==PAGE:1==
Prediction of protein sorting to lysosomes in
human cells
Master Thesis
DTU Health Tech
Department of Health Technology
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Prediction of protein sorting to lysosomes in human cells
Master Thesis
August 13, 2025
By
Celina Lykke Clausen
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the customary
bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
© Digizyme, Inc., Cell Signaling Technology Landscapes, https://www.digizyme.
com/cst_landscapes.html. Used with permission.
Published by:
DTU, Department of Health Technology, Ørsteds Plads, Building 345C, 2800
Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.healthtech.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Section for Bioinformatics, Department of
Health Techology, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU. It is submitted in partial fulﬁll-
ment of the requirements for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng. The research
activities presented in this thesis were conducted under the supervision of Associate Professor
Henrik Nielsen in the Protein Sorting Group at DTU and co-supervision of PhD student Mikkel
Rasmus Hansen in the T Cells and Cancer Group at DTU.
The thesis is a cross disciplinary project. The reader is assumed to have basic knowledge in the
areas of molecular biology and deep learning.
Celina Lykke Clausen - s194228
Signature
Date
ii
Prediction of protein sorting to lysosomes in human cells
13/08-2025
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
First and foremost, I would like to thank my supervisor, Henrik Nielsen, for his guidance and
encouragement throughout this project. His expertise, feedback, and steady support have been
essential to the rewarding process of writing this thesis. I especially appreciate his willingness to
remain engaged throughout the entire process, which has left a clear and positive mark on the ﬁnal
outcome.
I also would like to thank my co-supervisor, Mikkel Rasmus Hansen. I am grateful for the
opportunity to work with the results of his experiment, as well as for his helpful insights into
both the theoretical and practical aspects of the subject. His input signiﬁcantly strengthened the
scientiﬁc foundation of the project.
Finally, I would like to thank the Bioinformatics section at DTU for providing the opportunity and
framework to carry out this thesis. I am grateful to everyone – family, friends, and peers – who,
directly or indirectly, supported me throughout this journey. Your presence and encouragement
have truly enriched the experience.
Prediction of protein sorting to lysosomes in human cells
iii
==PAGE:6==
Abstract
Protein sorting is a fundamental process for proper cellular function. Information on a protein’s
cellular localization can provide crucial insights into its biological function and can aid in the
identiﬁcation of potential drug targets. DeepLoc2.1 is a deep learning model trained to predict the
localization and membrane type of a protein from its amino acid sequence. Of all classes included,
it delivers its weakest performance when classifying proteins targeted to the lysosome/vacuole.
To investigate the mechanisms and signals involved in the sorting of lysosomal proteins, a high-
throughput experiment was conducted. The method works by attaching over thousands of different
protein segments to a reporter construct, and screening the entire library in a single experiment.
Differential expression analysis of the resulting data identiﬁed 987 segments that enabled trans-
port of the construct to the lysosomes. The results were used to train a neural network classiﬁer to
predict the outcome of the experiment. The ﬁnal model resulted in an accuracy of 0.86 on the test
set. Attention scores produced by the model highlighted regions in each sequence potentially in-
volved in targeting, revealing multiple candidate motifs with inﬂuence on the trafﬁcking of soluble
proteins. These ﬁndings could contribute to a deeper understanding of the lysosomal trafﬁcking
pathway.
iv
Prediction of protein sorting to lysosomes in human cells
==PAGE:7==
Dansk Resumé
Proteinsortering er en essential proces for korrekt cellefunktion. Viden om et proteins lokalisering
i cellen kan give vigtig indsigt i dets biologiske rolle samt bidrage til identiﬁkation af potentielle
mål for lægemidler. DeepLoc2.1 er en deep learning-model, trænet til at forudsige et proteins
lokalisering og membrantype ud fra dets aminosyresekvens. Af alle kategorier præsterer mod-
ellen svagest, når den skal klassiﬁcere proteiner, der er lokaliseret i lysosomet/vakuolen. For at
undersøge mekanismerne og de sorteringssignaler, der ligger til grund for denne proces, blev der
udført et high-throughput-eksperiment, hvor tusindvis af forskellige proteinsegmenter blev koblet
til et reporter-konstrukt og screenet i et enkelt forsøg. Ved hjælp af ekspressionsanalyse af dataen
blev der identiﬁceret 987 segmenter, der muliggjorde sortering af konstrukterne til lysosomerne.
Disse resultater blev brugt til at træne et neuralt netværk til at forudsige resultaterne af forsøget.
Modellen opnåede en nøjagtighed på 0,86 på testdatasættet. Modellens attention-scores pegede på
sekvensregioner, der kunne være involveret i sortetings mekanismerne, og afslørede ﬂere mulige
motiver til sortering af opløselige lysosomale proteiner. Resultaterne kan bidrage til en dybere
forståelse af de gældende transportvej.
Prediction of protein sorting to lysosomes in human cells
v
==PAGE:8==
Abbreviations
β-GC
β-glucocerebrosidase
SE
standard error
AP
heterotetrameric clathrin adaptor
AUC
Area Under the Curve
BCE
binary cross-entropy
BFD
Big Fantastic Database
CCV
clathrin coated vesicle
CD
cation-dependent
CI
cation-independent
ER
Endoplasmic Reticulum
FN
False Negative
FNR
false negatives rate
FP
False Positive
FPR
false positives rate
GGA
Golgi-localized γ-ear-containing ADP-ribosylation factor-binding
GLM
Generalized Linear Model
LFC
log2 fold change (Logarithmic Fold Change)
LIMP-2
lysosomal integral membrane protein
LSD
lysosomal storage disorder
M6P
mannose 6-phosphate
MAP
maximum a posteriori
MCC
Matthews Correlation Coefﬁcient
MPR
M6P-speciﬁc receptor
NLP
Natural Language Processing
NT
neurotensin
PCA
Principal Component Analysis
pLM
Protein Language Model
PM
plasma membrane
PTM
post-translational modiﬁcation
ROC
Receiver Operating Characteristic
SNX
sorting nexin
TGN
trans golgi network
TN
True Negative
TP
True Positive
TPE
Tree-structured Parzen Estimator
TPR
true positives rate
UMAP
Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection
vi
Prediction of protein sorting to lysosomes in human cells
==PAGE:9==
Vps
vacuolar protein sorting
Prediction of protein sorting to lysosomes in human cells
vii
==PAGE:10==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
DanskResumé . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
1
Introduction
1
2
Sorting of Lysosomal Proteins
5
2.1
The Biosynthetic Pathway
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Sorting Signals
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Screening for Lysosomal Sorting Motifs
13
3.1
Experiment Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
Data Exploration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.3
Differential Expression Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.4
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4
Building a Sequence Classiﬁer
24
4.1
Homology Partitioning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.2
Sequence Embeddings
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.3
Model Training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.4
Model Interpretation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.5
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
5
Conclusion
61
Bibliography
63
Appendix A
67
Appendix B
70
Appendix C
71
Appendix D
72
viii
Prediction of protein sorting to lysosomes in human cells
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
Protein sorting and localization have long been subjects of interest due to their high relevance in
biomedical research. The eukaryotic cell is enclosed by a plasma membrane that houses a diverse
set of organelles, each contributing to the complex endomembrane system. Figure 1.1 illustrates
how compartments in the eukaryotic cell vary in their protein proﬁle. The translocation of pro-
teins from their site of synthesis to their functional destination is fundamental for proper cellular
functioning. Information on a proteins subcellular localizations can offer crucial context for their
function, as well as play an important role in the identiﬁcation of potential drug targets. In many
cases, the subcellular localization is encoded in the amino acid sequence. The information is usu-
ally represented as short sequence segments, called sorting signals. Some of these signals can be
well-deﬁned motifs, while others are vague sequence features. These signals should be interpreted
in the context of their location in the protein, as they must be accessible in the appropriate time
during the complex cascade of sorting mechanisms throughout protein trafﬁcking [1, 2].
Figure 1.1: Molecular landscape of the eukaryotic cell, illustrating the complexity of cell signaling and
protein trafﬁcking. Image credit: © Digizyme, Inc., Cell Signaling Technology Landscapes, https:// www.
digizyme.com/ cst_landscapes.html. Used with permission.
Prediction of protein sorting to lysosomes in human cells
1
==PAGE:12==
The prediction of protein sorting has long been an area of research in the ﬁeld of bioinformatics.
Over the years, many different techniques have been used in the development of multi-label sub-
cellular localization prediction software. Although earlier methods utilized the amino acid compo-
sition to make predictions, subsequence homology-based methods showed better results. The high
accuracy is assumed to be the result of evolution, as closely related proteins often are in the same
compartments. It was not until the implementation of deep learning methods that sequence-based
predictions started to surpass methods relying on homology information [3]. DeepLoc1.0 from
2017 was a front runner in the ﬁeld. The tool is a deep learning model trained to provide a prob-
ability prediction for 10 different subcellular localizations, as well as a differentiation between
soluble and membrane-bound proteins. The computed probabilities are derived from the amino
acid sequence alone [4]. Performance was later improved by incorporating a pre-trained Protein
Language Models (pLMs) in DeepLoc2.0 [5]. The Matthews Correlation Coefﬁcients (MCCs) are
presented in Table 1.1. Although providing generally good results, some locations are still difﬁcult
to predict. Among these are the lysosome, with an MCC of only 0.28±0.04.
Table 1.1: MCC results of DeepLoc 1.0 and DeepLoc 2.0 using pLM ProtT5. From [5].
Subcellular Localization
Accuracy
DeepLoc 1.0
DeepLoc 2.0
Cytoplasm
0.45±0.02
0.62±0.01
Nucleus
0.46±0.02
0.69±0.01
Extracellular
0.78±0.05
0.85±0.04
Cell membrane
0.53±0.02
0.66±0.01
Mitochondrion
0.58±0.04
0.76±0.02
Plastid
0.69±0.04
0.90±0.01
Endoplasmic reticulum
0.32±0.04
0.56±0.03
Lysosome/Vacuole
0.06±0.05
0.28±0.04
Golgi apparatus
0.20±0.04
0.34±0.06
Peroxisome
0.15±0.04
0.56±0.08
The lysosome has long been known as the center for macromolecular degradation in the eukaryotic
cell. The degradation task plays a crucial role in a wide variety of tasks, including the removal
of toxic cellular components, the elimination of worn-out organelles, the termination of signal
transduction, and the maintenance of metabolic homeostasis. Mutations affecting key lysosomal
proteins have been shown to cause a variety of hereditary syndromes known as lysosomal storage
disorders (LSDs), which can lead to metabolic dysfunction, neuro-degeneration, and impaired
growth. During the life spans of multicellular organisms, it is natural for lysosomal efﬁciency to
decline. This has been associated with a decrease in the regenerative capacity of organs and tissues.
In contrast to this, cancer cells have been shown to rely on efﬁcient lysosomal function during
tumor progression [6]. The pivotal role of the lysosome and its effect on a range of diseases make
it beneﬁcial to understand the cascade of mechanisms that are essential for its proper functioning.
In an effort to better understand the signals and mechanisms for sorting proteins to the lysosome,
2
Prediction of protein sorting to lysosomes in human cells
==PAGE:13==
a high-throughput experiment was conducted. The assayed constructs link a reporter protein to
fragments of several thousand proteins annotated to be associated with lysosomes, late endosomes,
or secretory vesicles. The goal of this project is to analyze the output data and train a deep neural
network to predict the outcome of the experiment from the sequence constructs.
Prediction of protein sorting to lysosomes in human cells
3
==PAGE:14==
4
Prediction of protein sorting to lysosomes in human cells
==PAGE:15==
2
Sorting of Lysosomal Proteins
The lysosome is a cellular compartment found in most mammalian cells. It functions as the center
for macromolecular degradation and plays an important role in cellular homeostasis, development,
and aging [7]. In animal cells, hundreds of individual lysosomes can be found, ranging in diam-
eter from 0.1 to 1 µm. One of their deﬁning characteristics is the low internal pH, which can
range from 4.5 to 5.5. The acidic environment is important for the proper functioning of protein
hydrolases within, which facilitate molecular digestion [6]. The organelle is composed of a wide
range of proteins, all of which are transported to the compartment in a signal-dependent manner.
Lysosomal biogenesis requires the continuous replenishment of essential soluble and membrane-
bound proteins, which are transported along what is often referred to as the biosynthetic pathway.
The route involves several intermediate locations such as the Endoplasmic Reticulum (ER), the
Golgi apparatus, and the endosomes. Proper sorting thus requires a complex and unique system
of sorting signals and recognition systems to be in place [8].
2.1
The Biosynthetic Pathway
The lysosome is a dynamic organelle. Cargo degradation rapidly consumes the compartment,
making regeneration a critical mechanism to maintain the necessary quantity of lysosomes in the
cell. Figure 2.1 shows the different degradation and regeneration pathways, including fusion with
phagosomes and autophagosomes to form digestive lysosomes [7].
Figure 2.1: Pathways involving the generation, consumption, and regeneration of lysosomes. Image from
[7].
Prediction of protein sorting to lysosomes in human cells
5
==PAGE:16==
The biosynthetic pathway refers to the pathway in which lysosomal proteins are synthesized and
trafﬁcked. The protein cargo must pass through several compartments along the way. It is syn-
thesized in the ER and subsequently moved to the Golgi apparatus. They progress through the
apparatus to reach the trans golgi network (TGN), where they are transported directly or indirectly
to the endosomes [8]. From there, an endosome either fuses with a lysosome or matures into one.
2.1.1
Synthesis and modiﬁcations in the ER
Although both membrane-bound and soluble proteins travel along the biosynthetic pathway, they
do not utilize the exact same mechanisms. Membrane proteins contain sorting signals in their
cytoplasmic domain that recruit vesicle trafﬁcking regulators. Soluble proteins, on the other hand,
require dedicated transport machinery to make the journey [9].
Lysosomal proteins are synthesized most often in the ER. They start off as small peptide chains
that function as signal sequences for translocation to the site of synthesis. While retained in
the ER, the peptide chain is cleaved from the ﬁnished protein. The modiﬁcation is followed by
N-glycosylation of asparagine residues in NX[S/T]-motifs. At the ER exit sites, the proteins are
packed and transported to the Golgi apparatus with the help of COPII protein complexes, as shown
in Figure 2.2. Sec24 is the protein responsible for cargo binding and subsequent packing into a
COPII coat. It recognizes various sorting signals in the cytosolic domain of membrane-bound
proteins. Soluble proteins are incorporated into the coat by attaching themselves to the lumenal
domain of cargo receptors such as CLN6, located in the membrane. The receptor then forms
a complex that interacts with Sec24. The mechanism allows soluble proteins to be transported
along the same route as membrane-bound proteins. It is unclear whether proteins are transported
from the ER to the Golgi via vesicles or tubules, but it is certain that their transport to the cis-
Golgi network is mediated by a COPII composition [10]. Retrograde trafﬁcking to the ER from
the Golgi occurs with the assistance of COPI protein complexes. COPI subunits and receptors
recruit ER-residents and pack them together so that they can bud off the cis-cisternae [11, 12, 10].
Figure 2.2: COPII coat assembly on the ER membrane. Visualizes the packing of soluble cargo with the
assistance of the Sec24 receptor. Image from [10].
2.1.2
Sorting along the Golgi Network
When moving through the different layers of the Golgi network, i.e. the cisternae, proteins undergo
further modiﬁcations. This includes phosphorylation of mannose residues attached to the protein
6
Prediction of protein sorting to lysosomes in human cells
==PAGE:17==
in the ER. The modiﬁcation is known as the mannose 6-phosphate (M6P)-tag and is crucial for
the sorting of soluble lysosomal proteins [8, 9]. There is some uncertainty about how proteins are
moved to the trans golgi network (TGN). One model claims that the compartment matures from a
cis- to a trans-cisterna, meaning the cargo remains in the same compartment throughout its journey
to the TGN. Another model claims the compartments are stable, meaning the cargo is trafﬁcked
via vesicles that bud from the initial cisternae and fuse with the subsequent layer [13].
In the TGN, M6P-tagged proteins are recognized by one of two M6P-speciﬁc receptors (MPRs)
– either the 46 kDa cation-dependent (CD) or the 300 kDa cation-independent (CI). Their struc-
tures are shown in Figure 2.3. CI-MPR contains two binding sites, while CD-MPR only has
one. For this reason, two CD-MPRs are required to transport cargo from the TGN. The binding
to either receptor is pH dependent. The neutral environment of the TGN enables the receptors
interaction with M6P. Once they reach the acidic environment of the late endosome, the cargo
is dissociated from the receptor. Although this is the most well-characterized mechanism for
sorting lysosomal proteins, alternative routes exist. It has been shown that CI-MPR can bind non-
phosphorylated mannose residues through alternative domains in its structure [11]. Alternative
receptors have also been discovered. Lysosomal integral membrane protein (LIMP-2) and Sortilin
are both located at the TGN. Like MPR, cargo binding to either receptor is pH dependent, with sig-
nal sequences in their cytosolic domain for recognition by adaptor proteins [14, 15]. Adaptors are
responsible for packing cargo into clathrin coated vesicles (CCVs). The best characterized CCV
adaptors are those of the heterotetrameric clathrin adaptor (AP) family, and the Golgi-localized
γ-ear-containing ADP-ribosylation factor-binding (GGA) proteins [13].
2.1.3
Endosome trafﬁcking
Once cargo enters the TGN, it can proceed directly to the endosome, or travel there indirectly, if
excreted to the plasma membrane (PM) beforehand. Both paths rely on CCVs, but is dependent
on different adaptor proteins. Direct transport is mediated by AP-1 and GGAs, which are located
at the TGN. Indirect transport, also called endocytosis, is mediated by AP-2, located at the PM.
AP-3 and AP-4 are two examples which are found both at the TGN and the PM. These are also
thought to be involved in clathrin-independent vesicular transport. Other proteins at the PM, and
associated to clathrins, include DAB2, Numb and ARH [18].
Once CCVs fuse with the endosome, the low pH causes the receptors to release its cargo. To escape
lysosomal degradation, receptors must be transported back to the TGN. There are several sorting
machineries involved in this process, each occurring at different stages of endosomal maturation.
They include clathrin-adaptors, AP-5, the retromer complex, and more. The clathrin-dependent
pathway occurs at the early stage of endosomal maturation and make use of the same adaptor
proteins as for antegrade transport. The AP-5 dependent transport does not make use of clathrins,
and occurs in the late endosome. It has been shown to be implicated in the retrieval of CI-MPR
and Sortilin. The retromer-dependent pathway transports cargo to the PM as well as the TGN. It is
essentially made up two subdomains. The domain selecting cargo is made up of vacuolar protein
sorting (Vps) protiens while sorting nexins (SNXs) mediate the formation of tubular-vesicular
carriers [19]. SNX-5 and SNX-6 have also been shown to associate with CI-MPR independently
Prediction of protein sorting to lysosomes in human cells
7
==PAGE:18==
Figure 2.3: Receptors for sorting soluble lysosomal proteins at the TGN. CI-MPR contains 15 domain
repeats and two high afﬁnity M6P-binding sites in repeat 3 and 9. Repeat 5 and 15 contain alternative
low-afﬁnity binding sites. CD-MPR contains one high afﬁnity binding site and therefore binds its cargo in
pairs. LIMP-2 contains a binding site for β-glucocerebrosidase (β-GC). Sortilin contains a binding site for
neurotensin (NT) and a separate site for other cargo [16]. Image created using [17].
of Vps [20]. The ﬁnal stage of the endosomal maturation stage is essentially a lysosome [6].
2.2
Sorting Signals
The sorting of lysosomal proteins relies on a range of sequence-dependent signals integrated into
their structure. While soluble proteins interact with receptors through the M6P-tag, receptors
and membrane-bound proteins often interact with adaptors through motifs. These motifs can be
categorized by the stage in which they are recognized in the biosynthetic pathway. The ﬁrst is the
ER-transport motifs for sorting proteins between the ER and cis-Golgi network. The second is the
TGN-transport motifs for sorting between the TGN and endosomes.
2.2.1
ER transport motifs
A small number of sorting motifs have been identiﬁed that facilitate anterograde and retrograde
transport between the ER and the cis-Golgi. An overview of the general patterns for the sequence
motifs is presented in Table 2.1. The diphenylalanine motif contains one or two of the large hy-
drophobic residues phenylalanine or tyrosine. It is located within an acidic tract at the C-terminus
and is important for the protein to be packed into COPII vesicles. The dilycine motif is also located
8
Prediction of protein sorting to lysosomes in human cells
==PAGE:19==
at the C-terminus. It is made up of two positively charged lysine residues and has a maximum of
one other residue positioned between them. The KDEL motif has its own receptor called KDELR.
Lysine and aspartic acid are not required, but the positions are usually ﬁlled by charged or po-
lar residues. Both dilycine and KDEL motifs are important for proteins to be packed into COPI
vesicles and are thereby part of the retrograde transport back to the ER [21].
Table 2.1: ER transport motifs. Φ represents a hydrophobic residue, while ^Φ represents non-hydrophobic
residues. The pattern as a simple version of what the motifs usually looks like. The last column is a note
on what type of vesicle the corresponding proteins are packed into (i.e. what direction the protein travels).
From [21].
Class
Motif Pattern
Direction
Cargo-type
Diphenylalanine
[FY][FY]
ER-to-Golgi
Membrane-bound
Dilycine
KK
Golgi-to-ER
Membrane-bound
KDEL
[^Φ]{2}EL
Golgi-to-ER
Soluble
2.2.2
TGN transport motifs
For transport by CCVs, transmemebrane proteins and receptors often contain tyrosine- or dileucine
motifs. Table 2.2 presents the general pattern of the two motif-types, along with the corresponding
adaptors that recognize the motif. It should be noted that the rules are inconsistent at best. The
rate of transport likely depends on the strength of the interaction between the motif and its binding
site.
Table 2.2: Most common motifs for sorting lysosomal membrane-bound proteins via the biosynthetic path-
way. Φ represents a hydrophobic residue. The pattern as a simpliﬁed version of what motifs in this class
often looks like. The last column lists the adaptors which recognize the given motifs. From [21, 18, 9].
Class
Motif Pattern
Adaptor
Pathway
Dileucine-based
[D/E]XXXL[L/I]
AP-1, AP-2, AP-3
Direct & Indirect
DXXLL
GGAs
Direct
Tyrosine-based
(G)YXXΦ
AP-1, AP-2, AP-3, AP-4
Direct & Indirect
NPXY
AP-2, DAB2, Numb, ARH
Indirect
TGN-retrieval
WLM
SNX1/2-SNX5/6
Retrograde
FLV
SNX1
Retrograde
PM-retrieval
NPXY
SNX17
Retrograde
Many variations of the dileucine motif have been identiﬁed. It always contains one or two nega-
tively charged aspartic or glutamic acids and two hydrophobic residues, such as leucine or pheny-
lalanine. These are always separated by two or more somewhat arbitrary residues. Variations in
the dileucine motif affect the different pathways the protein can travel, since speciﬁc variations
have designated adaptors. The same can be said for the tyrosine motifs. One is dependent on a
downstream hydrophobic residue, which allows the protein to interact with APs for both direct
Prediction of protein sorting to lysosomes in human cells
9
==PAGE:20==
and indirect transport. The other motif-variation depends on asparagine and proline, which ac-
commodate both indirect transport from the PM and retrograde transport between the endosome
and the PM [11, 21]. Beyond the PM-retrieval signal, two additional motifs have been shown to
be responsible for the retrograde transport to the TGN. The WLM-motif has been shown to bind
CI-MPR, while the FLV-motif binds Sortilin [9].
2.2.3
Alternative sorting signals
As mentioned in subsection 2.1.3, there are alternative pathways for soluble proteins to be trans-
ported from the TGN, which do not require the M6P-tag. It has been observed that, despite defects
in the common MPR trafﬁcking pathway, some cell lines still show signiﬁcant lysosomal activity.
While the MPR-dependent pathway has been described in detail, structural information on atypical
lysosomal transport is partially missing from the literature.
LIMP-2 has long been known to bind adaptor proteins via the common dileucine sorting motif,
but its binding to its cargo, β-glucocerebrosidase (β-GC), has only recently been revealed. Unlike
most soluble cargo, which binds to its receptor at the TGN, β-GC binds LIMP-2 in the ER, and
travels to the TGN and the lysosomes together. The cargo binds to the 5’th and 7’th helix motif
of LIMP-2 through four separate loops and two helix motifs [22]. Unlike previous sorting signals
made up of sequence motifs or post-translational modiﬁcations (PTMs), β-GC binds to its recep-
tor through a signal, dependent on its 3-dimensional structure. Important binding sites for this
interaction are highlighted in Figure 2.4.
Figure 2.4: Visualization of the complex formed between GCase (yellow) and LIMP-2 (blue). Important
binding sites in both proteins are highlighted in red. The exact orientation of the complex at the membrane
is unknown. Image from [22].
Sortilin is a second alternative receptor that has been found to assist in the sorting of lysosomal
proteins such as cathepsins D and H. It has also been shown to regulate the sorting of many non-
lysosomal proteins. It localizes at the PM, regulating indirect transport to the endosomes. The
speciﬁc function depends on PTMs of its cytosolic tail. The phosphorylation of different residues
affects its interaction with APs and GGAs, while palmitoylation is used for endosome-to-TGN
retrieval, and ubiquitination for lysosomal degradation [11]. Figure 2.5 shows the structure of
Sortilin. It includes a ten-bladed β-propeller domain that forms a tunnel inside the protein. The
10
Prediction of protein sorting to lysosomes in human cells
==PAGE:21==
tunnel is shown to have multiple binding sites. The C-terminal domain of neurotensin (NT) is
shown to bind Sites 1 and 2. It has been suggested that the tunnel also contains alternative binding
sites, both close to and distant from the binding site of NT. Cargo has been shown to dissociate
from the protein due to dimerization at low pH [23].
Figure 2.5: Visualization of sortilin. A shows a cartoon ﬁgure of the structure, including the TM-helix
which associated with the membrane and cytosolic tail used for recognition by adaptors. B Shows a closer
look at the ten-bladed β-propeller domain of the protein, including NT binding sites. Image from [23].
2.3
Discussion
From a review of lysosomal protein sorting, it is clear that there are gaps in the literature. Due
to a lack of understanding of how proteins are transported from the ER and sorted along the
Golgi apparatus, there is ambiguity in regards to the trafﬁcking mechanisms. Although there is
clarity around the occurrence of PTMs during the passage between cis- and trans-cisternae, there
is still uncertainty regarding how they are moved in between them. These gaps leave possibility
for sorting mechanisms to operate at this stage along the biosynthetic pathway. It is also evident
that there are alternative sorting signals for soluble cargo beyond the M6P-tag. In addition to
the binding sites discovered in MPR and Sortilin, it is also possible that there are undiscovered
receptors.
The review also highlights the complexity of sorting signals. For one, it reveals the possibility
for sorting signals to depend on the 3-dimensional structure of proteins rather than a sequence
motif. It also emphasizes the variability in sorting motifs. Although it is possible to recognize
sequence patterns across lysosomal proteins, motifs are vague and non-deterministic. The ability
for motifs to facilitate protein transport likely reﬂects a gradual shift inﬂuenced by the proteins
binding afﬁnity to a receptor or adaptor. The following chapters dive deeper into the topic of short
sequence motifs. The range of potential sorting motifs was explored from the results of a high
throughput sequencing experiment.
Prediction of protein sorting to lysosomes in human cells
11
==PAGE:22==
12
Prediction of protein sorting to lysosomes in human cells
==PAGE:23==
3
Screening for Lysosomal Sorting Motifs
The data explored in this section is collected from a high-throughput screening of lysosomal tar-
geting sequences, described in "A Novel Approach to High Throughput Screening of Lysosomal
Targeting Sequences" [24]. The main goal of the analysis is to divide the sequences based on their
ability to mediate the transportation of proteins from the ER to the lysosome. Signiﬁcant outcomes
will be classiﬁed as either "Positive" or "Negative" for this ability. The results are later used as
input labels for training a neural network classiﬁer.
3.1
Experiment Setup
Before screening, a sequence library had to be collected. Protein segments were assembled from
four different sources. Some of these are described in more depth in Appendix A.
UniProt: C-terminal sequences of proteins annotated as localized in secretory vesicles, late endo-
somes, or lysosomes.
DeepLoc2.0: Fragments used by the model to identify the location of lysosomal proteins.
Literature: Sequence fragments of proteins reported to be located in the lysosome.
Shufﬂed: Randomly shufﬂed sequences extracted by UniProt.
To test the sorting abilities of all sequences, each motif was integrated into a reporter gene and
transduced into a colony of cells. Figure 3.1 shows the resulting protein. It is constructed from a
combination of two ﬂuorescent proteins, mCherry and EGFP, and a signal peptide. Because only
mCherry is stable at an acidic pH, the signal will change if the protein reaches the lysosome. Figure
3.2 illustrates when, along the biosynthetic pathway, the signal changes from negative (yellow) to
positive (red).
Figure 3.1: Reporter protein construct made from two linked ﬂuorescent proteins, mCherry and EGFP, a
signal peptide responsible for locating the protein to the ER, and variable sorting motif. Image created in
[17].
Positive and negative samples were collected by a gating system, adjusted to distinguish between
positive and negative signals emitted from transduced cells in two control experiments. For the
Prediction of protein sorting to lysosomes in human cells
13
==PAGE:24==
Figure 3.2: Image visualizing trafﬁcking route of the reporter protein from the Golgi apparatus to the
lysosome. Because EGFP is unstable at low pH, the green light disappears when the endosome matures
into a lysosome. Image from [24].
negative control, the gene did not include a sorting motif. The gating was then deﬁned by the
intensity of light emitted from the cells at the wavelengths characteristic of mCherry and EGFP.
For the positive control, a sorting motif, extracted from LAMP2, was added to the gene [25]. The
gating was then deﬁned using the same procedure as for the negative control. Figure 3.3 shows the
gating strategy for each experiment, including the percentage of cells within the chosen boundaries.
The experiment was performed under a range of different conditions. An example is the separation
of sequence segments into two pools, depending on the sequence length. Segments in Pool 1 and
2 are 25 and 50 residues long, respectively. Sequences in Pool 1 are sourced from soluble proteins,
while sequences in Pool 2 are sourced from membrane-bound proteins. The separation is due
to the different sorting mechanisms and signals that apply for the two cargo groups. To judge the
reliability of the results, signal constructs were transduced into two different cell lines, i.e. SUP-T1
and K562. This allows for comparison of two different cellular systems, improving generalization
across cell types. The experiment was carried out twice using the SUP-T1 cell line, resulting in a
total of three repetitions of the experiment. The total number of sequences in the ﬁnal library is
shown in Table 3.1.
Table 3.1: Number of sequences in the screening library, separated by source and pool. From [24].
Sequence origin
Lysosomal location
Pool 1
Pool 2
25 aa
50 aa
DeepLoc 2.0
Lumen
37
Membrane
472
UniProt
Lumen
918
Membrane
3387
Literature
Both
355
Shufﬂed
NA
500
Total
1472
4242
14
Prediction of protein sorting to lysosomes in human cells
==PAGE:25==
Negative control
Positive control
Pool 1
Pool 2
SUP-T1
K562
Figure 3.3: Flow cytometry gating strategy for the separation of cells based on the wavelength and intensity
of light emitted from two coupled ﬂuorescent reporter proteins. Values within each gate is the percentage
of cells within the given boundary. Image from [24].
In addition to a positive and negative samples, a baseline population was also extracted from each
experiment. The sample will represent the general distribution of transduced genes in the cell line.
After cells were separated, genomic DNA was puriﬁed from each sample. The DNA was ampliﬁed
using PCR and sequenced using Nanopore.
3.2
Data Exploration
To gain a better understanding of the screening results, a simple data exploration was performed.
The process includes data cleaning, to ensure proper formatting and the removal of duplicates.
3.2.1
Controls
As mentioned in the previous section, gating variables were selected on the basis of two control
experiments. From the percentages shown in Figure 3.3, the false positives rates (FPRs) and false
negatives rates (FNRs) were calculated. The results are presented in Table 3.2. These suggests
that the reliability of the positive gate is higher than that of the negative gate. This is especially
the case for the results drawn from the K562 cell line, which has an FNR of 0.35.
Table 3.2: FPR of negative control experiment, and FNR of positive control experiment. Calculations
shown in Appendix B.
Cell Line
FPR
FNR
SUP-T1
0.024
0.110
K562
0.012
0.352
Prediction of protein sorting to lysosomes in human cells
15
==PAGE:26==
3.2.2
Screenings
The experiment was carried out three times, twice using SUP-T1 cell lines and once using K562.
These will be referred to as experiments 1, 2, and 3, in which the third is from K562. Each experi-
ment contains six samples, namely a positive, negative, and baseline from each pool, resulting in
a total of 18 samples. The resulting data contains a column of counts from each sample, with a
value from each sequence in the corresponding library.
Data Cleaning
Five result-ﬁles were provided, four of which contain the results of the experiments - One for
each pool and cell-type. Each row includes a sequence ID to identify the corresponding amino
acid sequence provided in the ﬁfth ﬁle. Although the data did not contain any negative or missing
values, there were 50 duplicate rows which were removed. The length of the amino acid sequences
were also checked. A total of 49 motifs were neither 25 nor 50 residues long. The shortest is 17 and
the longest is 51. There are also ﬁve sequences with invalid amino acids. One sequence contains
a space, while four contains a U. At this stage of the analysis, it was decided not to address the
issue any further as there is a possibility the sequences might be excluded from the dataset after
analysis.
Count Distribution
Despite the library of Pool 1 comprising 1,472 sequences, the ﬁnal datasets from Experiments 1
and 2 contain 1,391 sequences, while the third contains only 1,363. The same can be said of Pool
2. Although the library comprises 4,242 sequences, Experiments 1 and 2 contain 4,240, while
the third contains only 4,076. From a comparison between the sequences in each dataset, it was
shown that Experiment 3 contains no unique sequences in either pool.
The total count of each sample is presented in Figure 3.4. The plot shows a slight variation in
counts across the samples, ranging from 113K to 190K sequences. The slight differences are
due to variations in sequencing depth which occur when DNA is ampliﬁed. Although an uneven
distribution is to be expected, it also means that sequences cannot be directly compared between
samples. Because individual counts depend on the total counts of the corresponding sample, the
data is compositional in nature. The count distribution also shows similar sequencing depths
between Pools 1 and 2, despite their differences in library size. This means that individual counts
will be smaller in Pool 2. The difference is reﬂected in the varying statistics between Pool 1 and
Pool 2, in which the mean, median, and standard deviation are signiﬁcantly higher for Pool 1. The
numbers are presented in Appendix C.
To compare positive and negative samples of the same experiments, the proportions were com-
puted. The results are visualized in Figure 3.5. Due to its lower mean value, Pool 1 is scattered
across a larger range than Pool 2. This means that the analysis of Pool 2 would be more affected
by random noise, which could negatively impact the reliability of the results. The distribution of
shufﬂed sequences is highlighted in Pool 2. From a comparison of Pool 2 and the shufﬂed se-
quences presented in Appendix C, there does not appear to be a signiﬁcant difference between the
two. Although the mean and median of the shufﬂed sequences are lower than for Pool 2 (except
for one sample), the differences are very small.
16
Prediction of protein sorting to lysosomes in human cells
==PAGE:27==
Figure 3.4: Count distribution of each sample. Experiment 1 & 2 are from the SUP-T1 cell line, while
Experiment 3 is from K562. Because the baseline sample was only collected once per cell type, the columns
from Experiments 1 & 2 in both pools are identical.
3.3
Differential Expression Analysis
To explore the quantitative changes between the samples and create reliable labels for each se-
quence, a differential expression analysis was performed. DESeq2 is a tool created to analyze
high-throughput sequencing data for genomic studies [26]. Although designed for the analysis
of RNA sequence data, it is also applicable to metagenomic data and has been used to analyze
the results of a highly comparative high-throughput screening [27]. It applies statistical methods
to search for evidence of systematic changes between two different experimental conditions. For
this analysis, it has been used to compare positive and negative samples to ﬁnd consistent changes
among the three experiments. "Moderated estimation of fold change and dispersion for RNA-seq
data with DESeq2" provides an in-depth description of the methods used in the package and how
they should be applied to the data [28].
3.3.1
Methods
The input of DESeq2 is a raw count matrix K with a row for each gene i and a column for each
sample j. Each gene is ﬁtted to a Generalized Linear Model (GLM), assuming that the data follow
a negative binomial distribution with mean µij and dispersion αi. sj is used to scale the means to
account for differences in sequencing depth between samples, and is estimated using the median-
of-ratios method.
qij = µij
s j
(3.1)
qij is extracted from the linear equation and is used to ﬁt a GLM with design matrix elements xjr
and coefﬁcients βir.
log2qij = ∑
r
xjrβir
(3.2)
Elements of the design matrix indicate whether a sample is in the positive or negative category,
while the GLM ﬁt returns coefﬁcients that indicate the expression strength of each gene and log2
Prediction of protein sorting to lysosomes in human cells
17
==PAGE:28==
Figure 3.5: Scatterplot showing the proportions of negative vs. positive counts from each experiment and
pool. Experiment 1 and 2 were performed using SUP-T1 cell lines, while experiment 3 was performed
using K562. Pool 2 also shows the results of the randomly shufﬂed sequences (red).
fold change (LFC). One of the categories must be used as a reference for ﬁtting the model. If a
sequence shows differential expression towards the reference, the resulting LFC will be negative
in value.
Shrinkage of Dispersion
The variability between samples of the same type is modeled by the dispersion αi, which describes
the variance of counts.
VarKij = µij +αiµ2
ij
(3.3)
As it is common to have few replicates of an experimental design, DESeq2 accounts for a poten-
tially noisy estimate of the dispersion by pulling information across genes. Firstly, a dispersion
estimate is approximated using maximum likelihood on data from individual genes. Then, assum-
ing a similar dispersion for genes with similar average expression strengths, a smooth curve of
the dispersion is ﬁtted against the mean of the normalized counts. The line is used as the prior
distribution for the true dispersion values around the ﬁt. Each dispersion value is adapted to shrink
closer to the ﬁtted curve, depending on two conditions:
1) An estimate of how close the calculated dispersion values tend to be to the ﬁtted curve.
2) Degrees of freedom. If the sample size is large, the shrinkage decreases in strength.
Shrinkage of Logarithmic Fold Change
A common problem when dealing with count data is that the ratios have more noise when the
counts are low. This can be an issue when estimating the LFC, as it makes it difﬁcult to compare
effect sizes across the dynamic range of the data. DESeq2 address this by shrinking the LFC
18
Prediction of protein sorting to lysosomes in human cells
==PAGE:29==
towards zero for low-information genes, that is, genes with low counts, high dispersion, or few
degrees of freedom. This can be viewed as a trade-off between bias and variance, as variance is
reduced by increasing the bias towards an LFC value of zero.
The same process for shrinking the dispersion estimates is used for LFCs. Firstly, an ordinary
GLM is ﬁtted to obtain the maximum likelihood estimates. The estimates are then ﬁtted to a
normal distribution, which is used as prior in a second ﬁtting of the GLM, keeping the maximum
a posteriori (MAP) as ﬁnal estimates. The shrunken LFCs and standard errors, derived from the
curvature of the posterior distributions, are ﬁnally used in Wald tests for differential expression.
Wald test
To test whether the LFC of each gene differs signiﬁcantly from zero, DESeq2 uses a Wald test.
The null hypothesis is as stated:
H0 : βir = 0
(3.4)
If a gene passes the hypothesis, it does not show a signiﬁcant change in LFC. The z-statistic is
calculated by dividing the estimated LFC by the corresponding standard error (SE).
z =
!βir
SE(!βir)
(3.5)
As the posterior is assumed to follow a normal distribution, the p-value is calculated by comparing
the z-score to a standard Normal distribution: Z ∼N(0,1) [29].
3.3.2
Results
To optimize the number of hits obtained using DESeq2, it is crucial to avoid shrinkage due to lack
of information. Because there is only one baseline sample from the SUP-T1 cell line, there is a
risk of increased dispersion, which would lead to less signiﬁcant results. Instead, it was chosen
to perform the analysis on the positive and negative samples and use the baseline to examine the
reliability of the main analysis. This was done by comparing the negative and positive samples
with the baseline separately and afterwards making sure that there is no overlap in the results.
An issue of combining the experiments from the two cell lines arises due to the missing number of
sequences in Experiment 3. This means that the sequences that only occur in Experiments 1 and 2
will not be included in the analysis.
Positive vs. Negative Samples
From the comparison of positive and negative samples, using negatives as a reference, a total
of 2303 hits with a p-value below 0.05 were obtained. The distribution of positive and negative
results within each pool is presented in Table 3.3. The results show an imbalance in signiﬁcant
hits, in which the number of positives exceeds the number of negatives. This could be due to the
gating boundaries deﬁned during experimentation, which showed a higher rate of false hits when
deﬁning the negative gate (Table 3.2). This could increase the dispersion among genes, leading
to increased shrinkage of the LFC. The results also show a high number of shufﬂed sequences
classiﬁed as both positive and negative. Of the total number of sequences in Pool 2 and shufﬂed
sequences, both groups result in about 24% positive hits.
Prediction of protein sorting to lysosomes in human cells
19
==PAGE:30==
Table 3.3: Number of positive and negative hits within each pool from comparing the positive and negative
samples (p-value < 0.05). Shufﬂed sequences have been separated from Pool 2.
Pool 1
Pool 2
Shufﬂed
Positive
321
902
113
Negative
161
707
99
Total
482
1609
212
Positive vs. Baseline Samples
To explore the reliability of the main analysis, the same procedure was performed by comparing
all positive samples with the two baseline samples, using the baseline as reference. As expected,
the number of signiﬁcant hits decreased, resulting in only 955 sequences with a p-value below
0.05. In this group, 770 showed a positive LFC value, including 16 hits that were not classiﬁed
as positive in the main analysis. Within the small sample of signiﬁcant baseline hits, 162 were
already classiﬁed as signiﬁcant for the negative sample in the original analysis. This leaves a total
of 42 new sequences which could be added to the downstream analysis.
Negative vs. Baseline Samples
The same procedure was performed by comparing the negative and baseline samples and using the
baseline as reference. The analysis resulted in even fewer sequences with a p-value below 0.05,
with only 9 sequences from Pool 1 and 417 from Pool 2. This could be due to the high similarity
between the two categories. Because the number of negative sequences in the library is expected to
be higher than the number of positives, the difference between the negative and baseline samples
would be proportionally lower. The higher rate of false negatives when deﬁning the negative gates
during the experiment could also have contributed, as it could lead to increased dispersion among
the negative samples.
Final labeling
To determine which sequences should be included to train a deep learning model, a threshold p-
value for the LFC had to be decided. The choice was made considering the resulting exchange
between data size and accuracy. Because neural networks often require large amounts of data, the
number of hits should not be too low. However, a high p-value would also increase the risk of false
hits, which could negatively impact the performance of the ﬁnal model. Taking into account the
nature of the experiment, there could be an argument for having different p-values for the positive
and negative hits. Assuming that the probability of a sequence aiding the transport of proteins
from the ER to the lysosome is lower than the probability that it does not, it could positively
impact the model training, if the margin for positive hits is more stringent compared to negative.
In addition to this, a false positive may be less desirable than a false negative, considering the
intended application of the model. This would also help correct the data imbalance that occurs
when using the same p-value. Table 3.4 shows the number of hits when changing the p-value to
0.01. For this case, the number of hits in the positive class is closer to the number of hits in the
negative class when the p-value is 0.05.
20
Prediction of protein sorting to lysosomes in human cells
==PAGE:31==
Table 3.4: Number of positive and negative hits within each pool from comparing the positive and negative
samples (p-value < 0.01). Shufﬂed sequences have been separated from Pool 2.
Pool 1
Pool 2
Shufﬂed
Positive
225
665
83
Negative
50
386
58
Total
275
1192
141
The number of sequences for the ﬁnal labeling is presented in Table 3.5. It was chosen to in-
clude all positive results with a p-value below 0.01, including all signiﬁcant results from the main
analysis and 14 additional sequences with the same p-value from the comparison of positive and
baseline samples. For the negative group, the p-value was increased to 0.05, which included all
sequences from the main analysis and an additional 23 from the comparison of the positive and
baseline samples. This leaves a total of 1,977 sequences for model training, of which 50% be-
long to the positive class. Figure 3.6 shows a distribution plot equivalent to 3.5, where the colors
correspond to their ﬁnal label.
Table 3.5: Final number of positive and negative sequences chosen for model training.
Pool 1
Pool 2
Total
Positive
232
755
987
Negative
166
824
990
Figure 3.6: Scatterplot showing the relationship between the negative and positive sample proportions for
each pool and experiment, colored by their ﬁnal labels. A symmetric logarithmic scale has been added to
spread out small proportions.
Prediction of protein sorting to lysosomes in human cells
21
==PAGE:32==
Merging IDs and sequences
After the most promising results were selected from the screening experiment, the IDs were
matched with their respective amino acid sequence.
The combination revealed that ﬁve IDs
matched two non-identical sequences. The similarity between each pair was computed using a
sequence-matcher. It resulted in a similarity ratio between 0.76 and 0.98, indicating a nonrandom
error. The ﬁve IDs and corresponding sequences were excluded from the dataset as it is uncertain
why the error occurred and which sequences were used in the experiment.
The merge also showed that none of the sequences containing invalid amino acids remained in
the dataset after analysis. However, 18 sequences with unexpected lengths are still included. The
varying number of residues is due to the inclusion of short peptide chains in the library. These are
preserved for model training, as the length is not important for the particular model architecture
used.
3.4
Discussion
Although the experiment resulted in a good number of sequences for model training, the analysis
also revealed a handful of caveats that are important to consider when interpreting the results.
One such issue arises due to the low number of times the experiment was reproduced. Although
DESeq2 is designed to analyze results with a few replicates, 3 is still the minimum input. Despite
the use of shrinkage by DESeq2, some sequences may still generate high LFCs at random, or
due to experimental bias. The high FNR revealed by the analysis of the control experiments, the
probability that a sequence results in a false negative, is 0.352 · 0.1102 ≈0.0043, which is a total
of 25 sequences from the complete dataset. The results displayed in Figure 3.6 show that many
sequences included in the ﬁnal dataset are close to zero in both the positive and negative samples.
This suggests that some sequences might be selected on the basis of only one or two experiments.
This increases the probability of errors even further. In addition to this, the negative class is also
selected using a higher p-value. Each of these issues reduces the reliability of the negative label.
Another important factor to consider is the number of shufﬂed sequences included in the ﬁnal
dataset, along with their indistinguishable distribution from the remaining sequences in Pool 2.
These sequences were originally intended as controls, but resulted in as many hits as the tested
sequences from the library. This is notable because the library is not randomly assembled but is
derived from segments of proteins associated with lysosomes. These results could indicate the
existence of a relatively simple sorting motif or an error in the experiment setup.
It should also be noted that although the experimental setup was designed to allow sequences from
Pool 2 to reach adaptors on the cytosolic side of the membrane, this is only possible if the segment
can penetrate the lipid bilayer. Because this was not considered before the experiments were
performed, a transmembrane domain was not intentionally included in the sequences. For this
reason, sequences from both pools are likely to be sorted as soluble proteins instead of membrane-
bound. On the positive side of this, the sorting mechanism for soluble proteins, independently of
the M6P-tag, is the least understood of the two.
22
Prediction of protein sorting to lysosomes in human cells
==PAGE:33==
Prediction of protein sorting to lysosomes in human cells
23
==PAGE:34==
4
Building a Sequence Classiﬁer
Taking inspiration from the DeepLoc2.1 architecture [30], a binary classiﬁer was built to predict
the output labels provided in Table 3.5 from the amino acid sequences. The pipeline is divided
into three stages. To start with, sequence embeddings are extracted from a pre-trained Protein
Language Model (pLM). The output is passed to a downstream model trained to compress its
input into a one-dimensional representation using attention. The low representation output is
passed along to a binary classiﬁer, responsible for predicting the label probabilities. Figure 4.1
illustrates the different stages.
Figure 4.1: Three stages of sequence classiﬁer pipeline. Embeddings extracted from pre-trained Protein
Language Model (pLM) and passed to the next stage. Attention is used to compress each sequence repre-
sentation into a single scalar score. A multilayer perceptron is used to compute the label probabilities.
4.1
Homology Partitioning
Before transforming the input sequences, the data was divided into partitions to validate and test
the model during and after training, respectively. This was done using GraphPart, a program
designed to minimize data leakage caused by closely related (homologous) proteins [31]. As each
protein differ only in sorting motif, homology is not an issue for the given dataset. However, there
is still a chance that some sequences are very similar. This is due to the method used to acquire
the sequences, which allows different isoforms of the same protein to be included.
4.1.1
Methods
The partitioning is derived from pairwise global alignments. The percent identities are converted
to distances and used as edge weights for clustering the data. The clustering procedure is designed
to form assemblages of data so that no two sequences from different groupings exceed a predeﬁned
identity threshold. All clusters are then combined into a predeﬁned number of partitions, designed
24
Prediction of protein sorting to lysosomes in human cells
==PAGE:35==
to optimize class balance. Adding clusters together could lead to violations of the distance thresh-
old. To compensate for this, the last step attempts to move sequences to different partitions. If the
threshold cannot be met, the sequences are removed from the data.
To preserve sequence information during the screening experiment described in section 3.1, neigh-
boring segments in pool 2 of 50 amino acids have 10 overlapping residues. This means that they
have a global identity of ∼11%. If overlapping sequences contain sorting motifs, the information
would be leaked if divided into separate partitions. To avoid this, the threshold should ideally be
0.11. The goal of the partitioning is to divide the data into ﬁve folds, in which four are used for
training and validation, and one is set aside for testing.
4.1.2
Results
Partitioning the data into ﬁve folds using a threshold of 0.11 was not feasible. The lowest possible
was 0.25, but this resulted in a very uneven sequence distribution between partitions. Increasing
the threshold to 0.30 changed the distribution signiﬁcantly. The results are shown in Figure 4.2.
Although a lower threshold would lead to a better separation in terms of homology, the lower value
also required the program to remove more than 300 sequences from the data. In comparison, a
threshold of 0.30 allowed all sequences to remain. For this reason, it was chosen to move on with
the second partitioning.
Figure 4.2: Sequence and label distributions of 5-fold homology partitioning with a threshold of 0.25 and
0.30. Each bar includes percentage of positive and negative sequences for the corresponding fold. Splits
created using GraphPart [31].
4.2
Sequence Embeddings
Protein Language Models (pLMs) are large language models trained to capture information en-
coded in proteins. Advancing to become powerful tools in protein research, they can assist in the
prediction of structure, function, localization, and more. Their success is rooted in self-supervised
learning using transformer-based architectures, which emerged from the ﬁeld of Natural Language
Processing (NLP) [32, 33].
Prediction of protein sorting to lysosomes in human cells
25
==PAGE:36==
PLMs can be applied to a wide range of tasks. Some models are designed for speciﬁc purposes,
while others are created to be adaptable. Adaptable models, often referred to as foundation mod-
els, can help preprocess input data to simplify downstream tasks. They are especially useful for
training specialized models using little annotated data [34].
Although the screening process delivered many sequences for further analysis, deep learning mod-
els are known to require large amounts of data to recognize relevant patterns. Using a foundation
model, the training process can be optimized while improving the ﬁnal classiﬁcation results.
4.2.1
Foundation Models
The success of NLP was transferred to protein science because of similarities between human
languages and protein sequences. By equating a full sequence with a sentence, and individual
residues with words, methods in the ﬁeld of NLP can be utilized to translate what can be referred
to as the "language of life" [35]. Although proteins have complex 3-dimensional structures and are
heavily affected by their environment, they are still deﬁned by their amino acid sequence. In theory,
a sequence-based model should be able to learn all the information about proteins, but in practice,
there are still limitations to the current methods. Factors that inﬂuence model performance include
model architecture, positional encoding, scaling laws, and pre-training data [33]. Training efﬁcient
models is often hampered by a lack of data, but scarcity is often the most prevalent for labeled
data. In the case of proteins, there is currently an abundance of sequence data available without
associated experimental output. The data has been used to train many varieties of pLMs using
self-supervised learning. This has created a multitude of publicly available foundation models that
can be used to extract sequence representations [36].
Transformer-based foundation models have been shown to achieve revolutionary results in the pro-
cessing of protein sequences. These models are trained using architectures inspired by the original
Transformer, which means that the model processes sequences in parallel through self-attention.
The model is an autoencoder, that is, it is designed to encode its input into a compressed repre-
sentation and then regenerate it from the output embeddings [37, 33]. The model architecture is
shown in Figure 4.3. The encoder is fed input embeddings along with positional encodings, which
pass through a stack of N = 6 identical layers. Each layer contains a multi-head self-attention
mechanism and a fully connected feed-forward network. Multi-head attention allows the model
to view information from different representations in parallel. The structure can help capture com-
plex relationships within the data with computational costs similar to single-head attention. The
feed-forward layer processes the information from the attention layers and feeds it to the next
encoder stack. The ﬁnal stack produces the output embeddings which are then processed by the
decoder. The decoder is also a stack of six identical layers. It is composed of the same elements
as the encoder, except for an additional masked multi-head attention layer. Combined with off-
set output embeddings, masked attention forces the predictions to depend only on tokens at the
positions prior to the one which is being predicted. The layer feeds the values to the normal multi-
head attention layer, which is provided with keys and queries directly from the encoder. A linear
transformation and softmax function is used to convert the output of the decoder into next-token
probabilities. This is used to regenerate the original input as closely as possible.
26
Prediction of protein sorting to lysosomes in human cells
==PAGE:37==
Figure 4.3: Transformer architecture, containing an encoder (left) and decoder (right). Encoder and decoder
are each composed of a stack of N = 6 identical layers. Image from [32].
4.2.2
Methods
Transformer-based models do not have to include an encoder and a decoder, as the two systems
can be trained separately. For the problem at hand, there is only a need for an encoder to compress
the sequences. This excludes all decoder-based models from consideration. Potential models that
include encoders are ProtT5 [38], ESM2 [39] and Ankh [40]. Each of these has been shown to
succeed in transfer learning different tasks, including subcellular localization predictions.
ProtT5 is part of the ProtTrans project published in 2022. The model is based on the T5 trans-
former, composed of both an encoder and decoder [41]. It was created in two different sizes,
ProtT5-XL and ProtT5-XXL, made up of 3 billion and 11 billion trainable parameters, respec-
tively. Initial training was performed using the Big Fantastic Database (BFD), consisting of >2B
proteins [42, 43]. For training, the model uses a denoising objective of single tokens. During
training, 15% of the residues are randomly masked. The goal is to learn to reconstruct the input
sequence. Each output is based on all visible residues and their positional encodings, leading to
context-based predictions. The ﬁrst training is then followed by ﬁne-tuning using UniRef50, a
smaller but more diverse data set consisting of 45 million proteins [44]. They experienced that
this procedure delivered the best results, leading their best ProtT5 models to outperform current
state-of-the-art methods in transfer learning for subcellular localization predictions. A downside
of the ProtT5 models lies in their size, as even the smallest of the two is quite large. For the project
at hand, this could lead to issues on as such large models can be difﬁcult to manage. The potential
Prediction of protein sorting to lysosomes in human cells
27
==PAGE:38==
improvements in performance from the use of these models might not justify the additional time
and computational resources necessary.
ESM2 covers an even larger family of pLMs, all released in 2023. The family consists of six
models, ranging from 8 million parameters to 15 billion. It is a modiﬁed version of the transformer-
based BERT encoder [45]. Like ProtT5, ESM2 also masks random tokens for training, but due
to a lack of decoder, it only generated the missing tokens, not the full sequence. Rather than
utilizing BFD, ESM2 is trained only on sequences from the UniRef database. During training,
sequences are carefully sampled to optimize diversity, leading the model to see around 65 million
sequences. Although the efﬁciency of comparative models can be difﬁcult to measure, a surface-
level comparison was made between ESM2 and ProtT5. This showed similar results between
ProtT5-XL with 3 billion parameters and ESM2 with 650 million parameters. The ESM2 series
also have a model of 3 billion and 15 billion parameters, but these are not necessarily better despite
their size.
According to scaling laws, models can stagnate if the ratio of compute, model size, and training
data is suboptimal. For secondary structure predictions, ProtT5-XL is shown to outperform ProtT5-
XXL. In the case of mutational effects, the ESM2 predictions of the model with 650 million
parameters produced more accurate results compared to its larger counterparts [34].
Ankh is designed to improve performance via protein-speciﬁc optimization, rather than increasing
model size. It is available in two sizes; Ankh_large with 1.15 billion parameters and Ankh_base
with 450 million parameters. Drawing from the experience of the ProtTrans project, the Ankh base-
line models were pre-trained using data from UniRef50 and utilize the original encoder-decoder
transformer. The masking strategy was slightly adapted from the method used for ProtT5, using
partial reconstruction by the decoder and a masking probability of 20%. The encoder is made up
of 48 layers, while the decoder is made up of only 28 layers. Throughout development, Ankh
was continuously compared with ProtT5 and ESM2. Figure 4.4 shows the mean and median
performance scores of seven different benchmarking tasks, compared to the size of the model.
Ankh_base shows a median performance comparable to ESM2 (650M), using fewer parameters
and resulting in smaller embedding dimensions, while the mean performance is signiﬁcantly better
for Ankh. The ProtT5-XL shows a similar mean performance to Ankh_base, but slightly lower
median. The contextualized embeddings are extracted from the last hidden state of each model.
Of the seven benchmarking tasks, a localization task using the DeepLoc dataset was included [4].
The performance was best for Ankh_large and ProtT5-XL, each with an accuracy of 83.2 % ± 2 %.
However, these were only slightly better than ESM2 (650M) and Ankh_base, with an accuracy of
81.8 % ± 2 % and 81.4 % ± 2 %, respectively.
28
Prediction of protein sorting to lysosomes in human cells
==PAGE:39==
(a) Number of parameters of different language models.
(b) Embedding dimensions of the same models.
Figure 4.4: Plot comparing the mean and median performance from seven benchmarking tasks of different
language models. ’U50’ in ProtT5-XL-U50 refers to the ﬁne-tuning using UniRef50. Plots from [40].
From the options presented, ESM2 (650M) and Ankh_base seem to be the most optimal. "Fine-
tuning protein language models boosts predictions across diverse tasks" presents another compar-
ison between all three models [46]. It explores the effects of ﬁne-tuning baseline models before
extracting the embeddings. Fine-tuning has been shown to be particularly useful when dealing
with small datasets. The method increases performance because it gives access to the information
stored in the remaining model. Of the eight prediction tasks tested and presented in the article,
Prediction of protein sorting to lysosomes in human cells
29
==PAGE:40==
subcellular localization was included, again utilizing the DeepLoc dataset. Before ﬁne-tuning, the
accuracy using ESM2 (650M) was 62.9 % ± 1.26 %, while the accuracy using Ankh_base was
60.3 % ± 0.60 %. After ﬁne-tuning, the accuracy of the models increased to 63.8 % ± 1.31 % and
62.5 % ± 0.71 %, respectively. The lower score compared to the previous example is most likely
due to the simpliﬁed architecture utilized for the downstream classiﬁcation. Based on these results,
it was chosen to continue with the ESM2 (650M) as foundation model.
4.2.3
Results
Static embeddings were obtained by extracting the last hidden layer of the model after processing
each protein. As the layer consists of 1280 units, each residue is represented by a vector of the
same length. Figure 4.5 shows the mean standard deviation between residues of the same position
in each protein. The plot displays a clear spike in variation around the variable motif, as well as
a smaller spike around the linker sequence that connects the two ﬂuorescent proteins. It might be
less conﬁdent in its prediction of the linker sequence because it is artiﬁcially constructed. As a
result, the output is more affected by the residues around the variable motif.
Figure 4.5: Plot showing mean variability between embeddings for each residue in the full protein. Full
protein includes SP (signal peptide), mCherry, Link (linking sequence), EGFP, and the variable segment
(motif). The length corresponds to the longest protein in the dataset, i.e. the full protein construct and a
sequence segment of 50 amino acids.
To reduce downstream computation costs, only the motif region was saved for model training. Be-
fore proceeding to this step, the saved embeddings were used as input for Principal Component
Analysis (PCA) and Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection (UMAP). The data was sep-
arated by pool, excluding sequences differing in length from 25 or 50 residues. Figure 4.6 shows
the 2-dimensional projections using the components with the most variance. Each datapoint is col-
ored by the corresponding label assigned in section 3.1. Although the methods are unsupervised,
each seem to separate the data by label with varying accuracy. PC1 of Pool 2 and UMAP2 of Pool
1 show dense clusters of positive sequences. UMAP1 appears to effectively separate positive from
negative labels for each pool but is especially signiﬁcant for Pool 1.
30
Prediction of protein sorting to lysosomes in human cells
==PAGE:41==
Figure 4.6: Scatterplot of results from PCA and UMAP. Data is separated by pool and colored by label.
Pool 1 and 2 only contains sequences 25 and 50 amino acids long, respectively, meaning 18 sequences were
excluded from the analysis.
Both PCA and UMAP result in distinct clusters of positive labels. This could be due to sequence
similarity. To explore this further, the same plot was created, now colored by the partitioning
performed in section 4.1. The results, shown in Figure 4.7, reveal that the positive clusters that
form in Pool 2 belong to fold 4, which deviates signiﬁcantly in distribution from the remaining
folds. For Pool 1, fold 1 also appears to deviate slightly from the other distributions. From these
results, it was decided to avoid using folds 1 and 4 as test sets for model training, but instead to
use fold 5.
Prediction of protein sorting to lysosomes in human cells
31
==PAGE:42==
PCA
UMAP
Figure 4.7: Scatter- and density plot of results from PCA and UMAP. Data is separated by pool and colored
by fold (see section 4.1).
Finally, the same plot was also used to visualize the distribution of the randomly shufﬂed se-
quences. The results are shown in Figure 4.30. The shufﬂed sequences are clearly positioned in
a deﬁnite cluster in both the PCA and UMAP. This can aid in the interpretation of the overall
results. Because the shufﬂed sequences are generated by randomly mixing the residues of a se-
quence, sorting might not be dependent on a motif but instead the on presence of speciﬁc residues.
Clusters without shufﬂed sequences might contain certain sequence patterns recognized by the
pLM because they more commonly occur among proteins in the UniRef database.
32
Prediction of protein sorting to lysosomes in human cells
==PAGE:43==
Figure 4.8: Scatterplot of results from PCA and UMAP of Pool 2. Shufﬂed sequences are colored red.
4.3
Model Training
Extracting embeddings from the ESM2 model results in a matrix of dimension 1280×d per motif,
where d is the length of the sequence. The ﬁrst block of the classiﬁer pipeline, shown in Figure 4.9,
is created to compress the input matrix into a vector. The output vector is an attention weighted
sum of the token representations. The subsequent block is a sequential stack of classiﬁers followed
by an output layer.
Figure 4.9: Classiﬁer pipeline.
The attention weights of the pooling layer are used by the classiﬁer blocks to identify which parts
of the sequence are important to make an accurate prediction. The weights are the output of a
softmax function applied to attention scores learned during training. Attention scores are trained
using a Fourier-transform-based attribution prior. The method calls for a two part loss function:
L(x,y, f) = Lc(f(x),y)+λLp(g(x, f))
(4.1)
Prediction of protein sorting to lysosomes in human cells
33
==PAGE:44==
where Lc is the standard loss for the model and Lp is the attribution prior loss. The prior loss is
used to encourage smoothness in the attention scores by penalizing non-smooth patterns [47]. The
model is therefore explicitly trained to maximize interpretability to the extent in which the prior
loss is weighted by λ. The value of λ, among other hyperparameters, can have a signiﬁcant effect
on model training and performance. For this reason, the ﬁnal results can be improved through
hyperparameter optimization.
4.3.1
Methods
Attention pooling consists of an initial normalization and a linear layer. The output is fed to a
single head attention layer and is followed by a dropout layer. The output size of the attention
head is a hyperparameter, referred to as attention size. The classiﬁcation layers are a combination
of N identical stacks, each containing a normalization, linear, activation, and dropout layer. The
number of layers is a hyperparameter along with the output dimension of the linear layer and the
dropout rate of the dropout layers. The output dimension varies for each layer, while the dropout
rate is constant. The activation function uses LeakyReLU for the non-linear transformation. The
ﬁnal classiﬁer head is made up of a single linear layer with one output value. The ﬁnal predictions
are computed using the sigmoid function. During training, the optimizer attempts to minimize the
training loss, which is a sum of the binary cross-entropy (BCE) loss and a regularized attribution
prior loss. The regularizer, λ, along with the learning rate and batch size, are the remaining
hyperparameters. Training ends after 30 epochs or when the BCE loss of the validation set starts
to plateau.
For effective data usage, four models were trained and validated using different combinations of
the four folds created in section 4.1. Model 1 is validated using fold 1 and trained on remaining
three folds. The subsequent models follow the same pattern, resulting in models 2, 3, and 4
being validated on folds 2, 3, and 4, respectively. To obtain the lowest possible loss for each
model, the Optuna Optimization Framework was utilized [48]. The framework helps to explore
the hyperparameter space and its effect on the BCE loss by running multiple trials using the same
fold for training. The method utilizes a Tree-structured Parzen Estimator (TPE) model-based
algorithm to approximate the loss function and uses it to suggest hyperparameters. From the
results of previous trials, new suggestions are made, allowing the model to learn and improve with
each run [49]. The table in Appendix D shows the speciﬁc value ranges that were tested.
4.3.2
Results
Optimization
It was chosen to run a total of 200 trials, i.e. 50 trials per model. The choice was based on the low
number of hyperparameters included for optimization. Although examples from the Optuna article
[48] are performed using 100 trials, the framework is also designed to optimize up to hundreds of
parameters. With this in mind, 50 trials per model seemed sufﬁcient. To conﬁrm this assumption,
the validation BCE loss and accuracy for all 200 trials was plotted. The result is shown in Figure
4.10. Although there is still variance at the end of optimization, improvement show to stagnate
after a maximum of 30 trials. From here, it was chosen to continue working with the four models
with lowest BCE loss.
34
Prediction of protein sorting to lysosomes in human cells
==PAGE:45==
Figure 4.10: Results from hyperparameter optimization showing ﬁnal validation BCE loss and accuracy
after each trial.
For Model 1, 2 and 3, the best results were produced at the end of the optimization process, i.e.
trial 39, 42, and 48, respectively. This was not the case for Model 4, which showed the lowest
loss in trial 23. This corresponds well with the ﬁtted curve, which shows Model 4 to improve
faster and stagnate earlier, compared to the other models. These results could be linked to the
distribution observed in the PCA plot of the sequence embeddings shown in Figure 4.7. Although
the validation set (fold 4), seems to differ in sequence similarity from the remaining data, the
sorting motif could still translate. If sequences in fold 4 contain the same sorting motif, the pattern
is quickly identiﬁed by the model. From the optimization process, Model 2 stands out the most.
The loss and accuracy starts out good, but shows little improvement from the ﬁrst to the last trial.
The previous results do not give an indication of why this might be the case.
Training and validation accuracies were tracked during ﬁtting and are presented for each of the
four models in Figure 4.11. When comparing the two curves, none of the models appears to be
signiﬁcantly overﬁtted. If anything, they might have beneﬁted from a longer patience of the early
stopping mechanism. Of the four models, Model 2 stands out the most. For Models 1, 3, and
4, the validation accuracy is systematically above or near the training accuracy. Labels in fold 2
might be harder to predict because the patterns in the data are more unusual. This could be due
to uncommon sorting signals or false labels. Irregular motifs in fold 2 could contribute to the low
training accuracy of the remaining models, resulting in good generalization on their corresponding
validation sets.
Prediction of protein sorting to lysosomes in human cells
35
==PAGE:46==
Figure 4.11: Training and validation accuracy during training for Model 1, 2, 3, and 4, from trial 39, 42,
48, and 2, respectively.
The ﬁnal BCE loss and accuracy for each model is presented in Table 4.1 along with their cor-
responding hyperparameters. The table shows Model 2 having an attention size of 424 - Almost
double the size compared to the second largest value of 242 in Model 4. This could explain the
lack of hidden layers, which might be nonessential with the extra contribution of information from
the attention block. The results also show a high dropout rate in Model 1 and 2 of 0.45 and 0.23,
respectively. Based on previous observations, the high need for regularization is reasonable for
Model 2, but is surprising for Model 1. Model 1 also has a high λ value, meaning it prioritizes
attribution prior loss higher than the other models. This indicates noisy and non-smooth attention
scores, potentially hindering the models ability to generalize.
36
Prediction of protein sorting to lysosomes in human cells
==PAGE:47==
Hyperparameter
Model 1
Model 2
Model 3
Model 4
Validation set
Fold 1
Fold 2
Fold 3
Fold 4
Attention size
152
424
200
242
Number of hidden layers
2
0
2
1
Output dimension (clf. layers)
[200, 200]
-
[168, 168]
[256]
Dropout rate
0.45
0.23
0.01
> 0.01
Learning rate
2.3·10−4
3.1·10−4
2.2·10−4
1.4·10−4
Batch size
184
216
184
152
Attribution loss regularizer, λ
0.29
0.14
0.08
0.15
BCE loss
0.17
0.17
0.15
0.14
Accuracy
0.89
0.90
0.91
0.95
Table 4.1: Hyperparameters of each model and their performance metrics on the validation set.
In three of the four models, the dropout rate was estimated to be the hyperparameter with the
largest impact on performance (see Appendix 5). It was only Model 1 for which the learning rate
was more important. The high dropout rate for Model 1 might be explained by its smaller effect on
its performance. Having said that, the dropout rate is still the second most important parameter and
should therefore not be considered random. Three of the four models also have the learning rate
in its top two most important hyperparameters. It is only Model 4 in which λ is more important.
Performance & Reliability
The ﬁnal model is a combination of the four presented above. Its performance and reliability were
tested using fold 5 from section 4.1. The label probabilities computed by each model are used to
calculate a mean value and produce a single prediction. The prediction is labeled as Positive if
the mean probability is < 0.5 and Negative otherwise. The resulting test BCE loss and accuracy
are 0.35 and 0.86, respectively. Although not as good as the validation results, the model still
performed very well.
To further evaluate model performance, speciﬁcity and sensitivity was explored. Figure 4.12a
presents the intersection between the true and predicted labels through a confusion matrix. The
results show a balanced distribution between the two labels with minimal to no detectable bias.
The confusion matrix demonstrates the level of agreement at a threshold of 0.5, resulting in an
FPR of 0.132 and a TPR of 0.855. The relationship between the two values at different thresholds
is expressed through the Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curve presented in 4.12b. The
Area Under the Curve (AUC) is 0.92, which signiﬁes a classiﬁer with a good balance between
sensitivity and speciﬁcity.
Prediction of protein sorting to lysosomes in human cells
37
==PAGE:48==
(a) Confusion matrix showing the true vs. predicted labels.
(b) Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curve.
Figure 4.12: Evaluation metrics for the ﬁnal model.
The values in the confusion matrix were also used to calculate the Matthews Correlation Coefﬁ-
cient (MCC). The measure incorporates all four categories, i.e. the number of True Positives (TPs),
False Positives (FPs), True Negatives (TNs), and False Negatives (FNs).
MCC =
TP·TN −FP·FN
"
(TP+FP)(TP+FN)(TN +FP)(TN +FN)
(4.2)
The value is a measure of the correlation between true classes and predicted labels, expressed
through values ranging between −1 and +1 [50]. The resulting MCC is +0.72, which is signif-
icantly higher than the estimated MCC of +0.28 by DeepLoc2.0, presented in chapter 1, Table
1.1.
To judge the conﬁdence of the model, the computed probabilities were also evaluated. Figure 4.13a
shows the distribution of the predicted probabilities, separated by whether the ﬁnal prediction was
correct or incorrect. The plot shows many predictions with a probability below 0.1 or above 0.9.
It also shows that the predictions are close to random if the probability is between 0.4 and 0.6, as
the number of true and false predictions is almost equal. The calibration curve shown in Figure
4.13b displays the reliability of the estimated probabilities. It appears to be accurate around the
edges of the scale, while being less precise in the range of 0.3 to 0.7. It is especially overconﬁdent
in the range of 0.3 and 0.5. However, this could be due to the low number of predictions in the
middle range, which increases the potential for variability in the fraction of positives. Both ﬁgures
indicate reliable probability predictions from the model while also highlighting the importance of
considering the computed probability.
To try and identify whether there are any other systematic causes for incorrect predictions, the
results were included in the PCA and UMAP plots from section 4.2. The results are shown in
Figure 4.14. At ﬁrst glance, the placement of incorrectly predicted labels does not seem different
from the general distribution. Due to the good separation between positive and negative samples in
the UMAP of Pool 1, it is easier to see that the incorrect labels are located mainly at the boundary
between the two clusters. For the PCA of Pool 2, incorrect predictions seem to be more frequent
around the edge of the cluster when PC1 and PC2 > 0.
38
Prediction of protein sorting to lysosomes in human cells
==PAGE:49==
(a) Distribution of predicted probabilities of the ﬁnal
model, separated into true and false predictions. Proba-
bility threshold is < 0.5 for Positive labels and ≥0.5 for
Negative labels.
(b) Calibration curve comparing average predicted proba-
bilities vs. actual fraction of Positive labels divided into
10 bins. If the calibration curve moves below the diagonal,
the model is likely to be overconﬁdent.
Figure 4.13: Metrics for evaluating reliability of the probability predictions.
Figure 4.14: Scatterplot of results from PCA and UMAP in section 4.2. The plot only includes sequences
from test set (fold 5). Data is separated by pool and colored by their true label. The marker signiﬁes if the
result of the model prediction was correct or incorrect.
Prediction of protein sorting to lysosomes in human cells
39
==PAGE:50==
Comparison to DeepLoc2.1
For comparison, the test set was also submitted to DeepLoc2.1, using the complete sequence
construct as input [51]. The threshold for lysosomal localization is > 0.5848. The predictions
resulted in an MCC of +0.10. The corresponding confusion matrix and ROC curve are presented
in Figure 4.15. The ROC curve reﬂects a nearly random prediction performance, with an AUC of
0.56
(a) Confusion matrix showing the true vs. predicted labels.
(b) Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curve.
Figure 4.15: Evaluation metrics for predictions on the test set by DeepLoc2.1 [51].
Although the output of DeepLoc2.1 only includes seven sequences above the speciﬁed threshold,
in practice, the model resulted in 15 Positive labels. This is because the model falls back on the
locations with highest probability if no categories exceed the pre-deﬁned thresholds. Table 4.2
shows the number of times DeepLoc2.1 predicted each location. It is clear from these results that
the model most often predicts the extracellular label.
Table 4.2: Results using DeepLoc2.1 on test set (fold 5) [51]. Of the 383 sequences, 5 sequences were si-
multaneously predicted as ’Cell Membrane’ and ’Lysosome/Vacuole’. 5 labels (’Nucleus’, ’Mitochondrion,
’Plastid’, ’Golgi apparatus’, and ’Peroxisome’) are not included in the table, as the result was 0.
Subcellular Localization
No of Sequences
Cytoplasm
4
Extracellular
328
Cell membrane
17
Endoplasmic reticulum
24
Lysosome/Vacuole
15
Of the 15 Positive predictions, only 3 were incorrect. Interestingly enough, 7 of the 12 correct
predictions by DeepLoc2.1 were predicted incorrectly by the ﬁnal model. This suggests that the
two models do not identify and label their input based on the same sequence patterns.
In addition to the original ten locations predicted by DeepLoc2.0, DeepLoc2.1 also incorporates
membrane association predictions, i.e. soluble, peripheral, lipid anchor and transmembrane. As
40
Prediction of protein sorting to lysosomes in human cells
==PAGE:51==
mentioned in the discussion of chapter 3, the intention behind the division of sequences into pools
was to explore the sorting mechanisms of soluble and membrane-bound proteins separately. How-
ever, this was not incorporated into the sequences, meaning that the membrane-type is somewhat
arbitrary. Fortunately, DeepLoc2.1 can help to identify the potential membrane-type of each input.
Of all sequences in the test set, ∼90% of the proteins were predicted to be soluble, while ∼11%
were predicted to be transmembrane proteins. The remaining two were ≤1%. The distribution of
predicted probabilities for the two is shown in Figure 4.16. If the predictions are true, the model
is heavily biased by the sorting signals of soluble proteins.
Figure 4.16: Distribution of predicted probabilities of 2 different protein membrane-types by DeepLoc2.1
[51]. The two membrane types are soluble and transmembrane proteins.
Of the 15 proteins predicted to be localized in lysosomes by DeepLoc2.1, 12 were predicted to be
transmembrane proteins. In addition to this, out of the 3 incorrect predictions, 2 were predicted to
be soluble. This strongly suggests that DeepLoc2.1 mainly recognizes lysosomal transmembrane
proteins.
Of the 41 sequences predicted to be transmembrane proteins, 13 were incorrectly labeled by the
ﬁnal model. This is an accuracy of 68%, which is a relatively large drop from the overall accuracy
of 86%. This suggests that the trained model does not recognize sorting signals in transmembrane
proteins as well as soluble proteins.
4.4
Model Interpretation
In an attempt to decipher how the ﬁnal model makes its prediction, a deeper look will be taken
at the attention scores produced by the attention pooling layer. The model uses the output scores
to determine which positions, i.e. residues, are important to focus on to improve BCE loss. The
primary use of the scores is as input for the classiﬁcation layers, but they are also useful for model
interpretation using LOGO plots.
4.4.1
Methods
When creating a LOGO plot, the residues are often colored according to their properties as follows:
Prediction of protein sorting to lysosomes in human cells
41
==PAGE:52==
• Acidic [DE]: Red
• Basic [HKR]: Blue
• Hydrophobic [ACFILMPVW]: Black
• Neutral [GNQSTY]: Green
The neutral category is the least straightforward of the four. It includes glycine (G), which is
technically hydrophobic but is so small that its hydrophobic effect is limited. It also includes as-
paragine (N), glutamine (Q), serine (S), and threonine (T), which have polar side-chains. Tyrosine
(Y) is the last amino acid in this category. It is generally considered polar because of its hydroxyl
group, but can also exhibit non-polar characteristics as a result of its aromatic ring. Cysteine (C)
and proline (P) are both included in the hydrophobic group. Because of the thiol group in cys-
teine, the residue is actually polar. However, it is often categorized as a "special case" because
the formation of a disulﬁde bond makes it non-polar. Proline is unique because it binds to its
own backbone. However, the available cyclic structure is hydrophobic. Taking these chemical
properties into account, the following categorizations and colors were utilized.
• Acidic [D, E]: Red
• Basic [H, K, R]: Blue
• Hydrophobic [A, F, G, I, L, M, P, V, W]: Yellow
• Polar [C, N, Q, S, T, Y]: Green
For a disulﬁde bridge to form, two cysteines need to be present and in close proximity in the chain.
As this is assumed to be of lower likelihood in the speciﬁc experimental scenario, cysteine is added
to the polar group. Because the label for the neutral category was changed to polar, glycine was
moved to the hydrophobic category. Hopefully, the new coloring will aid in the interpretation of
the LOGO plots when analyzing the sequences for potential sorting motifs.
4.4.2
Results
To perform the model interpretation, it is necessary to view the sequences and corresponding
attention scores individually. For an organized approach, it was chosen to start by examining the
sequences for which the labels were correctly predicted. Afterwards, observed patterns are used
to hypothesize potential explanations for why the model predicted incorrectly for the remaining
sequences. The analysis is completed after examining the shufﬂed sequences to try to understand
why so many were included in the positive class.
Correctly Predicted Labels
Applying the model to the test set resulted in 330 correctly predicted labels from a total of 383
sequences. To avoid examining each individual result, sequences were strategically selected based
on their location in the PCA and UMAP from section 4.2.
Figure 4.17 shows the sequence ID and location of the four positive samples selected from Pool
1. The ﬁrst part of the ID is the UniProt ID of the protein from which the sequence is acquired.
42
Prediction of protein sorting to lysosomes in human cells
==PAGE:53==
Many are followed by an additional number, like the ’-4’ in Q8NCG7-4segm62-86. This is added
if there are multiple isoforms of the same protein included in the data. The "segm" part is short
for "segment" and is followed by the ﬁrst and last positions of the sequence in the protein. The
sequence, Q8NCG7-4segm62-86, was chosen based on its location in the small but largely positive
cluster formed in the PCA plot. The remaining three sequences were chosen in an attempt to cover
a wider area of the large cluster. The predicted probabilities are listed in Table 4.3. The table
includes a short name for each sequence that will be used to refer to particular samples throughout
the analysis.
Figure 4.17: Pool 1 results from PCA and UMAP in section 4.2, only including sequences from the test set
(fold 5). Datapoints are colored by their true label, while the marker represents the model results. The plot
points out the location of four Positive samples which were predicted as Positive by the model.
Table 4.3: Predicted probabilities of four different Positive samples in Pool 1. For model training, the
labels 0 and 1 were used in replacement of ’Positive’ and ’Negative’. A probability < 0.5 would result in a
Positive label.
ID
True Label [0/1]
Predicted probability
A.1
Q8TDC3-3segm319-343
Positive [0]
0.0179
A.2
Q13614-2segm400-424
Positive [0]
0.1571
A.3
P05089segm298-322
Positive [0]
0.0330
A.4
Q8NCG7-4segm62-86
Positive [0]
0.0941
Figure 4.18 shows the LOGO plot of the average attention score per residue for each of the four
chosen examples. It is clear from the resulting scores that the model places most attention on the
ﬁrst two to six residues. The beginning region is most similar when comparing sequence A.1 and
A.2. Both comprise of an acidic residue within a hydrophobic region. The two sequences are
close in proximity in both the PCA and UMAP. They are also located inside regions of the cluster
Prediction of protein sorting to lysosomes in human cells
43
==PAGE:54==
that contain a higher concentration of positive samples. For sequence A.2, there is also a lot of
attention on the residues between positions 8 to 17. The area is notably lacking in basic amino
acids.
Sequence A.3 is similar to sequences A.1 and A.2 but contains a threonine residue instead of an
acidic one. The polarity of its hydroxyl group might compensate for the lack of acidity, but might
also be sorted through a different mechanism. The high attention area also shares commonalities
with sequence A.4. As expected from the positioning in the PCA and UMAP, this sequence is
the most different of the four. The model stretches its attention slightly further than for the other
scores, covering a hydrophobic area from position 1 to 9. Sequences A.3 and A.4 both have higher
attention scores in positions 1 to 8, with no charged residues.
Figure 4.18: Average attention scores of four Positive samples in Pool 1, computed by the ﬁnal model
trained in section 4.3. Residues are colored by their chemical properties.
Moving on to Pool 2, Figure 4.19 shows the position of four new Positive samples in the PCA
and the UMAP. To optimize diversity, it was decided to select two sequences from each side of
44
Prediction of protein sorting to lysosomes in human cells
==PAGE:55==
the large cluster in the PCA-plot. The two areas showed to be quite different when visualizing the
positions of shufﬂed sequences in section 4.2. Table 4.4 shows the probabilities predicted by the
model for each sequence. It should be noted that one result is very close to the 0.5 threshold. This
should be taken into account when interpreting the LOGO plot.
Figure 4.19: Pool 2 results from PCA and UMAP in section 4.2, only including sequences from the test set
(fold 5). Datapoints are colored by their true label, while the marker represents the model results. The plot
points out the location of four Positive samples which were predicted as Positive by the model.
Table 4.4: Predicted probabilities of four different Positive samples in Pool 2. For model training, the labels
0 and 1 have been used in replacement of ’Positive’ and ’Negative’. A probability < 0.5 would result in a
Positive label.
ID
True Label [0/1]
Predicted probability
B.1
K7EIN0segm26-75
Positive [0]
0.1532
B.2
A0A3B3ISW7segm275-324
Positive [0]
0.0278
B.3
P20718segm121-170
Positive [0]
0.4848
B.4
P00533segm41-90
Positive [0]
0.0704
Figure 4.20 shows the LOGO plot for each sequence. As in Pool 1, much of the attention is placed
on the initial two to six residues. However, the motifs are quite different. Both sequences B.1 and
B.2 contain basic residues in this area. The lower conﬁdence in the prediction of sequence B.2
could be due to the serine residue in position 1. Like threonine, serine contains a hydroxyl group
at the end of its side chain. This group could be counteracting the basic properties of lysine at
position 2. The model also places attention on the downstream positions, speciﬁcally focusing on
areas with a higher amount of hydrophobic residues. Notably, sequence B.1 contains a dileucine-
motif in positions 32 to 37.
Sequence B.3 could have been predicted as Positive as a result of the many hydrophobic residues.
Prediction of protein sorting to lysosomes in human cells
45
==PAGE:56==
However, due to the low conﬁdence in the prediction, any interpretation is inevitably unreliable.
Having said that, the sequence is still a true Positive sample. From the patterns seen in sequences
B.1 and B.2, one could speculate that this is due to the basic arginine residues in positions 6 and
8. Despite the high conﬁdence in the prediction of sequence B.4, the attention scores are spread to
an extent that makes them difﬁcult to interpret. Interestingly enough, sequences B.3 and B.4 are
from the same cluster in the PCA and UMAP. The evenly distributed attention scores could hint
at the existence of a more complex sorting signal. If the signal has a low probability of occurring
by random, it would explain why there are no shufﬂed sequences in the area.
Figure 4.20: Average attention scores of four Positive samples in Pool 2, computed by the ﬁnal model
trained in section 4.3. Residues are colored by their chemical properties.
An interesting take-away from the patterns observed in Pool 1 and 2 is the contrast in residues
in the beginning region. While examples from Pool 1 were either fully hydrophobic or acidic,
residues from Pool 2 were often basic. The results hint towards different sorting pathways.
The next step of the analysis will focus on correctly predicted Negative samples. Figure 4.21
46
Prediction of protein sorting to lysosomes in human cells
==PAGE:57==
shows the location of four selected sequences from Pool 1 in the PCA and UMAP. Table 4.5
lists the corresponding probabilities predicted by the model. Three of the four sequences were
predicted with high conﬁdence, while one is very close to the threshold, with a probability of 0.52.
Figure 4.21: Pool 1 results from PCA and UMAP in section 4.2, including only sequences from the test set
(fold 5). Datapoints are colored by their true label, while the marker represents the model results. The plot
points out the location of four Negative samples which were predicted as Negative by the model.
Table 4.5: Predicted probabilities of four different Negative samples in Pool 1. For model training, the
labels 0 and 1 have been used in replacement of ’Positive’ and ’Negative’. A probability ≥0.5 would result
in a Negative label.
ID
True Label [0/1]
Predicted probability
C.1
Q8IU55segm245-269
Negative [1]
0.9768
C.2
B7Z424segm122-146
Negative [1]
0.9875
C.3
P05452segm178-202
Negative [1]
0.9708
C.4
A0A1B0GVG2segm317-341
Negative [1]
0.5249
Figure 4.22 presents the amino acid sequence and attention score for each of the selected samples.
At ﬁrst glance, sequence C.1 looks very similar to sequences A.3 and A.4 from the Positive sam-
ples. Sequence C.1 contains a serine residue in position 1, while sequence A.3 has a threonine
in position 3. In addition to this, they have a cysteine in positions 7 and 6, respectively. The
main difference between the two is the downstream hydrophobic region of sequence C.2, which
is somewhat similar to the stretched out attention of sequence A.4. Despite this, sequence C.1 is
predicted as Negative with high conﬁdence. This could suggest that the sequence contains a motif
that enables retrograde transport. The attention pattern of sequence C.3 is similar to C.2, as there
is mainly attention on areas with hydrophobic residues. This included the ﬁrst three residues and
the region between positions 16 and 23.
Prediction of protein sorting to lysosomes in human cells
47
==PAGE:58==
The beginning region of sequence C.2 includes an acidic residue in position 2, which was also
present in sequences A.1 and A.2, but in contrast to the Positive samples, the neighboring residues
are polar. This is similar to the same region in sequence C.4, but instead it only has one polar
residue in the area. This might explain the low conﬁdence of the prediction.
Figure 4.22: Average attention scores of four Negative samples in Pool 1, computed by the ﬁnal model
trained in section 4.3. Residues are colored by their chemical properties.
Figure 4.23 points out the location of the four Negative samples selected from Pool 2. As for the
Positive samples, two sequences were collected from each side of the large cluster in the PCA plot.
The corresponding predicted probabilities are listed in Table 4.6. The ﬁrst sequence resulted in a
very low conﬁdence of 0.52. This is reﬂected by the marginal location of the sequence in the PCA
and UMAP. Multiple neighboring sequences also resulted in incorrect predictions.
48
Prediction of protein sorting to lysosomes in human cells
==PAGE:59==
Figure 4.23: Pool 2 results from PCA and UMAP in section 4.2, including only sequences from the test set
(fold 5). Datapoints are colored by their true label, while the marker represents the model results. The plot
points out the location of four Negative samples which were predicted as Negative by the model.
Table 4.6: Predicted probabilities of four different Negative samples in Pool 2. For model training, the
labels 0 and 1 have been used in replacement of ’Positive’ and ’Negative’. A probability ≥0.5 would result
in a Negative label.
ID
True Label [0/1]
Predicted probability
D.1
O43236-6segm225-274
Negative [1]
0.5190
D.2
P40198segm203-252
Negative [1]
0.9587
D.3
A7VJC9segm496-545
Negative [1]
0.9338
D.4
P11279segm201-250
Negative [1]
0.9335
The attention scores and the corresponding sequences are presented in Figure 4.24. In the begin-
ning region of sequences D.1 and D.2 are many residues with similar properties. However, se-
quence D.2 includes a larger proportion of polar residues. When the same area is compared to the
Positive samples in sequences B.1 and B.2, there is also a combination of basic and polar residues.
This suggests a scale in which the properties move between basic, which enables sorting, and polar,
which equalizes the effect. This is also reﬂected in the conﬁdence of the probabilities, as sequence
D.1 is the least conﬁdent of the two Negative samples. It should also be noted that the two neg-
ative sequences place attention on multiple downstream areas. Perhaps by chance, both include
two neighboring dileucine residues, although neither pair takes part in a classic dileucine-motif.
The EL-pair actually bears a stronger resemblance to a KDEL-motif. The motif is responsible
for retrograde transport between the Golgi and ER of soluble proteins, so it makes sense if this is
the reason the sequence is in the Negative sample. Sequence D.1 also contains a diphenylalanine-
motif, which enables antegrade transport from the ER to the Golgi. However, this motif is for
membrane-bound proteins and therefore requires the sequence to penetrate the membrane in the
Prediction of protein sorting to lysosomes in human cells
49
==PAGE:60==
ER.
As expected from their location in the PCA, the results from sequences D.3 and D.4 look very
different from D.1 and D.2. For sequence D.3, the attention scores are spread to a degree that
makes them difﬁcult to interpret. However, the sequence contains many charged residues and no
hydrophobic stretches longer than 2 positions. In terms of sequence D.4, the attention patterns are
similar to D.2, but the residues are very different. Beyond a dileucine-pair in positions 32 to 33,
few parallels can be tied to the two ﬁrst examples.
Figure 4.24: Average attention scores of four Negative samples in Pool 2, computed by the ﬁnal model
trained in section 4.3. Residues are colored by their chemical properties.
From the limited number of sequences analyzed, a few potential sorting motifs can be hypothe-
sized. For Pool 1, the presence of an acidic residue in the beginning of the sequence seems to
enable sorting to lysosomes. However, it also seems that the acidic effect can be counteracted if
they are not placed among hydrophobic residues. This resulting motif could be something along
the line of "Φ[E/D][S/T/Φ]". From the analysis of the Negative sequences, it could be worth in-
50
Prediction of protein sorting to lysosomes in human cells
==PAGE:61==
vestigating the motif "GLVS" which was highlighted in sequence C.1, to ﬁgure out if it takes part
in retrograde sorting. In addition to this, a longer stretch of hydrophobic residues might also aid
in the sorting to the lysosomes. Interestingly enough, sequences from Pool 2 were often initiated
by basic residues. Again, the Negative samples showed that the sorting effect could be counter-
acted if neighboring polar residues. It is also noteworthy that the model often places attention on
leucine-pairs downstream from the ﬁrst residues in the sequence. From a comparison between
all sequences containing highlighted leucine-pairs in Pool 2, it makes sense if it has a role in the
retention of proteins along the biosynthetic pathway. The reasoning is not based on the labels but
rather on the speciﬁc probabilities. Although two Positive samples contain a downstream LL- or
IL-motif, these are the predictions with the worst conﬁdence.
Incorrectly Predicted Labels
In an attempt to further decipher the validity and reasoning behind the model predictions, a handful
of incorrect results were examined. Figure 4.25 shows the location of four sequences selected
from Pool 1 in the PCA and UMAP. In contrast to previous examples, the sequences are colored
according to the output probabilities. The intention was to obtain samples predicted with varying
conﬁdence. Table 4.7 presents the result for each sequence.
Figure 4.25: Pool 1 results from PCA and UMAP in section 4.2, including only sequences from the test
set (fold 5). Datapoints are colored according to the predicted probability, while the marker represents the
model results. The plot points out the location of four samples that were predicted incorrectly by the model.
Figure 4.26 shows the LOGO-plot for each sample. The ﬁrst three sequences are true Positives,
while the fourth is true Negative. Of the three Positives, the result for sequence E.1 was the closest
to the threshold, with a probability of 0.53. Although the sequence includes an acidic residue in
position 3, the residue also neighbors a polar asparagine. This could be one reason the model
resulted in a Negative prediction. The same can be said for sequence E.2 which is very similar
to E.1 in the beginning region. The sequence also includes a polar residue in position 4, which
might explain the increased conﬁdence by the model. However, there is also a slight increase
Prediction of protein sorting to lysosomes in human cells
51
==PAGE:62==
Table 4.7: Probabilities of four incorrectly predicted samples in Pool 1. For model training, the labels 0
and 1 were used in replacement of ’Positive’ and ’Negative’. A probability < 0.5 would result in a Positive
label.
ID
True Label [0/1]
Predicted probability
E.1
Q96G03segm588-612
Positive [0]
0.5251
E.2
P20155segm60-84
Positive [0]
0.9071
E.3
Q8TBE7segm99-123
Positive [0]
0.8020
E.4
P07288-4segm45-69
Negative [1]
0.1919
in attention on the leucine-pair in positions 19 to 20. Although the predictions are incorrect, the
results conﬁrm the reasoning behind the model predictions.
Figure 4.26: Average attention scores of four samples in Pool 1, computed by the ﬁnal model trained in
section 4.3. The ﬁrst three sequences are true Positives, predicted as Negatives, while the third is true
Negative and predicted as Positive. Residues are colored by their chemical properties.
52
Prediction of protein sorting to lysosomes in human cells
==PAGE:63==
In the case of sequence E.3, a signiﬁcant amount of attention is applied to the phenylalanine
residue in the ﬁrst position. The incorrect prediction could be the result of disproportionate at-
tention put on residues in unfamiliar positions. Although phenylalanine is not rare in itself, all
sequences observed so far are either initiated by hydrophilic residues or very small hydrophobic
ones. It is clear from previous results that the model heavily considers the residues beginning
region. One can speculate that the Negative samples might be more diverse than the Positives,
leading the model to have bias towards rare patterns, which would result in a Negative prediction.
However, from the Positive and correct predictions, it was speculated that heavily hydrophobic
sequences enabled sorting to the lysosome. If this is the case, it makes sense that sequence E.3 is
a true Positive, due to the long hydrophobic region from positions 6 to 23.
From the distribution in attention scores of sequence E.4, the reasoning behind the prediction is
difﬁcult to interpret. However, from the sequence alone, one would be inclined to believe that the
Positive prediction was based on the two basic residues in positions 1 and 3. The motif is very
similar to the same region of the true Positive sequence B.2 from Pool 2. Nevertheless, it seems
that the sequences from Pools 1 and 2 are sorted through different pathways. The distinction
between the two groups might not be fully recognized by the model.
Turning to Pool 2, Figure 4.27 shows the location of four new sequences in the PCA and UMAP.
As in previous examples, two sequences were chosen from each side of the large cluster. Table 4.8
lists the predicted probabilities.
Figure 4.27: Pool 2 results from PCA and UMAP in section 4.2, including only sequences from the test
set (fold 5). Datapoints are colored according to the predicted probability, while the marker represents the
model results. The plot points out the location of four samples which were predicted incorrectly by the
model.
Prediction of protein sorting to lysosomes in human cells
53
==PAGE:64==
Table 4.8: Predicted probabilities of four different samples in Pool 2. For model training, the labels 0 and 1
were used in replacement of ’Positive’ and ’Negative’. A probability < 0.5 would result in a Positive label.
ID
True Label [0/1]
Predicted probability
F.1
A0A024RC89segm376-425
Negative [1]
0.2088
F.2
Q9ULZ3segm146-195
Negative [1]
0.4377
F.3
B3KW95segm119-168
Positive [0]
0.6392
F.4
B4DNT7segm291-340
Positive [0]
0.8591
The resulting LOGO plots for each sequence are presented in Figure 4.28. Of the ﬁrst two se-
quences, it is most surprising that F.1 is a true Negative sample. The sequence is initiated by a
basic residue in a hydrophobic area. However, a bit of attention is also placed on the valine-pair
in positions 22 to 23, which could display similar properties as a leucine-pair. A similar attention
pattern appears in sequence F.2, but for this sample, a true Negative is in better correspondence
with previous results. In replacement of a basic residue in the beginning region, two polar residues
are present. In addition to this, the model highlights a shorter stretch with a leucine-pair. For
this case, it is more surprising that the model predicts the sequence to be Positive. However, the
predicted probability of sequence F.2 is still closer to the threshold than for sequence F.1.
For sequence F.3, the label is incorrectly predicted as Negative. Compared with previous results,
the sequence is similar in property composition to the true Negative sequence D.3, as both are
heavily mixed with both acidic and basic residues. Neither sequence includes areas with consid-
erably high attention scores. The result signiﬁes an unsupported prediction, potentially with too
few sequences to make a well informed suggestion. This is also reﬂected in the conﬁdence of the
prediction.
In contrast to sequence F.3, sequence F.4 consists mainly of hydrophobic residues. This includes
a long stretch of small hydrophobic residues in positions 16 to 36. Unlike hydrophobic stretches
previously seen, the length of this sequence could have the ability to pass through the lipid bilayer.
This assumption is supported by DeepLoc2.1, which predicts sequence F.4 to be a transmembrane
protein with a probability of 0.96. If this is the case, the sorting mechanisms would be different,
which explains the incorrect prediction by the model. DeepLoc2.1 also predicts the sequence to
be localized in the lysosomes with a probability of 0.66. Figure 4.29 shows the resulting attention
scores. The DeepLoc2.1 model puts signiﬁcantly more attention on the terminal region of the
sequence, which includes a tyrosine-based sorting motif.
54
Prediction of protein sorting to lysosomes in human cells
==PAGE:65==
Figure 4.28: Average attention scores of four samples in Pool 2, computed by the ﬁnal model trained in
section 4.3. The two ﬁrst sequences are true Negatives, predicted as Positives, while the third and fourth
are true Positives, predicted as Negatives. Residues are colored by their chemical properties.
Figure 4.29: Attention scores of protein construct with segment B4DNT7 291-340 by DeepLoc2.1 [51].
From a comparison between sequences with correctly and incorrectly predicted labels, some mo-
tifs become more distinct, while others appear more ambiguous. For Pool 1, the result supported
the suggestion that sorting depends on an acidic or hydrophobic residue in the beginning region.
However, the model was unable to judge the exact effect of neighboring residues. For Pool 2, the
sorting ability of basic residues in the same region was contradicted. The attention scores contin-
Prediction of protein sorting to lysosomes in human cells
55
==PAGE:66==
uously highlight the potential effect of a leucine-pair, which motif could be extended to include
valine, [L/I/V][L/I/V]. The effects of neighboring residues are unclear, but might contribute to the
varying sorting outcome.
Shufﬂed Sequences
As a last step of the analysis, the results of the shufﬂed sequences were examined more closely.
Figure 4.30 shows the location of the four selected samples in the PCA and UMAP. Of the four
sequences, two were predicted correctly. Table 4.9 lists the corresponding predicted probabilities.
Figure 4.30: Pool 2 results from PCA and UMAP in section 4.2, including only sequences from the test
set (fold 5). Datapoints are colored according to the predicted probability, while the marker represents the
model results. The plot points out the location of four shufﬂed sequences.
Table 4.9: Predicted probabilities of four shufﬂed samples in Pool 2. For model training, the labels 0 and 1
were used in replacement of ’Positive’ and ’Negative’. A probability < 0.5 would result in a Positive label.
ID
True Label [0/1]
Predicted probability
S.1
shufﬂed328
Positive [0]
0.0920
S.2
shufﬂed402
Negative [1]
0.9895
S.3
shufﬂed037
Negative [1]
0.1897
S.4
shufﬂed002
Positive [0]
0.6035
Figure 4.31 shows the sequence and attention scores of each sample. For sequence S.1, the cor-
rectly predicted Positive label is most likely the result of the glutamine residue in position 2. The
conﬁdence might have been reduced as a result of the isoleucine-pair in positions 27 and 28. The
sequence and attention patterns are very similar to sequence F.1, which has a glutamine in the
same position, along with a leucine-pair in positions 32 to 33. However, this sequence was a true
Negative predicted as Positive with low conﬁdence. The difference that stands out the most be-
tween the two sequences is the tyrosine residue in the ﬁrst position of F.1. In the case of sequence
56
Prediction of protein sorting to lysosomes in human cells
==PAGE:67==
S.2, which is Negative, but also correctly predicted, there is a glutamine in the same position as
before, along with an asparagine residue in position 1. The two are placed before an acidic residue,
which could counterbalance their properties.
Figure 4.31: Average attention scores of four shufﬂed samples in Pool 2, computed by the ﬁnal model
trained in section 4.3. Residues are colored by their chemical properties.
The most surprising result is the predicted label of sequence S.3. The true label is Negative. This
is consistent with previous observations because of the acidic residue in the ﬁrst position. In spite
of this, the model predicted it as Positive. One reason could be the motif in the high attention area
from positions 9 to 15. Another explanation could be a lack of clear distinction between sorting
signals in sequences from Pool 1 and Pool 2.
S.4 is the last sequence on the list. Unlike the case of S.3, the prediction aligns well with previous
observations, while the true label is surprising. Based on the acidic residue in position 3, the label
would be expected to be Negative. However, the model also highlights two other parts of the
sequence. The ﬁrst region, between positions 15 to 21, includes a VL-motif. The second, from
positions 41 to 43, is a basic residue in between isoleucine and leucine. It is not the ﬁrst time the
Prediction of protein sorting to lysosomes in human cells
57
==PAGE:68==
model highlights motifs of this form in sequences from Pool 2. A motif in the form of a basic
residue surrounded by small hydrophobic residues has been highlighted in sequences B.2, D.1,
D.3, D.4, F.2 and S.1. The results hint at a motif in the line of [A/V/I/L/M][K/R/N/Q][A/V/I/L/M].
These areas in S.4 support the ambiguity reﬂected in the less conﬁdent prediction of the sequence,
but do not help clarify why the true label is Positive.
From the results of the shufﬂed samples, it seems that the sequences are sorted through relatively
simple motifs. If the model outputs a high conﬁdence prediction, the attention-patterns are short
and revealing. For low conﬁdence predictions, the attention patterns are longer, vague, and disor-
dered. Unlike segments from proteins, the odds of discovering longer and more structured sorting
motifs in shufﬂed sequences are low.
4.5
Discussion
Through the development and evaluation of the sequence classiﬁer, several characteristics of the
data were displayed. From the analysis of the sequence embeddings alone, patterns were already
recognized. The PCA and UMAP reﬂected a clear distinction between Positive and Negative
sequences, as well as true protein segments and random shufﬂed samples. In addition to this, the
analysis exposed potential issues in the distribution of sequence similarity between different data
folds, particularly affecting fold 4. As a result, the optimization of Model 4 quickly stagnated.
This may have limited the effective use of the training data and introduced a level of bias into the
model.
The overall performance of the ﬁnal model on the test set was good. The ROC curve reﬂected a
good balance between TPR and FPR, conveying a high level of reliability in high conﬁdence pre-
dictions. From a comparison with the predictions by DeepLoc2.1, signiﬁcant differences between
the two models were revealed. Although low predictive performance was expected due to an artiﬁ-
cially constructed input, the Positive predictions by DeepLoc2.1 reﬂected an interesting difference
between the two models. Of the 6 correctly predicted Positive sequences, with a probability above
the speciﬁed threshold, all were predicted to be transmembrane proteins. This is noticeable since
only 11% were predicted as such. In addition to this, 5 of the same 6 sequences were predicted
incorrectly by the trained model. This suggests that DeepLoc2.1 mainly recognizes sorting signals
in lysosomal transmembrane proteins, while the trained model recognizes signals in soluble pro-
teins. Model performance might have improved if training had been performed only on proteins
predicted to be soluble.
From the model interpretation, several potential motifs were identiﬁed. First of all, the model
often highlighted the beginning region of the sequence, where the segment was connected to
the remaining protein construct. For this reason, it might have been relevant to include some
of the neighboring residues when training the model. The segment was attached to the C-terminus,
’DELYK-segm’. It is unknown whether these large and charged residues could have impacted the
results of the screening experiment. The relevant residues in the beginning region of each segment
also appeared to be highly dependent on the pool. Based on information from the literature, it is
clear that steric hindrance can impact sorting. This is especially the case for sorting via the Sortilin
58
Prediction of protein sorting to lysosomes in human cells
==PAGE:69==
receptor, which has been shown to interact with many different types of soluble cargo.
In the case of shorter sequences, i.e. 25 amino acid long segments from Pool 1, the beginning
region was generally made up of acidic and hydrophobic residues. From the limited number of
cases observed, only one example showed a basic residue on this position. Although the model
predicted the sequence to be Positive, the screening result was Negative. In the case of longer se-
quences from Pool 2, the opposite appeared to be the case. Here, Positive samples often displayed
basic residues in the beginning region. Pool 1 also resulted in less interpretable attention patterns
compared to Pool 2. Although some cases in Pool 1 showed downstream attention, patterns were
often too dispersed to interpret. This could be a result of the Gaussian ﬁlter width, which smooths
the attention scores. Due to the small input size, the width was reduced from 5 to 3, which was
used to train DeepLoc2.1. It might have made sense to reduce it even further or include it as a
hyperparameter for optimization. Nevertheless, the window size appears to have worked well for
the longer sequences in Pool 2, which displayed a handful of potential sorting motifs. One such
example is the leucine pair [V/I/L][V/I/L], which was often present in the Negative samples. Of-
ten in close proximity, a motif containing a basic amino acid was found, surrounded by smaller
hydrophobic residues [A/V/I/L/M][K/R/N/Q][A/V/I/L/M]. The two could be related or somewhat
interchangeable.
Prediction of protein sorting to lysosomes in human cells
59
==PAGE:70==
60
Prediction of protein sorting to lysosomes in human cells
==PAGE:71==
5
Conclusion
From a differential expression analysis of the output of the high-throughput screening experiment,
987 protein segments were found to enable sorting to the lysosomes with a p-value of 0.01. The
analysis simultaneously provided 990 segments that were found to prevent sorting to the lyso-
somes, with a p-value of 0.05. Of the 1472 sequences in the library of Pool 1, 232 resulted in
a Positive label, resulting in a hit rate of 16%. Of the 4242 sequences in the library of Pool 2,
755 resulted in a Positive label, leading to a hit rate of 18%. The experiment was successful in
delivering a large number of sequences to train the neural network. However, parts of the setup
could be adapted to improve the reliability of the results. Firstly, the experiment requires a better
control group. As the shufﬂed sequences were sorted as frequently as all other samples, it would
be advantageous to include a single Negative sequence multiple times. This would also aid in
error estimation. A higher number of experimental replicates would also improve the stability
of the results. Especially if they are carried out using other types of cell lines. One of the most
promising aspects of the experimental setup is the high-throughput feature. The large number of
results allows for a productive use of deep learning methods, which are often data hungry.
Despite the few issues mentioned, the ﬁnal model performed very well, emphasizing the high
potential of the experimental method. The BCE loss, accuracy, and MCC on the test set were 0.35,
0.86, and +0.72, respectively. The model showed generally good reliability, which corresponded
well with the probability estimates. The result did not reﬂect any signiﬁcant bias towards Positive
or Negative labels. However, this could be due to implicit bias in the data. Despite the use of
homology partitioning, the test set was still provided by the same experiment as the training and
validation sets. To properly quantify the model performance, it should be tested on data from a
separate trial, potentially using a slightly different experimental setup or method.
Analyzing the amino-acid sequences and corresponding attention-scores of the model revealed
multiple motifs with potential inﬂuence on the sorting of soluble proteins to the lysosomes. De-
pending on the length of the segment, an acidic or basic residue in the beginning region can facil-
itate sorting. Downstream motifs such as [V/I/L][V/I/L] and [A/V/I/L/M][K/R/N/Q][A/V/I/L/M]
could also affect sorting. For future experimentation, it would also be interesting to look further
into the effects of the sequence length, ﬁrstly to explore the functional shift between sorting mo-
tifs, but also to explore undiscovered pathways. For future trials, it might make sense to include a
consistent motif in the beginning of the variable segment. The area could be made up of a couple
of small hydrophobic or polar residues that have a lower chance of affecting the variable segment.
Although the model shows the potential to bridge the gap between the predictions of soluble and
transmembrane lysosomal proteins in DeepLoc2.1, there are possible pitfalls that could hinder the
integration of the results. Firstly, the model is trained on protein segments, while DeepLoc2.1 is
trained on full-length protein sequences. If DeepLoc2.1 were to be trained on the combination of
the reporter-protein and variable segments, the data could corrupt the reliability of the tool and add
bias to its predictions. Secondly, all DeepLoc versions are known to be trained on the DeepLoc
Prediction of protein sorting to lysosomes in human cells
61
==PAGE:72==
data, which is made up of annotated proteins with experimental evidence. The data is also ﬁltered
using stringent homology partitioning to avoid overﬁtting on certain protein-families. The process
would likely ﬁlter out most, if not all, of the sequences. If the results were to be utilized in the
model, it might make more sense to create an extension that examines the C-terminus of ER or
cell-membrane (PM) proteins, to search for sorting motifs.
62
Prediction of protein sorting to lysosomes in human cells
==PAGE:73==
Bibliography
[1]
Mien-Chie Hung and Wolfgang Link. “Protein localization in disease and therapy”. In: Jour-
nal of Cell Science 124.20 (2011), pp. 3381–3392. ISSN: 0021-9533. DOI: 10.1242/jcs.
089110. URL: https://doi.org/10.1242/jcs.089110.
[2]
Kenta Nakai. “Protein sorting signals and prediction of subcellular localization”. In: Anal-
ysis of Amino Acid Sequences. Vol. 54. Advances in Protein Chemistry. Academic Press,
2000, pp. 277–344. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0065-3233(00)54009-1. URL: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0065323300540091.
[3]
Henrik Nielsen et al. “A Brief History of Protein Sorting Prediction”. In: Protein Journal
38.3 (2019), pp. 200–216. DOI: 10.1007/s10930-019-09838-3.
[4]
José Juan Almagro Armenteros et al. “DeepLoc: prediction of protein subcellular localiza-
tion using deep learning”. In: Bioinformatics 33.21 (2017), pp. 3387–3395. DOI: 10.1093/
bioinformatics/btx431.
[5]
Vineet Thumuluri et al. “DeepLoc 2.0: multi-label subcellular localization prediction using
protein language models”. In: Nucleic Acids Research 30.1 (2022), W228–W234. DOI: 10.
1093/nar/gkac278.
[6]
Rushika M. Perera and Roberto Zoncu. “The Lysosome as a Regulatory Hub”. In: An-
nual Review of Cell and Developmental Biology 32.1 (2016), pp. 223–253. DOI: 10.1146/
annurev-cellbio-111315-125125.
[7]
Chonglin Yang and Xiaochen Wang. “Lysosome biogenesis: Regulation and functions”. In:
Journal of Cell Biology 220.6 (2021), e202102001. DOI: 10.1083/jcb.202102001.
[8]
Thomas Braulke and Juan S. Bonifacino. “Sorting of lysosomal proteins”. In: Biochimica
Et Biophysica Acta - Molecular Cell Research 1793.4 (2009), pp. 605–614. DOI: 10.1016/j.
bbamcr.2008.10.016.
[9]
Thomas Braulke, Jan E. Carette, and Wilhelm Palm. “Lysosomal enzyme trafﬁcking: from
molecular mechanisms to human diseases”. In: Trends in Cell Biology 34.2 (2024), pp. 198–
210. DOI: 10.1016/j.tcb.2023.06.005.
[10]
Vi T. Tang and David Ginsburg. “Cargo selection in endoplasmic reticulumtoGolgi transport
and relevant diseases”. In: Journal of Clinical Investigation 133.1 (2023), e163838. DOI:
10.1172/JCI163838.
[11]
Icten Meras, Juliette Maes, and Stephane Lefrancois. “Mechanisms regulating the sorting
of soluble lysosomal proteins”. In: Bioscience Reports 42.5 (2022), BSR20211856. DOI:
10.1042/BSR20211856.
[12]
Michael Schwake, Bernd Schröder, and Paul Saftig. “Lysosomal Membrane Proteins and
Their Central Role in Physiology”. In: Trafﬁc 14.7 (2013), pp. 739–748. DOI: 10.1111/tra.
12056.
[13]
Charlotte Ford et al. “Cargo sorting at the trans-Golgi network at a glance”. In: Journal of
Cell Science 134.23 (2021), jcs259110. DOI: 10.1242/jcs.259110.
Prediction of protein sorting to lysosomes in human cells
63
==PAGE:74==
[14]
Maria Francisca Coutinho, Maria João Prata, and Sandra Alves. “A shortcut to the lysosome:
The mannose-6-phosphate-independent pathway”. In: Molecular Genetics and Metabolism
107.3 (2012), pp. 257–266. DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2012.07.012.
[15]
Dovile Januliene et al. “Acidic Environment Induces Dimerization and Ligand Binding Site
Collapse in the Vps10p Domain of Sortilin”. In: Structure 25.23 (2017), 1809–1819.e3. DOI:
10.1016/j.str.2017.09.015.
[16]
Carine de Marcos Lousa and Jurgen Denecke. “Lysosomal and vacuolar sorting: not so
different after all!” In: Biochemical Society Transactions 44.3 (2016), pp. 891–897. DOI:
10.1042/BST20160050.
[17]
BioRender. BioRender. BioRender.com. Accessed May 14, 2025. 2024. URL: https://www.
biorender.com.
[18]
Catherine Staudt, Emeline Puissant, and Marielle Boonen. “Subcellular trafﬁcking of mam-
malian lysosomal proteins: An extended view”. In: International Journal of Molecular Sci-
ences 18.1 (2017), p. 47. DOI: 10.3390/ijms18010047.
[19]
Dominik P. Buser and Anne Spang. “Protein sorting from endosomes to the TGN”. In:
Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology 11 (2023), p. 1140605. DOI: 10.3389/fcell.
2023.1140605.
[20]
Boris Simonetti et al. “Sequence-dependent cargo recognition by SNX-BARs mediates
retromer-independent transport of CI-MPR”. In: Journal of Cell Biology 11 (2017), pp. 3695–
3712. DOI: 10.1083/jcb.201703015.
[21]
Manjeet Kumar et al. “ELM – the Eukaryotic Linear Motif resource – 2024 update”. In:
Nucleic Acids Research 52.D1 (Nov. 2023), pp. D442–D455. ISSN: 0305-1048. DOI: 10.
1093/nar/gkad1058. eprint: https://academic.oup.com/nar/article- pdf/52/D1/D442/
55040653/gkad1058.pdf. URL: https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkad1058.
[22]
Jan Philipp Dobert et al. “Cryo-TEM structure of -glucocerebrosidase in complex with its
transporter LIMP-2”. In: Nature Communications 16.1 (2025), p. 3074. DOI: 10 . 1038 /
s41467-025-58340-1.
[23]
Esben M Quistgaard et al. “Ligands bind to Sortilin in the tunnel of a ten-bladed -propeller
domain”. In: Nature Structural and Molecular Biology 16.1 (2009), pp. 96–98. DOI: 10.
1038/nsmb.1543.
[24]
Mikkel Rasmus Hansen et al. “A Novel Approach to High throughput Screening of lysoso-
mal Targeting Sequences”. Currently unpublished.
[25]
Juan S Bonifacino and Linton M Traub. “Signals for sorting of transmembrane proteins to
endosomes and lysosomes”. In: Annual Review of Biochemistry 72.1 (2003), pp. 395–447.
DOI: 10.1146/annurev.biochem.72.121801.161800.
[26]
Michael I Love, Wolfgang Huber, and Simon Anders. Differential gene expression analysis
based on the negative binomial distribution. Accessed: 2025-04-01. 2014. URL: https://
www.bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/html/DESeq2.html.
[27]
Zhou Y et al. “High-throughput screening of a CRISPR/Cas9 library for functional ge-
nomics in human cells”. In: Nature 509.7501 (2014), pp. 487–491. DOI: 10.1038/nature13166.
64
Prediction of protein sorting to lysosomes in human cells
==PAGE:75==
[28]
Michael I Love, Wolfgang Huber, and Simon Anders. “Moderated estimation of fold change
and dispersion for RNA-seq data with DESeq2”. In: Biorxiv 15.550 (2014). DOI: 10.1101/
002832.
[29]
Erika Cule, Paolo Vineis, and Maria De Iorio. “Signiﬁcance testing in ridge regression for
genetic data”. In: Bmc Bioinformatics 12.1 (2011), p. 372. DOI: 10.1186/1471-2105-12-
372.
[30]
Marius Thrane Ødum et al. “DeepLoc 2.1: multi-label membrane protein type prediction
using protein language models”. In: Nucleic Acids Research 52.W1 (2024), W215–W220.
DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkae237.
[31]
Felix Teufel et al. “GraphPart: homology partitioning for biological sequence analysis”. In:
Nar Genomics and Bioinformatics 5.4 (2023), lqad088. DOI: 10.1101/2023.04.14.536886.
[32]
Ashish Vaswani et al. “Attention Is All You Need”. In: Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems 30 2017 (2017), pp. 5999–6009.
[33]
Lei Wang et al. “A Comprehensive Review of Protein Language Models”. In: Arxiv (cornell
University) 14.8 (2025).
[34]
Michael Heinzinger and Burkhard Rost. “Teaching AI to speak protein”. In: Current Opin-
ion in Structural Biology 91 (2025), p. 102986. DOI: 10.1016/j.sbi.2025.102986.
[35]
Konstantin Weissenow and Burkhard Ros. “Are protein language models the new universal
key?” In: Current Opinion in Structural Biology 91 (2025), p. 102997. DOI: 10.1016/j.sbi.
2025.102997.
[36]
Andreas Bjerregaard et al. “Foundation models of protein sequences: A brief overview”.
In: Current Opinion in Structural Biology 91 (2025), p. 103004. DOI: 10.1016/j.sbi.2025.
103004.
[37]
Dor Bank, Noam Koenigstein, and Raja Giryes. “Autoencoders”. In: Machine Learning for
Data Science Handbook. 3rd ed. Gewerbestrasse 11, 6330 Cham, Switzerland: Springer
International Publishing, 2023, pp. 353–374. ISBN: 978-3-031-24627-2.
[38]
Ahmed Elnaggar et al. “ProtTrans: Toward Understanding the Language of Life Through
Self-Supervised Learning”. In: Ieee Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelli-
gence 44.10 (2022), pp. 7112–7127. DOI: 10.1109/TPAMI.2021.3095381.
[39]
Zeming Lin et al. “Evolutionary-scale prediction of atomic-level protein structure with a
language model”. In: Science 379.6637 (2023), pp. 1123–1130. DOI: 10.1126 /science.
ade2574.
[40]
Ahmed Elnaggar et al. “Ankh: Optimized Protein Language Model Unlocks General-Purpose
Modelling”. In: Biorxiv (2023), p. 29. DOI: 10.1101/2023.01.16.524265.
[41]
Colin Raffel et al. “Exploring the Limits of Transfer Learning with a Uniﬁed Text-to-Text
Transformer”. In: Arxiv 21.140 (2020), pp. 1–67. URL: https://www.jmlr.org/papers/v21/20-
074.html.
[42]
Martin Steinegger and Johannes Söding. “Clustering huge protein sequence sets in linear
time”. In: Nature Communications 9.1 (2018), p. 2542. DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-04964-
5.
Prediction of protein sorting to lysosomes in human cells
65
==PAGE:76==
[43]
Martin Steinegger, Milot Mirdita, and Johannes Söding. “Protein-level assembly increases
protein sequence recovery from metagenomic samples manyfold”. In: Nature Methods 16.7
(2019), pp. 603–606. DOI: 10.1038/s41592-019-0437-4.
[44]
Baris E. Suzek et al. “UniRef clusters: A comprehensive and scalable alternative for im-
proving sequence similarity searches”. In: Bioinformatics 31.6 (2015), pp. 926–932. DOI:
10.1093/bioinformatics/btu739.
[45]
Jacob Devlin et al. “BERT: Pre-training of Deep Bidirectional Transformers for Language
Understanding”. In: Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of
the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1
(Long and Short Papers). Minneapolis, Minnesota: Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, 2019, pp. 4171–4186. DOI: 10.18653/v1/N19-1423.
[46]
Robert Schmirler, Michael Heinzinger, and Burkhard Rost. “Fine-tuning protein language
models boosts predictions across diverse tasks”. In: Nature Communications 15.1 (2024),
p. 7407. DOI: 10.1038/s41467-024-51844-2.
[47]
Alex M. Tseng, Avanti Shrikumar, and Anshul Kundaje. “Fourier-transform-based attribu-
tion priors improve the interpretability and stability of deep learning models for genomics”.
In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 2020 (2020).
[48]
Takuya Akiba et al. “Optuna: A Next-generation Hyperparameter Optimization Frame-
work”. In: Proceedings of the Acm Sigkdd International Conference on Knowledge Dis-
covery and Data Mining (2019), pp. 2623–2631. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1145/3292500.
3330701.
[49]
James Bergstra et al. “Algorithms for Hyper-Parameter Optimization”. In: Advances in Neu-
ral Information Processing Systems. Ed. by J. Shawe-Taylor et al. Vol. 24. Curran Asso-
ciates, Inc., 2011. URL: https : / / proceedings. neurips. cc / paper _ ﬁles / paper / 2011 / ﬁle /
86e8f7ab32cfd12577bc2619bc635690-Paper.pdf.
[50]
Davide Chicco, Niklas Tötsch, and Giuseppe Jurman. “The Matthews correlation coefﬁcient
(MCC) is more reliable than balanced accuracy, bookmaker informedness, and markedness
in two-class confusion matrix evaluation”. In: Biodata Mining 14.1 (2021), p. 13. DOI: 10.
1186/s13040-021-00244-z.
[51]
Marius Thrane Ødum et al. DeepLoc 2.1 web server: multi-label membrane protein type pre-
diction using protein language models. Accessed: 2025-08-09. 2024. URL: https://services.
healthtech.dtu.dk/services/DeepLoc-2.1/.
66
Prediction of protein sorting to lysosomes in human cells
==PAGE:77==
Appendix A
A.1: Library Generation
1.
UniProt (release-2024_03) entries from humans with at least
one of the following annotations were extracted:
lysosome, GO:0005764
late endosome, GO:0005770
secretory vesicle, GO:0099503
Note:
This will automatically include the annotations cytolytic
granule, GO:0044194 (since GO:0044194 is_a GO:0005764) and
secretory granule, GO:0030141 (since GO:0030141 is_a
GO:0099503).
2.
These entries were divided into those that were annotated to
be associated with the membrane (GO:0016020) and those without
such annotation.
Note:
proteins with GO:0016020 are not necessarily
transmembrane - it can mean any type of membrane association,
including peripheral membrane proteins and lipid-anchored
proteins.
This gave the following initial dataset sizes (before removing
duplicates with 2 or 3 of the GO categories annotated):
AND membrane
NOT membrane
lysosome
8619
496
late_endo
754
94
sec_ves
1354
638
total
10727
1228
11955
3.
However, this search did not include all isoforms.
A new
search including UniProt-annotated isoforms gave:
AND membrane
NOT membrane
total
11774
1504
(This time, the numbers are not specified in the three locations,
since the search was made with one command).
4.
The C-terminal 25 and 50 aa were extracted, and duplicates at
the sequence level were removed:
Prediction of protein sorting to lysosomes in human cells
67
==PAGE:78==
AND membrane
NOT membrane
uniq 25
3029
918
uniq 50
3386
951
File "allmem.iso.uniq.Cterm.fasta" with the 3386 50 aa sequences
and
file "allnonmem.iso.uniq.Cterm.fasta" with the 918 25 aa
sequences
sent to Mikkel 04-07-2024
5.
All full sequences were analyzed by DeepLoc 2.0 and those
positive for "Lysosome/Vacuole" were selected.
The numbers are:
Positive for Lysosome/Vacuole:
allmem:
1327 of 11774
= 11.27%
allnonmem:
183 of 1504
12.17%
6.
The sequences predicted positive for "Lysosome/Vacuole" were
analyzed for their attention values from DeepLoc 2.0.
Sequences
that had "relatively high" attention in the "inner" part of the
sequence were selected.
The definition of "relatively high" was at least 10% of the
maximal attention value.
There is a general tendency for
attention to be high in the termini.
In addition, there will
typically be high attention in the signal peptide region.
The definition of "inner" part was the sequence minus the
N-terminal 25aa (to accommodate for the signal peptide) and
minus the C-terminal 50aa (in case of membrane proteins) or 25aa
(in case of non-membrane proteins) to avoid overlap with
sequences already selected.
The numbers were:
allmem:
(Cmask = 50):
950
allnonmem:
(Cmask = 25):
66
7.
From the selected sequences, 25aa centered on the position of
max attention (within the "inner" region) were extracted.
Then,
sequence duplicates were removed.
The remaining numbers:
allmem:
(Cmask = 50):
471
allnonmem:
(Cmask = 25):
35
Files "allmem.iso.uniq.mid.fasta" and
68
Prediction of protein sorting to lysosomes in human cells
==PAGE:79==
"allnonmem.iso.uniq.mid.fasta" with these 25aa sequences were
also sent to Mikkel 04-07-2024.
8.
"Random" sequences were created by taking the first 500
sequences from each of the files "allmem.iso.uniq.Cterm.fasta"
and "allnonmem.iso.uniq.Cterm.fasta" and shuffling the amino
acids of each sequence in random order.
Files
"shuffle25.numbered.fasta" and "shuffle50.numbered.fasta" were
sent to Mikkel 05-07-2024 .
Prediction of protein sorting to lysosomes in human cells
69
==PAGE:80==
Appendix B
B.1: Calculating FPR
Equation for computing false positive rate (FPR):
FPR =
FP
FP+TN =
pct(FP)
pct(FP)+pct(TN)
Here, FP and TN are the false positives and true negatives of the experiment, respectively. As
these are not given, percentages are used.
SUP-T1
FPR =
0.47%
0.47%+19.2% ≈0.024
K562
FPR =
0.20%
0.20%+15.9% ≈0.012
B.2: Calculating FNR
Equation for computing false negative rate (FNR):
FNR =
FN
FN +TP =
pct(FN)
pct(FN)+pct(TP)
Here, FN and TP are the false negatives and true positives of the experiment, respectively. As
they is not given, percentages are used.
SUP-T1
FPR =
1.46%
1.46%+11.6% ≈0.011
K562
FPR =
3.76%
3.76%+6.93% ≈0.352
70
Prediction of protein sorting to lysosomes in human cells
==PAGE:81==
Appendix C
C.1: Statistics for each samples
Table 1: Basic statistics for each sample of experiment 1, 2, & 3 in Pool 1 & 2. Baseline sample from
experiment 1 & 2 are replicates.
Pool 1
Pool 2
Exp.
Positive
Negative
Baseline
Positive
Negative
Baseline
Mean
1
93.3
81.1
104.8
29.4
33.1
37.2
2
106.4
101.0
-
43.9
33.3
-
3
139.0
91.1
108.1
42.1
44.4
43.6
Median
1
67
59
75
21
25
29.5
2
75
74
-
30
26
-
3
82
66
79
22
28
35
Std.
1
97.1
77.8
104.1
28.4
30.9
30.0
2
106.3
97.1
-
45.0
29.7
-
3
164.6
82.3
98.6
55.9
52.8
35.0
C.2: Statisitcs of Pool 2 vs control sequences
Table 2: Basic statisics for each sample of experiment 1, 2, & 3, separating Pool 2 from the control
sequences. Baseline sample from experiment 1 & 2 are replicates.
Pool 2
Controls
Exp.
Positive
Negative
Baseline
Positive
Negative
Baseline
Mean
1
29.5
33.2
37.4
28.4
32.7
35.3
2
43.9
33.4
-
43.7
32.0
-
3
42.0
44.4
43.6
43.3
44.2
43.6
Median
1
21
25
30
19
23
26
2
30
26
-
26
24
-
3
22
28
35
22
26
33
Std.
1
28.0
30.8
29.7
30.9
32.0
32.3
2
43.9
29.8
-
52.3
29.1
-
3
55.4
53.1
34.7
59.6
50.7
37.4
Prediction of protein sorting to lysosomes in human cells
71
==PAGE:82==
Appendix D
D.1: Hyperparameter Range for Optimization
Hyperparameter
Min value
Max value
Attention size
128
512
Number of layers
0
5
Output dimension (classiﬁer layers)
48
256
Dropout rate
0
1
Learning rate
10−5
10−2
Batch size
128
256
Attribution loss regularizer, λ
0.05
0.5
D.2: Hyperparameter Importances
(a) Model 1
(b) Model 2
(c) Model 3
(d) Model 4
Figure 1: Hyperparameter importance for model performance per fold.
72
Prediction of protein sorting to lysosomes in human cells
==PAGE:83==
Prediction of protein sorting to lysosomes in human cells
73
==PAGE:84==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Ørsteds Plads, Building 345C
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.healthtech.dtu.dk
