==PAGE:1==
Practical Estimation of Violin Bridge Admittance
Master Thesis
Holger Rindel
July 10th, 2025
DTU Electro
Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Practical Estimation of Violin Bridge Admittance
Master Thesis
July, 2025
By
Holger Rindel
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the customary
bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Published by:
DTU, Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering, Ørsteds Plads, Build-
ing 352, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.electro.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Preface
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of acoustics, signal processing
and statistics.
This document is divided into a research paper as well as the thesis proper. The research paper
is a condensed version of the thesis more suitable for scientific publication at a later date, e.g. as
a JASA express letter.
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Section for Acoustic Technology, Depart-
ment of Electrical and Photonics Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in
partial fulfillment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering Acoustics, MSc Eng.
Holger Rindel - s194310
Signature
Date
ii
Practical Estimation of Violin Bridge Admittance
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This thesis presents a practical and cost-effective method for measuring violin bridge admit-
tance and radiativity, aiming to correlate mechanical-acoustic properties with perceived violin
quality. Focusing on signature modes (A0, CBR, B1−, B1+), the study employs a pendulum for a
predictable impulse excitation, with responses captured using a laser-Doppler vibrometer for ad-
mittance and a microphone for radiativity. Key aspects like string damping, excitation method,
violin support, and mass-loading effects were investigated. Felt damping at the fingerboard’s
lower end and a stable wooden frame were found to give good results. The pendulum method
achieved a level uncertainty of about ±0.6 dB for the signature resonances. Strong correlations
were found between admittance and radiativity for resonance frequencies and levels, and the
computed transfer function between admittance and radiativity revealed a simple relationship
between the two measures at low frequencies. This indicated that radiativity measurements can
effectively replace the admittance for the purpose of investigating the signature resonances, re-
ducing reliance on costly equipment. This accessible method advances violin research by work-
ing towards a standardized violin measurement method. A pilot study with eight violins failed
to link perceived quality to measurable characteristics, highlighting the need for a robust quality
assessment method with participants familiar with quality assessment.
Practical Estimation of Violin Bridge Admittance
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisors Jonas Brunskog and John Heebøll for their input and en-
couragement, and luthier Jørgen Skotte for his comments and especially the tour of his violin
workshop.
I would also like to thank Jørgen and John for conducting the playing tests, and for providing
most of the violins used for the project.
A great thanks to Henrik Hvidberg, whose assistance with constructing the pendulum was an
essential part of the project.
iv
Practical Estimation of Violin Bridge Admittance
==PAGE:7==
List of Symbols
j
√−1
𝑖, 𝑗
index (integer)
𝑓
frequency (Hz)
𝑓0
natural frequency (Hz)
Δ𝑓
3 dB bandwidth (Hz)
𝑄
Q-factor = 𝑄= 𝑓0/Δ𝑓
𝜔
angular frequency (rad/s)
𝜔0
natural angular frequency (rad/s)
𝑘
stiffness (N/m)
𝑚
mass (kg)
𝑡
time (s)
𝐺
gravitational acceleration (≈9.8 m/s2)
𝑠2
sample variance
𝜇
group mean / expected value
𝑛
number of measurements
𝑁
number of violins
𝑅2
squared correlation coefficient
𝐹(𝑡)
force (N)
𝑥(𝑡)
displacement (m)
𝑣(𝑡)
velocity (m/s)
𝑎(𝑡)
acceleration (m/s2)
𝑌(𝑡)
admittance (m/Ns)
𝐻(𝜔)
generic transfer function
𝐻1(𝜔)
transfer function 1 for random excitation
𝐻2(𝜔)
transfer function 2 for random excitation
𝛾(𝜔)
coherence 𝛾= 𝐻1(𝜔)/𝐻2(𝜔)
𝐹(𝜔)
Fourier transform of 𝐹(𝑡)
𝑉(𝜔)
Fourier transform of 𝑣(𝑡)
𝐴(𝜔)
Fourier transform of 𝑎(𝑡)
𝑈(𝜔)
different instance of 𝑉(𝜔)
𝑌(𝜔)
Fourier transform of 𝑌(𝑡)
Notation
| ⋅|
absolute value (modulus)
𝜉
sample mean of 𝜉𝑖
Var(⋅)
variance
E[⋅]
expected value (mean)
dB
decibel scale: 20 × log10(| ⋅|)
Practical Estimation of Violin Bridge Admittance
v
==PAGE:8==
Signature Modes
A0
Helmholtz ”Breathing” mode 𝑓A0 ≈280 Hz
CBR
Center-Bout Rotation mode 𝑓CBR ≈400 Hz
B1-
First corpus bending mode 𝑓B1- ≈460 Hz
B1+
Second corpus bending mode 𝑓B1+ ≈530 Hz
Abbreviations
DAQ
Data Acquisition
DOF
Degrees of Freedom
FFT
Fast-Fourier Transform
FRF
Frequency Response Function
IEPE
Integrated Electronics Piezo-Electric
LDV
Laser-Doppler Vibrometer
MEMS
Micro-Electro-Mechanical Systems
SD
Standard Deviation
SE
Standard Error (standard deviation of the sample mean)
SNR
Signal-to-Noise Ratio
SPI
Serial Peripheral Interface
SPL
Sound Pressure Level
vi
Practical Estimation of Violin Bridge Admittance
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
List of Symbols . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
Paper
1
1
Background
7
1.1
Violin Acoustics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.2
Violin Measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.3
Violin Quality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2
Measurement Methodology
11
2.1
Common Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2
Equipment and Calibration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3
Validating measurement software . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.4
String Damping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.5
Impact Hammer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.6
Violin support . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.7
Sound Measurement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.8
Arduino Sensors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3
Mass Loading
25
3.1
Mass-loading properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.2
Small Masses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4
Pendulum Excitation
29
4.1
Pendulum Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.2
Proof of concept . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.3
Designing the Pendulum . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.4
Final Pendulum
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5
Pendulum Results
35
5.1
Measurement Setup and Playing Test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.2
Quality Assessment Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.3
Measurement Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.4
Admittance/Radiativity transfer function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.5
Quality Link . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
6
Discussion
42
7
Conclusion
44
Bibliography
45
A Additional Figures
47
B
Pendulum Results
56
Practical Estimation of Violin Bridge Admittance
vii
==PAGE:10==
viii
Practical Estimation of Violin Bridge Admittance
==PAGE:11==
Practical Estimation of Violin Bridge
Admittance
Abstract
This study presents a cost-effective method for measuring violin bridge admittance and radiativ-
ity, focusing on reliable estimation of the signature modes (A0, CBR, B1-, B1+). The importance
of string damping, violin support, excitation method and mass-loading was investigated. Using
a pendulum for impulse excitation, admittance and radiativity can be estimated. Results show
strong correlations between admittance and radiativity for resonance frequencies and levels, sug-
gesting that radiativity can partially substitute admittance measurements, reducing equipment
cost significantly. A pilot study of perceived quality highlights the need for a standardized qual-
ity assessment method and participants trained in quality evaluation.
Introduction
An understanding of violin quality has long been desired, and multiple attempts have been made
to link the perceived quality of the instrument to measurable characteristics. Bridge admittance
𝑌is one of the most common ways of measuring the violin response, quantifying how an input
force applied at the string notches causes the bridge, and by extension the instrument as a whole,
to move [1]. Another common transfer function is the radiativity 𝑅of the instrument, relating
input force to radiated sound. These two measures describe the interaction between instrument
and player and are thought to contain the information necessary to predict perceived quality.
The goal of this study is to develop a reliable and cost-effective method for obtaining the violin
bridge admittance. This method is intended to be used for establishing links to perceived quality.
The signature modes of the violin appear as a collection of prominent resonances that dominate
the low-frequency region of the frequency response functions, see Figure 1. Previous attempts
have been made to link these modes to quality with varying success [2, 3]. These attempts were
held back by a lack of robust, standardized methods for measurements and playing tests of the
violins. An accessible and reliable measurement method as a standard is a much-needed step
towards more conclusive findings
200
300
400
600
1000
1600
Frequency (Hz)
−50
−40
−30
−20
−10
|Y| (dB re. 1 m/Ns)
A0
CBR
B1-
B1+
Mean ±1 SE
Figure 1: Bridge admittance results for a violin obtained with the final pendulum method. The
width of the admittance curve indicates the sample mean ±1 standard deviation of the sample
mean (the standard error SE). The four signature resonances are clearly identifiable.
Practical Estimation of Violin Bridge Admittance
1
==PAGE:12==
Methodology
For all measurement methods, the excitation was applied to the E-string corner of the bridge,
while the response was captured at the G-string corner. A shaker was used for noise excita-
tion and an impact hammer for impulse excitation. The responses were captured by either a
laser-Doppler vibrometer, a piezoelectric accelerometer or a free-field microphone. The violins
were tuned to standard A440 pitch to reflect playing conditions. Each set of measurements con-
sisted of 10 measurements, where the violin was repositioned in its holding between measure-
ments to more accurately represent the measurement uncertainty. When comparing different
methods, measurements were alternated to account for variability from minor equipment repo-
sitioning or other unintended changes to the setup. Environmental factors were mitigated by
only comparing measurements conducted on the same day. The importance of string damp-
ing, violin holding method, excitation method and microphone placement were investigated.
The primary measurement method was iteratively refined based on these findings. The mea-
surement and post-processing software was written in Python to make the method open-source
https://github.com/Hol-G/ViolinDTU2025.git.
The viability of mass-loading sensors was investigated by comparing admittance measurements
with different mass-loads attached to the bridge. The effective mass-loads were found by apply-
ing a simple correction to the admittance results, aligning the B1+ resonance frequencies for the
free and loaded admittance.
Pendulum Design
A pendulum was developed to deliver a consistent impulse to the bridge for each impact. The
design was the result of multiple iterations, aiming to make the impulses as similar as possible
for different violins. The pendulum force spectrum was estimated using a ”true” admittance
(from impact hammer measurements) and the velocity response to the pendulum excitation. The
pendulum impulse was estimated using three representative violins, with the final force spectrum
estimate being a smoothed average. This resulted in a pendulum force spectrum that could be
used as weighting curve for the response spectrum of any violin, capable of giving the admittance
or radiativity depending on the measured response. The uncertainty of this estimate was also
determined.
Figure 2: Picture of the radiativity measurement setup, with the pendulum striking the E-string
corner of the bridge and a microphone placed to capture the sound pressure at the G-string
corner. Felt for string damping can be seen for both the upper and lower string lengths.
2
Practical Estimation of Violin Bridge Admittance
==PAGE:13==
Final method
The pendulum was used for bridge admittance and radiativity measurements for eight violins.
The resonance frequency, peak level and Q-factor were extracted for the signature modes A0,
CBR, B1- and B1+. A simple playing test was also conducted to better understand the challenges
that arise when attempting to link measurement results to quality ratings.
Results
String damping proved to be important, with different materials and positions having significant
influence over the measured admittance. It was found that the damping material should not be
placed at the upper end of the fingerboard, with a piece of felt at the lower end of the fingerboard
giving the best results. When using an impact hammer, it was determined that the mass of the
hammer should be very low and that the tip should be hard. Otherwise, the duration of impact
will be too long and the admittance results inaccurate. The choice of violin support was found to
have some influence, but the difference between holding methods is small compared to the effect
of holding the violin for playing. A safe and reliable holding method with a simple wooden frame
was favored over free-free boundary conditions.
A radiativity measurement conducted adjacent to the G-string corner of the bridge was found
to yield relevant results while not requiring room acoustics tailored to the measurement, see
Figure 2. An attempt was made to use modular sensors with an Arduino microcontroller to
serve as cheap alternatives to professional equipment, but they were not suited for accurate
measurements. Even lightweight sensors were found to have a noticeable mass-loading effect
on the admittance, shifting the signature resonances. Attempts to link quality assessments to
measured values did not succeed due to the unreliability of the quality assessment.
−90
−85
−80
−75
−70
−65
−60
6F6 (dB re. 1 N/√Hz)
E/ti) ted Pend1l1) Fo.ce F
est
V1 . w
V2 . w
V3 raw
Smoothed Avg F
est
±1 SD (poly)
200
300
400
600
1000
1600
Frequency (Hz)
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
Rel. SD
Relative Standard Deviation of F
est
Intra-violin Rel. SD
Inter-violin Rel. SD
T
otal Rel. SD
2nd order poly
.
Polyfit points
Figure 3: Top: Estimates of pendulum force spectrum for each of the three test violins, as well as
the averaged smoothed estimate with a shaded area of ±1 standard deviation (SD). Bottom: Intra-
and inter-violin relative standard deviations as well as combined relative standard deviation with
a polynomial fit as an envelope.
Practical Estimation of Violin Bridge Admittance
3
==PAGE:14==
Pendulum
The uncertainty of the force spectrum estimate is the combination of both the intra-violin un-
certainty and the inter-violin uncertainty. It was found that as the pendulum mass decreases the
force spectrum becomes flatter and the difference between violins decreases. Due to measure-
ment uncertainty and fundamental differences between impact hammer and pendulum excita-
tion, the force spectrum estimates required smoothing to be realistic, see Figure 3. It was found
that the inter-violin variability dominates the uncertainty of the force spectrum estimate, but
still allows the pendulum method to measure an accurate bridge admittance with a standard de-
viation of about ±0.6 dB for the signature resonances. Due to the smoothness of a short impulse,
this uncertainty does not affect resonance frequency and Q-factor significantly.
Admittance and Radiativity
Significant correlation between the admittance and radiativity measurements was found for the
signature resonance parameters: frequency, level and Q-factor. While non-linear effects were
indicated, this led to the idea that there exists a simple transfer function. The transfer function
between admittance and radiativity was computed for all violins, and shifted to align the A0
frequencies. The relationship was nearly the same for all the violins, and a running average was
computed, see Figure 4. Applying this transfer function to the radiativity results was found to
give reasonable estimates for the admittance for the B1 signature resonances. Given the overlap
in information for admittance and radiativity, it was concluded that the radiativity at the G-string
corner of the bridge can function as a reasonable replacement to the bridge admittance.
−50
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
Frequency (Hz, shifted A0=0)
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
|R|/|Y| (dB re. 1 Pa/(m/s))
V1
V2
V3
V4
V5
V6
V7
V8
Running Mean
Figure 4: Transfer functions between admittance 𝑌and radiativity 𝑅for the 8 violins, with a
running mean. Frequency axis aligned with the A0 frequency for the radiativity measurement.
Discussion
The pendulum method has been demonstrated to function as a viable replacement to impact ham-
mers, and has great potential for wider use. An even lighter pendulum could further improve
the accuracy of the method. Replacing the bridge admittance measurement with a radiativity
measurement would greatly decrease the cost of the equipment necessary to investigate the sig-
nature resonances. The relationship between the bridge admittance and radiativity would be
worth investigating further, perhaps extending the relationship to higher frequencies.
The largest hindrance to establishing links between measurements and perceived quality is the
robustness of the quality assessments. It is proposed that a standardized method should be de-
veloped, specifying room acoustics, quality descriptors [4] and playing tasks. The participants
should also be trained in the skill of assessing violin quality.
4
Practical Estimation of Violin Bridge Admittance
==PAGE:15==
Conclusion
The practical aspects of measuring violin frequency response functions have been investigated,
demonstrating the importance of string damping, excitation method, mass-loading and violin
support. A very simple method has been developed for obtaining admittance and radiativity
measurements for the violin bridge using a simple pendulum, both of which can be used to obtain
the signature resonances. It has been shown that a radiativity measurement at the bridge can
effectively replace the admittance measurement for investigating signature resonances, greatly
improving the affordability of violin measurements.
References
[1]
Woodhouse J. “The acoustics of the violin: a review”. In: Rep. Prog. Phys. 77 (2014).
[2]
Saitis C., Fritz C., Giordano B., and Scavone G. “Bridge admittance measurements of 10
preference-rated violins”. In: Acoustics 2012, Apr 2012, Nantes, France. (2012).
[3]
Bissinger G. “Structural acoustics of good and bad violins”. In: J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 124(3)
(2008), pp. 1764–1773.
[4]
Fritz C., Blackwell A. F., Cross I., Woodhouse J., and Moore B. C. J. “Exploring violin sound
quality: Investigating English timbre descriptors and correlating resynthesized acoustical
modifications with perceptual properties”. In: J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 131(1) (2012), pp. 783–794.
Practical Estimation of Violin Bridge Admittance
5
==PAGE:16==
6
Practical Estimation of Violin Bridge Admittance
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 1
Background
This thesis is the third project investigating violins at the DTU Vibrolab. The two previous
projects utilized a shaker and laser-Doppler vibrometer (LDV) for obtaining the admittance from
one corner of the violin bridge to the other. In 2023, Flocken [5] used bridge admittance mea-
surements and playing tests to determine whether a prolonged vibration of the instrument leads
to perceptible and measurable changes. No significant differences were found, and the measur-
able differences could have been caused by environmental changes. Then in 2024, Benson [6]
investigated the effect of humidity on the bridge admittance, finding that humidity can shift the
frequencies of resonance peaks by up to 8%.
The goal of this thesis is to develop a method that can obtain the bridge admittance of the violin
reliably, while not being prohibitively expensive. An affordable method would make violin mea-
surements more accessible to luthiers and educational institutions alike, potentially increasing
participation in violin research. The intended use of this method is to establish a link between
the quantifiable mechanical-acoustic properties and the perceived quality of violins from the
perspective of the player.
1.1
Violin Acoustics
The violin is a wooden box that transforms the action of bowing the strings into radiated sound.
A simple illustration of the instrument can be seen Figure 1.1. The process of generating sound
can be simplified in the following manner [1]:
Strings
Fingerboard
F-hole
Bridge
Soundpost
Tailpiece
Chinrest
Scroll
Pegs
C-bout
Top Plate
Figure 1.1:
Drawing of a top-down
view of a violin, labeled with names of
main parts.
1. Bowing causes the strings to oscillate.
2. The strings apply a varying force to the bridge at
the string notches, predominantly side-to-side.
3. The vibrations are transmitted through the
bridge, which connects to the top plate of the vi-
olin at two feet. These vibrations are transmitted
to the rest of the instrument, especially through
the soundpost, which connects the top and back
plates of the violin.
4. The motion of the different parts of the violin ra-
diate sound.
The strings of the violin are always in tension, and are
an integral part of the structure, meaning that tuning
each of the strings changes the mechanical properties
of the entire instrument. Bowing results in a ”stick-slip”
excitation of the string, with the applied force taking
the form of a sawtooth wave. It is assumed that the vi-
olin bridge represents the main interaction between the
strings and the body. This interaction can be under-
stood by examining the frequency response functions
(FRFs) at the string notches of the bridge, resulting in
a 3-dimensional transfer function for each of the four
string notches.
Practical Estimation of Violin Bridge Admittance
7
==PAGE:18==
The mechanical transfer function between force 𝐹and velocity 𝑣is called admittance 𝑌, while
the transfer function between force and sound pressure 𝑝is called radiativity 𝑅:
Admittance:
𝑌= 𝑣
𝐹
Radiativity:
𝑅= 𝑝
𝐹
(1.1)
The ”bridge admittance” is usually measured as a single transfer function, relating the force input
at one corner of the bridge to the velocity response at the opposite corner. An example bridge
admittance using impact excitation can be seen in Figure 1.2.
The admittance of the bridge goes both ways, such that the vibrations of the violin body feed back
into the strings and is thus felt by the player through the bow. The experience of the violinist
therefore consists not only of the emitted sound, but also the feedback felt when bowing the
strings. This is what is meant by playability, and is thus directly linked to the bridge admittance.
200
300
400
600
1000
1600
Frequency (Hz)
−50
−40
−30
−20
−10
|Y| (dB re. 1 m/Ns)
A0
CBR
B1-
B1+
Figure 1.2: Example bridge admittance, with signature res-
onances labeled (Violin V5, using pendulum method).
The body vibrations can be de-
scribed by its modal contributions.
At low frequencies, the violin is
characterized by individual modes,
while at higher frequencies it makes
more sense to discuss statistical ef-
fects due to the increasing modal
overlap. A number of low frequency
modes are often referred to as signa-
ture modes, and are prime candidates
for comparing different violins, on
account of them being easily iden-
tified in the FRFs of most violins [3].
This thesis focuses on the following
four signature modes:
• A0: Helmholtz-type cavity mode, ”breathing” through the f-holes.
• CBR: Center Bout Rotation.
• B1- and B1+: Combined breathing/bending modes
The A0, B1-, B1+ modes are strong radiators, and are therefore very relevant to sound radiation.
The CBR mode is also of interest since it is often quite prominent, and is coupled to breathing
modes due to the off-center position of the soundpost. In fact, it is this placement of the soundpost
which allows the bowed strings to excite the three strongly radiating modes by breaking up the
left-right symmetry of the violin. This coupling of the strongly radiating modes is of particular
interest, since the soundpost position is one of the few parts of the violin which can be adjusted
after its completion. The modes can be seen as resonance peaks on the transfer functions, and
can be described by three numbers: Frequency, Magnitude and Q-factor. The Q-factor indicates
the sharpness of the resonance peak, and is calculated as the resonance frequency 𝑓0 divided by
the 3 dB bandwidth Δ𝑓, reflecting the mode’s energy dissipation.
At high frequencies, the violin displays complicated behavior, with the envelope of the response
showing clear ”humps”, not unlike the formants of human speech. This is in contrast to other
stringed instruments like the guitar, which do not have a formant-like behavior at high frequen-
cies [1]. For the violin, the most prominent high frequency feature is a very large hump around
2-3 kHz that is often called the ”bridge hill”, and is thought to be very important for violin qual-
ity [7]. While undoubtedly relevant, these high frequency features are not investigated in this
thesis, which focuses on the signature modes.
8
Practical Estimation of Violin Bridge Admittance
==PAGE:19==
1.2
Violin Measurements
Ideally, the admittance of the bridge would be obtained by bowing the strings and measuring the
input admittance at each string notch, but this is not practical. Instead, the admittance of the vio-
lin bridge is usually measured by tapping one corner of the bridge with a hammer and measuring
the velocity at the opposite corner with an LDV. This corner-to-corner admittance captures the
main bowing direction, but fails to account for the other two dimensions of motion and doesn’t
distinguish between the string notches. Technically, this measurement gives the transfer admit-
tance from corner to corner rather than the input admittance, but for low frequencies the bridge
can be assumed to be rigid and the transfer admittance will be similar to the input admittance.
It has been shown on a cello (which is similar to a violin except in size) that excitation by bowing
is not fundamentally different from impact excitation and that the corner-to-corner admittance
is a good approximation for all four strings [8]. While the bridge can also be excited by a shaker
(as in [5] and [6]), the impact hammer is preferred since it does not couple mass to the bridge and
gives more consistent results because mass loading conditions do not change between measure-
ment sessions [9]. This mass-loading problem also applies if an accelerometer is used instead of
a laser for the response measurements.
While the unbowed strings are free to vibrate when playing, they are usually dampened when
measuring admittance and radiativity. This is done to prevent string resonances from obscuring
the body resonances. Even though it is quite important for the robustness of bridge admittance
measurements, no standardized string damping method exists. The holding of the violin is an-
other challenge. Methods such as clamping the neck, suspending the instrument from rubber
bands or using a violin stand give different results [10]. Holding the violin for playing could be
considered more accurate, but that is not a practical solution since the holding conditions must
be reproducible in order for the measurements to be useful.
Another way of investigating the body modes of the violin is with laser scans of multiple positions
from which a great number of transfer admittances can be computed [3]. This gives detailed
information about the mode shapes, but lacks the simplicity of the corner-corner measurement.
The radiativity is also difficult to measure properly since sound radiation is distance dependent,
directional and affected by room acoustics.
Violin measurements are further complicated by environmental factors, which have significant
influence [6]. Even small changes in relative humidity can cause admittance changes that are
much larger than measurement uncertainty [11]. Even a 1 gram change to the water weight
of the violin can be enough to cause significant changes to the B1- mode. For this reason, it is
important that environmental changes are considered carefully when comparing measurements.
1.3
Violin Quality
Perhaps the most extensive study on violin quality was performed in 1991 by Dünnwald [12].
Hundreds of violins were excited by a sinusoidal force at the bridge, and the radiated sound
measured in the far-field. It was found that the A0 mode should be loud, and other quality
parameters were extracted based on the sound content in different frequency ranges, relating
the different bands to terms such as nasality, brilliance and clarity. Unfortunately, it lacks details
on the choice of bands or how the quality assessment of the violins was conducted.
Multiple further attempts have been made to relate the measured response of violins to their
perceived quality, often using a unipolar scale from ”bad” to ”excellent”. Bissinger [3] performed
admittance and radiation measurements of 17 violins, finding that the A0 radiativity is higher and
the radiativity profiles more ”even” for excellent violins. No other quality link was found, and
it was pointed out that the robustness of the quality assessments is a large hindrance. Similarly,
Practical Estimation of Violin Bridge Admittance
9
==PAGE:20==
Saitis et al. [2] measured the bridge admittance for 10 violins that had been rated in preference by
13 participants in a carefully controlled environment. Again, no clear link between admittance
and quality was found.
Since the reliability of the playing tests is a big limitation, Fritz et al. [4] investigated the verbal
descriptors commonly used for violin quality, clustering words used to convey a similar meaning.
For overall sound quality, it was concluded that the terms made up a 3-dimensional space, with
two of the dimensions appearing to carry judgment of whether a violin is good or bad. This
mapping of quality descriptors is a good reference for designing playing tests and will be used in
this thesis. It was then attempted to relate some of the terms to artificially modified violin sounds
in a perceptive study. The findings were mostly inconsistent with the findings of Dünnwald, and
found that there was disagreement between the participants on what constituted a ”good” and
”nasal”.
10
Practical Estimation of Violin Bridge Admittance
==PAGE:21==
Chapter 2
Measurement Methodology
In this chapter, the methods for measuring the violin are investigated using the primary test violin
V1. An iterative approach was used, gradually improving the primary measurement method.
2.1
Common Setup
Here follows the general measurement method used throughout the thesis, irrespective of exci-
tation method or the measured response. Figure 2.1 shows some of the measurement setup.
The strings were tuned to standard A440 pitch for all measurements, ensuring tension consis-
tent with playing conditions. The strings were damped in two places to eliminate the string
resonances from the frequency response functions: A large piece of felt was placed at the edge
of the fingerboard to eliminate the main string resonances, while a smaller piece of felt was
placed to dampen the string lengths between the bridge and tailpiece. This choice of damping
method is based on the findings in Section 2.4.
All measurements were performed by exciting the E-string corner of the bridge and measuring
the response at the G-string corner. This direction was chosen since the G-string side usually has
a wider and flatter surface on which to attach a sensor. Note that most of the literature uses the
opposite direction, but due to reciprocity the chosen direction should not matter. The violin was
placed horizontally in a wooden frame, resting the lower bout on two shoulder rest feet, while
the neck rested on a length of cord, approximating the contact points of the player (see Section
2.6). The constant pressure applied to the chin rest when playing was not accounted for.
Figure 2.1: Left: Laser dot pointed at the G-string corner of the bridge. Right: Violin frame.
For all measurements, a sample rate of 3200 Hz was used with an FFT size of 6400. This gave
results with a bandwidth of 1600 Hz and a frequency resolution of 0.5 Hz, which is well suited
for investigating the signature resonances (200-600 Hz). The equipment was calibrated for each
measurement session.
The measured frequency responses were averaged across 10 measurements to account for mea-
surement uncertainty stemming from both equipment positioning and signal noise. The violin
was replaced in the frame between each measurement. In order to avoid drift due to equipment
changes, all measurement comparisons were based on alternating between the different configu-
rations. When comparing measurements, it was essential that all measurements were conducted
in a single session in order to minimize calibration error and environmental effects.
Practical Estimation of Violin Bridge Admittance
11
==PAGE:22==
2.2
Equipment and Calibration
The initial measurement setup was inherited from the previous projects [5, 6], and used a B&K
Pulse type 3560 FFT Analyzer along with the proprietary PULSE software that ran on the lab-
oratory computer. This was updated to use a Focusrite Scarlett 2i2 soundcard connected to a
laptop using Python for signal processing. This was done to make the measurement software
open source and to have more control over the measurement procedure and signal processing.
The results of this migration from PULSE to Python are discussed in Section 2.3, and the code
can be found at https://github.com/Hol-G/ViolinDTU2025.git.
2.2.1
Excitation Methods
Both noise and impact excitation were used. Note that the sensitivity of some transducers had
to be adjusted depending on the excitation method in order to avoid signal overload.
• Noise:
A shaker mounted on a tripod excites the bridge with white noise. A drive rod connects
to a force transducer which pushes against the E-string corner of the bridge. Welch’s
method was used with 90% overlapping segments and the Hanning window. The auto-
and cross-spectra were averaged across 100 segments, from which the transfer functions
𝐻1(𝜔), 𝐻2(𝜔) and the coherence 𝛾2(𝜔) were obtained. In this paper the 𝐻1(𝜔) transfer
function was used.
• Impact:
An impact hammer/pendulum strikes the E-string corner of the bridge. The transfer func-
tion 𝐻(𝜔) was computed for each impact and averaged across 10 impacts. The onset of
the impact was detected by the response signal exceeding a set value, which was adjusted
as needed. A 0.5 s rectangular window starting 0.05 s before the onset was used to capture
the violin response. A rectangular window is sufficient since the signal before and after
the impact is close to zero. Impact excitation is further investigated in Section 2.5.
2.2.2
Bridge Response
The mechanical bridge response was measured either with an LDV or a piezoelectric accelerom-
eter. Since both of these sensors are directional and the edge of the bridge is not perfectly vertical
when the violin is placed in the frame, they measure slightly different transfer admittances. Some
testing found that the accelerometer gives a slightly larger velocity response than the laser for
frequencies below 1 kHz, but otherwise the admittance was unchanged. A sound measurement
was introduced to obtain the radiativity of the violin.
• Velocity:
The velocity was measured using an LDV pointed at the G-string corner of the bridge. A
piece of reflective tape was attached to get a good signal. A signal delay of 1.221 ms had
to be accounted for when performing 2-channel measurements in order to obtain accurate
phase results.
• Acceleration:
A piezoelectric accelerometer was attached to the G-string corner of the bridge using
beeswax. The acceleration spectrum was converted to velocity by 𝑉=
1
j𝜔𝐴. While this
sensor was preferred for much of the project on account of having less signal noise, it
was ultimately less reliable due to the difficulty of attaching it to the bridge and had a
mass-loading effect which could not be ignored, see Chapter 3.
• Sound Pressure:
A GRAS 46AE 1/2” free-field microphone was placed about 5 mm from the G-string corner
of the bridge, allowing room to maneuver the violin. This proximity to the source ensured
a good SNR despite not using an anechoic chamber. See Section 2.7 for more.
12
Practical Estimation of Violin Bridge Admittance
==PAGE:23==
It was also attempted to conduct acceleration and sound pressure measurements using cheap
sensors connected to an Arduino Nano V3, but these did not give usable results (Section 2.8).
2.2.3
Equipment Overview
The B&K force transducer and piezoelectric accelerometer were run through an amplifier be-
fore connecting to a soundcard. The LDV was connected directly to the soundcard, while the
microphone was connected to a separate data acquisition device.
Miscellaneous
Signal Processing
• Soft felt for string damping.
Thickness: 4 mm, Density: 0.2 g/cm3
Large: 135×50 mm and small: 8×50 mm
• Wooden Frame
• Tripod
• Beeswax
• Reflective tape
• Exciter amplifier (for the shaker)
• FFT Analyzer
(B&K Pulse 3560-B-130)
• Conditioning amplifier (Nexus 2692)
• Focusrite Scarlett 2i2 soundcard
• ROGA Instruments IEPE DAQ
(Plug.n.DAQ Lite)
Excitation and Response
Calibration
• Shaker (B&K 4810)
• Piezoelectric accelerometer (B&K 4344)
• Laser-Doppler vibrometer (Polytech PDV-100)
• Force transducer (B&K 8200)
• Impact hammer + tips (B&K 8202)
• Free-field microphone set (GRAS 46AE)
• Pendulum
• Calibrator (B&K 4294)
• Microphone calibrator (GRAS 42AG)
• Mass ≈105 g
Figure 2.2: Basic overview of equipment connections for admittance and radiativity measure-
ments.
2.2.4
Calibration
First, the piezoelectric accelerometer is attached to a calibrator using beeswax. The gain is ad-
justed to achieve the desired RMS of 10 m/s2 at 159 Hz.
The force transducer is mounted on a shaker with a known mass and the accelerometer on top.
Newton’s 1st law can then be applied, whereby 𝐹/𝑎= 𝑚is obtained as the desired transfer
function. The total mass 𝑚was measured to be 108.5 grams, which includes the accelerometer
mass and transducer top mass of 3 grams [13]. The LDV is pointed at the accelerometer that is
mounted on the shaker. The desired transfer function between velocities is simply 1. The GRAS
46AE microphone is calibrated using the GRAS 42AG calibrator at 94 dB SPL and 1000 Hz.
Practical Estimation of Violin Bridge Admittance
13
==PAGE:24==
2.3
Validating measurement software
The validity of the soundcard/Python measurement was validated by comparing results with the
original measurement arrangement. The undamped violin was excited by a shaker and the re-
sponse measured by the piezoelectric accelerometer. The only changes between measurements
were the cable connections as shown in Figure 2.2, ensuring that any differences could be fully
attributed to the hardware and/or software. This comparison also served as a test for the cali-
bration implementation in Python.
−60
−50
−40
−30
−20
−10
3Y3 ( B re. 1 m/Ns)
U( ampe  0i)li( (V1) - Shaker/Piezo
PULSE
Python
−100
−50
0
50
100
∠Y ( eg)
200
300
400
600
1000
1600
Freque(c1 [H2]
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
C)here(ce γ
2
Figure 2.3: Admittance magnitude, phase and coherence for both old and new measurement
systems.
The 𝐻1 magnitude and phase, as well as the coherence for both systems are presented in Figure
2.3. The magnitudes are very consistent, validating the calibration procedure. Minor differences
are observed for phase and coherence, with the most notable discrepancy being a high frequency
roll-off of the coherence for the Python system. This is attributed to the practical limitations of
the sample rate, where the Nyquist frequency of half the sample rate is not a realistic frequency
cut-off. This could be mitigated by oversampling, but this was not implemented due to being
unnecessary for investigating the signature resonances.
Since the discrepancies appear to stem from differences between the B&K FFT Analyzer and the
soundcard, the Python implementation is accepted as a replacement. Note that the resonances
below 250 Hz stem from the shaker mounting, not the violin.
14
Practical Estimation of Violin Bridge Admittance
==PAGE:25==
2.4
String Damping
Why damp the strings? This is not done when playing the violin, so it might not be obvious why
this is necessary.
The strings are damped because the string resonances do not provide useful information about
what makes each violin unique. With a standard A440 tuning, the frequencies of the string res-
onances are completely predictable. The large dips in coherence seen in Figure 2.3 are the string
resonances, and their effect on the bridge admittance is significant. When a string resonance is
close to a body resonance, it becomes impossible to accurately determine the frequency and level
of the body resonance.
2.4.1
Previous Methods
In the course of the literature study for this project, it became clear that no standard for string
damping exists. This is an oversight, since it prevents measurements from being directly com-
parable.
Many methods have been used to achieve string damping: Plastic cards, business cards, folded
tissue, foam and nylon ribbons to name just a few. It has been noted that the position of the
damping material can noticeably affect the measurement results [14]. It has also been stated that
”the requirement for adequate damping is that no musical pitch can be heard when the strings
are plucked” [8], but it will be demonstrated that this is an insufficient criterion.
This thesis will therefore endeavor to determine a reliable string damping method, which can be
used as a standard henceforth. A number of different string damping methods were tested and
the best chosen.
2.4.2
Setup
The idea with string damping is to remove the string resonances from the admittance while
changing the rest of the admittance as little as possible. Criteria are established to judge the
different string damping methods:
1. The string resonances should be eliminated from the admittance. A necessary, but insuf-
ficient criterion is that the resulting coherence dip must be removed.
2. The damping material must not significantly change the admittance outside the string
resonances.
3. The placement of damping material should be reliable and unambiguous. The material
should be widely available.
Many preliminary investigations were made using the B&K PULSE system, testing different ma-
terials and positions. Of these, it was determined that the best damping method was to place two
pieces of paper tower along the fingerboard of the violin. This method was used as a reference
to which the other methods could be compared.
Some obvious limitations became apparent during the preliminary testing. The damping material
should be sufficiently stiff to restrict string movement and should not be placed too close to the
bridge, since that will cause a mass-loading effect.
All damping materials were woven between the strings, passing under the D and A strings, and
were placed in one of three ways: Aligned with the lower end of the fingerboard, aligned 1 inch
from the upper end of the fingerboard or aligned with the edge of the violin body.
The two materials chosen for in-depth investigation were some soft felt and standard playing
cards. A piece of felt was placed either along the string length, ensuring maximum contact area,
or placed across the strings with a smaller contact area. Stacks of 5 and 10 playing cards were
Practical Estimation of Violin Bridge Admittance
15
==PAGE:26==
used. Pictures of the damping methods can be seen in Figure A.1 in the appendix. The different
damping methods are listed below:
(a) Felt along lower fingerboard
(b) Felt along upper fingerboard
(c) Felt across lower fingerboard
(d) Felt across middle of fingerboard
(e) Felt across upper fingerboard
(f) 10 playing cards at lower fingerboard
(g) 10 playing cards at upper fingerboard
(h) 5 playing cards at lower fingerboard
(i) 5 playing cards at upper fingerboard
(j) 2 layers of paper towel
2.4.3
Results
−60
−50
−40
−30
−20
−10
|Y| (dB re. 1 m/N()
All damping me)hod( (V1) - Shaker/Piezo
200
300
400
600
1000
1600
Frequency (Hz)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Coherence γ
2
Figure 2.4: Admittance magnitude and coherence for all damping methods.
The results for all the damping methods are seen on Figure 2.4. All the damping methods pre-
vented any musical pitch from being heard when plucking the strings, and they all resulted in
much improved coherence. However, significant variation for the magnitude of the admittance
can be seen.
Placing the damping material only on the upper end of the fingerboard resulted in very bad
results regardless of material. Each of the three damping methods shown in Figure 2.5 (left)
resulted in jagged admittance curves at one or multiple places. It is suspected that if only the
upper segments of the strings are damped, most of the string lengths are still free to disturb the
admittance.
An example highlighting the importance of placement can be seen on Figure 2.5 (right). The B1+
resonance is shown for the stacks of 5 and 10 playing cards in the same two positions. It is clear
that position is just as important as material. None of these damping methods were desirable,
giving inconsistent results at the very important B1+ resonance.
All the playing card configurations resulted in admittance curves that deviated significantly from
the undamped admittance. For configuration (a) and (b), where the piece of felt was placed along
16
Practical Estimation of Violin Bridge Admittance
==PAGE:27==
300
400
500
Frequency (Hz)
−45
−40
−35
−30
−25
−20
−15
−10
|Y| (dB re. 1 m/Ns)
Upper end of fingerboard
(e) FeltShortHigh
(g) 10CardHigh
(i) 5CardHigh
500
550
600
Frequency (Hz)
Placement vs. material
(f) 10CardLow
(g) 10CardHigh
(h) 5CardLow
(i) 5CardHigh
Figure 2.5: Bridge admittance for different damping methods. Left: Different materials with
similar placement. Right: Two materials in two positions.
the string length, the B1+ mode was excessively damped. That left out configurations (c), (d)
and (j) as the best options, but (d) had much larger measurement uncertainty than the other two.
The two best methods were thus: the felt placed across the lower end of the fingerboard, and the
paper towel from the preliminary measurements. While the results for the paper towel method
had a slightly smaller uncertainty, the felt resulted in a more accurate FRF around both of the B1
modes, and caused slightly less damping of the peaks.
Therefore (c) was chosen as the best method, and was used for all other measurements in this
thesis. This damping method also managed a coherence above 0.99 for the entire range from 250
to 1400 Hz.
Figure 2.6 shows the admittance of the damped and undamped violin. It can be seen that the cho-
sen damping method results in a smooth FRF, which is in good agreement with the undamped
response (except at the string resonances of course). Note that the resonances around 390 and
430 Hz were greatly disturbed by the string resonances. The A0 resonance around 287 Hz was
affected in level and, while difficult to see, the B1+ resonance around 520 Hz was shifted slightly
down in frequency by the string resonance at 588 Hz. The uncertainties for the two measure-
ment sets are very similar, meaning that the placement of the damping material adds very little
uncertainty.
2.4.4
Lower string damping
For later measurements of violin V3, it turned out that the lower string sections between the
bridge and tailpiece were responsible for noticeable string resonances at high frequencies >1000
Hz. Therefore, a small piece of felt was placed at the tailpiece, woven between the strings. This
final damping method can be seen in Figure 2.7.
Practical Estimation of Violin Bridge Admittance
17
==PAGE:28==
−60
−50
−40
−30
−20
−10
|Y| (dB re. 1 m/Ns)
Best damping method (V1) - Shaker/Piezo
Free ±1 SE
Damped ±1 SE
200
300
400
600
1000
1600
Frequency (Hz)
0.000
0.025
0.050
0.075
0.100
0.125
0.150
Rel. SE |Y|
Free
Damped
Figure 2.6: Top: Admittance magnitude for the undamped and damped strings with the width
of the curves indicating the mean ±1 standard deviation of the mean (the standard error SE).
Bottom: The relative standard error.
Figure 2.7: Final damping method with a large piece of felt at the edge of the fingerboard and a
smaller piece of felt woven between the strings near the tailpiece.
18
Practical Estimation of Violin Bridge Admittance
==PAGE:29==
2.5
Impact Hammer
The initial measurement method used for the investigation of string damping excited the bridge
with a shaker. While effective at exciting a broad frequency range using white noise, the coupled
mass affects the FRF significantly. An impact hammer by contrast, offers an excitation method
with negligible mass-loading due to its very short contact time.
To accurately measure the FRF, the impact hammer must excite a broad range of frequencies at
an evenly high amplitude. A flat excitation spectrum is important to ensure that the response
reflects the violin’s properties rather than the variations in the input force. An uneven spectrum
can lead to problems with bad SNR and inadequate excitation at some frequencies.
The ideal impact is infinitely short, resulting in a perfectly flat spectrum. For a given sample
rate, as long as the duration is less than one sample (and is contained within a single sample), the
spectrum will be completely flat. The impact can naively be modeled as a 1-DOF mass-spring
system, with an initial velocity ̇𝑥(0) = 𝑣and an initial displacement of 𝑥(0) = 0. The solution is
a half-sine, with the duration of the impact being the second solution to 𝑥(𝑡) = 0:
𝑚̈𝑥+ 𝑘𝑥= 0
⇒
𝑥(𝑡) = 𝑣
𝜔0
sin (𝜔0𝑡) ,
⇒
𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑝𝑎𝑐𝑡= 𝜋
𝜔0
= 𝜋√
𝑚
𝑘,
(2.1)
Figure 2.8: Force transducer, hammer and tips.
where 𝑚is the mass, 𝑘the stiffness and 𝜔0
the natural frequency. The shortest impact is
achieved with a small mass and high stiffness.
The stiffness is limited by the violin bridge,
which is made of maple wood.
Two B&K 8200 force transducers were avail-
able, one being part of a big impact hammer
(B&K 8202). The big hammer was only used
without a dedicated tip, while the standalone
transducer was also used with three tips of
varying stiffness. The equipment is shown in
Figure 2.8.
The big hammer was held by the end of
the handle and carefully swung against the
bridge. The standalone transducer was held
by its cable, and digitally manipulated to
swing like a pendulum.
In order to mitigate the unreliability of the
hammer method, each measurement con-
sisted of 10 impacts, averaging the transfer
functions for each impact. Each set of 10 mea-
surements thus required 100 impacts.
The piezoelectric accelerometer was chosen for this investigation because the minimum sensi-
tivity on the LDV was still prone to cause significant signal overload for some impact methods.
While the accelerometer adds mass to the bridge, affecting both the force spectrum and the ad-
mittance, it should not alter how one impact method compares to another.
The measured bridge admittance for different impacts methods can be seen in Figure 2.9. The
admittances are normalized to 250 Hz since two different transducers were used. Note how using
the big hammer gives very bad results around 480 Hz, and how the soft tip diverges from the other
Practical Estimation of Violin Bridge Admittance
19
==PAGE:30==
methods above 600 Hz. The results for no tip and the hard tip are generally in good agreement.
(The medium stiffness tip gave results very close to the results with no tip and was omitted from
the plots for better readability.)
200
300
400
600
1000
1600
Frequency (H()
−20
−10
0
10
20
30
)Y) (dB re. 250 H()
Impact Hammers (V1) - Impact/Piezo
No Tip
Hard Tip
Soft Tip
Hammer - No Tip
Figure 2.9: Bridge admittance for each impact method, normalized to 250 Hz.
The averaged time signals and amplitude spectra for the force are seen in Figure 2.10. Both have
been normalized in order to highlight the differences in shape. The heavier and softer impacts
have longer durations, the effect of which can be seen on the force spectrum. Notice how a large
dip in spectral amplitude occurs around 480 Hz for the big hammer, where the admittance results
were also bad.
The stand-alone force transducer was the lightest of all the different ”impact hammers”, with the
shortest excitation signal and the flattest spectrum. For the rest of the thesis, this was used for
all impact hammer measurements.
−1
0
1
2
3
4
Time (ms)
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Force (Normalized)
1 N·s Impulse Normalized Force Signals
No Tip
Hard Tip
Soft Tip
Hammer - No Tip
200
400
600
1000
1600
Frequency (Hz)
−80
−70
−60
−50
−40
−30
−20
−10
0
Normalized Spectral Amplitude (dB re. 200 Hz)
200 Hz-Normalized Force Spectra
No Tip
Hard Tip
Soft Tip
Hammer - No Tip
Figure 2.10: (Left) Time signals (force) for each impact method, normalized to a 1 N·s total im-
pulse. (Right) Force spectra, normalized to the spectral amplitude at 200 Hz.
20
Practical Estimation of Violin Bridge Admittance
==PAGE:31==
2.6
Violin support
There are two main benefits from ensuring free-free boundary conditions. One is that it allows
direct comparisons to other instruments, and the other is that free-free boundary conditions are
mostly unambiguous. However, it is not very practical, often places the instrument precariously
and suffers from a lot of position-based uncertainty. Furthermore, the violin does not have free-
free boundary conditions when played.
The holding method for this thesis is mostly identical to the previous projects [5, 6]. The violin
was placed in a wooden frame, resting the lower bout on two shoulder-support feet, and the
neck on a piece of rope. These points of contact are also present when playing the violin with
a shoulder rest, and ensure a safe and reproducible placement of the violin. A drawing of the
frame can be seen in Figure A.9 in the appendix.
The impact hammer method with the piezoelectric accelerometer was used because it was im-
practical to align the LDV for a variety of holding methods. Only a single 10-impact measure-
ment was performed for each method since many were not set up to be reproducible. This should
still be sufficient to reveal any major differences between measurements caused by the holding
methods.
200
300
400
600
1000
1600
Frequency (Hz)
−50
−45
−40
−35
−30
−25
−20
−15
−10
−5
|Y| (dB re. 1 m/Ns)
Holdi g Methods (V1) - Impact/Piezo
Frame
Free
Playing
Figure 2.11: The bridge admittance for the frame, ”free” boundary conditions and playing condi-
tions (with shoulder rest).
Free boundary conditions were achieved by loosely suspending the violin by the screws, holding
it with the thumb and index finger of the left hand, thus avoiding contact with the violin body.
The bridge admittance was also measured when the violin was held for playing. These methods
are compared to the frame in Figure 2.11. The frame and ”free” support methods are a bit different
in the 300-400 Hz region, where the frame support has an additional resonance at 350 Hz, but a
less pronounced resonance at 390 Hz. Otherwise the two methods are very similar.
The admittance for playing conditions is very different from the two other methods, showing no
resonances in the 300-400 Hz range, significant damping for the B1 resonances and a shift in the
A0 resonance. Generally speaking, there is nothing to indicate that the frame support is a worse
method than suspending the violin freely. The frame was therefore judged to be a serviceable
holding method for violin measurements.
Practical Estimation of Violin Bridge Admittance
21
==PAGE:32==
2.7
Sound Measurement
Sound radiation measurements are non-trivial. At the low frequencies, the microphone must be
placed far away to avoid near-field effects (wavelength of 200 Hz is ≈1.7 m!), while interference
between different parts of the violin begins to come into play at high frequencies. In order to
obtain a somewhat accurate measure of the far-field radiation, it would thus require multiple
microphone positions and an anechoic chamber for mitigating reflections [3], but this method
does not align with the goal of this thesis.
Since the method is intended to work in most rooms, the microphone must be placed very close
to the violin. Information about which frequencies actually reach the far-field is hereby lost in
favor of obtaining a good SNR. In order to keep the method simple, only one microphone position
should be used. It has been suggested that a single reading in front of the bridge is sufficient to
capture the violin’s behavior up to 800 Hz, which includes all the signature resonances [14]. Two
microphone positions were considered to be particularly relevant:
• Placing the microphone right at the G-string corner of the bridge. This is where the ve-
locity is obtained for the admittance measurement, making this position ideal for relating
admittance and radiativity measurements.
• Placing the microphone where the violinist’s ears would be, represented as a single position
(centered about 10 cm above the end of frame). This could be particularly relevant for
quality assessments.
The final radiativity measurement placed the microphone 5 mm from the G-string corner of the
bridge, as can be seen in Figure 2.12.
Figure 2.12: Final radiativity method, with the microphone placed 5 mm from the bridge corner.
The two positions were tested by exciting the violin with a pendulum (see Chapter 4). The
responses were normalized because the closer position resulted in a higher output level. The
sound pressure responses (not radiativity) can be seen in Figure 2.13. Some acoustic egg-crate
foam was placed beneath the frame to eliminate the strongest reflections, but it was found to be
irrelevant for the pressure response at the bridge.
22
Practical Estimation of Violin Bridge Admittance
==PAGE:33==
200
300
400
600
1000
1600
Frequency (Hz)
−40
−30
−20
−10
0
10
20
So(nd press(re spectral densit) (dB re. 292 Hz)
So(nd press(re response (V1) - Pendulum/Microphone
Opposite bridge corner
Ear position
Figure 2.13: Sound pressure responses for two microphone positions.
The bridge response has a higher relative level at low frequencies which is attributed to the
near-field effects. The ear position response is more noisy which is attributed to reflections.
Both positions show very similar signature resonances, but the bridge position was chosen as
superior due to a better signal-to-noise ratio and a less ambiguous microphone position.
2.8
Arduino Sensors
Two cheap sensors were tested in the pursuit of alternatives to the LDV and GRAS 46AE. These
were the MEMS accelerometer ADXL345 [15] and the electret microphone MAX4466 [16]. These
were controlled using an Arduino Nano V3. The wiring connections can be seen on Table 2.1,
and pictures of the equipment in Figure A.2 in the appendix.
• ADXL345: Set up to use only the z-axis acceleration. Allows sampling rates up to 3200
Hz (was only used with 1600 Hz), with a 13-bit resolution and a ±16 g range. Communi-
cation was set up to use the SPI communication protocol. Calibration was performed by
measuring the ±1 g signal output. Overload was sometimes a problem.
• MAX4466: Saved data to an SD-card using an SD-card module. The gain was adjusted to
the minimum value, but overload was still a major problem.
Table 2.1: Arduino Nano V3 connections to the ADXL345, MAX4466 and SD-Card Reader.
*The SD card was powered by a separate power supply module.
Arduino Nano Pin
ADXL345
MAX4466
SD Card Reader
3.3V
VCC
VCC
-
5V*
-
-
VCC
GND
GND
GND
GND
A0
-
OUT
-
D2
INT1
-
-
D10
CS
-
CS
D11
MOSI (SDA)
-
MOSI
D12
MISO (SDO)
-
MISO
D13
SCK (SCL)
-
SCK
Practical Estimation of Violin Bridge Admittance
23
==PAGE:34==
The ADXL345 was compared to the LDV by pointing the laser at a piece of reflective tape attached
to the module. The MAX4466 was compared to the GRAS 46AE microphone at the ear position
in order to avoid signal overload, which was detrimental to the results at the bridge position. The
results can be seen in Figure 2.14, where the microphone gives usable results for the signature
resonances, but does not measure the high frequencies accurately, likely due to a much higher
noise floor. The accelerometer completely fails to replicate the LDV output, even when displaying
only the best impacts. This investigation of cheap sensors was discontinued, but the MAX4466
did show some promise.
200
400
600
1000
1600
Frequency (Hz)
−40
−30
−20
−10
0
10
Sound pressure (dB re. 292 Hz)
Sound Pressure Response
GRAS 46AE
MAX4466
200
300
400
600
800
Frequency (Hz)
−130
−120
−110
−100
−90
−80
|V| ( B )e. 1 m/√s)
Velocity Response
Lase) (mean)
ADXL345 (impacts)
Figure 2.14: Results for ADXL345 and MAX4466 compared to the LDV and GRAS 46AE respec-
tively.
24
Practical Estimation of Violin Bridge Admittance
==PAGE:35==
Chapter 3
Mass Loading
Since the violin bridge has a mass of 2-3 grams it takes very little to change its mechanical
properties. Therefore, any mounted transducer will usually cause a significant change in the
measured admittance. This effect depends not only on the mass of the transducer, but also its
position on the structure being investigated [17]. A practical way of evaluating this mass-loading
effect is to compare the natural frequencies of the loaded and unloaded violin.
For very low frequencies, where the bridge is much smaller than the wavelength, the bridge can
be assumed to act as a rigid body. Then the measured transfer admittance across the bridge will be
identical to its input admittance, and the bridge and added mass from mounted transducers will
have the same velocity. The force measured by the force transducer 𝐹𝑚𝑒𝑎𝑠is simply distributed
between the bridge and the added mass:
𝐹𝑚𝑒𝑎𝑠= 𝐹𝑏+ 𝐹𝑚,
(3.1)
where 𝐹𝑏is the force applied to the bridge, and 𝐹𝑚is the force applied to the added mass. Rewrit-
ing 𝐹𝑚= j𝜔𝑣𝑚and converting to the frequency domain we get
𝑌𝑏=
𝑉
𝐹𝑏
=
𝑉
𝐹𝑚𝑒𝑎𝑠−j𝜔𝑚𝑉=
𝑌𝑚𝑒𝑎𝑠
1 −𝑗𝜔𝑚𝑌𝑚𝑒𝑎𝑠
,
(3.2)
where 𝑚is the added mass, 𝑌𝑏is the true bridge admittance and 𝑌𝑚𝑒𝑎𝑠is the measured admittance.
Note that the phase information is important, and that any delay between channels therefore
must be accounted for. It was found that this correction does not work for eliminating the mass-
loading of the shaker setup. For the piezoelectric accelerometer, the correction is very effective
and it is possible to obtain very good results as seen in Figure 3.1.
−50
−40
−30
−20
−10
|Y| (dB re. 1 m/Ns)
Piezo mass- oad (V1) - Shaker/Laser
Free
Piezo
Piezo - Correc(ed
200
300
400
600
1000
1600
Freq)ency (Hz)
−50
−40
−30
−20
−10
|Y| (dB re. 1 m/Ns)
Piezo mass- oad (V1) - Impac(/Laser
Free
Piezo
Piezo - Correc(ed
Figure 3.1: Mass-load correction for the piezoelectric accelerometer (effective mass ≈2.5 grams).
Practical Estimation of Violin Bridge Admittance
25
==PAGE:36==
3.1
Mass-loading properties
One important question had to be answered in order to determine whether compensating for
mass loading could be a viable method:
• Are mass loads the same for different violins?
Correcting for mass-loading effects is interesting because LDVs are very expensive. If an ac-
celerometer has a known mass-loading effect, it potentially could work as a cheaper alternative
with no downsides. This will not be possible if the effective mass loads are not the same for dif-
ferent violins. A less important, but interesting question was also investigated in order to better
understand mass-loading:
• Is mass-loading linear?
It is assumed that for each violin and load there is an expected mass-loading effect. Measurements
were conducted for two violins (V1 and V3), across six mass-loading configurations, one being
the unloaded bridge. ”ADXL” refers to the MEMS accelerometer from Section 2.8. Admittances
for each mass load can be seen in Figure A.3 in the appendix.
• Free
• Mute
• Piezo
• Piezo & Mute
• ADXL
• ADXL & Mute
Figure 3.2: The violin bridge loaded with a mute (left), the piezoelectric accelerometer (middle)
and the ADXL345 accelerometer (right).
The LDV was used with the impact hammer method, with three measurement sets conducted
for each violin (V1a, V1b, V1c, V3a, V3b, V3c) for a total of 360 measurements consisting of 3600
impacts. The loads and violins were alternated to account for uncertainty from positioning the
violins, LDV and loads.
The effective mass-load was determined by matching the B1+ resonance frequency of the loaded
and free admittance. This resonance was chosen because it was prominent for both violins and
very sensitive to mass loading. Due to the frequency resolution of 0.5 Hz, this match could be
achieved with a range of mass values. The average of the smallest and largest valid masses was
used for each case, with the guessed mass incrementing by steps of 0.01 grams. For each set,
the free measurements were averaged to obtain a single reference B1+ resonance frequency and
the effective mass load was calculated for each loaded measurement. This yielded 30 reasonably
independent values per violin and load (two with 29 due to corrupted data). The combined
distributions are shown in Figure 3.3.
26
Practical Estimation of Violin Bridge Admittance
==PAGE:37==
Mute
Piezo
Piezo+Mute
ADXL
ADXL+Mute
0
5
10
15
20
Best-fit mass (g)
Violin V1
Violin V3
Figure 3.3: Boxplots for the effective masses of the different mass-loads. The boxplots for all sets
can be seen in Figure A.4 in the appendix.
Notice that the spread for the mass estimates is greater for V3 in all cases except for the mute.
The likely explanation is that the bridge for V3 was more narrow than for V1, meaning that
attaching the two accelerometers with beeswax was more difficult.
Question 1 was tested with the null hypothesis that the mean of the effective-masses are the same
for V1 and V3 for each load. Two-sample t-tests (Welch’s) were performed with a significance
level of 𝛼= 0.05. Normality was assessed via QQ plots, showing sufficient linearity. Since the
risk of false positives increases with the number of tests performed, the Bonferroni correction
was used, adjusting the significance level 𝛼/5 = 0.01 to account for the five tests.
Table 3.1: Best-fit mass values (g) for each load and violin.
Load
V1 Mean
± SD
V3 Mean
± SD
Mean Diff. (V1 - V3)
p-value
Mute
8.52
± 0.59
8.43
± 0.49
0.10
0.502
Piezo
2.58
± 0.15
2.61
± 0.20
-0.03
0.520
Piezo&Mute
11.08
± 0.47
11.33
± 0.89
-0.25
0.175
ADXL
8.42
± 0.89
8.74
± 1.82
-0.33
0.381
ADXL&Mute
18.29
± 2.16
18.14
± 2.51
0.15
0.810
The results can be seen in Table 3.1. The p-values are all much larger than 0.01, meaning that
there is insufficient evidence to reject the null hypothesis that mass-loads are the same for the
two violins. The effective mass-loads for V1 and V3 are thus statistically equivalent across all
the tested loads.
Question 2 was tested with the null hypothesis that the mean masses of the combined loads
Piezo&Mute and ADXL&Mute, are the same as the sum of the individual load means. One-sample
t-tests were used, with the Bonferroni correction adjusting the significance level to 𝛼/4 = 0.0125.
Practical Estimation of Violin Bridge Admittance
27
==PAGE:38==
Table 3.2: Best-fit mass loads (g) for Piezo&Mute vs. summed means of individual loads.
Violin
Combined Mean
± SD
Sum of Means
Diff. (Comb. - Sum)
p-value
V1
11.08
± 0.47
11.10
-0.02
0.775
V2
11.33
± 0.89
11.04
0.29
0.081
Table 3.3: Best-fit mass loads (g) for ADXL&Mute vs. summed means of individual loads.
Violin
Combined Mean
± SD
Sum of Means
Diff. (Comb. - Sum)
p-value
V1
18.29
± 2.16
16.94
1.35
0.002
V2
18.14
± 2.51
17.17
0.97
0.043
Table 3.2 does not show significant differences, with the p-values > 0.0125 for both violins, mean-
ing that the null hypotheses should not be rejected for the Piezo/Mute load. For these loads, the
mass-load behaves linearly. This is not the case for the ADXL/Mute, as Table 3.2 shows that V1
deviates from linearity (p = 0.002 < 0.0125). While this could be a false positive, it does not matter,
since mass loading of this scale is unnecessary and cannot be properly corrected for anyway.
3.2
Small Masses
Mass loading was also briefly investigated for some known masses. Two pieces of wood were
cut and their masses estimated to about 0.15 g and 0.60 g.
200
300
400
600
1000
1600
Frequency (Hz)
−50
−45
−40
−35
−30
−25
−20
−15
−10
−5
|Y| (dB re. 1 m/Ns)
Small mass-loads (V1) - Impact/Laser
Free
0.15 grams (opt 0.48 g)
0.60 grams (opt 1.67 g)
Figure 3.4: Mass-load correction for small pieces of wood.
The corrected FRFs for these loads can be seen in Figure 3.4, where it can be seen that the small
mass allows near-perfect results for the entire 200-1600 Hz range. The larger mass shows greater
deviation similar to the piezoelectric accelerometer. For a sensor of 0.15 g, mass-load correction
could be a viable option with few drawbacks, especially if only the first few modes are desired.
A heavier sensor is also viable, but suffers a bit at high frequencies. For the 1050 Hz mode, the
small mass causes a shift of 2 Hz in resonance frequency and an amplitude drop of 0.5 dB, which is
comparable to measurement uncertainty. Thus, a sufficiently small accelerometer could replace
the LDV.
28
Practical Estimation of Violin Bridge Admittance
==PAGE:39==
Chapter 4
Pendulum Excitation
An infinitely short impact has a perfectly flat spectrum, but even an impact lasting multiple
samples will still be quite flat. Such a short signal can’t contain much information, so the spectral
information concerning the violin modes will be found almost exclusively in the response.
Different violins have different bridge admittances, so the input signals will also be different, even
when using a perfectly reliable impact hammer. However, as the mass of the hammer decreases,
so does the duration of the impact, see Eq. (2.1). The shorter the impact, the smoother the force
spectrum will become and the less information it will contain. This is true for all violins, and in
the limit, where the impact duration becomes smaller than a sample, there is no longer anything
to distinguish between violins, except maybe a level difference. The spectrum will be perfectly
flat in all cases.
In summary, if an excitation method supplies a sufficiently brief impact signal, then the force
spectrum can be replaced by a constant weighting curve for all violins with very little uncertainty.
It is proposed that this can be achieved with a simple pendulum. If the pendulum is configured to
drop from a constant height, it should posses the same momentum every time it makes contact
with the violin bridge, and thus require a constant impulse to be repelled.
A pendulum with near-zero mass is not practical so there will inevitably be some difference
between the force spectra of different violins, which will add uncertainty to the method.
4.1
Pendulum Method
For a single violin, the procedure would be the following:
1. Perform a measurement of the ”true” admittance using the impact hammer method.
2. Measure the pendulum response to obtain an estimate for the pendulum force spectrum.
3. Perform a new pendulum measurement and use the estimated force spectrum to obtain an
estimate for the admittance.
The method is thus a simple 3-step calculation:
𝑌𝑡𝑟𝑢𝑒=
𝑉ℎ𝑎𝑚𝑚𝑒𝑟
𝐹ℎ𝑎𝑚𝑚𝑒𝑟
⟶
𝐹𝑒𝑠𝑡=
𝑉𝑝𝑒𝑛𝑑
𝑌𝑡𝑟𝑢𝑒
⟶
𝑌𝑒𝑠𝑡=
𝑈𝑝𝑒𝑛𝑑
𝐹𝑒𝑠𝑡
(4.1)
Here 𝑉ℎ𝑎𝑚𝑚𝑒𝑟and 𝐹ℎ𝑎𝑚𝑚𝑒𝑟refer to the velocity and force from the impact hammer method, 𝑉𝑝𝑒𝑛𝑑
is the pendulum velocity response used to estimate pendulum force, and 𝑈𝑝𝑒𝑛𝑑is the pendulum
velocity response used to estimate the admittance. The idea is for the estimated force spectrum
𝐹𝑒𝑠𝑡to be computed for a representative sample of violins, after which only the 3rd step will be
necessary.
4.1.1
Uncertainty
The 3-step procedure adds a lot of uncertainty compared to a single 2-channel measurement
with an impact hammer, since the relative variances will compound at each step. The sample
variances are computed empirically from the measurements.
Consider the estimated force 𝐹𝑗for violin 𝑗, which is based on the measurements 𝑌𝑖using the
impact hammer and 𝑉𝑖using the pendulum. The magnitudes are used, discarding the phase
Practical Estimation of Violin Bridge Admittance
29
==PAGE:40==
information to avoid unwanted cancellation. The estimated force spectrum 𝐹𝑗is thus real-valued
and positive, and is computed as
𝐹𝑗=
|𝑉|
|𝑌|
,
where
|𝑉| = 1
𝑛𝑉
𝑛𝑉
∑
𝑖=1
|𝑉𝑖|,
|𝑌| = 1
𝑛𝑌
𝑛𝑌
∑
𝑖=1
|𝑌𝑖|,
(4.2)
where 𝑛𝑉and 𝑛𝑌are the number of measurements for each method, and |𝑉| and |𝑌| are the sample
means of |𝑉𝑖| and |𝑌𝑖|. For this thesis 𝑛𝑉= 𝑛𝑌= 10. If the number of violins is 𝑁, then the sample
mean of the estimated force (averaged across violins) will be
E[𝐹𝑗] = 𝐹=
∑𝑁
𝑗=1 𝐹𝑗
𝑁
.
(4.3)
It is assumed that each of the estimates 𝐹𝑗is normally distributed around its expected value
𝜇𝑗, and that these group means across 𝑁violins follow a normal distribution centered on the
overall mean 𝜇. Assuming normal distributions is not strictly necessary for the calculations, but
allows for easier interpretation of deviations. Since the hammer and pendulum measurements
are independent, the relative variances compound in the following manner
Var(𝐹𝑗|𝜇𝑗)
|𝐹𝑗|2
=
Var(|𝑉|)
|𝑉|2
+
Var(|𝑌|)
|𝑌|2
= (
𝑠2
𝑉
𝑛𝑉|𝑉|2 +
𝑠2
𝑌
𝑛𝑌|𝑌|2 ) ,
(4.4)
where 𝑠2
𝑉and 𝑠2
𝑌are the sample variances of |𝑉𝑖| and |𝑌𝑖|. This is the uncertainty for the estimate
𝐹𝑗for a specific violin, around its expected value 𝜇𝑗. The law of total variance is used to account
for the differences between violins,
Var(𝐹𝑗) = E[Var(𝐹𝑗|𝜇𝑗)] + Var(E[𝐹𝑗|𝜇𝑗])
=
∑𝑁
𝑗=1 Var(𝐹𝑗|𝜇𝑗)
𝑁
+
∑𝑁
𝑗=1(𝐹𝑗−𝐹)2
𝑁−1
.
(4.5)
This is the variance of the estimate 𝐹𝑗for any violin, and represents the uncertainty when ap-
plying the estimated pendulum force spectrum to an unknown violin. Applying the method is
simple, once the estimated force spectrum and its uncertainty have been computed. A new set
of pendulum velocity responses 𝑈𝑖are introduced for the third step of the procedure,
𝑌𝑒𝑠𝑡=
|𝑈|
𝐹
,
|𝑈| = 1
𝑛𝑈
𝑛𝑈
∑
𝑖=1
|𝑈𝑖|,
(4.6)
where 𝑛𝑈= 10 is the number of measurements and |𝑈| is the sample mean. The relative variance
is then,
Var(𝑌𝑒𝑠𝑡)
|𝑌𝑒𝑠𝑡|2
=
Var(|𝑈|)
|𝑈|2
+
Var(𝐹𝑘)
|𝐹|2
(4.7)
This method is tested in the following sections.
4.1.2
Smoothing
It is necessary to apply smoothing to 𝐹𝑒𝑠𝑡in order to obtain a more realistic estimate. A 1st
order Savitzky–Golay filter with size 301 is applied twice to the estimated force spectrum. This
smoothing procedure was determined by experimenting with different methods in an attempt to
get something that looked reasonable.
30
Practical Estimation of Violin Bridge Admittance
==PAGE:41==
4.2
Proof of concept
The cord-held force transducer was used for the proof of concept since it has a known flat spec-
trum (see Section 2.5). With practice, the handheld impacts became very consistent, allowing it
to serve as a concept pendulum, albeit with more variability in level. Example measurements for
both violin V1 and V3 can be seen in Figure A.5 in the appendix. The entire procedure described
in Eq. 4.1 was followed for both violin V1 and V3 using the piezoelectric accelerometer.
−100
−90
−80
−70
−60
−50
|F| (dB re. 1 N/√Hz)
Pendulum concep) (V3) - Impact/Piezo
T
rue F
Estimated F
200
250
300
400
600
1000
1600
Frequency (Hz)
−50
−40
−30
−20
−10
−Y− (dB re. 1 m/N()
T
rue H
E() ma)ed H
Figure 4.1: Estimated and true force and admittance.
The results of the concept test on violin V3 can be seen in Figure 4.1. There is a small level
difference between the true and estimated force and admittance spectra, but this can be explained
by the variability of the handheld impact. This variability coincidentally evens out the difference
for the estimate of the admittance. Note that the estimated force spectrum is not completely
smooth. These peaks and dips cannot reflect the actual force spectrum, which must be smooth
due to its short duration. It is not a big problem in this case, but this roughness becomes a much
larger problem for different pendulums. While the handheld impact hammer is very consistent,
it is not a viable method for reproducibility in the long term. It has served as a successful proof
of concept.
4.3
Designing the Pendulum
The requirement for the pendulum is a consistent impact with a short duration to minimize dif-
ferences between violins. Multiple pendulums were tested with varying masses. Five pendulums
with varying masses were tested and compared to the cord-held transducer:
• Transducer
• Light - long
• Heavy
• Light - medium
• Medium
• Light - short
Images of the different pendulums can be seen in Figure A.6 in the appendix. The piezoelectric
accelerometer was used to avoid signal overload for the heavy pendulum.
Practical Estimation of Violin Bridge Admittance
31
==PAGE:42==
−100
−90
−80
−70
−60
−50
0F0 (dB (e. 1 N/√H/)
Fo(ce T
(an)duce(
V1 (aw
V1 )mooth
V3 (aw
V3 )mooth
Heav. Pendulum
V1 (aw
V1 )mooth
V3 (aw
V3 )mooth
−100
−90
−80
−70
−60
−50
0F0 (dB (e. 1 N/√H/)
Medium Pendulum
V1 (aw
V1 )mooth
V3 (aw
V3 )mooth
Li ht-Long Pendulum
V1 raw
V1 smooth
V3 raw
V3 smooth
200
300
400
600
1000
1600
Frequency (Hz)
−100
−90
−80
−70
−60
−50
0F0 (dB (e. 1 N/√H/)
Light-Medium Pendulum
V1 raw
V1 smooth
V3 raw
V3 smooth
200
300
400
600
1000
1600
Frequency (Hz)
Light-Short Pendulum
V1 raw
V1 smooth
V3 raw
V3 smooth
Figure 4.2: Force spectrum estimates for each pendulum for violins V1 and V3.
Figure 4.3: Pendulum position.
Figure 4.2 shows the estimated force spectra for all the pen-
dulums for violins V1 and V3. Notice that the roughness
of the spectra is much greater for the pendulums than for
the transducer. The reason for this is likely that the violin
responds differently to the various types of impact excita-
tion, so the ”true” admittance actually depends on the pen-
dulum. It is not known whether these differences are due
to the impact surfaces, pendulum masses or something else.
A smoothing filter was applied to eliminate this roughness,
giving a more realistic estimate. This also makes it easier to
see the differences between the pendulums.
The light-short pendulum was chosen as the best candidate,
showing minimal differences between the two violins up to
600 Hz. An even lighter pendulum was also tested, but its
impacts were not consistent.
32
Practical Estimation of Violin Bridge Admittance
==PAGE:43==
4.4
Final Pendulum
Figure 4.4: Pendulum setup with laser in
the background.
To ensure that impacts are as similar as possible,
the pendulum and violin bridge should be aligned
such that the edge of the pendulum tip is almost
parallel with the edge of the bridge, see Figure 4.3.
The point of contact should still be the corner of
the bridge. Since the pendulum fixture was used
with only two degrees of freedom, one rotational
and one translational, this meant that the axis was
in approximately the same position each time.
The entire pendulum setup can be seen in Figure
4.4, with a drawing in Figure A.10 in the appendix.
The LDV was used for the final method. The force
spectrum of the pendulum was estimated from
three violins V1, V2 and V3. The estimates were
averaged and smoothed to obtain the final estimate
𝐹𝑒𝑠𝑡. The total relative variance was estimated as
the combination of the relative inter- and intra-
violin variances as per Equation (4.5). The pendu-
lum fixture was reset between each measurement.
−90
−85
−80
−75
−70
−65
−60
5F5 (dB re. 1 N/√Hz)
S(oo/hed A1erage F
est
V1 raw
V2 raw
V3 raw
Smoothed Avg Fest
±1 SD (poly)
200
300
400
600
1000
1600
Frequency (Hz)
0.000
0.025
0.050
0.075
0.100
0.125
0.150
0.175
0.200
Rel. SD
Relative Standard Deviations
Intra-violin Rel. SD
Inter-violin Rel. SD
T
otal Rel. SD
2nd order poly
.
Polyfit points
Figure 4.5: Estimated force spectrum for the final pendulum, as well as the relative standard
deviation of the estimate. The inter-violin variance is based on smoothed force estimates for each
violin. The shaded area for the estimate is based on the polynomial fit of the relative standard
deviation.
Practical Estimation of Violin Bridge Admittance
33
==PAGE:44==
The results for the smoothed average of the raw estimates and the inter-violin variability of
smoothed estimates are shown in Figure 4.5. In order to get a better estimate of the inter-violin
variability of all violins, it was assumed that the relative standard deviation would always in-
crease with frequency. A simple 2nd order polynomial was fitted to some manually selected
points to generate an envelope for the relative standard deviation. This is believed to be a better
estimate of total variance for 𝐹𝑒𝑠𝑡. This also fits well with the inter-violin variability of the raw
estimates, as seen in Figure A.8 in the appendix.
It is important to note that the deviation per frequency bin is not be independent of the neighbor-
ing bins. Since the true force spectrum must be smooth and relatively flat, a deviation of +0.5 dB
at 300 Hz, means that the deviation at 301 Hz will also be very close to +0.5 dB. This is important,
since it means that the uncertainty of 𝐹𝑒𝑠𝑡does not significantly influence the frequencies and
Q-factors of the resonances. It is thus the level of frequency bands that is most affected by the
uncertainty of the estimate.
The inter-violin uncertainty is much larger than the intra-violin uncertainty. This means, that
when applying the method to new violins, it will still be the uncertainty of 𝐹𝑒𝑠𝑡which domi-
nates. We thus have a good estimate of the uncertainty of any measurement performed with the
pendulum method. For the 200-700 Hz range it means that the final results will have an uncer-
tainty of about ±0.6 dB. Put into context, it has been found that when presenting single notes,
the JND for the modes of the violin was 3-5 dB for amplitude and 3-5 % for the frequency of the
modes, while the JND for frequency bands was closer to 1-3 dB and 1-3 % [18]. The uncertainty
of the method is therefore so small that it should not pose significant problems for the accuracy
of quality investigations.
The results from applying the method to violin V3 can be seen in Figure 4.6. The ”true” ad-
mittance found with the impact hammer method mostly lies within a standard deviation of the
mean admittance for the pendulum method. The discrepancies are largest at the anti-resonances,
which is not a problem.
200
300
400
600
1000
1600
Frequency (Hz)
−50
−40
−30
−20
−10
(Y( (dB re. 1 m/Ns)
V3: T
rue vs Estimated Admittance
Estimate ±1 SE
True ±1 SE
Figure 4.6: Bridge admittance from impact hammer method compared to the pendulum method.
34
Practical Estimation of Violin Bridge Admittance
==PAGE:45==
Chapter 5
Pendulum Results
5.1
Measurement Setup and Playing Test
A total of 8 violins were measured using the pendulum method, acquiring bridge admittance
using the LDV and radiativity using the GRAS 46AE microphone. The standard procedure of
calibrating the equipment, tuning the instruments and damping the strings was followed.
Playing tests were conducted by two volunteers (inexperienced with quality assessments) who
provided a single grading for each of the following quality descriptors:
• Overall rating
• Projection
• Balance
• Tone
These correspond well with the three dimensions for the semantic mapping of overall quality
found by Fritz et al. [4]:
• Loud-Weak (projection)
• Uneven-Soft (balance)
• Rough-Clear (tone)
All measurements and playing tests were conducted within a few hours on June 19th, 2025.
5.2
Quality Assessment Results
The original results can be seen in Table B.1 in the appendix. The grading for overall rating
was converted to a 1-3 scale, with 3 being the best. The grading for projection and balance was
converted to a binary 1-2 scale, with 2 reflecting large projection and good balance respectively.
Tone was described with the words: ”Grainy”, ”Sharp”, ”Dark”, ”Raspy”, ”Pure” and ”Bright”.
These were interpreted as either ”Clear”, ”Dark”, ”Sharp”, or ”Rough” in accordance with [4].
Table 5.1: Quality assessment for the 8 violins.
Violin
V1
V2
V3
V4
V5
V6
V7
V8
Rating
2
1
1
2
3
3
2
1
Projection
1
1
2
2
2
2
2
1
Tone
Rough
Rough
Sharp
Dark
Clear
Clear
Clear
Rough
Balance
2
1
2
2
2
2
1
1
The results can be seen in Table 5.1. For the tone of the violins, only ”Rough” and ”Clear” were
used for multiple violins. Violins V3 and V4 were therefore ignored for this quality parameter.
Note that the ”Rough” tone perfectly coincides with a lower projection.
The players commented that it was immediately obvious to them which violins they preferred.
Practical Estimation of Violin Bridge Admittance
35
==PAGE:46==
5.3
Measurement Results
−50
−40
−30
−20
−10
|Y| (dB re. 1 m/Ns)
Admittance (8 vi lins)
V1
V2
V3
V4
V5
V6
V7
V8
200
300
400
600
1000
1600
Frequency (H()
−20
−10
0
10
20
30
40
)R) (dB re. 1 Pa/N)
Radiativity (8 vi lins)
V1
V2
V3
V4
V5
V6
V7
V8
Figure 5.1: Admittance and radiativity results with the pendulum method for all 8 violins.
The admittance and radiativity results are seen in Figure 5.1. Only the signature resonances A0,
CBR, B1- and B1+ were considered, since they were easily identifiable in most of the FRFs. For
each of these resonances, the frequency, level and Q-factor were determined. The results for
each violin can be seen in Figures B.1-B.4 in the appendix. The CBR resonance was often quite
weak, especially for radiativity. It was only included if its peak value was at least 3 dB above the
nearby FRF, making estimating the Q-factor possible. The Q-factor was difficult to determine
for the A0 resonance due to some violins displaying another resonance at a similar frequency.
This was judged to be the B0 ”neck mode”, which has previously been linked to improved sound
quality when close to the A0 mode [19], and could thus be worth investigating in the future.
Since the admittance and radiativity are related, it makes sense to investigate how the signature
resonances for the two FRFs compare. On Figure 5.2, the relationship between admittance and
radiativity is seen for the frequency, level and Q-factor of the signature resonances, with a best-
fit linear regression for each of them. For frequency, there is almost perfect correlation for all
the signature modes with a fixed slope of 1. The CBR, B1- and B1+ resonances have the same
frequency for both responses, while the A0 resonance was consistently 3 Hz higher in frequency
for the radiativity compared to the admittance. It can thus be concluded that the admittance
and radiativity measurements contain the same information with regards to signature resonance
frequencies.
For the peak level, the correlation is weaker. Note that the slopes of the best linear fit vary a lot
for the different modes, indicating a nonlinear relationship between the levels of admittance and
radiativity. With 𝑅2 values close to 1 it is once again indicated that the admittance and radiativity
contain mostly the same information concerning the levels of the resonances.
36
Practical Estimation of Violin Bridge Admittance
==PAGE:47==
250
300
350
400
450
500
550
Admittance Frequency (Hz)
250
300
350
400
450
500
550
Radiativity Frequency (Hz)
Admittance vs Radiativity: Signature Resonance Frequency
A0:   y = x +3.12   R
2
 = 0.99
CBR:  y = x -0.17   R
2
 = 1.00
B1-:  y = x +0.06   R
2
 = 1.00
B1+:  y = x +0.19   R
2
 = 0.99
−35
−30
−25
−20
−15
−10
Admittance Level (dB re. 1 m/Ns)
15
20
25
30
35
Radiativity Level (dB re. 1 Pa/N)
Admittance vs Radiativity: Signat re Resonance Level
A0:   y = 1.00x +55.65   R
2
 = 0.79
CBR:  y = 1.35x +48.46   R
2
 = 0.94
B1-:  y = 1.55x +53.01   R
2
 = 0.86
B1+:  y = 0.70x +41.78   R
2
 = 0.91
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Admittance Q
20
25
30
35
40
Radiativity Q
Admittance vs Radiativity: Signature Resonance Q -factor
A0:   y =-0.03x +21.00   R
2
 = 0.00
CBR:  y = 1.91x -23.25   R
2
 = 0.92
B1-:  y = 0.90x  +2.21   R
2
 = 0.93
B1+:  y = 0.65x +10.69   R
2
 = 0.51
CBR/B1-/B1+  y= 0.88x  +2.68   R
2
= 0.82
Figure 5.2: Comparison of signature resonance parameters for admittance and radiativity.
Practical Estimation of Violin Bridge Admittance
37
==PAGE:48==
The Q-factors show good correlation for the CBR and B1- modes, while there is weak or no cor-
relation for the A0 and B1+ modes. When collecting the three high frequency signature modes,
a strong correlation of 0.82 emerges for the entire group.
Generally speaking, it appears possible for the radiativity to serve as a stand-in for the admit-
tance measurement for the purpose of investigating the signature resonances, with only the A0
Q-factor showing bad correlation. More violins would need to be measured for more robust
conclusions to be drawn.
5.4
Admittance/Radiativity transfer function
The correlation between admittance and radiativity led to the idea that there might exist a sim-
ple transfer function between the two. Specifying the admittance as 𝑌and radiativity as 𝑅, the
transfer function 𝐻= 𝑅/𝑌will have the physical unit Pa/(m/s). This directly relates the vi-
brational velocity of the bridge to the measured sound pressure next to the bridge. The transfer
function for each violin can be seen in Figure 5.3.
20
30
40
50
60
70
dB re. 1 Pa/(m/s)
V1
V1
V2
V2
20
30
40
50
60
70
dB re. 1 Pa/(m/s)
V3
V3
V4
V4
20
30
40
50
60
70
dB re. 1 Pa/(m/s)
V5
V5
V6
V6
200
300
400
600
1000
1600
Frequency (Hz)
20
30
40
50
60
70
dB re. 1 Pa/(m/s)
V7
V7
200
300
400
600
1000
1600
Frequency (Hz)
V8
V8
Radiativity / Admittance
Figure 5.3: Radiativity/Admittance transfer function for each violin.
For all violins, there is a big peak at the A0 resonance. This is followed by a wide and relatively
smooth valley that ends with a peak around 600-700 Hz. This range includes the signature res-
onances for all violins and is therefore worth taking a closer look at. After the second peak, the
similarity between violins ends.
38
Practical Estimation of Violin Bridge Admittance
==PAGE:49==
For each violin, the frequency axis is shifted to align the A0 resonance frequency (for radiativity)
to 0 Hz. A running average of size 7 was used, gradually increasing to size 51 between 30 and 40
Hz. The shifted transfer functions are shown in Figure 5.4 along with the running average. There
are significant differences in the level of the transfer functions, with differences between the
largeest and smallest value increasing to 10 dB at 350 Hz above the A0 resonances. This supports
the findings of a nonlinear relationship between the magnitudes of the signature resonances for
admittance and radiativity. The fact that the transfer function is quite flat for the CBR, B1- and
B1+ resonances tracks with the correlation of their Q-factors.
−50
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
Frequency (Hz, shifted A0=0)
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
|R|/|Y| (dB re. 1 Pa/(m/s))
V1
V2
V3
V4
V5
V6
V7
V8
Running Mean
Figure 5.4: Shifted transfer functions for all violins with the running average in black.
The averaged transfer function was applied to the radiativity results as a weighting curve aligned
with the A0 resonance. As can be seen in Figure 5.5, the effectiveness of this approach varies a
lot. The B1- and B1+ estimates are pretty accurate, supporting the idea that the radiativity mea-
surement can replace the admittance measurement. The A0 and CBR estimates are less reliable,
but the method clearly replicates the admittance curve in general terms.
−40
−30
−20
−10
|Y| (dB re. 1 m/Ns)
Admi  ance V1
T
rue
Es ima ed
Admi  ance V2
T
rue
Es ima ed
200
300
400
500
600
Frequency (Hz)
−40
−30
−20
−10
|Y| (dB re. 1 m/Ns)
Admi  ance V3
T
rue
Es ima ed
200
300
400
500
600
Frequency (Hz)
Admi  ance V4
T
rue
Es ima ed
Figure 5.5: Averaged radiativity/admittance transfer function applied to the radiativity results.
Practical Estimation of Violin Bridge Admittance
39
==PAGE:50==
5.5
Quality Link
With a sample size of 8 violins, and a low-resolution quality rating, it is not possible to find any
meaningful correlation between measurements and quality. Either the quality rating would need
better resolution, making it possible to perform a meaningful linear regression, or the sample size
would have to be much larger, allowing for statistical tests. Therefore this investigation should
be considered a pilot study, testing how to use the measured responses to find quality links.
The quality ratings were related to a number of signature resonance parameters extracted from
the measurements: Frequency, relative frequency, level, relative level and Q-factor. This was
done for both admittance and radiativity, but no link to quality was found. The results for fre-
quency are seen in Figure 5.6, while the rest of the results have been omitted from the thesis.
260
270
280
290
A0
Rating
Projection
T
one
Balance
375
400
425
CBR
440
460
480
B1-
1
2
3
520
530
540
550
B1+
Ok
Large
Rough
Clear
Ok
Bad
Frequencies (admittance) vs quality parameters
Figure 5.6: Quality ratings related to the signature resonance frequencies of the admittance mea-
surement.
Of all the numerous comparisons (including the ones not shown), the only one with multiple
samples in each quality category and no overlap between categories, is the relationship between
A0 frequency and Tone. With only six samples, this is not significant, and it is rather surprising
that only one of such cases was found.
40
Practical Estimation of Violin Bridge Admittance
==PAGE:51==
Perhaps a more meaningful link between quality and measurements can be found by visual in-
spection of the results. It turns out that violins 4 and 8 are very similar, and that violins 5 and 6
are extremely similar. The admittance and radiativity results can be seen in Figure 5.7.
−50
−40
−30
−20
−10
|Y| (dB re. 1 m/s/N)
V4
V8
V5
V6
200
300
400
600
1000
1600
−20
−10
0
10
20
30
40
|R| (dB re. 1 Pa/N)
V4
V8
200
300
400
600
1000
1600
V5
V6
Frequenc  (Hz)
Figure 5.7: Results for violins V4 and V8, and violins V5 and V6.
V5 and V6 are almost identical and were given the exact same quality ratings as can be seen in
Table 5.1. V4 and V8 are mostly the same for both FRFs, with the biggest difference being above
700 Hz, and they scored differently for every single descriptor. Assuming that the quality ratings
are trustworthy (they aren’t), this would indicate that the quality is not determined solely by the
signature resonances, and that the high frequency content must be accounted for in some way.
The two violins with the best overall rating are V5 and V6. As can be seen on Figure 5.6, these
have the lowest frequency signature resonances, which is the exact opposite of earlier findings
[2]. A new investigation with more violins is warranted, most importantly with a more robust
quality assessment.
Practical Estimation of Violin Bridge Admittance
41
==PAGE:52==
Chapter 6
Discussion
Measurement Methods
The choice of string damping method was found to be quite important. It turns out that much
of the literature on violin acoustics has been using string damping methods that are far from
ideal. Hopefully the findings of this thesis will be considered, and a standard for string damping
established.
While the simple mass-loading correction showed promise, perhaps a better correction scheme
can be designed. Using this will unfortunately complicate the pendulum method, also requiring
an estimate for the phase of the impact spectrum.
The pendulum was demonstrated to be a viable replacement to an impact hammer, decreasing
the cost of the measurement method. Given that the inter-violin variance is the main source
of uncertainty, an improved pendulum would be the most obvious point of improvement for the
measurement method. With an even shorter impact, the measurement reliability should improve
significantly. It should also be possible to extend the frequency range of the method to include
the bridge hill. A specialized fixture for increased reliability and ease of use would also be a
significant improvement.
The radiativity and admittance for the bridge appears to contain mostly the same information
concerning the signature resonances. In combination with the pendulum method, this means
that the only costly equipment necessary for investigating the signature resonances will be a
microphone and DAQ device. This is a huge decrease in cost compared to the initial method. It
appears that the radiativity measurement is an easier and better method of obtaining quantitative
data on violins, while being more obviously relevant to perceived quality. For the relationship
between admittance and radiativity, only the simplest transfer function was constructed. A more
accurate transfer function could potentially be designed, taking the levels of signature levels into
account in order to account for issues relating to nonlinearity. It might also be possible to extend
the transfer function to give reasonable estimates for the higher frequencies, strengthening the
idea that the radiativity measurement is sufficient.
The simplicity and affordability of the pendulum and radiativity measurement is of great bene-
fit for making violin measurements accessible to more researchers. Making standardized violin
measurement equipment widespread would make it possible to collect a large amount of com-
parable data that would enable large-scale quality investigations.
Quality Assessment
The biggest challenge for the attempt to link measurements to perceived quality was the accuracy
of the quality assessment, and to a lesser extent the violin sample size. The participants were not
familiar with performing quality investigations, so it does not make sense to use the findings for
finding links to the signature resonances. A more reasonable conclusion to draw from the playing
test is that even players unfamiliar with quality assessment can clearly perceive differences in
violin quality.
The room acoustics for the quality assessment were quite bad, and only one set of grades was
provided for each violin. Since the players were also the owners of most of the violins, there was
also certainly a degree of bias in the ratings.
Ideally, a standard for violin quality assessment should be established, including criteria for room
acoustics and playing tasks. Quality descriptors should also be standardized. A variation of
42
Practical Estimation of Violin Bridge Admittance
==PAGE:53==
the ones used for this thesis could be selected in accordance with [4], with three descriptors +
overall quality likely being sufficient. It is important that the players agree on the meaning of
the descriptors in order for the ratings to be useful. To that end, it will probably be necessary
to train the players how to rate violins. This could be done using representative violins for each
descriptor, where the players would have to agree on their sound quality.
With a more robust playing test, it would be interesting to test how much the measured FRF and
perceived quality are affected by moving the soundpost or adjusting the bridge, given that this
is the most practical way to modify a violin.
Practical Estimation of Violin Bridge Admittance
43
==PAGE:54==
Chapter 7
Conclusion
The practical aspects of measuring violin FRFs have been investigated, demonstrating the im-
portance of string damping, excitation method, mass-loading and violin support.
A very simple method has been developed for obtaining admittance and radiativity measure-
ments for the violin bridge using a simple pendulum, both of which can be used to obtain the
signature resonances. It has also been shown that a radiativity measurement at the bridge is
probably sufficient, since it contains most of the low-frequency information found in bridge ad-
mittance measurements. This is a useful step towards making violin analysis more accessible.
While this thesis did not find any link between measurable attributes and perceived quality, it
has hopefully served to expand on the knowledge of violin measurement methods, and set the
stage for future studies.
44
Practical Estimation of Violin Bridge Admittance
==PAGE:55==
Bibliography
[1]
Woodhouse J. “The acoustics of the violin: a review”. In: Rep. Prog. Phys. 77 (2014).
[2]
Saitis C., Fritz C., Giordano B., and Scavone G. “Bridge admittance measurements of 10
preference-rated violins”. In: Acoustics 2012, Apr 2012, Nantes, France. (2012).
[3]
Bissinger G. “Structural acoustics of good and bad violins”. In: J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 124(3)
(2008), pp. 1764–1773.
[4]
Fritz C., Blackwell A. F., Cross I., Woodhouse J., and Moore B. C. J. “Exploring violin sound
quality: Investigating English timbre descriptors and correlating resynthesized acoustical
modifications with perceptual properties”. In: J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 131(1) (2012), pp. 783–794.
[5]
Flocken H. D. “Can Forced Vibrations Tranform the Sound of New Violins?” MA thesis.
DTU, 2023.
[6]
Benson N. “Quantative Assessment of the Impact of Relative Humidity on the Vibro-Elastic
Properties of a Violin”. MA thesis. DTU, 2024.
[7]
Jansson E.V. “Violin frequency response – bridge mobility and bridge feet distance”. In:
Applied Acoustics 65 (2004), pp. 1195–1205.
[8]
Zhang A. and Woodhouse J. “Reliability of the input admittance of bowed-string instru-
ments measured by the hammer method”. In: J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 136(6) (2014), pp. 3371–
3381.
[9]
Pyrkosz M. and Van Karsen C. “Comparative Modal Tests of a Violin”. In: Experimental
techniques. Michigan Technological university. Society for Experimental Mechanics. (2012).
[10]
Duerinck T., Segers J., Skrodzka E., Verberkmoes G., Leman M., Paepegem W. V., and
Kersemans M. “Experimental comparison of various excitation and acquisition techniques
for modal analysis of violins”. In: Applied Acoustics 177 (2021).
[11]
Piacsek A. and Lowery S. “Experimental Uncertainty in Measurements of Violin Impulse
Response Admittance”. In: Proceedings of the 10th Convention of the European Acoustics
Association Forum Acusticum 2023 (2023), pp. 3423–3428.
[12]
Dünnwald H. “Deduction of objective quality parameters on old and new violins”. In:
Catgut Acoust. Soc. J. Vol. 1, No. 7, Series II (1991), pp. 1–5.
[13]
Brüel & Kjær. Instructions and Applications. Force Transducer Type 8200.
[14]
Curtin J. “Measuring Violin Sound Radiation Using an Impact Hammer”. In: J. Violin Soc.
Am.: VSA Papers, Vol. XXII, No. 1 (2009), pp. 186–209.
[15]
url: https : / / www . analog . com / media / en / technical - documentation / data - sheets /
ADXL345-EP.pdf.
[16]
url: https : / / www . analog . com / media / en / technical - documentation / data - sheets /
MAX4465-MAX4469.pdf.
[17]
Ren J. and Wang J. “Assessment of transducer mass effects on measured FRFs in shaker
modal testing”. In: JVE International LTD. Journal of Vibroengineering, Aug 2017, Vol. 19,
Issue 5 (2017), pp. 3472–3487.
[18]
Fritz C., Cross I., Moore B. C. J., and Woodhouse J. “Perceptual thresholds for detecting
modifications applied to the acoustical properties of a violin”. In: J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 122(6)
(2007), pp. 3640–3650.
[19]
Woodhouse J. “The Acoustics of ”A0-B0” Mode Matching in the Violin”. In: Acta Acustica
84 (1998), pp. 947–956.
Practical Estimation of Violin Bridge Admittance
45
==PAGE:56==
46
Practical Estimation of Violin Bridge Admittance
==PAGE:57==
Appendix A
Additional Figures
String damping methods
(a) felt_long_low
(b) felt_long_high
(c) felt_short_low
(d) felt_short_mid
(e) felt_short_high
(f) 10_card_low
(g) 10_card_high
(h) 5_card_low
(i) 5_card_high
(j) paper_towel_low
Figure A.1: All string damping methods
Practical Estimation of Violin Bridge Admittance
47
==PAGE:58==
Arduino Setup
Figure A.2: Top: ADXL345 attached to the bridge. Bottom: Close view of breadboard with
MAXX4466.
48
Practical Estimation of Violin Bridge Admittance
==PAGE:59==
Mass-Load Admittances
−50
−40
−30
−20
−10
2Y2 (dB re. 1 m/Ns)
V1a - Mute (best mass: 8.60 g)
Free
Mu.e
Correc.ed ((=8.60g)
−50
−40
−30
−20
−10
2 2 (dB re. 1 (/Ns)
V1a - Piezo (best mass: 2.55 g)
Free
Piezo
Correc.ed ((=2.55g)
−50
−40
−30
−20
−10
|Y| (dB re. 1 m/Ns)
V1a - Piezo+Mute (best mass: 10.83 g)
Free
Pie1o+Mu.e
Correc.ed ((=10.83g)
−50
−40
−30
−20
−10
2 2 (dB re. 1 (/Ns)
V1a - ADXL (best mass: 9.11 g)
Free
ADXL
Correc.ed ((=9.11g)
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
Freque)c0 (H1)
−50
−40
−30
−20
−10
2 2 (dB re. 1 (/Ns)
V1a - ADXL+Mute (best mass: 18.99 g)
Free
ADXL+Mute
Corrected (m=18.99g)
Figure A.3: Free, loaded and corrected bridge admittances for each mass load.
Practical Estimation of Violin Bridge Admittance
49
==PAGE:60==
Mass-Load - Best Fit
V1a
V1b
V1c
V3a
V3b
V3c
Measurement set
Mute
V1a
V1b
V1c
V3a
V3b
V3c
Measurement set
Piezo
V1a
V1b
V1c
V3a
V3b
V3c
Measurement set
Piezo+Mute
V1a
V1b
V1c
V3a
V3b
V3c
Measurement set
ADXL
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
Best-fit mass (g)
V1a
V1b
V1c
V3a
V3b
V3c
Measurement set
ADXL+Mute
Mass correction distributions for all sets and loadings
Figure A.4: Boxplots for the best-fit mass-loads for each load type.
50
Practical Estimation of Violin Bridge Admittance
==PAGE:61==
Handheld Transducer
−100
−80
−60
|F| (dB re. 1 N/√Hz)
V1: 10 Measurements: F rce
−120
−100
−80
(V( (dB re. 1 m/√s)
V1: 10 Measurements: Vel city
−40
−20
(Y( (dB re. 1 m/Ns)
V1: 10 Measurements: Admittance
−100
−80
−60
(F( (dB re. 1 N/√Hz)
V3: 10 Measurements: F rce
−120
−100
−80
(V( (dB re. 1 m/√s)
V3: 10 Measurements: Vel city
200
250
300
400
600
1000
1600
Frequency (Hz)
−40
−20
(Y( (dB re. 1 m/Ns)
V3: 10 Measurements: Admittance
Figure A.5: Impact hammer results for 10 measurements for violins V1 and V3.
Practical Estimation of Violin Bridge Admittance
51
==PAGE:62==
Pendulums
Figure A.6: Left-to-right: Heavy, Middle and Light-Long pendulums. The light-medium and
light-short pendulums were just shorter versions of the light-long.
Variances for Force spectrum estimation
0.00
0.02
0.04
Rel. Std Dev |
̄
Y|
Relative Standa d Deviation of |
̄
Y|
V1
V2
V3
0.00
0.02
0.04
Rel. Std Dev (|
̄
V|)
Relative Standa d Deviation of |
̄
V|
V1
V2
V3
200
300
400
600
1000
1600
F equency (Hz)
0.00
0.02
0.04
Combined Rel. Std Dev
Combined Relative Standa d Deviation
V1
V2
V3
Ave age
Figure A.7: Separate and combined relative standard deviations.
52
Practical Estimation of Violin Bridge Admittance
==PAGE:63==
Final pendulum estimate and total variance
−90
−85
−80
−75
−70
−65
−60
|F| ( B re. 1 N/√Hz)
Ra0 F
est
V1
V2
V3
Average
Smoothed F
est
V1 - smooth
V2 - smooth
V3 - smooth
Smoothed Avg
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
SD (N/√Hz)
×10
−4
In−ra-violin SD
Inter-violin SD
T
otal SD
2nd order poly
.
×10
−4
In−ra-violin SD
Inter-violin SD
T
otal SD
2nd order poly
.
200
300
400
600
1000
1600
Frequency (Hz)
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
Rel. SD
Intra-violin Rel. SD
Inter-violin Rel. SD
T
otal Rel. SD
2nd order poly
.
200
300
400
600
1000
1600
Frequency (Hz)
Intra-violin Rel. SD
Inter-violin Rel. SD
T
otal Rel. SD
2nd order poly
.
Figure A.8: Estimated pendulum force spectrum and total standard deviation for raw and
smoothed results.
Practical Estimation of Violin Bridge Admittance
53
==PAGE:64==
Frame top-view
Frame side-view
65
160
65
20
690
20
20
250
20
160
200
370
65
35
20
55
195
20
730
20
13
65
550
10
25
55
65
75
Not to scale.
All lengths in mm.
65x20 mm pieces of wood.
All right angles
Figure A.9: Drawing of violin frame
54
Practical Estimation of Violin Bridge Admittance
==PAGE:65==
Pendulum side-view
Pendulum back-view
Pendulum axis
Material: Brass
Ø 24
12
Ø 10
Ø 24
Ø 10
Ø 5
Ø 24
Ø 11
Ø 5
12.2
4.5
4.5
15
21.2
24
15
90
12
5
85
25
5
8
Figure A.10: Pendulum drawings in mm. It should be noted that the author has no prior experi-
ence with technical drawings, and that most of the pendulum sizes are estimates due to a lack of
access to the lab during the summer.
Practical Estimation of Violin Bridge Admittance
55
==PAGE:66==
56
Practical Estimation of Violin Bridge Admittance
==PAGE:67==
Appendix B
Pendulum Results
Admittance and Radiativity
−50
−40
−30
−20
−10
|Y| (dB r . 1 m/Ns)
-29.5 dB
288.0 Hz
Q=9.0
-25.8 dB
383.5 Hz
Q=16.0
-18.3 dB
449.5 Hz
Q=27.2
-9.1 dB
552.5 Hz
Q=27.6
V1: Admittanc  and Radiati)ity
200
300
400
600
1000
1600
Fr q( ncy (Hz)
−10
0
10
20
30
40
|R| (dB r . 1 Pa/N)
26.0 dB
292.0 Hz
Q=20.9
24.1 dB
449.0 Hz
Q=27.2
36.0 dB
552.0 Hz
Q=31.5
−50
−40
−30
−20
−10
|Y| (dB re. 1 m/Ns)
-32.8 dB
273.0 Hz
Q=10.5
-21.7 dB
443.5 Hz
Q=17.7
-13.0 dB
531.5 Hz
Q=32.2
V2: Adm ttance and Rad at ( t)
200
300
400
600
1000
1600
Frequenc) (Hz)
−10
0
10
20
30
40
|R| (dB re. 1 Pa/N)
23.2 dB
278.0 Hz
Q=17.4
21.4 dB
444.5 Hz
Q=17.4
33.4 dB
533.0 Hz
Q=27.3
Figure B.1: Violins 1 and 2 annotated with signature resonance information. Shaded area shows
the mean admittance/radiativity ± SE, dots show the 3 dB bandwidth of the resonances.
Practical Estimation of Violin Bridge Admittance
57
==PAGE:68==
−50
−40
−30
−20
−10
|Y| (dB r . 1 m/Ns)
-31.3 dB
273.0 Hz
Q=10.1
-20.8 dB
430.5 Hz
Q=26.1
-17.1 dB
474.5 Hz
Q=38.0
-10.0 dB
542.5 Hz
Q=41.7
V3: Admittanc  and Radiati)ity
200
300
400
600
1000
1600
Fr q( ncy (Hz)
−10
0
10
20
30
40
|R| (dB r . 1 Pa/N)
23.9 dB
276.5 Hz
Q=29.1
20.0 dB
430.5 Hz
Q=27.8
26.4 dB
475.0 Hz
Q=36.5
34.6 dB
542.5 Hz
Q=40.2
−50
−40
−30
−20
−10
|Y| (dB r . 1 m/Ns)
-32.8 dB
282.5 Hz
Q=12.3
-26.4 dB
397.5 Hz
Q=13.7
-14.9 dB
492.0 Hz
Q=28.1
-18.8 dB
539.0 Hz
Q=38.5
V4: Admittanc  and Radiati)ity
200
300
400
600
1000
1600
Fr q( ncy (Hz)
−10
0
10
20
30
40
|R| (dB r . 1 Pa/N)
24.2 dB
284.5 Hz
Q=17.2
31.0 dB
491.5 Hz
Q=26.6
29.6 dB
539.5 Hz
Q=33.7
Figure B.2: Violins 3 and 4 annotated with signature resonance information. Shaded area shows
the mean admittance/radiativity ± SE, dots show the 3 dB bandwidth of the resonances.
58
Practical Estimation of Violin Bridge Admittance
==PAGE:69==
−50
−40
−30
−20
−10
|Y| (dB re. 1 m/Ns)
-31.3 dB
258.5 Hz
Q=14.0
-26.3 dB
363.0 Hz
Q=20.2
-17.3 dB
438.0 Hz
Q=30.2
-14.6 dB
525.5 Hz
Q=28.4
V5: Adm ttance and Rad at ( t)
200
300
400
600
1000
1600
Frequenc) (Hz)
−10
0
10
20
30
40
|R| (dB re. 1 Pa/N)
24.7 dB
261.0 Hz
Q=21.8
26.2 dB
438.0 Hz
Q=31.3
31.6 dB
525.0 Hz
Q=25.6
−50
−40
−30
−20
−10
|Y| (dB r . 1 m/Ns)
-31.0 dB
261.0 Hz
Q=13.7
-24.2 dB
364.5 Hz
Q=21.4
-16.1 dB
440.5 Hz
Q=33.9
-12.4 dB
521.5 Hz
Q=30.7
V6: Admittanc  and Radiati)ity
200
300
400
600
1000
1600
Fr q( ncy (Hz)
−10
0
10
20
30
40
|R| (dB r . 1 Pa/N)
23.4 dB
264.5 Hz
Q=20.3
16.7 dB
364.5 Hz
Q=18.2
25.9 dB
440.5 Hz
Q=31.5
33.2 dB
520.0 Hz
Q=34.7
Figure B.3: Violins 5 and 6 annotated with signature resonance information. Shaded area shows
the mean admittance/radiativity ± SE, dots show the 3 dB bandwidth of the resonances.
Practical Estimation of Violin Bridge Admittance
59
==PAGE:70==
−50
−40
−30
−20
−10
|Y| (dB r . 1 m/Ns)
-35.0 dB
264.5 Hz
Q=8.4
-25.8 dB
383.5 Hz
Q=24.7
-20.1 dB
459.5 Hz
Q=32.8
-12.6 dB
542.0 Hz
Q=35.0
V7: Admittanc  and Radiati)ity
200
300
400
600
1000
1600
Fr q( ncy (Hz)
−10
0
10
20
30
40
|R| (dB r . 1 Pa/N)
19.9 dB
267.5 Hz
Q=17.8
12.8 dB
383.0 Hz
Q=22.5
19.9 dB
459.5 Hz
Q=34.0
31.7 dB
542.5 Hz
Q=35.0
−50
−40
−30
−20
−10
|Y| (dB r . 1 m/Ns)
-31.0 dB
291.0 Hz
Q=11.2
-14.6 dB
487.0 Hz
Q=36.1
-17.8 dB
544.0 Hz
Q=37.5
V8: Admittanc  and Radiati)ity
200
300
400
600
1000
1600
Fr q( ncy (Hz)
−10
0
10
20
30
40
|R| (dB r . 1 Pa/N)
25.4 dB
292.5 Hz
Q=20.9
31.6 dB
487.0 Hz
Q=32.5
28.5 dB
545.5 Hz
Q=33.1
Figure B.4: Violins 7 and 8 annotated with signature resonance information. Shaded area shows
the mean admittance/radiativity ± SE, dots show the 3 dB bandwidth of the resonances.
60
Practical Estimation of Violin Bridge Admittance
==PAGE:71==
Quality Assessment
Date: 2025-06-19
Jørgen Skotte
John Hebøll
Table B.1: Quality assessment of violins 1–8. Direct translation from Danish to English.
Violin 1
Violin 5
”Chinese” measurement violin
Jørgen’s ”youngest”
Projection:
OK - normal
Projection:
Large
Tone:
OK - a bit grainy
Tone:
Bright - clear
Balance:
OK
Balance:
OK
Comments:
An OK playable violin
Comments:
Very beautiful tone
Grade:
8
Grade:
9
Violin 2
Violin 6
”Chinese” reference violin
Jørgen’s ”middlemost”
Projection:
OK
Projection:
Large
Tone:
Lacks fullness. A bit grainy
Tone:
Bright - clear
Balance:
Powerful on E. Closed on D.
Balance:
OK
Comments:
Grainy tone
Comments:
Grade:
7
Grade:
9
Violin 3
Violin 7
Holger’s violin
Jørgen’s ”oldest”
Projection:
OK →large
Projection:
Quite large
Tone:
Sharp - especially on A and E
Tone:
Bright - “middle”
Balance:
OK
Balance:
A-string. B-resonance.
Comments:
Resonance on B1
Comments:
Grade:
7
Grade:
8
Violin 4
Violin 8
John’s violin
John’s family violin
Projection:
Large
Projection:
OK - a bit weak on G and D
Tone:
A bit dark - closed
Tone:
A bit raspy
Balance:
OK
Balance:
A bit weak bass
Comments:
Comments:
OK violin. 140-160 years old.
Grade:
8
Grade:
7
Practical Estimation of Violin Bridge Admittance
61
==PAGE:72==
But of bliss and glad life there is little to be said, before it ends; as works fair and wonderful, while they still
endure for eyes to see, are ever their own record, and only when they are in peril or broken for ever do they
pass into song. - J.R.R. Tolkien
Technical
University of
Denmark
Ørsteds Plads, Building 352
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.electro.dtu.dk
