==PAGE:1==
Development
and
use
of
optimisation
algorithm
for
calculating
stable
bays
as
part of coastal protection
Master Thesis
Jacob Friland
DTU Construct
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
==PAGE:2==
Development and use of optimisation algorithm for calculating stable bays as part
of coastal protection
Master Thesis
10 July, 2025
By
Jacob Friland
Supervisor:
Erik Damgaard Christensen, Head of Section, Professor, Depart­
ment of Civil and Mechanical Engineering, DTU
External Supervisors:
Kasper Kærgaard, DHI
Asger Bendix Hansen, DHI
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include
the customary bibliographic citation, including author attribution,
report title, etc.
Published by:
DTU, Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering, Koppels
Allé, Building 404, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.construct.dtu.dk
Cover photo:
Google earth, 2025
==PAGE:3==
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Coastal protection is important for the environment, the people living near coasts, and
the infrastructure near coasts. One method of coastal protection is the use of stable
headland­bay beaches. The shape of these beaches has been described by empirical
formulas previously. It can, however, also be calculated numerically. This process is
currently very slow and computationally intensive.
This thesis aims to apply optimisation algorithms to a numerical model. This uses the
bay shape as an input parameter at each iteration. The output of the model is the net
littoral drift. The iterative process converges towards a stable bay shape, as that will
have no littoral drift. Two algorithms are used, the Steepest­Descent and the Broyden­
Fletcher­Goldfarb­Shanno (BFGS) method. It is found that the iterative process works
for the Steepest­Descent method, which heads towards a more stable bay. The BFGS
method iterates into problems with the scale of the bay, and there is thus no conclusive
result for its viability.
This thesis shows that it is possible to apply first­order optimisation algorithms to the shape
of Headland­Bay beaches, while second­order algorithms face challenges.
Development and use of optimisation algorithm for calculating stable bays as part of coastal protection
iii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisor, Erik Damgaard Christensen, for his guidance through­
out the project, especially with regards to algorithm setup.
I would like to thank my other supervisor, Kasper Kærgaard, for his expertise and help
with the setup of the MIKE 21/3 Coupled Model.
Finally, I would like to thank Anne Friland, Bo Friland, Adria Flóra Kerekes, and Mads
Falck Bornæs for their support and advice.
AI­tools(Grammarly AI, and Copilot) have been used to improve clarity and grammar and
have helped with the development of code. All the content and the structure of the thesis
presented is my own.
Development and use of optimisation algorithm for calculating stable bays as part of coastal protection
iv
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
2
2.1
Headland­Bay Beach Shape
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.2
Optimisation Algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Objective
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Method
9
3.1
MIKE 21 Model Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Algorithm Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4
Results
20
4.1
Validation of Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
4.2
Instability of Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
4.3
Steepest­Descent Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
4.4
BFGS Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
5
Discussion
31
5.1
Key findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
5.2
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
5.3
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
6
Conclusion
34
Bibliography
35
A Appendix
37
Development and use of optimisation algorithm for calculating stable bays as part of coastal protection
v
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
Coastal zones are environments that are valuable to the people living nearby and the
people using them [1]. Thus, it is important to protect them, the environment, and the
infrastructure near them from erosion. One method of protecting the coastal zones is
the formation of stable headland­bay beaches in between naturally formed or man­made
headlands. These features slow down the transport rate of sediment along the coastline
[2].
There are traditional approaches to designing the shape of these bays that have been em­
pirically derived. These approaches can lack the ability to account for the actual physical
actions of waves, currents, and sediment. Another method for designing the shape of the
beaches is by iterative simulations. This method has been described as ”discouraging”
due to the time and computing power needed [3].
This thesis aims to implement optimisation algorithms in conjunction with a MIKE 21/3
Coupled Model. An artificial parabolic bay is created and implemented in a MIKE 21/3
Coupled Model with waves, currents and sediment transport being incorporated. The
optimisation then targets the net littoral drift of the bay, as this is an indicator of shoreline
stability when it is near zero [4].
Two optimisation algorithms are used in this thesis: the Steepest­Descent method and the
Broyden­Fletcher­Goldfarb­Shanno (BFGS) method. These algorithms are implemented
in MATLAB to interface with the MIKE 21/3 Coupled Model.
This allows for iterative
changes to the shape of the bay. Both optimisation algorithms use the gradient of the
net littoral drift at each iteration, and are quite similar in method. As the BFGS method is
a quasi­Newton method, the rate of convergence using this method should be faster than
that of the Steepest­Descent, since the Steepest­Descent is a first­order method [5].
By showing that this is a viable approach that works, this thesis contributes to the devel­
opment of more efficient and faster tools for coastal modelling.
Development and use of optimisation algorithm for calculating stable bays as part of coastal protection
1
==PAGE:8==
2
Background
The concept of coastal protection is important in areas near the coast, as it is a valued
area. The value of these areas depends on the people living nearby, the infrastructure
placed close, and the environment in and around the water. These are factors that have
to be taken into account on an individual basis for each stretch of coast [1]. Due to this, it
is important to protect the coasts. There are multiple methods to protect the coasts. One
way of doing this is by beach stabilisation, where the rate of erosion is slowed down. A
way this can be achieved is through headlands [2].
2.1
Headland­Bay Beach Shape
The shape of the coasts around the world evolves over time due to erosion from the effects
of waves. In between two headlands, rocky outcroppings into the water, the shape of the
sandy beaches inside the bay is of specific interest. This is due to its effects as coastal
protection. An example of a headland­bay is the Lyall Bay in New Zealand shown in
Figure 2.1.
Figure 2.1: Natural headland­bay beach, Lyall Bay, New Zealand, Google Earth
This shape has long been the subject of mathematical approximations. One of the first
suggestions for an approximation of the shape of a headland­bay beach was a logarithmic
spiral [6]. This was then later modelled mathematically [7]. A showcase of this shape can
be seen in Figure 2.2.
Development and use of optimisation algorithm for calculating stable bays as part of coastal protection
2
==PAGE:9==
2.1. Headland­Bay Beach Shape
Figure 2.2: Definition sketch of the logarithmic spiral shape [8].
The shape was later refined into the crenulate shape, which can be seen in Figure 2.3.
This shape was defined by the headland spacing, the indentation of the bay, and the ratio
of those compared to the incoming wave angle [9].
Figure 2.3: Definition sketch of crenulate shaped bay [8].
The mathematical modelling of the crenulate shape of bays moved on to an empirically
determined formula. This formula matched well with experimental data and has become
commonly used. This formulation describes the shape of the bay as parabolic [10]. This
is given as the radial second­degree function:
R
R0
= C0 + C1
(β
θ
)
+ C2
(β
θ
)2
(2.1)
With this formulation, the coefficients C0, C1, and C2 are all given as functions of β. β is
the angle of the incoming waves relative to the control line. R0 is the reference line that
describes a downcoast point where the shoreline will be linear past that. This relationship,
along with the shape, can be seen in Figure 2.4.
Development and use of optimisation algorithm for calculating stable bays as part of coastal protection
3
==PAGE:10==
2.1. Headland­Bay Beach Shape
Figure 2.4: Definition sketch of variables employed in parabolic solution of bays [11].
Another formulation used to describe the shape of bays is the hyperbolic tangent profile
as seen in Equation 2.2. This formulation was developed due to the insensitivity of β in
Equation 2.1. This insensitivity caused the shape not to change much based on the angle
of the waves [12].
y = ±a tanhm(bx)
(2.2)
Here y = distance across shore, x = distance alongshore, and a (length), b(
1
length), and
m (dimensionless) are empirically derived. This formulation was later improved to take
diffraction of waves into account [13].
These shapes have all tried to describe the static equilibrium of bays. The static equilib­
rium is defined as the state of the bay where waves break simultaneously along the whole
bay. This leads to the littoral drift being almost non­existent along the bay. This means
no external source of sediment is needed to maintain the shape of the bay [4].
The littoral drift is also known as the longshore sediment transport. This is a parameter
that describes the volume of sediment transported per second. This is a flux, meaning
the transport rate through a plane. The parameters used for determining the littoral drift
are: the density of seawater, the density of the sediment, the porosity of the sediment, the
gravitational acceleration, the breaking wave height, and the angle of the incoming waves
[14].
Another factor to take into consideration when looking at the equilibrium bay shape and
littoral drift is the shape of the beach profile. Dean et al. [15] performed multiple types of
measurements of profile heights along different beaches. This led to an empirical formula
for an equilibrium beach profile, which is represented by the following power law profile:
h(y) = Aym
(2.3)
Since the formulations for bay shapes are empirically determined, they don’t take the
actual physical driving forces into account. Daly et al. [3] applied the Delft3D model to a
bay between two fixed structures 150 m apart. By their own words, computing multiple
scenarios could be ”discouraging” due to the time taken per computation.
Another program that can be used for this purpose is MIKE Zero, developed by Dansk
Hydrologisk Institut(DHI). By using the MIKE 21/3 Coupled Model FM it is possible to
combine waves, currents, and sediment transport in a single model. This allows for the
output of littoral drift based only on wave spectra.
It has been shown by Mandviwalla et al. [16] that shapes that stem from effects of water
can be optimised using an algorithm. It is assumed that this also applies to the shape of
a headland­bay beach.
Development and use of optimisation algorithm for calculating stable bays as part of coastal protection
4
==PAGE:11==
2.2. Optimisation Algorithms
2.2
Optimisation Algorithms
When it is said that an optimisation algorithm is used, it becomes necessary to understand
what it actually is. As described by Yanofsky [17]: ”For us, an algorithm is the total of all the
programs that express it.” By this definition, an algorithm is encompassed by all programs
that are ”essentially” the same. Some examples of this are given by:
• One program first performs one process and then performs an unrelated process
after. Another program performs these two processes in the opposite order.
• One program might perform a process n times in a loop, and the other program
performs it n −1 times and performs it once again outside the loop.
• One program performs two unrelated processes in a single loop, and another pro­
gram performs the same two processes in their own loops.
Each of the two programs in these examples performs the same function, and it can thus
be said that they are implementations of the same algorithms [17].
Optimisation is a tool used in the analysis of physical systems. To use this tool, an ob­
jective is needed. This objective can be a lot of different quantities that can be described
by a single individual number. Examples of this are profit, CO2 emissions, and energy.
The objective is dependent on the variables of the system. The goal of the process is to
find the values of the variables that result in the optimal objective. Once the objective and
variables have been identified, the next step becomes picking an appropriate algorithm
[5].
When combining the concepts of an algorithm and optimisation into an optimisation algo­
rithm, an iterative process is reached. For this iterative process, an initial guess for the
variables is needed, and a sequence of improved estimates is generated. This continues
until the algorithm hopefully terminates at a solution. The different strategies employed
distinguish different algorithms from each other. A good algorithm should contain the
following properties:
• Robustness: They should be able to perform well on a wide variety of problems.
• Efficiency: They should not require excessive computational power.
• Accuracy: They should reach a solution with precision, without being sensitive to
data errors or rounding errors.
Conflicts between these properties can arise, and thus picking an algorithm that prioritises
these properties best for the current task is the goal [5].
One such algorithm is the Steepest­Descent method. The requirement for this method is
that the cost function can be reduced if a small step along the search direction, d. This
is the descent direction. The philosophy of the Steepest­Descent method is to find the
direction, d, where the cost function decreases at the highest rate. This is what gives the
method its name. The Steepest­Descent is a first­order method, as only the gradient is
used to calculate the search direction [18]. The gradient is given by:
c = ∇f =
[ ∂f
∂x1
∂f
∂x2
... ∂f
∂xn
]T
(2.4)
The most important property of the gradient is that at a given point, it points in the direction
of maximum increase in the cost function. Thus, the highest rate of decrease is the oppo­
Development and use of optimisation algorithm for calculating stable bays as part of coastal protection
5
==PAGE:12==
2.2. Optimisation Algorithms
site of that. The negative gradient is thus the same as the direction of steepest descent
for the cost function:
d = −c
(2.5)
The descent needs to be scaled to minimise the cost function in the direction of d. This
is done with the step size, αk, for the current iterative step, k. After this, the design
parameters can be updated, and the descent direction can be found for the next step.
One more property of the Steepest­Descent method is the orthogonality of successive
iterations. This leads to the iterative pattern shown in Figure 2.5.
Figure 2.5: Showcase of the orthogonality of the Steepest­Descent method [19].
One way to evaluate the step size is by Armijo’s rule. Armijo’s rule states that an arbitrarily
picked α is repeatedly increased by a steady factor until the cost function until the following
statement is broken:
f(α) ≤q(α)
(2.6)
Where q is a linear function of α that is given by:
q(α) = f(0) + α[pf′(0)]
(2.7)
Here p is a constant between 0 and 1, and is usually set to 0.2 [19]. Armijo’s rule is a
formal method of finding a fitting α. The α can also be found more informally by having a
set of user­defined values and applying them to the cost function. The one picked is the
one that reduces the cost function the most.
The Steepest­Descent still has some drawbacks, even though it is robust:
• A large number of iterations might be needed to reach the minimum point.
• Each iteration is calculated independently. Information from previous iterations is
not used.
• The method uses only first­order information, and is thus dependent on the cost
function for the rate of convergence.
• Previous usage of the Steepest­Descent method has shown that the largest de­
crease of the cost function happens in the first few iterations. The descent then
slows considerably in later iterations [18],
Development and use of optimisation algorithm for calculating stable bays as part of coastal protection
6
==PAGE:13==
2.2. Optimisation Algorithms
To improve the rate of convergence, different methods can be used. One such method is
Newton’s method. This method uses the Hessian of the function to calculate the search
direction. This results in a quadratic rate of convergence. This method uses a second­
order Taylor’s expansion around the current point. This gives the change in design, ∆x,
as a second­order expression. With the second­order Taylor’s expansion of a function
f(x), the following is obtained:
f(x + ∆x) = f(x) + ∆xT ∇f(x) + 0.5∆xT ∇2f(x)∆x
(2.8)
’ Here ∇2f(x) is the Hessian for the function at point x, and is thus also described by H.
The optimal conditions for Equation 2.8 are given by:
∂f
∂(∆x) = 0. This yields the following
expression:
c + H∆x = 0
(2.9)
By rearranging this, an expression for ∆x is obtained:
∆x = −H−1c
(2.10)
Using this the initial design, x, can be updated by: x1 = x0 + ∆x [19].
This method is not without drawbacks either. These include:
• Each iteration is usually heavy on the amount of calculations needed, as a second­
order derivative is needed. In some cases, it might be impossible to calculate such
derivatives, rendering the method unusable.
• If the Hessian of the cost function becomes singular at any point, Equation 2.10
becomes unusable and the next step is impossible to reach [19].
To shore up some of the weaknesses of Newton’s method, a quasi­Newton method can
be implemented. A quasi­Newton method, like the Steepest­Descent method, requires
only the gradient at each iteration. This property allows them to produce superlinear
convergence. This gives a drastic improvement to the convergence rate of the Steepest­
Descent method, and can in some cases result in increased efficiency over Newton’s
method [5].
An often­used quasi­Newton method is the Broyden­Fletcher­Goldfarb­Shanno(BFGS)
method. This method starts with an estimate of the Hessian. The Hessian is then up­
dated at every iteration. The updates to the Hessian are based on the change in design,
gradient, and search direction. A comparison between the Steepest­Descent, BFGS, and
Newton’s method can be seen in Table 2.1.
Table 2.1: Comparison between the Steepest­Descent, BFGS, and Newton’s method [5].
Steepest­Descent
BFGS
Newton
1.827e­04
1.70e­03
3.48e­02
1.826e­04
1.17e­03
1.44e­02
1.824e­04
1.34e­04
1.82e­04
1.823e­04
1.01e­06
1.17e­08
Nodecal et al. [5] performed a test where the three algorithms were set to solve the same
problem. The Steepest­Descent method took 5264 iterations for convergence. The BFGS
method took 34 iterations. Finally, Newton’s method took 21 iterations. This shows that
there is little difference between the BFGS method and Newton’s method.
Development and use of optimisation algorithm for calculating stable bays as part of coastal protection
7
==PAGE:14==
2.3. Objective
2.3
Objective
Modelling and simulating the shape of a stable bay involves time­scale challenges. This
thesis aims to investigate whether it is possible to optimise the process. This involves
creating a suitable MIKE 21/3 Coupled Model that works on a headland­bay beach. Then,
extracting the littoral drift of this model as the optimisation parameter. Then, optimisation
algorithms are to be implemented with the parameters of the headland­bay beach as
parameters.
Development and use of optimisation algorithm for calculating stable bays as part of coastal protection
8
==PAGE:15==
3
Method
3.1
MIKE 21 Model Setup
For use in calculations in this thesis a MIKE 21/3 coupled model is set up to run and calcu­
late parameters used for optimisation. The following section will go over all of the settings
and choices made in the setup of the MIKE 21 file. The choices made for the variables
were based upon iterative tests.
3.1.1
Domain and Mesh
The mesh used as the domain for the model is generated in MATLAB. The bathymetry of
the mesh is generated using a Dean profile [15]. This leads to the profile being formulated
by the following power law profile:
h = −Aym
(3.1)
Where h is the depth, A is the sediment scale parameter as described by Dean et al. [15],
y is the distance from shore, and m is found as an average from other beach profiles to
be 0.66. From the shore, where y < 0, the beach is modelled by the following formula:
h = −y · 1
20
(3.2)
When this reaches 0.5 m above sea level, it is capped, and the beach does not gain more
height.
A sand bar is created on the beach profile. The sand bar uses the formulation given by
Nnafie et al. [20], and is thus described by:
hb = a exp
(
−5 ·
(y −yc
yc
)2)
(3.3)
For the profile used in this case, the amplitude of the sand bar, a, is set to 0.35 m. The
distance from the shore, yc, is 50 m. This leads to the profile shown in Figure 3.1.
Development and use of optimisation algorithm for calculating stable bays as part of coastal protection
9
==PAGE:16==
3.1. MIKE 21 Model Setup
Figure 3.1: Profile used for mesh generation.
Once the profile has been established, the width of the mesh is set to 3000 m with a span
from ­1500 m to 1500 m. This will be referred to as the x direction. The height of the mesh
will be referred to as the y direction. The y direction is set to range from ­300 m to 400
m above 0, sea level. A mesh grid of rectangles is created within these two directional
limits. The dimension of the rectangles in the x direction is 6.66 m, and the dimension in
the y direction is 2 m.
In this mesh, two headlands are created. They are 100 m wide and are placed from ­1100
m to ­1000 m and 1000 m to 1100 m in the x direction. These headlands are set to a
height of 0.5 m, and extend 300 m in the y direction. When the headlands end, the profile
of the bathymetry is of the correct depth to match the surrounding profiles. The size of the
bay and headlands has been chosen to have a long distance of longshore current, and to
have the effect of the headlands be noticeable on the bay shape.
In between the two headlands, the bathymetry is set up to be able to develop a bay. The
development of this bay is controlled by two variables, in this case a and b. The distance of
the apex of the bay from the 0 line in the y direction is described by a, and b describes the
distance from the right headland along the x direction. From the point described by these
two parameters, two parabolic functions, that have their endpoints where the headlands
begin on the x­axis, define the shape of the bay. This principle is showcased in Figure 3.2.
Development and use of optimisation algorithm for calculating stable bays as part of coastal protection
10
==PAGE:17==
3.1. MIKE 21 Model Setup
Figure 3.2: Showcase of what the parameters a and b represent.
The two parabolic functions used are described by:
yleft =
a
b −2000(x −(1000 −b))2 −a
(3.4)
yright = a
b (x −(1000 −b))2 −a
(3.5)
As there is no bay development initially, a and b are set to zero and thus the final mesh
with no bay development is as shown in Figure 3.3a. How the bay can look when it is fully
developed can be seen in Figure 3.3b to showcase the effects of a and b on the mesh.
(a) Mesh covering the domain of the simulations with a and b equal to 0.
(b) Mesh covering the domain of the simulations with a =150 m and b=750 m.
Figure 3.3: Two example meshes. The colouring represents elevation, where red is above
water, and going towards purple means deeper water.
3.1.2
Time Steps
The model uses only four time steps, each with a length of one hour. This is due to each
hour being one wind scenario, and this allows to get outputs after each scenario. An
hour for each step allows for the model to reach a decent convergence, while keeping
Development and use of optimisation algorithm for calculating stable bays as part of coastal protection
11
==PAGE:18==
3.1. MIKE 21 Model Setup
the computational power needed lower. This mainly takes the main output, the net littoral
drift, into consideration. Earlier in the process, the time for each scenario was set to two
minutes, as that was needed to get a better overview of when the convergence had been
reached. Thus the output file would get bloated with data that is unnecessary if more time
steps were added.
3.1.3
Hydrodynamic Module
The basic equation for the time formulation of the hydrodynamic module is set to use
instationary formulation, as using the quasi­stationary formulation can lead to conver­
gences that happen too early, and thus are not representative of the actual situation. This
was tested by having waves alternating 10 degrees east and west from direct north for
two hours each, where it was seen that the current did not change when the direction of
the waves changed with the quasi­stationary formulation, whereas the current changed
direction with the instationary formulation.
The solution technique used is Low order, fast algorithm for both the time integration and
the space discretisation in the shallow water equations. This allows the simulations to run
faster without affecting the results, as precise currents are not needed at short interval.
No depth correction is used for this module. The flood and dry settings remain unchanged
at a drying depth of 0.005 m and a wetting depth of 1 m. The density used is the barotropic
density type. The eddy viscosity remains unchanged as well, with the use of the Smagorin­
sky formulation. A manning number of 32 m1/3/s is chosen, as a higher number was
tested and resulted in unrealistically high current speeds.
No vegetation, wind forcing, ice coverage, tidal potential, precipitation, or infiltration is
used in this module. The wave radiation is set to come from the spectral wave simulation.
No sources or structures are added to the domain.
The initial conditions are set to be constant at a surface elevation of 0 m, a u­velocity of 0
m/s, and a v­velocity of 0 m/s.
For the southern boundary of the domain, it is set to be a land boundary, as it is the shore,
and thus a land boundary fits. The eastern and western boundaries are also set to be
land boundaries, as they have close to no effect on what is happening in between the two
headlands, regardless of their type. The land boundary leads to a shorter computation
time and is thus chosen. For the northern boundary, the boundary type is set to a specified
level. This is then set to be a constant value of 0 m. This allows for longshore currents
and keeps the water level steady in the domain. This is easily doable a the normal of the
coastline is pointing directly north.
The hydrodynamic module is set to have two types of output. These are an area output
and a line output. The area output is used to see the developments over the whole domain,
and the line output is used to see the specific changes along the profile in the middle of
the domain. The two types of output and their coverage can be seen in Figure 3.4a and
Figure 3.4b. The main outputs that were analysed for the check of the settings were the
U and V­velocities, as they show the currents in the bay.
Development and use of optimisation algorithm for calculating stable bays as part of coastal protection
12
==PAGE:19==
3.1. MIKE 21 Model Setup
(a) Showcase of the coverage of the area output.
(b) Showcase of the location of the line output.
Figure 3.4: The coverages of the line and area outputs. The colouring represents eleva­
tion, where red is above water, and going towards green means deeper water.
3.1.4
Spectral Wave Module
For the basic equations of the spectral wave module, the main aim was to reduce com­
puting time, as the difference in end result between the different formulations is negligible.
Thus, the spectral formulation used is the directionally decoupled parametric formulation,
and the time formulation used is the quasi­stationary formulation. These settings lead to
the time parameters and spectral discretisation being unchanged.
In the solution technique, the geographical space discretisation is set to a low­order, fast
algorithm. The method is then set to Newton­Raphson iteration. The maximum number
of iterations is set to 50, the tolerance (RMS­norm of residual) is set to 10−5, the tolerance
(max­norm of change in sig. wave height) is set to 0.01 m, and the relaxation factor is
set to 0.1. These settings lead to the spectral wave model to calculate single steps more
efficiently.
The module is set to have no water level variation. The current conditions are set to have
current variation from HD simulation. The module is also set to have no wind forcing, ice
coverage or diffraction. The wave breaking and bottom friction also remain unchanged at
their respective values of 0.8 and 0.04. The vegetation tab is set to no vegetation. There
are no structures added in this module.
The initial conditions for the spectral wave module use the Spectra from empirical formu­
las, and the type of formulas is set to the JONSWAP fetch growth expression. The wave
conditions and the JONSWAP parameters remain unchanged from the starting values.
For the boundary conditions of this module, there are only three boundaries that need to
be set, as the south boundary is above sea level along its entire length. The east and west
boundaries are both set to be closed boundaries, as having them be lateral boundaries
does not change the output in a significant way. The northern boundary is set to be the
type Wave parameters (version 2), and the format is set to Varying in time, constant along
line. This allows to have spectra based on different wave parameters at different times
along this boundary.
A .dsf0 file is created to be used for the different wave parameters at the northern bound­
ary. The parameters chosen for this file are the Significant wave height, Hm0, Peak wave
Development and use of optimisation algorithm for calculating stable bays as part of coastal protection
13
==PAGE:20==
3.1. MIKE 21 Model Setup
period, Tp, Mean wave direction, MWD, and Directional standard deviation. The file is
set up so that each set of parameters will have the duration of one hour. For the Signifi­
cant wave height, Peak wave period, and Mean wave direction, random values within an
interval were chosen. The random values were generated using MATLAB. The significant
wave height is within 1 m to 3 m. The peak wave period is within 5 s to 11 s. The mean
wave direction is within 10° to 45°. The directional standard deviation is set to 5°. The
final used parameters can be seen in Table 3.1.
Table 3.1: Parameters for the four wave climates.
Hour
Hm0[m]
Tp[s]
MWD[°]
Dir. std. deviation[°]
1
1.88
6.66
34.7
5
2
1.76
9.08
11.1
5
3
2.53
8.93
19.7
5
4
2.59
5.96
11.6
5
Each of the events lasts an hour to match the time steps of the overall model, and each
step is thus equal to each event. The soft start parameters are set to 0, and the interpo­
lation type is set to linear in time.
The output of this module is set to be area and line outputs, similar to the hydrodynamic
module seen in Figure 3.4. For both output types, all parameters except Particle veloci­
ties, Wave power, and Surface Stokes drift are in the results.
3.1.5
Sand Transport Module
In the model definition tab of the sand transport module, the model type is set to Wave
and current, as both are effects that affect the sediment transport in this case.
A sand transport table is also required at this point. This table can be generated using the
MIKE 21 Toolbox. Under the ”Sediments”, the option called ”Generation of Q3D Sediment
Tables” is used. In the setup of this file, the general parameters remain unchanged. The
next tab, Select Additional Parameters, is also not changed, and the initial values are
used. The Wave parameters also remain unchanged at Stokes wave theory, Gamma 1 =
1, Gamma 2 = 0.8, and order of solution = 5. Next, the sediment table axes need to be
defined. Due to the settings of the previous tabs, the bed slope in the current direction or
normal to the current direction, along with the centrifugal acceleration, cannot be changed.
The settings for the parameters that are used can be seen in Table 3.2.
Table 3.2: Parameters for sediment transport table axes.
First value
Spacing
No of points
Current speed
0.05
0.4
7
Wave height
0.1
0.3
9
Wave period
1
2
5
Wave height/water depth
0.01
0.1
10
Angle current/waves
0
30
12
Grain size
0.15
2
3
Sediment grading
1.1
0.15
3
These values are all chosen so that the wave and sediment dimensions are contained
Development and use of optimisation algorithm for calculating stable bays as part of coastal protection
14
==PAGE:21==
3.1. MIKE 21 Model Setup
within the boundaries of the table. It should be noted that the Wave height is given as
Hrms, thus the range of this axes is multiplied by the ratio between Hrms and Hm0, which
is given by Hm0 = Hrms ·1.41 [21]. The outputs of the hydrodynamic module and spectral
wave module are analysed, and it is ensured that the table covers all of the possibilities
these two modules can generate in conjunction.
The time parameters and the sediment properties remain at their initial values from when
the module is created. In the waves section under the forcings tab, the type is set to wave
field from the SW simulation.
In the morphology tab, the model definition, time parameter, and slope failure all remain
unchanged at their initial setting. The boundary conditions on the western, eastern, and
northern borders are all set to zero sediment flux gradient. The southern border is entirely
on land and therefore undefined. No bed­level sources are added.
Similarly to the HD and SW modules, the outputs for this module are an area output and a
line output. The output variables that are not chosen for these outputs are the Centrifugal
acceleration, Surface elevation, Still water depth, Total water depth, Wave height, Wave
period, and Wave direction. Most of these are shown in the outputs of the HD and SW
modules.
3.1.6
Shoreline Morphology
When the shoreline morphology module is added to the MIKE 21 model, it is added as
a subsection under the morphology tab in the sand transport module. The solution tech­
nique is set to the initial values of a tolerance of 0.001m3, maximum number of iterations
equal to 100, and the relaxation factor is 0.5. The offshore transport is not included, and
the type is set to only shoreline morphology.
For the setup of the baseline, the first step is picking the fitting map projection. The
coast used for this case is artificially created, and thus, the projection is picked to be
local coordinates. The baseline is a file containing coordinates for points given in the .xyz
format. This file can be generated using the mesh editor in MIKE zero. A starting point is
placed approximately 25 meters inland, close to the western corner of the bay. Another
point is placed the same distance inland, close to the other corner of the bay. These two
points form a line, and its properties can be accessed. This line is set to have a minimum
of 22 m between the points on the line, which results in the line containing 91 points. This
minimum distance and the minimum distance set for the baseline are to make sure that
three cells in the mesh are between each of the points. As the cells have a width of 6.66
m, 20 m is the minimum width needed to contain three cells. Thus, the minimum width of
22 m is sufficient for this purpose. On this line, the start node is set to a code value of 99,
while the other attributes are set to 100.
The next step is to set up the coastline. The type chosen for this is an .xy file, since this
file is created similarly to the baseline file. The map projection is again chosen as local
coordinates. The file is again generated using the MIKE zero mesh generator. The points
of this file are placed as close as possible to the shoreline in the mesh. The western
starting point is placed as close to the western headland as possible without touching it.
The eastern endpoint is placed similarly with regard to the eastern headland. These two
endpoints should be further apart than the two endpoints of the baseline. The attributes for
this line are set to a code value of 110, with the start node being 109. The function called
manage shoreline data is then found in the shoreline menu. Here, the attributes from the
baseline and coastline are entered in their respective boxes. The option modify coastline
Development and use of optimisation algorithm for calculating stable bays as part of coastal protection
15
==PAGE:22==
3.1. MIKE 21 Model Setup
arc is then selected. This creates points along the coastline that fit the baseline. That
means one point more than the baseline, thus this results in a coastline with 92 points.
The next step is the creation of the edge map. This is also created in the mesh generator.
An arc is drawn at a distance of 200 m from the coastline. This arc is set to have the
attribute of 120, with the starting node being 119. Then the manage edge map option in
the shoreline menu is opened. Here, the attribute of the edge map is entered, and the
option create edge map is selected. This creates strips from the coast to the line drawn.
It is checked that each of these strips has a width of 3­4 elements. The edge map can be
seen in Figure 3.5. The edge map is saved as a .dsfu file, which is then chosen as the
specific file in the edge map tab.
Figure 3.5: Edge map used in the Shoreline morphology module. The colouring here
represents the different values of the edge map along the shoreline.
The profile used is generated from the mesh, as the mesh is to be used as scatter data in
the mesh editor. In manage profiles in the shoreline menu, the profile start is set to ­10,
the profile end is set to 200, and the number of points is set to 211. As the initial case,
it is the same along the whole coastline; so any coast ID can be chosen, as long as it is
contained within the coastline. In this case, a coast ID of 45 is chosen. This is saved as
a .xyz file. In the MIKE 21 setup, the profile type is set to xy, and this file is used. The
closure depth is set to 3 m, as it is assumed that this coast will always fully develop. The
level at the top of the profile is set to 0.5 m, as this is the highest the profile will go above
sea level.
The initial condition is set to zero, and the dune erosion is set to no dune erosion.
In the outputs of the sand transport module, a third output is then created. The field type
for this output is chosen to be coastline. This leads to an output as shown in Figure 3.6.
Figure 3.6: Showcase of the location of the coastline output. The colouring represents
elevation, where red is above water, and going towards green means deeper water.
All output items are chosen for this file, as it makes the results easier to find with the use
of MATLAB. This is done as this file contains the most important output, the net littoral
drift. Since the bay is stable when the sum of all the points along the coastline is 0, this is
to be extracted. Since MIKE 21 outputs the data as a .dfs1 file, the DHI MATLAB toolbox
is downloaded and placed in the work folder for MATLAB. This allows MATLAB to open
Development and use of optimisation algorithm for calculating stable bays as part of coastal protection
16
==PAGE:23==
3.2. Algorithm Implementation
the file. Due to all the output items being selected in MIKE 21, item 9 can be chosen,
which will always be the net littoral drift. Each data point is then squared and summed up
for a single value as the output. The values are squared to increase the effect of points
with more littoral drift.
3.2
Algorithm Implementation
The algorithms used are the Broyden­Fletcher­Goldfarb­Shanno (BFGS) method and the
Steepest­Descent method, both described by Arora [19]. This algorithm is set up to run
in MATLAB. Initially, the gradient vector has to be calculated. This is done with the use of
the following expression for each of the variables:
∂f
∂x1
= f
(
[x0
1 + 1
2η x0
2]
)
−f
(
[x0
1 −1
2η x0
2]
)
η
(3.6)
In this case, the input parameters are the values a and b that determine the shape of the
bay, and the function is the MIKE 21 file described in section 3.1. Thus, the output of the
function is the net transport when a small change is applied to either side of the initial
bay shape. This method of describing the gradient is modified from the method used by
Mandviwalla et al. [16]. The method used is modified to both add and subtract 1
2η from
the initial value, rather than having only an increase in the initial value of eta.
This is done individually for each parameter, with a variation η that is different for each of
the variables. In this case, the initial parameters for a and b are set to 10 m and 500 m,
respectively. The η for a and b are set individually for the two parameters.
To set this up in MATLAB, the first part is creating a mesh. This is done with a reduction
of 1
2η in a and no change in b, which creates a bay that is closer to the zero line than a
bay with usage of a as it is. The net transport of this bay is found and stored by creating
a batch file using the MIKE 21 setup and running that batch file through MATLAB. This is
then done for an increase of 1
2η in a as well. The net transport of the increased a is then
subtracted by the case with the lowered a. That is then divided by η to obtain the gradient
for a.
This process is then repeated for the parameter b to obtain the gradient for that too. Now
that two parameters have a gradient, these are combined into a gradient vector, c(k). The
values for a and b are also combined into a vector, x(k).
3.2.1
BFGS Method
According to the BFGS method, a Hessian matrix is also needed for the initial step of the
cost function [19]. As there is no direct function, the Hessian matrix is defined as the n x n
identity matrix, H0 = I.
During the iteration process, the following steps are performed after the setup of the initial
iteration zero:
1. A stopping criterion is implemented in the form of evaluating the norm of the gradient
vector. If it goes below a certain value, ||c(k)|| < ϵ, the iterations will stop.
2. The direction of the descent, d(k), is found by the calculation:
d(k) = −
(
H(k))−1
c(k)
(3.7)
Development and use of optimisation algorithm for calculating stable bays as part of coastal protection
17
==PAGE:24==
3.2. Algorithm Implementation
3. The optimum value of the step size, α, is found. This is done with a set of α values
that contains three different values. The one with the output of net littoral drift closest
to zero in the MIKE 21 model is chosen.
4. The design parameters are updated based on the following:
x(k+1) = x(k) + αd(k)
(3.8)
5. The gradient vector is then calculated based on the updated design variables,
c(k+1) = ∇f
(
x(k+1))
. This is done by the linear calculation shown in Equation 3.6.
6. The Hessian matrix is then updated using the following parameters: s(k) = αd(k),
and y(k) = c(k+1) −c(k). These are, respectively, the change in design and the
change in gradient. Now, two correction matrices are given by:
D(k) =
y(k)y(k)T
(
y(k) · s(k)),
E(k) =
c(k)c(k)T
(
c(k) · d(k))
The updated Hessian matrix is then obtained as shown:
H(k+1) = H(k) + D(k) + E(k)
(3.9)
7. The iteration number is then incremented by one, k = k+1. Then the process loops
back to step 1.
When the function is called during this iterative process, the changed input parameter is
the mesh. This is done by first creating a setup file. This is done by opening the MIKE
21 file as a text document, as that allows for text editing. The mesh used during creation
is replaced with a string of letters unique in the whole file. This new file is then opened
every time the function is called. The string is replaced with the name of a new mesh file
generated with the needed a and b.
3.2.2
Steepest­Descent
The Steepest­Descent method is quite similar in method of implementation to the BFGS
method. The following steps are used for the Steepest­Descent method:
1. A stopping criterion is needed. The norm of the gradient vector is used. The stop­
ping criterion is thus: ||c(k)|| < ϵ.
2. The descent is determined by:
d(k) = −c(k)
(3.10)
3. Armijo’s rule is again used to decide the step size, α, using three values.
4. The design parameters are updated based upon Equation 3.8.
5. The gradient is recalculated for the updated parameters following step 5 of the BFGS
method.
6. The step counter is incremented by one, and the process then returns to step one.
As the same amount of α values are used by the Steepest­Descent method as the BFGS
method, there is no significant difference in calculation time between the two methods.
This is due to the function, the MIKE 21 model, taking up most of the computation time
for each iteration. The calculations performed internally as part of the algorithms are
Development and use of optimisation algorithm for calculating stable bays as part of coastal protection
18
==PAGE:25==
3.2. Algorithm Implementation
very quick in comparison to that. This leads to the BFGS method being the preferred
algorithm to use for reaching a stable bay shape, due to the shorter computation time.
The implementation of both algorithms along with the functions created for them can be
found in the appendix.
Development and use of optimisation algorithm for calculating stable bays as part of coastal protection
19
==PAGE:26==
4
Results
When the MIKE 21 model is used as the function in the algorithm, the outputs must first
be validated.
4.1
Validation of Model
The initial setup of MIKE 21 is checked for validity by comparing the net littoral drift with the
accumulated shoreline change at the end of a simulation of a length that creates a steady
state. The check is performed on a bathymetry with the parameters of a = 0, and 1000
in the functions describing the coastline in Equation 3.4 and Equation 3.5. This creates
a straight coastline, which provides the basis for comparison. The net littoral drift of this
coastline can be seen in Figure 4.1, and the accumulated shoreline change in Figure 4.2.
Figure 4.1: Net littoral drift along the shoreline. The x­axis is the position along the shore­
line. The y­axis is the littoral drift in m3
From Figure 4.1, it can be seen that the maximum littoral drift happens at around point
Development and use of optimisation algorithm for calculating stable bays as part of coastal protection
20
==PAGE:27==
4.1. Validation of Model
number 28. The output data is analysed by opening the .dsf1 file in MIKE Zero. Point
number 28 has a value of around 8000 m3.
Figure 4.2: Accumulated change of shoreline position. The x­axis is the position along
the shoreline. The y­axis is the change in shoreline in m.
When comparing the maximum littoral drift from Figure 4.1 to the shoreline change seen
in Figure 4.2, the shoreline change has to go through a series of calculations to reach
a comparable dimension. This is done to verify the validity of the results and serves
as an estimation. The first step in this series is to figure out the length of each point
along the shoreline. As the shoreline has a distance of 2000 m, the 91 data points will
each represent a distance of 2000 m/91 ≈22 m. Since the waves in this scenario are
coming from the east on average, as per Table 3.1, the points used for the summation of
shoreline change are the points to the right of point 28. This leads to a total amount of
points 91 −28 = 63 to the right. The average change of the shoreline among these points
is around 3 m. As the whole profile moves with the shoreline, the height chosen is from
the top of the profile to just before the sand bar seen in ??. The reference just before the
sand bar is chosen, as the rate of increase in depth slows down at this point. This leads
to a total height of ≈2 m. These parameters can now be combined:
Development and use of optimisation algorithm for calculating stable bays as part of coastal protection
21
==PAGE:28==
4.2. Instability of Algorithm
Q = w · n · d · h = 22 m · 63 · 3 m · 2 m ≈8300 m3
(4.1)
The total transport found from this calculation is then compared to the maximum from
Figure 4.1, 8300 m3
8000 m3 ≈1.04. The comparison between the two total transports show that
the difference between the two is around four percent. As this was an estimation to check
if the model is valid to use, the difference is within an acceptable limit. The model is thus
validated for use in the algorithm.
4.2
Instability of Algorithm
When the MIKE 21 is first implemented in the algorithm, the variables a and b are set to
the values of 10 m and 500 m, respectively. The η value used for a is set to 10 m, and
for b it is set to 500 m. This setup is run for one iteration with the BFGS method to obtain
the gradient for the variables and adjust the size of the three values of alpha used. This
leads to two main takeaways. The first takeaway is that the initial values for α are off,
since the initial setup had them at: α = [1, 3, 6]. This results in the mesh file exceeding
the boundaries of the area. This exceedance can be seen in Figure 4.3.
Figure 4.3: Showcase of poorly scaled α along with effect of instability on the mesh.
The colouring represents elevation, where red is above water, and going towards purple
means deeper water.
The results from this figure cannot be used for analysis, as the boundary conditions spec­
ified in section 3.1 are no longer valid.
To find an order of magnitude for the α­values, the gradient is analysed. The initial gradient
for step 0 in the iteration is: c0 = [277904, 388.832]. From this, it is seen that the maximum
order of magnitude for the is in the order of 100000. This is used for choosing new alpha
values for the following runs.
Another abnormality of Figure 4.3 is the direction of the bay shape. The coastline extends
towards the ocean, whereas all the empirically suggested shapes from section 2.1 extend
inland. This indicates that the initial values of a and b, along with their respective η values,
could cause this instability.
4.3
Steepest­Descent Results
The MIKE 21 model is then used with the Steepest­Descent method. This method has
been picked since it eliminates any instability that might come from the Hessian matrix
used in the BFGS method. For this, a is set to 100 m and b is set to 500 m. The η
for a is set to 20 m, and is set to 40 m for b. The α­values used for this run are α =
[
5
1000000,
1
100000,
2
100000
]
. The values bring the gradient to scale with the initial sizes of a
and b.
Development and use of optimisation algorithm for calculating stable bays as part of coastal protection
22
==PAGE:29==
4.3. Steepest­Descent Results
4.3.1
Iteration 1
From the first iteration, the gradient used for stepping is given by:
c0 =
[−435042.4
−9529.6
]
The optimisation of the step size leads to the following values for a and b:
a = 108.7 m
,
b = 500.19 m
The net littoral drift along the bay for the bay shape described by a and b can be seen in
Figure 4.4.
Figure 4.4: Net littoral drift along the bay after the first iteration with the Steepest­Descent
method. The x­axis is the position along the shoreline. The y­axis is the littoral drift in m3
This graph is created at each iteration to have a visual showcase of the littoral drift at a
given iteration.
4.3.2
Iteration 2
From the result obtained from the first iteration step, the gradient for use in the second
iteration is thus found to be:
c1 =
[−382116
−8787.6
]
This gradient results in a slightly smaller step of a and b. The values of a and b are thus:
a = 116.3 m
,
b = 500.37 m
Figure 4.5 is the net littoral drift from the bay shape with the current parameters of a and
b.
Development and use of optimisation algorithm for calculating stable bays as part of coastal protection
23
==PAGE:30==
4.3. Steepest­Descent Results
Figure 4.5: Net littoral drift along the bay after the second iteration with the Steepest­
Descent method. The x­axis is the position along the shoreline. The y­axis is the littoral
drift in m3
4.3.3
Iteration 3
The gradient is again of less magnitude than the previous step of the algorithm.
c2 =
[−283227.2
−5488.8
]
The parameters a and b both increase, and again the step size is smaller.
a = 122.0 m
,
b = 500.48 m
This iteration thus has the following littoral drift seen in Figure 4.6.
Development and use of optimisation algorithm for calculating stable bays as part of coastal protection
24
==PAGE:31==
4.3. Steepest­Descent Results
Figure 4.6: Net littoral drift along the bay after the third iteration with the Steepest­Descent
method. The x­axis is the position along the shoreline. The y­axis is the littoral drift in m3
4.3.4
Iteration 4
The gradient is again smaller for this iteration, but a slowdown of the reduction rate can
be noticed. This iteration is the first iteration where the change of c1 is clearly < 100000,
as c3
1 −c2
1 = −197640 −(−283227.2) ≈85000 < 100000.
c3 =
[−197640
−2202.8
]
As with the decreasing size of the gradient, the step size of a and b can be seen by:
a = 125.9 m
,
b = 500.52 m
The bay shape given by these parameters has the littoral drift seen in Figure 4.7.
Development and use of optimisation algorithm for calculating stable bays as part of coastal protection
25
==PAGE:32==
4.3. Steepest­Descent Results
Figure 4.7: Net littoral drift along the bay after the fourth iteration with the Steepest­
Descent method. The x­axis is the position along the shoreline. The y­axis is the littoral
drift in m3
4.3.5
Iteration 5
The gradient used for the final iteration with the Steepest­Descent method is:
c4 =
[−135554.4
−979.6
]
The values for a and b thus end at the following values after five iterations:
a = 128.7 m
,
b = 500.54 m
At the end of the final iteration, the net littoral drift is as shown in Figure 4.8.
Development and use of optimisation algorithm for calculating stable bays as part of coastal protection
26
==PAGE:33==
4.3. Steepest­Descent Results
Figure 4.8: Net littoral drift along the bay after the fifth iteration with the Steepest­Descent
method. The x­axis is the position along the shoreline. The y­axis is the littoral drift in m3
4.3.6
Comparison
It is evident from the results of the first five iterations of the Steepest­Descent method that
this method is causing the shape of the bay to move inland. This is seen by the gradual
increase of a. From these iterations, it is also seen that the initial guess for b is close to
the value that leads to the stable shape. This is interpreted from the small rate of change
occurring in b when comparing it to a. The bay after the fifth iteration can be seen in
Figure 4.9.
Figure 4.9: Mesh with the bay shape being defined by a = 128.7 m and b = 500.54 m
The colouring represents elevation, where red is above water, and going towards purple
means deeper water.
To visualise the step­by­step optimisation of this algorithm, the net littoral drifts of the first
five iterations are plotted against each other. This can be seen in Figure 4.10.
Development and use of optimisation algorithm for calculating stable bays as part of coastal protection
27
==PAGE:34==
4.3. Steepest­Descent Results
Figure 4.10: Comparison between the net littoral drifts of the first five iterations of the
Steepest­Descent method.
In Figure 4.10, it is difficult to see the actual difference between the iterations. Thus,
a zoom in is created from points 16 to 56 to see the order and difference between the
iterations more clearly. This part of the data is seen in Figure 4.11.
Figure 4.11: Section of the data showing the difference in net littoral drift between the first
five steps of the Steepest­Descent method.
Development and use of optimisation algorithm for calculating stable bays as part of coastal protection
28
==PAGE:35==
4.4. BFGS Results
In Figure 4.11, it is seen how each iteration of the Steepest­Descent method brings the
net littoral drift closer to zero, which is a stable state. It should be noted that each iteration
moves the net littoral drift less than the previous iteration. This is expected with the use
of the Steepest­Descent method, where the step size will decrease with each iteration.
Due to the nature of the function being a MIKE 21 model, the iterative process using this
method can be extremely time­consuming.
4.4
BFGS Results
Since the Steepest­Descent method has validated the step size, α, the BFGS method is
again used as the algorithm of choice for performing the iterative process. The BFGS
method is run through three iterations.
Due to the nature of the algorithm, it should
be closer to a stable bay shape after those three iterations than the Steepest­Descent
method. The initial parameters for the BFGS method are the same as they are for the
Steepest­Descent method. a and b are thus 100 m and 500 m respectively. The η value
is 20 m for a and 40 m for b. Finally the α­values are α =
[
5
1000000,
1
100000,
2
100000
]
.
4.4.1
Iteration 1
Due to the function that is subject to calculation being a MIKE 21 model, the initial Hessian
matrix is unknown. Therefore, the Hessian matrix is set to an identity matrix:
H0 =
[1
0
0
1
]
= I
This results in the first iteration of the BFGS method being identical to the Steepest­
Descent method as:
d0 = −
(
H0)−1 c0 = −(I)−1 c0 = −c0
The results from this iteration are thus found in subsection 4.3.1. The search direction is
summarised as:
d0 =
[435042.4
9529.6
]
4.4.2
Iteration 2
At the second iteration, the gradient is identical to the gradient from subsection 4.3.2. This
is due to the gradient originating from the previous iteration, which was identical between
the two methods. The Hessian matrix has been updated according to the method outlined
in subsection 3.2.1. This leads to the following updated matrix:
H1 =
[6081
85.2
85.2
2.19
]
This Hessian, along with the gradient, results in the following search direction, d:
d = −
[6081
85.2
85.2
2.19
] [−382116
−8787.6
]
=
[2324396099.5
32575528.044
]
When this is used along with the step size α and the gradient, the following values for a
and b are obtained:
Development and use of optimisation algorithm for calculating stable bays as part of coastal protection
29
==PAGE:36==
4.4. BFGS Results
a = 23352.8 m
,
b = 826. m
These values cause the mesh to become invalid with the boundary conditions and give
unverifiable results. Figure 4.12 shows how the southern boundary is becoming invalid
as the bathymetry extends too far inland, due to the scaling issues of the α­values.
Figure 4.12: Unverifiable mesh generated from iteration 2 of the BFGS method. The
colouring represents elevation, where red is above water, and going towards purple
means deeper water.
Development and use of optimisation algorithm for calculating stable bays as part of coastal protection
30
==PAGE:37==
5
Discussion
The main goal of this thesis was to investigate the feasibility of applying an optimisation
algorithm to the output of a MIKE 21/3 Coupled Model for a headland­bay beach. This
was done with the goal of shortening the calculation time for running the model to a stable
bay shape. In this chapter, the key findings will be presented, along with the limitations
that were found during the project. The further work that can be initiated is also discussed.
5.1
Key findings
5.1.1
Steepest­Descent
It is confirmed that the Steepest­Descent method converges towards a stable bay shape.
The convergence seen in Figure 4.11 is in accordance with the general theory of the
convergence of the method. One big upside to this method is the easy scaling of the step
size, α. Due to the direct interaction with the search direction, d, in each iteration of the
algorithm, the step size could become of a size that cancels the maximum magnitude of
d. This led to the scaling of the design parameters to be within the scale of single­digit
meters.
5.1.2
BFGS
It is difficult to draw meaningful conclusions regarding the results of the BFGS method,
as the setup mesh constantly breaks whenever the Hessian matrix is involved. However,
due to the nature of the BFGS method being a quasi­Newton method and the similarities
with the BFGS method shown in section 3.2, it can be inferred that the BFGS method
should also be able to converge. The root of this might lie in the scaling as the Hessian
matrix at the second iteration scales the search direction too much for the α­values to
follow. This will be discussed in further detail later in this chapter.
5.1.3
General findings
Having shown that a MIKE 21/3 Coupled Model can be optimised with at least one algo­
rithm opens up the possibility of trying different setups. Using an optimisation algorithm
results in a time gain compared to just running through in MIKE Zero. Thus, longer simula­
tions make up more time from the optimisation algorithms. This could lead to larger areas
being covered more finely than what is currently feasible. It also allows for the usage of a
Boussinesq Wave model in place of a spectral wave model for larger­scale problems. A
Boussinesq Wave model comes from depth­integrated velocity components [22], and is
thus computationally very intensive. The application of optimisation algorithms can hope­
fully help alleviate some of the computational power needed, and thus make the use of
Boussinesq Wave models more viable.
5.2
Limitations
5.2.1
α­values
One big hurdle in doing this optimisation project was the values picked for α. Three
values of alpha do not suffice for this scale of calculations. The difference between the
magnitude of the directional vector d in different iterations can be huge, as seen from
subsection 4.4.1 and subsection 4.4.2. The small sample size of alpha­values was chosen
to reduce computing time and prove the viability of the algorithms.
This can be circumvented by running the algorithm on a cluster instead of a single com­
puter. This would allow for the cost function to be calculated for each alpha simultane­
Development and use of optimisation algorithm for calculating stable bays as part of coastal protection
31
==PAGE:38==
5.3. Future Work
ously. This would drastically increase the amount of alpha­values, as each node in the
cluster can also calculate alpha­values sequentially. Doing this gives a better chance for
validated results at every iteration due to the amount of alpha­values analysed. When
doing this, a stopping criterion can be implemented. This stopping criterion would make
it so that x(k) + αd(k) does not exceed the physical bounds set by the mesh area. This
will help prevent the issues encountered with the usage of the BFGS method, where the
mesh boundaries were exceeded by a big margin.
5.2.2
Calculation of Gradient
If a bay shape is implemented, where the number of variables describing the shape is
drastically increased, the calculation time also increases. This is due to the method used
to calculate the gradient. The method used in this thesis, Equation 3.6, requires four runs
of the MIKE 21 model to obtain the gradient. Equation 3.6 requires more models to be
run if more variables are used for the bay shape. This follows the expression 2n, where
n is the number of variables.
Another method of calculating the gradient is given by Mandviwalla et al. [16], which is
given by:
∂f
∂x1
= f
(
[x0
1 + η x0
2...x0
n]
)
−f
(
[x0
1 x0
2...x0
n]
)
η
(5.1)
This method reduces the amount of calculations needed for the gradient to n + 1. Thus,
if a very computationally intensive model is used or a lot of variables are used for the bay
shape, Equation 5.1 might be preferable to use for the calculation of the gradient. The
two methods should be compared, however, as the gradient will not be completely the
same for both methods, and picking an unsuitable method can lead to deviations further
in the iterative process.
5.2.3
Scale
One limitation or difficulty of working with a 2 km long shoreline is the fact that the net
littoral drift becomes large. Thus, parameters and values become hard to intuitively scale.
This can be seen in section 4.2, where the α­values scaled the search direction out of
proportion. The initial α values were tested on model runs where the time scale was not
properly set. This was due to the desire to test the implementation of the algorithm for
crashes. This resulted in the α values being too large for the initial tests. Thus, tests
for algorithm usage should be independent of final runs. This also means that the full
time scale of the model should be used immediately. A test can also be performed just to
obtain the gradient of the initial state and find α­values around the order of magnitude for
the largest component of the gradient.
5.3
Future Work
5.3.1
Implementation of BFGS Method
For future work, the implementation of BFGS needs to go through more testing. This
is due to the working Steepest­Descent method, while the BFGS method fails. There
are multiple avenues of approaching this. One such avenue could be to try and better
understand what is happening with the scaling of the Hessian matrix. Another avenue
could be the optimisation of the α­values, mentioned previously in this chapter. When the
BFGS method is implemented to completion, the bay should end at a stable shape.
5.3.2
Implementation of Real Bay
Another way this can be worked on in the future is by trying to implement an existing bay
in the MIKE 21 model. This bay could, for example, be Lyall Bay from Figure 2.1. When
Development and use of optimisation algorithm for calculating stable bays as part of coastal protection
32
==PAGE:39==
5.3. Future Work
doing this, the mesh setup would need to be adjusted, along with the wave data. This
would help prove some of the real­life applications of used optimisation algorithms on bay
shapes. At the same time, the result is easy to verify due to the bay currently existing.
Development and use of optimisation algorithm for calculating stable bays as part of coastal protection
33
==PAGE:40==
6
Conclusion
The goal of this thesis was to see if it was possible to implement and adapt known optimi­
sation algorithms to work on a MIKE 21/3 Coupled Model that is modelling a headland­bay
beach. This was being done as a test of feasibility, and thus, the headland­bay beach
used doesn’t exist and was merely being used as an example. The optimisation parame­
ter used by the optimisation algorithms was the net littoral drift along the shoreline. This
was picked as the parameter of optimisation as there is an endpoint of net­zero trans­
port along the shoreline. This means the bay has become stable. A stable bay is an
important tool to use in coastal protection, as the shoreline reaches this final shape, and
infrastructure can be planned around that.
As a part of seeing if this was possible, a MATLAB function was made to create an example
headland­bay beach. The bay development of this script was based on two parameters, a
and b. These two parameters form the base for a parabolic bay shape. Another MATLAB
function was made to obtain the littoral drift along the coastline from MIKE Zero and then
convert it to a single value.
Two optimisation algorithms were implemented in MATLAB. The first of these was the
Steepest­Descent method, the second the Broyden­Fletcher­Goldfarb­Shanno (BFGS)
method. Both of these methods are based on the gradient of the function being opti­
mised. The Steepest­Descent method is a first­order algorithm, as it is only based on
the gradient. The BFGS method is a second­order algorithm that also uses the Hessian
matrix for reaching a solution. This means that the BFGS method converges faster than
the Steepest­Descent method, and was thus preferred to use.
When the MIKE 21 model was run as the function in the optimisation algorithms, it could
be seen from five iterations of the Steepest­Descent method that slight changes in the bay
parameters resulted in less littoral drift per iteration. When the BFGS method was run,
the model broke down due to scaling errors, as the computed bay parameters exceeded
the mesh zone, even when scaled by the step size α. This resulted in an invalid model
that no further iterations could be based upon.
The scaling errors seen when using the BFGS method could have been alleviated by
using a larger amount of α­values, which covered a wider range. If the calculations were
performed on a cluster, these calculations to check for the optimal α could have been run
in parallel, and thus taken the same time as doing a single calculation on one computer.
Even though the BFGS method broke down, it was still proven that it is possible to im­
plement the shape of a headland­bay beach in MIKE 21, and use the Steepest­Descent
method to optimise the shape towards an equilibrium. Further testing is needed to eval­
uate the convergence rate of the optimisation algorithms and compare it to the usage of
a fully numerical model.
Development and use of optimisation algorithm for calculating stable bays as part of coastal protection
34
==PAGE:41==
Bibliography
[1]
Lesley C. Ewing. “Resilience from coastal protection”. In: Philosophical Transac­
tions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences 373
(2053 Oct. 2015). ISSN: 1364503X. DOI: 10.1098/rsta.2014.0383.
[2]
David R. Basco. V­3­3. Beach Stabilization Structures. Tech. rep. 2003.
[3]
Christopher J. Daly, Karin R. Bryan, and Christian Winter. “Wave energy distribution
and morphological development in and around the shadow zone of an embayed
beach”. In: Coastal Engineering 93 (2014), pp. 40–54. ISSN: 03783839. DOI: 10.
1016/j.coastaleng.2014.08.003.
[4]
John R.C. Hsu et al. “Static bay beach concept for scientists and engineers: A re­
view”. In: Coastal Engineering 57 (2 Feb. 2010), pp. 76–91. ISSN: 03783839. DOI:
10.1016/j.coastaleng.2009.09.004.
[5]
Jorge Nodecal and Stephen J. Wright. Numerical Optimisation, Second Ed. Springer,
2006.
[6]
W.C. Krumbein. Shore Processes and Beach Characteristic. 1944.
[7]
Paul H Leblond. ON THE FORMATION OF SPIRAL BEACHES. 1972.
[8]
Richard Silvester. HEADLAND DEFENSE OF COASTS. 1976.
[9]
Richard Silvester and Siew­Koon Ho. CHAPTER 74 USE OP CRENULATE SHAPED
BAYS TO STABILIZE COASTS. 1972.
[10]
J. R.C. Hsu and C. Evans. “Parabolic bay shapes and applications”. In: Proceedings
­ Institution of Civil Engineers. Part 2. Research and theory 87 (Dec. 1989), pp. 557–
570. ISSN: 03078361. DOI: 10.1680/iicep.1989.3778.
[11]
Changbin Lim et al. “Impact Assessment of Beach Erosion from Construction of
Artificial Coastal Structures Using Parabolic Bay Shape Equation”. In: Journal of
Ocean Engineering and Technology 34 (6 Dec. 2020), pp. 436–441. ISSN: 1225­
0767. DOI: 10.26748/ksoe.2020.068.
[12]
Luis J Moreno, Nicholas C Kraus, and M Asce. EQUILIBRIUM SHAPE OF HEADLAND­
BAY BEACHES FOR ENGINEERING DESIGN. 1999, pp. 860–875.
[13]
Jonathan Kemp et al. A MODIFIED HYPERBOLIC TANGENT EQUATION TO DE­
TERMINE EQUILIBRIUM SHAPE OF HEADLAND BAY BEACHES. 2018.
[14]
Jesbin George and V. Sanil Kumar. “Long­Term Variations in Nearshore Wave Cli­
mate and Littoral Drift at Ganpatipule Coast, Eastern Arabian Sea and its Link to
Pacific Climate Variability”. In: Journal of Geophysical Research: Oceans 124 (11
Nov. 2019), pp. 7307–7327. ISSN: 21699291. DOI: 10.1029/2018JC014900.
[15]
Robert G. Dean and Robert A. Dalrymple. Equilibrium Beach Profiles. 2002.
[16]
Xerxes Mandviwalla et al. PREDICTION OF EQUILIBRIUM SCOUR HOLES US­
ING OPTIMIZATION PROCEDURES. 2020.
[17]
Noson S. Yanofsky. “Towards a definition of an algorithm”. In: Journal of Logic
and Computation 21 (2 Apr. 2011), pp. 253–286. ISSN: 0955792X. DOI: 10.1093/
logcom/exq016.
[18]
Jasbir S. Arora. “Numerical Methods for Unconstrained Optimum Design”. In: Intro­
duction to Optimum Design. Elsevier, 2012, pp. 411–441. DOI: 10.1016/b978-0-12-
381375-6.00010-3.
[19]
Jasbir S. Arora. “More on Numerical Methods for Unconstrained Optimum Design”.
In: Introduction to Optimum Design. Elsevier, 2012, pp. 443–489. DOI: 10.1016/
b978-0-12-381375-6.00011-5.
Development and use of optimisation algorithm for calculating stable bays as part of coastal protection
35
==PAGE:42==
Bibliography
[20]
Abdel Nnafie, Niek van Andel, and Huib de Swart. “Modelling the impact of a time­
varying wave angle on the nonlinear evolution of sand bars in the surf zone”. In:
Earth Surface Processes and Landforms 45 (11 Sept. 2020), pp. 2603–2612. ISSN:
10969837. DOI: 10.1002/esp.4916.
[21]
Leo C. Van Rijn. “A simple general expression for longshore transport of sand,
gravel and shingle”. In: Coastal Engineering 90 (2014), pp. 23–39. ISSN: 03783839.
DOI: 10.1016/j.coastaleng.2014.04.008.
[22]
James T Kirby. Boussinesq Models and Applications to Nearshore Wave Propaga­
tion, Surf Zone Processes and Wave­Induced Currents. Tech. rep. 2003.
Development and use of optimisation algorithm for calculating stable bays as part of coastal protection
36
==PAGE:43==
A
Appendix
Implementation of the Steepest­Descent method:
1
a=100;
2
b=500;
3
optcva = [];
4
optcvb = [];
5
c = [];
6
H = [1, 0; 0, 1];
7
8
NumIterations = 5;
9
%Op mod 16.5-17 timer
10
Out = cell(NumIterations+2,16);
11
% Hout = cell(NumIterations+1,1);
12
% Hout(1,1) = H;
13
14
Out(1,:) = {'Iteration','Alpha 1','Alpha 2','Alpha 3','Less a','
More a','Less b','More b','c1','c2','H1','H2','H3','H4','a','
b'};
15
16
av(1) = a;
17
bv(1) = b;
18
19
prevstep = sprintf('StepSD%d.mfm',i-1);
20
currentstep = sprintf('StepSD%d.mfm',i);
21
halfstep1 = sprintf('StepSD%dpre.mfm',i-1);
22
halfstep2 = sprintf('StepSD%daft.mfm',i-1);
23
24
astep = 10;
25
bstep = 20;
26
for f=1:2
27
for j=1:2
28
29
prevstep = sprintf('Step%d.mfm',0);
30
currentstep = sprintf('StepSD%d.mfm',i);
31
if f==1
32
halfstep1 = sprintf('StepSD%dprea.mfm',0);
33
halfstep2 = sprintf('StepSD%dafta.mfm',0);
34
halfstep1res = sprintf('C:/Users/jfril/OneDrive -
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet/Thesis/StepSD%dprea
.mfm - Result Files/SM-Coastline.dfs1',0);
35
halfstep2res = sprintf('StepSD%dafta.mfm - Result
Files/SM-Coastline.dfs1',0);
36
halfstep1path = sprintf('StepSD%dprea.mfm - Result
Files',0);
37
halfstep2path = sprintf('StepSD%dafta.mfm - Result
Files',0);
38
else
Development and use of optimisation algorithm for calculating stable bays as part of coastal protection
37
==PAGE:44==
39
halfstep1 = sprintf('StepSD%dpreb.mfm',0);
40
halfstep2 = sprintf('StepSD%daftb.mfm',0);
41
halfstep1res = sprintf('C:/Users/jfril/OneDrive -
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet/Thesis/StepSD%dpreb
.mfm - Result Files/SM-Coastline.dfs1',0);
42
halfstep2res = sprintf('StepSD%daftb.mfm - Result
Files/SM-Coastline.dfs1',0);
43
halfstep1path = sprintf('StepSD%dpreb.mfm - Result
Files',0);
44
halfstep2path = sprintf('StepSD%daftb.mfm - Result
Files',0);
45
end
46
47
if f==1
48
if j==1
49
NameMesh = sprintf('MeshStepSD%dprea.mesh',0);
50
else
51
NameMesh = sprintf('MeshStepSD%dafta.mesh',0);
52
end
53
else
54
if j==1
55
NameMesh = sprintf('MeshStepSD%dpreb.mesh',0);
56
else
57
NameMesh = sprintf('MeshStepSD%daftb.mesh',0);
58
end
59
end
60
61
if exist(NameMesh ,'file')
62
delete(NameMesh);
63
end
64
if f==1
65
if j==1
66
CoastMesh(a-astep,b,NameMesh);
67
else
68
CoastMesh(a+astep,b,NameMesh);
69
end
70
else
71
if j==1
72
CoastMesh(a,b-bstep,NameMesh);
73
else
74
CoastMesh(a,b+bstep,NameMesh);
75
end
76
end
77
78
fileText = fileread(prevstep);
79
80
fileText = strrep(fileText , 'StepMesh', NameMesh);
81
82
if j==1
83
fid = fopen(halfstep1 , 'w');
Development and use of optimisation algorithm for calculating stable bays as part of coastal protection
38
==PAGE:45==
84
if fid == -1
85
error('Cannot open file for writing: %s',
halfstep1);
86
end
87
fwrite(fid, fileText);
88
fclose(fid);
89
else
90
fid = fopen(halfstep2 , 'w');
91
if fid == -1
92
error('Cannot open file for writing: %s',
halfstep2);
93
end
94
fwrite(fid, fileText);
95
fclose(fid);
96
end
97
98
filepath = 'set path=C:\Program Files (x86)\DHI\MIKE
Zero\2025\bin\x64';
99
100
if f==1
101
if j==1
102
batchname = sprintf('runBatchSD%dprea.bat',0);
103
batch = sprintf([
104
'%s',newline ,...
105
'start /wait Mzlaunch.exe -exit StepSD%dprea.mfm
'
106
],filepath ,0);
107
bid = fopen(batchname , 'w');
108
if bid == -1
109
error('Cannot create batch file');
110
end
111
fwrite(bid,batch);
112
fclose(bid);
113
else
114
batchname = sprintf('runBatchSD%dafta.bat',0);
115
batch = sprintf([
116
'%s',newline ,...
117
'start /wait Mzlaunch.exe -exit StepSD%dafta.mfm
'
118
],filepath ,0);
119
bid = fopen(batchname , 'w');
120
if bid == -1
121
error('Cannot create batch file');
122
end
123
fwrite(bid,batch);
124
fclose(bid);
125
end
126
else
127
if j==1
128
batchname = sprintf('runBatchSD%dpreb.bat',0);
Development and use of optimisation algorithm for calculating stable bays as part of coastal protection
39
==PAGE:46==
129
batch = sprintf([
130
'%s',newline ,...
131
'start /wait Mzlaunch.exe -exit StepSD%dpreb.mfm
'
132
],filepath ,0);
133
bid = fopen(batchname , 'w');
134
if bid == -1
135
error('Cannot create batch file');
136
end
137
fwrite(bid,batch);
138
fclose(bid);
139
else
140
batchname = sprintf('runBatchSD%daftb.bat',0);
141
batch = sprintf([
142
'%s',newline ,...
143
'start /wait Mzlaunch.exe -exit StepSD%daftb.mfm
'
144
],filepath ,0);
145
bid = fopen(batchname , 'w');
146
if bid == -1
147
error('Cannot create batch file');
148
end
149
fwrite(bid,batch);
150
fclose(bid);
151
end
152
end
153
154
status = system(batchname);
155
156
if j==1
157
addpath(halfstep1path)
158
else
159
addpath(halfstep2path)
160
end
161
162
if f==1
163
if j==1
164
optcva(1)=NetDrift('C:/Users/jfril/OneDrive -
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet/Thesis/
StepSD0prea.mfm - Result Files/SM-Coastline.
dfs1');
165
else
166
optcva(2)=NetDrift(halfstep2res);
167
end
168
else
169
if j==1
170
optcvb(1)=NetDrift(halfstep1res);
171
else
172
optcvb(2)=NetDrift(halfstep2res);
173
end
Development and use of optimisation algorithm for calculating stable bays as part of coastal protection
40
==PAGE:47==
174
end
175
end
176
end
177
178
c(:,1) = [(optcva(2)-optcva(1))/(2*astep); (optcvb(2)-optcvb(1))
/(2*bstep)];
179
Out(2,:) = {0,0,0,0,optcva(1),optcva(2),optcvb(1),optcvb(2),c
(1,1),c(2,1),H(1,1),H(1,2),H(2,1),H(2,2),av(1),bv(1)};
180
181
for i=1:NumIterations
182
183
%d = (-H^(-1))\c(:,i);
184
d = -c(:,i);
185
186
alpha = [5./1000000, 1./100000, 2./100000];
187
188
for m=1:3
189
currentstep = sprintf('StepSD%dalph%d.mfm',i,m);
190
currentstepres = sprintf('StepSD%dalph%d.mfm - Result
Files/SM-Coastline.dfs1',i,m);
191
NameMesh = sprintf('MeshStepSD%dalph%d.mesh',i,m);
192
if exist(NameMesh ,'file')
193
delete(NameMesh);
194
end
195
CoastMesh(a+alpha(m)*d(1),b+alpha(m)*d(2),NameMesh);
196
197
fileText = fileread('Step0.mfm');
198
199
fileText = strrep(fileText , 'StepMesh', NameMesh);
200
201
fid = fopen(currentstep , 'w');
202
if fid == -1
203
error('Cannot open file for writing: %s',
currentstep);
204
end
205
fwrite(fid, fileText);
206
fclose(fid);
207
208
filepath = 'set path=C:\Program Files (x86)\DHI\MIKE
Zero\2025\bin\x64';
209
210
batchname = sprintf('runBatchSD%dalph%d.bat',i,m);
211
batch = sprintf([
212
'%s',newline ,...
213
'start /wait Mzlaunch.exe -exit StepSD%dalph%d.mfm'
214
],filepath ,i,m);
215
bid = fopen(batchname , 'w');
216
if bid == -1
217
error('Cannot create batch file');
218
end
Development and use of optimisation algorithm for calculating stable bays as part of coastal protection
41
==PAGE:48==
219
fwrite(bid,batch);
220
fclose(bid);
221
222
status = system(batchname);
223
224
addpath(halfstep1res)
225
226
x(m)=NetDrift(currentstepres);
227
end
228
[~,alk] =min(abs(x));
229
sk = alpha(alk)*d;
230
a = a + sk(1);
231
b = b + sk(2);
232
233
av(i+1) = a;
234
bv(i+1) = b;
235
236
%%%%%%%
Recalculate gradient vector
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
237
for f=1:2
238
for j=1:2
239
240
prevstep = sprintf('Step%d.mfm',0);
241
currentstep = sprintf('StepSD%d.mfm',i);
242
if f==1
243
halfstep1 = sprintf('StepSD%dprea.mfm',i);
244
halfstep2 = sprintf('StepSD%dafta.mfm',i);
245
halfstep1res = sprintf('C:/Users/jfril/OneDrive
- Danmarks Tekniske Universitet/Thesis/StepSD
%dprea.mfm - Result Files/SM-Coastline.dfs1',
i);
246
halfstep2res = sprintf('StepSD%dafta.mfm -
Result Files/SM-Coastline.dfs1',i);
247
halfstep1path = sprintf('StepSD%dprea.mfm -
Result Files',i);
248
halfstep2path = sprintf('StepSD%dafta.mfm -
Result Files',i);
249
else
250
halfstep1 = sprintf('StepSD%dpreb.mfm',i);
251
halfstep2 = sprintf('StepSD%daftb.mfm',i);
252
halfstep1res = sprintf('C:/Users/jfril/OneDrive
- Danmarks Tekniske Universitet/Thesis/StepSD
%dpreb.mfm - Result Files/SM-Coastline.dfs1',
i);
253
halfstep2res = sprintf('StepSD%daftb.mfm -
Result Files/SM-Coastline.dfs1',i);
254
halfstep1path = sprintf('StepSD%dpreb.mfm -
Result Files',i);
255
halfstep2path = sprintf('StepSD%daftb.mfm -
Result Files',i);
Development and use of optimisation algorithm for calculating stable bays as part of coastal protection
42
==PAGE:49==
256
end
257
258
if f==1
259
if j==1
260
NameMesh = sprintf('MeshStepSD%dprea.mesh',i
);
261
else
262
NameMesh = sprintf('MeshStepSD%dafta.mesh',i
);
263
end
264
else
265
if j==1
266
NameMesh = sprintf('MeshStepSD%dpreb.mesh',i
);
267
else
268
NameMesh = sprintf('MeshStepSD%daftb.mesh',i
);
269
end
270
end
271
if exist(NameMesh ,'file')
272
delete(NameMesh);
273
end
274
if f==1
275
if j==1
276
CoastMesh(a-astep,b,NameMesh);
277
else
278
CoastMesh(a+astep,b,NameMesh);
279
end
280
else
281
if j==1
282
CoastMesh(a,b-bstep,NameMesh);
283
else
284
CoastMesh(a,b+bstep,NameMesh);
285
end
286
end
287
288
fileText = fileread(prevstep);
289
290
fileText = strrep(fileText , 'StepMesh', NameMesh);
291
292
if j==1
293
fid = fopen(halfstep1 , 'w');
294
if fid == -1
295
error('Cannot open file for writing: %s',
halfstep1);
296
end
297
fwrite(fid, fileText);
298
fclose(fid);
299
else
300
fid = fopen(halfstep2 , 'w');
Development and use of optimisation algorithm for calculating stable bays as part of coastal protection
43
==PAGE:50==
301
if fid == -1
302
error('Cannot open file for writing: %s',
halfstep2);
303
end
304
fwrite(fid, fileText);
305
fclose(fid);
306
end
307
308
filepath = 'set path=C:\Program Files (x86)\DHI\MIKE
Zero\2025\bin\x64';
309
310
if f==1
311
if j==1
312
batchname = sprintf('runBatchSD%dprea.bat',i
);
313
batch = sprintf([
314
'%s',newline ,...
315
'start /wait Mzlaunch.exe -exit StepSD%dprea
.mfm'
316
],filepath ,i);
317
bid = fopen(batchname , 'w');
318
if bid == -1
319
error('Cannot create batch file');
320
end
321
fwrite(bid,batch);
322
fclose(bid);
323
else
324
batchname = sprintf('runBatchSD%dafta.bat',i
);
325
batch = sprintf([
326
'%s',newline ,...
327
'start /wait Mzlaunch.exe -exit StepSD%dafta
.mfm'
328
],filepath ,i);
329
bid = fopen(batchname , 'w');
330
if bid == -1
331
error('Cannot create batch file');
332
end
333
fwrite(bid,batch);
334
fclose(bid);
335
end
336
else
337
if j==1
338
batchname = sprintf('runBatchSD%dpreb.bat',i
);
339
batch = sprintf([
340
'%s',newline ,...
341
'start /wait Mzlaunch.exe -exit StepSD%dpreb
.mfm'
342
],filepath ,i);
Development and use of optimisation algorithm for calculating stable bays as part of coastal protection
44
==PAGE:51==
343
bid = fopen(batchname , 'w');
344
if bid == -1
345
error('Cannot create batch file');
346
end
347
fwrite(bid,batch);
348
fclose(bid);
349
else
350
batchname = sprintf('runBatchSD%daftb.bat',i
);
351
batch = sprintf([
352
'%s',newline ,...
353
'start /wait Mzlaunch.exe -exit StepSD%daftb
.mfm'
354
],filepath ,i);
355
bid = fopen(batchname , 'w');
356
if bid == -1
357
error('Cannot create batch file');
358
end
359
fwrite(bid,batch);
360
fclose(bid);
361
end
362
end
363
364
status = system(batchname);
365
366
if j==1
367
addpath(halfstep1res)
368
else
369
addpath(halfstep2res)
370
end
371
372
if f==1
373
if j==1
374
optcva(j)=NetDrift(halfstep1res);
375
else
376
optcva(j)=NetDrift(halfstep2res);
377
end
378
else
379
if j==1
380
optcvb(j)=NetDrift(halfstep1res);
381
else
382
optcvb(j)=NetDrift(halfstep2res);
383
end
384
end
385
end
386
end
387
388
c(:,i+1) = [(optcva(2)-optcva(1))/(2*astep); (optcvb(2)-
optcvb(1))/(2*bstep)];
389
Out(:,i+2) = {i,x(1),x(2),x(3),optcva(1),optcva(2),optcvb(1)
Development and use of optimisation algorithm for calculating stable bays as part of coastal protection
45
==PAGE:52==
,optcvb(2),c(1,1),c(2,1),H(1,1),H(1,2),H(2,1),H(2,2),av(i
+1),bv(i+1)};
390
391
% yk = c(:,i+1)-c(:,i);
392
%
393
% Dk = yk.*transpose(yk)/(dot(yk,sk));
394
% Ek = c(:,i).*transpose(c(:,i))/(dot(c(:,i),d));
395
%
396
% H = H + Dk + Ek;
397
% Hout(i+1,1) = H;
398
399
400
end
401
writecell(Out, 'LitDriftOutsSD.xlsx');
402
% writecell(Hout,'Hsteps.xlsx ');
403
abvals = table(av,bv);
404
writetable(abvals , 'abvaluesSD.xlsx');
405
cread = table(c);
406
writetable(cread,'cvaluesSD.xlsx');
407
save('Outputs.mat','Out','av','bv')
Implementation of the BFGS method
1
a=100;
2
b=500;
3
optcva = [];
4
optcvb = [];
5
c = [];
6
Out = [];
7
H = [1, 0; 0, 1];
8
9
NumIterations = 3;
10
11
Out = cell(2,16);
12
% Hout = cell(NumIterations+1,1);
13
% Hout(1,1) = H;
14
15
Out(1,:) = {'Iteration','Alpha 1','Alpha 2','Alpha 3','Less a','
More a','Less b','More b','c1','c2','H1','H2','H3','H4','a','
b'};
16
av(1) = a;
17
bv(1) = b;
18
19
prevstep = sprintf('Step%d.mfm',i-1);
20
currentstep = sprintf('Step%d.mfm',i);
21
halfstep1 = sprintf('Step%dpre.mfm',i-1);
22
halfstep2 = sprintf('Step%daft.mfm',i-1);
23
24
astep = 10;
Development and use of optimisation algorithm for calculating stable bays as part of coastal protection
46
==PAGE:53==
25
bstep = 20;
26
for f=1:2
27
for j=1:2
28
29
prevstep = sprintf('Step%d.mfm',0);
30
currentstep = sprintf('Step%d.mfm',i);
31
if f==1
32
halfstep1 = sprintf('Step%dprea.mfm',0);
33
halfstep2 = sprintf('Step%dafta.mfm',0);
34
halfstep1res = sprintf('C:/Users/jfril/OneDrive -
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet/Thesis/Step%dprea.
mfm - Result Files/SM-Coastline.dfs1',0);
35
halfstep2res = sprintf('Step%dafta.mfm - Result
Files/SM-Coastline.dfs1',0);
36
halfstep1path = sprintf('Step%dprea.mfm - Result
Files',0);
37
halfstep2path = sprintf('Step%dafta.mfm - Result
Files',0);
38
else
39
halfstep1 = sprintf('Step%dpreb.mfm',0);
40
halfstep2 = sprintf('Step%daftb.mfm',0);
41
halfstep1res = sprintf('C:/Users/jfril/OneDrive -
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet/Thesis/Step%dpreb.
mfm - Result Files/SM-Coastline.dfs1',0);
42
halfstep2res = sprintf('Step%daftb.mfm - Result
Files/SM-Coastline.dfs1',0);
43
halfstep1path = sprintf('Step%dpreb.mfm - Result
Files',0);
44
halfstep2path = sprintf('Step%daftb.mfm - Result
Files',0);
45
end
46
47
if f==1
48
if j==1
49
NameMesh = sprintf('MeshStep%dprea.mesh',0);
50
else
51
NameMesh = sprintf('MeshStep%dafta.mesh',0);
52
end
53
else
54
if j==1
55
NameMesh = sprintf('MeshStep%dpreb.mesh',0);
56
else
57
NameMesh = sprintf('MeshStep%daftb.mesh',0);
58
end
59
end
60
61
if exist(NameMesh ,'file')
62
delete(NameMesh);
63
end
64
if f==1
Development and use of optimisation algorithm for calculating stable bays as part of coastal protection
47
==PAGE:54==
65
if j==1
66
CoastMesh(a-astep,b,NameMesh);
67
else
68
CoastMesh(a+astep,b,NameMesh);
69
end
70
else
71
if j==1
72
CoastMesh(a,b-bstep,NameMesh);
73
else
74
CoastMesh(a,b+bstep,NameMesh);
75
end
76
end
77
78
fileText = fileread(prevstep);
79
80
fileText = strrep(fileText , 'StepMesh', NameMesh);
81
82
if j==1
83
fid = fopen(halfstep1 , 'w');
84
if fid == -1
85
error('Cannot open file for writing: %s',
halfstep1);
86
end
87
fwrite(fid, fileText);
88
fclose(fid);
89
else
90
fid = fopen(halfstep2 , 'w');
91
if fid == -1
92
error('Cannot open file for writing: %s',
halfstep2);
93
end
94
fwrite(fid, fileText);
95
fclose(fid);
96
end
97
98
filepath = 'set path=C:\Program Files (x86)\DHI\MIKE
Zero\2025\bin\x64';
99
100
if f==1
101
if j==1
102
batchname = sprintf('runBatch%dprea.bat',0);
103
batch = sprintf([
104
'%s',newline ,...
105
'start /wait Mzlaunch.exe -exit Step%dprea.mfm'
106
],filepath ,0);
107
bid = fopen(batchname , 'w');
108
if bid == -1
109
error('Cannot create batch file');
110
end
111
fwrite(bid,batch);
Development and use of optimisation algorithm for calculating stable bays as part of coastal protection
48
==PAGE:55==
112
fclose(bid);
113
else
114
batchname = sprintf('runBatch%dafta.bat',0);
115
batch = sprintf([
116
'%s',newline ,...
117
'start /wait Mzlaunch.exe -exit Step%dafta.mfm'
118
],filepath ,0);
119
bid = fopen(batchname , 'w');
120
if bid == -1
121
error('Cannot create batch file');
122
end
123
fwrite(bid,batch);
124
fclose(bid);
125
end
126
else
127
if j==1
128
batchname = sprintf('runBatch%dpreb.bat',0);
129
batch = sprintf([
130
'%s',newline ,...
131
'start /wait Mzlaunch.exe -exit Step%dpreb.mfm'
132
],filepath ,0);
133
bid = fopen(batchname , 'w');
134
if bid == -1
135
error('Cannot create batch file');
136
end
137
fwrite(bid,batch);
138
fclose(bid);
139
else
140
batchname = sprintf('runBatch%daftb.bat',0);
141
batch = sprintf([
142
'%s',newline ,...
143
'start /wait Mzlaunch.exe -exit Step%daftb.mfm'
144
],filepath ,0);
145
bid = fopen(batchname , 'w');
146
if bid == -1
147
error('Cannot create batch file');
148
end
149
fwrite(bid,batch);
150
fclose(bid);
151
end
152
end
153
154
status = system(batchname);
155
156
if j==1
157
addpath(halfstep1path)
158
else
159
addpath(halfstep2path)
160
end
161
Development and use of optimisation algorithm for calculating stable bays as part of coastal protection
49
==PAGE:56==
162
if f==1
163
if j==1
164
optcva(1)=NetDrift('C:/Users/jfril/OneDrive -
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet/Thesis/
Step0prea.mfm - Result Files/SM-Coastline.
dfs1');
165
else
166
optcva(2)=NetDrift(halfstep2res);
167
end
168
else
169
if j==1
170
optcvb(1)=NetDrift(halfstep1res);
171
else
172
optcvb(2)=NetDrift(halfstep2res);
173
end
174
end
175
end
176
end
177
178
c(:,1) = [(optcva(2)-optcva(1))/(2*astep); (optcvb(2)-optcvb(1))
/(2*bstep)];
179
Out(2,:) = {0,0,0,0,optcva(1),optcva(2),optcvb(1),optcvb(2),c
(1,1),c(2,1),H(1,1),H(1,2),H(2,1),H(2,2),av(1),bv(1)};
180
writecell(Out, 'LitDriftOuts2.xlsx');
181
182
for i=1:NumIterations
183
184
d = (-H^(-1))\c(:,i);
185
186
alpha = [5./1000000, 1./100000, 2./100000];
187
188
for m=1:3
189
currentstep = sprintf('Step%dalph%d.mfm',i,m);
190
currentstepres = sprintf('Step%dalph%d.mfm - Result
Files/SM-Coastline.dfs1',i,m);
191
NameMesh = sprintf('MeshStep%dalph%d.mesh',i,m);
192
if exist(NameMesh ,'file')
193
delete(NameMesh);
194
end
195
CoastMesh(a+alpha(m)*d(1),b+alpha(m)*d(2),NameMesh);
196
197
fileText = fileread('Step0.mfm');
198
199
fileText = strrep(fileText , 'StepMesh', NameMesh);
200
201
fid = fopen(currentstep , 'w');
202
if fid == -1
203
error('Cannot open file for writing: %s',
currentstep);
204
end
Development and use of optimisation algorithm for calculating stable bays as part of coastal protection
50
==PAGE:57==
205
fwrite(fid, fileText);
206
fclose(fid);
207
208
filepath = 'set path=C:\Program Files (x86)\DHI\MIKE
Zero\2025\bin\x64';
209
210
batchname = sprintf('runBatch%dalph%d.bat',i,m);
211
batch = sprintf([
212
'%s',newline ,...
213
'start /wait Mzlaunch.exe -exit Step%dalph%d.mfm'
214
],filepath ,i,m);
215
bid = fopen(batchname , 'w');
216
if bid == -1
217
error('Cannot create batch file');
218
end
219
fwrite(bid,batch);
220
fclose(bid);
221
222
status = system(batchname);
223
224
addpath(halfstep1res)
225
226
x(m)=NetDrift(currentstepres);
227
end
228
[~,alk] =min(abs(x(x>0.001)));
229
sk = alpha(alk)*d;
230
a = a + sk(1);
231
b = b + sk(2);
232
233
av(i+1) = a;
234
bv(i+1) = b;
235
236
%%%%%%%
Recalculate gradient vector
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
237
for f=1:2
238
for j=1:2
239
240
prevstep = sprintf('Step%d.mfm',0);
241
currentstep = sprintf('Step%d.mfm',i);
242
if f==1
243
halfstep1 = sprintf('Step%dprea.mfm',i);
244
halfstep2 = sprintf('Step%dafta.mfm',i);
245
halfstep1res = sprintf('C:/Users/jfril/OneDrive
- Danmarks Tekniske Universitet/Thesis/Step%
dprea.mfm - Result Files/SM-Coastline.dfs1',i
);
246
halfstep2res = sprintf('Step%dafta.mfm - Result
Files/SM-Coastline.dfs1',i);
247
halfstep1path = sprintf('Step%dprea.mfm - Result
Files',i);
Development and use of optimisation algorithm for calculating stable bays as part of coastal protection
51
==PAGE:58==
248
halfstep2path = sprintf('Step%dafta.mfm - Result
Files',i);
249
else
250
halfstep1 = sprintf('Step%dpreb.mfm',i);
251
halfstep2 = sprintf('Step%daftb.mfm',i);
252
halfstep1res = sprintf('C:/Users/jfril/OneDrive
- Danmarks Tekniske Universitet/Thesis/Step%
dpreb.mfm - Result Files/SM-Coastline.dfs1',i
);
253
halfstep2res = sprintf('Step%daftb.mfm - Result
Files/SM-Coastline.dfs1',i);
254
halfstep1path = sprintf('Step%dpreb.mfm - Result
Files',i);
255
halfstep2path = sprintf('Step%daftb.mfm - Result
Files',i);
256
end
257
258
if f==1
259
if j==1
260
NameMesh = sprintf('MeshStep%dprea.mesh',i);
261
else
262
NameMesh = sprintf('MeshStep%dafta.mesh',i);
263
end
264
else
265
if j==1
266
NameMesh = sprintf('MeshStep%dpreb.mesh',i);
267
else
268
NameMesh = sprintf('MeshStep%daftb.mesh',i);
269
end
270
end
271
if exist(NameMesh ,'file')
272
delete(NameMesh);
273
end
274
if f==1
275
if j==1
276
CoastMesh(a-astep,b,NameMesh);
277
else
278
CoastMesh(a+astep,b,NameMesh);
279
end
280
else
281
if j==1
282
CoastMesh(a,b-bstep,NameMesh);
283
else
284
CoastMesh(a,b+bstep,NameMesh);
285
end
286
end
287
288
fileText = fileread(prevstep);
289
290
fileText = strrep(fileText , 'StepMesh', NameMesh);
Development and use of optimisation algorithm for calculating stable bays as part of coastal protection
52
==PAGE:59==
291
292
if j==1
293
fid = fopen(halfstep1 , 'w');
294
if fid == -1
295
error('Cannot open file for writing: %s',
halfstep1);
296
end
297
fwrite(fid, fileText);
298
fclose(fid);
299
else
300
fid = fopen(halfstep2 , 'w');
301
if fid == -1
302
error('Cannot open file for writing: %s',
halfstep2);
303
end
304
fwrite(fid, fileText);
305
fclose(fid);
306
end
307
308
filepath = 'set path=C:\Program Files (x86)\DHI\MIKE
Zero\2025\bin\x64';
309
310
if f==1
311
if j==1
312
batchname = sprintf('runBatch%dprea.bat',i);
313
batch = sprintf([
314
'%s',newline ,...
315
'start /wait Mzlaunch.exe -exit Step%dprea.
mfm'
316
],filepath ,i);
317
bid = fopen(batchname , 'w');
318
if bid == -1
319
error('Cannot create batch file');
320
end
321
fwrite(bid,batch);
322
fclose(bid);
323
else
324
batchname = sprintf('runBatch%dafta.bat',i);
325
batch = sprintf([
326
'%s',newline ,...
327
'start /wait Mzlaunch.exe -exit Step%dafta.
mfm'
328
],filepath ,i);
329
bid = fopen(batchname , 'w');
330
if bid == -1
331
error('Cannot create batch file');
332
end
333
fwrite(bid,batch);
334
fclose(bid);
335
end
Development and use of optimisation algorithm for calculating stable bays as part of coastal protection
53
==PAGE:60==
336
else
337
if j==1
338
batchname = sprintf('runBatch%dpreb.bat',i);
339
batch = sprintf([
340
'%s',newline ,...
341
'start /wait Mzlaunch.exe -exit Step%dpreb.
mfm'
342
],filepath ,i);
343
bid = fopen(batchname , 'w');
344
if bid == -1
345
error('Cannot create batch file');
346
end
347
fwrite(bid,batch);
348
fclose(bid);
349
else
350
batchname = sprintf('runBatch%daftb.bat',i);
351
batch = sprintf([
352
'%s',newline ,...
353
'start /wait Mzlaunch.exe -exit Step%daftb.
mfm'
354
],filepath ,i);
355
bid = fopen(batchname , 'w');
356
if bid == -1
357
error('Cannot create batch file');
358
end
359
fwrite(bid,batch);
360
fclose(bid);
361
end
362
end
363
364
status = system(batchname);
365
366
if j==1
367
addpath(halfstep1res)
368
else
369
addpath(halfstep2res)
370
end
371
372
if f==1
373
if j==1
374
optcva(j)=NetDrift(halfstep1res);
375
else
376
optcva(j)=NetDrift(halfstep2res);
377
end
378
else
379
if j==1
380
optcvb(j)=NetDrift(halfstep1res);
381
else
382
optcvb(j)=NetDrift(halfstep2res);
383
end
Development and use of optimisation algorithm for calculating stable bays as part of coastal protection
54
==PAGE:61==
384
end
385
end
386
end
387
388
c(:,i+1) = [(optcva(2)-optcva(1))/(2*astep); (optcvb(2)-
optcvb(1))/(2*bstep)];
389
%Out(:,i+2) = {i;x(1);x(2);x(3);optcva(1);optcva(2);optcvb
(1);optcvb(2)};
390
391
yk = c(:,i+1)-c(:,i);
392
393
Dk = yk.*transpose(yk)/(dot(yk,sk));
394
Ek = c(:,i).*transpose(c(:,i))/(dot(c(:,i),d));
395
396
H = H + Dk + Ek;
397
%Hout(i+1,1) = H;
398
399
OutInt = [i,x(1),x(2),x(3),optcva(1),optcva(2),optcvb(1),
optcvb(2),c(1,i+1),c(2,i+1),H(1,1),H(1,2),H(2,1),H(2,2),
av(i+1),bv(i+1)];
400
NewOutRow = num2cell(OutInt);
401
writecell(NewOutRow , 'LitDriftOuts2.xlsx', 'WriteMode', '
append');
402
403
404
end
405
406
%writecell(Hout,'Hsteps.xlsx ');
407
abvals = table(av,bv);
408
writetable(abvals , 'abvalues.xlsx');
409
cread = table(c);
410
writetable(cread,'cvalues.xlsx');
411
save('Outputs.mat','Out','av','bv')
The function generating the mesh file:
1
function CoastMesh(a,b,MeshName)
2
3
x = [-1500:(6+2/3):1500];
4
5
y = -300:2:400;
6
7
m = 2/3;
8
A = 0.15;
9
alpha = 0.35;
10
beta = 0.05;
11
%z = -A*y.^m + alpha*exp(-beta*(y-15).^2);
12
a2 = 0.5;
13
loc = 50;
Development and use of optimisation algorithm for calculating stable bays as part of coastal protection
55
==PAGE:62==
14
z = -A*y.^m + a2*exp(-5*((y-loc)/loc).^2);
15
z(y<0) = -y(y<0)*1/20;
16
z(y<-10) = 0.5;
17
% for x = [-1100:-1000 1000:1100]
18
%
z(y<180) = 0.5;
19
% end
20
%z(z<-2) = -2;
21
22
% for i = 1:length(x)
23
%
if x(i) <= -1000 && x(i) >= -1100
24
%
z(y < 180) = 0.5; % Example condition
25
%
elseif x(i) >= 1000 && x(i) <= 1100
26
%
z(y < 180) = 0.5; % Different calculation
27
%
else
28
%
z(y < 0) = -y(y < 0) * 1/20; % Original condition
29
%
end
30
% end
31
32
%figure;
33
%plot(y,z);
34
[X,Y] = meshgrid(x,y);
35
Z = interp1(y,z,Y);
36
37
Z = zeros(length(y), length(x)); % Initialize Z matrix
38
39
Aval = a;
40
Bval = b;
41
42
Aloc1 = -Aval;
43
Bloc1 = 1000-Bval;
44
ran1 = -1000-Bloc1;
45
aLeft = -Aloc1/(ran1^2);
46
cLeft = Aloc1;
47
48
Aloc2 = -Aval;
49
Bloc2 = 1000-Bval;
50
ran2 = 1000-Bloc2;
51
aRight = -Aloc2/(ran2^2);
52
cRight = Aloc2;
53
54
55
% Apply conditions to Z based on values of x
56
for i = 1:length(x)
57
if x(i) < -1000 && x(i) >= -1100
58
Z(:, i) = -A * Y(:,i).^m + a2 * exp(-5 * ((Y(:,i) - loc)
/ loc).^2);
59
Z(Y(:,i) < 300, i) = 0.5; % Set all corresponding z
values to 0.5 for x < -1000
60
61
elseif x(i) > 1000 && x(i) <= 1100
Development and use of optimisation algorithm for calculating stable bays as part of coastal protection
56
==PAGE:63==
62
Z(:, i) = -A * Y(:,i).^m + a2 * exp(-5 * ((Y(:,i) - loc)
/ loc).^2); % Different calculation for this range
63
Z(Y(:,i) < 300, i) = 0.5;
64
65
elseif x(i) >= -1000 && x(i) <= Bloc1
66
Y2(:,i) = Y(:,i)-(aLeft * (x(i)-Bloc1)^2 + cLeft);
67
Z(:, i) = -A * Y2(:,i).^m + a2 * exp(-5 * ((Y2(:,i) -
loc) / loc).^2);
68
Z(Y2(:,i) < 0, i) = -Y2(Y2(:,i) < 0, i) * 1/20; % Apply
the condition for negative y values
69
Z(Y2(:,i) < -10, i) = 0.5;
70
71
elseif x(i) > Bloc1 && x(i) <= 1000
72
Y3(:,i) = Y(:,i)-(aRight * (x(i)-Bloc2)^2 + cRight);
73
Z(:, i) = -A * Y3(:,i).^m + a2 * exp(-5 * ((Y3(:,i) -
loc) / loc).^2);
74
Z(Y3(:,i) < 0, i) = -Y3(Y3(:,i) < 0, i) * 1/20; % Apply
the condition for negative y values
75
Z(Y3(:,i) < -10, i) = 0.5;
76
77
else
78
Z(:, i) = -A * Y(:,i).^m + a2 * exp(-5 * ((Y(:,i) - loc)
/ loc).^2);
79
Z(Y(:,i) < 0, i) = -Y(Y(:,i) < 0, i) * 1/20; % Apply the
condition for negative y values
80
Z(Y(:,i) < -10, i) = 0.5;
81
end
82
end
83
84
[E,N] = makeMeshFromGrid(X,Y,Z);
85
86
87
mzWriteMesh(MeshName ,E,N,'NON-UTM')
88
89
end
The function for extracting the output from the .dsf1 file:
1
function Out = NetDrift(file)
2
3
NETaddAssembly('DHI.Generic.MikeZero.DFS.dll');
4
import DHI.Generic.MikeZero.DFS.*;
5
6
% Load file
7
%dfs1 = DfsFileFactory.Dfs1FileOpen('C:\Users\jfril\OneDrive -
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet\Thesis/HLMorphWaveCli.mfm -
Result Files/SM-Coastline.dfs1 ');
8
9
dfs1 = DfsFileFactory.Dfs1FileOpen(file);
Development and use of optimisation algorithm for calculating stable bays as part of coastal protection
57
==PAGE:64==
10
11
DsfEle = 9;
12
13
% Extract some information of the first item.
14
itemname
= char(dfs1.ItemInfo.Item(DsfEle -1).Name);
15
itemunit
= char(dfs1.ItemInfo.Item(DsfEle -1).Quantity.
UnitAbbreviation);
16
numtimesteps = dfs1.FileInfo.TimeAxis.NumberOfTimeSteps;
17
18
%clf, shg
19
20
data = single(dfs1.ReadItemTimeStep(DsfEle,numtimesteps -1).Data)
';
21
22
Out = sum(data.^2);
23
24
dfs1.Close();
25
end
Development and use of optimisation algorithm for calculating stable bays as part of coastal protection
58
==PAGE:65==
Development and use of optimisation algorithm for calculating stable bays as part of coastal protection
59
==PAGE:66==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Koppels Allé, Building 404
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.construct.dtu.dk
