==PAGE:1==
Master’s Programme in Security and Cloud Computing (SECCLO)
Zero Knowledge Rollups in Trusted
Execution Environments
Gianni Canavero
Master’s Thesis
2025
==PAGE:2==
© 2025
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons
“Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 International” license.
==PAGE:3==
Author Gianni Canavero
Title Zero Knowledge Rollups in Trusted Execution Environments
Degree programme Security and Cloud Computing (SECCLO)
Major Security and Cloud Computing
Supervisor Prof. Gaurav Choudhary & Dr. Lachlan Gunn
Advisor Prof. Gaurav Choudhary
Date 31 July 2025
Number of pages 55+8
Language English
Abstract
The scalability limitations of blockchains such as Bitcoin and Ethereum have led to the
development of off-chain solutions known as Rollups where transactions are processed
in batches off-chain while relying on the underlying blockchain only for storage or for
final verification. This created two families of rollups: Optimistic rollups, which offer
low costs but require several days to confirm the transactions and Zero Knowledge
(ZK) rollups, which are confirmed within minutes at the expense of higher costs.
In this work, we propose a Zero Knowledge prover for rollups that leverages Trusted
Execution Environments (TEEs) to implement a dual-proof mechanism that allows for
a flexible trade-off between cost and confirmation time. ZK-proofs ensure correctness
and transaction validity, while TEE remote attestation proofs provide a lightweight
and cost-effective alternative for validation of the batches. By adjusting the frequency
at which each type of proof is verified, our system is able to reduce operational
costs up to 65% compared to conventional ZK-rollups, while maintaining finality of
transactions within a few minutes. We implemented our system using Winterfell, a
high-performance STARK prover, and Intel TDX Trusted Execution Environment.
The result of this thesis is a practical rollup prover proof-of-concept that balances
efficiency, cost, and security, laying the groundwork for new blockchain solutions.
Keywords Blockchain, ZK-STARK, ZK-rollup, TPM , TEE , Intel TDX
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This thesis culminates my SECCLO journey, which in two years gifted me with
incredible experiences, worldwide friendships and a lot of fun.
I would like to express my gratitude to everyone who helped me in this fantastic
adventure: starting with the course coordinators Eija, Emma and Tuomas from Aalto
University, to all the professors from Aalto and DTU, and finally my classmates who
formed the so-called SECCLOnd family.
I am deeply grateful to my supervisors, Gaurav and Lachlan, whose help was
crucial in the writing of this thesis.
A final and special grazie goes to whom from a distance kept me virtually as close
as possible, my family, my beloved girlfriend Sabrina, and my Bachelors friends and
roommates that took every flight back to Italy as a chance to meet me again.
Amsterdam, 31 July 2025
Gianni Canavero
4
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Abstract
3
Preface
4
Contents
5
Abbreviations and glossary
7
1
Introduction
8
1.1
Scope of this thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.2
Structure of the thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2
Background
11
2.1
The need for improvement of Layer 1 technologies
. . . . . . . . .
11
2.2
Legacy blockchain developments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2.1
Ethereum optimization via Optimistic and Zero-Knowledge
rollups
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3
Zero-Knowledge rollups proofs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.4
Trusted Execution Environment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3
Problem statement
18
3.1
System model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.2
Threat model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.3
System goals
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.4
Design challenges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4
Primitives
22
4.1
Merkle trees . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.2
Rescue Prime hash function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.3
Algebraic Intermediate Representation (AIR)
. . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.4
ZK-proof security . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.5
Remote attestation quote
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5
Implementation
24
5.1
System architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.2
Rollup prover . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.2.1
ZK-proofs with Winterfell . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.2.2
Proof options . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.2.3
Prover steps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.2.4
Rescue hash . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.2.5
Prover function and trace registers table . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.3
AIR’s constraints . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.4
Normal operation example . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.5
Adversarial scenarios and mitigations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5
==PAGE:6==
5.5.1
Malicious sequencer or prover operation . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.5.2
Incorrect proof submission . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
6
Results
33
6.1
Security analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
6.1.1
Undisclosed TEE vulnerability case . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
6.2
Performance evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
6.2.1
Test hardware . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
6.2.2
Measured performances
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
6.2.3
On-chain costs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
6.3
Comparison with counterparts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
7
Discussion
40
7.1
Findings and limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
7.2
Security comparison with TEERollup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
7.3
Further research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
8
Related works
42
8.1
Blockchain architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
8.1.1
Proof of work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
8.1.2
Proof of stake . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
8.2
Approaches to solve blockchain scalability issues . . . . . . . . . .
44
8.2.1
Bitcoin Lightning network via payment channels . . . . . .
45
8.2.2
The Algorand blockchain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
9
Conclusions
48
A Appendix
56
A.1
Algebraic Intermediate Representation - fragment . . . . . . . . . .
56
A.2
Prover fragment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
6
==PAGE:7==
Abbreviations and glossary
Abbreviations
AMD SEV
AMD Secure Encrypted Virtualization (type of TEE)
Intel SGX
Intel Software Guard Extensions (type of TEE)
Intel TDX
Intel Trusted Domain Extensions (type of TEE)
L1
Layer 1, the blockchain
L2
Layer 2, solutions running outside the blockchain but leveraging it
SNARK
Succinct Non-interactive ARgument of Knowledge (type of ZK proof) 2.3
STARK
Scalable Transparent ARgument of Knowledge (type of ZK proof) 2.3
TEE
Trusted Execution Environment
TPS
transactions per second
ZK
Zero Knowledge, usually refers to systems that use proofs of statements
that do not reveal any underlying information of the statement itself
Glossary
Finality time
In blockchain refers to a time span after which a transaction is
considered permanently confirmed on the network.
Redeemability
Ability to redeem funds from a rollup system by making them
available on the main chain.
Rollup
A L2 scaling solution that bundle multiple transactions in batches.
Only a single summarized proof or state update is submitted
to L1, reducing costs and processing time 2.2.1.
Smart Contract
A program executed on the blockchain for each block generation.
It allows for trusted execution of scripts, usually to enforce rules,
hence the ’contract’ in the name.
7
==PAGE:8==
1
Introduction
In the last decade, cryptocurrencies have grew in popularity and adoption, showing
the criticality that lies in the scalability of this instrument. For the first trimester
of 2025, the average processed transactions per second (TPS) by the second-largest
cryptocurrency by volume, Ethereum, is 14 transactions [14]. For the same network,
the theoretical maximum is 114 TPS [15]. When compared to credit card systems
such as Visa, which in August 2017 claimed to process 65000 TPS [71], the scalability
issue is clearly notable.
The nature of the blockchain complicates scalability, each block is usually created
with a specific time span and its size is limited. For Ethereum, the creation timespan
is of 12 seconds and the block size is limited to 30 million gas (below 2MB on
average) [65] [8]. Thus, those factors limit solutions implemented into the blockchain.
To overcome this issue, an important effort has been put into developing new solutions
built on top of the blockchain. These solutions are called Layer 2 solutions (L2),
because they run outside the blockchain but still leverage it by submitting information
in the blocks in a compressed way.
The most prominent of these solutions are zero-knowledge (ZK) rollups. ZK-
rollups networks process transactions off-chain, group them in batches, and produce a
single cryptographic proof for the whole batch, which is then stored and verified by the
blockchain. Rollup integrity is guaranteed thanks to publicly available data published
to the blockchain, whereas efficiency and scalability are achieved by compressing the
transactions data into a single cryptographic hash.
As of March 2025, there are currently 60 Rollups networks deployed, of which 16
are using zero-knowledge proving [69][17].
Zk-rollups are able to speed up the processing of transactions, but introduce new
costs for the verification of the proofs. These costs vary based on the number of
transactions in the batch processed and range around 760,000 to 996,000 Ethereum’s
gas [18][40][2], which correspond to 50 to 66 USD at the 1st of January 2025.
Another approach to processing batches of transactions are the Optimistic Rollups,
which do not produce any cryptographic proof but rely on user verification and
introduce a dispute period for reporting invalid transactions. Thus, the finality of the
transactions is achieved at the end of this period, which is usually of 7 days.
Wen et al. [72] propose Tee-rollup, a system that uses a network of Trusted
Execution Environments (TEE) to balance on-chain cost and finality, by submitting
the shorter and less expensive to-verify remote attestation proof to the blockchain
instead of a ZK-proof.
A TEE is a secure and isolated hardware within a CPU; it has been developed to
ensure that sensitive data and computations executed on it remain protected even in a
compromised system. Additionally, TEEs can provide cryptographic proof of their
initial state by remote attestation.
Unfortunately, TEEs are subjected to continuous improvements to address emerging
threats. Vulnerabilities affecting TEEs have been found in the past, which have been
subsequently been patched [12][53][63]. To address this issue, Tee-rollup uses a
network of different TEEs which have to agree on the blockchain state after each batch
==PAGE:9==
of transactions and submit each one its own proof of execution.
In this work, we follow the approach of Tee-rollup by investigating the feasibility
of using a single TEE which produces both a ZK-proof and its remote attestation
proof. This dual-proof strategy optimizes on-chain verification: the system primarily
uses the cheaper TEE proofs for most operations to reduce costs, while the ZK proofs
serve as a less frequent but robust check on the TEE’s integrity. Transactions reach
finality when a ZK-proof is verified. by adjusting the frequency of proof verification,
the system can be adapted to suit different applications: prioritizing faster finality at
the expense of higher fees, or lower fees with slower finality.
Additionally, working with a single TEE vendor eases the complexity of the
maintenance of a network of different TEEs, each one requiring ad-hoc application
development, while maintaining a robust and cheap form of integrity verification.
1.1
Scope of this thesis
This thesis aims to investigate the integration of ZK-rollups and TEEs to analyze its
feasibility and the benefits it can provide for the blockchain’s Layer 2 development.
Our main contribution are the following:
• Design and implementation of a ZK-STARK proving system within a TEE
• Comprehensive performances evaluation of the solution and comparison with
other systems
• Comparison of costs and analysis of feasibility of this kind of systems
1.2
Structure of the thesis
The thesis is structured in the following way:
Section 2 introduces the background necessary to understand ZK-rollups, covering
their underlying principles, the motivation for their development, and the techni-
cal challenges they aim to solve. Additionally, in this section, Trusted Execution
Environments are introduced.
Section 3 presents the problem statement, including the system architecture, the
threat model, and the primary security and performance objectives.
Section 4 details the cryptographic primitives that are used in this work.
Section 5 describe the implementation of the proposed system, explaining the
various components and how they interact to form a secure and efficient ZK-rollup.
Section 6 provides a performance evaluation based on benchmarks across different
trusted and non-trusted hardware configurations, assessing the system’s efficiency and
costs.
Section 7 reflects on the design trade-offs of the proposed architecture, discussing
its trust assumptions and practical deployment considerations, while also identifying
potential related future research.
Section 8 surveys related works from the literature aimed at optimizing blockchain
solutions.
9
==PAGE:10==
Finally, Section 9 concludes the thesis by summarizing key contributions and
outlining potential directions for future research.
10
==PAGE:11==
2
Background
In this section, we revisit the reasons that brought Layer 2 technologies, focusing on
ZK-rollups. Then we analyze and compare different TEEs.
2.1
The need for improvement of Layer 1 technologies
With the growth of blockchain technologies’ usage, scalability has become the main
concern in their development. Bitcoin’s block size is limited to 1MB and the proof
of work difficulty is computed to have a new block every 10 minutes. This restricts
transactions on Bitcoin to a maximum of 7 per second. For Ethereum, the second largest
blockchain by market cap, the theoretic limit is of 119 transactions per second [15].
Increasing block sizes is not a straightforward solution, because it would mean larger
storage space and longer propagation times.
Block creation intervals add also an intrinsic latency to any service developed on
the blockchain. For Bitcoin, the latency is of 10 minutes and for Ethereum it is of 12
seconds. Also, given the way the Bitcoin’s consensus mechanism works, to be sure
that a transaction is acknowledged from the majority of nodes, multiple blocks must
be created after the one containing the transaction to have guarantees that there will
not be bifurcations in the blockchain.
Another scalability issue introduced by the low transaction throughput, is the high
competition for getting transactions acknowledged from the blockchain, which leads to
high fees for each transaction. In days of high traffic, Ethereum reached an outstanding
fee of 196$ per transaction during May 2021 NFT surge, and Bitcoin surpassed 90$
fees in April 2024, close to the period of its halving1 [3] [33].
All these matters are summarized by the Vitalik’s Trilemma published in 2021 [11],
namely the impossibility of reaching all together security, scalability, and decentral-
ization. Its definitions for the 3 properties are the following:
• Decentralization: a node can be run with as little as 𝑂(𝑐) resources, like, for
example, a PC or a cheap server
• Scalability: the network must be able to process 𝑂(𝑛) ≫𝑂(𝑐) transactions
• Security: the system is secure against malicious actors with up to 𝑂(𝑛) resources
Where 𝑐might represent the resources available at a single node scale, whereas 𝑛
refers to a whole network scale. Following these definitions, we can classify Bitcoin
as a network which when was born attained both security and decentralization but
always lacked in scalability given the fact that 7 transactions per second is way smaller
than the capabilities of a single node in term of computation.
1Bitcoin halving is an event that happens every 210 000 blocks (about every 4 years) where the
block reward received by nodes is cut in half. This introduces scarcity in the currency in order to control
inflation. In 2009, for each block, the reward was of 50 Bitcoins, whereas currently it is of 3.125.
11
==PAGE:12==
Furthermore, given the recent developments in hardware designed for Bitcoin
mining2, the network is lacking also in decentralization as the costs to run a profitable
node rose to 5,000 USD per mined Bitcoin [34][37]. In contrast, Ethereum with its
transition to proof of stake was able to keep the cost of running a node uncorrelated
to the used hardware, but still it has entry requirements for a validator node which
cannot be defined on the scale of the cost of a personal computer. In fact, to run a
validator node 32 Ethereum are required, which at the start of 2025 meant 105 000
USD. On the other hand, its reliance on staking and not hardware make it much easier
for an individual to enter a liquidity pool where their staked sum can be agglomerated
with the one of other individuals.
Several studies have validated Vitalik’s trilemma in existing networks, such as
Werth et al. review of blockchain platforms by the triad of scalability, security, and
decentralization [73], and Nakai et al. mathematical formulation of the trilemma [54].
Therefore, research in the field has moved forward looking for solutions which
can mitigate the issues of one property of the triad while leveraging the other two.
The biggest developments have been built on top of the most famous blockchains, like
Bitcoin and Ethereum, making the most of their dominant market position. These
advancements are the already introduced Layer 2 solutions, which are built outside
the blockchain but in close contact with it. On the other hand, new blockchains were
built with the trilemma in mind, profiting by the lack of constraints imposed by older
platform architectures.
2.2
Legacy blockchain developments
Bitcoin and Ethereum together cover around 70% of the total cryptocurrencies market
cap. Their initial design choices and constraints undermine the development of a Layer
1 solution adopted by more recent blockchain like Algorand3. Therefore, development
is focused on solutions built on top of the existing blockchain, called Layer 2 solutions.
In specific, Bitcoin main Layer 2 technology is the Bitcoin lightning network3, whereas
Ethereum’s one is rollups.
2.2.1
Ethereum optimization via Optimistic and Zero-Knowledge rollups
Rollup networks interface with Ethereum users after they have secured funds in a
rollup contract on Layer 1. These networks accept several transactions from various
users and process them off-chain. As its name suggests, transactions are rolled up in
batches and committed to the main chain [16]. Merkle trees are used to merge various
transactions in a summarized form and then submit them 4.
There are currently 63 deployed rollup networks, which can be either Optimistic
or Zero Knowledge rollups [69].
Optimistic rollups are the simpler implementation as they assume that the sub-
mission to L1 is correct until a fraud is proven. This means that a fraudulent rollup
2Bitcoin mining is the colloquial term for the creation of a valid bitcoin block; this includes verifying
transactions and the generation of the proof of work.
3Algorand’s solution and the Bitcoin lightning network are discussed in Section 8.
12
==PAGE:13==
Figure 1: Overview of rollups architecture, in green components that are only present
in zero-knowledge implementations, in blue components that are only present in
optimistic ones.
network may publish to the main chain and rollback systems are needed to correct
the state of the chain. As a consequence, the transactions are not final until the time
window to present a fraud proof has expired. To verify the correct functioning of
the networks, third parties verifiers or validators can reproduce the work of them and
compare their results with the state root published to the blockchain. Any user of the
network can be a validator and earn a reward in case it is able to prove a fraud. Two
of the main optimistic rollups networks are Optimism [57] and Arbitrum [41] which
implement different fraud-proof mechanisms and have respectively a time window of
3 days and 12 hours, and 6 days and 8 hours [68].
Zero-knowledge rollups instead include a cryptographic proof to every batch
of transactions that is submitted to Layer 1 for verification. The proof is of the
zero-knowledge type, meaning that any user can verify the statement with only the
publicly available information, and therefore without having access to transaction data
and intermediate computations. The proving process adds more complexity to these
networks which require more computational resources compared to the optimistic
rollups, on the other hand, ZK-rollups offer an immediate finality of the transactions
and better privacy and security.
Figure 1 shows the different architectures of optimistic and ZK-rollups, whereas
Table 1 compares the most performing networks plus the Ethereum blockchain based
on transactions per second.
13
==PAGE:14==
Table 1: Perfomances of rollups networks [69], day average are referred to the period
from March 6 to April 5 2025
Rollup network
Rollup type
Maximum TPS
Day average TPS
Ethereum
-
22.69
13.73
Base
Optimistic
154.52
84.57
Starknet
ZK
127.50
7.03
ZKsync Era
ZK
62.07
0.95
Arbitrum One
Optimistic
58.97
24.40
Taiko Alethia4
Optimistic
57.89
28.44
Linea4
ZK
55.69
1.23
Soneium4
Optimistic
30.53
15.49
During the first trimester of 2025, the average TPS provided by the rollups networks
in total has been around 200 transactions per second. The great difference between
maximum and day average TPS is due to demand fluctuations and rollups adoption, and
a theoretical maximum TPS is estimated to range from 2000 to 4000 transactions [7].
2.3
Zero-Knowledge rollups proofs
In this work we focus on zero-knowledge rollups given their advantage over optimistic
rollups in finality of transactions and security.
Zk-rollups implementations are dividedin two types ofZK proofs: Zero-Knowledge
Succinct Non-interactive Arguments of Knowledge (SNARK) and Zero-Knowledge
Scalable Transparent Arguments of Knowledge (STARK) [60].
Originally, zero knowledge proofs involved an iterative process where the prover
Peggy had to answer several random queries to the verifier Victor in order to prove her
knowledge. As an example, in the Schnorr protocol 1, each answer for a lying Peggy
has a probability of 1
2 of succeeding. Therefore, Victor has to query 𝑛time Peggy to
have a good assurance that she is not lying, reducing the probability of succeeding if
lying to 1
2𝑛[64].
The iterative approach is not convenient given the high amount of communication
needed each time we want to verify a proof, thus new approaches are used in blockchain.
• SNARK is based on Common Reference String [10] which uses a true random
string generated in a setup phase and shared among all the participants. The
setup phase is the critical part of SNARK proofs because it requires all the
participants to be trusted. On the other hand, SNARK provides constant size
4L2beat in future will not classify these 3 networks as fully functional due to lacks in the proof system
for Taiko Alethia and Linea and critically low (<5) number of external validators for Soneium. [68]
14
==PAGE:15==
𝑝: 𝑟= 𝑟𝑛𝑑(Z𝑞)
𝑝→𝑣: 𝑡= 𝑔𝑟
𝑣→𝑝: 𝑐= 𝑟𝑛𝑑(Z𝑞)
𝑝→𝑣: 𝑠= 𝑟+ 𝑐· 𝑥
𝑣accepts if 𝑔𝑠= 𝑡· 𝑦𝑐
1: Schnorr protocol prover p wants to prove knowledge of 𝑥= 𝑙𝑜𝑔𝑔𝑦
to the verifier v. Here 𝑦= 𝑔𝑥∈G, where G is a group of prime order
𝑞.
proofs and uses a proof generation algorithm with linear complexity. Both Groth
et al. implementation and Parno et al. one [30][59], assume the hardness of
Discrete Logarithm Problem (DLP) which is not post-quantum secure due to
Shor’s algorithm.
• STARK is based on the Fiat-Shamir heuristic [26], where Peggy uses a cryp-
tographic hash of her commitments as a substitute for Victor’s queries. It is
possible to simulate multiple queries by using the hash of the previous results
as an input. Victor can verify the proof by repeating the process knowing the
queries generated by Peggy. STARK and the Fiat-Shamir heuristic are based on
the cryptographic assumption that the hash function provides a random-oracle
model, and post-quantum security is also assumed in STARK’s multi-party
computation (MPC) and Incrementally Verifiable Computation (IVC) imple-
mentations [4][36][70].
Currently, 11 ZK-rollup networks are using SNARK proof, whereas 5 are using
STARK ones.
Table 2 summarizes the characteristics of SNARK and STARK.
Table 2: SNARK and STARK comparison, 𝑐is a constant.
ZK-SNARK [30][59]
ZK-STARK [4]
Prover complexity
𝑂(𝑛· log(𝑛))
𝑂(𝑛· (log(𝑛))𝑐)
Verifier complexity
𝑂(1)
𝑂((log(𝑛))𝑐)
Proof size
𝑂(1)
𝑂((log(𝑛))𝑐)
Trusted setup
Required
No
Quantum secure
No
Assumed
Cryptographic assumptions
(EC)DLP, (B)DHP
Cryptographic hash function
15
==PAGE:16==
2.4
Trusted Execution Environment
In recent years, Trusted Execution Environments have become an increasingly common
feature of CPUs. They guarantee confidentiality and integrity to the code and data
executed within these environments. This is usually achieved by a layer of isolation
based on hardware solutions (e.g. hardware-based memory encryption) which protects
the executed code from an untrusted OS or hypervisor. Examples of TEEs are ARM
TrustZone, Intel SGX, Intel TDX, and AMD SEV [20].
Following recent developments in TEEs, they are now classified into two categories:
application-level and VM-level TEEs.
• Application-level TEEs allow a developer to define multiple secure enclaves
that live isolated between themselves and from other applications executed on
the machine. Each of these enclaves is running is own minimal OS. Usually an
application leverages an enclave only for specific computations; therefore the
app is divided into two parts, one running on the host OS and one running in the
enclave. Two examples of application-level TEEs are Intel SGX using the enclave
paradigm and ARM TrustZone that implements a Secure World separated from
the Normal World. In specific, Intel SGX enclaves are implemented thanks
to 18 dedicated instructions in the ISA and 128Mib/256Mib of Enclave Page
Cache (EPC), a part of memory accessible only to them [51].
• VM-level TEEs are focused on isolating a virtual machine from its hypervisor
and the host operating system. This usually means that the applications running
in the TEE have access to a complete trusted OS, such as Ubuntu 24.04 or
Windows Server 2022. Therefore, already existing applications can be run
inside this type of TEE without any substantial modification. Isolation from the
hypervisor is obtained by encrypting the entire memory dedicated to the VM
with hardware sealed keys. VM-level TEEs like Intel TDX, came after their
counterpart at application-level, and therefore are built on lessons learned from
the previous ones.
In our project, to guarantee fast proving times, we identified CPU performance as
the key requirement for the system, due to the proof generation operations. However,
adequate memory capacity is important for efficient in-memory access to the state
Merkle tree, minimizing latency during proof generation.
We chose Intel TDX as the base for the project, given its good balance in CPU and
memory performance. Intel TDX offers better throughput than the other contenders
(tested on nginx) and comparable CPU performance to Intel SGX (on PyTorch and
TensorFlow) [20]. Additionally, during memory-intensive workloads, it offers an
outstanding throughput, surpassing even native performance (tested on Redis).
TEEs are already been used as platforms for various blockchain project, such as
confidential smart contracts[47], TEE and blockchain-backed data sharing system [75]
and Teechain, a payment network based on Bitcoin blockchain [49], within many
others.
Most of these systems run on a singular TEE platform. The 3 cited above are all
running on Intel SGX [58]. This is due to the lack of standardized interfaces and
16
==PAGE:17==
development environments for the different TEEs, which complicates the development
and maintenance of systems built on multiple platforms.
It is important to note that recent research has exposed TEEs vulnerabilities,
namely based on side-channel attacks [50][46] and unprotected I/O [45].
Specifically, a notable example of risks generated from these vulnerabilities is
the xAPIC vulnerability discovered by Intel for Intel SGX, which required a Trusted
Computing Base recovery. This has affected a TEE-based smart contract platform
which executed its decryption of messages inside SGX enclaves [35]. This flaw allowed
researchers from sgx.fail to decrypt messages embedded in publicly available smart
contracts [63]. Following the disclosure, the same researchers actively collaborated in
developing mitigations to reduce the risk of exploitation.
These incidents highlight that TEE-based systems must be designed with the pos-
sibility of temporary TEE compromise in mind, and incorporate fallback mechanisms.
17
==PAGE:18==
3
Problem statement
In this section, we describe the objectives of this work by establishing the system
model and the threat model, and listing the design challenges.
The primary objective of this thesis is to build a proof-of-concept ZK-rollup prover,
which guarantees integrity of the system, even in the event of a compromised TEE,
and generally a fast finality of transactions.
System integrity: Correctness and consistency of state transitions is guaranteed
even under adversarial conditions.
Fast finality: Transactions are processed and finalized on the blockchain within a
time frame of a few hours, aligning with the latency typically observed in other
ZK-rollup systems.
3.1
System model
We consider a network consisting of 𝑛sequencers, each responsible for ingesting
transactions, aggregating them into batches, and forwarding them to a pool of 𝑚
provers. These sequencers operate outside a TEE and may show either honest or
malicious behavior.
Provers operate within Intel TDX environments and are responsible for generating
both a remote attestation quote of the integrity of their initial state, and a zero-
knowledge proof (ZK-proof) verifying the correctness of their transaction analysis.
Both proofs are submitted to the blockchain and verified according to a smart contract.
Additional smart contracts are implemented to force redeemability of tokens in
case of malicious or unresponsive sequencers and provers.
3.2
Threat model
Following Teerollup work [72], we also adopt a threat model which considers the TEE
as temporary compromisable. On the contrary, previous works, such as the already
cited Teechain [49] or others like L2chain [76] and POSE [27] consider TEE-specific
vulnerabilities outside the scope of their work.
In this work, we acknowledge that TEEs may be vulnerable to specific attacks or
exploits at certain points in time, due to undiscovered flaws or threats. However, such
vulnerabilities are eventually identified and patched, restoring the TEE’s integrity. This
approach follows the recommendation from Georgia Institute of Technology’s sgx.fail
team: "We recommend that developers have a TCB recovery plan in place, and should
implement mitigations against SGX compromise as a development priority" [63].
The following is the list of cases considered for the threat model. Since the
sequencer and the prover operate independently, the scenarios can appear in any
combination.
• Honest sequencer: No deviation from the protocol.
18
==PAGE:19==
• Malicious sequencer: Transactions assigned to these sequencers can be censored
or delayed. Communication with provers is compromised. Availability of the
service is not guaranteed.
• Uncompromised prover’s TEE: No deviation from the protocol.
• Compromised prover’s TEE: Again, transactions can be censored or delayed.
Therefore, availability of the service cannot be guaranteed. In addition, the
prover can fake its remote attestation quote as it has control of the TEE’s private
key. Whereas we expect the ZK-proof to be truthful. Thus, a compromised
prover can submit fraudulent transactions only if the TEE’s quote is verified.
Figure 2: System diagram with potential adversaries. (Icons credits Dewi Sari)
Main chain assumptions. The smart contracts executed on the main chain enforce
the finality of the transactions. The smart contracts collects a group of batches of
transactions and verifies the remote attestation proof for the majority of the batch. For
a randomly selected minority of the batches, the ZK-proof is verified. Once all proofs
are correctly evaluated, the batches are submitted to the main chain. Once on the main
chain, finality is provided as every participant can verify the validity of the publicly
available data.
3.3
System goals
Users can transfer cryptocurrencies or tokens 𝑇from the main chain to the rollup
system by smart contract. This creates an account for each user called 𝑐𝑎𝑑𝑑𝑟. Tokens
can be transferred between users of the rollup network by communicating with a
19
==PAGE:20==
sequencer and specifying the sender and recipient address, the transaction amount and
signing the message with the sender’s private key.
The sequencer creates batches of transactions and submits them to the prover. The
prover verifies each transaction by recursively analyzing the history of the transactions
of the sender until the base case, which is the deposit via smart contract. This process
can be sped up by pre-processing the current state of the system every time a group of
batches is finalized, in our benchmark we assume a system of this kind is implemented.
The prover submits a TEE quote and a ZK-proof to the underlying blockchain
through a smart contract. This contract chooses randomly one of the two proofs to
verify. Finality of a batch of transactions is reached when the blockchain verifies its
ZK-proof, or the ZK-proof of one of the following batches.
To withdraw tokens from the rollup to the blockchain, the user can send a request
to the sequencer or enforce it through a smart contract in case the sequencer turns out
to be malicious.
The system goal is to guarantee the following specifications:
• Correctness: the main chain integrity and accuracy of the state transition are
guaranteed.
• Redeemability: tokens can be redeem by any client in any adversary condition.
• Fast finality: a transaction must be confirmed within a time frame comparable
with other ZK-rollup systems (≃1 hour).
3.4
Design challenges
A compromise of either the prover or the sequencer, is the reason for the main
challenges. Specifically to our system’s goals, a compromise of the former can harm
both correctness and redeemability, whereas a compromise of the latter can harm only
redeemability.
• Compromised correctness: Recalling Section 3.2 a compromised TEE can
forge remote attestation proofs. To mitigate this, we leverage our double-proofing
system. In a group of batches of transactions, the smart contract will approve
the majority of the batches by verifying its remote attestation proof to lower
on-chain costs. Whereas the ZK-proof is verified for the remaining batches.
Both proofs are submitted to L1, and the smart contract chooses with a random
weighted binary function which proof it should verify. This makes it harder for
a malicious actor to know when it should generate a forged proof or a real one.
The smart contract stores the batches into the blockchain only after all the proofs
in the group have been verified.
The probability of the random function to choose which proof to verify is directly
correlated to the success of an attack, this will be explored in depth in Section 6.
Both proofs are stored with transaction data, this enables the network to restore
integrity in the case of a successful attack.
20
==PAGE:21==
• Compromised redeemability: Redeemability can be compromised by an attack
to both the prover and the sequencer. Following various implementations [68],
we introduce a smart contract based challenge mechanism to enforce the redeem
of tokens. In case an user’s transaction is not processed, the user can submit it
to the smart contract, which triggers the challenge. If the funds are not released
in the allotted time, the smart contract unlocks all the funds for withdrawal on
the main chain. This deterrent ensures the redeemability of the funds, even if
the sequencer or the prover go offline.
21
==PAGE:22==
4
Primitives
4.1
Merkle trees
Figure 3: An example of state Merkle tree.
A Merkle tree is a binary-perfect tree where each node is created by hashing the
concatenation of its children’s hashes [56]. As shown in Figure 3, Merkle trees are
used to store the state of the rollup by storing in each leaf the hash of an account’s
data (e.g., balance, nonce, storage root). The main property of the Merkle tree is that
the root hash represents the integrity of the entire state: any change to a leaf results in
a change to the root. This enables efficient and confidential storage of state transitions,
rollup protocols once a transition is verified can simply store the root hash to prove
the correctness of updates without publishing the entire state.
4.2
Rescue Prime hash function
Rescue Prime is a cryptographic hash function specifically designed to be effi-
cient within arithmetic circuits, particularly in the context of zero-knowledge proof
systems [67]. Rescue Prime is built for transparent proof systems, which do not
require trusted setups and have predictable performance when executed in ZK-friendly
environments.
A complete hashing is obtained by applying 𝑁Rescue-XLIX rounds, which consist
of the following cryptographic tools: an S-box layer, a linear layer with MDS matrix,
constants injection, an inverse S-box later, a second liner layer and a final injection of
constants.
In our work, we use Rescue Prime over a 64-bit prime field to produce a 256-bit
output. We use 6 registers of 128 bit each to store the computation.
The hashing process begins with an initialization round, where the data to be
hashed is put in the first 4 registers. 7 rounds of the Rescue-XLIX permutation follow
the initialization round. This results in a total of 8 rounds, chosen to have a power
22
==PAGE:23==
of 2 which simplifies the AIR design. The considered output consists of the first two
registers.
4.3
Algebraic Intermediate Representation (AIR)
Algebraic Intermediate Representation (AIR) is a formalism used in STARK imple-
mentations to encode the integrity of the execution as a system of algebraic constraints
over a finite field. Rather than verifying a computation by repeating it, AIR abstracts
the computation into a trace table of field elements that represents the evolution of the
program state over time. Verification is then reduced to checking whether each step of
this trace satisfies a well-defined set of transition and boundary constraints.
4.4
ZK-proof security
Modern STARK implementations, like Winterfell which is used in our work, expose
three security metrics: conjectured security, list decoding soundness, and unique
decoding soundness.
• Conjectured security: it is an extrapolation from the first conjecture of the
DEEP-FRI analysis [5]. It is an estimation of the necessary work in bits to forge
a proof by brute force. It reflects the expected resistance against real-world
adversaries.
• List decoding soundness: a rigorous lower bound that holds even when the
committed polynomial lies within a broad radius where multiple valid low-degree
polynomials could be close to the codeword [32].
• Unique decoding soundness: a strict formal bound that applies when there is
at most one codeword within the decoding radius, leading to tighter soundness
guarantees under ideal conditions [32].
4.5
Remote attestation quote
A remote attestation quote is a cryptographic statement that allows a remote verifier to
confirm that a software is running in a trusted execution environment (TEE).
The quote is created by a measurement hash representing the state of the guest
operating system and loaded components at boot time. Intel TDX provides a quote,
which is signed with its hardware-protected private key. The quote can be verified
using Intel’s public key infrastructure and by comparing the reported measurement
against a known or expected hash. This ensures that the environment was correctly
initialized and remains in a trusted state at the time of attestation.
23
==PAGE:24==
5
Implementation
5.1
System architecture
Figure 4: High level architecture of the system.
The system architecture is divided into 4 components: the sequencers, the provers,
the off-chain storage for data availability, and the smart contracts.
Here we will briefly give an high-level explanation of the components:
The sequencers:
Sequencers collect, order, and group in batches, user submitted transactions. Each
sequencer has a publicly available endpoint where the rollup users can request funds
transfers. Sequencers are connected also to the Ethereum bridge contract, which
handles deposits and withdrawals between the Layer 1 blockchain and the rollup.
The provers:
Provers verify the correctness of the list of transactions and generate both a ZK-
proof and a remote attestation quote. Both proofs are sent to the proof verifier smart
contract and to the off-chain data availability storage, but only the latter stores them
long-term.
The off-chain storage for data availability:
To ensure full access to the whole transaction data history, we use off-chain storage,
following an approach similar to that of ZK-Porter and Polygon Avail [39][43]. The
prover stores the transactions list and both ZK-proof and remote attestation quote
in the off-chain storage, whereas only a hash of these elements is submitted to the
blockchain.
24
==PAGE:25==
Smart contracts: The smart contracts are publicly accessible similarly to the
sequencers, the following is a list of their main functionality:
• Ethereum bridge contract: this contract permits to the user to trade Ethereums
for rollup tokens or vice versa.
Deposit: When called, the client deposits Ethereums into the contract. A
sequencer is invoked to schedule a transaction of an equivalent amount of token
with an unspecified sender, similar to what is done with coin minting, and as
recipient the user account in the rollup. In case of the first deposit, the account is
created and then the smart contracts saves a key-value pair mapping Ethereum
account address with rollup account address.
Redeem: a transaction burns the amount of redeemed tokens by setting an
unspecified recipient.
The smart contract sends the requested amount of
Ethereums to the mapped Layer 1 account.
• Proof verifier Smart contract: this contracts verifies one of the submitted
proofs and stores the new state into the blockchain.
A random weighted function chooses which proof to be verified. In the case of
a remote attestation proof, the contract verifies the signature using a preloaded
Intel public key. Otherwise, for the ZK-proof, the verify script defined in the
Winterfell’s AIR is used. In both cases, an hash of the proof is submitted to the
blockchain, whereas the proof is stored off-chain.
• Challenge Smart contract: this contract allows the user to force transactions
in case of malicious sequencer or prover.
The contract starts a challenge with the responsible sequencer or prover. A time
limit 𝜏is imposed to process the transactions otherwise the contract will ban
the sequencer/prover from the rollup and settle the transactions by itself. The
contract can reconstruct the state and force the transaction thanks to access to
off-chain data availability storage.
5.2
Rollup prover
The prover uses the Winterfell STARK library to generate the new state and prove the
correctness of its computation over a Merkle tree of 215 accounts.
5.2.1
ZK-proofs with Winterfell
We chose to use a STARK proof system because it does not require a trusted setup and
offers post-quantum security guarantees. For implementation, we selected Winterfell,
a STARK prover developed by Facebook, due to its performance, developer-friendly
design, and the fact that it is an actively maintained project [23].
To add Zero-Knowledge capabilities, we use a modified Winterfell version that
adds randomization of the execution trace and salted Merkle trees for the commitment
scheme following the work of Ulrich Habock and Al Kindi [42].
25
==PAGE:26==
5.2.2
Proof options
The proof options are as follows:
• Number of queries (NQ): 40
• Blowup factor (BF): 8
• Grinding factor (GF): 16
• FRI folding factor (FFF): 8
• FRI remainder maximum degree (FRMD): 31
• Field extension (FE): None
• Hasher (Hash): Blake3 256bit
These parameters were selected based on Winterfell’s recommended defaults,
aiming to achieve a balance between proof size and generation time [24]. We increased
the number of queries from the recommended 28 to 40 to reach better security without
increasing proof generation time. The generated proof has a conjectured security level
of 127 bits.
5.2.3
Prover steps
To optimize FFT-based computations during proof generation, we adopt a power-of-two
number of steps for the proof computation. Hashing is the base operation of the state
update. It is done to generate the updated leaf of the Merkle tree based on the account’s
new balance and nonce and then to update all the ancestor of the leaf in the tree.
Therefore, hash computation should be done in a power-of-two number of steps.
We model our hash implementation after Winterfell’s use of the Rescue hash
function. Each hash is computed over 7 steps, with an additional step required for
register setup, resulting in a total of 8 steps per hash operation. Consequently, the full
base hashing operation spans 23 steps in our trace. The hash computation is explained
more in-depth in Section 5.2.4.
Furthermore, we restrict each batch to a power-of-two number of transactions. In
our experimentation, we use batch sizes of 27 = 128, 210 = 1024, and 214 = 16384
transactions.
Finally, the height of the state Merkle tree must follow the form 2𝑥−1, allowing
for a total of 2𝑥hash computations for each transaction, counting the updated leaf
hash (1) plus the tree traversal (2𝑥−1 hashes). In our tests, we use a tree height of
15, which supports up to 215 = 32,768 user accounts. For production deployments,
however, we recommend using larger tree heights, such as 31 or 63, making it highly
improbable for typical applications to exceed it.
In our benchmarked computations, the total amount of steps for 1024 transactions
corresponds to:
26
==PAGE:27==
Total steps = (hash setup + hash compute) · (leaf + tree traversal) · n transactions
(2a)
= (1 + 7) · (1 + 15) · 210 = 217 = 131072 steps
(2b)
5.2.4
Rescue hash
The Rescue Prime hash function is implemented with a state width of 6 field elements
(6 · 128 = 768 bits, 96 bytes), of which four elements are allocated for the rate and
two for the capacity. The output digest consists of the first two field elements (32
bytes). Each permutation of the hash function uses seven rounds, providing a 128-bit
security level with a 40% security margin. This choice differs from the Rescue Prime
specification, which recommends 8 rounds to achieve a 50% margin, but following
Winterfell’s approach, we greatly simplify the Algebraic Intermediate Representations
(AIR) by using one less step [67] [25].
5.2.5
Prover function and trace registers table
The shown code is an high-level pseudocode outlining the steps performed by the
prover.
accounts is the array containing all the accounts information, such as address,
nonce, and balance. stateTree is the Merkle state tree, where each leaf node represents
the hash of an individual account’s data. Finally, transactions is the list containing the
transactions’ sum, recipient, and sender.
In Table 3 are shown the various registers used in constructing the proof’s trace.
Table 3: Trace Composition Overview
Index Range
Description
[0,1]
A’s balance, nonce
[2,3]
B’s balance, nonce
[4]
Transaction value
[5..11]
𝐴′
ℎ𝑎𝑠ℎpermutation values
[11..17]
𝐵′
ℎ𝑎𝑠ℎpermutation values
[17]
Flag left-right A
[18]
Flag left-right B
[19]
Flag init transaction
The flags are used to indicate if the currently considered 𝐴′ and 𝐵′ are left or right
child and to flag each first step of a new transaction computation.
Setup steps can do multiple operations in a single step because they modify the
same trace registry only once.
27
==PAGE:28==
Prover
1: procedure buildTrace(self, accounts, stateTree, transactions)
2:
for each 𝑡𝑥∈transactions do
// Setup new A,B hash in 1 step
3:
Set 𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑡_𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛_ 𝑓𝑙𝑎𝑔
4:
Load 𝐴𝑏𝑎𝑙𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒, 𝐴𝑛𝑜𝑛𝑐𝑒into registers [0, 1]
5:
Load 𝐵𝑏𝑎𝑙𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒, 𝐵𝑛𝑜𝑛𝑐𝑒into registers [2, 3]
6:
Update 𝐴𝑏𝑎𝑙𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒, 𝐴𝑛𝑜𝑛𝑐𝑒and 𝐵𝑏𝑎𝑙𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒, 𝐵𝑛𝑜𝑛𝑐𝑒
7:
Store 𝐴𝑏𝑎𝑙𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒, 𝐴𝑛𝑜𝑛𝑐𝑒in registers [5, 6]
8:
Store 𝐵𝑏𝑎𝑙𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒, 𝐵𝑛𝑜𝑛𝑐𝑒in registers [11, 12]
9:
10:
Unset 𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑡_𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛_ 𝑓𝑙𝑎𝑔
11:
compute 7 Rescue Hash rounds
⊲7 steps
12:
Copy computed 𝐴′
ℎ𝑎𝑠ℎin stateTree.leaves[𝐴𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑥]
13:
Copy computed 𝐵′
ℎ𝑎𝑠ℎin stateTree.leaves[𝐵𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑥]
14:
15:
for 𝑖= 0;𝑖<stateTree.Height;𝑖+ + do
// Setup interior nodes hashes in 1 step
16:
if 𝐴′ is left child then
17:
Load 𝐴′
ℎ𝑎𝑠ℎin registers [5, 6]
18:
Load sibling hash into registers [7, 8]
19:
else
20:
Load 𝐴′
ℎ𝑎𝑠ℎin registers [7, 8]
21:
Load sibling hash into registers [5, 6]
22:
end if
23:
if 𝐵′ is left child then
24:
Load 𝐵′
ℎ𝑎𝑠ℎin registers [11, 12]
25:
Load sibling hash into registers [13, 14]
26:
else
27:
Load 𝐵′
ℎ𝑎𝑠ℎin registers [13, 14]
28:
Load sibling hash into registers [11, 12]
29:
end if
30:
31:
compute 7 Rescue Hash rounds
⊲7 steps
32:
// Part of next iteration’s setup interior nodes step
33:
Store 𝑝𝑎𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑡(𝐴′
𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑥) into 𝐴′
𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑥
34:
Store 𝑝𝑎𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑡(𝐵′
𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑥) into 𝐵′
𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑥
35:
Copy computed 𝐴′
ℎ𝑎𝑠ℎin stateTree.leaves[𝐴′
𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑥]
36:
Copy computed 𝐵′
ℎ𝑎𝑠ℎin stateTree.leaves[𝐵′
𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑥]
37:
38:
end for
39:
end for
40: end procedure
28
==PAGE:29==
5.3
AIR’s constraints
Here we list the set of transition constraints implemented in the AIR to ensure the
correctness ofthe state transitions throughoutthe trace. There is a totalof17 constraints.
Rescue permutation. We defined 12 constraints of degree 5, one for each Rescue
hash register ([5..11] and [11..17]). These are enforced in the 7 out of 8 rounds of
the Rescue permutation. A mask identifies the current step. In the following formula,
𝑥𝑖is each hash permutation register before the Rescue hash step computation, whereas
𝑥𝑖+1 is the same register after the step. The degree of the constraint is determined by
the S-box, which maps each input 𝑥to its fifth power.
𝑚𝑎𝑠𝑘= [0, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1]
(3a)
𝑚𝑎𝑠𝑘[𝑖] ∗(𝑚𝑑𝑠(𝑠𝑏𝑜𝑥(𝑥𝑖)) −𝑠𝑏𝑜𝑥(𝑚𝑑𝑠−1(𝑥𝑖+1))) = 0
(3b)
Rescue initialization. The initial round of the 8 hash computation rounds in the
Merkle tree traversal is used to initialize the hash during Merkle tree reconstruction.
To ensure that the previously computed hash is correctly placed for the computation of
the new parent hash and that the 2 capacity registers are reset to 0. We implemented
12 constraints based on the binary flag indicating whether the node is a left ( 𝑓𝑙𝑎𝑔= 0)
or right ( 𝑓𝑙𝑎𝑔= 1) child in the tree structure. These are not separated constraints
from the previous, as they are applied in different steps of the computation and are of
a lower degree.
!𝑚𝑎𝑠𝑘[𝑖] · 𝑓𝑙𝑎𝑔· (𝑥[0]𝑖−𝑥[0]𝑖+1) = 0
(4a)
!𝑚𝑎𝑠𝑘[𝑖] · 𝑓𝑙𝑎𝑔· (𝑥[1]𝑖−𝑥[1]𝑖+1) = 0
(4b)
!𝑚𝑎𝑠𝑘[𝑖] · 𝑓𝑙𝑎𝑔· (𝑥[0]𝑖−𝑥[2]𝑖+1) = 0
(4c)
!𝑚𝑎𝑠𝑘[𝑖] · 𝑓𝑙𝑎𝑔· (𝑥[1]𝑖−𝑥[3]𝑖+1) = 0
(4d)
!𝑚𝑎𝑠𝑘[𝑖] · 𝑥[4]𝑖+1 = 0
(4e)
!𝑚𝑎𝑠𝑘[𝑖] · 𝑥[5]𝑖+1 = 0
(4f)
Balance updates. To guarantee the integrity of balance updates, two additional
constraints of degree 1 are enforced, verifying that the sender’s and receiver’s balances
are updated in accordance with the transaction value. In the following, 𝐴represents
the sender’s balance and 𝐵the recipient’s one.
𝐴𝑖+1 −(𝐴𝑖−𝑡) = 0
(5a)
𝐵𝑖+1 −(𝐵𝑖+ 𝑡) = 0
(5b)
Binary flags. Finally, 3 more constraints of degree 2 are enforced to guarentee
that the flags are binary:
𝑥· 𝑥−𝑥= 0
(6)
29
==PAGE:30==
5.4
Normal operation example
Figure 5: Normal operations diagrams.
• Deposit. To exchange Ethereum for the rollup Token, the user interacts with
the Ethereum bridge smart contract by sending Ethereum tokens. The contract
generates a key-value pair between the user’s Ethereum address and the newly
generated rollup address.
The rollup uses the same key algorithm as the main chain (ECDSA for Ethereum)
in order to allow the user to use the same private key for both Layer 1 and Layer
2 following what is done by other rollups systems [21].
Once the deposit is confirmed, the contract sends to the sequencer pool a request
for a transaction of the converted amount of Tokens from an unspecified sender
to the newly created user account. This transaction is grouped in a batch with
other transactions and forwarded to a prover.
The prover checks the correctness of the batch and generates the two proofs.
Both proofs and the transaction data are stored in an off-chain data availability
storage, whereas proofs and their hashes are sent to the Proof verifier smart
contract along with the new state hash (the root hash of the merkle tree). The
contract picks randomly which proof to be verified. For the ZK-proof, a verifier
function derived from the system’s AIR is used. For remote attestation, the
signature is verified against a set of trusted public keys provided by the hardware
vendor.
In the case of successful verification, the hashes of the proof and the new state
are stored on the blockchain.
30
==PAGE:31==
• Transactions. Transactions are directly initiated by communicating with the
sequencer pool, through a proxy component that forwards the request to a
specific sequencer instance. The sender provides the source and destination
addresses, along with the transaction amount. Once the request reaches the
sequencer, the operation is the same as the deposit.
• Withdrawal. Similarly, withdrawing funds does not require direct interaction
with the Ethereum bridge smart contract, since rollup addresses are already
registered within the system. In this case, the transaction is initiated with an
unspecified sender and the recipient is the user’s Ethereum address on the main
chain. The flow follows the one of a standard rollup transaction. Upon successful
proof verification, the Proof Verifier smart contract releases the corresponding
Ethereum amount to the user.
5.5
Adversarial scenarios and mitigations
5.5.1
Malicious sequencer or prover operation
In the case that one or more transactions get dropped or delayed, the user can force their
execution through the Challenge Smart Contract by providing the same information
sent to the sequencer.
The contract verifies the correctness of the report by querying the sequencer
proxy’s log and the off-chain data availability storage for the submitted transactions.
If the proxy’s logs file contains the transaction but the data availability storage does
not, the transaction has not been processed yet. The user has to provide collateral for
the cost of this operation, which is released if the request is honest.
On a valid claim, the contract initiates a challenge with the sequencer or prover,
which has to process the transaction within a time span 𝜏. 𝜏is a multiple of the block
time of Ethereum, and it is set to several hours.
In the case the transaction is settled within 𝜏the rollup proceed as normal.
Otherwise, the contract bans the malicious sequencer or prover from the system and
proceeds with forwarding the transaction again to the sequencers pool. In case of a
withdrawal operation, the contract directly executes it. The final outcome is recorded
on-chain for transparency.
To prevent malicious operation, a collateral for sequencers and provers can be
introduced, which is slashed in case of misbehavior.
5.5.2
Incorrect proof submission
If a prover submits a proof that fails verification, the corresponding batch is immediately
rejected and returned to the sequencer pool for reprocessing, ensuring the soundness
of the system is preserved.
The prover responsible for the invalid submission is permanently removed from
the rollup, and this action is publicly recorded on-chain.
31
==PAGE:32==
Again, to discourage such behavior, the system may require provers to post collateral
when registering to the rollup system. This collateral would be returned when the
prover de-registers from the rollup only if it has not manifested malicious behavior.
In case of incorrect ZK-proof submission, the contract will temporarily enter into
a safety mode, which until external intervention will only verify ZK-proofs.
32
==PAGE:33==
6
Results
This section demonstrates how oursystem meets the security, integrity and performance
requirements defined in Section 3.
6.1
Security analysis
We analyze security under the assumption that TEE vulnerabilities capable of forging
or replaying quotes are publicly disclosed before an exploit based on them is found.
Once such a disclosure appears, we expect the maintainers of the protocol to rapidly
update the verifier’s weighted functions to temporarily exclude all the TEE quotes
verification, using only the ZK-proofs.
This assumption makes the security of the system comparable to the one of other
ZK-rollup networks already deployed on Ethereum.
To ensure comprehensiveness, Section 6.1.1 covers the case of an attack using an
undisclosed vulnerability for Intel TDX.
Following L2beat’s risk analysis, we focus on state validation, data availability,
sequencer failure, and proposer failure [68].
State validation. State validation is achieved by ZK STARK proofs, which are
verified by the on-chain verifier smart contract for every group of batches. This would
be rated secure in L2beat’s ranking.
Data availability. State diffs containing a list of transactions, new state, ZK-proof,
and TEE quotes are stored off-chain, but their commitment hash is submitted to Layer
1. Additionally, the new state root is stored on-chain. This follows the approach used
by Starknet’s Volition mode [66], which is deemed secured following the classification.
Sequencer failure or malice. In case of an unavailable or malicious sequencer,
which censors transactions, users can enqueue via a Layer 1 smart contract their
transactions. This fallback, used by several other rollups systems, is rated as Medium
security by L2Beat. It could be improved to High by executing the entire fallback
transaction on L1, with higher processing costs.
Prover failure or malice. In case of an unavailable or malicious prover, users
can enqueue via a Layer 1 smart contract their transactions. In our system there
is no prioritized prover, therefore anyone can self-propose as a prover and process
the transactions that were dropped from the failed proposer. This is deemed secure
following L2beat classification.
Alignment with design goals. Relative to the objectives stated in Section 3, system
integrity is guaranteed by the state validation mechanism based on ZK-proof, whereas
fast availability is discussed in Section 6.2.
33
==PAGE:34==
For availability in general, when considering the threat model cases of a compro-
mised sequencer and/or prover the implemented smart contracts ensure the availability
of the system. An additional tool that we introduced to prevent malicious behav-
ior is requiring sequencers and provers to provide collateral and slash it in case of
unavailability or censorship.
6.1.1
Undisclosed TEE vulnerability case
The worst-case scenario for our system occurs when a vulnerability in the TEE is
known only to the attacker and has not yet been publicly disclosed. In this scenario,
the attacker may be able to forge or replay TEE quotes, but cannot generate invalid
ZK-proofs that pass verification due to their cryptographic soundness.
Let 𝑇𝑇be a truthful TEE quote, whereas 𝑇𝐹is a forged one. For ZK-proof we
define 𝑍𝑉for a valid proof and 𝑍𝐼for an invalid one. The possible pairs of proofs are
the following:
Table 4: Proof pair cases
Proof pair
Explanation
𝑇𝑇, 𝑍𝑉
Normal operation, both proofs are valid. Always accepted.
𝑇𝑇, 𝑍𝐼
Computational error/bug. Only TEE quote is accepted.
𝑇𝐹, 𝑍𝑉
Forged quote generation but correct processing. Only ZK-proof passes.
𝑇𝐹, 𝑍𝐼
Malicious quote generation and execution. Only TEE quote passes.
The pair (𝑇𝐹, 𝑍𝑉) represents an attack targeting system availability and is auto-
matically mitigated: the verifier contract bans the prover and resubmits the batch of
transactions to the pool of sequencers.
In contrast, an attacker targeting state integrity is interested in submitting only the
(𝑇𝑇, 𝑍𝑉) and (𝑇𝐹, 𝑍𝐼) pairs.
Thanks to the weighted randomized selection mechanism for proof verification, the
attacker cannot predict whether the secure ZK-proof or the forgeable TEE quote will
be verified. This introduces a probability of discovering the attack, which is linearly
correlated to the weight assigned to the ZK-proof verification.
Let 𝑃(𝑀) be the probability that the attacker submits the malicious pair (𝑇𝐹, 𝑍𝐼)
and 𝑃(𝑍) the weight assigned to the ZK-proof verification, we have:
Probability of discovering the attack = 𝑃(𝑀∩𝑍) = 𝑃(𝑀) · 𝑃(𝑍)
(7a)
Probability of success of the attack =
(7b)
= (𝑃(𝑀) · (1 −𝑃(𝑍))) · ((1 −𝑃(𝑀)) · 𝑃(𝑍)) ·
𝑖≥0
∏︂
𝑖
(1 −𝑃(𝑀)) (7c)
The probability of a successful attack depends on the attacker being able to submit
at least one forged TEE quote that is selected for verification, at least one valid ZK-proof
that passes verification, and an indefinite number of otherwise valid proof submissions.
34
==PAGE:35==
Furthermore, we can use a geometric distribution to estimate the expected number
of batches processed before the malicious batch is caught via ZK-proof verification.
Geo ∼𝑃(𝑀∩𝑍)
𝑓𝑥(𝑥) = 𝑃(𝑀∩𝑍) · (1 −𝑃(𝑀∩𝑍))𝑥−1
(8a)
𝐸[𝑋] =
1
𝑃(𝑀∩𝑍)
(8b)
This provides a probabilistic estimate of the number of malicious batches that may
be submitted before the attack is detected. It is important to note that once a malicious
batch is identified, the verifier’s smart contract switches to verifying only ZK-proofs,
preventing submission of other compromised batches until manual intervention occurs.
Furthermore, through external intervention, the rollup state can be restored to a
correct version by retrieving the full transaction history from the data availability
storage, identifying the malicious batches, and replaying only the valid transactions.
6.2
Performance evaluation
This section presents a performance evaluation of the proposed Prover based on
benchmarking.
6.2.1
Test hardware
The prover has been tested on two different hardware configurations. The listed costs
correspond to instances in europe-west4 region, as of June 2025.
Untrusted hardware: Google Cloud N2D instance with 4vCPU AMD Epyc Milan
and 16GB of RAM. OS: Debian 12.
Cost: 0.18604 USD per hour
Trusted hardware: Google Cloud C3 instance with 4vCPU Intel Xeon Sapphire
Rapids with Intel TDX enabled and 16 GB of RAM. OS: Ubuntu 24.04 LTS
Confidential VM.
Cost: 0.21169 USD per hour
6.2.2
Measured performances
To evaluate the efficiency of proof generation under different configurations, we
measured execution time and proof size across varying batch sizes and security
levels. Specifically, we compared the performance of producing a ZK-proof of 99 bit
conjectured security and 127 bit in both untrusted and trusted execution environments.
The results are summarized in Table 5.
The 99-bit conjectured security proofs are constructed using 28 queries, producing
a list decoding regime of 55 bits and a unique decoding regime of 39 bits. In contrast,
35
==PAGE:36==
Table 5: Average execution time in ms.
Transactions
per batch
Untrusted
99bit (ms)
Trusted
99bit(ms)
Proof Size
(KB)
Untrusted
127bit (ms)
Trusted
127bit (ms)
Proof Size
(KB)
128
1195.9
1258.8
55.4
1248.0
1322.1
76.4
1024
10 268.5
10 834.7
76.4
10 750.1
11 297.6
103.3
16384
182 102.3
192 530.8
107.2
187 360.8
198 867.1
145.2
Time increase:
5.5%
5.7%
the 127-bit security proofs require 40 queries, resulting in a list decoding regime of 69
bits and a unique decoding regime of 49 bits.
As expected, increasing the security level from 99 bits to 127 bits introduces some
computational overhead. However, this overhead is modest: the average execution
time increases by at most 5.03% which occurs for 128 transactions, whereas it slightly
decreases with larger batches (4.27% for 1024 and 3.29% for 16384).
While proof size increases substantially at 127-bit security, this has no impact on
on-chain costs due to the use of off-chain storage. Note that because we use a 256-bit
hash in the Fiat–Shamir transform, the protocol cannot offer more than 128 bits of
conjectured security as this is the ceiling set by hash collision probability.
Regarding hardware performance, the comparison between untrusted and trusted
environments shows that for both security levels, the proving time increases by less
than 6%, which remains well within the bounds required to meet our fast finality
objectives.
6.2.3
On-chain costs
We collected on-chain costs from different sources to estimate the total cost to operate
our system. These costs are shown in Table 6.
Gas is the unit used by Ethereum for computational cost. For better comprehension,
we converted the gas to Ethereum based on the average gas cost of 2024 (19.73 ·
10−9) [22]. USD conversion is based on Ethereum price at the 1st of January 2025
opening (3335.91 USD).
Table 6: List of prices in Gas, Ethereum and US dollars for different operations.
Operation
Gas
Ethereum
USD
at 01/01/2025
SNARK proof verification (Plonk) [2]
760 000
0.014 99
50.02
STARK proof verification (Boojum) [2]
996 000
0.019 65
65.55
TEE Quote verification [72]
156 263
0.003 08
10.28
Hash storage on-chain [74]
20 000
0.000 39
1.32
36
==PAGE:37==
SNARK proof verification is cheaper than STARK due to its linear complexity,
whereas verifying a TEE quote is almost 5 times cheaper than verifying a SNARK
proof. Finally, storing a hash on the blockchain is a minor cost, which is important
for our use case because we want to store two hashes for the two committed proofs
instead of a single one.
Table 7 presents the average costs of proving a batch of transaction within a group
of 10 batches. Each row corresponds to a different weight configuration for the proof
verification function. Notably, our approach achieves a 64 % cost reduction while
maintaining an average finality time slightly above one minute.
Table 7: List of prices for 10 batches of 1,024 transactions, varying the verifier
function weights. Costs are in USD at 01/01/2025 for on-chain fees and June 2025 for
hardware fees.
ZK-Proofs
TEE quotes
Cost per
batch
Cost per
transaction
Cost
reduction
Finality
100 %
0 %
68.18$
0.067$
0
%
13.56s
90 %
10 %
62.66$
0.061$
8.11%
15.06s
80 %
20 %
57.13$
0.056$
16.21%
16.95s
60 %
40 %
46.08$
0.045$
32.42%
22.60s
40 %
60 %
35.02$
0.034$
48.63%
33.89s
20 %
80 %
23.97$
0.023$
64.84%
67.79s
10 %
90 %
18.44$
0.018$
72.95%
135.57s
To explain how this is calculated, we focus on the 20 % ZK-proof configuration.
In a group of 10 batches:
• 2 will be proven with ZK-proof, costing 65.55 USD each.
• The remaining 8 cost 10.28 USD each due to the verification of the TEE Quote.
• Additionally, each batch incurs a storage cost of 2.64 USD to store the two
ZK-proofs.
The finality is reached every time we verify a ZK-proof. On average, one ZK-proof
is verified every 5 batches. Therefore, we compute the average finality time by
multiplying the ZK-proof generation time by 5. In addition, we consider also a 20 %
overhead for communication between components.
Equations 9a and 9b show a calculation example for obtaining the batch cost and
average finality of the 20% ZK-proof configuration.
37
==PAGE:38==
2 · 65.55 + 8 · 10.28 + 2 · 10 · 1.32 = 239.74 USD
(Batch cost)
(9a)
11297.6 · 5 · 1.20 = 67785.6 ms
(Average finality time)
(9b)
6.3
Comparison with counterparts
Table 8 compares our solution with different weight configurations with ZKsync Era
and Polygon zkEVM. We chose these two rollup systems because they are fully
open-source, making them well-documented and easier to analyze based on available
research. Additionally, they represent opposite ends of the rollup design spectrum:
ZKsync Era employs a GPU-based prover, enabling massive parallelization and
high throughput. While it is efficient in terms of CPU and RAM usage (only a third,
and a tenth, respectively, compared to our configuration), it relies on batching 3,000
to 5,000 transactions to amortize costs. This leads to longer finality times while
maintaining a low hardware cost. In our comparison, we use the suggested hardware
configuration based on 32 vCPUs, 128 GB RAM, and one NVIDIA L4 GPU.
Polygon zkEVM By contrast, Polygon zkEVM is designed for low-latency finality.
It submits very small batches (typically less than 50 transactions), achieving quicker
confirmations. However, this approach introduces higher fees per transaction unless
ZK-proofs are aggregated and compressed efficiently. Considered hardware: 96 vCPUs
and 768 GBs of RAM.
Table 8: Our solution compared to ZKsync Era and Polygon zkEVM rollups.
Rollup
Gas per
batch
Gas per
transaction
Hardware cost
per hour
Cost per
transaction
Finality
ZKsync Era [18] [69]
816 275
209
1.87 $
0.014$
1
h
Polygon zkEVM [18] [69]
59 434
2201
6.023$
0.149$
21
m
80-20 solution
868 053
847.71
6.668$
0.112$
119
s
60-40 solution
700 105
683.69
6.668$
0.090$
158
s
40-60 solution
532 158
519.69
6.668$
0.069$
4
m
20-80 solution
364 210
355.67
6.668$
0.048$
8
m
To compare our solution with other rollup systems, we have to account for hardware
costs in the evaluation and estimate its performance at the scale of a real system.
Hardware costs: To simulate a real-world scenario, we adopt the hardware config-
uration recommended for Polygon’s zkEVM: 96 vCPUs and 768 GBs of RAM. This
decision is supported by our experimental results using Intel TDX, which showed no
significant increase in CPU or memory usage when running in a trusted environment,
38
==PAGE:39==
as confirmed by tools like top and Valgrind’s Massif.
Scale: When compared to the two reference systems, our batch size of 1024
transactions appears well balanced. However, our proof of concept is tested against
a state size holding up to 32 768 accounts, significantly below the scale expected
in realistic deployments, which may involve billions of accounts. Scaling the state
introduces increased memory demands, which are manageable given our high-memory
configuration.
Fortunately, when considering the proving time, the growth is logarithmic when
varying the account number thanks to the usage of Merkle trees. The finality time and
the costs per transaction hypothesized in Table 8 are based on a conservative state size
of 263 accounts, resulting in an expected proving time over 4 times longer than in our
experiments. Additionally, we include a 100 % overhead assumption to account for
slowdowns associated with managing this substantially larger state.
The main reason Polygon zkEVM takes longer to reach finality is its use of proof
aggregation [44]. Rather than submitting a ZK-proof for each individual batch, it waits
to accumulate multiple ZK-proofs and then aggregates them into a single compressed
proof, which lowers the storage prices and the verification cost per transaction. This
process improves cost efficiency but introduces latency, as the system must wait for
enough batches to justify aggregation. Proof aggregation can be done after the prover
processes each batch and usually involves recursively combining multiple proofs
into a single one. A similar system can be integrated into our rollup between the
STARK proofs to further reduce costs in deployments where a longer finality time is
acceptable.
39
==PAGE:40==
7
Discussion
7.1
Findings and limitations
Our work introduces a novel approach to rollups which leverages a double-proof
system based on ZK-rollup and TEE quotes. Unlike purely optimistic or ZK-based
rollups, our system offers configurable finality, allowing developers to adapt security
and cost parameters to match different application profiles. This positions our design
as a flexible alternative in the field of L2 scaling solutions.
The measured performances are in line with already deployed rollups and we
believe that this model should be furthermore researched due to its peculiarities.
On the other hand, our experimentation is focused exclusively on the prover, which
is the core part of the rollup but this limitation obliges us to estimate the performances
of a full production-ready setup. In addition, the prototype was tested with a limited
number of users due to hardware constraints. This might hide performance bottlenecks
caused by scaling up the system.
7.2
Security comparison with TEERollup
To the best of our knowledge, the work by Wen et al. is the only other implementation
of rollups using Trusted Execution Environments [72]. Their system, TEERollup,
considers the risk of TEE vulnerabilities and mitigates it by using a group of TEEs
from different vendors. Consensus among this group is required to approve a batch of
transactions, and each TEE quote is submitted to a Data Availability storage. Whereas
the on-chain contract verifies only a single quote.
This design allows TEERollup to continue operating correctly even if a vulnerability
is exploited on a single TEE, as consensus enables detection of forged quotes and
exclusion of the compromised prover.
In contrast, our proposed system would, in this scenario, be temporarily vulnerable
to a malicious prover, potentially allowing a limited amount of fraudulent batches
before detection. However, once the vulnerability is identified, our architecture can
fully switch to relying on ZK-proofs, providing continued security at the cost of higher
fees. TEERollup, on the other hand, may become non-functional if multiple TEEs
across vendors are compromised simultaneously.
The core difference between the two systems lies in their underlying security
assumptions:
• Our work assumes that vulnerabilities are disclosed to the public before an
attacker can exploit them.
• TEERollup assumes that TEEs from different vendors are not compromised at
the same time.
In line with recommendations from the sgx.fail research group, our design incor-
porates a more comprehensive fallback mechanism in the event of a TEE compromise
when compared to TEERollup [63]. However, their model relies on a simpler and
more realistic security assumption.
40
==PAGE:41==
7.3
Further research
Our work is based on a proof of concept, which, as previously noted, brings various
limitations for its evaluation. A primary direction in research based on this architecture
is clearly integrating it into a complete test environment. This involves developing
sequencers, smart contracts for the Ethereum VM, and a deployment hardware capable
of supporting real-world scale. A thorough benchmark in this context can measure
communication overhead between system components and bottlenecks introduced by
high memory consumption, which in this work we could only estimate. Measuring
these factors is crucial to assess the rollup’s scalability and its suitability for use in
production ready environments.
A second direction is the investigation of proof compression techniques adapted to
our double-layer security model. This approach aims to reduce ZK-proof verification
costs at the expense of longer finality, but preserving the same security guarantees.
Such flexibility could make the system adaptable to a even wider range of deployment
contexts, from applications requiring low latency to those prioritizing cost efficiency.
41
==PAGE:42==
8
Related works
In this section, we review related work aimed at improving blockchain performance,
beginning withan in-depthanalysis ofthe originalblockchain system andits limitations:
Bitcoin.
8.1
Blockchain architecture
The blockchain is a sequence of blocks holding a list of transactions, simulating a
public ledger. The first block contains his own hash, a timestamp, and a nonce and the
transaction list. The following blocks are chained sequently together by having each
one of them store the hash of the previous block as shown in Figure 6.
Blockchain’s nature is decentralized. Each transaction is reviewed and committed
by one of a series of independent nodes.
Figure 6: A generic blockchain example.
The first blockchain was Bitcoin; it was created in 2009 by Satoshi Nakamoto [55]
which also maintained the first node. Since then, every new node of the network has
to sync with the already present ones by copying from them the entire blockchain,
thus acquiring the current state.
Once the state is synced, the node can start receiving transactions from clients.
Transactions on a blockchain contain portions of other previous transactions as a input.
These inputs are used to prove that the sender has the funds for the new transaction.
The node will analyze the inputs by checking that their sum is greater than the output
(the transaction value) and that the current state of the blockchain reflects the inputs.
Once the node has verified a series of transactions, to publish a new block, the node
has to show a proof of work to other nodes. In the case that more than the majority of
all the nodes agree on the transactions and on the truthfulness of the proof of work
of the submitted block, it will become part of the blockchain and all the nodes will
update their current state with the new transactions. When a new block is accepted
as part of the blockchain, the node that submitted it is rewarded with the differences
between the outputs and inputs of each transaction. This difference is usually called
transaction fee. The node collects his fee by inserting a transaction to himself inside
the block. Clearly, a node will prioritize transactions with a greater transaction fee;
therefore these fees rise in phases of high demands.
In addition to the fees, the submitter node also receives a reward in Bitcoin. This
is the way that the blockchain uses to mint new money. It is also used to solve the
42
==PAGE:43==
verification of transactions; if we think of it as a recursive problem each transaction
recursively is based on previous transactions until we reach the base case, which is the
minted coins received by a node as a reward.
8.1.1
Proof of work
Digital transactions were already existing before the introduction of Bitcoin. The
process, similarly to the previously explained one, is based on a digital signature of an
hash of a previous transaction. The previous transaction certify that the sender has the
funds and the signature verifies the identity of the sender. The issue for these systems
was the impossibility of blocking double spending; an user could sign a hash of a
previous transaction twice and pay two different users with the same funds. Without
publicly announcing the transaction, the two users would not have noticed the missing
funds. For this reason, a common solution is to introduce a trusted central authority,
which verifies all transactions. On the other hand, a central authority introduces censor
risk, citing Nakamoto: "The problem with this solution is that the fate of the entire
money system depends on the company running the mint, with every transaction
having to go through them, just like a bank". Nakamoto solved this issue by distributing
the work of the central authority to each node and introducing the proof of work as
part of the consensus mechanism.
As explained before, each node analyzes the transactions independently and then
submits his block. It is clear that all the nodes compete to receive the reward therefore
a strong distributed consensus method is needed. Consensus in blockchain is based
on CPU power; each node before submitting a block has to randomly generate a
nonce and hash the block until the first 𝑧bits of the hash are all zeroes. 𝑧is chosen
to make the average block generation time of 10 minutes, based on statistics from
previously created blocks. Nakamoto proved that the probability of generating a correct
block drops exponentially when 𝑧increases. Proof of work reduces the possibility of
simultaneous block creation but does not eliminate it, thus, in that case, a majority
consensus is used. Consider a bifurcation in the chain where two new different blocks
(A and B) are announced simultaneously like shown in Figure 7, a portion of the
nodes will build the next block on top of A, whereas another portion will consider B.
The branch considered as the true state of the blockchain is the one adopted by the
majority of nodes, therefore honest nodes as soon as they get to know the status of the
other nodes will move to the most adopted one.
This measures oblige an attacker node, which wants to revert a previous transaction
to rebuild all the subsequent blocks to the one that contains the transaction. Thanks to
the proof of work, the attacker has to control over the 50% of the CPU power of the
whole network to be able to do that.
Proof of work is indeed inefficient. All nodes have to put in the same amount of
work to create a new block independently, but only the work of one of these nodes
will be used.
43
==PAGE:44==
Figure 7: An example of blockchain bifurcation.
8.1.2
Proof of stake
Ethereum, in 2022, moved from proof of work to a new consensus mechanism called
proof of stake (PoS) [29]. Each node still verifies the transactions, but there is no more
need to hash with different nonces until a specific hash is obtained. To submit the block,
each node stakes a sum of Ethereums, which acts as collateral for the submission. The
consensus is reached by a distributed random computation weighted by stake using the
RANDAO algorithm [62]. RANDAO randomly chooses a submitter, then other nodes
verify its submitted block. If the block is correct it is inserted into the blockchain,
whereas if a malicious intent is found, the submitter loses is staked sum and a new
random selection is done.
Analysis of the transition show an outstanding decrease of 99.98% in electricity
consumption [38], which has always been a concern in the field given the fact that at
its peak, Ethereum alone consumed more TWh than the nation of Philippines. On
the other hand, the transition meant also an increase in fees per transaction of the
10%. This is because the reward for submitting a block to the blockchain has been
removed because the nodes had to use way less resources, and therefore the whole
node’s income is now composed of just transaction fees.
8.2
Approaches to solve blockchain scalability issues
In this section, we look into two approaches to mitigate blockchain scalability issues.
The first one, similarly to ZK-rollups used by Ethereum, is a Layer 2 solution based
on Bitcoin. The second one is an entirely new blockchain created with scale and
44
==PAGE:45==
decentralization as its objective.
8.2.1
Bitcoin Lightning network via payment channels
Payment channels are means of direct communication between two users based on a
multisignature address stored on the Bitcoin blockchain [28][52]. The multisignature
address requires both users to sign with their keys and allows them to deposit funds that
can then be exchanged off-chain by direct communication in the channel. Transactions
of value up to the committed funds can then be done privately without interacting
with the main chain. Each transaction is signed by both parties, and, in case one user
becomes unresponsive or turns out to be malicious, the other party can commit the
last agreed transaction to the blockchain and close the channel by publishing the final
balance to the Layer 1. Figure 8 shows a typical life-cycle for a payment channel
between two users.
Each new transaction also produces a pair of revocation keys for the previous
transaction. In case an user commits any transaction previous to the last one to the
blockchain, the other user can publish their revocation key within a time window and
receive all the funds committed to the payment channel [61]. The channel participants
choose the time window, and in case of honest users, they can both agree on the
channel closure and move the funds immediately. The revocation key is an elliptic
curve key derived from a base revocation key generated during the opening of the
channel and a commitment key related to the new transaction. The per-transaction
relation implicates that each user has to store all the revocation keys related to a channel
in order to revoke any possible commitment from the counterpart.
Block1
Block2
1. Channel Initialization
Block3
Block4
Block5
Block6
   Main Blockchain (Layer1)
2. Off-chain transactions
transaction 1
transaction 2
transaction 3
...
4. Submission of the Final State
and Channel Termination
3. Dispute Resolution
Actor1
Actor2
Figure 8: Typical life-cycle of a payment channel.
To avoid the initialization of 𝑛·(𝑛−1)
2
payment channels for 𝑛users, the Lightning
network implements a routing protocol between users. Users communicate with their
adjacent peers, announcing which other users they can reach, similarly to OSPF and
BGP network protocols. The sender computes the path to the recipient, minimizing
the fees and sends his transaction to one of his adjacent peers, which will forward it to
45
==PAGE:46==
the next one. To ensure no user interrupts the chain, intercepting the funds, a hashed
timelock contract (HTLC) is implemented.
HTLC is based on a secret 𝑠computed by the recipient of the payment, which
sends ℎ= 𝐻𝐴𝑆𝐻(𝑠) to the sender. The hash ℎis propagated through all the nodes
involved in the transaction, and each node sets a time window for the next node to
reveal the secret 𝑠. Once the transaction reaches the recipient, to claim the funds, it has
to reveal the secret 𝑠to the previous node within the time window. Each intermediate
node can then claim the fees by revealing the secret to the previous node, failing to do
so will result in paying the whole transaction with its own funds because they cannot
claim the inbound transaction. Whereas for the sender, the recipient can force it by
escalating to the Layer 1 chain. To avoid race conditions in the revealing of the secret,
each node sets a smaller time window to the next one, ensuring a big enough time
span between the reception of the secret and the propagation to the previous nodes.
Privacy is preserved on the network by leveraging an onion encryption protocol.
The Bitcoin Lightning network decouples greatly from the main chain and its
procedures. Its privacy features limit the analysis of network performance as statistics
like transactions per second cannot be determined. Available metrics show that at the
time of the writing there are more than 50 thousands nodes and around 40 thousands
channels open [1]. Its intrinsic complexity limits lightning network’s adoption. Every
node is required to be always online to respond within the different time windows
explained before. Routing is complex and often based on outdated data, the sender
node manages the whole routing process in contrast to what happens in routers, where
each node manages the routing of the packages it receives. Routing is also complicated
by the fact that each node has to own more than the value of the transaction to guarantee
that the recipient receives the funds also if a node does not propagate the secret. This
means that an up-to-date information of each peer is required for an optimal routing
otherwise rerouting will be frequent [31]. Bitcoin limits to a maximum of 483 HTLCs
per channel, equivalent to 483 transactions, introducing scalability issues.
All this matters end up in a centralization of nodes, where the ones with great
availability of funds and a major amount of adjacent peers, reducing hops count and
consequently fees, are the criteria for the selection. Lin et al. showed that, on average,
10% of the nodes hold 80% of the Bitcoins at stake [48].
8.2.2
The Algorand blockchain
Algorand is a blockchain platform introduced in 2017 by Chen and Micali [19] and
officially launched in June 2019. Algorand’s solution to the scalability trilemma is
totally built inside the blockchain without the need of Layer 2 technologies and is
driven by its usage of novel algorithms for consensus and transaction verification in a
scalable way.
In Algorand, each block is analyzed and submitted by a committee of nodes that
reach consensus via Byzantine agreement. This committee changes for every block,
and a Verifiable Random Function (VRF) chooses it. VRFs are random functions
that starting from a secret key and a message, produce a pseudo-random value and a
proof of correct execution. In this way, the node network can choose as a committee
46
==PAGE:47==
the nodes that computed a specific value, and these nodes can prove that they have
been selected without cheating. This provides security to the network, because an
attacker cannot know in advance which nodes will check the transaction, and therefore
an attack is possible only with a majority of malicious nodes. From the selected pool
of nodes, a leader is selected, being the one with the lowest proof value. The leader
proposes a block and the rest of the committee votes to accept or reject the block. The
block is submitted if two-thirds of the committee agree on accepting it.
The addition of an always-changing committee to the Byzantine agreement (BA)
consensus is a great introduction in the blockchain field. BA grants a secure solution
with instant finality, meaning that a block cannot be forked because only one is
produced at a time. But standard BA uses a fixed or semi-static committee, where an
attacker already knows all or a portion of the validator nodes and therefore can corrupt
them. To solve this issue, Algorand introduces the idea of player replaceability. In
Algorand, a new committee, which is secret until the first and only exchanged message,
executes each step of the protocol. This idea is made possible thanks to the previously
explained VRF and a stateless protocol with non overlapping steps, and creates a
blockchain resilient to attacks with up to a third of the malicious nodes.
In addition, the committees being both ephemeral and stateless are in consequence
parallelizable in a pipelined way, meaning for example that when a committee is voting
on a block submission, the next committee can be already formed and start analyzing
other transactions. Obviously, transactions from the same actors will be spread in time
in a way that the committee that analyzes a transaction is executed after the previous
one is already processed and acknowledged. This pipelining of operations means
that in Algorand a new block is created every 2.75s and the historical maximum TPS
reached is of 5 716 tx/s [13].
Further research has proved theoretically Algorand claims, but its lack of large
adoption given by an immature ecosystem and missing interoperability with other
chains undermine its importance in the cryptocurrencies scene [6][9].
47
==PAGE:48==
9
Conclusions
This thesis explored the combination of Trusted Execution Environments and Zero
Knowledge proofs to build a rollup prover for Ethereum blockchain with configurable
cost and performance balance. We designed, implemented, and benchmarked a
dual-proof system based on the STARK prover Winterfell and a single Intel TDX
enclave.
Our implementation demonstrates that the performance of this hybrid system is
comparable to established rollups. In particular, using TEE quotes for most batches
and ZK proofs selectively enables cost reductions up to 72 % without significantly
compromising finality. In our experimentation, the Intel TDX enclave incurs only a 6
% performance overhead, confirming its practicality for this kind of workload.
System security remains sound under the assumption of a temporarily publicly
disclosed TEE vulnerability. Additionally, we investigated the criticalities that lie
behind this assumption, showing how the attack surface is limited even in the case of
an undisclosed vulnerability.
A novel feature we introduced with this design, is the weighted verification
mechanism that can offer a range of cost-finality ratios. This makes the system
adaptable to varying application needs, balancing economic efficiency with fast
transaction acknowledgment.
We compared our architecture to an already existing solution leveraging TEEs
for Layer 2 systems, Teerollup. While Teerollup relies on a group of heterogeneous
TEEs to mitigate single-vendor risks, our single TEE approach is simpler to deploy
and easier to maintain, but it inherits the risk of vulnerabilities targeted at Intel TDX.
The fallback to ZK proofs, however, avoids a total shutdown of the system.
In the discussion, we stated the limitations of this work, which are mostly related to
scale limited to 32 768 accounts and to the lack of a complete system for testing. For
this reason, we outlined as future research a more extensive experimentation, which
involves the development of a full rollup system with smart contracts and sequencers,
to better assess its performances in a real-world scenario.
To conclude, this thesis offers a practical and cost-efficient pathway to deploy
rollups by combining the strengths of ZK proofs and TEEs. It extends the design
space of Layer 2 solutions and we believe it lays a strong foundation for future works
in secure blockchain scalability.
48
==PAGE:49==
References
[1] 1ml: Real-time lightning network statistics (2025), https://web.archive.org/
web/2/https://1ml.com/statistics
[2] Barbieri, E.: Starknet and zkSync: A comparative analysis (2024), https:
//medium.com/nethermind-eth/starknet-and-zksync-a-comparative-analysi
s-d4648786256b#8c9e
[3] Barry Elad, K.K.: Ethereum gas fees statistics 2025: In-depth statistics and what
they mean for users (2025), https://web.archive.org/web/20250321144254/h
ttps://coinlaw.io/ethereum-gas-fees-statistics/
[4] Ben-Sasson, E., Bentov, I., Horesh, Y., Riabzev, M.: Scalable, transparent, and
post-quantum secure computational integrity. IACR Cryptol. ePrint Arch. 2018,
46 (2018), https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:44557939
[5] Ben-Sasson, E., Goldberg, L., Kopparty, S., Saraf, S.: DEEP-FRI: Sampling
outside the box improves soundness (2019), https://arxiv.org/abs/1903.12243
[6] Benhamouda, F., Blum, E., Katz, J., Leung, D., Loss, J., Rabin, T.: Analyzing
the real-world security of the algorand blockchain. Cryptology ePrint Archive,
Paper 2023/1344 (2023), https://eprint.iacr.org/2023/1344
[7] bitquery: Understanding blockchain demand: Analyzing TPS and throughput
needs (2024), https://web.archive.org/web/20241203144454/https://bitque
ry.io/blog/understanding-blockchain-demand-tps-throughput-analysis
[8] Blockchain.com: Average block size (MB) (2025), https://web.archive.org/
web/20250124123238/https://www.blockchain.com/explorer/charts/avg-blo
ck-size
[9] Blocknews: Algorand faces decline amid market turbulence and mixed investor
sentiment (2024), https://web.archive.org/web/20250323182157/https:
//blocknews.com/algorand-faces-decline-amid-market-turbulence-and-mix
ed-investor-sentiment
[10] Blum, M., Feldman, P., Micali, S.: Non-interactive zero-knowledge and its
applications. In: Proceedings of the Twentieth Annual ACM Symposium on
Theory of Computing. p. 103–112. STOC ’88, Association for Computing
Machinery, New York, NY, USA (1988), https://doi.org/10.1145/62212.6222
2
[11] Buterik, V.: Sharding FAQ (2017), https://web.archive.org/web/2025021521
3258/https://vitalik.eth.limo/general/2017/12/31/sharding_faq.html#th
is-sounds-like-theres-some-kind-of-scalability-trilemma-at-play-wha
t-is-this-trilemma-and-can-we-break-through-it
49
==PAGE:50==
[12] Cerdeira, D., Santos, N., Fonseca, P., Pinto, S.: Sok: Understanding the
prevailing security vulnerabilities in trustzone-assisted TEE systems. In: 2020
IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP).
pp.
1416–1432 (2020),
https://www.doi.org/10.1109/SP40000.2020.00061
[13] Chaininspect: Algorand real-time TPS (2025), https://web.archive.org/web/
20250117181614/https://chainspect.app/chain/algorand
[14] Chaininspect: Ethereum real-time TPS (2025), https://chainspect.app/chain
/ethereum?range-tc=month
[15] Chaininspect: What does TPS stand for in blockchain performance? (2025),
https://web.archive.org/web/20250220062422/https://chainspect.app/blo
g/transactions-per-second-tps#
[16] Chaliasos, S., Firsov, D., Livshits, B.: Towards a formal foundation for blockchain
rollups (2025), https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.16219
[17] Chaliasos, S., Mohnblatt, N., Kattis, A., Livshits, B.: Pricing factors and tfms
for scalability-focused zk-rollups (2024), https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.13277
[18] Chaliasos, S., Reif, I., Torralba-Agell, A., Ernstberger, J., Kattis, A., Livshits,
B.: Analyzing and benchmarking ZK-rollups. Cryptology ePrint Archive, Paper
2024/889 (2024), https://eprint.iacr.org/2024/889
[19] Chen, J., Micali, S.: Algorand (2017), https://arxiv.org/abs/1607.01341
[20] Coppolino, L., D’Antonio, S., Mazzeo, G., Romano, L.: An experimental
evaluation of TEE technology: Benchmarking transparent approaches based
on sgx, sev, and tdx.
Computers amp; Security 154, 104457 (Jul 2025),
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.2025.104457
[21] Ethereum: Zero-knowledge rollups (2025), https://web.archive.org/web/2025
0526181144/https://ethereum.org/en/developers/docs/scaling/zk-rollups
/
[22] Etherscan: Ethereum average gas price chart (2025), https://etherscan.io/c
hart/gasprice
[23] Facebook: Winterfell, a STARK prover and verifier for arbitrary computations.
(2025), https://github.com/facebook/winterfell
[24] Facebook: Winterfell, proof options (2025), https://github.com/facebook/wi
nterfell/blob/main/air/README.md#protocol-parameters
[25] Facebook: Winterfell, rescue prime implementation (2025), https://github.c
om/facebook/winterfell/tree/main/crypto#rescue-hash-function-impleme
ntation
50
==PAGE:51==
[26] Fiat, A., Shamir, A.: How to prove yourself: Practical solutions to identification
and signature problems. In: Odlyzko, A.M. (ed.) Advances in Cryptology —
CRYPTO’ 86. pp. 186–194. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg
(1987), https://doi.org/10.1007/3-540-47721-7_12
[27] Frassetto, T., Jauernig, P., Koisser, D., Kretzler, D., Schlosser, B., Faust,
S., Sadeghi, A.R.: POSE: Practical off-chain smart contract execution. In:
Proceedings 2023 Network and Distributed System Security Symposium. NDSS
2023, Internet Society (2023), http://dx.doi.org/10.14722/ndss.2023.23118
[28] Gangwal, A., Gangavalli, H.R., Thirupathi, A.: A survey of layer-two blockchain
protocols (2022), https://arxiv.org/abs/2204.08032
[29] Grandjean, D., Heimbach, L., Wattenhofer, R.: Ethereum proof-of-stake consen-
sus layer: Participation and decentralization (2023), https://arxiv.org/abs/23
06.10777
[30] Groth, J.: On the size of pairing-based non-interactive arguments. In: Fischlin,
M., Coron, J.S. (eds.) Advances in Cryptology – EUROCRYPT 2016. pp.
305–326.
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg (2016), https:
//doi.org/10.1007/978-3-662-49896-5_11
[31] Guo, Y., Tong, J., Feng, C.: A measurement study of bitcoin lightning network.
In: 2019 IEEE International Conference on Blockchain (Blockchain). pp.
202–211 (2019), https://doi.org/10.1109/Blockchain.2019.00034
[32] Haböck, U.: A summary on the FRI low degree test. Cryptology ePrint Archive,
Paper 2022/1216 (2022), https://eprint.iacr.org/2022/1216
[33] Harper, C.: Bitcoin transaction fees hit record level after halving — here’s why
(2024), https://web.archive.org/web/20250321144624/https://www.forbes
.com/sites/colinharper/2024/04/22/bitcoin-transaction-fees-hit-recor
d-levels-after-halving---heres-why/
[34] Hass, M.: The cost sustainability of bitcoin. Academia (2018)
[35] Intel: Stale data read from legacy xapic (2023), https://www.intel.com/conten
t/www/us/en/developer/articles/technical/software-security-guidance/
advisory-guidance/stale-data-read-from-xapic.html
[36] Ishai, Y., Kushilevitz, E., Ostrovsky, R., Sahai, A.: Zero-knowledge from secure
multiparty computation. In: Proceedings of the Thirty-Ninth Annual ACM
Symposium on Theory of Computing. p. 21–30. STOC ’07, Association for
Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA (2007), https://doi.org/10.114
5/1250790.1250794
[37] Jabłczyńska, M., Kosc, K., Ryś, P., Sakowski, P., Ślepaczuk, R., Zakrzewski, G.:
Energy and cost efficiency of bitcoin mining endeavor. PLOS ONE 18(3), 1–45
(03 2023), https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0283687
51
==PAGE:52==
[38] Kapengut, E., Mizrach, B.: An event study of the ethereum transition to proof-
of-stake (2023), https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.13655
[39] Labs, M.: zkPorter: a breakthrough in L2 scaling (2021), https://web.archiv
e.org/web/20250512154953/https://blog.matter-labs.io/zkporter-a-break
through-in-l2-scaling-ed5e48842fbf
[40] Labs, M.: Awesome zero-knowledge proofs (ZKP) (2024), https://github.com
/matter-labs/awesome-zero-knowledge-proofs?tab=readme-ov-file#compar
ison-of-the-most-popular-zkp-systems
[41] Labs, O.: Arbitrum documentation (2024), https://docs.arbitrum.io/welcome
/get-started
[42] labs, P.: A note on adding zero-knowledge to STARK (2025), https://eprint.i
acr.org/2024/1037.pdf
[43] Labs, P.: Polygon Avail DA (2025), https://web.archive.org/web/2025051605
0203/https://www.availproject.org/
[44] Layer, P.K.: Aggregator (2025), https://web.archive.org/web/202506011954
33/https://docs.polygon.technology/zkEVM/architecture/proving-system/
aggregator-proofs/
[45] Li, M., Zhang, Y., Lin, Z., Solihin, Y.: Exploiting unprotected I/O operations in
AMD’s secure encrypted virtualization. In: 28th USENIX Security Symposium
(USENIX Security 19). pp. 1257–1272. USENIX Association, Santa Clara, CA
(Aug 2019), https://www.usenix.org/conference/usenixsecurity19/present
ation/li-mengyuan
[46] Li, M., Zhang, Y., Wang, H., Li, K., Cheng, Y.: CIPHERLEAKS: Breaking
constant-time cryptography on AMD SEV via the ciphertext side channel. In:
30th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 21). pp. 717–732.
USENIX Association (Aug 2021), https://www.usenix.org/conference/usen
ixsecurity21/presentation/li-mengyuan
[47] Li, R., Wang, Q., Wang, Q., Galindo, D., Ryan, M.: Sok: TEE-assisted
confidential smart contract (2022), https://arxiv.org/abs/2203.08548
[48] Lin, J.H., Primicerio, K., Squartini, T., Decker, C., Tessone, C.J.: Lightning
network: a second path towards centralisation of the bitcoin economy*. New
Journal of Physics 22(8), 083022 (aug 2020), https://dx.doi.org/10.1088/136
7-2630/aba062
[49] Lind, J., Naor, O., Eyal, I., Kelbert, F., Pietzuch, P., Sirer, E.G.: Teechain: A
secure payment network with asynchronous blockchain access (2019), https:
//arxiv.org/abs/1707.05454
52
==PAGE:53==
[50] Mandal, U., Shukla, S., Mishra, N., Bhattacharya, S., Saxena, P., Mukhopadhyay,
D.: Exploring side-channels in intel trust domain extensions. Cryptology ePrint
Archive, Paper 2025/079 (2025), https://eprint.iacr.org/2025/079
[51] McKeen, F., Alexandrovich, I., Anati, I., Caspi, D., Johnson, S., Leslie-Hurd,
R., Rozas, C.: Intel® software guard extensions (intel® SGX) support for
dynamic memory management inside an enclave.
In: Proceedings of the
Hardware and Architectural Support for Security and Privacy 2016. HASP
’16, Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA (2016),
https://doi.org/10.1145/2948618.2954331
[52] Miller, A., Bentov, I., Kumaresan, R., Cordi, C., McCorry, P.: Sprites and
state channels: Payment networks that go faster than lightning (2017), https:
//arxiv.org/abs/1702.05812
[53] Murdock, K., Oswald, D., Garcia, F., Van Bulck, J., Gruss, D., Piessens,
F.: Plundervolt: software-based fault injection attacks against intel sgx. In:
2020 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP). pp. 1466–1482. IEEE
Symposium on Security and Privacy, IEEE Computer Society Press (Jul 2020),
https://doi.org/10.1109/SP40000.2020.00057, 41st IEEE Symposium on
Security and Privacy ; Conference date: 17-05-2020 Through 21-05-2020
[54] Nakai, T., Sakurai, A., Hironaka, S., Shudo, K.: A formulation of the trilemma
in proof of work blockchain. IEEE Access 12, 80559–80578 (2024), https:
//doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2024.3410025
[55] Nakamoto, S.: Bitcoin: A peer-to-peer electronic cash system. (2008), https:
//web.archive.org/web/20250221222829/https://bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf
[56] de Ocáriz Borde, H.S.: An overview of trees in blockchain technology: Merkle
trees and merkle patricia tries. University of Cambridge: Cambridge, UK (2022),
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/358740207_An_Overview_of_Tr
ees_in_Blockchain_Technology_Merkle_Trees_and_Merkle_Patricia_Tries
[57] Optimism Foundation: Optimism documentation (2024), https://www.optimism
.io/
[58] Paju, A., Javed, M.O., Nurmi, J., Savimäki, J., McGillion, B., Brumley, B.B.:
Sok: A systematic review of TEE usage for developing trusted applications. In:
Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on Availability, Reliability and
Security. ARES ’23, Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY,
USA (2023), https://doi.org/10.1145/3600160.3600169
[59] Parno, B., Howell, J., Gentry, C., Raykova, M.: Pinocchio: Nearly practical
verifiable computation. In: 2013 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy. pp.
238–252 (2013), https://doi.org/10.1109/SP.2013.47
53
==PAGE:54==
[60] Pinto, A.M.: An introduction to the use of zk-SNARKs in blockchains. In:
Pardalos, P., Kotsireas, I., Guo, Y., Knottenbelt, W. (eds.) Mathematical Research
for Blockchain Economy. pp. 233–249. Springer International Publishing, Cham
(2020), https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-37110-4_16
[61] Poon, J., Dryja, T.: The bitcoin lightning network: Scalable off-chain instant
payments (2016), https://lightning.network/lightning-network-paper.pdf
[62] randao.org: Randao: Verifiable random number generation (2017), https:
//www.randao.org/whitepaper/Randao_v0.85_en.pdf
[63] van Schaik, S., Batori, A., Seto, A., AlBassam, B., Garman, C., Yurek, T., Miller,
A., Genkin, D., Yarom, Y.: SGX fail (2023), https://sgx.fail/
[64] Schnorr, C.P.: Efficient identification and signatures for smart cards. In: Brassard,
G. (ed.) Advances in Cryptology — CRYPTO’ 89 Proceedings. pp. 239–252.
Springer New York, New York, NY (1990), https://doi.org/10.1007/0-387-3
4805-0_22
[65] Sharples, J.: Ethereum docs - blocks (2024), https://web.archive.org/web/20
250221084727/https://ethereum.org/en/developers/docs/blocks/#proof-o
f-work-protocol
[66] Starknet: Volition on Starknet: Your Data, Your Choice (2023), https://web.ar
chive.org/web/20250409003447/https://www.starknet.io/blog/volition-o
n-starknet/
[67] Szepieniec, A., Ashur, T., Dhooghe, S.: Rescue-prime: a standard specification
(SoK). Cryptology ePrint Archive, Paper 2020/1143 (2020), https://eprint.i
acr.org/2020/1143
[68] team, L.: L2BEAT, https://l2beat.com/scaling/risk
[69] Team, L.: The state of layer 2 ecosystem (2025), https://web.archive.org/we
b/20250303175137/https://l2beat.com/scaling/summary
[70] Valiant, P.: Incrementally verifiable computation or proofs of knowledge imply
time/space efficiency. In: Canetti, R. (ed.) Theory of Cryptography. pp. 1–18.
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg (2008), https://doi.org/10.1
007/978-3-540-78524-8_1
[71] VISA: VISA fact sheet (2018), https://web.archive.org/web/2/https:
//www.visa.co.uk/dam/VCOM/download/corporate/media/visanet-technolog
y/aboutvisafactsheet.pdf
[72] Wen, X., Feng, Q., Lyu, H., Niu, J., Zhang, Y., Feng, C.: Teerollup: Efficient
rollup design using heterogeneous TEE (2025), https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.1
4647
54
==PAGE:55==
[73] Werth, J., Berenjestanaki, M.H., Barzegar, H.R., El Ioini, N., Pahl, C.: A review
of blockchain platforms based on the scalability, security and decentralization
trilemma. ICEIS (1) pp. 146–155 (2023), https://doi.org/10.5220/00118372
00003467
[74] Wood, G.: Ethereum: A secure decentralised generalised transaction ledger
(2025), https://ethereum.github.io/yellowpaper/paper.pdf
[75] Xie, H., Zheng, J., He, T., Wei, S., Hu, C.: TEBDS: A trusted execution
environment-and-blockchain-supported iot data sharing system. Future Genera-
tion Computer Systems 140, 321–330 (2023), https://www.sciencedirect.co
m/science/article/pii/S0167739X22003326
[76] Xu, Z., Chen, L.: L2chain: Towards high-performance, confidential and secure
layer-2 blockchain solution for decentralized applications. Proc. VLDB Endow.
16(4), 986–999 (Dec 2022), https://doi.org/10.14778/3574245.3574278
55
==PAGE:56==
A
Appendix
A.1
Algebraic Intermediate Representation - fragment
fn evaluate_transition<E: FieldElement + From<Self::BaseField>>(
&self,
frame: &EvaluationFrame<E>,
periodic_values: &[E],
result: &mut [E],
) {
let current = frame.current();
let next = frame.next();
debug_assert_eq!(TRACE_WIDTH, current.len());
debug_assert_eq!(TRACE_WIDTH, next.len());
/*
TRACE:
[0,1] A balance,nonce
[2,3] B balance,nonce
[4] transaction value
[5..11] hashA permutation
[11..17] hashB permutation
[17] left_right A bit
[18] left_right B bit
[19] init transaction bit
*/
/*
result:
[0..6] enforce round A
[6..12] enforce round B
[12,13,14] enforce bits
[15] updated balance A
[16] updated balance B
*/
// split periodic values into masks and Rescue round constants.
// periodic_values is a circular buffer with the following boolean values:
// [0, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1]
// the buffer is shifted of one value every step
let hash_flag = periodic_values[0];
let ark = &periodic_values[1..];
// when hash_flag = 1, constraints for Rescue round are enforced
56
==PAGE:57==
// Hash A constraints (result[0] to result[5])
rescue::enforce_round(
&mut result[0..HASH_STATE_WIDTH],
&current[5..11],
&next[5..11],
ark,
hash_flag,
);
// Hash B constraints (result[6] to result[11])
rescue::enforce_round(
&mut result[HASH_STATE_WIDTH..(2 * HASH_STATE_WIDTH)],
&current[11..17],
&next[11..17],
ark,
hash_flag,
);
let hash_init_flag = not(hash_flag) * not(current[19]);
// Aggregate constraints for hash state wiring for Hash A
// These add to result[0]..result[5]
let bit_a = next[17];
let not_bit_a = not(bit_a);
result.agg_constraint(0, hash_init_flag, not_bit_a * are_equal(current[5], next[5]));
result.agg_constraint(1, hash_init_flag, not_bit_a * are_equal(current[6], next[6]));
result.agg_constraint(2, hash_init_flag, bit_a * are_equal(current[5], next[7]));
result.agg_constraint(3, hash_init_flag, bit_a * are_equal(current[6], next[8]));
result.agg_constraint(4, hash_init_flag, is_zero(next[9]));
result.agg_constraint(5, hash_init_flag, is_zero(next[10]));
// Aggregate constraints for hash state wiring for Hash B
// These add to result[6]..result[11]
let bit_b = next[18];
let not_bit_b = not(bit_b);
result.agg_constraint(6, hash_init_flag,
not_bit_b * are_equal(current[11], next[11]));
result.agg_constraint(7, hash_init_flag,
not_bit_b * are_equal(current[12], next[12]));
result.agg_constraint(8, hash_init_flag,
bit_b * are_equal(current[11], next[13]));
result.agg_constraint(9, hash_init_flag,
bit_b * are_equal(current[12], next[14]));
result.agg_constraint(10, hash_init_flag, is_zero(next[15]));
result.agg_constraint(11, hash_init_flag, is_zero(next[16]));
57
==PAGE:58==
// Binary flag constraints (result[12], result[13], result[14])
result[12] = is_binary(current[17]);
result[13] = is_binary(current[18]);
result[14] = is_binary(current[19]);
// Check that the new balances are correctly computed
let transaction_init_flag = current[19];
result[15] = transaction_init_flag *
(current[5] - (current[0] - current[4]));
result[16] = transaction_init_flag *
(current[11] - (current[2] + current[4]));
}
A.2
Prover fragment
pub fn build_trace(
&mut self,
mut accounts: Vec<Leaf>,
state_tree: &mut MerkleTree<Rescue128>,
transactions: Vec<Transaction>)
-> TraceTable<BaseElement> {
const TRANSACTION_SEGMENT_LENGTH: usize = (DEPTH + 1) * 8;
let trace_len = transactions.len() * TRANSACTION_SEGMENT_LENGTH;
let mut trace = TraceTable::new(TRACE_WIDTH, trace_len);
// Initialize the entire trace with zeros
for row in 0..trace.length() {
for col in 0..TRACE_WIDTH {
trace.set(col, row, BaseElement::ZERO);
}
}
let mut a: usize = 0;
let mut b: usize = 0;
let mut heap_pos_a: usize = 0;
let mut heap_pos_b: usize = 0;
for step in 0..(trace_len-1) {
let transact_num = step / TRANSACTION_SEGMENT_LENGTH;
let transact_pos = step % TRANSACTION_SEGMENT_LENGTH;
let cycle_num = step / HASH_CYCLE_LEN;
let cycle_pos = step % HASH_CYCLE_LEN;
58
==PAGE:59==
if transact_pos == 0 {
// transaction init
trace.set(19, step,
BaseElement::ONE);
let transaction = &transactions[transact_num];
let temp_bytes = BaseElement::elements_as_bytes(&transaction.a);
let mut temp = [0u8; 8];
temp[..8].copy_from_slice(&temp_bytes[..8]);
// A info
a = usize::from_le_bytes(temp);
trace.set(0, step, accounts[a].balance);
trace.set(1, step, accounts[a].nonce);
accounts[a].nonce += 1;
// B info
let temp_bytes = BaseElement::elements_as_bytes(&transaction.b);
let mut temp = [0u8; 8];
temp[..8].copy_from_slice(&temp_bytes[..8]);
b
= usize::from_le_bytes(temp);
trace.set(2, step, accounts[b].balance);
trace.set(3, step, accounts[b].nonce);
accounts[b].nonce += 1;
trace.set(4, step, transaction.amount);
accounts[a].balance -= transaction.amount;
accounts[b].balance += transaction.amount;
accounts[a].nonce += BaseElement::from(1u8);
accounts[b].nonce += BaseElement::from(1u8);
trace.set(5, step, accounts[a].balance);
trace.set(6, step, accounts[a].nonce);
trace.set(7, step, BaseElement::ZERO);
trace.set(8, step, BaseElement::ZERO);
trace.set(9, step, BaseElement::ZERO);
trace.set(10, step, BaseElement::ZERO);
trace.set(11, step, accounts[b].balance);
trace.set(12, step, accounts[b].nonce);
trace.set(13, step, BaseElement::ZERO);
trace.set(14, step, BaseElement::ZERO);
trace.set(15, step, BaseElement::ZERO);
59
==PAGE:60==
trace.set(16, step, BaseElement::ZERO);
heap_pos_a = a + START_IDX;
heap_pos_b = b + START_IDX;
}
else if cycle_pos == 0 {
// hash init for tree traversal
// sibling hash A
let mut sibling_hash;
if heap_pos_a & 0x1 == 1 {
// a is right child
trace.set(17, step,
BaseElement::ONE);
sibling_hash = state_tree.get_node(heap_pos_a-1);
// sibling
A
// 5,6
7,8
trace.set(7, step, trace.get(5, step-1));
trace.set(8, step, trace.get(6, step-1));
trace.set(5, step, sibling_hash.to_elements()[0]);
trace.set(6, step, sibling_hash.to_elements()[1]);
trace.set(9, step, BaseElement::ZERO);
trace.set(10, step, BaseElement::ZERO);
} else {
// a is left child
trace.set(17, step,
BaseElement::ZERO);
// A
sibling
// 5,6
7,8
sibling_hash = state_tree.get_node(heap_pos_a+1);
trace.set(5, step, trace.get(5, step-1));
trace.set(6, step, trace.get(6, step-1));
trace.set(7, step, sibling_hash.to_elements()[0]);
trace.set(8, step, sibling_hash.to_elements()[1]);
trace.set(9, step, BaseElement::ZERO);
trace.set(10, step, BaseElement::ZERO);
}
// sibling hash B
if heap_pos_b & 0x1 == 1 {
// b is right child
trace.set(18, step,
BaseElement::ONE);
// sibling
B
// 11,12
13,14
sibling_hash = state_tree.get_node(heap_pos_b-1);
trace.set(13, step, trace.get(11, step-1));
trace.set(14, step, trace.get(12, step-1));
60
==PAGE:61==
trace.set(11, step, sibling_hash.to_elements()[0]);
trace.set(12, step, sibling_hash.to_elements()[1]);
trace.set(15, step, BaseElement::ZERO);
trace.set(16, step, BaseElement::ZERO);
} else {
// b is left child
trace.set(18, step,
BaseElement::ZERO);
// B
sibling
// 11,12
13,14
sibling_hash = state_tree.get_node(heap_pos_b+1);
trace.set(11, step, trace.get(11, step-1));
trace.set(12, step, trace.get(12, step-1));
trace.set(13, step, sibling_hash.to_elements()[0]);
trace.set(14, step, sibling_hash.to_elements()[1]);
trace.set(15, step, BaseElement::ZERO);
trace.set(16, step, BaseElement::ZERO);
}
}
else {
// A
let mut state_a = [
trace.get(5, step), trace.get(6, step), trace.get(7, step),
trace.get(8, step), trace.get(9, step), trace.get(10, step)
];
apply_round(&mut state_a, cycle_pos - 1);
for i in 0..state_a.len() {
trace.set(5+i, step+1, state_a[i]);
}
// B
let mut state_b = [
trace.get(11, step), trace.get(12, step), trace.get(13, step),
trace.get(14, step), trace.get(15, step), trace.get(16, step)
];
apply_round(&mut state_b, cycle_pos - 1)
for i in 0..state_b.len() {
trace.set(11+i, step+1, state_b[i]);
}
}
if cycle_pos == NUM_HASH_ROUNDS - 1 {
heap_pos_a = get_p(heap_pos_a);
heap_pos_b = get_p(heap_pos_b);
state_tree.set_node(heap_pos_a,
Hash::new(trace.get(5, step+1), trace.get(6, step+1)));
state_tree.set_node(heap_pos_b,
61
==PAGE:62==
Hash::new(trace.get(11, step+1), trace.get(12, step+1)));
}
}
62
