==PAGE:1==
Vision-Guided Robotic System for Real-Time
Object Tracking and Handling
Master Thesis
Karol Chudzicki
2025
DTU ELECTRO
Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Vision-Guided Robotic System for Real-Time Object Tracking and Handling
By
(s232675) Karol Chudzicki
Advisor(s)
Søren Hansen, Associate Professor at the Electrical Engineering and Photonics Depart-
ment of DTU
Education
Master Thesis
Programme
Electrical Engineering
Period
28 January 2025 to 15 August 2025
ECTS
30
Copyright:
Karol Chudzicki 2025
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Karol Chudzicki
Published by:
DTU, Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering,
Elektrovej 326, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
https://www.electro.dtu.dk
Remark
This report is submitted as partial fulfillment of the requirements for grad-
uation in the above education at the Technical University of Denmark.
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
From the early 1960s, robotic arms have been used in industry to manufacture, sort and
assemble a wide range of everyday items such as cars and electronic components. How-
ever, without vision systems and sensors providing feedback from the environment, their
functionality is limited to performing only predetermined motions. Even with a simple cam-
era, robotic arms can adjust and plan their actions based on input from the environment,
almost like a human would.
In this thesis, a robotic system was designed, consisting of an industrial robotic arm, a
basic webcam for guiding the robot, and a conveyor belt that supplied various parts for
the robotic arm to handle. The objective of this project was to use the robotic arm to
pick up different objects from the conveyor belt using only input from the camera. Vision
and object detection algorithms provided the robotic arm with the real-time position of the
detected part. The robot used this position to move to the part, grasp it from the conveyor
belt, and place it in a designated slot.
In the testing phase of the project, the system had a pick and place success rate of more
than 95% for lower conveyor belt speeds, and over 85% at higher speeds. The project
focused on using simple and effective methods as well as adaptability, allowing for easy
changes or modifications to vision and control algorithms.
ii
Vision-Guided Robotic System for Real-Time Object Tracking and Handling
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Problem Analysis
5
2.1
State of the Art . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Decisions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Product design: power supply
9
3.1
Product design choice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
4
Robotic System Architecture
11
4.1
Robotic Arm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
4.2
Conveyor Belt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
4.3
End-effector: Two finger Gripper
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
5
Vision: camera and algorithms
15
5.1
Related work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
5.2
Camera Calibration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
5.3
Hand eye calibration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
5.4
Vision system methodology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
5.5
Image processing pipeline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
5.6
Part classification and angle estimation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
5.7
Center pose tracking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
5.8
Graphical user interface (GUI)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
6
Control systems: robotic arm motion and trajectory planning
33
6.1
Methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
6.2
Standby . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
6.3
Pursuit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
6.4
Descend . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
7
System test
55
7.1
Performance tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
Vision-Guided Robotic System for Real-Time Object Tracking and Handling
iii
==PAGE:6==
8
Conclusion
61
Bibliography
63
iv
Vision-Guided Robotic System for Real-Time Object Tracking and Handling
==PAGE:7==
List of Abbreviations
YOLO
You Only Look Once
IBVS
Image-based Visual Servoing
PBVS
Position-based Visual Servoing
UR10
Universal Robots robotic arm (10 kg payload)
Robotiq 2F-85
Robotiq two-finger gripper (85 mm maximum opening)
TCP/IP
Transmission Control Protocol / Internet Protocol
RTU
Remote Terminal Unit (Modbus communication standard)
RS-485
Recommended Standard 485 (serial communication standard)
AC
Alternating Current
DC
Direct Current
OpenCV
Open Source Computer Vision Library
HSV
Hue, Saturation and Value colour space
CLAHE
Contrast Limited Adaptive Histogram Equalization
LAB
Lightness, A-Channel (green-red), B-Channel (blue-yellow) Colour Space
JSON
JavaScript Object Notation
GUI
Graphical User Interface
ROI
Region of Interest
FOV
Field of View
PnP
Perspective-n-Point
RPM
Rotations Per Minute
RPS
Rotations Per Second
freq
Frequency
STD
Standard Deviation
RSD
Relative Standard Deviation
Avg
Average
PC
Personal Computer
Vision-Guided Robotic System for Real-Time Object Tracking and Handling
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Vision-Guided Robotic System for Real-Time Object Tracking and Handling
==PAGE:9==
List of mathematical symbols
X, Y, Z
Cartesian Coordinate Axes
θx, θy, θz
Rotations about the X, Y, Z
f
Frequency
v
Velocity
r
Radius
vx
Velocity along the X-axis of the robotic arm
vy
Velocity along the Y -axis of the robotic arm
vz
Velocity along the Z-axis of the robotic arm
xee
Position of the end-effector in the robotic arm base frame along the X-axis
yee
Position of the end-effector in the robotic arm base frame along the Y -axis
zee
Position of the end-effector in the robotic arm base frame along the Z-axis
xcam
Position of a point along X-axis in the camera’s coordinate frame
ycam
Position of a point along Y -axis in the camera’s coordinate frame
zcam
Position of a point along Z-axis in the camera’s coordinate frame
xrel
Position of the part relative to the end-effector along the X axis
yrel
Position of the part relative to the end-effector along the Y axis
zrel
Position of the part relative to the end-effector along the Z axis
⃗xee
unit vector in the positive X direction of the end-effector coordinate frame.
⃗yee
unit vector in the positive Y direction of the end-effector coordinate frame.
⃗zee
unit vector in the positive Z direction of the end-effector coordinate frame.
⃗xcam
unit vector in the positive X direction of the camera’s coordinate frame.
⃗ycam
unit vector in the positive Y direction of the camera’s coordinate frame.
⃗zcam
unit vector in the positive Z direction of the camera’s coordinate frame.
Vision-Guided Robotic System for Real-Time Object Tracking and Handling
vii
==PAGE:10==
viii
Vision-Guided Robotic System for Real-Time Object Tracking and Handling
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation
As modern industrial automation has developed, more and more tasks have been taken
over by robotic arms. Robotic arms have taken tasks that were once performed by peo-
ple, especially repetitive, exhausting, or dangerous tasks. This has led not only to more
efficient and faster production rates, with a reduction in human errors, but also expanded
what can be achieved in manufacturing. robotic arms have made it possible to manu-
facture more advanced products with greater efficiency and intelligence. Key jobs per-
formed by robotic arms involve object tracking, handling and manipulation. Today indus-
trial robotic arms are ubiquitous in sectors such as electronic assembly or car manufac-
turing.[1]
A big breakthrough in industrial automation was the implementation of computer vision.
Humans depend on their sight to locate objects and navigate in the surroundings, and in
the same way, robotic arms can benefit from integration of visual systems to detect and
localize objects in their workspace. Adding vision to robotic arms enabled them to adapt
to their operating area, and not only perform preprogrammed movements, but also adjust
them based on the real-time input from the environment. The same way as humans react
when something falls to the ground, robotic arms can be programmed to notice it and
react accordingly using their visual input. In a more complex scenario, when an object is
moving, humans can follow and catch it using their sight. Similarly, robotic arms can rely
on visual systems or other sensors to do the same. [2]
This advancement is part of a wider transformation known as Industry 4.0. It’s often called
the 4th industrial revolution and revolves around introducing smart factories where all the
machines and sensors communicate with each other to optimize the process of the tasks
they do. Vision in this context plays a crucial role by adding to the system the ability
to make decisions based on visual input. By giving robotic arms the ability to ’see’ and
make decisions based on the data from their surroundings, manufacturers have gained
enormous flexibility and can automate a wider range of tasks. [3]
This project is inspired by the development of industrial automation and computer vision.
It’s meant to explore what is possible within a professional setup using an industrial robotic
arm, conveyor belt and a gripper, while using a simple web-camera and a personal PC
Vision-Guided Robotic System for Real-Time Object Tracking and Handling
1
==PAGE:12==
as a main processing system. In a typical industrial setting complex vision setups are em-
ployed, such as 3D stereo cameras or multi-camera configurations, to deliver accurate
object position [4]. This project provides insights into difficulties and bottlenecks of using
a basic vision system for robotic manipulation tasks. It’s meant to explore the feasibil-
ity of designing a practical robotic system and offers findings on potential upgrades and
improvements that could be made with more resources, such as higher-quality cameras,
computers with more computational power or additional sensors.
The goal of this project was to simulate an industrial assembly environment by developing
a robotic system capable of grasping parts scattered on a conveyor belt using a vision
system and placing them in designated locations. The code for this project was designed
with a focus on a modular structure. Each key functionality in this project was divided into
modules, allowing for simple modification or even replacement if needed, without affecting
other parts of the code. This approach also presents best practices in the design of the
automation software.
Before the work started on the project, several objectives were established to clearly de-
fine the work that had to be done.
1.2
Objectives
The main objectives of this thesis, listed by the priority are:
1. Part - Choosing, designing and 3D printing a product.
2. Supporting structures - Constructing supporting structures such as storage unit
and mount for the camera.
3. Image processing - Create an image processing algorithm for detecting and cate-
gorising the components as well as pinpointing the key points for guiding the robotic
arm.
4. robotic arm control - Create a code for controlling the robotic arm movements
based on the information and data from the image processing algorithm. It should be
robust and precise, ensuring that the parts are reliably picked up from the conveyor
belt and moved to a designated slot in the storage unit.
5. System integration - Create a code that will integrate parts of the systems together:
robotic arm, conveyor belt, camera and gripper.
6. Testing - Test the complete system and improve its performance if possible.
1.3
Limitations
In this project some limitations were set. These were introduced either because of physical
constraints or as a way to simplify the project to avoid unnecessary complexity. By setting
those restrictions the work in this project remained focused on the most crucial objectives
and could be completed within the available time frame. The limitations are as follows:
• Simplified product design - The product designed and handled by the robotic arm
in this project is only a representation of an actual component. It is intended to
simulate the dimensions and size of an actual product that could be found in a real-
world setting. Its width in the widest section had to also be smaller than the width of
the conveyor belt to prevent the product from extending beyond its boundaries. It’s
important to note that the product is only a simplification and/or representation and
was inspired by the shape of a real-world component. The aim of this project was to
2
Vision-Guided Robotic System for Real-Time Object Tracking and Handling
==PAGE:13==
demonstrate that the system can handle an object of similar size to real-world items,
rather than recreate the complexity of the actual product.
• Limited component number - The designed product also has a limited number of
components. This focused the project more on the robotic arm movement control
rather than handling many intricate parts as commonly done in real-world settings.
• Product colours - The colour of the product has to stand out from the background
to make it easier for the camera to detect it. Therefore it may not resemble colours
used in real-world scenarios.
• Grasping area - The area where the product could be picked up by the robotic arm
from the conveyor belt was limited, due to the robotic arm’s reach and conveyor belt
length. The system had to be designed according to this constraint. The graphic
below presents the dimensions of this area. The area in Figure 1.1 envelopes the
straight part of the conveyor belt after the first bend and before the second bend. It
was set to be as long as possible. The limiting factors were the vision system, and
the robotic arm reach.
Moving direction of the conveyor belt
Limited pickup area (0.95 m)
x = 0.8 m
x = -0.15 m
Figure 1.1: Limited pickup area
• Single camera - The project relies on a single camera for detecting and localizing
objects. A 3D vision system could most likely provide the system with more accurate
data, however it would add additional complexity. For the scope of this project one
camera was sufficient, to make the system reliable.
• Gripper geometry - The gripper used for this project had a limited maximum object
width that it could grasp and handle. Therefore, the designed parts had to be created
according to this constraint and had to be smaller than the gripping width. The
maximum gripper range is illustrated in Figure 1.2.
• Processing Power Limitations - The computer used in this project had limited
processing power which particularly affected the vision algorithms. It was important
to design the system with this limit in mind, since advanced and resource intensive
vision algorithms could cause significant latency issues during system operation.
Vision-Guided Robotic System for Real-Time Object Tracking and Handling
3
==PAGE:14==
85 mm
Figure 1.2: Maximum gripper range
4
Vision-Guided Robotic System for Real-Time Object Tracking and Handling
==PAGE:15==
2
Problem Analysis
2.1
State of the Art
Vision-guided robotic systems are used in many manufacturing settings, where efficiency
and reliability are important. Unlike traditional robotic systems, relying on fixed taught
positions, the integration of a vision system provides additional flexibility. Fixed positions
can be adjusted, and the robotic arm can use visual guidance to move to completely new
positions based on the visual localization.
2.1.1
Example Applications of Robotics and Vision in Industry
Automatic systems for assembly are widely used to manufacture everyday products. For
example, in the paper [5] an author presents a solution for assembling mobile phones
using an industrial robotic arm with 6 degrees of freedom. This system uses a stationary
camera mounted above the conveyor belt to detect screen and shell components for cell
phones and estimate their position for the robotic arm to grab them. The system demon-
strated that it is possible to achieve a 100% pickup rate and a 98% assembly success
rate for mobile phone components in a real industrial environment.
Robotic assembly systems can also be applied to large industrial components as demon-
strated in the paper [6]. In this system, the robotic arm is used for a novel idea of assem-
bling wind turbine blades using sensor feedback. The panels of the blades are picked up
by the robotic arm using a vision system mounted to the arm and then precisely guided to
their placement using force control combined with position-based visual servoing (PBVS).
Visual servoing refers to a technique where feedback from the camera is used to dynami-
cally adjust the robotic arm’s position in real time to ensure accuracy and good alignment
during the assembly process.
An interesting usage of automation and robotics can also be found in solving a bin pick-
ing problem. The authors of [7] use a camera mounted on a linear frame with two laser
sensors providing depth data to localise parts from a container (bin). Researchers de-
cided to avoid using 3D vision, which would involve complex data processing and higher
computational costs compared to using a 2D vision system.
2.1.2
Object Localization in Robotics Vision
To localise objects in the camera’s field of view, various approaches could be used includ-
ing masking, template matching or deep learning algorithms such as YOLO.
Vision-Guided Robotic System for Real-Time Object Tracking and Handling
5
==PAGE:16==
Masking is a technique that takes advantage of colour differences between objects and
their background. It is a simple and resource efficient algorithm, however it is only ef-
fective in environments with stable lighting conditions. Additionally, it may struggle with
detecting objects whose colour is similar to the background, so it can only be used in
specific circumstances [8].
Another method used in the vision system to distinguish objects of interest from the back-
ground is template matching. This technique compares sections of an image to a ref-
erence template to locate objects. It is effective when the object’s appearance remains
consistent, this means lighting conditions must be stable, and the object should not be
rotated or tilted, as template matching struggles with detecting rotated or tileted objects
[9].
A very common method used in automation for reliable object detection and localization is
using YOLOv8 deep learning model [10]. Researchers from China Agricultural University
[11] used it in combination with Kalman filtering and low-pass filter to detect, localise and
grasp oysters from a conveyor belt. They achieved a high success rate of oyster pickup
in static and dynamic settings. The limiting factor was conveyor belt speed which when
increased, decreased the success rate of pickups. To improve detection and grasping
accuracy, researchers proposed:
1. Stabilizing the robotic arm to reduce vibrations,
2. Mounting the camera higher above the conveyor belt to increase the field of view
and allow for faster detection,
3. Moving the camera away from the robotic arm to give it more time to adjust its
position before grasping the oyster, reducing the number of unsuccessful grasps.
2.1.3
Visual Servoing and Feedback Control
Visual servoing has advanced in recent years. A review by Hashmoto [12] highlights the
development of vision based control algorithms. He explains the two main methods used
for visual servoing: image-based visual servoing (IBVS) and position-based visual ser-
voing (PBVS). IBVS uses the image from the camera directly, which provides resilience
against camera calibration errors, but may be problematic due to camera-object interac-
tions. On the other hand, 3D pose of the target object estimated using PBVS is more
intuitive, because it uses real-world position, but is highly dependent on accurate 3D
modelling and camera calibration. Overall, visual servoing is especially useful for sys-
tems where the robotic arm needs to adaptively change its position based on the target
object.
This project was also inspired by researchers from the Automation and Control group at
the Technical University of Denmark. They developed a system for picking and placing
loins of meat from a conveyor belt onto designated racks [13]. Their system achieved
a success rate of 85% and the failures were mostly caused by low friction between the
gripper and the loin which was slipping. Their robotic process is divided into four stages:
cruising, tracking, grasping, and hanging, representing the actual robotic arm state divi-
sion used in this project.
2.1.4
Prediction and Filtering Techniques for Object Tracking
The authors of [14] propose a visual servo control algorithm to estimate the position of a
moving object. Instead of using position-based visual servoing (PBVS), which relies on
precise models of the camera and the robotic arm to calculate the actual coordinates of
the object in relation to the robotic arm’s base, the authors propose an image-based visual
6
Vision-Guided Robotic System for Real-Time Object Tracking and Handling
==PAGE:17==
servoing (IBVS) which controls the robotic arm based solely on image plane information,
avoiding the need to reconstruct 3D coordinates. This approach eliminates the errors
from robotic arm and camera models, which could come from camera calibration and
hand-eye calibration (see Section 5.3 for more details). To further improve the precision
of their system, the authors used a Kalman filter to improve pose estimation. The results
demonstrated that the incorrect data from a camera can be drastically reduced when using
a Kalman filter to correct it.
In another work [15], the authors presented a novel approach of using an adaptive Kalman
filter to estimate the position of a moving object. In contrast to a traditional Kalman filter,
which relies on fixed noise covariance matrices, the adaptive Kalman filter estimates the
measurement noise in real-time, making it ideal for environments with changing and un-
predictable conditions. For example, where the conveyor speed changes or the lighting
conditions vary in time. To achieve it, authors used fuzzy logic controllers to tune the
Kalman filter in real-time. Those essentially work by measuring the discrepancy between
camera output and predicted output and if the prediction quality degrades fuzzy rules ad-
just the noise covariance matrices to improve the prediction. The result authors obtained
from implementing this method demonstrated significant improvement in tracking quality
compared to a traditional Kalman filtering.
2.2
Decisions
This project focuses on the development of a robotic system that tracks and accurately
grasps items from a conveyor belt.
• Product design - simplified power supply used as a product handled by the robotic
arm. More about this topic can be found in Chapter 3.
• Camera mounting point - When it comes to the vision system, it was decided that
the camera will be mounted on the robotic arm itself. This decision was guided by
the fact that it would be very difficult to set up just one camera to completely cover
the relevant workspace while having enough resolution to accurately detect and
pinpoint objects in the camera’s field of view. Mounting the camera on the robotic
arm allows the system to move the camera during the performance of each task,
providing flexibility during part detection. This approach simplifies the hardware
setup and eliminates the need for several fixed cameras.
• Camera mounting tool - the camera on the robotic arm could be mounted in many
configurations. Figure 2.1a presents example variations in configurations with dashed
lines that indicate alternative optical axes. The solid line represents the optical axis
of a camera in a configuration used in this project. However, as described in the pa-
per [16], if the optical axis of the camera is not aligned with the Z-axis, as shown in
Figure 2.1a, even a small image error can cause millimetre-scale position misalign-
ments. This results from geometric transformations in the hand-eye transformation
procedure, (see Section 5.3) and to avoid adding additional sources of error it was
decided that the camera will be mounted with its optical axis parallel to the Z-axis,
as shown in Figure 2.1b.
2.3
Summary
The literature overview provided valuable insights into key applications of vision-guided
robotics in industrial settings. Several object detection methods were analysed including
masking, template matching and deep learning methods. With this information, the ac-
tual detection technique for this project was chosen. Additionally, findings about visual
Vision-Guided Robotic System for Real-Time Object Tracking and Handling
7
==PAGE:18==
OPTICAL AXIS
(a) Camera mount and alternative optical
axis configurations
X
Z
Y
OPTICAL AXIS
Robot
coordinate frame
(b) Optical axis of the camera and robotic
arm coordinate frame
servoing and feedback control as well as filtering techniques helped with deciding on the
robotic arm’s control methods.
8
Vision-Guided Robotic System for Real-Time Object Tracking and Handling
==PAGE:19==
3
Product design: power supply
3.1
Product design choice
After evaluating several options, at first a battery pack was chosen, because of its struc-
tured layout and relatively low complexity. This choice was inspired by the work presented
in a paper [17], where researchers designed a robotic system for assembling batches of
CR2023 cells. However, CR2023 cells were considered too small for this project’s re-
quirements, so a larger 26650 cell was selected instead. The prototype design, based on
the 26650 cell, is shown in Figure 3.1b.
However, it turned out to be a poor choice, since the batteries were rolling off the conveyor
belt. Moreover, the conveyor belt used had a width of only 8cm, which made it impractical
to design a small tray or fixture to hold batteries safely during the movement of the con-
veyor belt. Because of those limitations, this prototype was discarded and other product
ideas were considered.
The second idea was to design a simplified smoke detector (see Figure 3.1a). The concept
was inspired by a real-world solution developed by Lyric Robotics1. The smoke detector
prototype was less prone to shifting or rolling during the robotic arm handling process,
because of its flat shape. However, it was discarded, because the round design turned
out to be troublesome. Its circular shape meant that the gripper’s fingers would have to
be redesigned to securely handle it. This added complexity led to the decision to choose
a more well-shaped object for the robotic arm to manipulate.
The third design idea was a power supply. The design choice was proposed collabo-
ratively by the thesis promoter and the author. Several prototypes were designed and
tested. They were easy to detect by the vision system, because of their uniform rectangu-
lar shape. Rectangles have well-defined edges and corners making them straightforward
for computer vision algorithms to identify and localise. Additionally, two out of three parts
of the designed power supply did not cast any shadows, which is very helpful for the vision
system. It is well known that shadows in vision systems and robotics often cause errors
in object detection. Even though various methods to eliminate them were developed to
address this issue, shadows still remain a challenge in vision systems [18]. Each part of
1https://en.lyric-robot.com/solution-5-12-1.html
Vision-Guided Robotic System for Real-Time Object Tracking and Handling
9
==PAGE:20==
the designed power supply could also be easily grabbed by the robotic gripper. Consider-
ing all the advantages of this design including ease of manipulation and compatibility with
the vision system, the power supply was chosen as the final product.
3.2
Design
This power supply consists of three parts: the top casing, bottom casing and integrated
circuit board. The top casing includes grills for simulating ventilation slots similar to those
found in real power supplies. The bottom casing contains a press-fit slot and includes
internal pins for mounting the dummy integrated circuit board. The integrated circuit is
not based on a real design, it is simplified and only includes two vertical walls meant to
represent heat sinks. Those heat sink structures also help the robotic arm to grab and
manipulate the integrated circuit board. All of the parts were designed in Fusion 360 and
were 3D printed using different PLA colours to enhance visual distinction by the camera.
(a) Smoke detector in Fusion
360
(b) Battery pack in Fusion 360 (c) Power supply in Fusion 360
10
Vision-Guided Robotic System for Real-Time Object Tracking and Handling
==PAGE:21==
4
Robotic System Architecture
This chapter overviews the technical setup used in this project, along with corresponding
drivers and communication interfaces used to control each device. The system consists
of a UR10 robotic arm, a Robotiq 2F-85 gripper, an X85 Plastic Chain Conveyor, WA20
DR63M4 motor with inverter, and a camera mounted to the end effector of the robotic arm,
which will be described in the next chapter dedicated to vision (see Chapter 5).
Ethernet
(TCP/IP)
USB
(Modbus RTU)
USB
(Modbus RTU)
USB
(Video stream)
Central Control
Unit (PC)
UR10
Robotic Arm
Robotiq
Gripper
Vision sensor
(Web camera)
Conveyor
belt motor
and power
inverter
Figure 4.1: Robotic system architecture
Vision-Guided Robotic System for Real-Time Object Tracking and Handling
11
==PAGE:22==
Robotiq
Gripper
Vision sensor
(Web camera)
Conveyor Belt
Drive Motor
UR5 Robotic Arm
Conveyor Belt
Power inverter
Central Control
Unit (PC)
DC Power
Supply 24V
Figure 4.2: Robotic system setup
4.1
Robotic Arm
This project uses the Universal Robots UR10 robotic arm. It’s a collaborative robotic arm
designed to work safely alongside humans in a shared workspace. It is built with features
to reduce the risk of injury and allow the user to directly interact with the robotic arm - for
example, by physically teaching it a specific pose [19]. It has 6 degrees of freedom and a
reach of 1300 mm, which allows the robotic arm to cover a large portion of the workspace.
4.1.1
Robotic Arm Motion Control Driver
The first driver manages the movement of the robotic arm by sending commands in accor-
dance with the URScript programming language described in the documentation Script
Manual1. The commands are sent via TCP/IP over port 30001, which is a dedicated port
for robotic arm control. More details about the UR communication interfaces can be found
on the Universal Robots website: Overview of Client Interfaces2.
Communication with the robotic arm in Python is set up using the socket library, through
which the commands are sent encoded in UTF-8. An example command is shown bellow:
movel(p[0.15, 0.766, 0.081, 3.1415, 0, 0], 0.05, 0.1, 3)\n
This instruction commands the robotic arm to move to a specific position p[0.15, 0.766,
0.081, 3.1415, 0, 0] with an acceleration of 0.05 m/s2 and maximum velocity of 0.1 m/s
within a 3-second time-frame.
The driver only includes the most crucial commands for the robotic arm to operate within
the scope of this project. Additionally, all errors and information are displayed in the ter-
minal with the help of the logging library.
1https://s3-eu-west-1.amazonaws.com/ur-support-site/115824/scriptManual_SW5.11.pdf
2https://www.universal-robots.com/articles/ur/interface-communication/overview-of-client-interfaces/
12
Vision-Guided Robotic System for Real-Time Object Tracking and Handling
==PAGE:23==
4.1.2
Real-Time Position Read Driver
The second driver retrieves the real-time position of the robotic arm relative to its base
frame. It connects to the robotic arm through port 30003 2 which is used as a real-time
interface for the robotic arm. The driver uses the socket library used to continuously
receive binary packets from the robotic arm.
This driver must run from the start of the program continuously to get the position of the
robotic arm in real time, therefore it runs in a background thread that listens for incoming
data and provides updates when needed. The driver also has a reconnection function to
handle interruptions or disconnections from the robot.
To get the position of the robotic arm relative to its base frame, the program only needs
to call URReceiver.get_pose().
4.2
Conveyor Belt
To transport the parts to the robotic arm workspace, an X85 Plastic Chain Conveyor is
used. It is driven by a WA20 DR63M4 motor and is controlled by a VEVOR H100 inverter
which controls the motor by setting specific frequency. It’s set up in a looped configuration,
so the parts not picked by the robotic arm can circulate around it. In this way unpicked
parts can return for further attempts at grabbing them by the robot.
4.2.1
Driver Functionality
The conveyor belt is controlled by a custom driver that uses Modbus RTU communica-
tion standard. The Python implementation uses ModbusSerialClient library from the
pymodbus library. To control the inverter specific values are written into registers as de-
scribed in the documentation provided by the manufacturer Vevor documentation3. The
driver enables control over the basic behaviour of the conveyor, including starting, stop-
ping, direction control, and speed adjustment.
4.3
End-effector: Two finger Gripper
This project uses the Robotiq 2F-85, a two finger gripper. The “2F” designation indicates
its two-finger configuration, while “85” refers to the maximum opening width.
4.3.1
Driver Functionality
The gripper is controlled with a custom driver and handles the communication with the
device using the Modbus RTU protocol over an RS-485 physical interface, as described
in the Robotiq 2F-85 documentation4
The driver includes functionalities such as connecting to the gripper, activating it, checking
its status, and control over its finger position, speed, and force.
3https://images.thdstatic.com/catalog/pdfImages/b0/b008b752-3e4a-4c5c-aa62-3f425c50eff9.pdf
4https://assets.robotiq.com/website-assets/support_documents/document/2F-85_2F-140_Instruction_
Manual_e-Series_PDF_20190206.pdf
Vision-Guided Robotic System for Real-Time Object Tracking and Handling
13
==PAGE:24==
14
Vision-Guided Robotic System for Real-Time Object Tracking and Handling
==PAGE:25==
5
Vision: camera and algorithms
Vision systems are crucial in the robotic industry. They are often used in collaboration
with robotic arms to guide their movement and interact with moving elements. Beyond
positioning, vision systems are also used to identify and categorize objects. In some other
industrial applications, they are also used to detect flaws, imperfections, or damaged parts.
Each section related to coding and algorithms represent separate modules in the system.
These modules can be exchanged or altered without impacting other modules.
The camera used for image acquisition in this project was a standard webcam with a
resolution of 1920x1080 pixels and a frame rate of 30 FPS.
5.1
Related work
A substantial part of the vision algorithms and methodology applied in this project was
presented in the DTU course 34759 Introduction to robotic arm Vision [20].
The approach used in the work [21] forms the foundation of this project. The setup in this
paper resembles the setup used in this project, the camera is mounted near the robotic
arm’s grippers and is oriented straight down. This paper also describes the method used
for calibrating robotic arm with the camera and how the coordinates of an object in the
real world are transformed to the coordinates for the robotic arm.
5.2
Camera Calibration
5.2.1
Theoretical Background of Camera Calibration
Camera calibration is a fundamental process in computer vision and robotics. This pro-
cess determines intrinsic (internal) parameters of a camera and extrinsic (external) pa-
rameters. Those parameters are used to transform 2D pixel coordinates in an image to
3D points in the real world. Moreover, if the camera parameters are estimated correctly
it enables removal of lens distortions, which is mandatory for creating an accurate vision
system, as shown in the work [22].
• Focal length (fx, fy) - describes the distance between the camera’s optical centre
and the image plane (lens), when the lens is focused to infinity.
Vision-Guided Robotic System for Real-Time Object Tracking and Handling
15
==PAGE:26==
• Optical centre (cx, cy) - is a point where the camera’s optical axis intersects the
image plane (lens). In a perfect scenario, it would be exactly in the middle of the
lens, but due to imperfections and deviations, it is slightly displaced.
K =


fx
0
cx
0
fy
cy
0
0
1


• Distortion coefficients [23] [24]
– Radial Distortion Coefficients - These coefficients are responsible for the bulging
or pinching effect of the image. The further from the centre of the image the
point lines, the more severe the distortion becomes. It is caused by the lens
bending the light unequally across its surface. If the values of the radial distor-
tion coefficients are known it is possible to reduce or completely correct them.
– Tangential Distortion Coefficients - These coefficients are responsible for twist-
ing or asymmetrical shifting of the image. The further from the centre of the
image the point lines, the more severe the points are displaced. It occurs when
the lens is not perfectly aligned with the camera sensor. If the values of the tan-
gential distortion coefficients are known, it is possible to reduce or completely
correct radial distortion.
distortion_coefficients =

k1
k2
p1
p2
k3

• Extrinsic parameters [24]
– Rotation Matrix - describes the rotations around X, Y, Z axes.
– Translation Vector - specifies the translation of the camera with x, y, z coordi-
nates.
R =


r11
r12
r13
r21
r22
r23
r31
r32
r33


T =


tx
ty
tz


5.2.2
Camera calibration procedure
The camera calibration procedure in this study was performed by using the chequerboard
method. This method is widely used due to its simplicity and effectiveness. It relies on
capturing multiple images featuring a chequerboard pattern using the desired camera that
needs to be calibrated. [25]
Using the camera mounted to a robotic arm, a series of 40 pictures have been taken.
Each image has a clear view of the chequerboard and was taken with the chequerboard
in various orientations, distances, and angles. It is crucial to have diverse pictures to
improve the results of the calibration process. An example picture taken by the camera
is shown in Figure 5.1.
16
Vision-Guided Robotic System for Real-Time Object Tracking and Handling
==PAGE:27==
Figure 5.1: An example picture with a chequerboard
To take the pictures of the chequerboard in different orientations and positions, two robotic
arms were used. The first one had a camera mounted to its effector, and the second one
held a plywood board with a chequerboard attached to it. By moving the arm that had a
chequerboard pattern, 40 pictures had been taken. Each image shows the chequerboard
from a unique distance, angle, and pose.
The images were taken using a simple python script. This script displayed a live feed
from the camera on the computer screen and allowed the user to press the ’q’ key and
capture images when the desired chequerboard position was reached. 40 pictures with a
resolution of 1280x720 were taken. This resolution was selected because it was sufficient
for this application, and higher resolutions were too big for the computer screen to display
properly. Each image was saved to a designated folder and assigned a unique filename
based on a sequential numbering. This set of images are sufficient to precisely calculate
intrinsic and extrinsic parameters of the camera. According to Zhang [25], capturing im-
ages from just two or three different angles is enough to yield results, although increasing
the number of pictures improves the accuracy and precision of the calculated parameters.
When the set of pictures was completed a calibration procedure could be started. This
was done by running a python script that analysed each picture to detect a chequerboard
pattern. This process also involved doing a series of image preprocessing methods to
ensure accurate corner detection. The full overview of operations is explained here:
1. Reading the image: Loading the image.
2. Gray-scale conversion: Converting the image to gray-scale, which simplifies the
algorithm and is widely used in computer vision. Additionally, since chequerboards
are black and white keeping colours is unnecessary.
3. De-noising: Using Open-CV’s de-noising function noise is reduced while keeping
the edges. This method improved corner detection and accuracy.
4. Sharpening:
Sharpening the image containing the chequerboards to enhance
edge contrast and make the corners more distinguishable.
5. Histogram equalization:
Used to enhance the contrast. it is especially useful
when lighting conditions are uneven or where the image appears too dark or too
Vision-Guided Robotic System for Real-Time Object Tracking and Handling
17
==PAGE:28==
bright.
6. Chequerboard detection: The chequerboard corners were detected using Open-
CV function, which searches for a specified grid pattern within the image.
7. Refining corners:
If the chequerboard was successfully found, the corner posi-
tions were refined to improve the accuracy of placement of the detected corners.
8. Drawing corners:
The refined corners were drawn on the image as shown in
Figure 5.2
Figure 5.2: An example picture with marked chequerboard corners
After all the pictures were analysed for the chequerboards, the intrinsic and extrinsic pa-
rameters of the camera were calculated. The results are listed below:
Camera Matrix:
[[911.49,
0, 616.60],
[
0, 911.61, 348.08],
[0
,
0,
1]]
Distortion Coefficients:
[ 0.1020, -0.2222, -0.0014,
0.0012,
0.0571]
The results indicate that the focal lengths are approximately 911.49 in x direction and
911.61 pixels in y direction, respectively. The optical centre is located at pixel coordinates
(616.60, 348.08), which is close to the centre of the image. The image centre is located
at pixel coordinates (640, 360).
The distortion coefficients consist of five values:
• k1 = 0.1020, k2 = −0.2222, and k3 = 0.0571 are the radial distortion coefficients,
which account for barrel or pincushion distortion effects.
• p1 = −0.0014 and p2 = 0.0012 are the tangential distortion coefficients, which
correct for misalignment between the lens and the image sensor. They are very low,
18
Vision-Guided Robotic System for Real-Time Object Tracking and Handling
==PAGE:29==
which indicates minimal tangential distortion.
5.3
Hand eye calibration
In robotic systems, calibrating a robotic arm with a camera is known as hand-eye calibra-
tion. This process establishes a spatial relationship between the robotic gripper (hand)
and a camera (eye). When the calibration is done correctly, it allows for the robotic arm
to effectively cooperate with the camera. In this project, the camera is mounted to the
robotic end effector with a custom 3D printed bracket.
The optical centre of the camera is offset 8 cm from the centre of the gripper and is taken
into account in the calibration process.
There are two primary methods of setting the system for vision-based robotic arm control
as described in a paper [26].
• Hand-eye calibration - is used when the camera is mounted to the robotic arm
and moves with the robot. It involves finding a transformation from the robotic arm
end-effector frame to the camera frame.
• Robot-world-hand-eye calibration - is used when the camera is set stationary in
the robotic arm’s work space. It involves finding a transformation from the robotic
arm base or robotic arm end-effector frame to the camera.
Those two approaches differ in a mathematical description and the number of transforma-
tions. In this project, a hand-eye calibration was chosen, because the camera is mounted
to the robotic arm’s end effector. As proposed by the method used by Y.C. Shiu, S. Ahmad
[27] the hand-eye calibration involves solving the homogeneous transform equation:
Ac1
c2Xc
h = Xc
hBh1
h2
(5.1)
where:
Ac1
c2 : Transformation between two camera poses
Bh1
h2 : Transformation between two robotic arm poses
Xc
h : Transformation from the robotic arm end-effector frame to the camera frame
In the notation used throughout this work, the superscripts and subscripts denote coor-
dinate frames. For example Ac1
c2 refers to a transformation between camera pose 1 and
camera pose 2; similarly, Bh1
h2 refers to a transformation between robotic arm pose 1 and
robotic arm pose 2. Finally, Xc
h stands for the fixed transformation from the robotic arm
end-effector coordinate frame to the camera coordinate frame.
The process of doing the hand-eye calibration is similar to the procedure used to calibrate
the camera and remove distortions as shown in Section 5.2. The hand-eye calibration
method applied in this project is described in detail in paper [21] and [28]. The main steps
involve the following:
1. Calibrating the camera - calculating the extrinsic and intrinsic parameters.
2. Capturing chequerboard pictures - mounting the camera to the robotic arm’s end-
effector and moving it to various poses while capturing pictures and saving corre-
sponding poses of the robotic arm while doing so.
Vision-Guided Robotic System for Real-Time Object Tracking and Handling
19
==PAGE:30==
X
Z
Y
A
c1
c2
B
h1
h2
c
h
X
c
h
X
Figure 5.3: Setup for hand-eye calibration
3. Estimating the pose of the chequerboard - using Open-CV’s pose estimation func-
tions determine the pose of the chequerboard relative to the camera.
4. Solving hand-eye transformation - using the robotic arm and camera poses to solve
the hand-eye transformation.
After following those steps the algorithm determines the transformation between the cam-
era coordinate frame to the robotic arm’s end-effector frame expressed as a rotation matrix
R and translation vector t:
R =


0.0025
0.99998
0.0065
−0.99995
0.0026
−0.0093
−0.0093
−0.0064
0.99994

,
t =


−0.0592
−0.0140
−0.1149


To validate if the results from the hand-eye calibration are correct, the transformation
results can be compared with the physical placement of the camera. First, the rotation
matrix R represents the rotation of the camera frame relative to the robotic arm’s end-
effector frame. Each row of this matrix defines how one of the camera’s axes aligns with
the robotic arm’s end-effector coordinate system.
• First row – Camera’s X-axis in end-effector frame:
⃗xcam = 0.0025 · ˆxee + 0.99998 · ˆyee + 0.0065 · ˆzee
This indicates that the camera’s X-axis is almost perfectly aligned with the robot’s
Y -axis.
The small components along the X and Z-axis corresponds to a tilt of approximately
θ ≈sin−1(0.0065) ≈0.37◦and θ ≈sin−1(0.0025) ≈0.14◦. Those values are negligi-
ble and for the purposes of this project can be approximated to zero in practice.
• Second row – Camera’s Y -axis in end-effector frame:
⃗ycam = −0.99995 · ˆxee + 0.0026 · ˆyee −0.0093 · ˆzee
20
Vision-Guided Robotic System for Real-Time Object Tracking and Handling
==PAGE:31==
This indicates that the camera’s Y -axis points almost perfectly in the negative X
direction of the robot’s frame. The minor Y and Z-axis corresponds to a tilt of ap-
proximately θ ≈sin−1(0.0026) ≈0.15◦and θ ≈sin−1(−0.0093) ≈−0.53◦. Those
values are negligible and for the purposes of this project can be approximated to
zero in practice.
• Third row – Camera’s Z-axis in end-effector frame:
⃗zcam = −0.0093 · ˆxee −0.0064 · ˆyee + 0.99994 · ˆzee
This indicates that the camera’s Z-axis (optical axis) is very closely aligned with the
robot’s Z-axis.
The minor X and Y -axis corresponds to a tilt of approximately θ ≈sin−1(−0.0093) ≈
−0.53◦and θ ≈sin−1(−0.0064) ≈−0.37◦. Those values are negligible and for the
purposes of this project can be approximated to zero in practice.
As for the translation vector, it describes an offset from the centre of the robotic arm’s end-
effector frame to the optical centre of the camera. The values indicate that there is an
offset of approximately -5.92 cm along the X-axis, -1.40 cm along the Y -axis and -11.49
cm along the Z-axis. These values were validated against real-world measurements and
closely match the actual physical configuration.
5.4
Vision system methodology
The project’s main loop chart is presented in Figure 5.4. Vision system in this project is
responsible for two main functionalities:
1. Part classification and angle estimation:
Estimating the angle of rotation and
determining the specific part of the power supply based on the area of the object
seen by the camera.
2. Center pose tracking:
Calculating the coordinates of the part’s centre relative to
the end effector.
Although those two functions differ in functionality they both share the same object contour
detection pipeline which is overviewed in the following section.
5.5
Image processing pipeline
After completing the camera calibration and hand-eye calibration, the image processing
pipeline was developed. The main goal is to separate the object of interest from the back-
ground using a mask-based method. Each frame captured by the camera is processed
according to specific parameters. Each part of the power supply has a predefined set of
parameters tailored to it.
The processing pipeline includes the following steps:
1. Undistorting and cropping the image — The raw image from the camera is first
corrected for lens distortion and cropped according to the ROI1 (region of interest).
2. Reducing the region of interest — The ROI is further narrowed by placing two
black rectangles on the sides of the frame. This method avoids shifting the image
coordinates, which would happen if the image was cropped as a whole.
1https://docs.opencv.org/4.x/d3/df2/tutorial_py_basic_ops.html
Vision-Guided Robotic System for Real-Time Object Tracking and Handling
21
==PAGE:32==
Follow the 
part
Descend 
and grab the 
part
Velocity vector
Identify part 
type
Estimated velocity
Part identification number, angle of rotation
Estimate 
speed of a 
moving part
Move part from the conveyor to 
the storage unit
Storage indicator array
Update gui
Function 1: 
Calculate 
object area 
and angle of 
rotation
Function 2: 
Calculate 
object center 
(x,y)
Vision system
Main loop
Function 2: 
Calculate 
object center 
(x,y)
Figure 5.4: Overview of the system’s main control loop
22
Vision-Guided Robotic System for Real-Time Object Tracking and Handling
==PAGE:33==
3. Parameter assignment — Depending on the detected part, a corresponding JSON2
file is loaded. Parameters such as HSV3 colour bounds, as well as dilation4 and ero-
sion4 iteration counts, are extracted and assigned to variables.
4. Contrast enhancement — To improve the contrast of an image, particularly under
poor lighting conditions, CLAHE5 (Contrast Limited Adaptive Histogram Equaliza-
tion) is used. The image is converted to LAB3 colour space (L — lightness, A —
green-red component, B — blue-yellow) to modify the lightness channel specifically,
keeping the others unchanged. LAB colour space is chosen because it separates
luminance from chromaticity without affecting colour.
5. Colour space conversion — The image is converted from LAB space to HSV
space. HSV is used to extract specific colour ranges from the image, where H
stands for hue, S for saturation, and V for value. After converting to HSV, a mask is
applied to extract only pixels within the specified colour range.
6. Creating a mask - Using the HSV threshold values from the JSON file a binary
mask is created.
7. Initial noise reduction — Morphological operations6 of closing and opening are
performed to reduce noise, fill small holes and remove small artifacts from the mask.
8. Mask application - The mask is applied to extract regions of specific colours.
9. Further noise reduction — To further refine the result, dilation and erosion opera-
tions are applied. Their strength depends on the parameters loaded from the JSON
file.
10. Contour detection — Finally, valid contours are extracted from the image. Canny7
edge detection identifies sharp transitions corresponding to object boundaries. After
applying the Canny filter, contours are extracted and filtered according to their area.
The HSV colour parameters, dilation and erosion iteration counts, are calibrated using a
dedicated window in the GUI (see Section 5.8) of the system.
The image processing pipeline represents a separate module, allowing it to be easily
altered or switched for another method if needed. An alternative method to the one used in
this project would be a machine learning algorithm such as YOLO used by the researchers
from China Agricultural University described in Section 2.1.2.
In another study [29], researchers from the University of California developed a Grasp
Quality Convolutional Neural Network (GQ-CNN) to predict grasp success. Their system
was trained on a large dataset of point clouds and grasps. In their experimental setup
they achieved a high precision of 99% and a faster and more reliable response compared
to the traditional methods.
However, those solutions require big sets of training data and good computational re-
sources. In contrast, the approach used in this project is lightweight and simpler than
using machine learning methods. Moreover, both of those projects dealt with compleX
objects of varying shapes, sizes and colours. If objects of interest are more uniform in
2https://www.w3schools.com/python/python_json.asp
3https://opencv.org/blog/color-spaces-in-opencv/#h-hsv-hue-saturation-value-color-space
4https://docs.opencv.org/3.4/db/df6/tutorial_erosion_dilatation.html
5https://docs.opencv.org/4.x/d5/daf/tutorial_py_histogram_equalization.html
6https://docs.opencv.org/4.x/d9/d61/tutorial_py_morphological_ops.html
7https://docs.opencv.org/4.x/da/d22/tutorial_py_canny.html
Vision-Guided Robotic System for Real-Time Object Tracking and Handling
23
==PAGE:34==
shape, colour and dimensions, a simpler algorithm such as masking can be used as in
this project. A study from Chungnam National University [30] proposed a similar solution
to the one used here. They use background subtraction and HSV masking to detect ob-
jects in the camera’s field of view. Unlike the manual setting of HSV parameters employed
in this work, their method determines those based on random sampling of the region of
interest (ROI), HSV similarity comparison and ROI merging operations.
5.6
Part classification and angle estimation
Before guiding the robotic arm to grab an object moving on the conveyor belt, it is crucial to
determine which part of the power supply is currently under the robotic arm’s end effector.
The identified part number determines which JSON configuration file is loaded for the
masking algorithm. If an incorrect file is selected, the image processing pipeline will fail
to correctly identify the object’s contour.
Moreover, the part number is used during the sorting phase, where each part is placed in
a specific location within a 3D-printed part sorter. The part numbering used in this project
is shown in Figure 5.5.
3 - Top Cover
2 - Integrated Circuit
1 - Bottom Casing
Figure 5.5: Power supply part numbering
The classification algorithm works based on the area of the contour of the part in the
camera field of view. The method used cycles rapidly between available part numbers
(in this case from 1 to 3). For each part number an appropriate JSON configuration file
is loaded, which contains HSV thresholds and morphological parameters for the masking
algorithm (see Section 5.5). If the area of the detected contour is larger than the fixed
threshold of 20000 pixels that part number is considered a match. However, this part
number is preliminary and is further checked to ensure that the algorithm is robust.
Once the preliminary part number is found, it is further checked by capturing three valid
areas and angles of the part. If it fails to do so within a 15-second timeout the part number
is considered invalid and the algorithm terminates and displays an appropriate message
in the terminal.
If the algorithm manages to collect three valid (non-None and non-empty) area and angle
values, the data is then filtered. Afterwards, the average of both is calculated and the final
part number is selected based on the averaged area.
Although this algorithm is relatively simple compared to other alternative methods such
24
Vision-Guided Robotic System for Real-Time Object Tracking and Handling
==PAGE:35==
as machine learning, it performs reliably and has proven to be quite effective with no
mismatches observed during the testing phase.
The flowchart illustrating the operation of the function responsible for part classification
and angle estimation is as shown in Figure 5.6.
Start
Call function to get objects 
angle and area
Area < 20000 pixels
Add 1 to part 
number
Yes
No
Start timeout timer
Valid area captures < 3
No
Yes
Call function to get objects 
angle and area
Angle and area valid
Yes
No
Check timout
Yes
Less than 15s
More than 15s
Return None and None, 
inform about the timeout 
Append area 
and angle to 
their arrays
Area and angle arrays empty
No
Yes
Return None and None, 
inform that the arrays are 
empty
Filter the areas and angles
Return part identification 
number and the angle of 
rotation of the part
Identify which part is on the 
conveyor based on its area
Figure 5.6: Part classification and angle estimation function
5.7
Center pose tracking
For the robotic arm control system to function effectively it must be updated with real-
time information about the pose of objects moving on the conveyor belt. This information
can be determined through processing images captured by the camera mounted to the
end-effector of the robotic arm. The vision processing pipeline described in Section 5.5
provides object contours from the images captured by the camera, and in this section, it
will be overviewed how from those contours the real-world position is calculated.
By using this approach it is possible to develop an efficient 3D localization procedure using
Vision-Guided Robotic System for Real-Time Object Tracking and Handling
25
==PAGE:36==
only 2D images. This eliminates the need for dedicated depth sensors and reduces the
system complexity and cost.
The output of the localisation function is not expressed as global or world coordinates, but
in a coordinate system that’s relative to the end-effector. For example, if the algorithm
returns a position of [0.10, 0.00, 0.00] it indicates that the object is located 10 cm in the
positive X direction with respect to the end-effector frame. This method facilitates the
implementation of control algorithms that rely on calculating speed vectors from position
vectors.
z
optical axis
u
v
x
y
Pixel coordinates (u, v)
Principal point (cx, cy)
focal length
Camera frame
Image frame
y
x
z
Figure 5.7: Pinhole camera model
5.7.1
Center pose tracking overview
The pinhole camera model describes the projection of a 3D point onto a 2D image plane
(see Figure 5.7). This model shows how a 3D point (X, Y, Z) is projected at coordinates
(u, v) onto the image plane, using intrinsic camera parameters and known camera geom-
etry. This subsequent algorithm for position estimation is based on this model.
The algorithm in this section uses contours provided by the function from Section 5.5
to estimate object coordinates relative to the robotics arm end-effector. This function
provides multiple contours, so this algorithm only chooses the contour with the maximal
area. This assumption is valid, because if the masking is done correctly contour with the
maximal area is the part right under the camera on the conveyor belt.
After selecting the contour with the maximal area a minimum-area bounding rectangle
is fitted around it. This step provides pixel coordinates u, v of the part’s centre as well
as its angle of rotation. Additionally, after this step four corner points of the rectangle
are calculated and sorted to ensure their stability between frames. This is necessary,
because the raw order of the points can vary significantly between frames, which would
lead to instability in visualisation or potential problems in the later calculations. The sorting
is done by computing the angle between each corner point and the centre of the rectangle.
And arrange them in the next step in an anti-clockwise order.
However, in this algorithm, the corner points are used only for visualization and not for
any calculations relevant to the pose estimation. Since the distance to the object in the
26
Vision-Guided Robotic System for Real-Time Object Tracking and Handling
==PAGE:37==
picture is a known variable, coordinates of the centre point are sufficient to estimate the
pose of the object in the picture. If this distance would be unknown, it would be necessary
to use an algorithm such as PnP (Perspective-n-Point) to estimate the actual position of
the object. The benefit of the known distance is that it requires less computation and the
estimated coordinates are more accurate.
Given a detected 2D pixel point (u, v) in the image, the following steps were taken to
convert 2D pixel point to a 3D point in the robotic arm coordinate frame:
1. Convert 2D pixel coordinates into homogeneous pixel coordinates.
ppixel =


u
v
1


2. Back-project to Normalized Camera Coordinates using camera matrix K from cam-
era calibration procedure (see Section 5.2). Here, dcam is a direction vector in the
camera coordinate system.
dcam = K−1 · ppixel =


xn
yn
1


3. Scale direction vector dcam by the known depth Z. it is a known value, because for
this project the robotic arm is always keeping the same distance to the conveyor
belt.
Pcam =


X
Y
Z

=


xn · Z
yn · Z
Z


Pcam = [xcam, ycam, zcam]
4. Transformation to the robotic arm coordinate frame using parameters from hand-eye
calibration (see Section 5.3).
• Rcam→end-effector ∈R3×3 →rotation matrix from camera to robotic arm frame.
• tcam→end-effector ∈R3×1 →translation vector from camera to robotic arm frame.
Final 3D coordinates:
Prel = tcam→end-effector −Rcam→end-effector · Pcam
Prel = [xrel, yrel, zrel]
where Prel are the coordinates of a point seen by the camera relative to the end-
effector of the robotic arm.
This algorithm was developed with the help of OpenCV documentation [31]. To verify the
accuracy of the algorithm a simple test was performed. A bottom part of the 3D printed
power supply part was placed on a stationary conveyor belt with a ruler as a reference
point. The test was done separately for xrel and yrel positions. Figure 5.8 shows the
camera view during the testing.
Vision-Guided Robotic System for Real-Time Object Tracking and Handling
27
==PAGE:38==
The first column shows the testing of the xrel estimation. In the top image the part is
positioned at 0.0 m according to the camera system. The part was then shifted by -0.05
m and -0.1 m and the camera measured -0.049 m and 0.099 m respectively. In both
cases, the measurement error was approximately 1 mm. This deviation is minimal and
shows that the xrel estimation is accurate.
The second column presents the test results of the yrel estimation. The top image shows
the part positioned at 0.0 m according to the camera system. The part was then shifted by
-0.02 m and 0.02 m along the Y -axis and the camera measured the -0.019 m and +0.02 m
respectively. The measurement error was approximately 1 mm in the negative Y direction
and in the positive was negligible, indicating that the yrel estimation is accurate.
28
Vision-Guided Robotic System for Real-Time Object Tracking and Handling
==PAGE:39==
xrel: 0.000 m
xrel: -0.049 m
xrel: -0.099 m
yrel: 0.000 m
yrel: -0.019 m
yrel: +0.020 m
Figure 5.8: Camera view of part positions during testing, clipped to the relevant region.
The left column shows variations in xrel and the right column shows variations in yrel.
Vision-Guided Robotic System for Real-Time Object Tracking and Handling
29
==PAGE:40==
5.8
Graphical user interface (GUI)
Graphical interfaces in this system are used to interact with the system. This project is
not meant for external users, so it is not crucial to make it user-friendly. Functionality of
GUI:
• Camera view - live view from the camera mounted to the robotic arm displaying ad-
ditional information from image processing pipeline, such as contour lines, corners
and corner numbering. Allows for the user to assess the performance of the system.
• Calibration - if needed a possibility to perform a calibration of parameters used for
image processing.
• Storage status - simple graphical way of displaying the status of the storage unit.
• Start button - starts the whole system
• Stop button - halts the program
• Conveyor belt start button - sends a command to the robotic arm to move to the
home position
• Inverter frequency buttons — three buttons to set inverter frequency to: 15 Hz, 20
Hz and 25 Hz.
5.8.1
Parameter calibration
An important feature of the GUI in this project is the ability to calibrate the HSV parameters,
as well as erosion and dilation iteration number. This calibration allows to set and fine-tune
the parameters for the image processing pipeline. The window for parameter calibration
is shown in Figure 5.9, with the correct parameters set for masking.
Using the sliders, it is possible to adjust the lower and higher bounds for the HSV masking,
as well as the erosion and dilation iteration count. To show how a mask that needs adjust-
ment looks like see Figure 5.10. That mask needs adjusting because of cavities, which
could cause instabilities and incorrect part detection in the vision algorithm. A proper
mask needs to have corners as sharp as possible and have no holes or gaps.
Figure 5.9: Calibration window with a correctly set mask
30
Vision-Guided Robotic System for Real-Time Object Tracking and Handling
==PAGE:41==
Figure 5.10: Calibration window with an incorrectly set mask
Vision-Guided Robotic System for Real-Time Object Tracking and Handling
31
==PAGE:42==
32
Vision-Guided Robotic System for Real-Time Object Tracking and Handling
==PAGE:43==
6
Control systems: robotic arm
motion and trajectory planning
This chapter overviews the motion and velocity control of the robotic arm. Efficient control
of the robotic arm’s movement is important to quickly and accurately catch parts moving on
the conveyor belt within a limited workspace (see Figure 1.1). Using the position estimated
by the vision system (see Section 5.7) the robotic arm must intercept the moving part while
accounting for its rotation (see Figure 6.1). The gripper has two fingers with flat pads (see
Figure 1.2), and because the parts are rectangular, the finger pads must be alligned as
close to parallel to the sides of the part as possible to make sure that the grasp is secure.
The information about the rotation of the part is provided by the vision system designed
in Chapter 5.
6.1
Methodology
The methodology for robotic arm motion control in this project focused mainly on achieving
accurate and successful grasps of parts moving on the conveyor belt, rather than on speed
and efficiency. Based on insights from studies such as [13], the following methodology
was developed for detecting, tracking, and catching objects from the conveyor belt. It
involves four main steps:
Vision-Guided Robotic System for Real-Time Object Tracking and Handling
33
==PAGE:44==
State
Function
Linear
axes
Rotational
axes
1. Standby
The robotic arm hovers
above the conveyor and
monitors for incoming parts.
None
None
2. Pursuit
Tracks the part using visual
feedback and follows it along
the conveyor.
X, Y
None
3. Descend
Once aligned, the robotic
arm descends to grasp the
part from the conveyor.
Z
Rz
4. Placement
Lifts and moves the part to its
designated slot in the
storage unit.
X, Y, Z
θz, θy, θz
Table 6.1: Robotic arm states with corresponding functions as well as active linear and
rotational axes.
Figure 6.1: Example image of a rotated part viewed by the camera
34
Vision-Guided Robotic System for Real-Time Object Tracking and Handling
==PAGE:45==
Robotic arm base
coordinate frame
X-axis
Z-axis
Y-axis
Figure 6.2: Overview of the axes of robotic arm coordinate frame
6.2
Standby
In standby mode, the robotic arm hovers stationary above the conveyor belt. The goal
in this mode is to detect a part on the conveyor and calculate its angle of rotation (see
Section 5.6) as well as the initial velocity of the moving part. Estimating the initial velocity
is crucial for the subsequent algorithms to work correctly, it will be further discussed in
section: 6.3.
6.2.1
Initial calculation of the part’s velocity
The average velocity vx, avg of the moving part is found by capturing several frames with a
camera and figuring out the part’s position in each frame. This velocity is measured along
the robotic arm X-axis (see Figure 6.3). The average velocity measured by this method
is negative, because the conveyor belt moves in the opposite direction to the robotic arm
X-axis.
Only the third and third-from the last positions are used for the average velocity calcula-
tions. In this way potentially noisy measurements are avoided, which often occur at the
beginning or end of the sequence. This usually happens, when the object is just entering
or leaving the camera’s field of view. The measured position can be then unstable due to
noise or because the part is not yet fully visible.
To check the visibility of the part, the pixel area of the object is calculated and compared
to a fixed threshold. If this area is smaller than this threshold, the object is considered not
Vision-Guided Robotic System for Real-Time Object Tracking and Handling
35
==PAGE:46==
fully visible, and the corresponding reading is discarded. However, this method does not
entirely prevent noisy measurements. Therefore, some of the measurements from the
start and the end of the sequence are still discarded.
This method is relatively simple and could be improved, but it proved to be reliable and
good enough for this project. An alternative method would be to check the aspect ratio
of the detected part and comparing it to a predefined reference value - big deviations
from a predefined reference aspect ratio would indicate that the part is not fully visible.
This approach also handles changes in the camera height better than the area method
used in this project. However, the camera is always at the same height, so this change is
unnecessary.
Moving direction of the conveyor belt
Robot
coordinate frame
X
Z
Y
Figure 6.3: Robotic arm coordinate frame and the movement direction of the conveyor
belt
The method for calculating average velocity for this project:
∆xrel = xrel, 2 −xrel, n-2
where n is the number of captured data points, and xrel, xrel, n-2 are the third and third-
from-last position values in the array xrel = {xrel, 0, xrel, 1, xrel, 2, . . . , xrel, n-1}.
∆t = t2 −tn−2
vx, avg = ∆xrel
∆t
The final calculated average velocity is then used in the pursuit mode 6.3 for calculating
parameters such as maximal velocity or for predicting part position. A similar method was
presented in a study from Florida State University [32]. Where authors used a comparable
approach to estimate the velocity of a moving object on the conveyor belt.
To verify that average velocity computed by this method is correct, it was compared to the
actual conveyor belt velocity measured and calculated by other methods that didn’t rely
on the vision system.
36
Vision-Guided Robotic System for Real-Time Object Tracking and Handling
==PAGE:47==
6.2.2
Reference velocity of the conveyor belt
The reference velocity for the conveyor belt was estimated by measuring the time it takes
for an object to travel one meter using a manual stopwatch. This method relied on how
accurately a person could start and stop the stopwatch. So, to improve the reliability five
measurements were taken for each tested frequency 6.2, and the average was used to
calculate reference velocity. The inverter frequencies tested: 15 Hz, 20 Hz and 25 Hz
corresponded to the slow, medium and fast conveyor belt velocities.
Frequency (Hz)
Time for 1 m travel (s)
Avg. Time (s)
15
19.2
19.2
19.2
19.2
19.2
19.2
20
13.8
13.8
13.8
13.8
13.8
13.8
25
11.0
11.0
11.0
10.9
10.9
10.9
Table 6.2: Measured times for a 1 m travel distance at different inverter frequencies,
rounded to one decimal place
The average velocity vx, avg was calculated using the formula:
vx, avg = −1 m
tavg
(6.1)
tavg
Average time from the Table 6.2 (s).
To enable direct comparison with the velocity estimated by the vision system, the mea-
sured velocities have negative signs.
Frequency (Hz)
Avg. Time (s)
Avg. Velocity
(m/s)
15
19.2
-0.052
20
13.8
-0.072
25
10.9
-0.092
Table 6.3: vx, avg for each analysed inverter frequency
To ensure that the reference velocities are as close to the truth value as possible another
method was used to verify values from the Table 6.3. The inverter frequency relation
to the conveyor belt velocity could be derived from mathematical calculations using the
parameters of the motor and gearbox of the conveyor belt. According to the motor and
gearbox specifications, WA20 DR63M41, the motor’s shaft spins at 34 RPM (rotations per
minute) when the inverter is set to a frequency of 50 Hz. Using this data and the radius
of the conveyor belt drive wheel, we can calculate the actual conveyor belt velocity with
the following equation:
vx (f) = 34 rpm
60 s
·
f
50 Hz · 2πr
(6.2)
1https://download.sew-eurodrive.com/download/pdf/19464819.pdf
Vision-Guided Robotic System for Real-Time Object Tracking and Handling
37
==PAGE:48==
34 rpm
60 s
converts revolutions per minute (rpm) to revolutions per second (rps).
f
50 Hz
the inverter frequency (Hz).
2πr
the circumference of the conveyor belt drive wheel base on its radius (m).
Equation 6.2 assumes a linear correlation between frequency set on the inverter and
rotation of the motor’s shaft. To verify it, a test was conducted to measure the RPM of the
shaft. The method used involved recording a video of the motor’s shaft and analysing it
to count the shaft rotations. The results are presented in table:
Frequency (Hz)
Time (s)
Rotations
RPM
RPM expected
Velocity (m/s)
15
82.04
14
10.24
10.2
0.0525
20
79.98
19
14.25
13.6
0.0731
25
86.60
26
18.01
17
0.0924
Table 6.4: Test of shaft’s RPM
The table 6.4 confirmed that the correlation between frequency and motor’s shaft RPM is
linear.
Knowing that the radius of the conveyor belt drive wheel is 49 mm, the calculated linear
velocity of the conveyor belt at each inverter frequency is shown in table:6.5.
Frequency (Hz)
Calculated
Velocity (m/s)
15
0.0525
20
0.0731
25
0.0924
Table 6.5: Calculated conveyor belt velocities using motor specifications
The velocity values from table 6.5 confirm that the velocities measured with the stopwatch
method are close to the true values. Therefore, the velocity values from the table 6.3 were
used as a reference for the measured velocities.
To verify the velocity measurements recorded from the vision system, 20 measurements
per frequency and per part were recorded. These results are presented in the graphs
below 6.4.
38
Vision-Guided Robotic System for Real-Time Object Tracking and Handling
==PAGE:49==
0.053
0.052
0.051
0.050
0.049
0.048
0.047
0.046
Velocity [m/s]
 = 0.0014 m/s
15 Hz - Part 1
Measurements
Avg: -0.051 m/s
Reference: -0.052 m/s
 = 0.0013 m/s
15 Hz - Part 2
Measurements
Avg: -0.051 m/s
Reference: -0.052 m/s
 = 0.0035 m/s
15 Hz - Part 3
Measurements
Avg: -0.049 m/s
Reference: -0.052 m/s
0.072
0.070
0.068
0.066
0.064
Velocity [m/s]
 = 0.0016 m/s
20 Hz - Part 1
Measurements
Avg: -0.070 m/s
Reference: -0.072 m/s
 = 0.0013 m/s
20 Hz - Part 2
Measurements
Avg: -0.071 m/s
Reference: -0.072 m/s
 = 0.0040 m/s
20 Hz - Part 3
Measurements
Avg: -0.068 m/s
Reference: -0.072 m/s
Measurement number
0.092
0.090
0.088
0.086
0.084
0.082
Velocity [m/s]
 = 0.0032 m/s
25 Hz - Part 1
Measurements
Avg: -0.089 m/s
Reference: -0.092 m/s
Measurement number
 = 0.0038 m/s
25 Hz - Part 2
Measurements
Avg: -0.088 m/s
Reference: -0.092 m/s
Measurement number
 = 0.0050 m/s
25 Hz - Part 3
Measurements
Avg: -0.087 m/s
Reference: -0.092 m/s
Figure 6.4: Velocities measured using the positions provided by the camera, ∆= vx, avg −
vx, reference
Vision-Guided Robotic System for Real-Time Object Tracking and Handling
39
==PAGE:50==
To analyse the fidelity of the results, the mean measured velocity, standard deviation
(STD), relative standard deviation (RSD), and bias relative to the reference value were
calculated. Those values help with assessing any trends or systematic deviations can be
found in the data gathered by the vision system.
Freq (Hz)
Part
Avg. velocity (m/s)
Std
RSD (%)
Bias
Bias (%)
15
1
-0.05062
0.000288
0.57
-0.00148
-2.85
15
2
-0.05075
0.000276
0.54
-0.00135
-2.60
15
3
-0.04855
0.000550
1.13
-0.00355
-6.82
20
1
-0.07045
0.000689
0.98
-0.00205
-2.83
20
2
-0.07071
0.000764
1.08
-0.00179
-2.47
20
3
-0.06802
0.001166
1.71
-0.00448
-6.18
25
1
-0.08882
0.000892
1.00
-0.00248
-2.72
25
2
-0.08824
0.000914
1.04
-0.00306
-3.35
25
3
-0.08697
0.002051
2.36
-0.00433
-4.74
Table 6.6: Analysis of average velocity measurements
From Table 6.6, several trends can be observed.
Firstly, the system clearly underestimates the velocity of the moving part, and never over-
estimates. As the inverter frequency increases, both standard deviation and relative stan-
dard deviation increases. This shows that the precision of the measurements decreases
with increasing velocity of the conveyor. This effect is likely due to less available time for
the vision system to take position measurements - the higher the velocity of the moving
part the less measurements can be taken, reducing the quality of the assessed velocity
of the moving part.
Moreover, it is clear from the plots in Figure 6.4 and the data in Table 6.6 that the estimated
velocity for the third part is distinctly lower than the others. This is caused by the shadow
cast by the part, affecting the vision system’s measurement. When the part enters the
camera’s field of view the shadow is interpreted as part of the component due to using
masking as an object detection algorithm, see Section 5.5. During the movement of the
part the shadow changes size, which lowers the average velocity calculated.
Additionally, the absolute bias for all the parts and frequencies remains below 0.005 m/s,
which is acceptable for this application. The robotic arm always catches the part within 10
seconds, so this error would cause a maximum deviation of around 5 cm over that time.
Overall, the results are acceptable and provide a reliable initial velocity estimate.
40
Vision-Guided Robotic System for Real-Time Object Tracking and Handling
==PAGE:51==
6.3
Pursuit
The goal in the pursuit mode is to follow the part until the robotic arm gripper is directly
above it to later grasp the part during the descend mode 6.4. During the pursuit mode, the
robotic arm tracks the part detected by the vision system using either real-time feedback
from the camera or a predicted position.
6.3.1
Robust coordinates
To track a moving part on the conveyor belt, the robotic arm is controlled using velocity
vectors that are sent continuously to the robot. Their calculation relies on the part’s coor-
dinates provided by the vision system (xrel, yrel). To maintain stable control over the robot,
these coordinates must be delivered in real time consistently and without delays.
The vision system may occasionally fail to deliver coordinates of the tracked part due
to occlusions, motion blur or other image problems. To keep continuous tracking of the
object, when the algorithm detects invalid coordinates from the vision system, it switches
to using predicted coordinates. These are calculated from the last valid position of its
timestamp, as shown in equations (6.3) and (6.4).
However, a direct switch could potentially cause a noticeable jump in position used for the
calculation of the velocity vectors for the robot, since predicted and measured positions
may slightly differ. To prevent this, actual and predicted positions are smoothly blended
using the alpha blending factor as illustrated by the equations bellow:
xrel, pred[n] = (xrel, last + vinit · (tnow[n] −tlast)) −(xee[n] −xee, last)
(6.3)
yrel, pred[n] = yrel, last −(yee, last −yee[n])
(6.4)
xrel, final[n] = α · xrel, pred[n] + (1 −α) · xrel, meas[n]
(6.5)
yrel, final[n] = α · yrel, pred[n] + (1 −α) · yrel, meas[n]
(6.6)
α[n] =
(
α[n] −∆α,
if valid detection from the camera
α[n] + ∆α,
otherwise
(6.7)
∆α = 0.1
(6.8)
Vision-Guided Robotic System for Real-Time Object Tracking and Handling
41
==PAGE:52==
xrel, pred[n], yrel, pred[n]
predicted positions of the part
relative to the end-effector of the robotic arm.
xrel, meas[n], yrel, meas[n]
measured positions of the part
from the vision system relative to the end-effector of
the robotic arm.
xrel, final[n], yrel, final[n]
positions of the part
relative to the end-effector of the robotic arm used for its control.
xrel, last, yrel, last
last measured position of the part relative to the end-effector.
xee[n], yee[n]
positions of the robotic arm end effector.
vinit
estimated part velocity.
tnow[n], tlast
current timestamp and last recorded timestamps
when the position was measured by the camera.
α[n]
blending factor.
∆α
constant value tuned experimentally so that the blending
factor changes gradually, but not too slowly.
[n]
indicates that a variable was changing in each iteration
of the program, n ∈{0, 1, 2, 3, . . . }.
The alpha blending factor works as a smoothing parameter that gradually adjusts the
weights between the predicted and measured positions, whenever the source of the po-
sition switches. This approach reduces sudden changes and ensures that the positions
from both sources smoothly combine. This method is similar to the complementary filter
used during the sensor fusion [33]. Complementary filters merge different data sources
by blending them over time, which prevents rapid transitions from occurring and improves
the overall stability.
To validate the performance of this method the positions and velocities plots can be anal-
ysed to check if any big velocity jumps occur - this would indicate that the method is not
blending the predicted and measured positions smoothly.
Figure 6.5 illustrates an example run of the system and how the X-distance (see Figure
6.6), Y -distance (see Figure 6.7), vx, vy, and the α changes over time. At the beginning,
the measurements from the vision system (xrel, meas and yrel, meas) are zero, because the
part is not in the camera’s FOV (field of view). During this period the system must rely on
the predicted position of the part. When the part finally comes into the camera’s FOV at
around 1 second mark the measured values begin to blend with the predicted values for
both axes. Even thought, there is small deviation between xrel, meas and xrel, pred there is
no sudden jump in the vx. Instead, it decreases gradually, which indicates that the alpha
blending is working correctly. The same is observed for the vy. Moreover, the values for
the predicted and measured positions align very closely, confirming that the accuracy of
the estimated position.
6.3.2
Velocity control along X and Y axes
The coordinates (xrel, final, yrel, final) described in the previous method, are continuously
used during the pursuit mode. During this mode the robotic arm moves along the negative
X-axis direction using a PID controller, while making small adjustments to the Y position
to account for any shifts along the Y -axis. The Z-axis distance remains constant, ensuring
that the part is fully visible during the movements of the robot.
The goal is to minimize the error (distance along the X-axis from the gripper to the part,
as shown in Figure 6.6).
42
Vision-Guided Robotic System for Real-Time Object Tracking and Handling
==PAGE:53==
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
Time [s]
0.20
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00
Distance [m]
X Distance [m]
X Meas.
X Pred.
X Final
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
Time [s]
0.015
0.010
0.005
0.000
Distance [m]
Y Distance [m]
Y Meas.
Y Pred.
Y Final
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
Time [s]
0.275
0.250
0.225
0.200
0.175
0.150
0.125
0.100
X Speed [m/s]
X Speed [m/s]
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
Time [s]
0.000
0.002
0.004
0.006
0.008
0.010
0.012
0.014
Y Speed [m/s]
Y Speed [m/s]
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
Time [s]
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Alpha
Alpha
Figure 6.5: Comparison of vx and vy as well as α
The initial velocity calculated by the method described in Section 6.2.1 is used in this
mode to calculate the maximal vx for the robotic arm 6.9.
vx,max = vx, initial + (xlast + vx, initial · (tnow −tlast))
Tcatch
(6.9)
This equation estimates the velocity required to catch up to the part within Tcatch seconds
and sets the maximum allowable velocity for the robot. This step is important because
at the start of the pursuit mode the robotic arm is moving at high velocities, and setting
the maximum velocity proportional to the actual velocity of the part reduces the risk of
overshoot.
vx, max
maximum allowed velocity in the X direction.
vx, initial
initial estimated velocity of the part.
xrel, last
last known of the part relative to the end-effector.
tnow
current timestamp.
tlast
last timestamp of the part, when it was visible by the camera.
Vision-Guided Robotic System for Real-Time Object Tracking and Handling
43
==PAGE:54==
Distance along X-axis
Object's center point
Figure 6.6: Distance to the object along X-axis
Velocity control along X-axis
To control the velocity of the robotic arm along the X-axis, a PID controller is used. Equa-
tion 6.10 explains how vx[n] is calculated. The information about control theory and PID’s
controllers was taken from [34].
vx[n] = Kp · ex[n] + Ki ·
Z
ex[n]dt + Kd · dex[n]
dt
(6.10)
vx[n]
velocity along X-axis [m/s].
ex
distance to the part [m].
Kp · ex[n]
proportional term.
Ki ·
R
ex[n] dt[n]
integral term - calculates the accumulated error over time.
Kd · dex[n]
dt[n]
derivative term - estimates the rate of change of the error over time.
[n]
indicates that a variable was changing in each iteration of the program,
n ∈{0, 1, 2, 3, . . . }.
The PID controller used in this project uses positional error ex[n] (measured in meters) to
estimate the output velocity vx[n] (measured in meters per second). Therefore it’s highly
dependent on the integral term, since the proportional term becomes very small as the
44
Vision-Guided Robotic System for Real-Time Object Tracking and Handling
==PAGE:55==
robotic arm approaches the target. Without the integral term, the controller would output
velocity close to zero, which would cause erratic and unpredictable behaviour of the robot.
The tuning of the PID controller had to be performed in such a way that the integral term,
that accumulates the error over time, maintains enough velocity so the robotic arm doesn’t
stall, when the proportional term is very low.
After suitable proportional and integral terms were found, through trail-and-error testing,
the derivative term was tuned. The derivative term helps the robotic arm reach the target
faster. The derivative term is large when the error changes rapidly, and smaller when the
rate of change is low. This effectively increases the robotic arm’s velocity at the beginning
when the distance is large. As the robotic arm is near the target and the rate of change
slows down the derivative term decreases and contributes less to the velocity of the robot.
However, the derivative term is often noisy and this could lead to unstable velocity control.
To solve this issue low-pass filters are often implemented in PID controllers to mitigate
this problem.
The derivative term is calculated and passed through a first-order low-pass filter with time
constant τd to reduce the high-frequency noise.
dex[n]
dt[n] = ex[n] −ex,prev[n]
dt[n]
(6.11)
α[n] =
τd
τd + dt[n]
(6.12)
d[n] = α dprev[n] + (1 −α[n]) ex[n] −ex,prev[n]
dt[n]
(6.13)
eprev[n] = ex[n]
(6.14)
dprev[n] = d[n]
(6.15)
dex[n]
dt[n]
unfiltered derivative term.
ex[n]
distance to the part in meters.
α[n]
filter coefficient, controls derivative smoothing.
dt[n]
control loop time step.
dprev[n]
derivative value from the previous iteration.
d[n]
new filtered derivative value.
eprev[n]
error value from the previous iteration.
τd
low-pass filter time constant. Set to 0.3.
Its value was tuned experimentally.
[n]
indicates that a variable was changing in each iteration of the program,
n ∈{0, 1, 2, 3, . . . }.
However, a limiting factor in this design was the sample rate. The velocity could not
be updated faster than 100 ms, because algorithms used to estimate part position were
introducing delays. Moreover, the camera had a limited frame rate of 30 FPS restrict-
ing the image processing. In an ideal scenario with optimised code for image process-
ing and more computational resources. the position of the part could be updated every
1s/30FPS ≈33ms, which is approximately three times faster, however unrealistic in this
scenario.
Vision-Guided Robotic System for Real-Time Object Tracking and Handling
45
==PAGE:56==
Velocity control along the Y -axis
Since the position of the part on the conveyor belt is constant during its movement, the
velocity control along the Y -axis can be easily controlled without using a PID controller.
The position of the part along the Y -axis is constant, because the X-axis is parallel to
the movement direction of the conveyor belt (see Figure 6.3). Therefore to control the
Y -velocity a simple threshold-based control is used.
Distance along Y-axis
Object's center point
Figure 6.7: Distance to the object along Y -axis
vy[n] =







vy, max · sign(yrel[n]),
|yrel[n]| > yrel, threshold,
0.5 · vy[n],
otherwise,
0,
|vy[n]| < 1 · 10−4.
(6.16)
vy[n]
Current velocity of the part along the Y -axis [m/s].
vy, max
Maximum allowed velocity along the Y -axis [m/s].
Calculated as: vy, max = min
 |yrel[0]|, 0.015

yrel[n]
Distance to the part along the Y -axis [m].
yrel, threshold
Threshold distance to stop the velocity adjustment [m]. Set to 0.002 m.
signy
Direction of the required correction along the Y -axis (either +1 or -1).
[n]
indicates that a variable was changing in each iteration of the program,
n ∈{0, 1, 2, 3, . . . }.
When the |yrel[n]| > yrel, threshold, the velocity vy is set to the maximum allowed value vy, max,
but with a negative or positive sign depending on the required direction of movement.
46
Vision-Guided Robotic System for Real-Time Object Tracking and Handling
==PAGE:57==
Once the part gets closer and yrel goes over the ythreshold, the vy is reduced by half in
each iteration by multiplying it by 0.5. This ensures that the Y correction is done quickly,
smoothly and when the |vy[n]| goes below 1·10−4. the vy is zeroed. This is done, because
velocities below 1 · 10−4. are negligible and send to the robotic arm can cause problems
due to formatting limitations.
6.4
Descend
During descend mode the robotic arm moves at the vx estimated by the PID controller
while descending and rotating the end-effector along the Z-axis (see Figure 6.8) to grasp
the moving part. During this movement the camera doesn’t provide feedback to the sys-
tem. The robotic arm moves based on the estimated vx and part rotation θz.
Object's center point
distance
half
Figure 6.8: Distance along the Z-axis to the part
The distance to the part is calculated using this equation:
zrel[n] = zee[n] −zdescend
(6.17)
zrel[n]
Distance to the part [m].
zee[n]
Z-position of the robotic arm (see Section 4.1.2) [m].
zdescend
Target Z-position [m], set in the program to -0.103 m.
[n]
indicates that a variable was changing in each iteration of the program,
n ∈{0, 1, 2, 3, . . . }.
The zrel is needed to calculate the velocity of the robotic arm during the descent. The
velocity along the Z-axis, vz is calculated as follows:
Vision-Guided Robotic System for Real-Time Object Tracking and Handling
47
==PAGE:58==
vz[n] =





vz[n] + vz, increment,
zrel[n] > zhalf
vz[n] · (pz[n])0.6,
0 < zrel[n] ≤zhalf
(6.18)
where
pz[n] = zrel[n]
zhalf
,
pz[n] ∈[0, 1]
(6.19)
vz, increment = −0.003 m/s
(6.20)
vz, increment
Constant increment added to the vz [m/s].
zhalf
Half of the distance to the part (calculated before the descent starts) [m].
vz[n]
Velocity of the robotic arm along the Z-axis (starts at 0 m/s) [m/s].
zrel[n]
Distance to the part [m].
pz[n]
Ratio between the zrel[n] and zhalf at program iteration n.
It represents the progress in the robotic arm’s descent relative to the zhalf.
It is limited to [0, 1] to prevent multiplying vz[n]
by a negative or too big pz[n].
[n]
indicates that a variable was changing in each iteration of the program,
n ∈{0, 1, 2, 3, . . . }.
The descend of the robotic arm is divided into two parts:
1. Acceleration - the velocity of the robotic arm gradually increases by repeatedly
subtracting vz, increment from vz[n] until the robotic arm reaches the half point of the
descend zhalf.
2. Deceleration - the robotic arm smoothly decelerates its velocity by using pz[n],
which starts at 1 as the robotic arm is at zhalf, and decreases towards 0 as the
robotic arm approaches its target. The ratio is additionally raised to the power of
0.6, because using the ratio alone ,vz[n] · (pz, clipped[n]), the robotic arm approaches
its target too slowly. The value of 0.6 was determined experimentally.
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
Time [s]
0.100
0.075
0.050
0.025
0.000
0.025
0.050
0.075
Position [m]
zdistance
zdescend
vz
0.150
0.125
0.100
0.075
0.050
0.025
0.000
Velocity [m/s]
Descend
Figure 6.9: vz and position along the Z-axis during the descend of the robot
48
Vision-Guided Robotic System for Real-Time Object Tracking and Handling
==PAGE:59==
The plot 6.9 shows the velocity and Z-position of the robotic arm during the descent. When
accelerating, the velocity of the robotic arm changes at a constant rate from 0.0 m/s to
around -0.17 m/s and then back to 0.0 m/s, but this time with a slight curve, because
of the exponent used for smoother deceleration. It can also be seen from the plot that
the zdescend was smoothly reached and the robotic arm stops exactly when it reaches its
target.
Correct tuning of the vz was important, because the robotic arm had to descend slow
enough so the gripper could rotate around the Z-axis in time to account for the part’s
rotation (see Figures 6.1 and 6.2). Therefore, the algorithm for controlling the vθz had to
quickly accelerate the wrist (see Figure 6.10) of the robotic arm (the joint closest to the
gripper) and smoothly decelerate it, before the robotic arm reached the target zdescend.
Since the robotic arm had to rotate its wrist quickly, the approach using the increment (see
Equation 6.20) couldn’t be used, because during the experimentations it turned out to be
too slow. Therefore, to gain more control over the vθz the progress method was used (see
Equation 6.20), but with a different functions than used to control vz.
Wrist of the robotic arm
Camera mounted
in its mount
to the robotic arm
Figure 6.10: Wrist of the robotic arm and the camera (wrist is the last joint of the robotic
arm and is closest to the gripper)
Vision-Guided Robotic System for Real-Time Object Tracking and Handling
49
==PAGE:60==
In this method, the rotation motion is divided into three phases: acceleration, cruising at
constant velocity and deceleration. This gives far better control compared to using only
acceleration and deceleration as in the vz control. The cruising phase allows the wrist of
the robotic arm to rotate at a high and constant velocity, before decelerating enabling it to
cover a greater distance, while still allowing for a smooth deceleration.
The acceleration and deceleration ranges were calculated as follows:
θz, accel = 0.1 · θz, target
(6.21)
θz, decel = 0.9 · θz, target
(6.22)
θz, target
Target rotation angle around the Z-axis (see Figure 6.1).
θz, accel
Rotation angle at which the acceleration ends.
θz, decel
Rotation angle at which the deceleration starts.
In practice those equations mean that the wrist of the robotic arm accelerates until the
rotation angle reaches 10% of θz, target, and starts to decelerate after the wrist exceeds
90% of θz, target. The values of 0.1 and 0.9 were chosen based on experimentation and
manual tuning.
The angular velocity is controlled using those equations:
paccel[n] =

θz[n]
θz, accel

(6.23)
pdecel[n] =

θz[n] −θz, decel
θz, target −θz, decel
 =

θz[n] −0.9 · θz, target
0.1 · θz, target

(6.24)
(6.25)
s = sign(θz, target)
(6.26)
paccel[n], pdecel[n] ∈[0, 1]
vθz[n] =







s · vθ, max ·
 1 −e−4·pθ,accel[n]
,
|θz[n]| < |θz, accel|
vθz[n] ·

1 −
 1 −pθ,decel[n]
2
,
|θz[n]| ≥|θz, decel| ∧|vθz[n]| > 1 · 10−4
0,
|θz[n]| ≥|θz, decel| ∧|vθz[n]| ≤1 · 10−4
(6.27)
paccel[n]
Progress in the robotic arm’s wrist acceleration.
pdecel[n]
Progress in the robotic arm’s wrist deceleration.
θz[n]
Angle of rotation of the robotic arm’s wrist.
vθz[n]
Angle of rotation of the robotic arm’s wrist.
θz, target
Target rotation angle around the Z axis (see Figure 6.1).
θz, accel
Rotation angle at which the acceleration ends.
θz, decel
Rotation angle at which the deceleration starts.
sign()
Returns a sign of the value inside the brackets.
vθ, max
Maximal allowed angular velocity of the wrist.
[n]
indicates that a variable was changing in each iteration of the program,
n ∈{0, 1, 2, 3, . . . }.
50
Vision-Guided Robotic System for Real-Time Object Tracking and Handling
==PAGE:61==
The phases of the angular velocity control:
1. Acceleration - The angular velocity increases using an exponential function 1 −
e−4·pθ,accel, where pθ,accel starts at 0, since in the first iteration θz[n] = 0. As a result,
the exponential function yields 0 in the first step, which would cause the robotic arm
to not move, however, during the acceleration phase, the angular velocity is limited
and cannot go below a predefined threshold.
The exponential function increases the angular velocity very quickly. At a paccel[n] of
0.5 it already yields approximately 0.86, which means that the robotic arm reaches
around 86% of the maximal allowed angular velocity. The fast rate of change is
intentional as it was important to achieve the maximal angular velocity vθ, max as
fast as possible while maintaining smooth change.
2. Cruising at a constant velocity - when the θz[n] is between θz, accel, and θz, decel
the robotic arm’s wrist moves at a constant velocity
3. Deceleration - During the deceleration the system uses a quadratic ease-out func-
tion that smoothly decreases the vθz[n]. When the θz[n] is at the θz, decel the pdecel[n]
yields 0. As the θz[n] increases or decreases depending on the sign of θz, target the
paccel[n] increases until it reaches 1, which happens exactly when θz[n] = θz, target.
The function for decelerating decreases the angular velocity rapidly at the beginning
and slows down the deceleration near the end to make it very smooth. When the
absolute velocity goes below 1 · 10−4. it is zeroed. This is done, because velocities
below 1 · 10−4. are negligible and sent to the robotic arm can cause problems due
to formatting limitations.
The plots in Figure 6.11 show how the angular velocity and the wrist rotation change dur-
ing the descent of the robot. The plots illustrate how the vθz behaves for various part
rotations. During the acceleration phase, the velocity rapidly changes as expected from
the exponential function. At the beginning of the deceleration, the velocity is quickly re-
duced. When the θz is close to θtarget the rate of deceleration decreases and the velocity
smoothly converges to the θz, target.
In the second column of the plots the velocity of the robotic arm’s wrist doesn’t slow down
completely to 0 deg /s. However this is not a major problem, because the ∆θz defined
as θz, target −θz, final shows that the gripper is under-rotated in both cases by 2.4 and 2.5
degrees which is not a significant value and doesn’t cause any issues for the system to
properly and accurately grasp the part from the conveyor belt.
All of the functions used for velocity control during the descent were chosen to minimise
rapid and jerky movements of the robotic arm, which could cause it to exceed the torque
limit and go into emergency mode which would cause the whole system to shut down. All
these functions were taken or inspired by [35].
6.4.1
Placement
During the placement the part is moved from the conveyor belt to a designated slot in the
part holder. The system slows the robotic arm after the pursuit mode and simultaneously
ascends. The equations used for it are presented below.
vx[n] =



0.98 · vx[n],
otherwise
0,
vx[n] ≥−1 · 10−4
(6.28)
Vision-Guided Robotic System for Real-Time Object Tracking and Handling
51
==PAGE:62==
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
Time [s]
25
20
15
10
5
0
5
10
15
Degrees (°)
z, target: -23.2°, 
z, final: -22.7°, 
z: -0.5°
z
v
z
z, target 
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Time [s]
60
40
20
0
20
z, target: -58.5°, 
z, final: -56.0°, 
z: -2.5°
z
v
z
z, target 
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Time [s]
10
0
10
20
Degrees (°)
z, target: 26.5°, 
z, final: 25.8°, 
z: 0.7°
z
v
z
z, target 
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Time [s]
30
20
10
0
10
20
30
40
50
z, target: 53.0°, 
z, final: 50.6°, 
z: 2.4°
z
v
z
z, target 
Figure 6.11: vθz and θz during the descend of the robotic arm for four various part rotations
vx[n]
velocity along X-axis [m/s].
[n]
indicates that a variable was changing in each iteration of the program,
n ∈{0, 1, 2, 3, . . . }.
When the robotic arm moves up after catching the part the vx is smoothly reduced by
multiplying it by 0.98 in each iteration. As it goes below 1 · 10−4. it is zeroed. This is done,
because velocities below 1 · 10−4. are negligible and sent to the robotic arm can cause
problems due to formatting limitations.
vz[n] =



vz[n] + vz, increment,
t[n] < Tascend
2
vz[n] −vz, increment,
t[n] ≥Tascend
2
(6.29)
t[n]
time from the start of ascend in each iteration [s].
vz[n]
velocity along the Z-axis [m/s].
vz, increment
Constant increment added to the vz in each iteration.
Tascend
Ascend time set in the program.
[n]
indicates that a variable was changing in each iteration of the program,
n ∈{0, 1, 2, 3, . . . }.
52
Vision-Guided Robotic System for Real-Time Object Tracking and Handling
==PAGE:63==
The ascend velocity control is divided into two phases:
• Acceleration - The velocity along the Z-axis is increased using the vz, increment.
• Deceleration - The velocity along the Z-axis is decreased using the vz, increment.
After successfully completing the ascent, the robotic arm goes to the part storage unit
(see Figure 6.12) where it places the part in its designated spot.
Part holder in the setup
Figure 6.12: Part holder
Vision-Guided Robotic System for Real-Time Object Tracking and Handling
53
==PAGE:64==
54
Vision-Guided Robotic System for Real-Time Object Tracking and Handling
==PAGE:65==
7
System test
This chapter presents the outcome of the system tests performed to evaluate the work
done in this project. It’s also meant to verify that all the objectives defined in Chapter 2
1.2 have been met. Specifically, how it performs and identifies potential improvements.
7.1
Performance tests
A well-designed robotic system for pick-and-placement applications should have a suc-
cess rate close to 100% (see Chapter 2). Meaning that the robotic arm picks almost all
the parts from a conveyor belt and places them in their designated locations.
To test the reliability of the designed robotic system, a performance test was conducted
assessing the pickup rate based on the number of successful pickups for each part at
various conveyor belt speeds.
During the tests the parts were placed on the conveyor belt by hand. It was important to
place them at various angles and shifted along the Y -axis (see Figure 6.2) to simulate
real-world variations.
When the robotic arm failed to grasp a part, it was mainly caused by a misalignment
between the gripper and the part on the conveyor or an incorrect estimation of the part’s
velocity, which caused the robotic arm not to move at all. This was intentional, because
without a correct assessment of the part’s velocity the system didn’t have enough data to
correctly guide the robotic arm to the target.
Vision-Guided Robotic System for Real-Time Object Tracking and Handling
55
==PAGE:66==
Part
Freq (Hz)
Successful
Unsuccessful
In total
Success rate
Speed error
Failed grasp
1
25
48
0
2
50
96%
20
49
1
0
50
98%
15
48
0
2
50
96%
2
25
50
0
0
50
100%
20
50
0
0
50
100%
15
46
0
4
50
92%
3
25
32
15
3
50
64%
20
48
2
0
50
96%
15
48
0
2
50
96%
Table 7.1: Number of successful and unsuccessful pickup attempts
Part
Freq (Hz)
Avg.
Distance
Travelled (m)
Avg.
Identification
Time (s)
Avg. Speed
Estimation
Time (s)
Avg. Catch
Time (s)
1
25
0.76
0.29
1.58
6.39
20
0.62
0.3
2.01
6.12
15
0.56
0.31
2.68
7.56
2
25
0.75
0.3
1.68
6.17
20
0.67
0.3
2.19
6.68
15
0.63
0.35
3.01
8.5
3
25
0.76
0.3
1.35
6.55
20
0.62
0.31
1.61
6.32
15
0.54
0.32
2.2
6.92
Table 7.2: Distance travelled and timing statistics for part pick-up
56
Vision-Guided Robotic System for Real-Time Object Tracking and Handling
==PAGE:67==
0.70
0.75
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
Distance traveled (m)
Part 1 - (48 successful grasps)
Distance traveled
Avg Distance (0.76 m)
0
5
10
15
20
Time (s)
Part 1 - Time breakdown
Ident Stop Time
Speed Est. Time
Catch Time
Avg. Ident. Time (0.29s)
Avg. Speed Est. Time (1.58s)
Avg Catch Time (6.39s)
0.70
0.75
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
Distance traveled (m)
Part 2 - (50 successful grasps)
Distance traveled
Avg Distance (0.75 m)
0
5
10
15
20
Time (s)
Part 2 - Time breakdown
Ident Stop Time
Speed Est. Time
Catch Time
Avg. Ident. Time (0.30s)
Avg. Speed Est. Time (1.68s)
Avg Catch Time (6.17s)
0
10
20
30
40
50
Grasp number
0.70
0.75
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
Distance traveled (m)
Part 3 - (32 successful grasps)
Distance traveled
Avg Distance (0.76 m)
0
10
20
30
40
50
Grasp number
0
5
10
15
20
Time (s)
Part 3 - Time breakdown
Ident Stop Time
Speed Est. Time
Catch Time
Avg. Ident. Time (0.30s)
Avg. Speed Est. Time (1.35s)
Avg Catch Time (6.55s)
Figure 7.1: Performance tests for inverter frequency of 25 Hz
Vision-Guided Robotic System for Real-Time Object Tracking and Handling
57
==PAGE:68==
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Distance traveled (m)
Part 1 - (49 successful grasps)
Distance traveled
Avg Distance (0.62 m)
0
5
10
15
20
Time (s)
Part 1 - Time breakdown
Ident Stop Time
Speed Est. Time
Catch Time
Avg. Ident. Time (0.30s)
Avg. Speed Est. Time (2.01s)
Avg Catch Time (6.12s)
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Distance traveled (m)
Part 2 - (50 successful grasps)
Distance traveled
Avg Distance (0.67 m)
0
5
10
15
20
Time (s)
Part 2 - Time breakdown
Ident Stop Time
Speed Est. Time
Catch Time
Avg. Ident. Time (0.30s)
Avg. Speed Est. Time (2.19s)
Avg Catch Time (6.68s)
0
10
20
30
40
50
Grasp number
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Distance traveled (m)
Part 3 - (48 successful grasps)
Distance traveled
Avg Distance (0.62 m)
0
10
20
30
40
50
Grasp number
0
5
10
15
20
Time (s)
Part 3 - Time breakdown
Ident Stop Time
Speed Est. Time
Catch Time
Avg. Ident. Time (0.31s)
Avg. Speed Est. Time (1.61s)
Avg Catch Time (6.32s)
Figure 7.2: Performance tests for inverter frequency of 20 Hz
58
Vision-Guided Robotic System for Real-Time Object Tracking and Handling
==PAGE:69==
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Distance traveled (m)
Part 1 - (48 successful grasps)
Distance traveled
Avg Distance (0.56 m)
0
5
10
15
20
Time (s)
Part 1 - Time breakdown
Ident Stop Time
Speed Est. Time
Catch Time
Avg. Ident. Time (0.31s)
Avg. Speed Est. Time (2.68s)
Avg Catch Time (7.56s)
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Distance traveled (m)
Part 2 - (47 successful grasps)
Distance traveled
Avg Distance (0.63 m)
0
5
10
15
20
Time (s)
Part 2 - Time breakdown
Ident Stop Time
Speed Est. Time
Catch Time
Avg. Ident. Time (0.35s)
Avg. Speed Est. Time (3.01s)
Avg Catch Time (8.50s)
0
10
20
30
40
Grasp number
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Distance traveled (m)
Part 3 - (46 successful grasps)
Distance traveled
Avg Distance (0.54 m)
0
10
20
30
40
Grasp number
0
5
10
15
20
Time (s)
Part 3 - Time breakdown
Ident Stop Time
Speed Est. Time
Catch Time
Avg. Ident. Time (0.32s)
Avg. Speed Est. Time (2.20s)
Avg Catch Time (6.92s)
Figure 7.3: Performance tests for inverter frequency of 15 Hz
Vision-Guided Robotic System for Real-Time Object Tracking and Handling
59
==PAGE:70==
The data gathered during the testing gave some insights into the behaviour of the system
at different conveyor belt velocities. Table 7.1 overviews the number of successful and
unsuccessful pickup attempts for each part at different conveyor belt velocities. Table 7.2
shows the timing and distance data during the conducted tests.
The data from the Table 7.1 was analysed based on the inverter frequency:
• 25 Hz - When the conveyor moved at the highest considered velocity, the robotic arm
grabbed almost all parts number 1 and all the parts with number 2. However, part
number 3 proved problematic. Its velocity could often not be estimated, resulting
in errors. This is most likely, because the vision algorithms could not get sufficient
data to correctly estimate velocity of the moving part. Part number 3 appeared the
biggest from the perspective of the camera, therefore the vision algorithms had the
least amount of time to assess the velocity out of all the parts.
• 20 Hz - At this frequency there was a significant improvement in performance in the
pick up of part number 3. At lower velocity, the vision algorithms had sufficient time
to estimate velocity of the moving part reliably. Overall, the system performed the
best at this velocity, with only 4 unsuccessful grasps out of 150.
• 15 Hz - At the slowest conveyor belt velocity, the performance of the system was
similar to that observed at 20 Hz. Although, it was noted that the robotic arm at the
beginning of its movement moved relatively quickly and often overshoot its target.
The robotic arm usually corrected its trajectory and slowed down, however this be-
haviour sometimes caused the robotic arm to fail to pick up a part from the conveyor
belt.
The results from Table 7.2 show that when the conveyor belt moves slowly, the robotic
arm doesn’t travel as far, but it takes longer to estimate the velocity of the moving part
and catch it. This behaviour is expected, because the vision system uses as much time
as it can to estimate the velocity of the part, and at slower speeds of the conveyor belt,
the part remains longer in the camera’s field of view.
When the conveyor belt moves at its fastest speed, the times for identifying the part, esti-
mating velocity, and catch time remain relatively consistent. However for lower conveyor
belt speeds, the catch time becomes more variable, increasing the slower the conveyor
belt moves. This is likely, because of the overshooting behaviour described in List 7.1 for
frequency of 15Hz.
Overall, the testing showed that the system is generally reliable, but needs improvements
when it comes to catching part number 3. At the highest speed of the conveyor belt, the
system often failed to estimate its velocity, which is crucial for successful pick ups.
60
Vision-Guided Robotic System for Real-Time Object Tracking and Handling
==PAGE:71==
8
Conclusion
The goal of this thesis was to design a system for real-time object tracking and handling,
demonstrated through a case study using a simplified 3D-printed power supply meant to
mimic a product that could be found in industrial manufacturing. The project successfully
showed that even with relatively simple hardware - a webcam and a PC - combined with
an industrial robotic arm, conveyor belt, and gripper, it is possible to develop a functional
robotic system.
The vision system was fundamental to this project. It was used to determine the real-world
position of objects on the conveyor from image data. It provided accurate information
about the position of the object, but the image processing algorithms introduced delays.
This limited the update rate of data sent to the robotic arm, which reduced the system’s
ability to handle faster-moving objects. The key algorithm used to detect objects, colour
masking, although simple and mostly reliable, proved to be dependent on consistent light-
ing. While brightly coloured parts (blue and green) were used to improve visibility in this
experiment, such conditions are rare in real industrial settings. Shadows, especially for
the top cover of the power supply, caused inaccurate speed estimations and sometimes
detection failures. More advanced techniques such as a machine learning algorithm could
greatly improve the robustness of the system.
The control system for the robotic arm was mostly reliable, and effectively managed the
robotic arm’s velocities. However, it could be improved. In the current implementation
the robotic arm waits for a full velocity estimation before moving, which is not optimal and
could limit the performance of the system. If the robotic arm began its motion immediately
after detecting an object it could significantly improve the performance. Additional sensors
such as depth cameras could further enhance flexibility, since in this project the robotic
arm operated at a constant height when pursuing the part for simplicity.
At lower conveyor speeds, the system achieved a success rate above 95%, demonstrating
high reliability. Even at higher speeds, performance remained reasonable, although the
problematic top cover still posed some challenges and the system often failed to estimate
its velocity quickly enough, resulting in missed or failed grasps.
Overall, this project shows that an effective robotic system can be designed with the use
of low-cost hardware alongside industrial class hardware.
Vision-Guided Robotic System for Real-Time Object Tracking and Handling
61
==PAGE:72==
62
Vision-Guided Robotic System for Real-Time Object Tracking and Handling
==PAGE:73==
Bibliography
[1]
Industrial Process Improvement by Automation and Robotics. 2023. URL: https :
//www.mdpi.com/2075-1702/11/11/1011.
[2]
Robot Guidance Using Machine Vision Techniques in Industrial Environments: A
Comparative Review. 2016. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/1424-8220/16/3/335.
[3]
Challenges and Benefits of Industry 4.0: an overview. 2018. URL: https://www.
researchgate.net/publication/330668156_Challenges_and_Benefits_of_Industry_40_
an_overview.
[4]
Adaptable Distributed Vision System for Robot Manipulation Tasks. 2025. URL:
https://www.scitepress.org/Papers/2025/131156/131156.pdf.
[5]
A Robotic Automatic Assembly System Based on Vision. 2020. URL: https://www.
mdpi.com/2076-3417/10/3/1157.
[6]
Sensor-Guided Assembly of Segmented Structures with Industrial Robots. 2021.
URL: https://www.mdpi.com/2076-3417/11/6/2669?.
[7]
An Innovative Vision-Guided Feeding System for Robotic Picking of Different-Shaped
Components. 2024. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/2227-7080/12/9/153.
[8]
Puchuan Song. Object Detection based on HSV in OpenCV. 2025. URL: https://
www.ewadirect.com/proceedings/ace/article/view/19740.
[9]
Object Tracking using Adaptive Template Matching. 2015. URL: https : / / www .
researchgate.net/publication/277648222_Object_Tracking_using_Adaptive_Template_
Matching.
[10]
You Only Look Once: Unified, Real-Time Object Detection. 2016. URL: https://
arxiv.org/abs/1506.02640.
[11]
Computer Vision-Based Robotic System Framework for the Real-Time Identification
and Grasping of Oysters. 2025. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/2076-3417/15/7/3971.
[12]
Visual control of robot manupulators - a review. URL: https://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/
document?repid=rep1&type=pdf&doi=c02adc49d7027dee3f04b8bc159f8cac9530f705.
[13]
Visual Servoing for Object Manipulation: A Case Study in Slaughterhouse. 2016.
URL: https://backend.orbit.dtu.dk/ws/portalfiles/portal/130245523/PID4391789_
proofed.pdf.
[14]
Robot Visual Servo through Trajectory Estimation of a Moving Object Using Kalman
Filter. 2009. URL: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/220776549_Robot_
Visual _ Servo _ through _ Trajectory _ Estimation _ of _ a _ Moving _ Object _ Using _
Kalman_Filter/citations.
[15]
Target Tracking for Visual Servoing Systems Based on an Adaptive Kalman Filter.
International Journal of Advanced Robotic Systems. 2017. URL: https://journals.
sagepub.com/doi/10.5772/52035?.
[16]
Robotic eye-in-hand calibration by calibrating optical axis and target pattern. 1995.
URL: https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/BF01258384.
Vision-Guided Robotic System for Real-Time Object Tracking and Handling
63
==PAGE:74==
[17]
Robotic cell assembly to accelerate battery research. 2022. URL: https://pubs.rsc.
org/en/content/articlelanding/2022/dd/d2dd00046f.
[18]
FieldNet: Efficient real-time shadow removal for enhanced vision in field robotics.
2025. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0957417425010644.
[19]
Ramir Sultanov et al. A Review on Collaborative Robots in Industrial and Service
Sectors. 2022. DOI: 10.1109/SIBCON56144.2022.10003014.
[20]
34759 Perception for Autonomous Systems. 2024. URL: https://kurser.dtu.dk/
course/34759.
[21]
A Comparative Review of Hand-Eye Calibration Techniques for Vision Guided Robots.
2021. URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/9512030.
[22]
Camera Calibration in High-Speed Robotic Assembly Operations. 2024. URL: https:
//www.mdpi.com/2076-3417/14/19/8687#B15-applsci-14-08687.
[23]
Interpretation and Transformation of Intrinsic Camera Parameters Used in Pho-
togrammetry and Computer Vision. 2022. URL: https : / / www . mdpi . com / 1424 -
8220/22/24/9602.
[24]
Extraction and analysis of microscopic traffic data in disordered heterogeneous traf-
fic conditions. 2019. URL: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/337558917_
Extraction_and_analysis_of_microscopic_traffic_data_in_disordered_heterogeneous_
traffic_conditions.
[25]
Zhengyou Zhang. A Flexible New Technique for Camera Calibration. 1998. URL:
https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/wp-content/uploads/2016/02/tr98-
71.pdf.
[26]
Methods for Simultaneous Robot-World-Hand–Eye Calibration: A Comparative Study.
2019. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/1424-8220/19/12/2837.
[27]
Calibration of wrist-mounted robotic sensors by solving homogeneous transform
equations of the form AX=XB. 2002. URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/
88014.
[28]
A New Technique for Fully Autonomous and Efficient 3D Robotics Hand/Eye Cali-
bration. 1989. URL: https://kmlee.gatech.edu/me6406/handeye.pdf.
[29]
Dex-Net 2.0: Deep Learning to Plan Robust Grasps with Synthetic Point Clouds and
Analytic Grasp Metrics. -. URL: https://www.roboticsproceedings.org/rss13/p58.pdf.
[30]
HSV Color-Space-Based Automated Object Localization for Robot Grasping with-
out Prior Knowledge. 2021. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/2076-3417/11/16/7593.
[31]
OpenCV. Camera Calibration and 3D Reconstruction. 2025. URL: https://docs.
opencv.org/4.x/d9/d0c/group__calib3d.html?.
[32]
Conveyor visual tracking using robot vision. 2006. URL: https://www.researchgate.
net/publication/228670939_Conveyor_visual_tracking_using_robot_vision.
[33]
Sensor Fusion of GNSS and IMU Data for Robust Localization via Smoothed Error
State Kalman Filter. 2023. URL: https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC10099052/.
[34]
Gene F. Franklin. Feedback control of dynamic systems. 2020. URL: https://mrce.
in/ebooks/Feedback%20Control%20of%20Dynamic%20Systems%208th%20Ed.pdf.
[35]
Easing Functions in the New Form Based on Bézier Curves. 2016. URL: https :
//link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-319-46418-3_4#citeas.
64
Vision-Guided Robotic System for Real-Time Object Tracking and Handling
