==PAGE:1==
Balancing User Experience and Energy
Efficiency In 5G Mobile Communication
Networks
Master’s Thesis
Author
Md Rahul Mahmud - s230046
Supervisors
Lars Dittmann
Henrik Christiansen
Line Maria Pyndt Larsen
July 3, 2025
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
The 5G mobile networks had revolutionary changes to wire-
less network technology.
Unlike the other generation, 5G
provides low latency, and high-speed data, as well as wide
adoption for IoT devices. For many development projects,
5G needs to consume more power than the previous genera-
tions.
This report provides an energy-saving model of 5G from a 5G
base station, and balances the user experience. This report
outlines the evolution of 5G. It illustrates a brief description
of the differences between 5G and 4G in many ways. This
report contains a description of the energy consumption of
the 5G network. In the case of energy efficiency, this report
identifies three types of models that can save more energy
than a traditional base station. AI/ML-based traffic real-life
prediction and uses of AI to manage the benchmark perfor-
mance of 5G mobile networks. Renewable energy is another
achievement of this saving method. Using renewable energy
can reduce the pressure on the grid power. In the future, it
will be essential for us to use alternative energy. This report
also describes the possibility of storing power in a battery
from any renewable energy source, and using it at any time.
==PAGE:3==
Energy-Efficiency of 5G
Contents
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
The Evolution of 5G Mobile Networks
2
2.1
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Differences between 4G and 5G mobile networks
8
3.1
Network Architecture of 4G and 5G . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.2
4G cell sites and 5G cell sites
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.3
Speed and performance of 4G and 5G . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.4
Energy Efficiency of 5G and 4G . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.5
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4
Energy Consumption on 5G
19
4.1
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5
Energy Efficiency Method in 5G Mobile Networks
22
5.1
Equipment Deep Sleep . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.1.1
Impact on user
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5.1.2
Energy saving method for Equipment deep sleep . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5.1.3
AI-Based Traffic Prediction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.2
Symbol/slot shutdown
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.2.1
Impact on Users . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.2.2
Energy Saving Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.3
Channel Shutdown . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.3.1
Impact on users . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.3.2
Energy Saving Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.4
Carrier Shutdown
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.4.1
Impact on users . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.4.2
Energy saving method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.5
Massive MIMO and Beamforming Efficiency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.5.1
Impact on user
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.6
Energy-Efficient 5G Base Station Model Development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.6.1
Description of the Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.6.2
Assumptions for the model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.7
Effect of modified model on performance of base station . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.8
Energy efficiency model with AI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.9
Effect of AI/ML-based model on performance of base station . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.10 Energy Efficiency model with renewable energy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.11 Effect of renewable energy integrated with AI/ML based model on performance of
base station . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.12 Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.13 Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
6
Conclusion
46
Appendix A: Sample Code
53
ii
==PAGE:4==
Energy-Efficiency of 5G
1
Introduction
The mobile networks have transformed communications, access to information, as well as rela-
tionships with people across the world. It enables us to share information within the twinkle of an
eye. Advanced mobile technology has brought many opportunities to the industrial sector, which
helps a lot of people in other ways. Since the importance of mobile connectivity is increasing, the
necessity of maintaining faster, reliable, and efficient networks is growing as well.
Figure 1: Data traffic of 5G mobile network
[10]
5G, the wireless communication is providing better facilities to the users than any previous gen-
eration. Due to the higher facilities, demand for 5G mobile networks is growing rapidly. The need for
5G mobile networks is steadily increasing which also can be seen in Figure 1 . By 2030, the global
traffic will reach to peak for 5G mobile networks.[10] Energy efficiency development of 5G mobile
networks is important because of the growing popularity of this technology in the global market.[2]
With the higher demand for 5G, a high amount of power consumption is also required to serve the
growing users. The higher energy requirement was not available to the older generations. Even 4G,
which brought a drastic change to the communication world, did not need a higher power consump-
tion. It is not rare that a better facility costs more in many ways. So, a 5G base station needs
more power, but operators are trying to reduce energy consumption in many ways. For operating
the model, it may often ignore the quality. However, maintaining the quality while saving energy is
important.
The main idea of this report is to present a model for saving energy without harming the user
experience. To reflect the topic, the report is divided into several parts, which helps to understand
Page 1 of 52
==PAGE:5==
Energy-Efficiency of 5G
the main idea. These chapters were structured in a way that can lead a reader towards the main
model that helps to save energy.
Finishing this introduction part, this report contains the evolution of a 5G mobile network,
which gives a description of how 5G has come a long way and how it has developed through older
generations. The next chapter provides a broad difference between 4G and 5G mobile networks.
It illustrates differences in architecture , cell sites, and performance. The next chapter illustrates
detailed information about the energy consumption of 5G. The fifth section, provides a review of
different energy efficiency methods as well as the impact on the users then, it describes the method-
ology of the energy saving model for 5G base stations. It describes three different models with a
comparison of energy and performance. Finally, the last chapter describes a new way that can look
in the future to save more power without ignoring the user’s experience.
2
The Evolution of 5G Mobile Networks
Within the past forty years, much has changed in the field of communication.
It connects
the people, industries, and government. In the past, a simple system to make voice calls has now
grown that provide fast data, instant use of applications, and links to people across the globe. Each
generation of mobile networks came with new technology to support the changing society. The fifth
generation is not only faster or able to download more data.
It means starting from scratch in
designing networks. Among the different purposes of 5G, they are ultra-reliable and provide low-
latency support for all the systems that connect with 5G networks.5G provides immense support for
the vast number of IoT devices and more useful mobile broadband for enjoying rich online content.
As 5G is helping to enjoy high-quality and rich content than the older generation,5G is promising to
boost download speeds and improve stream quality. For having a lot of specifications, it is becoming
a mainstay in the digital evolution of every business and industry.[4][5]
Figure 2: Scheme of a cellular network[40]
Page 2 of 52
==PAGE:6==
Energy-Efficiency of 5G
The journey of mobile communication started seriously in the early 1980s. The first-generation(1G),
also known as an analog network, began to run its operation in 1980. During that period, the system
was only able to make mobile calls, but it didn’t provide good quality. There was not even a wide-
area reception and less security. After some time, more people are looking to get mobile access. So, a
new and updated generation was necessary to serve more people. In 1990,2G network was introduced
with some advanced facilities. 2G introduced text messages, and showed the use of digital signals.
It also brought some security features, which were used to secure voice calls, and message services.
After some years of using 2G networks, 3G was invented in early 2000, and it brought a new idea
among people that it is possible to use the internet on mobiles.[4]
Figure 3: First generation of cellular system[40]
1G was the only system that could make calls, but the quality is not guaranteed. 1G did not follow
any kind of security. After the small success of 1G mobile networks, some more became interested
in using mobile. For a better experience, 2G was brought with text messages and phone calls. It
followed some small security measures also. 3G came among people near 2000, and after launching
it provided the idea of using mobile internet. By using 3G, people were able to sent emails. Some
applications were available to use by 3G. After increasing the 3G consumer, it appeared that it was a
little bit slow to operate some applications. Later,4G and 4G LTE came with some big updates. 4G
gave the access to people for watching movie, playing games and many more. It was shortly used in
industrial sectors. 4G was able to gave support in cloud solutions and it became more popular. After
some years it drag a lot of users and it was difficult for 4G to support a large amount of people.[4][5]
Page 3 of 52
==PAGE:7==
Energy-Efficiency of 5G
Figure 4: 4G mobile network architecture[40]
After releasing 3GPP specification 8, LTE brought about a major change in the telecommuni-
cations sector. It helped UMTS to operate at its maximum potential. Therefore, LTE became a
natural choice to carry out the same task. Due to the necessity, it was needed for LTE to come up
with a new design for both the radio and network cores. Different network users can able to get un-
interrupted connections, which may provide higher data speed and faster response. This is possible
due to the design. WCDMA had a bandwidth of 5 MHz ,and it was successfully working. Later,
some problems appeared with the existing system because of multipath fading. This kind of problem
is caused by radio waves hitting the receiver at different points in time, which decreases the clarity
of quick communication signals. LTE uses Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiplexing (OFDM) to
send data in several slower channels. The bandwidth of every channel is narrow at 180KHz, which
is useful to minimize multipath effect, and maximize data travel velocity and versatility. LTE has
brought about marvelous development in different technological areas. It helps to bring technical
enhancement to the communication sector.LTE enables the possibility to configure bandwidth from
1.25 MHz to 20 MHz. Carrier aggregation was introduced to LTE-Advanced, which allows the use of
more than one carrier. That carrier provides speeds over 100 Mbit/s for users assigned 20 MHz.LTE
specification requires using MIMO technology. MIMO can send data faster with reliability. Data can
be sent i different streams by MIMO while using the same frequency. MIMO can provide a better
result when the signals are good.LTE brought some changes to the duplexing mode. Earlier UMTS
had TDD. LTE supports both FDD(Frequency Division Duplex) and TDD. Both duplexing supports
3G and 4G technologies. So, it was popular and easy to sell devices worldwide.[1][35][40]
Page 4 of 52
==PAGE:8==
Energy-Efficiency of 5G
Figure 5: LTE core network architecture[40]
LTE introduced the IP in the core network,which didn’t require any traditional separate channels
for voice and SMS.It helped those people who used voice services in unavailable or limited situations
with the help of VoLTE.All types of network nodes use IP-based technology to make it easy and
save money. LTE reduces the latency by using fewer network components and having a simplified
architecture. A light architecture is faster and allows a more satisfactory experience of voice and
video calls. LTE changed the direction of mobile communications by a high-performance network
architecture. It brought a smooth transition from older technologies to next-generation networks.
LTE served as a foundational platform for 5G.
4G and 4G LTE had the capabilities to provide all the necessary support for users, but people started
to depend on smart devices. Companies started to use various types of smart devices. Companies
had the need for a fast and better mobile network to grow their business. A new generation needed
to update the infrastructure and provide better service to the users.[35]
Page 5 of 52
==PAGE:9==
Energy-Efficiency of 5G
Figure 6: Evolution of 5G Mobile Networks.
The 3GPP standards body finished a provisional standard kit on December 31, 2017.
Due
to higher expectations from the user worldwide, 5G network specifications set a goal to build and
improve mobile broadband. 5G NR was defined and found a way that improve the 4G network,
which will offer both improved and better latency by its interim specification. Because of the 5G
architecture, 5G uses handset communication for data received by using 4G for basic communication.
So, 5G NR was able to use 5G technology for the radio part only. The 5G NSA(non-standalone)
architecture allows low latency and supports further improvements in latency as well as connection.
To provide services in critical services, support the Internet of Things, and user experience continuity,
5G introduced higher radio frequency, faster and more efficient fronthaul connections, Network slicing,
network function virtualization(NFV) technologies. [11]
The 3GPP organization has defined 5G as the fifth-generation mobile network. 5G is faster than the
previous generation, creating various opportunities for all sectors. 5G can serve users with higher
speeds and ultra-low latency for communication. It promises to provide more bandwidth to increase
the experience for the users. 5G opens the door to invent new uses such as real-time virtual reality
environments, autonomous vehicles, distance surgery, and many more. Due to the higher speeds,
and larger bandwidth, it will be possible to use the 5G network at different stages of our lives.[11][9]
Page 6 of 52
==PAGE:10==
Energy-Efficiency of 5G
2.1
Summary
Figure 7: Schematic Diagram of Next Generation 5G Wireless Networks.
[4]
2.1
Summary
This chapter describes the Journey of different kinds of generations. Over the last 40 years, mo-
bile communication transitioned from basic calls to advanced, which provide high-speed data systems
worldwide. The evolution is marked by successive generations from 1G to 5G by introducing different
technologies. 1G was introduced in the 1980s with low-quality voice calls, which were updated by
2G after 10 years. 2G introduced a little bit better voice call as well as short message service(SMS).
3G brought revolutionary changes to the world by introducing mobile internet. During that time,
people were able to browse, email, and use some simple applications.
4G and 4G LTE bring, high-quality video streaming, real-time gaming, and cloud services.
LTE brought some significant technical improvements and paved the wide path to introduce 5G.
As the demand is growing more among people for using different kinds of high-quality apps. There
was a massive change in the industrial sector, and they needed fast and low-latency with reliable
communication. 5G came with great changes in its infrastructure to give a boost to its users. 5G is
an important technology in the digital transformation in all industries and connectivity.
Page 7 of 52
==PAGE:11==
Energy-Efficiency of 5G
3
Differences between 4G and 5G mobile networks
4G and 5G cellular networks brought massive changes in mobile communication. 4G was capable
of providing all the facilities that a personal user needed, but 5G came with a massive upgrade over
4G. 5G has the capability to handle a large amount of traffic and provide the best experience for
personal, business sectors. As 5G is an upgraded version of 4G, there are a lot of differences between
them.
3.1
Network Architecture of 4G and 5G
The architectural design of the first three generations has not changed a lot. It is almost the
same in terms of telephone traffic or voice calls, but the design has changed with the new 4G net-
work. During the use of LTE, it was possible to access the internet in a similar way to the old
packet-switching system. The system sends any voice call request to the 3G, and after disconnecting,
the call link will revert to 4G LTE with the help of the system. Most of the voice calls of 4G networks
were attended by the old system network.[40]
The 4G core (Evolved Packet Core, EPC) was, to a great extent, a centralized, hardware-implemented
system with relatively fixed network functions. On the other hand, it is anticipated that 5G will
be a cloud-native, service-based architecture (SBA) with modular network functions (NFs) interact-
ing with each other through APIs. The 5G is all about virtualization, and microservices are the
control-plane capabilities (including session management and mobility management functions) that
are isolated out-of-band of user-plane functions to enable the ability to scale each elastically and
deploy them.[37] User planes and control are under control in the S-GW and P-GW functions of the
4G network. User-plane operation, which can merge S-GW and P-GW, can be handled by UPF(User
Plane Function). AMF manages the accessibility with mobility from the MME, S-GW control plane,
and SMF handles the session from the MME, P-GW plane. 4G service maintains point-to-point
interfaces, and it is not a good companion for cloud service, but there is a service-based architecture
in 5G mobile networks that can do cloud-native deployments.. During this process, network func-
tions scale independently. HSS(Subscriber data and authentication) and PCRF(policy and charging)
are not flexible in 4G mobile networks. By contrast, 5G uses UDM(Undefined Data Management)
to handle the subscription data as well as AuSF(Authentication server function). For authentica-
tion, it is necessary to control them. PCF(policy control function) can control the data storage.
ChF(Charging Function) merges online and offline charging for 5G, and AF (Application Function)
affects traffic routing that is retained from 4G.[41] NRF(Network Repository Function) may act as
a service registry and may also indicate the functional capability of the diverse network services.
During the process, NSSF chooses the best slices for PDN sessions.[41]
Page 8 of 52
==PAGE:12==
Energy-Efficiency of 5G
3.1
Network Architecture of 4G and 5G
4G mobile networks shifted the primary goal, and it became a network for data transfer. The
4G mobile network is the main source of 5G, which is almost true. Both 4G and 5G might have
some common structure, especially in the NSA mode(Non-Stand Alone). It is possible that 4G can
merge with 5G to provide better facilities for every user.[40]
Figure 8: 5G and 4G independant architecture[40]
The base station of 4G LTE is called an eNodeB, which is also referred to as an Evolved NodeB.
5G base stations are gNodeB, which is named the next-generation NodeB. It is also seen in Figure 8.
The figure represents a non-integrated architecture between 4G and 5G in parallel. 4G and 5G can
run together with two different access in the same core network. In this figure, UE1 and UE2 are
user equipment for 5G as well as 4G LTE. UE2 get the radio access from LTE 4G. EPC is the core
network architecture for LTE that contains MME, S-GW, P-GW, HSS, and PCRF, and they serve
their respective responsibility. The 5G base station is called gNodeB, which provides high-speed
wireless access, and NGCN is the 5G core network, which processes service-based architecture. This
figure illustrates the working process of both 4G and 5G networks. They can work individually in
the same network.[40]
Page 9 of 52
==PAGE:13==
Energy-Efficiency of 5G
3.1
Network Architecture of 4G and 5G
Figure 9: 5G NR- 3GPP NSA architecture[40]
The Evolved Packet Core (EPC) was designed to support 4G LTE networks. Still, with the
higher demand of users, it was necessary to reuse the Existing EPC infrastructure for the initial 5G
architecture. Some applications stream video that requires higher signaling or more stringent traffic
control to function correctly, while others require low traffic and a more flexible architecture. CUPS
divides these functions into two things: the control plane, which processes signals, and the user plane,
which processes users. data functions. The CUPS solution may provide the possibility of an inde-
pendent scaling of the control and user planes depending on the needs of the users. demands. CUPS
allows enhancing the flexibility and efficiency of the network. After scaling the target, it can opti-
mize investments, and it is also possible to reduce backhaul traffic, which can lead to better resource
management. This figure illustrates how 5G services use 4G infrastructure in NSA deployments.[40]
Figures 8,9,10, it shows the three stages of the evolution of 4G to 5G mobile networks.
Page 10 of 52
==PAGE:14==
Energy-Efficiency of 5G
3.1
Network Architecture of 4G and 5G
Figure 10: 5G-SA stand alone final architecture of 5G and 4G users[40]
4G RAN is centered on eNodeB base stations, which combine radio and baseband functionality
on each cell site (a distributed RAN model).
5G RAN adopts good base stations that may be
categorized in central unit(CU) and Distributed Unit(DU), and they allow centralized or cloud-
based RAN adoption for more resource coordination.
[37] 5G has disaggregated RAN, and the
baseband processing can be pooled by it. Baseband processing can transmit faster, reliable, and
flexible data. 4G was mostly covered in macrocell structures, but 5G uses a mix of macrocell and
very small cells. 5G, including dense small-cell uses, the mmWave frequency bands to be added
to the traditional towers.[38] 5G base stations also utilize technologies such as Massive MIMO and
advanced beamforming (dozens of antenna elements) to increase capacity, which were only lightly
deployed in 4G.
The network of 4G network was highly centralized (core-based in central data centers, with heavy
dependence on macro base stations). 5G is distributed in nature, both in its core and through the use
of edge nodes and cloud edges, so miniaturization is a key aspect. The radio network in 5G is even
more distributed, meaning it consists of many smaller cells and the possibility to divide functions into
central and distributed units. The distributed quality of 5G also enables computation and routing
near the end-user with the use of SDN that minimizes latency and consequently enhances efficiency.
The 5G networks also have the capability to operate as a variety of specialized networks simul-
taneously, rather than creating a one-size-fits-all pipe in 4G.4G can not handle the pressure from
growing industries. So, it is important to have a new model to control the growing needs. 5G came
out with a flexible architecture that initially follows the 4G architecture in different ways. This brings
out the fact that the architectural flexibility of 5G supports new services that 4G lacked the ability
to easily support on a single network.[19]
Page 11 of 52
==PAGE:15==
Energy-Efficiency of 5G
3.2
4G cell sites and 5G cell sites
3.2
4G cell sites and 5G cell sites
Most of the time, the 4G remote radio heads (RRHs) are seen on cell towers, and the roofs of
buildings. In these installations, radio frequencies below 3GHz were ideal because they could serve
a large geographical area. Each RRH would be linked to a second SFP in the BBU via an optical
cable, connected through a small form-factor pluggable (SFP) interface, and that SFP would be
connected to one CPRI link. This antenna is connected to the RF output ports of the RRH with a
short coaxial jumper. The range of a single cell site can be 10 kilometers. The fact that the RRH and
BBU functions were separated meant that less amplifier power was required, and this, in turn, meant
less HVAC and backup power were needed, as it eliminated the high-loss coaxial cable that was run
up the towers. However, the bandwidth that can be made available to the end user is restricted, as
there is no adjacent spectrum around the 4G frequency bands.[11]
Figure 11: Typical 4G RRH and 5G RU[11]
The 5G offers two spectrum bands, i.e., FR1 (450- 7125 MHz) and FR2 (24250- 52600 MHz).
FR2 frequencies (millimeter wave (mmWave) frequencies), occupying a non-crowded frequency band,
enable bandwidths of up to 400 MHz per channel, based on the spectrum band owned by the oper-
ator. This is possible, because FR1 frequencies adopt bandwidths of up to 100 MHz. The channel
bandwidth has a great impact on the theoretical throughput of a cell. However, when the frequency
rises, the RF signal range will reduce. Therefore, 5G cells, which support mmWave, need additional
cell sites to cover the same location. In addition, this kind of densification will be needed in order
to accommodate the 5G capacity when it comes to connected devices. The conventional positioning
of mmWave RUs is on utility poles, street lights, or building facades. That is due to the fact that
mmWave can only support very short distances. It is possible to cover a hundred or a few meters by
any site. 5G RUs have an integrated antenna.[11]
Page 12 of 52
==PAGE:16==
Energy-Efficiency of 5G
3.3
Speed and performance of 4G and 5G
3.3
Speed and performance of 4G and 5G
There is a significant change between 5G and 4G, and the changes came due to the boost in
speed and latency. 5G increases the speed and reduces the latency more magnificently than 4G. 4G
LTE network can obtain a few 100Mbps to roughly 1 Gbps download speed, but the network must
be in the perfect condition to run. It also depends on the network access model and its adherence
to LTE-Advanced.[20][37]
On the other hand, 5G is able to support multi-gigabit spectrum. It can be up to 1020 Gbps in
the lab peak downlink capacity on mmWave spectrum. Peak uplink also improves more with a 5G
network. In terms of activity, it has been seen that 5G is almost 100 times faster than 4G. It is not an
accurate number in performance, it is a theoretical comparison. If we think about the performance,
then it can be said that if a 4G network needs a few minutes to download an HD movie, then 5G
will need a few seconds to download the same movie.[38]
Though the theoretical value is much higher, the actual speed is much lower than the theoretical
speed in reality. Even in real life, 5G has improved a lot in this area. In most of the networks, 4G
networks can download 20 to 40 Mbps, but 5G networks can download 100 to 250 Mbps even in
standard time, and it can download up to 1 Gbps. 5G users can get a much better experience than
a 4G user. Recent tests in the UK found that 5G can download at a speed of 80 to 210 Mbps, but at
peak, it can go up to 800 Mbps. In the same network, 4G can download at speeds of up to 36 Mbps.
So, it can be seen that in real-life experience, 5G has a download speed much higher than 4G. Even
though the 5G network was not fully running, the old 5G network also had a better speed.[20][38]
Figure 12: Download speed comparison between 4G and 5G[20]
In Figure 12, A graphical comparison visualizes according to the data taken from the test in the
UK. In this Figure, the blue bar is the minimum and the red one is the maximum value. In Y-axis
it is indicated the download speed in Mbps.[20]
Minimizing latency is one of the most significant advantages of 5G networks. 4G mobile network
had higher latency. In a proper 4G network, the latency rate is around tens of milliseconds. LTE
data sessions have a latency of 30 to 50 ms, which is suitable for browsing and streaming.
5G
network brought massive changes in latency. The major aim of any 5G network is to reduce latency
significantly. 5G mobile network architecture targets a latency of around 1 to 5 ms.[38] The Current
5G network has an average latency of 29 to 34 ms in the US, but it is not much better than the
Page 13 of 52
==PAGE:17==
Energy-Efficiency of 5G
3.4
Energy Efficiency of 5G and 4G
previous model. It is almost similar to LTE. 5G networks offer improved latency in dense urban
areas. It shows that the latency rate in a densely urbanized area is below 10 ms. Recently, there was
a test in the UK where the 5G network had a latency of 17 ms, while the 4G network had a latency
of 36 ms in the same network.[20]
Figure 13: Latency comparison between 4G and 5G[20]
5G is providing higher speed to the user than 4G networks.
5G uses much wider channel
bandwidth and higher frequencies to provide better facilities. LTE channels max out at 20 MHz
each and operates below 3GHz. 5G can also use mid-band spectrum with 100 MHz channels and
high-band mmWave, large bandwidth. For this reason, 5G is getting more opportunities. 5G also has
massive MIMO and some more advanced features which is not available in 4G mobile networks.[37]
3.4
Energy Efficiency of 5G and 4G
In April 2025, a report was published from China about 5G power consumption. According to
the report, the power consumption of the 5G mobile network is significantly higher than that of the
4G mobile network. A mobile base station has two vital equipment that consume a lot of power.
They are AAU(Active Antenna Unit) and BBU(Baseband Unit). AAU is one of the main reasons
for higher power consumption. During the operation of a 5G base station, the AAU requires more
power, depending on the situation.[45]
Page 14 of 52
==PAGE:18==
Energy-Efficiency of 5G
3.4
Energy Efficiency of 5G and 4G
Figure 14: AAU/RRU power consumption of a 5G and base station[45]
The Figure reflects the AAU power consumption of the 5G base station.[45] It displays power
consumption under various scenarios. Business load primarily refers to the volume of traffic. When
there is 100% utilization, that means higher data traffic, and consequently, the power consumption
of the 5G base station is also higher. The amount of power consumption is approximately 1130 W,
but in the same situation, the power consumption rate of a 4G base station is only around 290 W,
which is 75% less than that of a 5G base station. It is also noticeable that the demand for AAU
power consumption depends on the traffic load. When traffic is lower, the AAU needs less energy
than during peak usage times. On the other hand, AAU of 4G requires almost the same power in
every situation. When there is no data traffic in the 5G base station, the AAU of 5G requires 400
W more than the 4G AAU.
Figure 15: Comparison between 5G and 4G BBU power consumption[45]
This figure reflects the power consumption of the BBU (Baseband Unit).[45] It shows that, BBU
of a 5G base station requires 293 W of power to operate during the busy hours of a day, and the
Page 15 of 52
==PAGE:19==
Energy-Efficiency of 5G
3.4
Energy Efficiency of 5G and 4G
amount of power is the same for all other situations. During the zero traffic period, the BBU requires
293 W of power to serve the base station. For 4G BBU, it also needs power consumption, and it is
almost the same amount for all situations. They also need the same power to operate during the
whole day, but the power consumption rate is still lower than the 5G BBU. 4G BBU requires 40%
less power consumption than 5G BBU.
Figure 16: Comparison between 5G and 4G total power consumption[45]
This Figure reflects the sum of AAU and BBU power consumption.[45] As AAU and BBU
consume a higher amount of energy in a base station, it reflects approximately the total power con-
sumption of a base station. From this Figure, it is visible that 5G requires higher power consumption
than 4G base stations in any circumstances. A 5G base station consumes 500 W more power than a
4G base station to operate in a low traffic period. In various traffic situations, the power requirements
for 5G are increasing rapidly, whereas those for 4G base stations remain constant. During peak usage
time, the 5G base station requires approximately 1,400 W of power, which is 273% higher than the
4G base station. So, a 5G base station requires more power to operate than a 4G base station.
Page 16 of 52
==PAGE:20==
Energy-Efficiency of 5G
3.4
Energy Efficiency of 5G and 4G
5G has a higher data rate, and it has quite a different infrastructure. So, it is expected to
consume more energy than 4G. Early 5G base stations were using massive MIMO electronics, and
they had many small cells that required more power. However, recent 5G is far more energy-efficient
than 4G. It is indicated that 5G is 90% more energy efficient than 4G for exchanging data in IoT
devices, but the main fact is 5G is more efficient based on data bits per kilowatt. If the calculation
is done only for energy consumed, then 5G requires more energy than 4G. 5G can deliver the same
data using better radio techniques and hardware than 4G. The first one is that large bandwidth and
high spectral efficiency are utilized, which means that a 5G cell can produce massive throughput,
and energy is, therefore, cheaper per bit. 5G technology uses power amplifiers, sleep modes, and
many more technologies that make it more energy efficient.[50]
Early 5G phones expressed one such vibe, with increased battery consumption than 4G, as the
mmWave-based modems required more power and were continually switching bands. Early modems
of the 5G standard, of course, consumed more power, and the 5G component (mmWave, with its
numerous antennae and RF modules) could warm up a phone in a short time. Nonetheless, with the
developement of 5G chipsets (7nm, 5nm process technology, and fully integrated 5G-RF), efficiency
has increased. Furthermore, battery life on current smartphones is as much as on 4G connections
due to the ability of the device to quickly finish the transmission of data and quickly enter a sleep
mode on normal usage on low/mid-band 5G. On the IoT aspect, 5G will add new types of devices
(NR-Light, RedCap in 5G) that aim at lower power requirements in simpler devices. Moreover, as
indicated, 5G caters to the current LTE-M and NB-IoT requirements of low-power wide-area ap-
plications, going to the extent of incorporating it in a way that a 5G network can access NB-IoT
devices and consume minimal energy. As indicated in the Digi data above 5G networks promote
flexible power operation to the extent that in 5Gs, the connected devices can run several months
or years without giving any problems, unlike the power-hungry short-range radio technology like
Wi-Fi or Zigbee. When the coverage using the higher frequencies of 5G does consume more power,
by nature, although it was possible to mitigate through 5G phone optimization, i.e., a 5G phone
on mmWave will have a faster battery drain consuming the band continuously as compared to a
4G band, because of the physics of propagation - a frequency or band with a longer wavelength
can transmit energy over a greater distance in a given time, regardless of the newer technology -
and because of beamforming requirements, which consume more energy. To address this, carriers
already use mmWave only to deliver very high data, and where available, they offload to sub-6
GHz 5G or 4G. With the optimization of the 5G networks, for normal users, most people will not be
able to distinguish the battery difference between 5G and 4G, and even more so for newer devices.[24]
In a recent analysis, it is said that 5G saves 90% of the energy of 5G over 4G. However, 5G
needs more power as it is carrying more data, and connecting more devices. If a 5G network cannot
manage energy-saving features, then 5G network will require more energy consumption.[50]
Page 17 of 52
==PAGE:21==
Energy-Efficiency of 5G
3.5
Summary
3.5
Summary
This chapter reflects the difference between 4G and 5G in various regions. 4G was mostly de-
signed to be used in 3G. However, 5G was introduced with a significant upgrade, with much higher
technologies. Especially, 5G came with higher speed and lower latency. 4G and 5G share some
architecture, but the core network is different than each other. preferable to one another. The above
section, explores the network architectural differences widely. 4G uses EPC, which is centralized and
hardware-based with static functions. 5G can serve independently and separate control and user
planes with different functions. This chapter shows the illustration of 4G core mapping to 5G core.
There are some cell differences between 4G and 5G, which were also explained in this chapter.
In terms of performance, 4G speeds up to 1 Gbps, which is theoretically. On the other hand, 5G
has a theoretical value up to 20 Gbps. In real life, these values are lower than the lab tests, but still,
5G is faster than 4G. 5G is dedicated to low latency and high throughput. The power consumption
rate of 5G base station is much higher than a 4G base station, but still, 5G is almost 90% efficient
in sending data. Though 5G consumes more power than 4G, 5G is more efficient based on data bits
per Kw.
Page 18 of 52
==PAGE:22==
Energy-Efficiency of 5G
4
Energy Consumption on 5G
To provide a lot of facilities for users, the 5G mobile network requires high power consumption.
Higher energy consumption depends on the traffic load. When 1G was invented, there were only a
few people who were using mobiles or any other devices that needed mobile networks. The scenario
was also similar for 2G. The number of users was rising from the 3G network, but still, the data
traffic for 3G was low.
Figure 17: Global Mobile Network Data Traffic
[10]
Figure 17 shows, data traffic for our mobile network, and it also indicates that 5G has higher
data traffic than other generations. Especially 2G and 3G have the lowest data traffic. So, it is
clearly noticeable that older generations did not have so much data traffic . So, they did not need a
lot of power to operate. New generations like 5G have higher data traffic and it will rise more in the
future. So, 5G mobile network needs more power to operate than other generations.
5G mobile network serving people all over the world with large bandwidth, high speed, and a
better experience for users. In short, the performance of 5G mobile networks is better than any other
generation. Though there are, a lot of facilities about 5G but still, power consumption is a concerning
fact for everyone. According to a test in Guangzhou and Shenzhen, the power consumption of a 5G
single station is higher than that of a 4G station, and it also indicated that an AAU(active antenna
unit) requires more power to operate. So, it can be said that 5G stations need more power for AAU.
In that area, 3700W is the full load power of a single station, and the demand is rising day by day,
but the increasing rate is a bit more shocking than expected. Most of the people of Guangzhou
and Shenzhen often say that the electric power company in China which named SGCC, significantly
benefited from the advanced technology of 5G, as they need to provide a lot of electricity for 5G,
Page 19 of 52
==PAGE:23==
Energy-Efficiency of 5G
and the demand is increasing. BBU(Baseband unit) and AAU are vital pieces of equipment for a 5G
base station.[45]
Figure 18: Power consumption and Business load of a 5G base station[45]
Figure 18 reflects the power consumption metric for 5G network equipment at various business
load levels. It shows the power consumption in two primary components that consume the majority
of the power of a base station. The average power consumption is in Watts. When there is a 100%
business load, it means a high traffic load, and the system of that base station is at peak usage.
From the Figure, we can see that when the system is at its peak, the AAU needs the highest power
to serve. AAU needs 1127.28 W in peak time, but the demand for power consumption decreases
when half of the traffic is being processed. AAU requires 892.32 W, which is 27% less than peak
usage time. The power consumption of AAU increases gradually when the traffic load goes from no
traffic to a few traffic. AAU requires only 633 W when there is no traffic at the base station. On the
other hand, BBU requires almost the same power throughout the entire period. There is virtually
no difference between peak usage time and no-load time for the BBU.
Page 20 of 52
==PAGE:24==
Energy-Efficiency of 5G
4.1
Summary
Orange, which is a leading telecommunications operator and service provider in Europe, states
that the power consumption for them is increasing moderately for 5G technology. They had a 4.4%
increase in power consumption than the previous year. It is also noticeable that 85% of energy usage
is from Networks and IT infrastructure, which indicates that 5G is using a large amount of power
from its energy.[31]
Figure 19: 5G base station power consumption over 24 hours[12]
The figure reflects the data of a 5G Base station’s power consumption at a single site. The data
in this figure is basically an assumption from a traffic load.[12] Figure 19 indicates the 24-hour
power consumption for a single site of a 5G base station. The highest power consumption is 1400
W from 10 to 16. By contrast, the lowest power consumption hour is 2 to 10, which is relatively
low, and the amount of power is only 150 W. The power consumption rate is in the middle range,
from 16 to 24. So, a modern base station needs a high amount of power to operate perfectly, and
the peak hour starts from morning and ends in the afternoon. At night, there is no traffic, and the
base station needs less power to provide its service.
4.1
Summary
This chapter of the report explores the energy consumption of a 5G base station due to the
growing mobile networks. It shows the benefits of mobile networks that increase the usage of energy.
The previous generations required minimal power because they had minimal traffic load, whereas
4G and more so 5G require increased power because of data load. Due to the increased complexity
and advance functionality, 5G is consuming more power than other mobile networks. This part also
defines that a recent test in China illustrates the real consumption of 5G mobile networks, mainly
based on 2 vital components. The result of the test shows that AAU is consuming more power than
BBU. When the traffic load rises energy consumption rate rapidly increases. On the other hand,
BBU is maintaining constant power consumption over the all load period. On the whole, the 5G
technology is contributing not only to worldwide communication and the development of the industry
but also imposes an increasing challenge in terms of energy efficiency.
Page 21 of 52
==PAGE:25==
Energy-Efficiency of 5G
5
Energy Efficiency Method in 5G Mobile Networks
5.1
Equipment Deep Sleep
Equipment deep sleep is one of the most aggressive energy-saving modes. This method effec-
tively puts 5G cells and, in some cases, the base station into an inactive state while there is very low
or zero traffic periods. During deep sleep, only some two or three important operating components
remain functional, and all the other radio equipment, including the baseband processor and digital
interfaces, shut down completely. Before entering into deep sleep, if there are any active users on that
cell, they are handed off to other cells, so that the users ensure continuity of service. Base stations
stop their activity during deep sleep, but after the traffic load rises again, and any kind of new access
attempt is detected, they require a brief hardware startup time to reactivate. Deep sleep needs a
long period of inactivity to schedule its operation.So, its operation occurs during late night when
low power does not affect the users. Although deep sleep provides the biggest energy conservation
among optimization strategies but it only works best in those base stations where traffic remains
inactive at night, and the capacity layer networks during off-peak usage periods. During the deep
sleep activation, power consumption at the base station reduces by 60 to 80%.[49]
Figure 20: Equipment deep sleep in low traffic load to save energy
[48]
As it is noticeable from Figure 20, during deep sleep most of the equipment is turned off, and
only a few are running to remain the base station active. Due to the deactivation of sme equipment,
it faces some challenges, such as wake-up delay. Equipment deep sleep needs a longer time to activate
than any other idle mode. During the equipment’s deep sleep, it may drop some calls due to the
coverage hole. For detecting users base station will need ultra-low power almost all the time on
control sites. If a sudden surge in the traffic load, then it may cause a brief delay.
This activates cell coverage preservation and reduces active cell nodes. The energy saving from deep
sleep operation may exceed 50% of a base station’s consumption throughout an extended period of
non-operation, which makes it a powerful tool for nightly energy optimization. Telefonica reported
that a 5G site that is using ”Radio Deep Sleep Mode”and shutting a cell during idle periods saved
up to 26% power during low -traffic hours. It is calculated that on average 8% power can be saved
over 24 hours .Deep sleep can be applied in small Cells, such as indoor or micro sites and secondary
layers that can be safely turned off during low traffic.
Page 22 of 52
==PAGE:26==
Energy-Efficiency of 5G
5.1
Equipment Deep Sleep
Figure 21: Illustration of Equipment Deep Sleep
To sum up, during there is no traffic or the amount of traffic is very low, the radio frequency unit
may be forced to deep sleep, and just the enhanced common public radio interface (eCPRI) process-
ing unit remains active.On the one hand, it requires the power supply so as to be active, but other
modules such as transceiver, baseband, DIF, etc could be totally closed down to conserve power. If
there is any user connected, then the connected user will migrate before the deep sleep starts.[17] [48]
5.1.1
Impact on user
During an equipment deep sleep, the active user may experience disruption, but it is minimal.
Connected users are handed over to another base station before deep sleep activates. During the
handoff to another base station, the user may face some delay, but the service is uninterrupted.[17]
Most of the base stations are modernized. So, they can provide continuous communication, but the
latency may rise for a specific time. Due to the deep sleep, the industrial IoT network faces less
throughput. IoT devices get less throughput due to waking up late and having a higher latency.[21]
Most of the deep sleep creates problems for the users due to wake-up delays.
Wake-up delays
affect service resumption. Turning active from deep sleep to active mode requires up to 5 minutes
for full functionality.[25] Potentially, it causes delays in connection setup if a traffic surge occurs
unexpectedly.
5.1.2
Energy saving method for Equipment deep sleep
Equipment Deep sleep saves a lot of energy, but it needs a brief hardware startup time to re-
activate. Future developments for deep sleep technology have to focus on scheduling optimization
combined with an early wake-up time from the deep sleep state. The implementation of AI-based
traffic can predict the time when there is no user connected to the base station. So, with the help
of AI prediction, operators can decide the state of a base station. It also provides the sudden traffic
data to wake up early from deep sleep. This strategy will optimize sleep duration by maintaining
good service quality. Intelligent wake-up mechanisms are also a good way to save energy and provide
the best quality for the user. The intelligent wake-up signal can use a neighbor cell measurement or
beacon signals from the user to the devices to detect any kind of presence of a user and then trigger a
Page 23 of 52
==PAGE:27==
Energy-Efficiency of 5G
5.1
Equipment Deep Sleep
sleeping cell to power on instantly.[9] It is also important to optimize cross layers. Deep sleep should
be connected with layer network management. So, that neighboring cell sites can complement each
other during their sleep. To avoid coverage holes, a controller can increase a neighbor’s transit power
or schedule a coverage overlap before giving instruction a lightly-loaded cell to sleep.[1]
5.1.3
AI-Based Traffic Prediction
AI-based traffic prediction is a great strategy to reduce energy in 5G networks by maximizing
the use of equipment deep sleep when necessary. Static schedule follows the old system to save energy
from base stations, and an AI/ML-based algorithm predicts the traffic periods ahead of time.
By using AI-based traffic prediction, networks can achieve the best out of equipment deep sleep
by efficiently identifying zero traffic periods. This is done by forecasting ahead to predict when (and
by how much) user demand will be minimal or zero on a cell. Some steps can be followed to manage
the AI-based traffic management system. After, receiving the per-cell traffic logs over extended time
frames, they train machine learning models like LSTM, GRU, or Random Forest. There are some
input features that should be involved. Such as Time of day, Day type (weekday, weekend, or public
holiday), Weather conditions, Recent traffic trends, and anomalies.[9]
It gives out a probability score for the probability of zero traffic in the next X minutes.The system
can proactively trigger deep sleep of the cell based on this probability being higher than a predefined
threshold.[9]
First of all, it is necessary to collect some data for the traffic logs for every cell. There are some
logs needed to follow for collecting data. Data throughput plays an important role in predicting the
data traffic by AI. It is the volume of data which transmitted via a base station. It displays the
human demand over a region or area.[13] When the throughput is declining or it looks flat, then it
represents zero traffic, and after a sudden drop in throughput, it signals the opportunity for sleep
mode.
The number of active users is also important for this AI prediction process.
Counting the
connected or recently active users in the cell is useful for the base station. A drop from a strong
candidate is the meaning of deep sleep for the specific cell or base station. A user may remain idle
for a long time, but may continue using after a while. So, a non-zero user prevents the cell from
going into deep sleep. Combining the throughput with active users may help to predict the best
traffic load. Another important element is session duration. The duration of a user connecting to
the base station is another vital element for prediction. When there is no data exchange for a longer
session means the user is about to disconnect or remain idle.[27] It helps to recognize background
connections with real activity. Using these features together allows the AI/ML to find out real-time
traffic. They help to predict the situation before it happens. Some temporal features need to be
input into the AI model to have a higher accuracy prediction. Mobile traffic follows daily patterns,
such as low usage from midnight 2 AM to 6 AM considered as most sleep time. After school or work
from 6 PM to 10 PM is considered peak usage time. So, the time of day is essential in predicting the
traffic drops consistently. During the night, it allows safe, deep sleep activation as there is constant
traffic. Time of the day helps the AI model to recognize the traffic drop after 2 AM, and it can
pre-trigger sleep mode by 1:50 AM. Recognizing the day type is another factor for AI prediction.
Weekdays and weekends don’t have the same traffic. On weekdays, there are fewer spikes between
Page 24 of 52
==PAGE:28==
Energy-Efficiency of 5G
5.2
Symbol/slot shutdown
morning and lunchtime and higher in the business area. On the other hand, weekends may provide
heavy usage in residential areas and lower usage in business areas. Public holidays are also similar to
weekends. Weather condition matters for the prediction. Weather impacts human mobility, which
also affects mobile usage. During heavy rain, snow, or extreme heat, has a significant impact on
people. It can keep people indoors. Outdoor cells or rural towers may remain quieter in bad weather
than on a good sunny day. The weather also affects signal quality, and if users disconnect from a
cell, it might drop the traffic volume. AI can learn during a storm or in bad weather how the traffic
should be in different areas, such as AI can learn that traffic at park-based small cells drops to zero
during a storm.[23][13] To find out the real-time traffic, recent traffic trends are essential. Real-time
traffic behavior provides immediate signals to the base stations, and any slow ramp-up may provide
an incoming signal. So, AI can train with recent traffic trends to avoid any problem and give the
best prediction to save more data as well as serve the best performance from the base stations for
the users.[32]
5.2
Symbol/slot shutdown
The fine-grained technique, known as symbol/slot shutdown, normally shuts down the transmit-
ter for OFDM or entire slots. It only shuts down the transmitter or the entire slot in which no user
data needs to be transmitted.[48]The 5G NR air interface’s ultra-lean design can reduce always-on
signals than LTE.[3] In this method, the base station scheduler crushes downlink traffic into symbols
as possible, and it also leaves symbols empty,blank if they don’t convey any kind of data. So, the
symbols that do not have signal reference of a cell (CRS), synchronized signal (SS), and broadcast
messages can be shut down. When some blank symbols remain, the gNB uses the power ampli-
fier (PA) off and the RF circuit for avoiding the ”idle runnin”which is considered a wasteful power
draw.[48]
Figure 22: Symbol shutdown during low traffic load on a base station
[48]
Page 25 of 52
==PAGE:29==
Energy-Efficiency of 5G
5.2
Symbol/slot shutdown
Symbol shutdown creates very short sleep periods, but for this short sleep it can save significant
power for a blank symbol. The duration of sleeping period is about 10 to 100 microseconds when
it is possible to toggle PA off and on, PA consumes large amount of power even there are np traffic
.So, if the PA is off then it can save a good amount of energy.[3]
Symbol shut down is mainly applicable for medium to low traffic load. It can work perfectly even
if there are some users. Symbol shutdown needs some gap between transmission then it can work.
Symbol shutdown can provide 10% energy reduction, but in some industrial cases, it can be seen
that 10–20% energy can be saved by enabling symbol/slot DTX.[49]
Figure 23: Illustration of symbol/slot shutdown
5.2.1
Impact on Users
During the shutdown process, base stations only activate transmission of components when
there is a user need to process the data, as well as maintain the connectivity. Though there is a
shutdown process running, data is still aggregated into active slots and allows more symbols to go
into sleep mode without any disruption. This process tries to maintain the disruption but causes
some delay, which means it provides higher latency with lower throughput. Power amplifiers need
some milliseconds to activate when the traffic resumes, which prevents a noticeable interruption but
gives some noticeable delay for the users. During the symbol shutdown, coverage is preserved as only
some non-essential symbols are disabled, but the main problem is latency. Some of the industrial
IoT applications may experience sub-millisecond wake-up delay to maintain low latency. Symbol
shutdown is only shutting down with some non-important slots.[17] So, it doesn’t leave so much bad
experience for the users without some delay or higher latency in some specific cases.
5.2.2
Energy Saving Method
The traffic prediction based on AI can help to enhance the shutdown of symbols scheduling. To
conserve more energy in shutting down symbols, AI/ML algorithms should be adopted to predict
instant traffic load. The consideration that is to be made later is that more strategic time should
be planned into the transmission process. AI-driven schedulers have the possibility of predicting the
future, consolidating non-urgent data into specific slots, and making the blank periods(PA-off) last
Page 26 of 52
==PAGE:30==
Energy-Efficiency of 5G
5.3
Channel Shutdown
longer. Greater hardware integration is also potentially cost-saving, even greater amounts of energy
in symbol shutdown. To allow shorter times, there may be a need to enable faster PA ramp-up/ramp-
down micro-sleeps. In case the RF circuitry is quicker and can switch between its states faster, then
the gNB may possibly shut off even in a single empty symbol.[16]Inter-protocol coordination may
be able to raise savings in symbol shutdown.MAC scheduler could cooperate with the higher-layer
traffic management, so as to signal RRC/message etc. transmit at a time. Through such activity,
bigger gaps can be caused.
5.3
Channel Shutdown
It is possible to shut down some of the segments of a channel (PAs and transceivers) during a low
traffic period to conserve a certain amount of energy. The technique is known as channel shutdown.
Some of their subset transmitter can be turned off in case of immense MIMO antennas with 32 or 64
transmitters. However, this can only be attained when the traffic load demand is low. Most of the
power is consumed by the Power amplifier as well as the antenna chain. . It will conserve so much
power in the sense that each transmit chain /channel will be terminated and saves its PA power and
RF processing power. Once the active channels are decreased, the antenna gain will be impacted
and there will be a decrease in the capacity of MIMO of the array. The system should also boost
the transmit power on the other channels, which are active, in order to maintain the cell edge signal
level in the case of the reduced coverage effect.The shutdown of the channel is normally employed
during the low to moderate traffic periods. And not to mention that, all the channels should be
available during the day or during the busy hours so that the maximum coverage and capacity is in
place. Nights or early in the morning it is also used. Up to 10-20 percent reduction in power may
be reaped by closing the channel in certain situations.[48]
Figure 24: Illustration of Channel Shutdown
Channel shutdown is mostly used in low to moderate traffic conditions.
During the day or
the busy hours,it is very important to have all the channels active to maintain the peak capacity
and coverage. So it is also used in the night hours or early morning. In some cases 10-20% power
reduction can be gained by shutting down the channel.[28]
Page 27 of 52
==PAGE:31==
Energy-Efficiency of 5G
5.4
Carrier Shutdown
5.3.1
Impact on users
Users can face capacity reduction during the channel shutdown. Any kind of deactivation of
a channel can reduce the bandwidth, and it can potentially increase disruption when there is any
sudden traffic appears. When the channel remains deactivated, then throughput may fluctuate, but
it may remain the same until the channel is reactivated. This might have taken around 30 seconds
to reactivate the channel. At this time, the latency will also be hampered. Though the service is
maintained by the base station. Reactivation delays cause the primary challenges. There is always a
transition delay, and due to this transition delay, which may be less than 30 seconds or equal to 30
seconds. For this new connection setup, the users may experience latency spikes, but the case may be
worse if a traffic load burst occurs during the connection time.[25] Due to this kind of energy-saving
method, most of the time, industrial IoT applications face degradation in their work. So, channel
shutdown also has an impact on users.
5.3.2
Energy Saving Method
A further improvement of channel shutdown can be achieved through the adoption capacities of
the antenna resources management. The distribution analysis through the use of Artificial Intelligence
offers the possibility to make better choices regarding antenna element muting by learning which
antenna beams may be disabled without altering the coverage, relying on the present location.[17]
MIMO reconfiguration is another improvement that can be done. The current hardware will consume
several seconds to complete the antenna mode switching. Minimizing this time will make the channel
shutdown react fast to the changes in the traffic.
5.4
Carrier Shutdown
Carrier shutdown is the act of switching off the whole cell/band carriers of a multi-band base
station are switched off. It is widely applied in contemporary base stations. Usually, there is it’s one
basic coverage carrier, so-called anchor carrier, and they are many to carry additional capacity. With
low traffic, extra carrier capacity is completely turned off. is running. In this time frame, only the
base coverage carrier is enabled. When a high-band 5G cell is co-sited with a low-band cell, then the
high-band 5G cell can be shut down during the low-traffic Period. During the low traffic period, the
low band cell has the capacity to provide coverage. When a carrier is shut down,it means turning off
its RF transmitter chain, including PAs for that band. Carrier shutdown is very useful with layered
coverage. Carrier shutdown is one of the oldest techniques for 5G energy saving.A field test observed
that 15-20% of energy can be saved by switching off the extra carrier layer at night.[49]
Page 28 of 52
==PAGE:32==
Energy-Efficiency of 5G
5.4
Carrier Shutdown
Figure 25: Illustration of Carrier Shutdown
5.4.1
Impact on users
During a carrier shutdown, users transfer to other 5G carriers before the processing is going
to starts. For this, transferring before the shutdown base station is able to prevent the call drops.
After the shutdown, remaining carriers increase the power density to maintain call service. So, there
is not so much degradation for coverage, but latency and throughput is facing some minor issues
for shutting down the carrier. Restoring the full functionality needs some seconds, which causes the
latency spike and less throughput.[17] Reduced bandwidth during shutdown may causes disruption
for a certain time. Due to the carrier shutdown, ultra-low latency applications may experience some
disruption during the failover.[26]
5.4.2
Energy saving method
Real-time traffic threshold needs to be used in the carrier shutdown to deactivate a carrier.
The threshold needs to depend on the traffic load. The base station will deactivate any secondary
carrier, if the traffic load remains low for a certain time. Normally, if the base station follows the
traditional schedule, it may cause some delay for the users. When AI/ML is forecasting the traffic
and predicting with the help of real-life data, with threshold policies, the output will not affect the
user. The adjustment of the threshold to have a better experience and save energy is supported using
AI/ML. It also helps to customize the shutdown schemes at any time.[17]
Page 29 of 52
==PAGE:33==
Energy-Efficiency of 5G
5.5
Massive MIMO and Beamforming Efficiency
5.5
Massive MIMO and Beamforming Efficiency
5G RAN is very reliant on massive MIMO (multiple-input multiple-output), which may be en-
ergy efficient. In massive MIMO, at base stations, large antenna arrays (32,64 or elements).are used
in focusing signals to make narrow beams toward the consumer’s direction. Rather than direct a lot
of radio energy at a total cell, it concentrates it on the places where it is required. Under the preci-
sion tendency of energy concentration, giant MIMO transmits more bits in the unit energy at more
minor interference. It avoids extra transmissions. In another way, the message that is transmitted
through the base station can improve the transmit power in making circuits that ensure that the
quality of the signal is good, with less overall medical cost.[43] Power as opposed to broadcasting in
all directions. Due to the enhancement of the efficiency of the link, increased user device battery life
and throughput are usually attained.[22]Massive MIMO operators could converge to capacity and
the coverage needs with less energy consumption. Due to array gain and spatial multiplexing, for
instance, a 5G base station that is working with 64 elements of an antenna array. It can provide
service to many users with the help of beamforming and can offer the same data throughput with
lower per-service costs. User power in comparison to a typical 4G cell. The level of energy efficiency
rises considerably by sending a much smaller amount of information. Narrower beams at the receiver
in the cell instead of power spreading on the walls of the cell.[34]The entire cell says one industry
analysis. It translates into the fact that more traffic can be accommodated using the same. The
value of energy input of an extensive MIMO system is adequately tuned.[19] However, if the massive
deployment of the antennas were undertaken. MIMO gear does require more power as they have
enormous power needs. The operators apply it to the above procedures of channel shutdown so as
to overcome it. They may not be offered a low-interest rate activity, and may not power up each
antenna element. As it has been said, it is possible to use a 64-Tx antenna. Save power with a 32-Tx
mode and ramp up when needed. If the beamforming on that of active antennas is altered, that
is, a little wider or stronger beam is directed to the cell. Reducing the number of elements in the
system makes sure that the coverage is not compromised. Many times, users do not understand this
dynamic adaptation since, irrespective of the 64 or 32 antennas that are being used on their device,
they still have an adequate signal and speed.[8]
The great majority of 5G operators build their dependence on their smart scheduling and use
massive MIMO radios for mid-band spectrum. In order to save energy, the base station, for instance,
can simply use a part of its array of antennas, or periodically transmit reference signals at a quiet
moment. When the user initiates a data session beamforming weights rise instantly and channel
energy towards the user. Software is behind all of this under the hood. Keying on the fact that
some spatial channels can be switched off, huge MIMO supports lots of users at once with high
spectral efficiency (bits/Joule). Finally, the direct energy in narrow beams helps to improve energy
efficiency.[33]
5.5.1
Impact on user
Throughput: Spatial antenna muting can provide maximum efficiency, and it can reduce cell
capacity. This process is done with the help of available MIMO layers. There is a change needed as
the beamforming gain can be degraded by turning off half of the antennas and reducing the maxi-
mum spatial multiplexing order (e.g. 4 rather than 8 streams).[28] Cell-edge subjects, are the most
extreme drawback, but the performance at the edge may be greatly biased by the 6 dB of antenna
Page 30 of 52
==PAGE:34==
Energy-Efficiency of 5G
5.5
Massive MIMO and Beamforming Efficiency
loss (going down to 64 to 32 antennas), as they are concerned. Therefore, MIMO muting is generally
done only when it is used whenever traffic is low or users are near enough that they do not need the
additional gain. Since the remaining antennas would still be in a position to handle the demanded
information, the consumers would not be in a position to realize the difference. Even in certain
circumstances, The BS would wake up the antennas to satisfy the requirements of throughput When
the strong demand occurs, it shuts down or has minor impact in the symbol level due to the level
of minimum effect on the performance or no effect at all since times, as there was no information
that was going to be present in the first place. It is only done by the use of idle periods without
any actual loss of bits. Using improved symbol power saving, When traffic is aggressively bundled,
the users can access their data in bursts (for example, the throughput itself over time is, in general,
though, unaffected in specific slots only.[28][46]
Latency: An implicated effect of antenna muting shall be that it may reach the transmission
distance of a particular amount of data, which is reduced marginally in case there are fewer active
antennas.One user requires less MCS (MCS, modulation and coding scheme), then there is less time,
which would be able to achieve the same throughput. Such an effect is generally minor unless it
is the case that the signal quality is affected when the antenna is reduced. The amount of loose
is moderate, symbol level DTX can develop scheduling when the data has been buffered to create
windowed opportunities to pursue empty symbols. Only a single TTI or slot can, in fact, be used to
limit this latency. To keep the slot requiring a higher slot power-saving strategy at the time, e.g. an
enhanced symbol power-saving strategy, may force a packet to the second slot, which may experience
a delay. The delay is a maximum of 1 ms.[3] This can hardly be felt by customers. It begins at its
own pace before learning about the setback.
Call Drop Rate: Such strategies are not aimed to disrupt the connectivity. In the event that
there were such a signal decrease on different active users to a critical level, then you should not
mute the antenna. In other words, it is given that without shutting down any of the transmitters,
the underlying network is to guarantee the coverage and provide a minimal SINR to all users. When
the user and his connection begin to degrade the system, the system can simultaneously re-enable
antennae or apply more power to inactive ones. As such, limitations to coverage are observed (that
none of the regions should go under the service threshold)[46] The chances of call dropouts due to
antenna muting are minimal. However, the BS can continue to send control channels and reference
signals. Symbol-level shutdown, poor-man’s service for call stability in practical terms (it mutes if
nothing is scheduled). Calls are not interrupted because there is no handover or reconfiguration. In
fact, via symbol shutdown, the proximity cells’ reliability may be enhanced through a reduction in
interference with suppressed symbols (a muted cell is quiet creating reduced interference to others).
Finally, energy savings up to 10 to 30% are commonly achieved in the use of MIMO muting, symbol-
level shutdown,[28] through the compromise of some excess capacity. In the low load or strong signal
scenarios, they exert the least impact on users’ throughput, latency, or drop rates. The network
intelligence guarantees that such features switch off when performance increases, hence maintaining
the user experience.
Page 31 of 52
==PAGE:35==
Energy-Efficiency of 5G
5.6
Energy-Efficient 5G Base Station Model Development
5.6
Energy-Efficient 5G Base Station Model Development
Base stations need energy for mobile networks. They are using more than half of the total
network power usage. So, it is necessary to improve the efficiency of the base station to reduce the
energy demand. Though the traffic of cellular networks is not the same all day, traditionally, a base
station runs at a normal pace.[6]
Figure 26: Traffic load during a day
[12]
Due to this constant configuration, a lot of energy is wasted. From this figure, it can be observed
that, during busy hours, there are some noticeable gaps in the data transmission period. Traffic load
fluctuates throughout the day. It is not the same whole day. 5G base stations face less traffic during
the night, and they experience peak during any time of day or evening, which is indicated in this
figure.[12]
5.6.1
Description of the Model
This model is going to observe the traffic load all over the day. As it has already been said,
there is a remarkable gap during data packet transmission, and the model will observe the whole day
in minutes. After observing 1440 minutes, it will set up a threshold for three different states. Most
of the base stations remain active or in deep sleep, but in this model, the base station can also stay
in light sleep. During the threshold, the model will wait for 10 minutes to observe the situation and
whether it is suitable to remain in the same state or switch to another. During the AI/ML-based
model, the model will observe the traffic load of the day, and then an AI/ML-based algorithm will
predict the traffic load of the day. This process will be broadly described in the following parts. After
getting the expected traffic load threshold, we will follow it to determine the state of the model. For
performance, the model also follows the predicted load and sets some algorithms to serve a better
experience for the users. During the renewable source model, it will follow all the same procedure,
just add extra power from the solar panel. The primary purpose of this model is to save more energy
than a traditional base station. After saving, it will also look for the performance of the base stations
Page 32 of 52
==PAGE:36==
Energy-Efficiency of 5G
5.6
Energy-Efficient 5G Base Station Model Development
such as, latency, throughput, coverage, and capacity. This model is trying to balance performance
with saving energy. After the simulation of the model, it is noticeable that the AI/ML-based model is
saving energy, and providing a better experience for the users. All the processes of the three different
models will be described later broadly.
5.6.2
Assumptions for the model
This model is based on traffic load. It will be used for energy optimization of a 5G base station.
It will balance the situation of a base station according to the network traffic over 24 hours. The
base station will adjust the power state according to the traffic load, as has already been observed,
with a noticeable gap during busy periods. Therefore, it would be beneficial if the simulation time
grid were set in seconds or minutes. In this model, the setup simulation time grid is minutes, 1440
steps for 1 day. According to the traffic model figure, traffic is at its peak during midday and low
at night. The load is between 0 to 1. Macro base stations typically require 1 to 4 kW of power to
remain active with radio units, and it can be 2 to 4 kW when using active antenna units.[14]
In this model, 1 kW is used for active mode. Approximately 40% of the active mode is considered
light sleep power, and 10% of the active power is used for deep sleep power. The main idea for power
mode is that during full traffic, it requires 100% power to operate and is considered active. When
the traffic is at a medium level, it will use 40% of power, and this period will be regarded as light
sleep. When traffic is low, it requires 10% power, which is considered a deep sleep mode.[7]
This model represents 0 as no traffic, and 1 represents peak traffic. There are some more con-
ditions added between 0 and 1. If the traffic load is less than 0.1, which means almost no traffic,
it will go to the deep sleep threshold, which means it is not going to deep sleep directly, as it can
affect the performance of the base station. So, a 0.1 less than the traffic load will put it on the deep
sleep threshold, and if the condition remains the same for more than 10 minutes, then it will go to
deep sleep. If the traffic load is more than 0.1 and less than 0.3, then it will follow the same rules,
and after waiting for 10 minutes without changing the situation, it will go to light sleep. Similarly,
when there is a lot of traffic load for more than 10 minutes, it will go to active mode. On the other
hand, if the traffic load is 0.3 or more than 0.3, it will return to active from light sleep, and when
it is 0.1 or more than 0.1, it will return to active from deep sleep. To prevent continuous toggling,
which affects the user experience the most. It also costs extra power and remains same condition
before switching.[30] The base station reads the minute-by-minute current traffic load and decides
its next step. It will decide whether to stay active, go to sleep, or wake up. Then it records the state
and energy uses per state. After getting data for all states, it will sum them up and show the total
energy usage.
Figure 27: MATLAB Output of modified energy saving model
Page 33 of 52
==PAGE:37==
Energy-Efficiency of 5G
5.6
Energy-Efficient 5G Base Station Model Development
The figure reflects the energy used per mode. It shows that active mode needs 17.05 kWh, light
sleep mode needs 2.21 kWh, and deep sleep mode only needs 0.14 kWh. So, the total energy used in
this model is 19.41 kWh. It also shows the base station state summary.
Page 34 of 52
==PAGE:38==
Energy-Efficiency of 5G
5.7
Effect of modified model on performance of base station
5.7
Effect of modified model on performance of base station
Figure 28: visualization of sleep modes, energy used based on the traffic load of the modified model
This figure reflects the relationship between traffic load and sleep modes as well as total energy
used. During the first 200 to 250 minutes, the base station will go to deep sleep and light sleep
based on the performance. Normally, the traffic load of a base station at midnight is very low, but
sometimes the load can be more than expected. So, keep in mind that this model is making some
changes to the traditional base station. Most of the base stations will go direct deep sleep during the
night, and when some unexpected traffic load, they wake up directly from sleep. In some cases, it
consumes extra power, but it especially affects the performance of the base station. Users are getting
higher latency and less throughput for a certain time, but if the base station follows this model, then
it can stay in light sleep on a typical load and wait for some time to observe the situation. Later, it
can decide whether it is suitable to go into deep sleep or stay in light sleep. It may not save much
power, but it can provide a better experience for the users.
Page 35 of 52
==PAGE:39==
Energy-Efficiency of 5G
5.7
Effect of modified model on performance of base station
Figure 29: visualization of latency, coverage, capacity, and throughput of the modified model
In this model, latency, coverage, capacity, and throughput depend on the traffic load. Power-
saving modes in a base station can increase the latency. During an active mode of a base station the
latency is always lower. Even all other key performance indicators are degrading during power-saving
modes.[15]
In case of KPI modeling corresponding to the effect of service quality, assuming the base delay of 10
ms at the active mode, whereas there should be certain alterations to the component also. Therefore,
take between 15-20 as the variable factor. In light sleep modes, suppose the base delay during light
sleep is 50 ms and 80 ms with the variance. The minimum delay of the latency of deep sleep is
100 ms, and the overall condition is 150 ms on the elements of a base station. But it also changes
with the traffic load. In making assumptions background coverage and capacity are assumed to be
100% during the active period. The coverage is reduced at 10-20% during light sleep mode and by
40-50% during deep sleep mode. Thus, 85 during the light sleep and 60 during the deep one are taken
into consideration in this model. Whenever the base station operates at active mode, full-service
coverage is offered. When it flows to light sleep, some of its components are put into sleep. In deep
sleep, coverage is very little and the user might require even handing off to neighbouring base station
(BS). This will be the same regarding capacity, and when the mode is on, it will be able to offer 100
percent capacity, and all the resources will be used. In light sleeping mode, it is degraded with some
antennas and processors switched off; and in the deep sleep mode there is minimal operations that
are carried out. Thus, its functionality will be compromised more compared to light sleeping. In the
case of the model, it is assumed that 100 percent of the time is spent in active mode, 75 percent in
light sleep mode and 50 percent in deep sleep mode.
Page 36 of 52
==PAGE:40==
Energy-Efficiency of 5G
5.8
Energy efficiency model with AI
5.8
Energy efficiency model with AI
The main idea of this model is also based on traffic load and sleep modes. It observes the
data and predicts the traffic load, then the model follows the predicted traffic load to determine its
condition. First of all, it predicts the traffic load, then it follows the same method as the modified
model. In reality, the AI/ML-based prediction is more accurate than the given prediction here. It
will provide better results when it gets more data to train. So, it can save more energy and give a
better experience for the users.
The artificial intelligence algorithm is assisted in being controlled by the wireless intelligent
application platform. It is able to achieve a balance between the level of user experience and energy-
saving performance with the assistance of a wireless intelligent application. Artificial intelligence
is also able to improve energy efficiency and proper usage of the network. Traffic load is also one
of the essential aspects that are required to support the base station. By estimating the AI/ML-
based network traffic load, one can minimize the energy cost without shutting down the resources by
switching off idle resources; however, one can keep the network capacity to a reasonable minimum.
In order to implement AI with this model and save more energy to balance the functionality, the
initial action is to collect the required information at the 5G base station. Information is made of
network performance parameters. The significant data points to move ahead are signal strength,
user session, and resource activity. The data containing the information on user interactions and the
calls is included in such parameters. The information can be collected by the network management
using its automatic collection system to test a base station’s performance in real-time.
This is
the sole satisfactory phase of forecasting with AI.[17] When the base station sends the data, it is
essential to eliminate errors or delete irrelevant data and look for missing values. Then reorganize
the data in such a way as to certain regulations, like sorting the data in terms of time or place.
Once these two are done, the data can be merged across many sources or periods to determine any
trends. An important component of this approach since the data selected will be applied as input to
machine learning models. it is possible to use the data as training data of models that can execute
actions to identify network patterns, and forecast load ahead of time.[17] At this step, the machine
learning algorithms will review the processed data to find out the real-time scenario of the user.
The environment of the base station surroundings also depends on proper output. So, the machine
learning algorithm will look for the data of the base station environment, as data varies in different
places. So, the most appropriate model determines the system based on the situation. When the
scenario is also identified, the threshold level is set by the system. This threshold needs to set the
minimum and maximum level of traffic load and determine where the energy-saving feature should
activate. AI-based threshold can be changed automatically by the algorithm. Then it is necessary
to set a time to react.To determine the threshold, a timer should be implemented in energy-saving
mode. After all the processes, a new strategy is formulated and sent to the management system for
choosing the state of the base station. After all of this process, the system will send feedback on
whether any changes are needed in the future or not.[17]
Page 37 of 52
==PAGE:41==
Energy-Efficiency of 5G
5.9
Effect of AI/ML-based model on performance of base station
Figure 30: MATLAB output of AI/ML-based energy saving model
The figure reflects the total energy used by the AI/ML-based model. It shows the total energy
is 18.32 kWh. It also reflects the base station state duration. The amount of energy is calculated
based on the duration of the states.
5.9
Effect of AI/ML-based model on performance of base station
Figure 31: visualization of sleep modes, energy used based on the traffic load of the AI/ML-based
model
This figure reflects the traffic load and the predicted traffic load in parallel. The base station
state is changing by the data of predicted traffic load. In the end, it shows the power consumption
of this model.
Page 38 of 52
==PAGE:42==
Energy-Efficiency of 5G
5.9
Effect of AI/ML-based model on performance of base station
AI/ML-based model can ensure better performance for the base station. Over the entire day
AI/ML model enters deep sleep less frequently. When it ensures there is not much traffic load or
there are no unexpected spikes in the traffic load, then it go to deep sleep. It mostly maintains active
or light sleep, which means it can provide lower latency. As it remains active or light sleep most of
the time, then it provides good coverage, higher capacity, and more throughput.
Figure 32: visualization of latency, coverage,capacity, and throughput of AI/ML based model
Figure 32 reflects the KPIs performance of the AI/ML-based model. It shows that it has better
latency, coverage, capacity, and throughput than the modified model.
Figure 33: Comparison between Latency, Capacity, Coverage, and Throughput between modified
model and AI/ML-based model
Figure 33 represents the comparison of KPIs between the modified model, and the AI/ML-
based model. It is noticeable that the latency of the AI/ML-based model is lower than the modified
model in almost all cases. The same thing happens with coverage and capacity, but throughput in
both model seems similar.
Page 39 of 52
==PAGE:43==
Energy-Efficiency of 5G
5.9
Effect of AI/ML-based model on performance of base station
Figure 34: Power consumption comparison between modified vs AI model
This figure reflects the comparison of the power consumption of the modified model and the
AI/ML-based model. The Green area represents the energy-saving area. So, it can be said that the
AI/ML-based model can save more energy than the modified model.
In reality, AI/ML-based prediction can provide more accurate results, and it also helps to main-
tain to have great latency or any other KPI. As the traffic patterns in networks evolve regularly, it is
wise to use AI and Machine Learning to contribute to the saving of energy. AI systems are based on
huge amounts of data to determine where and when additional capacity is required. The quantity
of network data, including user locations, strange events, and others. The AI, therefore, puts the
sleep modes and the scaling into action more conveniently than any fixed system and in real-time
modifications on network components. This causes a big reduction in energy savings and maintains
functionality the same. The possible major dynamic development is the dynamic shutdown of sites
or cells controlled by AI.Most historical energy saving efforts applied at a fixed schedule (switching
off cells at 1 AM every night and turning them on in 6 AM). But the traffic that the users require can
be difficult to predict. There appear to be cases where it can be broken, like vacations or sporting
events the common trend. AI can comprehend sensitive trends and respond promptly. They are, for
instance, in the case that it realizes that a given city region will hardly have any users between 2:00
and 4:00 AM, it can let that part enter into deep sleep. The AI can deal with sudden groups of users,
in case they emerge. activate the sector at the earliest or borrow resources at an adjacent site. Nokia
indicates that it is reducing its performance. An AI energy management system produces 2-5 times
more power savings as compared to non-AI systems that carry out periodic closure on a temporary
basis.[29]
In addition, AI can engineer energy-saving initiatives on a whole-scale basis network. Such a
human operator can ensure that he lowers the risks of operation by turning off a single carrier one
location after the other. After examining the network as a whole, an AI agent can execute more
complicated actions like switching off a transport link, reducing the bandwidth on a carrier and
shutting down or turning off several small cells simultaneously.[36]
To cut down energy use in RAN and backhaul, an AI system could shut off a separate 5G carrier
for a while and send leftover traffic over a 4G layer and an alternate path in the transport network.
This would only happen if the system believes that the users won’t mind (likely because just a few
Page 40 of 52
==PAGE:44==
Energy-Efficiency of 5G
5.9
Effect of AI/ML-based model on performance of base station
users need basic internet access at the time). In actual use, China Mobile’s AI-powered green 5G
solution was able to do this: it optimizes energy at the level of data center, transport, and wireless
infrastructure. It managed to save energy in all parts of the 5G network. It can also save energy for
wireless stations, transport networks, and data centers, and the best thing is that it can save energy
without lowering service quality.This included AI algorithms to shut down cells and even power down
parts of the optical transport when traffic was low.[39]
So, AI/ML can improve more on the performance of a base station and save energy. Due to
some limitations, this model saves less power than real life.
Page 41 of 52
==PAGE:45==
Energy-Efficiency of 5G
5.10
Energy Efficiency model with renewable energy
5.10
Energy Efficiency model with renewable energy
If this model combines renewable energy sources (such as solar panels or wind turbines) in the
base station, then include these in the model to achieve maximum energy savings. Using renewable
energy could massively reduce the net grid power requirement. Reports have indicated that a com-
bination of solar and wind within a BS site has the potential to reduce energy use in the grid by up
to 50%.[42] Renewable energy can improve the situation in the power supply. Adding a Solar power
simulation that follows the diurnal curve at midday. The setup of a solar system essentially forms a
base station microgrid, where the base station can draw power from renewable energy or the external
grid. The solar can provide higher power during midday and lower or zero power at night.[44] The
objective of this model is to maximize the usage of a renewable source and minimize drawing from
the grid.
First of all, it is necessary to find the relation between base stations’ energy-saving actions and
with availability of renewable energy. In a solar-based model, when the weather is nice and there
is little traffic, then the entire base station is powered by solar generating facilities. Although at
the same time traffic is light, it may not be desirable to go into a deep sleep state, as renewable
energy is taking the load as it does not need any extra cost. On the other hand, the BS can be
in a deep sleep on a low-traffic night when there is no solar. So, the base station needs only few
amount of energy to operate. An alternative approach would be to execute heavy work when green
energy is there. In case there exist any discretionary loads (maybe background systems update or
pre-computation), then schedule them off at a time when surplus solar energy is available. The
solar-powered cell could even be moved load upon in a network and allow the rest of the cells to take
a break during the daytime. It is possible to alter the model to favor green energy. Collaborative
scheme of a hybrid between traffic-aware sleep schedule and energy sharing, which implied that base
stations with surplus solar energy could share it, as all stations synchronized sleep states to keep grid
usage down to a minimum.[44]
Figure 35: MATLAB output of renewable energy-based energy saving model
This figure reflects the total energy of a base station after using renewable energy, solar power,
with an AI/ML traffic prediction model. If a base station requires 18.32 kWh in total, then this
model can help reduce the load for grid power. It can also be seen from this figure. For 18.32 kWh
of, energy, solar is giving 6.39 kWh, and the grid is providing 11.93 kWh.
Page 42 of 52
==PAGE:46==
Energy-Efficiency of 5G
5.11
Effect of renewable energy integrated with AI/ML based model on performance of base
station
5.11
Effect of renewable energy integrated with AI/ML based model on
performance of base station
Figure 36: visualization of sleep modes, energy used based on the traffic load of the renewable energy-
based model
This model is similar to the AI/ML-based model. Firstly, AI/ML has been utilized to determine
the traffic load. Depending on the traffic load determines whether it is going for deep sleep, light
sleep, or active. As this model uses renewable energy to operate, it doesn’t need to stay in deep
sleep for a long time. During the daytime, it can remain active with solar power and provide the
best performance for the users. In this figure, solar power is seen maximum during the day, and grid
power is lower in parallel. Due to less sunlight, the amount of solar power after midday is almost
zero, and the grid provides higher energy. This figure reflects that, solar power is affecting the base
station and saves more power for the grid energy than other models.
Figure 37: Comparison between grid power of renewable energy based model and modified model
Page 43 of 52
==PAGE:47==
Energy-Efficiency of 5G
5.12
Future Work
This figure reflects a line graph called "Grid Energy Consumption: Solar vs. Non-Renewable
Model." It measures grid energy (in kWh) cumulatively over time (in minutes), that is, the energy
consumed by two different energy consumption profiles of the grid: No Solar (Grid Only Profile),
represented by the red line, and With Solar (Grid Only Part), represented by the green line. The
graph shows that using solar energy with the help of AI/ML can decrease the dependency on grid
energy over 24 hours, thus make it cost-affective, and sustainable solution than a non-renewable
model, even it can even save more energy than the AI/ML-based model
5.12
Future Work
This model mainly uses the solar panel to convert sunlight into electricity. If the electricity
exceeds the demands, then it can be saved in a battery to use later.[47] Lithium-ion can be used
to store power. Lithium-ion battery has high efficiency and safety. The voltage level between the
solar panels and the batteries can be adjusted with the help of Power converters.[47] Solar panels
can be used instead of the grid power to achieve maximum power from rebewable energy. There
must be some excess solar energy that can charge the battery during the peak production hours
from the solar.A battery can be a good solution to store power and use it when there is no sunlight
to provide power for a solar panel. for avoiding extra power from the grid. To keep uninterrupted
communication for the users, grid power can be used instead of unavailable battery power.[18]
Figure 38: Grid power comparison between no solar, solar, and solar with battery
Figure 38 illustrates the comparison of needed grid power in three different circumstances. This
is an output of a MATLAB model that follows the same theory, used in previous models, with the
addition of a battery. According to the figure, grid consumption with solar, and grid consumption
addition with solar and battery have a slight difference, but in real life, adding a battery may need
some extra power, but still, it can reduce the pressure from grid energy. It is needed to do more
research about this topic. Whether it possible to save more energy with battery storage, or does
output remain the same with the use of solar?. It is also needed to maintain the KPIs’ performance
during these changes. So, solar with an additional battery can be further discussed issue in the
future.
Page 44 of 52
==PAGE:48==
Energy-Efficiency of 5G
5.13
Summary
5.13
Summary
The section above has given a critical review of the current energy efficiency approach to 5G
mobile networks. Since 5G mobile networks need higher power consumption, it is necessary to use an
efficient method to save more energy. Some existing methods are used in base stations. The equip-
ment deep sleep feature can minimize power consumption than any other method. It can reduce up
to 60 to 80% of power consumption from a base station, but it increases the latency, and any sudden
traffic spike hurts users. It takes time for the equipment to wake up from deep sleep. The 5G mobile
network may be more efficient and balance the user experience with the help of AI-based traffic
prediction. After the equipment has gone into deep sleep, symbol shutdown, channel shutdown, and
carrier shutdown are also saving energy with various kinds of technology. Most of them enhance
their efficiency with the help of AI technology. 5G technology uses Massive MIMO and beamforming
efficiency to enhance the KPIs performance.
Moreover, this chapter describes a modified model that helps to ensure energy saving for the
other two models. All three of these models are based on traffic load. During data transmission,
there are still a lot of gaps. It can be seen if a traffic load of 24 can be adequately observed. This
model will illustrate every minute traffic load, base station states, and energy consumption from the
base station. By installing an AI/ML-driven traffic estimation and real-time monitoring system on
this model would consume less energy than the modified model. When measured in performance,
an AI/ML-based model is efficient. Finally, such a model will be combined with renewable energy,
including solar panels, which serve to substitute the grid power with renewable energy. In the future,
stored energy in a battery from a solar panel can support the base station.
Page 45 of 52
==PAGE:49==
Energy-Efficiency of 5G
6
Conclusion
The journey of the telecommunication era started with 1G. Mobile networks brought a major
shift in the technical world. From 1G to 5G mobile networks, all of these have become a part and
parcel of our everyday life. The journey starts from 1G generation with voice call services, and later
it went to another level, adding short service messages with voice call by 2G. After some years, 3G
brought revolutionary changes in the telecommunication sector with mobile internet. Due to a higher
traffic load all over the world and higher demand of mobile internet, there was a necessity to bring
a new infrastructure to fulfill the demand. After the great success of 4G and LTE, 5G came with
massive changes to satisfy the user in terms of performance and to be used in different sectors.
Though 4G and 5G share some of their infrastructure, 4G and 5G have a lot of differences in
every possible sector. First of all, 4G used a centralized hardware-based system, which is called EPC,
and 5G follows cloud native service-based architecture. There is a big difference in cell sites between
the two generations. For speed and latency, 5G provides higher speed with a lower latency.[40] The-
oretically, 5G can be 100 times faster than a 4G network. For high demand for 5G , it needs a lot
of power to operate. 5G needs much more power than any other generation. AAU and BBU are
the main components of a base station that require most of the power. In 4G, AAU and BBU need
the same energy in every situation, but when there is a high load in a 5G base station, the power
consumption of AAU jumps drastically. But in reality, 5G is more efficient than 4G in terms of
sending data.[45]
Every technology we use to make our lives more comfortable needs power. 5G provides many
facilities, but it also requires a lot of power. Previous versions of mobile networks did not have a
lot of power issues. In particular, 1G, 2G, and 3G did not require much power. 4G and 5G need
higher power than the previous models. It is also noticeable that there is a big difference in users.
The world’s traffic load is rapidly increasing day by day. Reports say that traffic load will increase
by more in 2030. The power of base stations in 5G mobile networks is proportional to the business
load. During the low traffic period power consumption of a 5G base station also remains low. During
high traffic, the rate of power consumption jumps suddenly. At night, So, a 5G base station needs
low energy at night and high during the day[10]
Due to the higher power consumption, 5G base stations are adapting various methods to save as
much energy as they can. Equipment deep sleep is the most beneficial way to save energy. It can save
up to 80%. Though deep sleep means almost all equipment may be inactive, One or two operating
component remain active to power the base station. Though deep sleep gives more savings but it
also affects the performance of a base station. With the help of AI/ML-based traffic prediction, deep
sleep can be predicted ahead of time, and wake up earlier than the normal time. It helps to maintain
the user experience better. Symbol shut down, channel shutdown, and carrier shutdown are also
responsible for saving energy from a base station, but they can save less energy than the equipment’s
deep sleep. Traffic monitoring and prediction (based on AI) are also capable of maintaining the level
of performance between them. The newest techniques are Massive MIMO and Beamforming to pro-
vide base station energy efficiency. Massive MIMO can trade off energy efficiency and the experience
of the consumer.[48]
To save energy, most of the energy-saving methods slightly ignore user experience. Though main-
Page 46 of 52
==PAGE:50==
Energy-Efficiency of 5G
taining the performance is a must-needed factor for any operator, sometimes they need to ignore the
fact for some specific reasons. It is noticeable that, even in the peak usage time, it is possible to
save some energy. There is a lot of gap in a data transmission packet. A modified model with a new
threshold rule can save more power than a traditional base station, but an AI/ML-based model can
predict the traffic ahead of normal traffic and send a notification to the base station. After receiving
the data from the AI/ML-based traffic prediction, the base station decides whether it will change
the states. A base station can stay in deep sleep, active, or light sleep. After using the AI/ML in the
modified model, it saves energy than the previous model. It also had a great effect on maintaining
the performance. Renewable energy can put grid energy on hold for a certain time. This activity
can save more energy without affecting the user experience. Instead of consuming grid energy, it
is possible to utilize solar energy during the day. In the future, unused energy may be saved in a
battery, and it may be used when needed.
It is possible to say that, modeling and implementing a new model with the help of AI/ML can
be an energy-saving method that also balances the user experience. Using renewable energy sources
in an AI-based model is one of the best solutions to make the base station greener and enhance the
efficiency to balance the user experience.
Page 47 of 52
==PAGE:51==
Energy-Efficiency of 5G
References
References
[1] 3GPP. Energy efficiency in 3gpp technologies, July 2024. Accessed: 2025-05-12,fromhttps:
//www.3gpp.org/technologies/deep-dive/ee-article.
[2] 5G Americas.
Ai at the edge:
the next wave of mobile data growth?
Industry View-
point, 5G Americas, June 2025.
Accessed: 2025â07â02,fromhttps://www.5gamericas.org/
ai-at-the-edge-the-next-wave-of-mobile-data-growth/.
[3] 5G HUB TECHNOLOGIES. 5g ran energy-saving techniques, September 2019. Accessed: 2025-
05-12,fromhttps://5ghub.us/5g-ran-energy-saving-techniques/.
[4] Mamta Agiwal, Abhishek Roy, and Navrati Saxena.
Next generation 5g wireless networks:
A comprehensive survey. IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, 18(3):1617–1655, 2016.
fromhttps://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/7414384.
[5] Jeffrey G. Andrews, Stefano Buzzi, Wan Choi, Stephen V. Hanly, Angel Lozano, Anthony C. K.
Soong, and Jianzhong Charlie Zhang.
What will 5g be?
IEEE Journal on Selected Areas
in Communications, 32(6):1065–1082, 2014. fromhttps://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/
6824752.
[6] X. Dong, H. Yang, F. Chi, M. Peng, and Z. Jiang. Wireless sensors: Power consumption and
energy efficiency.
Sensors, 12(6):4281–4303, 2012.
Accessed: 2025-06-18,fromhttps://www.
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3355411/.
[7] Ericsson. Breaking the energy curve report 2022: Scaling 5g sustainably. Technical report, Eric-
sson, October 2022. Accessed: 2025-06-20,fromhttps://www.ericsson.com/4aa14d/assets/
local/about-ericsson/sustainability-and-corporate-responsibility/documents/
2022/breaking-the-energy-curve-report.pdf.
[8] Ericsson. Breaking the energy curve, August 2023. Accessed: 2025-05-12,fromhttps://www.
ericsson.com/en/blog/2023/8/breaking-the-energy-curve.
[9] Ericsson.
Singtel
partners
ericsson
to
achieve
industry
breakthrough
in
mobile
network
energy
savings,
February
2023.
Accessed:
2025-
05-12,fromhttps://www.ericsson.com/en/press-releases/2/2023/2/
singtel-partners-ericsson-to-achieve-industry-breakthrough-in-mobile-network-energy-s
[10] Ericsson.
Ericsson mobility report â mobile data traffic forecast.
Technical report,
Ericsson,
November
2024.
Accessed:
2025-06-16,fromhttps://www.ericsson.com/en/
reports-and-papers/mobility-report/dataforecasts/mobile-traffic-forecast.
[11] EXFO Inc.
The evolution of 5g mobile networks:
The what, why and how.
Tech-
nical
report,
EXFO
Inc.,
June
2020.
Accessed:
2025-06-10,fromhttps://www.
exfo.com/contentassets/331b8bd3b1c442718e03927c77204338/exfo_wpaper130_
evolution-of-5g-mobile-networks_en.pdf.
[12] PĂĽl Frenger and Richard Tano. A technical look at 5g energy consumption and performance.
Ericsson Blog, September 2019.
Accessed: 2025-06-18,fromhttps://www.ericsson.com/en/
blog/2019/9/energy-consumption-5g-nr.
Page 48 of 52
==PAGE:52==
Energy-Efficiency of 5G
References
[13] Zihang Gao. 5g traffic prediction based on deep learning. Computational Intelligence and Neuro-
science, 2022:1–10, 2022. Accessed: 2025-06-27,fromhttps://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/
10.1155/2022/3174530.
[14] Louis Golard, Youssef Agram, FranĂ§ois Rottenberg, FranĂ§ois Quitin, David Bol, and
JĂŠrĂ´me Louveaux. A parametric power model of multi-band sub-6 ghz cellular base sta-
tions using on-site measurements. In 2024 IEEE 35th International Symposium on Personal,
Indoor and Mobile Radio Communications (PIMRC), pages 1–7, 2024.
Accessed: 2025-06-
20,fromhttps://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/10817448.
[15] Xueying Guo, Zhisheng Niu, Sheng Zhou, and P. R. Kumar. Delay-constrained energy-optimal
base station sleeping control. IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, 34(5):1073–
1085, 2016. Accessed: June 21, 2025,fromhttps://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/7389334.
[16] Intel
Corporation.
A
holistic
study
of
power
consumption
and
energy
savings
strategies
for
open
vran
systems.
Technical
report,
Intel
Network
Builders,
2023.
Accessed:
2025-05-12,fromhttps://builders.intel.com/docs/networkbuilders/
a-holistic-study-of-power-consumption-and-energy-savings-strategies-for-open-vran-sys
pdf.
[17] International Telecommunication Union. Smart energy saving of 5g base stations: Based on ai
and other emerging technologies to forecast and optimize the management of 5g wireless network
energy consumption. Technical Report D.WG3-02, ITU-T Focus Group on Environmental Effi-
ciency for Artificial Intelligence and Other Emerging Technologies (FG-AI4EE), March 2021. Ac-
cessed:
2025-05-13, fromhttps://www.itu.int/en/ITU-T/focusgroups/ai4ee/Documents/
T-FG-AI4EE-2021-D.WG3.02-PDF-E.pdf.
[18] Mahshid Javidsharifi, Hamoun Pourroshanfekr, Tamas Kerekes, Dezso Sera, Sergiu Viorel
Spataru, and Josep M. Guerrero. Optimum sizing of photovoltaic and energy storage systems
for powering green base stations in cellular networks. Energies, 14(7):1895, 2021. Accessed:
2025-06-26,fromhttps://doi.org/10.3390/en14071895.
[19] Rahul Kaundal. Traditional vs 5g network. Telecomhall Forum post, March 2024. Accessed:
2025-06-14,fromhttps://www.telecomhall.net/t/traditional-vs-5g-network/27607.
[20] Sacha
Kavanagh
and
James
Rogerson.
5g
vs
4g:
No
contest.
5G.co.uk
guide,
December
2024.
Accessed:
2025-06-14,fromhttps://5g.co.uk/guides/
4g-versus-5g-what-will-the-next-generation-bring/.
[21] Taehoon Kim, Seungmin Lee, Hyeonsu Choi, Hyo Seon Park, and Jaesoo Choi. An energy-
efficient multi-level sleep strategy for periodic uplink transmission in industrial private 5g net-
works. Sensors, 23(22):9070, November 2023. Accessed: 2025-06-22,fromhttps://www.ncbi.
nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10674620/.
[22] Richard
Lee,
Dickon
Pinner,
Ken
Somers,
and
Sai
Tunuguntla.
The
case
for
committing
to
greener
telecom
networks.
McKinsey
&
Com-
pany,
February
2020.
Accessed:
2025-05-13,
fromhttps://www.mckinsey.
com/industries/technology-media-and-telecommunications/our-insights/
the-case-for-committing-to-greener-telecom-networks.
Page 49 of 52
==PAGE:53==
Energy-Efficiency of 5G
References
[23] Xiao Li, Yifan Zhou, Hui Chen, and Jianhua Wang.
Longâterm 5g base station traf-
fic prediction using gcformer: A spatialâtemporal model.
Computer Networks, 234:109005,
2024.
Accessed: 2025â07â02,fromhttps://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S1568494624011074.
[24] Jayna Locke. Key features and benefits of 5g technology. Digi International Blog, February
2024. Accessed: 2025-06-15,fromhttps://www.digi.com/blog/post/5g-benefits.
[25] Yi Ma, Tao Li, Yuxuan Du, and Schahram Dustdar. Sustainable connections: Exploring energy
efficiency in 5g networks.
In Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on emerging
Networking EXperiments and Technologies (CoNEXT â24), pages 33–40, 2024. Accessed: 2025-
06-23,fromhttps://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3680121.3697806.
[26] Lorenzo Maggi, Claudiu Mihailescu, Qike Cao, Alan Tetich, Saad Khan, Simo Aaltonen, Ryo
Koblitz, Maunu Holma, Samuele Macchi, Maria Elena Ruggieri, Igor Korenev, and Bjarne
Klausen. Energy savings under performance constraints via carrier shutdown with bayesian
learning. In 2023 Joint European Conference on Networks and Communications & 6G Sum-
mit (EuCNC/6G Summit), pages 1–6, 2023. Accessed: 2025-06-24,fromhttps://ieeexplore.
ieee.org/document/10188338.
[27] Hossein Mehri, Hao Chen, and Hani Mehrpouyan.
Rach traffic prediction in massive ma-
chine type communications. IEEE Transactions on Machine Learning in Communications and
Networking, 3:315–331, 2025. Preprint originally posted on arXiv:2405.05235; evaluated using
AIâbased summary tools :contentReference[oaicite:1]index=1,fromhttps://doi.org/10.1109/
TMLCN.2025.3542760.
[28] NGMN Alliance. Green future networks: Network energy efficiency. Technical report, Next Gen-
eration Mobile Networks (NGMN) Alliance, October 2021. Accessed: 2025-05-12,fromhttps:
//www.ngmn.org/wp-content/uploads/211009-GFN-Network-Energy-Efficiency-1.0.pdf.
[29] Nokia Corporation. Energy efficiency, May 2025. Accessed: 2025-05-13, fromhttps://www.
nokia.com/ai-and-analytics/energy-efficiency/.
[30] Oluwakayode Onireti, Abdelrahim Mohamed, Haris Pervaiz, and Muhammad Imran. Analyt-
ical approach to base station sleep mode power consumption and sleep depth. In 2017 IEEE
28th Annual International Symposium on Personal, Indoor, and Mobile Radio Communica-
tions (PIMRC), pages 1–7, 2017. Accessed: 2025-06-20,fromhttps://ieeexplore.ieee.org/
document/8292518.
[31] Orange S.A.
Orange steps up efforts to reduce energy consumption across europe.
Press Release, December 2022.
Accessed: 2025-06-16,fromhttps://newsroom.orange.com/
orange-steps-up-efforts-to-reduce-energy-consumption-across-europe/.
[32] Vasileios Perifanis, Nikolaos Pavlidis, and RemousâAris Efraimidis Koutsiamanis.
Fed-
erated learning for 5g base station traffic forecasting.
Computer Networks, 235:109950,
2023.
Accessed: 2025â07â02,fromhttps://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S138912862300395X.
[33] K. N. R. Surya Vara Prasad,
Ekram Hossain,
and Vijay K. Bhargava.
Energy ef-
ficiency in massive mimo-based 5g networks:
Opportunities and challenges.
IEEE
Page 50 of 52
==PAGE:54==
Energy-Efficiency of 5G
References
Wireless
Communications,
23(5):10–16,
2016.
Accessed:
2025-05-12,fromhttps:
//www.researchgate.net/publication/285270743_Energy_Efficiency_in_Massive_
MIMO-Based_5G_Networks_Opportunities_and_Challenges.
[34] Ranplan Wireless.
Maximizing 5g potential: Strategic planning and deployment of massive
mimo, July 2024. Accessed: 2025-05-12,fromhttps://www.ranplanwireless.com/resources/
strategic-planning-and-massive-mimo.
[35] Martin Sauter. Long term evolution (lte) and lteâadvanced pro. In From GSM to LTEâAdvanced
Pro and 5G: An Introduction to Mobile Networks and Mobile Broadband, chapter 4. Wiley, 2017.
fromhttps://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/9781119346913.ch4.
[36] J. Sharpe Smith.
Ai-powered rans allow carriers to increase energy efficiency.
In-
side
Towers,
January
2023.
Accessed:
2025-06-22,fromhttps://insidetowers.com/
ai-powered-rans-allow-carriers-to-increase-energy-efficiency/.
[37] TechLTE World.
Lte vs. 5g sa architecture:
A game-changing evolution!
LinkedIn
article,
November
2023.
Accessed:
2025-06-13,fromhttp://techlteworld.com/tag/
lte-architecture/.
[38] TechTarget. A deep dive into the differences between 4g and 5g networks. online, 2025. Published
4 months ago; Accessed: 2025-06-14,fromhttps://www.techtarget.com/searchnetworking/
feature/A-deep-dive-into-the-differences-between-4G-and-5G-networks.
[39] TM
Forum
/
China
Mobile.
China
mobileâs
green
5g
program
achieves
energy-
saving at scale.
TM Forum Inform Case Study,
October 2022.
Accessed:
2025-
06-22,fromhttps://inform.tmforum.org/research-and-analysis/case-studies/
china-mobiles-green-5g-program-achieves-energy-saving-at-scale/.
[40] Unknown author (ResearchGate).
The different architectures used in 1g, 2g, 3g, 4g,
and 5g networks.
ResearchGate publication,
2021.
Accessed:
2025-06-13;
presents
distinct
RAN
and
core
architectures
for
mobile
network
generations,fromhttps:
//www.researchgate.net/publication/363231789_The_Different_Architectures_Used_
in_1G_2G_3G_4G_and_5G_Networks.
[41] Wipro.
5g
network
deployment:
4
principal
considerations
for
an
inâdepth
examination.
Online
article,
September
2020.
Ac-
cessed:
2025-06-13,fromhttps://www.wipro.com/network-edge-providers/
5g-network-deployment-4-principal-considerations-for-an-in-depth-examination/.
[42] World
Resources
Institute.
Setting
the
record
straight
about
renewable
energy.
WRI Insights,
May 2020.
Accessed:
2025-06-21,fromhttps://www.wri.org/insights/
setting-record-straight-about-renewable-energy.
[43] Wray Castle. Understanding massive mimo and beamforming: A simple guide for everyone,
February 2023. Accessed: 2025-05-12,fromhttps://wraycastle.com/blogs/knowledge-base/
understanding-massive-mimo-and-beamforming-a-simple-guide-for-everyone.
[44] Ming Yan, Tuanfa Qin, Wenhao Guo, and Yongle Hu. Cooperative sleep and energyâsharing
strategy for a heterogeneous 5g base station microgrid system integrated with deep learning and
Page 51 of 52
==PAGE:55==
Energy-Efficiency of 5G
References
an improved moea/d algorithm. Energies, 18(7):1580, 2025. Accessed: 2025-06-22,fromhttps:
//www.mdpi.com/1996-1073/18/7/1580.
[45] YINGDAPC.
Why does 5g base station consume so much power and how to im-
prove it?
Blog post, April 2025.
Accessed:
2025-06-16,fromhttps://yingdapc.com/
why-does-5g-base-station-consume-so-much-power-and-how-to-improve-it/.
[46] Wei Zhang, Ming Li, Xiaoyu Chen, and Lei Wang. Energy efficiency for 5g and beyond 5g:
Potential, limitations, and future directions. Sensors, 24(22):7402, 2024. Accessed: 2025-05-
12,from , https://www.mdpi.com/1424-8220/24/22/7402.
[47] Binxin Zhu, Yizhang Wang, Hao Guo, Nan Yang, and Ling Lu. Improved model of base station
power system for the optimal capacity planning of photovoltaic and energy storage system.
Electronics, 12(23):4826, 2023. Accessed: 2025-06-26,fromhttps://www.mdpi.com/2079-9292/
12/23/4826.
[48] ZTE Corporation. Powerpilot: 5g energy saving in coordination with 4g. Technical report, ZTE
Corporation, December 2020. Accessed: 2025-05-12,fromhttps://www.zte.com.cn/content/
dam/zte-site/res-www-zte-com-cn/mediares/zte/files/newsolution/wireless/ran/
white_paper/PowerPilot_5G_Energy_Saving_in_Coordination_with_4G_20201215.pdf.
[49] ZTE Corporation. Zte and china unicom pilot 5g base station energy saving technologies, August
2020. Accessed: 2025-05-12,fromhttps://www.zte.com.cn/global/about/news/20200814e1.
html.
[50] Mia Ĺ Äap.
5g iot: The future of connected devices.
FreeeWay, October 2023.
Accessed:
2025-06-15,fromhttps://freeeway.com/5g-iot-the-future-of-connected-devices/.
Page 52 of 52
==PAGE:56==
Energy-Efficiency of 5G
References
Appendix A: Sample Code
Modified model code
Energy and state determining code
Page 53 of 52
==PAGE:57==
Energy-Efficiency of 5G
References
Page 54 of 52
==PAGE:58==
Energy-Efficiency of 5G
References
Page 55 of 52
==PAGE:59==
Energy-Efficiency of 5G
References
Modified model, performance code
Page 56 of 52
==PAGE:60==
Energy-Efficiency of 5G
References
Page 57 of 52
==PAGE:61==
Energy-Efficiency of 5G
References
AI/ML-based model code
Energy and state determining code
Page 58 of 52
==PAGE:62==
Energy-Efficiency of 5G
References
Page 59 of 52
==PAGE:63==
Energy-Efficiency of 5G
References
Page 60 of 52
==PAGE:64==
Energy-Efficiency of 5G
References
AI/ML-based model performance code
Page 61 of 52
==PAGE:65==
Energy-Efficiency of 5G
References
Page 62 of 52
==PAGE:66==
Energy-Efficiency of 5G
References
Renewable source based model code
Page 63 of 52
==PAGE:67==
Energy-Efficiency of 5G
References
Page 64 of 52
==PAGE:68==
Energy-Efficiency of 5G
References
Page 65 of 52
==PAGE:69==
Energy-Efficiency of 5G
References
Page 66 of 52
