==PAGE:1==
Machine learning-aided identification of reaction
paths to C3-products in electrochemical
CO(2)-reduction
Masters Thesis in Engineering Physics
Jonathan Roel Hjorth (s194092)
Supervised by:
Georg Kastlunger
Dipam Patel
Patrick Giese
Department of Physics
Technical University of Denmark
July 27, 2025
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
Climate change is evident, and calls for a global change to a green and sustainable energy system.
An electrification of the transportation sector is in effect, allowing for vehicles to run using energy
from renewable sources. Some areas however, require higher density energy storage, than what
is currently unavailable through battery technology. Creating high energy density fuels in a
sustainable manner can be a viable option. A method of doing so is through electrochemical
CO2 reduction, where water and CO2 is turned into carbon based fuels and chemicals such as
ethylene and propanol. While these compounds can be created experimentally, the rates of doing
so are rather poor and currently able to support the global demand. To improve the rates of
production, the mechanisms behind the reaction needs to be determined.
In this thesis the reaction pathways leading from CO to propanol and propylene will be de-
termined using an autonomous method developed throughout the study. The process utilises
pre-trained machine learning neural networks coupled with minima hopping and constraints, to
easily and efficiently determine the global minima of molecules on a surface.
Constraints used during minima hopping are improved to allow free movement of the molecule
while maintaining close proximity to the surface.
The Gibbs free energies of each intermediate is determined using density functional theory to
create a free energy landscape of the molecules at the surface, as a function of electrons trans-
ferred to the system. Using this energy landscape an algorithm is created to determine, and rank,
reaction pathways through the intermediates, based on thermodynamics. BEP relations are de-
termined from literature and used to approximate the kinetic barriers from the thermodynamics,
allowing kinetically favourable pathways be determined.
From the presented pathways, prominent C-C coupling steps leading to C3 are identified. *CO
coupling with *CC to form *CC-CO, is found to effectively lead to propylene. *CO coupling
with *CHCOH to form *CHCOH-CO, is found to effectively lead to propane.
General trends in protonation order, were determined for C1−3 molecules, thermodynamically
favouring carbon protonation, while kinetically favouring oxygen protonation.
i
==PAGE:3==
List of Abbreviation
ASE
Atomic Simulation Environment.
BEEF-vdW
Bayesian Error Estimation Functional with van der Waals correlation.
BEP
Brønsted-Evans-Polanyi.
BFGS
Broyden-Fletcher-Goldfarb-Shanno.
CHE
Computation Hydrogen Electrode.
CI-NEB
Climbing Image Nudged Elastic Band.
Cu(100)
Copper (100) facet.
DFT
Density Functional Theory.
DOF
Degrees of Freedom.
DOS
Density of States.
DTU
Technical University of Denmark.
eCO2R
Electrochemical CO2 Reduction.
EOS
Equation of State.
FCC
Face-Centered Cubic.
FIRE
Fast Inertial Relaxation Engine.
GUI
Graphical User Interface.
MD
Molecular Dynamics.
ML
Machine Learning.
NEB
Nudged Elastic Band.
NMA
Normal Mode Analysis.
NN
Neural Network.
PW
Plane Wave.
QN
Quasi Newton.
SHE
Standard Hydrogen Evolution.
SJM
Solvated Jellium Method.
XC
Exchange-correlation.
ZPE
Zero-Point Energy.
ii
==PAGE:4==
CONTENTS
CONTENTS
Contents
1
Motivation
1
2
Previous works
1
2.1
The path to C2 products . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2.2
The path to C3 products . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
3
Theory
4
3.1
Introduction to Density Functional Theory
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3.2
Introduction to Neural Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.3
Gas Reference . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.4
Reaction Rates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
4
Methodology
7
4.1
The Open Catalyst Project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
4.2
OCP in this project
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
4.3
Atomic Simulation Environment and the Unit Cell . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
4.4
Convergence Test and Lattice Constant
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
4.5
Minima Hopping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
4.6
The Benefit of Neural Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4.7
Local Optimizers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4.8
Constraints . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.9
Filtering using Inverse Distance-Based Fingerprints . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.10 Free Energy Correction and Vibrational Modes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.10.1 Vibrations and Zero-Point Energy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.10.2 Free Energy Correction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.11 Creating C3 Products
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
5
Results and Discussion
17
5.1
Minima Hopping and Constraints . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
5.2
The Path to C2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
5.2.1
Thermodynamic Pathways . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5.2.2
Kinetic Pathways . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5.3
The Path to C3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.3.1
Thermodynamic Pathways . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.3.2
Kinetic Pathways . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.4
Parity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
6
Conclusion
31
7
Outlook
31
iii
==PAGE:5==
CONTENTS
CONTENTS
A Supplementary pathways
34
A.1 Pathways Leaderboard . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
A.2 Forced Intermediates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
B C3 Energy Landscape
39
iv
==PAGE:6==
2
PREVIOUS WORKS
1
Motivation
We are moving toward a more sustainable future by prioritizing reliable and renewable energy
sources such as solar, wind, hydro, fusion, and fission, in place of polluting fuels like coal, natural
gas, and oil.
In many areas, sustainable energy can be stored in batteries for later use. However, current
battery technologies suffer from relatively low energy densities making it unviable in certain
sectors. In aviation, the weight of batteries significantly reduced the travel distance, and unlike
with aviation fuels the weight does not decrease as the fuel is consumed[1]. Similarly, electric
maritime freights designed for long trips, would use a lot more space on batteries and thus have
less space for cargo. In these cases high density fuels which can be created in a sustainable
manner are needed.
Electrochemical CO2 reduction (eCO2R) is a method which can create
carbon based chemicals and fuels from CO2 and water. Unfortunately the mechanisms behind
creating C3+ carbon structures are still rather unknown.
In this project, some estimates of reaction pathways towards the C3 products propylene and
propanol were made using an autonomous process implemented during the project. Determining
the pathways leading to the C3 products can help increase the production of these chemical and
serve as a stepping stone toward producing sustainable, high-density, carbon based chemical
fuels. Simulations were run on a copper surface at the (100) facet, due to it being one of the
best catalyst at producing C2+ structures. A combination of minima hopping, neural network
(NN) potentials, and density functional theory (DFT) was utilized to determine global minimas
of structures on Cu(100) and make accurate energy calculations.
2
Previous works
This chapter aims to provide the reader with insight into the state of the art of electrochemical
CO(2)-reduction (eCO2R) and previous works looking into the mechanics of C3-production.
In Section 2.1 a paper from 2023 predicting reaction pathways to C2 products will be covered.
The results of the paper will serve as an initial test of the feasibility of the methodology developed
in this project.
In Section 2.2 a paper from 2022 in which pathways to C3 products are predicted will be covered.
From some of the data they have generated, the Brønstad-Evans-Polanyi (BEP) relations of the
free surface-coupling of CO on Cu(100) will be determined to estimate the kinetics in this project.
2.1
The path to C2 products
This project is heavily inspired by the previous work done by Kastlunger et al.[2]. In the previous
study the most likely reaction pathways towards ethylene and ethanol was determined through
a thermodynamic study and a stepwise kinetic analysis on a Cu(100) surface. Both ethylene and
ethanol are high-value C2 products in eCO2R and are commonly created experimentally.
The thermodynamic study was achieved by calculating the constant-potential formation free
energies of reaction intermediates starting from CO adsorbed on the surface, denoted by a
asterics *CO, and towards the products ethylene and ethanol. The results of this study yielded
the free energy landscape shown in Figure 1, showing the predicted pathways from *CO to the
C2 product ethylene and ethanol.
In another previous study they identified the mechanism
toward C2+ products to proceed via the *CO dimerisation step of the *OCCO dimer under
typical reaction conditions[3]. We will consider this dimerisation step to be a prerequisite in our
analysis as the alternative protonations of *CO to *CHO or *COH lead to the production of
methane. As part of this new study we will attempt to predict similar pathways through the free
energy landscape as a proof of concept to a more automatised approach which will be developed
in this project.
Page 1 of 39
==PAGE:7==
2.1
The path to C2 products
2
PREVIOUS WORKS
Figure 1:
Free energy landscape from CO to the C2 products ethylene and ethanol from
Kastlunger et al.[2]
Original text: Free energy profile toward ethylene and ethanol at -0.77 VSHE and pH 13 (0
VRHE) on Cu(100). The thermodynamically preferred reaction paths are highlighted in green,
symbolizing the most stable intermediates shared by both products. Blue and ocher steps high-
light the reaction pathway toward ethylene and ethanol, respectively.
Note that the x axis
contains both the number of transferred proton-electron pairs (NH) and the respective potential
response of the intermediate (γ).
From the thermodynamic study it was found that at typical operating conditions for the reaction
(i.e. below -1 VSHE and at neutral or alkaline pH), nearly all reaction steps were exergonic. This
meant the step to the next reaction intermediate was energetically favourable and the reaction
paths were thus not governed by the thermodynamics. Instead, it was crucial to consider the
kinetics of the various reaction intermediates to identify the preferred reaction pathways.
To determine the kinetics of the intermediates they performed constant-potential climbing-image
nudged elastic band (CI-NEB) calculations to estimate the activation barriers under neutral
and alkaline conditions using the solvated jellium method (SJM). From this they were able
to determine the kinetically most feasible reaction pathways to the C2 products ethylene and
ethanol. They were also able to identify some general trends in elementary steps between the
thermodynamic step high and the kinetically determined activation barrier on Cu(100). In the
study they determined a linear correlation between the thermodynamics and kinetics in three of
the four elementary eCO2R steps considered in this project. This linear correlation is in the field
of catalysis known as the Brøndsted-Evans-Poyanei (BEP) relation. The four steps considered
are: C-protonation, O-protonation, OH-desorption and finally CO dimerisation.
For the first three steps the BEP relations were found to be:
1. C-protonation:
0.76∆E + 1.27eV
(1)
2. O-protonation:
0.89∆E + 0.59eV
(2)
3. OH-desorption:
0.25∆E + 0.87eV
(3)
Page 2 of 39
==PAGE:8==
2.2
The path to C3 products
2
PREVIOUS WORKS
where ∆E is the thermodynamic change in energy.
The fourth step will be calculated later using data from another paper in Section 2.2.
In this project there will be a lot more intermediates towards C3 products compared to C2. This
makes it unfeasible to conduct a kinetic study of all the intermediates within the timeline of
this project, as they are computationally demanding. Instead the BEP relations will be used to
estimate the kinetic barriers from the thermodynamics.
2.2
The path to C3 products
Once some pathways towards C3 products have been established, they will be compared to the
findings from one of the few papers predicting the mechanisms toward C3 products, namely
the paper by N´uria L´opez et al.[4] In the study they attempt to explain the C3-backbone and
elucidate the mechanism responsible for the observed selectivity using both density functional
theory (DFT) and experiments.
The intermediates considered in the study were determined from a screening made from experi-
ments from literature or their own work. The processes they deemed to be of interest was thus
determined by what intermediates they were able to measure during experiments. This may bias
some of the hard to detect and short-lived molecules such as CC, COCO, CHO and COH. To
combat this they supplement their initial findings with Nudged Elastic Band (NEB) simulations
to determine the reaction and activation energies of potential C-C coupling steps.
From the study they found the most frequently reported products to be mostly propionaldehyde
and small amounts of 1-propanol, both originating from the coupling of CH2CH and CHO.
From all the NEB data they collected the CO* coupling BEP relations could be determined by
making a linear fit to their data. The fit created from this can be seen in Figure 2. Giving us
the CO-coupling step:
0.81∆E + 0.98eV
(4)
Although the fit is not that great with a R2 value of only 0.54, this fit will be used to estimate
the kinetics of the CO* coupling steps towards C3. An attempt at determining the BEP relation
of the CO-coupling step was also done using the results from a papers by Tang et al., however
it resulted in a worse linear fit[5].
Figure 2: Fit of the BEP relations of CO* coupling to C3 structures[4].
Our own findings will later be compared with the predicted pathways from this paper.
Page 3 of 39
==PAGE:9==
3
THEORY
3
Theory
In this section we will briefly go through the theoretical side of the methods we are going to
use in this project. Although we have not specifically delved too much into these topics as part
of this project it is still rather important to understand the fundamental concepts of which the
tools we have been using are built upon.
3.1
Introduction to Density Functional Theory
Density Functional Theory (DFT) is a quantum mechanical method designed to simulate many-
body atomic systems, such as surfaces and molecules. Instead of solving the complex many-
electron wavefunction Ψ in Schr¨odinger’s equation seen in Equation (5) directly, which is ex-
tremely difficult to do, DFT instead simplifies the problem by focusing on the electron density
only.
ˆHΨ = EtotΨ
(5)
where the Hamiltonian ˆH describes: 1) the kinetic energy of electrons i, 2) the kinetic energy
of nuclei I, 3) the electrostatic potential between electrons i and j, 4) the electrostatic potential
between nuclei I and J, and 5) the electrostatic potential between nuclei and electrons I and i,
given as
ˆH = −
X
i
∇2
i
2 −
X
I
∇2
I
2MI
+ 1
2
X
i̸=j
1
|ri −rj| + 1
2
X
I̸=J
ZIZJ
|rI −rJ| −1
2
X
i,I
ZI
|ri −rI|
(6)
given in Hartree units ℏ= 1, e = 1, me = 1, a0 = 1, e2/a0 = 27.2 eV = 1 Hartree. MI is the
mass of nuclei I, |ra −rb| is the distance between particles, and ZI is the atomic number of the
nuclei I.
Describing the electrons and nuclei with separate wavefunctions is an assumption known as the
Born-Oppenheimer approximation.
It is a rather good approximation, given that the nuclei
are much larger, and relatively slow, compared to the electrons. The benefit of using the elec-
tron density is that it is a function of only three spatial variables, regardless of the number
of electrons. This is why the complexity of the system scales much slower, compared to the
complex many-electron wavefunction. The foundational principle behind DFT is described by
the Hohenberg-Kohn theorems, which state that all the properties of a ground-state system are
uniquely determined by its electron density. In other words, if you know the electron density of a
system in its lowest energy configuration, then you also know the exact many-body wavefunction
of the system, and thus, every property of the system.
The wavefunction of any ground state system can be acquired by solving the Kohn-Sham equa-
tions. These equations model the interacting system of electrons as a set of non-interacting
particles moving in an effective potential. This potential includes contributions from the exter-
nal potential, electron-electron Coulomb interactions, and an exchange-correlation (XC) term
that captures the complex many-body effects. Instead of solving the many-body Schr¨odinger
equation the Kohn-Sham equation is solved as

−ℏ2
2m∇2 + vR(r)

ϕi(r) = εiϕi(r)
(7)
where the effective potential is
vR(r) =
Z
n(r′)
|r −r′|dr′ + vion(r) + δExc[n]
δn
(8)
with the electron density
n(r) =
N
X
i=1
|ϕi(r)|2
(9)
Page 4 of 39
==PAGE:10==
3.2
Introduction to Neural Networks
3
THEORY
These equations are solved in a self-consistency loop until the electron density has converged to
within some predefined threshold ϵ.
Once the energy density has converged and thus the energy, the forces can be calculated as the
gradient of the energy, which can then be used to simulate molecular dynamics. This correlation
between the energy and the force is known as the Hellmann Feynman theorem.
The exchange-correlation term δExc is a sort of umbrella term, which is supposed to account for
all the approximations done to simplify the problem. Because the exact form of the exchange-
correlation functional is unknown, various approximations are used for different purposes. The
XC potentials are ranged on the five-rung ’Jacob’s ladder’, which spans from ’Hartrees world’
(no XC) to ’chemical accuracy’ where the accuracy and the computational requirements in-
creases as the ladder is climbed[6]. These approximations allow DFT to balance accuracy and
computational efficiency, making it a widely used tool in a wide range of different fields such as
materials science, chemistry, and physics. These calculations while much simpler than solving
the many-body Schr¨odinger equation still require a lot of computational power.
3.2
Introduction to Neural Networks
Machine learning neural networks (NN) play a vital role in this project allowing us to approxi-
mate the DFT calculations and run simulations at a much faster pace. Creating NNs is a tool
used almost anywhere in common day society whether it is to create large language models
like chatGPT, self-driving cars or determining which ads you see online. While the scale and
functionality of each model may differ substantially they all build on similar architectural frame-
works. This general framework consists of layers of nodes the first of which takes an initial input
and the last of it giving an output as seen in Figure 3. Each layer is then connected by weights
which are found by training the model on a typically large dataset of whatever problem it should
learn to predict.
Figure 3: Example of simple NN architecture.
A neural network used for predicting atomic energies should thus take a collection of positions
and atomic numbers from a system and from that be able to predict the energies and forces from
that. This however requires quite a complex NN architecture involving many layers and a large
amount of training data. Figure 4 shows the main architecture of the NN ’GemNet’, which is
from their paper[7]. The figure shows how complex these structures are compared to the simple
example in Figure 3. Fortunately all this work has been done by the GemNet team and we get
to just use them. These models will be described more in Section 4.2.
3.3
Gas Reference
When working with atomic simulation it is important to have a consistent and meaningful
baseline for comparing calculated energies, so they can be used for meaningful results. However,
DFT and the NNs used in this project do not yield absolute energies with physical meaning but
rather total energies that are only meaningful relative to a reference. To get results comparable
with experimental data it is common practice to change the basis to one composed of the
individual atoms used in the study. In our case we are going to consider molecules consisting of
Page 5 of 39
==PAGE:11==
3.4
Reaction Rates
3
THEORY
Figure 4: Example of complex NN architecture from one of the NN models used in this project[7].
some composition of carbon, hydrogen and oxygen. Reference energies for all three atomic types
would thus need to be determined. By calculating the energy of H2 and then dividing with two,
a reference for hydrogen is created.
EH = EH2
2
(10)
The reference energy of oxygen can then be determined from the energy of H2O. It would be
easier to get from O2 but DFT has well-known limitations when it comes to accurately calculating
the energy of molecular oxygen (O2)[8].
Instead the oxygen reference can be calculated from water
EO = EH2O −EH2
(11)
Lastly, the reference of carbon can be calculated from CO
EC = ECO −EO
(12)
With this basis set of atomic reference energies it is now possible to get meaningful results for
all considered molecules.
3.4
Reaction Rates
In order to know which reaction pathway is the most prominent the rate at which a given reaction
is occurring should be considered. The speed at which a reaction works is determined by the
reaction rate of that reaction under the conditions it is experiencing. This rate can be calculated
as
k = ν · e−Ea
kBT
(13)
where Ea is the activation energy of the reaction, kBT is the Boltzmann constant multiplied by
the temperature T and ν is a rate constant specific to that reaction (which is typically around
∼1013 for gas-phase reactions). Since kBT is constant during most reaction conditions, one of
the most important factors determining the reaction rate is the activation energy Ea as it has
Page 6 of 39
==PAGE:12==
4
METHODOLOGY
an exponential effect on the rate. Due to this the activation barrier is typically a good indicator
of how fast a given reaction occurs.
Now, if you have a chain of reactions occurring simultaneously, typically one of the reaction
steps has a larger activation barrier compared to the other steps. Due to how the rate scales
exponentially, this step is typically much slower than all the other reaction steps. Because of
this, the step can be considered the rate-limiting step and is what influences the rate of the
entire reaction chain.
If we now imagine a large network of possible reaction pathways going from reactant A to B
through an ocean of different intermediates. Then one pathway will react faster than all the
other pathways, since every other pathway has at least one energy barrier which is slightly larger
than that of the optimal pathway. This concept will be utilized later on when discerning which
pathway is the most optimal one.
4
Methodology
4.1
The Open Catalyst Project
In this project we will be utilizing pre-trained neural network energy predicting models from a
project known as the Open Catalyst Project (OCP). The Open Catalyst Project was initially
a collaborative research effort between Fundamental AI Research (FAIR) at Meta (the same
group behind facebook) and Carnegie Mellon University’s Department of Chemical Engineering.
The purpose of this collaboration was to use AI modelling to discover new catalysts for use in
renewable energy storage to help in addressing climate change.[9]
In 2020 and again in 2022, the OCP hosted competitions where neural networks (NN) were
trained from a provided dataset and competed to perform the best. After each competition the
pre-trained models were made public for anyone to use, as well as the FAIRChem framework
on which they are based upon. The datasets from 2020 and 2022 will be denoted as OC20 and
OC22, respectively.
4.2
OCP in this project
Throughout the project two of the pretrained NN models from the OCP will be tested, namely:
GemNet-OC OC22+OC20-All,
and EquiformerV2+DeNS(127M, λE=4, λF =100, OC22-only, fmax=0.1).
Although the names of these two models smoothly roll of the tongue, they will simply be denoted
as GemNet and Equiformer, respectively, throughout this project.
These two models are chosen because they are two of the best ranking models according to the
OCP leaderboards.[10]
These two models are also trained using different datasets. The GemNet model is trained using
both the dataset from OC20 and OC22, while the Equiformer model is only trained on OC22.
This means the GemNet model has ’seen’ more data and would ideally know how the energy
surface looks for more systems.
On the other side the Equiformer model is trained on less
data, but is ranked significantly higher on the OCP leaderboards at least according to their test
parameters.
The OC20 dataset consists of 133 million different training structures of varying adsorbates
and surfaces.
Some of the adsorbates consists of only hydrogen, oxygen, C1 molecules, and
C2 molecules, while the surfaces consists of only 5% unary (single element), 65% binary (two
elements), and 30% ternary (three elements) materials.[9] This dataset seems to be quite similar
to the system considered in this project.
The OC22 dataset on the other hand consists entirely of oxide surfaces with only the adsorbates:
O, H, N, C, OH, OOH, H2O, CO, and O2. This dataset also only contains just short of 10 million
Page 7 of 39
==PAGE:13==
4.3
Atomic Simulation Environment and the Unit Cell
4
METHODOLOGY
different training structures.[11] This dataset seems quite different from the systems which will
be simulated in this project, but we’ll look into how it performs later.
Initially it is unknown which of the two models perform the best for our system, which is why
an impression on both of them will have to be made. By studying the datasets used to train
each model it seems like the GemNet model has the best prerequisite to simulate the systems
we will be considering.
4.3
Atomic Simulation Environment and the Unit Cell
In this project the Atomic Simulation Environment (ASE) will be used to simulate atomic struc-
tures. ASE is a python library created at DTU Lyngby in the department of physics[12]. This
library is implemented in an object oriented way to make defining and configuring atomic sys-
tems trivial. It serves as a unified interface for building atomic structures, running simulations,
and analysing results. It allows a lot of freedom to use external calculators such as GPAW,
VASP or Quantum ESPRESSO to compute energies, forces, and stresses. It also contains a
lot of convenient tools such as GUI tools, databases, molecular dynamics, and minima hopping
which will be introduced in Section 4.5.
4.4
Convergence Test and Lattice Constant
In this project a 3x3x3 Cu(100) slab will be considered as the unit cell, which should be sufficient
to simulate our adsorbates. DFT calculations will be made using the GPAW calculator, which
is being developed at DTU. We will be using the plane wave (PW) mode with the Bayesian
error estimation functional with van der Waals correlation (BEEF-vdW) exchange correlation
functional. Before the calculator, some parameters needs to be adjusted to fit the systems being
simulated. Two different parameters has to be determined: PW-cutoff and k-points. These
parameters are determined by creating a convergence test of the parameters. The convergence
test is done by simulating a CO molecule adsorbed on top of our Cu(100) slab and calculating
the energy using varying PW and k-point parameters. The unit cell used is shown in Figure
5(a). The results of the convergence test is shown in Figure 5(b). The convergence parameters
are determined from the adsorption energy Eads = Etot −ECO −Eslab, since the adsorption
energies is the quantity of interest in this project. The convergence plot contains four different
lines each having varying numbers of k-points in the x and y directions, as described by the
legend. The adsorption energy is plotted with respect to the applied PW-cutoff energy. Once
the line becomes horizontal, the adsorption energy has converged with respects to the PW-cutoff.
The k-points are converged once the line stops shifting up or down as more k-points are added.
From the convergence plot the adsorption energy can be determined to have converged at 550
eV PW-cutoff energy and with four k-points in the periodic directions x and y. In z there are no
periodic boundary conditions and therefore no long range energy contributions requiring more
k-points, so one k-point is sufficient.
Page 8 of 39
==PAGE:14==
4.4
Convergence Test and Lattice Constant
4
METHODOLOGY
(a)
(b)
Figure 5: (a) Unit cell used for convergence test. (b) Convergence of adsorption energy of CO on
top of Cu(100). The dashed line indicate where the PW-cutoff energy is considered converged.
The arrow indicates the plot with converged k-points.
With the optimal parameters of the cut-off energy and the number of k-points found, the next
thing to determine is the optimal lattice constant. The lattice constant describes the size of our
crystal lattice and in turn the size of our unit cell. So far the experimental value of the Cu(100)
lattice constant has been used, which is 3.61 ˚A[13]. The optimal one for our unit cell can vary
slightly depending on our choice of calculator and XC potential. The optimal lattice constant
can be determined by doing a parametric sweep of the lattice constant centered around the ’good
guess’ and then using the equation of state (EOS) to determine the optimal value of the lattice
constant. The fit from EOS and the unit cell used is shown in Figure 6. Here we can see the
energy is at the lowest at a volume of 11.64 ˚A3. It should be noted that this is the single atom
unit cell of a face-centered cubic (FCC) crystal. Since the normal FCC crystal contains four
atoms the volume has to be multiplied by four. From this the lattice constant can be calculated
as
a =
3√
4V =
3q
4 · 11.64˚A
3 ≈3.60˚A
(14)
The result is only 0.01 ˚A smaller than the experimental value, so the experimental value was a
very good initial guess.
(a) Fit created using EOS to determine the optimal
lattice constant.
(b) Unit cell used to determine the optimal lattice
constant.
Figure 6: Equation of State (EOS) analysis of the Cu(100) surface.
Page 9 of 39
==PAGE:15==
4.5
Minima Hopping
4
METHODOLOGY
4.5
Minima Hopping
To determine the free energy landscape of the CO-reduction, the global minima of each inter-
mediate first needs to be determined. In other words, the position at the surface where the
adsorbate has the lowest energy, which is also where it binds the strongest, has to be deter-
mined. This can be a quite troublesome task especially as the size of the adsorbates increases
due to the degrees of freedom increasing. With small adsorbates such as the C1 adsorbates it is
usually quite easy to determine the global minima by simply guessing it being at either the top,
bridge or hollow sites of the FCC(100) crystal and then relaxing the structure. However, larger
adsorbates are big enough to cross several sites and one would either have to be really good at
guessing or use a more sophisticated method of determining the global minima.
This is where the minima hopping method created by Stefan Goedecker[14] and later improved
by Andrew Peterson[15] comes into play. Minima hopping is an algorithm created specifically
to determine the global minima of structures. Although there exists a large variety of global
optimizers this one requires very little initial input from the user.
This method will be one of the major work horses of this project so lets look into how it works.
The minima hopping method only requires an atoms object to work, but has a bunch of parame-
ters that can be modified as desired. The process flow of the minima hopping swaps between two
different phases until a desired number of minimas has been found. The first phase is relaxing
the structure using a local optimizer. This can be done with any local optimizers, the default
being the QuasiNewton local optimizer. This part of the minima hopping we will denote as QN
out of convention. What all these local optimizers do is to attempt to find the local minima
of energy surface by following the gradient of the energy. An analogue that can be used is a
man standing blindfolded on a hill and trying to find his way down to the bottom. In this case
the man would likely attempt to use his hands to feel which direction the hill has the highest
slope upwards and then take a small step the opposite way. If he continues to do this he will
eventually be at the foot of the hill.
The second phase is running molecular dynamics (MD). Here the molecule is initially ’heated
up’ to a specified temperature which by default is 1000 Kelvin. The system is simulated as
being heated up by applying velocities to the atoms of the molecule with values given around
a Maxwell Boltzmann distribution at that temperature. The molecule is then allowed to move
around freely using the VelocityVerlet method. The molecule then continues to move around
the surface until it has passed a specified number of minimas, which by default is two.
Once it has passed these minimas, it then goes back to relaxing the structure and starts over.
One evolution of MD and QN is known as one step. Every time the molecule has been relaxed
it then checks the energy and the position of the relaxed molecule to determine whether it has
found a new minimum. The new minimum check is quite rudimentary and only considers the
energy and positions of previously observed minima. Due to this we later determine the unique
minima using a more sophisticated filtering method. We will go into more details about this in
Section 4.9.
Page 10 of 39
==PAGE:16==
4.5
Minima Hopping
4
METHODOLOGY
(a)
(b)
Figure 7: Example of a (a) shorter, and (b) longer minima hopping process.
Examples of two minima hopping processes can be seen in Figure 7. Each of the summaries
show how the three variables: temperature (T), accepted energy difference (Ediff), and potential
energy (Epot) changes as the minima hopping process runs, starting from the top to the bottom,
respectively. From the potential energy diagram in Figure 7(a) (bottom), it is shown how the
potential energy changes through each step. It starts on the left with a horizontal line. These
flat lines are the QN steps where the structure is relaxed to determine the local minimum. To
the right of it there can be a green check mark or either one of these red arrows: ←, ←- , ⇓.
The green check mark and the red arrows symbolizes whether the found minimum is considered
a new minimum or not, respectively. The meaning of arrows used are described well by Figure
8, which is from Peterson’s paper[15].
Page 11 of 39
==PAGE:17==
4.6
The Benefit of Neural Networks
4
METHODOLOGY
Figure 8: Arrow symbolism from Peterson[15]
Considering the example in Figure 7(a). Due to the first minimum always being a new one, it
will always have a green check mark next to it. From the right of the horizontal lines a black line
shoots upwards rapidly and then oscillates a few times. This is the MD part of each step. The
MD part shows how after two local minimas are passed, it then returns to the second minima and
proceeds with QN. After the first minimum the algorithm finds 15 additional minima with very
similar energies, resulting in all of them getting rejected as new minima. Whenever a minimum
is rejected, the temperature graph shows an increase in the temperature, thus increasing the
energy of future MD simulations. After 16 steps a new minima is finally accepted, which results
in a decrease in the energy.
Whenever a new minimum is accepted the Ediff graph is also
decreased, making future energy comparisons more strict.
At the end you are left with a trajectory file containing every accepted minima configuration,
which can be used for further analysis.
4.6
The Benefit of Neural Networks
Running minima hopping requires quite a lot calculations. Running a long minima hopping
process on a molecule, it takes roughly 18000 DFT calculations. Running DFT calculations
using the converged parameters, each calculation would approximately take 24 seconds on the
powerful AMD EPYC Zen4 9474F CPUs running 96 cores in parallel. When using a NN such
as GemNet, calculations only take two seconds using a single core using a slower CPU. That is
a thousand times more efficient, even disregarding the difference in CPU performance. The NN
Equiformer was found to be significantly slower than GemNet, taking twelve seconds instead per
calculation. However, this is still a huge improvement compared to relying solely on DFT.
These NNs will be used to determine good initial guesses for global minimas of structures, which
afterwards can then be relaxed using DFT to get accurate energies.
4.7
Local Optimizers
Initially for simplicity sake the default parameters of the minima hopping algorithm was used.
It was found rather quickly that there were issues in converging the forces during relaxations.
Page 12 of 39
==PAGE:18==
4.8
Constraints
4
METHODOLOGY
These issues most likely arose from random kinks in the energy surfaces predicted by the NNs.
There exists quite a few different methods for energy landscape optimization. The initial al-
gorithm we used was an algorithm known as Broyden-Fletcher-Goldfarb-Shanno LineSearch
(BFGSLineSearch). This method usually performs very well and converges quickly. However,
when using a NN the energy surface might not be smooth in every point, which can lead to the
BFGSLineSearch method getting stuck in some cases. To circumvent this issue, another kind
of optimizer namely the Fast Inertial Relaxation Engine (FIRE)[16] optimizer was used instead.
This method utilizes inertia and is thus less likely to be bothered by random kinks in the energy
surface. Although the FIRE optimizer seemed to have less issues compared to BFGSLineSearch,
while still converging quickly, it would still get stuck sometimes. As a final line of defence, a
limit to the number of relaxation steps was implemented into the minima hopping algorithm.
In the case where the optimizer would get stuck, it would simply pass the relaxation after a
thousand relaxation steps and proceed with the next MD.
4.8
Constraints
During minima hopping the energy of the adsorbate is increased quite a lot through increases
in temperature. This increased temperature can lead to the bonds in the adsorbates breaking,
which is not desired, as it would destroy the molecular identity of the adsorbate. To mitigate
this a few constraints from the ASE package where introduced to the system during minima
hopping:
1. Hookean constraint:
To help mitigate the bonds in the adsorbate from breaking, a Hookean constraint between
each atom and its bound neighbours is introduced. This constraint allow for the atoms to
move freely until they reach a specified threshold rt, after which a Hookean force is applied
to the two atoms to keep them together.
2. Hookean plane constraint:
This constraint is a different variant of the Hookean constraint. Instead of applying a
Hookean constraint between two atoms, a Hookean is applied to the entire adsorbate and
a plane above the surface. If the molecule at some point passes this plane, then a Hookean is
applied to the entire adsorbate effectively pushing it back onto the surface. This constraint
can be used to prevent the adsorbate from flying too far away from the surface during the
MD part for minima hopping. This constraint did not work as we wanted it to, so we
modified it to suit our needs. previously it worked by applying a Hookean to any atom
that passed the threshold essentially pushing the atom into the molecule. This could result
in the molecule rotating and did not seem very physical. The constraint was changed to
apply a Hookean force evenly distributed across each atom of the molecule, effectively
applying a bunch of smaller springs to pull the molecule back to the surface. Additionally
the ’any’ and ’all’ modes were introduced. The ’any’ mode activates the constraint for each
atom that passes the specified plane and increases in strength as more atoms passes the
plane. The ’all’ mode only applies when the entire molecule has passed the plane. For the
purposes of this project, the ’all’ mode will be used, since this mode is independent of the
size of the molecule, and thus the position of the plane does not need to be moved when
dealing with larger molecules. This mode also allows the molecule to freely rotate during
the MD phase of the minima hopping without being restricted by the plane constraint.
The Hookean plane constraint has been essential in keeping the molecules close enough to
the surface, such that the molecule could always sense the presence of the surface, allowing
it to adsorb, even under extreme MD temperatures of ten of thousands of kelvin.
3. FixAtoms constraint:
To prevent the Cu surface from changing during minima hopping the FixAtoms constraint
was used to keep the location of the relaxed Cu atoms fixed. As a bonus this also slightly
reduces the computational time, since the fixed atoms don’t move around.
They are
however still considered when calculating the energy and forces of the adsorbate molecules.
Page 13 of 39
==PAGE:19==
4.9
Filtering using Inverse Distance-Based Fingerprints
4
METHODOLOGY
4.9
Filtering using Inverse Distance-Based Fingerprints
Since minima hopping generates quite a few minima, some way of making removing similar min-
ima is required. As mentioned earlier the minima hopping algorithm makes a very rudimentary
check of the shortest distance between positions of previously accepted minima and their ener-
gies. This primal filter results in a lot of very similar configurations, which computational power
preferably should not be wasted on when relaxing with DFT. To determine duplicates an inverse
distance-based fingerprint filter is used. The filter has been created by one of the post-docs in the
Surf-Cat department, Andreas Lynge Vishart[17]. The filter determines whether configurations
are duplicates from the inverse-distance fingerprints being within a specified threshold. Hence,
the specificity of the filter can be modified by changing this threshold.
4.10
Free Energy Correction and Vibrational Modes
The thermodynamically favourable path through the reaction intermediates is determined by
the Gibbs free energy of the intermediates. The energy achieved from DFT calculator is the
potential energy at 0 K. Thus, the so-called free energy correction needs to be calculated to get
the free energy of each intermediate. To calculate the free energy correction of a molecule, its
vibrational modes and the zero-point energy (ZPE) first needs to be determined.
4.10.1
Vibrations and Zero-Point Energy
The vibrational modes and frequencies can be calculated from the eigenvalues and eigenvectors
of the Hessian matrix. The Hessian is a square matrix consisting of second-order derivatives of
the potential energy with respect to atomic positions. Since the simulated unit cell is finite, a
finite difference approximation of the Hessian is used[18]. The second-order spacial derivatives
of the potential energy are determined from how the force changes as each atom is moved in each
direction along all three Cartesian coordinates x,y,z. With the force being the gradient of the
energy, the gradient of the force is thus the second-order spacial derivatives of the energy. The
vibrational modes and frequencies can then be calculated from solving the eigenvalue problem
of the Hessian.
4.10.2
Free Energy Correction
How to calculate the free energy depends on whether the intermediate is a solid or a gas. This
distinction is made based on whether or not the intermediate adsorbs to the surface.
If the intermediate adsorbs to the surface and thus gets qualified as a non-gas, then the free energy
correction can be calculated using the harmonic limit approximation[19]. In this approximation
for an adsorbate with N atoms all of the 3N degrees of freedom of the adsorbate is treated
harmonically since the adsorbate has no real translational nor rotational degrees of freedom.
The internal energy of an adsorbate at the harmonic limit can be calculated as
U(T) = Eelec + EZPE +
harmDOF
X
i
ϵi
eϵi/kBT −1
(15)
where the first two terms are the electronic energy and the zero-point energy, and the sum is
over all harmonic degrees of freedom (harm DOF). While the entropy of the adsorbate can be
calculated as
S(T) = kB
harmDOF
X
i
"
ϵi
kBT
 eϵi/kBT −1
 −ln

1 −e−ϵi/kBT #
(16)
The Helmholtz free energy is calculated as
F(T) = U(T) −TS(T)
(17)
Page 14 of 39
==PAGE:20==
4.10
Free Energy Correction and Vibrational Modes
4
METHODOLOGY
and finally the Gibbs free energy can be calculated as
G(T) = F(T) + pV
(18)
but when considering changes in free energy the pV term is small compared to the F term, so
it can be neglect to get
G(T) = F(T) = U(T) −TS(T)
(19)
Otherwise, if the molecule does not adsorb and is deemed a gas, then the Gibbs free energy
can be determined using the ideal gas approximation[19]. In this case the molecule is assumed
to be an ideal gas so that the enthalpy is not a function of pressure but only temperature.
The ideal-gas enthalpy is calculated from extrapolation of the energy at 0 K up to the relevant
temperature. The enthalpy can be calculated as
H(T) = Eelec + EZPE +
Z T
0
CP dT
(20)
where the first two terms are the same as in the harmonic limit, while the last term is the
extrapolation of the energy up to the relevant temperature, which is an integral over the constant-
pressure heat capacity. The constant-volume heat capacity can be separated into translational,
rotational, vibrational, and electronic parts
CV = CV,trans + CV,rot + CV,vib + CV,elec
(21)
To change it from constant-volume to constant-pressure kB can be added
CP = CV + kB
(22)
The translational constant-volume heat capacity CV,trans is 3/2kB for a 3-dimensional gas.
The rotational constant-volume heat capacity CV,rot can have three different values: 0 for a
monatomic species, kB for a linear molecule, and 3/2kB for a non-linear molecule. The elec-
tronic component of the constant-volume heat capacity CV,elec is assumed to be zero.
And
finally the vibrational constant-volume heat capacity can be calculated as an integrated form
using
Z T
0
CV,vibdT =
vib DOF
X
i
ϵi
eϵi/kBT −1
(23)
where ϵi are the energies associated with the vibrational frequencies ϵi = hωi. The vibrational
constant-volume heat capacity for non-linear molecules contain 3N −6 degrees of freedom and
3N −5 for linear molecules.
The ideal gas entropy can be calculated as a function of the temperature and pressure as
S(T, P) = S(T, P ◦) −kBln P
P ◦= Strans + Srot + Selec + Svib −kBln P
P ◦
(24)
The translational, rotational, electronic, and vibrational components can be calculated as
Strans = kB
(
ln
"2πMkBT
h2
3/2 kBT
P ◦
#
+ 5
2
)
(25)
Srot =









0
, if monatomic
kB
h
ln

8π2IkBT
σh2

+ 1
i
, if linear
kB

ln
 √πIAIBIC
σ

8π2kBT
h2
3/2
+ 3
2

, if non-linear
(26)
Page 15 of 39
==PAGE:21==
4.11
Creating C3 Products
4
METHODOLOGY
Svib = kB
vib DOF
X
i
"
ϵi
kBT
 eϵi/kBT −1
 −ln

1 −e−ϵi/kBT #
(27)
Selec = kB ln [2 × (total spin) + 1]
(28)
IA,B,C are the three principle moments of inertia for a non-linear molecule. I is the degenerate
moment of inertia for a linear molecule. σ is the symmetry number of the molecule. M is the
total mass of the molecule.
The ideal-gas Gibbs free energy is then simply calculated from the combination of the enthalpy
and the entropy as
G(T, P) = H(T) −TS(T, P)
(29)
While these calculations all seem quite complicated, it is rather simple to do in practice using the
thermochemistry and vibrations package in ASE, to calculate the Gibbs free energy corrections
and the vibrations of the molecules, respectively.
4.11
Creating C3 Products
To go to C3 products some way of getting or creating every conceivable C3 structure within the
boundaries of the project is needed. The C1−2 structures were already generated during the
study Kastlunger et al. We decided to create these C3 structures ourselves. For this project we
decided to limit ourselves to only consider C3 structures with the following limitations: 1. There
can be anywhere between zero and two oxygens. 2. There can be at most one oxygen bound to
the central carbon and at most one bound to either of the end carbons. 3. Any configuration of
hydrogen is considered.
With these limitations 222 different C3 molecules were created. It might however have been
useful to consider cases where oxygen could be bound in both ends of the carbon chain.
To keep track of these molecules, some naming convention was required to determine their
structures from just the name. In the case of C1−2 the names had been created by hand and
were constructed with the convention of everything after a C up until the next C (or the end of
the name) was bound that carbon. As an example consider the name of formaldehyde, CH3CHO,
where three hydrogens are bound to the first carbon and a hydrogen and an oxygen is bound to
the second carbon. If the H and O at the end were flipped, then it would be a hydroxy group
bound to the carbon, instead. With the C3 molecules, an autonomous way of generating the
names in a similar fashion was needed. The naming convention created consisted of three parts.
1. In front of the name is a prefix consisting of zero to two lower case letters serving as position
indicators showing the position where the carbons have oxygen bound. ’e’ for end indicates an
oxygen at the end of the molecules and is always connected to the third carbon. ’m’ for middle
indicates an oxygen at the middle of the molecule. Since we only allow at most one oxygen to
be bound to the molecule the possible prefixes are ’e’, ’m’, ’me’ or nothing.
2. After the prefix the arrangement of hydrogens to the carbons are shown in the same convention
as used in C1−2.
3. At the end of the name the oxygen groups are described in the same order as indicated by
the prefix.
Examples of this is shown in Figure 9. In Figure 9(a) propanol can be seen. Using the naming
convention its name becomes eCH3CH2CH2OH. Since it has an oxygen at the end it has the
prefix ’e’, the hydrogens are arranged as CH3CH2CH2 and the oxygen is an OH group located
at the end. In Figure 9(b) a more complex molecule can be seen. Using the naming convention
the molecule is named meCH3C2HOHOH. The molecule has an oxygen in both the middle and
the end, giving the prefix ’me’. The hydrogens are arranged as CH3C2H and both the central
and terminal oxygen is an OH group.
Page 16 of 39
==PAGE:22==
5
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
(a)
(b)
Figure 9: The molecules (a) propanol and (b) meCH3C2HOHOH.
5
Results and Discussion
In this section, the effectiveness of the neural networks, minima hopping, and constraints well be
examined. Then the outcome of the C2 study will be assessed before progressing to C3. Lastly,
general trends in thermodynamics and kinetics will be examined from the results of this study.
5.1
Minima Hopping and Constraints
In this section, the effectiveness of the minima hopping algorithm will be examined and the out-
comes achieved by using it will be outlined. For C2 structures, GemNet proved adept at quickly
identifying realistic global minima, often locating the global minimum among the initial few dis-
covered minima. Notably, the algorithm managed to adsorb CO2 on the surface, as illustrated in
Figure 10(a), and this adsorption even persisted throughout the DFT relaxation, a process that
typically poses challenging on a Cu(100) surface. Some molecules, like CH3CHO (acetaldehyde)
and the C2 products ethylene and ethanol, also initially adsorbed, but later desorbed during
DFT relaxation, as depicted in Figure 10(b). This desorption is rather common on weak binding
catalysts such as copper, for molecules that fully satisfy the octet rule. These molecules have no
free electrons to establish robust chemisorption bonds, resulting in just physisorption through
weak van der Waals interactions. CO2 surprisingly adhered to the surface even though it also
fully satisfies the octet rule. When molecules failed to adsorb, we processed them as gases and
determined their energies accordingly.
(a)
(b)
Figure 10: (a) CO2 adsorbing to the Cu(100) surface and (b) acetaldehyde having flown of the
Cu(100) surface.
Equiformer, on the other hand, was able to chemisorb most molecules easily. However, it tended
to bind them in odd and unnatural ways, as shown in Figure 11.
As noted in Section 4.2, the dataset used to train Equiformer consisted solely of oxide surfaces.
Hydrogen has a strong affinity for oxides, so the neural network likely learned this as a general
rule.
Page 17 of 39
==PAGE:23==
5.2
The Path to C2
5
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The only factor preventing the hydrogen atoms from detaching from the molecules was the set
of Hookean constraints introduced. In cases of unusual binding, the molecules would simply
drift away once the constraints were removed and the structure was relaxed using DFT. Often
because all the molecules orbitals were filled.
(a) Equiformer attemping to bind hydrogen to the
bridge site of the Cu surface.
(b) Equiformer attempting to bind the hydrogen to
the top site of the Cu surface
Figure 11: Images showing how the Equiformer NN binds the hydrogen of acetaldehyde to the
copper surface.
Due to the overall poor performance of Equiformer both with respect to how it binds and how
long it take it was opted out of and GemNet was just used instead.
With the addition of C3 products, the complexity of the molecular structures suddenly increased,
which introduced some new issues.
One major issue was that atoms began moving to new places on the molecules, even circum-
venting the Hookean constraints designed specifically to prevent this behaviour. The issue arose
when the atoms occasionally would move to the border of what was allowed by the constraints.
When the system then had to be relaxed with DFT and the constraints were lifted, the atoms
were suddenly free to move around and would swap places.
An example of this is the molecule meC3O2 shown in Figure 12. During minima hopping the
isolated carbon atom migrated around the central carbon and wedged itself between the two
other carbons, making the V-shape observed in Figure 12(b).
This is completely within the bounds of the constraints, provided the two carbons with oxygens
are not pulled too far apart. However, once the constraints were lifted, these carbons would
no longer be restricted and would drift apart - effectively turning meC3O2 into eeC3O2, which,
incidentally, is a more stable molecule with a lower energy.
To circumvent this issue, some way of penalizing these cases was needed. This was achieved by
evaluating the final DFT energy with the Hookean constraint penalty included, although they
were not included in the actual relaxation. This way, if the atoms moved away from their original
places during DFT, then they would get massively penalized by the constraints. Then, hopefully,
one of the other minima found would avoid this scenario, and would be approved as the global
minima. This however, was not always the case, and some molecules had to be excluded from
the results due to this issue. These few cases mostly consisted of ’me’ oxygenated molecules,
which, as mentioned in Section 2.2, are believed to not be key intermediates to C3 products.
5.2
The Path to C2
In this section, the results of the minima hopping is used to identify the reaction pathways,
which leads to the formation of the C2 products, ethylene and ethanol. These findings are then
compared to the results presented by Kastlunger et al. described in Section 2.1, in order to
assess the feasibility of our method.
Page 18 of 39
==PAGE:24==
5.2
The Path to C2
5
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
(a)
(b)
Figure 12: The structure of meC3O2 is shown in (a) prior to initiating minima hopping, and in
(b) following the hopping process. During minima hopping, the isolated carbon atom migrates
to become the central carbon in the chain and binds to the surface, effectively converting it into
eeC3O2-a structure excluded from our analysis.
5.2.1
Thermodynamic Pathways
With the minimas of the C2-molecules determined, the structures are relaxed using DFT with
the optimized parameters found in Section 4.4. This is done to get an accurate calculation of the
energies of each molecule at its, hopefully, global minima. Since the Gibbs free energy is needed
to assess the thermodynamics, the methods described in Section 4.10 are used to calculate the
free energy correction of each molecule.
A free energy landscape can then be created by plotting the Gibbs free energies along the y-
axis, and the number of electrons transferred to the system (starting at CO), along the x-axis.
The number of electrons transferred are determined from which atoms are in each molecule.
Each hydrogen ion introduced to the system, adds one electron to the system. Each oxygen ion
introduced, conversely, removes two electrons from the system. Because of this, the removal of
an OH group results in a net gain of +1 electron transferred. The allowed steps of protonating
a carbon, an oxygen, or dissociating OH all result in a step to the right along the x-axis, thus
being driven by the current in the electrolytic cell. To allow the C-C coupling steps to have a net
gain of zero transferred electrons (which experimentally is the case), the systems are simulated
to always contain the CO molecules needed for C-C coupling. For example, the CO point is
created with a system containing three separate CO molecules. This way two of the molecules
can couple forming COCO, without any electrons being transferred. The result of this is shown
in Figure 13. Note, acetaldehyde (CH3CHO) is shown as a star, because it is notoriously difficult
to get to stick to the surface, so its gas reference is used instead.
Page 19 of 39
==PAGE:25==
5.2
The Path to C2
5
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Figure 13: The free energy landscape of the C1−2 molecules that are being considered. Dots
are for adsorbed molecules while stars are for ’gases’ (non-adsorbed). Highlighted is the desired
C2-products ethanol and ethylene on the right and the starting molecule CO and the forced
intermediate COCO on the left.
The next step is to identify viable pathways through the molecular landscape. Our approach to
determine the most optimal routes within the free energy landscape begins by first finding all
feasible reaction pathways. As discussed in Section 2.1, the four possible transitions considered at
each intermediate step are: (1) protonation of carbon, (2) protonation of oxygen, (3) dissociation
of -OH, and (4) CO dimerisation. All possible pathways can be determined by a recursive loop
which starting from CO, which considers all four possible steps for each intermediate and notes
down the pathways.
As illustrated in Figure 13, there are quite a few different molecules to be considered. In fact,
starting from CO, 206 unique pathways are identified, culminating in the formation of the C2
products: ethylene and ethanol. Of these, 42 lead to ethylene, while the remaining 164 result in
ethanol.
If more C2 intermediates were included in the simulations then these numbers could be signifi-
cantly larger. To reduce the number of pathways, only those which initially pass through COCO
from CO are considered, since this step is essential for production of C2+ products, as mentioned
in Section 2.1. This restriction alone reduces the total number of possible pathways down to 49.
To determine the optimal pathways from here each possible pathway is considered and ranked
Page 20 of 39
==PAGE:26==
5.2
The Path to C2
5
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
based on what the rate limiting step is. As outlined in Section 3.4, the rate of a reaction is
proportional to the height of its activation barrier. In the context of thermodynamic barriers,
these correspond to the change in energy between intermediates.
Ei
a = Gi+1 −Gi
(30)
where i is a reaction step in the pathway.
Previously it was also noted that a single activation barrier often serves as the rate-limiting step
of a reaction. However, given the substantial overlap among many C2 pathways, evaluating each
solely by its highest barrier, would yield limited insight into which path is considered optimal.
Instead, the pathways are assessed based on the ’top X’ largest rate-limiting barriers, a concept
we define as depth. Here, depth refers to the number of most significant thermodynamic barriers
considered when determining the most favourable pathway. For this study, a depth of five was
found to be sufficient for evaluating C2 pathways, although the optimal paths typically contained
only two to five endergonic steps.
To better understand this concept, lets consider the results shown in Figure 14. The dashed lines
represent the most promising thermodynamic pathways, each evaluated using a depth of five.
The numbered arrows highlight the key barriers, with #1 indicating the largest and subsequent
numbers marking progressively smaller ones. Notably, the orange pathway has only two barriers,
while the blue pathway contains three, and the green pathway includes four. Despite its greater
number of steps, the blue pathway is predicted to be the most favourable, given that its second
and third barriers are substantially lower than the second barrier of the orange pathway.
Figure 14: Thermodynamically optimal pathways to ethylene and ethanol. The molecules in
bold are molecules forced to be along their pathways. The numbered arrows highlight the key
barriers, with #1 indicating the largest and subsequent numbers marking progressively smaller
ones along each pathway.
Page 21 of 39
==PAGE:27==
5.2
The Path to C2
5
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The green dotted line is the optimal pathway going through ’CCO’ which was in the optimal
thermodynamic pathway found by Kastlunger et al. Since the naming convention is slightly
different we will write the name in our convention first, and if theirs differ, then write their
convention in a parenthesis ie. COCO (OCCO).
By going through CCO another large barrier seems to appear going from CCO to CHCO
(HCCO), thus making this pathway slightly worse thermodynamically. The optimal pathway
found leading to ethanol is the same as one of the proposed pathways from Kastlunger et al.
but not the one they deemed as the optimal one.
Although it appears the barrier in their results are slightly larger going from CCO to CHCO
(HCCO) compared to COCOH (OCCOH) to COHCOH (HOCCOH), one might argue that
under reaction conditions there will be a larger coverage of CCO on the surface since it is more
stable, and thus is more likely to protonate into CHCO (HCCO). From our data however, we
have a much smaller barrier going from COCOH to COHCOH, making it a quite efficient path
getting to ethylene. Going to ethanol a very exergonic path is found by protonating COCO into
CHOCO, having only a barrier right at the end afterwards, which would also be present in the
optimal pathway proposed by Kastlunger et al.
This last barrier going to ethanol could be troublesome for the rates of the process. Fortunately
this is an electrochemical processes and a great way of making these steps slightly easier is
by applying a potential to the reaction chamber. Determining the free energy response to a
potential can be done using the rather simple computational hydrogen electrode (CHE) model.
In this model each electron transfer gets destabilized by exactly one eV per applied voltage
(V). Implementing this can be done by multiplying the voltage with the number of electrons
transfered (x-axis) of each molecule and adding it to its energy.
The optimal pathways when a negative potential of -1 V is applied can be seen in Figure 15.
The applied potential has made the small step up at the end easier and it is now also exergonic.
Although the pathway to ethanol is now much easier, the pathway to ethylene is also easier and
a mix of the two products would be created, reducing the selectivity. The CHE model does not
account for the energetic response of the reaction to an electric field, an effect captured by the
Solvated Jellium Method (SJM).
Since just the CHE model is used in this study, the barriers for CO dimerisation will be unaffected
by the applied potential, because both sides of the step have the same number of electrons. As
a result CHE is unable to predict how the potential affects the rate-limiting step going from
CO to COCO. The SJM would among other things be able to explicitly account for the dipole-
field interaction in CO, which could influence its Gibbs free energy differently than it would for
COCO. This could help reduce the height of the barrier going from CO to COCO.
Page 22 of 39
==PAGE:28==
5.2
The Path to C2
5
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Figure 15: Optimal thermodynamic pathways to ethylene and ethanol with a potential of -1V.
5.2.2
Kinetic Pathways
Using the BEP relations acquired in Section 2.1 and 2.2, the kinetics of the pathways can be
estimated.
The pathways found to be kinetically optimal are shown in Figure 16(a).
The
pathways are found to be mostly the same as the thermodynamic case with only slight changes
to the pathways. In the case of ethylene (blue path) the dissociation of OH happens slightly
later on, seemingly suggesting the OH is kinetically more stable. In the case of ethanol the
only difference is the oxygen in COCO being protonated, instead of the carbon, as found in the
thermodynamic case. This also seemingly suggests the OH to be slightly more stable.
Page 23 of 39
==PAGE:29==
5.2
The Path to C2
5
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
(a)
(b)
Figure 16: Kinetically optimal pathways to ethylene and ethanol at (a) 0V and (b) -1V.
Page 24 of 39
==PAGE:30==
5.3
The Path to C3
5
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Compared to the results from Kastlunger et al. the pathways found are slightly different. In
general the OH groups are found to be more stable staying on the molecules for longer. The
pathway found going to ethanol only varies slightly going from CH2CO to CH3CO instead of
CH2CHO. The pathway found going to ethylene seems to favour the same order of C-protonations
only favouring the quite stable OH groups.
Once again the later barriers can be reduced by applying a potential in this case -1V. The result
of this can be seen in Figure 16(b).
In summary a smaller barrier from COCOH (OCCOH) to COHCOH (HOCCOH) made one
of the alternative pathways suggested in Kastlunger et al. the most optimal one in our case.
Kinetically we found very similar pathways however with a tendency to prefer OH-groups more,
retaining it for much longer.
5.3
The Path to C3
With the success of predicting C2-pathways it is time to move on to C3-pathways. In this section
the structures described in Section 4.11 will be added. Using the global minima found using
minima hopping the energy landscape up to the C3 products: propylene and propanol can be
generated. The energy landscape can then be used to predict the reaction pathways through all
the intermediates, similarly to how it was done in the previous section.
5.3.1
Thermodynamic Pathways
With the inclusion of C3 molecules, there are significantly more intermediates than previously
considered. As mentioned in Section 4.11, 222 C3 molecules have been created, which are now
added to collection of C1 and C2 molecules. The new energy landscape is shown in Figure 17.
With this many molecules, it’s difficult to get a good overview of the energy landscape, so all
the C3 intermediates have been made semi-transparent. For a plot with all molecules shown, see
Appendix B.
Page 25 of 39
==PAGE:31==
5.3
The Path to C3
5
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Figure 17: The free energy landscape of the C1−3 molecules that are being considered. Dots
indicate adsorbed molecules while stars indicate ’gases’ (non-adsorbed molecules). Highlighted
is the desired C3-products propanol, propylene and propane on the right, the C2 products in the
center, and the starting molecule CO together with the forced intermediate COCO on the left.
With this many intermediates, we now have a whopping 4,566 unique pathways from COCO
to the C3 products—propanol and propylene. This is quite an increase, especially considering
the restrictions on the C3 structures mentioned in Section 4.11. Nonetheless, the same methods
used in the C2 case can be applied to identify the optimal pathways. Figure 18 illustrates the
most favourable pathways to propanol and propylene.
Page 26 of 39
==PAGE:32==
5.3
The Path to C3
5
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Figure 18: Thermodynamically optimal pathways to propylene and propanol.
Once again it is observed that the C2 species favour the formation of OH groups, only to eliminate
them as the molecule proceeds toward CC. Both pathways transition to C3 via eC3O—that is, a
three-carbon chain with an oxygen atom at the end. The two carbon atoms without oxygen are
subsequently protonated once each, after which the pathways diverge, both quickly protonating
the oxygen afterwards.
The dotted pathway is forced to pass through CH2CH and then through eCH2CHCO, a coupling
route previously suggested as a plausible mechanism for C3 formation by N´uria L´opez et al., as
described in Section 2.2. However, our results indicate this pathway must overcome a significant
energy barrier at this step, rendering it unlikely. Interestingly, this route eventually leads to one
of the same intermediates found to produce propylene via a pathway with much lower energy
barriers.
5.3.2
Kinetic Pathways
Once again, the kinetics can be switched on to obtain the pathways shown in Figure 19. The
kinetic pathway to propanol appears to follow a quite different coupling mechanism compared
to its thermodynamic counterpart. Once again, it seems to highly favour OH groups and now
couples to CO while retaining an OH group. It then immediately protonates the newly introduced
oxygen, resulting in two OH groups and only one protonated carbon. Next, it dissociates the
central OH and retains the other one, ultimately becoming propanol.
For propylene, the coupling mechanism still proceeds through CC and eC3O. However, the
pathway through C3 seems rather different, prioritizing protonation of the carbons closest to the
oxygen—opposite to the thermodynamic case. The oxygen is then rather quickly protonated,
and the OH group is dissociated afterward. The final steps to propylene remain unchanged.
Page 27 of 39
==PAGE:33==
5.3
The Path to C3
5
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
(a)
(b)
Figure 19: Kinetically optimal pathways to a) propylene and b) propanol.
Page 28 of 39
==PAGE:34==
5.4
Parity
5
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
5.4
Parity
From our results, we are also able to determine some trends in where hydrogen prefers to bind
by making the parity plots seen in Figure 20 and 21 for C1−2 and C3, respectively. The plots
are created by first determining whenever a molecule has the option of either protonating an
oxygen or the adjoining carbon. Then the energy required for the O- and C-protonation can
simply be plotted along the x- and y-axis, respectively. If the resulting point is to the left of the
diagonal parity line, then O-protonation is favoured and vice versa. The name displayed is from
the initial molecule before protonation.
For C1−2 the points in the thermodynamic case are all on the right side of the diagonal line. This
shows the hydrogen generally benefits thermodynamically from protonating the carbons instead
of the oxygens as this results in a lower free energy. In the kinetics a slight trend towards O-
protonation is seen. The tendencies of the thermodynamics can also be seen in the determined
pathways in Figure 14, albeit not very clearly. When the oxygen gets protonated from COCO
to COCOH there is an increase in the energy, while every C-protonation step is exergonic. It is
a rather small increase in this case probably because the energy already is rather large from the
CO dimerisation. In Appendix A.2 is an example where protonation of the carbon after COCO
is forced resulting in a much larger barrier for protonating the oxygen later on.
Based on the C2 kinetics shown in Figure 16(a), the barriers for C-protonation appear to be
significantly higher than those for O-protonation. However, the parity plot reveals that both
COCO and COCOH lie to the left of the parity line and undergo O-protonation, whereas CH2CO,
CH3CO, and gCH3CHO are positioned to the right of the line and get C-protonated in our
pathways. In that regard the tendencies seen in the parity plot seems to accurately predict the
steps found in our optimal pathways.
(a)
(b)
Figure 20: (a) Thermodynamic and (b) kinetic parity plots for C1−2-products.
For C3 the thermodynamic case again shows a slight tendency towards protonating the carbon,
however less compared to C2. The kinetics on the other hand shows a clear tendency towards
protonating the oxygen instead.
Looking at our thermodynamic pathways we have quite a few very energetically favourable C-
protonations in the C3 steps and only slightly favourable steps during O-protonation. With
the kinetics a tendency towards slightly smaller barriers for O-protonation and the oxygen gets
protonated rather quickly. However, the tendency does not seem quite as significant as the parity
plot suggests.
Page 29 of 39
==PAGE:35==
5.4
Parity
5
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
(a)
(b)
Figure 21: (a) Thermodynamic and (b) kinetic parity plots for C3-products.
Page 30 of 39
==PAGE:36==
7
OUTLOOK
6
Conclusion
By utilizing machine learning neural networks, minima hopping and constraints it is possible
to autonomously determine the global minima of molecules on a surface.
Using DFT it is
then possible to establish a free energy profile leading all the way from CO to propylene and
propanol, at only a fraction of the required time and computational power. The performance of
two different neural networks were tested, namely: GemNet and Equiformer. GemNet performed
the best for the carbon structures on Cu(100) considered in this project, being able to determine
prominent placements of global minima. Equiformer bound hydrogen to the surface in an odd
way, likely due to it being trained solely on oxide surfaces. GemNet also functioned six times
faster compared to the Equiformer counterpart.
From the resulting free energy profile and BEP relations from other works, feasible reaction
pathways from CO to C2 products were determined considering both thermodynamics and ki-
netics. The predicted pathways were similar to the pathways found in literature, however with
a tendency to retain OH groups. Going to C3 products, CO coupling to CC, creating CC-CO
was found to be the optimal access point to C3 for creating propylene, when only considering
CO-coupling as an option. Coupling CO to CHCOH, creating CHCOH-CO, was found as the
optimal pathway to create propanol.
From a parity analysis it was found that for C2 structures there is a thermodynamically favourable
tendency towards protonating the carbon instead of the neighbouring oxygen atom. Kinetically
no preferable tendency was found. For C3 structures a similar tendency was found for the ther-
modynamics, while the kinetics suggest protonating the oxygen as being more feasible. In the
determined optimal pathways, protonation of the oxygen did however seem to be preferred in
most cases.
7
Outlook
With all these methods fused into one, it is possible to autonomously sweep different reactions on
different surfaces, allowing for quick insight into potential reaction mechanisms. Using a larger
ensemble of molecules may allow for a more comprehensive study to be accomplished, as would
including more possible C-C coupling steps such as COH, CHO or CHOH.
Based on the quality of the fits used to approximate the BEP relations, the accuracy of the
kinetics results could be substantially improved. Using actual DFT-NEB, or even NN-NEB,
calculations instead of sub-par fitted BEP relations may allow for better kinetic predictions for
future studies.
Page 31 of 39
==PAGE:37==
REFERENCES
REFERENCES
References
[1] “Getting
electric
planes
off
the
ground.”
https://www.idtechex.com/journal/
print-articles.asp?articleids=32133. Accessed: 26-07-25.
[2] G. Kastlunger, H. H. Heenen, and N. Govindarajan, “Combining First-Principles Kinetics
and Experimental Data to Establish Guidelines for Product Selectivity in Electrochemical
CO2 Reduction,” ACS Catalysis, vol. 13, pp. 5062–5072, 4 2023.
[3] G. Kastlunger, L. Wang, N. Govindarajan, H. H. Heenen, S. Ringe, T. Jaramillo, C. Hahn,
and K. Chan, “Using pH Dependence to Understand Mechanisms in Electrochemical CO
Reduction,” ACS Catalysis, vol. 12, pp. 4344–4357, 4 2022.
[4] S. Pablo-Garc´ıa, F. L. P. Veenstra, L. R. L. Ting, R. Garc´ıa-Muelas, F. Dattila, A. J. Mart´ın,
B. S. Yeo, J. P´erez-Ram´ırez, and N. L´opez, “Mechanistic routes toward C ¡sub¿3¡/sub¿
products in copper-catalysed CO ¡sub¿2¡/sub¿ electroreduction,” Catalysis Science & Tech-
nology, vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 409–417, 2022.
[5] M. T. Tang, H.-J. Peng, J. H. Stenlid, and F. Abild-Pedersen, “Exploring Trends on Cou-
pling Mechanisms toward C ¡sub¿3¡/sub¿ Product Formation in CO ¡sub¿(2)¡/sub¿ R,” The
Journal of Physical Chemistry C, vol. 125, pp. 26437–26447, 12 2021.
[6] J. P. Perdew, “Jacob’s ladder of density functional approximations for the exchange-
correlation energy,” pp. 1–20, AIP Publishing, 2 2003.
[7] J. Gasteiger, M. Shuaibi, A. Sriram, S. G¨unnemann, Z. Ulissi, C. L. Zitnick, and A. Das,
“GemNet-OC: Developing Graph Neural Networks for Large and Diverse Molecular Simu-
lation Datasets,” 4 2022.
[8] E. Sargeant, F. Illas, P. Rodr´ıguez, and F. Calle-Vallejo, “Importance of the gas-phase error
correction for O2 when using DFT to model the oxygen reduction and evolution reactions,”
Journal of Electroanalytical Chemistry, vol. 896, p. 115178, 9 2021.
[9] L. Chanussot, A. Das, S. Goyal, T. Lavril, M. Shuaibi, M. Riviere, K. Tran, J. Heras-
Domingo, C. Ho, W. Hu, A. Palizhati, A. Sriram, B. Wood, J. Yoon, D. Parikh, C. L.
Zitnick, and Z. Ulissi, “Open Catalyst 2020 (OC20) Dataset and Community Challenges,”
ACS Catalysis, vol. 11, pp. 6059–6072, 5 2021.
[10] “Open catalyst project leaderboards.” https://opencatalystproject.org. Accessed: 16-
07-2025.
[11] R. Tran, J. Lan, M. Shuaibi, B. M. Wood, S. Goyal, A. Das, J. Heras-Domingo, A. Kolluru,
A. Rizvi, N. Shoghi, A. Sriram, F. Therrien, J. Abed, O. Voznyy, E. H. Sargent, Z. Ulissi,
and C. L. Zitnick, “The Open Catalyst 2022 (OC22) Dataset and Challenges for Oxide
Electrocatalysts,” 3 2023.
[12] A. Hjorth Larsen, J. Jørgen Mortensen, J. Blomqvist, I. E. Castelli, R. Christensen,
M. Du lak, J. Friis, M. N. Groves, B. Hammer, C. Hargus, E. D. Hermes, P. C. Jennings,
P. Bjerre Jensen, J. Kermode, J. R. Kitchin, E. Leonhard Kolsbjerg, J. Kubal, K. Kaasb-
jerg, S. Lysgaard, J. Bergmann Maronsson, T. Maxson, T. Olsen, L. Pastewka, A. Peterson,
C. Rostgaard, J. Schiøtz, O. Sch¨utt, M. Strange, K. S. Thygesen, T. Vegge, L. Vilhelmsen,
M. Walter, Z. Zeng, and K. W. Jacobsen, “The atomic simulation environment—a Python
library for working with atoms,” Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter, vol. 29, p. 273002,
7 2017.
[13] “General, atomic and crystallographic properties and features of copper.” https://www.
copper.org/resources/properties/atomic_properties.html. Accessed: 16-07-25.
Page 32 of 39
==PAGE:38==
REFERENCES
REFERENCES
[14] S. Goedecker, “Minima hopping: An efficient search method for the global minimum of the
potential energy surface of complex molecular systems,” The Journal of Chemical Physics,
vol. 120, pp. 9911–9917, 6 2004.
[15] A. A. Peterson, “Global Optimization of Adsorbate–Surface Structures While Preserving
Molecular Identity,” Topics in Catalysis, vol. 57, pp. 40–53, 2 2014.
[16] E. Bitzek, P. Koskinen, F. G¨ahler, M. Moseler, and P. Gumbsch, “Structural Relaxation
Made Simple,” Physical Review Letters, vol. 97, p. 170201, 10 2006.
[17] A. L. Vishart, “Accelerating catalysis simulations using surrogate machine learning models,”
2023.
[18] “Vibrational modes in ase.” https://wiki.fysik.dtu.dk/ase/ase/vibrations/modes.
html. Accessed: 26-07-25.
[19] “Thermochemistry.”
https://wiki.fysik.dtu.dk/ase/ase/thermochemistry/
thermochemistry.html. Accessed: 16-07-25.
[20] A. Swapnesh, V. C. Srivastava, and I. D. Mall, “Comparative Study on Thermody-
namic Analysis of CO Utilization Reactions,” Chemical Engineering & Technology, vol. 37,
pp. 1765–1777, 10 2014.
[21] X. Wang, A. Xu, F. Li, S.-F. Hung, D.-H. Nam, C. M. Gabardo, Z. Wang, Y. Xu, A. Ozden,
A. S. Rasouli, A. H. Ip, D. Sinton, and E. H. Sargent, “Efficient Methane Electrosynthesis
Enabled by Tuning Local CO ¡sub¿2¡/sub¿ Availability,” Journal of the American Chemical
Society, vol. 142, pp. 3525–3531, 2 2020.
[22] Y.-L. Liao, B. Wood, A. Das, and T. Smidt, “EquiformerV2: Improved Equivariant Trans-
former for Scaling to Higher-Degree Representations,” 6 2023.
[23] C. Yang, R. Mu, G. Wang, J. Song, H. Tian, Z.-J. Zhao, and J. Gong, “Hydroxyl-mediated
ethanol selectivity of CO hydrogenation,” Chemical Science, vol. 10, no. 11, pp. 3161–3167,
2019.
[24] X. Liu, P. Schlexer, J. Xiao, Y. Ji, L. Wang, R. B. Sandberg, M. Tang, K. S. Brown,
H. Peng, S. Ringe, C. Hahn, T. F. Jaramillo, J. K. Nørskov, and K. Chan, “pH effects on
the electrochemical reduction of CO (2) towards C 2 products on stepped copper,” Nature
Communications, vol. 10, 12 2019.
[25] L. Chanussot, A. Das, S. Goyal, T. Lavril, M. Shuaibi, M. Riviere, K. Tran, J. Heras-
Domingo, C. Ho, W. Hu, A. Palizhati, A. Sriram, B. Wood, J. Yoon, D. Parikh, C. L. Zitnick,
and Z. Ulissi, “The Open Catalyst 2020 (OC20) Dataset and Community Challenges,” 9
2021.
Page 33 of 39
==PAGE:39==
A
SUPPLEMENTARY PATHWAYS
A
Supplementary pathways
A.1
Pathways Leaderboard
(a)
(b)
Figure 22: Top 5 thermodynamically best pathways to (a) ethylene and (b) ethanol.
Page 34 of 39
==PAGE:40==
A.1
Pathways Leaderboard
A
SUPPLEMENTARY PATHWAYS
(a)
(b)
Figure 23: Top 5 thermodynamically best pathways to (a) propylene and (b) propanol.
Page 35 of 39
==PAGE:41==
A.1
Pathways Leaderboard
A
SUPPLEMENTARY PATHWAYS
(a)
(b)
Figure 24: Top 5 kinetically best pathways to (a) ethylene and (b) ethanol.
Page 36 of 39
==PAGE:42==
A.1
Pathways Leaderboard
A
SUPPLEMENTARY PATHWAYS
(a)
(b)
Figure 25: Top 5 kinetically best pathways to (a) propylene and (b) propanol.
Page 37 of 39
==PAGE:43==
A.2
Forced Intermediates
A
SUPPLEMENTARY PATHWAYS
A.2
Forced Intermediates
Figure 26: Reaction pathways to C2-products when CHOCO is forced. The pathway to ethylene
has a much larger barrier when protonating the oxygen.
Page 38 of 39
==PAGE:44==
B
C3 ENERGY LANDSCAPE
B
C3 Energy Landscape
Figure 27: The mess of an energy landscape going from C1 to C3 with all molecules showing.
Page 39 of 39
