==PAGE:1==
Tracing the coronary arteries in 3D com-
puted tomography scans
Master Thesis
Authors:
Mateusz Baldachowski (s230241)
Malgorzata Korona (s223322)
Supervisors:
Professor Rasmus Reinhold Paulsen
Postdoc
Kristine
Aavild
Sørensen
Postdoc Josefine Vilsbøll Sundgaard
PhD student Andreas With Aspe
Kongens Lyngby 2025
==PAGE:2==
Tracing the coronary arteries in 3D computed tomography scans
Master Thesis
3. February 2025 - 3. August 2025
35 ECTS points
Authors
Mateusz Baldachowski (s230241)
M.Sc. Business Analytics
Technical University of Denmark
Malgorzata Korona (s223322)
M.Sc. Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence
Technical University of Denmark
Supervisors
Professor Rasmus Reinhold Paulsen
Visual Computing, DTU Compute, Technical University of Denmark
Postdoc Kristine Aavild Sørensen
Novo Nordisk A/S and Visual Computing, DTU Compute, Technical University of Denmark
Postdoc Josefine Vilsbøll Sundgaard
Novo Nordisk A/S and Visual Computing, DTU Compute, Technical University of Denmark
PhD student Andreas With Aspe
Visual Computing, DTU Compute, Technical University of Denmark
PhD student Andreas Ohrt Johansen
Department of Cardiology, Righospitalet, University of Copenhagen
PhD student Jonas Jalili Pedersen
Department of Cardiology, Righospitalet, University of Copenhagen
Cover photo:
3D rendering of a heart volume with heart structures from TotalSegmentator [1],
coronary arteries segmentation from ImageCAS [2], and extracted centerlines.
Published by:
DTU Compute, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Cardiovascular diseases (CVDs) are a leading cause of global deaths. One of the most
serious forms of CVDs is coronary artery disease (CAD). It is caused by atherosclero-
sis, characterized by plaque building up in the arteries, resulting in a disrupted blood
flow. Coronary computed tomography angiography (CCTA) is a typical, non-invasive
method of diagnosing CAD. Automatic extraction of coronary artery centerline from
CCTA scan is vital for effective CAD diagnostic process. Moreover, it is a fundamen-
tal step for further coronary artery research, including lumen analysis and stenoses
detection. This project proposes a coronary tree tracing algorithm, that requires only
a CCTA scan and a location of the beginning of the coronary tree to trace the whole
left coronary artery (LCA) structure.
The proposed solution is based on four models: centerline tracer, branch point de-
tector, artery radius estimator, and artery likelihood estimator. All models utilize
convolutional neural networks (CNNs). The centerline tracer estimates the direction
in which the tracer should follow to mimic the blood flow. Branch point detector
is used for locating branch points based on likelihood. Radius estimator helps ap-
proximate the radius of coronary artery, given a point on the centerline. The artery
likelihood estimator outputs a likelihood of a given point being inside LCA. The en-
tire tracing algorithm is based on alternating centerline tracing and detecting branch
points on it. Artery likelihood estimator is used as a robust tool for terminating
the tracing and, together with radius estimator, is incorporated in branch spawning
method indicating the directions of subsequent branches.
The algorithm was trained and evaluated on a curated version of publicly available
ImageCAS dataset. All four models perform exceptionally. Centerline tracer reaches
an average weighted accuracy of 0.87 in predicting centerline directions.
Branch
detector has a recall of 0.84.
Radius estimator successfully approximates radii of
LCA with an average RMSE of 0.17. Artery likelihood estimator achieved AUC score
equal to 0.96, proving itself a useful tool for terminating the tracing and branch
spawning. The full coronary tree tracing algorithm reached an overlap of 81.2, being
comparable to state of the art methods, and average inside of 0.097 mm, surpassing
other available methods. The algorithm’s generalization performance was tested on
939 CCTA scans from Copenhagen General Population Study (CGPS), showing its
ability to capture the vast majority of LCA structures.
A secondary goal of this project was to detect phenotypes of the left main coronary
artery (LMCA). Such a solution could assist in identifying high risk patients and
gaining insight into causes of plaque formation. Three different phenotype profiles
were derived through hierarchical clustering, with their characteristics successfully
linked to known risks of plaque development.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis proposes a method for tracing coronary artery centerline in 3D computed
tomography scans.
The thesis was prepared in collaboration with the Section for Visual Computing at
DTU Compute, the Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, and
the Department of Cardiology at Rigshospitalet, University of Copenhagen.
The project lasted from February 3rd 2025 to August 3rd 2025 and was carried out
in fulfilment of the requirements for Master of Science degrees in Human-Centered
Artificial Intelligence and Business Analytics at the Technical University of Denmark
(DTU).
The reader is assumed to have a fundamental knowledge of machine learning, deep
learning, and image analysis concepts.
Mateusz Baldachowski (s230241)
Malgorzata Korona (s223322)
Kongens Lyngby, August 3, 2025
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
First and foremost, we would like to thank our main supervisor Professor Rasmus
R. Paulsen for guidance over the course of the project. We shared many insightful
discussions, and your expert knowledge combined with experience within the medical
imaging field have been pivotal in progressing our work.
We also thank everyone involved in the broad team conducting various heart-oriented
studies at DTU, including Postdocs, PhD and Master’s students. Our weekly meet-
ings were motivational and the shared feedback has been instrumental in the achieved
results.
Last but not least, we want to thank our families and friends for their invaluable sup-
port that we received both throughout the project and the whole course of studying.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Abbreviations
AI - Average Inside
AIC - Akaike Information Criterion
AUC - Area Under the Curve
BIC - Bayesian Information Criterion
CAD - Coronary Artery Disease
CCA - Conventional Coronary Angiography
CCHS - Copenhagen City Heart Study
CCTA - Coronary Computed Tomography Angiography
CGPS - Copenhagen General Population Study
CNN - Convolutional Neural Network
CPR - Curved Planar Reformatting
CT - Computed Tomography
CVD - Cardiovascular Disease
DDQN - Double Deep Q-Network
FN - False Negative
FP - False Positive
HU - Hounsfield Units
kNN - k-Nearest Neighbours
LA - Left Atrium
LAD - Left Anterior Descending
LCA - Left Coronary Artery
LCX - Left Circumflex Artery
LM - Left Main
LMCA - Left Main Coronary Artery
LV - Left Ventricle
NN - Neural Network
OV - Overlap
PDA - Posterior Descending Artery
RA - Right Atrium
RCA - Right Coronary Artery
ReLU - Rectified Linear Unit
RI - Ramus Intermedius
RL - Reinforcement Learning
RMA - Right Marginal Artery
RMSE - Root Mean Square Error
ROC - Receiver Operating Characteristic
RV - Right Ventricle
TPM - True Positive Method
TPR - True Positive Reference
==PAGE:10==
viii
Abbreviations
vMF - von Mises-Fisher
VMTK - The Vascular Modelling Toolkit
VTK - The Visualization Toolkit
WHO - World Health Organization
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Abbreviations
vii
Contents
ix
1
Introduction
1
2
Literature Review
3
3
Clinical Background
5
3.1
Heart anatomy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.2
Coronary artery disease (CAD) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.3
Coronary computed tomography angiography (CCTA) . . . . . . . . .
9
4
Dataset
11
4.1
ImageCAS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.2
Copenhagen General Population Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
5
Methods
15
5.1
Data preprocessing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
5.2
Centerline tracer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
5.3
Branch point detector
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.4
Artery radius estimator
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5.5
Artery likelihood estimator
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5.6
Branch spawning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.7
Coronary tree tracing algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.8
Tracing evaluation methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.9
Phenotype clustering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
6
Results
43
6.1
Centerline tracer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
6.2
Branch point detector
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
6.3
Artery radius estimator
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
6.4
Artery likelihood estimator
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
6.5
Coronary tree tracing algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
==PAGE:12==
x
Contents
6.6
Final algorithm selection and evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
6.7
Copenhagen General Population Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
6.8
Phenotype clustering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
7
Discussion
71
7.1
Centerline tracer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
7.2
Branch point detector
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
7.3
Artery radius estimator
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
7.4
Artery likelihood estimator
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
7.5
Coronary tree tracing algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
7.6
Phenotype clustering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
8
Conclusion
79
Bibliography
81
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Cardiovascular diseases (CVDs) are the most common global cause of deaths.
In
2021 around 20.5 million people died due to CVD accounting for around 1/3 of
global deaths. About half of them (49.2%) was caused by heart attacks while strokes
contributed to around 25% [3]. Both of them are usually caused by disruption in
blood flowing to the heart or brain. It is estimated that CVD affects over 500 million
people globally.
Disease of blood vessels responsible for supplying the heart muscle, called a coronary
heart disease, is directly linked to coronary artery which is the major blood vessel
pumping the blood into the heart. Patients suffering from it have a disrupted blood
flow caused by accumulated build-ups of fatty deposits on the inner walls of the
coronary artery. Diagnostics of coronary artery disease (CAD) is therefore crucial to
guide appropriate treatment in order to prevent heart failures [4, 5].
One way to diagnose CAD is through a coronary computed tomography angiography
(CCTA). This modality has been proven to be effective and since it is a non-invasive
procedure, it has been widely recommended. The problem with it, however, is that
mapping of the coronary artery based on the 3D image volume is usually done man-
ually by the experts which makes it time-consuming and error-prone [6].
The main purpose of this project is to propose a solution for automated tracing of
the coronary artery centerline based on CCTA scans. Our solution combines several
deep learning models aiming at finding tracing directions, detecting bifurcation points,
estimating radius of the artery and estimating likelihood of being inside an artery,
into one final tracing algorithm. The method proposed by us requires only 3D image
volume and a root point of the coronary artery to recreate the centerline of the whole
tree.
The tracing method can act as a complementary research tool that, together with
methods used for analysing lumen or plaque composition, can create a framework for
understanding the risk factors in CVDs [5, 7, 8]. Another potential use case is assisting
with the time-intensive task of annotating coronary arteries, typically performed by
medical imaging experts [6]. Our proposed approach has the potential to significantly
accelerate this process. Moreover, when combined with complementary techniques for
reconstructing the arterial structure around the centerline, our algorithm could enable
full automation of the annotation workflow.
As a secondary objective, our project looks into the characteristics behind coronary
artery trees’ anatomy to derive several phenotypes. Focusing at left main coronary
artery (LMCA), we extract a collection of measurements regarding artery length,
radius and branching angles, and apply a clustering method to uncover phenotype
profiles. Distinctive features of the phenotypes are linked to risk factors of cardio-
vascular diseases. The phenotype analysis, although here performed on ground truth
==PAGE:14==
2
1 Introduction
data, may as well be used along with the tracing algorithm making it deployable on
a larger scale. The solution can be used to identify patients at increased risk, either
in clinical field or as a tool to support research focused on CAD.
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2
Literature Review
Automatic coronary tree extraction has been a subject of research for the last few
decades. One of the first attempts [9, 10] involved minimal cost path methods, where
a path between two or more points is found by minimizing the cost function. The
cost between given locations is the lowest when they both lie on a centerline. Those
methods, however, struggle with tortuosity and often tend to make shortcuts, mean-
ing that they can potentially produce results which do not match the anatomical
structure.
More novel approaches include iterative tracking combined with convolutional neu-
ral networks (CNNs). Wolterink et al. [11] proposed a method using a 3D dilated
convolutional neural network for predicting most plausible direction of an artery to-
gether with its radius in a CCTA image. Once the direction is established, a seed is
placed in an artery either in a manual or automatic way, and a centerline is tracked
further. While this method achieves state-of-the-art results for tracking individual
coronary arteries, tracking the whole coronary tree requires many seed points out
of which many overlap with centerlines extracted before, making the whole process
time-consuming and computationally ineffective.
An extension of approach presented by Wolterink et al. was proposed by Leccardi et
al. [12]. They introduced a multi-path deep CNN that estimates the vessel radius, and
moving directions at each location. What is more, they expanded the iterative tracker
using seed spawning, and introduced additional post-processing stage using a graph-
based method. Combining all of those methods, they managed to track the whole
coronary tree using only two initial seed points: one for left, and one for the right
arterial branch. The downside of this approach is that its explorative nature requires
spreading of many seeds around the traced path affecting the tracing computational
time.
Another noteworthy approach was proposed by Radutoiu [13]. Based on convolutional
neural networks, the method combines a tracer tasked to follow the centerline with a
branch detector which is responsible for detecting bifurcation points along the traced
centerline. The study also introduces a solution for detecting the starting point of
the coronary artery tree. Unlike many prior studies in the literature, the algorithm
was trained on a publicly available ImageCAS dataset [2] of hundreds of scans. The
work resulted in a robust algorithm able to detect the coronary artery tree fully
automatically in a computationally eﬀicient manner.
Zhang et al. [14] proposed a branch-aware coronary centerline extraction method
(BACCE) based on Double Deep Q-Network (DDQN) and 3D dilated CNN. DDQN
is responsible for coronary centerline tracking, whereas CNN detects if a given point
in the image is a branch point and calculates the radius. The big advantage of this
method is that only one seed is needed for the entire coronary tree extraction. It also
==PAGE:16==
4
2 Literature Review
handles tracing of coronary arteries that suffer from plaque or stenosis well.
A reinforcement learning (RL) approach enabling extracting the whole tree structure
with only one initial point was proposed by Li et al. [15]. They presented a deep
reinforced tree-traversal agent - a RL-based method with sequential decision-making.
They also introduced a multi-task discriminator detecting bifurcations and vessel
terminations. The method yielded reliable results on a dataset of considerable size.
Another worth mentioning approach focuses on generalizing algorithm’s tracking abil-
ity to other vessels within the human body. SIRE proposed by Albas et al. [16]
concentrates on scale-invariant and rotation-equivariant estimation of arteries orien-
tation. The approach is aimed at solving two issues faced by most state-of-the-art
solutions, one being lack of generalization to different types of blood vessels, and the
other being the varying vessel tortuosity between patients. Authors propose a graph
neural network utilizing multiple, parallelly operating, nested spherical meshes with
different sizes. The method has been tested on several different training datasets
containing various vessels. The results showed potential in utilizing the generalizing
abilities of the model to automate various medical image processes.
Paper
Methods
Test scale
Overlap
Average Inside
Radutoiu
CNN
86
62.5
NA
Wolterink et al.
CNN
24
93.7
0.21
Leccardi et al.
Multi-path CNN
8
LAD = 100.0
LAD = 0.26
LCX = 98.6
LCX = 0.36
Zhang et al.
DDQN, CNN
8
96.2
0.21
Li et al.
RL
140
90.1
0.25*
Albas et al.
Graph NN
8
85
0.35
Wink et al.
Minimum cost path
32
NA
0.65*
Krissian et al.
Minimum cost path
16
90.9
0.39
Table 2.1: Comparison of most prominent coronary artery tracing methods. Aver-
age inside expressed in millimetres * - slightly modified versions of AI.
Shifting focus to phenotypes, an interesting work has recently been published by Wang
et al. [17]. The study performed an unsupervised clustering to uncover phenotypes
based on morphology of left main coronary artery (LMCA) fragments of 76 patients.
Further on, the authors applied methods for evaluating the fluid dynamics within
arteries of each phenotype. The phenotypes’ characteristics were successfully linked to
health risks indicating potential in detecting patients with risk of developing coronary
atherosclerosis.
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 3
Clinical Background
3.1
Heart anatomy
Heart is an organ that is responsible for supplying blood to the body. It consists of four
chambers: right atrium (RA), left atrium (LA), right ventricle (RV) and left
ventricle (LV). The atria are smaller than the ventricles. RA sends the deoxygenated
blood into the RV after receiving it from vena cava - human body’s largest vein. RV
then pumps the blood into the pulmonary circuit, where it is oxygenated. Afterwards,
oxygenated blood comes back into the LA and is then sent into LV. LV then pumps
the blood into the rest of the body. At the end, the blood returns through vena cava
to the right atrium and the whole cycle repeats. [18, 19] The circulatory system of a
human is visible in figure 3.1.
Figure 3.1: Circulatory system of a human, comprising systemic, pulmonary, and
coronary circuits.
Blood enters right atrium from systemic circuit
through vena cava, is sent to right ventricle and then to pulmonary
circuit. Oxygenated blood comes back to cardiac circuit: first to left
atrium, then to left ventricle. Finally it exits the cardiac circuit through
the aorta and is sent to other organs. Image from [20].
The cardiac cycle in which heart receives blood and then ejects it through the arteries
==PAGE:18==
6
3 Clinical Background
is divided into diastolic phase (diastole), in which heart chambers are relaxed receiving
blood, and systolic phase (systole), when the blood is sent out through chambers’
contractions. The atria and ventricles take turns contracting and relaxing. When
the atria are in diastolic phase, the ventricles are in systolic phase, and vice versa
[21]. There are four valves in the heart that ensure synchronization between those
phases and the correct direction of the passage of blood by appropriate opening and
closing. There are two types of vales: atrioventricular valves, including the tricuspid
and mitral valves, and semilunar valves, including the pulmonary and aortic valves.
Atrioventricular valves connect atria with ventricles: tricuspid one on the right side
of the heart, and mitral one on the left side. Semilunar valves are responsible for
blood flow between ventricles and arteries: pulmonary valve is connected to the right
ventricle, and aortic valve to the left ventricle [18, 19, 22].
Passage of the blood
throughout heart’s chambers and valves is demonstrated in figure 3.2.
Figure 3.2: The passage of blood in the human’s heart. Image from [23].
Cardiac muscle, called myocardium, is responsible for contraction and relaxation of
the heart, enabling it to receive and pump blood. Together with two other muscle
tissues it forms the heart wall, with myocardium being the thickest layer. Coronary
arteries supply blood to the cardiac muscle, facilitating its contractile function [18].
Coronary arteries encircle the heart, with small branches extending into the my-
ocardium to supply it with blood. There are two main coronary arteries: left coro-
nary artery (LCA) and right coronary artery (RCA). They branch from the
==PAGE:19==
3.1 Heart anatomy
7
base of the aorta (human body’s largest artery). Specifically, right and left coronary
artery arise from right and left cardiac sinuses, respectively, that are two out of three
dilations in aorta’s wall just at the base of the aorta [18, 19]. Coronary arteries are
shown in the figure 3.3
Left main coronary artery (LM or LMCA) is a short vessel, that branches into
left anterior descending artery (LAD) and left circumflex artery (LCX). In
some cases the LMCA might not be present with LAD and LCX emerging directly
from the left cardiac sinus. LAD, together with its branches, supplies both the ventri-
cles and interventricular septum (a wall separating ventricles). LAD mainly branches
into a varied number of diagonal branches. LCX primarily supplies the left atrium
and parts of the left ventricle. It branches into one or more (obtuse) marginal
arteries [18, 19, 24]. In around 15% of the population, LMCA trifurcates, giving rise
to LAD, LCX, and ramus intermedius (RI) [25]. Studies show that RI, when
present, has smaller length than LAD and LCX [26].
The RCA major branches include the posterior descending artery (PDA), supply-
ing interventricular septum, and the right marginal artery (RMA), that provides
blood to the right ventricle [18, 19, 24].
Figure 3.3: Coronary arteries (red text) and other key landmarks (blue text). Image
from [27].
Depending on where the PDA branches of, we define three types of heart dominance
[19, 24]:
• right-heart dominance, when PDA originates from RCA [19, 24], observed in
==PAGE:20==
8
3 Clinical Background
around 70% of the population [28],
• left-heart dominance, with PDA branching of LCX [19, 24], observed in 5-10%
of the population [28],
• co-dominance, when PDA is a result of anastomosis created between LCX and
RCA [19, 24], observed in the rest of the population [28].
3.2
Coronary artery disease (CAD)
Cardiovascular diseases (CVD) affect over 500 million people globally and are the pri-
mary cause of deaths worldwide [3]. In 2021, cardiovascular diseases, including heart
disease, brain-related vascular diseases, and blood vessel disorders, were responsible
for 20.5 million deaths [29]. The death toll is projected to rise to 35.6 million by 2050
[30]. CVDs can be classified in the following way [31]:
1. Caused by atherosclerosis:
• Ischemic or coronary artery disease (CAD) (e.g. heart attack),
• Cerebrovascular disease (related to the brain – e.g. stroke),
• Diseases of the aorta and arteries (e.g. hypertension or peripheral vascular
disease).
2. Other:
• Congenital heart disease,
• Rheumatic heart disease,
• Cardiomyopathies,
• Cardiac arrhythmias.
The most serious across the population are by far the first two caused by atheroscle-
rosis - CAD and cerebrovascular disease accounting for about 75% of CVD related
deaths [3]. Some studies indicate that in United States more than half of the 45- to
84-year-olds can suffer from atherosclerotic disease and may not be aware of this [32].
Atherosclerosis is a condition in which, over time, inner walls of arteries accumulate
fat, cholesterol, calcium and other substances [33, 34]. The build-up deposits, called
plaques, can narrow down the lumen limiting the blood flow. In the most severe
scenario plaques can rupture and form a blood clot which obstructs the circulation.
When atherosclerosis occurs in the coronary artery it is called a coronary artery dis-
ease. As coronary arteries are responsible for supplying the heart muscle with blood
together with oxygen and nutrients, their blockage can cause serious consequences.
Blocked blood flow leads to myocardium being deprived of oxygen which damages it
==PAGE:21==
3.3 Coronary computed tomography angiography (CCTA)
9
Figure 3.4: Atherosclerosis development. Image from [35].
causing, often fatal, myocardial infarction (heart attack). The process of atheroscle-
rosis development is shown in figure 3.4.
Atherosclerotic disease is a slowly developing disease which often does not show any
symptoms until it reaches its late stages. By that time, it might be too late to prevent
its serious consequences. This highlights the importance of early detection during the
subclinical phase to maintain a healthy population [4, 5].
One of the most serious forms of artery blockages are those happening in the left main
coronary artery. CAD located in LMCA is associated with high mortality and poor
clinical outcomes [36]. According to research, certain geometric parameters of the
LMCA are linked to the presence of atherosclerotic plaques. One of such features is
LMCA length: research found it was shorter in patients with coronary artery disease.
Short LMs were also related to the stenoses location associated with higher severity
[37]. High tortuosity and curvature of arteries were associated with plaques formation
[38]. Another study suggested negative correlation between the LM branch angle and
atherosclerotic disease formation in daughter branches (LAD and LCX) [39]. All of
those geometric features and their association with the coronary artery disease are
strictly related to the coronary artery hemodynamics and blood flow patterns.
Different patterns of wall shear stress can have different effects on plaque develop-
ment. Low shear stress is linked to a higher likelihood of plaque formation, whereas
elevated shear stress is associated with an increased risk of rupture [40]. Insights into
patient’s coronary arteries geometry could potentially help determine risk of develop-
ing atherosclerotic disease and guide the implementation of prevention measures.
3.3
Coronary computed tomography angiography
(CCTA)
Coronary computed tomography angiography (CCTA) is one of the diagnostic modal-
ities which has been quickly developing over the recent years. To perform it a patient
==PAGE:22==
10
3 Clinical Background
is laid down on the table of CT scanner, a dye is injected through an intravenous
line in patient’s hand or arm and several images at different angles are taken by the
scanner. Images are later processed to create the final 3D heart scan. CCTA is rec-
ommended as an initial test to establish whether patient suffers from CAD according
to the guidelines proposed by both European and American cardiology societies [41,
42]. Recent studies have shown that CCTA is a highly accurate non-invasive modal-
ity which has been proven to be as effective as its invasive counter-part, conventional
coronary angiography (CCA) [43, 44].
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 4
Dataset
4.1
ImageCAS
The ImageCAS [2] dataset consists of 1000 3D CCTA heart images obtained by
Siemens 128-slice dual-source scanner which have later been annotated by the ex-
perts to indicate coronary artery. Data was collected based on clinical cases from
Guangdong Provincial People’s Hospital. Included are 414 females and 586 males
with the average age of around 58 years. Only people over 18 years old and with
documented heart diseases connected to coronary artery were eligible. Each image
is of 512 x 512 x (206-275) voxel size, with planar resolution of 0.29-0.43 mm2 and
0.25-0.45 mm spacing. For each scan, there are coronary artery labels assigned by
two radiologists. The dataset is one of the first publicly accessible of this size and
has been widely used in various research.
Each scan has been additionally propagated through TotalSegmentator [1] to ob-
tain segmentation of the major heart structures. TotalSegmentator is an open source
model which allows for segmentation of over 100 anatomic structures from CT images.
It does not cover coronary arteries, however, it is helpful in providing an overview
of the heart anatomy and exploring relationship between coronary artery and other
anatomical structures. An example of heart structure with coronary artery segmen-
tation from ImageCAS, and other segmentations generated by TotalSegmentator, is
shown in figure 4.1.
(a) Heart scan dissection
(b) 3D model
Figure 4.1: Example of an image from ImageCAS dataset. The segmentation gen-
erated by TotalSegmentator has been overlaid on the image. Colours
indicate different anatomical structures. (a) shows a dissection in one
of the dimensions, while (b) shows 3D model of heart anatomical struc-
tures with coronary artery marked in yellow.
The dataset suffers from several limitations. Most of images, having various quality
issues making the artery segmentation anatomically implausible, were excluded from
==PAGE:24==
12
4 Dataset
the original ImageCAS dataset.
That resulted in a total of 762 remaining scans.
Still, the remaining images suffered from considerable issues. There are examples of
missing small parts of the branches, or even whole parts of the coronary tree, in the
segmentations of coronary arteries. Figure 4.2 shows three examples of such issues.
In (a), a big part of what seems to be an LCX is missing from the segmentation.
In (b), half of the coronary tree: LAD and its subbranches have been completely
omitted in the segmentation. In (c), part of the segmentation does not correspond
to the actual coronary tree and meanders into other heart structures. Additionally,
it can be seen that in some cases it is diﬀicult to determine specific endpoints of the
branches, as they get narrower and less visible due to the contrast washing out. All
those limitations can impact an algorithm and bias it towards the incorrect data, as
well as make it diﬀicult to evaluate its true performance.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 4.2: Examples of incorrect coronary artery segmentations pictured with
heart volume. Segmentations provided in ImageCAS are highlighted
in pink. Green circles show parts of the coronary tree that are missing
from the ground truth segmentation. Blue arrow points to a branch
in which the endpoint might have been incorrectly determined. Yellow
rectangle shows part of the segmentation not corresponding to the coro-
nary artery.
Another limitation concerns the quality of the scans themselves. The 128-slice scanner
used to obtain the images in ImageCAS, due to its technical constraints, cannot
capture the entire heart structure in one rotation. Thus, multiple acquisitions are
needed in order to produce an image of the entire heart.
That can lead to step
artifacts due to cardiac or patient’s motion.
Step artifacts in ImageCAS can be
found throughout all cardiac structures, but due to the nature of this project, they
pose the biggest problem when they are found in coronary arteries, as they can be
==PAGE:25==
4.1 ImageCAS
13
detrimental to the algorithm’s performance. Figures 4.3 and 4.4 show examples of
step artifacts in LCA and in other heart structures, respectively.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.3: Examples of step artifacts in LCA. In (a), a narrow band with different
intensity than in the rest of LCA can be observed. In (b), step artifact
caused misalignment between two parts of LCA.
==PAGE:26==
14
4 Dataset
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.4: Examples of step artifacts in other heart structures than LCA. Blue
colour indicates right atrium, green one - aorta, and yellow - left ven-
tricle.
In all cases a sudden change of intensity is observed.
In left
ventricle in (b) it can be noticed twice.
4.2
Copenhagen General Population Study
Apart from ImageCAS dataset, the algorithm’s generalisation abilities were tested on
a separate dataset. The dataset is a part of Copenhagen General Population Study
(CGPS) [45]. CGPS is a follow-up of the Copenhagen City Heart Study (CCHS)
[46], that was set up in 1975 in order to research prevention methods of heart dis-
eases. In the following years, the research was extended by many new aspects, e.g.
pulmonary or eye diseases. CGPS has been established in 2003 as an expansion of
CCHS, including over 100000 participants aged 20 to 100. Part of the study focusing
on CCTA scans was established in 2010 and included over 10000 participants aged
40 or more. The dataset used for this project is a subset of CGPS and comprises 939
scans of asymptomatic individuals. It includes segmentations of left coronary trees
automatically extracted with nnU-Net model [47], corrected manually by one expert.
The CPGS dataset was used in order to evaluate the algorithm’s performance and
generalisation abilities on new data.
As different CT machines produce scans of
different qualities, an algorithm’s performance can also differ based on the data used.
It is therefore vital to understand if an algorithm trained on one dataset would be
suitable for different datasets as well.
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 5
Methods
5.1
Data preprocessing
In our project we have used a curated version of ImageCAS dataset [2] consisting of
762 images. For the purpose of training models and tuning the tracing algorithm, the
images were split between training, validation, and testing datasets consisting of 450,
150 and 162 heart scans respectively.
Each image and the corresponding segmentation has been processed so that it can
serve as an input to the relevant models, or to be used in a tracing algorithm. During
data processing, each scan has been associated with the following information:
• starting and end points of the coronary artery tree,
• centerlines,
• branch points’ locations.
The centerlines are not directly available in the ImageCAS dataset - only the coronary
artery meshes are provided there. Hence, the centerlines were extracted given the
available segmentations in a following process:
1. Both left and right coronary arteries arise from the aorta above the left and
right cusps of the aortic valve, correspondingly [48]. Thus, the starting points
were found as an overlap between the segmentations of aorta and the dilation
of segmentations of coronary arteries. Center of the overlap was then defined
as a starting point.
2. VTK [49] function vtkDijkstraGraphGeodesicPath was used to find end points
in each coronary artery tree. The function uses Dijkstra’s algorithm to find
shortest geodesic paths between given points - in our case between the starting
point and points on the surface of coronary artery segmentation. End points
were defined as surface points that correspond to the local maxima of geodesic
distances in small regions.
3. Having coronary artery surfaces, start and end points, vmtkcenterlines method
from VMTK [50] library was used to extract the centerlines. This method out-
puts a set of branches, where each branch consists of set of points, that together
form a coronary artery tree. Points where different branches merge together
serve as branch points. Additionally, each point i is assigned a scalar value
corresponding to the radius ri of a maximum inscribed sphere. The results are
shown in figure 5.1(a). Since the algorithm is not precise in areas where arteries
are narrow (e.g. in stenoses), the segmentation was artificially dilated in such
==PAGE:28==
16
5 Methods
regions to ensure proper centerline extraction. This resulted in overestimated
spheres (figure 5.1(b)). Nevertheless, the results were accurate enough for the
goal of branch spawning.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.1: Example of LCA segmentation (in pink) together with maximum in-
scribed spheres (in yellow). (a) shows the whole coronary tree, whereas
(b) shows an overestimation of the spheres due to the narrowing of
artery structure.
After centerline extraction, each point is assigned a value corresponding to a distance
from a given point to a starting point in millimetres. Thus, the distances are mono-
tonically increasing, reflecting the flow of blood through arteries. An example of such
heatmap is presented in figure 5.2.
Figure 5.2: Example of LCA centerline with distances heatmap together with coro-
nary artery segmentation.
==PAGE:29==
5.1 Data preprocessing
17
Additionally, for the branch point detection model use case, we assign a likelihood of
each point on the centerline being a branch point. We define an influence radius of
5 millimetres. If a given point lies outside of influence radius from a ground truth
branch point, the likelihood assigned to it is equal to zero. Otherwise, we calculate
the probability density vi for a point i having distance to the branch point di using a
Gaussian distribution, i.e. di ∼N(0, 22), and vi = f(di) =
1
√
2π·22 e−
(d2
i )
2·22 . A heatmap
of branch point likelihoods is presented in figure 5.3
Figure 5.3: Example of LCA centerline with likelihoods of points being a bifurca-
tion.
5.1.1
Image processing
Having the preprocessed data, during the training of the models, as well as in the
tracing algorithm, we perform several steps of image processing.
Original image scans are non-isotropic, meaning that they have different spacing in
different axes. This can cause problems when training convolutional neural networks,
since image patches with the same number of voxels extracted from two different scans
may result in differing representations of heart scan volume. This in turn makes it
diﬀicult for the model to learn appropriate features from the dataset and generalize
well to the new data. To avoid potential issues, all scans are resampled to the isotropic
pixel spacing with voxel spacing equal to 0.5 mm.
Additionally, we perform HU augmentation on the images. Iodinated CT contrast
corresponds to HU range of 100 −600 [51]. In order to capture not only the lumen,
but also the calcified plaque and surrounding soft tissue, we defined our HU range as
-200 to 1200. At the same time, having in mind that the reference values might differ
==PAGE:30==
18
5 Methods
between individuals, we defined a minimum HU range as [−800, −200] and maximum
HU range as [1200, 2000]. For each sample, we took a random value from minimum
and maximum HU ranges and clipped all other voxel intensities to those values. Then,
we normalized the intensities to [−1, 1] scale according to the formula:
Iafter = (Ibefore −HUmin)
Inew
max −Inew
min
HUmax −HUmin
+ Inew
min
(5.1)
where Ibefore, Iafter are intensities before and after normalization, HUmin and HUmax
are HU values sampled from minimum and maximum HU ranges, Inew
min and Inew
max are
new minimum and maximum intensity values equal to −1 and 1, correspondingly.
5.2
Centerline tracer
One of the key components of the centerline tracing algorithm is being able to trace
a single centerline. The approach used in this project is a modification of a solution
used in Radutoiu’s thesis [13]. We incorporate a so called tracer, that after being
placed in a specific voxel, can move to one of N = 26 adjacent voxels. In other words,
we define a set of possible directions D, in which the tracer can follow, as:
D = {d1, d2, . . . , d26},
where di ∈{−1, 0, 1}3, di ̸= 0
(5.2)
Radutoiu proposed a convolutional neural network (CNN) that outputs a likelihood
of each direction being the best one - a direction with the highest value was chosen as
the next location of the tracer. Our modified approach incorporates a similar model,
but with the output being a direction quality score that a step in each direction
would achieve, according to the function defined below. This modification, which
essentially changes the CNN from a classification to regression type, provides more
flexibility. Having an approximation of quality score for each direction allowed us
to experiment with incorporating it into branch spawning when evaluating potential
path candidates, as described in section 5.6.1.
5.2.1
Direction quality score function
For the centerline tracing we used a direction quality score function that evaluates
how good is a direction of a step taken from current point to the next one, inspired
by reward function in Ekner’s thesis [52]. Its purpose is to encourage taking actions
which keep the tracer close to the centerline, as well as to follow it in the direction of
blood flow. For that purpose, it incorporates distances of the current position to the
centerline Dto and along the centerline Dalong:
Dto(p) = ∥p −gk∥2
(5.3)
==PAGE:31==
5.2 Centerline tracer
19
Dalong(p) = vk = ∥gk −gk−1∥2
dtotal
·vk+1+ ∥gk+1 −gk∥2
dtotal
·vk−1, dtotal = ∥gk+1−gk−1∥2
(5.4)
where:
• gk - the closest point on the true centerline to current location p,
• vk - cumulative distance along the centerline from the root of the artery.
Dalong uses an interpolation to rectify the possibility of the closest point on the
centerline laying between the two previously defined points on the centerline.
Figure 5.4: Visualization of components used for direction quality score function
calculation. G and P correspond to ground truth and predicted center-
line, respectively. Created with [53].
The proposed direction quality score function, assessing the quality of each move,
incorporates Dto and Dalong, and is defined as:
R =
{
ωα(Dto(p) −Dtopnext))
if Dto(pnext) > τ
ω (α (Dto (p) −Dto (pnext)) + (Dalong (pnext) −Dalong (p)))
otherwise
(5.5)
As an agent moves from its current location, p, to the next one, pnext the distances
to the centerline and along the centerline are calculated for both points to evaluate
the score function value. If a distance to the centerline in the new state exceeded
==PAGE:32==
20
5 Methods
threshold denoted by τ = 1 mm, only the difference in the distances to the centerline
between two points is considered. If, however, the distance to the centerline in the
new state is within the limit, the direction quality function takes into account change
in distance along the centerline as well. Parameter α = 2 is used to emphasize the
proximity to the centerline rather than distance along it. Parameter w =
1
∥d∥, where d
- direction between p and pnext, is used to account for bias towards selecting diagonal
directions caused by them having larger step lengths. In other words, choosing a
diagonal direction results in a greater distance between p and pnext, and without
factor w it would lead to a higher direction score.
Direction that corresponds to the largest score is considered the best one.
5.2.2
Model architecture and training
In order to evaluate the direction that the tracer should follow when being in a
specified location, we incorporated a CNN that estimates a direction quality score
obtained by following each of the possible directions. The input to the network is
an image patch of dimensions 41 x 41 x 41 voxels, centred at this specified location.
Image patch dimensions correspond to 20.5 mm x 20.5 mm x 20.5 mm in physical
dimension, ensuring that a patch covers the entire width of a coronary artery as well
as its immediate surroundings.
The convolutional neural network consists of 4 convolutional 3D blocks, that serve as a
feature extraction part, inspired by [54], and a regression part. Each block comprises
two 3D convolutional layers with kernel size equal to (3, 3, 3) and padding equal to
1. Both are followed by batch normalization and ReLU activation function. Block
is wrapped with max pooling. After the convolutional 3D blocks we apply adaptive
average 3D pooling. Next, in the regression part, we use 3 fully connected layers -
first two followed by a ReLU activation function. The final output vector has length
of 26. Each element of the vector denotes the predicted direction score obtained when
following a given direction. Schema of the model architecture can be found in figure
5.5.
==PAGE:33==
5.2 Centerline tracer
21
Figure 5.5: Simplified schema of model architecture. Architecture is represented in
2D for simplicity. Network takes a collection of 41 x 41 x 41 patches and
outputs a vector with direction quality scores for 26 possible directions.
3D patches, used in convolutions, are represented by square shapes.
Patch size is reflected by the square size. Three final outputs are one
dimensional vectors. Colour coded arrows represent different types of
blocks or layers.
During the training, points are randomly translated off the centerline by up to 2.5
mm, as described by Radutoiu [13], with probability of 80% that the point is going
to be translated. Due to the computational limitations, in each epoch we sample 55
points per scan, filling the memory. Having 450 scans in the training set, a memory
capacity is thus equal to 25000. Before a new epoch begins, 10 runs through memory
are performed. This procedure ensures that that the training process is sped up to
adhere to computational constraints, while creating as varied set as possible to avoid
overfitting. The training parameters are described in table 5.1.
Training setting
Value
loss function
Mean Squared Error Loss
optimizer
Adam
number of epochs
50
runs through memory
10
batch size
64
learning rate
10−4
weight decay
10−3
Table 5.1: Overview of the training setup for centerline tracer.
==PAGE:34==
22
5 Methods
5.2.3
Reverse tracing
The algorithm used in this project for tracing entire coronary tree consists of three
key steps:
1. Tracing the first centerline starting from the overlap point with aorta,
2. Detecting branch points on the tracked centerline,
3. Trace new centerlines from the vicinity of detected branch point.
Steps 2 and 3 are repeated until no new branch points are detected. More details
on that in section 5.7.
The proposed solution has one major drawback: parts of
the coronary tree between the detected branch points and starting points of new
centerlines are not tracked, resulting in gaps in the traced coronary tree. To this
end, we explored a possibility of incorporating a reverse tracer, that starts tracing
from the last point of a predicted centerline and proceeds with tracing in the opposite
direction to the blood flow. For this purpose, a direction quality score function was
modified in a following way:
R =
{
ωα(Dto(p) −Dto(pnext))
if Dto(pnext) > τ
ω (α (Dto (p) −Dto (pnext)) + (Dalong (p) −Dalong (pnext)))
otherwise
(5.6)
This slight modification takes place in case the distance of a new state (pnext) to the
centerline does not exceed the threshold τ, and ensures that the tracer is now guided
to take actions along the centerline, but in the direction opposite to the blood flow.
Incorporating the reverse tracing into the final algorithm could eliminate an issue of
gaps in the traced centerlines.
Reverse tracer network has the same model architecture and training strategy as the
regular one.
5.3
Branch point detector
Tracer alone is designed to follow one centerline until the terminating conditions are
met. Because of that, we introduce a branch point detector which acts as a tool
for indicating where the already traced centerline has bifurcation points so that the
tracer can follow subsequent branches.
The branch detector model is a slightly modified version of the one proposed in
Radutoiu’s thesis [13]. The model architecture follows the one described in section
5.2.2 with the modified output layer, as in this case the model outputs only one value,
the likelihood of a point being a branch point. The ground truth probabilities are
obtained as described in section 5.1. A lot of points lay far from any bifurcation point,
==PAGE:35==
5.4 Artery radius estimator
23
creating a heavy class imbalance. To remedy that, a sampling weight is introduced
favouring samples close to bifurcation points.
The trained model allows to create a heatmap of bifurcation point likelihoods given a
coronary artery centerline. In the neighbourhood of true branch points the likelihoods
can be high for several points on a predicted centerline. To indicate where within such
area the branch point actually is, we implemented a solution proposed by Radutoiu
[13]. The method first checks a range of heatmap values on a predicted centerline
to establish if any branch points are present on it. If so, it finds the point with the
highest value, and calculates the weighted average location within its neighbourhood.
Training is performed with a similar procedure as described in section 5.2.2.
5.4
Artery radius estimator
An important part of the algorithm is finding new tracing directions from detected bi-
furcation points. Having insight into the size of an artery in a branch point helps with
deciding how much space to consider when looking for branch candidates. This con-
sideration led to the development of an artery radius estimator. The process of finding
new directions from branch points incorporating radius estimations is described more
in detail in section 5.6.
The goal of an artery radius estimator is to approximate a radius, rest, for a given
point on a centerline, p. The form of input data, as well as the architecture of the
CNN are the same as described in section 5.2.2. The only difference lies in the output
layer: here we use a layer with a single output denoting rest. The training follows the
same procedure as described in section 5.2.2, with one slight modification. Since the
data complexity in the radius estimation task is significantly lower than in centerline
tracing, and the task itself is therefore also simpler, we decided to perform only a
single run through the memory.
5.5
Artery likelihood estimator
Another important part of the algorithm is the artery likelihood estimator.
The
convolutional neural network model is aimed at predicting the likelihood of a tracer
being inside a coronary artery. It is utilized both in terminating conditions and branch
spawning.
The model architecture follows the one described in section 5.2.2, however, the output
layer has been modified. The last fully connected layer outputs just one value and,
since it is the likelihood that we aim at predicting, it is passed through a sigmoid
activation function to squash the results to the unit interval. The training procedure
is similar as in section 5.2.2. The training examples are also translated away from
the centerline, similarly as for the centerline tracer, but up to 4 mm. This produces
==PAGE:36==
24
5 Methods
roughly equal distribution of points in and outside the coronary artery. For the loss
function a binary cross entropy loss has been chosen. The final output of the model
is evaluated against a binary ground truth label indicating whether a given state lays
within the coronary artery. The binary ground truth labels have been obtained by
comparing centre of the input image patch against the segmentation. The simplified
process has been visualized in figure 5.6.
Figure 5.6: Simplified process of evaluating ground truth labels of points sampled
around the coronary artery for artery likelihood estimator. Colours of
the points indicate ground truth labels with red meaning outside, and
green inside the artery segmentation. Created with [53].
5.6
Branch spawning
Branch detector allows for estimating locations of bifurcation points.
Given the
branch point, the objective of branch spawning solution is to determine which di-
rection should the tracer move towards to follow a yet untraced branch. This section
presents several approaches which we investigated.
5.6.1
Direction-score-based exploration
Direction-score-based exploration is a method of determining directions of branches
based on the accumulated direction score values at certain paths. The procedure
comprises three key steps:
1. Establishing a set of directions to explore,
2. Tracing in each direction for a number of steps and calculating accumulated
direction quality score,
3. Filtering out paths based on a number of conditions.
==PAGE:37==
5.6 Branch spawning
25
Establishing exploring directions
A popular method of distributing points on a sphere is a latitude-longitude lattice
[55], where points are located on the intersections of latitude and longitude lines. A
drawback of this method is that points are distributed in a highly anisotropic manner
and are clumped together near the poles. To avoid those issues, we used a Fibonacci
sphere algorithm [55]. In this method, points are generated on a unit sphere based on
the golden ratio value, helping to achieve isotropic spacing. A visualization of both
methods has been shown in figure 5.7. For the goal of branch spawning, we generated
50 points on a Fibonacci sphere, each corresponding to a potential branch direction
d1, · · · , d50.
(a) Latitude-longitude lattice
(b) Fibonacci lattice
Figure 5.7: Comparison of points distribution on a sphere.
Points of Fibonacci
sphere are distributed fairly evenly comparing to the latitude-longitude
one. Modified from [55].
Tracing in potential directions
After establishing potential directions, we estimate a radius value rest at the bifur-
cation location, and start tracing in a distance of 1.5 · rest from it in each potential
direction. Starting tracing too close to the branch point could result in the tracer
following already traced centerline and missing potential branches. Paths in each
direction are traced for 20 steps or until the likelihood of being inside an artery is
too low (described in detail in section 5.7.1). For each path candidate, accumulated
direction score estimated by the centerline tracer is calculated.
==PAGE:38==
26
5 Methods
Filtering path candidates
Out of all traced candidates paths, only those having Euclidean length greater than
2 mm are considered.
Denoting ps and pe as starting and ending points of a candidate path, respectively,
we define a direction of a path as:
dpath = pe −ps
d(pe, ps)
(5.7)
where d(pe, ps) is a Euclidean distance between pe and ps, serving as a normalizing
factor. If, for a given explored direction di, dpath · di ≤0.2, we assume that the
tracer wandered too much away from the original direction, and the path candidate
is discarded.
All paths for which pe is closer than 2 mm to any point on already traced centerlines,
are also discarded, as they are too near and therefore too similar to already traced
centerlines.
Finally, path candidates, for which distances between the ending points are smaller
than 5 mm, are compared to each other. For each set of such paths the direction with
highest average direction score is chosen as the final candidate, with the rest of them
being discarded.
After performing the filtering procedure, a number of found directions di shifted by
1.5 · rest serve as starting points of new branches.
5.6.2
Likelihood-sphere-based spawning
Alternative approach considered was centred around the idea of utilizing artery like-
lihood estimator to establish which direction is the most likely to be following an
artery. There are two steps included in this approach: building a direction likelihood
map and, determining the directions in which the agent should continue tracing based
on it.
Artery likelihood sphere
Once a bifurcation point b is established, rest is obtained from the radius estimator.
Then, we establish 400 rays corresponding to 400 directions d1, . . . , d400 on the Fi-
bonacci sphere [55]. Along each ray we evaluate artery likelihood on 11 evenly spaced
points defined as:
pki = b + di · rest · k,
where k ∈K = {1, 1.25, . . . , 3.5}
(5.8)
Here, pki is a point corresponding to ray di shifted from b by rest · k. The closest
vicinity of the bifurcation point is not considered. Finally, the accumulated likelihood
value along each ray is calculated according to the following equation:
==PAGE:39==
5.6 Branch spawning
27
ai =
∑
k∈K
f(pki)
(5.9)
where f(pki) is an artery likelihood in point pki.
This results in a discrete spherical likelihood map of 400 points laying on the surface
of the sphere with radius equal to 3.5 · rest. Therefore, the value ai of each point
reflects the certainty of following the branch in a particular direction.
The final
likelihood values have been normalized to a unit interval. A simplified visualization
of this process is shown in figure 5.8.
Figure 5.8: Process of a building a directional likelihood sphere around the branch
point. Visualization is reduced to 2D for aesthetic appeal. The colours
of points along the rays coming out of branch point indicate the likeli-
hood of point laying inside an artery. The darker the shade, the less
likely the point is to be inside an artery. Values along the rays are later
summed and normalized. Created with [53].
von Mises Fischer mixture model
Having created the directional likelihood map, the next part is to extract directional
vectors pointing towards the highest artery likelihoods. This task can be approached
in various ways. Most likely the simplest solution is to use k-Nearest Neighbours
algorithm, however, this would restrict the optimal direction to be identical to one
of the sampled rays and, given that the approach considers only 400 rays, it is very
==PAGE:40==
28
5 Methods
likely that the true optimal direction would lay somewhere in between. Therefore, it
has been decided to employ a model-based approach.
The likelihood space lays on a surface of a three dimensional sphere which makes
von Mises-Fisher (vMF) distribution [56] a perfect candidate for the model.
Von
Mises-Fisher distribution is a directional distribution defined on a unit hypersphere.
It is often perceived as an equivalent of a normal distribution on a sphere.
It is
characterized by the following functional form:
fp(x; µ, κ) = Cp(κ) exp
(
κµTx
)
(5.10)
where p denotes dimensions of the unit vectors, κ is the concentration parameter, µ
represents mean direction, while Cp(κ) is the normalization constant of the following
form:
Cp(κ) =
κp/2−1
(2π)p/2Ip/2−1(κ)
(5.11)
which in a 3-dimensional case simplifies to:
C3(κ) =
κ
4π sinh κ =
κ
2π(eκ −e−κ)
(5.12)
Importantly the support of the distribution is the hypersphere, more specifically 2-
sphere, defined as:
S2 =
{
x ∈R2 : ∥x∥= 1
}
(5.13)
which is precisely what the likelihood map represents.
==PAGE:41==
5.6 Branch spawning
29
Figure 5.9: The image shows three colour coded distributions fitted to point clouds
laying on the sphere. The particular distribution used in this case is
Kent distribution of which a special case is von Mises-Fisher distribution.
The purpose of the image is to illustrate the models fitted on spherical
data. Image from [57].
Having chosen an appropriate distribution, a mixture model of several components,
each following the von Mises-Fisher distribution, is created. We chose a number of
components to lay between 2 and 4, where 2 means that an analysed branch point
is a false positive and is located in the middle of an artery, whereas 4 means that
it corresponds to trifurcation. In very rare cases quadrifurcations are observed in a
population [58]. Since they are extremely unusual, this possibility was omitted for
the purposes of this project. The constructed mixture model is therefore finite and
can be represented as follows:
f(x) =
J
∑
j=1
πj · f3(x; µj, κj)
(5.14)
where πj denotes the likelihood of a point belonging to j-th component.
Lastly, an optimization is performed by minimizing least-squares loss function and
therefore the target can be defined as:
L =
400
∑
i

ai −
J
∑
j=1
πjf3(x; µj, κj)


2
(5.15)
The function is optimized numerically using a standard L-BFGS method for uncon-
strained optimization problems [59].
==PAGE:42==
30
5 Methods
Once the directions are established, the tracer starts following each of them from
the spawn point offset by 1.5 · rest from a branch point, and then continues tracing
in a regular manner. The procedure of filtering candidate paths is much simplified
compared to the one applied for direction-score-based spawning described in section
5.6.1. The only condition that is checked is whether the end point pe of the path
candidate is at least 2 mm away from any already traced centerline.
Model selection criteria
Having a framework for fitting our model for a given number of components, it is
important to decide how many components should be fitted on each sphere. This will
of course vary between the spheres so each sphere should be considered separately.
To choose an optimal number of directions, first a mixture model is fitted for each
number of components and then all models are evaluated to establish which one
reflects the data best. Relying on the loss values would be sub-optimal since the loss
can often simply decrease with the number of components increasing, as they make
the model more flexible. This is where Akaike and Bayesian information criteria [60,
61] can be of use as they penalize the model for too high complexity (number of free
parameters). Criteria can be calculated in the following way:
AIC = 2p −2 ln(ˆL)
(5.16)
BIC = p ln(N) −2 ln(ˆL)
(5.17)
where p - number of free parameters, N - number of observations, ˆL - maximized
likelihood for a given model. Note that especially for models with large number of
samples, the BIC model will penalize higher complexity more severely than AIC.
Initialization methods
Any kind of numerical optimization relies on initialization of the starting points. Poor
initialization can influence the final solution so the correct initialization technique
should be selected carefully. In the optimized mixture model mixture weights, con-
centration parameters, and mean directions need to be initialized. Since mean di-
rections are the most important for our use case, we focus on improving only their
initialization and randomly initialize the remaining parameters. The simplest solu-
tion is to randomly, independently draw number of points on the sphere, however,
this approach is often not reliable, as the final results may vary depending on the run.
We considered the following two approaches.
Minimization of electrostatic potential energy
The idea behind this approach
originates from the paper published in 1904 by J.J. Thomson [62] in which the au-
thor states the problem of arranging electrons on a sphere in such a way that the
==PAGE:43==
5.7 Coronary tree tracing algorithm
31
total electrostatic potential energy is minimized. The energy is minimized when the
electrons are as far from each other as possible. In other words, the solution to the
problem is to find a way of spreading the objects evenly on a sphere. This can be well
utilized to initialize points in our approach since in majority of cases the branches are
relatively far from each other. To achieve that, the following energy function needs
to be minimized:
E =
∑
i<j
1
∥xi −xj∥
(5.18)
Note that we introduce another optimization problem and this in turn again requires
initialization. Nevertheless, this solution ensures that the points are evenly spread
even if their placement is still random. To rectify this further, we additionally anchor
one of the points on the sphere by selecting a global likelihood maximum which should
lay very close to one of the branch directions. The only optimized points are therefore
the remaining ones. The function is again optimized using the same framework as in
case of loss function [59].
k-Nearest Neighbors
We previously advocated for not following the kNN inspired
solution for finding the maxima on the sphere, however, it still can be of use to resolve
the initialization problem. Our idea is to use kNN to find local maxima and consider
them starting points for fitting the von Mises-Fisher model. The maxima can be found
by scanning through the neighbourhood of each point on the sphere and checking if
the likelihood value of the considered point is higher than the likelihood value of any
of its neighbours. The algorithm is quick, requires only one pass and is deterministic
which eliminates the randomness factor. More importantly, this method eliminates
the need for comparing mixtures with different numbers of components as the number
of local maxima found equals number of fitted directions. The solution still requires
careful choice of number of neighbours considered and can result in finding too many
local maxima. Thus, in addition, we propose a relative threshold condition which
accepts the local maxima only if they are not lower than the global maximum times
the τ factor. Mathematically, the problem can be stated in the following way:
Local maxima:
ai > aj
∀j ∈Nk(i)
and
ai > τ · max
m am
(5.19)
where Nk(i) represents the neighbourhood of k points around point i.
5.7
Coronary tree tracing algorithm
This section presents an overview of an algorithm for tracing the whole left coronary
tree. The entire algorithm is based on an idea of alternating tracing single centerlines
and detecting branch points on them.
==PAGE:44==
32
5 Methods
Tracing single centerline is based on predicting the next location of the tracer pnext
given its current location p. This procedure is repeated for a maximum of 1000 steps,
unless one of the terminating condition is met earlier (described below). At each new
location of the tracer, we check if the terminating conditions are met. If not, and the
tracer appears in pnext for the first time, current location of the tracer is updated as
p = pnext and tracing continues. If pnext has already been visited before, momentum
procedure is applied (described below) to guide the tracer out of the problematic area,
before the tracing is continued. Tracing of a single centerline is presented in figure
5.10
Figure 5.10: Schema of tracing single centerline The procedure is repeated until the
maximum limit of steps is reached, or until terminating conditions are
met. Created with [53].
Starting points of each centerline are saved in a queue P. At the very beginning of
an algorithm, P comprises only one point, p0, being a point of overlap between the
aorta and coronary artery tree, extracted during data processing. Tracing of each
centerline C starts from a corresponding starting point and it is tracked until one
of the terminating conditions is met (described below). Then, each point in C is
passed through a branch detector to identify any possible branch points B. Each of
the detected branch points is then used for a branch spawning procedure in order to
find the beginning of new branches in a coronary tree, that are then added to the set
of starting points P. The procedure is repeated until there are no points in B and P
==PAGE:45==
5.7 Coronary tree tracing algorithm
33
left. Schema of the tracing algorithm is showed in figure 5.11.
Figure 5.11: Schema of coronary tree tracing algorithm. The algorithm runs until
both queue of starting points P and of branch points B are empty.
Created with [53].
5.7.1
Terminating criteria
In order to decide when to finish the tracing, we developed a few terminating criteria.
An important thing for consideration was that terminating the tracing too late is not
as harmful as terminating too early. Terminating too early would result not only
in a missing part of a centerline, but also in inability to detect potential bifurcation
points on it and subsequent parts of the coronary tree. On the other hand, tracing
too far could lead to inaccuracies and the tracer getting lost in areas where coronary
arteries are not present any more. Nevertheless, the terminating conditions should
lay in balance between capturing as much of coronary artery tree as possible and
avoiding unrealistic results.
A following set of terminating criteria was incorporated in the tracing algorithm:
1. Reaching a maximum number of steps, set as 1000,
2. Tracer going out of the image borders after taking a step in a predicted direction,
3. Having an average HU value of voxels in last 5 steps lower than 1,
4. Visiting the same point twice after momentum (described in section 5.7.2),
5. Having too low average likelihood of being inside an artery calculated over the
last 3 steps.
==PAGE:46==
34
5 Methods
Conditions 1 and 2 are straightforward. Criterium 1 guarantees tracing termination if
none of other conditions is met. A chosen number of steps is presumed to be enough
to trace the entire single centerline. In practice, this condition is rarely enforced.
Criterium 2 ensures that the tracing stays within the image boundaries.
Condition 3 ensures that the HU values along the tracked centerlines are high enough.
Coronary arteries in CCTA scans, due to the contrast enhancement, reach values of
a few hundreds [51], thus voxels with HU values below 1 can be assumed not to lay
in the coronary arteries volume.
Condition 4 makes sure that the tracing terminates if the tracer oscillates. If the
momentum procedure is applied, then visiting the same point twice means applying
momentum to push through a problematic area. If, even with momentum applied,
tracer again comes back to the same location, tracing is terminated.
In case the
momentum procedure is not used, tracing terminates immediately when a given point
is visited twice.
Condition 5 is described in more details below.
Too low likelihood of being inside an artery
We determine an artery likelihood threshold for which we terminate tracing as aT =
0.25. Denoting current state of the tracer as pn, and the output of the artery likeli-
hood estimator for that state as f(pn), we define terminating conditions as:
f(pn) + f(pn−1) + f(pn−2)
3
< aT
(5.20)
If the condition from eq. 5.20 is met, the tracing is terminated. The value of the
chosen threshold serves as a balance between tracking for too long and missing parts
of the coronary tree due to stopping too early. Calculating an average of last three
visited points ensures that we do not penalize the tracer if it occasionally goes away
from the centerline, and that we need to see a consistent pattern of tracing away from
the artery to terminate.
For the initial tracked centerline in a coronary tree we allow the tracer to work
for 10 steps before checking the terminating conditions. The reason for that is the
segmentation of the coronary tree in regions close to the aorta is of mixed quality,
which is why the outputs of the artery likelihood estimator tend to be low in those
areas, causing a risk of early stopping and not capturing the entire coronary structure.
For all subsequent centerlines we start checking the terminating conditions after 5
iterations of tracing, leaving the tracer a possibility to track through potentially
uncertain regions around bifurcation points.
The algorithm for terminating the tracing based on the likelihood of being in an artery
is presented in figure 5.12.
==PAGE:47==
5.7 Coronary tree tracing algorithm
35
Figure 5.12: Schema of terminating conditions for a single centerline. Terminating
criteria are first checked after 10 steps for the initial centerline, and
after 5 steps for all subsuquent centerlines. Created with [53].
5.7.2
Momentum
Sometimes, when the tracker gets too uncertain in some areas, it comes back to the
point visited before, causing an infinite loop. This kind of issue often occurs close
to the end of the centerlines. In such cases, simply terminating the tracing would
not be too harmful for the algorithm’s performance. At the same time, the problem
might arise far from the ending points, while the tracker is still localized inside an
artery. This could happen due to accumulated plaque or data quality issues. In order
to resolve the problem, we implemented a momentum solution, that helps the tracker
push through such uncertain areas and continue tracing.
When we encounter the same point twice, we first make sure that the current state is
not below artery likelihood threshold, using equation 5.20 with threshold aT = 0.25.
Here, pn is the first instance of a point visited twice. It means that we do not include
points that the tracer was looping over in the calculation of an averaged likelihood.
Next, we calculate an average direction that the tracer was following in the last 5
steps before entering the loop. We consider the first instance of the point visited
twice as the last point before entering the loop, and denote it pe. A point visited 5
steps earlier is denoted ps. The direction is then calculated as:
davg = pe −ps
d(pe, ps)
(5.21)
where d(pe, ps) is a Euclidean distance between pe and ps and serves as a normalizing
factor.
The new point, from which the tracing algorithm continues, is calculated as:
pnew = pe + σm · davg
(5.22)
In this project, σm = 3. Its value was chosen to send the tracer far enough so that
it does not come back to the same point again, while minimizing the risk of sending
==PAGE:48==
36
5 Methods
it to other centerlines in the coronary tree our to the regions where coronary arteries
are not present.
5.7.3
Reverse tracing
As already mentioned in section 5.2.3, the proposed algorithm suffers from small
gaps between the branch points and starting points of new branches. One way to
overcome this obstacle would be to manually stitch the missing parts of the tree. In
order to find a more robust way, we implemented the reverse tracer that is being set up
after the main tracing algorithm finishes. Having the whole coronary tree extracted,
tracing starts again, this time from the ending points of each path found before, in
the direction of the root. Reverse tracing is performed with the same terminating
conditions as the regular one, with one exception - momentum is not implemented in
this case, and tracing terminates as soon as the tracer visits the same point twice.
5.8
Tracing evaluation methods
5.8.1
Weighted accuracy
Weighted accuracy is a measure of evaluating a prediction given by a tracer network,
being an extension of a regular accuracy metric. Out of 26 possible directions which
the tracer can follow, only one, yielding the highest direction quality score, is cho-
sen as a correct one. Nevertheless, all other directions are not equally inadequate.
For example, if the true correct direction in which the tracer should go is straight
forward, then predicting a diagonal step instead is less detrimental than going in
a perpendicular or opposite direction. To account for different quality of predicted
directions, weighted accuracy has been introduced. Defining dgt as a ground truth
direction in which the tracer should take a step from a current location p, and dpred
as a predicted one, the weighted accuracy can be specified as:
w = max
(
0,
dgt · dpred
∥dgt∥2∥dpred∥2
)
(5.23)
Weighted accuracy is a measure based on cosine similarity. For a given location of
the tracer, it is equal to 1 if dgt and dpred are equal to each other, and 0 if the angle
between the two vectors is greater than or equal to 90 degrees. Otherwise, the closer
dgt and dpred are to each other, the closer to 1 the weighted accuracy is.
5.8.2
Evaluation metrics
The main method of tracing evaluation is an overlap (OV), calculated as defined by
Schaap et al. [63] All points on the ground truth and on the predicted centerline are
==PAGE:49==
5.8 Tracing evaluation methods
37
marked as true positive, false positive, or false negative, according to the following
criteria:
• a point on the ground truth centerline is considered TPR (true positive refer-
ence) if its distance to the predicted centerline is lower than the artery’s radius
at a given point, otherwise it is considered to be FN (false negative),
• a point on the predicted centerline is marked as a TPM (true positive method)
if it’s distance to at least one point on a ground truth centerline is smaller than
radius at a corresponding reference point, otherwise it is defined as FP (false
positive)
An illustration of centerline points’ classification is shown in figure 5.13.
Figure 5.13: Schematic illustration of centerline points’ classification into TPR,
TPM, FP, and FN groups, inspired by [63]. Black line corresponds
to the ground truth centerline G, and green line to the predicted cen-
terline P. Created with [53].
Denoting ∥· ∥as number of point in given category, e.g. ∥FN∥- a number of false
negatives, we define an overlap as:
OV =
∥TPM∥+ ∥TPR∥
∥TPM∥+ ∥TPR∥+ ∥FN∥+ ∥FP∥
(5.24)
An average inside (AI) defined by Schaap et al. [63] is a measure that helps evaluate
how accurate the tracking was in those parts of the coronary tree where the distance
between the ground truth and predicted centerline is lower than the ground truth
radius. In other words, it is calculated only for points classified as TPM, according to
the description above. AI is then specified as an average distance between the ground
truth and predicted centerlines for points fulfilling this condition.
Another two measures used in this project, as suggested by Radutoiu [13], are cov-
erage: CG→P , that defines how much of the ground truth path has been covered by
==PAGE:50==
38
5 Methods
the predicted one, and CP →G, which tells how much of the predicted centerline is
reflected in ground truth data. Both of those measures use labels proposed by Schaap
et al. [63] and are defined as:
CG→P =
∥TPR∥
∥TPR∥+ ∥FN∥
(5.25)
CP →G =
∥TPM∥
∥TPM∥+ ∥FP∥
(5.26)
CG→P equal to 1 means that the whole coronary tree was captured by the tracing
algorithm, and it is the most sought-after result. The lower the value is, the smaller
part of the reference tree was found by the algorithm.
CP →G equal to 1 means that the whole predicted path corresponds to the ground
truth data and there are no regions that are not reflected in the reference centerlines.
The lower the measure is, the more the algorithm misfits the ground truth data.
5.8.3
Curved Planar Reformatting
One of the methods of evaluating tracked centerlines is Straightened Curved Planar
Reformatting (CPR) [64]. It is a method used for visualizing curved tubular struc-
tures, such as blood vessels, or, in this case, coronary arteries. In particular, it allows
to visualize parts of the CCTA scan corresponding to a given centerline. It is espe-
cially useful considering that the ground truth segmentation of coronary arteries and
ground truth centerlines are not of the highest quality and they do not cover the
entire structure of coronary trees, making it diﬀicult to evaluate quality of the tracer
based on the ground truth data alone. The method relies on an extracted centerline
to ”straighten” coronary artery so that its entire structure could be seen in a single
image. For each point on the curved centerline, a local coordinate system is defined,
where z-axis corresponds to the tangent vector to the centerline, whereas x- and y-
axes correspond to the cross-sections of the artery. Then, a transformation mapping
from points on a curved centerline to points on a straight centerline is applied. CPR
results in two 2D images, each corresponding to the middle cross-sections of the ar-
teries. Height of the images corresponds to the length of the inspected centerline. An
example of CPR visualization is shown in figure 5.14.
==PAGE:51==
5.9 Phenotype clustering
39
Figure 5.14: Example of CPR visualization for two chosen branches based on the
ground truth centerlines. Heights of the CPR images correspond to
the length of the chosen centerlines.
5.9
Phenotype clustering
As described in section 3.2, certain geometric features of the coronary arteries are
linked to the increased risk of plaque formation. Having the centerlines of coronary
trees, it is possible to calculate such features for each patient. Based on the set of
the geometric features, it is interesting to see if phenotypes of coronary arteries can
be detected. Phenotypes could then be analysed with fluid dynamics methods to
see if they show characteristics associated with increased risk of plaque formation or
rupture. In this project, we try to uncover the phenotypes in our dataset.
The analysis was based on the ground truth centerlines. For each coronary tree in
our dataset, we extracted a fragment of LCA from the root until just after the first
bifurcation point. Usually, there are two branches going out of the first branch point,
corresponding to LAD and LCX. In cases where there were more paths branching
out, we calculated the length of each path extending from the branch point and took
into account only points belonging to the two longest ones, as they should correspond
to LAD and LCX, being the longest branches in the coronary tree [26]. Figure 5.15
depicts how a fragment of interest is extracted from LCA.
==PAGE:52==
40
5 Methods
Figure 5.15: Visualization of the fragment extracted for the phenotypes clustering.
Black line together with black dots correspond to the ground truth
centerline and points on it.
Yellow dot corresponds to the branch
point. Created with [53].
The extracted fragment was used to calculate geometric features that are later used
for clustering:
• Euclidean distance between the root point and the first point before the bifur-
cation point DLM,
• Geodesic distance between the root point and the first point before the bifurca-
tion point LLM
• Tortuosity of LM, defined as τLM = LLM
DLM
• Radii of maximum inscribed spheres in points adjacent to the bifurcation point:
φLM, φLAD, φLCX,
• Angles between LM, LAD, and LCX: αLM−LAD, αLM−LCX, αLAD−LCX.
Schematic visualization of geometric features is shown in figure 5.16.
==PAGE:53==
5.9 Phenotype clustering
41
Figure 5.16: Geometric features used for LM clustering. Black dots denote points
on the ground truth centerline, the yellow one to the branch point.
Pink area corresponds to the segmentation of LCA. Created with [53].
Having extracted the features, the outliers were removed using a Z-score with thresh-
old of ±3. Next, the data was standardized and agglomerative hierarchical clustering
has been applied. As the linkage criterion for the clustering we used Ward’s method
[65]. Starting from singletons where each observation is a separate cluster, in each
iteration two most similar clusters are merged all the way to the state where there
is only one cluster left. The merging is performed based on the increment of total
within-cluster variance being the sum of squared Euclidean distances. The merged
clusters are the two that contribute to the lowest increase in variance. The Ward
distance can therefore be formulated in the following manner:
dWard =
∑
i∈G∪H
∥xi−¯xG∪H∥2−
∑
i∈G
∥xi−¯xG∥2−
∑
i∈H
∥xi−¯xH∥2 =
√nGnH
nG + nH
∥¯xG −¯xH∥2
(5.27)
where G and H indicate clusters, xi represents feature values for i-th observation,
¯xG and ¯xH mean values for clusters G and H, respectively, nG and nH number of
observations in clusters G and H.
The Ward’s method tends to produce well balanced clusters and helps avoid chaining
problem which can happen when using other methods like e.g. single linkage.
==PAGE:54==
42
==PAGE:55==
CHAPTER 6
Results
6.1
Centerline tracer
In order to evaluate the quality of the tracer networks, we performed two experiments
on the test dataset, both for the regular tracer and for the reverse tracer. In the
first experiment, we checked tracers’ predictions for every point on the ground truth
centerline, and calculated a weighted accuracy given the true best direction. In the
second experiment, we drew ten offset points for each ground truth point on the
centerline, and again, calculated a weighted accuracy for each of the points. For each
of the test images, an average weighted accuracy was calculated for both experiments.
The results are shown in figure 6.1.
(a) Regular tracer.
For onset points, (min,
mean, max) = (0.68, 0.87, 0.93). For offset
points, (min, mean, max) = (0.74, 0.87, 0.92).
(b) Reverse tracer.
For onset points, (min,
mean, max) = (0.71, 0.90, 0.96). For offset
points, (min, mean, max) = (0.78, 0.89, 0.93)
Figure 6.1: Comparison of distributions of tracer’s weighted accuracies in test im-
ages. Left halves of violins show evaluation of points on the centerline,
the right ones of offset points. Both violins have quartiles marked with
dashed lines, as well as average value marked with black dot and mini-
mum and maximum values marked with beige dots.
For the regular tracer, the average weighted accuracy is similar both for onset and
offset points. In case of onset points, the distribution is a bit wider, with visibly
lower minimum accuracy, and a bit higher maximum accuracy. For onset points, a
true direction dgt lies along the centerline. For offset points, dgt is defined so that
the distance to the centerline is decreased (eq. 5.5). It seems that a task of moving
towards the centerline might be easier for the tracer than moving along it, thus
the spread of the weighted accuracy distribution is lower for offset points. For the
reverse tracer, the results are comparable, with slightly higher weighted accuracies
==PAGE:56==
44
6 Results
and narrower distributions than in case of the regular tracer. At the same time, it is
important to note that offset points were sampled separately for both models, thus
it is diﬀicult to evaluate with certainty if the reverse tracer is indeed more accurate
than the regular one.
Examples of tracer performance are shown in figure 6.2. The accuracies are lowest in
areas of branch points and end points. In the left images for both tracers, there are
branches that do not seem anatomically plausible - they are unusually short or follow
the direction opposite to the rest of the coronary tree. In those cases, the tracer’s
performance is also lower. It suggests that having better quality data would result
in even higher accuracies. The performance of both tracers is satisfactory, although
visibly lower weighted accuracy values around end points can undermine the idea of
using the reverse tracer to trace from ending points in order to fill the gaps around
the branch points.
(a) Regular tracer.
(b) Reverse tracer.
Figure 6.2: Comparison of tracers’ performance on offset points for images with
lowest, closest to average, and highest accuracy, from left to right.
6.2
Branch point detector
We evaluated the performance of branch point detector on images from test dataset.
We have obtained the likelihood of being a branch point for all points laying on ground
truth centerline and afterwards we followed the procedure explained in section 5.3 to
==PAGE:57==
6.2 Branch point detector
45
adjust locations of detected branch points based on their neighbourhood. Having gath-
ered the predictions we evaluated them against the ground truth annotated branch
points by calculating confusion matrix. We decided to classify the prediction as true
positive if it lays within the range of 4.0 mm from the true bifurcation point.
Metric
Count
True Positives
611
False Positives
384
False Negatives
116
Metric
Value
Precision
0.614
Recall
0.840
F1-score
0.710
Table 6.1: Branch detector performance summary. Left, components of confusion
matrix. Right, evaluation metrics: precision, recall and F1-score.
The results in table 6.1 show solid performance. The model was able to detect 84%
of all true bifurcation points. At the same time, only around 61% of positive predic-
tions were in fact correct. However, this is not that problematic for the tracing, as
exploring areas of non-existent branch points is better than missing out on potential
branch points completely. The most concerning part is 16% cases in which the branch
detector actually failed to detect a branch. After further investigation, we noticed
that among the images where the branch detector performs the poorest, many have
incorrect segmentations. Examples of that can be seen in figure 6.3 where some of
the cases classified as false negatives were not in fact true branch points even though
the ground truth data suggested that. All in all, the model is performing adequately
especially if we take into account that incorrect predictions are inflated because of
the ground truth issues. We decided to accept it as a part of our tracing algorithm.
Figure 6.3: Examples of two of some of the poorest performance of branch detector.
Green shows true positive branch points, yellow false positive and red
false negative predictions. The segmentations are clearly anatomically
implausible leading to incorrectly extracted ground truth bifurcation
points.
==PAGE:58==
46
6 Results
6.3
Artery radius estimator
Radius estimator was evaluated by comparing its predictions for points located on
ground truth centerlines from test dataset with corresponding true radii. For every
point from the test set, we calculated the difference between estimated, rest, and
ground truth radius, rgt, in a following way:
∆r = rest −rgt
(6.1)
It means that values larger than zero correspond to model overestimating true values,
and smaller than zero to model’s underestimation. Distribution of radii differences, as
well as distributions of ground truth and estimated radii for the test set are shown in
figure 6.4. The distribution of radii differences is centered aronud zero, meaning that
for majority of examples radius estimator is very close to the true values. Looking
at the distributions of ground truth and estimated radii, we can see that they are
both right skewed with mode localized in a similar range. At the same time, low radii
values are almost entirely not captured by the estimator, showcasing the flaws of the
model.
(a) Distribution of radii differences
with mean = −0.014 mm.
(b) Comparison of distributions of
ground truth radii, with mean of 1.294
mm, and estimated radii, with mean
of 1.280 mm.
Figure 6.4: Evaluation of radius estimator on test images.
We calculated RMSE for each of the test images. The results are presented in figure
6.5. Even though the range of true radii values is between 0.12 and 3.48 mm, the
model is quite accurate in its predictions, resulting in an average RMSE of 0.17.
==PAGE:59==
6.3 Artery radius estimator
47
Figure 6.5: Violin of RMSEs of radius estimator evaluated on the test set images.
(min, mean, max) = (0.10, 0.17, 0.37).
Examples of radii estimation performance are shown in figure 6.6. Image correspond-
ing to the highest RMSE is the same one that was particularly problematic for the
tracing networks, and it seems to be an outlier according to figure 6.5. It was mostly
suffering from an underestimation issue, but no specific areas were particularly diﬀi-
cult for the estimator. At the same time, ground truth in this image can be corrupted,
thus it might not be the best indicator of the model’s performance. In the other
two examples, estimator’s performance is quite stable along the whole coronary tree.
Model consistently overestimates radii at ending points of the coronary tree. Again,
it might be related to the quality of the dataset.
Figure 6.6: Examples of radii estimation for images corresponding to maximum,
average, and minimum RMSE, from left to right, respectively. Points
are color coded according to the definition from eq. 6.3. 6 points had
values exceeding the thresholds shown in the legend, and thus were
manually set to the limit values for the visualization purpose.
==PAGE:60==
48
6 Results
The performance of the estimator is very solid. Even though it does not fully capture
true radii range values, it can definitely serve as a useful tool in branch spawning.
6.4
Artery likelihood estimator
We evaluated the performance of artery likelihood estimator on the test set images.
For every point laying on the ground truth centerline we sampled 10 points offset
by up to 4 mm so that both points inside and outside coronary artery are included.
This resulted in a collection of 400 thousand points roughly equally distributed in
and outside coronary artery. We obtained the prediction from the artery likelihood
estimator for each such point and additionally calculated distance to the centerline.
(a) ROC curve
(b) Confusion matrix
Figure 6.7: ROC curve and confusion matrix demonstrating performance of artery
likelihood estimator on testset images. For the confusion matrix, classi-
fication threshold of 0.5 was used.
The model achieves accuracy of 0.89 and a high AUC score of 0.962.
The ROC
curve in figure 6.7 indicates that the the model is capable of distinguishing between
the two classes well. Looking at the confusion matrix, in the 11% of cases where
the model was mistaken it was more often a false positive rather than false negative.
This goes well in hand with the purpose of using it for terminating conditions as it is
less detrimental to not terminate the tracing early enough than it is to terminate it
while actually being in the artery. The confusion matrix is based on the classification
threshold of 0.5. However, in the terminating conditions implementation we are not
using the binary predictions. Instead we evaluate a moving average of the likelihood
with the threshold set to 0.25 which reduces the chance of getting a false negative
further. Based on a single point prediction with the 0.25 threshold the model would
produce a false negative prediction in 3.3% cases.
==PAGE:61==
6.4 Artery likelihood estimator
49
(a) Predictions
(b) Ground truth
Figure 6.8: Histograms comparing relationship between predictions and ground
truth labels with distance to the closest point on the centerline.
It is worth mentioning that both ROC curve and confusion matrix are based on the
assumption that all misclassification cases are equal, however it is definitely more
diﬀicult to predict when the point lays very close to the artery surface compared to
when it is far away from it. To make a closer look at how the estimator predictions
change with the distance to the closest point on the centerline we grouped the points
in 5 intervals of distances and investigated the distribution, as shown in figure 6.8(a).
As expected, when moving away from the centerline percentage of positive predictions
drop. After exceeding 2 mm, the model barely ever predicts that the point lays inside
an artery. This is consistent with radius of arteries we observed in our data as shown
in figure 6.4. Interestingly, there are cases of negative predictions even among the
points laying less than 1 mm away from the centerline. Those are very often correct
for points laying close to the narrow distal parts of the arteries. Additionally, in figure
6.8(b) we have shown a similar histogram created for ground truth labels. Histograms
are almost identical showing that the model’s predictions reflect the relationship with
distance to the centerline well.
==PAGE:62==
50
6 Results
Figure 6.9: Panel showing artery estimator predictive performance on three test
set examples. From left to right, images with lowest, closest to average,
and highest accuracy are visualized. Points were sampled following the
procedure described in section 6.4.
Naturally, some coronary arteries are more diﬀicult to predict due to various factors
such as tortuosity, the number of branch points or data quality. The accuracy does not
however vary that much across images as it ranges from 0.845 to 0.921 for the middle
99% of observations. Therefore, even in the most diﬀicult cases, model produces solid
results. Figure 6.9 shows examples of the worst, average and best performance based
on accuracy. There is no clear area in which the artery estimator underperforms.
On the first artery we can see that the accuracy drops in tortuous region on the
left, however, after closer qualitative investigation we noticed that there is an issue
with the segmentation as it partly includes other anatomical structures. The right
artery, with the highest accuracy proves that the model is capable of handling higher
tortuosity.
Even though this artery tree is fairly simple, the bottom right region
becomes more twisted. The model predictions are still correct in this area. Notably,
there is no indication that the model struggles in the bifurcation regions, suggesting
that it can be well utilized in branch spawning.
The artery estimator is a robust model capable of indicating whether the state lays
within the artery or not. It produces fully satisfactory results all around the artery
tree. It can definitely aid the terminating conditions and determine the tracing direc-
tion in bifurcation points.
6.5
Coronary tree tracing algorithm
This section presents the results of the coronary tree tracing algorithm with different
branch spawning techniques applied.
The algorithms are first evaluated without
the momentum procedure applied. Then, momentum is implemented for the most
promising algorithm. Finally, performance of all techniques is compared to each other.
==PAGE:63==
6.5 Coronary tree tracing algorithm
51
6.5.1
Direction-score-based branch spawning
Performance of direction-score-based branch spawning method has been evaluated on
the test set using the metrics introduced in section 5.8. Visualization of the result is
presented in figure 6.10. The method is characterized by a high CG→P coverage with a
mean of 0.835. CP →G coverage average is equal to 0.819, indicating the algorithm has
not suffered from too many false positives and most of the predicted centerlines were
corresponding to the ground truth ones. Even though CP →G is lower than CG→P , it
is more beneficial to find as much of the true coronary tree at the cost of dealing with
false positive, than the other way around. Overlap for the analysed method is equal
to 0.812 on average. The evaluation metrics indicate the algorithm’s strong ability
to capture structures of coronary artery trees. There were 4 scans with OV = 0, and
they were not included in the metrics’ calculation.
Figure 6.10: Boxplots of tracing evaluation measures. 4 images with OV = 0 were
not included in the visualization.
Even though the evaluation metrics are satisfactory, a deeper look into centerline pre-
dictions revealed important issues. The direction-score-based branch spawning is an
exploratory method where the tracer investigates multiple potential paths and, after
many filtering iterations, returns a set of starting points of new branches. Despite the
numerous filtering strategies and attempts to exclude any new starting points that
result in similar paths, the algorithm suffers from an issue of multiple, similar paths
originating from different spawn points of one branch point, that after a few steps
unite into one centerline. Examples of limitations stemming from the exploratory
nature of the method are shown in figure 6.11.
==PAGE:64==
52
6 Results
Figure 6.11: Issues due to the exploratory nature of direction-score-based branch
spawning. Multiple paths originate from one branch point before they
unite into one centerline.
6.5.2
Likelihood-sphere-based spawning
In this section we present the results of examining various approaches of creating
a robust algorithm using likelihood spheres for designating the tracing direction at
branch points.
The approach comprises two parts: creating a spherical direction likelihood map
and indicating the tracing direction utilizing the von Mises-Fisher distribution as
described in the section 5.6.2.
Figure 6.12 shows an example of several spheres built around the bifurcation points.
It can be seen that they clearly indicate the areas of cross-sections with the artery
segmentation. Even significantly thinner branches are still reflected in likelihood map.
The qualitative assessment ensured us that the approach we employed creates a solid
ground for denoting the tracing directions.
==PAGE:65==
6.5 Coronary tree tracing algorithm
53
Figure 6.12: Example of artery likelihood spheres created around the bifurcation
points of one of the testing images. The sphere correctly indicates how
the artery is positioned, with higher likelihoods at the cross-sections
with the segmentation.
6.5.2.1
Energy-based initialization
In order to test energy-based initialization described in section 5.6.2, we have taken
an image with 5 ground truth branch points.
For each of them, we have built a
likelihood sphere and made 10 runs of energy-based initialization followed by fitting
the mixture model and selecting the optimal one based on information criteria. The
resulting optimal number of directions was compared against the true directions which
we evaluated manually. Only a single image example was used for evaluation due to
computational reasons and lack of ground truth number of splits in each branch point.
The results have been summarized in the following way:
1. Missed - algorithm found less directions than expected,
2. Correct - algorithm found exactly the same number of directions as manually
annotated,
3. Overestimated - found more directions than required.
==PAGE:66==
54
6 Results
Figure 6.13: VMF model fitting with energy-based initialization ran 10 times for
5 branch points, optimized with AIC and BIC criteria.
”Correct”
means that the number of detected directions matched the ground
truth; ”Overestimated” means more directions were found; ”Missed”
means fewer were indicated.
The results of the experiment are shown in figure 6.13. Models selected based on
AIC tend to overestimate the number of components more frequently than those pre-
ferred by BIC. This is in line with expectations, as BIC imposes higher penalty for
model complexity. Given that the purpose of this model is to detect branch direc-
tions, fitting fewer components is far more detrimental than overestimating number
of components. When overestimating, the tracer is required to follow one additional
direction which will likely be quickly stopped by one of the terminating conditions,
however, when not detecting one of the directions algorithm would simply miss out on
whole potential branch and any of the subsequent branches. That being said, models
optimized with both AIC and BIC perform well on average, and only in one case
the model underestimated number of directions. Nonetheless, the biggest flaw of this
approach is its dependency on a random seed. If the model produces different results
on each run, it would require us to run this part of algorithm multiple times and select
the most common number of components. This would in turn make the algorithm
computationally ineﬀicient and extend the time needed to trace the coronary tree.
6.5.2.2
KNN initialization
Having identified the issues behind energy-based initialization, we decided to pursue
kNN-based approach. As previously stated, the model is deterministic, eliminating
the randomness factor. The method requires tuning of two parameters, number of
neighbours considered and relative threshold used to filter maxima. To find the most
optimal parameters, we sampled a few images, constructed likelihood spheres for all
ground truth branch points and, again, manually annotated the correct number of
directions, producing a ground truth for comparing results from various models. We
==PAGE:67==
6.5 Coronary tree tracing algorithm
55
tested the results on 83 spheres with four different configurations of parameters which
were established to be most suitable after initial exploration. Analysed configurations
of parameters are shown in table 6.2.
Model
Number of neighbours
Threshold
Model A
50
0.75
Model B
25
0.75
Model C
25
0.65
Model D
15
0.65
Table 6.2: Model configurations used in selecting the optimal kNN initialization
technique.
(a) Model A
(b) Model B
(c) Model C
(d) Model D
Figure 6.14: Directions found using different configurations of parameters in kNN
initialization. “Correct” means the number of components matched
the ground truth; “Overestimated” means more components were fit-
ted; “Missed” means fewer were fitted.
Results produced by different models are shown in figure 6.14. Model A performs best
in terms of number of ”correct” hits, but it results in the highest number of missed
directions, causing a risk of missing out on some parts of coronary artery tree. Since
==PAGE:68==
56
6 Results
the goal is to minimize the missed cases, more liberal model should be picked. Striking
a compromise between limiting the number of misses and not inflating overestimated
cases too much, we decided to select models B and C, and evaluate them together
with the whole coronary tree tracing algorithm.
(a) Model B
(b) Model C
Figure 6.15: Boxplots showing performance of the tracing algorithm with two con-
figurations of kNN initializations in likelihood-sphere-based spawning.
Configurations are described in table 6.2. 4 scans with OV = 0 are
not included.
Performance of tracing algorithms with Model B and Model C are shown in figure
6.15. Both models perform well, with relatively few outliers. Model B performs better
in terms of CP →G with the average of 0.876. However, when it comes to CG→P and
OV it is the Model C that stands out. For CG→P , the average values are 0.73 and
0.81 for Model B and C, respectively. Moreover, we can observe a higher interquartile
range with Model B reaching 0.22 compared to 0.17 in Model C.
The evaluation metrics confirm insights from figure 6.14. Lowering the threshold for
accepting the maxima translates into more tracing directions which, in turn allows,
for detection of a greater portion of LCA. This comes at a cost of accepting that the
tracer would sometimes detect false positive parts. Overall, the benefits outweigh the
drawbacks, and Model C appears to be the strongest performer.
==PAGE:69==
6.5 Coronary tree tracing algorithm
57
Figure 6.16: Example of directions found for one of the branch points using
likelihood-sphere-based spawning approach. Sphere has been overlaid
on the coronary artery segmentation. Colours on the sphere indicate
cumulative artery likelihood in a given direction. Arrows show tracing
directions predicted by the model.
Figure 6.16 shows the capabilities of detecting where the tracer should go using
the likelihood-sphere-based approach. Likelihood sphere clearly indicates where the
artery is located and shows higher likelihood at the cross-section with the segmenta-
tion. The von Mises-Fisher distribution fitting results effectively point towards those
areas designating further tracing directions.
6.5.3
Tracing with momentum
As the algorithm incorporating likelihood-sphere-based branch spawning does not
suffer from the issue of multiple, similar paths in branch point areas and is not a
strictly explorative method, we decided to use it for evaluating the next algorithm
improvements.
As the next step, we evaluated the tracing algorithm with added
momentum procedure. The boxplots of evaluation metrics are shown in figure 6.17.
==PAGE:70==
58
6 Results
Figure 6.17: Boxplots of evaluation metrics after adding momentum procedure to
tracing algorithm with likelihood-sphere-based branch spawning.
3
scans with OV = 0 were not included.
Mean CG→P is equal to 0.837, bringing an improvement in the fraction of ground
truth centerlines covered. CP →G is slightly lower than before - the reason for that
might be that the tracing proceeds further than the ground truth centerlines are
extracted. Nonetheless, as the ground truth data is not ideal and the ground truth
centerlines do not always cover the entire tree structure, the lower value of CP →G does
not necessarily mean a worse performance of the algorithm. Interestingly, one of the
images that previously had OV = 0, was successfully traced after adding momentum,
reaching OV = 0.807. Figure 6.18 showcases the examples of algorithm’s performance
after adding the momentum using CPR visualization method. It includes cases where
tracing proceeds further than the ground truth segmentation, with CPR suggesting
presence of coronary arteries. The CPR images’ irregular shapes are most likely due
to the lack of smoothing of the tracked centerlines, as the CPR is highly susceptible
to the quality of the centerlines. The results suggest that the true performance of the
algorithm might be higher than the evaluation metrics indicate, and having higher
quality data could help determine the performance with better accuracy.
==PAGE:71==
6.5 Coronary tree tracing algorithm
59
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 6.18: Evaluation of momentum procedure using CPR visualization method.
In (a) and (b) there are centerlines traced with momentum that do
not correspond to the ground truth segmentation, while CPR suggest
presence of the coronary artery. In (b), one of the traced centerlines
terminated too early without momentum applied, even though coro-
nary arteries are visible both in ground truth segmentation and CPR
visualization. (c) shows an example of momentum helping with high
tortuosity branch.
==PAGE:72==
60
6 Results
6.5.4
Reverse tracing
In order to evaluate reverse tracing performance, we calculated the evaluation metrics
for test set images. The reverse tracing was executed using ending points of centerlines
traced using algorithm incorporating likelihood-sphere-based spawning and momen-
tum. The results are shown in figure 6.19. Even though the CP →G coverage has
high values with an average of 0.863, meaning that most of the predicted centerlines
correspond to the true ones, CG→P performs much worse, with an average of 0.681,
indicating that a large fraction of coronary trees was not captured in the predictions.
The reason for such low values is that the reverse tracer, starting from ending points
of previously found centerlines, was often going into a loop, unable to find the whole
centerline. Examples of such issues are shown in figure 6.20.
Figure 6.19: Boxplots of evaluation metrics for reverse tracing algorithm. 3 scans
with OV = 0 were not included.
==PAGE:73==
6.6 Final algorithm selection and evaluation
61
Figure 6.20: Example of reverse tracing algorithm performance.
Image on the
left shows the regular tracing algorithm with likelihood-sphere-branch
spawning and momentum applied, image on the right shows reverse
tracing. Green circles show areas in which reverse tracer succeeded in
stitching up centerlines at branch points. Red circles indicate reverse
tracing inability to capture some of the centerlines, resulting in short
paths terminating too early, or completely missed branches.
Even though reverse tracing algorithm is successful in stitching up branches of the
coronary trees, the fraction of centerlines that was not traced was too large to incor-
porate it in the final algorithm. The issues of the algorithm are especially pronounced
for long centerlines, going beyond the ground truth segmentation. A possible solution
for that would be to apply reverse tracing for instance from midpoints of centerlines
tracked in a regular way, and then combining the results of a regular and reverse
tracing together. Nevertheless, the reverse tracing algorithm in its proposed state is
not functional as it misses to much of the ground truth coronary trees.
6.6
Final algorithm selection and evaluation
During the project we have experimented with multiple algorithm configurations,
each tackling the problem of tracing the LCA from a slightly different angle. Within
each configuration we tuned the parameters based on the performance on the test
set. From all the tuned versions of algorithm configuration we decided to highlight 5
of them comparing their coverage, overlap and average inside metrics, and select the
best performing one to use for deployment on CGPS data.
==PAGE:74==
62
6 Results
Model
CP →G
CG→P
OV
AI
DirectionScore
0.819 ± 0.112
0.835 ± 0.171
0.811 ± 0.123
0.113 ± 0.074
SphereStrict
0.876 ± 0.089
0.730 ± 0.198
0.802 ± 0.126
0.088 ± 0.038
Sphere
0.854 ± 0.098
0.810 ± 0.170
0.827 ± 0.110
0.095 ± 0.073
SphereMomentum
0.816 ± 0.106
0.837 ± 0.155
0.812 ± 0.109
0.097 ± 0.075
SphereReverse
0.863 ± 0.100
0.681 ± 0.211
0.787 ± 0.143
0.111 ± 0.159
Table 6.3: Performance metrics for different tracing algorithms (bold indicates best
value in each column).
Two highlighted rows correspond to two best
performing models overall.
Table 6.3 shows comparison of chosen algorithms. DirectionScore denotes an algo-
rithm with direction score spawning, whereas all models starting with Sphere incor-
porate likelihood-sphere-based spawning. Specifically, SphereStrict uses Model B
from table 6.2 for initialization, Sphere - Model C, SphereMomentum - Model C
and momentum, and SphereReverse - Model C, momentum, and reverse tracing.
No algorithm is superior in every aspect as each approach has its strengths and weak-
nesses. The DirectionScore works well when it comes to finding where the artery lays
but, at the same time, it sometimes tends to wander around, finding false positive
parts of centerline. Judged by the metrics alone, the algorithm is robust, however,
keeping in mind the issues coming from explorative nature shown in figure 6.11 we de-
cided to discard it. Centerlines traced with SphereStrict are the closest to the ground
truth when tracing inside an artery. At the same time, model does not produce many
false positives as indicated by the CP →G, however, utilizing it means missing out on
a lot of ground truth, as it only manages to find 73% of the whole tree. Similarly in
SphereReverse, although 87% of the tracing is the actual ground truth, even less of
the overall ground truth is found. We decided to discard both of them.
Following the principle that tracing too much is better than not tracing enough, we
would rather choose an approach with CG→P at the expense of CP →G. This led us to
consider the Sphere and the SphereMomentum approaches as the two best algorithms.
Both of them perform well in every aspect and the overall difference between them is
subtle. We decided to investigate them more in depth.
==PAGE:75==
6.6 Final algorithm selection and evaluation
63
Figure 6.21: Scatter plots comparing Sphere and SphereMomentum algorithms.
Each dot represents an image from the test set. The black line cor-
responds to a reference line indicating equal performance from both
models.
Figure 6.21 allows to shed a new light on the metrics and compare the tracing per-
formance on the image level. Most of the images lay on the reference line meaning
that in the majority of cases the models perform equally well. In terms of AI, the
differences for images deviating from the reference line are marginal and the two mod-
els’ performance is almost identical. As for other metrics, it is clearly visible that
model with momentum finds more of the ground truth at the cost of producing false
positives. This alone could arguably tip the scales in favour of SphereMomentum.
On top of that, one can see that there are several images in which SphereMomentum
achieved almost 90% of CG→P , whereas Sphere reached only around 50%. In other
words, for some images half of the whole tree is not detected in Sphere algorithm,
while SphereMomentum detects almost the entire tree.
Examples of SphereMomentum performance are shown in figure 6.22. Predicted cen-
==PAGE:76==
64
6 Results
terlines have been visualized on top of the rendered heart volume. (A) showcases an
image with the best overall performance, having CG→P = 1.0, CP →G = 0.951, and
OV = 0.964. It means that the entire ground truth LCA was captured in the tracing
and only very small parts exceed the ground truth segmentation of coronary arteries.
(B) shows example of a scan with one of the highest CG→P equal to 0.996. At the
same time, CP →G = 0.740, which means that a significant part of the tracing does not
correspond to the ground truth data. It resulted in OV = 0.792, which is lower than
the average for the whole test set. The visualization indicates that, in reality, almost
all predicted centerlines correspond to the coronary arteries visible in the scan, sug-
gesting that the low CP →G and OV values might be due to the segmentation quality,
not the algorithm’s performance itself. In (C), we can see LCA with high complex-
ity structure and tortuous branches. In that case, CG→P = 0.901, CP →G = 0.805,
and OV = 0.824. This example shows that the algorithm’s performance is highly
satisfactory in non trivial cases as well.
Figure 6.22: Centerlines (blue lines) predicted using SphereMomentum algorithm
overlayed on the 3D rendering of a heart volume. (A) shows exam-
ple with highest CG→P , (B) with high CG→P and considerably lower
CP →G, (C) shows algorithm’s performance for a complicated tree struc-
ture with high tortuosity branches.
The visual assessment showed that the algorithm was able to find both LAD and
LCX branches in 144 (89.44%) images in the test set, while in 8 (5%) only LAD was
found, and in 5 (3.1%) only LCX. It managed to find at least one of these branches
in 157 (97.52%) scans. For 3 images OV = 0.
All things considered, even though the performance of the analysed algorithms seems
to be quite similar based on the evaluation metrics, after a closer look we decided that
SphereMomentum slightly outperforms other configurations. It is able to capture the
biggest fraction of ground truth LCA, and even though it does not have the highest
CP →G and OV, it is probably caused by the quality of the dataset. Keeping in mind
the inaccuracies of evaluation metrics caused by data quality issues we supported our
judgment with visual analysis, finally deciding to use SphereMomentum for the final
==PAGE:77==
6.7 Copenhagen General Population Study
65
part of tracing algorithm analysis, i.e. evaluating its generalization abilities on a new
dataset.
6.7
Copenhagen General Population Study
Due to the fact that the CGPS data is associated only with coronary arteries segmen-
tation and starting points of LCA extracted as described in section 5.1, it was only
possible to conduct a qualitative evaluation of the model’s performance. To this end,
we analysed visualizations of tracked centerlines on top of the LCA segmentations.
We manually identified LAD and LCX branches for each scan, and decided to use
the algorithm’s ability to trace LAD and LCX as the main evaluation criterium. Out
of 939 scans, both LAD and LCX were found in 728 (77.5%) images. In 48 (5.1%)
scans only LAD was detected, and in 99 (10.5%) only LCX. In total, in 875 scans at
least one of those branches was found (93%)). In the rest of the images, LAD and
LCX were traced only partially, thus they were not classified as successful tracing.
Based on the visual inspection, for 722 (76.95%) scans almost entire coronary tree
was traced, meaning that the centerlines covered either the entire segmentation, or
only some very small subbranches were missed. For 12 images OV = 0, meaning that
none of the coronary tree was traced. In 42 scans traced centerline was very short,
reaching only the first bifurcation point or terminating even earlier.
Figure 6.23 shows examples of successful (in terms of finding LAD and LCX) tracing
on top of the LCA segmentation. It can be seen that the algorithm is capable of
tracing the LCA both for relatively simple tree structures (top row), as well as more
complicated ones (bottom row). Its performance is highly satisfactory for branches
of high tortuosity, showing that the model can capture even most complex branches.
In some cases, more branches were traced than the segmentation indicates (image
id: 0113). At the same time, the very beginnings of those branches are included in
the segmentation, suggesting that algorithm’s predictions might be correct, and the
issue lies in the quality of the dataset. For most of the scans were tracing of LAD
and LCX was successful, predicted centerlines terminated far away from the end of
the segmentation. Due to the limited access to the scans themselves, it was diﬀicult
to assess if this is due to incorrect segmentation, or if the terminating conditions
formulated based on ImageCAS do not adapt well to the new dataset and some
improvements would be required. Nevertheless, it is once again worth noting that
tracing too far away is less harmful than stopping too early.
Overall, the algorithm proposed in this project seems to be capable of generalizing
well to the new dataset. A more in-depth assessment including raw 3D scans could
reveal more about the algorithm’s true performance. The analysis also lacks a quan-
titative evaluation, which was not possible due to lack of ground truth centerlines
extraction. Nonetheless, the visual inspection shows that the results are promising
and the algorithm can be successfully used on data acquired with a different scanner
compared to one used in ImageCAS data, on which the method was trained.
==PAGE:78==
66
6 Results
Figure 6.23: Examples of tracing on CGPS dataset. In black, traced centerlines are
showed. In pink - ground truth segmentations of LCA. Top row shows
examples of coronary trees with relatively simple structure, whereas
bottom row includes examples of tree with more subbranches and
higher tortuosity.
6.8
Phenotype clustering
As the secondary aim of this project, we performed an analysis aimed at discovering
morphological phenotypes based on LMCA fragments of coronary arteries of patients
included in ImageCAS dataset.
After cleaning the dataset and removing outliers, our sample consisted of 693 samples.
As described in section 5.9, for each sample 9 features related to length of LM, radius
and branch angles were calculated and a hierarchical clustering using Ward’s method
has been performed.
==PAGE:79==
6.8 Phenotype clustering
67
(a) Dendrogram
(b) Silhouette score
Figure 6.24: On the left, dendrogram showing division of samples between hierar-
chical clusters.
Distance between each clusters has been shown on
y-axis. On the right, silhouette score for different numbers of clusters.
Results in figure 6.24 indicate that the optimal number of clusters lies somewhere
between 2 and 4. Following the silhouette score and exploration of results we decided
to split our samples among 3 phenotype clusters.
Wang et al.
[17] discovered 4
phenotype groups which arguably could also be chosen in our case, however, after
deeper investigation we noticed that the additional split of one of the clusters does
not seem to produce more diverse results in our dataset. The 3 cluster split gives a
fairly equally distributed phenotype groups which can be observed on the dendrogram
in 6.24 by the division of samples along the x-axis.
==PAGE:80==
68
6 Results
Figure 6.25: Box-plots of all features calculated separately for samples in each clus-
ter.
Phenotype groups have their unique characteristics as indicated by figure 6.25. Second
(orange) cluster includes samples with the longest Euclidean and geodesic distances
along with the highest tortuosity. On the other end, the first cluster (blue) consists
of patients with the shortest and least tortuous LMs, at the same time having the
highest ratios of radii. The third cluster’s (green) uniqueness lies mainly in angles
between the two branches and between each of the branch and LM as those patients
tend to have the most spread out branches.
==PAGE:81==
6.8 Phenotype clustering
69
(a) Phenotype 1
(b) Phenotype 2
(c) Phenotype 3
Figure 6.26: LM fragments for most representative samples of each phenotype found
by minimal distance to averages across all features.
==PAGE:82==
70
6 Results
The findings from quantitative analysis of clusters are also reflected in figure 6.26.
The presented samples are the most representative for their respective phenotypes
having the minimal distance to the cluster average across all features.
Observations within each phenotype group appear to have distinctive traits related to
their shape and size. Phenotype 1 cases are short and have branches almost as thick
as the LMs. Those presented in figure 6.26 have both euclidean and geodesic distances
of around 7 mm and both φLAD/φLM and φLCX/φLM of around 0.9. Phenotype 2 is
clearly elongated and curved. Presented samples measure from 11 to 13 mm and have
the highest tortuosity of above 1.08. Phenotype 3 patients stand out with high values
of αLAD-LCX. The angle for the samples presented in the figure measures around 90
degrees but for some cases within the cluster can reach even to 120 degrees.
Even with relatively few features, patients’ LMs can be divided into groups of unique
characteristics.
Those unique characteristics are the ones that were found to be
associated to certain health risks. Short LMs, represented by phenotype 1, are often
associated with CAD. What is more, short LMs are linked to higher risk of proximal
plaque formation, increasing the severity of a disease [37]. High tortuosity arteries
(phenotype 2) are of increased risk of developing plaques.
According to research,
segments of LCA with plaque were on average 30.8% more tortuous than others [38].
As for phenotype 3 with the largest bifurcation angles, they are attributed to the lower
risk of proximal plaque formation in LAD and LCX branches [39]. In the research,
small branch angles were linked to high risk of proximal atherosclerotic disease in
LAD and LCX, with stronger correlation in LCX.
Our results show that by calculating few relatively simple metrics based on the center-
line and radius of the coronary artery we can divide patients into phenotype groups
and mark those with an increased risk of forming a plaque. Together with the artery
tracer, this could serve as a tool to support various types of research aimed at under-
standing the risk of cardiovascular diseases, or as a solution for use in clinical settings
to automatically identify patients at risk of developing stenoses.
==PAGE:83==
CHAPTER 7
Discussion
7.1
Centerline tracer
The centerline tracer’s goal is to predict a direction d in which the tracer should follow
being placed in a current location. It is guided by a direction score quality function
(eq. 5.5) that encourages the tracer to follow the centerline in a direction of a blood
flow, while staying close to it. The choice of model architecture has already been
proven effective in previous works [13], with the size of the input image patch of 41
x 41 x 41 voxels being large enough to cover the entire coronary artery cross-section
and its immediate surroundings.
The centerline tracer network achieved an average weighted accuracy of 0.87 both
for onset and offset points (figure 6.1), manifesting its strong performance. As the
weighted accuracy measure is based on a cosine similarity, it takes into account not
only the correct predictions, but also close matches. Thus, its high value might be
influenced by having a lot of predictions close to the true directions, but not equal.
The distribution of weighted accuracies for both onset and offset points is similar in
shape, but quite wider for the onset points. As the direction score function shows
(eq. 5.5), the focus for offset points is mostly put on reducing their distance to the
centerline, while for onset points, apart from staying close to centerline, the new
locations have to follow the centerline in the blood flow direction. It suggests that
the task of staying close to the centerline might be slightly easier than following it in
the specified direction.
Visual inspection of centerline tracer (figure 6.2) allowed to capture its limitations.
Branch points were one of the areas where the weighted accuracies were visibly lower
than in the other parts of the coronary tree. It is in line with intuition, as in the
branch points there are two (or more) paths to follow, and choosing the one that
does not correspond to ground truth results in low weighted accuracy, even though
the tracer would still follow the centerline correctly. The tracer’s performance is also
highly influenced by data quality. As shown in figure 6.2, an example of coronary tree
with lowest weighted accuracy suffers from anatomical implausibility, where one of
the branches makes a sudden turn upwards, showcasing problems with ground truth
segmentation. Points on the mentioned branch have very poor accuracy, deflating the
overall score achieved for the test set.
The reverse centerline tracer displays comparable results to the regular one, and is
suffering from the same limitations.
==PAGE:84==
72
7 Discussion
7.2
Branch point detector
The branch detector model is responsible for identifying branch points on the already
traced centerline of the coronary artery tree. The implemented version is capable of
identifying bifurcation points with the recall of 0.84 (table 6.1). The true performance
of the model is diﬀicult to evaluate accurately due to segmentation data quality issues
often leading to incorrect positioning of ground truth bifurcations (figure 6.3). This is,
in turn, reflected by the inflated false negative count. The model tends to frequently
produce false positive predictions with only around 61% of its positive predictions
being correct. This, however, is not troublesome as it most often means additional
computational time of tracing in quickly terminated areas. Beyond the quantitative
assessment, we observed in our qualitative evaluation that the room for improvement
is not necessarily in the ability to detect that there is a branch point in a particular
area, but rather the exact positioning of the bifurcation point. All in all, the model
is adequate which is also reflected by the results of the whole tracing algorithm.
7.3
Artery radius estimator
Artery radius estimator is a model predicting a radius of coronary artery at a given
location. Its performance is very strong, with the distribution of differences between
true and estimated radii being centred around zero (figure 6.4). The distribution of
predicted radii is similar to the distribution of the ground truth, but it is clear that
the model has issues with correctly estimating the lowest values of up to around 0.75
mm. The input patch, similarly as in previous models, has size of 41 x 41 x 41 voxels,
corresponding to 20.5 x 20.5 x 20.5 mm in physical dimensions. It means that the
parts of coronary arteries with lowest radii correspond to relatively small areas of
the image patch, making it diﬀicult for the model to detect appropriate patterns in
the scans. Experimenting with different input sizes, or creating an ensemble model
combining a few networks with different input sizes, could help guide the solution to
capture different level of details in the scans and produce better results.
An important limitation of the radius estimator is the data it has been trained on.
As described in section 5.1, the ground truth radii correspond to radii of maximum
inscribed spheres centred on each point of the centerline. The maximum inscribed
spheres were created based on the dilated segmentation, as the algorithm used for
centerline extraction (and thus, the spheres) was not accurate enough in very narrow
regions of arteries. It means that the ground truth data does not correspond precisely
to the true artery morphology, making the solution too faulty for the potential clinical
use. At the same time, since in this project radius estimator is mainly used for finding
starting points of branches in the coronary tree, its performance is highly satisfactory,
regardless of the ground truth data.
==PAGE:85==
7.4 Artery likelihood estimator
73
7.4
Artery likelihood estimator
The artery estimator is a model tasked to predict the likelihood of a point located in
3D image space laying inside the coronary artery. The estimator is utilized in tracer’s
terminating conditions and in branch spawning to indicate the tracing directions at
bifurcation points.
The model achieved an impressive performance with the accuracy of 0.89 and AUC
score of 0.962 as shown in figure 6.7. The model showed strong capability of indicating
when the tracer state is no longer inside the artery. With the 11% misclassification
cases there is an advantage of false positive over false negative cases with the latter
happening for only 4.3% predictions. From the standpoint of terminating conditions,
falsely predicting that the state is within the artery is less harmful than incorrectly
predicting it to be outside while it is, in fact, still inside. The former would cause
tracer to wander away from the artery, in worst case scenario resulting in falsely
tracked parts of the artery tree. The latter, on the other hand, could cause the tracer
to terminate too early, potentially missing out on parts of the true artery. It is worth
mentioning that the above results are based on the predictive threshold of 0.5. In
the final implementation of the estimator in terminating conditions we are using the
likelihood itself, not the binary prediction, to evaluate whether the tracer should stop.
Furthermore, the condition is evaluated based on the average of last three steps and
the average likelihood needs to fall below 0.25 to enforce stopping of the tracer. This
way the algorithm is even less likely to be terminated too soon.
Figure 6.8 shows that there is a strong relationship between predictions and distance
to the centerline. The histograms created for both ground truth labels and predicted
ones are almost identical, showing how well the estimator handles predictions on the
test dataset. The models outputs mostly positive predictions for distance up to 2
mm to the closest point on the centerline, making it consistent with the results from
figure 6.4 and human anatomy [66]. The negative predictions tend to happen close
to the centerline, however, this can be attributed to the most distal segments of the
coronary tree where the artery becomes thinner. It can also be attributed to the fact
that offset points sampled from the end points, while laying close to the centerline,
were outside of the LCA.
Finally, the model performs consistently across all the images included in the test
dataset with the accuracy of 99% central observations contained within 0.845 and
0.921. It is also consistent across the entire coronary artery tree, showing no dif-
ficulties at branch points or in the more distal segments.
The results showed no
concerns regarding the suitability for the respective use cases within the algorithm.
It serves as a highly appropriate model for both likelihood-sphere-based spawning
and terminating conditions.
==PAGE:86==
74
7 Discussion
7.5
Coronary tree tracing algorithm
7.5.1
Direction-score-based branch spawning
Direction-score-based branch spawning is an explorative method that compares mul-
tiple paths starting in a detected branch point based on the accumulated direction
quality score. To be precise, we explore 50 potential paths in the directions defined
by a Fibonacci sphere.
In ImageCAS, the algorithm managed to capture a vast majority of the ground truth
centerlines, as suggested by CG→P (figure 6.10). It is important to remember that
the branch spawning procedures should not be evaluated in isolation from the branch
detector performance. Any false negative produced by branch detector harms the
final performance score, as it makes it impossible to find any new paths in the false
negative area. What is more, we sometimes observed that the predicted branch points
were offset from the true location towards one of the branches. As the set of exploring
directions is created based on the branch point location, the quality and presence of
the new paths is highly influenced by it.
The results show high coverage and overlap values. However, the method is based
on a wide set of heuristics, including specific rules for filtering path candidates. This
poses a risk of the solution potential inability to generalize to new datasets, and
puts into question possibility of further usage in the clinical or research setup. Even
though the set of heuristics was developed on ImageCAS data, in many cases it
was still insuﬀicient for filtering out the path candidates (figure 6.11). For multiple
scans it caused issues with having tracked multiple paths around the branch points,
that were often quite offset from the middle of the coronary artery (sometimes even
going beyond the artery segmentation), and only after a while they united into one
centerline.
Taking it all into account, the algorithm using direction-score-based branch spawning
seems to produce satisfactory results on ImageCAS, but it suffers from multiple issues
related to its explorative nature and heuristic-based approach, showing the need for
a more robust and flexible algorithm.
7.5.2
Likelihood-sphere-based branch spawning
The second branch spawning method we explored was based on the likelihood sphere
created using the artery likelihood estimator model.
This approach creates a 3D
sphere with the artery likelihood heatmap around the bifurcation point and fits the
vMF model to indicate the tracing directions.
We confirmed visually that the likelihood sphere built around the branch points re-
flects the artery segmentation making it suitable for indicating the directions (figure
6.12).
The task of establishing tracing directions based on the created likelihood
sphere was solved using a mixture of von Mises-Fisher distributions (eq. 5.10), suit-
==PAGE:87==
7.5 Coronary tree tracing algorithm
75
able for 3D spherical likelihood, which we decided to fit using least-squares numerical
optimization.
The k-Nearest Neighbors approach was the final method used for initialization. Other
approaches, such as random initialization, or energy-based initialization, suffered from
varied quality of outputs. Apart from making the results deterministic, kNN resolved
the problem of establishing how many directions should be found. This technique
requires the tuning of number of neighbours and local maxima acceptance threshold.
We tested a few combinations described in table 6.2 to finally choose Model C con-
figuration with 25 neighbours and threshold of 0.65 striking a compromise between
missed and overestimated directions.
With the implementation of this configuration the final tracing algorithm achieved an
OV of 0.827 and a CG→P of 0.81. The model was also consistent among all the test
images as indicated by figure 6.15. After qualitative assessment we found out that
the likelihood-sphere-based method rarely misses a tracing direction. The cases with
missing directions where mostly associated with segmentation issues. Although there
were very few cases where the spawning itself was underperforming, we noticed that
the method relies on the branch detector’s ability to indicate the exact placement
of the bifurcation point. In some cases where the predicted branch point is offset
towards one of the branches, the created spherical likelihood map does not reflect the
branching structure well enough for the method to correctly indicate directions. It
should also be emphasized that although all the networks have been trained using
training and validation datasets, some heuristics of the algorithm were tuned on the
testing dataset possibly making the performance subtly biased.
A very frequent reason for tracing termination was the tracer’s oscillations. Thus, we
implemented a momentum procedure along with the most favourable configuration of
the algorithm - Sphere (table 6.3). The momentum helps guide the tracer out of the
problematic areas. It increased CG→P from 0.810 to 0.837, helping to cover larger
parts of ground true centerlines. Even though CP →G decreased from 0.854 to 0.816
due to the fact that tracing was often terminating further than the ground truth seg-
mentation, CPR visualizations showed presence of the coronary arteries (figure 6.18)
in the alleged false positive. It suggests that the performance of the algorithm might
be better than demonstrated by the evaluation metrics. The momentum algorithm
is based on a direction between a point visited right before entering the loop, and a
point visited 5 steps earlier. The characteristics of this path segment, such as tortu-
osity or curvature, are not taken into account. It means that, when the oscillations
happen in the location where the artery bends, a calculated direction might be not
accurate enough, causing the tracer to leave the artery region and terminate due
to low artery likelihood. A more robust way of calculating the momentum, taking
the aforementioned features into account, could potentially make the algorithm even
more eﬀicient.
The design of the coronary tracing algorithm suffers from one significant limitation:
there are empty gaps between detected branch points and starting points of new
==PAGE:88==
76
7 Discussion
paths.
To solve this issue, we tried implementing a reverse tracing algorithm, in
which the reverse tracer would start from the end points of branches found with a
regular tracing, and proceeded in the direction opposite to blood flow. Unfortunately,
that resulted in entire branches not being covered due to the tracer terminating very
early (figure 6.20). At the same time, for branches that the algorithm managed to
cover, it showed its excellent abilities in stitching up previously disconnected parts
of LCA. Nevertheless, the reverse tracing is not adequate enough in its current state.
A potential improvement would be to modify the reverse tracing so that it starts
its course e.g.
from midpoints of each branch and combine the results of regular
and reverse tracing together. Another idea would be to apply an adjusted version of
momentum to aid the tracer in the troublesome areas. Resolving this issue was not
crucial for the purposes of this project but should this algorithm be employed in e.g.
clinical setup it would need to be addressed.
A possible addition to the solution proposed in this project would be to apply ap-
propriate post-processing to smooth out the tracked centerlines. The outputs of the
algorithm in their raw form wander a bit around the true centerlines, influencing the
results. An example of that can be seen in CPR visualizations in figure 6.18. Any
further research using the method proposed in this project could arguably benefit
from this additional post-processing step.
It is important to consider that our algorithm has been trained on ImageCAS dataset
which, even in the curated version, still suffers from data quality issues. Despite that,
the proposed algorithm is capable of delivering solid results on unseen CGPS dataset,
where it detected at least one of LAD and LCX branches in 93% of scans (comparing
to 97.52% in ImageCAS). The results for CGPS data are sligthly worse than for
ImageCAS. IT is worth noting that CGPS dataset consisted of 939 scans, potentially
including a bit more variability in LCA stuctures than in case of ImageCAS test set
of 162 scans. The proposed method is not free from heuristics that were tuned out on
ImageCAS scans, and might not adapt perfectly to CGPS. Replacing heuristic-based
approaches with more robust solutions could increase the algorithm’s flexibility even
more. It would be worthwhile to see how the algorithm performs when trained on a
high quality data, not suffering from significant segmentation errors.
7.5.3
Comparison to state-of-the-art methods
For the final tracing algorithm we have chosen the one utilizing likelihood-sphere-
based branch spawning, momentum and terminating conditions based on the artery
likelihood.
Our method requires only a starting point of the coronary artery to
track the whole LCA. The employed spawning allows for eﬀicient finding of tracing
directions with limited heuristics and without unnecessary tracer’s exploration. The
momentum helps the tracer progress through the narrow fragments of the artery
resulting in higher percentage of detected ground truth arteries. The terminating
conditions based on the artery likelihood make for a robust indicator of when the
tracer should be stopped.
==PAGE:89==
7.6 Phenotype clustering
77
The method achieves an OV of 0.812, CG−>P of 0.837 and AI of 0.097 evaluated on
162 images from ImageCAS dataset [2]. The achieved OV is slightly lower than the
ones registered by the best state-of-the-art models (table 2.1). However, a lot of those
algorithms were tested on a limited number of images, sometimes as few as 8. The AI
of our solution is much lower than any of the state-of-the-art methods achieved. None
of those methods reached AI lower than 0.21 mm, which makes the tracing accuracy
of our algorithm stand out. Moreover, unlike in our project, many studies [11, 12]
evaluate their result on the CAT08 dataset [63] which provides separate segmentation
for LAD, RCA and LCX. Therefore, the metrics are calculated based solely on these
parts of the coronary artery and do not reflect the capabilities of tracing the whole
LCA.
Another strength of our approach lays in the terminating conditions. Some state-
of-the-art methods [11, 13] terminate the tracer based on the uncertainty of the
tracer network. This solution, even though often effective, may sometimes behave
unexpectedly as the fact that the tracer network is uncertain does not necessarily
mean that the branch is ending. Our terminating conditions are based on a tailor-
made artery estimator tasked precisely with indicating when the tracer moves out of
the artery.
Lastly, our algorithm proposes a novel branch spawning technique which is not reliant
on explorative approach as is the case with other solutions [11, 12].
The tracing
directions approximated by the model eliminate the need for exploring and later
filtering potential branching candidates. Furthermore, our method does not rely on
HU values unlike other approaches [13] when selecting the tracing path at bifurcation
points. Instead, it utilizes the likelihood map built using the artery estimator. Using
HU values to filter path candidates can mislead the tracer by choosing the paths going
through the stenosis fragments as those disrupt the average HU calculation.
7.6
Phenotype clustering
On top of proposing the algorithm for tracing coronary artery, we employed a clus-
tering method aimed at uncovering phenotypes of coronary artery tree morphology.
With the use of hierarchical clustering applied on LM fragments, we found that the
patients are best split between three phenotypes. Each phenotype has its own char-
acteristics reflected in figures 6.25 and 6.26. The unique morphology of each type is
linked to the risk of developing plaques.
Our results differ slightly from the ones presented by Wang et al., [17] where four
clusters were found instead of three. The diverging number of clusters and slightly
different profile of each phenotype might come from various factors such as the use of
different dataset, inclusion of angle between coronary artery and the aorta, or optimal
model selection method.
Nevertheless, our findings also confirm that by making
several relatively simple measurements based on the centerline positioning and artery
radius one can identify patients with increased risk of suffering from atherosclerosis.
==PAGE:90==
78
7 Discussion
The scope of the analysis could also be expanded by including more parts of the
coronary artery, or even the full tree.
The proposed solution, especially combined with the tracing algorithm, has the poten-
tial to automatically mark high risk patients based on the CCTA scan. When applied
in a clinical setup, quicker identification of increased risk factors can support early
intervention and prevent illness development [4]. The phenotype detection method
can also be employed as a supporting tool in research of risk factors in cardiovascular
diseases. Being able to label patients according to their phenotype could potentially
shed a new light on which factors influence the likelihood of progression of CAD [8,
5].
==PAGE:91==
CHAPTER 8
Conclusion
In this study we have proposed an algorithm capable of tracing the left coronary trees
based on CCTA scan and root point at the cross-section of LCA with the aorta. The
method utilizes four neural network models combined into one final tracing algorithm.
The tracer CNN network is the main part responsible for guiding the tracer through
the scan using a concept of direction quality score. The branch detector is tasked with
identifying bifurcation points so that the tracer can be restarted to follow another
branch. The radius estimator is a supporting model tasked with evaluating the radius
of the coronary artery, while the artery estimator network is designed to predict the
likelihood of a point laying inside the artery.
On top of all the models a concept of likelihood-sphere-based spawning has been
introduced. This solution uses the artery and radius estimator models to scan the
space around the branch point to create a likelihood map of correct tracing directions.
The directions are approximated by utilizing the von Mises-Fisher modelling approach.
Additionally, the algorithm employs a concept of momentum allowing for progressing
through narrow fragments of the artery and robust terminating conditions based on
artery likelihood.
The algorithm achieved highly satisfactory results recording an OV = 0.812, CG−>P =
0.837 and AI = 0.097 mm. Our solution is capable of accurately detecting a substan-
tial part of the whole coronary artery tree by using a single seed point at the root of the
tree. The robustness of the results was proven with the deployment on CGPS dataset
where the algorithm successfully detected at least one of LAD and LCX branches in
93% cases. Our approach stands out among the state-of-the-art solutions with the
novel branch spawning approach based on the likelihood sphere, resilient terminating
condition solution and momentum employed to detect arteries in diﬀicult, narrow
fragments.
On top of tracing algorithm, this study also proposes framework for deriving pheno-
types based on the morphology of LMCA fragments. The phenotypes’ characteristics
are successfully linked to the risk factors of developing plaques.
Both of these solutions have the potential to be used either in clinical setup to aid
early intervention and prevention of the CAD illnesses, or in research field as a com-
plementary tools extending the scope of studies.
==PAGE:92==
80
==PAGE:93==
Bibliography
[1]
Jakob Wasserthal, Hanns-Christian Breit, Manfred T. Meyer, Maurice Pradella,
Daniel Hinck, Alexander W. Sauter, Tobias Heye, Daniel T. Boll, Joshy Cyriac,
Shan Yang, Michael Bach, and Martin Segeroth. “TotalSegmentator: Robust
Segmentation of 104 Anatomic Structures in CT Images.” In: Radiology: Arti-
ficial Intelligence 5.5 (2023), e230024. doi: https://doi.org/10.1148/ryai
.230024.
[2]
An Zeng, Chunbiao Wu, Guisen Lin, Wen Xie, Jin Hong, Meiping Huang, Jian
Zhuang, Shanshan Bi, Dan Pan, Najeeb Ullah, Kaleem Nawaz Khan, Tianchen
Wang, Yiyu Shi, Xiaomeng Li, and Xiaowei Xu. “ImageCAS: A large-scale
dataset and benchmark for coronary artery segmentation based on computed to-
mography angiography images.” In: Computerized Medical Imaging and Graph-
ics 109 (2023), page 102287. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compmedimag
.2023.102287.
[3]
Lee Nedkoff, Tom Briffa, Dawit Zemedikun, Saranne Herrington, and F. Lucy
Wright. “Global Trends in Atherosclerotic Cardiovascular Disease.” In: Clinical
Therapeutics 45.11 (2023), pages 1087–1091. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j
.clinthera.2023.09.020.
[4]
Rikke V. Nielsen, Valentin Fuster, Henning Bundgaard, Jose J. Fuster, Amer
M. Johri, Klaus F. Kofoed, Pamela S. Douglas, Axel Diederichsen, Michael D.
Shapiro, Stephen J. Nicholls, Børge G. Nordestgaard, Jes S. Lindholt, Calum
MacRae, Chun Yuan, David E. Newby, Elaine M. Urbina, Göran Bergström,
Martin Ridderstråle, Matthew J. Budoff, Morten Bøttcher, Olli T. Raitakari,
Thomas H. Hansen, Ulf Näslund, Henrik Sillesen, Nikolaj Eldrup, and Borja
Ibanez. “Personalized Intervention Based on Early Detection of Atherosclero-
sis: JACC State-of-the-Art Review.” In: Journal of the American College of
Cardiology 83.21 (2024), pages 2112–2127. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j
.jacc.2024.02.053.
[5]
Andreas Fuchs, Jannick T. Kühl, Peter E. Sigvardsen, Shoaib Afzal, Andreas
D. Knudsen, Morten B. Møller, Martina C. de Knegt, Mathias H. Sørgaard,
Børge G. Nordestgaard, Lars V. Køber, and Klaus F. Kofoed. “Subclinical Coro-
nary Atherosclerosis and Risk for Myocardial Infarction in a Danish Cohort: A
Prospective Observational Cohort Study.” In: Annals of Internal Medicine 176.4
(April 2023), pages 433–442. doi: https://doi.org/10.7326/M22-3027.
[6]
Reza Gharleghi, Ning Chen, Arcot Sowmya, and Sebastian Beier. “Towards
automated coronary artery segmentation: A systematic review.” In: Computer
Methods and Programs in Biomedicine 225 (October 2022), page 107015. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cmpb.2022.107015.
==PAGE:94==
82
Bibliography
[7]
Sung Nok Lee, Alexander Lin, Damini Dey, Daniel S. Berman, and Deokwon
Han. “Application of Quantitative Assessment of Coronary Atherosclerosis by
Coronary Computed Tomographic Angiography.” In: Korean Journal of Radi-
ology 25.6 (June 2024), pages 518–539. doi: https://doi.org/10.3348/kjr
.2023.1311.
[8]
Andrew Lin, Nipun Manral, Priscilla McElhinney, Aditya Killekar, Hidenari
Matsumoto, Jacek Kwiecinski, Konrad Pieszko, Aryabod Razipour, Kajetan
Grodecki, Caroline Park, Yuka Otaki, Mhairi Doris, Alan C. Kwan, Donghee
Han, Keiichiro Kuronuma, Guadalupe Flores Tomasino, Evangelos Tzolos, Aakash
Shanbhag, Markus Goeller, Mohamed Marwan, Heidi Gransar, Balaji K. Tama-
rappoo, Sebastien Cadet, Stephan Achenbach, Stephen J. Nicholls, Dennis T.
Wong, Daniel S. Berman, Marc Dweck, David E. Newby, Michelle C. Williams,
Piotr J. Slomka, and Damini Dey. “Deep learning-enabled coronary CT an-
giography for plaque and stenosis quantification and cardiac risk prediction:
an international multicentre study.” In: The Lancet Digital Health 4.4 (2022),
e256–e265. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/S2589-7500(22)00022-X.
[9]
Onno Wink, Alejandro F. Frangi, Bert Verdonck, Max A. Viergever, and Wiro
J. Niessen. “3D MRA coronary axis determination using a minimum cost path
approach.” In: Magnetic Resonance in Medicine 47.6 (2002), pages 1169–1175.
doi: https://doi.org/10.1002/mrm.10164.
[10]
Karl Krissian, Hrvoje Bogunović, Jose Pozo, Maria-Cruz Villa-Uriol, and Ale-
jandro Frangi. “Minimally Interactive Knowledge-based Coronary Tracking in
CTA using a Minimal Cost Path.” In: The MIDAS Journal (July 2008). doi:
https://doi.org/10.54294/b6ilok.
[11]
Jelmer M. Wolterink, Robbert W. van Hamersvelt, Max A. Viergever, Tim
Leiner, and Ivana Išgum. “Coronary artery centerline extraction in cardiac
CT angiography using a CNN-based orientation classifier.” In: Medical Image
Analysis 51 (2018), pages 46–60. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.media
.2018.10.005.
[12]
Matteo Leccardi, Marco Paracchini, Luca Mainardi, and Pietro Cerveri. “Deep
Learning Coronary Artery Centerlines Mapping from Contrast-Enhanced CT
Images of the Heart.” In: 2023 IEEE International Conference on Metrology
for eXtended Reality, Artificial Intelligence and Neural Engineering (MetroX-
RAINE). October 2023, pages 22–27. doi: https://doi.org/10.1109/Metro
XRAINE58569.2023.10405817.
[13]
Ana-Teodora Radutoiu. “Automatic Coronary Artery Centerline Extraction.”
Master’s thesis. Kongens Lyngby, Denmark: Technical University of Denmark,
February 2025.
[14]
Yuyang Zhang, Gongning Luo, Wei Wang, and Kuanquan Wang. “Branch-
Aware Double DQN for Centerline Extraction in Coronary CT Angiography.” In:
International Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted
==PAGE:95==
Bibliography
83
Intervention. September 2020, pages 35–44. doi: https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-030-59725-2_4.
[15]
Zhuowei Li, Qing Xia, Zhiqiang Hu, Wenji Wang, Lijian Xu, and Shaoting
Zhang. “A Deep Reinforced Tree-Traversal Agent for Coronary Artery Center-
line Extraction.” In: Medical Image Computing and Computer Assisted Inter-
vention – MICCAI 2021. Edited by Marleen de Bruijne, Philippe C. Cattin,
Stéphane Cotin, Nicolas Padoy, Stefanie Speidel, Yefeng Zheng, and Caroline
Essert. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2021, pages 418–428. doi: ht
tps://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-87240-3_40.
[16]
Dieuwertje Alblas, Julian Suk, Christoph Brune, Kak Khee Yeung, and Jelmer
M. Wolterink. “SIRE: Scale-invariant, rotation-equivariant estimation of artery
orientations using graph neural networks.” In: Medical Image Analysis 101
(2025). doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.media.2025.103467.
[17]
Qi Wang, Hua Ouyang, Lei Lv, Long Gui, Songran Yang, and Ping Hua. “Left
main coronary artery morphological phenotypes and its hemodynamic proper-
ties.” In: Biomedical Engineering Online 23.1 (2024). Published 2024 Jan 22,
page 9. doi: https://doi.org/10.1186/s12938-024-01205-3.
[18]
Anthony J. Weinhaus. “Anatomy of the Human Heart.” In: Handbook of Cardiac
Anatomy, Physiology, and Devices. Edited by Paul A. Iaizzo. Cham: Springer
Nature Switzerland, 2024, pages 51–77. doi: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-
3-031-72581-4_4.
[19]
Syed Shah, Gopinath Gnanasegaran, Jeanette Sundberg-Cohon, and John R.
Buscombe. “The Heart: Anatomy, Physiology and Exercise Physiology.” In:
Integrating Cardiology for Nuclear Medicine Physicians: A Guide to Nuclear
Medicine Physicians. Edited by Assad Movahed, Gopinath Gnanasegaran, John
Buscombe, and Margaret Hall. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg,
2009, pages 3–22. doi: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-78674-0_1.
[20]
Connie Rye, Robert Wise, Vladimir Jurukovski, Jean DeSaix, Jung Choi, and
Yael Avissar. “Mammalian Heart and Blood Vessels.” In: Biology. Houston,
Texas: OpenStax, 2016. Chapter 40.3. url: https://openstax.org/books
/biology/pages/40-3-mammalian-heart-and-blood-vessels.
[21]
J. Gordon Betts, Kelly A. Young, James A. Wise, Eddie Johnson, Dean H. Kruse
Brandon Poe, Oksana Korol, Jody E. Johnson, Mark Womble, and Peter DeSaix.
“Anatomy and Physiology.” In: Houston, Texas: OpenStax, 2013. Chapter 19.
url: https://openstax.org/books/anatomy-and-physiology/pages/1-in
troduction.
[22]
Liang Zhong, Ru San Tan, and Dhanjoo N. Ghista. “Anatomy and Physiology
of the Heart.” In: Computational and Mathematical Methods in Cardiovascular
Physiology. World Scientific, 2019. Chapter 1, pages 3–37. doi: https://doi.o
rg/10.1142/9789813270640_0001.
==PAGE:96==
84
Bibliography
[23]
Wapcaplet. Diagram of the human heart. This work is licensed under the Cre-
ative Commons Attribution Share-Alike 3.0 license. To view a copy of this
license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by- sa/3.0/. Last
accessed on 10-02-2025. 2006. url: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/F
ile%3aLambdaPlaques.jpg.
[24]
Amanda N. DeVos, Julianne H. Spencer, Sara E. Anderson, and Paul A. Iaizzo.
“The Coronary Vascular System and Associated Anatomical Features.” In: Hand-
book of Cardiac Anatomy, Physiology, and Devices. Edited by Paul A. Iaizzo.
Cham: Springer Nature Switzerland, 2024, pages 177–201. doi: https://doi
.org/10.1007/978-3-031-72581-4_10.
[25]
James O’Brien, Monvadi Srichai, Elizabeth Hecht, Danny Kim, and Jill Jacobs.
“Anatomy of the Heart at Multidetector CT: What the Radiologist Needs to
Know.” In: Radiographics : a review publication of the Radiological Society of
North America, Inc 27 (November 2007), pages 1569–82. doi: https://doi.o
rg/10.1148/rg.276065747.
[26]
Ratna Gajurel. “Dimensions of Normal Coronary Arteries in a Tertiary Cardiac
Center Kathmandu.” In: 45 (July 2024), pages 31–35. doi: https://doi.org
/10.59779/jiomnepal.1276.
[27]
Patrick J. Lynch, Fred the Oyster, and M.D. Mikael Häggström. Coronary
arteries and their branches. This work is licensed under the Creative Commons
Attribution Share-Alike 3.0 license. To view a copy of this license, visit http:
//creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/. Last accessed on 13-02-2025.
2010. url: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Coronary_arterie
s.svg.
[28]
Sally P. Allwork. “The applied anatomy of the arterial blood supply to the heart
in man.” In: Journal of anatomy 153 (1987), page 1.
[29]
Margaret Lindstrom, Nicholas DeCleene, Hannah Dorsey, Valentin Fuster, Christo-
pher O. Johnson, Katherine E. LeGrand, George A. Mensah, Carlos Razo, Ben-
jamin Stark, Julia Varieur Turco, and Gregory A. Roth. “Global Burden of
Cardiovascular Diseases and Risks Collaboration, 1990-2021.” In: Journal of
the American College of Cardiology 80.25 (December 2022), pages 2372–2425.
doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jacc.2022.11.001.
[30]
Bryan Chong, Jayanth Jayabaskaran, Silingga Metta Jauhari, Siew Pang Chan,
Rachel Goh, Martin Tze Wah Kueh, Henry Li, Yip Han Chin, Gwyneth Kong,
Vickram Vijay Anand, Jiong-Wei Wang, Mark Muthiah, Vardhmaan Jain, Anurag
Mehta, Shir Lynn Lim, Roger Foo, Gemma A Figtree, Stephen J Nicholls,
Mamas A Mamas, James L Januzzi, Nicholas W S Chew, A Mark Richards,
and Mark Y Chan. “Global burden of cardiovascular diseases: projections from
2025 to 2050.” In: European Journal of Preventive Cardiology (September 2024),
zwae281. doi: https://doi.org/10.1093/eurjpc/zwae281.
==PAGE:97==
Bibliography
85
[31]
Shanthi Mendis, Pekka Puska, and Bo Norrving. Global Atlas on Cardiovascular
Disease Prevention and Control. Edited by Shanthi Mendis et al. World Health
Organization, 2011. url: https://iris.who.int/handle/10665/44701.
[32]
Diane Bild, Robert Detrano, Do Peterson, Alan Guerci, Kiang Liu, Eyal Shahar,
Pamela Ouyang, Sharon Jackson, and Mohammed Saad. “Ethnic differences in
coronary calcification: the Multi-Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis (MESA).” In:
Circulation 111.10 (2005), pages 1313–1320. doi: https://doi.org/10.1161/
01.CIR.0000157730.94423.4B.
[33]
Johan L.M. Björkegren and Aldons J. Lusis. “Atherosclerosis: Recent develop-
ments.” In: Cell 185.10 (2022). Published: 2022-05-12, pages 1630–1645. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2022.04.004.
[34]
Shifa Jebari-Benslaiman, Unai Galicia-García, Asier Larrea-Sebal, Javier Rekondo
Olaetxea, Iraide Alloza, Koen Vandenbroeck, Asier Benito-Vicente, and César
Martín. “Pathophysiology of Atherosclerosis.” In: International Journal of Molec-
ular Sciences 23.6 (2022). doi: https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms23063346.
[35]
Kamila Florek, Elżbieta Bartoszewska, Szymon Biegała, Oliwia Klimek, Bernadeta
Malcharczyk, and Piotr Kübler. “Rotational Atherectomy, Orbital Atherec-
tomy, and Intravascular Lithotripsy Comparison for Calcified Coronary Le-
sions.” In: Journal of Clinical Medicine 12.23 (2023). doi: https://doi.or
g/10.3390/jcm12237246.
[36]
Pil Hyung Lee, Jung-Min Ahn, Mineok Chang, Seunghee Baek, Sung-Han Yoon,
Soo-Jin Kang, Seung-Whan Lee, Young-Hak Kim, Cheol Whan Lee, Seong-
Wook Park, Duk-Woo Park, and Seung-Jung Park. “Left Main Coronary Artery
Disease.” In: JACC 68.11 (2016), pages 1233–1246. doi: https://doi.org
/10.1016/j.jacc.2016.05.089.
[37]
Stephen Saltissi, Michael M. Webb-Peploe, and D. John Coltart. “Effect of
variation in coronary artery anatomy on distribution of stenotic lesions.” In:
Heart 42.2 (1979), pages 186–191. doi: https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1136 / hrt
.42.2.186.
[38]
Volkan Tuncay, Rozemarijn Vliegenthart, den Martijn Dekker, G.J. Jonge, J.K.
Zandwijk, Pim van der Harst, Matthijs Oudkerk, and Peter Van Ooijen. “Non-
invasive assessment of coronary artery geometry using coronary CTA.” In: Jour-
nal of Cardiovascular Computed Tomography 12 (February 2018). doi: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.jcct.2018.02.003.
[39]
Morton H. Friedman, Anne M. Brinkman, Jay J. Qin, and W.Anthony Seed.
“Relation between coronary artery geometry and the distribution of early su-
danophilic lesions.” In: Atherosclerosis 98.2 (1993), pages 193–199. doi: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/0021-9150(93)90128-H.
==PAGE:98==
86
Bibliography
[40]
Manli Zhou, Yunfeng Yu, Ruiyi Chen, Xingci Liu, Yilei Hu, Zhiyan Ma, Ling-
wei Gao, Weixiong Jian, and Liping Wang. “Wall shear stress and its role
in atherosclerosis.” In: Frontiers in cardiovascular medicine 10 (April 2023),
page 1083547. doi: https://doi.org/10.3389/fcvm.2023.1083547.
[41]
Juhani Knuuti, William Wijns, Antti Saraste, Davide Capodanno, Emanuele
Barbato, Christian Funck-Brentano, Eva Prescott, Robert F. Storey, Christi
Deaton, Thomas Cuisset, Stefan Agewall, Kenneth Dickstein, Thor Edvardsen,
Javier Escaned, Bernard J. Gersh, Pavel Svitil, Martine Gilard, David Has-
dai, Robert Hatala, Felix Mahfoud, Josep Masip, Claudio Muneretto, Marco
Valgimigli, Stephan Achenbach, Jeroen J. Bax, and ESC Scientific Document
Group. “2019 ESC Guidelines for the diagnosis and management of chronic coro-
nary syndromes: The Task Force for the diagnosis and management of chronic
coronary syndromes of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC).” In: Euro-
pean Heart Journal 41.3 (August 2019), pages 407–477. doi: https://doi.or
g/10.1093/eurheartj/ehz425.
[42]
Martha Gulati, Phillip D. Levy, Debabrata Mukherjee, Ezra Amsterdam, Deepak
L. Bhatt, Kim K. Birtcher, Ron Blankstein, Jack Boyd, Renee P. Bullock-
Palmer, Theresa Conejo, Deborah B. Diercks, Federico Gentile, John P. Green-
wood, Erik P. Hess, Steven M. Hollenberg, Wael A. Jaber, Hani Jneid, José A.
Joglar, David A. Morrow, Robert E. O’Connor, Michael A. Ross, and Leslee
J. Shaw. “2021 AHA/ACC/ASE/CHEST/SAEM/SCCT/SCMR Guideline for
the Evaluation and Diagnosis of Chest Pain: A Report of the American College
of Cardiology/American Heart Association Joint Committee on Clinical Prac-
tice Guidelines.” In: Circulation 144.22 (2021), e368–e454. doi: https://doi
.org/10.1161/CIR.0000000000001029.
[43]
Armin Arbab-Zadeh and John Hoe. “Quantification of coronary arterial stenoses
by multidetector CT angiography in comparison with conventional angiography
methods, caveats, and implications.” In: JACC: Cardiovascular Imaging 4.2
(February 2011), pages 191–202. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcmg
.2010.10.011.
[44]
Carlos Collet, Yoshinobu Onuma, Daniele Andreini, Jeroen Sonck, Giulio Pom-
pilio, Saima Mushtaq, Mark Meir, Yosuke Miyazaki, Johan De Mey, Oliver
Gaemperli, Ahmed Ouda, Juan Maureira, Damien Mandry, Edoardo Camen-
zind, Laurent Macron, Torsten Doenst, Ulf Teichgräber, Holger Sigusch, Taku
Asano, and Patrick Serruys. “Coronary computed tomography angiography for
heart team decision-making in multivessel coronary artery disease.” In: Euro-
pean Heart Journal 39.41 (November 2018), pages 3689–3698. doi: https://d
oi.org/10.1093/eurheartj/ehy581.
[45]
Michael Huy Cuong Pham. Ongoing cardiovascular CT projects. Cardiovascular
CT Research Unit at Rigshospitalet. Last accessed on 02-08-2025. url: https:
//rh-ct.org/projects/.
==PAGE:99==
Bibliography
87
[46]
Yasmine Aguib and Jassim Al Suwaidi. “The Copenhagen City Heart Study
(Østerbroundersøgelsen).” In: Global Cardiology Science and Practice 2015.3,
33 (2015). doi: https://doi.org/10.5339/gcsp.2015.33.
[47]
Fabian Isensee, Paul Jaeger, Simon Kohl, Jens Petersen, and Klaus Maier-Hein.
“nnU-Net: a self-configuring method for deep learning-based biomedical image
segmentation.” In: Nature Methods 18 (February 2021), pages 1–9. doi: https:
//doi.org/10.1038/s41592-020-01008-z.
[48]
Achilles J. Pappano and Withrow G. Wier. “11 - Coronary Circulation.” In:
Cardiovascular Physiology (Tenth Edition). Edited by Achilles J. Pappano and
Withrow Gil Wier. Tenth Edition. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2013, pages 223–236.
doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-323-08697-4.00011-3.
[49]
Will Schroeder, Ken Martin, and Bill Lorensen. The Visualization Toolkit (4th
ed.) Kitware, 2006. isbn: 978-1-930934-19-1.
[50]
Luca Antiga, Marina Piccinelli, Lorenzo Botti, Bogdan Ene-Iordache, Andrea
Remuzzi, and David Steinman. “An image-based modeling framework for patient-
specific computational hemodynamics.” In: Medical biological engineering com-
puting 46 (December 2008), pages 1097–112. doi: https://doi.org/10.1007/s
11517-008-0420-1.
[51]
Michael H Lev and Ramon G. Gonzalez. “17 - CT Angiography and CT Per-
fusion Imaging.” In: Brain Mapping: The Methods (Second Edition). Edited by
Arthur W. Toga and John C. Mazziotta. Second Edition. San Diego: Academic
Press, 2002, pages 427–484. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-012693019-
1/50019-8.
[52]
Anna Bøgevang Ekner. Deep reinforcement learning for path tracing in 3D
medical images. Bachelor’s thesis. Supervisors: Rasmus Reinhold Paulsen, Paula
López Diez, Michael Huy Cuong Pham. Kongens Lyngby, Denmark, May 2023.
[53]
BioRender. BioRender - Science Illustration Tool. Created with Biorender. Last
accessed on 2025-08-01. 2025. url: https://biorender.com.
[54]
Özgün Çiçek, Ahmed Abdulkadir, Soeren S. Lienkamp, Thomas Brox, and Olaf
Ronneberger. 3D U-Net: Learning Dense Volumetric Segmentation from Sparse
Annotation. June 2016. url: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-46723-
8_49.
[55]
Álvaro González. “Measurement of Areas on a Sphere Using Fibonacci and
Latitude–Longitude Lattices.” In: Mathematical Geosciences 42.1 (2010), pages 49–
64. doi: https://doi.org/10.1007/s11004-009-9257-x.
[56]
Ronald Aylmer Fisher. “Dispersion on a Sphere.” In: Proceedings of the Royal So-
ciety of London. Series A. Mathematical and Physical Sciences 217.1130 (1953),
pages 295–305. doi: https://doi.org/10.1098/rspa.1953.0064.
==PAGE:100==
88
Bibliography
[57]
Thomas Hamelryck, John T. Kent, and Anders Krogh. “Sampling Realistic
Protein Conformations Using Local Structural Bias.” In: PLoS Computational
Biology 2.9 (2006), e131. doi: https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi
.0020131.
[58]
Satheesha B. Nayak and KV V. Soumya. “Quadrifurcation of Left Coronary
Artery — An Extremely Rare Variation that can Lead to Acute Coronary
Artery Syndrome.” In: Online Journal of Health and Allied Sciences 19.1 (May
2020). Publisher Copyright: © Nayak S, Soumya KV Copyright: Copyright 2020
Elsevier B.V., All rights reserved., pages 1–2. issn: 0972-5997.
[59]
Ciyou Zhu, Richard H. Byrd, Peihuang Lu, and Jorge Nocedal. Algorithm 778:
L-BFGS-B: Fortran Subroutines for Large-Scale Bound-Constrained Optimiza-
tion. Technical report 4. ACM Transactions on Mathematical Software, 1997,
pages 550–560. doi: https://doi.org/10.1145/279232.279236.
[60]
Hirotugu Akaike. “A New Look at the Statistical Model Identification.” In:
IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control 19.6 (1974), pages 716–723. doi: ht
tps://doi.org/10.1109/TAC.1974.1100705.
[61]
Gideon Schwarz. “Estimating the Dimension of a Model.” In: The Annals of
Statistics 6.2 (1978), pages 461–464. doi: https://doi.org/10.1214/aos
/1176344136.
[62]
Joseph J. Thomson. “XXIV. On the structure of the atom: an investigation
of the stability and periods of oscillation of a number of corpuscles arranged
at equal intervals around the circumference of a circle; with application of the
results to the theory of atomic structure.” In: The London, Edinburgh, and
Dublin Philosophical Magazine and Journal of Science 7.39 (1904), pages 237–
265. doi: https://doi.org/10.1080/14786440409463107.
[63]
Michiel Schaap, Coert T. Metz, Theo van Walsum, Alina G. van der Giessen,
Annick C. Weustink, Nico R. Mollet, Christian Bauer, Hrvoje Bogunović, Car-
los Castro, Xiang Deng, Engin Dikici, Thomas O’Donnell, Michel Frenay, Ola
Friman, Marcela Hernández Hoyos, Pieter H. Kitslaar, Karl Krissian, Caroline
Kühnel, Miguel A. Luengo-Oroz, Maciej Orkisz, Örjan Smedby, Martin Styner,
Andrzej Szymczak, Hüseyin Tek, Chunliang Wang, Simon K. Warfield, Sebas-
tian Zambal, Yong Zhang, Gabriel P. Krestin, and Wiro J. Niessen. “Standard-
ized evaluation methodology and reference database for evaluating coronary
artery centerline extraction algorithms.” In: Medical Image Analysis 13.5 (2009).
Includes Special Section on the 12th International Conference on Medical Imag-
ing and Computer Assisted Intervention, pages 701–714. doi: https://doi.o
rg/10.1016/j.media.2009.06.003.
[64]
Armin Kanitsar, Dominik Fleischmann, Rainer Wegenkittl, Petr Felkel, and
Eduard Gröller. “CPR - Curved planar reformation.” In: IEEE Visualization,
2002. VIS 2002. December 2002, pages 37–44. doi: https://doi.org/10.
1109/VISUAL.2002.1183754.
==PAGE:101==
Bibliography
89
[65]
Joe H. Ward. “Hierarchical Grouping to Optimize an Objective Function.” In:
Journal of the American Statistical Association 58.301 (1963), pages 236–244.
doi: https://doi.org/10.1080/01621459.1963.10500845.
[66]
J.T. Dodge, B.G. Brown, E.L. Bolson, and H.T. Dodge. “Lumen diameter of
normal human coronary arteries. Influence of age, sex, anatomic variation, and
left ventricular hypertrophy or dilation.” In: Circulation 86.1 (1992), pages 232–
246. doi: https://doi.org/10.1161/01.CIR.86.1.232.
==PAGE:102==
