==PAGE:1==
Exploring the Impact of Sensor
Fusion on the Generalizability of
Aerial Magnetic Anomaly
Navigation
by
Philip Pirmo Lillelund
Earth and Space Physics
Master Thesis
DTU Space
July 27, 2025
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
Global reliance on GNSS for high-accuracy navigation has rendered society vulnera-
ble to jamming attacks. Magnetic anomaly navigation (MagNav), which uses maps
of the Earth’s magnetic anomaly field to determine position, has shown promise as
a viable alternative navigation system. Previous work in MagNav has demonstrated
its feasibility in real flight tests. However, several key challenges still remain for
MagNav, particularly the removal of magnetic aircraft effects from the in-flight mag-
netic measurements, also known as aero-magnetic compensation. Current research
is looking at how to minimize these disturbances with neural network-based mod-
els. Another potential approach is using sensor fusion. This study tests the impact
of various combinations of sensors on the navigation performance of MagNav on
twelve different simulated flight trajectories. In addition to the scalar magnetome-
ter (S) used for classic MagNav, three other sensors are used: barometric altimeter
(B), pitot-static system (P), and vector magnetometer (V). The study uses a real
anomaly map of a region in Western Australia and real INTERMAGNET temporal
variation data. The sensor combination using all four sensors (SBPV) was shown
to be effective at constraining the drift of an INS using a tactical-grade IMU in a
well-compensated aircraft field. The DRMS errors were below 100 m for all but two
trajectories. These two trajectories were shown to fly over regions of significantly
low magnetic spatial variability. All twelve trajectories achieved DRMS errors be-
low 100 m when the magnetic spatial variability was taken into account. The lowest
DRMS errors were around 5-6 m. A comparison of two filter models showed that es-
timating the anomaly map bias as a separate state, rather than as a combined state
with the temporal variations, yielded significantly better navigation performance
using the SBPV combination with a tactical-grade IMU in a well-compensated air-
craft field for all but one trajectory. The reason for this exception was undetermined
as it was shown not to achieve better estimates of the temporal variations and map
bias.
An analysis of varying levels of compensation of the aircraft field showed
that even in the worst case the SBPV combination achieved DRMS errors on the
order of 100 m or less with a tactical-grade IMU, again when taking into account
magnetic spatial variability.
Finally, the SBPV combination was tested using a
navigation-grade IMU. Here, classic MagNav was shown to be just as effective as
the SBPV combination in constraining the drift of the INS in a well-compensated
aircraft field. Neither classic MagNav nor the SBPV combination was shown to be
effective at constraining the drift of the INS in a poorly-compensated aircraft field.
Overall, the SBPV combination seems to be more effective against tactical-level
drift than navigation-level drift based on the results.
i
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:3==
Acknowledgements
Ten years have passed since finishing my undergraduate degree and venturing off into the
world of music for the better part of a decade. When I first started the Earth and Space
masters program here at DTU in the beginning of 2023, I wasn’t sure if, upon my return to
academia, I would still be able to solve the kinds of engineering problems I once had. Now
I’m at the finish line, smiling at the thought of my past concerns, remembering how each
one of them faded along the way. I’d like to give thanks to all those who have helped and
supported me in getting to this point, both academically and personally. There will likely
be some of you that I forget when writing this, but know that I am grateful nonetheless.
Thank you to Mr. Gunn for showing me my true potential in the field of mathematics
through a series of private tutoring sessions between middle school and high school. Thank
you to Mr. Kennedy, Mr. Campbell, and Mr. Reid for continuing to foster my interest
in math, statistics, and computer science throughout high school by just being really
cool people. Thank you to Prof. Joseph Kunc for being an incredible teacher and mentor
during my undergraduate days at the University of Southern California and for entrusting
me with my first non-lawn mower, non-fast food, non-intramural sports referee job. It
was a teacher’s assistant position grading the homework and tests of other students, but
it felt like a lot of responsibility at the time. Thank you also to Prof. Kunc, as well as
Prof. Dan Erwin, for the kind letters of recommendation that helped me get accepted
into DTU.
Thank you to Patty Woomer for helping my family and I assimilate so quickly when we
first moved to the states. Thank you to Julie and Jimmy Hamilton, Anna Merit, and
Cheryl Baker for taking southern hospitality to a whole other level during my music days.
Your generosity is something I will forever be inspired by and strive for in my own life.
Thank you also to Patty Ryan for the generous gift when my pride and joy - my acoustic
guitar - was having health complications. Thank you also to Bob Barnes for helping me
out when I came back overseas to attend Cameron’s wedding and was forced to pay more
money than I could afford at the US border to keep my permanent residency.
Thank you to my childhood friends Gunnar Hamilton, Kyle Hendren, and William Ryan
for the countless memories that shaped us as teenagers and for the continued friendship
today. Thank you to my music producer and friend Emil Lundbak who helped me realize
my dream of recording an album. Thank you to Jonas Klintstrøm, Lauge Jørn, Simon
Nyrup and all the other musicians who contributed to the album. Thank you to Jessica
Schrøder for the wonderful artist photos. Thank you to my DTU people Carlos Costa,
Zoe Parlapollis, Alex Cirugeda, Mara Guaini, Javi Casado, Paloma Babule, and Balázs
Szakter for all the new friendships that I look forward to taking with me after university.
Thank you to Prof. Chris Finlay for the unparalleled teaching throughout my time at
DTU and for all your guidance in the project leading up to this thesis. Your attention
to detail is humbling. Thank you to Nils Olsen for taking a chance on me and being the
best boss I’ve ever had. Your unwavering faith in my abilities, easy-going yet ambitious
ii
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:4==
approach, and arguably non-human availability has made working on the MagNav project
over the last year and a half a purely positive experience. And whatever lingering doubts I
had about my ability to return to the realm of engineering have been dissolved as a result.
Thank you to Antonia Hager for the many one-on-ones where you imparted much of your
hard-earned knowledge on me, helping me understand how all of this MagNav stuff works.
Thank you to Prof. Torleiv Bryne for helping me de-bug and make improvements to the
algorithm, particularly regarding inertial navigation. Oh, and for introducing me to the
impossibly-bubbly legendary Norwegian dishwashing detergent Zaro.
Thank you to my brother and my sister for so many hilarious and defining moments
growing up, the borderline-telepathic connection and understanding that they cultivated
between us, and for the comfort of knowing that we’ll always be there for each other.
Thank you to my mom and my dad for taking us on your little fifteen-year adventure
around the world, for doing what it took to steer me back into the right direction when
I drifted during my reckless teenage years, and for always supporting me in whatever
endeavors I choose to pursue. Thank you to Angel, Arnold, and Tyson for being the
best pups imaginable. And lastly, thank you to my girlfriend Laura for your honesty and
authenticity, for your patience when I get caught up in telling a story and over-explain
obvious or irrelevant details, and for reminding me every day that life is an adventure. I
can safely say that I wouldn’t be here today without all of you.
iii
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:5==
Table of Contents
Acronyms and Abbreviations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
vi
1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.1
Technical Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
The MagNav Concept
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Prior Aerial MagNav Studies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Contributions and Outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Background Knowledge
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1
INS Drift
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Sensor Fusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Types of Magnetic Measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Magnetic Field Sources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4.1
Core Field . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4.2
Crustal Field . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.4.3
Temporal Variations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.4.4
Aircraft Effects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Essential Data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.1
Flight Trajectory Datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
Magnetic Anomaly Map . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.3
Temporal Variation Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.4
Sensor Data and Noise Parameters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.4.1
Scalar Magnetometer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.4.2
Barometric Altimeter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.4.3
Pitot-Static System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.4.4
Vector Magnetometer
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4
The MagNav Software Package . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
4.1
System Architecture Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.2
Filter Design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.2.1
Extended Kalman Filter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.2.2
State Vector . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.2.3
State Dynamics Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.2.4
Measurement Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.3
Performance Metric . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.4
Test Cases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5
Test Case Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
5.1
Baseline Performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.2
Sensor Fusion Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.3
Map Bias State . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.4
Varying Aircraft Effects
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
iv
==PAGE:6==
5.5
IMU Grade Comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
6
Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
6.1
Key Findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
6.2
Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
6.3
Future Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
Bibliography
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
v
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:7==
Acronyms and Abbreviations
IMU
Inertial Measurement Unit
INS
Inertial Navigation System
DOF
Degrees of Freedom
ECEF
Earth-Centered Earth-Fixed
UTM
Universal Transverse Mercator
MagNav Magnetic Anomaly Navigation
nT
nanoTesla
WMM
World Magnetic Model
IGRF
International Geomagnetic Reference Field
IAGA
International Association of Geomagnetism and Aeronomy
GNSS
Global Navigation Satellite System
VRW
Velocity Random Walk
ARW
Angular Random Walk
FOGM
First-order Gauss-Markov
GSA
Geoscience Australia
FFT
Fast Fourier Transform
AGL
Above Ground Level
INTERMAGNET International Real-Time Magnetic Observatory Network
LRM
Learmonth
EKF
Extended Kalman Filter
NED
North-East-Down
DRMS
Distance Root Mean Square
RMSE
Root Mean Square Error
vi
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:8==
1
Introduction
Today, nearly all navigation relies on the Global Navigation Satellite System (GNSS).
The reason for this is that the GNSS is available world-wide and typically accurate to less
than 10 m (Misra and Enge, 2006). This combination is currently unmatched by other
navigation technologies. The problem with GNSS, however, is that it uses radio signals
which are vulnerable to jamming. As such, there is a rising global interest, both military
and commercial, to develop alternative navigation systems for when GNSS is unavailable.
An alternative that has shown promise in recent years is magnetic anomaly navigation
(MagNav) which uses the Earth’s magnetic anomaly field - the part that comes from
magnetized rocks in the Earth’s crust. This chapter explains why MagNav is a viable
alternative, what the challenges are with it, and how MagNav works in principle. The
contributions and outline of this study are then presented.
1.1
Technical Motivation
The Earth’s magnetic anomaly field has the right characteristics for potential use in
global navigation. Like the GNSS, it is available world-wide, regardless of time of day
or weather conditions. However, unlike the GNSS, the Earth’s magnetic anomaly field is
nearly unjammable, due to the physics of magnetic fields. The strength of radio signals
is inversely proportional to the square of the distance (1/r2) from the source, while the
strength of a magnetic field is inversely proportional to the cube of the distance (1/r3)
from the source (Mandea and Korte, 2011). In other words, if we consider the source of
a magnetic field as being located at the center of a sphere with radius r, the measured
magnetic field strength along the surface of that sphere would be the strength at the
source divided by (r3). This makes it extremely challenging to interfere with an aircraft’s
signal from the ground, for example.
There are a few practical challenges associated with MagNav that have to be solved be-
fore it can be employed as an alternative to GNSS. First, MagNav determines position
by comparing in-flight magnetic measurements of the Earth’s magnetic field to predicted
values based on magnetic anomaly maps. The quality of these maps directly impacts the
ability of the navigation algorithm to make accurate position estimates. It is, therefore,
essential that high-quality magnetic anomaly maps are available where MagNav is to be
used. These maps are made by trained professionals operating either drones or geo-survey
aircraft, which is expensive and time-consuming. Second, although interference of the de-
sired magnetic signal from external sources is unlikely, aircraft themselves consist of many
magnetic components that can disturb the signal. It is not physically possible to shield off
these disturbances entirely from the magnetic instruments without also losing essential
parts of the desired magnetic signal, so these disturbances are typically handled algorith-
mically. This is not trivial and developing a reliable method for doing so is an ongoing
area of research. Solving these challenges is crucial to achieving the level of reliability and
accuracy that MagNav needs to become an established alternative navigation system.
1
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:9==
1.2
The MagNav Concept
MagNav is a map-based navigation system. It is not fundamentally different from how
one uses a street map to navigate through a city. By observing the location of surrounding
physical features (e.g. roads, intersections, buildings, parks, etc.) and comparing them to
a street map, one can determine one’s own location. MagNav works similarly by compar-
ing magnetic measurements to a magnetic anomaly map. In practice, both the magnetic
measurements and the magnetic anomaly map are fed into a navigation algorithm that
compares them and uses the difference to correct the onboard Inertial Navigation System
(INS) which is subject to drift over time (see Section 2.1). Figure 1 shows the essential
components involved in MagNav.
Navigation Algorithm
INS Estimates
Magnetometer
Measurements
Magnetic
Anomaly Map
MagNav
Estimates
Figure 1: High-level overview of the essential components of the MagNav system.
1.3
Prior Aerial MagNav Studies
MagNav is being studied for aerial, underwater, space, ground, and indoor vehicles. This
study focuses on the aerial application of MagNav and was built on two main previous
works from the last decade: Absolute Positioning using Earth’s Magnetic Anomaly Field
(Canciani, 2016) by Aaron J. Canciani and Advanced Aeromagnetic Compensation Models
for Airborne Magnetic Anomaly Navigation by Albert R. Gnadt (Gnadt, 2022). These
two studies were themselves built on a lot of previous work in MagNav since the late
1980s.
In 2006, Canciani demonstrated the viability of aerial MagNav during real test flights.
Before this MagNav had only been demonstrated in simulations. The navigation algorithm
used was a Rao-Blackwellized particle filter. The flights were performed by a magnetically-
optimized geo-survey aircraft with the scalar magnetometer located on a tail stinger. On
2
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:10==
the first test flight, the aircraft flew for 1 hour over Louisa, VA at a low altitude and used
a high-quality magnetic anomaly map. Here, Canciani achieved a 13 m distance root
mean square (DRMS) error using a navigation-grade INS that experienced a drift of over
300 m when unaided by MagNav. On the second test flight, the aircraft flew for 5 hours
from Virginia to Iowa at an altitude of approximately 3000 m and used a comparatively
low-quality magnetic anomaly map.
Here, Canciani achieved a 3 km DRMS using a
tactical-grade INS that drifted over 50 km. His work showed the impact of map quality
and flying altitude. Canciani provided much of the theoretical foundation for this study.
In 2022, Gnadt tested the ability of various aeromagnetic compensation models to re-
move the aircraft effects from five scalar magnetometers onboard a geo-survey aircraft.
The magnetometers were positioned in locations of varying magnetic corruption (aircraft-
generated magnetic fields), ranging from a few nT to several thousand nT. Gnadt showed
that the classic Tolles-Lawson model provided better navigation accuracy for low levels of
corruption and a neural network-based model provided better navigation accuracy for high
levels of corruption. His work provided much of the practical (algorithmic) foundation
for this study.
1.4
Contributions and Outline
Current MagNav research is primarily focused on minimizing aircraft disturbances to in-
crease navigation performance. Another option is to integrate other types of sensors that
provide the navigation algorithm with additional information (see Section 2.2). Theoret-
ically, this additional information could lessen the degree to which aircraft disturbances
need to be minimized. The main research question of this study is,
”Which sensor combinations can enable an aircraft to perform magnetic anomaly naviga-
tion in the presence of significant aircraft disturbances?”
To test this, I created a software package called MagNav, which can be found at https:
//github.com/philiplillelund/MagNav-Thesis, that builds on the two prior MagNav
studies discussed in the previous section. The software package, with all its modularized
sensor simulation and update functions, is the main contribution of this study, not the
navigation algorithm’s filter design which is largely based on (Gnadt, 2022). Specifically,
the following contributions were made as part of the software package:
1. A complete simulation framework for testing MagNav performance under various
sensor-aiding combinations.
2. Improvements to current state-of-the-art MagNav algorithm, including quaternion-
based attitude error updates, Van Loan discretization, and Joseph form covariance
matrix updates, and an extra map bias state (see Chapter 4).
3. Addition of an extra state for estimating the magnetic anomaly map bias.
3
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:11==
The rest of the chapters in the report are organized as follows. Chapter 2 provides back-
ground knowledge on the various technical aspects necessary to understand how MagNav
works in practice. The limitations to inertial navigation, the role of sensor fusion, the
physics behind Earth’s magnetic field, and prior MagNav studies are covered. Chapter
3 describes which input data are required for testing MagNav, as well as the specific
datasets used in this study. Chapter 4 gives a detailed breakdown of the structure of
MagNav software package and the design of the navigation algorithm. The five experi-
mental scenarios tested in this study are also listed at the end of the chapter. Chapter
5 presents the results of these test cases. Finally, chapter 6 summarizes the key findings
and limitations of this study and proposes future work.
4
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:12==
2
Background Knowledge
The main theory behind MagNav combines three science and engineering fields, namely
inertial navigation, sensor fusion, and geomagnetism. This chapter provides general back-
ground information on the fundamental concepts involved from each of these fields, fol-
lowed by a brief discussion on the previous work that this study was based on.
2.1
INS Drift
The job of a navigation system is to characterize the location (position) and orientation
(attitude) of an object in 3D space. At the core of nearly all modern navigation systems
is an INS. An INS is a device that calculates position, velocity, and attitude estimates of
an object using two types of measurements of its motion - linear acceleration and angular
velocity. These two motion measurements are measured using an Inertial Measurement
Unit (IMU) located onboard the object. IMUs typically consist of an accelerometer (for
measuring linear acceleration) and a gyroscope (for measuring angular velocity). This
type of IMU is referred to as 6-DOF (degrees of freedom). Note that the DOF refers
to the two the number of axes of the measurements themselves and not the number
of unique bits of information that characterize the object. Some IMUs also include a
vector magnetometer. Naturally, these are then referred to as 9-DOF. The extra vector
magnetometer merely helps the INS to better estimate the heading (i.e. yaw) of the object
but is generally not considered necessary in most navigation systems. This study uses
a 6-DOF IMU. Acceleration is measured in units of specific force [m/s2], while angular
velocity is measured in angular rates [rad/s].
The object’s position, velocity, and attitude are calculated by the INS in five main steps.
First, each variable is initialized using some external measurement, typically from GNSS.
Then, the attitude is estimated by integrating the angular velocities from the gyroscope.
This attitude is then used to transform the specific forces from the accelerometer from
the body frame to whichever navigation frame is being used (e.g. local, Earth-centered
Earth-fixed (ECEF), etc.). The navigation-frame specific forces are then corrected for
gravity, which is observed by accelerometers even when there is no motion, using a gravity
model and integrated to obtain the velocity estimates. Lastly, these velocity estimates
are integrated to obtain the position estimates.
Any initialization errors or IMU measurement errors are propagated through the inertial
navigation equations used to integrate the measurements (Groves, 2013). Moreover, any
approximations in the inertial navigation equations themselves will add even more error
to the system. In a dead-reckoning scenario when external measurements from GNSS
become temporarily unavailable, these errors accumulate over time leading to what is
known as INS drift. Figure 2 shows an example of INS position drift during a real test
flight using a navigation-grade IMU. Easting and northing refer to Universal Transverse
Mercator (UTM) east and north directions, respectively.
Note that this IMU has an
5
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:13==
extremely high accuracy. A tactical-grade IMU can cause INS position drifts of up to
several tens of kilometers over the same time period.
Figure 2: INS position drift from a real test flight using a navigation-grade IMU (Gnadt, 2022).
2.2
Sensor Fusion
Sensor fusion refers to the process of combining measurements from various sensors to
produce a more accurate (less uncertain) and reliable representation of the system being
monitored.
Modern navigation algorithms, for example, use sensor fusion to monitor
the position and orientation of an aircraft by combining IMU measurements with GNSS
measurements (Groves, 2013). GNSS provides the aircraft with high-accuracy position
estimates, albeit often at a relatively low rate (around 1 Hz).
Meanwhile, the IMU
provides the aircraft with noisy, high rate (between 20 and 200 Hz) acceleration and
angular velocity measurements.
If both GNSS and IMU measurements are available,
this combination provides the best of both worlds: high accuracy position, velocity, and
attitude estimates at a high sampling rate. If GNSS become temporarily unavailable, the
navigation system has to rely on IMU measurements which, as explained in the previous
section, drift significantly over longer periods of time. In a sensor fusion context, the
IMU serves to provide accurate attitude estimates, sensitivity to rapid system changes
that occur on timescales smaller than the sampling rate of GNSS, and backup, lower-
accuracy position estimates when GNSS becomes unavailable.
Fusing sensors into a navigation algorithm is often a trade-off between desired accuracy
and computational requirements. The more sensors that are fused into a navigation algo-
rithm, the more information is available for representing the system, unless of course the
sensors are measuring the same thing, in which case the extra information being provided
is redundant and does not serve to increase the accuracy of the representation of the sys-
tem. On the other hand, the more measurements the algorithm has to take into account,
6
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:14==
the greater the computational requirement for handling those measurements. Effective
sensor fusion combines as few sensors as possible, where each type of measurement pro-
vides unique information about the system. Barometer measurements, for example, are
traditionally fused into modern navigation algorithms along with GNSS measurements,
as GNSS alone is not suﬀicient to constrain the otherwise unstable altitude estimates (see
Section 3.4.2). Similarly, as mentioned in the previous section, vector magnetometers are
sometimes incorporated to help constrain the attitude an aircraft which can be subject
to heading drift when only gyroscope measurements are used for attitude estimation.
2.3
Types of Magnetic Measurements
Magnetic fields are vector fields, meaning they have both a magnitude and a direction.
The standard unit of magnetic fields in geophysics is nanoTesla (nT). Measurements of
magnetic fields are made by instruments called magnetometers. There are two types of
magnetometers: scalar and vector.
Scalar
Scalar magnetometers measure the total intensity (magnitude) of the magnetic field vec-
tor. The total field intensity F is given by
F =
q
B2
X + B2
Y + B2
Z
(2.1)
where BX, BY , and BZ are the three orthogonal vector field components of any coordinate
frame. Scalar magnetometers do not measure the direction of the field vector. They have
accuracies on the order of 1 nT which makes them well-suited for navigation applications.
This is the type of magnetometer used for MagNav.
Vector
Vector magnetometers measure the individual components of the magnetic field vector.
They, therefore, provide not only the total field intensity but also its direction. Given this,
it seems vector magnetometers would be even better suited for navigation applications
than scalar magnetometers as they contain more information about the field. However,
these instruments have about 1-2 orders of magnitude worse absolute accuracy due to
attitude estimation errors. They are useful for determining the heading of an aircraft (i.e.
as compasses), as well as removing the aircraft effects (see Section 2.4.4).
7
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:15==
2.4
Magnetic Field Sources
MagNav relies on measurements of the Earth’s magnetic anomaly field. The anomaly
field, however, is not directly measurable as it is just one of several components that
make up Earth’s total magnetic field. Figure 3 shows the various sources that contribute
to the Earth’s magnetic field. There are also platform (i.e. aircraft) effects that disturb
the measurements of the Earth’s magnetic field. Separating all of these other components
from the anomaly field is essential to the functional operation of MagNav and doing so
requires knowledge about how each is characterized and modeled.
Figure 3: Depiction of the various sources that contribute to the Earth’s magnetic field (Sabaka
et al., 2002).
2.4.1
Core Field
The core field is the largest contributor to the Earth’s magnetic field, contributing on
average over 95 percent of the total field near the surface. It has magnitudes of 20,000-
60,000 nT and is responsible for protecting the Earth from cosmic radiation and charged
particles from the sun. It is also what makes a compass point north. As its name suggests,
the core field originates from deep within the Earth where conductive fluids, composed
primarily of molten iron, circulate in the outer core. Heat from the inner core, as well
as the rotation of the Earth itself, causes motion in these conductive fluids, generating
an electric current which, in turn, generates a magnetic field. The generated magnetic
field can be approximated by a tilted dipole. A dipole has two opposing positive and
8
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:16==
negative poles which determine the direction of the magnetic field lines. A standard bar
magnet is an example of a dipole. The field is tilted as its two poles do not align with the
geographic north and south poles of the Earth. The degree of this misalignment varies
over time as changes in the Earth’s core causes the direction of the dipolar axis to wander.
In order to account for these changes, also known as secular variations, the core field is
remodeled every five years (Hulot, 2011). Technically-speaking, it is the main field that
is modeled, which primarily consists of the core field but also inevitably captures some
anomaly field component (see next section). The most commonly used main field model
for scientific research is the International Geomagnetic Reference Field (IGRF) put out
by International Association of Geomagnetism and Aeronomy (IAGA). Figure 4 shows a
six-month average of the magnitude of the core field as given by the IGRF in 2014. Note
that the figure does not depict the direction, only the magnitude, of the field.
Figure 4: A six-month average of the magnitude of the Earth’s core field in 2014 measured by
the SWARM satellites (NASA Earth Observatory, 2014).
This study uses the IGRF-13, the thirteenth generation of the IGRF model (Alken et al.,
2021) which is valid form Jan. 1st, 1900 to Dec. 31st, 2024. The IGRF-13 is a spher-
ical harmonics model based on data from satellites and observatories around the world.
Spherical harmonics models attempt to fit periodic functions (harmonics) onto the sur-
face of a sphere through a set of coeﬀicients (or weights) (Blakely, 1995). Each of these
harmonics (also known as wave numbers) shapes specific wavelengths of the model. Thus,
by superimposing a series of harmonics onto the surface of a sphere, it is possible to model
the Earth’s magnetic field at a range of different spatial scales. The IGRF-13 models the
Earth’s magnetic field up to degree and order 13, which corresponds to a spatial resolution
of roughly 3000-4000 km. The model is limited, or truncated, to this degree and order to
capture the majority of the contributions from the core field while excluding the majority
of contributions from the anomaly field (see below). The spatial resolution of the core
field is, thus, not suﬀicient for navigation which, depending on the objective, requires
accuracy on the order of 1-100 m.
9
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:17==
2.4.2
Crustal Field
The crustal field, also called the lithospheric field, is the second largest contributor to the
Earth’s magnetic field, contributing on average between 1-5 percent of the total field near
the surface (Langel and Hinze, 1998). It has magnitudes on the order of one to several
hundred nT and stems from magnetization of rocks in the Earth’s crust, the outermost
layer of the lithosphere. Figure 5 shows an example of a map of the anomaly field which,
similar to the main field, primarily consists of the crustal field but also captures some of
the main field component. It is worth noting that an anomaly field map is technically
a projection of the crustal field into the direction of the crustal field (Canciani, 2016).
Due to the relatively low resolution of the main field, maps of the anomaly field can have
constant biases on the order of 100 nT or more.
Figure 5: Magnetic anomaly map of the Scandinavian region at 5 km altitude (McEnroe et al.,
2018).
Two types of magnetization exist in the crust: induced and remanent. Induced magneti-
zation occurs only when a magnetically susceptible mineral is placed into an ambient field.
This causes the mineral to create a temporary magnetic field of its own. If the ambient
field is changed or removed, so is the induced magnetization. Remanent magnetization,
on the other hand, remains even when no ambient magnetic field is applied. It occurs
when a mineral cools down below the Curie point (around 770◦C) in the presence of
an ambient magnetic field. Minerals above the Curie point are particularly magnetically
10
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:18==
malleable. As a material cools below the Curie point, it loses this malleability and the
magnetization caused by the ambient field is locked into place (Sabaka et al., 2002).
The anomaly field has suitable characteristics for use in navigation. It is temporally stable,
as it changes along geological timescales, and contains high-frequency spatial information.
The shortest expected magnetic field wavelengths are approximately equal to the altitude
at which the anomaly field is being measured. In other words, magnetic field wavelengths
of 5 km and longer are expected at an altitude of 5 km.
2.4.3
Temporal Variations
The third and final contributor to the Earth’s magnetic field is collectively known as
temporal variations. In general, temporal variations come from charged particles from the
sun interacting with the Earth’s magnetic field. These interactions create distinct areas
of electric currents surrounding the Earth called the ionosphere and the magnetosphere
(Sabaka et al., 2002). These areas, in turn, create their own magnetic fields. This is a
highly complex process, the specific details of which are outside the scope of this study.
Temporal variations are measured by ground stations and can vary widely. Their mag-
nitudes typically range from a few nT on a solar-quiet day to several hundred nT during
geomagnetic storms, with the exception of the polar regions where their magnitudes can
be over a thousand nT. Fast changing temporal variations tend to have lower amplitudes
and vice versa. This is beneficial from a navigation standpoint as it allows them to be
separated from the anomaly field (Canciani, 2016). Although temporal variations do vary
spatially as well, it is not as significant as for the core and crustal fields, typically on the
order of 1 nT per 50 km (Gnadt, 2022). This study assumes negligible spatial variation
for temporal variations.
2.4.4
Aircraft Effects
In addition to the Earth’s internal (core and crustal) and external (temporal variations)
magnetic fields described above, there are also magnetic fields generated by the aircraft
itself.
These can come from any the structural material of the aircraft, any electric
currents onboard, or induced magnetic fields from aircraft maneuvers through the Earth’s
magnetic field. These aircraft-generated magnetic fields are often referred to as platform,
or aircraft, effects. Aircraft effects are diﬀicult to characterize generally as they vary from
aircraft to aircraft and depend heavily on the onboard location of the magnetometer. For
example, a magnetometer placed on a tail stinger outside an aircraft is likely to be subject
to only a few nT of aircraft effects, whereas a magnetometer placed near the cockpit of
an aircraft can be subject to several thousand nT of aircraft effects. The compensation
(i.e. removal) of aircraft effects, small or large, is a crucial element of successful MagNav.
The state-of-the-art aero-magnetic compensation model is the Tolles-Lawson model which
uses vector magnetometer measurements to estimate and remove the aircraft effects from
11
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:19==
the scalar magnetometer measurements (Tolles and Lawson, 1950). However, this model
fails to compensate larger aircraft effects. In recent years, studies have shown that enhanc-
ing the Tolles-Lawson model with artificial neural networks can yield better compensation
results for larger aircraft effects (Gnadt, 2022), but this is an area of ongoing research.
12
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:20==
3
Essential Data
Four key types of input data are required to test the MagNav algorithm developed for
this project: flight trajectory, magnetic anomaly map, temporal variations, and sensor
measurements. Due to the scope of the study, I worked with a combination of real and
simulated data. This chapter provides the details of the specific datasets used and how
they were processed/simulated.
3.1
Flight Trajectory Datasets
Twelve different ground truth trajectories with realistic flight dynamics were simulated
using the UAV Toolbox in MATLAB1. Figure 6 shows each of these in 3-D view. The tra-
jectories were designed to test the MagNav algorithm under different levels of observability
- a measure of the filter’s ability to estimate its internal states from sensor measurements
(Huang et al., 2020). While most of simulated trajectories varied significantly in their
flight dynamics, some of them were intentionally kept similar to look specifically at the
effect of one or two parameters. For example, trajectories 1 and 2 share a similar “lawn-
mower” pattern in the horizontal plane, but trajectory 2 climbs and descends while the
altitude in trajectory 1 stays more or less constant. Similarly, trajectory 2 and 12 have
the same overall geometry, but trajectory 12 extends over a much greater area. Also,
trajectories 1-8 were simulated for 20 minutes and trajectories 9-12 were simulated for 60
minutes to test the impact of flight duration on navigation performance.
IMU measurements for each trajectory were then simulated.
This was done by first
numerically differentiating the ground truth positions and attitudes twice and once, re-
spectively, into specific forces and angular rates. White noise and a drifting bias modeled
as a first-order Gauss-Markov (FOGM) process was then added to the these simulated
measurement. In practice, IMU measurements often also have constant offsets which can
significantly affect navigation performance, especially if not properly taken into account in
the filter design. Adding constant offsets was not seen as essential for the purposes of this
study but should be done for a more comprehensive and realistic navigation algorithm.
The noisy IMU measurements were then fed into an INS and numerically re-integrated to
obtain realistic, drifting INS-estimated trajectories. Two sets of INS-estimated trajectories
were simulated: one using a tactical grade IMU with a sampling rate of 20 Hz and one
using a navigation-grade IMU with a sampling rate of 200 Hz. Table 1 lists the IMU
parameters used for simulating the two datasets.
The simulated ground truth and INS trajectories, as well as the IMU measurements and
parameters, were stored as MATLAB structs in .mat files and can be found inside the
Trajectories folder (see Figure 11).
1These were provided to me by fellow MagNav researcher Antonia Hager who was co-supervisor on
this study.
13
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:21==
Figure 6: Twelve ground truth flight trajectory cases simulated using the UAV Toolbox in
MATLAB. The black and white circles are the start and end points, respectively.
14
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:22==
Table 1: IMU Sensor Noise and Bias Parameters for Tactical- and Navigation-Grade Sensors
(Canciani, 2022).
Parameter
Tactical
Navigation
Sampling rate [Hz]
20
200
Velocity random walk (VRW) [m/s3/2]
3.3 × 10−4
10−12
Accelerometer std. dev. [m/s2]
√
Hz · VRW
√
Hz · VRW
Accelerometer bias std. dev. [m/s2]
9.81 × 10−3
10−5
Accelerometer bias time constant [s]
3600
3600
Angular random walk (ARW) [rad/s1/2]
3.6361 × 10−5
10−7
Gyroscope std. dev. [rad/s]
√
Hz · ARW
√
Hz · ARW
Gyroscope bias std. dev. [rad/s]
4.8481 × 10−6
10−8
Gyroscope bias time constant [s]
3600
3600
3.2
Magnetic Anomaly Map
For real flight tests, the quality of the magnetic anomaly map used for MagNav is one
of the major contributors to navigation performance. A magnetic anomaly map must be
properly geo-located, which makes many of the older maps available to us today from
before GNSS inadequate. Sampling is also a key factor. As a general rule of thumb, the
traverse flight lines flown during a survey must be separated by a distance no greater
than the flying altitude to be considered fully-sampled. Figure 7 shows the different types
of lines that make up a standard flight pattern for a basic aero-magnetic field survey.
A survey with a traverse line spacing greater than the altitude at which it was flown is
considered under-sampled as it is not able to capture all of the higher frequency features
of the magnetic field. An under-sampled map can be made fully-sampled by upward-
continuing (discussed below) the field to an altitude that matches or exceeds the traverse
line spacing. Tie lines are primarily used for interpolating and leveling the data.
The aforementioned are just a few of the main potential sources of error regarding the
use of magnetic anomaly maps for MagNav in real flight tests. In practice, there are
several other factors involved (e.g. micro-leveling, drape surfaces, etc.). However, since
this study relied on simulated in-flight magnetometer measurements derived from the
magnetic anomaly map itself (see Section 3.4.1), the map quality did not have an affect
on navigation performance, and as such, a comprehensive list of map error sources is not
necessary. Spatial resolution and magnetic field variability of a magnetic anomaly map
are, nevertheless, still key factors and do significantly affect navigation performance.
15
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:23==
Figure 7: Flight lines of a basic aero-magnetic field survey (Canciani, 2016).
The magnetic anomaly map chosen for this project was a real map of magnetic anomalies
of western Australia (Djomani et al., 2019). This map is a part of a nationwide effort by
the Commonwealth of Australia to provide up-to-date magnetic field data of the entire
country and is publicly available through the Geoscience Australia (GSA) database. The
height of the map is 80 meters, and the map has a grid spacing of approximately 80 meters,
meaning data points are spread out by approximately 80 meters in both the latitudinal
and longitudinal directions. Note that this is not the same as the traverse line spacing
mentioned above but merely the spacing of the grid onto which the observations were
interpolated. It does not tell us anything about the sampling quality of the map itself.
In MagNav map readings must be available everywhere along a flight trajectory. If map
readings are unavailable, even if temporarily, there is nothing for the filter to compare the
magnetometer measurements to and, thus, no way for it to update the position, at least
not based on magnetic information. Since most flights are not flown at constant altitude,
this requires a 3-D magnetic anomaly map.
In practice, this is achieved by upward-
continuing a magnetic anomaly field from a given height to a series of heights above it,
creating a stack of layered map surfaces. This is possible since magnetic anomaly fields
are potential fields. Of course, not all heights along the flight trajectory can have an
associated map as that would require nearly an infinite number of maps. Instead, an
interpolation function is created from the 3-D map whereby the filter can interpolate the
field intensity anywhere within the confines of the map.
Specifically, the GSA map was upward-continued using the Fast Fourier Transform ap-
proach (Blakely, 1995). The heights of the maps were separated by 100 m up to 1 km
16
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:24==
altitude, 200 m from 1 km to 5 km altitude, and 300 m from 5 km to 8 km altitude
for a total of 40 map surfaces. The reason for the gradual increase in step size is that
upward-continuation essentially acts as a low-pass filter, where high frequencies are at-
tenuated more with increasing altitude. To see this effect, Figure 8 shows the GSA map
upward-continued to 100 m and 1000 m. This low-pass filtering results in decreasing field
gradients which means less frequent sampling is required to capture the changes in the
field at higher altitudes. The source code for upward-continuing the magnetic anomaly
map can be found inside the Australia folder (see Figure 11.
The original 2-D and
processed 3-D are not included as the files were too large to upload to GitHub.
Figure 8: Magnetic anomaly map of western Australia from Geoscience Australia upward-
continued to 100 m and 1000 m above ground level (AGL).
It is worth mentioning that, in theory, upward-continuation assumes an infinite magnetic
anomaly map in both horizontal directions. This assumption is obviously not met in
practice and, consequently, most upward-continued anomaly maps contain errors along
the edges, also known as edge effects. Once again, since this study relied on simulated in-
flight magnetometer measurements derived from the magnetic anomaly map itself, these
edge effects are of no concern. However, in real flight tests, they would have to be taken
into account, and various techniques and general guidelines exist for doing so (Blakely,
1995).
3.3
Temporal Variation Data
This study used a real temporal variation dataset.
The dataset was acquired from
the International Real-Time Magnetic Observatory Network (INTERMAGNET) web-
site (British Geological Survey, 2025). The data was observed by the Learmonth (LRM)
observatory located on the northwestern coast of Australia. LRM was selected based on
its proximity to the location of the simulated trajectories.
17
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:25==
Temporal variations can vary significantly depending on the level of solar activity. How-
ever, as shown by Canciani, even the largest geomagnetic storms in non-polar regions do
not have a significant effect on navigation performance (Canciani, 2016). Experience in
polar regions is lacking. I selected May 8th, 2024, a solar-quiet day, and extracted 1 Hz
data which was the highest available from the observatory on the INTERMAGNET web-
site. An hour-long subset of this day-long data was then chosen at random and linearly
interpolated to the 20 Hz sampling rate of the INS. Finally, since the observatory captures
not only temporal variations but also the core and anomaly field, which are effectively
static on this timescale, the mean of the data was subtracted to isolate only the dynamic
part of total field. Figure 9 shows both the raw temporal variation dataset for May 8th,
2024, as well as the chosen hour-long, zero-mean subset.
Figure 9: Temporal variation data from the INTERMAGNET website captured by the Lear-
month observatory on a solar-quiet day (May 8th, 2024).
The original and processed INTERMAGNET datasets, as well as the source code used
for processing them, can be found inside the Intermagnet folder (see Figure 11.
3.4
Sensor Data and Noise Parameters
Since real flight tests were beyond the scope of this study, all sensor data had to be
simulated along the flight trajectories. I simulated four sensors: scalar magnetometer,
barometer, pitot tube, and vector magnetometer. In addition to the scalar magnetometer,
which is essential to MagNav, the other three sensors were chosen as they each provide
the filter with unique information about the state of the system. The barometer provides
information regarding position, the pitot tube provides information regarding velocity,
and the vector magnetometer provides information regarding attitude.
18
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:26==
3.4.1
Scalar Magnetometer
As explained in Section 2.4, the magnetic field observed by a magnetometer in-flight
has several sources, all of which need to taken into account when simulating realistic
magnetometer measurements for MagNav. The scalar magnetometer measurements were
simulated as
Bscalar = Bcore + Banomaly + Btv + Bbias + Baircraft + ε
(3.1)
where Bscalar is the total measured scalar magnetic field intensity, Bcore is the core‐field
component, Banomaly is the crustal anomaly component, Btv is the temporal‐variation
contribution, Bbias is the anomaly map bias, and Baircraft the aircraft‐induced field.
The term ε denotes zero‐mean white measurement noise,
ε ∼N
 0, σ2
scalar

,
where σscalar is the scalar‐magnetometer noise standard deviation.
Bcore was modeled using the IGRF. This was done by extracting the IGRF scalar field
intensities along the ground truth trajectories using the igrfmagm MATLAB function.
For consistency, the field intensities were extracted from the same day as the temporal
variation data (see Section 3.3).
Banomaly was simulated using the magnetic anomaly map. This was done by interpolating
the anomaly field (via the interpolation function described in Section 3.2) along the ground
truth trajectories.
Btv was simply the INTERMAGNET temporal variation data of the total magnetic field
intensity.
Bbias was set to be 100 nT.
As described in Section 2.4.4, aircraft effects can be rather complex. Modeling realistic
aircraft effects for the scalar magnetometer measurements was determined to be beyond
the scope of this project. For simulation purposes, I assumed Baircraft to be white noise and
merged it with ε. In this way, regulating σscalar corresponded to different levels of aircraft
effects. A small σscalar corresponded to a well-compensated aircraft field, whereas a large
σscalar corresponded to a poorly-compensated aircraft field. In reality, aircraft effects are
not white and should be modeled using state-of-the-art models, like Tolles-Lawson, for
more realistic magnetometer simulations.
The scalar magnetometer measurements were simulated with a sampling rate of 20 Hz.
σvector = 4.47 nT was used as the best case scenario to simulate a well-compensated
aircraft field, while 40σvector = 178.8 nT was used as the worst case scenario to simulated
a poorly-compensated aircraft field.
19
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:27==
3.4.2
Barometric Altimeter
Altitude is known to be unstable in INSs due to poor observability. Barometers, or baro-
metric altimeters, are commonly integrated into navigation algorithms to help solve this
problem, as they provide additional information on the altitude. They do so by measur-
ing atmospheric pressure and converting it into altitude estimates. A standard barometer
typically has an accuracy of a few meters or less, although strong weather conditions that
lead to abrupt temperature or pressure fluctuations can worsen this accuracy temporarily
mid-flight (Zaliva and Franchetti, 2014). For the purposes of this study, I did not simulate
noisy atmospheric measurements and then convert them into altitude estimates. Instead,
barometer-derived altitude measurements were simulated directly as
hbaro = htrue + ε
(3.2)
where hbaro is the barometer-derived altitude measurement, htrue is the true altitude above
ground level, and ε is the white measurement noise with ε ∼N
 0, σ2
baro

.
The barometric altimeter measurements were simulated with a sampling rate of 20 Hz
and σbaro = 1 m.
3.4.3
Pitot-Static System
A similar approach was taken for simulating the pitot tube measurements. A pitot tube
is part of the pitot-static system that provides airspeed estimates based on pressure dif-
ferences. Flight computers can reconstruct the ground speed by subtracting wind speed
forecasts from the calculated airspeed. Here, errors in the wind speed forecasts are the
primary factor in ground speed estimation accuracy. Wind speed errors of up to 60 knots
(approx. 30 m/s) have been reported (Williams and Green, 1998). For the purposes of
this study, pitot-derived ground speed measurements were simulated directly as
vpitot
b,x
= (Rbn vtrue
n
)x + ε
(3.3)
where vpitot
b,x
is the pitot-derived ground speed measurements in the body frame (along
the x-axis), vtrue
n
=
h
vtrue
n
vtrue
e
vtrue
d
i⊤
is the true velocity vector in the NED frame,
Rbn is the true rotation matrix from NED to body frame, (·)x denotes the first (i.e.,
along-track) component of the resulting vector, and ε is the white measurement noise
with ε ∼N
 0, σ2
pitot

.
The pitot tube measurements were simulated with a sampling rate of 20 Hz and σpitot =
10 m/s.
20
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:28==
3.4.4
Vector Magnetometer
In real flight test, vector magnetometer measurements would be influenced by the same
sources as scalar magnetometer measurements. Since the sole purpose of the vector mag-
netometer in this study was to provide information regarding attitude, it was suﬀicient to
model it using only the IGRF as the other field components either are too small to have
a significant effect (anomaly field and temporal variations) or were not modeled (aircraft
effects). This was done by extracting the IGRF vector field intensities (in NED frame)
along the ground truth trajectory using the igrfmagm MATLAB function. Again, for con-
sistency the field intensities were extracted from the same day as the temporal variation
data (see Section 3.3). The vector magnetometer measurements were then simulated as
Bvector
b
= Rbn BIGRF
n
+ ε
(3.4)
where Bvector
b
is the simulated vector magnetometer measurements in the body frame,
Rbn is the true rotation matrix from NED to body frame, BIGRF
n
=
h
BX
BY
BZ
i⊤
is
the IGRF magnetic-field vector in the NED frame, and ε is the white measurement noise
with ε ∼N(0, σ2
vector).
The vector magnetometer measurements were simulated with a sampling rate of 20 Hz
and σvector = 200 nT.
21
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:29==
4
The MagNav Software Package
The software package created for this study provides a modularized approach to testing the
impact of sensor fusion on MagNav. It is coded in MATLAB and requires the installation
of the Mapping Toolbox and the Signal Processing Toolbox to run. This chapter begins
with an overview of the MagNav software package and its file structure. I then go over
the design of the filter used for the navigation algorithm, as well as the metrics used to
evaluate its performance. Finally, a description of the various cases tested in this study
is given.
4.1
System Architecture Overview
The MagNav software package consists of many interlinked components. Figure 10 shows
how each component is connected within the system. Each component has a color that
represents the category to which they belong: magnetic field data are red, sensor mea-
surements are orange, flight data is yellow, navigation algorithm is in blue, and state
estimates are green. The lines are colored based on which direction information flows
between two components. Information flows from the component with the same color as
the line to the different colored component. The small arrows also indicate this. Below
is a step-by-step run-thru of the general flow of information:
• A ground truth trajectory is simulated and used to simulate IMU measurements.
• IMU measurements are fed into an INS to simulate an INS-estimated trajectory.
• The ground truth trajectory, magnetic anomaly map, INTERMAGNET data, and
IGRF are used to simulate sensor measurements.
• The sensor and IMU measurements, along with the INS-estimated trajectory, mag-
netic anomaly map, and IGRF, are then fed into the filter to produce error states.
• The INS-estimated trajectory is then corrected using the error states to produce the
final state estimates.
Figure 11 shows the file structure of the MagNav system. It is worth making a few clarifi-
cations about where specific functions can be found. The functions for loading the flight
trajectory, magnetic anomaly map, and INTERMAGNET data (see Section 3) into the
main MagNav script are found in the load folder. The function for calculating the final
state estimates are found in the analytics folder. All functions related to the filter (see
Section 4.2) are found in the model folder. Error metrics for evaluating filter performance
(see Section 4.3) are found in the residuals folder. Finally, the system was modularized
to allow for easy integration of additional sensors. Each sensor has two corresponding
functions: one for simulating its measurements (located in the simulate folder) and one
22
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:30==
Figure 10: Flow of information in the MagNav software package. Magnetic field data are red,
sensor measurements are orange, flight data is yellow, navigation algorithm is in blue, and state
estimates are green.
for updating the state vector in the filter (located in the update folder). The former
is implemented in the main MagNav script, while the latter is implemented in the ekf
function located in the model folder. The implementation of these two functions is both
necessary and suﬀicient for fusing a new sensor into the algorithm.
1
MagNav/￿￿￿
2
Australia /
# Australian
magnetic anomaly map data￿￿￿
3
Intermagnet /
# Temporal
variation
data from INTERMAGNET￿￿￿
4
Source /
# Main source
code￿￿￿￿
5
MagNav.m
# Main s c r i p t ￿￿￿￿
6
a n a l y t i c s /
# Data
a n a l y s i s
functions￿￿￿￿
7
load /
# Data loading
u t i l i t i e s ￿￿￿￿
8
model/
# Navigation and
f i l t e r
models￿￿￿￿
9
pl o tt in g /
# Vis ual izat ion
functions￿￿￿￿
10
r e s i d u a l s /
# Error
c a l c u l a t i o n
u t i l i t i e s ￿￿￿￿
11
simulate /
# Sensor
simulation
functions￿￿￿￿
12
t o o l s /
# General
u t i l i t y
functions￿￿￿￿
13
update/
# Measurement update
functions￿￿￿
14
T r a j e c t o r i e s /
# Flight
t r a j e c t o r y
data
Figure 11: File structure of the MagNav project.
23
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:31==
4.2
Filter Design
Filter design is critical to the performance of a navigation algorithm. Since navigation
algorithms consist of many interconnected variables, failure to properly model even just
one aspect of the system can result in significant decreases in performance that can be
diﬀicult to trace the origin of. This section describes how each of the main components
of the algorithm used in this study are designed.
4.2.1
Extended Kalman Filter
The algorithm used for MagNav in this study is the Extended Kalman filter (EKF) -
the standard for navigation systems. Kalman filters are algorithms that combine sensor
measurements (i.e. GNSS) and control inputs (i.e. steering) with a priori knowledge
(i.e. flight dynamics) of a given system (i.e. aircraft) to provide an optimal a posteriori
estimate of the state (i.e. position) of that system using joint probability distributions
(Kalman, 1960). They assume linear models with Gaussian noise and are analogous to
least squares minimization. EKFs are similar to Kalman filters except they do not assume
linear models. Instead, they linearize non-linear models about the current state of the
system.
Collectively, the states of the system one wishes to estimate are referred to as the state
vector (see Section 4.2.2). In an EKF, the process of estimating the state vector x and its
associated covariance matrix P occurs in two main steps: prediction and update. Figure
12 shows the process flow of the EKF. An initial estimate of the state vector x0 and
covariance matrix P 0 is set and passed into the prediction algorithm, along with any
control inputs that may be applied. The prediction (also called propagation) algorithm
then uses a priori knowledge of the system (and its control inputs) to predict the state
vector xk|k−1 and covariance matrix P k|k−1 of the system at the next time step k. This
step is associated with increasing uncertainty. If a sensor measurement is available at the
time step k, the predictions are fed into the update (also called innovation) algorithm
and updated to a posteriori state vector xk and covariance matrix P k.
This step is
associated with decreasing uncertainty. The updates are then fed back into the prediction
algorithm as xk−1 and P k−1 and the process reiterates for the next time step. Note that
if no measurement is available at time step k, the predictions cannot be updated and are
instead themselves fed back into the prediction algorithm.
The above was a general description of how EKFs work. The rest of the section will be
tailored to the specific filter used in this study.
Prediction Step
The error state dynamics for MagNav are linearized. The discrete state dynamics model
(i.e. how the system is predicted to evolve from one time step to the next) is given by
24
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:32==
prediction
(or propagation)
update
(or innovation)
x0, P 0
xk|k−1, P k|k−1
uk
zk
xk, P k
xk−1, P k−1
Figure 12: Extended Kalman Filter process flow diagram.
xk+1 = Φkxk + Bkuk + wk
(4.1)
where xk is the state vector at time k, Φ is the linear state transition matrix (see Section
4.2.3), B is the control input matrix that determines the change in the state based on
control input u, and w is the process noise with covariance Q (i.e. w ∼N(0, Q)) (see
Eq. 4.25). Since MagNav is passive, there are no system inputs u and, therefore, no
control input matrix B for the model used in this study. Equation 4.1 then simplifies to
xk+1 = Φkxk + wk
(4.2)
Algorithmically, the predicted state vector and covariance matrix are calculated as
ˆxk|k−1 = Φkˆxk−1
(4.3)
P k|k−1 = ΦkP k−1ΦT
k + Qk
(4.4)
where theˆsymbol indicates an estimate.
Update Step
Each type of sensor has an associated measurement model (i.e. how the expected sen-
sor measurement is calculated from the current state vector). The general form of the
measurement models is given by
zk = h(xk) + vk
(4.5)
where h(xk) is a non-linear measurement function converting the state vector xk at time
k from the state space to the measurement space and v is the measurement noise with
25
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:33==
covariance R (i.e.
v ∼N(0, R)) (see Section 4.2.4).
The corresponding prediction
and update equations are given below. Algorithmically, the updated state vector and
covariance matrix are calculated as
Hk = ∂h
∂x

ˆxk|k−1
(4.6)
Kk = P k|k−1HT
k
 HkP k|k−1HT
k + Rk
−1
(4.7)
ˆxk|k = ˆxk|k−1 + Kk
 zk −h
 ˆxk|k−1

(4.8)
P k|k =
 I −KkHk

P k|k−1
 I −KkHk
T + Kk Rk KT
k.
(4.9)
where H is the Jacobian matrix of the measurement model and K is the Kalman gain,
a measure of how much the filter trusts the actual sensor measurement versus the mea-
surement prediction.
To summarize, there are seven essential components that need to be defined in the filter:
the initial state vector x0 and covariance matrix P 0; the state transition matrix Φ and
the process noise matrix Q; and the measurement model h(ˆx), its Jacobian H, and the
measurement noise R. As mentioned above, the last three components have to be defined
for each sensor. Each component will be described below.
4.2.2
State Vector
The state dynamics model is based on the 9-state Pinson error model, which is a standard
first-order model for INS-based navigation systems (David Titterton, 2004). The Pinson
error model is an error-state model, meaning it tracks the state errors of the system
rather than the states themselves.
Specifically, it estimates the position δˆp, velocity
δˆv, and attitude δˆϵ errors. Six extra states were added to the state vector to estimate
accelerometer ˆa and gyroscope ˆg biases, which are common in IMU sensors and can lead
to significant decreases in performance if unaccounted for. Two final states were added to
estimate the temporal variations ˆSTV and anomaly map bias ˆSMB. The resulting 17-state
state vector is
26
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:34==
ˆx =


δˆp
δˆv
δˆϵ
ˆa
ˆg
ˆSTV
ˆSMB


(4.10)
where δˆp = [δ ˆϕ δˆλ δˆξ] are the estimated latitude, longitude, and altitude errors; δˆv =
[δˆvN δˆvE δˆvD] are the estimated velocity errors in the NED frame; δˆϵ = [δˆϵN δˆϵE δˆϵD]
are the estimated attitude errors (roll, pitch, yaw in the NED frame); ˆa = [ˆax ˆay ˆaz] are
the estimated 3-axis accelerometer biases in the body frame; and ˆg = [ˆgx ˆgy ˆgz] are the
estimated 3-axis gyroscope biases in the body frame.
The state vector ˆx is initialized as a zero vector and the state covariance matrix P
is initialized with the INS position, velocity, and attitude uncertainties, as well as the
expected temporal variation and map bias uncertainties, at the start time.
4.2.3
State Dynamics Model
The state dynamics model consists of two parts: the state transition matrix Φ and the
process noise matrix Q (see Eq. 4.3 and 4.4). Both are first constructed in their respective
continuous forms and then discretized at each time step. The continuous state dynamics
matrix F is broken down into blocks as
F =


F pp
F pv
03×3
03×3
03×3
03×2
F vp
F vv
F vϵ
F va
03×3
03×2
F ep
F ev
F ϵϵ
F ϵa
F ϵg
03×2
03×3
03×3
F aa
03×3
03×3
03×2
03×3
03×3
03×3
F gg
03×3
03×2
02×3
02×3
02×3
02×3
02×3
F ss


17×17
(4.11)
where each block represents how each type of error is affected by the others. Table 2
provides a description of the variables involved in the dynamics equations that make up
the blocks.
27
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:35==
Table 2: State-transition matrix variables.
Variable
Description
L
INS latitude [rad]
vn
INS north velocity [m/s]
ve
INS east velocity [m/s]
vd
INS down velocity [m/s]
fn
IMU north specific force [m/s2]
fe
IMU east specific force [m/s2]
fd
IMU down specific force [m/s2]
Cn
b
INS direction–cosine matrix (body →navigation) [–]
τa
IMU accelerometer time constant [s]
τg
IMU gyroscope time constant [s]
τtv
Temporal-variation time constant [s]
Re
WGS-84 Earth radius (6378137) [m]
Ω
Earth rotation rate (7.292 115 1467×10–5) [rad/s]
The blocks relate position to position errors as
F pp =


0
0
−vn
R2e
ve tan L
Re cos L
0
−
ve
R2e cos L
0
0
−k1


3×3
(4.12)
velocity to position errors as
F pv =


1
Re
0
0
0
1
Re cos L
0
0
0
−1


3×3
(4.13)
position to velocity errors as
F vp =


−ve(2Ωcos L +
ve
Re cos2 L)
0
v2
e tan L−vnvd
R2e
2Ω(vn cos L −vd sin L) +
vnve
Re cos2 L
0
−ve
vn tan L+vd
R2e
2Ωve sin L
0
v2
n+v2
e
R2e
+ k2


3×3
(4.14)
28
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:36==
velocity to velocity errors as
F vv =


vd
Re
−2(Ωsin L + ve tan L
Re
)
vn
Re
2Ωsin L + ve tan L
Re
vn tan L+vd
Re
2Ωcos L + ve
Re
−2vn
Re
−2(Ωcos L + ve
Re)
0


3×3
(4.15)
attitude to velocity errors as
F vϵ =


0
−fd
fe
fd
0
−fn
−fe
fn
0


3×3
(4.16)
position to attitude errors as
F ϵp =


−Ωsin L
0
−ve
R2e
0
0
vn
R2e
−Ωcos L −
ve
Re cos2 L
0
ve tan L
R2e


3×3
(4.17)
velocity to attitude errors as
F ϵv =


0
1
Re
0
−1
Re
0
0
0
−tan L
Re
0


3×3
(4.18)
and attitude to attitude errors as
F ϵϵ =


0
−

Ωsin L + ve tan L
Re

vn
Re
Ωsin L + ve tan L
Re
0
Ωcos L + ve
Re
−vn
Re
−

Ωcos L + ve
Re

0


3×3
(4.19)
The accelerometer to velocity errors are related via the body-to-navigation direction cosine
matrix as
F va = Cn
b
(4.20)
where Cn
b is derived from the Euler angles measured by the INS. The accelerometer errors
29
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:37==
are governed by the accelerometer time constant τa as
F aa =


−1
τa
0
0
0
−1
τa
0
0
0
−1
τa


3×3
.
(4.21)
The gyroscope to attitude errors are related via the body-to-navigation direction cosine
matrix as
F ϵg = −Cn
b .
(4.22)
The gyroscope errors are governed by the gyroscope time constant τg as
F gg =


−1
τg
0
0
0
−1
τg
0
0
0
−1
τg


3×3
.
(4.23)
The temporal variation (and the map bias) errors are governed by the temporal variation
time constant τtv as
F ss =
"
−1
τtv
0
0
0
#
2×2
(4.24)
where τtv is set to 600 s in line with Gnadt (2022).
Finally, the continuous process noise covariance matrix Qc describing the uncertainties
associated with the system dynamics is given by
Qc = diag

VRW1×3
ARW1×3
Da 1×3
Dg 1×3
Dtv
0

14×14
(4.25)
where V RW = σ2
V RW is zero-mean velocity random walk, ARW = σ2
ARW is zero-mean
angular random walk, Da = 2σ2
a
τa is accelerometer driving noise, and Dg =
2σ2
g
τg is gyroscope
driving noise found in Table 1. Dtv = 2σ2
tv
τtv is temporal variation driving noise where the
standard deviation of the temporal variations is set to σtv = 3 nT in line with Gnadt
(2022).
Both F and Qc are discretized (i.e. integrated over the time step) into Φ and Q, respec-
tively, at each time step using the Van Loan method. This results in a 17x17 matrix for
30
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:38==
Q where the position-related process noise components are determined by the rest. For a
full explanation of the Van Loan method, see Farrell (2008).
4.2.4
Measurement Models
Each sensor measures a different type of data and, therefore, has a corresponding unique
measurement model that relates the estimated state vector to an expected sensor mea-
surement. Each measurement model consists of three parts: the non-linear measurement
function h(ˆx), its Jacobian H, and the measurement noise R. The definitions of each of
these components are given below.
Scalar Magnetometer
The scalar magnetometer measurement model relates the state vector to an expected
scalar-field intensity (see Section 3.4.1) via the estimated position as
h(ˆx) = f scalar
IGRF(ˆϕ, ˆλ, ˆξ) + fmap(ˆϕ, ˆλ, ˆξ) + STV + SMB
(4.26)
where f scalar
IGRF is the IGRF scalar field model, fmap is the anomaly map interpolation func-
tion, and ˆϕ = ϕ+δ ˆϕ, ˆλ = λ+δˆλ, and ˆξ = ξ+δˆξ are the estimated latitude, longitude, and
altitude. The measurement Jacobian for the scalar magnetometer update is then given as
H(ˆx) =
h
∂h(ˆx)
∂ˆϕ
∂h(ˆx)
∂ˆλ
∂h(ˆx)
∂ˆξ
01×12
1
1
iT
(4.27)
where ∂h(ˆx)
∂ˆϕ , ∂h(ˆx)
∂ˆλ , ∂h(ˆx)
∂ˆξ
are the sum of the scalar field gradients of the IGRF and magnetic
anomaly map in the north, east, and up directions.
The scalar magnetometer measurement noise is simply the variance that characterizes the
noise used to simulate the scalar magnetometer measurements (see Section ??):
R = σ2
scalar
(4.28)
Barometric Altimeter
The barometric altimeter measurement model relates the state vector to the expected
altitude via the estimated altitude as
h(ˆx) = ξ + δξ
(4.29)
31
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:39==
The measurement Jacobian for the barometric altimeter update is then given as
H(ˆx) =
h
0
0
1
01×14
iT
(4.30)
The barometric altimeter measurement noise is simply the variance that characterizes the
noise used to simulate the barometric altimeter measurements (see Section ??):
R = σ2
baro
(4.31)
Pitot-Static System
The pitot-static system measurement model relates the state vector to the expected for-
ward (body-frame, x-axis) velocity via the estimated NED velocity and attitude as
h(ˆx) = eT
1 Rbn(ˆϵ)
 vn + ˆ
δv)
(4.32)
where e1 = [1 0 0]T selects the forward (x-) component in the body frame, Rbn(ˆϵ) is
the rotation matrix from NED to body constructed from the estimated Euler angles
ˆϵ = [ ˆϵN
ˆϵE
ˆϵD]T, vn = [vn ve vd]T is the INS velocity in the NED frame, and ˆδv =
[ ˆ
δvn ˆ
δve
ˆ
δvd]T are the estimated velocity-error states. Note that the quaternion method
was used to obtain the estimated Euler angles ˆϵ from the INS Euler angles ϵ and the
estimated attitude-error states δˆϵ (Solà, 2015).
Applying the small-angle approximation (Farrell, 2008) Rbn(ˆϵ) ≈Rbn(ϵ+δˆϵ) ≈Rbn(ϵ)
 I+
[δˆϵ]×

and retaining only first-order terms gives the measurement Jacobian for the pitot-
static system update as
H(ˆx) =
h
01×3
eT
1 Rbn
 ϵ

−eT
1 Rbn
 ϵ

[vn

×
01×8
i
(4.33)
where (·)x denotes the skew symmetric matrix.
The pitot-static system measurement noise is simply the variance that characterizes the
noise used to simulate the pitot-static system measurements (see Section ??):
R = σ2
pitot
(4.34)
Vector Magnetometer
The vector magnetometer measurement model relates the state vector to expected vector-
field intensities via the estimated position and attitude as
32
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:40==
h
 ˆx

= Rbn
 ˆϵ

f vector
IGRF (ˆϕ, ˆλ, ˆξ)
(4.35)
where f vector
IGRF is the IGRF vector field model. As with the pitot-static system, applying
the small angle approximation and retaining only first-order terms gives the measurement
Jacobian for the vector magnetometer update as
H(ˆx) =
h
∂h(ˆx)
∂ˆϕ
3×1
∂h(ˆx)
∂ˆλ
3×1
∂h(ˆx)
∂ˆξ
3×1
03×3
−Rbn
 ϵ
 
f vector
IGRF (ˆϕ, ˆλ, ˆξ)]×
03×8
i
(4.36)
where ∂h(ˆx)
∂ˆϕ , ∂h(ˆx)
∂ˆλ , ∂h(ˆx)
∂ˆξ
are the vector field gradients of the IGRF in the east, north, and
up directions rotated into the body frame.
The vector magnetometer measurement noise is simply the variance that characterizes
the noise used to simulate the vector magnetometer measurements (see Section ??):
R = diag

σ2
vector

3×3
(4.37)
4.3
Performance Metric
Navigation performance is primarily about position. Velocity and attitude estimation is
of course also of value but mainly in how it contributes to position accuracy. Moreover,
even affordable, tactical-grade IMUs restrict INS attitude drift to only a few degrees
of the course of multiple hours. The standard navigation metric is DRMS which mea-
sures horizontal position accuracy. Usually, as with this study, the altitude residual is a
consequence of the barometric data and not the ”map-matching”. It is, therefore, not con-
sidered in the performance metric, as it can be regulated independently of the horizontal
components. The DRMS metric is calculated as
DRMS =
v
u
u
t 1
N
N
X
k=1
(∆x2
k + ∆y2
k)
(4.38)
where N is the number of samples, ∆xk = xGT
k
−ˆxk is the UTM northing residual at time
step k, and ∆yk = yGT
k
−ˆyk is the UTM easting residual at time k. GT stands for ground
truth.
33
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:41==
4.4
Test Cases
This study examined the following five different test cases:
1. MagNav-Only: Pure MagNav was tested on the twelve flight trajectories without
sensor fusion to determine whether or not MagNav alone is enough to constrain the
drift of the INS using a tactical-grade IMU.
2. Sensor Fusion: All possible combinations of the four sensors were then fused into
the algorithm to test the impact of each on the performance and generalizability of
MagNav.
3. Map Bias State: State-of-the-art filters only include one catch-all state for tem-
poral variations and map bias (Gnadt, 2022). The filter used in this study has a
separate state for each of these (see Section 4.2.2). Both models were tested and
compared against each other.
4. Aircraft Effects: Various levels of aircraft effects were injected into the scalar
and vector magnetometer measurements (see Section 5.4) to simulate and test the
impact of a poorly-compensated scalar magnetometer on MagNav performance.
5. Nav-Grade: Test cases 1, 2, and 4 were repeated using a navigation-grade IMU.
34
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:42==
5
Test Case Results
This chapter presents the results of the five test cases in this study (see Section 4.4 across
all twelve simulated trajectories. The first section presents the baseline performance of
MagNav using a tactical-grade IMU and a well-compensated aircraft field. The second
section presents the impact of sensor fusion on the baseline performance of MagNav from
the first section. The third section compares the performance of the navigation filter used
in this study to one that does not estimate the anomaly map bias as a separate state. The
fourth section shows how varying levels of aircraft effects can impact the performance of
MagNav with the optimal sensor fusion from the second section. Finally, the fifth section
shows the difference between a well-compensated and a poorly-compensated aircraft field
on MagNav using a navigation-grade IMU with and without sensor fusion.
5.1
Baseline Performance
I started out by testing the baseline performance of MagNav using a tactical-grade IMU.
The main goal here was to see whether or not MagNav by itself was enough to constrain
the drift of the INS for any of the twelve trajectories. The tactical-grade IMU parameters
can be found in Table 1. For this test case, no other sensor measurements than the scalar
magnetometer measurements were used. The scalar magnetometer measurements were
simulating using sensor noise σscalar = 4.47 nT. This corresponds to a well-compensated
aircraft field. Tables 3 and 4 show the DRMS errors of the INS alone. It is clear that
without aid the INS drifts significantly (1-100 km) using a tactical-grade IMU, depending
on the flight trajectory and duration. The longer trajectories (9-12) have the greatest
drift which is to be expected.
Table 3: INS DRMS Error [m] by Trajectory using Tactical-Grade IMU and Scalar Magnetome-
ter Noise σscalar = 4.47nT (Trajectories 1-6).
Trajectory
1
2
3
4
5
6
DRMS [m]
9018.92
2645.75
6958.53
3937.62
9303.01
1219.47
Table 4: INS DRMS Error [m] by Trajectory using Tactical-Grade IMU and Scalar Magnetome-
ter Noise σscalar = 4.47nT (Trajectories 7-12).
Trajectory
7
8
9
10
11
12
DRMS [m]
2877.27
10591.54
29088.44
96191.32
15025.51
17067.23
Tables 5 and 6 show the DRMS errors when MagNav is used. The first thing to notice is
that DRMS errors for only five out of twelve trajectories are presented. DRMS errors for
other seven trajectories were unable to be calculated as the estimated altitude diverged to
the point of exceeding the bounds of the anomaly map (100-8000 m) somewhere along their
respective flight paths. All twelve trajectories are well within the bounds of the anomaly
35
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:43==
map (500-7500 m), so it is unlikely that extending the map bounds would provide any
benefit. The second thing to notice is that trajectory 2 and 9 have DRMS errors of roughly
2 km and above. For trajectory 2, this was not even a significant improvement from the
INS alone. For trajectory 9, MagNav did significantly constrain the drift of the INS but
not to the level that is typically desired for navigation purposes (on the order of 100 m or
less). Only trajectories 1, 7, and 11 showed a significant improvement from the INS alone
and had DRMS errors within the range of desired navigation performance using MagNav.
Table 5: MagNav DRMS Error [m] by Trajectory using Tactical-Grade IMU and Scalar Magne-
tometer Noise σscalar = 4.47nT (Trajectories 1-6).
Trajectory
1
2
3
4
5
6
DRMS
36.63
1969.54
–
–
–
–
Table 6: MagNav DRMS Error [m] by Trajectory using Tactical-Grade IMU and Scalar Magne-
tometer Noise σscalar = 4.47nT (Trajectories 7-12).
Trajectory
7
8
9
10
11
12
DRMS
38.58
–
2551.54
–
110.84
–
5.2
Sensor Fusion Analysis
I then tested the impact of sensor fusion on MagNav. The main goal here was to see which
combination of sensors achieved the best navigation performance. The IMU and scalar
magnetometer conditions were the same as for the baseline test (tactical-grade and σscalar
= 4.47 nT). All 15 possible combinations of the four sensors were tested, the first being the
baseline performance of MagNav from the baseline test. Tables 7 and 8 show the DRMS
errors for each sensor combination. The following abbreviations are used for clarity: S
= Scalar Magnetometer, B = Barometric Altimeter, P = Pitot-Static System, and V =
Vector Magnetometer. Also, cell referencing in this section will be sensor combination,
followed by a forward slash, followed by the trajectory number (i.e. B/5 for barometric
altimeter aiding on trajectory 5 or SPV/11 for scalar magnetometer, pitot-static system,
and vector magnetometer aiding for trajectory 11).
It is clear that none of the three other sensors (B, S, and V) alone are able to constrain
the drift of the INS to desired levels for navigation. The same goes for the BP, BV,
and PV combinations, with the exception of PV/2 which achieves a DRMS error of
roughly 94 m. The SP and SV combinations exceeded the bounds of the anomaly map
(as discussed in the previous section) for 8 and 3 trajectories, respectively. SB shows a
significant improvement to the baseline performance of MagNav by successfully keeping
the estimated altitude within the bounds of the map. However, still only SB/1,2,7,11 have
DRMS errors within the desired range. SBP and SBV show even further improvements to
SB, achieving DRMS errors within the desired range for 9 and 8 trajectories, respectively.
36
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:44==
Table 7: DRMS Error [m] by Trajectory and Sensor Combination using Tactical-Grade IMU
and Scalar Magnetometer Noise σscalar = 4.47nT (Trajectories 1-6). S = Scalar Magnetometer,
B = Barometric Altimeter, P = Pitot-Static System, and V = Vector Magnetometer.
Sensor
Combination
Traj
1
Traj
2
Traj
3
Traj
4
Traj
5
Traj
6
S
36.63
1969.54
–
–
–
–
B
>5000
3208.70
>5000
3892.30
>5000
2679.90
P
265.37
330.19
3770.88
1001.02
>5000
571.01
V
3243.99
1464.62
4107.53
1920.23
>5000
4746.91
S + B
41.46
41.47
1527.22
353.60
2771.91
3146.05
S + P
362.92
–
493.43
–
–
–
S + V
249.94
1807.74
1544.67
–
3498.27
3096.84
B + P
257.12
192.88
4339.36
923.58
>5000
556.88
B + V
3448.69
1493.58
3620.22
2138.38
1049.82
>5000
P + V
154.61
94.40
1802.71
388.00
2820.58
584.54
S + B + P
37.35
18.30
55.68
93.74
47.37
73.25
S + B + V
8.97
17.60
164.19
62.77
2621.94
51.29
S + P + V
14.92
62.65
564.70
72.10
–
50.55
B + P + V
193.47
142.41
532.01
410.04
544.65
689.49
S + B + P + V
6.16
13.02
73.43
53.61
24.67
28.15
37
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:45==
Table 8: DRMS Error [m] by Trajectory and Sensor Combination using Tactical-Grade IMU
and Scalar Magnetometer Noise σscalar = 4.47nT (Trajectories 7-12). S = Scalar Magnetometer,
B = Barometric Altimeter, P = Pitot-Static System, and V = Vector Magnetometer.
Sensor
Combination
Traj
7
Traj
8
Traj
9
Traj
10
Traj
11
Traj
12
S
38.58
–
2551.54
–
110.84
–
B
2606.05
>5000
>5000
>5000
>5000
>5000
P
175.58
175.57
>5000
>5000
928.22
3483.02
V
3067.78
>5000
>5000
>5000
>5000
>5000
S + B
32.98
2036.45
4125.41
1329.58
8.71
164.14
S + P
22.60
–
>5000
–
–
–
S + V
38.09
–
2320.63
–
94.45
371.27
B + P
178.05
170.76
>5000
>5000
653.81
865.62
B + V
1145.99
2705.30
>5000
>5000
>5000
>5000
P + V
192.30
112.97
>5000
>5000
891.02
1707.61
S + B + P
18.47
1015.88
556.52
1495.36
7.04
82.08
S + B + V
18.50
18.46
1030.43
553.51
6.11
73.94
S + P + V
34.79
–
2330.26
–
93.36
198.59
B + P + V
204.65
125.31
>5000
>5000
400.11
478.98
S + B + P + V
16.74
37.29
478.96
392.19
5.45
54.99
38
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:46==
Despite achieving low DRMS errors, SPV lacks the barometric altimeter measurements
to constrain the altitude and exceeds the map bounds for 3 trajectories. BPV does not
achieve DRMS errors within the desired range for any of the trajectories. Finally, SBPV
achieves the lowest DRMS errors on average with DRMS errors well within the desired
range for 10 trajectories. SBPV/1,11 have almost GNSS-level DRMS errors - about 6 m.
It is worth taking a closer look at the estimated magnetic field gradients of SBPV/9,10 to
see why they did not achieve DRMS errors in the desired range. Magnetic field gradients
are crucial to MagNav as they tell the navigation algorithm how to convert the difference
between the expected and actual scalar magnetometer measurements into position cor-
rections. Figure 13 shows the magnetic field gradients along the estimated flight path for
SBPV/9. We can see that the magnetic field gradients become negligible around 1400 s
(marked with an orange X). There are two reasons for this. The first is that this trajectory
gradually ascends throughout the duration of the flight from 500 to 7500 m. As described
in Section 3.2, magnetic field gradients decrease with increasing altitude. The second is
that the trajectory enters into an area of relatively low spatial magnetic variability at
this point. This is can be seen by visually inspecting the anomaly map upon which the
estimated flight path is plotted in figure 14. Note the direction of flight as marked by the
start and end points. It is clear that navigation performance decreases significantly after
1400 s. Up until 1400 s, SBPV/9 achieves a DRMS error of 18.81 m.
Figure 13: Magnetic field gradients along the estimated flight path of trajectory 9 using tactical-
grade IMU, scalar magnetometer noise σscalar = 4.47nT, and sensor fusion combination SBPV.
The orange cross indicates the time at which the magnetic field gradients become negligible
along the estimated flight path.
39
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:47==
Figure 14: Estimated flight path of trajectory 9 using tactical-grade IMU, scalar magnetometer
noise σscalar = 4.47nT, and sensor fusion combination SBPV. The orange cross indicates the
time at which the magnetic field gradients become negligible along the estimated flight path.
The estimated flight path of SBPV/10 is not shown as it closely resembles that of SBPV/9.
The only difference between trajectory 9 and 10 is altitude. While trajectory 9 continually
ascends, reaching 7500 m altitude at the end of the flight, trajectory 10 stops ascending
around 5500 m altitude, levels off, and then descends back down to 500 m altitude. This
explains why SBPV/10 achieves a slightly lower DRMS error than SBPV/9.
Despite
the return to a lower altitude, however, SBPV/10 was still not able to re-establish the
same level of navigation performance as before 1400 s which shows that the low spatial
magnetic variability of the region is likely the dominant factor, not the altitude. Similar
to SBPV/9, SBPV/10 achieves a DRMS error of 15.33 m before 1400 s. Note: none of
the other ten trajectories pass over regions of similar low spatial magnetic variability. In
summary, taking into account the low spatial variability of the magnetic anomaly map
for trajectories 9 and 10, the SBPV combination seems to achieve DRMS errors in the
desired range for all twelve trajectories.
Since overall navigation performance depends largely on INS performance, often a more
objective way of quantifying navigation performance is by looking at the ratio of im-
provement between INS and a given sensor fusion combination. Tables 9 and 10 show
the improvement ratios for each sensor combination. Here we can see how some sensor
combinations (e.g. B, V, BP) actually yield worse DRMS errors than the INS alone for
some trajectories. The vertical trends are the same as in Tables 7 and 8, but now we can
40
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:48==
Table 9: Improvement Ratio by Trajectory and Sensor Combination using Tactical-Grade IMU
and Scalar Magnetometer Noise σscalar = 4.47nT (Trajectories 1-6). Improvement Ratio = INS
DRMS / Sensor Fusion DRMS. S = Scalar Magnetometer, B = Barometric Altimeter, P =
Pitot-Static System, and V = Vector Magnetometer.
Sensor
Combination
Traj
1
Traj
2
Traj
3
Traj
4
Traj
5
Traj
6
S
246.22
1.34
–
–
–
–
B
1.01
0.82
0.75
1.01
1.00
0.46
P
33.99
8.01
1.85
3.93
1.07
2.14
V
2.78
1.81
1.69
2.05
1.19
0.26
S + B
217.53
63.80
4.56
11.14
3.36
0.39
S + P
24.85
–
14.10
–
–
–
S + V
36.08
1.46
4.50
–
2.66
0.39
B + P
35.08
13.72
1.60
4.26
1.11
2.19
B + V
2.62
1.77
1.92
1.84
8.86
0.19
P + V
58.33
28.03
3.86
10.15
3.30
2.09
S + B + P
241.47
144.58
124.97
42.01
196.39
16.65
S + B + V
1005.45
150.33
42.38
62.73
3.55
23.78
S + P + V
604.49
42.23
12.32
54.61
–
24.12
B + P + V
46.62
18.58
13.08
9.60
17.08
1.77
S + B + P + V
1464.11
203.21
94.76
73.45
377.10
43.32
41
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:49==
Table 10: Improvement Ratio by Trajectory and Sensor Combination using Tactical-Grade IMU
and Scalar Magnetometer Noise σscalar = 4.47nT (Trajectories 7-12). Improvement Ratio =
INS DRMS / Sensor Fusion DRMS. S = Scalar Magnetometer, B = Barometric Altimeter, P =
Pitot-Static System, and V = Vector Magnetometer.
Sensor
Combination
Traj
7
Traj
8
Traj
9
Traj
10
Traj
11
Traj
12
S
74.58
–
11.40
–
135.56
–
B
1.10
0.76
0.12
0.29
0.24
0.28
P
16.39
60.33
0.50
2.99
16.19
4.90
V
0.94
1.43
0.57
1.05
0.75
0.88
S + B
87.24
5.20
7.05
72.35
1725.09
103.98
S + P
127.31
–
5.25
–
–
–
S + V
75.54
–
12.53
–
159.08
45.97
B + P
16.16
62.03
0.28
1.17
22.98
19.72
B + V
2.51
3.92
0.64
0.87
0.78
0.97
P + V
14.96
93.76
1.50
1.17
16.86
9.99
S + B + P
155.78
10.43
52.27
64.33
2134.31
207.93
S + B + V
155.53
573.76
28.23
173.78
2459.17
230.83
S + P + V
82.70
–
12.48
–
160.94
85.94
B + P + V
14.06
84.52
1.21
3.64
37.55
35.63
S + B + P + V
171.88
284.03
60.73
245.27
2756.97
310.37
42
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:50==
see how much of an impact each sensor combination is having on the INS for each trajec-
tory. For example, SBPV/5,6 have similar DRMS errors (24.67 and 28.15, respectively).
Looking at their improvement ratios, however, SBPV/5 improves the INS estimates by
a factor of about 380, while SBPV/6 only improves the INS estimates by a factor of
about 40. Similarly, although SBPV/10 has a DRMS error outside the desired range,
it improved the INS estimates by a factor of about 250, in contrast to SBPV/7 which
achieves a DRMS error well within the desired range (16.74 m) but improves the INS
by a significantly less factor (about 170). These improvement ratios illustrate just how
effective sensor fusion, particularly the SBPV combination, is at constraining even the
most dramatic INS drift.
5.3
Map Bias State
Next, I removed the map bias state from the filter model, leaving just the temporal
variation state to estimate both the temporal variations and the map bias, as was done
in (Gnadt, 2022). The main goal here was to see what effect estimating the map bias
separately from the temporal variations has on navigation performance.
Due to time
constraints, I only tested the baseline performance of MagNav and the SBPV combination
with this model. Tables 11 and 12 show the resulting DRMS errors.
Table 11: DRMS Error [m] using Tactical-Grade IMU and Scalar Magnetometer Noise σscalar
= 4.47nT without Extra Map Bias State (Trajectories 1-6). S = Scalar Magnetometer, B =
Barometric Altimeter, P = Pitot-Static System, and V = Vector Magnetometer.
Sensor
Combination
Traj
1
Traj
2
Traj
3
Traj
4
Traj
5
Traj
6
S
–
–
–
–
2398.78
>5000
S + B + P + V
726.46
212.27
56.68
1694.82
75.38
2133.21
Table 12: DRMS Error [m] with Tactical-Grade IMU and Scalar Magnetometer Noise σscalar
= 4.47nT without Extra Map Bias State (Trajectories 7-12). S = Scalar Magnetometer, B =
Barometric Altimeter, P = Pitot-Static System, and V = Vector Magnetometer.
Sensor
Combination
Traj
7
Traj
8
Traj
9
Traj
10
Traj
11
Traj
12
S
–
–
–
–
–
–
S + B + P + V
42.30
67.99
2729.40
1431.09
15.98
2330.00
In general, navigation performance is much worse when using the model that does not
estimate the map bias separately. MagNav by itself fails to constrain the drift of the
INS to desired levels for any of trajectories; the estimated flight paths exceed the bounds
of the anomaly map for all but two of the trajectories.
Only five of the trajectories
43
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:51==
achieve DRMS errors within the desired range using the SBPV combination. Compared
to the model with the extra bias state, DRMS errors using the SBPV combination were
significantly larger for all but one of the trajectories. Interestingly, SBPV/3 had a lower
DRMS error by about 16 m. It seems plausible that the lower DRMS error using this
model would be attributed to a better estimation of the temporal variations and map
bias. However, this is not the case. Figure 15 show the combined temporal variations and
map bias estimates using both models. Clearly, the model with the extra map bias state
provides a much better estimate of the temporal variations and map bias. The root mean
square error (RMSE) of the residuals (difference between ground truth and estimates)
using the model with the extra map bias is around 2 nT, while the RMSE of the residuals
using the model without the extra map bias is around 68 nT. It is not clear what the
increase in navigation performance for SBPV/3 using the model without the extra map
bias state is coming from.
Figure 15: Estimated temporal variations + magnetic anomaly map bias for SBPV/3 using
tactical-grade IMU and scalar magnetometer noise σscalar = 4.47nT with and without extra map
bias state.
44
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:52==
5.4
Varying Aircraft Effects
I then re-instated the extra map bias state and tested the impact of varying levels of
aircraft effects on the navigation performance of the SBPV combination using a tactical-
grade IMU. The goal here was to see whether the SBPV combination could achieve desired
DRMS errors even in poorly-compensated aircraft fields. Aircraft effects were simulated
as white noise in the scalar magnetometer measurements as explained in Section 3.4.1.
In addition to the original noise level σscalar = 4.47 nT, four different noise levels were
used: 5σscalar = 22.35 nT, 10σscalar = 44.7 nT, 20σscalar = 89.4 nT, and 40σscalar = 178.8
nT. Note: for each noise level, the measurement noise R for the scalar magnetometer
update was set to the corresponding variance. This range of noise values is in line with
real scalar magnetometer errors found by (Gnadt, 2022). In that study, five scalar mag-
netometers were placed in different locations onboard an aircraft and exposed to varying
levels of aircraft effects throughout a test flight. With the exception of one of the scalar
magnetometers, which was placed in close proximity to the aircraft engine, the standard
deviations of the magnetic measurement errors ranged from about 6 to 110 nT when
compensated using the classic Tolles-Lawson model. Tables 13 and 14 show the resulting
DRMS errors for the five different noise levels.
Table 13: DRMS Error [m] by Trajectory and Scalar Magnetometer Noise Level using Tactical-
Grade IMU and SBPV Combination (Trajectories 1-6).
Noise
Level
Traj
1
Traj
2
Traj
3
Traj
4
Traj
5
Traj
6
σscalar
6.16
13.02
73.43
53.61
24.67
28.15
5σscalar
14.35
19.97
23.42
26.22
37.45
24.90
10σscalar
20.78
26.14
35.67
31.49
53.79
33.77
20σscalar
28.67
30.64
37.85
39.78
51.46
42.16
40σscalar
33.72
38.39
37.04
51.22
50.47
44.03
Table 14: DRMS Error [m] by Trajectory and Scalar Magnetometer Noise Level using Tactical-
Grade IMU and SBPV Combination (Trajectories 7-12).
Noise
Level
Traj
7
Traj
8
Traj
9
Traj
10
Traj
11
Traj
12
σscalar
16.74
37.29
478.96
392.19
5.45
54.99
5σscalar
28.36
58.57
571.34
1111.51
9.35
62.10
10σscalar
39.10
74.73
807.44
1173.83
14.28
78.06
20σscalar
45.68
71.05
1304.15
2537.45
20.02
121.87
40σscalar
42.07
81.19
2078.10
2966.25
25.56
186.63
45
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:53==
Overall, the SBPV combination seems to be fairly resilient to the varying noise levels. It
achieves DRMS errors in the desired range for all but three of the trajectories even in the
worst noise case (40σscalar). Moreover, two of these three trajectories are trajectories 9
and 10 which, as explained in Section 5.2, pass through a region of low spatial magnetic
variability. Before they pass into this region, trajectories 9 and 10 also achieve DRMS
errors in the desired range (104.33 m and 71.27 m, respectively) for the worst noise case.
Trajectory 12 is then the only trajectory to not achieve DRMS errors in the desired
range for all noise levels when taking spatial magnetic variability into account. This is a
promising results as it suggests that the SBPV combination could potentially mitigate the
need for aeromagnetic compensation beyond what is currently possible with the classic
Tolles-Lawson model.
There is a slight peculiarity in the DRMS errors for trajectories 3 and 4. The σscalar
noise case yields significantly higher DRMS errors than 5σscalar noise case. There are a
few other DRMS errors that run counter to the general trend of “higher noise, higher
error” in the tables, but they are on the order of a few meters at most and, therefore,
not as concerning from a navigation standpoint. It is not clear why the filter performs
significantly worse with lowest noise case for trajectories 3 and 4.
5.5
IMU Grade Comparison
Finally, I tested the baseline performance of MagNav, as well as the SBPV combination,
using a navigation-grade IMU in a well-compensated versus poorly-compensated aircraft
field. The main goal here was to see if the SBPV combination could confer similar benefits
to an INS using a navigation-grade IMU. The navigation-grade IMU parameters can be
found in Table 1. Tables 15 and 16 show the DRMS errors in a well-compensated aircraft
field (i.e. scalar magnetometer noise σscalar = 4.47 nT).
The first thing to notice is the DRMS errors for trajectories 4 and 5 are not available.
This was due to a technical error in the trajectory simulation process. The second thing
to notice is the dramatic reduction in INS drift when using a navigation-grade IMU
compared to a tactical-grade IMU. Without any sensor aiding, the INS already acheives
DRMS errors below 40 m for trajectories 1-8 and below 180 m for trajectories 9-12. The
latter group experienced higher INS drift due to their longer flight durations (20 minutes vs
60 minutes). MagNav by itself achieves significantly lower DRMS errors compared to the
INS for all twelve trajectories. Accounting for spatial magnetic variability as explained in
the previous sections, MagNav achieves DRMS errors of 4.48 m and 3.42 m for trajectories
9 and 10, respectively, leaving only trajectory 12 with a DRMS error above 10 m - still a
significant improvement from the INS. Similarly, the SBPV combination achieves DRMS
errors of 4.54 m and 3.18 m for trajectories 9 and 10, respectively, when accounting for
spatial magnetic variability. With the exception of trajectory 12, all DRMS errors either
remain roughly the same or decrease when using the SBPV combination compared to
MagNav by itself.
46
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:54==
Table 15: DRMS Error [m] by Trajectory and Sensor Combination Using Navigation-Grade IMU
and Scalar Magnetometer Noise σscalar = 4.47nT (Trajectories 1-6). S = Scalar Magnetometer,
B = Barometric Altimeter, P = Pitot-Static System, and V = Vector Magnetometer.
Sensor
Combination
Traj
1
Traj
2
Traj
3
Traj
4
Traj
5
Traj
6
INS-Only
21.91
9.38
24.17
N/A
N/A
22.73
S
3.46
6.20
7.07
N/A
N/A
5.13
S + B + P + V
4.06
3.64
7.74
N/A
N/A
4.36
Table 16: DRMS Error [m] by Trajectory and Sensor Combination Using Navigation-Grade IMU
and Scalar Magnetometer Noise σscalar = 4.47nT (Trajectories 7-12). S = Scalar Magnetometer,
B = Barometric Altimeter, P = Pitot-Static System, and V = Vector Magnetometer.
Sensor
Combination
Traj
7
Traj
8
Traj
9
Traj
10
Traj
11
Traj
12
INS-Only
33.67
26.45
175.63
96.83
144.26
118.89
S
5.55
2.43
76.76
88.37
4.29
19.78
S + B + P + V
5.50
1.52
50.88
283.27
2.18
36.92
Tables 17 and 18 show the DRMS errors using the navigation-grade IMU in a poorly-
compensated aircraft field (i.e. scalar magnetometer noise 40σscalar = 178.8nT). As ex-
pected, MagNav does not provide the same improvement to navigation performance now
as it did in the well-compensated aircraft field. For trajectories 1-6 MagNav actually yields
higher DRMS errors than the INS alone. For trajectories 7-12 the DRMS errors are all
higher than in the well-compensated aircraft field when accounting for spatial magnetic
variability. The SPBV combination further achieves lower DRMS errors for all trajec-
tories when accounting for spatial magnetic variability compared to MagNav by itself.
Even so, only for trajectories 7-12 does the SBPV combination achieve significantly lower
DRMS errors than the INS alone.
Table 17: DRMS Error [m] by Trajectory and Sensor Combination Using Navigation-Grade IMU
and Scalar Magnetometer Noise 40σscalar = 178.8nT (Trajectories 1-6). S = Scalar Magnetome-
ter, B = Barometric Altimeter, P = Pitot-Static System, and V = Vector Magnetometer.
Sensor
Combination
Traj
1
Traj
2
Traj
3
Traj
4
Traj
5
Traj
6
INS-Only
21.91
9.38
24.17
N/A
N/A
22.73
S
46.75
45.06
62.99
N/A
N/A
50.96
S + B + P + V
30.04
26.88
22.54
N/A
N/A
24.51
47
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:55==
Table 18: DRMS Error [m] by Trajectory and Sensor Combination Using Navigation-Grade IMU
and Scalar Magnetometer Noise 40σscalar = 178.8nT (Trajectories 7-12). S = Scalar Magne-
tometer, B = Barometric Altimeter, P = Pitot-Static System, and V = Vector Magnetometer.
Sensor
Combination
Traj
7
Traj
8
Traj
9
Traj
10
Traj
11
Traj
12
INS-Only
33.67
26.45
175.63
96.83
144.26
118.89
S
26.21
15.04
158.74
71.92
17.66
74.81
S + B + P + V
10.94
9.58
115.96
334.67
31.04
35.85
48
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:56==
6
Conclusion
This study tested the navigation performance of MagNav under five test cases described
in Section 4.4. The tests were conducted using the MagNav simulation software (Section
4.1 created for this study and the datasets described in Chapter 3. This section provides
a summary of the key findings from the conducted tests, followed by a discussion on the
limitations of the study and proposals for future work in MagNav.
6.1
Key Findings
In the first test case I looked at the baseline navigation performance of MagNav using
a tactical-grade IMU and a well-compensated aircraft field across twelve different flight
trajectories. MagNav was able to constrain the drift of the INS to desired navigation
levels (DRMS errors of approx. 100 m or less) for only three of the trajectories. The
estimated flight paths for seven of the trajectories exceeded the bounds of the magnetic
anomaly map, demonstrating the need for additional altitude aiding. The remaining two
trajectories stayed within the bounds of the map but achieved DRMS errors of approx.
2-2.5 km. Based on these simulations, it seems evident that without extra sensor aiding,
MagNav is not generally suﬀicient for constraining the drift of an INS using a tactical-
grade IMU even in a well-compensation aircraft field.
In the second test I case looked at the navigation performance of various sensor fusion
combinations under the same conditions as the first case. In general, adding sensor aiding
increased the navigation performance of MagNav. Adding all three additional sensors
(barometric altimeter, pitot-static system, and vector magnetometer) to MagNav yielded
the lowest DRMS errors. Only trajectories 9 and 10 had DRMS errors outside the desired
range. However, this was shown to likely be due to these trajectories entering into a region
of low spatial magnetic variability around half-way through the flight duration. When
accounting for the low spatial magnetic variability in trajectories 9 and 10, the four-sensor
combination achieved DRMS errors within the desired range for all twelve trajectories.
These simulations suggest that MagNav can achieve DRMS errors on the order of 5-75 m
even with a tactical-grade IMU if combined with these three extra sensors, assuming the
aircraft field is well-compensated.
In the third test case I looked at the impact of the filter estimating the map bias and
temporal variations separately using two states (as was done in the first two test cases)
versus together using one state (as was done in (Gnadt, 2022). Estimating them sepa-
rately was shown to yield much lower DRMS errors on average and, therefore, considered
the superior method. Only one of the trajectories achieved a lower DRMS error when
estimating them together. This was shown not to be due to better estimation of the map
bias and temporal variations themselves.
In the fourth test case I looked at the navigation performance of the four-sensor com-
bination with varying scalar magnetometer noise levels. These noise levels represented
49
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:57==
different levels of aero-magnetic compensation of the aircraft field and were chosen based
on real test flight data from (Gnadt, 2022). Again, a tactical-grade IMU was used. In
general, increasing the scalar magnetometer noise lead to higher DRMS errors. However,
even in the most poorly-compensated aircraft field, the four-sensor combination was able
to achieve DRMS errors within the desired range for all but one of the trajectories. This
suggests that the four-sensor combination may potentially mitigate the need for aero-
magnetic compensation beyond what is currently possible with state-of-the-art models
using a tactical-grade IMU.
In the fifth and final test case I looked at the navigation performance of MagNav by itself
and the four-sensor combination using a navigation-grade IMU in a well-compensated
and poorly-compensated aircraft field. Flight data for trajectories 4 and 5 were missing
for this test case.
Both MagNav by itself and the four-sensor combination were able
to significantly constrain the drift of the INS in a well-compensated aircraft field for
all ten trajectories. The four-sensor combination was not a significant improvement to
MagNav by itself, however. Neither MagNav by itself nor the four-sensor combination
was able to reliably constrain the drift of the INS using a navigation-grade IMU in a
poorly-compensated aircraft field. Based on these simulations, it seems that improving
aero-magnetic compensation of aircraft fields remains the best way for MagNav to be able
to significantly constrain the drift of an INS using a navigation-grade IMU, in line with
what has been shown by (Canciani, 2016).
6.2
Limitations
When considering the relevance of these key findings, it is important to note some of the
limitations of this study. First, there was an inherent time limit as this study was done
as a masters thesis. Second, this study used simulated flight trajectory and sensor data.
Any result achieved through simulation should, of course, be substantiated by real flight
tests. Real flight tests introduce the quality of the magnetic anomaly map as a relevant
factor and potential limitation. Third, the IMU data was simulated without biases. In
practice, both accelerometers and gyroscopes have triple-axis biases that change over time
and affect the absolute accuracies of these instruments. Typically, the filter is responsible
for estimating these biases and removing them from the measurements. However, the
uncertainties associated with these biases can affect navigation performance. For more
realistic results, the tests in this study should be repeated with biased IMU data. Fourth,
like IMUs, barometric altimeters and pitot-static systems also have time-varying biases
and scale factors in practice that could affect navigation performance if not modeled
correctly in the filter. Fifth, as explained in Section 3.4.3, the main source of error in the
ability of pitot-static systems to estimate ground speed is the wind speed models. For
this study, the pitot-static system measurements were simulated as white noise with a
10 m/s standard deviation. In some cases, this may be an underestimation of the actual
ground speed errors, but I lacked the technical knowledge to make this determination.
Sixth, due to the scope of the study, aircraft effects were modeled as white noise. As
50
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:58==
mentioned in Section 3.4.1 this is an oversimplification. In reality, aircraft effect are much
more complex. For more realistic results, they should be modeled and compensated using
state-of-the-art models like Tolles-Lawson.
6.3
Future Work
MagNav is still in the research stage. A number of challenges lie ahead that will need
to be overcome before realizing MagNav as a reliable alternative navigation system. The
following are a few proposals (by no means exhaustive) for future studies that could help
bring MagNav closer to that realization:
1. Enhanced Simulation: The MagNav simulation program could be made more
realistic by implementing the changes mentioned in the previous section.
This
includes adding biases to the simulated IMU data, adding biases and scale factors to
the simulated barometric altimeter and pitot-static system measurements, modeling
the simulated pitot-static system measurement using wind-speed models instead of
white noise, and modeling the simulated aircraft effects using the Tolles–Lawson
approach instead of white noise.
2. Real Flight Tests: With the aforementioned changes implemented and validated
in simulation, real flight tests could be performed with both tactical-grade and
navigation-grade IMUs to substantiate the findings of this study regarding the four-
sensor combination.
3. Aeromagnetic Compensation Models: Although significant progress has been
made on aeromagnetic compensation of aircraft effects, a solution that reliably
compensates the full range of effects in military and commercial flights remains
elusive.
Current research often explores neural-network–based models and their
architectures. Developing and testing new aeromagnetic compensation models is
therefore a promising area for future investigation.
4. Gradient and Velocity Effects: As explained in Section 5.2, navigation perfor-
mance of MagNav is closely linked to magnetic-field gradients. Aircraft velocity also
influences performance—higher speeds generally yield better results. An in-depth
study of how these two factors jointly affect navigation accuracy could inform opti-
mal flight-path planning for MagNav.
5. Filter Variants: This study implemented a feed-forward error-state Extended
Kalman filter.
It is not yet clear whether this outperforms the equivalent feed-
back model. Moreover, the Unscented Kalman filter has been shown to outperform
the Extended Kalman filter for certain nonlinear systems. A comparative study of
these and other filter architectures could identify the best choice for MagNav.
51
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:59==
Bibliography
P. Alken, E. Thébault, C. D. Beggan, and et al. International Geomagnetic Reference
Field: the Thirteenth Generation. Earth, Planets and Space, 73:49, 2021. doi: 10.1186/
s40623-020-01288-x. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1186/s40623-020-01288-x.
Richard J. Blakely.
Potential Theory in Gravity and Magnetic Applications.
Cam-
bridge
University
Press,
1995.
Available
at:
https://www.cambridge.org/
core/books/potential-theory-in-gravity-and-magnetic-applications/
348880F23008E16E663D6AD14A41D8DE.
British Geological Survey. INTERMAGNET Data Viewer, 2025. Available at: https:
//imag-data.bgs.ac.uk/GIN_V1/GINForms2.
Aaron J. Canciani. Absolute positioning using the earth’s magnetic anomaly field. Doc-
toral Dissertation, Air Force Institute of Technology, 2016.
Available at:
https:
//scholar.afit.edu/etd/251/.
Aaron J. Canciani. Magnetic navigation on an f-16 aircraft using online calibration. IEEE
Transactions on Aerospace and Electronic Systems, 58(1):420–434, 2022. Available at:
10.1109/TAES.2021.3101567.
John Weston David Titterton. Strapdown inertial navigation technology, 2nd edition.
Electromagnetics and Radar Series, Institution of Engineering and Technology, 2004.
Available at: https://doi.org/10.1049/PBRA017E.
Y. Poudjom Djomani, B.R.S. Minty, M. Hutchens, and R.J.L. Lane.
Total magnetic
intensity (tmi) grid of australia 2019 - seventh edition - 80 m cell size, 2019. Available
at: http://dx.doi.org/10.26186/5e9cf3f2c0f1d.
Jay A. Farrell. Aided Navigation: GPS with High Rate Sensors. McGraw–Hill Professional,
1st edition, 2008. ISBN 978-0-07-149329-1. Available at: https://dl.acm.org/doi/
abs/10.5555/1594745.
Albert R. Gnadt. Advanced aeromagnetic compensation models for airborne magnetic
anomaly navigation. Doctoral Dissertation, Air Force Institute of Technology, 2022.
Available at: https://dspace.mit.edu/handle/1721.1/145137.
Paul D. Groves.
Principles of GNSS, Inertial and Multisensor Integrated Navigation
Systems, chapter 5, pages 151–157. Artech House, 2 edition, 2013. ISBN 978-1-60807-
005-3. Available at: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9101092.
Peng Huang, Heinrich Meyr, Meik Dörpinghaus, and Gerhard Fettweis. Observability
analysis of flight state estimation for uavs and experimental validation. In 2020 IEEE
International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pages 4659–4665, 2020.
doi:
10.1109/ICRA40945.2020.9196635.
Available at:
https://ieeexplore.ieee.
org/document/9196635.
52
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:60==
G. Hulot. Terrestrial Magnetism. Space Science Series of ISSI. Springer, 2011. Available
at: https://link.springer.com/book/9781441979544.
R. E. Kalman. A new approach to linear filtering and prediction problems. Journal of
Basic Engineering, 82(1):35–45, 1960.
Available at: https://doi.org/10.1115/1.
3662552.
R. A. Langel and W. J. Hinze. The Magnetic Field of the Earth’s Lithosphere: The
Satellite Perspective. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 1998. Available at:
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511629549.
M. Mandea and M. Korte, editors.
Geomagnetic Observations and Models.
Springer
Netherlands, Dordrecht, Netherlands, 2011. doi: 10.1007/978-90-481-9858-0. Available
at: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-90-481-9858-0.
Suzanne A. McEnroe, Peter Robinson, Nathan Church, and Michael E. Purucker. Mag-
netism at depth: A view from an ancient continental subduction and collision zone.
Geochemistry, Geophysics, Geosystems, 19, 2018. doi: 10.1002/2017GC007344. Avail-
able at: https://doi.org/10.1002/2017GC007344.
Pratap Misra and Per Enge. Global Positioning System: Signals, Measurements, and
Performance. Ganga-Jamuna Press, 2006.
NASA Earth Observatory. Measuring Earth’s Magnetism, 2014. Available at: https:
//earthobservatory.nasa.gov/images/84266/measuring-earths-magnetism.
Terence J. Sabaka, Nils Olsen, and Robert A. Langel. A Comprehensive Model of the
Quiet-Time, Near-Earth Magnetic Field: Phase 3. Geophysical Journal International,
151(1):32–68, 2002. Available at: https://academic.oup.com/gji/article/151/1/
32/623680.
Joan Solà. Quaternion kinematics for the error-state kf. 03 2015. Available at: http:
//dx.doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1711.02508.
W. E. Tolles and J. D. Lawson. Magnetic compensation of mad equipped aircraft. Tech-
nical report, Report 201-1, 1950.
David H. Williams and Steven M. Green. Flight evaluation of center-tracon automation
system trajectory prediction process. Technical Publication NASA/TP-1998-208439,
NASA Langley Research Center, Hampton, Virginia, 1998. Available at: https://
ntrs.nasa.gov/api/citations/19980210598/downloads/19980210598.pdf.
Vadim Zaliva and Franz Franchetti. Barometric and gps altitude sensor fusion. In 2014
International Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pages
7525–7529, 05 2014.
ISBN 978-1-4799-2893-4.
doi: 10.1109/ICASSP.2014.6855063.
Available at: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/6855063.
53
Technical University of Denmark
