==PAGE:1==
DTU Compute
MSc in Computer Science and Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Optimal Blending of Frames in
Interactive Computer Graphics
Maser Thesis
Maximilian Maria Olden-Jørgensen (s204178)
Under supervision of Jeppe Revall Frisvad
July 10, 2025
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
In computer graphics, aliasing artifacts are a problem for which many different
methods to combat have been developed and researched, and one strategy that
has been widely adopted is temporal antialiasing (TAA). Its good results and
low performance cost have skyrocketed its popularity, but it also has its own
artifacts: blurring, ghosting, and flickering. These all stem from the underlying
implementation, in which the current frame is blending together with a historic
accumulation of past frames. The value for this blending factor is often static
or relies on simple heuristics, but there exists a theoretical optimal per-pixel
blending factor if the variance and squared difference between the current and
past frames can be accurately estimated. In this paper, we implement a spatial
estimation of this technique and extend it with a temporal accumulation to
better estimate variance and squared difference. We then show when compared
to other current TAA options available, it performs better on average than any
other single option.
==PAGE:3==
Contents
Contents
II
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Antialiasing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2
Related works
4
3
Theory
6
3.1
TAA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.1.1
Jittering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.1.2
Reprojection and filtering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.1.3
Blending . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.2
Theoretical optimal blending factor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.3
Implementation details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4
Result
12
4.1
CPBD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4.2
RMSE of image difference . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.3
RMSE of difference of image difference . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.4
Performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
5
Discussion
18
6
Conclusion
18
6.1
Future works
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
References
19
==PAGE:4==
1
Introduction
In computer graphics, aliasing has always been a prevalent issue as if it is not
correctly removed or handled it leaves unwanted artifacts in the final render-
ing. Throughout the years many different methods and algorithms to deal with
aliasing have been developed. But since over ten years ago, when temporal an-
tialiasing was first conceptualized, it has only grown in popularity and is now
one of the most widely used antialiasing methods in computer graphics[1]. This
is thanks the to relatively good quality it can provide for the low-performance
cost it has compared to other methods. In recent times, another method has
gained much notoriety, namely AI-powered antialiasing. Tech giants such as
NVIDIA[2] and Intel[3] have both released technologies that use AI tools to
improve both performance and antialiasing. Other technologies such as FSR,
released by AMD, have both non-AI, namely FRS1 up to FSR3, and AI-based
methods FSR4[4]. All three methods are gaining more widespread use, as the
AI-based methods besides just antialiasing also have support for massive per-
formance improvements, from frame generation and upscaling.
While these
developments have significantly advanced the state of the art, many of these
techniques rely on fixed, simple heuristics, or pre-trained models to calculate
the blending factor, that is the factor for how to combine the historical/tempo-
ral part with the current frame. There exists however, a theoretical method for
finding the optimal per pixel blending factor[5]. In this paper, we will look at
implementing this method in the popular game engine Unity, and then explore
different techniques for estimating the values needed to calculate the optimal
blending factor, as well as compare it to other popular temporal antialiasing
methods available.
1.1
Antialiasing
The term aliasing originates from signal processing, where it is a phenomenon in
which a reconstructed signal contains noise because the sampling resolution is
too small, similarly aliasing in computer graphics happens because of the same
fundamental reason. Since we can neither calculate nor have infinite resolution
when rending to a screen, artifacts from the limited resolution then appear
as what is called aliasing. Aliasing can manifest in different ways, such as in
the spatial sense with the ”staircase effect”(figure 1), or in the temporal sense
where thin lines can appear in one frame but not the next causing flickering
when multiple frames are being viewed in sequence (figure 2).
1
==PAGE:5==
Figure 1: Example of the staircase effect, the green triangle has a smooth line,
but because of limited pixels, the output, the blue triangle, has a jagged edge
Figure 2: Example of flickering, in the first frame the rectangle is drawn, but in
the next frame it is located between pixels and not drawn, causing it to flicker
Antialiasing is then the term that covers the methods used to diminish the
effect of this when rendering a frame. In general, they work to reduce aliasing
by softening edges, which would help remove jaggedness from lines, see figure 3.
Or try to get more accurate information about the underlying colors in a pixel,
which helps against flickering, see figure 4
2
==PAGE:6==
Figure 3: Example of using smoothed edges to reduce aliasing, with the less
stark contrast to the neighboring pixels the triangle is not as jagged
Figure 4: Example of using the amount of box overlap in each pixel to shade
with a more or less sharp blue color
3
==PAGE:7==
2
Related works
Since temporal antialiasing is such a widely adopted method, there exists much
research into different implementations and extensions, as such an overview of
current works will be given here.
While temporal antialiasing is one of the most popular antialiasing methods,
it is not the only one. Other methods such as FXAA, MSAA, and SMAA exist
and are still used.
FXAA(fast approximate antialiasing) works by searching for edges in the
rendered frame, then for every edge it finds smooth the edge according to values
calculated from the values of the pixels found around the edges[6]. While it is
extremely performant it is not of the greatest quality, and can depending on
how well the edge detection works overblur the image, especially in regards to
letters.
MSAA(multisample antialiasing) as the name implies takes multiple sam-
ples to try and improve antialiasing, since aliasing is usually found on edges it
only takes more samples on edges[7]. It does this by using the depth buffer,
a buffer that contains the depth value of every pixel, and checking if there is
a significant enough difference in the depth value. If a significant difference is
detected, it then samples that pixel multiple times, usually 2, 4, or 8 times,
and averages the values sampled. However, MSAA is not easily combined with
deferred rendering, in which all geometry is rendered before light and shading
are done, thus allowing for many more light sources[8]. In deferred rendering
the geometry, colors, and normals are stored in buffers, which are only in pixel
resolution, thus MSAA cannot, without overhead or changes to the rendering,
sample multiple times per pixel.
SMAA(subpixel morphological antialiasing), builds on top of MLAA (mor-
phological antialiasing) which works similarly to FXAA in that it searches
the fully rendered frame for edges and smooths them, MLAA however builds
an edge map and smooths the edges based on the shape thus improving the
antialiasing[9]. SMAA improves on this by using a better edge detection method,
in which edges in both horizontal and vertical directions are compared, and only
if the sharpness of the edge is above a certain threshold is that edge blurred[10].
SMAA can also be extended by using other methods such as multisampling like
in MSAA or temporal multisampling, to improve the quality of the antialiasing
at the cost of performance.
Since aliasing stems from not having a high enough resolution, and simply
rendering the frame at a high resolution is not feasible, another method then in-
stead of using space to overcome aliasing is to use time. Namely, using the past
rendered frames to help render the current frame.
TAA(temporal antialias-
ing), originating from more than a decade ago[11], has had many expansions
and changes over the years. In general, it works by keeping a buffer with the
accumulated historic value of every pixel, and using what the position of the
current pixel was in the last frame to blend the historic color and the current
color together[1]. Another key part is that is adds a slight jitter to the camera,
4
==PAGE:8==
which means even when the camera is stationary the output image would differ
slightly from frame to frame. These two techniques also give rise to most of the
problems with TAA, namely flickering and ghosting. Flickering is as described
earlier for objects in motion, but can now because of the jittering, also appear
for objects not moving. Ghosting appears when the historic value blends too
much into the current value and leaves after images of objects in motion in the
output image. A way to help solve this issue is to use the motion vectors for
each pixel, that is the distance and direction every pixel moved since the last
frame, to check for occlusion or guide the blending factor for objects with high
speeds.
A technique where TAA can offer improvements to quality is upscaling, up-
scaling works by rendering the frame at a smaller resolution and then upscaling
to the desired resolution. This helps performance but comes with a potentially
huge cost to quality since aliasing happens exactly because the resolution is too
small, these effects are then multiplied when upscaling. Normally you use some
form of blurring by using neighbors to fill in the missing pixels, but when com-
bined with TAA it can achieve much higher quality[12]. Because of the historic
buffer and the jittering TAAU(taa upscaling) can get a much better approxima-
tion of every pixel’s real color. Another area where TAA can improve quality is
in ray-tracing and path-tracing where it can work as a denoiser[13]. Similarly,
as with upscaling, the historical buffer provides an elegant way to average the
tracing algorithm’s output over time, thus working as a denoiser but with all
the benefits (and disadvantages) of TAA.
In recent times using deep learning / AI with TAA has shown great results,
and graphic cards have introduced proprietary DLSS(deep learning super sam-
pling) methods[2][3]. These work by having pre-trained networks use jittered
frames and motion vectors to predict how the current frame should look. Newer
versions also support many performance-related methods, such as upscaling
and frame generation, where AI is used to upscale from a low resolution to the
needed one, like TAAU, if no upscaling is preset it works just as deep learning
antialiasing. Frame generation uses AI to generate frames in between rendered
frames thus boosting FPS, but with varying degrees of quality depending on
the scene and original FPS. Other AI-based methods, not using proprietary
networks on graphics cards, have also been researched in which multiple small-
scale CNNs(convolutional neural networks) are used to calculate the final pixel
value[14]. A notable challenge with this is that since the CNNs do not use highly
specific hardware like DLSS and XESS, the size of the network cannot be too
large otherwise the performance hit would be too severe. And even with the
resolution set to 640 x 480, which today is not a resolution gaming and computer
graphics are rendering at mostly, except if heavy upscaling is done afterward,
the paper still calculated it to be decently performance-heavy. Another issue
with needed small-scale CNNs is that they are limited in how general they can
work, in the paper, which they are only trained on a small subset of the testing
data, they are still tested in the same scenes.
5
==PAGE:9==
3
Theory
In this chapter, we will provide some theory for how TAA works, as well as the
basics of how the theoretical blending factor is calculated. Lastly, we will cover
the chosen engine for implementation and a few engine-specific details.
3.1
TAA
While TAA was briefly covered in related works, a more detailed overview as
well as a description of the different parts will be covered here.
3.1.1
Jittering
One of the fundamental parts of TAA is the jittering of the camera, as this
is what leads to temporal supersampling. The jittering adds a small sub-pixel
offset to the camera’s projection, thus slightly changing what exactly is ren-
dered in each frame. This jittering has a few requirements to work properly.
Firstly, it should be well distributed in the sample space it has, as otherwise
sampling bias means it doesn’t obtain equal information for every part of the
sub-pixel. Another property that is desired is that the sequence does not have
a too long sequence length, as while it may be well distributed, if it takes too
long to visit most parts of a sub-pixel, occlusion or lighting changes might take
too long to resample. One such popular sequence that has these properties is
the Halton sequence[15]. The Halton sequence generates deterministic quasi-
random numbers, that is the numbers are the same if you use the same inputs
but the numbers appear random when viewed in a sequence. It generates these
numbers by using an index, the ith number in the sequence, and a base or di-
mension, which decides how the sequence behaves. To use it as a jitter offset,
two sequences are used one for x and one for y, where normally 2 and 3 are used
as their bases respectively, shorthanded to Halton(2,3), the jitter offsets it pro-
duces can be seen in figure 5. How these are sampled differs a bit, some sample
only the first 16 or 8 samples while others continuously sample the sequence,
which can have small differences in the output.
6
==PAGE:10==
Figure 5: First 20 numbers of the Halton(2,3) sequence, note how later numbers
from the sequence are close in position to earlier numbers
3.1.2
Reprojection and filtering
When sampling motion vectors, history color, and pixel color, just simply sam-
pling the information at the current uv-coordinate is not sufficient to ensure
good quality, because accuracy, geometry, and jittering all affect the output,
and as such special measures have to be put in place. When sampling the mo-
tion vector for the current pixel, if the pixel is currently on the edge of a moving
object, the motion vector returned might not be correct, because of aliasing, as
such one can use the depth buffer to sample better. If when we sample the mo-
tion vector we use the depth buffer to search in a small 3x3 box for the closest /
nearest matching depth and use that uv-coordinate instead when sampling the
motion vector[16], a much better value is found when the frame is in motion or
when occlusion occurs.
Now with a correct motion vector, the current pixel’s corresponding historic
value can then be sampled and then blended together with the current pixel’s
value, this operation is also called reprojecting the current pixel. There are also
a few things to keep in mind, namely that the historic value might be invalid, this
can happen because of occlusion or sudden change in color, from lighting, or base
color of the object changing. After detecting such invalid history, there are many
methods for dealing with it, from completely rejecting the history, eg choosing
only the current pixel’s value as output or clamping/clipping the historic value
to the neighborhood’s value. While completely rejecting the historic value is
7
==PAGE:11==
simple to do and fast, it is still undesired as you lose all the historical data for
the pixel, and have to start from scratch with the antialiasing for the pixel. A
more sophisticated method to rectify the historic value is then to clamp the value
to the current pixel’s neighborhood’s values[17]. Neighborhood clamping works
by finding the minimum and maximum of the four corners around the current
pixel, and clamping the historic value to the min and max values. An extension
to this is instead of clamping, to clip the color according to the neighbor’s values,
this helps not getting to extremes of the min/max of the neighborhood and thus
make the output color fit better[16], a visual difference between the two can be
seen in figure 6.
Figure 6: Difference between clamped and clipped color, not how the clamped
can get stuck in extremes/corners, while the clipped is more varied. Color space
visualized in 2D for simplicity
Before clipping the color, since the historic color is blurred from all the
prior blending, some TAA algorithms also include sharpening of the historic
color[18]. This makes the final output clearer, as well as keeps the historic value
from becoming too blurred. Conversely, some TAA implementations apply an
additional blur on the current color, such as a Gaussian blur with the neighbors.
This helps serve as a soft FXAA and can hide aliasing when not much history
is recorded yet, but it blurs the final image even more.
3.1.3
Blending
As it is not feasible to keep a record of all historic values for a given pixel,
instead TAA implementations use a recursive accumulated function:
f(p) = α ∗c(p) + (1 −α) ∗h(r(p))
(1)
Where p is the current pixel, f(p) is the output for the frame’s color at the pixel,
c(p) is the current frame’s color at the pixel, h(r(p)) returns the historic color
for the given pixel, where r(p) is the reprojection function. This function thus
makes older samples influence the final color less and less, for static α it comes
8
==PAGE:12==
out as an exponential decrease of influence. While static α is easy to use and
is still used today, it has less control over the output, and with the usual value
of around 0.1-0.2, has to rely on history rejection to not introduce too much
ghosting.
As such, many implementations use some metric to influence the
blending factor. A popular and simple method is to use the already sampled
motion vector of the pixel and increase α when the movement of the pixel
is high[19]. This intuitively works well to diminish ghosting, as that is only
present in motion. Another possibility is to keep track of the number of samples
currently recorded in the historic accumulation and decrease α according to the
number of samples[13]:
α = 1
N
(2)
While this leads to fast convergence, it also uses more storage as the number
of samples accumulated has to be stored. Lastly calculating an error or weight,
between the current sample and the historic sample can be used to guide the
blending factor. In [15], a difference between the historic pixels’ luminance and
the current pixel’s luminance is used, after scaling the difference into a value
between 0 and 1, this is then used as the blending factor.
3.2
Theoretical optimal blending factor
In [5], a theoretical optimal blending value is proposed which uses the bias and
variance of the historical pixel and of the current pixel, to find the best blending
factor. It is derived from the formula 1, by modelling c(p) and h(r(p)) as random
variables, and finding the value of α which minimizes the error:
α = 1 −
σ2
Y
E[(X −Y )2]
(3)
or alternatively
α = 1 −
σ2
Y
(E[X] −E[Y ])2 + σ2
X + σ2
Y
(4)
Where X is the historic pixel value, and Y is the current pixel, σ2
Y is then
the variance of the current pixel, and σ2
X is the variance for the historic pixel.
E[(X −Y )2] is the expected value of the squared difference between the his-
toric and current pixel. The graphical meaning of σ2
Y is the aliasing captured
in that pixel, that is how wildly the sampling of the pixel changes while still
having a static average. The graphical meaning of E[(X −Y )2] is then camera
movement, occlusion, or other things that cause the current pixel to have a
different expected value compared to the history. The formula then intuitively
tells us to use a low α when the expected difference is low, that is the camera
is stationary and the scene is static, and the variance is high. Then, when the
expected difference is high and the variance is low, a high value of α is used.
The challenge here is the fact that reliably calculating the variance and squared
difference is not trivial. A straightforward method would be to do as in MSAA
9
==PAGE:13==
and sample the current pixel many times to closely estimate variance and differ-
ence, just like MSAA would have performance issues if a high-quality estimation
is wanted. Additionally, in deferred rendering, this kind of resampling is not
possible. A more efficient way to calculate the variance is to temporally calcu-
late it, by using a buffer to store the variance, we can over time get a more and
more accurate estimate of the variance. This comes with a small overhead to
memory, from needing a new buffer, and performance, the lookup in memory for
the buffer’s data, but it is a lot less than sampling the pixel multiple times. A
problem with this method is that when the number of historical samples is low,
the data may be imprecise, a possible improvement is to use a special estimate
when the historical variance is too volatile[13].
To efficiently store the variance we use the Welford method for variance
and mean calculation, since it uses a single-pass method it is well suited for
continuous data. The Welford method uses three counters to keep track of the
mean, variance, and sample count this means it is easily stored in a single buffer,
as we have access to and r, g, b, and a components in each buffer. An example
of how this is used is shown below
vec4 data = readBuffer(buffer, prevUv)
if data.b < 2 or isOffscreen(prevUv) then
data.r = luminance(currentPixel)
data.g = 0
data.b = 2
else
old_mean = data.x
data.r += (luminance(currentPixel) - data.r) / data.b
data.g += (luminance(currentPixel) - data.r) * (luminance(currentPixel) - old_mean)
data.b += 1
end if
[...]
mean = data.r
variance = data.g / data.b
We can then also use the same method to estimate E[(X −Y )2], since we
still have an unused alpha channel to store the information in:
if data.b < 2 or isOffscreen(prevUv) then
data.a = (luminance(historicPixel) - luminance(currentPixel))^2
[...]
else
diff = (luminance(historicPixel) - luminance(currentPixel))^2
data.a += (diff - data.a) / data.b
[...]
end if
In both examples, we use the luminance of the pixels, as this gives a simple
value of pixels that can be stored in just one number.
A downside of this
10
==PAGE:14==
implementation is that the mean of the squared error will only change slowly
when the value of the newer pixel changes its underlying mean. Another option
could then be to use 4 instead, as that uses the variance also which updates
faster than the mean when different values are observed. To do this, however,
another buffer would be needed, which uses extra memory and processing.
3.3
Implementation details
In this paper, we chose to use Unity as our engine as it is a popular and much-
used engine in the world of games and computer graphics. It also comes with
many functionalities already baked in, such as lighting, camera, and other an-
tialiasing methods to compare with, which means we could fully focus on using
the theory to explore how the optimal blending works and how it can be re-
alized. In Unity, the HDRP(High Definition Render Pipeline) is used for the
improved graphics it brings, this also means deferred rendering is used.
11
==PAGE:15==
4
Result
In this section, we will compare the output of using TAA with the described
blend factor against Unity’s standard library of TAA options, which includes a
normal TAA, FSR2, and DLSS. They will be compared in four different metrics:
CPBD, performance, RMSE of difference, and RMSE of difference of difference.
For the comparisons, we chose two different scenes, a detailed classroom
with a moving camera, to see how they perform in a setting with many details
in which aliasing can easily occur. A simple fence with a moving light and a
static camera, to measure how they perform with moving shadows on static
terrain (figure ?? top left).
They are all compared to reference images, which are the scenes rendered
with no antialiasing at 8k resolution and then downscaled to 1440p, which is
the resolution the TAAs were benchmarked at.
4.1
CPBD
One side effect that TAA has is the blurring of the output image, which is one
of the most common complaints against TAA usage. To measure and compare
the amount of blur in the TAA output we use the Cumulative Probability of
Blur Detection(CPBD), which is a no-reference image blur metric based on the
human perception of blur in images[20]. This function evaluates edges in an
image and gives the P(PBLUR ≤PJNB), where PBLUR is the amount of blur
in the edge(s), and PJNB is a value describing ”Just Noticeable Blur” based
on the human perception of blur.
As such, the output of CPBD describes
the percentage of edges for which the probability of blur is less than the JNB,
meaning the higher the output value, the closer to 1, the clearer the image is.
And the lower the output value is, the closer to 0, the more blurry the image is.
The following table shows the average CPBD value for each method in the
different scenes:
Scene
Ref
base TAA
DLSS
FSR
Our
Classroom
0.614
0.426
0.275
0.407
0.36
Fence
0.243
0.188
0.09
0.358
0.154
Table 1: CPBD value of different methods in the different scenes
While higher CPBD values might represent less overall blur in the image, the
focus should be on which method is closest to the reference’s CPBD value. In
the classroom scene, DLSS performs the worst, and looking at 7, it is noticeably
more blurry than the other methods. Our method is also slightly more blurry
than both base TAA and FSR. Looking at the comparison below, another ar-
tifact, which is a common complaint against TAA, can be seen: ghosting. In
the base TAA, the chair leg is bleeding into the curtain behind, which is greatly
diminished in our implementation. The same problem is just barely noticeable
in the FSR while looking at the ends of the chair pieces.
12
==PAGE:16==
Ref
Base TAA
FSR
DLSS
Our
Figure 7: Zoom in on curtains behind the chairs, note the different amount of
ghosting in base TAA, FSR, and our
In the pillar scene, base TAA has the value closest to the reference’s value,
and FSR has the highest value. But looking at figure 8, FSR got clear artifacts,
which causes the CPBD value to be higher than it should be. Likewise, base
TAA also got artifacts, where some extra lines are present, but they are not as
noticeable. Neither DLSS nor our got any type of artifacts, as such, the CPBD
score accurately reflects their blurriness.
13
==PAGE:17==
Ref
Base TAA
FSR
DLSS
Our
Figure 8: Zoom in on shadows in pillar scene, note the different artifacts in FSR
and base TAA
The CPBD numbers show that any form of TAA, as expected, introduces
more blur compared to the reference. The number cannot be blindly trusted,
since artifacts might influence the CPBD score. As such, we next turn to com-
paring the output directly.
4.2
RMSE of image difference
To measure how different the output of the TAA is compared to the reference,
we use RMSE. Below is a table with the average RMSE for each method in the
two scenes:
Scene
base TAA
DLSS
FSR
Our
Classroom
8.82
11.04
7.71
8.68
Fence
3.69
2.11
6.6
2.26
Table 2: RMSE value of different methods in the different scenes
An interesting pattern can be seen here, where depending on the scene, FSR
and DLSS perform widely differently. In the classroom scene, DLSS performs
the worst, while FSR performs the best. The DLSS score comes from DLSS
having a significant amount of ghosting and a large amount of blurring. FSR
14
==PAGE:18==
however, performs very well, due to having next to no ghosting and little blur-
ring. Our method contains less ghosting than the base TAA, so it is a bit better,
but it suffers more from flickering, which we will see in the next comparison.
Conversely, for the fence scene, DLSS performs the best, and FSR performs the
worst. The reason for DLSS’ good performance is due to the fact that it is a
very simple scene, as such excessive blurring is a lot more subdued, and ghosting
hardly occurs as there is no object moving in front of each other. FSR’s bad
performance comes from the many artifacts it has, which the base TAA also
had. While ours is not the best in either case, it is only slightly behind the best.
Its score also shows that it is robust and can produce good results in both kinds
of scenes.
4.3
RMSE of difference of image difference
Another side effect of TAA is flickering, the artifact that manifests if the method
is temporally unstable. To measure the degree of flickering present in the images,
we first compute the difference between each frame of all the TAA outputs and
the reference. By first converting the image to grayscale and then computing
the absolute difference. Then we can calculate the RMSE, for which the average
value is shown below in the table:
Scene
base TAA
DLSS
FSR
Our
Classroom
7.98
8.26
7.47
8.10
Fence
4.24
1.61
8.26
1.87
Table 3: RMSE value of difference images for the methods in the different scenes
While these numbers are similar to the RMSE of just the images, we can
see that the blurring DLSS creates reduces the flickering measured, as such
its score is much lower.
Meanwhile, since both base TAA and our exhibits
some flickering, the score is relatively the same. Base TAA and FSR have a
much higher difference score in the pillar scene again because of the artifacts,
which introduce a lot of movement between frames, which does not exist in the
reference.
4.4
Performance
Lastly, we will measure the performance of the different TAA, compared to
having no TAA running. Unfortunately, it is not possible to measure the precise
timing of only the TAA in Unity, as such, the total frame time is measured:
15
==PAGE:19==
Figure 9: Performance with no TAA
Figure 10: Performance with the FSR
Figure 11: Performance with the DLSS
Figure 12: Performance with the base TAA
Figure 13: Performance with our TAA
In all pictures, the first 300 frames are shown. When a bright yellow color
is present at the top, it means the current frame took over 16ms, meaning it is
16
==PAGE:20==
running at less than 60fps. After a bit of startup lag, it is clear that running
with no TAA is, as expected, the most performant. DLSS comes second with
a small overhead, which makes sense since it is native to the GPU, meaning it
can run very performant. Our TAA and the base TAA both have very similar
performance, which means our method does not introduce any extra overhead
compared to Unity’s standard implementation. FSR performs the worst, which
might be because of the many operations it performs.
17
==PAGE:21==
5
Discussion
The per-pixel blending factor described in the paper was successfully imple-
mented in Unity and tested against other popular methods available. And while
it doesn’t give much higher visual fidelity compared to the others, it boasts over-
all higher stability and the ability to work reliably in different scenes, with no
large computational overhead compared to the other methods. The reasons for
this come down to the fact that robustly estimating variance and squared dif-
ference is difficult, and while historical accumulation for the variance showed
promising results, keeping the variance accurate while on the edges proved the
hardest, which resulted in the flicking in the TAA. Using historical accumulation
to find the squared difference gave mixed results, which could be because for-
mula 3 does not work well when we only have access to the accumulated history
and not the underlying value of the last pixel. While Unity provided easy access
to getting a basic scene up and running, and also provided an easy way to switch
between the different TAA methods, since they were already implemented. It
also had many limitations, such as combining different TAA methods was not
possible, as Unity automatically disables the base TAA when either FSR or
DLSS is selected. Personal little experience with Unity was also a hindrance,
since using custom post processing in HDRP has little documentation, as such,
much time was spent on getting the implementation to work.
6
Conclusion
In this paper, we covered the formula that provides a theoretical optimal blend-
ing factor between frames, implemented it in Unity, and looked at how it per-
forms with extensions against other popular TAA methods available in Unity.
6.1
Future works
The biggest issue with would be worth further research is obtaining reliable
squared difference estimates, a possible angle is looking at formula 4 and us-
ing more buffers. Another interesting approach could be to combine the TAA
with other methods such as FSR or DLSS, especially together with upscaling.
Another possible extension could be to employ a similar solution as was used
in history clamping/clipping, to try and rectify the historic value, when sudden
changes to the variance or squared difference occur.
18
==PAGE:22==
References
[1] Liu S. Yang, L. and M. Salvi. A survey of temporal antialiasing techniques.
Computer Graphics Forum, 39(2):607–621, 2020.
[2] Nvidia
dlss
2.0:
A
big
leap
in
ai
render-
ing.
https://www.nvidia.com/en-gb/geforce/news/
nvidia-dlss-2-0-a-big-leap-in-ai-rendering/.
[3] Xess2.
https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/developer/
topic-technology/gamedev/xess2.html.
[4] Game-changing
updates:
Fsr
4,
afmf
2.1,
ai-powered
fea-
tures
more!
https://community.amd.com/t5/gaming/
game-changing-updates-fsr-4-afmf-2-1-ai-powered-features-amp/
ba-p/748504l.
[5] Henrik Philippi and Jeppe Revall Frisvad. Practical temporal and stereo-
scopic filtering for real-time ray tracing. Proceedings of Eurographics Sym-
posium on Rendering, pages 111–118, 2023.
[6] Nvidia fxaa whitepaper.
https://developer.download.nvidia.com/
assets/gamedev/files/sdk/11/FXAA_WhitePaper.pdf.
[7] Kurt Akeley. Reality engine graphics. Computer Graphics Forum, SIG-
GRAPH ’93:109–116, 1993.
[8] Shawn Hargreaves. Deferred shading. https://shawnhargreaves.com/
DeferredShading.pdf.
[9] Alexander Reshetov. Morphological antialiasing. Proceedings of the Con-
ference on High Performance Graphics, 31(2pt1):109–116, 2009.
[10] SOUSA T. GUTIERREZ D IMENEZ J., ECHEVARRIA J. I. Smaa: En-
hanced subpixel morphological antialiasing.
Computer Graphics Forum,
31(2pt1):355–364, 2012.
[11] Lei Yang, Diego Nehab, Pedro V. Sander, Pitchaya Sitthi-amorn, Jason
Lawrence, and Hugues Hoppe. Amortized supersampling. ACM transac-
tions on graphics, 28(5), 2009.
[12] Screen
percentage
with
temporal
upscale.
https://
dev.epicgames.com/documentation/en-us/unreal-engine/
screen-percentage-with-temporal-upscale-in-unreal-engine.
[13] Christoph Schied,
Anton Kaplanyan,
Chris Wyman,
Anjul Patney,
Chakravarty R. Alla Chaitanya, John Burgess, Shiqiu Liu, Carsten Dachs-
bacher, Aaron Lefohn, and Marco Salvi. Spatiotemporal variance-guided
filtering: real-time reconstruction for path-traced global illumination. Pro-
ceedings of High Performance Graphics, (2):1–12, 2017.
19
==PAGE:23==
[14] Killian Herveau, Max Piochowiak, and Carsten Dachsbacher. Minimal con-
volutional neural networks for temporal anti aliasing. Computer Graphics
Forum, 2023.
[15] Lasse Jon Fuglsang Pedersen. Temporal reprojection anti-aliasing in inside.
Game Developers Conference, 2016.
[16] Brian Karis. High quality temporal supersampling. SIGGRAPH - Advances
in Real-Time Rendering in Games, 2014.
[17] Tiago Sousa. Graphics gems from cryengine 3. SIGGRAPH - Advances in
Real-Time Rendering in Games, 2013.
[18] Jorge Jimenez. Filmic smaa: Sharp morphological and temporal antialias-
ing. SIGGRAPH - Advances in Real-Time Rendering, 2016.
[19] Unity
anti-aliasing.
https://docs.unity3d.com/Packages/
com.unity.postprocessing@3.3/manual/Anti-aliasing.html#
temporal-anti-aliasing-taa.
[20] Niranjan D. Narvekar and Lina J. Karam. A no-reference image blur met-
ric based on the cumulative probability of blur detection (cpbd). IEEE
Transactions on Image Processing, 20, 2011.
20
