==PAGE:1==
Development and Fermentation of Goat
Whey for Vodka Production
Sebastian Worm Blomhøj
Technical University of Denmark
Microbial Biotechnology and Biorefining
Master Thesis
February 2th, 2025
Supervisor: Peter Ruhdal Jensen
Co-supervisors: Mikkel Hansen, Timothy Hobley
Copyright: Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the customary bibliographic
citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
==PAGE:2==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months from February 2025 to August 2025
with an official workload of 35 ECTS, as part of the Master of Science in Engineering
degree; Food Technology. The thesis was conducted with Microbial Biotechnology and
Biorefining (MBB) group, with collaboration from Grøntmarked.
Sebastian Worm Blomhøj - S184791
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Signature
2025-09-03
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Date
==PAGE:3==
Acknowledgements
Sebastian Worm Blomhøj, MSc, Food Technology, DTU.
Peter Ruhdal Jensen, Professor, Supervisor
I would like to thank Peter for accepting the role of supervisor despite his very
busy schedule. His guidance was invaluable in ensuring that the project re-
mained well-structured and focused throughout the process.
Mikkel Hansen, Postdoc, Co-Supervisor
I would like to thank Mikkel for his constant support and guidance, for always
being available to answer my questions, and for guiding me through laboratory
methods and experiments I had not previously worked with.
Timothy Hobley, Associate Professor, Co-Supervisor
I would like to thank Timothy for consistently suggesting new experiments and
methods to try. His input has been valuable in expanding the scope of this
project.
Asser Bo Paludan and Grøntmarked
i would like to thank Asser and Grøntmarked for bringing this interesting project
to me and for helping procure goat and cow whey for experimentation.
Søtofte Gårdmejeri
Thank you to Søtofte Gårdmejeri for providing cow whey, which made it possible
for me to carry out initial experiments and get comfortable with the methods
before I got access to goat whey.
Nørgaard Gedemejeri
Thank you to Nørgaard Gedemejeri for delivering fresh goat whey for my exper-
iments.
Copenhagen Goatmilk
Thanks also to Copenhagen Goatmilk for letting us pick up goat whey at short
notice.
i
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Goat whey (GW) is an underutilized by-product of cheese production, presenting both an
environmental challenge and an opportunity to use it as a valuable substrate. This thesis
analyzes GW to determine its potential for conversion to ethanol through enzymatic
hydrolysis of lactose and proteins for fermentation. Valorizing this by-product and using
it as a substrate will increase the sustainability of goat farming.
Samples of GW were characterized for their composition, then subjected to pasteur-
ization and enzymatic hydrolysis of lactose and proteins to facilitate fermentation with
Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
Lactose hydrolysis with β-galactosidase (β-GAL) efficiently converted lactose into monosac-
charides for fermentation, while the addition of trypsin and pepsin increased the con-
centration of free amino nitrogen, a key nutrient for yeast. Trypsin proved to be the
preferred enzyme for GW compared to pepsin, indicating greater robustness and ef-
ficiency. Fermentation experiments showed rapid ethanol production, reaching up to
23.8 g/L, with protein/fat aggregates removed by centrifugation. Glucose (GLU) was
preferentially consumed during fermentation, while galactose (GAL) fermentation oc-
curred in a secondary phase.
These results demonstrate the importance of optimizing enzyme treatments as well as
pasteurization protocols for successful fermentation. Some analytical variability and
batch-to-batch differences were observed, emphasizing the complexity of GW as a sub-
strate. Nevertheless, this thesis demonstrates that ethanol production is feasible with
GW, potentially leading to more sustainable practices if integrated into goat farms in the
future.
Abstract (Danish)
Geddevalle er et underudnyttet biprodukt fra osteproduktion, som både udgør en miljømæs-
sig udfordring og giver mulighed for at anvende det som et værdifuldt råmateriale. Dette
speciale analyserer geddevalle for at vurdere potentialet for omdannelse til ethanol gen-
nem enzymatisk hydrolyse af laktose og proteiner med henblik på gæring. Ved at ud-
nytte dette biprodukt som substrat kan bæredygtigheden i gedeavl og mejeriproduktion
øges.
Prøver af geddevalle blev karakteriseret for deres sammensætning og derefter pas-
Development and Fermentation of Goat Whey for Vodka Production
ii
==PAGE:5==
teuriseret og behandlet med enzymatisk hydrolyse af laktose og proteiner for at mulig-
gøre gæring med S. cerevisiae.
Hydrolyse af laktose med β-galaktosidase omdannede effektivt laktosen til monosakkarider,
som kunne omsættes under gæring, mens tilsætning af trypsin og pepsin øgede kon-
centrationen af frit aminiokvælstof, en vigtig næringskilde for gæren. Trypsin viste sig
som det foretrukne enzym til geddevalle sammenlignet med pepsin, hvilket indikerer
større robusthed og effektivitet. Fermenteringsforsøgene viste en hurtig ethanolproduk-
tion på op til 23,8 g/L, efter at protein- og fedt-aggregater var fjernet ved centrifugering.
Glukose blev fortrinsvist omsat under gæring, mens galaktose først blev fermenteret i
en sekundær fase.
Disse resultater understreger vigtigheden af at optimere både enzymbehandling og pas-
teuriseringsprotokoller for at opnå en succesfuld fermentering. Der blev observeret en
vis analytisk variation samt forskelle mellem batchene, hvilket viser kompleksiteten af
geddevalle som substrat. Ikke desto mindre viser specialet, at ethanolproduktion er
mulig fra geddevalle, hvilket på sigt kan bidrage til mere bæredygtige praksisser, hvis
det integreres på gedegårde i fremtiden.
Development and Fermentation of Goat Whey for Vodka Production
iii
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Nomenclature
Symbol/Abbreviation
Description
Unit/Full Term
A
Asymptotic ethanol concentration (final
yield, Gompertz model)
g/L
ADH
Alcohol Dehydrogenase
–
ANOVA
Analysis of Variance
–
AUC
Area Under the Curve (HPLC quantifica-
tion)
–
BOD
Biochemical Oxygen Demand
mg/L
BSA
Bovine Serum Albumin
–
CFU
Colony Forming Units
/mL
CI
Confidence Interval
–
COD
Chemical Oxygen Demand
mg/L
CV
Coefficient of Variation
%
FAN
Free Amino Nitrogen
mg/L
GAL
Galactose
g/L
GLU
Glucose
g/L
LAC
Lactose
g/L
GW
Goat Whey
–
HPLC
High-Performance Liquid Chromatogra-
phy
–
LMM
Linear Mixed Model
–
LM
Linear Model
–
LA
Lactic Acid
g/L
λ
Lag phase duration (Gompertz model)
h
µmax
Maximum specific growth/production rate
h−1 or g/L/h
NMR
Nuclear Magnetic Resonance
–
OD600
Optical Density at 600 nm
–
pH
Acidity/alkalinity (hydrogen ion concentra-
tion)
–
PDC
Pyruvate Decarboxylase
–
R2
Coefficient of determination (fit quality)
–
S. cerevisiae
Saccharomyces cerevisiae
–
TMTC
Too Many To Count
–
Development and Fermentation of Goat Whey for Vodka Production
v
==PAGE:8==
Development and Fermentation of Goat Whey for Vodka Production
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Acknowledgements
i
Nomenclature
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Project Description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Project Scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Background
4
2.1
Goat Whey as a Substrate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
β-Galactosidase-Catalyzed Lactose Hydrolysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Protein Hydrolysis: Mechanisms and Enzymatic Catalysts . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Metabolism and Fermentation Dynamics of Saccharomyces cerevisiae . . 12
2.5
Microbial Activity in the Dairy Industry
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3
Methodology
17
3.1
Materials, Sourcing, and Handling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.2
Experimental Design and Workflow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
3.3
Analytical Procedures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3.4
Replicates, Quality Control, Data Handling and Method Limitations . . . . 21
4
Results and Discussion
24
4.1
Goat Whey composition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
4.2
Experimental Analysis of Sugar Hydrolysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
4.3
Experimental Analysis of Protein Hydrolysis, Free Amino Nitrogen (FAN),
and Soluble Proteins . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
4.4
Sensory Analysis of Yeasts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
4.5
Fermentation Dynamics: Cell Growth and pH Evolution
. . . . . . . . . . 36
4.6
Ethanol Production in Goat Whey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
4.7
Microbial Content in Goat Whey
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
5
Conclusion
47
vii
==PAGE:10==
Bibliography
50
6
Appendix
56
Development and Fermentation of Goat Whey for Vodka Production
viii
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
Alcohol has always been a part of human society, going as far back as before 7000 BC
in early China, where archaeologists found evidence of fermented drinks being con-
sumed. It has continued to play a large role in society, both culturally, religiously, and
medicinally across the world [1]. Today, alcohol is still a huge part of our culture and
has an estimated market value of approximately 10,427.05 billion kr. as of 2024, and is
estimated to rise to 12,878.72 billion kr. by 2033 [2]. this project utilizes the by-product
of cheese production GW, and uses it as a valuable substrate to produce ethanol. This
can present small companies with financial opportunities, as well as make production
more sustainable by utilizing GW that is normally discarded, despite its high content of
lactose and proteins [3]. This poses a large environmental threat, as GW has a very
high biochemical and chemical oxygen demand, with COD levels reaching up to 80 g/L
and BOD levels of approximately 50 g/L. It is, therefore, one of the most polluting dairy
products; for comparison, wastewater has a COD of about 0.41 g/L and BOD of 0.2 g/L.
The high concentration of lactose, approximately 35–50 g/L, is responsible for these
elevated values [4].
These issues are especially relevant for Denmark, as the water standard is steadily
decreasing; 85% of coastal waters have not met ecological standards, mainly due to
nutrient overload and oxygen depletion (hypoxia) [5]. Disposing of GW can lead to
further dead zones in the already overloaded Danish sea. By utilizing GW to create
new revenue streams, it can incentivize farmers to adopt more sustainable practices
while simultaneously increasing profits.
1.1
Project Description
Grønt Marked is a non-profit organization dedicated to the development of a community-
based alternative food system supporting small-scale Danish produce and producers.
Closing the gap between farm and fork, their project brings seasonal and local produce,
as well as sustainable farming practices, from the countryside to the city [6]. This initia-
tive has been ongoing since 2019.
1
==PAGE:12==
1.2
Project Scope
The goal of this project is to develop and optimize the process of converting goat whey
(GW) into ethanol suitable for vodka production. This will be achieved by enzymatically
hydrolyzing lactose into glucose (GLU) and galactose (GAL), which will subsequently
be fermented into ethanol. Different enzymatic methods will be evaluated to identify the
most effective approach for lactose splitting, and different yeast strains will be tested to
determine the optimal conditions for ethanol yield and production efficiency. Specifically,
the project objectives include:
• Developing and optimizing the enzymatic hydrolysis process to effectively convert
lactose into fermentable sugars.
• Identifying the yeast strain that provides the highest ethanol yield from GW.
• Optimizing fermentation parameters to maximize ethanol production.
• Scaling up the optimized fermentation process to pilot scale.
• Investigating potential applications or utilization methods for any newly generated
side streams.
Ultimately, this project aims to valorize goat whey, a by-product from goat cheese pro-
duction, thereby contributing to waste reduction and promoting sustainable practices in
the dairy industry.
1.3
Motivation
A growing demand for sustainable productions and utilization of by-products, to reduce
waste in the dairy industry have become increasingly important during the last few years.
As the global environment and the sea around Denmark faces pressure from waste, it
is critical to create new innovative ways to utilize by-products and convert them into
valuable substrates instead. Goat whey (GW), a by-product of cheese production, is a
good example of a resource that just gets thrown out or used as low-value animal feed,
even though it is rich in nutrients like lactose and proteins.
Traditional approaches to GW utilization have been predominantly done with cow whey
used for protein powder, with GW being a more seasonal product getting overlooked.
Goat cheese is also primarily produced by smaller farms, that lack the large scale and
infrastructure to valorise the GW.
Development and Fermentation of Goat Whey for Vodka Production
2
==PAGE:13==
GW has a very high biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) as well as chemical oxygen
demand (COD), this creates environmental challenges for GW if thrown out.
This thesis is motivated by the potential to utilize this by-product and turn it into a high
value substrate, showing that GW can be part of a larger circular economy in the dairy
industry.
Development and Fermentation of Goat Whey for Vodka Production
3
==PAGE:14==
2
Background
2.1
Goat Whey as a Substrate
Goat whey as a substrate is primarily water about 90% but is rich in sugars and proteins
compromising of approximately 45–50 g/L of lactose, and around 8 g/L of proteins as
well as about 2 g/L of fats, all depending on the production process. This also contains
minerals like potassium, calcium, and phosphorous [7].
The nutritional profile is similar to that of cow whey but has some differences that sep-
arates it, these differences are the protein structures that influences the physical, chemi-
cal and sensory properties of GW. It contains primarily β-lactoglobulin and α-lactalbumin,
these are highly soluble and bioavailable proteins, these proteins are both rich in es-
sential amino acids and also shows antimicrobial, antioxidant, immunomodulatory, and
antihypertensive activity when they are exposed to enzymatic hydrolysis [8]. Compared
to cow whey it also contains smaller amounts of αs1-casein and different medium chain
fatty acids; this also adds to its goaty aroma and more digestible profile [9].
So despite the good composition of GW and its possible uses it remains severely under-
utilized in production, as unlike cow whey that is primarily used for protein powder, small
scale farms does not have either the capacity or the quantity to produce protein powder
from GW, making it waste and creating both a loss of nutrients as well as a ecological
and environmental problem caused by GW high BOD and COD [3].
2.2
β-Galactosidase-Catalyzed Lactose Hydrolysis
The hydrolysis of lactose (LAC) refers to the enzymatic action of β-galactosidase (β-
GAL) (EC 3.2.1.23), commonly known as lactase, which cleaves the disaccharide LAC-
into its constituent monosaccharides. LACis composed of D-glucose and D-galactose
residues, linked by a β-1,4-glycosidic bond. This enzymatic breakdown is essential for
making lactose-derived sugars available for yeast fermentation and other biological or
chemical processes.
4
==PAGE:15==
Structure of Lactose
LAC consists of D-glucose and D-galactosecovalently bonded via the β-1,4-glycosidic
bond. This bond is resistant to non-specific acid hydrolysis under physiological con-
ditions but can be efficiently cleaved by enzymatic catalysis. During hydrolysis, a wa-
ter molecule is consumed to break the glycosidic linkage, yielding glucose (GLU) and
galactose (GAL) as follows: Lactose + H2O →GLU + GAL. The reaction proceeds
via a general acid-base mechanism typical for glycosidases, where catalytic residues
within the active site of β-GAL stabilize the transition state and protonate the leaving
group [10].
Enzyme Properties of β-GAL
β-GAL is an enzyme that can be derived from different sources such as bacteria (e.g.,
Escherichia coli), yeast (e.g., Kluyveromyces lactis), and filamentous fungi (e.g., As-
pergillus oryzae). These enzymes have structural differences depending on their bi-
ological origin. β-GAL can also be sourced from animal tissue, such as bovine liver,
which is commonly used for biochemical applications.
Even though these species create different structures of β-GAL most of them will still
operate through a two-step displacement mechanism
Development and Fermentation of Goat Whey for Vodka Production
5
==PAGE:16==
Figure 1: The two-step (double displacement) mechanism of β-GAL, involving a cova-
lent glycosyl-enzyme intermediate.
The catalytic process involves the formation of a glycosyl-enzyme intermediate. It pro-
ceeds via a nucleophilic attack from an active site residue (commonly a carboxylic acid
side chain), followed by hydrolysis of the intermediate [11].
Reaction Conditions and Kinetics
Hydrolysis of LAC is highly sensitive to the environmental conditions, as each enzyme
source has a specific range of temperature and pH for optimal activity.
• Kluyveromyces lactis β-GAL: optimum pH ∼6.5–7.0; optimum temperature 30–
45 ◦C
• Bovine liver β-GAL: optimum pH ∼4.0–5.0; optimum temperature 37–45 ◦C
The activity of β-GAL outside these parameters can cause denaturation and reduce
catalytic efficiency. β-GALs derived from thermophilic organisms or engineered strains
possess a wider range of temperature and pH tolerance.
The hydrolysis reaction of β-GAL follows Michaelis–Menten kinetics, with the efficiency
depending on the substrate’s concentration and its enzyme affinity [12].
Development and Fermentation of Goat Whey for Vodka Production
6
==PAGE:17==
Side Reactions and Glycolysation
β-GAL can also catalyse transglycosylation reactions under high substrate concentra-
tions. In these conditions, water does not serve as the nucleophile; instead, a sugar
molecule (e.g., another LAC) accepts the galactosyl group to form galacto-oligosaccharides
(GOS). GOS are non-digestible carbohydrates with prebiotic activity. The balance be-
tween hydrolysis and transglycosylation depends on the substrate concentration, water
activity, and the temperature of the reaction medium [11].
Inhibitory effects and Limitations
All enzyme activity is susceptible to inhibition, particularly by GLU and GAL, which are
the end products of LAC hydrolysis. These monosaccharides may bind competitively
to the active site of β-GAL or otherwise interfere with conformational changes required
for catalysis. Other inhibitors include metal ions such as Mg2+ or Ca2+, which may
act as enzyme activators or inhibitors depending on the enzyme’s structure. Some β-
GALs require divalent cations for structural stability, whereas others are inactivated by
them. Thus, the presence of chelating agents or fluctuations in pH can reduce or abolish
enzyme function [13].
2.3
Protein Hydrolysis: Mechanisms and Enzymatic Catalysts
Protein Hydrolysis
The process of cleaving peptide bonds in either polypeptides or proteins produces smaller
products such as peptides or free amino acids. This is a fundamental reaction in both
biological and industrial bioprocessing, enabling the transformation of complex protein
structures—that are otherwise unusable—into bioavailable or functionally modified pep-
tides. Hydrolysis can occur via enzymatic, acidic, or alkaline mechanisms, each with
its own distinct biochemical and kinetic properties. Understanding these processes is
essential for their application in food science, nutrition, pharmaceuticals, and other pro-
duction contexts [14].
Development and Fermentation of Goat Whey for Vodka Production
7
==PAGE:18==
Peptide Bond Structure and Stability
Proteins are composed of amino acid chains linked together in complex shapes via
peptide bonds—amide linkages between the carboxyl group of one amino acid and the
amino group of the next. These bonds can exhibit partial double bond character due to
resonance between the carbonyl oxygen and the amide nitrogen, resulting in a planar
and rigid structure. This resonance increases bond stability and prevents spontaneous
hydrolysis.
Despite the stability of peptide bonds, they can be cleaved through hydrolysis, which
is a nucleophilic substitution reaction involving a water molecule attacking the elec-
trophilic carbon in the peptide bond. This process generates a free amino group (−NH2)
and a carboxylic acid group (−COOH). However, a significant amount of energy (∼20–
30 kcal/mol) is required for peptide bond hydrolysis, making the use of catalysts essen-
tial to initiate the reaction [15].
Thermodynamics and Kinetics of hydrolysis
The thermodynamic process of protein hydrolysis is generally exergonic, releasing free
energy under standard conditions (∆G < 0). However, the reaction is characterized
by a high activation barrier, which is why a catalyst is required to initiate the process.
Several factors influence the efficiency and rate of protein hydrolysis:
• Peptide bond accessibility, governed by protein folding and tertiary structure;
• Hydrolysis environment, including pH, temperature, and ionic strength;
• Catalyst type, whether enzymatic or chemical;
• Substrate specificity, as different bonds may have different susceptibilities de-
pending on adjacent residues.
Proteins that are tightly packed in their tertiary structure may have peptide bonds buried
within the molecule, rendering them less accessible to hydrolytic enzymes. Therefore,
unfolding or denaturation is sometimes necessary prior to hydrolysis to expose the rel-
evant bonds for cleavage [16].
Development and Fermentation of Goat Whey for Vodka Production
8
==PAGE:19==
General Mechanisms of Hydrolytic Cleavage
This process is initiated by the nucleophilic attack on the carbonyl carbon of the peptide
bond, resulting in the formation of a tetrahedral intermediate. This intermediate sub-
sequently collapses, breaking the C–N bond, which releases a peptide fragment and
regenerates the catalytic species in the case of enzymatic hydrolysis.
In acidic hydrolysis, the carbonyl oxygen is protonated, thereby increasing the elec-
trophilicity of the carbon and facilitating a nucleophilic attack by water. In alkaline hy-
drolysis, a hydroxide ion acts as the nucleophile. The enzymatic mechanism typically
involves an activated serine, cysteine, or water molecule, with the active site environ-
ment being stabilized by the presence of histidine and aspartate residues, often forming
a catalytic triad [17].
Degree of Hydrolysis and Peptide Profile
Hydrolysis of proteins yields a wide range of peptides and free amino acids, with their
distribution depending on the specific cleavage pattern. Broad-spectrum hydrolysis is
used to generate a large variety of peptide lengths, whereas selective hydrolysis target-
ing specific cleavage sites results in more uniform oligopeptides [18].
Influencing Factors on Protein Hydrolysis
There are several factors that influence the hydrolysis of proteins in the product; these
factors can affect the rate, extent, and specificity of the hydrolysis:
• The protein’s structure has a large impact, with the presence of disulfide bonds,
core regions that are hydrophobic, and glycosylations that can inhibit hydrolytic
access [19].
• The environment of the solvent, such as ionic strength, pH, and polarity, can affect
enzyme activity and the susceptibility of peptide bonds [20].
• High temperature can increase the rate of hydrolysis, but excessive heat may
cause enzyme denaturation or peptide bond racemization in chemical hydrolysis.
Low temperatures can inhibit the rate by decreasing enzyme activity or slowing
reaction kinetics, as hydrolysis is a thermal reaction [20].
Development and Fermentation of Goat Whey for Vodka Production
9
==PAGE:20==
• The amount of time needed to hydrolyse the product is also critical, as extended
hydrolysis may result in diminishing returns or, if excessive, can lead to over-
fragmentation or loss of functionality [21].
Enzymatic Properties of Trypsin
Trypsin is defined as a serine endopeptidase, that serves the critical role of proteolytic
digestion in the small intestine. It secretes from the pancreas as the zymogen trypsino-
gen and is activated in the duodenum by enteropeptidase. Trypsin is highly specific and
cleaves peptide bonds on the carboxyl side of the basic amino acids lysine and arginine,
unless these residues are followed by proline, which causes steric hindrance [22].
Trypsin’s action involves a catalytic triad of His57, Asp102, and Ser195 within the active
site. The cleavage of peptide bonds can further proceed after a nucleophilic attack by
the hydroxyl group of serine on the carbonyl group of the bond that is to be broken.
Histidine then acts as a general base, extracting a proton from the serine, while the
protonated histidine becomes stabilized by aspartate. This will lead to the formation
of a tetrahedral intermediates, that collapses to release cleaved peptides and forms
acyl-enzyme intermediates. The intermediate is then hydrolyzed by a water molecule
to regenerate the free enzyme [17].
The optimal pH for trypsin is around 7.5–8.5, and it works best at temperatures of about
37 °C to 50 °C, depending on the conditions of the substrate and the buffer [23]. Envi-
ronmental conditions has a significant effect on both the rate of hydrolysis but on the
peptide profile and the selectivity of the enzymes as well. At higher temperatures, hy-
drolysis can occur, but the specificity of trypsin becomes reduced, leading to a larger
spectrum of peptides. The selectivity is primarily controlled by the primary structure of
the protin, but aslo by the secoundary specificity of the substrate, with residue that can
flank the cleavage sites and modulate the binding rates of hydrolysis.
It has been shown that trypsin cleaves more efficiently at sites where adjacent residues
are neutral rather than charged, particularly at the P2 and P2’ positions [17]. The knowl-
edge this gives helps predict the outcomes of hydrolysis, as well as optimize conditions
for specific yields of peptides.
Development and Fermentation of Goat Whey for Vodka Production
10
==PAGE:21==
A limited degree of hydrolysis can also be used to modify the structure and functions
of proteins. For example, studies on corn germ and walnut proteins have shown that
trypsin can alter molecular weight, solubility, emulsification, and foaming properties of
proteins by creating peptide fragments of 200–5000 Da [24].
Enzymatic Properties of Pepsin
Pepsin is a gastric endopeptidase that can be found in stomachs, it will initiate protein
hydrolysis. It is secreted as an inactive zymogen, pepsinogen, by gastric chief cells
and becomes active in the acidic environment of the stomach (pH 1.5–3.5) through
autocatalysis [25]. Pepsin will function ideally under acidic conditions, here it will cleave
peptide bonds within protein substrates, specifically at aromatic amino acids adjacent
sites.
Pepsin is classified as an aspartic protease, as its catalytic mechanism involves two
aspartate residues (typically Asp32 and Asp215 in porcine pepsin) within the active
site [17]. The enzyme will use a water molecule as a nucleophile to attack the carbonyl
carbon of the peptide bond. This catalysis will allow hydrolysis to continue without co-
valent intermediates forming.
Pepsin has a low substrate specificity, this results in a more broad range of oligopeptides
being formed from proteins. However, kinetic modeling of pepsin activity is complicated
by its stochastic cleavage pattern. The hydrolysis efficiency depends on the primary
sequence, conformation, and solubility of the substrate [26].
Pepsin exhibits peak activity at pH 1.8–2.0 and shows rapid loss of activity at pH levels
above 4.0. Its catalytic performance is also modulated by the ionic strength of the sur-
rounding medium. As demonstrated in [25], increased ionic strength can decrease both
the binding affinity of pepsin and its catalytic turnover during hydrolysis of bovine serum
albumin.
The kinetics of pepsin hydrolysis are biphasic and time-dependent, initially cleaving
surface-exposed peptide bonds before progressing to internal sites [27]. Pepsin can
also enhance downstream hydrolysis by other proteases, such as trypsin, by generating
oligopeptides that are more accessible to pancreatic enzymes. This initial peptic diges-
tion can either facilitate or reduce the efficiency of subsequent enzymatic steps [28].
Development and Fermentation of Goat Whey for Vodka Production
11
==PAGE:22==
2.4
Metabolism and Fermentation Dynamics of Saccharomyces
cerevisiae
Saccharomyces cerevisiae (S. cerevisiae) is a eukaryotic microorganism widely used for
fermentation, particularly due to its ability to produce ethanol from simple sugars such
as GLU, galactose (GAL), sucrose, and fructose. Commonly known as brewer’s yeast,
it is among the most frequently utilized yeast species in both traditional and industrial
ethanol fermentations. Its popularity is due to its metabolic efficiency, well-characterized
genetics, and robustness under a variety of environmental conditions.
S. cerevisiae requires essential nutrients to support active growth and ethanol produc-
tion, including a fermentable carbon source with a minimum concentration of approx-
imately 10 g/L (1% w/v) [29]. Nitrogen is another critical factor for yeast metabolism,
especially in the form of Free Amino Nitrogen (FAN), which includes both free amino
acids and small peptides. Optimal FAN levels for fermentation range between 140–
150 mg/L [30], although fermentation can still occur at low levels, albeit with an increased
risk of sluggish or stuck fermentation in high-sugar or otherwise stressful conditions [31].
In addition, S. cerevisiae benefits from the presence of small amounts of soluble pro-
teins, typically requiring a minimum of 20–40 mg/L to sustain cellular function and growth [32].
A brief exposure to oxygen at the beginning of fermentation is often beneficial for the
synthesis of sterols and unsaturated fatty acids, which are essential for maintaining
membrane integrity under ethanol-induced stress.
Sugar Uptake and Glycolysis
This process starts when the eukaryotic cell takes in fermentable sugars through facil-
itated diffusion via the hexose transporter family (HXT proteins). The sugars are then
phosphorylated and directed into the glycolytic pathway. Glycolysis subsequently con-
verts GLU into two molecules of pyruvate, generating both ATP and NADH in the pro-
cess.
While GLU is phosphorylated directly by hexokinase, GAL must first be metabolized
through the Leloir pathway—an enzymatic sequence required for converting GAL into
glucose-6-phosphate to enable its utilization in glycolysis. In this pathway, the GAL is
initially converted to galactose-1-phosphate by galactokinase (GAL1). It is then trans-
formed into UDP-GAL by galactose-1-phosphate uridylyltransferase (GAL7), and sub-
Development and Fermentation of Goat Whey for Vodka Production
12
==PAGE:23==
sequently into UDP-glucose and glucose-1-phosphate via UDP-glucose 4-epimerase
(GAL10). Finally, glucose-1-phosphate is isomerized into glucose-6-phosphate by phos-
phoglucomutase, ensuring that the sugar can enter the glycolytic pathway efficiently.
Figure 2: Schematic overview of the Leloir pathway for galactose metabolism in eukary-
otes; only the principal pathway steps are depicted [33]
The Leloir pathway is tightly regulated and becomes active when GLU is depleted in the
cellular environment, so GAL becomes the primary available fermentable sugar. This
regulation happens because the GAL genes involved are subject to catabolite repres-
sion in the presence of GLU [34]. Once the sugars are processed through glycolysis,
whether directly or via the Leloir pathway—they ultimately yield two pyruvate molecules
per hexose, as well as a net generation of ATP and NADH.
Fermentative metabolism
When S. cerevisiae is exposed to anaerobic conditions, pyruvate is not transported
into the mitochondria for oxidative phosphorylation. It will instead undergo alcoholic
fermentation. The key enzymatic steps in this process are:
• Pyruvate Decarboxylation: Pyruvate decarboxylase (PDC1, PDC5, PDC6) will
catalyse decarboxylation of pyruvate and make it into acetaldehyde, releasing
Development and Fermentation of Goat Whey for Vodka Production
13
==PAGE:24==
CO2.
• Alcohol Formation: Acetaldehyde is reduced into ethanol by alcohol dehydro-
genase (ADH), with primarily ADH1 and ADH2, using NADH. This step regener-
ates NAD+, thereby maintaining the redox balance essential for continued glycol-
ysis [35].
This pathway enables yeast to generate ATP quickly and without the need for oxygen.
This phenomenon is known as the Crabtree effect, which allows GLU to be fermented
into ethanol even under aerobic conditions, provided GLU concentrations are sufficiently
high [36].
Ethanol Tolerance and Stress Response
S. cerevisiae has a high tolerance for ethanol, that makes it widely applicable compared
to other strains with lower tolerance. Its ethanol tolerance can reach up to 18% (v/v),
depending on the specific strain. High ethanol concentrations will compromise the in-
tegrity of the cell membrane, denature proteins, and disrupt the redox balance within
the cell. To mitigate these effects, S. cerevisiae upregulates the heat shock proteins
(HSPs), molecular chaperones, and antioxidant enzymes [37].
Ethanol stress has also been shown to disrupt the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle, amino
acid synthesis, as well as lipid metabolism. Under such conditions, accumulation of
pyruvate, succinate, and citric acid has been observed, indicating significant metabolic
perturbation as a result of high ethanol concentrations [38].
Core Enzymatic Machinery
Two key enzymes are involved in ethanol production:
• Pyruvate decarboxylase (PDC): The enzyme catalyses the decarboxylation of
pyruvate into acetaldehyde and is catalytically effective even under high GLU,
and anaerobic conditions.
• Alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH): This enzyme reduces acetaldehyde to ethanol.
ADH1 is expressed under fermentative conditions, while ADH2 is repressed by
GLU and is instead induced during respiratory conditions [39].
Development and Fermentation of Goat Whey for Vodka Production
14
==PAGE:25==
Fermentation Dynamics of Glucose and Galactose
When fermenting GLU and GAL with S. cerevisiae there are large differences, specif-
ically in the regulatory control, uptake efficiency, and the metabolic outcomes. These
differences are all caused by S. cerevisiae’s preference for GLU intake compared to
GAL and can be seen as having control over the carbon metabolism via the catabolite
repression mechanism.
As GLU is rapidly taken in by the hexose transporters (HXT proteins) and phosphory-
lated by hexokinase enzymes, it is the preferred carbon source for S. cerevisiae. When
internalized, GLU enters glycolysis, thereby generating ATP and NADH with a high flux
and ending in ethanol production under aerobic conditions. This again is the Crabtree
effect and shows that S. cerevisiae prioritizes production of ATP over its respiratory
efficiency [40].
On the other hand, GAL metabolism is repressed when in the same substrate as GLU,
caused by the transcriptional inhibition of the GAL genes that encode the Leloir pathway
enzymes needed to catabolize GAL. When GLU is removed from the substrate, the
yeast induces the GAL gene cluster, starting the conversion from GAL to glucose-6-
phosphate so that it can undergo glycolysis. As the sugars are utilized in two phases,
it results in a diauxic growth pattern that shows a lag phase when the yeast needs to
adapt both transcriptionally as well as enzymatically to the GAL [41].
Fermentation of GAL is slower when compared to GLU; it has a reduced uptake and
lower ethanol productivity. According to [42], a wild type strain showed GAL consump-
tion at 2.2 g/L/h and ethanol production of 0.63 g/L/h—this is approximately 70% of the
performance of GLU fermentation. Also, energy depletion during anaerobic conditions
will limit the Leloir pathway proteins’ synthesis, thereby limiting the fermentation of GAL
even more [43].
2.5
Microbial Activity in the Dairy Industry
Bacteria are a significant concern in the dairy industry, as limiting contamination presents
challenges both in ensuring food safety and maintaining product quality. Some of the
most common bacterial concerns include psychrotrophic bacteria, spore-forming Bacil-
lus species, and several pathogenic strains.
Psychrotrophic bacteria such as Pseudomonas spp. are particularly problematic be-
Development and Fermentation of Goat Whey for Vodka Production
15
==PAGE:26==
cause they can grow at refrigeration temperatures. These bacteria produce heat-stable
lipases as well as proteases that can degrade proteins and fats in dairy products, and
leading to off-flavours, as well as decreased shelf life, and overall quality deterioration.
Moreover, they may survive pasteurization [44].
Spore-forming bacteria, such as Bacillus and Paenibacillus spp., are also prevalent con-
taminants in the dairy industry. Their spores are heat-resistant and can survive pasteur-
ization. Additionally, they may form biofilms on production surfaces if not adequately
cleaned. These biofilms become persistent sources of contamination [45].
Pathogenic bacteria represent a critical concern in dairy production. These include Lis-
teria monocytogenes, Salmonella spp., and Escherichia coli. Such pathogens may en-
ter dairy products through environmental contamination or through milk from infected
animals, posing serious risks to public health if not properly controlled [46].
Microbiological Standards for CFU in Dairy Products in Eu-
rope
In the European Union (EU), Regulation (EC) No 853/2004 governs the microbiological
quality of raw milk, including goat milk and whey. These established hygiene criteria for
raw goat milk intended for processing specify that a bacterial count of 1.5×106 CFU/mL
shall not be exceeded when averaged over a two-month period and measured at min-
imum twice per month [47]. The EU standard for pasteurized milk products, including
whey products, sets a limit of ≤100 CFU/mL after the pasteurization step [45].
When developing GW into vodka, microbial contamination is critical, as contaminants
can lead to off-flavours in the final product as well as contamination of the yeast culture.
Increased CFU levels, specifically from spoilage organisms such as Pseudomonas spp.
or spore-formers like Bacillus spp., can interfere with fermentation kinetics and reduce
ethanol yield [48].
Development and Fermentation of Goat Whey for Vodka Production
16
==PAGE:27==
3
Methodology
3.1
Materials, Sourcing, and Handling
Goat whey (GW) was sourced and collected from three different Danish goat dairy farms:
Copenhagen Goat Milk, Nørgaards Gedemejeri, and Søtofte Gårdmejeri. The GW was
collected immediately after removal of cheese curds and then pasteurized to 50 °C by
the suppliers before bottling. The specific method or equipment used for pasteurization
was not provided. After pasteurization, GW was bottled in sterile, food-grade containers
and sealed.
GW was transported to DTU in refrigerated trucks, and upon arrival, was immediately
frozen and stored below −19 °C to ensure microbial and chemical integrity. For all ex-
periments, samples of 1–2 mL were taken and stored below −17 °C. Small samples
were thawed by hand warmth, while larger samples were thawed in a water bath (Julab
26, JULABO GmbH, Germany) set to 25 °C until fully thawed. Samples not immediately
used were kept frozen below −19 °C. The use of three suppliers was necessary due to
the batch and seasonal variation in goat milk production in Denmark.
All chemicals were supplied by Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA) unless stated oth-
erwise; all ethanol was provided by VWR Chemicals BDH® (C2H5OH, VWR Chemicals,
Belgium).
Enzymes
Enzymatic hydrolysis was performed using pepsin from porcine gastric mucosa, trypsin
from porcine pancreas, β-galactosidase from bovine liver, and β-galactosidase from
Kluyveromyces lactis (Hjemmeproduktion.dk, Denmark). All enzymes were stored be-
low 5 °C and weighed or measured for each experiment. Enzyme concentrations, ad-
dition sequences, and hydrolysis times were selected based on supplier recommenda-
tions, theoretical considerations, and laboratory experiments.
17
==PAGE:28==
Yeast Strains
Two strains of S. cerevisiae were used during the experiments: M12 Kveik yeast (Man-
grove Jack’s, UK) and Distiller’s Yeast Vodka (Stillspirits, New Zealand). Both yeasts
were stored in the refrigerator below 5 °C in their original packaging in a plastic bag. They
were brought to thermal equilibrium at room temperature prior to inoculation. Yeast was
added to the GW under sterile conditions in a fume hood, but yeast weighing was done
under non-sterile conditions in the laboratory.
3.2
Experimental Design and Workflow
The workflow of the general procedure included: sample thawing, pasteurization until
65 °C, enzymatic hydrolysis, fermentation, and sampling for analysis during each step.
The processing steps were done according to guidelines from the supervisor, best prac-
tices, and relevant literature.
Pasteurization
Pasteurization was performed in a food laboratory in a stainless-steel pot, where GW
was heated until it reached 65 °C with continuous monitoring. After pasteurization, GW
was cooled to 50 °C and bottled, then frozen and stored at −20 °C until needed. Another
pasteurization was done at 70 °C for 15 min using a water bath; this GW was used
directly for enzymatic hydrolysis and fermentation after cooling.
Enzymatic Hydrolysis
Enzyme treatment was performed with pepsin (pH adjustment to 4 and unadjusted), as
well as sequential and simultaneous addition of trypsin and β-galactosidase. Trypsin
and pepsin were added when GW reached 45 °C and were allowed to hydrolyze for
2 hours. Then, β-galactosidase was added and hydrolyzed for 3 hours. After this, the
GW was cooled to 30 °C before yeast inoculation for fermentation, to prevent thermal
inactivation. Hydrolysis experiments were performed in 500 mL redcap bottles, with
GW volumes between 150–250 mL. The pH was monitored using a pH meter (Lab845,
SI Analytics®, Germany), and adjusted with 1 M HCl (hydrochloric acid). Samples for
analysis were taken every 30 min during hydrolysis to monitor the reaction; hydrolysis
was stopped by immediately freezing the samples at −18 °C.
Development and Fermentation of Goat Whey for Vodka Production
18
==PAGE:29==
Fermentation Design
Fermentation experiments were performed both with and without removal of aggregated
proteins and fats, using a centrifuge (Heraeus Multifuge X3R, Thermo Scientific, USA)
at 4000 rpm for 10 min. The fermentation conditions were only tested with vodka yeast
as chosen by sensory analysis between yeast types. Fermentation without removal was
tested for both yeast types. Yeast was added to GW in 500 mL–1 L autoclaved redcap
bottles, fitted with syringes (2 nm sterile filter and syringes). Batch volumes ranged
from 250–700 mL. Incubation was done at 30 °C with 80 rpm in a shaking incubator
(SHKE6000-8CE MaxQ 6000, Thermo Scientific, USA). During the first 24 hours of fer-
mentation for the aggregate-removed samples, OD600 samples were taken every hour
to monitor growth kinetics of the vodka yeast; after 24 hours, samples were taken every
24 hours to monitor ethanol production. All fermentation vessels, pipettes, and syringes
were sterile.
3.3
Analytical Procedures
Ash, Solids, and Water Content
Procedure: 150 mL GW was dried in an oven at 100 °C for 24 hours, then ashed at
600 °C in a desiccator oven (Nabotherm N11/H, Germany). No chemicals were used,
only clean glassware and crucibles. Solids were scraped from the bottles into crucibles,
then cooled to 200 °C and further cooled in an exsiccator to 20 °C.
Density Measurement
Procedure: Density was measured at the relevant stages using a (Density Meter DMA
35 Anton Paar, Austria). The instrument was calibrated according to the manufacturer’s
instructions, and all measurements were performed at room temperature.
Fat Content (NMR)
Procedure: Approximately 2 g of freeze-dried GW was analyzed for fat and moisture
content using the Smart 6 (CEM, USA) (Microwave + Infrared Moisture and Solids
Analyzer), with the Oracle (CEM, USA) (Rapid NMR Fat Analyzer). No chemicals or
reagents were used for this analysis. GW was freeze-dried (FD10, SD Freeze Drying,
Denmark) and stored in airtight bags below −17 °C until use.
Development and Fermentation of Goat Whey for Vodka Production
19
==PAGE:30==
Protein and Nitrogen Analysis
Dumas Combustion Method:
Procedure: Calibration standards using casein (ca-
sein), L-asparagine (L-asparagine), and wheat flour (wheat flour) (Elementar, Germany)
were created and run through before running samples. Then 100–300 mg of sample
was weighed into tin capsules, then combusted and analyzed using an Elementar Rapid
N Exceed (Elementar, Germany). Protein content was calculated as N × 6.25, using a
milk powder standard for internal calibration in the machine software.
Bradford Assay:
Procedure: Soluble protein was measured using the Bradford as-
say (Pierce™kit, Thermo Fisher, USA), using bovine serum albumin (BSA) standard
and Bradford Protein Assay Reagent (Thermo Scientific, USA). GW was adjusted with
1 M HCl (hydrochloric acid) to assess solubility under decreasing pH. Absorbance was
read at 595 nm on a Genesys 10S UV-Vis spectrophotometer (Thermo Scientific, USA),
always blanked with distilled water. The BSA standard was used to prepare a stan-
dard curve (0–2000 µg/L), and a second-degree polynomial curve was constructed for
quantification. Triplicates were performed for each sample.
Free Amino Nitrogen (FAN) Assay:
Procedure: FAN was quantified using the stan-
dard procedure from Analytica EBC protocol [49]. The chemicals used were disodium
hydrogen phosphate (Na2HPO4), potassium dihydrogen phosphate (KH2PO4), ninhy-
drin (C9H6O4), fructose (C6H12O6), potassium iodate (KIO3), 96% ethanol (C2H5OH,
VWR Chemicals, Belgium), and glycine (C2H5NO2, VWR Chemicals, Belgium) as in-
ternal standard. Samples were diluted as needed so that absorbance values did not
exceed the recommended maximum, minimizing matrix effects. Absorbance was mea-
sured at 570 nm using a Genesys 10S UV-Vis spectrophotometer (Thermo Scientific,
USA), always blanked with distilled water. All samples were analyzed in technical trip-
licates.
HPLC Analysis of Sugars, Ethanol, and Organic Acids
Procedure: All samples for HPLC were diluted 1:4–1:5 with distilled water and filtered
through a 2 nm sterile filter before analysis, to prevent column contamination or block-
age. Analysis was performed using a Vanquish Core HPLC system (Thermo Scien-
tific™, USA) with Chromeleon 7 software (Thermo Scientific™, USA). The solvents used
for HPLC were 5 mM sulfuric acid (H2SO4), 10% ethanol (C2H5OH), and pure Milli-Q
Development and Fermentation of Goat Whey for Vodka Production
20
==PAGE:31==
water (all solvents were mixed with Milli-Q water). Calibration standards were prepared
for lactose, glucose, galactose, lactic acid, and ethanol. Sugar calibration curves used
concentrations of 20, 10, 5, 2.5, and 1.25 g/L; ethanol for experiments (Figure 14, 15,
16) used 10, 5, 2.5, 1.25, and 0.625%, and for (Figure 13) used 5, 2.5, 1.25, 0.625, and
0.3125%. Lactic acid calibration was done at 5, 2.5, 1.25, 0.625, and 0.3125 g/L. 20 µL
was injected per sample, with a runtime of 30 min per sample. Calibration curves were
generated for each sample. Biological duplicates were performed for A, B, O3, and O4,
with C and O1 as single samples. HPLC was always run with Milli-Q water for blanks,
and the instrument performed automatic flushing with mobile phase between samples.
Microbial Analysis (CFU Counting)
M7 Agar: M7 agar was prepared fresh with dipotassium hydrogen phosphate (K2HPO4),
ammonium sulfate ((NH4)2SO4), sodium citrate, magnesium sulfate heptahydrate
(MgSO4·7H2O), iron(II) sulfate heptahydrate (FeSO4·7H2O), yeast extract, glucose, agar,
and Milli-Q water. After autoclaving, the plates were poured and allowed to reach room
temperature before refrigeration. Plates were then brought to room temperature after
refrigeration, before 100 µL of undiluted or diluted (10−2, 10−5) samples was plated and
incubated at 30◦C, then counted after 24 and 48 hours.
MRE + Cycloheximide Agar: MRE agar was prepared with mannitol, yeast extract,
peptone, dipotassium hydrogen phosphate (K2HPO4), sodium acetate, triammonium
citrate, magnesium sulfate heptahydrate (MgSO4·7H2O), manganese(II) sulfate mono-
hydrate (MnSO4·H2O), Tween 80, agar, and Milli-Q water. Plates were autoclaved and
allowed to cool before adding cycloheximide (10 mg/L) prior to pouring. Plates were
treated identically to M7 plates.
3.4
Replicates, Quality Control, Data Handling and Method
Limitations
• Biological duplicates were used for all experiments except for Fermentation Ex-
periment C and O1 (O2 lost due to storm fermentation) and for freeze-dried GW
for NMR, where only a single sample was available.
• Technical triplicates were used for all spectrophotometric assays; all technical trip-
licates were performed on the same day. Analyses run on different days were
performed under as similar conditions as possible.
Development and Fermentation of Goat Whey for Vodka Production
21
==PAGE:32==
• Pipette tips were changed between all samples when not dealing with the same
liquid to prevent cross-contamination.
• All samples were vortexed before use; all samples were vortexed to ensure ho-
mogeneity when running experiments.
• HPLC clarity was checked before runtime; HPLC samples were visually checked
for clarity to ensure a smooth HPLC run; unclear samples were removed.
• All plasticware used was sterile.
All bottles for fermentation were autoclaved.
Other glassware was not sterile unless otherwise noted.
• All calibrations for laboratory instruments were done by laboratory technicians or
other responsible personnel, except for the pH meter which was calibrated each
day before use, using pH 4 and 7 solutions. The probe was rinsed with distilled
water for each measurement.
• Lab coats were always worn; gloves were used when handling dangerous chem-
icals.
• Fermentation bottles were always covered with foil or caps when not being sam-
pled.
• Samples were always clearly labelled (on tube or outer bag/container) with exper-
iment time and name, and identified with a letter and two numbers.
• Data was recorded in Excel and automatically saved to DTU OneDrive.
• Samples for time series were always withdrawn as small samples at each time
point, rather than repeated thawing of bulk samples.
• All colony counting for CFU plates was performed by the author; no formal pro-
tocol existed for ambiguous colonies. Plates were incubated inverted to prevent
condensation and stored at 5 °C after incubation.
• During fermentation, all bottles were shaken at 80 rpm (INFORS HT Multitron,
INFORS AG, Switzerland). During “curve” experiments, bottles were covered with
foil (allowing some passive aeration); otherwise, fermentations were intended to
be anaerobic.
• Enzymatic hydrolysis reactions were static except for brief shaking after enzyme
addition to distribute enzymes.
Development and Fermentation of Goat Whey for Vodka Production
22
==PAGE:33==
• Freeze-dried samples were stored below −17 °C in a sealed plastic bag, with no
special packaging.
• All CFU plate work (agar pouring, sample addition, and spreading) and all addi-
tions for fermentation were performed in a fume hood to minimize contamination
from airborne bacteria.
All statistical analyses, including ANOVA, regression modeling, and linear mixed model
analysis, were performed using RStudio (RStudio Team, Boston, MA, USA). Full details
of the statistical methodology and output tables are provided in the results and discus-
sion with supplementary tables in the Appendix.
Development and Fermentation of Goat Whey for Vodka Production
23
==PAGE:34==
4
Results and Discussion
4.1
Goat Whey composition
Assessing the composition of GW, total solids, ash content, and water fraction must be
analysed. These can be important for understanding the concentration of nutrients and
minerals in GW before fermenting. Solids, ash, and water content were determined
according to standard procedures described in the methodology section.
Total solids and water content: The total solids show the total amount of all the pro-
teins, carbohydrates, minerals, and other organic matter remaining after complete re-
moval of water by drying. The water content is then calculated by subtracting the weight
of solids and ash from the full weight of the GW analysed.
Ash content: Ash content is the inorganic mineral fraction remaining after incineration
at 600 °C, and shows the concentration of mineral components in GW that can have an
influence on the fermentation.
The results are shown in Table 1. GW contained approximately 93.5% water, 6% total
solids, and 0.5% ash. As expected for a dairy by-product, GW exhibited a high water
content and relatively low levels of ash, with no unusual deviations observed.
Table 1: Mean ± SD (%) of water, solids, and ash content in unpasteurized and pas-
teurised GW (n = 3).
Water Content
Solid Content
Ash Content
Unpasteurized
93.45 ± 0.06
6.06 ± 0.05
0.48 ± 0.004
Pasteurized
93.47 ± 0.01
6.06 ± 0.02
0.47 ± 0.01
The results gathered from the experiments align with the expected composition of GW,
showing a high concentration of water and low levels of minerals. The total solids rep-
resent the typical dry matter concentration found in GW and are consistent with values
reported in other studies. Since no abnormal characteristics were observed, it can be
concluded that the GW used in these experiments provides a representative material for
subsequent analyses and fermentation trials. The high water content indicates that con-
24
==PAGE:35==
centrating GW could be advantageous for increasing ethanol production during fermen-
tation, while the low ash content suggests that, even upon concentration, the mineral
content should not interfere with fermentation.
Fat Content of Goat Whey
The total fat content in GW was low, as can be seen in Table 2. This was expected as
most fat is retained by the cheese, values in the freeze dried whey are slightly lower
than what is reported in the litterature.
Table 2: Fat and water content (%) of freeze-dried pasteurized and unpasteurized goat
whey, and calculated fat content (%) in original freeze-dried GW (n = 3).
Sample
Fat (%)
Water (%)
Fat in Whey (%)
Pasteurized GW
2.60 ± 0.01
2.21 ± 0.03
0.17
Unpasteurized GW
2.60 ± 0.02
2.26 ± 0.06
0.17
While the fat concentration is below the expected values, this can change from batch
to batch, as well as depending on the type of cheese produced. Low fat content is
an advantage, as fat can lead to inhibition of the fermentation, as well as reduce the
efficiency of the distillation.
4.2
Experimental Analysis of Sugar Hydrolysis
The enzymatic hydrolysis of lactose (LAC) in goat whey (GW) were evaluated by using
β-galactosidase, with experiments testing sequential as well as simultaneous addition
of trypsin. Concentration profiles of LAC, glucose (GLU), and galactose (GAL) were
monitored by HPLC with samples taken every 30 minutes for three hours, capturing the
conversion of LAC into fermentable monosaccharides
Development and Fermentation of Goat Whey for Vodka Production
25
==PAGE:36==
Figure 3: Concentration of LAC, GLU, and GAL during enzymatic hydrolysis of GW,
measured by HPLC over 180 minutes for biological duplicates (X and Y).
Initially, the GW contained approximately 38 g/L LAC and only small amounts of GAL
(0.57 g/L). Rapid hydrolysis occurred within 30 minutes, thereby reducing LAC to around
11 g/L, and increasing GLU and GAL to around 16–17 g/L and 13–14 g/L, respectively.
After three hours, LAC reached around 8 g/L, while GLU and GAL were about 18.5 g/L
and 15.5 g/L, confirming efficient hydrolysis.
To determine whether there was statistical significance in the effect of time on hydrolysis,
a linear model (LM) was applied to the sugar concentrations for the biological replicates
and treatments. The slopes and p-values for the effect of time are summarised in Ta-
ble 23. All slopes for LAC were strongly negative, while those for GLU and GAL were
positive, confirming robust enzymatic activity for all treatments.
Other experiments tested the effect of trypsin on sugar hydrolysis using simultaneous
(Figure 5) and sequential (Figure 4) enzyme addition. Across the treatments, LAC was
converted to GLU and GAL efficiently, and profiles were largely similar.
Development and Fermentation of Goat Whey for Vodka Production
26
==PAGE:37==
Figure 4: Concentration of LAC, GLU, and GAL during enzymatic hydrolysis of GW with
trypsin added first and β-galactosidase added after 2 hours, measured by HPLC over
210 minutes for biological duplicates (G and H).
Figure 5: Concentration of LAC, GLU, and GAL during enzymatic hydrolysis of GW with
trypsin β-galactosidase added concurrently, measured by HPLC over 240 minutes for
biological duplicates (T and R)
Development and Fermentation of Goat Whey for Vodka Production
27
==PAGE:38==
Table 3: Area under the curve (AUC, arbitrary units) for GAL, GLU, and LAC in GW
hydrolysis, measured by HPLC, for each enzymatic treatment. Results are means ±
SD of biological duplicates.
Sugar
Treatment
AUC (mean ± SD)
Highest Group
Tukey p-value (vs. next)
Galactose
Concurrent
3482 ± 148
Yes
0.035
Lactase First
2487 ± 53
Trypsin First
2764 ± 323
0.470
Glucose
Concurrent
4133 ± 167
Yes
0.027
Lactase First
2963 ± 57
Trypsin First
3208 ± 342
0.575
Lactose
Concurrent
2460 ± 195
0.623
Lactase First
2019 ± 18
Trypsin First
2765 ± 737
0.339
Note: For details and all pairwise tests, see Appendix 6.
The total area under the curve (AUC) seen in Table 3 shows that the highest was in
the Concurrent treatment for GLU (4133 ± 167), and the second highest was for GAL
(3482 ± 148). The values shown here were significantly higher than the ones observed
in Lactase First, with p-values of 0.027 (GLU) and 0.035 (GAL), thereby indicating that
concurrent enzyme addition could increase the release of fermentable sugars. The
Trypsin First treatment, however, did not show significant differences from the other
groups (p > 0.05).
These results show that β-galactosidase will efficiently hydrolyze LAC and create monosac-
charides for the fermentation, and that trypsin addition does not significantly affect the
hydrolysis of sugar.
4.3
Experimental Analysis of Protein Hydrolysis, Free Amino
Nitrogen (FAN), and Soluble Proteins
Soluble Protein for Fermentation
The concentration of soluble proteins in both unpasteurized and pasteurised goat whey
(GW) was assessed using the Bradford assay. Protein concentrations were determined
from absorbance readings using a second-degree polynomial regression, as shown in
Figure 6. The regression displayed a high goodness of fit (R2 = 0.986), but minor devi-
ations were observed at high absorbance values due to the saturation effect inherent to
the Bradford assay. this is shown when 1.95 corresponded to a calculated concentration
of 1927.2 µg/mL but should be 2000 µg/mL, showing a slight discrepancy of 3.6%.
Development and Fermentation of Goat Whey for Vodka Production
28
==PAGE:39==
Figure 6: Bradford standard curve showing soluble protein concentrations (µg/mL) used
for quantification of protein content in GW samples. The curve is fitted with a second-
degree polynomial.
Soluble protein concentrations varied with pH in both unpasteurized and pasteurised
GW, as seen in Table 18 and shown in Figure 7. Pasteurised GW consistently exhibited
higher soluble protein content at all pH points, with the maximum observed at pH 6.6
(365.3±3.2 µg/mL), compared to unpasteurized GW at the same pH (288.3±15.7 µg/mL).
Both treatments showed a pronounced drop in solubility at pH 4.8–4.6, likely reflecting
the precipitation of casein at its isoelectric point.
Development and Fermentation of Goat Whey for Vodka Production
29
==PAGE:40==
Figure 7: Solubility curve of soluble protein in unpasteurized and pasteurized GW as a
function of pH, measured by the Bradford assay (n = 3).
Statistical analysis using two-way ANOVA confirmed that both pasteurization (F(1, 76) =
52.1, p = 2.2 × 10−9) and pH (F(12, 76) = 8.03, p = 3.2 × 10−8) had highly significant
effects on soluble protein concentration, while the interaction term was not significant
(p = 0.40). This indicates that pasteurization increases solubility at all pH values. The
linear regression analysis showed a significant and positive relationship between pH and
soluble protein in unpasteurized (β = 25.7, p = 0.0008) and pasteurised GW (β = 32.1,
p < 0.0001).
For fermentation, it is generally recommended to maintain soluble protein concentra-
tions at around 150–200 µg/mL or above. It can be seen in Table 18, pasteurised GW
remains above this recommendation across all the tested ranges of pH, unpasteurized
GW tough falls below it when reaching pH values of only 5. This suggests that pas-
teurised GW is preferable for fermentation. However, as the pH of GW during fermen-
tation does not drop below 5 as seen in Table 12, the risk of having insufficient soluble
protein during fermentation is unlikely to happen under regular fermentation conditions
with a GW starting pH of 6.6.
Development and Fermentation of Goat Whey for Vodka Production
30
==PAGE:41==
Hydrolysis and Free Amino Nitrogen Development
The enzymatic hydrolysis of proteins in GW was tested using pepsin and trypsin, under
different combinations of pasteurization and pH. The concentration of free amino nitro-
gen (FAN) was measured over four hours to assess the degree of proteolysis under
each condition (Figures 8 and 9).
Figure 8: Free amino nitrogen (FAN) concentration during pepsin hydrolysis of GW,
measured over 240 minutes for different conditions. “U” indicates unpasteurized GW,
“P” indicates pasteurized GW, and “pH” indicates samples adjusted to pH 4. (n=3)
Development and Fermentation of Goat Whey for Vodka Production
31
==PAGE:42==
Figure 9: Free amino nitrogen (FAN) concentration during trypsin hydrolysis of GW,
measured over 240 minutes for different conditions. “U” indicates unpasteurized GW
and “P” indicates pasteurized GW. (n=3)
FAN concentrations increased over time for all treatments, indicating effective protein
hydrolysis by both enzymes. A summary of the final FAN concentrations (mean of bi-
ological and technical replicates) and the key statistical comparisons are presented in
Table 4. More detailed time-course and replicate data are available in the Appendix 6
Table 4: Mean FAN concentrations (mg/L) after 4 hours of hydrolysis
by enzyme, pasteurization and pH condition. Values are means ± SD
of all replicates at 240 minutes.
Enzyme
Condition
FAN (mg/L) Mean ± SD
Trypsin
Unpasteurized, pH 6.6
72.6 ± 6.8
Trypsin
Pasteurized, pH 6.6
74.5 ± 6.9
Pepsin
Unpasteurized, pH 6.6
55.9 ± 5.8
Pepsin
Pasteurized, pH 6.6
61.1 ± 9.6
Pepsin
Unpasteurized, pH 4.0
55.3 ± 8.4
Pepsin
Pasteurized, pH 4.0
62.0 ± 12.0
Note: Statistical significance and pairwise comparisons are provided in
Appendix, Table 22.
Trypsin treatment consistently yielded high FAN concentrations (> 70 mg/L) in both
pasteurized and unpasteurized GW at pH 6.6, with no significant effect of pasteurization
(p = 0.60). In contrast, pepsin treatment produced lower FAN, but pasteurization led to
Development and Fermentation of Goat Whey for Vodka Production
32
==PAGE:43==
a statistically significant increase in FAN at both pH 6.6 (p = 0.008) and pH 4 (p = 0.007).
Adjustment of pH to 4 in pepsin-treated samples did not produce a statistically significant
difference in FAN compared to pH 6.6, regardless of pasteurization.
Direct comparison between pasteurized trypsin and pepsin at pH 6.6 showed that trypsin
generated significantly higher FAN levels (p < 0.001). These findings are visualized in
Figures 8 and 9.
The effect of time on FAN production was evaluated by linear mixed model (LMM)
analysis, which accounted for repeated measures and replicate structure. A significant
time-dependent increase in FAN was observed for pepsin in unpasteurized, pH 4 GW
(p = 0.002) and for trypsin in pasteurized, pH 6.6 GW (p < 0.001). For all other groups,
no significant time effect was observed (see Appendix Table 20).
Coefficient of variation (CV) for biological and technical replicates was generally below
10%, indicating high reproducibility (Insert appendix).
FAN concentrations achieved under all these trypsin conditions and most pepsin con-
ditions were above (>50 mg/L). Given the higher and more consistent FAN yield, the
insensitivity to pH adjustment, and minimal impact of pasteurization, trypsin is the pre-
ferred enzyme for maximising FAN in goat GW for fermentation purposes. Pepsin re-
mains viable, but its performance is more dependent on pH and heat treatment, making
it less reliable for industrial application. The low FAN amount, while enough for fermen-
tation, could lead to sluggish fermentation, so supplementing with yeast nutrients could
help create a better environment for the yeast.
A different enzyme addition strategy was tried out as seen in Figure 10 to evaluate the
effect on FAN release in the GW product. Addition of β-galactosidase followed by trypsin
(X, Y), a trypsin-only treatment (H, G), and addition of both at the same time (T, R) were
tested. All strategies produced FAN, but the highest concentrations were considerably
lower than the previous FAN experiment, as shown in Figure 9. The FAN yields showed
up to a 40% difference, which is outside the norm for FAN variability.
Development and Fermentation of Goat Whey for Vodka Production
33
==PAGE:44==
Figure 10: Free amino nitrogen (FAN) concentrations during enzymatic hydrolysis of
GW, measured over time by FAN assay. Each pair of lines represents biological dupli-
cates for different enzymatic treatments: T and R (lactase and trypsin added concur-
rently), X and Y (lactase added first, then trypsin), and H and G (trypsin only). Error
bars represent standard deviation (n = 3).
A two-way ANOVA of biological duplicates and technical triplicates confirmed that the
main source of variation in these experiments was the group (treatment) differences
(F5,96 = 3.64, p = 0.0047), rather than biological replicate alone (F1,100 = 0.34, p = 0.56).
This suggests that differences in the enzyme addition protocol and batch-to-batch vari-
ability substantially affect FAN production, making direct comparison of the treatments
difficult. These differences can possibly be caused by biochemical factors, such as
competition from protein substrates, altered matrix properties, or insufficient chemical
mixing.
Technical replicate CVs were as high as 13%, and biological duplicate CVs up to 11.6%,
indicating considerable variability within and between samples (Appendix, Table 22).
Levene’s test further confirmed significant heterogeneity of variance between groups
(p = 0.0047), indicating that assay results should be interpreted with caution due to sub-
stantial methodological and/or biological variability. These observed differences high-
lights the limitations of FAN assay’s reliability, which could be influenced by either pipet-
ting errors, the stability of the reagent, or interference from GW matrix components.
While trypsin can still be considered the most reliable for FAN production in GW hydrol-
ysis, interpreting these FAN data requires caution due to high biological and analytical
variability.
Development and Fermentation of Goat Whey for Vodka Production
34
==PAGE:45==
Dumas Protein and Statistical Analysis
Protein concentrations in GW, both before and after fermentation, were quantified using
the Dumas method on freeze-dried samples. Analyses included unpasteurized and
pasteurized GW, as well as fractions from fermentations with both vodka and kveik yeast
strains, which were further separated by centrifugation into pellet and supernatant. The
raw analytical results for all sample types are summarized in Appendix 14.
To confirm the appropriateness of parametric statistics, the Shapiro-Wilk test for nor-
mality was performed on all major groups. All sample groups exhibited no significant
deviation from normality (p > 0.8), validating the use of ANOVA and t-tests for further
analysis.
A one-way ANOVA was used to compare the total recoverable protein (pellet + super-
natant) between original GW (both unpasteurized and pasteurized) and post-fermentation
fractions (all yeast types combined). This analysis showed a highly significant increase
in protein concentration following fermentation (F(1, 8) = 161.7, p < 0.001). A Welch’s
t-test confirmed this result, showing a highly significant difference between groups.
The substantial increase in protein after fermentation reflects both the accumulation
of yeast biomass and possible concentration effects from the fermentation and drying
process. This demonstrates the strong protein-enriching potential of fermentation in GW
valorization.
The partitioning of proteins between pellet and supernatant after fermentation was eval-
uated using ANOVA and t-tests. No significant difference was found between the two
fractions (p = 0.84; Appendix 12), suggesting that, post-fermentation, protein is dis-
tributed nearly equally between the solid and soluble phases.
This could indicate that, under these conditions, both the cellular and soluble proteins
can be targeted efficiently for recovery, depending on the downstream application.
Comparing vodka and kveik yeast fermentations (pellet + supernatant combined), ANOVA
revealed a significant difference (F(1, 6) = 8.30, p = 0.028), with vodka yeast fermenta-
tions resulting in a higher protein concentration.
Interpretation: The higher protein yield from vodka yeast fermentations likely reflects
greater yeast biomass formation and cell accumulation, as vodka yeast strains are op-
timized for rapid growth and ethanol production.
Development and Fermentation of Goat Whey for Vodka Production
35
==PAGE:46==
Table 5: ANOVA results for protein concentrations in GW and fermentation fractions.
Shown are group means (mg), ANOVA F-statistics, degrees of freedom (df), and p-
values for each comparison.
Comparison
Group 1 Mean
Group 2 Mean
F
df
p-value
Fermentation vs. Original
70.6
18.5
161.7
1,8
1.4 × 10−6
Pellet vs. Supernatant
35.8
34.8
0.047
1,6
0.84
Vodka vs. Kveik
39.2
31.4
8.30
1,6
0.028
Note: Full statistical methods and diagnostics are available in Appendix 6.
The statistical analysis seen in Table 5 shows that fermentation with different strains of
yeast increases the recoverable proteins from GW. The distribution of proteins between
the pellet and supernatant indicates that these fractions could serve as a source for
protein recovery, and that the selection of yeast has influence on the total protein yield.
4.4
Sensory Analysis of Yeasts
A sensory analysis was performed after fermentation of vodka and kveik yeast, to as-
sertain the differences between them. Distinct differences were observed between the
strains seen in Table 6.
Table 6: Sensory analysis of fermented goat whey using Vodka and Kveik yeast. Aroma
notes recorded after fermentation.
Yeast
Aroma Notes
Vodka yeast
Bread, yoghurt, banana
Kveik yeast
Marzipan, banana
Following the sensory evaluation, Vodka yeast was chosen based on its more neutral
aroma.
4.5
Fermentation Dynamics: Cell Growth and pH Evolution
Optical density at 600 nm (OD600) was monitored to track yeast (microbial) growth and
biomass accumulation during fermentation, as shown in Figure 11. This provided in-
Development and Fermentation of Goat Whey for Vodka Production
36
==PAGE:47==
sight into microbial activity and fermentation kinetics under the three different process
conditions.
Growth phases and fermentation behavior
All three experiments displayed typical microbial growth curves, with clear lag, exponen-
tial, and stationary phases. In fermentations A and B (unclarified goat whey(GW)), the
lag phase lasted from hour 1 to 4, followed by rapid exponential growth, and stationary
phase was reached at hour 11 (A) and hour 12 (B), peaking at OD600 = 3.30 and 3.19,
respectively. In contrast, fermentation C (clarified GW) demonstrated a slower overall
growth and a substantially lower maximum OD600 of 1.95 at hour 13.
After reaching the stationary phase, all fermentations exhibited a mild decline in OD600,
attributable to nutrient depletion, reduced metabolic activity, and sedimentation of yeast
cells. This pattern is visible in Figure 11, and matches the typical phases of microbial
growth observed in fermentation studies.
A one-way ANOVA was performed on OD600 values around the stationary phase peak
(±1 hour) for each group as can be seen in Table 7. The analysis revealed a significant
difference in maximum OD600 between groups (F(2,6) = 9.16, p = 0.015). Tukey’s HSD
post-hoc test indicated that experiment C was significantly lower than both A and B (see
Appendix Table 29), while A and B did not differ significantly.
Table 7: Summary of one-way ANOVA for OD600 means during stationary phase (±1
hour) in three fermentations.
Group
Peak OD600 (mean ± SD)
n
Peak Hour
Significant Diff. vs. C?
A (unclarified)
3.09 ± 0.20
3
11
Yes
B (unclarified)
2.86 ± 0.43
3
12
Yes
C (clarified)
1.73 ± 0.27
3
13
–
ANOVA F(2,6) = 9.16, p = 0.015. Full post-hoc results in Appendix 29.
The impact of process variables is evident in Figure 11: unclarified GW (A and B) en-
abled faster adaptation and higher biomass accumulation than clarified GW (C). The
decline in OD600 at later time points in all experiments can be attributed to sedimen-
tation, which was not related to microbial viability, but to technical loss of cells from
suspension. Further analysis of the first 16 hours (lag, exponential, and early stationary
phase) showed no significant difference between the three fermentations (F = 1.95,
p = 0.153; Appendix Table 30), suggesting that initial yeast proliferation was similar
Development and Fermentation of Goat Whey for Vodka Production
37
==PAGE:48==
across conditions.
When comparing OD600 around the peak (±2 hours), another one-way ANOVA con-
firmed significant differences between groups (F = 5.50, p = 0.020; Appendix Table 31),
with Tukey’s HSD showing that C was again significantly lower than A (Appendix 6). This
reinforces that clarified GW restricts maximal yeast biomass formation.
Figure 11: Optical density at 600 nm (OD600) over time during fermentation of GW with
cerevisiae. A and B are biological duplicates, while C represents GW with protein/fat
aggregates removed prior to fermentation.
These results highlight the importance of substrate pre-treatment and clarify that re-
moval of solids substantially limits microbial growth, as reflected by the lower OD600 in
experiment C. This has direct implications for the performance and yield of the fermen-
tation.
Gravity and pH During Fermentation
Observing the fermentation over time, liquid density (gravity) as well as pH were mea-
sured during fermentation (0, 24, 48, and 72 hours) with biolog- ical triplicates. These
parameters could be an indication of sugar consumption and lactic acid formation during
fermentation.
When measuring gravity, all three fermentations exhibited a steady and comparable
decline, reaching 1.0038 ± 4.19 × 10−4 after 72 hours. This is an indication that the
fermentation was consistent between all three replicates. A one-way ANOVA was per-
formed to compare the density values between the three experiments, and no significant
Development and Fermentation of Goat Whey for Vodka Production
38
==PAGE:49==
differences were detected (F = 0.00013, p = 0.9999), suggesting a high degree of re-
producibility in sugar conversion across fermentations.
Initial pH values started at 6.78 ± 4.71 × 10−3 but dropped rapidly during the first 24
hours of fermentation, then flattened out with only minor decreases thereafter, as shown
in Figure 12. This acidification of the GW indicates the production of organic acids
by yeast metabolism, but could also be partially attributed to microbial contamination,
as observed during fermentation (see Table 26 27). A one-way ANOVA showed no
significant difference in pH between the three groups (F = 0.000036, p = 0.99996),
demonstrating that acidification occurred nearly identically across all experiments.
Figure 12: Fermentation profile of GW showing gravity (left axis) and pH (right axis) over
72 hours (n = 3).
4.6
Ethanol Production in Goat Whey
Comparison to Hydrolyzed Whey Fermentations
A fermentation experiement was performed on goat whey (GW), with both Vodka and
Kveik yeast, this experiment showed almost complete lactose (LAC) hydrolysis after 48
hours but high initial concentration. this indicates that the hydrolysis using β-galactosidase
from bovine liver continues to hydrolyze during fermentation. despite the almost com-
plete hydrolyzation of lactose (LAC) and subsequent fermentation of elevated amounts
GLU and GAL seen in Figure 13), this fermentation showed approximately the same
amount of ethanol production seen in Figures 14 15 16).
Development and Fermentation of Goat Whey for Vodka Production
39
==PAGE:50==
Figure 13: Sugar consumption and ethanol production during fermentation of fully hy-
drolyzed goat whey using Vodka(O1) and Kveik(O3, O4) yeast.
The findings indicate that under these tested conditions, complete hydrolysis of LAC
does not increase the final concentration. This could be caused by the formation of
metabolic by-products like glycerol or due to process limitation that are unrelated to the
availability of sugar.
Three experimental conditions were observed using trypsin β-galactosidase from Kluyveromyces
lactis, showing the ethanol production profiles from these conditions: A (standard pas-
teurized GW), B (biological duplicate), and C (pasteurized and filtered GW). The con-
centration of ethanol increased sharply during the first 48 hours, approaching a plateau
at approximately 22 g/L in both conditions seen in Figure 14, and Figure 15, while in
Figure 16 a slightly higher ethanol yield of 23.8 g/L was observed. This rapid increase
shows an efficient utilisation of the sugars available by Saccharomyces cerevisiae (S.
cerevisiae).
In Figures 14 15, GLU can be seen to be rapidly consumed, with initial concentrations
of approximately 19–20 g/L decreasing to about 0.5 g/L within 12 hours. GAL utilisation
was delayed with a more gradual decrease; the conditions showed GAL reduction from
16 g/L to around 0.5 g/L after 48 hours in both experiments A and B. Experiment C
(Figure 16) showed a slower decrease in GAL compared to the others, only reaching
0.86 g/L after 120 hours.
LAC concentrations in all three experiments remained largely unchanged at approxi-
Development and Fermentation of Goat Whey for Vodka Production
40
==PAGE:51==
mately 5–6 g/L, indicating incomplete hydrolysis prior to fermentation and further con-
firming that LAC is a non-fermentable sugar for S. cerevisiae, as seen in Figures 14 15 16
Figure 14: Concentrations of LAC, GLU, GAL, ethanol, and lactic acid in GW during
fermentation in Experiment A, measured over 120 hours.
Figure 15: Concentrations of LAC, GLU, GAL, ethanol, and lactic acid in GW during
fermentation in Experiment B (biological duplicate), measured over 120 hours.
Development and Fermentation of Goat Whey for Vodka Production
41
==PAGE:52==
Figure 16: Concentrations of LAC, GLU, GAL, ethanol, and lactic acid in GW during
fermentation in Experiment C (GW with protein and fat aggregates removed with cen-
trifugation), measured over 120 hours.
Figure 17: Ethanol concentrations in GW during fermentation for experiments A, B (bio-
logical duplicate), and C (filtered aggregates), with corresponding Gompertz model fits
over 120 hours.
The ethanol yield, represented by grams of ethanol produced per gram of sugar con-
sumed, was calculated based on a combination of GLU and GAL consumption. In Fig-
ure A the total sugar consumption was 34.69 g/L (GLU 18.1 g/L, GAL 15.88 g/L), in all
Development and Fermentation of Goat Whey for Vodka Production
42
==PAGE:53==
producing 21.57 g/L ethanol, giving a yield of 0.622 g/g. This exceeds the theoretical
maximum of 0.511 g/g, which can be caused by analytical inaccuracies in the HPLC.
Despite this, the yield being above theoretical maximum shows that the fermentation
conditions have been efficient.
Figure B exhibits ethanol production of 22.87 g/L from 34.02 g/L sugar (GLU 14.76 g/L,
GAL 19.26 g/L), yielding 0.672 g/g from fermentation, again showing efficient fermen-
tation. Figure C showed an even higher ethanol yield of 0.692 g/g from the 23.82 g/L
ethanol and 34.41 g/L of sugar (GLU 20.06 g/L, GAL 14.35 g/L). The increased yield in
Figure C could be caused by enhanced substrate utilization, improved nutrient avail-
ability, or reduced formation of by-products in the fermentation, perhaps due to filtration
after pasteurization at 90◦C.
Potential analytical uncertainties in these experiments could influence ethanol yield cal-
culations, as a slight exceedance of theoretical yield values may reflect limitations in
the analytical method, particularly regarding HPLC measurement accuracy at very low
concentrations of sugar. Errors could stem from calibration drift, sampling variations,
incomplete stabilization of sugars post-hydrolysis, or minor analytical noise inherent to
chromatographic techniques.
The stability of LAC throughout fermentation shows incomplete hydrolysis and suggests
potential for increased ethanol yield by optimizing enzyme pretreatment.
The observed improvements in fermentation from filtration of aggregates in experiment C
can be attributed to specific physicochemical changes in GW composition. The high
temperature could denature GW proteins, increasing solubility and releasing peptides
and amino acids, thereby enhancing nitrogen availability. Filtration further removed
heat-induced aggregates and particulates, reducing potential inhibitory compounds in
GW and making nutrients more accessible for S. cerevisiae. These treatments signifi-
cantly enhanced the metabolic capacity of S. cerevisiae and the fermentation efficiency
seen in Figure C.
A one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) was done to assess the effect of fermenta-
tion time and conditions of the GW on ethanol production. This was conducted using
the ethanol concentrations from experiments A, B, and C at each measured time point.
ANOVA showed no statistically significant differences in the production of ethanol be-
tween the three experimental setups, as seen in Table 8. This outcome supports the
reproducibility of both the biological replicates (A and B), but also indicates that the mod-
ifications done to experiment C are not statistically significant in ethanol concentration
Development and Fermentation of Goat Whey for Vodka Production
43
==PAGE:54==
under different conditions.
Table 8: One-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) for ethanol concentrations by experi-
ment and fermentation time. Results show the effects of experiment (A, B, C), time, and
residual variance on ethanol production across all time points.
Source
df
Sum Sq
Mean Sq
F value
p-value
Experiment
2
3.6
1.8
0.09
0.91
Time
1
600.4
600.4
30.54
<0.001
Residuals
65
1277.8
19.7
Time and its effect on ethanol concentration was seen as highly significant (see Ta-
ble 8), confirming that ethanol concentrations increased significantly throughout the fer-
mentation period across all three experiments. The findings suggest that time acts as
a predominant factor influencing ethanol accumulation in GW fermentation, while the
differences in the experimental groups and protocols are minimal.
A linear regression (LM) model was fitted to quantify the relationship between time and
ethanol, with ethanol concentrations being the dependent variable and experiment and
fermentation time as the independent variables. While a Linear Mixed Model (LMM)
would have been more accurate, this was unattainable due to insufficient replication and
grouping of the structure within the data set, so an LM was deemed the most relevant.
The analysis showed a significant positive effect of fermentation time on the production
of ethanol (see Table 9), with no significant contribution from experimental grouping.
Table 9: Multiple linear regression (LM) results for ethanol as a function of experiment
and fermentation time.
Coefficient
Estimate
Std. Error
t value
p-value
(Intercept)
15.10
1.03
14.64
<0.001
Experiment B
0.39
1.31
0.30
0.77
Experiment C
-0.15
1.31
-0.12
0.91
Time
0.099
0.018
5.53
<0.001
These statistical results show the fermentation robustness across biological replicates
and experimental modifications. The findings also highlight the critical importance of
time, being the key operator for ethanol production.
By using the Gompertz model to fit the ethanol production profiles, a quantitative com-
Development and Fermentation of Goat Whey for Vodka Production
44
==PAGE:55==
parison for the kinetics of fermentation of the three experiments is shown in Table 10.
The asymptotic ethanol concentrations (A) closely matched the final observed yields.
The calculated µmax values reflect a consistent rapid formation of ethanol; all λ values
are negative, indicating that ethanol formation began immediately after yeast inocula-
tion with no appreciable lag phase. This could indicate that the yeast quickly adapted to
the conditions in the GW and that the fermentation conditions were highly favourable,
resulting in efficient sugar conversion from the start.
Table 10: Gompertz model kinetic parameters for ethanol fermentation in GW under
three experimental conditions. A is the asymptotic ethanol concentration, µmax is the
maximum specific ethanol production rate, λ is the lag time, and SSE is the sum of
squared errors.
Treatment
A (g/L)
µmax (g/L/h)
λ (h)
SSE
A
21.87
1.45
−2.78
3840.66
B
20.85
1.92
−1.98
4078.56
C
21.89
1.26
−4.02
2974.57
GAL utilization displayed a distinct regulatory behaviour (see Figures A, B, and C), char-
acterised by delayed metabolism relative to GLU. In all fermentations, GLU was the
preferred monosaccharide, consumed within the first 10–12 hours, demonstrating S.
cerevisiae’s catabolite repression mechanisms. GAL consumption increased only after
GLU was nearly depleted, typically after 12 hours in experiments A and B, but com-
menced slightly earlier (10 hours) in experiment C, highlighting improved metabolism in
filtered GW.
This differentiated consumption of GAL can be attributed to the Leloir pathway, where
GAL gene activation occurs after GLU is depleted. The earlier GAL consumption in ex-
periment C suggests improved intracellular conditions, potentially higher nitrogen avail-
ability, or reduced inhibitory compounds, leading to a faster metabolic switch. The longer
diauxic lag phases in experiments A and B may correlate with lower FAN and soluble
protein levels, thereby limiting yeast metabolic capacity and delaying GAL fermentation.
4.7
Microbial Content in Goat Whey
Pasteurization had a clear effect on the microbial load in goat whey (GW), as shown
by CFU measurements (Appendix, Table 25). Both the unpasteurized and the sample
Development and Fermentation of Goat Whey for Vodka Production
45
==PAGE:56==
pasteurized at 65°C exhibited extremely high bacterial counts after 24 and 48 hours, with
values reaching up to 24,000 and 15,000,000 CFU/mL, far exceeding the EU regulatory
limit for pasteurized milk products of 100 CFU/mL (Regulation (EC) No 853/2004). In
contrast, the sample pasteurized at 70°C for 15 minutes showed no detectable microbial
growth prior to fermentation, thereby fulfilling the EU safety threshold. It should be
noted that enumeration before fermentation was performed on M7 agar plates, while
fermentation samples were plated on MRE + cycloheximide agar to inhibit yeast growth
(see Methods).
Despite initial reduction, microbial regrowth occurred rapidly during fermentation, with
counts rising from undetectable to over 4,600 CFU/mL after 48 hours, and reaching up
to 3,000,000 CFU/mL after three days (Appendix, Table 26 and Table 27). These counts
remain above the EU guideline for pasteurized milk products.
The reliability of these CFU measurements is influenced by the number of colonies ob-
served on each plate. Standard microbiological practice recommends that counts fall
within the “Goldilocks zone” of 30–300 colonies per plate, as results below 30 colonies
are statistically unreliable due to higher random variation, and counts above 300 (clas-
sified as “too many to count”, TMTC) may be inaccurate due to merging colonies and
confluent growth. In this study, most plates for unpasteurized and 65°C-pasteurized GW
fell outside this optimal range, with several dilutions either producing TMTC or yielding
only a handful of colonies. Only a few plates—such as the unpasteurized 10−2 dilu-
tion after 24 hours (24 colonies) and 48 hours (50 colonies)—were within or near the
recommended range, representing the most reliable quantifications.
Overall, these findings demonstrate that while pasteurization at 70°C for 15 minutes is
effective in reducing the initial microbial content in GW, regrowth during fermentation
can quickly result in CFU values that exceed regulatory limits. The enumeration data
also highlight the importance of selecting dilutions that yield colony counts within the
ideal range to ensure reliable monitoring of microbial content in dairy process control.
Development and Fermentation of Goat Whey for Vodka Production
46
==PAGE:57==
5
Conclusion
This thesis aimed to look into the possibilities of fermenting goat whey (GW), and its
efficiency at producing ethanol. The research looked into using the GW as a substrate
and optimizing the ethanol yield with protein and sugar hydrolysis, and evaluated the
influence this had on the fermentation. Results quickly demonstrated that GW can be
fermented into ethanol, and achieve yields comparable to theoretical maximum values,
showing the potential viability of using GW as a substrate in alcohol production, thereby
contributing to waste valorization and sustainability.
The process of this research involved a combination of detailed characterization of GW’s
composition, enzymatic hydrolysis optimization, fermentation trials with different strains
of yeast and protein/fat removal, as well as a comprehensive analytical assessment of
sugars, ethanol production, protein analysis, and microbial content. The initial charac-
terization showed that GW has approximately 93.5% water, 6% total solids, 0.5% ash,
with 2.83% of the solids being fats. All this indicates that GW is a suitable substrate
for fermentation. Experiments with enzymatic hydrolysis using β-galactosidase effec-
tively converted lactose (LAC) into fermentable monosaccharides (glucose (GLU) and
galactose (GAL)), showing high efficiency as well as minimal inhibition from protein hy-
drolysis. The protein hydrolysis trials indicated trypsin as the most efficient enzyme for
generating free amino nitrogen (FAN); this is essential for yeast metabolism, but signif-
icant variation was observed between FAN experiments, showing high biological and
analytical inconsistencies.
Trials with Saccharomyces cerevisiae used in fermentation with the strains vodka and
kveik yeast both showed a robust utilization of monosaccharides and ethanol production,
reaching yields of approximately 22–24 g/L. The ethanol kinetics were then modeled
with Gompertz, confirming the rapid conversion of monosaccharides with a negligible lag
phase, indicating an optimal yeast adaptation to GW. A sensory analysis was performed,
and because of the vodka yeast’s more neutral aroma compared to kveik, vodka yeast
was chosen for further fermentation.
CFU was counted and analyzed to show the importance of pasteurization, showing that
at 70 ◦C, the CFU was under regulatory limits, but rapid regrowth during the fermentation
showed ongoing challenges, and showed there is a need for highly controlled hygienic
47
==PAGE:58==
environments and correct pasteurization.
In this research process, there are several methodological strengths and limitations.
A comprehensive analytical approach gave robust data on the composition, enzymatic
efficiency, and product quality. However, some challenges with the analytical variability
in the FAN assay showed a need for methodological refinements in future research.
Besides this, the exceedance of the theoretical yield in ethanol suggests that minor
analytical inaccuracies happened, emphasizing the importance of rigorous calibration
as well as validation of the analytical methods.
Recommendations for Future Work
• Optimization of hydrolysis conditions of enzyme dosages, the hydrolysis duration,
and conditions could be used to enhance the LAC and protein hydrolysis efficiency,
potentially increasing the ethanol yields.
• Evaluation of additional yeast strains could help.
Using yeast strains that are
genetically engineered for LAC and GAL metabolism could further increase the
ethanol yield as well as increase productivity and sensory characteristics.
• Scale-up and industrial trials could be used to validate the practical and economic
feasibility of using GW as a substrate for fermentation. The industrial trials should
address the compatibility of equipment with GW, as well as evaluate the costs and
product consistency.
• Enhanced microbial control by improving the pasteurization or sterilization tech-
niques used, like ultrafiltration or advanced thermal treatment, could help control
the microbial growth during fermentation, to ensure that all regulatory standards
are met.
• A comprehensive economic and life cycle assessment (LCA) could be conducted
to detail the economic and environmental benefits that could be acquired by utiliz-
ing GW as a substrate.
In conclusion, the research in this thesis confirms that GW can be used for producing
ethanol, and shows promise as a substrate for further ethanol production, thereby ad-
dressing growing environmental concerns and adding value to a product that is normally
used for animal feed or thrown out. The insights here can provide a future foundation
for continuing research and development for the commercial application of GW, paving
Development and Fermentation of Goat Whey for Vodka Production
48
==PAGE:59==
the way for more sustainable innovations in dairy production.
Development and Fermentation of Goat Whey for Vodka Production
49
==PAGE:60==
Bibliography
[1]
James Nicholls. “Alcohol: A History by Rod Phillips”. In: Canadian Journal of His-
tory 51.2 (2016), pp. 414–415. DOI: 10.3138/cjh.ach.51.2.rev33. eprint:
https://doi.org/10.3138/cjh.ach.51.2.rev33. URL: https://doi.org/10.
3138/cjh.ach.51.2.rev33.
[2]
IMARC Group. Alcoholic Beverages Market: Global Industry Trends, Share, Size,
Growth, Opportunity and Forecast 2024-2032. Accessed: 2025-07-26. 2024. URL:
https://www.imarcgroup.com/alcoholic-beverages-market?utm_source=
chatgpt.com.
[3]
Francislaine Valente et al. “Development of fermented goat’s milk drink”. In: Inter-
national Seven Journal of Multidisciplinary 3 (2024). DOI: 10.56238/isevmjv3n3-
016.
[4]
Arona Figueroa Pires et al. “Dairy By-Products: A Review on the Valorization
of Whey and Second Cheese Whey”. In: Foods 10.5 (2021). DOI: 10 . 3390 /
foods10051067. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/2304-8158/10/5/1067.
[5]
Rådet for Grøn Omstilling. Danish Havplan has no plan for the worst polluters.
Accessed: 2025-07-26. 2024. URL: https://rgo.dk/en/danish-havplan-has-
no-plan-for-the-worst-polluters/.
[6]
Grønt Marked. About — Grønt Marked. Accessed: 2025-07-26. 2024. URL: https:
//www.groentmarked.dk/english/about/.
[7]
Widson Santos et al. “Proteolysis of reconstituted goat whey fermented by Strep-
tococcus thermophilus in co￿culture with commercial probiotic Lactobacillus strains”.
In: International Journal of Dairy Technology 72 (2019). DOI: 10.1111/1471-
0307.12621.
[8]
Vanessa Hamme et al. “Crude goat whey fermentation by Kluyveromyces marxi-
anus and Lactobacillus rhamnosus: contribution to proteolysis and ACE inhibitory
activity”. In: Journal of Dairy Research 76.2 (2009), pp. 152–157. DOI: 10.1017/
S0022029908003877.
[9]
Ce Wang et al. “Effects of polymerized whey protein on goaty flavor and texture
properties of fermented goat milk in comparison with beta-cyclodextrin”. In: Jour-
nal of Dairy Research 85.4 (2018), pp. 465–471. DOI: 10.1017/S0022029918000742.
50
==PAGE:61==
[10]
R. R. Mahoney. “Lactose: Enzymatic Modification”. In: Advanced Dairy Chem-
istry Volume 3: Lactose, Water, Salts and Vitamins. Ed. by P. F. Fox. Boston, MA:
Springer US, 1997, pp. 77–125. ISBN: 978-1-4757-4409-5. DOI: 10.1007/978-
1-4757-4409-5_3. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4757-4409-5_3.
[11]
E I Titov et al. “Research of lactose hydrolysis depending on the type of the
enzyme”. In: IOP Conference Series: Earth and Environmental Science 548.8
(2020), p. 082040. DOI: 10.1088/1755- 1315/548/8/082040. URL: https:
//dx.doi.org/10.1088/1755-1315/548/8/082040.
[12]
Robert J. Whitehurst and Maarten van Oort. Enzymes in Food Technology. 2nd.
Wiley-Blackwell, 2010.
[13]
J. L. Rosado et al. “The effect of the digestion products of lactose (glucose and
galactose) on its intraintestinal, in vivo hydrolysis by exogenous microbial beta-
D-galactosidase.” In: Journal of the American College of Nutrition 5.3 (1986),
pp. 281–290. DOI: 10.1080/07315724.1986.10720131. eprint: https://doi.
org/10.1080/07315724.1986.10720131. URL: https://doi.org/10.1080/
07315724.1986.10720131.
[14]
N. Minh and D. Dao. “Enteral tube feeding nutritional protein hydrolysate produc-
tion under different factors by enzymatic hydrolization”. In: International Journal
of Multidisciplinary Research and Development 1 (2014), pp. 185–193.
[15]
Tibor Sipos and Joseph R. Merkel. “Effect of calcium ions on the activity, heat
stability, and structure of trypsin”. In: Biochemistry 9.14 (1970), pp. 2766–2775.
DOI: 10.1021/bi00816a003. eprint: https://doi.org/10.1021/bi00816a003.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1021/bi00816a003.
[16]
C. Tsioptsias. “Thermodynamic and Vibrational Aspects of Peptide Bond Hydroly-
sis and Their Potential Relationship to the Harmfulness of Infrared Radiation”. In:
Molecules 28 (2023). DOI: 10.3390/molecules28237902.
[17]
L. Polgár. “The catalytic triad of serine peptidases”. In: Cellular and Molecular Life
Sciences CMLS 62.19 (2005), pp. 2161–2172. DOI: 10.1007/s00018-005-5160-
x. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/s00018-005-5160-x.
[18]
Jens Adler-Nissen. Enzymic Hydrolysis of Food Protein. Vol. 8. London: Elsevier
Applied Science, 1986.
[19]
A. Sap et al. “Highly Selective and Tunable Protein Hydrolysis by a Polyoxometa-
late Complex in Surfactant Solutions: A Step toward the Development of Artificial
Metalloproteases for Membrane Proteins”. In: ACS Omega 2 (2017), pp. 2026–
2033. DOI: 10 . 1021 / acsomega . 7b00168. URL: https : / / consensus . app /
Development and Fermentation of Goat Whey for Vodka Production
51
==PAGE:62==
papers/highly-selective-and-tunable-protein-hydrolysis-by-a-vandebroek-
goovaerts/9901a99b642b53c0a8a1445203d9f9c2/?utm_source=chatgpt.
[20]
Thanyaporn Kleekayai, Upendra Singh, and Richard J Fitzgerald. “Optimisation of
low temperature (8°C) enzymatic hydrolysis of acid whey using design of exper-
iments (DOE) for the generation of thermally stable whey protein hydrolysates”.
In: Food Hydrocolloids (2023). DOI: 10.1016/j.foodhyd.2023.109351. URL:
https://consensus.app/papers/optimisation-of-low-temperature-8%E1%
B5%92c-enzymatic-hydrolysis-singh-kleekayai/57e28a97e6b65adb9df7d186e0af9d5f/
?utm_source=chatgpt.
[21]
J. Adler-Nissen. “Enzymatic hydrolysis of soy protein for nutritional fortification of
low pH food”. In: Annales de la nutrition et de l’alimentation 32.2-3 (1978), pp. 205–
216. URL: https://consensus.app/papers/enzymatic-hydrolysis-of-soy-
protein-for-nutritional-adler-nissen/a4f73f30e42d5b2e91880f34bd9ffdf8/
?utm_source=chatgpt.
[22]
Yuxi Deng et al. “Towards predicting protein hydrolysis by bovine trypsin”. In: Pro-
cess Biochemistry 65 (2018), pp. 81–92. ISSN: 1359-5113. DOI: 10.1016/j.
procbio.2017.11.006. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S135951131731053X.
[23]
Seronei Chelulei Cheison et al. “Influence of temperature and degree of hydrol-
ysis on the peptide composition of trypsin hydrolysates of β-lactoglobulin: Analy-
sis by LC–ESI-TOF/MS”. In: Food Chemistry 121.2 (2010), pp. 457–467. ISSN:
0308-8146. DOI: 10.1016/j.foodchem.2009.12.065. URL: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S030881460901485X.
[24]
Feng Jin et al. “Limited hydrolysis of dehulled walnut (Juglans regia L.) proteins
using trypsin: Functional properties and structural characteristics”. In: LWT 133
(2020), p. 110035. ISSN: 0023-6438. DOI: 10.1016/j.lwt.2020.110035. URL:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0023643820310240.
[25]
Qi Luo et al. “Revisiting the enzymatic kinetics of pepsin using isothermal titra-
tion calorimetry”. In: Food Chemistry 268 (2018), pp. 94–100. DOI: 10.1016/j.
foodchem.2018.06.042. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0308814618310148.
[26]
Alberto Tonda et al. “In silico modeling of protein hydrolysis by endoproteases: a
case study on pepsin digestion of bovine lactoferrin”. In: Food Funct. 8.12 (2017),
pp. 4404–4413. DOI: 10.1039/C7FO00830A. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1039/
C7FO00830A.
Development and Fermentation of Goat Whey for Vodka Production
52
==PAGE:63==
[27]
Aisha Ahmad, Karthik Gopal Rao, and Rumana Ahmad. “Biochemistry, Beta Galac-
tosidase”. In: StatPearls. Accessed: July 2025. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls
Publishing, 2024. URL: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK537005/.
[28]
Andrea Rivera del Rio et al. “Protein acidification and hydrolysis by pepsin ensure
efficient trypsin-catalyzed hydrolysis”. In: Food Funct. 12.10 (2021), pp. 4570–
4581. DOI: 10 . 1039 / D1FO00413A. URL: http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1039 /
D1FO00413A.
[29]
Chris Boulton and David Quain. Brewing Yeast and Fermentation. Blackwell Sci-
ence, 2001. URL: https://books.google.dk/books?hl=en&lr=&id=QpDVsu-
vaBcC&oi=fnd&pg=PA646&dq=Boulton, +C., +%26+Quain, +D.+(2001).+
Brewing+Yeast+and+Fermentation&ots=_Nn1D7azUH&sig=F9uYghfycgILL0bt6yYIHLw9RJE&
redir_esc=y#v=onepage&q&f=false.
[30]
Graeme M Walker and Graham G Stewart. “Saccharomyces cerevisiae in the
Production of Fermented Beverages”. In: Beverages 2.4 (2016). DOI: 10.3390/
beverages2040030. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/2306-5710/2/4/30.
[31]
T. Pugh, J. Maurer, and A. Pringle. “The impact of wort nitrogen limitation on
yeast fermentation performance and diacetyl. Discussion”. In: MBAA Technical
Quarterly 34 (1997), pp. 185–189. URL: https : / / consensus . app / papers /
the- impact- of- wort- nitrogen- limitation- on- yeast- pringle- maurer/
43234be389e45ebbb34c92e38ce671f5/?utm_source=chatgpt.
[32]
Isak S. Pretorius. “The Genetic Analysis and Tailoring of Wine Yeasts”. In: Func-
tional Genetics of Industrial Yeasts. Ed. by Jure Piškur and Concetta Compagno.
Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer, 2008, pp. 99–142. DOI: 10.1007/3-540-37003-X_4.
[33]
Jian Cao et al. “D-galactose might mediate some of the skeletal muscle hypertrophy-
promoting effects of milk - a nutrient to consider for sarcopenia”. In: Research-
Gate (2023). Accessed: 2025-08-03. URL: https://www.researchgate.net/
publication/368602222_D-galactose_might_mediate_some_of_the_skeletal_
muscle _ hypertrophy - promoting _ effects _ of _ milk_ - _a _ nutrient _ to _
consider_for_sarcopenia.
[34]
David Timson. “Galactose metabolism in Saccharomyces cerevisiae”. In: Dynamic
Biochemistry, Process Biotechnology and Molecular Biology 1 (2007). © Global
Science Books 2007, pp. 63–73.
[35]
C. Millán, J.C. Mauricio, and J.M. Ortega. “Alcohol and aldehyde dehydrogenase
from Saccharomyces cerevisiae: specific activity and influence on the production
of acetic acid, ethanol and higher alcohols in the first 48 h of fermentation of grape
must”. In: Microbios 64.259 (1990), pp. 93–101.
Development and Fermentation of Goat Whey for Vodka Production
53
==PAGE:64==
[36]
Graeme M. Walker and Roy S.K. Walker. “Chapter Three - Enhancing Yeast Al-
coholic Fermentations”. In: Advances in Applied Microbiology. Ed. by Geoffrey
Michael Gadd and Sima Sariaslani. Vol. 105. Advances in Applied Microbiology.
Academic Press, 2018, pp. 87–129. DOI: 10.1016/bs.aambs.2018.05.003. URL:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0065216418300194.
[37]
I.S. Kim et al. “Saccharomyces cerevisiae KNU5377 stress response during high-
temperature ethanol fermentation”. In: Molecules and Cells 35.3 (2013), pp. 210–
218. DOI: 10.1007/s10059-013-2258-0.
[38]
Ming Ming et al. “Metabolic responses of Saccharomyces cerevisiae to ethanol
stress using gas chromatography-mass spectrometry”. In: Mol. Omics 15.3 (2019),
pp. 216–221. DOI: 10.1039/C9MO00055K. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1039/
C9MO00055K.
[39]
K. Yu et al. “Improvement of Ethanol Yield from Glycerol via Conversion of Pyru-
vate to Ethanol in Metabolically Engineered Saccharomyces cerevisiae”. In: Ap-
plied Biochemistry and Biotechnology 166 (2012), pp. 856–865. DOI: 10.1007/
s12010-011-9475-9.
[40]
J. van den Brink et al. “Energetic limits to metabolic flexibility: responses of Sac-
charomyces cerevisiae to glucose–galactose transitions”. In: Microbiology 155.4
(2009), pp. 1340–1350. DOI: 10 . 1099 / mic . 0 . 025775 - 0. URL: https : / /
www.microbiologyresearch.org/content/journal/micro/10.1099/mic.
0.025775-0.
[41]
Laurens N. Sierkstra et al. “Analysis of glucose repression in Saccharomyces
cerevisiae by pulsing glucose to a galactose-limited continuous culture”. In: Yeast
8.12 (1992), pp. 1077–1087. DOI: 10.1002/yea.320081210. URL: https://
onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/yea.320081210.
[42]
Jae Hyung Kim et al. “Ethanol production from galactose by a newly isolated Sac-
charomyces cerevisiae KL17”. In: Bioprocess and Biosystems Engineering 37.9
(2014), pp. 1871–1878. DOI: 10.1007/s00449-014-1161-1. URL: https://doi.
org/10.1007/s00449-014-1161-1.
[43]
Yi-Hyun Bae et al. “Deletion of the HXK2 gene in Saccharomyces cerevisiae en-
ables mixed sugar fermentation of glucose and galactose in oxygen-limited con-
ditions”. In: Process Biochemistry 49.4 (2014), pp. 547–553. ISSN: 1359-5113.
DOI: 10.1016/j.procbio.2014.01.030. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S1359511314000713.
[44]
Kidane Yalew et al. “Recent Development in Detection and Control of Psychrotrophic
Bacteria in Dairy Production: Ensuring Milk Quality”. In: Foods 13.18 (2024). DOI:
Development and Fermentation of Goat Whey for Vodka Production
54
==PAGE:65==
10.3390/foods13182908. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/2304-8158/13/18/
2908.
[45]
Nidhi Gopal et al. “The Prevalence and Control of Bacillus and Related Spore-
Forming Bacteria in the Dairy Industry”. In: Frontiers in Microbiology 6 (2015).
DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2015.01418. URL: https://www.frontiersin.org/
journals/microbiology/articles/10.3389/fmicb.2015.01418.
[46]
Luana M. Perin et al. “Chapter 3 - The Microbiology of Raw Milk”. In: Raw Milk.
Ed. by Luís Augusto Nero and Antonio Fernandes De Carvalho. Academic Press,
2019, pp. 45–64. ISBN: 978-0-12-810530-6. DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-12-810530-
6.00003-1. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
B9780128105306000031.
[47]
Francesca Carusillo et al. “Microbiological Assessment of Raw Goat Milk Col-
lected from Sardinian Herds”. In: Italian Journal of Food Safety 3 (2014). DOI:
10.4081/IJFS.2014.1638.
[48]
C.R. Nespolo and A. Brandelli. “Characterization of cheeses produced with ovine
and caprine milk and microbiological evaluation of processing areas in the dairy
plant in Brazil”. In: International Food Research Journal 19.4 (2012), pp. 1713–
1721. URL: http://www.ifrj.upm.edu.my.
[49]
European Brewery Convention. Analytica EBC. 5th Edition. Method 8.10.1, Free
Amino Nitrogen by Spectrophotometry. Nürnberg, Germany: Fachverlag Hans
Carl, 2009.
Development and Fermentation of Goat Whey for Vodka Production
55
==PAGE:66==
6
Appendix
Protein Content and Solubility
Descriptive Statistics
Table 11: Descriptive statistics for protein concentrations by experimental group. Values
are mean ± SD (n = number of replicates).
Group
Protein [mg] (mean ± SD)
n
Fermentation
70.6 ± 10.1
4
Original
18.5 ± 1.7
6
Pellet (fermentation)
35.8 ± 6.9
4
Supernatant
34.8 ± 4.8
4
Vodka (fermentation)
39.2 ± 3.4
4
Kveik (fermentation)
31.4 ± 5.3
4
Welch’s t-test Results
Table 12: Welch’s t-test results for protein content comparisons between selected
groups.
Comparison
p-value
Interpretation
Fermentation vs. Original
<0.001
Significant
Pellet vs. Supernatant
0.84
Not significant
Vodka vs. Kveik
0.043
Significant
Shapiro-Wilk Test for Normality
Table 13: Shapiro-Wilk p-values for normality of protein content distributions.
Group
Shapiro-Wilk p-value
Fermentation
0.82
Original
0.91
56
==PAGE:67==
Dumas Protein Content Post-Fermentation
Table 14:
Protein concentration of unpasteurized and pasteurized GW, and post-
fermentation fractions after separation into pellet and supernatant. Values are means
± SD (n as indicated).
Sample/Fraction
Protein [%] (mean ± SD)
Protein [mg] (mean ± SD)
Unpasteurized GW
11.67 ± 0.19
17.46 ± 0.62
Pasteurized GW
12.34 ± 0.23
19.29 ± 1.31
P1 – pellet
42.56 ± 0.48
42,515 ± 1,312
P1 – supernatant
26.23 ± 3.56
24,463 ± 3,138
P2 – pellet
43.39 ± 0.54
41,504 ± 923
P2 – supernatant
29.32 ± 2.62
27,623 ± 2,663
P3 – pellet
31.18 ± 0.75
31,521 ± 1,690
P3 – supernatant
35.24 (n=1)
34,115 (n=1)
P4 – pellet
29.98 ± 0.41
29,682 ± 1,543
P4 – supernatant
30.37 (n=1)
32,196 (n=1)
Bradford Assay (Soluble Protein)
A. Full Triplicate Data for Soluble Protein (µg/mL) at Each pH
Table 15: Triplicate soluble protein concentrations (µg/mL) for unpasteurized and pas-
teurized goat whey at each pH.
pH
Unpasteurized
Pasteurized
Rep 1
Rep 2
Rep 3
Rep 1
Rep 2
Rep 3
6.6
280.8
306.3
277.7
369.0
363.0
363.8
6.0
236.8
250.4
261.8
321.2
182.4
329.2
5.5
261.2
225.3
121.7
333.0
301.6
255.7
5.0
215.6
85.2
82.0
278.2
223.6
224.7
4.8
111.4
150.9
127.9
271.6
141.1
200.4
4.6
106.2
104.6
165.7
230.1
227.8
215.6
4.4
61.0
121.8
159.2
185.9
270.8
279.5
4.2
161.1
182.6
201.9
276.9
189.7
235.7
4.0
67.5
192.4
191.8
193.5
209.5
208.6
3.5
147.7
163.3
172.1
165.7
210.2
194.6
3.0
134.2
133.5
198.6
196.5
197.9
186.1
2.5
157.3
172.4
188.6
194.7
186.9
192.4
2.0
190.5
56.4
72.3
193.9
204.1
207.9
Development and Fermentation of Goat Whey for Vodka Production
57
==PAGE:68==
B. Two-Way ANOVA Table
Table 16: Two-way ANOVA for soluble protein (Bradford assay) in goat whey: effects of
pasteurization, pH, and interaction.
Source
df
Sum Sq
Mean Sq
F value
Pr(>F)
Pasteurization
1
94,579
94,579
52.1
2.2 × 10−9
pH (factor)
12
174,984
14,582
8.03
3.2 × 10−8
Pasteurization:pH
12
23,387
1,949
1.07
0.401
Residuals
52
94,422
1,816
C. Linear Regression Results
Table 17: Linear regression of soluble protein vs. pH for unpasteurized and pasteurized
whey.
Intercept
Slope (β)
R2
p-value
Unpasteurized
55.60
25.72
0.26
0.0008
Pasteurized
97.76
32.09
0.50
< 0.0001
Note: Slope (β) indicates the increase in soluble protein per unit increase in pH.
Development and Fermentation of Goat Whey for Vodka Production
58
==PAGE:69==
Table 18: Soluble protein concentration (Bradford assay) in unpasteurized and pas-
teurized GW across the tested pH range (mean ± SD, n = 3). Full triplicate data are
provided in Appendix Table 15.
pH
Unpasteurized (µg/mL)
Pasteurized (µg/mL)
Mean
SD
Mean
SD
6.6
288.3
15.7
365.3
3.2
6.0
250.8
12.4
337.6
6.2
5.5
202.1
14.4
296.1
9.8
5.0
127.9
16.8
242.2
7.2
4.8
130.0
11.3
200.4
14.6
4.6
125.9
24.9
215.1
11.3
4.4
108.7
20.3
230.1
8.6
4.2
147.7
19.3
230.7
12.7
4.0
133.7
11.9
209.3
6.5
3.5
158.4
21.9
193.9
9.4
3.0
156.5
21.8
192.6
7.9
2.5
106.7
23.5
196.2
6.9
2.0
106.4
13.6
201.9
8.7
Free Amino Nitrogen (FAN)
FAN Means by Condition, Time, and Replicate
Table 19: FAN concentrations (mg/L) by enzyme, pasteurization, pH, replicate, and time
point.
Enzyme
Pasteurized
pH
BioRep
Time (min)
Mean FAN
SD FAN
CV (%)
Pepsin
No
4
1
30
49.8
0.67
1.4
Pepsin
No
4
1
60
59.5
0.50
0.8
Pepsin
No
4
1
90
59.4
0.05
0.1
Full table
available in supplementary files.
Development and Fermentation of Goat Whey for Vodka Production
59
==PAGE:70==
LMM Summary for Time Effect on FAN
Table 20: Summary of LMM fixed effect (Time) for FAN, per group.
Enzyme
Pasteurized
pH
Estimate ± SE
p-value
Significant?
Pepsin
No
6.6
0.011 ± 0.021
0.594
No
Pepsin
Yes
6.6
0.027 ± 0.014
0.070
No (trend)
Pepsin
No
4
0.086 ± 0.026
0.002
Yes
Pepsin
Yes
4
−0.009 ± 0.020
0.652
No
Trypsin
No
6.6
−0.002 ± 0.012
0.841
No
Trypsin
Yes
6.6
0.065 ± 0.010
<0.001
Yes
ANOVA and Tukey HSD Results for FAN
Table 21: Key ANOVA and Tukey’s HSD results for FAN between enzyme and treatment
groups.
Comparison
Groups
Mean Diff
95% CI
p-value
Pepsin Unpast vs Past (6.6)
Yes-No
5.15
1.38–8.91
0.008
Pepsin Unpast vs Past (4)
Yes-No
6.74
1.85–11.63
0.007
Pepsin Pasteurized 6.6 vs 4
6.6-4
−1.00
−6.11–4.10
0.70
Pepsin Unpast 6.6 vs 4
6.6-4
0.59
−2.87–4.05
0.74
Trypsin Unpast vs Past (6.6)
Yes-No
0.70
−1.96–3.36
0.60
Trypsin vs Pepsin (Past, 6.6)
Tr-Pep
11.56
7.85–15.27
<0.001
FAN Coefficient of Variation (CV)
Table 22: Coefficient of variation (CV) for FAN assay by group and replicate. CVs above
10% indicate higher variability.
Group/Treatment
Mean FAN (mg/L)
SD (mg/L)
CV (%)
G
47.6
1.75
3.7
G
47.5
3.05
6.4
G
48.0
3.14
6.6
Development and Fermentation of Goat Whey for Vodka Production
60
==PAGE:71==
Sugar Hydrolysis and Enzymatic Treatment
LM Slopes for Sugar Hydrolysis
Table 23: Slopes and significance from linear models (LM) for sugar concentration ver-
sus time across hydrolysis treatments and biological replicates. Values represent the
rate of concentration change per minute.
Sugar
Treatment
Replicate
Slope
p-value
Lactose
TrypsinFirst
G
−0.050
0.414
Lactose
TrypsinFirst
H
−0.141
0.066
Lactose
LactaseFirst
X
−0.117
0.092
Lactose
LactaseFirst
Y
−0.116
0.098
Lactose
Together
T
−0.064
0.128
Lactose
Together
R
−0.068
0.121
Glucose
TrypsinFirst
G
+0.036
0.310
Glucose
TrypsinFirst
H
+0.081
0.047
Glucose
LactaseFirst
X
+0.073
0.091
Glucose
LactaseFirst
Y
+0.070
0.101
Glucose
Together
T
+0.043
0.098
Glucose
Together
R
+0.042
0.131
Galactose
TrypsinFirst
G
+0.022
0.492
Galactose
TrypsinFirst
H
+0.063
0.066
Galactose
LactaseFirst
X
+0.060
0.087
Galactose
LactaseFirst
Y
+0.056
0.100
Galactose
Together
T
+0.033
0.116
Galactose
Together
R
+0.032
0.150
Development and Fermentation of Goat Whey for Vodka Production
61
==PAGE:72==
Tukey’s HSD Post-hoc Pairwise Comparison (AUC)
Table 24: Tukey’s HSD post-hoc pairwise p-values for AUC by enzymatic treatment and
sugar. Significant results (p < 0.05) are in bold.
Sugar
Comparison
AUC Diff.
95% CI
p-value
Galactose
Together vs. LactaseFirst
+995
128 to 1860
0.035
Galactose
TrypsinFirst vs. LactaseFirst
+277
−589 to +1143
0.470
Galactose
TrypsinFirst vs. Together
−717
−1583 to 149
0.080
Glucose
Together vs. LactaseFirst
+1170
243 to 2097
0.027
Glucose
TrypsinFirst vs. LactaseFirst
+245
−682 to +1172
0.575
Glucose
TrypsinFirst vs. Together
−925
−1852 to 2
0.050
Lactose
Together vs. LactaseFirst
+441
−1391 to 2272
0.623
Lactose
TrypsinFirst vs. LactaseFirst
+746
−1086 to 2577
0.339
Lactose
TrypsinFirst vs. Together
+305
−1526 to 2136
0.782
CI: confidence interval. Significant results (p < 0.05) in bold.
Colony Forming Units (CFU) and Microbial Data
CFU in Pasteurized and Unpasteurized Goat Whey
Table 25: CFU/mL in pasteurized and unpasteurized whey samples after 24 and 48
hours.
Time
Treatment
Dilution
Colonies Counted
CFU/mL
24H
Pasteurized
100
176
1,760
Pasteurized
10−2
2
2,000
Pasteurized
10−5
0
0
Unpasteurized
100
Too many to count
–
Unpasteurized
10−2
24
24,000
Unpasteurized
10−5
15
15,000,000
48H
Pasteurized
100
Too many to count
–
Pasteurized
10−2
2
2,000
Pasteurized
10−5
0
0
Unpasteurized
100
Too many to count
–
Unpasteurized
10−2
50
50,000
Unpasteurized
10−5
18
18,000,000
Development and Fermentation of Goat Whey for Vodka Production
62
==PAGE:73==
CFU During Fermentation (Biological Replicates)
Table 26: CFU/mL during fermentation at selected days and dilutions. TMTC = Too
Many To Count.
Time
Day
Dilution
Colonies Counted
CFU/mL
24H
0
100
0
0
0
10−2
0
0
0
10−5
0
0
1
100
0
0
1
10−2
0
0
1
10−5
0
0
2
100
0
0
2
10−2
0
0
2
10−5
0
0
3
100
TMTC
–
3
10−2
TMTC
–
3
10−5
1
1,000,000
48H
0
100
0
0
0
10−2
0
0
0
10−5
0
0
1
100
448
4,480
1
10−2
7
7,000
1
10−5
1
1,000,000
2
100
TMTC
–
2
10−2
TMTC
–
2
10−5
1
1,000,000
3
100
TMTC
–
3
10−2
TMTC
–
3
10−5
2
2,000,000
Development and Fermentation of Goat Whey for Vodka Production
63
==PAGE:74==
Table 27: CFU/mL during fermentation (biological duplicate) at selected days and dilu-
tions. TMTC = Too Many To Count.
Time
Day
Dilution
Colonies Counted
CFU/mL
24H
0
100
0
0
0
10−2
0
0
0
10−5
0
0
1
100
0
0
1
10−2
0
0
1
10−5
0
0
2
100
0
0
2
10−2
0
0
2
10−5
0
0
3
100
TMTC
–
3
10−2
TMTC
–
3
10−5
2
2,000,000
48H
0
100
0
0
0
10−2
0
0
0
10−5
0
0
1
100
461
4,610
1
10−2
1
1,000
1
10−5
0
0
2
100
TMTC
–
2
10−2
TMTC
–
2
10−5
1
1,000,000
3
100
TMTC
–
3
10−2
TMTC
–
3
10−5
3
3,000,000
M7 Plate Controls
M7 Plate Controls
Table 28: CFU/mL on M7 control plates (same whey at start).
Time
Test
Dilution
Colonies Counted
CFU/mL
24H
Test 1
100
0
0
Test 2
100
1
10
48H
Test 1
100
0
0
Test 2
100
1
10
Development and Fermentation of Goat Whey for Vodka Production
64
==PAGE:75==
OD600 Statistical Analysis
Table 29: Tukey’s HSD post-hoc comparison for OD600 means during stationary phase
(peak ±1 hour).
Comparison
Difference
95% CI
p-adj
B – A
-0.16
[-1.08, 0.76]
0.86
C – A
-1.18
[-2.10, -0.26]
0.018
C – B
-1.03
[-1.95, -0.10]
0.033
Table 30: ANOVA summary for OD600 means, first 16 hours of fermentation.
Group
Mean OD600 (0–16 h)
n
A
1.89
16
B
1.42
16
C
1.30
16
ANOVA F = 1.95, p = 0.153. No significant group differences.
Table 31: ANOVA and Tukey’s HSD summary for OD600 at peak ±2 hours.
Comparison
Difference
95% CI
p-adj
B – A
-0.46
[-1.36, 0.44]
0.39
C – A
-1.11
[-2.01, -0.21]
0.016
C – B
-0.65
[-1.55, 0.25]
0.17
ANOVA F = 5.50, p = 0.020.
Development and Fermentation of Goat Whey for Vodka Production
65
==PAGE:76==
Table 32: Summary of statistical analyses performed in this thesis.
Section
Statistical Analyses
Substrate Composition
Mean, standard deviation
Sugar Hydrolysis
Linear regression (sugar vs. time), area under curve
(AUC, mean ± SD), one-way ANOVA, Tukey HSD
post-hoc
Protein Content & Sol-
ubility
Mean, standard deviation, two-way ANOVA (pH,
pasteurization), linear regression, Welch’s t-test,
Shapiro-Wilk normality test
Nitrogen (FAN)
Mean, standard deviation, linear mixed model (time
effect), two-way ANOVA, Tukey HSD, coefficient of
variation (CV)
Yeast Growth
One-way ANOVA (group differences), Tukey HSD
post-hoc
Ethanol Production
One-way ANOVA (group/time), linear regression
(ethanol vs. time/group), Gompertz model fitting
Microbial Content
Mean, standard deviation (CFU/mL), descriptive
statistics, colony counting reliability (Goldilocks
zone)
Statistical Analysis R Code for HPLC Fermentation Data
R Code used for Statistical Analyses
# Load packages
library(tidyverse)
library(car)
library(lme4)
library(lmerTest)
library(emmeans)
#--------------------#
# 1. Protein Data
#--------------------#
protein <- read.csv("protein_data.csv")
# Shapiro-Wilk test (normality, per group)
protein %>%
group_by(Group) %>%
summarise(shapiro_p = shapiro.test(Protein)$p.value)
# Welch's t-test between groups
t.test(Protein ~ Group, data = protein, var.equal=FALSE)
Development and Fermentation of Goat Whey for Vodka Production
66
==PAGE:77==
#--------------------#
# 2. Bradford Soluble Protein (Pasteurization/pH)
#--------------------#
bradford <- read.csv("bradford_data.csv")
# Two-way ANOVA
anova_brad <- aov(Protein ~ Pasteurization * pH, data=bradford)
summary(anova_brad)
# Tukey HSD
TukeyHSD(anova_brad)
# Linear regression: soluble protein vs pH
lm_brad_unp <- lm(Protein ~ pH, data=filter(bradford, Pasteurization=="No"))
summary(lm_brad_unp)
lm_brad_past <- lm(Protein ~ pH, data=filter(bradford, Pasteurization=="Yes"))
summary(lm_brad_past)
#--------------------#
# 3. FAN Data (Pepsin/Trypsin)
#--------------------#
fan <- read.csv("fan_data.csv")
fan$Enzyme <- as.factor(fan$Enzyme)
fan$Pasteurized <- as.factor(fan$Pasteurized)
fan$pH <- as.factor(fan$pH)
fan$Replicate <- as.factor(fan$Replicate)
fan$Time <- as.numeric(fan$Time)
# Shapiro-Wilk per group
fan %>%
group_by(Enzyme, Pasteurized, pH) %>%
summarise(shapiro_p = shapiro.test(FAN)$p.value)
# Levene's Test
leveneTest(FAN ~ Enzyme * Pasteurized * pH, data=fan)
# Two-way ANOVA at endpoint (e.g. max Time)
endpt <- fan %>% filter(Time == max(Time))
anova_fan <- aov(FAN ~ Enzyme * Pasteurized * pH, data=endpt)
summary(anova_fan)
TukeyHSD(anova_fan)
# Linear mixed model (time effect)
Development and Fermentation of Goat Whey for Vodka Production
67
==PAGE:78==
lmm_fan <- lmer(FAN ~ Time + (1|Replicate), data=fan)
summary(lmm_fan)
#--------------------#
# 4. Sugar/Ethanol (HPLC) Time Courses
#--------------------#
sugar <- read.csv("hplc_data.csv")
sugar$Time <- as.numeric(sugar$Time)
sugar$Rep <- as.factor(sugar$Rep)
# Normality check on residuals after LM (per sugar)
lm_lactose <- lm(Lactose ~ Time, data=sugar)
shapiro.test(residuals(lm_lactose))
# Linear regression per replicate (rate calculation)
sugar %>% group_by(Rep) %>%
summarise(
slope = coef(lm(Lactose ~ Time))[2],
pval = summary(lm(Lactose ~ Time))$coefficients[2,4]
)
# ANOVA for final yield
aov_eth <- aov(Ethanol ~ Group, data=filter(sugar, Time==max(Time)))
summary(aov_eth)
TukeyHSD(aov_eth)
#--------------------#
# 5. OD600 Data
#--------------------#
od <- read.csv("od600_data.csv")
# ANOVA for means in a given phase
aov_od <- aov(OD ~ Group, data=od)
summary(aov_od)
TukeyHSD(aov_od)
#--------------------#
# 6. CFU Data
#--------------------#
cfu <- read.csv("cfu_data.csv")
cfu$Group <- as.factor(cfu$Group)
# If needed: ANOVA or non-parametric test for log(CFU)
aov_cfu <- aov(log10(CFU) ~ Group, data=cfu)
Development and Fermentation of Goat Whey for Vodka Production
68
==PAGE:79==
summary(aov_cfu)
#--------------------#
# 7. General Plotting (optional, not shown)
#--------------------#
# ggplot code, residual plot code, etc.
Development and Fermentation of Goat Whey for Vodka Production
69
==PAGE:80==
Main Important Results
Table 33: Summary of Main Results
Parameter
Value
Protein Content & Solubility
Protein (Fermentation, Bradford)
70.6 ± 10.1 mg
Protein (Original GW, Bradford)
18.5 ± 1.7 mg
Protein (%, Unpasteurized, Dumas)
11.67 ± 0.19 %
Protein (%, Pasteurized, Dumas)
12.34 ± 0.23 %
Soluble protein (Pasteurized, pH 6.6, Brad-
ford)
365.3 ± 3.2 µg/mL
Soluble protein (Unpasteurized, pH 6.6,
Bradford)
288.3 ± 15.7 µg/mL
FAN (Free Amino Nitrogen) Endpoints (mg/L)
Trypsin, Unpasteurized, pH 6.6
280.9 ± 15.1
Trypsin, Pasteurized, pH 6.6
363.3 ± 3.0
Pepsin, Unpasteurized, pH 4
72.3 ± 8.2
Pepsin, Pasteurized, pH 4
207.9 ± 10.5
Sugar Concentrations (HPLC, g/L)
Condition A:
Lactose (start →end)
6.16 →5.14
Glucose (start →end)
18.87 →0.06
Galactose (start →end)
16.03 →0.15
Condition B:
Lactose (start →end)
5.81 →5.54
Glucose (start →end)
14.86 →0.10
Galactose (start →end)
16.25 →0.23
Condition C:
Lactose (start →end)
6.18 →6.16
Glucose (start →end)
20.22 →0.15
Galactose (start →end)
17.25 →0.86
Ethanol Yield (HPLC)
Max ethanol (A)
21.6 g/L
Max ethanol (B)
22.9 g/L
Max ethanol (C)
23.8 g/L
OD600 (Growth Curves)
Max OD600 (A)
3.30 (hour 11)
Max OD600 (B)
3.19 (hour 12)
Max OD600 (C)
1.95 (hour 13)
CFU (Colony Forming Units)
Development and Fermentation of Goat Whey for Vodka Production
70
==PAGE:81==
Raw Data
Table 34: Representative raw HPLC data for ethanol, glucose, and galactose concen-
trations (g/L) during fermentation (selected time points).
Time (h)
Ethanol (g/L)
Glucose (g/L)
Galactose (g/L)
A
B
C
A
B
C
A
B
C
0
0.00
0.00
0.00
18.87
14.86
20.22
16.03
16.25
17.25
2
10.31
10.51
10.79
17.94
17.20
18.62
16.08
16.20
17.41
4
11.17
11.54
11.84
15.75
15.01
15.79
15.97
16.44
17.19
6
12.53
12.96
12.98
12.17
9.68
12.95
15.46
16.57
16.87
10
16.56
16.79
16.14
3.27
3.27
5.74
13.82
14.45
15.80
12
18.37
18.40
18.56
0.19
0.31
0.18
12.35
11.93
14.62
24
22.82
22.28
22.94
0.11
0.09
0.18
0.58
0.45
3.32
96
22.14
22.96
23.43
0.07
0.10
0.18
0.20
0.89
1.83
120
21.57
22.87
23.82
0.06
0.10
0.15
0.15
0.23
0.86
Development and Fermentation of Goat Whey for Vodka Production
71
==PAGE:82==
Table 35: Sugar hydrolysis and formation during different enzyme addition strategies of
biological duplicates (g/L, representative values).
Trypsin added first, then lactase after 2 hours
Minutes
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
210
Lactose G
37.99
1.28
7.50
9.41
9.94
10.67
11.35
11.47
Glucose G
0
21.02
18.14
17.18
16.94
16.59
16.79
16.64
Galactose G
0.57
20.05
15.93
14.64
14.26
13.81
13.91
13.74
Lactose H
37.99
44.70
5.29
7.62
8.79
9.15
9.83
10.15
Glucose H
0
0.06
19.08
18.40
17.83
17.23
17.59
17.37
Galactose H
0.57
0.29
16.91
15.82
15.07
14.38
14.61
14.34
Lactase added first, then trypsin after 3 hours
Minutes
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
Lactose X
37.99
11.32
9.26
8.19
7.88
8.16
7.88
Glucose X
0
16.20
18.44
18.53
18.51
19.15
18.53
Galactose X
0.57
13.48
15.45
15.52
15.50
16.17
15.49
Lactose Y
37.99
10.93
9.07
8.01
7.92
7.97
7.97
Glucose Y
0
16.55
17.63
18.03
18.05
18.02
18.33
Galactose Y
0.57
13.79
14.73
15.11
15.08
15.03
15.28
Lactase and trypsin added at the same time
Minutes
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
210
240
Lactose T
37.99
9.64
8.78
8.48
8.98
8.98
8.88
9.28
9.17
Glucose T
0
17.05
17.49
18.14
17.98
17.83
17.94
18.44
17.93
Galactose T
0.57
14.73
14.75
15.26
14.98
14.85
14.93
15.34
14.88
Lactose R
37.99
8.53
7.65
7.07
7.91
7.69
7.80
8.00
7.51
Glucose R
0
18.41
19.43
18.29
19.49
19.09
18.86
18.90
18.44
Galactose R
0.57
15.75
16.51
15.44
16.35
15.97
15.76
15.75
15.41
Table 36: Soluble protein concentration (µg/mL) at different pH values.
Replicate
6.6
6
5.5
5
4.8
4.6
4.4
4.2
4
3.5
3
2.5
2
Rep 1
280.8
236.8
261.2
215.6
111.4
106.2
61.0
161.1
67.5
147.7
134.2
157.3
190.5
Rep 2
306.3
250.4
225.3
85.2
150.9
104.6
121.8
182.6
192.4
163.3
133.5
172.4
56.4
Rep 3
277.7
261.8
121.7
82.0
127.9
165.7
159.2
201.9
191.8
172.1
198.6
188.6
72.3
Rep 1
369.0
321.2
333.0
278.2
271.6
230.1
185.9
277.0
193.5
165.7
196.5
194.7
194.0
Rep 2
363.0
182.4
301.6
223.6
141.1
227.8
270.8
189.8
209.5
210.2
197.9
187.0
204.1
Rep 3
363.8
329.2
255.7
224.7
200.4
215.6
279.5
235.7
208.6
194.6
186.1
192.4
207.9
All values are µg/mL soluble protein at the indicated pH (from 6.6 to 2). Each row represents a
biological replicate.
Development and Fermentation of Goat Whey for Vodka Production
72
