==PAGE:1==
Fatigue of   
Bearing Materials 
by 
Jonathan Dahl Meier 
August 2025 
 
 
 
 
Master’s Thesis 
 
Materials and Manufacturing Engineering 
 
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering 
 
Technical University of Denmark 
 
Supervisors 
 
Dorte Juul Jensen 
 
Jesper Vejlø Carstensen 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract: 
New bearing materials are being developed to meet a growing demand for high fatigue strength, 
and their properties must be thoroughly understood and evaluated. This study investigates fatigue 
in three bearing materials, HM07, Lacomet 12.18, and AlSn40 subjected to 4-point bending. 
The objectives are to relate fatigue mechanisms to material microstructure, compare fatigue per-
formance of the three bearing materials, and evaluate the applicability of 4-point bending for 
bearing material assessment. Samples of the three bearing materials were ground, polished, and 
examined using SEM, EDS, LOM, and stereo microscopy. HM07 exhibited the most pro-
nounced fatigue damage, Lacomet 12.18 showed brittle characteristics and fractured easily under 
4-point bending, and AlSn40 demonstrated the highest overall performance. 4-point bending 
proved useful for studying fatigue mechanisms in bearing materials. However, bearing fatigue 
failure involves extensive fatigue damage to the bonding-zone, which could not be achieved by 4-
point bending, and thus the method cannot provide a full picture of bearing fatigue. 
 
==PAGE:2==
Jonathan Dahl Meier 
 
Fatigue of bearing materials  
 2 
1 Introduction 
The demand of outputs from marine combustion engines is ever-increasing, and, in turn, engine bearings 
must endure increasingly larger loads. This increases the risk of bearing fatigue, which can have large 
economic consequences, as standstill of these engines can lead to great economical losses. 
Conventional bearing materials, such as white metals, has been on the market for centuries (Me-
tatekeng.com, 2025), allowing their properties to be thoroughly tested and improved over time. However, 
to meet the increasing demands for fatigue strength, stronger bearing materials are being developed, some 
with completely diﬀerent microstructures, and a signiﬁcant knowledge gap remains regarding their funda-
mental fatigue mechanisms. 
Under working conditions, the thin lubricating oil ﬁlm protecting the bearing is subjected to ﬂuctuating 
pressure, exposing the bearing to cyclic stress (ISO 7905-1, 1995). This phenomenon, known as ﬂuctuating 
hydrodynamic oil pressure, may cause fatigue in the bearing material. 
Bearings consist of a steel bearing shell, coated with a thin layer of bearing material. What appears to be 
an established fact is that fatigue cracks initiate at the surface of the bearing material and propagate through 
it. Upon reaching the bonding zone between the steel bearing shell and the bearing material, cracks con-
tinue to propagate along the bonding zone. Ultimately, when cracks meet each other, large patches of 
bearing material can spall oﬀ. Traditionally, as seen in white metals, this is mitigated by strengthening the 
bearing material, either through solution hardening or by adding hard intermetallic particles. However, this 
has trade-oﬀ eﬀects, as it can reduce the ductility of the bearing material and degrade the tribological 
properties essential to engine bearings. 
This study speciﬁcally focuses on three bearing materials, each with diﬀerent chemical composition, pro-
duction method and microstructure. They thereby oﬀer a broad foundation for analyzing the relation-
ship between bearing material and fatigue mechanisms. These materials are: 
• HM07 – A centrifugal cast Sn based alloy with Cu, Sb and Cd. Resembling ASTM B23-2 (the 
most widely used bearing material within US (Koring, 2003)).  
• Lacomet 12. 18 – A laser cladded Sn based alloy with high Cu and Sb concentrations for en-
hanced fatigue strength. 
• AlSn40 – A cast and roll-bonded Al based alloy with soft Sn particles for enhanced tribologi-
cal properties. 
==PAGE:3==
Jonathan Dahl Meier 
 
Fatigue of bearing materials  
 3 
There is a variety of test methods (7905-1, 1995; 7905-2, 1995; 7905-3, 1995; 7905-4, 1995) commonly 
used to mimic the working conditions of engine bearings, but all existing methods are ﬂawed in one way 
or another. 
• None of the standardized tests accommodate the dimensions and geometry of specimens cut 
directly from marine engine bearings. Therefore, specially made test specimens are required, which  
may disregard production-related characteristics of the material. 
• Fatigue testing generates heat, which may permanently alter the material microstructure. This eﬀect 
is particularly signiﬁcant in strong materials, as greater mechanical work is required to induce fa-
tigue damage. 
• Testing bearings under actual ﬂuctuating hydrodynamic oil pressure requires non-standardized 
equipment, which makes it unfeasible in most practical settings. 
In this study, 4-point bending is used to test the three diﬀerent bearing materials. While this method is not 
commonly applied to bearing materials, it has been shown to induce fatigue damage eﬀectively, without 
exhibiting the above-mentioned ﬂaws (Meier, 2024).  
By subjecting HM07, Lacomet 12.18 and AlSn40 to 4-point bending and analysing the outcome, this study 
aims to investigate: 
• The relationship between material microstructure and fatigue  
• The relative fatigue strength of the three bearing materials 
• The accuracy of 4-point bending in mimicking the working conditions of bearings 
 
 
==PAGE:4==
Jonathan Dahl Meier 
 
Fatigue of bearing materials  
 4 
2 Background 
2.1 
Marine engine bearings 
In essence, bearings serve as an interface between two components that allows rotation while minimizing 
wear, fatigue, and energy loss. One of these components may be considered as the rotating component, 
and the other the static component (See Figure 2.1). Generally, bearings can be divided into two main 
categories i.e. roller bearings and sliding bearings. In sliding bearings, the static component is equipped 
with a bearing housing that holds the bearing itself, which consists of a steel bearing shell coated with a 
bearing material. The rotating component features a smooth cylindrical steel journal that runs within the 
bearing. A thin hydrodynamic oil ﬁlm separates the journal and the bearing, which prevents metal-to-metal 
contact to reduce wear, fatigue and energy loss.  
 
 
Figure 2.1: (left) Schematic of a bearing, showing the static and rotating component (right) exploded view of a bearing, showing the bearing housing, bearing shell, 
bearing material and smooth cylindrical journal. 
 
Bearings are essential in applications with rotating components that carry signiﬁcant loads, e.g. rolling-
mills, gears, generators, turbines, and ship propulsion (Koring, 2003). This study focuses on marine 
combustion engines, where bearings play a critical role for components that transfer power from 
combustion to propeller rotation. These components, along with their associated bearings, are highlighted 
in Figure 2.2. 
 
Bearing housing
Bearing shell
Bearing material 
Rotating component  
Smooth cylindrical journal
Static component
==PAGE:5==
Jonathan Dahl Meier 
 
Fatigue of bearing materials  
 5 
 
Figure 2.2: Schematic drawing of a marine two-stroke engine highlighting the key components that transfer power from combustion to propeller rotation. (Adapted 
from: Engine Selection Guide Two-stroke MC/MC-C Engines, 2000) 
 
2.2 Fatigue failure of Bearings 
Bearing failure may result from various causes, including abrasion, fatigue, and corrosion, often with 
multiple failure modes occurring simultaneously (Challen & Baranescu, 1999). This section provides a 
detailed elaboration on fatigue failure. 
During engine operation, the hydrodynamic oil ﬁlm undergoes ﬂuctuation pressure, subjecting the bearing 
material to cyclic loading (see Figure 2.3)(ISO 7905-1). This phenomenon, known as ﬂuctuating 
hydrodynamic oil pressure, can lead to fatigue over time. Notably, fatigue failure doesn’t require any metal-
to-metal contact. 
 
Figure 2.3: (left) Schematic drawing of an engine bearing in operation. (right) Illustration showing the magnitude and direction of the hydrodynamic oil pressure 
(Adapted from: ISO 7905-1, 1995) 
 
Crosshead bearing
 Crankpin bearing
 Main bearing
Piston rod
Connecting rod
Crankshaft
Journal
Hydrodynamic oil pressure
Bearing
Oil
==PAGE:6==
Jonathan Dahl Meier 
 
Fatigue of bearing materials  
 6 
Several failure cases were analyzed, and the following sequence of bearing fatigue is proposed (see Figure 
2.4) (Everllence, 2025)  
a) Initiation: Small irregularities raises local stress and act as potential crack initiation sites. These 
irregularities could either be surface ﬂaws or large intermetallic crystals at the surface. (Meier, 
2024) 
b) Oil penetration: When a crack becomes wide enough for oil to penetrate, the hydrodynamic oil 
pressure will exert a force on the walls of a crack, forcing the crack to propagate. (Meier, 2024) 
c) Bonding zone initiation: Eventually, when a crack reaches the underlying steel bearing shell, it 
is halted. The hydrodynamic oil pressure will continue to act on the walls of the crack, excerting 
bending moment and shear stress on the bonding zone, driving horizontal crack initiation. 
(Meier, 2024) 
d) Bonding zone propagation: When a cracks becomes wide enough for the oil to penetrate, it 
will propagate along the bonding zone. (Meier, 2024) 
e) Spalling: Finally, when enough bearing material has separated from the steel bearing shell, large 
patches of bearing material will spall oﬀ. (Meier, 2024) 
All failure cases involved HM07 bearings; thus, the sequence serves only as an example, and fatigue may 
diﬀer for other materials. 
 
 
Figure 2.4: Proposed sequence of fatigue failure in HM07 bearings (a) Surface irregularities raise local stress, promoting crack initiation. (b) Hydrodynamic oil 
pressure acts on the crack walls, driving propagation. (c) Bending moments and shear forces initiate fatigue in the bonding zone. (d) Hydrodynamic oil pressure acts 
on the crack walls, driving propagation along the bonding zone. (e) A patch of bearing material spalls oﬀ the steel bearing shell. 
Bending moment 
+ shear stress
Potential sites for crack initiation
a
b
c
d
e
==PAGE:7==
Jonathan Dahl Meier 
 
Fatigue of bearing materials  
 7 
2.3 Materials and Processes 
Generally, bearing materials should posess key properties to prevent fatigue, wear and seizuring.  
• Compatibility: Metal-to-metal contact may occur between the bearing material and the steel 
journal. In this situation, to prevent adhesive wear, the bearing material should be incapable 
of solid-state welding with steel.  (Challen & Baranescu, 1999) 
• Conformability: The bearing material should be able to plastically deform to compensate 
for misalignment. (Klit, 2013) 
• Embeddability: Foreign particles entering the hydrodynamic oil ﬁlm may disturb its ﬂow. 
Therefore, the matrix of the bearing material should be able to embed the ingress of foreign 
particles (Challen & Baranescu, 1999). This is a concern for stronger bearing materials, such 
as AlSn40, which have been shown to experience rapid failure due to this mechanism. 
(Everllence, 2019) (Klit, 2013) 
• Fatigue strength: The material should be resistant to crack initiation and propagation. 
(Challen & Baranescu, 1999) 
For large two-stroke marine engines, various Sn- and Al-based alloys are commonly used for bearing ma-
terials. The ones relevant for this study are detailed in the following section. 
HM07: 
HM07 is a Sn-based alloy containing 6-10% Sb and 3-6% Cu, classiﬁed as a white metal or Babbitt. White 
metal, invented by Isaac Babbitt in 1839, remains widely used as a sliding bearing material, particularly in 
high-duty applications such as large 2-stroke marine engines (metatekeng.com, 2025). 
HM07 is applied with centrifugal casting. This technique involves pouring liquid HM07 into a heated 
and rotating steel cylinder, where centrifugal forces distribute the melt uniformly along its inner diame-
ter. Before casting, the steel bearing shell is coated with pure Sn to protect the steel surface from oxida-
tion and to improve the adhesion of the HMO7 to the steel. This is applied by dipping the bearing shell 
in a hot Sn Bath. There will be an unavoidable reaction between the Sn and the steel to form a thin layer 
of FeSn and FeSn2 (see phase diagram Figure 2.5). 
==PAGE:8==
Jonathan Dahl Meier 
 
Fatigue of bearing materials  
 8 
 
Figure 2.5: The Fe-Sn phase diagram (Wang, X. et al. (2019). Growth behavior of intermetallic compounds in Fe/Sn diﬀusion couples. Journal of Materials 
Science: Materials in Electronics) 
 
Figure 2.6: (left) Ternary phase diagram of Sn–Cu–Sb with the elemental composition of HM07 indicated by a red dot located in the three-phase region between β-
Sn Cu6Sn5 (η′), and SbSn (β′). (Adapted from: American Society for Metals, Metals Handbook, Vol. 8: Metallography, Structures and Phase Diagrams, 
1973) 
(right) Enlarged section of the Sn–Cu–Sb phase diagram, outlined by a green polygon. The composition of HM07 (red dot) suggests that Cu6Sn5 is the primary 
intermetallic. Note: the enlarged section is ﬂipped diagonally. (Adapted from: B. T. K. Barry, Tin and Its Alloys and Compounds, , 1983) 
As shown in Figure 2.6 (left), HM07 is composed of bSn and two hard intermetallic phases Cu6Sn5 and 
SbSn. Cu6Sn5 is typically shaped like hollow hexagonal needles, which have been shown to inhibit crack 
propagation (Meier, 2024). As indicated in Figure 2.6 (right), the three-phase region is further divided into 
two distinct subregions: one where SbSn is the primary intermetallic compound, and another where Cu6Sn5 
is the primary. The elemental composition of HM07 places it in the latter, indicating that Cu6Sn5 is the 
ﬁrst to crystallize. The crystallization of Cu6Sn5 occurs preferentially through heterogeneous nucleation, 
thus it forms preferentially directly on the FeSn coating (Porter, 2022). As a result, Cu6Sn5 is more 
3
4
5
==PAGE:9==
Jonathan Dahl Meier 
 
Fatigue of bearing materials  
 9 
concentrated in the bonding zone of HM07. This eﬀect is more pronounced with low cooling rates, where 
Cu is given more time to diﬀuse. Consequently, low cooling rates can lead to excessive concentrations of 
Cu6Sn5 in the bonding zone, which is a concern for HM07, because this may lead to embrittlement of the 
bearing material. 
The SbSn intermetallic crystals are typically of cubic crystalline structure. These crystals have also been 
shown to inhibit crack propagation (Meier, 2024), though the opposite has also been hypothesized, espe-
cially with larger particle sizes, as sharp corners may act as crack starters (Koring, 2003).  
In HMO7, approximately 1% Cd is used to strengthen the b-Sn matrix by solution hardening. At high 
concentrations, CdSb crystals can form at the grain boundaries, which may reduce fatigue strength 
(Koring, 2003). Thus, an even distribution of the Cd is important. 
Overall, HM07 delivers good compatibility, conformability and embeddability, but exhibits inferior fa-
tigue strength compared to other popular bearing materials. 
Lacomet 12.18: 
Lacomet 12.18 is a diﬀerent type of white metal containing 12% Sb and 18% Cu, which is considerably 
higher than in HM07. Therefore, it contains more intermetallic particles (Cu6Sn5 and SbSn), which 
enhances fatigue strength. Unfortunately, as described in the previous section, high concentrations of hard 
particles can lead to embrittlement, especially in the bonding zone. This may be mitigated by fast cooling, 
which is achievable with laser cladding. This technique involves covering the bearing shell with Lacomet 
12.18 powder and melting it with a laser. Upon solidiﬁcation, the material forms a solid coating of Lacomet 
12.18. (Quintino, 2014) 
AlSn40: 
Al-Sn alloys have long been used as bearing materials in the automotive industry but have only recently - 
compared to HM07 - been introduced in large marine engines, due to the growing demand for fatigue 
strength. 
==PAGE:10==
Jonathan Dahl Meier 
 
Fatigue of bearing materials  
 10 
 
Figure 2.7: The Al-Sn phase diagram (ASM International, Binary Alloy Phase Diagrams, 2nd edition, 1990) 
Sn and Al are immiscible in the solid state, as shown in Figure 2.7, meaning that small additions of Sn to 
Al result in the formation of a distinct Al phase. Consequently, AlSn40 consists of a continuous hard Al 
matrix featuring soft b-Sn islands. Contrary to white metals, the matrix of Al-Sn alloys constitutes the 
hardest part of the microstructure. Manufacturing AlSn40 involves the following steps:  
1. AlSn40 is cast into sheets. (Carstensen, 2025) 
2. Strips are formed by hot-rolling AlSn40 and steel. (Carstensen, 2025) 
3. The bi-metal strip is bent into the ﬁnal bearing shape. (Carstensen, 2025) 
The soft Sn particles oﬀer conformability, and the hard Al matrix improves fatigue strength. The optimal 
balance of Sn and Al depends on the speciﬁc engine needs. Generally, AlSn20 (20% Sn) is used for 4-
stroke engines, whereas AlSn40 (40% Sn) is used for slower running two-stroke engines. AlSn40 is still 
approximately 30% stronger than most white metals while even maintaining its strength at higher operat-
ing temperatures (Koring, 2003). 
Though the high strength of Al-Sn alloys oﬀers excellent fatigue strength, it also reduces the embedability 
of the material, increasing the risk of foreign particles disturbing the oil ﬂow. This can cause excessive heat 
and wear, which may deprive the surface of Sn-islands, thereby removing the compatibility and tribological 
properties of the material. This may result in massive failures with adhesive wear and seizure which can 
induce severe damages to the journal. Such failures necessitate a full engine shutdown and may require 
major components to be re-machined, or sometimes, replaced (Klit, 2013). 
 
==PAGE:11==
Jonathan Dahl Meier 
 
Fatigue of bearing materials  
 11 
2.4 4-point bending 
In this study, 4-point bending was used to fatigue-test the aforementioned bearing materials. In this 
method, test samples may be obtained by cutting arc-shaped segments directly from a bearing. Each sam-
ple is ﬁxed with 4 rollers in a horizontal position, while a servo-hydraulic pump applies vertical force to 
the top rollers (Figure 2.8a). 
The forces acting on the sample, as well as the resulting bending moment, are illustrated in Figures 2.8a 
and 2.8b. As shown in the Figure 2.8b, the lower surface of the specimen is subjected to a constant bending 
moment between the upper rollers. This region will be referred to as the constant moment region. 
 
Figure 2.8: (a) Sketch of the 4-point bending setup. (b) Free-body-diagram of a sample loaded in 4-point bending. (c) Bending moment diagram for a sample sub-
jected to 4-point bending, showing a constant moment region between the inner contact points. 
 
a
b
c
==PAGE:12==
Jonathan Dahl Meier 
 
Fatigue of bearing materials  
 12 
R-value and Goodmanns empirical law 
The sample is ﬁxed in position by applying a constant force during testing. In mathematical terms, this 
can be described by the R value:  
R = F!"#
F!$%
> 0 
Where Fmin and Fmax are the minimum and maximum force applied during fatigue testing. A non-zero R-
value also implies a non-zero mean stress, which aﬀects fatigue. Theoretically, for any given stress 
amplitude, the amplitude can be normalized to an equivalent zero-mean amplitude using Goodman’s 
empirical law (Ashby, 2007): 
Δ σ&0  =  
Δ σ&m 
1  −  σm
σts  
 
Where Δ σ&0is the equivalent zero-mean stress amplitude, σm is the applied mean stress,  Δ σ&m is the 
applied stress amplitude and  σts is the tensile strength of the material. This value will be used throughout 
the report and referred to as the normalized stress amplitude. Using a normalized stress amplitude allows for 
direct comparison of fatigue damage in samples subjected to diﬀerent mean stresses. 
Stress analysis 
In the fatigue tests conducted in this study, the load was force-controlled, requiring a stress analysis to 
determine the target force values. According to ISO 7905-4 (1995), surface tension of curved bearing 
samples may be calculated according to cantilever beam theory: 
When exerting a force by 4-point bending, the resulting surface tension depends on the distance be-
tween the inner and outer contact points of the fatigue test. This distance was calculated as shown in ap-
pendix A. 
According to the cantilever beam theory, the bending moment M($) at point a (see Figure 2.9) can be 
found by sectioning the beam at point a, and replacing one side by an equivalent bending moment and 
shear force (Hibbeler, 2024). 
==PAGE:13==
Jonathan Dahl Meier 
 
Fatigue of bearing materials  
 13 
  
Figure 2.9: Free-body-diagram of a sample loaded in 4-point bending by a force F. Left-hand-side (from point a) is replaced with an equivalent bending moment 
M(a) and shear stress V 
Since the bending moment is constant in the constant moment region, M($) may be used to express the gen-
eral bending moment of the entire region M. By using Newtons 1st law of motion, M is expressed as: 
 
M = d,-../,0/1 
 3
4 
 
Substituting into the ﬂexure formula yields the surface tension: 
σ  = M ∙y
I
=   M ∙y ∙12
w ∙h5
=   d,-../,0/1  ∙F ∙y ∙6
w ∙h5
 
Where F is the applied force, y is the distance between the surface and the neutral axis of the beam, I is 
the moment of inertia of a rectangle, w is the sample width and h is the sample height. 
It should be mentioned, that the coating thickness was only considered when calculating the height h and 
not when calculating the distance to the neutral axis y. This may have distorted the analysis, particularly 
for Lacomet 12.18 which had the thickest coating. A method was later found for considering the coating 
thickness when calculating y. This method was used to re-calculate the stress in a Lacomet 12.18 sample, 
revealing a 44% increase in amplitude compared to the original calculation (Appendix E). 
The coating thickness is small compared to the steel bearing shell, and thus, the total E-modulus of the 
beam was assumed to equal that of steel. Meanwhile, the E-moduli of the bearing materials are much lower 
dcorrected
F / 2
F / 2
F / 2
F / 2
M(o)
V
a
==PAGE:14==
Jonathan Dahl Meier 
 
Fatigue of bearing materials  
 14 
than that of steel, and therefore, the coating carries a proportionately smaller fraction of the load. The 
corrected target force F,-../,0/1 was calculated: 
F,-../,0/1 = F677789:; ∙E<0//=
E,-$0"#>
 
Where Fapplied is the applied force, Esteel is the E-modulus of steel and Ecoating is the E-modulus of the bear-
ing material.  
2.5 Light Optical Microscopy 
Light optical microscopy (LOM) is a widely used technique for material characterization. The working 
principle of LOM is to place an object in front of a convex lens, which converges the light rays to pro-
duce a magniﬁed image on the opposite side. The magniﬁcation Mg of the resulting image can be calcu-
lated using the following equation:  
M𝑔= v −f
f
 
Where f is the focal length and v is the distance between the image and the lens.  
In modern compound lenses, the eﬀects of multiple lenses are multiplied. Theoretically, inﬁnite magniﬁ-
cation is possible, but at some point, the resulting image becomes blurry, due to the resolution of the im-
age. The concept of resolution is best understood by considering luminous point objects. A luminous 
point object appears as a so-called airy disc when magniﬁed, and the size of this disc is inversely propor-
tional to the wavelength of the light. The resolution of an image is deﬁned as the minimum distance d of 
two luminous points, at which their airy discs can be distinguished (see Figure 2.10). Thus, the greatest 
achievable resolution of LOM images (apprx. 200nm) is determined by the wavelength of visible light. 
 
Figure 2.10: Light intensity distribution proﬁles of two airy discs, i.e., magniﬁed luminous point objects, separated by the minimum distance d, at which they can be 
distinguished (Adapted from: Leng, 2008) 
==PAGE:15==
Jonathan Dahl Meier 
 
Fatigue of bearing materials  
 15 
The amount of light passing though the objective lens is controlled by the aperture. While more light 
results in brighter images, the depth of ﬁeld is compromised. The depth of ﬁeld is deﬁned by the range of 
position Df for an object, where the resolution remains equal to the minimum distance of two airy discs d 
(see Figure 2.11). This can be an issue with some 3D features such as rough surfaces. The issue can be 
mitigated using z-stacking, where multiple images at diﬀerent focus planes are combined to extend the 
depth of ﬁeld. 
 
Figure 2.11: Geometric relation of the depth of ﬁeld (Df) and the highest achievable resolution (d) (see ﬁgure 2.10) (Leng, 2008) 
 
2.6 Scanning Electron Microscopy and Energy Dispersive Spectros-
copy 
Scanning Electron Microscopes (SEM) use electrons to illuminate an object. Due to the short wave-
length of electrons (1-40 pm), much greater resolution can be achieved with the SEM, compared to 
LOM. 
In this study, a Field Emission Gun (FEG) was used as electron ﬁlament. Here, electrons are pulled 
from a sharp tip of a tungsten single crystal (~100nm tip radius) with a strong electromagnetic ﬁeld. The 
small tip radius contributes to a more focused electron beam. The electrons are then accelerated using a 
bias voltage to shorten their wavelength. The electron beam is focused with a series of electromagnetic 
lenses and used to probe the surface of a sample in a raster pattern to generate a 2D image. 
 
 
==PAGE:16==
Jonathan Dahl Meier 
 
Fatigue of bearing materials  
 16 
As the electrons strike the sample surface, diﬀerent signals are emitted: 
• Back Scatter Electrons (BSEs): Incoming electrons are deﬂected by the sample surface atoms 
by Coulomb forces. Some of these will escape the surface as BSEs. The fraction of electrons that 
are backscattered increases with the atomic number of the surface atoms, creating compositional 
contrast in the ﬁnal image. 
• Secondary Electrons (SE): When an incoming electron strikes an atom in the sample surface, it 
can knock out an electron from its atomic orbit. If such knocked-out electrons escape the sam-
ple surface, they are emitted as SE. SE escape edges of topographical features more easily than 
ﬂat parts, hence creating topographic contrast in the ﬁnal image. The kinetic energy of SE is 
lower than that of BSEs, enabling signal selection. For instance, SE can be attracted towards the 
electron detector by surrounding it with a positively charged Faraday cage. 
• Characteristic X-rays: When electrons are knocked out from an inner shell of an atom (see 
SE), they will be replaced by an electron from an outer shell. This reduces the energy state of the 
atom, and an X-ray photon is emitted. The X-rays have energy that is characteristic to the atom 
and may be used for X-ray energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) i.e. identifying chemical ele-
ments by recording the X-ray energy which is characteristic for the element. 
3 Methodologies 
3.1 Cutting and grinding 
The three diﬀerent bearing shells, each with a diﬀerent bearing material (as described in section 2.3), were 
cut into 220x20mm arc-shaped segments using a Struers Magnutom cut-oﬀ machine. Then, to secure 
parallelism, and to reduce surface roughness, the samples were ground with a pendulum surface grinder 
using a Tyrolit 97A462H8AV237 grinding wheel.  
3.2 Fatigue Testing 
The fatigue testing of this study was force controlled. This means, that the intensity of the tests was de-
termined by a force amplitude ∆𝐹 and a mean force 𝐹? 
Δ𝐹= 𝐹?6@ −𝐹?9A
2
 
𝐹? = 𝐹?9A + Δ𝐹 
==PAGE:17==
Jonathan Dahl Meier 
 
Fatigue of bearing materials  
 17 
Where 𝐹?9A and  𝐹?6@ are the minimum and maximum applied force during a fatigue test.  𝐹?9A was set 
to 500N in all tests to ﬁx the specimen in place (as described in section 2.4). 𝐹max was determined by 
choosing a target maximum stress and calculating the required force using the equations provided in Sec-
tion 2.4. 
The fatigue testing was performed on an Instron 8874, and the setup is shown in appendix B. For safety 
reasons, interrupted testing was sometimes necessary. Table 3.1 shows an overview of the samples with 
the most essential parameters. A more detailed overview of the tests is provided in Appendix C. 
Sample 
Normalized 
stress amplitude 
[Mpa] 
no. of stress 
cycles 
Al-virgin 
0.0 
0 
Al1 
84.9 
2000000 
Al3 
111.4 
1500000 
Al2 
136.8 
1500000 
HM-virgin 
0.0 
0 
HM3 
89.7 
100000 
HM4 
89.7 
200000 
HM2 
89.7 
300000 
HM1 
89.7 
500000 
La-virgin 
0.0 
0 
La3 
32.7 
2000300 
La4 
42.7 
2000000 
La2 
47.6 
1000000 
 
Table 3.1: Summary of tests for all samples, specifying the applied normalized stress amplitude and total number of stress cycles. 
The standard method of fatigue testing involves selecting a ﬁxed number of stress cycles and subjecting 
specimens to various stress amplitudes. The chosen number of cycles should be suﬀiciently high to ensure 
that, if the material does not fail, it is likely to endure signiﬁcantly more cycles. This method eﬀectively 
assesses whether a given stress amplitude can be considered safe for the material. The method was applied 
to Lacomet 12.18 and AlSn40, targeting 2 million stress cycles. However, the achievable frequency on the 
Instron 8874 was 10 Hz, meaning that 2 million cycles would take approximately 56 hours. To save time, 
fewer stress cycles were sometimes used. 
In a prior study, the standard method had already been applied to HM07. Therefore, to generate novel 
results, the stress amplitude was ﬁxed, and the number of cycles was varied for each test.  To be exact, all 
HM07 samples were subjected to a normalized stress amplitude of 89.7 Mpa. In the prior study, this 
speciﬁc amplitude had been proven more than enough to induce fatigue damage (Meier, 2024). By varying 
==PAGE:18==
Jonathan Dahl Meier 
 
Fatigue of bearing materials  
 18 
the number of applied cycles, each test sample represented a snapshot in the progression of fatigue dam-
age, allowing for the investigation of fatigue evolution. (Meier, 2024) 
3.3 Test data 
Test data from all runs were collected to conﬁrm that each test was carried out in accordance with the 
speciﬁed parameters. Due to the large number of cycles, data was only stored every 1000th cycle. For these 
cycles, maximum and minimum force were stored together with the maximum and minimum vertical 
position and rotational position of the actuator. Data showing the maximum and minimum force was used 
as an indicator to verify, if the fatigue testing machine had been delivering the intended force. 
One example is provided in Appendix D.  The data was collected from test no. 17 (ﬁrst 144.000 stress 
cycles of Al1). In the example, the maximum and minimum positions drop by approximately 0.2 mm 
during the ﬁrst ~50,000 cycles. Over the same interval, the rotational position ﬂuctuates more than during 
the subsequent cycles. This may be explained by the rollers being pressed ~0.2 mm into the soft bearing 
material, thereby stabilizing the rotational position. This tendency was present in all test runs and most 
pronounced in the softest bearing material, HM07, which is consistent with the explanation. 
3.4 Metallurgical sample preparation 
A total of 11 samples were selected for further metallurgical examination. These were sectioned into 
smaller pieces using a hand lever cut-oﬀ machine, while preserving the previously pendulum ground sur-
face.  
The smaller pieces were embedded in a polyfast/multifast resin - the Polyfast constituting the bottom two 
thirds of the resin, and the Multifast constituting the top third. The Multifast is electrically conducting and 
enables electrons to be conducted away from the sample during SEM inspection.  
The embedded samples were ground with two diﬀerent methods. Method 1 involved grinding with #80, 
#180, #220, #500, #800 and #1200 grit sandpaper. For the second batch, method 2 was introduced to 
safe time. This method involved grinding with #80, #220, #800 and #1200 grit sandpaper. The method 
used for each speciﬁc sample is speciﬁed in the summary of tests (Appendix C). Hereafter, all samples 
were polished with a 6µ, 3µ, and 1µ diamond suspension.  
==PAGE:19==
Jonathan Dahl Meier 
 
Fatigue of bearing materials  
 19 
4 Results & Analysis 
4.1 Material microstructure  
HM07: 
A non-fatigue-tested sample of HM07 was inspected with SEM and EDS (see Figure 4.1). As expected, 
HM07 features dark gray hollow hexagonal needle-shaped Cu6Sn5 particles distributed in a light gray Sn-
matrix when viewed using BSE. Interestingly, most of the Cu6Sn5 needles, especially the larger ones, are 
fractured. Given the fact that these samples were not fatigue tested, this feature must be related to the 
sample preparation. Probably, during the initial grinding steps, the Cu6Sn5 needles were crushed as large 
Si-carbides plowed through the Sn-matrix. This indicates that the Cu6Sn5 needles are quite brittle. 
 
Figure 4.1: (a) SEM micrograph showing the full bearing material thickness of a non-fatigue-tested HM07 sample. (b) Zoomed-in EDS map, indicated by a red 
rectangle in Figure a, showing red Cu6Sn5, green SbSn, and magenta CdSb. (c) Zoomed-in SEM micrograph, indicated by a red rectangle in Figure a, showing 
fractured Cu6Sn5 particles. 
SbSn particles are barely visible in the SEM image, appearing as particles slightly darker than the matrix. 
They are more clearly seen in the EDS map, which shows a ﬁne and uniform distribution throughout the 
microstructure. The EDS map also shows CdSb, appearing either as discrete particles or as thin, continu-
ous lines. The line-like structure indicates that CdSb has segregated in the grain boundaries. 
 
 
c
50 µm
b
2mm
a
==PAGE:20==
Jonathan Dahl Meier 
 
Fatigue of bearing materials  
 20 
Lacomet 12.18: 
 
Figure 4.2: (a) SEM micrograph showing the full bearing material thickness of a non-fatigue-tested Lacomet 12.18 sample. (b) Zoomed-in EDS map, indicated by 
a red rectangle in Figure a, showing red Cu-rich particles and green SbSn. (c) Zoomed-in SEM micrograph, indicated by red rectangle in Figure a, showing two 
distinct Cu-rich phases. 
A non-fatigue-tested sample of Lacomet 12.18 was inspected with SEM and EDS (see Figure 4.2).The 
microstructure of Lacomet 12.18 resembles that of HM07, featuring intermetallic particles distributed in 
a Sn-matrix (Cu6Sn5, SbSn and FeAl3). Comparing the two materials, the higher Sb concentrations in 
Lacomet 12.18 appear to lead to larger sizes of the SbSn particles, while the higher Cu concentration 
increases the number of Cu-rich particles. Additionally, in Lacomet 12.18, Cu seems segregated into two 
distinct phases: the Cu-rich needles (dark in the SEM image) surrounded by Cu-rich clouds (gray in the 
SEM image). The EDS map reveals that the needles contain the highest Cu concentration of the two. It 
is likely that, upon cooling, the material passed through the two-phase region (see Figure 4.3), leading to 
the formation of Cu3Sn needles. These particles would appear darker than the surrounding Sn-rich Cu6Sn5 
clouds in a BSE image; consistent with the observations in Figure 4.2. 
 
Figure 4.3: The Sn-Cu phase diagram. Upon cooling, Lacomet 12.18 passes through the two-phased region of liquid and Cu3Sn, indicated by a red line. 
(Adapted from: www.metallurgy, 2025) 
c
50 µm
b
2mm
a
==PAGE:21==
Jonathan Dahl Meier 
 
Fatigue of bearing materials  
 21 
AlSn40: 
 
Figure 4.4: (a) SEM micrograph showing the full bearing material thickness of a non-fatigue-tested AlSn40 sample (b) Zoomed-in EDS map, indicated by a red 
rectangle in Figure a, showing green Al-matrix, blue Sn-islands, red Cu-rich particles and purple SiC. (c) Zoomed-in SEM micrograph, indicated by a red rectangle 
in Figure a, showing horizontally elongated grain structure. 
A non-fatigue-tested sample of AlSn40 was inspected with SEM and EDS (see Figure 4.4). AlSn40 is 
annealed after rolling for a more equiaxed grain structure. However, the SEM images of the material show 
that the Sn-islands are elongated horizontally. This was observed in all four AlSn40 samples (Al-virgin, 
Al1, Al2 and Al3). This may result from insuﬀicient annealing. One may speculate if it could also be an 
artifact of sample preparation. This is however unlikely since the grinding direction was not always 
horizontal. 
Si-rich particles were found in abundance within the AlSn40 samples compared to the other materials. 
These are likely SiC particles from the grinding paper, embedded in the soft Sn-islands and trapped by the 
surrounding hard Al matrix. 
4.2 Fatigue behavior 
After 4-point bending, the samples were examined using LOM and SEM to investigate the materials’ 
fatigue response. This chapter seeks to analyse the damage mechanisms and compares how each material 
responded to 4-point bending. 
 
 
c
50 µm
b
2mm
a
==PAGE:22==
Jonathan Dahl Meier 
 
Fatigue of bearing materials  
 22 
HM07: 
Of the three materials, HM07 was by far the material showing the clearest signs of fatigue damage from 
4-point bending. Even with the naked eye, multiple cracks were visible in HM07 samples subjected to 
200,000 stress cycles and beyond at a normalized stress amplitude of 89.7 Mpa. 
Figure 4.5 presents four LOM mosaics showing the bearing material of four HM07 samples in the constant 
moment region. The number of cracks in each sample was counted and displayed in the accompanying 
chart. The chart indicates that cracks appear somewhere between 100,000 and 200,000 cycles. Hereafter, 
the crack quantity seems to increase linearly. Notably, the cracks appear more pronounced in the 300,000-
cycle sample compared to the 500,000-cycle sample. This is likely due to a variation in imaging contrast 
rather than actual crack severity. 
 
 
Figure 4.5: (top) LOM mosaics of four HM07 samples subjected to various numbers of stress cycles. The images show the bearing material across the whole 
constant-moment region. (bottom) Graph displaying the number of cracks identiﬁed in each LOM mosaic. 
100,000 stress cycles
200,000 stress cycles
300,000 stress cycles
500,000 stress cycles
5mm
5mm
5mm
5mm
0
5
10
15
20
25
100000
200000
300000
500000
No of cracks
Stress cycles
==PAGE:23==
Jonathan Dahl Meier 
 
Fatigue of bearing materials  
 23 
To gain a better understanding of crack initiation, two LOM mosaics were captured of two HM07 samples 
subjected to 100,000 and 200,000 stress cycles after grinding and polishing (see Figure 4.6). No cracks 
were observed in the 100,000-cycle sample, whereas the 200,000-cycle sample excibits two cracks 
extending through the entire bearing material. This suggests that once initiated, cracks rapidly propagate 
through the bearing material. 
 
Figure 4.6: LOM mosaics, captured after grinding and polishing, showing two HM07 samples subjected to diﬀerent numbers of stress cycles. The top sample shows 
no visible cracks, while the bottom sample exhibits two clear cracks extending through the entire bearing material, indicated by red arrows. 
Examining the 300,000- and 500,000-cycle samples, a few cracks were found reaching only halfway 
through the bearing material, although this was the minority. One of these cracks were inspeted further. 
 
Figure 4.7: SEM micrograph of a crack reaching halfway through the bearing material of a HM07 sample subjected to 4-point bending. After coinciding with a 
Cu6Sn5 particle, the crack branches. 
100,000 stress cycles
200,000 stress cycles
2mm
2mm
500µm
==PAGE:24==
Jonathan Dahl Meier 
 
Fatigue of bearing materials  
 24 
A high magniﬁcation SEM image of the crack tip (see Figure 4.7) shows that the crack branches and 
diminishes, after coinciding with a Cu6Sn5 particle, suggesting that the crack was halted by the particle. A 
known mechanism, where the branching doubles the surface area of the crack, which doubles the surface 
energy required for further propagation. (Meier, 2024) 
Lacomet 12.18: 
One sample of Lacomet 12.18 (La2) was subjected to 1 million stress cycles with a normalized stress 
amplitude of 47.6 MPa. The specimen developed a single crack extending through the bearing material 
and ~30mm along the bonding zone (see Figure 4.8). According to the test data (Appendix D, position 
La2), the actuator’s minimum position dropped abruptly after 720,000 stress cycles, indicating brittle frac-
ture.  
 
Figure 4.8: (Left) Stereo microscope image of a brittle fracture in La2 after 4-point bending. Crack is extending through the bearing material and leftward along the 
bonding zone. (Right) Sketch of La2 with brittle fracture indicated by a red line. 
The fact that La2 fractured after 720,000 stress cycles indicates that some fatigue damage must have 
occurred in the sample leading to the fracture. The sample was sectioned according to  Figure 4.9 to expose 
the fractured surface. This surface was examined with Stereo Microscopy  and SEM (see Figure 4.10) 
 
Figure 4.9: Sketch showing the sectioning of La2 (green line) and the brittle fracture (red line). After sectioning, the fractured surface (red arrow) was exposed in the 
smaller matchstick-shaped sample  
 
2mm
==PAGE:25==
Jonathan Dahl Meier 
 
Fatigue of bearing materials  
 25 
Figure 4.10a shows the fractured surface of La2 through a stereo microscope (surface is indicated by a red 
arrow in ﬁgre 4.9). It is characterized by a rough, irregular texture, indicative of brittle fracture. 
Additionally, ridges appear to emanate from the top left corner, suggesting this as the crack initiation site. 
In the same corner, a topographically distinct zone extends approximately 100 µm from the corner (see 
Figure 4.10b). A smaller area within this zone, captured at higher magniﬁcation, reveals a rippled texture 
(see Figure 4.10c). Given that the specimen was subjected to cyclic loading, it is plausible that these ripples 
are fatigue striations. If so, this would suggest a critical crack length of roughly 100 µm at 47.6 MPa, which 
is relevant information for bearing design, speciﬁcally following a yield-before-fracture strategy (Ashby, 
2007), where the coating thickness is kept below the critical crack length. Supporting this interpretation, 
the ripple spacing is ~1 µm, consistent with typical fatigue striation spacing (McEvily, 2010). However, 
the pattern deviates a lot from textbook examples, and the assumption remains doubtful. Further tests are 
required to verify the assumption. 
 
Figure 4.10: (a) Stereo microscope image showing the fractured surface of La2. The rough surface exhibits ridges pointing to the top left corner, indicative of brittle 
fracture originating from this location. (b) Zoomed-in SEM micrograph from the top left corner of the fractured surface, as indicated by a red rectangle. A 
topographically distinct zone extends approximately 100 µm from the corner. (c) Zoomed-in SEM micrograph from the topographically distinct zone, indicated by a 
blue rectangle, revealing a rippled texture. 
a
b
c
==PAGE:26==
Jonathan Dahl Meier 
 
Fatigue of bearing materials  
 26 
La4 was subjected to a slightly lower normalized stress amplitude of 42.7 Mpa for 2 million stress cycles, 
and did not fracture. Figure 4.11 (left) presents a LOM mosaics showing the coating of La4. No fatigue 
damage is visible in the mosaic. Throughout the bearing material, clusters of pits were observed (see Figure 
4.11). While not directly associated with any observed fatigue damage, pits may act as crack initiation sites 
(Callister, 2014) and are therefore expected to reduce fatigue strength. 
 
Figure 4.11: (left) LOM mosaic of a La4, showing no visible fatigue damage. (right) Zoomed-in LOM image, as indicated by a red rectangle, revealing several 
closely spaced pores within the bearing material. 
AlSn40: 
One sample of AlSn40 (Al2) was fatigue tested at a normalized stress amplitude of 136.8 MPa. This am-
plitude is remarkably higher than the amplitudes applied to the other materials in this study. However, 
no clear fatigue cracks were found in the sample using LOM and SEM.  
In Al2, one crack was found correlating with a bump in the surface (see Figure 4.12). Supposedly, in the 
grinding process, SiC from the grinding paper was pushed into the surface, deforming the bearing mate-
rial and causing the top 50µm of the surface to fracture. Despite being unrelated to fatigue, the site is 
convenient to study cracks in AlSn40.  
 
Figure 4.12: (a) SEM micrograph of Al2 showing a crack coinciding with a bump in the surface. Adjecent to the crack tip, a layer of fractured Sn-islands is 
indicated by red arrows. (b) Zoomed-in SEM micrograph, indicated by a brown rectangle, showing a Sn-island exhibiting fractures in multiple directions. 
a
b
==PAGE:27==
Jonathan Dahl Meier 
 
Fatigue of bearing materials  
 27 
Next to the crack tip, a layer was found containing multiple cracked Sn-islands, marked by red arrows in 
Figure 4.12a. One of these Sn-islands was examined at higher magniﬁcation, revealing many cracks with 
diﬀerent orientations (see Figure 4.12b). Possibly, when the surface fractured, the top ~50 µm layer slid 
slightly, crushing the Sn-islands in the process. No cracks were observed in the surrounding Al matrix.   
 
Figure 4.13: SEM micrographs showing Sn-islands from four diﬀerent samples of AlSn40 subjected to 4-point bending at various normalized stress amplitudes. 
None of the Sn-islands show any signs of fatigue 
The Sn-islands in AlSn40 consist of β-Sn, the same phase as the matrix in HM07, which was shown above 
to be susceptible to fatigue. Therefore, it is reasonable to speculate whether fatigue in AlSn40 may manifest 
as a gradual deterioration of the Sn-islands. Near-surface Sn-islands from four diﬀerent AlSn40 samples 
were examined for cracks. Despite a wide range of applied stress amplitudes, no signiﬁcant diﬀerences 
were observed, refuting the idea of Sn-island degradation (see Figure 4.13). This conclusion is further 
supported, when comparing to the clearly deteriorated Sn-island in Figure 4.12. 
0 MPa
158.4 MPa
206.0 MPa
250.7 MPa
==PAGE:28==
Jonathan Dahl Meier 
 
Fatigue of bearing materials  
 28 
5 Discussion 
5.1 Material fatigue comparison 
The results of this study show, that HM07, Lacomet 12.18 and AlSn40 react very diﬀerently to 4-point 
bending. HM07 was, by far, most susceptible to fatigue damage. The bearing material exhibited clearly 
visible cracks after only 200,000 stress cycles at a normalized stress amplitude of 89.7 MPa. Further sup-
porting the claim, a previous study on 4-point bending of HM07 showed that fatigue damage could be 
induced at a normalized stress amplitude of only 57 MPa (Meier, 2024).  
Lacomet 12.18 (with more Cu and Sb as compared to HM07) was subjected to a normalized stress 
amplitude of 47.6 Mpa, with no clear sign of fatigue after 2,000,000 stress cycles. Although this amplitude 
is smaller than the amplitude nescessary to induce fatigue to HM07, Lacomet 12.18 may tolerate much 
higher amplitudes because: 
• Fatigue testing above this amplitude was not possible without brittle fracture (see section 4.2), but 
in terms of fatigue, Lacomet 12.18 may tolerate even higher amplitudes. 
• Lacomet 12.18 had a coating thickness more than twice that of HM07, which may have 
signiﬁcantly increased the surface stress. As suggested in Section 3.2, this could result in a 44% 
increase, raising the normalized stress amplitude to 68.5 MPa. 
Therefore, it is a reasonable assumption, that fatigue strength of white metals may be enhanced by adding 
more Cu and Sb. AlSn40 was subjected to a normalized stress amplitude of 136.8 MPa, and no cracks 
were observed after 1,500,000 stress cycles. Hence, AlSn40 clearly outperforms both HM07 and Lacomet 
12.18 in terms of fatigue strength.  
The observed fatigue performance of HM07 and AlSn40 closely reﬂects typical behaviors from industrial 
applications. Numerous failure analysis reports of HM07 bearings (Everllence, 2025) have shown that 
fatigue failure is the predominant failure mode for this bearing material, which is well reﬂected by its poor 
fatigue performance under 4-point bending. On the other hand, fatigue failure of AlSn40 bearings is not 
widely reported, which is well reﬂected in its excellent fatigue performance under 4-point bending.  
5.2 Vertical crack propagation   
This section compares the theoretical stress concentrations of hydrodynamic oil pressure and 4-point 
bending and discusses the eﬀects on crack propagation. 
==PAGE:29==
Jonathan Dahl Meier 
 
Fatigue of bearing materials  
 29 
In 4-point bending, the steel bearing shell is deﬂected which allows the forces to concentrate at the crack 
tip (see Figure 5.1b). As a result, stress concentration increase with the crack length. 
In working bearings, crack propagation is supposedly driven by hydrodynamic oil pressure acting on the 
inner walls of a crack (see section 2.2). Pressure is the result of many small force components acting 
uniformly over a surface. Figure 5.1a illustrates two of such components, acting on the crack walls with a 
distance to the crack tip. Because the bearing material is ﬁxed by the steel bearing shell, these force com-
ponents must elastically deform the red region, before they can generate stress at the crack tip. Conse-
quently, the greater the distance between the force component and the crack tip, the lower the stress 
generated at the crack tip. This eﬀect reduces the stress concentration of hydrodynamic oil pressure. 
 
Figure 5.1: (a) Sketch of hydrodynamic oil pressure acting on the walls of a crack, illustrating how elastic deformation of the bearing material is necessary to generate 
stress at the crack tip. (b) Sketch of 4-point bending, showing the deﬂected steel bearing shell and the resulting stress concentration at the crack tip. 
In another study, an alternative method was used for fatigue testing bearing materials (Carstensen, 2025). 
This method, known as the Koring Method, applies ﬂuctuating oil pressure to the bearing material by 
means of a loaded rotating pad embedded in an oil bath (Carstensen, 2025). Interestingly, the study man-
aged to induce fatigue damage in Lacomet 12.18, possibly due to the above-mentioned eﬀect.  
The high stress concentrations inherent in 4-point bending may also inﬂuence the crack propagation rate 
i.e. as a crack propagates, stress intensiﬁes at the crack tip, accelerating its propagation. This could explain 
why, cracks in HM07 tended to propagate rapidly once initiated (see section 4.2). Therefore, crack 
propagation rate may be lower for ﬂuctuating hydrodynamic oil pressure. 
b
Oil film
Deformed region
a
Steel bearing shell
==PAGE:30==
Jonathan Dahl Meier 
 
Fatigue of bearing materials  
 30 
5.3 Bonding zone fatigue 
This section presents a comparison of hydrodynamic oil pressure and 4-point bending, focusing 
speciﬁcally on bonding zone fatigue of HM07 
In working engine bearings subjected to hydrodynamic oil pressure, after coinciding with the steel bearing 
shell, cracks continue to propagate along the bonding zone (see Section 2.2). At this stage, the oil pressure 
is redirected and can therefore continue to promote crack propagation. This mechanism is evident from a 
conﬁdential failure analysis report of an HM07 marine engine bearing (Everllence, 2019), where fatigue 
led to the spallation of a large patch of bearing material from the bearing shell (see Figure 5.2a & 5.2b). 
Adjacent to the spallation crater, a light gray area was identiﬁed (see Figure 5.2b). The bearing was 
sectioned through the grey area (indicated by the red line ‘M3’ in Figure 5.2b), and investigated with LOM 
(see Figure 5.2c). It appears that oil had penetrated the coating at three diﬀerent locations (marked with 
blue arrows in ﬁgure 5.2c), from where it reached the steel bearing shell, and promoted crack propagation 
along the bonding zone. 
 
Figure 5.2: (a) Photograph of an HM07 bearing failed due to fatigue. (b) Zoomed-in photograph, indicated by a red rectangle, showing a spallation crater and a 
neighboring white area (c) LOM image of a cross-section through the white area, as indicated by the red line ‘M3’ in Figure b, showing cracks extending though the 
bearing material and continuing along the bonding zone. (Adapted from: Everllence 2019) 
In Figure 5.3a, a crack induced by 4-point bending extends through the bearing material and terminates at 
the steel bearing shell. This crack closely resembles the one in Figure 5.3b, which was induced in a working 
bearing by ﬂuctuating hydrodynamic oil pressure, suggesting a similar propagation path under the two 
conditions. However, in the bonding zone, fatigue is only clearly visible in Figure 5.3b. 
a
b
c
==PAGE:31==
Jonathan Dahl Meier 
 
Fatigue of bearing materials  
 31 
 
Figure 5.3: Side-by-side comparison of: (a) LOM image showing a crack in an HM07 sample subjected to 4-point bending. Crack terminates at the bonding zone. 
(b) LOM image showing a crack in an HM07 bearing failed due to fatigue. Upon reaching the bonding zone, the crack continues along it (Everllence, 2019). 
A higher magniﬁcation LOM image of a crack induced by 4-point bending reveals fatigue damage in the 
bonding zone, manifested as a distinct pattern of multiple smaller inclined cracks near the bonding zone, 
marked by red arrows in Figure 5.4. 
 
Figure 5.4: 2 LOM images showing cracks in HM07 subjected to 4-point bending. Near the bonding zone, multiple smaller inclined cracks are visible, indicated 
by red arrows. 
 
A sequence of steps is proposed in Figure 5.5 to explain the observed crack pattern. Figure 5.5a shows the 
moment after a crack has reached the steel substrate. The stress vectors are inclined at roughly 45°, 
implying that cracks are likely to propagate as shown in Figure 5.5b. The process then repeats, as depicted 
in Figures 5.5c and 5.5d, resulting in the formation of multiple small, inclined cracks, as those observed in 
Figure 5.4.  
100µm
a
b
==PAGE:32==
Jonathan Dahl Meier 
 
Fatigue of bearing materials  
 32 
 
Figure 5.5: Proposed sequence of bonding zone fatigue from 4-point bending. (a) When a crack reaches the steel bearing shell, stress concentrations in the bearing 
material are highest at a ~45° angle (b) Inclined cracks form where the stress concentrations are highest  (c) Stress concentrations redistribute (d) New inclined 
cracks form where the stress concentrations are highest. 
In Figure 5.4, the fatigue damage in the bonding zone of a sample subjected to 2×10⁶ stress cycles, at the 
maximum stress amplitude achievable in 4-point bending, extended only ~50 µm from the point of inter-
section with the bonding zone. This distance is signiﬁcantly smaller than the distance observed in a sample 
subjected to ﬂuctuating hydrodynamic oil pressure (see Figure 5.3c), where the crack extends at least 2 
mm from the point of intersection with the bonding zone. 
The average spacing between cracks in Figure 4.5 (500,000 stress cycles) is approximately 3 mm. Conse-
quently, two cracks would need to propagate 1.5 mm along the bonding zone to meet. (This appears to be 
a criterion for bearing material spallation, as any bonding between the bearing material and the steel bear-
ing shell would hold the bearing material in place). This distance is 30 times greater than the length of the 
fatigue damage observed in Figure 5.4. Therefore, assuming a steady propagation rate, spallation would 
occur after 30×2×10⁶ stress cycles (about 70 days at 10 Hz), making the method unfeasible for inducing 
spallation. 
Furthermore, it seems from Figure 5.4, that a gap remains between the small, inclined cracks, which would 
also hold the bearing material in place, thus hindering spallation of the bearing material. 
In summary, it is unlikely that 4-point bending can induce any spallation of the bearing material, and thus, 
the method can only cover the initial stages of bearing fatigue. 
 
a
b
c
d
==PAGE:33==
Jonathan Dahl Meier 
 
Fatigue of bearing materials  
 33 
5.4 Sources of Error 
Surface roughness obscuring crack quantity result 
In Section 4.2, cracks were counted in LOM mosaics of HM07. Here, the surface roughness of the samples 
was limited by what could be achieved through pendulum grinding. Although pendulum grinding pro-
duced a ﬁner surface than what could be achieved with a cut-oﬀ machine, it was often ambiguous whether 
the observed cracks were real or merely surface artefacts. Consequently, the reported crack quantity may 
be inaccurate. 
True R-value  
Generally, for testing purposes, to optimize the chance of fatigue damage occurring within a reasonable 
time frame, the maximum stress should be at least 60% of material yield strength (Jordaan, 2018). In fact, 
in a previous study of 4-point bending of HM07, 106% of material yield strength was necessary to induce 
fatigue damage within 2×106 stress cycles (Meier, 2024). For this reason, the fatigue tests of the present 
study were conducted with a maximum stress beyond the material yield strength. This caused plastic de-
formation of the bearing material, which has implications for the stress conditions. 
 
Figure 5.6: Stress–strain curve of the bearing material under 4-point bending. The dotted line represents the curve after plastic deformation of the steel bearing shell. 
Assuming the bearing material deforms plastically under maximum load while the steel bearing shell re-
mains elastic, the elastic recovery of the steel will induce compressive stress in the bearing material. This 
eﬀect is illustrated in the stress-strain curve in Figure 5.6. Following plastic deformation of the bearing 
material, the stress will ﬂuctuate along the dotted line, alternating between compression and tension. As a 
result, the R value becomes negative.  
Elastic recovery of steel pulls the 
bearing material into compression
흐
흈
==PAGE:34==
Jonathan Dahl Meier 
 
Fatigue of bearing materials  
 34 
6 Conclusions 
 
In this study, samples of HM07, Lacomet 12.18, and AlSn40 were subjected to 4-point bending at various 
stress amplitudes and numbers of stress cycles, and investigated using stereo microscopy, LOM, SEM, and 
EDS. 
Sample preparation of bearing materials was challenging due to large hardness diﬀerences between matrix 
and particles. As a result, the intermetallic particles in HM07 and Lacomet 12.18 fractured during sample 
preparation. Also, the microstructure of AlSn40 experienced substantial plastic deformation from a 
ploughing eﬀect. 
In HM07, cracks initiated after approximately 200,000 stress cycles at a normalized stress amplitude of 
89.7 MPa. Once initiated, the cracks propagated rapidly through the bearing material.  The number of 
cracks increased linearly with the number of applied stress cycles. Hard intermetallic particles in HM07 
were shown to cause crack branching, which likely inhibit crack propagation. 
In Lacomet 12.18 the concentrations of Cu and Sb is increased as compared to HM07. This resulted in 
enlarged SbSn particles, an increase in the amount of Cu6Sn5, and an introduction of Cu₃Sn into the mi-
crostructure. This appears to improve the fatigue strength. However, excessive intermetallic particles cause 
embrittlement of white metals. Consequently, 4-point bending of Lacomet 12.18 resulted in brittle fracture 
rather than fatigue, raising concern for its application in engine bearings. 
AlSn40 outperformed both HM07 and Lacomet 12.18. Despite being exposed to signiﬁcantly higher stress 
amplitudes, the Al-matrix and the soft Sn-islands remained intact, showing no visible signs of fatigue 
damage or fracture. 
The yield strength of the underlying steel bearing shell sets a limit to the achievable stress amplitude of 4-
point bending. All three bearing materials were tested to this limit, yet fatigue damage was only observed 
in HM07. 
4-point bending proved useful for studying fatigue in bearing materials. Fatigue performance of HM07 
and AlSn40 reﬂected typical fatigue behaviour seen in the industry. Cracks in HM07 looked similar to 
cracks formed in bearings subjected to ﬂuctuating hydrodynamic oil pressure. However, bonding zone 
fatigue observed in HM07 subjected to 4-point bending extended only a very short distance, suggesting 
==PAGE:35==
Jonathan Dahl Meier 
 
Fatigue of bearing materials  
 35 
that the method cannot induce bearing material spallation. Thus, 4-point bending cannot provide a 
complete picture of bearing fatigue. 
7 Outlook 
 
In section 5.2, stress concentrations during hydrodynamic oil pressure were discussed. A useful next step 
would be to derive an equation for crack-tip stress as a function of crack length. Here, ﬁnite element 
method (FEM) simulations could serve as a tool to calculate the stress ﬁeld around the crack tip for dif-
ferent crack lengths, providing data necessary to ﬁt or derive that mathematical function. 
The double-layer structure of the bearings, consisting of shell and coating, complicated the stress analysis. 
FEM could be used, as an additional method to verify the stress analysis of this study. 
Section 5.4 examined whether plastic deformation of the bearing material may have resulted in a negative 
R value. This may be veriﬁed using digital image correlation (DIC), which could track plastic strain in the 
bearing material during 4-point bending. 
In Section 4.2, it was suggested that intermetallic particles may inhibit crack propagation by causing 
branching. However, as this observation was based on a single case, additional examples must be examined 
to assess whether it is a common phenomenon rather than a random occurrence. This would also clarify 
whether the mechanism is speciﬁc to Cu6Sn5 or applies to all hard particles. 
It would be interesting to study crack branches through serial sectioning, revealing the three-dimensional 
shape of both the branch and the particle responsible for it. This could help clarify how particle shape 
relates to the depth and width of the branches. 
The method of applying a ﬁxed stress amplitude while varying the number of cycles provided some insight 
into fatigue evolution. However, greater accuracy could be achieved by performing short-interval inter-
rupted tests and observing the behaviour of individual cracks between intervals. As reported in Section 
4.2, fatigue damage in HM07 occurred between 100,000 and 200,000 cycles. Using the same parameters, 
interrupted testing could be conducted within this range, for example at 110,000, 120,000, and 130,000 
cycles. Since samples cannot be sectioned between interrupted fatigue tests, the possibilities for sample 
preparation are greatly limited. Therefore, SEM with BSE is recommended, as it is less sensitive to surface 
roughness. 
==PAGE:36==
Jonathan Dahl Meier 
 
Fatigue of bearing materials  
 36 
References 
Challen, B. & Baranescu, R., 1999. Diesel Engine Reference Book, Chapter 13: Bearings and bearing metals. Butter-
worth-Heinemann Ltd, pp.330–345. 
Koring, R., 2003. Improved bearing alloy – a contribution toward environmental protection. Texas A&M University, 
Turbomachinery Laboratories, pp.85–89. 
Klit, P., Persson, S. & Vølund, A., 2013. Testing of bearing materials for large two-stroke marine diesel engines. 
Pprime Workshop: Solutions for performance improvement and friction reduction of journal and thrust 
bearings, pp.1–13. 
Callister, W.D. & Rethwisch, D.G., 2014. Materials Science and Engineering. 9th ed. John Wiley & Sons, 
pp.252–291. 
Porter, D., Easterling, K.E. & Sherif, M., 2022. Phase Transformations in Metals and Alloys. 4th ed. CRC Press, 
pp.205–210. 
Jordaan, J., 2018. Four-point bending fatigue test specimen design by FEA. Journal of the South African Institution 
of Mechanical Engineering, 34, pp.1–8. 
Ashby, M., Shercliﬀ, H. & Cebon, D., 2007. Materials: Engineering, Science, Processing and Design. 3rd ed. But-
terworth-Heinemann, pp.226–233. 
McEvily, A.J. & Matsunaga, H., 2010. On fatigue striations. Scientia Iranica, Transaction B: Mechanical En-
gineering, 18(1). Sharif University of Technology, pp.80–81. 
Hibbeler, R.C., 2024. Statics and Mechanics of Materials. 5th ed. Prentice Hall, pp. 120-122  
Carstensen, J.V., 2025. Measuring fatigue properties of bearing materials. Presentation at Danish Metallurgical 
Society. 
Meier, J.D., 2024. Crack formation in bearing materials, pp.1–20. 
International Organization for Standardization, 1995. ISO 7905-1: Plain bearings — Bearing fatigue — Part 1: 
Plain bearings in test rigs and in applications under conditions of hydrodynamic lubrication. pp. 1-5 
==PAGE:37==
Jonathan Dahl Meier 
 
Fatigue of bearing materials  
 37 
International Organization for Standardization, 1995. ISO 7905-2: Plain bearings — Bearing fatigue — Part 2: 
Test with a cylindrical specimen of a metallic bearing material. pp. 1-2 
International Organization for Standardization, 1995. ISO 7905-3: Plain bearings — Bearing fatigue — Part 3: 
Test on plain strips of a metallic multilayer bearing material. pp. 1-2 
International Organization for Standardization, 1995. ISO 7905-4: Plain bearings — Bearing fatigue — Part 4: 
Tests on half-bearings of a metallic multilayer bearing material. pp. 1-2 
Leng, Y., Zhang, W., & Han, B., 2008. Materials Characterization: Introduction to Microscopic and Spectroscopic 
Methods. John Wiley & Sons, pp.1–6 & 121–132. 
Everllence, 2019. Failure analysis report on HM07 coating. Internal document [Conﬁdential – not publicly 
available]. 
Metatek Engineering, 2025. White metal bearing: Beneﬁts, applications, and repair techniques. Available at: 
https://metatekeng.com/white-metal-bearing-beneﬁts-applications-and-repair/ [Accessed 14 Aug. 2025]. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:38==
Jonathan Dahl Meier 
 
Fatigue of bearing materials  
 38 
Appendix 
Appendix A 
Method for calculating the corrected distance 𝒅corrected, as used in Section 2.4 
Two small lengths m and n should be added to the distance between the centers of the rollers d 
 
d,-../,0/1 = d + m + n 
Realizing that m and n are the sides of two small triangles that are congruent with the larger triangles 
drawn in the Figure below, m and n may be expressed as: 
 
m =
.#
.$ ∙ k  
 
 
 
n =
.%
.%I.& ∙ l 
d
m
n
dcorrected
r1
k
l
r2
r3
r4
m
n
==PAGE:39==
Jonathan Dahl Meier 
 
Fatigue of bearing materials  
 39 
Appendix B 
Images of the experimental 4-point bending setup used for fatigue testing 
 
 
==PAGE:40==
Jonathan Dahl Meier 
 
Fatigue of bearing materials  
 40 
Appendix C 
Overview of test runs and summary of tests 
 
==PAGE:41==
Jonathan Dahl Meier 
 
Fatigue of bearing materials  
 41 
Appendix D 
Data from test runs (x-axis showing stress cycle / 1000) 
 
 
 
(Note: La2 was subjected to 500,000 stress cycles prior to the test above) 
 
 
2
2.5
3
1
10
19
28
37
46
55
64
73
82
91
100
109
118
127
136
Vertical position of actuator 
[mm] (test run 17)
Max position
Min position
-12000
-10000
-8000
-6000
-4000
-2000
0
1
12
23
34
45
56
67
78
89
100
111
122
133
144
Force applied [N] (test run 17)
Max load
Min load
-31.6
-31.58
-31.56
-31.54
-31.52
-31.5
1
10
19
28
37
46
55
64
73
82
91
100
109
118
127
136
Rotational position of actuator 
(test run 17)
Max rotation
Min rotation
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
1
35
69
103
137
171
205
239
273
307
341
375
409
443
477
Vertical position of actuator 
[mm] (test run 27)
Max position
Min Position
==PAGE:42==
Jonathan Dahl Meier 
 
Fatigue of bearing materials  
 42 
Appendix E 
Method for calculating the distance to the neutral axis 𝒚 (as described in section 2.4) 
When calculating the x-coordinate for the center of gravity of a body composed of two parts with diﬀerent 
masses, the following equation is used: 
𝑥cg = 𝑚K𝑥K + 𝑚4𝑥4
𝑚K + 𝑚4
 
𝑚K, 𝑚4 are the masses of the two bodies, and 𝑥K, 𝑥4 are the x-coordinates of their individual centers of 
gravity. 
The same method was applied to estimate the x-coordinate of the neutral axis of a composite beam, where 
the mass terms are replaced with the moduli of elasticity. The x-coordinate 𝑥 and the distance to the 
neutral axis 𝑦 are essentially the same geometric measure, and 𝑥 may therefore be substituted with 𝑦. 
 
𝑦= 𝐸K𝑥K + 𝐸4𝑥4
𝐸K + 𝐸4
 
 
In the case of Lacomet 12.18: 
 
𝑦=
57 ⋅L13 + 3.32
2 O + 210 ⋅L13 −3.32
2 O
57 + 210
= 6.94 
 
