==PAGE:1==
Integration of 3D leaky optical waveguides
in optoelectronic platform
Master Thesis
DTU Nanolab
National Centre for NanoFabrication and Characterization
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Integration of 3D leaky optical waveguides in optoelectronic platform
Master Thesis
July, 2025
By
Ida Kofoed Hvidsten
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title,
etc.
Cover photo:
Published by:
DTU, National Centre for NanoFabrication and Characterization, Ørsteds
Plads, Building 347, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.nanolab.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Section for DTU Nanolab, National
Center for Nanofabrication and Characterisation at the Technical University of Denmark,
DTU, for the degree Master of Engineering in Physics and Nanotechnology.
Ida Kofoed Hvidsten - s194096
Signature
Date
ii
Integration of 3D leaky optical waveguides in optoelectronic platform
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This Master Thesis was completed by Ida Kofoed Hvidsten as the final examination to
attain 30 ECTS and complete the M.Sc. in engineering in Physics and Nanotechnology at
the Technical University of Denmark(DTU). This project was carried out in the BIOMIC
group at DTU Nanolab over five months, going from 28 February 2025 to 28 July 2025.
The micro-fabrication work was carried out at the clean room facilities of DTU Nanolab.
AI was used in the correction of this thesis.
Integration of 3D leaky optical waveguides in optoelectronic platform
iii
==PAGE:6==
Abstract
This thesis presents the development of a 3D opto-electronic platform combining pyrol-
ysed carbon electrodes and SU-8 optical waveguides, with the goal of enabling future
applications such as neural stimulation and disease modelling.
The carbon electrodes are fabricated using projection micro-stereolithography, printed
directly onto an SU-8 coated SiO2 substrate, and subsequently pyrolysed in a high-
temperature inert atmosphere to convert the polymer structures into conductive carbon.
Challenges during the printing process—such as poor adhesion and detachment—were re-
solved by optimizing exposure settings, improving chip mounting, and ensuring membrane
stability throughout printing and pyrolysis.
SU-8 was employed to form optical waveguides through drop-casting and UV lithography.
Air bubbles trapped inside the 3D electrode structures inhibited proper exposure. Vacuum
degassing before the soft bake stage helped displace these bubbles, improving waveguide
formation. Both SU-8 2035 and lower-viscosity SU-8 2005 were tested to evaluate differ-
ences in flow and coating behaviour.
The final integrated device combines vertical SU-8 waveguides embedded within the pyrol-
ysed carbon electrodes. Optical testing using a bottom mounted LED showed successful
light transmission through the SU-8 waveguides, with minimal scattering, even for struc-
tured or angled structures.
Overall, this thesis demonstrates a viable fabrication process for producing an opto-
electronic platform that will be suitable for modelling Parkinson’s disease.
iv
Integration of 3D leaky optical waveguides in optoelectronic platform
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
Thanks to my supervisor Stephan Keller for his help and support during this project. I
would also like to thank Samuel Maraschin for his support during the experimental work.
I want to thank all members of the BIOMIC group at DTU Nanolab for discussions and
ideas on how to commence my work. As well as the fun Friday lunches, with a welcoming
atmosphere.
I want to thank my family for supporting me and being ready with a hug at any time
during this project.
Finally, I thank everyone at DTU Nanolab for processing information, equipment training
and general help inside the cleanroom.
Integration of 3D leaky optical waveguides in optoelectronic platform
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Integration of 3D leaky optical waveguides in optoelectronic platform
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Approval
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Preface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background and Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Project objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Design
4
3
Methods and Theory
8
3.1
3D printing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.2
Pyrolysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.3
Lithography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.4
SU-8 photo-lithography
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.5
SU-8 for waveguide purposes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.6
Characterisation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4
Electrode fabrication by 3D printing and pyrolysis
17
4.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.2
3D printing and pyrolysis on Si chip
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.3
Optimization of the feet length of the Kelvin cells
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.4
3D print on fused silica nanograss chip . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.5
3D printing on a SU-8 base layer chip
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.6
Printing discussion and conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5
Fabrication of SU-8 waveguide
32
5.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.2
Fabrication of test chips . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.3
Setup for UV-exposure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.4
SU-8 base plate layer fabrication
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.5
Initial testing for fabricating a waveguide
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.6
Results from recipe testing of SU-8 waveguides
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.7
Influence of the exposure setup on the waveguide fabrication
. . . . . . . .
39
5.8
Exposure at an angle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.9
Testing on pyrolysed SU-8 baseplate. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.10 Waveguide discussion and conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
6
The combination of electrode and waveguide, opto-electronic platform
46
6.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
6.2
Printing challenges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
6.3
Air bubbles and vacuum . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
6.4
Full process for the opto-electronic platform . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
6.5
LED optical tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
6.6
discussion and conclusion for final combination of waveguide and electrode
53
Integration of 3D leaky optical waveguides in optoelectronic platform
vii
==PAGE:10==
7
Conclusion
55
7.1
Outlook . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
Bibliography (All websites visited 28/7/2025)
56
A Appendix
59
A.1 Appendix A: Process flows . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
A.2 Appendix B: Alignment image, larger version . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
viii
Integration of 3D leaky optical waveguides in optoelectronic platform
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
1.1
Background and Motivation
The neurological condition Parkinson disease affects an estimated 7-10 million people
worldwide and 12000 in Denmark. This is a disease that mostly affect elderly over 60 years
but can also affect younger people. Parkinson disease is characterized by the degradation
of brain cells in a deep part of the brain called substantia nigra, especially the neurons
that contain and send out dopamine to different parts of the brain. [1]
This affect the patients both physically and psychologically as the dopamine is necessary
for signalling in the brain. Common symptoms include tremors and loss of motoric func-
tions. There is also psychic symptoms as depression and slow thoughts. The diagnostic is
made on the background of the physical symptoms and is often hard to diagnose at the
early start. The starting symptoms often are tiredness and less stable and slower move-
ments and walk. Later the more well-known symptoms of tremors in the hands appear
and the diagnosis is given. [2]
There is currently no cure for Parkinson disease and the reason for the disease is unknown.
The treatment is a symptomatic treatment for the dopamine deficient that is personalised
for each patient. Currently there are two types of symptomatic treatment: medicine or
surgery. There is different types of medicine, the most common is called levodopa, that is a
medicine that brakes down into dopamine in the brain and replaces the missing dopamine.
However oral medicine is not very effective at targeting a specific part of the brain. More
localised treatment would be an improvement. [2]
If the medicine options are not working effectively and often medicine becomes less effective
over time. The current alternative option is an implantation of electrode into the inner
part of the brain. This process is called deep brain stimulation. The electric signals from
the electrode dampens the physical symptoms.. Brain surgery is inherently high risk and
is a last resort. [2]
Therefore there is a strong need for more research into understanding the Parkinson disease
and how the disease affects the brain.
The current research concerns how to treat Parkinson disease using modified stem cells.
These stem cells are transplanted into the patient’s brain to replace the damaged cells to
produce the missing dopamine. They need to be modified so they can be activated when
there is a need for dopamine.[3]
The research into the underlying causes of Parkinson disease creates a demand for an
ex-vivo brain model that can mimic the real brain. OPENMIND is a research project into
how to create a in vitro opto-electronic brain model for disease modelling with organoids
(mini brain organs) on electrodes with a fluid microchannel between two organoids to
study the dopamine exchange between brain organoids [3].
An image of this brain model can be seen in figure 1.1. The model is made up from two
areas, each with a specific brain organoid on an opto-electronic platform, as shown in
the figure. The left organoid represent the cells in the ventral midbrain (VM) and the
right represent the striatum (STR). Both represent a crucial role in the motoric control.
The ventral midbrain contain the dopaminergic neurons that send out dopamine and the
striatum receives dopamine.
In the model between the two organoids there is a fluid
Integration of 3D leaky optical waveguides in optoelectronic platform
1
==PAGE:12==
channel where the two organoids can connect and the VM cell can send dopamine to the
STR cell.
Figure 1.1: Concept illustration of the full brain model. On the left is the brain organoid
of the ventral midbrain and to the right the model for the striatum. Under the brain
organoids is the opto-electronic platform. Illustration made by Samuel Tavares da Silva
Maraschin.[3].
An important part of the research into treating Parkinson via stem cells is opto-genetics.
This a method that combines optics and genetics and concerns how to use light to control
the activity of neurons. This is a more specific way to stimulate the neuron than the
electric impulses in current brain implants. [4].
The neurons are genetically altered to have light sensitive proteins called opsins that are
typically found in bacteria and algae. These opsins are sensitive to blue light and this
can be applied to activate the neurons. The light can be used to trigger dopamine release
from the cells [4].
Under the VM organoid opto-electronic structures are placed. These structures can send
the blue light into the organoid via waveguides to stimulated the modified stem cells. They
also measure if the organoid release dopamine due to the blue light using the electrodes.
[3].
Figure 1.2: Illustration of the opto-electrode.
The aim for this thesis is developing a process for integrating optical waveguides into
3D pyrolysed structures. A figure of this final design is shown in figure 1.2. The figure
shows a model electrode, that is a combination of a 2D base layer and 3D hollow grey
structures on top. Inside the 3D part of the electrode are the white waveguides for the
light transmittance into the brain organoid.
The 3D structure enables measurements deeper into the brain organoid and measures
2
Integration of 3D leaky optical waveguides in optoelectronic platform
==PAGE:13==
directly where the light affect the cell. This electrode design will also increase the surface
area when going from a 2D electrode to a 3D electrode. When the light-way is integrated
into the electrode, the electrode will be measuring very precisely at the affected area.
To be able to make the opto-electronic platform the first step is to 3D print the electrode
in resin and pyrolyse the resin to carbon to make it electric conductive.
The optical
waveguide is fabricated using lithography on a photoresist. The resist is exposed through
a hole in the baseplate that defines the waveguide. These steps are illustrated in figure
1.3, showing the important steps in the fabrication flow.
Figure 1.3: Illustration of the fabrication steps of the opto-electronic platform. Step 1:
fabricate base layer on a SiO2 substrate. Step 2: Print the 3D structure. Step 3: Pyrolyse
the resin. Step 4: Drop cast SU-8 on electrode. Step 5: Backside flood exposure of the
SU-8. Step 6: The finished opto-electronic platform.
1.2
Project objectives
The main objectives for this thesis is:
• 1) Fabrication of 3D pyrolytic carbon electrodes on transparent fused silica sub-
strates.
• 2) Integration and testing of waveguide structures inside the 3D electrodes.
• 3) Modification of existing cleanroom process flow for fabrication of the optoelec-
tronic platform with integrated 3D leaky optical waveguides and electrodes.
This thesis is divided into three parts, the first part concerning the 3D printing and
pyrolysing of the electrodes. The second part is the waveguide fabrication and the third
part is the combination of these two fabrication processes. The process flow for these were
developed and evolved throughout the project to create the final opto-electronic platform.
Integration of 3D leaky optical waveguides in optoelectronic platform
3
==PAGE:14==
2
Design
For the design of the electrode, the most important ability is need for stability during
pyrolysis, which means that it must be mechanical stable during shrinkage. The Kelvin
cell structure is a stable structure [5].
Kelvin cell is the name of the structure that comprise the electrode.
The Kelvin cell
is a tetrakaidecahedron, which is a 14-sided polyhedron with six square faces and eight
hexagonal faces, [5].
The Kelvin cell design is defined by the side length of the faces which is the same for
all sides of the structure, (see yellow arrow in figure 2.1). The side lengths explored are
100 µm, 200 µm, 300 µm and 400 µm. If the side length is 200 µm, the diameter of the
hexagon face is 346 µm and the height of the Kelvin cell 583 µm. These Kelvin cells can
be stacked on top of each other to create a tower of cells, as seen in figure 1.2. Another
important part of the Kelvin tower electrode is the feet that connect the Kelvin cells to
the baseplate. The feet prevent the cell from shrinking unevenly under the pyrolysis. In
section 4.3 different heights of feet are tested for stability, in this case the parameters
tested are feet with a design height of 150 to 300 µm. For most of the prints 150 µm were
used, this size is shown in figure 2.1 with a blue arrow. The diameter of the side beams of
the Kelvin cell are 60 µm, in order to avoid the structures collapsing. If the diameter were
too large the it could cause degassing issues and too small the structures would collapse
during pyrolysis.
The last part of the electrode is the baseplate that the 3D Kelvin cell structure stands on.
The baseplate thickness is set to 50 µm.
The Kelvin cell towers are placed with approximately 2 mm between them for easier
microscopy of the structures. For the final chip design for the medical experiments, the
goal is to have as many electrodes as close together as possible, this is explored in section
4.5, where the baseplate has holes in a circular pattern close together for packing purposes.
The packing of two different sizes Kelvin cells can be seen in figure 2.2.
For the design of the optical waveguides, the thickness of the waveguide is defined by the
diameter of a hole in the baseplate as the exposure of the material is through this hole.
The height of the waveguide depends both on the thickness and on the exposure dose of
the resist. The hole sizes used are 50 µm, 100 µm, 150 µm and 200 µm, as these waveguides
need to fit between the feet on the electrode design, as shown in figures 2.3 and 2.4. On
these drawings it can be seen that for the smallest Kelvin cells with side length of 100 µm,
only the 50 µm hole fits between the feet. For the 200 µm side length all hole sizes from
50 to 200 µm fit inside the feet design. This will also be the case for Kelvin cells with a
side length of 300 µm or 400 µm.
4
Integration of 3D leaky optical waveguides in optoelectronic platform
==PAGE:15==
Figure 2.1: Illustration of a single Kelvin cell with a side length shown by the yellow arrow.
It is standing on feet with a height shown by the blue arrow. Under the cell is a hole for
the waveguide with a width shown by the orange arrow.
Figure 2.2: Design for tightly packed Kelvin cells. Packing of Kelvin cells on a base plate
for a) side length 100 µm.
b) side length 200 µm and c) side view of the illustration
showing the tightly packed 200 µm Kelvin cell towers.
Integration of 3D leaky optical waveguides in optoelectronic platform
5
==PAGE:16==
Figure 2.3: Design showing the hole sizes compared to the spacing between the feet for
a Kelvin cell width side length 100 µm. The three grey circles shows the sizes of hole
diameter 50 µm, 100 µm and 150 µm.
Figure 2.4: Design showing the hole sizes compared to the spacing between the feet for a
Kelvin cell width side length 200 µm. The four grey circles shows the sizes of hole diameter
50 µm, 100 µm, 150 µm and 200 µm.
The full design is shown in figure 2.5. It is made of two parts, one is a rectangular baseplate
with combinations of Kelvin towers and hole sizes as explained above. On the baseplate in
front of the electrode a label is printed to keep track of the variations. They are labelled
with the hole diameter and the Kelvin side length. For example H15K2 indicates hole
diameter of 150 µm and cell side length of 200 µm, shown in figure 2.1.
Figure 2.5: 3D design of the final full design.
6
Integration of 3D leaky optical waveguides in optoelectronic platform
==PAGE:17==
The other part of the design is two circular baseplates with the packed holes and Kelvin
cells packed tightly.
These match the design for the complete brain model device by
Samuel Maraschin for the two brain organoids for the OPENMIND project, [3].
Integration of 3D leaky optical waveguides in optoelectronic platform
7
==PAGE:18==
3
Methods and Theory
3.1
3D printing
There are multiple types of additive manufacturing (3D printing) and printers that can
print in different materials. The focus in this thesis is the Boston Micro Fabrication: mi-
croArch S240 3D printer. This is a 3D printer that uses Projection micro-stereolithography
to 3D print.
This is a type of resin 3D printing that uses 405 nm UV light to select which parts of a
vat of resin should harden into the desired 3D form. The process of light curing resin is
called photopolymerisation. The resin used is ”BMF HTL-20”, and the resin composition
is:
HTL = Urethane acrylates. The HTL is the UV-curable resin and the 20 reference the
layer resolution in µm it is optimised to.
TPO = Diphenyl-2,4,6-trimethylbenzoyl phosphine oxide. The TPO is the photoinitiator,
that start the reaction when exposed to UV light.
ACMO = Acryloyl morpholine. This a curable monomer.
Tris[2-(acryloyloxy)ethyl] isocyanurate. The cross linking agent. [6] and [7].
The photopolymerisation technique works by projecting a image onto a large container of
resin with a platform. The UV light quickly polymerises a layer of resin on the platform,
that afterwards moves down a predetermined distance and a new image can be projected
into the vat (resin container). This series of images are built up into the desired 3D form
layer by layer [8].
In figure 3.1 the entire printing system is illustrated. On the illustration is the vat that
contain the photoreactive resin. This is placed on a stage that can move in the x and y
direction. Into the vat the platform with a chip on top is submerged and can be moved up
and down into the resin in the z direction. At the top of the vat is a transparent plastic
membrane. Above the vat is a UV projector that projects the image from the computer.
The BMF s240 uses a projection of pixels that are focused onto the surface, where each
pixel is 10 µm. It uses a DLP chip (Digital Light Processing) which is a chip made of
many tiny mirrors, the number of mirrors define the resolution of the projection. [9].
The resolution of the 3D print is in the x and y direction determined by the resolution
of the projection and also the exposure time. For this printer the print field is 1920 x
1080, the number of pixels in each direction. This also defines the maximum printing
area possible in a single exposure (19.2 x 10.8 mm). For a larger print stitching multiple
exposure areas together is possible[9].
In the z direction the resolution is determined by the layer thickness and how thin layer can
be set up. This layer is defined as the distance between the platform and the membrane,
this is shown in figure 3.2b.
The steps of the 3D printing with the s240 printer:
1. Create the 3D design in a CAD program, the program Fusion 360 by Autodesk is
used. (More detailed information in design section 2)
8
Integration of 3D leaky optical waveguides in optoelectronic platform
==PAGE:19==
Figure 3.1: Illustration of the microArch S240 3D printer. Adapted from/created with
inspiration from illustration from the thesis by Swetha Vasudevan Kanakkottu[10].
2. Slice the 3D sketch into a series of pictures to 2D project onto the resin. Here the
layer thickness for the design is defined and this determine the amount of images for
the projector. 5 µm is used for all prints, this is at the lower limit of the printer. The
manufacturer define the resolution as 10-40 µm thickness and the resin used during
this is optimized for 20 µm thick layers [9]. The design is now ready to be printed
3. Initially the chip is mounted on the platform using double sided tape. For rotational
alignment, alignment marks is printed on the platform to ensure the chip is placed
with as little rotation compared to the projection as possible, as the platform can
not adjust rotation.
4. The platform is then screwed into place above the vat of resin, into the holder that
can move in the z direction.
5. Next step is to focus the projected UV on the surface of the chip using a test image,
made up of thin lines. This will move the platform down and it is important that
no resin is flowing on top of the platform. For transparent chips this step requires
extra processing to ensure focus on top of the chip.
6. For the levelling of the platform to make it completely horizontal, a manual adjust-
ment in the x and y direction is necessary. The process uses a inbuilt laser to focus
on the top of the chip and set the distance to zero, then move the platform back
and forth underneath the laser to measure at the edges of the chip and level until
the tilt of the chip is less than 5 µm in difference.
7. The chip is positioned under the projection, ensuring that the design is correctly
placed on the chip and position noted. This is done using a projected image and
Integration of 3D leaky optical waveguides in optoelectronic platform
9
==PAGE:20==
an inbuilt camera in the 3D printer. The printer can move in steps of 1 µm during
this alignment step. This makes it possible to very precisely align the 3D on top of
existing structures on the chip. However rotation can not be adjusted for.
8. Last step concerning platform preparation is to save the height position (z direction)
of the platform and to set the laser to zero on top of the chip. For the later positioning
of the membrane the laser is zero on the chip to use as a reference point. Now the
platform and chip is submersed into the vat of resin.
9. Next step is to install the transparent plastic membrane on top of the vat. The
membrane is placed carefully on top of the vat while making sure no resin end up on
top the membrane. If the membrane is not touching the surfaced of the resin, more
resin is needed.
10. The horizontal levelling of the membrane adjusted until the difference between the
corners is less than 5 µm. Then the centre of the membrane is measured and resin
is added or removed using a pipette until the middle is at the same height as the
corners.
11. The membrane is then moved to a position above the laser zero reference mark from
step 8. The height of the membrane above this zero should be the thickness of the
membrane plus the height of the first layer. This is measured at the middle of the
membrane. The position of the membrane is saved.
12. Last manual process is to move the platform and membrane to the saved positions
and position the setup under the projector at the noted coordinates in step 7. The
printer at this stage is illustrated in figure 3.1
13. Using printing recipe and the first image of the projection slides the printer the
printer is set to print. The printer will print all sliced images in a serie. The print
can now print the resin structure.
14. After the print is finished, the membrane is carefully removed and resin residue on
the membrane drip off into the vat. Here the membrane should be checked for any
print stuck to the membrane. If anything is stuck, the membrane need to be cleaned
before a new print can begin.
15. The platform with the chip is removed from the printer and moved to a special fume
hood for the cleaning. The uncured resin is gently washed of the platform and the
chip using Isopropyl Alcohol (IPA).
16. When the platform is as clean as possible a razor blade is used to very carefully
remove the chip from the platform. Extra care is required with fused silica chips, as
these break very easily. The chip can be placed in a beaker with IPA for some extra
cleaning while the platform has a final clean. The sticky residue from the the tape
on the back side is removed and finally a nitrogen air gun is used for the drying of
the platform.
17. While cleaning the chip, the handling needs to be very careful as the 3D print can
break and fall off if touched. The backside of the chip can be carefully wiped with a
bit of acetone on a paper to remove tape stickiness and any uncured resin is washed
away as much as possible. Finally a gentle air with the nitrogen gun can dry the
chip.
If any resin is anywhere on the chip this will pyrolyse into carbon during
pyrolysis and can block light for the later SU-8 waveguide process. Now the 3D
printed electrode is ready for pyrolysis.
10
Integration of 3D leaky optical waveguides in optoelectronic platform
==PAGE:21==
This process is based on the guide for the printer on DTU Labmanager [6] and the man-
ufacturer BMF guide for the printer [11], as well as experiments during this thesis.
(a) 3D illustration for the focus and layer
definition steps
(b) 2D illustration for the layer definition by
platform and membrane.
Figure 3.2: The layer definition step in the printer process illustrated.
The 3D printing recipe used during this thesis is developed from a previous recipe used
by the BIOMIC group [10].
The recipe in the table 3.1 is the initial recipe used for printing directly on either a Si or a
SiO2 substrate. The first and second line is the printing of the base plate layer. The third
line is the first line of the 3D structure and therefore has a high intensity for adhesion.
The fourth line print all layers for the 3D structure.
Table 3.2 shows the final recipe used when printing on top of a SiO2 with a SU-8 base
layer already on the substrate. Therefore no base layer needs to be printed. The first and
second lines have an increased intensity for better adhesion to the SU-8 base layer and the
third line is for printing the rest of the 3D structure.
Image
Exp-t
Intst
P-d
Dt1
P-u
Dt2
Scra
1
1
1.00
40
0.000
0.00
0.000
300.00
0
2
11
1.00
30
4.000
2.00
3.995
300.00
2
3
1
2.00
80
4.000
2.00
3.995
300.00
0
4
388
2.00
65
4.000
2.00
3.995
60.00
10
Table 3.1: The initial recipe used for the 3D printing.
Image
Exp-t
Intst
P-d
Dt1
P-u
Dt2
Scra
1
1
4.00
80
0.000
0.00
0.000
300.00
0
2
4
4.00
80
4.000
2.00
3.995
300.00
0
3
370
4.00
65
4.000
2.00
3.995
60.00
10
Table 3.2: Example of a final recipe used for the 3D printing.
The first column in the recipe indicates the count of images that the will be treated at
Integration of 3D leaky optical waveguides in optoelectronic platform
11
==PAGE:22==
the condition explained by the line. If first line is 5 then the first five images in the slide
stack will be used under the first line of the recipe.
The next column is the exposure time, measured in seconds, this affect the exposure dose
at each layer. The dose should be higher at the first couple of layers to try the improve
adhesion of the 3D print to the chip. This will affect the resolution of the base layer of
the chip and therefore the size of the holes for later SU-8 waveguide creation.
The third column shows the intensity which combined with the exposure time will give
the exposure dose. This is the intensity and is measured in integer between 0 and 255,
with 255 being the maximum intensity. The maximum intensity for this printer is 90 mW
per cm2, [6].
The P-d and P-u column is the movement of the platform: platform down and platform
up (the unit is mm). After each layer the platform is first moved down 4 mm, the Dt1
(dwell time 1) indicate how long it stays down, then it is moved 4mm-layer thickness up
and stays here for the Dt2 (dwell time 2). The second dwell time is longer to let the
resin flow to an even layer between platform and membrane. Lastly the scraper cleans the
membrane between prints periodically for bubbles that would create voids in the printing.
During the experimental work the recipe in table 3.1 was used. However, at final half of
the experimental work printer issues appeared. Some changes were made to overcome the
issues, these are described in detail in section 6.2.
3.2
Pyrolysis
Figure 3.3: This is an illustration of the pyrolysis furnace. Through the furnace is the
glass cylinder for the samples. The cylinder has a flow of nitrogen gas from inlet to outlet.
Pyrolysis is the process of creating carbon of organic material by anaerobic heating using
a high temperature thermal decomposition process in inert atmosphere.
The purpose of the pyrosis process is to decompose the resin structure into carbon structure
that will be conductive and can work as an electrode that can measure the brain organoid
reaction to the light. The carbon produced by this process is a mix of two types of carbon.
The sp2 and sp3 which indicate two types of hybridization of atomic orbitals for the carbon
atom. A high fraction of sp2 hybridised carbon gives a more conductive carbon [10].
How much the resin structures shrink during pyrolysis depend on the type of polymer, the
size and form of the resin, the gas flow in the pyrolysis chamber and on pyrolysis recipe.
12
Integration of 3D leaky optical waveguides in optoelectronic platform
==PAGE:23==
The recipe and process used for this thesis has been developed and tested by Babak Rezaei
[12].
This recipe is a process with temperature stepwise ramping up to the final temperature
of 900°C, under a nitrogen flow of 400 sccm.
The first temperature step is 325°C, during the ramping to this temperature the water
and solvent will evaporate. The chamber stays at this temperature for two hours. Next
step is 370°C, this is where there is the most mass loss, and the structures turn black and
shrink the most here. At this step bi products evaporate, mostly oxygen and nitrogen.
Next step is 400°C, where the structures shrink to the final size. [12]
Between 400 and 900°C, there is a removal process of low molar wight carbon oxides. At
this stage there is a large percentage of sp3 hybridized carbon.[10]
At the final temperature of 900°C there is minimal mass loss and this is the stage were
the generation of sp2 graphene happens, often called the graphitation stage. [10]
Between each ramping step there is a waiting period at each temperature, to ensure the
change in structure is more uniform and will lead to a more stable carbon [12].
The full recipe can be seen as a table 3.3 and as a graph in figure 3.4.
During this project, there has been no issues during the pyrolysis with delamination or
collapse of structures using the recipe for pyrolysis.
Step nr
1
2
3
4
5
target temp [°C]
325
370
400
900
50
ramp rate [°C per min]
3
2
2
3
5
duration at target temp [h]
2
1
1
1
0
Table 3.3: Temperature Control Steps
Figure 3.4: The temperature plot for the pyrolysis process.
3.3
Lithography
Lithography is the transfer process of a pattern onto a substrate. The relevant process for
this thesis is UV lithography, where a pattern of UV light exposed onto a photo reactive
resist using a photomask. The exposure of the resist create the pattern. The resist is then
developed and the uncured resist is removed.
Integration of 3D leaky optical waveguides in optoelectronic platform
13
==PAGE:24==
The general steps are: Spin coating an even layer of resist on the wafer.
Expose the
pattern into the photoactive resist. Develop the resist and remove the uncured resist.
The wet photoactive resist is made of three components: A resin, a photoactive component
and a solvent.
The resist used for photolithography starts with resin and photoactive component dissolved
in solvent. The liquid is deposited on the substrate and spin coated to spread out into an
even layer. The thickness of the layer depends on the viscosity and the spin speed. The
spin coating speed recipe is usually determined by previous experiments in a spin curve
graph.
The next step is the soft bake for removing the solvent from the resist, the temperature
and time depend on the resist type and the thickness of the resist layer. The soft bake
can prevent a mask from sticking to resist and increase the adhesion of the resist to the
substrate. This also enables the possibility of spin coating multiple layers of resist on top
of each other.
The next step is the exposure of the pattern on the photoresist. The exposure activates
the photoactive component in the exposed area. Two types of exposure tools are used for
UV-photoresist, a mask aligner or a maskless aligner. The mask aligner is a lamp above
the substrate with a mask in direct contact with the photoresist. The maskless aligner is
a programmable exposure tool that requires the design as a 2D design file.
To correctly expose the resist it requires the right exposure dose. The dose is a product of
the exposure time and the light intensity (power per area). The way to find the optimal
dose is to perform a dose test based on manufacturer recommendations and previous users
processes.
The reason for the dose test is that the optimal dose depend on substrate
type (reflective/transparent), the resist type (spectral sensitivity), the resist thickness
(absorption) and on the pattern. The exposure is often followed by a post exposure bake
(PEB) step to ensure cross-linking of the exposed areas. It is the exposed areas for negative
photoresist, for positive it is the unexposed areas.
The last step is the development, in this step the pattern is revealed.
Depending on
the type of photo resist either the exposed parts is removed (positive tone resist) or the
unexposed parts is removed (negative tone resist). The developer liquid is usually either
a basic solution or a solvent. The developer set up is either submersion into the developer
in a beaker or bath or a puddle development on top of the substrate. This depend on the
type of resist and process needed. [13]
In this thesis UV-lithography is used to fabricate a baseplate of SU-8 on fused silica chips,
to fabricate test chips with a metal mask on and to fabricate the SU-8 waveguides.
3.4
SU-8 photo-lithography
The resist most used in this thesis is called SU-8. This is a epoxy resin photoresist that
cross-links at exposure, due to a component in the resin that act as a photo acid generator
(PAG), this acid opens the polymer groups in the resin and initiates a cross-linking process.
This is a negative photoresist. The resist contain a solvent, cyclopentanone, that makes
it possible to dispense the resist. After exposure the PEB step thermally drives a epoxy
cross-linking during the (PEB) step. During development the solvent propylene glycol
methyl ether acetate (PGMEA) is used to dissolved the uncured resin/unpolymerised
SU-8. [14].
There is different types of SU-8 optimised for layer thicknesses, and contain different
14
Integration of 3D leaky optical waveguides in optoelectronic platform
==PAGE:25==
fractions of solvents. The two used in this thesis is SU-8 2035 and SU-8 2005 contain
69.95 % solids and 45.00 % solids. The first is optimised for thicker layers resist and the
second for thinner layers.[14].
For SU-8 processes on fused silica wafers there is one important pre process step, which
is the dehydration of the wafer to improve film adhesion. this is due to the high water
content in SiO2 wafer that would weaken the bond between the resist and the substrate.
This increases the risk of delamination and prevents good adhesion. [15].
The recipe used for base plates of SU-8 is a standard process flow used by the BIOMIC
group, [16].
3.5
SU-8 for waveguide purposes
The SU-8 waveguide process creation is one of the main focuses of this thesis. Waveguides
are structures that can guide electromagnetic waves along a path, often confined and
directed in a direction. They work by trapping the light in a core material with a high
refractive index in surroundings of lower index, this will give total internal refraction. [17].
The refractive index of SU-8 depend on the wavelength for wavelengths between 400 nm
and 500 nm the refractive index is 1.622-1.598. [14]. The main factor to the waveguide
is the transmission, which is how much optical power travels through the waveguide.
This is affected by multiple factors, some of them are: the absorption of the material,
the scattering loss, bending loss and the wavelength of the light being transmitted.[17].
Transmittance of SU-8 resist is 0.9 for 400 nm and close to 1 for 480 nm which is the
wavelengths for blue light [14].
The SU-8 resist has a standard process flow from manufacturer that is developed for resist
layers between 0.5 µm to 40 µm for SU-8 2005 and 25 µm to 225 µm thicknesses. The
aim for this thesis is to fabricate SU-8 waveguides that are taller than these values. The
values from the data sheet for these thinner layers are used as starting point in the process
development for the SU-8 waveguides.[14].
3.6
Characterisation
Scanning electron microscopy
Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) is a microscopy method that utilises electrons instead
of light as probes to visualise the sample. The main reason is the higher resolution possible
with electrons, as the wavelength is limiting the resolution on optical microscopy, and the
wavelength of electron is much shorter than the wavelength of visible light. SEM images
are also used for great topological images as SEM has a large depth of field compared to
optical images.
The SEM works by accelerating a beam of electrons in vacuum into the sample and mea-
suring the resulting electrons from the interaction between the electrons and the sample.
The beam is scanned over the surface of the sample and the electrons from the sample is
detected.
One of the modes for the SEM is secondary electron (SE) mode, where the electrons
detected are low energy electrons formed by inelastic scattering (energy less than 50 eV).
These SE only originate from very close to the surface due to their low energy. This makes
them great for topological images as the amount of SE detected depend on the surface
structure. The interaction volume of the SE will be closer to the surface near an edge
and more electrons will escape and reach the detector. This is called edges effects and is
showing on images as edges being brighter than their surroundings.
Integration of 3D leaky optical waveguides in optoelectronic platform
15
==PAGE:26==
SEM require the sample to be conductive as else the beam will charge up the surface. If
the sample is non-conductive it can be coated with either a layer of gold or carbon. If this
is not possible the electron energy can be lowered.
The resin samples fabricated using 3D printing are very non-conductive and the above
solutions are not possible. For the pre-pyrolysis images the structures can not be coated.
The alternative is the variable pressure mode (VP mode) on the SEM. This mode work
by increasing the pressure in the chamber from vacuum to a higher pressure. This does
increase the noise of the chamber, but the extra air molecules in the chamber decharges
the sample and makes it possible to microscopy non conductive samples. This also requires
a different detector than the SE electron detector and to improve the signal, an angled
stage towards the detector will increase the signal. To increase the contrast the detector
bias should also be increased. [18] The values for pressure and detector bias used for the
imaging is: pressure at 30 Pa and the detector bias between 350 and 380 V. The SEM
machine used is the Zeiss Supra 40 VP SEM.
Optical microscopy
Optical microscopy is the technique of using a microscope with visible light and lenses
to see small samples. The main parts of the microscope is the light source and the lens.
Often the microscope has multiple light modes, bright field (BF) and dark field (DF).
For BF mode the sample is lit up directly and the light is reflected directly up into the
microscope, this gives images where the background is light and the sample is dark. For
DF mode the light is scattered around the sample and only light scattered/reflected by
the sample reaches the microscope, given dark background is dark and light samples.
The magnification depend on lenses available and are often at between 20x to 1000x
magnification. The resolution is limited by the wavelength of visible light.
The microscope used for all optical images is the Keyence VHX-X1F Digital Microscope.
This microscope has a few extra features than most standard microscopes. First is the
possibility of angling the entire microscope above the sample to take angled photos of the
sample. This is very useful when imaging 3D structures. The second feature is a software
option on the microscope. The software can move the microscope upward while taking a
series of photos. It then combines the pictures with different focus points to get an image
with greater depth of field, where even tall structures can be in focus. This is called depth
composition mode. The light of the microscope was tested with a optical UV optometer
and the microscope do not use light at wavelength 365 nm, and it should not expose the
SU-8 resist when taking pictures at different process steps.
16
Integration of 3D leaky optical waveguides in optoelectronic platform
==PAGE:27==
4
Electrode fabrication by 3D printing
and pyrolysis
In this chapter the different steps for 3D printing and pyrolysis for electrode fabrication
are explained together with presentation of the results.
4.1
Introduction
The initial printing process was based on unpublished preliminary work by Samuel Tavares
da Silva Maraschin and the PhD thesis by Swetha Vasudevan Kanakkottu[10].
The aim of the printing is to create a 3D electrode on a transparent substrate with a non-
transparent baseplate with holes in it. These holes are used for the waveguide fabrication
in the second part of the thesis.
To get to this final step, the iterations process gradually evolved toward this:
• Step 1: 3D print electrode design on a silicon substrate and examinate the results.
• Step 2: 3D print on a substrate of fused silica with nano-grass structure.
• Step 2.5: Fabricate chips with a base layer of SU-8 to print on.
• Step 3: 3D print on a base layer of SU-8 on a silicon wafer chip.
• Step 4: 3D print on a base layer of SU-8 on fused silica wafers.
The base layer of SU-8 is based on a well-tested process in the Biomaterial Microsystems
(BIOMIC) group to be able to create a even layer of SU-8 that adhere to the substrate
and do not crack during the process. [16]
The process for a base layer of SU-8 on a chip is: a) Dehumidify wafer. b) spin coat SU-8.
c) soft bake. d) expose design and post exposure bake (PEB). e) development. f) cleave
wafer into chips. These steps can also be seen in figure 4.1
Figure 4.1: Process steps for base layer of SU-8 on chips
4.2
3D printing and pyrolysis on Si chip
For the first printing iteration, the main purpose was to test the design and parameters
chosen to evaluate how the print design would print and undergo pyrolysis.
This print used the standard design, as described in the design section 2. The baseplate
was 50 µm thick with hole diameters: 0, 50, 100, 150 and 200 µm, as well as Kelvin cells
with side lengths of 200, 300 and 400 µm. The feet height was 150 µm.
Integration of 3D leaky optical waveguides in optoelectronic platform
17
==PAGE:28==
An optical image of the print can be seen in figure 4.2, where the top view of the 3D print
shows the placement of the Kelvin cells and the 3 sizes printed.
The first three columns were single Kelvin cells. The fourth and fifth were two Kelvin
cells stacked, and the sixth three Kelvin cells stacked. The first row did not have a hole,
the second the hole is 100 µm, the third row the hole is 150 µm and the fourth the hole is
200 µm in diameter.
The largest print for Kelvin cells of 400 µm side length did not print completely in column
five, as shown with the red box in figure 4.2. This indicate the upper limit of the stability
for the printing with this recipe.
Figure 4.2: Optical DF image of the first iteration chip with 3D electrodes printed on a
Si chip.
Figure 4.3: Optical tilted images of the first print. DF and depth composition mode used.
For the characterisation and inspection of the 3D printed structures both optical mi-
croscopy and SEM were used. The optical microscope provided a quick overview over the
entire chip, as seen in figure 4.3. This was a tilted optical image of the chip at a 30° angle.
The two images overlap, in total there are seven columns of Kelvin structures. The red
18
Integration of 3D leaky optical waveguides in optoelectronic platform
==PAGE:29==
colour of the chip substrate is an artefact caused by the angle of the microscope and were
not the colour of the Si chip. The images were taken using a depth composition mode on
the microscope for greater depth of field.
For the closer look at the structure, the SEM in VP mode was used. Examples can be
seen in figures 4.4a and 4.5a. These SEM images were useful for measurements and to
detect any defects.
For this first iteration the focus was on the printing design and the pyrolysis. The chip was
pyrolysed using the process recipe as described in section 3.2. Both before and after the
pyrolysis images were taken using the SEM to determine the shrinkage. Figure 4.4 shows
the first print before and after the pyrolysis at the nearly the same magnification for the
same area on the chip, clearly showing how much these cells shrank during pyrolysis. The
two large structures to the left in figure 4.4a were the same as the two large structures to
the right in figure 4.4b.
(a) Before pyrolysis, SEM at 30° stage and
VP mode.
(b) After pyrolysis, SEM at 30° stage and
VP mode.
Figure 4.4: SEM images showing the size difference of the electrodes before and after
pyrolysis.
(a) Before pyrolysis
(b) After pyrolysis.
Figure 4.5: SEM images of the K4H2 electrode before and after pyrolysis, showing shrink-
age.
Integration of 3D leaky optical waveguides in optoelectronic platform
19
==PAGE:30==
For more detailed analysis of this shrinkage figure 4.5 shows top-view SEM images of a
Kelvin cell with a designed side length of 400 µm and a hole diameter 200 µm. Direct
measurements on this Kelvin cell gave a side length of 396 ± 4 µm for the printed resin
before pyrolysis. This was measured on the horizontal bars using the middle of each bar.
After the pyrolysis the Kelvin cell had shrunk. The measured top square had a side length
of 178 ± 5 µm. For this structure that was a shrinkage of 55 %. The bar thickness shrank
from 66 ± 3 µm to 28 ± 1 µm after pyrolysis, a shrinkage of 58 %.
In figure 4.5b, the bottom square of the Kelvin design was visible as a square around the
hole that rest on the baseplate. That it was visible indicated that it shrank less than
the top square, likely due to fusing with the base layer, that shrank less, likely due to its
solid structure and possibly adhesion to the substrate. Further the base was shrinking in
thickness more than the lateral direction.
The shrinkage was structure dependent and highly dependent on the chosen pyrolysis
recipe. For the free standing structures a shrinkage of around 50 % matched previous
results by Swetha Kanakkottu [10].
Hole optimization during shrinkage of baseplate via pyrolysis
The important factor of the baseplate shrinkage was its effect on the hole sizes.
For this initial test design, an area with holes was created to test printer resolution and
how holes would pyrolyse. Holes were designed with diameters from 10 to 100 µm in 10 µm
intervals. The relevant printing parameter were the lateral resolution of the printer at 10
µm and therefore smallest holes would likely not print correctly. This effect was worsened
by overexposure during the base layer printing, done to improve adhesion, which could
cause diffusion into the hole areas and shrink them further.
The holes were observed using optical microscopy in figure 4.6. It was evident that the
10 µm and 20 µm holes did not print as holes, indicating that widths under 30 µm were
not feasible with the current settings. The Si substrate was visible through holes 60 µm
or greater, showing potential for use in waveguides.
(a) 10-30 µm
(b) 30-50 µm
(c) 60-80 µm
(d) 80-100 µm
Figure 4.6: Optical images of holes in the baseplate.
For quantification of the holes, SEM images of them before and after pyrolysis were taken
(shown in figure 4.7). After pyrolysis, holes with diameters above 40 µm went through the
50 µm baseplate and could be used for waveguides.
20
Integration of 3D leaky optical waveguides in optoelectronic platform
==PAGE:31==
(a) 10-60 µm, pre pyrol-
ysis.
(b) 50-100 µm, pre py-
rolysis.
(c) 10-60 µm, pyrolysed (d) 70-100 µm, pyrol-
ysed
Figure 4.7: SEM images of holes in the baseplate, before and after pyrolysis.
Figure 4.8a shows the measured hole diameters. The blue dots show the relation between
the pre-pyrolysis holes and the designed holes sizes and red dots show the post-pyrolysis
sizes. For pre-pyrolysis all holes are below the design size. After pyrolysis the smallest
holes match the design size, but the larger holes increased above the design. Figure 4.8b
shows the percentage increase, indicating that the smallest holes increased more, although
the trend did not follow a simple regression.
(a) Graph for the diameter of base plate holes
before and after pyrolysis.
(b) Percentage increase in hole diameter.
Figure 4.8: Graphs for the pyrolysis of holes in base plate.
From this first iteration, it was concluded that the electrode printing using the described
recipe (section 3.1) was successful and the pyrolysis process was effective. The structure
parameter sweep printed well for 100-300 µm side length and the Kelvin cells shrink
approximately 50 %. The holes in baseplate increased in diameter when the base plate
shrank but the increase was not uniform, and smaller holes saw a greater relative increase.
An example of one electrode is shown in figure 4.9: a 30° angled SEM of a 200 µm side
length Kelvin cell with 100 µm hole width, that looked promising for the waveguide.
Printing layers were visible in the SEM, and the structure was fused to the baseplate.
This could be due to foot height or a focus issue where the projection began inside the
chip rather than on the resin layer. OOO
Integration of 3D leaky optical waveguides in optoelectronic platform
21
==PAGE:32==
Figure 4.9: Pyrolysed Kelvin cell. The Kelvin cell with 200 µm side length and 100 µm
hole width.
4.3
Optimization of the feet length of the Kelvin cells
A small design test was focused on the feet of the Kelvin cells, as some prints either showed
broken foot connections or that the Kelvin cell was not standing on the feet but fused to
the baseplate. Therefore, a test chip with variations in foot height was printed on both
Si and SiO2 substrates in case the substrate type would influence the outcome. Tested
heights were 150, 200, 250, and 300 µm on cells with side lengths of 100, 200, and 300 µm.
The resulting print is shown in figure 4.10 for the 200 µm size. During pyrolysis, none of
the cells fused to the baseplate, not even those with the shortest feet, as seen in figure
4.11. For the taller designs, the extent of shrinkage in the Kelvin cells was clearly visible,
as the feet extended beyond the base of the shrunken structure. The test confirmed that
the cell would not retain its form without the feet, but also showed that 300 µm was not
necessary to prevent fusing, as there were no difference in the 150 µm and 300 µm feet for
the Kelvin cell.
Another factor influencing foot height was the focus during printing and the thickness of
the first layer. If the projected image was focused within the chip substrate instead of on
its surface, the first few layers of the feet would not print correctly. This would result in
shorter feet and explain earlier tests in which Kelvin cells fused to the baseplate during
pyrolysis.
This test did not show any feet length in the parameter sweep to be more optimal than
the rest, and for all future prints the feet length were chosen to be 150 µm.
22
Integration of 3D leaky optical waveguides in optoelectronic platform
==PAGE:33==
(a) 150 µm
(b) 200 µm
(c) 250 µm
(d) 300 µm
Figure 4.10: SEM images electrodes before pyrolysis with varied feet lengths, Kelvin cell
size 200 µm side length.
(a) 150 µm
(b) 200 µm
(c) 250 µm
(d) 300 µm
Figure 4.11: SEM images electrodes after pyrolysis with varied feet lengths, Kelvin cell
size 200 µm side length.
Integration of 3D leaky optical waveguides in optoelectronic platform
23
==PAGE:34==
4.4
3D print on fused silica nanograss chip
For the second iteration of 3D printing, the focus was on enabling printing on a transparent
surface. The substrate used was a fused silica chip (SiO2), a transparent substrate capable
of withstanding high temperatures. However, the surface properties of the material made
adhesion of the printed structures diﬀicult. To improve adhesion, a nanograss structure
was etched into both sides of the substrate to create a rougher surface.
The process of printing on a SiO2chip was nearly the same as for a Si chip. However, since
the chip was transparent, it was not possible to directly focus the projected image onto
the surface. Therefore, additional steps were introduced to properly focus the projection.
A small piece of Si chip was placed on top of the SiO2 chip, and the projection was focused
on the top of this Si piece. After measuring the height of the Si chip, the platform was
moved upward by the same amount, ensuring that the printing would be focused precisely
on the surface of the transparent chip. This focusing method is illustrated in figure 4.13,
while figure 4.12b shows an example of incorrect focusing.
(a) Illustration of focusing the UV projec-
tion on top of a SiO2 chip.
(b) Illustration of focusing at the bottom
of the chip instead of the top.
Figure 4.12: Focusing illustrations.
Figure 4.13: Steps for focusing on top of a transparent substrate. a) place chip on top of
substrate and focus on it. b) remove chip and measure its height. c) move platform up
the height of the focusing chip.
24
Integration of 3D leaky optical waveguides in optoelectronic platform
==PAGE:35==
The available SiO2 chips with nanograss were slightly smaller, and the design used for this
iteration included 12 Kelvin cells (with side lengths of 200, 300, and 400 µm) printed on
a baseplate with hole widths of 50, 100, 150, and 200 µm.
The printing process including the additional focus step was successful and the resulting
chips can be seen in figures 4.14. The first two figures show the same chip at different
light settings on the microscope, while the third showed a failed print, due to the removal
process from the printing platform. In figure 4.15 a close tilted view of the three sizes of
Kelvin cells can be seen. It is also shown that the print were of single cell structures for
the whole chip.
The resulting printed structures adhered well to the SiO2 substrate and the shrinkage
during pyrolysis was consistent with previous iterations on Si chips. As shown in figure
4.16 the Kelvin cell shrank to approximately half their original size while the holes wither
maintained their size or grew slightly.
Figure 4.13 shows the steps used for focusing on top of the transparent substrate: (a)
placing a Si chip on the SiO2 substrate and focusing the projection on top of the Si chip.
(b) removing the Si chip and measuring its height. (c) moving the platform upward by
the measured height to bring the projection into focus on the SiO2 chip.
(a) BF image of SiO2
chip
with printed baseplate and elec-
trode.
(b) DF image of SiO2 chip
with printed baseplate and elec-
trode.
(c) DF image of a broken chip,
that broke during removal from
printing platform.
Figure 4.14: Overview optical images of the printed electrode on SiO2.
The primary challenge during printing on the SiO2 chips was their reduced thickness and
increased brittleness compared to Si chips. As illustrated in figure 4.14c some chips cracked
during removal from the platform. This was caused by the strong adhesion between the
chip and the double-sided tape used during printing. Additionally, the nanograss structure
on the backside of the chip increased adhesion to the tape, raising the risk of breaking a
successfully printed chip. Furthermore, sticky residue from the tape needed to be carefully
removed from the backside, as it could turn into carbon during pyrolysis and obstruct the
holes in the baseplate.
Integration of 3D leaky optical waveguides in optoelectronic platform
25
==PAGE:36==
Figure 4.15: Tilted optical image of the electrodes on SiO2.
(a) SEM image 30° angle of
resin structure.
(b) SEM image of the top of py-
rolysed electrode.
(c) Side view SEM at 30° of
the pyrolysed electrode.
Figure 4.16: SEM images of an electrode on SiO2 chip. The designed side length is 100
µm and hole diameter 100 µm.
26
Integration of 3D leaky optical waveguides in optoelectronic platform
==PAGE:37==
4.5
3D printing on a SU-8 base layer chip
Figure 4.17: Illustration of the printer set up at the step: the design placement of pro-
jection on top of layer on chip. In a) the chip is shown with SU-8 layer (yellow) and the
projector with the image that is to be projected down on the chip.
For the third printing iteration, the goal was to print on top of an existing structure in
order to investigate the possibility of alignment. The existing structure was a baseplate
layer fabricated from SU-8 resist.
This alignment took place during the design placement step, where the projected design
was positioned on top of the chip and the coordinates were recorded. The placement was
determined using the printer’s built-in camera. This is shown in figure 4.17, where the
illustration shows the printer set-up at the design placement step. Figure 4.17a) shows a
close up view of the chip with SU-8 resist on top and the projector ready to project the
image onto the SU-8 layer.
To align on top of the SU-8 structure, the existing layer was incorporated into the digital
design, ensuring that the first sliced image matched the SU-8 structure on the chip. This
ensured that the printed design could be properly aligned with the layer.
The first image of the design was projected down onto the platform. The platform could
be adjusted laterally in steps as small as 1 µm, which enabled precise positioning of the
projection onto the chip structure. The camera view of this alignment is shown in Figure
4.18, where the illuminated regions represent the projection and the faint lines represent
the existing SU-8 structure. Misalignment could be observed on the left side of the image
due to a slight rotation of the chip on the platform relative to the projection. The platform
itself could not be rotated to compensate for this angular deviation. Although the chip
had a rotation of less than 1 degree, the long lateral span of 10.8 mm amplified the
misalignment, which could affect the ability to create waveguides within the electrodes, as
holes might not align with the electrode regions. The yellow lines in figure 4.18 indicate
this rotation. In appendix A.2 a larger version of this figure is placed for easier viewing
of the shift between the SU-8 layer and the projection.
This rotational misalignment could be compensated either by adjusting the design file
based on the measured angle or by using a physical alignment guide on the platform, such
as a long straight edge to help position the chip consistently.
Two sizes of Kelvin cells were tested in this iteration: one with 200 µm sides and one with
Integration of 3D leaky optical waveguides in optoelectronic platform
27
==PAGE:38==
Figure 4.18: Image showing the alignment of the print on top of SU-8 structure on a chip.
100 µm sides. The holes placement on the base plate is optimized to accommodate closely
packed Kelvin cells of 100 µm.
For the 200 µm Kelvin cells, the optical images of the print are shown in figure 4.19. The
right side print aligned with the baseplate holes, while the left was shifted due to rotation.
This confirmed that it was possible to print on the SU-8 base layer and if the rotation
was correct, then the printed electrode would print correctly on top of the holes. A close-
up of the aligned holes within the electrode before pyrolysis is shown in figure 4.20. It
can be seen that there are more holes surrounding the middle Kelvin cell. This is due
to design were optimised to smaller and more Kelvin towers, which made space for two
circles of cells around a cell in the middle. The chips were pyrolysed using the standard
pyrolysis recipe and the resulting chip can be seen in figure 4.21, were some of the cells
stuck together. They still adhered well to the SU-8 baseplate. These partly collapsed
Kelvin towers indicated that they were designed too tightly packed and that increasing
the spacing between towers might help preserve their integrity. Side view images both in
optical figure 4.19c and SEM figure 4.20c confirmed the presence of small gaps between
the Kelvin towers.
(a) Left side of the print
(b) Right side of the print
(c) Side view 30° of the right
side print.
Figure 4.19: Optical DF images of the electrode print on SU-8 base plate.
28
Integration of 3D leaky optical waveguides in optoelectronic platform
==PAGE:39==
(a) SEM image of the hole in
the base plate inside the elec-
trode.
(b) Top view of the alignment
of the holes on the base plate
to the printed electrode on top.
(c) Side view SEM.
Figure 4.20: SEM images of the 200 µm side length electrode print on SU-8 base plate.
(a) SEM image of the pyrolysed middle elec-
trode on the SU-8 base plate.
(b) Overview SEM image of the pyrolysed
electrode.
Figure 4.21: SEM images of the 200 µm side length pyrolysed electrode print on SU-8
base plate.
A separate print was carried out using 100 µm Kelvin cells, which matched the optimized
hole placement on the SU-8 baseplate. SEM images of these electrodes before and after
pyrolysis are shown in Figure 4.22. These are the before and after pyrolysis SEM images
of the electrode to the right side of the chip. The rotation was adjusted to fit this side
most, and the results confirmed proper alignment: all holes were covered by electrodes
(figure 4.22b), and no structures collapsed.
However, higher magnification images of the printed 100 µm side length Kelvin cells (figure
4.23), revealed that the holes through the cells were already quite narrow before pyrolysis
and did not widen during the process. This limitation would hinder their suitability for
integrated waveguide applications, as the holes are required for light exposure.
Integration of 3D leaky optical waveguides in optoelectronic platform
29
==PAGE:40==
(a) SEM VP image of electrode print on SU-
8 before pyrolysis.
(b) SEM image of electrode print on SU-8
after pyrolysis.
Figure 4.22: SEM VP image of electrode print on SU-8 with electrode design side length
100 µm. Both images are taken at the same angle 30°.
(a) Before pyrolysis.
(b) After pyrolysis.
(c) Side view pyrolysed.
Figure 4.23: SEM pictures of a 100 µm side electrode, before and after pyrolysis.
4.6
Printing discussion and conclusion
The results demonstrate that 3D printing onto a variety of substrates, silicon chips, SiO2
with nanograss structure, and SU-8 coated chips is possible with strong adhesion and re-
liable structural integrity. The printing process consistently produced well formed struc-
tures, and the adhesion remained intact even after pyrolysis.
For printing on nanograss etched SiO2 chips, an additional focusing step was necessary
due to the substrate being transparent. By focusing the image on a silicon chip placed
on top of the SiO2 substrate and compensating for its height, the projection could be
accurately focused on the top of the SiO2 chip.
Similarly, printing on SU-8 layer chips was successful, when aligning by incorporating the
SU-8 pattern into the design file. Though slight rotational misalignment introduced lateral
shifts in the final print. This rotation significantly affect alignment over long distances
and could be corrected at placement of chip by adding physical alignment structures on
the platform.
Across all substrates, the pyrolysis process resulted in consistent shrinkage of approxi-
mately 50 percent, with no delamination or structural breakage. The shrinkage of the
baseplate led to an increase in hole diameter, meaning that the final dimensions devi-
ated from the original design. This effect is considered when designing the electrode-hole
interface, to optimise the use of the space for the waveguide inside the electrode.
30
Integration of 3D leaky optical waveguides in optoelectronic platform
==PAGE:41==
Design-wise, Kelvin cells with 200 µm and 300 µm side lengths performed best. The 400
µm designs were too large for consistent printing, while the 100 µm structures shrank too
much for waveguides to be integrated inside. Additionally, holes smaller than 40 µm did
not print reliably due to the resolution of the printer. The Kelvin cell optimal side length
was between 200 to 300 µm and the holes needed to be larger than 40 µm and smaller
than the pyrolysed Kelvin side length.
Regarding the support structures for the Kelvin cells, 150 µm tall feet provided suﬀicient
spacing between base layer and Kelvin cell.
The feet also compensated for shrinkage
mismatches between the solid baseplate and the hollow electrodes. These feet effectively
prevented the electrodes from fusing to the baseplate during pyrolysis. In cases where the
print did fuse the reason is likely the printing set up affected the height of the feet.
Several printing challenges were also identified. Precise focus and accurate calibration
between the printer membrane and platform are essential; any deviation affected the first
layers and the adhesion of the print. Improper cleaning of residual resin could lead to
unintended material build up between Kelvin cells, likely contributing to structural col-
lapse during pyrolysis in closely packed designs. For SiO2 chips, excessive tape between
the chip and platform increased adhesion to the platform and caused breakage during
removal. This issue was enhanced by nanograss on the backside. Minimizing tape usage
was critical to preserve successful prints.
Integration of 3D leaky optical waveguides in optoelectronic platform
31
==PAGE:42==
5
Fabrication of SU-8 waveguide
5.1
Introduction
This chapter concerns the fabrication process for SU-8 waveguides and results.
For the optical waveguides, the focus is to investigate how to fabricate waveguides fitting
well into the electrode and to make tall stable waveguides that are able to leak light out
into the brain organoids.
To test the SU-8 process, it is necessary to have test chips that are not 3D printed as the
3D printing is very time intensive. Instead of 3D printed and pyrolysed base layer on a
transparent fused silica (SiO2) chip. The test chips consist of a metal layer with holes on
the transparent chip. The holes match the sizes needed for the 3D electrodes.
The fabrication steps for the test chips are:
• deposit a layer of Cr.
• Spin coat with a resist.
• Expose the hole design.
• Develop the resist.
• Dry etch the metal with the resist as a mask.
• Remove the resist using a oxygen plasma resist strip.
• cut the wafer into chips.
Figure 5.1: Process flow images for the Cr chip process
On these test chips the SU-8 process flow are tested and the resulting process flow can
be transferred to chips with a pyrolysed SU-8 baseplate to test the waveguides on this
surface.
• Drop cast SU-8 with a syringe onto the chip
• vacuum the chip (necessary if there is 3D printed structures on the chip)
• Soft bake SU-8 until it is mostly hard
• Expose chip in UV flood from the back side of the chip
• post exposure bake of chip
• Development of the SU-8
32
Integration of 3D leaky optical waveguides in optoelectronic platform
==PAGE:43==
Figure 5.2: Process flow images for the waveguide fabrication.
5.2
Fabrication of test chips
To develop a suitable process flow for fabricating tall and stable SU-8 waveguides, a ded-
icated test chip was fabricated.
The goal of these test chips was to allow more rapid
and repeatable testing of SU-8 processing recipes.
In contrast to the time-consuming
single-print 3D printing process, these chips offered a more eﬀicient platform for iterative
process optimization. The test chips consisted of SiO2 substrates coated with a patterned
metal mask containing arrays of holes. Chromium (Cr) was chosen as the mask material,
deposited as a 50 nm thin film using the E-Beam Evaporator (Temescal). Lithographic
patterning of holes in the Cr layer followed the standard protocol recommended by Labad-
viser [19]. The detailed process flow for the fabrication of these chips can be found in the
appendix A.1.
Four wafers were fabricated, each with a layout containing six 25×25 mm chips. Each
chip included hole arrays with widths of 50, 100, 150, and 200 µm.
The lithography
process began with spin coating 1.5 µm photoresist MIR701 on top of the metal Cr layer
using the Gamma UV spin coater, followed by exposure using the MLA1 maskless aligner.
The resist was developed using the Gamma e-beam and UV tool. Metal patterning was
performed via plasma etching in the ICP Metal Etch system, which was also used to strip
the remaining resist. The wafers were diced into individual chips using the Disco Dicing
Saw DAD 321.
In figure 5.3 image examples of the 4 hole sizes are shown.
The measured diameters
matched the design values within 1–2 µm, indicating slight overexposure. However, this
deviation would not affect subsequent waveguide fabrication.
Figure 5.3: Holes in test Cr mask chips. a) 50 µm, b) 100 µm, c) 150 µm and d) 200 µm
design diameter.
Integration of 3D leaky optical waveguides in optoelectronic platform
33
==PAGE:44==
Figure 5.4: Holder design for placing the chip with a layer of SU-8 upside down.
5.3
Setup for UV-exposure
For the SU-8 process a custom chip holder was designed and printed for holding a chip
upside down for exposure.
This ensured that the SU-8 would not stick to the carrier
surface when positioned upside down. The design created supported the chip at the edges
and was tall enough to have space for a thick SU-8 layer. The design is illustrated in figure
5.4. It is printed on a Formlabs 2 using the resin: High Temp resin, produced and sold
by Formlabs. The fabrication of the holder was a simple three step process: Design the
holder in the 3D design program Fusion 360 (Autodesk, USA), print file on the Formlabs
printer, wash the uncured resin using IPA and cure the structure using a UV chamber
with wavelengths 365 nm and 405 nm for 3 minutes. Figure 5.5a shows how a chip with
pyrolysed base and a layer of SU-8 is positioned upside down in the holder.
(a) Picture of chip placed upside down
in holder.
(b) Illustration of the chip in holder.
Figure 5.5: How the chip is placed in a holder for flood exposure from the backside of the
chip.
5.4
SU-8 base plate layer fabrication
For the final opto-electronic platform, the goal was to use SiO2 chip with a layer of SU-8
as the base plate, and on top of this layer print the electrode structure. Thereafter both
base plate and structure would be pyrolysed into an electrode and the waveguide would
be fabricated inside the electrode.
Chips with a SU-8 base layer were used for the final process, in which the electrode and
waveguide were combined. However, before final process, they were useful for testing the
34
Integration of 3D leaky optical waveguides in optoelectronic platform
==PAGE:45==
SU-8 waveguide fabrication process recipe on a chip with the correct design. For this the
base layer was pyrolysed into a non-transparent carbon.
The full process flow for this SU-8 base layer was designed and tested by various people
in the BIOMIC group, [16].
The first step of the process was dehumidification in a 250°C oven for 12 hours. Directly
after removing the wafers from the oven, they were moved to Plasma asher 4 for substrate
cleaning, for 1 hour, at 100 sccm O2, 100 sccm N2, and 1000 W. The dehumidification
and cleaning were crucial for the adhesion to the surface as SiO2 surfaces attracts water,
which makes adhesion of SU-8 resist diﬀicult.
Therefore, directly after the plasma treatment, the wafer was spin-coated with 15 µm SU-8
2035 in Spin Coater: RCD8. This was done following a two step recipe: 1000rpm, 10s,
200rpm/s followed by 5000 rpm, 120s, 1000rpm/s. The amount of SU-8 2035 added via
syringe to the wafer manually before spin coating was approximately 3 cm in diameter.
The resist was then soft baked on a ramping hot plate to 50°C for 15 min, with a ramping of
2°C per min. The exposure used the Maskless Aligner 1 (MLA1) with dose of 300 mJ/cm2
and defocus value of 0. The post exposure bake (PEB) was done the same hotplate with
a temperature of 50°C for two hours. The last step of the base layer was development
using the automatic spin coater Gamma E-beam and UV, the SU-8 was treated with the
developer PGMEA using the recipe: ”5603 NICOSTO 100mm puddle 3x1min”, which
used three times 1 min puddle development steps on the wafer.
The resulting SU-8 layer is shown in figure 5.6. This shows a closely-packed area (holes are
closely packed for a design) and a corner of a rectangle for testing different variations of
electrode and hole sizes. On the SU-8 there are visible lines, that came from the stitching
of the exposure in the exposure tool and did not affect the surface of the SU-8 layer.
(a) Close packed area in SU-8 base plate
layer.
(b) Corner of the rectangle for testing
sizes.
Figure 5.6: Optical images of the SU-8 base layer on sio2 chips.
5.5
Initial testing for fabricating a waveguide
Drop casting
First step in creating a recipe for the waveguides was to determine the required SU-8
volume for drop-casting (deposition on the chip with a syringe). The goal was to have
waveguides as tall as the electrodes or a little taller. For this a waveguide of approximately
1 mm would be suﬀicient.
Integration of 3D leaky optical waveguides in optoelectronic platform
35
==PAGE:46==
How the SU-8 reacts to be drop-cast depends on the viscosity of the SU-8. For this recipe
testing SU-8 2035 was used. This had 69.5 % solid content [14], which meant that solvent
was 30 % of the liquid resist. This is highly viscous liquid, with a viscosity of 7000 cSt,
and consistency were similar to thick honey.
To determine the amount of SU-8 needed to cover the 25x25 mm chip in 1 mm SU-
8 after the solvent evaporated, some calculations were done. The volume of SU-8 was
divided with the solid content in the SU-8 2035, this calculation gave that 0,9 ml would
be needed. Because the liquid had a high viscosity, automatic liquid dispensers could not
be used and the dispensing was manual using a syringe, which is not a precise dispensing
and measurement tool. To improve dispensing precision, a 10 ml syringe was filled from a
30 ml syringe and used in all subsequent applications on the chips. The 30 ml and 10 ml
syringes had diameters of 23 mm and 16 mm, respectively.
The resist remained localized at the deposition site and had limited flow. Experimental
results indicated that dispensing approximately 0.5 ml, corresponding to a 16 mm depo-
sition width, produced an even SU-8 coverage of close to 1 mm resist layer thickness after
the soft baking.
All test SU-8 2035 layers for the recipe development were measured with a digital caliper
and the thicknesses of a covered chip ranged from 0.89 mm to 1.68 mm, with an average
value of 1,2 mm.
The pre-soft bake drop size and the fully covering SU-8 layer can be seen in figure 5.7. To
the left is the SU-8 on the chips before the soft bake, and to the right is the covered chips
after the soft bake. As seen the two of the chips were completely covered by the resist.
The low solvent amount and the surface tension of the liquid ensured that the resin did
not flow over the edges of the chip and stayed where it was placed.
(a) Size of droplet on chips before soft
bake.
(b) Resist coverage of chips after soft
bake.
Figure 5.7: photos of chips used to determine the amount of SU-8 needed to cover the
chips. Images captured using a standard mobile phone camera.
A brief test with the smallest amount able to be dispensed on a chip showed that the
resist did not flow out completely even if a smaller amount was used. For this the droplet
width was measured to be 4 mm before the soft bake and after the soft bake a width of 7
mm and a height of 0.87 mm. Therefore if thinner layers are needed, a SU-8 with more
solvent and lower viscosity is needed.
36
Integration of 3D leaky optical waveguides in optoelectronic platform
==PAGE:47==
Soft bake
For the soft baking of the SU-8, the baking was performed on a programmable hot plate,
where the temperature was programmed to ramp 2°C per minute until it reached the
target temperature and held at this temperature for the set time and then ramp down.
Based on previous experience in the group BIOMIC the standard is soft baking at 50°C,
as this gives a better adhesion and less cracking. The manufacturer recommend a step
recipe first to 65°C then to 95°C. Both these recommended processes are for SU-8 layers
more than five times thinner than the goal of 1 mm. They were used as a starting point
for the development.
For the first test of the soft bake, the temperature was kept low at 50°C for 2 hours. This
did not result in visible or physical change in the SU-8 after this bake. The SU-8 resist
flowed slightly outward but mostly kept its shape with a soft shell of semi solid SU-8 with
liquid SU-8 inside. The second test involved baking at 65°C for 2 hours. This made the
SU-8 drop flow during the heating, but the temperature increase did not evaporate the
SU-8 solvent.
In the last test, the soft baking temperature were raised to 95°C, per manufacturer rec-
ommendation for this resist [14]. The chips were kept at this temperature for 10 hours to
see if the solvent could be evaporated from this very thick layer of SU-8.
This temperature evaporated the solvent and the SU-8 layer hardened and become non-
sticky. The higher temperature made the resist fluid enough to flow outwards to the corners
of the chip. The ten hours were estimated based on the values for thinner layers of SU-8
from the manufacturer, and a linear regression based on data points for 25-225 µm layers.
[14] Other amounts of soft bake time to evaporate the solvent were not investigated as 10
hours was effective. Figure 5.7b for image after the soft bake, these chips had a completely
solid layer of SU-8. During the soft bake, if the SU-8 was flowing more to one side of the
chip, the chip was rotated 180° to prevent the SU-8 from flowing and accumulating at the
side of the chip.
UV exposure
After the baking the resist layer was hardened and ready for the exposure. Layer thickness
was measured using a digital caliper, by subtracting the known 0.5 mm chip thickness from
the total measurement. The SU-8 was even after the soft bake and the thickness could be
used to calculate the needed exposure.
To estimate the required exposure dose, the exposure values for 10-250 µm thick layers
as described by manufacturer [14] were used.
The values were used to make a linear
regression and based on this the dose needed for 1 mm SU-8 layer was 1100 mJ
cm2 .
The exposure tool used for the exposure was the mask aligner ”Aligner: MA6-1”, used
without a mask and at the flood exposure mode. The machine exposed using collimated
UV light, with a exposure light peak at 365 nm. This matched the recommendation for
SU-8 that is expsosure wavelengths at 375 nm or lower [19].
The measured intensity was approximately 10.45 mW
cm2 during lamp testing, but the value
varied slightly and should be measured using a optometer before use of the machine. For
this intensity a exposure time of 104 seconds gave a dose close to 1100 mJ
cm2 . The dose was
split up in multiple exposures with a waiting time of 30 seconds between to prevent the
UV light heating up the resist. The total exposure time was split into four 26 seconds
exposures with 30 seconds pauses between exposures.
The chips were exposed, while
placed in the printed holder. It was observed that the chip holder fluoresced under UV
illumination during this first exposure, as shown in figure 5.8a.
Integration of 3D leaky optical waveguides in optoelectronic platform
37
==PAGE:48==
(a) Image showing a chip in a holder under the
UV light from the exposure tool. The holder flo-
rescence blue.
(b) Chips on a hotplate after the exposure.
Figure 5.8: photos of the chips at different steps of the process. Image captured using a
standard mobile phone camera.
Post exposure bake
The post exposure bake (PEB) is done to finish the cross linking process initiated by
the exposure. It was a shorter bake than the soft bake and at the same temperature, to
ensure resist mobility during the cross-linking. During the temperature ramping the SU-8
started to wrinkle at the surface, when the SU-8 underneath melted and the waveguides
were visible, even before development, in figure 5.8b these wrinkles are visible on the front
chip.
Development
For development the solvent PGMEA was used. The set up was a beaker with PGMEA
that the chips were carefully lowered into. The development rate for SU-8 in PGMEA is
20 µm per min [19], therefore an hour long development should be suﬀicient.
Because the SU-8 layer was thick, a large amount of PGMEA was needed and consumed
during development. For the SU-8 amount on three chips, a beaker with 15 cm diameter
was filled with 3-4 cm PGMEA. A pipette was used to stir and create flow, ensuring
fresh PGMEA could reach and dissolve the unexposed resist. The chips were periodically
removed from the solvent bath to monitor the unpolymerized resist removal. After one
hour most uncured resist were removed. For a final clean the chip was put into a new
beaker of fresh PGMEA for 15 min, then a carefully rinse with IPA and a nitrogen gun
dried the chips at as low air flow as possible. After the development a border of fully
cured SU-8 were still on the chip marking the edge of the SU-8 layer on the chip.
5.6
Results from recipe testing of SU-8 waveguides
The waveguides from the the process parameter testing in the recipe development section
can be seen in figures 5.9 and 5.10. All four waveguides thicknesses created stable and
tall SU-8 columns , but the thinnest at 50 µm width bends at the top, figure 5.9a. The
waveguide all tapper towards the top of the waveguide, as shown in figure 5.10. It also
shows that the top end in a well defined circular shape on all waveguides. The tapering
towards the top is likely due to the exposure coming from the bottom of the waveguide.
Had the exposure come from the top it is likely the waveguides would be thicker at the
top and potentially more unstable.
38
Integration of 3D leaky optical waveguides in optoelectronic platform
==PAGE:49==
(a) 50 µm diameter
(b) 100 µm diameter
(c) 150 µm diameter
(d) 200 µm diameter
Figure 5.9: Top view optical images of waveguides fabricated using exposure in 3D printed
holder.
(a) 50 µm diameter
(b) 100 µm diameter
(c) 150 µm diameter
(d) 200 µm diameter
Figure 5.10: VP SEM image of waveguide on Cr test chip exposed in 3D printed holder.
5.7
Influence of the exposure setup on the waveguide
fabrication
As shown in figure 5.8a the holder fluorescence during exposure. Therefore it is important
to investigate whether this influences the waveguide formation at exposure. The purpose
of the holder is to prevent SU-8 from sticking to the carrier surface during the backside
exposure. Since the resist is soft baked to a non-sticky hardened state, this is less of a
issue. To evaluate the holder/carrier influence on the formation of the waveguide, three
test chips were processed at the same time under identical conditions. The only difference
were which surface the chip was placed on at the exposure.
• On the 3D printed holder.
• Directly on the polished side of a Si carrier wafer.
• Directly on the unpolished side of a standard Si carrier wafer.
The polished Si surface is highly reflective and reflects the exposure light back into the
SU-8 at the exposure. The unpolished back side is rough and diffuses the reflected light.
No visible difference was observed between the waveguides fabricated on the holder and
those fabricated on the polished Si wafer, the top view of the waveguides from the polished
Si wafer can be seen in figure 5.11 and look identical to the top view from the holder
waveguides, figure 5.9. However the backside unpolished Si surface exposure did visibly
change the waveguide. The top section of the waveguides have a wrinkly structure, figure
Integration of 3D leaky optical waveguides in optoelectronic platform
39
==PAGE:50==
5.12. These wrinkles are not surface imprint into the SU-8 top as the wrinkles extends
into the waveguides volume as shown in figures 5.13. The direct contact for the Si carrier
both polished and unpolished did slightly adhere to the SU-8 layer but removal from the
carrier did not damage the resist layer.
(a) 50 µm.
(b) 100 µm.
(c) 150 µm.
(d) 200 µm.
Figure 5.11: Top view optical images of waveguides fabricated with exposure in direct
contact with polished side of a Si carrier wafer.
(a) 50 µm
(b) 100 µm
(c) 150 µm
(d) 200 µm
Figure 5.12: Top view optical images of waveguides fabricated with exposure in direct
contact with unpolished side of a Si carrier wafer.
For the intended function of the waveguides to spread the light into the brain cell, the more
wrinkly surface of the backside may be advantageous, as it would likely lead to increased
optical leakage compared to a smooth surface.
(a) 50 µm
(b) 100 µm
(c) 150 µm
(d) 200 µm
Figure 5.13: VP SEM image of waveguide on Cr test chip. Exposure in direct contact
with the unpolished side of a Si carrier wafer.
40
Integration of 3D leaky optical waveguides in optoelectronic platform
==PAGE:51==
Height measurement of waveguides
The height of the SU-8 layer can be measured by a caliper before the exposure, but
measuring the height of the waveguides is more diﬀicult. Optical profilometry can measure
the height or angled SEM image can provide good estimates of the height.
However, fallen-over waveguides, as shown in figure 5.14 offer an easier method. For this
chip, the SU-8 layer was measured via caliper to be 1270 µm thick.
From this figure
waveguides of different thicknesses can be seen.
The thinnest waveguides are 900 µm
in height while the thicker waveguides are measured the full layer thickness of 1270 µm.
This indicates that waveguide height in this process is primarily defined by the SU-8 layer
thickness. Therefore, the drop casting is the critical step in adjusting waveguide height.
Figure 5.14: Image used for height measurement on broken and fallen over waveguides.
5.8
Exposure at an angle
Figure 5.15: Illustration of the chip exposed at an angle by placing one edge on the holder.
It was considered if the waveguide were exposed from multiple angles then a tree-like
waveguide structure could be fabricated. This would spread light more effectively than a
single, vertical waveguide. The illustration in figure 5.15 shows how tilting the chip during
exposure affects the waveguide angle.
The height of the holder was 4.5 mm and the length of the chip was 25 mm. The angle of
the waveguide relative to the chip surface can be calculated:
angle = Cos−1
(4.5
25
)
= 79.6°
The only process modification in this test was tilting the chip during exposure.To achieve
this, one side of the chip was placed on the edge of the holder while the opposite side rested
Integration of 3D leaky optical waveguides in optoelectronic platform
41
==PAGE:52==
Figure 5.16: VP SEM images angled at 30° of the angled exposure test waveguides. a) 50
µm hole diameter, b) 100 µm hole diameter, c) 150 µm hole diameter and d) 200 µm hole
diameter.
on the carrier wafer. The chip was exposed, rotated 90°, and exposed again, repeating
until all four sides had been exposed.
Since a new area of SU-8 was exposed at each angle, the exposure dose was the same as
for one single waveguide, as long as the waveguides were clearly separated. However, the
bottom part of the waveguides, this area would receive exposure at four times the normal
dose.
The result of the exposure is shown in figure 5.16. The angled exposure successfully created
multiple waveguides from a single exposure hole. The waveguide thickness affected the
degree of angular separation, the thicker waveguides required a steeper angle than was
used in this test. Only the thinnest waveguides (from the 50 ￿m hole) were completely
separated. Larger hole diameters produced partially separated waveguides, with touching
at the tops. Another observation is that these waveguides appeared more chaotic than
vertically exposed ones, and the waveguide ends were not as clearly defined.
An issue identified in this process was that the 50 nm Cr metal mask was slightly transpar-
ent, allowing some exposure of the surrounding SU-8. Since this region was unintentionally
exposed four times, although partially shielded by the metal, the SU-8 received signifi-
cantly more than the recommended dose. This increased the required development time
and resulted in a residual SU-8 layer that could not be removed.
5.9
Testing on pyrolysed SU-8 baseplate.
Next step in the fabrication process toward the final process were the test of the waveguide
fabrication on a pyrolysed base layer chip. This chip is made of SiO2 with SU-8 base layer
design that is also used for the final combined design. This chip with the SU-8 layer is
pyrolysed and then used for waveguide processing. The holes on the closely packed area
were all designed with 60 µm diameter.
The waveguide fabrication process was identical to the previous Cr chip process. The
main difference was that the pyrolysed baseplate did not cover the entire chip. Therefore,
during exposure, SU-8 was exposed both through the holes and in areas surrounding the
baseplate design.
During development, less SU-8 was dissolved, and a smaller volume of developer was
required. However, the thick surrounding SU-8 layer formed a cavity into which fresh
developer needed to flow to reach and remove uncured resist. The resulting waveguide can
be seen in figure 5.18, where the surrounding SU-8 layer creates a cavity around the base
42
Integration of 3D leaky optical waveguides in optoelectronic platform
==PAGE:53==
Figure 5.17: The left chip was exposured four times more than the right chip.
layer. The waveguide were fabricated successfully and matched the previous waveguides
from the Cr chips. In figure 5.18b it is clear that the top of all waveguides bend slightly
and end in a tip.
Angled waveguide exposure was also tested on one of these chips, and the unintentional
overexposure in surrounding areas reached four times the intended dose. This overexposed
SU-8 turned yellow/orange, as shown in figure 5.19a and for better comparison in figure
5.17. In this figure the left chip was exposed four times at the four angles while the right
was exposed once. The black spots on the right are residue resin that were not properly
removed from the chip and turned into carbon during pyrolysis.
This thick, overexposed material caused problems during storage: the SU-8 stressed (pos-
sibly shrank), putting pressure on the glass substrate, and in some cases caused the chip
to crack. Additionally, on one occasion, the SU-8 layer delaminated during development,
although only large surrounding pieces detached—not the waveguides themselves.
The angled waveguides cover a larger surface area and appear capable of eﬀicient light
guidance, in figure 5.19a, a side view shows the coverage of the area for the tightly packed
holes. However, these waveguides were more irregular and less straight compared to ver-
tically exposed ones.
(a) SEM overview image of waveg-
uides fabricated on pyrolysed SU-8 base
plate.
(b) Close up view of the structure of waveguide
fabricated on pyrolysed SU-8 base plate.
Figure 5.18: VP SEM images of waveguide fabricated on pyrolysed SU-8 base plate with
60 µm diameter holes.
Integration of 3D leaky optical waveguides in optoelectronic platform
43
==PAGE:54==
(a) Overview optical image of angled waveg-
uides on pyrolysed SU-8 base plate.
(b) Structure of angled waveguides
Figure 5.19: Optical images of angled waveguides.
(a) Angled overview of angled waveguides
(b) higher magnification image of an-
gled waveguides.
Figure 5.20: Optical images at 30° of angled waveguides.
5.10
Waveguide discussion and conclusion
The drop casting method used for depositing SU-8 proved to be a reliable and effective
method of adding the resist to the chips. It consistently produced a relatively even layer
across the chip surface, that meet the aimed for thickness of 1 mm. However, the viscosity
of SU-8 2035 limit the achievable layer thicknesses. It was not possible to produce thick-
nesses below 0.7 mm. To fabricate shorter waveguides, a less viscous SU-8 formulation
were also tested, and succeeded in producing thinner layers of resist, however the low
viscosity meant that the resist could not easily be contained on the chip.
In terms of the soft bake step, the high temperature of 95°C for ten hours were able
to evaporate all solvent in the SU-8 2035 resist, even for layers above 1 mm.
Lower
44
Integration of 3D leaky optical waveguides in optoelectronic platform
==PAGE:55==
temperatures may be able to fully evaporate solvent, provided that significantly longer
baking times are used, however this was not explored.
The flood exposure with dose of 1100
mJ
cm2 used was suﬀicient for the 1 mm SU-8 layer
and created structurally stable waveguides. The waveguide had a cylindrical form defined
in width by the diameter of the base hole and in height by the height of the SU-8 layer
thickness.
The 3D-printed holder used during backside exposure performed well. Originally it were
designed for the purpose of limiting the contact area between the SU-8 and carrier during
upside down flood exposure. However the solid SU-8 from the high temperature soft bake,
reduced this issue. The unexpected fluorescence from the holder lead to exploration of the
carrier surface during exposure. The unpolished backside of the silicon wafer, used as an
alternative exposure surface, created structures in the top of the waveguide that might be
advantageous for the light spreading in the final opto-electronic device. The structure is
likely due to the back side roughness ability to diffuse reflected light, which influences the
cross linking dynamics during exposure.
Angled exposure was successfully demonstrated and enabled the fabrication of branched or
tree-like waveguide structures. These waveguides exhibited more irregular shapes, which
may be due to resist flow and cross-linking during post-exposure bake (PEB). The sepa-
ration of the waveguide branches depend on the angle and for thicker waveguides a larger
angle would be needed to seperate the waveguides fully. One drawback observed during
angled exposure is that parts of the chip remained in contact with either the holder or
adjacent SU-8, resulting in unintended exposure of areas that were intended to be shielded
by the baseplate. This is visible in Figure 5.20a.
The chromium (Cr) mask layer on the test chip was found to be too thin, with a thickness
of 50 nm allowing partial light transmission. This unintended exposure of surrounding SU-
8 led to complications, including increased development time and a residual layer staying
on the chip after development.
A critical issue throughout the process was the presence of exposed and unprotected SU-
8 areas on the chip. These areas often received multiple doses of exposure and caused
complications such as substrate chip cracking or delamination due to stress.
The process used for waveguide fabrication in this work has not been fully optimized. The
parameters described represent the functional baseline developed during the course of this
thesis.
Integration of 3D leaky optical waveguides in optoelectronic platform
45
==PAGE:56==
6
The combination of electrode and
waveguide, opto-electronic platform
6.1
Introduction
This chapter present the final full process for the opto-electronic platform, where the
additional steps were added, compared to the process testing in the previous chapters:
• Fabricate base layer of SU-8 on SiO2 chip (as described previously)
• 3D print on a SiO2 chip with a base layer of SU-8 on.
• Pyrolyse chip with electrode
• fabricate SU-8 waveguides into the electrode
6.2
Printing challenges
To fabricate the final electrode design, initially SiO2 chips had a base layer of SU-8 added.
This is the surface that the print must adhere to.
Poor adhesion results in the print
detaching on the chip, which were a significant issue encountered during this thesis work.
In many cases, the print adhered to the membrane, and the membrane needed to be
cleaned to remove the prints.
There are several potential causes of printer failure. Based on manufacturer troubleshoot-
ing guide possible factors for print failures include:
• Incorrect or uneven gap between the membrane and the printing platform
• A worn or damaged membrane requiring replacement
• Insuﬀicient energy for the first printed layers
• Printed structures with too small a footprint for proper adhesion
As multiple prints were failing, the levelling and gap settings were repeatedly checked and
adjusted, but these changes did not resolve the problem.
The printing recipe was then modified to increase the energy dose for the initial layers.
This adjustment was particularly important due to the substrate change from reflective
Si to transparent SiO2, which increased the energy requirements for proper curing.This
modification improved results, and one chip was successfully printed using the increased
dose for the first layers.
Replacing the membrane also led to improved print adhesion on the chip surface and
printing successfully. This could be due to the old membrane being more adhesive than
the chip itself. It is also possible that the SU-8 base layer had lower adhesion to the chip
than the membrane had to the print, which made this substrate more challenging to print
on than other surfaces.
6.3
Air bubbles and vacuum
For the first test of SU-8 on a chip with electrodes on it, the chip shown in figure 4.14
was used to test the process. The chip is smaller than the test chips for the SU-8 recipe.
Therefore, a smaller amount of SU-8 was used, but otherwise the process used was the
46
Integration of 3D leaky optical waveguides in optoelectronic platform
==PAGE:57==
same as described in the waveguide section 5.6. However, no waveguides were created on
the chip. The suspicion was either air bubbles being trapped by the 3D electrode structure
or residue on the backside turning into carbon in the pyrolysis, and covering the holes for
the waveguide. The backside did not reveal anything covering the holes and backside light
images of the chips before the SU-8 showed that the holes were not covered.
On the next test chip the SU-8 layer was investigated using a microscope before the soft
bake, and the result can be seen in figure 6.1. The short time under the microscope is
assumed not to affect the SU-8, as the microscope does not use light at UV wavelengths,
which are the most effective at exposing the SU-8. In the images of the SU-8 layer, bubbles
are clearly visible, especially inside the electrode structure.
If the air bubbles were not removed from inside the electrode during the soft bake this
would affect the fabrication of the waveguide. During the exposure no SU-8 would be
exposed through the hole under the electrode structure, as only air would be at the hole
and the waveguides would not be fabricated.
(a) Air bubbles in the SU-8 liquid
on a pyrolysed electrode
(b) Air bubbles trapped inside the electrode
structure
Figure 6.1: BF optical images of test chip to investigate air bubble trapping.
A possible solution for the air bubble issue was to de-gas the SU-8 resist layer before
the soft bake to remove the air trapped in the resist. To test this process, a chip with
electrodes was covered in a drop of SU-8 2035 and then put into a vacuum desiccator that
could connect to the vacuum supply in the clean room facilities. This is not a very powerful
vacuum but will remove the air from the desiccator. Two types vacuum treatments were
tested. The first test used multiple short vacuum times and the second used one much
longer time in the vacuum chamber to see which were the most effective at driving the air
out of the structure.
During the first couple of minutes in the vacuum, the SU-8 seemed to get more bubbles,
than before the vacuum chamber. The air likely came from inside the carbon beams of
the electrodes. the bubbles can be seen in figure 6.2a. At this point the test chip with
vacuum cycles were imaged and the bubbles were clearly not removed. After 4 cycles of
5-10 minutes the air bubbles were still not completely removed but sat at the top of the
SU-8 in the partially solid soft shell.
In the long test the chip with SU-8 were left in the vacuum for 3 hours and the result
Integration of 3D leaky optical waveguides in optoelectronic platform
47
==PAGE:58==
was very similar to the cycled vacuum test. The air bubbles left the electrode structures
and were driven up to the top of the SU-8 layer but could not escape the soft shell of
the SU-8. This can be seen in figure 6.2b, where the bubbles all sit in the soft shell and
create wrinkles in the shell. Even if the vacuum did not remove the air bubbles from the
SU-8 completely during the vacuuming, it still moved the air bubbles away from inside the
electrode structure where they were an issue. The vacuum treatment moved the trapped
air to the top and during the soft bake the soft shell around the SU-8 layer liquefied and
released the bubbles and a smooth SU-8 for the waveguide process for the opto-electric
platform.
Another alternative to the vacuum treatment for the air bubbles is to use a less viscous
SU-8 resist that would flow into the electrode structure. This was tested with SU-8 2005
that has a much lower viscosity at 45 cSt, and a solid content of 45 % [14]. This resist
did give some issues at the drop casting step as the lower viscosity lead to it flowing out
from the edges of the chip and hereby bonding the chip to the carrier wafer during the
soft bake. The amount to cover the chip with side length 25 mm without flowing outside
the chip was 25 drops from a syringe. This did give a thinner layer resist than the SU-8
2035 (0.5 mm in average compared to the 1.2 mm for the SU-8 2035) and the bake times
and exposure times were adjusted for the changed thickness.
(a) After 5 min in vacuum chamber.
(b) After 3 hours in vacuum chamber.
Figure 6.2: Images after vacuum test to remove the bubbles.
6.4
Full process for the opto-electronic platform
To successfully fabricate the opto-electronic platform with pyrolysed electrodes and SU-8
waveguides the first step is to apply a SU-8 2035 base layer on a SiO2 chip. This process
is described in detail in section 5.4. The next step is the electrode structure print on
the SU-8 layer, there were some issues with this printing setup and this is described in
section 6.2. The main focus for the printing was the aligning of the printed structure
on top of the SU-8 base plate holes and mounting of the chip on the platform with no
rotation. The result of the printing on the SU-8 can be seen in figure 6.3, these images show
the electrodes before the pyrolysis process and illustrate the different test electrode sizes
and configurations. The pyrolysis followed the standard recipe, and electrode fabrication
process were complete.
48
Integration of 3D leaky optical waveguides in optoelectronic platform
==PAGE:59==
(a) Optical image of the electrode structures used
for the final opto-electric platform.
(b) SEM image of the electrode
structures used for the final opto-
electric platform.
Figure 6.3: Electrode printed structure before pyrolysis.
To create the waveguide the SU-8 was drop cast on the chip in a drop with a diameter
around 16 mm, that covered all structures on the chip. The next step was a degassing
treatment in vacuum for 10 minutes that moved air bubbles from the electrode structures
to the top of the SU-8 layer.
Next step was the ten hour soft bake at 95°C, followed by the standard exposure in the
exposure holder with a dose of 1100 mJ per cm2. This was directly followed by the PEB
for 1.2 hours also at 95°C on a hot plate. Lastly, a development in PGMEA for 1 hour
in one beaker, with manual stirring periodically, followed by 15 minutes in a new beaker
with fresh PGMEA and lastly a rinse and dry step to finish the SU-8 waveguide.
(a) 300 µm side length,
hole 50 µm diameter.
(b) 300 µm side length,
hole 150 µm diameter.
(c) 200 µm side length,
hole 50 µm diameter.
(d) 200 µm side length,
hole 150 µm diameter.
Figure 6.4: Optical images of the opto-electronic waveguides.
The resulting opto-electrodes can be seen in optical images in figure 6.4, that clearly shows
the white SU-8 waveguide inside the grey electrode structure. Figures 6.4a and 6.4b show
the large Kelvin cells with side lengths of 300 µm with a waveguide hole at 50 µm and 150
Integration of 3D leaky optical waveguides in optoelectronic platform
49
==PAGE:60==
µm respectively. The thicker waveguide has a square top that is formed by the electrode
blocking the exposure light at the top of the electrode.
This same effect can be seen
in figure 6.4c and 6.4d with the electrodes made of Kelvin cells stacked on top of each
other. These are the design with side length 200 µm. The waveguide is the same height
as three Kelvin cells stacked on top of each other, which were an approximately 1 mm tall
structure. While following waveguide up through the electrode the width of the waveguide
shrink at the borders between the cells as the electrode beams constrain the waveguide.
The combined structure for the 300 µm Kelvin design can be seen in greater detail using
SEM imaging in figure 6.5. The first two figures show the same electrode at different
angles. The first is at 30° where the bottom of the waveguide is clearly visible, and the
second figure at 45° angle shows that the waveguide is taller than the electrode and extends
above the top. The next figure shows that the alignment step of the printing is accurate
as the waveguide is placed in the middle of the electrode in this top view of the structure
with a waveguide hole of 50 µm. The last figure shows the 150 µm hole and how the
square hole in the Kelvin design forms the waveguide, with a slight amount of waveguide
material extending outside the electrode square.
(a) Design side length 300 µm and hole
width 50 µm, at 30°.
(b) Design side length 300 µm and hole
width 50 µm, at 45°.
(c) Design side length 300 µm and hole
width 50 µm, top view.
(d) Design side length 300 µm and hole
width 150 µm, top view.
Figure 6.5: SEM images of the opto-electronic waveguides.
50
Integration of 3D leaky optical waveguides in optoelectronic platform
==PAGE:61==
(a) overview off the electrode platform
with waveguides.
(b) Magnified look at the bottom of the
middle electrode.
(c) Full view of the middle electrode
Figure 6.6: SEM images at 30° of the final opto-electronic platform.
The other design for the opto-electronic platform is the closely packed electrodes.
As
previously discovered the Kelvin cells with design side length 100 µm did not have space
for a waveguide. Therefore, the design for the close packed electrode used the 200 µm
design side length electrodes. The designed holes did not match the placement of the
Kelvin cells when the electrodes were this size but the middle electrode matched up with
the middle hole. This can be seen in figure 6.6a. Figure 6.6c shows a closer look at the
middle electrode, that shows that the waveguide fit perfectly inside the electrode. Figure
6.6b shows the feet of the electrode and the bottom of the waveguide.
6.5
LED optical tests
For the investigation of the optical properties of the SU-8 waveguide, Samuel Maraschin
developed a platform containing a light-emitting diode (LED) (WL-SMCW SMT Mono-
color Chip LED Waterclear by Würth Elektronik eiSos GmbH and Co. KG, Deutschland)
to illuminate the chips from the bottom with blue light (wavelength of 470 nm)[20].
Figure 6.7: LED platform for illuminating samples from the back side.
Integration of 3D leaky optical waveguides in optoelectronic platform
51
==PAGE:62==
Due to the chips being a different size than the holder from the setup it was diﬀicult to
place the waveguides directly on top of the LED diode, to ensure optimal illumination of
the waveguides.
This setup was placed under a microscope, where the light from the microscope could be
turned off completely, or for images of the structure, set to a low intensity. To enable
comparison of the images the exposure time was kept at either 4 ms or 10 ms.
For all waveguides ,the LED sent light in the waveguide and it was transmitted to the
top. There was no or very little diffusion to the surroundings, even for the image with
the electrode made with exposure on the backside unpolished side of the Si carrier (figure
6.8c) or the angled waveguides (figure 6.9).
In figure 6.8a, the waveguides from the closely packed electrode area can be seen, the
width of the holes are designed to be 60 µm and the top of the waveguides were 58 µm.
In figure 6.8b the light from a much wider waveguide is shown with a width of 150 µm. In
this waveguide there is dots in the waveguide where the light is blocked, these were not
visible on the waveguide and the surface seemed smooth in BF microscopy. The blocking
of the light might come from residue on the backside that was pyrolysed. In the last figure
6.8c, the waveguide is patterned by being exposed on the unpolished side of the carrier
wafer. This structure clearly captured and scattered the light from the diode.
(a) Close packed waveguides,
10x magnification.
(b) Waveguide 150 µm width.
20x magnification.
(c) Waveguide from exposure in
contact with unpolished Si car-
rier wafer. 10x mangification.
Figure 6.8: Optical images of different waveguides fabricated. 4 ms for all images.
Other interesting waveguide constructions tested with the LED, were the angled waveg-
uides in figure 6.9. To the left the image shows the top of the waveguides as well as the
blue light from the LED. The image to the right only shows the light from the LED. These
waveguides seemed to have lower transmission of light than the straight waveguides, as the
intensity of the blue light was much weaker on this image. At higher than 4 ms exposure,
the light could also be seen transmitted trough the bottom plate on this Cr chip as the
base plate layer was slightly transparent.
52
Integration of 3D leaky optical waveguides in optoelectronic platform
==PAGE:63==
Figure 6.9: Optical images of the LED transmitting through angled waveguides, waveguide
width of 50 µm. 10 x magnification.
The last optical LED test was conducted on a full device with both electrode and waveg-
uide, as shown in figure 6.10. Both structures are visible in the BF light of the microscope
and the focus is placed on top of the waveguide, therefore the electrode is out of focus.
The blue light in the waveguide is clearly visible and prove that it is possible to create an
optical waveguide inside a 3D printed electrode. This was the aim of this thesis to be able
to create this opto-electronic construction.
(a) 200 µm Kelvin design with 50 µm waveg-
uide.
(b) 300 µm Kelvin design with 50 µm waveg-
uide.
Figure 6.10: Optical images of the opto-electronic waveguide structure. Exposure time 10
ms.
6.6
discussion and conclusion for final combination of
waveguide and electrode
The process for combining the SU-8 waveguide with the pyrolysed electrode work well.
From a design perspective, when multiple Kelvin cells are packed closely together, a side
length of 200 µm is the most successfully. This configuration provides suﬀicient space for
including a waveguide without compromising structural integrity.
Integration of 3D leaky optical waveguides in optoelectronic platform
53
==PAGE:64==
Regarding the waveguide diameter, designs with widths of 100 µm and above did not
show any advantages over the 50 µm design. All larger waveguide widths were constrained
by the inner dimensions of the Kelvin cell structure. Due to the shrinkage that occurs
during pyrolysis, the side length of the Kelvin cells is reduced by approximately 50 %.
For example, a design with a 200 µm side length results in a post-pyrolysis side length of
100 µm. At the same time, the waveguide hole expands, meaning that an initial 100 µm
diameter hole becomes larger and may no longer fit within the shrunk structure.
Angled waveguides are likely to be compatible with the full process flow. However, the ad-
ditional exposure time required for angled designs affected the SU-8 around the baseplate,
causing mechanical stress that resulted in chip breakage.
The LED tests demonstrated successful light transmission through the SU-8 waveguides,
with minimal diffusion into the surrounding structures. This effect was observed even in
structures with a structured waveguide top or angled waveguides. The lack of light diffu-
sion is likely due to the high refractive index of SU-8, which confines the light effectively
within the waveguide using total internal refraction.
54
Integration of 3D leaky optical waveguides in optoelectronic platform
==PAGE:65==
7
Conclusion
In this thesis, a method for integrating 3D-printed pyrolysed carbon electrodes with SU-8
based optical waveguides on a SiO2 platform has been successfully demonstrated. The pro-
cess involved fabricating an SU-8 base layer, printing electrode structures via 3D printing,
performing pyrolysis, and forming SU-8 waveguides aligned with the electrode geometry.
Despite challenges with print adhesion, and trapped air during SU-8 deposition, practical
solutions were developed and validated through iterative testing and optical evaluation.
The electrode design based on Kelvin cell structures proved effective, with 200 µm side
lengths offering a good balance between structural support and space for the waveguide.
Thicker waveguides did not significantly improve performance and were constrained by
the internal geometry of the electrode.
Shrinkage from pyrolysis and widening of the
waveguide holes were also accounted for in refining the design.
The integration of SU-8 waveguides into the electrode structures was verified optically us-
ing a custom LED setup. Light transmission through the waveguides was clearly observed
with minimal scattering, confirming good optical confinement. Even designs with angled
paths or rough surfaces did not exhibit significant diffusion.
Ultimately, this work demonstrates a feasible and repeatable approach for combining
electrical and optical functionality in a single micro fabricated optoelectric platform, for
Parkinson disease modelling.
7.1
Outlook
There are several directions for improving the opto-electronic platform, both in terms of
the process and the design.
A future experiment could be combining angled waveguides with the 3D electrodes. The
straight waveguides have worked well, but angled ones might offer new possibilities for
directing light.
Another idea is plasma ashing the surface of the SU-8 waveguides. This could roughen
the surface and maybe help the waveguide diffuse light out into the surroundings, which
has not happened in the current tests. Since SU-8 and the carbon electrodes can handle
plasma without damage, this could be a good way to change how the waveguides behave
optically.
For the closely packed electrode design, the bottom plate layout could be updated. The
current design does not fit well with the 200 µm Kelvin cell structure once the waveguides
are added. A better layout would leave enough space for the waveguides while still packing
the cells as close together as possible. It could also help to add extra holes outside the
electrodes so more waveguides can be added to increase optical coverage.
One issue that came up was stress from SU-8 around the electrode base after exposure,
especially when there is extra SU-8 around the base layer that gets exposed unintentionally.
This causes many chips to break. A simple fix for this could be to add a metal cover or
mask during exposure to block light from hitting areas where it is not supposed to cure
the SU-8.
These changes could help improve reliability, reduce chip failure, and maybe give new ways
to use the waveguides and electrodes together in different applications.
Integration of 3D leaky optical waveguides in optoelectronic platform
55
==PAGE:66==
Bibliography (All websites visited 28/7/2025)
[1]
Parkinsonforeningen. Parkinson. 2025. url: https://parkinson.dk/viden-forskning/
om-parkinson/hvad-er-parkinson/.
[2]
Jakob Christensen. Parkinson. 2023. url: https://www.sundhed.dk/borger/patienthaandbogen/
hjerne-og-nerver/sygdomme/parkinson/.
[3]
Peter Aagaard Brixen. New brain model enables testing of treatments for Parkinson’s.
https://www.dtu.dk/english/newsarchive/2023/10/hjernemodel-aabner-for-at-teste-
medicin-mod-parkinsons-sygdom. 2023.
[4]
Vasudevan Shashank. “Leaky Opto-Electrical Neural Implants: A Multidisciplinary
Approach to Parkinson’s Disease Therapy”. Available at https://findit.dtu.dk/en/
catalog/5f842935d9001d0146116737. PhD thesis. DTU, June 2020.
[5]
R. Daya Karthic et al. “Mechanical characterization of 3D-printed Kelvin cell with
varying infill densities”. In: Materials Today: Proceedings 84 (2023). Third Interna-
tional Conference on Sustainable Energy Solutions for a Better Tomorrow, pp. 41–
46. issn: 2214-7853. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matpr.2023.04.675. url:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2214785323026093.
[6]
Samuel Tavares da Silva Maraschin and Swetha Vasudevan Kanakkottu. Manual
for 3D Printer 02 (BMF S140) + 3D Printer 03 (BMF S240). 2025. url: https:
//labmanager.dtu.dk/d4mb/show.php?dokId=20861$%5C&$mach=536.
[7]
BMF knowledge base. url: https://bmf3d.com/.
[8]
Phil Mooney. Projection Micro Stereolithography 3D Printing. 2020. url: https :
//bmf3d.com/blog/projection-micro-stereolithography-3d-printing/.
[9]
Laura Galloway. BMF Reveals the microArch S240: The First Micro-Precision 3D
Printer for Industrial Production. 2020. url: https://bmf3d.com/news/bmf-reveals-
the-microarch-s240/.
[10]
Swetha Vasudevan Kanakkottu. “Additive manufacturing-derived 3D pyrolytic car-
bon electrodes for on-chip microsupercapacitors”. Available at https://example.com/
thesis.pdf. PhD thesis. DTU, Sept. 2024.
[11]
microArch S240 User Manual. url: https://support.bmf3d.com/hc/en-us/articles/
1500002273201-S240-User-Manual.
[12]
Babak Rezaei et al. “Highly structured 3D pyrolytic carbon electrodes derived from
additive manufacturing technology”. In: Materials and Design 193 (2020), p. 108834.
issn: 0264-1275. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matdes.2020.108834. url: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0264127520303683.
[13]
T. Anhøj et. al. Lithography Tool Package Training. DTU course. spring. 2022.
[14]
Kayaku Advanced Materials. SU-8 2000 Permanent Epoxy Negative Photoresist data
sheet.
[15]
Thomas Aarøe Anhøj. “Fabrication of high aspect ratio SU-8 structures for inte-
grated spectrometers”. PhD thesis. DTU, 2007.
[16]
Nicolai Støvring et al. “Fabrication of pyrolytic carbon interdigitated microelec-
trodes by maskless UV photolithography with epoxy-based photoresists SU-8 and
mr-DWL”. In: Micro and Nano Engineering 23 (2024), p. 100257. issn: 2590-0072.
doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mne.2024.100257. url: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S2590007224000200.
[17]
M. Wubs et. al. 34020 Optics and photonics. DTU course. spring. 2021.
[18]
2025. url: https://labmanager.dtu.dk/d4mb/show.php?dokId=2180&mach=275.
[19]
LabAdviser. 2025. url: https://labadviser.nanolab.dtu.dk/index.php?title=LabAdviser.
56
Integration of 3D leaky optical waveguides in optoelectronic platform
==PAGE:67==
[20]
Würth Elektronik. WL-SMCW SMT Mono-color Chip LED Waterclear data sheet.
Integration of 3D leaky optical waveguides in optoelectronic platform
57
==PAGE:68==
58
Integration of 3D leaky optical waveguides in optoelectronic platform
==PAGE:69==
A
Appendix
A.1
Appendix A: Process flows
Figure A.1: Process flow for chrome layer test chips.
Integration of 3D leaky optical waveguides in optoelectronic platform
59
==PAGE:70==
Figure A.2: Process flow for fabricating waveguides in SU-8 2035.
60
Integration of 3D leaky optical waveguides in optoelectronic platform
==PAGE:71==
A.2
Appendix B: Alignment image, larger version
Figure A.3: Rotated larger version of figure 4.18
Integration of 3D leaky optical waveguides in optoelectronic platform
61
==PAGE:72==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Ørsteds Plads, Building 347
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.nanolab.dtu.dk
