==PAGE:1==
Topology optimization of surgical suture distribu-
tion using a simplified soft tissue model
Master of Science Thesis
Brandon Marshal Parks
Civil and Mechanical Engineering
Department of Solid Mechanics
==PAGE:2==
Topology optimization of surgical suture distribution using a simplified soft tissue model
Master of Science Thesis
July, 2025
Author:
Brandon Marshal Parks
M.Sc. Mechanical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Main Supervisor:
Niels Aage, PhD, Associate Professor
Civil and Mechanical Engineering
Department of Solid Mechanics
Technical University of Denmark
Co-supervisor:
Markus Tandrup Holm, PhD Student
Civil and Mechanical Engineering
Department of Solid Mechanics
Technical University of Denmark
Project Period:
03/02/2025 - 24/07/2025
Submission Date:
24/07/2025
Published by:
DTU, Department of Solid Mechanics, Koppels Allé, Building 404, 2800 Kongens
Lyngby Denmark
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months and three weeks at the Section for Solid Mechanics, De-
partment of Civil and Mechanical Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU) in partial
fulfillment for the degree of Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
Brandon Marshal Parks - s232225
Signature
Date
24/07/2025
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
This thesis establishes a foundational optimization framework for suture placement to improve wound
healing and surgical outcomes as a precursor to the OptCut project. Building on a previously established
discrete spring model for sutures, the approach extends this to a novel topology optimization framework
by interpolating spring stiffnesses to vary boundary conditions and external loading with the use of the
Method of Moving Asymptotes (MMA) optimization algorithm. Design variable filtering and penalties
enforce a length scale to attempt to match realistic suture diameters with a neo-Hookean hyperelastic finite
strain finite element formulation simulating suture tightening and subsequent wound closure. Constraints
on sufficient wound closure and suture quantity ensure meaningful solutions. Results demonstrate the
framework’s ability to generate discrete suture topologies, but highlight limitations in enforcing clini-
cally realistic, built-up sutures with current methods. The findings indicate that while the state problem
and sensitivities are correctly implemented, further developments such as advanced material models, im-
proved design variable interpolation, and mesh refinement are necessary for clinical relevance.
Topology optimization of surgical suture distribution using a simplified soft tissue model
ii
==PAGE:4==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
i
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
1
Project introduction and motivation
1
1.1
Current methods in literature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2
Finite element formulation
6
2.1
Non-linear kinematics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Principle of virtual work using the total Lagrangian . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Suture spring energy augmentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4
Suture spring tightening methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.5
Hyperelastic material models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.6
Ficticious domain energy interpolation scheme
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.7
Mesh generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3
Optimization problem and methods
15
3.1
Designable regions and design variables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2
Filtering of design variables
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.3
Objective function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.4
Constraint measures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.5
Adjoint sensitivity analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4
Numerical Implementation
27
4.1
Computational performance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5
Results
28
5.1
State problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.2
Mesh convergence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.3
Benchmark problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.4
Alternate initializations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.5
Case studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.6
Wound closure constraint . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.7
Removal of passive sutures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6
Conclusion
43
6.1
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
6.2
Disclosure of LLM usage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
Bibliography
45
A (Appendix start) In-depth derivations
48
A.1
Principle of virtual work with fictitious energy interpolation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
A.2
Neo-Hookean material model implementation validation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
A.3
Suture spring stiffness as a design variable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
A.4
Verification of sensitivities using 1st-Order finite difference . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
Topology optimization of surgical suture distribution using a simplified soft tissue model
iii
==PAGE:5==
1
Project introduction and motivation
Many procedures in the medical field are performed from best practices combined with the administering
of the physician’s judgement and experience. While the results are often satisfactory, there is room for
significant human error in the absence of quantification. This, coupled with the large number of possible
implementations by the attending surgeon, shows a large opportunity for the inclusion of additional sur-
gical planning tools. A variety of aspects of surgical automation and robotic suturing have been studied
where the results of this and future works could be applied clinically (Ostrander [33]).
The primary goal of this thesis is to propose, implement, and validate an optimization scheme for se-
lecting optimal suture locations of a simple wound shape. The limits of the state problem formulation
are explored to ensure accurate domains for the optimizer to search. Relevant constraints are included
to combat spurious minima, but are not necessarily inclusive of all conditions the project is interested in
satisfying/alleviating such as strain field tuning rather than homogenizing. The development of the cur-
rent scheme is critical such that a robust simulation framework is established for the state problem and a
stepping stone is lain towards the main project goal: optimization of the skin topology and its interactions
with sutures.
In optimizing suture topology, the end-goal is maximizing wound health through, and after, the healing
process. This is done in two ways: avoidance of blood flow restriction to areas highly compressed due to
suture tightening and avoiding wound dehiscence by ensuring sufficient wound closure.
1.1
Current methods in literature
The methods and results presented in this thesis is a continuation of that performed and initiated in Holm
[19] and Holm et al. [20]. These works focused on the mechanical and finite element implementations
while the current work is focused solely on the development of a topology optimization framework where
the state problem is comprised of the previously established mechanics. The interaction of these mechan-
ics with the optimizer is investigated and adjusted to ensure compatibility and prevent the optimization
algorithm from taking advantage of the numerics in a way that is not intended or physical.
1.1.1
Skin mechanics
Skin is a complex, multi-layered, composite material with three main components: the epidermis, der-
mis, and subcutaneous regions. It is known and has been shown to exhibit large strains, viscoelasticity,
anisotropy (even within the same layer), and load-history dependency (Joodaki [22]). Responsible for
the majority of the anisotropic behavior, the reticular region of the dermis is predominantly composed of
Type I (tensile) collagen fiber strands immersed in a ground matrix. These fibers are typically disordered
but become aligned upon loading. This load-induced alignment produces the viscoelastic behavior.
The overall mechanical response of the skin is dependent on many factors such as the location, age, orien-
tation to the resting skin tension lines (see Figure 1.2), and the local collagen fiber directions. However, in
general the biggest predictor of skin performance is the loading direction compared to the local collagen
fiber distribution.
Many material models have been used to model and study skin [14], [30], [21]. For isotropic hyperelastic
models, the incompressible one-term Ogden model tends to represent skin response better than the neo-
Hookean or Mooney-Rivlin model [22]. At minimum, a hyperelastic material model is then of interest due
to performance as well as being required for physical accuracy of skin modelling. This sets the foundation
for the inclusion of more involved material models such as the Holzapfel-Gasser-Ogden (HGO) model
[21] to account for the viscoelastic and anisotropic effects skin exhibits.
Topology optimization of surgical suture distribution using a simplified soft tissue model
1
==PAGE:6==
Figure 1.1: Detailed rendering of the layers present in the skin. Modified from [6].
Figure 1.2:
Resting skin tension lines (Langer’s
lines) locations shown on fore and aft sides. Shown
wound (1) is pulled opened by the tension lines nat-
urally while wound (2) is not. Modified from [2].
For a wide range of incision and suturing proper-
ties, suture forces are shown to be between 0-5N
(Chanda [13]). Suture forces greater than 2.5N
(250g) show significant increase in the risk of tis-
sue necrosis due to impaired blood flow inversely
proportional to the suture force (Larrabee [24]).
The center suture typically contains the highest
tightening force, 4x as compared to the first end
suture in the case of Chanda as it has the largest in-
cision separation to close, which is of course case-
dependent but remains valid for practical incision
geometries. This subsequently leads to dehiscence
and improper wound healing which then motivates
the minimization of suture stiffness studied herein.
1.1.2
Simulated suturing techniques
Sutures are cylindrical, fibrous strands of various
material (silk, polyester, etc.) that, upon tighten-
ing, augment the skin’s strain field by bearing into
the new, inner skin surface created by the suture
piercing the skin. There are many suturing forms and techniques. However, the current work only con-
siders the simple case of interrupted sutures due to their simplicity in implementation. Therefore, suturing
techniques attaching to specific layers of the skin, such as subcutaneous or deep sutures where the epider-
mis is not pierced, or those where consecutive bites do not cross the incision (vertical/horizontal mattress
sutures) are not remotely comparable to the results reported herein. To that end, inclusion of many more
material models is necessary to truly reflect how skin reacts to these suture techniques.
Topology optimization of surgical suture distribution using a simplified soft tissue model
2
==PAGE:7==
(a) Interrupted suture
(b) Continuous suture
(c) Horizontal mattress suture
(d) Vertical mattress suture
Figure 1.3: Selected suture techniques performed in clinical practice. The considered case here is closest
to an interrupted suture, (a). The techniques shown are from Orpet and Welsh [32].
Figure 1.4: Suture locations using the rule of halves
shown with 2nd-order. Each succeeding order con-
tains all previous orders’ sutures.
Sutures are typically placed according to two dif-
ferent rules: the rule of halves and equidistant.
Equidistant placement simply specifies a number
of sutures and evenly spaces these over the wound.
The rule of halves placement starts with an ini-
tial suture in the center of the wound, and then
all spans between existing sutures are continuously
bisected with additional sutures until the wound is
closed with ns being the total number of sutures.
Here the specific rule of halves geometry is de-
noted by its order and is equivalent to the number
of bisection batches required to achieve the suture
topology. The rule of halves is detailed further in
Figure 1.4. The choice of methods is normally left
to the surgeon, but the rule of halves is most often preferred due to the even closure behavior during the
procedure which better distributes skin between sutures.
Not directly investigated here, but of definite future interest is the design and optimization of skin flap
procedures. These are often made from additional incisions added to an existing wound to reduce risk of
recovery complications (dehiscence, necrosis, etc.). Of main interest is the common Z-plasty technique.
This technique generally adds two new incision lines to the end of an existing incision to approximately
create a ”Z” shape. The newly created, triangular skin flaps are then transposed such that the main incision
is re-aligned to the Langer’s Lines and the tension perpendicular to the incision’s main axis is reduced.
Alternatively, the Z-plasty can be used to augment the strain field around an existing incision by creating
a new incision in a Z-shape in the surrounding area. The transposition procedure tightens the skin in one
direction while loosening in the other, typically the direction between the existing incision and the new
plasty. This second use-case is of main interest here. An example of each is shown in Figure 1.5.
Topology optimization of surgical suture distribution using a simplified soft tissue model
3
==PAGE:8==
Figure 1.5: Z-plasty suturing technique example. This figure is modified from Salam [35].
1.1.3
Optimization methods
To the author’s knowledge, there currently exists no studies performing numerical optimization specif-
ically on the placement and stiffness design of interrupted sutures using a formulation reminiscient of
standard SIMP-based topology optimization. Overall, most studies seem to focus on either optimizing
the suturing process or claiming ”optimal” layouts without numerical optimization (Ostrander [33], Ra-
jabi [34]). Therefore, the development of relevant and well-performing optimization statements is done
with suggestions from similar works using optimization implementations that the current work also con-
tains. While no numerical optimization on this is seen in the literature, many studies perform domain
sweeps to determine ”optimal” suturing patterns and skin flap designs [34], [27], [17]. These typically
each focus on varying one feature such as a set of material model parameters, flap designs, or excision
shapes.
Topology optimization typically has been used to modulate the placement of material. The same design
variable penalization form is applied in Buhl [12] as is used in the Solid Isotropic Material with Penaliza-
tion (SIMP) method ([4], [5]) to an additional set of design variables denoting the partial existence or not
of a support at a mesh nodal location. Numerically, this is akin to applying springs with varying stiffness
at each designable nodal locations.
Avoidance of intermediate design variables has been of interest to many previous studies [3], [37]. Ap-
proaches have seemed to converge on the use of design variable filtering ([11], [10], [26], [25]) as well
as projection methods ([18]) to enforce maximally discrete (”black and white”) designs. Density and
sensitivity filters spread density and sensitivity values over a specified radius using various interpolation
methods while projections directly augment the input values (design variables, filtered design variables,
etc.) based on a set function such as a smoothed Heaviside filter [37].
Hyperelastic models have also been shown to produce significantly better performing designs in density-
based topology optimization. The exact choice of objective has an impact on the final topology and
equivalent performance as well, at least for density-based optimization [23]. To facilitate optimization
numerical stability in the presence of a finite strain formulation, an energy interpolation has been applied
depending on each element’s relative stiffness [40]. This equates to treating effectively non-existant ele-
ments (void) with linear strains, fully-present elements (solid) with nonlinear strains, and everything in
between as a linear interpolation between these two. The motivation is primarily in the context of inter-
mediate relative densities that the current work does not see, but is still effective in a static binary density
system (skin-wound) as well as of interest for the project’s future works.
1.1.4
Domain definition and suture model
The sutured wound topology is now detailed. There are four distinct regions in the current problem: the
skin, the wound, the designable region, and the buffer zone used to isolate the skin from boundary effects.
These are shown in Figure 1.6 along with generic suture springs shown in the designable region.
Topology optimization of surgical suture distribution using a simplified soft tissue model
4
==PAGE:9==
Figure 1.6: Domain regions for the current problem. The skin (Ωskin), wound (Ωwound), designable region
(Ωdesign), and buffer zones (Ωbuffer) are shown. Detail A shows an example of suture springs connected
between the two designable domain regions. The structure is clamped at its periphery.
The current work only considers an elliptical wound, but in general any wound defined by a convex
polygon is compatible with the current implementation. Of notable interest is that in practice, wounds
are typically excised into a vesica or fusiform shape to aid closure at the wound’s major axis vertices and
minimize dog-earing or the bunching of skin tissue there.
Chandra [13] used 3D skin and suture models with sutures modeled as an additional element that contacts
the skin. The current model simplifies this to a 2D plane stress model where each suture is represented
as a set of suture springs composing a single ”built-up” suture. This is done primarily to reduce the
computational workload in re-meshing at every iteration when the suture locations are updated.
Each suture spring is created by applying equal and opposite spring forces at corresponding suture node
pairs. These are typically at symmetrical locations on opposite sides of a wound; and this is the case for
all studies here. The spring stiffnesses, αi, are coupled and identical between these locations giving an
equivalent system as shown in Figure 1.7. The locations with suture springs present varies from case to
case.
Figure 1.7: Suture model and labeling of relevant regions. This model is implemented identically to that
shown in [20].
Topology optimization of surgical suture distribution using a simplified soft tissue model
5
==PAGE:10==
2
Finite element formulation
In the following section the relevant theory for solution of the state problem is presented. This includes
non-linear kinematics, the principle of virtual work, hyperelastic material models, and the addition of
suture springs to the existing theory. The general mesh generation process is also detailed.
The theory presented here is based on that from de Borst [9], Cook [15], and Bonet [7] and attempts to
follow the notation used in these references. Some variable names have been changed in the interest of
avoiding double-definitions, but in general if one is familiar with these references the following sections
should be easy to follow. In general, only key components of the mechanical formulation are shown to
provide more focus on Chapter 3.
2.1
Non-linear kinematics
In the context of large strains, the discrepancy between the undeformed and deformed configurations is no
longer negligible. One of these reference frames must be picked within which the subsequent analysis will
be performed. In selecting the undeformed configuration, the resulting stress measure is the second Piola-
kirchoff stress, S, which, conveniently, is work-conjugate to the Green-Lagrange strain, E. Formulating
in this reference frame allows the following derivations to be composed of these two tensors only without
need to consider other strain measures. This is also beneficial as the upcoming material models are
typically defined using the Green-Lagrange strain explicitly. The consequence of this choice is that neither
the Green-Lagrange strain, E, nor the second Piola-Kirchoff stress, S, have physical meaning and must
be transformed to the deformed frame to get true stress and strain values.
To map between these reference frames, the deformation gradient, F, is needed. This tensor directly maps
spatial points in the undeformed configuration to their counterpart in the deformed configuration. The
deformation gradient is defined as
F = ∂x
∂X = ∂(X + u)
∂X
= I + ∂u
∂X
(2.1)
where x is the deformed configuration coordinates, X is the undeformed configuration coordinates, and a
is the nodal displacement vector.
Figure 2.1: General deformation kinematics of a solid body in the undeformed (Ω0) and the deformed
(Ω) configurations. This figure is edited from Bonet [7].
The deformation gradient can be decomposed into a pure rigid-body rotation tensor, R, and a pure stretch
tensor, U. Here the right stretch tensor is chosen as opposed to the left stretch tensor. If the left is chosen,
the only consequence is the resulting strain measure is the Almansi strain tensor which is not of interest
here. The right stretch tensor, U, is then defined as
Topology optimization of surgical suture distribution using a simplified soft tissue model
6
==PAGE:11==
U = C1/2 =
 FT F
1/2
(2.2)
where C is the right Cauchy-Green deformation tensor, and the deformation gradient is then decomposed
with the right stretch tensor in the right position of the decomposition as opposed to the left:
F = RU.
(2.3)
As only the stresses and strains are desired, the pure rotation matrix, R, is of no interest here. This is then
followed by the definition of the Green-Lagrange strain tensor using the right Cauchy-Green deformation
tensor:
E = 1
2(C −I).
(2.4)
One key consideration is the second Piola-Kirchoff stress is a non-physical stress measure as it is defined in
the undeformed configuration. To obtain true stresses in the skin for analysis and suture performance, the
Cauchy stress, σ, can be obtained from the second Piola-Kirchoff stress, S, using the following relation:
σ = J−1FSFT
(2.5)
where J−1 is the inverse determinant of the deformation gradient, J = det F, and acts as a volume scaling
between the deformed and undeformed configurations.
2.2
Principle of virtual work using the total Lagrangian
The principle of virtual work (or minimum potential energy) is used to characterize the relationship be-
tween the skin strain energy and the applied tractions through suture tightening. The quantities are pre-
sented here in the skin’s reference/undeformed configuration, meaning the formulation shown is a Total
Lagrangian formulation. First the change in internal energy must equal the external work performed on
the structure:
δΠint = δΠext.
(2.6)
The internal energy is represented as the integral of the strain energy density over the reference skin
volume, Ω0. The external energy comes from applied traction loading and volumetric loading. The
current work does not consider the effects of volumetric loading, but future works could consider resting
tension lines in the skin which are a direct result of gravity. Inserting these definitions gives:
Z
Ω0
δET : S dΩ=
Z
Γ0
δuT t0 dΓ.
(2.7)
As there are no applied external tractions, t0, the external forces integral evaluates to zero. Then Equa-
tion 2.7 would result in no applied loading and no internal energy gained. In Equation 2.8 suture springs
are then introduced to the structure as a penalty term, Πs = 1
2tT At, added to the internal work term. The
incremental solution scheme is also denoted with the current increment, ∆t, and the state at the beginning
of the increment, t:
Topology optimization of surgical suture distribution using a simplified soft tissue model
7
==PAGE:12==
Z
Ω0
δET : St+∆t dΩ+ δaT ∂2Πs
∂a2 ∆a = 0 + δaT ∂Πs
∂a .
(2.8)
Expanding the internal energy term gives rise to five distinct stiffness terms,
K =
KL + KNL + KΣ + Ks
=
Z
Ω0
(BL + BNL)T D(BL + BNL) dΩ
+
Z
Ω0
BT
NLΣtBNL dΩ+ TT AT.
(2.9)
and taking the remaining term as the internal force vector and subtracting it from the external forces gives
the residual:
r =
fext −fint + fs = 0 −
Z
Ω0
BT
LSt dΩ+ TT AT(X + u).
(2.10)
Equation 2.8 is restructured using the relations in Equation 2.9 and Equation 2.10 and gives:
δaT (KL + KNL + KΣ + Ks)∆a = δaT (fs −fint).
(2.11)
A detailed derivation from Equation 2.8 to Equation 2.11 is shown in Section A.1, but without the penalty
energy augmentation, Πs (which is not taken into consideration for the energy interpolation regardless).
The linear and geometric stiffness terms are un-expanded here for brevity.
The statement in Equation 2.11 must hold for any kinematically admissible virtual displacement, δa.
Thus:
(KL + KNL + KΣ + Ks)∆a = (fs −fint)
(2.12)
and is solved iteratively for the displacements (using a Newton-Rhapson method or similar) for each
incremental step in the penalty numbers along the diagonals of A as:
∆a = −(KL + KNL + KΣ + Ks)−1(fint −fs).
(2.13)
2.3
Suture spring energy augmentation
To include the suture springs in the finite element formulation, the principle of virtual work of the system is
augmented by the penalty function Πs = 1
2tT At. This is equivalent to adding linear springs to the system
[19]. The penalty method implementation is performed identically to that described by [15]. Here, t is
a stacked column vector containing the vector ti = [t1
i , t2
i ]T between each ith suture node pair and A is
a diagonal matrix containing the penalty numbers, αi, for each suture spring present. These are directly
interpreted as the stiffness of the ith suture spring. The suture node separation vectors can be further
defined as:
Topology optimization of surgical suture distribution using a simplified soft tissue model
8
==PAGE:13==
ti = [x2 −x1]i = T(X + a)i =
"
−1
0
1
0
0
−1
0
1
#


X1
1 + a1
1
X1
2 + a1
2
X2
1 + a2
1
X2
2 + a2
2


i
(2.14)
where xj
k is the deformed coordinate, Xj
k is the undeformed coordinate, and aj
k is the nodal displacement
in the k-direction for the jth node in each suture node pair (k, j ∈(1, 2)). T is a coefficient array built to
ensure coordinates are appropriately mapped from nodal coordinates to global coordinates for all suture
node pairs. The resulting stacked separation vector, t, is shaped into a column vector with number of
elements equal to the number of suture springs times the dimensionality of the structure which in this
case is two.
The first and second derivative of the penalty function, Πs, with respect to the nodal displacements, a, are
required for the principle of virtual work in Section 2.2. These are derived here for the first derivative:
∂Πs
∂a
=
fs
=
1
2
∂
∂a
 (T(X + a))T AT(X + a)

=
1
2
 2TT AT(X + a)
 ∂
∂a(X + a)
=
TT AT(X + a)
(2.15)
and for the second derivative:
∂2Πs
∂a2
=
∂
∂a
∂Πs
∂a

=
Ks
=
TT AT ∂
∂a(X + a)
=
TT AT.
(2.16)
Each term’s relation to the tangent stiffness and residual terms has been defined here with Ks as the
stiffness and fs as the external force contributions.
2.4
Suture spring tightening methods
Non-linear formulations are often solved numerically by applying load over a finite number of increments.
Two separate increment discretization methods are implemented in the project’s MATLAB code; a fixed-
incremental scheme and a penalty scheme. The incremented load here is the suture stiffnesses, αj. Ideally,
a single load increment is desired, but practically this is not always possible due to potential equilibrium
non-convergence from large steps in the loading.
The fixed-incremental scheme applies the loading over a fixed number of increments, ni, with a constant
increment size, ∆αj, resulting in a maximum spring stiffness of αmax
j
. The analysis does not consider any
snap-through or buckling-like behavior so the increment size is chosen purely to guarantee state function
convergence at every iteration. Thus, the ideal increment size for compute cost is such that ∆αj = αmax
j
.
The downside of the fixed-incremental scheme is the spring stiffnesses required for sufficient closure of
the wound must be known a priori. This presents significant issues when introducing design variable
interpolation and is further discussed in Chapter 5.
The penalty scheme enforces a constraint equation, ti, or a series of constraint equations, t, through the
variable increase of a penalty coefficient, γ, which, if the initial spring stiffness, α0, is taken as 1, can be
taken directly as αj in the absence of other stiffness interpolation. The benefit of the penalty scheme is
Topology optimization of surgical suture distribution using a simplified soft tissue model
9
==PAGE:14==
its ability to reach an arbitrary, prescribed displacement field within a specified tolerance (assuming the
continuation step size of the penalty coefficient is sufficiently small) without requiring the stiffnesses to be
known beforehand. The penalty coefficient can therefore be increased indefinitely until the displacement
convergence criteria is met or the enforcement produces singular or near-singular system matrices in the
state function.
The suture spring stiffnesses at each increment for both schemes are given by
Fixed-Incremental:
αj = n∆αj ≤nmax∆αj = αmax
j
Penalty:
αj = γnα0 > 0,
γ > 1
(2.17)
where nmax is the total number of increments to be applied and n ∈Z>0 is the current step number. The
number of increments, n, is limited by nmax only for the fixed-incremental scheme while it is unbounded
for the penalty. The penalty coefficient, γ, is always greater than 1 to ensure an increase in the stiffness
rather than a decrease. The algorithm for solving the state function for each loading scheme is shown in
Algorithm 1 and 2.
Algorithm 1: Fixed-incremental Newton-Rhapson suture tightening scheme
Initialize suture spring stiffnesses α0 = diag(α0
j)
Compute the constraint matrix T
Initialize displacements ai=1
n=1 = 0
for n = 1, ..., nmax number of load increments
Update the suture spring stiffnesses αn =
n
nmax α0
for i = 1, ..., imax number of equilibrium iterations
Compute suture node pair separations ti
n(ai
n)
Compute tangent stiffness matrix Kt(ai
n, αn)
Compute residual vector r(ai
n, αn)
Apply boundary conditions to Kt(ai
n, αn) and r(ai
n, αn)
Check for equilibrium convergence:
if ||r(ai
n, αn)||2 < ϵ then
break Exit equilibrium loop if residual 2-norm is less than tolerance
end if
Solve for displacements ∆ai
n = −Kt−1(ai
n, αn)r(ai
n, αn)
Update displacements ai+1
n
= ai
n + ∆ai
n
end for
if i = imax then
exit Terminate incrementation on non-convergence
else
Initialize displacements for next increment a1
n+1 = ai
n
end if
end for
Topology optimization of surgical suture distribution using a simplified soft tissue model
10
==PAGE:15==
Algorithm 2: Penalty-enforced Newton-Rhapson suture tightening scheme
Initialize suture spring stiffnesses α0 = diag(α0
j)
Compute the constraint matrix T
Initialize displacements ai=1
n=1 = 0
Initialize wound edge closures cn=1(ainc)
while cn(ainc) > δ Sufficient wound closure measure
Increment the load step number n = n + 1
Update the suture spring stiffnesses αn = γnα0
for i = 1, ..., imax number of equilibrium iterations
Compute suture node pair separations ti
n(ai
n)
Compute tangent stiffness matrix Kt(ai
n, αn)
Compute residual vector r(ai
n, αn)
Apply boundary conditions to Kt(ai
n, αn) and r(ai
n, αn)
Check for equilibrium convergence:
if ||r(ai
n, αn)||2 < ϵ then
break Exit equilibrium loop if residual 2-norm is less than tolerance
end if
Solve for displacements ∆ai
n = −Kt−1(ai
n, αn)r(ai
n, αn)
Update displacements ai+1
n
= ai
n + ∆ai
n
end for
if i = imax then
exit Terminate incrementation on non-convergence
else
Initialize displacements for next increment a1
n+1 = ai
n
end if
Update wound edge closures cn=1(ainc)
end while
2.5
Hyperelastic material models
Skin has been shown to have a wide range of non-linear behaviors stemming from viscoelasticity, anisotropy,
and hyperelasticity. While models have been developed to consider these effects, the current work is self-
limiting to hyperelasticity contributions. A hyperelastic material model can be shown to be completely
defined by a strain energy function as a function of tensor invariants and material coefficients [7]. First,
the Saint Venant-Kirchoff strain energy function is written as
ΨSV K = λ
2
 tr(E)2
+ µE : E
(2.18)
and the corresponding second Piola-Kirchoff stress tensor is
SSV K = λtr(E)I + 2µE
(2.19)
where λ and µ are material coefficients and E is the Green-Lagrange strain tensor. These material coef-
ficients are defined as
Topology optimization of surgical suture distribution using a simplified soft tissue model
11
==PAGE:16==
λ =
νE
(1 + ν)(1 −2ν),
µ =
E
2(1 + ν)
(2.20)
with ν being Poisson’s ratio and E being Young’s Modulus. Here the definition of the stress tensor is
based on the strain energy function as
S = dΨ
dE = 2dΨ
dC.
(2.21)
Further, the fourth-order, constitutive elasticity tensor is defined by
C = dS
dE = 2 dS
dC.
(2.22)
The Saint Venant-Kirchoff model, while being the simplest material model to implement, is severely
limited due to the collapse in compression which is non-physical. To remedy this, the compressible neo-
Hookean model is introduced. The strain energy function for the neo-Hookean material model is written
as
ΨCNH = µ
2
 IC
1 −3

−µ ln
q
IC
3 + λ
2

ln
q
IC
3
2
(2.23)
and the corresponding second Piola-Kirchoff stress tensor is
SCNH = µ(I −C−1) + λ

ln
q
IC
3

C−1.
(2.24)
The strain energy for the neo-Hookean material model is written explicitly in terms of the invariants of
the right Cauchy-Green deformation tensor, C. These three invariants are
IC
1 = C : I = tr(C) = tr(FT F)
IC
2 = C : C = tr(CC)
IC
3 = det(C) = J2.
(2.25)
More advanced models have been shown to be a better fit for skin, but the steep increase in complexity is
deemed out of scope for the current work. Of main interest is to avoid the compression collapse to allow
for placement of sutures in the skin field rather than only on the wound edges. The neo-Hookean model
used in the current work is a custom MATLAB implementation that is validated in Section A.2 using both
benchmark data from Schröder [36] and the commercial FEA program COMSOL Multiphysics® ([1]).
The downside of using the neo-Hookean material model is that it is prone to non-convergence of the
equilibrium Newton-Rhapson solver. Extensive testing has shown that this is due to the change in dis-
placements being too large between load increments. Typically this occurs during the first few load incre-
ments as each marginal unit of spring stiffness results in a lower marginal displacement. In other words,
if ∆αn ≳αn−1 for small αn−1 the likelihood for non-convergence is high. To mitigate this, a power law,
or similar, on the incrementation may be used to shift ∆αn volume towards later load increments where
the incremental displacements are naturally smaller for the current problem. The form of the power law is
Topology optimization of surgical suture distribution using a simplified soft tissue model
12
==PAGE:17==
not specific as long as it accomplishes the goal of sufficiently shifting stiffness incrementation effectively,
and practically the form is obtained through trial and error.
2.6
Ficticious domain energy interpolation scheme
The ficticious domain method [40] was developed primarily for the purpose of relative element density
topology optimization in the presence of ”gray” or void regions to stabilize the convergence and accuracy
of finite strain formulation results. The current work does not operate with intermediate densities and
is only interested in modeling solid material or void regions. Consequently, this method could just as
easily be implemented as a single toggle between a linear and nonlinear solver based on what element
is being evaluated, and that is how the current work implements it. However, for evaluating the creation
of new incisions near the main wound for procedures like plastys, intermediate densities may be present
then. The fictitious domain method is therefore retained in the current work to account and allow for this
possibility.
The core component of the ficticious domain method is the strain energy density interpolation. Effectively,
the percent inclusion of geometrically non-linear stiffness and residual terms is linearly interpolated based
on the specific element’s density or stiffness. Elements with a minimum stiffness value represent regions
where no material is present and recieve only linear contributions while the opposite is true for elements
with a maximum stiffness value. The interpolation scheme is as follows:
φe(ue) = [φ(γeue) + φL(ue) + φL(γeue)]Ee
(2.26)
where φ denotes the stored elastic energy density, γe is the interpolation coefficient, and Ee is Young’s
Modulus. These quantities are evaluated separately for each element. For a detailed derivation of the
principle of virtual work with the inclusion of this energy interpolation, see Section A.1.
2.7
Mesh generation
Figure 2.2: Full skin mesh domain with uniform and
non-uniform regions. The clamp condition is shown
at the outer periphery.
The general structure for the finite element mesh
is composed of 2 main sections, a center uniform
mesh region (skin elements) and a surrounding
non-uniform region (buffer elements).
All ele-
ments are 4-noded quadrilaterals with bilinear, La-
grange shape functions used to interpolate quanti-
ties between nodes. Uniform elements are identi-
cally square while non-uniform elements are gen-
eral quadrilaterals with no requirements on their
exact shape but to fill the region between the uni-
form mesh and the fixed boundary. The use of
a uniform structured mesh allows the addition of
wound topology optimization and much better en-
ables GPU parallelization which are both of inter-
est for future works.
A mesh showing both the uniform and non-
uniform regions is shown in Figure 2.2. The mesh
is shown with no wound present, but, as shown in
Figure 1.6, the wound is placed in the center of the
uniform mesh for best minimization of boundary
effects.
The non-uniform mesh region’s element density is minimized to alleviate computational load while not
affecting intermediate iterations and subsequently the final design. The main point to avoid here is giving
Topology optimization of surgical suture distribution using a simplified soft tissue model
13
==PAGE:18==
these elements artificially high stiffness from distortion or size disparity with uniform mesh elements.
This mesh region’s sole purpose is to minimize, or ideally completely segregate, the uniform mesh from
boundary effects at the clamp condition. This will ensure that deformations in the uniform mesh best
resemble those for an infinite skin domain.
The representation of general wound shapes with square mesh elements can be somewhat difficult as
accurate representation is mesh dependent. In selecting elements of the uniform mesh to include for
wound definition, their center coordinates are checked against a distance function for the desired wound
shape. The distance function is a parametric function that evaluates to zero at the wound boundary,
negative inside the wound, and positive outside. A mesh convergence study is conducted in Section 5.2
to minimize the effects of mesh dependency on the optimal solution.
Topology optimization of surgical suture distribution using a simplified soft tissue model
14
==PAGE:19==
3
Optimization problem and methods
The necessary components to formulate the optimization problem are now shown. Suture design variables
are introduced and their influence on the principle of virtual work is detailed. The optimization problem
constraints are formulated to mimic clinical realities and motivate final topologies to exhibit desireable
characteristics. That is, the number of built-up sutures and their distribution are able to be optimized into
practical topologies. Augmentations to the presented optimization problem and design variables are then
shown with their respective rationale for their inclusion. The optimization process is detailed at the end
of this section in Algorithm 3.
The optimization problem must reflect and express the clinical objectives of the project: minimize dehis-
cence and local constriction of blood supply. The choice of objective function(s) and constraints are then
considered to best match these. In addition to these objectives, the standard requirements of equilibrium
convergence is imposed and the design variable values are limited to match the SIMP method [4].
The full optimization problem statement for the current work is
min
z
: f ,
subject to : r (z) = 0 ,
: Vmax (z) ≡Vf (z)
V ∗
max
−1 ≤0 ,
: Vmin (z) ≡1 −Vf (z)
V ∗
min
≤0 ,
: gs (z) ≡S (z)
S∗
−1 ≤0
: 0 < zmin < z ≤1
(3.1)
where f is the objective function, Vf is the suture spring volume, V ∗
max > V ∗
min are the maximum and
minimum suture spring volume limits, respectively, S is the wound edge closure measure, and S∗is
the wound edge seperation limit. The design variables z have a lower limit zmin imposed to allow for
reintroduction of sutures if the optimizer chooses to do so. Care must be taken in formulating the minimum
suture spring volume constraint in the same form as the maximum suture spring volume constraint as
doing so would result in a discontinuity in the gradient at the point where the constraint is active.
3.1
Designable regions and design variables
Typical design variables in topology optimization contain the relative element densities to modulate the
placement of material, hence augmenting the topology. In the current work the topology of the material
placement is not optimized, but rather the placement of supports modeled as springs with designable
stiffnesses. These springs are connected to paired locations in the structure, rather than their undeformed
location as is done in (Buhl [12]), to create the suture model.
The design variables, z, are used to determine and interpolate these suture spring stiffnesses. The design
variables are interpreted as the presence of a suture spring (zi = 1) or not (z = 0) while intermediate
values equate to partial suture existence which, of course, is non-physical. Therefore, intermediate inter-
polation values are heavily penalized using an exponential parameter, p, to motivate discrete, or ”black
and white”, designs. The exact interpolation method is modeled to resemble that from the SIMP method
[4] as
αi = zp
i α0
(3.2)
Topology optimization of surgical suture distribution using a simplified soft tissue model
15
==PAGE:20==
where α0 is the base suture spring stiffness and p is the penalization factor and is fixed to 3 for all results.
The numerical effect the penalization factor has on the penalized design variables can be seen in Fig-
ure 3.1. For zmin
i
<< 1, the impact on the design is essentially zero. For example, with zmin
i
as 1e−4, the
interpolated spring stiffnesses, αi, are one trillion times smaller than that of a fully present suture spring
with z = 1. Of critical import is the subscript i refers to each nodal pair rather than each suture node.
This enforces each suture spring to have identical stiffness with its counterpart in the opposing design
region. This also sets the number of design variables equal to exactly half the number of suture nodes.
The individual influence of these springs is then dependent on the design variables, zi, and the absolute
distance between the individual nodal pairs, ||ti||2 as shown in Section 2.3.
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Stiffness interpolation design variable, zi
Penalized design variable value, zp
i
p = 0.10
p = 0.33
p = 1.00
p = 3.00
p = 10.00
Figure 3.1: The effect of penalization on the stiffness
interpolation design variables. Only penalty values
greater than 1 are considered for the current problem.
In the implementation presented by Buhl [12],
the max stiffness value, k0 (here α0), is set large
enough to ensure fully constrained degrees of free-
dom (zi = 1) obtain displacements of at most
10−14m under any given load.
The α0 imple-
mented here can either be set as constant in the
same manner or modulated as a design variable to
handle the wound closure. However, for a constant
α0 other measures would need to be added to en-
sure sufficient closure.
Clinically, sutures are typically not placed past
the wound major vertices so the designable suture
spring region is limited to directly above and be-
low the wound. However, for the use of a Saint
Venant-Kirchoff material model, the designable
region must be strictly limited to the nodes coin-
cident with the wound edge. The explanation for
this is detailed in Section 2.7 and Section 2.5 and
is due to the model’s compression behavior. This
region is then split into hemispheres by the major
axis of the wound such that all suture nodes have
corresponding nodes in the opposing hemisphere.
These corresponding nodes form nodal pairs which then are numerically connected by imposing an arti-
ficial, linear spring at each node as shown in Section 2.3.
The loading, or suture tightening, method used is based on the inclusion of the optimizer or not. For
all results using optimization iterations the fixed-incremental method (see Algorithm 1) is used. For
all others the penalty method (see Algorithm 2) is preferred for consistently accurate wound closure to
compare to optimization results. Solving the state problem using the penalty method, which increases
the suture spring stiffnesses, αi, continuously until suture locations are sufficiently close, is not sensible
in an optimization context. If the state problem will simply increase αi until closure, then there exists no
uniqueness for a given design variable state. The key difference here is the penalty method’s lack of a
maximum suture spring stiffness.
Use of the penalty method with the optimizer also brings rise to additional issues such as how the closure
requirement of intermediate design variables should be set. Clearly a low design variable should not
be required to provide full wound closure. One potential option is shown by De Leon [16] for stress
constraints where the contribution of the von Mises stress to the objective function is based on each
element’s design variable value and interpolated in the same way as the design variables are in the current
work by the use of a penalty coefficient. The exact implementation for the current problem is left for future
works.
Topology optimization of surgical suture distribution using a simplified soft tissue model
16
==PAGE:21==
Lastly, it can be beneficial to force suture springs at a designable location similar to forcing material
existence around a boundary condition in density-based topology optimization. This can be done for
many reasons, but the most common is that regardless of the optimal topology certain designable locations
must be present for practical reasons. For example, it is common practice for surgeons to first close the
center of the wound with a single suture as doing this reduces bunching of the skin along the wound
edge compared to starting at a vertex. In this case, designable suture springs would be placed at the
center of the wound and not updated over design iterations. These fixed suture springs are then called
passive design variables, zpassive = {zi ∈Ipassive}, with the remaining design variables labeled as active,
zactive = {zi ∈z | zi /∈Ipassive}.
3.2
Filtering of design variables
Holm et al. [20] showed that each suture is best represented by a collection of multiple suture nodes
clustered at the implied suture location. This results in quality performance of the mesh (low possibility for
local element negative Jacobians) and avoidance of numerical instabilities from near- or full-singularity
of the tangent stiffness matrix. Most importantly, the clustering of suture nodes as previously described
allows for the introduction of a length scale to the optimization problem using a design variable filter as
has been done in many previous works ([11], [10]).
3.2.1
Radial averaging filter
The design variables each reference only a single suture spring attached to a single suture node. It is
desired to have many suture springs contructing a ”built-up” suture and to have the optimizer naturally
select them in this way. This is then enforced by spreading the design variable values within a physical
radius at each designable location. This filter radius results in a length scale that defines the size of each
built-up suture and is constant across the domain. This length scale is included on all figures contain-
ing design variables in physical space where radial, or distance, filtering has been applied as well as in
Figure 3.2. For the end-compliance problem this filter is typically referred to as the density filter.
The exact distance filter implementation is given by
¯zj =
Pnz
i=1 Hijzi
Pnz
i=1 Hij
(3.3)
with Hij(Xi −Xj) defined as
Hij(Xi −Xj) =



1 −||Xi −Xj||
rf
if ||Xi −Xj|| < rf
0
otherwise
,
i, j ∈{1, . . . , nz}
(3.4)
where nz is the number of design variables. Hij contains weights proportional to the distance from each
suture node to all other suture nodes, and may be precomputed a single time to be used for all design
iterations.
3.2.2
Heaviside filter
To mitigate intermediate design variable values (”gray” suture springs), as these have no physical mean-
ing, a smoothed Heaviside filter is inserted into the optimization process. This gives a heavy preference to
suture springs with a minimum filtered interpolation value, ¯zi, over a specified value. The filter is defined
as
Topology optimization of surgical suture distribution using a simplified soft tissue model
17
==PAGE:22==
˜zi = P(zi) = tanh(βη) + tanh
 β(zi −η)

tanh(βη) + tanh
 β(1 −η)

(3.5)
where ˜zi is the projected design variable, β is the projection smoothness parameter with β →∞ap-
proximating the standard Heaviside function, and η is the filter threshold. The smoothness parameter,
β, varies over the optimization process starting at a low value, βmin, and is doubled at a fixed iteration
interval until it reaches a maximum value, βmax. This is done to allow the optimizer to explore the design
space without suppressing optimal suture spring locations and then progressively increase β every nβ
design iterations. The exact method of continuation is chosen to double at each interval such that the
number of iterations required to reach βmax is nβ log2
βmax
βinit . An additional nβ iterations are forced after
the final update to allow the design to adjust after the final continuation step, but the minimum objective
value for all iterations where β = βmax is presented as the optimized solution.
The effect of these filters is shown applied to the base design variables, z, in Figure 3.2. A key consid-
eration is that these filters are non-volume preserving. For the current work, the distance filter is applied
first and then the Heaviside filter such that the physical design variables used to solve the state problem
are ˜¯z = P (H(X)z). An example of applying both filters in this manner is shown in Figure 3.2.
Figure 3.2: Example comparison of un-filtered and filtered design variables spatially distributed over a
unit 2-D space. The surface height and color represents the design variable values. The distance filter
radius is shown as
and the Heaviside filter parameters are β = 50 and η = 0.5.
3.2.3
Topology discretization
The purpose of implementing the filters detailed in Subsection 3.2.1 and Subsection 3.2.2 is to remove all
intermediate physical design variables, ˜¯zi ∈(0, 1), from, or discretize, the final suture topology. To pro-
vide a measure of this the measure of non-discreteness (MND) is introduced. Introduced in Sigmund [37],
the MND does not influence the optimization but simply measures the degree of intermediate physical
design variables present at each design iteration. The MND is defined as
Mnd = 1
nzi
nzi
X
i=1
4˜¯zi (1 −˜¯zi) × 100%.
(3.6)
3.3
Objective function
Blood flow constriction is typically caused by high compression in the skin near suture bite locations.
To addres this, the von Mises or effective strain, Evm, is introduced as a scalar measure of the skin’s
mechanical response to the applied loading measure. Here it is simply a measure of the distortion of the
skin and is defined in Equation 3.7. The von Mises strain is computed for all six unique strain components
resulting from Equation 2.4, but in the current work the out-of-plane components are zero, Ei3 = E3i = 0.
Topology optimization of surgical suture distribution using a simplified soft tissue model
18
==PAGE:23==
E2
vm = 1
2
 (E11 −E22)2 + (E11 −E33)2 + (E22 −E33)2 + 12
 E2
12 + E2
23 + E2
31

.
(3.7)
As the solution is interested in the least possible constriction, as opposed to limiting it at some value, this
quantity is chosen to define the objective function. Specifically, the values of the von Mises strain at all
field locations are considered to give the objective function as
f = 1
ne
ne
X
e=1
Ee
vm
(3.8)
where ne is the number of locations with considered strain values.
To incentivize the optimizer to select a fully discretized final design, an intermediate penalty term is added
to the objective function. The penalty term is defined as
fµ = µ
nz
nz
X
i=1
˜¯zi (1 −˜¯zi) ,
(3.9)
where µ is a penalty scaling coefficient that controls the strength of the intermediate penalty term. For
comparison of objective values with and without this term, As Mnd →0%, fµ →0.
This term is smooth and has only one stationary point at ˜¯zi = 0.5 which means all design variables will
maintain constant pressure towards either zi = zmin or zi = 1. This method is presented in Borrvall [8]
where it is formulated as a constraint while in the current work the penalization term is added directly
to the objective function. This variation avoids further restricting the feasible region while still applying
discretizing pressure on the design.
3.4
Constraint measures
Practical limitations must also be applied to the optimized suture topology through the enforcement of
limits on the design variables and various quantities computed using the state problem. The extent of
all constraints used in the current work is shown in the following subsections. The sensitivities of these
constraints with respect to the design variables, zi, are derived in Section 3.5.
3.4.1
Sufficient wound closure
To ensure the solution results in a sufficiently closed wound so the skin can properly heal after the suturing
procedure, the opposing edges of the wound must be forced together. This sufficient closure condition
is enforced through an optimization constraint. Practically, this constraint is measured between corre-
sponding mesh nodes along the wound edges. In vivo, ideal closure is typically made with an wound
edge separation of zero and some residual bearing stresses between opposite wound edges which slightly
and locally bulge the skin to maintain the closure. As the current work does not consider out-of-plane
deformations or self-contact, sufficient closure is relaxably defined as the opposing wound edges meeting
or crossing each other. The wound edge separation is measured as shown in Figure 3.3.
Topology optimization of surgical suture distribution using a simplified soft tissue model
19
==PAGE:24==
Figure 3.3: Definition of the wound edge separation for a general wound shape. This definition is valid
for any wound shape where the boundary is a convex polygon.
The wound edge separation at the ith location along the wound main axis is then calculated as
Si =
q
(x2
1,i −x1
1,i)2 + (x2
2,i −x1
2,i)2
(3.10)
with the constraint measure defined as
S =
1
nen
nen
X
i=1
Si
(3.11)
where nen is the number of locations the wound edge separation is measured.
One obvious downside of this measure is that it is only able to account for closure with minimal to no
lateral deformation of the wound edges relative to each other. This is a consequence of using fixed nodal
locations to measure the separations. Such a closure state could be seen by the optimizer as an open
wound even if the wound area is near or exactly zero. In general the pairing of nodes to measure separation
distance is not trivial and also not feasible. For an arbitrary mesh and wound orientation the separation
must be interpolated at each deformation increment based on the original definition and the preceding
deformation of the skin.
However, one benefit gained is that the wound edge separation defined in Equation 3.10 is circumferen-
tially symmetric. This means that the wound edges may be anywhere within a certain radius of each other
and result in the same separation which provides a nice, smooth field for the optimizer to search. It is also
typically desired that sutures are tightened symmetrically and, due to these formulation characteristics,
this is likely to assist in enforcing suture symmetry.
3.4.2
Suture spring volume
Perhaps the most obvious constraint to place on the current statement is the number of suture springs in
the design. Reminiscient of the volume constraint from end-compliance minimization formulations, this
constraint places a limit on the normalized sum of all design variables, z, used to directly interpolate the
suture spring stiffnesses, α. The constraint is taken as
Vf = 1
ns
ns
X
i=1
˜¯zi.
(3.12)
Critically, this suture spring volume constraint must be applied on the fully filtered design variables, ˜¯z,
Topology optimization of surgical suture distribution using a simplified soft tissue model
20
==PAGE:25==
due to the non-isochoric property of the design variable filters in Equation 3.3 and Equation 3.5. As the
applied loading from a suture spring is not mesh-dependent, it is favorable to define the suture spring
volumes and limits as a number of suture springs rather than a typical volume fraction using the number
of suture springs, nz. This is not a concern in classical density-based topology optimization as the change
in stiffness contribution from a single design variable (element) naturally scales with the mesh density.
The suture spring volume constraint limits, V ∗
min and V ∗
max, are defined by a mean value, V ∗and a feasible
width, V ∗
max−V ∗
min
nz
. The feasible width here is constant at 0.20.
3.4.3
Max-mean interpolation using a normalized p-norm
The p-norm aggregates a collection of data points to provide a measure that is somewhere between its
minimum and maximum values. The main benefit of this approach is being able to approximately optimize
for a minimum or maximum value where taking the typical min(·) or max(·) function is non-differentiable.
Then for a collection of n values of a generic measure, m, the normalized p-norm, Pm, of m is defined as
Pm(m) =
 
1
n
n
X
i=1
mpn
i
! 1
pn
(3.13)
where pn is the p-norm exponent. By varying pn, the p-norm smoothly interpolates between the mini-
mum, mean, and maximum of the measure m as
Pm(m) →





min(m),
as pn →−∞
1
n
Pn
i=1 mi,
if pn = 1
max(m),
as pn →∞
for
pn ∈R \ {0}.
(3.14)
As the desire is to homogenize the skin strains as well as overall reduction, the p-norm formulation is
applied to the previously presented von Mises strain for pn > 1. This is also applied to the wound closure
measure to reduce wound edge separation at all locations and effectively apply a maximum separation to
all measured locations with the addition of a single constraint. The p-norm-augmented objective function
is then
fp =
 
1
ne
ne
X
e=1
(Ee
vm)pn
! 1
pn
(3.15)
and the p-norm-augmented sufficient wound closure constraint is
Sp =
 
1
nen
nen
X
e=1
(Si)pn
! 1
pn
.
(3.16)
There is no requirement that the p-norm exponent, pn, must be the same in both Equation 3.15 and
Equation 3.16. However, for the current work, the same value is used as pn = 12 which is recommended
by De Leon [16]. A higher value of pn would be of interest to minimize the maximum wound edge
separation, but this is not considered in favor of numerical stability.
Topology optimization of surgical suture distribution using a simplified soft tissue model
21
==PAGE:26==
3.5
Adjoint sensitivity analysis
To obtain sensitivities of the objective function and/or constraint values with respect to the design vari-
ables the adjoint method is used. This greatly reduces the sensitivity complexity and allows avoidance
of computing the gradient of displacements with respect to the design variables, du
dzi . As the number of
design variables outnumbers the number of objectives and constraints, avoiding this displacement gradi-
ent greatly simplifies the final closed form sensitivities. First the sensitivities with respect to the physical
design variables are computed. The generic quantity h (objective or constraint) is augmented with an
additional term
c = h + λT r
(3.17)
where r = fext −fint = 0 is the residual vector and λ is a vector of Lagrange multipliers that may be
freely chosen. The following derivation will continue with h, but the augmented objective including the
penalization term, fµ, as detailed in Section 3.3 is trivially obtained by adding it to h as
cµ = (h + fµ) + λT r.
(3.18)
The total derivative with respect to the design variables of the augmented objective, c, is then:
∂c
∂˜¯zi
=
∂h
∂u
du
d˜¯zi
+ ∂h
∂˜¯zi

+ λT
 ∂r
∂u
du
d˜¯zi
+ ∂r
∂˜¯zi

(3.19)
where the derivative of the residual vector, r, is
∂r
∂˜¯zi
= TT 
p˜¯zp−1
i
αi

T(X + a).
(3.20)
To eliminate the dependence of the displacements on the design variables, du
d˜¯zi , the objective function is
chosen such that its design variable sensitivity contains this as a coefficient. Here the definition of the
tangent stiffness matrix, KT = −∂r
∂u, is substituted. Now the Lagrange multipliers and objective function
must be chosen to satisfy Equation (3.21):
∂h
∂u −λT KT
 du
d˜¯zi
= 0.
(3.21)
Clearly, the Lagrange multipliers are dependent only on the choice of objective function and its depen-
dence on the displacements:
λ = K−1
T
∂h
∂u.
(3.22)
Therefore, to obtain the sensitivities of an arbitrary objective function or constriant, h, with respect to the
design variables, ˜¯zi, only the derivatives with respect to the displacements, dh
du, must be newly computed.
The adjoint method then allows the tangent stiffness matrix, KT , to be assembled and inverted only a
single time and re-used for all quantities. The resulting sensitivities are then reduced to
Topology optimization of surgical suture distribution using a simplified soft tissue model
22
==PAGE:27==
∂c
∂˜¯zi
= ∂h
∂˜¯zi
+ λT ∂r
∂˜¯zi
.
(3.23)
If filtering is not applied, ˜¯zi in the previous derivation should be replaced with zi and the derivatives with
respect to it should become total. As a rule, Hessians are never computed due to the sharp increase in
computational cost and complexity compared to the benefit they provide.
The penalty term, fµ, is only dependent on the design variables so its sensitivities with respect to the
design variables are
∂fµ
∂˜¯zi
= µ
nz
(1 −2˜¯zi) .
(3.24)
The sensitivities for the penalized objective value, cµ, are then given by
∂cµ
∂˜¯zi
= ∂c
∂˜¯zi
+ ∂fµ
∂˜¯zi
.
(3.25)
For optimization the sensitivities with respect to the base design variables, zi, are required. For any
function (·) dependent on zi and filtered as described in Section 3.2, the chain rule gives its sensitivities
as
d(·)
dzi
= ∂(·)
∂˜¯zi
d˜¯zi
d¯zi
d¯zi
dzi
.
(3.26)
All sensitivities are validated using a forward/backward finite difference scheme before use in the current
work. Further details and convergence curves are shown in Section A.4.
3.5.1
Sensitivity of normalized p-norm quantities
In order to get sensitivities of p-norm quantities such as fp and Sp, the derivative of the p-norm with
respect to the base measure is required. Returning to the notation used in Subsection 3.4.3, let q =

1
n
Pn
j=1 mpn
j

, and then the derivative of the p-norm, Pm, of a measure, m, with respect to that measure
is
∂Pm(m)
∂mi
=
d

q
1
p

dq
∂q
∂mi
=
 1
nmpn−1
i
 
1
n
n
X
j=1
mpn
j


1
pn −1
.
(3.27)
Any p-norm quantities can then use this term to compute sensitivities with respect to the design variables,
z.
3.5.2
Objective function sensitivity
To compute the sensitivities of the objective function, c, with respect to the design variables, the chain
rule must be applied to the objective function and the filtering applied to the design variables:
Topology optimization of surgical suture distribution using a simplified soft tissue model
23
==PAGE:28==
dc
dzi
=
∂fµ
∂˜¯zi
+ λT
c
∂r
∂˜¯zi
 ∂˜¯zi
∂¯zi
 ∂¯zi
∂zi

(3.28)
where λc is the adjoint vector for the objective function specifically. As stated in Section 3.5, only the dis-
placement sensitivities, dfp
du , are newly required as the inverse tangent stiffness matrix, K−1
T , and derivative
of the residual, ∂r
∂˜¯zi , are re-used from the state problem. The objective adjoint vector is then
λc = K−1
T
∂fp
∂u .
(3.29)
Now, let q = fpn
p
=

1
ne
Pne
j=1

Ej
VM
pn
. Then applying the chain rule gives
∂fp
∂u = ∂fp
∂q
∂q
∂Ej
VM
∂Ej
VM
∂˜E
∂˜E
∂u
= 1
pn

1
ne
ne
X
j=1

Ej
VM
pn


1
pn −1 ne
X
j=1
pn
ne

Ej
VM
pn−1  
∂Ej
VM
∂˜E
∂˜E
∂u
!
(3.30)
where the explicit strain derivatives are all that remain to compute. The six unique Green-Lagrange strain
components are reformed into ˜E = [E11, E22, E33, E12, E13, E23]T . The first term is shown for all strain
components as
∂Ee
vm
∂˜E
=
1
2Eevm


2E11 −E22 −E33
2E22 −E33 −E11
2E33 −E11 −E22
12E12
12E13
12E23


(3.31)
and the second term is simply
∂˜E
∂u = 1
2

FT ∂F
∂u + ∂(FT )
∂u
F

(3.32)
with the simple derivative ∂F
∂u given by
dF
du = d
du

I + du
dX

= dN
dX.
(3.33)
where the shape function interpolation of the displacements u = Na is used.
3.5.3
Suture spring volume constraint sensitivities
The sensitivities of the suture spring volume constraints are constant and trivial. For both the minimum
and maximum, the suture spring volume constraint sensitivities are given as
Topology optimization of surgical suture distribution using a simplified soft tissue model
24
==PAGE:29==
∂Vmin
∂zi
=
1
nzV ∗
min
,
∂Vmax
∂zi
=
1
nzV ∗
max
.
(3.34)
3.5.4
Sufficient closure constraint sensitivity
Similar to the objective function sensitivity in Subsection 3.5.2, the sensitivities for the sufficient closure
constraint are computed using the adjoint method due to the presence of the displacements in the constraint
value. Again, the chain rule must be applied to the constraint value, gs, and the filtering applied to the
design variables:
dgs
dzi
=
 ∂gs
∂Sp
 ∂Sp
∂˜¯zi
 ∂˜¯zi
∂¯zi
 ∂¯zi
∂zi

= 1
S∗
∂Sp
∂˜¯zi
 ∂˜¯zi
∂¯zi
 ∂¯zi
∂zi

.
(3.35)
with the constraint measure derivative defined using the adjoint method as
∂Sp
∂˜¯zi
= λT
s
∂r
∂˜¯zi
(3.36)
where λs is
λs = K−1
T
∂Sp
∂u .
(3.37)
For clarity, let q = Spn
p
=

1
nen
Pnen
j=1 Spn
j

. Then, applying the chain rule gives
∂Sp
∂u = ∂Sp
∂q
∂q
∂Sj
∂Sj
∂u
= 1
pn

1
nen
nen
X
j=1
Spn
j


1
pn −1 nen
X
j=1
 pn
nen
Spn−1
j
· ∂Sj
∂u

(3.38)
The derivative of the nodal closure values with respect to the displacements is
∂Sj
∂u = ∂Sj
∂x
∂x
∂u
=
nen
X
j=1
1
Sj
LT  x2
j −x1
j

(3.39)
where L ∈R2×ndof is a selector matrix that places the operator
 1 0
0 −1

at the degrees of freedom corre-
sponding to the jth wound edge node pair and 0 at all others.
3.5.5
Sensitivity filtering
Filtering as detailed in Section 3.2 can also be applied to design sensitivities. In this case the design
variable values are directly replaced with the values of the gradients at each design location and filtered
identically from that point. In the current work, all sensitivities are filtered using the distance filter detailed
Topology optimization of surgical suture distribution using a simplified soft tissue model
25
==PAGE:30==
in Section 3.2, but practically there is no difference for filtering values with constant gradients such as
the minimum and maximum volume constraints. For a collection of general sensitivities, the filtered
sensitivities are then
∂(·)
∂z = H(X)∂(·)
∂z
(3.40)
Algorithm 3: Optimization process for suture topology using MMA
Initialize mesh, designable locations, and optimization settings
Set initial design variable state z0
Assign passive and active design variable domains z0
passive, z0
active
Pre-compute distance filter weights based on undeformed geometry H (X)
for each optimization iteration i = 1, ..., imax
if i mod nβ = 0 and β < βmax, then
Update β ←min(2β, βmax)
end if
Apply design variable filtering ˜¯zi ←P
 H (X) zi
Solve state problem for the displacements u
Compute objective function value fp and sensitivities ∂fp
∂z using adjoint method
Evaluate volume and closure constraints Vmin, Vmax, and gs
Check convergence criteria:
if
 max zi −zi−1 < ϵz

and (Vmin, Vmax, gs ≤0) and (β = βmax) then
break Exit design iteration loop if constraints are met and design is converged
end if
Compute constraint sensitivities ∂Vmin
∂z , ∂Vmax
∂z , ∂gs
∂z
Filter sensitivities using distance filter ∂fp
∂z , ∂Vmin
∂z , ∂Vmax
∂z , ∂gs
∂z
Update active design variables using MMA zi+1
active ←zMMA ∈zactive
Save all quantities for iteration i
end for
Save and export final results for post-processing
Topology optimization of surgical suture distribution using a simplified soft tissue model
26
==PAGE:31==
4
Numerical Implementation
The solution of the problem setup in Chapter 2 and Chapter 3 is implemented using a custom code-
base developed in MATLAB1 [28]. This language was chosen due to the simplicity of implementation
and debugging compared to compiled languages. Future works will ideally be handled in other envi-
ronments/languages due to the expected increase in computational load as mesh density increases, more
complex material models are added, and the design domain expands to include optimization of additional
suturing features and procedures such as plasty placement and advanced closure measures.
The Method of Moving Asymptotes (MMA) algorithm is used to solve the constrained optimization prob-
lem with a MATLAB implementation by Krister Svanberg [38]. The MMA algorithm is known to be quite
robust for a wide range of structural optimization problems. The Newton-Rhapson method is chosen to
solve equilibrium iterations in the state problem due to its quadratic convergence. As the chosen material
model is hyperelastic, in the state problem the displacements can be solved in a single increment if the
Newton algorithm is able to converge with such a step size. It is noted that real skin exhibits energy
dissipative properties across multiple loading cycles as well as transient anisotropic properties due to the
straightening of collagen fibers. Therefore, this assumption will not hold in the consideration of all skin
mechanical effects. Regardless, many load increments and loading schemes are already used in practice
to avoid non-convergence.
4.1
Computational performance
Following the implementation of Chapter 2 and Chapter 3, it is clear that performing parameter sweeps
and/or investigating problems with FE converged meshes, as well as meshes that allow meaningful min-
ima to be represented, is infeasible in a purely-MATLAB environment for the current problem. The
vectorizing of some operations provides some relief, but the bulk of the computational load is contained
in building the tangent stiffness matrix, Kt, and the residual vector, r. To reduce this load the computation
of shape function quantities is off-loaded to a MATLAB MEX function written in C++ then called in-line
as a direct replacement for the previous MATLAB function. The current implementation sees an overall
4x speed increase from this change, but is still many orders of magnitude slower than a pure Fortran or
C++ implementation would be.
In the same effort to reduce code execution time, cases with similar configurations are executed in parallel
using the Central DTU HPC Cluster hosted by the DTU Computing Center (DCC). Each case submission
utilized a single CPU core with 3 GB of RAM. While this is by far the easiest parallelization imaginable,
the speed increase is on the order of 100x and allows results to be computed in a timeframe compatible
with the current project timeline. It is noted that the individial cores accessible on this cluster perform
worse than personally accessible compute nodes, but the drastic reduction in parallelization capacity leads
to a net loss in performance. For this reason, single optimization cases (not yet parallelized) are computed
on personal hardware.
1The project’s Github repository is available at: https://www.github.com/BrandonMParks/SutureOpt
Topology optimization of surgical suture distribution using a simplified soft tissue model
27
==PAGE:32==
5
Results
The following sections show results using the formulations and implementations detailed in the preceding
chapters. First, the mesh convergence is demonstrated for the solution of a state problem with arbitrary
topology and then of the resulting topology post-optimization. Then, a benchmark problem with a sharp
limitation on the degrees of freedom is compared to the proven minimum of this reduced system demon-
strating the formulation’s ability in finding the known optimal solution. This also serves as a controlled
method to further show correct sensitivity derivations secondary to finite difference computations. Fol-
lowing these, a systematic study is then presented to show variations of optimization results with respect
to changes in the wound geometry and the desired number of sutures.
For these cases described above, the closure constraint, Sp, is removed from the optimization statement.
The modified optimization statement is then
min
z
: fp ,
subject to : r
 ˜¯z

= 0 ,
: Vmax (z) ≡
Vf
V ∗
max
−1 ≤0 ,
: Vmin (z) ≡1 −
Vf
V ∗
min
≤0 ,
: 0 < zmin < z ≤1.
(5.1)
Parameter
Value
Young’s modulus, E
1 MPa
Poisson’s ratio, ν
0.495
Skin thickness, t
2 mm
Penalty coefficient, γ
1.02
Objective p-norm exponent, pn
12
Penalty parameter, p
3.0
Heaviside filter threshold, η
0.10
Heaviside filter exponent, β
βinit = 2, βmax = 256
Heaviside interval length, nβ
35
Table 5.1: Summary of constant parameters used in all
results cases unless otherwise noted.
It is expected that suture topologies using this modified statement will not produce a sufficiently closed
wound. The interest at this point is to assess the difficulty of the optimization problem and then produce
more practically sensible results after. In the absence of a sufficient closure constraint, a fixed αmax is
used to solve the state problem at each iteration. Manual tuning of this value is currently required and
is constant for all of a given case’s design iterations. All results presented in this section will use the
parameters listed in Table 5.1 unless otherwise noted.
Figure 5.1: Color gradient scale for physical de-
sign variable, ˜¯z, representation in all results.
Unless otherwise stated only the physical design
variables, ˜¯z, are shown. These are represented using
a grayscale similar to previous density-based topol-
ogy optimization works [5]. This corresponds to a
fully active design variable (˜¯z = 1) showing as solid
black, a completely inactive design variable (˜¯z = 0)
showing as solid white, and all other values in be-
tween shown as a gradient of gray between them as in Figure 5.1. All figures showing field quantities
such as the von Mises strain have elements in the vicinity of the suture nodes shown without values to
avoid artificially inflation due to the discrete introduction of the suture springs. All shown objective func-
tion values also do not consider these elements in their computation as their inclusion would dominate
the sensitivities.
Topology optimization of surgical suture distribution using a simplified soft tissue model
28
==PAGE:33==
5.1
State problem
Holm [19] presents a study of varying wound aspect ratios and suture counts, ns, placed using the rule
of halves. Identical problem parameters, geometry, and mesh density are used to qualitatively compare
results in the current work to this reference, but an exact comparison can not be drawn for the following
reasons. The exact length of the wound, L = 2a, is not distinguishable from the reference so is set, and
fixed, at 50 mm. The aspect ratio, w
L, is then obtained by varying the wound height, w = 2b. The von
Mises strains, Ee
vm, shown in Figure 5.2 and Figure 5.3 are not filtered as is done in the reference similar
to Section 3.2. The closure condition also varies slightly where in the current work the explicit wound
edge is used as the basis instead of the distance between suture centers. This is done because during the
design iterations the definition of a suture center is typically not distinguishable.
All sutures are placed an equal distance from the wound centerline. Along with the compressible cases in
Figure 5.2, nearly incompressible cases are shown in Figure 5.3 to more closely match the skin behavior
of interest.
ns = 3
ns = 7
ns = 15
w/L = 0.10
w/L = 0.20
w/L = 0.30
Figure 5.2: Final deformation plots with element-value von Mises strains, Ee
vm
 units: mm
mm

for the first
three rule of halves orders and three wound aspect ratios, w
L. All suture locations are tightened until the
wound edges between them are coincident. The objective value shown is computed using Equation 3.15
and Equation 3.17 with pn = 1. Deviating parameters: ν = 0.300.
The incompressible case shows for all aspect ratios that many sutures (4th-order rule of halves or ns = 15
in most cases) are required to provide sufficient closure. Clearly, the addition of more sutures better closes
the wound for all aspect ratios. For all cases strains tend to peak and concentrate on the outer sutures.
This implies that during optimization the outermost developing sutures should see higher sensitivities
compared to sutures between them with this effect increasing with suture count. The addition of more
sutures also reduces the maximum strains in the skin at the expense of increasing the mean strain shown
by c. In general, the mean strains increase from the top right to the bottom left and the maximum strains
increase from the top left to the bottom right in both Figure 5.2 and Figure 5.3.
Topology optimization of surgical suture distribution using a simplified soft tissue model
29
==PAGE:34==
ns = 3
ns = 7
ns = 15
w/L = 0.10
w/L = 0.20
w/L = 0.30
Figure 5.3: Final deformation plots with element-value von Mises strains, Ee
vm
 units: mm
mm

for the first
three rule of halves orders and three wound aspect ratios, w
L. All suture locations are tightened until the
wound edges between them are coincident. The objective value shown is computed using Equation 3.15
and Equation 3.17 with pn = 1.
The behavior of the compressible neo-Hookean material model used here with a nearly incompressible
Poisson’s ratio is indicative of how the optimization should be expected to select sutures in the absence
of a forced closure constraint. This insight must be taken with consideration for the value of the p-norm
exponent, pn, used in the specific case as the trend for the mean and max strains are opposite each other
as the results in Figure 5.3 show. Comparing, again qualitatively, with [20] that performs a similar study
but with the one-term Ogden model shows a similar conclusion but with a more realistic deformation of
the skin.
5.2
Mesh convergence
In the context of the current problem, mesh convergence studies are performed to verify that the computed
objective function values, strain distributions, and suture spring responses are not significantly affected
by further mesh refinement.
For the present work, structured meshes of varying densities are used to assess convergence. Four quan-
tities are measured between mesh densities: the objective function value fp, maximum von Mises strain
max(EVM), the absolute displacement of a corner of the skin element region, Ωskin, and the time to com-
pute a single Newton-Rhapson equilibrium iteration, tangent stiffness matrix, KT , and residual vector, r.
Due to the symmetry of the problem, the displacement is the same for all four corner nodes of the skin
region, Ωskin. The results demonstrate that beyond a certain mesh density, changes in these quantities
become negligible, indicating that an increase in the mesh density provides a negligible impact on the
results. Due to computational constraints, the ideal mesh size is not selected for use in the current work.
Future works will more focus on computational efficiency and speed.
It is also noted that the definition of the wound and suture locations on a fixed grid mesh introduces
minor geometric inconsistencies between mesh densities. While this can slightly affect the exact nodal
positions of sutures, the overall trends and convergence behavior remain consistent. As such, the chosen
mesh density for subsequent optimization studies is justified based on these convergence results.
Topology optimization of surgical suture distribution using a simplified soft tissue model
30
==PAGE:35==
5.2.1
State problem
A basic topology with a single suture composed of 4 suture springs at the center of the wound is used
to demonstrate the state problem convergence. Convergence of the values previously listed is shown for
varying mesh densities against both the side length and area of a skin mesh element in Figure 5.5. The
computation time for a single equilibrium iteration is also shown as a function of the fixed grid mesh
density used in the skin region, Ωskin. Note that the quantities measured in Figure 5.5d are computed at
least (4 equilibrium iterations) × (280 design iterations) = 1120 times and often twice this amount due
to additional equilibrium iterations. These quantities are computed using the Central DTU HPC Cluster
with 1 CPU core and 3 GB of RAM1.
Figure 5.4: Problem geometry for the mesh convergence study shown in Figure 5.5.
An unavoidable inconsistency between mesh densities is the definition of the wound shape on the fixed
mesh grid. The location of the suture nodes in physical space between mesh densities varies slightly
due to exact nodal locations being dependent on the mesh density. A solution to this would be to use
an unstructured mesh or only meshes with nodes at the desired locations. However, fixed structured
meshes are necessary for interfacing with the optimizer so an unstructured mesh is not of interest. Only
studying mesh densities with nodes at fixed physical locations would require a 4x increase in the number
of elements for each succeeding case. This sharp increase is only due to the fact that all skin elements
must stay identical. Therefore, generating enough data points for a reasonable convergence conclusion is
computationally prohibitive for the current implementation. Convergence must then be considered with
this deviation in mind.
The slopes of the linear (in logspace) curves vary as expected between the element length and area with
the element area showing one order of convergence lower than the element length. Due to the extreme
computational cost of the state problem with dense meshes, a maximum mesh density corresponding to
a normalized skin element length, lel
a , of 0.04 is taken for all following results. This is equivalent to a
mesh with 100x100 elements in the skin domain, Ωskin. While a more refined mesh is preferred, in order
to guarantee convergence of the equilibrium solver many load increments must be used, and as a result
approximate optimizer run-times are 15 hours for this mesh size and increase exponentially with the mesh
density. In addition, to represent even the largest standard suture size of 0.7 mm the number of elements
in the skin region would need to increase to a 300x300 element skin region. By inspection of Figure 5.5d,
which only shows a maximum compute time for a 250x250 element skin region, the time to compute
for the interested minimum mesh size is clearly infeasible for the current implementation. Building the
tangent stiffness matrix, KT , and residual vector, r, comprise over 90% of the total compute time including
design variable updates and sensitivities. Therefore other processes are negligible by comparison and not
shown in Figure 5.5d.
1Specific hardware specifications are not provided, but the collection of all compute nodes used in this cluster can be found
here: https://www.hpc.dtu.dk/?page_id=2520
Topology optimization of surgical suture distribution using a simplified soft tissue model
31
==PAGE:36==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 5.5: Skin element size convergence study for the state problem. Values studied are the (a) objective,
c, (b) maximum von Mises strain, and (c) corner nodal displacement as a function of normalized skin
element length, lel, and area, Ael. Single equilibrium iteration computation times are shown in (d).
5.3
Benchmark problem
As previously stated, to the author’s knowledge the optimization formulation presented herein is novel.
With no pre-existing knowledge of its regularity, the sparsity, or not, of strong local minima, or expected
convergence characteristics, first examining a highly restricted problem is prudent. A configuration lim-
ited to 3 sutures is then constructed with one suture fixed to the exact center of the wound and the remaining
2 placed symmetrically around it. Here, the possible suture locations are forced to have common y−co-
ordinates to prevent the optimizer from taking advantage of the increased and, more importantly, free to
select value of suture nodes located further apart. Designable locations in the center suture are held fixed
while the outer sutures are shifted outward symmetrically to produce variant problem topologies. The
objective function values for all possible final topologies are then computed along with the required suture
spring stiffnesses to achieve them. The topologies of all possible problem configurations are shown in
Figure 5.6.
5.3.1
Final topology candidates
Each suture is composed of 3 suture springs in both x−and y−directions to be compatible with the
minimum distance filter radius, rf = rmin =
√
2(1 element length), that has an effect on the topology
and also produces sutures composed of square suture node clusters. This gives a suture spring volume
Topology optimization of surgical suture distribution using a simplified soft tissue model
32
==PAGE:37==
of V3 = (3 x-suture nodes) (3 y-suture nodes) (3 sutures) = 27 suture springs. All suture locations are
tightened equally until sufficient local (suture-wise) closure of the wound edges is achieved. Due to the
symmetry of the 2 outer sutures, these always share final suture spring stiffnesses.
Figure 5.6: All possible suture node locations for the benchmark problem. A configuration with outer
sutures centered at x
a = 0.5 is shown for example.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.7: Objective function and suture spring stiffness values for all possible suture configurations
detailed in Figure 5.6. The wound is closed using the penalty method. The objective function is computed
for the labeled values of the p-norm exponent, pn, and the true maximum values are shown for comparison.
Figure 5.8: Illustration of the staircasing
effect with an example suture topology. In
general, the effect occurs when S1 ̸= S2
and disappears as element size decreases
and S1 →S2.
The curves shown in Figure 5.7 contain sharp peaks over the
suture locations with the effect in Figure 5.7a exaggerated for
higher values of pn. These peaks are caused by ”staircasing”
of the skin mesh at the wound edge and the location of the
sutures relative to it. At these locations the wound edge sep-
arations can be different for each suture spring. Furthermore,
due to the deformation of the center suture, as the outer su-
tures separate from the center the effective wound edge sep-
aration they must close increases. This effect is alleviated
by the decreasing initial separation towards the ends of the
wound as can be seen in both Figure 5.7a and Figure 5.7b.
Deformed results for select cases are shown in Figure 5.9.
Topology optimization of surgical suture distribution using a simplified soft tissue model
33
==PAGE:38==
(a) minimum c (pn = 12)
(b) maximum c (pn = 12)
Figure 5.9: Select deformation plots for the benchmark problem with element-value von Mises strains,
Ee
vm
 units: mm
mm

. The objective value shown is computed for pn = 12. Colorbar ranges are synced to
the max of both cases for ease of comparison.
5.3.2
Optimization results comparison
Figure 5.10: Initial design variable state for the op-
timization problems described in Subsection 5.3.2
and Subsection 5.3.3.
The benchmark optimization problem has all pos-
sible suture node locations as designable locations.
Suture nodes common to the center suture are forced
as passive domain design variables fixed at full pres-
ence, zpassive = 1. All other design variables, the
active set, are initialized identically at z0
active = 0.25
(see Figure 5.10). Passive design variables are ex-
cluded from all filtering to avoid erosion and/or ac-
cretion at passive/active boundaries.
For the current problem, the suture spring stiffnesses
for the configuration at the minimum objective func-
tion value shown in Figure 5.7a are used as this is the
expected resulting topology from the succeeding op-
timization case. The volume constraint limits, V ∗
max
and V ∗
min, are set to 10% above and below the de-
sired suture spring volume, V3 = 27 suture springs, respectively. Testing with a much more narrow
feasible volume band shows overconstraint of the problem and results in oscillations of the current design
between two infeasible points up to the maximum iterations allowed.
The filter radius is rf = 1.40 mm (the diagonal distance between a single skin element’s nodes for the
current mesh) which sets a length scale compatible with the forced suture definition shown in Figure 5.6.
The optimization executes a minimum of nβ

log2
βmax
βinit + 1

= 280 design iterations.
Topology optimization of surgical suture distribution using a simplified soft tissue model
34
==PAGE:39==
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.11: Optimized suture topology for the benchmark problem shown in Figure 5.6 with element-
value von Mises strains, Ee
vm
 units: mm
mm

. Color bar values are synced with those in Figure 5.12.
5.3.3
Penalized objective function
The objective penalty term, fµ, is now included into the objective function. Various values of the penalty
scaling coefficient, µ, are trialed to explore the effect on the convergence and final topology. Note that
direct comparison of penalized objective values, cµ, with the objective values in Figure 5.7a is only ap-
proximate in the case that MND = 0 as detailed in Section 3.3. For values of MND near 0, the comparison
can be weakly made, but due to the large number of possible non-discrete topologies is done so with
caution. In short, the minimum objective value shown in Figure 5.7a remains the desired minimum value
even with inclusion of this penalty.
The addition of the penalty term, fµ, successfully achieves a discretized final topology for µ = 5 and
µ = 10 while µ = 1 results in significant intermediate values of ˜¯zi. The inclusion of fµ reduces volatility
in the design updates as µ increases. This is due to the landscape of the penalty term being strictly concave
with the gradients increasing linearly with µ. One undesired interaction is that for µ too large, at the β
continuation interval previously inactive design variables can pass the filter threshold, η, and are then
forced to ˜¯zi = 1. Often these locations are not located inside previously developing sutures which poses
a problem if the volume constraints do not allow for additional suture formation. Depending on the relative
gradients of fp and fµ this can render desired design configurations unreachable for the remainder of the
design iterations. This occurs for µ = 5 in Figure 5.12c where the existence of the outermost scattered
suture nodes limit the ability of the active clusters near the center to develop the length scale prescribed
by the distance filter radius.
In early design iterations, the optimizer moves towards suture nodes at and around those shown in Fig-
ure 5.9a as expected. After the first β continuation other influences begin affecting the design. Suture
node pairs located further apart have a higher influence on the design, and due to the lack of any mitiga-
tion the optimizer prefers these as they provide more design impact for the same cost compared to other
suture node pairs. Simply, each suture spring applies an absolute spring force equal to αi||X2 −X1||,
so for a higher ||X2 −X1|| the spring force is larger. Even though, in reality, further removing sutures
from the wound causes many unwanted effects, the state problem does not consider this and therefore the
optimizer takes advantage of the ”free” reduction in objective value. This mechanic is what is causing the
final topologies in Figure 5.12c and Figure 5.12e to be spread further than the distance filter radius, rf.
In consideration of these interactions, the case with µ = 10 very nearly achieves the desired minimum
shown in Figure 5.9a. The realized outer sutures more represent the topology for the configuration shifted
one step inward, but the objective values for these two are nearly identical with only a 0.004, or 0.5%,
difference in their values. The effect of the Heaviside filter is also reduced for high µ as is seen by the
Topology optimization of surgical suture distribution using a simplified soft tissue model
35
==PAGE:40==
µ = 10 case converging to its final design in ear half the minimum forced iterations. For µ = 1 and µ = 5
the final objective values are lower, but this is expected as the final topology violates the configuration
requirements.
(a) µ = 1
(b) µ = 1
(c) µ = 5
(d) µ = 5
(e) µ = 10
(f) µ = 10
Figure 5.12: Optimized suture topology for the benchmark problem shown in Figure 5.6 with element-
value von Mises strains, Ee
vm
 units: mm
mm

. The color map is synced between cases.
5.4
Alternate initializations
Two identical problems to that posed in Subsection 5.3.2 are now considered. The initial design variables
are set to mimic the topology for the worst (Case 1) and best (Case 2) performing configuration in Fig-
Topology optimization of surgical suture distribution using a simplified soft tissue model
36
==PAGE:41==
ure 5.7a. All designable locations not in this configuration are set to z0
active = 0.25. The initial design
variable states are shown together with the optimized topology in Figure 5.13.
(a) Case 1
(b) Case 2
(c) Case 1 initial state
(d) Case 2 initial state
(e) Case 1
(f) Case 2
Figure 5.13: Optimized suture topology for the problem described in Subsection 5.3.3 (µ = 10) with
element-value von Mises strains, Ee
vm
 units: mm
mm

and variant initial design variable states. The color
map is synced between both cases.
Figure 5.13 shows that the optimizer is unable to escape the local minimum created by the objective
penalty term, fµ. The sensitivities of the outer design variables with ˜¯zi start at their highest value, and the
volume constraints and objective sensitivities are unable to overcome it. This leads to the final topology
Topology optimization of surgical suture distribution using a simplified soft tissue model
37
==PAGE:42==
remaining at approximately the same x
a location. The spreading of the initial 3x3 sutures is also seen
in previous cases. The optimized design locations morph closer into a single line to smooth the local
deformations which leads to lower maximum strain values. This would show less for the same design
problem with lower values of pn. Again here the influence of the initial suture node separation can be
seen contributing to the lack of a visible length scale in the final topology. The key point here is that the
optimizer is susceptible to poor initial design states if they create strong local minima, and this is primarily
due to the objective penalty term for large values of µ. While not ideal, the Heaviside filter is not enough
to enforce a discretized final design so the penalty term, fµ for µ = 10, is used for the remainder of the
results.
5.5
Case studies
A parametric study similar to that shown in Section 5.1 is now explored. The center passive suture remains
in the design, and instead of analyzing for a fixed number of sutures (3, 5, 7 as in Section 5.1) the optimized
topology for three bands of feasible suture spring volume are used. The wound aspect ratio, w
L, is varied
at the same values. Nine cases are then studied covering all combinations of three wound aspect ratios
(w
L = 0.10, 0.20, 0.30) and three suture spring volume limits (V ∗= 27, 45, 63). The same initial state
as shown in Figure 5.10 is used for all cases. Wound aspect ratios greater than w
L = 0.30 were attempted,
but all resulted in equilibrium non-convergence during the design iterations.
V ∗= 27
V ∗= 45
V ∗= 63
w/L = 0.10
w/L = 0.20
w/L = 0.30
Figure 5.14: Final design topologies with element-value von Mises strains, Ee
vm
 units: mm
mm

for nine
combinations of the suture spring volume limit, V ∗, and wound aspect ratios, w
L. The undeformed geom-
etry is shown for design topology clarity.
Topology optimization of surgical suture distribution using a simplified soft tissue model
38
==PAGE:43==
V ∗= 27
V ∗= 45
V ∗= 63
w/L = 0.10
w/L = 0.20
w/L = 0.30
Figure 5.15: Final design topologies with element-value von Mises strains, Ee
vm
 units: mm
mm

for nine
combinations of the suture spring volume limit, V ∗, and wound aspect ratios.
As an immediate comparison, the V ∗= 27, w
L = 0.30 case in Figure 5.15 is identical to that shown in
Figure 5.12e. Within each aspect ratio w
L, each final design mostly contains the final design lower V ∗
values. The small variations from this are due to the inclusion of more suture springs combined with
truncation from combined Heaviside continuation intervals and penalty term sensitivities. The tendency
remains to spread the loading as evenly as possible from the center as the optimized designs cluster around
the passive suture springs. For w
L = 0.30 isolated suture springs appear. As demonstrated in Figure 5.3,
the localization of von Mises strains, Ee
VM, resulting from large unsupported wound lengths increases
greatly with wound aspect ratio. Therefore, as w
L increases it becomes more preferable to slightly move
suture springs outward to reduce the local rotation of the deformed wound edge than to add more closure
capacity towards the center of the wound.
5.6
Wound closure constraint
An identical problem to that solved in Subsection 5.3.3 for µ = 10 is now considered with the closure
constraint, gs, re-introduced such that Problem 3.1 defines the optimization problem. The sufficient clo-
sure constraint measures are computed in addition to the results shown in Figure 5.7 for all values of
the p-norm exponent in Figure 5.7a. These constraint measures are then used to choose a reasonable
constraint limit, S∗, for the succeeding optimization problem to use. As seen in Figure 5.16, the closure
constraint limit is chosen as S∗= 8 mm as this provides a relatively narrow feasible region of config-
urations, assuming they conform to the suture shapes shown in Figure 5.6. The exact value here is not
important as long as it constricts the feasible region with its introduction.
Topology optimization of surgical suture distribution using a simplified soft tissue model
39
==PAGE:44==
Figure 5.16:
Deformed wound edge separations,
Sp, for all possible configurations detailed in Fig-
ure 5.6. The closure constraint value, S∗, for the re-
sults shown in Figure 5.17a is shown for reference.
For this loose constraint on the closure, the final
design topology is between a 2nd- and 3rd-order
rule of halves configuration even with a suture
spring volume limit only meant for 2nd-order, or
3 full 3x3 suture node sutures. The active con-
straints are both the minimum suture volume con-
straint, Vmin, and the sufficient closure constraint,
gs, as intended. Further downsides of the penalty
term inclusion, fµ, are seen with an asymmet-
ric final design produced. Again here the Heav-
iside filter continuation works together with the
penalty term and suppresses otherwise potentially
active design locations. This highlights the need
for a more robust method to enforce design dis-
cretization without removing designable locations
from reappearing. A much better design of c ≈
cµ = 0.675 is achieved compared to the minimum
shown in Figure 5.7a due to these deviations from
the expected topology form.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.17: Optimized suture topology for the problem described in Subsection 5.3.3 (µ = 10) with
element-value von Mises strains, Ee
vm
 units: mm
mm

and the sufficient wound closure constraint, gs, re-
introduced with S∗= 8 mm.
5.6.1
Sufficient closure
A more restrictive closure constraint limit is now considered. In trialing of constraint limit values, S∗= 3
mm is found to be the lowest reasonable value where the equilibrium iterations consistently converge for
all load increments. The suture spring constraint limit is also increased to V ∗= 45 as testing with lower
suture spring volume limits shows both volume constraints are consistently violated due to the maximum
constraint limit for V ∗= 27 seemingly eliminating all feasible points. With V ∗increased, the expected
closures are much lower and the feasible region is expanded.
Topology optimization of surgical suture distribution using a simplified soft tissue model
40
==PAGE:45==
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.18: Optimized suture topology for the problem described in Subsection 5.3.3 (µ = 10) and
Subsection 5.6.1 with element-value von Mises strains, Ee
vm
 units: mm
mm

and the sufficient wound closure
constraint, gs, re-introduced with S∗= 3 mm. The color map is synced with Figure 5.19.
The sufficient closure constraint is the sole active constraint here as seen in Figure 5.18b with the mini-
mum volume constraint closely following. The effect of the decreased constraint limit, S∗, is seen in the
additional iterations required to bring the design back into the feasible region after the β updates compared
to Figure 5.17b. Figure 5.19a shows the design initially approximates the 1st-order rule of halves con-
figuration and immediately begins synthesizing 2nd-order rule of halves topology. When the design has
developed enough to provide moderate closure the outer sutures then split to that shown in Figure 5.19b
and again to form approximate 3rd-order rule of halves topology as shown in Figure 5.18a. While the
structure is obviously not exact, the optimization’s tendency to select distributed topology rather than a
collective as in those shown in Figure 5.14 is evident.
(a) Design iteration 9
(b) Design iteration 69
Figure 5.19: Optimized suture topology for the problem described in Subsection 5.3.3 (µ = 10) with
element-value von Mises strains, Ee
vm
 units: mm
mm

and the sufficient wound closure constraint, gs, re-
introduced. Select design iteration topologies shown with interpreted suture locations drawn as
. The
color maps are synced with Figure 5.18a.
5.7
Removal of passive sutures
An identical problem to Subsection 5.6.1 is investigated with the removal of the passive domain such
that all suture spring locations are designable. Previously, the suture nodes in the center suture were held
fixed to simplify the problem and attempt to enforce a topology known in practice to perform well. By
Topology optimization of surgical suture distribution using a simplified soft tissue model
41
==PAGE:46==
allowing all designable locations to be active, the optimizer is given full freedom to select the optimal
suture arrangement subject to Problem 3.1. Of main interest here is recovery of the center suture and how
the absence of passive design variables influences the final topology and strain distribution. The results
are compared to previous cases to highlight differences in designable locations selection, wound closure,
and objective function performance.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.20: Optimized suture topology for the problem described in Subsection 5.6.1 (µ = 10) with
element-value von Mises strains, Ee
vm
 units: mm
mm

and the sufficient wound closure constraint, gs, re-
introduced. All designable locations are active (no passive design variables).
With a flat initialization as in Section 5.6, the final topology is still selected as a sparsely and approximately
defined 3rd-order rule of halves configuration. The cause of the sparsity is due to the volume limits
intending to select 5 sutures rather than the 7 appearing in Figure 5.20a, as well as the better objective
performance of laterally-even loading. The closure constraint is still seen here as the design limiting
constraint, along with the minimum suture spring volume constraint attempting to reduce overall applied
loading and thus the average strains.
The objective value here decreases slower than all other cases, especially those in Section 5.6 with the
closure constraint, gs, present. Without the center passive suture, the final topology results in a higher
objective value of cµ = 0.698. Due to the presence of some intermediate design variables, the penalty
term, fµ = 0.038 contributes significantly to this gap in performance with the final design shown in
Figure 5.18a having a penalty value of only 0.004 (computed from the shown Mnd values). This again
highlights the main downside of the penalty term, fµ, which is early design variable suppression.
The full population of design locations at the wound center further validates the preceding use of these
as a passive center suture. Wound edges not fully closed or overlapping are located at the wound major
vertices, x = a = L
2 . This occurs due to Poisson effects combined with the near-incompressibility for
ν = 0.495 deflecting these locations away from each other as sutures are tightened and the wound is
closed. Closing these locations requires very high compression in the major vertices of the wound and
contributes to the clinically observed dog-ear formation. The current work is unable to model this effect
as stability problem must be solved to determine the onset and state of wrinkling.
Topology optimization of surgical suture distribution using a simplified soft tissue model
42
==PAGE:47==
6
Conclusion
The goals of this thesis and the OptCut project are to improve wound healing and increase the quality of
surgical and clinical suturing procedures. This thesis then focuses on establishing a foundational opti-
mization framework for the placement of sutures to sufficiently close a wound onto which extensions can
be made.
The numerical representation of a suture using structured discrete springs first described by Holm [20] is
expanded to topology optimization through the interpolation of boundary conditions and external forces.
To mimic the physical size of a suture, design variable filtering along with a penalty on intermediate
design variables is used to enforce a length scale equivalent to a suture’s diameter. A neo-Hookean
hyperelastic finite strain finite element formulation is used to simulate suture tightening and wound closure
with design interpolation from optimization design variables. Through enforcement of constraints on the
final deformation state of the sutured skin and the amount of suture springs, sufficient closure of the wound
is ensured while avoiding trivial solutions such as the null case.
The current formulation succeeds in producing discrete final design topologies. However, all results
indicate that the enforcement of discrete ”built-up” sutures is not sufficient with the current methods
alone. Final topologies are interpreted as equally distributed discrete sutures as is seen clinically, but
individual suture definitions are inconsistent and insufficient with what is expected from the problem
definition and constraints. This shows that mechanics and sensitivities are correctly defined but that
additional considerations such as the robust formulation [39] or alternate methods for design variable
interpolation are required. The need for a compiled language implementation for mesh refinement is
equally important so that real suture sizes can be physically represented and state problem results are
accurate. Mitigation for the preference of outermost designable locations must also be included through
wrinkling models or transverse symmetry of the design space. The current work is a first step towards a
more complex and realistic optimization framework for suturing procedures, and it is clear and expected
that the current methods are not sufficient to produce clinically relevant results.
6.1
Future work
The following are extension suggestions and areas for future consideration based on the author’s experi-
ence with the current work:
• Most importantly, the porting of the current implementation to a compiled language such as C++
must be done to allow for the addition of more computationally demanding simulations. Without
a realistic material model and a finer mesh, the results derived cannot be clinically meaningful.
• Modelling of the skin using the one-term Ogden or Holzapfel-Gasser-Ogden material model to
better represent the skin’s realistic mechanical properties. Significant deviations occur between the
current work’s neo-Hookean and these two advanced models.
• Addition of wound topology as a designable feature e.g. by using SIMP-based topology optimiza-
tion methods or shape optimization of the wound edge definition. Surgeons often have to make
modifications to the shape of a wound when suturing so an ellipse as used here is not accurate or
optimal for healing in general.
• Explore different constraint formulations on sufficient closure of the wound. This can be paired
with a wrinkling model to account for wound edge contact or dog-ear formation. Generalization of
the wound edge definition and what constitutes sufficient closure will also be required.
Topology optimization of surgical suture distribution using a simplified soft tissue model
43
==PAGE:48==
6.2
Disclosure of LLM usage
In accordance with the Technical University of Denmark’s guidelines on the use of Large Language Mod-
els (LLMs) in academic work, the following disclosure is made:
The author has utilized the ChatGPT [31] and Github Copilot [29] LLMs to assist in the writing and
editing of this thesis, specifically using the GPT-4.1 model. These LLMs are employed strictly to help
navigate diction and accelerate the development of code in MATLAB and C++, primarily through the
correction of syntax. In addition, no code fragments are synthesized beyond the author’s existing ability
to create them independent of LLM assistance at the time of writing.
The primary interfaces for the use of LLMs are the built-in VScode integration with Github Copilot and
the desktop application for ChatGPT.
Topology optimization of surgical suture distribution using a simplified soft tissue model
44
==PAGE:49==
Bibliography
[1]
AB, COMSOL. COMSOL Multiphysics® v. 6.3. Stockholm, Sweden, 2025.
[2]
Agache, Pierre. Physiologie de la peau et explorations fonctionnelles cutanées. Collection explo-
rations fonctionnelles humaines. Tec & Doc Lavoisier, 2000.
[3]
Andreassen, Erik et al. “Efficient topology optimization in MATLAB using 88 lines of code”. In:
Structural and Multidisciplinary Optimization 43.1 (Jan. 2011), pp. 1–16. issn: 1615-147X, 1615-
1488. doi: 10.1007/s00158-010-0594-7. url: http://link.springer.com/10.1007/s00158-010-
0594-7 (visited on 05/18/2025).
[4]
Bendsøe, M. P. “Optimal shape design as a material distribution problem”. In: Structural Opti-
mization 1.4 (Dec. 1989), pp. 193–202. issn: 0934-4373, 1615-1488. doi: 10.1007/BF01650949.
url: http://link.springer.com/10.1007/BF01650949 (visited on 05/14/2025).
[5]
Bendsøe, M. P. and Sigmund, O. “Material interpolation schemes in topology optimization”. In:
Archive of Applied Mechanics (Ingenieur Archiv) 69.9 (Nov. 22, 1999), pp. 635–654. issn: 0939-
1533, 1432-0681. doi: 10 . 1007 / s004190050248. url: http : / / link . springer . com / 10 . 1007 /
s004190050248 (visited on 05/14/2025).
[6]
Betts, J. Anatomy and Physiology 2e. 2nd ed. OpenStax, Rice University, 2019. url: https://med.
libretexts.org/Bookshelves/Anatomy_and_Physiology/Human_Anatomy_%28Lange_et_al.%29/
04%3A_Integumentary_System/4.02%3A_Layers_of_the_Skin (visited on 07/12/2025).
[7]
Bonet, Javier and Wood, Richard. Nonlinear Continuum Mechanics for Finite Element Analysis.
2nd. Cambridge, 2008. isbn: 978-0-521-83870-2.
[8]
Borrvall, Thomas and Petersson, Joakim. “Topology optimization using regularized intermediate
density control”. In: Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 190.37 (June 22,
2001), pp. 4911–4928. issn: 0045-7825. doi: 10.1016/S0045-7825(00)00356-X. url: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S004578250000356X (visited on 07/16/2025).
[9]
Borst, Rene de. Non-Linear Finite Element Analysis of Solids and Structures. 2012.
[10]
Bruns, T. E. and Tortorelli, D. A. “An element removal and reintroduction strategy for the topology
optimization of structures and compliant mechanisms”. In: International Journal for Numerical
Methods in Engineering 57.10 (2003). _eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/nme.783,
pp. 1413–1430. issn: 1097-0207. doi: 10.1002/nme.783. url: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/
doi/abs/10.1002/nme.783 (visited on 05/18/2025).
[11]
Bruns, Tyler E. and Tortorelli, Daniel A. “Topology optimization of non-linear elastic structures
and compliant mechanisms”. In: Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 190.26
(Mar. 16, 2001), pp. 3443–3459. issn: 0045-7825. doi: 10.1016/S0045-7825(00)00278-4. url:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0045782500002784 (visited on 05/18/2025).
[12]
Buhl, T. “Simultaneous topology optimization of structure and supports”. In: Structural and Mul-
tidisciplinary Optimization 23.5 (June 1, 2002), pp. 336–346. issn: 1615-1488. doi: 10.1007/
s00158-002-0194-2. url: https://doi.org/10.1007/s00158-002-0194-2 (visited on 02/24/2025).
[13]
CHANDA, ARNAB and UNNIKRISHNAN, VINU. “A REALISTIC 3D COMPUTATIONAL
MODEL OF THE CLOSURE OF SKIN WOUND WITH INTERRUPTED SUTURES”. In: Jour-
nal of Mechanics in Medicine and Biology (June 29, 2016). Publisher: World Scientific Publish-
ing Company. doi: 10 . 1142 / S0219519417500257. url: https : / / www . worldscientific . com /
worldscinet/jmmb (visited on 05/17/2025).
[14]
Chaudhry, H. R. et al. “Optimal patterns for suturing wounds”. In: Journal of Biomechanics 31.7
(July 1, 1998), pp. 653–662. issn: 0021-9290. doi: 10 . 1016 / S0021 - 9290(98 ) 00069 - 4. url:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0021929098000694 (visited on 05/17/2025).
[15]
Cook, Robert et al. Concepts and Applications of Finite Element Analysis. 4th. 2002. (Visited on
05/18/2025).
Topology optimization of surgical suture distribution using a simplified soft tissue model
45
==PAGE:50==
[16]
De Leon, Daniel M. et al. “Stress-constrained topology optimization for compliant mechanism
design”. In: Structural and Multidisciplinary Optimization 52.5 (Nov. 1, 2015), pp. 929–943. issn:
1615-1488. doi: 10.1007/s00158-015-1279-z. url: https://doi.org/10.1007/s00158-015-1279-z
(visited on 06/28/2025).
[17]
Flynn, Cormac. “Finite element models of wound closure”. In: Journal of Tissue Viability 19.4
(Nov. 1, 2010), pp. 137–149. issn: 0965-206X. doi: 10.1016/j.jtv.2009.10.001. url: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0965206X09000382 (visited on 05/17/2025).
[18]
Guest, J. K., Prévost, J. H., and Belytschko, T. “Achieving minimum length scale in topology op-
timization using nodal design variables and projection functions”. In: International Journal for Nu-
merical Methods in Engineering 61.2 (2004). _eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/nme.1064,
pp. 238–254. issn: 1097-0207. doi: 10.1002/nme.1064. url: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/
abs/10.1002/nme.1064 (visited on 05/18/2025).
[19]
Holm, Markus T. “Optimization of surgical incisions of human skin to promote optimal wound
healing”. PhD thesis. Technical University of Denmark, June 30, 2023.
[20]
Holm, Markus T. et al. “Simple incision and suture modeling on fixed structured grids”. In: Journal
of the Mechanical Behavior of Biomedical Materials 160 (Dec. 1, 2024), p. 106692. issn: 1751-
6161. doi: 10.1016/j.jmbbm.2024.106692. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S1751616124003242 (visited on 03/24/2025).
[21]
Holzapfel, Gerhard, Gasser, Thomas, and Ogden, Ray W. “A new constitutive framework for ar-
terial wall mechanics and a comparative study of material models”. In: Journal of Elasticity 61.1
(2000), pp. 1–48. issn: 15732681. doi: 10.1023/A:1010835316564.
[22]
Joodaki, Hamed and Panzer, Matthew B. “Skin mechanical properties and modeling: A review”.
In: Proceedings of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers, Part H: Journal of Engineering in
Medicine 232.4 (Apr. 1, 2018). Publisher: IMECHE, pp. 323–343. issn: 0954-4119. doi: 10.1177/
0954411918759801. url: https://doi.org/10.1177/0954411918759801 (visited on 02/12/2025).
[23]
Klarbring, Anders and Strömberg, Niclas. “Topology optimization of hyperelastic bodies includ-
ing non-zero prescribed displacements”. In: Structural and Multidisciplinary Optimization 47.1
(Jan. 1, 2013), pp. 37–48. issn: 1615-1488. doi: 10 . 1007 / s00158 - 012 - 0819 - z. url: https :
//doi.org/10.1007/s00158-012-0819-z (visited on 02/16/2025).
[24]
Larrabee, Wayne F., Holloway, G. Allen, and Sutton, Dwight. “Wound Tension and Blood Flow in
Skin Flaps”. In: Annals of Otology, Rhinology & Laryngology 93.2 (Mar. 1984). Publisher: SAGE
Publications, pp. 112–115. issn: 0003-4894, 1943-572X. doi: 10.1177/000348948409300202.
url: https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/000348948409300202 (visited on 05/17/2025).
[25]
Lazarov, B. S. and Sigmund, O. “Filters in topology optimization based on Helmholtz-type dif-
ferential equations”. In: International Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering 86.6 (2011).
_eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/nme.3072, pp. 765–781. issn: 1097-0207.
doi: 10.1002/nme.3072. url: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/nme.3072 (visited
on 05/18/2025).
[26]
Lazarov, Boyan Stefanov and Sigmund, Ole. “Sensitivity Filters In Topology Optimisation As A
Solution To Helmholtz Type Differential Equation: 8th World Congress on Structural and Multidis-
ciplinary Optimization”. In: WCSMO-8 8th World Congress on Structural and Multidisciplinary
Optimization - 8, 2009, LNEC, Lisbon, Portugal (2009).
[27]
Lott-Crumpler, D. A. and Chaudhry, H. R. “Optimal patterns for suturing wounds of complex
shapes to foster healing”. In: Journal of Biomechanics 34.1 (Jan. 1, 2001), pp. 51–58. issn: 0021-
9290. doi: 10.1016/S0021-9290(00)00160-3. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S0021929000001603 (visited on 05/17/2025).
[28]
MATLAB. Version R2023b (23.2.0.2365128) 64-bit (glnxa64). Aug. 23, 2023.
[29]
Microsoft. Visual Studio Code. Version 1.102. 2025. url: https://code.visualstudio.com.
[30]
Ogden, Raymond William and Hill, Rodney. “Large deformation isotropic elasticity – on the corre-
lation of theory and experiment for incompressible rubberlike solids”. In: Proceedings of the Royal
Topology optimization of surgical suture distribution using a simplified soft tissue model
46
==PAGE:51==
Society of London. A. Mathematical and Physical Sciences 326.1567 (1972). Publisher: Royal So-
ciety, pp. 565–584. doi: 10.1098/rspa.1972.0026. url: https://royalsocietypublishing.org/doi/abs/
10.1098/rspa.1972.0026 (visited on 02/13/2025).
[31]
OpenAI. ChatGPT. 2025. url: https://chat.openai.com (visited on 07/23/2025).
[32]
Orpet, Hilary and Welsh, Perdi. “Skin Suturing Techniques”. In: Handbook of Veterinary Nursing.
Section: 20 _eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/9780470690376.ch20. John
Wiley & Sons, Ltd, 2001, pp. 132–143. isbn: 978-0-470-69037-6. doi: 10.1002/9780470690376.
ch20. url: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/9780470690376.ch20 (visited on
05/18/2025).
[33]
Ostrander, Benjamin T. et al. “The current state of autonomous suturing: a systematic review”. In:
Surgical Endoscopy 38.5 (May 1, 2024), pp. 2383–2397. issn: 1432-2218. doi: 10.1007/s00464-
024-10788-w. url: https://doi.org/10.1007/s00464-024-10788-w (visited on 05/17/2025).
[34]
Rajabi, Amirhossein, Dolovich, Allan T., and Johnston, J. D. “From the rhombic transposition flap
toward Z-plasty: An optimized design using the finite element method”. In: Journal of Biomechan-
ics 48.13 (Oct. 15, 2015), pp. 3672–3678. issn: 0021-9290. doi: 10.1016/j.jbiomech.2015.08.
021. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0021929015004601 (visited on
05/17/2025).
[35]
Salam, Gohar A. and Amin, Janki P. “The Basic Z-Plasty”. In: American Family Physician 67.11
(June 1, 2003), pp. 2329–2332. url: https://www.aafp.org/pubs/afp/issues/2003/0601/p2329.html
(visited on 05/18/2025).
[36]
Schröder, Jörg et al. “A Selection of Benchmark Problems in Solid Mechanics and Applied Math-
ematics”. In: ResearchGate (2020). doi: 10.1007/s11831-020-09477-3. url: https://www.
researchgate.net/publication/345205630_A_Selection_of_Benchmark_Problems_in_Solid_
Mechanics_and_Applied_Mathematics (visited on 07/14/2025).
[37]
Sigmund, Ole. “Morphology-based black and white filters for topology optimization”. In: Struc-
tural and Multidisciplinary Optimization 33.4 (Feb. 26, 2007), pp. 401–424. issn: 1615-147X,
1615-1488. doi: 10.1007/s00158-006-0087-x. url: http://link.springer.com/10.1007/s00158-
006-0087-x (visited on 05/18/2025).
[38]
Svanberg, Krister. “The Method of Moving Asymptotes”. In: International Journal for Numerical
Methods in Engineering 24.2 (June 17, 1986), pp. 359–373. doi: https://doi.org/10.1002/nme.
1620240207.
[39]
Wang, Fengwen, Lazarov, Boyan Stefanov, and Sigmund, Ole. “On projection methods, conver-
gence and robust formulations in topology optimization”. In: Structural and Multidisciplinary Op-
timization 43.6 (June 1, 2011), pp. 767–784. issn: 1615-1488. doi: 10.1007/s00158-010-0602-y.
url: https://doi.org/10.1007/s00158-010-0602-y (visited on 07/22/2025).
[40]
Wang, Fengwen et al. “Interpolation scheme for fictitious domain techniques and topology opti-
mization of finite strain elastic problems”. In: Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engi-
neering 276 (July 1, 2014), pp. 453–472. issn: 0045-7825. doi: 10.1016/j.cma.2014.03.021. url:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0045782514001078 (visited on 04/04/2025).
Topology optimization of surgical suture distribution using a simplified soft tissue model
47
==PAGE:52==
A
(Appendix start) In-depth derivations
A.1
Principle of virtual work with fictitious energy interpolation
Derivation of element-level tangent stiffness and force matrices/vectors have been shown in countless
papers and other references, but, to the author’s knowledge, a detailed derivation including a fictitious
domain energy interpolation [40] of the potential function has not been explicitly shown.
The total Lagrangian is used to represent the system as this results in complementary stress and strain
measures (the Second Piola-Kirchoff stress and the Green-Lagrange strain). First, the variations of the
internal potential energy and external work over the domain are:
δΠint =
Z
Ω
δϵT σ dΩ=
Z
Ω0
δET S dΩ
δΠext =
Z
Γ0
δuT t0 dΓ +
Z
V0
δuT ρ0g dV
(A.1)
which is then arranged to solve incrementally for the internal stresses, St+∆t, at each ∆t load increment
[9]:
Z
Ω0
δET St+∆t dΩ=
Z
Γ0
δuT tt+∆t
0
dΓ +
Z
V0
δuT ρ0g dV
(A.2)
In the current work, body/volumetric loading is not considered. Therefore, compared to the derivation
shown in de Borst [9], the volumetric external work integral contribution is not present. The internal
stresses are then separated into known and unknown components:
Z
Ω0
δET St dΩ+
Z
Ω0
δET S∆t dΩ=
Z
Γ0
δuT tt+∆t
0
dΓ +

Z
V0
δuT ρ0g dV
(A.3)
Here the displacement dependencies have been inserted to track where the fictitious domain energy in-
terpolation coefficient is placed within the final stiffness element. The definition of the stress increment
is then substituted:
S∆t = D∆E
∆E = ∆EL + ∆ENL
(A.4)
where D is the constitutive matrix for the selected material model (Saint Venant-Kirchoff, Ogden, etc.)
at increment t, and ∆E is the Green-Lagrange strain increment containing both linear and non-linear
components. Inserting these definitions into Equation A.2 gives:
1 :
Z
Ω0
δET
NLSt dΩ
+
2 :
Z
Ω0
δET
LD∆EL dΩ
+
3 :
Z
Ω0

δET
LD∆ENL + δET
NLD∆EL + δET
NLD∆ENL

dΩ
=
4 :
Z
Γ0
δuT tt+∆t
0
dΓ −
Z
Ω0
δET
LSt dΩ
(A.5)
Topology optimization of surgical suture distribution using a simplified soft tissue model
48
==PAGE:53==
The numbered terms are: 1 - the stress stiffness response, 2 - the linear stiffness response, 3 - the ge-
ometric stiffness response, and 4 - the external and internal forces. The strains, EL and ENL, are now
substituted with the linear and non-linear strain displacement matrices, BL and BNL, and corresponding
nodal displacements, a, defined as:
EL = BLa
ENL = BNLa
u = Na
(A.6)
At this point it is critical to note that the non-linear strain displacement matrix, BNL, is not the same
as used in de Borst [9]. The matrix BNL used by de Borst is written as G in the current work to al-
low sensible subscripting of the strain-displacement matrices here as ”L” and ”NL” for linear and non-
linear components, respectively. Now, inserting the definitions in Equation A.6 into Equation A.5 (Note:
(Ba)T = aT BT ):
1 :
δaT
Z
Ω0
GT ΣtG dΩ∆a
+
2 :
δaT
Z
Ω0
BT
LDBL dΩ∆a
+
3 :
δaT
Z
Ω0

BT
LDBNL + BT
NLDBL + BT
NLDBNL

dΩ∆a
=
4 :
δaT
Z
Γ0
NT tt+∆t
0
dΓ −δaT
Z
Ω0
BT
LSt dΩ
(A.7)
where N is the 2x8 shape function matrix used to interpolate element displacements from the nodal
displacements:
N =
"
N1
0
N2
0
N3
0
N4
0
0
N1
0
N2
0
N3
0
N4
#
(A.8)
The integrand of the stress stiffness response in Equation A.5, δET
NLSt, is equivalent to δaT GT ΣtG∆a
where Σt is the stacked Second Piola-Kirchoff stress matrix of the form:
Σt =
"
St
0
0
St
#
=


St
11
St
12
0
0
St
21
St
22
0
0
0
0
St
11
St
12
0
0
St
21
St
22


(A.9)
and G contains the derivatives of the shape functions:
G =


∂Ni
∂ξ
0
· · ·
· · ·
∂Ni
∂η
0
· · ·
· · ·
0
∂Ni
∂ξ
· · ·
· · ·
0
∂Ni
∂η
· · ·
· · ·


for i = 1, 2, · · · , n(e)
nodes
(A.10)
The linear and non-linear stiffness components as well as the internal and external force vectors are now
defined by extracting the common terms from both sides of Equation A.7:
K(e)
L =
Z
Ω0
BT
LDBL dΩ
(A.11)
Topology optimization of surgical suture distribution using a simplified soft tissue model
49
==PAGE:54==
K(e)
NL =
Z
Ω0

BT
LDBNL + BT
NLDBL + BT
NLDBNL

dΩ
(A.12)
K(e)
Σ =
Z
Ω0
GT ΣtG dΩ
(A.13)
f(e), t+∆t
ext
=
Z
Γ0
NT tt+∆t
0
dΓ
(A.14)
f(e), t
int
=
Z
Ω0
BT
LSt dΩ
(A.15)
Using these definitions, the principle of virtual work now reads:
δaT 
K(e)
L + K(e)
NL + K(e)
Σ

∆a = δaT 
f(e), t+∆t
ext
−f(e), t
int

(A.16)
with (·)(e) denoting an element-level quantity as opposed to a global quantity.
In order to properly satisfy the fictitious domain energy interpolation, additional terms must be added to
the tangent stiffness matrix and residual. This corresponds to the linear energy terms shown in Equa-
tion 2.26 equation written earlier in this report. The element linear strain energy and, by using their
definition, the residual and tangent stiffness matrix are expressed as:
φ(e)
L (a) = 1
2aT K(e)
L a
r(e)
L (a) = ∂φ(e)
L
∂a
= K(e)
L a
K(e)
L (a) = ∂2φ(e)
L
∂a2
= K(e)
L
(A.17)
Expanding the energy interpolation shown in Equation 2.26 with the quantities in Equation A.17 and
Equation A.16 gives:
φ(e)(ue) =
φ(γeue) −φL(γeue) + φL(ue)
=
δ(γeaT )
h
K(e)
L + K(e)
NL(γeu) + K(e)
Σ (γeu)
i
∆(γea)
+ δaT 
K(e)
L

∆a + δ(γeaT )

K(e)
L

∆(γea)
=
δaT 
f(e), t+∆t
ext
−f(e), t
int

−δ(γeaT )

K(e)
L (γea)

+ δaT 
K(e)
L a

(A.18)
The placement of γe coefficients in Equation A.16 is the interested results here as that is where they
are inserted during assembly of these quantities. Note that the variational, δaT , and the displacement
increment, ∆a, both contribute one γe each as is shown in Equation A.18 already.
K(e)
NL(γeu) =
Z
Ω0

BT
LDγeBNL + γeBT
NLDBL + γeBT
NLDγeBNL

dΩ
(A.19)
St = D(BL + 1
2γeBNL)γeat
(A.20)
This assumes the constitutive tensor, D, is separable from the strain energy density (is not a function
Topology optimization of surgical suture distribution using a simplified soft tissue model
50
==PAGE:55==
of the displacement) [40] and that the Saint Venant-Kirchoff material model is used. The constitutive
tensor is not separable for material models used to characterize skin such as the Ogden model, and so
in future works this will have to be considered. In practice, the correct formulation is typically obtained
by calculating each φ term in Equation A.18 separately with or without γe where appropriate and then
summing them to build the residual and tangent stiffness matrix. Constructing this way is better as it
allows better accounting of many different material models.
A.2
Neo-Hookean material model implementation validation
Parameter
Value
Lamé’s first parameter, λ
432.099 MPa
Shear modulus, µ
185.185 MPa
Applied shear stress, τ
20 MPa
Thickness, t
1 mm
Table A.1: Summary of material and geomet-
ric parameters used for the results shown in
Section A.2 unless otherwise noted.
The neo-Hookean material model is implementation in
the current work as a custom MATLAB function based on
that shown in Bonet [7]. The accuracy of this implemen-
tation is verified against the benchmark solution contained
in Schröder [36] and the commercial FEA software COM-
SOL Multiphysics® for the Cook’s membrane benchmark
problem. The formulation and basis results of this bench-
mark problem are shown in Schröder [36]. The definition
of the neo-Hookean material model used here is shown
in Section 2.5 explicitly with the strain energy and stress
functions.
The structure geometry, material parameters, and loading are identical to that described in Schröder [36].
The reference uses triangular and hexahedral meshes to obtain the data shown in Figure A.2b while the
current work is implemented only for 4-noded quadrilateral elements. This difference is noted, but the
convergence to the same tip displacement is still observed. The problem parameters and geometry are de-
tailed in Table A.1 and Figure A.1a, respectively. An example mesh used to compute the tip displacements
for the current implementation is shown in Figure A.1b.
(a) Cook’s membrane benchmark problem definition.
The problem described here is identical to that found
in, and is modified from, [36]. All dimensions are in
mm.
(b) Example mesh for the Cook’s membrane benchmark
problem. The mesh shown has 441 nodes, 882 degrees
of freedom and 400 elements.
Figure A.1: (a) Cook’s membrane benchmark problem definition. (b) Example mesh used for the current
implementation.
Topology optimization of surgical suture distribution using a simplified soft tissue model
51
==PAGE:56==
(a)
(b)
Figure A.2: Tip displacement convergence results for the Cook’s membrane problem. (a) Current MAT-
LAB implementation (b) Benchmark data from Schröder, Fig. 3a [36].
An identical problem is now solved with Poisson’s ratio changed to that used in Chapter 5 of ν = 0.495.
This corresponds to a Lamé’s first parameter of λ = 16.554 GPa and a shear modulus of µ = 167.22
MPa. As the benchmark reference does not contain data for these values, the problem is analzyed using
the commercial FEA software COMSOL Multiphysics® [1] and the results produced are then used to
validate the current implementation.
(a)
(b)
Figure A.3: Tip displacement convergence results for the Cook’s membrane problem for a nearly incom-
pressible material, ν = 0.495. (a) Current MATLAB implementation (b) Benchmark data created with
COMSOL.
The tip displacements shown in Figure A.3a and Figure A.3b are within a relative error of 0.9%. As the
current implementation agrees with both the benchmark case and COMSOL for the Cook’s membrane
problem shown in Schröder, Fig. 3a [36], it is proven accurate and acceptable for further use.
Topology optimization of surgical suture distribution using a simplified soft tissue model
52
==PAGE:57==
A.3
Suture spring stiffness as a design variable
To precisely control wound closure, the base suture spring stiffness, α0, is converted into a design variable
and takes a different value for each designable location. This is also motivated by trying to alleviate
the spring force difference for suture springs located at different distances from the wound center as
discussed in Chapter 5. while the addition shown here is not used in any results or testing, it remains in
consideration for future works and is therefore presented here. The interpolated suture spring stiffnesses
are then redefined as
αi = zp
i α0
i
(A.21)
where α0
i is the base stiffness value for the ith designable location.
The primary impact this has is in the sensitivity analysis shown in Section 3.5. The gradients with respect
to these new design variables are now required as is done for the suture spring presence variables, zi,
in Equation 3.28. The form for this is the same with the α0
i design variables directly replacing the zi
design variables and removal of all filtering terms. The decision to filter the suture spring stiffnesses
using Section 3.2 is left for future works, and is assumed to be unfiltered here. The objective function
sensitivity with respect to the suture spring stiffness design variables is then
dc
dα0
i
=
∂fµ
∂α0
i
+ λT
c
∂r
∂α0
i

= λT
c
∂r
∂α0
i
(A.22)
where the penalty term gradient ∂fµ
∂α0
i = 0. Note that the adjoint method now removes the dependence
on the displacement sensitivity
du
dα0
i instead of du
dzi . The only remaining dependence on the suture spring
stiffness design variables, α0
i , is in the residual gradient which is trivially computed as
∂r
∂α0
i
= TT (˜¯zp
i ) T(X + a).
(A.23)
The computation of λT
c is identical to that shown in Subsection 3.5.2. The sufficient wound closure
constraint sensitivity is similarly derived as
dgs
dα0
i
= 1
S∗
∂Sp
∂α0
i

= 1
S∗

λT
s
∂r
∂α0
i

(A.24)
where the residual derivative,
∂r
∂α0
i , is identical to that given in Equation A.23, and λT
s is unchanged from
Subsection 3.5.4.
A.4
Verification of sensitivities using 1st-Order finite difference
In the derivation of design sensitivities for complex optimization problems, derivatives quickly become
complicated and the chain rule must be applied multiple times to achieve the correct results. Combined
Topology optimization of surgical suture distribution using a simplified soft tissue model
53
==PAGE:58==
with applying the adjoint method (Section 3.5), it is difficult and not suggested to verify closed form
sensitivities by inspection alone.
To verify accurate analytic gradients for optimization, both central and forward finite difference methods
are introduced. Finite difference in general approximates the derivative of a function by creating an
approximation of the function in a local region at a point. Compared to analytic gradients, finite difference
approximated gradients are orders of magnitude less complex but come with prohibitive computation
costs as well as a large risk of significant error distorting the design space. Therefore, for problems
where analytic gradients are possible one should make an effort to obtain them over finite difference
approximations.
Many forms of finite difference exist, but only 1st-order methods are used here. Higher order methods
provide higher gradient accuracy at the cost of additional function evalations. As the interest is only in
verifying analytic gradients rather than using the finite difference gradients for optimization, 1st-order
finite difference is acceptable here. For a general function, h (x), the central difference gradient at a point
x1 is computed as
∇C
x h ≈h(x1 + ∆x) −h(x1 −∆x)
2∆x
(A.25)
and the forward difference gradient is
∇F
x h ≈h(x1 + ∆x) −h(x1)
∆x
(A.26)
where ∆x is the step size. The appropriate step size is relative to the magnitude of the function h. For the
current work with a range of independent values zi ∈[zmin, 1], step sizes used are ∆x ∈

10−8, 10−2
.
Values in this range are small enough that the local function approximation remains valid, but large enough
to avoid machine precision truncation.
The objective sensitivity shown in Equation 3.28 is now verified using central and forward finite differ-
ence. The use of forward difference is frivolous as central difference will provide better accuracy, but
both are shown for comparison. In Figure A.4, central and forward difference values are computed us-
ing 14 step sizes logarithmically spaced between ∆z, ∆α0
i ∈
 10−8, 10−2
. The problem described in
Figure 5.4 is used here with all design variables zi = 0.9 to ensure the foward step does not overstep the
variable’s bounds. The suture spring stiffness design variables are set to base values of α0
i = 50.0 N
m.
The error between the finite difference gradients and the analytic gradients is computed as
EC
zi =
∇C
zicµ −dcµ
dzi

 dcµ
dzi

× 100%,
EC
α0
i =
∇C
α0
i cµ −dcµ
dα0
i

 dcµ
dα0
i

× 100%
(A.27)
for central difference, and
EF
zi =
∇F
zicµ −dcµ
dzi

 dcµ
dzi

× 100%,
EF
α0
i =
∇F
α0
i cµ −dcµ
dα0
i

 dcµ
dα0
i

× 100%
(A.28)
for forward difference.
Topology optimization of surgical suture distribution using a simplified soft tissue model
54
==PAGE:59==
The difference in the order of accuracy (O(h) for forward difference and O(h2) for central difference) is
clearly seen in Figure A.4 for both sets of design variables. For the methods detailed here, a minimum
relative error value less than 10−6 is generally considered the threshold to denote correctly defined analytic
gradients. All gradients shown in Figure A.4 meet this criteria.
Figure A.4: Finite difference convergence plots for the gradients shown in Equation 3.28 for all design
variables zi and α0
i . The difference schemes are denoted by:
Central difference
Forward difference.
Topology optimization of surgical suture distribution using a simplified soft tissue model
55
==PAGE:60==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Koppels Allé, Building 404
2800 Kongens Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://construct.dtu.dk/
