==PAGE:1==
Edible Mycelium of Laetiporus sulphureus
Substrate Suitability and Microbial Food Safety
Written by:
Magdalena Joanna Dzierzynska (s194428)
Supervised by:
Claus Heiner Bang-Berthelsen
Tina Beck Hansen
Celia L. Jansen
Xingchen Zhao
Master Thesis
DTU Food
June 2025
==PAGE:2==
Master Thesis
Magdalena Dzierzynska
June 2025
Abstract
Investigating the use of the fungus Laetiporus sulphureus for edible mycelium production
could expand the portfolio of species to use for food innovation of sustainable meat alter-
natives. The objective of this master’s thesis is twofold: i) to identify a suitable substrate
for production of an edible mycelium by evaluating growth of L. sulphureus in agar-based
media and solid state fermentation, and ii) to investigate microbial food safety of this edible
mycelium.
Experiment one showed that L. sulphureus can grow on unsupplemented plant-based
substrates in agar-based media. Growth rates, radial colony diameter, appearance, color,
and density of L. sulphureus mycelium was evaluated on the side streams apple pomace,
sugar beet pulp, and potato pulp, the seaweed U. lactuca, as well as a positive control on
nutrient-rich malt extract agar (MEA). The substrate-agar that best supported growth of L.
sulphureus was MEA, followed by potato pulp, apple pomace, U. lactuca and sugar beet
pulp. The growth rate was significantly higher (p < 0.05) on MEA (1.5±0.1 cm/day) than in
all of the biomasses. The growth rate was not significantly different between potato pulp,
apple pomace, and U. lactuca (1.1-1.2 cm/day), and significantly lower in sugar beet pulp
(0.7±0.1 cm/day).
Experiment two showed that L. sulphureus can grow on unsupplemented plant-based
substrates in solid state fermentation. Nine substrates were investigated: Apple pomace,
sugar beet pulp, U. lactuca, rye, pearl barley, rice, corn, quinoa, and chickpeas. Of these,
the four that were able to support growth of L. sulphureus under the experimental con-
ditions were rye, sugar beet pulp, rice, and pearl barley. Pearl barley was selected as
a promising substrate for an edible mycelium, and was subject to microbial analysis, be-
cause it showed the most uniform growth of orange L. sulphureus mycelium, it can be
locally grown in Denmark, and it was easy to handle.
In experiment three, the food pathogens Listeria monocytogenes and Bacillus cereus s.l.
were inoculated into pearl barley at the beginning of solid state fermentation with L. sul-
phureus to investigate their growth in a challenge test. This was compared to how the
pathogens grew in pearl barley without fungus, as well as in fungally fermented pearl
barley without inoculated pathogens. L. sulphureus can inhibit growth of food pathogens
during solid state fermentation as compared to samples where L. sulphureus was ab-
sent. However, the pathogens grew faster than the fungus, their concentration increased
between 4-5.5 log CFU/g within the first 24 hours, whereas L. sulphureus colonized the
substrate more slowly. After seven days, the pH of most samples with L. sulphureus had
decreased below 4.4, which correlated with a decrease in bacterial concentration. After 14
days, the L. sulphureus fermented samples would not be considered food safe because
one duplicate contained >2 log CFU/g L. monocytogenes, which is the microbiological
criterion, and although the concentration of B. cereus s.l. was <5 log CFU/g, it had been
>5 log CFU/g at the beginning of the fermentation, which meant heat-stable emetic toxins
could have been formed. A potential solution for ensuring a food safe edible mycelium is
to lower the pH of the substrate to below 4.4 prior to solid state fermentation. This would
align with the acidophilic growth preferences of L. sulphureus.
i
==PAGE:3==
Master Thesis
Magdalena Dzierzynska
June 2025
Preface
This master thesis has been prepared over the course of 5 months at the Department of
Food, at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU) in the spring of 2025. The workload
of this project was 30 ECTS credits which correspond to 840 hours, which comprised both
experimental work, data analysis, thesis writing, and reviewing scientific literature on the
subject.
The thesis has been written by Magdalena Joanna Dzierzynska, a Food Technology mas-
ter student. The main supervisor of the project is Claus Heiner-Bang Berthelsen, senior
scientist at the research group for Microbial Biotechnology and Biorefining. The project
has been co-supervised by Tina Beck Hansen, senior scientist at the research group for
Food Microbiology and Hygiene and Xingchen Zhao, postdoc at the research group for
Food Microbiology and Hygiene, and Celia Jansen, PhD student at the Research Group
for Microbial Biotechnology and Biorefining. I would like to thank Celia and Xingchen for
their guidance in and outside of the lab.
All figures, photographs, and plots have been made by Magdalena, unless otherwise
stated in the figure text. Figures have been made using Canva. Plots have been made
using Rstudio.
Magdalena Joanna Dzierzynska - s194428
Signature
Date
ii
27.06.2025
==PAGE:4==
Master Thesis
Magdalena Dzierzynska
June 2025
Abbreviations
BE
Biological Efficiency
C
Carbon
C:N
Carbon:Nitrogen ratio
CFU
Colony forming units
DM
Dry matter
DTU
Technical University of Denmark
EFSA
European Food Safety Authority
F scenario
Fungus only
FP scenario
Fungus + patogens
LAF
Laminar Air Flow
MEA
Malt Extract Agar
N
Nitrogen
P scenario
Pathogens only
PALCAM
Selective agar for L. monocytogenes
RBC
Selective agar for B. cereus sensu lato
RBCheated
Selective agar for B. cereus sensu lato spores.
The sample is heated to 80 °C for 10 min before being plated on RBC
RTE
Ready-to-eat foods
RASFF
Rapid Alert System for Food and Feed
SSF
Solid State Fermentation
TSA
Tryptone Soy Agar
iii
==PAGE:5==
Master Thesis
Magdalena Dzierzynska
June 2025
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
i
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
List of Abbreviations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Objective and Hypotheses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Background
3
2.1
Edible Mycelium
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Laetiporus sulphureus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Substrate Suitability
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4
Characteristics of the Biomasses Used as Substrates
. . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.5
Microbial Safety of Fermented Foods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.6
Characteristics of the Pathogens in the Challenge Test . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3
Methods
14
3.1
Experiment 1: Substrate-Agar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.2
Experiment 2: Solid State Fermentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.3
Experiment 3: Challenge Test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
4
Results
26
4.1
Substrate-Agar Experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
4.2
Solid State Fermentation Experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
4.3
Challenge Test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
5
Discussion
44
5.1
Substrate-Agar Experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
5.2
Solid State Fermentation Experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
5.3
Challenge Test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
5.4
Collective Discussion and Other Perspectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
6
Conclusion
63
Bibliography
65
A Appendix
73
A.1 Phylogenetic Tree of Fungi
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73
A.2 Experiment 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 74
A.3 Experiment 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75
A.4 Experiment 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79
iv
==PAGE:6==
Master Thesis
Magdalena Dzierzynska
June 2025
1
Introduction
The world population is projected to reach 10 billion by 2050, which will cause an increase
in food demand of 50-60 % (Falcon et al. 2022). New sustainable sources of producing
foods and proteins are sought after, as an alternative to climate-intensive meat production,
and to avoid further land expansion. One way to develop sustainable foods or alternative
proteins is to use fungi to transform plant-based biomass, such as residual side streams
from food industries that would otherwise have been treated as waste. Mushrooms have
always been eaten all over the world, but exploring the use of the mycelium could create
new types of food products. Edible mycelia are seen in traditional Asian foods: oncom,
tempeh, koji and sufu, but they are made by a limited number of species, and are not
very wide-spread in a Western diet (Nout and Aidoo 2011). The mycelium of fungi can
transform the texture, taste, and nutritional composition of the substrate they grow in, and
several studies have claimed edible mycelium to be meat-like in their texture and umami-
rich flavor (Van Dam et al. 2024; Maini Rekdal, Van Der Luijt, et al. 2024; Gmoser et
al. 2020). An emerging direction within food technology and biotechnology is therefore to
harness the power of fungi to develop edible mycelia for the next generation of sustainable
proteins and meat alternatives by exploring new species and new substrates.
No guidelines exist at the European level for the safe preparation of fungally fermented
foods (Allwood et al. 2023). The fermentation process of edible mycelia is typically carried
out at temperatures between 20-30°C, which is a temperature where foodborne pathogens
can thrive. It is therefore of importance to food safety, and ultimately consumer health,
to investigate whether pathogens can grow in edible mycelium during the fermentation
process, or in the final product.
Research on edible mycelium using species that produce edible fruiting bodies is an
emerging, yet narrow field, in which the most researched species are Pleurotus ostreatus
(Oyster Mushroom), Agaricus bisporus (Button Mushroom), and Lentinula edodes (Shi-
itake) (Berger et al. 2022). In this master’s thesis, the lesser known species Laetiporus
sulphureus is chosen as the subject of investigation. L. sulphureus, commonly known as
”Chicken of the woods”, is an edible parasitic brown rot fungus, with fruiting bodies of a
characteristic color between orange and yellow, and a mild taste similar to tofu or turkey
meat (Adamska 2023). To the best of the author’s knowledge, only a single study has
been published that investigates the use of L. sulphureus fermentation with the intention
of producing edible mycelium, by Todorov et al. (2024) from the research group for Micro-
bial Biotechnology and Biroefining at DTU, where this master’s thesis is also conducted.
Investigating the use of L. sulphureus for edible mycelium production could expand the
portfolio of species to use for food innovation of sustainable meat alternatives.
Page 1 of 82
==PAGE:7==
Master Thesis
Magdalena Dzierzynska
June 2025
1.1
Objective and Hypotheses
This master’s thesis investigates fermentation of edible mycelium using the fungus Laeti-
porus sulphureus. The objective of the thesis is twofold:
i) to identify a suitable substrate for production of an edible mycelium by evaluating growth
of L. sulphureus in agar-based media and solid state fermentation
ii) to investigate microbial food safety of this edible mycelium.
To address these objectives, the following hypotheses were formulated:
1. L. sulphureus can grow on unsupplemented plant-based substrates in agar-based
media
2. L. sulphureus can grow on unsupplemented plant-based substrates in solid state
fermentation
3. L. sulphureus can inhibit growth of food pathogens during solid state fermentation
Three experiments were carried out to test these hypotheses. Experiment one inves-
tigated growth rates, radial colony diameter, appearance, color, and density of L. sul-
phureus mycelium on agar-media created from four different unsupplemented biomasses,
and compared them to a nutrient-optimized medium. These substrates were character-
ized by their content of dry matter, carbon, nitrogen, protein, and C:N ratio.
Experiment two investigated nine different substrates to determine which one was best
suited for growth of L. sulphureus in solid state fermentation. Three substrates were
carried over from Experiment 1, while the others were newly introduced. These substrates
were characterized by their content of carbon, nitrogen, protein, and C:N ratio. Growth
and mycelial density were assessed visually. The most promising substrate would be
used in experiment three.
In experiment three the food pathogens Listeria monocytogenes and Bacillus cereus s.l.
were inoculated into pearl barley at the beginning of solid state fermentation with L. sul-
phureus, to investigate their growth in a challenge test. This was compared to how the
pathogens grew in pearl barley without L. sulphureus, as well as the microbial develop-
ment in edible mycelium without inoculated pathogens.
Page 2 of 82
==PAGE:8==
Master Thesis
Magdalena Dzierzynska
June 2025
2
Background
2.1
Edible Mycelium
Growth and expansion of filamentous fungi occurs through the growth of hyphae, which
are single-celled threads that spread into their growth medium, called the substrate, to
absorb nutrients (Carlile et al. 2001). These hyphae constitute a network that is called
the mycelium of the fungus . Edible mycelium consists of the mycelium of a fungal species
that is safe to consume, and can either be separated from the substrate, if grown in sub-
merged culture, or be an integrated part of the substrate, if grown in solid state fermenta-
tion (Biesebeke et al. 2002). To ensure substrate edibility the substrate should be of food
origin (Berger et al. 2022).
Edible mycelia have long existed in a traditional diet in Asian countries such as Japan,
China, and Indonesia (Nout and Aidoo 2011). Tempeh and Oncom are traditional In-
donesian foods that are examples of edible mycelium. They are typically made using
the ascomycetes Rhizopus oligosporus or Rhizopus oryzae, and Neurospora intermedia
respectively. The fungus is grown on steamed legumes or food industry waste, and the
product is eaten in curries and stews. Another example is Koji, which is traditionally not
eaten directly, but used to make miso and soy sauce, which is rice fermented with the
ascomycete Aspegillus oryzae. Sufu is a Chinese condiment made by fermenting tofu in
solid state with fungi from the genera Actinomucor, Mucor or Rhizopus, which after 2-7
days of fermentation is submerged in a salty brine (Nout and Aidoo 2011).
In recent years researchers and food companies have begun experimenting with using
new substrates, new fungal species, and new methods for developing edible mycelium.
Companies that produce edible mycelium, or contain mycelium as an integral compo-
nent, are emerging all around the world. Notable Danish companies include Matr Foods,
Yeti Foods, Myco4Food, and Tempty Foods, which are all in the startup or pilot-plant
scale. European companies include The Protein Brewery, Norwegian Mycelium, Mush-
labs, Revo Foods, Bosque Foods, Kynda, Millow, Libre Foods, Adamo Foods - all startups
and scale-ups - and the company Quorn, who have been producing edible mycelium since
1985 using the fungus Fusarium venatum in submerged culture (Ahmad et al. 2022). A
lot of research is focused on trying new substrate combinations with the fungal species
that have traditionally been used in Asia, with the purpose of upcycling side streams
such as brewer’s spent grain or oil press cake from the food industry into meat alter-
natives (Stodolak et al. 2020; Rousta et al. 2021; Maini Rekdal, Villalobos-Escobedo, et
al. 2024; Gmoser et al. 2020). Other research is focused on editing the fungal genome
using CRISPR-Cas9 to express properties that produce a more meat-like edible mycelium
(Maini Rekdal, Van Der Luijt, et al. 2024).
The use of new fungal species from the Basidiomycota phylum, such as Pleurotus os-
treatus (oyster mushroom) or Lentinula edodes (shiitake), to develop edible mycelium
is also being intently investigated, as is both evident by published research (Todorov,
Tomasikova, et al. 2024; Van Dam et al. 2024), as well as numerous novel food applica-
tions (The Protein Brewery 2025; MyForest Foods Co. 2024; Spanish Agency for Food
Safety and Nutrition (AESAN) 2023; EFSA Panel on Nutrition, Novel Foods and Food
Allergens 2022). Although the fruiting bodies of many Basidiomycota are safe to eat and
have been eaten for centuries, the idea of eating the mycelium from these species is
relatively new.
Page 3 of 82
==PAGE:9==
Master Thesis
Magdalena Dzierzynska
June 2025
In the European Union, all foods that have not been eaten before 15th May 1997 are
considered novel foods, and are subject to a rigorous food safety assessment by the
European Food Safety Authority (EFSA), before they can be considered safe to eat (Eu-
ropean Commission 2015). An example of an edible basidiomycota mycelium that has
recently been approved as a novel food is pea and rice protein fermented by Lentinula
edodes mycelium (European Commission 2023). A scientific opinion has been published
by EFSA stating that this edible mycelium is safe at the proposed processing conditions
and conditions of use. EFSA emphasizes that the fruiting bodies of L. edodes have been
consumed and are considered safe, and it cites a study that concluded that mycelium and
fruiting bodies of L. edodes share 98 % similarity in composition. The panel concludes
that no toxicological studies are required on this L. edodes mycelium (EFSA Panel on
Nutrition, Novel Foods and Food Allergens 2022).
In a review paper by Berger et al. (2022) on the comparison of metabolites between
mycelium and fruiting bodies of edible Basidiomycota, it is concluded that there is little
scientifically founded reason to doubt the food safety of mycelia from edible fungi pro-
duced under controlled conditions. The composition of the mycelium and fruiting bod-
ies is dependent on the growth substrate, the species, the strain, and the environment
(Berger et al. 2022). Typically the same compounds can be found in fruiting bodies and
mycelium, but the concentrations often differ. Presumed defence compounds such as tox-
ins, show higher concentrations in fruiting bodies as a defence towards predators. Levels
of toxic heavy metals is generally lower in mycelium than in fruiting bodies. Fruiting bod-
ies and mycelium in Basidiomycota differ due to differential gene expression, as a result
of the exposure of the cells to different chemical and physical surroundings. As a conse-
quence, genomes lacking the genetic information encoding for toxins will produce toxin
free mycelium and fruiting bodies (Berger et al. 2022), which is why several studies on ed-
ible mycelium use genomics to screen for the species ability to produce toxins (Van Dam
et al. 2024; Maini Rekdal, Villalobos-Escobedo, et al. 2024).
2.1.1
Solid State Fermentation and Submerged Fermentation
Mycelium can be produced in submerged fermentation systems or in solid state fermen-
tation systems (Ferreira et al. 2016; Biesebeke et al. 2002). Solid state fermentation
(SSF) can be defined as a process in which moist solid particles act as substrate for the
growth of microorganisms in the absence of free-flowing water (López-Gómez and Venus
2021; Ferreira et al. 2016). SSF takes place in nature when fungi decompose solid or-
ganic matter such as trees, or when fruiting bodies are cultivated on agro-industrial side
streams (Pleszczyńska et al. 2013). SSF is also used in bread fermentation with yeast,
or in fermentation of tempeh, koji, oncom and sufu.
In submerged fermentations, water accounts for most of the bioreactor’s working vol-
ume, creating homogeneous conditions that facilitate mixing. Fungi are typically grown
in nutrient-rich media under continuous agitation to ensure adequate oxygen availability
(Ashok and Kumar 2017; Ritala et al. 2017). Downstream processing usually involves
separating the fungal biomass from the liquid, for example, through centrifugation. Sub-
merged fermentation systems are generally considered more controlled and easier to
scale than solid-state fermentation processes, due to their efficient heat and mass trans-
fer, culture homogeneity, and ease of process control (López-Gómez and Venus 2021;
Ferreira et al. 2016).
Page 4 of 82
==PAGE:10==
Master Thesis
Magdalena Dzierzynska
June 2025
SSF processes are highly heterogeneous, which makes it more difficult to control fermen-
tation parameters such as oxygen availability, moisture gradients, pH gradients, tempera-
ture gradients and heat removal compared to submerged fermentations. Due to this issue,
the applications of SSF in industry are rare, and scaled-up SSF bioreactors are underde-
veloped compared to submerged fermentation systems (López-Gómez and Venus 2021).
SSF has several advantages compared to submerged fermentations from an economic
and waste management point of view. Compared to submerged fermentations, SSF re-
quires less energy, can produce greater yields, can utilize cheaper feedstocks, and the
required bioreactor volume is smaller due to less water, and there is less wastewater and
less downstream processing (López-Gómez and Venus 2021; Ferreira et al. 2016).
2.2
Laetiporus sulphureus
Laetiporus sulphureus, commonly known as ”Chicken of the woods”, is an edible parasitic
brown rot fungus, commonly found on hardwoods with fruiting bodies of a characteristic
color between orange and yellow (figure 2.1) (Adamska 2023). It is commonly found in
Europe and North America, but it has been found in South America, Africa, Asia, and Aus-
tralia. The taste of the fruiting bodies has been reported to be mild and similar to tofu or
turkey meat, and their texture is firm. Laetiporus sulphureus belongs to the phylum Basid-
iomycota, class Agaricomycetes, order Polyporales, and family Laetiporaceae (National
Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) 2020). L. sulphureus produces a variety of
biochemical compounds. A review article by Duan et al. (2022) summarized 80 bioac-
tive metabolites in L. sulphureus, including polysaccharides, lectins, sterols, triterpenes,
sesquiterpenes, polyenes, volatile compounds. These metabolites exhibit antimicrobial,
anticancer, antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, and antidiabetic activities. The orange pig-
ment responsible for the color of the fungus is laetiporic acid A, which is a non-isoprenoid
polyene (Davoli et al. 2005). The majority of L. sulphureus research has focused on the
isolation and identification of active compounds that are present in the fruiting bodies,
rather than in the mycelium (Adamska 2023; Duan et al. 2022). L. sulphureus has the
capacity to acidify its growth medium. A study by Hwang et al. (2008) observed that in
submerged culture, regardless of initial pH (6-2) of the medium, L. sulphureus var. minia-
tus acidified the medium to a final pH around 2.
Sulphur shelf (Laetiporus sulphureus),
Havré, Belgium. Photo by Grandmont (2007)
(CC BY 2.5).
Microscopy image of L. sulphureus mycelium
10x magnified.
Image taken by author.
Figure 2.1: Laetiporus sulphureus fruiting body (left) and mycelium (right).
Page 5 of 82
==PAGE:11==
Master Thesis
Magdalena Dzierzynska
June 2025
2.2.1
Optimal pH and Temperature for L. sulphureus
The temperature and pH are important factors that influence fungal growth (Carlile et al.
2001). A study by Hwang et al. (2008) found that in submerged culture, the biomass pro-
duction of L. sulphureus var. miniatus increased with decreasing pH, with an optimal pH
at 2. They found that 25°C was the optimal temperature for maximal biomass production.
A study by Todorov, Orban, et al. (2024) confirmed that L. sulphureus benefits from an
acidified media in agar-based media. They observed maximal growth rates at pH 4.3
compared to pH of 5.9 in agar-based media. The type of acid used for acidification had
an influence, where the best results were obtained when using HCl as the acid, as com-
pared to lactic acid or co-cultivation with lactic acid bacteria. They used an incubation
temperature of 27°C.
A study by Luangharn et al. (2014) investigated the optimal temperature and pH in an
agar-growth experiment of L. sulphureus. They found that the optimal pH for growth was
6-8, but they did not test pH below 5. In fact, they found that the growth rate increased
when increasing pH from 5 to 8, where the highest growth rate was observed at pH 6-8.
This result is in contradiction to the results by Hwang et al. (2008) and Todorov, Orban,
et al. (2024), who found that lower pH was more favorable for growth of L. sulphureus.
These studies used different strains, and different methods of cultivation, which could have
an influence on the optimal pH and make it difficult to directly compare results. Preliminary
studies (data not published) from the DTU research group for Microbial Biotechnology and
Biorefining confirmed that lowering the pH gave a more optimal mycelial growth and that
28°C was the optimal temperature for growth of L. sulphureus.
2.3
Substrate Suitability
Basidiomycota are highly adaptive to changing environmental conditions, which allows for
their growth in a wide range of substrates. In its natural habitat, in Europe, L. sulphureus
most often inhabits deciduous trees of the genera Quercus but it can also be found in
the species Castanea, Fraxinus, Prunus, and Salix (Wright et al. 2022). Previous studies
have cultivated Basidiomycota on a wide range of agro-industrial side streams such as
bran from wheat, corn, rice, potato peels, pomace from apple, grape, citrus, banana,
sugar beet pulp, cabbage cuttings, press-cake from oil production, sunflower hulls, peanut
shells, corn cobs, pomace from beer and winemaking (Berger et al. 2022). Food industry
side streams have great potential for becoming upcyled into foods by fungal fermentation,
but this requires that they are treated as food and not as waste upon production. An issue
with food industry side streams are their susceptibility to spoilage and the logistics of food-
value chains that require batch-homogenity and high volume for a cost-effective process.
(López-Gómez and Venus 2021; Berger et al. 2022). L. sulphureus has previously been
cultivated on wood and straw, but most of the research uses agar-based media. Potato
dextrose agar (PDA) and malt extract agar (MEA) are the most commonly used agar-
based media in studies of L. sulphureus, and are also found to be the optimal media
amongst a wider range of common laboratory-media (Luangharn et al. 2014; Siwulski et
al. 2009; Adamska 2023).
Fungal growth is very dependent on the substrate’s composition, moisture content and
water activity, ratio of carbon to nitrogen, minerals, surfactant, pH, moisture, sources and
content of nitrogen and carbon, particle size, and amount of inoculum, presence of antin-
utrients or antimicrobial agents and the presence of interactions between microorganisms
(Bellettini et al. 2019; Carlile et al. 2001). .
Page 6 of 82
==PAGE:12==
Master Thesis
Magdalena Dzierzynska
June 2025
2.3.1
Nutrient Requirements
Several studies investigate the effect of different substrates on L. sulphureus growth, but
the majority of them investigate composite substrates (Luangharn et al. 2014; Siwulski
et al. 2009; Jasińska et al. 2017; Todorov, Orban, et al. 2024; Pleszczyńska et al. 2013),
rather than systematically examining the effect of a single nutrient, which is however done
by Hwang et al. (2008).
Carbon (C) plays a crucial role, as it is required as an energy source and is the backbone
of all organic compounds synthesized by fungi (Carlile et al. 2001). The brown-rot fungi,
which L. sulphureus is classified as, can effectively degrade cellulose, hemicellulose, and
some polysaccharides, but not lignin (Chai et al. 2022). All fungi can utilize glucose, yet
many other sugars can serve as carbon source (Carlile et al. 2001) . A study by Hwang
et al. (2008) investigated the effect on biomass production of L. sulphureus var. miniatus
when utilizing different sugars as carbon sources in submerged culture. They found that
maltose followed by glucose and sucrose resulted in maximal biomass production. L.
sulphureus var. miniatus was also able to grow on fructose, sorbitol and lactose but here
it produced up to 2.5 times less biomass. They report that the optimal concentration and
sugar type for mycelial growth of L. sulphureus var. miniatus was 30 g/L maltose (Hwang
et al. 2008).
Nitrogen (N) is essential for the synthesis of proteins as it is present in all amino acids. N is
also present in nucleic acids, as well as chitin, which is the main component of fungal cell
walls (Carlile et al. 2001) . For maximal biomass production of L. sulphureus var. miniatus,
the optimal nitrogen source was found to be soy peptone followed by polypeptone (Hwang
et al. 2008). The optimal fungal growth was observed when 2 g/L of soy peptone was
employed as sole nitrogen source (Hwang et al. 2008).
A measure which is often used for evaluating substrate suitability for fungal growth is the
ratio of carbon to nitrogen (C:N ratio) (Suwannarach et al. 2022).Different Basidiomycota
require different C:N ratios. The optimum C:N ratio for Agaricus bisporus was found to
be 19:1, but its close relative Agaricus subrufescens requires a C:N ratio of 27:1 (Suwan-
narach et al. 2022). The optimum C:N ratios for Pleurotus spp. have been reported
between 30-60:1 (Bellettini et al. 2019; Suwannarach et al. 2022). The optimum C:N ra-
tios for Lentinula edodes and Volvariella volvacea have been reported as 30–35:1 and
40–60:1, respectively (Suwannarach et al. 2022). According to Carlile et al. (2001) a
balanced medium suitable for most fungi, will have a C:N ratio of 10:1 which will favor
high protein content in the mycelium. To the best of the author’s knowledge there are
no studies that systematically investigate the effect of C:N ratio on L. sulphureus. Luard
(1985) investigated the effect of C:N ratio on a close relative of L. sulphureus, namely
Tramates versicolor from the order Polyporales. Tramates versicolor had the greatest
mycelial density at a C:N ratio of 30:1, however, the fastest growth rate occured at a C:N
ratio 300:1. A study by Hsieh (2004) investigated Ganoderma lucidum, a close relative
of L. sulphureus from the order Polyporales in solid state fermentation of soy residue,
and reported an optimal C:N ratio of 70–80:1. In figure A.1 in the appendix, phylogenetic
relationships between L. sulphureus and the species mentioned here can be seen.
A number of minerals are also essential for optimal fungal growth: potassium (K), sulphur
(S), phosphorous (P), magnesium (Mg), Iron (Fe), zinc (Zn), manganese (Mn), and copper
(Cu), which all play important roles in fungal metabolism (Carlile et al. 2001) . Mn was
found to be the mineral that had the greatest effect on biomass production of L. sulphureus
var. miniatus in submerged culture (Hwang et al. 2008). The most commonly required
vitamins by fungi are thiamine (B1) and biotin (B7 or vitamin H) (Carlile et al. 2001).
Page 7 of 82
==PAGE:13==
Master Thesis
Magdalena Dzierzynska
June 2025
2.3.2
The Growth Rate as a Measure of Substrate Suitability
Several studies investigate the growth-rate of L. sulphureus on agar-based media, as
a means of evaluating the suitability of the medium (Siwulski et al. 2009; Luangharn et
al. 2014; Jasińska et al. 2017; Todorov, Orban, et al. 2024; Jansen 2023). What these
experiments have in common, is that the development of radial colony diameter over time
(i.e. the growth rate) on a substrate-agar plate, is the central measure for evaluating the
suitability of the substrate to support growth of the fungus.
The growth rate is maximal when all required nutrients are present in excess and no
inhibitors are present in the substrate (Carlile et al. 2001). In filamentous fungi, growth
occurs in three phases: lag, exponential, and stationary. In the lag phase the fungus
adapts to the environment, growth is minimal, and biomass remains constant. During the
exponential phase a constant specific growth rate is maintained and biomass increases
rapidly. The specific growth rate is a function of nutrient concentration. In the stationary
phase the growth rate slows due to nutrient depletion or accumulation of toxic metabolic
products.
In an agar-based medium in a petri dish the medium is usually inoculated from the center,
where it forms a circular colony of increasing radius (Carlile et al. 2001). At the margin
of the mycelium there is an extension zone characterized by exponential growth. The
extension zone of the fungal colony is the region in which hyphae are advancing into un-
exploited medium. Extension of the hyphae happens at the tips and their growth involves
extension of the fungal cell wall and the biosynthesis of cell wall components. Individual
hyphae extend linearly, yet the whole mycelium increases exponentially due to the hy-
phae branching exponentially into individual tips. The result is that during the exponential
growth phase the colony will show a linear increase in radius with time as the colony mar-
gin advances at a uniform rate until the edge of the petri dish is encountered. Towards
the center of the colony is a productive zone, where the major increase in biomass takes
place. Depletion of an essential nutrient will result in lowering of the specific growth rate,
and the end of the exponential growth phase. (Carlile et al. 2001).
In heterogenous substrates, such as solid media, some regions may be depleted of nu-
trients or oxygen before others, hence growth will come to an end in some parts of the
culture while still proceeding elsewhere, and stationary and exponential growth phases
will overlap (Carlile et al. 2001).
Page 8 of 82
==PAGE:14==
Master Thesis
Magdalena Dzierzynska
June 2025
2.4
Characteristics of the Biomasses Used as Substrates
This thesis tried to investigate how a range of different biomasses support the growth
of L. sulphureus both in agar-based media as well as in solid state fermentation. The
biomasses that were selected for investigation in the agar-based experiment were the
seaweed Ulva lactuca, apple pomace, sugar beet pulp, and potato pulp. These were
selected due to their local origin, the fact that they are under-utilized resources, and the
latter three are side-streams from the food industry, which means there could be an en-
vironmental benefit related to repurposing them for food rather than feed or biogas.
Ulva lactuca is a green seaweed that is edible but underutilized commercially (Laramore
et al. 2022). However it is rich in nutrients and high in protein, and the production is consid-
ered sustainable and contributes to improvement of water quality. Apple pomace consists
of kernels, skin, and stalks from apples (Malus domestica) and is the fibrous residue from
apple juice production, which is rarely exploited due to its rapid oxidation and spoilage
(Gowman et al. 2019). Apple pomace is composed mainly of cellulose, hemicellulose,
lignin, and pectin. Sugar beet pulp is the largest by product created when extracting su-
crose from sugar beets (Beta vulgaris subsp. vulgaris) (Baryga et al. 2023). In the EU,
about 14 million tons of sugar beet pulp are produced annually, and their current use
is mostly animal feed. Sugar beet pulp is mainly composed of cellulose, hemicelluloses,
and pectins. Potato pulp is a side stream of potato starch production which consists of the
disrupted tuber cell walls, skin fractions, and residual intact cells from potatoes (Solanum
tuberosum L.) (Meyer et al. 2009). Potato pulp primarily consists of starch, cellulose,
and pectin. In Denmark, around 75.000 tons of wet potato pulp are produced annually.
These food industry wastes are produced in large quantities and represent a huge eco-
nomic and environmental burden for the industry and society (Gowman et al. 2019; Meyer
et al. 2009). Side streams will typically be depleted of some of their proteins, vitamins,
and minerals compared to the virgin biomass from which they are derived (Vassilev et al.
2010). Particularly if the sidestream is a press-cake, where the liquid part is absent, and
only the fibrous residues remain, then the majority of the soluble compounds that were
present in the liquid phase have been depleted of the substrate.
In the solid state fermentation experiment, it was decided to include more biomasses to
diversify the types of substrate and increase the chances of sucess. In addition to the
abovementioned, pearl barley, rye, quinoa, chickpeas, brown rice, and corn were inves-
tigated. Pearl barley (Hordeum vulgare L.) is one of the main cereal crops in the world,
cultivated in more than 100 countries, hereamongst Denmark (Heuzé et al. 2016). It
is an annual, erect and tufted grass, that is used both as food, for production of beer,
whisky and ethanol, and as feed. Rye (Secale cereale L.) is a grain from annual or bien-
nial grass that is well adapted to colder climates (Heuzé, Tran, Nozière, et al. 2015). It is
primarily used for bread-making and animal feed, and is cultivated in Denmark. Quinoa
(Chenopodium quinoa) is a highly nutritious pseudo-cereal crop that is mainly cultivated
for its energy and protein-rich, gluten-free seeds, which are eaten as a grain (Heuzé et
al. 2021) . It is native to South America, but in recent years it has been more frequently
cultivated in Denmark. Chickpeas (Cicer arietinum L.) is a legume that is widely eaten
as a source of protein (Heuzé, Tran, Boudon, et al. 2015). It is mostly cultivated in the
Mediterranean, Asia, and Australia. and was included to test how L. sulphureus grows in
legumes. Brown rice (Oryza sativa) is dehulled rice that retains the bran coating (Feedi-
pedia n.d.). It originates from Asia, and was included because it is the preferred substrate
of Aspergillus oryzae fermented Koji, which is a type of edible mycelium.
Page 9 of 82
==PAGE:15==
Master Thesis
Magdalena Dzierzynska
June 2025
Corn (Zea mays L.) is a major staple food grain throughout the world, particularly in Africa,
Latin America, and Asia (Heuzé et al. 2017). It was included due to its status as a dietary
staple in Mexico, where the DTU Microbial Biotechnology and Biorefining research group
is engaged in a collaborative, inter-institutional project focused on biomass valorization.
Feedipedia is an online animal feed resources information system, that gathers data on
nutritional composition from multiple references for a wide range of biomasses, including
side streams, grains, and legumes. In table 2.1 nutritional value tables for the substrates
investigated in this master’s thesis have been gathered, based on the mean values re-
ported in Feedipedia. It can be seen that the side streams tend to have a higher fibre
content, and ash content compared to the grains and legumes. The protein content is
highest in U. lactuca, chickpeas, and quinoa. The sugar content is highest in apple po-
mace and sugar beet pulp. The lignin content is highest in apple pomace and potato pulp.
The gross energy across the substrates is approximately similar.
Table 2.1: Physico-chemical composition of substrates investigated in the thesis. All values
reported in the table are mean values from various sources reported in Feedipedia.org. (Heuzé,
Tran, Hassoun, et al. 2020; Heuzé, Tran, Boudon, et al. 2020; Heuzé, Thiollet, et al. 2019; Heuzé,
Tran, Giger-Reverdin, et al. 2017; Heuzé, Tran, Boudon, et al. 2015; Heuzé, Tran, and Lebas
2017; Heuzé, Tran, Noblet, et al. 2016; Heuzé, Tran, Bastianelli, et al. 2021; Feedipedia n.d.
Heuzé, Tran, Nozière, et al. 2015)
DM
Crude protein
Crude fibre
Lignin
Ash
Total sugars
Gross energy
% total
% DM
% DM
% DM
% DM
% DM
MJ/kg DM
Apple pomace
20.8
6.8
20.7
15.7
2.5
6.2
19.0
Potato pulp
86.9
5.4
18.6
5.9
3.5
1.8
17.6
Sugar beet pulp
24.3
8.7
20.8
1.8
6.8
5.2
17.1
U. lactuca
88.6
18.6
6.9
3.5
23.0
0.64
14.7
Chickpeas
89.0
22.1
10.5
0.7
3.3
3.6
19.6
Corn
86.3
9.4
2.5
0.6
1.4
2.1
18.7
Pearl barley
87.1
11.8
5.2
1.1
2.6
2.8
18.4
Quinoa
88.2
13.6
3.0
1.3
3.7
3.5
19.1
Brown Rice
88.6
10.5
2.0
2.0
1.7
0.4
18.2
Rye
86.8
10.3
2.2
1.1
2.0
3.6
18.0
Page 10 of 82
==PAGE:16==
Master Thesis
Magdalena Dzierzynska
June 2025
2.5
Microbial Safety of Fermented Foods
Food fermentation is a process where microorganisms, bacteria, yeast or filamentous
fungi, transform a food, which contributes to both preservation as well as changes in the
sensory profile (Gänzle 2022). Fermented foods have traditionally been consumed in
diets all around the world, and some examples of fermented foods are cheese, bread,
coffee, cocoa, saurkraut / kimchi, cured ham, and alcoholic beverages. To the best of the
author’s knowledge, there is no published research touching upon microbiological haz-
ards in Basidiomycota fermented mycelium. According to Allwood et al. (2023) there are
no national food safety guidelines for traditional edible mycelia, such as koji and Tem-
peh, i.e. fermented foods that have a pH above 4.6, in the European Union, Australia,
Canada, and the United States. To identify which microbial hazards might be relevant in
an edible mycelium, it can be considered which hazards are relevant in fermented foods
in general, in the raw material, which hazards could contaminate throughout the process,
which hazards are relevant in the product category plant-based meat alternatives, and
which hazards are relevant in traditionally produced edible mycelia.
Fermented foods that are made correctly are rarely associated with food safety outbreaks
(Allwood et al. 2023). Microbial food safety in fermented foods can be jeopardized through:
the use of previously contaminated raw materials, lack of adequate heat-treatment, the
use of poorly controlled natural fermentations, contaminated starter cultures, inadequate
storage or maturation conditions which enable growth or survival of pathogens, consump-
tion without prior heating (Nout 1994). To ensure microbial food safety of fermented foods,
it is important to avoid contamination of the raw material, maintain good hygiene pro-
cesses during production, and use control measures such as pH, water activity and tem-
perature to ensure that the right microorganisms flourish but that spoilage and pathogenic
organisms are surpressed (Danish Veterinary and Food Administration 2025b; Allwood et
al. 2023).
In fermented vegetables with a liquid phase (salt brine), such as sauerkraut, the primary
control measure is pH. In order to ensure a food-safe process, the pH should drop below
4.5 within 48 hours, and the pH of the final product should be below 4 (Danish Veterinary
and Food Administration 2025b). In fermented meats, such as sausages, the control
measures are typically a combination of lowering the pH below 5.3 within the first 48 hours,
and subsequently combining drying and lowering temperatures, to decrease water activity,
and stop the acidification to preserve the taste of the product (Danish Veterinary and
Food Administration 2025c). Microbial hazards that are relevant in fermented foods are
Clostridium botulinum, Clostridium perfringens, Staphylococcus aureus, Bacillus cereus,
Escherichia coli, Salmonella spp., and Listeria monocytogenes (Allwood et al. 2023; Nout
1994).
Page 11 of 82
==PAGE:17==
Master Thesis
Magdalena Dzierzynska
June 2025
2.6
Characteristics of the Pathogens in the Challenge Test
A method for assessing the ability of a food matrix to support growth of pathogens is chal-
lenge testing . A microbiological challenge test is a laboratory-based study that measures
the growth of artificially contaminated pathogens in a food, mimicking a realistic contami-
nation and realistic storage conditions (Komitopoulou 2011; Álvarez-Ordóñez et al. 2015;
Bergis et al. 2021). Commonly, the purpose of challenge testing is to determine the shelf
life of a food. Here, the focus was on determining the growth of pathogens during the
fermentation process. The pathogens B. cereus s.l. and L. monocytogenes were se-
lected for challenge testing of solid-state fermented edible mycelium, the reasons for this
selection are described in the following section.
The Rapid Alert System for Food and Feed (RASFF) is a European Commission tool used
to notify of recent food safety risks in the European Union. A search on ”Tempeh” as sub-
ject, which is the most widely eaten edible mycelium, revealed three notifications that are
serious or potential risk. Two of these notifications concerned B. cereus in Tempeh pro-
duced in Denmark, and one of these concerned Listeria monocytogenes in frozen tempeh
cubes from the Netherlands (European Commission n.d.), all in the years 2024 and 2025.
L. monocytogenes was selected for challenge testing because it is expected to be able to
grow in the food-matrix during solid state fermentation, because it is a severe pathogen
that is problematic in ready-to-eat foods and processed foods, because it is often con-
taminated through the food-processing environment, and because it was recently found
to be a risk in Tempeh (Álvarez-Ordóñez et al. 2015). B. cereus was selected because
it has a high risk of occurrence in plant-based raw materials. According to a large world-
wide meta-study of B. cereus prevalence in different foods by Rahnama et al. (2023), B.
cereus was highly prevalent in grains, cereals and vegetables. It was found to be present
in 41% of all cereal products (n = 11303) and 37% of all vegetables (n = 10586). In a
study by Dušková et al. (2024) B. cereus was found to be the most relevant pathogen
in plant-based meat analogs such as chilled or frozen plant-based burgers, meatballs,
and imitation steaks, where it was detected in in 81% of samples placed on the market.
Likewise, B. cereus is reported to be a hazard of major concern in traditional Asian edible
mycelium such as sufu (Han, Cao, et al. 2004; Han, Beumer, et al. 2001) and tempeh
(Nout, Beernink, et al. 1987).
2.6.1
Listeria monocytogenes
Listeria monocytogenes is ubiquitously found in the environment and it is frequently present
in raw foods of both plant and animal origin (Álvarez-Ordóñez et al. 2015). L. monocy-
togenes is a severe food-pathogen, which can cause Listeriosis, which has the highest
hospitalization rate amongst zoonoses monitored in EU, and which causes death in ap-
proximately 25% of cases, especially among pregnant, elderly, and immunocompromised
people (Álvarez-Ordóñez et al. 2015). L. monocytogenes is a gram-positive facultative
anaerobic bacterium. The most common route of L. monocytogenes into the food is via
the food processing environment, where it can form persistent biofilms. L. monocytogenes
can grow at temperatures between 0-46°C (Danish Veterinary and Food Administration
n.d.[a]), its ability to grow at low temperatures makes it especially problematic in chilled
ready-to-eat foods with a long shelf-life. The D-value ranges from 0.08 to 0.6 min at 65
°C (Aryani et al. 2015), depending on the strain, and the Danish Veterinary and Food Ad-
ministration recommends heating foods to 75°C to inactivate L. monocytogenes (Danish
Veterinary and Food Administration n.d.[a]). There are microbiological criteria for ready-
to-eat (RTE) foods in the Commission Regulation (EC) No 1441/2007 on microbiological
criteria for foodstuffs (European Commission 2007). Products with pH ≤4,4 or aw ≤0,92,
or products with pH ≤5,0 and aw ≤0,94, or products with a shelf-life of less than five
Page 12 of 82
==PAGE:18==
Master Thesis
Magdalena Dzierzynska
June 2025
days, are ”unable to support growth” of L. monocytogenes. The sampling criterion for L.
monocytogenes, is that it must not be detected in 5 samples of 25g before the food has left
the immediate control of the food business operator, and it may not exceed 2 log CFU/g
during the shelf-life of the product (European Commission 2007).
2.6.2
Bacillus cereus s.l.
The Bacillus cereus group, also called Bacillus cereus sensu lato or Bacillus cereus s.l., is
a species complex of the genus Bacillus, that has a challenging taxonomical classification
which has undergone several changes in the past 25 years (Carroll et al. 2022). Prior to
1998, there were four species classified as B. cereus s.l., whereas today, depending on
taxonomic assignment methods, up to 40 species are reported to belong to this group.
The species within B. cereus s.l. are hard to distinguish from one another when plating
on selective agar and even when using MALDI-TOF (EFSA Panel on Biological Hazards
2016). Throughout this thesis, whenever B. cereus is referred to, what is meant is B.
cereus s.l. rather than the species Bacillus cereus sensu stricto.
B. cereus s.l. are ubiquitous in the environment. They are found in soil and commonly con-
taminate many types of food products, such as vegetables, fruits, grains, and milk (Car-
roll et al. 2022). Some species within B. cereus s.l. are opportunistic human pathogens
involved in food-related infection, some can cause food spoilage, whereas others are
harmless. Bacillus cereus s.l. are gram-positive, spore-forming, facultative aerobic, and
rod-shaped bacteria. B. cereus s.l. form endospores that are very resistant to heat, radia-
tion, chemicals, and drying, which means they are difficult to eliminate in a food production
setting (EFSA Panel on Biological Hazards 2016). When the food matrix is heated up,
spores will germinate and turn into vegetative cells. Vegetative cells of some strains of B.
cereus s.l. can cause food-related illness by producing toxins.
There are two types of toxins: enterotoxin, which can cause diarrheal poisoning, and
emetic toxin (cerulide), which causes food poisoning and rapid onset of vomiting (EFSA
Panel on Biological Hazards 2016). Enterotoxins that are present in the food are not
problematic, but if they are ingested and produced in the small intestine, they will cause
symptoms. Enterotoxins are heat- and acid-labile, and can be inactivated by heating at 56
°C for 5 min (Pexara and Govaris 2018). Emetic toxins that are pre-formed in the food can
cause outbreak of illness, and they are highly resistant to heat and acid. Emetic toxins can
resist heat treatment at 121 °C for 2 hours, and are resistant to pH as low as 2 (Pexara and
Govaris 2018). B. cereus s.l. can grow at temperatures between 4-55°C, at pH between
4.5-9.3 and at water activities >0.92 (Danish Veterinary and Food Administration 2025a).
There are no microbiological criteria for B. cereus s.l., other than for dried infant and medi-
cal foods, in the Commission Regulation (EC) No 1441/2007 on microbiological criteria for
foodstuffs (European Commission 2007). However, several European countries have es-
tablished food-safety guidelines for foods such as ready-to-eat (RTE) foods, spices, fresh
vegetables, and infant foods (EFSA Panel on Biological Hazards 2016). Most cases of
food-borne outbreaks caused by the B. cereus group have been associated with bacte-
rial concentrations above 105 CFU/g, which is why the guidelines from countries such as
Finland, Ireland, and Austria consider B. cereus concentrations in RTE foods above 105
CFU/g unsafe (EFSA Panel on Biological Hazards 2016).
Page 13 of 82
==PAGE:19==
Master Thesis
Magdalena Dzierzynska
June 2025
3
Methods
3.1
Experiment 1: Substrate-Agar
3.1.1
Study Design
Experiment one investigated the growth of L. sulphureus on agar-based media. Four
different biomasses were investigated and compared to a positive control of malt extract
agar. The biomasses were subject to dry matter analysis, and content of carbon and
nitrogen was measured. Agar-media were then created from the biomasses by blending
them with water so that each medium contained 1% dry matter, and the media were not
supplemented with additional minerals or nitrogen sources. In this way it was the suitability
of the ”pure” biomass to support fungal growth that was tested, and environmental and
economical costs associated with the production of laboratory grade supplements were
avoided.
The pH of all media was adjusted to 4, as L. sulphureus favors an acidified medium. The
agar plates were centrally incoulated with pre-grown L. sulphureus mycelium, they were
then incubated at 28°C and throughout a period of 10 days, their growth was monitored.
Growth rates, radial colony diameter, visual appearance, color and density of mycelium
was evaluated. A graphical overview can be seen in figure 3.1. The experimental design
and methodology was inspired by Siwulski et al. (2009), Luangharn et al. (2014), Jasińska
et al. (2017), Todorov, Orban, et al. (2024), and Jansen (2023), who all investigate the
growth rate of L. sulphureus on different agar-based media, as well as Jo et al. (2014)
and Kim et al. (2005), who investigate growth rates on agar-based media of Auricularia
auricula-judae and Sphaeropsis pyriputrescens respectively.
7) Inoculate agars
with pre-grown   
L. sulphureus mycelium
A
P
S
U
9) Track radial
growth over 10 days
8) Incubate at 28°C
Agar
+
A
U
S
P
Different Biomasses
1) Water + 1 % DM biomass
2) Blend 3 min
3) Add 20 g/L agar
4) Sterilize
5) Adjust pH to 4
6) Pour into petri dishes
10) Evaluate color &
density of mycelium
Figure 3.1: Graphical Overview of Experiment 1
Page 14 of 82
==PAGE:20==
Master Thesis
Magdalena Dzierzynska
June 2025
3.1.2
Fungal Strain and Maintenance
L. sulphureus strain no. NFICC 9002 that was isolated from a cherry tree (Prunus spp.)
was provided by the National Food Institute Collection (NFICC) from the Technical Uni-
versity of Denmark (DTU). The strain was continuously grown on parafilmed MEA plates
at 28°C throughout the project period.
3.1.3
Preparation of Malt Extract Agar
Malt Extract Agar (MEA) contained 30 g/L malt extract (Th. Geyer, Germany), 5 g/L
Peptone from soybean (Sigma-Aldrich, Germany) and 20 g/L bacteriological agar (Th.
Geyer, Germany ) and demineralized water. It was autoclaved at 121°C for 15 min at 15
psi. Once autoclaved, pH was adjusted to 4.00 ± 0.05 using 1M and 5M hydrochloric acid
(HCl) (CAS: 7647-01-0, Sigma-Aldrich, Germany) and sodium hydroxide (NaOH) (CAS:
1310-73-2, Sigma-Aldrich, Germany), and a calibrated pH meter (SevenExcellence from
Mettler Toledo, UK) under sterile conditions in a LAF bench. Once cooled to ∼50°C the
media was poured onto sterile Petri dishes.
3.1.4
Substrate Origin
The following biomasses were used in the experiment: apple pomace (A) from Gasa Nord
Grønt, Aarhus, Denmark. It was stored in a -40°C freezer for up to two years and in a
-20°C freezer for the project period. Sugar Beet Pulp (S) from Nordzucker, Nykøbing
Falster, Denmark. Sugar Beet Pulp was coarsely grated and stored in a -40°C freezer for
up to 1 year. It was milled to a finer grain size and stored at -20°C for the project period.
Ulva lactuca came from Denmark and was provided by the DTU Research Group for
Bioactives – Analysis and Application. U. lactuca was freeze-dried and had been stored
in -80°C freezer for one year and -20°C freezer for the project period. Potato Pulp (P)
was provided by KMC, Denmark. Potato pulp was in the form of a fine-grain powder and
was stored at room temperature for up to 1 year, and in a -20°C freezer during the project
period.
3.1.5
Dry Matter Analysis
The dry matter content was determined following the protocol from Sluiter et al. (2008)
where 1±0.1 g of sample was weighed in aluminium trays, then put in a drying oven
(Elektro Helios, Sweden) at 105°C for 24 hours. The dry matter was computed as dry
weight divided by fresh weight. The analysis was conducted in triplicate for each substrate
and the results were reported as mean± standard deviation.
3.1.6
Salt Content Analysis
As opposed to the other substrates, U. lactuca was expected to have a high content of salt.
Salt Content in U. lactuca was therefore measured folowing the protocol from DFU Afd.
for Fiskeindustriel Forskning (FF) (2017) where Cl content is determined through titration
with 0.1 M AgNO3 using an automated titrator (848 titrino plus, Metrohm, Germany).
1 ± 0.001g of sample was weighted and mixed with 50mL demineralized water and 1 mL
1 M HNO3. The analysis was performed in technical duplicates. The salt content was
given as % fresh weight with a method specific standard deviation of 0.06%.
3.1.7
Analysis of Carbon, Nitrogen, C:N ratio and Protein Content
Carbon (C) and nitrogen (N) content in the apple pomace, sugar beet pulp, U. lactuca,
potato pulp, malt extract and soy peptone was determined by combustion-based elemen-
tal analysis by using El cube (Elementar, Germany). The samples had dried at room
temperature and were homogenized prior to analysis. Samples were prepared by weigh-
ing 5 mg ± 0.5mg of sample into tin weighing boats, which were sealed using tweezers
and a manual pressing tool. Each sample was prepared in triplicate. Prior to running
Page 15 of 82
==PAGE:21==
Master Thesis
Magdalena Dzierzynska
June 2025
the samples 3 blanks were run, then 4 standards with sulfanilamide, 2 controls with ca-
sein, and 2 controls with wheat flour. The method ”5mg90s” was used, and the weight
of the samples was inserted in the elementar software. Results were given in percent-
ages and reported as mean ± standard deviations. C:N ratio was calculated by dividing
carbon content with nitrogen content. A nitrogen-protein conversion factor of 6.25 was
employed for all substrates (Gosukonda et al. 2020). Protein content was calculated by:
protein% = N% · 6.25. To calculate the content of carbon, nitrogen, C:N ratio and protein
content in MEA, a weighted average was computed based on the proportions and mean
value of of malt extraxt 30/35=86% and soy peptone 5/35=14%.
3.1.8
Preparation of Substrate-Agars
Firstly the dry matter content in each of the four biomasses was determined as desctibed
in section 3.1.5. The substrate-agar media were prepared by blending 1% DM of each
biomass with demineralized water, accounting for the differences in dry matter content in
different substrates. U. lactuca, apple pomace and sugar beet pulp were blended for 3
min at highest setting (11) with a 1000W hand blender (Braun AG, Germany). Potato pulp
was stirred for 20 min using a magnetic stirrer. 20 g/L bacteriological agar (ChemSolute,
Th. Geyer, Germany) was added after blending/stirring substrates. The media were then
autoclaved at 121°C for 15 min at 15 psi, then pH was adjusted to 4.00 ± 0.05 and poured
into Petri dishes, in the same manner as described in section 3.1.3.
3.1.9
Inoculation and Incubation
Substrate-agars were prepared from apple pomace, sugar beet pulp, potato pulp, U. lac-
tuca, and a positive control of MEA, as described in section 3.1.3 and 3.1.8. Sterile disks
(Sigma-Aldrich, Germany) with 10mm diameter were overgrown with mycelium by plac-
ing them on MEA inoculated with L. sulphureus for 10 days at 28°C. To inoculate, these
overgrown discs were placed in the center of each substrate-agar using sterile tweezers
under sterile conditions in a LAF bench. The substrate-agars were incubated for 10 days
at 28°C without light. Biological triplicates were prepared for each substrate-agar, as well
as an extra plate of each substrate, on which sterile disks were placed at the periphery of
the plate for measuring color of mycelium.
3.1.10
Colony Diameter and Growth Rate
On days 2, 4, 6, 8, and 10 after inoculation, the radial colony diameter was measured by
tracing the periphery of the colony with a marker and then measuring the distance from
one side of the periphery to the other across the center in 3 random points with a ruler
and calculating the mean. For each substrate-agar, radial colony diameter was reported
as mean ± standard deviation.
The growth rate was calculated as the radial colony expansion over time in units of cm/day.
The lag phase was assumed to be between day 0-2, and was excluded from the growth
rate, and the first day where L. sulphureus reached the periphery of the Petri dish on one
of the plates happened to be day 6. A growth rate was calculated for each of the biological
triplicates by equation 3.1.
Growth Rate (cm/day) = Radial colony diameter day 6 (cm) −Radial colony diameter day 2 (cm)
6 (days) −2 (days)
(3.1)
The mean growth rate of triplicates from each substrate-agar were then compared in a
one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) with a significance level of 5%, which was run
according to the methods described in chapter 8 in Introduction to Statistics by Brockhoff
et al. 2018. It was assumed that the growth rates were normally distributed, that the
Page 16 of 82
==PAGE:22==
Master Thesis
Magdalena Dzierzynska
June 2025
observations were independent, and that the variances were equal. Tukey’s post hoc
test was performed to identify which growth rate means were significantly different from
one another at a significance level of 5%. The statistical analysis was performed using R
(RStudio 2024.12.1+563).
3.1.11
Visual Appearance, Color and Density of Mycelium
Ten days after inoculation photographs were taken of a representative sample using a
VideometerLab (Videometer A/S, Denmark). The color of mycelium was examined 10
days after inoculation by measuring mean and standard deviations of L*(light/darkness),
a*(green/red) and b*(blue/yellow) of the cross-sectional area of the white discs overgrown
with mycelium, on a black background, using a VideometerLab (Videometer A/S, Den-
mark). Mycelial density was visually assessed on day 10 by assigning a number from
the mycelial density scoring scheme: 0=no growth, 1=very thin, 2=thin, 3=somewhat
compact, 4=compact, that is based on the methodology from Maini Rekdal, Villalobos-
Escobedo, et al. (2024) and Jo et al. (2014).
3.2
Experiment 2: Solid State Fermentation
3.2.1
Study Design
In the second experiment a wider range of substrates were subject to solid state fermen-
tation with L. sulphureus with the purpose of selecting a single one for microbial food
safety evaluation. The substrates that had been used in the first experiment were used
again, apart from potato pulp and MEA, which, due to their small particle size, were not
deemed suitable for solid state fermentation as it would likely impair oxygen availability.
To increase the possibility of seeing a successful solid state fermentation, the number
of substrates was increased to nine by including a number of grains and legumes that
had not been investigated in the first experiment. One reason why more food industry
side streams were not included was due to the fact that they would take longer time to
obtain compared to grains and legumes that could be immediately purchased in the su-
permarket. Another reason was to diversify the types of substrates. The nine substrates
that were investigated were: Apple pomace, sugar beet pulp, U. lactuca, rye, pearl barley,
brown rice, corn, quinoa, and chickpeas. A fungal inoculum was prepared by cultivating L.
sulphureus mycelium in submerged culture for 7 days at 28°C. Inoculating with a liquid in-
oculum from mycelium produced in submerged culture would facilitate more homogenous
mixing with the substrates, as opposed to using the inoculation method in experiment 1.
A pre-experiment determined whether biomasses should be soaked prior to sterilization
or not. Grains and legumes were soaked overnight in the fridge in excess of water. Apple
pomace, sugar beet pulp, and corn were not soaked beforehand. All substrates were
then sterilized, cooled, inoculated, mixed, and packed into Petri dishes that served as the
fermentation containers. Each sample was prepared in triplicate, they were then incu-
bated at 28°C and monitored for 10 days. A sterilized, uninoculated negative control of
each substrate was stored in the incubator for comparison. The substrates were not sup-
plemented with additional minerals or nitrogen, and moisture content was not adjusted.
As opposed to experiment 1, the pH of the substrates was not adjusted, the reason for
this was that experiment 2 served as a pre-experiment to test solid state fermentation
conditions for challenge testing in experiment 3. In challenge testing lowering the pH
would control the pathogens, thus the ability of L. sulphureus to inhibit pathogenic growth
would not be tested. From experiment 2, a single substrate would be selected for chal-
lenge testing in experiment 3. The primary selection criterion was visible mycelial growth,
secondary selection criteria were local availability of the substrate and ease of handling.
Page 17 of 82
==PAGE:23==
Master Thesis
Magdalena Dzierzynska
June 2025
Figure 3.2 shows a graphical overview of the experiment. The experimental design and
methodology was inspired by Maini Rekdal, Villalobos-Escobedo, et al. (2024), Stodolak
et al. (2020), and Gmoser et al. (2020) who visually assessed substrate suitablility in
solid state fermentation for development of edible mycelium in Neurospora intermedia,
Aspergillus oryzae and Rhizopus oryzae, in various food industry side streams.
4) Mix with water
5) Blend for 15 s
Mycelium+
2) Incubate at 28°C,
200 rpm for 7 days
1) Add L. sulphureus
mycelium grown on
MEA to ME broth, pH=4
3) Filter
Inoculum
0.1 g mycelium/mL
=
6) Soak biomass overnight
7) Sterilize 
8) Inoculate and mix
0.01 g mycelium/g biomass
9) Incubate at 28°C for 10-14 days
Figure 3.2: Graphical Overview of Experiment 2
3.2.2
Substrate Origin
Nine different substrates were investigated: Ulva lactuca, Apple pomace, sugar beet pulp,
pearl barley, chickpeas, rice, rye, quinoa and corn. The grains and legumes used were
purchased in Netto, Denmark. They were: organic pearl barley (ØGO, harvested in EU),
dried organic chickpeas (ØGO, unspecified country of origin), organic brown rice (ØGO,
harvested outside EU), cracked rye (Mamone, harvested in Denmark), quinoa (Harvest
Best, unspecified country of origin), blanched frozen corn (Harvest Best, unspecified
country of origin). Sugar beet pulp, apple pomace and U. lactuca came from the same
origins as described in section 3.1.4.
3.2.3
Analysis of Carbon, Nitrogen, C:N ratio and Protein Content
Analysis of carbon, nitrogen, C:N ratio and protein Content in pearl barley, chickpeas, rice,
rye, quinoa, and corn was done in the same way as described in section 3.1.7. The only
difference was that this time it was not the dry substrates that were subject to analysis, they
were instead soaked, drained, autoclaved and ’ready to inoculate’. Except for corn which
was not soaked, but analyzed directly from frozen, which was the same pre-treatment for
corn that was ’ready to inoculate’. U. lactuca, apple pomace and sugar beet pulp were
not analyzed again, as they were already analyzed in experiment one.
Page 18 of 82
==PAGE:24==
Master Thesis
Magdalena Dzierzynska
June 2025
3.2.4
Fungal Inoculum
The fungal strain used was the same as in experiment 1 (described in section 3.1.2).
Inoculum for solid state fermentation experiment was prepared by scraping L. sulphureus
mycelium from MEA plates that had grown at 28 °C into nine 500 mL Erlenmeyer flasks
with 250mL malt extract (ME) broth. ME broth was prepared by mixing 17 g/L malt extract
(Th. Geyer, Germany), 3 g/L soy peptone (Sigma-Aldrich, Germany) with demineralized
water and autoclaving at 121°C for 15 min at 15 psi. Afterwards pH was adjusted to
4.00 ± 0.05 under sterile conditions, as described in section 3.1.3. The Erlenmeyer flasks
were covered with sterile foil and incubated at 28°C while stirring at 200 rpm for seven
days.
After seven days the mycelium was harvested by filtering the liquid using a vacuum pump
and a rapid-flow Nalgene filter unit with a PES membrane with a pore size of 0.2 µm
(Thermo scientific, US). Three flasks were pooled to make inocula that would be bio-
logically distinct. Then the mycelium was twice resuspended with 400mL miliQ water to
remove the malt extract broth. Once it was filtered, the mycelium was weighed and 100
mL miliQ water were mixed with 14.23g filtered mycelium, which corresponded to the
lowest weight of the 3 pooled samples, to a concentration of 0.142 g mycelium/mL. The
mixture was blended for 15 seconds at highest setting (11) with a 1000W hand blender
(Braun AG, Germany), that had been desinfected with ethanol. Then the samples were
transferred to sterile Falcon tubes and used for inoculation on the same day. Everything
was done under sterile conditions in a LAF bench.
3.2.5
Solid State Fermentation
Grains and legumes were soaked overnight in the fridge in excess of water. Apple po-
mace, sugar beet pulp, and corn were not soaked beforehand but directly sterilized, as a
pre-experiment showed they were otherwise too wet (data not shown). The water from
soaked substrates was drained before all substrates were put into individual autoclavable
plastic bags sealed with autoclavable tape. Substrates were autoclaved for 15 min at
121°C and 15 psi. Sterile Petri dishes served as fermentation containers. They were
packed with ∼25g of autoclaved substrate, and for each substrate triplicates were pre-
pared, as well as a negative control of autoclaved, uninoculated substrate. Once cooled
the substrates were inoculated with 2.0 mL of the inoculum per Petri dish, which corre-
sponds to ∼80µL/g, or 0.012 g mycelium/g, using biologically distinct inoculum for each
replicate. The substrates were mixed with the inoculum using the pipette tip that had been
used for inoculation. The Petri dishes were sealed with their lid and parafilmed and placed
in a 28°C incubator for 10 days. Every 3 days the Petri dishes were shaken.
3.2.6
Visual Appearance
The samples were monitored 3, 6, 8, and 10 days after inoculation by comparing them
to the negative, uninoculated control, and visually assessing differences in color and
mycelium density. After 10 days of incubation, photographs of a single representative
sample, as well as the negative control, were taken using a VideometerLab (Videometer
A/S, Denmark).
Page 19 of 82
==PAGE:25==
Master Thesis
Magdalena Dzierzynska
June 2025
3.3
Experiment 3: Challenge Test
3.3.1
Study Design
In experiment three, the microbial food safety of the solid state fermentation of pearl barley
with L. sulphureus was investigated. This was done in the form of a challenge test where
the food pathogens Listeria monocytogenes and Bacillus cereus s.l. were artificially in-
oculated into the substrate alongside L. sulphureus at the beginning of the fermentation
process. The objective of the experiment was to assess whether the substrate could sup-
port growth of food pathogens during solid state fermentation, or whether L. sulphureus
would inhibit their growth.
This was compared to how the pathogens grew in pearl barley without fungus, as well as
the microbial development in fungally fermented pearl barley without inoculated pathogens.
These three scenarios were named FP (fungus + pathogens), P (pathogens only), and
F (fungus only). The microbial development over a period of 14 days was monitored by
measuring pH of samples and enumerating their bacterial load on agar media selective
for B. cereus s.l. (both the combination of vegetative cells and spores, as well as spores
only), for L. monocytogenes, and a general count media. Photographs were also taken
each sampling day to visually assess the development of L. sulphureus. The solid state
fermentation of all samples followed the same preparation, inoculation and incubation pro-
cedure as experiment two. On each sampling day, two individual Petri dishes from each
scenario were taken out of the incubator to conduct the analysis in duplicates. Figure 3.3
shows a graphical overview of the experiment.
L. sulphureus 0.01 g mycelium/g 
F
FP
L. sulphureus 0.01 g mycelium/g
+ B. cereus 500 cfu/g
+ L. monocytogenes 500 cfu/g
P
B. cereus 500 cfu/g 
+ L. monocytogenes 500 cfu/g
1) Inoculate 
different scenarios
2) Incubate at 28°C
Sample at day 0,1,2,3,7,9,14
3) Sampling:
Measure pH
4) Sampling: 
Homogenize, dilute, 
plate on selective agars
1:10
Sample
10 g
BPW
90 g
+
100 uL
-1
100 uL + 900 uL 
   MRD
100 uL + 900 uL 
   MRD
1:100
1:1000
100 uL
100 uL
-2
-3
5) Incubate
selective agars
PALCAM
RBC
RBC
TSA
General count
24h, 30°C
L. monocytogenes
48h, 37°C
B. cereus veg. cells + spores
24h, 30°C
B. cereus spores
24h, 30°C
F
F
F
F
FP
FP
FP
FP
P
P
P
P
5) Count 
Colonies
To detect 
B. cereus spores
heat -1
dilution
for 10 min
at 80°C
Figure 3.3: Graphical Overview of Experiment 3
Page 20 of 82
==PAGE:26==
Master Thesis
Magdalena Dzierzynska
June 2025
3.3.2
L. monocytogenes Inoculum
L. monocytogenes challenge testing should be performed with a mixture of L. monocy-
togenes strains to account for variation in growth and survival among strains (Bergis et
al. 2021). Samples in P and FP scenario were inoculated with a cocktail composed of
3 strains of L. monocytogenes. Strain Lm 568 isolated from a shrimp processing plant,
strain Lm 08-5578 isolated during a food outbreak in RTE meat products, and strain Lm
EGD-e isolated from rabbit (Janickova 2019). The strains were provided by the Food Mi-
crobiology and Hygiene Group at DTU Food. The strains were revived from frozen stock
cultures and cultivated on Tryptone Soy Agar (TSA) (SSI Diagnostica, Denmark) at 37 °C
for 28h. A single colony was taken from each TSA plate and streaked on both PALCAM
and blood agar (SSI Diagnostica, Denmark) using the quadrant streak method to sepa-
rate individual colonies. The agar plates were incubated for 72 hours at 28°C to adapt the
strains to the fermentation temperature, as recommended for challenge testing (Álvarez-
Ordóñez et al. 2015). An overnight culture was prepared in duplicate for each strain by
taking, if possible, a single colony from the blood agar plates and placing them in a test
tube with 9 mL tryptone soy broth (Merck, Germany) and incubating at 28°C overnight.
The PALCAM plates were used to confirm that it was L. monocytogenes.
The cell density of the overnight cultures was determined by direct phase-contrast mi-
croscopy (Olympus BX51, Japan) at 100x magnification. Undiluted, ten-fold and 100-fold
dilutions of overnight culture, diluted with maximum recovery diluent (MRD, OXOID, Eng-
land), were examined. A single drop of culture was placed on a microscopy slide, a cover
slide was placed on top, and pressed down using a tissue. A drop of immersion oil was
placed on top of the cover slide before insertion in the microscope. The cell density was
based on the assumption that 1 cell/field of view corresponds to ∼106 CFU/mL. The num-
ber of cells that could be counted from ten randomly picked fields of view was averaged
and multiplied with 106 to estimate the cell density of the overnight culture. The average
cell density was used to to calculate the amount of inoculum from each strain to add to
the samples. The desired initial concentration of L. monocytogenes in the sample was
500 CFU/g, meaning the concentration of each strain was to be 500/3=167 CFU/g. Table
3.1 in section 3.3.5 shows the determined cell density and added volume of undiluted
inoculum. Inoculation happened on the same day as the cell density was determined.
3.3.3
B. cereus s.l. Inoculum
Isolate no. 16, a spore suspension of B. cereus s.l. isolated from brewer’s spent grain by
the DTU Food Microbiology and Hygiene group, was used to inoculate samples in P and
FP scenarios. Spore viability was assessed by direct phase-contrast microscopy (Olym-
pus BX51, Japan) at 100x magnification. Spores appeared white, indicating intact spores,
whereas damaged spores would appear dark. To determine cell density, the suspension
was serially diluted with maximum recovery diluent (MRD, OXOID, England) from 10−1
to 10−7- -7, -6, and -5 dilutions were plated on tryptone soy agar (TSA, SSI Diagnostica,
Denmark). To further assess viability, the suspension was heated to 80°C for 10 min to
activate spores before a second serial dilution series was prepared and plated on TSA.
TSA was incubated at 30°C for 24 hours. Comparison of heated and unheated counts
indicated viability, as damaged spores would lower counts. The heated spore suspen-
sion had marginally fewer counts (<0.5 log CFU/g) compared to the unheated suspension,
which was not considered significant. Based on the concentration of cells in the unheated
suspension, the volume of spore suspension to add in order to reach an initial concentra-
tion of 500 CFU/g in the samples was determined. Table 3.1 in section 3.3.5 shows the
determined cell density and volume of undiluted inoculum added to the samples.
Page 21 of 82
==PAGE:27==
Master Thesis
Magdalena Dzierzynska
June 2025
3.3.4
Fungal Inoculum
The fungal strain used was the same as in experiment 1 and 2 (described in section 3.1.2).
Fungal inoculum was prepared by cultivating L. sulphureus in ME broth in submerged cul-
ture for seven days at 28°C, then on the day of inoculation it was filtered, blended, and
diluted to a concentration of 0.142 g mycelium/mL, following the methods described in
section 3.2.4. Two biologically distinct inocula, labelled a and b, were prepared. Samples
in scenario F and FP were inoculated with a concentration of 0.012 g mycelium/g sam-
ple, and inoculum ”a” was used to inoculate duplicates ”a” and inoculate ”b” was used to
inoculate duplicates ”b”.
3.3.5
Substrate Preparation, Inoculation and Incubation
The substrate used was organic pearl barley from the same origin as described in section
3.2.2. It was soaked, drained, and sterilized in autoclavable plastic bags in batches of
∼270g following the methods described in section 3.2.5. Once cooled, the pearl bar-
ley was inoculated according to three different scenarios: F(fungus only), FP(fungus +
pathogens), and P (pathogens only). There were seven sampling times, on day 0, 1, 2, 3,
7, 9, 14, and for each sampling time duplicates a and b of each scenario were prepared.
Negative controls of sterilized, uninoculated pearl barley were sampled on day 0 (dupli-
cates), and on day 14 (single sample). Figure 3.4 shows an overview of the samples and
sampling days.
F
FP
P
Day 0
Fa
Fb
FPa
FPb
Pa
Pb
Day 1
Fa
Fb
FPa
FPb
Pa
Pb
Day 2
Fa
Fb
FPa
FPb
Pa
Pb
Day 3
Fa
Fb
FPa
FPb
Pa
Pb
Day 7
Fa
Fb
FPa
FPb
Pa
Pb
Day 9
Fa
Fb
FPa
FPb
Pa
Pb
Day 14
Fa
Fb
FPa
FPb
Pa
Pb
Control
Control
Control
Figure 3.4: Overview of the samples in the challenge test. Each square represents an indi-
vidual Petri dish of pearl barley, inoculated according to the scenario specified, or uninoculated
control. There were three scenarios: F (fungus only), FP (Fungus + pathogens) and P (pathogens
only), and for each scenario there were duplicates a and b.
Fungal inoculum was added in a concentration of 0.012 g mycelium/g to samples in sce-
nario F and FP. B. cereus s.l. was added in a concentration of 500 CFU/g to samples
in scenario FP and P. L. monocytogenes cocktail was added in a concentration of 500
CFU/g to samples in scenario FP and P. The volume of inoculum that should be added
per gram of sample was dependent of the inoculum concentration, and was determined
according to equation 3.2:
Vinoculum[mL] =
Csample[ CFU
g
] · msample[g]
Cinoculum[ CFU
mL ]
(3.2)
Page 22 of 82
==PAGE:28==
Master Thesis
Magdalena Dzierzynska
June 2025
Where Vinoculum is the volume of inoculum with concentration Cinoculum that should be
added to the mass of sample msample, to achieve the desired initial concentration Csample.
Equation 3.2 was used for determining volume of B. cereus s.l. and each strain of L.
monocytogenes cocktail to add. When detemining the volume of fungal inoculum to add
the equation can be used when substituting ”g mycelium” into the units of concentration
instead of CFU. Table 3.1 shows the concentration Cinoculum of fungal inoculum, B. cereus
s.l. inoculum and each strain of L. monocytogenes, as well as the volume of undiluted
inoculum Vinoculum that should be added per gram of sample to reach the desired con-
centrations.
Table 3.1: Overview of the inoculum concentration Cinoculum and volume Vinoculum of undi-
luted inoculum from each strain that was added per gram of sample to the scenarios F (fungus
only), FP (Fungus + pathogens), and P (pathogens only) to reach the desired initial concentrations
Csample.
Strain
Cinoculum
Vinoculum (µL/g)
Csample
F
FP
P
L. sulphureus
NFICC 9002
0.142 g mycelium/mL
80
80
-
0.012 g mycelium/g
B. cereus s.l.
isolate no 16.
5.9 · 108 CFU/mL
-
8.47 · 10−4
8.47 · 10−4
500 CFU/g
Lm EGD-e
5.2 · 106 CFU/mL
-
3.2 · 10−2
3.2 · 10−2
167 CFU/g
Lm 08-5575
5.8 · 107 CFU/mL
-
2.9 · 10−3
2.9 · 10−3
167 CFU/g
Lm 568
6.2 · 107 CFU/mL
-
2.7 · 10−3
2.7 · 10−3
167 CFU/g
Pearl barley was inoculated in six batches of 250g, which represented one duplicate of
a scenario (Fa, Fb, Pa, Pb, FPa, FPb). Six Falcon tubes of inoculum were prepared,
according to table 3.1, that would be added to each batch. If the amount of bacterial
inoculum to add for 250g was <10 µL, appropriate dilutions were made using maximum
recovery diluent (MRD) to increase the inoculum volume while maintaining the desired
concentration. In scenarios FP and P the following volumes and dilutions were added:
212 µL of B. cereus s.l. isolate no 16. 10−3 dilution was added per 250 g. 8.01 µL of
undiluted Lm EGD-e strain were added per 250g. 7.2 µL of the 10−1 dilution of Lm 08-
5575 strain were added. per250g. 6.7 µL of the 10−1 dilution of Lm 568 strain were added
per 250g. In the end the final volume of added liquid was adjusted across all scenarios
by adding 20mL miliQ water to the P scenario Falcon tubes, and adding 234 µL MRD to
F scenario Falcon tubes to correct for the differences in inoculum volume and diluent.
The preparation of Falcon tubes with inoculum, and the inoculation was done under ster-
ile conditions in a Biosafety cabinet that had been cleaned with ethanol. The inoculation
happened by first removing surplus pearl barley from the autoclaved plastic bags with a
sterile spoon, so there was only 250g in each bag. The Falcon tubes with inoculum were
then added to the plastic bags with pearl barley, which was then mixed by shaking and
massaging it for one minute. The bags were inoculated one by one in a random order, and
were refrigerated immediately after inoculation to slow growth while the remaining bags
were inoculated. Once all six batches (Fa, Fb, Pa, Pb, FPa, FPb) of pearl barley had
been inoculated, samples were distributed in individual sterile Petri dishes with 25 ± 0.5g
in each. These Petri dishes were labelled according to scenario and duplicate (fx FPa),
parafilmed and incubated at 28°C. From an uninoculated, sterilized bag of pearl barley
three parafilmed Petri dishes were prepared as a negative control. Two of these were
sampled on the same day (day 0), and one was placed in the incubator at 28 °C with the
Page 23 of 82
==PAGE:29==
Master Thesis
Magdalena Dzierzynska
June 2025
rest of the samples. An overview of the sampling plan and the days of sampling can be
seen in figure 3.4. At each day of sampling, six samples, that is, biological duplicates
of each scenario (Fa, Fb, Pa, Pb, FPa, FPb), were taken out of the incubator and pho-
tographed using the camera of an iPhone 8, and subject to microbial analysis and pH
analysis.
3.3.6
Water Activity Analysis
Water activity (aw) was measured once in a single sample of the uninoculated control on
day 0. Water activity was measured using a water activity meter (Aqualab CX-2, USA).
The equipment was heated to a temperature of 25 ± 0.2°C, before calibration with stan-
dards of distilled water and 40% potassium sulphate. A sampling cup was filled with
un-homogenized pearl barley that had been pre-heated to 25 °C and water activity was
analyzed by the equipment.
3.3.7
pH Analysis
At each time of sampling pH was measured in duplicates from each scenario (Fa, Fb, Pa,
Pb, FPa, FPb) using a pH meter (Radiometer, Denmark). The probe was inserted into the
unhomogenized solid sample, and once the measurement stabilized, the pH was noted
down. For each sample the pH was measured twice. pH of the control was measured on
day 0 and day 14. pH was reported as mean ± standard deviation.
3.3.8
Microbial Analysis
At each time of sampling, duplicates from each scenario (Fa, Fb, Pa, Pb, FPa, FPb),
were subject to microbial analysis in random order. 10g of sample were diluted 10-fold
by adding 90 g of sterile buffered peptone water (OXOID, England) to a Stomacher 400
(Seward Medical, London) and homogenizing for 1 min at normal speed. The diluted,
homogenized sample was then transferred to a Falcon tube (10−1 dilution). 900 µL max-
imum recovery diluent (Oxoid, England) was added to Eppendorf tubes, and a 10-fold
serial dilution series was made by adding 100 µL of the 10−1 dilution to the first Eppen-
dorf tube (which then becomes the 10−2 dilution), vortexing and adding 100 µL to the
next Eppendorf tube (10−3 dilution) and so forth. The plating happened by vortexting the
intended dilution, using a pipette with a filtered tip to spread 100 µL of dilution on an agar
plate and spreading it using a metal Drigalski spatula.
The selective agars used were: Tryptone Soy Agar (TSA, SSI Diagnostica, Denmark),
which is a general count agar. PALCAM agar (Oxoid, England) with PALCAM selective
supplement (Oxoid, UK) was used to enumerate L. monocytogenes. Rapid B. Cereus
(RBC) agar (Bio-Rad, USA) with RBC supplement was used to enumerate B. cereus s.l.
vegetative cells + spores, as well as spores only.
In order to enumerate B. cereus s.l. spores only, the homogenized sample (10−1 dilution)
was transferred to a glass tube which was heated in a water bath for 10 min at 80 °C in
order to inactivate the vegetative cells. The heated glass tubes were stored in ice until
they were plated. Then the appropriate dilution series was made as described above, and
100 µL were spread plated on RBC agar to count the B. cereus s.l. spores present in the
sample.
On each sampling day it was determined which dilutions to plate, based on the expected
range that the concentration would fall within. In the excel file-appendix the full sampling
scheme can be seen, where it is specified which dilutions were plated on which agar at
each sampling point.
The F scenario was not inoculated with pathogens, so here microbial analysis was used
to check for background contamination. The F scenario was plated on TSA at every
Page 24 of 82
==PAGE:30==
Master Thesis
Magdalena Dzierzynska
June 2025
sampling point. At some time points samples from F scenario were plated on PALCAM
or RBC (both unheated for vegetative cells + spores and heated for spores only) to check
for L. monocytogenes or B. cereus s.l. contamination.
Scenarios inoculated with pathogens (FP and P scenario) were at every time point plated
on PALCAM and RBC (both unheated for vegetative cells + spores and heated for spores
only). The negative control was plated in duplicate on TSA on day 0, and a on day 14 sin-
gle negative control was plated on TSA, PALCAM and RBC (both unheated for vegetative
cells + spores and heated for spores only).
PALCAM plates were incubated at 37°C for 48 h, RBC and TSA plates were incubated at
30°C for 24h. The sampling was not done in a LAF-bench or biosafety cabinet, but in a
laboratory with filtered ventilation.
Microbial analysis was conducted in duplicates rather than triplicates due to the time con-
straints related to measuring 3x3 samples as compared to 2x3 samples at every sampling
point. As a consequence, the data lack the statistical robustness provided by triplicate
measurements, and consequently, analysis of variance (ANOVA) was not performed.
3.3.9
Enumerating Plates
The concentration of bacteria in a sample in log(CFU/g) was determined by counting
the number of colonies on the selective agar plates. Plates that contained between 10-
250 countable colonies were enumerated using equation 3.3, where n is the number of
colonies on the plate, dilution is the dilution plated, and Vplated is the volume plated in mL
( 0,1 mL = 100 µL). It is assumed that 1 mL = 1 g.
log CFU/g = log10
!
n
(10−dilution · Vplated
"
(3.3)
If multiple plates from the dilution series were in the range of 10-250, a weighted average
was calculated using equation 3.4.
log CFU/g = log10
!
n1 + n2
(10−dilution1 + 10−dilution2) · Vplated
"
(3.4)
If there were no colonies within the range 10-250, the available counts would be used
for enumeration. If there were only too numerous to count (TNT) plates or plates with
0 colonies the following approach was used: If there were 0 colonies the lowest plated
dilution was assumed to have 1 colony, based on which a log(CFU/g) value was deter-
mined. That concentration corresponds to the theoretical detection limit based on the
available dilutions, which was reported as ”<(number of detection limit) CFU/g” to specify
that the actual value was lower than the reported value. If all the dilutions were TNT it
was assumed that the lowest dilution plated contained 250 colonies, based on which a
log(CFU/g) value was determined. That concentration corresponds to the upper detection
limit based on the available dilutions, which was reported as ”>(number of detection limit)
CFU/g” to specify that the actual value was bigger than the reported value.
3.3.10
MALDI-TOF
Agar plates that contained bacteria of unexpected morphologies were refrigerated until
the end of the sampling period at 5°C. After the sampling period they were given to a
researcher from the DTU research group for Microbial Food and Hygiene, for species
identification using MALDI-TOF (MALDI Biotyper, Bruker, USA).
Page 25 of 82
==PAGE:31==
Master Thesis
Magdalena Dzierzynska
June 2025
4
Results
4.1
Substrate-Agar Experiment
Mycelial growth of L. sulphureus was evaluated on agar media of four different biomasses:
Apple pomace (A), Potato pulp (P), Sugar beet pulp (S) and Ulva lactuca (U), as well as
a positive control on malt extract agar (MEA), all with an initial pH of 4.00 ± 0.05. The
substrate-agars contained 1% dry matter, and the dry matter content in the substrates
was 81.59±0.64% in apple pomace, 91.33±0.17% in potato pulp, 30.52±0.15% in sugar
beet pulp, 86.99±0.05% in U. lactuca. The substrates were subject to elemental analysis
prior to inoculation. The radial colony diameter, growth rate, and visual appearance of the
mycelium were evaluated.
4.1.1
Content of Carbon, Nitrogen, C:N ratio and Protein
Nitrogen (N) and carbon (C) content was measured in the biomasses by combustion-
based elemental analysis. These results, as well as C:N ratio and protein content, can
be seen in table 4.1 for apple pomace, potato pulp, sugar beet pulp, U. lactuca, and
MEA. MEA was note measured but was calculated as a weighted average of 86% malt
extract and 14% soy peptone, which were measured. The salt content was measured in
U. lactuca only, as it was presumed to be high since it is a seaweed. The salt content in
U. lactuca was 5.28 ± 0.06 %DM.
Table 4.1: Content of Carbon (C), Nitrogen (N), C:N ratio and protein in Substrates. Results
are shown as mean±standard deviation (n = 3). A nitrogen-to-protein conversion factor of 6.25
was used. Malt extract agar (MEA) was calculated as a weighted average of 86% malt extract and
14% soy peptone.
Substrate
C [%]
N [%]
C:N ratio
Protein [%]
Apple pomace
41.18 ± 1.27
0.52 ± 0.03
79.39 ± 3.48
3.25 ± 0.17
Potato pulp
41.64 ± 0.32
1.04 ± 0.02
40.19 ± 0.41
6.48 ± 0.10
Sugar beet pulp
19.49 ± 4.15
0.48 ± 0.14
40.72 ± 2.45
3.02 ± 0.85
U. lactuca
27.12 ± 0.16
2.41 ± 0.01
11.26 ± 0.08
15.04 ± 0.07
Malt Extract
40.63 ± 0.56
1.29 ± 0.02
31.56 ± 0.18
8.04 ± 0.1
Soy Peptone
42.72 ± 1.17
10.12 ± 0.3
4.22 ± 0.01
63.23 ± 1.84
MEA
40.93
2.55
27.65
15.93
Carbon content was lowest in sugar beet pulp (19.49±4.15%), followed by U. lactuca
(27.12 ± 0.16%). Carbon content was similar in MEA (40.63 ± 0.56 %), apple pomace
(41.18 ± 1.27%) and potato pulp (41.64 ± 0.32%) which have the highest carbon content.
Nitrogen content was higest in MEA (2.55%) and U. lactuca(2.41 ± 0.01 %), followed by
potato pulp(1.04 ± 0.02 %), whereas apple pomace (0.52 ± 0.03 %) and sugar beet pulp
(0.48 ± 0.14 %) have very low nitrogen, and therefore also low protein content. The C:N
ratio was highest in apple pomace (79.39 ± 3.48 ), comparable in sugar beet pulp (40.72
± 2.45) and potato pulp (40.19 ± 0.41), followed by MEA (27.65), and was lowest in U.
lactuca (11.26 ± 0.08).
Page 26 of 82
==PAGE:32==
Master Thesis
Magdalena Dzierzynska
June 2025
4.1.2
Colony Diameter and Growth Rate
To measure the speed of mycelial growth, the radial colony diameter was measured every
two days for a period of ten days in three random points for triplicates of each substrate-
agar. Figure 4.1 shows the radial colony diameter over time on the substrate-agars, and
the same values reported as mean±standard deviations can be seen in table A.1 in the
appendix. Colony growth was physically limited to the inner diameter of the Petri dish,
which was 8.7 cm.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Time (days)
Colony Diameter (cm)
Substrate
A
M
P
S 
U
Figure 4.1: Radial colony diameter of L. sulphureus on different substrate-agars at 28°C.
Apple pomace agar (A), Potato pulp agar (P), Sugar beet pulp agar (S), Ulva lactuca agar (U) and
malt extract agar (M). Curves show mean value and vertical bars show standard deviations.
L. sulphureus had fully colonized all MEA plates 6 days after inoculation. On apple po-
mace and potato pulp L. sulphureus had very similar growth curves and fully colonialized
the plate after 8 days. One of three samples on U. lactuca reached the edge of the plates
on day 10, and on sugar beet pulp L. sulphureus did not reach the edges of the Petri dish
within the 10 day period of the experiment. On sugar beet pulp it reached the edges of
the agar plate 16 days after inoculation. It can be seen from figure 4.1 that the increase
in radial colony diameter was steeper between days 2-6 than between days 0-2.
Page 27 of 82
==PAGE:33==
Master Thesis
Magdalena Dzierzynska
June 2025
b
a
b
c
b
Sugar Beet Pulp
Ulva
Potato Pulp
Apple Pomace
MEA
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
Mean Growth Rate (cm/day)
Figure 4.2: Growth rate of L. sulphureus on different substrate-agars at 28°C. Bars show
mean value and error bars show standard deviations. Different letters signify that means are
significantly different in a Tukey’s post hoc test at 5% significance.
Figure 4.2 shows the growth rate of L. sulphureus on different substrate-agars, based on
the growth between day 2 and day 6. L. sulphureus had a significantly faster growth rate
on MEA (1.5±0.1 mm/day) compared to all other substrates, followed by apple pomace
(1.2±0.1 mm/day), potato pulp (1.2±0.1 mm/day) and U. lactuca (1.1±0.1 mm/day) which
were not significantly different from one another, and sugar beet pulp (0.7±0.1 mm/day)
had a significantly slower growth rate than all other substrates.
Page 28 of 82
==PAGE:34==
Master Thesis
Magdalena Dzierzynska
June 2025
4.1.3
Visual Appearance, Color and Density of Mycelium
For each substrate-agar there was one extra agar plate intended for color measurement
of the mycelium. At the periphery of a Petri dish a white disc was placed where the
intention was that the mycelium would cover the disc by the end of ten days, and the disc
would serve as a uniform background so that the color of the mycelium, rather than the
color of the biomass-agar, was measured by the videometer. Table 4.2 shows these color
measurements, as well as the mycelial density. The color measurement can be used as
a supplement to the mycelial density. The density score was assigned on the basis of a
visual assessment of three samples, whereas the color measurement is a more objective
quantitative measurement, measured as an average of the cross-sectional area of the
disc taken from a single Petri dish. Photographs were also taken of a representative Petri
dish from each substrate-agar plate after 10 days of incubation at 28 °C, these can be
seen in figures 4.3 and 4.4.
Table 4.2: Color measurements and density of L. sulphureus mycelium after 10 days at 28
°C. Mean±standard deviation are shown, where L* is lightness, a* is red/green as b* is blue/yellow.
The background color of the white disc without any mycelium is also reported. The mean values
of L*, a*, b* were converted to RGB color scale to display the shade using https://colorizer.org/.
L*
a*
b*
Shade
Mycelial Density
Apple pomace
84.92 ± 2.07
-1.14 ± 1.11
5.55 ± 1.07
Somewhat compact (3)
Potato pulp
80.80 ± 2.38
2.81 ± 1.46
12.84 ± 3.87
Compact (4)
Sugar beet pulp
86.33 ± 3.72
-0.21 ± 1.21
0.83 ± 1.1
Very thin (1)
U. lactuca
84.25 ± 1.77
-0.30 ± 0.98
3.16 ± 0.95
Somewhat compact (3)
MEA
78.19 ± 2.23
6.14 ± 1.4
24.56 ± 2.71
Compact (4)
Background
94.69 ± 5.84
0.29 ± 1.59
0.39 ± 1.31
-
Ten days after incubation, the discs on U. lactuca and sugar beet pulp agar barely con-
tained any mycelium, which is reflected in table 4.2, where their colors are most alike to
the color of the white disc background, and their density was very thin (1) or somewhat
comact (3). The disc from MEA was the most overgrown with mycelium, this color rep-
resents the most ’true’ color of L. sulphureus as the growth on the other discs was more
scattered. It can be seen that greater lightness (L*) indicated the color being closer to the
background color, and less lightness was closer to the color of L. sulphureus on MEA.
Page 29 of 82
==PAGE:35==
Master Thesis
Magdalena Dzierzynska
June 2025
A
P
S
U
Figure 4.3: Mycelium of L. sulphureus after 10 days at 28°C on different substrate-agars.
Apple pomace agar (A), Potato pulp agar (P), Sugar beet pulp agar (S), and Ulva lactuca (U). A
single representative sample out of three is shown.
Page 30 of 82
==PAGE:36==
Master Thesis
Magdalena Dzierzynska
June 2025
MEA
Figure 4.4: Mycelium of L. sulphureus after 10 days at 28°C on positive control of malt extract
agar (MEA). A single representative sample out of three is shown.
The mycelium was most dense on the positive control (MEA), which also had the most
distinct color and appearance. Amongst the biomasses, potato pulp appeared to have
the most prominent mycelial development of the four biomasses evaluated, it showed
concentrical patterns in the mycelium. This was also confirmed by observed density and
the color being closest to the color of MEA. Mycelium on apple pomace also appeared
very developed after ten days, the agar plate showed some spots of mycelium with greater
density than surroundings. Mycelium on U. lactuca agar was difficult to see and had
smaller dense-spots of mycelium compared to apple pomace. Sugar beet pulp showed
the poorest mycelial growth, as it was thinner, barely visible, not very dense, and the
mycelium did not reach the edge of the agar plate within 10 days, as was the case for the
other substrate-agars. It was difficult to see the mycelial growth and measure the radial
colony diameter due to the opaque nature of the substrates. Potato pulp and MEA were
the least opaque, likely due to the uniform and small grain size of the powders used to
create these media. U. lactuca was almost fully opaque, whereas sugar beet pulp and
apple pomace were lighter and more easy to see through.
Page 31 of 82
==PAGE:37==
Master Thesis
Magdalena Dzierzynska
June 2025
4.2
Solid State Fermentation Experiment
To identify suitable substrates for solid state fermentation, L. sulphureus was grown on
nine different biomasses: Ulva lactuca, apple pomace, sugar beet pulp, pearl barley,
chickpeas, rice, rye, quinoa, and corn. Prior to sterilization U. lactuca, pearl barley, chick-
peas, rice, rye and quinoa were soaked overnight, then drained, whereas corn, apple
pomace and sugar beet pulp were not soaked. After sterilization ∼25 g of each biomass
was placed in sterile Petri dishes, inoculated with L. sulphureus mycelium from liquid
culture, and incubated at 28 °C. Each substrate was tested in triplicate. Visual assess-
ment of colonization was performed over time and compared to uninoculated controls.
This qualitative screening was used to evaluate the ability of L. sulphureus to colonize
the substrates under low-tech solid-state conditions, without added nutrients or pretreat-
ments, and to select a single substrate for challenge testing. The substrates were not
adjusted for pH, as opposed to experiment one.
4.2.1
Content of Carbon, Nitrogen, C:N ratio and Protein
Nitrogen (N) and carbon (C) content was measured pearl barley, chickpeas, rice, rye,
quinoa and corn by combustion-based elemental analysis. Prior to elemental analysis
pearl barley, chickpeas, rice, rye and quinoa were soaked, drained and sterilized, whereas
corn was not soaked and drained, but sterilized from frozen. The results, as well as C:N
ratio and protein content, can be seen in table 4.3. Apple pomace, sugar beet pulp and
U. lactuca had been measured in experiment one, and can be seen in table 4.1.
Table 4.3: Content of Carbon (C), Nitrogen (N), C:N ratio and protein in Substrates: Results
are on a wet basis, and shown as mean±standard deviation (n = 3). A nitrogen-to-protein conver-
sion factor of 6.25 is used. * n=2 because of measurement error.
Substrate
C [%]
N [%]
C:N ratio
Protein [%]
Chickpeas*
21.52 ± 0.37
1.39 ± 0.01
15.53 ± 0.12
8.69 ± 0.09
Corn
20.94 ± 9.23
0.60 ± 0.11
33.31 ± 10.25
3.77 ± 0.67
Pearl barley
25.08 ± 4.42
0.63 ± 0.17
40.36 ± 4.83
3.96 ± 1.06
Quinoa*
42.94 ± 30.27
2.78 ± 2.38
17.01 ± 3.66
17.38 ± 14.85
Rice
14.85 ± 6.72
0.54 ± 0.21
27.15 ± 2.38
3.40 ± 1.34
Rye
18.92 ± 1.28
0.35 ± 0.10
56.69 ± 16.8
2.21 ± 0.64
One sample of quinoa and one sample of chickpeas (out of three) showed a nitrogen and
carbon content of 0%, which was evidently an error in the measurement. These outliers
were removed from the dataset, hence the results for chickpeas and quinoa are based on
duplicate, rather than triplicate measurements. The mean carbon content was greatest in
quinoa (42.94 ± 30.27 %) but the standard deviation was very large, and calculated based
on the values 64.25%C and 21.54%C. The standard deviations were also very large for
corn, pearl barley and rice, indicating uncertainty in the precision of the measurements.
Pearl barley had a carbon content of 25.08 ± 4.42 %, chickpeas, corn and rye were around
20%, and rice had the lowest carbon content of 18.92 ± 1.28 %. The mean nitrogen and
protein content was highest in quinoa (2.78 ± 2.38% N), again with a very large standard
deviation that miscredits the results, it was calculated based on the values 4.46%N and
1.10%N. For rice the standard deviation of the N and protein content was also large (39%
of the mean). The nitrogen content of chickpeas was 1.39 ± 0.01%N, for pearl barley, rice
and corn it was around 0.6%N, and rye had the lowest nitrogen content of 0.35 ± 0.1%.
For the C:N ratio there was again a large standard deviation, particularly for rye, corn and
quinoa. C:N ratio was the highest in rye (56.69 ± 16.8), followed by pearl barley (40.36
± 4.83), corn(33.31 ± 10.25), rice (27.15 ± 2.38), quinoa (17.01 ± 3.66), and chickpeas
(15.53 ± 0.12).
Page 32 of 82
==PAGE:38==
Master Thesis
Magdalena Dzierzynska
June 2025
4.2.2
Visual Appearance
The samples were visually monitored three, six, eight, and ten days after inoculation,
and a representative sample of each substrate, as well as the uninoculated control was
photographed on the tenth day.
After three days of incubation, rice, pearl barley, sugar beet pulp and apple pomace
showed signs of mycelial growth as seen by white-mycelium appearing on the surface
of the substrate, whereas the other substrates showed no signs of mycelium. After six
days rice, rye and pearl barley had clearly developed mycelium, on pearl barley and rice
the color of the mycelium was orange and the substrate was heterogenously colonized in
spots, on rye it was white and more fluffy with some orange spots, and a heterogeneous
distribution. Sugar beet pulp showed subtle signs of white myclium after six days. After
six day apple pomace seemed to have dried out, the substrate appeared very dry and
the mycelium had not expanded since day three. Quinoa and chickpeas also seemed
very dry after six days and showed no signs of mycelium, and appeared identical to the
controls. Corn and U. lactuca did not seem dry, but showed no signs of mycelium after
six days and appeared identical to the controls.
This development prevailed eight, and ten days after inoculation. After ten day sugar
beet pulp, rice, rye and pearl barley distinctly showed mycelium and there were obvious
visual differences between the inoculated samples and the uninoculated controls, which
appeared darker in color and drier. The rice and the pearl barley mycelium had an orange
color (figure 4.5), whereas mycelium on rye and sugar beet pulp was white (figure 4.6 ).
The growth of mycelium on rice and rye especially, was not uniform on the samples but
showed spots of orange mycelium and part of the substrate appeared uncolonized. Apple
pomace, U. lactuca, quinoa, corn, and chickpeas showed barely any mycelial growth after
10 days, their photographs can be seen in appendix figures A.2, A.3, and A.4).
Some samples from each substrate continued to be stored in the incubator after the ten
days designated for the experiment. Four weeks after inoculation the mycelium on rye
and sugar beet pulp was more fluffy and compact as compared to how it looked after ten
days and the substrates appeared bound together by a thick mycelial mat (see figures
A.5 and A.6 in the appendix). Pearl barley and rice looked the same as they had after
ten days, and appeared somewhat dry after four weeks (see figures A.7 and A.8 in the
appendix). Corn, which had shown no signs of mycelium after ten days, had developed a
thick, orange, dense mycelium after four weeks (see appendix figure A.9). Apple pomace,
U. lactuca, chickpeas, and quinoa had not developed any mycelium after four weeks.
Page 33 of 82
==PAGE:39==
Master Thesis
Magdalena Dzierzynska
June 2025
Rice
P.B.
Figure 4.5: Rice and pearl barley (P.B.) inoculated with L. sulphureus (top) and uninoculated
control (bottom) after 10 days at 28°C. A single representative sample out of three is shown.
Page 34 of 82
==PAGE:40==
Master Thesis
Magdalena Dzierzynska
June 2025
Rye
S
Figure 4.6: Rye and sugar beet pulp (S) inoculated with L. sulphureus (top) and uninoc-
ulated control (bottom) after 10 days at 28°C. A single representative sample out of three is
shown.
Page 35 of 82
==PAGE:41==
Master Thesis
Magdalena Dzierzynska
June 2025
4.3
Challenge Test
A challenge test was conducted to see how growth of food pathogens L. monocytogenes
and B. cereus s.l. develops during 14 days of solid state fermentation at 28 °C with L. sul-
phureus. There were three scenarios: F (fungus only), P (pathogens only) and FP (fungus
+ pathogens). Each scenario consisted of duplicates a and b. In scenarios F and FP the
duplicates were inoculated with biologically distinct fungal inoculum. The substrate cho-
sen for the challenge test was pearl barley, because it was a locally available substrate in
Denmark, and it showed the most uniform growth of orange L. sulphureus mycelium in the
solid state fermentation in experiment two. On each sampling day, individual Petri dishes
with pearl barley inoculated according to the scenario, were taken out of the incubator,
photographed, pH was measured and the samples were subject to microbial analysis by
spread-plating on selective agar. Sampling was done on day 0, 1, 2, 3, 7, 9 and 14 after
inoculation.
4.3.1
Visual Appearance
Figure 4.7 shows photographs of the samples from scenario P, FP and F used in the
challenge test from day 1 to day 14, as well as photographs from day 30 after inoculation
where sampling was not done. From figure 4.7 it can be seen that the P scenario did
not change visually throughout the time period, and appeared indistiguishable from the
uninoculated negative control (which can be seen in figure A.10 in the appendix). On
day 3 there was no apparent mycelium in FP and F scenarios, but there was a slight
change in the color of the substrates, they appeared lighter, compared to P scenario.
The exact day where L. sulphureus mycelium first showed in FP and F scenario was not
determined since no sampling was done between day 3 and day 7. From day 7 onwards
the substrates in scenario FP and F showed clear signs of L. sulphureus mycelium, and
had a different color and appearance from the P scenario, and the negative control. There
were no notable visual differences between samples from FP and F scenario between day
1 and day 9, but on day 14 and day 30 it was clear that there a difference between FP
and F scenarios. FP scenario had a more scattered mycelium, compared to F which had
a more homogenous mycelium on day 14 and day 30.
Page 36 of 82
==PAGE:42==
Master Thesis
Magdalena Dzierzynska
June 2025
1
2
3
7
9
14
Pa
Pb
FPa
FPb
Fa
Fb
Day
30
Figure 4.7: Time series of solid state fermentation of pearl barley with L. sulphureus at 28
°C. Samples from day 1-14 were used in the challenge test. P (pathogens only), FP (fungus +
pathogens), and F (fungus only) indicates the inoculation scenario and a and b represents dupli-
cates.
Page 37 of 82
==PAGE:43==
Master Thesis
Magdalena Dzierzynska
June 2025
4.3.2
pH Profile during Solid State Fermentation
The pH was measured in duplicate for every sample on day 0, 1, 2, 3, 7, 9 and 14 after
inoculation in duplicates a and b of the three scenarios: F (fungus only), P (pathogens
only) or FP (fungus + pathogens), as well as in uninoculated, sterilized pearl barley (neg-
ative control) on day 0 and day 14. Figure 4.8 shows the pH profile during solid state
fermentation in the F, FP and P scenario. The pH of the negative control was fairly stable
at pH 6.04 ± 0.36 (n = 4) on day 0 after sterilization and pH 5.76 ± 0.01 (n = 2) on day 14
after sterilization where it had been kept in the same incubator as the inoculated samples
at 28 °C. Water activity in the negative control was measured to be 0.989 (n = 1) on day
0.
2
3
4
5
6
7
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
Time (days)
pH
Scenario
F
FP
P
control
Figure 4.8: pH profile during solid state fermentation of pearl barley at 28 °C in the scenarios:
F (fungus only), P (pathogens only), FP (fungus + pathogens). Curves show mean pH of duplicates
a and b, that were measured twice each, and vertical lines show standard deviations (n = 4). Black
dots show mean value of negative control.
During the first three days a decrease in pH was observed for all scenarios but the de-
crease was greater in the scenarios containing pathogens compared to the F scenario.
From day seven onwards, scenarios containing fungus (FP and F) followed a similar curve
where the pH decreased greatly (3.81±0.79 in scenario FP and 3.69±0.40 in scenario F)
compared to the P scenario, where the pH remained close or slightly higer (6.13±0.21 on
day seven), to the initial pH of the negative control throughout the remaining time. On
day seven there was a large difference between replicates in the FP scenario where the
mean pH was 3.07 for duplicate FPa and 4.56 for replicate FPb (n = 2). The lowest pH
was observed on day nine where it was 2.72 ± 0.23 in the F scenario and 3.24 ± 0.04 in
the FP scenario.
Page 38 of 82
==PAGE:44==
Master Thesis
Magdalena Dzierzynska
June 2025
4.3.3
Microbial Analysis
Microbial analysis was conducted on day 0, 1, 2, 3, 7, 9 and 14 after inoculation in dupli-
cates a and b of the three scenarios: F (fungus only), P (pathogens only) or FP (fungus
+ pathogens), as well as in uninoculated, sterilized pearl barley (negative control) on day
0 and day 14. RBC agar was selective for B. cereus s.l. (RBC was used both for vege-
tative cells + spores and RBCheated for spores only), PALCAM agar was selective for L.
monocytogenes, and TSA was a non-selective general count agar.
Microbial Analysis in Negative Control and Fungus only Scenario
Figure 4.9 shows the results from plating samples from Fa and Fb duplicates from the F
(fungus only) scenario. Scenario F was plated on TSA at every time point, on PALCAM
on day 2,7,9,14, heated on RBCheated on day 9, and unheated on RBC on day 1, 2, 3, 7,
9, 14. In comparison to the F scenario, sterilized, uninoculated pearl barley was used as
a negative control to check for contamination and growth of any pathogens on day 0 and
on day 14 of the challenge test. No bacteria were detected on TSA, PALCAM and RBC
for the control except for 1.6 log CFU/g B. cereus s.l. spores on day 14 (table A.2 in the
appendix).
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
Time (days)
Log CFU/g
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
Time (days)
Agar
PALCAM
RBC
RBCheated
TSA
Figure 4.9: Microbial analysis on pearl barley inoculated with L. sulphureus at 28 °C in
duplicates Fa (left) and Fb (right) in scenario F (fungus only). Values highlighted with triangles
were above or below the detection limit and should be interpreted as ”< shown value” (downward-
pointing triangles) or ”> shown value” (upwards-pointing triangles).
Bacteria were detected on TSA in Fa and Fb samples from day 1 onwards. L. monocy-
togenes was not detected in either duplicate of the F scenario at any time. For the Fa
samples the colony counts on TSA and RBC followed each other (left-hand side of figure
4.9), where the maximal count was >5.3 log CFU/g on day 3, and remained around 5 log
CFU/g between days 7-14. The morphology observed on the TSA plates of Fa scenario
indicated B. cereus s.l.. In the Fb samples on the other hand the counts on RBC and TSA
followed each other and increased on day 1 and 2, but from day 3 onwards no B. cereus
s.l. was deteced on RBC plates in Fb. Fb samples on TSA ranged between 2.30-6.46
log CFU/g between days 3-14. Data points for day 2 for TSA and RBC reached >6.52 in
both duplicates but these data points were taken out of the series because of confirmed
B. cereus s.l.-contamination in the dilution series.
Page 39 of 82
==PAGE:45==
Master Thesis
Magdalena Dzierzynska
June 2025
Challenge Test of L. monocytogenes
Figure 4.10 shows the growth over time of L. monocytogenes on pearl barley in P and FP
scenarios which was enumerated on PALCAM agar. The initial load of L. monocytogenes
turned out to be 4.1 log CFU/g for all samples in FP and P scenarios, instead of the
expected 2.7 log CFU/g (500 CFU/g).
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
Time (days)
Log CFU/g
Sample
FPa
FPb
Pa
Pb
Figure 4.10: Growth of L. monocytogenes in pearl barley at 28 °C in challenge test. CFU
were counted on PALCAM agar that had incubated at 37°C for 48h. Duplicates a and b in scenario
FP (fungus + pathogens) and P (pathogens only) are shown. Values highlighted with triangles were
below the detection limit and should be interpreted as ”< shown value”.
After 24 hours the concentration of L. monocytogenes grew around 5.5 log and increased
to 9.58±0.07 log CFU/g in the FP scenario and to 9.90±0.02 in the P scenario (table
4.4). From day 3 to day 14 the concentration of L. monocytogenes decreased in the FP
scenario whereas it stayed between 9-10 log CFU/g in the P scenario until day 14. There
was >1 log difference between FPa and FPb duplicates on day three, seven and nine
where FPb has a higher concentration than FPa. On day 14 there was 2.8 log CFU/g in
FPa duplicate, whereas no L. monocytogenes was detected in the FPb duplicate (<2 log
CFU/g).
Table 4.4: Concentration of L. monocytogenes in pearl barley at 28 °C in challenge test.
Initial concentration, minimal concentration and maximal concentration in scenarios FP (fungus +
pathogens) and P (pathogens only). n = 2.
Scenario
Init. (log CFU/g)
Min. (log CFU/g)
Max. (log CFU/g)
P
4.10 ± 0.04
4.10 ± 0.04
9.90 ± 0.02
Day 0
Day 2
FP
4.12±0.05
2.39 ± 0.45
9.58 ± 0.07
Day 14
Day 1
Page 40 of 82
==PAGE:46==
Master Thesis
Magdalena Dzierzynska
June 2025
Challenge Test of B. cereus s.l.
Homogenized 10-fold dilutions of P and FP samples were heated to 80°C for 10 minutes,
to kill vegetative B. cereus s.l. cells, but not B. cereus s.l. spores. Both the heated
dilutions as well as unheated dilutions were spread plated on RBC agar to enumerate
both the combination of vegetative B. cereus s.l. cells and spores (left-hand side of figure
4.11), as well as spores only (right-hand side of figure 4.11). When the left-hand side
of figure 4.11 was higher than the right-hand side it indicated growth of vegetative cells,
whereas when the two graphs follow each other it indicated that what was seen in the
left-hand side of the graph were spores.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
Time (days)
Log CFU/g
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
Time (days)
Sample
FPa
FPb
Pa
Pb
Figure 4.11: Concentration of Bacillus cereus s.l. vegetative cells + spores (left) and spores
only (right) in pearl barley at 28 °C in challenge test. CFU were counted on RBC agar that
had incubated at 30°C for 24h. Duplicates a and b in scenario FP (fungus + pathogens) and P
(pathogens only) are shown. Values highlighted with triangles were below the detection limit and
should be interpreted as ”< shown value”.
The initial load of B. cereus s.l. spores was around 2.8-3.1 log CFU/g, which was close to
the expected inital load of 2.7 log CFU/g (table 4.5). During the first 24 hours there was an
increase in vegetative cells of around 4-5 log for both FP and P scenario. Spore formation
(right-hand side of figure 4.11) increased in both FP and P scenario until day 3, whereafter
it declined in FP scenario but continued to increase in P scenario. Between days 3 and
7 the P scenario reached a stationary phase around 8-9 log CFU/g for vegetative cells
where spores were formed. On day 9 and 14 the left-hand side and right-hand side of
figure 4.11 follow each other in both FP and P scenario which indicated that there were
not many vegetative cells but mostly spores left. Both FPa and FPb dupliccates had <5
log CFU/g from day 9 onwards but the difference between the replicates was > 2 log on
day 14. Data points from day 2 were taken out of the series because the dilution series
were contaminated with B. cereus s.l..
Table 4.5: Concentration of B. cereus s.l. concentration of vegetative cells + spores in
pearl barley at 28°C in challenge test. Initial concentration, minimal concentration and maximal
concentration in scenarios FP (fungus + pathogens) and P (pathogens only). n = 2.
Scenario
Init. (log CFU/g)
Min.(log CFU/g)
Max. (log CFU/g)
P
2.81 ± 0.01
2.81 ± 0.01
8.49 ±0.14
Day 0
Day 7
FP
3.07±0.01
3.07±0.01
7.62 ± 0.40
Day 0
Day 1
Page 41 of 82
==PAGE:47==
Master Thesis
Magdalena Dzierzynska
June 2025
4.3.4
Organisms Identified by MALDI-TOF
Throughout the challenge test whenever a colony differed in morphology from what was
easily identifiable as either B. cereus s.l. or L. monocytogenes the agar plate was taken
aside. By the end of the experiment these organisms were identified by MALDI-TOF. The
results can be seen in table 4.6, alongside descriptions of the morphology. The organ-
isms that were identified by MALDI-TOF, that were not inoculated into any of the scenar-
ios, were: Bacillus mycoides, Bacillus subtilis, Bacillus licheniformis, and Staphylococcus
warneri. Selected photographs of these can be seen in figure 4.13.
Table 4.6: Organisms from challenge test which had differing morphologies. The organisms
were identified by MALDI-TOF and a score value >2 indicates a high-confidence identification. The
sampling day, scenario and replicate of sample and type of agar that the organisms were identified
on is stated, as well as a visual description of the differing morphology.
Day
Sample
Agar
Visual Description of Morphology
Organism
MALDI-TOF
Score value
2
Fb
PALCAM
A darker organism with radial growth
and bubbly brighter spots in the middle.
Bacillus cereus
2.27
2
Pa
PALCAM
A darker organism. Larger than the other bacteria counted
on the plate. With radial growth and black spots in the middle.
Bacillus cereus
2.26
7
Pb
PALCAM
Totally yellow plate with tiny too numerous to count (TNT) colonies
Staphylococcus warneri
2.01
7
Pa
PALCAM
A TNT listeria plate with larger ’yellowish’ wart-like bacteria
Bacillus mycoides
2.04
9
Fb
TSA
Smeared all over the plate in a very liquidy manner
Does not have circular distinct colonies but looks like dried liquid
Bacillus subtilis
2.06
9
Pb
PALCAM
A large spot with dark ’skin’ of purplish dark color
and a lighter periphery. Size larger than the listeria on the plate.
Bacillus licheniformis
2.16
14
FPa
PALCAM
Smeared and orange in color. Hard to discern.
Does not have circular distinct colonies.
Bacillus licheniformis
2.17
On the analyzed samples from day 2 it turned out that the organism with the atypical mor-
phology was B. cereus. Figure 4.12 displays this atypical B. cereus colony morphology
in comparison to what was was judged by a researcher from the food microbiology and
hygiene research group to be the typical appearance of B. cereus s.l..
Bacillus cereus
PALCAM FPa day 7
Bacillus cereus
PALCAM Fb day 2
Figure 4.12: Morphological variation of B. cereus s.l. on PALCAM agar. Typical B. cereus
colony morphology (left). Atypical morphology that was confirmed as B. cereus by MALDI-TOF
(right).
Page 42 of 82
==PAGE:48==
Master Thesis
Magdalena Dzierzynska
June 2025
Bacillus subtilis
TSA Fb day 9
Bacillus mycoides
PALCAM Pa day 7
Bacillus licheniformis
Pb day 14
PALCAM
Staphylococcus
warneri
Pb day 7
PALCAM
Figure 4.13: Organisms from challenge test which had differing morphologies. The organ-
isms were identified by MALDI-TOF. From top left to bottom right: Staphylococcus warneri, Bacillus
mycoides, Bacillus subtilis, Bacillus licheniformis.
Page 43 of 82
==PAGE:49==
Master Thesis
Magdalena Dzierzynska
June 2025
5
Discussion
This master’s thesis investigates fermentation of edible mycelium using the fungus Laeti-
porus sulphureus. The objective of the thesis was to identify a suitable substrate for
production of an edible mycelium by evaluating growth of L. sulphureus in agar-based
media and solid state fermentation, and to investigate microbial food safety of this edible
mycelium. To address these objectives, three experiments were conducted, a substrate-
agar experiment, a solid state fermentation experiment, and a challenge test with L. mono-
cytogenes and B. cereus s.l..
5.1
Substrate-Agar Experiment
Experiment one was designed to evaluate the hypothesis: L. sulphureus can grow on
unsupplemented plant-based substrates in agar-based media. Mycelial growth of L. sul-
phureus was evaluated on agar media of four different substrates: Apple pomace, potato
pulp, sugar beet pulp, and Ulva lactuca, as well as on a positive control of malt extract
agar (MEA).The substrate-agars contained 1% dry matter and all media had an initial pH
of 4 ± 0.05.
5.1.1
Comparison of Growth on Different Substrate-Agars
The fastest growth rate, speediest colononization, and most dense mycelium of L. sul-
phureus was observed on the positive control, malt extract agar(MEA), in the substrate-
agar experiment. The growth rate on MEA was 1.5 ± 0.1 cm/day, which was significantly
greater than growth rates on the biomasses tested. Amongst the four biomasses tested,
the most suitable for L. sulphureus mycelial growth was potato pulp, followed by apple
pomace, then U. lactuca and lastly sugar beet pulp. In potato pulp and apple pomace
the speediest colonization of the agar plate was observed, and the fastest growth rate
was observed (1.2±0.1 cm/day), yet potato pulp had slightly denser mycelium than apple
pomace. This growth rate was not significantly different from the growth rate on the sea-
weed U. lactuca (1.1 ± 0.1 cm/day) which however colonized the agar plates slower and
had somewhat less compact mycelium than on potato pulp and apple pomace. Sugar
beet pulp was the poorest substrate for supporting L. sulphureus growth as it had the low-
est growth rate (0.7 ± 0.1 cm/day), the slowest speed of colonization and the least dense
mycelium. The growth rate was calculated between the end of the lag phase (day 2) and
the first day where mycelium reached the edge of the agar plate on one of the substrates
(day 6).
A study conducted by Luangharn et al. (2014), investigated growth of L. sulphureus on
agars based on: yeast extract, peptone dextrose, corn meal, oat meal, potato dextrose,
and malt extract. They found that potato dextrose and malt extract agars were most fa-
vorable with growth rates of 1.1 cm/day (PDA) and 1.0 cm/day (MEA). The least favorable
medium was yeast extract peptone dextrose agar on which no growth ocurred. The growth
rate found on MEA in experiment 1 (1.5± 0.1 cm/day), was higher than the one reported
by Luangharn et al. (2014). This difference could be due to the fact that pH was not ad-
justed in the study, the growth temperature was 30 °C, the growth rate was calculated
based on the whole period rather than the exponential growth phase only, and different
strains of L. sulphureus were used.
A master’s thesis conducted by Jansen (2023) at the DTU research group for Microbial
Biotechnology and Bioreﬁning investigated growth rates of L. sulphureus on agars based
Page 44 of 82
==PAGE:50==
Master Thesis
Magdalena Dzierzynska
June 2025
on apple pomace, sugar beet pulp, as well as other side stream substrates, and MEA.
Jansen (2023) found a growth rate of 1.23±0.12 cm/day for apple pomace agar, 1.03±0.09
cm/day for sugar beet pulp agar, and 0.99±0.04 cm/day for MEA for L. sulphureus grown
at 28°C for 10 days, the differences between media were however, statistically insignifi-
cant. These experiments are very comparable to mine as the incubation temperature, the
substrates, and the way of calculating growth rate by excluding days 0-2 as lag phase,
were identical. Interestingly, the growth rates still differ, and especially sugar beet pulp
had a much higher growth rate in Jansen’s project than was seen here. The concentra-
tion of substrates was not directly comparable as the dry matter content was 1% in all of
the substrate agars in this experiment, whereas that was not the case in Jansen’s work
where regardless of dry matter content, the concentration of substrate in the media was
50 g/L. The substrate agars in the work by Jansen (2023) were adjusted to an initial pH of
6, whereas here the pH was 4. Perhaps the fact that a higher growth rate was observed
on MEA here than in Jansen’s work could be due to the lowered pH, as L. sulphureus
prefers an acidic environment (Hwang et al. 2008; Todorov, Orban, et al. 2024).
Perhaps the fact that Jansen (2023) observed a higher growth rate of L. sulphureus on
sugar beet pulp than was observed here, could be explained by the coarse particle size
of sugar beet pulp in experiment 1. The sugar beet pulp was somewhat more difficult to
blend compared to apple pomace and U. lactuca. The resulting substrate-agars revealed
that sugar beet pulp agar consisted of coarser particles than the other agars (see figure
4.3). On the other hand, potato pulp and MEA, which both performed very well, were very
fine-grained. Perhaps nutrients were more readily available in smaller-size particles, or
perhaps they resulted in more homogenous substrates which might have positively im-
pacted growth of L. sulphureus. In future experiments I would recommend standardizing
particle size for all substrates, or to investigate the effect of particle size on growth rates
in agar media used for fungal growth.
A study conducted by Jasińska et al. (2017) investigated growth of L. sulphureus, as well
as other basidiomycota species, on wheat-based, manure-based and digestate-based
agar media. They found that after 9 days of incubation at 25 °C the radial colony diam-
eter of L. sulphureus was 8.4-8.2 cm on the manure-based agar and wheat-based agar,
whereas the radial colony diameter on digestate-based agar was only 0.5-1.5 cm. The
agars were not adjusted for pH. The study did not report growth rate, but the fastest col-
onization corresponds to 8.4cm/9 days = 0.93 cm/day, which is within range, yet lower
than most of the growth rates seen here.
Another study by Siwulski et al. (2009) tested the growth of L. sulphureus at 25 °C on
eight different agar media, that varied in terms of mineral content, organic and inorganic
nitrogen and carbon sources. They found that potato dextrose agar (PDA) was the best
medium. They did not report growth rates, only radial colony diameter, but the maximal
growth rate would correspond to 8.1cm/7 days = 1.16 cm/day, which is within the range
of growth rates seen here. Their agars were not pH adjusted.
Growth rates corresponding to up to 8.5 cm / 6 days = 1.42 cm/day were found by Todorov,
Orban, et al. (2024) when growing L. sulphureus at 27 °C on potato-dextrose-peptone
agar plates acidified to a pH of 4.3. The medium and pH level in that study was optimized
for L. sulphureus, yet still lower than the growth rate of 1.5± 0.1 cm/day seen on MEA
here. This could be explained by the fact that growth rates here were calculated based
on the exponential growth phase between days 2 and 6, whereas several other studies
did not report growth rate only radial colony diameter on the final day, based on which I
then calculated corresponding growth rates for the whole incubation period as the growth
Page 45 of 82
==PAGE:51==
Master Thesis
Magdalena Dzierzynska
June 2025
on individual days was not reported. Had the growth rate for MEA in experiment 1 been
calculated based on the whole incubation time it took to reach the edges of the agar plate
(including the lag phase), then it would be 8.7 cm /6 days = 1.45 cm/day
5.1.2
Relation between Substrate Composition and Fungal Growth
The content of carbon and nitrogen was determined in all substrates, on the basis of which
protein content and C:N ratios were calculated.
The carbon content of 19.49 ± 4.15% in sugar beet pulp and 27.12 ± 0.16% in U. lactuca
was unexpectedly low. A meta-study by Vassilev et al. (2010) investigated the elemental
composition of a 86 varieties of biomasses, and ranges of carbon was between 42-60
% carbon on a dry matter basis (Vassilev et al. 2010). The low carbon content could
indicate an error in the measurement. The dry matter content in sugar beet pulp was
30.52 ± 0.15%, which was much lower than in any other biomass where it was between
80-90%, which might have skewered the remaining results. The biomasses were dried at
ambient temperature rather than in an oven or dehydrator before elemental analysis. In
future studies I would recommend measuring carbon and nitrogen content in biomasses
that are dried in a standardized manner.
There were no apparent trends between nitrogen content and C:N ratio in substrate and
growth of L. sulphureus. In the substrate-agar experiment the lowest C:N ratio was found
in U. lactuca (11:1), followed by MEA, potato pulp and sugar beet pulp (around 40:1), and
apple pomace had the highest (79:1) C:N ratio. The fastest growth rate did not correlate
with C:N ratio as apple pomace, potato pulp and U. lactuca had similar growth rates but
vastly different C:N ratios. The higehst nitrogen content was seen in MEA (2.55%) and
U. lactuca (2.41 ± 0.01%). One might expect a higher nitrogen content to promote fungal
growth but U. lactuca which was the biomass with the highest nitrogen content was a
somewhat poorer substrate than apple pomace and potato pulp. Perhaps the salt content
of 5.28±0.06%DM in U. lactuca could be inihibitory to the fungus, causing it to grow poorly
in this substrate, despite its high nitrogen content and low C:N ratio. A pattern that was
distinct for apple pomace and potato pulp was that they both had a similar carbon content
around 41%. As described in section 2.3.1 the C:N ratio of the substrate is an important
factor for fungal growth, but different fungi have different optimal C:N ratios (Suwannarach
et al. 2022). No systematic studies on optimal C:N ratio for L. sulphureus have been
carried out but Luard (1985) investigated the effect of five different C:N ratios between
10:1 and 1000:1 on Tramates versicolor, a close relative of L. sulphureus. The radial
colony diameter and growth rates were determined in a basic nutrient agar medium with
glucose as carbon source. The C:N ratio was varied between by varying the amount of
nitrogen. The nitrogen source was either organic asparaginine or inorganic (NH4)2SO4.
Luard (1985) concluded that the C:N ratio only had a small effect on the radial growth
rate, but that Tramates versicolor had the greatest mycelial density at a C:N ratio of 30:1
and the fastest growth rate occured at a C:N ratio 300:1 (0.74 cm/day). The effect of
organic or inorganic nitrogen sources on growth rate was neglible, but mycelial biomass
yield was was greater when the nitrogen source was organic (Luard 1985). The growth
rate observed by Luard (1985) was lower than most of the substrates in experiment 1, but
comparable to sugar beet pulp.
To validate the measurements, the protein content found in experiment 1 can be com-
pared to the nutritional tables of the substrates found in Feedipedia (see table 2.1). Ap-
ple pomace and sugar beet pulp had a lower protein content here, whereas U. lactuca
and potato pulp were more comparable. One might suspect it could be due to a differ-
ent nitrogen-protein conversion factor, but the nitrogen-protein conversion factor of 6.25
Page 46 of 82
==PAGE:52==
Master Thesis
Magdalena Dzierzynska
June 2025
which was used here is very high, and rarely higher N-P conversion factors are used. A
nitrogen-protein factor of 6.25 generally overestimates protein content, as it does not con-
sider non-protein nitrogen, however it is still widely used for detemining protein content
of biomasses (Gosukonda et al. 2020). In this particular project the protein content was
not the main focus, the protein content is only used for comparison between substrates.
For instance for seaweed a nitrogen-protein conversion factor of 5 has been proposed
(Laramore et al. 2022), which would result in a protein content around 12% instead of
15% in U. lactuca, which is still a greater protein content than in the other biomasses
seen in table 4.1. The reason for the higher protein content seen in table 2.1 must there-
fore be different origin or analytical method, rather than the nitrogen-protein conversion
factor.
Attempting to search for trends between the nutritional composition reported in Feedipedia
and fungal growth, there does not seem to be a clear trend related to fibre content or lignin.
One could image that a high content of lignin impaired growth of L. sulphureus as brown
rot fungi are uncapable of degreading lignin (Chai et al. 2022). Apple pomace has the
highest lignin content according to table 2.1 and potato pulp has the second highest lignin
content, but those were better at supporting L. sulphureus growth than sugar beet pulp
and U. lactuca which had lower lignin content.
The content of sugars and sugar profile was not experimentally determined in the sub-
strates. It would however be relevant to investigate whether the sugar profiles of the
substrates could explain the variation in growth seen in experiment 2, keeping in mind
that maltose and glucose were reported to be optimal sugars for L. sulphureus biomass
production (Hwang et al. 2008). A study by Gowman et al. (2019) found that fructose was
the most prevalent sugar in apple pomace followed by glucose and sucrose. Content of
maltose and lactose in apple pomace was reportedly <0.2%. A study by Baryga et al.
(2023) reported that fructose followed by glucose and sucrose were the most prevalent
sugars in sugar beet pulp, whereas rafinose, trehalose and kestose were not detected.
A study by Todorov, Tomasikova, et al. (2024) investigated the use of sugar beet pulp for
edible mycelium fermentation using Pleurotus ostreatus in submerged culture, and found
that sugar beet pulp was a suitable growth medium. They reported that the most preva-
lent sugars in sugar beet pulp were glucose, followed by galactose and arabinose, but
other sugars were not investigated. They also noted that the sterilization process might
affect the sugar composition of the substrate, by hydrolyzing polysaccharides into simple
sugars (Todorov, Tomasikova, et al. 2024).
A study by Choi et al. (2016) analyzed content of fructose, sucrose and glucose in potato
pulp, but other types of sugar were not reported. In different varieties of potato the con-
tents varied between 113-1000 mg/gDM fructose, 76.5-1060 mg/g DM glucose and 173-
823 mg/g DM sucrose, and it was dependent on the potato variety which sugar was most
prevalent. The sugar profile in U. lactuca was not reported in several reports of chemi-
cal composition (Laramore et al. 2022; Yaich et al. 2011; Heuzé, Tran, Giger-Reverdin,
et al. 2017), but the total amount of sugars was very low (0.64 %DM (Heuzé, Tran, Giger-
Reverdin, et al. 2017)) compared to the other biomasses.
As expected, the best performing substrate was MEA. MEA consists of malt extract and
soy peptone. Soy peptone is an enzymatic digests of soy flour that is rich in high-quality
protein, carbohydrates, calcium, and other micronutrients (Thermo Fisher n.d.). Soy pep-
tone was found to be the optimal nutrient source for L. sulphureus maximal biomass pro-
duction in a study by Hwang et al. (2008). On the malt extract container the supplier had
stated that it consisted of 60% maltose but other ingredients were not stated. Another
Page 47 of 82
==PAGE:53==
Master Thesis
Magdalena Dzierzynska
June 2025
source states that malt extract usually contains (w/w) ca. 52% maltose, 20% glucose,
15% dextrin, 6% other carbohydrates, and 5% protein (Hubálek 2003). The high content
of maltose and glucose in MEA might explain why it is such an excellent medium for L.
sulphureus growth.
Maltose is likely not present in relevant amounts in sugar beet pulp, potato pulp, apple
pomace and U. lactuca. Maltose is a disaccharide that is naturally present in some grains,
but it is mostly formed during heating processes by the hydrolysis of starch by enzymes
(Lebot 2017). The lack of maltose reported by the abovementioned studies, as well as
the low content found in apple pomace, could indicate that these biomasses do not con-
tain relevant amounts of maltose, which could partly explain their worse performance as
growth medium for L. sulphureus compared to MEA. One could also imagine that many
compounds that could positively influence growth such as minerals, vitamins, and proteins
are depleted in the side streams compared to the virgin biomass they are derived from.
This might also explain why MEA, which contains many nutrients, is a better medium for
growth of L. sulphureus compared to food industry side streams.
Other than C, N, protein content and C:N ratio, there are several variables that were
not measured here that could influence the mycelial growth performance: Macronutrient
composition, vitamins, minerals, nutrient availability, sugar profile, organic acids profile,
amino acid profile, presence of anti-nutrients, and particle size could be investigated for
a more complete physico-chemical profile of each substrate.
Page 48 of 82
==PAGE:54==
Master Thesis
Magdalena Dzierzynska
June 2025
5.2
Solid State Fermentation Experiment
Experiment two was designed to evaluate the hypothesis: L. sulphureus can grow on
unsupplemented plant-based substrates in solid state fermentation. L. sulphureus was
grown on nine different substrates: apple pomace, sugar beet pulp, U. lactuca, rye, pearl
barley, rice, corn, quinoa, and chickpeas, in solid state fermentation. The content of car-
bon, nitrogen, protein and C:N ratio was determined in the substrates, and the growth
was assessed visually. Four of the substrates were colonized by L. sulphureus after ten
days at 28°C, namely pearl barley, rice, rye and sugar beet pulp.
5.2.1
Comparison between substrate-agar and solid state fermentation
experiments
Interstingly the conclusions seen in the agar experiment were not directly transferrable
to the solid state fermentation.
Sugar beet pulp had the poorest performance in the
substrate-agar experiment but was one of the better substrates in the SSF. Apple po-
mace and U. lactuca on the other hand were barely able to support mycelial growth in
SSF. The pH in the substrate-agar experiment had been adjusted to 4 in all substrates,
whereas in solid state fermentation it was no longer adjusted but was the native pH of the
substrates, this might also have negatively impacted the results as L. sulphureus grows
faster in an acidic environment (Hwang et al. 2008; Todorov, Orban, et al. 2024). The
reason pH was not adjusted was to mimic the preferable conditions for the challenge test
solid state fermentation, where lowering the pH would adversly affect the bacteria, so
that the ability of the edible mycelium to support bacterial growth would not be seen. An-
other reason could be that several variables, such as moisture and grain size were not
controlled for that might have negatively impaired growth.
5.2.2
Mycelium Color
The mycelium appeared heterogenous on especially rice and rye, which could indicate
that the substrates should be more thoroughly mixed after incoulation, or during incuba-
tion. The most homogenous distribution of mycelium was seen on pearl barley which
appeared well-mixed and organge. It was interesting that L. sulphureus mycelium was
more orange in color on rice and pearl barley, compared to rye and sugar beet pulp.
When cultivating L. sulphureus on malt extract broth in submerged culture, to produce
the fungal inoculum, the mycelium has a deep orange color. A polyene named laetiporic
acid A is the main pigment responsible for the orange color of L. sulphureus (Davoli et
al. 2005). Future studies could investigate the relationship between mycelium color and
substrate characteristics.
5.2.3
Lack of Trend between Substrate Composition and Fungal Growth
There was no clear trend between carbon content, nitrogen and protein content, and C:N
ratio and the ability of substrates to support growth of L. sulphureus.
A study by Hsieh (2004) investigated the effect of C:N ratio on growth rate of Ganoderma
lucidum, a close relative of L. sulphureus in solid state fermentation. The substrate was
soy residue and sawdust, mixed in different proportions to obtain C:N ratios from 30:1 to
80:1. They found statistically significant differences between growth rates of G. lucidum
grown at different C:N ratios. The highest growth rate of mycelium was observed to be
0.60 cm/day at a C:N ratio of 80:1, whereas the lowest growth rate of 0.3 cm/day was
observed at C:N ratios of 30:1 and 40:1. They concluded that a higher substrate C:N ratio
led to a higher growth rate of mycelium, but the mycelial density appeared to decrease.
This finding was in accordance with Luard (1985) who observed that mycelial density in
T. versicolor was greatest at a C:N ratio of 30:1, whereas the fastest growth rate was
observed at a C:N ratio of 300:1. Perhaps the same relationship between C:N ratio of
Page 49 of 82
==PAGE:55==
Master Thesis
Magdalena Dzierzynska
June 2025
substrate and mycelial density and grotwth rate can be expected in L. sulphureus, which
is from the same order as G. lucidum and T. versicolor. This was however not observed
under the conditions tested.
The protein contents in substrates in experiment 2 (table 4.3 in the results section) can be
compared to the nutritional composition of the substrates that was found in the Feedipedia
database (table 2.1), to look for trends between fungal growth and substrate composition.
It can be seen that the protein contents reported in the database are much higher for all
substrates compared to the protein contents measured in experiment 2, which is expected
as they are reported on a dry basis, whereas in experiment 2 they are reported on a wet
basis. The substrates which have the highest protein content relative to one another, was
consistent between the database values and the values measured in experiment 2. The
carbon and nitrogen measurements for quinoa were highly unreliable due to one invalid
measurement and large variation between the results. Attempting to search for trends
between the nutritional composition reported in Feedipedia and fungal growth, there does
not seem to be a clear trend either. The lack of trend between fungal growth and sub-
strate composition could indicate that other aspects of substrate composition than the
ones investigated were governing for growth. This could for instance be the sugar com-
position, the types of starches, the amino acid profile, the mineral profile or the presence
of antinutrients in the substrates.
5.2.4
Particle Size and Moisture Content were Not Controlled
The lack of a trend between fungal growth and substrate composition could also indicate
that another variable than substrate composition was more relevant for L. sulphureus
growth in solid state fermentation. This could for instance be moisture content of sub-
strates or particle size. Neither of those variables were controlled for. Several of the
substrates that did not support L. sulphuerus growth in solid state fermentation appeared
rather dry after six days, namely apple pomace, quinoa and chickpeas. The apple po-
mace had not been soaked overnight as this gave an overly moist result in the pre-trial,
but as a consequence it was likely too dry. On the other hand sugar beet pulp, which did
support growth had not been soaked either. Chickpeas and quinoa had been prepared
like the other grains, by soaking overnight then draining prior to sterilization. Rice and
pearl barley appeared somewhat dry too, but they did support L. sulphureus growth. In
future experiments the moisture content of all substrates should be fixed around 40-55%,
which Pleszczyńska et al. (2013) reported to be optimal for growth of L. sulphureus. Si-
wulski et al. (2009) also used 55% moisture in solid state fermentation with L. sulphureus.
Something else that wasn’t controlled for was the particle size which varied greatly be-
tween tiny particles of quinoa, to large flakes of U. lactuca. What rye, pearl barley, sugar
beet pulp and rice all had in common, as opposed to the other substrates, was a similar
particle size. The particle size of apple pomace was finer, and the fibres were compressed
to larger heterogenous chunks, U. lactuca was heterogenous in big sheets that stuck to
each other, and quinoa’s particle size is very small, all of which reduced porosity and con-
sequently might have impaired oxygen availability. Chickpeas on the other hand had the
biggest particle size of all substrates, but it left gaps between particles (appendix figure
A.4) making it difficult for mycelium to connect, also the available surface area for pen-
etration of hyphae will decrease with an increase in particle size. Chickpeas was lightly
smashed prior to inoculation to prevent this issue, which also made the substrate more
heterogenous. Corn had a similar grain size to the substrates that did support growth, and
it was also seen that after four weeks corn too was able to support growth of L. sulphureus.
On the other hand tempeh can be made by solid state fermentation of both quinoa and
chickpeas.
Page 50 of 82
==PAGE:56==
Master Thesis
Magdalena Dzierzynska
June 2025
Perhaps the uniform, small-medium particle sizes of rye, pearl barley, sugar beet pulp
and rice created an ideal porosity and oxygen availability for growth of L. sulphureus. In
future experiments I would recommend controlling for grain size in solid state fermentation.
Creating uniform particle sizes in wetter substrates might be difficult, but dry substrates
could be crushed and then sieved using fixed mesh sizes.
A study by Pandey (1991) investigated the effect of particle size on enzyme production
in solid state fermentation with Aspergillus niger. They found that the lowest enzyme
activity was attained on the larger particles, and that the smaller the particle size the higher
enzyme activity. Particles in the ranges <180 µm to 600 µm showed greater enzyme
activity than particles in the ranges 600µm to >1.4 mm. Maximum enzyme activity was
obtained on substrates of particles sized 425-500 µm. Assuming that enzyme production
can be used as a proxy for fungal growth, this study could serve as an indication for
optimal particle size in solid state fermentation. In experiment 2 the particle sizes were not
measured, but surely all of the substrates, apart from quinoa and apple pomace perhaps,
had grain sizes larger than 1.4 mm, which was reportedly the worst size for maximal
enzyme activity (Pandey 1991).
5.2.5
Selection of Pearl Barley for Challenge Testing
Based on the solid state fermentation experiment, a single substrate was selected to per-
form a challenge test on. Of the four substrates on which L. sulphureus grew, pearl barley
appeared to have the most uniform growth, since all the barley grains were somewhat ho-
mogenously covered with orange L. sulphureus mycelium. The mycelium on sugar beet
pulp and rye was white, as opposed to orange, and rye had a sticky texture, which made
it more difficult to mix. As opposed to rice, pearl barley is also a substrate that can grow
in the nordics, which is preferable for the development of local plant-based foods. An-
other advantage of pearl barley is that previous and ongoing research at the research
group for Food Microbiology and Hygiene centers around brewer’s spent grain, which is
a side stream that stems from barley husks, making the matrix more comparable. Malt
extract agar, which was the most succesfull substrate in the substrate-agar experiment is
also derived from barley, which could imply that barley has a similar nutrient profile. For
these reasons, pearl barley was selected as the substrate of choice for further analysis of
microbial food safety of edible mycelia.
A study by Zhou et al. (2024) investigated the changes in edible mycelium of highland
barley (Hordeum vulgare) caused by solid state fermentation with six different species of
edible Basidiomycota, namely Ganoderma lucidum, G. leucocontextum, Phellinus igniar-
ius, Flammulina velutipes, Lentinula edodes, Hericium erinaceus (see phylogenetic rela-
tionship to L. sulphureus in figure A.1). They found that solid state fermentation caused
the chewiness, hardness, gumminess and springiness of barley to decrease. The protein
content was significantly increased by all species, when barley was fermented with P.
igniarius the protein content increased >400%. The amino acid content was increased
and the amino acid profile was improved, with a higher ratio of indispensable amino acids
to total amino acids. The flavonoid and triterpene content increased and the antioxidant
activity was improved. The changes could be partly explained by consumption of com-
pounds in the substrate and by an observed decrease in water content. The study by
Zhou et al. (2024) indicates that barley is a very promising substrate for edible mycelium
production, and that the nutritional composition, taste and texture of barley can be signif-
icantly improved by solid state fungal fermentation.
Page 51 of 82
==PAGE:57==
Master Thesis
Magdalena Dzierzynska
June 2025
5.2.6
Development over Longer Time Period
The master’s thesis was under time constraint which is why after ten days of fermenta-
tion a single substrate, pearl barley, was chosen to continue with in the challenge test.
Wwhen inspecting mycelium after 28 days of incubation at 28°C, rye, sugar beet pulp and
corn seem quite promising (figures A.6, A.5 and A.9 in the appendix). It appears that L.
sulphureus formed a thick mycelial mat that bound the substrates together, a trait that
would be desirable in a meat analogue. The fact that L. sulphureus could also grow on
corn, but only after a longer period than ten day implies that discarding further experimen-
tation for less speedier substrates is not necesarily ideal. Speed of mycelial development
is desirable for efficiency of production, but it is not the only measure for a successful
edible mycelium. Other attribtues such as flavor profiles could still be worth investigating
in slower substrates. Further investigation of especially rye, and sugar beet pulp, as they
are locally grown in Denmark, but also and corn, are recommended when investigating
edible mycelium production with L. sulphureus.
5.2.7
Quantitative Evaluation Methods
A limitation of experiment two was the lack of quantitative methods for evaluating fungal
growth. The methods used for evaluating fungal growth here were simple and effective,
and have been employed by other researchers (Maini Rekdal, Villalobos-Escobedo, et al.
2024), but quantitative methods would have ensured more comparability across different
studies and conditions, and might be more precise.
A simple method to obtain a quantitative evaluation parameter of fungal growth in solid
state fermentation would be to measure the linear growth rate. This method was em-
ployed in studies by Luangharn et al. (2014), Hsieh (2004) and Siwulski et al. (2009), who
used transparent fermentation containers, such as glass tubes, that were inoculated from
the top, and then linear growth rates were calculated by tracing the downwards mycelial
development over time from the outside of the tube. However, measuring linear growth
on heterogeneous solid substrates overlooks three-dimensional growth dynamics, inter-
nal colonization, and changes in biomass density.
Computer-based image analysis could also have been used to quantify the amount of fun-
gus present. A study by Ulzurrun et al. (2015) presents a novel automated image-analysis
approach that is completely automated and can measure several fungal growth dynamics,
including the total length and area of the mycelium in heterogenous substrates. However
this method might also overlook internal colonization, three dimensional growth dynamics
and changes in biomass density, and it works less well on complex or opaque samples
(Ulzurrun et al. 2015). In experiment 1 the color of mycelium was analyzed through image
analysis by a VideometerLab, the reason the same analysis was not repeated in experi-
ment 2 was because the background color of the substrate was thought to have too large
an impact on the measurements.
Another quantitative method that could be used for evaluating fungal growth in solid
state fermentation is quantitative PCR. qPCR is a quick, sensitive, acurate, and culture-
independent technique that is often used to detect and quantify microorganisms in en-
vironmental samples (Saragih et al. 2025).
The method involves amplifying a DNA-
sequence by PCR, where primers are designed to target DNA-sequences that are unique
to the organism. The content of the unique DNA-sequence in the sample is then used as a
proxy for the amount of cells in the sample, which can be calculated using a pre-validated
standard curve.
Page 52 of 82
==PAGE:58==
Master Thesis
Magdalena Dzierzynska
June 2025
5.3
Challenge Test
Experiment three was designed to evaluate the hypothesis: L. sulphureus can inhibit
growth of food pathogens during solid state fermentation. The food pathogens Listeria
monocytogenes and Bacillus cereus s.l. were inoculated into pearl barley at the beginning
of solid state fermentation with L. sulphureus at 28°C, to investigate their growth in a chal-
lenge test. This was called the FP (fungus + pathogens) scenario, which was compared
to pearl barley inoculated with pathogens only (scenario P), and pearl barley inoculated
with fungus only (scenario F). The visual appearance, microbial growth, and pH were
monitored over a period of 14 days. L. monocytogenes is a severe food pathogen that
is often contaminated through the food-processing environment (Álvarez-Ordóñez et al.
2015) whereas the food pathogen B. cereus is a hazard of major concern in plant-based
meat anaolgues and traditional edible mycelium, due to its ability to form heat-resistant
endospores and toxins (Dušková et al. 2024; Nout, Beernink, et al. 1987; Han, Beumer,
et al. 2001).
5.3.1
Sources of Error in the Challenge Test
Initial load of Inoculum
The initial load of L. monocytogenes was 4.1 log CFU/g in scenarios containing pathogens,
which was much higher than the expected initial load of 2.7 log CFU/g. The reason for
this was most likely due to the uncertainty of the direct phase-contrast microscopy method
used for determination of cell density in the L. monocytogenes inoculum. An initial load
of 4.1 log CFU/g L. monocytogenes is very unrealistic in a food production. The standard
initial load for challenge testing of L. monocytogenes is in the range of 50-100 CFU/g
but realistic contamination values are much lower (Bergis et al. 2021). Although the high
initial load skewers the results to be less realistic it does not affect that the log increase
and log decrease would be the same regardless of initial load, and the patterns observed
between scenarios FP and P will still be relevant as both scenarios were incoulated with
the same initial load.
Bacillus cereus s.l. Contamination in Dilution tubes
On day 1 and day 2 of the challenge test, a problematic pattern was detected from the
dilution series plated on RBC. The bacterial counts did not follow the dilution series as
expected, instead higher counts were seen on more diluted samples. The raw data can
be seen in the excel sheet appendix for day 1 and day 2.It was hypothesized that the
problem could be due to contamination in the Eppendorf tubes used for making the dilution
series, which were pre-filled with maximum recovery diluent (MRD) six days in advance
of beginning the challenge test (day 0), and stored at 5°C. In order to check this suspicion
MRD from one of these Eppendorf tubes was plated on TSA and on RBC. The colonies
were too numerous to count but exceeded >2.4 log CFU/g. Following the discovery of
this B. cereus s.l. contamination, new Eppendorf tubes with newly sterilized MRD were
prepared in a LAF bench in a clean lab, and used for dilution series from day 3 onwards.
Because of this B. cereus s.l. contamination the microbial counts from day 2 on RBC and
TSA were taken out of the dataset for all scenarios. The results on RBC and TSA from
day 1 are still included but should be treated with caution. The PALCAM plates from day
1 and day 2 seemed unaffected, they followed the dilution series, and are included in the
dataset.
Page 53 of 82
==PAGE:59==
Master Thesis
Magdalena Dzierzynska
June 2025
Most likely this B. cereus s.l. contamination stemmed from the bio-safety cabinet where
the Eppendorf tubes were prepared. The bio-safety cabinet was thoroughly cleaned with
ethanol before preparing the tubes, but B. cereus s.l. and other pathogens are commonly
worked with in it. To avoid such a contamination in future challenge tests it would be
better to always prepare dilution tubes in a clean lab, always store them at chilled tem-
peratures, avoid preparing them too far in advance, and test absence of bacteria in them
upon beginning the challenge test.
Other Contaminants Identified by MALDI-TOF
Some of the agar plates from the challenge test contained contamination from unknown
organisms which were not the inoculated B. cereus s.l. or L. monocytogenes. MALDI-TOF
of those plates revealed that Bacillus licheniformis, Bacillus subtilis, Bacillus mycoides and
Staphylococcus warneri were present ( table 4.6 in Results section).
S. warneri was detected in a single dupliacte in scenario P on day 7. Interestingly it was
only detected on -7 and -8 dilution plated on PALCAM agar, where the plates had changed
to an atypical yellow color (see figure 4.13), whereas the lower dilutions -4 to -6 seemed
unaffected with the usual morphology expected of L. monocytogenes on PALCAM agar.
Likewise the same -7 and -8 dilutions plated on RBC agar did not seem atypical. S. warneri
is a component of normal skin microbiome and can also be found in the nose and mouth.
It can cause pathogenicity to immunocompromised people. (Ravaioli et al. 2024). S.
warneri is closely related to S. aureus which is a common contaminant in food production,
that stems from the skin microbiome and is an indicator of poor hygiene (Danish Veterinary
and Food Administration n.d.[b]). This contaminant likely came from the skin and from
lacking hygiene during sampling.
B. cereus, B. licheniformis, B. subtilis and B. mycoides all belong to the Bacillus genus.
They are all aerobic, endospore-forming, gram-positive bacteria, which can form persis-
tent contamination in food processing plants, laboratories, or hospitals. B. subtilis and B.
licheniformis are closely related and both belong to Bacillus subtilis group. They can form
biofilms persistent to cleaning and sanitation protocols (Yassin and A. M. Ahmad 2012;
Dai et al. 2024).
B. cereus and B. mycoides both belong to B. cereus s.l.
group and can be indistin-
guishable when using MALDI-TOF, and when using RBC agar (EFSA Panel on Biological
Hazards 2016). B. mycoides is known to form unusual rhizoidal colonies on agar plates
(Fiedoruk et al. 2021), perhaps these were observed on PALCAM agar in figure 4.13.
The B. cereus s.l. isolate no 16 which was used for inoculation has not been classified on
strain level.
On day 2 of the challenge test B. cereus s.l. colonies with an atypical morphology were
detected on PALCAM plates in one of the duplicates in scenario F (fungus only), which
had not been purposefully inoculated. As described above, this contamination likely came
from the dilution series, which could indicate that the strain of B. cereus s.l. which had
contaminated the MRD tubes was a different strain than the strain used for inoculating B.
cereus in the challenge test, as the morphologies observed on day 2 looked very different
from typical B. cereus colonies (figure 4.12 and table 4.6).
These Bacillus spp. contaminants were likely present on the bench due to their per-
sistency, and perhaps entered the samples due to a pipette tip, or a spoon, touching a
surface. To combat contamination of persistent spores, the lab bench was desinfected
after each sampling using 2.4% natriumhypochlorite.
Page 54 of 82
==PAGE:60==
Master Thesis
Magdalena Dzierzynska
June 2025
5.3.2
Visual Observations and pH Profile during Challenge Test
L. sulphureus caused a decrease in the pH of the substrate during the fermentation period.
The initial pH was around 6, then it slowly decreased in scenario F (fungus only) and FP
(fungus + pathogens) throughout the first three days, then it was not measured before
day seven where it had dropped to 3-5, and on day 9 the pH was at the lowest point at
2.72 ± 0.23 in FP scenario and 3.24 ± 0.04 in F scenario, and it remained around there
until day 14. This decrease in pH is in accordance with a study by Hwang et al. (2008)
who observed that L. sulphureus var.miniatus caused a decrease in pH from 6 to 2.56 in
submerged culture, and that regardless of initial pH L. sulphureus var.miniatus caused an
acidification of the medium. In P scenario the pH remained close to the negative control.
Interestingly there is a small decrease in pH in P and FP scenario, between days 1-3,
which is not observed in F scenario. Perhaps the pathogens could be responsible for this
small initial decrease in pH.
Photographs of scenario F and FP showed an evident difference in mycelial growth be-
tween day 3, where mycelium was not visible but a slight color change was, and day 7
where mycelium was visible on the substrate (figure 4.7). Between day 3 and day 7 a
large decrease in pH was also observed in F and FP scenarion, this indicates that the
fungal growth accelerated between day 3 and day 7. For future experiments the pH, as
well as microbial sampling and photography of L. sulphureus in a challenge test should
be monitored more closely between day 3 and day 7 to pinpoint when rapid fungal growth
and acidification took place.
From the visual comparison of mycelium in scenario F and FP in figure 4.7. On day
14 and day 30 it was clear that there was a difference between these two scenarios.
When pathogens were present (FP scenario), the mycelium had a more scattered growth,
whereas when they were absent (scenario F) the mycelium appeared more homogenous.
The pathogens seemed to have an inhibitory effect on the fungus, perhaps they consumed
some of the sugars and nutrients that the fungus also competed for, or perhaps they have
some antifungal properties.
5.3.3
Pearl Barley Fermented with L. sulphureus without Pathogens
The F scenario (fungus only) was not expected to contain any bacteria as the substrate
was sterilized and no bacteria were inoculated into it. Any bacteria detected would there-
fore stem from contamination in the fermentation process. B. cereus s.l. was detected in
both duplicates of the F scenario on day 1 and day 2, but as described above this con-
tamination could be traced back to the dilution series. However on day 1 the enumeration
was based on the 10−1 dilution, which did not contain any MRD, which indicates that both
samples were indeed contaminated with B. cereus s.l. around 4.3-4.5 log CFU/g on day
1. In replicate Fa B. cereus s.l. contamination prevailed, around 5-6 log CFU/g, between
day 3 and day 14 (left-hand side of figure 4.9). This contamination did not come from
the MRD tubes, as they were replaced with uncontaminated ones from day 3 onwards.
Sample Fa would not be considered food safe, as B. cereus s.l. was around or exceeding
5 log CFU/g (EFSA Panel on Biological Hazards 2016) between days 3 and 14.
In replicate Fb on the other hand, B. cereus s.l. was only detected on day 1 and day
2 (where contamination of MRD tubes was very likely). Colonies were detected on the
general count agar (TSA) between days 3 and 14, which indicates some contamination
in Fb replicates, which was not B. cereus s.l. (right-hand side of figure 4.9). The colonies
from day 3, 7 and 14 were not identified by MALDI-TOF but the colonies from day nine
were, since their morphology was atypical. The high bacterial load of 6.46 Log CFU/g
seen on day 9 in replicate Fb turned out to be B. subtilis (table 4.6). Its morphology made
Page 55 of 82
==PAGE:61==
Master Thesis
Magdalena Dzierzynska
June 2025
it very difficult to enumerate because it was hard to discern one colony from another (figure
4.13) so the high bacterial load should be treated with caution.
The fact that uninoculated negative control revealed no contamination on TSA (table A.2)
indicates that the sterilization process was successful and that placing into Petri dishes
was hygienic, and that any contamination in the F scenario must have occured either
when inoculating or when sampling. The B. cereus s.l. found in Fa scenario might have
entered when inoculating with fungal inoculum, which was done in the same biosafety
cabinet as the pathogen inoculum was prepared in. Even better hygiene practices and a
more strict separation of inoculum and samples with pathogens from those without could
perhaps have avoided this contamination. The sampling was not done inside a LAF bench
but on an open bench in the laboratory. The laboratory was equipped with an air filter
and ventilation, but the air in the room, as well as the benches could be a source of
contamination, as could the buffer peptone water, the skin or gloves of the sampler, or the
fungal inoculum. In future studies to eliminate the possibility that the fungal inoculum is
contaminated one should plate it on TSA on the day of inoculation.
5.3.4
Growth of Pathogens on Pearl Barley without L. sulphureus
The water activity and pH of pearl barley before the beginning of fermentation was aw =
0.989, and pH = 6.04 ± 0.36, which means that pathogenic bacteria, if present, were ex-
pected to grow. The microbial analysis of the P scenario (pathogens only) showed how L.
monocytogenes and B. cereus s.l. grow in pearl barley at 28°C when L. sulphureus is not
present. These results are here compared to a predictive growth model from ComBase
with the same initial contamination level, pH, aw and temperature in broth, which can be
considered an optimal nutrient source, or a ”worst case scenario” (ComBase 2025). The
model can be seen in figure A.11 in the appendix.
During the first 24 hours B. cereus s.l. increased 4-5 log CFU/g in P scenario, which is in
accordance with the predictive model which shows a 4.5 log increase in B. cereus s.l. in
24 hours. After the first 24 hours B. cereus s.l. vegetative cells + spores stabilized around
8-9 log CFU/g in scenario P, whereas B. cereus s.l. does not exceed 7.61 log CFU/g in
the predictive model. The observed concentration of B. cereus s.l. cells is thus higher
than the maximal expected concentration, the reason for this discrepancy could be due
to the combined count of spores and vegetative cells in the P scenario.
L. monocytogenes increased 5.5 log in the first 24 hours in scenario P, whereas in the
predictive model it increased 4.5 log. L. monocytogenes stabilized around 9-10 log CFU/g
in the stationary phase in scenario P, whereas it does not exceed 8.52 log CFU/g in the
model. The observed concentration of L. monocytogenes is thus higher than the maximal
expected concentration. Like in the predictive model, in the P scenario it can likewise
be seen that the stationary phase of L. monocytogenes is at a higher CFU/g than for B.
cereus s.l., but in both cases the bacterial count was higher than in the model.
Foods are considered unsafe to eat when L. monocytogenes >2 log CFU/g (European
Commission 2007) and B. cereus s.l. >5 log CFU/g (EFSA Panel on Biological Hazards
2016), which means that at the contamination level seen in the pearl barley in scenario P
is unsafe to eat within 24 hours at 28°C.
Page 56 of 82
==PAGE:62==
Master Thesis
Magdalena Dzierzynska
June 2025
5.3.5
Growth of Pathogens on Pearl Barley with L. sulphureus
At the beginning of fermentation the growth curve for L. monocytogenes and B. cereus s.l.
vegetative cells + spores in FP scenario (fungus + pathogens) is indistinguishable from P
scenario (pathogens only). After 24 hours the concentration of B. cereus s.l. vegetative
cells + spores reaches 7.62 ± 0.40 log CFU/g and L. monocytogenes reaches 9.58 ± 0.07
log CFU/g in the FP scenario, both concentrations which would render the pearl barley
unsafe to eat.
However in contrast to the P scenario it was seen that when L. sulphureus was present in
the substrate (FP scenario), a decrease was observed in both L. monocytogenes and B.
cereus s.l. vegetative cells + spores, and spores only. The most straightforward explana-
tion for the inhibitory effect on B. ceures and L. monocytogenes seen in FP scenario, is
the decrease in pH observed in FP scenario. B. cereus s.l. and L. monocytogenes can-
not grow below pH 4.5 and 4.4 respectively (Danish Veterinary and Food Administration
2025a). For FP scenario the graphs for pH and bacterial load appear to be correlated as
a decrease in pH is observed parallel to a decrease in the concentration of pathogens
(compare FP scenario in figures 4.8, 4.10, and 4.11 in the Results section).
It is important to note that the observed bacterial concentrations and pH in FP scenario
show some fluctuation between duplicates and in concentration over time. This is likely
due to the fact that each sampling came from an individual Petri dish. This indicates
that the product across different Petri dishes was not fermented in an entirely uniform
manner. Heterogenous conditions is one of the drawbacks of solid state fermentation
(López-Gómez and Venus 2021). On day 7 pH had dropped below 4 in the FPa duplicate,
which was reflected in no growth detected on RBC and PALCAM plates (<5 log cfu/g),
whereas FPb replicate on the same day had a pH of 4.6 and >2 log higher concentration
of L. monocytogenes. In FPb the pH also dropped below 4 on day 9. Notably on day 9,
there was a difference in L. monocytogenes concentration of 5 log CFU/g between the two
duplicates FPa and FPb. This heterogenity is important because it has implications for the
food safety of the product. The speedier pH drop in FPa replicate created an unfavorable
environment for pathogenic growth sooner than was the case in the FPb replicate.
5.3.6
Edible Mycelium was Unsafe for Food after Challenge Test
In fermented foods such as vegetables and sausages a rapid decrease in pH within the
first 48 hours is essential for ensuring food safety (Danish Veterinary and Food Admin-
istration 2025b; Danish Veterinary and Food Administration 2025c). In the solid state
fermentation of pearl barley with L. sulphureus the pH did not decrease rapidly enough,
and the high water activity of the substrate and high fermentation temperature caused fa-
vorable conditions for pathogenic growth. The most rapid increase in pathogenic growth
occured within the first 24 hours of solid state fermentation at 28°C, where the growth
curves for FP and P scenario were indistinguishable. Although the pH at the end of fer-
mentation inhibits growth of L. sulphureus and B. cereus s.l., the final product in the FP
scenario can not be considered food safe. The concentration of B. cereus s.l. was <5
CFU/g from day 9 onwards in FP scenario, but since it was above 5 log CFU/g at the be-
ginning of the fermentation, heat-stable toxins could be present in the final product. With
regards to L. monocytogenes the final product was also not safe as the FPa replicate had
>2 log CFU/g at day 14. As an additional food safety measurement the final product could
be heat-treated, this would inactivate L. monocytogenes but not emetic toxins that could
have been formed by B. cereus s.l..
Page 57 of 82
==PAGE:63==
Master Thesis
Magdalena Dzierzynska
June 2025
5.3.7
Heat Treatments
A heat-inactivation of fungally fermented edible mycelium in a food-production setting
might be a good idea for several reasons. One reason is to inactivate pathogens, but an-
other reason is to inactivate the fungus, so it does not continue growing during retail and
at the consumer. A reason which is listed for heat-treating the edible mycelium ”Quorn”
produced by using submerged fermentation with Fusarium venatum, is to to lower the
RNA content from 9% to 1%. To achieve this Quorn is given a heat treatment at 72–74
°C for 30–45 min (Carlile et al. 2001). RNA content can be high in microbially produced
single cell proteins and can lead to a build-up of uric acid in the blood (Ahmad et al. 2022)
. Although an edible mycelium consisting of pearl barley and L. sulphureus is not a single
cell protein, the RNA content should be further investigated, to see whether it is at safe
levels below 2% (Carlile et al. 2001). The recently authorised novel food, pea and rice
protein fermented by Lentinula edodes, is likewise heat treated to terminate the fermenta-
tion, but it is not specified how (European Commission 2023). The traditional Indonesian
edible mycelia Tempeh and Oncom are not heat-treated after fermentation by the food
producer, instead they are heat-treated by the consumer by frying or steaming before
ingestion (Nout 1994; Maini Rekdal, Villalobos-Escobedo, et al. 2024). The traditional
Chinese Sufu is submerged in 8-10% salted brine after fungal fermentation, and sterilized
before leaving the food-producer (Nout 1994; Han, Cao, et al. 2004).
The safety of an edible mycelium depends on how the substrate is heat treated before fer-
mentation. In all experiments in this Master’s thesis the substrate was sterilized at 121°C
for 15 minutes prior to inoculation, which is a severe heat treatment that is expected to kill
any microorganisms or spores present. However many food production operators have
an interest in avoiding such an intense heat-treatment to lower the energy consumption,
to lower the economical costs, and environmental burden of production.
The recommendation from a recent master’s thesis by Oliveira (2025) on microbial food
safety of edible mycelium, from the DTU research group Food Microbiology and Hygiene,
was that pasteurization of the substrate at 70 °C was insufficient to ensure a food safe
product. The master’s thesis investigated the microbial food safety of solid-state fermen-
tation of barley malt grain husks (BSG, a side stream from beer brewing) using the fungus
Rhizopus oryzae to obtain a tempeh-like edible mycelium. This substrate was highly com-
parable to pearl barley used here, with a similar origin, initial water activity and pH. The
fermentation process was conducted at 25-35°C for 3-4 days. The pathogen of greatest
concern was found to be B. cereus s.l. which was present in a range of 1.7-3.7 log CFU/g
in the initial substrate of all samples. During the first 20 hours an average log increase of
1.3 log CFU/g occured for B. cereus s.l., with a peak concentration of 4.9 log CFU/g where-
after the concentration declined for most samples. Coliforms and L. monocytogenes were
also found to be important hazardz (Oliveira 2025).
5.3.8
Microbial Food Safety in Traditional Edible Mycelia
A study by Nout, Beernink, et al. (1987) investigated growth of inoculated B. cereus dur-
ing fungal fermentation at 30°C with Rhizopus oligosporus on soybeans (Tempeh). They
found that in a traditional, non-sterile tempeh manufacturing process, the B. cereus counts
could reach 8-9 log CFU/g during the fungal fermentation stage, if the fermentation pro-
cess was not controlled by adding acetic or lactic acid. A similar concentration of B.
cereus s.l. in fungally fermented pearl barley was seen here in experiment 3. Fermen-
tation with R. oligosporus increased the pH of the substrate from 4.6 to 6.6 during fer-
mentation, due to the release of ammonia, as opposed to L. sulphureus which lowers the
substrate pH. Nout, Beernink, et al. (1987) concluded that acidification of the soybeans to
approximately 4.85 or 4.4, depending on acid type, before inoculation with the fungus was
Page 58 of 82
==PAGE:64==
Master Thesis
Magdalena Dzierzynska
June 2025
essential to ensure a safe process and prevent growth of B. cereus. Other contaminants
that were detected in the tempeh samples were Clostridium botulinum, Staphylococcus
aureus, Salmonella typhimurium, and Yersinia enterocolitica, lactic acid bacteria, Enter-
obacteriaceae, and yeasts.
A study by Han, Cao, et al. (2004) investigated the microflora of fungally fermented tofu
(sufu) made with Actinomucor elegans. After 48 hours at 25°C, high levels (107–109 cfu/g)
of Enterobacteriaceae, lactic acid bacteria, spores, and total counts of mesophilic aerobic
bacteria were found, whereas B. cereus levels were at 103 cfu/g. The fungal fermentation
was followed by a 80 day period submerged in a salted brine of 8-10% salt, during which
the concentrations of all bacteria decreased, except for the concentration of B. cereus ,
which remained around 103 cfu/g (Han, Cao, et al. 2004). Microbial hazards that were of
food-safety concern in sufu were Bacillus cereus, Clostridium perfringens, Staphylococ-
cus aureus, and Enterobacteriaceae (Han, Beumer, et al. 2001). These studies highlight
the importance of controlling microbial food safety in solid state fermented edible mycelia.
The growth of fungi does not seem to be an adequate control measure in itself, but should
be coupled with other control measures.
5.3.9
Acidification of Edible Mycelium
A solution to enhance the food safety of edible mycelium that is solid state fermented with
L. sulphureus, could be to lower the pH of the substrate to 4.4 before the beginning of
fermentation. This would inhibit growth of any pathogens, as well as support the growth
of L. sulphureus, which favors an acidic environment.
A relevant question is, whether the final pH of L. sulphureus fermented edible mycelium,
of around 3, would be delicious to eat? Foods that may have a pH below 3 are vinegar,
plums, grapes, grapefruit, lime, lemon, strawberries, pomegranate, gooseberries (FDA/-
Center for Food Safety & Applied Nutrition 2009). These acidic foods have some palata-
bility but it is hard to imagine savory products or meat analogues with such a sour flavor.
Pickled or fermented products usually have a pH below 4.5 but above 3 (FDA/Center for
Food Safety & Applied Nutrition 2009). In fermented sausages a pH below 4.6 is consid-
ered undesirable from a flavor perspective, it is described to cause a sour and tangy flavor,
which is why drying is used as a control measure in combination with a pH decrease to
5.3 (Meats and Sausages n.d.). Perhaps for the creation of a palatable edible mycelium
a similar approach could be further investigated - to combine a more moderate decrease
in pH with subsequent drying of the mycelium, drying would however likely impair the
fungal growth in a negative way. Another direction for further investigation could be to in-
vestigate whether L. sulphureus could maintain a stable pH around 4.4 where pathogens
do not grow, instead of further acidifying its growth medium to 2 as Hwang et al. (2008)
observed. Contrary to fungal food fermentation with Aspergillus oryzae or Rhizopus spp.
which do not lower the pH below 4.6 (Allwood et al. 2023), the unique acidification prop-
erties of L. sulphureus could be beneficial in producing safe edible mycelia, as a low pH
would not inhibit L. sulphureus.
Page 59 of 82
==PAGE:65==
Master Thesis
Magdalena Dzierzynska
June 2025
5.4
Collective Discussion and Other Perspectives
Experiment 1 and 2 showed that L. sulphureus is capable of growing in a wide range of
substrates and side streams in both agar-based media and solid state fermentation.
From experiment 1 it was seen that the best performing side streams reached growth
rates that were 80% of the optimized laboratory medium. There could be economical
benefits to using unsupplemented side streams in an edible mycelium production as they
are cheaper than laboratory media, and upcycling these side streams rather than treating
them as waste could also pose an environmental benefit. An ideal substrate should sup-
port L. sulphureus growth, have a fast growth rate to ensure efficiency of production, and
also price, availability, ease of handling, obtainable volumes, and sustainability should be
considered. Furthermore, the resulting product should be tasty and safe.
It proved difficult to transfer the results from the agar-based experiment to the solid state
fermentation, and a weakness in the experimental design was that the list of substrates
used was not the same in experiment 1 and experiment 2. In an ideal scenario, the
purpose of experiment 1 would have been to pre-screen a wider range of substrates for
the fastest growth rates, thereby narrowing the number of substrates selected for solid
state fermentation. Instead it was the other way around, that the number of substrates
was expanded in solid state fermentation, and only one of the substrates from experiment
1 (sugar beet pulp) supported growth of L. sulphureus in solid state fermentation.
Experiment one was a more controlled way of investigating how well the substrate com-
position supported growth of L. sulphureus than experiment two. In experiment two, not
only the substrate composition, but also the physical matrix: the heterogeneity of the
substrate, the particle size, the moisture content and water-holding capacity, all played a
role. Had the sole focus of this master’s thesis been optimization of the solid state fer-
mentation there would have been more time to optimize these variables, but the focus
was rather on selecting a single substrate on which solid state fermentation worked, and
then investigating microbial food safety in that process. Reduced heterogeneity in solid
state fermentation might be important to achieve uniform fermentation, for instance, the
pH should be uniform across the substrate to be used as a reliable food safety control. In
Experiment 3 it was observed that pH varied a lot between duplicates of the same sce-
nario, but also within the sample itself, which in a food product could compromise food
safety.
The substrates might have been optimized by adjusting pH, supplementing with nitrogen
or minerals, adjusting moisture or particle size, but the reason this was not done to be-
gin with, is that to ensure the sustainability benefits of producing meat alternatives using
fungal solid state fermentation, a low-intervention process with minimal pre-treatment is
desirable, as to lower economical and environmental burdens related to production and
use of energy and chemicals.
Under the conditions tested, rye, brown rice, sugar beet pulp and pearl barley were all
substrates capable of supporting L. sulphureus growth in solid state fermentation. All of
these could be further investigated for their sensory profiles. Also it can not be excluded
that the substrates which did not support L. sulphureus growth might be able to do so
if the fermentation conditions were optimized, and as several of them appeared too dry,
supplying more moisture to them might solve the issue.
Regarding food safety of the solid state fermentation, it was seen that fungal fermenta-
tion with L. sulphureus alone was not a sufficient control measure to ensure food safety if
pathogens were present in the substrate under the conditions tested. Fermentation tem-
Page 60 of 82
==PAGE:66==
Master Thesis
Magdalena Dzierzynska
June 2025
perature, initial pH and water activity of the substrate provided good conditions for bacte-
rial growth. This highlights the importance of avoiding contamination with pathogens at the
beginning of fermentation, by heat-treating the substrate and avoiding re-contamination.
Due to the likely occurrence of B. cereus in raw materials and the inability of the fermenta-
tion process to avoid levels where toxins can be formed, B. cereus should be considered
an important hazard in the production of edible mycelium.
The substrate is vulnerable to become colonialized by bacteria, and the most rapid growth
of bacteria occured in the first 24 hours, whereas a major decrease in pH caused by
L. sulphureus, was only observed after seven days. Eventually L. sulphureus had an
inhibitory effect on bacteria and definitely created a more food-safe product than when
absent. A solution for ensuring food safety would be to lower the pH of the substrate
below 4.4 before fermentation, as is done in the case of Tempeh (Nout, Beernink, et
al. 1987). At this pH, pathogens can not grow, but L. sulphureus thrives at low pH. This
quality of thriving in a low pH environment is unique to L. sulphureus and could be a major
advantage for edible mycelium production, as several other fungi prefer a netural pH. An
issue could arise if L. sulphureus overly acidifies its substrate, which could negatively
affect the flavor of an edible mycelium. This could be a real issues, as experiment 3
showed that pH reached 2.7 after 14 days, and likewise Hwang et al. 2008 observed that
L. sulphureus acidified its media to a pH around 2.
5.4.1
Recommendations for Future Studies
Substrate Optimization
A way to systematically screen optimal substrates could be to analyze the full physico-
chemical profile of potential substrates: macronutrient composition, vitamins, minerals,
nutrient availability, sugar profile, organic acids profile, amino acid profile, presence of
anti-nutrients, volatiles. A wider range of variables could be systematically tested one at
a time in an agar-growth experiment, or in submerged fermentation, to ensure maximal
homogeneity, by keeping as many variables as possible fixed and varying one substrate-
composition variable at a time, to see which compounds have the biggest influence on
growth. Once it is fully characterized which parameters are essential for L. sulphureus
growth, possible substrates could be screened for the presence of these. Determining
which C:N ratio is optimal for L. sulphureus by systematically testing a range of ratios
from, for instance, 10:1 to 300:1, as was done by Luard (1985) and Hsieh (2004) in other
species from the Polyporales would also be relevant as this has not been done before.
Future studies could develop predictive models for L. sulphureus growth rate based on
substrate composition. Once such a model has been developed and validated it can min-
imize the amount of laboratory experiments, thereby lowering costs. A study by Bekiaris
et al. (2020) developed a model for prediciting biological efficiency (BE) in solid state fer-
mentation with the fungus Cyclocybe cylindracea based on substrate composition. The
model used Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy as a quick method for deter-
mining substrate composition. Positive correlations were found between the predicted BE
and carbohydrates and lignocellulosic compounds, and negative correlation between BE
and amides and carbonate esters.
Optimize Solid State Fermentation
The solid state fermentation process could be optimized for every substrate that is used
with regards to moisture, grain size, temperature, strain, pH. Solid state fermentation
poses challenges due to its heterogeneous nature, and it is difficult to control oxygen
availability, moisture gradients, pH gradients, temperature gradients, and heat removal
(Ferreira et al. 2016; López-Gómez and Venus 2021). It could be further researched
Page 61 of 82
==PAGE:67==
Master Thesis
Magdalena Dzierzynska
June 2025
which solid state fermentation reactors exist, that are designed to tackle these challenges.
Such reactors would also be essential to scaling up the solid state fermentation process.
It would also be interesting to test the combination of substrates rather than single sub-
strates, as they might have complementary nutrient profiles, and provide different textures
that could be beneficial for oxygen availability, however this would increase substrate het-
erogenity.
Further Investigate Microbial Interactions
A single study of cross-kingdom interactions between L. sulphureus and lactic acid bac-
teria (LAB) has been done by Todorov, Orban, et al. (2024) where LAB promoted fungal
growth, and induced morphological and metabolic changes in the mycelium. Further in-
vestigation of cross-kingdom interactions of L. sulphureus and both pathogenic and posi-
tive bacteria could be done. It would be interesting to investigate the antibacterial effects
of L. sulphureus mycelium, as several studies have reported antibacterial effects of ex-
tracts from L. sulphureus fruiting bodies (Adamska 2023; Zhang et al. 2018). It would
also be interesting to investigate which acids are secreted by L. sulphureus, and whether
methods exist to control the pH decrease.
Further Investigations of Relevance to Food Safety
Grains, legumes and food industry side streams, which are candidates for edible mycelium
substrates, have a high risk of containing B. cereus spores. In order to ensure a microbially
food-safe edible mycelium the raw material should not be contaminated, or sufficiently
heat-treated to eliminate pathogens and pathogenic spores. It would be relevant to in-
vestigate different heat-treatment of the substrate to see if a less severe heat-treatment
that sterilization could be sufficient, if used in combination with other control measure-
ments, such as pH, to avoid growth of pathogenic bacteria. Previous studies have shown
that not only pH but also the type of acid used is relevant for controlling pathogens in
edible mycelia (Nout, Beernink, et al. 1987), thus it would be relevant to investigate the
effect of different acids on L. sulphureus growth, and on inhibition of pathogens in L. sul-
phureus fermented edible mycelium. A hazard analysis and critical control point (HACCP)
plan should be made for the production process, and good hygiene should be maintained
throughout the fermentation process to avoid re-contamination of the substrate. It should
be further investigated whether heat treatment is necessary at the end of fermentation to
decrease RNA content, stop the fermentation and eliminate heat-labile pathogens such
as L. monocytogenes.
Furthermore one could investigate the production of ethyl carbamate, which is mostly rel-
evant in alcoholic beverages, but it can also occur in soy-sauce, and biogenic amines,
which can be formed in fermented products such as wine, cheese, fish, meat, and veg-
etables (Nout 1994).
Future studies could also investigate risks of mycotoxin formation by L. sulphureus. The
mycotoxin beauvericin was detected in the mycelium of L. sulphureus by Deol et al. (1978).
The mycotoxin-producing capabilities of the genome could be investigated through ge-
nomics, which is done in other fungal species used for edible mycelium by Van Dam et al.
(2024) and Maini Rekdal, Villalobos-Escobedo, et al. (2024).
Before a L. sulphureus fermented edible mycelium can be commercialized it would need
a novel food approval. Allthough the first Basidiomycota edible mycelium in Europe was
recently novel food approved European Commission (2023), a separate novel food appli-
cation would have to be filed for edible mycelium fermented using L. sulphureus, as the
novel food approval is specific for the strain and fermentation conditions.
Page 62 of 82
==PAGE:68==
Master Thesis
Magdalena Dzierzynska
June 2025
6
Conclusion
Laetiporus sulphureus was cultivated on a broad range of substrates, including seaweeds,
food industry side streams, grains, and legumes. The aim was to identify a suitable sub-
strate for production of edible mycelium and investigate the microbial food safety during
solid state fermentation.
L. sulphureus can grow on unsupplemented plant-based substrates in agar-based media.
The speediest colonization, most dense mycelium, and a significantly faster growth rate
were observed on the positive control (MEA), as expected. Amongst the four biomasses
tested in the substrate-agar experiment, the most suitable for growth of L. sulphureus
was potato pulp, followed by apple pomace, then U. lactuca and lastly sugar beet pulp. In
potato pulp and apple pomace, the speediest colonization of the agar plate was observed,
potato pulp had slightly denser mycelium than apple pomace, and the fastest growth rate
was observed (1.2 ± 0.1 cm/day). The growth rate on potato pulp and apple pomace
was not significantly different from the growth rate on the seaweed U. lactuca (1.1 ± 0.1
cm/day), whereas the growth rate on sugar beet pulp was significantly lower (0.7 ± 0.1
cm/day).
There was no obvious trend between faster growth rate and content of carbon, nitrogen
and C:N ratio. Nitrogen content may relate to mycelial development, as the positive control
(MEA) and potato pulp had higher nitrogen content than apple pomace and sugar beet
pulp. However, this trend did not hold for U. lactuca. The high salt content (5.28 ± 0.06%)
in U. lactuca may have impaired L. sulphureus growth, despite its high nitrogen content,
and low C:N ratio. As no unambiguous trends were observed between growth rate and
content of carbon, nitrogen, and C:N ratio, other parameters such as the types of sugars
and fibres present in the substrates, nutrient availability, and homogeneity of the substrate,
should be investigated in future experiments.
L. sulphureus can grow on unsupplemented plant-based substrates in solid state fermen-
tation. L. sulphureus mycelium had colonized four of nine substrates after 10 days of solid
state fermentation at 28°C, namely pearl barley, rice, rye and sugar beet pulp. No unam-
biguous trend between the substrate’s ability to support growth of L sulphureus in solid
state fermentation, and its content of carbon, nitrogen, and C:N ratio was observed. A
fast growth rate on substrate-agar did not translate to rapid mycelial growth in solid state
fermentation, as sugar beet pulp, which had the slowest growth rate in the substrate-agar
experiment, was better at supporting growth of L. sulphureus in solid state fermentation
than apple pomace and U. lactuca, on which it barely grew, whereas potato pulp was
not included in the solid state fermentation experiment. Moisture content and particle
size were not controlled for in the solid state fermentation experiment, this might have im-
pacted the results, as several of the substrates that did not support growth of L. sulphureus
appeared dried out. What the four substrates that did support growth of L. sulphureus had
in common was a somewhat similar particle size. Of the four substrates that supported
L. sulphureus growth, pearl barley was selected as the most suitable because it showed
the most uniform growth of orange mycelium, it can be locally grown in Denmark, and it
was easy to handle. Pearl barley was thus the substrate in which microbial food safety
was investigated through a challenge test with food pathogens Listeria monocytogenes
and Bacillus cereus s.l..
Page 63 of 82
==PAGE:69==
Master Thesis
Magdalena Dzierzynska
June 2025
L. sulphureus was to some degree able to inhibit growth of both pathogens in solid state
fermentation of pearl barley, but the most rapid growth of bacteria, an increase between 4-
5.5 log CFU/g, occurred in the first 24 hours, whereas the fungus colonized the substrates
more slowly. From day 3 after inoculation onwards, a decrease in both L. monocytogenes
and B. cereus s.l. was observed when samples contaied L. sulphureus, whereas sam-
ples without L. sulphureus maintained a high bacterial concentration. The decrease in
pathogens can most likely be attributed to the decrease in pH caused by L. sulphureus.
After seven days, the pH of most samples with L. sulphureus had decreased below 4.4,
where the pathogens would no longer be able to grow, which correlated with a decrease in
bacterial concentration. After 14 days, the L. sulphureus fermented samples would not be
considered food safe because one duplicate contained >2 log CFU/g L. monocytogenes,
and although the concentration of B. cereus s.l. was <5 log CFU/g, it had been >5 log
CFU/g at the beginning of the fermentation, which means heat-stable emetic toxins could
have been formed. A possible solution for ensuring a food safe edible mycelium would
be to lower the pH of the substrate below 4.4 at the beginning of fermentation with L.
sulphureus. Such a solution would also enhance mycelial growth as L. sulphureus favors
an acidic environment, however, the palatability of such a product should be investigated
in future experiments.
Page 64 of 82
==PAGE:70==
Master Thesis
Magdalena Dzierzynska
June 2025
Bibliography
Adamska, I. (2023). “The Possibility of Using Sulphur Shelf Fungus (Laetiporus sulphureus)
in the Food Industry and in Medicine—A Review”. In: Foods 12.7, p. 1539. DOI: 10.3390/
foods12071539.
Ahmad, M. I., S. Farooq, Y. Alhamoud, C. Li, and H. Zhang (2022). “A review on myco-
protein: History, nutritional composition, production methods, and health benefits”. In:
Trends in Food Science & Technology 121, pp. 14–29. DOI: 10.1016/j.tifs.2022.01.027.
Allwood, J. G., L. T. Wakeling, L. S. Post, and D. C. Bean (2023). “Food safety considera-
tions in the production of traditional fermented products: Japanese rice koji and miso”.
In: Journal of Food Safety 43.4, e13048. DOI: 10.1111/jfs.13048.
Álvarez-Ordóñez, A., D. Leong, B. Hickey, A. Beaufort, and K. Jordan (2015). “The chal-
lenge of challenge testing to monitor Listeria monocytogenes growth on ready-to-eat
foods in Europe by following the European Commission (2014) Technical Guidance
document”. In: Food Research International 75, pp. 233–243. DOI: 10.1016/j.foodres.
2015.06.004.
Aryani, D. C., H. M. W. den Besten, W. C. Hazeleger, and M. H. Zwietering (2015). “Quan-
tifying variability on thermal resistance of Listeria monocytogenes”. In: International
Journal of Food Microbiology 193, pp. 130–138. DOI: 10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2014.10.021.
Ashok, A. and D. S. Kumar (2017). “Different methodologies for sustainability of optimiza-
tion techniques used in submerged and solid state fermentation”. In: 3 Biotech 7.5,
pp. 1–12. DOI: 10.1007/s13205-017-0934-z.
Baryga, A., R. Ziobro, D. Gumul, J. Rosicka-Kaczmarek, and K. Miśkiewicz (2023). “Physic-
ochemical Properties and Evaluation of Antioxidant Potential of Sugar Beet Pulp—
Preliminary Analysis for Further Use (Future Prospects)”. In: Agriculture 13.5, p. 1039.
DOI: 10.3390/agriculture13051039.
Bekiaris, G., G. Koutrotsios, P. A. Tarantilis, C. S. Pappas, and G. I. Zervakis (2020).
“FTIR assessment of compositional changes in lignocellulosic wastes during cultiva-
tion of Cyclocybe cylindracea mushrooms and use of chemometric models to predict
production performance”. In: Journal of Material Cycles and Waste Management 22.4,
pp. 1027–1035. DOI: 10.1007/s10163-020-00995-7.
Bellettini, M. B., F. A. Fiorda, H. A. Maieves, G. L. Teixeira, S. Ávila, P. S. Hornung, A. M.
Júnior, and R. H. Ribani (2019). “Factors affecting mushroom Pleurotus spp.” In: Saudi
Journal of Biological Sciences 26.4, pp. 633–646. DOI: 10.1016/j.sjbs.2016.12.005.
Berger, R. G., S. Bordewick, N.-K. Krahe, and F. Ersoy (2022). “Mycelium vs. Fruiting
Bodies of Edible Fungi-A Comparison of Metabolites”. In: Microorganisms 10.7, p. 1379.
DOI: 10.3390/microorganisms10071379.
Bergis, H., L. Bonanno, A. Asséré, and B. Lombard (2021). On challenge tests and dura-
bility studies for assessing shelf-life of ready-to-eat foods related to Listeria monocyto-
genes. European Union Reference Laboratory for Listeria monocytogenes. URL: https:
//food.ec.europa.eu/system/files/2021-07/biosafety_fh_mc_tech-guide-doc_listeria-in-
rte-foods_en_0.pdf (visited on 06/19/2025).
Biesebeke, R., G. Ruijter, Y. S. Rahardjo, M. J. Hoogschagen, M. Heerikhuisen, A. Levin,
K. G. Driel, M. A. Schutyser, J. Dijksterhuis, Y. Zhu, F. J. Weber, W. M. Vos, K. A. Hondel,
A. Rinzema, and P. J. Punt (2002). “Aspergillus oryzae in solid-state and submerged
fermentations”. In: FEMS Yeast Research 2.2, pp. 245–248. DOI: 10.1111/j.1567-
1364.2002.tb00089.x.
Page 65 of 82
==PAGE:71==
Master Thesis
Magdalena Dzierzynska
June 2025
Brockhoff, P., J. Møller, E. Andersen, P. Bacher, and L. Christiansen. (2018). Introduction
to Statistics at DTU. Kgs. Lyngby. DTU Compute. URL: https://02402.compute.dtu.dk/
enotes/book-IntroStatistics.pdf (visited on 04/01/2025).
Carlile, M. J., S. C. Watkinson, and G. W. Gooday (2001). The Fungi. 2nd ed. London:
Academic Press.
Carroll, L. M., R. A. Cheng, M. Wiedmann, and J. Kovac (2022). “Keeping up with the Bacil-
lus cereus group: taxonomy through the genomics era and beyond”. eng. In: Critical
Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition 62.28, pp. 7677–7702. DOI: 10.1080/10408398.
2021.1916735.
Chai, Y., M. Bai, A. Chen, L. Peng, J. Shao, S. Luo, Y. Deng, B. Yan, and C. Peng (2022).
“Valorization of waste biomass through fungal technology: Advances, challenges, and
prospects”. In: Industrial Crops and Products 188, p. 115608. DOI: 10.1016/j.indcrop.
2022.115608.
Choi, S.-H., N. Kozukue, H.-J. Kim, and M. Friedman (2016). “Analysis of protein amino
acids, non-protein amino acids and metabolites, dietary protein, glucose, fructose, su-
crose, phenolic, and flavonoid content and antioxidative properties of potato tubers,
peels, and cortexes (pulps)”. In: Journal of Food Composition and Analysis 50, pp. 77–
87. DOI: 10.1016/j.jfca.2016.05.011.
ComBase (2025). ComBase - Growth Model. URL: https://combasebrowser.errc.ars.usda.
gov/ComBase_Predictor.aspx?model=1 (visited on 06/18/2025).
Dai, H., L. Ma, Z. Xu, T. Soteyome, L. Yuan, Z. Yang, and X.-a. Jiao (2024). “Invited review:
Role of Bacillus licheniformis in the dairy industry—Friends or foes?” In: Journal of Dairy
Science 107.10, pp. 7520–7532. DOI: 10.3168/jds.2024-24826.
Danish Veterinary and Food Administration (2025a). Bakterier i fødevarer. da. URL: https:
//foedevarestyrelsen.dk/Media/638181819258416746/Bakterier%20i%20f%C3%B8devarer2022.
pdf (visited on 05/23/2025).
– (2025b). Fermentering af grøntsager. URL: https://sikrefoedevarer.foedevarestyrelsen.
dk/Proces/cb9ea4af-4f63-4d88-aa07-9b9d182a4886 (visited on 06/10/2025).
– (2025c). Fermentering af pølser. URL: https://sikrefoedevarer.foedevarestyrelsen.dk/
Proces/79c92993-9767-4d06-a0bb-18e7e1b69ae2 (visited on 06/10/2025).
– (n.d.[a]). Listeria monocytogenes i fødevarer. da. URL: https://foedevarestyrelsen.dk/
kost-og-foedevarer/foedevaresikkerhed/bakterier-virus-og-parasitter/bakterier-i-foedevarer/
listeria (visited on 06/11/2025).
– (n.d.[b]). Staphylococcus aureus og fødevarer. da. URL: https : / / foedevarestyrelsen .
dk/kost- og- foedevarer/foedevaresikkerhed/bakterier- virus- og- parasitter/bakterier- i-
foedevarer/staphylococcus-aureus-og-foedevarer (visited on 06/01/2025).
Davoli, P., A. Mucci, L. Schenetti, and R. W. S. Weber (2005). “Laetiporic acids, a family
of non-carotenoid polyene pigments from fruit-bodies and liquid cultures of Laetiporus
sulphureus (Polyporales, Fungi)”. In: Phytochemistry 66.7, pp. 817–823. DOI: 10.1016/
j.phytochem.2005.01.023.
Deol, B., D. Ridley, and P. Singh (1978). “Isolation of cyclodepsipeptides from plant pathogenic
fungi”. In: Australian Journal of Chemistry 31.6, p. 1397. DOI: 10.1071/CH9781397.
DFU Afd. for Fiskeindustriel Forskning (FF) (2017). Bestemmelse af salt (som chlorid) –
potentiometrisk. Technical Report FF-Analyseforskrift nr. 104.07. DFU Afd. for Fiskein-
dustriel Forskning (FF).
Duan, Y., J. Qi, J.-m. Gao, and C. Liu (2022). “Bioactive components of Laetiporus species
and their pharmacological effects”. In: Applied Microbiology and Biotechnology 106.18,
pp. 5929–5944. DOI: 10.1007/s00253-022-12149-w.
Dušková, M., K. Dorotíková, K. Bartáková, M. Králová, O. Šedo, and J. Kameník (2024).
“The microbial contaminants of plant-based meat analogues from the retail market”. In:
Page 66 of 82
==PAGE:72==
Master Thesis
Magdalena Dzierzynska
June 2025
International Journal of Food Microbiology 425, p. 110869. DOI: 10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.
2024.110869.
EFSA Panel on Biological Hazards (2016). “Risks for public health related to the presence
of Bacillus cereus and other Bacillus spp. including Bacillus thuringiensis in foodstuffs”.
In: EFSA Journal 14.7, e04524. DOI: 10.2903/j.efsa.2016.4524.
EFSA Panel on Nutrition, Novel Foods and Food Allergens (2022). “Safety of pea and rice
protein fermented by Shiitake (Lentinula edodes) mycelia as a Novel food pursuant to
Regulation (EU) 2015/2283”. In: EFSA Journal 20.4, e07205. DOI: 10.2903/j.efsa.2022.
7205. (Visited on 05/07/2025).
European Commission (2007). COMMISSION REGULATION (EC) No 1441/2007 of 5
December 2007 amending Regulation (EC) No 2073/2005 on microbiological criteria for
foodstuffs. URL: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:
32007R1441 (visited on 06/06/2025).
– (2015). Regulation (EU) 2015/2283 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25
November 2015 on novel foods, amending Regulation (EU) No 1169/2011 of the Euro-
pean Parliament and of the Council and repealing Regulation (EC) No 258/97 of the Eu-
ropean Parliament and of the Council and Commission Regulation (EC) No 1852/2001
(Text with EEA relevance). URL: http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg/2015/2283/oj/eng
(visited on 05/07/2025).
– (2023). Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2023/6 of 3 January 2023 autho-
rising the placing on the market of pea and rice protein fermented by Lentinula edodes
(Shiitake mushroom) mycelia as a novel food and amending Implementing Regulation
(EU) 2017/2470. URL: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=
CELEX:32023R0006 (visited on 06/20/2025).
– (n.d.). RASFF Window Search for ”Tempeh”. URL: https://webgate.ec.europa.eu/rasff-
window/screen/search?searchQueries=eyJkYXRlIjp7InN0YXJ0UmFuZ2UiOiIiLCJlbmRSYW5nZS
(visited on 06/10/2025).
Falcon, W. P., R. L. Naylor, and N. D. Shankar (2022). “Rethinking Global Food Demand
for 2050”. In: Population and Development Review 48.4, pp. 921–957. DOI: 10.1111/
padr.12508.
FDA/Center for Food Safety & Applied Nutrition (2009). Approximate pH of Foods and
Food Products. URL: https://web.archive.org/web/20090926230123/http://vm.cfsan.
fda.gov/~comm/lacf-phs.html (visited on 06/19/2025).
Feedipedia (n.d.). Rice grain, brown. Feedipedia, a programme by INRAE, CIRAD, AFZ
and FAO. URL: https://www.feedipedia.org/node/747 (visited on 06/20/2025).
Ferreira, J. A., A. Mahboubi, P. R. Lennartsson, and M. J. Taherzadeh (2016). “Waste
biorefineries using filamentous ascomycetes fungi: Present status and future prospects”.
In: Bioresource Technology. Waste Biorefinery - Advocating Circular Economy 215,
pp. 334–345. DOI: 10.1016/j.biortech.2016.03.018.
Fiedoruk, K., J. M. Drewnowska, J. Mahillon, M. Zambrzycka, and I. Swiecicka (2021).
“Pan-Genome Portrait of Bacillus mycoides Provides Insights into the Species Ecology
and Evolution”. In: Microbiology Spectrum 9.1, pp. 10–1128. DOI: 10.1128/spectrum.
00311-21.
Gänzle, M. (2022). “The periodic table of fermented foods: limitations and opportuni-
ties”. In: Applied Microbiology and Biotechnology 106.8, pp. 2815–2826. DOI: 10.1007/
s00253-022-11909-y.
Gmoser, R., R. Fristedt, K. Larsson, I. Undeland, M. J. Taherzadeh, and P. R. Lennartsson
(2020). “From stale bread and brewers spent grain to a new food source using edible
filamentous fungi”. In: Bioengineered 11.1, pp. 582–598. DOI: 10.1080/21655979.2020.
1768694.
Page 67 of 82
==PAGE:73==
Master Thesis
Magdalena Dzierzynska
June 2025
Gosukonda, V., H. Singh, and R. Gosukonda (2020). “Comparative Analysis of Nitrogen-
to-Protein Conversion Factors for Determining Net Protein Content in Six Superfoods”.
In: Journal of microbiology, biotechnology and food sciences 9.4, pp. 856–860. DOI:
10.15414/jmbfs.2020.9.4.856-860.
Gowman, A. C., M. C. Picard, A. Rodriguez-Uribe, M. Misra, H. Khalil, M. Thimmanagari,
and A. K. Mohanty (2019). “Physicochemical analysis of apple and grape pomaces”.
In: BioResources 14.2, pp. 3210–3230. DOI: 10.15376/biores.14.2.3210-3230.
Grandmont, J.-P. (2007). Sulphur shelf (Laetiporus sulphureus), Havré, Belgium. URL:
https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?curid=1517795 (visited on 06/04/2025).
Han, B.-Z., R. R. Beumer, F. M. Rombouts, and M. Nout (2001). “Microbiological safety
and quality of commercial sufu – a Chinese fermented soybean food”. In: Food Control
12.8, pp. 541–547. DOI: 10.1016/S0956-7135(01)00064-0.
Han, B.-Z., C.-F. Cao, F. M. Rombouts, and M. Nout (2004). “Microbial changes during
the production of Sufu––a Chinese fermented soybean food”. In: Food Control 15.4,
pp. 265–270. DOI: 10.1016/S0956-7135(03)00066-5.
Heuzé, V., H. Thiollet, G. Tran, D. Sauvant, D. Bastianelli, and F. Lebas (2019). Sugar
beet pulp. Feedipedia, a programme by INRAE, CIRAD, AFZ and FAO. URL: https:
//www.feedipedia.org/node/710 (visited on 06/20/2025).
Heuzé, V., G. Tran, A. Boudon, D. Bastianelli, and F. Lebas (2015). Chickpea seeds,
desi type. Feedipedia, a programme by INRAE, CIRAD, AFZ and FAO. URL: https:
//www.feedipedia.org/node/319 (visited on 06/20/2025).
– (2020). Potato pulp, dehydrated. Feedipedia, a programme by INRAE, CIRAD, AFZ and
FAO. URL: https://www.feedipedia.org/node/26045 (visited on 06/20/2025).
Heuzé, V., G. Tran, S. Giger-Reverdin, M. Lessire, and F. Lebas (2017). Sea lettuce (Ulva
spp.) Feedipedia, a programme by INRAE, CIRAD, AFZ and FAO. URL: https://www.
feedipedia.org/node/19253 (visited on 06/20/2025).
Heuzé, V., G. Tran, P. Hassoun, and F. Lebas (2020). Apple pomace and culled ap-
ples. Feedipedia, a programme by INRAE, CIRAD, AFZ and FAO. URL: https://www.
feedipedia.org/node/22381 (visited on 06/20/2025).
Heuzé, V., G. Tran, P. Nozière, M. Lessire, and F. Lebas (2015). Rye grain and by-
products. Feedipedia, a programme by INRAE, CIRAD, AFZ and FAO. URL: https :
//www.feedipedia.org/node/12542 (visited on 06/20/2025).
Heuzé, V., G. Tran, D. Bastianelli, and F. Lebas (2021). Quinoa (Chenopodium quinoa),
grain. Feedipedia, a programme by INRAE, CIRAD, AFZ and FAO. URL: https://www.
feedipedia.org/node/12492 (visited on 06/20/2025).
Heuzé, V., G. Tran, and F. Lebas (2017). Maize grain, Europe. Feedipedia, a programme
by INRAE, CIRAD, AFZ and FAO. URL: https://www.feedipedia.org/node/12542 (visited
on 06/20/2025).
Heuzé, V., G. Tran, J. Noblet, D. Renaudeau, M. Lessire, and F. Lebas (2016). Barley
grain. Feedipedia, a programme by INRAE, CIRAD, AFZ and FAO. URL: https://www.
feedipedia.org/node/227 (visited on 06/20/2025).
Hsieh, C. (2004). “Reusing soy residue for the solid-state fermentation of Ganoderma
lucidum”. In: Bioresource Technology 91.1, pp. 105–109. DOI: 10.1016/S0960-8524(03)
00157-3.
Hubálek, Z. (2003). “Protectants used in the cryopreservation of microorganisms”. In: Cry-
obiology 46.3, pp. 205–229. DOI: 10.1016/S0011-2240(03)00046-4.
Hwang, H. S., S. H. Lee, Y. M. Baek, S. W. Kim, Y. K. Jeong, and J. W. Yun (2008). “Pro-
duction of extracellular polysaccharides by submerged mycelial culture of Laetiporus
sulphureus var. miniatus and their insulinotropic properties”. In: Applied Microbiology
and Biotechnology 78.3, pp. 419–429. DOI: 10.1007/s00253-007-1329-6.
Page 68 of 82
==PAGE:74==
Master Thesis
Magdalena Dzierzynska
June 2025
Janickova, Z. (2019). “Challenge test studies on Listeria monocytogenes in ready-to-
eat chicken salad”. Unpublished manuscript, shared via personal email by supervisor
Xingchen Zhao on 24/03/2025.
Jansen, C. L. (2023). Investigation of different industrial side streams as growth media
for Laetiporus sulphureus and lactic acid bacteria. Master thesis. Université Bourgogne
Franche-Comté and DTU.
Jasińska, A., L. Dawidowicz, M. Siwulski, and P. Kilinowski (2017). “Growth of Mycelium
of Different Edible and Medicinal Mushrooms on Medium Supplemented with Diges-
tate from AD Biogas Plant”. In: Notulae Botanicae Horti Agrobotanici Cluj-Napoca 45.2,
pp. 498–506. DOI: 10.15835/nbha45210954.
Jo, W.-S., D. G. Kim, S.-J. Seok, and H.-Y. Jung (2014). “The culture conditions for the
mycelial growth of Auricularia auricula-judae”. In: The Journal of Mushrooms 12.2,
pp. 88–95.
Kim, Y., C. Xiao, and J. Rogers (2005). “Influence of culture media and environmental
factors on mycelial growth and pycnidial production of Sphaeropsis pyriputrescens”. In:
Mycologia 97.1, pp. 25–32. DOI: 10.1080/15572536.2006.11832835.
Komitopoulou, E. (2011). “Microbiological challenge testing of foods”. In: Food and Bever-
age Stability and Shelf Life. Elsevier, pp. 507–523. DOI: 10.1533/9780857092540.2.507.
Laramore, S. E., P. S. Wills, and M. D. Hanisak (2022). “Seasonal variation in the nutri-
tional profile of Ulva lactuca produced in a land-based IMTA system”. In: Aquaculture
International 30.6, pp. 3067–3079. DOI: 10.1007/s10499-022-00950-3.
Lebot, V. (2017). “Rapid quantitative determination of maltose and total sugars in sweet
potato (Ipomoea batatas L. [Lam.]) varieties using HPTLC”. In: Journal of Food Science
and Technology 54.3, pp. 718–726. DOI: 10.1007/s13197-017-2510-2.
López-Gómez, J. P. and J. Venus (2021). “Potential Role of Sequential Solid-State and
Submerged-Liquid Fermentations in a Circular Bioeconomy”. In: Fermentation 7.2, p. 76.
DOI: 10.3390/fermentation7020076.
Luangharn, T., S. C. Karunarathna, K. D. Hyde, and E. Chukeatirote (2014). “Optimal
conditions of mycelia growth of Laetiporus sulphureus sensu lato”. In: Mycology 5.4,
pp. 221–227. DOI: 10.1080/21501203.2014.957361.
Luard, E. J. (1985). “Interaction of Substrate C:N Ratio and Osmotic Potential on Growth
and Osmoregulation of Four Filamentous Fungi”. In: New Phytologist 101.1, pp. 117–
132. DOI: 10.1111/j.1469-8137.1985.tb02821.x.
Maini Rekdal, V., C. R. B. Van Der Luijt, Y. Chen, R. Kakumanu, E. E. K. Baidoo, C. J.
Petzold, P. Cruz-Morales, and J. D. Keasling (2024). “Edible mycelium bioengineered
for enhanced nutritional value and sensory appeal using a modular synthetic biology
toolkit”. In: Nature Communications 15.1, p. 2099. DOI: 10.1038/s41467-024-46314-8.
Maini Rekdal, V., J. M. Villalobos-Escobedo, N. Rodriguez-Valeron, M. Olaizola Garcia,
D. Prado Vásquez, A. Rosales, P. M. Sörensen, E. E. K. Baidoo, A. Calheiros De Car-
valho, R. Riley, A. Lipzen, G. He, M. Yan, S. Haridas, C. Daum, Y. Yoshinaga, V. Ng,
I. V. Grigoriev, R. Munk, C. H. Wijaya, L. Nuraida, I. Damayanti, P. Cruz-Morales, and
J. D. Keasling (2024). “Neurospora intermedia from a traditional fermented food en-
ables waste-to-food conversion”. In: Nature Microbiology 9.10, pp. 2666–2683. DOI:
10.1038/s41564-024-01799-3.
Meats and Sausages (n.d.). Fermented sausages are cured sausages. URL: https://
www.meatsandsausages.com/sausage-types/fermented-sausage (visited on 06/19/2025).
Meyer, A. S., B. P. Dam, and H. N. Lærke (2009). “Enzymatic solubilization of a pecti-
naceous dietary fiber fraction from potato pulp: Optimization of the fiber extraction pro-
cess”. In: Biochemical Engineering Journal 43.1, pp. 106–112. DOI: 10.1016/j.bej.2008.
09.006.
Page 69 of 82
==PAGE:75==
Master Thesis
Magdalena Dzierzynska
June 2025
MyForest Foods Co. (2024). Public summary of mycelium from oyster mushroom. URL:
https://food.ec.europa.eu/document/download/7530c063-628a-43b6-8100-5520a81d04e3_
en?filename=novel-food_sum_ongoing-not_2023-15001.pdf (visited on 06/20/2025).
National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) (2020). Taxonomy browser: [Laeti-
porus sulphureus]. URL: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Taxonomy/Browser/wwwtax.
cgi?mode=Info&id=5630&lvl=3&lin=f&keep=1&srchmode=1&unlock (visited on
03/04/2025).
– (n.d.). Common Taxonomy Tree. URL: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Taxonomy/
CommonTree/wwwcmt.cgi (visited on 06/27/2025).
Nout, M. (1994). “Fermented foods and food safety”. In: Food Research International 27.3,
pp. 291–298. DOI: 10.1016/0963-9969(94)90097-3.
Nout, M. and K. E. Aidoo (2011). “Asian Fungal Fermented Food”. In: Industrial Applica-
tions. Ed. by M. Hofrichter. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer, pp. 29–58. DOI: 10.1007/978-
3-642-11458-8_2.
Nout, M., G. Beernink, and T. Bonants-van Laarhoven (1987). “Growth of Bacillus cereus
in soyabean tempeh”. In: International Journal of Food Microbiology 4.4, pp. 293–301.
DOI: 10.1016/0168-1605(87)90004-3.
Oliveira, K. W. d. (2025). Food safety management of solid-state fermented brewers’ spent
grain. Master thesis. DTU.
Pandey, A. (1991). “Effect of Particle Size of Substrate on Enzyme Production in Solid-
State Fermentation”. In: Bioresource Technology 37.2, pp. 169–172.
Pexara, A. and A. Govaris (2018). “Bacillus cereus: an important foodborne pathogen”.
In: 61.2, pp. 127–133. DOI: 10.12681/jhvms.14881.
Pleszczyńska, M., A. Wiater, M. Siwulski, and J. Szczodrak (2013). “Successful large-
scale production of fruiting bodies of Laetiporus sulphureus (Bull.: Fr.) Murrill on an
artificial substrate”. In: World Journal of Microbiology and Biotechnology 29.4, pp. 753–
758. DOI: 10.1007/s11274-012-1230-z.
Rahnama, H., R. Azari, M. H. Yousefi, E. Berizi, S. M. Mazloomi, S. Hosseinzadeh, Z. De-
rakhshan, M. Ferrante, and G. O. Conti (2023). “A systematic review and meta-analysis
of the prevalence of Bacillus cereus in foods”. In: Food Control 143, p. 109250. DOI:
10.1016/j.foodcont.2022.109250.
Ravaioli, S., A. De Donno, G. Bottau, D. Campoccia, A. Maso, P. Dolzani, P. Balaji, F. Pe-
greffi, M. Daglia, and C. R. Arciola (2024). “The Opportunistic Pathogen Staphylococcus
warneri: Virulence and Antibiotic Resistance, Clinical Features, Association with Ortho-
pedic Implants and Other Medical Devices, and a Glance at Industrial Applications”. In:
Antibiotics 13.10, p. 972. DOI: 10.3390/antibiotics13100972.
Ritala, A., S. T. Häkkinen, M. Toivari, and M. G. Wiebe (2017). “Single Cell Protein—State-
of-the-Art, Industrial Landscape and Patents 2001–2016”. In: Frontiers in Microbiology
8. DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2017.02009.
Rousta, N., C. Hellwig, S. Wainaina, L. Lukitawesa, S. Agnihotri, K. Rousta, and M. J.
Taherzadeh (2021). “Filamentous Fungus Aspergillus oryzae for Food: From Submerged
Cultivation to Fungal Burgers and Their Sensory Evaluation—A Pilot Study”. In: Foods
10.11, p. 2774. DOI: 10.3390/foods10112774.
Saragih, S. A., S. Takemoto, and N. Kamata (2025). “Specific Primer Design for Detection
and Quantification of Entomopathogenic Fungi Metarhizium anisopliae using Quantita-
tive PCR (qPCR) in Soil and Cocoon Samples”. In: AGRIVITA Journal of Agricultural
Science 47.1, pp. 168–175. DOI: 10.17503/agrivita.v47i1.4644.
Siwulski, M., M. Pleszczyńska, A. Wiater, J.-J. Wong, and J. Szczodrak (2009). “The influ-
ence of different media on the Laetiporus sulphureus (Bull.: Fr.) Murr. mycelium growth”.
In: 55.3.
Page 70 of 82
==PAGE:76==
Master Thesis
Magdalena Dzierzynska
June 2025
Sluiter, A., B. Hames, C. Hyman, C. Payne, R. Ruiz, C. Scarlata, J. Sluiter, D. Templeton,
and J. Wolfe (2008). Determination of Total Solids in Biomass and Total Dissolved Solids
in Liquid Process Samples: Laboratory Analytical Procedure (LAP). Technical Report
NREL/TP-510-42621. National Renewable Energy Laboratory. (Visited on 02/12/2025).
Spanish Agency for Food Safety and Nutrition (AESAN) (2023). Application for consulta-
tion to determine the status of a novel food, pursuant to Article 4(2) of the Regulation
(EU) 2015/2283 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 November 2015
on novel foods. URL: https://food.ec.europa.eu/document/download/46ff9169-1f96-4fa0-
a97a-12d6a62623b5_en?filename=novel-food_consult-status_2023-306385.pdf (visited
on 05/07/2025).
Stodolak, B., A. Starzyńska-Janiszewska, and M. Bączkowicz (2020). “Aspergillus oryzae
(Koji Mold) and Neurospora intermedia (Oncom Mold) application for flaxseed oil cake
processing”. In: LWT 131, p. 109651. DOI: 10.1016/j.lwt.2020.109651.
Suwannarach, N., J. Kumla, Y. Zhao, and P. Kakumyan (2022). “Impact of Cultivation
Substrate and Microbial Community on Improving Mushroom Productivity: A Review”.
In: Biology 11.4, p. 569. DOI: 10.3390/biology11040569.
The Protein Brewery (2025). Summary of the dossier: Fungal protein-fiber rich biomass.
URL: https : / / food . ec . europa . eu / document / download / 0e540011 - b76a - 420b - 855c -
58c4c2cbf39b_en?filename=novel-food_sum_ongoing-app_2020-1795.pdf (visited on
05/07/2025).
Thermo Fisher (n.d.). Technical guide to peptones, supplements, and feeds. URL: https:
//assets.thermofisher.com/TFS- Assets/BPD/brochures/peptones-supplements-feeds-
technical-reference-guide.pdf (visited on 01/06/2025).
Todorov, S. K., A. Orban, A. Hammer, M. Oberpaul, C. Back, C. L. Jansen, T. J. Hobley,
M. Rühl, and C. H. Bang-Berthelsen (2024). “Interactions between two strains of lactic
acid bacteria and Laetiporus sulphureus strain FH24 and FH319, and Wolfiporia cocos
strain FH9 mycelium”. In: LWT 197, p. 115891. DOI: 10.1016/j.lwt.2024.115891.
Todorov, S. K., F. Tomasikova, M. Hansen, R. Shetty, C. L. Jansen, C. Jacobsen, T. J.
Hobley, R. Lametsch, and C. H. Bang-Berthelsen (2024). “Using pre-fermented sugar
beet pulp as a growth medium to produce Pleurotus ostreatus mycelium for meat alter-
natives”. In: International Journal of Food Microbiology 425, p. 110872. DOI: 10.1016/
j.ijfoodmicro.2024.110872.
Ulzurrun, G.-D. de, J. M. Baetens, J. Van den Bulcke, C. Lopez-Molina, I. De Windt, and B.
De Baets (2015). “Automated image-based analysis of spatio-temporal fungal dynam-
ics”. In: Fungal Genetics and Biology 84, pp. 12–25. DOI: 10.1016/j.fgb.2015.09.004.
Van Dam, L., P. Cruz-Morales, N. Rodriguez Valerón, A. Calheiros De Carvalho, D. Prado
Vásquez, M. Lübke, L. Kloster Pedersen, R. Munk, M. O. A. Sommer, and L. J. Jahn
(2024). “GastronOmics: Edibility and safety of mycelium of the oyster mushroom Pleu-
rotus ostreatus”. In: Current Research in Food Science 9, p. 100866. DOI: 10.1016/j.
crfs.2024.100866.
Vassilev, S. V., D. Baxter, L. K. Andersen, and C. G. Vassileva (2010). “An overview of
the chemical composition of biomass”. In: Fuel 89.5, pp. 913–933. DOI: 10.1016/j.fuel.
2009.10.022.
Wright, R., K. Woof, B. Douglas, and E. Gaya (2022). “The genome sequence of the
chicken of the woods fungus, Laetiporus sulphureus (Bull.) Murrill, 1920”. In: Wellcome
Open Research 7, p. 83. DOI: 10.12688/wellcomeopenres.17750.1.
Yaich, H., H. Garna, S. Besbes, M. Paquot, C. Blecker, and H. Attia (2011). “Chemical
composition and functional properties of Ulva lactuca seaweed collected in Tunisia”. In:
Food Chemistry 128.4, pp. 895–901. DOI: 10.1016/j.foodchem.2011.03.114.
Page 71 of 82
==PAGE:77==
Master Thesis
Magdalena Dzierzynska
June 2025
Yassin, N. A. and A. M. Ahmad (2012). “Incidence and Resistotyping Profiles of Bacillus
subtilis Isolated from Azadi Teaching Hospital in Duhok City, Iraq”. In: Materia Socio-
Medica 24.3, pp. 194–197. DOI: 10.5455/msm.2012.24.194-197.
Zhang, J., J. Lv, L. Zhao, X. Shui, and L.-a. Wang (2018). “Antioxidant and Antimicrobial
Activities and Chemical Composition of Submerged Cultivated Mycelia of Laetiporus
sulphureus”. In: Chemistry of Natural Compounds 54.6, pp. 1187–1188. DOI: 10.1007/
s10600-018-2591-9.
Zhou, X., J. Wang, G. Shao, X. Chang, Y. Liu, T. Xiang, Q. Zhu, A. Ren, A. Jiang, and Q.
He (2024). “Bidirectional Solid-State Fermentation of Highland Barley by Edible Fungi to
Improve Its Functional Components, Antioxidant Activity and Texture Characteristics”.
In: Plant Foods for Human Nutrition 79, pp. 308–315. DOI: 10.1007/s11130-024-01166-x.
Page 72 of 82
==PAGE:78==
Master Thesis
Magdalena Dzierzynska
June 2025
A
Appendix
A.1
Phylogenetic Tree of Fungi
Figure A.1: Phylogenetic tree of Fungi mentioned in the master’s thesis The tree has been
made using NCBI’s taxonomy tool ”common tree”, which is based on the NCBI taxonomy database,
which is derived from a diverse array of phylogenetic resources (National Center for Biotechnology
Information (NCBI) n.d.). The tree displays evolutionary relationships betwen fungal species that
were mentioned in this master’s thesis.
Page 73 of 82
==PAGE:79==
Master Thesis
Magdalena Dzierzynska
June 2025
A.2
Experiment 1
In the excel sheet ”Appendix Raw Data”, raw data of dry matter content can be found in
the tab ”DM_agar_exp”, data on salt content in U. lactuca can be found in the tab ”Salt
Ulva”, and radial colony diameter can be found in the tab ”Agar_experiment”.
Table A.1: Radial colony diameter(cm) and growth rate (cm/day) of L. sulphureus growing
on different side stream agars at 28°C. Values are shown as mean± standard deviation. In bold
is marked which substrate had the fastest growth rate and which substrate first reached the edges
of the plate. Apple pomace (A), potato pulp (P), sugar beet pulp (S),U. lactuca (U) and MEA (M).
Substrate
2 days
4 days
6 days
8 days
10 days
Growth Rate (cm/day)
A
2.4 ± 0.2
4.7 ± 0.5
7.2 ± 0.2
8.7 ± 0
8.7 ± 0
1.2 ± 0.1
P
2.1 ± 0.3
5.3 ± 0.4
6.8 ± 0.5
8.7 ± 0
8.7 ± 0
1.2 ± 0.1
S
1.8 ± 0.2
3.1 ± 0.5
4.5 ± 0.1
5.5 ± 0.1
6.2 ± 0.2
0.7 ± 0.1
U
1.3 ± 0.1
3.5 ± 0.1
5.6 ± 0.3
6.7 ± 0.4
8.2 ± 0.5
1.1 ± 0.1
M
2.7 ± 0.2
6.2 ± 0.3
8.7 ± 0
8.7 ± 0
8.7 ± 0
1.5 ± 0.1
Page 74 of 82
==PAGE:80==
Master Thesis
Magdalena Dzierzynska
June 2025
A.3
Experiment 2
A
U
Figure A.2: Apple pomace (A) and U. lactuca (U) inoculated with L. sulphureus (top) and
uninoculated control (bottom) after 10 days at 28°C.
Q
Corn
Figure A.3: Quinoa (Q) and corn inoculated with L. sulphureus (top) and uninoculated con-
trol (bottom) after 10 days at 28°C.
Page 75 of 82
==PAGE:81==
Master Thesis
Magdalena Dzierzynska
June 2025
CP
Figure A.4: Chickpeas (CP) inoculated with L. sulphureus (top) and uninoculated control
(bottom) after 10 days at 28°C.
Figure A.5: Petri-dishes with sugar beet pulp after 28 days of solid state fermentation with L.
sulphureus at 28°C. Uninoculated (top), and inoculated replicates (bottom). The inoculated petri-
dishes were unsterile because they were opened in an unsterile environment for photography after
10 days.
Page 76 of 82
==PAGE:82==
Master Thesis
Magdalena Dzierzynska
June 2025
Figure A.6: Petri-dishes with Rye after 28 days of solid state fermentation with L. sul-
phureus at 28°C. Uninoculated (top), and inoculated replicates (bottom). The inoculated petri-
dishes were unsterile because they were opened in an unsterile environment for photography
after 10 days.
Figure A.7: Petri-dishes with Rice after 28 days of solid state fermentation with L. sul-
phureus at 28°C. Uninoculated (top), and inoculated replicates (bottom). The inoculated petri-
dishes were unsterile because they were opened in an unsterile environment for photography
after 10 days.
Page 77 of 82
==PAGE:83==
Master Thesis
Magdalena Dzierzynska
June 2025
Figure A.8: Petri-dishes with pearl barley after 28 days of solid state fermentation with L.
sulphureus at 28°C. Uninoculated (top), and inoculated replicates (bottom). The inoculated petri-
dishes were unsterile because they were opened in an unsterile environment for photography after
10 days.
Figure A.9: Petri-dishes with corn after 28 days of solid state fermentation with L. sul-
phureus at 28°C. Uninoculated (top), and inoculated replicates (bottom). The inoculated petri-
dishes were unsterile because they were opened in an unsterile environment for photography
after 10 days.
Page 78 of 82
==PAGE:84==
Master Thesis
Magdalena Dzierzynska
June 2025
A.4
Experiment 3
In the excel sheet ”Appendix Raw Data”, raw data can be found for:
• The colony counts for days 0-14, where marked with blue are the values used for the
cfu/g calculation, and marked with yellow are observations that were unexpected.
The calculations for bacterial concentration in cfu/g and log cfu/g can also be found
here. Here it can also be seen which dilutions were plated on which sampling day,
as well as descriptory notes from each sampling day.
• In the tab ”MALDTI-TOF” can be found data from MALDI-TOF of colonies that had
an unexpected morpholohy.
• In the tabs ”ph combined” and ”CFU combined” can be found the combined data
for all samples for all days for pH and log CFU/g respectively. The same data are
presented in table A.3 and table A.4 in the appendix.
• The tabs ”Bcereus inoculum” and ”Lm inoculum” show the calculations for determin-
ing inoculum concentration for challenge testing.
Figure A.10: Sterilized uninoculated pearl barley (negative control) on day 0 (left) and day
14 (right) of challenge test. Stored at 28°C in the same incubator as the other samples from
the challenge test. Values that were <[value] contained no detectable colonies from the dilutions
plated.
Table A.2: Microbial Analysis on Sterilized Uninoculated Pearl Barley (Negative Control).
Two control samples were plated on TSA on day 0, and one control sample on day 14 was plated
on TSA, PALCAM, RBC and RBC after heating to 80 °C for 10 minutes (spores only). The 14 day
control sample was stored at 28°C in the same incubator as the other samples from the challenge
test.
Day
Agar
Log CFU/g
0
TSA
<1
14
TSA
<1.3
14
PALCAM
<2
14
RBC: Vegetative cells + spores
<2
14
RBC: spores only
1.60
Page 79 of 82
==PAGE:85==
Master Thesis
Magdalena Dzierzynska
June 2025
Table A.3: pH measurements in challenge test in scenario F (fungus only), FP (fungus +
pathogen) and P (pathogens only) in duplicates a and b. In each sample pH was measured twice
Sample
Day
pH 1
pH 2
Mean pH
FPa
0
5.56
5.97
5.765
FPb
0
5.93
6.21
6.070
Pa
0
6.19
6.00
6.095
Pb
0
5.96
6.05
6.005
Fa
0
6.75
6.23
6.490
Fb
0
5.68
5.65
5.665
FPa
1
5.44
5.72
5.580
FPb
1
5.30
5.58
5.440
Pa
1
5.74
5.08
5.410
Pb
1
5.41
5.49
5.450
Fa
1
5.72
5.72
5.720
Fb
1
5.69
6.17
5.930
FPa
2
5.28
4.98
5.130
FPb
2
5.09
5.16
5.125
Pa
2
5.15
5.21
5.180
Pb
2
5.46
5.12
5.290
Fa
2
5.57
5.70
5.635
Fb
2
5.70
5.70
5.700
FPa
3
5.38
5.41
5.395
FPb
3
4.95
4.97
4.960
Pa
3
5.49
5.16
5.325
Pb
3
5.17
5.35
5.260
Fa
3
5.67
5.62
5.645
Fb
3
5.68
5.69
5.685
FPa
7
3.03
3.10
3.065
FPb
7
4.67
4.45
4.560
Pa
7
6.11
6.45
6.280
Pb
7
6.02
5.93
5.975
Fa
7
3.39
3.23
3.310
Fb
7
4.01
4.12
4.065
FPa
9
3.24
3.18
3.210
FPb
9
3.30
3.25
3.275
Pa
9
6.22
6.43
6.325
Pb
9
6.11
6.27
6.190
Fa
9
3.05
2.78
2.915
Fb
9
2.47
2.59
2.530
FPa
14
3.23
3.25
3.240
FPb
14
3.46
3.43
3.445
Pa
14
5.37
6.16
5.765
Pb
14
6.11
6.08
6.095
Fa
14
2.90
3.01
2.955
Fb
14
2.99
2.91
2.950
control
14
5.75
5.76
5.755
control
0
5.58
5.92
5.750
control
0
6.49
6.16
6.325
Page 80 of 82
==PAGE:86==
Master Thesis
Magdalena Dzierzynska
June 2025
Table A.4: Microbial analysis in challenge testin scenario F (fungus only), FP (fungus +
pathogen) and P (pathogens only) in duplicates a and b. RBCheated means that the sample was
heated to 80 °C for 10 min before being plated on RBC. Values that were <[value] contained no
detectable colonies from the dilutions plated and values that were or >[value] were too numerous
to count. See section 3.3.9 in Methods to understand how these values were calculated.
Day
Sample
Agar
Log CFU/g
Day
Sample
Agar
Log CFU/g
0
FPa
PALCAM
4.07
7
FPa
RBC
<5
0
FPa
RBC
3.06
7
FPa
RBCheated
5.02
0
FPa
RBCheated
2.90
7
FPb
PALCAM
7.16
0
FPb
PALCAM
4.16
7
FPb
RBC
5.30
0
FPb
RBC
3.08
7
FPb
RBCheated
5.13
0
FPb
RBCheated
2.90
7
Pa
PALCAM
9.85
0
Pa
PALCAM
4.13
7
Pa
RBC
8.61
0
Pa
RBC
2.80
7
Pa
RBCheated
8.09
0
Pa
RBCheated
2.90
7
Pb
PALCAM
9.73
0
Pb
PALCAM
4.06
7
Pb
RBC
8.37
0
Pb
RBC
2.82
7
Pb
RBCheated
7.85
0
Pb
RBCheated
3.00
7
Fa
TSA
4.81
0
Fa
TSA
<1
7
Fa
PALCAM
<2
0
Fb
TSA
<2
7
Fa
RBC
4.79
1
FPa
TSA
7.85
7
Fb
TSA
3
1
FPa
PALCAM
9.52
7
Fb
PALCAM
<2
1
FPa
RBC
7.96
7
Fb
RBC
<2
1
FPa
RBCheated
4.20
9
FPa
PALCAM
<2
1
FPb
TSA
7.32
9
FPa
RBC
4.98
1
FPb
PALCAM
9.64
9
FPa
RBCheated
4.70
1
FPb
RBC
7.27
9
FPb
PALCAM
6.46
1
FPb
RBCheated
3.65
9
FPb
RBC
3.59
1
Pa
TSA
7.19
9
FPb
RBCheated
3.32
1
Pa
PALCAM
9.68
9
Pa
PALCAM
9.38
1
Pa
RBC
7.30
9
Pa
RBC
8.32
1
Pa
RBCheated
4.19
9
Pa
RBCheated
8.15
1
Pb
TSA
7.16
9
Pb
PALCAM
9.78
1
Pb
PALCAM
9.72
9
Pb
RBC
8.39
1
Pb
RBC
7.12
9
Pb
RBCheated
8.02
1
Pb
RBCheated
4.31
9
Fa
TSA
4.80
1
Fa
TSA
4.33
9
Fa
PALCAM
<2
1
Fa
RBC
4.34
9
Fa
RBC
4.63
1
Fb
TSA
4.44
9
Fa
RBCheated
4.56
1
Fb
RBC
4.49
9
Fb
TSA
6.46
2
FPa
PALCAM
9.30
9
Fb
PALCAM
<2
2
FPa
RBC
NA
9
Fb
RBC
<2
2
FPa
RBCheated
NA
9
Fb
RBCheated
<2
2
FPb
PALCAM
9.80
14
FPa
PALCAM
2.78
2
FPb
RBC
NA
14
FPa
RBC
4.43
2
FPb
RBCheated
NA
14
FPa
RBCheated
4.12
2
Pa
PALCAM
9.88
14
FPb
PALCAM
<2
2
Pa
RBC
NA
14
FPb
RBC
2.20
2
Pa
RBCheated
NA
14
FPb
RBCheated
1.30
2
Pb
PALCAM
9.92
14
Pa
PALCAM
9.72
2
Pb
RBC
NA
14
Pa
RBC
8.41
2
Pb
RBCheated
NA
14
Pa
RBCheated
8.26
2
Fa
TSA
7.25
14
Pb
PALCAM
9.31
2
Fa
PALCAM
<2
14
Pb
RBC
8.51
2
Fa
RBC
NA
14
Pb
RBCheated
8.15
2
Fb
TSA
6.52
14
Fa
TSA
5.11
2
Fb
PALCAM
<2
14
Fa
PALCAM
<2
2
Fb
RBC
NA
14
Fa
RBC
5.02
3
FPa
PALCAM
7.76
14
Fb
TSA
2.30
3
FPa
RBC
6.62
14
Fb
PALCAM
<2
3
FPa
RBCheated
4.30
14
Fb
RBC
<2
3
FPb
PALCAM
9.43
14
Fb
RBC
<2
3
FPb
RBC
7.41
3
FPb
RBCheated
5.60
3
Pa
PALCAM
9.76
3
Pa
RBC
8.06
3
Pa
RBCheated
6.83
3
Pb
PALCAM
9.81
3
Pb
RBC
8.11
3
Pb
RBCheated
6.38
3
Fa
TSA
>5.3
3
Fa
RBC
>5.6
3
Fb
TSA
4.74
3
Fb
RBC
<2
Page 81 of 82
==PAGE:87==
Master Thesis
Magdalena Dzierzynska
June 2025
Figure A.11: ComBase broth model showing predicted growth of L. monocytogenes (pur-
ple) and B. cereus (yellow). At pH = 6, aw = 0.989, T = 28°C, Phys.state unchanged from
standard settings. (ComBase 2025)
Page 82 of 82
