==PAGE:1==
           DTU Wind and Energy Systems
DynamiF FRnsXmStiRn FRntrRO IRr 
resROYing ERttOeneFNs in mediXm YROtage 
grids
$XtKRr
Christian Broberg Christensen
DT8 :LQG093
$XJXVW
==PAGE:2==
DT8 :LQG093
$XJXVW 
(&T6 3
(GuFDWLRQ 0DVWHU RI 6FLHQFH
SXSerYisRrs
7LlPDQ :HFNHVVHU
+HQULN :LllLDP %LQGQHU
DTU Wind 	 Energy Systems
$llDQ 1RUVN -HQVHQ
5adiXs&eriXs
5emarNs
TKLV UHSRUW LV VuEPLWWHG DV SDUWLDl 
IulILllPHQW RI WKH UHTuLUHPHQWV IRU 
JUDGuDWLRQ LQ WKH DERYH HGuFDWLRQ DW WKH 
THFKQLFDl 8QLYHUVLWy RI DHQPDUN
TeFKniFaO UniYersity RI DenmarN 
DHSDUWPHQW RI :LQG DnG(QHUJy
6\VWePV)UHGHULNVERUJYHM 99  
5RVNLlGH DHQPDUN
ZZZZLQGGWuGN
$XtKRr
Christian Broberg Christensen
TitOe
'\naPiF FonsXPStion FontroO Ior 
resoOYing bottOeneFNs in PeGiXP 
YoOtage griGs
DT8 :LQG 	 (QHUJy 6yVWHPV LV D GHSDUWPHQW RI 
WKH THFKQLFDl 8QLYHUVLWy RI DHQPDUN ZLWK D uQLTuH 
LQWHJUDWLRQ RI UHVHDUFK HGuFDWLRQ LQQRYDWLRQ DQG 
SuElLFSULYDWH VHFWRU FRQVulWLQJ LQ WKH ILHlG RI ZLQG 
HQHUJy 2uU DFWLYLWLHV GHYHlRS QHZ RSSRUWuQLWLHV 
DQG WHFKQRlRJy IRU WKH JlREDl DQG DDQLVK 
H[SlRLWDWLRQ RI ZLQG HQHUJy 5HVHDUFK IRFuVHV RQ 
NHy WHFKQLFDlVFLHQWLILF ILHlGV ZKLFK DUH FHQWUDl IRU 
WKH GHYHlRSPHQW LQQRYDWLRQ DQG uVH RI ZLQG 
HQHUJy DQG SURYLGHV WKH EDVLV IRU DGYDQFHG 
HGuFDWLRQ DW WKH HGuFDWLRQ
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This Master thesis is made at the Department of Wind and Energy Systems in the section
for Distributed Energy Systems at the Technical University of Denmark. It is made in
cooperation with Cerius­Radius.
The workload of this project is 30 ECTS points, and it has been carried out from February
3rd 2025 to August 14th 2025. The defence is planned to take place on August 29th 2025.
The project has been supervised by assistant professor Tilman Weckesser and senior
researcher Henrik William Bindner of the section for Distributed Energy Systems. They
have both been very kind and patient with me during the entire project. They have been
great at giving constructive feedback at our weekly meetings. A big thanks to them for
taking on supervising this project and for being supportive the whole way through.
The project has also been supervised by Lead Grid Analyst, Allan Norsk Jensen, from
Cerius­Radius. He has been very supportive and has always been available for help and
supervision. Also a big thanks to Allan and Zaid Al­Jassim, Head of the grid planning
department, for giving me the opportunity to write this project.
Finally, a special thanks goes to the grid planning team in Cerius­Radius. They have been
very welcoming and accommodating throughout the whole project. They have shown
great interest in my project and in discussing the aspects of it with me. It has been a nice
experience being able to work on the project at their office space.
All data used in this project is obtained using simulations performed on a grid model cre­
ated and owned by Cerius­Radius.
Christian Broberg Christensen ­ s172539
MSc Electrical Engineering
Dynamic Consumption Control for Resolving Bottlenecks in Medium Voltage Grids
iii
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
The purpose of this project is to create an algorithm, that selects the optimal electrical
load units for participating in a curtailment programme. This programme reduces the
consumption of the electrical units as a result of an overload in the electrical grid. The new
selection algorithm should be better than the method Cerius­Radius is currently planning
to use. This means, that it should achieve a higher curtailment efficiency, disturb fewer
customers, and still be able to solve all possible overloads.
Cerius­Radius has made a curtailment programme, that designates the units in four differ­
ent groups. These groups denote high, medium, low, and no impact on a specific network
element. All units are designated into either of these groups for every single network el­
ement. Cerius­radius splits the grid into smaller areas. Units that reside outside of these
areas will not be included in the curtailment strategy for network elements inside the ar­
eas. Thus, they will receive the ”no impact” designation. After this, the impact of the units
inside the areas is determined by the topology if the grid.
A new method is proposed, using a grid sensitivity analysis to determine the impact of
each unit. The sensitivity analysis reveals which units affect the different cables and
transformers in the network. With the use of the K­means clustering algorithm, the units
are grouped based on their sensitivity. Area subdivisions will still be used to determine
which units are outside of influence.
These areas are also investigated. Again using the K­means algorithm and the sensitivity
analysis, it is attempted to create this subdivision of the grid. This attempt yielded a new
set of areas, that is very close to those created by Cerius­Radius. Only a slight change
to these areas is proposed.
The new unit selection algorithm is revealed to have a better average curtailment effi­
ciency than Cerius­Radius’ method. It uses the same amount or fewer units to resolve
the potential bottlenecks, that exist in the grid today. This results in an efficiency increase,
at the time of solving the bottleneck of up to 2.4 % points. Also, it is able to resolve all the
same bottlenecks as Cerius­Radius’ method is.
iv
Dynamic Consumption Control for Resolving Bottlenecks in Medium Voltage Grids
==PAGE:5==
Nomenclature
Abbreviations and acronyms
DRT
Down­Regulation­Threshold
DSO
Distribution System Operator
DTU
Technical University of Denmark
FGA
Full Grid Access
LGA
Limited Grid Access
OLTC
On­Load Tap Changer
POC
Point of Connection
PTDF
Power Transfer Distribution Factor
URT
Up­Regulation­Threshold
Symbols ­ Electrical Parameters
I
Current
A
Il
Line Current
A
Itr
Transformer Current
A
Symbols ­ Sensitivity Analysis
∆Ibus
Change in current flowing to a bus
A
∆Il
Change in current flowing through a network element
A
∆Pbus
Change in active power flowing to a bus
W
∆Pl
Change in active power flowing through a network element
W
PTDF
Power Transfer Distribution factor
pu
Symbols ­ Clustering
C
A specific cluster
CH
The Calinski­Harabasz index
DB
The Davies­Bouldin index
k
The number of clusters
N
The number of points in a specific cluster
S
The silhouette coefficient
WCSS
Within­Cluster Sum of Squared distance (Inertia)
Dynamic Consumption Control for Resolving Bottlenecks in Medium Voltage Grids
v
==PAGE:6==
vi
Dynamic Consumption Control for Resolving Bottlenecks in Medium Voltage Grids
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
Nomenclature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Congestion Management and Demand Response
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
The Scope of the project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.5
Reading Instructions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Limited Grid Access and System­Protection
5
2.1
Limited Grid Access . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
System­Protection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Performance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Methodology
13
3.1
The Regulation Strategy Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.2
Sensitivity Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.3
LGA Unit Selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.4
Clustering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.5
Evaluation of LGA Unit Selection Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
4
Case Study
21
4.1
The Grid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4.2
Network Parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4.3
Load Flow Simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
5
Preliminary Investigations
23
5.1
Perturbation Magnitude
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
6
Sensitivity Analysis
27
7
Area Clustering
31
7.1
Clustering with K­Means . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
7.2
Clustering Metrics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
7.3
The Weakness of The Area Clustering Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
7.4
Useful Areas
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
8
Zone Designation
39
8.1
Scaling and Clustering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
8.2
Area Sorting and Clustering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
8.3
Cerius­Radius’ Zone Designation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
9
Method Comparison & Evaluation
43
9.1
Lost Regulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
9.2
Resolving Bottlenecks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
9.3
A Better Selection Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
Dynamic Consumption Control for Resolving Bottlenecks in Medium Voltage Grids
vii
==PAGE:8==
10 Conclusion & Outlook
51
Bibliography
53
A LGA Load Comparison
55
B Sensitivity Analysis
57
C Full Zone Designations
59
D Zones Created for Network Elements at Risk of Overload
64
viii
Dynamic Consumption Control for Resolving Bottlenecks in Medium Voltage Grids
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation
As electrification of many sectors of the world progresses, so does the need for capacity in
the electrical grid. Furthermore, this grid should be secure, robust, and reliable. This is a
costly endeavour as the grid has to be expanded in order to include the new consumption
units being connected. With high lead times, up to several years, for network components
and installation, network expansion is struggling to keep up with the rising demand.
Another struggle for the electrical grid is the time dependency of the consumption. More
energy is being consumed in the winter months, and less in the summer. There are
even daily variations in consumption with high demand in the evening and low demand
at night. This necessitates a grid which is dimensioned for peak consumption, leading to
poor utilisation of the network infrastructure. This is wasteful both in terms of physical and
economical resources.
In order to have better utilisation of the grid at times of low consumption, the available
capacity can be sold as a time dependant electrical connection. This will facilitate the
ability to connect a costumer to the grid, whose consumption normally would not fit during
peak consumption hours. However, with the caveat that the full capacity might not be
available at all times.
1.2
Congestion Management and Demand Response
Congestion management in electrical power systems is the concept of performing some
action in order to alleviate ongoing network limit violations. These could be voltage­ or
stability violations and thermal overload, which create a congestion bottlenecking the per­
formance of the rest of the grid. Congestion management can be performed as preventive
or corrective measures [1]. Preventing congestion typically includes upgrading the bottle­
neck or moving consumption to off­peak hours. Correcting a congestion is generally done
by lowering consumption [2]. However, in certain cases, congestions can be caused by
the presence of a large amount of electrical production in an area. In these cases, con­
gestions should be managed by reducing the production of electricity.
Typically electrical loads are owned by costumers for whom it would be an inconvenience
to reduce consumption. So, to be able to realise an effective demand response, a plethora
of different programmes can be used.
One of these programmes is time­based or price­based demand response. With these
programmes, Time of Use, Real­Time Pricing and Critical Peak Pricing is incorporated
into the electricity market. Here, the price of electricity will vary throughout the day and
will follow the supply and demand of electricity. This means, that the price of electricity will
be highest when demand is at its peak and vica versa. The increase in electrical pricing
incentivise all customers to lower their consumption [2]. These programmes can help with
solving network congestions in periods of peak consumption. Many Danish residential
customers has chosen to enter into an electrical pricing deal that includes variable pricing.
However, this is mostly to have some control over their own electrical bill [3].
Other demand response programmes incentivise customers to sign up with flexible elec­
trical consumption units. These units can then either be interrupted or curtailed to lower
Dynamic Consumption Control for Resolving Bottlenecks in Medium Voltage Grids
1
==PAGE:10==
their consumption. These loads can be paid or receive other compensation either upon
sign up or when they are curtailed [2].
Ancillary service programmes allow consumers to offer their consumption reduction as a
reserve that can be activated as needed. They will be paid to sign up, but can be subject
to penalty if the unit does not respond when needed [2]. These services can help with
network stability and are especially used to regulate the network frequency if needed.
And lastly, demand bidding programmes allow consumers to bid that they reduce their
consumption by a certain amount at a specific time for a specified price [2].
All of these programmes use some form of economic incentive to get customers to reduce
consumption at critical times. The cost of reducing the power consumption of customers,
along with information about their impact on different network components, can be used
to optimise demand response. Finding the cheapest way to alleviate as much of a con­
gestion as possible, for the lowest price [4].
1.3
Background
Alongside dynamic electrical pricing, Cerius­Radius has created a demand response pro­
gramme based on the flexibility of electrical consumers. The customers who enter into
this programme have a preliminary economic incentive to enter. Here, the price for being
connected to the electrical grid is significantly reduced if the electrical unit is connected
with Limited Grid Access (LGA). This will in turn mean that the costumer risk not having
access to the full, or any of the, electrical capacity needed to operate their equipment.
Thus, Cerius­Radius has the ability to reduce consumption if congestion management is
needed [5].
In some instances, the LGA programme is be used as an intermediary to gaining Full Grid
Access (FGA). This can be in cases where the customer wish to be connected to the grid
fast, but the capacity of the grid is limited. If possible, the customer can be connected
with LGA until Cerius­Radius is able to upgrade the grid to accommodate them fully.
The LGA programme has been active for some years. As of right now, a limited number
of customers have been admitted to the programme, since the control of these customers
is done manually. This includes manually calling LGA customers to tell them to lower
consumption, when a congestion occurs. In practice, it has only happened a handful of
times [6]. However, with an increasing number of LGA customers, this method of con­
trol becomes unrealistic. This is because there will be more customers to contact, and
overloads will happen more often. Therefore, an automatic control system called ”Sys­
tem Protection” is in development, at Cerius­Radius. This system will handle the load
reduction when a congestion occurs.
Connecting customers with limited grid access has to be done in accordance with laws
regarding the supply of electricity [7]. Furthermore, both customers and the grid company
are subject to terms regarding this LGA connection. These terms state, among other
things, how customers should be treated when using them for congestion management.
When multiple LGA customers are connected in the same geographical area, they should
all be curtailed with the same percent load reduction of their nominal power [8]. So, the
size of the LGA unit should not be a determining factor in how much of a load reduction
is issued to this unit.
Choosing which units to curtail when a line or transformer is overloaded can be a com­
plicated task. This is especially true for electrical grids of a meshed topology. This is
because the power supplied to an LGA unit has many different ways to flow. Also, the
2
Dynamic Consumption Control for Resolving Bottlenecks in Medium Voltage Grids
==PAGE:11==
load reduction will not necessarily correspond directly to how much power is relieved from
an overloaded network element. So, investigating consumer impact is important to make
sure the right customers are curtailed at the right moment. Also, optimizing this curtail­
ment is important from a customer satisfaction point of view.
1.4
The Scope of the project
Ultimately, the goal is to create a better regulation strategy for the LGA units than what
is currently used. This strategy should have higher regulation efficiency, meaning that it
should have more relieved power per unit of curtailed power. It should be able to resolve
all possible bottlenecks in the system. This should be done with as few units as possible,
to minimise the disturbance of customers.
This goal will be reached through an investigation of the sensitivity of the electrical grid.
Through multiple load flow simulations, the change in power flow, following multiple load
reductions, is analysed. This information will be used for picking the most efficient loads
to participate in the curtailment. The network elements analysed will be cables/lines and
transformer. In this project, only LGA consumption units will be taken into consideration.
With this, the following questions will be answered.
• How can the consumption reduction be optimized in a meshed network with an over­
loaded network element?
• What is the impact of time and location for where a consumption reduction takes
place?
• Can the consumption curtailment be optimized such that minimal consumer annoy­
ance takes place with any given overloaded network component?
1.5
Reading Instructions
This section will provide reading instructions for this report along with a brief summary of
the contents of each chapter. The report is written in such a way that a person with basic
knowledge in electric energy systems and their components will be able to understand its
content.
Limited Grid Access and System­Protection explains the concept of limited grid ac­
cess as used by Cerius­Radius. The design of this product along with the monitoring
and control algorithm ”System­Protection” is presented.
Methodology presents the methods used throughout the project and the theory behind
them. Here, the new method for creating a regulation strategy is also discussed.
Case Study is devoted to showing the grid for which the methods will be applied and
studied. Details about simulations are also discussed here.
Preliminary Investigations covers the investigations that were made prior to the main
investigation of regulation strategy.
Sensitivity Analysis presents and discusses the results obtained by the sensitivity anal­
ysis.
Area Clustering discusses the use of the K­means clustering algorithm for dividing the
grid in to areas used when creating the regulation strategy.
Zone Designation presents and discusses the regulations strategies obtained by the
three investigated methods.
Dynamic Consumption Control for Resolving Bottlenecks in Medium Voltage Grids
3
==PAGE:12==
Method Comparison & Evaluation presents the resulting performance of the different
regulations strategies and compares them to each other. The evaluation of how well
each method performs is also discussed here.
Conclusion & Outlook is the final chapter and will provide a conclusion to the project.
This includes an interpretation of the results obtained throughout the project, and a
recommendation for further work.
4
Dynamic Consumption Control for Resolving Bottlenecks in Medium Voltage Grids
==PAGE:13==
2
Limited Grid Access and
System­Protection
In the following chapter the concept of LGA and the overlooking management program
”System­Protection” is explained.
2.1
Limited Grid Access
LGA is a grid connection product available at Cerius­Radius. With it, a customer can be
connected to the grid for a reduced price. The downside of this price reduction is that
Cerius­Radius claims the full control of when and how much power is available in the
Point of Connection (POC). In case of an overloaded line or transformer LGA customers
will participate in a collective load curtailment programme with the goal of returning the
overloaded network element to a safe state.
LGA can be offered to customers who wish to be connected at a voltage level of 10 kV
or higher. Which voltage level and where in the network the customers are connected
will determine which System­Protection will order their curtailment. Currently, LGA is only
offered to consumption units. However, in the near future, the product will also be offered
to production units.
2.2
System­Protection
System­Protection is the automatic control algorithm that monitors the loading of network
elements. It has the ability to control the consumption of LGA units if the loading of any
network element exceeds a predetermined threshold. This controlling action is carried
out in steps to try to ensure that only the necessary amount of load curtailment is issued.
Each step takes 2 minutes to complete and the next step will only be activated if the load
of the network element is still above the threshold. Later, when the loading decreases and
reaches a lower predetermined threshold, the LGA units will be allowed to consume more
power again [6]. The process of regulation is summarized in the flowchart in figure 2.1.
2.2.1
The Different Kinds of System­Protection
There are three different types of System­Protection. Each one has different protection
goals and controllable assets. Control­wise, they are arranged in a hierarchical structure.
As illustrated in figure 2.2 each System­Protection has a specific part of the grid that it
monitors. They also have a specific set of LGA units that they each can control directly. It
is possible for a higher hierarchy System­Protection to send a load set point to a System­
Protection in a lower hierarchy. This System­Protection will then control the load of the
LGA units that are available to it and so on.
2.2.1.1
Area System­Protection
The first System­Protection is monitoring the 50 kV lines and 132/50 kV transformers in
a defined area of the distribution grid. The LGA units available for direct control from this
System­Protection are all the A­high units in this area. These units are divided into zones.
When a network element is overloaded, LGA units are curtailed in steps according to
table 2.1. The zone designation corresponds to how big of an impact the LGA unit has on
a specific network element. Units in zone A has a high impact, in zone B, medium impact
and zone C denotes a low impact on the network element. Units that have not received
a zone designation will not be curtailed if that network element is overloaded. The Area
Dynamic Consumption Control for Resolving Bottlenecks in Medium Voltage Grids
5
==PAGE:14==
Figure 2.1: A flowchart showing the process that the System­Protection goes through
when curtailing LGA units.
6
Dynamic Consumption Control for Resolving Bottlenecks in Medium Voltage Grids
==PAGE:15==
Figure 2.2: The hierarchy of the three different System­Protections. Each has a specific
set of controllable LGA unit available for regulation. Communication happens from a
higher ranked System­Protection to a lower one.
System­Protection is more complex than the other two System­Protections because of the
meshed topology of the grid it monitors. This means that a reduction in load anywhere in
this grid does not necessarily lead to a 1:1 reduction in loading of the network elements.
This System­Protection is what will be discussed throughout the report.
Table 2.1: The steps of which the regulation of LGA customers will take place for the Area
System­Protection. Values are given as a percentage of the nominal power. The higher
the value, the more power the LGA units are allowed to use [6].
Step
Zone A
Zone B
Zone Z
0
100 %
100 %
100 %
1
70 %
100 %
100 %
2
40 %
70 %
100 %
3
0 %
40 %
70 %
4
0 %
0 %
40 %
5
0 %
0 %
0 %
2.2.1.2
Local System­Protection: Main Station
The main station System­Protection is monitoring the 50/10 kV transformers situated in
the main station. When a transformer is overloaded, all the A­low LGA units connected
directly to the transformer will be regulated. This is because the load of everything con­
nected to the secondary side of the transformer all flows through this. So, the amount of
load reduced will correspond directly to the reduction in loading shared between parallel
transformers in the main station, not accounting for losses. This makes the regulation
strategy for this System­Protection much more simple. The curtailment of units will be
done in steps of 20 % of nominal power as described in table 2.2.
Table 2.2: The consumption allowed in each step of the regulation process for the Local
System­Protections. It is given in a percentage of nominal power [6].
Step
0
1
2
3
4
5
Allowed consumption
100 %
80 %
60 %
40 %
20 %
0 %
When a new main station needs to be monitored, a separate System­Protection controller
is created. The only purpose of this will be to monitor that main station.
Dynamic Consumption Control for Resolving Bottlenecks in Medium Voltage Grids
7
==PAGE:16==
2.2.1.3
Local System­Protection: Outlets
This System­Protection is monitoring a 10 kV radial cable outlet of a main station. It will
protect the cables along the radial and can call upon all the B­high LGA units connected
along the radial to be regulated. As with the Main Station system­Protection, a reduction
in load on the radial will directly correspond to the reduction in loading of the cables along
the radial. The curtailment of this system will also be done in steps as shown in table 2.2.
Whenever a new radial needs to be monitored, a new System­Protection is created. This
will now be the controller monitoring the new radial.
2.2.1.4
Hierarchy
The hierarchy of the System­Protections goes from the highest voltage level to the lowest.
So the hierarchy is:
1. Area System­Protection
2. Local System­Protection: Main Station
3. Local System­Protection: Outlets
Higher ranking System­Protections can command the lower ranking ones to curtail the
units that they manage. This is because these units can also have an impact on the
network elements that the higher ranking System­Protection manages.
2.2.2
Areas
Cerius­Radius has defined some areas inside which the Area System­Protection will be
bound. The areas for the gird investigated in this project can be seen in figure 2.3. The
philosophy behind these areas is that they should be bounded by the ingestion points
from the 132 kV­ to the 50 kV grid. This assumes that all LGA units situated behind the
ingestion point has a negligible impact on network elements in front of the ingestion point.
The red area of figure 2.3 stops at the ingestion points in Valseværket (VAL) and Borup
(BOR), where the green area starts. The green and blue areas are separated by the
ingestion point in Teglstrup (TEG). The grey area is not electrically connected to the rest
of the grid at 50 kV. It also only has one ingestion point, in Glentegård (GLN), making it
the last area.
2.2.3
Zones
The zones used in the Area System­Protection is determined purely from a topological
perspective. It is done on a per­area and per­element basis. This means that an LGA unit
can be in different zones for different network elements. In addition, the zones will not
cross area boundaries. Only network elements on the boundary of two areas will have
zones in both areas. The zones, A, B and C denotes, as earlier stated, how impactful an
LGA unit is on a network elements loading. Units are divided into zones based on the
topology of the network [6]:
Zone A (high impact): LGA units that do not have any 50 kV branch points between
them and the network element.
Zone B (medium impact): Units with one 50 kV branch between them and the network
element. This means that the current has more ways to flow, reducing the impact on a
line or transformer.
Zone C (low impact): This zone is designated for LGA units with two or more 50 kV
branches between them and the network element.
8
Dynamic Consumption Control for Resolving Bottlenecks in Medium Voltage Grids
==PAGE:17==
Figure 2.3: A map of the grid ”Radius Nord” and the Glentegård island divided into four
areas. Each area denotes the boundary of which network elements an Area System­
Protection will monitor and which LGA units it can control.
No zone (”no” impact): This designation is meant for LGA units that is not inside of the
area. However, if a unit is located at the far end of an area with one or more ingestion
points in between, it can also receive the ”No zone” allocation.
The definition for when a unit should receive the ”No Zone” allocation means that in prac­
tice, another area is now created. Figure 2.4 shows the effective areas that the grid is
divided into, when taking the zone designation into account.These are not real areas as
the blue and magenta area are controlled by the same System­Protection. However, an
overload on a network element in the blue area will not result in a curtailment of LGA unit
in the magenta area, and vice versa.
One special case for zone designation is when the grid has isolated islands with only one
ingestion point, such as the Glentegård island. Here, the power to all LGA units in the
island is supplied from the transformers of that single ingestion point. Thus, all units have
the same impact on the transformers and so will be designated to zone A, regardless of
their position in the islanded grid [6].
2.2.4
Regulation Thresholds
The System­Protection will start the regulation process if a certain loading threshold is
reached. This threshold refers to a percentage of the maximum loadability of a line or
transformer. Two thresholds are set for each monitored network element, a down­ and
an up­regulation­threshold (DRT and URT respectively). These determine when a cur­
Dynamic Consumption Control for Resolving Bottlenecks in Medium Voltage Grids
9
==PAGE:18==
Figure 2.4: A map showing the effective areas that the grid is divided into. These are
not actual areas, since the blue and magenta area are controlled by the same System­
Protection.
tailment or a release of available power, respectively, is sent to the LGA units. Threshold
values are generally chosen according to the grid structure near a network element with
a few exceptions. These are explained below with a summation in table 2.3 [6].
50 kV lines: The down­regulation­threshold of 50 kV lines is set according to how many
ingestion points are in the grid around the line. If there is only one ingestion point, the
DRT is set to 90 %. When more ingestion points are present, the DRT is set with the loss
of one of these points in mind. It is assumed that with the loss of one ingestion point in
a ring and mesh topology grid, the line loading can increase with up to 100 % and 50 %
respectively. Thus, the DRT should be half and two thirds of the 1­hour value for the line:
DRTline =
LineLoad
LineLoad + LoadIncrease · OverloadLimit
(2.1)
50/10 kV and 132/50 kV transformers: The threshold is set according to how many
parallel transformers are connected. If there is only one transformer connected, then
90 % is used. However, if more are connected, the threshold is set according to the
overload limit with the loss of one transformer. The overload limit is the 1­hour value for
the transformers which is set to 125%:
DRTtrafo = (Ntrafo −1) · OverloadLimit
Ntrafo
(2.2)
10 kV outlets: Finally, the is generally set to 90 % of the maximum loadability of the
outlets. This corresponds to the limit of where a line is overloaded, with a 10% margin to
avoid alarms in the DSO control room.
2.2.5
Definition Table
Each System­Protection is created with information given in a definition table. The table
summarises all the information regarding cables, transformers, LGA units, zones and
10
Dynamic Consumption Control for Resolving Bottlenecks in Medium Voltage Grids
==PAGE:19==
Table 2.3: A summation for the rules of determining the down­regulation­threshold as a
%­value of the element loadability [6].
50 kV Lines
Network structure:
Down­regulation­
threshold:
Rule for dimensioning:
Radial line
90%
Overload in N­0
Line between two
132/50 kV ingestion points
(ring topology)
50% · 125% = 62.5% ∼60%
Loss of one
ingestion point
Line between three or more
132/50 kV ingestion points
(mesh topology)
66.6% · 125% = 83.3% ∼80%
Loss of one
ingestion point
50/10 kV and 132/50 kV Transformers
Parallel transformers:
Down­regulation­
threshold:
Rule for dimensioning:
1
90%
Overload in N­0
2
1/2 · 125% = 62.5% ∼60%
Loss of one
parallel transformer
3
2/3 · 125% = 83.3% ∼80%
Loss of one
parallel transformer
10 kV Outlet
Network structure:
Down­regulation­
threshold:
Rule for dimensioning:
10 kV line
90%
Overload in N­0
regulation thresholds. It will be set up with all the names of cables, and transformers that
are at risk of being overloaded. The down­ and up­regulation­thresholds for each cable
will also be stated here. Then, information regarding which LGA units affects the given
cables and transformers are stated. For the Area System­Protection, the definition table
will also contain the zones that each LGA unit is assigned to, for each network element.
This provides the team that constructs the System­Protection program with all the neces­
sary information about the grid.
2.3
Performance
Cerius­Radius does not directly state their expectations regarding the performance of the
System­Protection. However, during the design process regarding the regulation steps,
Cerius­Radius gives a peak into how they expect the performance will be inside a given
area. When deciding the step size of 100% to 70%, 40% and 0% they use the weighted
combined LGA load inside an area as a reason why these four set points are acceptable.
They have set up some calculations of the LGA load in an area while undergoing cur­
tailment because of an overloaded network element. The calculations are based on the
following assumptions. One, the LGA load is approximately equally distributed between
the three zones, A, B and C. Two, loads in zone A will reduce the loading of the network
element with 100 % of the reduced power, zone B with 66 % and zone C with 33 %.
Computing the 5 steps of the curtailment process yields the consumption and reduction
pattern of figures 2.5 and 2.6, respectively.
Some observations that come from these calculations are that after step 3, 75 % of the
Dynamic Consumption Control for Resolving Bottlenecks in Medium Voltage Grids
11
==PAGE:20==
Figure 2.5:
Consumption of all the LGA
units inside an area, while a stepwise reg­
ulation takes place [6].
Figure 2.6: The reduction of load for all LGA
units in an area, in each step of the regula­
tion [6].
LGA load in the area has been curtailed. This leaves only 25 % for the last two steps. That
means that the majority of the load is curtailed rather quickly, leaving the less impactful
costumers online. Another observation is that over 90 % of the LGA load in the area is
gone after step 4. The conclusion made is that this leaves a miniscule chance of step 5
being activated. Step 5 will shut off both LGA consumption and production, leaving all
LGA customers with 0 % access to the grid [6].
12
Dynamic Consumption Control for Resolving Bottlenecks in Medium Voltage Grids
==PAGE:21==
3
Methodology
In this chapter, the methods used throughout the project will be presented. The theory
behind the methods will also be explained.
3.1
The Regulation Strategy Algorithm
In order to find a new regulation strategy for the LGA units, an algorithm is developed.
The algorithm should perform the following actions:
1. Load simulation data
2. Perform a sensitivity analysis for the entire simulated grid
3. Select the optimal LGA units to participate in the regulation based on:
• Sensitivity data
• Laws regarding customer curtailment
• The regulation process used by Cerius­Radius
3.2
Sensitivity Analysis
To determine which LGA units affect the different network elements, a sensitivity analysis
is performed. The sensitivity of the network is quantified with the use of Power Transfer
Distribution Factors (PTDF). PTDFs are calculated for the entire network. This yields an
N × M matrix where N is the number of network elements and M is the number of LGA
units. This should reveal exactly which LGA units have the greatest effect on the loading of
different network elements. Whether cables and transformers are positively or negatively
affected can also be seen. These PTDFs will be used to divide LGA units into the zones
A, B and C.
3.2.1
Power Transfer Distribution Factor
Power Transfer Distribution Factors are used to determine which part of an electrical net­
work the load of a given bus is flowing through. It is a useful parameter to analyse the
network flow in grids with a meshed topology as the current in such grids has multiple
paths in which it can flow. PTDFs can be computed with equation (3.1) [9, 1].
PTDF =
∆Pl
∆Pbus
=
∆Il
∆Ibus
.
(3.1)
Here, ∆Pl and ∆Il are the changes in power and current flow, respectively, in a line. ∆Pbus
and ∆Ibus denote the change in power and current, respectively, exchanged between two
buses in the network. If one of the buses participating in the power exchange is the
reference bus, ∆Pbus and ∆Ibus will simply be the change in load at the receiving bus.
The numerical value of a PTDF ranges from ­1 to 1 indicating that ­100 % to 100 % of the
power from a given bus flows through a given network element. It can also be seen as
watts of power relieved per watt of power reduced. A negative value denotes a reduction
in the load of a network element with a reduction in the load at a given bus. A positive
value denotes further strain on the network component. Furthermore, a value closer to 1
or ­1 can indicate that a specific part of the grid has a more radial topology since close
Dynamic Consumption Control for Resolving Bottlenecks in Medium Voltage Grids
13
==PAGE:22==
to 100% of the power flows through one network element. This is also why the use of
PTDFs in a grid of purely radial topology is unnecessary, since the power only has one
path to flow through.
3.3
LGA Unit Selection
The PTDFs calculated in the sensitivity analysis are what the LGA unit selection will
be based on. Laws regarding load curtailment of customers will also be taken followed
[7, 8]. The regulation mechanism used by Cerius­Radius and explained in sections 2.2
and 2.2.1.1 will remain the same. So, when choosing the LGA units to participate in the
reduction, the regulation steps of table 2.1 will be used. Also, the units will still be split
into the zones A, B and C.
Zones will be designated on a per­element basis. This means that ”LGA unit 1” can be
in zone A for one cable but in zone B for another cable. Finally, some LGA units can
receive the designation ”No Zone”. These units are not curtailed whenever the respective
network element is overloaded.
Taking all this into account, the unit selection algorithm should do two things. First thing
is, that it should rule out LGA units with a low impact on the element. Second thing is to
divide the remaining LGA units into up to three zones. These two tasks can be performed
either by a single action or by two separate ones.
3.3.1
Selection Methods
The main concept behind the selection methods is that LGA units with similar impact on a
network element, should be designated to the same zone. This is thought to be possible
using some form of clustering algorithm. Since the size of the LGA units may not be taken
into consideration, the value of their PTDF is what will be used in the clustering.
Using this clustering technique to divide the LGA units in up to 4 different groups should
accomplish this. These four groups would correspond to the zones A, B, C and no­zone.
However, with this it is difficult to determine how many groups to create. In some cases
most of the units have very similar PTDFs and thus should only be divided into 1 or 2
groups. But, in other cases the PTDFs are far apart and should be divided in 4 groups.
The main problem with this was finding the limit between when LGA units should be in
a regulated zone (A, B or C) and when to give them the ”No­zone” designation. Using
clustering metrics for this was inconsistent and created the need for setting up a lot of
rules to aid in this determination.
The need for a method to weed out units with low impact was eminent. Setting a hard
limit on the PTDFs will not work. This is because the range of the PTDFs vary a lot
depending on which network element is inspected. Thus, there is a risk of either excluding
or including too many LGA units. This will lead to the inability to resolve a given bottleneck
or the disturbance of more customers than needed.
With these considerations, two LGA unit selection methods are created. Figure 3.1 shows
an illustration of how they work. Common for them is that they use a clustering algorithm
to divide LGA units into zones. However, they use different methods for determining when
a unit should be out of influence. The methods are explained below:
Variable lower limit + clustering (Scale­KM): This method uses a variable lower limit
for the PTDF to determine which units receive the ”No Zone” designation. Practically, it is
done by performing a scaling of the PTDFs for each network element, then setting a limit
14
Dynamic Consumption Control for Resolving Bottlenecks in Medium Voltage Grids
==PAGE:23==
Figure 3.1: Illustrations showing how the PTDF of each LGA unit is used to divide LGA
units into zones.
on the scaled PTDFs.
ScaledPTDFn,m =
PTDFn,m
max(PTDFn)
(3.2)
here, ScaledPTDFn,m is the mth scaled PTDF of the nth network element.
The scaled PTDFs corresponds to the impact of the LGA unit, relative to the biggest
impactor of the network element. If a limit of, for example, 0.10 is set, this means that
all LGA units with PTDFs below 10% of the highest PTDF will receive the ”No Zone”
designation. This will facilitate a variable lower limit of the numerical value of the PTDF,
since the highest PTDF is different depending on the element. After this scaling, the rest
of the units are clustered in up to three groups.
Lower limit set by area + clustering (Area­KM): The last method is based on the method
used by Cerius­Radius. Here, the whole grid is divided into areas and only LGA units that
are in the same area as a network element, will be used in the regulation strategy. This
means that if an LGA unit is outside of the area, it will receive the ”No Zone” designation.
After ruling out these units, the rest (LGA units inside the area) will be clustered in up to
three zones using a clustering algorithm.
3.4
Clustering
When separating data into a number of groups, clustering algorithms can come in handy.
These can take data points and group them together with other similar data points in a
dataset. The similarity is determined in different ways depending on the algorithm used.
The clustering algorithm will be used to divide LGA units into different zones. This is done
by looking at the PTDFs and grouping these based on their value. This group of PTDFs
correspond to a group of LGA units, which will be in the same zone.
When choosing which algorithm should be used, some criteria was made. For one, it has
to be fast. This is because it potentially has to be used hundreds of times throughout
the grouping process since it is done on a per element basis. It has to be reliable and
relatively deterministic. One last criteria is that the algorithm should allow the user to pick
the number of clusters. With these criteria, the choice landed on the K­Means algorithm.
Dynamic Consumption Control for Resolving Bottlenecks in Medium Voltage Grids
15
==PAGE:24==
3.4.1
K­Means
K­means is a clustering algorithm which is used in many areas. It can be used for a wide
range of tasks, from grouping of customers to image segmentation [10, 11]. The goal of
this algorithm is to separate a data set of points into k groups. These groups should be
created in such a way that the inertia is minimized. Inertia is also called ”Within­cluster
sum of squares” and the minimization of it is given by equation (3.3) [12, 13]:
WCSS =
n
!
i=1
min
µj∈C(||xi −µj||2)
(3.3)
Here, n is the number of samples in the data set, x is the coordinate of a sample and µ is
the mean corresponding to the cluster C to which the sample is assigned.
It works by being given the desired number of clusters, then randomly generating the
same number of centroids. Centroids are points that acts as the centre for each cluster.
Centroids are generated in the same space as the data e.g. 1D, 2D or 3D space. Each
sample of the data is then assigned to the nearest centroid, representing a cluster. The
mean of each cluster is now computed and new centroids are created, based on those
means. Then the points of the data set are assigned to the nearest new centroid, and the
difference between the mean of the new and the old is calculated. This loop will continue
until the difference between iterations is below a certain set limit, meaning the algorithm
has converged [14, 12].
The final clusters created by this process depend somewhat on the centroids initially gen­
erated. Since these are generated randomly, the distribution of the samples into clusters
can vary slightly. Thus, the algorithm can end up converging on a local minima instead
of the global minimum. One solution to this is to run the clustering process multiple times
and choose the run with the best outcome. By doing this, it is more likely to reach a bet­
ter result than when only doing a single run, however, the computational time increases
linearly with the number of runs made. Another solution is to use a better centroid ini­
tialization method. One such method could be the k­means++ initialization. This method
initializes the centroids so that they are distant from each other. This gives a better sepa­
ration between clusters to begin with and allows for easier determination of which cluster
a sample belongs to. This can help the algorithm reach the global minimum instead of a
local minimum.
3.4.2
Clustering Evaluation
In order to determine whether the output of a clustering algorithm is good, some metrics
have to be used. There are many different evaluation metrics which can be used for
this task. Some require knowledge of the ”ground truth”. This is the desired outcome of
the clustering algorithm. However, the ground truth is not always known. The following
clustering metrics require no knowledge of the ground truth and can thus be used for all
clustering attempts.
3.4.2.1
Within­Cluster Sum of Squared Distances
In addition to being used to determine the result for the clustering, inertia can be used to
evaluate the clustering performance too. The final inertia is calculated as:
WCSS =
k
!
j=1
!
i∈C
(xi −µj)2
(3.4)
16
Dynamic Consumption Control for Resolving Bottlenecks in Medium Voltage Grids
==PAGE:25==
where k is the number of clusters. This metric will tell how tight the clusters are. With
points being closer to the centre of their cluster, resulting in a lower inertia [12, 13].
3.4.2.2
Silhouette Coefficient
The silhouette coefficient is useful for determining whether points are assigned to the right
cluster. This is because the points are compared both to other points in the same cluster,
and to the nearest other cluster. The coefficient is computed for each data point in a
dataset. It consists of information regarding average distance from a point to all points in
the same cluster, along with the average distance to all points in the nearest cluster. The
difference of these two average distances is then found and divided by the largest of the
averages as shown in equation (3.5).
a(i) =
1
NC1
!
j∈C1, i̸=j
(xi −xj),
b(i) =
1
NC2
!
j∈C2
(xi −xj),
S(i) =
b(i) −a(i)
max(a(i), b(i)). (3.5)
Here, a(i) and b(i) is the average distance from point i to all other points in the same
and the nearest cluster, respectively. S(i) is the silhouette coefficient of the point i. The
silhouette coefficient of the entire data set is the average silhouette coefficient of all points
in the set. The silhouette coefficient ranges from ­1 to 1. A negative score means that the
data point is closer to the centre of another cluster than it is to its assigned cluster. Thus,
the data point is assigned to the wrong cluster. A good cluster assignment is denoted by
positive silhouette coefficients close to 1. [15, 12]
3.4.2.3
Davies­Bouldin Index
The Davies­Bouldin index is a metric that compares the average simularity between clus­
ters. This is done by looking at the size of the cluster and the distance between clusters.
The best possible score is zero, where a better score is awarded to clusters that are
closely packed and far apart. The Davies­Bouldin index can be computed as shown in
equation (3.6).
sm =
1
NCm
!
n∈Cm
(xn −xCm),
Ri,j =
si + sj
xCi −xCj
,
DB = 1
k
k
!
i=1
max
i̸=j (Ri,j)
(3.6)
s is the average distance between points of a cluster and its centre. xCm, xCi and xCj is
the x value of cluster centres. From Rij it is seen that having a large distance between
clusters and more compact clusters will result in the index being lower. [16, 12]
3.4.2.4
Calinski­Harabasz Index
The Calinski­Harabasz index also indicates whether clusters are dense and far away from
each other, or sparse and close to each other. The index uses the sum of squared distance
between the centres of each cluster, and the sum of squared distance between points
inside the clusters. It is calculated with equations (3.7) and (3.8).
Bk =
k
!
q=1
nq(cq −cE)(cq −cE)T ,
Wk =
k
!
q=1
!
x∈Cq
(x −cq)(x −cq)T
(3.7)
CH = tr(Bk)
tr(Wk) × nE −k
k −1
(3.8)
Dynamic Consumption Control for Resolving Bottlenecks in Medium Voltage Grids
17
==PAGE:26==
here, Bk and Wk is the between, and within cluster sum of squared distance, respectively.
E, marks the data set, so nE and cE is the number of points in the data set and the centre
of it. q marks a specific cluster, again with nq and cq being the number of points in, and
the centre of that cluster.
This results in a score that increases with tighter clusters and clusters that are further
apart. Thus, a higher score is better [17, 12].
3.5
Evaluation of LGA Unit Selection Method
In order to compare the different methods of unit selection, some metrics are determined
for what makes a method ”good”. These are; the regulation efficiency, which is how much
power is relieved per unit of power curtailed. The higher the efficiency, the better the
method. The number of customers affected is also important, because any given over­
load of an element should result in as little customer disturbance as possible. It is also
crucial that, whichever method is used, the curtailment strategy obtained should be able
to resolve any possible bottleneck in the grid.
3.5.1
Lost Regulation
In order to get a sense of these metrics, the unit selection methods will be compared to
a baseline. This will make it easier to evaluate the performance of the specific method.
Then the performance of the methods can be held up against each other. The baseline
used is the ”best” possible regulation strategy. This strategy will, for a given network
element, take the LGA units with the highest PTDF, and reduce its load to 0 % first. Then
it will take the unit with the second highest PTDF, and so on. This method is the most
efficient way to relieve a congestion, but contradicts a lot of the rules in the field of LGA
[7, 8]. Thus, it is not possible to directly use this method, but it can be used as a baseline
when comparing regulation efficiency.
Plotting relieved power as a function of reduced power for both the ”best” method and
another method, gives a visual representation of the regulation efficiency. An illustration
of this can be seen in figure 3.2.
The way a unit selection method is evaluated is by finding the average ”lost” regulation,
compared to the ”best” regulation strategy. This will be the average vertical distance ( ¯
∆y)
between the two curves in figure 3.2. So, this metric is the average amount of relieved
power that a method achieves less than the ”best” regulation strategy at any given amount
of curtailed power. It is calculated by finding the area between the curves, and dividing it
with the curves propagation in the x­axis (equation (3.9)).
A =
" x1
0
BestReg(x) dx −
" x1
0
OtherMethod(x) dx,
¯
∆y = A
x1
(3.9)
This average lost regulation can then be used to compare the unit selection methods, to
see which one has the best regulation efficiency.
18
Dynamic Consumption Control for Resolving Bottlenecks in Medium Voltage Grids
==PAGE:27==
Figure 3.2: An illustration of the regulation efficiency for the ”best” regulation strategy
to the strategy obtained by using another method. The average ”lost” regulation, com­
pared to the ”best” method is computed from the area between the curves and the curves
propagation in the x­axis.
Dynamic Consumption Control for Resolving Bottlenecks in Medium Voltage Grids
19
==PAGE:28==
20
Dynamic Consumption Control for Resolving Bottlenecks in Medium Voltage Grids
==PAGE:29==
4
Case Study
In this chapter, the case study used for testing the methods of chapter 3 will be discussed.
4.1
The Grid
The investigations of this project will be carried out on the 50 kV meshed distribution grid
of northern Sealand. Figure 4.1 shows this grid which is the North island and Glentegård
island owned by Radius. This grid features a mix of radial, ring and meshed sub networks
all interconnected with each other. There are multiple ingestion points from the overlaying
132 kV transmission network, scattered throughout the grid. The sensitivity analysis will
be carried out on all lines and cables in this 50 kV network, along with all 132/50 kV
transformers that connect the transmission grid to the distribution grid.
Figure 4.1: A map showing the 50 kV distribution grid of the Radius owned North island
(the big island) and Glentegård island (the small island in the lower right corner). All
Radius owned main stations are shown with a purple dot. All 132/50 kV ingestion points
are also shown with a transformer diagram. Dashed lines indicate two parallel cables.
4.2
Network Parameters
Load flow simulations are performed on a grid in normal operation, unless otherwise
stated. Meaning all cables, lines, and transformers that are normally in use (the ones
shown in figure 4.1) will be connected to the grid.
4.2.1
Load Perturbations
A perturbation in consumption is applied to each node of the grid, to observe the evolution
of the network element loading. The size of this perturbation could affect the results of the
investigations for a variety of reasons. These reasons and their impacts are investigated
and shown in section 5.1. The size ended up being 1 MW, which will be connected as
a load along with an equal but opposite negative load (see figure 4.2). This is done to
Dynamic Consumption Control for Resolving Bottlenecks in Medium Voltage Grids
21
==PAGE:30==
ensure that the total load of the network stays unchanged from that of the existing network
load. Thus, when the positive load is disconnected, a load reduction will take place in the
node.
Figure 4.2: The connection of a positive and negative load of the same size will ensure
that the overall grid loading does not increase (left). Applying the perturbation will result
in a negative supply of power (right).
When referring to the base case, this means a system with no applied perturbation.
4.2.2
On Load Tap Changers
When load flow simulations are computed, the On­Load Tap Changers (OLTCs) of all
transformers in the grid will be automatically set. This is allowed when computing the
base case, as that ensures a stable system, converging to a state which represents real
world operation. After the base case is computed, the OLTCs are locked and will remain
so when performing the simulations for the different load perturbations.
This is done to ensure that the investigations are carried out in a system that resembles a
real operating scenario. Here, the OLCTs will be set to and left at a constant value until the
network load has evolved in such a way that changing the transformer taps is necessary.
Therefore, the time constant for changing the OLTCs is much longer (on the order of a
year) than that of the regulation of load curtailment (on the order of minutes).
4.2.3
Distributed Energy Production
LGA units will usually see curtailment during the winter months, when energy demand
is high. For this reason, all distributed energy production, e.g. solar, wind and small
synchronous machines, of the grid model is turned off. This will create a more realistic
scenario and the sensitivity analysis will more closely represent the real­world effect of
the LGA units.
4.3
Load Flow Simulations
In order to assess changes in network element loading as the consumption is reduced,
some load flow simulations have been carried out. First, a simulation with all the afore­
mentioned positive and negative loads connected to the grid. After this, several load flows
were computed in which a single load is disconnected from its respective bus. This re­
turned a base case loading for each network component and a loading after the load is
disconnected. All these load flows are simulated using Neplan and the grid model used
by Radius.
Data is exported as a CSV file from which all dependencies of the grid can be extracted.
22
Dynamic Consumption Control for Resolving Bottlenecks in Medium Voltage Grids
==PAGE:31==
5
Preliminary Investigations
Before performing the main investigations of network sensitivity, some key quantities had
to be investigated. This was done to ensure reliable results, and to establish a base case
with which all other studies are compared.
5.1
Perturbation Magnitude
When choosing the magnitude of the nodal perturbations, a couple of different aspects had
to be taken into consideration. First of all, since both a positive and a negative load is used
in the simulation model, there were no immediate consequences of the perturbation size.
However, when the positive load is disconnected, the full effect of the perturbation will
be seen. Therefore, the perturbation can not be too large, as this could put unnecessary
strain on the grid, resulting in strange simulations results.
To investigate the effect that the LGA unit size, 5 different simulations are computed. Each
simulation has a different nodal perturbations. In the first case, this is set to 1 MW. The
other simulations are computed with 5 MW, 10 MW, 15, MW and 20 MW perturbations.
The PTDFs are calculated for all the simulations and the difference between these shows
how much of an effect the larger power disturbance has.
Figure 5.1: Heat map of the difference between PTDFs of a simulation case with 1 MW
LGA load in all nodes and another case with 5 MW. The pixel colour shows whether the
PTDF difference is negative or positive, and how large it is. The pixels marked with an ”x”
denotes that the PTDF have changed sign.
From figure 5.1 it can be seen that when moving from a scenario with LGA units of 1 MW
to units of 5 MW, some PTDFs change. The largest change seen is 0.32, showing a 32%
point increase in sensitivity. It can also be observed that some of the PTDFs change sign.
When going from 5 MW to 10 MW (figure 5.2), more PTDFs start to change. This is also
seen when going from 10 MW to 15 MW (figure 5.2) and from 15 MW to 20 MW (see
appendix A).
Dynamic Consumption Control for Resolving Bottlenecks in Medium Voltage Grids
23
==PAGE:32==
Figure 5.2: Heat map of the difference between PTDFs of a simulation case with 5 MW
LGA load in all nodes and another case with 10 MW.
5.1.1
Counterflow
It is observed that when using LGA units that are too large, a simulation result that is
physically impossible can emerge. In the case where 20 MW LGA units are simulated, it is
possible to reverse the current flow in some cables. Some of these cables are connected
radially to the grid. Since only consumptions units are present at the end of the cable, a
reverse flow of current can never happen in reality. Figure 5.3 shows this situation, along
side with a scenario where 1 MW LGA units are used. In the 1 MW scenario, the expected
behaviour is seen, with a reduction of current in the radially connected cable.
Figure 5.3: A schematic showing an edge case where using 20 MW LGA units results in
a reversal and increase in the current flow of 31 A. This leads to a positive PTDF. In the 1
MW case there are no reversal, and the current decreases by 12 A, resulting in a negative
PTDF.
From this, it can be concluded that the LGA load should be smaller than the lowest amount
of power flowing in any cable. This will ensure the most accurate sensitivity analysis.
24
Dynamic Consumption Control for Resolving Bottlenecks in Medium Voltage Grids
==PAGE:33==
5.1.2
Non­linearity
The electrical grid and the equations describing it are non linear. This means that with
increasing load sizes, the loading of cables and transformers can change in a non linear
fashion. This in turn means that the sensitivity of the network could change when larger
perturbations are applied. To avoid running into this problem, small perturbations should
be used. This will bring the load changes of the grid closer to linearity.
On the basis of these investigations, it is decided to use 1 MW for the LGA units in all
simulations going forward.
Dynamic Consumption Control for Resolving Bottlenecks in Medium Voltage Grids
25
==PAGE:34==
26
Dynamic Consumption Control for Resolving Bottlenecks in Medium Voltage Grids
==PAGE:35==
6
Sensitivity Analysis
This chapter will present the results of the sensitivity analysis.
Performing sensitivity analysis on the simulated data yields the PTDF of each LGA unit on
each network element. In order to visually inspect the results, a heat map can be plotted
(figure 6.1). This heat map shows what happens to the network element loadings when
either of the LGA units are disconnected. A positive PTDF (red) indicates an increase in
loading, and a negative PTDF (blue) indicates a decrease in loading. A larger absolute
value of the PTDF shows that more of the power to an LGA unit flows through this network
element.
Figure 6.1: A heatmap showing the PTDFs of all LGA units and all network elements. A
blue colour (negative PTDF) mean the load of the cable or transformer decreases with the
disconnection of the respective LGA unit. A red colour (positive PTDF) shows an increase
of loading of the network element after the respective LGA unit is disconnected.
The first interesting thing to observe is that some elements are affected by LGA units
outside of their Cerius­Radius designated area. This can be seen in figure 6.2 where all
LGA units that affect the line going from Dageløkke (DAG) to Ullerød (ULL) are plotted
in a map. It shows the PTDF of all Units for that specific line. The units plotted above
Teglstrup (TEG) all have some impact on the line, even though they are outside of the
area of the line, and behind an ingestion point. This means that if units outside of the
area are excluded from the regulations strategy, it might not be able to resolve a given
bottleneck fully.
In some cases, the highest impactors outside the area can be larger than the smallest
inside the area. For the line in figure 6.2, LGA units placed in the main stations of Helsingør
(HLS) and Horneby (HBY) would be outside of the area of the line. However, their impact is
greater than some units inside of the area, such as the ones in Trollesgård (TRO), Hillerød
(HIL) and Allerød (ALL). This could become problematic when trying to designate zones
Dynamic Consumption Control for Resolving Bottlenecks in Medium Voltage Grids
27
==PAGE:36==
for regulation, as some of the more efficient units are excluded from influence. This can
lead to a lower total efficiency of regulation.
Figure 6.2: LGA units affecting the line going between Dageløkke and Ullerød (marked
with green). It is seen that LGA units outside of the area of the line also have some impact
on the line. Some of them even have more impact than other LGA units inside the area
of the line.
Almost all network elements have some LGA units with more or less impact situated out­
side of their Cerius­Radius designated areas. And two other lines have the same issue
as DAG­ULL with a higher impactor being outside of the area. These are the line going
from Dageløkke (DAG) to Mørdrup (MDR) and the one from Stasevang (STA) to Ullerød
(ULL). The map showing the impacting LGA units on them can be seen in appendix B.
The amount of LGA load that resides outside of the Cerius­Radius designated areas is
quite high. For DAG­ULL it is more than 40 % of the impacting LGA load that is outside of
the areas. For DAG­MDR it is over 25 % and for STA­ULL it is over 30 %. Other numbers
can be found in appendix B.
Another thing to note is that the size of the PTDFs. These are shown in figure 6.3 where
each dot correspond to the PTDF of an LGA unit on a specific cable. Here, the majority of
PTDFs show a regulation efficiency below 50 %. Some network elements have a few units
above 50 %, but many do not have any above 50 %. This clashes with the assumptions
presented in section 2.3. Here, units of zone A, B and C are assumed to have a 100 %,
66 % and 33 % efficiency of regulation respectively. Based on the calculated PTDFs, it
will not be possible for units in these zones to have regulation efficiencies that high.
An interesting investigation to do in future work, could be, to see what happens with the
PTDFs if there is a change of topology in the network. This change could be an N­1
contingency, where a cable or transformer is disconnected. If this happens in the 50 kV
grid, Cerius­Radius is able to see it and is allowed to disconnect LGA units to mitigate any
overloads caused by the contingency. But, if the contingency happens in the overlaying
28
Dynamic Consumption Control for Resolving Bottlenecks in Medium Voltage Grids
==PAGE:37==
132 kV grid, Cerius­Radius would not know. So, if the PTDFs change significantly during
such a contingency, the whole regulation strategy could be compromised.
Dynamic Consumption Control for Resolving Bottlenecks in Medium Voltage Grids
29
==PAGE:38==
Figure 6.3: A visual representation of all PTDFs in the network. Each dot represent an
LGA unit. Its placement on the x­axis shows the PTDF of that unit, and the y­axis place­
ment shows for which Network element it corresponds to. All LGA units have a PTDF for
each network element, so a the line of each element, the same number of dots are plotted
30
Dynamic Consumption Control for Resolving Bottlenecks in Medium Voltage Grids
==PAGE:39==
7
Area Clustering
One of the investigated methods (Area­KM) uses areas to filter away LGA units with a low
contribution. This naturally leads to the question of how the right areas are found. Cerius­
Radius’ definition of areas is made using the ingestion points as boarders as explained
in section 2.2.2. But, as seen in the results from the sensitivity analysis in chapter 6, the
ingestion points do not act like a ”wall” preventing power to come from the other side of
it. Some power will come from the other side, and how much depends on the size of
the ingestion point compared to the robustness of the rest of the grid. So, to determine
the relationship between LGA units and network elements in the entire grid, a clustering
algorithm is used to separate the grid into areas. The goal is to see if Cerius­Radius’
areas somehow emerge from the sensitivity data. If not, then a new set of areas could be
found.
7.1
Clustering with K­Means
It is possible to use the K­means algorithm to accomplish this task. The way it works is
that the K­means algorithm is provided with the entire matrix of PTDFs from figure 6.1.
The value of the PTDFs is what is used for clustering, meaning LGA units with similar
PTDFs will be grouped together. Each network element is treated as a feature. K­means
will take each feature into account when minimizing the inertia. In this way, it should be
possible to group LGA units, with similar affects on network elements, together.
Figure 7.1: Map of the areas assigned to main stations by the K­means clustering algo­
rithm. The grid is clustered into five areas. Each colour represents a different area.
In figure 7.1 the result of a clustering of the grid into five areas is shown. Five areas were
chosen as this is the amount that Cerius­Radius effectively uses. The areas look quite
similar to the ones used by Cerius­Radius (figure 2.4). Only Helsinge (HIG) and Hun­
dested (HUN) of the red area are assigned differently. This is believed to have something
to do with the characteristics of the transformer sensitivity, compared to that of the line
sensitivity.
Dynamic Consumption Control for Resolving Bottlenecks in Medium Voltage Grids
31
==PAGE:40==
PTDFs of LGA units will all be negative for the transformers, since they are all downstream
of the power flow. For lines some LGA units are upstream of the power flow, which will
result in a positive PTDF. All downstream units will have negative PTDFs for lines as well.
Line and transformer sensitivity characteristics are illustrated in figure 7.2. This difference
could create conflicting data for the clustering algorithm.
Figure 7.2: An illustration of the sensitivity characteristic of a transformer (green) and
a line (blue). LGA units are shown as the purple dots, and current flow is shown with
arrows. Because of the current flow into the network through the transformer, all PTDFs
are negative. For the line, every unit in front of the current flow has a negative PTDF, and
behind the flow, a positive PTDF.
7.1.1
Leaving out Transformer Sensitivity
In order to see whether this difference in characteristics is the cause for the difference in
areas, the transformer sensitivity are omitted. The rest of the data is then clustered into
five areas. The result of this is plotted in figure 7.3 which shows some areas that does
not make much sense. The blue, red, magenta and yellow areas look fine, but the green
area is scattered with units in different parts of the grid. This will not be acceptable, as
units in these different parts of the grid will not have much, if any impact on the other parts
of this area.
Figure 7.3: Map of the areas assigned to main stations by the K­means clustering algo­
rithm. Each colour represents a different area.
To see why the clustering algorithm finds this result, a sorted version of the PTDF heat
map is plotted in figure 7.4. It is sorted into the different areas so that the similarity within
32
Dynamic Consumption Control for Resolving Bottlenecks in Medium Voltage Grids
==PAGE:41==
Figure 7.4: A heatmap of PTDFs sorted in the 4 areas which are shown in figure 7.3.
the areas can be seen. Here, the LGA units in the blue area seems to generally affect the
same lines. This can be seen by the patches of the heatmap coalescing at the same LGA
units and Lines. The same thing is seen in the red, magenta and yellow areas. The units
in the green area do not have this similarity. The suspected reason for this is that when
the K­means algorithm create the five clusters, the minimization of the inertia causes four
of them to be very good. But no matter how the data points from the fifth cluster are
redistributed, it will always give a larger inertia. Thus, the result is four nice clusters and
a ”rubbish bin” cluster where the rest of the data points are allocated.
The root cause of this might be, that the grid is split into two islands. Since they are not
electrically connected at the 50 kV level, their sensitivities can only be linked through the
transformer data, which is not used.
7.1.2
Only Looking at the North Island
This dependency on the transformer data might be removed if only the cables that are
electrically connected, at the same voltage level, is considered. Thus, only a single island
of the grid will be used for the clustering. Leaving out the grid sensitivity of the Glentegård
will accomplish this. Transformer sensitivities are still left out. Now, only the sensitivity of
the cables in the North island is left. This time, only four clusters will be created, as one
of the original areas is now gone. This clustering is shown in figure 7.5. Here, the green
area is split in two with one part on each side of another area. It looks like the green area
should have been two different areas. And, if the clustering algorithm is told to make 5
areas, this is also what is found (figure 7.6).
The reason why the green area of figure 7.5 looks like this to begin with, is because of
the similar impact it has on the blue area. Power flows from both green areas into the
blue area. This means that the units in both the green areas have a similar affect on the
cables in the blue area.
The grid has now been divided into five usable areas. However, it has not been determined
whether the clusters of figure 7.6 are the right solution. It might be that the clustering of
figure 7.1 is the right solution. Furthermore, the number of clusters is determined from
Dynamic Consumption Control for Resolving Bottlenecks in Medium Voltage Grids
33
==PAGE:42==
Figure 7.5: Map of the North island split into
four areas
Figure 7.6: Map of the North island split into
five areas
what Cerius­Radius uses. Whether this is the right number is also not decided. So, to
assess this, clustering metrics are calculated and used.
7.2
Clustering Metrics
To evaluate how good a clustering is, the inertia, silhouette coefficient, Davis­Bouldin
index, and Calinski­Harabasz index is calculated. The first thing to evaluate is the number
of clusters. To do this, the clustering algorithm is run multiple times. Each time, the
algorithm is tasked with dividing the data into more clusters, going from two clusters all
the way to 22. Each time the algorithm finishes, the four metrics are calculated. Then,
the metrics can be plotted against the number of clusters. Figure 7.7 shows these plots,
when the clustering is done without transformer sensitivities and only looking at the North
island.
First off, looking at inertia, the best number of clusters is determined by finding the elbow of
the curve (figure 7.7). This suggests that the number of clusters should be 8, however, the
elbow is not very well defined here. Next, the silhouette coefficient shows the best number
of clusters with the highest coefficient. Here, 7 clusters have the highest silhouette coef­
ficient. For the Davis­Bouldin index, a lower score better and for the Calinski­Harabasz
index, a higher score is better. So, for these two indices, there is no clear best number.
Both indices gets better when clusters are small, dense and far apart from other clusters.
So with an increasing number of clusters, these indices will just continue getting better.
Looking at the four metrics as a whole, also shows no clear indication that a maximally
performing number of clusters exists. Figure 7.8 shows the two suggested number of
clusters, 7 and 8. When the network is divided into a larger number of areas, these areas
risk becoming very small. In both cases with 7 and 8 areas, the smallest areas contain
only two units. If these areas are used, only two units can participate in the curtailment,
which will almost certainly result in an insufficient load reduction of an overloaded line or
transformer. Therefore, these two clusterings cannot be used.
7.2.1
Full Grid and All Sensitivities
Going back and looking at the full grid the number of clusters is again analysed. Now, the
transformer data is taken into account again. Clusterings of 2 to 22 areas are computed
34
Dynamic Consumption Control for Resolving Bottlenecks in Medium Voltage Grids
==PAGE:43==
Figure 7.7: Clustering metrics plotted against the number of clusters. The clustering
algorithm only looks at the North island and also does not look at transformer sensitivities.
The number marked at the curves indicate the suggested best number of clusters for that
metric.
and the four metrics are plotted in figure 7.9.
For this method, the elbow of the inertia curve again indicates 8 as the best number of
clusters. The maximum value of the silhouette coefficient is found at 9 clusters. The
Davis­Bouldin index once again just decreases with an increasing number of cluster. This
suggests no clear best number of clusters. Lastly, there is a peak in the Calinski­Harabasz
index at 3 clusters. Looking at all of the metrics as a whole does not suggest any best
number of clusters either.
In figure 7.10 these three suggested number of clusters is shown. Here, it is again seen
that the areas get unacceptably small when splitting the grid into 8 and 9 areas. The
smallest area consists of only one LGA unit. For the grid that only has 3 areas, the areas
start to look like the ones Cerius­Radius has made. However, they are a bit too big now. It
is interesting how this method of clustering comes very close to the Cerius­Radius areas.
With 5 areas (figure 7.1), they look almost identical, indicating that Cerius­Radius’ areas
might fine.
7.3
The Weakness of The Area Clustering Method
This method of dividing the grid into areas using K­means as a clustering algorithm can
yield both expected and unexpected results. The clustering algorithm only has the PTDFs
to use when splitting the areas. It knows nothing about how the grid is built and where
each LGA unit is located. So, using this method cannot be done unsupervised. Choosing
the number of areas is not trivial either. In general, this method requires some knowledge
about the grid and its structure in addition to using the clustering algorithm if it is to be
used.
A discovery that really showcases the volatility of this method was made when adding an
extra main station to the grid. This was originally done to try to ensure that the station
would be detected in the zone designation algorithm (chapter 8). However, when this
station was included in the data set for area clustering, the areas turned out very different.
Figure 7.11 shows areas made without the extra station and areas made with the extra
station. The addition of the test station (TST) results in the left most area becoming much
Dynamic Consumption Control for Resolving Bottlenecks in Medium Voltage Grids
35
==PAGE:44==
(a) 7 areas
(b) 8 areas
Figure 7.8: Grid divided into the number of clusters suggested from silhouette coefficient
(a) and inertia (b).
larger, and the right most area being split into more smaller areas. So, the clustering of
areas is very dependent on network topology, and even small changes can result in vastly
different areas. This further shows that having knowledge of how the grid is structured is
crucial. The areas can not blindly be made using clustering.
7.4
Useful Areas
With these investigations, it is found that the clustering can yield areas that closely re­
sembles those created by Cerius­Radius. This is found when using the full PTDF matrix
containing all stations and sensitivities. There are only a few differences between the ar­
eas obtained. Notably, the main station in Hundested (HUN) is always clustered with the
south­westeren par of the grid (red area in figure 7.1). This is contrary to Cerius­Radius’
areas, placing it in the northern part of the grid. Also, the border between the northern and
the south­western areas is placed differently. All other areas and borders are the same.
With this, two alternative sets of areas are created. These are shown in figure 7.12. The
areas in figure 7.12a is a slight modification of Cerius­Radius’ areas. Only the main station
in Hundested has moved from the northern area to the south­western area. The areas
in figure 7.12b are the ones determined by K­means. The border between the areas are
established using the cluster centroids.
Having the border between the red and green areas in figure 7.12b, not being on stations
with transformer might be a problem. This will make it so that the transformers will have
fewer LGA units available for regulation. Furthermore, the green area has gotten a lot
smaller. This could also become a problem because of the limited number of LGA units
in it. The further performance of these areas is presented in chapter 9.
36
Dynamic Consumption Control for Resolving Bottlenecks in Medium Voltage Grids
==PAGE:45==
Figure 7.9: Clustering metrics plotted against the number of clusters. Here, the clus­
tering algorithm looks at both the North island and the Glentegård island. Transformer
sensitivities are included in the clustering. The number marked at the curves indicate the
suggested best number of clusters for that metric.
(a) 3 areas
(b) 8 areas
(c) 9 areas
Figure 7.10:
Grid divided into the number of clusters suggested from the Calinski­
Harabasz index (a), inertia (b), and silhouette coefficient (c). The 9th area in (c) is at
the same spot as the yellow area. This is one main station (Ørnegård (ØRN)), where the
busbar is split into two. Each busbar is supplied with its own cable.
Dynamic Consumption Control for Resolving Bottlenecks in Medium Voltage Grids
37
==PAGE:46==
(a) Only Radius main stations
(b) With extra main station
Figure 7.11: Grid divided into 5 areas wit only Radius’ main stations (a) and when adding
a new station to the grid (b). The clusters change significantly, showing that the clustering
is very dependant on the network topology.
(a) Cerius­Radius Modified areas
(b) K­means areas
Figure 7.12: Final sets areas used for further investigation. These are either fully (b) or
partially (a) based on the k­mean analysis.
38
Dynamic Consumption Control for Resolving Bottlenecks in Medium Voltage Grids
==PAGE:47==
8
Zone Designation
In this chapter, the final zone designation will be investigated and discussed. Three differ­
ent methods will be shown. The first one is the method using PTDF scaling to rule out low
impact LGA units, then using K­means clustering to split the remaining units into Zones.
The second method uses defined areas to rule out low impact LGA units, then K­means
to divide remaining units into zones. The third is Cerius­Radius’ own method.
8.1
Scaling and Clustering
As described earlier, this method starts off by applying a scaling to the PTDFs. This scaled
PTDF is a per unit value of the biggest PTDF seen for each network element. A lower
limit for this is set, and every LGA unit with a scaled PTDF below this limit receives the
”No Zone” designation. This means they will not participate in curtailment for that specific
network element. In figure 8.1, these are shown as gray dots. The limit here is set to
0.15, meaning LGA units with PTDFs lower than 15 % of the largest PTDF, will get no
zone. The rest of the LGA units are split in up to 3 zones using K­means clustering. This
is done separately for positive and negative PTDFs.
The scaling limit was chosen to be 0.15 because this provided a regulations strategy
where neither too few nor to many units participate. Going past 0.17 meant that for net­
work elements such as the transformers in Ølstykke (ØLS), only two units were participat­
ing. Going lower than 0.15 resulted in many units participating, worsening the regulations
efficiency dramatically.
The algorithm uses inertia to decide how many clusters should be made. A new threshold
is set, and when the inertia is below this threshold, the right number of clusters has been
reached. The threshold was chosen by looking at how far apart two PTDFs should be for
them to be in separate zones. First off, 0.1 was used as a good distance between PTDFs.
The threshold is then calculated as the sum of squared distance to the centre between
these two PTDFs
InertiaThreshold =
2
!
i=1
(xi −µ)2 = 0.052 + 0.052 = 0.005
(8.1)
The result of the zone designation is shown in figure 8.1. A limited number of especially
interesting elements is shown here, with the full figure shown in appendix C in figure C.1. It
can be seen that the scaling successfully creates a variable lower limit for which LGA units
to include in the zones. This ensures that for elements with LGA units of high contribution,
fewer units with low contribution are curtailed. Furthermore, the unit or units with the
largest PTDFs are also always assigned to zone A. This is important because when the
curtailment starts, the most impactful LGA units should reduce their power first. This will
ensure that the bottleneck can be resolved as quickly and efficiently as possible.
8.2
Area Sorting and Clustering
Another investigated method uses the areas to determine which LGA units should be out
of influence. The rest of the LGA unit will be clustered into zones using K­means, just as
with the previous method. The zones created from this method are shown in figure 8.2.
Dynamic Consumption Control for Resolving Bottlenecks in Medium Voltage Grids
39
==PAGE:48==
Figure 8.1: A visualisation of the zones made with the ”Scale­KM” method for some el­
ements. The PTDFs of all LGA units is shown as dots. Gray dots indicate LGA units
which are outside of influence (no zone designation). Coloured dots show units that is
the annotated zone (A, B or C). Red and green dots show whether the PTDF of a unit is
positive or negative respectively. The lower limit after scaling is set to 0.15 and the inertia
threshold is set to 0.005.
The areas that Cerius­Radius has defined are used here. The zones created when using
the modified Cerius­Radius areas and the K­means areas can be seen in appendix C.
It is again seen that the most impactful units are assigned to zone A. Another thing that can
be seen is that, for some elements, less impactful units are being assigned to zones, while
more impactful units are not assigned to a zone. This is observed with the following lines;
ALL_HIL, BIR_STA, BOR_NOR, DAG_ULL, FRS_ØLS, GIL_HBY, GIL_VBY, HBY_HLS,
HLS_TEG and STA_ULL. This can be seen by the grey dots that have a larger PTDF
value than some of the coloured dots. Leaving out more impactful units will results in a
lower regulation efficiency.
8.3
Cerius­Radius’ Zone Designation
Lastly, the two other methods should be compared to Cerius­Radius’ method. This is the
method that assigns zones according to how many network branches are between the
network element and the LGA units. The result of this is shown in figure 8.3.
As with the ”Area­KM” method, some the more impactful LGA units are left out of the
regulations strategy for certain network elements. It can be seen at all the same lines as
for the previous method. This highlights one of the issues with pre­defining areas in the
grid. There is a risk that for some elements, a more impactful unit will be situated outside
of the area, and thus be out of influence.
Another thing to note is that zones are observed to overlap each other, such that the units
in zone B actually are more impactful than some units in zone A, and the same for C
and B. This is most obvious with the transformers in Allerød (TR_ALL) and Stasevang
40
Dynamic Consumption Control for Resolving Bottlenecks in Medium Voltage Grids
==PAGE:49==
Figure 8.2: Visualising the zones created by the ”Area­KM” method for a limited number
of network elements. For each network element, all LGA units’ associated PTDFs are
plotted as dots. The results shown here uses the areas that Cerius­Radius has defined.
A figure showing all elements can be seen in figure C.2
(TR_STA).
The last notable observation for this method is that for some elements, only zones B and
C are being used, with no units assigned to zone A. This will result in some dead time
when starting the load reduction, because no units are curtailed when zone A is activated.
This is an inherent flaw with the method where the node that a cable is connected to, can
be a branching node. Thus, one branch is between the cable and the LGA unit, putting
the unit in zone B and units further out in zone B or C. However, this could easily be fixed
by setting the requirement that the LGA units of the first note always should be in zone A,
since this unit always will have the biggest impact on the cable.
Dynamic Consumption Control for Resolving Bottlenecks in Medium Voltage Grids
41
==PAGE:50==
Figure 8.3: The zones obtained by using Cerius­Radius’ topology method shown for a
select few elements. The figure shows the PTDF, on the x­axis, of each unit for each
network element. The zones for all the elements is shown in figure C.5
42
Dynamic Consumption Control for Resolving Bottlenecks in Medium Voltage Grids
==PAGE:51==
9
Method Comparison & Evaluation
A complete comparison between the three different methods is challenging. This is be­
cause they create regulations strategies that include a very different amount of units. This
makes it difficult to find a common baseline to measure the methods against. Two differ­
ent comparison schemes will be used to compare all three methods. These are presented
in this chapter.
9.1
Lost Regulation
Lost regulation, as explained in section 3.5.1, is computed and plotted. With this eval­
uation method, it is possible to compare Cerius­Radius’ unit selection method, with the
”Area­KM” method.
Care must be taken to ensure that the set of areas is kept constant. If a comparison
between the different sets of areas is desired, a different comparison method has to be
used. This is because with a different set of areas, a different number of LGA units will
be a part of the regulation strategy. Comparing two methods with a different number of
participating units will be disadvantageous to one of the two methods.
For the investigation of lost regulation, LGA units and network elements residing in the
Glentegård island are not taken into consideration. This is because it is a small separate
island with only one ingestion point. This makes the topology of this island different from
the main North island. So, they cannot be statistically compared.
(a) Line from Allerød to Hillerød.
(b) Tranformer in Stasevang.
Figure 9.1: Relieved power plotted as a function of curtailed power. Three different reg­
ulation strategies are shown, the ”best” strategy, the one obtained with ”Area­KM” and
Cerius­Radius’.
The regulation efficiency curves for the line between Allerød (ALL) and Hillerød (HIL) are
plotted in figure 9.1a. In figure 9.1b, the efficiency curves for one of the transformers
in Stasevang (STA) are plotted. These plots show the ”best” regulation, Cerius­Radius’
method and the ”Area­KM” method, applied in the areas made by Cerius­Radius. The
curve shows how the regulation would perform when the specified network element is
overloaded. The amount of load reduction is seen on the x­axis, and the amount of power
relieved from the network element is seen on the y­axis. In figure 9.1a it can for example
be seen that when 3 MW of power is curtailed, the ”best” regulations strategy relieves
Dynamic Consumption Control for Resolving Bottlenecks in Medium Voltage Grids
43
==PAGE:52==
1.05 MW on the line from Allerød to Hillerød. The regulation strategy from ”Area­KM” and
Cerius­Radius only relieves 0.78 MW and 0.70 MW respectively.
It is seen from figure 9.1 that the efficiency curve of the ”Area­KM” method lies slightly
closer to the ”best” regulation than Cerius­Radius’ method. It depends on the element
which method is more efficient and by how much. So, to quantify the efficiency for all
elements the average vertical distance from each curve to the ”best” regulations curve is
calculated as explained in section 3.5.1.
(a) Lost regulation sorted by size.
(b) Distribution of lost regulation
Figure 9.2: Lost regulation compared to the ”best” regulation strategy. Cerius­Radius’
areas were used. In (a), the network elements are sorted after the value of the lost regu­
lation.
These distances are plotted in figure 9.2. Here, it is seen that the ”Area­KM” method on
average is closer to the ”best” regulation than Cerius­Radius’ method. This means that
the ”Area­KM” method on average is more efficient than Cerius­Radius’ method. This
is more evident when looking at the distribution of lost regulation in figure 9.2b, where
the red curve shows more elements with lower lost regulation than the blue curve. Finally,
doing a T­test on this result shows, with a p­value of 0.002235, that ”Area­KM” on average
is closer to the ”best” regulation than Cerius­Radius’ method is.
This analysis can also be performed for the other sets of areas. Figure 9.3 shows the
distribution of lost regulation for the modified Cerius­Radius areas. This set of areas is al­
most identical to the original set from Cerius­Radius. So, teh result does not change much,
and the ”Area­KM” method still creates on average a more efficient regulation strategy.
A T­test on this result gives a p­value of 0.002474. This shows statistical significance for
the ”Area­KM” method being closer to the ”best” regulation strategy than Cerius­Radius’
method.
Lastly, the two unit selection methods are applied to the areas created with K­means
clustering. The results of the lost regulation analysis can be seen in figure 9.4. Here, the
two methods are much closer to each other, meaning that both losses around the same
mount of regulation compared to the ”best” regulation strategy. The distribution of lost
regulation in figure 9.4b also shows that the two methods are very close, with a slight
victory for the ”Area­KM” method. However, a T­test reveals that it is not a statistically
significant victory with a p­value of 0.1606
A common theme for these analyses is that the ”Area­KM” seems to create a more efficient
44
Dynamic Consumption Control for Resolving Bottlenecks in Medium Voltage Grids
==PAGE:53==
(a) Lost regulation sorted by size.
(b) Distribution of lost regulation
Figure 9.3: Lost regulation regulation compared to the ”best” regulation strategy. Cerius­
Radius Modified areas were used.
regulation strategy than Cerius­Radius’ method does. However, this increase in efficiency
will only be present when the regulation has not reached step 5 (table 2.1). This is because
both methods are limited by the areas. So, they will pick the same units to participate in
the curtailment. The difference between the methods is the way they split the units into
zones. Here, the ”Area­KM” method manages to divide the units in such a way that the
average efficiency, throughout the regulation process, is higher. Although, when reaching
regulation step 5, the same units will have been curtailed, and thus the efficiency is the
same at that point.
(a) Lost regulation sorted by size.
(b) Distribution of lost regulation
Figure 9.4: Lost regulation regulation compared to the ”best” regulation strategy. K­means
areas were used.
9.2
Resolving Bottlenecks
For comparing methods across different sets of areas the performance of each method
will be evaluated using a realistic set of LGA units. So, a new set of load flow simulations
is computed. Instead of having 1 MW of LGA consumption in each node, realistically sized
Dynamic Consumption Control for Resolving Bottlenecks in Medium Voltage Grids
45
==PAGE:54==
LGA units are placed in the grid. The size and position of these units are based on LGA
units that Cerius­Radius has already admitted to the grid. With these new LGA loads,
the network elements at risk of being overloaded, have been identified. These will be the
elements around which the evaluation is centred. An investigation of the performance of
each method regarding the overloads will be performed. Table 9.1 shows the elements at
risk of overload. The loading stated in the table is derived from the load flow simulation
where all FGA and LGA units of consume 100 % of their rated power. This would be the
worst­case scenario. To resolve these bottlenecks, the regulation strategy has to curtail
more current than the amount the element is overloaded.
Table 9.1: Overloaded elements in the worst case where all LGA and FGA customers
area at 100 % load. The element loading and the DRT is stated along with the loadability,
and the amount of load over the DRT.
Loading [%]
DRT [%]
Loadability [A]
Overload amount [A]
L_ALL_HIL
85.3
80
700
36.9
L_GLN_LYN
83.0
80
560
16.5
L_HKB_STA
95.2
80
450
68.4
TR_ALL_1
99.1
60
682
267.0
TR_ALL_2
92.3
60
682
261.1
TR_STA_1
72.2
60
1312
160.6
TR_STA_2
73.0
60
1312
170.8
TR_TEG_1
83.2
60
888
206.2
TR_TEG_2
79.9
60
888
176.7
There are three different methods being analysed. Cerius­Radius’ method, the Scale­KM
method and the Area­KM method. For the Area­KM method, three different sets of areas
will be used, Cerius­Radius’ areas, the modified version of these, and the K­means areas.
In total, 5 different complete methods are investigated.
The performance of each method can be seen i table 9.2. From this, it is seen that all
but one method succeed in resolving 7 out of 9 bottlenecks. The last method manages
only 5 out of 9. All cells marked with green means that the method performs better than
Cerius­Radius’ method. Red means worse performance and orange marks the overload
cases that were not resolved.
Scale­KM: In some cases this method uses less units to resolve the bottleneck and, in
other cases more. Generally, the fewer customers being disturbed by the curtailment
the better. This method mostly curtails the same amount of current or less to solve the
bottleneck. This means, that it lets more consumption stay online, which is good. Lastly,
the Scale­KM method has in four of the cases included more load in the regulation strategy
than Cerius­Radius’ method does. This is not immediately bad, but it could potentially end
up affecting more customers than what is necessary, in the future.
Cerius­Radius’ Areas, Area­KM: This method manages to use the same or less LGA
units to resolve the bottleneck. Regarding the amount of current curtailed to resolve the
bottleneck. In two cases, the method curtails 35 A and 201 A more than Cerius­Radius’
method. But, in two other cases it curtails 433 A and 717 A less. This method includes the
same amount of load in the regulations strategy, because it is based on the same areas
as Cerius­Radius’ method.
Cerius­Radius Modified Areas, Area­KM: Mostly the same is observed as with the pre­
vious method. But, even less units and less load is included in the regulation strategy.
46
Dynamic Consumption Control for Resolving Bottlenecks in Medium Voltage Grids
==PAGE:55==
K­means Areas, Area­KM: This method falls short of the other four, as there are two
additional cases it cannot resolve. This is because the areas, that these units reside in,
are too small. Only 6 LGA units are included in the regulation strategy, which means there
is not enough load to be curtailed in order to resolve the overload.
When looking at the way that Cerius­Radius’ method creates the zone, it is seen that
for some elements, there are no LGA units in zone A and B. figure 9.5 shows the zones
created by Cerius­Radius’ method. This lack of units in zone A and B will result in extra
dead­time when a regulation is started. The System Protection will try to lower the con­
sumption of Zone A and B first, then C. This is not the case with the other methods. The
zones they have created can be seen in appendix D.
Figure 9.5: Zones created by Cerius­Radius’ method with realistic LGA units. Network
elements at risk of being overloaded are shown.
Curiously, none of the methods manage to resolve the overload of the transformers in
Allerød. These transformers are already quite heavily loaded to 59 % with FGA con­
sumption. Including LGA consumption, this is raised to 99.1 % loading. When curtailing
all units in the regulation strategies, 1.3 % load still comes from other LGA units. This
means that the total load of the transformer now is 60.3 % which is higher than the DRT,
meaning the bottleneck is not resolved fully. Whether this is a problem with the way LGA
load is admitted to the system is unknown. But, it shows that it is important to remember
the small contributors in the system.
9.3
A Better Selection Method
With all of this taken into consideration, the LGA unit selection method that looks most
promising is the Area­KM, used on the modified Cerius­Radius areas. It will choose mostly
the same units to use in the regulation strategy. However, the way it splits them into zones
seem to result in a more efficient regulation. This is even more evident when looking at
the regulation efficiencies stated in table 9.3. Here, it is seen that this method has the
same or better overall efficiency compared to Cerius­Radius’ method. And the efficiency
obtained when the bottlenecks are resolved is also the same or better, reaching up to
a 2.4 % point increase in efficiency. This shows that the method will be able to solve
bottlenecks with the use of less curtailment. Furthermore, the method ensures that the
most impactful units are regulated first.
Dynamic Consumption Control for Resolving Bottlenecks in Medium Voltage Grids
47
==PAGE:56==
Table 9.2: The performance of the 5 different complete methods. These performance
numbers include the number of solved bottlenecks and the number of LGA units used
to solve them. For each method, the amount of power needed, the amount relieved,
and the curtailed power is also shown, along with the total regulation efficiency for each
overloaded network element. Green cells means better performance than that of Cerius­
Radius’ method, red is worse and orange marks the cases bottleneck was not resolved
completely.
Cerius­
Radius
Scale­
KM
CR Areas
Area­KM
CR Mod Areas
Area­KM
Kmeans Areas
Area­KM
Resolved
bottlenecks
78 %
(7/9)
78 %
(7/9)
78 %
(7/9)
78 %
(7/9)
56 %
(5/9)
Bottleneck
not resolved
22%
(2/9)
22%
(2/9)
22%
(2/9)
22%
(2/9)
44 %
(5/9)
...
...
...
...
...
Number of LGA units to resolve the overload / contained in the regulation strategy
L_ALL_HIL
3 / 5
3 / 4
3 / 5
3 / 5
3 / 5
L_GLN_LYN
1 / 1
1 / 1
1 / 1
1 / 1
1 / 1
L_HKB_STA
2 / 2
2 / 2
2 / 2
2 / 2
2 / 2
TR_ALL_1
7
7
7
7
7
TR_ALL_2
7
7
7
7
7
TR_STA_1
7 / 7
6 / 9
5 / 7
5 / 7
5 / 7
TR_STA_2
7 / 7
6 / 9
7 / 7
7 / 7
7 / 7
TR_TEG_1
10 / 10
13 / 13
10 / 10
9 / 9
6
TR_TEG_2
10 / 10
13 / 13
10 / 10
9 / 9
6
...
...
...
...
...
Current relieved/curtailed to solve the bottleneck [A]
L_ALL_HIL
83 / 223
99 / 258
99 / 258
99 / 258
99 / 258
L_GLN_LYN
76 / 135
76 / 135
76 / 135
76 / 135
76 / 135
L_HKB_STA
79 / 145
79 / 145
79 / 145
79 / 145
79 / 145
TR_ALL_1
259 / 1827
259 / 1827
259 / 1827
259 / 1827
259 / 1827
TR_ALL_2
256 / 1827
256 / 1827
256 / 1827
256 / 1827
256 / 1827
TR_STA_1
259 / 1032
184 / 737
165 / 599
165 / 599
165 / 599
TR_STA_2
262 / 1032
186 / 737
311 / 1233
311 / 1233
311 / 1233
TR_TEG_1
235 / 2536
207 / 2099
235 / 2536
222 / 2329
177 / 1653
TR_TEG_2
225 / 2536
199 / 2099
178 / 1819
213 / 2329
170 / 1653
...
...
...
...
...
Current relieved/curtailed in the whole regulation strategy [A]
L_ALL_HIL
312 / 1538
293 / 971
312 / 1538
312 / 1538
312 / 1538
L_GLN_LYN
252 / 451
252 / 451
252 / 451
252 / 451
252 / 451
L_HKB_STA
142 / 289
142 / 289
142 / 289
142 / 289
142 / 289
TR_ALL_1
259 / 1827
259 / 1827
259 / 1827
259 / 1827
259 / 1827
TR_ALL_2
256 / 1827
256 / 1827
256 / 1827
256 / 1827
256 / 1827
TR_STA_1
391 / 1827
403 / 2058
391 / 1827
391 / 1827
391 / 1827
TR_STA_2
395 / 1827
407 / 2058
395 / 1827
395 / 1827
395 / 1827
TR_TEG_1
235 / 2536
265 / 2941
235 / 2536
222 / 2329
177 / 1653
TR_TEG_2
225 / 2536
255 / 2941
225 / 2536
213 / 2329
170 / 1653
48
Dynamic Consumption Control for Resolving Bottlenecks in Medium Voltage Grids
==PAGE:57==
Table 9.3: The regulation efficiency of the 5 different complete methods. Efficiency is
given both at the point where a bottlenecks is resolved and for the total regulation strategy.
Green cells means the efficiency is higher than that of Cerius­Radius’ method, red is lower
and orange marks the cases bottleneck was not resolved completely.
Cerius­
Radius
Scale­
KM
CR Areas
Area­KM
CR Mod Areas
Area­KM
Kmeans Areas
Area­KM
Curtaiment efficiency when bottleneck is solved [%]
L_ALL_HIL
37,0
38,5
38,5
38,5
38,5
L_GLN_LYN
55,8
55,8
55,8
55,8
55,8
L_HKB_STA
54,8
54,8
54,8
54,8
54,8
TR_ALL_1
14,2
14,2
14,2
14,2
14,2
TR_ALL_2
14,0
14,0
14,0
14,0
14,0
TR_STA_1
25,2
25,0
27,6
27,6
27,6
TR_STA_2
25,4
25,3
25,2
25,2
25,2
TR_TEG_1
9,3
9,9
9,3
9,5
10,7
TR_TEG_2
8,9
9,5
9,8
9,1
10,3
...
...
...
...
...
Curtailment efficiency of the whole regulation strategy [%]
L_ALL_HIL
20,3
30,2
20,3
20,3
20,3
L_GLN_LYN
55,8
55,8
55,8
55,8
55,8
L_HKB_STA
49,1
49,1
49,1
49,1
49,1
TR_ALL_1
14,2
14,2
14,2
14,2
14,2
TR_ALL_2
14,0
14,0
14,0
14,0
14,0
TR_STA_1
21,4
19,6
21,4
21,4
21,4
TR_STA_2
21,6
19,8
21,6
21,6
21,6
TR_TEG_1
9,3
9,0
9,3
9,5
10,7
TR_TEG_2
8,9
8,7
8,9
9,1
10,3
Dynamic Consumption Control for Resolving Bottlenecks in Medium Voltage Grids
49
==PAGE:58==
50
Dynamic Consumption Control for Resolving Bottlenecks in Medium Voltage Grids
==PAGE:59==
10
Conclusion & Outlook
This chapter will provide a conclusion to the report, and give an interpretation of the re­
sults, and their limitations, obtained throughout the project. Finally, a recommendation for
further work regarding the Limited Grid Access programme and regulation strategy will be
given.
The goal of this project was to create a new method for selecting variable loads to par­
ticipate in a curtailment strategy. This new method should have an improved regulation
efficiency compared to the existing method created by Cerius­Radius. It should also result
in the disturbance of fewer customers, while still being able to resolve any potential bot­
tleneck of the grid. Cerius­Radius’ existing method divides the grid into areas (figure 2.4).
These determine which load units can contribute to resolving an overloaded network ele­
ment. Units inside of an area are then divided into three zones, A, B, and C, which denote
high, medium, and low impact on a specific network element, respectively. These zones
are unique for each network element and are determined using the grid topology. The
new method will use the grid sensitivity instead of grid topology to determine the zones.
From the sensitivity analysis it is found that the impact of the load units can reach far
into the grid. Even far beyond the boundaries of the predetermined areas. For some
Network elements, units that reside in a neighbouring area can have a larger impact on
the element, than some of the units in the elements own area (figure 6.2). This results
in lower total regulation efficiency, since the more effective units will not be a part of the
regulation strategy. It is also discovered that the regulation efficiency of the individual
load units is lower than expected. For the majority of the units, their regulations efficiency
regarding a specific network element is below 50 %. Only units that lie at the end of a
single radial line can reach above 90 % regulation efficiency for that particular line. This
is shown in figure 6.3. This means that for most units, when their consumption is reduced
by 1 MW, less than 0.5 MW is relieved from any given network element. This is because
there are many ways for the current to flow in an electrical grid with a meshed topology.
The areas used to divide the grid have also been investigated. Using the K­means clus­
tering algorithm and the data from the sensitivity analysis, two new sets of areas have
been created. The hypothesis was that the different load units could be grouped into ar­
eas based on their impact on all elements of the network. The first set of areas created
is the direct output of the clustering process and is shown in figure 7.12b. They look very
similar to areas used by Cerius­Radius, with only a single border having been moved. The
second set of areas (figure 7.12a) is even more similar to those used by Cerius­Radius.
Here, a single main station is moved from one area to another because every single clus­
tering attempt suggested this change. Using the first set of areas resulted in a regulation
strategy that was unable to resolve all possible bottlenecks. This was caused by some of
the areas being too small, thus not including enough load units in the regulation strategy.
When the second areas were used, there was a single case where fewer customers were
disturbed. Otherwise it performed the same as Cerius­Radius’ areas did.
Two alternative methods for selecting the participating loads were investigated. Both uses
the K­means clustering algorithm to divide available units into zones. Their difference lies
in how they chose which units should be out of influence. The first method, Scale­KM
uses a scaling of the sensitivity results to find the units with lowest contribution. The other
method, Area­KM, uses areas. Scale­KM was found to have a better regulation efficiency
Dynamic Consumption Control for Resolving Bottlenecks in Medium Voltage Grids
51
==PAGE:60==
only at the time of resolving relevant bottlenecks. The total regulation efficiency was
generally worse because the method included more load units in the regulation strategy.
This is shown in section 9.2. The Area­KM method was found to have a higher average
regulation efficiency compared to Cerius­Radius’ method. This is when considering the
same set of areas for both methods. The total regulation efficiency is the same for both
methods since they both use the same areas to determine which units are out of influence.
This is discussed in section 9.1. The better average regulation efficiency can be attributed
to the way the zones are divided. The clustering algorithm makes sure units in zone A
always is more impactful than unit in zone B, which are more impactful than units in zone
C. This is not the case with Cerius­Radius’ method.
With this, a combination of the areas that were only modified by one station, and the
Area­KM method was found to have a slight edge over the other methods. This is based
on the sensitivity of the grid, as of today, with no contingencies present. It is suggested
to investigate whether this sensitivity changes substantially if an N­1 contingency occurs
in the 132 kV grid. If the sensitivity changes significantly, the regulation strategy could
possibly be compromised, as this strategy is not updated in real time. Incorporating the
above method with Limited Grid Access Production units would also be interesting to look
into. Production and consumption units could possibly work together to resolve certain
bottlenecks in the system. Going a bit further, having a regulation goal could help im­
prove the optimisation of the unit selection. Knowing how much power relieve should be
obtained, an optimisation algorithm could pick the right number of units and curtail them
by the perfect amount to resolve the bottleneck. However, this would require a complete
rework of the regulation algorithm and the framework behind it.
52
Dynamic Consumption Control for Resolving Bottlenecks in Medium Voltage Grids
==PAGE:61==
Bibliography
[1]
Ehsan Dehnavi and Hamdi Abdi. “Determining Optimal Buses for Implementing De­
mand Response as an Effective Congestion Management Method”. eng. In: Ieee
Transactions on Power Systems 32.2 (2017), pp. 1537–1544. ISSN: 15580679,
08858950. DOI: 10.1109/TPWRS.2016.2587843.
[2]
Smriti Singh and Ashwani Kumar. “Congestion management using demand re­
sponse program”. In: 2017 International Conference on Power and Embedded Drive
Control (ICPEDC). 2017, pp. 83–88. DOI: 10.1109/ICPEDC.2017.8081064.
[3]
Michael Bilde Hinrichsen. Elkunder flokkes om variable priser — greenpowerden­
mark.dk. https://greenpowerdenmark.dk/nyheder/elkunder-flokkes-om-variable-priser.
[Accessed 10­08­2025]. 2024.
[4]
Jessie Ma. “Influence of Demand Response Suppliers’ Interests on Economic De­
mand Response”. eng. In: Canadian Conference on Electrical and Computer Engi­
neering (2024), pp. 713–717. ISSN: 08407789, 25767046. DOI: 10.1109/CCECE59415.
2024.10667165.
[5]
Cerius­Radius. Tilslutning med Begrænset Netadgang (BNA); Radius — radiusel­
net.dk. https://radiuselnet.dk/om-elnettet/tilslutning-med-begraenset-netadgang-
bna/. [Accessed 25­04­2025].
[6]
Cerius­Radius. Systemværn for begrænset netadgang (BNA) og VE. Designdoku­
ment. 2024.
[7]
Bekendtgørelse af lov om elforsyning. https://www.retsinformation.dk/eli/lta/2023/
1248. [Accessed 10­08­2025]. 2023.
[8]
Vilkår og betingelser for tilslutning med begrænset netadgang for forbrugsanlæg.
https://forsyningstilsynet.dk/Media/638217465860299209/vilkaar- og- betingelser-
for- tilslutning- med- begraenset- netadgang- for- forbrugsanlaeg- 2- 0.pdf. [Accessed
10­08­2025]. 2019.
[9]
Allen J. Wood, Bruce F. Wollenberg, and Gerald B. Sheblé. Power generation, oper­
ation and control. eng. Wiley, 2014, xxii, 632 Seiten (unknown). ISBN: 0471790559,
1118733827, 1118733843, 1118733916, 1299939651, 1523111003, 9780471790556,
9781118733820, 9781118733844, 9781118733912, 9781299939653, 9781523111008.
[10]
Kayalvily Tabianan, Shubashini Velu, and Vinayakumar Ravi. “K­Means Cluster­
ing Approach for Intelligent Customer Segmentation Using Customer Purchase
Behavior Data”. In: Sustainability 14.12 (2022). ISSN: 2071­1050. DOI: 10.3390/
su14127243. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/2071-1050/14/12/7243.
[11]
Nameirakpam Dhanachandra, Khumanthem Manglem, and Yambem Jina Chanu.
“Image Segmentation Using K ­means Clustering Algorithm and Subtractive Clus­
tering Algorithm”. In: Procedia Computer Science 54 (2015). Eleventh International
Conference on Communication Networks, ICCN 2015, August 21­23, 2015, Ban­
galore, India Eleventh International Conference on Data Mining and Warehousing,
ICDMW 2015, August 21­23, 2015, Bangalore, India Eleventh International Confer­
ence on Image and Signal Processing, ICISP 2015, August 21­23, 2015, Bangalore,
India, pp. 764–771. ISSN: 1877­0509. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.2015.
06.090. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1877050915014143.
[12]
2.3. Clustering — scikit­learn.org. https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/clustering.
html. [Accessed 23­06­2025].
Dynamic Consumption Control for Resolving Bottlenecks in Medium Voltage Grids
53
==PAGE:62==
[13]
Christo El Morr et al. “K­Means”. In: International Series in Operations Research
and Management Science 334 (2022), pp. 361–384. DOI: 10.1007/978- 3- 031-
16990 - 8 _ 12. URL: https : / / www . scopus . com / inward / record . uri ? eid = 2 - s2 . 0 -
85143549791&doi=10.1007%2f978- 3- 031- 16990- 8_12&partnerID=40&md5=
98a87960911194382a50bffe66455404.
[14]
Jaya Sreevalsan­Nair. “K­Means Clustering”. In: Encyclopedia of Mathematical Geo­
sciences. Ed. by B.S. Daya Sagar et al. Cham: Springer International Publishing,
2020, pp. 1–3. ISBN: 978­3­030­26050­7. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-030-26050-7_171-1.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-26050-7_171-1.
[15]
Peter J. Rousseeuw. “Silhouettes: A graphical aid to the interpretation and valida­
tion of cluster analysis”. In: Journal of Computational and Applied Mathematics 20
(1987), pp. 53–65. ISSN: 0377­0427. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/0377-0427(87)
90125-7. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/0377042787901257.
[16]
David L. Davies and Donald W. Bouldin. “A Cluster Separation Measure”. In: IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence PAMI­1.2 (1979), pp. 224–
227. DOI: 10.1109/TPAMI.1979.4766909.
[17]
Tadeusz Caliński and Harabasz JA. “A Dendrite Method for Cluster Analysis”. In:
Communications in Statistics ­ Theory and Methods 3 (Jan. 1974), pp. 1–27. DOI:
10.1080/03610927408827101.
54
Dynamic Consumption Control for Resolving Bottlenecks in Medium Voltage Grids
==PAGE:63==
A
LGA Load Comparison
Figure A.1: Heat map of the difference between PTDFs of a simulation case with 10 MW
LGA load in all nodes and another case with 15 MW.
Figure A.2: Heat map of the difference between PTDFs of a simulation case with 15 MW
LGA load in all nodes and another case with 20 MW.
Dynamic Consumption Control for Resolving Bottlenecks in Medium Voltage Grids
55
==PAGE:64==
Figure A.3: Heat map of the difference between PTDFs of a simulation case with 1 MW
LGA load in all nodes and another case with 20 MW.
56
Dynamic Consumption Control for Resolving Bottlenecks in Medium Voltage Grids
==PAGE:65==
B
Sensitivity Analysis
(a) The line between Dageløkke and Mørdrup
(b) The line between Stasevang and Ullerød
Figure B.1: LGA units affecting the line marked with green. It is seen that LGA units
outside of the area of the line also have some impact on the line. Some of them even
have more impact than other LGA units inside the area of the line.
Dynamic Consumption Control for Resolving Bottlenecks in Medium Voltage Grids
57
==PAGE:66==
Figure B.2: The amount of impacting LGA load reduced by the regulations strategy. The
amount is shown in percentage of impacting load. It is shown how much each step of the
regulation reduces.
58
Dynamic Consumption Control for Resolving Bottlenecks in Medium Voltage Grids
==PAGE:67==
C
Full Zone Designations
Figure C.1: A visualisation of the zones made with the ”Scale­KM” method for all network
elements. The PTDFs of all LGA units is shown as dots.
Dynamic Consumption Control for Resolving Bottlenecks in Medium Voltage Grids
59
==PAGE:68==
Figure C.2: Visualising the zones created by the ”Area­KM” method. For each network
element, all LGA units’ associated PTDFs are plotted as dots. The results shown here
uses the areas that Cerius­Radius has defined.
60
Dynamic Consumption Control for Resolving Bottlenecks in Medium Voltage Grids
==PAGE:69==
Figure C.3: A visualisation of the zones made with the ”Area­KM” method applied to
the modified Cerius­Radius areas. For each network element, all LGA units’ associated
PTDFs are plotted as dots.
Dynamic Consumption Control for Resolving Bottlenecks in Medium Voltage Grids
61
==PAGE:70==
Figure C.4: A visualisation of the zones made with the ”Area­KM” method. For each
network element, all LGA units’ associated PTDFs are plotted as dots. The results shown
here uses the areas made using K­means.
62
Dynamic Consumption Control for Resolving Bottlenecks in Medium Voltage Grids
==PAGE:71==
Figure C.5: The zones obtained by using Cerius­Radius’ topology method. The figure
shows the PTDF, on the x­axis, of each unit for each network element.
Dynamic Consumption Control for Resolving Bottlenecks in Medium Voltage Grids
63
==PAGE:72==
D
Zones Created for Network Elements at
Risk of Overload
Figure D.1: Zones created by the Area­KM method, for the network elements at risk of
being overloaded. The method is used in conjunction with Cerius­Radius’ areas.
Figure D.2: Zones created by the Area­KM method applied to the modified Cerius­Radius
areas. Network elements at risk of being overloaded is shown.
64
Dynamic Consumption Control for Resolving Bottlenecks in Medium Voltage Grids
==PAGE:73==
Figure D.3: Zones created by the Area­KM method, for the network elements at risk of
being overloaded. Here, the areas created with K­means is used.
Figure D.4: Zones created by the Scale­KM method. Elements at risk of being overloaded
is shown.
Dynamic Consumption Control for Resolving Bottlenecks in Medium Voltage Grids
65
==PAGE:74==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Department of Wind and Energy Systems
Systems Frederiksborgvej 399
4000 Roskilde
Tlf. 4677 5085
www.wind.dtu.dk
