==PAGE:1==
M.Sc.Eng. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Design, construction, and validation of a system
for recording ECG signals with a focus on analog
and digital techniques for noise suppression
Master Thesis - 2025
Frederik Justesen (s194035)
Kongens Lyngby 2025
==PAGE:2==
Thesis written by:
Frederik Justesen (s194035)
Thesis title:
Design, construction, and validation of a system for recording ECG signals with a focus
on analog and digital techniques for noise suppression
Advisors:
Kaj-˚Age Henneberg
Sadasivan Puthusserypady Kumaran
DTU Electrical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
2800 Kongens Lyngby
Denmark
ECTS:
30
Project Period: 24. February 2025 - 24. July 2025
Copyrights:
@Frederik Justesen 2025
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
This thesis presents the design, construction, and validation of an electrocardiograph
with emphasis on analog and digital filter techniques for noise suppression.
The
project is motivated by the requirement for heavy noise suppression involved in mea-
surement equipment for physiological signals. In addition, the project allows for ap-
plication and implementation of much electrical and signal processing theory learned
at university.
The system is constituted by instrumentation amplification, active feedback circuits,
and both low pass and notch filters, with an STM32 microcontroller responsible for
real-time sampling and digital signal processing. The project puts emphasis on filter
behavior, with thorough evaluation of Butterworth, Chebyshev, Bessel-Thomson and
various FIR and IIR implementations. Frequency-domain behavior of the filters are
analyzed, with particular attention to obtaining a minimally phase distorting system.
Digital filtering was performed both offline and in real-time. Offline forward-backward
filtering enabled undistorted phase, while real-time filtering with filters designed with
frequency sampling or Parks-McClellan’s algorithm removed baseline drift during the
sampling process. Pan-Tompkins’ QRS detection algorithm was implemented and
tested in real-time on the STM32.
The complete system complied with several of the IEC-60601-2-25 standards, includ-
ing input impedance, noise level, and waveform reproducibility. The electrocardio-
graph yielded clean ECG recordings with very low noise levels, suitable for diagnostic
purposes.
i
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This report is written as the final requirement for achieving a Master of Science degree
in Electrical Engineering from the Technical University of Denmark.
The more than 70 figures in this thesis are my own creations unless stated otherwise,
and they are made with MATLAB, KiCad, and Inkscape. Usage of these figures in
other contexts is granted by the author, without the need to request for a written
permission.
ChatGPT has been used in the writing of this thesis, solely as an assisting tool for
rephrasing or improving the clarity of text already written by the author.
ii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
This is likely to be my last academic assignment ever, so I will take this opportunity
to thank the people I’ve met during my time at university who have helped me get
this far.
Thank you to my study friends Anders, Anders, and Marcus for the great teamwork
we’ve had during our courses, and for all the fun times we’ve had - both at and outside
of DTU.
Thank you to Jan Kilund for supplying me with the tools, instruments, and other
electronic equipment needed to complete my thesis. And thank you for the tips and
tricks regarding instrumentation you shared along the way.
Thank you to the biomedical engineering students who attended the Rapid Prototyp-
ing and Signal & Systems courses during the years 2022 to 2025. Every week, I looked
forward to being a teaching assistant in those courses more than anything else. It
has been the most rewarding experience of my studies, and it has been so much fun
meeting so many different people. Thank you for being so kind and open-minded to-
ward me - both in person and in the evaluations. It means more to me than you think.
Last, but certainly not least, thank you to Kaj-˚Age Henneberg. Thank you for com-
pletely changing the way I think about acquiring new knowledge and learning in
general. I am grateful to have taken the 2021 Signals & Systems course with you.
I’m certain that had it not been you teaching that course - and had I not had the
opportunity to talk to you and learn from you - I would have become a completely
different engineer. Thanks for all the interesting academic discussions we’ve had over
the years, and for all the enjoyable times we’ve had as a teacher-teaching assistant
team in your courses. It has truly been fun.
iii
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
ii
Acknowledgements
iii
1
Introduction
1
2
Electrocardiography, noise sources and IEC standards
2
2.1
The electrocardiogram . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.2
ECG noise types and origins . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2.1
Electrode imperfections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2.2
Baseline drift . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.3
50 Hz hum . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Electrocardiograph standards and specifications . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Technology overview
10
3.1
Analog techniques . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.2
Digital techniques . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4
Analysis of noise types and suppression methods
13
4.1
50 Hz common-mode voltage - initial model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.2
Common-mode suppression via instrumentation amplifiers
. . . . . .
14
4.3
Common-mode voltage simulation results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.4
Reducing noise voltage on cables
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.5
Driven right leg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.6
Noise reduction techniques simulated . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.7
Electrode half-cell potential and baseline drift . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5
Signal conditioning stages
31
5.1
Sampling and quantization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.2
Sallen-Key sensitivity analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.3
Anti-aliasing filter type selection and implementation . . . . . . . . .
35
5.4
Notch filter
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.5
Gain and offset stage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.6
Complete circuit
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
6
Construction and verification
47
6.1
PCB design in KiCad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
6.2
Preliminary verification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
6.3
Shielded enclosure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
7
Firmware
55
7.1
Timer setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
7.2
ADC setup with circular buffers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
iv
==PAGE:7==
8
Offline signal processing
61
8.1
Removal of movement artifacts digitally
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
8.2
Spectral analysis and downsampling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
9
Real-time signal processing
70
9.1
Frequency sampling method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
9.2
Parks-McClellan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
9.3
FIR filter implementation on the STM32 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
9.4
Pan-Tompkins’ algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
10 Performance evaluation
81
10.1 Noise floor and harmonic distortion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
10.2 Effect of noise reduction techniques . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
10.3 IEC standard - Input impedance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
10.4 IEC standard - Noise level . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
10.5 IEC standard - Evaluation ECG . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
11 Conclusion
90
12 Limitations and future work
90
13 Appendix A
94
13.1 Instrumentation amplifier CMRR derivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
94
13.2 Common-mode voltage with floating ground . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
97
13.3 AC coupling high pass filter derivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
98
13.4 Driven right leg derivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
99
13.5 Sallen-Key transfer function derivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
101
13.6 Sallen-Key filter design process
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
102
13.7 Gain and offset circuit equation derivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
104
13.8 IIR filter design using the bilinear transformation method . . . . . . .
106
13.9 Forward-backward filtering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
107
13.10Transient in ECG recording
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
108
13.11Moving average formulas derivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
109
13.12Phase response of FIR filter designed with frequency sampling method 110
13.13Importance of window length
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
111
13.14Recordings without the shielded box
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
112
14 Appendix B
113
14.1 Bessel-Thomson filter coefficients
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
113
14.2 Butterworth filter coefficients
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
114
15 Appendix C
115
15.1 LTspice simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
115
15.2 Maple calculations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
116
16 Appendix D
118
v
==PAGE:8==
1
Introduction
This thesis takes on the challenge of designing an ECG recording system with a partic-
ular focus on analog and digital noise suppression techniques. ECG is an abbreviation
for electrocardiogram, and it is a biomedical measurement of the electrical activity of
the heart. ECGs are used for vital medical purposes such as the monitoring of heart
arrhythmia, cardiac arrests, or for investigation of the heart’s general health [18] (pp.
444-446).
The QRS-complex is a section of the ECG that is usually of interest, because it
allows for the calculation of the heart rate. Fig. 1.1 illustrates a typical bipolar limb
lead I ECG recording, where notable excursions have been annotated.
4
4.2
4.4
4.6
4.8
5
5.2
5.4
5.6
5.8
6
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
P
Q
R
S
T
Fig. 1.1: The morphology of a healthy ECG signal recorded during the project.
ECG signals are measured by an electrocardiograph using cables connected to pre-
gelled electrodes placed on the body. This setup is prone to noise that contaminate
the ECG making it unsuitable for diagnostic purposes.
To overcome this, analog
and digital noise reduction techniques - implemented as filters and amplifiers - are
employed in an ECG amplifier and signal processing hardware. The ECG amplifier
together with the signal processing hardware constitute the electrocardiograph.
In this project, the analog filters and amplifiers are designed and soldered onto
custom printed circuit boards (PCBs) using discrete components and ICs. The digital
filters are implemented on an STM32 microcontroller with support of a DSP filtering
library. In addition, the microcontroller samples and transmits the processed ECG
signal using a timer triggered analog-to-digital converter (ADC) and UART commu-
nication with a computer. The STM32 will also be responsible for additional signal
processing schemes. A conceptual block diagram of the recording scheme is seen in
Fig. 1.2.
ECG amplifier
Microcontroller
Display
ECG signal
Diagnostics
Fig. 1.2: Conceptual block diagram of the recording scheme.
1
==PAGE:9==
2
Electrocardiography, noise sources and IEC stan-
dards
This section establishes the setting for the recording of ECG signals. It begins by
explaining the origin of the electrocardiogram and the techniques used to record it.
Afterwards, the main noise sources associated with ECG recordings are introduced.
Lastly, an appropriate selection of the international standards for electrocardiographs
is presented and specifications for the electrocardiograph to be built in this project
are derived.
2.1
The electrocardiogram
An electrocardiogram is the measurement of electrical activity in the heart associ-
ated with the cardiac cycle. It is a measurement performed with electrodes placed
on the body surface. The physiological process of a heart beat is highly complex. A
brief overview of the cardiac cycle and its electrical manifestations will be given below.
A cardiac cycle consists of two phases; activation and recovery, also known as depo-
larization and repolarization. During activation, or depolarization, a group of cardiac
cells undergoes a rapid change in membrane potential. Starting from their resting
potential (−80 mV) the membrane potential becomes gradually less negative. The
membrane potential is the voltage difference between the cell’s interior and exterior.
When this potential reaches a critical threshold, the cell fires an electrical impulse
called an action potential. This event is characterized by a rapid excursion of the
membrane potential, followed immediately by repolarization, during which the po-
tential gradually returns to its resting value. The initiation of an action potential in
one group of cells triggers neighboring cell groups to depolarize and fire their own
action potentials. This depolarization chain continues through the heart, activating
different sections in sequence. This means that some heart regions will be activated
before others [18] (pp. 414).
The cardiac cycle is initiated by pacemaker cells in the sinoatrial node. These cells are
unique in their ability to generate action potentials, without requiring activation from
neighboring cells. This is because when they are at rest their membrane potential is
not constant but gradually increasing, until it reaches the threshold value that triggers
the action potential.
The generation of action potentials in the sinoatrial node activates cells in the AV
node causing a local action potential firing in this node. This activation causes the
activation process to continue through the His bundle and into the Purkinje fibers.
The Purkinje fibers at the bottom of the heart have contact with the ventricular muscle
cells responsible for contracting the heart, causing blood flow [18] (pp. 414-415).
The activation sequence and the associated action potentials at different heart
regions are illustrated in Fig. 2.1. Notice that the baseline for the sinoatrial and AV
nodes exhibits a slope, indicating the presence of pacemaker cells. This is not the
case with the common bundle and ventricular muscles, which have a flat baseline.
2
==PAGE:10==
Sinoatrial node
AV node
Common bundle
Ventricular muscles
Action potenials
Fig. 2.1: Action potentials at different regions of the heart. Figure adapted from [18] (pp. 416)
and [8] (pp. 11).
When the membrane potential of a cell deviates from its resting value, an ionic current
flows from outside to inside the cell. A group of cells undergoing depolarization can
therefore be viewed as a small dipole current source - that is, a current vector with
both magnitude and direction. Summing all current vectors in the heart at a given
instance t = t0 produces a three-dimensional vector called the heart vector ⃗H(t0) [23].
Because depolarization occurs at different times in different regions of the heart,
these individual dipole current sources vary over time. Consequently, the heart vector
is also time-varying, ⃗H(t). Tracing out the curve that ⃗H(t) produces over one cardiac
cycle is called the time-varying heart vector trajectory, and it is periodic in t [8]. The
concept of the varying heart vector is illustrated in Fig. 2.2.
3
==PAGE:11==
1
2
3
4
Fig. 2.2: The heart vector at four different instances. Both the magnitude and direction changes
as different locations in the heart go through depolarization. Figure inspiration taken from [18] (pp.
418).
The standard 12-lead ECG is recorded using three electrodes placed on the limbs:
the right arm (RA), left arm (LA), and left leg (LL). An electrode is a conductive
interface that converts an ionic current in the body to an electrical current [21] (pp.
6). These three electrodes define three lead vectors
• From right arm to left arm, ⃗L1.
• From right arm to left leg, ⃗L2.
• From left arm to left leg, ⃗L3.
These vectors lie in a plane and together form an approximately equilateral triangle,
with the heart located near its center. This triangle, known as Einthoven’s triangle,
expresses the directional sensitivity of the lead vectors to the heart vector.
The
concept of Einthoven’s triangle is seen in Fig. 2.3.
4
==PAGE:12==
Fig. 2.3: The three lead vectors composing the sides of Einthoven’s triangle. Figure inspiration
taken from [18] (pp. 422).
There is a remarkable relationship between the heart vector, the lead vectors, and
the potential differences between the three body parts. Specifically, the time-varying
voltage difference between left arm and right arm (denoted I) corresponds to the
projection of the heart vector onto lead vector 1. Similarly, the voltage differences
between the left leg and right arm (II), and between the left leg and left arm (III),
correspond to projections onto lead vectors 2 and 3, respectively. Mathematically,
one has [18]
I = VLA −VRA = ⃗H(t) · ⃗L1
(2.1a)
II = VLL −VRA = ⃗H(t) · ⃗L2
(2.1b)
III = VLL −VLA = ⃗H(t) · ⃗L3
(2.1c)
These are referred to as bipolar limb leads. The connection between a limb voltage
difference and the projection of the heart vector onto the corresponding lead vector is
useful, because it allows the translation of easily measurable body surface potentials
into electrical heart activities.
Eqs.
2.1 are not linearly independent, due to the symmetry of the sides in
Einthovens’ triangle. For example, it follows that III = II −I. Although no new
information is gained by obtaining III when II and I are already known it remains
standard practice to measure all three bipolar limb leads. In addition to the bipo-
lar limb leads, there are also the augmented unipolar limb leads and the precordial
leads. These won’t be covered here; in particular, only the bipolar limb lead I will be
measured in this project.
A final electrode is placed on the right leg.
The function of this electrode is
not to define additional lead vectors but to serve as a reference voltage potential for
5
==PAGE:13==
the electrocardiograph. Sec. 4.1 investigates how and why this is an appropriate
technique.
Electrically, an ECG signal can be represented as a single differential voltage source
with voltage Vd(t). However, for modelling it is useful to represent the ECG as two
voltage sources with amplitudes Vd1(t) = Vd2(t) = Vd(t)
2
connected as shown in Fig.
2.4.
Right arm
Left arm
Fig. 2.4: ECG signal represented as two voltage sources.
2.2
ECG noise types and origins
ECG measurements are performed using electrodes on the body surface, and are
typically performed in medical environments. As a result, the recorded ECG signal
is often contaminated by various sources of electrical noise.
2.2.1
Electrode imperfections
A prerequisite for reliable body surface measurements is a low-impedance connection
between skin and the cable connecting the ECG amplifier. This connection is estab-
lished via ECG electrodes, which are commonly Ag/AgCl types with a pre-applied
gel at the contact point. The gel contains electrolytes (NaCl), providing a conductive
interface between the skin and the electrode.
At the Ag/AgCl interface there is a separation of charge resulting in a half-cell
potential. For Ag/AgCl electrodes, this potential is approximately VHC = 0.223 V
and can be modelled as a DC battery [22]. In addition, Assambo et al. [4] provides
a resistive and capacitive model of the electrode that at 50 Hz has an impedance of
Ze = 5.66kΩ∠−45◦. Incorporating these electrode imperfections into the model from
Fig. 2.4 yields the updated presentation in Fig. 2.5.
6
==PAGE:14==
Fig. 2.5: ECG signal and electrode imperfections.
2.2.2
Baseline drift
Baseline drift is a type of low-frequency noise caused by movement artifacts in the
electrode cables. It appears as a slowly varying sinusoidal signal that shifts the ECG
baseline over time. This drifting can interfere with heart rate calculation.
Heart rate is usually determined by measuring the time interval between consecu-
tive R-peaks. These peaks are detected by comparing the ECG signal to a predefined
threshold. When the baseline wanders, parts of the ECG that are not actual R-peaks
may exceed the threshold, falsely triggering a peak detection.
Conversely, actual
R-peaks may fall below the threshold and go undetected.
It doesn’t require much cable movement to introduce large drifts in the baseline,
which is why it is important the patient lies still during the ECG recording. The base-
line drift is modelled as a sinusoidal voltage source in the millivolt range, appearing
in both signal paths.
2.2.3
50 Hz hum
The most dominant noise source in ECG recordings is the 50Hz hum caused by power
line interference. The noise originates from electrical devices connected to the mains
supply in proximity of the electrocardiograph.
Electromagnetically, 50 Hz interference exists because electric field lines radiate
from power outlets (230Vrms) towards ground. Some of these field lines couple through
the body, the electrodes, and the electrode cables, inducing a potential on the con-
ductors.
Since the body is a relatively good conductor (as discussed in Sec. 4.1) the 50 Hz
noise appears nearly identical across the entire body. Because this voltage is common
to every part of the body it is referred to as a common-mode voltage Vcm. In the
circuit model, it is represented as a voltage source that elevates all local potentials
relative to building ground.
7
==PAGE:15==
Adding both baseline drift and 50 Hz interference into the previous model results in
the updated circuit shown in Fig. 2.6.
Fig. 2.6: ECG signal and all the associated noise sources.
2.3
Electrocardiograph standards and specifications
The International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) defines standards for electrocar-
diographs in IEC-60601-2-25. This standard specifies essential safety and performance
requirements, some of which - such as defibrillation protection - are beyond the scope
of this project.
The standard in [10] was reviewed, and a list of requirements that are both feasible
and relevant to this project is given below.
1. Amplitude and wave duration evaluation: When applying biological eval-
uation ECGs as input to the electrocardiograph, deviations in QRS amplitude
and duration at the output must not exceed ±40 µV and ±10 ms, respectively.
2. Input impedance: The input impedance shall be at least 2.5 MΩ.
3. CMRR: A 10 Vrms mains frequency signal with 200 pF source capacitance,
applied between building ground and all connected leads, shall not produce an
output signal greater than 1 mV.
4. Noise level: The noise level shall not exceed 30 µV peak-to-peak referred to
the input over a 10 s period.
5. Linearity and dynamic range: The electrocardiograph shall be capable of
recording a ±5 mV input signal.
6. Sampling and amplitude quantization: If uniform sampling is used, the
ECGs shall be sampled with at least 500 samples/sec. Amplitude quantization
shall be less than 5µV/LSB compared to the input.
Based on these standards, and with reference to [18], the following assumptions, speci-
fications, and design choices are made for the ECG signals and the electrocardiograph.
8
==PAGE:16==
• ECGs stemming from the body are assumed to have amplitudes in the range
±2.5 mV. The electrocardiograph will have headroom for an input signal with
a maximum range of ±5 mV.
• The relevant frequency content of the ECG is assumed to lie between 0.05 Hz
and 150 Hz.
• The electrocardiograph should introduce minimal phase distortion and group
delay. Passband amplitude distortion should be as low as possible, but is not a
strict priority.
• Prior to digitization, the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) shall be maximized using
analog noise-reduction techniques.
• The sampling frequency will be set to fs = 1000 Hz, using the STM32’s 12-bit
successive approximation ADC with a 3 V reference to record the ECGs.
• The microcontroller will perform real-time heart rate calculations. Additional
signal processing applied as a ”last touch” to enhance signal clarity may be
used, but should not further alter the ECG waveform.
9
==PAGE:17==
3
Technology overview
This section provides a brief critical overview of the technologies used in the project
and sheds light on why one method was chosen among a sea of alternatives. It also
offers a preview of the content and conclusions of later sections. More detailed anal-
yses are provided in their respective chapters.
3.1
Analog techniques
One key component whose inclusion in the electrocardiograph was predetermined is
the instrumentation amplifier (inamp). This component is ubiquitous in ECG ampli-
fiers due to its ability to reject common-mode noise and its excellent performance in
amplifying differential signals (see articles by Webster & Tompkins, Metting van Rijn
et al., Pall`as-Areny et al.). In this project, the chosen instrumentation amplifier is
the AD620 [1]. It is used as one of the first processing stages for the raw ECG signal
as it significantly improves the SNR.
The half-cell potential is removable with filters that reject the DC-component. One
possibility is a multiple feedback second order band pass filter located after the output
of the inamp, as suggested by Webster and Tompkins [21]. Analog Devices [2] suggests
using a DC servo loop, that passes the output signal of the inamp through an inverting
low pass filter and feeds it back to the inamp’s reference. This effectively suppresses
low-frequency components on the inamp’s output.
These methods maintain the inamp’s high input impedance and common-mode-
rejection-ratio but impose limitations on the inamp’s allowable differential gain, thereby
limiting the SNR improvement. Instead, this project uses a third approach proposed
by Pall`as-Areny et al. [19], which AC-couples the inamp’s front end with a differential
first order high pass filter. This configuration eliminates the DC offset before ampli-
fication. Although it reduces both input impedance and common-mode rejection, it
was chosen over the other methods because of its superior SNR enhancement and to
avoid complications with opamp saturation.
An anti-aliasing low pass filter is required before digitizing the ECGs. Three filter
types were evaluated; Butterworth, Chebyshev, and Bessel-Thompson [12]. Based
on the specifications in Sec. 2.3 the Bessel-Thompson type was chosen due to its
maximally flat group delay, which preserves waveform integrity.
In addition to the low pass filter, an optional notch filter was implemented using
an active twin-T network with adjustable quality factor. The twin-T network realizes
a third order filter, but exhibits a pole-zero cancellation if the component values are
chosen appropriately, allowing precise rejection of power line interference.
The STM32’s 12-bit ADC operates with a 3 V reference. To fully utilize its dynamic
range, the ECG amplifier output must be confined to the 0 - 3 V interval. Any more,
and the ADC is overdriven and can crash the microcontroller program; any less, and
the ADC’s dynamic range is not fully used leading to degraded resolution. To map
the ECG signal into this range, gain and offset stages were implemented using non-
inverting amplifiers in a two-stage configuration, allowing independent adjustment.
10
==PAGE:18==
This circuit uses two opamps. There exists topologies that only use one opamp to
adjust the gain and offset but they do not allow for independent tuning. Given the
availability of dual and quad opamp ICs, the two-stage approach was preferred. The
opamps used in the project were the OPA2156 (dual package), and the OPA4197
(quad package).
Huhta and Webster [9] proposed a method to reduce the common-mode voltage from
body to reference by driving the right leg electrode to the inverted common-mode
voltage, and feed it back into the body in a negative feedback loop. This idea is ex-
panded upon in this project by deriving an analytical expression for the improvement
in common-mode rejection when the driven right leg (DRL) circuit is employed. In
addition to the improved common-mode rejection, a stability problem associated with
the feedback loop is undesirably introduced. The stability problem is experimentally
combated using compensation.
Active cable drivers in the form of unity gain buffers were designed as attachment
boards that clip onto the electrodes. The drivers provide a low output impedance
that help reduce the noise pickup impedance and mitigates the power line interfer-
ence on the cables. A passive version of the attachment board was also made, and
the difference in SNR between the two is clear.
Finally, a shielded enclosure was constructed to suppress radiated noise pickup. The
enclosure was created by 3D printing a box with a removable lid and covering the
interior with conductive copper foil.
A conceptual block diagram of the analog noise reduction techniques is shown in Fig.
3.1.
High pass
Low pass
Notch
Inamp
DRL
ECG
Gain and
offset
Cable driver
Right leg
STM
STM
Shielded enclosure
Fig. 3.1: Block diagram of the analog noise reduction techniques.
3.2
Digital techniques
Further noise reduction is possible once the ECG is digitized. In particular, baseline
drift that harms the ECG visibility is suppressible.
For offline processing - i.e when the entire signal has been recorded - a sixth order
IIR Butterworth high pass filter was designed to attenuate frequencies below 1 Hz. It
used a forward-backward filtering scheme, as proposed by S¨ornmo [18] (pp. 462), to
avoid phase distortion.
11
==PAGE:19==
For real-time processing, the forward-backward scheme could not be used. Instead,
two linear phase high order FIR filters were designed; one using the frequency sampling
method, the other using the Parks-McClellan algorithm (also called equiripple or
minimax method) proposed in [15]. A downsampling scheme was also programmed
on the STM32 to accommodate for the frequency sampled filter’s excessively high
order. Both filters were applied using a multiply-and-accumulate scheme with the
CMSIS DSP software library, supported by the STM32 microcontroller.
Finally, the algorithm for calculating heart rate (HR) using a dynamic decision
rule suggested by Pan and Tompkins [14] was implemented in a simplified form.
A conceptual block diagram of the digital techniques is seen in Fig. 3.2.
ECG
Downsampling
Parks-McClellan
Frequency sampling
Filtered ECG
HR
Pan-Tompkins
Fig. 3.2: Block diagram of the digital noise reduction techniques. Either the equiripple filter is
used, or the frequency sampled filter with downsampling is used. The heart rate (HR) is always
provided, as well as the filtered ECG.
12
==PAGE:20==
4
Analysis of noise types and suppression methods
Given that the 50 Hz common-mode noise is by far the most dominant source of
interference in ECG recordings, it is appropriate to analyze this noise type first.
4.1
50 Hz common-mode voltage - initial model
As described in Sec. 2.2.3, electric field lines originating from mains couple through
the electrodes, the body, and the electrode cables. With circuit theory, this coupling
can be modelled using stray capacitances connected between the power lines and the
various conductors. In a three-electrode configuration - with the third electrode acting
as reference - an equivalent model can be constructed as in Fig. 4.1. In this model,
the body parts have an assumed resistance of 1kΩ. V1 and V2 correspond to the right
arm and left arm potential, respectively.
Fig. 4.1: Electrical model of the noise coupling from the power lines. Note that the ground symbol
denotes building ground.
The electrode stray capacitance Cel capacitively couples the power line voltage onto
the electrode. It can be estimated to be Cel = ε0
A
D = 8.85 pF/m · 5 cm2
2 m ≈2 fF using
the parallel-plate capacitor formula. A is the overlapping area between electrode clip
and power line, and D is the plate distance [6] (pp. 123). The electrode is assumed
to have an area of 5 cm2.
The stray capacitance between the power line and body (CPOW) and between body
and building ground (CBODY) have values that are taken from Metting van Rijn in
[13].
For the stray capacitance between an unshielded cable of diameter d, with a dis-
tance D to the power line in free space, the analytical formula is Ccable =
πε0
cosh−1( D
d )l
13
==PAGE:21==
[6] (pp. 166). Before applying this formula directly let’s investigate the behavior of
Ccable as a function of D
d . Fig. 4.2 shows, that when d and D are of comparable size,
Ccable is sensitive to small changes in D
d . In such a setting the stray capacitance may
vary between cables. When D is much larger than d, minute changes in the ratio
yields almost no change in Ccable, as seen by the curve flattening out. Specifically, the
difference in Ccable between D
d = 100 and D
d = 200 is approximately 1 dB, which is
relatively insignificant.
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
-15
-14
-13
-12
-11
-10
-9
-8
-7
-6
-5
Fig. 4.2: The cable capacitance as a function of the ratio D
d .
Based on this analysis, the precise distance between electrode cable and power line is
not critical to estimate the stray capacitance in our case. Additionally, the trend of
the curve suggests that even if the cables are moved far away from the power line the
stray capacitance would not be reduced significantly.
It is assumed that the cables all have a distance of D = 2 m to the power line,
they all have a conductor with diameter d = 4 mm and a length of l = 1 m. This
yields a capacitance of Ccable ≈4 pF for all cables.
The effect of the stray capacitances will be simulated shortly but to further extend
the model in Fig. 4.1 an analysis of instrumentation amplifiers in general is performed.
4.2
Common-mode suppression via instrumentation ampli-
fiers
A method to suppress a common-mode signal is to employ a differential amplifier,
particularly in the form of an instrumentation amplifier. A differential amplifier am-
plifies the voltage difference between its two input terminals by a differential gain Gd
(much greater than 1), while amplifying the common-mode voltage present on both
inputs by a common-mode gain Gcm (much less than 1).
The input impedance of a differential amplifier depends on its gain resistors, which
are often not very high, typically in the 10 - 100 kΩrange [1]. If such an amplifier
is used with a signal whose source resistance is comparable to the amplifier’s input
impedance, loading effects occur, and only a portion of the input signal is amplified
[7].
In the context of ECGs that inherently have small amplitudes it is of great interest
to avoid loading effects. Therefore, a high input impedance is required. An instru-
14
==PAGE:22==
mentation amplifier achieves this by having two non-inverting amplifiers in front of
the differential amplifier, as shown in Fig. 4.3 (a).
(a)
(b)
Fig. 4.3: (a) Circuit schematic for a three-opamp instrumentation amplifier. (b) Equivalent in-
put impedance model, showing both common-mode input impedance Rcm and differential input
impedance Rd.
An inamp comes in an integrated circuit, but it can also be constructed using three
discrete opamps and 7 resistors, as in Fig. 4.3 (a). Which implementation should be
chosen?
To not degrade the inamp’s performance it requires that the resistors are matched to
each other in the following way;
R1a = R1b,
R2a = R2b,
R3a = R3b
(4.1)
If the total differential gain should only depend on R1a and RG this can be done by
setting
R2a = R2b = R3a = R3b
(4.2)
Any mismatch in component values introduces a resistive asymmetry in the two sig-
nal paths leading into the differential amplifier. An asymmetry converts part of a
common-mode signal into a differential signal and will significantly worsen the per-
formance of the inamp [23]. It is shown in Sec. 13.1 in Appendix A that if resistor
mismatch is introduced such that
15
==PAGE:23==
R2a = R2b = R3b,
R3a = αR3b,
R1a = βR1b
(4.3)
the output of the inamp is given by
Vo =
1 + α
2

V2 −αV1 + R1a
RG
1 + α
2
+ αβ

(V2 −V1)
(4.4)
When a common-mode signal Vcm is present on both inputs, i.e., V1 = V2 = Vcm, Eq.
(4.4) simplifies to
Vo =
1 −α
2

|
{z
}
Gcm
Vcm
(4.5)
This result shows that as R3a deviates from R3b the common-mode gain increases. In
a scenario where 10%-tolerance resistors are used, the worst case value of α is
αworst = R3a
R3b
= 1.1R
0.9R = 1.22
(4.6)
yielding a common-mode gain of Gcm = −0.11 ≈−19dB. If the resistors are perfectly
matched (α = 1 and β = 1) Eq. (4.4) becomes
Vo =

1 + 2R1a
RG

|
{z
}
Gd
(V2 −V1)
(4.7)
In this case, the common-mode gain is reduced to 0 and the inamp behaves ideally.
Because even small mismatches can severely affect performance, it is much safer
to use a commercially available IC where the amplifier specs have been guaranteed by
the manufacturer, which is why the AD620 will be used. With Gd = 1000 its CMRR
is 130 dB. Its common-mode and differential input impedances are both 10 GΩ||2 pF
[1]. The AD620 uses the same topology as in Fig. 4.3 (a) and the manufacturer
specifies that
R1a = R1b = 24.7 kΩand R2a = R2b = R3a = R3b = 10 kΩ
(4.8)
This is the case with α = β = 1, so Eq. (4.7) can be used to calculate the differential
gain to be
Gd =
Vo
V2 −V1
= 1 + 2 · 24.7 kΩ
RG
= 1 + 49.4 kΩ
RG
(4.9)
which matches the formula for differential gain provided by the manufacturer [1],
where RG is an external gain resistor.
16
==PAGE:24==
The equivalent input impedance model of the inamp is seen in Fig. 4.3 (b).
The instrumentation amplifier requires a reference, but what should it be? To explore
this, consider what happens to the common-mode voltage if the reference is made to
be building ground, as in Fig. 4.4. Here, only the body stray capacitances have been
included.
The patient is also connected to building ground through the reference
electrode ZGE.
Fig. 4.4: Inamp reference and patient connected to building ground.
In this configuration, the common-mode voltage from body to reference has an am-
plitude of
|Vcm| =

ZCBODY||ZGE
ZCPOW + ZCBODY||ZGE
VPOW

= 325 V ·

1
j2π·50 Hz·300 pF||5.66 kΩ
1
j2π·50 Hz·3 pF +
1
j2π·50 Hz·300 pF||5.66 kΩ

= 325 V ·

−j10.6 MΩ||5.66 kΩ
−j1.06 GΩ−j10.6 MΩ||5.66 kΩ

= 1.71 mV
(4.10)
Due to the relatively low impedance of the reference electrode, most of the coupled
power line voltage is dropped across CPOW. This causes the common-mode voltage
from body to reference to be in the low millivolt range.
However, using building ground as reference is not permitted in medical instrumen-
tation systems for safety reasons. Instead, the system must operate with a floating
ground, ensuring isolation from building ground and the power lines.
Introducing a floating reference forms a new stray capacitance (CISO) between the
floating ground and building ground, with the same magnitude as CBODY [13]. The
new configuration is seen in Fig. 4.5.
17
==PAGE:25==
Fig. 4.5: Inamp with floating ground as reference and patient isolated from building ground. Notice
that the symbols for the reference ground (triangular ground) and building ground are different.
From here, the common-mode voltage from body to reference is determined analyti-
cally. The algebra is shown in Appendix A Sec. 13.2 and the result is
Vcm =
ZCBODY||(ZGE + ZCISO)
ZCPOW + ZCBODY||(ZGE + ZCISO) ·
ZGE
ZGE + ZCISO
VPOW
≈
ZCBODY||ZCISO
ZCPOW + ZCBODY||ZCISO
· ZGE
ZCISO
VPOW
(ZGE ≪ZCISO)
=
ZGE
ZCPOW
1 +
ZCISO
ZCPOW +
ZCISO
ZCBODY
VPOW
(4.11)
Plugging in values in Eq.
(4.11) shows that the amplitude of the common-mode
voltage is approximately |Vcm| = 0.86 mV. Note that this calculation is based on a
model, and may not represent the reality with complete certainty. Nevertheless, it
provides insight into the effect of using a floating reference.
Having a floating amplifier ground not only isolates the patient from building
ground; it is also a technique that decreases the common-mode voltage.
This is
because the impedance of CISO is magnitudes greater than ZGE, so the voltage drop
from body to reference decreases.
4.3
Common-mode voltage simulation results
The magnitude of Vcm should be minimized to decrease the severity of the situation,
should it happen that part of the common-mode voltage is converted to a differential
signal.
To investigate the coupling of common-mode voltage into the system, the circuit
in Fig. 4.1 is extended to include the isolation capacitor as well as the inamp input
impedances. Additionally, it was discovered that the model was not symmetric yield-
ing inaccurate results. It was converted to a delta configuration to accommodate the
asymmetry. The resulting circuit is seen in Fig. 4.6.
18
==PAGE:26==
Fig. 4.6: Extended and altered noise coupling model of Fig. 4.1. Note that the labels LA and RA
provide connections between two points without using wires, to enhance the clarity of the schematic.
The peak value of the voltages V1 and V2 are wished determined when driven by the
power line through the stray capacitors, as they are the input voltages to the inamp.
These are computed via simulation and are measured with respect to reference ground
(triangular ground).
Simulating with all stray capacitances active would obscure
the contribution of individual stages.
Therefore, each coupling stage is simulated
independently to understand their individual significance. The simulation results from
LTspice are seen in Table 1, where variations have been applied to the capacitances
as well.
Active capacitances
Cel1
Cel2
Cel3
CPOW
CBODY
Ccable1
Ccable2
V1
V2
V1 −V2
Electrodes
2 fF
2 fF
2 fF
–
–
–
–
3.6 µV
3.6 µV
0 µV
Electrodes
2 fF
4 fF
2 fF
–
–
–
–
4.8 µV
4.8 µV
0 µV
Electrodes
2 fF
3 fF
4 fF
–
–
–
–
5.5 µV
5.4 µV
0.1 µV
Body
–
–
–
3 pF
300 pF
–
–
1 mV
1 mV
0 mV
Body
–
–
–
2.7 pF
330 pF
–
–
0.87 mV
0.87 mV
0 mV
Body
–
–
–
3.3 pF
270 pF
–
–
1.15 mV
1.15 mV
0 mV
Cable
–
–
–
–
–
4 pF
4 pF
7.1 mV
7.1 mV
0 mV
Cable
–
–
–
–
–
3 pF
5 pF
6.5 mV
7.7 mV
-1.2 mV
Cable
–
–
–
–
–
2 pF
6 pF
6 mV
8.3 mV
-2.3 mV
Table 1: Simulation results of capacitive coupling from power lines to electrodes, body, and cables.
For the coupling between the electrodes and power lines, Table 1 shows that stray
capacitances are so small that the resulting common-mode voltage is in the µV range.
This corresponds to an amplitude approximately 60 dB lower than the amplitude
of an ECG signal. Therefore, it is reasonable to neglect the influence of the stray
capacitances Cel1, Cel2, and Cel3 in further analysis.
In contrast, for the stray capacitances between ground, body, and the power line,
the node voltages are in the millivolt range. This noise coupling should not be disre-
garded.
It is apparent that the cable coupling is most critical, producing a common-mode
voltage amplitude at several millivolts. Screenshots of one of the LTspice simulations
are seen in Sec. 15.1 Fig. 15.1.
4.4
Reducing noise voltage on cables
Now a cable noise reduction technique is devised. Before anything else, recall the
basic voltage amplifier model shown in Fig.
4.7 [7], where the amplifier and the
19
==PAGE:27==
source voltage both have building ground as reference. The resistances Rin ≫1 Ωis
the amplifier’s input resistance and Ro < 1 Ωis the amplifier’s output resistance.
Fig. 4.7: Voltage amplifier model with source resistance Rs, input resistance Rin, output resistance
Ro, and open circuit voltage gain Gvoc.
If Vin = 0 V, then observe that Ro provides a low impedance path from output to
ground. This provides us with a hint on how to reduce cable noise, as shall be seen
in a moment.
Consider a scenario in which a cable located near power lines is directly connected
to an amplifier with an input impedance of 10 GΩ||2 pF, and the amplifier reference
is building ground. From the perspective of the power line voltage looking into the
amplifier, the circuit model realizing the scenario is given in Fig. 4.8 to the left, and
its Norton equivalent to the right.
(a)
(b)
Fig. 4.8: (a) Noise coupling via the cable stray capacitance, when the signal is fed directly into the
inamp with building ground as reference. (b) The Norton equivalent circuit.
The circuit can be modelled as a noise current IN being injected into a pickup
20
==PAGE:28==
impedance Zpu, producing a noise voltage VN. At 50Hz, these quantities are given by
|IN| = |jωCcable1VPOW| = 0.41 µA
(4.12)
|Zpu| =

Rd1
jω (Ccable1 + Cd1) Rd1 + 1
 = 530 MΩ
(4.13)
|VN| =

jωCcable1Rd1VPOW
jω (Ccable1 + Cd1) Rd1 + 1
 = 216 V
(4.14)
From this model, the produced noise voltage is severely large.
The only ways to
reduce VN are to decrease the cable capacitance, or to reduce the pickup impedance.
The dominant factor is the pickup impedance because of its very large magnitude.
A way to decrease Zpu is to shunt the input impedance of the inamp with a low-
impedance path to ground. To do this, we drive the cable with a unity gain opamp
referenced to building ground, as shown in Fig. 4.9 (a). Only the buffer’s influence on
VN is of interest, so the input voltage is disregarded and Vin = 0V. This results exactly
in the scenario described for Fig. 4.7 earlier, where Ro provides a low impedance path
to ground. Incorporating this into the noise coupling circuit results in Fig. 4.9 (b).
(a)
(b)
Fig. 4.9: (a) Driving the cable with a unity gain opamp with a low output resistance of Ro =
0.25 mΩ. (b) The equivalent resistive and capacitive circuit.
The OPA2156 used in this project operated as a unity gain buffer has an output
resistance of Ro = 0.25 mΩ. The noise current remains the same, but the pickup
impedance now becomes
Zpu =
Rd1||Ro
jω(Ccable1 + Cd1)Rd1||Ro + 1
≈
Ro
jω(Ccable1 + Cd1)Ro + 1
≈Ro
(4.15)
with an associated noise voltage of
VN = INZpu = 0.1 nV
(4.16)
These results indicate that driving the cable with a unity gain buffer is sufficient to
attenuate the noise voltage caused by capacitive coupling from the cables. The cable
need not even be shielded.
21
==PAGE:29==
4.5
Driven right leg
A widely used technique for reducing common-mode voltage on the body is the driven
right leg circuit. It involves sensing the common-mode voltage on the body, amplifying
it, and injecting the amplified signal back into the body via the reference electrode
placed on the right leg. The technique relies on the principle of negative feedback,
which reduces the error e(t) between a reference signal f(t) and an output signal y(t).
A general block diagram realization of a negative feedback loop is seen in Fig. 4.10,
where F(s) is the Laplace transform of f(t), and G(s), H(s) represent the forward
and feedback path transfer functions, respectively.
Fig. 4.10: Block diagram of a negative feedback loop. Figure adapted from [12] (pp. 428).
The error signal in the Laplace domain is given by
E(s) = F(s)
1
G(s)H(s) + 1
(4.17)
As the feedback gain increases H(s) →∞, the error E(s) →0, meaning that the
output tracks the input.
In the context of ECGs, the error signal is the common-mode voltage Vcm. The driven
right leg circuit shown in Fig. 4.11 implements this negative feedback loop. Strictly
speaking, the driven right leg circuit actually implements positive feedback, because
the voltage VB is fed straight back to Vcm. However, because of the inverting amplifier
stage the circuit in total implements a negative feedback loop.
Fig. 4.11: Circuit schematic for a DRL network. Circuit taken from [9] but slightly modified.
22
==PAGE:30==
Analysis involving determination of Vcm in Fig. 4.11 analytically is not trivial. The
derivation can be found in Section 13.4 in Appendix A. Under the assumption that
ZGE ≪ZCISO and that the opamps are ideal Vcm is approximately given by
Vcm ≈
ZGE
ZCPOW
(β(s) + 1)

1 +
ZCISO
ZCPOW +
ZCISO
ZCBODY
VPOW
(4.18)
with
β(s) = R2
R1
1
sC1R2 + 1
(4.19)
Comparing this expression for Vcm to the case without the driven right leg circuit in
Eq. (4.11) reveals that
Gcm, DRL =
Vcm (with DRL)
Vcm (without DRL)
=
1
β(s) + 1
(4.20)
In words; the driven right leg circuit attenuates the common-mode voltage by a factor
equal to the magnitude of the inverting amplifier’s gain plus one.
This naturally raises the questions: Why not let β(s) →∞to eliminate Vcm en-
tirely, and what is the purpose of C1?
The reason for not allowing β(s) →∞is that the system is not necessarily stable
for all values of β(s). The DRL circuit operates as a feedback loop. It might happen
that the voltage being fed back to the summing point is of the same polarity as Vcm.
In that case, the negative feedback loop in Fig. 4.10 would become positive feedback
and the error in Eq. 4.17 would instead become
E(s) = F(s)
1
1 −G(s)H(s)
(4.21)
It follows from Eq. 4.21, that if there exists a frequency s = jω0 where
G(jω0)H(jω0) = 1
(4.22)
it results in a singularity causing the error signal to become unbounded. This condi-
tion indicates instability and is to be avoided by appropriately choosing a value for
the compensation capacitor C1.
To evaluate the stability of a feedback system, the phase margin ϕm of the open
loop transfer function Tol(s) = G(s)H(s) is investigated. The phase margin must be
positive for the closed loop system to be stable. If not, the open loop system’s Nyquist
plot encircles the point (−1, 0) clockwise which induces a right-half-plane pole in the
closed loop transfer function [12] (pp. 493). The closer ϕm is to 0◦the closer the
system is to instability.
For positive feedback systems, the phase margin is defined as
23
==PAGE:31==
ϕm = ∠Tol(jωcross) −0◦
(4.23)
where the crossover frequency ωcross is the frequency at which |Tol(jω)| = 0 dB [12]
(pp. 491). Tol(s) is found as the product of all transfer functions in the loop, when
the loop is opened. An open loop configuration is seen in Fig. 4.12 (a).
While it is possible to perform an analytical derivation of the open loop transfer
function for the DRL circuit, it is imprecise and not worth the effort. In particular, the
assumption that the opamps are ideal is invalid, as real opamps have finite bandwidth
and other imperfections that affect the stability.
To account for these limitations, the phase margin is evaluated using simulations with
an appropriate opamp model rather than with symbolic analysis. The equivalent open
loop circuit, in which Vcm is driven by an AC voltage source, is shown in Fig. 4.12
(b).
(a)
(b)
Fig. 4.12: (a) The simple feedback loop investigated in open loop configuration. (b) The associated
open loop driven right leg circuit.
A safety resistor of 18 kΩhas been added at the output of the inverting amplifier to
prevent lethal currents from being injected into the body in the case of a fault. This
resistor was omitted from earlier schematics as its inclusion complicates the analyti-
cal analysis. The opamp model chosen was the OP227 as it was the closest possible
match for the OPA2156 available in LTspice.
To obtain the open loop frequency response, an AC sweep is performed by exciting
the system with a voltage source Vcm(jω) = 1V for all ω, while monitoring the output
voltage VB(jω). The open loop frequency response is then given by
Tol(jω) = VB(jω)
Vcm(jω) = VB(jω)
(4.24)
We begin by selecting R1 = 1kΩ, R2 = 100kΩ, and remove the compensation capacitor
by setting C1 = 0. This results in β(s) = 100. The previously described AC sweep is
performed on the circuit in Fig. 4.12 (b) and the resulting Bode plot is shown in Fig.
4.13.
24
==PAGE:32==
10 2
10 4
10 6
-20
0
20
40
10 2
10 4
10 6
-200
-100
0
100
200
Fig. 4.13: Bode plot of the open loop driven right leg circuit in Fig. 4.12. The part values are
R1 = 1 kΩ, R2 = 100 kΩ, C1 = 0 nF. The phase margin is ϕm = −6.6◦.
The phase margin is −6.6◦indicating that the closed loop system will be unstable.
Introducing a compensation pole by setting C1 = 1 nF and C1 = 10 nF, one obtains
the Bode plots in Fig. 4.14 (a) and (b).
25
==PAGE:33==
10 2
10 4
10 6
-20
0
20
40
10 2
10 4
10 6
-200
-100
0
100
200
10 2
10 4
10 6
-20
0
20
40
10 2
10 4
10 6
-200
-100
0
100
200
(a)
(b)
Fig. 4.14: (a) Phase margin of 32◦when using a 1 nF capacitor. (b) Phase margin of 84◦when
using a 10 nF capacitor.
This demonstrates that a compensation capacitor of C1 = 1 nF and C1 = 10 nF
yield a phase margin of ϕm = 32◦and ϕm = 84◦respectively. A phase margin of
60◦is typically aimed for [12] (pp.
493).
To provide a safety margin, we choose
C1 = 10 nF. Although a phase margin of 84◦may seem excessive, it is important to
recognize that the results are based on model that may not represent reality perfectly.
A consequence of choosing a large compensation capacitor is that it lowers the fre-
quency of the compensation pole.
This causes an early roll-off in the magnitude
response of the Bode plot, ultimately leading to the closed loop system having a nar-
rower bandwidth. This narrower bandwidth causes the transient response associated
with the onset of an input signal to decay slower.
Transient simulations showed,
26
==PAGE:34==
however, that the longer decay time was insignificant. Finally, note that
βss = |β(j2π · 50)| =

100 kΩ
1 kΩ
1
j2π · 50 Hz · 10 nF · 100 kΩ+ 1
 = 95.4
(4.25)
4.6
Noise reduction techniques simulated
Several simulations are now performed to evaluate the impact of the noise reduction
techniques on the common-mode voltage. The simulation circuit is shown in Fig.
4.15. Notice
• the unity gain buffers connected to each electrode,
• the isolation capacitor CISO between building ground and amplifier ground,
• the driven right leg circuit that senses Vcm = V1+V2
2
and injects it back into the
body.
Fig. 4.15: Circuit used for simulating all the covered techniques. Each method is tested individually
and in different combinations by removing or disconnecting different components at a time.
The techniques are tested individually and in different combinations to appreciate
their individual noise reducing effects. The results are summarized in Table 2.
DRL
Isolation
Driven cable
V1+V2
2
No
No
No
9.2 mV
No
No
Yes
4.2 mV
No
300 pF
No
5.9 mV
No
300 pF
Yes
3.27 mV
No
3 pF
Yes
2.42 mV
βss = 95.4
No
No
95 µV
βss = 95.4
No
Yes
43.4 µV
βss = 95.4
300 pF
No
93.1 µV
βss = 95.4
300 pF
Yes
42.5 µV
βss = 95.4
3 pF
Yes
18.6 µV
Table 2: Overview of simulation results stemming from several combinations.
27
==PAGE:35==
The common-mode voltage is reduced significantly when the driven right leg circuit is
active. Driving the cable decreases the common-mode signal even further. Introducing
an isolation capacitor of 300 pF with the DRL circuit active does not have a great
effect. Decreasing CISO to 3 pF shows much greater effect, indicating that proper
isolation is important in noise reduction.
4.7
Electrode half-cell potential and baseline drift
In addition to common-mode interference, baseline drift and half-cell potentials are
also present. The ECG signal along with the noise sources can be collected in a model
illustrated in Fig. 4.16.
Fig. 4.16: The electrical model of the recording situation with the different noise sources present.
In the ideal case, both differential branches would encounter identical conditions.
That is, the half-cell potentials would each be 223 mV, and the baseline drift would
be synchronized in phase, amplitude, and frequency. In such a scenario, the output
of the inamp would be
Vo = Gd ([Vcm + Vd1 + VHC −VBASE] −[Vcm −Vd2 + VHC −VBASE])
= Gd(Vd2 + Vd1)
(4.26)
However, such perfect symmetry cannot be guaranteed in practice. In particular, the
half-cell potentials may differ between the electrodes. For example, one electrode could
have VHC,1 = 123mV and the other have VHC,2 = 223mV, resulting in ∆VHC = 100mV.
This asymmetry introduces an additional voltage at the inamp’s output
Vo = Gd(Vd2 + Vd1) + ∆VHCGd
= Gd(Vd2 + Vd1) + 0.1Gd V
(4.27)
Such an offset limits the possible differential gain. The output swing for the AD620
is Vo ∈[VEE + 1.1 V, VCC −1.2 V] [1]. To avoid the inamp saturating when powered
28
==PAGE:36==
by 9 V batteries it is required that
Gd(Vd2 + Vd1) + 0.1Gd V < VCC −1.2 V
0.005Gd + 0.1Gd V < 7.8 V
0.105Gd V < 7.8 V
Gd <
7.8 V
0.105 V ≈74
(4.28)
A differential gain of 74 is not adequate here, as the intended gain is Gd = 1000. A
solution to these gain-limiting half-cell potentials is to AC-couple the inamp by placing
a passive high pass filter in front of the input terminals [19]. The configuration is seen
in Fig. 4.17.
Fig. 4.17: AC-coupled front end inamp used to attenuate the electrode half-cell potentials.
It is shown in Sec. 13.3 in Appendix A that the transfer function from Vid to Vod,
assuming that C1 = C2 = C and R1 = R2 = R3 = R4 = R, is
Ghigh-pass(s) =
s
s +
1
RC
(4.29)
which is the transfer function of a first order high pass filter with cutoff frequency
fc =
1
2πRC
(4.30)
With component values C = 1 µF and R = 4.7 MΩ, this yields fc = 0.03 Hz, which
removes the half-cell potential and the inherent ECG DC-value. A disadvantage of
using this circuit is that it can introduce asymmetries in the differential signal paths.
29
==PAGE:37==
The advantage is that it does not put any restrictions on the differential gain. At DC,
the differential input impedance is
Zid, (DC) = R1 + R2 = 9.4 MΩ
(4.31)
At AC the differential input impedance of the front end is
Zid, (AC) =

R1||

1
jωC1
+ R3

+

R3||

1
jωC2
+ R4

= 2

R1||

1
j2πfC1
+ R3

≈2(R1||R3) = 4.7 MΩfor f ≫1 Hz
(4.32)
where the inamp input is considered an open circuit as its input impedance is mag-
nitudes greater than the front end impedances.
The DC and AC input impedances are in compliance with the IEC standards. Other
techniques for suppressing the DC offset on the input signal exist, for example a DC
servo loop. They won’t be covered here.
To summarize, a list of the noise reduction techniques is given here:
• Use of an instrumentation amplifier for high differential gain and high input
impedance.
• Driven electrode cable.
• Floating ground as amplifier reference.
• Driven right leg.
• Passive first order high pass filter to AC couple inamp front end.
30
==PAGE:38==
5
Signal conditioning stages
This section covers the filters and fine-tuning stages necessary for the ECG signal to
be properly sampled.
5.1
Sampling and quantization
Sampling a continuous-time signal f(t) with a sampling period Ts corresponds to
evaluating the signal at discrete points t = kTs =
k
fs, k ∈Z [12]. Conversely, re-
constructing the continuous-time signal from its samples using linear interpolation
corresponds to the substitution k = tfs.
The sampling operation has serious consequences for sinusoidal signals. Consider, for
example, sampling a 7 Hz cosine wave with sampling frequency fs = 10 Hz.
cos(2π · 7t)
sampling
−−−−−−−−−→
fs=10 Hz
cos
14π
10 k

= cos(1.4πk)
= cos
 (−0.6π + 2π)k

= cos(−0.6πk + 2πk)
= cos(−0.6πk)
= cos(0.6πk)
(5.1)
Reconstruction then gives
cos(0.6πk)
reconstruction
−−−−−−−−−−−→cos(0.6π · 10t)
= cos(6πt)
= cos(2π · 3t)
(5.2)
The original signal was cos(2π·7t) but the reconstructed signal is cos(2π·3t). This phe-
nomenon is called aliasing and it happens because discrete sinusoids are 2π-periodic
in k [12].
In general, when sampling a continuous-time cosine wave f(t) = cos(ωt) the result is
a discrete-time signal
f[k] = cos
 ω
fs
k

= cos(Ωk)
(5.3)
where Ω∈[0, π] is called a normalized frequency [12].
Any physically realizable signal can be synthesized as a sum of scaled and phase
shifted cosine functions [12]. From this it follows, that time-domain signals that are
not inherently sinusoidal also suffer from the problem of having aliases. Nyquist’s
theorem states that to avoid aliasing it requires
fs
2 > B
(5.4)
where B is the signal bandwidth [12] (pp. 321). Real-world signals are time-limited
and thus have infinite bandwidth, meaning the Nyquist condition is not satisfiable.
31
==PAGE:39==
The only way to mitigate aliasing for physically realizable signals is to suppress the
spectral content above fs
2 .
The STM32’s N = 12 bit successive approximation ADC operates with a Vref = 3 V
reference voltage. It follows that the bit resolution is
∆VLSB = Vref
2N = 3 V
212 = 0.73 mV
(5.5)
In a successive approximation ADC, if the input voltage lies between two quantization
levels, the ADC outputs the code of the lower level. For instance, if the input voltage
is Vin = 0.6 mV the ADC sees it as 0 V and outputs the bit-code 0b00, despite the
fact that 0.6 mV is closer to 0.73 mV than 0 V. This is called a biased ADC because
the quantization error e(t) = fanalog(t) −fdigital(t) is always greater than zero.
The ADC can be bias-corrected by internally offsetting the input voltage by ∆VLSB
2
causing the ADC to round the input voltage to the nearest quantization level rather
than truncating. This concept is seen in Fig. 5.1 (a) and (b).
0
0.73
1.46
2.19
2.92
0
0.73
1.46
2.19
2.92
(a)
(b)
Fig. 5.1: (a) and (b) shows the bit-code as a function of input voltage for a biased and unbiased ADC
respectively. In the biased case, the input voltage must be greater than or equal to a quantization
level for the bit code to change.
The STM32’s datasheet does not specify whether the ADC is biased or unbiased. To
be on the safe side, the ADC is assumed to be unbiased. In that case, an input voltage
of 0.73 mV
2
= 0.365 mV will toggle the least significant bit of the ADC. Because the
dynamic range is
DR = 20 log10

3 V
0.365 mV

≈78 dB
(5.6)
it follows that the ADC won’t detect input signals whose amplitudes are more than
78 dB below Vref.
5.2
Sallen-Key sensitivity analysis
The ambiguity introduced by aliasing is undesirable, as it causes high-frequency com-
ponents to appear as low-frequency signals. To avoid this, an anti-aliasing filter in
32
==PAGE:40==
the form of an analog low pass filter is used prior to sampling. There are two widely
used circuit topologies that implement analog filters: a Sallen-Key circuit, and the
multiple-feedback circuit. A Sallen-Key low pass filter uses one opamp and four com-
ponents, while the multiple-feedback filter uses one opamp and five components. The
multiple-feedback circuit is often used for filters with a low damping ratio [24]. This
is not going to be the case in our particular anti-aliasing filter. Therefore, the Sallen-
Key topology is chosen, as it is the topology that requires the fewest components.
The Sallen-Key topology with unity gain seen in Fig. 5.2 will be employed.
Fig. 5.2: Circuit schematic for a Sallen-Key low pass filter.
As derived in Sec. 13.5 in Appendix A, the transfer function from Vin to Vo is
H(s) =
1
C1C2R1R2
s2 + s

1
C2R2 +
1
C2R1

+
1
C1C2R1R2
(5.7)
In general, a second order low pass transfer function can be expressed in two standard
forms: a mathematical form and a physical form [12] (pp. 434).
Hmath(s) =
b0
s2 + a1s + a0
(5.8)
Hphysical(s) = K
ω2
n
s2 + ωn
Q s + ω2
n
(5.9)
Here, a1, a0, b0 are real coefficients, and Q, ωn are the quality factor and undamped
resonance frequency, respectively.
The challenge in filter design lies in matching a desired transfer function in the form
of Eq. (5.8) by selecting suitable component values that produce the desired coeffi-
cients. At this point it is not obvious how to do that. There are more components
than there are coefficients, and changing one component might affect multiple coef-
ficients. Moreover, there might exist certain component combinations that make the
filter more robust to component drift.
To investigate how individual components influence the filter, a sensitivity analysis is
carried out. The sensitivity of a parameter y with respect to a component x is defined
as [11] (pp. 263)
33
==PAGE:41==
Sy
x = x
y
∂y
∂x
(5.10)
The value of Sy
x can be interpreted as: if x changes by 1 % then y changes by Sy
x %
in response. The two obvious parameters to perform the sensitivity analysis on is Q
and ωn. By comparing Eq. (5.7) with Eq. (5.9), these parameters can be expressed
in terms of component values as:
ωn =
r
1
C1C2R1R2
and Q =
√C1C2R1R2
C1R2 + C1R1
(5.11)
Application of Eq. (5.10) on the expressions for ωn and Q is done in Sec. 15.2 in
Appendix C. The analysis showed that
Sωn
x
= −1
2
(5.12)
regardless of whether x is C1, C2, R1 or R2. In words; a 1% increase in any of the four
components results in a 0.5 % decrease in ωn. For Q, the results were

























SQ
C1
= −1
2
SQ
C2
= 1
2
SQ
R1
= 1
2
R2−R1
R1+R2
SQ
R2
= 1
2
R1−R2
R1+R2
(5.13)
These expressions show that Q is sensitive to mismatch between R1 and R2.
To
eliminate this sensitivity, we establish the constraint R1 = R2 = R causing SQ
R1 =
SQ
R2 = 0. This component constraint causes the transfer function in Eq. (5.7) to
become
H(s) =
1
C1C2R2
s2 + 2s
1
C2R +
1
C1C2R2
(5.14)
The constraint not only simplifies the design by eliminating a variable, it also elimi-
nates component sensitivity. Comparison of (5.14) with Eq. (5.8) reveals that
a1 = 2 1
C2R and a0 =
1
C1C2R2
(5.15)
Isolating R in the expression for a1 gives R = 2
1
C2a1 which with insertion into the
expression for a0 gives
a0 = C2
2a2
1
4C1C2
⇔
4a0
a2
1
= C2
C1
(5.16)
34
==PAGE:42==
Similarly, isolating C2 in Eq. (5.16) gives C2 = 4C1a0
a2
1
which with insertion into the
expression for a1 with R isolated gives
R = 2
a2
1
4C1a0a1
=
a1
2C1a0
(5.17)
Eq. (5.16) and (5.17) define component constraints that guide the selection of values
to achieve a desired filter transfer function. With these constraints in place, the next
step is to choose the type of anti-aliasing filter.
5.3
Anti-aliasing filter type selection and implementation
To guard against aliasing, the spectral content must be attenuated by at least 78 dB
above fs
2 , assuming the spectral content beyond this point has an amplitude equal
to the full-scale ADC input. From the system specifications in Sec. 2.3, a cutoff
frequency of fc = 150 Hz and a sampling frequency of fs = 1000 Hz are prescribed.
To assess the attenuation at fs
2 = 500Hz, we consider an nth-order order unity gain low
pass filter. Since there are approximately two octaves from 150Hz to 500Hz, assuming
an immediate amplitude roll-off at cutoff the expected gain at fs
2 is approximately
n = 2 :
H

j2πfs
2
 ≈−24 dB
n = 4 :
H

j2πfs
2
 ≈−48 dB
n = 6 :
H

j2πfs
2
 ≈−72 dB
These estimates indicate that not even sixth order filter would be sufficient to fully
guard against aliasing. However, the assumption that the ECG content above 500 Hz
has full-scale amplitude is incredible cautious. A more realistic assumption is that
the ECG spectrum itself decays at 6dB/oct beyond 150Hz. Under this condition, the
fourth order filter would achieve −60 dB magnitude at fs
2 while the sixth order filter
has −84 dB magnitude.
Given this, the fourth order filter is chosen. Although it does not completely eliminate
aliasing it saves two opamps compared to the sixth order filter, which is deemed a
favorable tradeoff.
At this point, the appropriate filter type must be selected. There are three relevant
choices [12]:
1. Butterworth filter - has poles on the unit circle and maximally flat magnitude
response in the passband.
2. Chebyshev filter - has poles on an ellipse and a sharp roll-off.
3. Bessel-Thomson filter - transfer function determined by Bessel polynomial, pro-
viding uniform passband group delay.
35
==PAGE:43==
Each filter type presents specific trade-offs. The Butterworth filter introduces non-
uniform time delay in its passband. The Chebyshev filter has ripples in its amplitude
response. The Bessel-Thomson filter has a slow roll-off [12].
The property that gives the Bessel-Thomson its uniform group delay is its linear phase
response. To see this, consider a filter with unity gain that delays its input component
by a group delay td, such that the output y(t) to an input f(t) becomes
input: f(t) = cos(ωt)
output: y(t) = cos

ω(t −td)

= cos

ωt −ωtd

(5.18)
The group delay td manifests as a phase delay ωtd of the cosine function [12]. The
steady state response of an LTIC system with transfer function H(s) subjected to the
input f(t) is given by [12]
y(t) = |H(jω)| · cos

ωt + ∠H(jω)

(5.19)
By comparing Eqs. (5.18) and (5.19) it follows that
∠H(jω) = −ωtd
⇔
td = −d
dω∠H(jω)
(5.20)
which implies that if the derivative of ∠H(jω) is a constant (i.e. ∠H(jω) is a straight
line) then the group delay is also a constant. That is, all input components are delayed
equally. A consequence of a filter with constant group delay for all signal components
is that the timing of events or excursions are not affected. In other words; waveform
integrity is maintained.
A comparison of fourth order Butterworth, Chebyshev, and Bessel-Thomson filters
with a normalized cutoff frequency of 1 rad/s is shown in Fig. 5.3.
36
==PAGE:44==
10 -1
10 0
10 1
-40
-20
0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
-400
-300
-200
-100
0
10 -1
10 0
10 1
0
5
10
Bessel
Butterworth
Chebyshev
Fig. 5.3: Comparison between the magnitude response, phase response, and group delay of the
three filter types. The x-axis of the phase response plot is made linear to show the phase linearity
of the Bessel-Thomson filter.
Precise detection of the R-R intervals in the ECGs are of interest in this thesis. For
this reason, the Bessel-Thomson filter is chosen. From the look-up table in Appendix
B, Sec. 14.1 [5], the pole locations for a fourth order Bessel-Thomson low pass filter
with ωc = 1 rad/s are obtained.
These correspond to two cascaded second order
stages:
HBessel(ˆs) =
2.0453
ˆs2 + 2.7401ˆs + 2.0453
|
{z
}
stage 1
·
2.5707
ˆs2 + 1.9904ˆs + 2.5707
|
{z
}
stage 2
(5.21)
where ˆs denotes that the filter is frequency normalized. The sensitivity analysis from
earlier resulted in the two component constraints
C2
C1
= 4a0
a2
1
and R =
a1
2a0C1
The design process of choosing appropriate component values using these constraints
is seen in Sec. 13.6 in Appendix A. It involves choosing normalized frequency com-
ponents, performing frequency scaling on the capacitors to move the cutoff frequency
to 150Hz, and implement impedance scaling to achieve reasonable component values.
For the first stage, this yielded the component values:
C1 = 15 nF,
C2 = 15 nF,
R = 47 kΩ
(5.22)
37
==PAGE:45==
The process was carried out on stage 2 as well, resulting in the component values
R3 = R4 = 39 kΩand C3 = 10 nF, C4 = 27 nF. The complete fourth order Bessel-
Thomson filter is implemented by two cascaded Sallen-Key stages, as shown in Fig.
5.4.
Fig. 5.4: Two cascaded Sallen-Key networks implementing a fourth order Bessel-Thomson filter.
The amplitude response, phase response and group delay are presented in Fig. 5.5.
Notably, the group delay is maximally flat in the passband.
10 1
10 2
10 3
-60
-40
-20
0
10 1
10 2
10 3
-300
-200
-100
0
10 1
10 2
10 3
0
1
2
Fig. 5.5: Amplitude response, phase response, and group delay of the Bessel-Thomson filter. Notice
that the group delay is maximally flat in the passband.
5.4
Notch filter
Although several techniques have already been applied to attenuate power line inter-
ference, residual components at 50 Hz may still be present. To address this, a notch
filter is employed to selectively attenuate a single frequency, ω0. A second order notch
filter has a transfer function of the form [12]
H(s) =
s2 + ω2
0
s2 + (2ω0 cos θ)s + ω2
0
(5.23)
38
==PAGE:46==
The transfer function has a pair of purely imaginary conjugated zeros at s = ±jω0.
The presence of these zeros causes complete attenuation of the frequency component
ω0 in any signal passing through the filter.
To see this, let f(t) = cos(ω0t) be the input to the notch filter. The steady state
response is then
yss(t) = |H(jω0)| · cos

ω0t + ∠H(jω0)

=

(jω0)2 + ω2
0
(jω0)2 + (2ω0 cos θ)jω0 + ω2
0
 · cos

ω0t + ∠H(jω0)

= 0 · cos

ω0t + ∠H(jω0)

= 0
(5.24)
It’s interesting to investigate the effect of the pole locations on the amplitude response.
When θ = 0◦, the poles are purely real and located at s = −ω0. When θ = 90◦the
poles are purely imaginary and conjugated, located at s = ±jω0. Fig. 5.6 shows the
amplitude response for different values of θ.
Fig. 5.6: Amplitude response of notch filter described by Eq. (5.23). Figure replicated from [12]
(pp. 502).
The notch filter distorts the amplitude of other frequency components than ω0. For
low values of θ, the poles are predominantly real and the amplitude response shows
slow recovery from the notch, indicating poor selectivity. For high values of θ, the
imaginary component dominates, and the amplitude response exhibits a fast recovery,
as with the case of θ = 87◦.
A circuit used for implementing analog notch filters with adjustable selectivity is the
active twin-T circuit with feedback, shown in Fig. 5.7.
39
==PAGE:47==
Fig. 5.7: Circuit schematic for a twin-T circuit used for notch filter implementation.
Analysis of the circuit has been included as the system exhibits an interesting pole-
zero cancellation. To begin, note that VB = Vo and VD = αnotchVo, where αnotch ∈[0, 1]
is the position of the potentiometer wiper. The node equations are















VA−Vin
R1
+ VA−Vo
R2
+ sC3(VA −αnotchVo)
= 0
Vo−VA
R2
+ sC2(Vo −VC)
= 0
VC−αnotchVo
R3
+ sC1(VC −Vin) + sC2(VC −Vo)
= 0
(5.25)
Solving Eqs. (5.25) yields a third order transfer function of the form
H(s) = Vo(s)
Vin(s) = b3s3 + b2s2 + b1s + 1
a3s3 + a2s2 + a1s + 1
(5.26)
where the coefficients are given by
b3 = C1C2C3R1R2R3
b2 = C1C2R3(R1 + R2)
b1 = R3(C1 + C2)
a3 = C1C2C3R1R2R3
a2 = −αnotchR1C3(C1R3 + [R2 + R3]C2) + R1R3(C1C2 + C1C3 + C2C3) + C1C2R1R3 + C2C3R1R3
a1 = αnotch(C2R1 −C2R2 −C3R1) + C1R3 + C2R1 + C2R2 + C2R3 + C3R1
Analysis of these expressions are impractical. To simplify the problem, all coefficients
in the numerator are wished normalized to the same time constant τ = RC raised to
different powers. That is,















C1C2C3R1R2R3
= (RC)3
C1C2R3(R1 + R2)
= (RC)2
R3(C1 + C2)
= RC
R3
= R
C3
= C
(5.27)
40
==PAGE:48==
Solving Eqs. (5.27) gives
R1 = R2 = 2R,
C1 = C2 = C
2
(5.28)
With these, the transfer function in Eq. (5.26) becomes much more manageable,
H(s) =
(RC)3s3 + (RC)2s2 + RCs + 1
(RC)3s3 + (5 −4αnotch)(RC)2s2 + (5 −αnotch)RCs + 1
=
τ 3s3 + τ 2s2 + τs + 1
τ 3s3 + (5 −4αnotch)τ 2s2 + (5 −αnotch)τs + 1
=

(τs + 1)(τ 2s2 + 1)

(τs + 1)(τ 2s2 + 4(1 −αnotch)τs + 1)
=
τ 2s2 + 1
τ 2s2 + 4(1 −αnotch)τs + 1
=
s2 +
  1
τ
2
s2 + 4(1−αnotch)
τ
s +
  1
τ
2
=
s2 +
  1
RC
2
s2 + 4(1−αnotch)
RC
s +
  1
RC
2
(5.29)
Observe that during the reduction of the transfer function, the term τs + 1 appears
in both the numerator and denominator, leading to a pole-zero cancellation. This
cancellation reduces the system order from three to two, and results in a transfer
function of the same form as in Eq. (5.23). Choosing, R = 68 kΩand C = 47 nF
results in a notch frequency of
ω0 = 317.5 rad/s
⇒
f0 = 50.5 Hz
(5.30)
The circuit in Fig. 5.7 was implemented in LTspice and its amplitude response was
simulated for three values of αnotch, as shown in Fig. 5.8. The selectivity is finest for
high values of αnotch, but since the notch is not located exactly at 50Hz a wider notch
may be more appropriate to ensure attenuation of mains hum.
41
==PAGE:49==
10 1
10 2
-120
-100
-80
-60
-40
-20
0
Fig. 5.8: Simulated amplitude response for twin-T circuit with three different values for αnotch.
Intuitively, tight matching of component values is required for a selective notch filter.
To explore this, we investigate the impact of a ±10% deviation in nominal component
values. In Fig. 5.9, each subplot shows three curves. They indicate the effect of
varying a single component while keeping αnotch = 0.85. This is done for R1, R3, and
C1, C3.
0
50
-80
-60
-40
-20
0
0
50
-80
-60
-40
-20
0
0
50
-80
-60
-40
-20
0
0
50
-80
-60
-40
-20
0
0
(a)
(c)
(b)
(d)
Fig. 5.9: Amplitude response with ±10% variation in component values. (a) and (b) show the
amplitude response when R1 and R3 are varied from their nominal value, respectively. Figure (c)
and (d) show the impact of deviating C1 and C3, respectively.
It is evident that deviations in R3 and C3 have the biggest impact on the amplitude
response. Both the depth and location of the notch changes. Investigation of the
pole-zero map in Fig. 5.10 with varying values of R3 shows why this happens. The
crosses are pole locations, the circles are zero locations.
42
==PAGE:50==
-300
-250
-200
-150
-100
-50
-300
-200
-100
100
200
300
Fig. 5.10: Pole-zero map of the notch filter with R3 varying ±10% from its nominal value. The
blue pole-zero pair correspond to a +10% deviation, the red a −10% deviation, and the black no
deviation.
The plot indicates that deviations in R3 do not affect the pole-zero cancellation, as
seen to the left in Fig. 5.10. However, the locations of the complex conjugate zeros
near the jω-axis are affected. When R3 is at its nominal value, the zeros lie on the
imaginary axis. For deviating values of R3 the zeros shift to the left (−10%) or the
right (+10%). It is this movement of zeros that destroys the notch filter’s ability to
attenuate one specific frequency.
5.5
Gain and offset stage
After the signal passes through the various filter stages, it may still not be ready for
sampling. The input voltage to the ADC must be in the interval 0 to 3 V. If the
signal becomes negative the ADC will clip the signal. If the signal amplitude is too
low, the ADC’s full resolution won’t be utilized.
As assumed in Sec. 2.3, the raw ECGs lies in the range −2.5 to 2.5 mV. To map this
to 0 - 3 V, a gain of 600 and an offset of 1.5 V are required. The inamp from earlier
provides a gain of 1000 but does not provide an offset.
To properly scale and offset the signal, a two-stage approach is employed: a variable
gain stage and a variable offset stage. Both stages use non-inverting amplifier con-
figurations. The first with a variable gain without any offset. The second stage has
a fixed gain of 2 and introduces a variable offset that varies with a potentiometer
setting αoffset. The circuit is seen in Fig. 5.11.
43
==PAGE:51==
Fig. 5.11: Gain and offset stage used to fine-tune the output signal to fit the ADC.
It is shown in Sec. 13.7 in Appendix A that the output Vo is given by
Vo = 2αgain

1 + R2
R1

|
{z
}
gain
Vin −
R5
R3 + R5
VA
|
{z
}
offset
,
VA ∈[−9, 9] V
(5.31)
This design has the advantage that gain and offset are independent of each other,
making calibration easy. The trade-off is that it requires two opamps. Note that
alternative designs using a single opamp exist; but in those cases the gain and offset
cannot be adjusted independently.
The gain can be adjusted to values between 0 and 9.94, while the offset can be adjusted
to values between −3.6 to 3.6 V.
5.6
Complete circuit
Combining all the stages into a single schematic yields the complete ECG amplifier
circuit shown in Fig. 5.12. Note that the gain resistor RG of the inamp has been
replaced by two resistors of equal value, each RG
2
= 27 Ω, resulting in a differential
gain of Gd = 49.4 kΩ
54 Ω+ 1 = 916 ≈60 dB. This implementation provides an elegant way
to extract the common-mode voltage and feed it into the driven right leg circuit.
44
==PAGE:52==
8
Right arm
Left arm
Right leg
Fig. 5.12: Complete analog circuit of the ECG amplifier. The label VLP connects the output of the
low pass filter to the input of the gain stage. This has been done to improve clarity of the schematic.
The transfer function from VLA −VRA to Vo is given by the product of each individual
stage’s transfer function:
H(s) = 2αgain

1 + R15
R14

GdGhigh-pass(s)Glow-pass(s)Gnotch(s)
(5.32)
where

































Gd
= 49.4 kΩ
RG
+ 1
Ghigh-pass(s)
=
s
s+
1
C1R1
Glow-pass(s)
=
1
C3C4R2
7
s2+2s
1
C4R7 +
1
C3C4R2
7
·
1
C5C6R2
9
s2+2s
1
C6R9 +
1
C5C6R2
9
Gnotch(s)
=
s2+

1
R20C8
2
s2+ 4(1−αnotch)
R20C8
s+

1
R20C8
2
The Bode plot of H(s) is given in Fig. 5.13, along with the group delay. The +360◦
phase jump around f = 280 Hz is a consequence of phase wrapping caused by the
plotting software, which confines the phase to the interval ] −180◦, 180◦]. On the
other hand, the phase jump of +180◦at f = 50 Hz results from the notch filter’s zero
on the jω-axis.
45
==PAGE:53==
10 1
10 2
10 3
-20
0
20
40
60
10 1
10 2
10 3
-250
-200
-150
-100
-50
0
50
100
150
200
10 1
10 2
10 3
0
2
4
6
Fig. 5.13: Theoretical Bode plot and group delay of the full system transfer function. Notice that
the magnitude at the notch frequency is less than 0 dB.
Although the Bessel-Thomson filter provides uniform group delay in the passband of
the low pass filter, the bottom plot in Fig. 5.13 reveals that the overall system does
not maintain a constant group delay. The non-uniformity is caused by the notch filter.
For comparison, Fig. 5.14 shows the Bode plot and group delay without the notch
filter.
10 1
10 2
10 3
-20
0
20
40
60
10 1
10 2
10 3
-250
-200
-150
-100
-50
0
50
100
150
200
10 1
10 2
10 3
0
1
2
Fig. 5.14: Theoretical Bode plot and group delay without notch filter.
This indicates that if the effect of the notch filter is not significant on the noise level
46
==PAGE:54==
we should not use it, as it defeats the purpose of choosing the Bessel-Thomson filter
type.
6
Construction and verification
Due to the complexity and the amount of components involved in the amplifier circuit,
a custom PCB with surface-mounted components was required for implementation.
A few words will be put on the design of the PCB.
6.1
PCB design in KiCad
The total circuit was partitioned into five blocks:
1. Passive high pass filter.
2. Instrumentation amplifier.
3. Low pass filter.
4. Gain- and offset stage, including notch filter.
5. Driven right leg network.
The layout and trace routing of each block were designed independently in KiCad
to achieve modularity.
This allowed for compact layouts, clean routing and easy
interconnection between blocks. The sub-circuit partitioning and layout are seen in
Fig. 6.1. Some components were placed on the bottom side of the PCB and are not
visible.
(a)
(b)
Fig. 6.1: The complete circuit divided into sub-circuits. (a) PCB layout and trace routing. Red
indicates top layer, blue indicates bottom layer. (b) 3D view of the PCB. Top left: high pass filter.
Top right: inamp. Bottom left: gain and offset stage with notch filter. Bottom right: low pass filter.
Note that the component annotations do not match the numbers in Fig. 5.12.
The PCB was designed with four copper layers, with ground planes on all layers. The
stackup was signal-ground-power-signal, meaning that the top (first) layer was used
for signal routing, while the third layer was reserved for power connections.
The choice to use four layers in this project instead of two was based on practical
considerations. First, the cost increase associated with manufacturing a four-layer
47
==PAGE:55==
board compared to a two-layer board is negligible for our application. Secondly, the
additional layers simplify routing. Thirdly, the presence of dedicated ground planes
allows for a solid, uninterrupted low-impedance path for return currents. Layer two
was used as a continuous ground plane exactly for this reason.
Fig. 6.2 (a) shows a routed section with only the top layer visible, while (b) shows
the same section with only the third layer visible.
(a)
(b)
Fig. 6.2: (a) A section of the routed PCB with only the front layer visible, while (b) shows the
same section with only the third layer visible.
Two important design choices need to be highlighted. First, the width of the signal
traces in (a) is deliberately narrower than that of the power traces in (b). This is
acceptable, because the signal paths carry currents in the microampere range, which
do not require wide traces. In contrast, the power traces should be reasonably wide
to minimize their impedance and reduce any voltage drop across them.
Second, stitching vias are heavily used on the board. These vias connect all four
ground planes throughout the PCB, ensuring that the ground potential remains uni-
form across the entire board.
With these design principles, a two-channel PCB was designed, manufactured, and
hand-soldered by the author. Fig. 6.3 shows the assembled board with one ECG
channel soldered. The pin headers to the right provide access to the signal at various
stages, such that individual stage behavior can be investigated.
48
==PAGE:56==
Fig. 6.3: ECG amplifier PCB with one channel soldered. From top to bottom, the BNC connectors
correspond to right arm, left arm, right leg, left leg. This particular board is revision 3.
6.2
Preliminary verification
Verification of the ECG amplifier’s performance is done by exciting the input of the
board while monitoring the output. The first parameter of interest is the common-
mode gain, Gcm.
To determine Gcm, a known signal Vin, cm is applied simultaneously to both left arm
and right arm. The resulting output of the ECG amplifier Vo, cm is measured with an
oscilloscope. The schematic associated with this test is seen in Fig. 6.4.
49
==PAGE:57==
Fig. 6.4: Test setup for measuring the common-mode gain, Gcm. In the case shown in the figure,
the driven right leg network is disconnected.
The test setup was implemented practically by generating a high-amplitude sinusoidal
waveform with a signal generator such that Vin(t) = 5 sin(2π · 10t) V, such that the
peak-to-peak input voltage is 10 V. The output of the ECG amplifier without the
notch filter was measured.
The resulting output waveform in the time-domain (green), along with its frequency
spectrum are seen in Fig. 6.5. These waveforms are without the driven right leg
network.
Fig. 6.5: Resulting waveform of the common-mode gain test. The output waveform (green) and
FFT (purple) of the ECG amplifier, without driven right leg. The strength of the 10 Hz component
is −70.4 dB.
The green curve in Fig. 6.5 shows that the time-domain waveform is contaminated by
noise, making it difficult to determine the true output peak-to-peak voltage. However,
50
==PAGE:58==
the frequency-domain representation (the purple curve) provides a clearer view of the
output amplitude. In the case without driven right leg, the amplitude of the 10 Hz
component is read to be Vo, no-DRL = −70.4 dB = 0.30 mV. The common-mode gain
is
Gcm, no-DRL = Vo, no-DRL
Vin, cm
= 2 · 0.30 mV
10 V/2
= 120 · 10−6 V
V = −78.4 dB
(6.1)
In Eq. (6.1), the output voltage is multiplied by 2 to compensate for the oscilloscope’s
FFT that provides the amplitude of a frequency component, and not the peak-to-peak
amplitude. Additionally, the input voltage is divided by 2 due to the voltage division
caused by the four identical test resistors.
It is also worth noting that the FFT reveals several harmonics of the 10 Hz signal.
This suggests that the ECG amplifier exhibits non-linear behavior for signals with low
amplitude. Nonetheless, if only the fundamental frequency component is considered,
the common-mode rejection ratio of the entire amplifier is estimated to be
CMRR =
Gd, total
Gcm, no-DRL
=
600
120 · 10−6 ≈130 dB
(6.2)
A similar measurement was attempted with the driven right leg circuit active. How-
ever, the output amplitude was so low that the oscilloscope effectively measured only
the noise floor. As such, it is not meaningful to attempt a precise determination of
Gcm, DRL. Additionally, it would not be as straight forward to calculate CMRR as in
Eq. (6.1), since the presence of the driven right leg network influences the voltage
divider network. Nevertheless, the results indicate that the driven right leg network
performs a substantial attenuation of the common-mode signal.
The next parameter of interest is the differential frequency response. The test circuit
is nearly identical to that shown in Fig. 6.4, with the difference that the voltage
drop across Rtest2 is now applied to the inamp’s input terminals, rather than feeding
both inputs the same voltage. The input signal amplitude is set to 2.5 mV to avoid
saturating the inamp, and the output of the ECG amplifier with the notch filter is
measured. The frequency response obtained using the oscilloscope is shown in Fig.
6.6.
51
==PAGE:59==
Fig. 6.6: Frequency response for the differential input. The magnitude at the notch is 23.3 dB.
When comparing this to the theoretical frequency response in Fig. 5.13, the behavior
appears identical. The only deviation seems to be that the notch is not as deep in
the measured response as it is in the theoretical response. In the measurement, the
magnitude at the notch is 23.3 dB while in the theoretical magnitude response it is
less than 0 dB.
In addition to the amplifier board, both passive and active electrode attachment
boards were designed. The passive attachment board consists of a conductive contact
that clips onto the electrode and routes the signal through a shielded BNC cable.
The active attachment board does the same, but adds a unity gain buffer between the
electrode contact and the BNC connector. The buffer and associated decoupling ca-
pacitors are enclosed in a shielded can to shield from 50Hz noise. The two attachment
boards are seen in Fig. 6.7.
(a)
(b)
Fig. 6.7: (a) Passive electrode attachment board. (b) Active electrode attachment board, powered
by two button cell batteries.
The purpose of the active electrode board is to drive the inner conductor of the coaxial
BNC cable with a low-impedance source, reducing the noise pickup impedance and
52
==PAGE:60==
the associated noise voltage, as described in Sec. 4. To verify this behavior, the
input of the two attachment boards are subjected to a low-amplitude sinusoid (2 mV
peak-to-peak) and the output is measured directly by an oscilloscope. The setup is
seen in Fig. 6.8 (a) and (b) and oscilloscope measurements in (c) and (d).
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Fig. 6.8: (a) and (b) Setup for the passive attachment board and active attachment board, respec-
tively. (c) and (d) Output waveforms for the passive and active attachment board, respectively.
Based on these preliminary tests, the analog circuitry is deemed to perform satisfac-
torily. Specifically:
• The circuit has a common-mode rejection ratio of roughly 130dB under balanced
input conditions, considering only the fundamental frequency.
• The differential frequency response is almost identical to the theoretical predic-
tion.
• The active electrode attachment board delivers a defined signal with relatively
low noise, even at low input amplitudes.
It should be emphasized that the goal of this preliminary verification was not to
ensure compliance with IEC standards, but rather to confirm that the analog elec-
tronics perform well enough to proceed with the implementation of digital processing
techniques.
53
==PAGE:61==
6.3
Shielded enclosure
After implementing all these noise reduction techniques, it would be inadequate to
leave the circuitry exposed to power line interference. A simple box was designed in
Onshape and 3D printed to house the PCB. Holes were made for the BNC connectors
and for the PCB’s mounting holes. Holes in the lid were made to connect the board’s
ground and signal pins to the microcontroller.
The interior of the enclosure was covered with conductive copper foil to create a
Faraday cage. Pin headers were soldered onto the copper foil, providing a way to
connect the shield to the amplifier ground. The shielded box and lid are seen in Fig.
6.9.
(a)
(b)
Fig. 6.9: (a) Open shielded box. (b) Closed shielded box with wires for ground and output pro-
truding.
54
==PAGE:62==
7
Firmware
This section describes the firmware responsible for sampling, processing and transmit-
ting signals using the STM32F429I microcontroller. Before discussing the firmware
in detail, the development environment will be explained briefly.
The STM32 microcontroller is programmed using STM32CubeIDE, an integrated
development environment. It provides a graphical user interface that allows for rapid
setup of core functionalities without requiring the user to write low-level initialization
code.
The user interface offers an overview of all the available microcontroller pins. The
user can click on individual pins and change their state to, for example, an analog
output pin. A screen capture of the pin GUI is seen in Fig. 7.1.
Fig. 7.1: Screen capture of the STM32CubeIDE graphical user interface, showing all the available
pins on the microcontroller.
Additionally, STM32CubeIDE provides several drop down menus from which the
microcontroller’s peripherals can be setup and initialized. Fig. 7.2 illustrates this, by
setting up the timer TIM2 with some specific counter settings.
55
==PAGE:63==
Fig. 7.2: STM32CubeIDE timer drop down menu and counter settings configuration tab.
After manually configuring the necessary options, the user can opt to have STM32CubeIDE
auto-generate the code.
Continuing with the timer example, the resulting auto-
generated code will be as seen in Listing 1.
1
static void MX_TIM2_Init(void)
2
{
3
htim2.Instance = TIM2;
4
htim2.Init.Prescaler = 1599;
5
htim2.Init.CounterMode = TIM_COUNTERMODE_UP;
6
htim2.Init.Period = 9;
7
htim2.Init.ClockDivision = TIM_CLOCKDIVISION_DIV1;
8
htim2.Init.AutoReloadPreload = TIM_AUTORELOAD_PRELOAD_DISABLE;
9
//More code below.
10
}
Listing 1: Auto-generated code by the STM32CubeIDE for timer 2.
The auto-generated code also includes error handling and invokes the appropriate
_Init functions. That said, STM32CubeIDE should be regarded as a tool for gen-
erating boiler-plate code - it does not replace the need for microcontroller specific
knowledge or skill.
Additionally, STM32CubeIDE supports the use of the HAL (Hardware Abstraction
Layer) library. This library provides high-level functions that greatly simplify the
development process by making the code easier to read and write. Without it, the
user would need to manually manipulate register bits to perform simple tasks.
The objective of the firmware is to sample and process the ECG signals received from
the amplifier. To illustrate the overall firmware structure, a block diagram of the
intended processing scheme is provided in Fig. 7.3.
56
==PAGE:64==
Update event
DMA
Circular buffer
Timer 2
ADC
Memory
Start sampling
UART transmit
ECG
Fig. 7.3: Conceptual block diagram showing the firmware scheme. A timer update event will trigger
the ADC to perform a conversion and store it using DMA. The conversions are stored in memory
with buffers that are circularly transmitted.
7.1
Timer setup
The recording system operates with a static sampling frequency of fs = 1000Hz. This
requires the ADC to be setup in such a way, that it performs an analog to digital
conversion every millisecond. In other words, the ADC must be triggered by a source
at equidistant time instances for an extended period of time. This is a task well-suited
for a timer.
The STM32 includes multiple timers, with several different modes of operation. Timer
2 (TIM2) will be used in its simplest mode, the up-counter mode. In principle, up-
counter mode works as shown in Fig. 7.4. The diagram will be explained in detail.
CK_PSC
00
1
0
01
02
03
FA FB
F7
F8 F9
FC
CK_EN
CK_CNT
TIM2_CNT
TIM2_PSC
Write new value to TIM2_PSC
TIM2_ARR = 0xFC
Fig. 7.4: Figure taken and modified from [20].
In up-counter mode, TIM2 relies on three registers; TIM2_CNT, TIM2_PSC, and
TIM2_ARR.
TIM2_CNT is a 32-bit register that holds the current counter value. It increments on
every rising edge of the clock signal, CK_CNT.
When the value of TIM2_CNT matches the value in the auto-reload register TIM2_ARR,
an update event occurs, and the counter is reset. This event triggers the ADC.
The prescaler register TIM2_PSC determines the frequency of CK_CNT.
Specifi-
cally, TIM2_PSC sets how many rising edges of the internal clock signal CK_PSC
are required to produce one rising edge of CK_CNT.
Fig.
7.4 shows that when
TIM2_PSC = 0, CK_CNT and CK_PSC are identical. But when TIM2_PSC = 1, it
takes two rising edges of CK_PSC to generate one rising edge of CK_CNT.
57
==PAGE:65==
By selecting values for TIM2_ARR and TIM2_PSC, an update event can be configured
to happen with a desired frequency.
The internal clock frequency for the TIM2 peripheral is by default fCK PSC = 16 MHz
[20]. The time required to generate one tick of CK_CNT is determined by
TCK CNT = (PSC + 1)
fCK PSC
(7.1)
To produce an update event, the counter must count from 0 to the auto-reload value.
This duration is the sampling period, and it is equal to
Ts = (ARR + 1) · TCK CNT
(7.2)
Combining the two expressions and isolating ARR one obtains
ARR = fCK PSCTs
PSC + 1 −1
(7.3)
For a desired sampling frequency of fs = 1000Hz, it follows that Ts = 1ms. Choosing
PSC = 1599, the required value of ARR becomes
ARR = 16 MHz · 1 ms
1599 + 1
−1 = 9
(7.4)
The HAL library provides a non-blocking function, HAL_TIM_PeriodElapsedCallback(),
which is automatically invoked on every update event caused by a timer - provided
that the timer’s global interrupt is enabled. This function is used to increment a
counter that disables the timer after a predefined time interval has elapsed.
The
implementation will be shown in code shortly.
7.2
ADC setup with circular buffers
A single ADC channel (pin PA0) is used with the highest available resolution of 12
bits. The ADC is configured to start a conversion on PA0 every time a TIM2 update
event occurs.
Additionally, the ADC is set to operate with direct memory access (DMA) in circular
mode. Direct memory access is a feature that streams data from a peripheral directly
to memory without the need for the CPU’s involvement. The concept is illustrated
in Fig. 7.5.
58
==PAGE:66==
CPU
CPU
Timer
ADC
Timer
ADC
Memory
Memory
DMA
(a)
(b)
Without DMA
With DMA
Fig. 7.5: Conceptual block diagram of direct memory access. (a) ADC sampling with CPU involve-
ment. (b) Storing ADC readings in memory with DMA.
To use DMA, a buffer named adc_data[BUFFER_SIZE] is defined, and the DMA pro-
cess is initialized. After each ADC conversion, the result is automatically stored in
the buffer. When the buffer is full, new conversions overwrite the oldest values in a
circular fashion. This means that there is a limited time window in which the ADC
samples must be transferred to another location in memory.
To manage this, the HAL library provides two callback functions that are automatically
called: HAL_ADC_ConvHalfCpltCallback() when the buffer is half full, and
HAL_ADC_ConvCpltCallback() when it is completely full.
By defining two additional arrays, each with length BUFFER_SIZE/2, the first half
of the DMA buffer can be stored in one array when the half-complete callback is trig-
gered. Similarly, the last half can be stored in the other array once the ADC buffer
is completely full. The callback functions are non-blocking, so the ADC is free to
perform new conversions while earlier conversions are being stored.
The ADC samples are 16-bit unsigned integers, but the filtering routines used in the
subsequent sections require data of type float32_t. Therefore, during the transfer,
each sample is cast to float32_t and multiplied by ∆VLSB to convert the raw ADC
codes into voltages.
Finally, the processed data buffers are transmitted via UART using a non-blocking
function, and the data is stored to a file on the computer.
Listing 2 shows the
implementation.
59
==PAGE:67==
1
#define BUFFER_SIZE 32
2
#define HALF_BUFFER_SIZE (BUFFER_SIZE / 2)
3
#define ADC_CONVERSION_FACTOR 0.00073260073
4
5
//Auto-generated handles by STM32CubeIDE
6
ADC_HandleTypeDef hadc1;
7
DMA_HandleTypeDef hdma_adc1;
8
TIM_HandleTypeDef htim2;
9
UART_HandleTypeDef huart1;
10
11
uint32_t MAX_SAMPLES = 10000;
//Sample for 10 seconds
12
volatile uint16_t adc_data[BUFFER_SIZE] = {0};
//DMA buffer
13
volatile float32_t data_buffer0[HALF_BUFFER_SIZE] = {0}; //Transmit buffer0
14
volatile float32_t data_buffer1[HALF_BUFFER_SIZE] = {0}; //Transmit buffer1
15
volatile uint32_t timer2_counter = 0;
16
volatile uint8_t transmit_flag = 0;
//Which buffer to send
17
18
void HAL_ADC_ConvHalfCpltCallback(ADC_HandleTypeDef *hadc){
19
transmit_flag = (1 << 0);
20
for(int i = 0; i < HALF_BUFFER_SIZE; i++){
21
data_buffer0[i] = (float32_t)adc_data[i]*ADC_CONVERSION_FACTOR; //Store first half
22
}
23
}
24
25
void HAL_ADC_ConvCpltCallback(ADC_HandleTypeDef *hadc){
26
transmit_flag = (1 << 1);
27
for(int i = HALF_BUFFER_SIZE; i < BUFFER_SIZE; i++){
28
data_buffer1[i-HALF_BUFFER_SIZE] = (float32_t)adc_data[i]*ADC_CONVERSION_FACTOR;
29
}
30
}
31
32
void HAL_TIM_PeriodElapsedCallback(TIM_HandleTypeDef *htim){
33
timer2_counter++;
34
}
35
36
int main(void){
37
MX_DMA_Init();
38
MX_ADC1_Init();
39
MX_TIM2_Init();
40
MX_USART1_UART_Init();
41
HAL_ADC_Start_DMA(&hadc1, adc_data, BUFFER_SIZE); //Setup DMA
42
HAL_TIM_Base_Start_IT(&htim2);
//Start data acquisition
43
44
while (1){
45
switch(transmit_flag){
46
case 1: //Transmit buffer0
47
transmit_flag = 0;
48
HAL_UART_Transmit_IT(&huart1,(uint8_t*)data_buffer0, sizeof(data_buffer0));
49
break;
50
case 2: //Transmit buffer1
51
transmit_flag = 0;
52
HAL_UART_Transmit_IT(&huart1,(uint8_t*)data_buffer1, sizeof(data_buffer1));
53
break;
54
}
55
if(timer2_counter >= MAX_SAMPLES){ //Sampling has gone on for 10 seconds. Stop.
56
HAL_TIM_Base_Stop_IT(&htim2);
57
HAL_ADC_Stop_DMA(&hadc1);
58
while(1){} //Keep program locked
59
}
60
}
61
}
Listing 2: C code implementation of the sampling process with DMA.
60
==PAGE:68==
8
Offline signal processing
This section presents techniques for offline processing - that is, processing after the
signal has been stored on the computer. All signals in this section have been recorded
with the ECG amplifier and firmware implementation described in the preceding
sections.
8.1
Removal of movement artifacts digitally
Although a passive high pass filter is included before the ECG signal reaches the
inamp, its cutoff frequency is too low to suppress movement artifacts. These artifacts
appear as low-frequent sinusoids, an example of which is visible in the amplified ECG
signal in Fig. 8.1.
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
1.6
1.7
1.8
Fig. 8.1: ECG recording with a sinusoidal baseline.
To attenuate movement artifacts, a digital high pass is applied in the form of a
sixth order Butterworth infinite impulse response (IIR) filter with cutoff frequency
fc = 1 Hz.
The filter is designed using the bilinear transformation method with
frequency prewarping, as described in [12] (pp. 740). The design process is done in
Sec. 13.8 in Appendix A, and it yielded the transfer function
Hd(z) =
0.9879(z −1)6
(z2 −1.9967z + 0.9967)(z2 −1.9911z + 0.9911)(z2 −1.9878z + 0.9879)
(8.1)
In continuous-time, the frequency characteristic of a system is found by evaluating the
Laplace transform H(s) along the jω-axis, i.e., with s = jω. The Laplace transform
and z-transform of a causal discrete-time system with impulse response h[k] are [12]
(pp. 695)
¯H(s) =
∞
X
k=0
h[k]e−skTs
and
H(z) =
∞
X
k=0
h[k]z−k
(8.2)
which implies that the z-transform can be considered as a Laplace transform with
z = esTs [12]. The transformation z = esTs maps the jω-axis in the s-plane to the
unit circle in the z-plane.
61
==PAGE:69==
Consequently, the frequency response of the digital filter is obtained by evaluating
Hd(z) on the unit circle, i.e., by computing Hd
 ejΩ
on the normalized frequency
interval Ω∈[0, π].
This normalized interval corresponds to the analog frequency
interval f ∈

0, fs
2

, because Ω= 2πf
fs .
The frequency response for the digital high pass filter is shown in Fig. 8.2, with analog
frequency axis.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
-100
-80
-60
-40
-20
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
-400
-200
0
200
Fig. 8.2: Frequency response for a sixth order Butterworth IIR high pass filter with fc = 1 Hz.
Only the interval below 10 Hz is plotted to investigate the behavior at low frequencies, even though
the response extends to 500 Hz.
The IIR filter achieves high attenuation with relatively low filter order, but it has
a nonlinear phase response. Additionally, the filter has poles very close to the unit
circle. A discrete-time system is unstable if it has at least one pole lying outside the
unit circle in the z-plane [12] (pp. 691). The system described by Eq. (8.1) has a
complex conjugated pole pair at z = 0.99835 ± j0.00606 which are just barely inside
the unit circle.
Applying the filter to the signal in Fig. 8.1 yields the presentation seen in Fig. 8.3.
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
Fig. 8.3: ECG recording after being filtered by the IIR high pass filter.
62
==PAGE:70==
The recordings shown in Fig. 8.3 and 8.1 were acquired with a version of the ECG
amplifier board that contained a design flaw, resulting in high noise level. Two sub-
sequent measurements were performed with a corrected version of the board, which
produced much cleaner signals.
These improved recordings were also processed using the same IIR high pass filter
and are shown in Fig. 8.4, where both the passive and active attachment boards were
used for comparison.
Only the interval t = 1 to 10s is displayed. The initial segment (t = 0 to 1s) contains
a large transient caused by operator movement during recording initialization and
the filter’s own transient response. Waveforms starting from t = 0 s in Sec. 13.10 in
Appendix A show this transient.
Furthermore, the amplitude of both waveforms in Fig. 8.4 has been scaled inversely
with the gain of ECG amplifier (600 V
V) to reflect the natural ECG amplitude. This
gain correction is done on all figures containing ECGs throughout the remainder of
this thesis.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
(a)
(b)
Fig. 8.4: (a) and (b) Processed ECG recordings using the passive and active attachment boards,
respectively.
As expected, the measurements obtained using the active attachment boards exhibit
lower noise levels compared to those using the passive attachment boards. However,
the ST-T segments in both ECG recordings appear distorted. This distortion is caused
by the nonlinear phase response introduced by the IIR filter [18].
To avoid phase distortion and maintain the magnitude response, a forward-backward
filtering scheme is applied. It involves filtering the input signal once, time-reversing
the result, filtering the time-reversed result, and finally time-reversing one more time.
This scheme effectively filters the amplitude of the input signal twice, but leaves the
phase unaffected. This is rigorously shown in Sec. 13.9 in Appendix A.
63
==PAGE:71==
For now, applying this forward-backward filtering scheme to the signals in Fig. 8.4
yields the waveforms seen in Fig. 8.5.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
(a)
(b)
Fig. 8.5: Same ECG recordings as in Fig. 8.4, now without a distorted ST-T segment.
8.2
Spectral analysis and downsampling
To better understand the frequency content of the signal in Fig. 8.5 (b), spectral
analysis is performed using the discrete Fourier transform (DFT). Although the sig-
nal is denoted VECG(t), it is in fact a discrete-time signal, VECG[k]. The continuous
appearance in the plots is due to linear interpolation between sample points added
by the plotting software.
If N0 is the number of sample points in VECG[k], then the normalized DFT of the
waveform above is given by [12]
Y [r] = 1
N0
N0−1
X
k=0
VECG[k]e−jrΩ0k,
Ω0 = 2π
N0
,
r = 0, 1, . . . , N0 −1
(8.3)
The DFT provides insight to the spectral information only at a set of discrete normal-
ized frequencies Ω= rΩ0, where Ω0 is the frequency resolution, and r is the frequency
bin. In hertz, these normalized frequencies correspond to the discrete analog frequen-
cies
f = r fs
N0
,
r = 0, 1, . . . , N0 −1
(8.4)
So the list of frequency bins r = {0, 1, 2} correspond to the discrete analog frequencies
f =
n
0, fs
N0, 2 fs
N0
o
Hz.
64
==PAGE:72==
The DFT of the signal in Fig. 8.5 (b) is shown in Fig. 8.6, plotted in mV (a), and
in dB (b). Note that the x-axis is the (discrete) analog frequency f in Hz and not
the frequency bin r, even though the y-axis shows |Y [r]|. This is done on purpose to
give physical meaning to the amplitude response, since plotting |Y [r]| along r does
not explicitly indicate what frequencies (in Hz) are present in the signal.
-500
-400
-300
-200
-100
0
100
200
300
400
500
0
2
4
6
8
10 -3
-500
-400
-300
-200
-100
0
100
200
300
400
500
-120
-100
-80
-60
-40
(a)
(b)
Fig. 8.6: DFT of the ECG signal in Fig. 8.5 (b). (a) Linear scale. (b) dB scale.
The plots show that the majority of the signal’s energy is concentrated in the fre-
quency range from approximately 0 - 150 Hz. A local peak is observed at exactly
150 Hz, which is likely the third harmonic of the power line frequency. Apart from
this component, the recording appears to be particular clean with very little noise.
All recordings so far have been performed without the notch filter. Fig. 8.7 compares
two ECG recordings, both using the active attachment boards, but only one using
the notch filter.
The spectrum of the notch filtered signal in (b) shows a clear attenuation around
50 Hz, and both the second and third harmonics are suppressed, as opposed to the
spectrum in (a). However, the time-domain waveforms in both recordings exhibit
similar noise levels. This indicates that the apparent noise does not stem from power
line interference, and that the notch filter is not particularly effective in this case.
65
==PAGE:73==
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
-500
-400
-300
-200
-100
0
100
200
300
400
500
-140
-120
-100
-80
-60
-40
-20
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
-500
-400
-300
-200
-100
0
100
200
300
400
500
-140
-120
-100
-80
-60
-40
-20
(a)
(b)
Fig. 8.7: (a) ECG signal without notch filter. (b) ECG signal with notch filter. Both using the
active electrode board.
Since the spectral content is primarily concentrated below 150 Hz, it is useful to in-
vestigate whether the signal can be downsampled without loss of important waveform
features.
Downsampling a discrete-time signal f[k] by an integer factor M ∈N produces a new
signal fd[k] = f[Mk], effectively reducing the sampling frequency to fs
M . Decreasing
the sampling frequency results in aliasing. To mitigate aliasing, frequencies above
fs
2M
must be suppressed by a low pass filter before downsampling.
Downsampling is performed on the signal in Fig. 8.8 (a) with different factors using
MATLAB’s decimate function, that internally applies a low pass filter before re-
ducing the sampling frequency. The rest of the plots in Fig. 8.8 show that the shape
of the ECG signal does not change significantly with downsampling.
66
==PAGE:74==
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Fig. 8.8: Effect of downsampling on the signal waveform.
The associated DFTs of the waveforms in Fig. 8.8 are shown in Fig. 8.9.
67
==PAGE:75==
-500
-400
-300
-200
-100
0
100
200
300
400
500
-120
-100
-80
-60
-40
-500
-400
-300
-200
-100
0
100
200
300
400
500
-120
-100
-80
-60
-40
-500
-400
-300
-200
-100
0
100
200
300
400
500
-120
-100
-80
-60
-40
-500
-400
-300
-200
-100
0
100
200
300
400
500
-120
-100
-80
-60
-40
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Fig. 8.9: The effect of downsampling on the frequency spectrum.
By comparing the waveform in Fig. 8.8 (d) with its frequency spectrum in Fig. 8.9
(d), it is evident that important excursions - namely the P-wave, QRS-complex, and
T-wave - are preserved when the signal is bandlimited to 0 - 62.5 Hz.
While the overall shape remains the same when downsampling, the SNR and peak-
to-peak amplitude are affected.
The acceptable degree of downsampling depends on what features of the ECG signal
is of interest. If the heart rate is of interest, the downsampling factor might be on
the orders of 8 or above. However, if the precise peak-to-peak value is desired, only
modest downsampling may be acceptable.
A reasonable specification could be, that the peak-to-peak value of the downsampled
68
==PAGE:76==
signal should not deviate by more than 5% or 7.5% from the true peak-to-peak value.
The effect of downsampling on the peak-to-peak value is illustrated in Fig. 8.10. (a)
shows how the peak-to-peak value varies as a function of M. (b) presents the relative
deviation between the true and downsampled average peak-to-peak value, calculated
as:
Relative deviation = Vo, pp[k] −Vo, pp[Mk]
Vo, pp[k]
· 100 %
(8.5)
0.12
0.14
0.16
0.18
0.2
0.22
0.24
0.26
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
5
10
15
20
25
30
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
(a)
(b)
Fig. 8.10: (a) Average peak-to-peak amplitude as a function of M. (b) Relative deviation from the
true peak-to-peak value.
Fig. 8.10 (b) shows that the relative deviation reaches 7 % at M = 4, and increases
to 13% at M = 6. This confirms that peak-to-peak amplitude is sensitive to down-
sampling. If we want to conform to the specification of 5 % maximum peak-to-peak
deviation, the downsampling factor is limited to M = 2.
69
==PAGE:77==
9
Real-time signal processing
To enable real-time processing implemented on the STM32, the filtering approach
must be adapted. The forward-backward filtering scheme is not applicable in real-
time, because it requires access to the entire signal segment. Attempts were made to
apply real-time forward-backward filtering to short blocks of samples (of 32 and 64
samples), but the results were unsatisfactory.
Instead of an IIR filter, linear phase finite-impulse-response (FIR) filters will be used
instead, as they are readily usable for real-time applications.
Unlike IIR filters, an FIR filter is a system whose poles all lie in the origin of the
z-plane. In other words; FIR filters have no feedback coefficients [12]. Consequently,
the impulse response has finite duration and can be designed to have linear phase.
Two FIR filter design methods are investigated and compared: the frequency sampling
method described in [12], and the Parks-McClellan equiripple design method [15].
Both methods produce linear phase filters, but differ in terms of algorithm complexity
and frequency response characteristics.
9.1
Frequency sampling method
The frequency sampling design method involves the following steps [12]:
• Sketch the amplitude response of an ideal filter |Hideal(ejΩ)| that is symmetric
around Ω= 0.
• Choose the filter order n. This defines the number of sample points N0 = n + 1
and the frequency resolution Ω0 = 2π
N0.
• Sample the ideal amplitude response at N0 equidistant points in the range Ω∈
[0, 2π] to obtain H[r] = |Hideal(ejrΩ0)|, r = 0, 1, . . . , n.
• Perform an IDFT, h[k] = IDFT{H[r]}. The impulse response will be a real and
even signal symmetric around k = 0, and is thus non-causal and unrealizable.
• Delay each sample in h[k] by n
2 to obtain a causal signal and then perform the
z-transform to obtain the transfer function H(z) = Pn
k=0 h

k −n
2

z−k.
A detailed explanation of why this method produces a linear phase filter can be
found in Sec. 13.12 in Appendix A. That section also shows that the filter introduces
constant group delay of td[r] = n
2 samples.
A consequence of this method is that the resulting filter’s amplitude response only
matches the ideal response at the sampled frequency points. Between these points,
the amplitude responses deviate. This phenomenon is illustrated in Fig. 9.1, where
the ideal amplitude response (dotted line) is plotted alongside the amplitude response
of the designed FIR filter. The corresponding impulse response is also shown.
70
==PAGE:78==
0.2
-4
-3
-2
-1
1
2
3
4
0.2
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
ideal
0
0
(a)
(b)
(c)
Fig. 9.1: Frequency sampling method visualized. (a) Only in the sample points (the filled dots) are
the two amplitude responses equal to each other. (b) The associated even and non-causal impulse
response belonging to the sampled frequency response. (c) Same impulse response, now delayed to
obtain causality and realizability. Inspiration for figure taken from [12].
Because the resulting amplitude response only matches the desired response in the
sample points, increasing the filter order improves the approximation to the ideal
filter. Increasing the filter order also increases the amount of filter coefficients as well
as the group delay.
In the case of a 1000th order filter with sampling frequency fs = 1 kHz, there will
be one sample point per 1 Hz interval in the amplitude response. This is insufficient
for a high pass filter where accurate behavior below 1 Hz is essential. However, by
downsampling the signal to be filtered to a sampling frequency of 250 Hz, the same
filter order provides four samples per 1 Hz interval. This effect is illustrated in Fig.
9.2, where the same order high pass filter with a cutoff in 1 Hz is designed using the
frequency sampling method at two different sampling frequencies.
71
==PAGE:79==
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
-8
-6
-4
-2
0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
-60
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
(a)
(b)
Fig. 9.2: Amplitude responses of high pass filters designed to the same specifications. Both have
an order of n = 1000, but (a) has fs = 1000 Hz while (b) has fs = 250 Hz.
As previously shown in Fig. 8.10 (b), a downsampling factor of M = 4 results in
average peak-to-peak deviation of 7 %. Because this deviation is low, this downsam-
pling factor is adopted in the real-time implementation, as it significantly improves
the FIR filter’s performance.
9.2
Parks-McClellan
Another method for designing linear phase FIR filters is the Parks-McClellan algo-
rithm, which produces so-called equiripple filters.
Unlike the frequency sampling
method, this design method is based on an optimization approach and is considerably
more technical.
In essence, given a passband Bp, a stopband Bs, a desired amplitude response Hd(ejΩ),
and maximum allowable passband and stopband ripple δp and δs, the algorithm iter-
atively computes the filter coefficients of H(z) such that the maximum error between
Hd(ejΩ) and H(ejΩ) is minimized in both bands [15]. The algorithm guarantees a
minimized maximum error between ideal and resulting amplitude response in the
passband and stopband, but does not minimize the error in the transition band from
Bp to Bs. Fig. 9.3 (a) shows an equiripple low pass filter with a wide transition band.
Consequently, this filter has low order.
(b) Shows a filter with a tight transition
band, that is consequently of high order, producing additional ripples. Relaxing the
conditions on the allowable ripple could be done to reduce the order.
72
==PAGE:80==
(a)
(b)
Fig. 9.3: Parks-McClellan equiripple filters. (a) Low pass filter with wide transition band. (b) Low
pass filter with tight transition band.
A comparison between the frequency sampling method and the Parks-McClellan algo-
rithm is shown in Fig. 9.4. Both methods were used to design filters of order 8. The
equiripple filter exhibits lower ripple amplitudes, but there is a large deviation in the
transition band. In contrast, the filter designed with the frequency sampling method
shows less deviation in the transition band, but has larger ripples with non-uniform
amplitudes.
73
==PAGE:81==
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Equiripple
Frequency sampling
Fig. 9.4: Comparison between an equiripple and frequency sampled filter.
If ripples in the amplitude response are acceptable, the Parks-McClellan algorithm
produces a filter with significantly lower order than those required by the frequency
sampling method to achieve comparable performance. This is illustrated in Fig. 9.5,
which shows the amplitude response of two equiripple high pass filters of orders 1000
and 1500 respectively, both designed to a sampling frequency of fs = 1000 Hz. When
compared to the 1000th order frequency sampled filter in Fig. 9.2 (a), the equiripple
filter achieves substantially more attenuation in the band 0 - 1 Hz, despite having the
same order and sampling frequency. In (c) the maximum allowable passband ripple
has been reduced, resulting in a higher order.
74
==PAGE:82==
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
-80
-60
-40
-20
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
-5
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
-5
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
(a)
(b)
(c)
Fig. 9.5: (a) Amplitude response of equiripple filter designed for fs = 1000Hz with order n = 1000.
(b) Same amplitude response as in (a) but the y-axis is scaled to enhance the view of the ripple
amplitudes. (c) Amplitude response of an n = 1500 order equiripple filter.
Filters using both techniques were designed with MATLAB’s fir2 and firpm func-
tions, and their frequency characteristics were investigated. Since the equiripple filter
avoided downsampling and achieved much lower order with similar performance it
was ultimately chosen in the final implementation.
9.3
FIR filter implementation on the STM32
To implement FIR filtering on the STM32, the CMSIS DSP library is used. This
library provides functions for processing input samples of type float32_t using a
multiply and accumulate (MAC) scheme. Since an FIR filter of order n contains only
feedforward coefficients, its difference equation is of the form [12]
y[k] = bnf[k] + bn−1f[k −1] + · · · + b0f[k −n]
(9.1)
The output y[k] can be computed in a multiply and accumulate fashion as illustrated
in Fig. 9.6.
75
==PAGE:83==
Fig. 9.6: Multiply and accumulate scheme for FIR filtering provided by the CMSIS DSP library.
The z−1 blocks correspond to a delay of one sample. Figure inspiration taken from [3].
The multiply and accumulate scheme performs N0 = n+1 multiplications and N0 −1
additions per input sample, so the computational cost is said to be O(NsN0), where
Ns is the amount of input samples. There exists other filtering schemes - like the
overlap and add method - that utilize the Fast-Fourier-Transform and its inverse to
achieve block filtering with computational cost that is of the form O

Ns log2(N0)

[12]. Since the order of our FIR filters are high it may be more appropriate to use
block filtering instead of MAC. However, the CMSIS DSP library does not this type of
filtering, and the project’s time limitation did not allow for a custom implementation.
Hence, the MAC scheme was used in the implementation.
The filter coefficients obtained from the two design methods discussed earlier are com-
puted in MATLAB, saved in a header file, and included in the main microcontroller
program. The CMSIS DSP static library is linked to the project and the associated
header file arm_math.h is included to provide access to the library functions. The
documentation on how to use the FIR block filtering functions is given on CMSIS
DSP’s API website [3] and was heavily used during implementation.
The documentation specifies, that an arm_fir_instance_f32 structure must be
defined as a handle for the filter. Additionally, a state buffer to contain the previous
inputs must be statically allocated. In addition, the filter coefficients should be pro-
vided in reverse order. After that, initializing the filter with the init() function,
filtering is performed by invoking arm_fir_f32() which applies the multiply and
accumulate scheme. Listing 3 shows a minimal implementation, stripped of other
functionalities apart from filtering and transmitting.
76
==PAGE:84==
1
#include "arm_math.h"
2
#include "fir_coeffs_equiripple.h" //Contains array with filter coefficients
3
4
#define BUFFER_SIZE 32
5
#define HALF_BUFFER_SIZE (BUFFER_SIZE / 2)
6
#define FIR_FILTER_ORDER 1500
7
#define FIR_FILTER_LENGTH (FIR_FILTER_ORDER + 1)
8
#define FIR_LENGTH (HALF_BUFFER_SIZE + FIR_FILTER_LENGTH - 1)
9
10
volatile uint8_t transmit_flag = 0;
11
volatile float32_t uart_data0[HALF_BUFFER_SIZE] = {0};
12
volatile float32_t data_buffer0[HALF_BUFFER_SIZE] = {0};
13
14
float32_t fir_state_equiripple[FIR_LENGTH] = {0};
15
arm_fir_instance_f32 fir0; //Create FIR filter handle
16
17
//Reverse array in place
18
static void reverse_array(float32_t arr[], int size) {
19
float32_t temp;
20
int last_index = size - 1;
21
for (int i = 0; i < size/2; i++) {
22
temp = arr[i];
23
arr[i] = arr[last_index - i];
24
arr[last_index - i] = temp;
25
}
26
}
27
28
int main(void)
29
{
30
reverse_array(fir_coeffs_equiripple, FIR_FILTER_LENGTH);
31
arm_fir_init_f32(&fir0, FIR_FILTER_LENGTH,
32
fir_coeffs_equiripple, fir_state_equiripple, HALF_BUFFER_SIZE);
33
while (1)
34
{
35
switch(transmit_flag){
36
case 1: //Transmit buffer0
37
transmit_flag = 0;
38
arm_fir_f32(&fir0, data_buffer0, uart_data0, HALF_BUFFER_SIZE); //Filter
39
HAL_UART_Transmit_IT(&huart1, (uint8_t*)uart_data0, sizeof(uart_data0));
40
break;
41
}
42
}
43
}
Listing 3: FIR filtering implemented on the STM32.
This implementation enables real-time suppression of movement artifacts, enhancing
the clarity of the ECG signal without the need for offline processing.
9.4
Pan-Tompkins’ algorithm
The QRS-complex is particularly interesting to analyze in ECGs. By measuring the
average time between two R-peaks, the heart rate can be calculated.
Therefore,
reliable QRS detection is an important feature of the electrocardiograph.
Detection of the QRS-complex can be difficult, as the ECG waveform may vary
between patients. Moreover, there might be cases where the T-wave spontaneously is
of the same amplitude as an R-peak, leading to false detections.
The QRS detection algorithm implemented in this project is a real-time adaptation
of the method developed by Pan and Tompkins in [14]. It consists of two parts:
• Signal preprocessing
• Dynamic decision rule
77
==PAGE:85==
In the signal preprocessing stage, the ECG is first passed through a fourth order
digital IIR band pass filter with passband in 5 - 15 Hz to enhance the SNR.
After filtering, the signal is differentiated using a five-point derivative operator with
impulse response [14]
h[k] = fs
8 {−1, −2, 0, 2, 1}
(9.2)
Differentiating a time-domain signal is an operation that amplifies high frequency
content and attenuates low frequency content. It follows that this stage is intended
to amplify the QRS complex.
The next step is to square the differentiated signal.
Squaring a real signal is an
operation that amplifies large amplitudes and suppresses low amplitudes.
It also
results in a strictly positive signal.
Lastly, the squared signal is integrated using a sliding window with fixed width L.
This operation computes the average of the L most recent samples as the window
shifts to the right on the waveform. The sliding window is equivalent to a moving
average filter with order L, that smoothens out fast transitions in the signal.
A
moving average filter is more straightforward to implement than a sliding window, as
the output expression simplifies to two cases.
Let maL[k] be the current output of the moving average filter with order L, where k
is the sample number starting from 0, and let maL[k −1] be the previous output. It
is shown in Sec. 13.11 in Appendix A that the output of the moving average filter
subjected to the input values f[0], f[1], . . . , f[k] is given by















maL[k] = f[k] + k · maL[k −1]
k + 1
for k < L
maL[k] = maL[k −1] + f[k] −
oldest sample
z
}|
{
f[k −L]
L
for k ≥L
(9.3)
The Pan-Tompkins preprocessing algorithm was applied offline to the noisy ECG
recording from Fig. 8.3, and the results at each processing stage are presented in Fig.
9.7. The results demonstrate that the preprocessing stage successfully transforms the
ECG into a waveform where the location of each QRS-complex is clearly identifiable,
even in the presence of noise.
78
==PAGE:86==
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
-0.2
0
0.2
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
-0.1
0
0.1
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
-10
-5
0
5
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
0
20
40
60
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
0
5
10
15
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Fig. 9.7: The Pan-Tompkins preprocessing algorithm applied to an ECG signal. (a) The ECG
signal with movement artifacts suppressed. (b) The ECG signal passed through a band pass filter
with passband 5 - 15Hz. (c) Performing a five-point derivative on the processed signal. (d) Squaring
the differentiated signal. (e) Integrating the squared signal with a sliding window.
After preprocessing the signal, it is subjected to a decision rule. The purpose of the
dynamic decision rule is to check if a sample in the processed signal is a peak, and to
determine whether the detected peak corresponds to a true QRS-complex.
If a sample is indeed an R-peak, the algorithm enforces a refractory period. This
period reflects a physiological mechanism that makes it physically impossible for there
to be two QRS-complexes in a 200 ms time span. During this interval peak detection
is disabled.
After the 200 ms period has elapsed, the algorithm resumes searching for a potential
peak. A sample is classified as an R-peak if its amplitude exceeds a dynamically
updated threshold, denoted as THRESHOLD1I. This threshold value is computed as
THRESHOLD1I = NPKI + 0.5(SPKI −NPKI)
(9.4)
Here, SPKI is the running estimate of the recent QRS-complex amplitudes, while
NPKI is the esimate of non-QRS peaks. These estimates are dynamically updated as
follows:
79
==PAGE:87==
• If a sample f[k0] is classified as a peak, then SPKI is updated
SPKI ←0.125 · f[k0] + 0.875 · SPKI
(9.5)
• If a sample is not classified as a peak, then NPKI is updated
NPKI ←0.125 · f[k0] + 0.875 · NPKI
(9.6)
THRESHOLD1I is recalculated after each update to SPKI or NPKI, making the de-
tection threshold dynamic.
When a valid QRS-complex is detected, its sample index is stored. After eight QRS-
complexes have been detected, the average sample difference between successive R-
peaks is calculated. Dividing the average sample difference by the sampling frequency
gives the average heart rate, from which the beats per minute is computed as
bpm =
60
s
min
avg. RR interval [s]
(9.7)
Due to the implementation complexity and code length, the full real-time version of
the algorithm is not included here. However, during testing on the STM32 some key
observations were made.
First, it takes roughly 10 s for the eight R-peaks to be detected, so the output of the
algorithm during these first ten seconds are not the true bpm.
Second, the adaptive threshold value is sensitive to abrupt changes in the signal. When
the algorithm was tested using a pulse waveform generated by a wave generator, a
sudden change in frequency caused THRESHOLD1I to increase beyond the level of
subsequent peaks, such that no peaks were ever detected again.
Lastly, it seems that the weighting coefficients in Eqs. (9.4), and for updating SPKI
and NPKI can be tuned to yield either a more sensitive or insensitive peak detector,
and the appropriate values may deviate from patient to patient.
80
==PAGE:88==
10
Performance evaluation
This section evaluates the performance of the electrocardiograph and analyzes the
impact of the implemented noise reduction techniques. Recordings are examined in
the time-domain and in the frequency-domain.
10.1
Noise floor and harmonic distortion
Before recording any signals, the noise floor is measured. To do this, the two inputs
to the ECG amplifier were left floating, while the driven right leg circuit remained
connected through the right leg electrode. This resulted in a noise signal n(t) at the
output of the ECG amplifier. This was sampled by the STM32, and the spectrum
was computed.
Fig. 10.1 shows the amplitude spectrum |N[r]| of the noise signal with and without
the shielded enclosure.
The results demonstrate that 50 Hz noise and its second
harmonic are attenuated when using the shielded enclosure. Additionally, the general
noise floor decreases from around −90 dB to −100 dB.
-500
-400
-300
-150-100 -50
0
50 100 150
300
400
500
-140
-120
-100
-80
-60
-40
-500
-400
-300
-150-100 -50
0
50 100 150
300
400
500
-140
-120
-100
-80
-60
-40
Fig. 10.1: Comparison of noise floor without and with a shielding box enclosing the circuit.
To evaluate the frequency response of the system, a square-wave test signal with a
fundamental frequency of 10Hz was applied to the input. The peak-to-peak amplitude
was chosen such that the output of the ECG amplifier has a swing of 0 - 3 V. The
amplifier output was sampled by the STM32 for 9 seconds, and the resulting signal
was filtered using the equiripple high pass filter. A portion of the waveform is seen in
Fig. 10.2 (a).
81
==PAGE:89==
5
5.1
5.2
5.3
5.4
5.5
5.6
5.7
5.8
5.9
6
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
-150
-100
-50
-10 0 10
50
100
150
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
-150
-100
-50
-10 0 10
50
100
150
0
1
2
3
4
-150
-100
-50
-10 0 10
50
100
150
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Fig. 10.2: Difference in analytical and measured square-wave harmonics. In general, the amplitude
of the measured square-wave harmonics are lower than the theoretical.
The theoretical Fourier coefficients for a square-wave are given by [12] (pp. 196)
|Dn,analytical| =







0
for even n
4A
πn
for odd n
(10.1)
with A being the amplitude, which in this case is 1.5 V. These theoretical coefficients
are plotted in Fig. 10.2 (b). For comparison, Fig. 10.2 (c) shows the DFT of the
recorded square-wave. The difference between the theoretical and measured Fourier
coefficients are provided in (d). Beyond the third and fifth harmonic the recorded
harmonics start to deviate from theoretical values. This is to be expected, as the
Bessel-Thomson filter does not have a flat amplitude passband.
Specifically, the
150 Hz component of the measured signal is nearly 4 dB lower than the theoretical
Fourier coefficient. This corresponds to the anti-aliasing filter having a −3 dB cutoff
frequency at 150 Hz.
82
==PAGE:90==
Apart from the attenuation of the higher harmonics, the amplifier seems to produce
a clean square-wave on the output, indicating insignificant amplitude distortion.
It should be mentioned, that when comparing the theoretical Fourier coefficients of a
continuous-time periodic signal to the DFT of the sampled waveform, it is essential
that the DFT is computed over an integer number of periods. Otherwise, discon-
tinuities at the window edges introduce spectral leakage, leaking the energy in one
harmonic to adjacent frequency components. This condition was ensured in the test-
ing just discussed. A detailed explanation of the consequences of spectral leakage is
provided in Sec. 13.13 in Appendix A.
10.2
Effect of noise reduction techniques
This section evaluates the individual and combined effect of the noise reduction tech-
niques.
ECG measurements are performed without the notch filter in a stepwise
manner, enabling different suppression technique combinations at a time. Fig. 13.10
provides a presentation of the recordings made with the shielded box.
83
==PAGE:91==
-500
-250
0
250
500
-120
-100
-80
-60
-40
Undriven, shielded, with DRL
-500
-250
0
250
500
-120
-100
-80
-60
-40
Driven, shielded, with DRL
-500
-250
0
250
500
-120
-100
-80
-60
-40
Undriven, shielded, no DRL
-500
-250
0
250
500
-120
-100
-80
-60
-40
42
42.5
43
43.5
44
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
Undriven, shielded, with DRL
42
42.5
43
43.5
44
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
Driven, shielded, with DRL
42
42.5
43
43.5
44
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
Undriven, shielded, no DRL
42
42.5
43
43.5
44
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
Driven, shielded, no DRL
Driven, shielded, no DRL
Fig. 10.3: Measurement results with shielded box and without notch filter. Notice the noise spikes
at 50, 150, 250, 450 Hz are progressively attenuated.
Recordings without the shielded box are seen in Sec. 13.14 in Appendix A. Both mea-
surement campaigns show particular noise spikes at 50, 150, 250 and 450Hz. These are
the harmonics associated with 50Hz. It is evident from the frequency content that the
magnitude of the spikes decrease as more suppression techniques are used, as seen in
the bottom-right subplot of Fig. 10.3. Additionally, the time-domain signal shows a
larger SNR with all techniques active, when comparing the top left time-domain plot
to the bottom right time-domain plot. Among the techniques applied, the driven right
84
==PAGE:92==
leg circuit appears to have the most significant impact on noise reduction, as both
noise spikes in the frequency-domain are reduced and the SNR in the time-domain is
increased.
To obtain measurements that clearly demonstrated the effects of the techniques, three
test configurations were evaluated. In the initial setup, ECG signals were recorded in
a standard office environment. Under these conditions, the techniques could not be
meaningfully distinguished, as the general noise level was very low.
In the second setup, a powered oscilloscope and soldering iron was placed right next
the ECG amplifier. This configuration introduced excessive noise levels of which none
of the techniques were able to reduce.
In the final setup, the soldering iron and oscilloscope were moved approximately 50cm
away from the circuitry, and a desk lamp was placed directly above the amplifier. This
environment allowed the impact of the individual techniques to be evaluated, and is
where the results in Fig. 10.3 stem from.
10.3
IEC standard - Input impedance
The IEC standard requires an input impedance of no less than 2.5 MΩ. Fig. 10.4
shows the measurement of the differential input impedance, and the multimeter reads
9.33 MΩat DC. This measurement is consistent with the theoretical prediction pre-
sented earlier in Sec. 4.7.
Fig. 10.4: Measurement of the input impedance at DC.
10.4
IEC standard - Noise level
The IEC standard specifies that the input-referred noise level must not exceed 30 µV
peak-to-peak. Scrutiny of the measurement in Fig. 10.3 with all techniques active
85
==PAGE:93==
and adjusting the y-scale accordingly, the signal exhibits a peak-to-peak amplitude
below 30 µV. This is seen in Fig. 10.5.
42
42.2
42.4
42.6
42.8
43
43.2
43.4
43.6
43.8
44
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
Driven, shielded, with DRL
42.2
42.3
42.4
42.5
42.6
42.7
42.8
42.9
43
43.1
-40
-20
0
20
40
60
80
100
Fig. 10.5:
Investigation of the noise level for the ECG measurement with all noise reduction
techniques active. It is in compliance with the standard.
10.5
IEC standard - Evaluation ECG
The IEC standard specifies that the electrocardiograph must accurately reproduce
standardized test ECG waveforms without distortion. While the official test wave-
forms were not publicly available, a comparable dataset was sourced from ANSI/AAMI
EC13 database hosted on Physionet [16].
The dataset consists of a 1D array of 16-bit integers representing ADC readings of an
ECG signal, sampled at fs = 720 Hz with a specified bit resolution of ∆VLSB. From
this, the numerical 1D array was scaled to physical units in millivolts and plotted as
a function of time in seconds to confirm the waveform.
To inject the signal into the amplifier, the STM32’s digital-to-analog converter (DAC)
was configured for timer-triggered operation using DMA. Initially, the raw DAC out-
put matched the original ECG amplitude in millivolts, but this led to a poor waveform
appearance due to the DAC’s limited resolution.
To improve the waveform, the amplitudes were scaled before being outputted by the
DAC to occupy a larger voltage range - improving resolution and reducing quanti-
zation noise. The scaled output from the DAC was then passed through a buffer
and a potentiometer before being fed to the ECG board. The attenuation caused by
the potentiometer was calibrated such that the inamp wouldn’t saturate, while the
waveform preserved its shape. The circuit used for this is shown in Fig. 10.6.
86
==PAGE:94==
Fig. 10.6: Circuit used to downscale the ECG signal, preventing the inamp from saturating.
During the attempt to produce the evaluation ECG with the DAC while simulta-
neously sampling the output of the ECG amplifier with the ADC, an unexpected
stability issue arose. The microcontroller consistently issued a hard fault interrupt,
crashing the program as soon as sampling began. Due to time constraints, the root-
cause of this issue was not found and a solution involving the STM32 was not found
either.
As a second option, the oscilloscope was used to record the output of the ECG ampli-
fier. This approach provided a reliable way to measure the output, but did not allow
for the influence of quantization or the digital filters to be investigated.
A segment of the recorded waveform captured from the oscilloscope is seen in Fig.
10.7. The oscilloscope recorded for roughly 90 seconds, which included a repetition
of the input test waveform, as the DAC circularly outputs values.
Fig. 10.7: Output of the ECG amplifier measured on the oscilloscope.
For reference, Fig. 10.8 shows the evaluation waveform VECG, (val)(t) and the corre-
sponding waveform exported by the oscilloscope VECG, (meas)(t).
87
==PAGE:95==
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
-0.5
0
0.5
1
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
40
50
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
(a)
(b)
Fig. 10.8: (a) The validation ECG from Physionet. (b) The output from the ECG amplifier excited
with the DAC and measured by the oscilloscope.
To evaluate whether distortion is introduced, the oscilloscope measurement was com-
pared with the validation waveform. However, a direct comparison is not straightfor-
ward due to differences in scaling, offset, and timing.
First, scaling and offsetting was performed. The oscilloscope measurement was orig-
inally in volts, while the validation waveform was in millivolts.
Additionally, the
measured waveform had a DC offset different from the validation waveform. The
amplitude was corrected by scaling the waveform such that its peak-to-peak value
was identical to the validation waveform. The offset was corrected by appropriately
shifting the waveform down.
Next, the two signals were temporally aligned. The oscilloscope recorded at a sampling
frequency of 500 Hz, while the original waveform had a sampling frequency of 720 Hz.
Both signals were resampled to a common frequency of 720 Hz using MATLAB’s
resample function.
To determine the correct time offset between the two signals, cross-correlation was
employed. The discrete cross-correlation between two signals is [17]
Rfg[k] = f[k] ⋆g[k] =
∞
X
m=−∞
f[m]g[k + m]
(10.2)
The lag k corresponding to the maximum of Rfg[k] indicates the time shift needed to
align the signals. To do this MATLAB’s alignsignals function was used, which
internally applies cross-correlation.
88
==PAGE:96==
The result of the alignment is shown in Fig. 10.9. (a) shows the original validation
waveform after being shifted. (b) presents the resampled, scaled and offset-adjusted
measured signal. (c) through (e) show magnified overlay plots of the two signals, in
increasingly smaller time intervals.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
0
0.5
1
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
-2
0
2
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
0
0.5
1
40
40.5
41
41.5
42
42.5
43
43.5
44
44.5
45
0
0.5
1
41.5
42
42.5
43
0
0.5
1
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Fig. 10.9:
(a) The validation waveform shifted to align with the measurement waveform.
(b)
Resampled, scaled and offset measurement waveform.
(c), (d) and (e) Overlay plots of the two
signals magnified to different time intervals.
The overlay plots reveal a large similarity between the validation and measured out-
put. There is a small amount of noise present on the measurement waveform, which is
to be expected. Interestingly, a small constant group delay appears between the two
signals, with the measured waveform leading the validation signal. This is believed
to be a resampling artifact.
While this comparison is solely based on visuals, the large similarity suggests that
the amplifier introduces negligible distortion, both in amplitude and in group delay.
It is concluded that the amplifier is in compliance with the IEC standards regarding
minimal distortion of evaluation ECGs.
89
==PAGE:97==
11
Conclusion
This thesis presented the design, construction and validation of an ECG amplifier sys-
tem with emphasis on analog and digital noise suppression techniques. The system
was developed with the goal of meeting a selection of the IEC-60601-2-25 standards.
Sources of noise - particularly common-mode noise from power line interference - were
systematically analyzed. Practical solutions were proposed and implemented based
on theoretical modelling and LTspice simulations. These included a driven right leg
circuit for body noise, shielded coaxial cable with driven inner conductors to mitigate
cable coupled noise, an AC-coupled front end to eliminate half-cell potentials, and a
shielded enclosure.
Analog signal integrity was ensured by designing a fourth order anti-aliasing filter of
the Bessel-Thomson type, chosen for its linear phase characteristics. PCB layout and
grounding practices were chosen to preserve signal quality and have a solid ground
reference.
On the digital side, both offline and real-time processing schemes were developed. Of-
fline, a sixth order IIR high pass filter was applied using forward-backward filtering to
remove baseline drift without introducing phase distortion. A spectral analysis showed
that the essential ECG features reside below 62.5 Hz, which allowed downsampling
by a factor of four while preserving the QRS characteristics to an acceptable degree.
Real-time filtering was achieved with the CMSIS DSP library. The Parks-McClellan
algorithm was shown to outperform the frequency sampling method in terms of a
lower filter order, if ripples in the passband and stopband are acceptable.
To calculate heart rate, a real-time implementation of the Pan-Tompkins QRS de-
tection algorithm was developed. The preprocessing stage proved effective, but the
detection threshold was found to be sensitive to abrupt changes in the signal.
The final system was evaluated according to the IEC requirements. Measurements
confirmed an input impedance of 9.33MΩ, an input-referred noise level well below the
30 µV peak-to-peak, and negligible harmonic distortion in the passband. Using the
STM32’s DAC, generating a validation ECG from Physionet, the system was shown
to reproduce the waveform accurately, validating the analog circuitry, but not the
digital filters as an unexpected problem occurred while trying to use the DAC and
ADC simultaneously.
Overall, the project has demonstrated how noise reduction techniques contribute to
a faithful reproduction of an ECG waveform. Using prototyping components it was
possible to satisfy those IEC requirements which concern noise artifacts even when
recordings were made in a noisy environment.
12
Limitations and future work
Even though the electrocardiograph complied with several IEC standards, the system
exhibits limitations that point to improvement in the future.
First, updates to the amplifier board would be appropriate. The simultaneous use of
the DAC and ADC caused the STM32 to issue hard fault interrupts - likely due to
90
==PAGE:98==
overvoltages at the ADC’s input. This could be avoided by adding protection diodes
at the output of the ECG amplifier. Additionally, small shunt capacitors to ground
should be placed on the inputs from right and left arm to act as short circuits to
ground for high frequency signals. The board should also be equipped with a more
sophisticated way of enabling and disabling the driven right leg circuit.
Lastly, the project relied on floating point filtering operations from the CMSIS DSP
library using the multiply and accumulate scheme.
The library also offers fixed-
point equivalent operations, which could offer performance or memory improvements.
It would be interesting to perform a benchmark test, to evaluate the trade-offs in
speed and precision between the floating and fixed point operations. It would also
be interesting to see if switching to a block-filtering approach would improve the
performance further.
91
==PAGE:99==
References
[1] ANALOG DEVICES. Low Cost Low Power Instrumentation Amplifier AD620,
1 2011. Rev. H.
[2] ANALOG DEVICES. Wide Supply Range, Micropower, Rail-to-Rail Instrumen-
tation Amplifier, 1 2012. Rev. A.
[3] Arm Limited. arm fir f32 – finite impulse response (fir) filters · cmsis-dsp, 2024.
Accessed: 2025-07-11.
[4] C´edric Assambo and Martin J Burke.
Low-frequency response and the skin-
electrode interface in dry-electrode electrocardiography. Advances in Electrocar-
diograms—Methods and Analysis, 2012.
[5] C. Bond. Bessel filters polynomials, poles and circuit elements. 2003.
[6] David Keun Cheng et al. Field and wave electromagnetics. Pearson Education
India, 1989.
[7] Allan R Hambley. Electrical engineering: principles and applications. Pearson,
2019.
[8] Kaj-˚Age Henneberg.
Ecg project: Origin of ecg - measurement techniques -
bioelectric amplifier with filters. Rapid Prototyping of Digital Sensor Systems,
2022.
[9] James C Huhta and John G Webster. 60-hz interference in electrocardiography.
IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering, pages 91–101, 2007.
[10] International Electrotechnical Commission. Medical electrical equipment – Part
2-25: Particular requirements for the basic safety and essential performance of
electrocardiographs, 2011. Edition 2.0.
[11] David E Johnson. Introduction to filter theory. Prentice-Hall, 1976.
[12] Bhagwandas Pannalal Lathi and Roger A Green. Signal processing and linear
systems, volume 2. Oxford University Press Oxford, 1998.
[13] AC Metting van Rijn, Abraham Peper, and CA Grimbergen. High-quality record-
ing of bioelectric events. Medical and Biological Engineering and Computing,
28(5):389–397, 1990.
[14] Jiapu Pan and Willis J Tompkins. A real-time qrs detection algorithm. IEEE
transactions on biomedical engineering, 32(3):230–236, 1985.
[15] T Parks and James McClellan. Chebyshev approximation for nonrecursive digital
filters with linear phase. IEEE Transactions on circuit theory, 19(2):189–194,
1972.
[16] Physionet. ANSI/AAMI EC13 Test Waveforms (Version 1.0.0). PhysioNet, 2002.
Accessed: 2025-07-11.
92
==PAGE:100==
[17] John G Proakis and Dimitris G Manolakis. Digital signal processing: principles,
algorithms, and applications, 3/E. Pearson Education India, 2007.
[18] Leif S¨ornmo and Pablo Laguna. Bioelectrical signal processing in cardiac and
neurological applications. Academic press, 2005.
[19] Enrique Mario Spinelli, Ramon Pall`as-Areny, and Miguel Angel Mayosky. Ac-
coupled front-end for biopotential measurements. IEEE transactions on biomed-
ical engineering, 50(3):391–395, 2003.
[20] STMicroelectronics. STM32F405/415, STM32F407/417, STM32F427/437 and
STM32F429/439 advanced Arm®-based 32-bit MCUs, 6 2024. RM0090 Refer-
ence manual.
[21] Willis J Tompkins and G. Webster. Design of microcomputer-based medical in-
strumentation. Prentice-Hall, 1981.
[22] Petr Vanysek. Electrochemical series. CRC handbook of chemistry and physics,
8, 2000.
[23] John G Webster. Medical instrumentation: application and design. John Wiley
& Sons, 2009.
[24] Hank Zumbahlen. Mini Tutorial MT-220: Multiple Feedback Filters. Technical
Report MT-220 Rev.B, Analog Devices, Inc., Norwood, MA, USA, 2021. Ac-
cessed: 2025-07-22.
93
==PAGE:101==
13
Appendix A
13.1
Instrumentation amplifier CMRR derivation
A differential amplifier is shown in Fig. 13.1
Fig. 13.1: A differential amplifier.
To derive Vo the superposition principle can be used, by first nullifying VB, and find
Vo1. Then nullify VA and find Vo2 and lastly sum the two results.
When VB = 0 V, then certainly Vb = 0 V. This causes Va = 0 V as well, due to the
negative feedback inferring a virtual short between the opamp’s input terminals. The
node equation for Va is then
0 −VA
R2a
+ 0 −Vo1
R3a
= 0 ⇔
Vo1 = −R3a
R2a
VA
(13.1)
When VB is active then clearly Vb =
R3b
R2b+R3bVB. With the same argument as before,
one has that Va =
R3b
R2b+R3bVB. With VA = 0 V the node equation for Va is
94
==PAGE:102==
Va −0
R2a
+ Va −Vo2
R3a
= 0 ⇔
Vo2 =

1 + R3a
R2a

Va
Vo2 =
R2a + R3a
R2a

Va
Vo2 =
R2a + R3a
R2a
 
R3b
R2b + R3b

VB
(13.2)
The total output voltage is then
Vo = Vo2 + Vo1 =
R2a + R3a
R2a
 
R3b
R2b + R3b

VB −R3a
R2a
VA
(13.3)
Next, the complete instrumentation amplifier is investigated. Again, superposition
will be used. The inamp and associated interesting node voltages are shown in Fig.
13.2.
(a)
(b)
Fig. 13.2: Instrumentation amplifier with superposition applied to its two input signals.
These two cases can very elegantly be analyzed. When V2 = 0 V as in case (a), the
upper opamp, R1a and RG constitute a non-inverting amplifier configuration with VA1
as output voltage and V1 as input. The lower opamp, RG and R1b constitute an invert-
ing amplifier configuration with VB1 as output and V1 as input. A similar situation
happens in case (b), except that the inverting and non-inverting configuration have
been swapped. Recognizing this, leads to very convenient expression for VA and VB.
VA =

1 + R1a
RG

V1 −R1a
RG
V2
(13.4)
VB =

1 + R1b
RG

V2 −R1b
RG
V1
(13.5)
95
==PAGE:103==
At this point it is interesting to investigate what happens if all but one resistor are
matched. Setting R2a = R2b = R3b but letting R3a = αR3b causes Eq. 13.3 to become
Vo =
R3b + αR3b
R3b
 
R3b
R3b + R3b

VB −αR3b
R2a
VA
=
1 + α
2

VB −αVA
(13.6)
Additionally, setting R1a = βR1b changes the expression for VA. Inserting the Equa-
tions in 13.4 in Eq. 13.6 yields
Vo =
1 + α
2

V2 −αV1 + R1a
RG
1 + α
2
+ αβ

(V2 −V1)
(13.7)
96
==PAGE:104==
13.2
Common-mode voltage with floating ground
The circuit in question is
Fig. 13.3: Instrumentation amplifier with floating reference.
We wish to determine an expression for Vcm.
Vcm =
ZCBODY||(ZGE + ZCISO)
ZCPOW + ZCBODY||(ZGE + ZCISO) ·
ZGE
ZGE + ZCISO
VPOW
≈
ZCBODY||ZCISO
ZCPOW + ZCBODY||ZCISO
· ZGE
ZCISO
VPOW
(ZGE ≪ZCISO)
=
ZCBODYZCISO
ZCBODY+ZCISO
ZCPOW +
ZCBODYZCISO
ZCBODY+ZCISO
· ZGE
ZCISO
VPOW
=
ZCBODYZCISO
ZCPOW(ZCBODY + ZCISO) + ZCBODYZCISO
· ZGE
ZCISO
VPOW
=
ZCBODYZCISO
ZCBODY(ZCISO + ZCPOW) + ZCPOWZCISO
· ZGE
ZCISO
VPOW
=
ZCBODYZGE
ZCBODY(ZCISO + ZCPOW) + ZCPOWZCISO
VPOW
=
ZGE
ZCISO + ZCPOW +
ZCPOWZCISO
ZCBODY
VPOW
=
ZGE
ZCPOW
ZCISO+ZCPOW
ZCPOW
+
ZCPOWZCISO
ZCBODYZCPOW
VPOW
=
ZGE
ZCPOW
1 +
ZCISO
ZCPOW +
ZCISO
ZCBODY
VPOW
(13.8)
97
==PAGE:105==
13.3
AC coupling high pass filter derivation
The circuit in question is seen in below. It is desired to determine Vod
Vid .
Fig. 13.4: Instrumentation amplifier with AC-coupled front end.
Let VE be the reference node. In that case, VA = Vid and the associated node equations
become















VB−VC
R3
+ (VB −Vid)sC1
= 0
VC−Vid
R1
+ VC−VB
R3
+ VC
R2 + VC−VD
R4
= 0
VD−VC
R4
+ VDsC2
= 0
(13.9)
Solving the system of equations with respect to VB, VC, VD yields expressions for all
three node voltages. In the present case, we are interested in Vod = VB −VD which
comes out to be
Vod
Vid
=
(C1C2(((R3 + R4)R2 + R3R4)R2 + R2R3R4)s + C1R1R3 + C2R2R4)
C1C2(((R3 + R4)R2 + R3R4)R1 + R2R3R4)s2 + (((R2 + R3)R1 + R2R3)C1 + ((R2 + R4)R1 + R2R4)C2)s + R1 + R2
(13.10)
which by performing the assignments R1 = R2 = R3 = R4 = R and C1 = C2 = C
undergoes a pole-zero cancellation and turns into
H(s) = Vod
Vid
=
sRC
sRC + 1
(13.11)
Maple calculations are seen in Sec. 15.2 Fig. 15.3.
98
==PAGE:106==
13.4
Driven right leg derivation
The circuit is seen in Fig. 13.5. It is desired to obtain an expression for Vcm.
Fig. 13.5: Driven right leg circuit.
The node equations are as follows







VC−Vcm
ZCPOW + VD−Vcm
ZCBODY +
VD
ZCISO
= 0
Vcm−VC
ZCPOW + Vcm−VD
ZCBODY + Vcm−VB
ZGE
= 0
(13.12)
In addition, we recognize the second opamp stage as an inverter which infers the
constraint that VB = −
R2
R1(sC1R2+1)Vcm = −β(s)Vcm. Additionally, one has a constraint
from the supernode constituted by VC and VD given by VC = VD + VPOW. Solving
Eqs. 13.12 with these constraints gives this expression for Vcm. Maple calculations
are seen in Fig. 15.4.
Vcm =
ZGEZCBODY
(ZCPOW + βZCPOW + βZCISO + ZGE + ZCISO)ZCBODY + ZCPOW(ZCISO + βZCISO + ZGE) VPOW
=
ZGEZCBODY
ZCBODY ZCPOW

ZCPOW
ZCPOW +
βZCPOW
ZCPOW +
βZCISO
ZCPOW +
ZGE
ZCPOW +
ZCISO
ZCPOW

+

ZCISO
ZCBODY +
βZCISO
ZCBODY +
ZGE
ZCBODY
 VPOW
=
ZGE
ZCPOW
1 + β + β
ZCISO
ZCPOW +
ZGE
ZCPOW +
ZCISO
ZCPOW +
ZCISO
ZCBODY + β
ZCISO
ZCBODY +
ZGE
ZCBODY
VPOW
=
ZGE
ZCPOW
1 +
ZCISO +ZGE
ZCPOW
+
ZCISO +ZGE
ZCBODY
+ β

1 +
ZCISO
ZCPOW +
ZCISO
ZCBODY
 VPOW
(13.13)
Because ZGE ≪ZCISO it is valid to assume ZCISO + ZGE ≈ZCISO from which the
following approximation is also valid
99
==PAGE:107==
Vcm =
ZGE
ZCPOW
1 +
ZCISO+ZGE
ZCPOW
+
ZCISO+ZGE
ZCBODY
+ β

1 +
ZCISO
ZCPOW +
ZCISO
ZCBODY
VPOW
≈
ZGE
ZCPOW
1 +
ZCISO
ZCPOW +
ZCISO
ZCBODY + β

1 +
ZCISO
ZCPOW +
ZCISO
ZCBODY
VPOW
≈
ZGE
ZCPOW
(β + 1)

1 +
ZCISO
ZCPOW +
ZCISO
ZCBODY
VPOW
(13.14)
100
==PAGE:108==
13.5
Sallen-Key transfer function derivation
The circuit in question is seen in below. It is desired to determine Vo
Vin.
Fig. 13.6: Sallen-Key unity gain low pass filter.
The node equations for VA and VB are





VA−Vin
R1
+ VA−VB
R2
+ (VA −Vo)sC2
= 0
VB−VA
R2
+ VBsC1
= 0
(13.15)
Because there is negative feedback, the principle of the virtual short applies, causing
VB = Vo. Solving the system of equations in Maple with respect to VA, Vo yields
Vo =
1
C1C2R1R2s2 + s(C1R2 + C1R1) + 1Vin ⇔
(13.16)
Vo
Vin
=
1
C1C2R1R2
s2 + s

1
C2R2 +
1
C2R1

+
1
C1C2R1R2
(13.17)
101
==PAGE:109==
13.6
Sallen-Key filter design process
From the look-up table in Appendix B 14.1 [5], the pole locations for a normalized
fourth order Bessel-Thomson low pass filter with ωc = 1 rad/s are obtained. These
correspond to two cascaded second order stages:
HBessel(ˆs) =
2.0453
ˆs2 + 2.7401ˆs + 2.0453
|
{z
}
stage 1
·
2.5707
ˆs2 + 1.9904ˆs + 2.5707
|
{z
}
stage 2
(13.18)
where ˆs denotes that the filter is frequency normalized.
The sensitivity analysis
resulted in the two component constraints
C2
C1
= 4a0
a2
1
and R =
a1
2a0C1
For the first stage, this yields the normalized component values
C1 = 10 F
C2 = 10.896 F
R = 0.067 Ω
To shift the cutoff frequency from 1 rad/s to 150 Hz, a frequency scaling operation is
applied. First, by defining a scaling factor
Kf = ˆωc,desired
ˆωc,current
= 2π · 150 Hz
1 rad/s
= 942.4
(13.19)
Then noticing that the frequency characteristic can be rewritten as
H(jˆω) =
1
C1C2R2
(jˆω)2 + jˆω
2
C2R +
1
C1C2R2
=
1
R2
(jˆω)2C1C2 + jˆω 2C1
R +
1
R2
=
1
R2
(jˆωKf)2 C1
Kf
C2
Kf + jˆωKf
C1
Kf
2
R +
1
R2
(13.20)
Lastly, letting C′
1 = C1
Kf , C′
2 = C2
Kf , and changing the frequency axis with the substitu-
tion ω = Kf ˆω
H(jω) =
1
C′
1C′
2R2
(jω)2 + jω
2
C′
2R +
1
C′
1C′
2R2
(13.21)
yields a filter with a cutoff frequency Kf times higher than before, and the capaci-
tances become
C′
1 = 10 F
942.4 = 0.0106 F and C′
2 = 10.896 F
942.4
= 0.0116 F
Finally, to obtain proper component values an impedance scaling factor is defined
102
==PAGE:110==
KZ =
C′
1
Cdesired
= 0.0106 F
15 nF
= 707355
(13.22)
which multiplies all resistances and divides all capacitances to give
C′′
1 = 15 nF,
C′′
2 = 15 nF,
R′′ = 47 kΩ
(13.23)
103
==PAGE:111==
13.7
Gain and offset circuit equation derivation
Two parts of the circuit is seen below. In circuit (a) the offset source has been turned
off. In circuit (b) the input source has been turned off. The superposition principle
tells us, that to find the total circuit equation, it is enough to find each individual
source’s influence on the output voltage, and then add the result up. It is desired to
determine Vo as a function of Vin.
(a)
(b)
Fig. 13.7: (a) Gain adjustment circuit. (b) Offset adjustment circuit.
Circuit (a) is simply two cascaded non-inverting amplifier stages. The circuit equation
for that circuit is
Vo1 = αgainVin

1 + R2
R1
 
1 +
R6
R4 + R3||R5

≈αgainVin

1 + R2
R1
 
1 + R6
R4

≈2αgainVin

1 + R2
R1

for R4 = R6
(13.24)
In circuit (b) the voltage at the non-inverting input of opamp 2 is just 0 V, causing
the inverting input to also be 0 V due to the principle of a virtual short. Because
R4 ≫R5, one has that Voffset ≈VA
R5
R3+R5. The node equation for the inverting
104
==PAGE:112==
0 −Vo2
R6
+ 0 −Voffset
R4
= 0 ⇔
Vo2 = −Voffset
R6
R4
Vo2 = −VA
R5
R3 + R5
,
VA ∈[−9, 9] V
(13.25)
Addition of Equations 13.24 and 13.25 finally yields
Vo = Vo1 + Vo2 = 2αgainVin

1 + R2
R1

−VA
R5
R3 + R5
,
VA ∈[−9, 9] V
(13.26)
105
==PAGE:113==
13.8
IIR filter design using the bilinear transformation method
The first step is to look up the analog sixth order Butterworth low pass transfer
function, frequency normalized to a cutoff frequency of 1 rad/s from a table seen in
Appendix B Sec. 14.2.
Ha(s) =
1
(s2 + 0.5176s + 1)
1
(s2 + 1.4142s + 1)
1
(s2 + 1.9318s + 1)
(13.27)
To preserve the analog filter behavior after the bilinear transformation, the cutoff
frequency is prewarped [12]:
ω′
c = tan
 ωc
2fs

= tan
2π rad/s
2000 Hz

=
π
1000 rad/s
(13.28)
Next, the transfer function is frequency scaled by ω′
c and transformed into a high pass
filter by substituting s →ω′
c
s :
Ha
 ω′
c
s

=
s6
(s2 + 1.626 · 10−3s + 9.869 · 10−6)(s2 + 4.442 · 10−3s + 9.869 · 10−6)(s2 + 6.06 · 10−3s + 9.869 · 10−6)
(13.29)
Finally, the bilinear transformation is performed by substituting s = z−1
z+1, resulting in
the digital high pass filter
Hd(z) = Ha
z −1
z + 1

=
0.9879(z −1)6
(z2 −1.9967z + 0.9967)(z2 −1.9911z + 0.9911)(z2 −1.9878z + 0.9879)
(13.30)
106
==PAGE:114==
13.9
Forward-backward filtering
Let f[k] be the input signal, h[k] be the IIR filter’s impulse response, and y[k] be the
final output. The forward-backward filtering procedure is then as follows [18]:
x1[k] = h[k] ∗f[k]
(13.31)
x2[k] = h[k] ∗x1[−k]
(13.32)
y[k] = x2[−k]
(13.33)
Here, ∗denotes linear convolution. The result is a signal whose amplitude has been
filtered twice, but whose phase is unaffected. To see this, the following properties are
used [12] (pp. 633)
1. x1[k] ∗x2[k] ↔X1(ejΩ)X2(ejΩ)
2. x[−k] ↔X(e−jΩ)
With this, the output spectrum becomes
Y (ejΩ) = X2(e−jΩ)
= H(e−jΩ)X1(ejΩ)
= H(e−jΩ)H(ejΩ)F(ejΩ)
= |H(ejΩ)|2F(ejΩ)
(13.34)
showing that ∠Y (ejΩ) = ∠F(ejΩ). Note that if H(z) has real-valued coefficients then
H(e−jΩ) = H∗(ejΩ).
107
==PAGE:115==
13.10
Transient in ECG recording
The figure below presents the transient component that exists in the beginning of
the ECG recordings. It exists, because the transient response of the digital high pass
filter takes a while to decay to zero, due to the low cutoff frequency.
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
-0.5
0
0.5
1
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
-0.5
0
0.5
1
(a)
(b)
Fig. 13.8: Transient component in ECG signal associated with the digital high pass filter.
108
==PAGE:116==
13.11
Moving average formulas derivation
A moving average filter of order L outputs the average value of L consecutive input
values f[k], where k is the sample number starting from 0. So when k = 1 there has
been two input values.
When the filter is applied to a signal, initially, there are less than L values to take
the average of. In the case that only (k −1) < L input values are ready to be taken
the average of, the output of the moving of the moving average filter being subjected
to f[0], f[1], . . . , f[k −1] input values is
maL[k −1] = 1
k (f[0] + f[1] + · · · + f[k −1])
(13.35)
Similarly, the output of the moving average filter being subjected to f[0], f[1], . . . , f[k]
input values (where k < L) is
maL[k] =
1
k + 1 (f[0] + f[1] + · · · + f[k])
=
1
k + 1 (kmaL[k −1] + f[k])
(13.36)
Which shows that the current output maL[k] can be computed from the previous
output, the current input and the sample number k, when less than L input values
have been fed to the moving average filter.
Once at least L input values have been fed into the moving average filter, the previous
output is given by
maL[k −1] = 1
L (f[k −L] + f[k −L + 1] + · · · + f[k −1])
(13.37)
The current output must then be
maL[k] = 1
L (f[k −L + 1] + f[k −L + 2] + · · · + f[k −1] + f[k])
= 1
L (f[k −L + 1] + f[k −L + 2] + · · · + f[k −1] + f[k] + f[k −L] −f[k −L])
= maL[k −1] + 1
L (f[k] −f[k −L])
(13.38)
Which shows that the current output maL[k] can be computed from the previous
output, the current input, the oldest input, and the sample number k, when at least
L input values have been fed to the moving average filter.
109
==PAGE:117==
13.12
Phase response of FIR filter designed with frequency
sampling method
If a real-valued signal f[k] has the Fourier transformation F(ejΩ) then f

k −n
2

↔
F(ejΩ)e−jΩn
2 . Similarly, one has
DFT
n
f
h
k −n
2
io
= F[r]e−jr Ω0n
2
(13.39)
We are interested in the phase of the right hand side. If F[r] is real, then
Θ[r] = ∠F[r]e−jr Ω0n
2
(13.40)
= ∠e−jr Ω0n
2
(13.41)
= −Ω0n
2 r
(13.42)
The group delay of a DTFT is computed as the negative slope of the phase shift, i.e.
td(Ω) = −dΘ(Ω)
dΩ. The group delay of a DFT is also calculated as the negative slope of
the phase shift, but now using td[r] = Θ[r+1]−Θ[r]
Ω0
which in this case evaluates to
td[r] = −Θ[r + 1] −Θ[r]
Ω0
(13.43)
= −−Ω0n
2 (r + 1) + Ω0n
2 r
Ω0
(13.44)
= −

−n
2(r + 1) + n
2r

(13.45)
= −

−n
2

(13.46)
= n
2
(samples)
(13.47)
In the frequency sampling method, the amplitude response of an ideal filter is sam-
pled and assigned as the DFT of the filter’s impulse response H[r] =
Hideal(ejrΩ0)
.
H[r] is clearly real-valued. The IDFT of H[r] is h[k], which is delayed to give h

k −n
2

which yields a causal impulse response of the resulting filter. It follows from the ar-
guments above, that h

k −n
2

has a linear phase behavior and group delay n
2.
110
==PAGE:118==
13.13
Importance of window length
A discrete-time signal f[k] with length N0 has a continuous DTFT, F(ejΩ). The DFT
of f[k] is found by sampling F(ejΩ) at N0 equidistant points in the interval 0 to 2π
F[r] = F(ejrΩ0),
Ω0 = 2π
N0
,
r = 0, 1, . . . , N0 −1
(13.48)
Because the DFT is discrete with spacing 2π
N0 between the samples it follows that the
DFT assumes f[k] to be N0 periodic.
If the DFT is to be compared with the continuous-time Fourier coefficients for a
periodic continuous time-signal f(t), then the discrete-time signal f[k] must have a
waveform with the same periodicity and amplitude. This happens, if f[k] contains
exactly an integer number of periods. In that case, because the DFT assumes pe-
riodicity, the scenario will be as seen in Fig. 13.9 (a) and the continuous Fourier
coefficients are comparable with the DFT.
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
-2
-1
0
1
2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
-150
-100
-50
0
50
100
150
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
-2
-1
0
1
2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
-150
-100
-50
0
50
100
150
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Fig. 13.9: (a) Square-wave and associated DFT for a whole number of periods. (b) Square-wave
and associated DFT for a non-integer number of periods.
Conversely, if a non-integer number of periods is contained in f[k] the periodic exten-
sion of f[k] produces a signal that does not have the same periodicity as its continuous-
time counterpart. This is the case in Fig. 13.9 (b) and it does not make sense to
compare Fourier coefficients with the DFT.
111
==PAGE:119==
13.14
Recordings without the shielded box
Below are the measurements of the various ECG techniques without using the shielded
box.
-500
-250
0
250
500
-120
-100
-80
-60
-40
Undriven, unshielded, with DRL
-500
-250
0
250
500
-120
-100
-80
-60
-40
Driven, unshielded, with DRL
-500
-250
0
250
500
-120
-100
-80
-60
-40
Undriven, unshielded, no DRL
-500
-250
0
250
500
-120
-100
-80
-60
-40
Undriven, unshielded, with DRL
42
42.5
43
43.5
44
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
Undriven, unshielded, with DRL
42
42.5
43
43.5
44
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
Driven, unshielded, with DRL
42
42.5
43
43.5
44
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
Undriven, unshielded, no DRL
42
42.5
43
43.5
44
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
Driven, unshielded, no DRL
Fig. 13.10: Measurement results without shielded box or notch filter.
112
==PAGE:120==
14
Appendix B
14.1
Bessel-Thomson filter coefficients
Fig. 14.1: Bessel-Thomson filter pole-zero locations.
113
==PAGE:121==
14.2
Butterworth filter coefficients
Fig. 14.2: Butterworth filter coefficients table. Taken from [12] (page 509).
114
==PAGE:122==
15
Appendix C
15.1
LTspice simulations
Fig. 15.1: LTspice simulation with the cable stray capacitances active.
115
==PAGE:123==
Fig. 15.2: LTspice simulation with driven right leg, isolation, and driven cable techniques used.
15.2
Maple calculations
Below are Maple calculations for the AC-coupling stage.
116
==PAGE:124==
Fig. 15.3: Maple calculations for the AC-coupling stage.
Below are Maple calculations for the DRL circuit.
Fig. 15.4: Maple calculations for the DRL circuit.
Below are Maple calculations for the sensitivity of Q and ωn for a Sallen-Key circuit.
117
==PAGE:125==
Fig. 15.5: Maple sensitivity calculation for ωn and Q.
16
Appendix D
The microcontroller code as well as the Python code required for UART communica-
tion is seen here: https://github.com/s194035/Master-s-thesis-code
118
