==PAGE:1==
Assessing the industry’s role in greenhouse gas
emissions using eddy covariance measurements
A case study in Gladsaxe
Master Thesis
DTU Sustain
Department of Environmental and Resource Engineering
==PAGE:2==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Department of Environmental and
Resource Engineering Waste, Climate & Monitoring, at the Technical University of Den-
mark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc
Eng.
Marie-Therese Hallkvist Guidje - s180863
Signature
Date
Assessing the industry’s role in greenhouse gas emissions using eddy covariance measurements
i
13-08-2025
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Urban areas are major contributors to global greenhouse gas emissions where the in-
dustrial sector being one of them. Quantifying specific sectoral contributions remains
challenging on a local scale due to data gaps and complex emission sources. This study
addresses this gap by combining eddy covariance (EC) data with bottom-up modeling
of residential heating, traﬀic and vegetation fluxes to isolate the industrial signal. Aim-
ing at estimating direct CO2 emissions from a industrial area in Gladsaxe Municipality
by subtracting modeled non-industrial sources from total measured flux. The residual
CO2 flux was regressed against the footprint-weighted fraction of the industry land-use
to derive emission densities. The analysis covers a five month period from February–
June 2025.
The results show a statistically significant positive relationship between industry land-
use fraction and residual CO2 fluxes (slope = 6.10 µmol CO2 m−2 s−1, p < 0.001, R2
= 0.039), corresponding to an estimated annual emission of 17,760 tons CO2 from the
industrial area within the footprint. Seasonal analysis revealed the strongest industrial
signal during winter months, with weaker correlations in late spring and early summer,
consistent with reduced heating demand and increased biogenic CO2 uptake. Work-
day versus non-workday differences further indicated higher emissions during working
days.
While limited by the assumption of uniform emissions across the industrial area and
the lack of local industry activity data, the approach provides a transparent and repro-
ducible approach for estimating industrial CO2 emissions in data scarce urban environ-
ments. The results highlight the potential of combining EC observations with bottom-up
modeling to isolate and estimate direction CO2 emission from sector specific sources.
Assessing the industry’s role in greenhouse gas emissions using eddy covariance measurements
ii
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
Andreas Ibrom, Supervisor, Associate Professor, Department of Environmental and Re-
source Engineering Waste, Climate & Monitoring
Ziqiong Wang, Co-supervisor, PhD Student, Department of Environmental and Re-
source Engineering Waste, Climate & Monitoring
Ricardo Gabbay de Souza, Co-supervisor, Associate Professor, Department of Environ-
mental and Resource Engineering Waste, Climate & Monitoring
I would like to express my sincere gratitude to my three supervisors for their continu-
ous support, guidance and valuable insights throughout this project. Your dedication,
knowledge and support have been essential in shaping this work and I am truly thankful
for the opportunity to learn from you.
I would also like to extend my deepest thanks to my brother Alexandre Guidje for his
great support, reassurance and for generously sharing his knowledge of environmental
engineering. Your help has meant a lot to me during this process.
Assessing the industry’s role in greenhouse gas emissions using eddy covariance measurements
iii
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
i
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
2
Material and methods
5
2.1
Material
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.1
Study area description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.2
Eddy Covariance method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.3
Flux footprint model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.1.4
Modeling anthropogenic CO2 surface fluxes from spatial activity
data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2.1
Identification of relevant processes and how they were modeled .
11
2.2.2
Company selection and data access attempts . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2.3
Bottom-up estimation of residential area
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2.4
Modeled Residential flux
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.2.5
Other modeled flux . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.2.6
Estimating direct industrial CO2 emissions . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.3
Uncertainty and limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3
Results
21
3.1
General trend in CO2 flux . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2
Modeled flux . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.3
Residual CO2 flux . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.4
Estimated direct industrial CO2 emissions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.4.1
Seasonal variability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.4.2
Workdays vs non-workdays . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4
Discussion
36
4.1
Interpreting the residual flux
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.1.1
Seasonal and temporal variation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.2
Limitation due to data availability
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.3
Eddy covariance in urban areas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.4
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5
Conclusion
40
Bibliography
41
Assessing the industry’s role in greenhouse gas emissions using eddy covariance measurements
iv
==PAGE:6==
A Appendix
46
A.1 Links to each data source used for modeling residential heating emission
46
A.2 Python script: calculation of residential heating flux . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
A.3 Company Questionnaire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
Assessing the industry’s role in greenhouse gas emissions using eddy covariance measurements
v
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
Urban areas are hotspots of anthropogenic carbon dioxide emissions, contributing sig-
nificantly to global climate change. About 30 to 40 percent of all direct greenhouse gas
emissions from human activities come from urban areas (Satterthwaite, 2008). Within
these urban areas, the combustion of fossil fuels for transportation, industry and res-
idential heating is the dominant source of CO2 emissions (Crippa et al., 2021). Un-
derstanding these emissions accurately is essential for both scientific understanding
and policy development. The eddy covariance (EC) method, which provides direct
measurements of surface flux exchange, has increasingly been applied in urban setting
to quantify emissions from transportation, buildings, vegetation and human activity
(Nordbo et al., 2012).
A growing number of literature demonstrates EC’s utility for revealing urban CO2 flux
patterns, including diurnal cycles, seasonal variability and responses to local emissions
sources (Bataille et al., 2018). For example Coutts et al., 2007 demonstrated that traﬀic
and domestic heating drove distinct diurnal CO2 flux patterns in suburban Melbourne,
with vegetation offering only partial improvement. CO2 fluxes exhibit strong diurnal
patterns, often peaking during morning and evening rush hours due to traﬀic (Coutts
et al., 2007) and significant seasonal variations, with higher emissions in winter due to
increased heating demand and reduced vegetative uptake (Coutts et al., 2007). Study
by Christen et al., 2011 found out that weekend emissions were notably lower than week-
days, largely due to reduced traﬀic.
In more densely built environments, EC has also proven effective for spatial source at-
tribution. In cities such as Sakai, Japan (Ueyama and Takano, 2022) and Vancouver,
Canada (Christen et al., 2011,Crawford and Christen, 2015) EC has helped to separate
complex urban flux signals. These studies highlight how local land use, surface cover,
and human activity shape CO2 fluxes on fine spatial and temporal scales. Both Christen
et al., 2011 and Crawford and Christen, 2015 enhanced the understanding of urban CO2
emissions in Vancouver by integrating eddy covariance data with emission modeling.
Christen et al., 2011 showed that bottom-up CO2 emission models could be validated
with EC observations and achieved close agreement between modeled and measured
emissions. Their research found transportation and residential heating as the dominant
emission sources with clear temporal patterns such as elevated emissions in winter and
weekdays. Crawford and Christen, 2015 broaden the analysis by incorporating spatial
source attribution with EC data and land use and geospatial modeling. Though the stud-
ies contributed to the understanding of urban emissions, they were both faced with lim-
itation by the EC method. Neither study could fully distinguish between overlapping
emission sources (e.g., heating vs. traﬀic in mixed-use zones) and both acknowledged
substantial data gaps due to weather and quality control filtering, potentially leading to
underestimation of annual fluxes. Additionally, while the emission models were care-
fully designed, they relied on generalized assumptions (e.g., for traﬀic intensity and
Assessing the industry’s role in greenhouse gas emissions using eddy covariance measurements
1
==PAGE:8==
heating demand) that may not capture localized variability in urban form and energy
use.
Traditional bottom-up emissions inventories rely on reported activity data, such as en-
ergy use, traﬀic intensity or industrial output, and apply standard emission factors to
estimate total greenhouse gas output. While such inventories offer reliable estimates at
annual scales, they tend to perform poorly at finer temporal resolutions (e.g., hourly or
daily) or in heterogeneous urban environments. For instance Gioli et al., 2015 showed
that incorporating local proxies (e.g., real-time traﬀic and gas consumption data) into
emission models improved alignment with EC measurements by up to 47%. Similarly,
top-down approaches using EC data have revealed consistent underestimation of emis-
sions by inventories, particularly during peak hours or in areas with unaccounted sources
(Min et al., n.d.). In Vancouver, Christen et al., 2011 used EC data to validate a spatially
resolved emissions inventory. They found that the two matched well on an annual ba-
sis, but at finer time resolutions large differences emerged, likely due in some part to
assumptions about vehicle speeds, heating patterns and building energy use.
All studies experienced substantial data loss due to quality control criteria, weather con-
ditions (e.g., rain, snow, low turbulence) and instrument malfunctions. This can lead to
biases, especially if data gaps occur during specific atmospheric conditions (e.g., stable
nighttime conditions) or seasons (Ueyama and Takano, 2022, Gioli et al., 2015)
While EC has been widely applied in residential and mixed-use urban areas, relatively
few studies have attempted to isolate industrial emissions. Most existing EC studies fo-
cus on traﬀic and heating, while the industrial sector is mentioned, but rarely discussed
as a separate contributor to the anthropogenic flux. This study addresses this gap by
combining EC data with bottom-up data to isolate the industrial signal.
The industrial CO2 emissions in Denmark have decreased since 1990, but they still make
up a significant part of the total Danish emissions (Danmarks Statistik, 2023). In addi-
tion, around 4% of Denmark’s total greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions arise from indus-
trial processes beyond energy use (Hájek et al., 2019). As Denmark is committed to
fulfill its climate commitments under the Paris Agreement, national emissions data is
regularly reported to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
(UNFCCC). While national emissions data are reported to the UNFCCC, local assess-
ments are necessary to design and evaluate mitigation policies where they are most
often implemented at the municipal and regional levels (Mueller et al., 2021). Most
existing emissions reports are done on an annual and global scale and smaller compa-
nies are not yet required to submit their emissions data. For small and medium-sized
enterprises, it is only recommended to follow a voluntary standard for sustainability re-
porting, but it is not mandatory (European Commission, 2025). As a result, industrial
process data is often not available in suﬀicient temporal or spatial resolution, creating
data-poor environments where bottom-up statements are diﬀicult to verify.
This thesis investigates how to make this gap smaller by developing a methodology
for assessing CO2 emissions from industrial areas using EC observations, with a focus
on data-limited environments. The study is set in Gladsaxe Municipality, northwest of
Copenhagen, which includes a diverse industrial district and serves as a case study for
Assessing the industry’s role in greenhouse gas emissions using eddy covariance measurements
2
==PAGE:9==
exploring industrial GHG fluxes in an urban environment. This work is part of a broader
research project that uses atmospheric measurements to monitor GHG exchange across
the region. A central goal of this thesis is to compare bottom-up emission estimates with
top-down measurements from an EC tall tower located in the area.
Although the EC tower captures total net CO2 fluxes from its footprint, the idea is that
it is possible to split and identify key contributing sources. The hypothesis is that by es-
timating and subtracting the flux contributions from known sources (traﬀic, residential
heating, and vegetation) the residual signal can be attributed to industrial emissions as
visualized in Figure 1.1.
Assessing the industry’s role in greenhouse gas emissions using eddy covariance measurements
3
==PAGE:10==
Figure 1.1: Conceptual overview, inspired by Christen et al., 2011, of the methodological framework used
in this study. Total CO2 fluxes measured using eddy covariance are split into known source components:
traﬀic, residential heating and vegetation. The residual flux, after subtracting these contributions, is at-
tributed to industrial activity
Assessing the industry’s role in greenhouse gas emissions using eddy covariance measurements
4
==PAGE:11==
2
Material and methods
This chapter outlines the materials, data sources and analytical methods used to assess
the contribution of industrial activities to greenhouse gas emissions within Gladsaxe
Municipality, using eddy covariance measurements as the primary observational tool.
The study combines both bottom-up and top-down approaches to estimate emissions,
with a focus on separating industrial contributions from other local sources such as
residential heating, traﬀic and vegetation. Due to limited access to direct local industry
reported data, a residual method was used, treating the industrial component as the dif-
ference between total measured emissions and modeled emissions from non-industrial
sources. The chapter begins by describing the datasets, software and measurement sys-
tems used, followed by a detailed account of the methodological framework, including
company screening, residential emissions modeling and the application of the EC tech-
nique.
2.1
Material
This section presents the datasets, software tools and other key resources used in this
study. Multiple types of data were required to quantify emissions from non-industrial
sources, including national energy statistics, building and housing registries, popula-
tion grids and atmospheric measurements. Geographic data processing was performed
primarily using QGIS. The EC system setup is also described, including tower place-
ment and data coverage. Data processing and calculations were carried out in Python
version 3.12.7 and with the geographic information system (GIS) software QGIS version
3.40.9.
2.1.1
Study area description
The area of interest is the city of Gladsaxe, located northwest of Copenhagen, Denmark.
Gladsaxe Municipality stretches across four separate towns namely Gladsaxe, Buddinge,
Bagsværd, and Mørkhøj. The municipality spans approximately 25 km2 and, as of 2022,
had a population of 70,000, corresponding to a population density of 2,800 inhabitants
per km2. (Gladsaxe Kommune, n.d.).
Assessing the industry’s role in greenhouse gas emissions using eddy covariance measurements
5
==PAGE:12==
Figure 2.1: Land use classification map of the Gladsaxe area covering 10 km × 10 km, centered on the eddy
covariance (EC) tower location (black “X”). Colors indicate land use classes according to the Basemap04
classification, including various built-up types, industrial and business areas, roads, natural areas etc.
The specific study area is defined as a sector within a 4 km radius of the tall eddy co-
variance tower shown in Figure 2.1. It consists of a mix of the municipality’s main land
use types, including residential and industrial areas, road networks and green spaces.
Land cover classification is based on Basemap04, Denmark’s national land use and land
cover dataset. Basemap04 is a raster map with a 10×10m cell size, created by integrating
multiple public spatial data sources. It preserves the original land use categories of its
input datasets, allowing users to aggregate or reclassify according to specific analytical
needs. Basemap04 is widely used by researchers, public agencies, and private sector ac-
tors, including Statistics Denmark, which employs it for land use statistics and national
green accounting (“Basemap”, n.d.).
The area under study can be broadly classified as suburban. According to the European
Environment Agency, a suburban area is defined as a largely built-up urban environ-
ment composed of detached buildings at a lower density than continuously built-up ar-
eas and typically combined with non-urbanized spaces such as green areas, open land
or roads (European Environment Agency, 2013). This mix matches the land cover in
the study area.
Assessing the industry’s role in greenhouse gas emissions using eddy covariance measurements
6
==PAGE:13==
In this thesis the different land use zones are divided into these different segments for
simplicity where roads (traﬀic) are interconnected in all segments (Figure 2.2):
• Residential: 340°– 120°
• Vegetation: 120°– 240°
• Industry: 240°– 340°
Figure 2.2: Map of the study area showing the 4 km radius around the eddy covariance (EC) tower (black
triangle), divided into three main sectors based on dominant surface properties: industry (red dashed
outline), vegetation (green dashed outline) and residential areas (blue dashed outline). These sectors
represent areas with distinct surface characteristics such as building density and vegetation cover that
contribute differently to the fluxes measured by the EC tower.
2.1.2
Eddy Covariance method
The eddy covariance method is a widely used, direct micro meteorological technique for
quantifying the exchange of gases - such as CO2 - between the surface (land or water)
and the atmosphere, based on high-frequency single-point measurements from fixed
or mobile stations (Burba, 2022). It works by capturing rapid, simultaneous measure-
ments of vertical wind speed and gas concentration and computing their covariance to
estimate the net vertical flux (Baldocchi, 2003). The EC method is particularly suited
Assessing the industry’s role in greenhouse gas emissions using eddy covariance measurements
7
==PAGE:14==
for flat, homogeneous terrains (Burba, 2022). However, it has also been adapted for use
in complex urban environments through careful site selection and post-processing tech-
niques (Nordbo et al., 2012; Crawford and Christen, 2015). This study applies the EC
method in a suburban setting characterized by a mix of residential, green and industrial
land use.
The fundamental physical principle behind eddy covariance flux measurements is to
quantify the net exchange of gas molecules between the surface and the atmosphere by
capturing how many molecules move vertically and how fast they travel. Mathemati-
cally, this vertical flux is expressed as the covariance between fluctuations in vertical
wind velocity and the concentration of the scalar of interest, representing the average
contribution of turbulent eddies to gas transport over time (Burba, 2022). The core EC
equation (2.1) describes the turbulent flux F of any scalar (e.g., CO2, CH4) as the prod-
uct of the mean dry air density ρd and the covariance of fluctuations in vertical wind
velocity w’ and scalar mixing ratio s’:
Fturbulent = ρd · w’s’
(2.1)
The surface flux (2.2) is then defined as the sum of the turbulent flux and the storage
flux - the rate of change of the CO2 concentration in the air column below the EC sensor:
Fsurface = Fturbulent + Fstorage
(2.2)
The storage flux represents the portion of the surface exchange that change the gas con-
centration in the layer beneath the measurement height but has not yet been transported
past the sensor. The storage change is estimated by the CO2 concentration profile.
Instrumentation and site description
The EC system is mounted on a radio mast with inlets positioned at 71, 90, and 112 me-
ters above ground. Sampling alternates between these heights, with zm (measurement
height) selected to maximize valid data coverage and footprint extent based on bound-
ary layer dynamics. Gas concentrations are measured by an Aerodyne dual-laser spec-
trometer (TILDAS), which records fluxes of CO2, CH4, N2O, CO, and COS. Air is drawn
through 150-meter-long tubing from the selected inlet. Wind and turbulence data are
collected at 10 Hz using three METEK uSonicMP ultrasonic anemometers mounted at
each height. The atmospheric boundary layer height (ABL) is continuously monitored
using a Vaisala CL51 ceilometer. Measurements began in late January 2025 and continue
throughout the period of analysis.
Data processing and filtering
The raw EC data were not processed as part of this study. Pre-processing, including
sensor diagnostics, spike detection, despiking, statistical screening and corrections, was
performed by the project group using standard EC post-processing workflows (Burba,
2022). In this study, only minor filtering of the already quality controlled flux dataset
was performed. The following data points were excluded from analysis:
Assessing the industry’s role in greenhouse gas emissions using eddy covariance measurements
8
==PAGE:15==
• Measurements flagged with a quality control (QC) score of 2, indicating unreli-
able fluxes due to instrument errors or failure to meet EC assumptions (Foken et
al., 2004) .
• Measurements with friction velocity (u∗) below 0.1 m/s, typically indicating poorly
developed turbulence and non-representative fluxes Aubinet et al., 1999.
• Measurements from wind directions near 240° were excluded because of a known
chimney source that causes outliers and is not modeled here.
2.1.3
Flux footprint model
To understand the turbulent flux measurements from the tall tower, it is essential to
know which part of the surface contributed to the observed CO2 signal at each point in
time. In other words, it refers to the upwind surface area from which air parcels and
the CO2 they contain originate before reaching the sensor. This area is known as the
flux footprint. The footprint is the surface area where emitted gases are picked up by
turbulent air and transported to the tower, contributing to the measured flux. (Burba,
2022).
Modern footprint models, such as the two-dimensional parameterisation for Flux Foot-
print Prediction (FFP) used in this study, build upon previous work by providing more
comprehensive estimates (Kljun et al., 2015). FFP, for instance, accounts for not only the
extent but also the width and shape of the footprint, explicitly considering the effects of
surface roughness length and atmospheric stability. (Kljun et al., 2015). This model is
based on a novel scaling approach and an improved version of earlier parameterisations,
validated using sophisticated models like the backward Lagrangian stochastic particle
dispersion model (LPDM-B) (Kljun et al., 2015). FFP is designed to be applicable across
a broad range of boundary layer conditions and measurement heights, making it suit-
able for long-term monitoring programs and quick field estimates (Kljun et al., 2015).
The output of the FFP is spatial maps or functions showing the relative contribution of
upwind areas to the measured flux (Kljun et al., 2004).
The model was originally designed for homogeneous surfaces, its application in a hetero-
geneous area is experimental and is part of a larger research part project (”Observation
System of Greenhouse Gas Sources and Sinks at the Landscape Scale for Verification of
the Green Transition of Denmark”).
2.1.4
Modeling anthropogenic CO2 surface fluxes from spatial
activity data
Multiple databases were used to estimate emissions of fossil fuel carbon dioxide related
to residential heating in the study area. Table A.1 in Appendix A provides links to all
the data sources that are mentioned in this subsection.
Emission factors for residential heating
The emission factors used for this study are those from Denmark’s National Inventory
Document (Nielsen et al., 2025), which is submitted annually to the IPCC as part of the
Assessing the industry’s role in greenhouse gas emissions using eddy covariance measurements
9
==PAGE:16==
country’s oﬀicial greenhouse gas reporting. The emission factors (EF) are provided in
kilograms of CO2 per gigajoule (kg CO2/GJ) and reflect the carbon content and com-
bustion characteristics of the fuel. These are differentiated by fuel type and by sector. In
particular, such EF are given for residential stationary combustion, accounting for the
specific fuels commonly used in households for heating, such as firewood, wood pellets,
heating oil, and natural gas. These factors are developed and maintained by Aarhus Uni-
versity’s Department of Environmental Science and are publicly available through the
Danish Centre for Environment and Energy (DCE) (“Emission factors”, n.d.). In this
study Emission factors for stationary combustion greenhouse gases and main pollutants for the
year 2023 are used.
Spatial distribution
To determine the locations of residential buildings and identify their heating systems
within the study area, data from Denmark’s national Building and Housing Register
(Bygnings- og Boligregistret, BBR) was utilized. The register detailed information on
buildings throughout the country, including heating types, usage classifications, floor
areas and the number of dwellings (Bygnings- og Boligregistret, n.d.). Municipalities
are responsible for maintaining and updating these records, relying on mandatory sub-
missions from property owners, who are legally required to keep their information
(Bygnings- og Boligregistret, n.d.). The BBR data is publicly available as a geographic
information system (GIS) point layer provided by the Danish Agency for Data Supply
and Infrastructure (Styrelsen for Dataforsyning og Infrastruktur). The dataset follows
the INSPIRE data specification for buildings and is given in the ETRS89 coordinate ref-
erence system with UTM projection zone 32N (EPSG:25832) (“ETRS89 / UTM zone
32N - EPSG:25832”, n.d.). The data is owned by the Assessment Agency and accessible
through the national geodata platform, Dataforsyningen (“Dataforsyningen”, n.d.).
Activity data
This study used several data sources to describe energy use and population distribu-
tion. Information about household energy consumption for space and water heating
in Denmark in 2023 was taken from Eurostat’s database on disaggregated final energy
consumption in households – quantities, filtered for Denmark (Eurostat, 2023). These
values are also reported in the Danish Energy Agency’s 2023 Energy Statistics report
(Danish Energy Agency, 2023). Population figures for Denmark in 2023 were taken
from Statistics Denmark (FOLK1AM: Population at the first day of the month by region,
sex and age). These figures were then divided, which obtained energy use of 24.12 GJ
per person per year. To support the spatial analysis, the Eurostat 1 x 1 km2 population
grid dataset was used (Eurostat, n.d.).
Temporal distribution
Information on how electricity used for heating and domestic hot water is distributed by
the hour, across both weekdays and weekends throughout the year was sourced from
Andersen et al., 2017. This paper provides monthly and diurnal profiles reflecting typi-
cal household consumption patterns in Denmark.
Assessing the industry’s role in greenhouse gas emissions using eddy covariance measurements
10
==PAGE:17==
2.2
Methods
This section outlines the methodological framework used to quantify and compare CO2
emissions in Gladsaxe Municipality.
A hybrid approach was applied, combining a
bottom-up estimation of emissions from residential heating with top-down measure-
ments obtained through the eddy covariance method. Since industrial emissions could
not be directly retrieved from companies, the industries were instead treated as a resid-
ual after subtracting modeled residential emissions and other background contributions
from the total EC flux. The methods include the construction of spatial emission maps,
temporal distribution and flux conversion for comparison with EC data. This mixed
method approach provides a more nuanced assessment of industrial contributions un-
der conditions of data scarcity.
2.2.1
Identification of relevant processes and how they were
modeled
For the above to be possible, it is important to identify relevant processes besides the
industrial. This study applies a residual approach to estimate the contribution of in-
dustrial CO2 emissions within the EC footprint. The total CO2 flux measured by the
EC tower is split into separate components. Emissions from residential heating, traﬀic,
and vegetation uptake are quantified independently using bottom-up methods. After
these components are subtracted from the total measured flux, the remaining signal is
assumed to primarily reflect industrial activity, though other unknown sources could
contribute.
IndustryCO2,flux = ECtowerCO2,flux
+ (ResidentialCO2,flux −V egetationCO2,flux −TrafficCO2,flux)
(2.3)
2.2.2
Company selection and data access attempts
To explore the potential for bottom-up estimation of industrial CO2 emissions, an initial
effort was made to identify and assess relevant companies operating within the EC tower
footprint in Gladsaxe Municipality. Using the Central Business Register (CVR. Danish:
”Det Centrale Virksomhedregister”) (Danish Business Authority, 2025a), a filtered list
of 378 companies was compiled based on the following criteria:
1. Location within Gladsaxe Municipality
2. More than 10 employees
3. Active business status
Companies were then categorized by their NACE (industry) codes. Those classified
under NACE Code C, which includes manufacturing activities involving physical, me-
chanical, chemical, or biological processing of materials (Danish Business Authority,
Assessing the industry’s role in greenhouse gas emissions using eddy covariance measurements
11
==PAGE:18==
2025b), were identified as most relevant for this study. This filtering process yielded 25
companies for potential analysis.
To assess their emissions relevance, these companies were ranked on a 3-point scale:
• 0 – Not relevant
• 1 – Potentially relevant
• 2 – Likely relevant
Based on this ranking, 17 companies were prioritized (ranks 1 and 2) for further investi-
gation. Direct contact was initiated via phone to confirm on-site production activity, fol-
lowed by email communication including a detailed questionnaire requesting emission
related information (Appendix A, section A.3). Despite multiple contact attempts, the
response rate was low and the quality of available data was inconsistent. Many compa-
nies either did not respond or were unable to provide local quantitative emissions data
suitable for the bottom-up analysis.
As a result, the bottom-up estimation of industrial CO2 emissions based on company
reported data was not feasible at that given moment in time. Therefore, rather late in
the process, the study shifted its methodological focus to using eddy covariance mea-
surements combined with residential, traﬀic and vegetation emissions modeling to es-
timate residual industrial emissions within the measurement footprint. This methodol-
ogy change was a necessary adjustment due to limited access to direct emissions data
from local industries. Despite this limitation, the modified approach still allows for a
meaningful assessment of the industry’s CO2 contribution by relying on independent
top-down measurements from the eddy covariance system.
2.2.3
Bottom-up estimation of residential area
CO2 emissions from residential buildings typically varies throughout the day, which re-
flects patterns in human activity such as heating, cooking and electricity use. Whereas,
industrial operations (especially those involving continuous production) often operate
around the clock, maintaining a more constant emission profile. To separate the resi-
dential contribution to the overall CO2 flux from the industries a few steps where taken
in place.
Spatial distribution
To determine the spatial distribution, the building data used in this study were obtained
from the Building and Housing Register (BBR). This dataset includes a geographic point
for each building, along with information on its use, type, construction status, construc-
tion year and heating source and system. Only buildings located within a 4-kilometer
radius of the tower were included in the analysis, as indicated by the red circle on Fig-
ure 2.3. To narrow the dataset, only buildings currently marked as “functional” were
considered. Despite this initial filtering, a large number of buildings still had missing
or undefined information about heating sources and systems. As a result, buildings
categorized as ‘ancillary’, ‘agriculture’, ‘None’, or ‘Unknown’ in terms of their nature
were excluded. This decision is based on the assumption that such structures, especially
Assessing the industry’s role in greenhouse gas emissions using eddy covariance measurements
12
==PAGE:19==
those classified as ‘ancillary’ or ‘agriculture’, assumed to be garages or greenhouses, are
generally not heated. Additionally, buildings labeled with ‘None’ or ‘Unknown’ were
removed due to a lack of clear information about their heating systems.
Since this section focuses on residential buildings, non-residential types such as ‘com-
merceAndServices’, ‘oﬀice’, ‘industrial’, ‘publicServices’ and ‘trade’ were also excluded,
even though many of these had defined heating types and sources. The remaining build-
ings left were of the type ’individualResidence’, ’collectiveResidence’ ’twoDwellings’
and ’residenceForCommunities’. Furthermore, if the number of dwellings was unde-
fined, these buildings were also excluded as the number of dwellings were used further
to estimate the population density later in 2.2.3.
Figure 2.3: Spatial distribution of residential heating sources within a 4 km radius of the EC tower (black
triangle). Different colors represent the primary heating source for each building: liquid fuels (dark blue),
natural gas (cyan), solid fuels (orange), electricity (purle), district heating (red), other (light green), and
none (green). The inset map shows a magnified view of the black dashed box area, providing a more
detailed representation of heating source patterns.
The final selection of buildings, along with their associated heating sources, is illustrated
in Figure 2.3. From the visual representation, it is clear that the dominant heating source
in the study area is “warmWaterOrStream,” which in the BBR dataset is exclusively as-
sociated with district heating systems. Meaning that a large number of buildings within
Assessing the industry’s role in greenhouse gas emissions using eddy covariance measurements
13
==PAGE:20==
the 4 km radius are connected to the district heating network. Also, the spatial distribu-
tion of the remaining heating sources reveals clear clustering patterns, particularly in
areas not yet connected into the district heating network. These clusters have alterna-
tive heating sources such as natural gas, solid fuel or liquid fuel. The absence of district
heating in these zones is consistent with external data obtained from district heating
providers, according to their maps confirm that these specific neighborhoods or sectors
have not yet been connected to the district heating grid (Gentofte Gladsaxe Fjernvarme,
2025). Natural gas were identified as the second most common heating source in the
study area.
Population
To estimate annual CO2 emissions from residential heating at a 10×10m spatial reso-
lution, population estimates were calculated for each building unit. This was done by
multiplying the number of dwellings per building with the average household size. The
average number of people per household was derived from municipal statistics for Glad-
saxe, based on the total population and number of residential units Gladsaxe Kommune,
n.d.:
Pop(x, y) = dw(x, y) · Pavg
(2.4)
where Pop(x, y) is the estimated population in cell (x, y), dw(x, y) is the number of
dwellings within that cell, and Pavg is the average number of people per dwelling. These
population estimates were then used together with the heating energy source assigned
to each building in the footprint model, allowing for spatial allocation of CO2 emissions
from residential heating. To check the consistency of the estimated population distribu-
tion, the 10×10m data were aggregated to a 1×1 km resolution and compared with the
2021 EU population grid (Census version 2025) from Eurostat (Eurostat, n.d.). The ref-
erence data are provided as a GeoPackage in the ETRS89-LAEA projection (EPSG:3035).
This comparison does not serve as a direct validation but gives an indication of whether
the dwelling-based estimates and the assumed average household size are reasonable
for the study area.
Emission factors
The emission factors applied in this study are based on the values provided for “resi-
dential plants” in Denmark’s National Inventory Document (Nielsen et al., 2025). These
factors reflect the direct fossil fuel-based CO2 emissions (CO2,ff) associated with differ-
ent fuel types used for heating. While the BBR dataset includes information on whether
a building uses solid or liquid fuels, it does not specify the exact type of fuel within
these categories. However, the fuel classifications used in the BBR data align with the
IPCC fuel categories.
To simplify the analysis and ensure consistency with national energy statistics, the most
commonly used fuel type within each category was assumed. For liquid fuels, gas oil
was selected as the representative fuel. This choice is supported by data from the Dan-
ish Energy Agency, which shows that gas oil is by far the most commonly used liquid
fuel for residential heating in Denmark (Danish Energy Agency, 2023). For buildings
Assessing the industry’s role in greenhouse gas emissions using eddy covariance measurements
14
==PAGE:21==
heated by electricity or connected to district heating networks, the emission factor for
CO2,ff is set to 0 g/GJ. This is because the emissions associated with these energy sources
occur outside the building at power plants or district heating plants and do not occur
directly at the building itself. As this analysis focuses on direct emissions from build-
ings, these indirect emissions fall outside the scope of the emission factors used here.
Finally, buildings marked as having no heating system (“none”) or an undefined heat-
ing source (“other”) were assigned an emission factor of 0. These buildings either do
not consume fuel for heating or lack suﬀicient data for a reliable emissions estimate and
thus do not contribute to the calculated CO2,ff emissions in this study.
Heating Source
Fossil Fuel Type
Emission Factor
(kg CO2/GJ)
solidFuels
Brown coal briquettes
97.5
liquidFuels
Gas oil
74.1
district heating
0
0
electricity
0
0
naturalGas
Natural gas
57.14
other
0
0
none
0
0
Table 2.1: Fuels in the building data and their associated fossil fuel emission factors
Temporal distribution of emissions
The emissions calculated per grid cell initially represent annual totals. To estimate heat-
ing related emissions on an hourly basis, these yearly values were redistributed using
temporal scaling factors derived from Andersen et al., 2017 and also applied in Pousset,
2023. These factors vary by month and also distinguish between weekdays and week-
ends. In this study, weekdays are considered workdays, while weekends and public hol-
idays are grouped as non-workdays. However, holidays were not explicitly accounted
for in this initial approach. The temporal factors used act as distribution weights that
allocate annual emissions across the hours of the year. For each combination of month
and day type (workday or non-workday), the sum of all hourly weights adds up to one,
ensuring that the total annual emissions remain unchanged after redistribution. They
are calculated as follows:
ci
t = ai
d · ai
d,m · ai
d,m,h
(2.5)
Where, ai
d, ai
d,m and ai
d,m,h are coeﬀicients that describe the level and shape of the hourly
consumption profiles for household appliances, where i in this case is heating (Ander-
sen et al., 2017). To further explain the coeﬀicients, ai
d,m,h describes the shape of the daily
consumption curve for one month. The coeﬀicients ai
d,m, describe the relative level of
Assessing the industry’s role in greenhouse gas emissions using eddy covariance measurements
15
==PAGE:22==
the monthly curve, and the coeﬀicients ai
d describe the level of consumption on the type
of day (workdays and non-workdays) as per figure 2.4.
(a) Workdays ad = 0.000113
(b) Non-workdays ad = 0.000121
Figure 2.4: Hourly consumption profiles for heating (Andersen et al., 2017)
The hourly consumption of the appliance i would then be: Ci
t = ci
t · Ci
year.
Although these time profiles were originally developed to represent electricity consump-
tion patterns for space heating and domestic hot water, they are applied here to all heat-
ing systems regardless of fuel type. This generalization is based on the assumption that
most heating systems, whether electric, oil or gas fueled, would respond to similar daily
Assessing the industry’s role in greenhouse gas emissions using eddy covariance measurements
16
==PAGE:23==
and seasonal heating demands, especially in residential areas. This assumption has also
been used in previous work (Pousset, 2023).
To obtain emissions at a finer temporal resolution, the hourly values were further split
into half-hour intervals. This was done by assuming that energy consumption within
each hour is evenly distributed, resulting in identical values for the first and second
half-hour segments.
2.2.4
Modeled Residential flux
To estimate the number of people contributing to heating-related emissions within the
flux footprint, the population dataset from section 4.2.3 (Population) was separated into
five categories based on heating source: natural gas, electricity, solid fuels, liquid fuels
and district heating (warm water or steam). Each point in the dataset contained infor-
mation on the number of people per dwelling and the associated heating source. For
each category, population counts were aggregated into a 10 x 10m raster by summing
the number of people per grid cell, resulting in five spatial layers representing the dis-
tribution of population by heating source.
The flux footprint for each 30-minute interval was then calculated using the FFP model.
For each heating-source raster, the footprint values were multiplied by the correspond-
ing population layer to produce a footprint-weighted population sum:
p(t) =
∑
i
FFPi,t · Pi
(2.6)
where FFPi,t is the footprint value at pixel i and time t, and Pi is the number of people in
pixel i using that heating source. The resulting sums were used as the input population
values in Equation 2.7 to calculate the CO2 flux from residential heating.
The final equation used to estimate the CO2 flux from residential heating at each half-
hourly timestamp is given by:
CO2, fluxheating =
∑
p(t) · ECyear · EFs · ct
i · 1000
44.01 · 106
(2.7)
Here, p(t) is the number of heating related emitters per square meter at time t, weighted
according to the heating source used. The variable ECyear is the average yearly energy
consumption per person, in gigajoules, while EFs is the fuel specific emission factor in
kilograms of CO2 per gigajoule. Temporal variation in heating demand is determinte
by the coeﬀicient ct
i, which distributes the annual emissions across individual half-hour
intervals throughout the year. This temporal coeﬀicient is described in detail in the
section Temporal Distribution of Emissions. The last expression,
1000
44.01 · 106, ensures that
the calculated flux values are in the same units as those measured by the flux tower;
micromoles of CO2 per square meter per second. This conversion is done by changing
kilograms to grams, dividing by the molecular weight of CO2 (44.01 g/mol) and scaling
the result to micromoles.
Assessing the industry’s role in greenhouse gas emissions using eddy covariance measurements
17
==PAGE:24==
This setup ensures compatibility with the flux measurements obtained from the tower,
which are in the same units. The python script for the modeled residential flux can be
found in Appendix A section A.2.
2.2.5
Other modeled flux
The estimation of CO2 fluxes from traﬀic and vegetation was not performed directly in
this study but was instead based on models developed by a collaborating MSc student
(Paula Dawn Sachsenmaier, 2025) as part of the same research project and it described
below how it was modeled:
Traﬀic flux
To account for anthropogenic contributions to the CO2 flux, modeled traﬀic emissions
were incorporated based on a method sourced from Denmark’s National Inventory Doc-
ument (Nielsen et al., 2025) and implemented using OpenStreetMap (OSM) road-type
classifications and local traﬀic counts. While the model itself was not developed or exe-
cuted as part of this study, the resulting traﬀic-related CO2 fluxes were utilized in this
analysis. This approach estimates traﬀic emissions per 10×10m pixel for 30-minute in-
tervals by considering road lengths, vehicle type-specific emission factors, daily vehicle
counts, diurnal traﬀic patterns and weekday/weekend scaling. Four road types from
OSM were assigned appropriate driving conditions (urban, rural, highway) and their
emissions were calculated using:
CO2emission(t, d, r) =
∑
i=roadtype
= ri · EFi · vehicles
24h
· p(t) · d
(2.8)
Where ri is the integrated road length weighted by footprint contribution, EFi is the
emission factor for road type i, p(t)i is the time-of-day traﬀic distribution, and d scales for
workday/non-workday differences. The emission factors were derived using national
fleet composition and driving condition-specific emission rates. Final fluxes were con-
verted from gCO2 to µmol m CO2 m−2 s−1 for comparison with eddy covariance obser-
vations.
Vegetation flux
Biogenic CO2 fluxes were estimated using the Vegetation Photosynthesis and Respira-
tion Model (VPRM), originally introduced by Mahadevan et al. (2008) and updated by
Glauch et al. (2025) for use with higher-resolution satellite imagery such as Sentinel-2.
In this study, modeled flux outputs from this approach were used to represent gross
primary production (GPP), ecosystem respiration (R), and net ecosystem exchange
(NEE).
VPRM estimates GPP and R based on the Enhanced Vegetation Index (EVI), photo-
synthetically active radiation (PAR), temperature, and empirical parameters tailored to
vegetation types. The following equations describe the relationships:
NEE = −GPP + R
(2.9)
Assessing the industry’s role in greenhouse gas emissions using eddy covariance measurements
18
==PAGE:25==
GPP = ϵ ·
1
1 + PAR/PAR0
· PAR · e
(2.10)
ϵ = λ · Tscale · Wscale · Pscale
(2.11)
R = α · T + β
(2.12)
Here, e is the EVI integrated over the flux footprint and ϵ represents light use eﬀiciency
modulated by temperature and water availability. Monthly spatial EVI values were de-
rived from Sentinel-2 imagery in Google Earth Engine (GEE), using only images with
<30% cloud cover and selected surface classes (vegetation, bare soil, water and built-up).
To reduce model complexity, a uniform vegetation classification approach was applied
(“green is green”), without distinguishing between different land cover types such as
forest or grassland. As with traﬀic emissions, all fluxes were weighted by the spatial
footprint to ensure compatibility with observed eddy covariance measurements.
2.2.6
Estimating direct industrial CO2 emissions
To isolate and estimate direct industrial CO2 emissions, a linear regression analysis was
applied between the residual CO2 flux and the footprint-weighted fraction of indus-
try land use fi. The residual flux was calculated by subtracting modeled contributions
from residential heating, traﬀic, and vegetation from the measured EC flux. Residual
flux values below a physically meaningful threshold [-30:+20] µmol CO2 m−2 s−1 were
excluded to remove outliers.
The linear regression model used is:
Fresidual = a + b · fi
(2.13)
Where Fresidual is the residual CO2 flux (µmol m−2 s−1). fi is weighted average of the
contribution of industrial areas to the flux (from 0 to 1), a is the y-intercept, representing
residuals not systematically dependent on industrial sources b is the slope, representing
the change of emission density per unit change of the industrial contribution (denoted
Ei). Assuming that industrial emissions are uniformly distributed in space and constant
over time, the slope b reflects the mean emission rate from industrial areas. The slope is
used to estimate the average industrial emission density for a theoretical pure industrial
surface. When fi = 1 the total flux becomes b. To estimate total industrial emissions Ei,t,
the emission density Ei was multiplied by the total industrial area in the target area Ai:
Ei,t = Ei · Ai
(2.14)
The target area was established earlier to be in the wind direction 240-340 degrees, giving
an area size of 2098300 m2.
The regression was implemented in Python using scikit-learn’s LinearRegression() class.
To assess statistical significance, the model was also fitted using ordinary least squares
(statsmodels.OLS) to obtain p-values, standard errors, and confidence intervals for the
slope and intercept.
This approach enables a bottom-up, measurement based estimate of direct industrial
CO2 emissions, independent from industry self-reporting.
Assessing the industry’s role in greenhouse gas emissions using eddy covariance measurements
19
==PAGE:26==
2.3
Uncertainty and limitations
Despite the application of established methods and high-resolution data sources, this
study is subject to several sources of uncertainty and methodological limitations. These
arise from the eddy covariance measurements, footprint modeling, bottom-up emission
estimates and the residual based approach of industrial emissions. The following sub-
sections describe these key uncertainties.
Uncertainty in bottom-up emission models: The bottom-up modeling of CO2 emis-
sions from residential heating, traﬀic, and vegetation is based on several assumptions
and has limitations in the input data. For residential heating, a national average for
annual energy consumption per person was used. This assumes that every person in
Denmark uses the same amount of energy for heating, which may not be true at a local
level. Differences in the age of the buildings, insulation and heating systems can lead
to large variations in actual energy use. In addition, the emission factors are based on
IPCC Tier 1 values or Country specific, but they may not accurately reflect local fuel
types in Gladsaxe.
Uncertainty in the residual method: The residual method used to estimate direct indus-
trial emissions is based on subtracting modeled fluxes from the total EC measured flux.
This assumes that all other sources are accurately measured and that the remaining sig-
nal can be explained by industrial activity. In practice, unknown sources may contribute
to the residual. The linear regression between residual flux and the footprint-weighted
fraction of industrial land assumes a uniform emission density in the industrial area.
This may not hold true in areas with strong emission sources (e.g., a single chimney)
or varying industrial activity levels. To address these issues, flux residuals outside a
defined threshold (−30 to +20 µmol CO2 m−2 s−1) were excluded, and wind directions
corresponding to known unmodeled point sources were filtered out.
Time period: The analysis in this study is limited to data from a five-month period
(February–June 2025). While this periode includes winter heating demand and spring
vegetation growth, it excludes full seasonal cycles. Therefore, annual emissions or long-
term trends cannot be directly derived. Also, large parts of the data were removed due to
EC quality control filtering, leading to temporal gaps that can affect the representative-
ness. For this reason the results presented here should be interpreted as representative
of the study period and not as definitive and long-term results.
Data gaps and quality: Although the initial data processing of raw data was not done
in this thesis it still needed further filtering for instance filtering out low quality data
and when the turbulence were low (u∗: friction velocity). This data loss can lead to bias
results, reduce representativeness and create gaps in periods with realistic flux values
leading to potential underestimation or overestimation of fluxes.
Assessing the industry’s role in greenhouse gas emissions using eddy covariance measurements
20
==PAGE:27==
3
Results
This section presents the results of the CO2 flux analysis, combining both modeled CO2
fluxes and EC flux measurements. The analysis begins with general trends between
the two. Next, the modeled residential heating flux, as it represents one of the primary
components of local anthropogenic emissions. The focus then shifts to the residual CO2
flux, obtained after subtracting modeled contributions from residential heating, traﬀic
and vegetation. To assess the influence of industrial land use on the remaining flux, both
correlation and regression analyses were conducted between the residual flux and the
footprint-weighted industrial land fraction. The regression model is used to estimate
emission densities from industrial areas, which form the basis for the final industrial
CO2 emission estimates.
3.1
General trend in CO2 flux
First investigation of the behavior of the modeled flux and the measured flux from the
tower can be seen in Figure 3.1 & 3.2 alongside industry fraction and wind direction.
The data in this visualization are not yet filtered for extreme values instead axis limits
have been adjusted to get a clearer look into the trends.
Assessing the industry’s role in greenhouse gas emissions using eddy covariance measurements
21
==PAGE:28==
(a) Measured flux vs modeled flux
(b) Industry land use cover
Figure 3.1: 3.1a A snippet in February (2025-02-01 to 2025-02-09) of the modeled and measured flux from
the tower (black). 3.1b A snippet in February (2025-02-01 to 2025-02-09) of the industry fraction landuse
with wind direction indication
Figure 3.1a shows an initial comparison between the measured CO2 flux from the EC
tower and the modeled contributions from residential heating, traﬀic, and vegetation
for a selected period in February. Looking at Figure 3.1a & 3.1b side by side reveal
that periods with higher industrial fraction within the flux footprint often correspond
to higher residual fluxes, suggesting a potential link between the two. Additionally, the
wind direction data indicate that increased fluxes tend to occur when the wind comes
from the industry sector (240°–340°). Furthermore, an inverse relationship between the
residual and modeled traﬀic flux can be seen, with higher traﬀic related emissions often
corresponding to more negative residual values.
Assessing the industry’s role in greenhouse gas emissions using eddy covariance measurements
22
==PAGE:29==
(a) Measured flux vs modeled flux
(b) Industry land use cover
Figure 3.2: 3.2a A snippet in June (2025-06-01 to 2025-06-09) of the modeled and measured flux from the
tower (black). 3.2b A snippet in June (2025-06-01 to 2025-06-09) of the industry fraction landuse with
wind direction indication
Figure 3.2 presents a similar snippet from early June. As expected during this time of
year, the modeled vegetation flux dominates due to increased biogenic activity (Fig-
ure 3.2a). However, several measured flux peaks remain visible during periods with
high industrial fraction and wind directions pointing toward the industry sector (Fig-
ure 3.2b), suggesting continued industry influence even in the presence of biogenic CO2
uptake.
3.2
Modeled flux
Figures 3.3a and 3.3b show the half-hourly surface fluxes of CO2 from residential space
and water heating plotted separately for workdays and non-workdays. It can been seen
that emissions are higher during the winter period (e.g., February, shown in blue) com-
pared to summer (e.g., June, in purple), reflecting increased energy use for heating in
colder months.
Across all months a clear diurnal pattern can be observed with peaks typically occurring
Assessing the industry’s role in greenhouse gas emissions using eddy covariance measurements
23
==PAGE:30==
around 08:00 and 20:00. These peaks likely correspond to times of increased hot water
usage and cooking, such as morning and evening routines (Andersen et al., 2017). A key
difference between the two plots is the timing of morning activity. On non-workdays,
the morning peak shifts later in the day, suggesting a delayed start to household routines.
This contrasts with workdays, where the morning rise in emissions is sharper and more
concentrated around typical commute hours. These seasonal and diurnal patterns are
also identified in Christen et al., 2011 and Crawford and Christen, 2015.
(a) Workdays
(b) Non-workdays
Figure 3.3: Average half-hourly modeled CO2,ff surface flux from heating buildings during (a) workdays
and (b) non-workdays in the study area.
Assessing the industry’s role in greenhouse gas emissions using eddy covariance measurements
24
==PAGE:31==
Table 3.1 showcases the average monthly CO2 fluxes from the modeled sources, sepa-
rated into workdays and non-workdays. For vegetation, no distinction is made between
day types, as vegetation uptake is not directly influenced by human activity patterns. A
clear workday vs. non-workday trend is visible in the traﬀic emissions. For all months
CO2 fluxes are consistently higher on workdays peaking in May with an average of 5.02
µmol m−2 s−1. Compared to non-workdays traﬀic fluxes are much lower with its lowest
being 1.65 µmol m−2 s−1 in February. This pattern reflects increased commuting activ-
ity during the workweek. Relatively higher traﬀic emissions are seen in March through
May, which may be partly explained by public holidays such as the Easter break and As-
cension Day falling within this period which is not treated as non-workdays in this the-
sis. For residential heating, the average CO2 flux generally decreases from winter into
late spring, consistent with warmer weather and reduced heating demand with average
values decreasing from 0.77 µmol m−2 s−1 in February to 0.09 µmol m−2 s−1. Unlike traf-
fic, residential heating shows slightly higher emissions on non-workdays for example,
in February, non-workdays average 0.92 µmol m−2 s−1 compared to 0.72 µmol m−2 s−1
on workdays, likely due to people spending more time at home during weekends.
Month
Residential
Traﬀic
Vegetation
February
0.77
2.89
1.39
Workday
0.72
3.39
Non-workday
0.92
1.65
March
0.41
3.67
0.54
Workday
0.39
4.52
Non-workday
0.43
1.80
April
0.41
3.52
-0.59
Workday
0.41
4.27
Non-workday
0.40
1.68
May
0.18
4.03
-1.98
Workday
0.17
5.02
Non-workday
0.22
1.80
June
0.09
3.59
-2.09
Workday
0.08
4.47
Non-workday
0.11
1.66
Table 3.1: Average monthly CO2 fluxes (µmol m−2 s−1) for workdays and non-workdays across mod-
eled flux sources. Monthly averages for each column are shown in bold next to each month.
Assessing the industry’s role in greenhouse gas emissions using eddy covariance measurements
25
==PAGE:32==
Vegetation shows increasing CO2 uptake from February to June. Fluxes shift from a
small positive value in February 1.39 µmol m−2 s−1 to higher negative values in May
and June −1.98 and −2.09 µmol m−2 s−1, respectively, reflecting active photosynthesis
as green areas are becoming more green and the weather gets warmer.
3.3
Residual CO2 flux
To investigate the relationship between residual CO2 flux and industrial land use, monthly
linear correlation analyses were performed using the footprint-weighted fraction of in-
dustrial land (fi) for each 30-minute flux observation. The strength of the correlation
was evaluated using the Pearson correlation coeﬀicient (r) as shown in Figure 3.4.
Assessing the industry’s role in greenhouse gas emissions using eddy covariance measurements
26
==PAGE:33==
(a) February
(b) March
(c) April
(d) May
(e) June
Figure 3.4: Linear correlation between residual flux and industrial fraction
Results show a moderate positive correlation during the winter and early spring months,
with Pearson r values of 0.319 in February and 0.299 in March (Figure 3.4a & 3.4b).
This indicates a tendency for residual CO2 fluxes to increase with greater industrial
land coverage in the flux footprint during this period. In April, the correlation weakens
(r = 0.203), and by May and June, the relationship is very weak (r = 0.081 and 0.075,
respectively), with little to no clear linear trend visible in the scatter plots.
Assessing the industry’s role in greenhouse gas emissions using eddy covariance measurements
27
==PAGE:34==
These results suggest a seasonal decline in the correlation between industrial land use
and residual fluxes over the study period.
3.4
Estimated direct industrial CO2 emissions
Following the initial correlation analysis, linear regression was conducted to model the
relationship between residual flux and industrial land fraction. This allowed for an esti-
mation of the mean emission rate from industrial areas, based on the regression slope.
For the entire study area a linear regression was applied on the full dataset covering
February through June to estimate industrial emission density based on the relationship
between residual CO2 flux and industrial fraction land use fraction (fi) within the eddy
covariance (EC) footprint. Data used include an industrial footprint fraction fi > 0.05
and residual CO2 flux within the range –30 to +20µmol CO2 m−2 s−1 (Figure 3.5). The
results show a statistically significant positive association between fi and residual CO2
fluxes, with a slope of 6.10 µmol CO2 m−2 s−1 and a p-value < 0.001. The model explains
approximately 3.9% of the variance (R2 = 0.039).
Despite the relatively low R2, the strength and significance of the relationship indicate
that areas with higher industrial land cover consistently correspond to higher measured
residual fluxes. This suggests that direct industrial emissions are a source of CO2 across
the study period.
Assessing the industry’s role in greenhouse gas emissions using eddy covariance measurements
28
==PAGE:35==
Figure 3.5: Linear regression between residual CO2 flux (µmol CO2 m−2 s−1) and the industrial foot-
print fraction fi. The slope of the regression line (red) represents the estimated emission density from
industrial areas, while the intercept captures residual flux contributions not systematically dependent on
industrial activity.
Parameter
Coeﬀicient
Std. Error
t-value
p-value
Intercept (a)
–2.04
0.16
–12.42
<0.001
Slope (b) for fi
6.10
0.51
11.99
<0.001
R2
0.039
No. of observations
3,560
Table 3.2: Summary of linear regression between residual CO2 flux and industrial footprint fraction (fi)
for February–June.
Using the value of the slope from Table 3.2 and Equation 2.14 yields an annual CO2
emission of 17,760.23 tons/year in the direction of the industries (240-340 degrees).
Assessing the industry’s role in greenhouse gas emissions using eddy covariance measurements
29
==PAGE:36==
3.4.1
Seasonal variability
Taking a closer look at how the linear regression behaves for each month can be seen in
Figure 3.6 Linear regression models were fitted separately for each month from February
to June to evaluate how the residual CO2 flux responds to changes in the industrial
footprint fraction (fi). The analysis shows a clear pattern in seasonal progression:
• In February, the relationship was strongest with a steep slope of 12.16 (µmol CO2 m−2 s−1)
and a p-value < 0.001, suggesting that increases in the industrial land fraction are
strongly associated with increasing residual CO2 fluxes. This indicates a strong
industrial signal in winter, likely due to additional heating related emissions.
• In March and April, the slope decreases to 9.98 and 6.05 respectively. The trend
still indicates a positive relationship, although the signal is weakening. This may
be due to a reduced heating demand and a small seasonal variation in atmospheric
conditions (e.g. warmer weather causing the boundary layer to grow, which means
the same emissions are diluted in a larger volume of air).
• By May, the slope drops further to 2.37, showing a weaker correlation. This flat-
tening suggests that other sources or processes, such as uptake by vegetation or
dilution in the atmosphere, may play a bigger role now.
• In June, the slope remains low at 2.24 and there is still a weak positive correlation.
Overall, the decreasing slope from winter to summer supports the interpretation that
industrial activity contributes most prominently to residual CO2 fluxes during colder
months, while its relative influence reduces as biogenic and atmospheric factors become
more dominant in late spring and early summer.
Assessing the industry’s role in greenhouse gas emissions using eddy covariance measurements
30
==PAGE:37==
(a) February
(b) March
(c) April
(d) May
(e) June
Figure 3.6: Linear regression between residual CO2 flux (µmol CO2 m−2 s−1) and the industrial footprint
fraction fi for each month
Assessing the industry’s role in greenhouse gas emissions using eddy covariance measurements
31
==PAGE:38==
Table 3.3: Regression – February
Parameter
Coeff.
SE
t
p
Intercept
-3.99
0.53
-7.49
<0.001
fi Slope
12.16
1.82
6.70
<0.001
R2
0.102
n
396
Table 3.4: Regression – March
Parameter
Coeff.
SE
t
p
Intercept
-3.30
0.41
-8.04
<0.001
fi Slope
9.98
1.17
8.57
<0.001
R2
0.089
n
751
Table 3.5: Regression – April
Parameter
Coeff.
SE
t
p
Intercept
-2.22
0.33
-6.73
<0.001
fi Slope
6.05
1.12
5.41
<0.001
R2
0.041
n
682
Table 3.6: Regression – May
Parameter
Coeff.
SE
t
p
Intercept
-0.88
0.29
-3.00
0.003
fi Slope
2.37
0.98
2.41
0.016
R2
0.006
n
895
Table 3.7: Regression – June
Parameter
Coeff.
SE
t
p
Intercept
-0.60
0.36
-1.65
0.100
fi Slope
2.24
1.03
2.18
0.030
R2
0.006
n
834
Using Equation 2.14 with slight modification (multiplied by the total number of sec-
onds in the corresponding month instead of a year). Monthly CO2 emissions from each
month resulted in the following:
Assessing the industry’s role in greenhouse gas emissions using eddy covariance measurements
32
==PAGE:39==
Table 3.8: Monthly CO2 Values
Month
CO2 emission (tons/month)
February
2715.6
March
2468.1
April
1447.8
May
586.1
June
536.0
From Table 3.8 the month of February has highest CO2 emissions with 2715.6 ton/month
and June the lowest with 536 tons/month.
3.4.2
Workdays vs non-workdays
Figure 3.7 shows linear regression models fitted separately for workdays and non-workdays
to examine how the residual CO2 fluxes respond to variations in the industrial footprint
fraction. On working days, the slope is significantly steeper (b = 7.62 µmol CO2 m−2 s−1)
than on non-working days (b = 2.52 µmol CO2 m−2 s−1), indicating a stronger positive
relationship between the presence of industrial land and measured residual fluxes when
industrial activity is likely at its peak. The weaker slope on non-working days suggests a
reduced influence of industrial sources, consistent with reduced activity on weekends.
Assessing the industry’s role in greenhouse gas emissions using eddy covariance measurements
33
==PAGE:40==
(a) Workdays
(b) Non-workdays
Figure 3.7: Linear regression for workdays and non-work days
The results from statistical analysis, as presented in Table 3.9 & 3.10, reveals a signifi-
cantly stronger relationship on workdays (slope = 7.62 ± 0.624 ), R² = 0.054, p < 0.001)
compared to non-workdays (slope = 2.52 ± 0.785, R² = 0.011, p = 0.001). This suggests
that industrial activity is a systematic contributor to residual fluxes during operational
days, whereas its influence on non-workdays is weaker. These results support the hy-
pothesis that direct industrial emissions contribute to the residual flux, with a stronger
contribution on weekdays when industrial activity is higher.
Assessing the industry’s role in greenhouse gas emissions using eddy covariance measurements
34
==PAGE:41==
Table 3.9: Regression – Workdays
Parameter
Coeff.
SE
t
p
Intercept
-2.89
0.20
-14.31
<0.001
fi Slope
7.62
0.62
12.21
<0.001
R2
0.054
n
2608
Table 3.10: Regression – Non-workdays
Parameter
Coeff.
SE
t
p
Intercept
0.10
0.25
0.42
0.676
fi Slope
2.52
0.79
3.21
0.001
R2
0.011
n
952
Assessing the industry’s role in greenhouse gas emissions using eddy covariance measurements
35
==PAGE:42==
4
Discussion
This study aimed to assess and estimate direct CO2 emissions related to industrial ac-
tivity using eddy covariance flux measurements combined with bottom-up modeling
of residential, traﬀic and vegetation emissions. While residential emissions were esti-
mated in more detail due to available demographic and heating data, the primary goal
of this study remains the analysis of industrial contributions to CO2 fluxes. The core of
the approach lies in interpreting the residual flux, so what remains after modeled con-
tributions are subtracted, as an indicator of industrial emissions. Although this method
provides an opportunity to assess industrial CO2 contributions without direct reporting
it also depends on a set of assumptions and simplifications that influence the accuracy
and interpretation of the results.
4.1
Interpreting the residual flux
The annual CO2 emission from industrial activity estimated in this study was 17,760
tons CO2 per year, based on eddy covariance data and residual analysis. According to
SparEnergi, which the Danish Energy Agency is behind, reports that Gladsaxe Munici-
pality in 2023 emitted a total of 172,422 tons CO2e across all sectors, of which 4,290 tons
CO2e were attributed to the “chemical processes” sector (SparEnergi, 2023). This sector
includes non-energy related emissions from industrial processes, oil refining, flaring,
and solvent use. As this is the only category in the municipal inventory that explicitly
covers industrial processes, it is not directly comparable to the EC-based estimate in
this study. The EC estimate includes all direct CO2 emissions from the industrial area
within the flux footprint regardless of sector and may also capture energy related emis-
sions from industrial buildings not connected to the district heating network. Therefore,
it is expected that the estimated value is higher than the value reported under chemical
processes alone.
A direct comparison of the estimated residual CO2 flux and the municipality’s reported
emission is a bit diﬀicult because the to figures cover different things. The municipality
emission figures are reported in CO2e, which include other greenhouse gases such as
methane (CH4) and nitrous oxide (N2O) expressed in CO2 equivalent terms. The EC
system used in this study do measure multiple gases, but here, only CO2 was analyzed
and only emissions occurring within the flux footprint are included. Therefore, differ-
ences between the two estimates may be due to differences in the gases included, the
spatial coverage and the sector definitions used.
The interpretation of residual CO2 fluxes as industrial emissions is subject to several
uncertainties. First, this approach assumes that emissions from other sources, espe-
cially residential heating, traﬀic and vegetation, are accurately estimated. Any system-
atic overestimation or underestimation in these components directly affects the residual.
Assessing the industry’s role in greenhouse gas emissions using eddy covariance measurements
36
==PAGE:43==
Second, it assumes that the EC measurements themselves are accurate, despite known
limitations.
Moreover, the method assumes that industrial emissions are evenly spread across all
industrial land within the footprint and do not vary over time. This is a strong simplifi-
cation. In reality, emissions likely vary between facilities and across time (e.g., between
working hours and weekends). Without high-resolution industrial activity data, this
assumption cannot be validated nor refined. In addition, the regression results are sen-
sitive to outliers and a small number of high-flux measurements, which may skew the
estimation of emission density. For this reason, these measurements were excluded, but
it may also have eliminated any potential high emission events associated with indus-
trial activity. Despite these uncertainties, similar approaches has been applied in other
urban CO2 flux studies when sector specific data were unavailable (Stagakis, Feigenwin-
ter, Vogt, and Kalberer, 2023, Stagakis, Feigenwinter, Vogt, Brunner, et al., 2023). Part
1 of the study, a bottom-up model was developed to estimate hourly urban CO2 fluxes
from buildings, traﬀic, human respiration and biogenic sources at 20 m resolution. Part
2 integrated EC flux observations with the bottom-up model using Bayesian inversion,
optimizing emission estimates by flux source type and reducing uncertainties. The two
studies found seasonal and spatial variability were well-captured, with building emis-
sions peaking in winter and traﬀic along main roads. Bottom-up estimates were lower
than oﬀicial inventories, partly due to scope differences and showed good agreement
with EC tower observations. The approach provides a transparent and reproducible
framework for estimating emissions in environments with limited data.
4.1.1
Seasonal and temporal variation
The analysis of the seasonal and workdays vs non-workdays showed a clear pattern
that the CO2 emission density from industrial land use is higher during workdays then
non-workdays indicating that industrial activities is associated with more human activ-
ity. There’s also a clear seasonal pattern of the five months period that includes winter
into spring and early summer. Highest values were observed in the winter period and
increasingly lower when moving into spring and summer, this suggest that industrial ac-
tivity contributes most prominently to residual CO2 fluxes during colder months, while
its relative influence decreases as biogenic factors become more dominant in late spring
and early summer. Similar seasonal patterns have been reported in previous studies,
such as Christen et al., 2011 and Coutts et al., 2007 where emissions were higher in
winter months - when space heating demand rises and vegetation uptake is reduced
vice versa lower in summer where vegetation uptake is increased. Moreover, a week-
day‑weekend contrast was also observed with weekend emissions being 25% lower than
weekdays, reflecting reduced traﬀic activity. These results also highlight that seasonal
heat demand and weekly traﬀic patterns are dominating the temporal variation of CO2
fluxes in urban areas. However, it is important to note that the analysis in this study is
based on only the first half of the year. This naturally does not capture a full annual cy-
cle and likely misses other seasonal behaviors, particularly during the late summer and
autumn months, when factors like heating demand, lower biogenic uptake or changes
in industrial activity may influence flux patterns.
Assessing the industry’s role in greenhouse gas emissions using eddy covariance measurements
37
==PAGE:44==
4.2
Limitation due to data availability
A major limitation of this study was the lack of direct data from industrial sources.
While the location of industrial areas was known there was no access to emission data
at the facility level or information about how and when they operate. Multiple attempts
to get this information through collaboration with local companies were largely unsuc-
cessful. Without access to real-time or reported emission rates on a local scale, the study
was not able to validate whether the residual fluxes matched the actual industrial activ-
ity. This lack of engagement from the industries points to a bigger challenge in urban
emission studies. Companies approached during this study either would or could not
share emission data sometimes due to confidentiality, inconsistent reporting or simply
because they did not have the systems in place to monitor emissions closely.
Further limitations lies in the absence of more recent datasets resulting that all mod-
eling of anthropogenic components, like traﬀic and residential heating, was based on
2023 data. This includes emission factors from Nielsen et al., 2025, which were used in
both the traﬀic and residential heating models. The same goes for the energy use data
for space and water heating, taken from (Eurostat, 2023) and (Danish Energy Agency,
2023). But using 2023 data might not fully reflect how people behave or use energy in
2025, which is when the EC measurements were taken. Things like policy changes, en-
ergy prices or new technologies could have shifted emissions up or down. So relying on
2023 data might lead to either an over- or underestimation of the actual fluxes in 2025.
Although these variation may be small, they still add some uncertainty to the bottom-up
flux estimates.
4.3
Eddy covariance in urban areas
The eddy covariance method is a valuable tool for measuring net CO2 fluxes at high
temporal resolution and it has increasingly been applied in urban environments (Ve-
lasco and Roth, 2010). However, using EC to attribute fluxes to specific sectors (such as
industry) presents significant challenges.
First, EC measures the net vertical flux of CO2 from all sources within the flux footprint.
In complex urban areas, this footprint often contains a mixture of land uses, includ-
ing residential, industrial, green spaces mixed with traﬀic congested roads. Separating
these overlapping contributions is diﬀicult without highly detailed spatial and temporal
emissions data (Lietzke et al., 2015). The footprint itself also varies with atmospheric
stability and wind direction, meaning that different land-use zones are sampled at differ-
ent times, further complicating source attribution (Rey-Sanchez et al., 2022). Secondly,
EC does not capture all emissions equally. Point source emissions from tall stacks can be
released above the height of the measuring instruments and under stable atmospheric
conditions, can travel across the area without being mixed down to sensor level. This
means that some industrial emissions are never detected by the system. (Christen et al.,
2011). Additionally, EC systems can suffer from data loss due to low turbulence, sensor
malfunction or unfavorable weather, which can introduce sampling biases over time.
Despite these limitations, EC remains a powerful method for observing actual CO2 ex-
Assessing the industry’s role in greenhouse gas emissions using eddy covariance measurements
38
==PAGE:45==
change at the neighborhood to city scale. When combined with spatial data and bottom-
up modeling, as done in this study, it enables a useful top-down perspective on emis-
sions, especially in urban areas where self-reported data is often incomplete or unreli-
able.
While the estimated industrial flux should be interpreted with caution - as indicative
rather than absolute and always in the context of the underlying assumptions - the re-
sults highlight the potential of EC-based monitoring as a complementary tool to urban
emissions inventories, especially in areas where industrial reporting is limited or incon-
sistent.
4.4
Future work
Urban areas are complex and very diverse and this complexity needs to be considered in
the way their emissions are studied. Each city has its own mix of land use, infrastructure
and human activity patterns, meaning one-size-fits-all methods are often not applicable.
Future research should focus on adapting and improving methods to better capture this
variation.
A key step to improve the methodology in future work could be to implement a multi-
tower setup within the studied urban area, as also explored in the study by Järvi et al.,
2018. The study used two identical EC systems located on opposite sides of a building to
analyze how measurement location and flow distortion affect the accuracy of CO2 flux
measurements. The aim of the study was to quantify how much a single-point EC setup
may over- or underestimate annual fluxes due to missing or filtered data and providing
guidance on data quality control and gap-filling methods for urban EC studies. The
study concluded that adding a second measurement system on the opposite side of
a structure significantly reduces systematic uncertainties. This of course it has some
budget constraints, as EC systems are very costly.
Another opportunity, in terms of high-resolution data, is being more persistent with
the communication with the industry. Building trust takes time, but it is essential for
long-term collaboration. A transparent dialog and clear communication can strengthen
the relationship and eventually open the door to better access to emissions data. This
will allow residual flux estimates to be validated more accurately and reduce the need
to rely on assumptions.
Finally, addressing some of the simplification made when modeling the anthropogenic
sources. For example assuming uniform emissions across industrial areas, treating holi-
days as workdays or ”green is green” approach in the vegetation model. The residential
heating model did not account for differences in building types, such as single family
homes and apartment complexes. Making these differentiation would make the model
more robust and accurate, ultimately reducing the risk of over- or underestimation.
Assessing the industry’s role in greenhouse gas emissions using eddy covariance measurements
39
==PAGE:46==
5
Conclusion
This thesis developed and applied a method to estimate direct CO2 emissions from in-
dustrial areas using eddy covariance measurements combined with bottom-up model-
ing of residential heating, traﬀic and vegetation fluxes. The method was tested in Glad-
saxe Municipality in Denmark over a period of five months (February-June 2025) using
an EC system with high towers.
By modeling and subtracting known non-industrial flux components from the total mea-
sured flux, a residual signal was obtained and interpreted as the contribution from in-
dustrial activity. Regression analysis between this residual signal and the footprint-
weighted fraction of industrial land gave an estimated average emission density of 6.10
µmolCO2m−2s−1, corresponding to 17,760 tCO2yr−1 for the industrial sector. Although
the explained variance was modest (R2 = 0.039), the relationship was statistically sig-
nificant, suggesting that industrial land use within the footprint is a consistent source
of CO2.
A clear seasonal and diurnal pattern was observed, with emission densities being high-
est in winter and early spring and decreasing in summer as vegetation uptake became
more prominent. Working days showed stronger industrial signals than non-working
days, consistent with reduced industrial activity on weekends.
The study also highlighted key limitations:
• Data availability: the lack of direct and high resolution industrial emissions data
prevented validation of the residual flux estimates and required assumptions of
uniform spatial and temporal emission densities.
• Methodological assumptions: the accuracy depends on the quality of bottom-up
models for residential heating, traﬀic, and vegetation.
• Temporal coverage: the analysis covered only five months, missing potential sea-
sonal behaviors in late summer and autumn.
Despite these limitations the results show that EC measurements, when combined with
spatial modeling can provide valuable top-down insights into industrial CO2 emissions
in urban environments with little data. This method provides a complementary ap-
proach to bottom-up assessments.
Future improvements should focus on extending measurements over full annual cycles,
fine-tuning bottom-up models with more localized data, improving industry sector en-
gagement and considering multi-tower EC setups to reduce uncertainties associated
with single-point measurements. With these improvements, EC-based residual anal-
ysis has strong potential to contribute to transparent and independent verification of
industrial emissions in cities, supporting both scientific research and climate policy im-
plementation.
Assessing the industry’s role in greenhouse gas emissions using eddy covariance measurements
40
==PAGE:47==
Bibliography
Satterthwaite, D. (2008). Cities’ contribution to global warming: Notes on the allocation
of greenhouse gas emissions. Environment and Urbanization, 20(2), 539–549. https:
//doi.org/10.1177/0956247808096127
Crippa, M., Guizzardi, D., Pisoni, E., Solazzo, E., Guion, A., Muntean, M., Florczyk, A.,
Schiavina, M., Melchiorri, M., & Hutfilter, A. F. (2021). Global anthropogenic
emissions in urban areas: Patterns, trends, and challenges. Environmental Research
Letters, 16(7). https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/AC00E2
Nordbo, A., Järvi, L., & Vesala, T. (2012). Revised eddy covariance flux calculation
methodologies-effect on urban energy balance. Tellus, Series B: Chemical and Phys-
ical Meteorology, 64(1). https://doi.org/10.3402/TELLUSB.V64I0.18184
Bataille, C., Åhman, M., Neuhoff, K., Nilsson, L. J., Fischedick, M., Lechtenböhmer, S.,
Solano-Rodriquez, B., Denis-Ryan, A., Stiebert, S., Waisman, H., Sartor, O., & Rah-
bar, S. (2018). A review of technology and policy deep decarbonization path-
way options for making energy-intensive industry production consistent with
the Paris Agreement. Journal of Cleaner Production, 187, 960–973. https://doi.org/
10.1016/J.JCLEPRO.2018.03.107
Coutts, A. M., Beringer, J., & Tapper, N. J. (2007). Characteristics influencing the variabil-
ity of urban CO2 fluxes in Melbourne, Australia. Atmospheric Environment, 41(1),
51–62. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.ATMOSENV.2006.08.030
Christen, A., Coops, N. C., Crawford, B. R., Kellett, R., Liss, K. N., Olchovski, I., Tooke,
T. R., Van Der Laan, M., & Voogt, J. A. (2011). Validation of modeled carbon-
dioxide emissions from an urban neighborhood with direct eddy-covariance mea-
surements. Atmospheric Environment, 45(33), 6057–6069. https://doi.org/10.1016/
J.ATMOSENV.2011.07.040
Ueyama, M., & Takano, T. (2022). A decade of CO2 flux measured by the eddy covari-
ance method including the COVID-19 pandemic period in an urban center in
Assessing the industry’s role in greenhouse gas emissions using eddy covariance measurements
41
==PAGE:48==
Sakai, Japan. Environmental Pollution, 304, 119210. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.
ENVPOL.2022.119210
Crawford, B., & Christen, A. (2015). Spatial source attribution of measured urban eddy
covariance CO2 fluxes. Theoretical and Applied Climatology, 119(3-4), 733–755. https:
//doi.org/10.1007/S00704-014-1124-0
Gioli, B., Gualtieri, G., Busillo, C., Calastrini, F., Zaldei, A., & Toscano, P. (2015). Im-
proving high resolution emission inventories with local proxies and urban eddy
covariance flux measurements. Atmospheric Environment, 115, 246–256. https://
doi.org/10.1016/J.ATMOSENV.2015.05.068
Min, K.-E., Mun, J., Perdigones, B., Lee, S., & Kwak, K.-H. (n.d.). Insights on estimating
urban CO2 emissions using eddy-covariance flux measurements. https://doi.org/
10.5194/acp-2022-205
Danmarks Statistik. (2023). CO2 fra biomasse udgør 31 pct. af drivhusgasser. https://
www.dst.dk/da/Statistik/nyheder-analyser-publ/nyt/NytHtml?cid=46703
Hájek, M., Zimmermannová, J., Helman, K., & Rozenský, L. (2019). Analysis of carbon
tax eﬀiciency in energy industries of selected EU countries. Energy Policy, 134,
110955. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.ENPOL.2019.110955
Mueller, K. L., Lauvaux, T., Gurney, K. R., Roest, G., Ghosh, S., Gourdji, S. M., Karion, A.,
DeCola, P., & Whetstone, J. (2021). An emerging GHG estimation approach can
help cities achieve their climate and sustainability goals. Environmental Research
Letters, 16(8). https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/AC0F25
European Commission. (2025). Commission presents voluntary sustainability reporting
standard to ease burden on SMEs. https://finance.ec.europa.eu/publications/
commission-presents-voluntary-sustainability-reporting-standard-ease-burden-smes_
en
Gladsaxe Kommune. (n.d.). Fakta om Gladsaxe. https://gladsaxe.dk/kommunen/om-
gladsaxe-kommune/fakta-om-gladsaxe
Basemap. (n.d.). https://envs.au.dk/en/research-areas/society-environment-and-resources/
land-use-and-gis/basemap
European Environment Agency. (2013). Data Dictionary - Vocabulary. https://dd.eionet.
europa.eu/vocabularyconcept/aq/areaclassification/suburban/view
Assessing the industry’s role in greenhouse gas emissions using eddy covariance measurements
42
==PAGE:49==
Burba, G. (2022). Eddy Covariance Method for Scientific, Regulatory, and Commercial Appli-
cations. LI-COR Biosciences.
Baldocchi, D. D. (2003). Assessing the eddy covariance technique for evaluating carbon
dioxide exchange rates of ecosystems: past, present and future. Global Change Bi-
ology, 9(4), 479–492. https://doi.org/10.1046/J.1365-2486.2003.00629.X
Foken, T., Göockede, M., Mauder, M., Mahrt, L., Amiro, B., & Munger, W. (2004). Post-
Field Data Quality Control. Handbook of Micrometeorology, 181–208. https://doi.
org/10.1007/1-4020-2265-4{\_}9
Aubinet, M., Grelle, A., Ibrom, A., Rannik, Ü., Moncrieff, J., Foken, T., Kowalski, A. S.,
Martin, P. H., Berbigier, P., Bernhofer, C., Clement, R., Elbers, J., Granier, A.,
Grünwald, T., Morgenstern, K., Pilegaard, K., Rebmann, C., Snijders, W., Valen-
tini, R., & Vesala, T. (1999). Estimates of the Annual Net Carbon and Water Ex-
change of Forests: The EUROFLUX Methodology. Advances in Ecological Research,
30(100), 113–175. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0065-2504(08)60018-5
Kljun, N., Calanca, P., Rotach, M. W., & Schmid, H. P. (2015). A simple two-dimensional
parameterisation for Flux Footprint Prediction (FFP). Geoscientific Model Develop-
ment, 8(11), 3695–3713. https://doi.org/10.5194/gmd-8-3695-2015
Kljun, N., Calanca, P., Rotach, M. W., & Schmid, H. P. (2004). A simple parameterisation
for flux footprint predictions. Boundary-Layer Meteorology, 112(3), 503–523. https:
//doi.org/10.1023/B:BOUN.0000030653.71031.96
Nielsen, O.-K., Plejdrup, M. S., Winther, M., Nielsen, M., Gyldenkærne, S., Hjorth Mikkelsen,
M., Albrektsen, R., Hjelgaard, K., Fauser, P., Bruun, H. G., Levin, G., Callisen,
L. W., Andersen, T. A., Kvist Johannsen, V., Nord-Larsen, T., Vesterdal, L., Stu-
pak, I., Scott-Bentsen, N., Rasmussen, E., … Gunnleivsdóttir Hansen, M. (2025).
Denmark’s National Inventory Document 2025 - Emission Inventories 1990-2023 - Sub-
mitted under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change and the
Paris Agreement (tech. rep.).
Emission factors. (n.d.). https://envs.au.dk/en/research-areas/air-pollution-emissions-and-
effects/air-emissions/emission-factors
Bygnings- og Boligregistret. (n.d.). Om BBR - BBR. https://bbr.dk/om-bbr
ETRS89 / UTM zone 32N - EPSG:25832. (n.d.). https://epsg.io/25832
Assessing the industry’s role in greenhouse gas emissions using eddy covariance measurements
43
==PAGE:50==
Dataforsyningen. (n.d.). https://dataforsyningen.dk/
Eurostat. (2023). Disaggregated final energy consumption in households - quantities.
https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/databrowser/view/nrg_d_hhq__custom_17534261/
default/table
Danish Energy Agency. (2023). Annual and monthly statistics. https : / / ens . dk / en /
analyses-and-statistics/annual-and-monthly-statistics
Eurostat. (n.d.). Population grids - GISCO. https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/web/gisco/
geodata/population-distribution/population-grids
Andersen, F. M., Baldini, M., Hansen, L. G., & Jensen, C. L. (2017). Households’ hourly
electricity consumption and peak demand in Denmark. Applied Energy, 208, 607–
619. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.APENERGY.2017.09.094
Danish Business Authority. (2025a). CVR. https://datacvr.virk.dk/
Danish Business Authority. (2025b). Branchekode. https://erst.virk.dk/branchekode/
kategori/indexKategori
Gentofte Gladsaxe Fjernvarme. (2025). Søg på din adresse og find ud af om du kan få
fjernvarme. Ligger du i et grønt område, kontakt. https://gentofte.maps.arcgis.
com/apps/webappviewer/index.html?id=7c5b3a5571524ac6bb6754c9b7743609
Pousset, P. C. (2023). Evaluation of carbon monoxide exchange in a rural landscape as
proxy for the distinction between fossil and natural carbon dioxide emissions.
SparEnergi. (2023). Gladsaxe | Energistyrelsen. https://sparenergi.dk/offentlig/energi-og-
co2-regnskabet/gladsaxe?year=2023
Stagakis, S., Feigenwinter, C., Vogt, R., & Kalberer, M. (2023). A high-resolution moni-
toring approach of urban CO2 fluxes. Part 1 - bottom-up model development. The
Science of the total environment, 858(Pt 3). https://doi.org/10.1016/J.SCITOTENV.
2022.160216
Stagakis, S., Feigenwinter, C., Vogt, R., Brunner, D., & Kalberer, M. (2023). A high-
resolution monitoring approach of urban CO2 fluxes. Part 2 – surface flux op-
timisation using eddy covariance observations. Science of The Total Environment,
903, 166035. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.SCITOTENV.2023.166035
Velasco, E., & Roth, M. (2010). Cities as net sources of CO2: Review of atmospheric
CO2 exchange in urban environments measured by eddy covariance technique.
Assessing the industry’s role in greenhouse gas emissions using eddy covariance measurements
44
==PAGE:51==
Geography Compass, 4(9), 1238–1259. https://doi.org/10.1111/J.1749-8198.2010.
00384.X
Lietzke, B., Vogt, R., Feigenwinter, C., & Parlow, E. (2015). On the controlling factors
for the variability of carbon dioxide flux in a heterogeneous urban environment.
International Journal of Climatology, 35(13), 3921–3941. https://doi.org/10.1002/
JOC.4255
Rey-Sanchez, C., Arias-Ortiz, A., Kasak, K., Chu, H., Szutu, D., Verfaillie, J., & Baldocchi,
D. (2022). Detecting Hot Spots of Methane Flux Using Footprint-Weighted Flux
Maps. Journal of Geophysical Research: Biogeosciences, 127(8). https://doi.org/10.
1029/2022JG006977
Järvi, L., Rannik, U., Kokkonen, T. V., Kurppa, M., Karppinen, A., Kouznetsov, R. D.,
Rantala, P., Vesala, T., & Wood, C. R. (2018). Uncertainty of eddy covariance flux
measurements over an urban area based on two towers. Atmospheric Measurement
Techniques, 11(10), 5421–5438. https://doi.org/10.5194/AMT-11-5421-2018
Assessing the industry’s role in greenhouse gas emissions using eddy covariance measurements
45
==PAGE:52==
A
Appendix
A.1
Links to each data source used for modeling
residential heating emission
Database
Publisher
Link
Basemap04
raster
map
with a cell size of 10 x 10
m
Aarhus University, DCE – Dan-
ish Centre for Environment and
Energy
https://envs.au.dk/en/research-
areas/society-environment-and-
resources/land-use-and-gis/basemap
INSPIRE
-
Bygnings-
og
Boligregistret
(BBR)
bygninger og boliger
Dataforsyningen
https://dataforsyningen.dk/data/3829
Population in 2023
Danmarks Statistik
https://www.dst.dk/da/Statistik/
emner/borgere/befolkning/
befolkningstal
Emission factors for resi-
dential heating
Aarhus University
https://envs.au.dk/en/research-
areas/air-pollution-emissions-and-
effects/air-emissions/emission-factors
Energy usage for space
and water heating
EUROSTAT
https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/
databrowser/view/nrg_d_hhq_
_custom_17534261/default/table
Population grid 1 x 1 km
grid
EUROSTAT
https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/
web/gisco/geodata/population-
distribution/population-grids
Table A.1: List of the different data sources used to estimate residential heating emissions with links to
the databases
A.2
Python script: calculation of residential heating flux
1
import pandas as pd
2
import glob
Assessing the industry’s role in greenhouse gas emissions using eddy covariance measurements
46
==PAGE:53==
3
from typing import Dict
4
from pytz import timezone
5
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
6
import seaborn as sns
7
8
def flux_calc_heating(
9
df: pd.DataFrame ,
10
energy_consumption: float,
# GJ/year/person
11
emission_factors: Dict[str, float],
# kg CO2/GJ
12
workday_factors: pd.DataFrame ,
13
nonworkday_factors: pd.DataFrame ,
14
a_d_workday: float,
15
a_d_nonworkday: float,
16
datetime_col: str = "datetime",
17
total_col: str = "residential_CO2_flux"
18
) -> pd.DataFrame:
19
"""
20
Estimate CO2 flux (µmol/m2/s) from residential heating using
21
footprint weighted number of emitting persons m^-2 using different
energy types.
22
23
Handles UTC-based input timestamps and converts them to local time (CET
/CEST)
24
for applying heating schedules.
25
26
Args:
27
df: DataFrame with datetime and energy type columns (people/m²).
28
energy_consumption: GJ/year/person
29
emission_factors: Dict of kg CO2/GJ for each energy type
30
workday_factors / nonworkday_factors: Seasonal/diurnal factor
tables
31
a_d_workday / a_d_nonworkday: Annual -day normalization factors
32
datetime_col: Name of datetime column (must be in UTC)
33
total_col: Output column name for total heating CO2 flux (µmol/m2/s
)
34
35
Returns:
Assessing the industry’s role in greenhouse gas emissions using eddy covariance measurements
47
==PAGE:54==
36
df: Original DataFrame with new columns for each energy type's CO2
flux.
37
"""
38
39
#Constants
40
MOLAR_MASS_CO2 = 44.01
# g/mol
41
KG_TO_UMOL = 1e9 / MOLAR_MASS_CO2
# µmol/kg
42
SECONDS_PER_HOUR = 3600
43
44
#Ensure timestamps are timezone -aware in UTC
45
if datetime_col in df.columns:
46
datetimes_utc = pd.to_datetime(df[datetime_col]).dt.tz_localize("
UTC")
47
else:
48
datetimes_utc = pd.to_datetime(df.index).tz_localize("UTC")
49
50
#Convert to local time for heating behavior
51
local_tz = timezone("Europe/Copenhagen")
52
df["datetime_utc"] = datetimes_utc
53
df["datetime_local"] = datetimes_utc.tz_convert(local_tz)
54
55
#Identify workdays using local time
56
df["is_workday"] = df["datetime_local"].dt.weekday < 5
57
df["workday_label"] = df["is_workday"].map({True: "Workday", False: "
Non-workday"})
58
59
flux_cols = []
60
factor_list = []
# Store the applied factor
61
62
#Loop through energy types
63
for energy_type , emission_factor in emission_factors.items():
64
flux_list = []
65
66
#Loop through each timestamp
67
for i, t_utc in enumerate(datetimes_utc):
68
t_local = t_utc.astimezone(local_tz)
# Convert to local time
69
Assessing the industry’s role in greenhouse gas emissions using eddy covariance measurements
48
==PAGE:55==
70
month = t_local.month
71
hour = t_local.hour
# To match the factor table
72
is_workday = df.iloc[i]["is_workday"]
73
74
#Choose correct time-dependent scaling factors
75
factors = workday_factors if is_workday else nonworkday_factors
76
a_d = a_d_workday if is_workday else a_d_nonworkday
77
78
# Get heating intensity multiplier
79
diurnal = float(factors.at[month, str(hour)])
80
seasonal = float(factors.at[month, "Month"])
81
factor = (diurnal * seasonal * a_d)/SECONDS_PER_HOUR
82
83
if energy_type == list(emission_factors.keys())[0]:
84
# Store the factor only once (they're the same for all
energy types)
85
factor_list.append(diurnal * seasonal * a_d)
86
87
#Apply heating emissions formula
88
model_value = df.iloc[i][energy_type]
# persons/m2
89
CO2_kg_per_m2_s = model_value/100 * energy_consumption *
emission_factor * factor
90
CO2_umol_per_m2_s = CO2_kg_per_m2_s * KG_TO_UMOL
91
92
flux_list.append(CO2_umol_per_m2_s)
93
94
#Save results
95
flux_col = f"{energy_type}_CO2_flux_umol"
96
df[flux_col] = flux_list
97
flux_cols.append(flux_col)
98
99
#Total residential heating CO2 flux
100
df[total_col] = df[flux_cols].sum(axis=1)
101
102
# Add the applied scaling factor
103
df["heating_scaling_factor"] = factor_list
104
Assessing the industry’s role in greenhouse gas emissions using eddy covariance measurements
49
==PAGE:56==
105
return df
106
107
#%% Look up tables
108
workday_factors = pd.DataFrame({
109
'0': [0.869, 0.870, 0.878, 0.970, 1.150, 1.213, 1.378, 1.282, 1.076,
0.876, 0.854, 0.834],
110
'1':
[0.814, 0.862, 0.848, 0.949, 1.017, 1.124, 1.219, 1.112, 0.899,
0.855, 0.783, 0.796],
111
'2':
[0.800, 0.861, 0.851, 0.898, 0.894, 0.955, 1.097, 1.063, 0.842,
0.808, 0.769, 0.774],
112
'3':
[0.808, 0.866, 0.866, 0.889, 0.875, 0.912, 0.991, 0.958, 0.831,
0.787, 0.779, 0.776],
113
'4':
[0.818, 0.884, 0.889, 0.904, 0.862, 0.851, 0.907, 0.931, 0.823,
0.804, 0.800, 0.795],
114
'5':
[0.841, 0.911, 0.914, 0.925, 0.887, 0.894, 0.916, 0.991, 0.849,
0.823, 0.814, 0.827],
115
'6':
[0.942, 1.020, 1.043, 0.943, 0.858, 0.760, 0.822, 0.917, 0.839,
0.857, 0.951, 0.937],
116
'7':
[1.247, 1.260, 1.353, 1.070, 0.965, 0.993, 0.938, 1.006, 1.089,
1.046, 1.254, 1.164],
117
'8':
[1.229, 1.278, 1.452, 1.447, 1.840, 1.739, 1.264, 2.134, 1.775,
1.334, 1.293, 1.190],
118
'9':
[1.121, 1.183, 1.315, 1.437, 1.802, 1.778, 1.390, 2.392, 1.637,
1.363, 1.149, 1.122],
119
'10': [1.065, 1.112, 1.195, 1.258, 1.319, 1.277, 1.382, 1.477, 1.273,
1.216, 1.075, 1.072],
120
'11': [1.019, 1.034, 1.082, 1.145, 1.091, 1.093, 1.110, 1.081, 1.095,
1.115, 0.982, 1.040],
121
'12': [0.995, 1.001, 0.990, 1.055, 0.871, 0.831, 0.949, 0.658, 0.804,
1.009, 0.956, 1.048],
122
'13': [0.952, 0.942, 0.901, 0.991, 0.770, 0.776, 0.822, 0.414, 0.725,
0.919, 0.967, 1.026],
123
'14': [0.943, 0.925, 0.877, 0.916, 0.662, 0.735, 0.772, 0.289, 0.689,
0.883, 0.975, 1.032],
124
'15': [0.937, 0.902, 0.814, 0.858, 0.659, 0.683, 0.599, 0.306, 0.636,
0.866, 1.010, 1.043],
Assessing the industry’s role in greenhouse gas emissions using eddy covariance measurements
50
==PAGE:57==
125
'16': [0.971, 0.913, 0.803, 0.849, 0.594, 0.575, 0.459, 0.203, 0.644,
0.836, 1.039, 1.059],
126
'17': [1.043, 0.941, 0.790, 0.778, 0.582, 0.529, 0.354, 0.113, 0.637,
0.866, 1.046, 1.098],
127
'18': [1.077, 1.001, 0.869, 0.728, 0.641, 0.465, 0.344, 0.102, 0.651,
0.899, 1.072, 1.070],
128
'19': [1.179, 1.092, 1.051, 0.786, 0.714, 0.522, 0.487, 0.185, 0.818,
1.043, 1.190, 1.138],
129
'20': [1.190, 1.112, 1.147, 1.022, 1.204, 1.153, 1.226, 1.315, 1.330,
1.270, 1.189, 1.155],
130
'21': [1.118, 1.066, 1.081, 1.104, 1.427, 1.483, 1.854, 1.855, 1.570,
1.282, 1.085, 1.071],
131
'22': [1.056, 1.010, 1.029, 1.049, 1.215, 1.466, 1.432, 1.746, 1.305,
1.111, 1.023, 1.012],
132
'23': [0.966, 0.955, 0.962, 1.028, 1.102, 1.194, 1.289, 1.471, 1.164,
1.026, 0.942, 0.921],
133
'Month': [1.840, 2.135, 1.248, 1.035, 0.405, 0.323, 0.188, 0.163,
0.377, 0.876, 1.278, 2.133]
134
}, index=[1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12])
135
136
# NON-WORKDAYS
137
nonworkday_factors = pd.DataFrame({
138
'0': [0.844, 0.838, 0.841, 0.899, 1.001, 1.018, 1.163, 1.005, 0.903,
0.937, 0.829, 0.848],
139
'1':
[0.810, 0.826, 0.792, 0.836, 0.899, 0.911, 1.122, 1.042, 0.808,
0.827, 0.775, 0.812],
140
'2':
[0.774, 0.836, 0.785, 0.797, 0.919, 0.869, 1.020, 0.891, 0.768,
0.800, 0.751, 0.793],
141
'3':
[0.776, 0.847, 0.804, 0.799, 0.885, 0.828, 0.871, 0.811, 0.779,
0.759, 0.749, 0.786],
142
'4':
[0.781, 0.849, 0.809, 0.804, 0.832, 0.795, 0.824, 0.826, 0.752,
0.751, 0.764, 0.795],
143
'5':
[0.800, 0.865, 0.831, 0.815, 0.820, 0.757, 0.861, 0.821, 0.754,
0.796, 0.776, 0.809],
144
'6':
[0.832, 0.912, 0.907, 0.851, 0.809, 0.680, 0.677, 0.806, 0.796,
0.811, 0.822, 0.849],
Assessing the industry’s role in greenhouse gas emissions using eddy covariance measurements
51
==PAGE:58==
145
'7':
[0.924, 0.986, 0.969, 0.911, 0.844, 0.634, 0.596, 0.681, 0.822,
0.866, 0.916, 0.933],
146
'8':
[0.992, 1.065, 1.058, 0.978, 0.977, 0.733, 0.649, 0.607, 0.877,
0.957, 1.038, 1.011],
147
'9':
[1.064, 1.146, 1.176, 1.051, 1.018, 0.773, 0.682, 0.721, 0.847,
1.082, 1.094, 1.070],
148
'10': [1.176, 1.258, 1.294, 1.210, 1.199, 1.037, 1.046, 1.212, 1.228,
1.155, 1.252, 1.176],
149
'11': [1.224, 1.223, 1.311, 1.350, 1.390, 1.423, 1.393, 1.446, 1.538,
1.261, 1.266, 1.229],
150
'12': [1.275, 1.181, 1.219, 1.305, 1.340, 1.489, 1.336, 1.559, 1.446,
1.213, 1.237, 1.227],
151
'13': [1.210, 1.121, 1.142, 1.288, 1.303, 1.495, 1.370, 1.443, 1.245,
1.170, 1.192, 1.214],
152
'14': [1.126, 1.062, 1.087, 1.192, 1.146, 1.299, 1.114, 1.260, 1.259,
1.108, 1.142, 1.172],
153
'15': [1.084, 1.008, 1.022, 1.083, 1.105, 1.088, 1.077, 0.933, 1.159,
0.999, 1.053, 1.103],
154
'16': [1.056, 0.974, 0.894, 1.035, 0.889, 0.916, 0.800, 0.611, 0.963,
0.981, 1.049, 1.048],
155
'17': [1.053, 0.992, 0.932, 0.932, 0.801, 0.823, 0.659, 0.648, 0.788,
0.937, 1.115, 1.069],
156
'18': [1.025, 1.007, 0.970, 0.917, 0.720, 0.832, 0.549, 0.577, 0.703,
1.001, 1.051, 1.017],
157
'19': [1.143, 1.083, 1.100, 0.892, 0.732, 0.759, 0.753, 0.702, 0.704,
1.028, 1.142, 1.094],
158
'20': [1.116, 1.084, 1.116, 0.996, 1.014, 1.231, 1.122, 1.139, 1.199,
1.277, 1.156, 1.078],
159
'21': [1.036, 0.987, 1.031, 1.064, 1.259, 1.456, 1.596, 1.442, 1.471,
1.268, 1.013, 1.024],
160
'22': [0.978, 0.951, 0.991, 1.033, 1.100, 1.138, 1.589, 1.406, 1.186,
1.038, 0.941, 0.952],
161
'23': [0.902, 0.902, 0.918, 0.964, 1.000, 1.015, 1.131, 1.409, 1.003,
0.979, 0.875, 0.892],
162
'Month': [1.856, 2.178, 1.301, 1.113, 0.482, 0.357, 0.191, 0.175,
0.382, 0.921, 1.209, 1.835]
163
}, index=[1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12])
Assessing the industry’s role in greenhouse gas emissions using eddy covariance measurements
52
==PAGE:59==
164
165
# Emission factors from NID 2023
166
emission_factors= ({"warmWaterOrStream": 0,
167
"electricity": 0,
168
"naturalGas": 57.14 ,
169
"liquidFuels":74.1 ,
170
"solidFuels":97.5})
171
172
#%% Importing the FFP values as one data frame
173
174
# Path to folder where PeopleHeating csv files are stored
175
csv_files = glob.glob(" "path"/*.csv")
176
177
# Read and concatenate all CSV files from the FFP model
178
FFP = pd.concat([pd.read_csv(file) for file in csv_files], ignore_index=
True)
179
180
# Convert "DT" to datetime
181
FFP["DT"] = pd.to_datetime(FFP["DT"])
182
183
# Sort by "DT"
184
FFP = FFP.sort_values(by="DT")
185
FFP = FFP.set_index("DT")
186
187
#%% Calling function
188
result = flux_calc_heating(
189
df=FFP,
190
energy_consumption= 24.123761,
191
emission_factors=emission_factors ,
192
workday_factors=workday_factors ,
193
nonworkday_factors=nonworkday_factors ,
194
a_d_workday=0.000113,
195
a_d_nonworkday=0.000121
196
)
Assessing the industry’s role in greenhouse gas emissions using eddy covariance measurements
53
==PAGE:60==
A.3
Company Questionnaire
The MSc project is part of a large Danish national research project that aims at measuring greenhousgas 
exchange in Gladsaxe in the area around the CIBICOM radiomast . The MSc project will help us understanding 
the contributions from the industries in the investigated area.
Candidate: Marie Therese Hallkvist Guidje
Main supervisor: Andreas Ibrom. DTU-Sustain (anib@dtu.dk, 21325201)
Please remember due to the time limits of an MSc project we aske for quick responses (approximately 1 week) - 
We therefore appreciate you to send us a preliminary answer with those answers that you can easily provide. 
Among those please always include answers to question 1. 
The sheet Information request contains 8 questions some of which are prefilled as examples. Please delete or 
adapt these examples where relevant
In order to reduce your  efforts, we are happy to assist you when filling the template.
If you characterise information that you share confidential, please tell us, whether we can use it in summary 
tables, i.e. in anonymised form.
If you have any question, please do not hesitate to contact us.
(Try to list at least 90 % of the total)
Assessing the industry’s role in greenhouse gas emissions using eddy covariance measurements
54
==PAGE:61==
1 Which products and services do 
you create in Gladsaxe in which 
amounts per year? (try to list at 
least 90 % of the total)
Industrial process name
Product name
Amount per year
Unit
Linkages
Anaerobic digestion  
Biogas
10000 m^3
market
Polymerization
Plastics
market
Fermentation
Lactic acid 
market
Freeze Drying
Enzymes and proteins
market
Industrial process5
P5
market
Industrial process6
S6
other company
….
2 Which resources do you use for 
production on company level in 
Gladsaxe?
Resource name
Amount per year
Unit
input from
free text comment
electricity
grid
electricity
colocated company
electricity
on site renewable
electricity
on site fossil
heat
district heating
heat
on site renewable
heat
on site fossil
substance 1 
market
substance 2
colocated company
substance 3
…
….
Info: the industrial process and product name are prefilled as an example. 
Delete and enter those industrial processes and product names that suit 
Info: "Resource names" and "Input from"  are prefilled as examples. Delete and 
please enter resource names and inputs that suits your company .
Assessing the industry’s role in greenhouse gas emissions using eddy covariance measurements
55
==PAGE:62==
3 Which by-products and 
wastes/emissions result from the 
production on company level in 
Gladsaxe?
Waste/by-product name
Amount per year
Unit
Output to
free text comment
CO2
15 t CO2
atmosphere
N2O
0,2 t CO2_eq
atmosphere
CH4
atmosphere
other air pollutants
atmosphere
wastewater1
treatmentPlant1 
wastewater2
treatmentPlant2
wastewater3
treatmentPlant3
electricity
grid
electricity
colocated company
heat
market
substance 1
substance 2
substance 3
….
4 How many employes work in your 
facilty in Gladsaxe kommune?
Workforce
Amount
Unit
free text comment
Confidentiality
staff
persons
staff
person months
5 What are the most critical 
logistics flows?
Resource name
Amount
Unit
input from
free text comment
transport goods
t yr^-1
transport persons by private car
person yr^-1
transport persons by public transport
transport persons walking or biking 
Assessing the industry’s role in greenhouse gas emissions using eddy covariance measurements
56
==PAGE:63==
6 How do you greenhousgas 
emission vary in time?
0 to 6h 
6 to 12h
12 to 18h
18 to 24h
diurnally (day, night)
fraction in % of average day
work day
weekend/ holiday
weekly
fraction in % of week
seasonally
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
fraction in % of the year
company holidays
Date start
Date end
Easter
Summer
Fall
Winter
7 What are the current trends 
(recent achievements) and plans 
to contribute / respond to the 
Danish Green Transition ?
Text entry including links/ references to documents shared
8 Information source 
About this information
Name of contact person
Role of contact person
Date
Assessing the industry’s role in greenhouse gas emissions using eddy covariance measurements
57
==PAGE:64==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Bygningstorvet, Building 115
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.sustain.dtu.dk
