==PAGE:1==
Pareto Optimal Trace Generation for Agent-
Based Business Process Simulation
An Extension of AgentSimulator
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Department of Applied Math-
ematics and Computer Science, at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU) in
partial fulfillment for the Master of Science in Engineering for Human-Centered
Artificial Technology.
Artemis Doumeni - s234061
Signature
Date
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include
the customary bibliographic citation, including author attribution,
report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Dall-E
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Sci-
ence, Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyn-
gby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
ii
Pareto Optimal Trace Generation for Agent-Based Business Process Simulation
20-08-2025
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Agent-Based Simulation (ABS) offers a powerful paradigm for modeling the com-
plex, resource-driven dynamics of modern business processes. However, the
application of ABS in Business Process Management is scattered and has largely
focused on descriptive simulation, replicating “as-is” behavior, rather than pre-
scriptive optimization.
This thesis explores this gap and proposes a practical
framework that extends an existing, architecturally-constrained ABS system to
support prescriptive optimization.
Using the AgentSimulator framework as a case study, we implement and evaluate
a multi-objective Genetic Algorithm (NSGA-II). To determine an effective search
strategy, four distinct mutation variants are designed and compared, balancing
exploration, exploitation, and refinement.
Evaluation across multiple datasets
demonstrates that while this approach successfully discovers Pareto fronts of non-
dominated policies, providing a spectrum of optimized trade-offs, no single muta-
tion strategy is universally superior, highlighting the context-dependent nature of
the problem.
It concludes that while such extensions are viable, the ultimate effectiveness of
prescriptive ABS is contingent not only on the optimization algorithm but also on
the fidelity of the underlying simulation model and the autonomy of its agents.
Pareto Optimal Trace Generation for Agent-Based Business Process Simulation
iii
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgments
I would like to express my gratitude to the people who have helped make this
thesis a reality.
First and foremost, my sincere thanks go to my supervisor, Hugo-Andrés López-
Acosta, Associate Professor at DTU Compute, for his invaluable insight, support,
and time he dedicated to my supervision.
I would also like to extend my gratitude to the authors of the AgentSimulator frame-
work. Their decision to make their work open-access provided the essential foun-
dation upon which this entire thesis is built and is a testament to their contribution
to the research community.
Finally, on a more personal note, I would like to thank my family, friends, and part-
ner for their support, patience, and belief in me throughout this academic journey.
iv
Pareto Optimal Trace Generation for Agent-Based Business Process Simulation
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
2
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Problem Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Research Question . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.5
Thesis Outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Background
5
2.1
Business Process Management & Simulation . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Agent-Based Simulation in Business Process Management . . . .
7
2.3
A Survey of Multi-Agent Optimization Techniques . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.4
Multi-Objective Optimization and the Pareto Front
. . . . . . . . .
20
3
Methodology
21
3.1
Problem Formulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2
Research Setting: The AgentSimulator Architecture
. . . . . . . .
23
3.3
Optimization Engine Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4
Evaluation
43
4.1
Rationale for the Evaluation Framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.2
Experimental Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5
Results
49
5.1
General Performance Improvement Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5.2
Pareto Front Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
6
Discussion
53
6.1
Evaluation Against Simulated Baseline and Ground Truth . . . . .
53
6.2
Evaluation of the Pareto Front Quality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
7
Conclusion
59
Bibliography
61
Pareto Optimal Trace Generation for Agent-Based Business Process Simulation
1
==PAGE:6==
1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation
Within the field of Business Process Management (BPM) Business Process Sim-
ulation (BPS) is a widely employed technique for analyzing process performance
and evaluating the impact of potential changes [1]. The traditional paradigm for
BPS is rooted in a “control-flow-first” perspective [2], often utilizing methods like
Discrete-Event Simulation (DES) [3], that model a system as a network of queues
and activities [4]. While this approach excels at modeling centrally orchestrated,
predictable workflows, it faces limitations when applied to some modern business
processes, namely the ones that are more dynamic and heavily influenced by the
heterogeneous behaviors of their (human) participants [5]. Attempts to capture
this real-world variability within DES models may lead to overly complex “spaghetti
models” or unrealistic simplifications, such as modeling diverse individuals as a
single, homogeneous resource pool [2].
Agent-Based Simulation (ABS), a Multi-Agent System (MAS) enabled simulation
paradigm, has emerged as an alternative that directly addresses these limita-
tions [6]. By modeling individual resources, like employees or systems, as au-
tonomous agents with unique capabilities, schedules, and decision-making logic,
ABS can capture the system-level behavior that arises from their individual (micro-
)interactions [7]. The ability of ABS to model the impact of these small behavioral
features on macro-level business process outcomes has been empirically demon-
strated [3, 8], but despite this potential, the application of ABS within BPM remains
a still evolving but scattered sub-field, with the current body of research largely fo-
cused on descriptive simulation, replicating “as-is” behavior for handcrafted mod-
els of new processes [5, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14].
This focus on descriptive use cases highlights a critical gap in the literature. While
a minority of literature has successfully applied prescriptive optimization tech-
niques, identifying the “best” scenario by changing variables like the resource
mix [15], to agent-based models, these approaches are typically standalone case
studies that rely on non-data-driven, handcrafted simulators [16, 17, 18, 19].
Combining descriptive “as-is” simulation with prescriptive “what’s best” optimiza-
tion can unlock the full potential of Agent-Based Modeling and Simulation (ABMS)
as a decision-support tool for BPM. A complete example of such a framework
would be able to: (1) model existing processes with high fidelity, (2) generate re-
alistic outputs, and (3) recommend how a process should operate to achieve spe-
cific KPIs. Realizing this potential requires either creating a new custom frame-
work, or extending modern, data-driven agent-based simulators with the ability
to autonomously search for optimal operational policies that balance competing
objectives like cost and time. Such an integration would transform a powerful de-
scriptive tool into a prescriptive engine that could then generate Pareto-optimal
process traces, offering decision-makers a portfolio of optimized trade-off solu-
tions [20]. This thesis is motivated by the need to bridge this specific gap and
2
Pareto Optimal Trace Generation for Agent-Based Business Process Simulation
==PAGE:7==
investigates how a state-of-the-art, data-driven agent-based simulator (namely
the AgentSimulator proposed by [5]) can be extended to serve as a prescriptive,
multi-objective optimization tool for business process improvement.
1.2
Problem Statement
The current state-of-the-art in data-driven Business Process Simulation includes
advanced agent-based frameworks that can automatically discover and simulate
“as-is” process behavior from event logs [5, 21]. However, these frameworks
are fundamentally descriptive and lack an integrated mechanism for prescriptive
optimization.
Thus, the core problem addressed by this thesis is to design, implement, and eval-
uate a methodology for extending one of the existing, and therefore, architecturally-
constrained, data-driven agent-based simulators to support prescriptive, multi-
objective optimization, generating optimal traces based on a predefined multi-cost
function, such as minimizing for both process cost and wait time.
1.3
Research Question
The main research question this thesis aims to answer is:
Main RQ:
Given an existing agent-based business process simulator, how
can a meta-heuristic method be employed for the generation of
Pareto-optimal process traces based on a pre-defined multi-cost
function?
Based on the identified prior research (described in Chapter 2), we selected the
AgentSimulator [5] as our baseline simulator and the tailored, multi-objective Ge-
netic Algorithm (NSGA-II) [22] as the meta-heuristic method for our case study.
Thus, we can break the problem into the following sub-questions:
SQ1:
What are the existing Multi-Agent System (MAS) paradigms within
Business Process Management (BPM), and how do they currently
address the challenge of process optimality?
SQ2:
How can a multi-objective Genetic Algorithm (NSGA-II) be de-
signed, implemented and integrated within the existing agent-
based business process simulator (the AgentSimulator) and op-
erate within its identified architectural constraints?
SQ3:
To what extent does this Genetic Algorithm-based framework im-
prove process performance across competing objectives (i.e., cost,
wait time) when compared to the simulator’s baseline “as-is” pol-
icy?
1.4
Contributions
The main contributions of this thesis are:
• An overview of the current State of the Art of ABMS within BPM, or in other
words, the intersection of MAS and BPM domains.
Pareto Optimal Trace Generation for Agent-Based Business Process Simulation
3
==PAGE:8==
• The design and implementation of a custom, multi-objective Genetic Algo-
rithm (NSGA-II), featuring four distinct mutation strategies and tailored to the
architectural constraints of the AgentSimulator framework [5].
• A comprehensive experimental evaluation of the proposed optimization frame-
work against the baseline “as-is” simulation across a diverse set of real-world
and synthetic datasets.
1.5
Thesis Outline
The thesis is organized as follows:
• Chapter 2 reviews the relevant literature on Business Process Simulation,
Agent-Based Mining and Simulation within Business Process Management,
and provides an overview of Multi-Agent Systems and related optimization
techniques.
• Chapter 3 defines the optimization problem and outlines the proposed opti-
mization strategy, including the baseline simulation framework that is being
extended, its key architectural components, rationale for framework selec-
tion, and its limitations.
• Chapter 4 details the experimental framework, defining the datasets, the
GA variants under test, the benchmarks for comparison, and the specific
metrics used to assess performance and Pareto front quality.
• Chapter 5 presents the quantitative outcomes of the experiments, focusing
on the numerical performance of the GA variants against the established
benchmarks for both performance improvement and Pareto front quality.
• Chapter 6 provides an in-depth analysis and interpretation of the exper-
imental results, synthesizes the findings to discuss their implications and
limitations, and outlines promising directions for future research.
• Chapter 7 concludes the thesis by summarizing the entire work, from the
initial problem statement to the key findings and situating the it within the
broader academic context.
4
Pareto Optimal Trace Generation for Agent-Based Business Process Simulation
==PAGE:9==
2
Background
2.1
Business Process Management & Simulation
According to Dumas et al. [1, pp. 1–6], “a Business Process is a collection of
events, activities, and decision points that involve a number of actors (internal
and external) and objects, which collectively lead to an outcome that has value to
at least one customer”. The customer is defined as the actor who directly benefits
from the outcome of the process. Business Process Management (BPM) is the
discipline of discovering, analyzing, redesigning, and monitoring these processes
to achieve organizational goals [1, pp. 1–6]. Rather than focusing on optimizing
the inner workings of a single task or action, BPM is concerned with the man-
agement, oversight, and performance of the entire end-to-end “chain of events”.
This optimization is centered around specific performance improvement objec-
tives, which vary from organization to organization. Common ones include the
reduction of costs, error rates, and overall cycle times.
The management of business processes is a continuous flow, modeled as the
BPM Lifecycle (Figure 2.1) [1, pp. 16–24].
Figure 2.1: BPM Lifecycle as described by Dumas et al. [1]
According to Dumas et al. [1], the phases of the Lifecycle are described as:
• Process Identification: A business problem is identified, and the boundaries
of the processes relevant to that problem are defined. This phase results in
a process architecture that provides an overall view of the processes in an
organization.
Pareto Optimal Trace Generation for Agent-Based Business Process Simulation
5
==PAGE:10==
• Process Discovery: The process is documented in detail, typically resulting
in one or more process models, independent of model format. This is where
process mining techniques are applied.
• Process Analysis: The “as-is” process is analyzed to identify and quantify
issues, such as bottlenecks or high costs. This phase produces a structured
collection of identified weaknesses.
• Process Redesign: Improvement opportunities are explored, and a “to-be”
process model is designed to address the issues identified in the analysis
phase.
• Process Implementation: The changes required to transition from the “as-is”
to the “to-be” process are prepared and executed.
• Process Monitoring: Data is collected and analyzed to determine how the
redesigned process is performing against its objectives, which can lead back
to the identification of new issues, restarting the cycle.
This thesis is primarily concerned with the Process Analysis phase, as that’s
where Process Simulation (descriptive and perscriptive) reside.
Business Process Simulation (BPS) is potentially the most common technique
used to support the quantitative analysis phase of the BPM lifecycle. As described
by Dumas et al. [1, p. 279], a simulator does not execute the “real” version of the
process, but rather creates a “work item” for each (hypothetical) case and tracks
its journey task-per-task, through a process model. To do this, the simulation re-
quires a model featuring key parameters, including the case inter-arrival times, the
probability distribution for the processing time of each activity, and the definition
of the resource pools (systems and people) responsible for performing the work.
Generally, when a work item for a specific activity is created, the simulator at-
tempts to assign it to an available resource from the designated pool [1, p 280]. If
all resources in the pool are busy, the work item (activity) is placed in a queue, ac-
cumulating waiting time. Once a resource is assigned, the engine determines the
activity’s duration by drawing a random value from the specified probability distri-
bution. Upon completion, the simulator records key timestamps and the identifier
of the resource used. Of course, there are differences across the many process
simulation tools which mostly regard nuanced parameters and inner mechanisms
like the ability to represent breaks in calendars, XOR conditions [1], or, more com-
monly, different simulators may require a different input model format.
The final output of a simulator is a synthetic event log, from which performance
metrics like average waiting time, cycle time, and resource cost can be computed
[1, 5, 15]. This data allows analysts to understand the performance of the “as-is”
process and to use this baseline model to answer “what-if” questions that inform
the process redesign phase [1, 23]. This redesign effort can range from incremen-
tal improvements to transformational changes [1]. The work in this thesis exists
at the intersection of the Analysis and Redesign phases, proposing a highly auto-
mated, data-driven method for discovering optimal process variants.
While powerful for quantitative analysis, the traditional BPS approach is believed
6
Pareto Optimal Trace Generation for Agent-Based Business Process Simulation
==PAGE:11==
to have some limitations stemming from its “control-flow-first” nature. As argued
by Tour et al. [2], it is often focused on discovering and leveraging single, mono-
lithic process models, resulting in models that are not optimal for analyzing the
behavior of individual resources, as the work of a single actor is often scattered
across the control-flow diagram. This directly contributes to potential simulation in-
accuracies, as by individual behavior potentially being obscured, simulation mod-
els may resort to simplifying assumptions, such as grouping heterogeneous actors
into homogeneous “pools” with undifferentiated performance and availability [24].
These challenges motivate a paradigm shift towards a more resource-centric, and
potentially agent-based, simulation approach, as will be described in the next sec-
tion.
2.2
Agent-Based Simulation in Business Process
Management
2.2.1
Core Principles and Advantages
As mentioned above, Process Simulation is a well-established practice for Pro-
cess Analysis within BPM [1]. There are multiple methods and paradigms of Pro-
cess Simulation, with one of the most well explored being Discrete-Event Simu-
lation (DES) [3]. DES is a computer-based operations research technique that
models a system as a network of queues and activities [4], where changes occur
at discrete moments in time [25]. This approach is fundamentally control-flow-
centric, focusing on the prescribed sequence of activities and related events that
constitute a process [6].
In contrast, Agent-Based Modeling and Simulation (ABMS), coming from the in-
tersection of Modeling and Simulation [6] and Multi-Agent Systems (MAS) fields,
offers a bottom-up perspective. In the ABMS paradigm the overall process is
centered around the individual agent, its behaviors, and how they affect and are
affected by the environment and other agents’ actions [6]
To get a better understanding, let us consider the example of modeling and sim-
ulating a hospital’s emergency room. In a DES, patients would be designed to
follow a fixed control-flow pathway (e.g., Triage →Wait in Queue →See Doctor
→Discharge), and doctors would be modeled as a homogeneous resource pool
with a set capacity. In contrast, an ABMS would model doctors, nurses, and even
patients as autonomous agents. A doctor agent might have dynamic attributes
like a fatigue level that decreases their efficiency, a specific skill set, and complex
decision rules, along with individual attributes like a schedule that is different to all
other staff members. The overall patient throughput and quality of care emerge
from the independent decisions and interactions of these heterogeneous agents,
rather than being dictated by a single, overarching process map.
The primary advantage of ABMS for Business Process Simulation is its ability to
model and simulate the complex, heterogeneous, and human-centric behaviors
that control-flow methods struggle to represent [3], as when they attempt to cap-
ture all real-world process variations, the resulting models can become visually
convoluted “spaghetti models”, which are difficult to simulate and understand [26,
Pareto Optimal Trace Generation for Agent-Based Business Process Simulation
7
==PAGE:12==
2]. ABMS manages this complexity by encapsulating it within the agents them-
selves, allowing for their modeling as heterogeneous and autonomous resources.
The significance of this capability was empirically demonstrated by Halaška and
Šperka [3], who showed that introducing small, negative behavioral variations at
the agent level resulted in statistically significant impacts on macro-level process
outcomes.
However, this power comes with significant challenges. Building agent-based
models often requires expertise in object-oriented programming, and specialized
frameworks [3, 26], which, along with a lack of industry standard framework for
both ABM and ABS make widespread adoption within the BPM field difficult [3].
However, the most commonly agreed upon concern, within the BPM community,
seems to be that of model validation and verification [26, 7]. Validating an agent-
based model is especially complex as it requires validation at both the individual
agent level and the system level [7]. This difficulty in establishing the credibility of
a model, particularly in modeling real human behavior, has been a persistent chal-
lenge for the simulation community and a significant obstacle to wider adoption
[27, 6].
2.2.2
State of the Art
ABSM Maturity within BPM
While ABMS is a well-established and mature field in the broader scientific com-
munity [6], its application within BBPM has been comparatively limited [3]. To
validate this observation for more recent times, a search on Scopus1, the largest
abstract and citation database of peer-reviewed literature, was conducted for the
period 2020-2025. The search terms “Agent-Based Simulation” or “ABSN” yielded
over 48,589 publications when combined with a search for general “simulation” or
“modeling”, confirming the field’s general activity. However, narrowing this search
to include the terms “Business Process Modeling” or “Business Process Simula-
tion” instead of their generic counterparts, reduced the result set to just 214 papers
over the same time-span.
Figure 2.2: Number of Publications Over the last 25 years of ABSM (left) and
ABSM within BPM (right)
This disparity indicates that while the potential of ABMS for BPM is recognized,
research is relativelly scattered and it remains a specialized and evolving sub-
1http://www.scopus.com
8
Pareto Optimal Trace Generation for Agent-Based Business Process Simulation
==PAGE:13==
field. As argued by Halaška and Šperka [3], this might be related to the fact that
even after 7 years there is no field standard framework for neither agent-based
modeling and simulation, nor solely simulation, while Macal [6] mentions that de-
spite interest in agent-based systems, researchers often encounter difficulty when
moving from DES to ABMS approaches.
The following section will therefore provide a review of the most relevant modern
works from this smaller body of literature, selected to provide a representative
overview of the current state of the art in agent-based business process simula-
tion.
Research landscape overview
As described above, ABMS is a modeling simulation approach that builds and ex-
ecutes a process model around the individual agents, leveraging Multi-Agent Sys-
tems (MAS). This implies that information about the agent’s behavior and capa-
bilities is included in the model. Building on this, we have identified three different
categories of research within BPM that build on and around the ABMS paradigm.
• Pure Process Miners (ABM) [5, 28]: Corresponds to the Modeling compo-
nent of ABMS. Not a primary focus of this work, as process discovery lies
outside the thesis scope.
• Pure Simulators (ABS): Either assumes a predefined model not created
through a data-driven approach or derives the environment and agent pa-
rameters from an existing model format (e.g., BPMN) to build a MAS-based
simulation engine [8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 16, 17, 18, 19].
• Integrated Discovery and Simulation Frameworks [5, 21]: Combines
agent-specific model discovery along with the development of a custom,
MAS-based simulation engine.
Pure Process Miners (ABM)
As mentioned above, Agent Based Modeling (ABM)
is the synthesis of a simulation model that represents a process as a set of agents
interacting with each other and their environment [7]. Process mining, conversely,
is the discipline focused on extracting process-related knowledge from event data
recorded by information systems (logs) to discover, monitor and improve real-life
processes [29]. Most such process mining methods aim to produce models fit for
control-flow-first simulations [2]. The following paragraphs review two indicative
studies exploring the intersection of these domains, which aim to derive agent-
based business process models from raw logs.
For instance, Bemthuis and Lazarova-Molnar [28] provide an important initial proof-
of-concept, aiming to prove that agent models can be discovered from behavioral
data. They aim to generate an event log from a classic agent-based simulation
model(the Schelling’s Segregation Model [30]) and then leverage it to reverse en-
gineer the process model and agent information via traditional Process Mining.
Specifically, they use the Disco tool and its fuzzy miner algorithm [31] to ana-
lyze the synthetic log, demonstrating the feasibility of discovering and extracting
the agents’ underlying behavioral rules directly from their execution data. While
their work focuses on a theoretical model it establishes the methodological link
Pareto Optimal Trace Generation for Agent-Based Business Process Simulation
9
==PAGE:14==
between the fields of Process Mining, ABM, MAS, and BPM.
Building on this, the AgentMiner by Tour et al. [2] presents a formal divide-and-
conquer algorithm that first decomposes an event log into (1) individual agent logs
and (2) a single interaction log which captures activity handovers. From these sets
of logs, two separate behavioral models are discovered, one for each agent type
(agent nets) and one for their coordination (an interaction net). These two models
are then composed into a final Multi-Agent System (MAS) net. The results demon-
strate that the modular MAS-nets are often less complex and describe the original
process more faithfully compared to monolithic process models discovered using
state of the art control-flow algorithms.
While these “Pure Miners” establish the first step of automating discovery of an
agent-centric process representation from raw data, their primary contribution
ends with the delivery of the model itself; they do not provide a simulation en-
gine to execute these models for performance analysis.
Pure Simulators
In contrast to the mining paradigm, a significant body of re-
search approaches ABS from a “model-first” perspective, where the simulation
model is either handcrafted from domain knowledge to simulate new or concep-
tual processes [10, 9, 11], or is derived from existing, standard process notations
to simulate established processes [12, 13, 14, 8].
Foundational work in this area began with the ADEPT (Advanced Decision Envi-
ronment for Process Tasks) framework by Jennings et al. [10]. As one of the ear-
liest agent-based business process management systems, it modeled a British
Telecom process by representing business units as autonomous software agents
that coordinated their work through negotiation, governed by a proprietary Service
Description Language (SDL).
Building on that approach, more recent frameworks attempt to use ABS in green-
field modeling for log generation and “what-if” analysis where historical data is
unavailable. For instance, Sulis and Di Leva [9] developed a handcrafted model
of a new hospital Emergency Department using NetLogo [32], a low-code, 3D-
based agent simulation framework. Agents are representing patients and staff
and follow simple behavioral rules. The framework aims to enable the analysis
of specific KPIs to determine and validate the new hospital department’s layout
before its construction. Similarly, the conceptual framework by Kashefi and Al-
wzinani [11] proposes a multiscale model for analyzing organizational resilience
by integrating three distinct simulation paradigms at different organizational lev-
els. Their framework uses ABS at the micro-level to capture individual behaviors,
DES at the meso-level for operational processes, and System Dynamics at the
macro-level to explore long-term strategic trends, thereby creating a holistic view
of the organization.
A second major stream of research focuses on bridging the agent paradigm with
existing, standard business process modeling notations to simulate established
processes. The framework by Duduka and Guerreiro [12] does this by having
agents modeled in NetLogo interact with a standard business process model de-
10
Pareto Optimal Trace Generation for Agent-Based Business Process Simulation
==PAGE:15==
ployed on a BPMN engine via a REST API. For example, in their hospital reg-
istration case study, a Patient Agent and Receptionist Agent first resolve their
interaction within the NetLogo simulation, where the time taken is influenced by a
behavioral factor like language proficiency, before the agent sends a message to
the BPMN engine to complete the corresponding formal task. A more conceptually
advanced approach is the agileBPM framework by Kir and Erdogan [13], which
employees Belief-Desire-Intention (BDI) agents [33], a well established architec-
ture for rational decision-making. The business environment is formally captured
in ontologies and enriched with Semantic Web Rule Language (SWRL), a lan-
guage for writing declarative IF-THEN rules over ontological data, allowing BDI
agents to reason about business policies (e.g., “any order over €10,000 requires
manager approval”) during execution.
Finally, Sielskaitė and Kalibatienė [14]
propose a framework for simulating dynamic Software Development Processes
(SDP) built on the case handling paradigm. To formalize this, they use CMMN
(Case Management Model and Notation) [34], a standard method for modeling
flexible, knowledge-driven work. Human actors are modeled as agents using the
Mesa simulation framework [35], and agent behavior factors, like motivation, are
captured via a fuzzy logic.
The unique value of ABS for simulating existing processes has also been high-
lighted through direct comparison with other, well established methods. The work
of Fauzan, Sarno, and Machfud [8] provides an example, using the AnyLogic [36]
platform to create two parallel simulations of a port container terminal process:
one agent-based and one using DES. Their results showed that the agent-based
model produced more realistic cycle times by explicitly accounting for the delays
caused by asynchronous messaging between organizational agents, a real-world
factor abstracted away in the DES model.
While the most agent-based frameworks focus on descriptive or exploratory sim-
ulation, a distinct minority utilizes ABS for prescriptive process optimality. These
systems move beyond answering “what is” or “what if” to address the “what’s best”
question. They integrate the agent-based simulation model with a formal opti-
mization algorithm, allowing the system to autonomously search for the optimal
parameter settings or policies that maximize a given performance objective.
The work of Sulis et al. [16] provides a clear example in a healthcare context.
Building upon their agent-based model of a hospital Emergency Department men-
tion above [9], they integrate a Genetic Algorithm to optimize the patient admission
process. The GA evolves a set of parameters, specifically, waiting time thresholds
and the priority criteria for patient selection, to find the combination that minimizes
a composite Quality Score. This transforms their descriptive simulation into a pre-
scriptive decision-support tool that can recommend optimal operational policies.
A similar approach is taken by Chen and Yang [17] for cross-enterprise production
scheduling. They designed a MAS representing different organizational roles and
used a Genetic Algorithm to find the optimal production schedule that maximizes
profit across the entire supply chain. Alternative optimization techniques from the
field of Artificial Intelligence have also been explored, with Noureddine, Gharbi,
and Ahmed [18] applying Deep Reinforcement Learning (RL) to the dynamic task
allocation problem. In their framework, agents do not follow a pre-programmed
Pareto Optimal Trace Generation for Agent-Based Business Process Simulation
11
==PAGE:16==
policy but instead learn an optimal allocation strategy through trial and error, us-
ing a Deep Q-Network to improve their decision-making over time. In the domain
of cloud computing, Saif et al. [19] propose a multi-agent framework for auto-
nomic resource provisioning for business processes. Their system uses a nature-
inspired metaheuristic, Multi-Objective Termite Colony Optimization, to solve the
complex problem of optimally placing application containers across a multi-cloud
environment to satisfy multiple, often conflicting, Quality of Service objectives.
Integrated Discovery and Simulation Frameworks
While the preceding sec-
tions have treated agent model discovery and simulation as separate concepts, a
final, seemingly nascent category of research seeks to combine them into a sin-
gle, integrated framework. These systems draw inspiration from non-agent based,
data-driven simulators like the Prosimos and Optimos framework by López-Pintado,
Dumas, and Berx [15], and represent a more holistic data-driven approach, cre-
ating a full pipeline with input historical event data and output a synthetic log gen-
erated by an executable, agent-based simulator.
One of the more complete realizations of this vision, and the foundational frame-
work for this thesis, is the AgentSimulatorframework created by [5]. It proposes a
comprehensive, resource-first methodology that first discovers a complete MAS
from an event log, modeling granular resource details like agent-activity capability
pairs, next-step probability, individual work schedules, and probabilistic handover
patterns. Subsequently, it uses these properties to create a MAS capable of ex-
ecuting a high-fidelity agent-based simulation aimed at process understanding
and potentially performance analysis. A more detailed architectural overview of
AgentSimulator is provided in Section 3.2.1.
Another interesting take on integration is presented by Bemthuis et al. [21]. Their
work proposes an architecture where process mining is used to analyze the out-
put of an agent-based simulation. In their case study, a simulation of a job-shop
factory is run, which generates event logs of the agents’ (Automated Guided Vehi-
cles) behavior. These logs are then fused to discover and analyze the emergent
process, aiding in identifying bottlenecks in the system.
The relative scarcity of such truly integrated frameworks underscores the research
gap this thesis aims to address by extending one of the few existing systems with
prescriptive capabilities.
2.2.3
Conclusions on the State of the Field
The preceding survey reveals a diverse yet scattered landscape of Multi-Agent
System paradigms (ABMS) within Business Process Management. Thus, in an-
swer to the first research sub-question (see section 1.3), the existing MAS paradigms
within BPM can be broadly categorized into three main activities:
• Agent Model Discovery (Mining), which focuses on extracting agent-centric
models from data
• Agent-Based Simulation, which executes these models to explore process
dynamics and thus includes prescriptive optimization tools
12
Pareto Optimal Trace Generation for Agent-Based Business Process Simulation
==PAGE:17==
• Integrated Framework, a nascent category that combines both.
While these paradigms show the growing interest in applying agent-based tech-
niques to BPM, the field lacks a unified framework and features a variety of distinct
and mostly incompatible solutions.
Furthermore, while many of these systems are presented as “agent-based”, they
often exhibit a low degree of agent autonomy and rely on centralized control ar-
chitectures [5, 12, 17, 19]. This reflects a broader immaturity in the BPM and
Business Process Simulation fields, where the full potential of decentralized, au-
tonomous agent decision-making has yet to be consistently realized.
Finally, regarding the challenge of process optimality, the survey shows that the
vast majority of existing MAS-BPM paradigms focus on descriptive (“as-is”) or
exploratory (“what-if”) simulation. While some works have successfully applied
techniques such as Genetic Algorithms [16, 17], Reinforcement Learning [18],
and other metaheuristics [19], these approaches often exist as standalone case
studies and are not combined or integrated with agent-specific data-driven mining.
Hence, we identify a research gap in integrating these prescriptive optimization
capabilities directly into the more general, data-driven discovery and simulation
frameworks that are emerging as the state-of-the-art [5].
2.3
A Survey of Multi-Agent Optimization
Techniques
In order to explore the agent-based prescriptive simulation problem, we need to
understand what optimization means in a Multi-Agent System setting. Tradition-
ally, a MAS consists of a collection of autonomous computing entities, known
as agents, that autonomously interact with each other and their environment to
achieve goals that are beyond the capabilities of any single agent [37]. Dorri, Kan-
here, and Jurdak [38] extend this definition by proposing a generalization where
an agent is an entity situated in an environment, capable of sensing parameters to
make decisions toward a goal and performing actions based on those decisions.
The true power of the system is realized when multiple agents collaborate, giving
rise to key system-level features such as heterogeneity (agents having diverse ca-
pabilities) and varying organizational structures (Flat, Hierarchical, Holonic, Coali-
tion, Team, Matrix, and Congregation) [38].
One of the most critical challenges in any MAS is coordinating the actions of in-
dividual agents to achieve a collective objective, a problem broadly known as
Multi-Agent Optimization [39]. This involves casting a system-level problem into
a formal optimization problem, with defined variables, constraints, and a cost func-
tion, whose solution may require the active participation of the agents. The spe-
cific problem this thesis addresses, assigning a sequence of process tasks to a
pool of agents to minimize both cost and wait time, is an instance of Multi-Agent
Resource Allocation (MARA) problem, defined as the problem of distributing a
number of items/tasks among a number of agents [40].
The literature on MAS optimization presents a wide array of methods for solving
such problems [41]. The following paragraphs provide a brief survey of the main
Pareto Optimal Trace Generation for Agent-Based Business Process Simulation
13
==PAGE:18==
families of techniques used for MAS optimization, with a focus on those applicable
in business process simulation. The aim is to understand their core ideas and their
typical architectural prerequisites, which will build a clear rationale for the meth-
ods chosen for the work presented in this thesis. The primary techniques can be
broadly categorized into market-based methods, distributed constraint optimiza-
tion, exact methods, heuristic, metaheuristic, learning based, and game theory
approaches.
Before describing the separate categories, we need to define the concept of MAS
architecture. Broadly, a system can be organized to be centralized or decentral-
ized. In a centralized MAS, a specific, central coordinator agent (or system) is
present, whose role is to manage the resource (worker) agents and make the fi-
nal decisions on how tasks are to be allocated (following a “leader-follow” model),
typically based on a global utility function [38]. This approach avoids conflicts in
task assignments and can, under conditions, discover optimal solutions. How-
ever, it is often criticized for its high computational costs, vulnerability to the fail-
ure of the central agent [41], and susceptibility to the creation of “bottlenecks” [38]
which can limit scalability and robustness of the system. On the contrary, a de-
centralized model is characterized by the distribution of decision-making authority
among the agents themselves [39]. Instead, agents negotiate and interact locally
to converge on a globally implemented solution.
Market-Based / Auction Mechanisms
In this paradigm, the MARA problem is
framed as a market [39], with a central auctioneer agent announcing tasks, and
autonomous agents acting as bidders, submitting bids that reflect their private
costs and capabilities. This approach is considered a “generic” way to solve many
instances of the resource allocation problem and has been proven particularly
effective for settings where agents are self-interested [42].
This family of methods is quite diverse, ranging from simple single-item auctions
to more powerful but computationally complex combinatorial approaches, where
agents can bid on bundles of tasks [39]. While specific protocols like the Con-
tract Net Protocol (CNP) facilitate decentralized negotiation, many auction mech-
anisms are implemented within a centralized architecture where a single prede-
fined auctioneer is responsible for selecting the agent-task pairings [39]. Here we
will provide a more detailed overview of two of these methods more commonly en-
countered in ABS, the Contract Net Protocol and the Consensus-Based Bundle
Algorithm [41].
• Contract Net Protocol (CNP): Originally proposed by Smith [43], it follows a
simple, intuitive process: the “manager” agent owns the task and announces
it to the network, the available “contractor” agents evaluate the task and
submit bids. The manager awards the contract to the most suitable bidder.
Any agent may act as manager if they own the task. While effective and
simple, a well-known limitation of CNP is its potential for high communica-
tion overhead and message congestion, which can degrade performance in
large-scale systems [41].
• Consensus-Based Bundle Algorithm (CBBA): Proposed more recently, by
14
Pareto Optimal Trace Generation for Agent-Based Business Process Simulation
==PAGE:19==
Choi, Brunet, and How [44], its algorithm operates in two phases. First,
each agent iteratively bids on tasks to greedily build a bundle of tasks it
intends to execute. Then, in a “consensus” phase, agents communicate
with their neighbors to identify and resolve any conflicts in task assignments.
This combination of a greedy auction with a decentralized conflict resolution
mechanism makes CBBA highly scalable and well-suited for dynamic task
allocation problems [41].
Distributed Constraint Optimization Problems (DCOPs)
DCOPs frame the
MARA problem as a joint optimization problem to be solved through decentralized
negotiation, defining a set of variables controlled by individual agents and a set of
constraints that control the utility or cost of their joint actions [39].
For instance, consider a simple meeting scheduling problem between two agents,
Agent A and Agent B. Agent A’s variable, time_A, can take a value from its domain
[9am, 10am], while Agent B’s variable, time_B, has the domain [10am, 11am]. A
shared constraint provides a high utility (+10) only if they select the same time slot
(time_A = time_B), and zero otherwise. To solve this, the agents would engage in
local message passing to negotiate a joint assignment of values (time_A=10am,
time_B=10am) that maximizes their collective utility [45].
While powerful for coordinating cooperative teams, it requires a high degree of
agent autonomy and sophisticated peer-to-peer communication protocols for ne-
gotiation, along with low action uncertainty and environment stochasticity, at least
in its basic form [45].
Exact Optimization Methods
Coming from the field of operations research, a
proven method that is able to find an optimal solution to the MARA problem is In-
teger Linear Programming (ILP) [46]. ILP is a mathematical method for finding the
optimal solution to a problem that can be expressed with a linear objective func-
tion (a value to be maximized or minimized) and a set of linear constraints (rules
or limitations), where the decision variables must be integers [46]. This makes it
an extremely powerful and widely used tool for solving deterministic assignment
and allocation problems. Indeed, some MARA problems, such as the winner de-
termination problem in combinatorial auctions, can be formally modeled as an ILP
[39].
However, the general task allocation problem is NP-hard [41, 47], rendering it
computationally intractable for large-scale applications. More importantly, stan-
dard ILP requires that all model parameters be known, deterministic values (see
the centrality assumption) [46]. This makes it unsuitable for inherently stochastic
environments where outcomes are non-deterministic.
Heuristic Algorithms
To overcome the computational overhead and strict as-
sumptions of exact methods, heuristic algorithms may be employed (see [9]).
These are techniques designed to find a high-quality, approximate solution in
a practical amount of time for complex optimization problems where finding the
provably optimal solution is intractable [41]. The core motivation for their use is
Pareto Optimal Trace Generation for Agent-Based Business Process Simulation
15
==PAGE:20==
to address the exponential overhead of complete search, particularly in dynamic,
real-time, or large-scale settings where optimality is not achievable within reason-
able time constraints [39].
Many heuristics operate on a principle of local search, where an agent or co-
ordinator (system) makes an iterative, short-sighted choice to achieve the best
immediate improvement. While computationally efficient, this approach means
they are not guaranteed to find the global optimum and can converge to a locally
optimal solution [39].
Metaheuristic Methods
A metaheuristic is a higher-level strategy that guides a
subordinate heuristic search to explore the solution space more effectively, mak-
ing them highly suitable for complex optimization problems [48]. In the context of
the NP-hard problem of business process resource allocation, metaheuristics are
essential for approximating a set of optimal solutions as an exhaustive search is
impossible [47].
The literature broadly classifies metaheuristics based on their search strategy into
two main families:
• Single-solution-based methods, like tabu-search and hill-climbing, main-
tain and iteratively improve a single candidate solution. They are efficient
but may still be susceptible to getting trapped in local optima [15].
• Population-based methods, including evolutionary algorithms and swarm
intelligence, maintain a whole population of diverse candidate solutions,
which are evolved and combined over generations. This approach is more
computationally intensive but is generally more robust at exploring the global
search space and avoiding local optima [47, 17, 16, 19].
The decision-making within many population-based methods is often stochas-
tic and can be categorized as either threshold-based or probabilistic [41].
In
threshold-based models, an action is triggered when a stimulus crosses a certain
value [49], while in probabilistic models, choices are made according to probabil-
ities derived from experience or environmental data [50].
Genetic Algorithms (GAs) are a foundational type of population-based, evolu-
tionary metaheuristic that heavily utilizes probabilistic principles. They operate on
a population of candidate solutions, iteratively refining them through processes
that mimic natural evolution, such as probabilistic selection, crossover, and mu-
tation [22]. This population-based, stochastic approach makes GAs inherently
suited for black-box optimization, where the problem’s underlying mathematical
model is either unknown or too complex to formulate directly [47]. Examples of
GA implementation for MAS optimization within BPM include Sulis et al. [16] and
Chen and Yang [17]
2.3.1
Learning-Based Approaches
Learning-Based (LB) methods are applicable for both centralized and decentral-
ized MAS architectures [41]. While describing LB techniques in depth is outside
the scope of this work, we include a brief overview of how learning algorithms can
16
Pareto Optimal Trace Generation for Agent-Based Business Process Simulation
==PAGE:21==
be leveraged in MAS, when they are suitable to use, and their most prominent
techniques, to provide the reader with a full understanding of the space.
LB approaches are utilized when the environment is dynamic and features a high
degree of uncertainty [41], as they aim to enable agents to adapt to unforeseen
situations by learning from experience, thereby allowing them to act automatically
and learn how to communicate, in order to generate an effective policy [18].
One of the main paradigms in this category is Reinforcement Learning (RL) [38].
In its standard, single-agent form, an agent learns an optimal policy through trial-
and-error interaction with its environment, seeking to maximize a cumulative re-
ward signal [41]. This approach fundamentally relies on the environment being
predictable or stationary, a condition formalized by the Markov Decision Process
(MDP) framework, where the rules governing the environment’s response to an
agent’s actions are stable [18].
This assumption of “stationarity” is the main limitation of default RL, as when mul-
tiple agents learn simultaneously, the environment becomes non-stationary from
the perspective of any individual agent [18]. As the other agents are also part of
the environment, their actions impact it, and they adapt their own policies contin-
uously; the rules of the setting are constantly changing for everyone. This chal-
lenge gave rise to the field of Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL) [41].
MARL is therefore fundamentally different from single-agent RL as its core focus
is on developing algorithms that can learn effective policies in the face of this non-
stationarity, requiring agents to reason about the actions and learning processes
of others [41, 18].
Modern MARL approaches often leverage Deep Reinforcement Learning to han-
dle the high-dimensional state spaces, and employ a paradigm of Centralized
Training with Decentralized Execution (CTDE), where global information is used
to stabilize learning offline, but agents act decentrally during execution [18]. The
primary limitation of MARL remains its high computational cost and sample com-
plexity, which escalates as the number of agents increases [41].
2.3.2
Game Theory-Based Approaches
Another method for analyzing the task allocation problem is Game Theory, which
mathematically models strategic interactions between rational agents [41]. This
approach is particularly powerful for systems involving self-interested agents who
aim to maximize their own individual utility or “payoff” [51]. The field is broadly
divided into two areas:
• Non-Cooperative Games, where agents make independent decisions. The
central goal is often to find or design systems that lead to a Nash Equilibrium,
a state where no agent can improve its own outcome by unilaterally changing
its strategy [41].
• Cooperative (Coalitional) Games, where agents can form groups or coali-
tions to coordinate their actions for mutual benefit, though still driven by their
individual interests [39, 41].
It is important to note that the work in this thesis assumes a fully cooperative
Pareto Optimal Trace Generation for Agent-Based Business Process Simulation
17
==PAGE:22==
setting where all agents share a single, global objective function, rather than a
game-theoretic one where agents optimize for individual payoffs [51].
We note that other than DCOP and Game Theory, all methods can be adjusted
to comply with both centralized and decentralized systems, but feature their indi-
vidual limitations for each. For example, an agent may make decisions greedily
based on a heuristic to maximize their own utility, or a central auctioneer may se-
lect from the available agent pool based on the system’s global utility. Thus, the
selection of the optimization method is closely related with (1) the system archi-
tecture and (2) the final goal of the optimization.
2.3.3
MAS Optimization and ABS-BMP Literature
While most of the simulators reviewed in section 2.2.2 are primarily designed
for reproductive simulation, some feature an optimization protocol [16, 17, 18,
19]. These, along with frameworks that feature inter-agent communication and
decision-making based on specific KPIs [10], are presented in the following table,
accompanied by the optimization method they employ.
Table 2.1: Analysis of BPM-ABS Frameworks as Instances of the Multi-Agent
Resource Allocation (MARA) Problem
Paper
Allocation
Approach
Description
Sulis et al. [16]
Metaheuristic
(Genetic Algorithm)
The problem is to allocate limited
hospital resources (time slots with
staff) to incoming patients (tasks).
The GA searches for the optimal
admission and scheduling policy
(the allocation rule) that best utilizes
these resources to minimize a
quality-of-service metric.
Chen and Yang [17]
Hybrid (Genetic
Algorithm +
Auction-Based)
The goal is to allocate
manufacturing tasks to a distributed
set of machines (resources) owned
by different enterprise agents. The
allocation is optimized in two
stages: first, a centralized GA is
used to find a globally near-optimal
production schedule that maximizes
profit. Second, the tasks from this
schedule are allocated to
workshop-level agents.
18
Pareto Optimal Trace Generation for Agent-Based Business Process Simulation
==PAGE:23==
Table 2.1 – continued from previous page
Paper
Allocation
Approach
Justification as a MARA Problem
Noureddine,
Gharbi, and Ahmed
[18]
Learning-Based
(Reinforcement
Learning)
Agents must learn a decentralized
policy to allocate dynamically
arriving tasks to the most suitable
agent in the network based on
resource availability and
capabilities, aiming to maximize
task completion.
Saif et al. [19]
Metaheuristic
(Termite Colony
Optimization)
This framework allocates business
process workloads (tasks) to cloud
containers (resources). A “Global
Agent” uses a Multi-Objective
Termite Colony Optimization
algorithm to find the optimal
allocation. Simulated “termites”
explore the solution space of
possible workload-container
pairings, leaving behind
“pheromone trails” that guide the
swarm towards solutions that best
satisfy a multi-objective fitness
function, minimizing cost, energy
consumption, and SLA violations
while maximizing throughput.
Jennings et al. [10]
Auction-Based
(Contract Net
Protocol)
The framework allocates tasks (e.g.,
“Vet Customer”) to provider agents
through a market-based negotiation
protocol (CNET). The optimal
allocation is result of agent
competition and agreement.
The survey table highlights that prominent MAS optimization paradigms like DCOP
and game-theory approaches are not featured in any of the prescriptive simula-
tors reviewed, despite being powerful optimization methods. Consequently, most
frameworks make use of metaheuristics and learning based approaches. This
finding aligns with the principle that metaheuristic and learning-based approaches
are particularly well-suited for optimizing complex, stochastic “black-box” systems
where the underlying mechanics are either unknown or too complex to model di-
rectly [41] and validates the selection of a Genetic Algorithm as the implemented
method within this work.
Pareto Optimal Trace Generation for Agent-Based Business Process Simulation
19
==PAGE:24==
2.4
Multi-Objective Optimization and the Pareto
Front
Since we have now defined the optimization methods within MAS, let us take one
step back to understand the intricacies of this concept within BPM. A foundational
concept within the field is that performance metrics such as cost, time, and quality
are often in conflict [1, p. 303]. For example, optimizing for cost by selecting the
cheapest resources will often lead to a decrease in speed or quality. This creates
the need for a formal Multi-Objective Optimization method. In this thesis, we will
be focusing on Pareto Optimization [52], which is the core Multi-Objective Opti-
mization technique used in contemporary BPS research to find optimal balances
between competing goals [15].
Pareto Optimization aims to identify “good compromises”, discovering solutions
where a dimension can be improved without “penalizing” another [52]. To under-
stand this, let us first define the concept of dominance.
Consider two potential solutions (e.g., two different process execution traces),
t1 and t2, with corresponding cost vectors ⃗C(t1) and ⃗C(t2). Following the formal
definition, we say that solution t1 dominates t2 if it is better or equal in all objectives
and strictly better in at least one [20]. For a minimization problem like the one
addressed in this thesis, this means:
• Solution A (Cost=€100, Time=2h) dominates Solution B (Cost=€110, Time=2.5h)
because it is both cheaper and faster.
• However, Solution A does not dominate Solution C (Cost=€90, Time=3h),
because while Solution C is cheaper, it is also slower.
A solution is considered Pareto-optimal if no other feasible solution in the entire
search space dominates it [52]. It represents a point at which any improvement
in one objective can only be achieved by degrading at least one other objective.
The set of all such Pareto-optimal solutions is known as the Pareto front [52].
This front is the ultimate goal of a multi-objective optimization process, as it does
not provide a single “best” answer, but rather a “menu” of optimal, non-dominated
choices. This enables a human decision-maker to select the specific trade-off that
best aligns with their current strategic priorities [22].
20
Pareto Optimal Trace Generation for Agent-Based Business Process Simulation
==PAGE:25==
3
Methodology
3.1
Problem Formulation
3.1.1
Multi-Objective Optimization Problem
As mentioned previously, within this thesis we aim to extend an existing agent-
based simulator beyond replication of historical behavior and towards the gener-
ation of optimal traces. This requires formally defining the optimization problem
and cost function against which the performance of any generated trace of can be
evaluated.
In Chapter 2 we established that a core premise of process optimization is that
not all validly generated process traces are equally desirable [53]. While a re-
productive simulator ensures traces are compliant with the discovered process
model, some might be sub-optimal regarding one or more dimensions (e.g., mon-
etary cost, time, emissions) . To discern between these traces, we formulate the
challenge as a multi-objective optimization problem.
A process trace can be considered a decision vector, t, from a set of all possible
traces, T. In the case of multi-agent simulation a t contains an ordered sequence
of (activity, agent) assignments. The performance of this trace is evaluated by an
objective vector, ⃗C(t), which is the projection of the trace onto a set of k objective
functions. Each function fi in our case represents a cost to be minimized.
We consider a cost vector composed of key performance indicators often explored
in business process analysis:
• Total Wait Time (Cwait_time): Defined as the sum of all periods during which
a case is idle, awaiting resource availability [54].
• Total Man-Hour Cost (Cman-hour): The aggregated monetary cost of all ac-
tivities in a trace, calculated as the sum of each activity’s duration (in hours)
multiplied by the performing agent’s hourly rate. Similar to an activity cost
metric in cases of deterministic activity durations [53].
Total Cycle Time (Ccycle_time), defined as the total wall-clock time from the start to
the completion of a trace (case), was also considered, as it is one of the most com-
monly used performance metrics in BPM [1]. However, it was ultimately excluded,
since it is also defined as
Ccycle_time = Cprocessing_time + Cwait_time
[55]. As will be discussed later, processing times in our implementation are de-
termined stochastically, making Wait Time a more stable and reliable metric for
optimization.
The final cost vector for a trace t is therefore expressed as:
⃗C(t) = [Ccycle_time(t), Cman-hour(t)]
(3.1)
Pareto Optimal Trace Generation for Agent-Based Business Process Simulation
21
==PAGE:26==
As these objectives are often in conflict (i.e., minimizing man-hour cost may in-
crease total circle time), the goal is to find solutions representing optimal trade-
offs. This is formalized through the concept of Pareto optimality. Following the
definitions of Diaz et al. [53], adapted for cost minimization, we say that a trace
t ∈T dominates another trace t′ ∈T if its cost vector is better or equal in all
dimensions (wait time or monetary man hour cost) and strictly better in at least
one:
∀i ∈{1, ..., k} : fi(t) ≤fi(t′) ∧∃j ∈{1, ..., k} : fj(t) < fj(t′)
(3.2)
A trace t∗is considered Pareto-optimal if no other trace t ∈T exists that dominates
it. The objective of our prescriptive framework is therefore not to find a single
‘best’ trace, but to discover the set of all non-dominated, Pareto-optimal traces
(the Pareto front) [53].
3.1.2
Multi-Agent Optimization Problem
The aforementioned optimization problem must also be defined within the es-
tablished MAS literature as an instance of the Multi-Agent Resource Allocation
(MARA) problem [39], further described in Chapter 2. In this framing, the core
challenge is the way of distributing a set of items (actions) amongst a number of
agents to achieve a collective objective [41].
For the problem addressed in this thesis, the components are defined as follows:
• The Agents (A): The set of ResourceAgents (the term will be described in
section 3.2.1) available in the simulation, each with distinct capabilities and
availability schedules.
• The Items (I): The sequence of tasks (activities) that must be executed
to complete a process case. This will not be extensively explained as the
Activities differ for each dataset/process log.
• The Allocation (π): A policy that defines the probability distribution for agent
assignment, conditioned on the current state and the next activity.
The
AgentSimulator’s internal logic first determines the next activity (Ito) based
on its fixed historical model. The policy π then provides the probability of
assigning this task to a specific next agent (Ato). Formally, the policy is the
function that defines this conditional probability distribution:
π : P(Ato|Afrom, σprefix, Ito)
(3.3)
This function must satisfy the condition that for any given state (prefix-agent
to pair) and next activity, the sum of probabilities over all agents capable of
performing that activity is equal to one.
• The Collective Objective: To find an allocation policy π that generates
traces resulting in a Pareto-optimal cost vector ⃗C, as defined in the previous
section.
This formal classification will allow us to later contextualize the specific challenges
of our research setting in Section 3.2.3.
22
Pareto Optimal Trace Generation for Agent-Based Business Process Simulation
==PAGE:27==
Solving this agent-based, multi-objective optimization problem requires a frame-
work that can be extended to both execute policies and evaluate their outcomes.
The following sections will detail the AgentSimulator framework, which serves as
our experimental platform, analyze its architectural constraints and identify the
selected optimization method based on them.
3.2
Research Setting: The AgentSimulator
Architecture
While in Chapter 2 the AgentSimulator framework [5] was introduced as an inte-
grated discovery and simulation framework, this section re-examines it through
an engineering lens, aiming to establish it as the specific experimental platform
and baseline for this thesis.
In the following paragraphs, a detailed architectural overview of the AgentSimu-
lator’s process mining and simulation logic are provided to showcase the specific
architecture and algorithms that are either leveraged, modified by, or limit the
proposed extension. This aims to establish the context within which the proposed
framework operates, to provide clarity on the optimization method’s selection, and
to justify the selection of AgentSimulator as the experimental platform.
3.2.1
AgentSimulator Architectural Overview
This section provides an in-depth description of the AgentMiner’s process mining
(ABM) and simulator (ABS) components. The first aims to provide the reader
with an understanding of the available parameters an optimization extension can
leverage, while the second outlines the inner workings of agent operation and
coordination, showcasing the components that impact optimization options or that
will be utilized and extended during optimization.
Phase 1: MAS Discovery
The discovery phase of the AgentSimulator includes the identification of all the
parameters necessary to re-create a high-fidelity ABS tool that captures the be-
haviors of individual, real-life resources, their capabilities, availability, behaviors,
and interaction patterns. These parameters are discovered through an automated
structured analysis of a given event log L, and are used to create a MAS that rep-
resents the real-life system within which the process depicted in the L takes place.
This MAS is defined as M = (A, P), where A is the set of agents and P contains
general simulation parameters.
We note that the following paragraphs will focus specifically on the discovery of
the agent-specific parameters, including discovery of the agents, their schedules,
capabilities, and behaviors, as the general system ones, such as case inter-arrival
times and extraneous delays, are not central to the extension of the system to a
prescriptive optimization tool.
1. Agent Instantiation
The process begins by creating a digital counterpart for
each actor in the process. For every unique resource (human or system) res ∈
RESL (where RESL the set of all resources in the event log L), a corresponding
agent a is instantiated and added to the set of agents A. To ensure that all activities
Pareto Optimal Trace Generation for Agent-Based Business Process Simulation
23
==PAGE:28==
Algorithm 1 MAS Discovery Phase
1: procedure DiscoverMAS(L)
2:
A ←∅
▷Initialize the set of agents
3:
P ←∅
▷Initialize general simulation parameters
4:
RESL ←GetUniqueResources(L)
5:
RESno_res ←GetActivitiesWithoutResource(L)
6:
for all res ∈RESL do
7:
a ←CreateAgent(res)
8:
a.s ←DiscoverSchedule(a, L)
9:
a.c ←DiscoverCapabilities(a, L)
10:
a.b ←DiscoverBehavior(a, L)
11:
A ←A ∪{a}
12:
for all act ∈RESno_res do
13:
adummy ←CreateDummyAgent(act)
14:
adummy.c ←DiscoverCapabilities(adummy, L) ▷Mainly processing times
15:
A ←A ∪{adummy}
16:
P.fiat ←DiscoverInterArrivalTime(L)
17:
P.D ←DiscoverExtraneousDelays(L)
18:
return (A, P)
in the log can be simulated, for any activity in ACTL that has associated events
with no resource information, a single “dummy agent” is created. This ensures
that a responsible entity exists for every possible task.
2. Agent Schedule Discovery (a.s)
To accurately model resource contention
and waiting times, AgentSimulator discovers an individual weekly work schedule
for each agent. This approach avoids using a generalized, one-size-fits-all cal-
endar and implements a schedule discovery algorithm proposed by [24], which
generates a weekly schedule a.s for each agent, specifying the time intervals dur-
ing which they are available to perform work.
3. Agent Capability Discovery (a.c)
An agent’s capabilities are defined by two
components: the tasks they can perform and their efficiency in performing them.
• Set of Activities (a.c.ALLOC): This is determined by a straightforward in-
spection of the event log. The set a.c.ALLOC for an agent a is defined as
the set of all activities that its corresponding resource res has executed in
L.
• Processing Times: This refers to the probability density distributions (PDFs)
of the durations of each agent-activity pair. As there are performance varia-
tions between the different agents (e.g., a senior vs. a junior clerk), a unique
processing time distribution is fitted for each agent-activity pair. Following
the methodology proposed in [24, 1], for each pair (a, act), the empirical
distribution of activity durations is collected from the event log. Then, a
set of standard parametric distributions (Exponential, Gamma, Normal, Log-
24
Pareto Optimal Trace Generation for Agent-Based Business Process Simulation
==PAGE:29==
Normal, Uniform, and a fixed value) is fitted to this empirical data. The best-
fitting distribution is selected as the one that minimizes the Earth Mover’s
Distance (EMD) to the empirical distribution. The result is a mapping fPT :
(A, ACTL) →PDF, which can be sampled during the simulation to generate
realistic, agent-specific activity execution times.
4. Agent Behavior Discovery (a.b)
Agent behavior is defined as the agent’s
interaction patters, or in other words, as the answer to the question: How is the
case progressing after an agent a performs activity act; What will be the next
activity act′, and who will perform it?
The AgentSimulator distinguishes between, and subsequently models, processes
using two different configurations:
• Orchestrated, which refers to processes where a centralized system de-
termines what activity will happen next. In such caess, a.b is determined
based on global control-flow patterns and does not take into account spe-
cific agents.
• Autonomous, which allow for a.b to be determined based on handover pat-
terns unique to each agent, enabling the simulator to capture processes
where resources (humans) have decision power and interaction preferences.
The framework is able to identify which process category it is called to discover.
For each setting (orchestrated and autonomous) two distinct models are created,
each with a separate set of probabilistic parameters.
• The Orchestrated Model: Here only one probabilistic structure is mined,
that of the Global Activity Transition Probabilities, which capture the overall
control-flow of the process only based on the previous activities that oc-
curred (prefix). This transition probability P(actto|σact_prefix), is computed by
counting how often each observed activity prefix (σact_prefix) in the event log
L is followed by each possible next activity actto. The agent assignment is
not learned in any way.
• Autonomous Behavior In the autonomous setting, both activity selection
and agent selection/handover are modeled. This involves two distinct probability-
based structures:
– Local Activity Transition Probabilities: This structure captures an
agent’s specific preference for what activity should follow next. The
probability
P(actto | σact_prefix, afrom)
is computed by counting, for each agent afrom, the number of times the
prefix σact_prefix (ending with an activity performed by afrom) is followed
by the activity actto.
– Agent Handover Probabilities: This parameter refers to the handover
patterns between agents, regarding specific tasks.
The conditional
probability of handing over a case from agent aj to agent ai after activity
Pareto Optimal Trace Generation for Agent-Based Business Process Simulation
25
==PAGE:30==
act has been completed,
P(ai | aj, act),
is computed by counting all occurrences where aj performs act and
is immediately followed by ai, divided by the total number of times aj
performs act.
In both settings, for cases where a specific activity prefix has not been observed
in the log, the framework iteratively removes the first activity from the prefix until
a known sub-sequence is found.
It is worth noting that while the authors of the AgentSimulator do not explicitly use
the term, these probabilistic parameters can be interpreted as implementations
of Markov chains. The Global and Local Activity Transition models function as
higher-order Markov chains, where the state is defined not by the last activity
but by the entire activity prefix σact_prefix. Similarly, the Agent Handover model
represents a separate, context-dependent Markov chain over the set of agents,
where the probability of transitioning from one agent-state to another is conditional
on the specific activity being performed.
Phase 2: MAS Simulation
The simulation phase uses the discovered MAS parameters to generate new,
synthetic event logs that mimic the behavior captured in the original data. The
simulation operates as a discrete-event system, managed by a central Process
Model entity that controls the simulation clock and the queue of active cases (Σ).
It progresses via a main loop, outlined in Algorithm 2, which iterates through (Σ),
processing the case with the earliest timestamp at each step. There is no concur-
rent execution of cases within the main control flow.
The following paragraphs will first explain the architecture of the multi-agent sys-
tem that powers the simulation and then provide a detailed algorithmic breakdown
of the distinct decision strategies used for Autonomous and Orchestrated config-
urations respectively.
Architecture
The simulator’s architecture is built on a 2-level hierarchical struc-
ture, between a central orchestrator and a pool of passive worker agents. More
specifically:
1. The Orchestrator (ContractorAgent) is a single, predefined agent that acts
as the central “brain” of the simulation. It does not correspond to any real-
world resource and its sole purpose is to make all key decisions for every
active case, at every step. It determines which activity should be performed
next and selects which agent will be assigned the task. It holds the knowl-
edge of Global and Local Transition Probabilities, along with Agent Han-
dover probabilities and the current state of all cases and their prefixes. The
ContractorAgent’s decision logic differs for Autonomous and Orchestrated
processes, specifically in the next activity determination and agent selection
steps, that will be explained in detail in the following paragraphs.
2. The Executors (ResourceAgents) represent the actual resources from the
event log (e.g., clerks, managers, systems). Their role is passive, as they
26
Pareto Optimal Trace Generation for Agent-Based Business Process Simulation
==PAGE:31==
Algorithm 2 MAS Simulation Loop
Require: A: set of agents, n: number of cases to simulate, Pfiat: arrival distribu-
tion
Ensure: Simulated event log L′
1: Σ ←∅, L′ ←∅
2: while len(L′) < n do
3:
Σ ←CheckForNewCases(Σ, Pfiat)
4:
for each case in SortByTimestamp(Σ) do
5:
next_activity ←GetNextActivity(case)
▷Contractor selects next task
6:
if next_activity = end then
7:
L′ ←L′ ∪case.trace;
8:
Σ ←Σ \ {case}
9:
continue
10:
selected_agent ←SelectAgent(next_activity, case)
▷Contractor
selects next agent
11:
if selected_agent ̸= None then
12:
success, new_event ←ExecuteActivity(selected_agent, next_activity, case)
13:
if success then
▷Resource executes the activity
14:
case.trace.append(new_event)
15:
case.last_agent ←selected_agent
16:
case.timestamp ←new_event.end_time
17: return L′
do not make decisions about which task to take or when to start working
on it. They wait for a direct command from the ContractorAgent and upon
receiving it they either execute the assigned task, or reject it, if it does not
align with their schedule or availability. They report the completion of the task
back to the Orchestrator but have no autonomy or power over the process
flow.
Configuration Variations
As mentioned above, Autonomous and Orchestrated
processes are implemented differently within the AgentSimulator framework. Namely,
for Autonomous processes, the ContractorAgent first determines the next activity
for a given case based on the Local Activity Transition Probabilities by adaptively
searching for the most relevant historical context. It does not simply look up the
full case history, but first attempts to find a rule in the model
P(actto | σact_prefix, afrom)
matching the complete activity prefix σact_prefix and the agent who performed the
last task afrom.
If a specific sequence of activities has never been observed in the training data,
the ContractorAgent iteratively truncates the prefix from the front (e.g., a history of
⟨act1, act2, act3⟩becomes ⟨act2, act3⟩) and repeats the search. This prefix fallback
mechanism continues until it identifies the longest known suffix of the case history
for which a valid transition probability exists for the given agent.
Pareto Optimal Trace Generation for Agent-Based Business Process Simulation
27
==PAGE:32==
Once this most specific available context is found, the corresponding probability
distribution over the possible next activities is retrieved. The final next activity is
then selected via a weighted random sample from this distribution. This entire
adaptive search and sampling logic is formally detailed in Algorithm 3.
Algorithm 3 GetNextActivity Procedure (Autonomous Handover)
1: procedure GetNextActivityAutonomous(case)
2:
prefix ←case.trace
3:
afrom ←case.last_agent
4:
while
prefix
/∈
LocalTransitionProbs.keys()
or
afrom
/∈
LocalTransitionProbs[prefix].keys() do
5:
prefix ←prefix[1 :]
6:
if prefix = ∅then
7:
return “end”
8:
activity_distribution ←LocalTransitionProbs[prefix][afrom]
9:
next_activity ←Sample(activity_distribution.keys(), activity_distribution.values())
10:
return next_activity
After determining the next activity, the ContractorAgent selects an agent to per-
form it. This is not an optimization or negotiation, but a rigid selection criterion, as
described in Algorithm 4, which is includes the following steps:
1. The creation of a capable agents list, where agents that can perform the
pre-selected activity are identified.
2. The specialization sorting, where these agents are first sorted by the number
of activities they can perform, from most specialized (fewest available activ-
ities) to least specialized, in order to preserve generalist agents for tasks
that only they can do.
3. The availability sorting, which adds a second level to the previous list, also
arranging agents based on their availability, from earliest to latest available.
4. The probabilistic handover preference based final election, where the task is
assigned to an agent sampled based on its Handover Probability to conduct
the activity. The first two sorts serve as a tie-breaker while the main driver
of the decision progression is the probabilistic model.
Once the ContractorAgent selects the next agent, it requests it to perform the
chosen activity. The ResourceAgent proceeds with a series of compliance checks:
• It confirms its own availability and whether the scheduled start time falls
within its working calendar.
• If the task execution would span across off-duty periods (e.g., overnight), it
calculates the interruptions and determines the true completion time.
If all conditions are met, it “executes” the task. This involves updating its own
availability status and appending the new event (with case ID, activity name, re-
source, start time, and end time) to the final simulated log. If the conditions are
not met (i.e. if the agent is already busy or the task must start during an off-duty
28
Pareto Optimal Trace Generation for Agent-Based Business Process Simulation
==PAGE:33==
Algorithm 4 Select Agent Procedure (Autonomous Handover)
1: procedure SelectAgent(next_activity, case)
2:
afrom ←case.last_agent
3:
Pa ←FindAgentsCapableOf(next_activity)
4:
candidates1 ←SortBySpecialization(Pa)
▷Sort by specialization
5:
candidates2 ←SortByAvailability(candidates1)
▷Sort by earliest
availability
6:
Pho ←HandoverProbs[afrom]
▷Sort by probability
7:
weights ←[ Pho.get(a, 0) for a in candidates2 ]
8:
if sum(weights) > 0 then
9:
selected_agent ←Sample(candidates2, weights)
10:
else
11:
selected_agent ←candidates2[0]
▷Fallback to earliest available
12:
return selected_agent
period), the ResourceAgent takes no action. Control implicitly returns to the Con-
tractorAgent, which, having received no confirmation of success, proceeds with
its contracting protocol. It moves to the next-best candidate in its prioritized list
and repeats the request. This cycle of request and potential refusal continues
down the list until a suitable agent accepts and performs the task, or the list of
candidates is exhausted for the current time step.
On the contrary, for the Orchestrated configuration, the ContractorAgent deter-
mines the next activity based only on the activity prefix, ignoring which agent per-
formed the previous task. The next activity decision is now based on the Global
Activity Transition Probabilities, using the simpler agent-independent model:
P(actto|σact_prefix)
(3.4)
The ContractorAgent employs the same prefix fallback mechanism as in the Au-
tonomous configuration, iteratively shortening the case history σact_prefix until a
known prefix is found within this global transition model. The next activity is then
chosen via a weighted sample from the resulting probability distribution.
Algorithm 5 GetNextActivity Procedure (Orchestrated Handover)
1: procedure GetNextActivityOrchestrated(case)
2:
prefix ←case.trace
3:
while prefix /∈GlobalTransitionProbs.keys() do
4:
prefix ←prefix[1 :]
5:
if prefix is empty then
6:
return “end”
7:
activity_distribution ←GlobalTransitionProbs[prefix]
8:
next_activity ←Sample(activity_distribution.keys(), activity_distribution.values())
9:
return next_activity
After the next activity is determined, the ContractorAgent selects the next agent
by simply identifying all agents capable of performing the task and assigns it to
Pareto Optimal Trace Generation for Agent-Based Business Process Simulation
29
==PAGE:34==
the one who is available at the earliest point in time. This mimics a central queue,
where tasks are sorted and picked up by the next free, qualified worker, as outlined
in Algorithm 6.
Algorithm 6 Select Agent Procedure (Orchestrated Handover)
1: procedure SelectAgentOrchestrated(next_activity)
2:
Pa ←FindAgentsCapableOf(next_activity)
3:
selected_agent ←SortByAvailability(Pa)[0]
▷Select the agent with the
earliest availability
4:
return selected_agent
The final step of task execution, is identical to the one described for autonomous
processes, with the selected ResourceAgent receiving the command and pro-
ceeding with the same compliance and execution checks before logging the com-
pleted event.
3.2.2
Justification for Framework Selection
The reason that motivated the selection of the AgentSimulator as the foundational
framework for this thesis is two-fold:
• State-of-the-Art Integrated Discovery and ABS framework: The AgentSim-
ulator constitutes the most recent example of a data-driven ABMS frame-
work, mining an agent-based model and integrating a custom simulation
engine, making it a relevant and contemporary platform for extension.
• Open Architecture: The framework’s implementation is accessible through
the author’s GitHub repository; a prerequisite for the kind of architectural
integration this thesis aims to achieve.
3.2.3
Architectural Limitations for Optimization
While the AgentSimulator framework performs well for “as-is” simulation, certain
architectural choices limit both the range of feasible optimization methods and
their potential effectiveness. In the following paragraphs, an overview of the three
most prominent inherent limitations of the system are discussed.
Centralized Control and Lack of Agent Autonomy
As mentioned in Chapter 2, centralized MAS systems are characterized by the
presence of a central coordinator agent that possesses a global view and makes
all key decisions [38]. Within AgentSimulator, the ContractorAgent embodies this
role, as it manages the “negotiations” and decides the next task to be executed
and allocated to the an agent. The ResourceAgents, in turn, function as passive
executors with no decision-making autonomy.
This design, while featuring many benefits, first of which the complete avoidance
of conflicts, also stands in contrast to the more autonomous and decentralized
paradigms that underpin much of the advanced MAS optimization literature. As
described by Cerquides et al. [39], a central goal in the multi-agent simulation
and optimization field is to enable agents to make joint decisions for coordinated
actions in a distributed fashion. The AgentSimulator architecture, lacking any
30
Pareto Optimal Trace Generation for Agent-Based Business Process Simulation
==PAGE:35==
peer-to-peer communication channels or negotiation protocols, and featuring only
a small degree of agent autonomy, does not facilitate such a paradigm.
This also renders entire classes of established MAS optimization techniques ar-
chitecturally infeasible [39]. Indicatively, Distributed Constraint Optimization Prob-
lems (DCOPs) and some market-based methods like CNP cannot be implemented
without a complete and fundamental redesign of the framework’s communication
and inherent agent models. In other words, this constraint forces any optimization
strategy built upon the existing framework to also adopt a centralized approach
and work without a communication protocol in place.
Resource Allocation Problem Formulation & Structural Dependency on
Historically-Driven Task Allocation
This refers to the Task Allocation (MARA) problem formulation discussed in sec-
tion 3.1.2. The AgentSimulator does not model its architecture in a way that ad-
dresses it, nor does it include a global or local utility function. It simply utilizes a
fixed frequentist model discovered from the event log to assign tasks.
This means that any optimization strategy is forced to operate within the confines
of the historically-plausible paths. The probabilistic parameters discussed previ-
ously (see Section 3.2.1) are the sole mechanism enforcing the integrity of the
simulated process, implicitly encoding the underlying business rules, control-flow
logic, and resource allocation in one step. To remove it would be to leave the
simulator with no coherent method for progressing a case, effectively dismantling
the very framework we aim to extend.
Thus, the optimization problem is funneled away from process re-sequencing and
is largely constrained to agent assignment, answering the question: for a given,
historically-probable next action, who is the best agent to perform it?
Stochastic Nature of the Simulation
Many MAS optimization formalisms, like DCOP, are built on the assumption that
the cost or utility functions for all joint agent actions are known and deterministic
[56]. The literature acknowledges that this is a strong assumption at best and
that incorporating uncertainty is a key challenge for creating robust, real-world
solutions [41].
In the AgentSimulator, this uncertainty is a core feature of the simulation engine.
However, it does not necessarily come from environmental factors, but from the
stochastic nature of the task execution itself. The cost of a decision, specifically
the time required for an agent to complete a task, is not a deterministic value, but
a random variable sampled from a probability distribution during execution. This
means that at the moment of decision, an optimizer must plan using a determin-
istic proxy (i.e., the mean of the distribution), while the simulation executes with
a random outcome. This mismatch creates a landscape where a policy that is
superior on average can, by random chance, yield a worse outcome in any single
simulation execution.
This inherent randomness (1) necessitates computationally expensive averag-
ing over multiple simulation runs to obtain a reliable performance score [47, 15],
and (2) points to learning-based and metaheuristic approaches as particularly
Pareto Optimal Trace Generation for Agent-Based Business Process Simulation
31
==PAGE:36==
suitable, being fundamentally designed to discover robust policies in such non-
deterministic environments [41, 47, 57].
Within this thesis, a metaheuristic method for the optimization framework pre-
sented, and specifically a slightly tuned genetic algorith, as it constitutes the most
commonly applied technique to similar process optimization problems (within the
reviewed methodology) [16, 17, 47]. Thus, the second sub-question (SQ2 1.3)
was formulated, to investigate how a GA can be designed to effectively navigate
this noisy, non-deterministic, and centralized environment.
3.3
Optimization Engine Implementation
As mentioned, meta-heuristic approaches are believed to be a good fit for prob-
lems like Resource Allocation under uncertainty [47]. In the following sections
we explore and describe the implementation of a Genetic Algorithm (GA), within
the context of extending the AgentSimulator engine, to produce Pareto-optimal
traces in terms of wait time and monetary cost, by optimizing the agent handover
probability component, or in other words, the recourse-to-task allocation policy.
3.3.1
Architectural Modifications and Integration with
AgentSimulator
The integration of the GA-based multiobjective optimizer implementation (that will
be described in detailed later) required a re-architecting of the original system’s
control flow (Figure 3.1).
Figure 3.1: Architectural change from the linear pipeline of the original AgentSim-
ulator to the closed-loop architecture of the Optimiser.
The AgentSimulator is a linear, single-pass system. An event log (L) is input
into the discovery component, which learns a single, historically representative
handover policy (the Agent Handover Probabilities as described in section 3.2.1).
This policy is then fed to the simulation engine, which executes it to produce the
final output of a new simulated event log (L′).
The new architecture of the optimization extension changes this flow but keeps
the inner workings of the original components intact. The discovery component is
32
Pareto Optimal Trace Generation for Agent-Based Business Process Simulation
==PAGE:37==
still used to generate an initial, baseline handover policy. However, this policy is
no longer the final one but the baseline that will be optimized.
The core architectural modification is the interception of the discovery and simula-
tion components by the “genetic optimizer”. As shown in the architectural changes
diagram in Figure 3.1, the simulation engine is no longer the final step in the
pipeline, but has the role of the fitness function that is repeatedly called by the
genetic optimizer.
The workflow is as follows:
1. The “genetic optimizer” creates and maintains a population of candidate
Handover Probability Distributions, or Handover Policies (individuals), ini-
tialized with the original baseline policy discovered from the event log.
2. For each candidate policy in the population, the optimizer calls the simulation
engine as a black-box component, for the policy’s (hpi) simulated logs (L′
i)
to be produced.
3. These simulated logs (L′
i) are used to compute a multi-objective fitness
score for the policy.
4. The optimizer uses this feedback to apply evolutionary operators (selection,
crossover, mutation) to its population, generating a new, potentially superior
generation of candidate policies.
5. This loop continues for a predefined number of generations.
The final output of this new architecture is no longer a simulated log, but a set
of Pareto-optimal policies that can be used by the simulation engine to create an
optimal log L′.
This workflow is further detailed to include the inner workings of the “genetic op-
timizer” in the following section.
3.3.2
Genetic Algorithm Implementation and Core Components
Having established the high-level architectural overview of the proposed exten-
sion and diversion of the original framework, this section details the actual imple-
mentation of the “genetic optimizer” component.
The optimizer is based on the Non-dominated Sorting Genetic Algorithm II (NSGA-
II) [22] and its core components: (1) the representation of policies as individuals,
(2) the fitness evaluation, and (3) the genetic operators.
The following subparagraphs describe each of the core components and their
implementation within the context of the AgentSimulator extension.
Policy Representation and Search Space Pruning
Within the presented extension, an “individual” of the GA population, also referred
to as a “chromosome”, represents a complete, executable agent handover policy
hpi. It is encoded as a nested dictionary structure that maps a given “lite” state
(here defined by the last-acting agent and the activity prefix) to a probability over
all possible next agent assignments.
Pareto Optimal Trace Generation for Agent-Based Business Process Simulation
33
==PAGE:38==
hpi : (afrom, σprefix) 7→P(ato, actto)
(3.5)
For any given state, the sum of probabilities over all possible assignments is equal
to one.
To make the optimization computationally “lighter” we implemented a pruning pre-
processing step. More specifically, the initial handover policy discovered from the
event log is analyzed to separate it into two parts:
1. Fixed Policy: Decision points where only one possible outcome was ever
observed in the historical data. These are considered non-negotiable busi-
ness rules and are not subject to optimization.
2. Variable Policy: Decision points where multiple different agent handovers
were observed. These represent the true areas of discretion in the process.
The chromosome is “shortened” to contain only the variable policy, thus reducing
the dimensionality of the search space and focusing on the parts of the process
that can actually be improved, taking into account the historic and probabilistic
limitations of the original AgentSimulation paper.
Fitness Evaluation
The evaluation of a single chromosome’s fitness is the most computationally in-
tensive component of the optimizer, due to the simulator’s stochastic nature. In
essence, fitness evaluation treats the entire AgentSimulator simulation engine as
a black-box function whose output is to be evaluated. The workflow is described
as follows, and in algorithm 7.
1. Policy Reconstruction: First, the candidate’s variable policy (the chromo-
some) is merged with the static fixed policy to create a single, complete
handover policy, in the format expected by the AgentSimulator.
2. Simulation Configuration: A fresh instance of the simulation model is con-
figured. This is done by taking the rest of the static, originally discovered
simulation parameters (agent instantiation variables, schedule, capabilities,
and activity transition probabilities) and injecting the newly reconstructed
handover policy as the agent handover probabilities.
3. Simulation and Averaging: To obtain a stable performance measure from
the stochastic simulation, the configured simulation model is executed in-
dependently for a predefined number of times (runs per fitness). For each
of these N runs, a complete simulated event log is generated, and its per-
formance metrics (total cost, cycle time, etc.) are calculated. The final,
definitive multi-objective fitness score for the chromosome is the vector of
the mean values for each metric, averaged across all N simulation runs.
34
Pareto Optimal Trace Generation for Agent-Based Business Process Simulation
==PAGE:39==
Algorithm 7 Fitness Evaluation via Multiple Simulations
1: procedure EvaluateFitness(variable_policy, fixed_policy, base_params, N)
2:
full_policy ←MergePolicies(variable_policy, fixed_policy)
3:
all_run_results ←EmptyList
4:
for i ←1 to N do
5:
sim_params ←Copy(base_params)
6:
sim_params.handover_probabilities ←full_policy
7:
simulated_log ←RunSingleSimulation(sim_params)
8:
cost_vector ←CalculateMetrics(simulated_log)
9:
Append(all_run_results, cost_vector)
10:
average_fitness_vector ←VectorMean(all_run_results)
11:
return average_fitness_vector
Genetic Operators
Genetic algorithms get their name from the genetic-like, evolutionary process that
drives them, with the selection, crossover, and mutation operators being their core
“decision” engine [22]. In our case they were designed or chosen to effectively
navigate the solution space of agent handover policies.
Selection
The standard NSGA-II selection mechanism is employed [22].
At
each generation, this operator prioritizes individuals for survival and breeding
based on a dual-criteria approach that is designed to simultaneously achieve two
goals:
• Driving towards the Optimum (Convergence): The primary criterion is the
non-domination rank. The algorithm first identifies the best set of solutions
in the current population that are not dominated by any others. This group is
assigned Rank 1 and given the highest priority. It then finds the next best set
from the remainder, assigning them Rank 2, and so on. This aims to create
a strong evolutionary pressure that pushes the entire population towards the
Pareto front.
• Spreading out the Solutions (Diversity): As a tie-breaker for individuals
within the same rank, the algorithm uses a secondary criterion called crowd-
ing distance. This metric measures how much room a solution has by calcu-
lating the distance to its neighbors on the same front. To maintain a diverse
set of trade-offs, the algorithm gives preference to solutions in less-crowded
regions. This aims to prevent the population from collapsing into a single
point or a small cluster on the Pareto front.
Crossover
A custom decision point crossover operator is designed to create
valid offspring from two parent policies. A naive crossover, which might swap key-
value pairs arbitrarily, may break the internal consistency of a decision’s probability
distribution, causing it to no longer sum to 100%.
To avoid this, our crossover operator functions at the level of a complete decision
point. For instance, consider a state where a JuniorClerk has just completed the
Pareto Optimal Trace Generation for Agent-Based Business Process Simulation
35
==PAGE:40==
InitialDataEntry task. Two parent policies might have different strategies for this
exact scenario:
• Parent Policy A: Has a 90% probability of handing over to a SeniorClerk for
review, and only a 10% chance of handing over to another JuniorClerk.
• Parent Policy B: Has a 20% probability of escalating to a SeniorClerk, and an
80% chance of handing over to another JuniorClerk to continue processing.
The decision point crossover operator has a predefined chance of 50% to swap
these two entire probability distributions. As a result, one offspring inherits Parent
B’s 80/20 strategy for this specific scenario, while still retaining Parent A’s other
decision strategies, and the other offspring features Parent B’s decisions for all
instances other than this one, where it inherits Parent A’s 90/10 policy.
Mutation
Mutation is the primary genetic operator for introducing novelty, as
in simple terms, it “scrambles” the new individuals that enter the population at
randomly selected decision points. To determine the most effective strategy and to
accommodate the different characteristics of varied business models, four distinct
mutation variants were implemented:
Random Mutation Variant
Aiming to ensure a broad exploration of the solution
space, this variant employs the purely random, default mutation operator. At a
randomly selected decision point (as defined in the Crossover section), it com-
pletely re-initializes the probability distribution with new, random values.
Algorithm 8 Random Mutation Operator
1: procedure RandomScrambleMutate(policy, indpb)
2:
if Random(0, 1) > indpb then ▷Probabilistically decide whether to mutate
3:
return policy
4:
Dmutable ←FindMutableDecisionPoints(policy)
5:
if Dmutable is empty then
6:
return policy
7:
dp ←RandomChoice(Dmutable)
▷Select one decision point to change
8:
T ←GetPossibleTransitions(dp)
9:
Pnew ←GenerateRandomDistribution(size(T))
▷Create a new p. dist.
10:
UpdatePolicy(policy, dp, Pnew)
▷Replace the old strategy
11:
return policy
Greedy Mutation Variant
To aggressively exploit more “promising” regions of
the search space, this variant implements an purely opportunistic mutation. Its
purpose is to test the effectiveness of decisive convergence towards the nearest
local optimum.
At a randomly selected decision point, the operator first identifies the single best
and single worst agent choice based on a simple local heuristic (i.e., the agent
with the lowest hourly cost). It then performs an ”all-or-nothing” shift: it moves all
36
Pareto Optimal Trace Generation for Agent-Based Business Process Simulation
==PAGE:41==
probability away from the worst choice. For example, consider a decision point
with the following probability distribution:
• Agent A (low-cost, “best”): 30%
• Agent B (medium-cost): 50%
• Agent C (high-cost, “worst”): 20%
After a greedy mutation, the new distribution would become:
• Agent A (low-cost, “best”): 50%
(30% + 20%)
• Agent B (medium-cost): 50%
• Agent C (high-cost, “worst”): 0%
Algorithm 9 Greedy Mutation Operator
1: procedure GreedyMutate(policy, base_params, objectives, indpb)
2:
if Random(0, 1) > indpb then ▷Probabilistically decide whether to mutate
3:
return policy
4:
dp ←SelectRandomMutableDecisionPoint(policy)
5:
obj ←SelectRandomGuidableObjective(objectives)
▷’cost’ or ’time’
6:
best_choice ←FindBestAgentForObjective(dp, obj, base_params)
7:
worst_choice ←FindWorstAgentForObjective(dp, obj, base_params)
8:
if best_choice = worst_choice then
9:
return policy
10:
prob_to_move ←GetTotalProbability(policy, dp, worst_choice)
11:
SetProbability(policy, dp, worst_choice, 0) ▷Remove prob. from the worst
choice
12:
AddProbability(policy, dp, best_choice, prob_to_move) ▷Give it to the best
choice
13:
return policy
Guided Mutation Variant
Aiming to subtly refine already assumed high-quality
solutions, this variant makes a small, greedy-like adjustment. It is meant to oper-
ate in a search landscape that is already relatively smooth.
Similar to the greedy operator, this mutation first identifies the best and worst
agent choices at a decision point based on a local heuristic. However, instead of
an “all-or-nothing” shift, it moves a small, random portion of probability from the
worst choice to the best one. For example, consider the same initial probability
distribution:
• Agent A (low-cost, “best”): 30%
• Agent B (medium-cost): 50%
• Agent C (high-cost, “worst”): 20%
The operator might decide to move, for example, one-quarter of the worst choice’s
probability (a random portion). The new distribution would become:
Pareto Optimal Trace Generation for Agent-Based Business Process Simulation
37
==PAGE:42==
• Agent A (low-cost, “best”): 35%
(30% + 5%)
• Agent B (medium-cost): 50%
• Agent C (high-cost, “worst”): 15%
(20% - 5%)
Algorithm 10 Guided Mutation Operator
1: procedure GuidedMutate(policy, base_params, objectives, indpb)
2:
if Random(0, 1) > indpb then ▷Probabilistically decide whether to mutate
3:
return policy
4:
dp ←SelectRandomMutableDecisionPoint(policy)
5:
if dp is null then
6:
return policy
7:
obj ←SelectRandomGuidableObjective(objectives) ▷e.g., ’cost’ or ’time’
8:
best_choice ←FindBestAgentForObjective(dp, obj, base_params)
9:
worst_choice ←FindWorstAgentForObjective(dp, obj, base_params)
10:
if best_choice = worst_choice then
11:
return policy
12:
fraction ←Random(0.1, 0.5)
▷Determine a small portion to move
13:
total_prob_worst ←GetTotalProbability(policy, dp, worst_choice)
14:
prob_to_move ←total_prob_worst × fraction
15:
DecreaseProbability(policy, dp, worst_choice, prob_to_move)
▷Slightly
reduce bad choice
16:
AddProbability(policy, dp, best_choice, prob_to_move)
▷Slightly increase
good choice
17:
return policy
Hybrid Mutation Variant
To balance the competing needs of exploration, ex-
ploitation, and refinement, this variant uses a mixed strategy.
At each muta-
tion event, it probabilistically applies one of the three aforementioned mutation
functions based on a single random draw. The specific probabilities are explicitly
weighted to favor refinement over more disruptive changes:
• 60% probability: Guided Mutation is applied.
• 20% probability: Greedy Mutation is applied.
• 20% probability: Random Mutation is applied.
This weighting reflects a hypothesis that once the GA has found a reasonably good
region of the search space, small adjustments should be the most effective way to
progress, while still retaining a significant chance for aggressive exploitation and
broad exploration to maintain diversity and escape local optima.
Core Algorithm Parameters
We should also take some time to note that the
behavior and performance of the GA are governed by a set of key hyperparame-
ters that control the balance between the breadth and depth of the search. The
primary parameters configured for this implementation are:
38
Pareto Optimal Trace Generation for Agent-Based Business Process Simulation
==PAGE:43==
• Population Size: This parameter defines the number of individuals main-
tained in each generation. A larger population provides greater diversity and
allows the algorithm to explore more of the solution space simultaneously,
reducing the risk of premature convergence to a local optimum. A smaller
population, while computationally faster, increases this risk.
• Number of Generations: This parameter dictates the total number of evo-
lutionary iterations the algorithm will perform. It controls the depth of the
search. More generations provide more opportunities for the algorithm to
refine solutions and converge towards the true Pareto front, at the cost of
longer execution times.
• Crossover Probability (cx_prob): This is the probability that two selected
parent individuals will undergo the crossover operation to create offspring.
If the crossover event does not occur, the offspring are simply clones of their
parents. This parameter, along with the mutation probability, determines the
degree of exploitation, as it controls how often the algorithm combines the
strategies of existing high-performing solutions.
• Mutation Probability (mut_prob): This is the probability that a newly cre-
ated offspring (either through crossover or cloning) will be modified by one
of the mutation operators. This parameter controls the rate at which new
strategies are introduced into the population.
• Simulations per Fitness Evaluation (runs_per_fitness): This parame-
ter is the primary mechanism for mitigating the “noisy” fitness landscape
caused by stochastic activity durations. It specifies the number of indepen-
dent simulation runs that are executed and averaged to compute a single,
stable fitness score for each candidate policy. The higher the value the more
reliable the estimate of a policy’s true performance.
The specific values used for these parameters in the experimental runs are de-
tailed in the Evaluation chapter.
Having established the core notions and components of the implementation, the
next section provides a toy example to demonstrate the flow of the optimization in
action.
3.3.3
Example Execution
To demonstrate the entire evolutionary workflow in action, we consider a simplified
toy example.
The Environment and Goal
Imagine a simple two-step business process: Task A (Data Entry) is followed by
Task B (Approval).
• Task A is always performed by a “System” agent.
• Task B can be performed by one of two available human agents:
– A Generalist, who is slow but cheap (e.g., takes 4 hours, costs €20/hr).
– A , who is fast but expensive (e.g., takes 1 hour, costs €50/hr).
Pareto Optimal Trace Generation for Agent-Based Business Process Simulation
39
==PAGE:44==
There is only one single decision point to be optimized, which regards the prob-
ability of the System handing over the case to the Generalist or Specialist agent
after completing Task A. The goal of this optimization is to find the Pareto-optimal
trade-offs between Man-Hour Cost and total Cycle Time.
GA Parameters for the Example
We will use a small set of parameters to keep the example clear:
• Population Size: 4 individuals
• Number of Generations: 1
• Crossover Probability: 1.0 (will always happen)
• Mutation Probability: 0.5 (50% chance)
• Mutation Strategy: Hybrid
• Runs per Fitness: 5
Generation 0: Initialization and First Evaluation
The GA begins by creating
an initial population of 4 individuals (policies). Initially, 4 copies of the original
baseline policy are created, then half are replaced with completely random policies
and half are mutated. The first individual of the newborn population (in our case,
a random one) is replaced by the original policy to ensure that it is preserved. We
note that for this simple problem, a policy can be defined simply by the probability
of choosing the Specialist.
Individual
Policy
(Prob. of Specialist)
Fitness
(Cost, Time)
Rank
Status
Individual 1
10%
(€82, 3.1h)
1
Non-Dominated
Individual 2
90%
(€122, 1.3h)
1
Non-Dominated
Individual 3
50%
(€100, 2.5h)
1
Non-Dominated
Individual 4
30%
(€90, 3.7h)
2
Dominated (by 1)
Table 3.1: Population at Generation 0
After running the simulation for each policy, we obtain their fitness scores (Ta-
ble 3.1). The NSGA-II algorithm then determines the non-domination rank. In-
dividual 4 is dominated by Individual 1 because it is both more expensive and
slower. The initial Pareto front consists of Individuals 1, 2, and 3.
Generation 1: Evolution and Improvement
The algorithm now creates a new
population of 4 individuals by breeding from the parent population. It will create
two pairs of offspring.
Creating the First Pair of Offspring
1. Selection: The algorithm selects two parents. Based on their high non-
domination rank, it selects Individual 1 (10% Specialist) and Individual 2
(90% Specialist).
40
Pareto Optimal Trace Generation for Agent-Based Business Process Simulation
==PAGE:45==
2. Crossover: With a crossover probability of 1.0, the operator is guaranteed
to run. It swaps the single decision point between the two parents, creating
two initial offspring:
• Offspring A: Has a 90% Specialist policy (from Parent 2).
• Offspring B: Has a 10% Specialist policy (from Parent 1).
3. Mutation: Each offspring is now considered for mutation with a 50% prob-
ability.
• Let’s say Offspring A is selected for mutation. The algorithm applies the
Guided Mutation strategy. It sees that for cost, the Generalist agent is
better. It nudges the policy in that direction by moving a small amount of
probability. The policy changes from 90% Specialist to 80% Specialist.
• Let’s say Offspring B is not selected for mutation and remains at 10%
Specialist.
Creating the Second Pair of Offspring
1. Selection: The algorithm again selects two parents. Let’s say it selects In-
dividual 3 (50% Specialist) and again selects Individual 1 (10% Specialist).
2. Crossover: Crossover is applied again, creating two more initial offspring:
• Offspring C: Has a 10% Specialist policy (from Parent 1).
• Offspring D: Has a 50% Specialist policy (from Parent 3).
3. Mutation: Each of these offspring is also considered for mutation with a
50% probability.
• Let’s say Offspring C is selected for mutation. The algorithm applies
the Greedy Mutation and randomly selects to optimize for the cost di-
mension. It identifies that the “Generalist” selection is more efficient
than the “Specialist”. It performs an “all-or-nothing” move, shifting all
probability away from the Specialist. The policy changes from 10%
Specialist to 0% Specialist.
• Let’s say Offspring D is also selected for mutation. The algorithm ap-
plies the Random Mutation strategy. It discards the 50% policy and
generates a new, completely random probability. The policy changes
from 50% Specialist to a new random value, say 65% Specialist.
Final Population for Generation 1
The NSGA-II selection mechanism is ap-
plied to the combined pool of all 8 individuals (the 4 original parents from Gener-
ation 0 and the 4 new offspring). It ranks all individuals based on non-domination
and crowding distance, and the absolute best 4 individuals are selected to survive
and form the new population.
The new population now consists of only four new, evolved individuals. After
evaluating their fitness, we might get the results shown in Table ??.
Pareto Optimal Trace Generation for Agent-Based Business Process Simulation
41
==PAGE:46==
Individual
Policy (Prob. of Specialist)
Fitness (Cost, Time)
Status
Parent 1
10%
(€82, 3.1h)
Non-Dominated
Parent 2
90%
(€122, 1.3h)
Non-Dominated
Offspring A
80%
(€116, 1.6h)
Non-Dominated
Offspring C
0%
(€80, 4.0h)
Non-Dominated
Table 3.2: Final Population after Generation 1.
In this new generation, the evolutionary process has successfully improved the
overall set of solutions. The best parents from the previous generation were pre-
served due to the elitist selection strategy, while high-performing offspring created
through crossover and mutation have replaced weaker individuals.
In the case of more generations, this iterative process continues until the final
generation is reached.
42
Pareto Optimal Trace Generation for Agent-Based Business Process Simulation
==PAGE:47==
4
Evaluation
4.1
Rationale for the Evaluation Framework
As the evaluation of heuristic-based, multi-objective optimization algorithms in a
stochastic simulation environment presents a significant challenge, we utilize two
core principles from the field of computational science to guide our approach.
First, the “No Free Lunch” theorem [58] posits that no single optimization algo-
rithm is universally superior for all problems. This makes a comparative evalua-
tion framework where different strategies are benchmarked against one another
to understand their relative strengths and weaknesses for the specific problem at
hand a necessity.
Second, for non-deterministic and NP-complete problems like Resource Alloca-
tion [15, 47], the true Pareto-optimal front is computationally intractable to find. It
is impossible to exhaustively search the entire solution space. Consequently, we
cannot measure the absolute quality of our solutions against a known,=, “perfect”
answer.
To address these challenges, we adopt an internal benchmarking methodology
inspired by López-Pintado, Dumas, and Berx [15], which relies on creating a Ref-
erence Pareto Front (PRef) by pooling the best results from all tested variants. This
PRef serves as the best-known approximation of the true optimal front, allowing
for relative performance comparisons.
4.2
Experimental Setup
4.2.1
Datasets and Data Preparation
Dataset Selection
The evaluation is conducted on five publicly available event logs, which are also
utilized in the original AgentSimulator paper [5]. The datasets consist of both
synthetic and real-world processes, as presented in table 4.1. For four of those,
their original simulation was executed using the autonomous configuration in the
AgentSimulator paper. The fifth (Loan Application) models an orchestrated pro-
cess, but it is included here, simulated with an autonomous configuration.
Other than consistency with the original paper, the selection of this specific subset
of logs is also guided by technical and practical constraints. Namely, a key require-
ment for the AgentSimulator’s discovery phase is the presence of fine-grained
start and end timestamps for each event, which significantly narrows the pool of
suitable public datasets. Furthermore, within the original paper’s set of timestamp-
complete logs, the real-world datasets, BPI12W and BPI17W, were excluded from
the thesis’ evaluation due to technical incompatibilities encountered during the re-
production of the baseline simulation environment.
Pareto Optimal Trace Generation for Agent-Based Business Process Simulation
43
==PAGE:48==
Table 4.1: Summary of Evaluation Datasets.
Dataset Name
Type
# Traces
# Events
# Activities
# Resources
Loan Application
syn
1000
7492
12
19
ACR
real
954
6870
18
432
P2P
syn
608
9119
21
27
Confidential 1000
syn
1000
38160
42
26
Confidential 2000
syn
2000
77418
42
26
For each dataset, a temporal train-test split is performed. The first 80% of cases,
ordered by their start time, constitute the training set (df_train), which is used by
AgentSimulator for model discovery. The remaining 20% of cases form the test set
(df_test) serve as the “ground truth” for evaluating the realism and performance
of the generated traces. This splitting methodology is identical to the one used in
the original AgentSimulator paper, ensuring a fair and direct comparison against
the baseline.
We also note that it is important to contextualize the expected outcomes of this
evaluation. While several of the chosen logs feature concurrent activities, the
AgentSimulator framework processes tasks sequentially within a single case. This
architectural mismatch represents a known source of deviation between any sim-
ulated trace (baseline or optimized) and the ground truth.
Cost Determination
It is worth mentioning that none of the available datasets feature relevant cost in-
formation, which is, of course, necessary for cost-based optimization. This makes
the creation of a synthetic cost model necessary for each of the available process
logs. While a simple approach, such as assigning a uniform unitary cost to all
resources as done in López-Pintado, Dumas, and Berx [15], ensures a simple
baseline, it prevents the exploration of realistic cost-time trade-offs.
To create a more plausible optimization scenario, a synthetic, performance corre-
lated cost model was developed for each dataset. The methodology is designed
to reflect the real-world principle that more efficient or specialized resources are
typically more expensive. The procedure is as follows:
1. Agent Profiling: First, a performance profile was generated for each agent
based on their activity durations and capabilities discovered from the training
log.
2. Performance Tier Clustering: K-Means clustering was applied to these
performance profiles to automatically group agents into five distinct perfor-
mance “tiers.”
3. Tier-Based Cost Assignment: Each tier was then mapped to a predefined
hourly cost range, establishing a direct correlation where higher-performing
tiers are associated with higher costs (e.g., Tier 1: 10–25/hr, Tier 5: 60–
90/hr).
4. Individual Cost Generation: Finally, a specific hourly cost was randomly
sampled for each agent from within their tier’s assigned range.
44
Pareto Optimal Trace Generation for Agent-Based Business Process Simulation
==PAGE:49==
This methodology ensures that the optimization algorithms face a realistic eco-
nomic tension, forcing them to navigate the trade-off of utilizing fast, expensive
resources versus slower, more economical ones.
4.2.2
Optimization Scenarios: Genetic Algorithm Variants
The primary goal of this evaluation is to determine the most effective configuration
for the proposed Genetic Algorithm (GA) and to identify whether it sufficiently op-
timizes the original simulated process. To this end, four variants of the GA, each
differing in its mutation strategy, will be tested. As described in Chapter 3 these
are:
1. Exploration-Focused GA (Random Mutation): Uses a mutation operator
that makes unstructured changes to an individual’s policy.
2. Exploitation-Focused GA (Greedy Mutation): Incorporates a greedy heuris-
tic into its mutation operator to aggressively push a segment of the policy
towards a locally optimal choice.
3. Refinement-Focused GA (Guided Mutation): Uses a subtle mutation op-
erator that makes small adjustments to an existing policy, pushing it slightly
closer to local optima and away from the worst-case decision.
4. Hybrid GA (Balanced Mutation): Uses a mixed strategy that probabilisti-
cally applies all three operators (exploration, exploitation, and refinement).
4.2.3
Benchmarks for Comparison
The performance of the four GA variants will be assessed against three bench-
marks, each answering a different evaluation question:
• Benchmark 1: The “As-Is” Simulated Baseline Policy. This is the pri-
mary control group, defined as the performance of the unmodified AgentSim-
ulator operating in its default autonomous handover mode. Since the output
of the original simulator is non-deterministic, this “as-is” benchmark is the
mean of 10 simulation runs.
• Benchmark 2: Ground Truth (Original Event Log). To assess the realism
of the generated optimal traces, their costs will be compared to those of the
raw historical traces in the test set (df_test).
• Benchmark 3: The Reference Pareto Front (PRef). To compare the four
GA variants against each other, a PRef will be constructed by aggregating all
non-dominated solutions discovered across all runs of all four variants. This
PRef represents the best-known approximation of the true optimal front.
4.2.4
Evaluation Metrics
The evaluation metrics employed are divided into two categories: metrics for as-
sessing overall performance improvement (Benchmarks 1 and 2), and metrics
for assessing the quality of the discovered Pareto fronts, estimating how good
each variant is at searching for a diverse and high-quality set of optimal solutions
(Benchmark 3).
Pareto Optimal Trace Generation for Agent-Based Business Process Simulation
45
==PAGE:50==
Performance Improvement Metrics
Mean Improvement Ratio
Provides a high-level, aggregate measure of the im-
provement of each variant’s Pareto front, compared to the baseline’s average
performance. The calculation is performed independently for each cost objective
(Cycle Time, Man-Hour Cost) as [15]:
Most Balanced Solution Improvement
To identify a single, actionable policy
representing the best compromise, we select the “most balanced” solution from
the discovered (approximated) Pareto front (PApprox). This is the solution that is
geometrically closest to the ideal point in a normalized objective space, meaning
the beginning of the cost axes.
First, for each objective j, the set of solutions on the front is normalized to a
common scale of [0, 1]. The most balanced solution is then identified as the one
with the minimum Euclidean distance to the origin in this new, normalized space.
The performance improvements for this single, selected policy are then reported
against the baseline.
Pareto Front Quality Metrics
These metrics are used for the comparative evaluation of the four Genetic Algo-
rithm variants against the joint, Reference Pareto Front (PRef). They are adapted
from the simulation and multi-objective optimization literature [15] [47] and are
designed to assess two key aspects of a front’s quality:
1. Convergence: How close the discovered solutions are to the true optimum
2. Diversity: How well the solutions are distributed across the front.
Hyperarea Ratio (HR)
The Hyperarea captures both convergence and diversity
[59] and measures the area of the space that is weakly dominated by an approx-
imated Pareto front (PApprox) relative to a pre-defined worst-case reference point,
⃗r. To provide a normalized and comparable measure, we use the Hyperarea Ra-
tio, which is computed by comparing the hyperarea of the approximated front to
that of the reference front:
HR = HA(PApprox)
HA(PRef)
(4.1)
The result is a value in the range [0, 1]. A value closer to 1.0 indicates a higher-
quality front, with a score of 1.0 signifying that the approximated front covers at
least the same area as the reference front.
Purity
Purity measures pure convergence [60]. It answers the question: “What
proportion of the solutions found by a variant are members of the best-known set
of optimal solutions?” It is calculated as the ratio of the number of solutions in the
approximated front (PApprox) that are also in the reference front (PRef) to the total
number of solutions in the approximated front:
Purity = |PApprox ∩PRef|
|PApprox|
(4.2)
A Purity score closer to 1.0 indicates excellent convergence, as it means the al-
gorithm is highly effective at finding solutions that are part of the best-known front.
46
Pareto Optimal Trace Generation for Agent-Based Business Process Simulation
==PAGE:51==
Averaged Hausdorff Distance (davgH)
This metric provides a formal measure
of the distance between the approximated front and the reference front, serving
as an indicator of convergence [61]. It is more robust against outliers than the
standard Hausdorff distance. It is calculated as the maximum of two average
distances: the average distance from each point in PApprox to its nearest neighbor
in PRef, and vice versa.
A lower value for the Averaged Hausdorff Distance signifies better convergence,
with a value of 0 indicating that the two fronts are identical.
Delta Spread (∆)
The Delta Spread metric is a measure of diversity, evaluating
how uniformly the solutions are distributed along the Pareto front [60]. A lower
value indicates a better, more even spread. The metric combines the distances
between the extreme points of the approximated and reference fronts with the
standard deviation of distances between consecutive points on the approximated
front.
Let PApprox = {⃗p1, ..., ⃗pN} be the set of solutions sorted by one objective. The
metric is defined as:
∆= df + dl + ∑N−1
i=1 |di −¯d|
df + dl + (N −1) ¯d
(4.3)
where:
• df and dl are the Euclidean distances between the extreme (”first” and ”last”)
solutions of PApprox and PRef.
• di is the Euclidean distance between consecutive solutions ⃗pi and ⃗pi+1 in the
sorted PApprox.
• ¯d is the average of all distances di.
This metric effectively measures the non-uniformity of the front. A value close to
0 indicates a perfectly uniform distribution of solutions.
4.2.5
Hyperparameter Configuration and Computational
Environment
To ensure the reproducibility of the results, it is necessary to detail the specific hy-
perparameter settings of the computational environment in which the experiments
were conducted. Due to the high computational cost of the optimization process,
two distinct experimental runs were performed.
Primary High-Fidelity Experiment
The primary experiment was designed to
allow for a deep exploration of the solution space. The GA was configured with
the following parameters:
• Population Size: 100 individuals
• Number of Generations: 100
• Simulations per Fitness Evaluation: 100 runs
• Mutation Probability: 0.3
Pareto Optimal Trace Generation for Agent-Based Business Process Simulation
47
==PAGE:52==
• Crossover Probability: 0.7
Secondary Scaled-Down Experiment
Due to computational budget restric-
tions, to ensure that a complete set of results could be obtained for all five datasets,
a secondary, scaled-down run was conducted.
This run served as a feasibil-
ity analysis and allowed for a complete, albeit less deep, comparison across all
datasets. The parameters were adjusted as follows:
• Population Size: 20 individuals
• Number of Generations: 10
The results from the high-fidelity experiment will be the primary focus of the anal-
ysis, while the results from the scaled-down run will be used specifically for the
analysis of the Confidential, C1000 and C2000, datasets.
Table 4.2: Average Runtimes for the
High-Fidelity Experiment.
Dataset Name
Runtime (hrs)
Loan Application
5.66
ACR
12.46
P2P
8.94
C1000
>20.0*
C2000
>20.0*
Table 4.3: Average Runtimes for the
Scaled-Down Experiment.
Dataset Name
Runtime (hrs)
Loan Application
0.17
ACR
0.62
P2P
0.36
C1000
6.2
C2000
14.25
*The C1000 and C2000 datasets did not complete the high-fidelity experiment within the
20-hour time limit and were therefore timed out.
Both experiment setups for all 5 datasets were executed on a High-Performance
Computing (HPC) cluster. Each run was allocated 20 CPU cores (Intel Xeon Gold
6226R) with 16 GB of memory per core. A computational time limit of 20 hours
was imposed for each dataset/variant pair. The average runtimes are presented
in Table 4.2.
48
Pareto Optimal Trace Generation for Agent-Based Business Process Simulation
==PAGE:53==
5
Results
This chapter presents the quantitative outcomes of the experiments designed in
Chapter 4. The results are presented without interpretation, focusing on the nu-
merical performance of the four Genetic Algorithm (GA) variants against the es-
tablished benchmarks. The analysis and discussion of the meaning behind these
results will be reserved for Chapter 6.
The chapter is structured to first establish the baseline performance, then to eval-
uate the improvements offered by the optimized policies, and finally to discuss the
Pareto Front Quality of the four variants, as compared to the Reference Pareto
Front.
5.1
General Performance Improvement Evaluation
5.1.1
Baseline Performance Analysis
Before evaluating the optimization strategies, we need to establish a clear perfor-
mance baseline. As defined in the experimental setup, this consists of two com-
ponents: (1) the “ground truth” performance derived from the original test data
(Benchmark 1), and (2) the simulated performance of the “As-Is” policy from the
unmodified AgentSimulator (Benchmark 2).
Due to the stochastic nature of the simulation, the “As-Is” Baseline Policy does not
yield a single, deterministic outcome. Therefore, the baseline was re-evaluated
at the start of each individual optimization experiment by averaging the results
of 10 simulation runs. Table 5.1 presents the aggregated baseline performance
across all five datasets, providing the benchmark against which all improvements
are measured.
Table 5.1: Ground Truth vs. Simulated Baseline Performance (Mean and Stan-
dard Deviation).
Dataset
Metric
Ground Truth
Simulated Baseline (As-Is)
Mean
Std. Dev.
LoanApp
Man-Hour Cost (€)
107,845.58
90,246.64
515.94
Wait Time (h)
0.3132
0.32
0.01
ACR
Man-Hour Cost (€)
883.35
40,158.74
288.18
Wait Time (h)
13.8933
46.74
0.08
P2P
Man-Hour Cost (€)
60,356.33
34,783.67
1,244.38
Wait Time (h)
59.9390
0.83
0.19
C1000
Man-Hour Cost (€)
91,005.56
85,306.44
19,496.17
Wait Time (h)
0.252
1.680
0.194
C2000
Man-Hour Cost (€)
218,475.27
218,831.03
6,323.87
Wait Time (h)
0.216
1.597
0.091
Pareto Optimal Trace Generation for Agent-Based Business Process Simulation
49
==PAGE:54==
Table 5.2: Percentage improvement of the most balanced solution over the base-
line, split by As-Is Simulation and Ground Truth. Bold values indicate the best-
performing variant for each dataset.
Dataset
GA Variant
Man-Hour Cost Impr. (%)
Wait Time Impr. (%)
As-Is
Ground Truth
As-Is
Ground Truth
LoanApp
Random
15.22%
29.12%
12.65%
6.08%
Greedy
14.94%
28.87%
10.87%
10.13%
Guided
16.49%
29.50%
9.57%
7.07%
Hybrid
12.30%
27.14%
13.08%
10.51%
P2P
Random
30.99%
59.96%
70.73%
99.70%
Greedy
38.58%
63.79%
60.06%
99.38%
Guided
35.47%
61.68%
72.39%
99.69%
Hybrid
42.91%
69.08%
54.64%
99.19%
ACR
Random
40.20%
-2706.39%
6.99%
-211.89%
Greedy
93.51%
-192.11%
20.40%
-167.89%
Guided
75.52%
-1098.49%
15.94%
-180.94%
Hybrid
70.61%
-1239.91%
7.46%
-210.64%
C1000*
Random
6.09%
13.59%
26.78%
-430.40%
Greedy
14.12%
18.01%
26.07%
-385.46%
Guided
10.62%
14.24%
23.58%
-546.90%
Hybrid
9.16%
20.57%
21.46%
-464.03%
C2000*
Random
6.26%
9.24%
11.83%
-594.43%
Greedy
7.07%
3.57%
12.99%
-546.55%
Guided
4.12%
2.53%
11.21%
-530.62%
Hybrid
5.83%
3.94%
11.95%
-534.66%
*Results for C1000 and C2000 are from the scaled-down experimental configuration.
5.1.2
Performance Improvement of Optimized Policies
The effectiveness of the four GA variants was evaluated by comparing their out-
puts to the simulated baseline calculated at the beginning of each experiment run.
We analyze the improvements from two perspectives: the performance of the sin-
gle “most balanced” solution from each Pareto front, and the average performance
across the entire front.
Most Balanced Solution Improvement
The “most balanced” solution represents a single, actionable policy that offers
the best compromise between the competing objectives. Table 5.2 shows the
percentage improvement of this single solution for each GA variant and dataset
when compared to the simulated baseline.
Mean Improvement Ratio of the Pareto Front
This metric provides a high-level view of the overall quality of an entire Pareto
front by comparing its average performance to the baseline. Table 5.3 presents
these aggregate improvement ratios.
5.2
Pareto Front Analysis
Here, the overall quality of the entire set of non-dominated solutions discovered by
each GA is assessed (Benchmark 3), by comparing the approximated Pareto front
50
Pareto Optimal Trace Generation for Agent-Based Business Process Simulation
==PAGE:55==
Table 5.3: Mean Improvement Ratio of the Full Pareto Front vs. Baseline, split by
As-Is Simulation and Ground Truth.
Dataset
GA Variant
Man-Hour Cost Impr. (%)
Wait Time Impr. (%)
As-Is
Ground Truth
As-Is
Ground Truth
LoanApp
Random
14.07%
28.16%
13.75%
5.00%
Greedy
14.75%
28.71%
5.78%
7.38%
Guided
15.54%
28.70%
9.88%
6.63%
Hybrid
15.54%
27.52%
13.75%
7.25%
P2P
Random
33.97%
61.69%
67.92%
99.67%
Greedy
38.46%
63.72%
58.45%
99.35%
Guided
36.44%
62.26%
68.10%
99.64%
Hybrid
40.54%
67.79%
55.44%
99.20%
ACR
Random
37.52%
-2832.19%
5.21%
-217.86%
Greedy
92.98%
-215.85%
19.76%
-170.02%
Guided
83.38%
-713.66%
8.43%
-206.03%
Hybrid
67.65%
-1374.58%
2.50%
-228.37%
C1000*
Random
6.19%
26.86%
13.52%
-430.82%
Greedy
13.85%
25.84%
18.76%
-381.00%
Guided
9.30%
22.45%
13.82%
-550.03%
Hybrid
9.16%
21.46%
20.57%
-430.82%
C2000*
Random
6.26%
2.03%
11.83%
-594.43%
Greedy
5.58%
0.20%
12.68%
-548.87%
Guided
1.82%
3.63%
10.88%
-532.97%
Hybrid
5.53%
9.24%
11.14%
-540.51%
*Results for C1000 and C2000 are from the scaled-down experimental configuration.
from each variant (PApprox) against the aggregated Reference Pareto Front (PRef).
As with the previous section, results from the primary high-fidelity experiment are
presented where available (LoanApp, ACR, P2P), while results from the secondary
scaled-down experiment are used for the remaining datasets (C1000, C2000).
Table 5.4: Hyperarea Reference Points used for each Dataset.
Dataset
Reference Cost (€)
Reference Wait Time (h)
Loan Application
81,247.13
0.32
ACR
44,891.87
52.63
P2P
30,123.05
0.56
Confidential 1000*
104699.63
1.70
Confidential 2000*
229126.58,
1.55
*Reference point derived from the scaled-down experimental configuration.
For the quantitative comparison, the four Pareto front quality metrics defined in
Section 4.2.4 were calculated for each variant on each dataset. The results, mea-
suring Hyperarea Ratio, Purity, Averaged Hausdorff Distance, and Delta Spread,
are summarized in Table 5.5.
We note that to ensure a fair and consistent comparison for the Hyperarea metric,
Pareto Optimal Trace Generation for Agent-Based Business Process Simulation
51
==PAGE:56==
Table 5.5: Pareto Front Quality Metrics for each GA Variant across all Datasets.
Bold values indicate the best performance for each metric within a given dataset.
Dataset
GA Variant
Hyperarea Ratio (↑)
Purity (↑)
Hausdorff Dist. (↓)
Delta Spread (↓)
LoanApp
Random
0.856
0.000
161.10
0.865
Greedy
0.931
0.273
205.09
1.167
Guided
0.966
0.364
149.36
0.845
Hybrid
0.664
0.000
475.71
0.746
P2P
Random
0.960
0.714
404.00
0.971
Greedy
0.412
0.000
2107.67
0.962
Guided
0.960
0.231
384.61
1.049
Hybrid
0.280
0.538
1075.02
0.903
ACR
Random
0.476
0.000
22080.61
1.020
Greedy
1.000
1.000
0.000
0.750
Guided
0.842
0.000
3374.10
1.009
Hybrid
0.580
0.000
9455.14
1.114
C1000*
Random
0.788
0.667
219.38
0.147
Greedy
0.962
1.000
701.38
0.837
Guided
0.225
0.000
2871.51
0.838
Hybrid
0.015
0.000
36976.73
inf
C2000*
Random
0.115
1.000
10036.86
inf
Greedy
0.694
0.333
3829.67
0.690
Guided
0.693
0.000
4133.29
0.828
Hybrid
0.893
0.833
1824.86
0.865
*Results for C1000 and C2000 are from the scaled-down experimental configuration.
Arrows (↑↓) indicate whether a higher or lower value is better for the given metric.
a unique reference point was calculated for each dataset. This point was de-
termined by finding the maximum cost and maximum wait time observed across
all solutions from all GA variants for that specific dataset, and then adding a 5%
buffer. This method provides a consistent “worst-case” anchor for each experi-
ment (table 5.4).
52
Pareto Optimal Trace Generation for Agent-Based Business Process Simulation
==PAGE:57==
6
Discussion
6.1
Evaluation Against Simulated Baseline and
Ground Truth
6.1.1
Ground Truth Comparison and Limitations
In order to interpret the optimization results it is necessary to first assess the fi-
delity of the simulated baseline against the “ground truth” performance of the orig-
inal process. This comparison, detailed in Table 5.1, reveals that the descriptive
accuracy of the “as-is” simulation, at least in terms of total agent cost and wait
time, varies significantly across the different datasets.
The most significant deviations are observed in the ACR and P2P datasets. More
specifically, for the ACR process, the simulated baseline dramatically overesti-
mates both cost (40,158€ vs. 883€) and, most notably, wait time (46.7h vs. 13.9h).
This suggests that the simulation is modeling a system with much more severe
resource contention and bottlenecks than the real-world process. On the con-
trary, the P2P dataset shows the opposite pattern for wait time, with the ground
truth featuring an extremely high average wait time of nearly 60 hours, whereas
the simulated baseline predicts an almost negligible 0.83 hours. This indicates
that the primary cause of delay here is not captured by the simulator’s standard
discovery of resource calendars and processing times, but is most likely caused
by the environment’s external delays. The AgentSimulator framework includes
an optional mechanism to discover and model such “extraneous delays”, which
was enabled for the P2P experiments. However, the large discrepancy remained,
which suggests that the nature of the delays in this specific log may be too com-
plex or varied to be captured by the framework’s discovery methods.
The Confidential datasets (C1000, C2000) present a slightly different picture. For
Man-Hour Cost, the simulated baseline is relatively accurate, predicting values
very close to the ground truth. However, for Wait Time, the simulation again shows
a significant overestimation, predicting wait times that are 6-7 times higher than
the ground truth. This pattern points to a limitation in the simulation engine itself,
likely related to its handling of resource allocation and queuing.
These findings need to be taken into account when analyzing the performance
improvements reported, especially against the ground truth (Benchmark 1). More
specifically, the negative improvement scores against the ground truth seen in
ACR, C1000, and C2000 should not be interpreted as a failure of the optimizer,
as they merely indicate that the GA was only successful at finding an optimal policy
for a simulated world that was a skewed replica of reality. The only dataset where
we can compare the optimized costs to the ground truth is LoanApp, as both
simulated Man-Hour Cost and Wait Time are reasonably similar to the original
process.
Specifically, the “most balanced” solutions found by all GA variants for the LoanApp
Pareto Optimal Trace Generation for Agent-Based Business Process Simulation
53
==PAGE:58==
dataset reduced the real-world Man-Hour Cost by over 27% and the Wait Time by
over 6% (Table 5.2). This positive trend also holds for the mean improvement ra-
tio, as it shows a consistent reduction in both cost (over 27%) and time (over 5%)
across all variants (Table 5.3). This confirms that, for a sufficiently accurate simu-
lation model, without external delays from the environment, the proposed frame-
work can indeed discover policies that lead to tangible, real-world performance
gains.
6.1.2
Comparative Analysis of the Mutation Variants
While all GA variants successfully discovered policies that outperformed the base-
line, a closer analysis of the results reveals that no single mutation strategy is uni-
versally superior. The effectiveness of each approach (exploration, exploitation,
and refinement) appears to be dependent on the specific process that is being
optimized. The following analysis will proceed on a dataset-by-dataset basis to
highlight these differences.
For the three datasets that completed the full, high-fidelity experimental run (LoanApp,
ACR, and P2P), clear patterns emerge regarding the effectiveness of the different
search strategies.
• LoanApp: This dataset appears to favor a balanced search. When consider-
ing the most balanced solution (Table 5.2), the Guided variant achieved the
best Man-Hour Cost improvement (16.49%), while the Hybrid variant was
superior for Wait Time improvement (13.08%). Similarly, when assessing
the mean of the Pareto front, the hybrid mutation still seems to be perform-
ing the best with a Man-Hour Cost improvement of 15.54% and a Wait Time
improvement of 13.75%. This suggests that for this process, small, intelli-
gent refinements and a balanced portfolio of strategies are more effective
than aggressive, exploitative moves.
• P2P: For this dataset, when comparing for both the most balanced and av-
erage of the solutions, the Hybrid variant found the solution with the best
cost reduction (42.91% and 40.54%, respectively), and the Guided variant
was superior when optimizing for wait time (72.39% and 68.10%).
• ACR: In contrast, the results for the ACR dataset (both for the most balanced
and mean solution) show a dominant performance by the Greedy mutation
variant. It achieved the best improvement in both Man-Hour Cost (93.51%
ans 93.98%) and Wait Time (20.40% and 19.76), vastly outperforming all
other strategies. This outcome potentially suggests that the solution space
for ACR could be characterized by steep, isolated optima so an aggressive,
hill-climbing exploitation strategy may produce a high-quality solution.
The results for the C1000 and C2000 datasets exhibit a higher degree of vari-
ability and inconsistency compared to the other logs. For example, in the C1000
dataset, the Random variant found the best single solution for wait time improve-
ment (26.78%), but the Hybrid variant produced the front with the best average
wait time improvement (20.57%) . Furthermore, these datasets show the most dis-
crepancy between improvements over the simulated baseline versus the ground
truth, with different mutation strategies performing better for each baseline.
54
Pareto Optimal Trace Generation for Agent-Based Business Process Simulation
==PAGE:59==
This variability may be primarily attributable to the scaled-down experimental con-
figuration used for these datasets. With only 10 generations, the GA has signifi-
cantly less opportunity to converge. The final results are therefore more heavily
influenced by the random initial population and early mutations, representing a
snapshot of an “immature” search rather than a stable, converged outcome. This
effect is likely compounded by the inherent complexity of these processes. As
shown in Table 4.1, both C1000 and C2000 contain 42 distinct activities, more
than double that of the LoanApp or P2P datasets. This larger search space is
inherently more difficult to explore, and a short computational run is less likely
to consistently find the most promising regions. Therefore, while the positive im-
provements against the baseline demonstrate the optimizer’s potential even with
limited resources, the results for these two datasets is only indicative.
6.2
Evaluation of the Pareto Front Quality
It is also necessary to explore and evaluate the Pareto fronts of each generated
variant holistically. The visual comparison in Figure 6.1, combined with the quanti-
tative metrics in Table 5.5, allows for a deeper understanding of how each mutation
strategy navigates the trade-off between cost and wait time.
Figure 6.1: Comparison of the discovered Pareto fronts for each GA variant
against the Reference Pareto Front (PRef) across all datasets. The ideal point
is at the origin (0,0) in each subplot. Plots for C1000 and C2000 are generated
from the scaled-down experimental configuration.
Pareto Optimal Trace Generation for Agent-Based Business Process Simulation
55
==PAGE:60==
To interpret these results, we can evaluate each variant’s discovered front (PApprox)
against the Reference Pareto Front (PRef, marked in “x”), which represents the
best-known set of solutions. These visual characteristics we will discuss are quan-
tified by the metrics in Table 5.5. As mentioned before, Hyperarea Ratio and
Hausdorff Distanc primarily measure convergence, with a higher ratio and lower
distance indicating a front that is closer to the ideal point. Purity measures dom-
inance, counting how many of a variant’s solutions were good enough to be in-
cluded in the PRef, while Delta Spread measures diversity, where a lower value
signifies a less diverse and more uniform distribution of solutions along the front.
More specifically, the LoanApp dataset shows that no single strategy was domi-
nant. As seen in Figure 6.1, the PRef is a composite, formed by solutions from the
guided and greedy variants. The Guided variant (blue circles) is able to find lower
cost solutions, which is confirmed by its superior Hyperarea Ratio (0.966), Pu-
rity (0.364), and Hausdorff Distance (149.36). The Greedy variant, even though
present in the PRef, is largely outperformed, with most of its solutions being dom-
inated and quite further away from the reference front. The Random and Mixed
strategies contribute solutions at the higher-cost, lower-wait-time end of the spec-
trum. This suggests that the LoanApp solution space benefits from a mix of ex-
ploratory and refining strategies, and a single approach is insufficient to uncover
the entire optimal front.
Similarly, for the P2P dataset, the Guided (blue circles) and Random (green di-
amonds) variants perform exceptionally well, with their solutions almost perfectly
tracing the PRef. This visual dominance is supported by their high Hyperarea
Ratios (0.960) and the Random variant’s significant Purity of 0.714. Conversely,
the Greedy strategy (orange squares) fails completely, producing a front that is
far from the PRef and entirely dominated. This is quantified by its poor Hyper-
area Ratio (0.412), zero Purity, and massive Hausdorff Distance (2107.67). For
this process, exploration and refinement were critical, while a purely exploitative
strategy became trapped in a sub-optimal region.
The ACR dataset presents the opposite scenario to P2P, with the different strate-
gies being almost clearly separated. Here, the Greedy mutation (orange squares)
is the runaway winner. Visually, the Greedy front is the PRef, as its solutions are
so perfectly aligned that the “x” markers obscure the orange squares. This abso-
lute dominance is reflected in its perfect metrics: a Hyperarea Ratio and Purity of
1.000, and a Hausdorff Distance of 0.00. All other variants produced solutions that
were significantly inferior. This result strongly suggests that the ACR optimization
landscape contains steep, well-defined optima where an aggressive, hill-climbing
exploitation strategy is the most effective way to find the best solutions. However,
since the original simulator appears to underperform for this process, it would be
wise not to consider this an “easy” win but to dig deeper into the reasons behind
this success.
The C1000 and C2000 datasets show more erratic and less conclusive results,
exhibiting inconsistencies not only between the performance of the most balanced
and average solutions but also in the Pareto quality metrics themselves. For in-
stance, in the C1000 dataset, the Greedy variant achieves perfect Purity, indicat-
56
Pareto Optimal Trace Generation for Agent-Based Business Process Simulation
==PAGE:61==
ing all its solutions are part of the PRef, yet the Random variant has a significantly
better Hausdorff Distance and Delta Spread. This variability is largely attributed
to the scaled-down experimental configuration used for these datasets. As men-
tioned before, with a run of only 10 generations, the GA has insufficient time to
converge, making the final results highly sensitive to the random initial population
and early mutations, which was likely compounded by the inherent complexity of
these datasets.
6.2.1
Discussion and Future Work
As mentioned above, this thesis is able to produce encouraging results regarding
the use of a tailor-made Genetic Algorithm for Agent-Based Prescriptive Simula-
tion within the Business Process Simulation field, managing to extend an existing
data-driven agent-based framework for process mining and descriptive simula-
tion. Evaluation on 5 synthetic and real-life datasets yields significant process
improvements on Man-Hour and Wait-Time Costs. It is worth noting that these
improvements are the result of optimizing over only a small part of the task allo-
cation mechanism (the hand-over policy), and not the complete task assignment
logic.
The proposed exploration and evaluation of different mutation strategies, diverg-
ing from the default random scramble of NSGA-II, confirms that while moving be-
yond a simple random approach may prove beneficial, there is no single “silver
bullet” strategy. The performance of each variant is context-dependent and con-
tingent on the specific business process. This is best illustrated by the contrasting
results between the datasets. Namely:
• In the ACR dataset, the exploitative Greedy strategy was overwhelmingly
dominant, suggesting a problem with clear, steep optima.
• Conversely, in the LoanApp and P2P datasets, the more exploratory Guided
and Random strategies were, respectively, superior, while the Greedy ap-
proach mostly failed, indicating a more complex search space where pure
exploitation is detrimental.
Perhaps the most insightful finding relates to the Mixed Strategy. While designed
to be a robust, all-purpose approach, it rarely emerged as the top performer. In-
stead, its constituent parts (the Greedy, Guided, and Random mutations) often
performed better independently. This suggests that the simple, probabilistic com-
bination of strategies within the Mixed variant was suboptimal. The individual
strengths of the specialized operators were diluted rather than acting in synergy.
This observation, however, may open a discussion for future work, as a more dy-
namic or adaptive mechanism that selects the most appropriate mutation strategy
based on the state of the search could yield significantly better results.
Additionally, we need to take into account that the success of the optimization
is heavily dependent on the fidelity of the simulation model. For example, the
discrepancies between the simulated baseline and the ground truth for datasets
like ACR and P2P underscore the risk of the optimization producing solutions that
are only optimal for a world that is not modeled accurately enough to match reality.
That being said, for the accurately modeled LoanApp process, the optimizer was
Pareto Optimal Trace Generation for Agent-Based Business Process Simulation
57
==PAGE:62==
able to generate both simulated and tangible, real-world gains.
Similarly, the architectural limitations of the original simulation framework dictated
the actual design of the proposed generic-based implementation. Firstly, as dis-
cussed in Sections 3.2.3 and 2, they drove the selection of the optimization algo-
rithm itself. Secondly, they constrained the “levers” the optimizer could manipu-
late, as the core task allocation logic could not be altered without compromising
the integrity of the simulated logs. Hence, the optimizer’s role was necessarily
limited to the fine-tuning of handover probabilities between resources. This ef-
fectively framed the optimization problem as a search for an optimal operational
policy within a fixed historical context, making the proposal of new, innovative
solutions improbable. Additionally, since the handover probabilities are a feature
exclusive to the autonomous configuration of the AgentSimulator, the optimization
framework is consequently only compatible with that particular operational mode.
In summary, this thesis confirms the power of a Genetic Algorithm for prescrip-
tive Business Process Simulation and validates the value of developing tailored
mutation operators over a generic baseline. However, it also establishes that a
successful application of such a framework is contingent on several critical factors.
Namely:
• A sufficiently accurate and versatile descriptive model, as the quality of any
optimized policy is fundamentally bound to the fidelity of the simulation from
which it is derived.
• The thoughtful selection of optimization strategies appropriate for both the
target process and the constraints of the baseline simulation framework (in
the case of an extension).
• An understanding of the systemic constraints imposed by the simulation tool,
such as the limitation to optimizing handover probabilities;
• An adequate computational budget to tackle complex problem spaces, as
evidenced by the less robust results from the Confidential datasets, which
were constrained by a 20-hour runtime limit.
Additionally, while the proposed framework may be a powerful extension of the
AgentSimulator, at least for some process types, it could and should be further
validated through comparative external benchmarking against other data-driven
optimization methods, such as the framework proposed by López-Pintado, Du-
mas, and Berx [15].
58
Pareto Optimal Trace Generation for Agent-Based Business Process Simulation
==PAGE:63==
7
Conclusion
As described previously, this thesis aimed to design, implement, and evaluate
a multi-objective optimization extension of a data-driven, agent-based simulation
framework, the AgentSimulator. However, its contributions can also be framed by
their broader implications in the field of ABS and BPM. Namely, the primary con-
tribution is a proof-of-concept that an existing, architecturally constrained, data-
driven ABS framework can be effectively extended for prescriptive optimization.
At the same time, the comparative analysis of four distinct mutation operators
validated that tailored search strategies may outperform the default random ap-
proach, confirming the “No Free Lunch” theorem in this specific problem domain.
Additionally, in order to build this new optimization engine, the research explored
the broader state of the current ABS tools within BPM. It was noted that a sig-
nificant portion of the current frameworks do not yet leverage the full potential of
Multi-Agent Systems (MAS) theory. For example, within the AgentSimilator, the
agents are passive executors with no true decision-making autonomy, operating
under the command of a central orchestrator. This architecture, while practical,
falls short of the true promise of ABS, where intelligent, autonomous agents could
negotiate, learn, and adapt their behaviors.
This observed lack of agent autonomy is symptomatic of a challenge confronted
by the wider ABS community, namely, the accurate modeling of human behavior
[6], as optimizing for a world of simplistic, rule-following agents could yield policies
that fail when deployed in a real-world environment. While the broader Modeling
and Simulation field appears to actively engage with this problem [6], the literature
reviewed within this thesis suggests that it has yet to be fully researched within
the Business Process Simulation sub-domain, pointing to an assumed immaturity
of the adoption of MAS within it.
Thus, we may identify several promising avenues for future research that can
collectively push the frontier of prescriptive ABS in BPM.
• Richer, Autonomous Agent Models: The most critical direction for future
work is the development of frameworks that support behaviorally richer,
more autonomous, and potentially decentralized agent models.
This in-
cludes the integration of agents with learning capabilities (e.g., via Rein-
forcement Learning), enabling them to adapt their policies dynamically rather
than following a static, globally optimized rule set, and the modeling of nu-
anced human-like parameters such as fatigue effects.
• Expanded Optimization Scope: Building on the previous point, future frame-
works should provide optimizers with more meaningful “levers.” This includes
moving beyond parameter tuning to allow for the optimization of core pro-
cess structures, agent team compositions, and scheduling policies, similar
to [15].
Pareto Optimal Trace Generation for Agent-Based Business Process Simulation
59
==PAGE:64==
• Comparative Benchmarking: Finally, to situate this work within the broader
field of data-driven process optimization, a next step should be to conduct
comparative benchmarking against other prescriptive methods, such as the
framework proposed by López-Pintado, Dumas, and Berx [15].
In conclusion, this thesis contributes a functional optimization framework while
also providing a critical perspective on the field’s current limitations. By demon-
strating both the possibilities and the challenges, this work aims to be a useful
contribution to future research on intelligent, data-driven process improvement.
60
Pareto Optimal Trace Generation for Agent-Based Business Process Simulation
==PAGE:65==
Bibliography
[1]
Marlon Dumas et al. Fundamentals of business process management. Springer,
2018.
[2]
Andrei Tour et al. “Agent miner: An algorithm for discovering agent systems
from event data”. In: International Conference on Business Process Man-
agement. Springer. 2023, pp. 284–302.
[3]
Michal Halaška and Roman Šperka. “Is there a Need for Agent-based Mod-
elling and Simulation in Business Process Management?” In: Organizacija
51.4 (2018), pp. 255–270.
[4]
Sally C. Brailsford and N. A. Hilton. “A comparison of discrete event simu-
lation and system dynamics for modelling health care systems”. In: (2001),
pp. 18–39.
[5]
Lukas Kirchdorfer et al. “AgentSimulator: An Agent-based Approach for Data-
driven Business Process Simulation”. In: 2024 6th International Conference
on Process Mining (ICPM). 2024.
[6]
Charles M Macal. “Everything you need to know about agent-based mod-
elling and simulation”. In: Journal of Simulation 10.2 (2016), pp. 144–156.
[7]
Bhakti Stephan Onggo and Joël Foramitti. “Agent-Based Modeling and Sim-
ulation for Business and Management: A Review and Tutorial”. In: Proceed-
ings of the 2021 Winter Simulation Conference (WSC). 2021, pp. 1–15. doi:
10.1109/WSC52266.2021.9715352.
[8]
Abd. Charis Fauzan, Riyanarto Sarno, and Imam Machfud. “Simulation of
Agent-Based and Discrete Event for Analyzing Multi Organizational Perfor-
mance”. In: 2019 International Seminar on Application for Technology of
Information and Communication (iSemantic). IEEE. 2019, pp. 224–229.
[9]
Emilio Sulis and Antonio Di Leva. “An Agent-Based Model of a Business
Process: The Use Case of a Hospital Emergency Department”. In: Business
Process Management Workshops. Springer, 2018, pp. 124–132.
[10]
N. R. Jennings et al. “Implementing a Business Process Management Sys-
tem Using ADEPT: A Real-World Case Study”. In: vol. 14. 5. 2000, pp. 421–
465.
[11]
Armin Kashefi and Faris Alwzinani. “A Multiscale Modeling Framework for
Organizational Resilience: Integrating Agent-Based, Discrete Event, and
System Dynamics Approaches”. In: International Conference on Computa-
tional Science (ICCS 2025 Workshops). Springer Nature Switzerland, 2025,
pp. 48–56.
[12]
Jácint Duduka and Sérgio Guerreiro. “Systemic Business Process Simu-
lation using Agent-based Simulation and BPMN”. In: Proceedings of the
12th International Joint Conference on Knowledge Discovery, Knowledge
Engineering and Knowledge Management (IC3K 2020) - Volume 2: KEOD.
SCITEPRESS, 2020, pp. 122–130.
[13]
Huseyin Kir and Nadia Erdogan. “A knowledge-intensive adaptive business
process management framework”. In: Information Systems 95 (2021), p. 101639.
Pareto Optimal Trace Generation for Agent-Based Business Process Simulation
61
==PAGE:66==
[14]
Šarūnė Sielskaitė and Diana Kalibatienė. “On Fuzzy and Case-Based Dy-
namic Software Development Process Modeling and Simulation Approach”.
In: Applied Sciences 13.11 (2023), p. 6603.
[15]
Orlenys López-Pintado, Marlon Dumas, and Jonas Berx. “Discovery, simu-
lation, and optimization of business processes with differentiated resources”.
In: Information Systems 120 (2024), p. 102289. doi: 10.1016/j.is.2023.102289.
[16]
Emilio Sulis et al. “Agent-oriented Decision Support System for Business
Processes Management with Genetic Algorithm Optimization: an Applica-
tion in Healthcare”. In: Journal of Medical Systems 44 (2020), pp. 1–7.
[17]
Lili Chen and Jianbing Yang. “A cross-enterprise collaborative production
scheduling decision support algorithm with multi-agent support”. In: Applied
Mathematics and Nonlinear Sciences 9.1 (2024), pp. 1–19.
[18]
Dhouha Ben Noureddine, Atef Gharbi, and Samir Ben Ahmed. “Multi-agent
Deep Reinforcement Learning for Task Allocation in Dynamic Environment.”
In: ICSOFT. 2017, pp. 17–26.
[19]
Mufeed Ahmed Naji Saif et al. “Multi-agent QoS-aware autonomic resource
provisioning framework for elastic BPM in containerized multi-cloud envi-
ronment”. In: Journal of Ambient Intelligence and Humanized Computing
14 (2023), pp. 12895–12920.
[20]
Wilfried Jakob and Christian Blume. “Pareto optimization or cascaded weighted
sum: A comparison of concepts”. In: Algorithms 7.1 (2014), pp. 166–185.
[21]
Rob H. Bemthuis et al. “An agent-based process mining architecture for
emergent behavior analysis”. In: 2019 IEEE 23rd International Enterprise
Distributed Object Computing Workshop (EDOCW) (2019), pp. 54–63.
[22]
Kalyanmoy Deb et al. “A fast and elitist multiobjective genetic algorithm:
NSGA-II”. In: IEEE transactions on evolutionary computation 6.2 (2002),
pp. 182–197.
[23]
David Chapela-Campa et al. “SIMOD: Automated discovery of business
process simulation models”. In: SoftwareX 30 (2025), p. 102157. issn: 2352-
7110. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.softx.2025.102157.
[24]
O. López-Pintado and M. Dumas. “Business process simulation with dif-
ferentiated resources: Does it make a difference?” In: Business Process
Management (BPM). Springer, 2022.
[25]
S. M. Qureshi et al. “Predicting the effect of nurse–patient ratio on nurse
workload and care quality using discrete event simulation”. In: Journal of
Nursing Management 27.5 (2019), pp. 971–980.
[26]
Andrei Tour, Artem Polyvyanyy, and Anna Kalenkova. “Agent System Min-
ing: Vision, Benefits, and Challenges”. In: IEEE Access. Vol. 9. 2021, pp. 98336–
98350. doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2021.3095464.
[27]
K. Hoad and C. Watts. “Are we there yet? Simulation modellers on what
needs to be done to involve agent-based simulation in practical decision
making”. In: Journal of Simulation 6.2 (2012), pp. 67–70.
[28]
Rob H Bemthuis and Sanja Lazarova-Molnar. Discovering agent models us-
ing process mining: Initial approach and a case study. 2022 IEEE Intl Conf
on Parallel & Distributed Processing with Applications, Big Data & Cloud
Computing, Sustainable Computing & Communications, Social Computing
62
Pareto Optimal Trace Generation for Agent-Based Business Process Simulation
==PAGE:67==
& Networking (ISPA/BDCloud/SocialCom/SustainCom)(pp. 163–172). IEEE.
2022.
[29]
Wil Van Der Aalst. “Data science in action”. In: Process mining: Data science
in action. Springer, 2016, pp. 3–23.
[30]
Thomas C Schelling. “Models of segregation”. In: The American economic
review 59.2 (1969), pp. 488–493.
[31]
Christian W Günther and Anne Rozinat. “Disco: Discover your processes”.
In: Demonstration Track of the 10th International Conference on Business
Process Management, BPM Demos 2012. CEUR-WS. org. 2012, pp. 40–
44.
[32]
Uri Wilensky. NetLogo. Center for Connected Learning and Computer-Based
Modeling, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, 1999.
[33]
Michael P Georgeff and Amy L Lansky. “Reactive reasoning and planning”.
In: Proceedings of the 6th National Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-
87). 1987, pp. 677–682.
[34]
Object Management Group. “Case Management Model and Notation (CMMN)
Version 1.1”. In: OMG Document Number formal/2016-03-04. 2016. url:
https://www.omg.org/spec/CMMN/1.1/.
[35]
Jacqueline Kazil, David Masad, and Andrew T Crooks. “Utilizing python for
agent-based modeling: The mesa framework”. In: Social, Cultural, and Be-
havioral Modeling. Springer. 2020, pp. 308–317.
[36]
Ilya Grigoryev. AnyLogic 7 in Three Days: A Quick Course in Simulation
Modeling. AnyLogic North America, 2016.
[37]
Michael Wooldridge. An introduction to multiagent systems. John wiley &
sons, 2009.
[38]
Ali Dorri, Salil S Kanhere, and Raja Jurdak. “Multi-agent systems: A survey”.
In: IEEE Access 6 (2018), pp. 28573–28593.
[39]
Jesus Cerquides et al. “A tutorial on optimization for multi-agent systems”.
In: The Computer Journal 57.6 (2014), pp. 799–824.
[40]
Y. Chevalleyre et al. “Issues in Multiagent Resource Allocation”. In: Infor-
matica 30 (2006), pp. 3–31.
[41]
George Marios Skaltsis, Hyo-Sang Shin, and Antonios Tsourdos. “A survey
of task allocation techniques in MAS”. In: 2021 International Conference on
Unmanned Aircraft Systems (ICUAS). IEEE. 2021, pp. 488–497.
[42]
Félix Quinton, Christophe Grand, and Charles Lesire. “Market approaches
to the multi-robot task allocation problem: a survey”. In: Journal of Intelligent
& Robotic Systems 107.2 (2023), p. 29.
[43]
Reid G Smith. “The contract net protocol: High-level communication and
control in a distributed problem solver”. In: IEEE Transactions on Comput-
ers. Vol. C-29. 12. 1980, pp. 1104–1113.
[44]
Han-Lim Choi, Luc Brunet, and Jonathan P How. “Consensus-based de-
centralized auctions for robust task allocation”. In: IEEE Transactions on
Robotics 25.4 (2009), pp. 912–926.
[45]
Ferdinando Fioretto, Enrico Pontelli, and William Yeoh. “Distributed con-
straint optimization problems and applications: A survey”. In: Journal of Ar-
tificial Intelligence Research 61 (2018), pp. 623–698.
[46]
Frederick S Hillier. Introduction to operations research. McGrawHill, 2005.
Pareto Optimal Trace Generation for Agent-Based Business Process Simulation
63
==PAGE:68==
[47]
Orlenys López-Pintado et al. “Silhouetting the cost-time front: Multi-objective
resource optimization in business processes”. In: International Conference
on Business Process Management. Springer. 2021, pp. 92–108.
[48]
Ilhem Boussaı￿d, Julien Lepagnot, and Patrick Siarry. “A survey on optimiza-
tion metaheuristics”. In: Information sciences 237 (2013), pp. 82–117.
[49]
Kai Zuo. “A Response Threshold-Based Task Allocation Method for Multi-
Robot Systems in Dynamic Environments”. In: 2025 5th International Con-
ference on Machine Learning and Intelligent Systems Engineering (MLISE).
IEEE. 2025, pp. 12–15.
[50]
Hajar Bagheri Tolabi, Afshin Lashkar Ara, and Rahil Hosseini. “An enhanced
particle swarm optimization algorithm to solve probabilistic load flow prob-
lem in a micro-grid”. In: Applied Intelligence 51.3 (2021), pp. 1645–1668.
[51]
Simon Parsons and Michael Wooldridge. “Game theory and decision theory
in multi-agent systems”. In: Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems
5.3 (2002), pp. 243–254.
[52]
Vilfredo Pareto. Cours d’économie politique. Vol. 1. Librairie Droz, 1964.
[53]
Juan F. Diaz et al. “Pareto-Optimal Trace Generation from Declarative Pro-
cess Models”. In: Business Process Management Workshops. Ed. by Jochen
De Weerdt and Luise Pufahl. Springer Nature Switzerland, 2024, pp. 314–
325.
[54]
Ifigeneia Drosouli et al. “A process mining approach for resource allocation
management in a bike sharing system”. In: Proceedings of the 24th Pan-
Hellenic Conference on Informatics. 2020, pp. 327–333.
[55]
Muhammad Awais Ali, Fredrik Milani, and Marlon Dumas. “Data-driven iden-
tification and analysis of waiting times in business processes”. In: Business
& Information Systems Engineering 67.2 (2025), pp. 191–208.
[56]
Boi Faltings and Makoto Yokoo. “Introduction: Special issue on distributed
constraint satisfaction”. In: Artificial Intelligence 161.1-2 (2005), pp. 1–5.
[57]
Jeroen Middelhuis et al. “Learning policies for resource allocation in busi-
ness processes”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.09970 (2023).
[58]
David H Wolpert and William G Macready. “No free lunch theorems for op-
timization”. In: IEEE transactions on evolutionary computation 1.1 (1997),
pp. 67–82.
[59]
Jin Wu and Shapour Azarm. “Metrics for quality assessment of a multiob-
jective design optimization solution set”. In: J. Mech. Des. 123.1 (2001),
pp. 18–25.
[60]
Ana Luísa Custódio et al. “Direct multisearch for multiobjective optimiza-
tion”. In: SIAM Journal on Optimization 21.3 (2011), pp. 1109–1140.
[61]
Oliver Schütze et al. “Using the averaged hausdorff distance as a perfor-
mance measure in evolutionary multiobjective optimization”. In: IEEE trans-
actions on evolutionary computation 16.4 (2012), pp. 504–522.
64
Pareto Optimal Trace Generation for Agent-Based Business Process Simulation
==PAGE:69==
Pareto Optimal Trace Generation for Agent-Based Business Process Simulation
65
==PAGE:70==
Technical University of Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
