==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
Multi-copy genomic integration in
Yarrowia lipolytica using Type I-F
CRISPR-associated transposons
Valeria Stavila
==PAGE:2==
Contents
Contents
Abstract
1
Resumé
2
Acknowledgments
3
1
Introduction
4
2
Literature review
5
2.1
CRISPR-associated transposon
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Experimental design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2.1
Pilot testing of CAST mediated site-specific integration at single and
multiple loci . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2.2
Assessment of CAST protein expression
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2.3
GFP-based reporter assay of Cas6 RNase function . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3
Materials and Methods
13
3.1
General methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
Routine cultivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.3
Plasmid cloning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.4
Chemical transformation of E. coli competent cells
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.5
Transformation of Y. lipolytica competent cells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.6
SDS page
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.7
Protein HiBiT assay
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.8
GFP fluorescence reporter assay of the SV40-Cas6 function . . . . . . . . . .
17
4
Results
18
5
Discussion
22
6
Conclusion
24
7
Supplementary Material
27
i
==PAGE:3==
Contents
Abstract
CRISPR-associated transposons (CAST) represent an innovative genome engineering
technology that combines the programmable targeting capabilities of CRISPR-Cas systems
with transposon-mediated DNA insertion, enabling precise genome modification without
generating cytotoxic double-strand breaks. This study aimed to evaluate the possibility of
implementing Type I-F CRISPR-associated transposon technology from Vibrio cholerae in
the industrially relevant oleaginous yeast Yarrowia lipolytica for targeted DNA integration.
The research was structured around three specific objectives: (1) assessing Type I-F
CAST system’s ability to mediate site-specific integration of a linearized uracil expressing
cargo at one and four defined genomic loci, thereby demonstrating its potential as a pro-
grammable DNA insertion tool in Yarrowia lypolytica, (2) testing expression profiles of CAST
proteins in Y. lipolytica using HiBiT tagging„ (3) evaluating RNase activity of Cas6 using a
GFP-based reporter assay
Expression analysis confirmed successful expression of all seven CAST proteins (TnsA,
TnsB, TnsC, TniQ, Cas6, Cas7, and Cas5-8) as determined by HiBiT blotting. Additionally,
the expression of ClpX bacterial chaperone and Cas6 protein containig a NLS was proven.
However, several proteins, including TnsA, TnsB and Cas6 lacking NLS, exhibited multiple
bands migration patterns suggestive of protein degradation or aggregation. Notably, fusion
of Cas6 with an SV40 nuclear localization signal resulted in dramatically improved protein
stability, producing a single, intense band compared to the unmodified protein, suggesting
that subcellular localization optimization is crucial for maintaining protein integrity.
The functional RNA-guided DNA integration was not achieved. Despite colony appear-
ance on selection plates following transformation with the CAST system and URA3 cargo,
comprehensive colony PCR analysis failed to confirm successful integration events at targeted
E1 loci. This outcome was attributed to potential false-positive recombination events, based
on complex genetic backgrounds of transformation strains containing pre-existing URA3-
disrupted alleles.
Flow cytometry experiments assessing Cas6-mediated pre-crRNA pro-
cessing yielded inconclusive results due to contamination and limited biological replicates,
preventing robust statistical analysis.
This work represents an important first step toward establishing Y. lipolytica as a plat-
form for CRISPR-associated transposon technology. The successful expression of six CAST
proteins demonstrates basic compatibility with yeast cellular machinery, while identification
of protein stability challenges and nuclear localization benefits provides clear direction for
future optimization focusing on comprehensive biological validation, and systematic protein
stabilization strategies.
Page 1 of 31
==PAGE:4==
Contents
Resumé
CRISPR-associerede transposoner (CAST) repræsenterer en innovativ genomteknolo-
gisk metode, der kombinerer de programmerbare målretningsegenskaber fra CRISPR-Cas-
systemer med transposon-medieret DNA-indsættelse, hvilket muliggør præcis genommodi-
fikation uden at generere cytotoksiske dobbeltstrengsbrud. Dette studie havde til formål at
undersøge muligheden for at implementere Type I-F CRISPR-associeret transposonteknologi
fra Vibrio cholerae i den industrielt relevante olieproducerende gær Yarrowia lipolytica med
henblik på målrettet DNA-integration.
Forskningen var struktureret omkring tre specifikke mål: (1) vurdering af Type I-F
CAST-systemets evne til at mediere stedspecifik integration af et lineært uracil-ekspresserende
DNA-fragment ved ét og fire definerede genomiske loci og dermed demonstrere dets poten-
tiale som et programmerbart DNA-integrationsværktøj i Yarrowia lipolytica, (2) undersøgelse
af CAST-proteinernes ekspressionsprofiler i Y. lipolytica ved hjælp af HiBiT-tagging, og (3)
evaluering af Cas6 RNase-aktivitet ved brug af en GFP-baseret reporteranalyse.
Ekspressionsanalyser bekræftede vellykket udtryk af alle syv CAST-proteiner (TnsA,
TnsB, TnsC, TniQ, Cas6, Cas7 og Cas5–8) som bestemt ved HiBiT-blotting. Desuden blev
udtrykket af det bakterielle chaperone ClpX og Cas6-proteinet med en nukleær lokaliser-
ingssekvens (NLS) påvist. Flere proteiner – herunder TnsA, TnsB og Cas6 uden NLS – viste
dog migreringsmønstre med flere bånd, hvilket tyder på proteinaggregation eller nedbryd-
ning. Bemærkelsesværdigt er, at fusionen af Cas6 med en SV40 nukleær lokaliseringssekvens
markant forbedrede proteinstabiliteten og producerede et enkelt, intenst bånd sammenlignet
med det umodificerede protein, hvilket understreger vigtigheden af subcellulær lokalisering-
soptimering for opretholdelse af proteinintegritet.
Funktionel RNA-styret DNA-integration blev ikke opnået. På trods af koloniudseende
på selektionsplader efter transformation med CAST-systemet og URA3-kargo, bekræft-
ede omfattende koloni-PCR-analyser ikke integration ved de målrettede E1-loci. Dette re-
sultat tilskrives potentielle falsk-positive rekombinationshændelser som følge af komplekse
genetiske baggrunde i transformationsstammerne, der indeholder forudeksisterende URA3-
disrupterede alleler. Flowcytometriske analyser til vurdering af Cas6-medieret pre-crRNA-
processering gav inkonklusive resultater på grund af kontaminering og manglende biologiske
replikater, hvilket forhindrede robust statistisk analyse.
Dette arbejde udgør et vigtigt første skridt mod at etablere Y. lipolytica som en plat-
form for CRISPR-associeret transposonteknologi. Den vellykkede ekspression af seks CAST-
proteiner demonstrerer grundlæggende kompatibilitet med gærcellulært maskineri, mens
identificeringen af udfordringer med proteinstabilitet og fordelene ved nukleær lokalisering
giver klar retning for fremtidig optimering med fokus på omfattende biologisk validering og
systematiske strategier til stabilisering af proteiner.
Nøgleord: CRISPR-associerede transposoner, CAST, Yarrowia lipolytica, genomte-
knologi, transposase, stedspecifik integration, proteinudtryk
Page 2 of 31
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Acknowledgments
I would like to express my deepest gratitude to everyone who has been a source of
knowledge, encouragement, and support throughout my studies.
First and foremost, I am thankful to my supervisor, Ridwan Elemosho, for his guidance,
helpful recommendations, and radiating positivity. He gave me freedom and independence to
explore such an interesting and complex topic. I would also like to thank Claus Heiner Bang-
Berthelsen for the interest he showed in my project and for the direction he provided along
the way. My heartfelt thanks go to Chenxi Zhang for our exciting and thought-provoking
scientific discussions, which always left me inspired. I am grateful to Sebastian Gude, who
taught me how to approach research in a structured and methodical way - a skill I will carry
with me far beyond this project.
To my partner, family, and friends - thank you for your love and patience. Your support
has been my anchor through every challenge.
Lastly, I would like to extend my appreciation to the DTU Center for Biosustainability
for providing a welcoming and stimulating environment, and for giving me the resources,
space, and freedom to learn, grow, make mistakes, and connect with incredible people along
the way.
Page 3 of 31
==PAGE:6==
1
Introduction
1
Introduction
In 1987, Yoshizumi Ishino and his colleagues at Osaka University were working on the
sequencing of a newly found IAP gene - a putative protease thought to be involved in the
catalysis of alkaline phosphatases in E.coli. As they analyzed the upstream region of the
gene, they stumbled upon a puzzling sequence. A publication in the Journal of Bacteriology
followed, in which the authors write: ”An unusual structure was found in the 3’-end flanking
region of iap. Five highly homologous sequences of 29 nucleotides were arranged as direct
repeats with 32 nucleotides as spacing (...) So far, no sequence homologous to these has
been found elsewhere in procaryotes, and the biological significance of these sequences is not
known” [1].
At the time, the scientists did not know that these mysterious repeats would later
be found in about 47% of bacterial and 84% of archaeal genomes [2].
With the rise of
metagenomics, more of these elements began to appear - until in 2002, Ruud Jansen and
his colleagues at Utrecht University gave them a name: Clustered Regularly Interspaced
Short Palindromic Repeats, or CRISPR [3].
Today, the acronym CRISPR is spoken by
microbiologists around the world - and sometimes even by economists.
Clustered Regularly Interspaced Short Palindromic Repeats (CRISPR) - are DNA frag-
ments that consist of arrays of short direct repeat sequences (typically 23–37 nucleotides),
interspaced by variable, non-repetitive spacer sequences (17–84 nucleotides) derived from
foreign genetic elements such as bacteriophages, plasmids, or other mobile genetic elements
[4, 2]. Once integrated, the spacer becomes part of the CRISPR locus and is used to recog-
nize and destroy future invasions by the same foreign DNA. Essentially, the CRISPR system
functions as an archive of previous phage infections, capable of memorizing specific genetic
threats and transmitting its acquired immunity vertically through cell division [5]. Therefore,
it is an essential component of the bacterial and archaeal immune response.
The ability of CRISPR-Cas to efficiently manipulate foreign DNA in a modular and pro-
grammable way is the reason this system has been harnessed at accelerated rates in various
organisms with the purpose of using it for genome editing, diagnostics, and therapeutics.
One such organism where CRISPR-Cas based genome editing has been successfully
employed is Yarrowia lipolytica - an oleaginous yeast with prominent industrial potential as
a robust host for heterologous protein expression [6]. Several key features make Y. lipolytica
particularly attractive for biotechnological applications. Specifically, this non-conventional
yeast is capable of growing across a wide pH range (3.5 - 9.7) and can tolerate various
salinity levels [7]. It also displays exceptional metabolic versatility, being able to utilize a
broad spectrum of carbon sources, including hydrophobic substrates such as n-alkanes as
sole carbon and energy sources. This ability makes it an excellent candidate for growth
on toxic or waste substrates, emphasizing its promising application for bioremediation and
sustainable bio-production [8].
Furthermore, Y. lipolytica possesses an intrinsically powerful and extensive secretory
machinery. Compared to Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Y. lipolytica has a secretome that is
approximately two-fold larger [8]. A comparative analysis of the sequence similarity between
proteins involved in the secretory machinery of S. cerevisiae and Y. lipolytica revealed that
Page 4 of 31
==PAGE:7==
2
Literature review
the secretory system of Y. lipolytica shares up to 40% greater similarity with mammalian
homologs than that of S. cerevisiae [9].
This enhanced secretory capacity facilitates ex-
tracellular protein production, simplifying downstream processing and reducing purification
costs.
Collectively, these attributes position Y. lipolytica as a powerful model organism for
the sustainable production of a multitude of biological molecules, i.e. fatty acids, organic
acids, oils, proteins, growth factors; highlighting its versatility and applicability in industrial
biotechnology [8, 10].
To date, the genetic engineering toolbox available for Yarrowia lipolytica includes an
expanding repertoire of promoters, secretory signal peptides, genome editing platforms, and
modular cloning strategies [11, 8]. Tools like the CRISPR-Cas9 editing system have greatly
facilitated both fundamental knowledge exploration and industrial applications in this versa-
tile yeast. However, traditional CRISPR-Cas systems rely on the induction of double-strand
breaks (DSBs) at target loci, followed by cellular repair pathways such as non-homologous
end joining (NHEJ) or homology-directed repair (HDR). While effective for single-locus
editing, applying this method to multiple genomic sites simultaneously can lead to cytotoxic
effects, off-target insertions, and reduced cell viability due to the accumulation of DSB [12,
13, 14]. These drawbacks pose significant barriers when high-level expression of recombinant
proteins requires multi-copy integration of related expression cassettes.
In contrast, a promising system that remains unexplored in Y. lipolytica has the po-
tential to address some of the key limitations associated with conventional CRISPR-Cas9
based genome editing. This system is known as CRISPR-associated transposons (CAST)
and represents an uncommon mechanism capable of multi-copy, site-specific DNA integration
[15].
CRISPR-associated transposon systems utilize components from both CRISPR-Cas and
Tn7-like transposon machineries to mediate precise, site-specific DNA insertion without gen-
erating DSBs or requiring homologous recombination.
These systems harness the RNA-
guided targeting capability of the CRISPR complex to direct a transposase complex to
predefined genomic loci, enabling recombination-independent and scarless DNA integration.
As such, CAST offers a potentially safer alternative for genome engineering in Y. lipolytica.
In this body of work, we aim to establish the foundational steps toward a functional
reconstitution of a CRISPR-associated transposon system in Y. lipolytica. The literature
review section will provide an overview of the molecular architecture and mechanism of
action of CAST systems, followed by a rationale for the experimental design implemented in
this study. The methods and results sections will describe a practical guide for the laboratory
work and the data generated. Finally, the findings will be deliberated upon in the discussion
chapter, with an emphasis on future perspectives, followed by conclusions summarizing the
key outcomes and their implications.
2
Literature review
Since its discovery, the CRISPR-Cas system has revealed an astonishing diversity of
gene composition and genomic architecture. This diversity is reflected in a wide range of
Page 5 of 31
==PAGE:8==
2
Literature review
mechanisms of action, leading to extensive research and classification efforts [4]. Typically,
CRISPR arrays are flanked upstream by an AT-rich leader sequence, ranging from 300 to
500 bp, which functions as a promoter and as a recognition site for the spacer integration
(i.e. foreign viral DNA) [16]. Furthermore, adjacent to the CRISPR array lies a cluster
of CRISPR-associated (Cas) genes, which encode the protein machinery required for the
system’s function. These include adaptor proteins - involved in the acquisition of new spac-
ers (mainly Cas1 and Cas2) - as well as effector proteins responsible for transcription and
processing of the CRISPR array, and for recognition and interference with invading viral or
plasmid DNA. The CRISPR array is transcribed as a long precursor CRISPR RNA (pre-
crRNA), which is processed into individual crRNAs by Cas endonucleases (e.g. Cas6).
As the body of knowledge on the CRISPR-Cas system grew, it became necessary to
establish a standardized classification system based on the structure and function of Cas
effector proteins.
Today, CRISPR-Cas systems are broadly categorized into 2 classes, 6
types, and 24 subtypes [17]. Class I systems are defined by multi-subunit ribonucleoprotein
complexes that comprise several Cas proteins. For instance, in Type I CRISPR systems,
target recognition is carried out by a multi-protein Cascade complex comprising Cas5, Cas6,
Cas7, Cas8, and Cas11, while DNA unwinding and cleavage are executed by two separate
Cas3 proteins. In contrast, Class II systems use a single, multidomain effector for both
recognition and cleavage, such as Cas9 (Type II), Cas12 (Type V) and Cas13 (Type VI) [18,
4].
2.1
CRISPR-associated transposon
Among the various branches of CRISPR-Cas systems, one particularly intriguing devel-
opment is the discovery of Tn7-like transposons that have recruited elements of Type I-F
CRISPR-Cas systems. Transposons are mobile genetic elements capable of relocating within
a genome by inserting their DNA sequences into new genomic sites in the presence of trans-
posases. A defining feature of transposases is their ability to mediate full DNA integration
independently of DNA repair pathways such as homology-directed repair or non-homologous
end joining. Therefore, the integration can occur without generating double-strand breaks
thereby minimizing genomic disruption during the process [19, 20]. CRISPR-transposases are
believed to have evolved through the integration of transposable elements encoding nuclease
domains into the ancestral CRISPR-Cas systems [17]. Notably, core enzymatic mechanisms
involved in spacer acquisition (e.g. Cas1) and RNA-guided DNA targeting (e.g. Cas12)
are derived from mobile genetic elements [20]. These systems, known as CRISPR-associated
transposons (CAST), utilize CRISPR-based RNA-guided targeting for site-specific insertion,
but lack the typical endonuclease interference function [21]. Instead, CAST systems couple
the programmability and target specificity of CRISPR-Cas with the DNA-inserting capabili-
ties of transposases. This fusion of RNA-guided targeting and DNA transposition represents
a promising tool for genome engineering, as it enables double-strand break free (DSB) and
recombination-independent DNA integrations. Therefore, it offers a safer and more precise
alternative to traditional CRISPR-based editing methods [19].
The CRISPR-associated transposon (CAST) system investigated in this study is based
on the Tn6677 transposon found in Vibrio cholerae strain HE-45. This system contains two
Page 6 of 31
==PAGE:9==
2
Literature review
main functional modules: (1) a Type I-F CRISPR-associated complex (also referred to as
cascade) that includes Cas6, Cas7, and a fusion protein of Cas5 and Cas8 (Cas5–8), and (2)
the transposition machinery, consisting of TnsA, TnsB, TnsC, and TniQ [2]. The transposon
is flanked by terminal left (L-end) and right (R-end) sequences, which harbor binding sites
for TnsB [19] (see Fig. 1).
Figure 1: Schematic representation of the Tn6677 CRISPR-associated transpo-
son system from Vibrio cholerae HE-45
Each component of the transposon system plays a defined role in the transposition
process. TnsA contains an N-terminal endonuclease domain that cleaves the 5’ end of the
transposon/ cargo DNA, while its C-terminal region interacts with TnsB and TnsC to fa-
cilitate coordinated cleavage and insertion [22]. In contrast, TnsB cleaves the 3’ end of the
transposon [21]. TnsC is an ATPase that bridges the interaction between the DNA-bound
Cascade complex and the transposition machinery by binding to the C-terminus of TnsB and
assisting with cargo integration [22, 20, 21]. During DNA targeting and integration, TniQ
serves as a connection between the crRNA bound cascade and the transposon complex [20].
TniQ facilitates site-specific DNA insertion by guiding the system to a conserved chromoso-
mal attachment site known as attTn7 [21]. Within the Cascade complex, six Cas7 subunits
assemble into a helical filament that encases the crRNA, protecting and stabilizing it along
its length [2, 23]. Cas6 is responsible for processing the precursor CRISPR RNA into mature
crRNA molecules [19]. The Cas5–8 fusion protein serves a dual role by binding both to TniQ
and to the 5’ handle of the crRNA. Additionally, it directly recognizes and interacts with
the protospacer adjacent motif (PAM), a short conserved DNA sequence of 2–6 base pairs
located immediately adjacent to the crRNA target site [23]. Integration of the transposon
typically occurs 47–51 bp downstream from PAM-distal end of the target sequence [23, 20].
In light of the existing knowledge and the goal of exploring CAST system integration
in Yarrowia lypolytica, the following hypothesis is proposed:
Hypothesis:
Type I-F CRISPR-associated transposon derived from the Vibrio cholerae
system can be functionally expressed in Yarrowia lipolytica and is capable of
mediating targeted integration of DNA into single and multiple loci in the
yeast genome.
The validity of this hypothesis will be investigated by aiming:
Page 7 of 31
==PAGE:10==
2
Literature review
1. To evaluate the functionality of an eight-gene cluster encoding the Type I-F CRISPR-
associated transposon (CAST) system and the bacterial ATP-dependent chaperone
ClpX, previously integrated into the ku70 locus of Yarrowia lipolytica. This will be
achieved by assessing the system’s ability to mediate site-specific integration of a lin-
earized uracil expressing cargo at one and four defined genomic loci, thereby demon-
strating its potential as a programmable DNA insertion tool in an eukaryotic host.
2. To confirm the expression of each of the eight proteins encoded by the gene cluster
within Yarrowia lipolytica cells, a HiBiT protein tag will be genetically fused to the
C-terminus of each open reading frame. Following expression, protein samples will
be analyzed by SDS-PAGE to separate the proteins based on size, followed by HiBiT
blotting to specifically detect the tagged proteins. This approach will provide direct
evidence of successful translation and stability of all encoded proteins in the yeast host.
3. To investigate the RNAse activity of Cas6, a reporter construct will be designed in
which an inverted repeat sequence containing a Cas6 recognition site, derived from the
Type I-F CAST system, is cloned upstream of a GFP coding sequence. Upon expression
in Yarrowia lipolytica, Cas6-mediated cleavage of the RNA at the recognition site is
expected to impact GFP translation. Fluorescence intensity will be quantified by flow
cytometry, allowing indirect assessment of Cas6 RNA processing activity in vivo.
2.2
Experimental design
For information regarding primer sequences, and plasmid maps please refer to supple-
mentary material.
2.2.1
Pilot testing of CAST mediated site-specific integration at single and
multiple loci
The first experiment aims to assess the functionality of an eight-gene cluster encoding
the Type I-F CRISPR-associated transposon (CAST) system, along with the E.coli ATP-
dependent chaperone ClpX. The decision to include ClpX, was guided by earlier studies
demonstrating that its presence can significantly enhance the efficiency of transposon inte-
gration in human cells [24]. This effect is believed to stem the ability of the chaperone to
mediate the disassembly of the post-transposition complex, which is otherwise known to be
remarkably stable.
This initial pilot study will focus on determining whether the system can mediate site-
specific integration of a linear uracil-expressing DNA cargo into the yeast genome. Integra-
tion will be tested at both a single target locus and at four defined loci, allowing evaluation of
the system’s multiplex integration capability. Successful site-specific insertion would demon-
strate the potential of this CAST-based system as a programmable genome engineering tool
in Y. lipolytica and lay the foundation for its further study and application.
The host strain of CAST that will be used in this part of the experiment is derived from
a commonly used laboratory Y. lipolytica strain PO1f (MatA, leu2-270, ura3-302, xpr2-322,
axp1-2; ATCC no. MYA-2613) [25]. While PO1f was not directly applied in this work,
Page 8 of 31
==PAGE:11==
2
Literature review
it served as the progenitor strain from which a series of derivative strains were developed.
Notably, PO1f is a haploid auxotroph for uracil and leucine, making it suitable for recom-
bineering applications due to the strong selection pressure provided by these auxotrophies.
Moreover, it is a commonly used protein expression host. Building on PO1f, a closely related
strain was generated in-house, in which the ku70 gene - known to mediate non-homologous
end joining (NHEJ) - was disrupted. In its place, the Cas9 endonuclease gene was inte-
grated, fused at its 3’ end with a nuclear localization signal (NLS) derived from the SV40
large T-antigen to facilitate efficient nuclear import [6].
Subsequently, the Type I-F CRISPR-associated transposon (CAST) cassette, compris-
ing a codon-optimized eight-gene operon and the human ATP-dependent chaperone ClpX
- was integrated into the Cas9 locus (see plasmid no.1).
This newly constructed strain,
harboring the CAST system, is hereafter referred to as pO1f-CAST-1E1. To investigate
multi-locus integration capacity of the CAST system, the E1 cassette, naturally found on E
chromosome, was inserted into three additional loci located on different chromosomes (D1,
C2, and E3), resulting in the PO1f-CAST-4E1 strain. These loci were selected based on the
integration sites characterized in the EasyCloneYALI system [6], where additional details
regarding their genomic context and validation can be found.
For transposition, a uracil marker gene is chosen as a selectable cargo. The cassette will
be amplified from an in-house plasmid no.2 using primer 24 and primer 25, generating a linear
donor fragment (see Supplementary Table 1 and 2). The design of this fragment includes the
URA3 gene placed under the control of an EXP1 promoter and a CYC1 terminator, ensuring
efficient transcription and termination. Downstream of the terminator, an inert GFP open
reading frame is located; this region lacks both a promoter and terminator and therefore,
will not be expressed, as can be seen in Fig.2. This entire construct is flanked by inverted
terminal repeats: the right-end (R-end) upstream and left-end (L-end) downstream. These
ITR regions are specific DNA sequences recognized by the transposase part of the CAST
complex.
Page 9 of 31
==PAGE:12==
2
Literature review
CAST E1 
locus crRNA
Nat resistance 
gene
CAST cassette  
URA cargo
  
Integration of URA in 
E1 locus
  
Integration of URA in E1 locus 
repeated 4 times across the 
genome
Strain p01f-CAST-1E1
Strain p01f-CAST-4E1
URA
prEXP1
R-end
L-end
tCYC
GFP
+
Figure 2: Pilot testing of the genome integration of an uracil-expressing cargo
by CRISPR-associated transposon.
crRNA Vector The crRNA required for the CAST system will be expressed from a
dedicated vector constructed on a nourseothricin-resistant backbone (plasmid no. 3). This
vector harbors the crRNA cassette under a suitable RNA polymerase III promoter, ensuring
efficient transcription of guide RNAs targeting the E1 loci.
The linearized cargo and the gRNA plasmid will be transformed into the PO1F-CAST-
1E1 and PO1F-CAST-4E1 strains using Y. lipolytica dry transformation protocol and plated
on YPD + Nat plates, as described in Materials and Methods.
2.2.2
Assessment of CAST protein expression
To evaluate whether each of the eight genes from the Type I-F CRISPR-associated
transposon (CAST) system can be successfully expressed in Y. lipolytica, a strategy in-
volving the use of the HiBiT tagging system was employed. Specifically, an 11-amino-acid
HiBiT tag (VSGWRLFKKIS) was fused to the C-terminus of each protein. Upon expres-
sion, the tagged proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE and subsequently transferred to a
nitrocellulose membrane. The HiBiT tag is exposed, allowing for high-affinity binding by
the complementary LgBiT protein.
This interaction reconstitutes a functional luciferase
holo-enzyme. In the presence of its substrate, furimazine, the enzyme produces a chemilu-
minescent signal that can be detected using standard imaging systems. This method was
chosen for its high specificity and sensitivity, even at low expression levels. Additionally, the
small size of the HiBiT tag minimizes interference with protein folding and function.
For protein tagging and expression, the strain of choice is derived from Y. lipolytica
Page 10 of 31
==PAGE:13==
2
Literature review
W29/CLIB89 (ATCC 20460), a parental strain of the engineered PO1f. This strain carries
a Cas9 gene disruptively inserted in the ku70 locus, allowing for targeted DNA integration.
It was selected for its prototrophic phenotype, which supports faster growth and facilitates
routine laboratory cultivation. Each of the eight tagged proteins was individually integrated
into the E1 genomic locus, resulting in the construction of eight separate strains, as it is
shown in Fig 3. To maintain expression consistency, the same promoter and terminator
sequences used in the 8-gene cluster of the PO1f-CAST-1E1 strain, were employed for these
individual constructs.
Previous studies have demonstrated that CAST-mediated DNA integration in human
cells is significantly impaired in the absence of nuclear localization signals (NLS) [24]. Based
on these findings, it was decided to fuse the SV40 NLS exclusively to the Cas6 protein, given
its pivotal role in pre-crRNA maturation. The remaining CAST components were deliber-
ately left unmodified at this stage, with the intention of introducing NLS sequences in future
investigations. Although fluorescence spectroscopy–based assays in Pichia pastoris have re-
ported relatively low nuclear import efficiency for the SV40 NLS, this sequence remains one
of the most commonly employed due to its well-characterized performance and broad utility
across species [26]. The same SV40 NLS has been successfully utilized in Yarrowia lipolytica
within the YaliEasyClone toolbox for Cas9-mediated CRISPR integrations, supporting its
functional relevance in this yeast species [6]. Moreover, in the context of Type I-F CAST
system, which includes the identical Cas6 protein used in this study, N-terminal fusion of the
SV40 NLS was shown to be more effective than C-terminal fusion [24]. Specifically, 3’ end
fusions nearly abolished Cas6-mediated pre-crRNA processing. Therefore, it was decided
to fuse the SV40 sequence to the 5’ end of Cas6. Hence, to assess whether the addition
of NLS impacts protein expression, SV40-Cas6 will be compared to unmodified Cas6 using
HiBiT-based blotting.
Integration plasmids for the nine proteins, including the modified Cas6, were assembled
using a USER cloning strategy, involving two or three DNA fragments depending on the
complexity of the construct. For genes with short synthetic terminators, the terminator
sequences were incorporated directly into the primer overhangs, enabling a two-fragment
assembly.
Otherwise, a three-fragment strategy was used.
The plasmid backbone con-
tains the E1 homology arms, an ampicillin resistance marker for bacterial selection, and a
nourseothricin resistance marker for yeast selection. The links containing the plasmid maps
can be found in supplementary material Table 2.
Page 11 of 31
==PAGE:14==
2
Literature review
HiBit tag
HiBit tag
HiBit tag
HiBit tag
HiBit tag
HiBit tag
HiBit tag
HiBit tag
HiBit tag
Linker
SV40-NLS
Integration in E1 locus of 
W29-Cas9 strain
Strains
YALI-TnsA
YALI-TnsB
YALI-TnsC
YALI-TniQ
YALI-Cas5-8
YALI-Cas6
YALI-SV40-Cas6
YALI-Cas7
YALI-ClpX
Protein production
SDS-page and 
HiBiT blotting
Figure 3:
Workflow for assessing expression of HiBiT-tagged protein of the
CAST gene cluster.
2.2.3
GFP-based reporter assay of Cas6 RNase function
To assess the functionality of the Cas6 protein, a GFP-based reporter assay was de-
signed. Cas6 is known to mature pre-crRNA into crRNA by recognizing and cleaving inside
the CRISPR repeat sequence of the CRISPR array. In the Type I-F CAST system, the
typical CRISPR array architecture has the following defined sequence: 5’- GTGAACTGC-
CGAGTAGGTAGCTGATAAC - N32 - GTGAACTGCCGAGTAGGTAGCTGATAAC -3’.
Cas6 cleaves precisely 8 nucleotides upstream of the spacer region. This results in a mature
crRNA with the following structure: 5’- CUGAUAAC - N32 - GUGAACUGCCGAGUAG-
GUAGCUGAUAAC -3’ [24].
To evaluate Cas6 activity in Yarrowia lipolytica, a strain expressing SV40-Cas6 from
the E1 genomic locus was transformed with a plasmid-based GFP reporter construct (Fig.
4). This construct was designed such that a single CRISPR array sequence was placed down-
stream of the translation initiation region and upstream of the GFP. If Cas6 is functionally
expressed, it will recognize and cleave the CRISPR repeat, thereby disrupting translation
initiation. As a result, there will be a measurable decrease in fluorescence signal, which can
be quantified with the help of flow cytometry.
Page 12 of 31
==PAGE:15==
3
Materials and Methods
HiBit tag
Linker
SV40-NLS
GFP
m7G
pTEF
pL41
pA
pA
tTEF
tTEF
Cas6 
cleavage
AAAA
No GFP 
fluorescence
CRISPR array
SV40-Cas6 strain
Figure 4: GFP-based reporter assay of Cas6 function
3
Materials and Methods
3.1
General methods
PCRs were performed using Phusion U Hot Start PCR Master Mix and PCR Phusion
High-Fidelity PCR Master Mix (Thermo Fisher Scientific). PCRs on E. coli colonies were
carried out using OneTaq Quick-Load 2X Master Mix with Standard Buffer (New England
Biolabs), while REDTaq ReadyMix PCR Reaction Mix (Sigma-Aldrich) was used for Y.
lipolytica colonies. DNA oligonucleotides were purchased from Integrated DNA Technologies.
Gel electrophoresis was performed on 1% agarose gel (Sigma-Aldrich) using RedSafe™Nucleic
Acid Staining Solution (LAB-A-PORTER) and GeneRuler 1 kb DNA Ladder (Thermo Fisher
Scientific). NucleoSpin Gel and PCR Clean-up kit (MACHEREY-NAGEL) was used for
purification of DNA prior to Sanger sequencing (Eurofins Genomics). Plasmids were purified
with NucleoSpin Plasmid, Mini Kit (MACHEREY-NAGEL) and some were sent to Nanopore
sequencing (Unveil Bio).
3.2
Routine cultivation
E. coli was grown at 37 ℃with agitation at 200 RPM in LB media + Ampicillin (10
g/L tryptone, 5 g/L yeast extract, 10 g/L NaCl, 15 g/L agar for solid media, 100 mg/L
Ampicillin). In the event of cell recovery, SOC media was preferred (20 g/L tryptone, 5 g/L
yeast extract, 0.6 g/L NaCl (10 mM), 0.02 g/L KCl (2.5 mM), 2.04 g/L MgCl2 (10 mM), 8
g/L glucose, and 10 mM MgSO4).
Y. lipolytica was grown at 30 ℃with agitation at 200 RPM in one of the following
media: YPD (10 g/L yeast extract, 20 g/L peptone, 20 g/L glucose, and 15 g/L agar for
Page 13 of 31
==PAGE:16==
3
Materials and Methods
solid media) or synthetic complete (SC) medium without uracil (6.7 g/L yeast nitrogen base
without amino acids, 1.92 g/L yeast synthetic dropout supplement without uracil, 20 g/L
glucose, and 20 g/L agar for solid media). Where applicable, selection antibiotics were added
depending on the strain: nourseothricin (250 µg/mL), hygromycin (400 µg/mL).
3.3
Plasmid cloning
Plasmid constructs were assembled using the USER (Uracil-Specific Excision Reagent)
cloning method. The fragments containing overlapping overhangs were amplified prior. The
list of primers can be found in Supplementary Table 1 1. All steps were performed on ice
unless stated otherwise. The reactions were set-up in a PCR tube by adding: 100 ng of
each linear DNA fragment, 1 µL of 10× T4 DNA ligase buffer (NEB), 0.5 µof DpnI (Thermo
Fischer Scientific), and 0.5 µL of USER enzyme mix (NEB) and enough MQ water to reach
a total volume of 10 µL.
The mixture was gently mixed and incubated at 37°C for 15 minutes to facilitate uracil
excision and DNA assembly, followed by 25°C for 15 minutes to promote fragment annealing.
After incubation, the reaction mixture was used directly for transformation into chemically
competent E. coli cells.
3.4
Chemical transformation of E. coli competent cells
50 µL TOP10 chemically competent E. coli cells (Thermo Fischer Scientific) were mixed
with 50–100 ng of plasmid DNA and incubated on ice for 30 minutes. The cells were then
heat-shocked at 42 ℃for 30 seconds and immediately returned to ice for 5 minutes. Following
heat shock, 450 µL of SOC media was added and the cells were incubated at 37 ℃, 750
RPM for 1 h to allow recovery and expression of the antibiotic resistance marker. Aliquots of
50–150 µL were plated on LB agar plates containing the appropriate antibiotic and incubated
overnight at 37 ℃.
3.5
Transformation of Y. lipolytica competent cells
This dry transformation protocol is based on an optimized version of the EasyCloneYALI
paper.
Prior to the transformation, a transformation mix (TM) had been prepared by
combining 83.5 µL of 50% PEG 8000, 2.5 µL of 10 mg/mL single stranded DNA (ssDNA)
from salmon testes (pre-boiled at 95 ℃for 5 minutes immediately placed on ice), 5 µL of 2
M lithium acetate, 5 µL of 2 M dithiothreitol (DTT) and 4 µL of Tris-HCl. The TM can
be stored at -20 ℃for future use, however, repeated freeze-thaw cycles should be avoided to
maintain ssDNA efficiency. For multiple reactions, the mix was scaled proportionally.
As an initial step, a YPD agar plate was densely inoculated with a parent strain of Y.
lipolytica to form a uniform lawn and left to grow for 24h at 30 ℃. The next day, 3-4 large
loops of biomass were harvested and gently re-suspended in 1 mL of sterile water in a 2 mL
Eppendorf tube. The optical density at 600 nm (OD600) was measured after a 100× dilution.
The initial 1 mL cell suspension is adjusted to have an OD value of 66 (approximately 3.3
x 109 cells/mL), although values between 30 to 90 are acceptable. An aliquot of 100 µL
Page 14 of 31
==PAGE:17==
3
Materials and Methods
of the cell suspension was used per transformation, allowing up to 10 transformations per
preparation. Cells were centrifuged at 4,000 × g for 4 minutes at room temperature and the
supernatant was discarded. This protocol is readily scalable by proportionally increasing the
biomass and re-suspension volume to accommodate a larger number of transformations.
Typically, 0.5-1 µg of gRNA plasmid, 1–2 µg of linearized repair fragment and 100
µL of transformation mix (TM) is added per transformation. A recommended practice is
to add the gRNA to the side of the tube, followed by the linearized fragment and lastly
the transformation mix, to facilitate uniform mixing. Subsequently, the mixture was re-
suspended by gently sliding the tube across a rack to mix the contents. Cells were incubated
at 39°C for 1 h, followed by centrifugation at 4,000 x g for 5 minutes at room temperature.
The supernatant was discarded, and cells were resuspended in 500 µL of YPD medium and
incubated at 30°C for 2 h at 700rpm in a thermocycler to allow recovery.
Following recovery, 250 µL of the transformation culture was spread using glass beads
on selective SC or YPD agar plates. Plates were incubated at 30°C for 2–5 days before
colony analysis.
3.6
SDS page
Individual colonies of eight Yarrowia lipolytica strains, each expressing a CAST protein
of interest fused with a HiBiT tag, were inoculated into 20 mL of liquid YPD medium in
250 mL baffled shake flasks. The cultures were grown at 30 ℃for 24h with agitation set
at 200 RPM. Following overnight incubation, cultures were transferred into 50 mL Falcon
tubes and centrifuged at 5,000 x g for 5 minutes at room temperature. The supernatant
was discarded, and the resulting cell pellets were re-suspended in 5 mL of 100 mM Tris-HCl
buffer (pH 8.0) and placed on ice.
All subsequent steps were performed on ice unless otherwise stated.
From each re-
suspension, 1 mL of cells was transferred into SureSeal screw-cap microcentrifuge tubes
(USA Scientific), each pre-filled halfway with sterile 400-800 µm glass beads (Thermo Fisher
Scientific). Cell lysis was carried out using a bead beater operated at 6500 rpm for 20 seconds
per cycle, with samples placed on ice for 1 minute between each run. This cycle was repeated
four times to ensure thorough cell disruption. Lysates were centrifuged at 17,000 x g for 5
minutes at 4 ℃to pellet the beads and cell debris. 500 µL of crude protein extract was
collected and stored at -20 ℃for downstream analysis.
For SDS-PAGE sample preparation, a reducing buffer was freshly prepared at room
temperature by combining one part NuPAGE LDS Sample Buffer (4×) with nine parts
of 0.5 M Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP). To each 30 µL aliquot of crude protein
extract, 10 µL of the reducing buffer was added, and the samples were denatured by heating
at 95 ℃for 10 minutes.
Protein samples were resolved on 4–20% Mini-PROTEAN® TGX™precast protein gels
(15-well, 15 µL; Bio-Rad Laboratories). Prior to use, the electrophoresis chamber (Bio-Rad)
was thoroughly cleaned with soap and water, and the tape seal at the bottom of the gel was
removed. The chamber was filled with 1× SDS running buffer (3.03 g of Tris base, 14.4 g
of glycine, 1 gram of SDS in 1 L of distilled water) up to the indicated fill line. A volume
of 12 µL of each denatured protein sample was loaded into separate wells, along with 3 µL
Page 15 of 31
==PAGE:18==
3
Materials and Methods
of PageRuler™Plus Prestained Protein Ladder (Thermo Fisher Scientific) as a molecular
weight marker. Electrophoresis was performed at 180 V for approximately 35 minutes, or
until the tracking dye reached the bottom of the gel.
3.7
Protein HiBiT assay
Prior to HiBiT blotting, 1× TBST buffer was prepared by diluting 10× TBS buffer to
1× with distilled water, followed by the addition of 0.1% (v/v) Tween-20. To prepare 1 L of
10× TBS buffer, 240 g of Tris base and 80 g of NaCl were dissolved in 800 mL of distilled
water, the pH was adjusted to 7.6 with hydrochloric acid (HCl) and the volume was brought
up to 1 liter with distilled water. The gel cast was opened with a spatula and the gel was
gently placed in distilled water.
The next step involved transferring the protein bands from the gel to a nitrocellulose
membrane using the iBlot™2 Dry Blotting System (Thermo Fisher Scientific) along with
iBlot™2 Transfer Stacks, nitrocellulose, regular size (Thermo Fisher Scientific) [6]. To better
understand the layers of the transfer stack, Fig.5 displays a graph based the user guide
provided by the manufacturer.
Top stack
Bottom 
stack
Figure 5: Layers of the iBLOT 2 transfer stack as provided by the manufacturer’s
user guide [27]
According to the manufacturer’s protocol, the transfer stack was first unsealed, and the
top stack was carefully separated and set aside with the gel-facing side upwards [27]. The
bottom stack remained in its plastic tray, which was then placed in the center of the blotting
surface of the device, ensuring correct alignment of the electrical contacts.
Page 16 of 31
==PAGE:19==
3
Materials and Methods
The pre-run gel was briefly rinsed in deionized water, then carefully positioned on top of
the nitrocellulose membrane within the bottom stack. The iBlot™filter paper was soaked in
deionized water and placed on top of the membrane. To eliminate any trapped air bubbles
between layers, a blotting roller was gently rolled over the stack. The white separator sheet
from the top stack was then removed and discarded. The top stack was placed onto the
soaked filter paper with the copper electrode facing up and the gel layer facing down.
Subsequently, the iBlot 2 Absorbent Pad was positioned over the stack, aligning its
electrical contacts with those of the blotting surface. The blotting roller was again used to
flatten the stack and ensure even contact. Finally, the transfer was initiated by running
program P3 (20 V, 7 minutes) on the iBlot 2 device.
Upon completion of the run, the
nitrocellulose membrane was inspected for successful visible protein bands, submerged in a
container with 1x TBST buffer and gently gently rocked to remove residual transfer buffer
and enhance solubilization of the HiBiT tag. The membrane should not be allowed to dry
out.
The next stage of the procedure is to blot the nitrocellulose membrane using Nano-Glo
HiBiT Blotting System (Promega Corporation) according to the manufacturer’s protocol
[28]. 1× Nano-Glo Blotting Buffer was prepared by diluting the 10× stock with water to
a total of 10 mL (enough volume to submerge the membrane). Subsequently, the LgBiT
Protein was diluted 1:200 in the 1× Nano-Glo Blotting Buffer, i.e. 50 µL LgBiT in 10 mL
buffer, and the membrane was incubated in this solution for 1 hour at room temperature with
gentle rocking. Next, the Nano-Glo Luciferase Assay Substrate was diluted 1:500 directly
into the LgBiT/buffer solution by tilting the container and dispensing the substrate into the
pooled liquid, followed by immediate mixing by rocking. The membrane was incubated for
5 minutes at room temperature.
For imaging, the membrane was either left submerged in reagent or transferred between
transparent sheets or plastic wrap and imaged using a chemiluminescence imager with ap-
propriate exposure settings. To optimize detection, a program with progressively increasing
exposure times (1 min to 60 min) was recommended to capture both strong and weak signals
while avoiding detector saturation.
3.8
GFP fluorescence reporter assay of the SV40-Cas6 function
Four strains of interest were chosen to assess the ribonuclease activity of Cas6: (i)
wild-type W29, (ii) W29 containing a GFP genomically integrated in the D1 locus (W29-
GFP-g), (iii) W29 transformed with a plasmid expressing GFP preceded by a CRISPR
repeat (W29-CrSeq-GFP), and (iv) an engineered strain constitutively expressing SV40-
Cas6 and harboring the same CRISPR-repeat-GFP plasmid (SV40-Cas6-CrSeq-GFP). The
strains were grown overnight in 10 mL of YPD with or without nourseothricin at 30 ℃
and 200 RPM. The next day, 6 replicates of each strain were set up in a 96-well microplate
and in 200 µL of the corresponding media. The OD600 of initial culture was adjusted to
0.2 to normalize the cultures. The microplate was grown at 30 ℃with mixing for 24 h.
The following day, 20 µL from each well were re-suspended in 180 µL of PBS (pH=8) and
analyzed via flow cytometry on a Novocyte Penteon (Agilent).
Page 17 of 31
==PAGE:20==
4
Results
4
Results
The results presented in this section follow the chronological order of the experimental
workflow outlined earlier. First, the genomic integration efficiency of URA3-expressing cargo
at one or four loci in the Yarrowia lipolytica genome will be assessed. This will be followed
by an analysis of the expression profiles of eight HiBiT-tagged proteins of the CAST system.
Finally, the RNase activity of Cas6 on crRNA processing will be evaluated with the help of
flow cytometry data.
Y. lipolytica strains carrying the CAST system were transformed with a linearized
URA3-expressing cargo fragment and the corresponding gRNA plasmid. Following transfor-
mation, cells were plated on SC-URA3 supplemented with nourseothricin and incubated at
30 ℃. This media applies strong auxotrophic selection and antibiotic selection, requiring both
successful integration of the URA33 marker and maintenance of the gRNA plasmid carrying
the Nat resistance gene. Three negative controls were included: untransformed cells of the
parental strain, cells transformed with the gRNA plasmid alone, and cells transformed with
the linearized URA3 fragment. After three days of incubation, colony growth was observed
for both strains containing either a single E1 integration site or four E1 integration sites
(Fig. 6), while no colonies were detected under any of the control conditions, confirming
that colony formation was dependent on the presence of both the cargo and gRNA plas-
mid. To evaluate whether site-specific integration had occurred at the E1 loci, 16 colonies
from each transformation plate were randomly selected and subjected to colony PCR using
primers flanking the targeted integration E1 site/sites. In all colonies, PCR amplification
yielded a ∼1.2 kb fragment corresponding to the wild-type E1 locus (Fig. 6, gel 1), indi-
cating the absence of cargo integration at the intended sites. To rule out the possibility of
off-target integration, a second PCR was performed using primers that bind internally in
the cargo (targeting the R-end and L-end regions). No amplification products were detected
in any of the colonies (Fig.6, gel 2), further confirming that the URA3 fragment was not in-
tegrated elsewhere in the genome. These findings suggest that, under the tested conditions,
the CAST system did not facilitate successful integration of the linearized URA3 gene.
Page 18 of 31
==PAGE:21==
4
Results
1500
PO1f-CAST-1E1
PO1f-CAST-4E1
1000 
1500
1000 
1500
1000 
1000 
1000 
3000 
3000 
1
2
Figure 6:
URA3 integration by CAST system.
Transformation plates with the
parental strains containing one E1 locus or four E1 loci are displayed to the left. 1. Gel
of the colony PCR targeting E1 locus/loci - a band of ∼1.2 kb corresponding to wild-type
parental strain. 2. Gel of colony PCR that binds to R-end and L-end of the URA3 cargo
shows no bands.
We will continue with the analysis of the expression profile of HiBiT-tagged proteins in
Y. lipolytica strain W29. Integration of all nine constructs - comprising eight CAST proteins
and one variant of Cas6 containing an SV40 nuclear localization signal (SV40-Cas6) - into
the targeted E1 locus was confirmed by colony PCR and Sanger sequencing. Initial HiBiT
blot analysis revealed distinct bands for six out of the nine proteins (Fig. 7a). No detectable
signal was observed for Cas6, SV40-Cas6, and TnsB, indicating either low expression or
degradation of these proteins. Notably, the TnsA sample displayed two bands: a strong band
at the expected molecular weight and an additional lower-molecular-weight band of weaker
intensity, suggesting potential protein degradation or alternative translation initiation.
It is important to note that all protein samples were prepared on ice without the addition
of protease inhibitors, which may have contributed to a small degree of protein degradation.
To improve detection of the initially undetected proteins, a second round of HiBiT blotting
was conducted. In this round, samples were concentrated by re-suspending the pellets in
half the original volume of Tris-HCl buffer. Additionally, both the soluble fraction and the
total crude lysate (containing both soluble and insoluble proteins) were analyzed (Fig. 7b).
The second blot showed generally higher band intensities across samples of the crude lysate
fractions. Similar to TnsA, TnsB and Cas6 (without the nuclear localization signal) displayed
Page 19 of 31
==PAGE:22==
4
Results
multiple bands, with TnsB showing four distinct bands of varying sizes, suggesting possible
degradation products or post-translational intermediates. Interestingly, SV40-Cas6 yielded
a single, prominent band with stronger signal intensity compared to the unmodified Cas6,
potentially indicating improved expression or stability due to the presence of the nuclear
localization signal.
180
130
100
70
55
40
35
25
15
10
180
130
100
70
55
40
35
25
15
10
a
b
Soluble fraction
Crude lysate
Figure 7: Expression profile of HiBiT-tagged proteins in Yarrowia lipolytica.
Lanes marked 1 and 2 represent the same protein expressed from two independent transfor-
mant colonies.
To evaluate the ribonuclease activity of Cas6, four Y. lipolytica strains were selected:
(i) wild-type W29, (ii) W29 containing a GFP genomically integrated in the D1 locus (W29-
GFP-g), (iii) W29 transformed with a plasmid expressing GFP preceded by a CRISPR
repeat (W29-CrSeq-GFP), and (iv) an engineered strain constitutively expressing SV40-Cas6
and harboring the same CRISPR-repeat-GFP plasmid (SV40-Cas6-CrSeq-GFP). All GFP-
expressing strains were constructed with the constitutive L41 promoter positioned upstream
of the GFP coding sequence.
The gating strategy applied for selection of GFP-positive
population is shown in Fig. 8.
Page 20 of 31
==PAGE:23==
4
Results
Figure 8: Gating strategy used for flow cytometry analysis of GFP fluorescence.
Initially the gate was set for Yarrowia population, followed by gating for single cells and
lastly, the GFP positive or negative population was chosen, respectively.
It is important to note that flow cytometry was performed twice. However, the dataset
from the primary run was excluded from further analysis due to sample contamination
and evidence of cross-sample mixing. However, the other run is a trial run that contains
only six technical replicates per strain. One must consider that technical replicates do not
capture biological variability; rather, they are repeat runs that can be informative about the
instrument’s consistency across runs. Therefore, based on the data obtained, the functional
activity of Cas6 can not be reliably assessed; instead, the results only provide insight into
the variability between technical runs.
Fig. 9 (left panel) displays representative fluorescence histograms from one technical
replicate per strain. As expected, the wild-type W29 exhibited no detectable fluorescence.
The W29-GFP-g strain, which expresses GFP from the genome, showed a sharp peak con-
sistent with a normal distribution. In contrast, the W29-CrSeq-GFP and SV40-Cas6-CrSeq-
GFP strains, which rely on plasmid-based expression, exhibited broader and non-normal
distributions of GFP intensity, likely due to variability in plasmid copy number, as well as
expression efficiency due to the repeat.
To assess the instrument’s reproducibility, the median fluorescence intensity (MFI) of
Page 21 of 31
==PAGE:24==
5
Discussion
each replicate was calculated. Subsequently, we plotted the mean MFI across the six repli-
cates per strain, along with their standard deviation, shown as black error bars in Figure 9
(right panel). The error bars were relatively short for all strains, indicating that the MFI
values within each group were tightly clustered around the mean.
This suggests a high
degree of consistency between runs of the flow cytometer. A future calibration step could
potentially reduce this variability even further.
Figure 9: Flow cytometry analysis of GFP fluorescence. Right panel displays the
mean MFI across six technical replicates. Black error bars are shown on top of histograms.
5
Discussion
The primary objective of this project was to lay the foundation for assessing whether
Type I-F CRISPR-associated transposon found naturally in Vibrio cholerae can be suc-
cessfully implemented for RNA-guided DNA integration into endogenous sites of Yarrowia
lipolytica.
Despite the appearance of colonies on the transformation plates, colony PCR failed to
confirm successful integration of the URA3 cargo, suggesting that the observed growth may
not be due to proper genome editing events. This discrepancy can be attributed to two
primary causes: selection background growth and potential recombination artifacts.
Although dual selection was applied using both uracil auxotrophy and nourseothricin
resistance, neither selection pressure appears to have been stringent enough to completely
suppress the growth of non-transformed cells. Nourseothricin (Nat), while commonly used as
a dominant selection marker, is known to permit residual growth in some Yarrowia species.
A recent study demonstrated that several strains within the Yarrowia clade exhibited low-
level resistance to nourseothricin, particularly at concentrations below 500 µg/mL. In the
case of Yarrowia phangngensis, residual growth was present even at concentrations as high
as 1 mg/mL [29]. In our experiments, a nourseothricin concentration of 250 µg/mL was used,
which may not have been sufficient to fully suppress background growth. Although negative
control plates (cells transformed with only the gRNA plasmid containing Nat resistance) did
Page 22 of 31
==PAGE:25==
5
Discussion
not yield colonies in this specific trial, prior experience in our laboratory has shown that Nat
selection alone can occasionally allow for the growth of non-transformants.
Similarly, the use of uracil auxotrophy for selection may also be prone to background
effects. During transformation, cells are typically recovered in YPD rich media, which may
leave residual nutrients sufficient to support transient growth of uracil auxotrophs, especially
during the early stages of colony formation. Although if that would be the case, colonies
would have grown on negative controls.
Secondly, the genetic background of the parental strains may contribute to unexpected
recombination events. The transformation strains used in this study, PO1f-CAST-1E1 and
PO1f-CAST-4E1, contain a URA3-disrupted allele in which a cassette derived from Sac-
charomyces cerevisiae - including a sucrose synthase gene under control of the Y. lipolytica
XPR2 promoter - was inserted into the native URA3 locus [25]. It is plausible that the intro-
duced URA3 cargo underwent partial homologous recombination or even non-homologous
end joining, resulting in restoration of prototrophy that is independent of site-specific inte-
gration [30]. Such unintended recombination could lead to false-positive colonies that carry
URA3 expression but not via the designed CAST-mediated insertion mechanism.
Supporting this possibility, studies in other non-conventional yeasts have shown that
transformation with linear DNA cassettes often results in non-canonical integration events.
For example, in Pichia pastoris, random integration into off-target loci has been reported to
alter native gene function and exhibit unrelated phenotypes [31]. A similar mechanism may
explain some of the colonies observed in our experiment.
The second experiment resulted in the partially successful expression of CAST-associated
proteins in Y. lipolytica. This represents a promising first step towards establishing this
yeast species as a platform for CRISPR-associated transposon-mediated DNA integration.
However, several observations require further analysis and experimental clarification. Par-
ticularly, HiBiT blot analysis revealed that three proteins, i.e., TnsA, TnsB, and Cas6, con-
sistently displayed multiple lower molecular weight bands, which might indicate potential
presence of inactive protein forms (Fig. 7). Additionally, this pattern suggests the presence
of protein degradation or truncated protein forms. An explanation is partial proteolysis dur-
ing sample preparation. Although protease inhibitor was not added during cell preparation,
samples were kept on ice, which should stall the catalytic activity of proteases [32]. More-
over, partial protein denaturation with LDS and TCEP during SDS-page sample preparation
could contribute to the observed migration anomalies. Improperly denatured proteins may
retain secondary or tertiary structure, altering their electrophoretic mobility and resulting
in atypical band patterns.
Another possible explanation is the formation of insoluble protein aggregates, also called
inclusion bodies. Misfolded or partially folded proteins trapped in these aggregates may be
more susceptible to proteolytic degradation and therefore, lead to the appearance of multiple
bands on a blot. If these inclusion bodies were present in the pellet fraction, they would
result in the appearance of truncated or degraded forms in the total lysate, as well as soluble
fraction. This argument is partially supported by the observation that the crude lysate -
which includes both soluble and insoluble components - shows bands that are more intense
than those the soluble fraction alone. The increased signal could reflect a higher total protein
concentration or the accumulation of misfolded protein in the insoluble fraction. To clarify
Page 23 of 31
==PAGE:26==
6
Conclusion
this, it would be beneficial to compare the protein content of the soluble and insoluble
fractions by isolating and analyzing the pellet and soluble fraction in parallel.
Post-translational modifications (PTMs) in Y. lipolytica may also play a role. As a
non-native host, the yeast may modify heterologously expressed proteins in unanticipated
ways, including non-specific proteolytic processing or cleavage at cryptic recognition sites,
potentially leading to truncated species.
Additionally, translational irregularities such as alternative translation start or stop
sites, or ribosomal stalling events, could produce protein isoforms of different sizes. Interest-
ingly, all three proteins in question were each expressed under the same constitutive TEF1
promoter, while TnsC and Cas5-8, also driven by TEF1, did not. This suggests that alter-
native promoter initiation is an unlikely cause, given that TEF1 is a well-characterized and
widely used promoter in Y. lipolytica expression systems. Nevertheless, the TEF1 promoter
is a strong, constitutive promoter, originally designed for the identification of endogenous
enzyme genes via expression cloning, rather than for high-level heterologous protein produc-
tion. Its continuous activity throughout all growth phases can lead to premature or excessive
expression of non-native proteins, which may negatively affect cell physiology and growth
[10]. This issue becomes particularly relevant when expressing large proteins such as TnsB,
which has a molecular weight of approximately 71 kDa. The metabolic burden associated
with overexpression of such a large protein may lead to misfolding or aggregation, placing
undue stress on the Y.lypolytica’ protein-folding systems. This, in turn, could account for
the complex expression profile of TnsB that exhibit multiple lower molecular weight bands.
Interestingly, the expression profile of Cas6 changes when fused to the SV40 nuclear lo-
calization signal (NLS). The SV40-Cas6 form of the protein consistently produced a single,
more intense band on the blot, in contrast to 2 bands observed for its unmodified homolog.
While the more intense signal might also result from higher protein expression or biomass
in that particular strain, the contrast in banding patterns suggests the NLS enhances the
stability of Cas6 by promoting its import into the nucleus, thus shielding it from cytoplas-
mic proteases. Nuclear localization could also position the protein closer to its pre-crRNA
substrate potentially increasing its functional capability and stability. Therefore, it would
be advisable to include NLS sequences for all the genes belonging to the cluster.
The results obtained from flow cytometry are inconclusive, as the availability of only
technical replicates prevents robust statistical analysis to determine whether Cas6 effectively
cleaves the pre-crRNA. To address this limitation, the experiment is planned to be repeated
with biological replicates to generate a statistically significant dataset.
6
Conclusion
This study explored the feasibility of reconstituting a Type I-F CRISPR-associated
transposon (CAST) system from Vibrio cholerae in the oleaginous yeast Yarrowia lipolytica
with the aim of enabling RNA-guided, site-specific genomic integration without double-
strand breaks.
Expression analysis confirmed successful expression of all seven CAST proteins (TnsA,
TnsB, TnsC, TniQ, Cas6, Cas7, and Cas5-8) as determined by HiBiT blotting. Additionally,
Page 24 of 31
==PAGE:27==
References
the expression of ClpX bacterial chaperone and Cas6 protein containig a NLS was proved
to be succesful. However, several proteins, including TnsA, TnsB and Cas6 lacking NLS,
exhibited multiple bands migration patterns suggestive of degradation or aggregation. The
fusion of an SV40 nuclear localization signal to Cas6 markedly improved protein stability
and yielded a distinct single band, highlighting the importance of subcellular localization for
heterologous protein expression in yeast.
Despite encouraging expression results, no successful site-specific integration of the
URA3 cargo could be confirmed by colony PCR. Although colonies formed on selective
media, no evidence of integration was detected at either the intended target sites or po-
tential off-target genomic loci. These results highlight the need for further optimization of
the CAST system in Yarrowia lipolytica, including the incorporation of nuclear localization
signals (NLS), refinement of the expression cassette architecture, and a deeper investigation
into the system’s mechanism of action and expression dynamics in this host.
Flow cytometry experiments aimed at evaluating the RNase activity of Cas6 produced
inconclusive results due to contamination. Nevertheless, the observed trends warrant further
investigation with more rigorous experimental settings.
In summary, this work establishes is a starting point for the future implementation of
CAST systems in Y. lipolytica. It demonstrates basic compatibility between the host and
bacterial transposon machinery, identifies protein stability challenges, and highlights the
significance of nuclear localization in enhancing protein expression. Future directions should
prioritize systematic engineering of expression constructs to enhance protein solubility and
functionality, optimization for integration efficiencies and target specificity, mutations library
for enhanced function of each component.
References
1
Ishino Yoshizumi et al. “Nucleotide sequence of the iap gene, responsible for alkaline phosphatase
isozyme conversion in Escherichia coli, and identification of the gene product”. In: Journal of Bacteri-
ology 169.12 (1987), pp. 5429–5433. doi: 10.1128/jb.169.12.5429-5433.1987.
2
Nathan McDonald et al. “CRISPR-Cas systems are present predominantly on mobile genetic elements
in Vibrio species”. In: BMC Genomics 20 (Feb. 2019). doi: 10.1186/s12864-019-5439-1.
3
Ruud Jansen et al. “Identification of genes that are associated with DNA repeats in prokaryotes”.
In: Molecular Microbiology 43.6 (2002), pp. 1565–1575. doi: https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1365-
2958.2002.02839.x.
4
Irina Gostimskaya. “CRISPR-Cas9: A History of Its Discovery and Ethical Considerations of Its Use in
Genome Editing”. In: Biochemistry (Mosc) 87 (2022), pp. 777–788. doi: https://doi.org/10.1134/
S0006297922080090.
5
Rodolphe Barrangou et al. “CRISPR Provides Acquired Resistance Against Viruses in Prokaryotes”.
In: Science 315.5819 (2007), pp. 1709–1712. doi: 10.1126/science.1138140.
6
Carina Holkenbrink et al. “EasyCloneYALI: CRISPR/Cas9-Based Synthetic Toolbox for Engineering
of the Yeast Yarrowia lipolytica”. In: Biotechnology Journal 13.9 (2018). doi: https://doi.org/10.
1002/biot.201700543.
Page 25 of 31
==PAGE:28==
References
7
R Zvyagilskaya et al. “Proton- and Sodium-Coupled Phosphate Transport Systems and Energy Status
of Yarrowia lipolytica Cells Grown in Acidic and Alkaline Conditions”. In: The Journal of membrane
biology 183 (Oct. 2001), pp. 39–50. doi: 10.1007/s00232-001-0054-9.
8
Dmitry Mamaev and Renata Zvyagilskaya. “Yarrowia lipolytica: a multitalented yeast species of ecolog-
ical significance”. In: FEMS Yeast Research 21.2 (Feb. 2021), foab008. issn: 1567-1356. doi: 10.1093/
femsyr/foab008.
9
Ewelina Celinska and Jean-Marc Nicaud. “Filamentous fungi-like secretory pathway strayed in a yeast
system: peculiarities of Yarrowia lipolytica secretory pathway underlying its extraordinary performance”.
In: Applied Microbiology and Biotechnology 103 (Jan. 2019). doi: 10.1007/s00253-018-9450-2.
10
Catherine Madzak, Claude Gaillardin, and Jean-Marie Beckerich. “Heterologous protein expression and
secretion in the non-conventional yeast Yarrowia lipolytica: a review”. In: Journal of Biotechnology
109.1 (2004). Recombinant Proteins and Host Cell Physiology, pp. 63–81. issn: 0168-1656. doi: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.jbiotec.2003.10.027.
11
M. Larroude et al. “Synthetic biology tools for engineering Yarrowia lipolytica”. In: Biotechnology Ad-
vances 36.8 (2018), pp. 2150–2164. issn: 0734-9750. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biotechadv.
2018.10.004.
12
Selina Teh et al. Mechanism of delayed cell death following simultaneous CRISPR-Cas9 targeting in
pancreatic cancers. Apr. 2023. doi: 10.1101/2023.04.03.535384.
13
Dingyu Liu et al. “Development and characterization of a CRISPR/Cas9n-based multiplex genome
editing system for Bacillus subtilis”. In: Biotechnology for Biofuels 12 (Sept. 2019). doi: 10.1186/
s13068-019-1537-1.
14
Patrick Hsu et al. “DNA targeting specificity of RNA-guided CAS9 nucleases”. In: Nature biotechnology
31 (July 2013). doi: 10.1038/nbt.2647.
15
Yanmei Liu et al. “CRISPR RNA-Guided Transposases Facilitate Dispensable Gene Study in Phage”.
In: Viruses 16.3 (2024). issn: 1999-4915. doi: 10.3390/v16030422.
16
Cas Mosterd, Geneviève M. Rousseau, and Sylvain Moineau. “A short overview of the CRISPR-Cas
adaptation stage”. In: Canadian Journal of Microbiology 67.1 (2021), pp. 1–12. doi: 10.1139/cjm-
2020-0212.
17
Eugene V. Koonin and Kira S. Makarova. “Mobile Genetic Elements and Evolution of CRISPR-Cas
Systems: All the Way There and Back”. In: Genome Biology and Evolution 9.10 (Sept. 2017), pp. 2812–
2825. issn: 1759-6653. doi: 10.1093/gbe/evx192.
18
Prarthana Mohanraju et al. “Diverse evolutionary roots and mechanistic variations of the CRISPR-Cas
systems”. In: Science 353.6299 (2016), aad5147. doi: 10.1126/science.aad5147.
19
Amnah Alalmaie, Saousen Diaf, and Raed Khashan. “Insight into the molecular mechanism of the
transposon-encoded type I-F CRISPR-Cas system”. In: Journal, genetic engineering and biotechnology
21 (May 2023), p. 60. doi: 10.1186/s43141-023-00507-8.
20
Sanne E. Klompe et al. “Transposon-encoded CRISPR–Cas systems direct RNA-guided DNA integra-
tion”. In: Nature 571 (2019), pp. 219–225. url: https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:
189817057.
21
Joseph E. Peters et al. “Recruitment of CRISPR-Cas systems by Tn7-like transposons”. In: Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences 114.35 (2017), E7358–E7366. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1709035114.
22
Francisco Tenjo-Castaño et al. “Conformational landscape of the type V-K CRISPR-associated transpo-
son integration assembly”. In: Molecular Cell 84.12 (2024), 2353–2367.e5. issn: 1097-2765. doi: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2024.05.005. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S1097276524003988.
23
Tyler Halpin-Healy et al. “Structural basis of DNA targeting by a transposon-encoded CRISPR–Cas
system”. In: Nature 577 (Jan. 2020), pp. 1–4. doi: 10.1038/s41586-019-1849-0.
Page 26 of 31
==PAGE:29==
7
Supplementary Material
24
George Lampe et al. Targeted DNA integration in human cells without double-strand breaks using
CRISPR RNA-guided transposases. Mar. 2023. doi: 10.1101/2023.03.17.533036.
25
Jean-Marc Nicaud et al. “Protein expression and secretion in the yeast Yarrowia lipolytica”. In: FEMS
Yeast Research 2.3 (Aug. 2002), pp. 371–379. issn: 1567-1356. doi: 10.1016/S1567-1356(02)00082-X.
eprint: https://academic.oup.com/femsyr/article-pdf/2/3/371/17937902/2-3-371.pdf. url:
https://doi.org/10.1016/S1567-1356(02)00082-X.
26
Astrid Weninger, Anton Glieder, and Thomas Vogl. “A toolbox of endogenous and heterologous nuclear
localization sequences for the methylotrophic yeast Pichia pastoris”. In: FEMS yeast research 15 (Sept.
2015). doi: 10.1093/femsyr/fov082.
27
Thermo Fisher Scientific. iBlot 2 Dry Blotting System User Guide. Tech. rep. Pub. No. MAN0013500.
Thermo Fisher Scientific, 2018. url: https://assets.thermofisher.com/TFS-Assets/LSG/manuals/
MAN0009112_iBlot2DryBlotSystem_UG.pdf.
28
Promega Corporation. Nano-Glo HiBiT Blotting System. Tech. rep. Technical Manual TM426. Promega
Corporation, 2019. url: https : / / www . promega . com/ - /media / files / resources / protocols /
technical - manuals / 500 / nano - glo - hibit - blotting - system - technical - manual . pdf ? rev =
98a236877fc0448184ea31a61ce66f1a.
29
Young-Kyoung Park and Tristan Rossignol. “Broadening the application of Yarrowia lipolytica synthetic
biology tools to explore the potential of Yarrowia clade diversity”. In: Microbiology 170.6 (2024). doi:
https://doi.org/10.1099/mic.0.001472.
30
Yuan-Ru Xiong et al. “Patterns of spontaneous and induced genomic alterations in <i>Yarrowia lipoly-
tica</i>”. In: Applied and Environmental Microbiology 91.1 (2025), e01678–24. doi: 10.1128/aem.
01678-24.
31
Jan-Philipp Schwarzhans et al. “Non-canonical integration events in Pichia pastoris encountered dur-
ing standard transformation analysed with genome sequencing”. In: Scientific Reports 6 (Dec. 2016),
p. 38952. doi: 10.1038/srep38952.
32
Zahuiti Hernández-Montañez et al. “The intracellular proteolytic system of Yarrowia lipolytica and
characterization of an aminopeptidase”. In: FEMS Microbiology Letters 268.2 (Mar. 2007), pp. 178–186.
issn: 0378-1097. doi: 10.1111/j.1574-6968.2006.00578.x.
Acknowledgments
I would like to acknowledge the use of OpenAI’s ChatGPT to assist with language
refinement, clarification of concepts. All scientific content, data interpretation, and conclu-
sions were solely my own. The availability of these open-source and commercial tools has
been essential for the successful completion of this research project (ImageJ/FIJI, Biorender,
GraphPad Prism, FlowJo, Benchling, Addgene ). We particularly acknowledge the contri-
butions of the scientific community in developing and maintaining these resources, which
enable reproducible and rigorous scientific research.
7
Supplementary Material
Page 27 of 31
==PAGE:30==
7
Supplementary Material
Table 1: Primers repository used in this study.
No
Name
Sequence
2
CfB6677-fw
ACAGCCAGUCCTCCACGATCC
3
CfB6677-rev
AAGCACUATCCTCTGCTGCGTCGAA
4
TnsA-prom-fw
AGTGCTUAGAGACCGGGTTGGCGGCG
5
TnsA-HiBit-rev
ATATCAUCAGCTAATCTTTTTAAACAGGCGCCAGCCCGACAC
TCCGTAGCTTGCCAGCTCGAAACG
6
TnsA-HiBit-Term-fw
ATGATAUATAACTGTCTAGAAATAAAGAGTATCATCTTTCAA
AACAGCCAGTCCTCCACGATCCAGCTC
7
Cas6-HiBit-rev
ATCTTTTUAAACAGGCGCCAGCCCGACACGATAAGAGGAACG
GGTTGAAAAGAATTCTCAGAATTG
8
Cas6-HiBit-Term-fw
AAAAAGAUTAGCTGATGACCCCACGTTGCCGGTCTT
9
Cas7-HiBit-rev
ACCCATCAUCAGCTAATCTTTTTAAACAGGCGCCAGCCCGAC
ACGTCGCCTTTGTGCTGAAACATTCCTCCTTTG
10
Cas7-HiBit-Term-fw
ATGATGGGUGGTATATATAACTGTCTAGAAATAAAGAGTATC
ATCTTTCAAAACAGCCAGTCCTCCACGATC
11
Cas5-8-HiBit-rev
ATCTTTTUAAACAGGCGCCAGCCCGACACAAGCGAGGACTTG
TCTGTTGTCTCGTC
12
Cas5-8-HiBit-Term-fw
AAAAAGAUTAGCTGATGATCATGTAATTAGTTATGTCACGCT
TACATTC
13
Cas5-8-Term-rev
ACTGGCTGUCGAGCGTCCCAAAACCTTCTCAAG
14
ClpX-prom-fw
AGTGCTUAAGGAGTTTGGCGCCCGTTTTTTC
15
ClpX-HiBit-rev
ATCTTTTUAAACAGGCGCCAGCCCGACACCTCACCAGAAGCC
TGCTGTGCTTCAG
16
TniQ-prom-fw
AGTGCTUTGTGCTTGAGCGGTATGTGCTTG
17
TniQ-HiBit-rev
ATCATCAGCUAATCTTTTTAAACAGGCGCCAGCCCGACACCC
ATCGAGACACATAGAAGCTCCGATTGAATTC
18
TniQ-HiBit-
Term-fw
AGCTGATGAUGGGTGGTATATATATATATATATATATATATA
ACTGTCTAGAAATAAAGAGTATCATCTTTCAAAACAGCCAGT
CCTCCACGATCC
19
TnsB-HiBit-rev
ATCATCAGCUAATCTTTTTAAACAGGCGCCAGCCCGACACCA
CGTAATCGATATCCCAGTCGTCGTTGTCTG
20
TnsB-HiBit-
Term-fw
AGCTGATGAUATATATATATATATATATATATAACTGTCTAG
AAATAAAGAGTATCATCTTTCAAAACAGCCAGTCCTCCACGA
TCC
21
TnsC-HiBit-rev
ATCTTTTUAAACAGGCGCCAGCCCGACACTTCAAAGAAATTT
TTGTTTCGTCCGGGTTTCGAC
Page 28 of 31
==PAGE:31==
7
Supplementary Material
No
Name
Sequence
22
TnsC-HiBit-
Term-fw
AAAAAGAUTAGCTGATGAAAGTGTGGATGGGGAAGTGAGTG
23
TnsC-Term-rev
ACTGGCTGUACGCAACTAACATGAATGAATACGATATACATC
AAAG
24
LF-Tn Donor_F
TGTTGGAACAACCATAAAATGATAATTACACCC
25
FragD-R
TGTTGATGCAACCATAAAGTGATATTTAATAATTATTTATAA
TCAGC
26
FragD_F
GTGAACTGCCGAGTAGGTAGCTGATAAC
27
VInt_R
GAAATGACCTCTTCATGAAAATGTCG
28
SfGFP_F
ATGTCCAAAGGCGAAGAACTG
29
URA3-sf_GF-Insert
ATTTTCATGAAGAGGTCATTTCAGAACAGCTGAAGCTTCGTA
CG
30
Ura3_Rend_F
TCTTCGCCTTTGGACATAGGCCACTAGTGGATCTGATATCAC
31
Cas6-Term-rev
ACTGGCTGUGACACGGGCATCTCACTTGCATATGTATG
32
IntE1_check_
FWD
GGTGTCAGATCAGCTCCGACGGAGAAATCTGAGTAATTCG
33
MuTR_D1_Up
GTTGACAAATTAGTGGGAACAATGCAGAG
34
MuTR_C2_Up
GACTACACAAAGCTAACAGACAAATGTAGGTC
35
MuTR_E3_Up
CTTCTTCCCTGTATCGTACGAACTTGTACTC
36
Check_IntE1_
down_new
GGGGTTAGAAGCAATTGGAGAAGAAACGTTC
37
E1-up
TTGATATGGTGTAACAATGATAAACCAAGGC
38
E1-down
GTTAGAAGCAATTGGAGAAGAAACGTTC
39
#39-SV40_
Cas6_fw
AGGTCTCUCGAGCCGACGTGAAGTGGTACTATAAG
40
#40-SV40_rv
AGAGACCUTTCGCTTCTTCTTAGGCATTTTGAATGATTCTTA
TACTC
41
#41_hrGFP_fw
ATAACATGGUGAGCAAGCAGATCCTGAAGAACAC
42
#42_Tl41_fw
ACTATGCCUTGTTGGAACAACCATAAAATCGC
43
#43_Vchr_rv
ACCATGTTAUCAGCTACCTACTCGGCAGTTC
44
#44_TerRPR1_rv
ACCCACUCGTGCAGGCTGCCC
45
#45_TerRPR1_fw
AGTGGGUGTTTTTTTGTGTGGGTACGGTTGTTG
46
CXPR061UR
AGGCATAGNGAGTATTTGAACTTTTAGTCAGATACTGGTAGT
TATATATTTATTTTG
47
#47_psgRNA
colPCR-dw
GTGTCGCCCTTATTCGACTCAC
Page 29 of 31
==PAGE:32==
7
Supplementary Material
No
Name
Sequence
48
#48_hrGFP_2_fw
AGTAGGUAGCTGATAACATGGTGAGCAAGCAGATCCTGAAG
49
#49_TngRNA_
2_rv
ACCTACUCGGCAGTTCACTAACCAACCTGCGCCGAC
50
#50_TngRNA_
2_rv
ACCCACUCGTGCAGGCTGCCC
51
#51_Pl41_rv
ACCTACUCGGCAGTTCACTCTGGGTTAGTTCCATGTTCTCCG
C
52
#52_Pl41_fw
AACGGAAUGCGTGCGATTGTGCTTGAGCGGTATGTGCTTG
53
#53_Cen_rv
ATTCCGTUGCATCAAATTTAGGGATGCCATCAAC
54
#54_TerRPR1_
2_fw
AGTGGGUGTTTTTTTGTGTGGGTACGGTTGTTG
55
L41-check
GCTATAAGCACTCTCTATGCACGTCAACATTTTG
56
Tn_SgRNA
GGCCGCAAATTTAAATAAAATGAAGTGAAGTTCC
57
#57_BB_TL41_
GFP_fw
ACTATGCCUTGTTGGAACAACCATAAAATCGCGTGCATTC
Table 2: Plasmid repository used in this study. Sequence information
is accessible via hyperlinks embedded in the plasmid names.
No
Name
Cloning
Selection
marker
Comment
1
CAST_8
In-house
Ampicillin
Map of the entire CAST
system
2
URA_template
In-house
Ampicillin
Template for
linearization of URA
fragment
3
gRNA_E1_CAST
In-house
Nourseothricin/
Ampicillin
E1 locus gRNA plasmid -
CAST
4
gRNA_E1_
Cas9_Nat
In-house
Nourseothricin/
Ampicillin
E1 locus gRNA plasmid -
Cas9 on nourseothricin
5
gRNA_E1_
Cas9_Hygro
In-house
Hygromycin/
Ampicillin
E1 locus gRNA plasmid -
Cas9 on hygromycin
6
CfB6677_TnsA
This work
Nourseothricin/
Ampicillin
Integration plasmid of
TnsA in E1 locus
7
CfB6677_TnsB
This work
Nourseothricin/
Ampicillin
Integration plasmid of
TnsB in E1 locus
Page 30 of 31
==PAGE:33==
7
Supplementary Material
No
Name
Cloning
Selection
marker
Comment
8
CfB6677_TnsC
This work
Nourseothricin/
Ampicillin
Integration plasmid of
TnsC in E1 locus
9
CfB6677_TniQ
This work
Nourseothricin/
Ampicillin
Integration plasmid of
TniQ in E1 locus
10
CfB6677_Cas6
This work
Nourseothricin/
Ampicillin
Integration plasmid of
Cas6 in E1 locus
11
CfB6677_Cas7
This work
Nourseothricin/
Ampicillin
Integration plasmid of
Cas7 in E1 locus
12
CfB6677_Cas5-8
This work
Nourseothricin/
Ampicillin
Integration plasmid of
Cas5-8 fusion in E1 locus
13
CfB6677_ClpX
This work
Nourseothricin/
Ampicillin
Integration plasmid of
ClpX in E1 locus
14
CfB6677-Cas6-SV40
This work
Nourseothricin/
Ampicillin
Integration plasmid of
Cas6_SV40 n E1 locus
15
Pl41_Vchr_GFP_
Tl41_Nat
This work
Nourseothricin/
Ampicillin
plasmid expressing GFP
with 1 CAST repeat
upstream of GFP
Page 31 of 31
