==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Hypoglycemia prediction in intensive care
units
A machine learning approach
Stefanos Avramis (s232461)
Kongens Lyngby 2025
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Hypoglycemia in the ICU has been associated with an increased risk for mortal-
ity[Yeh+25]. Early episodes occur in approximately 13.8% of patients, and are
associated with greater odds of adjusted ICU deaths(OR 1.41; 95% CI 1.31–
1.54) while the severity of these episodes was associated with ’dose-response’
increases in mortality[Bag+09].
As electronic health records become commonplace in ICU settings, the vol-
ume of patient data generated has grown significantly. This has made it possi-
ble for more complex deep learning methods to be applicable so as to get better
and more robust models. However, careful considerations need to be taken into
account when creating these models as the irregularity of these data makes it
diﬀicult to naively apply these methods.
The dataset used to replicate these results and to further test models is the
AmsterdamUMCDB [J+21]. Like other ICU datasets, it is highly imbalanced,
with admissions without hypoglycemic events far outnumbering those with. For
that reason, apart from the performance metrics, calibration metrics were also
taken into account when evaluating the models. The data was preprocessed
using the duckdb library to produce irregular and regular time series formats
that were used to train the models.
We initially reproduce the results found in [Man+22] to establish a base-
line. In this publication, XGBoost was used to predict hypoglycemia for ICU
patients, using data from the first two hours of their admission. The first mod-
els that were tested were the GRU-D model[Che+16] and transformer models
as they have been shown in literature to be able to handle irregular time series
data. Both models were unable to produce any meaningful results, largely due
to the complexity and imbalance of the data. The data was then processed so
as to produce regular time series. Metric of the features were calculated over
30 minute windows and were used for the hypoglycemia prediction. In this
setting, RNN, CNN, transformer models and XGBoost were able to perform
much better compared to the baseline. The metrics used to compare the mod-
els were accuracy, precision, recall and AUROC. Calibration plots showed that
the models were also well calibrated.
While the performance of these models is promising, caution must be ex-
ercised when interpreting the results due to the sensitive nature of clinical
decision-making. These findings suggest that there is potential real life appli-
cation that could benefit from using ICU data to make predictions for hypo-
glycemia in an ICU setting and should be further explored.
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and Com-
puter Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the
requirements for acquiring a MSc degree in Mathematical modeling and com-
putation.
Kongens Lyngby, August 4, 2025
Stefanos Avramis (s232461)
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisor, Tommy, first and foremost for the support
and guidance he provided for this thesis. Thank you Tommy for your patience.
I would also like to thank Benjamin, Milda and Davide for their help. The input
and feedback that you provided was very important in shaping my thesis.
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
ii
Acknowledgements
iii
Contents
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
ICU and Hypoglycemia
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Research questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Background and related work
3
2.1
Irregular Time Series Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Related work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3
Experimental Setup
7
3.1
Preprocessing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.3
Training and Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4
Results
17
4.1
Baseline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.2
Irregular time series
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.3
Regular time series . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5
Discussion
33
5.1
First Experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.2
Second and Third Experiment comparison . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.3
Regular Time Series model comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.4
Explainability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.5
Future Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
6
Conclusion
39
A Appendix
42
A.1 AmsterdamUMCDB tables
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
A.2 SQL scripts used for AmsterdamUMCDB . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
A.3 Model architectures
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
Bibliography
50
==PAGE:7==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
In recent years, machine learning has emerged as a highly versatile and ef-
fective tool across a wide range of domains, from finance and engineering to
natural language processing and autonomous systems. Its ability to leverage
large, high-dimensional datasets to identify complex patterns has made it par-
ticularly well-suited for tasks that were previously considered too intricate or
resource-intensive to automate. Among these domains, the medical field has
seen especially promising applications.
Machine learning has been success-
fully employed in diagnostic imaging, predictive modeling, genomics, and per-
sonalized treatment planning, demonstrating its potential to support clinical
decision-making and improve patient outcomes.
As healthcare systems increasingly adopt electronic health records and real-
time monitoring technologies, the volume of patient data generated—particularly
in high-acuity environments like the intensive care unit (ICU)—has grown ex-
ponentially. This has opened new avenues for machine learning to assist in
timely and accurate clinical predictions. One such critical application, which
will be the focus of this thesis, is the prediction of hypoglycemia, a poten-
tially life-threatening condition that often presents without overt symptoms in
sedated or non-responsive patients.
1.1
ICU and Hypoglycemia
Hypoglycemia is defined as a state in which blood glucose levels fall below the
standard physiological range, typically plasma glucose level below 4 mmol/L.
Because glucose is the brain’s primary energy source, even moderate reduc-
tions can lead to serious neurological impairments. While commonly associated
with diabetes, in an ICU setting hypoglycemia is also a frequent and clinically
significant occurrence among critically ill patients without a diabetes diagno-
sis.[Yeh+25] It has become a daily concern, particularly following the introduc-
tion of strict glycemic control protocols.[LJP09] Contributing factors include
aggressive insulin therapy, abrupt changes in nutrition, sepsis, stress-induced
metabolic changes, and impaired hormonal counter-regulation. According to
[Yeh+25], 12.7% of patients experienced at least one hypoglycemic episode,
while other studies report even higher numbers(18%-65% among different co-
horts by [Kri+11] and 22.4% by [Egi+10]).
In this setting, the clinical relevance of hypoglycemia lies in its consistent
association with increased mortality.[Yeh+25; Her+10] Research has shown a
dose-response relationship, where the frequency and severity of hypoglycemic
episodes correlates with higher risk of death—even after adjusting for confound-
ing factors such as insulin therapy.[Egi+10; NIC+12] Notably, non-diabetic
ICU patients appear to face disproportionately higher mortality risks. How-
==PAGE:8==
1.2 Research questions
2
ever, while these associations are significant, they remain correlational; un-
derlying physiological conditions may contribute both to hypoglycemia and
adverse outcomes, underscoring the need for proactive prediction rather than
reactive treatment.
Given that ICU patients are often sedated or non-responsive, blood glucose
monitoring remains the standard method for detection. But real-time measure-
ment alone is insuﬀicient; accurate prediction is needed to support preventive
clinical interventions. In order to tackle this problem, this thesis will try to
address the research questions presented in the next section.
1.2
Research questions
This thesis investigates the extent to which machine learning can be leveraged
to anticipate hypoglycemic events in ICU patients using clinical time series
data, with the aim of contributing to safer and more proactive patient care.
More specifically the research goals of this thesis are:
• Explore whether and to what extent hypoglycemic events can be antici-
pated in advance in an ICU setting.
• Evaluate how different models perform on this task. The evaluation will
be based on previous work in the literature.
• Determine the importance of different factors in predicting hypoglycemia.
• Identify the problems that come from applying machine learning models
on real world medical datasets and how should one address them.
With these goals in mind, the thesis is structured in two parts. The first
part focuses on reproducing established findings in the literature to create a
robust baseline for hypoglycemia prediction using conventional machine learn-
ing techniques.[Man+22; MKC24] One thing to keep in mind is that although
these papers will be used as reference, there cannot be a direct comparison.
The reason for that is that apart from a difference in datasets, there are also
a lot of details in the implementations which are not easily reproducible. For
example, in [MKC24], undersampling was used for the majority class during
training to counter the problems that arose from a heavily imbalanced dataset.
The second part explores novel modeling approaches, novel in the sense
that have not yet been documented in the existing literature for this applica-
tion, with the goal of enhancing predictive accuracy and extending the usable
prediction horizon. This dual approach not only validates prior work but also
aims to differentiate from what currently exists in the literature.
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER 2
Background and
related work
As mentioned, there has been a rapid evolution in the machine learning field in
recent years. This has been followed by growing research on possible applica-
tions of machine learning in the medical field. This chapter explores previous
related work specific to ICU and hypoglycemia and we state some of the diﬀi-
culties that can arise in such applications.
2.1
Irregular Time Series Data
Clinical data collected in ICUs often fall under the category of Irregular Time
Series (ITS), which makes both forecasting and prediction tasks much harder.
Unlike data collected in a laboratory or from fixed-interval sensors, ICU data
collection is dictated by the judgment of physicians, with measurements such as
vital signs, laboratory results, and medication administrations being recorded
at varying intervals and their frequencies determined by clinical needs rather
than fixed schedules. This results in data that are:
• Irregular: The sampling intervals for each feature depend on clinical de-
cisions, patient status, and available resources. For example, heart rate
might be recorded frequently when a patient is unstable and/or in crit-
ical condition or less frequently otherwise and laboratory measurements
such as glucose or creatinine may occur frequently or not at all based on
clinical records or suspicion(e.g. diabetic patients will be under stricter
glucose monitoring). This results in time series with no consistent sam-
pling frequency, even within the same variable. The lack of regularity
makes it diﬀicult to model temporal dynamics and identify meaningful
trends, with traditional time series models often being non applicable as
they rely on fixed-interval inputs.
• Sparse: Missing values are common and usually rather than being the
result of data entry errors, missingness reflects clinical decisions.
For
instance, an entry for a particular lab test may be missing for the majority
of the patients because the clinician saw no reason for them to have it.
This examples highlights that in contrast to traditional datasets, the
absence of data can carry clinical meaning, so one must be careful when
handling missing data(e.g.
imputing missing data can lead to loss of
information or false information).
==PAGE:10==
2.1 Irregular Time Series Data
4
• Asynchronous: The irregularity of the sampling intervals is even more
profound between different features. Typically, the sampling times do not
align across variables. Most models are not suitable for such data and the
preprocessing to fix that often involves interpolation and/or aggregation,
each with its pros and cons(e.g. additional noise, loss of data).
• High dimensional and heterogenous: ICU datasets are high-dimensional
and multimodal which means they include many different continuous (e.g.
heart rate, blood pressure) and categorical variables (e.g. administered
medications, diagnoses). The encoding of these variables in a way that
can preserve their information can be challenging.
Throughout the literature, the most common approach, specifically to hy-
poglycemia prediction, to handle irregular time series data was to use some
aggregation function to compile feature values into regularized time windows
or even a single value and for the outcome variable, either use a prediction hori-
zon or predict hypoglycemia at any point during the ICU stay of the patient.
For this thesis, in addition to these methods, models suitable for irregular time
series will be tested. The dataset that will be used is the AmsterdamUMCDB
dataset[J+21].
2.1.1
AmsterdamUMCDB Dataset
AmsterdamUMCdb is a freely accessible European intensive care database. It
contains de-identified electronic health records (EHR) from patients admitted
to the Amsterdam University Medical Centers and it includes a comprehen-
sive set of clinical data, such as physiological signals, laboratory test results,
medication administration records, and patient demographics. The database
contains data from the clinical patient data management system of the de-
partment of Intensive Care, a mixed medical-surgical ICU. The clinical data
contains 23,106 admissions of 20,109 patients admitted from 2003 to 2016 with
a total of almost 1.0 billion clinical observations consisting of vitals, clinical
scoring systems, device data and lab results data and nearly 5.0 million med-
ication records. [J+21] For this thesis, we are using the legacy version which
contains 7 tables:
• admissions: Admissions and demographic data of the patients admitted
to the ICU or MCU. The data of interest in this table are categorical,
meaning that the demographic data(age, sex, height etc.) are assigned
into groups(e.g. heightgroups are 160-169, 170-179 etc.).
• drugitems: Medication orders including fluids, (parenteral) feeding and
blood transfusions during the stay on the ICU. The name of the medi-
cation, the dosage and the period of administration are recorded in this
table.
• freetextitems: Observations, including laboratory results, that are based
on non-numeric(text) data.
• listitems: Categorical observations, e.g. based on a selection from a list,
like type of heart rhythm, ventilatory mode, etc.
==PAGE:11==
2.2 Related work
5
• numericitems: Numerical measurements and observations, including
vital parameters, data from medical devices, lab results, outputs from
drains and foley-catheters, scores etc.
• procedureorderitems: Procedures and tasks, such as performing a
chest X-ray, drawing blood and daily ICU nursing care and scoring.
• processitems: Catheters, drains, tubes, and continuous non-medication
processes (e.g. renal replacement therapy, hypothermia induction, etc.)
All tables have an associated admissionid from the admissions table. The
main tables used for the model training are the numericitems and drugitems
tables, and depending on the model the admissions and listitems tables. The
contents of the tables can be seen in detail in Appendix A.1.
2.2
Related work
In this chapter publications that are relevant to this thesis are reviewed. While
there is plenty of literature on hypoglycemia prediction for diabetic patients,
the chosen articles are not specific to prediction in diabetics patients(they in-
clude both diabetic and non-diabetic patients).
2.2.1
Predicting hypoglycemia in critically Ill patients using
machine learning and electronic health
records[Man+22]
In this study, the dataset that was used was the eICU Collaborative Research
v2.0 database (eICU-CRD)[Pol+18].
Similarly to the AmsterdamUMCDB,
the eICU Collaborative Research Database is a multi-center database compris-
ing deidentified health data associated with over 200,000 admissions to ICUs.
These admissions are across the United States between the years 2014-2015.
The database includes patient demographics, vital sign measurements, care
plan documentation, severity of illness measures, diagnosis information, and
treatment information. This study included only patients who had at least two
blood glucose readings during their stay in the ICU.
For predictor variables, 44 candidate predictors were considered. Labora-
tory results and vital sign recordings were averaged over the first two hours
of the patient’s ICU stay. The predictor variables associated with medications
and diagnoses were binary and were set either to 0 or to 1 accordingly. The
coeﬀicient of variation for blood glucose during the first two hours was also
used as a predictor variable. Predictors missing over 40% of their values were
removed and for the rest of the missing data, KNN and 4-h fill-forward im-
putations were used with small differences in the results(<1%). The outcome
variable was set to 1 if there was any hypoglycemic event for the patient after
the second hour of their stay in the ICU or to 0 otherwise.
A total of 15 different machine learning models were evaluated to predict
hypoglycemia. The dataset was split 80-20 for training/validation and testing.
The models were fine tuned using tenfold cross validation and the best perform-
ing one was further developed for testing. The best performing algorithm based
==PAGE:12==
2.2 Related work
6
on the AUROC(Area Under the Receiver Operating Characteristic curve) was
the XGBoost (eXtreme Gradient Boosting) with the model achieving an AU-
ROC of 0.85 and a sensitivity, specificity, and precision of 0.76, 0.76, and 0.44
respectively.
2.2.2
Enhancing glucose level prediction of ICU patients
through hierarchical modeling of irregular
time-series[MKC24]
For this paper, the same dataset was used(eICU-CRD). However, this time
only patients with at least 6 blood glucose measurements were included. Out
of 31 tables in the eICU database, 11 tables are selected and only tables with
low data coverage or those deemed highly irrelevant to the prediction task
were excluded, allowing the model to decide which features to leverage. The
dataset was split into three non-overlapping sets: 70% for training, 10% for
validation and 20% for testing. The aim was to predict the class of the next
BG measurement using only the data available up to the current BG. The three
classes are: hypoglycemia, hyperglycemia and euglycemia.
For the preprocessing, all numerical features were standardized using z-score
normalization, which means the features had zero mean and unit variance after
the preprocessing. Missing numerical values were imputed using zeros, which in
this case is the same as mean-imputation. For categorical features, a separate
category corresponding to unknown was assigned in the cases where they were
missing.
The model used was Multi-source Irregular Time-Series Transformer (MITST)
which is a transformer based model. The evaluation metrics were (AUROC),
Area Under the Precision-Recall Curve (AUPRC), positive predictive value
(PPV), negative predictive value (NPV), sensitivity (recall), and specificity.
It was compared to a random forest model, which it was able to outper-
form. Specifically, the evaluation metrics were: AUROC=90%, AUPRC=66%,
PPV=53.9%, NPV=83%, sensitivity=81.7% and specificity=83%.
The last
four metrics where macro averaged over the three classes.
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 3
Experimental Setup
This chapter outlines the methodology that will be followed to solve the prob-
lem of hypoglycemia prediction. This includes the details regarding the prepro-
cessing of the data as well as the modeling and the experimental setup. A total
of three different experiments will be conducted. First will be the recreation
of the results in [Man+22]. The second experiment will be an ITS approach as
seen in [MKC24], where there will be minimal preprocessing and instead mod-
els that are able to handle these data will be chosen. The third experiment will
be using aggregation functions to create Regular Time Series(RTS) and then
train more conventional machine learning algorithms. Across all experiments,
the first criterion for feature selection will be availability. That means that
only the more frequent features will be taken into account. For example, blood
cholesterol will not be taken into account as it has 2386 only distinct measure-
ments while blood pH will be take into consideration, as it has 659777 distinct
measurements. Other criteria for the choice were medical relevance and model
and training eﬀiciency.
3.1
Preprocessing
Data preprocessing was performed using DBeaver and Python with the usage
of the DuckDB API. The corresponding code and SQL scripts are provided in
Appendix A.2. In all experiments, the data was separated into two sets with
a 80-20 ratio. The 80% was used for feature selection and model fine tuning
via 5-fold cross validation.
The 20% was used for model evaluation.
The
actual number of datapoints differs between the experiments, as for example
the criteria for inclusion differ and the in the third experiment a data point
was created for each blood glucose measurement instead of each admission. A
sample flow of the data selection can be seen below:
3.1.1
First Experiment-Baseline
For the first experiment, only the numericitems table will be used and the
preprocessing will be similar to [Man+22]. For each admission, all measure-
ments recorded during the first two hours of ICU stay were extracted. Then,
the measurement types that were missing in more than 50% of the admissions
were dropped and for each remaining measurement type, the mean and stan-
dard deviation over this two-hour window were computed. This resulted in
94-dimension feature vector for each admission. As some of these features were
missing in certain admissions, K-nearest neighbors (KNN) imputation with
==PAGE:14==
3.1 Preprocessing
8
Figure 3.1: Dataset split example.
k = 3 was applied to fill in missing values. This method estimates the missing
values based on the three most similar admissions (in feature space).
To define the binary outcome variable, the minimum blood glucose value
recorded after the two-hour window was identified. If this minimum value was
below 4 mmol/L, the admission was labeled as a positive case (hypoglycemia =
1); otherwise, it was labeled as negative (hypoglycemia = 0). This can better
be showcased in the following plot:
Here, the red area represents the first two hours of the admission.
For
the two measurement that are in the red area, the mean and the variance
will be calculated. These will be two of the predictor variables. The same
process is done for each different type of measurement. Also, the red dotted
line represents the threshold of 3.9 mmol/L for hypoglycemia. In this case, since
there is at least one measurement below that threshold, it will be assigned the
class 1, corresponding to hypoglycemia.
All the admissions which didn’t have at least one blood glucose measure-
ment after the first two hours of the admission were dropped, as they could
not be classified. In addition, to reduce the noise from the imputation, all
the admissions that were missing more than 50% of the features were dropped.
The data selection process can be seen in Figure 3.3 below.
3.1.2
Second Experiment-Irregular Time Series
For the second experiment, the admissions, numericitems, listitems and drugitems
tables were used. For each admission, all blood glucose measurements were lo-
cated. Then among them one was chosen at random. If there were one or
more measurements indicating hypoglycemia, then the choice was among these
measurements.
Using the time of the measurement as a reference, all data
that were between 30 minutes and 90 minutes prior to the measurement were
extracted. This resulted in one hour long windows and a 30 minutes prediction
horizon. Based on the table from which they originated, the data were handled
as follows:
==PAGE:15==
3.1 Preprocessing
9
Figure 3.2: Sample addmision BG measurements.
• admissions: The height, age, weight and sex were extracted from this
table. As these variables were categorical in the table, for each feature
a number from 0-1(evenly spaced) was assigned to each different value.
The missing values were imputed with the number 0.5 for simplicity as
the mean imputation yielded similar results.
• numericitems: 88 different features were chosen. No imputation was
done.
Also, for each feature the average over the whole dataset was
calculated.
• listitems: 90 features were chosen. Zero imputation was used for the
missing data. Then for each feature, all the different values were taken
into account and were encoded to a numeric value between 0 and 1(evenly
spaced). The reason this method was chosen over one hot encoding was
to keep the dimensionality of the data smaller.
• drugitems: 88 features were chosen. The missing data were imputed
with zeros, as it was assumed that no drugs were administered if there
==PAGE:16==
3.1 Preprocessing
10
Figure 3.3: Dataset split for the first experiment.
was no recording of it.
To keep the temporal information, all the data were combined in a single
table where the time of measurement was added as a dimension(column) where
the time of each measurement/administration was recorded. The missing values
that emerged on this table due to the union were imputed according to the
table from which they originated, meaning that there was no imputation for
the dimension corresponding to the numericitems table, zero imputation for
the ones corresponding to the listitems table etc.
Lastly, to have more eﬀicient parallel training with larger batch sizes, the
data were either clipped or padded with zeros so that all series have the same
length of 100.
3.1.3
Third Experiment-Regular Time Series Transformation
For the third experiment, the preprocessing was done so that the data was
converted into regular time series. Since that requires some aggregation func-
tion, only the numericitems and drugitems tables were chosen. From the nu-
mericitems table, the 151 most frequent features were chosen and from the
drugitems table the 133 most frequent ones. For each blood glucose measure-
ment a sequence was created. As before, the prediction window was set to 30
minutes. All the data from these tables corresponding to the aforementioned
features for the last five hours prior to the prediction horizon were extracted.
Then, for each 30 minute window of the sequence, the average value of each fea-
ture was calculated. For the features originating from the numericitems table
the variance was also calculated. The reason it was not also calculated for the
drugitems variables was that it was assumed that drugs were administered with
a constant rate and as such the variance would provide no extra information.
Linear imputation was used for the numericitems features and zero imputation
for the drugitems ones, following the same reasoning as before. If there were
==PAGE:17==
3.2 Models
11
Figure 3.4: Dataset split for the second experiment.
still missing data(e.g. there was a measurement that was missing during the
whole 5 hour period) the mean value of the whole dataset was once again used.
This resulted in series of length 10 with 435 features(151 times 2 for the
mean and the variance plus 133) for each blood glucose measurement.
All
the measurement which didn’t have the 5 and half hour required history were
dropped alongside series that had at least one of the 10 time windows without
any measurement or drug administration. This was done to reduce the amount
of data using sparsity as a criterion.
The resulting dataset can be seen in
Figure 3.5.
3.2
Models
As this was an experimental thesis, many different models were chosen through
a trial and error process. The rationale for the choices was mainly through
referencing the literature for similar problems and using models that have been
shown to yield good results. The first model that we will present is XGBoost as
it was shown to outperform classic machine learning algorithms. The second
choice are deep learning model architectures.
GRU-D which is suitable for
handling ITS.
3.2.1
XGBoost
XGBoost is the basic algorithm that will be used to establish a baseline, as it
was shown to outperform most simple machine learning algorithms[Man+22].
==PAGE:18==
3.2 Models
12
Figure 3.5: Dataset split for the third experiment.
Also, since the resulting data of the third experiment are also of a low dimen-
sionality, the model will also be used for the regular time series data.
XGBoost is an ensemble learning algorithm that uses as basis gradient
boosted decision trees. The algorithm is shown below:
Algorithm 1: XGBoost(unregularized)
Input: Training set {(xi, yi)}N
i=1, differentiable loss L(y, F(x)),
number of rounds(learners) M, learning rate α
1 Initialize with constant: ˆf (0)(x) = argθ min PN
i=1 L(yi, θ)
2 for m = 1 to M do
3
Compute gradients and Hessians:ˆgm(xi) =
∂L(yi,f(xi))
∂f(xi)

f= ˆ
f (m−1) ,
ˆhm(xi) = ∂2L(yi,f(xi))
∂f(xi)2

f= ˆ
f (m−1)
4
Fit a weak learner ϕm(x) (e.g. a regression tree) by solving:
ϕm(x) = argϕ∈ϕmin
N
X
i=1
1
2 hm(xi)
h
ϕ(xi) −
 −gm(xi)
hm(xi)
i2
5
Update model: ˆf (m)(x) = ˆf (m−1)(x) + α ϕm(x)
6 end
7 return final boosted model: ˆf (M)(x) = PM
m=0 α ϕm(x)
Basically, the algorithms creates an ensemble of trees where each new tree
is fitted to fix the error of the previous trees. This means that the residual
error of each step is used to fit a new tree. This idea is the same as other
==PAGE:19==
3.2 Models
13
gradient boosting algorithms. Where it differs is that it also uses second order
derivatives for the optimization and due to this it works as Newton-Raphson
in function space instead of gradient descent. XGBoost gained significant fa-
vor in the last few years as a result of its performance in many tasks. One of
its strengths is its built-in regularization which prevents overfitting. The al-
gorithm presented above is the base/non-regularized version, however in most
libraries/packages, XGBoost includes both L1 and L2 regularization in the ob-
jective. Also, similar to a random forest, XGBoost can be forced to only use
a subset of the features for each tree. This adds randomness and prevents the
model from relying too heavily on a single predictor.
3.2.2
Deep Learning Architectures
Deep neural networks have been shown to perform well in time series problems
[LZ21]. Recurrent neural networks(RNN) specifically are designed with time
series in mind, however 1D Convolutional Neural Networks(CNN) and Trans-
former based architectures[MKC24] have also been shown to be able to adapt
to such tasks.
3.2.2.1
GRU-D
GRUD-D[Che+16] is an RNN architecture that was designed specifically to
handle irregular time series. For the input, suppose a multivariate time series
X = (x1, x2, ..., xD)T ∈RT ×D, with D variables of length T, xt ∈RD is the
t-th observation and xd
t ∈R is the measurement of the d-th variable of that
observation. Lastly, assuming the first observation is done at t = 0, st ∈R
denotes the t-th timestamp. GRU-D introduces a masking vector mt ∈{0, 1}D
which is defined as:
md
t =
(
1
if xd
t is observed
0
otherwise
(3.1)
It also introduces a time interval δd
t ∈R which is defined as:
δd
t =
(
st −st−1 + δd
t−1,
md
t−1 = 0
st −st−1,
md
t−1 = 1
(3.2)
The masking vectors denotes the missing variables while the time interval
denotes the time since the last observation. The masking vector Mn alongside
the time interval vector ∆are used as input for GRU-D alongside X and s.
The authors in [Che+16] defined GRU-D for a classification problem which is
exactly our case. So, if ln ∈{1, ..., L} are the labels, the time series data is
defined as D = {(Xn, sn, Mn∆n, ln)}.
The standard GRU update equations are:
zt = σ(Wzxt + Uzht−1 + bz)
(3.3)
rt = σ(Wrxt + Urht−1 + br)
(3.4)
˜ht = tanh(Wxt + U(rt ⊙ht−1) + b)
(3.5)
ht = (1 −zt) ⊙ht−1 + zt ⊙˜ht
(3.6)
==PAGE:20==
3.3 Training and Evaluation
14
Where ⊙denotes element-wise multiplication. GRU-D introduces a decay
mechanism that can be applied to both the input and the hidden states. The
decay rates are defined as:
γt = exp (−max(0, Wγδt + bγ))
(3.7)
Where γt ∈(0, 1) and Wγ and bγ are both learnable parameters. For the
input, the decay is used as follows:
xd
t ←md
t xd
t + (1 −md
t )
 γd
x,txd
t′ + (1 −γd
x,t)˜xd
(3.8)
where t′ < t is the last time xd was observed and ˜xd is the empirical mean.
This causes the inputs to decay towards the empirical mean the longer the
time since the last observation. The decay to the hidden states is applied in a
similar fashion.
ht−1 ←γh,t ⊙ht−1
(3.9)
This causes the model to gradually ”forget” information that comes from older
inputs. The GRU-D update functions are:
zt = σ(Wzxt + Uzht−1 + Vzmt + bz)
(3.10)
rt = σ(Wrxt + Urht−1 + Vrmt + br)
(3.11)
˜ht = tanh(Wxt + U(rt ⊙ht−1) + V mt + b)
(3.12)
ht = (1 −zt) ⊙ht−1 + zt ⊙˜ht
(3.13)
Vz, Vr, V are new parameters for masking vector mt.
3.3
Training and Evaluation
For the train and evaluation of the models a similar procedure was followed in
the baseline and regular time series experiments. Initially, a mentioned before,
the 20% of the data was held out for model evaluation. Then, the rest 80% was
used in a 5-fold cross validation for choosing the model parameters. The choice
was made based on the AUROC metric, as it is the one used in the literature
as well. The number of epochs/rounds that each model was trained varied and
was depended on the converging of each model.
For the irregular time series, due to time constraints the hold out set was
used for hyperparameter tuning without cross validation. The time constraints
arose due to the fact that the dataset was much larger compared to the other
two cases and the model had a much harder time learning. Additionally, similar
to [MKC24], undersampling without replacement was used for the majority
class.
Since this is a classification task, binary cross entropy was chosen as a loss
function for all cases.
For evaluating the models, apart from the AUROC,
the precision, the recall and in some cases the AUCPR(Area Under the Curve
Precision-Recall) were used. The reason for this is that these metrics comple-
ment each other and show the model’s robustness especially in scenarios where
the dataset is heavily imbalanced towards one class, which is our case. Lastly,
a calibration plot is included for each model.
==PAGE:21==
3.3 Training and Evaluation
15
Explainability will also be explored when possible for the models. Specifi-
cally, for XGBoost model the SHAP(SHapley Additive exPlanations) method
will be used to explain the prediction of the XGBoost model.
3.3.1
SHAP
SHAP (SHapley Additive exPlanations) is a method to explain individual pre-
dictions. SHAP is based on the game-theoretically optimal Shapley values. In
cooperative game theory, the Shapley value is a method for fairly distributing
the total gains or costs among a group of players who have collaborated. For
example, in a team project where each member contributed differently, the
Shapley value provides a way to determine how much credit or blame each
member deserves. The definition for Shapley presented below.
Let N = {1, 2, . . . , n} denote the set of players, and let v : 2N →R be the
characteristic function that assigns a value to each subset (coalition) of players.
The function satisfies v(∅) = 0.
The Shapley value ϕi(v) for a player (feature) i ∈N is the unique value
allocation that satisfies the following:
• Eﬀiciency:
X
i∈N
ϕi(v) = v(N)
The total value of the grand coalition v(N) is fully distributed among all
players.
• Symmetry: If v(S ∪{i}) = v(S ∪{j}) for all S ⊆N \ {i, j}, then
ϕi(v) = ϕj(v). Players contributing equally receive equal value.
• Dummy player: If v(S ∪{i}) = v(S) for all S ⊆N \{i}, then ϕi(v) = 0.
A player who adds no marginal contribution receives zero value.
• Additivity: For two games v and w, the Shapley value of their sum
satisfies:
ϕi(v + w) = ϕi(v) + ϕi(w)
Under these constraints, the Shapley value for player i is uniquely defined
as:
ϕi(v) =
X
S⊆N\{i}
|S|! (n −|S| −1)!
n!

v(S ∪{i}) −v(S)

(3.14)
where:
• S is a subset of N not containing i,
• |S| is the cardinality of S,
• n = |N| is the total number of players,
• v(S) is the value of coalition S.
==PAGE:22==
3.3 Training and Evaluation
16
Considering the features as the ”players” and the prediction as the ”gain”,
then the Shapley value of a feature is the average marginal contribution of
that feature across all possible coalitions. The interpretation of the Shapley
value for a single feature is: The value of the j-th feature contributed ϕj to
the prediction of this particular instance compared to the average prediction
for the dataset.
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 4
Results
Here we will present the results for all the models in all three experiments.
Although there are many similarities across experiments, the comparison will
be done only on models trained on the same data. Also, although it will be
mentioned, metric regarding the eﬀiciency(e.g. how fast a model converges)
will not be taken into account, as it is beyond the scope of this thesis.
4.1
Baseline
Initially, the model was fine tuned using grid search and 5-fold cross validation.
The parameters for the tuning were the learning rate, the maximum depth of
each tree and the subsample ratio of columns when constructing each tree. The
metric used was the AUROC and the results were:
learning rate
0.2
subsample ratio
0.6
maximum depth
12
Training with these parameters yielded the ROC curve in 4.1. The AUROC
is slightly lower than what was reported in [Man+22]. However, since the two
datasets are different, this was within expectations. In addition, the model
seems to be well calibrated as can be seen by the calibration plot 4.2.
==PAGE:24==
4.1 Baseline
18
Figure 4.1: XGBoost ROC curve.
Since the dataset is highly imbalanced, the precision, recall, f1-score were
also calculated and are shown in Table 4.1.
Table 4.1: XGBoost performance metrics.
Class
Precision
Recall
F1-score
Support
Euglycemia
0.84
0.96
0.90
2055
Hypoglycemia
0.64
0.30
0.41
517
Accuracy
0.83
2572
Macro avg
0.74
0.63
0.65
2572
Weighted avg
0.80
0.83
0.80
2572
It can be seen that the model was not able to properly adapt to the imbal-
ance of the dataset. Specifically, the precision and the recall for the ”Hypo-
glycemia” class are significantly low. The reported numbers in [Man+22] are
0.44 and 0.76 respectively. Obviously these metric refer to the ”Hypoglycemia”
class. In that case, XGBoost seems to have performed better on the Amster-
damUMCDB dataset in terms of precision but much worse in terms of recall.
This hints that our models is biased towards predicting Euglycemia, even if
the calibration plot does not indicate that. This also comes with the upside,
that the model had much greater specificity our case where it reached 0.96
compared to the reported 0.76 in [Man+22].
==PAGE:25==
4.1 Baseline
19
Figure 4.2: XGBoost Calibration plot.
As mentioned in chapter 3, the SHAP library was used to offer some in-
sights in the inner workings of the algorithm. That is, to quantify the feature
importance so that some explainability about the way the model makes pre-
dictions. As it can be seen in Figure 4.3, the most important feature is the
average blood glucose value as expected.
==PAGE:26==
4.2 Irregular time series
20
Figure 4.3: Mean SHAP value.
4.2
Irregular time series
As mentioned, the model was finetuned using the 80% of the dataset. For the
GRU-D model the architecture was 3 GRU-D layers with 4096,4096, and 2048
nodes respectively followed by a 3 layer MLP with 2048, 2048 and 1024 nodes.
Training this model yielded the ROC curve seen in Figure 4.4.
==PAGE:27==
4.2 Irregular time series
21
Figure 4.4: GRU-D ROC curve.
From the curve it can be seen that the model is not able to clearly distin-
guish between Hypoglycemia and Euglycemia. This can be confirmed also by
table 4.2. The precision for Hypoglycemia is especially low, which means that
the model is not at all well calibrated. Instead, the model is heavily biased
towards predicting hypoglycemia. This can be easily verified by the calibra-
tion plot 4.5 and the confusion matrix. The reason for this is likely due to the
undersampling of the euglemic datapoints.
Table 4.2: GRU-D performance metrics.
Class
Precision
Recall
F1-score
Support
Hypoglycemia
0.23
0.61
0.34
670
Euglycemia
0.89
0.62
0.73
3514
Accuracy
0.61
4184
Macro avg
0.56
0.61
0.53
2572
Weighted avg
0.79
0.61
0.67
2572
==PAGE:28==
4.2 Irregular time series
22
Figure 4.5: GRU-D Calibration plot.
Figure 4.6: GRU-D Confusion matrix.
Overall, the model is unable to perform to a satisfactory degree. The prob-
lem is that the model is unable to identify patterns in the data and generalize.
The mode likely reason for this is the noise in the data.
==PAGE:29==
4.3 Regular time series
23
4.3
Regular time series
For the regular time series experiment, the models that were tested were a
transformer based model, an RNN(LSTM) model, a 1-D CNN model and lastly
XGBoost. For the deep network architectures, the parameters that were fine-
tuned was the number of layers and the number of nodes on each layer. For
the XGBoost algorithm, as in the first experiment, the learning rate, the max
depth and the subsample ratio were fine tuned.
4.3.1
Transformer model
After finetuning, the model chosen had 3 layers and 256 nodes per layer. The
number of heads for the attention mechanism was set to 4. For the output, the
last output/token was used as input in one fully connected layer of also size
256 for the prediction.
Figure 4.7: Transformer model ROC curve.
The model was able to achieve good performance which can be seen in
table 4.3, with the minority class having lower precision and recall as expected.
Table 4.3: Transformer performance metrics.
Class
Precision
Recall
F1-score
Support
Euglycemia
0.99
0.99
0.99
28595
Hypoglycemia
0.90
0.84
0.87
2249
Accuracy
0.98
30844
Macro avg
0.95
0.92
0.93
30844
Weighted avg
0.98
0.98
0.98
30844
Regarding the calibration, the model is well but not perfectly calibrated,
with the drop in the graph indicating that the model under predicts hypo-
==PAGE:30==
4.3 Regular time series
24
glycemia in some cases. This is also within expectation due to the imbalance
in the dataset. This can also be seen from the recall and the confusion ma-
trix, where the biggest ratio of incorrectly classified data points is from the
Hypoglycemia class.
Figure 4.8: Transformer Calibration plot.
Figure 4.9: Transformer Confusion matrix.
==PAGE:31==
4.3 Regular time series
25
4.3.2
LSTM model
Similar to the transformer model, the model chosen was a 3 layer LSTM with
256 nodes which was connected for one fully connected dense layer of the same
size for the output.
Figure 4.10: LSTM model ROC curve.
The model was able to achieve similar performance to the transformer, with
minor differences that are not statistically significant. Once again, the minority
class metrics are significantly worse than the majority class.
Table 4.4: LSTM performance metrics.
Class
Precision
Recall
F1-score
Support
Euglycemia
0.99
0.99
0.99
28595
Hypoglycemia
0.89
0.86
0.87
2249
Accuracy
0.98
30844
Macro avg
0.94
0.92
0.93
30844
Weighted avg
0.98
0.98
0.98
30844
Regarding the calibration, the model seems slightly better calibrated than
the transformer with no apparent bias one way or another.
==PAGE:32==
4.3 Regular time series
26
Figure 4.11: LSTM Calibration plot.
Figure 4.12: LSTM Confusion matrix.
From the confusion matrix we can see that the LSTM model managed
to correctly classify more data points belonging to the second class than the
transformer. This further confirms that the model is slightly better calibrated.
==PAGE:33==
4.3 Regular time series
27
4.3.3
CNN model
The model chosen was a 3 layer 1D-CNN with filter size 256 and kernel size
3. Max pooling was added to the first layer and average pooling in the last
layer. The output of the CNN was fed into a dense layer with 256 nodes. Also,
padding of size 1 was used in the convolution layers to keep sizes between layers
consistent.
Figure 4.13: LSTM model ROC curve.
The model was able to achieve similar performance to the previous two
models with no apparent difference in terms of metrics.
Table 4.5: CNN performance metrics.
Class
Precision
Recall
F1-score
Support
Euglycemia
0.99
0.99
0.99
28595
Hypoglycemia
0.91
0.85
0.88
2249
Accuracy
0.98
30844
Macro avg
0.95
0.92
0.93
30844
Weighted avg
0.98
0.98
0.98
30844
The model seems well calibrated similar to the LSTM model with a slight
bias towards predicting Euglycemia.
==PAGE:34==
4.3 Regular time series
28
Figure 4.14: CNN Calibration plot.
Figure 4.15: CNN Confusion matrix.
4.3.4
XGBoost
The results of the fine tuning can be seen in the table below. As before, AUROC
was the metric for which the model was fine tuned.
==PAGE:35==
4.3 Regular time series
29
learning rate
0.2
subsample ratio
1
maximum depth
8
Training with these parameters yielded the ROC curve seen in Figure 4.16.
These results exceed expectation, as the previous algorithms were unable to
identify any underlying patterns in the data so eﬀiciently. The other metrics
seen in table 4.6 as well as the calibration plot 4.17 also verify these results.
Figure 4.16: XGBoost ROC curve.
The model was able to perform extremely well even on the minority class,
identifying correctly 1998 out of 2249 cases of hypoglycemia as can be seen in
the confusion matrix 4.18. In addition, the Precision-Recall curve 4.19 shows
that the model is able to clearly distinguish between the two cases. As in the
first experiment, the SHAP library can be leveraged to give some insights on
how the model works.
Table 4.6: XGBoost performance metrics.
Class
Precision
Recall
F1-score
Support
Euglycemia
0.99
1.00
0.99
28595
Hypoglycemia
0.95
0.89
0.92
2249
Accuracy
0.99
30844
Macro avg
0.97
0.94
0.96
30844
Weighted avg
0.99
0.99
0.99
30844
As can be seen in Figure 4.20, the last blood glucose measurement plays
the most important role, followed by the variance in heart frequency and also
insulin medication can be seen in the list.
These indicate that the model
correctly correlates the input to the hypoglycemia.
==PAGE:36==
4.3 Regular time series
30
Figure 4.17: XGBoost Calibration plot.
It is of interest to note that perhaps the prediction window is too small, as
this was chosen so that it is the same as the second experiment in which the
models were unable to perform quite as well.
Figure 4.18: XGBoost Confusion matrix.
==PAGE:37==
4.3 Regular time series
31
Figure 4.19: Precision Recall curve.
Another good indicator of the good performance of the model are the SHAP
values. As it can be seen in Figure 4.20, the most significant feature for the
model are the average blood glucose for the last window which is what we would
expect, while the average blood glucose for previous windows is also quite high.
In addition, seeing a repeat of the same features but different windows is also
a good indication, as it means there is some correlation with those specific
features and hypoglycemia.
==PAGE:38==
4.3 Regular time series
32
Figure 4.20: Mean SHAP value.
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 5
Discussion
In this chapter we discuss the results of the experiments as well as insights that
were gained through the process. Although the three different experiments are
quite different, a comparison can provide some clues as to why some models
performed better than others.
5.1
First Experiment
The purpose of the first experiment was to establish a baseline in terms of the
plausibility of hypoglycemia prediction given the AmsterdamUMCDB dataset
as there was no reference in the literature, as far as we know, of anyone using
this dataset in such manner. In that sense, the first experiment was a success.
Table 5.1: XGBoost
performance
on
AmsterdamUMCDB
and
eICU
datasets..
Metric
AmsterdamUMCDB
eICU
Specificity
0.96
0.76
Sensitivity (Recall)
0.30
0.76
Precision
0.64
0.44
AUROC
0.82
0.85
As can be seen in table 5.1 XGBoost is performing similarly well in both
datasets with some differences. The most important difference is in the Recall
and Precision metrics. This tells us that in our experiment, the model was
biased towards predicting Euglycemia instead of Hypoglycemia. This is not
due to the imbalance of the AmsterdamUMCDB datasets, as in our case we
had 2583 cases of hypoglycemia out of the 12858 admissions which results
in ∼20% which is almost equal to the ratio reported in [Man+22] which
was 19.9%. But the different datasets could still play a role in this difference.
Another likely reason is due to the fine tuning and feature selection process
followed in [Man+22], as a backwards stepwise feature selection algorithm was
used.
==PAGE:40==
5.2 Second and Third Experiment comparison
34
Figure 5.1: XGBoost eICU feature importance.
Also, the study included a feature importance graph 5.1 which if we compare
the feature importance graph 4.3 from our experiment, it becomes apparent
that there are major differences between the two datasets. Although there are
a few features that are common, the most important features that were chosen
from the eICU dataset, are missing from the AmsterdamUMCDB. Namely,
there is no medical history for the patients so previous hypoglycemia or diabetes
cannot be used as features.
5.2
Second and Third Experiment comparison
The second and third experiments can be compared in regards to their out-
comes. In both experiments the same dataset was used, and the purpose is to
predict hypoglycemia given a window and a horizon. The only major difference
is the approach to data preprocessing, and specifically the use of aggregation
functions to reduce the data and ”regularize”. The use of aggregation function
has a few serious implications in regards to the resulting dataset. A few of
them are:
• Information loss.
• Smoothing of the data/noise reduction.
• Shrinkage of the size of the data.
Basically we can think of applying the aggregation function as applying a
filter to a signal. When we use the average function, it is the same as applying
a smoothing filter on a signal and hence the noise reduction and the loss of
information. In our case, the original unprocessed dataset contains a lot of
noise. This problem is not model specific, as a transformer based model was
also unable to produce good results.
==PAGE:41==
5.3 Regular Time Series model comparison
35
On the contrary, with the regularized time series, all models were able
to perform excellently and accurately predict hypoglycemia 30 minutes into
the future. A side by side comparison between GRU-D and the LSTM used
in the regular time series version of the data makes this contrast even more
profound. Although both are RNN based architectures, the GRU-D model is
more complex and computationally expensive.
Yet, the performance of the
lstm model was far superior. This is not to say that one model is inherently
better than the other, but that the second approach(regularization of the data)
is more eﬀicient and effective.
Table 5.2: GRU-D and LSTM performance comparison..
Metric
GRU-D
LSTM
Specificity
0.61
0.99
Sensitivity (Recall)
0.63
0.92
Precision
0.74
0.94
AUROC
0.82
0.95
From table 5.2 it becomes clear that the regularization approach outper-
forms the direct approach in every metric.
5.3
Regular Time Series model comparison
All models were able to perform very well in this setting, with minor differ-
ences between them. When comparing the 3 deep learning architectures, the
CNN architecture came on top as it can be seen in table 5.4, however all the
differences in the metric were < 1%.
Table 5.3: Transformer, LSTM and CNN performance comparison..
Metric
Transformer
LSTM
CNN
Specificity
0.99
0.99
0.99
Sensitivity (Recall)
0.92
0.92
0.92
Precision
0.95
0.94
0.95
AUROC
0.95
0.95
0.96
In terms of calibration, the CCN models was again slightly better than
the other two.
However, all three models were outperformed by XGboost.
The difference in performance was greater than the in between differences of
the 3 Deep Learning models.
XGboost was able to achieve an AUROC of
0.98, a precision of 0.97 and a recall of 0.94. This tell us that the model was
able to better identify correlations between the features to accurately predict
Hypoglycemia.
==PAGE:42==
5.4 Explainability
36
Table 5.4: CNN and XGBoost performance comparison..
Metric
CNN
XGBoost
Specificity
0.99
0.99
Sensitivity (Recall)
0.92
0.94
Precision
0.95
0.97
AUROC
0.96
0.98
5.4
Explainability
Another big advantage of XGBoost is its explainability. This is because it is
a random forest based model, and although it is not directly explainable like
traditional random forest models, it is still easier to explain through methods
like SHAP compared to a neural network. Also, this explainability allows us
to have a sanity check for the process followed throughout this thesis.
Looking at Figures 4.3 and 4.20, we can see that the two different processes
assign different importance to the features. In both models the average glucose
plays a really important role, but apart from that, all the other features are
different. This is logical, as in the first case the model is trying to identify
basically biases. This conclusion is further supported by Figure 5.1 where the
previous hypoglycemia and diabetes play a very important role. Basically, the
model is trying to identify those biases, as in many cases a hypoglycemic event
during an ICU stay might not be related to something during the first two
hours of the patients stay.
In contrast, when looking at Figure 4.20, we can see that most of the most
important features make sense from a clinical viewpoint. A more detailed view
on the SHAP values can be seen Figure 5.2.
==PAGE:43==
5.4 Explainability
37
Figure 5.2: Detailed SHAP summary.
As we can see from this figure, the most important features clearly impact
the model differently depending on if they have low or high values. For example,
low average blood glucose strongly ”pushes” the models towards predicting
hypoglycemia while high values do the opposite, as they should.
==PAGE:44==
5.5 Future Work
38
5.5
Future Work
This thesis has showcased that it is possible to predict hypoglycemia in an ICU
setting. It has showcased that data preprocessing is a very important decision
that can affect the model effectiveness. Apart from the regularization, feature
selection and normalization can also play an important role. For example, a
multidiscipline approach that involves phycisians in addition to engineers could
highly benefit this field and lead to great results.
In regards to the irregular time series approach, although the results were
much worse than the regularized approach, they still show potential for im-
provement. Since noisy data seems to be the most important factor hindering
model fitness, the aforementioned multidisciplinary approach might highly ben-
efit this approach. Also, the interest in this approach lies in its simplicity. That
is, if a model can effectively predict hypoglycemia in these conditions, it would
be easier to have a direct application.
The SHAP analysis also provided great insights to the models inner work-
ings.
This framework could also make the collaboration between people of
medical background and engineers smoother, as a lot of caution is needed in
medical settings and black box approaches can sometimes have unpredictable
results.
Of course all the above points are indications and not final conclusions.
Although the indications are great, further research in this area is required.
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 6
Conclusion
The aim of this thesis was to use ML models to predict hypoglycemia. After
reviewing the literature, it was found that there are few cases where this has
been tried before, and none of which was on the same dataset. Due to the
high flexibility of neural networks and the size of the dataset, it was assumed
that a deep neural network could be trained for this task on the minimally pre-
processed dataset, similarly to [MKC24]. To gradually approach the problem,
[Man+22] was chosen as a basis due to the simplicity in the approach.
After achieving satisfactory results in the first experiment, a more direct
approach to the problem was taken. From the literature, GRU-D was chosen
as the most appropriate model for our case. Although it had not been tried
for hypoglycemia prediction, it was chosen because it was designed for irreg-
ular time series. The results showed that the model was unable to properly
navigate through the data. Alongside it, a transformer model was designed.
The reason for that is that transformer based architectures can handle inputs
of variable length and have the ability to learn temporal encodings. In theory,
this model could extract all the necessary information for the dataset to make
a prediction. This setup was explored plenty through trial and error by trying
model finetuning, feature selection and even changing the problem between
forecasting and classification. In the end, the results showed that there might
be a possibility to build a model that could use the raw data as input and
predict hypoglycemia, however there was much room for improvement. Espe-
cially when taking into consideration that this is a medical application. One
important takeaway from this process was that although the data were kept as
close to the original as possible, there were still many important decisions to
be made about the preprocessing. For example, there were many categorical
variables and since the GRU-D model was not designed to handle this type of
data, they required encoding. One hot encoding was the obvious choice, how-
ever it largely increased the dimensionality of the data which in turn added
potentially more noise.
In the third experiment, the focus shifted towards the data instead of the
model. By calculating the average and the variance over 30 minutes windows
over a 5-hour period, the models were able to accurately predict hypoglycemia
over a 30 minute prediction horizon. There were minor differences between
models, with all of them achieving an AUROC of over 0.94 and a recall of at
least 0.84 for the Hypoglycemia class. Of all the models, XGBoost was the best
performer with an AUROC of 0.98 and Recall of 0.89. These results indicate
two things. First, the noise reduction from averaging the data far outweighed
the loss of information. Second, it is highly possible that hypoglycemia can be
predicted over an even longer prediction horizon. The second point is the most
important, as it points towards an application in real medical setting. Further
==PAGE:46==
6 Conclusion
40
research would be required, but our findings show promise towards such an
application.
==PAGE:47==
APPENDIX A
Appendix
==PAGE:48==
A.1 AmsterdamUMCDB tables
42
A.1
AmsterdamUMCDB tables
Table A.1: admissions: admissions and demographic data of the patients
admitted to the ICU or MCU.
Column
Type
Description
patientid
Integer
unique value to identify individual patients throughout
their admission(s)
admissionid
Integer
unique value to identify the admission to the ICU. Patients
may have multiple admissionid’s during the same or another
hospitalization, when they are discharge from the ICU or
MC unit. Admissionid is used as an identifier in all other
tables.
admissioncount
Integer
for each patient, each additional ICU/MCU admission will
increase this counter by one
location
String
the department the patient has been admitted to, either IC,
MC or both (IC&MC or MC&IC)
urgency
Bit
determines wheter the admission was urgent (1) (i.e. un-
planned) or not (0) (planned)
origin
string
department the patient originated from (e.g. Emergency
department, regular ward)
admittedat
Integer
number of milliseconds since the first admission. For the
first admission this is set to zero.
admissionyeargroup
String
year of admission, categorised
dischargedat
Integer
time of discharge in number of milliseconds since the first
admission
lengthofstay
Integer
length of stay of the admission in hours
destination
String
department
the
patient
has
been
discharged
to
or
’Overleden’ if the patient died during the ICU/MCU ad-
mission
gender
String
gender, ’Man’ for male, ’Vrouw’ for female
agegroup
String
age at admission (years), categorised
dateofdeath
Integer
the date on which the patient died calculated as the number
of milliseconds since the first admission, if applicable (non-
null)
weightgroup
String
weight at admission (kg), categorised
weightsource
String
method used to determine the weight at ICU/MCU admis-
sion, either measured (’gemeten’), estimated (’geschat’) or
asked (’anamnestisch’).
heightgroup
String
height of the patient (cm), categorised
heightsource
String
method used to determine the height at ICU/MCU admis-
sion, either measured (’gemeten’), estimated (’geschat’) or
asked (’anamnestisch’)
specialty
String
medical specialty the patient has been admitted for
==PAGE:49==
A.1 AmsterdamUMCDB tables
43
Table A.2: drugitems: contains all administered medication including fluids,
(parenteral) feeding and blood transfusions during the stay on the
ICU..
Column
Type
Description
admissionid
Integer
links the item with the admissionid in the admissions table
orderid
Integer
uniquely identifies this medication record
ordercategoryid
Integer
id of medication category, e.g. antibiotics, fluids, etc.
ordercategory
String
name of medication category e.g. antibiotics, fluids, etc.
itemid
Integer
id of the medication name
item
string
medication name
isadditive
Bit
shows whether this order is an additive, meaning it has
been added to a parent solution with the same orderid
isconditional
Bit
shows whether the order is conditional, meaning the health
care provider, should verify if the order should be given at
the planned date and time
rate
Float
rate of medication infusion, expressed as a volume (amount
of fluid) per time unit.
Rate can be set to 0 for bolus
medication (injections)
rateunit
String
unit of the infusion rate (e.g. ml/hour)
rateunitid
Integer
id of the volume unit of the infusion rate
ratetimeunitid
Integer
id of the time unit of the infusion rate
doserateperkg
Bit
shows whether the dose rates (if applicable) are dosed by
patient weight
dose
Float
prescribed dose, expressed as either an absolute dose (e.g.
doseunit = ’mg’) or dose per time unit (e.g. doserateunit
= ’mg/hour’)
doseunit
String
unit of prescribed dose (e.g. mg)
doserateunit
String
time unit of infusion rate (e.g. hour)
doseunitid
Integer
id of doseunit
doserateunitid
Integer
id of doserateunit
administered
Float
administered dose, which may or may not be the same as
prescribed dose
administeredunit
String
unit of administered dose (e.g. mg)
administeredunitid
Integer
id of administeredunit
action
String
defines the reason for documenting (i.e. new bag/syringe,
pause, restart, stopped)
start
Integer
start time of medication infusion in milliseconds from the
first admission
stop
Integer
stop time of medication infusion in milliseconds from the
first admission
duration
Integer
duration of medication infusion (stop - start) in minutes
solutionitemid
Integer
id of the solution, if any, used to prepare the medication
solutionitem
String
name of the solution, if any, used to prepare the medication
solutionadministered
Float
amount of solution administered
solutionadministeredunit
String
unit of solution administered (e.g. ml)
fluidin
Float
amount of fluid volume administered in ml, including the
solution
iscontinuous
Bit
determines wheter this order is continuous, i.e. restart on
empty infusion bag
==PAGE:50==
A.1 AmsterdamUMCDB tables
44
Table A.3: freetextitems: contains all observations, including laboratory
results, that store text (non-numeric) data.
Personal data, in-
cluding references to hospital staff have been removed..
Column
Type
Description
admissionid
Integer
links the item with the admissionid in the admissions table
itemid
Integer
id to identify the type of result
item
String
type of result
value
String
value of this text result
comment
String
comment associated with this result
measuredat
Integer
time associated with this result in milliseconds since the
first admission. Negative results imply that the sample was
drawn before the first ICU admission
registeredat
Integer
time the result was saved to the database in milliseconds
since the first admission. Negative results imply that the
sample was drawn before the first ICU admission.
registeredby
String
user group that updated the result (’System’)
updatedat
Integer
time the result was updated, in milliseconds since the first
admission
updatedby
String
user group that updated the result (’System’)
islabresult
Bit
determines wheter the observation is a labresult. Currently,
only freetext labresults have been released
Table A.4: listitems:contains all categorical observations, e.g. based on a
selection from a list, like type of heart rhytm, ventilatory mode,
etc..
Column
Type
Description
admissionid
Integer
links the item with the admissionid in the admissions table
itemid
Integer
id to identify the type of observation
item
String
type of observation
value
String
value of this observationt
measuredat
Integer
time associated with this observation in milliseconds since
the first admission. Negative results imply that the sample
was drawn before the first ICU admission
registeredat
Integer
time the result was saved in the database in milliseconds
since the first admission. Negative results imply that the
sample was drawn before the first ICU admission.
registeredby
String
user group that documented the observation, e.g. nurses,
physicians or NULL for linked devices
updatedat
Integer
time of updating the observation in milliseconds since first
admission
updatedby
String
user group that documented the observation, e.g. nurses,
physicians or NULL for linked devices
islabresult
Boolean
determines whether the observation is a labresult.
Cur-
rently, only item ’Afnameplaats’ is a labresult, used to de-
termine the location of sample drawing during down-time
of the lab or hospital system.
==PAGE:51==
A.1 AmsterdamUMCDB tables
45
Table A.5: numericitems: contains all numerical measurements and observa-
tions, including vital parameters, data from medical devices, lab
results, outputs from drains and foley-catheters, scores etc..
Column
Type
Description
admissionid
Integer
links the item with the admissionid in the admissions table
itemid
Integer
id to identify the type of observation
item
String
name of the observation
unitid
Integer
id of the unit of the observation.
unit
String
unit of the observation (e.g. mmHg).
comment
String
user specified comment. Comments may have been removed
(’Opmerking verwijderd’) due to containing personal data.
value
Float
value of the observation
measuredat
Integer
time associated with this observation, expressed as millisec-
onds since the first ICU admission. Negative values imply
that the observation (e.g. lab result) was performed before
the first ICU admission
registeredat
Integer
time the result was stored in the database, expressed as mil-
liseconds since the first admission. Negative values imply
that the observation (e.g. lab result) was performed before
the first ICU admission.
registeredby
String
the user group that entered the result, e.g. nurses, physi-
cians or NULL for linked devices
updatedat
Integer
time the observation was updated in milliseconds from the
first ICU admission.
updatedby
String
the user group that entered the observation, e.g. nurses,
physicians or NULL for linked devices
islabresult
Bit
determines whether the observation is a lab result (islabre-
sult=1).
fluidout
Integer
the amount of fluid in ml that was removed from the patient
(e.g. urine, drain).
Table A.6: procedureorderitems: contains all orders for procedures and
tasks, such drawing blood, perfforminroutine ICU nursing care
and scoring..
Column
Type
Description
admissionid
Integer
links the item with the admissionid in the admissions table
orderid
Integer
unique number identifiying this order
ordercategoryid
Integer
id of procedure category
ordercategoryname
String
name of procedure category
itemid
Integer
id of procedure name
item
String
procedure name
registeredat
Integer
time the result was stored in the database, expressed as
milliseconds since the first ICU admission.
registeredby
String
user group that entered the result, e.g. nurses, physicians,
etc.
==PAGE:52==
A.2 SQL scripts used for AmsterdamUMCDB
46
Table A.7: processitems: contains all catheters, drains, tubes, and conti-
nous non-medication processes (e.g. renal replacement therapy,
hypothermia induction, etc) that patients received during their
stay on the ICU..
Column
Type
Description
admissionid
Integer
links the item with the admissionid in the admissions table
itemid
Integer
id to identify the type of process.
item
string
name of the process.
start
Integer
start time (time of introduction) of the process, in millisec-
onds since the first ICU admission.
stop
Integer
stop time (time of removal) of the process, in milliseconds
since the first ICU admission.
duration
Integer
duration of the process, i.e. the difference between start
and stop times, in minutes.
A.2
SQL scripts used for AmsterdamUMCDB
1 COPY (
2 WITH cte AS
3 (
4
SELECT n2.admissionid , n2.item, AVG(n2.value) AS avg_value, VAR_POP(
n2.value) AS var_value, MAX(CASE WHEN n1.value <= 3.9 THEN 1
ELSE 0 END) AS hypoglycemia
5
FROM numericitems as n1, numericitems as n2
6
WHERE n1.admissionid = n2.admissionid AND n1.item = 'Glucose (bloed)'
AND n1.measuredat >= 2*60*60*1000 AND n2.measuredat >= 0 AND n2
.measuredat <= 2*60*60*1000
7
GROUP BY n2.admissionid , n2.item
8
ORDER BY n2.admissionid
9 ),
10 useful_feats
AS
11 (
12 SELECT item
13 FROM cte
14 GROUP BY item
15 HAVING count(*) >= (SELECT COUNT(DISTINCT admissionid) FROM cte)/2
16 ),
17 filtered_cte AS
18 (
19
SELECT cte.*
20
FROM cte
21
WHERE cte.item IN (SELECT item FROM useful_feats)
22
ORDER BY admissionid
23 ),
24 train_data AS
25 (
26 PIVOT filtered_cte
27 ON item
28 using SUM(avg_value) AS avg_val, sum(var_value) AS var
29 )
30 SELECT * FROM train_data
31 ) TO 'first_exp_data.csv' (HEADER, DELIMITER ',');
Listing A.1: SQL extraction of baseline experiment features.
==PAGE:53==
A.3 Model architectures
47
A.3
Model architectures
1 class GRUD(nn.Module):
2
def __init__(self, input_size, hidden_size , num_layers=3, device='
cpu'):
3
super(GRUD, self).__init__()
4
self.input_size = input_size
5
self.device = device
6
self.num_layers = num_layers
7
self.hidden_sizes = [hidden_size]
8
hs = hidden_size
9
for _ in range(num_layers -1):
10
self.hidden_sizes.append(hs)
11
hs //= 2
12
self.register_buffer("x_mean", torch.zeros(input_size))
13
self.W_gamma_x = nn.Linear(input_size, input_size)
14
self.W_gamma_h = nn.ModuleList([
15
nn.Linear(input_size, self.hidden_sizes[l]) for l in range(
num_layers)
16
])
17
self.z_gates = nn.ModuleList()
18
self.r_gates = nn.ModuleList()
19
self.h_tildes = nn.ModuleList()
20
for l in range(num_layers):
21
prev_hidden = self.input_size if l == 0 else self.
hidden_sizes[l-1]
22
curr_hidden = self.hidden_sizes[l]
23
in_size = prev_hidden + self.input_size + self.input_size +
curr_hidden
24
self.z_gates.append(nn.Linear(in_size, curr_hidden))
25
self.r_gates.append(nn.Linear(in_size, curr_hidden))
26
self.h_tildes.append(nn.Linear(in_size, curr_hidden))
27
28
self.output_layer = nn.Sequential(
29
nn.Linear(self.hidden_sizes[-1], self.hidden_sizes[-1]),
30
nn.ReLU(),
31
nn.Linear(self.hidden_sizes[-1], self.hidden_sizes[-1] //
2),
32
nn.ReLU(),
33
nn.Linear(self.hidden_sizes[-1] // 2, 1)
34
)
35
36
def forward(self, X, M, Delta):
37
if X.dim() == 2:
38
X = X.unsqueeze(0)
39
M = M.unsqueeze(0)
40
Delta = Delta.unsqueeze(0)
41
B, T, D = X.shape
42
device = X.device
43
h = [torch.zeros(B, self.hidden_sizes[l], device=device) for l
in range(self.num_layers)]
44
x_last = torch.zeros_like(X[:, 0, :])
45
46
for t in range(T):
47
x_t = X[:, t, :]
48
m_t = M[:, t, :]
49
d_t = Delta[:, t, :]
50
gamma_x = torch.exp(-F.relu(self.W_gamma_x(d_t)))
51
imputed = gamma_x * x_last + (1 - gamma_x) * self.x_mean
52
x_hat = torch.where(m_t.bool(), x_t, imputed)
53
x_last = torch.where(m_t.bool(), x_t, x_last)
54
layer_input = x_hat
==PAGE:54==
A.3 Model architectures
48
55
for l in range(self.num_layers):
56
# Hidden decay per layer
57
gamma_h = torch.exp(-F.relu(self.W_gamma_h[l](d_t)))
58
h[l] = gamma_h * h[l]
59
h_cat = torch.cat([layer_input , m_t, d_t, h[l]], dim
=-1)
60
z = torch.sigmoid(self.z_gates[l](h_cat))
61
r = torch.sigmoid(self.r_gates[l](h_cat))
62
h_tilde_input = torch.cat([layer_input , m_t, d_t, r * h
[l]], dim=-1)
63
h_tilde = torch.tanh(self.h_tildes[l](h_tilde_input))
64
h[l] = (1 - z) * h[l] + z * h_tilde
65
layer_input = h[l]
# next layer input is current layer
output
66
out = self.output_layer(h[-1])
67
return out.squeeze(-1)
Listing A.2: GRU-D implementation.
1 class TimeSeriesTransformer(nn.Module):
2
def __init__(self, input_dim, d_model=64, nhead=4, num_layers=2,
dim_feedforward=64, output_dim=1):
3
super().__init__()
4
self.seq_len = 10
# fixed input length
5
self.input_projection = nn.Linear(input_dim, d_model)
6
self.pos_embedding = nn.Parameter(torch.randn(1, self.seq_len,
d_model))
7
encoder_layer = nn.TransformerEncoderLayer(
8
d_model=d_model, nhead=nhead, dim_feedforward=
dim_feedforward , batch_first=True
9
)
10
self.transformer = nn.TransformerEncoder(encoder_layer ,
num_layers=num_layers)
11
self.output_layer = nn.Linear(d_model, output_dim)
12
13
def forward(self, x):
14
x = self.input_projection(x)
15
x = x + self.pos_embedding
16
x = self.transformer(x)
17
#x = x.mean(dim=1)
18
x = x[:, -1, :]
19
return self.output_layer(x).squeeze(-1)
Listing A.3: Transformer model for Third Experiment.
1 class RNNModel(nn.Module):
2
def __init__(self, input_dim, hidden_dim=512, rnn_type='lstm'):
3
super().__init__()
4
self.rnn_type = rnn_type.lower()
5
if self.rnn_type == 'lstm':
6
self.rnn = nn.LSTM(input_dim, hidden_dim, num_layers=3,
batch_first=True)
7
elif self.rnn_type == 'rnn':
8
self.rnn = nn.RNN(input_dim, hidden_dim, num_layers=3,
batch_first=True)
9
else:
10
raise ValueError("rnn_type must be 'rnn' or 'lstm'")
11
self.fc = nn.Linear(hidden_dim, 1)
12
13
def forward(self, x):
14
out, _ = self.rnn(x)
15
out = out[:, -1, :]
==PAGE:55==
A.3 Model architectures
49
16
return self.fc(out).squeeze(1)
Listing A.4: RNN for Third Experiment.
1 class TimeSeriesCNN(nn.Module):
2
def __init__(self, input_dim):
3
super().__init__()
4
self.conv_layers = nn.Sequential(
5
nn.Conv1d(in_channels=input_dim, out_channels=256,
kernel_size=3, padding=1),
6
nn.ReLU(),
7
nn.Conv1d(256, 256, kernel_size=3, padding=1),
8
nn.ReLU(),
9
nn.MaxPool1d(kernel_size=2),
# (batch, 128, 1)
10
nn.Conv1d(256, 256, kernel_size=3, padding=1),
11
nn.ReLU(),
12
nn.Conv1d(256, 256, kernel_size=3, padding=1),
13
nn.ReLU(),
14
nn.AdaptiveAvgPool1d(1)
15
)
16
self.fc = nn.Linear(256, 1)
# Single output unit for binary
classification
17
18
def forward(self, x):
19
x = x.permute(0, 2, 1)
20
x = self.conv_layers(x)
21
x = x.squeeze(-1)
22
logit = self.fc(x)
23
return logit.squeeze(-1)
Listing A.5: CNN for Third Experiment.
==PAGE:56==
Bibliography
[Bag+09]
Sean M Bagshaw et al. “The impact of early hypoglycemia and
blood glucose variability on outcome in critical illness.” en. In: Crit
Care 13.3 (June 2009), R91.
[Che+16]
Zhengping Che et al. Recurrent Neural Networks for Multivari-
ate Time Series with Missing Values. 2016. arXiv: 1606.01865
[cs.LG]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/1606.01865.
[Egi+10]
Moritoki Egi et al. “Hypoglycemia and Outcome in Critically Ill
Patients.” In: Mayo Clinic Proceedings 85.3 (2010), pages 217–224.
issn: 0025-6196. doi: https://doi.org/10.4065/mcp.2009.0394.
url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0025619611604072.
[Her+10]
Jeroen Hermanides et al. “Hypoglycemia is associated with inten-
sive care unit mortality*.” In: Critical Care Medicine 38.6 (2010).
[J+21]
Thoral P. J. et al. AmsterdamUMCdb. 2021. doi: 10.1097/CCM.
0000000000004916. url: https://journals.lww.com/ccmjournal/
fulltext/2021/06000/sharing_icu_patient_data_responsibly_
under_the.16.aspx.
[Kri+11]
James S Krinsley et al. “Mild hypoglycemia is independently as-
sociated with increased mortality in the critically ill.” en. In: Crit.
Care 15.4 (July 2011), R173.
[LJP09]
Jean-Claude Lacherade, Sophie Jacqueminet, and Jean-Charles Preiser.
“An Overview of Hypoglycemia in the Critically Ill.” In: Journal
of Diabetes Science and Technology 3.6 (2009). PMID: 20144377,
pages 1242–1249. doi: 10.1177/193229680900300603. eprint: https:
//doi.org/10.1177/193229680900300603. url: https://doi.
org/10.1177/193229680900300603.
[LZ21]
Bryan Lim and Stefan Zohren. “Time-series forecasting with deep
learning: a survey.” In: Philosophical Transactions of the Royal So-
ciety A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences 379.2194
(February 2021), page 20200209. issn: 1471-2962. doi: 10.1098/
rsta.2020.0209. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1098/rsta.2020.
0209.
[Man+22]
Sreekar Mantena et al. “Predicting hypoglycemia in critically Ill
patients using machine learning and electronic health records.” en.
In: J. Clin. Monit. Comput. 36.5 (October 2022), pages 1297–1303.
url: https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC9152921/
pdf/nihms-1807966.pdf.
==PAGE:57==
Bibliography
51
[MKC24]
Hadi Mehdizavareh, Arijit Khan, and Simon Lebech Cichosz. En-
hancing Glucose Level Prediction of ICU Patients through Irregular
Time-Series Analysis and Integrated Representation. 2024. arXiv:
2411 . 01418 [cs.LG]. url: https : / / arxiv . org / abs / 2411 .
01418.
[NIC+12]
NICE-SUGAR Study Investigators et al. “Hypoglycemia and risk
of death in critically ill patients.” en. In: N Engl J Med 367.12
(September 2012), pages 1108–1118.
[Pol+18]
Tom J. Pollard et al. “The eICU Collaborative Research Database,
a freely available multi-center database for critical care research.”
In: Scientific Data 5.1 (September 2018), page 180178. issn: 2052-
4463. doi: 10.1038/sdata.2018.178. url: https://doi.org/10.
1038/sdata.2018.178.
[Yeh+25]
Hsuan-Fan Yeh et al. “Hypoglycemia and hospital mortality in
critically ill patients.” In: Scientific Reports 15.1 (January 2025),
page 2642. issn: 2045-2322. doi: 10.1038/s41598-025-87163-9.
url: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-87163-9.
==PAGE:58==
