==PAGE:1==
DTU Wind and Energy Systems
Power hardware in the loop (PHIL) of 
inverter based renewable systems 
(IBRs): study case of grid following vs. 
grid forming converters
Gerard Burjalès del Amo
DTU Wind-M-0928 
August 2025
==PAGE:2==
DTU Wind-M-0928
August 2025
ECTS: 30
Education: Master of Science
Supervisor(s):
Nenad Mijatovic
DTU Wind & Energy Systems
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for 
graduation in the above education at the 
Technical University of Denmark.
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Wind and Energy 
Systems Frederiksborgvej 399
4000 Roskilde
Denmark
www.wind.dtu.dk
Author:
Gerard Burjalès del Amo
Title:
Power hardware in the loop (PHIL) of inverter 
based renewable systems (IBRs): study case of 
grid following vs. grid forming converters
DTU Wind & Energy Systems is a department of 
the Technical University of Denmark with a unique 
integration of research, education, innovation and 
public/private sector consulting in the field of wind 
energy. Our activities develop new opportunities 
and technology for the global and Danish 
exploitation of wind energy. Research focuses on 
key technical-scientific fields, which are central for 
the development, innovation and use of wind 
energy and provides the basis for advanced 
education at the education.
==PAGE:3==
Abbreviations
AC Alternating Current
ADC Analog­to­Digital Converter
CIL Control­in­the­Loop
DAC Digital­to­Analog Converter
DC Direct Current
DUT Device Under Test
EUT Equipment Under Test
GTAI Giga­Transceiver Analog Input card (RTDS interface)
GTAO Giga­Transceiver Analog Output card (RTDS interface)
HIL Hardware­in­the­Loop
HUT Hardware Under Test
IBRs Inverter­Based Resources
NSP Non­Synchronous Penetration
PCC Point of Common Coupling
PHIL Power Hardware­in­the­Loop
PWM Pulse width modulation
RoCoF Rate of Change of Frequency
RTDS Real­Time Digital Simulator (also the company name)
TSO Transmission System Operator
Power hardware in the loop (PHIL) of inverter based renewable systems (IBRs)
i
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
The rapid global incorporation of inverter based renewable generation has pushed for grid­
forming inverters (GFM) that can provide virtual inertia and voltage support to low­inertia
networks. Power hardware in the loop (PHIL) platforms are indispensable for testing of
power converter control strategies before field deployment, yet most existing PHIL tests
rely on ideal voltage­type interfaces that become unstable when the emulated grid con­
tains stiff sources. This instability hides the true dynamic behavior of the inverter control
and limits the fidelity of real­time studies.
The objective of this thesis is to investigate, implement and experimentally validate a
current­type PHIL interface for GFM research at DTU, thus overcoming the limitations of
voltage­type coupling and allow for stable testing.
To reach this goal, the work (i) analyzed the impact of PHIL latency and measurement
noise on closed­loop stability, (ii) compared grid­following (GFL) and grid­forming (GFM)
converter behaviors to identify what each requires from a PHIL test bench to faithfully
reproduce system dynamics, and (iii) evaluated mitigation strategies, virtual impedance,
and a current­controlled voltage source, to enable testing under low short­circuit ratio
(SCR) conditions.
Methodologically, a NovaCor RTDS was coupled to a four­quadrant power amplifier through
both voltage and current type ideal transformer models (ITMs). The GTIO RTDS blocks
were examined to implement PHIL, quantify delays, and weigh the pros and cons of dif­
ferent signal paths. GFM operation was investigated by transforming a Simulink GFM
example to a dSPACE­based model, from which a microgrid was established. A VSG
model was analyzed to understand what changes would be needed for GFM operation.
Finally, a current control model was developed in RSCAD to drive the power amplifier,
treating a voltage source as a current source, so that a future GFM controller can com­
mand the simulated grid.
Overall, the proposed interface and accompanying analysis provide a foundation for sta­
ble, high­fidelity PHIL studies of GFMs in low­inertia power systems.
ii
Power hardware in the loop (PHIL) of inverter based renewable systems (IBRs)
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
This thesis was prepared over six months at DTU Wind, Tech­
nical University of Denmark (DTU), in partial fulfillment of the
MSc in Electrical Engineering.
It would not have been possible without the guidance of my
supervisor and the support of the DTU Power Lab team.
I am equally grateful to my home­away family in Denmark,
who made the past couple of years (and many more to come,
whether here or in my heart) truly special. Finally, to my family
and friends in my hometown, La Pobla de Mafumet (Tarrag­
ona): Without you, this would have remained a dream.
Tusind tak, Danmark!
Power hardware in the loop (PHIL) of inverter based renewable systems (IBRs)
iii
==PAGE:6==
iv
Power hardware in the loop (PHIL) of inverter based renewable systems (IBRs)
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
2
1.1
Context and Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Power Hardware­in­the­Loop (PHIL) as a Validation Tool . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Grid­Following and Grid­Forming Converters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Project Description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.5
Problem Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.6
Background and Prior Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.7
Experimental Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.8
Thesis Outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Grid Following versus Grid Forming Converters
7
2.1
Grid following converter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Grid forming converter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Electrical representation of GFM and GFL converters
. . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.4
Strength of a power grid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.5
Comparison table . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.6
Virtual Impedance in PHIL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3
Power Hardware­in­the­Loop (PHIL)
15
3.1
Definition of PHIL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.2
RTDS block . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.3
PHIL simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3.4
PowerLab PHIL Hardware Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
3.5
Initial PHIL test with a resistive HUT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
3.6
Induction machine test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
4
GFM model
35
5
Modeling of current source for GFM testing
43
5.1
Small­signal model and closed­loop transfer function . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
5.2
RSCAD model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
6
Results
49
6.1
Matlab simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
6.2
RSCAD simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
6.3
Comparison between mathematical and RTDS modeling . . . . . . . . . . . 51
6.4
Current controlled voltage source PHIL
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
7
Conclusion
55
Bibliography
57
A Transfer function Matlab script
61
Power hardware in the loop (PHIL) of inverter based renewable systems (IBRs)
1
==PAGE:8==
1
Introduction
1.1
Context and Motivation
Modern power systems have been undergoing a rapid transition from large, synchronous
generators to inverter­based resources (IBRs). While this shift enables massive integra­
tion of renewables, it simultaneously removes the natural rotational inertia that historically
buffered voltage and frequency oscillations. The resulting reduction in system inertia has
two direct implications: (i) the rate of change of frequency (RoCoF) following disturbances
increases, and (ii) after a disturbance, the grid frequency drops faster and goes lower than
before. This makes it harder for the system to react in time, detect when parts of the grid
are cut off (islanding) and bring the system back online after a blackout (black start).
The economic driver behind the decline in inertia is simple: non­synchronous renewables
are more price competitive, yet contribute no inherent inertia.
Based on an evaluation of the current inertia situation, [1] the following indicators are
extracted. In the last two decades, the inertia of the system has fallen by about 20%
throughout the continent, and in Denmark it has fallen to less than half of its 1996 value, a
decline driven primarily by the replacement of synchronous thermal units with converter­
interfaced wind capacity [2]. With this reduction in inertia, operators are seeing faster
RoCoF and deeper frequency dips as a consequence [3],[4].
Looking ahead, twelve transition scenarios compiled from three major studies [5],[6],[7]
all indicate a growing problem. Simulations suggest that the Nordic grid could face grid
instabilities related to inertia as early as 2025 [8]. Therefore, the study [1] concludes that
meeting the climate targets of Europe for 2050 will require not just renewable energy, but
an explicit strategy to introduce and geographically locate sufficient synthetic or physical
inertia.
The Iberian Peninsula has already experienced a blackout on 28 April 2025. Disconnected
from the rest of Europe and Africa had to black­start the grid. The scenario proved the
need for a stable grid as societies need electricity and blackouts endanger societies and
poses, and posed, a mortal risk [9].
Figure 1.1: Blackout triggers emergency shutdown at La Pobla de Mafumet (Tarragona,
Catalonia) chemical complex, the largest in south of Europe.
2
Power hardware in the loop (PHIL) of inverter based renewable systems (IBRs)
==PAGE:9==
Several transmission system operators (TSOs) have reacted by tightening grid codes,
introducing explicit RoCoF withstand requirements [1]. TSOs would like all the production
to be synchronous or at least that it behaves the same way and to do that GFM converters
are the future as they can provide the grid with synthetic inertia together with black­start
capabilities. In order to enhance validation, PHIL tests are and will be carried out as they
are cost­effective [10].
1.2
Power Hardware­in­the­Loop (PHIL) as a Validation Tool
Real­Time Digital Simulation permits the detailed emulation of large power systems. There
are different types of techniques, for example Control in the Loop (CIL), a testing method
where a real controller is connected to a simulated system running in real time. When
combined with hardware under test, this forms a hardware­in­the­loop (HIL) setup. PHIL
extends the concept by exchanging power rather than only signals: a power amplifier
(PA) interfaces the simulated network and the physical device. PHIL is therefore uniquely
suited to validate controller stability, protection interoperability, and dynamic performance
under realistic electrical stress prototypes under controlled conditions.
However, PHIL presents its own challenges. Latencies come in different forms: (a) numer­
ical solving in the simulator, (b) ADC/DAC conversions, (c) signal processing in external
peripherals, and (d) PA dynamics. Noise, quantification, and saturation further complicate
closed­loop behavior. If not understood and considered, these non­idealities can desta­
bilize the loop, especially when testing grid­forming (GFM) converters that impose their
own voltage.
1.3
Grid­Following and Grid­Forming Converters
IBRs generally operate using one of the following control techniques [11]:
Grid­following (GFL): The converter behaves as a controlled current source. A phase­
locked loop (PLL) synchronizes to the grid voltage, and the converter injects current
set­points. This mode presupposed a stiff voltage source in the network.
Grid­forming (GFM): The converter synthesizes its own voltage waveform, effectively
acting as a controlled voltage source. Through internal control loops, often based
on virtual inertia or power­balancing laws, it regulates frequency and voltage and
can contribute to black start.
As NSP increases, TSOs increasingly mandate GFM capability for large­scale IBRs to
rebuild system strength and support islanded operation [12]. The provision of test setups
to validate such controls in a safe, repeatable, and scalable manner motivated the PHIL
study carried out in this project.
1.4
Project Description
The project focused on analyzing the possibilities and limitations of PHIL for testing IBR
controls, particularly in the context of GFL and GFM operation. An experimental PHIL
implementation was carried out at DTU PowerLAB to investigate the suitability of two
classical PHIL interface concepts—the Voltage Ideal Transformer Model (VITM) and the
Current Ideal Transformer Model (CITM)—and related approaches for GFM/GFL convert­
ers.
Figure 1.2 presents the block diagram of the implementation. The left­hand side shows the
RTDS simulation; the right­hand side contains the hardware setup with the device under
Power hardware in the loop (PHIL) of inverter based renewable systems (IBRs)
3
==PAGE:10==
test (DUT) and a four­quadrant power amplifier. ADC/DAC stages couple the analogue
and digital domains.
Figure 1.2: Block diagram of the PHIL test arrangement.
1.5
Problem Statement
Laboratory validation of GFM controls is technologically challenging. Traditional PHIL
setups employ a voltage­type interface: the RTDS commands the PA to impose a stiff
PCC voltage, while the DUT injects current. If the DUT tries to impose voltage (GFM
converter, for example), two voltage sources conflict, potentially causing instability or PA
over­current.
In order to see this issue, a simulation in RTDS has been carried out. In Figure 1.3 two
voltage sources can be seen. Both of them with the same internal impedance.
Figure 1.3: Problem statement simulation schematic.
The voltage source on the right of Figure 1.4 can be tuned during the simulation. When
the parameters of both two of them are the same, as can be seen in Figure 1.4, no issues
are experimented. Virtually no current is flowing. When the right voltage source is tuned
out a bit, going from a magnitude of 0.23kV to a magnitude of 0.235kV, it can be seen how
the system becomes unstable, in this case showing thousands of amperes in the circuit.
To solve this, some work has been found in literature in which some solutions implement
a current­type interface in which the PA is ordered to sink/source current so that the DUT
4
Power hardware in the loop (PHIL) of inverter based renewable systems (IBRs)
==PAGE:11==
Figure 1.4: Result of problem statement simulation.
can freely set the PCC voltage [13]. Their prototype achieved a stable blackstart of a
90 kVA converter.
This thesis will study the suitability of VITM and CITM for GFL and GFM converter tests
under realistic conditions, including delays and noise, and explore methods to reduce or
compensate for those delays.
1.6
Background and Prior Work
Before this thesis, a special course was conducted to familiarize the author with the RTDS
capabilities of DTU PowerLAB. Several earlier PHIL­related projects and publications in­
formed the present work:
• Montoya (2020) offers a comprehensive overview of PHIL testing approaches within
smart­grid research [14].
• Vogel (2020) investigated distributed PHIL testing using a grid­forming converter as
the power interface [15].
• Scheel (2024) examined HIL testing in renewable systems [16].
• Kraft (2022) demonstrated geographically distributed PHIL coupling between TU
Dortmund and DTU [17].
These works provided insights on interface algorithms, communication links, and mea­
surement synchronization that were adapted or extended here.
1.7
Experimental Resources
All experiments were carried out within DTU Wind and executed at DTU PowerLAB. The
following equipment was used:
• RTDS computing unit with external GTIO boards.
• Peripheral RTDS rack connected via optical fiber.
Power hardware in the loop (PHIL) of inverter based renewable systems (IBRs)
5
==PAGE:12==
• Four­quadrant power amplifier capable of sourcing/sinking current and imposing
voltage.
• Measurement devices: voltage/current probes, oscilloscopes and auxiliary signal­
conditioning units.
The following software was used:
• Matlab: for data processing and for simulation using Simulink.
• Python: for data processing.
• RSCAD: for modeling using RTDS.
1.8
Thesis Outline
This thesis is organised as follows:
Front matter: Acronyms, Abstract and Acknowledgments.
Chapter 1: Introduction; context and motivation; PHIL as a validation tool; high­level
overview of GFL vs. GFM; project description; problem statement; background and
prior work; experimental resources; thesis outline.
Chapter 2: Grid­Following versus Grid­Forming converters, explaining virtual impedance
in PHIL.
Chapter 3: Power Hardware­in­the­Loop; definition of PHIL; RTDS block; PHIL simu­
lation setup; PowerLab hardware implementation; comparison of current­sensing
technologies.
Chapter 4: GFM model; understanding the control of a GFM model.
Chapter 5: Modeling of current source for GFM testing
Chapter 6: Results
Chapter 7: Conclusion; key findings, limitations, guidelines, and future work.
6
Power hardware in the loop (PHIL) of inverter based renewable systems (IBRs)
==PAGE:13==
2
Grid Following versus Grid Forming
Converters
This section offers a self­contained comparison of their principles and differences and how
this affects the testing process.
2.1
Grid following converter
A GFL converter behaves as a regulated current source that must lock to an externally
imposed voltage phasor. Synchronization is achieved with a phase­locked loop (PLL)
that continuously estimates the angle θPLL and frequency ωPLL as can be seen in 2.1. The
reference d and q axis currents (id, iq) follow active and reactive power commands. Inertial
energy is not exchanged; the converter simply injects a controlled complex current.
Figure 2.1: Block diagram representation of grid­following converter [18, Fig. 2].
The block diagram shows an outer P–Q power­control loop that determines grid­injected
active and reactive power, and an inner current­control loop that regulates converter cur­
rents to track the outer­loop references.
As it can be seen in Figure 2.1 the PLL estimates the angle, θ, of the grid to synchronize
the converter with the grid. The PLL works according to the voltage in the PCC as seen
in Figure 2.2 and Equation 2.1.
Figure 2.2: PLL block diagram [18, Fig. 2].
θPLL = TPLL(s)
s
uc
pccq =

kpPLL + kiPLL
1
s
 uc
pccq
s
(2.1)
Power hardware in the loop (PHIL) of inverter based renewable systems (IBRs)
7
==PAGE:14==
The outer power­control loop regulates the active (P) and reactive (Q) power injected into
the grid. In the synchronous dq frame aligned with the PCC voltage:
p = 3
2
 ud id + uq iq

,
q = 3
2
 uq id −ud iq

.
(2.2)
The average (low­pass filtered) powers used by the outer loop are
Pe =
ωc
s + ωc
p,
Qe =
ωc
s + ωc
q,
(2.3)
where ωc is the cutoff frequency of the first­order low­pass filter. From this, the power loop
generates the dq­current references via a PI regulator:
ic
d,ref(s) =

kpPQ + kiPQ
s
  Pref −Pe

,
ic
q,ref(s) = −

kpPQ + kiPQ
s
  Qref −Qe

,
(2.4)
where kpPQ and kiPQ are the PI parameters.
The inner current control loop regulates the converter output currents to follow the refer­
ence values generated by the outer power­control loop. A virtual resistance­based active
damping method is implemented by feeding back the capacitor current, which helps sup­
press the LC resonance without significantly affecting system efficiency.
The dq­axis voltage references generated by the current controller are:
uc
d,ref =

kpc + kic
s
 ic
d,ref −ic
gd

−ωgLgic
gq −KC
 ic
d −ic
gd

,
uc
q,ref =

kpc + kic
s
 ic
q,ref −ic
gq

+ ωgLgic
gd −KC
 ic
q −ic
gq

,
(2.5)
where:
• kpc, kic: PI gains of the current controller
• ωg: Grid frequency
• Lg: Filter inductance
• KC: Capacitor current feedback coefficient
• ic
d, ic
q: Converter­side inductor currents
• ic
gd, ic
gq: Grid­side inductor currents
8
Power hardware in the loop (PHIL) of inverter based renewable systems (IBRs)
==PAGE:15==
2.2
Grid forming converter
In contrast with a GFL, a GFM converter imposes its own voltage waveform and thus acts
as a voltage source. A virtual oscillator injects both frequency and voltage states into the
grid, which may be realized in different ways, for example: virtual synchronous machine
(VSM/VSG) emulation, droop­based self­synchronized voltage sources, or dispatchable
virtual oscillator control (dVOC) [19].
Figure 2.3: Block diagram representation of grid­forming converter [18, Fig. 3].
One of the most common implementations of GFM converters is the use of the VSG model,
which provides the converter with synthetic inertia and damping [20]. The VSG block can
be seen in blue in Figure 2.3. Its algorithm consists mainly of two parts. On the one
hand, a power­frequency controller that emulates the equation of a rotor motion, normally
referred to as the swing equation. On the other hand, an excitation controller that adopts
the proportional component and adjusts the output voltage (Em). Equation 2.6 represents
the swing equation and equation 2.7 corresponds to the excitation equation.





J dω
dt = Pref
ω
−Pe
ω −D(ω −ωg),
dθ
dt = ω
(2.6)
1
kq
dEm
dt
= Qref −Qe + ku (UN −Upcc)
(2.7)
The above equations correspond to the VGS algorithm in 2.3 and can be represented as
the control system seen in Figure 2.4.
Power hardware in the loop (PHIL) of inverter based renewable systems (IBRs)
9
==PAGE:16==
Figure 2.4: GFM VSG block model [18].
The voltage control loop regulates the converter current references so that the voltages
at the PCC track the setpoints provided by the outer VSG control.
The output current references from the voltage controller in the dq­frame are given by:
ic
d,ref =

kpu + kiu
s
  Eref −uc
pccd

−ωgCfuc
pccq,
ic
q,ref =

kpu + kiu
s
  0 −uc
pccq

+ ωgCfuc
pccd,
(2.8)
where:
• kpu, kiu: PI gains of the voltage controller
• ωg: Grid frequency
• Cf: Capacitance at the PCC
• Eref: Voltage amplitude reference from the VSG controller
• uc
pccd, uc
pccq: PCC voltages in the dq frame
The current control loop of the GFL converter presented in the previous Section 2.1 is the
same for the GFM converter.
2.3
Electrical representation of GFM and GFL converters
While GFL units require a stiff grid; GFM units can establish or restore grid conditions
autonomously.
Thus, it can be defined that the GFL converter would electrically resemble a current source
and thus will match better with a stiff grid that could be represented as a voltage source.
In the case of the GFM converter, it is the opposite way. A GFM model will try to impose
its own frequency and voltage, acting as a voltage source, and thus will match better with
a weaker grid.
In Figure 2.5 presents the electrical representation of both converters can be seen.
Figure 2.5: Electrical representation of GFL and GFM converters [18].
10
Power hardware in the loop (PHIL) of inverter based renewable systems (IBRs)
==PAGE:17==
2.4
Strength of a power grid
When discussing what topologies work best with the coupled grid, a term is always present:
the strength of the power grid. This term is quantified by the short­circuit ratio (SCR)
SCR = SSC
SN
= 1.5U2
g
SNZg
(2.9)
From equation 2.9 SSC is the short­circuit apparent power of the power grid, SN is the
rated apparent power of the inverter, Ug is the amplitude of the grid voltage, and Zg is the
amplitude of the grid impedance.
According to the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) Standard 1204­
1997 (IEEE Std 1204­1997, 1997) [21], the strength of a power grid increases with the
SCR value. When SCR > 3, the grid is considered strong; for 2 < SCR < 3, it is classified
as weak; and when SCR < 2, it is considered very weak [21].
Figure 2.6: Grid classification based on SCR.
As can be seen in equation 2.9, the larger the impedance of the grid seen by the converter,
the smaller the SCR will be and thus will lead to lower grid strength.
For testing of different SCR scenarios, a common practice is to use virtual impedance,
discussed in Section 2.6, to recreate different grids, adjusting Zg.
As presented in [18] GFL converters lose stability with lower SCR values. As detailed in
the paper, the GFL becomes unstable when the SCR is less than 1.5. This is not the case
with the GFM model, which maintains stability at SCR 1.
2.5
Comparison table
The following Table 2.1 presents the differences found between the two converter control
topologies.
Table 2.1: Key characteristics of grid­following and grid­forming converters [18].
Aspect
Grid­Following
Grid­Forming
Synchronisation
External PLL; dependent on SCR
Internal oscillator; PLL­less
Inertia
None (emulated via outer control)
Configurable virtual inertia
Voltage support
Reactive current only
Droop control
Islanded operation
Not possible
Native (single or multi­converter)
Harmonic sensitivity
High due to current­source nature
Mitigated by stiff voltage output
Stability in weak grids
Poor for SCR < 3
Robust down to SCR ≈1
Complexity
Well matured; simpler hardware
More CPU demand
Power hardware in the loop (PHIL) of inverter based renewable systems (IBRs)
11
==PAGE:18==
12
Power hardware in the loop (PHIL) of inverter based renewable systems (IBRs)
==PAGE:19==
2.6
Virtual Impedance in PHIL
Virtual impedance is a widely used control strategy to emulate physical impedance at
the point of common coupling (PCC), also in PHIL simulations. This approach effectively
modifies the terminal behavior of the inverter or PHIL system without requiring physical
elements. Prevents direct coupling with ideal voltage sources, mitigating numerical insta­
bility and unbounded current transients, improving system stability.
Definition of Virtual Impedance
The virtual impedance is modeled as a series impedance composed of resistance and
inductance:
Zv(s) = Rv + sLv
(2.10)
This impedance is not physically but simulation implemented.
Voltage Reference Adjustment
The voltage drop across the virtual impedance is calculated based on the measured cur­
rent:
∆vv(t) = Rv · i(t) + Lv · di(t)
dt
(2.11)
The inverter’s voltage reference is then adjusted as:
vref(t) = vPCC(t) −∆vv(t)
(2.12)
Frequency­Domain Representation
In the Laplace domain, the modified voltage reference becomes:
Vref(s) = VPCC(s) −Zv(s) · I(s)
(2.13)
where:
• VPCC(s) is the original voltage at the PCC,
• I(s) is the output current of the inverter or DUT,
• Zv(s) is the virtual impedance transfer function.
Advantages
Virtual impedance offers several benefits:
• Enhances numerical stability in PHIL setups.
• Emulates weak grid conditions for robust control testing.
• Improves current sharing and power flow control in multi­inverter systems.
• Dampens high­frequency oscillations and resonance.
Power hardware in the loop (PHIL) of inverter based renewable systems (IBRs)
13
==PAGE:20==
2.6.1
Simulation of virtual impedance
In order to prove the effect of virtual impedance, a test following the one presented in the
Introduction 1. In this simulation, a RL load (1Ωand 0.05H) is connected between the
voltage sources. As can be seen in the simulation results of Figure 2.8 virtual impedance
solves the instability.
Figure 2.7: Schematic of virtual impedance simulation.
Figure 2.8: Simulation of virtual impedance effect.
This topic will be tested in a PHIL setup presented in Section 3.6.
14
Power hardware in the loop (PHIL) of inverter based renewable systems (IBRs)
==PAGE:21==
3
Power Hardware­in­the­Loop (PHIL)
3.1
Definition of PHIL
Power Hardware­in­the­Loop (PHIL) couples a real­time digital simulation of the rest­of­
system (ROS) with a power­stage hardware under test (HUT) through a power amplifier
and measurement chain. Unlike (i) pure offline or real­time simulation (no hardware), and
(ii) Controller­Hardware­in­the­Loop (CHIL), where only low­power signals are exchanged,
PHIL allows real power to flow, exposing converter nonlinearities, protection behavior,
saturation, and fault responses under safely emulated network conditions. Compared with
full­scale testing, PHIL reduces risk and cost while retaining key power­stage realism.
Power interface and ITM formalism.
To interconnect the real­time simulation environ­
ment with the hardware under test (HUT), a power interface enforces simulated electrical
quantities on the physical device and feeds back its measured response into the simula­
tion. Ideal Transformer Model (ITM) can be devided in two types:
• Voltage­Type Interface (VITM): The simulator outputs a voltage reference, which is
applied to the HUT terminals via a power amplifier. The measured HUT current is fed
back and injected into the simulation as a controlled current source. This configuration
is conceptually simple and the most common implementation.
• Current­Type Interface (CITM): The HUT is treated as a current source: its measured
output current is injected into the simulated node, while the computed node voltage is
enforced at the HUT terminals via the amplifier.
PHIL can become unstable.
The closed­loop transfer around simulator, converters, in­
terface, and amplifier is effectively
Gloop(s) = Gsim(s) e−sTd GDAC(s) Gamp(s) GHUT(s) GADC(s),
with Td the cumulative delay. Delay and finite bandwidth introduce phase lag that can
make the system unstable and oscillate.
3.2
RTDS block
RTDS has developed a block to achieve PHIL systems. The _rtds_PHIL_GTAOGTAI.def,
in Figure 3.1, is developed to interface with an external amplifier by using the GTAO
and GTAI cards. The component includes embedded voltage and current sources and
provides, according to [22], a reduced loop delay for PHIL­based applications.
Power hardware in the loop (PHIL) of inverter based renewable systems (IBRs)
15
==PAGE:22==
Figure 3.1: Single phase PHIL block. Current source in the left and voltage source in the
right.
The block can be configured to operate as a VITM or a CITM. In addition, they can be
configured to work for both a one­ and a three­phase circuit. This is important as the
block allocates resources that cannot be shared. For instance, one analogue GTAI card
can only be used by one block, so if a three­phase system is implemented with 3 different
blocks, this would mean that three GTAI cards would be needed. The same applies when
using traditional GTAI input blocks; only one block linked to each GTIO can be used.
Figure 3.2: Current source PHIL block. Single phase in the left and three phase in the
right.
3.2.1
Comparison between PHIL block and traditional IO blocks
As explained in the previous section, the dedicated PHIL block was developed by RTDS
to improve the performance. However, it has some downsides. On the one hand, no
logic can be applied to the output in a straight­forward way. This logic is important in
PHIL as an additional layer of security to ensure that the amplifier or DUT will not receive
a dangerous control signal, for example outside of the rated values. Also, no control
can be applied to the input and, for example, no digital filtering can be added. This can
be troubleshooted by using dummy circuits as will be discussed in Section 5 where an
implementation containing limitation and filtering is implemented.
To compare and evaluate performance, two models have been developed. On the one
hand, one uses the PHIL block and the other one uses GTAO and GTAI blocks.
As can be seen in Figure 3.3, the test model uses the PHIL block connected to a DC
source that will create a voltage step change to evaluate the delay. The output and input
of the cards are shorted; thus, the delay from the signal from the GTAO to the GTAI will
be negligible.
16
Power hardware in the loop (PHIL) of inverter based renewable systems (IBRs)
==PAGE:23==
Figure 3.3: Test of PHIL block with a step.
Compared to the previous test setup, in Figure 3.4, the signal is transferred using tradi­
tional blocks. The step is generated in the same way and the GTAO and GTAI pins are
shorted too.
Figure 3.4: Test of PHIL without dedicated block with a step. Using GTAO and GTAI.
Figure 3.5 shows the results of the test performed. As can be seen, there is better per­
formance of the propitiatory block. The delay in the case of the proprietary block is 30µs,
and for the one using the traditional block, the time delay is 40µs. Considering that the
simulation time step is defined as 10µs, this means that it takes three and four time steps,
respectively.
Power hardware in the loop (PHIL) of inverter based renewable systems (IBRs)
17
==PAGE:24==
Figure 3.5: Step response of the comparison of use of RTDS PHIL block
18
Power hardware in the loop (PHIL) of inverter based renewable systems (IBRs)
==PAGE:25==
3.3
PHIL simulation
Testing with HUT lab equipment needed to be carried out in a safe way and thus a test
plan was carried out to ramp up the testing in a safe and effective way.
Prior tests with RTDS GT boards where carried out in the author’s previous special course
[23]. Those were a foundation for testing and obtaining a basic understanding of RTDS
hardware and software.
The first test that needed to be carried out was to validate the performance of the PHIL
block and the RTDS example on PHIL was used for that. The example represents the
implementation of a photovoltaic system with consumption close to the generation. An
example of that could be a house. With solar panels representing the generation and the
load representing the home consumption and the connection to the grid for power sharing.
Figure 3.6: PHIL example simulation configuration, including AC grid model, fault injection,
load, PHIL interface, and amplifier connection.
Figure 3.6 illustrates the configuration of the Power Hardware­in­the­Loop (PHIL) simula­
tion used in the RTDS PHIL example. The system is divided into functional subsystems,
highlighted with dashed green boxes. The following are described:
• AC Grid: This block models the upstream electrical grid using an ideal voltage
source. In this case with a line­to­line voltage of 0.24 kV. The grid impedance, in
the form of virtual impedance, is represented using a resistive­inductive branch, in
order to provide a more realistic dynamic source behavior.
• Fault Insertion: A configurable single line­to­ground fault is introduced at the phase.
The fault switch can be triggered to evaluate the system’s fault ride­through capabil­
ities and protection responses.
• Load: A resistive load is connected to simulate electrical consumption close to the
production. The circuit breaker allows the load to be disconnected during certain
test scenarios.
Power hardware in the loop (PHIL) of inverter based renewable systems (IBRs)
19
==PAGE:26==
• PHIL Interface to DUT: This section is planned to form the real­time interface be­
tween the simulated environment and the physical DUT. The reference voltage sig­
nal (VRTDS) is generated by the real­time digital simulator (RTDS) and applied to the
DUT via the 4­quadrant amplifier. The resulting current (IAPS) is measured and fed
back to the simulator to close the loop.
• 4­Quadrant Amplifier: The 4­quadrant amplifier acts as the power interface be­
tween the RTDS and DUT. It operates in all four quadrants, enabling it to source
and sink both current and voltage. This is essential for testing under both load and
regenerative conditions.
3.3.1
Alternative PHIL Interface Due to Protocol Limitations
In the simulation example in Figure 3.6, the AURORA communication protocol is used.
This protocol allows for high­speed communication between the RTDS simulator and ex­
ternal hardware, in this case the power amplifier. However, the 4­quadrant amplifiers
available at DTU do not support the AURORA protocol natively. As a result, it cannot be
directly interfaced with the RTDS using the standard AURORA­compatible PHIL blocks.
To address this limitation, an alternative PHIL interface approach has been adopted. As
explained in Section 3.2 multiple PHIL blocks developed by RTDS are available. In this
case, a 3­phase current source is used.
3.3.2
Emulated Power Injection Without Amplifier Using RTDS Analog I/O
In the PHIL setup, the power injected by the photovoltaic (PV) system is determined by
the current flowing from the DUT into the simulated grid. Under normal operation with
a power amplifier, the RTDS provides a reference voltage signal to the amplifier, which
then applies this voltage to the DUT. The current injected by the DUT is measured and
fed back to the simulation environment.
However, to test and validate the PV system model without relying on the physical power
amplifier, an alternative approach has been implemented. Instead of measuring the cur­
rent directly from the amplifier output, a synthetic current signal is generated within the
RTDS environment. This signal is designed to replicate the expected feedback current
that the amplifier would measure.
The generated signal is phase­shifted 180◦in relation to the simulated grid voltage to
represent the direction of power injection. This is because in an AC power system, the
direction of power flow is determined by the phase relationship between the voltage and
current at the point of common coupling (PCC). For a resistive load that consumes power,
the current is in phase with the voltage. In contrast, for a generator (such as the PV
system in the original example) that injects power into the grid, the current must be in the
opposite direction, that is, phase­shifted by 180◦relative to the voltage, considering only
active power is injected. Defining the grid voltage at the PCC as:
v(t) = Vpeak · sin(ωt)
(3.1)
To inject active power into the grid, the current injected by the PV system must be:
i(t) = Ipeak · sin(ωt + π) = −Ipeak · sin(ωt)
(3.2)
This 180◦phase shift causes the instantaneous power to become:
p(t) = v(t) · i(t) = Vpeak · sin(ωt) · (−Ipeak · sin(ωt)) = −VpeakIpeak · sin2(ωt)
(3.3)
20
Power hardware in the loop (PHIL) of inverter based renewable systems (IBRs)
==PAGE:27==
Since sin2(ωt) ≥0 for all t, this results in:
p(t) < 0
(3.4)
With this method, changing the amplitude of the emulated current directly changes PPV. It
has been experimentally verified in the simulation environment that this causes the overall
power balance at the PCC to shift, influencing the grid power PGrid in accordance with:
PGrid = PLoad −PPV
(3.5)
It may seem trivial that the synthetic current signal is generated directly in RTDS. However,
the decision was made to ensure the correct performance of the model. If an external sig­
nal is used, extreme synchronization is required, as a small deviation in the frequency of
the external signal generator and the simulation environment will have a misalignment.
This described phenomenon was tested and reproduced, just by tolerance of the signal
generation at the exact frequency of the RTDS simulated grid signal. The misalignment
causes the current flow into the circuit to change and modifies the impedance of the sim­
ulated load or generation. Thus, the sinusoidal waveform is generated in the RTDS envi­
ronment.
This emulated current signal is sent out of the RTDS using a GTAO module and looped
back into the simulation through a GTAI channel connected to the PHIL interface block.
This method allows the PHIL block to receive a realistic current feedback signal even in
the absence of a physical amplifier.
Modifying the magnitude of the emulated current has been verified to affect the power con­
tribution of the photovoltaic system within the simulation, demonstrating that the interface
loop responds appropriately to the synthetic signal. Figure 3.7 shows a step in inverter
injection without a load connected. Figure 3.8 shows the same model with the connected
load, in this case the inverter starts injecting power when the load is already consuming
making the current from the grid. This setup provides a valid and practical method for
testing PHIL control logic and DUT behavior without requiring physical power hardware
during the early stages of development.
Power hardware in the loop (PHIL) of inverter based renewable systems (IBRs)
21
==PAGE:28==
Figure 3.7: Solar power production with emulated PHIL. Plot with solar injection and no
load.
Figure 3.8: Solar power production with emulated PHIL. Plot with solar injection and and
load.
22
Power hardware in the loop (PHIL) of inverter based renewable systems (IBRs)
==PAGE:29==
3.4
PowerLab PHIL Hardware Implementation
This section details the Power Hardware­in­the­Loop (PHIL) hardware platform imple­
mented at PowerLab DTU. The PHIL architecture leverages the capabilities of a Real­
Time Digital Simulator (RTDS) system interfaced with physical hardware via a four­quadrant
amplifier in a flexible inter­laboratory infrastructure.
3.4.1
Power Amplifier
At the core of the PHIL setup is a high­power 150 kVA four­quadrant amplifier. This ampli­
fier plays a central role in emulating the voltage at the point of common coupling (PCC).
The four­quadrant behavior is described in the voltage­current (v­i) plane. The sign of
the output voltage (v) and current (i) determines the operating quadrant of the amplifier.
Each quadrant corresponds to a specific direction of power flow:
Quadrant
Voltage v
Current i
Power p = v · i
Mode
I
v > 0
i > 0
p > 0
Source (Forward power)
II
v < 0
i > 0
p < 0
Sink (Reverse voltage)
III
v < 0
i < 0
p > 0
Source (Reverse power)
IV
v > 0
i < 0
p < 0
Sink (Reverse current)
Quadrant I: Forward Motoring (Power Sourcing)
v > 0,
i > 0
⇒
p = v · i > 0
In this case, the amplifier behaves as a conventional voltage source supplying power to
a passive or active load. This is typical in scenarios where the amplifier emulates a grid
voltage and delivers current into a consuming load.
Quadrant II: Forward Regeneration (Power Sinking)
v < 0,
i > 0
⇒
p = v · i < 0
Here, the amplifier applies a negative voltage while still allowing positive current. This
condition is often encountered during regenerative operation where energy flows back
into the amplifier (e.g., when the HUT feeds power into the system).
Quadrant III: Reverse Motoring (Power Sourcing, Reversed Polarity)
v < 0,
i < 0
⇒
p = v · i > 0
This quadrant corresponds to sourcing power but with reversed voltage and current sink­
ing current in the negative direction.
Quadrant IV: Reverse Regeneration (Power Sinking, Reversed Current)
v > 0,
i < 0
⇒
p = v · i < 0
This quadrant represents a condition where the amplifier maintains a positive output volt­
age while the current is negative. Power flows from the HUT back into the amplifier.
The four­quadrant capability is particularly important in PHIL systems because the device
under test (DUT), actively pushes power back into the amplifier. This is the case of IBRs.
Thus, without 4Q operation, the amplifier would not be able to absorb this reverse power.
Power hardware in the loop (PHIL) of inverter based renewable systems (IBRs)
23
==PAGE:30==
3.4.2
Amplifier configuration
The amplifier used in this thesis is the SyCore PAS50000, a three­phase setup consisting
of three PAS50000 controlled using the Spitzenberger & Spies SyCore. In Figure 3.9 the
nine racks for the amplifier are shown. Each amplifier consists of 3 racks. The Control
unit, the SyCore is installed in one of the racks.
The name of the amplifier defines one of the main characteristics of the PAS50000 ampli­
fier. It is a 50 kVA one phase amplifier that can deliver from 0 to 270 Vrms and a frequency
range from DC to 5 kHz according to [24]. The amplifier is well protected against different
phenomena to avoid easy mistakes that could be made. SyCore, the coordinator module
of the different phases, is responsible for controlling the protections. Each of the phases
is protected against overload, short circuit, and over­temperature. However, no voltage
protection is indicated on the output.
Figure 3.9: Spitzenberger & Spies PAS50000 power amplifier racks.
Figure 3.10: Top: SyCore front view with General Control Unit (left) and Phase Control
Unit (right); bottom: rear view of SyCore with analogue inputs.
24
Power hardware in the loop (PHIL) of inverter based renewable systems (IBRs)
==PAGE:31==
In Figure 3.11 the manual describes how the connection of the SyCore is established. On
the one hand, number 10, the connection with the different phase amplifiers is established.
On the other hand, number 16 is the analogue input to control the amplifier.
Figure 3.11: SyCore rear pannel
The amplifier receives its reference via a low­level analog signal (±10V ) [22]. According
to the SyCore manual (and general practice), the input control signal has a floating ground.
This prevents ground loops and potential interference. In Figure 3.10 the control unit can
be seen. In the rear part of the rack, a connecting cable that allows for connection of the
analogue inputs can be seen.
The external input is configured as an addition to the internal amplifier oscillator. Since
the adder function is continuously active by the manufacturer, no additional enabling is
necessary. Thus, the total output voltage of the amplifier, Vout, is the sum of a set of inter­
nal control values Vctrl (which can be programmed locally) and the analog input applied
externally Vin:
Vout = Vctrl + Vin · Gamp
(3.6)
where Gamp is the gain applied to the input stage of the amplifier. The analog input Vin must
be scaled to ±10V , and overshooting this range can result in signal clipping or distortion.
The reason why the amplifier is natively having the input added is unknown to the writer of
this Thesis. It is thought to be prone to errors and, although it has some case applications,
does not seem to be a feature that will be used on a regular basis. Adding two sine signals
one on top of the other can result dangerous considering frequency and misalignment
issues.
3.4.3
Amplifier Signal Scaling and Configuration
As explained, the RTDS GTAO output driving the amplifier, and thus both gains need to be
considered for the right performance. Considering VRTDS as the voltage signal produced
within the simulation environment, Vout can be represented as:
Vout = GRTDS · VRTDS + Vctrl = (Gamp · GGTAO) · VRTDS + Vctrl,
(3.7)
As explained in the previous section the input range is (±10 V). Considering that the range
the amplifier is setup to be 270 V as a maximum it can be expected that:
Gamp =
Vamp out MAX
Vsignal input MAX
= 270 ·
√
2
10
= 38.18,
(3.8)
Power hardware in the loop (PHIL) of inverter based renewable systems (IBRs)
25
==PAGE:32==
Experimentally, it was found that such gain is 38.19. This small change is due to toler­
ances both in the measurements and in the amplifier itself. Meaning that a 1 Vrms input
signal will generate 38.19 Vrms in the output of the amplifier, meaning that:
Vsignal input = VRTDS
Gamp
= VRTDS
38.19
(3.9)
The following is the scaling formula used for the RTDS DAC converter as described in
2.A.4.4. in [22]:
GRTDS =
VRTDS
1000 · 5
Vsignal input
=
VRTDS
1000 · 5
VRTDS
38.19
= 5 · 38.19
1000
= 0.19095
(3.10)
3.4.4
Inter­Laboratory Grid
PowerLab is equipped with an internal power distribution infrastructure that allows flexible
routing of power between different laboratory lab cells. These cells are interconnected
through a managed internal grid system that is configured via an ABB graphical interface,
MicroSCADA Pro based using Monitor Pro+.
The amplifier output is connected to one of the lab cells, while the HUT is placed in another
lab cell inside of a testing cage. The internal grid allows the routing of connected devices
through intermediary cells, by activating power­through paths using built­in relays. Figure
3.12 shows the output and power­through relays in each of the cells. In Figure 3.13 it can
be seen how the amplifier is connected via Line 2, one of the internal lines of the lab, to
lab cell 11 and the connection is brought all the way to lab cell 8.
Figure 3.12: Output connection and pass­by connections of a lab cell.
This routing enables PHIL setups to be configured without physically relocating the HUT
or amplifiers, maximizing flexibility.
26
Power hardware in the loop (PHIL) of inverter based renewable systems (IBRs)
==PAGE:33==
Figure 3.13: Laboratory connection from amplifier to HUT using lab cells.
3.4.5
Current Sensing
Precise and stable current measurement is critical in power hardware­in­the­loop (PHIL)
testing. Several current sensing technologies exist, each with specific trade­offs in ac­
curacy, drift, bandwidth, and isolation. Among the leading options are shunt resistors,
Hall effect sensors (open­ and closed­loop), Rogowski coils, and fluxgate­based closed­
loop transducers. This section outlines their comparative performance and explains the
rationale for adopting Danisense fluxgate sensors.
Technology Comparison
Table 3.1 summarizes key features of major sensing technologies, drawing on the reviews
in [25] and [26].
Table 3.1: Comparison of Current Sensing Technologies.
Technology
DC Capable
Accuracy
Drift
Bandwidth
Isolation
Shunt Resistor
Yes
Moderate
Temp. sensitive
High (lim. by amp.)
No
Open­loop Hall
Yes
∼1%
High
Up to 100 kHz
Yes
Closed­loop Hall
Yes
∼0.1%
Medium
Up to 200 kHz
Yes
Rogowski Coil
No (AC only)
Good (AC only)
Low
>1 MHz
Yes
Fluxgate
Yes
ppm­level (<0.01%)
Very Low
DC–100 kHz
Yes
Hall effect sensors are popular for their compact size and ease of use, but suffer from sig­
nificant thermal drift, offset errors, and sensitivity to external magnetic fields [25]. Closed­
loop Hall sensors improve linearity and reduce drift but remain limited in precision.
Danisense Fluxgate Technology
Danisense current transducers are based on the closed­loop fluxgate principle. The mag­
netic flux induced by the primary current using a secondary feedback current, ensuring
the core remains unsaturated and linear. The core flux is sensed by a fluxgate sensor
that operates in a pulsed excitation mode, ensuring high common­mode noise immunity
and ultra­low offset drift [27].
Danisense units integrate both the sensing head and control electronics in a compact
shielded housing, reducing electromagnetic interference and enhancing thermal stability.
Key characteristics include:
• Accuracy: PPM­level linearity (<1 ppm error), in some of the products but not the
one at DTU Power Lab, verified via built­in calibration windings [27].
Power hardware in the loop (PHIL) of inverter based renewable systems (IBRs)
27
==PAGE:34==
• Stability: Long­term drift of less than 1 ppm/year.
• Immunity: Shielded aluminum casing grounded mitigates common­mode noise and
parasitic capacitance currents.
Rationale for Choosing Danisense over Hall Sensors
In high­performance scenarios like PHIL setups, Danisense fluxgate sensors offer deci­
sive advantages over Hall­effect sensors:
• Superior Precision: While closed­loop Hall sensors can achieve ∼0.1% accuracy,
Danisense fluxgate devices deliver <0.001% (ppm­level) [26].
• Thermal and Long­Term Stability: Fluxgate sensors exhibit near­zero tempera­
ture drift, enabling robust operation without frequent recalibration.
• Common­Mode Noise Rejection: The grounded, shielded casing and internal cir­
cuitry design minimize disturbance from high dV /dt environments (e.g., switching
inverters) [27].
Thus, for applications that require high linearity, low noise and absolute measurement
integrity, such as feedback in the studied PHIL setups, Danielsense’s closed­loop fluxgate
transducers provide a substantial performance benefit compared to Hall effect solutions.
The selected current probe outputs are routed to the RTDS via GTAI (Giga­Transceiver
Analog Input) cards. These cards provide ±10 V differential input with high­resolution
ADCs.
Measurement error using hall effect probes.
During the first testing, hall effect probes were used. However, the results obtained were
not satisfactory. Figure 3.14 shows three­phase currents at the power­amplifier output:
Ia is a clean sinusoid, while Ib and Ic periodically collapse to a flat line, then recover.
Because only the two phases whose Hall probes sit on the phase racks farthest from the
GTAI unit suffer this dropout, the problem points to the measurement chain, not the actual
current. The tall, narrow spikes that precede each gap suggest a burst of electromagnetic
interference that briefly saturates or trips the remote Hall sensors, it is believed that the
closer Ia probe, with shorter, better­shielded leads, is immune. In short, these are EMI­
induced measurement dropouts, not true current interruptions. Another reason for this
phenomena could be a low battery level.
Figure 3.14: Problems when using hall effect probes.
3.4.6
Implementation of the current sense
Figure 3.15 illustrates the current input signal chain used in the PHIL setup:
• Current Sensor: Danisense current sensor.
28
Power hardware in the loop (PHIL) of inverter based renewable systems (IBRs)
==PAGE:35==
• DANISENSE SCU: The Signal Conditioning Unit receives the raw signal from the
sensor and performs filtering, scaling, and electrical isolation. Converts the signal
into a standard ±10 V analog voltage range.
• RTDS GTAI: The RTDS GT Analog Input (GTAI) card digitizes the conditioned ana­
log voltage and makes it available to the real­time simulation environment.
• General View: The final image provides a visual overview of the physical setup,
showing how the components are interconnected.
Figure 3.15: Current sensor (left) connected to the DANISENSE SCU (second), which
feeds a conditioned analog signal into the RTDS GTAI card (third); the final image shows
a general view of the complete setup.
Figure 3.16 shows the physical installation of the current sensors.
The sensors are
mounted inside the circuit breaker enclosure that connects the output of the power ampli­
fier to the rest of the laboratory. The amplifier output cable is routed through the sensor
apertures. Sensor cables are routed out of the circuit breaker box and into the Danisense
SCU rack.
Figure 3.16: Installation of the current sensor (right) inside the circuit breaker cabinet
(left).
3.4.7
RTDS signal distribution
RTDS establishes connection between the NovaCor processing unit ports and the GTIO
units through optical connections. The NovaCor has different optical IOs and the boards
can be connected directly or daisy chained. When daisy chaining, certain limitations apply.
Power hardware in the loop (PHIL) of inverter based renewable systems (IBRs)
29
==PAGE:36==
These limitations are explained in [23] based on [22] and [28] and have to do with the
bandwidth needed for each board in order to keep latency stable.
To implement the PHIL it was needed to establish a GTAO next to the PAS and a GTAI
next to the current measurement. To implement this, an optical connection was patched
from the RTDS simulation room to the Power Lab lab cell. A box was created to connect
the GTAO to the input of the PAS and from there another optic cable is connected to the
GTAI for the current sense. That board was already inside one of the external RTDS
racks, as can be seen in 3.15.
30
Power hardware in the loop (PHIL) of inverter based renewable systems (IBRs)
==PAGE:37==
3.5
Initial PHIL test with a resistive HUT
The first PHIL experiment used a purely resistive load as the hardware under test (HUT).
This is the safest and most transparent way to validate the loop, as any deviation from
the linear relation i = v/R immediately reveals sign errors, scaling errors, bandwidth
limitations, or instability. To do that the model seen in Figure 3.17 was used.
Figure 3.17: Simulation for resistor test with PAS PHIL.
Procedure
The following were the steps followed to slowly bring up the test.
1. Sensor checkout with the internal oscillator of the power amplifier (no RTDS): the
amplifier generated a known sinusoid while the current sensors, A/D chain and ac­
quisition paths were verified for polarity, gain, linearity, noise floor and headroom.
This isolated the measurement chain from the real­time model and avoided closed­
loop effects.
2. RTDS open­loop test: the RTDS produced the voltage reference and the amplifier
applied it to the HUT. The measured current was observed but not re­injected into
the simulated node. This validated analog scaling, amplifier gain and phase, and
ensured that no internal limiters or slew­rate constraints were unintentionally trig­
gered.
3. Closed­loop PHIL: the measured current was fed back into the RTDS, closing the
power interface. Stability was verified at nominal conditions before expanding the
operating range.
Operating sweep
The resistive test was repeated at different power levels, terminal
voltages, and fundamental frequencies and confirmed that amplifier and sensors operated
within their linear regions.
Loop delay identification
The real­time control and feedback loop is based on seam­
less integration of RTDS peripheral cards:
• GTAO: Outputs analog voltage references to the amplifier. The configuration in­
cludes port assignment, scaling, and DAC delay compensation.
• GTAI: Feeds current signals back into the RTDS, closing the PHIL loop.
The overall loop latency is determined by:
TPHIL = TDAC + Tamplifier + Tsensor + TADC + Tsimulation,
(3.11)
Power hardware in the loop (PHIL) of inverter based renewable systems (IBRs)
31
==PAGE:38==
The tests provided an estimate of the end­to­end loop delay Td. With a resistive HUT, the
ideal phase shift between commanded voltage and measured current should be the total
delay. The observed lag is attributed to the cumulative delay from the simulation timestep,
D/A and A/D conversions, amplifier group delay, sensors, and also a bit of line inductance
from the different elements of the circuit. The delay was found to be around 120µs.
Another test was carried out to investigate more on the topic and validate the results
obtained. A measurement of the command voltage to the amplifier and the voltage at the
terminals of the EUT was measured. This measurement includes the delay of the PAS
and the lab cabling from the PAS to the EUT. The results show an approximate delay
of 100µs. It has to be an approximate as the signals become noisy and the delays of
the sensing equipment start to become relevant. For reference, the delay of the coaxial
cable from the command voltage located in the PAS to the oscilloscope is measured to
be 3.8µs.
32
Power hardware in the loop (PHIL) of inverter based renewable systems (IBRs)
==PAGE:39==
3.6
Induction machine test
In order to further validate the performance of PHIL with PAS and RTDS an induction
machine test was carried out. This allowed testing of the current sensors at different
frequencies and also testing of the power amplifier with inductive loads. Figure 3.18 shows
the motor used for the test and the connection coming from the PAS through the lab cells.
Figure 3.18: Induction motor connected to the PAS.
Scalar control is applied for the test, using a V/f ratio rotation at different speeds is achieved
keeping the stator magnetic flux constant. As can be seen in Figure 3.19 the frequency
has been the controlling signal and the voltage is adjusted to match the nominal V/f ratio
(400V /50Hz).
Figure 3.19: RSCAD model for motor test.
Figure 3.20 shows the effect of virtual impedance in the circuit. As can be seen, there is
a step change in the value of the virtual impedance from 0.5 to 0.001Ω.
Power hardware in the loop (PHIL) of inverter based renewable systems (IBRs)
33
==PAGE:40==
Figure 3.20: Virtual impedance change from 0.5 to 0.001Ω.
Figure 3.21: Current and voltage phase difference.
34
Power hardware in the loop (PHIL) of inverter based renewable systems (IBRs)
==PAGE:41==
4
GFM model
Starting from the Matlab model that can be found in [29] an implementation with dSpace
and Simulink was carried out. The objective was to implement a GFM control structure
capable of establishing its own voltage and frequency reference, and connect it to the
RTDS controlled PAS to establish PHIL. Although full synchronization and stable GFM
operation were not achieved, a functional microgrid setup was successfully implemented
and tested with hardware.
The initial step was to understand the behavior and performance of the model. Once
completed, the model was implemented in an open­loop configuration using an inverter
connected to real hardware, and once validated, a closed­loop was established. This
process involved discretizing the model to make it compatible with dSpace operation, en­
suring proper signal conditioning, and addressing issues with input current measurements.
These measurements were initially very noisy, so a digital filter had to be designed and
applied to improve their quality.
Figure 4.1 shows the general view of the model discretized and adapted for dSpace op­
eration. In the original, a grid is connected to the ABC output as well as the load. As the
first step was to implement a microgrid to validate the hardware, only the load was left.
Figure 4.2 shows one level down. The model is divided in two sections; on the top is the
converter power circuit and on the bottom the control.
Figure 4.1: General view of the GFM model
[29].
Figure 4.2:
GFM power stage and con­
verter.
Originally, there was a simulated power stage (Figure 4.3) that was changed for the real
hardware, establishing the dSpace IO setup as seen in Figure 4.4. This includes the
voltage control signal for the dSpace and the current inputs. It is important to note that as
can be seen, some gains have been applied to both currents and voltages. The reason
is that the tests were carried out at lower levels to increase setup safety.
Power hardware in the loop (PHIL) of inverter based renewable systems (IBRs)
35
==PAGE:42==
Figure 4.3: Original GFM power stage blocks.
Figure 4.4: Replacement of power blocks for dSpace IO.
Voltages Vabc (Figure 4.5) and Iabc (Figure 4.6) are introduced into dSpace via analog
inputs; transformations from line­to­line to phase voltages are carried out together with
filtering of the signals, as they were too noisy to be introduced into the circuit without
filtering. Gains are applied and compensate for both: dSpace and probe gains.
36
Power hardware in the loop (PHIL) of inverter based renewable systems (IBRs)
==PAGE:43==
Figure 4.5: Controller input voltage, same applies for grid voltage.
Figure 4.6: Controller input current.
The control part of the converter can be seen in Figure 4.7. It consists of a power control
that gives the references for both active and reactive power.
Figure 4.7: GFM control.
Figure 4.8: Active and reactive power con­
trol.
As can be seen in Figure 4.9 and 4.10 virtual impedance is used to provide the model with
better stability [30] and [31], following the principle presented in Section 2.6.
Power hardware in the loop (PHIL) of inverter based renewable systems (IBRs)
37
==PAGE:44==
Figure 4.9: Current limiting based on virtual impedance.
Figure 4.10: Block diagram of current limiting.
Providing the voltage reference to the inverter, there is the voltage and current control
in dq frame, as seen in Figure 4.12 followed by the inverse park transform to output the
voltage mabc as presented in Figure 4.11.
Figure 4.11: d and q voltage and current control.
38
Power hardware in the loop (PHIL) of inverter based renewable systems (IBRs)
==PAGE:45==
Figure 4.12: Blocks inside d and q voltage and current control.
The hardware implementation can be seen in Figure 4.13 with the different elements
needed for the microgrid implementation. DC voltage source on the right provides the
stiff voltage DC bus that energizes the inverter rails. The bus feeds the inverter, a four­
switch power stage that chops the DC into the desired reference voltage; its gate signals
are generated by a dSpace real­time controller, which also logs data and runs the control
algorithms. Downstream of the bridge, an L filter (series inductor) attenuates the switch­
ing ripple so that a nearly sinusoidal current is delivered to the resistive load 40Ω. Analog
signals containing voltage and current signals are feed back to the dSpace system for
closed­loop regulation and protection. To have a quick measurement to compare it with
the algorithm­based measurements, a power meter was introduced in the circuit.
Figure 4.13: Different elements of the microgrid.
Once the microgrid was working the next step was to work of syncronizing to the grid to
effectively have a GFM converter, it was decided to go back and develop the grid­forming
model from a VSG model.
After some work to understand the performance of the model, some work was done to
transform the VSG model into a GFM model, reading [32]. Figure 4.14 shows the global
view of the original model.
Power hardware in the loop (PHIL) of inverter based renewable systems (IBRs)
39
==PAGE:46==
Figure 4.14: VSG model: global view.
The schematic in Fig. 4.14 presents the VSG model. From left to right, a DC source and
its link capacitor feed a three­phase, two­level voltage source inverter whose six insulated
gate switches are driven by the control. Downstream, an LCL output filter removes switch­
ing harmonics before a software breaker/contactor couples the converter to the external
grid. Voltage and current sensors are placed at both the converter terminals and the point
of common coupling (PCC).
Above the power stage sits the control layer. The controller receives the measured three­
phase voltages and currents together with set points for active and reactive power.
Internally it emulates the swing equation and produces a sinusoidal voltage reference
that mimics the output of a synchronous machine. A PWM block running at the system
sampling period defined by the powergui block converts this reference into high­frequency
gate pulses for the inverter. The closed loop formed by measurements, VSG algorithm,
PWM and switching bridge allows the converter to set, rather than follow, grid voltage and
frequency.
In order to transform it, a PLL synchronization was implemented. This PLL would work
only during the synchronization phase. Once the system is synchronized the breaker
would close and the VSG would take over with the control.
40
Power hardware in the loop (PHIL) of inverter based renewable systems (IBRs)
==PAGE:47==
Figure 4.15: VSG model: VSG control.
The way this is implemented is by using the PLL to define the angle between the generated
voltage and the grid and use a PI to reduce it. To work on implementing the synchroniza­
tion and PLL [33] and [34] were considered.
Figure 4.16: VSG model: synchronization block.
Power hardware in the loop (PHIL) of inverter based renewable systems (IBRs)
41
==PAGE:48==
42
Power hardware in the loop (PHIL) of inverter based renewable systems (IBRs)
==PAGE:49==
5
Modeling of current source for GFM
testing
As explained in [13] and presented in Section 1, to solve the issue of using a voltage
source to test a GFM model, a current­controlled voltage source could be used to recreate
a weaker grid. In essence, in the paper, a power amplifier is controlled to behave as a
current source and avoid the instabilities presented in 1.3. Compared to it, a simulation
is presented in 5.1 to demonstrate that the performance of a current source connected to
the PCC is stable.
Figure 5.1: Test of current source as PCC grid emulation.
The implementation carried out in this chapter is based on [13]. The control part adjusts
the amplifier input voltage to keep the current constant to the defined constant.
A first implementation of this theory was carried out in Simulink to implement and validate
the proposed control. Figure 5.2 shows this first iteration.
On the far left, an independent signal source generates the current reference. The square
wave block Iref steps between discrete amplitude levels, while the sine wave block sup­
plies the waveform shape and fundamental frequency. Multiplying the two produces the
instantaneous current reference Iref(t).
The reference then enters the control subsystem (upper box), which implements a clas­
sical PI current controller. A summing block subtracts the measured current Isense from
Iref to create the error signal that drives the PI compensator. The compensator out­
put passes first through an anti­wind­up limiter (CmdSat) to prevent integrator saturation
during large transients, and then through a gain block that converts the dimensionless
controller output into volts. A final hard limiter (V ref_sat) clamps the command to the
Power hardware in the loop (PHIL) of inverter based renewable systems (IBRs)
43
==PAGE:50==
maximum voltage the power amplifier can safely deliver. The result of the controller is
V ref.
The power amplifier is modeled as an ideal voltage controlled source Vsrc whose control
port receives V ref. Its output is connected to the inductor and a current sensor mea­
sures the circuit current (Isense), closing the feedback loop. Additional voltage probes
measure the amplifier’s terminal voltage (V gen) and the voltage across the inductor (VL)
for diagnostic purposes.
The rectangle on the right represents the HUT. Two configurable resistors form the load:
one can be switched in or out in parallel with the other, allowing rapid changes in load
impedance. V hw voltage sensor monitors the HUT voltage and a controllable voltage
source in series with the resistors lets you test the response of the system under an
externally imposed voltage.
Figure 5.2: Simulink model of current controlled voltage source.
As can be seen in Figure 5.2, the model was implemented in continuous time. However,
it was also tested in discrete time, as the control part will be discrete when moving to the
experimental test.
Once the Simulink model was implemented, a RSCAD model was developed. To do the
conversion, RTDS has not developed any tool for that. This is a competitive disadvantage
compared to OPAL­RT, an RTDS competitor. Thus, all the component blocks needed to
be found and placed manually.
The first implementation was carried out with a one­phase system, as was done before
with the Simulink model. Then it was adapted to the three­phase system that needed to
44
Power hardware in the loop (PHIL) of inverter based renewable systems (IBRs)
==PAGE:51==
be implemented.
Once the model was working, it had to be adapted to work as a PHIL where both the
inductor and resistive load would be physical. A resistor in parallel with the PAS was
added in order to protect the amplifier from sudden changes that could potentially create
voltage peaks that could damage the PAS, basically creating a LPF. This resistor was also
added in the simulation.
5.1
Small­signal model and closed­loop transfer function
From Figure 5.2 the transfer functions of the different parts of the system are obtained:
(a) Power­stage admittance
Element impedances in the s­domain are:
ZRpl = Rpl,
ZLR = Rload + sL
(5.1)
Because Rpl and the (Rload + sL) branch are in parallel, the total admittance seen by the
control voltage Vref is
T(s) = Isense(s)
Icmd(s) =
C(s)Yp(s)
1 + C(s)Yp(s) =
Ka(Kps + Ki) (sL + R1 + R2)
s(R1sL + R1R2) + Ka(Kps + Ki) (sL + R1 + R2)
(5.2)
(b) Controller transfer function
The controller in Fig. 5.2 is a proportional­integral block
followed by an additional gain Ka
C(s) = Ka

Kp + Ki
s

= Ka
Kps + Ki
s
(5.3)
(c) Loop and closed­loop transfer functions
The open­loop transfer function is the
product of the controller and plant:
L(s) = C(s) Yp(s).
(5.4)
Considering the reference current as a sine wave of amplitude Iref, Icmd(s) = Iref(s) ×
sin(ωt), standard negative feedback gives:
Isense(s) =
L(s)
1 + L(s) Icmd(s).
(5.5)
Consequently, the closed­loop transfer function is
T(s) = Isense(s)
Icmd(s) =
C(s)Yp(s)
1 + C(s)Yp(s)
=
Ka(Kps + Ki) (sL + R1 + R2)
s(R1sL + R1R2) + Ka(Kps + Ki) (sL + R1 + R2)
(5.6)
Power hardware in the loop (PHIL) of inverter based renewable systems (IBRs)
45
==PAGE:52==
In order to model it more realistic both delay and high pass filtering are considered:
D(s) = e−sτ ≈1 −τ
2s
1 + τ
2s
(5.7)
HHP(s) =
s2
s2 + 2ζωcs + ω2c
,
ωc = 2π · 1 rad/s, ζ =
√
2
2 .
(5.8)
Considering delay and offset the open­loop transfer function becomes:
L(s) = C(s) Yp(s) D(s) HHP(s)
(5.9)
5.1.1
Closed–loop from commanded to real current
The transfer function from the commanded current to the real (current flowing in the plant)
is
Tcmd(s) = Isense(s)
Icmd(s) =
C(s) Yp(s) D(s)
1 + C(s) Yp(s) D(s) HHP(s) .
(5.10)
As expected, if the HPF and delay are omitted (HHP(s) = 1, D(s) = 1), (5.10) is the same
as the original expression without them.
5.2
RSCAD model
Figure 5.3 shows the general view of the model developed for current control of the voltage
source. At the top, there is a calculation block for the active (P) and reactive (Q) power.
Below it, the PHIL block is responsible for injecting current into the circuit. On the left­
hand side, the current controllers for each phase are located. At the bottom of the figure,
a simulated circuit is shown. The system can switch between pure simulation and PHIL
implementation, which is useful both for debugging and for predicting results.
Figure 5.3: RSCAD current model, general view.
46
Power hardware in the loop (PHIL) of inverter based renewable systems (IBRs)
==PAGE:53==
The current control can be seen in Figure 5.4. The same control is used in each of the
phases. The parts of the control can be found in 5.1 where they are described.
Figure 5.4: RSCAD current control model.
Physical implementation
As in previous implementations, the amplifier is connected through the lab cells to a cage
where the DUT is placed. Two loads are adjusted to around 10Ωand connected in parallel
and in series with the inductor. In Figure 5.6 the implementation can be seen, following the
implementation schematic in Figure 5.5. All the connections were done in star connection.
After the photo was taken, the second load was connected in parallel using a breaker that
was triggered from outside of the cage. This is because you have to switch more than
one switch from the second load to get it to do the desired load step. The breaker was
the best option to ensure a synchronized change.
Figure 5.5: Schematic of current­controlled voltage source implementation.
Power hardware in the loop (PHIL) of inverter based renewable systems (IBRs)
47
==PAGE:54==
Figure 5.6: Implementation of DUT for current­controlled voltage source.
The loads obtained were measured to ensure a symmetric load and the measurements
can be seen in Table 5.1. In Table 5.2 the impedance seen by the amplifier is measured.
Rload
A
B
C
Ron
5.263
5.253
5.256
Roff
8.779
8.763
8.788
Table 5.1: Resistance measurement of the HUT.
Routput
A
B
C
Ron
4.702
4.711
4.702
Roff
7.246
7.250
7.249
Table 5.2: Resistance measurement seen by the PAS
48
Power hardware in the loop (PHIL) of inverter based renewable systems (IBRs)
==PAGE:55==
6
Results
This section presents the results of the different simulations and tests to analyze the per­
formance of the current controlled voltage source. As presented in Section 5 different
simulations were carried out and can be found ordered to show progress from one to the
other.
6.1
Matlab simulation
In Figure 6.1 the results of the Simulink model of a current­controlled voltage source can
be seen. The upper plot shows the current reference and the measured current (Iref,
Isense) over time, while the bottom plot compares the reference voltage after the control
and the generated voltages in the circuit (Vref, Vgen).
As can be seen at 0.2s there is a step change in the current reference from 1 to 10Arms,
and the controller adjusts the voltage by a factor of 10 as expected. At 0.4 seconds there
is a step change, but in this case in load. The second 10Ωis connected in parallel with the
already existing one, thus the resistance is cut in half. In this case, the current remains
constant, while the voltage is cut in half as expected.
This simulation already points out that the current change will be more control demand­
ing than the load change. At 0.2s, a small voltage spike can be seen when the step is
introduced but nothing is perceived in the load change at 0.4s.
Figure 6.1: Top: Current reference and measured current (Iref, Isense). Bottom: Voltage
reference and generated voltage (Vref, Vgen).
Figure 6.2 represents the case of a voltage source with a fixed current value marked by
the resistors. As can be seen, the model works as expected. Considering the voltage in
the load, the amplifier still manages to keep constant current.
Power hardware in the loop (PHIL) of inverter based renewable systems (IBRs)
49
==PAGE:56==
Figure 6.2: Current reference step with series voltage source in Simulink model. Top:
measured current (Isense). Bottom: generated voltage (Vgen).
6.2
RSCAD simulation
Figure 6.3 shows the performance of the simulation model implemented in RSCAD. The
simulation is running completely in the NovaCore, no PHIL is used. This validation is to
make sure that the control works before implementing the PHIL.
Figure 6.3: Current step in RSCAD model. Top: measured current (Isense). Bottom:
generated voltage (Vgen).
In Figure 6.4 a step change in the load can be seen, going from 10 to 5Ω.
50
Power hardware in the loop (PHIL) of inverter based renewable systems (IBRs)
==PAGE:57==
Figure 6.4: Load step in RSCAD model. Top: measured current (Isense). Bottom: gener­
ated voltage (Vgen).
6.3
Comparison between mathematical and RTDS modeling
In order to prove that the mathematical model obtained using the transfer functions , it
is tested compared to the RTDS model presented in the previous section. The results of
both simulations can be seen in Figure 6.5. Icmd represents the reference current in both
models, Imeas represents the current input that the control would see (as can be seen an
offset from the measurement device is considered), Isense corresponds to the calculated
current based on the transfer function and Irtds corresponds to the RTDS simulation. The
Matlab script for the mathematical calculation can be seen in Appendix A.
Figure 6.5: Comparison between mathematical and RTDS modeling to 0 to 10A step
change.
As can be seen, Figure 6.5 shows the correlation between the mathematically calculated
Power hardware in the loop (PHIL) of inverter based renewable systems (IBRs)
51
==PAGE:58==
model and the RTDS simulation validating both methods.
6.4
Current controlled voltage source PHIL
To validate the performance of the PHIL model, tests were carried out and the model
was tuned to ensure stability. To achieve this tunning of the PI and filter were needed.
After testing the system, the proportional gain was adjusted to P = 0.2 and the integral
time constant to Ti = 5 × 10−4 s, which resulted in a limiting closed­loop bandwidth of
approximately 80 rad/s
As seen in Figure 6.6, the load is changed in a step to validate that the current remains
constant, following the current reference, at different load levels. The plots show the
RTDS voltage (top), measured voltage (middle), and measured current (bottom) for all
three phases during a load step event that occurs at approximately 3.83 s. The transition
is clearly visible as a sudden increase in both RTDS and measured voltage amplitudes,
whereas the current waveform is adjusted to maintain regulation under the current control
scheme. The current remains stable and sinusoidal, demonstrating the effectiveness of
the current­type PHIL interface in handling load disturbance.
Figure 6.6: Load change with current control. RTDS voltage (top), measured voltage
(middle), and measured current (bottom) for all three phases.
Figure 6.7 shows the step change in the current reference. As can be seen going from
10 to 20 Arms.
52
Power hardware in the loop (PHIL) of inverter based renewable systems (IBRs)
==PAGE:59==
As presented in Section 5.1, where the offset was considered, it has been crucial to add
filtering that, as expected, has caused a reduction in bandwidth.
The PI controller is
C(s) = Kp + Ki
s ,
Ki = P
Ti
.
With current sense gain Ka and plant impedance Z(s) = sL + R1 + R2, the closed­loop
transfer function is
T(s) = Isense(s)
Icmd(s) =
Ka (Kps + Ki) (sL + R1 + R2)
s
 R1sL + R1R2

+ Ka (Kps + Ki) (sL + R1 + R2).
Using P = 0.2, Ti = 5 × 10−4 s ⇒Ki =
0.2
5 × 10−4 = 400, R1 = R2 = 10 Ω, L = 2.2 mH,
and Ka = 1:
(Kps + Ki)(sL + R1 + R2) = (0.2s + 400) (0.0022s + 20) = 0.00044 s2 + 4.88 s + 8000.
The denominator part from the plant is
s
 R1sL + R1R2

= s
 10 · 0.0022 s + 10 · 10

= 0.022 s2 + 100 s.
Therefore,
T(s) =
0.00044 s2 + 4.88 s + 8000
(0.022 + 0.00044)
|
{z
}
0.02244
s2 + (100 + 4.88)
|
{z
}
104.88
s + 8000 =
0.00044 s2 + 4.88 s + 8000
0.02244 s2 + 104.88 s + 8000.
The −3 dB bandwidth fBW is defined by |T(jω)| = 1/
√
2 with ω = 2πf. Numerically solving
for the above T(s) gives
fBW ≈12.44 Hz
(ωBW ≈78.13 rad/s).
For a well­damped second­order response, the 10% −90% rise time is approximated by
tr ≈0.35
fBW
⇒
tr ≈0.35
12.44 ≈2.81 × 10−2 s = 28.1 ms.
Thus, in the experimental test it will be seen that the results match with the calculations.
The implementation of the current reference has been challenging as the control had to
be tuned to ensure the correct performance and avoid oscillations. It is because of that
that in order to compensate for filtering and delays a rate limiter in the current reference
had to be used. At first, this rate change was set to a limit of 10 A/s and after tuning it was
possible to safely bring it up to 500 A/s.
Power hardware in the loop (PHIL) of inverter based renewable systems (IBRs)
53
==PAGE:60==
Figure 6.7: Current step from 10 to 20A with current control. RTDS voltage (top), mea­
sured voltage (middle­top), and measured current (middle­bottom) for all three phases
(bottom) power change.
54
Power hardware in the loop (PHIL) of inverter based renewable systems (IBRs)
==PAGE:61==
7
Conclusion
This chapter presents the work carried out on power­hardware­in­the­loop (PHIL) tests
for two kinds of power converters: grid­forming (GFM) and grid­following (GFL). With the
increase of IBRs power grids contain much less inertia than before. GFM converters are
expanding to provide synthetic inertia, and reliable PHIL test methods are needed. The
main goal was therefore to investigate how laboratory tests at DTU can be deployed to
improve the testing.
This project had the following objectives to investigate deeper into. First, the effect of
PHIL delay and noise on closed­loop stability had to be assessed. Second, the GFM and
GFL converters had to be compared to analyze their principle of operation and how they
relate to ITMs. Third, solutions had to be found so that weak grids, described by a low
short­circuit ratio (SCR), could still be studied in the laboratory. Virtual impedance and
current­controlled power amplifier tests were chosen as the main solutions because they
can be applied without major changes to the existing setup.
The work was carried out at DTU PowerLab. The NovaCor real­time digital simulator
(RTDS) was linked to a four­quadrant power amplifier through ideal transformer models of
both voltage and current type. Hardware connections were deployed in a thoughtful way to
allow flexible testing. It has been proven to work as multiple tests were carried out around
the lab. Current measurement has been found to be critical in PHIL implementations, and
after different technologies were discussed, flux gate current sensors with high accuracy
were deployed. The delay tests showed that the total delay in the implementation is 120µs.
Converter models were developed in two software platforms, Matlab Simulink and RTDS
RSCAD. RTDS was used to simulate grid conditions while Simulink was used to under­
stand the performance of GFM converters and for tests of current controller voltage sup­
ply. During the development of a GFM converter model, synchronization between the
dSPACE­based Simulink GFM prototype and the grid was not reached during the project,
but a microgrid was operated without problems. Further modeling steps were carried out
working on transforming a VSG model into a GFM converter.
As GFM converters work as a stiff voltage source, a current control model has been im­
plemented to have the PAS behave as a current source, although limits were met. The
current control had to include a rate limiter to stay stable when including digital filtering to
remove the small DC component of the current measurement, thus the current steps were
limited to a 500 A/s change, similar to the rate of change of the black­start test presented
in [13].
Suggested future work includes benchmarking the current controller against a stiff voltage
source to quantify its intrinsic performance, followed by experiments with a real GFM
converter to verify that low SCR grid conditions can be reproduced and to investigate how
varying grid strengths affect the converter’s dynamics.
In summary, the study has shown that PHIL tests of GFM and GFL converters can be
deployed at DTU using the RTDS infrastructure, and they can be improved with reduced
delay, by adding virtual impedance, and by running the power amplifier in current mode.
Power hardware in the loop (PHIL) of inverter based renewable systems (IBRs)
55
==PAGE:62==
56
Power hardware in the loop (PHIL) of inverter based renewable systems (IBRs)
==PAGE:63==
Bibliography
[1]
Christos Agathokleous and Jimmy Ehnberg. “A Quantitative Study on the Require­
ment for Additional Inertia in the European Power System until 2050 and the Po­
tential Role of Wind Power”. In: Energies 13.9 (May 2020). Special Issue “100%
Renewable Energy Transition: Pathways and Implementation II”, p. 2309. DOI: 10.
3390/en13092309.
[2]
A. Fernández­Guillamón et al. “Power Systems with High Renewable Energy Sources:
A Review of Inertia and Frequency Control Strategies over Time”. In: Renewable
and Sustainable Energy Reviews 115 (Nov. 2019), p. 109369. DOI: 10.1016/j.rser.
2019.109369.
[3]
R. Doherty et al. “An Assessment of the Impact of Wind Generation on System
Frequency Control”. In: IEEE Transactions on Power Systems 25.1 (Feb. 2010),
pp. 452–460. DOI: 10.1109/TPWRS.2009.2030348.
[4]
Y. Wang et al. “High Wind Power Penetration in Isolated Power Systems—Assessment
of Wind Inertial and Primary Frequency Responses”. In: IEEE Transactions on Power
Systems 28.3 (Aug. 2013), pp. 2412–2420. DOI: 10.1109/TPWRS.2013.2240466.
[5]
McKinsey&Company. Transformation of Europe’s Power System Until 2050, for Ger­
many, Electric Power and Natural Gas Practice. Tech. Rep. Accessed: 2020­02­07.
McKinsey & Company, 2010. URL: https://www.mckinsey.com/~/media/mckinsey/
dotcom/client_service/epng/pdfs/transformation_of_europes_power_system.ashx.
[6]
European Commission. EU Reference Scenario 2016: Energy, Transport and GHG
Emissions Trends to 2050. Tech. rep. Brussels, Belgium: European Commission,
2016. DOI: 10.2833/001137.
[7]
DNV­GL. Integration of Renewable Energy in Europe. Rep. ENER/C1/427­2010.
Accessed: 2020­02­07. DNV­GL, 2014. URL: https://www.dnvgl.com/publications/
integration-of-renewable-energy-in-europe-103268.
[8]
E. Nycander et al. “Curtailment Analysis for the Nordic Power System Considering
Transmission Capacity, Inertia Limits and Generation Flexibility”. In: Renewable En­
ergy 152 (Aug. 2020), pp. 942–960. DOI: 10.1016/j.renene.2020.01.059.
[9]
RTVE. Las autoridades investigan la vinculación de la muertes en Galicia y Madrid
de siete personas con el gran apagón. Accessed: 2025­08­06. 2025. URL: https:
//www.rtve.es/noticias/20250429/muerto-heridos-gran-apagon-electrico-investigan/
16559113.shtml.
[10]
W. Rü, Z. Chen, and D. Pattabiraman. “Grid­Forming Inverters: A Critical Asset
for the Power Grid”. In: IEEE Journal of Emerging and Selected Topics in Power
Electronics 8.2 (2020), pp. 925–935.
[11]
X. Gao et al. “Grid­following and grid­forming control in power electronic based
power systems: A comparative study”. In: Proc. IECON. 2021.
[12]
D. Pattabiraman, R. H. Lasseter, and T. M. Jahns. “Comparison of grid following and
grid forming control for a high inverter penetration power system”. In: Proceedings of
the 2018 IEEE Power and Energy Society General Meeting (PESGM). 2018, pp. 1–
5.
[13]
Z. Feng et al. “Current­Type Power Hardware­in­the­Loop Interface for Black­Start
Testing of Grid­Forming Converter”. In: Proceedings of the 2022 IEEE 48th An­
nual Conference of the Industrial Electronics Society (IECON). IEEE. 2022. DOI:
10.1109/IECON49645.2022.9968517.
Power hardware in the loop (PHIL) of inverter based renewable systems (IBRs)
57
==PAGE:64==
[14]
Juan Montoya et al. “Advanced laboratory testing methods using real­time simula­
tion and hardware­in­the­loop techniques: A survey of smart grid international re­
search facility network activities”. eng. In: Energies 13.12 (2020), p. 3267. ISSN:
19961073. DOI: 10.3390/en13123267.
[15]
Steffen Vogel et al. “Distributed Power Hardware­in­the­Loop Testing Using a Grid­
Forming Converter as Power Interface”. eng. In: Energies 13.15 (2020), p. 3770.
ISSN: 19961073. DOI: 10.3390/en13153770.
[16]
Nicklas Scheel. “Hardware­in­the­loop testing of POTT scheme based on IEC61850­
9­2 in renewable power systems, Hardware­in­the­loop testing af POTT skema
baseret pa IEC61850­9­2 i vedvarende energisystemer”. und. 2024.
[17]
O. Kraft et al. “Geographically Distributed Power­Hardware­in­the­Loop Coupling of
a Physical Low Voltage Grid and a Real Time Simulation”. eng. In: 9th International
Conference, Integration of Renewable & Distributed Energy Resources, Adelaide,
Australia, 24/10/2022 (2022).
[18]
X. Gao et al. “A Comparative Study of Grid­Following and Grid­Forming Control
Schemes in Power Electronic­Based Power Systems”. In: Power Electronics and
Drives 8.1 (2023), pp. 1–20.
[19]
R. Rosso et al. “Grid­Forming Converters: Control Approaches, Grid­Synchronization,
and Future Trends—A Review”. In: IEEE Open Journal of Industry Applications
(2021), pp. 93–109.
[20]
J. Fang et al. “Distributed Power System Virtual Impedance Implemented by Grid­
Connected Power Converters”. In: IEEE Transactions on Power Electronics 33.10
(2018), pp. 8488–8499.
[21]
IEEE Standards Association. IEEE Std 1204­1997: IEEE Guide for Fault Clearing
Time of Phase­to­Ground Faults on Shunt Reactor Banks. https://standards.ieee.
org/standard/1204-1997.html. IEEE Standard. 1997.
[22]
RTDS Input and Output Tutorial. Available through RSCAD software help section.
RTDS Technologies.
[23]
Gerard Burjalès del Amo. Introduction to Real­Time Simulation and Hardware­in­
the­Loop with RSCAD. 2025.
[24]
PAS series of 4­Quadrant Amplifiers. Technical data sheet SPS­TD­PAS­Overview­
e­0001. Spitzenberger & Spies GmbH & Co. KG, 2013.
[25]
S. Ziegler et al. “Current Sensing Techniques: A Review”. In: IEEE Sensors Journal
9.4 (2009), pp. 354–376.
[26]
Q. Song et al. “Intelligent Closed­Loop Fluxgate Current Sensor Using Digital PID
Control with Single­Neuron Pre­Optimization”. In: Signals 6.2 (2025), p. 14. DOI:
10.3390/signals6020014.
[27]
Danisense. Product User Manual v1.5. Available upon request or via authorized
distribution channels. 2023.
[28]
RTDS Technologies. GTIO Cards. 2025. URL: https://knowledge.rtds.com/hc/en-
us/article_attachments/12728010319639.
[29]
MathWorks. Design and Analyze Grid­Forming Converter. Accessed: Jul. 29, 2025.
The MathWorks, Inc. 2023. URL: https://se.mathworks.com/help/sps/ug/design-
analyze-gridforming-converter.html (visited on 07/29/2025).
[30]
A. K. Adapa and V. C. John. “Virtual resistor based active damping of LC filter in
standalone voltage source inverter”. In: Proc. APEC. 2018, pp. 1834–1840.
[31]
P. A. Dahono et al. “Damping of transient oscillations on output LC filter of PWM
inverters by using a virtual resistor”. In: Proc. IECON. 2018, pp. 403–407.
58
Power hardware in the loop (PHIL) of inverter based renewable systems (IBRs)
==PAGE:65==
[32]
M. Chen, D. Zhou, and F. Blaabjerg. “Modelling, Implementation, and Assessment
of Virtual Synchronous Generator Power Systems”. In: Journal of Modern Power
Systems and Clean Energy 8.3 (2020), pp. 399–411.
[33]
X. Wang, M. G. Taul, et al. “Grid­Synchronization Stability of Converter­Based Resources—
An Overview”. In: IEEE Open Journal of Industry Applications. 2022, pp. 115–134.
[34]
D. Dong et al. “Analysis of Phase­Locked Loop Low­Frequency Stability in Three­
Phase Grid­Connected Power Converters Considering Impedance Interactions”. In:
IEEE Trans. Power Electronics 30.1 (2015), pp. 310–321.
Power hardware in the loop (PHIL) of inverter based renewable systems (IBRs)
59
==PAGE:66==
60
Power hardware in the loop (PHIL) of inverter based renewable systems (IBRs)
==PAGE:67==
A
Transfer function Matlab script
This section contains the Matlab script used in Section 6.3 to analyze the control.
1
2
% Rate limiter
3
rate_max
= 500;
%
A/s
(± 500 A per second)
4
Iref_amp
= 10*sqrt(2);
%
A
step of 10 A considering peak
5
% Test signal
6
f_test
= 50;
%
Hz
grid freq.
7
% Sensor bias
8
offset
= 2e-3;
%
A
offset to test filter
9
% Simulation grid
10
Ts
= 1e-5;
%
10 µs time step
11
t_end
= 100/f_test + Iref_amp/rate_max;
% sumulatio time
12
t
= 0:Ts:t_end;
13
14
%CONTINUOUS -TIME LOOP
15
16
s
= tf('s');
17
Yp = (s*L + (Rpl+Rload)) / (Rpl*s*L + Rpl*Rload);
% plant admittance
18
C
= Ka*Kp*(1 + 1/(Ti*s));
% PI control
19
T
= feedback(C*Yp,1000);
% Isense / Icmd
20
21
% Transfers from offset
22
Toffset = -T;
% effect of bias on REAL current
23
Tmeas
= 1 - T;
% effect of bias on MEASURED current (= Isense+
offset)
24
25
% BUILD THE RATE-LIMITED REFERENCE
26
27
T_ramp = Iref_amp / rate_max;
% seconds needed to reach full amp
28
env
= min(t/T_ramp, 1);
% 0 to 1 linear ramp, then flat
29
30
Icmd
= env .* ( Iref_amp * sin(2*pi*f_test*t) );
% limited sine
31
Ioff
= offset * ones(size(t));
% bias vector
32
33
T_ramp2 = Iref_amp / 520;
% seconds needed to reach full amp
34
env
= min(t/T_ramp2 , 1);
% 0 to 1 linear ramp, then flat
35
36
Icmd2
= env .* ( Iref_amp * sin(2*pi*f_test*t) );
% limited sine
37
38
% LINEAR -SYSTEM SIMULATION
39
40
41
Isense = lsim(T, Icmd+Ioff, t);
% due to bias
42
Imeas
= Isense + offset;
% what the ADC feeds back
43
Irtds
= lsim(T, Icmd2+Ioff, t);
44
45
46
% PLOTS
47
48
figure
49
yyaxis left
50
plot(t, Icmd, '--', 'LineWidth', 1.2, 'Color', [0 0.4470 0.7410])
51
hold on
52
plot(t, Isense*1000, 'LineWidth', 1.4, 'Color', [0.8500 0.3250 0.0980])
53
plot(t, Imeas*1000, ':', 'LineWidth', 1.2, 'Color', [0.4660 0.6740 0.1880])
Power hardware in the loop (PHIL) of inverter based renewable systems (IBRs)
61
==PAGE:68==
54
plot(t+0.0002, Irtds*1000, ':', 'LineWidth', 1.2, 'Color', [0.4660 0.6740
0.880])
55
ylabel('Currents
(A)')
56
xlim([0 0.15]);
57
58
grid on, xlabel('Time (s)')
59
title('50 Hz sine with 500 A/s ‑ramplimit and 0.05 A sensor offset')
60
legend('Icmd','Isense','Imeas','Irtds','Location','best')
61
62
T = table(t(:), Icmd(:), Isense(:)*1000, Imeas(:)*1000, Irtds(:)*1000, ...
63
'VariableNames', {'t','Icmd','Isense','Imeas','Irtds'});
64
writetable(T, 'signals.csv');
Listing A.1: Simulation script
62
Power hardware in the loop (PHIL) of inverter based renewable systems (IBRs)
==PAGE:69==
Power hardware in the loop (PHIL) of inverter based renewable systems (IBRs)
63
==PAGE:70==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Systems Frederiksborgvej 399
4000 Roskilde, Denmark
www.wind.dtu.dk
