==PAGE:1==
Master Thesis
Integrated Theoretical and Experimental Study of Na+ Diffusivity in
Prussian Blue Cathodes: Influence of Water Content and State of
Charge
by
Georgios Trovas
August 2025
==PAGE:2==
MSc Thesis - s230156
PREFACE
This thesis was prepared over a period of six months at the Department of Energy Conversion
and Storage at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU). The project commenced on February
3, 2025, and was completed on August 3, 2025. This work is submitted in partial fulfillment of the
requirements for the degree of Master of Science in Sustainable Energy within the study line of
Energy Conversion and Storage.
Georgios Trovas - s230156
03.08.2025
i
==PAGE:3==
MSc Thesis - s230156
ABSTRACT
This MSc thesis presents an integrated theoretical and experimental study on the diffusivity of
sodium ion (𝑁𝑎+) in Prussian Blue (PB) cathodes, examining the influence of water content and
state of charge (SOC). The research combines computational modeling and laboratory experi-
ments to understand the underlying trends in the 𝑁𝑎+ diffusion process within the bulk cathode
material.
In the theoretical section, Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) are used to develop a Machine Learn-
ing Force Field (ML-FF) that will accurately predict the materials properties. The ML-FF is trained
on a dataset of 33 PB structures, each with varying concentrations of sodium and water. Long-
range molecular dynamics simulations are then conducted to compute the Diffusion Coefficient
and Mean Square Displacement (MSD) for the different PB structures at high temperatures. The
resulting Diffusion Coefficients are finally extrapolated to 300 K.
The experimental part of the study involves fabricating half-cells with Prussian Blue cathodes.
Vacuum drying routines are employed to investigate different hydration levels of the cathode. The
cells are subjected to Galvanostatic Cycling with Potential Limitation (GCPL) to ensure they are
operational and to determine their specific capacity. Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy
(EIS) measurements are then performed at various states of charge to extract the ion diffusion
coefficients.
Results of the two methods yield different values, with the experimental ones being in the range
of literature expected values. The water content balance towards enhancing or hindering the
ion diffusion process, is shown to be highly sensitive to the sodiation of the material. Thus an
intricate relationship between diffusivity, water content and sodium content is determined.
ii
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
MSc Thesis - s230156
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Completing this thesis would not have been possible without the contributions of several people,
and I am deeply grateful for their support.
First and foremost, I would like to extend my sincere thanks to my supervisors. To Juan Maria
Garcia Lastra (Professor, Head of Section, Atomic Scale Materials Modeling, DTU Energy) and
William Sandholt Hansen (PhD student, DTU Energy) for the valuable insights they provided me
into the field of computational materials modeling. Their feedback and advice were crucial to the
theoretical foundation of this work. To Domenico Battaglia (Postdoc, DTU Energy) for his ex-
ceptional support and guidance in the experimental phase of this project. His practical expertise
was instrumental in overcoming numerous challenges.
I would also like to extend my gratitude to Chiku Parida (PhD student,DTU Energy) for his timely
advice. His perspective was insightful and helped steer my research in a more productive direc-
tion during a critical moment.
Finally, this thesis would not have been possible without the support of my family and friends.
To my family, thank you for your constant encouragement and for always believing in me. Your
support made all the difference. To my friends, thank you for making the past few months en-
joyable and for providing a much needed escape from the demands of my research.
I hope this work offers meaningful insight into the material under study and serves as a useful
contribution to the field of material research.
iv
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
MSc Thesis - s230156
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Contents
Preface
i
Abstract
ii
Acknowledgements
iv
Table of Contents
vi
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Sodium Ion Batteries (SIB)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Prussian Blue Analogues (PBA) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Objective . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Theoretical Investigation
4
2.1
Dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.1
Structure Geometry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.2
Refinement
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.3
Stability
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Ab initio DFT
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2.1
Structural relaxation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2.2
Single Point Calculation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Machine Learning in atomistic simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3.1
Message Passing Neural Networks (MPNNs) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3.2
MACE architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3.3
CURATOR active learning workflow
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.4
𝑁𝑎+ Diffusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.4.1
Arrhenius relationship . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3
Experimental Investigation
15
3.1
Coin cell fabrication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.1.1
Cathode . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.1.2
Electrolyte . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.1.3
Anode . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.1.4
Assembly
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2
Thermogravimetric Analysis (TGA) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
Page vi of 43
==PAGE:8==
MSc Thesis - s230156
3.3
Galvanostatic Cycling with Potential Limitation (G.C.P.L) . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.4
Battery SOC and Na+ SOC
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.5
Electrochemical Impendance Spectroscopy (EIS) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.5.1
Nyquist Plots
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.5.2
Equivalent Circuit Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.5.3
Impendance Z-fitting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4
Results & Discussion
23
4.1
Theoretical Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.1.1
MACE training
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.1.2
MACE Molecular Dynamics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.1.3
Mean Square Displacement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.1.4
Diffusion Coefficients at 300 K . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.2
Experimental Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.2.1
Impendance Spectra Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.2.2
Diffusion Coefficient Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.3
Comparative Analysis & Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5
Conclusion and Future Work
35
5.1
Future Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
References
36
Appendix
40
A Theoretical part
40
B
Experimental Part
43
vii
==PAGE:9==
MSc Thesis - s230156
1
INTRODUCTION
Battery energy storage, whether for electric vehicles (EVs) or large-scale stationary applications,
is crucial for achieving the UN Sustainable Development Goal for Affordable and Clean Energy.
Rechargeable lithium-based batteries (LIBs) have dominated the market in recent decades, pri-
marily due to lithium’s natural abundance and its favorable electrochemical properties when
combined with materials like 𝑁𝑖, 𝐶𝑜, 𝑀𝑛and others. However, cathode replacements for 𝐿𝑖are
now under active investigation to address environmental and human labor concerns associated
with the mining practices of LIB constituent metals [1]. Furthermore, critical issues within the
LIB industry’s supply chain and the ever-growing peak electricity demand are compelling rea-
sons to diversify battery storage chemistries and solutions [2].
Alkali metal sodium (𝑁𝑎) is on the epicenter of the 𝐿𝑖and 𝐶𝑜free research. It shares same prop-
erties with 𝐿𝑖, it is abundant, has a lower market price than 𝐿𝑖and the practices used during the
mining process have smaller environmental footprint [3].
1.1
Sodium Ion Batteries (SIB)
Sodium based batteries (SIB) operate under the same LIB mechanism where, instead of 𝐿𝑖, 𝑁𝑎
ions are exchanged between the anode and cathode during charge and discharge cycles [4]. They
can offer high safety standards and scalability due to sodium abundance, although they lack in
terms of energy density and capacity retention during cycling compared to the LIB ones. This is
attributed to the bigger ionic radius of 𝑁𝑎(1.02 vs. 0.76 Å) [5] that can induce mechanical stress
and lead to microcracks during the intercalation. The ion radius size difference also significantly
affects migration kinetics within the cathode material. Consequently, the energy barriers for
ion migration within the crystal structure are higher, resulting in lower diffusion coefficients for
sodium ions. Despite these drawbacks, significant advancements in electrode materials such as
layered oxides, polyionic compounds and Prussian blue analogue cathodes, are rapidly improving
their performance. Research is also focused on optimizing electrolytes to overcome challenges
like dendrite formation and achieve longer cycle life. The scalability of sodium resources makes
SIBs particularly attractive for grid applications such as balancing, frequency regulation and peak
shaving, where large-scale battery energy storage systems (BESS) are needed and energy density
can be compromised for cost and safety.
Focus of this MSc thesis will be a classification of sodium based materials, called Prussian Blue
Analogues (PBA) type compounds, which are an emerging alternative to Li-based battery cath-
odes.
1.2
Prussian Blue Analogues (PBA)
Prussian Blue Analogues (PBA) crystal compounds follow the generic chemical formula:
𝐴𝑥𝑀𝑦[𝑀(𝐶𝑁)6]𝑧
(1.1)
𝐴is usually an alkali metal and 𝑀are transition metals [6]. In this investigation the alkali metal
will be sodium - 𝑁𝑎and the transition metals will be iron - 𝐹𝑒ions. Thus the general formula of
Page 1 of 43
==PAGE:10==
MSc Thesis - s230156
the material under investigation will be:
𝑁𝑎𝑥𝐹𝑒[𝐹𝑒(𝐶𝑁)6]1−𝑦· (𝐻2𝑂)𝑧
(1.2)
The term : ·(𝐻2𝑂)𝑧, expresses the hydration level of the structure.
The ideal Prussian Blue structure is a face centered cubic one where 𝐹𝑒centers are split into high
spin (Fe-III) and low spin (Fe-II), octahedrally coordinated and linked by cyanide (C-N) ligands.
Iron’s ability to transfer electrons between Fe(II) and Fe(III) drives the electrochemical behavior
of these materials. The 𝑥value for 𝑁𝑎can vary from 0 to 2 with respect to the State of Charge,
as ions are inserted or removed from the structure. The presence of numerous interstitial sites
facilitates 𝑁𝑎+ diffusion and leads to a rich sodium storage capacity, which contributes to high
specific capacity and improved energy density. The fully sodiated form is commonly known as
Prussian White and occurs during battery discharge, while the fully desodiated also known as
Berlin Green occurs during battery charge. The transformation of the cathode material during
the charge/discharge process is showcased in Figure 1.1. Water content is not included in this
illustration.
Figure 1.1: Redox cycle and lattice transformation of Prussian Blue Analogues [7]
The addition of Na ions can cause a lattice distortion and consequently a structural transformation
of the Prussian Blue from the cubic to the rhombohedral phase. This is also expected by the
removal of water from the structure [7].
Water can be present as interstitial, surface adsorbed or coordinated [8]. The amount of water
heavily influences the materials effectiveness as cathode. According to literature [9], PBA synthe-
sis with low water content as well as high Na+ content is expected to increase the electrochemical
performance of the compound. Thus the thermal dehydration of the material is crucial to release
water molecules coordinated to 𝐹𝑒and 𝑁𝑎cations. However water presence is documented to
prevent abrupt cell volume changes during Na+ insertion/removal [10].
The specific PBA type under investigation will be:
𝑁𝑎2𝐹𝑒[𝐹𝑒(𝐶𝑁)6]
(1.3)
with a stoichiometric ratio 1:1 of ferric to ferrous ions [11]. Water presence is ignored in the
formula, however it’s part of the structure. Equation 1.3 is essentially Prussian White since it’s
in the fully sodiated form. It yields a high theoretical capacity of 170 𝑚𝐴ℎ/𝑔and a theoretical
voltage plateau in the range of 2.8 V to 3.3 V.
Page 2 of 43
==PAGE:11==
MSc Thesis - s230156
The 𝑁𝑎+ diffusion into the bulk material structure is documented to be facilitated by the abun-
dance on interstitial sites and impeded by the abundance of water or vacant sites [12]. While it’s
theorized that water occupies the same sites with sodium, the vacant sites potentially alter and
inhibit the ionic diffusion pathways[13].
1.3
Objective
This project will theoretically and experimentally explore how both water content and the con-
centration of sodium (state of charge) impact the movement of 𝑁𝑎+ ions inside the Prussian Blue
material.
The results of both parts will be analyzed and if possible compared against each other. Goal is to
uncover underlying trends behind the effects of water and sodium content in the diffusion pro-
cess. This way a better understanding of the Na+ diffusion in the bulk cathode material will be
developed, which could lead to important improvements on the material fabrication techniques
and specifications for use in battery cells.
1.4
Outline
This thesis embarks on an investigation of 𝑁𝑎ion diffusivity in Prussian Blue cathodes and is
arranged in 5 chapters. A short sum-up of each chapter follows:
• Introduction: Current chapter, that introduces the system under investigation, establishes
the current state of research and sets the stage for the subsequent methodologies.
• Theoretical Investigation : Analyzes GNN theory used for atomistic material calculations.
Introduces the Machine Learning model that will be used for the generation of Interatomic
Potentials and establishes the basic theory behind ion diffusion.
• Experimental Investigation : Analyzes the fabrication processes of the PB coin cells, the
characterization techniques used for the cathode powder and testing methods for the PB
cells.
• Results & Discussion : Presents and analyzes the findings of both approaches. Investigates
possible trends and correlations in the Na+ diffusion behavior. Compares the two parts.
• Conclusion & Future Work : Summarizes key contributions and proposes avenues for fur-
ther research.
Page 3 of 43
==PAGE:12==
MSc Thesis - s230156
2
THEORETICAL INVESTIGATION
2.1
Dataset
The computational part is relying on a training and validation dataset of 39277 structures,
generated from ab initio quantum mechanical methods. The biggest part of them, almost
80%, is a database that’s the laboratory’s property, stemming from older DFT experiments
and consists of PB trajectories produced via molecular dynamics simulations. The 15% con-
sists of frames that are structurally relaxed using the Vienna Ab Initio Simulation Package
(VASP). A final 5% is added during the implementation of the Curator active learning work-
flow, utilizing again VASP, this time for single point calculations.
2.1.1
Structure Geometry
The initial PB structures are based on an expanded version (supercell) of the "colloidal" PB
cubic cell. This supercell contains 8 𝐹𝑒, 24 𝐶and 24 𝑁atoms, with a 1:1 ratio of ferric to
ferrous ions [14]. Figure 2.1 depicts the initial dataset for the experiment, categorizing the
structures by their 𝑁𝑎and 𝐻2𝑂content, comprising of 33 different geometries, with the
quantity of each indicated by the bar colors. The average number of atoms per structure is
78, with the structures containing 7 𝑁𝑎atoms and 10 𝐻2𝑂molecules being the most densely
populated, i.e 93 atoms, while the fully desodiated structures with just 2 𝐻2𝑂molecules be-
ing the lightest populated with 62 atoms.
Figure 2.1: Dataset
Page 4 of 43
==PAGE:13==
MSc Thesis - s230156
2.1.2
Refinement
Prior to inclusion in the final ML training batch (39277 trajectories), each structure within
the dataset underwent revision to discard "outliers," particularly those exhibiting extremely
high interatomic forces. To lessen their impact on ML training, structures where the maxi-
mum force on any atom went above 25 𝑒𝑉/Å we discarded . This threshold was set empir-
ically, based on prior experience with MLFFs. The histograms of Total Energy and Inter-
atomic Forces across the dataset are illustrated in Figure 2.2. The mean interatomic force is
1.86 𝑒𝑉/Å, while the total energy spans in a range between -450 𝑒𝑉to -610 𝑒𝑉for the dif-
ferent structures. The structure containing 7 𝑁𝑎atoms and 10 𝐻2𝑂molecules is the most
stable one, while the one with no 𝑁𝑎atoms and 2 𝐻2𝑂molecules generates the highest
energy value of the dataset.
(a) Total Energy per structure
(b) Interatomic Forces
Figure 2.2: Distribution of Energies and Forces in the dataset
2.1.3
Stability
Extensive molecular dynamics simulations were conducted with the MACE package, em-
ploying the trained MLFF model. These nanosecond-scale MD simulations were performed
at elevated temperatures of 1000 K, 700 K and 500 K. This approach significantly boosts ion
mobility, enabling the generation of reliable results in relatively short simulation times.
It’s important to note that Prussian Blue (PB) typically undergoes thermal decomposition
above 650 K.[15]. Given this, a critical assumption in the study is that a hypothetically
stable Prussian Blue-like structure, that does not decompose at these high temperatures, is
being simulated.
2.2
Ab initio DFT
2.2.1
Structural relaxation
As aforementioned a part of the initial dataset consists of structures that were "relaxed".
Structural relaxation identifies the minimum energy state of each structure, i.e the one
Page 5 of 43
==PAGE:14==
MSc Thesis - s230156
that corresponds to the most stable electron arrangement. This procedure is crucial for
the quantum mechanical prediction of the material properties at an atomic and molecular
scale.
The relaxation is performed using Density Functional Theory (DFT), specifically imple-
mented with the Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package (VASP). VASP approximates the
many-body Schrodinger equation:
ˆ𝐻Ψ(𝑟𝑖, 𝑅𝑗) = 𝐸Ψ(𝑟𝑖, 𝑅𝑗)
(2.1)
Here ˆ𝐻represents the systems Hamiltonian operator, E the total energy of the system and
Ψ denotes the systems wave functions. The terms 𝑟𝑖and 𝑅𝑗refer to the coordinates of the
electrons and atomic nuclei respectively.
Under the Born-Oppenheimer adiabatic approximation, the atomic nuclei coordinates, 𝑅𝑗
are considered fixed and focus is solely on the dynamic coordinates of the electrons𝑟𝑖. How-
ever, for a system of 𝑁𝑛electrons, equation (2.1) involves 3(𝑁𝑛) coordinates, which deem
the problem extremely difficult to solve. To overcome this, VASP utilizes the Hohenberg-
Kohn theorem [16], which states that the systems total energy is a unique functional of the
electron density 𝜌:
𝐸(𝜌) = 𝑇𝑠(𝜌) + 𝐸𝐻(𝜌) + 𝐸𝑋𝐶(𝜌) + 𝐸𝑍(𝜌)
(2.2)
,where 𝑇𝑠is the Kohn-Sham electron kinetic energy, 𝐸𝐻the electron-electron repulsion
(Hartree term), 𝐸𝑍the external potential term arising from nuclei-electron attraction and
𝐸𝑋𝐶the exchange correlation energy from quantum interactions. 𝐸𝑋𝐶, the only unknown
term, is approximated using the PBE functional. By focusing on 𝜌rather than each electrons
position, a much simpler 3 coordinate problem is generated.
Varying the total energy w.r.t a set of orbitals the Kohn-Sham potential 𝑈𝑒𝑓𝑓is obtained.
Adding that to the Kohn-Sham kinetic potential term and multiplying with the orbital𝜓(𝑖),
the Kohn-Sham equation is derived:
[−ℏ2
2𝑚∇2 + 𝑈𝑒𝑓𝑓(𝑟)] ∗𝜓𝑖(𝑟) = 𝜖𝑖∗𝜓𝑖(𝑟)
(2.3)
Here, ℏis the reduced Planck constant, 𝑚is the electron mass, and 𝜖𝑖are the eigenvalues
corresponding to the orbitals. Assuming an initial electron density:
𝜌(𝑟) =
𝑁𝑛
∑︁
𝑖=1
|𝜓𝑖(𝑟)|2
(2.4)
Equation 2.3 is solved iteratively, until the values converge within a prescribed tolerance,
"ediffg", known as the ionic convergence criterion. The procedure is also terminated when
the maximum number of ionic steps, "nsw" is reached. This self consistency cyclic proce-
dure computes the total minimum energy and its corresponding electron density [17].
Table 2.1 indicates the values of the most important parameters of VASP in the INCAR file.
nsw
ediff
xc
ediffg
isif
1000
1e-05
PBE
-0.03
2
Table 2.1: VASP structural relaxation parameters
Page 6 of 43
==PAGE:15==
MSc Thesis - s230156
2.2.2
Single Point Calculation
Seeking to enhance and diversify the initial dataset, 1800 more structures were incorpo-
rated, generated as part of the Curator active learning workflow (analyzed later). These
additions were carefully distributed to ensure equal representation across all 33 input ge-
ometries. VASP was leveraged once again, to determine the electronic structure and total
energy of each system at a fixed atomic geometry. No ionic steps were considered and
the SCF (self-consistency field) calculation was solely driven by an electronic convergence
criterion. The calculation was deemed converged once the total energy difference between
two successive electronic steps fell below a specified threshold "ediff". Refer to Table 2.2
for the key VASP parameters.
nsw
ediff
xc
ediffg
isif
0
1e-05
PBE
no effect
no effect
Table 2.2: VASP single point calculation parameters
The full parameter sets for both VASP codes can be found in Appendix A.
2.3
Machine Learning in atomistic simulations
The advent of machine learning (ML) in atomistic simulations, has revolutionized the field
by enabling the development of highly accurate yet computationally efficient force fields.
These "machine learning force fields" (MLFFs) are trained on data from computationally ex-
pensive quantum mechanical calculations, to efficiently approximate the Potential Energy
Surface (PES) of atomistic systems, as indicated in Figure 2.3. They achieve that, simulta-
neously combining:
– Accuracy: Results nearing the highly accurate ab initio calculations.
– Scalability: Rapid simulations of much larger systems and over longer timescales.
This has dramatically expanded the scope of atomistic simulations, facilitating the efficient
molecular dynamic exploration of systems for materials discovery and drug design [18].
Figure 2.3: ML PES prediction in atomistic simulations
This project aims to predict material properties such as the potential energy and the inter-
atomic forces of molecular atoms.
Page 7 of 43
==PAGE:16==
MSc Thesis - s230156
Nevertheless, the most significant hurdle in creating machine learning models for molecu-
lar structures was the selection and computation of their descriptors. Luckily, the invention
of Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) simplified this process.
2.3.1
Message Passing Neural Networks (MPNNs)
Message Passing Neural Networks (MPNNs), a subclass of GNNs, take graphs as inputs,
utilizing the fundamental operation mechanics of GNNs. Graphs are undirected data struc-
tures that consist of nodes 𝑋connected by edges 𝐸. Each node and edge input is accompa-
nied by a feature vector 𝑥𝑖and 𝑒𝑖𝑗respectively, which encapsulate the amount of inherent
properties and information for every graph element. Applying this concept to molecular
structures is incredibly intuitive and convenient. In this context, each node becomes an
atom, and each edge signifies the relationship between neighboring atoms and their fea-
ture vectors derive from ab initio calculations. [19].
Phases
MPNNs workflow is split into the message passing phase and readout phase and their inno-
vation is the architecture, where each node/edge is updated through message passing with
its neighbors. The message passing phase, achieved in several steps known as message
passing layers𝑇, ensures that after the step completion each node will contain information
of all the neighboring/target nodes within a specified distance, known as cut-off radius.
This phase is defined by two functions. The message function 𝑀𝑡and the update function
𝑈𝑡.[20]
𝑚𝑡+1
𝑖
=
∑︁
𝑗∈𝑁(𝑖)
𝑀𝑡

ℎ𝑡
𝑖,ℎ𝑡
𝑗,𝑒𝑖𝑗

(2.5)
ℎ𝑡+1
𝑖
= 𝑈𝑡
 ℎ𝑡
𝑖,𝑚𝑡+1
𝑖

(2.6)
As indicated in (2.5) and (2.6) and Figure 2.4, the hidden layer vector ℎ𝑡+1
𝑖
of the source
node is updated with a message vector 𝑚𝑡+1
𝑖
, that contains information about the former
hidden layer vector of the source nodeℎ𝑡
𝑖, the target node vectorℎ𝑡
𝑗as well as the relation𝑒𝑖𝑗
between them. The sum over 𝑁(𝑖) assures that all neighbor nodes of 𝑖provide information.
The cyclic procedure is over after 𝑇message passing steps.
MPPNs output graph level, node level or edge level information. The most typical graph
level output in molecular systems and pertinent to this study, is the total energy, while the
most common node level output are the forces experienced by each individual atom of the
system. In the case of a graph level output the readout phase is employed, that transforms
and aggregates information of the whole graph into a feature vector, using the readout
function 𝑅. 𝑅iterates through all the nodes 𝑣of the graph during the final message passing
layer:
ℎ𝐺= 𝑅

ℎ𝑇
𝑖| 𝑖∈𝐺
	
.
(2.7)
The readout function can be a sum,mean or maximum and give a single vector ℎ𝐺, which
is a numerical representation of the entire graph.
Page 8 of 43
==PAGE:17==
MSc Thesis - s230156
Figure 2.4: MPNN architecture phases [19]
It is common that weights are implemented during the message passing and readout phases
of a MPNN. These weights quantify the influence or importance of interaction a node has
on its neighbors and, consequently, on the representations of nodes in subsequent layers.
They are often learnable parameters, i.e. they learn what aspects of a neighboring node’s
and the connecting edge’s features are relevant for forming a message.
Hyperparameters
Apart from trainable parameters, a MPNN consists of specific non trainable parameters,
that are decided before training. Their main function is to tune the model and enhance its
generalizability to diverse and unseen datasets [21]. These, known as hyperparameters can
be split into two distinct groups:
– The ones that affect the model composition (i.e. type of NN architecure, type of ker-
nel).
– The ones that affect the training of the model (i.e. number of hidden layers, learning
rate, number of epochs,batch size, weight initialization).
Invariance - Equivariance
A crucial topic of consideration when applying MPNN to molecular structures is the accu-
rate replication of the governing conservation laws as well as the inherent symmetries of
the structure in the model [21]. Invariance and equivariance are mathematical properties
that deep learning models, especially MPNNs, aim to satisfy to respect these underlying
symmetries.
Invariance means that the output of a function remains unchanged under certain trans-
formations of its input. Equivariance means that if the input is transformed, the output
transforms in a predictable and consistent way, which is particularly important for vector
or tensor properties. In the context of MPNN for molecular structures, these expressions
primarily refer to permutation, rotation and translation.
Permutation refers to the rearrangement of the order of atoms as nodes in the graph. Holis-
tic properties like the total energy shouldn’t be affected by that, since they’re dependent
on the relative distances between the atoms.
Page 9 of 43
==PAGE:18==
MSc Thesis - s230156
Rotation and translation refer to the rotation or movement of atoms and molecules in 3D
space respectively. Since vectorial atomic properties like forces and dipole moments are
affected by these transformations, it is essential that an efficiently descriptive and accurate
MPNN is equivariant to them [22].
The model developed in this project will be trained on the dataset’s pool of energies and
interatomic forces. It’s important to note that potential energy is a graph-level property
and should remain invariant both to rotation R and translation T:
𝐸(R) = 𝐸(RR + T),
(2.8)
R represents the cartesian coordinates of the atoms. Conversely, the forces (which are
the negative gradients of the potential energy with respect to atomic coordinates) will be
rotationally equivariant and should transform as follows [23].:
𝐹(RR + T) = −∇R𝐸(RR + T) = −R∇R𝐸(R)
(2.9)
2.3.2
MACE architecture
The MPNN model used in the scope of this project is MACE. Developed by Batatia et al. 2022
[24] MACE utilizes equivariant message passing techniques with the distinction of using
high body order interactions. The high body order message passing concerns interactions
of more atoms in each message, as illustrated in Equation 2.10.
𝒎(𝑡)
𝑖
=
∑︁
𝑗
𝒖1

𝜎(𝑡)
𝑖;𝜎(𝑡)
𝑗

+
∑︁
𝑗1,𝑗2
𝒖2

𝜎(𝑡)
𝑖;𝜎(𝑡)
𝑗1 , 𝜎(𝑡)
𝑗2

+· · ·+
∑︁
𝑗1,...,𝑗𝜈
𝒖𝜈

𝜎(𝑡)
𝑖;𝜎(𝑡)
𝑗1 , . . . , 𝜎(𝑡)
𝑗𝜈

, (2.10)
where the message representation of node 𝑖is the sum of contributions of hierarchical
body order terms. Here 𝜎(𝑡)
𝑖
represents the state on node 𝑖in layer 𝑡, 𝑢𝜈are learnable
functions going up to the maximum correlation order 𝜈(body order - 1) and the sums run
over the neighbors 𝑗𝜈of node 𝑖. The construction of high body order polynomial functions
(features) is facilitated by the Atomic Cluster Expansion (ACE) framework, where spherical
harmonics are used to ensure total rotational equivariance of the model [25]. For a more
detailed description of the MACE architecture and the involved functions refer to [24].
The incorporation of high body order terms for the message passing phase between the
hidden layers is proven to enhance the PES prediction [26], since high-order terms capture
more subtle and complex atomic interactions. Beyond that, they offer increased computa-
tional efficiency, reaching the desired accuracy with fewer message passing layers (usually
2) than what PaiNN or NequIP require[27]. The MACE architecture’s training and eval-
uation codes can be found in GitHub under : https://github.com/ACEsuit/
mace/.
Training
The training, as aforementioned, is done for a dataset of 39277 PB structures, comprising
of 33 distinct chemical formulas all of which are assigned the same weight. Goal is to
train the model on energy, atomic force values to later accurately predict these and other
Page 10 of 43
==PAGE:19==
MSc Thesis - s230156
properties . The precise determination of atomic reference energies 𝐸0𝑠for the 6 atoms
(𝐻,𝑂,𝑁,𝐹𝑒,𝐶& 𝑁𝑎) involved in the structure is a crucial prerequisite. Using mismatched
values can induce significant errors. As outlined in the official MACE documentation page
[28] users can either let MACE determine these 𝐸0𝑠as an average from the provided dataset
or compute them as isolated atomic energies using the identical DFT parameters (Appendix
A) that were employed to generate the dataset itself. For systems with mixed electronic
states, such as Prussian Blue, the second approach is recommended. This is confirmed
by investigating both methods, since the first one yielded nonsensical results during the
molecular dynamic simulations that followed the MACE training.
The ADAM optimizer is utilized [29], meaning that a dynamic learning rate is applied, ad-
justing to the complexity of the model. The fraction of the data used for validation purposes
is picked randomly and consists of 5% of the dataset. The size of the model’s ℎ𝑖𝑑𝑑𝑒𝑛𝑖𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑝𝑠
is 128𝑥0𝑒+ 128𝑥1𝑜with 𝑙𝑚𝑎𝑥= 1, meaning that the internal embeddings of the model pass
messages that contain:
– 128 independent scalar (l=0) embeddings with even parity (p=e), which capture in-
variant properties, i.e the energy values.
– 128 independent vector (l=1) embeddings with odd parity (p=o), which capture direc-
tional (rotationally equivariant) properties, i.e the atomic forces.
This size of model features offers a tradeoff between accuracy and speed of training. The
input correlation order is 3, meaning that messages pass up information for up to 4-body
interactions.
The cutoff radius of the model is set to 5 Å and the message passing layers are 2, yielding a
maximum receptive field of 10 Å. Batch size is set to 15 and the dataset is trained over 100
epochs. Stochastic Weight Averaging, 𝑠𝑤𝑎is enabled for the last 20% of epochs, a mode
that aims to reduce energy errors and improve generalization of the model.
The CuEquivariance library is enabled, to accelerate the training of equivariant messages
on the GPU up to 5𝑥times.
Molecular Dynamics
The trained model will be loaded and used as a base for 33, distinct geometry, molecular
dynamic simulations, implemented in the ASE calculator [30]. A brief analysis of the sim-
ulation environment ensues.
Initialization parameters: The simulation for each geometry is initialized by inputting a
random frame trajectory from the initial training dataset. An expanded supercell of (2,2,2)
is created to achieve a tradeoff between accurate modeling of the material properties and
computational cost, while also keeping 3D symmetry w.r.t. the input cell. The benefit
of using supercells combined with PBCs, is the easier simulation of an "infinite" crystal by
replicating the simulation box in 3D space. Atoms at one edge of the box interact with their
images on the opposite edge, removing surface effects and artificial boundaries and allow-
ing for the study of long range phenomena like ion diffusion [31]. The Maxwell-Boltzmann
distribution is used to initialize the velocities. This ensures that the simulation, in a system
under thermal equilibrium, starts in a physically realistic state [32]. Initialization at 1000 K
was attempted firstly and for structures that yielded unreliable results, an initialization at
Page 11 of 43
==PAGE:20==
MSc Thesis - s230156
300 K was implemented later.
Langevin ensemble: A canonical 𝑁𝑉𝑇ensemble is chosen, utilizing a Langevin thermostat
to drive and maintain a stable Temperature throughout the simulation. Langevin equation
implements a small friction term and a fluctuating force to Newton’s second law which is
then integrated numerically. A detailed description of the process can be found at [33].
The choice of friction is critical, since it defines the intensity of coupling to the heat bath.
Bibliography [34] suggests values in the range of 0.001 to 0.01 𝑓𝑠−1.
Simulations are attempted in 500 K, 700 K and 1000 K successively to obtain the material
properties at diverse temperature ranges. The temporal drawbacks of simulating systems
in physiological temperatures make high-T simulations a practical alternative to speed up
simulations. Acquiring properties at various high-T will allow to later infer them to lower
more physically sensible Temperatures. Each simulation will run for 2 nanoseconds, to en-
sure an initial equilibration phase and a stable simulation phase.
When selecting the ideal timestep, the highest vibrational frequencies of the atomic bond
must be taken into consideration [35]. In the examined case the 𝐻−𝑂bonds vibrate
with a period on the order of 10 femtoseconds. A good timestep should be at least 5-10
times smaller than this period, to capture them accurately and ensure stable simulations. A
timestep of 0.5 femtoseconds is decided, taking into account that larger timestep attempts
lead to non physical behavior & unstable simulations while smaller timestep attempts sig-
nificantly speed down the simulations of the examined expanded supercell.
The main parameters are summed up in Table 2.3:
run time [𝑛𝑠]
timestep [𝑓𝑠]
supercell size
Temperature [K]
friction [𝑓𝑠−1]
2
0.5
(2,2,2)
1000/700/500
0.003
Table 2.3: Parameters of NVT Molecular Dynamics Simulation
2.3.3
CURATOR active learning workflow
This chapter will address a problem encountered during the theoretical investigation and
the subsequent method employed to resolve it. During the initial attempt to run MACE
molecular dynamics simulations, all simulations proved highly unstable, ’exploding’ and
generating extremely high, non-physical energy and temperature values within femtosec-
onds from initialization. A first attempt to investigate and tackle this issue focused on
generating more structures for the MACE training, for which purpose the CURATOR ac-
tive learning workflow was utilized.
Briefly, CURATOR consists of four phases iterated into a cyclic active learning loop in order
to generate accurate ML interatomic potentials that predict PES, as illustrated in Figure 2.5.
These four phases include:
– ML training : Three different size PaiNN models are trained on energy and force values
of the dataset.
– Uncertainty Quantification : Short-range MD simulations are run using PaiNN, gen-
erating uncertain structures based on specified thresholds for the force standard de-
viation values between the three PaiNN models.
Page 12 of 43
==PAGE:21==
MSc Thesis - s230156
– Batch selection : Based on the uncertainty quantification, CURATOR employs batch
selection algorithms to choose a batch of the most informative data points. These
indicate where the model’s uncertainty and variance are high.
– Data Labelling and Model Refinement: The selected batch of data points are labelled
and undergo VASP single point static calculation. The newly generated structures are
used to refine and retrain the MLIP models.
A more thorough insight on CURATOR can be found on [27], while the selected hyperpa-
rameters for it’s phases are given in Appendix A.
Figure 2.5: Curator active learning workflow
As aforementioned in the MACE training chapter, the determination of atomic reference
energies 𝐸0𝑠is a crucial starting point and if not executed correctly it can induce significant
errors in the predictions. Initially 𝐸0𝑠were approximated as an average from the provided
dataset values, instead of computing the isolated atomic energies of each constituent ele-
ment of the structures. Upon altering this initialization parameter the molecular dynamics
started providing much more stable and reliable results on the nanosecond scale.
Thus, while the CURATOR experimentation did not resolve the existing problem, it served
as a valuable detour that expanded and diversified the MACE input dataset by 1800 struc-
tures.
2.4
𝑁𝑎+ Diffusion
The trajectories of the molecular dynamic simulations that are stable and reliable, provide
information to directly compute the diffusion coefficient for each specific structure. Tak-
ing into account the number of 𝑁𝑎ions as well as their positions during the simulation
trajectory the mean square displacement (MSD) in 3D space is calculated. MSD quantifies
the speed at which the 𝑁𝑎ion diffusion occurs. It is a microscopic representation of the
diffusion coefficient, i.e as mean squared distance over which a molecule has traveled over
a time interval Δt [34]. It is given by the following formula:
𝑀𝑆𝐷(Δ𝑡) = 1
𝑁
𝑁
∑︁
𝑖=1
< |𝑟𝑖(Δ𝑡) −𝑟𝑖(0)|2 >
(2.11)
Page 13 of 43
==PAGE:22==
MSc Thesis - s230156
where in the examined case N is the number of the Na ions contributing to diffusion, ri(Δt)
express the 3D coordinates and the brackets expresses the time average over multiple time-
frames.
The diffusion coefficient is given according to the Einstein relation for a selected time in-
terval Δt and the dimension 𝑑of space it is investigated in, which in this case is the 3D
space.
𝐷𝑁𝑎+(Δ𝑡) = 𝑀𝑆𝐷(Δ𝑡)
2𝑑Δ𝑡
(2.12)
To accurately capture the long-time MSD slope, a sufficient number of uniformly saved
frames on the molecular dynamics trajectory file is necessary, with a minimum of 1,000
generally recommended to balance data fidelity with simulation efficiency, as suggested by
[36]. This investigation’s simulations, conducted for 2 nanoseconds with a 0.5 femtosec-
ond timestep, saved frames every 100 femtoseconds, thus providing a robust dataset well
exceeding the suggested lower limit for reliable MSD calculation. Out of the 2 nanoseconds
of simulation time the first half is discarded, since it’s considered to be the equilibration
step and the second half is used to compute the MSD and the corresponding 𝐷𝑁𝑎+.
2.4.1
Arrhenius relationship
The diffusion of ions in crystalline solids is usually either interstitial or vacancy diffusion,
depending on the type of sites that the diffusion species occupy [37]. The coefficient of dif-
fusive ions into solid material is well described by the Arrhenius relationship. This empiri-
cal relationship is widely used to model the Temperature variation of diffusion coefficients
and is given by the following formula:
𝐷𝑁𝑎+ = 𝐷0 exp

−𝐸𝑎
𝑅𝑇

(2.13)
𝐷is the diffusion coefficient, 𝐷0 is the frequency factor , 𝐸𝑎is the activation energy i.e. the
energy barrier a 𝑁𝑎+ has to overcome to move from one interstitial site to another, 𝑅is the
universal gas constant and 𝑇is the absolute temperature in Kelvin.
Plotting the natural logarithm of the Diffusion Coefficient against the reverse of Temper-
ature, the so-called Arrhenius plot is created. This plot describes an inversely propor-
tional relationship between Temperature and Diffusion Coefficient and gives a straight
line through which the 𝐷0 and 𝐸𝑎constants are determined. Since in that project the dif-
fusion coefficient is calculated for higher Temperatures, this relationship and plot will be
employed to extrapolate the 𝐷𝑁𝑎+ to 300 K. Critical assumption is the linear relationship
that the 𝐷𝑁𝑎+ will have with respect to Temperature changes, i.e. assuming that the same
diffusion mechanism is dominant regardless of Temperature variation.
Page 14 of 43
==PAGE:23==
MSc Thesis - s230156
3
EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION
The experimental investigation revolves around the fabrication of full coin cells utilizing
Prussian Blue as the cathode material. Three distinct cathode drying techniques will be
implemented. Operational cells, following Galvanostatic Cycling with Potential Limita-
tion (GCPL) testing, will undergo Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy (EIS) measure-
ments. The application of EIS during cell cycling aims to derive ion diffusion coefficients
at various states of charge (SOC), thereby evaluating the effect of 𝐻2𝑂and 𝑁𝑎content on
the 𝑁𝑎+ diffusion process within the cathode.
3.1
Coin cell fabrication
The battery coin cell fabrication consists of the main stages of cathode fabrication, elec-
trolyte fabrication, anode cutting and full cell assembly. Each stage is analyzed in the fol-
lowing subsections.
3.1.1
Cathode
Slurry Fabrication:
The powder, under the formula 𝑁𝑎1.8−2𝐹𝑒[𝐹𝑒(𝐶𝑁)6] · 2.2(𝐻2𝑂), was bought from Altris
AB, Sweden and labeled as Fennac. This formula when repeated 4 times gives the exact
number of 𝐹𝑒, 𝐶and 𝑁atoms of the structures used in the theoretical part. For better com-
parison with the theoretical formula the upper threshold of 2 Na+ in the Fennac formula is
assumed during the experimental phase.
Fennac is mixed with Carbon Black and PVDF in a mass ratio of 7:2:1, using an NMP sol-
vent to achieve a 20% solid material concentration. The mixture is then left overnight on a
magnetic stirrer to facilitate the homogeneous mixing of the solvent and the solid content.
Carbon Black serves as a conductive additive that enhances Prussian Blue electronic con-
ductivity. PVDF acts as a binder for PB and C-black, offering structural, thermal and elec-
trochemical stability to the cathode as well as better sticking of the components to the
substrate [38]. The goal of ideal mixing is to achieve a balanced trade-off between high
performance and electrochemical conductivity.
Coating & Cutting: The stirred slurry is then coated to form the cathode surface in the tape
casting machine. Aluminum foil with a thin layer of conductive graphene is used as sub-
strate and acts as the current collector. The coating thicknesses are 2 mil (0.0508 mm) and
4 mil (0.1016 mm). After coating, the uncut electrodes are dried in a vacuum oven at 50 ◦C
for 18 hours, where NMP is removed. Consequently, circular cathodes of 15 mm diameter
are cut in a electrode disc cutting machine.
Drying: The final step of the cathode fabrication. Goal is to vary the water content within
the cathodes, in order to investigate possible effects of 𝐻2𝑂content on 𝑁𝑎ion diffusion.
Sample A is not vacuum dried, while two drying routines are applied for the rest in the
Vacuum Drying Glass Oven B-585:
Page 15 of 43
==PAGE:24==
MSc Thesis - s230156
– Sample B: Step drying at 40/80/120 ◦C, for 4 hours each.
– Sample C: 200 ◦C for 12 hours.
Including the undried samples, 3 distinct𝐻2𝑂content cathode batches have been fabricated.
3.1.2
Electrolyte
For the electrolyte fabrication, Sodium hexafluorophosphate 𝑁𝑎𝑃𝐹6, one of the most adopted
electrolyte salts for SIBs [39], is used. Mixed with Propylene Carbonate (PC), that is com-
patible with Na metal anodes, but should be avoided for Hard Carbon anodes, since it can
cause exfoliation. In this case Dimethyl ether (DME) is preferred. A 1M solution of 𝑁𝑎𝑃𝐹6
in Propylene Carbonate (PC) is recommended [40]. Using 20 mL of PC, each time, 0.3427
𝑔of 𝑁𝑎𝑃𝐹6 powder with molar mass of 167.95 𝑔/𝑚𝑜𝑙should be added to achieve a 1 M
solution. A new electrolyte mixture has to be fabricated every once in a while, since it is
observed that it degrades with time. The degradation process is visible by the changing of
the color from transparent to yellow or brown, depending on the extent of degradation.
3.1.3
Anode
𝑁𝑎metal is used to fabricate the anode. This particular anode can prove beneficial when
the primary goal is to maximize the performance and longevity of the cathode, since 𝑁𝑎+
are not lost to irreversible side reactions. On the drawbacks it is highly reactive which can
lead to several degradation processes. However, in battery cell setups commonly known
as half-cell setups, where purpose is to isolate and investigate only one electrode, it serves
it’s purpose.
After removing the oxidized outer layer from the cubic shaped material, it is rolled into a
thin layer in a non reactive Teflon substrate and then cut accordingly to match the cath-
ode’s disc diameter. Since the theoretical specific capacity of 𝑁𝑎metal is approximately
1160 𝑚𝐴ℎ/𝑔[41] the cathode is the limiting electrode of the cell.
Figure 3.1: Schematic representation of the PB coin cell
3.1.4
Assembly
The cell assembly commences with the negative casing, followed by the addition of a plas-
tic outer ring to seal the cell and prevent short-circuiting. Next, a wave spring and a spacer
Page 16 of 43
==PAGE:25==
MSc Thesis - s230156
are introduced before carefully placing the main components: the Na metal anode, the
electrolyte-soaked 18 mm separator, and the Prussian Blue (P.B.) cathode. Finally, the pos-
itive outer casing is added, and the cell is sealed by undergoing 500 kg of pressure in a
hydraulic press for several seconds. Figure 3.1 illustrates a schematic representation of the
cell components.
3.2
Thermogravimetric Analysis (TGA)
Thermogravimetric Analysis (TGA) is a thermal analysis technique that measures the change
in mass of a sample as a function of temperature. The analyzers specifications can be found
under [42]. By measuring weight loss upon heating, TGA aims to quantify the amount of
moisture (𝐻2𝑂content) in the powder samples.
Weighting approximately 10 mg of each sample (undried, dried at 200◦C and dried at 40-80-
120◦C) and placing it in the Netzsch STA 409 PC/PG thermal analyzer, the TGA is set under
inert 𝑁2 gas atmosphere (flow of 50 ml/min) to avoid air oxidation. The measurements ini-
tialize at room Temperature and reach no more than 450◦C to avoid thermal decomposition
[43]. The heating rate is set to 5◦C/min. As the temperature is increased, mass changes are
continuously recorded and the resulting plot of percentage of initial mass versus tempera-
ture (thermogram) is illustrated in Figure 3.2.
Created with NETZSCH Proteus software
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
Temperature /°C
85
90
95
100
105
TG /%
Main    2025-07-24 13:54    User: TA
 
[1] 200_dried.ngb-ssv
TG
[2] 40-80-120_dried.ngb-ssv
TG
[3] undried.ngb-ssv
TG
Mass Change: -11.09 %
Mass Change: -9.13 %
Mass Change: -0.42 %
[1]
[2]
[3]
Figure 3.2: TGA results of the 3 distinct routines
A useful assumption, made to quantitatively approximate the water content in the three
samples, involves defining a threshold temperature for water removal, at which all the wa-
ter present in the structure is fully removed. As depicted in Figure 3.2, a second downward
slope of mass loss appears at 420 ◦C. However, since Prussian Blue (PB) is expected to
have released all its structural water [44] and to start decompose at around 400◦C under
Page 17 of 43
==PAGE:26==
MSc Thesis - s230156
inert atmosphere, this second mass loss is not part of the dehydration [43]. Therefore, the
percentage of water removed from the undried sample represents almost the entire mass
of water (adsorbed, interstitial, and crystallized) that is part of the Altris Fennac formula.
Calculating the mass percentage of water in the initial formula [45] :
Initial 𝐻2𝑂Mass % =
 Molar Mass of 𝐻2𝑂in Fennac formula
Molar Mass of Fennac formula

∗(100%)
(3.1)
it is concluded that𝐻2𝑂comprises 11.21% of the total compound mass. This value is roughly
consistent with the total mass loss of the undried sample, which is 11.09%. Thus, it can be
assumed that the water lost during TGA of the undried sample A accounts for almost the
whole water mass of the initial Fennac formula. Consequently, a greater mass loss during
TGA indicates a higher remaining water content in the sample before the process.
For each sample, the remainder water molecular content is computed as follows:
Remainder 𝐻2𝑂Molecules =
 𝐻2𝑂Mass change % during TGA
Initial 𝐻2𝑂Mass %

∗(2.2),
(3.2)
where the numerator refers to the % mass change values from Figure 3.2, the denominator
to the % mass of 𝐻2𝑂in the initial Fennac formula from Equation 3.2 and the 2.2 multipli-
cation expresses the result in terms of remainder molecular content, indicated in Table 3.1.
Sample
Fennac Formula 𝐻2𝑂content
Undried (A)
2.17
40-80-120◦C dried (B)
1.79
200◦C dried (C)
0.08
Table 3.1: Fennac Remnant 𝐻2𝑂molecules after drying routines
The coordinated water removal is documented to happen in the range of 200◦C to 260◦C
. After TGA the sample dried under the 40-80-120◦C routine retains almost 80% of water
while the sample dried at 200◦C contains barely 0.03% of the initial water content. These
results indicate that the greater part of dehydration for the Fennac samples, when vacuum
drying is applied, is occurring in the Temperature window of 120◦C to 200◦C.
The unexpected initial mass gain during the measurements, is potentially happening cause
of some moisture presence in the chamber although an inert atmosphere is established.
This inaccuracy of the Thermal Analyzer equipment is not taken into account in the hy-
dration calculations and the mass loss is computed comparing mass at initial temperatures
of insertion in the chamber with mass at decomposition temperatures.
3.3
Galvanostatic Cycling with Potential Limitation (G.C.P.L)
Galvanostatic Cycling is performed as an initial testing procedure, to ensure the cells op-
eration and evaluate the specific capacity of each cell. Coin cells yielding an OCV in the
range of 2.8 V to 3.3 V are considered operational and are thus kept for further testing.
Page 18 of 43
==PAGE:27==
MSc Thesis - s230156
Figure 3.3: GCPL operational testing
Knowing the cathode active material mass for each cell and dividing the experimentally
attained capacity (mAh) with this mass, the individual specific capacities are derived and
indicated in Table 3.2. These are lower than earlier literature findings suggest, but still indi-
cating the trend that dictates more dehydrated cells to yield higher specific capacity values,
due to a larger fraction of dehydrated rhombohedral phase [46].
Sample
Specific Capacity (𝑚𝐴ℎ/𝑔)
Undried (A)
79.17
40-80-120◦C dried (B)
95.89
200◦C dried (C)
101.54
Table 3.2: Cell Specific Capacities
Five testing points are decided, aligning with literature based charge/discharge curves of
Prussian Blue batteries. Assuming a higher cutoff voltage at 3.8 V, to avoid side reactions
that reduce cycling stability [47] and a lower discharge voltage at 2 V, these two points,
complemented by measurements at 2.6 V, 2.9 V and 3.2 V represent the various state of
charge (SOC) instances. Applying a step by step GCPL in the test cells the aforementioned
instances are isolated and EIS can instantly be performed in each one of them.
3.4
Battery SOC and Na+ SOC
The SOC of a battery cell is given by:
SOC(𝑡) = SOC (𝑡0) +
∫𝑡
𝑡0 𝐼(𝜏)𝑑𝜏
𝑄max
× 100%
(3.3)
where 𝑡0 is the initial instance with a known SOC, 𝐼(𝜏) is the current flowing in or out of
the cell during the timespan 𝜏of the measurement and 𝑄𝑚𝑎𝑥is the maximum (or nominal)
capacity of the cell. Regarding the Na+ content in the cathode, a linear relationship between
capacity change and sodiation change is assumed. Consequently, the sodium content 𝑥
within the chemical Fennac formula is approximated as:
𝑋𝑁𝑎= 2 ·
𝑄
𝑄𝑚𝑎𝑥
(3.4)
Page 19 of 43
==PAGE:28==
MSc Thesis - s230156
𝑄𝑚𝑎𝑥can be either the theoretical maximum capacity or the experimentally maximum at-
tained capacity. In the first case, since the experimentally attained values are lower than
the theoretical, the coin cells will never reach a 100% battery SOC.
According to Equation 3.4, when 𝑋𝑁𝑎= 2 the Na+ SOC is considered 100% according to the
Fennac formula. At this point a clear distinction between the SOC of the battery cell and
the Na+ content SOC in the cathode material must be made. Their relationship is inversely
proportional, since the first one is a metric of the available energy stored in the battery and
is maximized when the cell is fully charged. At this point though the cathode material is
fully desodiated. In clear words when the battery SOC=100% then the Na+ content SOC=0%
and vice versa.
3.5
Electrochemical Impendance Spectroscopy (EIS)
Electrochemical Impendance Spectroscopy (EIS) is a non-destructive technique for charac-
terizing the performance and providing information about the electrochemical processes
taking place inside a battery cell by measuring its impendance characteristics [48]. Specif-
ically Potentiostatic EIS (PEIS) involves applying a small, alternating voltage to the bat-
tery at various frequencies and measuring the resulting current response and impendance
𝑍= 𝑉/𝐼. The frequency spectrum for battery testing can range from MHz magnitude
(limited by potentiostat bandwidth) to very low mHz-level frequencies, depending on the
system under investigation. These thresholds are usually empirically determined. Aim is
to capture all the processes that take part inside the battery cell. These can be split into 3
broad categories, based on the frequency range that they emerge:
– High Frequencies (kHz to MHz), where fast evolving resistive phenomena occur. In
battery cells this range mainly concerns the resistance of electrolyte, separator and
electrical contacts.
– Medium Frequencies (Hz to kHz), where the dominant electrochemical processes are
charge transfer phenomena at the electrolyte-electrode interface and SEI layer resis-
tive phenomena.
– Low Frequencies (mHz to Hz), where slow reactions take place that involve mass
transfer phenomena. In battery cells specifically ion diffusion processes within the
electrode.
3.5.1
Nyquist Plots
Plotting the imaginary part of the impedance −𝑍′′ against the real part 𝑍′ at each fre-
quency, the characteristic Nyquist plot is generated [49]. Nyquist plot is the main tool used
in Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy (EIS) to analyze the internal resistance and
impedance components of battery cells. It is divided into distinct regions, each one corre-
sponding to the aforementioned electrochemical processes. From a qualitative viewpoint
it has an inverse relationship with frequency. Concerning battery cells, a typical Nyquist
plot is expected to intercept the x-axis in high frequencies, in medium frequencies it usually
forms semicircles (typically 1 or 2, full or half), while in low frequencies it forms a diago-
nal, 45◦w.r.t. the x-axis line that indicates diffusion phenomena, specifically semi-infinite
Page 20 of 43
==PAGE:29==
MSc Thesis - s230156
linear diffusion, known as the Warburg region.
3.5.2
Equivalent Circuit Theory
The extraction of crucial electrochemical metrics from the Nyquist plot is done with the
equivalent circuit modeling theory. EIS measurements can be simulated to an equivalent
electrical circuit, consisting of components like resistances, capacitors, inductors. In this
sense, the electrochemical phenomena occurring inside the cell are assigned to specific
electrical circuit components based on their resistive, capacitive, or inductive physical be-
havior. Additionally the constant phase element (CPE) and Warburg element are utilized to
characterize specific phenomena that the conventional circuit components don’t model ac-
curately enough. Given that an impedance spectrum can be represented by various circuit
models and that increasing the number of components often improves the model represen-
tation quality, it becomes essential to ensure each component scientifically correlates to a
specific process.
For example, high-frequency phenomena are modeled as an internal ohmic resistance com-
ponent𝑅𝑏. Charge transfer and SEI layer phenomena are represented by resistances (𝑅𝑐𝑡,𝑅𝑆𝐸𝐼
and capacitors (𝐶𝑑𝑙,𝐶𝑆𝐸𝐼) , respectively, while ion diffusion into the bulk electrode is mod-
eled as the Warburg element 𝑍𝑊. It’s worth mentioning that experimentally the interfacial
layer and double layer capacitance are not ideal since this could only happen for a perfectly
flat electrode [50]. Thus instead of a capacitor element C they are modeled as CPE. A typi-
cal Nyquist plot and the corresponding equivalent circuitry are depicted in Figure 3.4.
The retrieval of numerical values for all these components facilitates the quantification of
electrochemical processes within the battery cell. This report investigates the diffusion of
the active species Na+ into the cathode electrode, thus the Warburg element is on focus.
Figure 3.4: Common EIS Nyquist Plot and Equivalent Circuit for ideal battery cell [51]
Warburg Element
Ion diffusion is modeled as the Warburg element 𝑍𝑊, which quantifies the mass transport
limitations of the redox species 𝑁𝑎+ to the electrode surface under semi-infinite linear
Page 21 of 43
==PAGE:30==
MSc Thesis - s230156
diffusion behavior. Fitting the EIS curve with a circuit that includes 𝑍𝑊yields the Warburg
constant (𝜎), which is then utilized in the diffusion coefficient calculation as follows:
𝐷𝑁𝑎+ = 𝑅2𝑇2/2𝐴2𝑛4𝐹4𝐶2𝜎2.
(3.5)
𝐴expresses the electrode surface, 𝑛the number of electrons transferred in the redox re-
action, 𝐹the Faraday constant and 𝐶the molar concentration of the redox species (Equa-
tion B.1) in the cathode material. Deviations from the perfect 45◦angle can occur, with
variations typically falling between 35◦and 55◦. Additionally, the system may display non-
linearity, a consequence of its non-ideal characteristics [52].
The limitation of Equation 3.5 is that a stable diffusion mechanism is a prerequisite. If a
phase transition occurs and the diffusion mechanism alters, this equation won’t be suffi-
cient enough for determining the diffusion coefficient. [51]. An extra element (Warburg
or different) would be needed to model the diffusion process on the other phase. A more
thorough analysis of the modeling theory and each individual components contribution
can be found on the cited EIS tutorial scientific publications [48], [51].
At this point it should be mentioned that this investigation aims to focus only on the dif-
fusion phenomena occurring in the positive electrode. The much faster times in which the
deposition of Na+ into the 𝑁𝑎metal electrode happens compared to the insertion of Na+
into the PB electrode decouples the two phenomena and the EIS analysis can focus solely
on the PB cathode diffusion.
3.5.3
Impendance Z-fitting
The modeling of the impedance data into electrical circuit equivalent is done utilizing the
Z-fit mode on the EC-Lab electrochemical analyzer software. The primary goal is to fit a
curve onto the Nyquist plots of the experimental data to assess the magnitude of the Na ion
diffusion process into the cathode electrode and generally all the associated electrochemical
phenomena. The fitting tool works by randomizing the values initially to manage a passing
initial fit to the Nyquist curve and then applying the Simplex algorithm for 500000 steps
until minimization. An indicative example of the fitting process is illustrated in Figure 3.5,
where the sample is in blue and the fitting in red color.
Figure 3.5: Z-fitting on Nyquist Plot, 2.9 V, Sample C
Page 22 of 43
==PAGE:31==
MSc Thesis - s230156
4
RESULTS & DISCUSSION
4.1
Theoretical Results
4.1.1
MACE training
The graphical representation of the results for the MACE model training of 100 epochs are
depicted in Figure 4.1. The values of most important metrics to assess the models perfor-
mance are given in Table 4.1.
Figure 4.1: MACE training results
Validation loss
0.0402
MAE E/atom
0.0025 𝑒𝑉
RMSE E/atom
0.0050 𝑒𝑉
MAE F
0.0297 𝑒𝑉/Å
RMSE F
0.0613 𝑒𝑉/Å
Table 4.1: MACE training results
The magnitude of the validation loss indicates a model that doesn’t overfit and is able to
generalize accurately on unseen datapoints. The mean absolute error (mae) values of both
energy and force demonstrate the model’s high average accuracy. The discrepancy between
Page 23 of 43
==PAGE:32==
MSc Thesis - s230156
mae and the root mean squared error (rmse), where rmse is double the mae for atomic
energies and triple the mae for forces, indicate the presence of some larger errors in some
predictions. Small enough in absolute sense though to not be considered detrimental for the
model’s validity. Comparing the model against established benchmarks [24],[26],[53],[54].
it is concluded that it performs well enough with mae values of both energy and force being
within traditionally acceptable limits.
The scatter plots indicate atomic energy values lower than 8 𝑒𝑉while force values lower
than 20 𝑒𝑉/Å. For both energy and force the predicted values are in accordance with the
reference values. The formulas used for mae and rmse calculations are found on Appendix,
Equation A.1,Equation A.2.
4.1.2
MACE Molecular Dynamics
The molecular dynamics simulations were successful for approximately one-third of the 30
distinct structures in the dataset. The remaining simulations yielded highly unstable and
non-physical results. The following tuning techniques were employed to address this issue:
– Lowering the Temperature of simulations, to investigate whether high T provoked
the specific system’s behavior.
– Velocity initialization, from a Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution at room temperature.
This was done to promote slower kinetics and a more stable equilibration of the sys-
tem.
– Stronger coupling with the thermostat by increasing the friction coefficient up to a
threshold of 0.01. Ensuring more stability but also keeping a realistic representation
of the systems dynamic behavior.
– Using a smaller or different geometry supercell.
– Altering the input, structure specific, trajectory of the simulation.
Despite these efforts, none of the techniques was effective in increasing the number of sta-
ble simulations.
An observed pattern in the structures that explode is the low content of the two species
under investigation. This means that there is a greater amount of unoccupied interstitial
sites and possibly vacancies in these structures. Consequently, there are more possible
pathways for a 𝑁𝑎+ to diffuse. This freedom might cause the simulation to create paths
that yield extremely high interatomic forces and thus rapid increase on Energy and Tem-
perature values the so called "explosion".
Lowering the timestep to 0.25 𝑓𝑠could potentially enhance the stability. However, this ap-
proach was not pursued due to the computational cost (2x higher) and time limitations of
the project.
4.1.3
Mean Square Displacement
As already discussed the structures that underwent successful molecular dynamics for 2 𝑛𝑠
are the ones utilized for the diffusivity predictions. Firstly the MSD values are computed
from the MD generated trajectory file of each structure and afterwards based on Equa-
tion 2.12 the diffusion coefficients will be derived. Figure 4.2 depicts the MSD plots for a
Page 24 of 43
==PAGE:33==
MSc Thesis - s230156
specific structure, under the chosen Temperatures. The plots effectively illustrate the effect
of temperature on ion mobility. A clear relationship is observed, where the magnitude of
ion displacement (on the y-axis) increases with rising temperature.
(a) 1000 K
(b) 700 K
(c) 500 K
Figure 4.2: MSD plots for 𝑁𝑎7𝑊10 structure
4.1.4
Diffusion Coefficients at 300 K
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 4.3: Arrhenius Plots for (a) 𝑁𝑎3𝑊6, (b) 𝑁𝑎3𝑊10, (c) 𝑁𝑎5𝑊4 and (d) 𝑁𝑎5𝑊6
Page 25 of 43
==PAGE:34==
MSc Thesis - s230156
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
Figure 4.4: Arrhenius Plots for (a) 𝑁𝑎6𝑊8, (b) 𝑁𝑎6𝑊10, (c) 𝑁𝑎7𝑊4, (d) 𝑁𝑎7𝑊10, (e) 𝑁𝑎8𝑊6 and (f) 𝑁𝑎8𝑊8, (g) 𝑁𝑎2𝑊4
Page 26 of 43
==PAGE:35==
MSc Thesis - s230156
Employing the Arrhenius equation 2.13 and corresponding plot, a linear regression fit is
performed on the known diffusion coefficients and Temperature values to compute the 𝐷0
and 𝐸𝑎values and based on them approximate the 𝐷𝑁𝑎+ at 300 K. Basic assumption is that
the same diffusion mechanism is dominant, so that the Arrhenius fit can be linearized. The
generated Arrhenius Plots are found in Figure 4.3 and Figure 4.4.
Table 4.2 sums up the computed 𝐷𝑁𝑎+ values at 300 K for the 11 structures that yielded
meaningful molecular dynamic simulations.
Structure
𝐷[𝑐𝑚2/𝑠]
Structure
𝐷[𝑐𝑚2/𝑠]
𝑁𝑎3𝑊6
5.09 ∗10−10
𝑁𝑎3𝑊10
1.75 ∗10−9
𝑁𝑎5𝑊4
9.38 ∗10−9
𝑁𝑎5𝑊6
3.32 ∗10−9
𝑁𝑎6𝑊8
4.26 ∗10−10
𝑁𝑎6𝑊10
1.76 ∗10−11
𝑁𝑎7𝑊4
1.00 ∗10−10
𝑁𝑎7𝑊10
9.80 ∗10−10
𝑁𝑎8𝑊6
1.71 ∗10−8
𝑁𝑎8𝑊8
2.48 ∗10−10
𝑁𝑎2𝑊4
7.41 ∗10−10
-
-
Table 4.2: Extrapolated Diffusion Coefficients at 300 K
Most of them lie in the range of 10−8 cm2/s to 10−10 cm2/s. Exception is the structure that
contains 6 sodium atoms and 10 water molecules in the examined supercell, which indicates
a coefficient smaller by an order of magnitude than the next lower value.
Analysis
Figure 4.5: 𝐷300 vs. 𝑁𝑎content
Figure 4.5 depicts the diffusion coefficient against the existing sodium content for each
structure. To consider an observation as a trend applicable for assessment, more than two
structures that share the same content of sodium or water, must be available. This allows
Page 27 of 43
==PAGE:36==
MSc Thesis - s230156
evaluation of the other species ( water or sodium respectively) effect.
For 4 𝐻2𝑂molecules the highest diffusion coefficient value is for the structure that con-
tains 5 𝑁𝑎atoms in the supercell. For less (𝑋𝑁𝑎=2) or more sodium content the coefficient
drops, with the lowest being for 𝑋𝑁𝑎=7. In the case of 6 𝐻2𝑂molecules supercells there is
a consistent increase of the 𝐷𝑁𝑎as more 𝑁𝑎atoms are part of the structure. Considering
10 𝐻2𝑂molecules in the supercell the trend is non monotonic again, since the 𝐷𝑁𝑎+ is the
highest for 5 𝑁𝑎atoms in the supercell, drops to the lowest for 6 𝑁𝑎atoms and increases
again when 𝑋𝑁𝑎= 7.
When attempting to assess the 𝐻2𝑂presence effect there are only two datapoints available
per 𝑁𝑎content. Even when assessing these, jumping between different 𝑁𝑎contents, there
is no clear trend observed.
However splitting the structures into to 2 distinct groups regarding the 𝑁𝑎content, a slight
trend could be established. Considering structures with 2-5 𝑁𝑎atoms as a group the dif-
fusion coefficient generally increases with more 𝑁𝑎. This suggests that in this range, 𝑁𝑎
ions may facilitate diffusion by enhancing ion mobility. For the second group, consisting
of 6-8 𝑁𝑎atoms, the trend is more complex and depends heavily on the water content. A
plausible speculation of this could point out to the bigger amount of 𝑁𝑎atoms competing
with each other as well as with 𝐻2𝑂molecules for the same occupational sites and thus the
diffusion is generally lower, excluding the structure on the top right of Figure 4.5.
All the diffusion coefficient values generated during this theoretical investigation are sev-
eral (2-3) magnitudes of order higher than experimentally documented values [55],[56],[57].
Hypotheses and speculation regarding this fact will be presented in the Section 4.3 "Com-
parative Analysis & Discussion".
Page 28 of 43
==PAGE:37==
MSc Thesis - s230156
4.2
Experimental Results
The results will be analyzed for two scenarios. In the first one the experimentally reached
specific capacities, Table 3.2, are used as the maximum specific capacities of the cells, while
in the second the theoretical maximum capacity of the material, 170 𝑚𝐴ℎ/𝑔is the compar-
ison basis to approximate the charge and discharge of the cells in terms of energy content
and sodiation rate. A linear relationship between Na sodiation/desodiation and capacity
change is assumed, as aforementioned.
4.2.1
Impendance Spectra Analysis
The impedance analysis with the Z-fitting tool is performed for the five selected voltage
datapoints within each sample and for a frequency range of 1 mHz to 100 kHz. The 5 EIS
measurements for sample A, B and C are indicated in Figure 4.6,Figure 4.7 and Figure 4.8
respectively. Zooming in on the high and medium frequency regions a similar behavior
among all samples is indicated. Irrespectively of the Na content or the hydration level a
first small region intersecting the x-axis is depicted in the frequency range of kHz, fol-
lowed by a first semicircle that ranges from 200 to 600 Ohms depending on the sample and
the corresponding 𝑁𝑎content. This is a very frequent behavior during battery cells EIS
measurements [48].
Figure 4.6: Sample A - Impendance Spectra
The first high frequency region where the impendance spectra meets the x-axis, expresses
the internal resistance that a cell possesses due to the electrolyte, separator and current
collectors Ohmic resistances and will be modeled as a pure resistive element 𝑅1. The first
semicircle, observed within the high to medium frequency ranges, is associated with the
formation of the Solid Electrolyte Interphase (SEI) on the electrode surface. The SEI is an
layer formed due to the decomposition of the electrolyte near the Na metal anode surface,
Page 29 of 43
==PAGE:38==
MSc Thesis - s230156
and its presence primarily affects the anode’s performance and properties. This electro-
chemical phenomenon is simulated as a capacitor in parallel with a resistor 𝑅2 in equivalent
circuit theory. Since the electrode surface cannot be considered perfectly flat the capacitor
component is simulated as a CPE 𝑄2, expressing the non ideal real world behavior accu-
rately [50].
At this point the samples are analyzed separately to indicate more more 𝑁𝑎and 𝐻2𝑂con-
tent specific behaviors. Looking at the spectra of the most hydrated Sample A (Figure 4.6),
a differentiation is observed regarding the size of the first semicircle. The smaller one cor-
responds to the datapoint where the cell is least sodiated, i.e., at 3.8 V, followed by the
next least sodiated instance at 3.2 V. This general trend of the SEI resistance dropping with
desodiation, i.e battery charge is a phenomenon also observed in related EIS research on
Lithium-ion cells [50].
Figure 4.7: Sample B - Impendance Spectra
Sample B (Figure 4.7) follows the exact same trend regarding the first, SEI formation asso-
ciated, semicircle. For sample C (Figure 4.8) although the low 𝑁𝑎SOC datapoints of 3.8 V
and 3.2 V follow the trend, when moving into higher sodiation levels, the opposite trend
occurs, although in a smaller extent, since the lower sodiation datapoints (2.9 V) have big-
ger semicircles than higher ones (2V and 2.6 V).
Approaching lower frequencies at the range of 1 kHz to 1 mHz the behavior of the EIS
spectra starts to differ all the more. EIS related research on NMC 𝐿𝑖+ cells suggests that
the charge transfer related resistance, 𝑅𝑐𝑡is more prone to change than the ohmic or SEI
related resistances during battery operation [58]. In the majority of the cases (Sample A
: 2.9 V, 2.6 V / Sample B: 3.2 V, 2.9 V / Sample C : 3.2 V, 2.9 V, 2.6 V) a distinct second
much bigger semicircle is formed coupled by a straight or semi straight sloped line at the
lowest frequencies. The second semicircle is associated with reaction kinetics, expresses
charge transfer phenomena in the electrolyte/electrode interface and is also simulated as
a CPE element (double layer capacitance) 𝑄3 in parallel with a resistor (charge transfer
Page 30 of 43
==PAGE:39==
MSc Thesis - s230156
resistance) 𝑅3. The sloped line afterwards expresses the 𝑁𝑎+ diffusion processes starting at
the electrolyte-electrode interface and continuing inside the electrode. It is modeled by the
Warburg impendance 𝑊4. The full equivalent circuit model for these spectra is showcased
in Figure 4.9a.
Other datapoints (Sample A : 3.2 V, 3.8 V Sample B: 2 V, 2.6 V, 3.8 V Sample C: 3.8 V) consist
of only one semicircle and a diffusion line afterwards and are simulated as in Figure 4.9b
. In that case the semicircle could incorporate both SEI and charge transfer effects, due to
similar time constants, according to literature [48]. Finally there is a case (Sample C: 2 V)
where a second semicircle is formed but no straight line is coupled at low frequencies and
thus simulated as in Figure 4.9c.
Figure 4.8: Sample C - Impendance Spectra
(a) Circuit 1
(b) Circuit 2
(c) Circuit 3
Figure 4.9: Equivalent Circuit Models used during EIS analysis
4.2.2
Diffusion Coefficient Analysis
Given that the diffusion coefficients will be analyzed against both experimental and theo-
retical specific capacities, referencing individual data points by their calculated sodiation
contents, rather than voltage, provides greater clarity. Table 4.3 gives the pertinent in-
formation. When referenced to theoretical capacity, the sodiation contents are notably
different, indicating a much less dynamic change in the cell’s sodium concentration. For
Sample A, the degree of sodiation changes by only 25% when referenced to the theoretical
maximum capacity. However, when compared to the experimentally observed capacity,
this variation doubles. Since the diffusion coefficient is dependent on the sodium molar
Page 31 of 43
==PAGE:40==
MSc Thesis - s230156
concentration Appendix B which is dependent on the 𝑋𝑁𝑎, it’s expected that their values
will be lower when referenced against the theoretical maximum capacity.
It is evident that for sample B two datapoints are omitted. These are the ones that yielded
the most sodiated versions of the sample, i.e 𝑋𝑁𝑎=1.98 and 2 respectively. However comput-
ing the diffusion coefficient through equivalent circuit theory, the values were in the range
of e-43. These extremely low values indicate that the diffusion phenomenon is blocked
limiting the cell’s power capability. The expansion of the first semicircle could also affect,
meaning that the combined SEI and charge transfer resistance gets higher.
Regarding the omitted datapoint for Sample C (𝑋𝑁𝑎=2) the impendance spectra could only
be approximated by the Figure 4.9c which does not include the Warburg element. It’s form-
ing a second much bigger semicircle that is not coupled with a diffusion indicating line
afterwards. This spectra could indicate that the reaction is charge transfer blocked and
limited by phase transitions in the electrode [51]. The fact that this phenomenon is only
observed for the most dehydrated sample aligns with the theory that water presence is a
key contributor to ensure contained volume changes and structural stability of the material
during 𝑁𝑎+ insertion. Thus when the material has no water structural collapse could be a
repercussion. [59].
Table 4.3: Cumulative Experimental Data
Sample
D (cm2/s)
Na content (Qexp)
D (cm2/s)
Na content (Qtheor)
H2O content
A
3.58709E-14
1.04
1.71643E-14
1.55
2.17
3.20233E-14
1.16
1.76E-14
1.61
2.17
2.60479E-14
1.34
1.70721E-14
1.69
2.17
6.50434E-14
1.62
5.27782E-14
1.82
2.17
4.24577E-16
2.00
4.24577E-16
2.00
2.17
B
4.8032E-12
0.19
1.95046E-13
0.98
1.79
3.93769E-12
0.55
9.22983E-13
1.18
1.79
9.04171E-12
1.64
7.68801E-12
1.80
1.79
C
9.27404E-12
0.16
3.30184E-13
0.90
0.08
2.54107E-12
1.22
1.68294E-12
1.53
0.08
1.08826E-13
1.53
8.85914E-14
1.72
0.08
5.20469E-14
1.71
4.64399E-14
1.83
0.08
Comparing the Diffusion Coefficient values between the 3 samples, it is obvious that ir-
respectively of the 𝑋𝑁𝑎content, Sample A, i.e the most hydrated one, yields the lower
diffusivity values. This confirms earlier investigations that indicated the beneficial effects
of low water content in the 𝑁𝑎+ diffusion, since there is less competition for 𝑁𝑎+ regarding
the occupancy of sites. Moreover the general trend for Sample A points out to decreasing
𝐷𝑁𝑎values as the sodiation goes up. Literature values range in the vicinity of 10−12 cm2/s
to 10−14 cm2/s, aligning with the majority of the experimental values [55],[56],[57]. The
coefficient value of (10−16 (cm2/s)) in the case of the fully sodiated Sample A could indicate
the initialization of ion mobility limitations in the cathode.
Page 32 of 43
==PAGE:41==
MSc Thesis - s230156
Figure 4.10: 𝐷𝑁𝑎+ vs. 𝑁𝑎content - w.r.t. Experimentally measured capacities
Assessing the impact of the specific capacity effect, sample B indicates a relatively stable ion
diffusion when referenced to experimental capacities Figure 4.10, the diffusion coefficient
change becomes more dynamic when referenced to the theoretical capacity Figure 4.11. In
that case the higher sodiation leads progressively to higher 𝐷𝑁𝑎coefficients. Sample C,
the most dehydrated, showcases a decreasing 𝐷𝑁𝑎trend w.r.t. increasing 𝑁𝑎content when
referenced against experimental capacities Figure 4.10. This trend become less dominant
when referenced against the theoretical capacity value, but still observable in high sodia-
tion values. A possible hypothesis could indicate to structural instabilities arising in the
dehydrated cathode as more 𝑁𝑎is inserted, which compromise the ion diffusion process
[10].
Figure 4.11: 𝐷𝑁𝑎+ vs. 𝑁𝑎content - w.r.t. Maximum theoretical capacity
Page 33 of 43
==PAGE:42==
MSc Thesis - s230156
4.3
Comparative Analysis & Discussion
The results of both investigations presented in the former sections of this chapter were an-
alyzed individually indicating slight trends in the case of the theoretical analysis and more
concrete and expected outcomes in the case of the experimental analysis.
However the numerical values have been importantly different between the two approaches.
While experimentally defined diffusion coefficients lie within the range of the literature ex-
pected values, the ones derived from the MD simulations are 2-3 order of magnitude higher
and barely approach the upper threshold of the literature values. Thus a direct compari-
son between the outcomes of the two parts, to evaluate underlying trends of the involved
mechanisms proves not feasible.
Some hypotheses have to be made, concerning the reasons that the computationally de-
rived values are higher than expected.
The code generated structures assume more idealized crystals that contain less or not de-
fects at all. Vacancies and impurities are present in real-world materials and known to
induce burdens in their performance [8] and consequently higher energy barriers for ionic
diffusion. However, literature expects lower values in the range of 10−12 cm2/s to 10−13
cm2/s even for highly crystallized Prussian Blue materials [55],[56].
Moreover the use of the Arrhenius plot for the diffusivity extrapolation to 300 K is a fac-
tor under consideration. The assumption of a constant energy barrier for the diffusion
mechanism is useful but an empirically set criterion, that some times ignores temperature
dependent diffusion behavior.
Other reasons could point out to hyperparameter optimization. The large energy weight
of the loss during the last 20% of training epochs could have negatively affected the gen-
eralization of forces. The amount of molecular dynamics simulations "exploding", could
demand a timestep smaller than 0.5 femtoseconds.
It’s worth mentioning that while the computational investigation focuses solely on the ionic
movement of 𝑁𝑎within the PB material, the experimental investigation examined the dif-
fusion from the scope of a half-cell setup. This setup is used when the area of focus is a
specific component (cathode in this case). Thus it cannot be excluded from the discussion,
that the cell measured diffusion is also examining the electrolyte-electrode interface and
then moving inside the bulk electrode [48].
Page 34 of 43
==PAGE:43==
MSc Thesis - s230156
5
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In the scope of this project the effects of water and sodium content on the 𝑁𝑎+ diffusivity
in Prussian Blue cathodes were investigated.
Machine Learning Force Field (ML-FF) were generated with the MACE software and trained
on a dataset of 33 PB structures with varying sodium and water concentrations. Molecular
dynamics simulations were performed to calculate the high temperature diffusion coeffi-
cients, which were then extrapolated to 300 K using the Arrhenius relationship. A non-
monotonic relationship between diffusion coefficient and sodium content, which varied
based on the amount of water present, was identified. It was also observed that the dif-
fusion coefficient generally increased with more sodium in the range of 2-5 𝑁𝑎atoms,
suggesting that increased sodium could potentially facilitate diffusion in this range.
Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy (EIS) was performed at fabricated coin cells to
measure the ion diffusion coefficients at various states of charge. The TGA analysis con-
firmed the significant water content difference between an undried cathode and one that
is vacuum dried at 200◦. The experimental findings showed a clear trend. Lower water
content improved 𝑁𝑎+ diffusion. Nevertheless, dehydrated cathodes indicated a decreas-
ing trend in the diffusion coefficient as sodium content increased, a phenomenon possibly
related to abrupt volume changes and structural instability. Thus achieving a trade off
between dehydration and performance could be a safe space for future exploration.
A comparative analysis of the theoretical and experimental results revealed that the diffu-
sion coefficient values differed by several orders of magnitude, making a direct comparison
of underlying trends challenging. This discrepancy is hypothesized to be due to various
reasons ranging from the idealized nature of the computational structures to the accuracy
of the methods used to determine the diffusion coefficients.
5.1
Future Considerations
This section outlines potential improvements for future research based on the methods and
findings.
– A mass spectrometer coupled with the TGA , could facilitate the analysis of evolved
gasses and assess dehydration and decomposition more accurately. Neutron Powder
Diffraction could be utilized for more precise water content analysis of the samples.
– EIS measurements coupled with other techniques like Galvanostatic Intermittent Titra-
tion Technique (GITT) could lead to a more comprehensive analysis.
– The use of Curator, although it could have been skipped if the isolated atomic energy
matter was tuned beforehand, was a useful detour that introduced the batch active
learning process and the benefits it can yield during MLIPs construction.
– Limitations of Arrhenius relationship should be taken into account, since the same
diffusion mechanism in not always dominant, during temperature changes and phase
transitions.
Page 35 of 43
==PAGE:44==
MSc Thesis - s230156
REFERENCES
[1] W. Mrozik, M. A. Rajaeifar, O. Heidrich, and P. Christensen, “Environmental impacts,
pollution sources and pathways of spent lithium-ion batteries,” Energy Environ. Sci.,
vol. 14, no. 12, pp. 6099–6121, 2021.
[2] C. Öztürk, Z. Chen, and A. Yildizbasi, “The lithium-ion battery supply chain,” in The
Palgrave Handbook of Supply Chain Management, pp. 1487–1505, Cham: Springer In-
ternational Publishing, 2024.
[3] N. Yabuuchi, K. Kubota, M. Dahbi, and S. Komaba, “Research development on sodium-
ion batteries,” Chem. Rev., vol. 114, pp. 11636–11682, Dec. 2014.
[4] M. D. Slater, D. Kim, E. Lee, and C. S. Johnson, “Sodium-ion batteries,” Adv. Funct.
Mater., vol. 23, pp. 947–958, Feb. 2013.
[5] P. Hong, C. Xu, C. Yan, Y. Dong, H. Zhao, and Y. Lei, “Prussian blue and its analogues
for commercializing fast-charging sodium/potassium-ion batteries,” ACS Energy Lett.,
vol. 10, pp. 750–778, Feb. 2025.
[6] F. S. Hegner, J. R. Galán-Mascarós, and N. López, “A database of the structural and
electronic properties of prussian blue, prussian white, and berlin green compounds
through density functional theory,” Inorg. Chem., vol. 55, pp. 12851–12862, Dec. 2016.
[7] B. Wang, Y. Han, X. Wang, N. Bahlawane, H. Pan, M. Yan, and Y. Jiang, “Prussian blue
analogs for rechargeable batteries,” iScience, vol. 3, pp. 110–133, May 2018.
[8] F. M. Maddar, D. Walker, T. W. Chamberlain, J. Compton, A. S. Menon, M. Copley,
and I. Hasa, “Understanding dehydration of prussian white: from material to aqueous
processed composite electrodes for sodium-ion battery application,” J. Mater. Chem.
A Mater. Energy Sustain., vol. 11, no. 29, pp. 15778–15791, 2023.
[9] W. R. Brant, R. Mogensen, S. Colbin, D. O. Ojwang, S. Schmid, L. Häggström, T. Erics-
son, A. Jaworski, A. J. Pell, and R. Younesi, “Selective control of composition in prus-
sian white for enhanced material properties,” Chem. Mater., vol. 31, pp. 7203–7211,
Sept. 2019.
[10] I. Nielsen, A. Ulander, F. Juranyi, S. R. Larsen, M. Karlsson, W. R. Brant, and M. S.
Andersson, “Impact of sodium on the water dynamics in prussian blue analogues,”
Chem. Mater., vol. 36, pp. 11246–11253, Nov. 2024.
[11] C. Q. X. Lim and Z.-K. Tan, “Prussian white with near-maximum specific capacity in
sodium-ion batteries,” ACS Appl. Energy Mater., vol. 4, pp. 6214–6220, June 2021.
[12] B. Zhou, Y. Gao, X. Lin, B. Yang, N. Kang, Y. Qiao, H. Zhang, L. Li, and S. Chou, “Bulk
and interface engineering of prussian blue analogue cathodes for high-performance
sodium-ion batteries,” Chem. Sci., vol. 16, pp. 13594–13628, July 2025.
[13] I. Nielsen, D. Dzodan, D. O. Ojwang, P. F. Henry, A. Ulander, G. Ek, L. Häggström,
T. Ericsson, H. L. B. Boström, and W. R. Brant, “Water driven phase transitions in
prussian white cathode materials,” J. Phys. Energy, vol. 4, p. 044012, Oct. 2022.
[14] A. Kraft, “Some considerations on the structure, composition, and properties of prus-
sian blue: a contribution to the current discussion,” Ionics, vol. 27, pp. 2289–2305, June
2021.
Page 36 of 43
==PAGE:45==
MSc Thesis - s230156
[15] C. Aparicio, J. Filip, and L. Machala, “From prussian blue to iron carbides: high-
temperature XRD monitoring of thermal transformation under inert gases,” Powder
Diffr., vol. 32, pp. S207–S212, Sept. 2017.
[16] C. C. M. Rindt and S. V. Gaastra-Nedea, “Modeling thermochemical reactions in ther-
mal energy storage systems,” in Advances in Thermal Energy Storage Systems, pp. 375–
415, Elsevier, 2015.
[17] J. R. Chelikowsky, “Nanostructures, electronic structure of,” in Encyclopedia of Con-
densed Matter Physics, pp. 500–508, Elsevier, 2005.
[18] T. Morawietz and N. Artrith, “Machine learning-accelerated quantum mechanics-
based atomistic simulations for industrial applications,” J. Comput. Aided Mol. Des.,
vol. 35, pp. 557–586, Apr. 2021.
[19] Y. Wang, Z. Li, and A. B. Farimani, “Graph neural networks for molecules,” arXiv
[cs.LG], 2022.
[20] J. Gilmer, S. S. Schoenholz, P. F. Riley, O. Vinyals, and G. E. Dahl, “Neural message
passing for quantum chemistry,” 2017.
[21] O. T. Unke, S. Chmiela, H. E. Sauceda, M. Gastegger, I. Poltavsky, K. T. Schütt,
A. Tkatchenko, and K.-R. Müller, “Machine learning force fields,” Chem. Rev., vol. 121,
pp. 10142–10186, Aug. 2021.
[22] S. Batzner, A. Musaelian, L. Sun, M. Geiger, J. P. Mailoa, M. Kornbluth, N. Molinari, T. E.
Smidt, and B. Kozinsky, “E(3)-equivariant graph neural networks for data-efficient and
accurate interatomic potentials,” Nat. Commun., vol. 13, p. 2453, May 2022.
[23] F. Noé, A. Tkatchenko, K.-R. Müller, and C. Clementi, “Machine learning for molecular
simulation,” Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., vol. 71, pp. 361–390, Apr. 2020.
[24] I. Batatia, D. P. Kovács, G. N. C. Simm, C. Ortner, and G. Csányi, “MACE: Higher order
equivariant message passing neural networks for fast and accurate force fields,” 2022.
[25] R. Drautz, “Atomic cluster expansion for accurate and transferable interatomic poten-
tials,” Phys. Rev. B., vol. 99, Jan. 2019.
[26] I. Batatia, P. Benner, Y. Chiang, A. M. Elena, D. P. Kovács, J. Riebesell, X. R. Advincula,
M. Asta, M. Avaylon, W. J. Baldwin, F. Berger, N. Bernstein, A. Bhowmik, S. M. Blau,
V. Cărare, J. P. Darby, S. De, F. Della Pia, V. L. Deringer, R. Elijošius, Z. El-Machachi,
F. Falcioni, and E. Fako, “A foundation model for atomistic materials chemistry,” 2024.
[27] X. Yang, M. H. Petersen, R. Sechi, W. S. Hansen, S. W. Norwood, Y. Krishnan, S. Vin-
cent, J. Busk, F. R. J. Cornet, O. Winther, J. M. Garcia Lastra, T. Vegge, H. A. Hansen,
and A. Bhowmik, “CURATOR: Building robust machine learning potentials for atom-
istic simulations autonomously with batch active learning.” Feb. 2024.
[28] “Troubleshooting
and
Q&A
guide
—
mace
0.3.13
documentation.”
https://mace-docs.readthedocs.io/en/latest/guide/
troubleshooting.html. Accessed: 2025-7-16.
[29] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,” 2014.
[30] “Atomic simulation environment — ASE documentation.” https://wiki.
fysik.dtu.dk/ase/. Accessed: 2025-7-16.
[31] S. T. Murphy and N. D. M. Hine, “Anisotropic charge screening and supercell size
convergence of defect formation energies,” Phys. Rev. B Condens. Matter Mater. Phys.,
vol. 87, Mar. 2013.
Page 37 of 43
==PAGE:46==
MSc Thesis - s230156
[32] P. Mohazzabi and S. P. Shankar, “Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution in solids,” J. Appl.
Math. Phys., vol. 06, no. 03, pp. 602–612, 2018.
[33] M. P. Allen and D. J. Tildesley, Computer simulation of liquids. Oxford, England: Oxford
University Press, Aug. 2017.
[34] D. Frenkel and B. Smit, Understanding molecular simulation. Computational science
series, San Diego, CA: Academic Press, 2 ed., Oct. 2001.
[35] S. Kim, “Issues on the choice of a proper time step in molecular dynamics,” Phys.
Procedia, vol. 53, pp. 60–62, 2014.
[36] E. J. Maginn, R. A. Messerly, D. J. Carlson, D. R. Roe, and J. R. Elliot, “Best practices
for computing transport properties 1. self-diffusivity and viscosity from equilibrium
molecular dynamics [article v1.0],” Living J. Comput. Mol. Sci., vol. 2, no. 1, 2020.
[37] W. D. Callister and D. G. Rethwisch, Fundamentals of materials science and engineering.
Nashville, TN: John Wiley & Sons, 5 ed., Oct. 2016.
[38] M. Srivastava, A. Kumar, and K. Zaghib, “Binders for li-ion battery technologies and
beyond: A comprehensive review,” Batteries, vol. 10, p. 268, July 2024.
[39] F. Cheng, M. Cao, Q. Li, C. Fang, J. Han, and Y. Huang, “Electrolyte salts for sodium-ion
batteries: NaPF6 or NaClO4?,” ACS Nano, vol. 17, pp. 18608–18615, Sept. 2023.
[40] D. M. C. Ould, S. Oswald, H. E. Smith, C. A. O’Keefe, T. Song, E. Kendrick, D. S. Wright,
and C. P. Grey, “Properties of NaPF6 electrolytes and effect of electrolyte concen-
tration on performance in sodium-ion batteries,” Chem. Commun. (Camb.), vol. 61,
pp. 8516–8519, June 2025.
[41] X. Zheng, C. Bommier, W. Luo, L. Jiang, Y. Hao, and Y. Huang, “Sodium metal anodes
for room-temperature sodium-ion batteries: Applications, challenges and solutions,”
Energy Storage Mater., vol. 16, pp. 6–23, Jan. 2019.
[42] https://analyzing-testing.netzsch.com/en/services/
contract-testing/methods/thermogravimetric-analysis.
Accessed: 2025-7-24.
[43] D. O. Ojwang, L. Häggström, T. Ericsson, J. Ångström, and W. R. Brant, “Influence
of sodium content on the thermal behavior of low vacancy prussian white cathode
material,” Dalton Trans., vol. 49, pp. 3570–3579, Mar. 2020.
[44] C. Aparicio, L. Machala, and Z. Marusak, “Thermal decomposition of prussian blue
under inert atmosphere,” J. Therm. Anal. Calorim., vol. 110, pp. 661–669, Nov. 2012.
[45] Compendium of chemical terminology hardcover. IUPAC International Union of Pure
and Applied Chem, Feb. 1987.
[46] N. Y. Samoylova, I. A. Bobrikov, I. Razanau, S. V. Sumnikov, R. N. Vasin, E. A. Ko-
rneeva, O. Y. Ponomareva, and U. Novikau, “Peculiarities of charge-discharge pro-
cesses in prussian white electrodes with different level of dehydration,” J. Alloys
Compd., vol. 983, p. 173849, May 2024.
[47] D. O. Ojwang, M. Svensson, C. Njel, R. Mogensen, A. S. Menon, T. Ericsson, L. Häg-
gström, J. Maibach, and W. R. Brant, “Moisture-driven degradation pathways in prus-
sian white cathode material for sodium-ion batteries,” ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces,
vol. 13, pp. 10054–10063, Mar. 2021.
Page 38 of 43
==PAGE:47==
MSc Thesis - s230156
[48] A. C. Lazanas and M. I. Prodromidis, “Electrochemical impedance Spectroscopy-A tu-
torial,” ACS Meas. Sci. Au, vol. 3, pp. 162–193, June 2023.
[49] H. S. Magar, R. Y. A. Hassan, and A. Mulchandani, “Electrochemical impedance spec-
troscopy (EIS): Principles, construction, and biosensing applications,” Sensors (Basel),
vol. 21, p. 6578, Oct. 2021.
[50] U. Westerhoff, K. Kurbach, F. Lienesch, and M. Kurrat, “Analysis of lithium-ion battery
models based on electrochemical impedance spectroscopy,” Energy Technol., vol. 4,
pp. 1620–1630, Dec. 2016.
[51] W. Choi, H.-C. Shin, J. M. Kim, J.-Y. Choi, and W.-S. Yoon, “Modeling and applica-
tions of electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) for lithium-ion batteries,” J.
Electrochem. Sci. Technol., vol. 11, pp. 1–13, Feb. 2020.
[52] N. O. Laschuk, E. B. Easton, and O. V. Zenkina, “Reducing the resistance for the use of
electrochemical impedance spectroscopy analysis in materials chemistry,” RSC Adv.,
vol. 11, pp. 27925–27936, Aug. 2021.
[53] D. P. Kovács, I. Batatia, E. S. Arany, and G. Csányi, “Evaluation of the MACE force field
architecture: From medicinal chemistry to materials science,” J. Chem. Phys., vol. 159,
July 2023.
[54] I. Poltavsky, A. Charkin-Gorbulin, M. Puleva, G. Fonseca, I. Batatia, N. J. Browning,
S. Chmiela, M. Cui, J. T. Frank, S. Heinen, B. Huang, S. Käser, A. Kabylda, D. Khan,
C. Müller, A. J. A. Price, K. Riedmiller, K. Töpfer, T. W. Ko, M. Meuwly, M. Rupp,
G. Csányi, O. A. von Lilienfeld, J. T. Margraf, K.-R. Müller, and A. Tkatchenko, “Crash
testing machine learning force fields for molecules, materials, and interfaces: model
analysis in the TEA challenge 2023,” Chem. Sci., vol. 16, pp. 3720–3737, Feb. 2025.
[55] Y. You, X.-L. Wu, Y.-X. Yin, and Y.-G. Guo, “High-quality prussian blue crystals as su-
perior cathode materials for room-temperature sodium-ion batteries,” Energy Environ.
Sci., vol. 7, no. 5, pp. 1643–1647, 2014.
[56] M. Qin, W. Ren, R. Jiang, Q. Li, X. Yao, S. Wang, Y. You, and L. Mai, “Highly crystallized
prussian blue with enhanced kinetics for highly efficient sodium storage,” ACS Appl.
Mater. Interfaces, vol. 13, pp. 3999–4007, Jan. 2021.
[57] J. Nordstrand, E. Toledo-Carrillo, S. Vafakhah, L. Guo, H. Y. Yang, L. Kloo, and J. Dutta,
“Ladder mechanisms of ion transport in prussian blue analogues,” ACS Appl. Mater.
Interfaces, vol. 14, pp. 1102–1113, Jan. 2022.
[58] S. S. Zhang, K. Xu, and T. R. Jow, “Electrochemical impedance study on the low tem-
perature of li-ion batteries,” Electrochim. Acta, vol. 49, pp. 1057–1061, Mar. 2004.
[59] X. Guo, Z. Wang, Z. Deng, X. Li, B. Wang, X. Chen, and S. P. Ong, “Water contributes
to higher energy density and cycling stability of prussian blue analogue cathodes for
aqueous sodium-ion batteries,” Chem. Mater., vol. 31, pp. 5933–5942, Aug. 2019.
Page 39 of 43
==PAGE:48==
MSc Thesis - s230156
A
THEORETICAL PART
1)VASP DFT parameters
Structural Relaxation
method: vasp
parameters:
xc = PBE
algo = Normal
icharg = 1
command = mpiexec vasp_std
ldau_luj = {’Fe’: {’L’: 2, ’U’: 5.5, ’J’: 0}}
lorbit = 12
ivdw = 11
lcorr = True
encut = 400
nelmin = 12
kpts = [2,2,2]
gamma = False
ediff = 1e-05
ediffg = -0.03
nsw = 1000
isym = 0
isif = 2
ispin = 2
ibrion = 2
potim = 0.5
lwave = False
lcharg = True
sigma = 0.05
prec = Accurate
nelm = 150
nelmdl = 8
lmaxmix = 4
lreal = auto
ncore = 4
Single Point Calculation
method: vasp
parameters:
xc = PBE
algo = normal
icharg = 1
command = mpiexec vasp_std
ldau_luj = {’Fe’: {’L’: 2, ’U’: 5.5, ’J’: 0}}
lorbit = 12
ivdw = 11
lcorr = true
encut = 400
nelmin = 12
kpts = [2,2,2]
gamma = False
ediff = 1e-05
nsw: 0
isym = 0
ispin = 2
lwave = False
lcharg = True
prec = accurate
sigma = 0.05
nelm = 500
nelmdl = 8
lmaxmix = 4
lreal = auto
ncore = 4
ismear = 0
npar: 1
kpar: 1
istart = 0
kspacing = 0.3
setups = recommended
nwrite = 2
Page 40 of 43
==PAGE:49==
MSc Thesis - s230156
2)MACE Training Parameters
mace_run_train \
--name="MACE_model" \
--train_file="train_and_valid.xyz" \
--valid_fraction=0.05 \
--config_type_weights=’{"Default":1.0}’ \
--E0s=’{1: -1.11493979, 6: -1.25476243, 7: -3.11096409,
8: -1.52991653, 11: -0.21887895999999998, 26: -1.85245406}’ \
--model="MACE" \
--hidden_irreps=’128x0e + 128x1o’ \
--r_max=5.0 \
--batch_size=15 \
--max_num_epochs=100 \
--swa \
--start_swa=80 \
--ema \
--ema_decay=0.99 \
--patience=50 \
--amsgrad \
--restart_latest \
--device=cuda \
--enable_cueq=True \
--seed=3
3)Curator Parameters
* Single Point Calculation is used for Labeling
defaults:
- model/representation: painn
- simulator: md
- labeling_method: vasp
- task/scheduler: reduce_on_plateau
data:
datapath: /home/energy/s230156/data_for_georgios/train/Iteartion_0.traj
cutoff: 5.0
batch_size: 10
num_train: 0.9
num_val: 0.1
normalization: True
atomwise_normalization: True
species:
- Na
- Fe
- C
- H
- O
- N
model:
representation:
num_interactions: 3
lmax: 2
train:
run_path: ./train
energy_weight: 5
forces_weight: 95
device: cuda
nodename:
a100
cores:
8
tmax: 50h
deploy_model: False
restart: False
use_previous_model: True
trainer:
log_every_n_steps: 1
max_epochs: 100000
logger:
_target_: pytorch_lightning.loggers.CSVLogger
task:
patience: 200 # 40000
optimizer:
lr:
0.0001
simulate:
run_path: ./simulate
model_path: ./train
device: cuda
nodename: sm3090el8
cores: 8
tmax: 2d
simulator:
start_index: 0
rattle: null
fix_under: null
friction: 0.01
temperature: 1000 #K
timestep: 1.0 #fs
print_step: 1
dump_step: 1
min_steps: 100
max_steps: 100000
uncertainty:
high_threshold: 0.5
Page 41 of 43
==PAGE:50==
MSc Thesis - s230156
low_threshold: 0.1
max_uncertain_calls: 3000
#uncertain_traj: warning_struct.traj
select:
run_path: ./select
model_path: ./train
train_set: /home/energy/s230156/data_for_georgios/train/Iteartion_0.traj
batch_size: 30
kernel: full-g
method: lcmd_greedy
#kernel based selection
n_random_features: 500
device: cuda
nodename: sm3090el8
cores: 8
tmax: 1d
uncertainty:
uncertain_traj: warning_struct.traj
ensemble:
model120:
model:
representation:
num_features: 120
model124:
model:
representation:
num_features: 124
model128:
model:
representation:
num_features: 128
4)MAE & RMSE mathematical formulas
Mean absolute error (mae) measures the average magnitude of the errors between predicted and
actual values. It’s calculated by taking the average of the absolute differences between each pair of
predicted and actual values.
M A E = 1
𝑛
𝑛
∑︁
𝑖=1
|𝑦𝑖−ˆ𝑦𝑖|
(A.1)
Root mean squared error (rmse) measures the average magnitude of the errors by taking the square
root of the average of the squared differences between predicted and actual values.
R M S E =
v
t
1
𝑛
𝑛
∑︁
𝑖=1
(𝑦𝑖−ˆ𝑦𝑖)2
(A.2)
Where:
𝑦𝑖is the reference/actual value.
ˆ𝑦𝑖is the predicted value.
𝑛is the number of datapoints.
Page 42 of 43
==PAGE:51==
MSc Thesis - s230156
B
EXPERIMENTAL PART
1)Experimental Setup
(a) Tape casting of cathode
slurry into substrate
(b) Cathode disc cutting ma-
chine
(c) Vacuum Drying Glass Oven
B-585
Figure B.1
(a) Individual components of
cell before assembly
(b) Hydraulic Press for cell seal-
ing
(c) EC-Lab cell testing setup
Figure B.2
2)Molar Concentration of Sodium in Cathode Material
𝐶Na = 𝑋𝑁𝑎·
𝑚active
𝑀active × 𝑉electrode
[𝑚𝑜𝑙/𝑐𝑚3]
(B.1)
Page 43 of 43
