==PAGE:1==
Explore alive microalgae oral delivery
system through optimizing core-shell
alginate microbeads fabrication
Author
Chenyu Yang - s232385
Supervisors
Dr. Yumeng Chen
Asst. Prof. Zhongyang Zhang
Prof. Anja Boisen
Department of Health Technology
Technical University of Denmark
Ørsteds Plads, Building 345C
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
July 19, 2025
==PAGE:2==
Contents
Acknowledgments
1
1
Introduction
2
1.1
Drug Administration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.1.1
Parental administration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.1.2
Oral drug delivery
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Challenges for oral drug delivery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2.1
From the drug molecules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2.2
From the living barrier . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Oral drug delivery strategies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3.1
Alginate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3.2
Principle of alginate crosslink
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.3.3
Controlled release property . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.4
Microalgae . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.4.1
Microalgae and its biomedical application
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.4.2
Microalgae as a drug carrier . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.4.3
Microswimmer/ microrobots . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Project Overview
7
2.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Aim
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Hypothesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Materials and Methods
9
3.1
Materials
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Microalgae cultivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.3
Core-shell microbeads fabrication by extrusion method
. . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.4
Microfluidic fabrication of alginate microbeads . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.5
Characterization of core-shell microbeads . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.5.1
Optical microscopy of core-shell microbeads
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.5.2
Scanning electron microscope of core-shell microbeads . . . . . . . . .
13
3.6
Viability of microalgae in FaSSIF . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.7
Stability test in the stimulated intestine/gastric fluid
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.8
Cytotoxicity of microalgae and core-shell microbeads
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.8.1
Caco-2 cell culture
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.8.2
LDH . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.8.3
CCK-8 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.9
Statistical analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4
Results and Discussion
16
4.1
Fabrication and characterization of core-shell microbeads by extrusion . . . .
16
4.1.1
Optimization of infusion rate
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
i
==PAGE:3==
Master thesis
Contents
4.1.2
Optical microscopy of the core-shell microbeads . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.1.3
Microalgae movement in the culture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.1.4
Microalgae in the core-shell alginate microbeads . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.1.5
SEM image of the core-shell microbeads
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.2
Fabrication and optimization of microbeads by microfluidic method . . . . .
22
4.2.1
Steady flow in microfluidics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.2.2
Flow rate independence
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.2.3
Viscosity affects the location of droplet formation . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.2.4
Droplet formation in the outlet tube
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.2.5
Optical images of microbeads
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.2.6
Optimization of spinning rate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.2.7
Summary for microfluidic fabrication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.3
Viability of microalgae in FaSSIF . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.4
Stability test of core-shell microbeads . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.4.1
Stability in simulated gastric fluid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.4.2
Microalgae in microbeads in the SGF . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.4.3
Stability of microbeads in FaSSIF . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.5
Cytotoxicity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.5.1
Cytotoxicity of microalgae . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.5.2
Cell viability under the treatment of microalgae . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.5.3
Cytotoxicity of microalgae-loaded microbeads
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.5.4
Cell viability under treatment of microalgae-loaded microbeads . . . .
37
5
Conclusion
38
6
Perspective
38
7
Appendix A
41
List of Figures
I
List of Tables
II
Nomenclature
III
ii
==PAGE:4==
Master thesis
Contents
Acknowledgments
I would like to thank my thesis advisor, Dr. Yumeng Chen, Prof. Zhongyang Zhang and
Prof. Anja Boisen for their expert guidance, constructive feedback, and support throughout
this project. I also want to express special thanks to Dr. Yumeng Chen and Prof. Zhongyang
Zhang for their insightful guidance and valuable suggestions that significantly strengthened
this work. Thanks to the PhD student, Sungyeong Kim for her patient training in freeze-
dryer and assistance during the sample preparation.
I would like to thank all members of the IDUN lab for their technical assistance, pro-
fessional training, and support throughout this project. Thanks the entire IDUN group for
introducing me to the world of scientific research. Over these past months, I have grown im-
mensely, and I feel fortunate to have learned in such a supportive environment, surrounded
by colleagues who were always willing to share their expertise and encouragement.
Page 1 of 46
==PAGE:5==
Master thesis
1
Introduction
1.1
Drug Administration
Drug administration refers to the method by which therapeutic agents are delivered
into the body to achieve a desired pharmacological effect.
The choice of administration
route such as oral, intravenous, intramuscular, transdermal, or inhalation significantly in-
fluences the drug’s absorption, distribution, metabolism, and excretion. Among these, oral
administration is the most common due to its convenience and patient compliance, but it
faces challenges such as enzymatic degradation, variable absorption, and poor bioavailability
[1]. Advances in drug delivery systems, including nanoparticles, hydrogels, and bioengineered
carriers, aim to overcome these limitations and enhance therapeutic efficacy by targeting spe-
cific tissues, controlling release rates, and improving stability within biological environments
[2, 3, 4].
1.1.1
Parental administration
Parenteral administration is one of the most prevalent ways of drug administration.
It can reach a high bioavailability and 100% for intravenous route. It can also act fast in
intravenous injection where the drug is directly delivered into the bloodstream. However,
the parenteral administration has some disadvantages. It usually requires the performance
of professionals and it is inconvenient for patients to operate it independently. The drug
delivery process is along with the discomfort and the pain with needle insertion. In more
severe cases, it can induce local allergy and increase the risk of infection [5].
1.1.2
Oral drug delivery
Oral drug delivery is another common and convenient administration route. Approx-
imately 60% of the commercially available small-molecule drug products are administered
by oral route [2]. It is a easily acceptable, painless route of administration for people. Oral
delivery is convenient without the need for a sterilization environment, which provides great
flexibility to patients. The self-administered method reduces the risk of infection. It pro-
motes patient compliance when it comes to chronic disease especially [6]. Oral drug delivery
is also a cost-effective approach and is cheaper than parenteral forms in terms of manufac-
turing, storage, and administration [7]. Drugs administered orally must pass through the
complex gastrointestinal (GI) environment, which includes variable pH conditions, enzymatic
activity, and physiological barriers such as mucus and epithelial membranes.
1.2
Challenges for oral drug delivery
1.2.1
From the drug molecules
The physicochemical properties of drug molecules, including aqueous solubility, disso-
lution rate, membrane permeability, and stability under varying chemical and biological
Page 2 of 46
==PAGE:6==
Master thesis
1.2
Challenges for oral drug delivery
conditions, play a critical role in determining their retention and absorption within the GI
tract [2, 8]. Solubility dictates the rate to which a drug dissolves in the luminal fluids of the
GI tract. A drug must be in solution before it can be absorbed and undissolved drug parti-
cles cannot permeate the epithelial barrier. Permeability reflects the ability of the dissolved
drug to cross the intestinal epithelium through passive diffusion, carrier-mediated transport,
or endocytosis into the portal blood. The Biopharmaceutics Classification System (BCS)
groups oral drugs into four classes based on their solubility and permeability. BCS Class I
drugs have high solubility and permeability and are good candidates for oral delivery. Con-
versely, other BCS classes are challenging candidates for oral delivery owing to their low
solubility (BCS Class II), low permeability (BCS Class III), or both (BCS Class IV) [2].
Small molecules, particularly with low solubility, are hard to pass through the intes-
tine epithelium and are limited absorbed by the GI tract. The low solubility of these drug
molecules in the GI tract leads to low bioavailability. Without sufficient dissolution in the
gastrointestinal lumen, the drug cannot be absorbed, no matter how permeable it is. Drug
molecules like peptides, proteins, and nucleic acids have target-specific binding and potency,
but they face the threat of acid or enzyme degradation. Acid and enzyme-mediated degra-
dation in the stomach can destroy the active molecule before it reaches the absorption site.
Drugs must get across the intestinal epithelium. Large molecular size, high hydrophilicity,
and the surface charge may hinder their diffusion and permeation across the intestinal ep-
ithelium. Large molecular weight (> 500 Da), high polarity, or extensive hydrogen-bond
donors/acceptors impede passive diffusion while a certain extent of lipophilicity is necessary
for passive absorption by the epithelial cell membrane [9]. Furthermore, the structure of the
protein (complex secondary, tertiary, and quaternary structures) is easily to be affected by
chemicals in the lumen of the stomach (e.g. pH, ionic strength, metal ions, surfactants) and
cause a loss of function of the drug. [10].
1.2.2
From the living barrier
The living barrier also brings difficulty for oral drug delivery. The GI tract is the or-
gan system in the body responsible for digesting food, absorbing nutrients, and eliminating
waste. It is also known as the digestive tract or alimentary canal. It contains the mouth,
esophagus, stomach, small intestine, large intestine rectum and anus. It is also a main part
that prevents the invasion of surrounding pathogens into the body. The majority of orally
administered drugs are predominantly absorbed in the duodenum and jejunum, located in
the upper regions of the GI tract. In contrast, the stomach exhibits limited drug absorption
capacity due to its relatively smaller surface area and the presence of a thicker mucus barrier
compared to the intestinal lining [11].
For drug absorption in the GI tract, there are three main barriers that the drug needs to
overcome (Figure 1) [12]. The first one is the biochemical barrier or gastric barrier. Luminal
pH and digestive enzymes are the major biochemical barriers in the stomach to oral drug
delivery, which limits its bioavailability. The second one is the mucus barrier. Mucus is a
complex dilute aqueous viscoelastic secretion consisting of many components: water, elec-
Page 3 of 46
==PAGE:7==
Master thesis
1.3
Oral drug delivery strategies
Figure 1: Main GI barrier for oral drug delivery [12]
trolytes, lipids, and various proteins [2]. The mucus layer along the GI tract is a lubricant
for food digestion and protection for epithelia. It acts as a physical barrier for protecting the
mucosal surface from dehydration and mechanical damage. At the same time, it also helps
against destructive hydrolases, digestive enzymes, pathogenic bacteria, viruses and para-
sites and other chemical insults [13]. The third barrier is the epithelium barrier. Epithelial
cells are organized in a single columnar layer, with structural units interspersed among en-
terocytes and connected at their apical surface by zonula occludens, also known as tight
junctions. The apical surface of the epithelium extends along with the underlying lamina
propria to form villi, which are further lined with microvilli. Although microvilli significantly
enhance the absorptive surface area of the small intestine, they also serve as an enzymatic
barrier due to the high concentration of digestive enzymes present on their brush border [14].
1.3
Oral drug delivery strategies
In recent research, many strategies have emerged to improve oral drug delivery and
achieve better bioavailability. Material science-based drug delivery platforms such as nanopar-
ticles, hydrogel, bacteria, algae, mucoadhesive microdevices, microneedles, and smart robotic
devices, have gained attention to be a good approach to increase drug absorption and ther-
apeutic efficiency [10].
1.3.1
Alginate
Among them, hydrogel is a popular topic for oral drug delivery. Hydrogels are poly-
mers with crosslinked 3D networks and have good hydrophilicity. The space between the
crosslink provides the capability of containing water. With good biocompatibility and biolog-
ical structure-mimicking properties, the hydrogel has been investigated widely in biomedical
Page 4 of 46
==PAGE:8==
Master thesis
1.3
Oral drug delivery strategies
applications including drug delivery. The porosity and good water-retaining capability make
hydrogel a good candidate for drug loading. Additionally, the swelling behavior as well as
permeability of hydrogel can be altered in response to either physical or chemical stimuli,
providing the possibility of smart drug delivery approaches with site-specific and sustained
release capabilities [10].
Alginate is one of the natural hydrogels that have been used for drug delivery. It is a
polysaccharide extracted from brown seaweeds, including Laminaria hyperborea, Laminaria
digitata, Laminaria japonica, Ascophyllum nodosum, and Macrocystispyrifera [15]. It is a
biocompatible polymer with low toxicity.
1.3.2
Principle of alginate crosslink
Figure 2: Principle of crosslink [16]
Sodium alginate contains repeating units of mannuronic and guluronic acids, which
have negatively charged carboxylate groups. When sodium alginate is exposed to a calcium
chloride solution, the calcium ions (Ca2+) replace the sodium ions (Na+) in the alginate
structure, forming ionic bonds with the carboxylate groups [16]. These bonds link adjacent
alginate chains together, creating a three-dimensional network that forms a gel (Figure 2).
1.3.3
Controlled release property
The presence of carboxylic acid groups on the alginate moiety makes the polymer pH-
sensitive. The carboxyl groups that can be ionized at pH levels above 4.4, carboxylic acid
groups become ionized and electrostatic repulsion of the negative charge occurs causing ex-
pansion of the polymer chain and matrix swelling. It is soluble under neutral and alkaline
conditions, which supports its broad applicability across various uses. In acidic environ-
ments, alginate carboxyl groups are protonated, thereby it becomes more stable and limits
drug release. It is hypothesized that the release of encapsulated/entrapped molecules within
the alginate beads gets stopped when external media pH is low like in case of gastric media
Page 5 of 46
==PAGE:9==
Master thesis
1.4
Microalgae
as the polymer shrinks [17]. Thus, the solubility and pH sensitivity make alginate a good
biomaterial for drug delivery systems [18]. For example, alginate is a preferable platform
when the drug is delivered to the intestine. It can stand in the acidic environment in the
stomach and gradually swells and degrades in the small intestine, so that the encapsulated
drugs can be released.
1.4
Microalgae
1.4.1
Microalgae and its biomedical application
Microalgae are single-celled organisms that live in salt or freshwater. They are pho-
tosynthetic microorganisms that can rapidly generate biomass from solar energy, CO2, and
nutrients in bodies of water [19]. Their productivity in biomass and other natural products
makes them popular in food industry and renewing energy resources [20]. These microorgan-
isms are already extensively utilized in the pharmaceutical, cosmetic, food, nutraceutical,
and biomedical industries because they produce bioactive compounds, including proteins,
vitamins, and fatty acids [21, 22].
1.4.2
Microalgae as a drug carrier
Recently, microalgae has gained more attention in the drug delivery area for its bio-
logical properties such as photosynthesis, active surface, and good biocompatibility. Tradi-
tional drug delivery systems frequently exhibit limitations such as low bioavailability, poor
drug solubility, short duration of activity, and suboptimal pharmacokinetic profiles.
In
contrast, microalgae offer several advantageous properties, such as high biocompatibility,
cost-effectiveness, a large active surface area, and rapid propulsion. These properties make
microalgae promising biomaterials for overcoming these challenges in drug delivery.
Mi-
croalgae have been shown to effectively adsorb micromolecules, nanoparticles, and a range
of metal ions through both simple mechanisms, such as electrostatic interactions and physical
deposition, as well as more complex physicochemical and biochemical processes [23, 24, 25].
These absorption capabilities make microalgae an ideal biomaterial for drug carriers.
1.4.3
Microswimmer/ microrobots
Some microalgae have the ability to move. Microalgae, a biocompatible microswimmer,
provides new insight and strategy for drug delivery [21]. Many microalgae possess flagella,
which are whip-like appendages that propel the cell through water. These flagella can be
arranged in various patterns and beat in coordinated ways to create different gaits, like trot-
ting or galloping. From previous study, nanoparticle-modified microrobots were constructed
to actively deliver antibiotics to the lungs by modifiying C. reinhardtii [26]. It proved the
considerable attention of microalgae as a drug carrier for inhalation.C. reinhardtii is also
Page 6 of 46
==PAGE:10==
Master thesis
used by Studer et al. to deliver the antibiotic, vancomycin, which is attached to the sur-
face of the microalgae via a disulfide-based linker and released by thiol-based reducing agents.
However, the motility of the modified microalgae was only in vitro evaluated [27]. In one
study, microalgae motors were constructed. C. reinhardtii were covered by a pH-sensitive
capsule to protect them from the harsh gastric environment. C. reinhardtii loaded with
doxorubicin exhibited sustained motility in intestinal fluid for over 12 hours following release
from the capsules, thereby enhancing the retention time of doxorubicin within the intestinal
tract [28]. In general, there are wide biomedical application prospects to deliver drugs via
microalgae. However, the exploration of microalgae with its natural mobility are in their
start-up stage for oral drug delivery and they are not abundant yet.
2
Project Overview
2.1
Motivation
Despite their promise as drug carriers, microalgae must first survive the harsh gastric
environment before they can deliver the loaded drug in the small intestine. In the stomach,
the low pH can disrupt the cellular structure of microalgae, potentially leading to cell lysis
or damage to the cell membrane [29]. Digestive enzymes like pepsin, found in gastric fluid,
can break down proteins and other biomolecules within the microalgal, then compromise
microalgae cell membrane integrity and flagellar motility [30]. Without this active propul-
sion, algae cannot navigate the intestinal mucus layer or adhere to the epithelium where
absorption is highest. The main obstacle for microalgae-based active carriers, is how to
maintain their moving viability, ability and membrane integrity before being released in the
intestine then trigger their release once they reach the more neutral, enzyme-rich lumen of
the small intestine. Strategies such as enteric encapsulation, pH-responsive polymer coatings
or co-formulation with protective excipients are being explored to meet this challenge and
fully harness microalgae’s active transport advantages [28, 31, 32].
2.2
Aim
The alginate-encapsulated microalgae was proposed to protect microalgae because the
alginate can stand the acidic environment in the gastric fluid and remain intact. Nowadays,
many techniques are developed to fabricate alginate particles for drug delivery. Extrusion,
spray-drying and emulsification are the three most reported techniques to fabricate alginate
microbeads [33]. However, most of the alginate microbeads are solid balls, which have limited
drug-loading efficiency and releasing efficiency. The more important is, changes in calcium
levels in the microalgae, such as increases in cytosolic calcium, can be triggered by various
stimuli like mechanical stimuli or osmotic stress. These calcium signals can then affect the
movement of microalgae, including processes like deflagellation (loss of flagella) and gliding
motility [34, 35, 36]. Calcium ions, which are necessary for the crosslink of alginate prepara-
Page 7 of 46
==PAGE:11==
Master thesis
2.3
Hypothesis
tion, can decrease the mobility of microalgae flagella if the microalgae directly contact CaCl2
when fabricating alginate microbeads.
To keep the locomotion of microalgae, we propose a core-shell alginate microbeads struc-
ture to protect the microalgae from the aicdic gastric fluid as well as avoid the direct contact
with calcium ions during the fabrication. The inner core is aqueous phase and contains
microalgae drug carrier and the outer shell is alginate to protect the microalgae. Along with
this core-shell structure, we try to minimize the contact between microalgae and Ca2+ in
the gelation solution. More drugs can be loaded into the water phase with the microalgae
absorption and the drug releasing process is quicker with a thin alginate layer instead of
solid beads. The alginate layer protects the microalgae from the acidic gastric fluid, so that
microalgae retain good viability before reaching the small intestine. The water phase can
ensure the moving activity of microalgae and then the microalgae can increase drug delivery
efficiency in the small intestine by locomotion.
2.3
Hypothesis
Figure 3: Coaxial needle structure
Encapsulating the microalgae in an alginate shell shields them from the stomach’s acidic
environment, preserving cell viability until they reach the small intestine. The alginate is
stable in the acidic solution and less stable in the neutral and based solution in principle.
The core-shell structure remains intact during its stay in the gastric environment and waits
to be released when it arrives in the intestine. This hydrated coating also maintains their
motility, allowing the algae to actively move themselves and thereby enhance drug delivery
Page 8 of 46
==PAGE:12==
Master thesis
efficiency once in the intestinal lumen.
The proposed strategy of this project is to develop and optimize a simplified and effective
method for encapsulating Chlamydomonas reinhardtii in core-shell alginate microbeads for
oral drug delivery applications by using the coaixial needle in Figure 3. This approach aims
to separate the microalgae and alginate by establishing two independent channel on one
needle. The alginate will crossklink in the CaCl2 bath and reduce the contact of microalgea
to the Ca2+ ion. This is to preserve viability and motility of microalgae. Additionally, the
project aims to evaluate the possibility of this core-shell microbeads system for oral drug
delivery, especially the performance in the simulated stomatic and intestinal environment.
The cytotoxicity potential of this system will also be assessed through in vitro drug delivery
assays using Caco-2 cell models. The resulting protocol will serve as a foundational platform
for other microalgae strains and drug candidates for future work.
3
Materials and Methods
3.1
Materials
Chlamydomonas reinhardtii (strain CC-125, wild-type *mt+*) was obtained from the
Chlamydomonas Resource Center (University of Minnesota, USA). Tris-Acetate-Phosphate
(TAP) medium were purchansed from Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc (Waltham, Massachusetts,
U.S., Cat. No. A1379801). Sodium alginate was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis,
MO, USA, Cat. No. 180947-100G). Calcium chloride was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St.
Louis, MO, USA, Cat. No. C3306-100G). A coaxial needle assembly (inner/outer diame-
ters: 21G/30G) was used for microbead generation and mounted on a standard tripod stand.
Two independent syringe pumps were used to control the flow rates of the core and shell
fluids. Ultrapure water used throughout the studies was obtained from a Q-POD dispenser
from Merk Millipore (Burlington, MA, USA). The rapeseeds oil was purchased from Ollineo
(Netto, Køge, Denmark). Fasted State Simulated Intestinal Fluid (FaSSIF) was purchased
from Biorelevant (London, United Kingdom). Caco-2 cells were purchased from ATCC (Man-
assas, VA, USA) and cultured in DMEM (Thermo Fisher Scientific) supplemented with 10%
fetal bovine serum (FBS), 1% penicillin-streptomycin, and 1% non-essential amino acids.
3.2
Microalgae cultivation
Chlamydomonas reinhardtii (strain CC-125, wild-type *mt+*) was obtained from the
Chlamydomonas Resource Center (University of Minnesota, USA). Cells were initially main-
tained on solid Tris-Acetate-Phosphate (TAP) agar plates and subsequently inoculated into
liquid TAP medium (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for suspension culture. Cell cultures were
maintained at room temperature ( 22-25◦C) under a cycle of 12-hour light and 12-hour dark
photoperiod using cool white fluorescent light to simulate natural day-night cycles [28].
Page 9 of 46
==PAGE:13==
Master thesis
3.3
Core-shell microbeads fabrication by extrusion method
3.3
Core-shell microbeads fabrication by extrusion method
Figure 4: Workflow of extrusion fabrication
A core-shell microbead structure is proposed here to carry the microalgae and conduct
oral drug delivery. The extrusion technique is the simplest and widest technique used in
drug-loaded alginate microbead fabrication by ionic gelation of alginate which involves a
simple diffusion and cross-linking reaction by Ca2+. The core-shell structure is produced by
the coaxial needle with extrusion (Figure 3). The microalgae dissolved in the culture medium
is connected to the inner channel and the sodium alginate solution is connected to the outer
channel. By pumping out the coaxial needle, the preliminary core-shell structure is formed as
a core-shell droplet at the tip of the needle and will drip into the CaCl2 bath down from the
needle. The droplet will drop in the CaCl2 solution right down the needle. Sodium alginate
will start to crosslink as soon as it reaches the CaCl2 bath and form a rigid gel shell. The
Na+ ions in the alginate structure are replaced by the Ca2+ ions and harden the membrane
to form a shell layer [33, 37]. The inner microalgae will stay in a water phase and maintain
a good viability in theory. The alginate shell will protect the microalgae from the gastric
fluid and release the microalgae until they reach the small intestine. Though there are other
approaches to synthesizing the core-shell microcapsule such as electrospinning, electrospray,
and microfluidics [38, 39, 40]. We hope to fabricate the core-shell microcapsule by using the
simplest and economical way, which could bring more research and commercial potential for
its further application.
The core-shell microbeads were synthesized by extrusion with a coaxial needle. Two
syringes containing microalgae and 1% (w/v) sodium alginate were placed on two syringe
pumps. Chlamydomonas reinhardtii (Cr) was connected to the inlet of the inner channel in
the coaxial needle and injected the microalgae into the core. The sodium alginate solution
Page 10 of 46
==PAGE:14==
Master thesis
3.4
Microfluidic fabrication of alginate microbeads
was connected to the inlet of the outer channel in the coaxial needle and injected into the
shell. The infusion rate of microalgae is 0.03 mL/min and the infusion rate of sodium al-
ginate is 0.13 mL/min. The core-shell microbeads were generated at the tip of the coaxial
needle, and it will drop down when the microcapsule reaches a certain size and is induced by
the gravity force. A Petri dish containing 4% (w/v) CaCl2 was put right below the coaxial
needle to hold the mircobeads. The magnetic stirrer keeps stirring the CaCl2 solution and
ensures the microcapsule is immersed in the CaCl2 solution. This is to make sure the fast
and complete crosslink of sodium alginate so that the core-shell structure is well maintained.
The synthesized microbeads were collected in a centrifuge tube and the microbeads
sedimented under gravity. The supernatant was discarded, and the microbeads were resus-
pended in microalgae culture media. The core-shell microbeads were stored at the room
temperature and waited until further use.
3.4
Microfluidic fabrication of alginate microbeads
Figure 5: Microfludic fabrication workflow
In addition to extrusion, microfluidics is an alternative approach to fabricating the core-
shell microbeads. Microfluidics refers to the methodology for controlling and manipulating
Page 11 of 46
==PAGE:15==
Master thesis
3.4
Microfluidic fabrication of alginate microbeads
fluids within channels on the micrometer scale. Fluid mixing is typically achieved by in-
corporating junctions that interconnect these microchannels. When immiscible or partially
miscible fluids converge at these junctions, the interaction can result in the formation of
microdroplets, a process known as droplet-based microfluidics [41].
Microfluidic techniques have emerged as a powerful tool for synthesizing scaffolds and
drug delivery vehicles for tissue engineering and biomedical applications.
Droplet-based
microfluidic platforms have been extensively utilized for the synthesis of microparticles, en-
abling precise regulation of both particle heterogeneity and size uniformity by tuning device
architecture and fluidic parameters [42, 43]. In particular, this approach facilitates the repro-
ducible production of monodisperse alginate microparticles, thereby broadening their utility
as reliable carriers in drug delivery applications [44].
The general workflow is shown in the Figure 5. The two-channel microfluidic chip is
used for the synthesis. The oil and alginate are injected through two different channels and
the two fluids meet at the junction. The oil fluid can cut the alginate fluid by the flow flow-
focusing channel and then form the microdroplets. The microdroplets can further crosslink
in the CaCl2 bath and form microbeads. This fabrication method contains two steps. In
the first step, we hope to fabricate homogenous pure alginate microbeads by this approach.
After the system is stable, we will connect the coaxial needle to the alginate channel in the
Figure 5. That is the second step. The two inlet liquids in the coaxial needle are the same
as the extrusion method. The difference is, that the outlet of the coaxial needle will connect
to the inlet of the two-channel microfluidic chip. The core-shell fluid from the coaxial nee-
dle is expected to be cut at the junction by flow focusing and then generate the core shell
microbeads. The core-shell droplet will be separated by oil and keep the bead shape then
transferred into CaCl2 solution to crosslink.
To realize a stable, round and size-uniform production of microbeads, a two-channel mi-
crofluidic chip was used to produce the microbeads. It was used to optimized the structure of
core-shell microbeads. Two syringes containing rapeseed oil and 1% (w/v) sodium alginate
were placed on two syringe pumps. The rapeseed oil and sodium alginate were connected to
the two inlets of the microfluidic chip as shown in Figure 5. The infusion rate of rapeseed
oil is 20-30 µL/min and the infusion rate of sodium alginate is 2-5 µL/min. The real in-
fusion rate may vary because of the practical condition. The microdroplets were generated
at the junction of the channel theoretically, and they flew out through the outlet. A tube
connecting the outlet introduced the product into a Petri dish. The Petri dish containing
4% (w/v) CaCl2 to hold the oil-encapsulated microdroplets and let sodium alginate crosslink
into microbeads. The magnetic stirrer keeps mixing the CaCl2 solution and ensures the mi-
crobead is fully contacted by Ca2+ ion. This is to make sure the fast and complete crosslink
of sodium alginate so that the microbead structure is well maintained.
Page 12 of 46
==PAGE:16==
Master thesis
3.5
Characterization of core-shell microbeads
3.5
Characterization of core-shell microbeads
3.5.1
Optical microscopy of core-shell microbeads
The core-shell microbeads were observed and quantified by geometrical measurements
using microphotographs from an inverted light microscope. The light microscope was applied
to check the physical and structural properties of the microbeads such as structure of the
core-shell, location of the microalgae core in the microbeads, morphology of the microcapsule,
and thickness of the alginate shell. The diameter of microbeads was measured randomly to
determine the initial diameter size and distribution. All observations were performed at room
temperature under clean bench conditions to avoid contamination or optical distortion.
3.5.2
Scanning electron microscope of core-shell microbeads
Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) is a powerful imaging technique that uses a fo-
cused beam of electrons to produce high-resolution images of a sample’s surface. Unlike
optical microscopes, SEM provides much greater magnification (up to 100,000x) and supe-
rior depth of field, allowing detailed visualization of micro- and nanostructures [45].
SEM works by scanning a focused beam of high-energy electrons across surface of the
sample in a vacuum. The electron beam, generated by a tungsten filament or field-emission
gun, is narrowed by electromagnetic lenses and interacts with the sample, producing sig-
nals such as secondary electrons and backscattered electrons. These signals are detected and
converted into a high-resolution, magnified image, revealing fine surface details at nanometer-
scale resolution [46].
The microbeads were washed with TAP and frozen in the −20 ◦C freezer overnight and
all the samples were waited to be frozen. Then the frozen microbeads were put into a freeze-
dryer overnight. The dried microbeads were observed under SEM.
Surface morphology and microstructural features of the fabricated samples were char-
acterized using a SEM with a Hitachi TM3030 Plus tabletop microscope (Hitachi High-
Technologies Europe, Krefeld, Germany). Before imaging, samples were thoroughly dried
using a freeze-dryer for 24 hours to enhance conductivity and minimize charging artifacts.
SEM imaging was performed under high-vacuum mode with an acceleration voltage of 5-15
kV. Images were acquired at various magnifications to assess feature dimensions and surface
uniformity.
3.6
Viability of microalgae in FaSSIF
The microalgae were treated with Fasted State Simulated Intestinal Fluid (FaSSIF) to
verify their viability under in-vivo intestine fluid condition. Microalgae (10 mL) was cen-
trifuged and the supernatant was discarded. The remaining microalgae cells are introduced
into 10 mL of FaSSIF. The mixture was maintained at a temperature of 37 ◦C for 10 minutes
Page 13 of 46
==PAGE:17==
Master thesis
3.7
Stability test in the stimulated intestine/gastric fluid
incubation to simulate in-vivo conditions. The TAP (10 mL) is used as the control group and
incubated with the same quantity of microalgae under 37 ◦C. After 10 minutes incubation,
the mixture was centrifuged again and the supernatant was dicarded to remove FaSSIF and
TAP. The cells were resuspended in 10 mL TAP. The viability of microalgae was accessed
by SYTOXTM Green Nucleic Acid Stain (Thermo Fisher, Cat. No. S7020). A Leica TCS
SP8 CARS confocal microscope (Leica Microsystems, Wetzlar, Germany) was used to take
the images of microalgae after staining. Further cell number counting from the pictures were
conducted by ImageJ 1.53c (National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA).
3.7
Stability test in the stimulated intestine/gastric fluid
This experiment aimed to evaluate the stability of the core-shell microbeads under sim-
ulated gastrointestinal conditions using Fasted State Simulated Gastric Fluid (FaSSGF) and
FaSSIF from Biorelevant. The FaSSGF in the lab was run out and the new FaSSGF cannot
arrive before the project ends, so 1x PBS (pH=2) was prepared to make a homemaded Sim-
ulated Gastric Fluid (SGF) to simulate the acidc environment in the stomach. The study
focused on assessing the degradation of the microbeads and their physical structure over
time. A certain amount of the microbeads were introduced into 5 mL of FaSSIF and SGF
respectively. The mixture was incubated at a temperature of 37 ◦C to simulate in-vivo con-
ditions. The double-distilled water is used as the control group and incubated with the same
quantity of microbeads under 37 ◦C. Stability was monitored by observing the mixtures
every 30 minutes.
3.8
Cytotoxicity of microalgae and core-shell microbeads
3.8.1
Caco-2 cell culture
Cell Line and Maintenance
Caco-2 cells (ATCC HTB-37) were maintained in Dul-
becco’s Modified Eagle’s Medium (DMEM; high glucose, with L-glutamine and sodium
pyruvate) supplemented with 10% (v/v) heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum (FBS), 1%
non-essential amino acids, and 100 U/mL penicillin-100 µg/mL streptomycin. Cultures were
incubated at 37 ◦C in a humidified atmosphere of 5% CO2. Medium was replaced every 2-3
days, and cells were passaged at 80-90% confluence.
Cell passaging
Monolayers of Caco-2 cells were washed once with PBS, then dissociated
with 0.05% trypsin-EDTA at 37 ◦C for 5 min. Trypsin activity was quenched by adding an
equal volume of complete medium, and cells were collected by centrifugation at 1500 rpm
for 5 min. The pellet was resuspended in fresh medium and seeded at a 1:4-1:6 split ratio
into T-75 flasks.
Page 14 of 46
==PAGE:18==
Master thesis
3.8
Cytotoxicity of microalgae and core-shell microbeads
3.8.2
LDH
Cytotoxicity was quantitatively assessed using a lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) assay kit
(Sigma-Aldric, Cat. No. 4744926001) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. A 96-well
plate was prepared and cells were seeded on each well with 100 µL cell medium one day before
the treatment. Three groups of C. reinhardtii or microbeads with different concentrations
were tested to explore the cytotoxicity. The C. reinhardtii or core-shell microbeads were
resuspended with Caco-2 cell medium for 24 hours to prepare the conditional medium. The
conditional medium was filtered with the membrane (pore size 0.22 µm) to remove the
bacteria and other residue. Then 100 µL of the conditional media was cultured with Caco-2
cells in the 96-well plate for 24 hours. For the low and high control group, 100 µL of cell
medium was added in to each well. After the 24-hour treatment, 5 µL of lysis solution was
added to each well in the group of high control. The plate was incubated for 15 minutes.
LDH reaction mixture was added to each well, followed by incubation at room temperature
for 20 minutes in a dark environment. Absorbance was measured at 490 nm with a reference
at 680 nm using a microplate reader. Varioskan LUX multimode microplate reader (Thermo
Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) was used to measure the colorimetric signal from
the LDH test. The LDH release, indicative of membrane damage, was normalized to the
maximum LDH release obtained from cells treated with lysis solution as a high control.
Results were expressed as a percentage of total LDH release by calculating in the following
equation:
Cytotoxicity (%) = exp. value −low control
high control −low control × 100
Each condition was tested in six replicates.
3.8.3
CCK-8
Cell viability was assessed using the Cell Counting Kit-8 (CCK-8; Merck, Cat. No.
96992) following the manufacturer’s protocol for 96-well plates. Cells were seeded in 96-well
plates at the appropriate density and under treatment for 1, 3, and 5 days.
Four wells
containing only culture medium without cells were included as blank controls to correct
for background absorbance. Three groups of C. reinhardtii or microbeads with different
concentrations were tested to explore the cell viability. The C. reinhardtii or microbeads
were resuspended with Caco-2 cell medium for 24 hours to prepare the conditional medium.
The conditional medium was filtered with the membrane (pore size 0.22 µm) to remove the
microalgae and other residue. Then 100 µL of the conditional medium was cultured with
Caco-2 cells in the 96-well plate for 24 hours. For the control group, 100 µL of cell medium
was added in to each well.
At the end of the treatment period, the old medium in the plate was removed. Around
10 µL of CCK-8 reagent was added directly to each well containing 100 µL of fresh culture
medium, resulting in a 1:10 dilution ratio. Plates were gently mixed and incubated at 37 ◦C
in a humidified incubator with 5% CO2 for 3 hours.
Page 15 of 46
==PAGE:19==
Master thesis
3.9
Statistical analysis
After incubation, absorbance was measured at 450 nm using a microplate reader. All
measurements were performed in the dark to prevent photodegradation of the assay. The
final absorbance values were corrected by subtracting the mean absorbance of the blank
wells. Cell viability was expressed relative to untreated control cells, and all experimental
conditions were tested in six replicates.
3.9
Statistical analysis
All experiments were repeated as independent experiments several times, as shown by
the figure captions. The results are reported as means ± Standard Deviation. A one-way
analysis of variance (ANOVA) with Dunnett’s test was performed to test the significance
for multiple comparisons. Statistical significance is indicatedas *p< 0.05, **p< 0.01, ***p<
0.001, and ****p< 0.0001.
4
Results and Discussion
4.1
Fabrication and characterization of core-shell microbeads by
extrusion
4.1.1
Optimization of infusion rate
Figure 6: The microbeads under different infusion rate, scale bar: 200 µm. The flow rate for
each picture is shown in Table 1
Table 1: Flow rates of alginate and microalgae in Figure 6
Flow rate
A
B
C
Alginate
0.1 mL min−1
0.1 mL min−1
0.13 mL min−1
Microalgae
0.07 mL min−1
0.05 mL min−1
0.04 mL min−1
To find the optimal infusion rate to fabricate core-shell microbeads, three groups of
infusion rates were tested. The microbeads were collected and observed under an optical
microscope. The infusion rate setting was summarized in Table1. Figure 6 A shows the
core-shell microbeads when the alginate infusion rate was 0.1 mL/min and the infusion rate
Page 16 of 46
==PAGE:20==
Master thesis
4.1
Fabrication and characterization of core-shell microbeads by extrusion
for microalgae was 0.07 mL/min. The microbeads shows an irregulated shape with several
cavities inside the beads. In addition, the microalgae leaked from the microbeads while drip-
ping into the gelation bath. Figure 6 B shows the core-shell microbeads when the alginate
infusion rate was 0.1 mL/min and the infusion rate for microalgae was 0.05 mL/min. It
seems that an aqueous core is inside the bead with green microalgae. While fabrication,
it was found that the microalgae leaked from the microbeads. The microalgae leaked from
alginate when dripping into the CaCl2 bath. Figure 6 C shows the core-shell microbeads
when the alginate infusion rate was 0.13 mL/min and the infusion rate for microalgae was
0.04 mL/min. The microalgae did not leak from the alginate shell during gelation. It turned
out that the round shape microbeads was produced and a general water cavity was shown
in the figure.
From the observation in the fabrication process and the microscopy, the infusion rate at
Figure 6 A and B cannot produce intact and sphere microbeads without microalgae leaking.
The microalgae infusion rate in Group A may be too fast and the alginate cannot encapsulate
the aqueous microalgae solution completely. Though the microalgae infusion rate in Group
B is lower than Group A, it can support the production of sphere microbeads with a leaking
of microalgae. For Group C, the infusion rate of microalgae was reduced and the infusion
rate of microalgae was increased to 0.13 mL/min. This infusion rate setting brings a more
stable structure of the microbeads and an aqueous cavity can be roughly observed from the
microscopic image. However, the core-shell microbeads structure is obscure if we only rely
on this image. More experimental results are needed to verify successful fabrication of the
core-shell structure. An optical microscope with higher image quality was applied to get a
closer investigation on the structure of the core-shell microbeads.
4.1.2
Optical microscopy of the core-shell microbeads
As the optimal infusion rate was found, more microbeads were produced to verify the
stability of the fabrication method as well as provide materials to check the structure of
the microbeads. The microbeads were synthesized by dripping the microalgae and alginate
solution through the coaixal needle into the gelation bath (Figure 4). The magnetic stirrer
kept stirring in the bath to make sure the fully crosslink reaction. The alginate crosslinked
in the gelation bath and formed the rigid shell. The fabricated microbeads were transferred
to a microscope slide and the microbeads were observed under a high-resolution optical mi-
croscope.
The optical microscope image is shown in Figure 7. Figure 7 A-C shows the general
structure of the microbeads under 4x magnification. A hollow core was easily differentiated
from the image. The microbead exhibits a well-defined spherical morphology with an intact
outer shell layer. The shell structure appears optically denser than the inner core, indicat-
ing successful encapsulation (Figure 7 D and E). No significant deformation or rupture was
observed, and the bead diameter was approximately 3.29 mm referring to the scale bar. The
contrast between the core and shell regions supports the successful formation of a core-shell
structure.
Page 17 of 46
==PAGE:21==
Master thesis
4.1
Fabrication and characterization of core-shell microbeads by extrusion
Figure 7: Optical microscopy of coreshell microcapsule under 4x magnification (A, B & C,
scale bar: 1 mm), and 10x magnification (C, D & E, scale bar: 200 µm)
The optical characteristics and morphology observed in Figure 7 confirm the successful
fabrication of core-shell alginate microbeads. The distinct boundary between the shell and
the core (Figure 7 D & E) suggests effective phase separation between alginate solution and
the microalgae culture, likely driven by interfacial tension and flow rate optimization. The
spherical shape and structural integrity indicate that the crosslink process was rapid enough
to stabilize the outer shell without significant deformation. Minor surface irregularities and
refractive variations could be attributed to inhomogeneities in alginate crosslinking or the
force when dripping into the bath. Figure 7 F shows the microalgae were well maintained in
the core of the microbeads.
4.1.3
Microalgae movement in the culture
The microalgae at native state was observed to explore the cell morphology and mobil-
ity. One drop of microalgae culture (10 µL) was transferred on a microscope slide and the
sample was observed under an optical microscope. Figure 8 shows the states of microalgae in
Page 18 of 46
==PAGE:22==
Master thesis
4.1
Fabrication and characterization of core-shell microbeads by extrusion
Figure 8: Microalgae in culture media; A, scale bar: 100 µm; B,C & D, scale bar: 10 µm.
the culture media. The mircoalgae we used here are C. reinhardtii. It has two polar flagella
to sense its environment and move in response to light [47]. The flagella are important for
their mobility. The flagella were shown as red arrow pointing out in Figure 8.
The movement of microalgae was verified through Figure 8 and the video in the supple-
mentary. Around 90% of the microalgae were moving towards random directions under the
microscope. This results shows the great mobility of microalgae and it sets the foundation
to apply it in the oral drug delivery, where we hope it can enhance the drug absorption in
the intestine by moving across the mucus layer in the small intestine.
4.1.4
Microalgae in the core-shell alginate microbeads
To observe the living state of microalgae in the microbeads, a higher magnification was
applied on the optical microscope. Figure 9 shows the microalgae in the microbeads under
4-40x magnification. From Figure 9 A, we could see the microalgae were concentrated in the
inner core of the microbeads. They were concentrated on the top side in the figure under the
focus sight. Figure 9 B gives a clear illustration on the disperse distribution of the microalgae
in the core of microbeads. The microalgae shows a dark green with an intact sphere shape.
Under 40x magnification, the microalgae still show a good cell integrity while most of the
cell are static.
Based on the result of the optical microscopy, the microalgae were confirmed to be in
Page 19 of 46
==PAGE:23==
Master thesis
4.1
Fabrication and characterization of core-shell microbeads by extrusion
Figure 9: Microalgae in the Microbeads under 4x magnification (A, scale bar: 1 mm), 10x
magnification (B, scale bar: 200 µm) and 40x magnification (C, scale bar: 100 µm)
the microbeads with a great population. The colors of the microalgae was dark or light green
with good cell integrity and similar to the microalgae at native state (Figure 8 A). The cell
structure was well maintained and the cell wall kept intact. The only unexpected fact was
that most microalgae were motionless which is different from when the microalgae is grown in
aqueous culture. One possible reason is that the high calcium concentration in the crosslink
bath stimulates the microalgae and cause a disbalance of calcium level inside the cells. The
abnormal calcium level inhibits the movement of microalgae and causes deflagellation and
gliding motility [35]. Another reason could be that the microalgae are trapped into the
alginate. The excellent mobility of microalgae allows them keep moving in the water. Some
microalgae might swim into the sodium alginate solution when the sodium alginate and the
microalgae are pumped out from the coaxial needle. When the core-shell droplet forms,
the sodium alginate does not contact the calcium ion and it is still in liquid phase. The
microalgae can swim into the sodium alginate solution and they are locked in the alginate
when the droplet is dripped into CaCl2 bath, where the crosslink reacts. After crosslinking,
the alginate is solid and microalgae cannot move out of the gelation network with its mobility.
However, the microalgal flagella were also not visible in the microalgae in the microbeads
(Figure 9 C) when we compared it with the microalgae in the native state (Figure 8 A). There
are two possible explanations for this phenomenon. The first one is that the magnification is
not high enough to observe the microalgal flagellum in the microbeads. However, the higher
magnification cannot be applied due to the thickness of the microbeads, the microbeads will
contact the lens. Addtionally, the thickness of the microbeads brings difficulty to focus on
the microalgae. The microscope can only focus on one plane per time. Another possible
explanation is that the microalgal flagellum detaches from the cells due to a physical or
chemical stimulus, such as a high calcium concentration during the fabrication process. The
stimulus causes the microalgae to lose their flagella. If time allows, further research is needed
to determine the cause of the immobility of microalgae in the microbeads.
Page 20 of 46
==PAGE:24==
Master thesis
4.1
Fabrication and characterization of core-shell microbeads by extrusion
Figure 10: SEM image of the core-shell microbeads, scale bar in each figure is 500 µm
4.1.5
SEM image of the core-shell microbeads
To get a closer look into the mophology of the core-shell microbeads, SEM was con-
ducted and images of the core-shell microbeads were acquired. The microbeads were dried
in a freeze-dryer for 24 hours. The dried microbeads were observed under SEM. The results
are shown in Figure 10. In the figure, the shape of the microbead is irregular with a hole
in the center or on the side. The size of the microbeads is around 1.5 mm and the average
diameter of the holes is around 0.5 mm. The surface of the microbeads is rough with wrinkles.
The morphology of the microbeads is not the regular sphere of optical microscopy, which
explains the irregular shape under SEM. In addition, with the process in the freeze-dryer,
the surface morphology may become rougher and have a more irregular shape. The water
content in the microbeads are supposed to evaporate during the treatment in the freeze-
dryer. The water core in the microbeads should be empty after drying. The shell layer may
be fragile after freeze-dry, particular if the core is not centrally located in the microbeads.
The hole in the microbeads proves the present of the water core. When taking a closer view
to the hole on the microbeads, it clearly shows a hollow cavity in the microbeads. This
supports our core-shell structure and proves that we fabricated the core-shell microbeads
successfully.
However, the water core was not located at the center of the microbeads. The droplet
formed at the nozzle of coaxial needle has gravity force which dripping the droplet into the
gelation bath. The droplet faces the drag force from the air and the water when dripping
into the water. The microbeads from extrusion method may deform and have a teardrop
shape due to drag forces following the impact with the gelation bath [48]. At the same
time, the droplet needs to overcome the surface tension of water to penetrate the water-air
interface. These forces applied on the microbeads make the microbeads have an irregular
structure and may further affect the water core, which then leads to the random location of
the water core inside the microbead.
Page 21 of 46
==PAGE:25==
Master thesis
4.2
Fabrication and optimization of microbeads by microfluidic method
To optimize the structure and shape of the core-shell microbeads, microfluidic technol-
ogy was introduced to fabricate the structure. Microfluidics offers significant advantages over
traditional dripping methods for fabricating core-shell beads, primarily due to its ability to
produce highly monodisperse particles with precise control over size and structure [49, 50].
We assume that it can helps to produce uniform and monodispersed core-shell microbeads.
4.2
Fabrication and optimization of microbeads by microfluidic method
4.2.1
Steady flow in microfluidics
Figure 11: The flow of the fluid when reaching the steady state
The microfluidic fabrication system was set up and an optical microscope was used to
observe the flow in the microfluidic chip. Figure 11A shows the flow at the intersection
of alginate inlet channel and oil inlet channel. Figure 11B shows the location of droplet
formation. The location of them on the microfluidic chip is illustrated in Figure 11C. The
microfluidic fabrication was set up, and the infusion rate was adjusted to ensure stable flow
in the microfluidic chip while the flow in the oil channel will not run into the alginate input
Page 22 of 46
==PAGE:26==
Master thesis
4.2
Fabrication and optimization of microbeads by microfluidic method
channel. From the hypothesis, the two flows meet at the junction, and the alginate flow
will be cut into continuous droplets at the intersection point. Then the droplet will be sur-
rounded by oil flow and flow through the boarder outlet channel. The flow in the steady
state was shown in Figure 11A and B.
The oil phase and alginate phase meet at the junction from Figure 11A. However, the
alginate flow was not cut into droplet at the junction. A clear, continuous phase separation
was formed from the junction until to the tail part of output channel. The droplet formation
did not appear from the junction until it was close to the outlet. A possible reason for
this phenomenon is the flow rated. We speculated that the appropriate flow for the two
fluid could be found to optimize the location of droplet formation. We hope to generate the
droplet at the intersection to ensure the good quality of the droplet outlet.
4.2.2
Flow rate independence
Table 2: Droplet location under different flow conditions
Number of test
Alginate (µL/min)
Rapeseed oil (µL/min)
Droplets location
1
2
22
Outlet
2
3
10
Outlet
3
3
15
Outlet
4
3
22
Outlet
5
3
31
Outlet
6
4
23
Outlet
7
5
20
Outlet
8
7
40
Outlet
To investigate the influence of flow rate on the location of droplet formation, several
different flow rates were tested.
Eight trials were tested and the flow rate reaching the
steady state was recorded in Table 2. The range for alginate infusion rate is from 2 to 7
µL/min. The range of rapeseed oil infusion rate is from 10 to 40 µL/min. The infusion rate
of rapeseed oil is always at least three times faster than the alginate. Though the rate of
the tests varies, the droplets all formed at the outlet and none of them formed at the junction.
From these test, we found that it is hard to find a fixed value for the infusion rate of
alginate and rapeseed oil. The actual infusion rate for steady state fluctuated referring to
the channel. Since the channel is quite small as 50 µm, it was easily to be blocked by small
particles or fibers in the rapeseed oil. The infusion rate at steady state is affected by the
blocking of the channels. Some blockings are not big enough to block the channel but it
partially blocks the channels and a larger infusion rate is needed to let the liquid pass. How-
ever, an optimal range of the infusion rate can be concluded. The optimal range for alginate
is from 2 to 5 µL/min and the optimal range for rapeseed oil is from 20 to 30 µL/min. The
Page 23 of 46
==PAGE:27==
Master thesis
4.2
Fabrication and optimization of microbeads by microfluidic method
exact values can be found by performing the experiment.
From these test, the droplets were not generated in the junction as expected though we
tried to adjust the infusion rate. From this case, it is impossible to generate the droplets
at the junction by adjusting the infusion rate, which means that the location of droplet
formation is independent with the flow rate. After discussion, the viscosity might be the key
factor in influencing the location of droplet formation. To verify this, we decided to replace
alginate with water. Water has a less viscosity compared to sodium alginate solution. A
larger viscosity difference between oil and water may change the location of droplet formation.
4.2.3
Viscosity affects the location of droplet formation
Figure 12: The flow when infusing oil and alginate (A&B) and the flow when infusing oil
and water (C)
Here, we replaced the alginate solution with water to explore the effect of viscosity on
the location of droplet formation. Figure 12 A & B shows the droplet formation in the mi-
crofluidic chip when rapeseed oil and alginate are infused. When reaching steady state, the
alginate droplet was formed at the end of outlet as in the previous results. When infusing
oil and water, the droplet was formed at the junction of two fluids Figure 12 C.
The difference of applying water and alginate is quite obvious. The round and droplets
continued to generate homogeneously at the intersection point of oil and water. The viscos-
ity difference of two fluids is the key to decide where the droplet forms. The reason why
the droplet cannot form at the junction is the low viscosity difference between the oil and
Page 24 of 46
==PAGE:28==
Master thesis
4.2
Fabrication and optimization of microbeads by microfluidic method
alginate. To realize the uniformly droplet formation at the junction for alginate, a higher
viscosity organic solvent is needed. The viscosity of the solvent has to be larger than rape-
seed oil and the solvent has a phase separation with alginate aqueous solution.
Besides, the infusion rates at steady state for the two groups are different. When the
group of water and oil reached steady state, the infusion rate of water is 4 µL/min and the
infusion rate of oil is 9 µL/min. For alginate and oil, their infusion rate are 5 µL/min and
20 µL/min respectively. The infusion rate of oil was lower when it generate water beads
compared with when it generate alginate beads. We concluded that the rate at reaching
steady state depends on the viscosity of the fluids.
4.2.4
Droplet formation in the outlet tube
Figure 13: Alginate droplet in the outlet tube
Though the alginate droplet cannot form at the junction, the droplet was formed at the
end of chip outlet continuously. A outlet tube was used to connect the outlet and the CaCl2
bath. This is used to guide the droplet to flow into the gel bath and crosslink in the bath.
This step is to verify the general working principle of the microfluidic fabrication and see if
it can produce the crosslinked alginate beads.
The outlet fluid was shown in Figure 13. The small and homogenous droplet was mov-
ing continuously in the outlet tube. There was also a bigger droplet followed by some small
droplet (red circle in Figure 13).
The possible explanation for the large droplet in the outlet tube is the location of droplet
formation. The droplet formed at the end of outlet, they will accumulate and fuse into larger
droplets then flow out through the outlet tube. Considering the diameter of the channels
increases from the outlet in the microfluidic chip to the connected tube, this leads a slower
flow rate for the droplets in the tube compared with in the chip.
The slower flow rate
provides the opportunity for droplet fusion.
Page 25 of 46
==PAGE:29==
Master thesis
4.2
Fabrication and optimization of microbeads by microfluidic method
4.2.5
Optical images of microbeads
Figure 14: A-C, Optical image of microbeads under 4x magnification, scale bar is 200 µm;
D, demonstration of the oil interface in the bath
The microbeads of this microfluidic fabrication were observed under an optical micro-
scope. Pictures of microbeads were taken under microscope (Figure 14). From Figure 14, we
can see the microbeads have roughly round shape and some of them are oval. Microbeads
are clearly presented and surrounded by a flat layer. The individual microbead shows a egg
structure: a hard sphere core inside like yolk centered by a thin layer like the egg white.
The microdroplet coming out from the outlet tube will immersed in CaCl2 bath imme-
diately. The microbeads should have a round shape and rigid core. It is not supposed to
be a egg-like structure. After tracing back the fabrication process, the stirring speed might
be the key problem. At this time, the stirring speed was 450 rpm. The microbeads came
out with the oil from the outlet tube and they float up to the water surface along with the
tube. The stirring process cannot separate the microbeads with oil because the oil has strong
surface tension. We could observe that the microbeads are clumping on the liquid level and
are wrapped by the big drop of oil (Illustrated in Figure 14D). We hypothesis that the oil
traps the microbeads in the oil phase in the liquid level and make the microbeads have flat
side. To verify it, a higher stirring speed was applied to see if there is any progress.
4.2.6
Optimization of spinning rate
The microbeads of this microfluidic fabrication after increasing the stirring rate to 850
rpm were observed under an optical microscope. Pictures of microbeads were taken under
microscope Figure 15 and the size was measured. The summary of size distribution was
shown in Table 3.
From Figure 15, the sphere-structured microbeads were shown. By increasing the stir-
ring rate, the oil floating on the water is reduced and the microbeads clumped was reduced
as well. By adjusting the stirring rate, the structure of micrbeads was altered. The egg-like
microbeads disappeared during this fabrication. This shows that the stirring rate can alter
the clumping of microbeads in the oil on the water-air interface. It helps to mix alginate
droplet with CaCl2 bath thoroughly so that optimize the bead structure.
Page 26 of 46
==PAGE:30==
Master thesis
4.3
Viability of microalgae in FaSSIF
Figure 15: Optical image of microbeads under 10x magnification, scale bar is 200 µm
From Figure15, we could see round alginate beads with a diameter of around 500 µm.
The size of the microbead was not uniformly distributed. There were also smaller microbeads
with a diameter around 300 µm. From the size distribution of 13 microbeads, the average
size of the beads is around 500 µm with a standard deviation of 106.34 µm.
The diameter of the outlet channel on the microfluidic chip is 250 µm. Theoretically, the
size of the beads should be less than 250 µm, which is much smaller than the experimental
results.
The results prove the speculation that the droplet will fuse and form a bigger
droplet in the connected outlet tube. The bigger microbeads can hold more microalgae for
drug delivery. It also brings a threat for the stable structure of core-shell microbeads. Since
our goal is to connect the coaxial needle to the microfluidic chip and let the oil to encapsulate
the core-shell droplet of alginate and microalgae. The fusion of droplets may disrupt the
core-shell structure.
4.2.7
Summary for microfluidic fabrication
Because the limited time for the project, the exploration of microfluidic fabrication
ended here. We tried set up the microfluidic system and explore the effect of flow rate and
viscosity on the flow of the microfluidic chip. We found out that the location of droplet
formation is very viscosity-dependent.
A higher viscosity solvent like silicone oil can be
applied to see if it helps to generate the droplet at the junction. It is also expected that it
could solve the problem of droplet fusion by improving the viscosity of organic solvent to
ensure the stable production of microbeads in the future.
4.3
Viability of microalgae in FaSSIF
The viability of the microalgae in the FaSSIF was tested to verify the mobility for oral
drug delivery application. The microalgae was cultured in 10 mL TAP and FaSSIF respec-
tively for 10 minutes, then the mixture was centrifuged at 1500 rpm for 5 min. The supernant
was discard and the microalgae was resuspended in 10 mL TAP culture. SYTOXTM green
Page 27 of 46
==PAGE:31==
Master thesis
4.3
Viability of microalgae in FaSSIF
Figure 16: Viability of C. reinhardtii in FaSSIF and TAP
was used to stain the dead microalgae cells for 5 minutes. The samples were observed under
a confocal microscope.
Figure 16 shows the viability of microalgae cells after the treatment in the FaSSIF and
TAP solution for 10 minutes. The green fluorescent points are the dead cells and the red
florescence are auto-fluorescent viable cells. Under the same visual field, there are more red
fluorescence than the green florescence in FaSSIF group. The cell numbers were counted by
analyzing the fluorescence signals in the images by Image J. The numbers of live and dead
cells were 380 and 105 for the FaSSIF group (see Appendix Table 4). The cell viability of
FaSSIF treatment is 78.35%. For the control group, the green fluorescent signal is quite weak
and only few points. The dead and live cells are analyzing the signal points in the image.
There are 120 viable cells and only 2 dead cells in the control group after removing the noise
(see Appendix Table 4. The cell viability in the control group is 98.36%.
From this result, it shows that the cell viability decreases for 20% when treating in the
FaSSIF for 10 minutes. It means that the intestinal fluid affects the viability of microalgae
cells negatively. The intestinal fluid has high concentration of salts and enzymes, which
might disrupt cell membranes as well as degrade the cellular components.
The osmotic
pressure further impair metabolic activity and energy production. These factors compromise
membrane integrity and physiological function, leading to decreased survival of microalgae in
the intestinal environment. For the 10 minutes treatment in FaSSIF, 70% of the cells keeps
good viability and most of them still have mobility though the mobility is moderately reduced
than its native state (see video 1 and 2 in supplementary). This observation indicates that
a substantial portion of the microalgae can survive the initial intestinal environment and
maintain functional motility after release from the microbeads. The preserved movement
Page 28 of 46
==PAGE:32==
Master thesis
4.4
Stability test of core-shell microbeads
suggests that the microalgae are still capable of moving through the intestinal fluid, thereby
supporting their potential utility as an active, self-propelling drug delivery system from
the microbeads in the intestine. Though only 10 minutes was tested here, we assume it is
sufficient for microalgae to swim towards the mucosa from the intestine lumen consider the
swimming speed of microalgae is around 50 µm/s [51].
4.4
Stability test of core-shell microbeads
4.4.1
Stability in simulated gastric fluid
Figure 17: Microbeads after incubation in SGF for 2 hours (A, the scale bar: 1 mm; B, the
scale bar: 200 µm)
Since the FaSSGF in the stock was run out. 1x PBS buffer with a pH of 2 was prepared
to as a substitute solution. This experiment is to verify the stability of the microbeads in
the simulated gastric fluid (SGF), where the acidic environment threatens the viability of
microalgae. We want to explore whether the core-shell structure can maintain well in the
acidic solution as well as protect the microalgae in the core. The core-shell microbeads (0.8
g) were transferred to a glass tube and co-cultured with 5 ml of PBS (pH = 2). The states
of the microbeads were observed after 2 hours incubation. Figure 17 shows the morphology
of microbeads after 2 hours incubation in SGF. The microbeads retained a general round
shape and the boundary is very differentiated. The shell alginate is very compacted and the
whole core-shell microbeads maintain a solid shell.
The gastric environment is the pathway for the core-shell microbeads to release in the
intestine. The acidic fluid in the gastric tract increases the difficulty to deliver drug. Food
generally spends between 40 minutes to 2 hours in the stomach before moving to the small
intestine [52]. The exact time can vary based on the type of food and individual factors.
The structure of microbeads keeps intact and stable after 2 hours incubation in SGF. It
proves that this core-shell microbeads structure can maintain and keep stable under the
acidic environment in the stomach. The core-shell structure keeps intact before it enters
intestine.
Page 29 of 46
==PAGE:33==
Master thesis
4.4
Stability test of core-shell microbeads
4.4.2
Microalgae in microbeads in the SGF
Figure 18: Microalgae in the microbeads under the co-culture with 1xPBS (pH=2) (the scale
bar: 100 µm)
To explore if the core-shell structure can protect the microalgae in the SGF. The pictures
of microalgae were taken during the stability test of microalgae in the SGF. The core-shell
microbeads (0.8 g) were co-cultured with 5 ml of PBS (pH = 2) in a glass tube. The states
of the microalgae in the microbeads were observed during 2 hours of incubation. The record
was in Figure 18. The microalgae remained green and showed a round or oval shape dur-
ing 2 hours of incubation. From 10 min, some microalgae had an encapsulated transparent
layer (red arrows in Figure 18 while some microalgae kept a solid green-bead shape. This
phenomenon lasted from the first 10 minutes to 2 hours. Some microalgea clusters could
be found in the figure (yellow arrows). Two to four microalgae cells stuck each other and
formed a small cluster.
From the cell color and shape, most microalgae keeps green and round or oval during the
two hours’ treatment in SGF. The states of microalgae did not vary too much with respect
of treatment time. Most cells show plasmolysis and shrink inside the cell wall. The liquid
content of the cell leaks out due to exosmosis. The cell collapses, and the cell membrane
pulls away from the cell wall. Plasmolysis is caused by immersing cells in strong saline or
sugar solutions. This means that the SGF we used here is hypertonic to microalgae. Long
time in plasmolysis is not good for the viability and proliferation of the cells. The homemade
SGF is not good for the growth of microalgae. This result here can be an indication for the
performance of microalgae in the gastric fluid to certain extent. However, the gastric fluid
is a dynamic, enzyme-rich secretion, where the acidified PBS is a simple, inert laboratory
buffer. Their constitution are different. Gastric fluid is a complex, enzyme-rich secretion and
it contains 99 % water mixed with around 0.4 % HCl, around 0.05 % w/v pepsin, 2% mucin
Page 30 of 46
==PAGE:34==
Master thesis
4.4
Stability test of core-shell microbeads
glycoproteins, intrinsic factor and electrolytes [11]. Our homemade SGF is a simple isotonic
buffer 1x PBS acidified with HCl, contains no proteins or enzymes, and relies on a fixed
phosphate system for buffering. From the previous research, gastric osmolality in the fasted
state has been shown to range from 29-276 mOsm/kg [53]. The osmolality for standard 1x
Phosphate-Buffered Saline is 275 - 304 mOs/kg, as given in the Sigma product specification
sheet [54]. With more HCI in the homemade SGF, the osmolality for the homemade SGF will
be higher than 279 mOsm/kg H2O. To get a reliable result of microalgae viability in SGF,
further experiment with commerial SGF is needed to figure out the response of microalgae
in the core-shell microbeads. While PBS (pH=2) provided a preliminary model, future work
should validate results with commercial FaSSGF containing pepsin and mucin.
4.4.3
Stability of microbeads in FaSSIF
Figure 19: Video record of the microbeads under 37 ◦C incubation with water (left) and
simulated intestine fluid (right)
The goal of the core shell microbeads carrying the microalgae is to provide a new oral
drug delivery system and the microalgae are expected to be released in the intestine. The
stability of the microbeads is tested to see its releasing performance in the simulated intes-
tine fluid. The microbeads (0.75 g) were mixed with 5 mL FaSSIF and water respectively.
Water is used as the control group. The mixture were stored in a closed glass and incubated
under 37 ◦C. The state of the mixture at various time points was shown in Figure 19. The
mixture in the FaSSIF group started to be turbid from 30 min and the color of the liquid
part became opalescent. After 2 hours incubation, some microbeads in the FaSSIF started
to deform and swell. Compared with the water group under the same incubation time, the
microbeads in the FaSSIF were bigger and more transparent from appearance. When the
microbeads were incubated for 3.5 hours, obvious deformation and breaking beads were ob-
served in FaSSIF group. The debris was clearly observed by eyes when shaking the tube.
While the microbeads in the water kept intact and the liquid in the water group was still
lucid after 24 hours incubation. The microbeads were whiter compared with the initial state
before the incubation in the water group. The video record of the microbeads can be found
in supplementary material.
From the result, we could see that the microbeads degraded in FaSSIF under 37 ◦C
without mechanical force on them. The microbeads were seen to degrade when they were
Page 31 of 46
==PAGE:35==
Master thesis
4.4
Stability test of core-shell microbeads
incubated with FaSSIF after 30 minutes. However, it remains visually intact in the water.
The alginate is stable under low pH like gastric fluid and it is soluble under neutral condition.
The pH of FaSSIF is neutral and this explains the alginate microbeads partially degrade
and show a deform structure. However, the water group has the same neutral pH but the
microbeads seem intact. There are more ions and enzymes in FaSSIF. It is possible that
these ions and enzymes accelerate the degradation of the alginate shell, making it more
fragile and deformed as the longer incubation time.
Figure 20: The microbeads incubated with FaSSIF and water under 37 ◦C after 2 hours, and
the scale bar is 200 µm
The microscopic images of the microbeads for 2h and 24h incubation were taken during
this stability test. From Figure 20, the morphology of the beads for 2 hours incubation was
shown. For the FaSSIF group, the structure of the beads seems intact under the microscopy.
The boundary is unsmooth and it shows clear deformation. There are many pores toward
the outside and the outer layer of the alginate is wrinkled (red arrow in Figure 20). For the
water group, the structure of the microbeads is intact. The outer layer of the microbeads is
integrated and well packed. On the boundary of the transparent outer layer, there are some
tiny tips pointing outwards to the microbeads.
The degradation of the microbeads starts from the surface to the inner layer. The outer
layer of the microbeads shows obvious wrinkle in the FaSSIF while the outer layer seems
still intact and packed in the water. Additionally, the microbeads maintain its structure
integrity at the inner core area. This shows that the degradation in the solvent starts from
outer layer to the inner layer. Since the outer layer contacts directly the treatment solvent
than the inner core. Ion exchange and enzymatic reaction are quite active here than the
inner microbeads. This explains that outer layer degrades faster than the inner core.
By comparing the treatment with water and FaSSIF, the solution process of microbeads
in the FaSSIF is faster and more obvious than the treatment in the water. The wrinkle of
outer layer alginate was observed from FaSSIS treatment while was not from water treat-
ment. FaSSIF react with the alginate more actively than the water.
Page 32 of 46
==PAGE:36==
Master thesis
4.4
Stability test of core-shell microbeads
Figure 21: The microbeads incubated with FaSSIF and water under 37 ◦C after 24 hours
(The white scale bar is 500 µm and the black scale bar is 200 µm)
From Figure 21, the morphology of the beads for 24 hours incubation was shown. For
the treatment with FaSSIF, the microbeads was roughly maintained with an oval core under
microscope. The defects in the shell layer can be easily detected. The outer layer of the
alginate was mostly degraded, and there were only a few pieces of debris left. The shrink
of the microbeads was observed and the morphology of the microbeads were uneven and
irregular. For the treatment in the water, the microbeads still maintain a good and intact
physical structure. The boundary alginate layer formed stripe-like structure. The surface of
the outer shell is a little rough.
The outer layer of the microbeads almost degraded after incubation with FaSSIF for 24
hours. Compared with the pictures of 2 hours incubation, the outer layer of the microbeads
was digested mostly.
The microbeads in the water still keeps a good morphology.
The
stripe-shape of the outer layer shows the microbeads swelled and there are gaps between the
gel. The Ca2+ in the alginate provides osmotic pressure against the water, which makes the
gel absorb more water.
From the results above, we proved the digestion of alginate microbeads in the simulated
intestine fluid. Though the microbeads started to break after 2 hours of FaSSIF treatment, we
could tell the reaction happens at the beginning of the incubation in the first 30 minutes. Here
we designed the experiment at body temperature without adding the mechanical force to the
beads. In reality, the microbeads will encounter the mechanical force from all directions in
the intestine because of the peristalsis of the small intestine. Peristalsis will apply mechanical
force on the microbeads and let them break so that the microalgae inside the microbeads
will release to the intestinal tract quickly.
Page 33 of 46
==PAGE:37==
Master thesis
4.5
Cytotoxicity
4.5
Cytotoxicity
4.5.1
Cytotoxicity of microalgae
Figure 22: LDH cytotoxicity test of various microalgae concentrations
Three groups of C. reinhardtii with different concentrations were tested to explore the
cytotoxicity. The C. reinhardtii were resuspended with Caco-2 cell medium for 24 hours to
prepare the conditional medium. Caco-2 cells were plated in the 96-well plate. The condi-
tional medium was filtered with the membrane (pore size 0.22 µm) to remove the microalgae.
Then the conditional media was cultured with Caco-2 cells in the 96-well plate for 24 hours.
The cytotoxicity detection kit was used for quantitating cytotoxicity and cytolysis by mea-
suring LDH activity released from damaged cells. The result was shown in Figure 22.
The cytotoxicity of all the experimental groups is below 20%. The cytotoxicity of low C.
reinhardtii, medium C. reinhardtii and high C. reinhardtii is -8.66%, -10.83% and -13.05%
respectively. The cytotoxicity decreases as the concentration of C. reinhardtii increases.
From the results in Figure 22, the cytotoxocity is negative compared with low control,
which is treated by the normal cell culture medium of Caco-2 cells. The negative value
means that C. reinhardtii has no cytotoxicity to Caco-2 cells. Additionally, it can contribute
to the proliferation of Caco-2 cells. As the concentration of C. reinhardtii goes higher, the
contributing effect is more prominent. In culture, Caco-2 cells spontaneously differentiate
into a heterogeneous mixture of intestinal epithelial cells. It is primarily used as a model
of the intestinal epithelial barrier. Since C. reinhardtii has no cytotoxicity to the Caco-2,
we conclude that C. reinhardtii has no cytotoxicity to the intestine epithelial cells in theory.
This provides the foundation for the core-shell microbeads for drug releasing in the intestine,
because the microalgae is supposed to be released in small intestine and further deliver loaded
drugs to the intestine epithelial cells.
Page 34 of 46
==PAGE:38==
Master thesis
4.5
Cytotoxicity
4.5.2
Cell viability under the treatment of microalgae
Figure 23: Cell viability of Caco-2 cells under the treatment of microalgae.
Statistical
significance is presented as *** (p ≤0.001).
Three groups of C. reinhardtii with different concentrations were tested to explore the
cell viability. The experimental procedure is similar to LDH cytotoxicity test. C. reinhardtii
was resuspended in Caco-2 cell culture medium at different concentrations and incubated for
24 hours to produce the conditional medium. After seeding Caco-2 cells in 96-well plates,
the conditioned medium was subsequently filtered through a 0.22 µm pore size membrane
to remove algal cells and other particles. The filtered conditioned medium was then applied
to the Caco-2 cells and co-cultured for an additional 1 day, 3 days and 5 days respectively.
The CCK-8 kit was used to assess cell viability by measuring metabolic activity. It relies
on the reduction of the water-soluble tetrazolium salt WST-8 by cellular dehydrogenases in
viable cells, producing a yellow-orange formazan dye.
The result of the cell viability test was shown in Figure 23. The viability with C. rein-
hardtii treatment are higher than the control group on the first day. On day 3, the cell
viability of all groups increases around one time than day 1. The different thing is that, the
viability of the control group is higher than the three experimental group, as same as it is
on day 5. On day 5, the cell viability of all groups is higher than day 5 and the increment
is 20-30%, slower than from day 1 to day 3. Each group shows an increment in viability as
an increasing incubation time.
The results shows the long term effect of the C. reinhardtii to the growth and metabolism
of Caco-2 cells. From day 1, the viability of cells with microalgae treatment is higher than
the control group, which means the microalgae can promote the growth of Caco-2 cells. The
cell viability of low C. reinhardtii concentration group has the highest cell viability, which
means its promoting effect is the best. On day 3 and day 5, the cell viability increases around
by one time for the experimental groups, around 30% lower than the control group. It shows
Page 35 of 46
==PAGE:39==
Master thesis
4.5
Cytotoxicity
that the microalgae conditional medium can promote the growth of Caco-2 cells for 5 days,
though the growth speed is not high as the normal culture medium. The promoting effect of
all the three levels of microalgae are roughly the same from day 3 to day 5. This experiment
shows that the microalgae can promote the metabolism and proliferation of Caco-2 cells
from a long term perspective. This increases the feasibility of core-shell drug releasing in
the intestine.
4.5.3
Cytotoxicity of microalgae-loaded microbeads
Figure 24: LDH cytotoxicity test of the microbeads with various concentration
Three groups of microbeads loaded with C. reinhardtii (0.15 g, 0.416 g and 0.511 g)
were tested to explore the cytotoxicity of the core-shell microbeads. The microbeads were
resuspended with 3 mL Caco-2 cell medium for 24 hours to prepare the conditional medium.
Caco-2 cells were planted in the 96-well plate. The conditional medium was filtered with
the membrane (pore size 0.22 µm) to remove the bacteria and microalgae. Then the cells
were incubated with conditioned medium in the 96-well plate for 24 hours. The cytotoxicity
detection kit was used for quantitating cytotoxicity and cytolysis by measuring LDH activity
released from damaged cells. The result was shown in Figure 24.
The cytotoxicity of all the experimental groups are below 20%. The cytotoxicity of low
microbeads concentration, medium microbeads concentration and high microbeads concen-
tration are -7.25%, -7.23% and -10.66% respectively. The cytotoxicity of low C. reinhardtii
(Cr) and medium Cr are generally the same and they are around 3% lower than the high Cr
group.
The results in the Figure 24 show that all the experimental groups have negative cyto-
toxicity on the Caco-2 cells, which means that the microbeads have no cytotoxicity on Caco-2
cells. In addition, it can promote the growth of Caco-2 cells. The highest concentration of
Page 36 of 46
==PAGE:40==
Master thesis
4.5
Cytotoxicity
microbeads shows the most promotive effect than the lower concentration of microbeads
group. The promotive effect does not show as a linear relationship to the concentration
of the microbeads. In general, the microbeads loaded with C. reinhardtii does not show a
cytotoxicity to the Caco-2 cells, which verifies its possibility to be applied in drug delivery
and controlled release in the small intestine.
4.5.4
Cell viability under treatment of microalgae-loaded microbeads
Figure 25: Cell viability of Caco-2 cells under the treatment of microbeads.
Statistical
significance is presented as ** (p ≤0.01) and *** (p ≤0.001).
Three batches of C. reinhardtii-containing microbeads (weighing 0.203 g, 0.477 g, and
0.806 g) were processed as described above to assess cell viability. Each batch was sus-
pended in 5 mL of Caco-2 culture medium and incubated for 24 h to produce conditioned
media. Caco-2 cells were then plated in 96-well plates, and the conditioned media were
passed through a 0.22 µm filter to remove any Cr cells and debris before using. The re-
sulting filtrates were applied to Caco-2 cells and co-cultured for 1 and 5 days, respectively.
Cell viability was assessed using the CCK-8 assay, which quantifies metabolic activity via
the reduction of the tetrazolium salt WST-8 by intracellular dehydrogenases in viable cells,
yielding a water-soluble formazan dye detectable by absorbance at 450 nm.
From the result in Figure 25, the cell viability in day 1 are all close to 100% for every
group while there are some variance between the groups. The viability of low Cr microbeads
is the highest to 106.87%. The viability of high Cr microbeads is the lowest to 98.16%. The
cell viability increases a lot on day 5. The viability of the control groups has risen for three
times, similar as the low Cr microbeads group. The medium Cr group increases to 354% and
the high Cr microbeads group increases to 285%. Each experimental group has a significant
Page 37 of 46
==PAGE:41==
Master thesis
increasing and the increment decreases with respect to the increasing amount of microbeads.
The p-value for day 5 is less than 0.001.
On day 1, the value of cell viability of all the experimental group are around the same and
greater than 98%. The cell viability of three experimental groups shows that the microbeads
are generally considered biocompatible in vitro. The value of cell viability increases a lot on
day 5, which shows a good condition of the cells. The promotive effect on the cell viability
decreases as the microbead concentration increases. The p-value is less than 0.001, which
means that the viability difference has a strong relation with the difference in the amount of
microbeads. Though the high amount of microbeads cannot support the cell growth as the
normal cell culture medium does, but it can still ensure sufficient cell proliferation and show
no obvious cytotoxicity. It shows the great biocompatibility of the core-shell microbeads and
the non-cytoxicity from a long-term perspective.
5
Conclusion
In this project, a novel core-shell alginate microbead system was successfully developed
to encapsulate C. reinhardtii for potential oral drug delivery applications. Using a coaxial
extrusion setup, core-shell beads with distinct alginate shells and aqueous cores were fabri-
cated, as confirmed by optical microscopy and SEM imaging. Although extrusion-produced
beads exhibited irregular shapes and variable core positioning, they provided effective protec-
tion of the microalgae in simulated gastric conditions (pH 2) for at least two hours, retaining
structural integrity of the core-shell within the core. Microalgae released into FaSSIF main-
tained approximately 78 % viability after 10 minutes. The preserved motility indicates that
a substantial fraction of microalgae cells remains functional when passing to the intestine,
which can enhance the mucosal penetration. The degradation of microbeads in the FaSSIF
shows the releasing process of microalgae in the small intestine. The cytotoxicity test ver-
ify that core-shell microbeads is a biocompatible system to realize oral drug delivery and
drug releasing in the GI tract. A preliminary microfluidic approach was explored to find
an approach to optimize the beads generation. We found that viscosity modulation is criti-
cal for on-chip droplet formation, and that elevated stirring rates during CaCl2 crosslinking
yield more uniform, spherical beads. However, the principle behind the microfluidics is com-
plicated and more time input is needed to further optimize into the core-shell microbeads
fabrication. These results establish a proof-of-concept for encapsulating living microalgae in
pH-sensitive core-shell alginate carriers and highlight key fabrication parameters that govern
bead morphology and cargo viability.
6
Perspective
This study demonstrated that core-shell alginate beads can encapsulate C. reinhardtii
in an aqueous core by using a coaxial needle.
The controlled releasing property in the
GI tract was verified and the core-shell microbeads behaved excellent biocompatibility and
Page 38 of 46
==PAGE:42==
Master thesis
non-cytotoxicity. However, the mobility of microalgae in the microbeads, survival passage
through simulated gastric fluid, the viability of the microalgae under dynamic gastric con-
dition and their ability to release from the microbeads remain to be fully characterized.
Addressing these gaps will be essential to promote this core-shell alginate microbeads deliv-
ery platform toward clinical translation.
Optimization of the core-shell structure can be one of the focus in the further work.
Optimize bead integrity and microalgae protection by systematically varying coaxial extru-
sion parameters (e.g., the flow rate, alginate and CaCl2 concentration, light). Finding an
optimal flow rate helps to fabricate a stable core-shell structure that more microalgae can
be encapsulated inside the alginate. We can attempt to lower the concentration of CaCl2
where the effect of calcium ions on the microalgae can be reduced and the generation of mi-
crobeads remains sufficient. The fabrication process was conducted in a light environment.
Light significantly influences microalgae mobility by affecting their photosynthetic activity
and subsequent growth. Microalgae require light for photosynthesis, and the intensity and
duration of light exposure can significantly impact their motility [55]. If the fabrication is
conducted in a dark environment, the mobility of microalgae may be mitigated and less
microalgae will swim into the alginate during crosslink. More microalgae can stay in the
water phase, which is a possible solution for enhancing the mobility.
As for the microfluidic fabrication, there are more work to be explored in this fabrication
method. Firstly, the rapeseed oil can be replaced by another organic solvent with higher
viscosity. This is to create a larger viscosity difference and control the droplet formation
at the junction. Viscosity affects the flow behavior of fluids. For instance, higher viscosity
can lead to larger droplets, while shear-thinning fluids can impact droplet formation dy-
namics [56]. Secondly, microfluidic channel geometries and flow-focusing parameters can be
optimized to achieve narrower size distributions and higher throughput of alginate beads [57].
Mobility of microalgae inside the microbeads needs further exploration. The mobility
is the key to improve the oral drug administration in this case by overcoming the mucus
barrier. For the future work, the mobility of the microalgae have to be determined. From
the previous research, they show that both whole-cell and sharply localized apical Ca2+
transients-triggered by acid shock or elevated external Ca2+ - are closely correlated with
the severing of flagella, implicating rapid, region-specific Ca2+ (cyt) elevations as the key
signal initiating autotomy [58]. From the current result, there is a great possibility that the
high Ca2+ concentration in the bath stimulates the microalgae and cause a dysfunction of
flagellum moving or deflagellation. In the future, strains with less sensitivity to the external
Ca2+ can be applied to fabricate the core-shell microbeads. This is to reduce the sensitivity
of microalgae to Ca2+ so that the flagella can keep a normal structure and function to ensure
the mobility of the microalgae.
The viability of microbeads needs to be identified with commercial SGF, since the PBS
(pH=2) makes the microalgae plasmolysis. Though the effect of the commercial SGF to
the microalgae is unknown, the high viability is expected since the gastric fluid has a lower
Page 39 of 46
==PAGE:43==
Master thesis
osmolality. Moreover, acid-tolerant variants of C. reinhardtii have been identified, including
strains like CPCC 121, which exhibit increased tolerance to acidic conditions and heavy met-
als compared to the wild type [59]. These strains have developed mechanisms to mitigate the
toxic effects of acidic environments and heavy metals. The improved viability of microalgae
can be realized by using this acid-tolerant to fabricate the core-shell microbeads.
Drug loaded on microalgae realizes the targeting delivery. Microalgae offer a versatile,
biocompatible platform for drug loading by exploiting their robust cell walls. Drugs can
be incorporated intracellularly via osmotic shock or electroporation, physically adsorbed or
chemically conjugated to cell-wall polysaccharides [21]. The unique phototactic movement
of microalgae enables them controlled drug delivery to targeted tissues in patients [60].
Chlorella vulgaris, a naturally photosynthetic microalga, was applied as a drug carrier for the
chemotherapeutic agent doxorubicin, creating a multifunctional therapeutic platform (CV@
DOX) designed for tumor microenvironment modulation via light activation and combined
chemo-photodynamic treatment of osteosarcoma [61]. In future work, the drug can be loaded
on the microalgae and test the efficiency of this drug delivery system. Furthermore, the
targeting delivery can be realized by the phototactic movement of microalgae. The core-shell
microbead structure sets a foundation to yield a living drug-delivery vehicle with tunable
loading capacity, release kinetics and targeting specificity.
Page 40 of 46
==PAGE:44==
Master thesis
7
Appendix A
Table 3: Measured sizes of beads by microfluidic fabrication
Number
Size of beads (µm)
1
613.04
2
665.00
3
336.25
4
436.56
5
633.05
6
629.31
7
690.68
8
465.22
9
501.05
10
484.44
11
520.00
12
471.11
13
444.44
Average size
530.01
Standard deviation
106.34
Table 4: C. reinhardtii cell counts and viability under Control (TAP) and FaSSIF conditions.
Control
FaSSIF
Dead cells
2
105
Live cells
120
380
Cell viability
98.36%
78.35%
Page 41 of 46
==PAGE:45==
Master thesis
References
References
[1] B. Homayun, X. Lin, and H.-J. Choi, “Challenges and recent progress in oral drug
delivery systems for biopharmaceuticals,” Pharmaceutics, vol. 11, no. 3, p. 129, 2019.
[2] M. S. Alqahtani, M. Kazi, M. A. Alsenaidy, and M. Z. Ahmad, “Advances in oral drug
delivery,” Frontiers in pharmacology, vol. 12, p. 618411, 2021.
[3] J. Reinholz, K. Landfester, and V. Mailänder, “The challenges of oral drug delivery via
nanocarriers,” Drug delivery, vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 1694–1705, 2018.
[4] M. Plaza-Oliver, M. J. Santander-Ortega, and M. V. Lozano, “Current approaches in
lipid-based nanocarriers for oral drug delivery,” Drug delivery and translational research,
vol. 11, pp. 471–497, 2021.
[5] N. Gulati and H. Gupta, “Parenteral drug delivery: a review,” Recent patents on drug
delivery & formulation, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 133–145, 2011.
[6] K. S. Ingersoll and J. Cohen, “The impact of medication regimen factors on adherence
to chronic treatment: a review of literature,” Journal of behavioral medicine, vol. 31,
pp. 213–224, 2008.
[7] Y. Song, C. M. Day, F. Afinjuomo, J.-Q. E. Tan, S. W. Page, and S. Garg, “Advanced
strategies of drug delivery via oral, topical, and parenteral administration routes: where
do equine medications stand?,” Pharmaceutics, vol. 15, no. 1, p. 186, 2023.
[8] M. Azman, A. H. Sabri, Q. K. Anjani, M. F. Mustaffa, and K. A. Hamid, “Intestinal
absorption study: Challenges and absorption enhancement strategies in improving oral
drug delivery,” Pharmaceuticals, vol. 15, no. 8, p. 975, 2022.
[9] M. Goldberg and I. Gomez-Orellana, “Challenges for the oral delivery of macro-
molecules,” Nature reviews Drug discovery, vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 289–295, 2003.
[10] J. Ouyang, Z. Zhang, B. Deng, J. Liu, L. Wang, H. Liu, S. Koo, S. Chen, Y. Li, A. V.
Yaremenko, et al., “Oral drug delivery platforms for biomedical applications,” Materials
Today, vol. 62, pp. 296–326, 2023.
[11] D. M. Mudie, G. L. Amidon, and G. E. Amidon, “Physiological parameters for oral
delivery and in vitro testing,” Molecular pharmaceutics, vol. 7, no. 5, pp. 1388–1405,
2010.
[12] D. Wang, Q. Jiang, Z. Dong, T. Meng, F. Hu, J. Wang, and H. Yuan, “Nanocarriers
transport across the gastrointestinal barriers: the contribution to oral bioavailability
via blood circulation and lymphatic pathway,” Advanced drug delivery reviews, vol. 203,
p. 115130, 2023.
[13] L. Tarabova, Z. Makova, E. Piesova, R. Szaboova, and Z. Faixova, “Intestinal mucus
layer and mucins (a review),” Folia Vet, vol. 60, no. 1, pp. 21–5, 2016.
Page 42 of 46
==PAGE:46==
Master thesis
References
[14] O. Zupančič and A. Bernkop-Schnürch, “Lipophilic peptide character–what oral barriers
fear the most,” Journal of Controlled Release, vol. 255, pp. 242–257, 2017.
[15] K. Y. Lee and D. J. Mooney, “Alginate:
properties and biomedical applications,”
Progress in polymer science, vol. 37, no. 1, pp. 106–126, 2012.
[16] N. B. Erdal, M. Hakkarainen, and A. G. Blomqvist, “Polymers, giant molecules with
properties: An entertaining activity introducing polymers to young students,” Journal
of Chemical Education, vol. 96, no. 8, pp. 1691–1695, 2019.
[17] K. Chaturvedi, K. Ganguly, U. A. More, K. R. Reddy, T. Dugge, B. Naik, T. M.
Aminabhavi, and M. N. Noolvi, “Sodium alginate in drug delivery and biomedical areas,”
in Natural polysaccharides in drug delivery and biomedical applications, pp. 59–100,
Elsevier, 2019.
[18] D. M. Hariyadi and N. Islam, “Current status of alginate in drug delivery,” Advances in
pharmacological and pharmaceutical sciences, vol. 2020, no. 1, p. 8886095, 2020.
[19] N. S. Yaacob, H. Abdullah, M. F. Ahmad, M. N. Maniyam, and F. Sjahrir, “Microalgae
biotechnology: emerging biomedical applications,” in Algal Biotechnology, pp. 335–346,
Elsevier, 2022.
[20] L. Barsanti and P. Gualtieri, “Is exploitation of microalgae economically and energeti-
cally sustainable?,” Algal research, vol. 31, pp. 107–115, 2018.
[21] H. Huang, Y. Lang, S. Wang, and M. Zhou, “Microalgae-based drug delivery systems
in biomedical applications,” Engineered Regeneration, vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 361–374, 2024.
[22] D. Zhuang, N. He, K. S. Khoo, E.-P. Ng, K. W. Chew, and T. C. Ling, “Applica-
tion progress of bioactive compounds in microalgae on pharmaceutical and cosmetics,”
Chemosphere, vol. 291, p. 132932, 2022.
[23] J. Delasoie and F. Zobi, “Natural diatom biosilica as microshuttles in drug delivery
systems,” Pharmaceutics, vol. 11, no. 10, p. 537, 2019.
[24] D. Zhong, D. Zhang, T. Xie, and M. Zhou, “Biodegradable microalgae-based carriers for
targeted delivery and imaging-guided therapy toward lung metastasis of breast cancer,”
Small, vol. 16, no. 20, p. 2000819, 2020.
[25] I. S. Shchelik, S. Sieber, and K. Gademann, “Green algae as a drug delivery system for
the controlled release of antibiotics,” Chemistry–A European Journal, vol. 26, no. 70,
pp. 16644–16648, 2020.
[26] F. Zhang, J. Zhuang, Z. Li, H. Gong, B. E.-F. de Ávila, Y. Duan, Q. Zhang, J. Zhou,
L. Yin, E. Karshalev, et al., “Nanoparticle-modified microrobots for in vivo antibiotic
delivery to treat acute bacterial pneumonia,” Nature materials, vol. 21, no. 11, pp. 1324–
1332, 2022.
Page 43 of 46
==PAGE:47==
Master thesis
References
[27] T. Studer, D. Morina, I. S. Shchelik, and K. Gademann, “Biohybrid microswimmers
for antibiotic drug delivery based on a thiol-sensitive release platform,” Chemistry–A
European Journal, vol. 29, no. 26, p. e202203913, 2023.
[28] F. Zhang, Z. Li, Y. Duan, A. Abbas, R. Mundaca-Uribe, L. Yin, H. Luan, W. Gao,
R. H. Fang, L. Zhang, et al., “Gastrointestinal tract drug delivery using algae motors
embedded in a degradable capsule,” Science robotics, vol. 7, no. 70, p. eabo4160, 2022.
[29] S. Hua, S. Liu, L. Zhou, L. Wang, C. Liu, H. Wang, X. Chen, T. Shan, and M. Zhou,
“Natural floating biosystem for alcohol-induced diseases,” Matter, vol. 7, no. 5, pp. 1879–
1894, 2024.
[30] S. Paterson, M. Majchrzak, D. Alexandru, S. Di Bella, S. Fernández-Tomé, E. Ar-
ranz, M. Á. De la Fuente, P. Gómez-Cortés, and B. Hernández-Ledesma, “Impact of
the biomass pretreatment and simulated gastrointestinal digestion on the digestibility
and antioxidant activity of microalgae chlorella vulgaris and tetraselmis chuii,” Food
Chemistry, vol. 453, p. 139686, 2024.
[31] M. V. Vieira, L. M. Pastrana, and P. Fuciños, “Microalgae encapsulation systems for
food, pharmaceutical and cosmetics applications,” Marine drugs, vol. 18, no. 12, p. 644,
2020.
[32] L. A. Sharpe, J. E. Vela Ramirez, O. M. Haddadin, K. A. Ross, B. Narasimhan, and
N. A. Peppas, “ph-responsive microencapsulation systems for the oral delivery of polyan-
hydride nanoparticles,” Biomacromolecules, vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 793–802, 2018.
[33] N. T. T. Uyen, Z. A. A. Hamid, N. X. T. Tram, and N. Ahmad, “Fabrication of al-
ginate microspheres for drug delivery: A review,” International journal of biological
macromolecules, vol. 153, pp. 1035–1046, 2020.
[34] G. Wheeler, K. Helliwell, and C. Brownlee, “Calcium signalling in algae,” Perspectives
in Phycology, 2018.
[35] R. Amaral, D. Duci, F. C. Cotta, F. L. Bacellar, S. Oliveira, F. Verret, K. Asadi, L. K.
Vandamme, N. M. Reis, L. D. Bryant, et al., “Ion-driven communication and acclimation
strategies in microalgae,” Chemical Engineering Journal, vol. 473, p. 144985, 2023.
[36] P. Aiyar, D. Schaeme, M. García-Altares, D. Carrasco Flores, H. Dathe, C. Hertweck,
S. Sasso, and M. Mittag, “Antagonistic bacteria disrupt calcium homeostasis and im-
mobilize algal cells,” Nature Communications, vol. 8, no. 1, p. 1756, 2017.
[37] A. Raha, S. Bhattacharjee, P. Mukherjee, M. Paul, and A. Bagchi, “Design and charac-
terization of ibuprofen loaded alginate microspheres prepared by ionic gelation method,”
Int. J. Pharma. Res. Health Sci, vol. 6, pp. 2713–2729, 2018.
[38] D. K. Nguyen, Y. M. Son, and N.-E. Lee, “Hydrogel encapsulation of cells in core–shell
microcapsules for cell delivery,” Advanced healthcare materials, vol. 4, no. 10, pp. 1537–
1544, 2015.
Page 44 of 46
==PAGE:48==
Master thesis
References
[39] W. Kim and S. S. Kim, “Multishell encapsulation using a triple coaxial electrospray
system,” Analytical Chemistry, vol. 82, no. 11, pp. 4644–4647, 2010.
[40] B. M. Ladeira, C. A. Custódio, and J. F. Mano, “Core–shell microcapsules: biofab-
rication and potential applications in tissue engineering and regenerative medicine,”
Biomaterials Science, vol. 10, no. 9, pp. 2122–2153, 2022.
[41] C. Zhang, R. Grossier, N. Candoni, and S. Veesler, “Preparation of alginate hydrogel
microparticles by gelation introducing cross-linkers using droplet-based microfluidics: a
review of methods,” Biomaterials Research, vol. 25, no. 1, p. 41, 2021.
[42] B. G. Chung, K.-H. Lee, A. Khademhosseini, and S.-H. Lee, “Microfluidic fabrication of
microengineered hydrogels and their application in tissue engineering,” Lab on a Chip,
vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 45–59, 2012.
[43] Q.-Q. Liao, S.-K. Zhao, B. Cai, R.-X. He, L. Rao, Y. Wu, S.-S. Guo, Q.-Y. Liu, W. Liu,
and X.-Z. Zhao, “Biocompatible fabrication of cell-laden calcium alginate microbeads
using microfluidic double flow-focusing device,” Sensors and Actuators A: Physical,
vol. 279, pp. 313–320, 2018.
[44] K. T. L. Trinh, N. X. T. Le, and N. Y. Lee, “Microfluidic-based fabrication of alginate
microparticles for protein delivery and its application in the in vitro chondrogenesis of
mesenchymal stem cells,” Journal of Drug Delivery Science and Technology, vol. 66,
p. 102735, 2021.
[45] Paras, K. Yadav, P. Kumar, D. R. Teja, S. Chakraborty, M. Chakraborty, S. S. Moha-
patra, A. Sahoo, M. M. Chou, C.-T. Liang, et al., “A review on low-dimensional nano-
materials: nanofabrication, characterization and applications,” Nanomaterials, vol. 13,
no. 1, p. 160, 2022.
[46] K. Akhtar, S. A. Khan, S. B. Khan, and A. M. Asiri, Scanning Electron Microscopy:
Principle and Applications in Nanomaterials Characterization, pp. 113–145.
Cham:
Springer International Publishing, 2018.
[47] S. Dupuis and S. S. Merchant, “Chlamydomonas reinhardtii: A model for photosynthesis
and so much more,” 2023.
[48] J. P. Paques, E. van der Linden, C. J. van Rijn, and L. M. Sagis, “Preparation methods
of alginate nanoparticles,” Advances in colloid and interface science, vol. 209, pp. 163–
171, 2014.
[49] F. M. Galogahi, Y. Zhu, H. An, and N.-T. Nguyen, “Core-shell microparticles: Genera-
tion approaches and applications,” Journal of science: advanced materials and devices,
vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 417–435, 2020.
[50] L. Zhang, X. Ge, B. Xu, W. Zhang, L. Qu, C.-H. Choi, J. Xu, A. Zhang, H. Lee, D. A.
Weitz, et al., “Microfluidic fabrication of microparticles for biomedical applications,”
2018.
Page 45 of 46
==PAGE:49==
Master thesis
References
[51] E. Rycroft, “Swimming behaviour of a flagellated alga in newtonian and complex fluids,”
2022.
[52] T. Okabe, H. Terashima, and A. Sakamoto, “Determinants of liquid gastric emptying:
comparisons between milk and isocalorically adjusted clear fluids,” British Journal of
Anaesthesia, vol. 114, no. 1, pp. 77–82, 2015.
[53] C. Gisolfi, R. Summers, G. Lambert, and T. Xia, “Effect of beverage osmolality on
intestinal fluid absorption during exercise,” Journal of Applied Physiology, vol. 85, no. 5,
pp. 1941–1948, 1998.
[54] Merck KGaA, “Phosphate buffered saline ph 7.4, liquid, sterile-filtered, suitable for cell
culture (specification sheet),” 2025.
[55] K. Gaurav, K. Neeti, and R. Singh, “Microalgae-based biodiesel production and its
challenges and future opportunities: A review,” Green Technologies and Sustainability,
vol. 2, no. 1, p. 100060, 2024.
[56] Q. Chen, J. Li, Y. Song, B. Chen, D. M. Christopher, and X. Li, “Pressure-driven
microfluidic droplet formation in newtonian and shear-thinning fluids in glass flow-
focusing microchannels,” International Journal of Multiphase Flow, vol. 140, p. 103648,
2021.
[57] F. Mardani, S. Falahatian, and M. Taghipoor, “Mapping flow-focusing microfluidic
droplet formation to determine high-throughput droplet generation configurations,” Re-
sults in Engineering, vol. 18, p. 101125, 2023.
[58] G. L. Wheeler, I. Joint, and C. Brownlee, “Rapid spatiotemporal patterning of cytosolic
ca2+ underlies flagellar excision in chlamydomonas reinhardtii,” The Plant Journal,
vol. 53, no. 3, pp. 401–413, 2008.
[59] M. Samadani, F. Perreault, A. Oukarroum, and D. Dewez, “Effect of cadmium accu-
mulation on green algae chlamydomonas reinhardtii and acid-tolerant chlamydomonas
cpcc 121,” Chemosphere, vol. 191, pp. 174–182, 2018.
[60] X. Wang, S. Ma, R. Liu, T. Zhang, X. Mao, Y. Chen, P. Wan, Z. Chi, and F. Kong,
“Microalgae-driven microrobots: revolutionizing drug delivery and targeted therapy in
biopharmaceuticals,” Advanced Biotechnology, vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 1–17, 2025.
[61] F. Liang, X. An, R. Wang, W. Wu, L. Yang, Y. Zheng, Q. Jiang, X. Xu, D. Zhong, and
M. Zhou, “Microalgae-based drug delivery system for tumor microenvironment photo-
modulating and synergistic chemo-photodynamic therapy of osteosarcoma,” Engineered
Regeneration, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 199–209, 2024.
Page 46 of 46
==PAGE:50==
Master thesis
List of Figures
List of Figures
1
Main GI barrier for oral drug delivery [12] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Principle of crosslink [16] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3
Coaxial needle structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
4
Workflow of extrusion fabrication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
5
Microfludic fabrication workflow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
6
The microbeads under different infusion rate, scale bar: 200 µm. The flow
rate for each picture is shown in Table 1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
7
Optical microscopy of coreshell microcapsule under 4x magnification (A, B &
C, scale bar: 1 mm), and 10x magnification (C, D & E, scale bar: 200 µm) .
18
8
Microalgae in culture media; A, scale bar: 100 µm; B,C & D, scale bar: 10 µm. 19
9
Microalgae in the Microbeads under 4x magnification (A, scale bar: 1 mm),
10x magnification (B, scale bar: 200 µm) and 40x magnification (C, scale bar:
100 µm) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
10
SEM image of the core-shell microbeads, scale bar in each figure is 500 µm .
21
11
The flow of the fluid when reaching the steady state . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
12
The flow when infusing oil and alginate (A&B) and the flow when infusing oil
and water (C) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
13
Alginate droplet in the outlet tube
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
14
A-C, Optical image of microbeads under 4x magnification, scale bar is 200
µm; D, demonstration of the oil interface in the bath
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
15
Optical image of microbeads under 10x magnification, scale bar is 200 µm . .
27
16
Viability of C. reinhardtii in FaSSIF and TAP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
17
Microbeads after incubation in SGF for 2 hours (A, the scale bar: 1 mm; B,
the scale bar: 200 µm) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
18
Microalgae in the microbeads under the co-culture with 1xPBS (pH=2) (the
scale bar: 100 µm)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
19
Video record of the microbeads under 37 ◦C incubation with water (left) and
simulated intestine fluid (right)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
20
The microbeads incubated with FaSSIF and water under 37 ◦C after 2 hours,
and the scale bar is 200 µm
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
21
The microbeads incubated with FaSSIF and water under 37 ◦C after 24 hours
(The white scale bar is 500 µm and the black scale bar is 200 µm) . . . . . .
33
22
LDH cytotoxicity test of various microalgae concentrations . . . . . . . . . .
34
23
Cell viability of Caco-2 cells under the treatment of microalgae. Statistical
significance is presented as *** (p ≤0.001).
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
24
LDH cytotoxicity test of the microbeads with various concentration . . . . .
36
25
Cell viability of Caco-2 cells under the treatment of microbeads. Statistical
significance is presented as ** (p ≤0.01) and *** (p ≤0.001). . . . . . . . .
37
Page I of III
==PAGE:51==
Master thesis
List of Tables
List of Tables
1
Flow rates of alginate and microalgae in Figure 6
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2
Droplet location under different flow conditions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3
Measured sizes of beads by microfluidic fabrication
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4
C. reinhardtii cell counts and viability under Control (TAP) and FaSSIF con-
ditions. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
Page II of III
==PAGE:52==
Master thesis
Nomenclature
Nomenclature
C. reinhardtii/CR Chlamydomonas Reinhardtii
CCK-8 Cell Counting Kit-8
DMEM Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle’s Medium
FaSSIF Fasted State Simulated Intestinal Fluid
GI
Gastrointestinal
LDH Lactate Dehydrogenase
PBS
Phosphate-Buffered Saline
SEM Scanning Electron Microscopy
SGF
Simulated Gastric Fluid
TAP
Tris-Acetate-Phosphate
Page III of III
