==PAGE:1==
Exploring different approaches to customize
LLMs for textВӯtoВӯcode generation
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Exploring different approaches to customize LLMs for textВӯtoВӯcode generation
Master Thesis
August, 2025
By
LuГӯs Freire
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cusВӯ
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Brovej, Building 118, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.byg.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000Вӯ0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000Вӯ00Вӯ0000Вӯ000Вӯ0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000Вӯ0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000Вӯ00Вӯ0000Вӯ000Вӯ0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the LEGO Group, in partial fulfillment
for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng. Computer Science and EngiВӯ
neering at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU).
It was started on February 17th 2025 and submitted on August 27th 2025. The workload
corresponds to 35 ECTS.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of programming lanВӯ
guages, deep learning and generative AI.
LuГӯs Freire Вӯ s233483
Signature
Date
ii
Exploring different approaches to customize LLMs for textВӯtoВӯcode generation
17th of August, 2025
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Improving software development productivity with Machine Learning (ML) has gained sigВӯ
nificant traction in industry over the past decade as the recent advanced in Large LanВӯ
guage Models (LLMs) have opened new opportunities for automating software developВӯ
ment through textВӯtoВӯcode generation.
While general purpose models achieve strong
results across diverse programming languages, adapting them to specialized domains
requires further adaption and can be a challenge. This thesis investigates how LLMs
can be customized for specific code generation tasks, balancing accuracy, efficency and
resource constraints.
We design a synthetic dataset targeting the use case of exercises in Python, ScikitВӯ
learn and OpenCV tasks, and evaluate three customization strategies: fewВӯshot learnВӯ
ing, retrievalВӯaugmented generation (RAG) and parameter efficient fineВӯtuning (PEFT)
with Low Rank Adaptation (LoRA). We evaluate these techniques combining benchmarkВӯ
based metrics and similarityВӯbased metrics to capture both the general performance and
domain alignment.
The results show that fewВӯshot learning and RAG improve the model in terms of similarity
to the tasks at hand, making them costВӯeffective, though their effectiveness is limited by
context length and preВӯexisting model knowledge on the subject of the task. FineВӯtuning,
while more expensive, yields the highest accuracy in most of the benchmarks and the
highest similarity to the tasks, outperforming the other approaches.
We conclude that the optimal customization strategy depends on the context and reВӯ
sources, when provided of a model that has already been trained extensively for a certain
task, fewВӯshot or RAG offer flexibility and can achieve good results, whereas fineВӯtuning on
a curated dataset provides stronger results even in models with less capacity to solve such
tasks. This work contributes with a systematic comparison of customization strategies,
an evaluation framework for domainВӯspecific code generation, and insights into tradeВӯoffs
between generalВӯpurpose and specialized LLMs.
Exploring different approaches to customize LLMs for textВӯtoВӯcode generation
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
This thesis has been completed with the guidance and support from:
Nicki Skafte Detlefsen, Associate Professor, Technical University of Denmark
Thesis supervisor.
Fernanda Andalo,Lead AI Engineer, the LEGO Group
External supervisor and expert.
Furthermore, I would like to thank all the professors that were part of my journey, the
people at the LEGO Group that were involved and helped me with the project and last but
not least, I would like to thank my friends and family for their relentless support throughout
the last few months.
Thank you all. Muito obrigado.
iv
Exploring different approaches to customize LLMs for textВӯtoВӯcode generation
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
3
2.1
LLMs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
LLM Adaptation Techniques . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Methodology Overview
10
4
Synthetic Dataset Creation
12
4.1
Generation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
4.2
Validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4.3
Dataset Split
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
5
LLM Customization
19
5.1
PreВӯtrained LLMs for code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
5.2
Customization Techniques . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
5.3
Code Generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
5.4
Tools and Computation Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
6
Results
27
6.1
Baseline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
6.2
FewВӯshot learning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
6.3
RetrievalВӯAugmented Generation (RAG) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
6.4
FineВӯtuning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
6.5
Comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
7
Conclusion
42
7.1
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
7.2
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
Bibliography
44
A Prompt Engineering
47
A.1 Iterations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
A.2 Final Prompts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
B Results
53
B.1 Baseline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
B.2 RAG . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
Exploring different approaches to customize LLMs for textВӯtoВӯcode generation
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Exploring different approaches to customize LLMs for textВӯtoВӯcode generation
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Improving software development productivity with Machine Learning (ML) has gained sigВӯ
nificant traction in industry over the past decade. Software intelligence tools are helping
developers automate repetitive tasks, write betterВӯquality code, and accelerate workflows,
all while reducing costs and effort. A particularly exciting innovation is textВӯtoВӯcode generВӯ
ation, where developers describe what they need in plain language, and an AIВӯpowered
assistant generates or completes the code for them [1].
While general code generation ML models are designed to handle a wide range of proВӯ
gramming languages, achieving high accuracy in specialized contexts often requires addiВӯ
tional adaptation. Generating code tailored to a particular domain, language, or framework
demands models capable of understanding and operating within unique development enВӯ
vironments. At the same time, these models can be resourceВӯintensive and costly. In
many cases, especially for custom tasks, it is more efficient to adapt smaller models to
achieve strong performance on narrowly defined problems, rather than relying on large,
generalВӯpurpose models.
To tackle this problem, the goal of this thesis is to explore and compare different apВӯ
proaches for customizing Large Language Models (LLMs) for code generation, which are
typically trained for broad, generalВӯpurpose tasks. Given a task description, the model
must generate code that not only solves the task but also adheres to the constraints of a
narrow context, for instance, leveraging a specific library, framework, or API.
Customization strategies such as fineВӯtuning, prompt engineering, or other adaptation
strategies can be employed to align general models with these specialized requirements.
The overarching goal is to evaluate how these techniques improve accuracy and efficiency
when applied to targeted libraries or tasks, thereby addressing the unique demands of
domainВӯspecific use cases.
We aim to analyze these approaches not only in terms of accuracy, but also considering
factors such as adaptation complexity, inference time and costs, model size, and data
requirements. These aspects are critical for adapting to different contexts, especially
when resources are limited, ensuring the solutions are efficient, scalable, and practical
for a variety of use cases.
To this end, our two main research questions are:
1. How can Large Language Models be effectively customized to improve accuracy
and efficiency in domainВӯspecific code generation tasks?
2. What are the tradeВӯoffs between different customization approaches in terms of
criteria such as performance, data requirements, and implementation complexity
across various code generation tasks?
Our expected contributions are as follows:
1. A systematic analysis of different strategies for customizing Large Language Models
in the context of code generation.
2. An evaluation framework that compares customization approaches across multiple
criteria, including accuracy, adaptation complexity, inference cost, and data requireВӯ
ments.
Exploring different approaches to customize LLMs for textВӯtoВӯcode generation
1
==PAGE:10==
3. Insights on the creation of datasets designed for assessing domainВӯspecific code
generation tasks.
4. Empirical insights into the tradeВӯoffs between generalВӯpurpose and specialized LLMs,
highlighting conditions under which lightweight adaptations can outperform larger
models.
This thesis was developed with support from the LEGO Group [2], where product deВӯ
velopment spans a wide range of domains, from digital play experiences such as video
games and mobile apps, to educational robotics, and enterpriseВӯscale systems. Each of
these areas brings its own technical challenges, for instance, ensuring code aligns with
the companyвҖҷs internal frameworks, generating safe code for different levels of users, or
automating workflows. To support these diverse needs, the company envisions a MLВӯ
based solution that can be customized to specific contexts. Such flexibility would enable
developers to generate taskВӯrelevant code efficiently, while maintaining precision and conВӯ
sistency across different initiatives.
This thesis begins in Chapter 2 with the theoretical foundations of Large Language Models
and their customization techniques. Chapter 3 then provides an overview of the proposed
methodology, followed by Chapter 4, which describes the construction of the dataset used
in the experiments. The considered techniques for LLM customization and how they are
applied are presented in Chapter 5, while the experimental results and their analysis are
discussed in Chapter 6. Finally, Chapter 7 concludes the thesis by summarizing the key
findings, discussing limitations, and outlining directions for future work.
2
Exploring different approaches to customize LLMs for textВӯtoВӯcode generation
==PAGE:11==
2
Background
In this chapter, we introduce the fundamental concepts underlying Large Language ModВӯ
els (LLMs), starting from their architectural foundations in the Transformer model, through
tokenization, embeddings, and context windows, to the decoding strategies.
We also cover the principles behind scaling laws and the key metrics used for evaluatВӯ
ing both generalВӯpurpose and domainВӯspecific models, with a particular focus on code
generation tasks.
Finally, we discuss several adaptation techniques that enable LLMs to perform well in speВӯ
cialized contexts, including fewВӯshot learning, retrievalВӯaugmented generation, parameterВӯ
efficient fineВӯtuning, and knowledge distillation.
2.1
LLMs
Large Language Models (LLMs) are, as the name implies, largeВӯscale machine learning
models preВӯtrained on massive amounts of text data. Examples include LLaMA [LLaMMA],
GPT [GPT], and PaLM [PaLM]. These models exhibit emergent capabilities such as inВӯ
context learning, instruction following, and multiВӯstep reasoning.
2.1.1
Architecture
In most cases, the architecture used in LLMs derive from the Transformer model, which
can be encoderВӯonly, decoderВӯonly or encoderВӯdecoder. We briefly outline how this arВӯ
chitecture works as it is not only essential to understand how LLMs function, but also
provides background for several concepts discussed in later chapters.
Transformer
The Transformer [3] model was proposed as a new network architecture based solely on
a selfВӯattention mechanism, which could capture information more effectively on GPUs
than Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) and Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs).
Its original architecture, illustrated in Figure 2.1, consists of an encoder and decoder. The
former is composed by a stack of N identical layers, each with two subВӯlayers: the first
is a multiВӯhead selfВӯattention layer and the second is a positionВӯwise feedВӯforward netВӯ
work. The latter is composed by a stack of N identical layers, but with an additional layer
compared to the encoder: a multiВӯhead attention mechanism over the encoder output,
alongside its own masked selfВӯattention and feedВӯforward layers.
Since the model does not contain recurrence or convolution, in order to keep the order of
the tokens in the sequence, positional encodings are added to the input embeddings at
the bottom of the encoder and decoder stacks.
The attention function is described as mapping a query to a set of keyВӯvalue pairs to an
output, where the query, keys, values, and output are all vectors. The function is computed
for a set of queries simultaneously, packed together into a matrix Q. The keys and values
are also packed together intro matrices K and V , respectively.
The matrix of outputs is then computed as
Attention(Q, K, V ) = softmax
(QKвҠӨ
вҲҡdk
)
V,
Exploring different approaches to customize LLMs for textВӯtoВӯcode generation
3
==PAGE:12==
Figure 2.1: Transformer model architecture composed of an encoder (left) and a decoder
(right) [3].
where вҲҡdk is a scaling factor that prevents the dot products from growing too large in
magnitude.
In the Transformer model, multiВӯhead attention is used, where the queries, keys, and
values are projected h times using different learned projections. The attention function
is then applied in parallel to each of these projected versions of the queries, keys and
values, as shown in Figure 2.2, allowing the model to jointly attend to information from
different representation subspaces at different positions.
The output is calculated as
MultiHead(Q, K, V ) = Concat(head1, . . . , headh)W O,
where headi = Attention(QW Q
i , KW K
i , V W V
i ), and the projections are weight matrices
W Q
i
вҲҲRdmodelГ—dk, W K
i
вҲҲRdmodelГ—dk, W V
i
вҲҲRdmodelГ—dv, and W O вҲҲRhdvГ—dmodel.
4
Exploring different approaches to customize LLMs for textВӯtoВӯcode generation
==PAGE:13==
Figure 2.2: MultiВӯHead Attention composed of several attention layers running in paralВӯ
lel [3].
In the following subsections, we briefly present the main variants of the Transformer arВӯ
chitecture: encoderВӯonly, decoderВӯonly, and encoderвҖ“decoder.
EncoderВӯOnly
In this type of architecture, only the encoder component from the original Transformer
is used. It is characterized by the fact that all the attention layers have access to all
the words in the initial sequence. This makes it particularly effective for language unВӯ
derstanding tasks such as text classification. These models are usually preВӯtrained by
masking random tokens with the intent of teaching the model how to predict them based
on context. The most prominent example of encoderВӯonly models is BERT (Bidirectional
Encoder Representations from Transformers) [4].
DecoderВӯOnly
This kind of model includes only the decoder component of the Transformer and is often
called autoВӯregressive model. In this case, all attention layers have access only to the
words before a given word in a sentence, and no other words in the initial sequence. This
property makes these type of models suited for generative tasks such as text or code genВӯ
eration. The preВӯtraining focuses on predicting the next word in a sequence. The GPT [5]
family, such as GPTВӯ2, GPTВӯ3 and its successors, is a prominent example of this model
category.
EncoderВӯDecoder
As the name implies, both the encoder and decoder are used and in this case, meaning
it combines the properties of the previous architectures. First, the encoder processes
the entire input and generates a set of contextВӯaware representations, then the decoder
generates the output sequence word by word. It excels in tasks where the input seВӯ
quence differs heavily from the output, such as machine translation, text summarization,
and question answering. Some examples of this type of model are the Transformer, BARD
and T5 [6].
Exploring different approaches to customize LLMs for textВӯtoВӯcode generation
5
==PAGE:14==
2.1.2
Tokenization
Tokenization is the process of breaking down an input sequence into smaller units, knows
as tokens, that the model can process. The simplest methods of tokenization separate a
sentence into words or characters, but this has proved to be inefficient, as languages can
use prefixes and suffixes to convey meaning, or in the case of code, where symbols carry
meaning.
Most LLMs use subВӯword tokenizers, which can be combined to form a large number of
words, including the words unseen in training or different languages.
2.1.3
Embedding
Embeddings are vector representations of textual inputs such as words, sentences, or
code. They capture semantic and syntactic information by mapping tokens into a highВӯ
dimensional space, where relationship between them is preserved. These embeddings
are learned during training and enable the model to process, compare, and generalize
across different inputs more effectively.
2.1.4
Context Window
The context window, often referred as context length, is the amount of data, measured in
tokens, that a model can consider at once when prompted. This includes both the input
and the output. Initially, TransformerВӯbased models had relatively small context lengths,
but due to the growing need for larger contexts, new methods have been developed to
address this limitation. For example, FlashAttention [7] enables faster training and allows
models to handle longer contexts while maintaining, or even improving, performance.
Although context length has increased significantly, it is still not fully understood how
models make use of this additional information. Research has shown that the position of
information within the context can strongly affect how tokens influence the output, with toВӯ
kens at the beginning and end of the window often having a greater impact on generation
than those in the middle[8].
Recent models highlight the scale of this progression: GPTВӯ4 Turbo supports context winВӯ
dows of up to 128k tokens [], while the more recent AnthropicвҖҷs Claude Sonnet 4 extends
this limit to 1 million tokens []. These expansions illustrate the rapid increase in capacВӯ
ity, though the effective utilization of such extended contexts remains an open research
question.
2.1.5
Decoding
Decoding is the process of generating an output where the model, based on the tokens it
receives as input, predicts the next most likely token by generating logits for each, which
are then transformed into probabilities.
Different strategies can be used for decoding, with the most common being greedy search,
beam search, and sampling techniques such as topВӯk.
вҖў Greedy Search: Picks the token with the highest probability at each step. It is fast
but can get stuck in suboptimal sequences.
вҖў Beam Search: Keeps the topВӯk most likely sequences (beams) at each step and
explores them in parallel, choosing the best at the end.
6
Exploring different approaches to customize LLMs for textВӯtoВӯcode generation
==PAGE:15==
вҖў Sampling: Picks the next token randomly based on the probability distribution, alВӯ
lowing more diversity. It is often combined with temperature and topВӯk sampling to
control randomness.
2.1.6
Scaling Laws
Scaling laws [9] demonstrate that increasing the size of a language model, the volume
of training data, or the amount of compute leads to predictable improvements in perВӯ
formance, with a bigger impact than changes to architectural parameters, regardless of
whether the model is wider or deeper. Given the continuous increase in compute, it has
been shown that the impact of the other factors can be predicted, as seen in Figure 2.3,
shifting the focus when scaling up primarily to model size and dataset size, since these
have a strong impact on performance improvements.
Figure 2.3: Representation of scaling laws [9].
2.1.7
Evaluation
The evaluation of LLMs depends heavily on the type of task. For instance, if the purpose of
the model is to classify text, then metrics such as accuracy, precision, recall, and F1Вӯscore
are typically used. Conversely, when the goal is text generation, evaluation often relies
on similarityВӯbased metrics such as BLEU [10] or ROUGE [11], which compare generated
text against one or more reference outputs.
Code generation is a different case, as it cannot be evaluated effectively using the same
metrics used for other generative tasks. Although some of these have been adapted to
better evaluate code, such as CodeBLEU [12], which uses AST parsing to check structural
similarity, they do not assess functionality.
The definitive measure for code is functional correctness, whether the generated code
executes successfully and produces the expected outputs for all given test cases. For that
reason, the standard for code generation evaluation is through benchmarks that contain
test suites for each problem.
The most common metric used in such benchmarks is Pass@k, where the code generated
for a certain problem is tested thoroughly and marked as correct if it passes all tests. In
the following equation, k is the number of predicted solutions retrieved per problem, n
represents the total number of solutions, and c stands for the number of correct solutions.
pass@k := EProblems
[
1 вҲ’
(nвҲ’c
k
)
(n
k
)
]
.
Exploring different approaches to customize LLMs for textВӯtoВӯcode generation
7
==PAGE:16==
2.2
LLM Adaptation Techniques
LLMs are usually trained for generalВӯpurpose use and may underperform on tasks in a
specific domain or involving a specific structure. Once trained, the knowledge they acquire
becomes static and does not, by default, include access to even the current date and time.
In this section, we will explore different techniques that can be used to make LLMs suitable
for specific tasks and keep them updated with recent knowledge.
2.2.1
FewВӯshot Learning
FewВӯshot learning [13] refers to the technique where a prompt is extended with a set of
demonstrations of the task at hand as conditioning the output, but no weight updates are
performed. This leverages the information that the model has already learned. As shown
in Figure 2.4, when translating from English to French, a few examples (shots) of this task
are given as context, and then the model has to complete the translation in the same way.
Figure 2.4: FewВӯshot example. [13]
2.2.2
RetrievalВӯAugmented Generation (RAG)
PreВӯtrained LLMs can store factual knowledge in their parameters. However, this knowlВӯ
edge may not be upВӯtoВӯdate and retraining the models with the latest information is exВӯ
pensive. RetrievalВӯAugmented Generation (RAG) [14] mitigates this issue by combining a
modelвҖҷs parametric memory with nonВӯparametric memory retrieved from external sources
such as a vector database.
As illustrated in Figure 2.5, data from an external data source is retrieved based on the
initial prompt. The prompt is then augmented with the relevant data and passed to the
LLM for generation of the final response.
2.2.3
ParameterВӯEfficient FineВӯTuning (PEFT)
ParameterВӯEfficient FineВӯTuning (PEFT) [16] is a set of techniques designed to adapt
large language models to new tasks while updating only a small subset of their parameВӯ
ters. Instead of fineВӯtuning the entire model, PEFT methods introduce lightweight trainable
components that significantly reduce computational cost and memory usage.
This set of methods can be divided into three categories, as illustrated in Figure 2.6. AdВӯ
ditive PEFT combines the already preВӯtrained parameters with new trainable parameters,
modifying the initial architecture of a model. Selective PEFT selects a subset of the paВӯ
rameters and freezes the rest during fineВӯtuning. Reparameterization PEFT creates a
lowВӯdimensional representation of the original modelвҖҷs parameters that is applied to the
preВӯtrained parameters during inference.
These approaches can also be combined into hybrid techniques, where methods from
different categories are used together.
8
Exploring different approaches to customize LLMs for textВӯtoВӯcode generation
==PAGE:17==
Figure 2.5: Simple RAG example with LLMs [15].
Figure 2.6: Different types of PEFT [16].
2.2.4
Knowledge Distillation
Knowledge Distillation (KD) enables the transfer of knowledge from one (or multiple)
larger, more capable model Вӯ usually referred to as the teacher Вӯ to a smaller, more
efficient model Вӯ the student Вӯ with the intent of reducing inference time and improving
generalization.
This is an umbrella term for different techniques around the same concept [17], some of
them being:
вҖў Response distillation uses the output of a teacher model to teach the student how
to perform in a similar way.
вҖў Feature distillation uses not only the output but also information from intermediВӯ
ate layers to create a better internal representation of the teacher when distilling
knowledge to the student.
вҖў API distillation focuses on querying an LLM through an API, such as OpenAIвҖҷs
GPT (acting as teacher), to create a synthesized highВӯquality dataset that can then
be used to teach the student.
Exploring different approaches to customize LLMs for textВӯtoВӯcode generation
9
==PAGE:18==
3
Methodology Overview
The goal of this work is to adapt smaller Large Language Models (LLMs) to perform
domainВӯspecific code generation tasks across different use cases. To make this probВӯ
lem concrete, we focus on programming exercises defined within the same language but
spanning different practical contexts:
вҖў Python: Exercises emphasizing core language concepts, syntax, and problemВӯ
solving fundamentals.
вҖў ScikitВӯlearn: Exercises centered on applying machine learning techniques through
the functionalities of the ScikitВӯlearn library.
вҖў OpenCV: Exercises targeting computer vision tasks using image processing and
manipulation functions of the OpenCV library.
Addressing these tasks requires a dataset that accurately reflects the intended use cases.
Since collecting large amounts of highВӯquality domainВӯspecific task descriptionВӯcode pairs
can be challenging, we start by constructing synthetic datasets with the aid of a larger LLM.
This involves carefully designed prompt engineering to generate exercises, followed by
a validation process to ensure the quality and diversity of the resulting examples. The
final datasets serve as the foundation for all experiments conducted in this thesis. This
process is described in Chapter 4.
With this dataset in place, we then select a smaller LLM as the target for customization.
We investigate different adaptation methods to align the model with our defined tasks
(Chapter 5) and subsequently evaluate its ability to generate functionally correct code
(Chapter 6).
Specifically, we study three customization techniques:
вҖў FewВӯshot learning: Using static examples from the dataset as inВӯcontext demonВӯ
strations.
вҖў RetrievalВӯAugmented Generation (RAG): Dynamically retrieving relevant examВӯ
ples from the dataset to augment the prompt context.
вҖў FineВӯtuning: Training the model on the synthetic dataset to specialize it for each
use case.
Figure 3.1 provides a highВӯlevel overview of the methodology, illustrating the process of
dataset generation and LLM adaptation.
10
Exploring different approaches to customize LLMs for textВӯtoВӯcode generation
==PAGE:19==
Figure 3.1: Overview of the methodology, including dataset generation and customization
techniques.
Exploring different approaches to customize LLMs for textВӯtoВӯcode generation
11
==PAGE:20==
4
Synthetic Dataset Creation
Knowledge Distillation (KD), where knowledge from a larger teacher model is transferred
to a smaller student model, plays a critical role when using API distillation. In this variant
of KD, the teacher is accessed through an API (e.g., GPTВӯ3.5) rather than direct access
to its weights. A synthetic dataset is first created by querying the teacher with carefully
designed prompts, and this curated data is then used to train the student model. A key
component of this process is the creation of a tailored, promptВӯbased dataset that captures
the reasoning of the teacher model. In our case, the advantage is that we aim to train a
smaller model on a dataset created by a larger model, making it both efficient and practical
for specialized use cases.
An example of how API distillation can be used to curate highВӯquality data, is the model
phiВӯ1 [18], which is a result of fineВӯtuning phiВӯ1Вӯbase on synthesized вҖңtextbookВӯqualityвҖқ data
distilled from GPTВӯ3.5. This approach demonstrated improvements in executing Python
tasks, including some not explicitly covered in the synthetic dataset, suggesting that the
training on such curated data consolidates previously learned knowledge.
This chapter outlines the methods used to generate the necessary synthetic datasets,
focusing on the prompt engineering and validation steps that ensure consistency in the
resulting samples.
4.1
Generation
Our goal is to generate data aligned with phiВӯ1 and to create scenarios that showcase
different aspects of each proposed use case through exercises divided into two compoВӯ
nents: a problem, defined by a docstring that contains the problem statement, and the
solution, which contains the necessary library imports and the code implementation, with
comments documenting each step.
The synthetic data is generated using OpenAIвҖҷs GPTВӯ4o [19], a stateВӯofВӯtheВӯart multimodal
model with strong capabilities in both natural language understanding and code generВӯ
ation, and exceptional performance on most code benchmarks. Importantly, GPTВӯ4o is
only used here as a teacher model to generate the dataset, so it was not involved in
any further steps of this work. To create the dataset, the model is queried with a variety
of prompts that were iteratively refined to produce wellВӯstructured, useful code samples
across a wide range of topics.
4.1.1
Prompt Engineering
Here, we detail the process of prompt engineering used to arrive at effective prompts and
consistent results for the proposed use cases.
Initially, a simple prompt was used to understand the output structure, as well as whether
the code generated by the model could produce valid examples for a specific scenario.
We started by trying to create an exercise for a specific topic:
You are an expert in Python. Create a Python programming exercise
on the topic of Lists.
The result A.1.1 shows a simple exercise that demonstrates different functionalities of
Python lists and contains comments explaining the task at hand, which aligns with our
expectations. To further ensure that the generated dataset could include different practical
12
Exploring different approaches to customize LLMs for textВӯtoВӯcode generation
==PAGE:21==
uses, in the next prompt iteration, we included professions as target personas for these
exercises (e.g., BioВӯinformatics for the profession variable), adding contextual relevance
from different domains in addition to the topic variable:
You are an expert in Python tasked with creating Python exercises
tailored to various professions. Create a Python programming exercise
on the topic of {topic} simulating a realistic scenario in the field
of {profession}.
The result A.1.2 differs in format, presenting code snippets divided into steps, while still
focusing on and meaningfully integrating the suggested Python topic. It also introduces
other topics such as loops, slightly increasing the difficulty level by showing how to access
a certain rage of elements in a list. Based on that, the next iteration focuses on introducing
variety in difficulty levels by adding a skill level parameter to the prompt (e.g., beginner).
You are an expert in Python tasked with creating Python exercises
tailored to various professions. Create a Python programming exercise
simulating a realistic scenario in the field of {profession}, specifically
focusing on the topic of {topic}. The exercise should be suitable
for {skill level} level.
As can be seen, there are some differences between result A.1.3 and result A.1.4, correВӯ
sponding to beginner and advanced levels, respectively. The former shows how to loop
through a list, while the latter shows, for instance, how to create a list using comprehenВӯ
sion. The use case also changes slightly, with the exercise becoming more complex, both
in terms of the code concepts explored and the practical application.
Finally, we introduced a structured format to ensure that both the problem statement and
explanatory comments are consistently included in each snippet. We also enforced that
the libraries used should not deviate from the intended purpose of the exercise, an isВӯ
sue that occasionally arose when prompting for specific use cases. To address this, we
extended the prompt with the following text:
The output should be the code with the problem statement as a docstring,
and also comments in the code explaining the solution. Only import
conventional libraries. The structure of the response should be:
```python
"""
Problem statement
"""
imports
code
```
In result A.1.5, the code is very similar to the previous beginnerВӯlevel exercise but follows
the structure format specified in the prompt, which is exactly what we intended.
For each targeted use cases, we slightly modified the prompt to specify the intended
library. For example, for ScikitВӯlearn, we use:
You are an expert Machine Learning instructor tasked with creating
Scikit-learn exercises tailored to various professions. Create a Scikit-learn
programming ...
Exploring different approaches to customize LLMs for textВӯtoВӯcode generation
13
==PAGE:22==
As shown in the previous prompts, we defined several variables to ensure diversity in both
content and complexity, making the dataset more representative of realВӯworld usage. The
variables defined to be used across all use cases are:
вҖў topic: Core topics that need to be covered in that use case.
вҖў profession: Relevant professions that could represent target users of the model.
вҖў skill level: Different levels of difficulty applicable to various tasks Вӯ beginner, interВӯ
mediate or advanced.
For professions, guided by the official documentation, we extracted the primary themes
and identified any subtopics that also required attention. To ensure these were addressed,
we created a pipeline that iterated through the main topics, prompted GPTВӯ4o to generate
lists of subtopics for each theme, and combined them into a comprehensive list of topics
that included both the primary themes and the newly generated subtopics. In the case of
ScikitВӯlearn, the official documentation offered sufficiently detailed guidance to cover the
entire use case, so the pipeline was not applied in this scenario.
In some cases, additional variables were introduced, requiring small changes to the final
prompt to better fit the different applications.
For the Python use case, the following variables were added:
вҖў user interaction: Specifies whether the exercise should focus on Command Line
Interface (CLI) interation or not.
вҖў error handling: Determines the level of error handling Вӯ basic or advanced.
For the ScikitВӯlearn use case, the following variables were added:
вҖў dataset size: Specifies the expected size of the dataset used in the exercise.
вҖў dataset challenge: Indicates whether the dataset contains issues such as data
imbalance, missing values, high dimensionality, noisy data, outliers, or none of these
challenges.
The final prompt for each use case builds on the base prompt, incorporating the extra
variables and small adjustments to better specify the type of exercise being solved. The
complete prompts can be found in Appendix A.2.
4.1.2
Analysis
A workflow was created for each use case, where each prompt was combined with all
the possible variables to dynamically generate the final prompt. These were then used to
query GPTВӯ4o.
Each request took around 30 seconds, with an input length of approximately 150 tokens on
average and a maximum amount of 1500 new tokens. On average, about 21.6 thousand
exercises were generated for each use case, amounting to around 9.7M input tokens in
total and 35M output tokens.
The API cost is $2.5 per 1M input tokens and $10 per 1M output tokens, amounting to a
total of $24 for input and $350 for output.
We took a sample of around 5000 requests per use case and compiled some insights to
better understand the trend between the different use cases in terms of completion tokens
per request, as shown in Figure 4.1.
14
Exploring different approaches to customize LLMs for textВӯtoВӯcode generation
==PAGE:23==
Figure 4.1: Distribution of generated exercises.
Most of the generated examples have between 300вҖ“700 tokens with an average of apВӯ
proximately 540 tokens for ScikitВӯlearn and OpenCV, and 520 for Python. These amounts
include both the task description and the code solution. Occasionally, some extra text is
included in the response. Token counts were computed by the GPTВӯ4o tokenizer through
the API.
We then analyzed the number of characters per problem and solution as illustrated in
Figure 4.2, which shows that Python exercises have lengthier problem statements on
average, whereas ScikitВӯlearn exercises have lengthier solutions.
Python
OpenCV
Sklearn
0
1,000
2,000
3,000
4,000
5,000
6,000
Characters
Problem and Solution Lengths with MinвҖ“AvgвҖ“Max
Problem Avg.
Solution Avg.
Figure 4.2: MinвҖ“AvgвҖ“Max visualization of problem and solution lengths.
The libraries in the solutions align with the expectations as presented in Table 4.1. Most
Exploring different approaches to customize LLMs for textВӯtoВӯcode generation
15
==PAGE:24==
exercises use relevant libraries for each use case, with Python exercises rarely including
nonВӯstandard libraries, which shows that the exercises focus on native Python. It is also
worth mentioning that both OpenCV and ScikitВӯlearn rely heavily on the use of numpy,
which could also support customized models using the synthetic datasets in making more
consistent use of this library.
Library
Python
OpenCV
Sklearn
Standard libraries
16,427
вҖ“
20,325
Without any library
6,838
вҖ“
вҖ“
numpy
266
18,867
17,522
pandas
139
69
13,398
sklearn
54
1,029
20,330
matplotlib
31
4,906
6,079
Table 4.1: Consolidated library usage across synthesized Python, OpenCV, and ScikitВӯ
learn exercises.
16
Exploring different approaches to customize LLMs for textВӯtoВӯcode generation
==PAGE:25==
4.2
Validation
The focus of this step is to ensure the usability and quality of the generated code. For this
purpose, a twoВӯstage validation process was implemented, specified in Algorithm 1:
1. Syntactic Validation: Each code snippet is parsed into an Abstract Syntax Tree
(AST). If parsing fails, the sample is discarded to ensure that all retained code is at
least syntactically valid.
2. Semantic Validation: Each imported function or method is checked against its reВӯ
spective library using introspection and module inspection. This ensures that genВӯ
erated code does not rely on outdated APIs or hallucinated methods. After syntacВӯ
tic validation, modules are dynamically imported, and all methods or attribute calls
made on them are inspected. If any are missing or invalid, the snippet is flagged
as invalid. One simplifying assumption is made: nested modules are not invoked
inВӯline. That is, when accessing modules within modules, they must be explicitly
imported at the beginning of a snippet, otherwise, the snippet is considered invalid.
Algorithm 1
1: function HasValidMethods(code)
2:
tree вҶҗparsed code into an AST
3:
imports вҶҗempty map
4:
for all node in tree do
5:
if node is an import then
6:
Add imported names to imports
7:
else if node is a fromВӯimport then
8:
Add full import path to imports
9:
else if node is a method call then
10:
Extract attribute chain (e.g., module.utils.method_name)
11:
Get base name and resolve through imports
12:
Try importing module and walking through attributes
13:
if any import or attribute is invalid then
14:
return False
15:
end if
16:
end if
17:
end for
18:
return True
19: end function
Table 4.2 summarizes the total number of generated samples versus those that passed
validation. For Python, all invalid cases are due to formatting or syntax issues. OpenCV
has the lowest retention rate, primarily because many invalid samples rely on deprecated
APIs from earlier versions of the library, as GPTВӯ4o cannot always generate fully upВӯtoВӯ
date code.
Category
Total Generated
Valid Samples
General Python Exercises
21,745
21,042
OpenCV Exercises
22,770
21,039
ScikitВӯlearn Exercises
20,330
20,052
Table 4.2: Generated vs. validated samples across exercise types.
Exploring different approaches to customize LLMs for textВӯtoВӯcode generation
17
==PAGE:26==
4.3
Dataset Split
The datasets are split into train, validation, and test sets, which are then used for all
considered customization techniques. Specifically:
вҖў The training set is used to fineВӯtune the model, to provide documents for RAG, and
as examples for fewВӯshot learning.
вҖў The validation set is used to monitor training performance and calculate intermeВӯ
diate metrics.
вҖў The test set is reserved for the final evaluation of all techniques.
The training set for all cases consists of 97% of the data, the validation of 1%, and the
test set of 2%. These values were chosen to ensure a comparable number of examples
to common codeВӯgeneration benchmarks: approximately 200 examples in the validation
set and 400 test examples per use case.
18
Exploring different approaches to customize LLMs for textВӯtoВӯcode generation
==PAGE:27==
5
LLM Customization
In this chapter, we first present the preВӯtrained LLMs selected as base models for cusВӯ
tomization. We then describe the adaptation techniques explored in this work and detail
how each was implemented in our experimental setup.
5.1
PreВӯtrained LLMs for code
In this section, we review openВӯaccess preВӯtrained code LLMs that have demonstrated
competitive performance across a variety of benchmarks at the time of release. From
these, we select StarCoder and DeepSeekCoder as the primary base models for our
experiments, since they provide strong performance while remaining accessible within
our computational resources.
5.1.1
StarCoder
StarCoder [20] is a family of decoderВӯonly models developed specifically for code, ranging
in size from 1B to 15.5B parameters. The models were trained on The Stack [21], a collecВӯ
tion of GitHub repositories, comprising 1 trillion tokens across more than 80 programming
languages, including 35B Python tokens. StarCoder was trained using the FillВӯinВӯMiddle
(FIM) objective [22], employs a MultiВӯQuery Attention [22], and supports a context window
of 8k tokens.
5.1.2
DeepSeekCoder
DeepSeekCoder [23] is a series of decoderВӯonly code LLMs trained on 2 trillion tokens, of
which 87% is source code from GitHub repositories (covering 87 programming languages)
and the remaining 13% is natural language in English and Chinese. These models range
in size from 1.3B to 33B parameters. Similar to StarCoder, DeepSeekCoder was trained
with the FillВӯinВӯtheВӯMiddle objective and supports a 16k token context window, as well as
fillВӯinВӯtheВӯblank tasks for projectВӯlevel code completion and infilling.
5.1.3
Alternatives
Other notable code models include CodeLlama [24], a family of decoderВӯonly models (7BвҖ“
34B) trained on 500B code tokens, supporting both FillВӯinВӯtheВӯMiddle and long context
lengths. WizardCoder [25] builds on CodeLlama through instruction tuning for multiВӯturn
code generation. SantaCoder [26] is a 1.1B parameter model, trained on 240B tokens of
permissively licensed data, though with a shorter context length.
5.2
Customization Techniques
As introduced in Chapter 3, we investigate three customization techniques that differ in
complexity, resource requirements, and degree of specialization. These can be summaВӯ
rized as follows:
вҖў FewВӯshot learning is the simplest approach, requiring no additional training. It only
depends on providing carefully selected examples within the input prompt. While
lightweight and easy to apply, it is limited by the modelвҖҷs context window and does
not alter the modelвҖҷs underlying parameters.
вҖў RetrievalВӯAugmented Generation (RAG) adds an external retrieval step, where
relevant examples or documents are dynamically retrieved from a knowledge source
(e.g., a vector database). This increases implementation complexity by requiring a
retrieval infrastructure, but it effectively extends the modelвҖҷs usable memory and
adaptability without retraining.
Exploring different approaches to customize LLMs for textВӯtoВӯcode generation
19
==PAGE:28==
вҖў FineВӯtuning is the most resourceВӯintensive method, as it updates the modelвҖҷs paВӯ
rameters through additional training. It requires significant computational resources,
careful handling of distributed training and sufficient data to avoid overfitting. HowВӯ
ever, it offers the highest level of domain adaption and longВӯterm specialization.
In the following subsections, we describe how each of these customization techniques is
applied in our setup, along with their respective advantages and limitations.
5.2.1
FewВӯshot Learning
FewВӯshot learning uses examples of how a task should be solved to guide the LLM in
producing outputs aligned with the desired structure and domain. In our case, these exВӯ
amples are drawn from the synthetic dataset and appended o the prompt, demonstrating
how similar exercises should be solved.
The advantages are that the LLM does not need to be fineВӯtuned for a specific task which
could potentially reduce its wide knowledge into a more narrow field once fineВӯtuned, and
the amount of data needed to achieve this is very limited.
The disadvantages are that the amount of new information that can be introduced is also
limited and it can be difficult to include enough examples to represent the extent of a task
that can fit within the context window of the model.
In accordance with this, we choose random examples that are then used as context on
how to solve the exercises for each given use case. The ideal amount of examples can
vary depending on the use case and on the context length of the LLMs. The prompt used
is the following:
Context:{context}
Question: Complete the code with help from similar examples given
as context.
Answer:
5.2.2
RetrievalВӯAugmented Generation (RAG)
RAG builds on the same idea of fewВӯshot learning, where the existent knowledge of the
model is leveraged, but allows the model to have access to upВӯtoВӯdate information or
examples that are more relevant to the user prompt, through retrieval of documents that
relate to it.
In our case, the relevant documents come from the training set of the synthetic dataset and
the model used to create the vector embeddings is sentenceВӯtransformers/allВӯMiniLMВӯL6Вӯ
v2. These are then stored and can be retrieved using Mosaic AI Vector Search, a vector
database that is integrated within the Databricks platform, and supports search for both
text and vector embeddings. More information about Databricks is detailed later in this
section.
The vector search uses Euclidean distance to measure the embedding vector similarity,
but also allows for cosine similarity, as long as the embeddings are normalized. A hybrid
keywordВӯsimilarity search is also supported, which combines the vectorВӯbased embedВӯ
ding search with a keywordВӯsearch algorithm, resulting in the retrieval of documents with
relevant keywords and similar semantic relationships to the query.
The similarity score is calculated as
1
1 + dist(q, x)2 ,
20
Exploring different approaches to customize LLMs for textВӯtoВӯcode generation
==PAGE:29==
where dist is the Euclidean distance between the query q and the index entry x:
dist(q, x) =
вҲҡ
(q1 вҲ’x1)2 + (q2 вҲ’x2)2 + В· В· В· + (qd вҲ’xd)2
The keywordВӯsearch algorithm used in the hybrid method is calculated using BM25 [27].
Then the final score is a calculated using Reciprocal Rank Fusion (RRF) [28], which scores
the documents as follows:
1
1 + rank + k,
where rank is the sum of all scores of a document and k is a smoothing factor.
We aim to understand whether the amount of relevant examples can impact the results,
but also whether including better examples (with higher similarity scores) can impact the
result. The considered prompt is adapted from the one used in fewВӯshot learning:
Context:{context}
Question: Complete the code with help from relevant examples given
as context.
Answer:
5.2.3
FineВӯtuning
FineВӯtuning refers to the process of adapting a preВӯtrained language model to a specific
downstream task or domain by updating its parameters based on a curated dataset. Given
the large size of modern LLMs, fineВӯtuning requires substantial computational resources
and careful optimization strategies. In practice, this is achieved by leveraging distributed
training frameworks that enable efficient use of hardware accelerators across multiple
GPUs or even multiple nodes.
One way to make training more efficient, and which we employ in this work, is data paralВӯ
lelism: each worker processes a different subset of the training data while maintaining a
synchronized copy of the model. Gradients are aggregated across workers at each step,
ensuring parameter consistency. This approach scales well with the number of GPUs and
is often combined with techniques such as gradient accumulation to handle large batch
sizes.
Although full fineВӯtuning of all parameters ensures maximum flexibility, it quite expenВӯ
sive and can lead to overfitting on small domainВӯspecific datasets. To address these
challenges, PEFT methods have been introduced, which drastically reduce memory reВӯ
quirements and training costs while still achieving similar results, and allow for training on
smaller datasets without overfitting.
LowВӯRank Adaptation (LoRA) [29] is a lightweight PEFT technique that drastically reВӯ
duces the amount of trainable parameters by introducing a lowВӯrank decomposition of
weight updates. Let us consider a preВӯtrained weight matrix W0 вҲҲRdГ—k in a transformer
layer, for instance, in the attention or feedВӯforward components. LoRA introduces two
lowВӯrank matrices, A вҲҲRdГ—r and B вҲҲRrГ—k, where r вүӘmin(d, k). Instead of directly
updating W0, the adapted weight is defined as h = W0 + вҲҶW = W0 + AB, so that W0 is
frozen during training and only A and B are updated.
In the forward pass, for an input vector x, the output is modified as:
h = W0x + вҲҶWx = W0x + BAx.
Here, B is initialized with zeros and A with a random Gaussian, so that вҲҶW = BA is zero
at the beginning of training. The update вҲҶWx is then scaled by Оұ
r , where Оұ is a constant.
This process is shown in Figure 5.1.
Exploring different approaches to customize LLMs for textВӯtoВӯcode generation
21
==PAGE:30==
Figure 5.1: LoRA reВӯparametrization [29]. Only A and B are trained.
Intuitively, LoRA works because the updates needed to adapt a large preВӯtrained model
to a specific task usually lie in a much smaller subspace of the full parameter space. By
constraining updates to this lowВӯrank decomposition, LoRA captures the most important
directions of change with far fewer trainable parameters, while preserving the general
knowledge stored in the frozen weights.
We aim to explore the best choice of rank r for each use case. This may vary depending
on the model, for instance, when the preВӯtrained model already performs well, a lower
rank may suffice to consolidate the knowledge, whereas for weaker case, a higher rank
might be necessary.
This technique can be applied to any subset of weight matrices. In the Transformer archiВӯ
tecture, for example, there are four weight matrices in the selfВӯattention module and two in
the MLP modules. While LoRA could, in principle, be applied to any of them, the original
study restricted it to the attention weights, freezing the MLP modules so that they are not
trained on downstream tasks. This choice is motivated by the fact that attention layers
tend to capture taskВӯspecific patterns, while MLP layers encode more general knowledge
that should remain stable. In our fineВӯtuning setup, we follow this approach and apply
LoRA to the four weight matrices in the attention module, namely the Q, K, V , and O
projections.
22
Exploring different approaches to customize LLMs for textВӯtoВӯcode generation
==PAGE:31==
5.3
Code Generation
In this section, we briefly describe the inference setup and the evaluation process apВӯ
plied across all experiments, which combines benchmarkВӯbased performance metrics with
semantic similarity measures. This dual perspective allows us to better understand the
tradeВӯoffs between producing benchmarkВӯvalidated solutions and generating code that is
closer in style and structure to the targeted use case.
5.3.1
Inference
The code generated in the various experiments relies on the same decoding strategy,
namely greedy search. This method is deterministic, ensuring consistent outputs across
runs for the same input prompt. Since it always selects the single most likely next token
at each step, without exploring alternatives, it is more computationally efficient than beam
search, but it may miss alternative valid solutions.
5.3.2
Evaluation
As mentioned previously, evaluation for code generation relies on benchmarkВӯbased metВӯ
rics, often testing across multiple benchmarks. A common limitation of benchmarks is that
they impose a fixed structure of input and output, making it difficult to fully capture how a
given adaptation impacts performance in scenarios that differ in structure or content. For
this reason, in this work the evaluation focuses on two complementary aspects:
вҖў Performance: BenchmarkВӯbased evaluation of whether each customization techВӯ
nique improves model accuracy. HumanEval is used to test Python, BigBenchCode
is used for ScikitВӯlearn and OpenCV.
вҖў Similarity: Since the goal is to adapt LLMs for different use cases, we also measure
how much closer the generated code becomes to the target dataset in terms of
structure and semantics. This complements benchmark correctness with a measure
of domain alignment.
We now describe the two benchmarks employed in this work, HumanEval and BigBenchВӯ
Code, followed by the similarity search procedure.
HumanEval
HumanEval has become a standard benchmark for testing LLMs. It consists of a functionВӯ
level dataset of 164 handВӯwritten programming problems, each including a task description
and several unit tests (7.7 tests on average per problem).
Snippet 5.1 shows an example task, which includes imports, a function definition, a docВӯ
string (with a description and an example), and the canonical solution.
Exploring different approaches to customize LLMs for textВӯtoВӯcode generation
23
==PAGE:32==
Listing 5.1: Task with ID HumanEval/0 from the HumanEval benchmark.
1
from typing import List
2
3
def has_close_elements(numbers: List[float], threshold: float) -> bool:
4
""" Check if in given list of numbers , are any two numbers closer to each
other than
5
given threshold.
6
>>> has_close_elements([1.0, 2.0, 3.0], 0.5)
7
False
8
>>> has_close_elements([1.0, 2.8, 3.0, 4.0, 5.0, 2.0], 0.3)
9
True
10
"""
11
for idx, elem in enumerate(numbers):
12
for idx2, elem2 in enumerate(numbers):
13
if idx != idx2:
14
distance = abs(elem - elem2)
15
if distance < threshold:
16
return True
17
18
return False
BigBenchCode
BigBenchCode is inspired in HumanEval but introduces more complex instructions and
a wider variety of function calls. It contains 1, 140 code tasks (148 marked as hard to
solve) spanning 139 libraries, with an average of 5.6 test cases each. All tasks contain
both a prompt for code completion tasks and another for instruction tasks with minimal
information.
In this work, we focus on the codeВӯcompletion setting and use two subsets relevant to our
use cases:
вҖў BCSk: 152 tasks focusing on ScikitВӯlearn (19 from the вҖңhardвҖҷвҖҷ subset).
вҖў BCCV: 10 tasks focusing on OpenCV (2 from the вҖңhardвҖҷвҖҷ subset).
Snippet 5.2 shows an example, where the docstring provides detailed task specifications,
including parameters, return values, errors, requirements, and examples.
24
Exploring different approaches to customize LLMs for textВӯtoВӯcode generation
==PAGE:33==
Listing 5.2: Shortened task with ID BigCodeBench/92 from the BigBenchCode benchВӯ
mark.
1
import pandas as pd
2
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
3
from sklearn.cluster import KMeans
4
from matplotlib.collections import PathCollection
5
6
def task_func(data, n_clusters=3):
7
"""
8
Perform K-means clustering on a dataset and generate a scatter plot
visualizing the clusters and their centroids.
9
10
Parameters:
11
...
12
Returns:
13
...
14
Raises:
15
...
16
Requirements:
17
...
18
Example:
19
...
20
"""
21
...
22
return labels, ax
Similarity Search
We complement benchmark evaluation with a similarity measure that quantifies how closely
the generated code matches the target dataset. For this, we compute cosine similarity
between vector embeddings of predictions and canonical solutions.
Two types of similarity are considered:
вҖў Validation similarity: Used during training to guide fineВӯtuning. It is calculated
between the predicted output and the canonical validation examples.
вҖў Test similarity: Used for final evaluation across all models and techniques on a
common test set.
Both use the same embedding model. The main difference is in what is embedded. For
test similarity, only the code solution is embedded. For validation similarity, the entire outВӯ
put is embedded (prompt + solution), due to HuggingFace (openВӯsource framework used
for implementation) evaluation producing predictions that include the full output during loss
calculation. While including the prompt could inflate similarity scores, token mismatches
often lower them, so validation similarity provides a noisier but still useful signal.
5.4
Tools and Computation Resources
In this work, several tools and platforms were used to support the development, training,
and evaluation of models:
вҖў HuggingFace: Provides access to stateВӯofВӯtheВӯart models, datasets, and libraries
such as transformers and datasets, enabling experimentation and fineВӯtuning for
the code generation tasks.
вҖў Databricks: A scalable cloudВӯbased platform used for distributed training and deВӯ
Exploring different approaches to customize LLMs for textВӯtoВӯcode generation
25
==PAGE:34==
ployment. It simplifies resource management and integrates seamlessly with ML
pipelines, supporting largeВӯscale experiments with multiВӯnode, multiВӯGPU setups. It
also provides vector search through Mosaic AI Vector Search.
вҖў MLflow: Used for experiment tracking, it allows systematic comparison of training
runs, hyperparameters, and evaluation metrics, ensuring reproducibility and traceВӯ
ability of results.
вҖў Spark DataFrames (SparkDF): Enables distributed handling of large datasets, makВӯ
ing it possible to efficiently prepare data for training and evaluation within Databricks
вҖў PyTorch with TorchDistributor: While HuggingFace provides the core training and
evaluation framework, TorchDistributor in Databricks is essential to scale training
to large datasets. It enables efficient distributed execution across multiple GPUs and
nodes, significantly reducing training time.
The computation resources available in Databricks for training and evaluation consisted
of three clusters with a multiВӯnode setup of 9 nodes of which 8 were workers Вӯ each had
16GB of RAM and a T4 as GPU Вӯ and the other, a driver Вӯ with the same specifications.
26
Exploring different approaches to customize LLMs for textВӯtoВӯcode generation
==PAGE:35==
6
Results
In this chapter, we present a detailed comparison of the different techniques explored in
our experiments, highlighting their impact on model performance across multiple benchВӯ
marks and use cases.
We begin by establishing a baseline using the unmodified base models, providing a refВӯ
erence point for subsequent improvements which allows us to measure the relative gains
obtained through each intervention.
Following the baseline, we analyze the effect of fewВӯshot learning, retrievalВӯaugmented
generation, and LoRA fineВӯtuning. We measure how increased trainable parameter counts
influence the metrics and also examine how these relate to each other. This analysis
helps us understand the tradeВӯoffs between generalization to diverse coding tasks and
specialization for a given domain or use case.
6.1
Baseline
The base models we chose have already been trained on Python code, as mentioned
previously. We first run the benchmarks to establish a baseline for comparison with the
different techniques applied. As shown in Table 6.1, both models perform well for Python
tasks. DeepSeekCoder, in particular, also shows stronger performance on the libraryВӯ
specific benchmarks.
Model
Benchmark
UseВӯcase
Pass@1 (%)
StarCoderВӯ1B (base)
HumanEval
Python
16.0
DeepSeekВӯCoderВӯ1.3B (base)
HumanEval
Python
30.5
StarCoderВӯ1B (base)
BCSk
Sklearn
13.2
DeepSeekВӯCoderВӯ1.3B (base)
BCSk
Sklearn
32.9
StarCoderВӯ1B (base)
BCCV
OpenCV
0
DeepSeekВӯCoderВӯ1.3B (base)
BCCV
OpenCV
20.0
Table 6.1: Baseline performance of LLMs on different benchmarks.
We also evaluate a baseline for the test similarity to better understand how our specific use
cases improve with the different techniques applied, relative to benchmark performance.
Outputs are limited to a maximum of 512 new tokens using greedy search, without stopВӯ
word truncation. This may slightly decrease scores in cases where the model continues
generating beyond the intended solution.
As shown in Table 6.2, the baseline similarity values are relatively low. One possible
reason is that docstrings used as input are not part of the modelsвҖҷ training objectives,
or because many docstrings include explicit instructions, a format for which these modВӯ
els were not specifically fineВӯtuned. The extent of training on individual libraries is not
documented, which may also affect the results.
Throughout the following sections, we highlight values above the baseline in green and
those below the baseline in red with the addition of the delta in percentage point.
Exploring different approaches to customize LLMs for textВӯtoВӯcode generation
27
==PAGE:36==
Model
UseВӯcase
Test Similarity (%)
StarCoderВӯ1B (base)
Python
73.6
DeepSeekВӯCoderВӯ1.3B (base)
Python
84.2
StarCoderВӯ1B (base)
Sklearn
62.8
DeepSeekВӯCoderВӯ1.3B (base)
Sklearn
73.2
StarCoderВӯ1B (base)
OpenCV
79.4
DeepSeekВӯCoderВӯ1.3B (base)
OpenCV
85.9
Table 6.2: Baseline similarity of LLMs outputs on the test dataset.
6.2
FewВӯshot learning
Here we experiment with different amounts of shots. Since the context length of StarCoder
is around 8k, it cannot always accomodate 10 examples depending on their length, so
those results are presented only for DeepSeekCoder.
As shown in Table 6.3, both models improve in relation to the baseline in terms of similarity,
with the optimal number of examples lying between 3 and 5 examples. One noteworthy
result is that, for Python, adding more examples seems to introduce noise, even to the
proposed use cases, since similarity decreases with higher shot counts.
The benchmarks are included to illustrate that performance increases mainly for use cases
where the model has been trained on larger amounts of data and at larger scales. For
example, DeepSeekCoder improves by up to +8.5 percentage points (pp) on HumanEval
compared to the baseline, while StarCoder remains below. This could be explained by
the fact that our exercises specifically target Python concepts. As discussed in Chapter 4,
however, the exercises often involve multiple steps that indirectly cover other concepts of
the language, which may enrich the context sufficiently for a variety of HumanEval tasks.
For the remaining tasks, improvements in the benchmarks are limited. This may be due
to the fact that BigBenchCode exercises are more complex than those in HumanEval,
typically involving longer solutions and additional steps such as error handling. It is worth
noting that StarCoder does show improvements in one benchmark example, as shown
in Listing 6.1. On the left, the generated solution follows steps similar to the reference
example on the right, but with one addition step: converting the image to HSV. This step in
unrelated to the problem itself and was introduced because one of the fewВӯshot examples
involved converting an image from RGB to HSV.
28
Exploring different approaches to customize LLMs for textВӯtoВӯcode generation
==PAGE:37==
Listing 6.1: Predicted
1
# Check if the image file exists
2
if not os.path.exists(image_path):
3
raise FileNotFoundError(f"File {
image_path} does not exist.")
4
5
# Read the image from the file
6
img = cv2.imread(image_path)
7
8
# Check if the image is loaded
successfully
9
if img is None:
10
raise ValueError(f"Error: Could not
open or find the image.")
11
12
# Convert the image from BGR color space
to HSV color space
13
hsv_img = cv2.cvtColor(img, cv2.
COLOR_BGR2HSV)
14
15
# Check if the threshold is an integer
and in the range 0-255
16
if not isinstance(threshold , int) or
threshold < 0 or threshold > 255:
17
raise ValueError(f"Error: Threshold
must be an integer in the range
0-255.")
18
19
# Create a binary image using the
threshold
20
binary_img = cv2.inRange(hsv_img , (0, 0,
threshold), (255, 255, 255))
21
22
# Return the original and binarized
images as numpy arrays
23
return img, binary_img
Listing
6.2:
Reference
(BigВӯ
Bench/423)
1
if not isinstance(threshold
, int) or not (0 <=
threshold <= 255):
2
raise ValueError("
Threshold must be
an integer
between 0 and
255.")
3
4
if not os.path.exists(
image_path):
5
raise
FileNotFoundError
(f"No image found
at {image_path}"
)
6
7
img = cv2.imread(
image_path , cv2.
IMREAD_GRAYSCALE)
8
binary_img = np.where(img
> threshold , 255, 0)
.astype('uint8')
9
10
return np.array(img),
binary_img
Overall, similarity improves in most cases, confirming that fewВӯshot learning leverages
the modelвҖҷs preВӯtrained knowledge and helps align the structure to the target use case.
However, the effectiveness depends heavily on the quality and relevance of the examples.
Most benchmark scores fall below baseline, not because the model performs worse overВӯ
all, but because this form of customization does not always provide sufficiently relevant
context. In many cases, the examples introduce structural differences or irrelevant conВӯ
tent, adding noise to the response. The exception is the Python case, where additional
contextual richness provides measurable improvements.
6.3
RetrievalВӯAugmented Generation (RAG)
The vector embeddings are created in the same way as for the test similarity, using the
embedding model mentioned in Chapter 5. Document similarity is calculated using cosine
similarity.
For the experiments, we use the hybrid search introduced in he previous, since we noticed
that it produced a wider range of scores, allowing us to experiment with score thresholds,
and also provided more accurate initial results compared to search based solely on vector
Exploring different approaches to customize LLMs for textВӯtoВӯcode generation
29
==PAGE:38==
Table 6.3: Comparison of model performance across different fewВӯshot settings and
benchmarks. Deltas are computed relative to the baselines in Tables 6.1 and 6.2.
UseВӯcase
Model
Benchmark
1Вӯshot
3Вӯshot
5Вӯshot
10Вӯshot
Python
StarCoder
HumanEval
14.0 (вҲ’2.0)
14.6 (вҲ’1.4)
15.9 (вҲ’0.1)
Вӯ
Test Similarity
73.1 (вҲ’0.5)
75.8 (+2.2)
76.2 (+2.6)
Вӯ
DeepSeekCoder
HumanEval
1.1 (+0.6)
39.0 (+8.5)
35.4 (+4.9)
36.6 (+6.1)
Test Similarity
83.3 (вҲ’0.9)
82.2 (вҲ’2.0)
83.1 (вҲ’1.1)
80.7 (вҲ’3.5)
Sklearn
StarCoder
BCSk
7.2 (вҲ’6.0)
3.9 (вҲ’9.3)
6.6 (вҲ’6.6)
Вӯ
Test Similarity
65.7 (+2.9)
68.0 (+5.2)
69.1 (+6.3)
Вӯ
DeepSeekCoder
BCSk
27.0 (вҲ’5.9)
28.9 (вҲ’4.0)
26.3 (вҲ’6.6)
27.0 (вҲ’5.9)
Test Similarity
71.9 (вҲ’1.3)
74.5 (+1.3)
75.4 (+2.2)
75.7 (+2.5)
OpenCV
StarCoder
BCCV
0.0
10.0 (+10)
10.0 (+10)
Вӯ
Test Similarity
80.9 (+1.5)
81.1 (+1.7)
80.3 (+0.9)
Вӯ
DeepSeekCoder
BCCV
0.0 (вҲ’20.0)
0.0 (вҲ’20.0)
10.0 (вҲ’10.0)
10 (вҲ’10.0)
Test Similarity
85.2 (вҲ’0.7)
86.4 (+0.5)
86.3 (+0.4)
85.5 (вҲ’0.4)
similarity.
As shown in Table 6.4, the number of retrieved examples is the main influencing factor.
This highlights that models with a smaller context length are not ideal. The examples are
inserted into the prompt ordered by similarity score, from highest to lowest. As discussed
in Chapter 2, this ordering matters, since tokens at the beginning and end of the context
window tend to have a stronger influence on the modelвҖҷs predictions.
We first fix the minimum score threshold at 0.5, ensuring that in all cases the target number
of examples are retrieved. Both benchmarks and similarity scores show an improvement
relative to using fewВӯshot learning, as expected, since the retrieved examples are directly
relevant to the task.
It is important to note that, compared to fewВӯshot learning, the number of examples has a
higher influence. This suggests that providing more highВӯquality examples provides better
and more varied knowledge to the model, which can improve the quality of the generated
solutions.
In comparison to the baseline, however, benchmark performance follows the same trend
observed in fewВӯshot learning: the examples may introduce noise because their structure
differs from the benchmark tasks, leading to mismatched outputs that do not align with
benchmark requirements.
DeepSeekCoder achieved relatively good results given its longer context window, so we
experiment as well with different similarity thresholds. Here, only documents above the
threshold were kept, with the aim of filtering out potential noise in the prompt. Results
are show in Table 6.5. For this experiment, we retrieve up to 10 examples. When fewer
documents were retrieved due to higher thresholds, scores often dropped. This is likely
because a discarded lowВӯscoring document may still have been relevant.
Regarding the OpenCV tasks, similarity drops comparatively to the previous experiment.
This can be explained by the fact that, at a threshold of 0.7, the average number of reВӯ
trieved documents dropped to 9.66. Similarly, at 0.75 for ScikitВӯlearn and Python, the
average number of retrieved documents was only 9.24. At 0.85, this dropped further to
about 6 documents on average.
These results confirm that retrieving fewer examples, even if they have higher similarity
30
Exploring different approaches to customize LLMs for textВӯtoВӯcode generation
==PAGE:39==
Table 6.4: Comparison of RAG configurations for different numbers of retrieved docВӯ
uments across models and benchmarks for multiple use cases.
Threshold fixed at
score > 0.5 for all experiments. Deltas are computed relative to the baselines in TaВӯ
bles 6.1 and 6.2.
UseВӯcase
Model
Benchmark
#1
#3
#5
#10
Python
StarCoder
HumanEval
15.9 (вҲ’0.1)
14.0 (вҲ’2.0)
10.4 (вҲ’5.6)
вҖ“
Test Similarity
79.9 (+6.3)
80.9 (+7.3)
81.5 (+7.9)
вҖ“
DeepSeekCoder
HumanEval
38.4 (+7.9)
39.6 (+9.1)
37.2 (+6.7)
37.2 (+6.7)
Test Similarity
85.3 (+1.1)
85.6 (+1.4)
85.1 (+0.9)
85.5 (+1.3)
Sklearn
StarCoder
BCSk
3.3 (вҲ’9.9)
4.6 (вҲ’8.6)
2.6 (вҲ’10.6)
вҖ“
Test Similarity
69.7 (+6.9)
74.5 (+11.7)
76.2 (+13.4)
вҖ“
DeepSeekCoder
BCSk
28.3 (вҲ’4.6)
29.6 (вҲ’3.3)
31.6 (вҲ’1.3)
32.2 (вҲ’0.7)
Test Similarity
75.7 (+2.5)
78.5 (+5.3)
78.6 (+5.4)
80.0 (+6.8)
OpenCV
StarCoder
BCCV
0 (Вұ0.0)
0 (Вұ0.0)
0 (Вұ0.0)
вҖ“
Test Similarity
85.4 (+6.0)
87.6 (+8.2)
87.0 (+7.6)
вҖ“
DeepSeekCoder
BCCV
10 (вҲ’10.0)
20 (Вұ0.0)
0 (вҲ’20.0)
0 (вҲ’20.0)
Test Similarity
88.1 (+2.2)
88.2 (+2.3)
88.9 (+3.0)
89.3 (+3.4)
scores, impacts the model negatively. As the threshold increases, the model is provided
with too few good examples, reducing its ability to generalize.
Table 6.5: Comparison of RAG configurations for different thresholds using up to 10 reВӯ
trieved examples.
UseВӯcase
Model
Benchmark
> 0.70
> 0.75
> 0.80
> 0.85
Python
DeepSeekCoder
HumanEval
35.9
37.2
36.5
34.7
Test Similarity
84.8
85.1
85.3
85.2
Sklearn
DeepSeekCoder
BCSk
27.6
28.9
25.6
26.3
Test Similarity
Вӯ
Вӯ
77.6
77.1
OpenCV
DeepSeekCoder
BCCV
0
10
0
10
Test Similarity
88.7
88.6
88.4
87.6
Exploring different approaches to customize LLMs for textВӯtoВӯcode generation
31
==PAGE:40==
6.4
FineВӯtuning
We run experiments for different values of r and Оұ, where r = Оұ so that the weights are not
scaled, to understand how each use case, given its level of complexity, may require more
or fewer parameters to achieve better performance in the proposed evaluation metrics.
All the values presented in the tables are relative to the best model for each run, chosen
based on the validation similarity as described earlier. This metric is not a guarantee of
optimal performance, so we analyze for a few specific runs to check whether there is
any correlation between the validation similarity and benchmark performance. We save
a checkpoint every epoch, which is then tested against the benchmarks.
For hyperparameters, we use a similar number of trainable parameters for both models,
with a lora_dropout = 0.1 in all experiments (to reduce overfitting), a learning rate of
4e вҲ’5, fp16 mixed precision training, and theadamw_bnb_8bit as optimizer.
It is worth noting that the number of tokens seen by the models per epoch ranges from
12.5M to 15M per use case, depending on the tokenizer. FineВӯtuning experiments are
run for 10 epochsНҫ beyond that, both similarity and performance started dropping in most
cases.
Python
As shown in the Table 6.6, increasing the number of parameters improves test similarity
but does not necessarily improve benchmark performance. In both models, r = 128 yields
the best benchmark results, while r = 256 produces the highest similarity scores.
Table 6.6: Ablation study of LoRA fineВӯtuning with varying rank and alpha for Python use
case.
Model
Parameters
r
Оұ
Test Sim. (%)
HumanEval (pass@1%)
StarCoder
14.2M
32
32
85.1 (+11.5)
17.1 (+1.1)
28.7M
64
64
87.0 (+13.4)
17.1 (+1.1)
57.4M
128
128
87.1 (+13.5)
18.3 (+2.2)
114.9M
256
256
87.9 (+14.3)
15.2 (вҲ’0.8)
DeepSeekCoder
12.5M
32
32
88.2 (+4.0)
34.8 (+4.3)
25.2M
64
64
87.5 (+3.3)
32.3 (+1.8)
50.4M
128
128
88.2 (+4.0)
38.4 (+7.9)
100.7M
256
256
89.1(+4.9)
37.2 (+5.5)
In Figure 6.1, we compare validation similarity and benchmark performance across epochs.
While similarity increases steadily, benchmark scores peak earlier, with HumanEval reachВӯ
ing its highest values in epochs 6 and 8, while the highest similarity scores are on the 9th
and 10th. This suggests that although the model continues improving on the training
exercises, its generalization for broader Python tasks may decrease.
For StarCoder (Figure 6.2), both validation similarity and benchmark performance peak
in the second epoch, after which no further improvement is observed.
32
Exploring different approaches to customize LLMs for textВӯtoВӯcode generation
==PAGE:41==
Figure 6.1: Metrics over epochs for DeepSeekCoder with a = r = 128 trained for Python
Figure 6.2: Metrics over epochs for StarCoder with a = r = 128 trained for Python
Exploring different approaches to customize LLMs for textВӯtoВӯcode generation
33
==PAGE:42==
ScikitВӯlearn
For ScikitВӯlearn, as presented in Table 6.7, results are similar to Python regarding the
amount of parameters necessary to achieve the highest similarity, but does not correlate
in the same way with benchmark performance. StarCoder requires more parameters than
DeepSeekCoder to achieve the highest score.
Table 6.7: Ablation study of LoRA fineВӯtuning with varying rank and alpha for ScikitВӯlearn
use case.
Model
Parameters
r
Оұ
Test Sim. (%)
BCSk (pass@1%)
StarCoder
14.2M
32
32
79.4 (+17.4)
17.1 (+3.9)
28.7M
64
64
77.9 (+15.7)
19.1 (+5.9)
57.4M
128
128
77.5 (+15.2)
20.4 (+7.2)
114.9M
256
256
79.4 (+17.4)
17.1 (+3.9)
DeepSeekCoder
12.5M
32
32
81.5 (+7.9)
34.9 (+2.0)
25.2M
64
64
81.9 (+8.3)
35.5 (+2.6)
50.4M
128
128
83.0 (+9.4)
33.9 (+1.0)
100.7M
256
256
84.8(+11.6)
28.9 (вҲ’3.0)
Figure 6.3: Metrics over epochs for best ScikitВӯlearn model.
A good example of validation similarity diverging from benchmark performance is the run
with DeepSeekCoder at r = Оұ = 256 (Figure 6.4). Here, due to the high amount of paВӯ
rameters, the model achieves good benchmark results early without corresponding gains
in similarity. The best benchmark epoch does not even appear among the topВӯ5 validation
similarity scores, suggesting the model is overfitting to the use case and becoming less
general.
34
Exploring different approaches to customize LLMs for textВӯtoВӯcode generation
==PAGE:43==
Figure 6.4: Metrics over epochs for best Sklearn model
Exploring different approaches to customize LLMs for textВӯtoВӯcode generation
35
==PAGE:44==
OpenCV
For OpenCV (Table 6.8), StarCoder achieves its best benchmark and similarity results with
the smallest number of parameters, unlike in other useВӯcases. Similarly, DeepSeekCoder
performs best with r = 64, and even at r = 32, similarity is close to the highest result. This
suggests that fewer parameters are sufficient, likely due to OpenCVвҖҷs APIВӯbased nature:
the tasks may be semantically simpler compared to Python or ScikitВӯlearn.
Table 6.8: Ablation study of LoRA fineВӯtuning with varying rank and alpha for OpenCV
use case.
Model
Parameters
r
Оұ
Test Sim. (%)
BCCV (pass@1%)
StarCoder
14.2M
32
32
89.4 (+10)
30 (+30)
28.7M
64
64
87.9 (+8.5)
30 (+30)
57.4M
128
128
87.1 (+7.8)
20 (+20)
114.9M
256
256
88.2 (+8.8)
20 (+20)
DeepSeekCoder
12.5M
32
32
91.3 (+6.4)
40 (+20)
25.2M
64
64
91.3 (+6.4)
50 (+30)
50.4M
128
128
90.9 (+6.0)
50 (+30)
100.7M
256
256
91.4 (+6.5)
30 (+10)
Finally, comparing validation similarity and benchmark scores (Figure 6.5), we see that
the highest benchmark scores align with epochs where similarity is also near its peak,
although the amount of examples in the benchmark is very limited.
Figure 6.5: Metrics over epochs for best OpenCV model.
36
Exploring different approaches to customize LLMs for textВӯtoВӯcode generation
==PAGE:45==
6.5
Comparison
In this section, we review the best models for each technique and analyze their results.
The time taken to adapt each technique is very low for fewВӯshot since it requires a few good
examples of how the task must be performed, and does not need any further adjustments
other than prompt engineering.
RAG and fineВӯtuning required an extensive process of data generation as mentioned in
Chapter 4, plus the infrastructure to support each technique. On top of that, fineВӯtuning
requires an extensive amount of training which for our case given the amount of data
and computation available took on average around 2 hours depending on the model and
amount of parameters trained.
As illustrated in Table 6.9 the most time consuming techniques in terms of inference are
RAG and fewВӯshot due to the extensive use of context length, creating a higher load on
the model.
Table 6.9: Comparison of evaluation time in minutes for a test set with 128 tasks of our
datasets across techniques.
Method
Configuration
Total Time on average (min)
FewВӯshot Prompting
1 shot
39
FewВӯshot Prompting
3 shots
53
FewВӯshot Prompting
5 shots
67
FewВӯshot Prompting
10 shots
105
RAG
1 example
38
RAG
3 examples
52
RAG
5 examples
65
RAG
10 examples
90
FineВӯtuning
Вӯ
27
Exploring different approaches to customize LLMs for textВӯtoВӯcode generation
37
==PAGE:46==
6.5.1
Python
Table 6.10: Models with better combination of benchmark and similarity for the different
techniques and their configurations for Python
Model
Technique
Config.
Test Sim. (%)
Benchmark (%)
StarCoder
FewВӯshot
5Вӯshot
76.2 (+2.6)
15.9 (вҲ’0.1)
RAG
3Вӯexamples,score > 0.5
81.5 (+7.9)
10.4 (вҲ’5.6)
FineВӯtuned
r = Оұ = 128
87.1 (+13.5)
18.3 (+2.3)
DeepSeekCoder
FewВӯshot
3Вӯshot
82.2 (вҲ’2.0)
39.0 (+8.5)
RAG
3Вӯexamples, score > 0.5
85.6 (+1.4)
39.6 (+9.1)
FineВӯtuned
r = Оұ = 256
89.1 (+4.9)
37.2 (+6.7)
38
Exploring different approaches to customize LLMs for textВӯtoВӯcode generation
==PAGE:47==
6.5.2
ScikitВӯlearn
Table 6.11: Models with better combination of benchmark and similarity for the different
techniques and their configurations for ScikitВӯlearn.
Model
Technique
Config.
Test Sim. (%)
Benchmark (%)
StarCoder
FewВӯshot
5Вӯshot
69.1 (+6.3)
6.6 (вҲ’6.6)
RAG
5Вӯexamples, score > 0.5
76.2 (+13.4)
2.6 (вҲ’10.6)
FineВӯtuned
r = Оұ = 32
77.5 (+15.2)
20.4 (+7.2)
DeepSeekCoder
FewВӯshot
10Вӯshot
75.7 (+2.5)
27 (вҲ’5.9)
RAG
10Вӯexamples, score > 0.5
80.0 (+6.8)
32.2 (вҲ’0.7)
FineВӯtuned
r = Оұ = 64
81.9 (+8.3)
35.5 (+2.6)
Exploring different approaches to customize LLMs for textВӯtoВӯcode generation
39
==PAGE:48==
6.5.3
OpenCV
Table 6.12: Models with better combination of benchmark and similarity for the different
techniques and their configurations for OpenCV.
Model
Technique
Config.
Test Sim. (%)
Benchmark (%)
StarCoder
FewВӯshot
3Вӯshot
81.1 (+1.7)
10 (+10.0)
RAG
3Вӯexamples, score > 0.5
87.6 (+8.2)
0
FineВӯtuned
r = Оұ = 32
89.4 (+10.0)
30 (+30)
DeepSeekCoder
FewВӯshot
5Вӯshot
86.3 (+0.4)
10 (вҲ’10.0)
RAG
3Вӯexamples, score > 0.5
88.2 (+2.3)
20
FineВӯtuned
r = Оұ = 64
91.3 (+5.4)
50 (+30.0)
As can be seen in Table 6.12 fineВӯtuning yields the best results in all aspects, specially
using the model DeepSeekCoder. Starting with the benchmarks, in this analysis we focus
on the DeepSeekCoder adaptations in Table 6.12, and compare their results.
Compared to the baseline, the fineВӯtuned model solves all the same examples as the
baseline plus three additional ones. The two examples solved by RAG differ from those
in the baseline, and one of them is also not part of the fineВӯtuned set of solved exercises.
The only exercise solved by fewВӯshot learning, which has been shown earlier, cannot be
solved by any other method.
Figures 6.3 and 6.4 present the solutions to the task 426 in BigBenchCode for RAG and
fineВӯtuning, respectively. As highlighted, the main differences are:
вҖў In the RAG solution, likely influenced by context, the code includes additional error
checks not required by the prompt (see Appendix ??).
вҖў The RAG solution also returns a grayscale image, although this was not required
(and not caught by the tests).
вҖў Both solutions return values without explicitly converting them to np.array, which still
passes the tests. This suggests that the models learned that cv2.imread already
produces compatible arrays, which is correct.
40
Exploring different approaches to customize LLMs for textВӯtoВӯcode generation
==PAGE:49==
Listing 6.3: BigBench/426 Вӯ RAG #3 Вӯ Result: Pass
1
# Check if the image file exists
2
if not os.path.exists(image_path):
3
raise FileNotFoundError(f"Image file not found at {image_path}")
4
5
# Read the image using OpenCV
6
image = cv2.imread(image_path , cv2.IMREAD_GRAYSCALE)
7
8
# Check if the image was successfully read
9
if image is None:
10
raise Exception(f"Failed to read image from {image_path}")
11
12
# Check if the threshold is valid
13
if not isinstance(threshold , int) or threshold < 0 or threshold > 255:
14
raise ValueError("Threshold must be an integer between 0 and 255")
15
16
# Binarize the image using the given threshold
17
_, binary_image = cv2.threshold(image, threshold , 255, cv2.THRESH_BINARY
)
18
19
# Save the binary image to disk
20
cv2.imwrite('binary_image.jpg', binary_image)
21
22
# Return the original and binarized images
23
return image, binary_image
Listing 6.4: BigBench/426 Вӯ FineВӯtuned Вӯ Result: Pass
1
# Check if the image exists
2
if not os.path.exists(image_path):
3
raise FileNotFoundError(f"The image file at {image_path} does not
exist.")
4
5
# Read the image
6
image = cv2.imread(image_path , cv2.IMREAD_COLOR)
7
8
# Convert the image to grayscale
9
gray_image = cv2.cvtColor(image, cv2.COLOR_BGR2GRAY)
10
11
# Check if the threshold is valid
12
if not isinstance(threshold , int) or not 0 <= threshold <= 255:
13
raise ValueError("Threshold must be an integer between 0 and 255.")
14
15
# Binarize the image using the threshold
16
_, binary_image = cv2.threshold(gray_image , threshold , 255, cv2.
THRESH_BINARY)
17
18
# Save the binary image
19
cv2.imwrite('binary_image.jpg', binary_image)
20
21
return gray_image , binary_image
Exploring different approaches to customize LLMs for textВӯtoВӯcode generation
41
==PAGE:50==
7
Conclusion
The goal of this thesis was to investigate how LLMs, typically trained for generalВӯpurpose
tasks, can be adapted to specialized programming tasks.
We started by generating
a synthetic dataset designed with examples designed for solving exercises in Python,
ScikitВӯlearn, and OpenCV. We then explored three different customization strategies Вӯ
fewВӯshot learning, retrievalВӯaugmented generation (RAG), and fineВӯtuning with LoRA Вӯ,
and proposed different methods to evaluate the customization techniques, through both
benchmarksВӯbased metrics and similarityВӯbased metrics.
Our experiments showed that each approach comes with distinct tradeВӯoffs in terms of
accuracy, efficiency, and data requirements.
FewВӯshot learning showed improvements in terms of similarity to the tasks in the use
cases, requiring no retraining and virtually no data, but it is limited by the modelвҖҷs context
window and preВӯacquired knowledge. It performed exceptionally well on the HumanEval
benchmark for Python with DeepSeekCoder, as the context was rich enough to support
the solution of these tasks and the model had been trained on a larger amount of data
compared to StarCoder. However, for lengthier tasks where the context window is limited,
or when the modelвҖҷs knowledge of the task is not extensive enough, the few examples
were insufficient, and performance on the benchmarks did not improve.
RAG extended this approach by dynamically retrieving relevant examples, leading to imВӯ
proved results in terms of similarity to the use cases, at the cost of additional infrastructure
and curated data. It excelled in the benchmarks for HumanEval just like fewВӯshot, since
it created a more relevant context, but it had the same problem with tasks that are not as
well known to the model and required lengthier solutions.
FineВӯtuning, while the most expensive in terms of computation and data, enabled the
highest level of customization. LoRA demonstrated that strong performance could be
achieved both in benchmarks, indicating improved knowledge after fineВӯtuning, and in
similarity metrics, showing that it is the most effective approach in terms of accuracy.
From this analysis, we conclude that the choice of customization technique depends
strongly on the application context. When resources are constrained and flexibility is
needed across multiple domains, prompting or RAG may be preferable if more capaВӯ
ble models preВӯtrained on the data relevant the use case are available, as these can be
sufficient in terms of performance and can even surpass fineВӯtuning to a certain extent.
However, when accuracy and domain specialization are the priority, fineВӯtuning provides
the most robust solution in terms of both similarity and benchmarks performance.
7.1
Limitations
A few limitations were encountered during the process of generation and adaptation of the
LLM techniques. Starting with data generation, if time and costs had not been an issue, it
would have been ideal to generate a higher volume of data and study how this affects the
fineВӯtuningНҫ for instance, identifying at what point the improvements in performance and
similarity would plateau.
In terms of models used for this research, we were heavily constrained by the memory
available in the available GPUs. Although model distribution could have been an option,
42
Exploring different approaches to customize LLMs for textВӯtoВӯcode generation
==PAGE:51==
time constraints and technical issues did not allow for its implementation. For that reason,
we were not able to explore a wider range of model sizes.
7.2
Future Work
Future work can expand on these results in several directions. One promising line is to
explore hybrid strategies, such as combining retrieval with lightweight fineВӯtuning, potenВӯ
tially offering the benefits of both adaptability and efficiency. Another direction could be
to expand the preВӯtrained model size to evaluate the impact on performance.
Exploring different approaches to customize LLMs for textВӯtoВӯcode generation
43
==PAGE:52==
Bibliography
[1]
Rohit Singh. TextВӯtoВӯcode generation with TensorFlow, HuggingFace and MBPP.
Kaggle. Retrieved January 28, 2025, from https://www.kaggle.com/code/rhtsingh/
text-to-code-generation-with-tensorflow-mbpp. 2022.
[2]
The LEGO Group. The LEGO Group. Company Website. Accessed: 2025Вӯ03Вӯ20.
2025. url: https://www.lego.com/en-us/aboutus.
[3]
Ashish Vaswani et al. Attention Is All You Need. 2023. arXiv: 1706.03762 [cs.CL].
url: https://arxiv.org/abs/1706.03762.
[4]
Jacob Devlin et al. BERT: PreВӯtraining of Deep Bidirectional Transformers for LanВӯ
guage Understanding. 2019. arXiv: 1810.04805 [cs.CL]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/
1810.04805.
[5]
Alec Radford et al. вҖңImproving Language Understanding by Generative PreВӯTrainingвҖқ.
In: OpenAI Blog 1.8 (2018), pp. 1вҖ“12. url: https://www.cs.ubc.ca/~amuham01/
LING530/papers/radford2018improving.pdf.
[6]
Colin Raffel et al. вҖңExploring the Limits of Transfer Learning with a Unified TextВӯtoВӯ
Text TransformerвҖқ. In: CoRR abs/1910.10683 (2019). arXiv: 1910.10683. url: http:
//arxiv.org/abs/1910.10683.
[7]
Tri Dao et al. FlashAttention: Fast and MemoryВӯEfficient Exact Attention with IOВӯ
Awareness. 2022. arXiv: 2205.14135 [cs.LG]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2205.14135.
[8]
Nelson F. Liu et al. Lost in the Middle: How Language Models Use Long Contexts.
2023. arXiv: 2307.03172 [cs.CL]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.03172.
[9]
Jared Kaplan et al. Scaling Laws for Neural Language Models. 2020. arXiv: 2001.
08361 [cs.LG]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2001.08361.
[10]
Kishore Papineni et al. вҖңBleu: a Method for Automatic Evaluation of Machine TransВӯ
lationвҖқ. In: Proceedings of the 40th Annual Meeting of the Association for ComВӯ
putational Linguistics. Ed. by Pierre Isabelle, Eugene Charniak, and Dekang Lin.
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA: Association for Computational Linguistics, July
2002, pp. 311вҖ“318. doi: 10.3115/1073083.1073135. url: https://aclanthology.org/P02-
1040/.
[11]
ChinВӯYew Lin. вҖңROUGE: A Package for Automatic Evaluation of SummariesвҖқ. In:
Text Summarization Branches Out. Barcelona, Spain: Association for ComputaВӯ
tional Linguistics, July 2004, pp. 74вҖ“81. url: https://aclanthology.org/W04-1013/.
[12]
Shuo Ren et al. вҖңCodeBLEU: a Method for Automatic Evaluation of Code SynthesisвҖқ.
In: CoRR abs/2009.10297 (2020). arXiv: 2009.10297. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2009.
10297.
[13]
Tom B. Brown et al. вҖңLanguage Models are FewВӯShot LearnersвҖқ. In: Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems 33 (2020), pp. 1877вҖ“1901. url: https://
arxiv.org/abs/2005.14165.
[14]
Yunfan Gao and Yun Xiong and Xinyu Gao and Kangxiang Jia and Jinliu Pan and
Yuxi Bi and Yi Dai and Jiawei Sun and Meng Wang and Haofen Wang. вҖңRetrievalВӯ
Augmented Generation for Large Language Models: A SurveyвҖқ. In: arXiv preprint
arXiv:2312.10997 (2024).
[15]
Databricks. RetrievalВӯAugmented Generation (RAG) on Databricks. Accessed: 2025Вӯ
05Вӯ15. May 2025. url: https://docs.databricks.com/aws/en/generative-ai/retrieval-
augmented-generation (visited on 05/15/2025).
[16]
Zeyu Han et al. ParameterВӯEfficient FineВӯTuning for Large Models: A ComprehenВӯ
sive Survey. 2024. arXiv: 2403.14608 [cs.LG]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.14608.
44
Exploring different approaches to customize LLMs for textВӯtoВӯcode generation
==PAGE:53==
[17]
Shervin Minaee et al. Large Language Models: A Survey. 2025. arXiv: 2402.06196
[cs.CL]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.06196.
[18]
Suriya Gunasekar et al. Textbooks Are All You Need. 2023. arXiv: 2306 . 11644
[cs.CL]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.11644.
[19]
OpenAI. Hello GPTВӯ4o. Accessed: 2025Вӯ08Вӯ15. May 2024. url: https://openai.com/
index/hello-gpt-4o/ (visited on 08/15/2025).
[20]
Raymond Li, Loubna Ben Allal, et al. StarCoder: may the source be with you! 2023.
arXiv: 2305.06161 [cs.CL]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.06161.
[21]
Denis Kocetkov et al. The Stack: 3 TB of permissively licensed source code. 2022.
arXiv: 2211.15533 [cs.CL]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2211.15533.
[22]
Mohammad Bavarian et al. Efficient Training of Language Models to Fill in the MidВӯ
dle. 2022. arXiv: 2207.14255 [cs.CL]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2207.14255.
[23]
Daya Guo et al. вҖңDeepSeekВӯCoder: When the Large Language Model Meets ProВӯ
gramming вҖ“ The Rise of Code IntelligenceвҖқ. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.14196
(2024).
[24]
Baptiste Roziere, Charles Packer, Sam Petrov, et al. вҖңCode Llama: Open FoundaВӯ
tion Models for CodeвҖқ. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.12950 (2023).
[25]
Chenfei Luo, Qinghao Zhu, Weizhen Wang, et al. вҖңWizardCoder: Empowering Code
Large Language Models with EvolВӯInstructвҖқ. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.08568
(2023).
[26]
Yacine Allal, Mohamed Ben Allal, et al. вҖңSantaCoder: donвҖҷt reach for the stars!вҖқ In:
arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.03988 (2023).
[27]
Stephen Robertson and Hugo Zaragoza. вҖңThe Probabilistic Relevance Framework:
BM25 and BeyondвҖқ. In: Found. Trends Inf. Retr. 3.4 (Apr. 2009), pp. 333вҖ“389. issn:
1554Вӯ0669. doi: 10.1561/1500000019. url: https://doi.org/10.1561/1500000019.
[28]
Gordon V. Cormack, Charles L A Clarke, and Stefan Buettcher. вҖңReciprocal rank fuВӯ
sion outperforms condorcet and individual rank learning methodsвҖқ. In: Proceedings
of the 32nd International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in
Information Retrieval. SIGIR вҖҷ09. Boston, MA, USA: Association for Computing MaВӯ
chinery, 2009, pp. 758вҖ“759. isbn: 9781605584836. doi: 10.1145/1571941.1572114.
url: https://doi.org/10.1145/1571941.1572114.
[29]
Edward J. Hu et al. LoRA: LowВӯRank Adaptation of Large Language Models. 2021.
arXiv: 2106.09685 [cs.CL]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2106.09685.
Exploring different approaches to customize LLMs for textВӯtoВӯcode generation
45
==PAGE:54==
46
Exploring different approaches to customize LLMs for textВӯtoВӯcode generation
==PAGE:55==
A
Prompt Engineering
A.1
Iterations
A.1.1
Initial Prompt Result
### Python Exercise: Working with Arrays
**Objective:** Practice basic operations with arrays using PythonвҖҷs builtВӯin list type.
**Task:** You will create a simple program that performs the following operations on arВӯ
rays:
1. **Create an Array:** Вӯ Initialize an array with at least five integer elements.
2. **Access and Print Elements:** Вӯ Print the first and last elements of the array.
3. **Array Modification:** Вӯ Change the third element in the array to a new integer value.
4. **Add Elements:** Вӯ Append a new integer to the end of the array.
5. **Remove Elements:** Вӯ Remove the second element from the array.
6. **Iterate and Print:** Вӯ Use a loop to print each element of the array.
7. **Find Maximum and Minimum:** Вӯ Calculate and print the maximum and minimum
values in the array.
1
2
def array_operations():
3
# Step 1: Create an Array
4
my_array = [10, 20, 30, 40, 50]
5
6
# Step 2: Access and Print Elements
7
print("First element:", my_array[0])
8
print("Last element:", my_array[-1])
9
10
# Step 3: Array Modification
11
my_array[2] = 35
12
print("Modified array:", my_array)
13
14
# Step 4: Add Elements
15
my_array.append(60)
16
print("Array after appending:", my_array)
17
18
# Step 5: Remove Elements
19
my_array.pop(1)
20
print("Array after removing second element:", my_array)
21
22
# Step 6: Iterate and Print
23
print("Iterating through array:")
24
for item in my_array:
25
print(item)
26
27
# Step 7: Find Maximum and Minimum
28
max_value = max(my_array)
29
min_value = min(my_array)
30
print("Maximum value:", max_value)
31
print("Minimum value:", min_value)
32
33
# Call the function to see results
Exploring different approaches to customize LLMs for textВӯtoВӯcode generation
47
==PAGE:56==
34
array_operations()
вҖ” **Instructions:**
Вӯ Copy the starter code into a Python environment and run it. Вӯ Observe the output to
understand how each operation works. Вӯ Try modifying the initial array, adding different
elements, or removing others to see different results.
A.1.2
Second Iteration Result
**Exercise Title: DNA Sequence Analysis**
**Objective:** Use Python arrays (lists) to explore and analyze DNA sequences for comВӯ
mon patterns or mutations.
**Scenario:** In bioinformatics, analyzing DNA sequences often involves searching for
specific nucleotide patterns or mutations that could signify important genetic information.
You are tasked with writing a Python script to identify specific motifs within a given DNA
sequence.
**Task:**
1. **Define a DNA Sequence:** Create a Python list to represent a DNA sequence. For
simplicity, use only the four nucleotides: вҖҷAвҖҷ, вҖҷTвҖҷ, вҖҷCвҖҷ, вҖҷGвҖҷ.
1
dna_sequence = ['A', 'T', 'C', 'G', 'G', 'A', 'T', 'T', 'C', 'A']
2. **Pattern Analysis:** Write a function that takes the DNA sequence list and a motif
(pattern) as input, and returns the starting indices where this motif occurs in the sequence.
1
def find_motif(sequence , motif):
2
indices = []
3
motif_length = len(motif)
4
for i in range(len(sequence) - motif_length + 1):
5
if sequence[i:i + motif_length] == motif:
6
indices.append(i)
7
return indices
3. **Test Your Function:** Use the function to find motifs вҖҷATвҖҷ and вҖҷGGвҖҷ within the given
DNA sequence. Print out the results.
1
motif1 = ['A', 'T']
2
motif2 = ['G', 'G']
3
print("Motif 'AT' found at indices:", find_motif(dna_sequence , motif1))
4
print("Motif 'GG' found at indices:", find_motif(dna_sequence , motif2))
4. **Challenge Extension:** Modify the function to count how many times each nucleotide
appears within the DNA sequence and identify the most frequent nucleotide.
**Expected Output:** вҖңвҖҳpython Motif вҖҷATвҖҷ found at indices: [0, 6] Motif вҖҷGGвҖҷ found at indices:
[3] вҖңвҖҳ
48
Exploring different approaches to customize LLMs for textВӯtoВӯcode generation
==PAGE:57==
A.1.3
Third Iteration Result for вҖқBeginnerвҖқ skill level
### Exercise: Analyzing DNA Sequences
**Scenario:**
You are a bioinformatics researcher analyzing DNA sequences. Your task is to count the
occurrences of each nucleotide (A, C, G, T) in a given DNA sequence using arrays.
**Objective:**
Write a Python function that takes a DNA sequence as input and returns the count of each
nucleotide.
**Instructions:**
1. Create a function named вҖҳcount_nucleotidesвҖҳ that accepts a string parameter вҖҳdna_sequenceвҖҳ.
2. Use an array (list) to store the counts of each nucleotide: A, C, G, and T. 3. Iterate
over the вҖҳdna_sequenceвҖҳ and update the counts in the array. 4. Return the array with the
counts.
**Example:**
1
def count_nucleotides(dna_sequence):
2
# Initialize a list to store counts of A, C, G, T
3
counts = [0, 0, 0, 0]
4
5
# Dictionary to map nucleotides to their index in the counts list
6
nucleotide_index = {'A': 0, 'C': 1, 'G': 2, 'T': 3}
7
8
# Iterate over each character in the dna_sequence
9
for nucleotide in dna_sequence:
10
if nucleotide in nucleotide_index:
11
# Increment the appropriate count
12
counts[nucleotide_index[nucleotide]] += 1
13
14
return counts
15
16
# Test the function
17
dna_sequence = "ACGTACGTAGCTAGCTAGGCTA"
18
print(count_nucleotides(dna_sequence))
# Output should be [6, 5, 5, 6]
**Task:**
Вӯ Implement the вҖҳcount_nucleotidesвҖҳ function. Вӯ Test the function with different DNA seВӯ
quences. Вӯ Ensure your code handles sequences with mixed cases (e.g., вҖқaCgTвҖқ).
A.1.4
Third Iteration Result for вҖқAdvancedвҖқ skill level
**Exercise: Analyzing Genetic Sequence Data**
**Objective:** In this exercise, you will write a Python program to analyze genetic seВӯ
quence data. You will simulate the process of identifying mutations in DNA sequences
using arrays. This is a common task in bioinformatics, where identifying mutations can
lead to insights into genetic diseases.
**Scenario:** You are provided with two DNA sequences: a reference sequence and a
sample sequence. Your task is to identify mutations in the sample sequence compared
to the reference sequence.
Exploring different approaches to customize LLMs for textВӯtoВӯcode generation
49
==PAGE:58==
**DNA sequences:** Вӯ Both sequences are arrays of characters (вҖҳAвҖҳ, вҖҳTвҖҳ, вҖҳCвҖҳ, вҖҳGвҖҳ), repreВӯ
senting nucleotides.
**Tasks:**
1. **Load the Sequences:** Create two arrays to store the reference and sample DNA
sequences. You can simulate this by generating random sequences or using predefined
ones.
2. **Identify Mutations:** Write a function to compare the two arrays and identify positions
where the sample sequence differs from the reference sequence. These are potential
mutation sites.
3. **Classify Mutations:** Classify each mutation as a substitution, insertion, or deletion.
Assume that the sequences are aligned and of equal length for simplicity.
4. **Output Results:** Print the positions and types of mutations. Additionally, count the
total number of mutations.
**Hints:**
Вӯ Use loops to iterate through the arrays. Вӯ Consider using list comprehensions for conВӯ
cise code. Вӯ Use PythonвҖҷs builtВӯin functions and libraries, like вҖҳnumpyвҖҳ, for efficient array
operations if needed.
**Example Code Structure:**
1
import random
2
3
def generate_sequence(length):
4
return [random.choice('ATCG') for _ in range(length)]
5
6
def identify_mutations(reference , sample):
7
mutations = []
8
for i in range(len(reference)):
9
if reference[i] != sample[i]:
10
mutation_type = "Substitution"
# In this simplified scenario ,
assume substitution
11
mutations.append((i, reference[i], sample[i], mutation_type))
12
return mutations
13
14
def main():
15
length = 100
# Example sequence length
16
reference_sequence = generate_sequence(length)
17
sample_sequence = generate_sequence(length)
18
19
mutations = identify_mutations(reference_sequence , sample_sequence)
20
21
print("Mutations found:")
22
for mutation in mutations:
23
print(f"Position: {mutation[0]}, Reference: {mutation[1]}, Sample: {
mutation[2]}, Type: {mutation[3]}")
24
print(f"Total mutations: {len(mutations)}")
25
26
if __name__ == "__main__":
27
main()
**Next Steps:**
50
Exploring different approaches to customize LLMs for textВӯtoВӯcode generation
==PAGE:59==
Вӯ Try extending the exercise by handling sequences of different lengths to identify inserВӯ
tions and deletions. Вӯ Incorporate real genetic data for more realistic analysis.
A.1.5
Final Iteration Result
1
"""
2
Problem Statement:
3
In the field of bioinformatics , DNA sequences are often analyzed to find
patterns or specific nucleotide occurrences.
4
You are given a list of DNA strands. Your task is to write a Python function
that counts the occurrence of each
5
nucleotide ('A', 'T', 'C', 'G') in a given DNA strand and returns the result
as a dictionary.
6
7
Instructions:
8
1. Define a function named `count_nucleotides ` that takes a single parameter:
a string representing a DNA strand.
9
2. Initialize a dictionary to store the count of each nucleotide.
10
3. Iterate over the DNA strand and update the count for each nucleotide in the
dictionary.
11
4. Return the dictionary containing the nucleotide counts.
12
13
Example:
14
Input: "ATCGATCGA"
15
Output: {'A': 3, 'T': 2, 'C': 2, 'G': 2}
16
"""
17
18
# Define the function to count nucleotides
19
def count_nucleotides(dna_strand):
20
# Initialize a dictionary to store nucleotide counts
21
nucleotide_count = {'A': 0, 'T': 0, 'C': 0, 'G': 0}
22
23
# Iterate over each character in the DNA strand
24
for nucleotide in dna_strand:
25
# Update the count for the current nucleotide
26
if nucleotide in nucleotide_count:
27
nucleotide_count[nucleotide] += 1
28
29
# Return the dictionary with counts
30
return nucleotide_count
31
32
# Example usage
33
dna_sequence = "ATCGATCGA"
34
print(count_nucleotides(dna_sequence))
# Output: {'A': 3, 'T': 2, 'C': 2, 'G
': 2}
A.2
Final Prompts
A.2.1
Python
You are an expert Python instructor tasked with creating specialized
programming exercises tailored to various professions.
Create a Python programming exercise simulating a realistic scenario
in the field of {profession},specifically focusing on the topic of {topic}.
The exercise should be suitable for {skill_level} level, include a clear
problem statement, be practical and not overly theoretical.
The user interaction should be {user_interaction} and the error handling
should be {error_handling}.
The output should be the code with the problem statement as a docstring,
Exploring different approaches to customize LLMs for textВӯtoВӯcode generation
51
==PAGE:60==
and also comments explaining the solution. Do not include any further
explanations or other
text outside the code snippet.
Only import conventional libraries.
The structure of the response should be:
```python
"""
Problem statement
"""
imports
code
```
A.2.2
OpenCV
You are an expert Computer Vision instructor tasked with creating OpenCV
exercises in Python tailored to various professions.Create an OpenCV
programming exercise simulating a realistic scenario in the field of
{profession}, specifically focusing on the topic of {topic}.
The exercise should be suitable for {skill_level} level, include a clear
problem statement, be practical and not overly theoretical.The output should
be the code with the problem statement as a docstring, and also comments
explaining the solution. Do not include any further explanations or other
text outside the code snippet.Only import conventional libraries.
The structure of the response should be:
```python
"""
Problem statement
"""
imports
code
```
A.2.3
ScikitВӯlearn
You are an expert Machine Learning instructor tasked with creating
Scikit-learn exercises tailored to various professions. Create a
Scikit-learn programming exercise simulating a realistic scenario
in the field of {profession}, specifically focusing on the topic of
{topic}. The exercise should be suitable for {skill_level} level,
include a clear problem statement, be practical and not overly theoretical.
Dataset size should be {dataset_size} and contain {dataset_challenge}.
The output should be the code with the problem statement as a docstring,
and also comments explaining the solution. Do not include any further
explanations or other
text outside the code snippet.
Only import conventional libraries.
The structure of the response should be:
```python
"""
Problem statement
"""
imports
code
```
52
Exploring different approaches to customize LLMs for textВӯtoВӯcode generation
==PAGE:61==
B
Results
B.1
Baseline
B.1.1
OpenCV
BigBench/426
Listing B.1: BigBench/426 Вӯ Prompt
1
import numpy as np
2
import cv2
3
import os
4
5
def task_func(image_path='image.jpg', threshold=128):
6
"""
7
Read an image, convert it to grayscale , binarize it using a given
threshold , and save it as 'binary_image.jpg'.
8
The function returns numpy arrays of the original and binarized images ,
and ensures that the threshold value is valid.
9
10
Parameters:
11
- image_path (str): The path to the image file. Default is 'image.jpg'.
12
- threshold (int): The threshold value for binarization , must be between
0 and 255. Default is 128.
13
14
Returns:
15
- tuple: A tuple containing two numpy arrays; the first is the original
grayscale image, the second is the binarized image.
16
17
Raises:
18
- FileNotFoundError: If the image file does not exist at the specified
path.
19
- ValueError: If the threshold is not an integer or not in the range
0-255.
20
21
Requirements:
22
- opencv
23
- numpy
24
- os
25
- pillow
26
27
Example:
28
>>> create_dummy_image('image.jpg')
29
>>> original_img_array , binary_img_array = task_func('image.jpg', 128)
30
>>> os.remove('image.jpg')
31
>>> original_img_array.shape, binary_img_array.shape # ((image_height ,
image_width), (image_height , image_width))
32
((20, 20), (20, 20))
33
"""
Exploring different approaches to customize LLMs for textВӯtoВӯcode generation
53
==PAGE:62==
Listing B.2: BigBench/426 Вӯ Canonical Solution
1
if not isinstance(threshold , int) or not (0 <= threshold <= 255):
2
raise ValueError("Threshold must be an integer between 0 and 255.")
3
4
if not os.path.exists(image_path):
5
raise FileNotFoundError(f"No image found at {image_path}")
6
7
# Image processing
8
img = cv2.imread(image_path , cv2.IMREAD_GRAYSCALE)
9
binary_img = np.where(img >= threshold , 255, 0).astype('uint8')
10
cv2.imwrite('binary_image.jpg', binary_img)
11
12
return np.array(img), np.array(binary_img)
Listing B.3: BigBench/426 Вӯ DeepSeek Baseline Вӯ Test status: Fail
1
if not os.path.exists(image_path):
2
raise FileNotFoundError(f"The image file '{image_path}' does not
exist.")
3
4
if not isinstance(threshold , int):
5
raise ValueError("The threshold must be an integer.")
6
7
if threshold < 0 or threshold > 255:
8
raise ValueError("The threshold must be between 0 and 255.")
9
10
img = cv2.imread(image_path)
11
gray = cv2.cvtColor(img, cv2.COLOR_BGR2GRAY)
12
_, binary = cv2.threshold(gray, threshold , 255, cv2.THRESH_BINARY)
13
cv2.imwrite('binary_image.jpg', binary)
14
return img, binary
Listing B.4: BigBench/426 Вӯ DeepSeek FewВӯShot Вӯ Test status: Fail
1
# Read the image
2
image = cv2.imread(image_path)
3
4
# Check if the image is loaded successfully
5
if image is None:
6
raise FileNotFoundError("Error: Could not open or find the image.")
7
8
# Convert the image to grayscale
9
gray_image = cv2.cvtColor(image, cv2.COLOR_BGR2GRAY)
10
11
# Convert the image to binary
12
binary_image = cv2.threshold(gray_image , threshold , 255, cv2.
THRESH_BINARY)[1]
13
14
# Save the binary image to a file
15
cv2.imwrite(image_path + '_binary.jpg', binary_image)
16
17
# Return the original and binarized images
18
return image, binary_image
54
Exploring different approaches to customize LLMs for textВӯtoВӯcode generation
==PAGE:63==
BigBench/423
Listing B.5: BigBench/423 Вӯ Prompt
1
import numpy as np
2
import cv2
3
import os
4
5
def task_func(image_path='image.jpg', threshold=128):
6
"""
7
Read an RGB image, convert it to grayscale , binarize it using a given
threshold , and return both the original and binarized images as numpy
arrays.
8
The function checks for the existence of the image file and validates
the threshold value.
9
10
Parameters:
11
- image_path (str): Path to the image file. Defaults to 'image.jpg'.
12
- threshold (int): Threshold value for binarization. Must be an integer
in the range 0-255. Defaults to 128.
13
14
Returns:
15
- tuple: A tuple containing two numpy arrays. The first array represents
the original grayscale image,
16
and the second array represents the binarized image.
17
18
Raises:
19
- FileNotFoundError: If the image file does not exist at the specified
path.
20
- ValueError: If the threshold is not an integer or not in the range
0-255.
21
22
Requirements:
23
- opencv
24
- numpy
25
- os
26
- PIL
27
28
Example:
29
>>> img_path = 'image.jpg'
30
>>> create_dummy_image(img_path)
31
>>> original_img_array , binary_img_array = task_func(img_path , 128)
32
>>> os.remove(img_path)
33
>>> original_img_array.shape, binary_img_array.shape # ((image_height ,
image_width), (image_height , image_width))
34
((20, 20), (20, 20))
35
"""
Exploring different approaches to customize LLMs for textВӯtoВӯcode generation
55
==PAGE:64==
Listing B.6: StarCoder Вӯ Baseline (BigBench/423) Вӯ Test status: Fail
1
# Check for the existence of the image file
2
if not os.path.exists(image_path):
3
raise FileNotFoundError(f'Image file {image_path} does not exist.')
4
5
# Read the image file
6
img = cv2.imread(image_path)
7
8
# Convert the image to grayscale
9
gray_img = cv2.cvtColor(img, cv2.COLOR_BGR2GRAY)
10
11
# Convert the grayscale image to binary
12
binary_img = cv2.threshold(gray_img , threshold , 255, cv2.THRESH_BINARY)
[1]
13
14
# Return the original and binarized images as numpy arrays
15
return img, binary_img
Listing B.7: DeepSeekCoder Вӯ Baseline (BigBench/423) Вӯ Test status: Pass
1
if not os.path.exists(image_path):
2
raise FileNotFoundError(f"The image file {image_path} does not exist
.")
3
if not isinstance(threshold , int) or not 0 <= threshold <= 255:
4
raise ValueError("Threshold must be an integer in the range 0-255.")
5
6
img = cv2.imread(image_path)
7
gray_img = cv2.cvtColor(img, cv2.COLOR_BGR2GRAY)
8
_, binary_img = cv2.threshold(gray_img , threshold , 255, cv2.
THRESH_BINARY)
9
10
return img, binary_img
56
Exploring different approaches to customize LLMs for textВӯtoВӯcode generation
==PAGE:65==
B.2
RAG
B.2.1
OpenCV
Listing B.8: DeepSeekCoder Вӯ RAG#10 (BigBench/423) Вӯ Test status: Fail
1
# Check if the image file exists
2
if not os.path.exists(image_path):
3
raise FileNotFoundError(f"Image file not found at {image_path}")
4
5
# Read the image using OpenCV
6
image = cv2.imread(image_path)
7
8
# Convert the image from RGB (OpenCV uses BGR) to Grayscale
9
gray_image = cv2.cvtColor(image, cv2.COLOR_BGR2GRAY)
10
11
# Apply a binary threshold to the grayscale image
12
# Below 127, pixels are set to 0 and above 127, they are set to 255
13
_, binary_image = cv2.threshold(gray_image , threshold , 255, cv2.
THRESH_BINARY)
14
15
# Return the original and binarized images as numpy arrays
16
return image, binary_image
Exploring different approaches to customize LLMs for textВӯtoВӯcode generation
57
==PAGE:66==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
