==PAGE:1==
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone
Protection
Master’s Thesis
Oliver Søderberg Lundstrøm
2025
DTU ELECTRO
Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
By
(s181500) Oliver Søderberg Lundstrøm
Supervisors
Christian Rosenberg Petersen, Senior Researcher at the Electrical Engineering and Photonics De-
partment of DTU
Jens Christian Andersen, Associate Professor at the Electrical Engineering and Photonics Depart-
ment of DTU
Education
Master’s Thesis
Programme
Electrical Engineering
Period
27 January 2025 to 27 July 2025
ECTS
35
Copyright:
Oliver Søderberg Lundstrøm 2025
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the customary
bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Oliver Søderberg Lundstrøm, 2025
Published by:
DTU, Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering,
Elektrovej 326, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
https://www.electro.dtu.dk
Remark
This report is submitted as partial fulfillment of the requirements for graduation
in the above education at the Technical University of Denmark.
==PAGE:4==
ii
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
==PAGE:5==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Department of Electrical and Photonics Engi-
neering, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment of the degree Master
of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
Oliver Søderberg Lundstrøm - s181500
Signature
Date
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
iii
==PAGE:6==
iv
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
==PAGE:7==
Abstract
The increasing use of unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) for malicious purposes has heightened
the need for anti-drone protection. This thesis examines laser-based countermeasures designed
to disable or destroy drone camera systems with minimal collateral damage, using galvanometer
mirrors to direct and control laser scanning patterns onto a static camera module.
The objectives of the thesis include comparing lasers, determining damage thresholds, and finding
the optimal laser scanning patterns. Two laser sources were tested: The PL252 visible continuous-
wave diode laser and VENUS Series pulsed infrared fiber laser. The lasers were tested on various
camera modules, and the effects were observed and analysed to determine laser scanning patterns,
damage thresholds, and the effectiveness of the lasers and their use cases.
Test results show that the PL252 laser can cause temporary dazzling and blinding effects, especially
at low incidence angles. The VENUS pulsed laser demonstrated the ability to cause permanent
damage to both camera sensors and lenses, with damage thresholds depending on the laser pattern
and camera model. Harmonic scanning patterns require lower average output power to cause dam-
age, but require precise targeting. In contrast, non-harmonic patterns offer more uniform coverage,
making them suitable for moving targets, such as drones.
The thesis gives practical insights into utilizing laser-based countermeasures and scanning pat-
terns for effective anti-drone protection. The limitations of the controlled laboratory setting are ac-
knowledged, and suggestions for future work include incorporating real-time tracking, considering
atmospheric conditions, and expanding testing and analysis to support deployment in real-world
scenarios.
Brugen af ubemandede luftfartøjer (UAV’er eller droner) til fjendtlige formål er steget hurtigt, og
derfor er behovet for effektive metoder til at beskytte mod droner også vokset. Dette speciale
undersøger laserbaserede foranstaltninger, der kan forstyrre, skade eller ødelægge dronekameraer
med minimal indirekte skade på omgivelserne. Dette gøres ved hjælp af galvanometerspejle, som
styrer laserens bevægelsesmønstre.
Specialets formål er at sammenligne lasere, bestemme skadestærksler for kameraer, og finde de
bedste laserscanningsmønstre. To typer lasere blev testet: Den synlige diode-laser PL252 og den
infrarøde fiber puls laser i VENUS-serien. Disse blev testet på forskellige kameramoduler, og
resultaterne er blevet analyseret for at finde ud af, hvordan laserne virker, og hvilke mønstre der er
mest effektive.
Resultaterne viser, at PL252-laseren kan blænde og forstyrre kameraerne midlertidigt. VENUS
laseren kan forårsage permanent skade på både kameraets sensor og linse. Skaderne afhænger af
både laserscanningsmønsteret og typen af kamera. Harmoniske mønstre kræver mindre effekt for
at skade, men kræver præcis styring. Ikke-harmoniske mønstre giver derimod en jævnere dækning
og er bedre til at ramme bevægelige mål såsom droner.
Dette speciale giver en praktisk forståelse af, hvordan laserbaserede foranstaltninger kan bruges til
effektiv dronebeskyttelse. Specialet anerkender, at laboratorieforhold ikke dækker alle virkelige
situationer, og foreslår derfor, at fremtidigt arbejde skal fokusere på at inkludere sporing af dronen,
tage højde for atmosfæriske forhold og udvide test og analyser, så systemet kan bruges i praksis.
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Problem formulation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Thesis Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.5
Project Plan Reflection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
State of the Art
5
2.1
Anti-drone Countermeasures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Laser Effects on Camera Sensors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Related Studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Laser Patterns . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.5
Project Scope and Contribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
System Architecture
9
3.1
System Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Galvanometer Mirror System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.3
DAQ Control and Analog Output . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.4
Camera Modules
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.5
Laser Sources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.6
Test Setup and Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.7
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4
Method and Modeling
21
4.1
Experimental Methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.2
Numerical Modeling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.3
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5
Test Results
29
5.1
PL252 Laser Test Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.2
VENUS Series IR Pulsed Laser Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.3
VENUS Series IR Pulsed Laser Results Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
6
Discussion
55
6.1
Key takeaways of Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
6.2
Test Results Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
6.3
Laser Pattern Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
vii
==PAGE:10==
6.4
Relevance of Results to Objectives, Real-Life Scenarios and Literature . . . . . .
65
7
Conclusion
67
List of References
69
A Appendices
73
A.1 Test Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
A.2
Software setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
A.3
Datasheet Specifications
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
A.4 Test Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
A.5 Test Result Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
A.6
Method and Modeling: Tables and Simulations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
A.7
Python Code for Image Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
A.8
C++ Pattern Control Software
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
96
viii
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
In recent years, the expansion of unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs), also known as drones, has
represented one of the most significant technological advances in the last decades. Drones are now
essential to applications from aerial photography and agriculture to industrial inspection, mapping,
and, in particular, military operations [1, 2, 3, 4].
However, this rapid growth of drones has also introduced new and complex challenges in protecting
critical infrastructure. Drones can now easily access restricted or sensitive areas, raising concerns
about unauthorized surveillance, terrorism, and other malicious activities. [1, 5].
An essential feature of most modern drones is their use of camera sensors, which are used for
navigation, target acquisition, and surveillance [1]. These camera sensors are vital for the drones
and are potential points of vulnerability. Disrupting the camera system of a drone can affect its
mission and thereby prevent possible malicious events from happening. Given the increasing use
of drones, developing an effective solution to counteract their camera systems without causing
collateral damage could be a groundbreaking achievement [6, 7].
1.1
Problem formulation
A promising countermeasure for anti-drone protection is to target the drones’ optical systems di-
rectly [7, 6, 8]. As part of a collaborative project with Nationalt Forsvarsteknologisk Center (NFC)
[9], this thesis focuses on the development of such a countermeasure. The proposed system is a
laser-based countermeasure for anti-drone protection. It uses directed laser patterns, steered by gal-
vanometric mirrors, to induce temporary dazzling, blinding, or permanent damage to drone camera
systems. Unlike most previous work, this thesis examines the impact of dynamic laser scanning
patterns on camera sensors, rather than relying solely on static beam exposures.
Although this concept appears promising, previous theoretical studies and laboratory experiments
in this field are limited, restricted, or classified [6, 10]. Given the limited research and increasing
number of drones, the need for thoroughly tested, scalable, and precisely targeted optical counter-
measures is also growing. Therefore, this thesis aims to address this gap by designing, developing,
and testing a laser-based countermeasure for anti-drone protection.
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
1
==PAGE:12==
1.2
Objectives
This thesis focuses on developing and validating a laser-based system that uses galvanometer mir-
rors for beam steering to interfere with a static camera setup. The main objectives are:
1. Instrument Comparison: Test and compare two laser sources: The Thorlabs PL252 red
diode laser and VENUS Series IR pulsed fiber laser. The comparison is done by charac-
terizing their effectiveness in causing temporary blinding or permanent damage to various
camera modules.
2. Threshold Determination: Determine the minimum exposure power required to achieve
temporary blinding or permanent damage using different laser parameters, patterns, and cam-
era modules.
3. Optimal Galvo Scanning Pattern and Speed: Estimate the efficiency of different laser
scanning patterns and determine the galvo-mirror angular velocity needed to maximize cam-
era interference.
In addition to the main objectives, the thesis examines several objectives, including how different
incident angles affect the laser’s impact on the camera, as well as the differences between harmonic
and non-harmonic scanning patterns.
1.3
Limitations
The scope of this project was limited to laboratory tests, which involved a static camera setup and
fixed test distances. This means that real-time tracking of moving targets and tests in an outdoor
environment is considered beyond the scope of this thesis. Additionally, variables such as atmo-
spheric conditions and long-range propagation are not examined, although they are relevant for
future research. Another restriction was the limited number of available camera modules, which
meant that not every test could be conducted on every camera. The choice of tests was therefore
prioritized to ensure that the most valuable tests were performed.
1.4
Thesis Structure
The thesis is structured as follows:
• Chapter 2 – State of the Art: Reviews previous research and existing countermeasure
technologies, providing the literature context for the project scope and focus.
• Chapter 3 – System Architecture: Describes the hardware and software used, including
lasers, galvo mirrors, camera modules, and the overall system setup.
• Chapter 4 – Method and Modeling: Details experimental procedures, test parameters, and
numerical methods used for simulations and data analysis.
• Chapter 5 – Test Results: Presents and analyzes results from both the PL252 laser and
VENUS pulsed laser tests.
• Chapter 6 – Discussion: Discusses key findings, compares results to simulations, and con-
siders the implications of real-life laser-based countermeasures.
• Chapter 7 – Conclusion: Summarizes the main results, evaluates the objectives, and out-
lines directions for future work.
Additional material, including test setup, test results, and selected code examples, is provided in
the Appendix.
2
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
==PAGE:13==
1.5
Project Plan Reflection
To provide an overview of the project, a summary of the project plan and changes is presented.
Initially, a Gantt diagram was designed to provide a visual representation of the project as seen in
Figure 1.1. It covers the entire project period, from January 27, 2025, to July 27, 2025, including
specific tasks and milestones.
Figure 1.1: Gantt Chart: Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
The project was structured into a series of tasks T1–T17, but mainly organized in four different
phases:
• Literature Study: This part is ongoing throughout the whole project. It covers initial re-
search and evaluation of galvo-mirror controls, laser theory, investigation of camera blinding
techniques, and study of drone detection and imaging systems.
• Phase 1: Laser Scanning & Hardware Setup: The first phase is focused on constructing
the galvo-mirror system, implementing the control interface, and validating the setup using
a weak laser.
• Phase 2: Testing & Data Analysis: This phase includes laser parameter calculations and
experimental testing to determine and verify the optimal laser parameters. It also includes
system optimization, drone localization, data collection, and sensor impairment analysis.
• Phase 3: Final Demonstration & Documentation: The final phase of the project focuses
on integrating all system components and demonstrating the complete system. This phase
also includes final analysis, further work, and handing in the final thesis.
As the project progressed, adjustments were required for both the Gantt diagram and the details of
the learning objective.
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
3
==PAGE:14==
The Literature study didn’t change much, but the scope of drone detection was removed from the
project, as it was too broad. Additionally, other accompanying studies performed in parallel to
this thesis focused on this part. The focus, therefore, shifted to addressing the two lasers, the laser
scanning patterns, and their impact on the cameras.
Phase 1 turned out as expected, and the implementation and control of the galvanometer mirrors
were completed within the deadlines.
Phase 2 took longer than expected. The general testing and observation, analysis, and data handling
did not follow the initial plan, and the phase ultimately became a mix of testing, analysis, and
optimization. The phase also did not focus on drone detection, as this was no longer part of the
project scope.
Phase 3 went almost as expected. The final demonstration never occurred, but the system did have
”final tests”, and the results were presented for both supervisor and NFC.
In conclusion, the project mainly proceeded as planned. Although the scope and objectives evolved
during the project, these changes did not affect the overall results or limit the project’s outcome.
And thus, the project and thesis were well-designed, and the plan was effectively executed.
4
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
==PAGE:15==
2
State of the Art
This chapter examines the technical and literary context of the project, examining the previous
studies in the field. The focus will be on previous research, identifying gaps in existing studies,
and defining how this thesis can contribute to the field.
2.1
Anti-drone Countermeasures
Countermeasures against drones can be categorized into two main types: kinetic and non-kinetic
methods. Kinetic solutions include projectiles, interceptor drones, and netting systems, which
physically neutralize UAVs. However, these solutions come with risks of collateral damage, mak-
ing them inappropriate for densely populated areas, such as large cities. [11, 5, 12]. Non-kinetic
techniques include GPS denial and radio frequency jamming. These methods are used to disrupt
drone control or navigation. While these techniques can be effective, they are often limited by reg-
ulatory constraints and the potential for unintended interference with civilian or friendly systems
[11, 13, 12].
In recent years, laser-based countermeasures have gained attention as a promising alternative.
These systems offer precision targeting, fast effects, and are scalable. Known laser weapons, like
the US Navy’s Laser Weapon System (LaWS), have demonstrated the ability to disable or destroy
fast flying drones at ranges up to several kilometers away [7]. Other military applications, such
as the Lockheed Martin ATHENA (Advanced Test High Energy Asset), have also shown great
potential with anti-drone protection [14]. However, most of these studies are confidential, and
the technical information is therefore limited. This creates a gap in the literature regarding the
systematic testing methods.
To provide an overview, Table 2.1 shows the anti-drone countermeasure technologies currently
in use in the field. The table is adapted from Univision’s Overview of Drone Defense and Coun-
termeasure Applications[12] and Anvil Labs: Kinetic vs. Non-Kinetic Drone Mitigation: Key
Differences[11].
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
5
==PAGE:16==
Table 2.1: Overview anti-drone countermeasure technologies
Technology
Type
Principle
Reference
Projectile
Kinetic
Disables or destroys
drone via direct impact
(e.g., bullets, missiles)
[12, 11]
Netting
Kinetic
Launches a net to en-
tangle and bring down
drone
[12, 11]
Interceptor Drone
Kinetic
Physically
collides
with target drone in
flight
[12, 11]
RF Jamming
Non-Kinetic
Disrupts drone control
or
communication
links
[12, 11]
GPS Spoofing
Non-Kinetic
Deceives drone’s nav-
igation system to mis-
lead or divert it
[12, 11]
Laser
Non-Kinetic
Dazzles sensors or de-
stroys electronics with
focused energy
[12, 11]
Electromagnetic
Pulse (EMP)
Non-Kinetic
Disables onboard elec-
tronics via strong EM
field
[12, 11]
As an example of how a laser countermeasure system looks, Figure 2.1 shows the layout for the
US Navy’s LaWS system [7].
Figure 2.1: US Navy’s Laser Weapon System (LaWS). Source: [7].
6
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
==PAGE:17==
2.2
Laser Effects on Camera Sensors
Laser exposure affects cameras by either dazzling (temporary blinding or pixel saturation) or caus-
ing permanent damage. Both effects depend on the laser’s properties, such as wavelength, intensity,
beam diameter, pulse duration, and exposure time. It also depends on the camera’s design, such as
pixel size, coatings, filters, and lens material. [8, 6]. Dazzling and blinding effects occur when the
sensor’s pixels are overexposed, resulting in blooming or saturation. Permanent damage occurs if
the delivered energy heats or destroys the pixels, sensor or camera lens.
2.3
Related Studies
Multiple lab and field studies have tested the effects of lasers on various sensors. Visible and
near-infrared laser dazzling of CCD and CMOS cameras used visible and near-infrared lasers to
characterize how overexposed pixel area grows with increasing irradiance, affected by ambient
lighting and lens properties [8]. Assessing Laser Dazzling Effects on UAV Cameras and Collision
Avoidance in Laboratory and Field Settings have expanded on these results, showing that typi-
cal drone cameras require 1.5–3 W/cm2 irradiance for full dazzling in bright sunlight [6]. Other
studies, such as Development Status and Operation Analysis of Laser Weapons in Anti-drone War-
fare, examine future combat methods and how anti-drone protection technology, including laser
weapons, can serve as a promising countermeasure.[7]
Despite numerous studies, significant gaps remain, including the testing methods and the use of
infrared lasers to damage camera sensors. Other gaps include the protection of drones without
causing collateral damage and the use of dynamic laser scanning patterns for anti-drone protection.
2.4
Laser Patterns
Lasers are widely used across many industries, from medical applications to LiDAR for scanning
and mapping. In related research, laser scanning also plays an important role in real-time tracking
systems [15]. However, most existing studies focus on static laser beams rather than dynamic
scanning patterns.
Laser scanning patterns can be important when the laser needs to cover an area or track moving
targets, such as drones [15]. Various patterns are used, such as sinusoidal scan patterns, parallel
scan lines, or elliptical scan patterns [16]. Different patterns offer different advantages depending
on the application.
In seeker systems, spiral scan patterns have been examined for efficiently covering wide areas with
minimal control effort and overlap. Spiral patterns enable the system to scan large fields of view
while optimizing scanning speeds.[17]
Raster scanning patterns are commonly used in aerial laser scanning (LiDAR) applications to cover
an area with parallel scan lines. This pattern provides uniform point distribution. While raster
patterns are good, they also have a fast reverse direction at each line end.[16]
Based on the literature, the objectives of this thesis, and collaborative studies running in parallel
to this thesis, three laser scanning patterns are selected for testing: spiral, raster (referred to as
raster/zigzag in this thesis due to its zigzag motion), and circle-in-circle.
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
7
==PAGE:18==
2.5
Project Scope and Contribution
This thesis aims to fill the gap between theory and real-world applications in laser-based anti-drone
countermeasures.
To achieve this, the focus is to conduct systematic tests on off-the-shelf camera modules, inves-
tigating both stationary and dynamic laser scanning patterns. The tests are structured to measure
key thresholds for dazzling and permanent damage, using both qualitative observations and quan-
titative image analysis.
A particular focus is on dynamic laser scanning patterns, as these may pose a more effective coun-
termeasure solution than stationary laser beams. By focusing on comparisons, the thesis aims
to deliver practical results that can guide the development and examination of future laser-based
anti-drone systems, directly supporting the objectives.
8
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
==PAGE:19==
3
System Architecture
This chapter describes the architecture of the test system used to steer and control the laser onto a
stationary target camera. The chapter provides an overview and specifications of both the instru-
ments and the control, as well as a description of the test setup and procedure.
3.1
System Overview
The test setup is designed to be flexible and modular, which allows for easy modification and adap-
tation to different test scenarios. The goal is to provide a repeatable and systematic test environment
for evaluating the effects of laser exposure on the cameras under controlled conditions. Multiple
independent components work together in the system to allow accurate testing and control.
The main components are as follows:
• Galvanometric mirror system: The Thorlabs GVS112 dual-axis galvanometer mirror sys-
tem controls precise and real-time steering of the laser beam. The system includes dedicated
driver boards with adjustable voltage-to-angle scaling and capacitive position feedback and
is powered by a Thorlabs GPS011 dual-channel linear power supply [18, 19]. The galvo
mirrors are also used to steer the laser scanning patterns.
• Laser sources: Two different lasers are tested independently:
– Thorlabs PL252 continuous-wave laser, 639 nm, 4.5 mW, used for initial tests, incident
angled camera tests, and blinding [20].
– VENUS Series pulsed laser source, 1560 nm, is used for higher power tests. The laser
is infrared and is primarily used to examine the damage thresholds of the camera [21].
Both lasers are coupled into the optical path and can be exchanged as needed for each test.
• Control system: The system is operated via a main PC running custom C++ software, which
generates analog control signals to the galvanometer system, using a National Instruments
USB-6341 DAQ board [22] and the NI-DAQmx API [23, 24, 25]. The NI MAX software is
used for initial hardware testing, laser beam alignment, and calibration, and the C++ software
is used for laser scanning pattern generation.
• Camera modules: Test camera targets include an OKDO 5MP Pi Camera [26], Raspberry
Pi Camera Module 3 [27], and PiNoIR Camera v2 [28] and a single Raspberry Pi Camera
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
9
==PAGE:20==
Module 2. All cameras are mounted inside a custom laser-safe test box and are controlled
and recorded via a separate Raspberry Pi 4 [29], which handles data collection and control
of the camera modules.
Both the laser source and the camera modules can be exchanged or adjusted independently of
each other. This supports the need for a flexible and modular test design, ensuring that direct
comparisons of component performance across different tests can be made.
Figure 3.1 shows the overall flow of the system and interaction between subsystems, from the
software-generated control signals through the DAQ and galvanometer mirrors to the laser source
and camera sensors.
Figure 3.1: Block diagram of the system architecture and primary signal flow.
As seen from Figure 3.1, there are several subsystems. Each of them will be described in detail in
the next section. Further technical information for each component can be found in the dedicated
datasheets, and additional relevant specifications are provided in the Appendix.
3.2
Galvanometer Mirror System
The setup uses a dual-axis galvanometric mirror system, Thorlabs GVS112, to steer the laser beam
in two dimensions, X and Y. It consists of two orthogonally mounted galvanometer actuators with
integrated gold-coated mirrors and two dedicated driver boards that control the angular position of
each mirror. The galvos are used for directing the laser beam onto the target camera and for gen-
erating dynamic laser scanning patterns during tests. All position control is based on analog input
signals, which are processed through a data acquisition board and then routed to the two dedicated
galvo driver boards. The galvo mirrors are caged in a Thorlabs GCM012 Galvo System Cage
Adapter [30], which allows for both stable positioning of the galvos and direct mounting of the
laser onto the galvo system. The entire galvo assembly is fixed to a solid aluminum optical bread-
board, which makes the setup easy to move during tests while also being sturdy and preventing
any unintended vibrations [18, 31].
10
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
==PAGE:21==
3.2.1
Mechanical and Electrical Specifications
The GVS112 has several specifications that are crucial for understanding how it operates.
The key specifications are taken from the manufacturer’s user manuals [18, 19] and are as follows:
• Maximum mechanical scan angle: The maximum scan angle of the galvo depends on the
laser beam diameter and the specific axis. However, the maximum scan angle for the lowest
suggested beam diameter is ±15.5∘in the X-axis and ±20∘in the Y-axis.
• Maximum optical scan angle: The outgoing laser beam is deflected by twice the mechani-
cal scan angle, resulting in an optical scan angle of up to ±31∘in the X-axis and ±40∘in the
Y-axis.
• Scanning speed: The full scan bandwidth at ±20∘is 25 Hz for square wave and 35 Hz for
sine wave signals. However, for small angles, the system can move up to 1 kHz.
• Input control voltage range: The maximum input voltage used to control the mirrors is
±10 V.
• Voltage-to-degree scaling factor: The voltage-to-degree scaling factor can be set to either
0.5𝑉/∘, 0.8𝑉/∘, 1𝑉/∘. The scaling affects the maximum scanning angle.
• Power supply: The galvo drivers are powered by a dedicated GPS011, which provides
±15 V DC. The power supply is designed specifically for Thorlabs galvo systems and can
power the two driver boards simultaneously.
All specifications comply with the values outlined in the manufacturer’s documentation, and a
comprehensive list of specifications can be found in the user manual [18].
3.2.2
Galvo Voltage Range, Scan Speed, and Amplitude Limits
The GVS112 system accepts analog input voltages in the range of ±10 V, corresponding to the
maximum mechanical scan angles described above. During initial characterization, the full range
of ±10 V was tested to verify system operation and determine practical limitations. It was seen
that input voltages above approximately ±9 V would cause the laser to hit the galvo mirror cage
adaptor, indicating a practical upper limit for operation. The relationship between input voltage
and scan speed is controlled by both the scaling factor and the galvo mirror frequency. At low
input voltages, e.g., ±0.2 V, the system can achieve its maximum specified bandwidth of up to 1
kHz. At larger input voltages, the scan speed is limited by the mirror’s maximum frequency [18].
The initial scans at high amplitude of around ±9 V were used exclusively to characterize system
performance, scan field coverage, and mechanical limits. All test patterns were later performed at
lower voltages as described in Chapter 4.
3.2.3
Optical Layout and Beam Path
The laser beam enters the galvanometer system along the optical axis and is first reflected by the X-
axis mirror. The beam then passes to the Y-axis mirror, which is mounted orthogonally to provide
two-dimensional steering. After reflecting from both mirrors, the beam exits the galvo system and
continues toward the target camera sensor. There are no additional focusing optics or beam-shaping
elements between the galvo output and the camera.
Although the maximum mechanical scan angle is stated as ±20∘, the maximum angle achievable
without interference depends on several conditions. Firstly, the larger the diameter of the input
laser beam, the smaller the achievable scanning angle. Secondly, the applied input voltage causes
the laser beam to move away from the center of the mirrors. The larger the input voltage, the
greater the movement from the center [18]. An illustration of the optical layout is shown in Figure
3.2 below.
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
11
==PAGE:22==
Figure 3.2: Optical layout of the galvanometric mirrors [18].
Figure 3.2 also shows how increasing or decreasing the input voltage deflects the beam from the
center of the mirror.
The galvo is aligned so that the default mirror position directs the beam centrally out of the out-
put axis, towards the target. Any adjustments to the beam path are achieved entirely through the
controlled deflection of the mirrors [18].
The beam spot size at the target camera depends on the initial laser beam diameter and the propaga-
tion distance. For this project, the galvo assembly does not use focus lenses, which means that the
laser propagates and diverges [20]. Minor variations in the incident angle may occur. These effects
were almost negligible in the close-distance test setup. However, some alignment calibration was
needed when testing at longer distances.
3.2.4
Voltage-to-Degree Scaling Factor
As mentioned in 3.2.1, the voltage-to-degree scaling factor can be set to either 0.5 𝑉/∘, 0.8 𝑉/∘,
1 𝑉/∘, which affects the angular movement of the galvo mirrors. The driver electronics translate
the analog input voltage into the angular position of the galvo mirror. The specific scaling factor
is set using an onboard jumper. The scaling factor determines the relationship between the applied
control voltage and the resulting mechanical scan angle [18].
For each scaling factor, the corresponding maximum mechanical scan angle at the full input voltage
range of ±10 𝑉, is defined as [18]:
• 0.5 𝑉/∘= ±20∘
• 0.8 𝑉/∘= ±12.5∘
• 1.0 𝑉/∘= ±10∘
For this setup, the scaling is set to 0.5 𝑉/∘, which is the manufacturer’s default and provides access
to the full mechanical scan angle [18].
All scaling and interface parameters were set according to the manufacturer’s documentation and
were verified during initial testing.
12
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
==PAGE:23==
3.3
DAQ Control and Analog Output
Analog control of the galvanometer mirror system is provided by a National Instruments USB-6341
multifunction data acquisition (DAQ) board. This model is selected based on the requirements
outlined in the Thorlabs GVS112 datasheet, particularly the need for high-resolution analog output
and a DAC update rate exceeding 20 kS/s [18].
The USB-6341 offers two simultaneous analog output channels with 16-bit resolution and a maxi-
mum update rate of up to 900 kS/s per channel [32]. Each channel supports an output range of ±10
V, matching the input requirements of the galvo driver boards [22, 18]. The DAQ uses port A0 for
the X-axis mirror and port A1 for the Y-axis mirror, and sends signals to these two through wiring
to the galvo control drivers. The device connects via USB 2.0 to the main computer for signal com-
munication, and it is fully compatible with the NI-DAQmx software suite. Further specifications
can be found in the datasheets and user manual [22, 32].
3.3.1
Software Interface
For this project, the control of the DAQ device is split between two software interfaces. During
initial setup and beam alignment, National Instruments Measurement & Automation Explorer (NI
MAX) was used. For running actual tests and generating scan patterns, a custom C++ script was
used.
NI MAX:
NI MAX provides an intuitive graphical user interface for configuring the DAQ hard-
ware, calibrating output channels, and generating test signals. This makes it easy to verify that the
DAQ, drivers, and galvo mirror system are all connected as intended and functioning as expected
without the need for any programming. Throughout the project, NI MAX has been used for initial
hardware checks and for calibrating the system before each set of measurements. The software
operates by using the provided GUI test panels to set an output voltage for each driver and then
updates the galvo’s position accordingly [23].
The NI MAX GUI main page is shown in Figure A.8 of the Appendix. Other examples of how to
set the output voltage signal in the NI MAX test panel can be found in Figures A.9, A.10, and A.11
in the appendix.
Custom C++ Software:
For all laser-scan pattern tests, a custom application written in C++
is used to control the galvo system in real time. The application is used to define and control
the laser scanning patterns, adjust frequencies, and send analog output signals to the galvo driver
inputs. The software was developed in Microsoft Visual Studio, and the code used for the tests was
generated using Open Source Tools and the NI-DAQmx API, and enhanced with AI [24, 25, 33].
The NI-DAQmx API has premade libraries that are set up manually in Microsoft Visual Studio.
An example of the application is provided in the Appendix A.8.
3.4
Camera Modules
Three different camera modules are used as test targets in the setup. The cameras are selected
to provide a mix of optical characteristics and spectral sensitivity. All modules are low-cost, off-
the-shelf components and compatible with the Raspberry Pi platform. Each camera is connected
to a dedicated Raspberry Pi 4 for control and data capture [29]. An overview for the camera
specifications are shown in Table 3.1.
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
13
==PAGE:24==
Table 3.1: Overview of camera module specifications. [26, 27, 28]
Parameter
OKDO 5MP Pi Camera
Pi Camera Module 3
Pi NoIR Camera v2
Sensor Type
CMOS
CMOS
CMOS
Sensor
OmniVision OV5647
Sony IMX708
Sony IMX219
Resolution
2592×1944 (5 MP)
4608×2592 (11.9 MP)
3280×2464 (8 MP)
Pixel Size
1.4 𝜇m
1.4 𝜇m
1.12 𝜇m
Focus
Manual
Autofocus (PDAF)
Fixed (> 0.5𝑚)
Field of View
90∘/74∘
66∘/41∘
62.2∘/48.8∘
IR Filter
Standard
Standard
No IR filter
All three camera modules use CMOS image sensors and are equipped with plastic or hybrid plastic-
glass lenses. For the Pi NoIR Camera v2, the lens is made without an IR filter [28], allowing the
sensor to have a wider spectral response. The lens materials are relevant for understanding how
each camera responds to laser exposure, since melting or permanent damage can occur in these
layers before reaching the sensor itself. However, the specific damage threshold for each camera
was not available and had to be determined through tests and qualitative analysis.
For further details and specifications, see the respective datasheets and product briefs. [26, 27, 28]
3.5
Laser Sources
Two different laser sources are used in the test setup to cover a range of wavelengths, power levels,
and pulse characteristics. The choice of different lasers enables controlled testing of both visible
and infrared exposure, as well as a direct comparison between the effects of low-power continuous-
wave and high-power pulsed lasers. Each laser is coupled into the optical path individually, and
only one source is active during any tests.
Table 3.2: Overview of laser source specifications [20, 21]
Parameter
Thorlabs PL252
VENUS Series 1560 nm Pulsed
Type
Diode laser (CW)
Pulsed fiber laser
Wavelength
639 nm
1560 nm
Output Power / AOP
4.5 mW (nominal)
Up to 5.4 W avg. (AOP, at max pump)
Operation Mode
Continuous-wave
Pulsed (0.5–50 ns pulse width)
Repetition Rate
–
10 kHz – 3 MHz (typ. 3 MHz)
Beam Diameter
3.0 mm
Fiber-coupled (SM), collimated output
Divergence
<0.6 mrad
–
Safety Class
Class 3R
Class 4
Table 3.2 summarizes the main specifications of the two laser sources used in the tests. Further
specifications can be found in the dedicated datasheets [20, 21]. Relevant VENUS laser speci-
fications are provided in Appendix A.3. Both lasers are described in more detail in the section
below.
14
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
==PAGE:25==
3.5.1
Thorlabs PL252 Laser
The Thorlabs PL252 is a compact, continuous-wave diode laser operating at 639 nm, with a typical
output power of 4.5 mW. The device is USB-powered and features an on/off switch with a status
LED. The beam is factory-collimated to a diameter of approximately 3 mm with a divergence of
less than 0.6 mrad, and the laser emits linearly polarized light.[20]
The PL252 is mainly used for visible alignment, laser scan pattern observation, and non-destructive
sensor response tests. It is also used for incident angle camera tests. Its low power and visible light
make it good for a safe setup and initial testing. The module is compatible with the Thorlabs
GCM012 optical mounts [30], which makes the laser easy to integrate into the setup [20].
3.5.2
VENUS Series Pulsed Laser
The VENUS Series 1560 nm pulsed laser is a high-power, single-mode fiber laser source with
adjustable output parameters. The default pulse width is 0.5 ns, with the option to adjust up to 50
ns. The repetition rate can be set between 10 kHz and 3 MHz, with a default value of 3 MHz [21].
The maximum average output power (AOP) is over 5.4 W at maximum pump power, corresponding
to high peak powers for short pulses. This laser is used explicitly for estimating sensor damage
thresholds and the effects of intense, short-pulse infrared exposure. The VENUS series laser emits
infrared light and is not visible during incident angled blinding tests, such as the PL252.
To control the VENUS pulsed laser, a dedicated software, ConLAS V.2.0.95, was used. Examples
of the GUI are described in Section 3.6, and figures are shown in the Appendix A.2.
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
15
==PAGE:26==
3.6
Test Setup and Procedure
This section provides an overview of how the full test system is assembled and used during laser
exposure tests. The focus is on the physical setup, how the tests were conducted, and the practical
aspects of data collection. Since the laser and camera configuration changed between tests, the
figures shown in this section do not represent every individual test; however, they are included to
provide an overall impression of the typical test setup.
3.6.1
Overview of actual test Setup
Figures 3.3 and 3.4 provide a visual overview of the main test setup used for the laser exposure
tests.
Figure 3.3: Full overview of the test setup.
As shown in Figure 3.3, the full system layout used during a typical test is depicted, and the separate
subsystems are numbered as follows:
• 1: Main PC: Acts as the main control hub. It is connected to both the laser and the DAQ
board. It generates the control signals, sets pulse parameters, and controls the laser power
for the VENUS laser.
• 2: DAQ board: The National Instruments USB-6341, which is connected to the PC and
provides the analog control signals to the galvo mirrors.
• 3.1: Galvo mirrors and casing: The galvo mirrors are shown inside their protective casing
and are responsible for steering the laser beam.
• 3.2: Galvo power supply: Generates the power for the galvo drivers, which control the
galvo mirrors servo motors.
• 4.1: VENUS Series 1560 nm pulsed laser: The laser source that generates the laser pulses.
This is not used with the PL252 laser as it is powered through USB.
• 4.2: Laser power supply: Dedicated power supply for the VENUS laser.
16
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
==PAGE:27==
• 4.3: Laser output (fiber-coupled): The laser output is mounted on the galvo casing and
aligned onto the galvo mirrors X-axis.
• 5: Test box: Contains the camera and protects against stray laser exposure and reflections
during the tests.
• 6: Inside the box: The camera module is mounted on the back of the test box and connected
to the Raspberry Pi 4.
• 7: Monitor for the Raspberry Pi: Used to control and display the real-time output from the
camera. This is used for alignment and allows direct monitoring of what the camera ”sees”
during tests.
Figure 3.4: Side and top view of the main optical path and test box.
Figure 3.4 shows a closer look at the system, the laser beam alignment, and the inside of the test
box.
The left image is a side view, showing the VENUS laser, VENUS power supply, test box, and
galvo mirror system. It can also be seen how the galvo mirror system is mounted on the optical
breadboard. The laser beam path is drawn illustratively as a red line, showing how the beam passes
from the galvo system and enters the test box through a small aperture.
The image on the right is a top-down view of the test box. Here, it can be seen that the camera
module is mounted on the back of the test box and is connected to the Raspberry Pi 4. The laser
beam path is again shown in red, illustrating how the optical path is aligned with the camera during
exposure. The galvo control drivers are also shown mounted on the breadboard.
The figures shown in this section provide a representative overview of the setup as it appears during
most tests. The specific details may vary slightly depending on the laser or camera used, but the
basic layout and workflow remain consistent throughout all tests.
Images of the galvo drivers, galvo casing, galvo setup, DAQ connection, and other relevant figures
can be found in Appendix A.1.
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
17
==PAGE:28==
3.6.2
Test Box and Camera Mounting
The primary purpose of the assembled test box is to keep the laser beam path enclosed, eliminate
stray beam reflections, and block out ambient light during tests. The test box features a lid that can
be closed during testing and opened when changing cameras. The front panel has a small aperture
that allows the laser to enter and expose the camera. Power and data cables for the Raspberry Pi
4 are routed through a small hole on the back of the box. All camera modules are mounted at a
fixed point with duct tape and Velcro on the back of the box and are ≈50cm from the galvo mirrors.
Figures 3.5a and 3.5b illustrate the setup inside the test box and the camera’s mounting position.
(a) Top view inside the test box, showing the camera,
Raspberry Pi 4, and power data cable entry.
(b) Camera mounting on the back of the test box,
viewed through the front aperture.
Figure 3.5: Test box setup: (a) Interior top view, (b) Camera mounting.
3.6.3
Data Handling Workflow
Each camera module is connected to the Raspberry Pi 4 inside the test box. During each test, the
Raspberry Pi recorded either still images or video, depending on the test procedure. The system
runs Linux, and standard command-line utilities are used for all recordings.
For initial setup and live preview or laser-camera alignment, the command rpicam-hello -t 0
was used. Video recordings are captured using:
rpicam-vid --width 1280 --height 1080 -t 30000 -o "filename.h264"
Where ”-t” sets the time to 30-second recordings. All video data is saved in h264 format and later
converted to MP4 after being transferred to the main PC.
The videos were then processed, where every 10th frame of each separate video was extracted,
along with its corresponding timestamp. This helped to see when specific events occurred. The
reason for not capturing every frame was that it would take too much time to both extract and
analyse every single frame, and every 10th frame proved to give a good overview of specific
events of the tests.
The reason for using 1280 × 1080 resolution, while non-standard compared to typical settings,
such as 1280 × 720 or 1920 × 1080, is based on practical results that achieved optimal image
quality and file sizes. After all tests were done, all files were transferred from the Raspberry Pi 4
to the main PC, backed up, and processed using custom Python scripts for further analysis. This
ensured that nothing was lost and made it straightforward to compare results across the different
tests.
18
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
==PAGE:29==
3.6.4
Test Procedure
The test procedure consists of three main stages: control tests, test execution, and subsequent data
analysis. The overall workflow follows these steps:
1. Control Test: The system is adjusted for the specific test. The laser is turned on at low
power, the galvo mirrors are aligned and calibrated, and the camera output is verified. A
safety check is performed before proceeding.
2. Conduct Test: The laser is operated with the determined output parameters. The desired
laser pattern is generated, and the effect on the camera sensor is recorded.
3. Analyze Results: Data is recorded, transferred, and analyzed. Both quantitative and qual-
itative analyses are performed on the recorded data to evaluate the laser’s impact on the
cameras.
Additional Setup Procedures:
For all tests involving the VENUS series pulsed laser, the output
parameters such as pulse power, width, and repetition frequency were configured using the Con-
LAS laser control software. An example is shown in Figure 3.6. Other examples of the ConLAS
setup can be found in the Appendix, in Figures A.12 to A.17.
Figure 3.6: ConLAS GUI showing pump power of 1500mW, which equals 200mW AOP according
to the VENUS pulsed laser datasheet[21].
An additional setup was also used for the incident angle exposure tests with the PL252 laser. The
camera was mounted on a tripod and secured with tape to precisely control and repeat the angle of
incidence. The desired angle was set using the tripod’s integrated angle scale protractor. An image
of this setup is shown in Figure A.7, in the Appendix.
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
19
==PAGE:30==
3.6.5
Safety Measures
All laser experiments were performed in compliance with relevant safety regulations for Class 3R
and Class 4 laser devices. Appropriate laser safety eyewear was worn at all times during testing, and
beam paths were enclosed wherever possible with both the test box and a small barrier between the
galvo system and the main PC. Furthermore, access to the test area was restricted during operation.
All tests were conducted by institutional guidelines and manufacturer recommendations.
3.6.6
Laser alignment
Before each test, alignment and calibration were performed to ensure that the laser would hit the
camera as intended. For the PL252, the red spot was visible, and the laser beam alignment was eas-
ily done. However, as the VENUS pulsed laser operates in the infrared range, indirect techniques
using an IR-sensitive target for calibration and alignment were required. This is shown in Figures
3.7.
(a) Laser alignment with no visible marker.
(b) Laser alignment with visible marker.
Figure 3.7: Alignment procedure for VENUS infrared laser tests.
3.7
Summary
The laser exposure test setup is designed to be modular and flexible, allowing for the observation
of laser effects on multiple camera modules. This chapter has outlined the main components, in-
cluding the galvanometric mirror system, laser sources, DAQ control, and camera modules, and
describes their functions within the overall workflow. The proposed system architecture supports
precise control and observation of laser exposure, allowing reproducible tests under various test
conditions.
20
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
==PAGE:31==
4
Method and Modeling
This chapter describes the methods and modeling approaches used to examine the effects of lasers
on different camera modules. Building on the system architecture presented in the previous Chap-
ter 3, the following sections explain both the test procedures and the numerical models used. The
experimental methods outline how laser exposure tests were performed, including a systematic
overview of all test parameters and measurements. The modeling section presents the mathemat-
ical description of the laser scanning patterns as well as simulations of the patterns. Together,
these methods form the basis for the following test, analysis, and discussion of the laser–camera
interactions.
4.1
Experimental Methods
The experimental part of this project was designed to systematically test how different cameras
respond to two types of laser exposure. The methodology aimed to cover the most relevant com-
binations of camera types, laser sources, exposure patterns, and test conditions. The overview of
these test combinations is outlined in Table 4.1.
For all tests, the camera was set to record video or still images during laser exposure. The test
protocol can be explained as follows: Start recording with the camera for approximately 30 sec-
onds. The laser activates for 5-10 seconds, except for specific long-duration exposures. After each
exposure, the camera modules were checked for immediate effects such as pixel errors, flicker,
image noise, or visible lens damage. With the VENUS pulsed laser, if no effect was observed, the
laser power was increased in 100 mW steps. For the PL252 laser, power was fixed at ≈4.5mW,
by manufacturer default [20].
As described in Chapter 3, the target cameras include the OKDO 5MP, PiNoIR v2, and Raspberry
Pi Camera Module 3, as well as, in one instance, a standard Raspberry Pi Camera Module 2. With
the VENUS series pulse laser, the cameras were tested at a fixed distance of 50 cm from the galvo
mirrors. In contrast, the PL252 laser blinding and incident angle tests were performed at two
separate distances: 1 meter and 4 meters, respectively.
Exposure patterns included stationary, raster/zigzag, and either spiral or circle-in-circle. The spiral
pattern was changed to circle-in-circle with the VENUS pulsed laser tests, due to alignment with
other parallel projects. Incident angle-dependent tests were conducted only with the PL252 laser,
using incidence angles of 0°, 30°, 60°, and 90° relative to the camera.
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
21
==PAGE:32==
4.1.1
Test Matrix and Parameters
A complete overview of the various test combinations and conditions is shown in Table 4.1.
Table 4.1: Overview of tests for each camera and laser combination.
Laser
Pattern
AOP (mW)
Dist.
Angle(s)
Cameras
PL252 Red
Stationary
4.5 (fixed)
4 m
0°, 30°, 60°, 90°
All
PL252 Red
Raster/zigzag
4.5 (fixed)
4 m
0°, 30°, 60°, 90°
All
PL252 Red
Spiral
4.5 (fixed)
4 m
0°, 30°, 60°, 90°
All
PL252 Red
All
4.5 (fixed)
1 m
0°-90° (10° steps)
PiNoIR
PL252 Red
Spiral Off-center
4.5 (fixed)
1 m
0°-90° (10° steps)
PiNoIR
PL252 Red
Spiral + Raster (1000Hz)
4.5 (fixed)
1 m
0°
PiNoIR
VENUS 1560
Stationary
200-5420
50 cm
0°
All
VENUS 1560
Raster/zigzag
200-5420
50 cm
0°
All
VENUS 1560
Raster/zigzag Harmonic
200-5420
50 cm
0°
OKDO 5MP
VENUS 1560
Circle-in-circle
200-5420
50 cm
0°
OKDO 5MP
VENUS 1560
Circle-in-circle Harmonic
200-5420
50 cm
0°
OKDO 5MP
VENUS 1560
Circle-in-circle Off-center
200-5420
50 cm
0°
OKDO 5MP
VENUS 1560
Stationary 1MHz
200-1500
50 cm
0°
RPI-cam 2
Every VENUS laser test in Table 4.1 was conducted only once per camera, as the camera sensor
or lens failed with increasing exposure. Almost every test was conducted with an average output
power (AOP) between 200mW and 5420mW, which is the minimum to maximum AOP of the
VENUS laser [21]. This, however, does not mean that the individual camera sensors or lenses did
not break before the maximum AOP. This is shown to emphasize that the cameras were exposed
to the maximum output in most cases, allowing for the observation of the maximum AOP effect
on the camera modules. As stated in the limitations Section 1.3, there was only a finite number of
cameras available. This is why the OKDO 5MP is represented and tested more frequently, as there
were more OKDO 5MP cameras available. Multiple tests were done with both the Raspberry Pi
Camera Module 3 and PiNoIR. However, due to limited quantities, only a few were available for
testing.
Step sizes of 100 mW in AOP were selected for the VENUS pulsed laser tests. This increment
provided sufficient resolution to observe the gradual response of the camera. For the PL252 laser,
the power was fixed at 4.5 mW [20]. The test distances were chosen based on practical consider-
ations. For the VENUS laser tests, a distance of 50 cm was used because alignment was easier,
and focusing optics were not available. The PL252 laser blinding and incident angle tests were
performed at 1 or 4 meters to simulate a potential real-world scenario where a sensor might be
targeted from a distance, and to explore the effect of incidence angle over a meaningful range.
4.1.2
Galvo Scan Amplitudes and Frequency Settings
All dynamic laser scan patterns in the tests were performed with analog input voltage set between
±0.1 V and ±0.5 V for both X and Y axes. The values were chosen for several reasons:
• At the test distance of 50 cm, ±0.1 V provided a small scanning angle, with a still large
enough scan area to fully cover the camera sensor for all patterns.
• Small scan amplitudes allowed the galvo system to achieve the highest specified bandwidth
of up to 1 kHz, allowing for the use of high pattern frequencies.
22
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
==PAGE:33==
• Initial tests with higher input voltages of up to ±9 V demonstrated that while the galvo could
achieve much larger scan angles, the maximum achievable scan frequency decreased signif-
icantly due to the increased mechanical load. For instance, at ±10 V (±20∘), the effective
bandwidth was limited to ∼30–50 Hz [18].
Table 4.2, from manufacturer data [18] and test verification, shows these practical limitations.
Table 4.2: Galvo scan amplitude and achievable frequency for different input voltages.
Input Voltage (±V)
Angular Deflection (∘)
Max Scan Frequency (Hz)
0.2
0.4
∼1000
0.5
1.0
∼400
3.0
6.0
∼100
10.0
20.0
∼30–50
The specific frequencies chosen for the laser scanning patterns will be described in 4.2.3.
4.1.3
Determining Average Output Power (AOP) for Testing
To ensure consistent and reproducible test conditions with the VENUS pulsed laser, the average
output power for each test was set by adjusting the pump power in the ConLAS software. The man-
ufacturer provides calibration data only at discrete pump power settings [21], so linear interpolation
was used to estimate the required pump power for target AOP values used in the tests.
Manufacturer Reference Data:
Table 4.3 shows the factory estimated AOP values at selected
pump power levels (pulse width 0.5 ns, 3 MHz repetition rate) [21].
Table 4.3: Manufacturer data: Average output power (AOP) as a function of pump power, 0.5 ns
and 3 MHz.
Pump Power (mW)
AOP (mW)
1500
200
2000
500
3000
840
5000
1470
7000
2120
9000
2730
11000
3250
13000
3770
15000
4300
17000
4850
19000
5420
Interpolation for Estimated AOP Levels:
Since the desired test setpoints of 100mW steps did
not always match the discrete calibration values, linear interpolation was applied between adjacent
data points to estimate the required pump power for each chosen AOP value [34].
𝑃= 𝑃1 + ( 𝐴𝑂𝑃−𝐴𝑂𝑃1
𝐴𝑂𝑃2 −𝐴𝑂𝑃1
) (𝑃2 −𝑃1)
(4.1)
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
23
==PAGE:34==
, where 𝑃is the estimated pump power, and (𝐴𝑂𝑃1, 𝑃1) and (𝐴𝑂𝑃2, 𝑃2) are the data points below
and above the desired AOP value.
Example Calculation:
For a target AOP of 1000 mW, the two determining data points are 840
mW at 3000 mW pump power and 1470 mW at 5000 mW pump power as seen in Table 4.3. This
yields:
𝐴𝑂𝑃1 = 840 mW,
𝑃1 = 3000 mW
𝐴𝑂𝑃2 = 1470 mW,
𝑃2 = 5000 mW
Then the estimated pump power is calculated as:
𝑃= 3000 + (1000 −840
1470 −840) (5000 −3000)
= 3000 + (160
630) × 2000
= 3000 + 508 ≈3508 mW
Interpolated AOP:
In practice, all tests were performed at 100 mW increments across the avail-
able AOP range. The complete list of interpolated pump power values for all 100 mW steps is
provided in Appendix A.1.
The 100mW step interpolated pump power was chosen to ensure that each test could be performed
with a low enough increment of defined output power to observe changes in the camera. This
method allowed for even comparison across all laser exposure tests.
4.2
Numerical Modeling
This section describes the numerical models used to simulate and create the motion of the laser
across the cameras for different laser scanning patterns. The purpose is to quantify the variation in
spatial and temporal coverage between patterns.
4.2.1
Choice of Laser Scanning Patterns
Several different scanning patterns were selected for tests. Each pattern has specific movement
profiles and hits the camera differently. The only criterion for choosing the patterns was that they
had to be implementable within the bandwidth and amplitude constraints of the galvanometric
mirror system, as explained in Section 4.1.2.
The specific patterns were chosen as explained in Chapter 2.
The following patterns were included:
• Stationary spot: The laser remains fixed at a single point on the sensor.
• Raster/zigzag scan: This pattern moves the laser spot in triangle waveforms in both axes,
resulting in a zigzag motion.
• Spiral scan: The laser spot follows a continuously outward-moving spiral, covering a circu-
lar area.
• Circle-in-circle scan: The spot moves along a small inner circle, which itself orbits along a
larger outer circle.
24
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
==PAGE:35==
Each pattern was simulated in Python using the same amplitude and frequency limits set by the
manufacturer [18], which were also used during testing. This ensured that all simulations reflected
the physical test conditions.
4.2.2
Mathematical Description of Scanning Patterns
Each laser scan pattern was implemented by generating the analog voltage signals for the X and
Y galvo axes, which were then translated into galvo frequencies 𝑓𝑥and 𝑓𝑦. The mathematical
description of each pattern is shown below.
Raster/zigzag Pattern:
The raster/zigzag pattern is generated by applying triangle waveforms
to both X and Y axes, with different frequencies:
𝑋(𝑡) = 𝐴𝑥⋅tri(𝑓𝑥𝑡)
𝑌(𝑡) = 𝐴𝑦⋅tri(𝑓𝑦𝑡)
, where tri(⋅) represents a triangle waveform, 𝐴𝑥and 𝐴𝑦are the analog voltage signals and 𝑓𝑥and
𝑓𝑦are the frequencies for the X and Y axes.
Spiral Pattern:
The spiral pattern is defined as:
𝑋(𝑡) = 𝐴mod ⋅sin(2𝜋𝑓mod𝑡) ⋅cos(2𝜋𝑓rot𝑡)
𝑌(𝑡) = 𝐴mod ⋅sin(2𝜋𝑓mod𝑡) ⋅sin(2𝜋𝑓rot𝑡)
, where 𝐴mod is the modulation amplitude, 𝑓mod = 𝑓𝑥is the radial modulation frequency, and
𝑓rot = 𝑓𝑦is the angular frequency.
Circle-in-Circle Pattern:
The circle-in-circle pattern is created by superimposing two circular
motions with different radii and frequencies:
𝑋(𝑡) = 𝑅outer cos(2𝜋𝑓outer𝑡) + 𝑅inner cos(2𝜋𝑓inner𝑡)
𝑌(𝑡) = 𝑅outer sin(2𝜋𝑓outer𝑡) + 𝑅inner sin(2𝜋𝑓inner𝑡)
, where 𝑅outer and 𝑅inner are the input voltage amplitudes of the outer and inner circles, and 𝑓outer =
𝑓𝑥and 𝑓inner = 𝑓𝑦are their respective frequencies.
In practice, all the generated patterns also have a 𝑋off and 𝑌off. These are used as analog signal
offsets to center the pattern on the camera module.
4.2.3
Harmonic vs. Non-Harmonic Frequency Selection
A key variable in designing the scanning patterns and choosing suitable frequencies is the ratio
between the frequencies applied to the X and Y galvo axes. This choice determines whether the
scan pattern is periodic and repeats over time, or whether it gradually fills the exposure area without
ever repeating itself. In this thesis, this is referred to as harmonic vs. non-harmonic frequencies,
using either rational or irrational ratios [35].
Harmonic (Rational) Frequency Ratios:
With a rational frequency ratio, such as 𝑓𝑦= 𝑓𝑥/4,
the scan pattern is perfectly periodic. The spot retraces identical paths, resulting in repetition and
specific points being revisited at regular intervals [35]. This pattern causes a few spots in the
camera to receive many laser pulses, thereby increasing the intensity at those spots.
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
25
==PAGE:36==
Non-Harmonic (Irrational) Frequency Ratios:
When the ratio is irrational, for example, 𝑓𝑦=
𝑓𝑥/
√
2 or 𝑓𝑦= 𝑓𝑥/𝜋, the X and Y components never synchronize over any finite time [35]. This
produces a non-repeating coverage, and the spot gradually visits nearly all possible positions within
the scan area. This distributes the laser pulses more evenly, resulting in better coverage on the
camera but lower maximum intensity at any single point.
Practical Frequency Choices:
In both the simulations and tests,
√
2 was chosen as the irrational
ratio. This was motivated by its mathematical irrationality, while remaining close to ratios like 1:1
or 1:2, so that the coverage pattern remains within the galvo’s operating range. Other irrational
numbers, such as 𝜋, could also be used [35], but this would produce patterns that are closer to 1:3
or 1:4 ratios and may require lower frequencies to stay within galvo limits. However, the exact
value was not critical as long as it is not a simple fraction and the resulting frequencies do not
exceed the galvo limits [18].
The scan frequencies were chosen to be as high as possible, typically between 𝑓𝑥= 400 Hz and
800 Hz, with 𝑓𝑦= 𝑓𝑥/2 or 𝑓𝑦= 𝑓𝑥/4 for harmonic patterns, and 𝑓𝑦= 𝑓𝑥/
√
2 for non-harmonic.
The specific frequencies chosen depended on the input voltage. The reason for not using 1 kHz
was the mechanical stress and approaching the galvo limit [18]. The question of whether harmonic
or non-harmonic frequency ratios are best for camera damage, dazzling, or blinding is examined
further in the Discussion Chapter 6.
4.2.4
Simulation of Scan Patterns
Each laser scan pattern was simulated using Python. All simulated parameters, frequency, ampli-
tude, and duration, were chosen to match the physical parameters of the test setup described in
4.2.2 and 4.2.3.
For each pattern, both harmonic and non-harmonic frequency ratios were simulated. This allowed
for a direct visual comparison of how spot coverage develops over time in each case.
The following figures 4.1, 4.2, and 4.3 show the simulated laser trajectories for the different scan-
ning patterns using harmonic frequency ratios. The frequencies used for each pattern are 𝑓𝑥= 800
Hz and 𝑓𝑦= 𝑓𝑥/4 Hz, and the simulations run from 1 ms to 200 ms.
Figure 4.1: 2D Simulated spiral pattern with harmonic frequencies.
Figure 4.2: 2D Simulated circle-in-circle pattern with harmonic frequencies.
26
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
==PAGE:37==
Figure 4.3: 2D Simulated raster (zigzag) pattern with harmonic frequencies.
As seen from all the patterns, the use of harmonic frequency ratios results in spot trajectories that
are strictly periodic and repeat over the same locations with each cycle. This means that certain
points on the scan area receive a higher number of laser pulses, leading to spots with increased
intensity.
For comparison, the following figures 4.1, 4.2, and 4.3 show the simulated laser trajectories for
the different scanning patterns using non-harmonic frequency ratios. In these simulations, the
frequencies used for each pattern are 𝑓𝑥= 800 Hz and 𝑓𝑦= 𝑓𝑥/
√
2 Hz, and the simulations run
from 1 ms to 200 ms.
Figure 4.4: 2D Simulated spiral pattern with non-harmonic frequencies.
Figure 4.5: 2D Simulated circle-in-circle pattern with non-harmonic frequencies.
Figure 4.6: 2D Simulated raster (zigzag) pattern with non-harmonic frequencies.
In the non-harmonic patterns, it is seen that the laser hits the target more evenly compared to the
harmonic patterns. This provides the reason for choosing non-harmonic patterns for more tests,
as it is easier to hit specific spots in the camera. The pattern pulse intensity and effect will be
compared to test results and examined further in the discussion Chapter 6.
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
27
==PAGE:38==
Further simulations of both the harmonic and the non-harmonic patterns in 3D plots can be seen
in A.33, A.34, A.35, A.36, A.37 and A.38 in the Appendix A.6.
4.3
Summary
This chapter has provided the methods and modeling approaches used to test the laser-induced
effect on the cameras. The experimental methods presented the test matrix and the chosen parame-
ters, while the numerical section provided reasoning behind the laser scanning patterns and chosen
frequencies.
The presented methods, simulations, and models will be examined further and compared with the
test results in the following Results and Discussion Chapters.
28
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
==PAGE:39==
5
Test Results
This chapter presents the main test results from both the PL252 laser and the VENUS pulsed laser.
The results are organized according to the test matrix shown in Table 4.1, and follow the system
structure and methods described in Chapters 3 and 4.
Throughout the tests, a range of effects were observed on the cameras as a result of the laser ex-
posures. The most significant results included dazzling, temporary blinding, lens flares, sensor
damage and failure, and melting of the lens. Examples of these results are presented in this Chap-
ter.
Although the test matrix itself is not extensive, numerous tests were conducted, each generating
a substantial amount of data, far more than can be fully presented in this thesis. Therefore, only
the most essential and significant results are shown here. However, all results are included for the
analysis and comparison between tests. Some of the additional results which are not described can
be found in the Appendix A.4. Else, a complete dataset with both videos, frame-by-frame images,
and other test images is available as an additional zip file containing all results.
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
29
==PAGE:40==
5.1
PL252 Laser Test Results
As described in Section 4.1.1, the PL252 was primarily used for initial testing, pattern exposure,
and the essential incident angled camera tests, which allowed for the observation of effects from
laser exposure on the camera at different incident angles. The following sections present these test
results.
5.1.1
Key Results
The most significant PL252 test results are as follows:
Stationary laser on OKDO 5MP with 0∘incident angle:
Figure 5.1 shows the camera view
of the OKDO 5MP camera, without any laser exposure. Each test of each camera includes videos
or images taken without laser exposure, which are used for comparison with the camera during or
after laser exposure.
Figure 5.1: OKDO 5MP frame image of the PL252 laser test without laser exposure.
Figure 5.2: Stationary exposure from the PL252 laser on the OKDO 5MP camera, with 0∘incident
angle.
30
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
==PAGE:41==
Figure 5.2 shows the result of the stationary PL252 test on the OKDO 5MP camera with 0∘incident
angle. The laser is pointed almost at the center of the camera, and it can be seen that there is a white
saturation of pixels in the middle where the laser is focused. Around the white hot spot, a red lens
flare spreads and fills almost the entire image, resulting in nearly complete blinding of the camera.
The stationary tests with both the PiNoIR and RPi-Cam 3 yielded the same results, and are de-
scribed in Section 5.1.2.
Stationary laser on OKDO 5MP with 30∘-90∘incident angle:
The following Figures, 5.3, 5.4,
and 5.5, show the results from the stationary laser exposure with different incident angles on the
OKDO 5MP camera. The camera was mounted on a tripod ≈4m away from the galvo mirrors
and tilted to the appropriate angle of incidence.
Figure 5.3 shows the 30∘incident angle result. It can be seen that there is pixel saturation on the left
side of the image, where the laser hits the camera lens. The red lens flare spreads out throughout
the lens and dazzles the camera. This results in almost complete blinding of the camera; however,
there are traces of visibility of the background.
Figure 5.3: Image of stationary exposure test with the PL252 laser on the OKDO 5MP camera,
with 30∘incident angle.
Figure 5.4: Image of stationary exposure test with the PL252 laser on the OKDO 5MP camera,
with 60∘incident angle.
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
31
==PAGE:42==
This background visibility becomes more apparent in the 60∘camera test, seen in Figure 5.4. The
pixel saturation becomes less frequent. However, the camera is still quite indistinct and filled with
red lens flare, which makes the background less visible.
The dazzling effect stops at higher incident angles, as shown in Figure 5.5, which illustrates the 90∘
test. There is almost no visibility of the laser exposure, and only a minor lens flare is noticeable.
Figure 5.5: Image of stationary exposure test with the PL252 laser on the OKDO 5MP camera,
with 90∘incident angle.
These test results align with the rest of the incident angle tests across the different cameras, as
shown in Section 5.1.2.
Raster/zigzag laser pattern on RPi-Cam 3 with 0∘incident angle:
The following Figure 5.7
shows the results from the raster/zigzag pattern tests on the Raspberry Pi Camera Module 3. The
camera was mounted on a tripod ≈4m away from the galvo mirrors. Figure 5.6 shows a frame
image from the RPi-Cam 3 without any laser exposure, used for comparison.
Figure 5.6: RPi-Cam 3 frame image of the PL252 laser test without laser exposure.
32
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
==PAGE:43==
The images seen in Figure 5.7 show a frame-by-frame view of the raster pattern exposure test. The
frames are shown as every 10th frame of the original video, as described in Section 3.6.3. It can be
seen how the pattern blinds the camera, with occasional non-blinding, as shown in 5.7b and 5.7e.
However, even when the laser pattern doesn’t saturate the pixels, the brightness of the image is
extremely low, compared to 5.6. In this test, the galvo moved with frequencies of 𝑓𝑥= 600 Hz
and 𝑓𝑦= 𝑓𝑥/
√
2 ≈424.2 Hz. This proved to be enough for the raster/zigzag pattern to hit the
OKDO camera frequently enough to cause almost complete blinding.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure 5.7: Frame-by-frame: Raster/zigzag laser pattern exposure of the PL252 laser on the Rasp-
berry Pi camera module 3, at 0∘t incident angle and 4m distance.
The raster/zigzag pattern was also tested with different incident angles on the cameras. The results
of these tests are described in Section 5.1.2.
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
33
==PAGE:44==
Spiral laser pattern on RPi-Cam 3 with 0∘incident angle:
Just as the raster pattern, the spiral
pattern was also tested on RPi-Cam 3. The camera was mounted on a tripod ≈4m away from the
galvo mirrors. This test data was not captured on video, but rather with consecutive images taken
every 0.5 seconds. The setup, however, was the same as the raster/zigzag pattern tests.
The results of the spiral pattern test can be seen in Figure 5.8.
(a) Spiral test image 1
(b) Spiral test image 2
(c) Spiral test image 3
Figure 5.8: Consecutive images: Spiral laser pattern exposure of the PL252 laser on the Raspberry
Pi camera module 3, at 0∘incident angle and 4m distance.
Even though the data was captured as images, it can still be seen that there is a dazzling effect,
pixel saturation, and the occurrence of non-blinding effects. It is also clear that the brightness of
the images is low compared to 5.6.
The spiral pattern tests were also conducted with different incident angles and on all cameras and
the results are summarized in Section 5.1.2.
Spiral laser pattern on PiNoIR with 0∘-90∘incident angle, at 1m distance:
In the initial phase,
the Raspberry PiNoIR 2 camera was tested separately. The tests involved estimating the laser
patterns to determine their movement and impact on the camera. The test was conducted at a
distance of 1m from the galvo mirrors, and the frequencies were chosen to be 𝑓𝑥= 400 Hz and
𝑓𝑦= 𝑓𝑥/
√
2 ≈282.8 Hz. These frequencies are relatively slow, compared to the maximum
available frequencies. However, they were chosen to see the pattern effect at lower frequencies,
for comparison.
For this specific setup, the incident angle of the camera was adjusted with steps of 10∘per test. The
first few frames of 0∘, 30∘, 60∘and 90∘can be seen in Figures 5.9, 5.10, 5.11 and 5.12. The rest of
the 10∘steps can be found in Appendix A.4.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 5.9: Frame-by-frame: Spiral pattern exposure on the PiNoIR camera, with 0∘incident angle.
34
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
==PAGE:45==
Just as the raster pattern test on the RPi-Cam 3 seen in 5.7, the spiral pattern shows signs of lens
flares and pixel saturation, with periods of non-blinding. As seen from Figure 5.9, the PL252
blinds the camera occasionally, but when the laser doesn’t hit the lens, it doesn’t show any signs
of lowered brightness.
This non-blinding effect worsens at higher incident angles. At 30∘to 60∘, there are still some
blinding effects as seen in Figures 5.10 and 5.11. This becomes less at 90∘in Figure 5.12, where
there is only minor lens flare. This matches the results of the other angled camera tests.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 5.10: Frame-by-frame: Spiral pattern exposure on the PiNoIR camera, with 30∘incident
angle.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 5.11: Frame-by-frame: Spiral pattern exposure on the PiNoIR camera, with 60∘incident
angle.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 5.12: Frame-by-frame: Spiral pattern exposure on the PiNoIR camera, with 90∘incident
angle.
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
35
==PAGE:46==
1000 Hz laser patterns exposure on PiNoIR camera:
One of the main objectives of testing
with the PL252 was to test the maximum achievable galvo frequency. This was done using both
the spiral and raster/zigzag patterns on the PiNoIR camera at a distance of 1m. The focus of the
tests was to observe the effects of high pattern frequencies on the camera, compared to the usual
frequencies tested. The frequencies were set to 𝑓𝑥= 1000 Hz and 𝑓𝑦= 𝑓𝑥/
√
2 ≈707.1 Hz. The
input voltage of the galvos was set to 0.1 V, and the pattern covered the whole camera lens.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 5.13: Frame-by-frame: 1000 Hz raster/zigzag pattern exposure on the PiNoIR.
The first test was performed using the raster/zigzag scan pattern, as shown in Figure 5.13. In this
case, the laser sweeps horizontally across the sensor, creating several bright bands that illuminate
the camera pixels simultaneously. While the overall brightness is reduced, the level of pixel sat-
uration is not particularly high. Instead, the pattern mainly results in a broad dimming effect that
disturbs the image, but does not completely blind the camera.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 5.14: Frame-by-frame: 1000 Hz spiral pattern exposure on the PiNoIR.
The spiral pattern, shown in Figure 5.14, produces a different outcome. Here, the laser traces a
spiral path across the sensor, resulting in a central flare where the laser hits most, and a series
of minor horizontal lens flares. Compared to the raster scan, the blinding effect is more focused,
but the saturated spot where the laser hits is smaller and less intense, and the background is less
affected.
It is worth noting that at these high scan frequencies, both patterns guarantee the laser hits the
sensor in every frame. Although neither pattern causes full sensor blinding, the spiral scan tends
to concentrate the effect into a smaller, more pronounced area. In contrast, the raster scan makes a
few large horizontal flares across the image.
36
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
==PAGE:47==
5.1.2
PL252 Results Summary
To provide an overview of all the PL252 laser test results, a comprehensive table has been created
as shown in Table 5.1. The table shows the pattern used, the camera on which it was used, the
incident angles, and the observed effects.
Table 5.1: Summary of observed effects for all PL252 tests by pattern, camera, angle, and distance.
Pattern
Camera
Incident
Angle
Observed Effects
Stationary
All
0°
Almost complete blinding. Large central satura-
tion and intense lens flare.
Stationary
All
30°–90°
Partial blinding. Medium edge saturation and lens
flare.
Some background visibility.
Effects de-
crease with increased incident angle.
Raster/zigzag
All
0°
Periodic blinding.
Medium central saturation.
Horizontal lens flare. Low background illumina-
tion.
Raster/zigzag
All
30°-90°
Less periodic blinding. Medium edge saturation.
Horizontal lens flare.
Effects decrease with in-
creased incident angle.
Spiral
All
0°
Periodic blinding.
Medium central saturation.
Horizontal lens flare. Low background illumina-
tion.
Spiral
All
30°-90°
Less periodic blinding. Medium edge saturation.
Horizontal lens flare.
Effects decrease with in-
creased incident angle.
Raster/zigzag, 1m
PiNoIR
0°
Periodic blinding. Large central saturation. Lens
flare.
Raster/zigzag, 1m
PiNoIR
30°–90°
Less periodic blinding. Medium edge saturation.
Effects decrease with increased incident angle.
Spiral, 1m
PiNoIR
0°
Periodic blinding. Large central saturation. Lens
flare.
Spiral, 1m
PiNoIR
30°–90°
Less periodic blinding. Medium edge saturation.
Effects decrease with increased incident angle.
Spiral
Off-Center,
1m
PiNoIR
0°
No blinding. Some lens flare. Low background
illumination.
Spiral
Off-Center,
1m
PiNoIR
30°–90°
No blinding. Some lens flare.
1000 Hz Raster, 1m
PiNoIR
0°
Constant blinding. Large central saturation. Large
horizontal lens flares. Low background illumina-
tion.
1000 Hz Spiral, 1m
PiNoIR
0°
Constant blinding. Small central saturation. Many
small horizontal flares. Low background illumina-
tion.
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
37
==PAGE:48==
5.2
VENUS Series IR Pulsed Laser Results
As described in Section 4.1.1, the VENUS Series pulsed laser was primarily used for high-power
exposure on the cameras. Since the laser uses infrared frequencies, the objective was not to blind
the cameras, but rather to determine the threshold at which the cameras failed. The tests were
conducted according to the setup explained in Chapters 3 and 4, and all VENUS laser tests were
performed at ≈0.5 m. Each test was conducted with a power step of 100 mW, meaning that
each test consisted of multiple ”sub-tests”. Therefore, this section will only have the most relevant
or significant results. All test results with the VENUS laser are included in the summary and
comparison in 5.3.
In these tests, the observed effects were lens melting, flicker and noise, burned pixels, and sensor
damage. The following sections present these test results.
5.2.1
Key Results
The most significant VENUS Pulsed laser test results are as follows:
Stationary laser test on the OKDO 5MP camera:
Just as with the PL252 tests, the VENUS
laser tests began by capturing a video of the camera view without any laser exposure. These non-
exposure frames are used for comparison with the frames after laser exposure. A non-exposure
frame image of the OKDO 5MP is shown in Figure 5.15.
Figure 5.15: Frame image of the VENUS laser test setup, on the OKDO 5MP, without any laser
exposure.
As shown, the camera is mounted inside the test box. Therefore, the view appears black, with the
only light source coming through the aperture at the front of the test box. This is also where the
laser beam enters the test box and hits the camera.
The stationary VENUS laser test on the OKDO camera was unusual compared to the other tests,
in that no effects occurred at all. The AOP started at 200 mW and increased in steps of 100 mW
until a maximum AOP of 5420 mW was reached. After each step, the camera was observed, both
physically and from the captured data, and this showed no effects.
To determine if anything happened after prolonged laser exposure, the laser was turned on with a
maximum AOP for 1 minute, focusing on the center of the camera lens. But still, after 60 seconds,
no effects were observed. The final frame of the test can be seen in Figure 5.16.
38
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
==PAGE:49==
Figure 5.16: Last frame of the stationary VENUS laser test, on the OKDO 5MP, 5420 mW AOP.
The white hot spot in the center of the image is not pixel damage, but is a small bandwidth of laser
light that the camera can observe. All the cameras capture this effect.
The stationary test on the OKDO 5MP was the first test with the VENUS series pulsed laser. Be-
cause it didn’t yield any observable results, it was decided to try a quick circle-in-circle pattern
test to see if any effect occurred. This was done without setting the AOP to a low setting, and
was terminated too quickly. Therefore, this counts as an error test. However, the results were cir-
cumstantial. Although the stationary laser test didn’t yield the desired results, the scanning pattern
immediately destroyed the sensor. Figure 5.17 shows how the camera shuts down after less than
half a second. In 5.17a, the laser is off, and the galvos are moving at 𝑓𝑥= 800 Hz and 𝑓𝑦≈565.7
Hz. Figure 5.17b shows the first captured frame after the laser hits the camera, and as seen, the
camera sensor blacks out.
(a) Test 5240 mW AOP circle pattern before.
(b) Test 5240 mW AOP circle pattern after.
Figure 5.17: Error test: Before and after comparison of the error test with circle-in-circle pattern
laser exposure on the OKDO 5MP with 5240 mW AOP.
Due to these results, it was apparent that damage could be done to the OKDO 5MP camera. The
objective of the next tests was to determine the AOP and pattern required to reach the camera’s
threshold.
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
39
==PAGE:50==
Circle-in-Circle laser pattern test on the OKDO 5MP camera:
The circle-in-circle pattern
was tested only on the OKDO 5MP camera as explained in Chapter 4. The pattern was tested with
frequencies of 𝑓𝑥= 800 Hz and 𝑓𝑦≈565.7 Hz and with increasing 100 mW steps of AOP from
200 mW to 5420 mW. In this test, the laser was turned on for approximately 10 seconds before
being turned off.
Between the initial power levels of 200 mW and 1900 mW, no damage or effect was observed.
But at 2000 mW AOP, the camera began to react to the laser. Figure 5.18 shows frame-by-frame
images of the event happening at 2000 mW AOP.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
Figure 5.18: Frame-by-frame: Event at 2000 mW AOP circle-in-circle laser pattern exposure on
the OKDO 5MP.
After approximately 5 seconds of laser exposure, the camera started to flicker as seen in image
5.18b. This flickering became worse over time, and eventually, the entire camera image was cov-
ered in vertical, damaged pixel lines. The last frame image 5.18i shows how the laser is almost not
visible anymore, just before the laser was turned off after 10 seconds.
40
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
==PAGE:51==
Figure 5.19 shows the camera output after the 2000 mW AOP exposure test. It can be seen that the
entire camera image is covered in vertical lines because of the damaged sensor, and the aperture
of the test box is no longer visible.
Figure 5.19: OKDO 5MP after 2000 mW AOP circle-in-circle pattern laser exposure.
It was observed from the error test 5.17 that the sensor would black out at a certain point; therefore,
it was decided to determine that threshold. The test continued with increased AOP. At 2500 mW
AOP, the blackout effect was observed. This is shown in Figure 5.20.
(a) Frame image of 2500 mW AOP circle pattern,
laser off.
(b) Frame image of 2500 mW AOP circle pattern,
laser on.
Figure 5.20: Frame-by-frame: Event at 2500 mW AOP circle-in-circle laser pattern exposure on
the OKDO 5MP.
The figure shows how the 2500 mW AOP circle-in-circle pattern exposure completely damages the
camera sensor in under half a second. There was no visible damage on the camera itself, and only
sensor damage was observed. It can therefore be concluded that, with the circle-in-circle pattern,
the required AOP to damage the OKDO 5MP camera sensor is between 2000 Hz and 2500 Hz.
The tests continued with increasing AOP, and the results showed no further effects.
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
41
==PAGE:52==
Raster/zigzag laser pattern test on the OKDO 5MP camera:
The raster/zigzag pattern was
tested on all three cameras. The objective of these tests was the same as with the circle-in-circle
pattern. The tests were conducted in increments of 100 mW AOP, from 200 mW to 5420 mW. The
raster/zigzag pattern frequencies were set to 𝑓𝑥= 800 Hz and 𝑓𝑦≈565.7 Hz, and the laser was
turned on for approximately 5 seconds.
The raster/zigzag pattern showed observable effects at lower AOPs. Figure 5.21 shows the result
of the raster/zigzag pattern test on the OKDO 5MP camera, with 800 mW AOP exposure. Image
5.21a shows the last frame of the exposure with the laser turned on, and image 5.21b shows the
first frame after the laser is turned off. The images do not show very clear visible results, but in
5.21b a small white spot appears. This white spot did not disappear even with the laser turned
off, indicating pixel damage to the sensor. With increasing AOP, this pixel damage became more
apparent, and more similar damage spots appeared if the camera was moved between tests.
(a) Frame image of 800 mW AOP raster pattern, dur-
ing laser exposure.
(b) Frame image of 800 mW AOP raster pattern, af-
ter laser exposure.
Figure 5.21: Frame-by-frame: Results of 800 mW AOP raster/zigzag pattern test on OKDO 5MP.
At 1100 mW AOP, the observed effect changed to complete sensor damage. Figure 5.22 shows
frame-by-frame images of this effect occurring. It can be seen how the sensor starts to flicker,
and in image 5.22a, the sensor damage becomes more visible. This effect worsens throughout the
frames. Image 5.22e shows how the sensor becomes almost completely damaged after 5 seconds
of exposure.
42
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
==PAGE:53==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure 5.22: Frame-by-frame: Event at 1100 mW AOP raster/zigzag pattern exposure on the
OKDO 5MP.
Figure 5.23 shows the damaged camera sensor output after the 1100 mW AOP exposure. The first
image 5.23a shows the sensor output without any light sources, and it is seen that the image is filled
with vertical sensor damage lines. The second image 5.23b shows the sensor output, but with a
flashlight pointed at the camera. It is clearly seen that the camera sensor is damaged, as the light
appears as a black spot. The aperture is no longer visible in any of the images shown in the figure.
(a) After frame image of 1100 mW AOP laser expo-
sure.
(b) After frame image of 1100 mW AOP laser expo-
sure with flashlight.
Figure 5.23: After image of the 1100 mW raster pattern exposure on the OKDO 5MP.
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
43
==PAGE:54==
The raster/zigzag pattern test with increasing AOP continued until the camera was completely
damaged. This happened at 2400 mW AOP, and is shown in 5.24. The raster/zigzag pattern was
not tested beyond this AOP, as the sensor was dead. No other effect besides sensor damage was
observed during these tests.
Figure 5.24: OKDO 5MP after 2400 mW AOP raster pattern exposure.
Stationary laser test on the PiNoIR camera:
The following results show the results of the
stationary VENUS laser test on the PiNoIR camera. This test was conducted using the same setup
as the OKDO 5MP stationary test, with increasing AOP in 100 mW increments.
(a) Frame image of 500 mW AOP
laser exposure.
(b) Frame image of 900 mW AOP
laser exposure.
(c) Frame image of 1300 mW AOP
laser exposure.
(d) Frame image of 1500 mW
AOP laser exposure.
(e) Frame image of 2000 mW AOP
laser exposure.
(f) Frame image of 3000 mW AOP
laser exposure.
Figure 5.25: Frame images from multiple stationary laser exposures on the PiNoIR.
44
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
==PAGE:55==
Figure 5.25 shows separate frames from different AOP tests, where significant results were ob-
served. Whereas the OKDO 5MP camera did not show any observable results with the stationary
laser test, the PiNoIR clearly showed signs of damage. In image 5.25a, the camera starts to become
blurry with 500 mW AOP exposure. This blurry effect becomes more apparent with the increasing
AOP. As seen in images 5.25b, 5.25c, and 5.25d, the camera lens on the PiNoIR starts to melt. At
2000 mW seen in image 5.25e, the camera lens was almost completely melted, and at 3000 mW,
the camera lens was set on fire, which is seen in image 5.25f as a bright pink flare.
(a) Frame image of the PiNoIR, without any laser
exposure.
(b) Frame image of the PiNoIR, after 3000 mW
AOP laser exposure.
Figure 5.26: Before and after comparison of the stationary laser exposure on the PiNoIR.
Figure 5.26 shows the PiNoIR camera before laser exposure and after 3000 mW AOP laser ex-
posure. It was confirmed that the camera lens was completely melted, and therefore, the camera
was incapable of capturing useful images or video. Images of the melted camera lens are shown
in Appendix A.4.
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
45
==PAGE:56==
Raster/zigzag laser pattern test on the RPi-Cam 3:
The raster/zigzag pattern was tested on the
Raspberry Pi Camera Module 3. The frequencies were set to 𝑓𝑥= 800 Hz and 𝑓𝑦≈565.7 Hz.
The test results are presented below.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.27: Frame-by-frame: Event at 1000 mW AOP raster/zigzag pattern exposure on the RPi-
Cam 3.
The first effect was observed at 1000 mW AOP. The observed effect was a small burned pixel spot.
Figure 5.27 shows the frame-by-frame images of the laser exposure and the observed damage. It
is observed in image 5.27b that minor pixel spot damage appears in the center of the image, where
the laser hit the camera lens. With increasing AOP, the pixel damage became increasingly visible.
There was also minor flickering and noise spots appearing all over the sensor image.
Figure 5.28 shows how the laserspot and pixel damage, flickering, and noise evolve with increasing
AOPs. Image 5.28a shows these effects at 1500 mW AOP. It is also observed that there are vertical
and horizontal lines of pixel damage at the center of the area where the laser hits the camera. These
lines become more apparent as the AOP increases to 1800 mW and 2100 mW, respectively. At
2500 mW exposure in image 5.28d, it can be seen how the brightness of the image becomes more
saturated, and the image becomes more blurry. At 2900 mW to 3300 mW AOP, the raster pattern
exposure stops doing sensor damage, and instead, the camera lens begins to melt, resulting in a
completely dark and blurry image.
46
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
==PAGE:57==
(a) Frame image of 1500 mW AOP
laser exposure.
(b) Frame image of 1800 mW
AOP laser exposure.
(c) Frame image of 2100 mW AOP
laser exposure.
(d) Frame image of 2500 mW
AOP laser exposure.
(e) Frame image of 2900 mW AOP
laser exposure.
(f) Frame image of 3300 mW AOP
laser exposure.
Figure 5.28: Frame-by-frame: Raster/zigzag pattern laser exposure on the RPi-Cam 3, with in-
creasing AOP.
After these effects began to appear, the testing continued with increasing AOP. The images shown
in Figure 5.29 illustrate the effects observed after the laser exposures of respectively 3300 mW,
4000 mW, and 5240 mW.
(a) Frame image after 3300 mW
AOP laser exposure.
(b) Frame image after 4000 mW
AOP laser exposure.
(c) Frame image after 5420 mW
AOP laser exposure.
Figure 5.29: After images of multiple raster/zigzag pattern tests on the RPi-Cam 3.
Image 5.29a shows how the flickering and sensor damage blur the camera. A white paper was
placed in front of the camera to observe the effects more clearly. The melting of the lens becomes
stronger at 4000 mW, and at approximately 5400 mW AOP, the lens was completely melted as
shown in image 5.29c. It is seen that nothing can be deduced from the camera image due to the
melted lens.
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
47
==PAGE:58==
Harmonic raster/zigzag laser pattern test on the OKDO 5MP camera:
An essential objective
of testing with the VENUS series pulsed laser was to see whether the harmonic or non-harmonic
has the best performance when damaging cameras. The test was done only on the OKDO 5MP
camera. The test setup was conducted as with all other VENUS tests, using an increasing AOP
with steps of 100 mW.
The harmonic pattern is theoretically a mix between the stationary and non-harmonic patterns, in
that it hits fewer points in the camera lens compared to the non-harmonic pattern, but is more dis-
tributed than a stationary laser beam. The galvo mirror frequency for both the harmonic raster/zigzag
pattern and harmonic circle-in-circle pattern was set to 𝑓𝑥= 800 Hz and 𝑓𝑦= 𝑓𝑥/2 = 400 Hz.
This way, the laser beam will move in a repetitive pattern, as explained in Section 4.2.
The first observation with the harmonic raster/zigzag pattern appeared at 700 mW AOP. As shown
in Figure 5.30, the harmonic pattern damages the camera quite significantly. The images are shown
frame by frame, and it can be seen in 5.30c that the image is considerably worse compared to image
5.30a. The observed damage primarily consisted of sensor flickering and pixel damage.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 5.30: Frame-by-frame: 700 AOP harmonic raster pattern exposure.
This flickering became much worse already at 800 mW AOP, as seen in Figure 5.31. It can be seen
how the laser almost completely destroys the sensor. The first image 5.31a shows a frame after
6 seconds of laser exposure, and image 5.31b shows the next captured frame, where the sensor is
destroyed.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.31: Frame-by-frame: 800 AOP harmonic raster pattern exposure.
48
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
==PAGE:59==
Even though the sensor appeared to be entirely damaged, the tests continued to make further ob-
servations of the effects. This is shown in 5.32. Here, it can be seen that the laser remains visible
when turned on, even though nothing is visible when the laser is off. This means that the camera
continues to detect the laser beam. However, this effect stopped at 1700 mW AOP, where the
sensor turned blue, and no effect occurred after that.
(a) Frame image of 1000 mW AOP
laser exposure.
(b) Frame image of 1500 mW
AOP laser exposure.
(c) Frame image of 1700 mW AOP
laser exposure.
Figure 5.32: Fame images of multiple harmonic raster/zigzag pattern tests on the OKDO 5MP.
These results showed that damage occurs at a relatively low AOP. The next test was to see if the
harmonic circle-in-circle pattern would yield the same results.
Harmonic Circle-in-Circle laser pattern test on the OKDO 5MP camera:
As explained, the
harmonic circle-in-circle was conducted in the same way and with the same setup as the other tests.
The test results are presented below.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.33: Frame-by-frame: Event at 1400 mW AOP harmonic circle-in-circle pattern exposure
on the OKDO 5MP.
Whereas the harmonic raster/zigzag pattern showed effects at low AOP, the harmonic circle-in-
circle pattern showed the first visible effect at 1400 mW AOP. The observed effects were minor
pixel damage as seen in Figure 5.33, where a small white spot can be seen in image 5.33b.
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
49
==PAGE:60==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure 5.34: Frame-by-frame: Event at 1600 mW AOP harmonic circle-in-circle pattern exposure
on the OKDO 5MP.
Figure 5.34 shows frame-by-frame images of the laser exposure at 1600 mW AOP. It is observed
that the camera starts to flicker, indicating increasing sensor damage. This effect increased, and as
seen in 5.35, the sensor was almost destroyed after exposure to 1700 mW AOP.
Figure 5.35: Frame image after 1700 mW AOP harmonic circle-in-circle pattern exposure.
These results indicate that the harmonic patterns of both the raster/zigzag and circle-in-circle are
viable options for damaging the camera sensor, and will be further examined in the Discussion
Chapter 6.
50
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
==PAGE:61==
Off-center Circle-in-Circle laser pattern test on the OKDO 5MP camera:
Another way to
determine the camera threshold was to create a pattern and offset it from the center of the camera
lens. This way, the pattern would still hit the sensor, but only some pulses would hit the camera
lens off-center. The chosen pattern was circle-in-circle, as it has more pulses in the center of the
pattern and, therefore, would not be as effective in the outer regions. The galvo frequencies used
in this test were 𝑓𝑥= 600 Hz and 𝑓𝑦= 424.3 Hz. The AOP was increased in steps of 100 mW,
but whereas the other tests consisted of individual tests with the laser on and off, this test had the
laser on constantly, with the AOP increased by 100 mW every 10 seconds. This way, the effects
could be captured at the right time with an approximate AOP. The results of the test are shown in
Figure 5.36.
(a) Off-center circle pattern 2000
mW AOP.
(b) Off-center circle pattern 2100
mW AOP.
(c) Off-center circle pattern 2200
mW AOP.
(d) Off-center circle pattern 2300
mW AOP.
(e) Off-center circle pattern 2400
mW AOP.
(f) Off-center circle pattern 2450
mW AOP.
Figure 5.36: Frame-by-frame: Off-center circle pattern with increasing AOP from 2000 mW to
2500 mW.
The test began with an AOP of 1500 mW. The first image 5.36a at 50 seconds and ≈2000 mW AOP,
shows how minor sensor flares and damage start to form. This effect then increases throughout
the increment of the AOP. Already at ≈2100 mW AOP, the damage increases exponentially and
worsens fast. The off-center laser pattern ultimately destroys the sensor at 95 seconds, with an
approximate AOP of ≈2450 mW.
These results align with the centered circle-in-circle pattern effect observed on the OKDO 5MP
camera, indicating that off-center patterns can also have an impact on the cameras. This also
indicates that the curvature of the camera lens focuses the laser, which then damages the sensor.
Therefore, hitting the edge of the camera lens, rather than the center, will cause more damage to
camera modules, such as the OKDO 5MP.
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
51
==PAGE:62==
5.3
VENUS Series IR Pulsed Laser Results Summary
To better understand and compare the VENUS series laser tests, a table summarizing all the results
and observed effects has been created. The overview can be seen below in Table 5.2. This table
includes all the previous examples, as well as the tests that haven’t been explained.
Table 5.2: Overview of camera damage thresholds and observed effects under VENUS Series IR
Pulsed Laser exposure.
Camera
Pattern
First Effect
(mW AOP)
Fails
at
(mW AOP)
Observed Effects
PiNoIR
Stationary
500
3000
Lens melts before sensor is
damaged
PiNoIR
Raster
900
5000
Initial sensor damage. Lens
melts at the 5000 mW
RPi-Cam Module
3
Stationary
5420
2500
Fast lens melting after initial
pixel damage
RPi-Cam Module
3
Raster
800
5420
Initial sensor damage. Lens
melts at 5420 mW
OKDO 5MP
Stationary
0
–
No observable effect
OKDO 5MP
Circle-in-Circle
2000
2500
Sensor detroyed at 2500 mW
AOP
OKDO 5MP
Raster
800
2400
Sensor fails above 1100 mW
OKDO 5MP
Circle – Harmonic
1400
2500
Sensor destroyed after 1900
mW
OKDO 5MP
Raster – Harmonic
700
1700
Sensor destroyed after 1000
mW
OKDO 5MP
Circle – Off-center
2000
2450
Sensor destroyed at 2450
mW
RPi-Cam Module
2
Stationary 1MHz
300
–
Camera was not tested to
failure
The table shows the camera, pattern, AOP of when the first effect was observed, AOP when the
sensor or camera lens failed, and the observed effects of the specific test.
The content of the table has also been converted into a diagram, which visually illustrates the results
of the VENUS laser tests, as shown in 5.37.
52
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
==PAGE:63==
Figure 5.37: Diagram showing the summary of camera damage thresholds.
The diagram shows the lowest AOP at which the first effect was observed, marked by a black dot.
The highest AOP before the observed effect changed is marked with a light blue triangle. The AOP
at which complete sensor failure or lens melting occurred is marked with a red cross. Each camera
is color-coded, and different hatching styles are used for the various exposure patterns. In cases
where no failure was observed, only the initial effect is marked and annotated as “No Failure.” The
RPi-Cam 2 was only tested within a small AOP range. Therefore, it can’t be concluded where the
threshold is. The RPi-Cam 2 test results can be found in Appendix A.4.
Test results of both the PL252 laser and the VENUS series pulsed laser will be examined and
compared further in the Discussion Chapter 6.
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
53
==PAGE:64==
54
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
==PAGE:65==
6
Discussion
This chapter discusses the main results of the tests, analyzing both the PL252 laser and the VENUS
pulsed laser exposures on the camera modules. The chapter examines the observed effects, com-
pares the results with simulations, and considers the implications for real-world anti-drone coun-
termeasures.
6.1
Key takeaways of Results
As detailed in Chapter 5, a range of effects were observed across the tests, from temporary daz-
zling or blinding and lens flares to permanent sensor damage and lens melting. The results are
summarized in Tables 5.1 and 5.2.
The most significant results are:
• PL252 Laser: The laser induced temporary dazzling or blinding in all tested cameras, seen
as pixel saturation and intense lens flare. The most significant effects occurred at incident
angles of 0∘−30∘, with a rapid decrease as the angle increased. The blinding effects disap-
peared between 60∘−90∘. The laser patterns produced periodic blinding, with higher scan
frequencies resulting in more even coverage but still requiring relatively low incident angles
for the full dazzling effect.
• VENUS Pulsed IR Laser: The IR laser did not cause visible blinding but caused permanent
sensor or lens damage above specific AOP thresholds. Damage included sensor failure, dead
pixels, or lens melting, with thresholds varying depending on the camera type and pattern.
Harmonic scan patterns induced damage at lower AOP due to repeated hits on the same spots,
though these spots are more complex to hit specifically.
These results will be examined in further detail in the following sections.
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
55
==PAGE:66==
6.2
Test Results Analysis
To gain a better understanding of the test results, further analysis has been conducted. This analysis
has been performed using as much data as possible, with some relevant examples presented in this
section.
PL252 Stationary 0∘OKDO 5MP:
To better understand the effects of the PL252 laser on the
OKDO 5MP camera, a simple image analysis was performed comparing the images before laser
exposure 5.1 to the stationary 0∘exposure Figure 5.2. The goal of these comparisons is to get both
a quantitative and qualitative analysis of how much of the image is blinded or changed due to the
laser exposure.
Figure 6.1 shows the pixel intensity histogram for both the reference and the exposed image. The
most frequent pixel value, marked as the ”dazzling threshold”, shows a clear change from the
reference image. It also shows a structural similarity index measure (SSIM), which is a difference
map that visually represents the differences between two images, calculated using the SSIM index.
[36].
Figure 6.1: Pixel intensity histogram and SSIM Difference Map, for the stationary 0∘PL252 test
on the OKDO 5MP. The “dazzling threshold” is marked by the dashed line.
To get a more concrete number for how much of the image is affected, the absolute difference
value between the two images was calculated pixel by pixel. Any pixel with a difference greater
than 10 intensity is considered “changed”. The value of 10 is selected because it’s high enough not
to be regarded as noise. Doing this, the results show that about 81.5% of all pixels in the image
are affected. This means that the camera is not just seeing a few saturated hot spots, but that the
majority of the image is fundamentally altered when the laser directly hits it. This means that the
camera is almost completely blinded, which was also apparent from the qualitative analysis. The
exact values from the analysis are:
• Most frequent intensity ”Dazzling/Blinding Threshold”: 76
• Pixel that changed > 10 intensity: 81.5%
Figure 6.2 shows a heatmap of the most blinded region, which is the parts of the image at or above
the ”dazzle threshold”. Visually, it’s clear that the whole central part is completely blinded, and
the effect spreads out through the sensor.
56
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
==PAGE:67==
Figure 6.2: Heatmap of the blinded region, stationary 0∘, OKDO 5MP. The color scale shows the
pixel intensity in the blinded region.
This histogram and SSIM difference analysis clearly indicate that a stationary 0∘exposure with the
PL252 laser can practically blind the camera, not just locally but across almost the entire image.
The same type of analysis was repeated for both pattern and angled exposure tests.
The code used for this analysis was generated using literature reference, AI, and Open-Source
Tools[36, 37, 38], and an example can be seen in Appendix A.7.
PL252 Stationary 0∘to 60∘PiNoIR:
For the different incident angle tests, the analysis shows
interesting results. The PiNoIR camera was chosen for the analysis because the tests produced
better images without laser exposure, which are used as the reference image.
Figures 6.3 show the results of the analysis.
(a) Heatmap of 0∘blinded region.
(b) Heatmap of 30∘blinded region.
(c) Heatmap of 60∘blinded region.
Figure 6.3: Heatmap of the dazzled or blinded region at different incident angles, stationary 0∘−60∘
on the PiNoIR.
The percentage of pixels with an intensity change of more than 10, for the different incident angles,
can be seen as:
• 0∘= 99.46%
• 30∘= 66.24%
• 60∘= 95.17%
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
57
==PAGE:68==
From the analysis results, it is observed that the 0∘test exhibits the highest change in pixels. This
is expected, just as the other stationary PL252 laser tests show more blinding at 0∘. However, the
interesting part of the analysis comes with the tests at 30∘and 60∘respectively. Whereas the test
with an incident angle of 60∘doesn’t have any major white hot-spots, the change of pixels is much
higher compared to the 30∘incident angle tests. The results of the SSIM analysis show that the
change of pixels is ≈95%, almost as much as the 0∘test.
A possible reason for this could be so-called veiling glare, which is the effect of stray light that
fogs images and reduces contrast in shadow areas. It is caused by reflections between surfaces of
lens components and the inside barrel of the lens [39, 40]
The results of the analysis indicate that these unseen effects occur at varying incident angles. Ini-
tially, it was thought that lower incident angles were necessary for better dazzling or saturation.
However, the analysis suggests that this may not be the case. Further study will be required to
determine whether this issue is specific to the PiNoIR camera or if the other camera models show
the same behavior. These additional analyses, however, have not been made in this thesis and are
part of future work.
PL252 1000 Hz Pattern PiNoIR:
Another SSIM analysis that was important to do was for the
1000 Hz patterns. This analysis uses the 1000 Hz pattern tests shown in Figures 5.14a and 5.13a.
(a) Heatmap: 1000 Hz Spiral Pattern
(b) Heatmap: 1000 Hz Raster Pattern
Figure 6.4: Heatmap of blinding effect: 1000 Hz spiral pattern and raster/zigzag pattern exposure
on the PiNoIR camera, at 0∘camera incident angle.
Figure 6.4 shows the pixel intensity heatmaps of both the 1000 Hz spiral pattern and raster/zigzag
pattern. The results of the analysis are that the pixel change of the 1000 Hz spiral pattern is ≈
71.5%, whereas the pixel change of the 1000 Hz raster/zigzag pattern is ≈77.5%. This means that
for dazzling or blinding effects, the patterns are almost equally good, with the raster/zigzag scan
performing slightly better than the spiral pattern.
These results match the initial qualitative analysis, as the background of the spiral pattern was less
saturated. However, further analysis is needed to determine whether the raster/zigzag pattern is
most effective for camera dazzling, and is not included in this thesis.
58
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
==PAGE:69==
6.2.1
VENUS Pulsed IR Laser
The VENUS pulsed laser results were physically observable. This means that comparison analysis,
such as SSIM, might not be applicable. However, a similar technique of comparing frames before
exposure to frames after exposure can be used to observe which effect occurred. This works by
highlighting the changes, just like the SSIM, but without indicating the percentage of change.
One example of such a comparison is from the 1000 mW AOP raster/zigzag pattern test on the
RPi-Cam 3, seen in Figure 5.27. This test revealed only a minor change to the camera sensor after
exposure, which easily could be missed.
Figure 6.5: Comparison of the first frame vs. the last frame of the 1000 mW raster/zigzag pattern
test on the Raspberry Pi Camera Module 3.
Figure 6.5 shows the results of the analysis. Compared to the actual captured image, the figure
shows the highlighted changes. It is apparent that not only is the white pixel damage visible in
the center, but also minor pixel saturation spots throughout the image. This could be noise or dust.
However, when compared to other test results, these highlighted spots are more pronounced.
Figure 6.6: Comparison of the first frame vs. the last frame of the 1100 mW raster/zigzag pattern
test on the Raspberry Pi Camera Module 3.
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
59
==PAGE:70==
In Figure 6.6, the highlighted damage becomes more apparent. The figure illustrates the extent of
damage that occurs with just a 100 mW increase in AOP. This analysis helps observe otherwise
unseen effects, especially in the darker regions of the image. The damage is clearly observable with
this comparison, and the pixel damage effect becomes more prominent throughout the analysis of
the tests.
Additional images of the further damage growth from the raster/zigzag test can be found in Ap-
pendix A.5.
An example of how the comparison improved the analysis and observed results was for the off-
center circle-in-circle pattern on the OKDO 5MP. Initially, the threshold for the first observed
effect was noticed at approximately 2000 mW AOP. However, the comparison analysis revealed
signs of pixel damage as early as 1500 mW AOP.
The results of the highlight comparison can be seen in Figure 6.7. The pixel damage is still minimal,
but it is visible, and without the analysis, it would not have been discovered.
Figure 6.7: Comparison of the first frame vs. the last frame of the 1500 mW off-center circle-in-
circle pattern on the OKDO 5MP camera
In conclusion, the analysis of both the PL252 and VENUS pulsed laser results improved the out-
come of the tests. However, further analysis will be required to determine whether these observed
effects are consistent throughout all tests.
Examples of the code used for the analysis can be found in Appendix A.7.
60
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
==PAGE:71==
6.3
Laser Pattern Analysis
An essential part of the thesis objectives is to determine the effectiveness of the different laser
scanning patterns. The simulations explained in Chapter 4, and the practical test results, can be
compared and analyzed to determine which patterns are most optimal for different scenarios.
6.3.1
Comparison of Simulation and Test Results
To improve the understanding of the test results, simulations of the laser patterns were made as
seen in Chapter 4. However, further simulations were needed to determine why the patterns affect
the cameras differently.
The new simulations consist of heatmaps, which show the number of pulses from the VENUS laser
that hit each spot with the different laser patterns. The simulation process involves calculating the
laser spot position over time. The number of pulses in each spot depends on the analog input
voltage, the distance from the galvo mirrors to the target camera, and the pattern frequencies. With
these parameters, the simulated heatmaps show the number of laser pulses at every single spot,
which can then be used to interpret why the different patterns showed dissimilar results.
Figures 6.8, 6.9, and 6.10 show the simulated pulse exposure heatmaps for the spiral, circle-
in-circle, and raster/zigzag scanning patterns. Each figure includes both the harmonic and non-
harmonic patterns. The simulations use a 3 MHz pulse repetition rate, which matches the VENUS
laser default setting used in the tests. The input voltage is set to 0.2 V. The distance from the galvo
mirrors to the target camera is approximately 50 cm, which is also used in the simulation. The
galvo frequencies of the different patterns are set to 𝑓𝑥= 800 Hz and 𝑓𝑦= 200 Hz for the har-
monic patterns and 𝑓𝑥= 800 Hz and 𝑓𝑦= 𝑓𝑥/
√
2 Hz for the non-harmonic patterns. This means
that all parameters in the simulations are based on the same values used in the conducted tests.
From all three patterns, it can be seen how the harmonic Patterns distribute the pulses over a re-
peatable trajectory. This increases the number of pulses in the limited and specific spots. Whereas
the non-harmonic pattern is more evenly distributed across all patterns, but with way fewer pulses
in each spot. This matches the simulations described in Section 4.2.
Figure 6.8 shows the harmonic and non-harmonic spiral pattern. It can be seen from both patterns
that they have a higher number of pulses in the center of the pattern. Harmonic has 7020 pulses
in the highest peak, which is in the center, and non-harmonic has 7650.0 pulses in the center. The
high concentration of pulses in the center indicates that both harmonic and non-harmonic patterns
are center-focused. This means that using a spiral pattern, the laser’s energy will be focused more
in a small, specific area, thus making it harder to blind or damage over a larger area, or hit a specific
spot of a moving target.
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
61
==PAGE:72==
Figure 6.8: Pulse exposure heatmap for the spiral pattern at 50 cm with 0.2 V input, showing
harmonic and non-harmonic scans.
Figure 6.9: Pulse exposure heatmap for the circle-in-circle pattern at 50 cm with 0.2 V input,
showing harmonic and non-harmonic scans.
The center-focused effect can also be seen in the circle-in-circle pattern in Figure 6.9. In this
simulation, the harmonic max pulses in one spot are 7560.0, and the non-harmonic max pulses in
one spot are 7650.0. This means that both the harmonic and non-harmonic have almost the same
number of pulses in the center of the pattern. It is also worth noting that the spiral and circle-in-
circle patterns exhibit very similar pulse distribution profiles. Therefore, these two patterns can be
expected to produce equivalent effects on a camera sensor. Both patterns are more center-focused
and therefore require a higher AOP to cause sensor damage, which was also observed on the OKDO
5MP camera tests. This also suggests that these patterns may be more effective at melting a camera
lens. However, due to the limited cameras, neither the circle-in-circle nor the spiral patterns were
tested on the PiNoIR or RPi-Cam 3, which were the camera modules where lens melting effects
were observed. Further testing will be needed with these camera modules to confirm whether this
hypothesis is correct.
62
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
==PAGE:73==
The raster/zigzag pattern shown in Figure 6.10 shows a different behaviour compared to the circle-
in-circle and spiral patterns. The raster/zigzag pattern shows a uniform distribution of pulses in
the harmonic pattern, with specific focus points in the edges. The maximum number of pulses in
one spot of the harmonic pattern is 5400.0, but where both the spiral and circle-in-circle patterns
had almost identical amounts of highest pulses, the non-harmonic raster/zigzag pattern has a much
lower maximum pulse count. The non-harmonic pattern has a maximum pulse count of 180.0
at a single spot. This means that the non-harmonic raster/zigzag pattern has a much more even
distribution of pulses, compared to the other patterns.
This pulse distribution comes with a tradeoff. The camera module will experience much more
even intensity across all of the sensor, but not high intensity in one specific spot. Therefore, the
raster/zigzag pattern is effective at damaging the camera sensor, as observed in the conducted tests,
but may not be as effective at melting a camera lens. Although the pattern proved capable of
melting a lens, a comparison of whether it is worse than the circle-in-circle or spiral pattern needs
to be examined further.
Another important takeaway is that the even distribution of pulses suggests that the pattern will be
good at hitting a specific spot at a potential moving target.
Figure 6.10: Pulse exposure heatmap for the raster pattern at 50 cm with 0.2 V input, showing
harmonic and non-harmonic scans.
For comparison, the simulation results can help explain why the raster/zigzag pattern required a
lower AOP to cause damage compared to the circle-in-circle pattern. Even though the raster/zigzag
pattern has fewer pulses in each spot, the evenly distributed pulses hit more areas of the camera.
The circle-in-circle and spiral are more center-focused. This means that, especially for cameras
like the OKDO 5MP, the camera will require a higher AOP when hitting the center, as no effect
was observed when only hitting the center of the camera.
To further examine the patterns, the simulations were also done with longer distances between the
galvo mirrors and the target camera. The simulations demonstrate how the maximum pulses in a
single spot decrease with distance, given a fixed input voltage of 0.2 V and no focus lens. These
simulations can be used for future analysis and are presented in the Appendix A.5.
The Python code used to generate the simulations is generated using AI and Open-Source and can
be found in Appendix A.7.
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
63
==PAGE:74==
6.3.2
Harmonic vs. Non-Harmonic Patterns
With both the simulation and physical test results, the comparison of harmonic and non-harmonic
patterns can be examined.
The harmonic patterns all showed excellent results in the physical tests, requiring low AOP before
effects were observed. An explanation for this could be that the patterns are slightly less centered
and pulses are more evenly distributed compared to the non-harmonic patterns. When the harmonic
laser pattern hits the outer regions of the lens, the beam becomes more focused, resulting in higher
energy per unit area.
However, harmonic patterns might not be ideal in real-life anti-drone scenarios. Even though the
patterns have a higher local fluence, it would be difficult to hit a moving target exactly at a specific
spot. Therefore, the harmonic patterns would require extreme precision to hit the target camera on
a moving drone.
The non-harmonic laser patterns also showed excellent results in the physical tests. The required
AOP is higher compared to the harmonic patterns. However, it is still low enough to be completely
viable for causing blinding or damage. The non-harmonic circle-in-circle pattern is more center-
focused, whereas the raster/zigzag pattern is more distributed. Both patterns demonstrated the
ability to cause effects on both the camera lens and sensor.
In real-life scenarios, non-harmonic lasers may be a better alternative due to their constant, non-
repetitive motion of the pattern. It will require a higher AOP, but since the pattern is non-repetitive,
a target camera on a moving drone would require less precision to hit.
In conclusion, both patterns would be viable for dazzling or temporary blinding and causing dam-
age. However, the non-harmonic patterns might be more feasible in a real-life scenario.
64
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
==PAGE:75==
6.3.3
Implications for Pattern Selection
Each pattern has pros and cons, and is viable in various real-life scenarios, whether it’s for dazzling
or blinding a stationary target, or damaging the camera of a moving drone. The patterns’ use cases,
pros, and cons are summarized in Table 6.1 below.
Table 6.1: Summary of Laser Scan Patterns: Pros, Cons, and Best Uses
Pattern
Pros
Cons
Best Use
Spiral or Circle-
in-Circle
Allows
higher
galvo
frequencies due to its
smooth,
continuous
motion. Might be good
for lens melting.
Requires higher AOP for
permanent sensor dam-
age. Pulses are concen-
trated in the center.
Dazzling,
blinding,
or
lens-melting
slow-
moving targets.
Raster/Zigzag
Evenly distributes laser
pulses across the sensor
area. Effective at a lower
AOP for causing perma-
nent pixel or sensor dam-
age.
Galvo
mirrors
experi-
ence more mechanical
wear due to rapid direc-
tion changes.
Lower
number of pulse peak
intensity.
Efficient
and
uniform
sensor
blinding
or
damage of fast-moving
targets.
Circle-in-Circle
(Harmonic)
Smooth, continuous mo-
tion with high local inten-
sity. Require low AOP.
Pulse
distribution
is
center-focused.
Repet-
itive
patterns
require
precise
aiming
to
hit
moving
targets
effec-
tively.
Temporary blinding or
damage of stationary tar-
gets, where precision is
possible.
Raster/Zigzag
(Harmonic)
More distributed pulse
pattern
than
circle-
in-circle
harmonic.
Requires relatively low
AOP for sensor damage.
Increased
mechanical
wear with rapid direction
change.
Repetitive
patterns require precise
aiming to hit moving
targets effectively.
Temporary blinding or
damage of stationary tar-
gets, where precision is
possible.
6.4
Relevance of Results to Objectives, Real-Life Scenarios and
Literature
The focus of this thesis was to develop and test a laser-based countermeasure system for anti-
drone protection. The objectives were divided into three main sections: Instrument comparison,
Threshold determination, and Optimal Galvo Scanning Patterns and Speed.
The test results of the PL252 showed that the laser can produce temporary blinding under controlled
conditions, particularly at lower incident angles. Furthermore, the VENUS pulsed IR laser shows
significant potential for permanent damage to both the sensor and the lens of the camera. With
the tests and simulations, the threshold for both stationary beams and laser scanning patterns has
been determined and is well characterized. The test results align with the instrument comparison
and threshold objectives, providing a good understanding of the effect on the cameras at different
exposure levels.
The optimal galvo speed for the individual laser patterns depends on several factors. The minimum
usable speed is determined by not being too slow to hit multiple spots of a possible moving target. If
the patterns are moving too slowly, the accumulated pulses in a few places will have great intensity.
However, it will be harder to hit a specific spot of a moving target. In contrast, the maximum
pattern frequencies are determined by the limitations of the galvo system. The faster the galvo
mirrors move, the more evenly distributed the pulses will be. At a 3 MHz pulse repetition rate, a
matter of 500 Hz to 1000 Hz does not make a significant difference in damaging a camera sensor.
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
65
==PAGE:76==
For dazzling or blinding effects, the faster the galvo mirrors move, the more evenly distributed the
effects appear. The blinding is lower, but less periodic and more consistent.
The findings, based on test results, simulations, and analysis, suggest that both temporary blinding
and permanent damage capabilities could form an effective countermeasure for anti-drone protec-
tion. However, there are still challenges and uncertainties regarding real-life scenarios, environ-
mental parameters, and further analysis of the results to gain a better understanding of the effects.
Furthermore, analyzing and examining the differences between the various camera modules is also
necessary. The cameras all yield relatively similar results regarding the blinding effects. However,
the differences in filters, materials, lenses, focal lengths, and field of view have not been thoroughly
examined. Examples of how the laser beam passes through the lens and causes the observed sensor
damage must be reviewed before real-life deployment can be done.
In a real-world scenario, parameters such as drone movement and atmospheric conditions will
affect the system and potentially alter the outcome. The quick blinding or damage observed in
the tests suggests that a laser countermeasure could be a viable solution for anti-drone protection.
However, targeting the camera sensor on a moving drone and focusing the laser pattern is crucial.
Further analysis and tests with tracking systems and environmental parameters will be required
before real-life deployment can be done.
There are some similarities when comparing the results of this thesis to previous literature studies.
Earlier studies, such as Visible and near-infrared laser dazzling of CCD and CMOS cameras, have
demonstrated that the optimal combination of laser wavelength, optical power, or focal length on
the camera can achieve efficient laser dazzling [8]. This matches the results in this thesis, where
the visible 639 nm wavelength from the PL252 effectively dazzled the cameras. The effect of
optical power also corresponds to the thesis findings, particularly in the VENUS laser tests on the
OKDO 5MP. The OKDO 5MP has a wider FOV than the other tested camera models and exhibits
some characteristics of a fish-eye lens. The observations from the VENUS laser tests showed that
the camera focused the laser energy more strongly on the outer edges of the lens. Therefore, no
significant damage occurred in the center, whereas substantial damage was observed when focused
on the edges. This also implies that incident angles can influence the damage to a camera. However,
various incident angles were not tested with the VENUS laser.
Other studies, such as Assessing Laser Dazzling Effects on UAV Cameras and Collision Avoidance
in Laboratory and Field Settings, found that through a combination of laboratory and field tests,
laser dazzling can effectively disrupt both the observation and navigation of a UAV. The study also
found that a few watts were sufficient for dazzling, but higher power would be required in real-life
scenarios [6]. In this thesis, it was found that only a few mW were enough to dazzle the camera
at close range, whereas higher AOP, such as 3W, was enough not just to damage the sensor, but to
melt the camera lens, such as with the PiNoIR and RPi-Cam 3, which have lenses made of plastic.
Both studies explored the dazzling effect, and their results align with the findings of this thesis.
However, the impact of permanent damage, without any collateral damage, and the use of laser
scanning patterns still need to be examined further in the literature before comparison of results
can be done.
In general, the results of this thesis demonstrate significant relevance for the further development
of a deployable countermeasure for anti-drone protection.
66
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
==PAGE:77==
7
Conclusion
This thesis has explored the use of laser-based countermeasures for anti-drone protection by tar-
geting the optical systems of drones, specifically their camera sensors. A system was designed
using galvanometer mirrors to steer dynamic laser scanning patterns of two distinct laser sources:
The PL252 continuous-wave diode laser and the VENUS Series pulsed infrared fiber laser. These
were tested on various low-cost Raspberry Pi camera modules, and the laser-induced effects were
observed and analysed.
The test results showed that the PL252 laser effectively induces temporary dazzling and blinding ef-
fects across all tested cameras, particularly at low incident angles. These effects rapidly decreased
as the angle increased, nearly disappearing at 90°. However, implications of blinding at higher
incidence angles have also been shown. Dynamic laser scanning patterns were able to blind the
camera sensor periodically and showed promising results at higher frequencies.
In contrast, the VENUS pulsed infrared laser showed the capability to cause permanent damage
to both camera sensors and lenses. The damage thresholds varied with the laser scanning pat-
tern and camera model, with harmonic scan patterns generally inducing damage at lower average
output powers compared to non-harmonic patterns. However, harmonic patterns require precise
targeting, which limits their effectiveness when dealing with moving targets in real-life scenarios.
Non-harmonic patterns, although requiring higher AOP, offer more uniform coverage and could
provide a better effect for moving targets.
Despite these promising results, the controlled laboratory environment has had limitations. The
static camera setup and the absence of environmental factors, such as atmospheric parameters and
actual drone movement, show that further research is necessary. Future work should include inte-
gration with real-time drone tracking systems, studies on laser propagation in varying atmospheric
conditions, and further testing and analysis of results, to give a better understanding of the laser-
camera interaction.
In conclusion, countermeasures using galvanometer-steered laser patterns show great potential,
and the objectives of this thesis have been thoroughly examined and met. The results demon-
strate promising capabilities for both dazzling and damaging drone camera sensors. It proves that,
through continued development, testing, and further analysis, laser countermeasures can become
a highly effective tool for anti-drone protection in real-world scenarios.
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
67
==PAGE:78==
68
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
==PAGE:79==
List of References
[1]
Muhammad Yeasir Arafat, Muhammad Morshed Alam, and Sangman Moh. “Vision-Based
Navigation Techniques for Unmanned Aerial Vehicles: Review and Challenges”. In: Drones
7.2 (2023), p. 89. DOI: 10.3390/drones7020089.
[2]
Asif Ali Laghari et al. “Unmanned aerial vehicles: A review”. In: Cognitive Robotics 3
(2023), pp. 8–22. DOI: 10.1016/j.cogr.2022.12.004.
[3]
Shin Ichiro Higashino Agus Budiyono. A Review of The Latest Innovations in UAV Technol-
ogy. 2023. URL: https://ojs.unsysdigital.com/index.php/jias/article/view/1059/pdf_
39.
[4]
P.S. Ahmed F. Mohanta. JC. Keshari A. Yadav. Recent Advances in Unmanned Aerial Vehi-
cles: A Review. 2022. DOI: 10.1007/s13369-022-06738-0. URL: https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.
nih.gov/articles/PMC9035982/.
[5]
ASIS Online. The Rise of Drones and Counter-Drone: A Double-Edged Sword. 2024. URL:
https://www.asisonline.org/security-management-magazine/monthly-issues/security-
technology/archive/2024/August/The-Rise-of-Drones-and-Counter-Drone/.
[6]
Jaan Goyvaerts et al. “Assessing Laser Dazzling Effects on UAV Cameras and Collision
Avoidance in Laboratory and Field Settings”. In: High-Power Lasers and Technologies for
Optical Countermeasures II. 2024. DOI: 10.1117/12.3031630. URL: https://doi.org/10.
1117/12.3031630.
[7]
Longwen Liao, Xiaoliang Huang, and Fengyu Xie. “Development Status and Operation
Analysis of Laser Weapon in Anti-Drone Warfare”. In: 2023 IEEE International Conference
on Unmanned Systems (ICUS). IEEE, 2023, pp. 305–310. DOI: 10.1109/ICUS58632.2023.
10318249.
[8]
Cristiane N. Santos et al. “Visible and near-infrared laser dazzling of CCD and CMOS cam-
eras”. In: 10797 (2018), pp. 179–187. DOI: 10.1117/12.2325631.
[9]
Nationalt Forsvarsteknologisk Center. Nationalt Forsvarsteknologisk Center (NFC). 2024.
URL: https://www.nfc.dk/.
[10]
Lieber Institute / West Point. The Drone Threat, the Laser Response, and the Law – Part II.
2025. URL: https://lieber.westpoint.edu/drone-threat-laser-response-law-part-ii/.
[11]
Anvil Labs. Kinetic vs. NonKinetic Drone Mitigation: Key Differences. 2025. URL: https:
//anvil.so/post/kinetic-vs-non-kinetic-drone-mitigation-key-differences.
[12]
UNVIOT. Overview of Drone Defense and Countermeasure Applications. 2024. URL: https:
//www.unviot.com/news/overview-of-drone-defense-and-countermeasure-applications/.
[13]
DFend Solutions. Which Anti Drone Tech Can Minimize Collateral Damage? 2024. URL:
https://d-fendsolutions.com/blog/which-anti-drone-tech-can-minimize-collateral-
damage/.
[14]
Army Technology. US Army tests ATHENA laser weapon system for protection from air-
borne targets. 2017. URL: https://www.army- technology.com/news/newsus- army-
tests-athena-laser-weapon-system-for-protection-from-airborne-targets-5931251/.
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
69
==PAGE:80==
[15]
Endrowednes Kuantama et al. “Laser-based drone vision disruption with a real-time track-
ing system for privacy preservation”. In: Expert Systems With Applications 255 (2024),
p. 124626. DOI: 10.1016/j.eswa.2024.124626. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0957417424014933.
[16]
Sergejs Kodors and Ilmars Kangro. “Simple Method of Lidar Point Density Definition for
Automatic Building Recognition”. In: Proceedings of the Engineering for Rural Develop-
ment Conference. Jelgava, Latvia, May 2016, pp. 415–424. URL: https://www.iitf.lbtu.
lv/conference/proceedings2016/Papers/N074.pdf.
[17]
Zahir Ahmed Ansari et al. “Spiral Scan Pattern Generation for Laser Spot Tracker”. In:
4th International Conference on Advances in Control and Optimization of Dynamical Sys-
tems. 2016, pp. 112–117. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S2405896316300386.
[18]
Thorlabs Inc. GVS011 and GVS012, GVS111 and GVS112 Large Beam Diameter Scanning
Galvo Systems User Guide. 2024. URL: https://www.thorlabs.com/.
[19]
Thorlabs Inc. GPS011 Galvo Scanner System Linear Power Supply Manual. 2013. URL:
https://www.thorlabs.com/.
[20]
Thorlabs Inc. PL252 Compact Laser Module, USB-powered, 639 nm, 4.5 mW. MTN032138-
S01, Rev C. Jan. 2024. URL: https://www.thorlabs.com/contact.
[21]
Ltd. Connet Laser Technology Co. VENUS Series 1560 nm Single-Mode Pulsed Laser Source.
P/N: VFLS-1560-M-0.5-3000-3.5:SM, S/N: 202405140; Test Report Dated 2024-06-17. June
2024.
[22]
National Instruments. National Instruments USB-6341 Series Manual. 2019. URL: https:
//www.ni.com/pdf/manuals/370784K-01.pdf.
[23]
National Instruments. NI-DAQmx Driver Download. 2025. URL: https://www.ni.com/
en/support/downloads/drivers/download.ni-daq-mx.html.
[24]
National Instruments. Using NI-DAQmx in Text-Based Programming Environments. 2025.
URL: https://www.ni.com/en/support/documentation/supplemental/21/using-ni-
daqmx-in-text-based-programming-environments.html.
[25]
National Instruments. NI-DAQmx User Manual. 2025. URL: https://www.ni.com/docs/
en-US/bundle/ni-daqmx/page/user-manual-welcome.html.
[26]
OKDO Electronics. OKDO 5MP Camera Module User Manual. 2024.
[27]
Raspberry Pi Ltd. Raspberry Pi Camera Module 3 Product Brief. 2024. URL: https://www.
raspberrypi.com/documentation/accessories/camera.html.
[28]
Raspberry Pi Ltd. Pi NoIR Camera Module Product Brief. 2024. URL: https : / / www .
raspberrypi.com/documentation/accessories/camera.html.
[29]
Raspberry Pi Foundation. Raspberry Pi 4 Model B Datasheet. 2023. URL: https://datasheets.
raspberrypi.com/rpi4/raspberry-pi-4-datasheet.pdf.
[30]
Thorlabs Inc. GCM012 Galvo System Cage Adapter Manual. 2012. URL: https://www.
thorlabs.com/.
[31]
Thorlabs Inc. Solid Aluminum Optical Breadboards. 2025. URL: https://www.thorlabs.
com/newgrouppage9.cfm?objectgroup_id=159.
[32]
National Instruments. National Instruments Multifunction I/O Product Flyer. 2024.
[33]
National Instruments. nidaqmx-python GitHub Repository. 2025. URL: https://github.
com/ni/nidaqmx-python.
[34]
Koshurai. Understanding Linear Interpolation: A Simple Guide. 2024. URL: https : / /
koshurai.medium.com/understanding-linear-interpolation-a-simple-guide-fe817d89cbc7.
[35]
Austin Henderson Patrick J. Kiger. Differences Between Rational and Irrational Numbers.
2023. URL: https://science.howstuffworks.com/math-concepts/rational-vs-irrational-
numbers.htm.
70
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
==PAGE:81==
[36]
Francesco Marchetti. “Convergence rate in terms of the continuous SSIM (cSSIM) index in
RBF interpolation”. In: Dolomites Research Notes on Approximation 14 (2021), pp. 27–32.
URL: https://drna.padovauniversitypress.it/system/files/papers/Marchetti_2021_
CRT.pdf.
[37]
Biswarup Debnath. SSIM Map Calculation of an Image in Python. 2023. URL: https://
github.com/BiswarupDebnath/SSIM-Map-calculation-of-an-image-in-Python.
[38]
mubeta06. Python Implementation of SSIM (Signal Processing). 2023. URL: https://github.
com/mubeta06/python/blob/master/signal_processing/sp/ssim.py.
[39]
Bruce S. Maccabee and Charles G. Grover. “Veiling Glare in Camera Lens Systems”. In:
Stray Light Problems in Optical Systems (SPIE Vol. 107). International Society for Op-
tics and Photonics. 1977, pp. 158–164. DOI: 10.1117/12.964610. URL: https://www.
spiedigitallibrary.org/conference-proceedings-of-spie/0107/1/Veiling-Glare-In-Camera-
Lens-Systems/10.1117/12.964610.full.
[40]
Imatest LLC. Veiling Glare (Lens Flare). 2024. URL: https://www.imatest.com/docs/
veilingglare/.
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
71
==PAGE:82==
72
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
==PAGE:83==
A
Appendices
A.1
Test Setup
Figure A.1: Galvo System.
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
73
==PAGE:84==
(a)
(b)
Figure A.2: Galvo drivers.
Figure A.3: DAQ + Galvo
74
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
==PAGE:85==
Figure A.4: DAQ wire connections.
Figure A.5: Galvo Mirror + Casing
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
75
==PAGE:86==
Figure A.6: Galvo mirror view
Figure A.7: Tripod setup used for angled camera exposure tests.
76
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
==PAGE:87==
A.2
Software setup
Figure A.8: NI MAX GUI front page.
Figure A.9: NI MAX analogue output example at 0V on A0 (X-axis).
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
77
==PAGE:88==
Figure A.10: NI MAX analogue output example at 2V on A0 (X-axis).
Figure A.11: NI MAX analogue output example at -2V on A0 (X-axis).
78
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
==PAGE:89==
Figure A.12: ConLAS GUI laser OFF.
Figure A.13: ConLAS GUI, showing pump power 2000mW equal 500mW AOP.
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
79
==PAGE:90==
Figure A.14: ConLAS GUI, showing pump power 10038mW equal 2W AOP.
Figure A.15: ConLAS GUI, showing pump power 13868mW equal 4W AOP.
80
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
==PAGE:91==
Figure A.16: ConLAS GUI, showing pump power 17526mW equal 5W AOP.
Figure A.17: ConLAS GUI, showing pump power 19000mW equal 5.4W AOP (MAX AOP).
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
81
==PAGE:92==
A.3
Datasheet Specifications
(a)
(b) .
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure A.18: VENUS series pulsed laser datasheet and specifications. Showing the optical spec-
trum, broadening spectrum and general specifications.
A.4
Test Results
A.4.1
PL252
Spiral laser pattern on PiNoIR with 0∘-90∘incident angle, at 1m distance:
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure A.19: Frame-by-frame: Spiral laser pattern exposure of the PL252 laser on the PiNoIR
camera at 10∘incident angle.
82
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
==PAGE:93==
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure A.20: Frame-by-frame: Spiral laser pattern exposure of the PL252 laser on the PiNoIR
camera at 20∘incident angle.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure A.21: Frame-by-frame: Spiral laser pattern exposure of the PL252 laser on the PiNoIR
camera, with 40∘incident angle
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure A.22: Frame-by-frame: Spiral laser pattern exposure of the PL252 laser on the PiNoIR
camera, with 50∘incident angle
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
83
==PAGE:94==
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure A.23: Frame-by-frame: Spiral laser pattern exposure of the PL252 laser on the PiNoIR
camera, with 70∘incident angle.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure A.24: Frame-by-frame: Spiral laser pattern exposure of the PL252 laser on the PiNoIR
camera, with 80∘incident angle.
84
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
==PAGE:95==
Off-center spiral laser pattern on PiNoIR with 0∘incident angle:
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure A.25: Frame-by-frame: Off-center Spiral laser pattern exposure of the PL252 laser on the
PiNoIR camera, at 0∘incident angle and 1m distance.
A.4.2
VENUS Series Pulsed Laser
Damaged PiNoIR camera lens after 3000 mW exposure:
(a) PiNoIR module after exposure.
(b) No observable sensor damage.
(c) Melted camera lens.
Figure A.26: Various images of the PiNoIR camera module and melted camera lens.
Stationary 1 MHz pulse repetition frequency test on the RPi-Cam 2:
(a) Frame image of 300 mW AOP
laser exposure.
(b) Frame image of 300 mW AOP
laser exposure.
(c) Frame image of 300 mW AOP
laser exposure.
Figure A.27: Before, during, and after frame images of the 300 mW AOP stationary laser exposure
with 1000 MHZ pulse repetition frequency, on the Raspberry Pi module 2.
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
85
==PAGE:96==
(a) Frame image of 600 mW AOP
laser exposure.
(b) Frame image of 600 mW AOP
laser exposure.
(c) Frame image of 600 mW AOP
laser exposure.
Figure A.28: Before, during, and after frame images of the 600 mW AOP stationary laser exposure
with 1000 MHZ pulse repetition frequency, on the Raspberry Pi module 2.
A.5
Test Result Analysis
(a) Highlighted 1500 mW.
(b) Highlighted 2000 mW.
Figure A.29: Comparison of the first frame vs the last frame of the 1500 mW - 2000 mW
raster/zigzag pattern test on the Raspberry Pi Camera Module 3.
86
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
==PAGE:97==
Figure A.30: Pulse exposure heatmap for the spiral pattern at 100 cm with 0.2 V input, showing
harmonic and non-harmonic scans.
Figure A.31: Pulse exposure heatmap for the circle-in-circle pattern at 100 cm with 0.2 V input,
showing harmonic and non-harmonic scans.
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
87
==PAGE:98==
Figure A.32: Pulse exposure heatmap for the raster pattern at 100 cm with 0.2 V input, showing
harmonic and non-harmonic scans.
88
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
==PAGE:99==
A.6
Method and Modeling: Tables and Simulations
Table A.1: Interpolated pump power required for each AOP level (100 mW steps) used in the tests.
AOP
Pump
AOP
Pump
AOP
Pump
(mW)
(mW)
(mW)
(mW)
(mW)
(mW)
200
1500.0
2100
6938.5
4000
13867.9
300
1666.7
2200
7262.3
4100
14245.3
400
1833.3
2300
7590.2
4200
14622.6
500
2000.0
2400
7918.0
4300
15000.0
600
2294.1
2500
8245.9
4400
15363.6
700
2588.2
2600
8573.8
4500
15727.3
800
2882.4
2700
8901.6
4600
16090.9
900
3190.5
2800
9269.2
4700
16454.5
1000
3507.9
2900
9653.8
4900
17175.4
1100
3825.4
3000
10038.5
5000
17526.3
1200
4142.9
3100
10423.1
5100
17877.2
1300
4460.3
3200
10807.7
5200
18228.1
1400
4777.8
3300
11192.3
5300
18578.9
1500
5092.3
3400
11576.9
5400
18929.8
1600
5400.0
3500
11961.5
5420
19000.0
1700
5707.7
3600
12346.2
1800
6015.4
3700
12730.8
1900
6323.1
3800
13113.2
2000
6630.8
3900
13490.6
Figure A.33: Time evolution of the spiral pattern with harmonic frequencies, plotted in 3D (X, Y,
and time).
Figure A.34: Time evolution of the circle-in-circle pattern with harmonic frequencies, plotted in
3D (X, Y, and time).
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
89
==PAGE:100==
Figure A.35: Time evolution of the raster (zigzag) pattern with harmonic frequencies, plotted in
3D (X, Y, and time).
Figure A.36: Time evolution of the spiral pattern with non-harmonic frequencies, plotted in 3D
(X, Y, and time).
Figure A.37: Time evolution of the circle-in-circle pattern with non-harmonic frequencies, plotted
in 3D (X, Y, and time).
Figure A.38: Time evolution of the raster (zigzag) pattern with non-harmonic frequencies, plotted
in 3D (X, Y, and time).
90
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
==PAGE:101==
A.7
Python Code for Image Analysis
SSIM and Heatmap for PL252:
1 #%% SSIM and Heatmap for data analysis of PL252
2
3 import cv2
4 import numpy as np
5 import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
6 from skimage.metrics import structural_similarity as ssim
7
8 # File paths
9 img_ref = r'E:\School\Skole\Master\Master Thesis\Test and
results\Master Thesis\Laser Counter -Measures Test\Frames - Laser
Counter -Measures Test\Tests\OKDO 5MP\No
Laser\C3_0deg_stationary_nolaser\frame_00000_000.00s.png'
10 img_laser = r'E:\School\Skole\Master\Master Thesis\Test and
results\Master Thesis\Laser Counter -Measures Test\Tests\OKDO
5MP\PL252\Stationary\C3_0deg_stationary_01.jpg'
11
12 # --- Load and preprocess images ---
13 image = cv2.imread(img_laser)
14 reference = cv2.imread(img_ref)
15 gray = cv2.cvtColor(image, cv2.COLOR_BGR2GRAY)
16 ref_gray = cv2.cvtColor(reference , cv2.COLOR_BGR2GRAY)
17
18 if ref_gray.shape != gray.shape:
19
ref_gray = cv2.resize(ref_gray , (gray.shape[1], gray.shape[0]))
20
21 # --- 1. HISTOGRAM & DAZZLE THRESHOLD
---
22 hist, bins = np.histogram(gray.ravel(), bins=256, range=[0,256])
23 peak_value = np.argmax(hist)
24 dazzled = (gray >= peak_value).sum()
25 percent_dazzled = dazzled / gray.size * 100
26
27 # --- 2. CHANGED AREA ---
28 diff = cv2.absdiff(gray, ref_gray)
29 change_thresh = 10
30 changed = (diff > change_thresh).sum()
31 percent_changed = changed / diff.size * 100
32
33 # --- SSIM DIFFERENCE MAP ---
34 ssim_value , ssim_diff = ssim(ref_gray , gray, full=True)
35
36 # --- PRINT ALL METRICS ---
37 print(f"Most frequent intensity (dazzle threshold): {peak_value}")
38 print(f"Pixels changed more than {change_thresh} intensity:
{percent_changed:.2f}%")
39
40 # --- PLOT HISTOGRAM WITH DAZZLE THRESHOLD ---
41 plt.figure(figsize=(12,5))
42 plt.subplot(1,2,1)
43 plt.hist(gray.ravel(), bins=256, range=[0,256], color='red',
alpha=0.7, label='Laser')
44 plt.hist(ref_gray.ravel(), bins=256, range=[0,256], color='blue',
alpha=0.5, label='Reference')
45 plt.axvline(peak_value , color='black', linestyle='--', label=f'Dazzle
threshold: {peak_value}')
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
91
==PAGE:102==
46 plt.xlabel("Pixel Value")
47 plt.ylabel("Frequency")
48 plt.legend()
49 plt.title("Pixel Intensity Histogram")
50
51 plt.subplot(1,2,2)
52 im = plt.imshow(ssim_diff , cmap='plasma', vmin=0, vmax=1)
53 plt.title("SSIM Difference Map")
54 plt.axis('off')
55 plt.colorbar(im, fraction=0.046, pad=0.04, label='SSIM Index')
56 plt.tight_layout()
57 plt.show()
58
59 # Visualize only the dazzled region
60 dazzled_img = np.zeros_like(gray)
61 dazzled_img[gray >= peak_value] = gray[gray >= peak_value]
62
63 plt.figure()
64 im = plt.imshow(dazzled_img , cmap='hot')
65 plt.title("Blinded Region")
66 plt.axis('off')
67 plt.colorbar(im, fraction=0.046, pad=0.04, label='Pixel Intensity')
68 plt.show()
Listing A.1: SSIM and Heatmap
Pattern Pulse Density Simulation:
1 #%% Galvo Pattern Pulse Density Simulation
2 import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
3 from mpl_toolkits.mplot3d import Axes3D
4 import matplotlib.colors as mcolors
5 import matplotlib.cm as cm
6 import math
7 import numpy as np
8
9 # ---------- Global Settings ----------
10 plt.rcParams.update({
11
"axes.titlesize": 16,
12
"axes.labelsize": 14,
13
"xtick.labelsize": 12,
14
"ytick.labelsize": 12,
15
"figure.titlesize": 18,
16
"figure.dpi": 300,
17
"axes.facecolor": "white",
18
"savefig.facecolor": "white"
19 })
20
21 # ---------- Custom Colormap
----------
22 base_cmap = plt.colormaps['plasma']
23 colors = base_cmap(np.linspace(0, 1, 256))
24 colors[0] = [1, 1, 1, 1]
25 white_inferno = mcolors.ListedColormap(colors)
26
27 # ---------- Inputs ----------
28 distance_m =
0.5
# Distance between galvo and sensor [m]
29 input_voltage = 0.2
# Input amplitude [V] (max ±10 V)
30 pulse_rate = 3000000
# Laser repetition rate [Hz]
92
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
==PAGE:103==
31 sample_rate = 100000
# Simulation sample rate [Hz]
32 durations = [0.5]
# Duration per simulation [s]
33 resolution_mm = 0.05
# Heatmap resolution [mm]
34 scaling_v_per_deg = 0.5
# Galvo scaling [V/deg]
35
36 # Pattern frequencies (harmonic baseline)
37 x_freq = 800
38 y_freq = 200
39 angular_freq = 800
40 modulation_freq = 200
41 outer_rotation_freq = 800
42 inner_rotation_freq = 200
43
44 # Non-harmonic (irrational ratio)
45 x_freq_irr = x_freq
46 y_freq_irr = x_freq / math.sqrt(2)
47 modulation_freq_irr = angular_freq / math.sqrt(2)
48 inner_rotation_freq_irr = outer_rotation_freq / math.sqrt(2)
49
50 # Pattern amplitude
51 x_amplitude = y_amplitude = input_voltage
52 modulation_amplitude = input_voltage
53 outer_radius = input_voltage / 2
54 inner_radius = input_voltage / 2
55
56 # ---------- Functions ----------
57 def triangle_wave(phase):
58
return 2.0 * np.abs(2.0 * (phase - np.floor(phase + 0.5))) - 1.0
59
60 def volts_to_mm(volts):
61
deg = volts / scaling_v_per_deg
62
rad = np.deg2rad(deg)
63
return np.tan(rad) * distance_m * 1000
# mm
64
65 def pulses_per_step():
66
return pulse_rate / sample_rate
67
68 def accumulate_heatmap(x_mm, y_mm):
69
max_range = np.max([np.abs(x_mm).max(), np.abs(y_mm).max()]) + 1
70
bins = int((max_range * 2) / resolution_mm)
71
heatmap = np.zeros((bins, bins))
72
73
x_bins = ((x_mm + max_range) / (2 * max_range) * bins).astype(int)
74
y_bins = ((y_mm + max_range) / (2 * max_range) * bins).astype(int)
75
76
# Remove out-of-range indices
77
valid_mask = (x_bins >= 0) & (x_bins < bins) & (y_bins >= 0) &
(y_bins < bins)
78
x_bins = x_bins[valid_mask]
79
y_bins = y_bins[valid_mask]
80
81
# Accumulate pulses
82
np.add.at(heatmap , (y_bins, x_bins), pulses_per_step())
83
84
return heatmap , max_range
85
86
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
93
==PAGE:104==
87 def plot_combined_heatmaps(heatmap_h , heatmap_nh , max_range_h ,
max_range_nh , title, save_name):
88
fig = plt.figure(figsize=(14, 12), facecolor="white")
89
90
# -------- Harmonic 2D --------
91
ax1 = fig.add_subplot(2, 2, 1)
92
ax1.set_facecolor("white")
93
extent_h = [-max_range_h , max_range_h , -max_range_h , max_range_h]
94
im1 = ax1.imshow(heatmap_h , extent=extent_h , origin='lower',
cmap=white_inferno , vmin=0, vmax=heatmap_h.max())
95
fig.colorbar(im1, ax=ax1, fraction=0.046, pad=0.04)
96
ax1.set_title("Harmonic 2D")
97
ax1.set_xlabel("X [mm]")
98
ax1.set_ylabel("Y [mm]")
99
100
# -------- Non-Harmonic 2D --------
101
ax2 = fig.add_subplot(2, 2, 2)
102
ax2.set_facecolor("white")
103
extent_nh = [-max_range_nh , max_range_nh , -max_range_nh ,
max_range_nh]
104
im2 = ax2.imshow(heatmap_nh , extent=extent_nh , origin='lower',
cmap=white_inferno , vmin=0, vmax=heatmap_nh.max())
105
fig.colorbar(im2, ax=ax2, fraction=0.046, pad=0.04)
106
ax2.set_title("Non-Harmonic 2D")
107
ax2.set_xlabel("X [mm]")
108
ax2.set_ylabel("Y [mm]")
109
110
# -------- Harmonic 3D --------
111
Xh = np.linspace(-max_range_h , max_range_h , heatmap_h.shape[1])
112
Yh = np.linspace(-max_range_h , max_range_h , heatmap_h.shape[0])
113
Xh, Yh = np.meshgrid(Xh, Yh)
114
ax3 = fig.add_subplot(2, 2, 3, projection='3d', facecolor="white")
115
ax3.plot_trisurf(Xh.flatten(), Yh.flatten(), heatmap_h.flatten(),
116
cmap=white_inferno , linewidth=0,
antialiased=False, shade=False)
117
ax3.set_title("Harmonic 3D")
118
ax3.set_xlabel("X [mm]")
119
ax3.set_ylabel("Y [mm]")
120
ax3.set_zlabel("Pulses")
121
ax3.set_zlim(0, heatmap_h.max())
122
ax3.view_init(elev=35, azim=35)
123
124
# -------- Non-Harmonic 3D --------
125
Xn = np.linspace(-max_range_nh , max_range_nh , heatmap_nh.shape[1])
126
Yn = np.linspace(-max_range_nh , max_range_nh , heatmap_nh.shape[0])
127
Xn, Yn = np.meshgrid(Xn, Yn)
128
ax4 = fig.add_subplot(2, 2, 4, projection='3d', facecolor="white")
129
ax4.plot_trisurf(Xn.flatten(), Yn.flatten(), heatmap_nh.flatten(),
130
cmap=white_inferno , linewidth=0,
antialiased=False, shade=False)
131
ax4.set_title("Non-Harmonic 3D")
132
ax4.set_xlabel("X [mm]")
133
ax4.set_ylabel("Y [mm]")
134
ax4.set_zlabel("Pulses")
135
ax4.set_zlim(0, heatmap_nh.max())
136
ax4.view_init(elev=35, azim=35)
137
94
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
==PAGE:105==
138
fig.suptitle(title, fontsize=18)
139
plt.tight_layout()
140
plt.savefig(f"{save_name}_whitefriendly_combined.pdf",
bbox_inches="tight", facecolor="white")
141
plt.show()
142
143
144 # ---------- Pattern Definitions ----------
145 def spiral_pattern(harmonic=True):
146
t = np.linspace(0, durations[0], int(sample_rate * durations[0]))
147
if harmonic:
148
r = modulation_amplitude * np.sin(2*np.pi*modulation_freq*t)
149
theta = 2*np.pi*angular_freq*t
150
else:
151
r = modulation_amplitude *
np.sin(2*np.pi*modulation_freq_irr*t)
152
theta = 2*np.pi*angular_freq*t
153
x_v = r * np.cos(theta)
154
y_v = r * np.sin(theta)
155
return volts_to_mm(x_v), volts_to_mm(y_v)
156
157 def raster_pattern(harmonic=True):
158
t = np.linspace(0, durations[0], int(sample_rate * durations[0]))
159
if harmonic:
160
x_v = x_amplitude * triangle_wave(x_freq * t)
161
y_v = y_amplitude * triangle_wave(y_freq * t)
162
else:
163
x_v = x_amplitude * triangle_wave(x_freq_irr * t)
164
y_v = y_amplitude * triangle_wave(y_freq_irr * t)
165
return volts_to_mm(x_v), volts_to_mm(y_v)
166
167 def dual_pattern(harmonic=True):
168
t = np.linspace(0, durations[0], int(sample_rate * durations[0]))
169
outer_theta = 2*np.pi*outer_rotation_freq*t
170
inner_theta = 2*np.pi*(inner_rotation_freq if harmonic else
inner_rotation_freq_irr)*t
171
cx = outer_radius * np.cos(outer_theta)
172
cy = outer_radius * np.sin(outer_theta)
173
x_v = cx + inner_radius * np.cos(inner_theta)
174
y_v = cy + inner_radius * np.sin(inner_theta)
175
return volts_to_mm(x_v), volts_to_mm(y_v)
176
177 # ---------- Run Simulation ----------
178 patterns = [
179
("Spiral", spiral_pattern),
180
("Raster", raster_pattern),
181
("Circle -in-Circle", dual_pattern)
182 ]
183
184 for name, func in patterns:
185
x_h, y_h = func(harmonic=True)
186
heatmap_h , max_range_h = accumulate_heatmap(x_h, y_h)
187
print(f"{name} Harmonic max pulses in one spot:
{heatmap_h.max()}")
188
189
x_nh, y_nh = func(harmonic=False)
190
heatmap_nh , max_range_nh = accumulate_heatmap(x_nh, y_nh)
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
95
==PAGE:106==
191
print(f"{name} Non-Harmonic max pulses in one spot:
{heatmap_nh.max()}")
192
193
plot_combined_heatmaps(
194
heatmap_h , heatmap_nh ,
195
max_range_h , max_range_nh ,
196
f"{name} Pattern\n{input_voltage} V @ {distance_m*100:.0f}
cm",
197
f"{name.lower()}_{input_voltage}V_{int(distance_m*100)}cm"
198
)
Listing A.2: Galvo Pattern Pulse Density Simulation
A.8
C++ Pattern Control Software
Raster/zigzag Pattern Generation in C++ with NIDAQmx:
1 #include <iostream >
2 #include <cmath>
3 #include <vector>
4 #include <thread>
5 #include <chrono>
6 #include <NIDAQmx.h>
7
8 #ifndef M_PI
9 #define M_PI 3.14159265358979323846
10 #endif
11
12 // Device and channel definitions
13 #define DEVICE "Dev1"
14 #define X_CHANNEL DEVICE "/ao0"
15 #define Y_CHANNEL DEVICE "/ao1"
16 #define VOLTAGE_MIN -10.0
17 #define VOLTAGE_MAX 10.0
18
19 // Zigzag scan parameters
20 #define X_AMPLITUDE 0.1
// Horizontal (x)
21 #define Y_AMPLITUDE 0.1
// Vertical (y)
22 #define X_FREQ 800
// Horizontal frequency (Hz)
23 #define Y_FREQ X_FREQ / 4
// Vertical frequency (Hz)
24
25 // DAQ settings
26 #define SAMPLE_RATE 100000.0
// Hardware sample rate (Hz)
27 #define BUFFER_DURATION 100
// Buffer duration (seconds)
28
29 // Triangle wave generator
30 double triangle_wave(double phase) {
31
return 2.0 * fabs(2.0 * (phase - floor(phase + 0.5))) - 1.0;
32 }
33
34 // Error handling function
35 void HandleDAQmxError(int32 error) {
36
if (error != 0) {
37
char errBuff[2048] = { '\0' };
38
DAQmxGetExtendedErrorInfo(errBuff , 2048);
39
std::cerr << "DAQmx Error: " << errBuff << std::endl;
40
exit(EXIT_FAILURE);
41
}
96
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
==PAGE:107==
42 }
43
44 int main() {
45
int bufferSize = static_cast <int>(SAMPLE_RATE * BUFFER_DURATION);
46
std::vector<double > buffer(bufferSize * 2, 0.0);
47
48
std::cout << "Generating raster scan waveform..." << std::endl;
49
50
// Generate zigzag waveform
51
for (int i = 0; i < bufferSize; i++) {
52
double t = i / SAMPLE_RATE;
53
54
double x = X_AMPLITUDE * triangle_wave(X_FREQ * t);
55
double y = Y_AMPLITUDE * triangle_wave(Y_FREQ * t);
56
57
// offset
58
x += 0.25;
59
y += 1.75;
60
61
buffer[i] = x;
// X channel (ao0)
62
buffer[bufferSize + i] = y;
// Y channel (ao1)
63
}
64
65
TaskHandle taskHandle = 0;
66
67
// Create and configure DAQ task
68
HandleDAQmxError(DAQmxCreateTask("", &taskHandle));
69
HandleDAQmxError(DAQmxCreateAOVoltageChan(taskHandle , X_CHANNEL , "
",
70
VOLTAGE_MIN , VOLTAGE_MAX , DAQmx_Val_Volts , NULL));
71
HandleDAQmxError(DAQmxCreateAOVoltageChan(taskHandle , Y_CHANNEL , "
",
72
VOLTAGE_MIN , VOLTAGE_MAX , DAQmx_Val_Volts , NULL));
73
74
// Configure hardware -timed continuous output
75
HandleDAQmxError(DAQmxCfgSampClkTiming(taskHandle , "", SAMPLE_RATE
,
76
DAQmx_Val_Rising , DAQmx_Val_ContSamps , bufferSize));
77
78
// Loop buffer forever
79
HandleDAQmxError(DAQmxSetWriteRegenMode(taskHandle ,
DAQmx_Val_AllowRegen));
80
81
// Write waveform to device
82
int32 samplesWritten = 0;
83
HandleDAQmxError(DAQmxWriteAnalogF64(taskHandle , bufferSize , false
, 10.0,
84
DAQmx_Val_GroupByChannel , buffer.data(), &samplesWritten , NULL
));
85
86
std::cout << "Written " << samplesWritten << " samples per channel
." << std::endl;
87
88
// Start the task
89
HandleDAQmxError(DAQmxStartTask(taskHandle));
90
std::cout << "Zigzag scan started. Press Ctrl+C to stop." << std::
endl;
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
97
==PAGE:108==
91
92
// Run indefinitely
93
while (true) {
94
std::this_thread::sleep_for(std::chrono::seconds(1));
95
}
96
97
// Cleanup
98
HandleDAQmxError(DAQmxStopTask(taskHandle));
99
HandleDAQmxError(DAQmxClearTask(taskHandle));
100
return 0;
101 }
Listing A.3: Raster/zigzag Pattern Generation in C++ with NIDAQmx
98
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
==PAGE:109==
Laser Countermeasures for Anti-Drone Protection
99
==PAGE:110==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Elektrovej 326
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://www.electro.dtu.dk
