==PAGE:1==
Heat transfer in scavenging flow simulations
Master Thesis
DTU Construct
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Heat transfer in scavenging flow simulations
Master Thesis
August, 2025
By
Jiri Hlavacek
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering, Anker Engelunds
Vej 101, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
construct.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Fluid Mechanics, Coastal and Mar­
itime Engineering, Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering at the Technical Uni­
versity of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science (MSc) in
Mechanical Engineering. The project was conducted in cooperation with Everllence, Pro­
duction location Copenhagen.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of thermodynamics and
fluid mechanics.
Jiri Hlavacek ­ s232823
ii
Heat transfer in scavenging flow simulations
==PAGE:5==
Heat transfer in scavenging flow simulations
iii
==PAGE:6==
Abstract
This work examines the heat transfer in the scavenging flow in a large two­stroke marine
diesel engine. Commercial CFD software STAR­CCM+ is used. LES, DES and RANS
models are applied to simulate the flow in the engine without simulating the heat transfer.
It is revealed that these models predict similar trends in the gas flow. However, differences
are observed. The heat transfer through various surfaces of the combustion chamber and
its development in time is explored. It is shown that the heat transfer is mainly influenced
by the flow velocity and the gas temperature. DES and RANS turbulence models are
used to run the cases exploring the heat transfer. The results reveal differences between
the values of the heat transfer predicted by these two models. Finally, the mesh quality is
evaluated first by decreasing the number of prism layers and then by evaluating LES IQ.
iv
Heat transfer in scavenging flow simulations
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my deepest gratitude to my supervisors: Jens Honore Walther,
Arash Nemati, Kar Mun Pang and Laurits Munck.
Their valuable feedback, insights
and suggestions helped me overcome multiple challenges arising during the work on the
project. They have not only helped me learn a lot about the problematics, but also made
the work on my project very enjoyable.
Words cannot express the gratefulness I feel towards my family, which has been support­
ing me during my studies in all the possible ways. Without their support, encouragement
and faith in my skills, my academic journey would be hardly possible.
Thank you to the Technical University of Denmark for being such an amazing place to
study at. And thank you to my friends I have made during my studies at DTU, they have
made these two years great and unforgettable.
Jiri Hlavacek, MSc Mechanical Engineering student, DTU
Supervisors:
Jens Honore Walther, Professor, Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering, DTU
Arash Nemati, Assistant Professor, Department of Energy Conversion and Storage, DTU
Kar Mun Pang, Senior Research Engineer, Everllence
Laurits Munck, PhD Student, Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering, DTU
Heat transfer in scavenging flow simulations
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Heat transfer in scavenging flow simulations
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
1
Introduction and Background
1
1.1
Two­stroke engine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Heat transfer in an internal combustion engine
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2
Literature study
11
3
Theoretical framework
15
3.1
Governing equations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.2
Turbulence modeling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3.3
Heat transfer models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
3.4
Heat transfer in STAR­CCM+ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
4
Method
27
4.1
Mesh
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4.2
Heat transfer simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
4.3
Velocity profiles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
4.4
Mesh sensitivity ­ number of prism layers
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
4.5
LES quality assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
5
Results and Discussion
33
5.1
Adiabatic case
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
5.2
Non­adiabatic case . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
5.3
Mesh quality
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
6
Conclusion
47
7
Suggestions for further work
49
Bibliography
51
A Appendix A ­ Surfaces of interest, mesh
55
B Appendix B ­ Plane section scenes
59
B.1 Velocity scenes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
B.2 Passive scalar scenes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
B.3 Temperature scenes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
B.4 LES IQ scenes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
B.5 Non­adiabatic DES and RANS temperature gradients IDDES Blending Func­
tion on selected areas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
C List of symbols
72
Heat transfer in scavenging flow simulations
vii
==PAGE:10==
viii
Heat transfer in scavenging flow simulations
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction and Background
Maritime transport is, in general, regarded as a crucial sector for trade and economic
growth globally. According to an UNCTAD Report, 80% in terms of volume and 70% in
terms of value of the international trade is carried by sea. For less developed economies,
the share is even higher [1]. UNCTAD expects maritime trade to increase by 2,4% annu­
ally between 2025 and 2029. This growth is supposed to be supported by technological
advancements, the transition to cleaner energy, and infrastructure development [2].
The need to decarbonize maritime transport and reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) emis­
sions is a challenge that will require significant operational shifts, innovation, and invest­
ments [2]. According to the IEA, in 2022, international shipping was responsible for ap­
proximately 2% of global energy­related CO2 emissions. The International Maritime Or­
ganization has revised GHG strategy targets net zero emissions around 2050. To steer
the maritime shipping sector onto such a trajectory, a 15% reduction in emissions is re­
quired between 2022 and 2030, despite an expected increase in activity [3]. In 2024, the
largest share of the marine engines market was held by two­stroke low­speed internal
combustion engines. These are expected to dominate the market in the future as well
and grow with the highest CAGR [4].
In July 2023, the International Maritime Organization (IMO) adopted the 2023 IMO Strat­
egy on Reduction of GHG Emissions from Ships. The first level of ambition of the doc­
ument is “carbon intensity of the ship decline through further improvement of the energy
efficiency for new ships” [5]. The energy efficiency of internal combustion engines it to
a great extent influenced by the heat transfer. Understanding of the heat transfer within
engines can therefore help in the development towards higher efficiency. However, ex­
ploring the physical phenomena within an engine through an experimental work can be
demanding in various ways. This challenge can be addressed through the application of
numerical models. The goal of this work is to study heat transfer in scavenging flow using
commercial CFD software.
1.1
Two­stroke engine
Two­stroke engines perform the work producing process each revolution of the engine in­
stead of every other revolution as in the four­stroke cycle. Thus, two­stroke engines have
higher specific power (i.e. more kW per liter of displacement) than four­stroke engines
[6].
The two­stroke engine is used in wide range of applications. These are from garden
utilities, mopeds and model air planes up to large bore marine diesel engines. Its power
to weight ratio and relatively simple design make the two­stroke engine an optimal choice
when simplicity and reliability are important factors [7].
The principle of the two stroke uniflow scavenged diesel engine is displayed on Figure 1.1.
The scavenging is marked as “exhaust and intake” on the figure. In the two­stroke engine,
the gas exchange is done by flows into the cylinder, inside the cylinder and out through
the exhaust port. At the bottom dead center (BDC) the intake ports open and fresh charge
is blown inside. It is necessary to generate pressurized intake air to be available at the
opening of the intake ports. After the scavenging is completed, the piston starts moving
up, so the intake ports close and since the exhaust valve closes as well, the compres­
sion follows. Then fuel is injected into the pressurized air and expansion (power) stroke,
Heat transfer in scavenging flow simulations
1
==PAGE:12==
Figure 1.1: Two­stroke uniflow scavenged diesel engine [8]
that generates work, begins and the piston moves down [6]. This is a general descrip­
tion, the cycle and scavenging are described in more detail in chapters 1.1.2 and 1.1.3,
respectively.
Ideally, two­stroke engine would operate with the same mean effective pressure and pro­
duce twice the power of a four­stroke engine. There are, however, factors that result in a
lower mean effective pressure for two­stroke engines [6].
First, applying to all two­stroke engines, is that the air exchange process occurs within
a single revolution. This means giving up a part of the displacement volume to the air
exchange process. During the scavenging the cylinder is open to the intake, exhaust,
or both, therefore the compression and expansion cannot occur and little work can be
produced during this period [6].
Second factor is that the amount of the fresh air entering the engine, and hereby the
amount of fuel that can be burned, is limited in the scavenging process. The air exchange
in two­stroke engine is much more sensitive to the design of the flow system compared
to the four­stroke engine. In general, it is more difficult to reach an efficient air exchange.
However, for large two­stroke diesel engines, which are object of this thesis, exhaust
valves are used instead of ports. Proper matching of turbochargers then allows an efficient
air exchange [6].
1.1.1
The studied engine
The model examined in this study represents the 4T50ME­X research engine located at
Everllence, Copenhagen, Denmark. This engine is being used for different tests with
different fuels under the single fuel mode or dual­fuel mode [9]. The overall engine spec­
ifications for the engine can be found in Table 1.1.
2
Heat transfer in scavenging flow simulations
==PAGE:13==
Table 1.1: 4T50ME­X research engine specifications and operating conditions [9]
Parameter
Value
Bore
500 mm
Stroke
2200 mm
Connecting rod
2885 mm
Cylinders
4
Inlet ports per cylinder
30
Port angle
20◦
Max Power
∼7 MW
Max engine speed
123 RPM
Charging
Turbo­charged
Load (this project)
25 %
Engine speed (this project)
75 RPM
Figure 1.2: Cross section and side view of a MAN B&W G90ME­C (ultra long stroke)
uniflow scavenged engine [7]
1.1.2
Uniflow scavenged two­stroke diesel engine air flow and cycle
The air flow in the MAN B&W engine is depicted on Figure 1.3. Ambient air enters the
compressor side of the turbo charger and is pressurized. Then it continues through a
diffuser into the cooler unit to be cooled down to a pick point temperature. After that the
water­mist catcher dehumidifies the air before it enters the scavenge receiver. The scav­
enge receiver is a large volume that damps out the pressure fluctuations and produces a
stable scavenge pressure [7].
Approximately 120 – 130 crank angle degrees after top dead center (CAD ATDC) the
exhaust valve opens in order to equalize the in­cylinder pressure with the pressure in
the scavenge receiver (so called blow­down process). Optimal for scavenging is equality
between cylinder pressure and scavenge pressure at inlet port opening (IPO). In such
case no blow­back will occur and the fresh air from the scavenge receiver will immediately
Heat transfer in scavenging flow simulations
3
==PAGE:14==
Figure 1.3: Air flow through a MAN B&W engine [7]
enter the cylinder. Blow­back is in general undesirable because it can lead to fouling of
the scavenge receiver. However, due to fuel optimization, ME control system is set to
allow circa 1% of the cylinder mass to blow back in the scavenge box. The force acting
on the piston is maximized this way [7].
After the ports are uncovered, the scavenge air flows into the cylinder. The air moves
up the cylinder in a swirling, helical motion. The swirl is beneficial for multiple reasons.
Firstly, it supports the mixture of air and fuel as the fuel is injected into the cylinder in
the same direction as the swirl. Furthermore, it minimizes the recirculation zones at the
sharp top and side corner of the scavenging ports where the flow separates because of
the sharp edges. It also reduces the effect of the asymmetric inlet to the cylinder [7].
However, the confined swirling flow also lead to a number of drawbacks. Radial pressure
gradients are present at any axial position due to centrifugal effects even at low swirl
levels. At low swirl levels, these gradients do not cause more than a slight axial pressure
gradient which is not strong enough to cause axial recirculation. But when increasing the
swirl, these adverse pressure gradients increase and it leads to a central recirculation
zone. This affects the mixing of exhaust gases and fresh air. Exhaust gases are being
trapped in the center of the cylinder. This increases the air amount needed to fully flush
the cylinder [7].
The scavenge air exits the cylinder through the exhaust valve. Next, it enters the exhaust
receiver ­ a large volume, responsible for damping out pressure oscillations and providing
a stable boost pressure for the turbine side of the turbocharger [7].
The two­stroke engine principle was presened and explained in section 1.1. Below is a
description of the specific, studied engine cycle.
4
Heat transfer in scavenging flow simulations
==PAGE:15==
Figure 1.4: Studied engine cycle [7]
The engine cycle, depicted on the diagram in Figure 1.4 can be divided into 2 phases that
consist of 5 processes:
1. Closed volume phase
a) Compression
b) Combustion and expansion
2. Open volume phase
a) Blow down
b) Scavenging
c) Push out
In the closed volume phase no transfer of mass to or from the cylinder occurs, except for
the injected fuel. This phase is started by exhaust valve closing (EVC) and terminated
by exhaust valve opening (EVO). Compression, combustion and expansion occur during
this phase [7].
The open volume phase is started by EVO and terminated by EVC. First process is the
blow down (between exhaust valve opening EVO and intake ports opening IPO) , which
is responsible for adjusting the cylinder pressure with the scavenge pressure in order to
control blow­back. Next, the scavenging process is responsible for flushing the cylinder
– replacing the exhaust gas with fresh air. The push out process (between intake ports
closing IPC and exhaust valve closing EVC) is used to determine the compression ration
pcomp/pscav, the compression pressure and the charge mass in the cylinder [7].
Heat transfer in scavenging flow simulations
5
==PAGE:16==
1.1.3
Scavenging
Unlike in the four­stroke engine, there are no separate induction and exhaust strokes
in the two­stroke engine. The induction and exhaust processes happen simultaneously
in the two­stroke engine and this gas exchange is called the scavenging process. The
scavenging process has a significant influence on the efficiency and performance of the
two­stroke engine [7].
During the scavenging process, the cylinder is cleaned from the exhaust gas from the pre­
vious combustion process and it is replaced with fresh air for the subsequent compression
stroke and combustion. To achieve this, the inlet pressure is increased by a blower or a
turbo charger. The intake port is uncovered by the piston and the scavenging gradient
(pressure difference between the intake and exhaust manifolds) displaces the exhaust
gases in the cylinder. The exhaust manifold can be either connected to the cylinder by
ports or by one or several valves [10].
Figures 1.5a and 1.5b display cross and loop scavenging, which both use inlet and ex­
haust ports in the cylinder liner. These are uncovered when the piston approaches BDC.
The difference between cross and loop scavenging is in the orientation of the ports, as
can be observed in the Figure 1.5. Common goal of all the configurations is to avoid
short­circuiting (i.e. the fresh air traveling across the cylinder leaving pockets of exhaust
gases untouched). Cross and loop scavenging are normally found in rather small en­
gines. These mostly use the underside of the piston and the crankcase as a pump which
compresses the inlet air [10].
Figure 1.5c depicts the uniflow scavenging. In this configuration, the inlet ports are milled
in the cylinder liner at the bottom dead center and the exhaust valve/valves is/are located
in the cylinder cover (also called cylinder head). The airflow is uniform in the axial di­
rection. In order to create a swirling flow, the inlet ports are angled with respect to the
local radius. This arrangement is the most effective one of the presented principles. The
inlet ports and the exhaust valve(s) configuration make the short­circuiting almost impos­
sible, as they are in opposite ends of the cylinder. The exhaust poppet valve, although
increasing the complexity of the engine, brings flexibility and performance optimization.
The uniflow scavenging configuration is being used in large marine two­stroke diesel en­
gines. These engines have large stroke to bore ratio, which would cause short­circuiting
if cross or loop scavenging were employed [7].
The scavenging process is responsible for replacing the exhaust gas with the fresh air as
mentioned above. It is also responsible for cooling the cylinder liner, engine cover and the
exhaust valve. Thus, the scavenging process sets the initial conditions for the combustion
process. Therefore it can be stated that the scavenging process indirectly affects engine
performance, specific fuel oil consumption and emission of hazardous gases [7].
6
Heat transfer in scavenging flow simulations
==PAGE:17==
(a) Cross scavenging
(b) Loop scavenging
(c) Uniflow scavenging
Figure 1.5: Scavenging systems [10]
(a) Scavenge ports
(b) Scavenge ports and box
Figure 1.6: Inlet to cylinder in uniflow scavenged diesel engines [11]
1.2
Heat transfer in an internal combustion engine
Heat transfer has an important impact on the thermal efficiency of the engine because of
the heat losses. These occur mainly during combustion and expansion. It also affects
the volumetric efficiency of the engine, because the cold incoming gases are heated by
warm engine surfaces, reducing the charged mass. Mechanical strength of engine parts
(such as pistons and valves) can be lessened by high temperatures. Friction is affected as
well, as friction energy must be removed from the engine through the heat transfer. Heat
Heat transfer in scavenging flow simulations
7
==PAGE:18==
transfer process determine the lubricating oil temperature, which is a key factor in the
durability of the engine. In the exhaust system, the energy available for the turbocharger
and the temperature of the after­treatment devices will be also affected by the heat transfer
[6].
The overall cooling of the engine is an important part of engine operation and design.
The heat transfer away from engine surfaces must be adequate in order to keep the en­
gine temperature in a satisfactory operating range. The engine cooling and the cooling
of engine intake air in pressure charged engines depends on the performance of heat
exchangers [6].
The heat transfer also indirectly affects the emission formation in the combustion chamber.
The temperature has an influence on the rate of chemical reactions taking place and
therefore the formation of emissions. High gas temperatures will promote NOx formation.
However, decreasing the gas temperature will likely lead to increasing PM emissions [12].
1.2.1
In­cylinder heat transfer in two­stroke marine diesel engines
In­cylinder heat transfer refers to the heat transfer between the surfaces of the combustion
chamber and the gas in that chamber. The combustion chamber is limited by the surfaces
of the piston, liner, cylinder cover, and exhaust valve bottom, as can be seen in Figure 1.7
The liner and cover are cooled by water, whereas the piston is cooled by oil. The exhaust
valve is is cooled by the flow of the fresh air charge during the scavenging. The same fresh
air charge also contributes to cooling of the other surfaces of the combustion chamber [12].
Figure 1.7: Engine components confining the combustion chamber [13] (adjusted)
As described above, the heat loss affects the efficiency of the engine. The more heat is lost
to the combustion chamber surfaces, the less energy is left for conversion into mechanical
work. In two­stroke marine diesel engines, the heat loss amounts to 5­10 % of the fuel
energy input. In comparison with smaller automotive engines (where the heat loss is in
the range 25­30 % of the fuel energy input), this is relatively low. The reason for the
lower relative heat loss in large marine diesel engines is that these have a quiescent type
combustion chamber geometry. This geometry does not have significant squish zones.
In automotive diesel engines there is usually a bowl­in­piston type combustion chamber
geometry. The squish influence on the flow field in automotive diesel engines leads to
increased heat transfer rates [12].
Next reason for the lower relative heat loss in large marine diesel engines is that these
8
Heat transfer in scavenging flow simulations
==PAGE:19==
have a larger combustion chamber volume to surface area ratio compared to automotive
engines. Due to the low relative heat loss the large marine diesel engines reach high
efficiency. The brake efficiency of these engines is about 50 % [12].
Better knowledge about the in­cylinder heat transfer is therefore important for engine man­
ufacturers. More accurate estimation of the heat transfer magnitude, spatial distribution
and variation during the engine cycle can result in better predictions of other engine pa­
rameters. This may eventually lead to improved engine designs [12].
Heat transfer in scavenging flow simulations
9
==PAGE:20==
10
Heat transfer in scavenging flow simulations
==PAGE:21==
2
Literature study
This chapter presents results of previously done studies on the topics related to scaveng­
ing and heat transfer in two­stroke marine diesel engines. It also introduces works related
to the studied problem and to the state­of­the­art research and innovations within the field
of this type of engine.
In the master thesis by Hemmingsen [11], the convective heat transfer during scaveng­
ing in a model diesel engine is studied. Firstly, heat transfer in a swirling pipe flow is
investigated. Experimental data measured on a heated pipe with a swirling flow are used.
Hemmingsen [11] then performs numerical simulations of the same flow, using commer­
cial CFD software STAR­CCM+. The computational domain can be seen in Figure 2.1
To compare the accuracy of different models, seven RANS based turbulence models and
one LES model are utilized.
Figure 2.1: Hemmingsen: computational domain of swirling pipe flow [11]
Nusselt number for all utilized turbulence models are compared to those obtained from
experimental measurements and RSM. It is shown that LES underestimates the Nusselt
number but moves towards experimental measurements downstream. As for RANS, both
the realizable k−ϵ and standard k−ϵ correspond very well with the experimental results.
Details about the remaining turbulence models can be found in the referred paper. Since
there was no experimental data of the velocity field for the described set­up, the accuracy
of the velocity profiles for LES and RANS models is not studied. This is, however, done
for the following scaled diesel engine [11].
The experimental measurements are conducted on the DTU Glass Cylinder Engine (sim­
plified scale model of an uniflow scavenged engine, based on MAN Diesel & Turbo test
engine, 4T50ME­X. The experimental results are then compared with the results obtained
from numerical simulation. The computational domain for the numerical simulation can
be seen in Figure 2.2. This domain has the same geometrical dimensions as the experi­
mental set­up, minor geometrical simplifications are applied [11].
Figure 2.2: Hemmingsen: computational domain for scaled engine [11]
Heat transfer in scavenging flow simulations
11
==PAGE:22==
After the numerical model is validated in terms of velocity profiles, the convective heat
transfer is numerically investigated. The heat transfer simulations are performed with
LES turbulence model on the steady­flow and with the k­ω SST turbulence model on the
dynamic­flow. In case of the steady­flow case, a uniform heat flux is applied to the surface
of the cylinder. As a result an average of the wall temperature and internal temperature is
obtained as well as Nusselt number distribution. The steady­flow case revealed temper­
ature streaks along the cylinder wall. In the dynamic­flow case, the heat flux is applied on
an isothermal simulation at t/tcyc = 0.00 of the 3rd cycle. Wall temperatures and Nusselt
number profiles are obtained, as well as the wall shear­stress values. A link between
shear stresses and wall temperatures is found [11].
Suggestions for future work, listed by Hemmingsen [11], include, among others:
• Simulate the steady­ and dynamic­flow model with the use of a Detached Eddy
Simulations. With the combination of the RANS based model and LES it would be
suitable to use for prediction of the heat transfer in swirling flow.
• Apply a movement of the exhaust valve.
• The influence on the flow for applying a scavenging box.
• Real engine simulations.
Nemati et al. [14] made numerical study of the scavenging process in a large two­stroke
marine engine and compared results obtained with URANS and LES turbulence models.
The results are validated with experimental data. They show, that LES performs better in
capturing the qualitative velocity field inside the cylinder. In the top of the cylinder, URANS
predicts a solid body rotation for the tangential velocity, whereas LES predicts a non­solid
body rotation. Furthermore, URANS is incapable of predicting the central re­circulation
region around the cylinder axis between BDC and IPC. LES captures this region. LES
also performs better in the prediction of a Burgers vortex near the scavenging ports and it
predicts a higher angular momentum inside the cylinder than RANS. As for the scavenging
efficiency, LES and URANS lead to similar results. Despite some discrepancies, there is
in general a good agreement between the numerical and experimental results [14].
Sigurdsson et al. [15] did a CFD model of a 12◦engine sector (corresponding to one
scavenge port) to study the scavenging process and convective heat transfer in a large
two­stroke low­speed uniflow­scavenged marine diesel engine. Multiple simplifications
are made in the model (scavenge box and exhaust duct assumed rotational symmetric;
the piston, cylinder head, exhaust valve, and scavenge port geometries modeled using
plane surfaces with sharp edges). In spite of these simplifications, model shows a good
agreement with experimental data. As the result, the convective contribution to the in­
cylinder heat loss is predicted to be 3.2% of the fuel energy flow to the cylinder. However,
fuel injection and combustion are not explicitly simulated. Therefore, the true convective
heat loss is expected to be higher [15].
To authors best knowledge, there is no more papers focused solely on the heat transfer
during scavenging in two­stroke low­speed marine diesel engines. However, multiple
studies have been done on related topics, such as heat transfer during scavenging in
other types of two­stroke engines, or studies on how scavenging affects other aspects
and properties of two­stroke marine diesel engines.
Regarding the heat transfer during gas exchange, Galdo & Vidal [16] have performed
a CFD simulation of the fluid flow and heat transfer inside the cylinder of a two­stroke
engine during scavenging. In this work, two types of two­stroke engine are described:
12
Heat transfer in scavenging flow simulations
==PAGE:23==
motorbike spark ignition engine and marine compression ignition engine. However, the
study is focused on the first of the mentioned engines. [16] De Castro et al. [17] performed
a numerical simulation of the fluid flow and heat transfer processes during scavenging.
They assumed steady­state conditions and used very simplified geometry of two­stroke
engine cylinder. They obtained a Nusselt number for different values of inlet angle, cylin­
der aspect ratio and Reynolds number [17].
The influence of scavenging air pressure and temperature on the engine performance
and emission products was studied by Yu et al. [18]. The results indicate, that increase in
scavenging air pressure leads to higher indicated thermal efficiency (ITE) and indicated
mean effective pressure (IMEP). Increase in scavenging air temperature, on the other
hand, leads to lower ITE and IMEP. It is important to note that the scavenging air pres­
sure has higher impact than the scavenging air temperature [18]. Pehlivan and Altın [19]
did similar study. They researched the impact of the scavenge air inlet temperature on the
combustion and exhaust emissions in two­stroke marine diesel engine and reached sim­
ilar results as the previous study [19]. The effect of cylinder wall temperature on marine
engine combustion was investigated by K. H. Park [20]. Cylinder wall temperature is to
great extent influenced by the heat transfer during scavenging. According to the results,
it is desirable to maintain the combustion chamber wall temperature between 150 ◦C and
180 ◦C in order to reach an optimal combustion efficiency and exhaust emissions [20].
With the common goal of reducing emissions, different alternations in the marine two­
stroke diesel engines are being explored. These are as well related to the thermodynam­
ics in the engine. Commonly researched topic is the waste heat recovery from marine
engines. An overview of the technical solutions can be found, among others, in works
by Singh [21], Díaz­Secades et al. [22] or Zhu et al. [23]. A way to improve thermal
efficiency of marine two­stroke engine proposed by Lu et al. [24] is the Cylinder Gas Re­
circulation (CGR). CGR improves the in­cylinder swirl intensity and optimized the fuel/air
mixing and combustion processes. This leads to increase in the gross indicated work and
in the effective power output [24].
Another means of fulfilling the emission regulations and targets of GHG reductions is
the implementation of alternative fuels in the marine engines. [25] An overview of these
alternative fuels can be found in article by Kołwzan [26]. Lebedevas and Milašius [27]
studied the thermal load of a marine engine operating on alternative fuels. Except for
biodiesel, the thermal load on the components increases when the diesel fuel is replaced
by alternative fuels. For further work, they suggest to research thermal and mechanical
loads under partial load engine modes [27].
The potential fuel savings at low to medium loads are described in the work by Zhu et
al. [28]. Different scavenging air control technologies in marine two­stroke engines are
explored in this study. It is shown that there exists an optimal exhaust valve closing timing
to minimize the ”Miller loss” with the high pressure tuning. In spite of aforementioned
potential fuel savings at low to medium loads, the high­pressure tuning is shown to be
superior to the exhaus gas bypass tuning due to a lower engine thermal load. At loads
higher than 60%, the power turbine bypass appears to be the best solution, whereas
under 50% it is the sequential turbocharging system [28].
Heat transfer in scavenging flow simulations
13
==PAGE:24==
14
Heat transfer in scavenging flow simulations
==PAGE:25==
3
Theoretical framework
The equations of fluid mechanics are analytically solvable only for a limited number of
flows. The known solutions can rarely be used directly in engineering analysis or design.
Simplifications based on experimental data are commonly used approach. However, in
many cases it is impossible to use it for several reasons. An alternative is the computa­
tional fluid dynamics (CFD). It is a tool to obtain an approximate solution numerically.
Discretization method is used to approximate the differential equation by a system of alge­
braic equations, which can then be solved on a computer. The approximations are applied
to small domains in space and/or time. Therefore, the numerical solution provides results
at discrete locations in space and time. The accuracy of these solutions is dependent on
the quality of discretization used [29].
Simcenter STAR­CCM+ is a commercial Computational Aided Engineering software by
Siemens. It’s version 2410.0001 Build 19.06.009 is used to solve the problem of this work.
The software models a range of physics phenomena including fluid mechanics and heat
transfer. The mathematical models describing the physics of continua are derived from
fundamental laws that express conservation principles. The conservation laws can be
expressed using an Eulerian or a Lagrangian approach. Simcenter STAR­CCM+ employs
both of these approaches, whichever is most convenient for modeling a particular field of
physics [30].
Most of the physics in Simcenter STAR­CCM+ is based on a core set of fundamental
laws. The fundamental laws of the mechanics of fluids are the Conservation of mass,
Conservation of momentum (linear and angular), and Conservation of Energy [30].
3.1
Governing equations
To derive conservation laws in fluid flows, the so­called control volume approach is used.
It deals with the flow within a certain spatial region called a control volume (V ). The
conservation laws are transformed into a control volume form below. The fundamental
variables are intensive rather than extensive properties. The intensive properties are
independent of the amount of matter considered. If ϕ is any conserved intensive property,
then the corresponding extensive property Φ can be expressed as:
Φ =
Z
M
ρϕ dV,
(3.1)
where:
• M is the volume occupied by the control mass,
• ρ is the fluid density [29].
To transform the conservation laws to the control volume form, the control volume equa­
tion, also called Reynold’s transport theorem, will be used:
d
dt
Z
M
ρϕdV = d
dt
Z
V
ρϕdV +
I
A
ρϕ(v −vb) · da,
(3.2)
where:
Heat transfer in scavenging flow simulations
15
==PAGE:26==
• t is time,
• V is the control volume,
• A is the surface enclosing CV,
• v is the fluid velocity,
• vb is the velocity with which the CV surface is moving.
Described in words, the rate of change of the amount of the property in the control mass
is the rate of change of the property within the control volume plus the net flux of it through
the CV boundary [29]. In the equations below, a fixed V is considered (vb = 0).
Gauss’s theorem (also called the divergence theorem or Ostrogradsky’s theorem) is also
used below to change the form of the equations. The Gauss’s theorem can be written as:
Z
V
(∇· F) dV =
I
A
F · da,
(3.3)
where F is any vector field.
Conservation of mass
The fact that the mass m is neither created nor destroyed in the flows of engineering
interest can be expressed by the conservation equation:
dm
dt = 0.
(3.4)
The integral form of the mass conservation equation (also called continuity equation) is
obtained directly from the Reynold’s transport theorem, by setting ϕ = 1:
∂
∂t
Z
V
ρdV +
I
A
ρv · da = 0.
(3.5)
Applying the Gauss’ divergence theorem the surface integral is transformed to the volume
integral. Considering infinitesimally small volume, a differential coordinate­free form of the
continuity equation is obtained [29]:
∂ρ
∂t + ∇· (ρv) = 0.
(3.6)
Conservation of momentum
Conservation equation of momentum, which can be changed by the action of forces, is
Newton’s second law of motion:
d(mv)
dt
=
X
fb,
(3.7)
where fb are the forces acting on the control mass.
Combining Equation 3.2 and Equation 3.7 and replacing ϕ by v yields:
∂
∂t
Z
V
ρvdV +
I
A
(ρv ⊗v) · da =
X
fb.
(3.8)
16
Heat transfer in scavenging flow simulations
==PAGE:27==
The left hand side of the Equation 3.8 states that the rate of change equals the flux across
the CV boundaries. The forces on the right hand side of Equation 3.8 can be divided into
surface forces and body forces. Body forces are neglected in the following derivation as
well as for the needs of the simulations presented in this work. It is also assumed that the
fluid is Newtonian. For a Newtonian fluid, the surface forces can be represented by the
stress tensor T [29].
∂
∂t
Z
V
ρvdV +
I
A
(ρv ⊗v) · da =
I
A
T · da.
(3.9)
The stress tensor with Einstein notation:
Ti,j = −

p + 2
3µ ∂vj
∂xj

δi,j + 2µDi,j,
(3.10)
where:
• p is the static pressure,
• µ is the dynamic viscosity,
• x is the spatial coordinate,
• δi,j is the Kronecker delta,
• Di,j is the rate of the strain tensor [7].
The viscous stress tensor, Ti,j = Ti,j + pδi,j, written in Einstein notation is:
Ti,j = 2µDi,j −2
3µ ∂vi
∂xi
δi,j,
(3.11)
where the rate of strain is:
Di,j = 1
2
 ∂vi
∂xj
+ ∂vj
∂xi

.
(3.12)
Applying the Gauss divergence theorem yields:
∂ρvi
∂t + ∂ρvivj
∂xj
= ∂Ti,j
∂xj
−∂p
∂xi
.
(3.13)
Conservation of energy
The energy equation represents the first law of thermodynamics applied to a control vol­
ume. The first law of thermodynamics follows:
dE = dQ + dW
(3.14)
where:
• E is the total internal energy in a control volume,
• Q is the added heat,
Heat transfer in scavenging flow simulations
17
==PAGE:28==
• W is work done to the system.
The left hand side of the Equation 3.14 can be evaluated for total enthalpy H:
E = H −p/ρ,
(3.15)
where:
H = h + |v|2/2,
(3.16)
and h is the static enthalpy.
Enthalpy is a state function, meaning it depends solely on the current thermodynamic
conditions—such as temperature, pressure, and chemical composition—and not on the
process by which the system arrived at that state. Due to the diversity in molecular be­
havior, phase changes, and intermolecular interactions, a single equation of state cannot
universally represent the thermodynamic properties of all substances across all condi­
tions.
Simcenter STAR­CCM+ offers a range of equation of state (EOS) models, each tailored
to specific materials and modeling assumptions. Within the software, static enthalpy is
formulated using thermochemical enthalpy, which is defined as:
h = e + p
ρ + h0,
(3.17)
where:
• e is specific internal energy,
• h0 is the heat of formation.
Applying the Reynolds transport theorem yields:
∂
∂t
Z
V
ρEdV +
I
A
ρHv·da = −
I
A
˙q′′ · da
|
{z
}
Conduction
+
I
A
T · vda
|
{z
}
V iscousWork
+
Z
V
fb·vdV +
I
A
X
i
hiJida+
Z
V
SudV,
(3.18)
where:
• ˙q′′ is the heat flux vector,
• J is the diffusive flux,
• Su is a user­specified source term.
where the heat term is defined by Fourier’s law ˙q′′ = λ∇T ( λ is thermal conductivity, T
is temperature). The net work on the control volume is done by pressure and the viscous
stress. Radiative heat transfer is neglected [7].
Applying the Gauss divergence theorem yields:
∂ρh
∂t + ∂ρhvj
∂xj
= ∂p
∂t + ∂pvj
∂xj
+ Ti,j
∂vi
∂xj
+

λ∂2T
∂x2
i

.
(3.19)
18
Heat transfer in scavenging flow simulations
==PAGE:29==
3.2
Turbulence modeling
Flows encountered in the natural world and in engineering practice are mostly turbulent.
This includes flows in engines. Although imperfect, a simple definition of turbulence is
the following: it is a dissipative flow state characterized by nonlinear fluctuating three­
dimensional vorticity. Basic features of turbulence are: fluctuations, nonlinearity, vortic­
ity, dissipation, and diffusivity. Turbulence involves fluctuations that are unpredictable in
detail. However, predictions about it are possible with help of numerical simulations and
computational schemes [31].
The scavenging flow in a marine two­stroke diesel engine is highly turbulent, with Reynolds
number typically in the order of millions. [7] Resolving turbulence in time and space comes
at excessive computational cost. Instead of solving for the exact governing equations of
turbulent flows, it is possible to solve for averaged or filtered quantities and get and ap­
proximate, but computationally less expensive result. Turbulence models provide different
approaches for modeling the turbulent structures [30].
3.2.1
Large Eddy Simulations (LES)
In this inherently transient technique the large scales of the turbulence are directly re­
solved everywhere in the flow domain, and the small­scale motions are modeled. LES
technique can be justified by fact that by modeling ”less” of the turbulence, and explicitly
solving more of it, the error in the turbulence modeling assumptions is not as consequen­
tial. Also, the smaller eddies are self­similar and lend themselves to simpler and more
universal models. However, the drawback is the excessive computational expense [30].
The equations that are solved for LES are obtained by a spatial filtering. Each solution
variable ϕ is decomposed into a filtered value ˜ϕ and a sub­filtered, or sub­grid value ϕ′ :
ϕ = ˜ϕ + ϕ′.
(3.20)
The spatial filtering removes the smaller eddies and thus reduces the range of scales
which has to be resolved. LES filtering can be explicit or implicit. STAR­CCM+ uses
the implicit filtering [30]. The filtering of the generic instantaneous flow variable ϕ(t, x) is
defined following way:
˜ϕ(t, x) =
ZZZ ∞
−∞
G
 x −x′, ∆

ϕ(t, x′)dx′,
(3.21)
where G(x, ∆) is the filter function characterized by a filter width ∆= (∆x∆y∆z)1/3.
For implicit filtering the computational grid determines the scales of the eddies to be filtered
out. Implicit filtering takes full advantage of the grid resolution and is computationally less
expensive than explicit filtering [30].
Decomposed solution variables inserted into the Navier­Stokes equations result in the
following equations:
∂ρ
∂t + ∇· (ρ˜v) = 0,
(3.22)
∂
∂t (ρ˜v) + ∇· (ρ˜v ⊗˜v) = −∇· ˜pI + ∇·

eT + TSGS

+ fb,
(3.23)
Heat transfer in scavenging flow simulations
19
==PAGE:30==
∂
∂t

ρ eE

+ ∇·

ρ eE˜v

= −∇· ˜p˜v + ∇·

eT + TSGS

˜v −∇· ˜q + fb˜v,
(3.24)
these are filtered mass, momentum, and energy equations, respectively, where:
• ˜v is the filtered velocity,
• ˜p is the filtered pressure,
• I is the identity tensor,
• eT is the filtered stress tensor,
• eE is the filtered energy per unit mass,
• ˜q is the filtered heat flux.
The turbulent stress tensor now represents the subgrid scale stresses. These are a result
of the interaction between the larger, resolved eddies and the smaller, unresolved eddies
and are modeled using the Boussinesq approximation:
TSGS = 2µtS −2
3(µt∇· ˜v)I,
(3.25)
where S is the strain rate tensor computed from the resolved velocity field ˜v.
µt is the subgrid scale turbulent viscosity and it must be described by a subgrid scale
model that accounts for the effects of small eddies on the resolved flow. Siemens STAR­
CCM+ uses the following subgrid scale models:
1. Smagorinsky Subgrid Scale model,
2. Dynamic Smagorinsky Subgrid Scale model,
3. WALE Subgrid Scale model [30].
For the purposes of this work, the WALE (Wall­Adapting Local­Eddy Viscosity) was used.
The WALE Subgrid Scale model provides the following mixing­length type formula for the
subgrid scale viscosity:
µt = ρ∆2Sw,
(3.26)
where,
• ∆is the length scale or grid filter width,
• Sw is a deformation parameter (definition can be found in STAR­CCM+ User Guide)
[30].
The length scale ∆is defined in terms of the cell volume V as:
∆=
(
CwV 1/3
if length scale limit is not applied
min
 κd, CwV 1/3
if length scale limit is applied
(3.27)
where:
• Cw is a Model Coefficient,
20
Heat transfer in scavenging flow simulations
==PAGE:31==
• κ is the von Karman constant.
The model coefficient Cw is not universal. Validations using Simcenter STAR­CCM+ have
shown that the default value of Cw = 0,544 works well for both homogeneous isotropic
decaying turbulence and for channel flows. Von Karman constant is set to value of κ = 0,41
[30].
3.2.2
Reynolds­Averaged Navier­Stokes (RANS) Turbulence Models
RANS turbulence models provide closure relations for the Reynolds­Averaged Navier­
Stokes equations. In order to obtain the Reynolds­Averaged Navier­Stokes equations,
every solution variable ϕ in the instantaneous Navier­Stokes equations is decomposed
into the mean, or averaged, value ϕ and the fluctuating component ϕ′ [30].
ϕ = ϕ + ϕ′.
(3.28)
The averaging process can be explained as time­averaging for steady­state situations and
ensemble averaging for repeatable transient simulations. The decomposed solution vari­
ables inserted into the Navier­Stokes equations result in equations for the mean quantities
[30]. Following are the mean mass, momentum and energy transport equations:
∂ρ
∂t + ∇· (ρv) = 0,
(3.29)
∂
∂t (ρv) + ∇· (ρv ⊗v) = −∇· pmodI + ∇·
 T + TRANS

+ fb,
(3.30)
∂
∂t
 ρE

+ ∇·
 ρEv

= −∇· pmodv + ∇·
 T + TRANS

v −∇· q + fbv,
(3.31)
where:
• v is the mean velocity,
• pmod = p + 2
3ρk is the modified mean pressure, where p is the mean pressure and k
is the turbulent kinetic energy,
• I is the identity tensor,
• T is the mean viscous stress tensor,
• E is the mean total energy per unit mass,
• q is the mean heat flux.
These equations are basically identical to the original Navier­Stokes equations, except the
additional term in the momentum and energy transport equations. This additional term is
the stress tensor:
TRANS = −ρ


u′u′
u′v′
u′w′
u′v′
v′v′
v′w′
u′w′
v′w′
w′w′

+ 2
3ρkI.
(3.32)
And the challenge is to model TRANS in terms of the mean flow quantities to provide closure
to the governing equations. STAR­CCM+ uses two basic approaches: Eddy viscosity
models and Reynolds stress transport models [30].
Heat transfer in scavenging flow simulations
21
==PAGE:32==
For the purposes of this work, K­Omega Model (belongs to Eddy Viscosity Models) was
selected. It is a two­equation model that solves transport equations for the turbulent kinetic
energy k and the specific dissipation rate ω (the dissipation rate per unit turbulent kinetic
energy (ω α ϵ/k)) in order to determine the turbulent eddy viscosity [30].
3.2.3
Detached Eddy Simulation (DES)
This is a hybrid modeling approach combining features of LES in some parts of the flow
and RANS in others. The unsteady RANS equations are applicable to transient simula­
tions where the unsteadiness is either imposed (for example by time­varying boundary
condition), or is inherent (for example the vortex shedding in a massively separated flow).
In the latter case, transient simulations often lead to a better results than using the steady­
state approach. However, successful unsteady RANS simulations require the time scales
of the turbulence to be disparate from the mean­flow unsteadiness. Also, the limitations
of the turbulence model may preclude good unsteady results [30].
DES turbulence models use RANS closure model to solve boundary layers and irrota­
tional flow regions. However, the turbulence model is intrinsically modified so that, in
case the grid is fine enough, the basic LES subgrid scale model is emulated in detached
flow regions. This combines the best from both approaches: a RANS simulation in the
boundary layers and an LES in the unsteady separated regions. However, DES is not the
answer to all turbulence modeling problems [30].
Simcenter STAR­CCM+ provides DES modeling approach for the following RANS models:
• Spalart­Allmaras DES,
• Elliptic Blending K­Epsilon DES,
• SST K­Omega DES [30].
The momentum equations for the LES filtered velocity ˜v and the RANS averaged velocity
v are defined in Equation 3.23 and Equation 3.30, respectively. For the LES model:
TSGS = f(∇· ˜v, ∆),
(3.33)
and for RANS:
TRANS = f(∇· v, k, ϵ),
(3.34)
where:
• ∆is the local measure of the grid size
• k is the turbulent kinetic energy
• ϵ is the turbulent dissipation rate
In Equation 3.33, the most crucial role is played by the filter width, or length­scale, which
is used for the definition of the subdgid­scale eddy viscosity and for the definition of the
transition region [30].
A unified approach can be used to solve for a quantity bui, that is dependant on the local
definition:
∂
∂t
 ρbv

+ ∇· (ρbv ⊗bv) = −∇· bpI + ∇·

bT + Tmodel

+ fb,
(3.35)
22
Heat transfer in scavenging flow simulations
==PAGE:33==
where the modeled stress tensor Tmodel is defined as:
Tmodel = f∆
∆
lk

TRANS,
(3.36)
where:
• lk is the turbulent length­scale,
• f∆is a damping function that depends on the DES variant.
For the purposes of this work, Spalart­Allmaras DES model was chosen. It combines
features of the Standard Spalart­Allmaras RANS model in the boundary layers with a
large eddy simulation (LES) in unsteady separated regions. The IDDES formulation was
selected. Detailed information can be found in STAR­CCM+ User Guide [30].
3.3
Heat transfer models
In engineering systems, three types of heat transfer are generally considered. These
are conduction, convection and radiation, as depicted in Figure 3.1. All of them play an
important role in combustion engines [6].
Figure 3.1: Engine heat transfer mechanisms [12]
Conduction is heat transfer through materials due to a temperature gradient, it is gov­
erned by Fourier’s law:
˙Qx = −k · Ax
∂T
∂x
(3.37)
Heat transfer in scavenging flow simulations
23
==PAGE:34==
where:
˙Qx is the heat flux in the x direction, k is the thermal conductivity of the material, Ax
is the area of a surface, and T is the temperature of the material. Conduction is important
in determining the temperature of the piston. Pistons are usually made of aluminium alloys
and these lose strength with higher temperatures. Knowledge about conduction through
the liner is important to determine surface temperatures and the lubricating oil film [6].
Convection is heat transfer that involves the motion of fluids. It is normally described by
Newton’s law of cooling:
˙Q = h · A(T −T∞)
(3.38)
where: ˙Q is the heat flux from a surface, h is the heat transfer coefficient, A is the area
of the surface, T is the temperature of the surface and T∞is the temperature of the fluid
surrounding the surface. Convection in engines mostly occurs through forced convec­
tion. The heat transfer coefficient is usually related to fluid and flow properties and thus
determined by dimensionless parameters:
• Nusselt number (Nu): ratio of convective heat transfer to conductive heat transfer,
• Prandtl number (Pr): ratio of momentum diffusivity to thermal diffusivity,
• Reynolds number (Re): ratio between inertial and viscous forces.
Convection correlations are typically of the form:
Nux = C · Rea
x, Prb
(3.39)
where a, b and C are constants determined empirically [6].
Radiation is a heat transfer between substances where the energy is transferred in the
form of electromagnetic radiation. Radiation is important, especially during combustion in
diesel engines. Radiation also occurs from exhaust systems and blocks to the surround­
ings, although this is not usually important regarding the performance. Following is the
expression for the radiation heat transfer between two surfaces that only ”see” each other:
˙Q1→2 =
σT 4
1 −σT 4
2
1−ϵ1
ϵ1A1 +
1
A1F12 + 1−ϵ2
ϵ2A2
(3.40)
where: σ is the Stefan­Boltzmann constant, ϵi is the emissivity of the body i, Ai is the
radiating surface of body i, and F12 is the shape factor, that is fraction of energy radiated
from surface 1 that reaches surface 2.
In an engine, most surfaces have emissivity close to one, with the exception of polished
parts. In the combustion chamber, the diesel flame has an emissivity rather close to one.
Piston and and cylinder head also have rather high emissivity, because of the layer of
soot and deposits on the surfaces. Regarding spark ignition engines, the radiation heat
transfer does not play much of a role [6].
3.4
Heat transfer in STAR­CCM+
The general theory behind heat transfer is described in section 3.3. In Simcenter STAR­
CCM+, heat transfer can be calculated within a fluid, between different fluid streams,
between a fluid and a solid, and within a solid. The coupled heat transfer within a fluid
24
Heat transfer in scavenging flow simulations
==PAGE:35==
and an adjoining solid is called conjugate heat transfer. For the analysis of a conjugate
heat transfer, the energy equation is solved throughout the fluid and the solid solution
domain with an efficient implicit thermal coupling at the interface between the fluid and
the solid. All other conservation equations are only solved within the fluid [30].
In Simcenter STAR­CCM+ the energy equation is implemented in the integral form pre­
sented in Equation 3.18.
The governing equation for energy transport within a solid is the following:
d
dt
Z
V
ρCpT dV +
I
A
ρCpT vs · da = −
I
A
˙q′′ · da +
Z
V
SudV,
(3.41)
where:
• ρ is the solid density,
• Cp is the specific heat,
• vs is the solid convective velocity (only applicable when the region is a pure body of
rotation),
• Su is a user­defined volumetric heat source within the solid.
Simcenter STAR­CCM+ solves for Equation 3.41 using either the finite volume method
or the finite element method. In case of finite element method, the second term on the
left­hand side is not included [30].
Heat transfer in scavenging flow simulations
25
==PAGE:36==
26
Heat transfer in scavenging flow simulations
==PAGE:37==
4
Method
4.1
Mesh
Two different mesh settings were used for the purpose of this work. Firstly, the flow in the
engine without the heat transfer through the walls (i.e. boundary conditions set adiabatic
on all the walls) was simulated (this case will be further referred to as the adiabatic case).
After that, constant temperatures were set on certain walls and the heat transfer through
these walls was examined (this case will be further referred to as the non­adiabatic case).
For the purpose of the non­adiabatic case, it was necessary to make certain changes to
the mesh used in the the adiabatic case.
To run the adiabatic case, the mesh was generated using the Automated mesh operation
in STAR­CCM+. Enabled meshers were: Surface Remesher and Trimmed Cell Mesher
for all the operations, and Prism Layer Mesher and Automatic Surface Repair for most of
them. The base size was set to either 5 mm or 10 mm for the most parts. The exhaust
receiver was meshed with base size of 100 mm. The mesh in the bottom of the cylinder
and in the scavenging ports was refined, so was the mesh around the bottom part of the
valve. Prism layers were disabled in the bottom part of the liner and on the piston surface,
as well as on the scavenging ports outlets. On most of the surfaces, the number of prism
layers was set to either 2 or 3. Exceptions are liner (7 prism layers) and Exhaust receiver
(no prism layers). Scenes displaying mesh plane sections can be found in the Appendix A.
The adiabatic case was run using the following turbulence models: LES WALE Subgrid
Scale, DES Spalart­Allmaras IDDES and RANS k−ω. The velocity profiles obtained from
these were compared.
The non­adiabatic case required increasing the number of prism layers, in order to reach
lower Wall Y+ values. The numbers of prism layers on the surfaces, where the heat
transfer was measured, were set to values between 10 and 15. Significant difference
is the presence of the prism layers on the piston surface. Surfaces of valve and cover
were refined in terms of base size to avoid divergence. More information about the mesh
together with figures can be found in Appendix A.
The numbers of prism layers on different surfaces and the prism layer total thickness in
the adiabatic case can be found in Table 4.1. The same for the non­adiabatic case is
documented in Table 4.2. The prism layer stretching was set to 1.5 in all the cases.
Surface
Number of prism layers
PL total thickness (relative to base)
cover
2
15 %
valve
3
15 %
liner
7
33,3 %
piston
Prism layers disabled
Prism layers disabled
Table 4.1: Prism layers adiabatic case
The non­adiabatic case was performed using DES Spalart­Allmaras IDDES and RANS
k −ω turbulence models. The only difference in the mesh settings between these two
models was the number of prism layers on valve face (the valve face is displayed in the
Figure 4.1a, the valve face occupies 15,7 % of the valve surface included in the heat trans­
fer measurement). Mesh for the DES turbulence model was constructed with 12 prism
Heat transfer in scavenging flow simulations
27
==PAGE:38==
Surface
Number of prism layers
PL total thickness (relative to base)
cover upper
15
15 %
cover lower
12
15 %
valve
12
15 %
liner
10
33,3 %
piston
12
33,3 %
Table 4.2: Prism layers non­adiabatic case
layers on the valve face, as on the rest of the valve (see Figure 4.1b). However, this
causes divergence using RANS. To avoid the divergence, the number of prism layers on
the valve face was reduced from 12 to 2 (while on the rest of the valve surface, 12 prism
layers was maintained). The mesh with these settings is displayed on Figure 4.1c. This
measure was taken for 0,5 CAD in the beggining of the simulation (from 128 to 128,5 CAD
ATDC). After that, this number was increased back to 12 and mesh was generated with
settings identical to the DES case.
(a) Valve face
(b) PLs on valve face default
(c) PLs on valve face RANS 128 ­ 128,5 CAD
Figure 4.1: Valve face prism layers
There are two moving parts in the model: valve and piston. As for the piston, the Morpher
Displacement Specification was set to Grid Velocity, defined by the following vector:
28
Heat transfer in scavenging flow simulations
==PAGE:39==


0
0
r · ω · sin (ω(t + t0)) −
r2·ω·sin(2ω(t+t0))
2·√
l2−r2·sin2(ω(t+t0))

,
where:
• r is the crank radius,
• ω is the engine rotational speed,
• t is time,
• t0 is the start time,
• l is the connecting rod length.
Valve displacement over time was specified via a tabulated dataset. Linear interpola­
tion was employed between discrete time­position entries to obtain the continuous valve
movement profile.
To ensure mesh quality and to avoid excessive cell deformation due to valve motion, the
mesh surrounding the valve was regenerated at approximately each 0,5 CAD increment
during the valve motion. In the non­adiabatic case, the remeshing was also applied to the
cylinder due to the prism layers on the piston surface. The script was set to remesh the
cylinder each 0,5 CAD as well. To avoid the negative volume cells, rigid prism morphing
was enabled on moving walls and on cover surface in the non­adiabatic case.
Both cases start with closed valve and with piston at 128 CAD ATDC.
In the adiabatic case, the whole mesh consists of 9 480 258 at that point. The adiabatic
case does not undergo an extensive remeshing (except for the remeshing in the dead
volume, which does not have a significant effect on the total number of cells), therefore
the number of cells at the BDC is 10 063 929.
The non­adiabatic case starts with 13 845 198 cells at 128 CAD ATDC. The higher number
of cells is caused by the added prism layers. The cylinder remeshing together with the
dead volume remeshing increase the number of cells to 15 094 804 at the BDC.
4.2
Heat transfer simulation
To simulate the heat transfer, constant static temperatures were set on the surfaces,
where the heat transfer was measured (see Table 4.3). For more information about these
surfaces locations, read Appendix A.
Surface (BC: Wall)
Static temperature [K]
cover
473
valve
853
liner
473
piston
673
Table 4.3: Static temperatures on studied surfaces
The Heat transfer rate [W] and cumulative heat transfer [J] through these walls are mea­
sured using time monitors of the reports in STAR­CCM+.
Heat transfer in scavenging flow simulations
29
==PAGE:40==
4.3
Velocity profiles
The goal of running the adiabatic case was to compare how the three different turbulence
models will perform in terms of the working fluid flow simulation. For this purpose, hori­
zontal planes were placed in the cylinder model. The planes were placed in the following
positions: z/D = 1; 2; 3; 4, where z/D = 0 represents the bottom of the scavenging ports
(z is the vertical axis, D is the cylinder diameter). The positions of these planes are dis­
played in Figure 4.2. In these planes, the axial and tangential velocity components were
measured. Azimuthal averaging was used to post­process the obtained data.
(a) 130 CAD ATDC
(b) 160 CAD ATDC
(c) 190 CAD ATDC
(d) 220 CAD ATDC
Figure 4.2: Plane sections in the cylinder
4.4
Mesh sensitivity ­ number of prism layers
To explore the mesh sensitivity, the non­adiabatic DES case was performed with de­
creased number of prism layers. All the settings were left unchanged, the only change
was decreasing the number of prism layers on all the surfaces of interest (see Table 4.2)
by 3. The heat transfer measured was then compared with the original case. There was
also an attempt to explore the influence of increased number of prism layers. However,
this case required significant base size reduction on certain surfaces (mainly in the dead
volume) to avoid divergence. Computation cost was increased to such extent, that it was
decided not to continue with this case.
4.5
LES quality assessment
To evaluate the quality of LES simulations, the method proposed by I. B. Celik et al. [32]
was applied. The index of quality of LES is denoted as LES IQ. It measures how much
of the turbulence is modeled by the subgrid model by using the turbulent viscosity ratio.
According to I. B. Celik et al. [32], LES IQ of 0,75 to 0,85 is adequate for most engineering
applications that occur at high Reynolds numbers. LES models were assessed for LES
30
Heat transfer in scavenging flow simulations
==PAGE:41==
adiabatic case and both DES cases (adiabatic and non­adiabatic). First, scenes with high
velocity magnitudes were generated and then the LES IQ was evaluated on these scenes.
Heat transfer in scavenging flow simulations
31
==PAGE:42==
32
Heat transfer in scavenging flow simulations
==PAGE:43==
5
Results and Discussion
5.1
Adiabatic case
The Figure 5.1 displays the axial velocity profiles (radial distribution of axial velocities)
from adiabatic case at the plane sections clarified in Figure 4.2. The velocity profiles
were captured at 130, 160, 190 and 220 CAD ATDC. Azimuthal averaging was used
to generate the plots. For more detailed insight, the velocity plane section scenes are
displayed in Appendix B.
The 130 CAD ATDC position is shortly after the start of the valve opening and the scav­
enging ports are still closed, thus the flux is not as significant as at the other values of
CAD and all the models predict similar velocity profiles.
At 160 and 190 CAD ATDC the central recirculation region is predicted by all the models
(the fact that there is a central recirculation region was experimentally shown by K.M.
Ingvorsen et al. [33]). Although similar trends can be observed, there are differences
between how different models predict the flux. These differences can also be observed
close to the liner surface (R = 0,25 m), which can cause that these models will predict
different heat transfer.
Figure 5.1: Axial velocity profiles, adiabatic case
LES WALE Subgrid Scale
DES Spalart­Allmaras IDDES
RANS k −ω
Figure 5.2 displays tangential velocity profiles. All the turbulence models predict the swirl.
The swirl is more significant in the bottom part of the cylinder, compared to the top part of
Heat transfer in scavenging flow simulations
33
==PAGE:44==
the cylider ­ this is predicted by all the models and it was also shown experimentally by
K.M. Ingvorsen et al. [33]. However, as in the case of the axial velocity profiles, there are
differences in the velocity profiles predicted by different models, including the area close
to the liner surface. Therefore it is likely that there will be differences in the heat transfer
predicted by different models.
Figure 5.2: Tangential velocity profiles, adiabatic case
LES WALE Subgrid Scale
DES Spalart­Allmaras IDDES
RANS k −ω
5.2
Non­adiabatic case
5.2.1
Heat transfer prediced by DES Spalart­Allmaras
The non­adiabatic DES case was run to the BDC. Due to the lack of computational re­
sources, the other non­adiabatic cases did run for less amount of physical time than the
DES case. Thus, the DES case is used to describe the characteristics of the heat transfer
through the selected surfaces. Positive values of heat transfer indicate heat being trans­
ferred from the working fluid to the surface (surface being heated by the gas). Figures
displaying heat transfer and cumulative heat transfer are presented below. The simula­
tion starts at 128 CAD ATDC. Due to the initial conditions artifact, the plots displaying the
heat transfer are only presented from 128,5 CAD ATDC. Cumulative heat transfer plots
are presented from 128 CAD ATDC.
34
Heat transfer in scavenging flow simulations
==PAGE:45==
(a) Heat transfer
(b) Cumulative heat transfer
Figure 5.3: DES case heat transfer cover
Due to the high temperature of the gas after combustion and expansion (the simulation
starts with cylinder gas temperature of 850 K) , the cover is accepting the heat in most of
the simulated phase. The heat transfer through cover (Figure 5.3a) first reaches a bottom
shortly before 130 CAD ATDC. This is due to the initial conditions artifact. Then it starts
increasing and it reaches a peak of 15,92 kW at 134,2 CAD ATDC. This increase is caused
by the high velocity of the fluid during this phase of the valve opening. After reaching the
peak, the heat transfer decreases. This is caused by decreasing temperature of the gas in
cylinder as the blow­down goes on and by decreasing velocity of the flow along the cover
surface. The most significant part of the heat transfer through the cover occurs on the
upper part of cover, where the fluid velocity along the cover surface is highest as depicted
in Figure 5.4 and Figure 5.5.
(a) 134 CAD ATDC
(b) 140 CAD ATDC
Figure 5.4: Velocity magnitude in the dead volume
Heat transfer in scavenging flow simulations
35
==PAGE:46==
Figure 5.5: Heat flux cover 134 CAD ATDC
Figure 5.6: Heat flux cover 180 CAD ATDC, negative values only
After leveling off, the heat transfer through cover starts to gradually increase again. This is
due to the increasing fluid velocity as the scavenging ports open and the flux is accelerated
by the pressure gradient. However, the effect is not immediate, as the flux takes time to
develop before reaching the cover. The scavenging ports start opening at 143,7 CAD
ATDC, however, the effect on the cover heat transfer starts to be visible at 155 CAD
ATDC. As the fresh air reaches the cover, the heat transfer decreases to negative values
short before 180 CAD ATDC. This indicates the cover being cooled by the fresh air. The
top part of the cover also plays the most significant role at cooling before the TDC, as the
fresh air is being directed to the exhaust manifold. Due to the swirl the cooling is not as
symmetric. This can be well observed in the Figure 5.6.
36
Heat transfer in scavenging flow simulations
==PAGE:47==
(a) Heat transfer
(b) Cumulative heat transfer
Figure 5.7: DES case heat transfer liner
The heat transfer through the liner, displayed in Figure 5.7a, is at first affected by the initial
conditions artifact. After reaching the bottom at 131,7 CAD ATDC, the heat flux through
the liner increases as the valve start to open and the forced convection has the same
effect on the top part of the liner as it has on the cover. It reaches the bottom at 134,2
CAD and then the heat transfer decreases with decreasing temperature of the gas in the
cylinder. After opening of the scavenging ports and the fresh air flowing to the cylinder,
the liner is being cooled down in its bottom part. The overall value of the heat transfer
through the liner turns into negative values at 157,5 CAD and further decreases as the
fresh air fills in the cylinder.
(a) Heat transfer
(b) Cumulative heat transfer
Figure 5.8: DES case heat transfer piston
The heat transfer through the piston starts at positive values, as Figure 5.8a depicts. It
decreases with decreasing temperature of the gas in the cylinder and turns negative at
140 CAD ATDC. When the scavenging ports start opening at 143,7 CAD ATDC, the gas
first flows from the cylinder to the scavenge box (explained in subsection 1.1.2). Sharp
decrease in the heat transfer comes when fresh air starts flowing into the cylinder. This
indicates a significant cooling of the piston by the fresh air. However, from 156 CAD ATDC,
the cooling decreases. This can be explained by the decreasing velocity magnitude of the
fresh air flux, as the area of the open scavenging ports increases. The decreasing velocity
Heat transfer in scavenging flow simulations
37
==PAGE:48==
magnitude (illustrated in the Figure 5.9) leads to decrease in forced convection.
(a) 150 CAD ATDC
(b) 165 CAD ATDC
Figure 5.9: Velocity magnitude in the cylinder bottom
Figure 5.10: Temperature in the cylinder bottom, 151 CAD ATDC
It is worth noting that the fresh air enters the cylinder at an angle of approximately 20◦
above the horizontal. Thus, the fresh air does not flow directly on the piston surface and
the hot gas remains trapped in the piston bowl in the beginning of the scavenging, as
depicted in the Figure 5.10.
38
Heat transfer in scavenging flow simulations
==PAGE:49==
(a) Heat transfer
(b) Cumulative heat transfer
Figure 5.11: DES case heat transfer valve total surface
The heat transfer through the valve surface correlates well with the mean velocity mag­
nitude in the dead volume. This is displayed in the Figure 5.11a, where the values of
the mean velocity magnitude are displayed as negative to illustrate the correlation. As
already described in the cover case, the velocity first increases with the valve opening
(blow­down), then it decreases as the valve is open enough, and then it increases again
during the scavenging. There is not a perfect correlation though, because the changing
temperature of the gas also affects the heat transfer. The values of the heat transfer are
negative during the whole period described, due to the high temperature of the valve. As
the fresh air reaches the valve at 170 CAD ATDC, the cooling increases significantly.
(a) Heat transfer
(b) Cumulative heat transfer
Figure 5.12: DES case heat transfer valve bottom surface
The heat transfer through the valve bottom surface, displayed in the Figure 5.12a follows
the similar trend as the total surface of the valve. The radial velocity along this surface
plays the most important role. Fluctuations of a high frequency can be observed in the
Figure 5.12a, these are caused by periodic remeshing and by changes in the valve move­
ment velocity. Although the mesh is being regenerated around the whole body of the valve
during its movement, the valve surface is more sensitive to this than the rest of the valve
surface. To test the influence of these fluctuations on the cumulative heat transfer, the
simulation was run with a time step 10 times lower. The result showed that the influence
is negligible.
Heat transfer in scavenging flow simulations
39
==PAGE:50==
5.2.2
DES and RANS comparison
Figures 5.13 ­ 5.17 display the comparison between resulting heat transfer obtained with
DES Spalart­Allmaras and RANS k­ω turbulence models. Due to the limited computational
resources, the RANS case was only simulated to circa 153 CAD ATDC.
It is obvious that both models predict very similar trends. However, there are significant
differences in the heat transfer values.
In general, it can be observed that RANS will predict less heat transfer in positive values
(heating the surface by the gas) and more heat transfer in negative values. In other words,
the line representing RANS is below the line representing DES in the plots (with some
exemptions, for example the valve bottom). This trend is best illustrated in the figures
representing the cumulative heat transfer.
Temperature plane scenes and IDDES Blending Function planes scenes for selected sur­
faces are displayed in Appendix section B.5. The areas with most significant differences
in heat transfer were selected. The IDDES Blending Function value close to 1 indicates,
that the area is simulated with RANS, whereas value close to 0 indicates LES. From the
figures in Appendix section B.5, it is obvious that the prism layers are simulated using
RANS, and the remaining areas using LES, as can be expected.
There can be multiple reasons for the differences in heat transfer between DES and RANS
cases. One of them is that in DES case, different RANS model was implemented than in
the RANS case. However, the different patterns in the flux, described in the section 5.1
most likely also influence the results. This section remains without conclusion and re­
quires further research.
(a) Heat transfer
(b) Cumulative heat transfer
Figure 5.13: DES and RANS heat transfer comparison, cover
40
Heat transfer in scavenging flow simulations
==PAGE:51==
(a) Heat transfer
(b) Cumulative heat transfer
Figure 5.14: DES and RANS heat transfer comparison, liner
(a) Heat transfer
(b) Cumulative heat transfer
Figure 5.15: DES and RANS heat transfer comparison, piston
(a) Heat transfer
(b) Cumulative heat transfer
Figure 5.16: DES and RANS heat transfer comparison, valve total
Heat transfer in scavenging flow simulations
41
==PAGE:52==
(a) Heat transfer
(b) Cumulative heat transfer
Figure 5.17: DES and RANS heat transfer comparison, valve bottom
5.3
Mesh quality
5.3.1
Influence of reduced prism layers on the heat transfer
The non­adiabatic DES case with reduced number of prism layers was run to circa 146
CAD ATDC. It was not run further due to the project time limit and limited computational
resources. Figures 5.18 ­ 5.22 display the comparison of the case with original number of
prism layers and the case with reduced number of prism layers in terms of heat transfer
and cumulative heat transfer. In general, the case with reduced number of prism layers
predicts higher heat transfer (both in terms of heating and cooling the surfaces). This
difference reveals that the solution is sensitive to reducing the number of prism layers.
The Figure 5.23 displays the temperatures in the prism layers close to the cover sur­
face at 134 CAD ATDC, in the area with high value of the heat transfer (cover upper). The
cases with original and reduced numbers of prism layers are compared. The Figure 5.23a
reveals temperature differences between the prism layers closest to the surface. This in­
dicates that to resolve the temperature gradient, it is necessary to use at least the number
of prism layers applied in the original case.
(a) Heat transfer
(b) Cumulative heat transfer
Figure 5.18: DES case heat transfer cover, different number of PLs
42
Heat transfer in scavenging flow simulations
==PAGE:53==
(a) Heat transfer
(b) Cumulative heat transfer
Figure 5.19: DES case heat transfer liner, different number of PLs
(a) Heat transfer
(b) Cumulative heat transfer
Figure 5.20: DES case heat transfer piston, different number of PLs
(a) Heat transfer
(b) Cumulative heat transfer
Figure 5.21: DES case heat valve total, different number of PLs
Heat transfer in scavenging flow simulations
43
==PAGE:54==
(a) Heat transfer
(b) Cumulative heat transfer
Figure 5.22: DES case heat valve bottom, different number of PLs
(a) original case (15 PLs)
(b) Reduced PLs (12 PLs)
Figure 5.23: Temperature cover upper, zoom, 134 CAD
5.3.2
LES quality assessment
In the Figure 5.24 a region with high flow velocity magnitude and yet high LES IQ number,
in the DES non­adiabatic case, is displayed. It is the region between valve face and
cover, indicated by the purple circles. In this area, the mesh is refined to 15 % of the base
size. Refining the rest of the mesh to such value would increase the computational costs
significantly.
In the rest of the model, the mesh in not sufficiently fine to capture the turbulence when
the fresh air starts to flow in from the scavenge box. This is depicted in the Figure B.14
in the appendix Appendix B. This issue can be either solved by refining the mesh, or by
applying more suitable LES model. In LES WALE adiabatic case, the values of LES IQ
are higher, as depicted in the Figure B.14.
44
Heat transfer in scavenging flow simulations
==PAGE:55==
(a) Velocity magnitude
(b) LES IQ
Figure 5.24: LES IQ evaluation, DES non­adiabatic, 134 CAD ATDC, cover detail
Some degree of error can be expected due to the insufficient turbulence simulation. How­
ever, as the influence of the DES IQ on the heat transfer was not explored, it is not possible
to derive any exact conclusions.
Heat transfer in scavenging flow simulations
45
==PAGE:56==
46
Heat transfer in scavenging flow simulations
==PAGE:57==
6
Conclusion
The adiabatic case was performed with different turbulent models. From the velocity pro­
files observation, these all predict flows with similar trends, yet different values of velocity
components in detail. This is most likely one of the reasons for the different heat transfer
predicted by DES and RANS models later in the non­adiabatic case.
The non­adiabatic case was run to 180 CAD ATDC furthest, due to the limitations in com­
putational resources. This does not describe the whole scavenging process. However, it
is possible to derive some general conclusions. The heat transfer through the examined
surfaces is to great degree influenced by the flux velocity (forced convection), as well as
by the changing temperature of the gas in the cylinder. The influence of gas temperature
is most obvious when the fresh air reaches the examined surfaces.
Comparing DES and RANS models with non­adiabatic settings, it is observed that they
predict similar trends. However, the differences in the predicted values of the heat trans­
fer raise questions regarding the accuracy of these models with the particular settings.
Further research and improvement of the simulation settings are needed.
The comparison of the non­adiabatic DES case with the case using identical settings with
less prism layers reveals, that in order to properly resolve the temperature gradients at the
examined surfaces, the numbers of prism layers used in the original case are necessary
at minimum. Increasing the number of prism layer might lead to even more accurate
gradients resolution. It will, however, require decreasing the base size on certain surfaces
and therefore increase the computational cost significantly.
LES quality index revealed that the mesh settings used to run the non­adiabatic DES case
are not sufficiently fine to capture all the turbulence. This does not necessarily mean that
the heat transfer predictions are wrong. The influence of LES IQ on the heat transfer
prediction was not examined. However, some degree of error due to this factor can be
expected.
Heat transfer in scavenging flow simulations
47
==PAGE:58==
48
Heat transfer in scavenging flow simulations
==PAGE:59==
7
Suggestions for further work
• Run the whole engine cycle
• Run DES case using DES k −ω
• Run RANS model with coarsened mesh
• Explore the influence of the LES IQ on the heat transfer
• Explore the influence of increasing number of prism layers
Heat transfer in scavenging flow simulations
49
==PAGE:60==
50
Heat transfer in scavenging flow simulations
==PAGE:61==
Bibliography
[1]
European Comission. Maritime Transport. URL: https : / / competition - policy . ec .
europa.eu/sectors/transport/maritime-transport_en#antitrust. (accessed: 18.05.2025).
[2]
United Nations. Review of Maritime Transport 2024: Overview. Tech. rep. UNCTAD,
2024. URL: https://unctad.org/system/files/official-document/rmt2024overview_en.
pdf.
[3]
International Energy Agency. International Shipping – Overview. Accessed: 2025­
05­18. URL: https://www.iea.org/energy-system/transport/international-shipping.
[4]
Fortune Business Insights. Marine Engine Market Size. Market Research Report
FBI100771. Accessed: 2025­05­18. Fortune Business Insights, 2025. URL: https:
//www.fortunebusinessinsights.com/industry-reports/marine-engine-market-100771.
[5]
International Maritime Organization. Resolution MEPC.377(80): 2023 IMO Strat­
egy on Reduction of GHG Emissions from Ships. IMO Resolution MEPC.377(80).
Adopted on 7 July 2023. Accessed: 2025­05­18. International Maritime Organiza­
tion, 2023. URL: https://wwwcdn.imo.org/localresources/en/OurWork/Environment/
Documents/annex/MEPC%2080/Annex%2015.pdf.
[6]
Spencer C. Sorenson. Internal Combustion Engine Principles. with Vehicle Appli­
cations. Automatic Press, 2017. ISBN: 8792130577.
[7]
Fredrik Herland Andersen. “Integrated Analysis of the Scavenging Process in Ma­
rine Two­Stroke Diesel Engines”. PhD Thesis. Kongens Lyngby, DK: DTU Mechan­
ical Engineering, Aug. 2015.
[8]
Martin Leduc. The marine Diesel engine. Accessed: 2025­05­34. 2001. URL: https:
//www.dieselduck.info/machine/01%20prime%20movers/diesel_engine/diesel_engine.
01.htm.
[9]
Arash Nemati. “Numerical Simulation of Combustion under Marine Engine Like
Conditions”. PhD Thesis. Kongens Lyngby, DK: DTU, Department of Mechanical
Engineering, Apr. 2022.
[10]
John B. Heywood. Internal combustion engine fundamentals. McGraw­Hill, 1988.
ISBN: 0071004998.
[11]
Casper Schytte Hemmingsen. Numerical Simulation of Convective Heat Transfer
During Scavenging in a Model Diesel Engine. DTU, Department of Mechanical En­
gineering, Building 404, 2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark, 2014.
[12]
Michael Vincent Jensen. “Heat Transfer in Large Two­Stroke Marine Diesel En­
gines”. PhD Thesis. Kongens Lyngby, DK: DTU, Department of Mechanical Engi­
neering, Aug. 2012.
[13]
MAN Energy Solutions. Emission project guide. Available at https://man-es.com/
applications/projectguides/2stroke/content/special_pg/PG_7020-0145.pdf. 2024.
[14]
Arash Nemati et al. “Numerical Study of the Scavenging Process in a Large Two­
Stroke Marine Engine Using URANS and LES Turbulence Models”. In: SAE Tech­
nical Paper Series 2020­01­2012 (2020). URL: https://www.sae.org/publications/
technical-papers/content/2020-01-2012/.
[15]
E. Sigurdsson et al. “Numerical analysis of the scavenge flow and convective heat
transfer in large two­stroke marine diesel engines”. In: Applied Energy (2014). DOI:
10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2014.01.064.
[16]
Mara Isabel Lamas Galdo and Carlos G. Rodrguez Vidal. “Simulation of the Scav­
enging Process in Two­Stroke Engines”. In: Numerical Modelling. Universidade da
Coruña: InTech, 2012. DOI: 10.5772/37097.
Heat transfer in scavenging flow simulations
51
==PAGE:62==
[17]
M. de Castro Gouveia, J. A. dos Reis Parise, and A. O. Nieckele. “Numerical Simu­
lation of the Fluid Flow and Heat Transfer Processes During Scavenging in a Two­
Stroke Engine Under Steady­State Conditions”. In: Journal of Heat Transfer 114.2
(1992), pp. 383–393. DOI: 10.1115/1.2911286.
[18]
Hongliang Yu et al. “The impact of scavenging air state on the combustion and
emission performance of marine two­stroke dual­fuel engine”. In: Scientific Reports
14.1 (July 2024). ISSN: 2045­2322. DOI: 10.1038/s41598-024-66826-z. URL: http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-66826-z.
[19]
Enes Fatih Pehlivan and İsmail Altın. “A full­scale CFD model of scavenge air in­
let temperature on two­stroke marine diesel engine combustion and exhaust emis­
sion characteristics”. In: International Journal of Energy Studies 9.3 (Sept. 2024),
pp. 493–517. ISSN: 2717­7513. DOI: 10.58559/ijes.1467215. URL: http://dx.doi.
org/10.58559/ijes.1467215.
[20]
Kweon Ha Park. “Effect of cylinder wall temperature on marine engine combustion”.
In: Journal of Advanced Marine Engineering and Technology 47.6 (2023), pp. 309–
316. DOI: https://doi.org/10.5916/jamet.2023.47.6.309.
[21]
Dig Vijay Singh and Eilif Pedersen. “A review of waste heat recovery technologies
for maritime applications”. In: Energy Conversion and Management 111 (2016),
pp. 315–328. ISSN: 0196­8904. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enconman.2015.12.
073. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0196890415011826.
[22]
Luis Alfonso Díaz­Secades, R. González, and N. Rivera. “Waste heat recovery from
marine engines and their limiting factors: Bibliometric analysis and further system­
atic review”. In: Cleaner Energy Systems 6 (2023), p. 100083. ISSN: 2772­7831.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cles.2023.100083. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S277278312300033X.
[23]
Sipeng Zhu, Kun Zhang, and Kangyao Deng. “A review of waste heat recovery from
the marine engine with highly efficient bottoming power cycles”. In: Renewable and
Sustainable Energy Reviews 120 (2020), p. 109611. ISSN: 1364­0321. DOI: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2019.109611. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S1364032119308196.
[24]
Zhen Lu et al. “An efficient approach to improve thermal efficiency on a low­speed
two­stroke marine diesel engine”. In: Fuel 329 (2022), p. 125386. ISSN: 0016­2361.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2022.125386. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S0016236122022207.
[25]
Michal Wojcieszyk et al. “Effect of Alternative Fuels on Marine Engine Performance”.
In: SAE Technical Papers (2019). DOI: 10.4271/2019-01-2230.
[26]
K. Kołwzan and M. Narewski. “Alternative Fuels for Marine Applications”. In: Latvian
Journal of Chemistry 51.4 (2012), pp. 398–406. DOI: 10.2478/v10161-012-0024-9.
[27]
Sergejus Lebedevas and Edmonas Milašius. “Comparative Assessment of the Ther­
mal Load of a Marine Engine Operating on Alternative Fuels”. In: Journal of Marine
Science and Engineering 13.4 (2025). ISSN: 2077­1312. DOI: 10.3390/jmse13040748.
URL: https://www.mdpi.com/2077-1312/13/4/748.
[28]
Sipeng Zhu et al. “Thermodynamic analysis of the turbocharged marine two­stroke
engine cycle with different scavenging air control technologies”. In: Energy 191
(2020), p. 116533. ISSN: 0360­5442. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2019.
116533. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0360544219322285.
[29]
Joel H. Ferziger and Milovan Perić. Computational Methods for Fluid Dynamics.
Berlin: Springer, 1997.
52
Heat transfer in scavenging flow simulations
==PAGE:63==
[30]
Siemens Digital Industries Software. Simcenter STAR­CCM+ 2410 User Guide. Ver­
sion 19.06.009­R8, unpublished work. Siemens Digital Industries Software. Sept.
2024.
[31]
Pijush K. Kundu, Ira M. Cohen, and David R. Dowling. Fluid Mechanics. 6th ed. San
Diego: Academic Press, 2016. ISBN: 9780124059351.
[32]
I. B. Celik, Z. N. Cehreli, and I. Yavuz. “Index of Resolution Quality for Large Eddy
Simulations”. In: Journal of Fluids Engineering 127.5 (Sept. 2005), pp. 949–958.
ISSN: 0098­2202. DOI: 10.1115/1.1990201. eprint: https://asmedigitalcollection.
asme.org/fluidsengineering/article- pdf/127/5/949/5835552/949\_1.pdf. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1115/1.1990201.
[33]
K. M. Ingvorsen et al. “Turbulent swirling flow in a dynamic model of a uniflow­
scavenged two­stroke engine”. In: Experiments in Fluids 55.5 (2014), p. 1748. DOI:
10.1007/s00348-014-1748-y.
Heat transfer in scavenging flow simulations
53
==PAGE:64==
54
Heat transfer in scavenging flow simulations
==PAGE:65==
A
Appendix A ­ Surfaces of interest, mesh
Appendix A contains figures displaying the engine geometry with highlighted surfaces of
interest. It also contains scenes displaying important aspects of the mesh.
The heat transfer is simulated and measured on the valve (includes the whole surface of
the valve, not the valve spindle though) ­ Figure A.1a, valve bottom (only the flat valve
bottom surface) ­ Figure A.1b, liner ­ Figure A.2a, cover ­ Figure A.2b and piston ­ Fig­
ure A.2c.
For the purpose of the non­adiabatic case, the cover was split to upper and lower part and
different numbers of prism layers were generated on these in order to get approximately
the same Wall Y+ values on both of them. All the other settings were kept identical and
the heat transfer was measured through the cover as a whole.
(a) Valve
(b) Valve bottom
Figure A.1: Valve and valve bottom
Heat transfer in scavenging flow simulations
55
==PAGE:66==
(a) Liner
(b) Cover
(c) Piston
Figure A.2: Liner, cover and piston surfaces
56
Heat transfer in scavenging flow simulations
==PAGE:67==
The mesh plane section of the whole geometry is displayed in Figure A.3. Detailed com­
parison between mesh used for adiabatic and non­adibatic cases can be seen in Fig­
ure A.4 and Figure A.5.
Figure A.3: Plane section mesh
Heat transfer in scavenging flow simulations
57
==PAGE:68==
(a) Adiabatic
(b) Non­adiabatic
Figure A.4: Valve and cover plane section mesh
(a) Adiabatic
(b) Non­adiabatic
Figure A.5: Piston plane section mesh
58
Heat transfer in scavenging flow simulations
==PAGE:69==
B
Appendix B ­ Plane section scenes
B.1
Velocity scenes
(a)
130
CAD
ATDC
(b)
160
CAD
ATDC
(c)
190
CAD
ATDC
(d)
220
CAD
ATDC
Figure B.1: Adiabatic LES WALE axial velocity
Heat transfer in scavenging flow simulations
59
==PAGE:70==
(a)
130
CAD
ATDC
(b)
160
CAD
ATDC
(c)
190
CAD
ATDC
(d)
220
CAD
ATDC
Figure B.2: Adiabatic DES Spalart­Allmaras axial velocity
(a)
130
CAD
ATDC
(b)
160
CAD
ATDC
(c)
190
CAD
ATDC
(d)
220
CAD
ATDC
Figure B.3: Adiabatic RANS k −ω axial velocity
60
Heat transfer in scavenging flow simulations
==PAGE:71==
(a)
130
CAD
ATDC
(b)
160
CAD
ATDC
(c)
190
CAD
ATDC
(d)
220
CAD
ATDC
Figure B.4: Adiabatic LES WALE tangential velocity
(a)
130
CAD
ATDC
(b)
160
CAD
ATDC
(c)
190
CAD
ATDC
(d)
220
CAD
ATDC
Figure B.5: Adiabatic DES Spalart­Allmaras tangential velocity
Heat transfer in scavenging flow simulations
61
==PAGE:72==
(a)
130
CAD
ATDC
(b)
160
CAD
ATDC
(c)
190
CAD
ATDC
(d)
220
CAD
ATDC
Figure B.6: Adiabatic RANS k −ω tangential velocity
(a)
130
CAD
ATDC
(b)
160
CAD
ATDC
(c)
190
CAD
ATDC
(d)
220
CAD
ATDC
Figure B.7: Adiabatic LES WALE radial velocity
62
Heat transfer in scavenging flow simulations
==PAGE:73==
(a)
130
CAD
ATDC
(b)
160
CAD
ATDC
(c)
190
CAD
ATDC
(d)
220
CAD
ATDC
Figure B.8: Adiabatic DES Spalart­Allmaras radial velocity
(a)
130
CAD
ATDC
(b)
160
CAD
ATDC
(c)
190
CAD
ATDC
(d)
220
CAD
ATDC
Figure B.9: Adiabatic RANS k −ω radial velocity
Heat transfer in scavenging flow simulations
63
==PAGE:74==
B.2
Passive scalar scenes
(a) 146 CAD ATDC
(b) 150 CAD ATDC
(c) 155 CAD ATDC
(d) 160 CAD ATDC
(e) 165 CAD ATDC
(f) 170 CAD ATDC
(g) 175 CAD ATDC
(h) 180 CAD ATDC
Figure B.10: Passive scalar DES
64
Heat transfer in scavenging flow simulations
==PAGE:75==
B.3
Temperature scenes
(a) 146 CAD ATDC
(b) 150 CAD ATDC
(c) 155 CAD ATDC
(d) 160 CAD ATDC
(e) 165 CAD ATDC
(f) 170 CAD ATDC
(g) 175 CAD ATDC
(h) 180 CAD ATDC
Figure B.11: Temperature DES
Heat transfer in scavenging flow simulations
65
==PAGE:76==
B.4
LES IQ scenes
(a) 160 CAD ATDC
(b) 190 CAD ATDC
(c) 160 CAD ATDC
(d) 190 CAD ATDC
Figure B.12: Velocity magnitude and LES IQ, LES WALE adiabatic
66
Heat transfer in scavenging flow simulations
==PAGE:77==
(a) 160 CAD ATDC
(b) 190 CAD ATDC
(c) 160 CAD ATDC
(d) 190 CAD ATDC
Figure B.13: Velocity magnitude and LES IQ, DES Spalart­Allmaras adiabatic
Heat transfer in scavenging flow simulations
67
==PAGE:78==
(a) 160 CAD ATDC
(b) 160 CAD ATDC
Figure B.14: Velocity magnitude and LES IQ, DES Spalart­Allmaras non­adiabatic
68
Heat transfer in scavenging flow simulations
==PAGE:79==
B.5
Non­adiabatic DES and RANS temperature gradients
IDDES Blending Function on selected areas
(a) IDDES Blending Function
(b) Temperature DES
(c) Tempearture RANS
Figure B.15: Cover, 132 CAD ATDC
Heat transfer in scavenging flow simulations
69
==PAGE:80==
(a) IDDES Blending Function
(b) Temperature DES
(c) Tempearture RANS
Figure B.16: Piston, 152 CAD ATDC
70
Heat transfer in scavenging flow simulations
==PAGE:81==
(a) IDDES Blending Function
(b) Temperature DES
(c) Tempearture RANS
Figure B.17: Liner top part, rotated 90◦, 134 CAD ATDC
Heat transfer in scavenging flow simulations
71
==PAGE:82==
C
List of symbols
A
Surface enclosing the control volume
ATDC
After top dead center
BDC
Bottom dead center
Cp
Specific heat
D
Cylinder diameter
Di,j
Rate of the strain tensor
∆
Local measure of the grid size
δi,j
Kronecker delta
E
Total energy
EV C
Exhaust valve closing
EV O
Exhaust valve opening
f∆
Damping function that depends on the DES variant
fb
Resultant of the body forces (such as gravity and centrifugal forces) per unit volume acting on the
F
Any vector field
G(x, ∆)
Filter function characterized by a filter width ∆= (∆x∆y∆z)1/3
h
Static enthalpy
h0
Heat of formation
H
Total enthalpy
I
Identity tensor
IPC
Intake port closing
IPO
Intake port opening
J
Diffusive flux
k
Turbulent kinetic energy
l
Connecting rod length
lk
Turbulent length­scale
λ
Thermal conductivity
M
Volume occupied by the control mass
m
Mass
µ
Dynamic viscosity
p
Static pressure
Q
Added heat
r
Crank radius
ρ
Density
Su
User­specified source term
T
Temperature
T
Stress tensor
TDC
Top dead center
T
Viscous stress tensor
t
Time
˙q′′
Heat flux vector
v
Continuum velocity
vb
Velocity with which the V surface is moving
vs
Solid convective velocity (only applicable when the region is a pure body of rotation)
V
Control volume
72
Heat transfer in scavenging flow simulations
==PAGE:83==
W
Work done on the system
x
Spatial coordinate
ω
Engine rotational speed
ϵ
Turbulent dissipation rate
e
Specific internal energy
Φ
Any conserved extensive property
ϕ
Any conserved intensive property
Heat transfer in scavenging flow simulations
73
==PAGE:84==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Anker Engelunds Vej 101
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
construct.dtu.dk
