==PAGE:1==
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic
Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
Insights from the Copenhagen Pregnancy Loss (COPL) Study
Agnes Syshøj Lorenzen
Master Thesis in Bioinformatics
DTU Health Tech
Department of Health Technology
==PAGE:2==
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using
Proteomics
Insights from the Copenhagen Pregnancy Loss (COPL) Study
Master in Bioinformatics
30 June 2025
By:
Agnes Syshøj Lorenzen
Supervisors:
Karina Banasik
David Westergaard
Ole Lund
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the customary
bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Published by:
DTU, Department of Health Technology, Ørsteds Plads, Building 345C, 2800
Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.healthtech.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This thesis has been prepared over a period of 5.5 months, corresponding to 32.5 ECTS, at the
Section for Health Bioinformatics and Personalized Medicine, Department of Health Technol-
ogy, Technical University of Denmark (DTU), in collaboration with the Department of Obstet-
rics and Gynaecology at Hvidovre Hospital. The work was carried out as part of the requirements
for the Master of Science in Engineering (MSc Eng) degree.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic understanding of human biology, genetics, statistics,
and R programming. Supporting figures, plots, and tables are provided in the Appendix for
reference.
Agnes Syshøj Lorenzen - s194692
Signature
Date
ii
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
June 30th 2025
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) is a complex endocrine disorder affecting approximately
5–15% of reproductive-aged women (1). It is typically associated with hyperandrogenism, ovu-
latory dysfunction, polycystic ovaries, and metabolic disturbances. Current diagnostic criteria
rely heavily on clinical presentation and expert consensus rather than empirical data. As a re-
sult, they may fail to capture the underlying biological heterogeneity of PCOS and contribute to
underdiagnosis – particularly of milder subtypes.
In this study, PCOS was characterized using clinical, hormonal, and proteomic data from 3,016
women in the Copenhagen Pregnancy Loss (COPL) cohort. A data-driven diagnostic algo-
rithm, based on the Rotterdam criteria, was applied and compared to self-reported PCOS status.
Women meeting algorithmic criteria were further classified into NIH-defined phenotypes (A–
D).
Proteomic data were available for 999 participants, with 2,900+ serum proteins quantified using
the Olink®Explore 3072 platform. Differential expression analysis was performed using linear
mixed-effects models (adjusted for age and batch effects) and one-way ANOVA for smaller
subgroups. Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) identified altered biological pathways.
Only one protein, OXT, was significantly downregulated in self-reported PCOS (log2FC = –
0.743, FDR < 0.05), while ZP4 was downregulated in algorithm-defined cases (log2FC = –1.24,
FDR < 0.05). GSEA revealed upregulation of immune, apoptotic, and cell cycle pathways. Phe-
notype analyses suggested that current NIH-defined subtypes do not clearly reflect underlying
biological differences in patients.
This exploratory study highlights the value of data-driven diagnosis in identifying milder PCOS
phenotypes, supports the need for biologically informed subtype definitions, and serves as a
proof of concept for integrating clinical and omics data in future, more comprehensive studies.
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
iii
==PAGE:5==
Abbreviations
AFC
antral follicle count
AMH
Anti-Müllerian hormone
BMI
body mass index
COPL
Copenhagen Pregnancy Loss
CVD
cardiovascular disease
E2
estradiol
EDA
exploratory data analysis
EDC
endocrine-disrupting chemical
FDR
false discovery rate
FG
Ferriman–Gallwey
FNPO
follicle number per ovary
FSH
follicle-stimulating hormone
GC
granulosa cell
GnRH
gonadotropin-releasing hormone
GSEA
gene set enrichment analysis
GWAS
genome-wide association study
HA
hyperandrogenism
IR
insulin resistance
LC-MS liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry
LH
luteinizing hormone
MetS
metabolic syndrome
NIH
National Institutes of Health
NPX
Normalized Protein eXpression
OA
oligo-anovulation
OR
odds ratio
PCO
polycystic ovaries
PCOM
polycystic ovarian morphology
PCOS
Polycystic Ovary Syndrome
SHBG
sex hormone-binding globulin
TC
theca cell
T2D
type 2 diabetes mellitus
TVUS
transvaginal ultrasound
17-OHP 17-hydroxyprogesterone
iv
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Abbreviations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
2
1.1
PCOS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Proteomics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
1.3
Research Objectives and Hypothesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2
Methods
15
2.1
Ethics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.2
Copenhagen Pregnancy Loss (COPL) Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.3
Data Collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.4
Data Analyses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3
Results
28
3.1
Exploratory Data Analysis: Characterizing Self-Reported PCOS in the COPL
Cohort . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.2
Data-based PCOS Diagnosis & Phenotype Classification . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.3
Proteomic Signatures of PCOS in the COPL Cohort . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4
Discussion
54
4.1
Comparing Clinical and Hormonal Features: Self-Reported vs. Algorithmic
Diagnoses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
4.2
Comparing PCOS Phenotype Distributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
4.3
Exploring the Biological Relevance of the Classified Phenotypes . . . . . . . .
59
4.4
Proteomic Insights and Molecular Candidates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
4.5
Strengths and Limitations of the Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
4.6
Future Perspectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
5
Conclusion
66
Bibliography
67
A Appendix
71
A.1
Supplementary Figures & Plots . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
A.2
Supplementary Tables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
A.3
Summary Tables for Variables in COPL Data, Stratified by Self-reported PCOS
76
A.4
Summary Tables for Variables in COPL Data, Stratified by Data-based PCOS
Diagnosis (Post-2023 Full-criteria Model) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
93
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
1
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
1.1
PCOS
PCOS is one of the most common endocrine disorders affecting reproductive-aged women, with
many studies citing a prevalence of 5–15%, depending on the diagnostic criteria applied and with
slight variation across ethnic groups (1, 2). More precisely, a recent comprehensive review by
Salari et al. (2024) estimated a global prevalence of 9.2% (CI: 6.8–12.5%) (3).
As a complex, multifactorial condition, PCOS is characterized by clinical manifestations of
hyperandrogenism (HA), oligo-anovulation (OA), and polycystic ovarian morphology (PCOM),
alongside a well-recognized metabolic component. The first three clinical features form the
basis of current diagnostic criteria, underscoring that PCOS is not diagnosed through a simple
laboratory test.
The clinical presentation of PCOS typically begins around menarche and varies widely between
individuals. Manifestations of PCOS often extend beyond reproductive challenges such as infer-
tility to include an increased risk of metabolic disorders, including type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2D)
and obesity (1, 4). The complications connected to PCOS substantially affect both physical and
mental health, reducing quality of life and increasing the burden on healthcare systems. Emerg-
ing evidence also suggests a male phenotype associated with PCOS-related traits, highlighting
that some genetic and metabolic characteristics of the syndrome may also be observed in male
relatives (5).
Despite its high prevalence and wide-ranging consequences, the etiology of PCOS remains
poorly understood. The molecular mechanisms driving its clinical heterogeneity are still be-
ing unraveled, complicating efforts in both diagnosis and treatment. The absence of definitive
biomarkers or data-based diagnostic criteria further underscores the need for continued research.
Given its considerable health burden and associated economic costs, PCOS also represents a sig-
nificant medical and socioeconomic concern.
1.1.1
Pathophysiology: Connecting Molecular and Clinical Features
The definition and understanding of PCOS continues to evolve as new evidence emerges, re-
flecting its complex, multifactorial, and polygenic nature. As described by Baskind et al., its
pathophysiology involves intrinsic ovarian dysfunction that is heavily influenced by external
factors such as the hypothalamic–pituitary axis and hyperinsulinaemia (6). These factors inter-
act to produce the clinical manifestations of PCOS across reproductive, endocrine, and metabolic
systems.
Neuroendocrine and reproductive components
In a normal menstrual cycle, the hypothalamus secretes gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH),
which stimulates the anterior pituitary to release follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) and luteinizing
hormone (LH). These gonadotropins act on the ovary to regulate folliculogenesis and ovulation,
respectively.
Folliculogenesis begins during the final days of the preceding menstrual cycle and continues
until ovulation, driven by changes in FSH. In the late luteal phase, FSH rises due to the fall of
2
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
==PAGE:8==
Inhibin A, which normally suppresses FSH, as well as the increase in GnRH pulsatile secretion
in response to a decline of both estrogen and progesterone. The increase in FSH promotes the
recruitment, growth and maturation of ovarian follicles – one of which is destined for ovulation
in the following cycle. FSH stimulates the proliferation of granulosa cells (GCs), which convert
androgens – produced by theca cells (TCs) in response to LH – into estrogen (see the “Normal”
mechanism in Figure 1.1a). As follicles grow, serum estrogen levels rise in parallel with the
increasing GC population.
The follicular phase, and thereby the menstrual cycle, begins with menses. Although FSH levels
are initially elevated at this time, they begin to decline due to the rising production of estrogen
and Inhibin B from developing follicles. This negative feedback suppresses FSH secretion and
facilitates the selection of a single dominant follicle, which continues to grow and secrete in-
creasing levels of estrogen (7).
Once estrogen levels remain above a critical threshold, of approximately 200 pg/mL for about 50
hours, a positive feedback mechanism is triggered. This amplifies GnRH secretion and markedly
increases LH. The resulting LH surge initiates ovulation and promotes formation of the corpus
luteum, which then secretes progesterone to prepare the endometrium for potential implantation.
In the absence of fertilization, progesterone levels decline and menstruation follows (8, 9).
(a) Normal physiology
(b) Pathophysiology of PCOS
Figure 1.1: Comparison of the hypothalamic-pituitary-ovarian axis in individuals with and without PCOS.
Under normal conditions, the balanced pulsatile secretion of GnRH stimulates a proportionate release of LH and
FSH. FSH promotes GC aromatase activity, allowing efficient conversion of testosterone to estrogen, and sup-
ports follicular development. In POCS, increased pulsatile release of GnRH leads to an increased LH:FSH ratio.
The elevated LH stimulates TC production of testosterone, while reduced FSH activity limits the conversion of
testosterone to estrogen in the GCs. This results in excess circulating androgens, which contribute to the clinical
features of PCOS and impair hypothalamic feedback sensitivity to estrogen and progesterone. These endocrine dis-
turbances form a self-reinforcing feedback loop, often referred to as the “vicious cycle” of PCOS. Figure created
with https://BioRender.com.
In PCOS, one of the primary abnormalities is the abnormal secretion of GnRH, along with ovar-
ian dysfunction. There is increased pulsatile GnRH secretion from the hypothalamus, which
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
3
==PAGE:9==
preferentially stimulates LH secretion while suppressing FSH. This disrupts the hormonal bal-
ance required for “normal” follicle maturation.
The increased LH promotes androgen production in the TCs, while the relative deficiency of
FSH limits aromatase activity in the GCs, reducing their capacity to convert androgens into es-
trogens (see the “PCOS” mechanism in Figure 1.1b) (10–12). Additionally, there is intrinsic
dysfunction of the TCs which contributes to hypersecretion of androgens in PCOS (13, 14).
This results in increased serum androgens, i.e. testosterone, which can lead to symptoms like
hirsutism, acne, and alopecia. The free testosterone decreases the sensitivity of the hypothala-
mus to the negative feedback of estrogen and progesterone – so there are ongoing high frequency
GnRH pulses – and what has been called the “vicious cycle” of PCOS, as seen in Figure 1.1b
(14).
The persistently elevated LH:FSH ratio disrupts follicular maturation and follicles stall at the
antral stage, producing the characteristic PCOM observed via transvaginal ultrasound (TVUS).
The absence of a dominant follicle and lack of an LH surge results in anovulatory infertility.
Without ovulation, the growth of a corpus luteum and subsequent progesterone secretion is im-
paired, leading to irregular or absent menstruation (6, 14, 15).
Metabolic component
The connection between PCOS and metabolic dysfunction was first described in the 1980s, when
women with the condition were found to have exaggerated insulin responses during oral glucose
tolerance tests, independent of obesity. Many also exhibited acanthosis nigricans, a clinical
marker of hyperinsulinaemia (15). Dunaif (1995) later identified PCOS as a phenotypically
unique disorder of insulin action with about the same magnitude of insulin resistance (IR) as
T2D (16). This IR contributes to a range of comorbidities, including obesity, T2D, hypertension,
and dyslipidaemia (15).
Hyperinsulinemia, a compensatory response to IR, acts synergistically with LH in TCs to en-
hance androgen production. Additionally, the increased insulin suppresses the production of sex
hormone-binding globulin (SHBG) in the liver, further increasing the concentration of bioavail-
able androgens (6, 13, 17).
PCOS research also highlights mechanisms by which hyperandrogenism contributes to IR and
central obesity. IR typically arises in tissues such as the liver and skeletal muscle and is as-
sociated with visceral adiposity and adipocyte dysfunction – both of which are exacerbated by
elevated androgen levels (13, 15, 18). Correspondingly, women with PCOS have been shown to
have more central obesity compared to body mass index (BMI)-matched controls, contributing
to the comorbidities associated with the syndrome (17).
These findings reinforce the concept of a vicious cycle in PCOS pathophysiology, in which IR
and HA mutually reinforce one another. This hormonal and metabolic imbalance also feeds back
on the hypothalamic-pituitary-ovarian axis, disrupting normal GnRH pulsatility and contributing
to the abnormal LH:FSH secretion patterns that characterize PCOS (see Figure 1.2).
1.1.2
Health Consequences and Comorbidities
Beyond its diagnostic features and underlying pathophysiology, PCOS has well-documented im-
plications for both short- and long-term health. Reproductively, it is a leading cause of anovu-
latory infertility and is linked to pregnancy complications such as gestational diabetes (odds
ratio (OR): 2.94) and pre-eclampsia (OR: 3.47) (19). Metabolically, PCOS is a major risk
4
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
==PAGE:10==
Figure 1.2: Pathophysiology of PCOS including insulin resistance (IR). IR contributes to hyperinsulinemia,
which further enhances androgen production and reduces SHBG synthesis in the liver, increasing free androgens
further. Elevated androgen levels feed back on the hypothalamus and exacerbate the neuroendocrine and metabolic
disturbances, forming a cycle. Figure created with https://BioRender.com.
factor for metabolic syndrome (MetS) and T2D, as well as nonalcoholic fatty liver disease and
cardiovascular disease (CVD) (17). Women with PCOS are also at increased risk of endometrial
cancer, likely due to prolonged unopposed estrogen exposure resulting from chronic anovula-
tion. The risk is greater for those with increased BMI (1, 4).
In addition to physical health concerns, PCOS significantly impacts mental health. The preva-
lence of anxiety and depression is higher among PCOS women. Studies suggest that the effects
of HA, weight gain, and infertility challenges impact the mood, self-esteem, sexuality and qual-
ity of life of these women (4, 20, 21).
1.1.3
Risk Factors for PCOS
While the etiology of PCOS remains unknown, a variety of studies have tried to uncover both
environmental and genetic risk factors contributing to the syndrome.
Environmental factors
Various environmental influences have been discussed in relation to the development and pro-
gression of PCOS. Among the most widely recognized, are obesity or being overweight, prenatal
exposure to androgens, endocrine-disrupting chemicals (EDCs), and epigenetic modifications.
Obesity
While obesity is more prevalent among PCOS women compared to the general pop-
ulation, it is not completely clear whether obesity is an etiological factor of PCOS or a con-
sequence of the syndrome. Both obesity and PCOS are associated with IR and MetS, further
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
5
==PAGE:11==
connecting the two conditions. It is also well documented that obesity exacerbates PCOS and
that symptoms improve with weight loss and diet changes (22). Overall, the impact of obesity on
PCOS is complex: obesity is both risk factor for the development of PCOS, but also a common
feature of the underlying pathophysiology presenting as a symptom of PCOS.
Prenatal androgen exposure
Experimental and clinical evidence suggests that exposure to
elevated androgen levels during intrauterine development may contribute to subsequent neu-
roendocrine dysfunction. In humans, increased levels of testosterone have been detected in the
umbilical veins of female infants born to PCOS mothers. Animal studies further support this.
Rhesus monkeys and sheep exposed to testosterone in early gestation exhibit PCOS-like traits
later on, including HA, OA, IR, elevated LH levels and abdominal adiposity (6). Further re-
search can help clarify whether the neuroendocrine dysfunction observed in women with PCOS
is a primary cause or a secondary effect of elevated androgen exposure before or during puberty.
Endocrine-disrupting chemicals (EDCs)
EDCs, such as bisphenol A (BPA), have been asso-
ciated with elevated androgen levels in multiple studies. For instance, serum BPA concentrations
have been found to be higher in hyperandrogenic women with PCOS compared to both healthy
controls and a non-hyperandrogenic PCOS subgroup. EDCs are also known to influence neu-
roendocrine regulation and reproductive function, including impairing fertility. Furthermore,
EDC exposure has been linked to increased oxidative stress and systemic inflammation – factors
that contribute to key features of PCOS including insulin resistance, obesity, and subfertility.
Emerging evidence also suggests that EDCs may induce epigenetic alterations, potentially facil-
itating the transgenerational inheritance of PCOS-related traits (22, 23). Nevertheless, further
research is needed to fully define the mechanisms by which EDCs contribute to PCOS patho-
genesis.
Epigenetic mechanisms
As mentioned, emerging evidence points to epigenetic modifica-
tions as a possible contributor to PCOS pathophysiology. Particularly changes in microRNA
(miRNA) expression have been identified in GCs, TCs, adipose tissue, and serum of women
with PCOS. MiRNAs act post-transcriptionally and primarily silence genes through transla-
tional repression or mRNA degradation. Either the under- or over-expression of miRNAs can
contribute to key features of PCOS pathogenesis. For example, the decreased expression of
miR-92a and miR-92b allow genes, GATA6 and IRS-2, to become more active. Their increased
activity stimulates the CYP17 enzyme, contributing to increased androgen synthesis by the TCs
(22). Beyond their mechanistic roles, miRNAs detected in serum could have potential as non-
invasive biomarkers for PCOS.
Heritability and genetic risk factors
It is well-established that having a family history of PCOS increases an individual’s risk of
developing the condition. Both the clustering of PCOS cases in families, and the high prevalence
of PCOS in first-degree relatives, provide evidence of PCOS as a heritable disorder. Twin studies
further reinforce this, showing that PCOS traits co-occur more frequently in monozygotic than
in dizygotic twins, indicating a significant genetic component to the condition in addition to
environmental influences (5, 24).
PCOS is described as primarily following a non-Mendelian inheritance pattern, driven by the
combined effects of numerous genetic variants. One approach to studying complex traits, like
6
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
==PAGE:12==
PCOS, is via genome-wide association study (GWAS) which enables the identification of genetic
variants statistically associated with a disease (5). Until recently, GWAS studies on PCOS have
been limited in statistical power. However, a recent (not yet peer-reviewed) study by L. M.
Moolhuijsen et al. conducted a large-scale GWAS meta-analysis with twice as many PCOS
cases as earlier studies, providing enhanced insight into genetic risk loci and potential causal
mechanisms.
This study has identified genetic loci related to hormonal regulation, metabolic pathways, and
reproductive function in PCOS. Signals at FSHB and FSHR were detected. These genes en-
code the FSH beta subunit and its receptor, respectively, underlining the role of the pituitary
gonadotropins and ovarian follicle development in PCOS pathophysiology. SHBG, INHBB (In-
hibin B), AMH and TEX41 (a gene associated with AMH levels) were loci of novel variants in
PCOS and support the idea of a hormonal regulation etiology, including folliculogenesis and
feedback mechanisms as described in Section 1.1.1. Other novel variants in PCOS were found
in the CYP3 complex, FTO and MSH6 loci. The CYP3 enzyme complex is involved in the
metabolism of estradiol (E2) and testosterone, and its reduced activity has been associated with
elevated free testosterone levels. A variant in the fat mass and obesity-associated gene, FTO,
reinforces the connection between obesity-related genes and PCOS risk.
MSH6, along with known variants in CHEK2 and RAD50, are related to DNA repair. The loci
were significantly associated with both PCOS and later age of natural menopause. They indicate
that impaired DNA repair processes may contribute to PCOS pathophysiology. For instance,
CHEK2 is thought to cause DNA-damaged oocytes to remain in the ovary for longer, reducing
oocyte atresia and continuing AMH expression (7).
DENND1A, a regulator of androgen biosynthesis, was the most significant signal associated
with PCOS. Previous research by Dapas et al. (2020) describe that women with rare variants
in DENND1A are significantly more likely to have a reproductive subtype of PCOS (25). An-
other paper by Dapas et al. (2022) also describes PCOS-specific rare variants in AMH and
AMHR2 which disrupt AMH signaling. This study also found 20 PCOS GWAS susceptibil-
ity loci identified in European and Chinese populations, some of which were confirmed by the
aforementioned L. M. Moolhuijsen et al. study. The 20 genes were implicated in gonadotropin
signaling (FSHB, FSHR, LHCGR), steroidogenesis (DENND1A, HMGA2), insulin signaling
(INSR), neuroendocrine regulation and folliculogenesis (YAP1, ERBB3/4, BMP6), and repro-
ductive aging/DNA repair (RAD50). GATA4/NEIL2 and C9orf3 were also identified, and have
been strongly associated with metabolic phenotypes related to PCOS (5).
Taken together, these findings highlight PCOS as a genetically heterogeneous and complex trait
influenced by both common and rare variants across multiple biological pathways. The combi-
nation of risk loci related to hormonal regulation, follicle development, metabolism, and DNA
repair reinforces the multifactorial nature of PCOS pathogenesis and deepens our understanding
of the described pathophysiological model (see Section 1.1.1). Research into the genetic profile
of PCOS also suggests that different biological subtypes exist – some with stronger reproduc-
tive features, others with predominantly metabolic characteristics. This highlights the need for
further data-driven research into PCOS subtypes and more tailored approaches to diagnosis and
treatment.
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
7
==PAGE:13==
1.1.4
Diagnostic Criteria
Despite the advances in the genetic and molecular characterization of PCOS, the diagnosis of the
syndrome in clinical practice remains reliant on consensus-based criteria and the clinicians own
expertise. There is not a single definitive diagnostic test and diagnosis has limited dependence
on biochemical measures or serum biomarkers.
Two widely used diagnostic frameworks for PCOS are the National Institutes of Health (NIH)
and Rotterdam criteria. The NIH criteria, proposed in 1990, defines PCOS as the presence of HA
accompanied by OA, after excluding other endocrinopathies. In 2003, the Rotterdam consensus
broadened the diagnostic scope, requiring the presence of at least two of the following features:
1. clinical or biochemical hyperandrogenism (HA)
2. oligo-anovulation (OA)
3. polycystic ovarian morphology (PCOM)
while continuing to exclude other alternative diagnoses (4, 26).
HA can be identified through clinical signs or symptoms, like acne and hirsutism, or through
laboratory findings like blood tests for androgen levels. Oligo- or anovulation refers to menstrual
cycles that are longer than 35 days, shorter than 21 days, or having no ovulation at all. PCOM
is considered diagnostic when the ovaries contain at least 12 follicles measuring 2–9 mm in
diameter, or when the total ovarian volume exceeds 10 mL. These specific thresholds align with
Rotterdam criteria. PCOM is most accurately assessed using TVUS (22).
In 2006, a third well-known diagnostic framework for PCOS was defined when the Androgen
Excess and PCOS Society (AE-PCOS) gathered a task-force of international experts to review
the clinical evidence linking PCOS phenotypes to health risks. Based on their findings, they
proposed that HA should be an essential diagnostic criterion for PCOS. As a result, their defi-
nition restricted diagnosis to individuals with clinical or biochemical HA in combination with
either OA or PCOM.
Below is a figure summarizing the three diagnostic frameworks (Figure 1.3). Notably, they all
require some combination of HA, OA, and polycystic ovaries (PCO). Despite evidence of a
metabolic component, metabolic clinical features are not part of current diagnostic criteria.
Impacts of differential diagnosis
In 2012, a NIH expert panel recommended that healthcare providers use the Rotterdam criteria
for diagnosing PCOS, which contributed to an rise in prevalence (27). The Rotterdam criteria
allow for diagnosis of women with PCO who exhibit either HA or OA, but does not necessitate
both, thereby explaining the increased prevalence (28).
Women with a 1990 NIH-type diagnosis of HA and OA are at a higher risk of reproductive
and metabolic issues, such as infertility and T2D. While IR and obesity are frequently ob-
served in these women, these features are not included in the diagnostic criteria. Interestingly,
women who’s diagnosis aligns with the Rotterdam criteria show different trends. The Rotter-
dam framework allows for the diagnosis of PCOS in women without menstrual irregularities.
These ovulatory women with PCOS generally have a lower BMI, as well as reduced levels of
hyperinsulinemia and HA, compared to those diagnosed under the 1990 NIH criteria. Addition-
ally, women with PCO and OA, but without androgen excess, experience fewer and less severe
symptoms (4).
8
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
==PAGE:14==
Figure 1.3: Comparison of the three major diagnostic criteria for PCOS (NIH 1990, Rotterdam 2003, and
AE-PCOS 2006) The table outlines how each diagnostic framework incorporates the three key components of
PCOS: clinical or biochemical hyperandrogenism (HA), oligo-anovulation (OA), and polycystic ovaries (PCO).
The NIH 1990 criteria require both HA and OA but exclude PCO. The Rotterdam 2003 criteria require any two of
the three features. The AE-PCOS Society 2006 criteria require HA and at least one of OA or PCO. Color coding
indicates whether a component is required (green), optional (yellow), or not required (red).
Women diagnosed under different criteria often exhibiting diverse clinical, hormonal, and metabolic
characteristics further reflect the complexity of PCOS. This variability underscores the impor-
tance of clearly specifying the diagnostic criteria used in any research or clinical analysis involv-
ing PCOS. Grouping all women with PCOS into a single category can obscure meaningful dis-
tinctions and hinder scientific understanding. Therefore, stratification of PCOS into subgroups
or phenotypes is crucial for advancing personalized diagnostics and therapeutic strategies.
PCOS phenotypes
The recognition that PCOS can manifest through different combinations of HA, OA, and PCOM
has led to the classification of PCOS into distinct ‘phenotypes’ (subtypes). In 2012, the NIH
defined four phenotypes based on these criteria, which are summarized in Table 1.1. The table
outlines the clinical characteristics commonly associated with each phenotype, as well as their
estimated prevalence among PCOS patients.
The phenotype classification was made to assist clinicians in gaining a clearer understanding of
the nuances of PCOS presentation and the impacts of the syndrome by considering the severity
of clinical symptoms, associated comorbidities, reproductive health issues, and quality of life
implications for each subgroup (18). Furthermore, the distribution of patients across phenotypes
can inform more tailored prevention and treatment strategies, as well as guide research priorities.
It is worth noting, however, that phenotypes C and D would not meet the 1990 NIH diagnostic
criteria, meaning that women with these profiles may be overlooked by clinicians who rely solely
on that definition – potentially delaying diagnosis and appropriate intervention. Figure A.1 in
Appendix A.1 illustrates how the 2012 NIH-defined phenotypes correspond to the three major
diagnostic frameworks. This visual comparison helps clarify which profiles are excluded under
certain criteria and emphasizes the need for a unified diagnostic strategy.
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
9
==PAGE:15==
Phenotype
Characteristics
Clinical Features
Prevalence
(European & US)
Hyperandrogensim
Menstrual irregularity
Polycycstic ovaries
Type A (Classic)
X
X
X
Hirsutism, acne (manifestations of HA)
Menstrual irregularity
Subfertility/infertility
Ovulatory dysfunction
Higher rates of obesity, IR, dyslipidemia, hepatic
steatosis, and increased probability for MetS
44.8%
Type B (Non-PCO)
X
X
Hirsutism, acne (manifestations of HA)
Menstrual irregularity
Subfertility/infertility
Ovulatory dysfunction
Risk of adverse metabolic and cardiovascular
outcomes (like Type A)
14.9%
Type C (Ovulatory)
X
X
Ovulation is preserved
HA (lower levels than A & B)
Polycystic ovaries
Lower BMI, less hyperinsulinism, and reduced IR*
When matched for BMI and abdominal fat,
cardiometabolic risk is similar to A & B
*Reduced IR is mainly due to lower abdominal adiposity
16.2%
Type D (Non-HA)
X
X
No clinical/biochemical HA (may be slightly higher than non-PCOS women)
Menstrual irregularity, Ovulatory dysfunction, Polycystic ovaries
Elevated LH and LH/FSH ratio
May experience increased BMI, dyslipidemia, and IR
Compared to A and B: have a milder metabolic risk profile, lower
total and abdominal adiposity, lower prevalence of MetS
Reproductive dysfunction may be more driven by abdominal-obesity-related
IR than by HA
19.5%
Table 1.1: PCOS Phenotypes as defined by the NIH in 2012. Clinical features as described by Khan et al. (18).
Prevalence is in % of PCOS patients. European and US prevalence is from a 2022 systematic review on PCOS
phenotype frequency based on Rotterdam (2003) criteria (29).
It is clear that the diagnosis of PCOS remains consensus-based and evolves with shifting ex-
pert perspectives and clinical priorities. The use of different diagnostic frameworks can lead to
inconsistencies in identifying patients, prolonged time to diagnosis, and complicate both clini-
cal care and research. This complexity highlights the need for more objective diagnostic tools.
Identifying serum biomarkers may help provide a more consistent diagnosis, aid in patient strat-
ification, and guide treatment decisions.
1.1.5
Current Serum Biomarkers
The 2023 evidence-based guidelines on PCOS identify two main biomarkers for assessing the
condition: testosterone and Anti-Müllerian hormone (AMH). The guidelines recommend evalu-
ating biochemical HA using total and free testosterone measurements. This assessment is partic-
ularly useful in women with minimal clinical signs of HA. It has been observed that women with
polycystic ovaries, even with mild or no symptoms, tend to have higher mean serum testosterone
levels compared to women with normal ovaries. The guidelines note that laboratories should
use LC-MS/MS assays, as other methods have worsened accuracy and precision for diagnosing
HA in PCOS. Testosterone measurements for assessing HA are less informative in those taking
the combined oral contraceptive pill.
AMH serves as a marker of the increased number of follicles in PCOS women and is produced
exclusively by GCs of growing pre-antral and small antral follicles. According to the 2023
guidelines, serum AMH can be used to define PCOM in adults but should not be relied upon
as a single test for diagnosing PCOS. It should only be used in accordance with the diagnostic
algorithm, and for patients with irregular menstrual cycles and hyperandrogenism, an AMH
measurement is not necessary. It is also not necessary if PCOM is identified via TVUS.
AMH as a biomarker has limitations. It should not be used for diagnosing PCOS in adoles-
cents, and healthcare professionals need to consider factors like age (AMH peaks between 20-25
10
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
==PAGE:16==
years), BMI (lower AMH in individuals with higher BMI), hormonal contraception (the com-
bined oral contraceptive pills can suppress AMH), and the menstrual cycle day (AMH levels
may vary). Laboratories should also use population- and assay-specific AMH cut-off values for
accurate assessment (6, 30).
Section Summary and Proteomic Outlook
Although genetic studies and newer guidelines have provided valuable insights, PCOS is
still primarily diagnosed based on symptoms and clinical features rather than the underly-
ing molecular mechanisms with the most popular diagnostic frameworks being the NIH
and Rotterdam criteria. The heterogeneity of the syndrome underscores the limitations of
current diagnostic criteria and motivates a shift toward more biologically informed and
data-driven classification. An emerging approach to address this is proteomics, which
can capture protein-level changes reflective of disease processes. Integrating proteomic
data may help define molecular subtypes of PCOS and improve diagnostic precision.
1.2
Proteomics
1.2.1
Definition
Proteomics is the study of all the proteins that are expressed by the genome of a cell, tissue,
or organism (31). Proteins perform many functions including regulating cellular processes, in-
fluencing metabolism, and mediating signaling pathways. Unlike genomics, which examines
genetic sequences, proteomics can capture dynamic changes in protein expression.
One gene can encode many diverse proteins, depending on the cellular environment and ongoing
regulatory mechanisms. By moving from genomics to proteomics, researchers gain a clearer
understanding of disease mechanisms at a molecular level, uncovering protein-level alterations
that are not evident from genetic information alone.
1.2.2
Proteomics to Study PCOS
For a complicated, heterogeneous disorder like PCOS, proteomics has the potential to pro-
vide a more comprehensive understanding of the cellular and metabolic changes at play. Pro-
teomics provides information on PCOS by identifying protein-level alterations associated with
hormonal imbalances, metabolic dysfunction, and ovarian abnormalities. Traditional genetic
studies can reveal susceptibility loci and gene variants associated with disease risk, whereas
proteomics more readily captures the current physiological state by quantifying circulating and
tissue-specific proteins linked to the pathophysiology of PCOS (31).
By profiling protein expression patterns, researchers can identify up- or down-regulated proteins
in the PCOS-positive women in comparison to PCOS-negative women, thus revealing proteins
and biological pathways of interest for understanding mechanisms of the disease. In addition,
proteomics enables the discovery of serum protein biomarkers, which may allow for simpler
diagnostics and perhaps earlier detection and risk assessment in patients. Proteomics can also
allow us to characterize PCOS subtypes, improving diagnostic accuracy and facilitating person-
alized treatment strategies (7, 31).
State of the art in proteomics research for PCOS
Proteomics research in PCOS has primarily consisted of mass spectrometry (MS)-based ap-
proaches, including data-independent acquisition (DIA), data-dependent acquisition (DDA), and
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
11
==PAGE:17==
hybrid DDIA workflows. These techniques enable the identification and relative quantifica-
tion of large numbers of proteins across biological samples. They support both qualitative and
quantitative profiling of protein differences between healthy individuals and those with PCOS,
providing essential information on the pathophysiology of the syndrome (31).
In addition to MS-based approaches, newer affinity-based technologies such as Olink proxim-
ity extension assays (PEA) have been increasingly adopted in large cohort studies due to their
high sensitivity, reproducibility, and ability to measure hundreds to thousands of low-abundance
proteins from minimal sample volumes (32). Notably, the large-scale study by Moolhuijsen et
al. (7) utilized Olink panels to quantify plasma protein levels across thousands of individuals,
integrating these measurements with genetic data to identify PCOS-relevant biomarkers and
pathways.
Protein biomarkers
Proteomics is particularly useful for identifying disease-associated pro-
tein biomarkers, and the research reflects this. Numerous up- and down-regulated PCOS-relevant
proteins have been identified in diverse clinical samples, including follicular fluid, ovarian tis-
sue, lymphocytes, GCs, and blood plasma or serum. One of the largest PCOS meta-analyses
to date, by Moolhuijsen et al. (2024), found that proteins involved in lipid and cholesterol
metabolism, such as PCSK9, LDLR, FABP1, and FABP4, show altered abundance in PCOS
patients (7). The same study also identified differential expression of enzymes related to pro-
gesterone and testosterone biosynthesis, including GSTA1 and GSTA3. Crucially, all of these
proteins were associated with ovarian dysfunction – emphasizing the interplay between the re-
productive and metabolic features of PCOS.
Hormones and signaling molecules
Peptide hormones such as LH, FSH, AMH, and SHBG
are critical for the regulation and maintenance of the female reproductive system. Imbalances in
these hormones contribute to hallmark features of PCOS, including follicular arrest, anovulation,
and hyperandrogenemia.
Proteomic profiling has also implicated several signaling pathways in PCOS. For instance, the
WNT/β-catenin signaling pathway is linked to apoptosis of GCs, contributing to impaired fol-
liculogenesis. Moreover, in the Hippo signaling pathway, dysfunction of YAP1 has been as-
sociated with hyperandrogenemia and IR, due to its interference with insulin/IGF-1 signaling
(31). These pathways highlight how dysregulated intracellular signaling networks can produce
reproductive and metabolic abnormalities.
Integration with genomics
The study by Moolhuijsen et al. also integrated GWAS and pro-
teomic data to explore causal relationships between genetic variants, plasma protein levels, and
PCOS. This approach helped distinguish proteins that may act as upstream contributors to PCOS
pathogenesis from those that are downstream effects. For example, IGFBP2 and NCAM2 were
identified as upstream determinants of PCOS, while proteins such as CDHR2 and CPM appear to
be downstream consequences. Genetic variants in loci such as ERBB3, FTO, and MAF influence
these plasma protein levels, and mapping the relationships has helped uncover protein–disease
pathways (7).
Limitations and Future Directions
Despite progress in PCOS proteomics research, several
challenges remain. Differences in sample types, patient characteristics (including age and PCOS
subtype), and diagnostic criteria make it hard to compare results across studies. Many studies
12
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
==PAGE:18==
also include few participants, which limits statistical power and generalizability. In some cases,
it is difficult to recruit appropriate control groups – like reproductively healthy women – due
to ethical concerns, especially when collecting reproductive tissue samples (33). In addition,
most studies use cross-sectional designs, which do not capture how protein expression or the
condition changes over time.
To address these issues, future research should use standardized and generalizable methods, fol-
low participants over time, and include larger and more diverse cohorts. Combining proteomics
with other omics approaches – such as genomics, transcriptomics, and metabolomics – may help
identify reliable biomarkers and help advance precision medicine for PCOS.
1.3
Research Objectives and Hypothesis
This thesis takes an exploratory approach to investigating the clinical and molecular heterogene-
ity of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS). While current diagnostic criteria are based on expert
consensus, these classifications – and the derived phenotypes (A-D) – may not fully capture the
underlying biology of the syndrome. There is growing interest in data-driven diagnostic strate-
gies that better integrate hormonal, clinical, and molecular information. Using proteomics data
from the Olink platform in combination with biochemical measures and survey-based clinical
data from the Copenhagen Pregnancy Loss (COPL) cohort, this project aims to:
• Characterize the clinical and molecular features of women in the cohort who report having
PCOS.
• Identify and describe women who meet PCOS diagnostic criteria based on clinical and
hormonal thresholds, independent of self-report.
• Classify PCOS-positive individuals into the four established NIH phenotypes (A–D) using
literature-informed thresholds.
• Identify and examine differentially expressed serum proteins between PCOS-positive and
PCOS-negative women, as well as across PCOS phenotypes (e.g., Phenotype A vs. B).
• Perform gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) to determine whether differentially ex-
pressed proteins are associated with specific biological pathways linked to PCOS.
We hypothesize that women identified as PCOS-positive in the COPL cohort will exhibit dis-
tinct proteomic signatures compared to those without PCOS, and that further classification into
Rotterdam-defined phenotypes (A–D) may reveal biologically meaningful subgroup-specific
patterns. By integrating clinical, biochemical, and proteomic data, this exploratory study aims
to gain a deeper molecular understanding of PCOS and to investigate whether patient stratifi-
cation into the conventional phenotypic classifications (A–D) is substantiated at the molecular
level.
1.3.1
Expected Outcomes
This project is expected to provide new insights into the molecular underpinnings of PCOS by
integrating proteomic data with clinical and biochemical information from a large, pregnancy-
related cohort. Through exploratory analysis of protein expression patterns, the study aims to
characterize proteomic differences between PCOS-positive and PCOS-negative women, shed-
ding light on key biological features of the syndrome. It also seeks to determine whether clin-
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
13
==PAGE:19==
ically defined PCOS phenotypes (A–D) differ in their proteomic profiles, and whether these
subgroup distinctions are reflected at the molecular level.
In addition to its immediate findings, this project serves as a foundational analysis in prepara-
tion for future research within the COPL cohort, helping to shape an analysis pipeline that can
accommodate larger datasets as they become available. The results may inform whether routine
measurement of biomarkers like AMH is scientifically supported and cost-justified in future
cohort studies. More broadly, this work contributes to the development of data-driven, biolog-
ically grounded approaches to PCOS classification and supports ongoing efforts to personalize
diagnostics and care in reproductive endocrinology.
14
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
==PAGE:20==
2
Methods
This chapter details the study design, participant selection, ethical considerations, and method-
ologies applied to classify and analyze PCOS within the COPL cohort. It includes a comprehen-
sive description of data sources, variable definitions, diagnostic criteria, and analytical strategies
including exploratory data analysis (EDA), data-driven classification, phenotype assignment
and further proteomic analyses.
2.1
Ethics
This study was conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki. Data and biomaterial
collection and planned analyses (including genomic and proteomic analyses) were approved
by the Health Research Ethics Committees for the Capital Region of Denmark (H-18024745)
and the Videnscenter for Dataanmeldelser (P-2020–1019). All participants provided informed
oral and written consent. Personal identifiable information was handled in a REDCAP database
according to the requirements of the Capital Region of Denmark. Participation was voluntary,
and participants could withdraw at any point without consequences for their medical care (34,
35).
2.2
Copenhagen Pregnancy Loss (COPL) Study
The COPL study, led by Professor Henriette Svarre Nielsen and colleagues at Hvidovre Hos-
pital, is designed to investigate the causes and risk factors associated with pregnancy loss. The
participants, and their partners, contribute a wide range of biological samples (including blood,
semen and urine samples, vaginal and rectal swabs, pregnancy and fetal tissue) and phenotypic
information collected at the time of pregnancy loss and at follow-up visits (35). This dataset
provides a valuable resource not only for studying pregnancy loss itself, but also for exploring
related endocrine and reproductive health conditions, such as PCOS.
2.2.1
Study Design & Inclusion Criteria
This project represents one of several studies branching from the COPL cohort. The COPL data
in this study consists of 3016 inclusions referred to public hospitals in the Capital Region of
Denmark due to pregnancy loss. Women were invited to participate between November 2020
and May 2025 (2025-05-22) at Copenhagen University Hospital Hvidovre, Herlev Hospital, or
North Zealand Hospital. Inclusion criteria required that participants were over 18 years of age
and had experienced a pregnancy loss before 22 weeks of gestation, confirmed by ultrasound.
Women with pregnancies of unknown location, molar pregnancies, or who were unable to pro-
vide informed consent were excluded (34).
For the present thesis, analyses were restricted to female participants only. The first part of the
project aims to characterize PCOS in the whole cohort and thus focuses on the phenotypical
and biochemical data for all 3016 inclusions. The second part focuses on the proteomics data
that has been collected for a subset of these inclusions. Specifically, proteomics data is currently
available for approximately 1,000 women. PCOS status was self-reported through questionnaire
responses, as described in more detail in Section 2.3.1.
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
15
==PAGE:21==
2.3
Data Collection
2.3.1
Clinical, Questionnaire & Hormone Data
Clinical data
Measures of clinical features were obtained both retrospectively, from hospital records, and
prospectively from ultrasound evaluations and body measurements taken during inclusion and
follow-up visits. These data were extracted from REDCap and included variables such as ma-
ternal age at inclusion, BMI, blood pressure at baseline and follow-up, and ovarian morphology
measures of total and side-specific antral follicle counts assessed via TVUS at follow-up. Mea-
sures related to thyroid structure – such as echogenicity, volume, and nodule number via thyroid
ultrasound – were also accounted for to flag a potential association between PCOS and metabolic
diseases.
Questionnaire data
Participants completed electronic questionnaires assessing menstrual history, fertility, metabolic
health, psychological well-being, lifestyle factors and family health history. The primary ques-
tionnaire was sent out two weeks after the patient’s visit to the hospital, while shorter follow-up
questionnaires were administered 6 and 12 months later (35).
The variables extracted from the questionnaire data included information on the participates cy-
cle regularity, expressed by cycle length and cycle type (i.e. Long/Short/No or Regular cycle).
The presence of PCOS-related symptoms including irregular cycles, hirsutism, HA, and PCOM
scan results were also extracted, as well as self-reported Ferriman–Gallwey (FG) scores which
the participants answered with the help of a diagram. Measures of fertility history encompassed
infertility status, time to pregnancy, and whether the conception was natural or assisted. Psy-
chological health was conveyed through scores for depression (MDI), perceived stress (PSS),
and anxiety (GAD-7), as well as derived categorical classifications (i.e. Mild-, Moderate- and
Severe- anxiety). The questionnaire also provides detail on family health history, providing
binary indicators for first-degree relatives with PCOS, T2D, CVD, and thyroid disorders.
PCOS status was captured via the binary variable M_PCOS (0 =“No PCOS”, 1 = “PCOS”), which
indicates whether the woman has, is suspected to have, or believes she has PCOS. It is a question
she answers in the survey. This label could also be updated during clinical review, if PCOS was
suspected by healthcare personnel during the study. This is the variable which we refer to as
self-reported PCOS, throughout all analyses.
Hormone data
Serum hormonal markers relevant to the pathophysiology and diagnosis of PCOS were extracted
retrospectively from Labka, a online laboratory database for the Capital Region of Denmark.
These data were not collected prospectively as part of COPL inclusion or follow-up visits. In-
stead, the hormone measurement is the value measured closest to the inclusion date, with a
window of maximum 24 months before or after. If multiple values were available, the median
value within this window was used.
The following serum hormones were included:
• Total testosterone (Total T)
• Free testosterone (Free T) – calculated based on SHBG and Total T
16
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
==PAGE:22==
• Sex hormone-binding globulin (SHBG)
• Anti-Müllerian hormone (AMH)
• Luteinizing hormone (LH)
• Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH)
• 17-Hydroxyprogesterone (17-OHP)
• Estradiol (E2)
Using these measures, two variables – AMH_Elevated_ref and merged_LH_FSH_ratio – were
determined.
AMH_Elevated_ref is a binary indicator of whether AMH was elevated relative to the partici-
pant’s age-specific reference range, based on assay-specific intervals (stored in AMH_ref). This
measurement serves as a biochemical indicator of PCOM and was used as a diagnostic variable
for PCOS classification and phenotype assignment, as described in Section 2.4.2.
To represent the LH:FSH ratio, merged_LH_FSH_ratio was calculated. This ratio is often ele-
vated in PCOS and can reflect disrupted gonadotropin signaling (as described in the Introduction,
Section 1.1.1). The ratio is not used in Rotterdam diagnosis of PCOS, but serves as a measure
to compare the phenotypes in the Results, Section 3.2.
All the collected variables, relevant to the analyses of this study, and their coded_names are
present in the summary tables of Appendix, Section A.3.
2.3.2
Proteomic Data
Blood samples were collected at inclusion (at the time of pregnancy loss) and at a follow-up visit
6–8 weeks later (35). Proteomic profiling was performed using the Olink®Explore 3072 plat-
form, which quantifies protein expression using proximity extension assay (PEA) technology.
The measured proteins spanned 4 biological panels: cardiometabolic, inflammation, neurol-
ogy and oncology. Raw data were normalized and processed following Olink guidelines. The
resulting protein levels are given as Normalized Protein eXpression (NPX) values, which are
log2-scaled relative expression levels (32).
The four data sources – clinical feature measures, questionnaire responses, biochemical (hor-
mone) measures and protein expression data – define the variables used and referenced through-
out the whole thesis. They were essential for characterizing self-reported in the COPL cohort
and further defining a data-based PCOS diagnosis and corresponding phenotypes, as well as
making up the parameters upon which proteomic analyses were made.
2.4
Data Analyses
2.4.1
Exploratory Data Analysis: Characterization of Self-reported PCOS
in the COPL cohort
The purpose of the exploratory data analysis (EDA) was to characterize the cohort and evaluate
the completeness and distribution of key clinical, hormonal, and self-reported variables relevant
to studying PCOS in the context of the COPL study. This step served both to better under-
stand the dataset, to identify clinical and molecular characteristics of the self-reported PCOS
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
17
==PAGE:23==
individuals, and to inform the design of downstream analyses, including an operational PCOS
classification and differential protein expression analysis.
Variable selection
The EDA was conducted using both continuous, categorical, and binary variables derived from
clinical laboratory data, survey responses, and ultrasound findings, as described above. The data
was collected in REDCap and was sourced both during the COPL study and retrospectively, us-
ing Labka data, resulting in large amounts of data. The REDCap data consisted of 482 variables
for 3016 inclusions, of which 76 variables were selected for this investigation. The subset of
variables included in the exploratory analysis were selected to capture the three diagnostic com-
ponents of PCOS (HA, OA, and PCOM), as well as relevant demographic, metabolic, endocrine,
mental health, and family health variables, in order to comprehensively characterize the clinical
profiles and comorbidity patterns within the cohort.
Group definitions
Participants were grouped according to self-reported PCOS status, coded by the binary variable
M_PCOS, to facilitate visual comparisons and gain better knowledge of features unique to PCOS
individuals.
To account for temporal changes in data collection, the dataset was stratified into two periods:
pre-2023 and post-2023. This division was necessary because several key variables relevant
to PCOS diagnosis — including the FG score and antral follicle counts (AFCs) — were only
introduced in 2023 (see Plot A.3 in Appendix A.1 for when each variable was included in the
study). We avoided comparing women who were never assessed for these variables with those
who were, to ensure valid comparisons. The table below summarizes the number of inclusions
in each group:
Period
Total inclusions
PCOS-negative
PCOS-positive
PCOS-NA
Before 2023
1533
1258
165
110
After 2023
1483
1206
160
117
Table 2.1: Number of individuals included in the study, stratified by inclusion period and
self-reported PCOS classification. “PCOS-NA” refers to participants for whom the PCOS
classification is missing.
Data processing
While the REDCap data used in the analyses was already processed and cleaned to some extent
by colleagues at the Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology at Hvidovre Hospital, initial
data processing included the removal of incorrectly entered values and verification of appro-
priate data types for all variables. New variables were also generated from the existing vari-
ables, such as BMI class (merged_maternal_bmi_class) and a simplified conception variable
(Conception_Binary). Missing data were handled on a per-analysis basis: participants were
excluded from a given analysis if they lacked data for the variables involved in the specific
plot or comparison. No imputation was applied at this stage in order to preserve the raw struc-
ture of the data. Variables with skewed distributions were log-transformed where appropriate to
facilitate the interpretability of the visualizations.
18
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
==PAGE:24==
Statistical analysis
For comparison of characteristics between the PCOS-positive and PCOS-negative groups, within
each period, summary statistics were computed using available data for each variable. P-values
were calculated using t-tests or Wilcoxon rank-sum tests for continuous variables and Chi-
squared or Fisher’s exact tests for categorical variables, depending on distribution and expected
cell counts. Observations with missing values were excluded from the respective statistical
tests. All analysis steps were implemented in R using packages including tidyverse, readr,
and table1.
For binary variables that showed statistically significant differences between groups, odds ratios
(ORs) were calculated using 2×2 contingency tables. PCOS was treated as the reference group,
meaning odds were defined as the likelihood of the outcome among individuals with PCOS
relative to those without PCOS. Thus, an OR greater than 1 indicates that the outcome was
more likely in the PCOS group. ORs were calculated using the maximum likelihood estimate
from Fisher’s exact test via the fisher.test() function in R. Each OR corresponds to the first
level of the binary variable (e.g., Yes vs. No) and is reported alongside the associated p-value in
parentheses and rounded to one decimal (e.g., 0.03 (1.7)).
2.4.2
Data-based PCOS Diagnosis
Although self-reported PCOS status provides valuable insight, it is subject to limitations such as
recall bias, lack of formal clinical confirmation, and underdiagnosis — particularly among in-
dividuals who have not undergone comprehensive reproductive or hormonal evaluation. There-
fore, to enhance diagnostic consistency and allow identification of potentially undiagnosed
cases, a data-based PCOS classifier was developed using structured clinical, hormonal, and
imaging parameters available in the COPL dataset. This approach leverages the three compo-
nents of the Rotterdam criteria – HA, OA, and PCOM – and enables standardized classification
across the cohort. The resulting classifications also form the basis for subsequent PCOS pheno-
type assignment and comparisons.
Variables used for PCOS diagnosis
To identify PCOS cases in the data, we focus on measures of the three components of the current
diagnostic frameworks — HA, OA, and PCOM — in the COPL study.
Hyperandrogensim
Hyperandrogenism is represented in the data through measures of both
free (TESTOFRI) and total testosterone (testoan) as well as the FG score (M_Ferriman_Gallway).
There are also binary variables for whether the mother has acne (merged_acne) or has had acne
treatment (merged_acne_treat), including the type of treatment. FG and acne related param-
eters were only measured post 2023.
The measures of testosterone are provided as the median value within 12 months of inclusion.
They were collected from Labka and then analyzed via liquid chromatography–mass spectrome-
try (LC-MS), where free testosterone is calculated based on total testosterone and SHBG. Mea-
sures are provided in nmol/L with normal levels – for women of reproductive age – of free
testosterone being 0,006-0,034 nmol/L and 0,55-1,8 nmol/L for total testosterone. For this in-
vestigation, testosterone levels above these thresholds are considered a sign of HA.
The FG score is a way to measure hirsutism (excess terminal hair growth with a male-pattern
distribution) by which women score themselves on their level of hair growth from 0-4 in nine
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
19
==PAGE:25==
different body regions using a FG diagram as a guide. A maximum score of 36 is possible (10,
36). When evaluating hirsutism it is important to consider the ethnicity of the individual and
wether they have self-treated for the hair growth. A score ≥8 was used as the threshold as
this is considered indicative of androgen excess for Black and White women in the US and UK
(10). Literature states that hirsutism itself is sufficient for satisfying the HA criteria of a PCOS
diagnosis (30, 37).
Although acne is commonly reported in women with PCOS, the International Evidence-based
Guideline for the assessment and management of PCOS recognizes that acne alone (i.e., without
hirsutism) is a relatively weak predictor of biochemical hyperandrogenism (30). Thus, neither
merged_acne or merged_acne_treat were used for PCOS classification.
Menstrual irregularity
Menstrual irregularity encompasses OA and is indicated by a cycle
length of > 35, < 21 days, or by the complete absence of a menstrual period (cycle length = 0
days) (30). These are conveyed by the variables M_Cycle and M_Cycle_length. For the first,
the women answer How long was your cycle the last 6 months before you became pregnant?
selecting one of the options: Regular cycle, Short cycle, Long cycle, or No cycle. For the latter,
they answer How long is your cycle usually? with an integer value in days. Long cycle, Short
cycle, or No cycle as well as a cycle length longer than 35 days, less than 21 days, or equal to 0
days, were considered indicative of OA.
Ovarian morphology
Both follicle count and AMH are recognized as diagnostic features of
PCOS (37). In the COPL data, left, right and total antral follicle counts are measured (afc_left,
afc_right, afc_total) post 2023. These are determined via TVUS. The recommended
threshold for follicle counts and whether to use the total follicle count or follicle count per ovary
follicle number per ovary (FNPO) has varied throughout time and between studies (37). The
2023 evidence-based guidelines on PCOS requires a FNPO ≥20 in at least one ovary as the
threshold for PCOM in adults (30).
AMH levels (AMH) can serve as a biochemical marker of FNPO for diagnosing PCOM. The
AMH values are extracted from Labka data and are the median AMH value within 24 months
of inclusion in pmol/L. The thresholds for AMH vary depending on age, therefore the binary
variable AMH_elevated_ref was used to indicate if a woman has elevated AMH with respect
to her age.
To indicate PCOM, a FNPO ≥20 was used for afc_left and afc_right. afc_total had a
threshold of ≥40, and AMH_elevated_ref = “Yes” also served as an indicator.
Below is an overview of the variables and thresholds used to create a data-based PCOS diagnosis
variable:
20
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
==PAGE:26==
PCOS Component
Variable
Threshold
HA
M_Ferrimann_Gallwey
>= 8
HA
testoan
> 1.8 nmol/L
HA
TESTOFRI
> 0.034 nmol/L
OA
M_Cycle_length
> 35, < 21, or = 0 days
OA
M_Cycle
%in% c(”No Cycle”,
”Short Cycle”,
”Long Cycle”)
PCOM
afc_total
>= 40
PCOM
afc_right
>= 20
PCOM
afc_left
>= 20
PCOM
AMH_elevated_ref
= ”Yes”
Table 2.2: Variables and thresholds used for assigning PCOS diagnosis accord-
ing to Rotterdam criteria. Each variable contributes to one of the three diagnostic
components: HA, OA, or PCOM.
Classification constraints due to data availability
Because measures of FG and AFC were only measured post-2023 (see Plot A.3 in Appendix
A.1), a period based stratification of the analysis was necessary for diagnosing PCOS in the
dataset. The absence of the components, which are central to the diagnostic frameworks for
PCOS, in earlier records would limit classification accuracy and therefore this inequality be-
tween time period measures had to be accounted for.
As a result, the data-based PCOS diagnosis analysis was split into two sections. First, a minimum
criteria was used with only variables that were measured across both periods (i.e. excluding FG
and AFC) to diagnose PCOS individuals and identify their phenotype. Afterwards, the analysis
was limited to identifying PCOS only among participants included after January 1st, 2023, when
the full set of clinical, hormonal, and imaging parameters became consistently available. This
allows the comparison of phenotype prevalence between two models: a diagnosis with fewer
variables but more participants, and a diagnosis model prioritizing richer variable detail over
broader participant coverage.
The PCOS diagnosis algorithm
The data-based diagnosis followed the Rotterdam criteria, requiring two out of three diag-
nostic components (HA, OA, PCOM). For an individual to satisfy a component, they only
needed to surpass one of the thresholds within the component (see Table 2.2). For instance, a
TESTOFRI measurement above 0.034 nmol/L was satisfactory to indicate HA in the individual;
they did not also need to have a testoan or M_Ferrimann_Gallwey measure above thresh-
old. Participants meeting criteria in at least two domains were assigned to the PCOS diagnosis
group: PCOS_diagnosis = "PCOS indicated". Those meeting one or none were assigned:
"No PCOS indicated". The full algorithmic procedure is outlined below.
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
21
==PAGE:27==
Algorithm 1 PCOS Classification Algorithm (Rotterdam-based)
Require: Dataset including clinical and biochemical measures for HA, OA, and PCOM
1: Step 1: Define diagnostic thresholds (see Table 2.2)
2: Step 2: Evaluate PCOS components for each participant
3: for all participants do
4:
Assess HA via testosterone or FG score
5:
Assess OA via cycle length or cycle type
6:
Assess PCOM via AFC or AMH
7: end for
8: Step 3: Filter dataset
9: Exclude participants with missing values for any of the three components
10: Step 4: Assign diagnostic label
11: for all participants with complete component data do
12:
Count number of components (HA, OA, PCOM) that meet threshold
13:
if count ≥2 then
14:
Assign PCOS_diagnosis = "PCOS indicated"
15:
else
16:
Assign PCOS_diagnosis = "No PCOS indicated"
17:
end if
18: end for
The algorithmic diagnosis was exploratory and aimed to flag individuals meeting PCOS di-
agnostic criteria according to the data, but perhaps not formally diagnosed. It also served to
identify a PCOS group which we could further classify into phenotypes, in order to study the
phenotypes prevalence in the COPL cohort and compare it to the general prevalence in PCOS-
positive individuals as reported by literature. The phenotypes were also used to study how
clinical and hormonal features vary across the subtypes and for protein expression comparisons
in later proteomic analyses.
Handling of missing data
To maintain diagnostic integrity and prevent biased misclassifica-
tions, the PCOS diagnosis algorithm was applied only to participants with complete data across
all three diagnostic components: HA, OA and PCOM (see Step 3 in Algorithm 1). This means
that only participants with non-missing TRUE/FALSE values for each component were retained,
and any cases with missing data (e.g., a combination of HA = TRUE, OA = TRUE, but PCOM
= NA) were excluded from classification (see Table A.2 in Appendix, Section A.2). This con-
servative complete-case approach ensured that no participant was incorrectly assigned a “No
PCOS indicated” label due to incomplete data. It also preserved the integrity of subsequent
phenotype classification (described later in Section 2.4.3), preventing cases of misclassification
(e.g., mislabeling a potential Type A phenotype – which requires all three components – as one
of the other phenotypes only requiring two components).
The diagnostic algorithm was applied under two models: a minimum criteria model (applied
across all years of the study) and a full-criteria model used for participants enrolled after 2023.
The logic of the algorithm remained the same, but the set of eligible variables differed. In the
minimum criteria model, FG and AFC were excluded due to unavailability prior to 2023. As a
result, HA was defined solely by elevated total or free testosterone, while PCOM could only be
indicated by age-adjusted AMH elevation.
22
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
==PAGE:28==
2.4.3
Phenotype Classification
Participants classified as having PCOS based on the data-driven algorithm were further catego-
rized into one of four phenotypes, as defined by the NIH international consensus (see Table 1.1
in the Introduction, Section 1.1.4):
• Type A: HA + OA + PCOM
• Type B: HA + OA
• Type C: HA + PCOM
• Type D: OA + PCOM
A participant could only be classified into a phenotype if she had complete data for each com-
ponent, and at least two components met the diagnostic thresholds defined in Table 2.2, Section
2.4.2. The specific combination of components which met the criteria determined the assigned
phenotype. The algorithm is as follows:
Algorithm 2 PCOS Phenotype Classification
Require: Dataset with logical indicators and non-missing data for HA, OA, and PCOM among
PCOS-positive participants
for all participants with PCOS_diagnosis = "PCOS indicated" do
2:
if HA and OA and PCOM then
Assign PCOS_phenotype = "Type A"
4:
else if HA and OA and not PCOM then
Assign PCOS_phenotype = "Type B"
6:
else if HA and not OA and PCOM then
Assign PCOS_phenotype = "Type C"
8:
else if not HA and OA and PCOM then
Assign PCOS_phenotype = "Type D"
10:
else
Assign PCOS_phenotype = "No PCOS indicated"
12:
end if
end for
The logic used to derive a component diagnosis (e.g., HA) from multiple variables involved
a logical OR across inputs, such that a TRUE in any variable resulted in a TRUE outcome,
while the presence of NA values could yield an indeterminate result (NA). This follows the line
of thinking that just one indication of HA, OA, or PCOM is enough to satisfy the diagnostic
component. An illustrative example of the coding logic for the HA component is shown in
Table A.3 in Appendix, Section A.2. Only cases with a definite TRUE or FALSE outcome for
all three components were considered for downstream analyses.
Consequently, all prevalence estimates were calculated using this complete-case subset to pre-
serve internal validity. No imputation of missing values was applied. Prevalence results are
reported as both raw counts and proportions within the PCOS-positive group.
2.4.4
Visualization and output
Summary tables were generated similarly to those in the EDA and were used to display the
distribution of key variables between data-based diagnosed PCOS-positive and PCOS-negative
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
23
==PAGE:29==
participants. UpSet plots were employed to visualize combinations of diagnostic components
and the resulting PCOS phenotypes. Bar plots with proportions and Raincloud plots – a com-
bination of box plots, violin plots, and jittered points – were used to assess the distribution of
PCOS-relevant traits across phenotypes, with participant counts included for reference (38).
All analyses were conducted in R, using packages such as dplyr, ComplexUpset, and ggplot2.
Additionally, flow diagrams were created to illustrate the filtering process from the total cohort
to the final analytic subsets.
24
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
==PAGE:30==
2.4.5
Proteomic Analysis
The proteomics analysis builds upon and extends the current Olink data analysis pipeline de-
veloped by the Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology at Hvidovre Hospital. The analysis
utilizes protein expression data generated with the Olink®Explore 3072 platform, which pro-
files over 2,900 proteins across multiple biological domains. To visualize differential protein
expression between PCOS-positive and PCOS-negative groups, and between phenotypes, the
pipeline was customized to include Volcano plots. These plots highlight proteins with both sta-
tistical and biological relevance, enabling a clear overview of differentially expressed proteins.
The pipeline integrates the OlinkAnalyze R package with additional tools for linear regres-
sion modeling, multiple testing correction, and data visualization, thereby providing a robust
framework for proteomic profiling in a clinical research context.
Pre-processing and inclusion
The proteomic data were collected and processed as described in Section 2.3.2, resulting in
protein abundance values expressed as Normalized Protein eXpression (NPX). To help ensure
data quality and analytical robustness, a series of additional preprocessing steps were applied.
Technical replicates were identified, and resolved by averaging their NPX values across assays
(proteins), resulting in a single consensus profile per individual. NPX data were also screened
for excessive missingness; since protein-level missingness was low (around 3%), no proteins
were filtered out. However, all rows and columns with any remaining missing values were
removed before dimensionality reduction via principal component analysis (PCA).
PCA was performed on the scaled NPX matrix to visually assess potential batch effects, where
samples were colored by Olink plate ID to evaluate clustering by assay batch (see Plot A.2 in
Appendix A.1). Slight plate-driven separation was observed, why plate ID was retained as a
random effect in downstream linear mixed-effects modeling to formally account for technical
variability.
The NPX values, together with assay-level metadata (including Olink ID, UniProt accession,
panel, and quality control variables), and select variables from the clinical and questionnaire
data (detailed in Section 2.3.1), were stored in a SummarizedExperiment object. This object
was subsequently converted to a long-format dataframe compatible with the OlinkAnalyze R
package. For this analysis, only maternal samples collected at the time of inclusion and with
non-missing values for the phenotype of interest—such as M_PCOS or PCOS_diagnosis—were
included. The long-format data frame was used for input in the linear mixed-effects model-
ing and the results from this were then used in subsequent volcano plot analyses and gene set
enrichment analysis (GSEA).
Differential expression analysis
Differential protein expression analysis was conducted to identify serum proteins associated
with PCOS status and phenotypic subtypes. NPX values were used as the outcome variable,
and models were fit independently for each protein. Two types of comparisons were performed:
(1) women with PCOS versus controls, based on both self-reported and algorithmically defined
PCOS status, and (2) comparisons between NIH PCOS phenotypes (A-D).
PCOS status: linear mixed-effects models
To identify differentially expressed proteins be-
tween women with and without PCOS while adjusting for potential confounders and technical
variability, linear mixed-effects modeling was employed. This approach included age as a fixed
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
25
==PAGE:31==
covariate and Olink plate ID as a random intercept to account for batch effects. The statistical
tests were implemented using the olink_lmer_posthoc() function from the OlinkAnalyze
package. As the adjusted p-values returned by this function corresponded to the raw p-values,
corrected p-values were recalculated using the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure to control the
false discovery rate (FDR).
The analyses were performed separately for PCOS status based on self-report and algorithmic
classification, with PCOS status modeled as a binary predictor in both cases. The model structure
was:
NPX ∼PCOS + Age + (1 | PlateID)
Proteins were considered FDR-significant if the adjusted p-value was less than 0.05 and the
absolute log2 fold change (“estimate” in R) exceeded 0.5, corresponding approximately to a
1.41-fold change in expression, keeping the exploratory aim of this thesis in mind. Proteins
with p-values below 0.05 and absolute log2 fold change above 0.5, but without FDR significance,
were considered Nominally significant. Results were visualized using volcano plots, in which
the top 20 significant proteins were labeled. In some cases, fewer labels appear due to a lack of
proteins meeting the significance criteria or because of overlapping labels in the visualization.
Supporting tables provide an overview of the top significant proteins included in the plots (up
to 20), with each row detailing the protein assay (gene name), Olink ID, UniProt accession,
panel assignment (Oncology, Neurology, Cardiometabolic, or Inflammation), estimated log2
fold change, 95% confidence intervals, raw p-value, and FDR-adjusted p-value.
PCOS phenotypes: one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA)
Due to small sample sizes
within PCOS phenotype subgroups, we could not account for batch effects using linear mixed-
effects modeling. For this comparison, one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) was applied
using the olink_anova_posthoc() function, with phenotype treated as a binary variable (i.e.
with phenotype A = 1 and phenotype B = 0) and age included as a covariate:
NPX ∼Phenotype + Age
As with the LME analysis, p-values were adjusted using the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure,
and significance was defined as an adjusted p-value < 0.05 and an absolute log2 fold change >
0.5.
Pathway enrichment analysis
In order to identify biological processes and molecular mechanisms associated with PCOS,
GSEA was performed using the olink_pathway_enrichment() function from the OlinkAnalyze
R package. The analysis was applied to ranked lists of proteins based on effect size estimates
(log2 fold changes) derived from linear mixed-effects models, and was conducted separately for
both Gene Ontology (GO) terms and Reactome pathway databases.
GSEA evaluates whether predefined sets of proteins – representing specific biological pathways
– are collectively upregulated or downregulated. This approach provides a more system-level
perspective on the molecular alterations in PCOS and complements single-protein analysis by
highlighting broader functional trends.
Pathways were considered significantly enriched if their FDR-adjusted p-values were below
0.05. Enrichment results were interpreted to explore whether particular processes – such as
26
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
==PAGE:32==
metabolic regulation or reproductive functions – were disproportionately represented in PCOS-
positive individuals, either self-reported or diagnosed via the data-based algorithm.
Overview of the PCOS analysis workflow in this study
The following figure provides a visual summary of the overall analytical workflow used in this
study, from data collection to phenotypic classification and molecular analyses.
Figure 2.1: Overview of the PCOS analysis pipeline. Data collected from questionnaire responses, clinical lab-
oratory results (Labka), and blood samples were integrated to examine PCOS status and phenotypes. Reported
clinical features, medical history, and hormone measures were used to characterize self-reported PCOS and to de-
velop a diagnostic algorithm based on the Rotterdam criteria. Algorithm-defined PCOS and PCOS phenotypes
were characterized and compared using clinical and proteomic data. Proteomic profiling (Olink Explore 3072) was
available for pre-2023 participants and used for differential expression analysis (via LME, ANOVA, and volcano
plots). Comparisons included women with and without self-reported or algorithm-diagnosed PCOS – where path-
way enrichment analysis (GSEA) was also applied – and between phenotypes (A-D). Blue text represents analyses
performed with the minimum criteria model. Red text represents analyses performed with the full criteria model.
LME = linear mixed-effects. ANOVA = analysis of variance.
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
27
==PAGE:33==
3
Results
3.1
Exploratory Data Analysis: Characterizing Self-Reported
PCOS in the COPL Cohort
The exploratory data analysis (EDA) served multiple purposes in this project. Most importantly,
it enabled the characterization of women in the COPL cohort who self-reported having PCOS.
Throughout the EDA, we examined variables that differed significantly between self-reported
PCOS-positive and PCOS-negative participants. This approach allowed us to describe both the
clinical and molecular features associated with PCOS in this cohort, providing a foundation for
later classification and proteomic analyses.
In addition to characterizing differences between self-reported PCOS-positive and PCOS-negative
individuals, the EDA also served as a quality control step. Variables with inconsistent format-
ting, high uncertainty, or problematic data entry were flagged for exclusion from subsequent
analyses, including the diagnostic algorithm and summary comparisons. For example, the waist-
to-hip ratio measurement was removed entirely due to evident issues with data entry errors. This
ensured that downstream analyses were based on reliable and interpretable data.
For simplicity, the following sections on the clinical and molecular features of PCOS in the
COPL cohort use post-2023 data as the primary basis for comparisons. Where relevant, differ-
ences observed in the pre-2023 data are noted. Complete summary tables for both time periods
are available in the Appendix, Section A.3.
3.1.1
Clinical Profile
Table 3.1 summarizes the key clinical and ultrasound features, related to PCOS diagnostic crite-
ria, between self-reported PCOS-positive and PCOS-negative individuals included in the COPL
cohort from 2023 onward. Notably, all variables but Treated for acne show significance with
p-values less than 0.05, validating these clinical features as forming the diagnostic criteria. The
two acne-related parameters as well as the FG score, are especially affected by missingness
(44% - 88% missingness) (see the full Table A.8 in Appendix, Section A.3). Along with AFCs,
these measures were not tracked for inclusions prior to 2023.
No PCOS
PCOS
P-value
(N=1206)
(N=160)
Acne
Yes
143 (12%)
31 (19%)
0.03 (1.7) *
No
532 (44%)
68 (43%)
Treated for acne
Yes
6 (0.5%)
4 (2.5%)
0.08 (2.9) .
No
137 (11%)
27 (17%)
Ferriman-Gallwey score
3.00 [0, 26.0]
5.00 [0, 26.0]
<0.001 ***
Cycle type
Long Cycle
36 (3%)
48 (30%)
<0.001 ***
28
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
==PAGE:34==
No PCOS
PCOS
P-value
(N=1206)
(N=160)
No Cycle
24 (2%)
7 (4%)
Regular Cycle
862 (72%)
72 (45%)
Short Cycle
6 (0.5%)
2 (1.3%)
Cycle length (days)
28.0 [14.0, 45.0]
32.0 [14.0, 69.0]
<0.001 ***
AFC (right)
9.00 [0, 50.0]
19.0 [2.00, 43.0]
<0.001 ***
AFC (left)
9.00 [0, 50.0]
17.0 [1.00, 50.0]
<0.001 ***
AFC (total)
18.0 [0, 100]
36.0 [4.00, 88.0]
<0.001 ***
PCOS symptom: Increased androgens
No
1206 (100%)
139 (87%)
<0.001 (0) ***
Yes
0 (0%)
21 (13%)
PCOS symptom: Hirsutism
No
1206 (100%)
138 (86%)
<0.001 (0) ***
Yes
0 (0%)
22 (14%)
PCOS symptom: Irregular cycle
No
1205 (99.9%)
108 (68%)
<0.001 (0.002) ***
Yes
1 (0.1%)
52 (33%)
PCOS symptom: PCOM via scan
No
1205 (99.9%)
109 (68%)
<0.001 (0.002) ***
Yes
1 (0.1%)
51 (32%)
Table 3.1: Clinical and ultrasound features compared between self-reported PCOS-positive and
PCOS-negative individuals in the COPL cohort (post-2023 inclusions). Values are reported as counts
and (rounded percentages) or medians [min, max]. P-values were calculated excluding missing values.
Significance codes: . p < 0.1, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001. AFC = antral follicle count. Odds
ratios (ORs) are provided in parentheses after the p-values for binary variables [p-value (OR)]. PCOS is
the reference group, and the OR represents the odds for the first listed level within the variable (e.g., for
Acne, the odds of having acne among PCOS individuals is 1.7 times that of non-PCOS individuals). This
is a condensed version of Table A.8 in Appendix A.3.
Only Cycle type and Cycle length were available for pre-2023 inclusions, both of which were
also significant for that period (see Table A.7 in Appendix, SectionA.3). The distribution of
cycle types is significantly different between PCOS-positive and PCOS-negative participants,
with greater proportions in Long-, No- and Short Cycle for both periods. The PCOS-positive
group also has mean and median cycle lengths around 32-34 days for both periods, while the
PCOS-negative group’s mean and median are about 28 days – the typical menstrual cycle length.
Right, left and total AFCs are all very significant, validating PCOM as a key component of
PCOS. All measures of PCOS symptoms were also significant, with only one inclusion from the
PCOS-negative group reporting both the PCOM and irregular cycle symptoms. Being from the
same woman, it was considered a data entry error, as symptom information should only be filled
in if the participant indicated suspicion of PCOS while answering the questionnaire. Excluding
this case, the most common symptom was irregular cycles, reported in 52 inclusions, followed
closely by PCOM with 51 inclusions.
A contingency table (Table A.1 in Appendix, Section A.2) was created to explore how of-
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
29
==PAGE:35==
ten symptoms co-occurred. The most common symptom profile was the absence of all four
symptoms — irregular cycles, hirsutism, PCOM, and hyperandrogenism — observed in 2,947
women. The second most frequent combination was irregular cycles and PCOM, found in 23
inclusions. A few combinations were very rare: only one individual reported the combination
of hirsutism, PCOM, and hyperandrogenism in the absence of irregular cycles. Three additional
combinations were also observed only once: (i) irregular cycles and hyperandrogenism with-
out hirsutism or PCOM, (ii) hyperandrogenism alone, and (iii) PCOM and hirsutism without
irregular cycles or elevated androgens.
Although the four symptom variables were collected across both time periods and exhibited no
missingness, their limited frequency – at most 52 inclusions per symptom despite 325 partici-
pants being entered as PCOS-positive – raised concerns about how consistently these variables
were completed. Specifically, it is unclear whether all eligible participants were prompted or
encouraged to complete the symptom questions. Due to this uncertainty, the PCOS symptom
variables were excluded from further analyses in this thesis.
Additional variables of significance
In addition to PCOS diagnostic features, several other variables showed statistically signifi-
cant differences between women with and without self-reported PCOS across the COPL cohort.
These differences span fertility characteristics, maternal and family health conditions, mental
health outcomes, with several associations being period-specific. Table 3.2 summarizes the ad-
ditional significant features between self-reported PCOS-positive and PCOS-negative inclusions
(post-2023).
No PCOS
PCOS
P-value
(N=1206)
(N=160)
Age at inclusion
34.2 [20.0, 49.2]
32.8 [21.6, 45.2]
0.002 **
Fertility
Infertility
Tried <12 months
668 (55%)
69 (43%)
<0.001 (0.4) ***
Tried >12 months
224 (19%)
58 (36%)
Time to pregnancy (months)
3.00 [0, 132]
6.00 [0, 90.0]
0.002 ***
Conception
Natural
942 (78%)
112 (70%)
0.01 (0.6) *
Assisted
228 (19%)
45 (28%)
Familial health conditions
Near family with PCOS
No
847 (70%)
114 (71%)
0.005 (0.3) **
Yes
23 (2%)
10 (6%)
Near family with type 2 diabetes
No
687 (57%)
86 (54%)
0.03 (0.6) *
Yes
187 (16%)
38 (24%)
Thyroid gland characteristics
Echogenicity of the TG
Normal light gray
570 (47%)
65 (41%)
0.009 **
30
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
==PAGE:36==
No PCOS
PCOS
P-value
(N=1206)
(N=160)
Slightly reduced
151 (13%)
29 (18%)
Moderately hypo-echogenic
54 (5%)
13 (8%)
Pronounced hypo-echogenic
9 (0.7%)
2 (1.3%)
Pseudonodular
16 (1%)
6 (4%)
Mental health conditions
Major depression index (MDI)
15.0 [0, 47.0]
21.0 [1.00, 46.0]
0.001 **
Maternal depression class
No depression
751 (62%)
91 (57%)
0.002 **
Mild depression
33 (3%)
9 (6%)
Moderate depression
41 (3%)
12 (8%)
Severe depression
56 (5%)
15 (9%)
Perceived stress scale (PSS)
19.0 [0, 36.0]
20.0 [4.00, 37.0]
0.01 **
General anxiety disorder (GAD)
6.00 [0, 21.0]
7.00 [0, 21.0]
0.03 **
Anxiety class
0.03 *
No anxiety
346 (29%)
42 (26%)
0.03 *
Mild anxiety
334 (28%)
43 (27%)
Moderate anxiety
128 (11%)
22 (14%)
Severe anxiety
73 (6%)
20 (13%)
Table 3.2: Significant variables between self-reported PCOS-positive and PCOS-negative individu-
als in the COPL cohort (post-2023 inclusions). Values are presented as counts and (rounded percent-
ages) or medians [min, max]. P-values are calculated excluding missing values. Significance codes: .
p < 0.1, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001. TG = thyroid gland. Odds ratios (ORs) are provided
in parentheses after the p-values for binary variables [p-value (OR)]. PCOS is the reference group, and
the OR represents the odds for the first listed level within the variable (e.g., for Infertility, the odds of
having Tried <12 months among PCOS individuals is 0.4 times that of non-PCOS individuals). This is a
condensed version of Tables A.6,A.12, A.14 and A.16 in Appendix A.3.
Age at inclusion
PCOS-positive women were consistently younger at the time of inclusion
in both periods (mean difference ∼1.3 years), with statistically significant differences observed
before and after 2023 (p = 0.002).
Fertility characteristics
Across both time periods, PCOS-positive individuals consistently
exhibited indicators of reduced fertility. Infertility was more common in the PCOS group, with
a significantly greater proportion having tried to conceive for more than 12 months (p < 0.001
in both periods). Correspondingly, Time to pregnancy was longer in PCOS-positive women,
with a median of 6 months vs. 3-4 months in PCOS-negative women (p = 0.04 before 2023; p
= 0.002 after 2023). Assisted Conception methods, which include IUI or IVF, were used more
often among PCOS-positive women (p = 0.02 before 2023; p = 0.01 after 2023). Donor sperm
use was significantly lower in PCOS-positive women before 2023 (p = 0.04), but this association
was not significant after 2023.
BMI measures
Significant differences in BMI were only observed in inclusions prior to 2023.
PCOS-positive women had higher mean and median BMI before 2023 (p < 0.001), with greater
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
31
==PAGE:37==
proportions in the overweight and obesity categories. Post 2023, neither BMI (p = 0.06) nor
BMI class were significant.
Maternal and familial health conditions
Only one maternal health measure, Maternal hyper-
tension, was significantly associated with PCOS and only for the pre-2023 data. Hypertension
was more frequent in PCOS-positive women (p = 0.03), though this difference was not observed
post-2023. Self-reported history of a CVD incident (Has ever had CVD) or diabetes type 1 and
2 (Has diabetes) were not significantly different in either period. Interestingly, first-degree rel-
atives with T2D (Near family with type 2 diabetes) were more common among PCOS-positive
women in both periods (p = 0.005 before; p = 0.03 after). Cardiovascular disease in the family
(Near family with CVD) also showed a significant association with PCOS before 2023 (p = 0.02),
but this was not observed after 2023 (p = 0.07). Near family with PCOS was only collected after
2023 and showed a significantly higher prevalence in PCOS-positive women (p = 0.005).
Thyroid gland characteristics
Variables for thyroid gland measurements were only intro-
duced after 2023, of these Echogenicity of the thyroid gland showed significant group differ-
ences (p = 0.009), with more PCOS-positive women exhibiting altered echogenicity patterns
(e.g., slightly/moderately hypo-echogenic, and pseudonodular). Thyroid volume and nodule
counts, however, did not differ significantly.
Mental health conditions
PCOS-positive women consistently reported worse mental health
across both time periods. Major Depression Index (MDI) was significantly higher in the PCOS-
positive group (p = 0.04 before; p = 0.001 after). Maternal depression class was significant
for the post-2023 period as well, with greater proportions of PCOS-positive inclusions in Mild,
Moderate and Severe depression categories (p = 0.2 before; p = 0.002 after). Perceived Stress
Scale (PSS) scores were also higher among PCOS-positive women (p = 0.03 before; p = 0.01
after). Both General Anxiety Disorder (GAD-7) and Anxiety class showed significance, with
higher mean and median scores and higher proportions in moderate and severe anxiety classes
in the PCOS group (p = 0.01 before; p = 0.03 after for GAD-7,p = 0.04 before; p = 0.03 after
for anxiety class).
3.1.2
Hormone Profile
Being interested in serum biomarkers of PCOS, it is of relevance to examine the hormone mea-
sures between PCOS and non-PCOS individuals. Table 3.3 compares the medians of PCOS-
related hormone measures between the self-reported PCOS cases and the rest of the COPL co-
hort, for inclusions after 2023.
We observe a significant increase in total and free testosterone, AMH, LH, and the LH:FSH ratio,
consistent with findings in the literature and with established knowledge of PCOS pathophysi-
ology and biomarkers (referenced in Section 1.1.5 and Figure 1.2 in the Introduction) (2). The
same is true for inclusions before 2023 (see Appendix Section A.9). Additionally, this earlier pe-
riod also had significantly decreased SHBG and increased 17-hydroxyprogesterone (17-OHP).
32
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
==PAGE:38==
No PCOS
PCOS
P-value
(N=1206)
(N=160)
Total T (nmol L−1)
0.860 [0.100, 2.04]
1.14 [0.590, 3.12]
<0.001 ***
↑
Free T (nmol L−1)
0.0100 [0, 0.0300]
0.0200 [0.0100, 0.0700]
<0.001 ***
↑
SHBG (nmol L−1)
59.8 [14.9, 143]
58.0 [14.0, 172]
0.324
↓
AMH (pmol L−1)
12.0 [0.0600, 89.0]
33.0 [3.60, 157]
<0.001 ***
↑
LH (IU L−1)
6.30 [0.0200, 67.1]
9.00 [2.60, 88.8]
<0.001 ***
↑
FSH (IU L−1)
5.90 [0.205, 37.2]
5.20 [1.20, 21.4]
0.245
↓
LH:FSH ratio
1.09 [0.00353, 7.84]
2.06 [0.697, 5.91]
<0.001 ***
↑
17-OHP (nmol L−1)
1.39 [0.0100, 10.3]
1.56 [0.560, 10.8]
0.0694 .
↑
E2 (nmol L−1)
0.310 [0.0100, 3.86]
0.280 [0.0700, 1.79]
0.84
↓
Table 3.3: PCOS-related hormone measures stratified by PCOS status in the COPL cohort
(post-2023 inclusions). Values are reported as medians [min, max]. P-values were calculated ex-
cluding missing values. Significance codes: . p < 0.1, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001.
Arrows indicate whether the median in the PCOS group is higher (↑) or lower (↓) than in the non-
PCOS group. This is a condensed version of Table A.10 in Appendix, SectionA.3.
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
33
==PAGE:39==
3.2
Data-based PCOS Diagnosis & Phenotype Classification
Building on the hormonal and clinical differences observed in self-reported PCOS individuals,
a data-based PCOS classifier was developed to systematically identify suspected PCOS cases
within the COPL cohort. The classification algorithm was inspired by the Rotterdam criteria and
uses selected clinical and biochemical variables – including total and free testosterone, AMH,
and menstrual cycle characteristics – to flag individuals who fulfill at least two out of three
diagnostic components. This approach enables the identification of previously unrecognized
PCOS cases, facilitates comparison with self-reported cases, and provides the basis for assigning
NIH-defined phenotypes. These phenotypes are then compared in terms of clinical features,
hormone profiles, and proteomic signatures in downstream analyses.
3.2.1
Addressing Missingness in the Variables Required for a Data-based
Classifier
As described in the Methods, the diagnostic variables used for classifying PCOS in the COPL
cohort are impacted by a large degree of missingness. Figure 3.1 shows the proportion of missing
data for each variable included in the PCOS classification algorithm, stratified by time period
(pre-2023 vs. post-2023).
Figure 3.1: Missingness of diagnostic variables for PCOS classification before and after 2023. This bar plot
shows the percentage of missing data for each diagnostic variable used in the PCOS classification algorithm, strat-
ified by time period (pre-2023 vs. post-2023).
Variables such as the M_Ferrimann_Gallwey score and AFC measures were only introduced
after 2023, resulting in complete missingness for these variables in the earlier time period. In
contrast, menstrual cycle characteristics and AMH were more consistently available across both
inclusion periods.
This pattern of data availability motivated the implementation of the two classification mod-
els. The minimum criteria model, which excluded the FG score and AFCs, could be applied
to participants from all time periods. The full-criteria model, which incorporated all diagnostic
components, was restricted to participants enrolled after 2023.
34
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
==PAGE:40==
3.2.2
Minimum Criteria Analysis (Full Cohort)
Using the minimum diagnostic criteria, 277/3016 (9%) participants had complete data on all
three components.
Among these:
• 39 participants (14%) were classified as PCOS-positive, having at least two of the three
criteria.
• Of those classified as PCOS-positive, 85% (33/39) had also self-reported a PCOS diag-
nosis.
• Among the 238 classified as “No PCOS indicated”, 27% (63/238) had self-reported PCOS.
The following diagram summarizes the flow of data for this analysis:
3016 inclusions
in COPL
277 inclusions
with full
component data
39 diagnosed
238 not
diagnosed
33 with self-
reported PCOS
6 without self-
reported PCOS
63 with self-
reported PCOS
175 without self-
reported PCOS
Diagnosed
Not diagnosed
2739 incomplete cases excluded
Figure 3.2: Flow diagram showing data availability and diagnostic classification in the COPL cohort after
applying the minimum criteria. Of the 3,016 total inclusions, 277 participants had complete data for all three
diagnostic components. Among them, 39 were algorithmically diagnosed with PCOS and 238 were not. The figure
also shows overlap with self-reported PCOS status within each group.
3.2.3
Investigating Phenotype Prevalence (Full Cohort)
The phenotype distribution among the PCOS-positive group (N = 39) was as follows:
Phenotype
Count
Prevalence (%)
Type A (HA + OA + PCOM)
14
35.9
Type B (HA + OA)
7
18.0
Type C (HA + PCOM)
5
12.8
Type D (OA + PCOM)
13
33.3
For this minimum criteria model and subset of complete data, the most common phenotype is
Type A closely followed by type D.
To get an visual representation of intersections of the diagnostic components, as well as an
indication of how frequently single diagnostic components were presented among the remaining
238 women who didn’t classify for PCOS diagnosis, an UpSet plot was made (see Figure 3.3).
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
35
==PAGE:41==
Among the 277 participants with complete diagnostic data, 161 (58%) did not meet thresh-
old for any PCOS component. A substantial number of participants met only one component,
particularly OA or HA, and did not satisfy the Rotterdam requirement for PCOS diagnosis. No-
tably, PCOM was more frequently observed in combination with OA than either PCOM alone
or PCOM in combination with HA.
Figure 3.3: UpSet plot of PCOS diagnostic component combinations among participants with complete data
(N = 277) diagnosed with the minimum criteria. The plot visualizes the intersections of the three PCOS diagnostic
components – OH, HA, and PCOM – used in the Rotterdam criteria. Bars represent the number of participants
meeting each unique combination of components, including those who did not meet criteria and were classified as
“No PCOS indicated”.
This minimum criteria PCOS diagnosis will be explored further in the later proteomics analyses,
as there is only proteomic data available for inclusions prior to 2023.
3.2.4
Full Criteria Analysis (After 2023 Cohort)
For participants enrolled after 2023, a separate analysis was performed using the full Rotterdam
criteria. Participants were classified using the same threshold definitions, now including the
FG and AFC metrics where available (all variables and thresholds are outlined in Table 2.2 in
the Methods, Section 2.4.2). This allows us to compare the self-reported PCOS cases to those
diagnosed with a data-based algorithm including the full set of Rotterdam-relevant variables in
the COPL cohort.
Among 1,483 participants enrolled post-2023, a subset of 79 had complete data on all three
diagnostic components.
36
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
==PAGE:42==
Of these:
• 43 participants (54%) were classified as PCOS-positive, fulfilling at least two of the three
criteria.
• Out of the PCOS-positive group, 25 individuals (58%) had also self-reported PCOS.
• Among the 36 classified as “No PCOS indicated”, 7 individuals (19%) had self-reported
PCOS.
A flowchart summarizing this data flow and classification outcome is shown in Figure 3.4.
3016 inclusions
in COPL
1483 inclusions
post 2023
79 inclusions
with full
component data
43 diagnosed
36 not diagnosed
25 with self-
reported PCOS
18 without self-
reported PCOS
7 with self-
reported PCOS
29 without self-
reported PCOS
Diagnosed
Not diagnosed
1533 inclusions before 2023
1404 incomplete cases excluded
Figure 3.4: Flow diagram showing data availability and diagnostic classification in the COPL cohort after
applying the full criteria. Of the 3,016 total inclusions, 79 post-2023 participants had complete data for all three
diagnostic components. Among them, 43 were algorithmically diagnosed with PCOS and 36 were not. The figure
also shows overlap with self-reported PCOS status within each group.
Clinical and hormonal characteristics of PCOS women with a data-based diagnosis
Assuming that the full-criteria model has a greater ability to capture the clinical heterogeneity
of PCOS, we examined whether participants identified as PCOS-positive by the full algorithm
also exhibited key clinical and hormonal features of the syndrome. While certain traits – such as
elevated testosterone and long or irregular cycles – are required by the algorithm and therefore
expected, this step serves to confirm that the classification performs as intended. Beyond these
diagnostic components, we also assessed additional clinical characteristics, including BMI, fer-
tility outcomes, and mental health indicators. These broader traits provide external context to
the algorithm-defined group and establish a foundation for comparison with self-reported symp-
tom profiles in the Discussion. All summary tables for clinical and hormonal features of women
with a full-criteria, data-based diagnosis are provided in the Appendix, Section A.4.
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
37
==PAGE:43==
Diagnostic clinical features
Significant differences emerged in the clinical traits directly rel-
evant to PCOS diagnosis.
Full-criteria, PCOS-positive women had:
• Higher FG scores (median 10.0 vs. 6.5, p = 0.004)
• Longer or absent menstrual cycles (no short cycles were reported in either group)
• Longer cycle lengths (median 32.5 vs. 29.5 days, p < 0.001)
• Higher AFCs:
– Total AFC median: 42.0 vs. 20.0
– Right and left ovary counts also significantly higher (p < 0.001 for all)
These results confirm the intended function of the classification algorithm. All median values
– except for cycle length – exceeded the respective diagnostic thresholds. Additionally, no
significant group differences were observed in the acne-related variables.
Demographics and reproductive features
Women with a full-criteria, data-based PCOS di-
agnosis were significantly younger than non-PCOS individuals (median age 31.3 vs. 34.6 years,
p < 0.001). They also had a significantly different BMI class distribution (p = 0.01), with a
greater proportion of women in the overweight and obese categories. However, BMI, did not
achieve significance (median 23.8 vs. 22.6, p = 0.06).
Although Infertility was reported in both groups, no statistically significant differences were
observed in time to pregnancy (p = 0.5) or conception method (p = 0.2). Notably, none of the 79
inclusions in the full-criteria model used donor oocytes. Only two women in the PCOS-negative
group, and none in the PCOS-positive group, reported use of donor sperm.
Hormonal profile
As expected, total and free testosterone, as well as AMH, were significantly
elevated in the PCOS-positive group. Total testosterone was higher (median 1.48 vs. 0.865
nmol/L, p < 0.001), and free testosterone followed the same trend (median 0.0200 vs. 0.0100
nmol/L, p < 0.001).
AMH was markedly increased (median 59.0 vs. 17.0 pmol/L, p < 0.001), and 23% of PCOS
women had age-adjusted elevated AMH, compared to approximately 3% in the PCOS-negative
group (p < 0.001). However, about 56% of PCOS-positive individuals had missing AMH data.
Among the remaining hormones, the LH:FSH ratio was significantly higher in the PCOS group
(median 2.30 vs. 1.42, p < 0.001). No significant differences were observed in SHBG, FSH,
or estradiol (E2) levels. However, 17-OHP was significantly higher in PCOS-positive women
(median 2.15 vs. 1.19 nmol/L, p = 0.03).
Maternal and family health measures
No significant differences were identified between the
two groups in maternal health conditions or mental health indicators. The only exception was
thyroid echogenicity: PCOS-positive women were more likely to present with slightly reduced
or moderately hypo-echogenic thyroid patterns. No statistically significant differences were
found in any of the family health history variables.
38
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
==PAGE:44==
3.2.5
Investigating Phenotype Prevalence (After 2024 Cohort)
Having established the clinical and hormonal characteristics of women diagnosed with PCOS
using the full-criteria model, we next examined how these individuals distribute across the four
NIH-defined PCOS phenotypes (A–D). This analysis provides insight into the relative preva-
lence of phenotypes within the COPL cohort, after the inclusion of additional diagnostic vari-
ables. It also helps assess whether certain subtypes are more common in this pregnancy loss
population.
Among the 43 PCOS-positive individuals, the phenotype distribution was:
Phenotype
Count
Prevalence (%)
Type A (HA + OA + PCOM)
15
34.9
Type B (HA + OA)
2
4.65
Type C (HA + PCOM)
20
46.5
Type D (OA + PCOM)
6
14.0
The distribution of diagnostic component combinations among the 79 participants with complete
data is shown in Figure 3.5. Phenotypes C and A were the most common among PCOS-positive
individuals.
Figure 3.5: UpSet plot of PCOS diagnostic component combinations among participants with complete data
(N = 79) diagnosed with the full criteria. The plot visualizes the intersections of the three PCOS diagnostic
components – OH, HA, and PCOM – used in the Rotterdam criteria. Bars represent the number of participants
meeting each unique combination of components, including those who did not meet criteria and were classified as
“No PCOS indicated”.
Among the diagnostic components, HA was the most commonly fulfilled criterion in isolation,
followed by PCOM. PCOM appeared more frequently in this analysis compared to the mini-
mum criteria model, and greater number of participants met combinations that included HA and
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
39
==PAGE:45==
PCOM. OA was less commonly fulfilled as a standalone component, and OA was also more
common in combination with PCOM, than alone or with only HA.
Comparing phenotype prevalence between self-reported & data-based PCOS cases
After narrowing down the data set to those with complete component data post-2023, 32 of the
79 women had self-reported PCOS. Of these women, 25 were also diagnosed with PCOS based
on the algorithm. We thought it interesting to compare the prevalence of the phenotypes within
the self-reported PCOS women who also fulfill the data-based Rotterdam (2/3) criteria to that
of the classified women.
Figure 3.6: Prevalence of PCOS phenotypes based on classification source [algorithm-based PCOS-positive
(N = 43) vs. self-reported PCOS-positive (N = 25)] among participants included after 2023 with complete
diagnostic data. Algorithm-classified phenotypes were derived using the full criteria. Self-reported PCOS was
based on participant survey responses. Type A was the most common phenotype among self-reported PCOS (48%),
whereas Type C was more prevalent in the algorithm-classified group (46.5%).
In Figure 3.6 we observed that the most common phenotype for the self-reported PCOS women
is Type A followed by Type C, which is opposite to the data-based phenotype distribution.
Exploring phenotype differences across key biological domains
Having defined the PCOS phenotypes using the full-criteria model, we investigated whether
these subgroups differ in traits that reflect distinct biological processes relevant to PCOS. To
avoid a circular argument, we did not compare phenotypes using the variables that define them
– such as FG score, testosterone, AMH, or menstrual cycle features. Instead, we focused on
traits from three biological domains implicated in PCOS pathophysiology (Introduction, Sec-
tion 1.1.1): metabolic, neuroendocrine, and reproductive function.
40
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
==PAGE:46==
One representative trait was selected from each domain based on relevance and data complete-
ness: BMI (metabolic), LH:FSH ratio (neuroendocrine), and Infertility (reproductive). Rain-
cloud plots were generated to visualize the distribution of the first two trait across phenotypes
A–D and the PCOS-negative group (Figures 3.7–3.8). For Infertility, a categorical variable, a
bar plot with proportions was used (Figure 3.9).
Across all three traits, substantial overlap was observed between phenotypes, with no statisti-
cally significant differences detected.
Figure 3.7: BMI distribution across PCOS phenotypes and PCOS-negative group. No significant differences
were observed (Kruskal–Wallis p = 0.3), but Type A and C displayed higher variability.
For BMI, although phenotypes A and C showed greater variability, their group medians were
similar (Kruskal–Wallis p = 0.3, Figure 3.7). Phenotypes B and D had higher medians, but also
smaller sample sizes.
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
41
==PAGE:47==
The LH:FSH ratio appeared elevated in all PCOS phenotypes relative to the PCOS-negative
group (Figure 3.8), with a significant difference detected when all groups were included (p =
0.02); however, this difference disappeared when the PCOS-negative group was excluded (p =
0.7).
Figure 3.8: LH:FSH ratio distribution across PCOS phenotypes and PCOS-negative group. All phenotypes
show higher median LH:FSH ratios than the PCOS-negative group. A significant difference was detected (Kruskal–
Wallis p = 0.02). However, after removal of the PCOS-negative group, the significance was eliminated (Kruskal–
Wallis p = 0.7).
Phenotypes C and D were the least affected by infertility with about 30% having tried to get preg-
nant for more than 12 months. Phenotypes A and B has similar proportions to the PCOS-negative
group, with approximately 50% having tried to get pregnant for more than a year Figure 3.9).
42
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
==PAGE:48==
Figure 3.9: Infertility distribution across PCOS phenotypes and PCOS-negative group. Type C has the small-
est proportion of inclusions who have tried to get pregnant for more than 12 months. No statistically significant
differences were found (Fisher’s Exact Test p = 0.6).
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
43
==PAGE:49==
3.3
Proteomic Signatures of PCOS in the COPL Cohort
To explore molecular signatures associated with PCOS, differential expression analyses were
performed on proteomics data from participants included in the COPL cohort prior to 2023
(N = 1533) – the only group with Olink proteomics data available. Two complementary case
definitions were used: self-reported PCOS and data-based PCOS diagnosis, as described in
earlier sections. With proteomics data only being available for approximately 1000 inclusions
prior to 2023 (see Table A.4, in Appendix, Section A.2), the data-based PCOS diagnosis had to
be based on the minimum model, described in the Methods, Section 2.4.2. For each analysis,
linear mixed-effects models were applied to NPX values from the Olink Explore panel, adjusting
for age and plate ID as a random effect.
3.3.1
Differential Expression Analysis: Self-reported PCOS
The first analysis compared proteomic profiles between participants who self-reported a PCOS
diagnosis and those who did not. Out of the women with proteomic data, 107 individuals had
self-reported PCOS.
A volcano plot of the results, filtered by FDR-adjusted p-value and log2 fold change threshold
(|log2FC| > 0.5), is shown in Figure 3.17.
Figure 3.10: Volcano plot showing differential protein expression between individuals with self-reported
PCOS and those without, ordered by adjusted p-value and filtered by fold change (|log2FC| >0.5). Each
dot represents a protein quantified using the Olink Explore platform. The x-axis displays the log2 fold change in
NPX values, and the y-axis shows the –log10 p-value from linear mixed-effects modeling (adjusted for age, with
plate as a random effect). Proteins highlighted in red are FDR-significant (adjusted p < 0.05 and |log2FC| > 0.5),
while blue-labeled proteins are nominally significant (p < 0.05 and |log2FC| > 0.5). Notably, only the OXT protein
remained significant after correction for multiple testing.
Only one protein – OXT (Oxytocin-neurophysin 1) – remained statistically significant after
multiple testing correction and surpassed the fold change threshold. For OXT, log2FC = –0.743
44
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
==PAGE:50==
(adj. p-value = 0.002), corresponding to a decrease in expression level of approximately 40%
in the PCOS-positive group compared to the reference group: PCOS-negative group. OXT is
responsible for smooth muscle contraction in both the uterus and mammary glands (39).
Additional proteins showing nominal significance, and achieving the fold change threshold (p
< 0.05, |log2FC| > 0.5), included MAGEA3, TAGLN3, TP73, and OGT, of which TAGLN3 is
the only one that is downregulated (see Table 3.4).
Assay
OlinkID
UniProt
Panel
estimate
conf.low
conf.high
p.value
Adj_pval
Threshold
OXT
OID21047
P01178
Neurology
-0.743
-1.03
-0.454
5.19e-07
0.00152
FDR significant
MAGEA3
OID31331
P43357
Oncology_II
0.843
0.158
1.53
0.0158
0.512
Nominally significant
TAGLN3
OID31225
Q9UI15
Oncology_II
-0.812
-1.48
-0.144
0.0173
0.527
Nominally significant
TP73
OID30879
O15350
Neurology_II
0.508
0.08667
0.929
0.0182
0.534
Nominally significant
OGT
OID31300
O15294
Oncology_II
0.681
0.0777
1.28
0.0270
0.602
Nominally significant
Table 3.4: Top differentially expressed proteins between individuals with self-reported PCOS and those with-
out, ordered by adjusted p-value and filtered by fold change (|log2FC| >0.5). The table shows the top proteins
with the largest effect sizes and strongest statistical support. Results are based on linear mixed-effects modeling
with age as a covariate and plate as a random effect. Only OXT was statistically significant after false discovery
rate (FDR) correction (p.adj. <0.05), while the remaining proteins are nominally significant (p <0.05 and |log2FC|
>0.5).
The top 20 proteins sorted by adjusted p-value, without fold change filtering, are presented in
Table 3.5, and visualized in Figure 3.11, with most showing downregulation in PCOS-positive
individuals.
Figure 3.11: Volcano plot showing differential protein expression between individuals with self-reported
PCOS and those without, ranked by adjusted p-value. Each dot represents a protein quantified using the Olink
Explore platform. The x-axis displays the log2 fold change in NPX values, and the y-axis shows the –log10 p-value
from linear mixed-effects modeling (adjusted for age, with plate as a random effect). Proteins highlighted in dark
red are nominally significant (p < 0.05), as is default for the OlinkAnalyze olink_lmer_posthoc function.
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
45
==PAGE:51==
Notably, the proteins ZP4, IGSF9, and HAO1 are downregulated in the PCOS-positive group,
with log2 fold changes approaching the threshold of | log2 FC| > 0.5.
Assay
OlinkID
UniProt
Panel
estimate
conf.low
conf.high
p.value
Adj_pval
OXT
OID21047
P01178
Neurology
-0.743
-1.03
-0.454
5.19e-07
0.00152
ZP4
OID31185
Q12836
Oncology_II
-0.431
-0.621
-0.241
9.34e-06
0.00820
RTN4R
OID21424
Q9BZR6
Oncology
-0.160
-0.230
-0.0894
9.39e-06
0.00820
CREG1
OID21515
O75629
Oncology
-0.202
-0.292
-0.112
1.12e-05
0.00820
ITGA11
OID20581
Q9UKX5
Inflammation
0.195
0.106
0.284
2.01e-05
0.0118
CTSV
OID21405
O60911
Oncology
-0.242
-0.354
-0.129
2.75e-05
0.0130
IGSF9
OID30330
Q9P2J2
Cardiometabolic_II
-0.459
-0.675
-0.243
3.30e-05
0.0130
MAN2B2
OID30306
Q9Y2E5
Cardiometabolic_II
-0.297
-0.438
-0.157
3.55e-05
0.0130
ACE2
OID20105
Q9BYF1
Cardiometabolic
-0.195
-0.288
-0.102
4.31e-05
0.0141
CCN5
OID21068
O76076
Neurology
-0.208
-0.309
-0.107
5.86e-05
0.0172
CTBS
OID30710
Q01459
Inflammation_II
-0.135
-0.201
-0.0680
7.85e-05
0.0205
AMOT
OID30572
Q4VCS5
Inflammation_II
-0.238
-0.356
-0.120
8.36e-05
0.0205
SCGB3A1
OID30577
Q96QR1
Inflammation_II
0.114
0.0569
0.171
9.71e-05
0.0220
IGFBP2
OID20325
P18065
Cardiometabolic
0.249
0.113
0.386
0.000352
0.0688
EPHA1
OID20677
P21709
Inflammation
-0.151
-0.234
-0.0683
0.000366
0.0688
IDUA
OID21468
P35475
Oncology
-0.183
-0.284
-0.0821
0.000386
0.0688
CST7
OID20704
O76096
Inflammation
-0.340
-0.528
-0.152
0.000398
0.0688
HAO1
OID21395
Q9UJM8
Oncology
-0.477
-0.748
-0.205
0.000596
0.0924
CRH
OID21257
P06850
Oncology
0.352
0.150
0.553
0.000633
0.0924
APCS
OID30778
P02743
Inflammation_II
-0.190
-0.298
-0.0807
0.000656
0.0924
Table 3.5: Top 20 proteins ranked by FDR-adjusted p-value from the differential expression analysis com-
paring individuals with self-reported PCOS to those without, ordered by adjusted p-value. Results are based
on linear mixed-effects modeling adjusted for age, with plate ID as a random effect. No fold change threshold was
applied in this selection. All numeric values are rounded to 3 significant figures.
46
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
==PAGE:52==
To complement these single-protein results, GSEA was performed on Gene Ontology (GO) and
Reactome biological processes. Several GO pathways related to lipid catabolism and small
molecule metabolism were negatively enriched (Figure 3.12), however none of these reach sta-
tistical significance.
Figure 3.12: GSEA results for self-reported PCOS using GO terms. The plot shows significantly enriched
Gene Ontology (GO) biological processes based on ranked protein expression changes from the linear mixed-
effects model (adjusted for age, with plate ID as a random effect). The normalized enrichment score (NES) is
plotted on the x-axis, indicating direction and magnitude of enrichment. Color shading reflects the FDR-adjusted
p-value (p.adjust). Several lipid and small molecule catabolic processes were negatively enriched (left-shifted),
suggesting downregulation in self-reported PCOS compared to the PCOS-negative group.
GSEA based on Reactome pathways in self-reported PCOS cases revealed downregulation of
processes related to peroxisomal protein import, protein localization, and carbohydrate metabolism
diseases, although as with the GO processes, none reached conventional significance thresholds
(FDR-adjusted p < 0.05) (see Table A.4 in the Appendix, Section A.1).
3.3.2
Differential Expression Analysis: Data-based PCOS diagnosis
In this second analysis, we compared proteomic profiles between participants classified as PCOS-
positive or PCOS-negative based on the minimum criteria algorithm. Of the 277 women diag-
nosed via this model, 118 had proteomics data available and only 15 women were classified as
PCOS-positive. Hence, the following analysis is based on a smaller subset of individuals.
Here, ZP4 was significantly downregulated in the PCOS group (log2FC = –1.24, FDR = 0.03)
and remained the only protein that passed the FDR threshold (Figure 3.13 and Table 3.6).
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
47
==PAGE:53==
Figure 3.13: Volcano plot of differential expression between PCOS-diagnosed and non-PCOS individuals. Proteins
are classified based on FDR-adjusted p-values and absolute log2 fold change > 0.5. FDR-significant proteins are
shown in red, nominally significant in blue.
For the data-based PCOS diagnosis subset, we see that a lot more proteins satisfy the log2 fold
change > 0.5 threshold:
48
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
==PAGE:54==
Assay
OlinkID
UniProt
Panel
estimate
conf.low
conf.high
p.value
Adj_pval
Threshold
ZP4
OID31185
Q12836
Oncology_II
-1.24
-1.78
-0.711
1.01e-05
0.0297
FDR significant
PILRA
OID21129
Q9UKJ1
Neurology
0.600
0.302
0.897
1.15e-04
0.0836
Nominally significant
NFIC
OID30988
P08651
Neurology_II
-0.632
-0.946
-0.318
1.15e-04
0.0836
Nominally significant
PILRB
OID20197
Q9UKJ0
Cardiometabolic
0.747
0.371
1.12
1.42e-04
0.0836
Nominally significant
GNAS
OID31008
O95467
Neurology_II
-0.660
-1.01
-0.316
2.37e-04
0.116
Nominally significant
SEPTIN3
OID31025
Q9UH03
Neurology_II
0.582
0.267
0.897
3.86e-04
0.162
Nominally significant
VCPKMT
OID31179
Q9H867
Oncology_II
-1.21
-1.92
-0.495
1.07e-03
0.349
Nominally significant
MLN
OID20541
P12872
Inflammation
0.737
0.265
1.21
2.49e-03
0.611
Nominally significant
RALB
OID30567
P11234
Inflammation_II
0.591
0.199
0.983
3.42e-03
0.670
Nominally significant
IL22
OID31407
Q9GZX6
Oncology_II
0.605
0.158
1.05
8.43e-03
0.907
Nominally significant
HBZ
OID30307
P02008
Cardiometabolic_II
-0.973
-1.72
-0.228
0.0109
0.907
Nominally significant
PCARE
OID30838
A6NGG8
Neurology_II
-0.624
-1.11
-0.141
0.0117
0.907
Nominally significant
MCEMP1
OID30501
Q8IX19
Inflammation_II
0.949
0.198
1.70
0.0137
0.907
Nominally significant
PDP1
OID21176
Q9P0J1
Oncology
0.734
0.136
1.33
0.0166
0.907
Nominally significant
PLXNA4
OID20597
Q9HCM2
Inflammation
0.824
0.148
1.50
0.0173
0.907
Nominally significant
SIGLEC6
OID21394
O43699
Oncology
0.574
0.102
1.05
0.0177
0.907
Nominally significant
KLK1
OID21499
P06870
Oncology
0.826
0.134
1.52
0.0197
0.907
Nominally significant
TREH
OID30388
O43280
Cardiometabolic_II
-0.741
-1.39
-0.0950
0.0249
0.907
Nominally significant
ABO
OID30675
P16442
Inflammation_II
-1.23
-2.30
-0.154
0.0254
0.907
Nominally significant
TARM1
OID30937
B6A8C7
Neurology_II
-0.969
-1.82
-0.115
0.0265
0.907
Nominally significant
Table 3.6: Top 20 differentially expressed proteins between individuals with a PCOS diagnosis (based on
minimum diagnostic criteria) and those without, ranked by FDR-adjusted p-value. Results are from linear
mixed-effects modeling adjusted for age, with plate ID as a random effect. The table includes log2 fold change
estimates, 95% confidence intervals, raw and adjusted p-values, and significance classification. Only ZP4 was
significant after multiple testing correction (FDR < 0.05), while the remaining proteins were nominally significant
(p < 0.05). All numeric values are rounded to 3 significant figures.
The overlap between proteins significant in the self-reported and data-based analyses was lim-
ited, with ZP4 being the only overlap within the top 20 proteins based on adjusted p-value. ZP4
is an oocyte-specific protein, being a constituent of the zona pellucida – the glycoprotein matrix
encasing the oocyte – that plays a key role in mediating sperm attachment (33).
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
49
==PAGE:55==
With the data-based diagnosis we also achieved more significant GSEA results for both Gene
Ontology (GO) and Reactome biological processes, with most of the pathways being upregulated
(Figure 3.14-3.15).
In the GO results, the only down regulated pathway is neuropeptide receptor binding. In con-
trast, molecular adaptor activity was positively enriched, and very significant (adjusted p < 0.01).
Additional upregulated pathways included microtubule cytoskeleton and cytoskeleton organi-
zation, and many cell cycle processes.
Figure 3.14: GSEA results for algorithm-diagnosed PCOS using GO terms. The plot shows significantly
enriched Gene Ontology (GO) biological processes based on ranked protein expression changes from the linear
mixed-effects model (adjusted for age, with plate ID as a random effect). The normalized enrichment score (NES)
is plotted on the x-axis, indicating direction and magnitude of enrichment. Color shading reflects the FDR-adjusted
p-value (p.adjust).
In the Reactome pathway enrichment analysis, several immune and cell cycle–related pathways
were significantly upregulated in women with a data-based PCOS diagnosis. The most signifi-
cantly enriched terms included innate immune system and NOD1/2 signaling pathways (adjusted
p = 0.03). Additionally, pathways involved in programmed cell death/apoptosis, PKR-mediated-
and NLR signaling, and mitotic cell cycle progression also showed positive enrichment, suggest-
ing increased immune and cellular turnover activity in PCOS. The only down regulated pathway
shown in the figure is reproduction, but this does not reach significance.
50
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
==PAGE:56==
Figure 3.15: GSEA results for algorithm-diagnosed PCOS using Reactome terms. The plot shows significantly
enriched Reactome biological processes based on ranked protein expression changes from the linear mixed-effects
model (adjusted for age, with plate ID as a random effect). The normalized enrichment score (NES) is plotted
on the x-axis, indicating direction and magnitude of enrichment. Color shading reflects the FDR-adjusted p-value
(p.adjust).
3.3.3
Differential Expression Analysis: PCOS Phenotypes
To explore potential molecular differences between PCOS phenotypes, we conducted differen-
tial protein expression analyses across the four NIH-defined subtypes (A–D). Only 15 PCOS-
positive individuals had available proteomic data, with their phenotype distribution shown in
Table 3.7.
Phenotype
No PCOS
Type A
Type B
Type C
Type D
Count
103
6
3
2
4
Table 3.7: Distribution of PCOS phenotypes among women with proteomics data at inclusion.
Due to the small sample sizes, it was not feasible to account for Olink plate ID batch effects using
the linear mixed-effects models applied in previous analyses. Instead, differential expression
was assessed using one-way ANOVA, adjusting for age as a covariate. Each phenotype was
compared to phenotype A, which served as the reference group due to its larger representation.
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
51
==PAGE:57==
(a) Phenotype A vs. B
(b) Phenotype A vs. C
(c) Phenotype A vs. D
Figure 3.16: Volcano plots comparing phenotype A to B, C, and D. Each comparison illustrates differential
protein expression using one-way ANOVA with age as a covariate. Dark blue dots are nominally significant.
Although no proteins passed FDR correction in the comparisons involving phenotype A, sev-
eral proteins showed nominal significance (p < 0.05, |log2FC| > 0.5). Notably, subfigure 3.16c
suggests a trend toward downregulation of multiple proteins in phenotype A compared to phe-
notype D. However, due to the very small group sizes, these results should be interpreted with
caution and considered exploratory.
Interestingly, the direct comparison between phenotypes C and D (N =2 and N =4, respectively)
did yield FDR-significant results. As shown in Figure 3.17, PTK7 and LCN2 were significantly
differentially expressed after correction for multiple testing.
52
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
==PAGE:58==
Figure 3.17: Volcano plot showing differential protein expression between individuals with Phenotype C
and those with Phenotype D, ordered by adjusted p-value and filtered by fold change (|log2FC| >0.5). Each
dot represents a protein quantified using the Olink Explore platform. The x-axis displays the log2 fold change
in NPX values, and the y-axis shows the –log10 p-value from one-way ANOVA modeling (adjusted for age).
Proteins highlighted in red are FDR-significant (adjusted p < 0.05 and |log2FC| > 0.5), while blue-labeled proteins
are nominally significant (p < 0.05 and |log2FC| > 0.5). Notably, only the PTK7 and LCN2 proteins remained
significant after correction for multiple testing.
Overall, this phenotype-level analysis is limited by low statistical power but demonstrates the
feasibility of studying clinical PCOS subtypes with proteomic data. It serves as a proof of
concept for future investigations with larger sample sizes, where more definitive conclusions
may be drawn regarding phenotype-specific molecular signatures.
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
53
==PAGE:59==
4
Discussion
This chapter discusses the clinical, hormonal, and molecular findings related to PCOS in the
COPL cohort, contextualizing them within existing literature and diagnostic frameworks. By
comparing self-reported and algorithm-based diagnoses using Rotterdam criteria, and integrat-
ing proteomic data from a subset of participants, the analysis provides insights into diagnostic
concordance, phenotype heterogeneity, and underlying molecular pathways.
4.1
Comparing Clinical and Hormonal Features: Self-Reported
vs. Algorithmic Diagnoses
Women could be considered PCOS-positive based on two definitions: self-reported PCOS (N =
325), encompassing women who identified, suspected, or were flagged by clinicians as having
PCOS, and algorithm-based diagnosed using the Rotterdam criteria. As mentioned, changes
in data collection over time meant that a minimum criteria model was applied across all 3016
inclusions (N = 39 PCOS-positive), while a full-criteria model was limited to post-2023 inclu-
sions with additional measures of FG scores and AFCs (N = 43 PCOS-positive). The following
section discusses the characteristics of women diagnosed by each method.
4.1.1
Hormonal Characteristics
Consistent with existing literature, women with PCOS (based on either classification) exhibited
significantly elevated total and free testosterone, AMH, LH, and higher LH:FSH ratios. These
hormone profiles reflect well-established PCOS features such as follicular excess and hyperan-
drogenism, and support the biological plausibility of both the self-reported diagnoses and the
algorithm-based diagnosis.
The validity of the self-reported PCOS is substantiated by literature. Day et al. (2018), demon-
strated that self-reported PCOS cases from a 23andMe dataset exhibited similar genetic asso-
ciations with PCOS susceptibility loci as clinically diagnosed cases. Specifically, no signifi-
cant differences in effect size were observed for 13 out of 14 genetic variants across diagnostic
groups, reinforcing the credibility of self-reported PCOS as a meaningful classification (40).
Interestingly, median testosterone values for the algorithmically diagnosed group were not above
the diagnostic thresholds, suggesting that many PCOS cases in this model may have met the HA
criterion based primarily on FG scores rather than serum levels of testosterone.
In contrast, SHBG, FSH, 17-OHP, and E2 did not show significant differences in the self-
reported group. These findings are in line with previous evidence that these hormones may
remain unchanged in PCOS or differ between PCOS subtypes. For instance, SHBG is typically
reduced in insulin-resistant PCOS, as hepatic SHBG production is suppressed by hyperinsu-
linemia (6, 13, 17). This mechanism is most pronounced in metabolic phenotypes; Chang et
al. observed that the reproductive PCOS subtype was characterized by elevated SHBG levels,
along with relatively low BMI and insulin concentrations, while the metabolic subtype exhibited
the opposite pattern – higher BMI, glucose, and insulin levels, accompanied by reduced SHBG
levels (1).
54
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
==PAGE:60==
FSH is not expected to differ strongly in isolation, as PCOS is primarily characterized by an
elevated LH:FSH ratio which can result from increased LH alone. Dumesic et al. reported that
the disrupted gonadotropin secretion in PCOS typically presents as elevated LH levels alongside
low or low-normal FSH concentrations (4), alinging with with our findings in the analysis. Here,
FSH was slightly decreased in PCOS-positive women but did not reach significance (p = 0.3).
17-OHP showed a modest increase in the self-reported PCOS group (p = 0.07) and was signif-
icantly elevated in the data-based diagnosis group (p = 0.03). E2 was slightly lower in PCOS-
positive individuals but not significantly so. These findings may reflect underlying phenotype
heterogeneity. Wang et al. reported that levels of both 17-OHP and E2 differ significantly be-
tween hyperandrogenic (HA-PCOS) and non-hyperandrogenic (non-HA) PCOS subtypes, with
both hormones elevated in the HA-PCOS group. Notably, non-HA PCOS women exhibited sig-
nificantly lower E2 levels compared to controls, whereas E2 levels were higher in HA-PCOS
women, which may account for the absence of a significant difference in E2 observed in our
overall comparisons (2). This pattern is reflected in our findings: elevated 17-OHP reached
statistical significance in PCOS-positive women identified using the full-criteria model. The
phenotype distribution in this group supports a link between 17-OHP elevation and HA-PCOS,
as the majority of cases were classified as phenotype C (HA + PCOM), followed by isolated HA
cases and phenotype A (HA + OA + PCOM), all of which include a hyperandrogenic component.
4.1.2
Clinical Characteristics
Clinical measures such as higher FG scores, irregular menstrual cycles and increased AFC
counts among PCOS-positive women were all significant, regardless of the diagnostic method,
further providing robust support for the components of the Rotterdam diagnostic criteria and
known characteristics of PCOS. However, median values in the self-reported group often fell
just below the thresholds used in the algorithm, suggesting a more inclusive and less strict def-
inition among self-reporting individuals.
Cycle irregularity was especially prominent in the PCOS-positive groups, with a greater pro-
portion reporting long or absent cycles and a shift toward longer cycle lengths overall. These
findings directly support ovulatory dysfunction as an essential feature of PCOS. Nonetheless,
ovulatory phenotypes should not be overlooked. Among post-2023 inclusions, 45% of self-
reported PCOS-positive, and approximately 48% of algorithm-diagnosed cases, reported regular
cycles. Given that all cohort members had achieved pregnancy, this representation of ovulatory
PCOS (phenotype C) is not unexpected.
Fertility outcomes also differed by classification. The self-reported PCOS group had longer time
to pregnancy and greater use of assisted conception technologies, highlighting the reproductive
burden associated with PCOS. In contrast, these differences were not observed in the algorithm-
based group, where none of the fertility-related variables reached statistical significance. This
may reflect both the higher prevalence of ovulatory phenotype C and limited sample size due to
missing component data. More complete data would allow for broader algorithmic classification
and clearer comparisons.
Mental health and psychological burden
Mental health symptoms – including anxiety, de-
pression, and perceived stress – were significantly elevated in self-reported PCOS-positive in-
dividuals. This aligns with prior research emphasizing the psychological impact of PCOS. In-
terestingly, these differences were absent in the data-based group. With more data, including
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
55
==PAGE:61==
women who achieved natural conception and perhaps were less supported by medical staff, we
can say more about the associations of mental health burdens to PCOS.
Age at inclusion and reproductive timing
PCOS-positive women were significantly younger
at the time of inclusion across both periods (mean difference ≈1.3 years). In the algorithm-based
diagnosis, the median age was 31.3 years in the PCOS group vs. 34.6 years in the PCOS-
negative group (p < 0.001). This likely reflects the early impact of PCOS on reproductive
function. Ovulatory dysfunction and HA may be more severe earlier in reproductive life and
can attenuate with age; Dumesic et al. describe age-related decreases in ovarian volume, follicle
count, AMH, and androgen levels (4). Moolhuijsen et al. further suggest that while PCOS
women may experience relative infertility at younger ages, they also have extended reproductive
windows, resulting in later last birth and longer reproductive lifespan (7).
Metabolic and endocrine features
Significant differences in BMI were observed only before
2023, with higher BMI among PCOS-positive women. In post-2023 data, BMI approached
significance in all diagnostic groups, and BMI class was significantly associated with PCOS in
the algorithm-based group.
In the self-reported group, hypertension, family history of T2D and CVD were more common
in PCOS-positive women. After 2023, family history of PCOS and T2D remained significantly
elevated, supporting a genetic component to PCOS etiology. Family history of CVD and hy-
perthyroidism did not achieve significance. Notably, thyroid echogenicity was consistently and
significantly different regardless of diagnostic method. This supports the well-documented as-
sociation between PCOS and metabolic and endocrine comorbidities. As Palomba et al. em-
phasize, thyroid disorders often co-occur with PCOS, but the precise nature of this relationship
– in regards to etiology, pathology, and clinical outcomes – remains to be clarified (41).
4.1.3
Concordance & Discrepancies between PCOS Classification Strate-
gies
The minimum criteria model showed strong concordance with self-report: approximately 85%
of algorithm-diagnosed cases also self-reported PCOS. However, about 27% of those not meet-
ing the algorithmic criteria still reported PCOS, indicating that self-report may capture a broader
context than what is reflected in the data and algorithm alone.
In the full-criteria model, the inclusion of additional input variables enhanced the model’s ability
to detect PCOS but also increased the risk of missing data. To ensure consistency in diagnosis
and subsequent phenotype assignment, classification required complete information for all three
Rotterdam components: HA, OA, and PCOM. Consequently, participants who met two of the
three criteria but had missing data for the third were excluded from classification.
This approach may explain the lower overlap with self-reported PCOS. Only 58% of algorithm-
diagnosed individuals also self-reported PCOS, while 19% of those not meeting algorithmic
criteria still did. This suggests a more conservative, standardized classification approach in the
algorithm compared to the lived or perceived experience captured by self-report.
It is also very possible that the algorithm is detecting previously undiagnosed PCOS in women
who were unaware of their condition. These individuals may not report PCOS simply because
they have never been evaluated or informed of a diagnosis. This is particularly relevant in milder
56
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
==PAGE:62==
or less symptomatic cases. Therefore, the discordance between self-report and algorithmic clas-
sification is not necessarily a reflection of misclassification. It may, in some cases, reflect the
strength of a structured approach in identifying subclinical or overlooked cases.
Nevertheless, several factors may explain the discordance between methods beyond missing
data. The algorithm uses strict clinical cutoffs, so participants with borderline values may not
meet thresholds despite experiencing symptoms. The timing of measures is also important. Hor-
monal measures can fluctuate with the menstrual cycle, but values in this study were extracted
as medians from Labka records within a 12–24 month window, without cycle phase control.
In some cases, participants may report PCOS based on a prior clinical diagnosis or suspicion
that was not documented in the available data. Others may misattribute common symptoms
(e.g., acne or irregular cycles) or draw conclusions from family history. As such, not all self-
reported cases necessarily reflect true PCOS, underscoring the value of standardized diagnostic
frameworks.
Overall, the combined use of self-reported and algorithm-based diagnoses offers a more nuanced
understanding of PCOS in the cohort. While the algorithm provides a standardized and repro-
ducible classification based on objective criteria, self-report adds contextual depth, capturing
information that may not be reflected in the current data. Their combined use helps address the
limitations of each approach and supports a more comprehensive analysis of PCOS heterogene-
ity. Importantly, increasing data completeness would enhance the algorithm’s sensitivity and
allow more participants to be classified, ultimately improving its ability to detect both recog-
nized and previously undiagnosed PCOS cases.
4.2
Comparing PCOS Phenotype Distributions
To explore the heterogeneity among PCOS-positive individuals, we analyzed phenotype distri-
butions using both the minimum and full diagnostic models, as well as self-reported data. Here
we compare these prevalences to each other and to known prevalences from previous studies.
These comparisons highlight how diagnostic input and algorithmic completeness influence phe-
notype assignment and reveal underlying trends in PCOS expression within the COPL cohort.
4.2.1
Phenotype Distribution by Diagnostic Model
Under the minimum criteria model, phenotype A (HA + OA + PCOM) and phenotype D (OA
+ PCOM) were the most common, accounting for approximately 36% and 33% of diagnosed
individuals, respectively. In contrast, the full criteria model identified a greater proportion of
phenotype C (HA + PCOM), which constituted about 47% of cases, followed by phenotype A
at 35%. This shift appears to result from the expanded variable set used in the full model –
including the FG score and AFC-based measures – which improved evaluability of the HA and
PCOM components due to lower rates of missingness compared to serum testosterone and AMH
(see Figure 3.1, in the Results).
The inclusion of three separate AFC variables increased the likelihood of PCOM being satis-
fied, while the FG score enabled more frequent HA detection compared to the biochemical-only
proxy. In contrast, OA was the least frequently satisfied criterion in the full model, likely due
to many participants reporting regular cycles. As a result, ovulatory phenotypes such as Type C
were more prominent. OA appeared most often in combination with PCOM (Type D) or with
both HA and PCOM (Type A), supporting the biological link between ovarian morphology and
menstrual irregularity through shared disruptions in folliculogenesis (4).
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
57
==PAGE:63==
Algorithmic sensitivity and classification bias
While the full criteria model enabled more
comprehensive phenotype detection, it also introduced greater susceptibility to classification
bias due to partial missingness. The diagnostic algorithm marks a component as NA if its in-
put variables are neither clearly above nor below threshold. Consequently, some components
previously classified as “false” under the minimum model could become “missing” under the
full model requiring additional variables (see Table A.3, Appendix A.2). This method avoids
misclassification of a phenotype A into any of the other phenotypes (only requiring two compo-
nents) due to missingness. It highlights how changes in data availability and algorithmic design
can influence not only PCOS-positive vs. PCOS-negative classifications but also the subsequent
phenotype outcomes.
Despite these challenges, the expanded model facilitated the identification of less overt pheno-
types and uncovered a higher prevalence of phenotype C, which might otherwise remain under-
diagnosed.
4.2.2
Self-Reported vs. Data-derived Phenotype Distribution
Among women who self-reported PCOS and also received a data-based diagnosis via the full
model, phenotype A remained the most common, followed by phenotype C. This aligns with
expectations: phenotype A – considered the “classic” and most symptomatic presentation – is
characterized by hirsutism, acne, irregular cycles, and polycystic ovaries. These visible symp-
toms make it more likely to be clinically recognized and self-identified.
Conversely, phenotype C retains ovulatory function and lacks overt menstrual irregularity. Al-
though it includes HA and PCOM, its subtler presentation may lead to underrecognition with-
out formal diagnostic evaluation. The higher proportion of phenotype C in algorithm-classified
cases not only makes sense in a cohort where all participants achieved pregnancy, but illustrates
the utility of data-driven approaches in capturing subclinical presentations.
4.2.3
Comparison with Established Phenotype Prevalence
Table 1.1 (in the Introduction, Section 1.1.4) summarizes phenotype frequencies from a 2022
systematic review by Chiaffarino et al. (29). Here, phenotype A was the most prevalent (≈
45%), followed by D (≈20%), C (≈16%), and B (≈15%) across European and U.S. popula-
tions. These distributions closely resemble those observed in the minimum criteria model of the
current study, where phenotypes A and D also dominated.
In contrast, the full-criteria model shifted the distribution toward a predominance of phenotype
C. Again, this is likely a result of the study population: all participants had achieved pregnancy,
differentiating them from the more general reproductive-age populations in the systematic re-
view.
Despite these differences, phenotype A remained consistently prevalent across both models,
likely due to its presentation as the most symptomatic and severe form of PCOS – meeting all
three Rotterdam criteria. This makes it more readily identifiable by patients, clinicians, and
diagnostic algorithms alike.
Phenotype B (HA + OA without PCOM) was consistently rare across all models. This may
indicate that PCOM is a central pathophysiological feature of PCOS that commonly co-occurs
with menstrual or androgenic abnormalities. In fact, studies have shown that more than 90% of
women who present with HA and OA, also present with PCOM (5).
58
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
==PAGE:64==
4.3
Exploring the Biological Relevance of the Classified Phe-
notypes
Part of the analysis aimed to explore whether PCOS phenotypes, as defined by the Rotterdam-
based full-criteria model, differ meaningfully across key biological domains – namely metabolic,
neuroendocrine, and reproductive functions. Identifying such differences could indicate if the
current PCOS phenotypes could inform more precise treatment and diagnostics. However, no
statistically significant differences were observed across phenotypes in BMI, LH:FSH ratio, or
infertility rates. While subtle trends were noted, all three traits exhibited substantial intra-group
variability and inter-group overlap.
The lack of differentiation in BMI suggests that metabolic burden, as approximated here, may
not align neatly with traditional phenotype groupings. Although phenotypes A and C exhibited
greater variability, the similarity in group medians and the non-significant p-value reinforce the
possibility that metabolic risk spans across phenotypes. Based on prior literature (Table 1.1,
Section 1.1.4), one might anticipate that phenotypes A and B would exhibit higher BMI due
to their association with cardio-metabolic comorbidities (5, 18). However, phenotype B was
underrepresented in this dataset (N = 2), limiting interpretability and statistical power for that
subgroup.
The LH:FSH ratio was elevated across all PCOS phenotypes compared to the PCOS-negative
group. This is consistent with established neuroendocrine disruptions in PCOS. Yet, the dis-
appearance of statistical significance when the PCOS-negative group was excluded could sug-
gest that this marker does not reliably distinguish between phenotypes, but rather differentiates
PCOS from non-PCOS status more broadly. More complete data could help determine whether
the neuroendocrine imbalance is a common feature of PCOS, or if it could be a differentiator
between subtypes.
For reproductive function, measured as the proportion of women who had tried to conceive for
more than 12 months, phenotypes C and D had the lowest observed infertility rates. Although
these differences were not statistically significant, the trend aligns with preserved ovulatory
function in phenotype C.
Taken together, these results suggest that Rotterdam-defined phenotypes may not adequately
capture deeper biological heterogeneity beyond their defining criteria (i.e. increased testos-
terone, cycle length or AMH). Several factors could contribute to this, including small sample
sizes, particularly for phenotypes B and D, and the possibility that PCOS presents in ways not
fully reflected in the A–D classification. Recent molecular research, such as the work by Dapas
et al. (2020), has proposed biologically derived metabolic and reproductive subtypes that cut
across the traditional phenotypic boundaries. The study even found preliminary evidence for
distinct genetic architectures for these two subtypes (5).
These findings underscore the need to revisit and refine PCOS subtyping. Larger cohorts with
more complete phenotypic and molecular data – including genomics and proteomics – are es-
sential for identifying biologically grounded subtypes with greater diagnostic, prognostic, and
treatment utility. Ultimately, data-driven stratification approaches may provide more precise,
clinically meaningful subgroups than those currently derived from expert consensus alone.
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
59
==PAGE:65==
4.4
Proteomic Insights and Molecular Candidates
Proteomic profiling offers a complementary lens to clinical and hormonal assessments in un-
covering the underlying molecular features of PCOS. By examining circulating protein levels,
we can explore potential biomarkers and gain insight into dysregulated biological pathways that
may contribute to or result from the syndrome.
In this study, differential expression analysis was performed on 2940 proteins measured using
the Olink®Explore 3072 platform in a subset of COPL participants recruited prior to 2023 (N =
999). Among these, 107 women self-reported a PCOS diagnosis, and 15 met the data-derived
diagnostic criteria. While the number of classified PCOS cases was modest, these exploratory
analyses provide valuable initial signals of proteomic alterations associated with PCOS.
4.4.1
OXT: Oxytocin-neurophysin 1
Oxytocin was found to be significantly downregulated in self-reported PCOS-positive individu-
als, a finding consistent with previous research summarized in a recent systematic review (2024)
(42). Specifically, two human studies and one animal study included in the review reported
lower basal serum oxytocin levels in women with PCOS compared to controls, suggesting a
potential role for oxytocin in the pathophysiology of the syndrome. Oxytocin plays key roles
in reproduction, including follicular development, ovulation, and uterine function. The review
speculated that oxytocin may act synergistically with follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) to sup-
port folliculogenesis, and that reduced levels of both hormones may contribute to the anovulation
commonly observed in PCOS.
In animal models, oxytocin administration has been shown to reduce body weight, visceral fat,
and food intake—effects that align with known metabolic features of PCOS. In humans, lower
plasma oxytocin levels have been observed in obese women compared to non-obese controls,
reinforcing the potential link between oxytocin deficiency and metabolic dysregulation in PCOS
(42).
While no studies to date have directly assessed the impact of oxytocin on mood or behavior in
women with PCOS, depression has been associated with oxytocin levels in other contexts, and
animal studies have demonstrated a reduction in depressive-like symptoms following oxytocin
administration. The review also noted that intranasal oxytocin improved sleep apnea and overall
sleep quality in patients with sleep disorders (42). Given that obstructive sleep apnea is recog-
nized as a comorbidity in PCOS, as highlighted in the 2023 international guidelines, this may
represent another relevant clinical pathway (30).
The combined reproductive, metabolic, mood, and sleep-related evidence supports further in-
vestigation into oxytocin as a multifaceted contributor to PCOS clinical features and pathophys-
iology.
4.4.2
ZP4: Zona Pellucida Sperm-Binding Protein 4
ZP4 was significantly downregulated in data-based diagnosed PCOS, with a log2 fold change of
−1.24, corresponding to an approximate 58% reduction in expression compared to non-PCOS
individuals. It also reached adjusted statistical significance in the self-reported PCOS group,
although with a smaller effect size (log2FC = −0.431). ZP4 was the only protein consistently
ranked among the top 20 most significantly differentially expressed proteins in both classifica-
tion strategies, underscoring its potential relevance across PCOS definitions.
60
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
==PAGE:66==
ZP4 is a zona pellucida glycoprotein involved in oocyte–sperm interaction, particularly in regu-
lating sperm binding to the zona pellucida. Its expression has been shown to be highest in mature
antral follicles. A previous study comparing ZP4 mRNA levels across PCOS phenotypes found
the highest expression in phenotype C (polycystic ovaries but regular cycles), and much lower
levels in phenotypes A and B, which both involve OA (33). This supports the link between ZP4
expression and the presence of mature, ovulatory follicles.
In our proteomics subset, most PCOS-positive individuals belonged to phenotypes A, B, or D,
with only 2 out of 15 classified as phenotype C. All of the predominant phenotypes involve OA,
further supporting the hypothesis that ZP4 downregulation reflects impaired follicular matura-
tion rather than being a universal feature of PCOS. Given its functional role in oocyte quality
and fertilization, the consistent downregulation of ZP4 in these anovulatory PCOS subtypes
may contribute to follicular arrest and infertility, and warrants further investigation as a candi-
date biomarker of reproductive competence in PCOS.
4.4.3
Biological Pathway Enrichment in PCOS: Insights from GSEA
To complement single-protein differential expression findings, GSEA was performed to assess
whether groups of functionally related proteins were systematically altered in PCOS. These anal-
yses revealed distinct molecular signatures depending on whether self-reported or algorithm-
based PCOS definitions were applied.
In the self-reported PCOS analysis, the enriched pathways were overwhelmingly associated
with metabolic, lipid and catabolic processes, supporting the metabolic component of PCOS
biology. None of the gene sets reached the conventional threshold for statistical significance
(FDR-adjusted p < 0.05), however. Notably, all but one of the top pathways were negatively
enriched, suggesting reduced metabolic activity, particularly in processes such as lipid oxidation
and energy production. Similarly, none of the Reactome pathways were statistically significant.
Pathways related to peroxisomal protein import and carbohydrate metabolism disorders were
downregulated, while RIPK1 mediated necrosis was upregulated. RIPK1 is involved in necrop-
tosis and linked to inflammation. According to Li et al. (2025) its enrichment may reflect the
necroptosis of GCs and oocytes which contributes to follicular atresia, an identified feature of
PCOS-related ovarian dysfunction (43).
In contrast to the self-reported PCOS group, the algorithm-based PCOS analysis (based on
the minimum Rotterdam criteria) yielded several significantly enriched pathways, suggesting
more robust and consistent molecular differences in this subgroup. Among the upregulated GO
pathways, the most statistically significant included molecular adaptor activity, microtubule cy-
toskeleton organization, and cell cycle processes, all of which point toward increased cellular
proliferation and signaling activity. Also enriched were pathways related to apoptotic signal-
ing and cellular response to stress. These processes could reflect folliculogenesis and follicular
atresia in PCOS as well as a heightened state of cellular stress, consistent with the hormonal and
metabolic dysregulation in PCOS.
The Reactome GSEA further highlighted cell death processes and immune system activation as
well as cell cycle pathways. Pathways such as innate immune system and NOD1/2 signaling,
programmed cell death, death receptor signaling, and PKR-mediated signaling, and multiple cell
cycle progression pathways, were all significantly upregulated. This could suggest that PCOS is
associated with increased immune activity, apoptosis, and cell proliferation. This activity may
also reflect the chronic low-grade inflammation frequently observed in PCOS.
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
61
==PAGE:67==
Among the top pathways, the Reactome reproduction pathway was the only downregulated path-
way in algorithm-diagnosed PCOS. It did not reach statistical significance, however its down-
regulation aligns with broader reproductive dysfunction in PCOS and supports its biological
relevance on a molecular level.
Overall, these GSEA findings support the notion that PCOS is not only a hormonal disorder
but also involves dysregulation of immune, metabolic, neuroendocrine, and cell cycle-related
pathways. The contrast between self-reported and algorithm-based cases may reflect different
underlying biological profiles – where self-report captures the most symptomatic aspects (e.g.,
metabolic dysfunction), while algorithm-based diagnosis reflects measurable pathophysiologi-
cal traits (e.g., immune activation, ovarian remodeling).
The identification of significantly enriched pathways—particularly those tied to cellular stress,
immune signaling, and reproductive signaling—adds a valuable layer of molecular context to
the differential expression results and underscores the potential of proteomic profiling for under-
standing the biological mechanisms of a complex disease and for potential biomarker discovery.
4.4.4
Differential Expression Analysis of PCOS Phenotypes
This analysis explored differential protein expression across the four NIH-defined PCOS phe-
notypes (A–D) using proteomic data from a small subset of women in the cohort. Although the
group sizes were limited – especially for phenotypes C and D – the study represents an initial
attempt to integrate clinical PCOS subtypes with molecular data. While most comparisons did
not yield proteins significant after FDR correction, several proteins reached nominal signifi-
cance, and one comparison (Phenotype C vs. D) identified two proteins, PTK7 and LCN2, that
remained significant after multiple testing correction.
The statistical significance of PTK7 and LCN2, highlights possible biological divergence be-
tween the less common phenotypes. Biologically, PTK7 (Protein Tyrosine Kinase 7) is involved
in diverse cellular processes including cell adhesion, migration, polarity, proliferation, apopto-
sis, and actin cytoskeleton organization. PTK7 is also involved in embryogenesis, epithelial tis-
sue organization and VEGF-mediated angiogenesis (44). As the menstrual cycle involves cyclic
angiogenic remodeling, one could guess that PTK7 would be upregulated in the ovulatory phe-
notype. However, PTK7 was downregulated in phenotype C compared to phenotype D. Studies
show that PTK7 is primarily associated with pathological angiogenesis and is upregulated in
various cancers (45). As such, its higher expression in phenotype D may reflect dysregulated
angiogenic signaling. Additionally, since proteomic data were derived from serum, these dif-
ferences may reflect systemic changes rather than tissue-specific angiogenesis. Further studies
are needed to clarify PTK7’s potential role in PCOS and across PCOS phenotypes.
LCN2 (Lipocalin-2), has been studied in the context of PCOS, and studies have shown that serum
levels of LCN2 are significantly elevated in women with PCOS compared to BMI-matched
controls, suggesting its potential as a biomarker for insulin resistance PCOS (46). As such it
could also serve as a marker for distinguishing phenotypic subtypes with divergent metabolic
profiles.
Nevertheless, the findings presented here must be interpreted with caution given the suscepti-
bility to showing individual-level variation, instead of phenotype variation, in the small sample
size (N = 6) (see Table 3.7 in Results, Section 3.3.3). Rather than definitive conclusions, these
results should be viewed as hypothesis-generating.
62
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
==PAGE:68==
4.5
Strengths and Limitations of the Study
This study has several notable strengths. It employed a dual diagnostic approach, incorporating
both self-reported and data-driven classifications of PCOS. This enabled cross-validation of
diagnoses and revealed important discrepancies between perceived and algorithmically defined
cases. The algorithmic classification was based on structured criteria aligned with the Rotterdam
framework, improving reproducibility and comparability with existing PCOS literature. The
algorithm also improved diagnosis of PCOS in women with less overtly presenting symptoms.
The integration of proteomics data added a valuable molecular layer, allowing exploration of
the biological mechanisms of PCOS. Findings such as the downregulation of OXT and ZP4
are supported by existing literature, strengthening the biological plausibility of the observed
associations. The use of linear mixed-effects models to adjust for age and batch effects further
strengthened the robustness of the differential expression analysis.
However, several limitations should be acknowledged. Despite the large size of the COPL co-
hort, the subset with complete PCOS-relevant data was limited due to substantial missingness
in key diagnostic variables and changes in data collection practices over time. This reduced the
number of individuals eligible for algorithmic classification and may have biased the analytic
sample toward those with more complete health records. Proteomics data were limited to pre-
2023 inclusions, covering only about one-third of the total cohort (999 of 3016). Consequently,
we could only study the proteomics for the subset of women diagnosed by the minimum crite-
ria – defined by a less comprehensive set of diagnostic variables – leaving 118 participants for
differential expression analysis. This small sample size restricted statistical power and general-
izability.
Correspondingly, phenotype comparisons were especially constrained by small subgroup sizes.
The low number of individuals per phenotype further restricted statistical power, prevented ad-
justment for batch effects, and increased the risk of detecting individual-level variation rather
than true phenotype-specific differences.
There were also limitations related to the diagnostic variables used to characterize and algo-
rithmically diagnose PCOS. Hormone measurements were extracted from Labka rather than
collected systematically within the COPL study, meaning only women with available records
could be included—potentially introducing selection bias. Moreover, information on cycle tim-
ing – an important factor influencing hormone levels – was unavailable and therefore could not
be accounted for. Some hormone assays, such as those measuring testosterone, are known to
have poor sensitivity for detecting hyperandrogenism, and clinically relevant symptoms may
still occur when serum levels fall within the normal range (22). These challenges highlight the
importance of using multiple hormone measurements and incorporating contextual information
to improve diagnostic accuracy. Including additional biomarkers such as androstenedione and
dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate (DHEAS) could further enhance the completeness of hormonal
profiling.
The binary self-reported PCOS variable (M_PCOS) also introduces interpretation challenges.
Many women may be unaware of their condition due to prior contraceptive use or mild symp-
toms, while others may self-diagnose without clinical confirmation. Future studies could benefit
from distinguishing between self-perceived and clinician-confirmed diagnoses.
Finally, the use of a pregnancy-loss cohort may introduce selection bias. Women with ovulatory
phenotypes or those undergoing fertility treatment may be overrepresented, making the findings
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
63
==PAGE:69==
here potentially less transferrable to the general population. Nonetheless, this study provides
valuable insight into the clinical and molecular features of the population presented in COPL,
including ovulatory women with PCOS.
4.6
Future Perspectives
This study demonstrates the potential of proteomic profiling to study PCOS and distinguish be-
tween its subtypes. Despite limited statistical power, observed trends in differentially expressed
proteins, including biologically plausible candidates, support the utility of proteomics in char-
acterizing the molecular heterogeneity of PCOS. Future research should build on these findings
by incorporating larger cohorts with more complete clinical and molecular data to enable more
robust analyses.
A key area for further development is the refinement of diagnostic strategies. Integrating self-
reported symptoms and health history with biochemical and proteomic features may improve
diagnostic accuracy and help capture biological variation not reflected in current criteria. The
performance of the data-driven diagnostic algorithm in this study was constrained by missing
data, particularly for essential clinical and hormonal variables. Improving data completeness
would not only increase statistical power but also enable the application of machine learning
methods, including both supervised classification and unsupervised clustering, to explore novel
subtypes of PCOS. Additionally, the application of data imputation techniques could help ad-
dress missingness in key clinical or hormonal variables, thereby expanding the number of indi-
viduals eligible for algorithmic classification.
Subtype identification would benefit from broader metabolic profiling, including indicators such
as glucose tolerance and insulin levels, which are currently underrepresented in the dataset.
These measures are critical for assessing insulin resistance and metabolic risk in PCOS and could
support more detailed phenotype definitions. Expanded hormonal profiling may also reveal
distinct neuroendocrine features relevant to classification.
The findings of this study suggest that the traditional Rotterdam phenotypes (A–D) may not suf-
ficiently distinguish biologically distinct subgroups. The absence of consistent metabolic, repro-
ductive, or hormonal differences across phenotypes points to the limitations of this framework.
Alternative subtyping strategies, such as the reproductive versus metabolic clusters proposed
by Dapas et al. (2020), may offer more biologically meaningful groupings and merit further
investigation in future studies.
Proteomic profiling may play an important role in this process. The identification of proteins
such as OXT and ZP4 as differentially expressed demonstrates the feasibility of biomarker dis-
covery in PCOS using serum proteomics. With more comprehensive proteomic coverage and
adequate sample sizes, future work could explore pathway-level differences between subtypes
and develop molecular signatures that support diagnostic or prognostic tools.
Finally, this study adjusted AMH levels and differential expression models for age but did not
control for BMI, which is known to influence hormonal profiles and may confound observed
associations. Incorporating BMI as a covariate in future models will help clarify whether iden-
tified molecular patterns are specific to PCOS or reflect broader effects of adiposity.
In summary, this study underscores the value of multidimensional, longitudinal datasets in ad-
vancing PCOS research. Future efforts should aim to improve data quality and completeness,
64
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
==PAGE:70==
refine diagnostic classifications, and integrate clinical, hormonal, and molecular layers to enable
more personalized and biologically informed approaches to diagnosis and management.
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
65
==PAGE:71==
5
Conclusion
This study investigated the clinical and molecular heterogeneity of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome
(PCOS) using phenotypic, hormonal, and proteomic data from the Copenhagen Pregnancy Loss
(COPL) cohort. By comparing self-reported PCOS to a structured, data-based diagnosis mod-
eled on the Rotterdam criteria, the study assessed the reliability and biological relevance of
existing diagnostic strategies and explored how molecular profiling may refine PCOS classifi-
cation and subtyping.
The comparison between self-reported and algorithmically diagnosed PCOS revealed moder-
ate concordance, with the data-based approach identifying a subset of individuals not captured
through self-report. This finding underscores the potential underdiagnosis of PCOS in clinical
settings and supports the use of data-based diagnostic criteria in population studies and in future
clinical practices. The statistical significance in PCOS-relevant biochemical measures – such as
AMH, testosterone and LH – between PCOS-positive and PCOS-negative women also supports
the continued measurement of these hormones in future studies.
Stratification based on the Rotterdam phenotypes revealed limited biological differentiation,
with no significant differences observed across reproductive, hormonal, or metabolic features.
This suggests that the conventional A–D phenotypes may not capture biologically distinct sub-
groups.
Differential expression analysis using Olink proteomics data identified several proteins with
potential associations to PCOS status. Notably, OXT and ZP4 were significantly differentially
expressed in PCOS-positive individuals and are consistent with neuroendocrine and reproduc-
tive pathways implicated in the condition. However, the analysis was constrained by missing
data and limited proteomic coverage, affecting the generalizability of the findings. The analysis
of protein expression between phenotypes, was also limited by small sample sizes, but revealed
the potential in discovering the molecular differences of subtypes via proteomic methods.
Despite these challenges, the study demonstrates the feasibility of combining clinical and molec-
ular data to investigate PCOS heterogeneity. It also highlights the importance of improving data
completeness to enable more comprehensive classification models. Future work should incorpo-
rate additional metabolic and hormonal markers, account for confounders such as BMI, consider
imputation strategies to address incomplete data, and explore machine learning approaches to
uncover PCOS subtypes. Proteomic profiling may ultimately support the development of novel
biomarkers for diagnosis, stratification, and targeted management of PCOS.
Taken together, this study contributes to a growing body of evidence highlighting the multi-
faceted nature of PCOS. By integrating clinical, hormonal, and proteomic data, it emphasizes
the limitations of current diagnostic criteria and the promise of omics approaches to enhance
disease classification. The findings support a shift toward data-driven diagnostic frameworks
that reflect the biological diversity of PCOS presentations. As the availability of high dimen-
sional and longitudinal clinical data expands, so does the opportunity to translate these insights
into more precise diagnostic tools and therapeutic strategies, ultimately improving outcomes for
individuals affected by this complex condition.
66
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
==PAGE:72==
Bibliography
1.
S. Chang, A. Dunaif, Endocrinology and Metabolism Clinics of North America 50, 11–23,
ISSN: 08898529, (2025; https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0889852920300797)
(Mar. 2021).
2.
M. Wang et al., The Journal of Steroid Biochemistry and Molecular Biology 245, 106626,
ISSN: 09600760, (2025; https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0960076024001742)
(Jan. 2025).
3.
N. Salari et al., Archives of Gynecology and Obstetrics 310, 1303–1314 (Sept. 2024).
4.
D. A. Dumesic et al., Endocrine Reviews 36, 487–525 (Oct. 2015).
5.
M. Dapas, A. Dunaif, Endocrine Reviews 43, 927–965, ISSN: 0163-769X, 1945-7189,
(2025; https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article/43/6/927/6506411) (Nov. 25, 2022).
6.
N. E. Baskind, A. H. Balen, Best Practice & Research Clinical Obstetrics & Gynaecology
37, 80–97, ISSN: 1521-6934, (https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S1521693416300037) (2016).
7.
L. M. Moolhuijsen et al., Genomic and proteomic evidence for hormonal and metabolic
foundations of polycystic ovary syndrome, Apr. 19, 2024, (2025; http://medrxiv.org/
lookup/doi/10.1101/2024.04.18.24306020).
8.
B. G. Reed, B. R. Carr, in Endotext, ed. by K. R. Feingold et al. (MDText.com, Inc., South
Dartmouth (MA), 2000), (2025; http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK279054/).
9.
R. E. Jones, K. H. Lopez, in Human Reproductive Biology (Elsevier, 2006), chap. 3, pp. 73–
95, ISBN: 978-0-12-088465-0, (2025; https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/
B978008050836850007X).
10.
A. Ghafari et al., Endocrine and Metabolic Science 17, 100228, ISSN: 2666-3961, (https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2666396125000147) (2025).
11.
I. R. Thompson, U. B. Kaiser, Molecular and Cellular Endocrinology 385, 28–35, ISSN:
03037207, (2025; https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0303720713003742)
(Mar. 2014).
12.
A. M. Moore, Journal of Neuroendocrinology, e70028, ISSN: 0953-8194, 1365-2826,
(2025; https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jne.70028) (Apr. 18, 2025).
13.
M. Harada, Reproductive Medicine and Biology 21, e12487, ISSN: 1445-5781, 1447-0578,
(2025; https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/rmb2.12487) (Jan. 2022).
14.
A. Dunaif, The Journal of Clinical Endocrinology & Metabolism 101, 759–768, ISSN:
0021-972X, 1945-7197, (2025; https://academic.oup.com/jcem/article-lookup/doi/10.
1210/jc.2015-3780) (Mar. 2016).
15.
E. Diamanti-Kandarakis, A. Dunaif, Endocrine Reviews 33, 981–1030, ISSN: 0163-769X,
1945-7189, (2025; https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article/33/6/981/2354926) (Dec. 1,
2012).
16.
A. Dunaif, The American Journal of Medicine 98, S33–S39, ISSN: 0002-9343, (2025;
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0002-9343(99)80057-6) (Jan. 16, 1995).
17.
P. Kempegowda, E. Melson, K. N. Manolopoulos, W. Arlt, M. W. O’Reilly, Therapeutic
Advances in Endocrinology and Metabolism 11, 2042018820934319, ISSN: 2042-0188,
2042-0196, (2025; https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/2042018820934319)
(Jan. 2020).
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
67
==PAGE:73==
18.
U. I. Khan, R. Farid, in Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (Elsevier, 2024), pp. 6–10, ISBN: 978-
0-323-87932-3, (2025; https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/B9780323879323000116).
19.
C. Boomsma et al., Human Reproduction Update 12, 673–683, ISSN: 1355-4786, (https:
//doi.org/10.1093/humupd/dml036) (Aug. 2006).
20.
A. Dokras, Steroids 77, 338–341, ISSN: 0039128X, (2025; https://linkinghub.elsevier.
com/retrieve/pii/S0039128X11003539) (Mar. 2012).
21.
J. E. De Niet et al., Human Reproduction 25, 1497–1503, ISSN: 0268-1161, 1460-2350,
(2025; https://academic.oup.com/humrep/article- lookup/doi/10.1093/humrep/
deq068) (June 1, 2010).
22.
R. Rehman, A. Sheikh, Polycystic Ovary Syndrome: Basic Science to Clinical Advances
Across the Lifespan (Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2023).
23.
S. Singh et al., Journal of Clinical Medicine 12, 1454, ISSN: 2077-0383, (2025; https:
//www.mdpi.com/2077-0383/12/4/1454) (Feb. 11, 2023).
24.
S. M. Sirmans, K. A. Pate, Clinical Epidemiology 6, 1–13 (2013).
25.
M. Dapas et al., PLOS Medicine 17, ed. by J. E. Myers, e1003132, ISSN: 1549-1676,
(2025; https://dx.plos.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1003132) (June 23, 2020).
26.
M. E. Lujan, D. R. Chizen, R. A. Pierson, Journal of obstetrics and gynaecology Canada
30, 671–679 (2008).
27.
National Institutes of Health, Evidence-based Methodology Workshop on Polycystic Ovary
Syndrome: Final Report, https://prevention.nih.gov/sites/g/files/mnhszr241/files/
2018-06/FinalReport.pdf, 2012.
28.
W. A. March et al., Human Reproduction (Oxford, England) 25, 544–551 (2010).
29.
F. Chiaffarino et al., European Journal of Obstetrics & Gynecology and Reproductive
Biology 279, 159–170, ISSN: 0301-2115, (https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0301211522005681) (2022).
30.
H. J. Teede et al., European Journal of Endocrinology 189, G43–G64, ISSN: 0804-4643,
(https://doi.org/10.1093/ejendo/lvad096) (Aug. 2023).
31.
I. Naqvi, A. Bandyopadhyay, A. Panda, B. Hareramadas, Reproductive Sciences 32, 618–
646, ISSN: 1933-7191, 1933-7205, (2025; https://link.springer.com/10.1007/s43032-
025-01789-8) (Mar. 2025).
32.
M. Boluda-Navarro, in Cerebrospinal Fluid (CSF) Proteomics, ed. by E. Santamaría, J.
Fernández-Irigoyen, Series Title: Methods in Molecular Biology (Springer US, New York,
NY, 2025), vol. 2914, pp. 141–163, ISBN: 978-1-0716-4461-4, (2025; https : / / link .
springer.com/10.1007/978-1-0716-4462-1_12).
33.
B. Meczekalski et al., Journal of Endocrinological Investigation 38, 791–797, ISSN: 1720-
8386, (2025; http://link.springer.com/10.1007/s40618-015-0260-4) (July 2015).
34.
T. S. Hartwig et al., The Lancet 401, 762–771, ISSN: 0140-6736, (https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S0140673622026101) (2023).
35.
Nielsen, Henriette Svarre and COPL team, Information letter about participation in a
health-science project: COPL – Copenhagen Pregnancy Loss cohort - Female Partici-
pants, https://cdn.prod.website-files.com/6058e54263b25b777ed0af5a/65a4f1444261408a71bbac8e_
Deltagerinformation_kvinder(ENG)_oktober2023.pdf, Oct. 2023.
36.
Lægehåndbogen [Internet], Ferriman-Gallwey hirsutisme-score, https://www.sundhed.
dk/sundhedsfaglig/laegehaandbogen/endokrinologi/illustrationer/tegning/ferriman-
galwey-hirsutisme-score/, 2024.
37.
D. M. Gershenson, G. M. Lentz, F. A. Valea, R. A. Lobo, Eds., Comprehensive gynecology
(Elsevier, Phildaelphia, PA, 8th edition, 2022), chap. 39, ISBN: 978-0-323-79078-9.
68
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
==PAGE:74==
38.
M. Allen et al., Wellcome Open Research 4 (2021).
39.
UniProt Consortium, OXT - Oxytocin/Neurophysin 1 Prepropeptide (Human), Accessed:
22 June 2025 (https://www.uniprot.org/uniprotkb/P01178/entry).
40.
F. Day et al., PLOS Genetics 15, e1008517, ISSN: 1553-7404, (2025; https://dx.plos.
org/10.1371/journal.pgen.1008517) (Dec. 5, 2019).
41.
S. Palomba, C. Colombo, A. Busnelli, D. Caserta, G. Vitale, Frontiers in Endocrinology
14, 1251866, ISSN: 1664-2392, (2025; https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/
fendo.2023.1251866/full) (Aug. 11, 2023).
42.
N. Cera, J. Pinto, D. Pignatelli, Current Issues in Molecular Biology 46, 5223–5241, ISSN:
1467-3045, (2025; https://www.mdpi.com/1467-3045/46/6/313) (May 25, 2024).
43.
Y.-y. Li et al., Biochemistry and Biophysics Reports 43, 102043, ISSN: 2405-5808, (https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S240558082500130X) (2025).
44.
W.-S. Shin et al., Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications 371, 793–798,
ISSN: 0006291X, (2025; https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0006291X08008450)
(July 2008).
45.
V. S. Golubkov et al., Journal of Biological Chemistry 285, 35740–35749, ISSN: 00219258,
(2025; https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0021925820469145) (Nov. 2010).
46.
E. Akal, M. Ozkaya, Y. Engin-Ustun, Y. Ustun, Journal of Endocrinological Investigation
34, 97–100, ISSN: 0391-4097, 1720-8386, (2025; http://link.springer.com/10.1007/
BF03347037) (Feb. 2011).
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
69
==PAGE:75==
70
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
==PAGE:76==
A
Appendix
A.1
Supplementary Figures & Plots
Figure A.1: Phenotype overlap between diagnostic frameworks
Figure A.1: Three diagnostic criteria for PCOS including the phenotypes which fall under each diagnostic
criteria.
Plot A.2: Principal component analysis (PCA) of NPX data colored by assay
plate
Figure A.2: Principal component analysis (PCA) of NPX data colored by assay plate. Each point in the PCA
plot represents a maternal sample from inclusion. Samples were colored by assay plate (Plate 1–11), and ellipses
were drawn to indicate the 95% confidence region of each plate group. The visual inspection of PCA plots reveals
slight clustering by plate, suggesting limited batch effects.
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
71
==PAGE:77==
Plot A.3: Variables collected over time in the COPL study
Figure A.3: Timeline of the first and last inclusion dates for each variable in this study.
72
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
==PAGE:78==
Plot A.4: GSEA results for self-reported PCOS using Reactome terms
Figure A.4: GSEA results for self-reported PCOS using Reactome terms. The plot shows significantly enriched
Reactome biological processes based on ranked protein expression changes from the linear mixed-effects model
(adjusted for age, with plate ID as a random effect). The normalized enrichment score (NES) is plotted on the x-
axis, indicating direction and magnitude of enrichment. Color shading reflects the FDR-adjusted p-value (p.adjust).
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
73
==PAGE:79==
A.2
Supplementary Tables
Table A.1: Contingency table for PCOS symptoms
Increased androgens
Hirstuism
Irregular cycle
PCOM
Count
No
No
No
No
2947
No
No
Yes
Yes
23
No
No
Yes
No
7
No
No
No
Yes
7
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
6
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
6
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
6
No
Yes
No
No
2
No
Yes
Yes
No
2
Yes
Yes
No
No
2
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
2
Yes
No
No
Yes
2
No
Yes
No
Yes
1
Yes
No
No
No
1
Yes
No
Yes
No
1
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
1
Table A.1: PCOS-related symptoms: A contingency table to examine how many inclusions have multiple
symptoms.
Table A.2: Showing what component data is included for deriving the data-
based PCOS diagnosis
HA
OA
PCOM
Classification Inclusion
TRUE / FALSE
TRUE / FALSE
TRUE / FALSE
Included
TRUE / FALSE
TRUE / FALSE
NA
Excluded
TRUE / FALSE
NA
TRUE / FALSE
Excluded
NA
TRUE / FALSE
TRUE / FALSE
Excluded
Table A.2: Combinations of component-level diagnoses for hyperandrogenism (HA), oligo/anovulation (OA),
and polycystic ovarian morphology (PCOM), and whether each case is included in the data-based PCOS
diagnosis algorithm. Only rows with non-missing (‘TRUE‘ or ‘FALSE‘) values for all three components are
retained. Rows with one or more ‘NA‘ values are excluded from classification to preserve diagnostic accuracy and
avoid misclassification due to incomplete information.
74
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
==PAGE:80==
Table A.3: An example of how the algorithm determines the presence of a
PCOS component
testoan
testofri
FG
Result (HA)
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
FALSE
TRUE
TRUE
FALSE
FALSE
NA
NA
TRUE
NA
NA
TRUE
NA
FALSE
NA
NA
Table A.3: Example illustrating how logical OR (‘|‘) across multiple variables results in different outcomes
for the HA component. The HA component is only non-missing (‘TRUE‘ or ‘FALSE‘) when all variables are
either non-missing or one of them is ‘TRUE‘. When all are ‘FALSE‘ or ‘NA‘, and at least one is ‘NA‘, the result
is ‘NA‘, and the participant is excluded from the complete-case analysis.
Table A.4: Number of individuals in various in analyses subsets, including
proteomics data availability
Period
Total inclusions
PCOS-negative
PCOS-positive
PCOS-NA
Proteomic data at inclusion
Before 2023
1533
1258
165
110
999
After 2023
1483
1206
160
117
0
Table A.4: Number of individuals included in the study, stratified by inclusion period and self-reported PCOS
classification. “PCOS-NA” refers to participants for whom the PCOS classification is missing.
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
75
==PAGE:81==
A.3
Summary Tables for Variables in COPL Data, Stratified
by Self-reported PCOS
Table A.5: Measurements of basic characteristics, before 2023
Basic characteristics of the participants, including fertility parameters, and information on
proteomics data availability. Stratified by self-reported PCOS status.
Before 2023
No PCOS
(N=1258)
PCOS
(N=165)
P-value
Age at inclusion
merged_maternal_age_at_inclusion
Mean (SD)
34.1 (5.15)
32.8 (4.55)
0.00186 **
Median [Min, Max]
33.9 [18.5, 49.1]
32.9 [21.2, 43.6]
BMI
merged_maternal_bmi
Mean (SD)
24.4 (4.29)
26.4 (5.66)
<0.001 ***
Median [Min, Max]
23.6 [16.7, 46.2]
25.2 [17.9, 46.1]
BMI class
merged_maternal_bmi_class
Underweight
30 (2.4%)
3 (1.8%)
<0.001 ***
Normal weight
780 (62.0%)
77 (46.7%)
Overweight
310 (24.6%)
46 (27.9%)
Obesity
138 (11.0%)
39 (23.6%)
Age at menarche (years)
M_menarche
Mean (SD)
12.9 (1.40)
13.1 (1.81)
0.501
Median [Min, Max]
13.0 [8.00, 20.0]
13.0 [10.0, 26.0]
Missing
132 (10.5%)
17 (10.3%)
Infertility
Infertility
Tried <12 months
794 (63.1%)
79 (47.9%)
<0.001 ***
Tried >12 months
327 (26.0%)
68 (41.2%)
Missing
137 (10.9%)
18 (10.9%)
Time to pregnancy (months)
merged_time_to_pregnancy
Mean (SD)
10.0 (16.6)
12.8 (17.9)
0.0359 *
Median [Min, Max]
4.00 [0, 168]
6.00 [0, 120]
Missing
106 (8.4%)
17 (10.3%)
Conception
Conception_Binary
Natural
956 (76.0%)
112 (67.9%)
0.0197 *
Assisted
274 (21.8%)
50 (30.3%)
Missing
28 (2.2%)
3 (1.8%)
Donor oocyte used
merged_donor_g
No
1235 (98.2%)
164 (99.4%)
0.154
Yes
19 (1.5%)
0 (0%)
76
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
==PAGE:82==
Before 2023
No PCOS
(N=1258)
PCOS
(N=165)
P-value
Missing
4 (0.3%)
1 (0.6%)
Donor sperm used
merged_donors_d
No
1190 (94.6%)
162 (98.2%)
0.043 *
Yes
64 (5.1%)
2 (1.2%)
Missing
4 (0.3%)
1 (0.6%)
Caesarean section
M_sectio
No
955 (75.9%)
124 (75.2%)
0.896
Yes
129 (10.3%)
18 (10.9%)
Missing
174 (13.8%)
23 (13.9%)
Euploid
Euploid
No
588 (46.7%)
66 (40.0%)
0.199
Yes
582 (46.3%)
83 (50.3%)
Missing
88 (7.0%)
16 (9.7%)
Pregnant at follow up
M_PregnantAtFollowup
No
1150 (91.4%)
155 (93.9%)
0.511
Yes
42 (3.3%)
8 (4.8%)
Missing
66 (5.2%)
2 (1.2%)
Proteomics at inclusion
omics_prot_w_incl
No
432 (34.3%)
58 (35.2%)
0.905
Yes
826 (65.7%)
107 (64.8%)
Proteomics at follow up
omics_prot_w_fu
No
572 (45.5%)
80 (48.5%)
0.517
Yes
686 (54.5%)
85 (51.5%)
Proteomics for male partner
omics_prot_m
No
624 (49.6%)
85 (51.5%)
0.705
Yes
634 (50.4%)
80 (48.5%)
Table A.6: Measurements of basic characteristics, after 2023
Basic characteristics of the participants, including fertility parameters, and information on
proteomics data availability. Stratified by self-reported PCOS status. Note there are no pro-
teomics data for inclusions post-2023.
After 2023
No PCOS
(N=1206)
PCOS
(N=160)
P-value
Age at inclusion
merged_maternal_age_at_inclusion
Mean (SD)
34.3 (4.88)
33.0 (4.76)
0.00155 **
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
77
==PAGE:83==
After 2023
No PCOS
(N=1206)
PCOS
(N=160)
P-value
Median [Min, Max]
34.2 [20.0, 49.2]
32.8 [21.6, 45.2]
BMI
merged_maternal_bmi
Mean (SD)
24.4 (4.46)
25.5 (5.67)
0.0618 .
Median [Min, Max]
23.4 [17.0, 49.6]
24.1 [17.4, 48.5]
Missing
12 (1.0%)
1 (0.6%)
BMI class
merged_maternal_bmi_class
Underweight
36 (3.0%)
2 (1.3%)
0.16
Normal weight
729 (60.4%)
93 (58.1%)
Overweight
294 (24.4%)
37 (23.1%)
Obesity
135 (11.2%)
27 (16.9%)
Missing
12 (1.0%)
1 (0.6%)
Age at menarche (years)
M_menarche
Mean (SD)
13.0 (1.53)
12.9 (2.25)
0.165
Median [Min, Max]
13.0 [9.00, 33.0]
13.0 [9.00, 30.0]
Missing
308 (25.5%)
33 (20.6%)
Infertility
Infertility
Tried <12 months
668 (55.4%)
69 (43.1%)
<0.001 ***
Tried >12 months
224 (18.6%)
58 (36.3%)
Missing
314 (26.0%)
33 (20.6%)
Time to pregnancy (months)
merged_time_to_pregnancy
Mean (SD)
9.51 (15.7)
11.3 (13.8)
0.00202 **
Median [Min, Max]
3.00 [0, 132]
6.00 [0, 90.0]
Missing
290 (24.0%)
30 (18.8%)
Conception
Conception_Binary
Natural
942 (78.1%)
112 (70.0%)
0.0103 *
Assisted
228 (18.9%)
45 (28.1%)
Missing
36 (3.0%)
3 (1.9%)
Donor oocyte used
merged_donor_g
No
1177 (97.6%)
157 (98.1%)
0.348
Yes
24 (2.0%)
1 (0.6%)
Missing
5 (0.4%)
2 (1.3%)
Donor sperm used
merged_donors_d
No
1152 (95.5%)
152 (95.0%)
1
Yes
49 (4.1%)
6 (3.8%)
Missing
5 (0.4%)
2 (1.3%)
Caesarean section
M_sectio
78
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
==PAGE:84==
After 2023
No PCOS
(N=1206)
PCOS
(N=160)
P-value
No
780 (64.7%)
110 (68.8%)
0.953
Yes
93 (7.7%)
14 (8.8%)
Missing
333 (27.6%)
36 (22.5%)
Euploid
Euploid
No
508 (42.1%)
62 (38.8%)
0.178
Yes
439 (36.4%)
70 (43.8%)
Missing
259 (21.5%)
28 (17.5%)
Pregnant at follow up
M_PregnantAtFollowup
No
1083 (89.8%)
150 (93.8%)
0.508
Yes
71 (5.9%)
7 (4.4%)
Missing
52 (4.3%)
3 (1.9%)
Proteomics at inclusion
omics_prot_w_incl
No
1206 (100%)
160 (100%)
NA
Yes
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
Proteomics at follow up
omics_prot_w_fu
No
1206 (100%)
160 (100%)
NA
Yes
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
Proteomics for male partner
omics_prot_m
No
1206 (100%)
160 (100%)
NA
Yes
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
Table A.7: PCOS clinical features, before 2023
Before 2023
No PCOS
(N=1258)
PCOS
(N=165)
P-value
Has acne
merged_acne
Yes
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
NA
No
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
Missing
1258 (100%)
165 (100%)
Treated for acne
merged_acne_treat
Yes
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
NA
No
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
Missing
1258 (100%)
165 (100%)
Ferrimann-Gallwey score
M_Ferrimann_Gallwey
Mean (SD)
NA (NA)
NA (NA)
NA
Median [Min, Max]
NA [NA, NA]
NA [NA, NA]
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
79
==PAGE:85==
Before 2023
No PCOS
(N=1258)
PCOS
(N=165)
P-value
Missing
1258 (100%)
165 (100%)
Cycle type
M_Cycle
Long Cycle
49 (3.9%)
57 (34.5%)
<0.001 ***
No Cycle
24 (1.9%)
9 (5.5%)
Regular Cycle
1072 (85.2%)
83 (50.3%)
Short Cycle
13 (1.0%)
2 (1.2%)
Missing
100 (7.9%)
14 (8.5%)
Cycle length
M_Cycle_length
Mean (SD)
28.5 (3.15)
34.3 (7.73)
<0.001 ***
Median [Min, Max]
28.0 [14.0, 60.0]
33.0 [15.0, 60.0]
Missing
157 (12.5%)
32 (19.4%)
Antral follicle count (right)
afc_right
Mean (SD)
NA (NA)
NA (NA)
NA
Median [Min, Max]
NA [NA, NA]
NA [NA, NA]
Missing
1258 (100%)
165 (100%)
Antral follicle count (left)
afc_left
Mean (SD)
NA (NA)
NA (NA)
NA
Median [Min, Max]
NA [NA, NA]
NA [NA, NA]
Missing
1258 (100%)
165 (100%)
Antral follicle count (total)
afc_total
Mean (SD)
NA (NA)
NA (NA)
NA
Median [Min, Max]
NA [NA, NA]
NA [NA, NA]
Missing
1258 (100%)
165 (100%)
PCOS symptom: Irregular cycle
M_PCOS_symptoms_cycle
No
1258 (100%)
165 (100%)
NA
Yes
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
PCOS symptom: Hirsutism
M_PCOS_symptoms_hair
No
1258 (100%)
165 (100%)
NA
Yes
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
PCOS symptom: PCOM via scan
M_PCOS_symptoms_ovaries
No
1258 (100%)
165 (100%)
NA
Yes
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
PCOS symptom: Increased androgens
M_PCOS_symptoms_androgens
No
1258 (100%)
165 (100%)
NA
Yes
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
80
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
==PAGE:86==
Before 2023
No PCOS
(N=1258)
PCOS
(N=165)
P-value
Table A.7: Before 2023 - Measurements of PCOS-related clinical features, stratified by self-reported
PCOS status.
Table A.8: PCOS clinical features, after 2023
After 2023
No PCOS
(N=1206)
PCOS
(N=160)
P-value
Has acne
merged_acne
Yes
143 (11.9%)
31 (19.4%)
0.0336 *
No
532 (44.1%)
68 (42.5%)
Missing
531 (44.0%)
61 (38.1%)
Treated for acne
merged_acne_treat
Yes
6 (0.5%)
4 (2.5%)
0.0796 .
No
137 (11.4%)
27 (16.9%)
Missing
1063 (88.1%)
129 (80.6%)
Ferrimann-Gallwey score
M_Ferrimann_Gallwey
Mean (SD)
4.06 (4.03)
7.03 (6.08)
<0.001 ***
Median [Min, Max]
3.00 [0, 26.0]
5.00 [0, 26.0]
Missing
565 (46.8%)
72 (45.0%)
Cycle type
M_Cycle
Long Cycle
36 (3.0%)
48 (30.0%)
<0.001 ***
No Cycle
24 (2.0%)
7 (4.4%)
Regular Cycle
862 (71.5%)
72 (45.0%)
Short Cycle
6 (0.5%)
2 (1.3%)
Missing
278 (23.1%)
31 (19.4%)
Cycle length
M_Cycle_length
Mean (SD)
28.7 (3.08)
33.7 (7.55)
<0.001 ***
Median [Min, Max]
28.0 [14.0, 45.0]
32.0 [14.0, 69.0]
Missing
312 (25.9%)
43 (26.9%)
Antral follicle count (right)
afc_right
Mean (SD)
10.4 (6.47)
18.7 (7.99)
<0.001 ***
Median [Min, Max]
9.00 [0, 50.0]
19.0 [2.00, 43.0]
Missing
333 (27.6%)
29 (18.1%)
Antral follicle count (left)
afc_left
Mean (SD)
10.0 (6.42)
17.5 (8.33)
<0.001 ***
Median [Min, Max]
9.00 [0, 50.0]
17.0 [1.00, 50.0]
Missing
370 (30.7%)
35 (21.9%)
Antral follicle count (total)
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
81
==PAGE:87==
After 2023
No PCOS
(N=1206)
PCOS
(N=160)
P-value
afc_total
Mean (SD)
20.6 (12.2)
36.7 (14.8)
<0.001 ***
Median [Min, Max]
18.0 [0, 100]
36.0 [4.00, 88.0]
Missing
397 (32.9%)
36 (22.5%)
PCOS symptom: Irregular cycle
M_PCOS_symptoms_cycle
No
1205 (99.9%)
108 (67.5%)
<0.001 ***
Yes
1 (0.1%)
52 (32.5%)
PCOS symptom: Hirsutism
M_PCOS_symptoms_hair
No
1206 (100%)
138 (86.3%)
<0.001 ***
Yes
0 (0%)
22 (13.8%)
PCOS symptom: PCOM via scan
M_PCOS_symptoms_ovaries
No
1205 (99.9%)
109 (68.1%)
<0.001 ***
Yes
1 (0.1%)
51 (31.9%)
PCOS symptom: Increased androgens
M_PCOS_symptoms_androgens
No
1206 (100%)
139 (86.9%)
<0.001 ***
Yes
0 (0%)
21 (13.1%)
Table A.8: After 2023 - Measurements of PCOS-related clinical features, stratified by self-reported PCOS
status.
Table A.9: PCOS-related hormone and biochemical measures, before 2023
Before 2023
No PCOS
(N=1258)
PCOS
(N=165)
P-value
Total T (nmol/L)
testoan
Mean (SD)
0.971 (0.423)
1.50 (0.832)
<0.001 ***
Median [Min, Max]
0.870 [0.340, 2.57]
1.27 [0.410, 4.06]
Missing
1095 (87.0%)
83 (50.3%)
Free T (nmol/L)
TESTOFRI
Mean (SD)
0.0141 (0.00710)
0.0249 (0.0141)
<0.001 ***
Median [Min, Max]
0.0100 [0, 0.0400]
0.0200 [0.0100, 0.0600]
Missing
1103 (87.7%)
85 (51.5%)
SHBG (nmol/L)
SHBG
Mean (SD)
75.2 (44.2)
57.0 (31.3)
0.00407 **
Median [Min, Max]
65.9 [11.1, 290]
54.9 [12.0, 132]
Missing
1110 (88.2%)
103 (62.4%)
AMH (pmol/L)
AMH
Mean (SD)
17.0 (12.9)
54.4 (52.7)
<0.001 ***
82
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
==PAGE:88==
Before 2023
No PCOS
(N=1258)
PCOS
(N=165)
P-value
Median [Min, Max]
14.0 [0.700, 96.0]
37.5 [5.60, 327]
Missing
691 (54.9%)
65 (39.4%)
Elevated AMH
AMH_Elevated_ref
No
558 (44.4%)
75 (45.5%)
<0.001 ***
Yes
9 (0.7%)
25 (15.2%)
Missing
691 (54.9%)
65 (39.4%)
LH (IU/L)
LH
Mean (SD)
7.19 (9.06)
10.2 (7.10)
<0.001 ***
Median [Min, Max]
5.30 [0.0300, 82.8]
7.80 [0.180, 50.4]
Missing
853 (67.8%)
69 (41.8%)
FSH (IU/L)
FSH
Mean (SD)
5.92 (4.04)
5.58 (2.20)
0.942
Median [Min, Max]
5.55 [0.0900, 50.2]
5.60 [0.280, 11.7]
Missing
838 (66.6%)
88 (53.3%)
LH:FSH ratio
merged_LH_FSH_ratio
Mean (SD)
1.39 (1.46)
2.19 (1.86)
<0.001 ***
Median [Min, Max]
1.04 [0.0270, 16.9]
1.58 [0.486, 10.1]
Missing
932 (74.1%)
92 (55.8%)
17-OHP (nmol/L)
HYPRO17
Mean (SD)
2.38 (2.99)
2.84 (2.57)
0.00422 **
Median [Min, Max]
1.31 [0.0400, 17.9]
1.87 [0.570, 12.7]
Missing
1096 (87.1%)
83 (50.3%)
E2 (nmol/L)
ESTRA
Mean (SD)
0.448 (0.457)
0.407 (0.384)
0.303
Median [Min, Max]
0.330 [0, 4.73]
0.280 [0.0700, 1.92]
Missing
757 (60.2%)
69 (41.8%)
Table A.9: Before 2023 - PCOS-related hormone measures, stratified by self-reported PCOS status.
Table A.10: PCOS-related hormone measures, after 2023
After 2023
No PCOS
(N=1206)
PCOS
(N=160)
P-value
Total T (nmol/L)
testoan
Mean (SD)
0.890 (0.389)
1.32 (0.609)
<0.001 ***
Median [Min, Max]
0.860 [0.100, 2.04]
1.14 [0.590, 3.12]
Missing
1105 (91.6%)
106 (66.3%)
Free T (nmol/L)
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
83
==PAGE:89==
After 2023
No PCOS
(N=1206)
PCOS
(N=160)
P-value
TESTOFRI
Mean (SD)
0.0144 (0.00662)
0.0215 (0.0118)
<0.001 ***
Median [Min, Max]
0.0100 [0, 0.0300]
0.0200 [0.0100, 0.0700]
Missing
1110 (92.0%)
107 (66.9%)
SHBG (nmol/L)
SHBG
Mean (SD)
63.7 (31.4)
59.0 (34.3)
0.324
Median [Min, Max]
59.8 [14.9, 143]
58.0 [14.0, 172]
Missing
1115 (92.5%)
114 (71.3%)
AMH (pmol/L)
AMH
Mean (SD)
15.5 (13.0)
40.7 (31.9)
<0.001 ***
Median [Min, Max]
12.0 [0.0600, 89.0]
33.0 [3.60, 157]
Missing
844 (70.0%)
92 (57.5%)
Elevated AMH
AMH_Elevated_ref
No
365 (30.3%)
53 (33.1%)
<0.001 ***
Yes
5 (0.4%)
16 (10.0%)
Missing
836 (69.3%)
91 (56.9%)
LH (IU/L)
LH
Mean (SD)
7.84 (7.92)
13.5 (15.0)
<0.001 ***
Median [Min, Max]
6.30 [0.0200, 67.1]
9.00 [2.60, 88.8]
Missing
948 (78.6%)
93 (58.1%)
FSH (IU/L)
FSH
Mean (SD)
6.34 (4.32)
5.77 (3.34)
0.245
Median [Min, Max]
5.90 [0.205, 37.2]
5.20 [1.20, 21.4]
Missing
890 (73.8%)
90 (56.3%)
LH:FSH ratio
merged_LH_FSH_ratio
Mean (SD)
1.45 (1.11)
2.27 (1.26)
<0.001 ***
Median [Min, Max]
1.09 [0.00353, 7.84]
2.06 [0.697, 5.91]
Missing
972 (80.6%)
97 (60.6%)
17-OHP (nmol/L)
HYPRO17
Mean (SD)
2.19 (2.14)
2.82 (2.45)
0.0694 .
Median [Min, Max]
1.39 [0.0100, 10.3]
1.56 [0.560, 10.8]
Missing
1105 (91.6%)
106 (66.3%)
E2 (nmol/L)
ESTRA
Mean (SD)
0.503 (0.545)
0.470 (0.412)
0.84
Median [Min, Max]
0.310 [0.0100, 3.86]
0.280 [0.0700, 1.79]
Missing
864 (72.0%)
89 (55.6%)
Table A.10: After 2023 - PCOS-related hormone measures, stratified by self-reported PCOS status.
84
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
==PAGE:90==
Table A.11: Maternal health conditions, before 2023
Before 2023
No PCOS
(N=1258)
PCOS
(N=165)
P-value
Has diabetes
M_Diabetes
No
1067 (84.8%)
140 (84.8%)
0.656
Yes
11 (0.9%)
2 (1.2%)
Missing
180 (14.3%)
23 (13.9%)
Has type 1 diabetes
M_Diabetes_type_1
No
1074 (85.4%)
142 (86.1%)
1
Yes
4 (0.3%)
0 (0%)
Missing
180 (14.3%)
23 (13.9%)
Has type 2 diabetes
M_Diabetes_type_2
No
1070 (85.1%)
140 (84.8%)
0.328
Yes
8 (0.6%)
2 (1.2%)
Missing
180 (14.3%)
23 (13.9%)
Has hypertension
M_Hypertension
No
1035 (82.3%)
130 (78.8%)
0.0333 *
Yes
44 (3.5%)
12 (7.3%)
Missing
179 (14.2%)
23 (13.9%)
Has hypothyroidism
M_Hypothyroidism
No
1025 (81.5%)
131 (79.4%)
0.264
Yes
55 (4.4%)
11 (6.7%)
Missing
178 (14.1%)
23 (13.9%)
Has hyperthyroidism
M_Hypothyroidism
No
1071 (85.1%)
141 (85.5%)
1
Yes
7 (0.6%)
1 (0.6%)
Missing
180 (14.3%)
23 (13.9%)
Has ever had CVD
M_CVD
No
1061 (84.3%)
142 (86.1%)
0.246
Yes
17 (1.4%)
0 (0%)
Missing
180 (14.3%)
23 (13.9%)
Systolic BP at inclusion (mmHg)
M_bt_sys_bl
Mean (SD)
118 (11.8)
119 (11.5)
0.401
Median [Min, Max]
118 [90.0, 180]
119 [94.0, 150]
Missing
6 (0.5%)
0 (0%)
Diastolic BP at inclusion (mmHg)
M_bt_dia_bl
Mean (SD)
74.1 (10.2)
74.8 (10.2)
0.429
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
85
==PAGE:91==
Before 2023
No PCOS
(N=1258)
PCOS
(N=165)
P-value
Median [Min, Max]
74.0 [42.0, 111]
75.0 [49.0, 102]
Missing
6 (0.5%)
0 (0%)
Systolic BP at follow up (mmHg)
M_bt_sys_fu
Mean (SD)
NA (NA)
NA (NA)
NA
Median [Min, Max]
NA [NA, NA]
NA [NA, NA]
Missing
1258 (100%)
165 (100%)
Diastolic BP at follow up (mmHg)
M_bt_dia_fu
Mean (SD)
NA (NA)
NA (NA)
NA
Median [Min, Max]
NA [NA, NA]
NA [NA, NA]
Missing
1258 (100%)
165 (100%)
TG volume (right side)
thy_right_vol
Mean (SD)
NA (NA)
NA (NA)
NA
Median [Min, Max]
NA [NA, NA]
NA [NA, NA]
Missing
1258 (100%)
165 (100%)
TG volume (left side)
thy_left_vol
Mean (SD)
NA (NA)
NA (NA)
NA
Median [Min, Max]
NA [NA, NA]
NA [NA, NA]
Missing
1258 (100%)
165 (100%)
TG volume (total)
thy_total_vol
Mean (SD)
NA (NA)
NA (NA)
NA
Median [Min, Max]
NA [NA, NA]
NA [NA, NA]
Missing
1258 (100%)
165 (100%)
TG nodules (right side)
thy_right_nod_num
0
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
NA
1
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
>1
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
Missing
1258 (100%)
165 (100%)
TG nodules (left side)
thy_left_nod_num
0
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
NA
1
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
>1
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
Missing
1258 (100%)
165 (100%)
Echogenicity of the TG
thy_ekko
Normal light gray
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
NA
Slightly reduced
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
Moderately hypo-echogenic
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
Pronounced hypo-echogenic
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
86
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
==PAGE:92==
Before 2023
No PCOS
(N=1258)
PCOS
(N=165)
P-value
Pseudonodular
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
Missing
1258 (100%)
165 (100%)
Table A.11: Before 2023 - Maternal health conditions, stratified by self-reported PCOS status. CVD =
cardiovascular disease (thrombus/brain hemorrhage/angina pectoris), BP = blood pressure, TG = thyroid
gland.
Table A.12: Maternal health conditions, after 2023
After 2023
No PCOS
(N=1206)
PCOS
(N=160)
P-value
Has diabetes
M_Diabetes
No
863 (71.6%)
122 (76.3%)
0.312
Yes
7 (0.6%)
2 (1.3%)
Missing
336 (27.9%)
36 (22.5%)
Has type 1 diabetes
M_Diabetes_type_1
No
867 (71.9%)
123 (76.9%)
0.414
Yes
3 (0.2%)
1 (0.6%)
Missing
336 (27.9%)
36 (22.5%)
Has type 2 diabetes
M_Diabetes_type_2
No
866 (71.8%)
123 (76.9%)
0.487
Yes
4 (0.3%)
1 (0.6%)
Missing
336 (27.9%)
36 (22.5%)
Has hypertension
M_Hypertension
No
828 (68.7%)
118 (73.8%)
1
Yes
42 (3.5%)
6 (3.8%)
Missing
336 (27.9%)
36 (22.5%)
Has hypothyroidism
M_Hypothyroidism
No
822 (68.2%)
119 (74.4%)
0.602
Yes
49 (4.1%)
5 (3.1%)
Missing
335 (27.8%)
36 (22.5%)
Has hyperthyroidism
M_Hypothyroidism
No
860 (71.3%)
123 (76.9%)
1
Yes
10 (0.8%)
1 (0.6%)
Missing
336 (27.9%)
36 (22.5%)
Has ever had CVD
M_CVD
No
849 (70.4%)
121 (75.6%)
0.543
Yes
21 (1.7%)
4 (2.5%)
Missing
336 (27.9%)
35 (21.9%)
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
87
==PAGE:93==
After 2023
No PCOS
(N=1206)
PCOS
(N=160)
P-value
Systolic BP at inclusion (mmHg)
M_bt_sys_bl
Mean (SD)
118 (11.9)
118 (12.2)
0.765
Median [Min, Max]
118 [11.0, 165]
116 [95.0, 158]
Missing
165 (13.7%)
23 (14.4%)
Diastolic BP at inclusion (mmHg)
M_bt_dia_bl
Mean (SD)
76.0 (9.72)
76.3 (10.6)
0.999
Median [Min, Max]
76.0 [41.0, 115]
76.0 [47.0, 111]
Missing
165 (13.7%)
23 (14.4%)
Systolic BP at follow up (mmHg)
M_bt_sys_fu
Mean (SD)
120 (11.8)
121 (12.3)
0.74
Median [Min, Max]
119 [88.0, 169]
121 [96.0, 155]
Missing
283 (23.5%)
25 (15.6%)
Diastolic BP at follow up (mmHg)
M_bt_dia_fu
Mean (SD)
78.7 (9.38)
79.5 (9.96)
0.747
Median [Min, Max]
79.0 [41.0, 114]
78.0 [57.0, 105]
Missing
283 (23.5%)
25 (15.6%)
TG volume (right side)
thy_right_vol
Mean (SD)
5690 (2740)
5960 (2880)
0.414
Median [Min, Max]
5400 [283, 39400]
5280 [59.6, 20800]
Missing
432 (35.8%)
46 (28.8%)
TG volume (left side)
thy_left_vol
Mean (SD)
4840 (2200)
5030 (2340)
0.566
Median [Min, Max]
4620 [707, 27600]
4600 [46.5, 13000]
Missing
423 (35.1%)
48 (30.0%)
TG volume (total)
thy_total_vol
Mean (SD)
10500 (4480)
11000 (4850)
0.39
Median [Min, Max]
9970 [1620, 48900]
10000 [106, 33800]
Missing
437 (36.2%)
48 (30.0%)
TG nodules (right side)
thy_right_nod_num
0
698 (57.9%)
99 (61.9%)
0.226
1
78 (6.5%)
9 (5.6%)
>1
20 (1.7%)
6 (3.8%)
Missing
410 (34.0%)
46 (28.8%)
TG nodules (left side)
thy_left_nod_num
0
707 (58.6%)
105 (65.6%)
0.396
1
61 (5.1%)
6 (3.8%)
88
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
==PAGE:94==
After 2023
No PCOS
(N=1206)
PCOS
(N=160)
P-value
>1
23 (1.9%)
1 (0.6%)
Missing
415 (34.4%)
48 (30.0%)
Echogenicity of the TG
thy_ekko
Normal light gray
570 (47.3%)
65 (40.6%)
0.00903 **
Slightly reduced
151 (12.5%)
29 (18.1%)
Moderately hypo-echogenic
54 (4.5%)
13 (8.1%)
Pronounced hypo-echogenic
9 (0.7%)
2 (1.3%)
Pseudonodular
16 (1.3%)
6 (3.8%)
Missing
406 (33.7%)
45 (28.1%)
Table A.12: After 2023 - Maternal health conditions, stratified by self-reported PCOS status. CVD =
cardiovascular disease (thrombus/brain hemorrhage/angina pectoris), BP = blood pressure, TG = thyroid
gland.
Table A.13: Measurements for family health conditions, before 2023
Before 2023
No PCOS
(N=1258)
PCOS
(N=165)
P-value
Near family with PCOS
M_Family_PCOS
No
1078 (85.7%)
142 (86.1%)
NA
Yes
0 (0%)
0 (0%)
Missing
180 (14.3%)
23 (13.9%)
Near family with type 2 diabetes
M_Family_Diabetes2
No
881 (70.0%)
102 (61.8%)
0.00532 **
Yes
199 (15.8%)
41 (24.8%)
Missing
178 (14.1%)
22 (13.3%)
Near family with CVD
M_Family_Cardiovascular
No
923 (73.4%)
111 (67.3%)
0.0206 *
Yes
157 (12.5%)
32 (19.4%)
Missing
178 (14.1%)
22 (13.3%)
Near family with hypothyroidism
M_Family_Hypothyroid
No
1040 (82.7%)
136 (82.4%)
0.856
Yes
38 (3.0%)
6 (3.6%)
Missing
180 (14.3%)
23 (13.9%)
Near family with hyperthyroidism
M_Family_Hyperthyroid
No
1006 (80.0%)
133 (80.6%)
1
Yes
72 (5.7%)
9 (5.5%)
Missing
180 (14.3%)
23 (13.9%)
Table A.13: Before 2023 - Family health conditions, stratified by self-reported PCOS status.
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
89
==PAGE:95==
Table A.14: Measurements for family health conditions, after 2023
After 2023
No PCOS
(N=1206)
PCOS
(N=160)
P-value
Near family with PCOS
M_Family_PCOS
No
847 (70.2%)
114 (71.3%)
0.00474 **
Yes
23 (1.9%)
10 (6.3%)
Missing
336 (27.9%)
36 (22.5%)
Near family with type 2 diabetes
M_Family_Diabetes2
No
687 (57.0%)
86 (53.8%)
0.0284 *
Yes
187 (15.5%)
38 (23.8%)
Missing
332 (27.5%)
36 (22.5%)
Near family with CVD
M_Family_Cardiovascular
No
706 (58.5%)
92 (57.5%)
0.0667 .
Yes
165 (13.7%)
33 (20.6%)
Missing
335 (27.8%)
35 (21.9%)
Near family with hypothyroidism
M_Family_Hypothyroid
No
829 (68.7%)
118 (73.8%)
1
Yes
41 (3.4%)
6 (3.8%)
Missing
336 (27.9%)
36 (22.5%)
Near family with hyperthyroidism
M_Family_Hyperthyroid
No
806 (66.8%)
108 (67.5%)
0.0721 .
Yes
67 (5.6%)
16 (10.0%)
Missing
333 (27.6%)
36 (22.5%)
Table A.14: After 2023 - Family health conditions, stratified by self-reported PCOS status.
Table A.15: Maternal mental health conditions, before 2023
Before 2023
No PCOS
(N=1206)
PCOS
(N=160)
P-value
Major depression index (MDI, from 0-50)
maternal_major_depression
Mean (SD)
17.1 (10.8)
19.0 (11.1)
0.0429 *
Median [Min, Max]
15.0 [0, 46.0]
18.0 [1.00, 50.0]
Missing
151 (12.0%)
19 (11.5%)
Maternal depression class (based on MDI)
maternal_depression_class
No depression
938 (74.6%)
120 (72.7%)
0.2
Mild depression
33 (2.6%)
9 (5.5%)
Moderate depression
57 (4.5%)
9 (5.5%)
Severe depression
79 (6.3%)
8 (4.8%)
90
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
==PAGE:96==
Missing
151 (12.0%)
19 (11.5%)
Perceived stress scale (PSS, from 0-40)
maternal_perceived_stress
Mean (SD)
18.0 (7.65)
19.5 (7.28)
0.0325 *
Median [Min, Max]
18.0 [0, 40.0]
19.0 [2.00, 39.0]
Missing
150 (11.9%)
18 (10.9%)
Maternal stress class (based on PSS)
maternal_stress_class
No
585 (46.5%)
70 (42.4%)
0.274
Yes
523 (41.6%)
77 (46.7%)
Missing
150 (11.9%)
18 (10.9%)
General anxiety disorder
(GAD-7, from 0-21)
maternal_general_anxiety
Mean (SD)
6.24 (5.18)
7.39 (5.43)
0.0116 *
Median [Min, Max]
5.00 [0, 21.0]
6.00 [0, 21.0]
Missing
156 (12.4%)
19 (11.5%)
Maternal anxiety class (based on GAD-7)
maternal_anxiety_class
No anxiety
488 (38.8%)
53 (32.1%)
0.0434 *
Mild anxiety
360 (28.6%)
44 (26.7%)
Moderate anxiety
155 (12.3%)
31 (18.8%)
Severe anxiety
99 (7.9%)
18 (10.9%)
Missing
156 (12.4%)
19 (11.5%)
Table A.15: Before 2023 - Comparison of maternal mental health outcomes between women with and
without PCOS.
Table A.16: Maternal mental health conditions, after 2023
After 2023
No PCOS
(N=1206)
PCOS
(N=160)
P-value
Major depression index (MDI, from 0-50)
maternal_major_depression
Mean (SD)
17.4 (10.2)
20.7 (11.0)
0.00128 **
Median [Min, Max]
15.0 [0, 47.0]
21.0 [1.00, 46.0]
Missing
325 (26.9%)
33 (20.6%)
Maternal depression class (based on MDI)
maternal_depression_class
No depression
751 (62.3%)
91 (56.9%)
0.00184 **
Mild depression
33 (2.7%)
9 (5.6%)
Moderate depression
41 (3.4%)
12 (7.5%)
Severe depression
56 (4.6%)
15 (9.4%)
Missing
325 (26.9%)
33 (20.6%)
Perceived stress scale (PSS, from 0-40)
maternal_perceived_stress
Mean (SD)
18.5 (7.02)
20.3 (7.55)
0.0109 *
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
91
==PAGE:97==
Median [Min, Max]
19.0 [0, 36.0]
20.0 [4.00, 37.0]
Missing
322 (26.7%)
33 (20.6%)
Maternal stress class (based on PSS)
maternal_stress_class
No
440 (36.5%)
52 (32.5%)
0.0773 .
Yes
444 (36.8%)
75 (46.9%)
Missing
322 (26.7%)
33 (20.6%)
General anxiety disorder
(GAD-7, from 0-21)
maternal_general_anxiety
Mean (SD)
6.55 (4.83)
7.76 (5.60)
0.0323 *
Median [Min, Max]
6.00 [0, 21.0]
7.00 [0, 21.0]
Missing
325 (26.9%)
33 (20.6%)
Maternal anxiety class (based on GAD-7)
maternal_anxiety_class
No anxiety
346 (28.7%)
42 (26.3%)
0.031 *
Mild anxiety
334 (27.7%)
43 (26.9%)
Moderate anxiety
128 (10.6%)
22 (13.8%)
Severe anxiety
73 (6.1%)
20 (12.5%)
Missing
325 (26.9%)
33 (20.6%)
Table A.16: After 2023 - Comparison of maternal mental health outcomes between women with and
without PCOS.
92
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
==PAGE:98==
A.4
Summary Tables for Variables in COPL Data, Stratified
by Data-based PCOS Diagnosis (Post-2023 Full-criteria
Model)
Table A.17: Measurements of basic characteristics
No PCOS indicated
(N=36)
PCOS indicated
(N=43)
P-value
Age at inclusion
merged_maternal_age_at_inclusion
Mean (SD)
35.4 (3.59)
31.6 (3.02)
<0.001 ***
Median [Min, Max]
34.6 [29.4, 43.0]
31.3 [26.0, 37.8]
BMI
merged_maternal_bmi
Mean (SD)
22.7 (2.59)
25.4 (5.47)
0.0616 .
Median [Min, Max]
22.6 [17.4, 29.4]
23.8 [19.2, 39.7]
Missing
1 (2.8%)
0 (0%)
BMI class
merged_maternal_bmi_class
Normal weight
30 (83.3%)
27 (62.8%)
0.0123 *
Obesity
0 (0%)
7 (16.3%)
Overweight
4 (11.1%)
9 (20.9%)
Underweight
1 (2.8%)
0 (0%)
Missing
1 (2.8%)
0 (0%)
Age at menarche
M_menarche
Mean (SD)
12.6 (1.61)
12.8 (1.37)
0.597
Median [Min, Max]
13.0 [9.00, 16.0]
13.0 [9.00, 15.0]
Infertility
Infertility
Tried <12 months
18 (50.0%)
27 (62.8%)
0.36
Tried >12 months
18 (50.0%)
16 (37.2%)
Time to pregnancy (months)
merged_time_to_pregnancy
Mean (SD)
13.1 (13.0)
13.0 (17.7)
0.531
Median [Min, Max]
9.50 [0, 48.0]
6.00 [0, 90.0]
Conception
Conception_Binary
Natural
22 (61.1%)
33 (76.7%)
0.277
Assisted
13 (36.1%)
10 (23.3%)
Missing
1 (2.8%)
0 (0%)
Donor oocyte used
merged_donor_g
No
36 (100%)
43 (100%)
NA
Donor sperm used
merged_donors_d
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
93
==PAGE:99==
No
34 (94.4%)
43 (100%)
0.204
Yes
2 (5.6%)
0 (0%)
Caesarean section
M_sectio
No
34 (94.4%)
41 (95.3%)
1
Yes
2 (5.6%)
2 (4.7%)
Euploid
Euploid
No
18 (50.0%)
20 (46.5%)
0.951
Yes
14 (38.9%)
18 (41.9%)
Missing
4 (11.1%)
5 (11.6%)
Proteomics at inclusion
omics_prot_w_incl
No
36 (100%)
43 (100%)
NA
Proteomics at follow up
omics_prot_w_fu
No
36 (100%)
43 (100%)
NA
Proteomics for male partner
omics_prot_m
No
36 (100%)
43 (100%)
NA
Table A.17: Basic characteristics of the participants, including fertility parameters, and information on
proteomics data availability. Stratified by full-criteria-based PCOS diagnosis status.
Table A.18: PCOS clinical features
No PCOS indicated
(N=36)
PCOS indicated
(N=43)
P-value
Acne
merged_acne
No
26 (72.2%)
28 (65.1%)
1
Yes
10 (27.8%)
10 (23.3%)
Missing
0 (0%)
5 (11.6%)
Acne treatment
merged_acne_treat
No
8 (22.2%)
8 (18.6%)
1
Yes
2 (5.6%)
2 (4.7%)
Missing
26 (72.2%)
33 (76.7%)
Ferriman-Gallwey score
M_Ferrimann_Gallwey
Mean (SD)
6.97 (4.36)
10.4 (5.49)
0.00373 **
Median [Min, Max]
6.50 [0, 20.0]
10.0 [0, 25.0]
Missing
0 (0%)
5 (11.6%)
Cycle type
M_Cycle
Long Cycle
1 (2.8%)
18 (41.9%)
<0.001 ***
No Cycle
1 (2.8%)
4 (9.3%)
94
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
==PAGE:100==
Regular Cycle
34 (94.4%)
21 (48.8%)
Cycle length
M_Cycle_length
Mean (SD)
29.8 (3.04)
34.4 (7.74)
<0.001 ***
Median [Min, Max]
29.5 [25.0, 36.0]
32.5 [25.0, 69.0]
Missing
0 (0%)
3 (7.0%)
Antral follicle count (right)
afc_right
Mean (SD)
11.0 (6.66)
22.2 (7.12)
<0.001 ***
Median [Min, Max]
10.0 [3.00, 31.0]
22.0 [4.00, 35.0]
Missing
1 (2.8%)
1 (2.3%)
Antral follicle count (left)
afc_left
Mean (SD)
11.3 (6.90)
20.9 (6.76)
<0.001 ***
Median [Min, Max]
9.00 [1.00, 30.0]
20.0 [5.00, 40.0]
Missing
0 (0%)
1 (2.3%)
Antral follicle count (total)
afc_total
Mean (SD)
22.0 (12.9)
43.0 (12.0)
<0.001 ***
Median [Min, Max]
20.0 [4.00, 57.0]
42.0 [10.0, 73.0]
Missing
1 (2.8%)
1 (2.3%)
Table A.18: Key PCOS-related characteristics, stratified by PCOS diagnosis (full criteria).
Table A.19: Hormonal profiles
No PCOS indicated
(N=36)
PCOS indicated
(N=43)
P-value
Total T (nmol/L)
testoan
Mean (SD)
0.892 (0.416)
1.52 (0.683)
<0.001 ***
Median [Min, Max]
0.865 [0.300, 2.04]
1.48 [0.380, 3.12]
Missing
12 (33.3%)
20 (46.5%)
Free T (nmol/L)
TESTOFRI
Mean (SD)
0.0138 (0.00647)
0.0235 (0.00982)
<0.001 ***
Median [Min, Max]
0.0100 [0.0100, 0.0300]
0.0200 [0.0100, 0.0400]
Missing
12 (33.3%)
20 (46.5%)
SHBG (nmol/L)
SHBG
Mean (SD)
64.4 (30.3)
61.2 (33.6)
0.743
Median [Min, Max]
59.4 [19.5, 122]
60.1 [14.0, 144]
Missing
13 (36.1%)
23 (53.5%)
AMH (pmol/L)
AMH
Mean (SD)
19.3 (15.8)
63.0 (40.5)
<0.001 ***
Median [Min, Max]
17.0 [-0.980, 69.0]
59.0 [6.40, 157]
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
95
==PAGE:101==
Missing
1 (2.8%)
24 (55.8%)
AMH elevated
AMH_elevated_ref
No
34 (94.4%)
9 (20.9%)
<0.001 ***
Yes
1 (2.8%)
10 (23.3%)
Missing
1 (2.8%)
24 (55.8%)
LH (IU/L)
LH
Mean (SD)
8.42 (4.99)
15.5 (16.8)
0.0111 *
Median [Min, Max]
7.30 [1.60, 22.8]
12.4 [2.60, 88.8]
Missing
11 (30.6%)
19 (44.2%)
FSH (IU/L)
FSH
Mean (SD)
6.15 (3.35)
5.85 (3.74)
0.552
Median [Min, Max]
6.10 [1.40, 14.3]
5.50 [1.20, 20.9]
Missing
5 (13.9%)
20 (46.5%)
LH:FSH ratio
merged_LH_FSH_ratio
Mean (SD)
1.61 (0.949)
2.54 (0.950)
<0.001 ***
Median [Min, Max]
1.42 [0.457, 4.79]
2.30 [1.12, 4.25]
Missing
12 (33.3%)
20 (46.5%)
17-OHP (nmol/L)
HYPRO17
Mean (SD)
2.03 (1.78)
3.29 (2.46)
0.0324 *
Median [Min, Max]
1.19 [0.0100, 6.78]
2.15 [0.740, 9.16]
Missing
12 (33.3%)
20 (46.5%)
E2 (nmol/L)
ESTRA
Mean (SD)
0.372 (0.346)
0.415 (0.412)
0.873
Median [Min, Max]
0.270 [0.0600, 1.58]
0.250 [0.0100, 1.79]
Missing
3 (8.3%)
22 (51.2%)
Table A.19: Hormonal profile of participants stratified by PCOS status (full criteria) for post-2023 cohort.
Table A.20: Comorbidities and thyroid ultrasound findings
No PCOS indicated
(N=36)
PCOS indicated
(N=43)
P-value
Has diabetes
M_Diabetes
No
36 (100%)
43 (100%)
NA
Has type 1 diabetes
M_Diabetes_type_1
No
36 (100%)
43 (100%)
NA
Has type 1 diabetes
M_Diabetes_type_2
No
36 (100%)
43 (100%)
NA
96
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
==PAGE:102==
Has hypertension
M_Hypertension
No
33 (91.7%)
42 (97.7%)
0.326
Yes
3 (8.3%)
1 (2.3%)
Has hypothyroidism
M_Hypothyroidism
No
36 (100%)
42 (97.7%)
1
Yes
0 (0%)
1 (2.3%)
Has hyperthyroidism
M_Hyperthyroidism
No
36 (100%)
41 (95.3%)
0.498
Yes
0 (0%)
2 (4.7%)
Has ever had CVD
M_CVD
No
34 (94.4%)
43 (100%)
0.204
Yes
2 (5.6%)
0 (0%)
Systolic BP at inclusion (mmHg)
M_bt_sys_bl
Mean (SD)
118 (11.3)
120 (14.1)
0.679
Median [Min, Max]
114 [100, 150]
117 [95.0, 158]
Missing
7 (19.4%)
6 (14.0%)
Diastolic BP at inclusion (mmHg)
M_bt_dia_bl
Mean (SD)
74.7 (8.49)
78.5 (11.0)
0.11
Median [Min, Max]
73.0 [59.0, 90.0]
79.0 [56.0, 100]
Missing
7 (19.4%)
6 (14.0%)
Systolic BP at follow up (mmHg)
M_bt_sys_fu
Mean (SD)
117 (10.8)
121 (13.2)
0.228
Median [Min, Max]
117 [101, 150]
123 [88.0, 142]
Missing
1 (2.8%)
4 (9.3%)
Diastolic BP at follow up (mmHg)
M_bt_dia_fu
Mean (SD)
78.9 (7.94)
79.2 (12.1)
0.893
Median [Min, Max]
78.0 [64.0, 100]
79.0 [41.0, 108]
Missing
1 (2.8%)
4 (9.3%)
TG volume (right)
thy_right_vol
Mean (SD)
5770 (3130)
5900 (3780)
0.948
Median [Min, Max]
4840 [1880, 16300]
5230 [59.6, 20800]
Missing
3 (8.3%)
6 (14.0%)
TG volume (left)
thy_left_vol
Mean (SD)
4760 (2040)
5470 (3070)
0.354
Median [Min, Max]
4090 [2200, 9800]
5010 [46.5, 16200]
Missing
4 (11.1%)
7 (16.3%)
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
97
==PAGE:103==
TG volume (total)
thy_total_vol
Mean (SD)
10600 (4960)
11400 (6460)
0.482
Median [Min, Max]
9420 [4370, 25200]
11000 [106, 33800]
Missing
4 (11.1%)
7 (16.3%)
TG nodules (right)
thy_right_nod_num
0
25 (69.4%)
31 (72.1%)
0.761
1
7 (19.4%)
5 (11.6%)
>1
1 (2.8%)
1 (2.3%)
Missing
3 (8.3%)
6 (14.0%)
TG nodules (left)
thy_left_nod_num
0
29 (80.6%)
33 (76.7%)
0.29
1
3 (8.3%)
1 (2.3%)
>1
0 (0%)
2 (4.7%)
Missing
4 (11.1%)
7 (16.3%)
Echogenicity of the TG
thy_ekko
Normal light gray
29 (80.6%)
23 (53.5%)
0.038 *
Slightly reduced
3 (8.3%)
11 (25.6%)
Moderately hypo-echogenic
0 (0%)
2 (4.7%)
Pseudonodular
1 (2.8%)
1 (2.3%)
Missing
3 (8.3%)
6 (14.0%)
Table A.20: Clinical comorbidity profile and thyroid characteristics of participants, stratified by PCOS
diagnosis status (based on full criteria). BP = blood pressure. TG = thyroid gland.
Table A.21: Mental health characteristics of participants
No PCOS indicated
(N=36)
PCOS indicated
(N=43)
P-value
Major depression index (MDI, from 0-50)
maternal_major_depression
Mean (SD)
19.8 (12.5)
21.0 (10.6)
0.428
Median [Min, Max]
17.0 [6.00, 47.0]
19.0 [3.00, 40.0]
Maternal depression class (based on MDI)
maternal_depression_class
No depression
30 (83.3%)
31 (72.1%)
0.289
Mild depression
0 (0%)
3 (7.0%)
Moderate depression
1 (2.8%)
4 (9.3%)
Severe depression
5 (13.9%)
5 (11.6%)
Perceived stress scale (PSS, from 0-40)
maternal_perceived_stress
Mean (SD)
21.9 (6.72)
20.2 (7.86)
0.302
Median [Min, Max]
20.5 [10.0, 35.0]
20.0 [4.00, 37.0]
Maternal stress class (based on PSS)
98
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
==PAGE:104==
maternal_stress_class
No
14 (38.9%)
16 (37.2%)
1
Yes
22 (61.1%)
27 (62.8%)
General anxiety disorder
(GAD-7, from 0-21)
maternal_general_anxiety
Mean (SD)
7.81 (5.37)
7.26 (5.39)
0.625
Median [Min, Max]
6.00 [1.00, 21.0]
6.00 [0, 18.0]
Anxiety class (based on GAD-7)
maternal_anxiety_class
No anxiety
12 (33.3%)
15 (34.9%)
0.987
Mild anxiety
14 (38.9%)
16 (37.2%)
Moderate anxiety
4 (11.1%)
6 (14.0%)
Severe anxiety
6 (16.7%)
6 (14.0%)
Table A.21: Overview of self-reported maternal mental health measures, stratified by PCOS diagnosis
(full criteria).
Table A.22: Family health history of participants
No PCOS indicated
(N=36)
PCOS indicated
(N=43)
P-value
Near family with PCOS
M_Family_PCOS
No
35 (97.2%)
40 (93.0%)
0.621
Yes
1 (2.8%)
3 (7.0%)
Near family with type 2 diabetes
M_Family_Diabetes2
No
27 (75.0%)
29 (67.4%)
0.626
Yes
9 (25.0%)
14 (32.6%)
Near family with CVD
M_Family_Cardiovascular
No
31 (86.1%)
30 (69.8%)
0.146
Yes
5 (13.9%)
13 (30.2%)
Near family with hypothyroidism
M_Family_Hypothyroid
No
32 (88.9%)
39 (90.7%)
1
Yes
4 (11.1%)
4 (9.3%)
Near family with hyperthyroidism
M_Family_Hyperthyroid
No
34 (94.4%)
41 (95.3%)
1
Yes
2 (5.6%)
2 (4.7%)
Table A.22: Overview of reported family history of selected metabolic, endocrine, and cardiovascular
conditions, stratified by PCOS diagnosis (full criteria).
Characterization and Molecular Analysis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Using Proteomics
99
==PAGE:105==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Ørsteds Plads, Building 345C
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.healthtech.dtu.dk
