==PAGE:1==
Lunar 3D Construction Printing: Establishing
a processability window for laser processing
of regolith simulants
Master Thesis
Author: Emma Therese Porsbjerg
Supervisor: M. Bayat
Co-supervisors: V. Nadimpalli, N. Ranjbar, C. Budden
DTU Construct
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Lunar 3D Construction Printing: Establishing a processability window for laser pro-
cessing of regolith simulants
Master Thesis
Master Thesis
July, 2025
By
Emma Therese Porsbjerg
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Emma Therese Porsbjerg, 2025
Published by:
DTU, Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering, Koppels Allé,
Building 404, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
https://construct.dtu.dk/
==PAGE:4==
Approval
Emma Therese Porsbjerg - s184751
Signature
Date
ii
Lunar 3D Construction Printing: Establishing a processability window for laser processing of regolith
simulants
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Additive manufacturing using lunar regolith has emerged as a promising strategy for en-
abling sustainable infrastructure on the Moon. This thesis explores the feasibility of laser
powder bed fusion (LPBF) of highland-type lunar regolith simulant (LHS-1) at an under-
represented scale, using layer heights of 1–2.5mm. A dual-track approach is employed:
An engineering study investigates the processability window through parametric varia-
tion and mechanical testing, while a fundamental research track focuses on melt pool
dynamics via in-situ monitoring. Print fidelity and strength were evaluated using optical
microscopy, compression testing, and X-Ray Dispersive spectroscopy. In-situ monitor-
ing in the form of high-speed, SWIR, and IR video revealed plume behavior and spatter
patterns linked to laser-material coupling states. The results demonstrate that process
stability and part integrity are highly sensitive to energy input. Observations suggest that
spatter frequency may serve as a qualitative proxy for melt pool stability, with implica-
tions for future closed-loop control. This work establishes one of the first comprehensive
processability maps for macro-scale LPBF of lunar regolith and contributes novel insights
toward scalable lunar additive manufacturing. Samples with compressive yield strength of
50MPa could be produced reliably, further supporting the use of laser processed regolith
as a construction material.
Lunar 3D Construction Printing: Establishing a processability window for laser processing of regolith
simulants
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgments
My first introduction to materials science was exactly one year ago. Coming from a back-
ground in Automation and Robotics, I knew next to nothing about ceramics, material char-
acteristics, and phase analysis, and so this past year has been full of hand holding and
gently worded lessons in materials for dummies. I want to dedicate this thesis to all the
people who made it possible, who on no occasion questioned why I would choose a topic
so far from my specialization even when I had to ask for hours of their time helping me
catch up, and who never doubted that I could carry out the project. Writing this thesis has
been a joy because of you.
I especially want to thank my supervisors:
Mohamad Bayat, your enthusiasm for additive manufacturing has been an inspiration and
your expertise within the field invaluable. Providing everything from lessons in laser pro-
cessing to sparing and funding, you truly enabled the success of this thesis work. Your
unwavering support and your trust in me allowed be tackle a project which I might not
otherwise of dared.
Venkata Nadimpalli, thank you for once again letting me strew sand all over the AM lab
and for sharing your expertise with me. You ask the right questions and your sharp in-
sights provided much value.
Navid Ranjbar, for your providing your expertise on mechanical testing and providing the
required facilities.
Christian Leslie Budden, for entrusting me with your SLS machine which allowed this
project to hit the ground running. Without your welcome into the AM lab and your guid-
ance I would not have been able produce the same amount of results.
Marion Caroline Defer, your advice and your support in the lab has been completely in-
valuable. You gave the me push I needed to go for the special course which would go
on to enable this project, and have seen me through everything. Without you this thesis
would not exist.
Dan Meng, for your guidance and supervision in geopolymer and embedding as well as
compressive strength testing.
iv
Lunar 3D Construction Printing: Establishing a processability window for laser processing of regolith
simulants
==PAGE:7==
Contents
1
Introduction
2
1.1
Project objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Project plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Theoretical background
5
2.1
Motivations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Material . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Additive manufacturing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
Laser Powder Bed Fusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.5
In-situ monitoring . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3
Experimental Basis
19
3.1
Material analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3.2
System Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
4
Parametric Study
23
4.1
Design of Experiment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.2
Parametric study results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.3
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
5
Phases and Microstructure of Sample p11_s07
31
5.1
Macro structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
5.2
Microstructure observed by LOM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
5.3
SEM-EDS Analysis - Elemental Mapping
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
5.4
X-Ray Diffraction - Identification of Phases
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
5.5
Summary of EDS and XRD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
6
In-situ Monitoring
39
6.1
Monitoring setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
6.2
Infrared Video . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
6.3
Short-Wave Infra Red Video . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
6.4
Ultra High Speed Imagery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
6.5
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
7
Benchmark Geometries
49
7.1
Design of LRS Macro-LPBF Benchmark Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
7.2
Dross Experiment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
7.3
Printing on A Substrate
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
8
Conclusion
55
8.1
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
A System Architecture Figure
57
B Geopolymer recipe
58
C Log book
59
Lunar 3D Construction Printing: Establishing a processability window for laser processing of regolith
simulants
1
==PAGE:8==
1
Introduction
The Moon is increasingly seen not just as a destination, but as a platform for research,
deeper space exploration, and international collaboration. Lunar exploration has entered
a new era, with major space agencies once again actively pursuing the return of humans
to the Moon - this time to stay and establish a lunar economy [1]. NASA’s Artemis pro-
gram is aiming to land the first woman and the next man on the Moon in mid 2027, and
eventually establish a sustainable presence on the lunar south pole. Artemis is backed
by international partnerships through the Artemis Accords, with contributions from ESA
(European Space Agency), JAXA (Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency), and the Cana-
dian Space Agency, among others [2],[3]. China’s Chang-E program has also achieved
several successful robotic missions as part of the ambitious plans for a lunar presence,
and plan to land their first crewed mission by the end of the 2030’s.
This new lunar agenda will require large-scale infrastructure of likes which we currently
lack the technology to produce [3]. Vertical take-off vertical-landing (VTVL) pads will be
necessary for deflecting rocket plumes which accelerate the razor sharp regolith particles
to dangerous velocities[4], as will dust mitigation surfaces allowing movement without
damage to vehicles and EVA suits. Habitats will need to protect against radiation and
micro-meteorite impacts to enable long term missions and here regolith is the most avail-
able resource for constructing such a shield [5].
Laser processed lunar regolith simulant (LRS) has shown great potential as a building
material that requires only local materials, regolith and sunlight. Several studies present
laser powder bed fusion (LPBF) processed LRS with compressive yield strength com-
parable to Portland cement, and the LPBF method has been shown to be possible in
vacuum. However, the majority of LRS LPBF research doesn’t scale. The focus is on
small components for which there is no demand and the dynamics of larger scale print-
ing are largely ignored. This work introduces the term ”Macro LPBF” to describe LPBF
processes with layer heights of >=1 mm. Most existing studies employ layer heights of
100-200µm, more comparable to conventional metal LPBF printing than what is actually
needed for infrastructure build-up on the Moon. Closing this research gap is the next step
towards realizing lunar infrastructure.
1.1
Project objectives
The primary objectives of the current thesis are defined as follows:
1. Conducting a parametric study on multi-layer laser-processing of lunar regolith sim-
ulant to establish a process window
2. Microstructure and mechanical analysis of manufactured samples
3. In-situ operando monitoring of the process to better understand the melting behavior
of lunar regolith simulant, spatter formation, as well as an evaluation of the feasibility
of using the data for closed-loop feedback
4. Designing a down-sized benchmark model that serves to standardize the evaluation
of laser-based additive manufacturing (AM) of lunar regolith simulant for construc-
tion purposes
2
Lunar 3D Construction Printing: Establishing a processability window for laser processing of regolith
simulants
==PAGE:9==
1.2
Project plan
This project builds upon a prior project completed by the author, titled ”Effect of processing
parameters on the microstructure and mechanical properties of additively manufactured
lunar regolith simulant components”. In the prior work, the first of its type in Denmark,
single-layer samples were produced using the same process and material as is employed
for this thesis work. The project also included a literature review, which, along with the ex-
perimental results, serves as a feasibility study for this thesis. As such, the master thesis
project could begin with transferring the identified process parameters from the old print-
ing system to the system to be used for this work before commencing the experimental
campaign.
The project is divided into three major phases:
1. Parametric study of multi-layer printing (engineering track).
2. Ex-situ characterization of samples (hybrid engineering and fundamental research
track).
3. In-situ monitoring of printing process (fundamental research track).
Following the conceptualize, design, implement, observe (CDIO) regime, this is a cyclical
process where the results inform the next iteration. For example, a print test is conducted
based on a literature review. The samples are then analyzed ex-situ. The most interesting
parameters are tested again, this time with in-situ monitoring. An interesting phenomenon
is observed during printing, and the next print test is designed to further explore this phe-
nomenon.
1.2.1
Two tracks
This field of study is still young and there are many knowledge gaps. There is a lack of
established best manufacturing approaches and characterization methods, and as such
many studies employ a trial and error methodology which lead to small sample sets and
results which are difficult to compare across the board. Despite this lack of fundamental
understanding of the regolith LPBF process, there is an encroaching demand for ISRU
construction methods and LPBF is often cited as the most promising. In order to reflect
this need for fundamental research concurrently with the acceleration of the technology
readiness level (TRL) of regolith LPBF, this project is organized into two tracks.
Fundamental research track: This track aims to improve the understanding of the fun-
damental behavior of the LRS LPBF process, such as laser-material interaction, melt pool
dynamics and plume- and ejecta dynamics. In-situ monitoring via high speed imaging is
the main approach used to achieve this.
Engineering track: This track takes a more pragmatic and empirical approach, and the
goal is to simply produce the best results in terms of process stability, strength of produced
samples, and build-rate efficiency - the so-called process window identification. Visual in-
spection and compressive strength tests are selected as the main criteria to guide the
parameter choices for achieving a sound print test. The parametric study (process pa-
rameter variation) is the main part of this track.
Lunar 3D Construction Printing: Establishing a processability window for laser processing of regolith
simulants
3
==PAGE:10==
4
Lunar 3D Construction Printing: Establishing a processability window for laser processing of regolith
simulants
==PAGE:11==
2
Theoretical background
2.1
Motivations
The goal of the Artemis program is to lay the groundwork for a sustained long-term pres-
ence in the form of a permanent base, which will be a center of an envisioned lunar econ-
omy [2]. The goal to establish a lunar economy is what sets the 21st century space race
apart from that of the 70’s where the US and USSR competed to reach the Moon. Now,
topics like refueling for solar-system exploration, deep space exploration stations, and
the extraction of rare earth minerals for use on Earth are on the agenda. These activities
require a host of new technologies that currently do not exist, or are in very early devel-
opment stages. They will also require a permanent human presence which raises the
question: How can we keep humans safe and healthy in such as extreme environment?
2.1.1
Moon village
The moon’s surface is a harsh environment, harsher even than open space. The moon
has no magnetic field to protect against the solar winds and cosmic radiation present
in outer space, nor any atmosphere to provide a pressurized environment. The lunar
day-night cycle is 28 Earth days long, resulting in temperatures ranging from -233 to
123 degrees Celsius [6]. The regolith dust is extremely abrasive and electrostatically
charged, which poses a great risk to personnel, machinery, and instruments. In addition
to this, the fine dust components are likely toxic to humans [7]. Meteorite impact and
moon quakes add further risk to a long-duration surface mission [8]. Shelter will not only
be a requirement for human crew, but also for protecting the vast systems needed to keep
the crew alive.
Protective shelters and infrastructure require mass. Cost of landing a kilo of payload
on the moon is around 1 million USD and is projected to stay in this order for decades
to come. This makes ISRU a strict necessity and the best shelter one that can be built
from local materials only. These requirements must inform design decisions and research
approaches right down to the construction materials.
Habitat designs
All options for producing building material by ISRU, whether geopolymer or vitrified re-
golith, result in brittle materials with very low tensile strength. Regardless of these chal-
lenges, a wide array of concepts have been proposed that leverage the material’s high
compressive strength by designing with vaulting, buttressing, and gravity-assisted inter-
locking.
Yuan et al. [9] takes inspiration from marine shells in their design of structures which fea-
ture ribbed, waffle-like vaults that diffuse loads efficiently across sintered regolith shells-
This bio-mimetic approach merges form and function, leveraging low-resolution SLS to
craft robust shells capable of radiation shielding and micro-meteoroid protection. A simi-
lar architecture proposal from Bjarke Ingels Group’s and ICON is Project Olympus, which
envisions rib vaults where interlocking exterior ribs support regolith infill, exploiting 16% lu-
nar gravity to produce structures that are load-bearing and process efficient. These vaults
rely solely on compression, utilizing the strength of sintered regolith [10]. Figure 2.1 (a)
shows the habitats with its open cell vaults which are designed to hold loose regolith.
Other approaches take inspiration from ancient structures such as vaulting and corbelling.
Both methods use dry stacking, where the compressive force of the structure and the fric-
tion of the building elements remove the need for mortar or other binding material. These
Lunar 3D Construction Printing: Establishing a processability window for laser processing of regolith
simulants
5
==PAGE:12==
simple methods have been employed for thousands of years by various cultures around
the globe and many examples dating from neolithic times still stand to this date and the
end-products are more resistant to seismic activity and settling of the structure over time.
Woolf and Angel propose a massive pantheon-like structure which can house agricultural
areas as well as crew in one space. The 2000m2 space is protected by a corbelled struc-
ture made from cast regolith blocks, which is then covered with additional loose regolith
to protect from radiation and impacts [11]. Farries et al. [12] proposed a habitat wherein
an inflatable structure serves as a barrier to contain an atmospheric environment as well
as a scaffolding during the construction of a vaulted shell using selective laser melting
(SLM) - produced regolith bricks.
Hassell and Foster [13] designed a lunar village concept for ESA, which, similarly to Far-
ries et al., uses inflatable structures as the environmental barrier and scaffolding, but their
tetrapod building elements, inspired by wave crash barriers, are unique. These elements
will be piled up to form a shield, a disorganized and thus more robust and flexible means
of construction, see figure 2.1 (b).
a) Bjarke Ingels Group habitat design for NASA
in collaboration with ICON
[10]
b) Hassell’s modular lunar base
for the European Space Agency
[13]
Figure 2.1: Lunar habitat concepts
Build-rate will be one of the highest priorities in order to enable these large-scale struc-
tures. The proposed regolith shields for habitats clock in at between 400 m3 for minimum
crew sizes[14] to 100,000 m3 for village-sized concepts[11]. For a 400 m3 regolith shield,
the build rate would need to be around 1500cm3/min in order to complete the construc-
tion within a reasonable time frame of 6 months, that is given that the progress is ongoing
around the clock.
The Lunar South Pole
Potential permanent base locations are all located in the lunar south pole region. This
area has permanently shadowed regions inside the many craters, which may contain wa-
ter ice and other volatile elements that have remained shielded from the Sun for billions
of years [15] - critical to mission sustainability and of great interest to researchers. Along-
side these permanently shadowed areas, the south pole is also unique in due to having
locations that receive very nearly constant sunlight all year long. This indefinite energy
source would vastly improve the feasibility of a sustained presence as surviving the lunar
6
Lunar 3D Construction Printing: Establishing a processability window for laser processing of regolith
simulants
==PAGE:13==
night is a massive challenge.
Other criteria include diversity of local geology, direct line of sight for communication with
earth, and flat, stable terrain for landing and building. Based on these factors, potential
landing sites for NASA’s Artemis III mission have been selected using GIS data [16]. The
sites are shown in Figure 2.2.
Figure 2.2: Artemis III potential landing sites [16]
The lunar south pole is a highlands region. Highlands (or terrae) are the brights areas
which cover most of the moon while mare (or maria) make up the dark sections. Mare
regions are basaltic plains which have been formed due to volcanic activity after mas-
sive impacts which significantly altered the moon’s crust. Highlands are the ancient lunar
landscape that escaped this activity and are anorthositic in composition. Highlands are
shaped by massive craters which can reach kilometers in height and depth, it is a rugged
landscape which poses challenges to landers - but also hosts the permanently shadowed
and near-permanently lit areas which are so attractive.
2.2
Material
Regolith is the loose, powdery material that covers the surface of the moon. It is created
by impacting meteorites and then eroded by space weather radiation which gives the
grains a complex morphology with large surface area to volume ratios and sometimes
razor sharp edges as seen in Figure 2.3.
Highlands and mare regolith differ from each other due to the process by which they are
formed. Highlands regolith, eroded by billions of years of micro-meteorite impact and
space weather, is defined by its higher component of aluminum-oxide - >23% to the circa
15% in mare regolith. This bright mineral makes the regolith more reflective [18][17], thus
more difficult to do laser processing on. But as all the most promising landing sites are
Lunar 3D Construction Printing: Establishing a processability window for laser processing of regolith
simulants
7
==PAGE:14==
Figure 2.3: Micro-morphology of regolith gathered during Apollo 17[7]
Figure 2.4: The bidirectional reflectance spectra a) Apollo 12001 mare and b) Apollo
64801 highland lunar soil [17]
situated in the highlands of the lunar south pole, it seems most sensible to work with
highlands regolith.
The real lunar regolith is, of course, not obtainable in the quantities needed for additive
manufacturing testing. Instead, lunar regolith simulant (LRS) is used. An LRS can be
anything from simple mined basalt to manufactured mullite, but the best simulant types
are high fidelity types such JSC-A1 (Johnson Space Center A1, created by NASA but
no longer in production) or LHS-1 (Lunar Highland Simulant 1, produced by Exolith for
ESA but also commercially available). These materials accurately simulate the chemical
composition as well as the morphology of real lunar soil [19][18]. LHS-1 was selected as
the feedstock for the experimental campaign presented in this work and will be discussed
further in section 3.1.1. A selection of simulants are compared to highland regolith in Table
2.1.
8
Lunar 3D Construction Printing: Establishing a processability window for laser processing of regolith
simulants
==PAGE:15==
Table 2.1: Comparison of the chemical composition of Lunar soil 68501, a sample rep-
resentative of a highlands region [20], and some of the most used high-fidelity simulant
types: Mare simulant JSC-1A[21], highland simulant NU-LHT-2M [22], and highland sim-
ulant LHS-1[23], as well as mullite, an alumina silicate phase which shares similarities
with lunar soil and is used extensively in industry [24], used in a prior study of the group.
Lunar soil 68501
JSC-1A
NU-LHT-2M
LHT-1
Mullite
SiO2
45.10
47.71
46.70
49.12
35.70
TiO2
0.56
1.59
0.41
0.63
0.86
Al2O3
26.60
15.02
24.40
26.29
60.83
Cr2O3
-
0.04
-
-
-
Fe2O3
-
3.44
-
-
1.09
FeO
5.35
7.35
4.16
3.20
-
MnO
0.07
0.18
0.07
0.06
-
MgO
6.30
9.01
7.90
2.86
0.13
CaO
15.30
10.42
13.60
13.52
0.29
Na2O
0.46
2.70
1.25
2.55
0.39
K2O
0.12
0.82
0.08
0.34
0.19
P2O5
-
0.66
0.15
0.17
-
2.3
Additive manufacturing
Contour-crafting (CC), binder-jetting (BJ), direct energy deposition (DED) and laser pow-
der bed fusion (LPBF) are the four additive manufacturing (AM) methods typically pro-
posed for lunar construction. Contour crafting involves extruding a paste such as con-
crete; conventional hydraulic concrete is not compatible with the lunar environment, so
research is ongoing on alternatives. One option is geopolymer, which can be created
mostly from locally sourced materials, but for which curing is inhibited by extreme cold,
significantly limiting its strength[25]. Printing with molten regolith has been tested in a
vacuum and presented inherent challenges due to rapid cooling, causing thermal crack-
ing [26]. Sulfur concrete is a frequently proposed alternative to conventional concrete and
has its merits, but is challenged by the fact that sulfur sublimates in lunar day-time tem-
peratures, and studies have even showed that that cured sulfur concrete will erode due to
sublimation at a rate of 1 cm per 5 years [27],[28]. CC in general carries challenges such
as keeping the material alive in extreme cold and high vacuum, and ensuring consistent
deposition in low gravity[29].
BJ uses a liquid chemical to bind powder in layers by a chemical reaction. Cesaretti et al.
[30] presented the most thorough work on binder-jetting, more specifically the technology
known as D-shape, in which they leverage a reaction between magnesium oxide (MgO)
in the feedstock and the magnesium chloride water solution binder. This study found a
solution to the problem of the binder evaporation; injecting the binder a few millimeters
into the powder, allowing the binder to stay stable long enough for the reaction to occur.
However, the solution does rely on imported MgO - an astounishing amount of 3.8 tons
for a 250 ton shelter which can host a small crew, as well as locally sourced water [30].
DED is another powder-based AM method. Here, the powder is ejected onto a substrate
and melted in place using a laser. It requires no support material, and has been shown
Lunar 3D Construction Printing: Establishing a processability window for laser processing of regolith
simulants
9
==PAGE:16==
to work with regolith simulant as feedstock [31][32]. However, while metal wire-fed DED
works well in vacuum, powder-fed DED is not possible as it requires a carrier gas to move
the powder through the system. Carrier gas has been used for sample collection on the
moon, but using it for a continuous process would not be sustainable.
Figure 2.5: a) LPBF or SLM, b) DED, c) Contour crafting or fused deposition modelling
(FDM) [12]
2.4
Laser Powder Bed Fusion
In LPBF, layers of powder feedstock are sintered or melted together into consolidated lay-
ers using a laser. Although LPBF is typically associated with the manufacturing of metal
additive precision components, the process has been successfully applied to lunar regolith
simulant [33][22], including on a larger scale [34],[35], and using simulated sunlight as an
alternative to a laser [36],[37]. The LPBF method is truly ISRU enabled, requiring only
energy which can be harnessed from sunlight, and regolith. There appear to be little re-
quirements for the feedstock, as studies using a wide array of simulant types have shown
good results. Compared to geopolymer or binder jetting which require exact recipes and
a fine powder size, LPBF requires practically no pre-processing of feedstock at all. This
means that elements can be printed directly from- and on the naturally occurring regolith
floor. This is especially practical for VTVL (Vertical Takeoff Vertical Liftoff) pads and roads.
The LPBF process is contactless, meaning the active material is not handled by any hard-
ware like in the case of sulfur concrete or geopolymer where the material must be mixed
and deposited.
The process is thus less demanding of hardware and can simply be
paused and resumed in the case of a malfunction, without the risk of clogging the ma-
chinery.
2.4.1
Printing parameters and energy metrics
The LPBF process is typically defined by four first order printing parameters: Laser Power
P, scan velocity v, hatch-spacing h, and layer height lh. These variables are used to
calculate the energy input, usually called energy density or more specifically volumetric
energy density:
Ev =
P
v × h × l
[J/m3]
(2.1)
Energy input can sometimes refer to the layer-wise energy density, used for single-layer
processes:
10
Lunar 3D Construction Printing: Establishing a processability window for laser processing of regolith
simulants
==PAGE:17==
El =
P
v × h
[J/m2]
(2.2)
Higher energy density is linked to better particle melting and fusion, which enhances part
density and compressive yield strength [38]. However, excessive energy input can lead to
keyholing which concentrates stress and thermal cracking [39],[40]. Some studies corre-
late energy density negatively to part density, and attribute this relationship to evaporation
or denudation occurring at higher laser power [22],[41]. Despite the poor correlation be-
tween energy density and print outcomes, this metric remains the most commonly used
indicator of part quality due to the lack of a better alternative. As a result, print parame-
ters must be adapted to new systems or material compositions by a time-consuming and
laborious trial and error process.
Normalized Enthalpy
Energy density may be a misleading term, as this expression solely describes the energy
input (a more apt name). The energy that effectively contributes to the melt is dependent
on a number of material parameters, which the energy density equation does not take
into account. Normalized enthalpy ∆H describes the energy that is absorbed by the melt
pool, see equation 2.3, has been suggested as a more optimal rule for translating printing
parameters in metal LPBF [42].
∆H =
αP
ρ(C∆T + Lm)
√
πω3V D
[42]
(2.3)
Where α is absorptivity, ρ is density, C is the specific heat, ∆T is the difference between
the ambient temperature of the material and the melting point, Lm is the latent energy
of melting, ω is the beam waist diameter, v is the scan velocity and D is the diffusivity.
Several of these values are known for LHS-1 and LMS-1[43].
A major limitation of this model is the absorptivity which evolves over the solid and liquid
state of the material. Loose powder also has a much higher absorbance than bulk ma-
terial due to ingress of energy into void between particles, and larger particles are more
absorbent than smaller particles [17]. The absorptivity of LRS in its liquid state has not
been studied.
Residual Heat
Lunar regolith, being an aluminosilicate ceramic, has a very high specific heat capacity
and a very low thermal conductivity. Apollo samples have thermal conductivity in the order
of 10−3W/(mK) [43], many orders of magnitude lower than aluminum and copper.
The fundamental energy balance around the melt pool is:
˙Elaser = ˙Econduction + ˙Eradiation + ˙Econvection + ˙Estorage
(2.4)
Where ˙Econduction is downwards conduction into the layer below and literal conduction into
the powder at the sides. In a simplified case we can ignore lateral conduction. Radiation
and convection will also be assumed negligible.
Lunar 3D Construction Printing: Establishing a processability window for laser processing of regolith
simulants
11
==PAGE:18==
Conductive heat flux is driven by the cooling capacity and the thermal conductivity of the
material:
∇T = ∆T
Lch
= Tmelt −Tsubstrate
Lch
(2.5)
˙Econductive = −k∇T = −k∆T
Lch
(2.6)
Where k is the thermal conductivity and Lch is the characteristic length. As the residual
heat in the part increases, the cooling capacity goes down, leading to a further increase
in the stored energy in the melt pool.
It is apparent that the ceramic LPBF process is largely governed by this residual heat,
and as such it can be assumed that layer time will significantly influence the results.
Downwards conductance will also depend on the geometry of the substrate below or lack
thereof, entailing entirely different conditions for initializing a print on a powder bed, and
printing on an overhang- or bulk feature.
2.4.2
Plume-Spatter Dynamics and The Bernoulli Effect
When a high-power laser strikes a powder bed, the localized energy input can rapidly
heat the surface to the point of material vaporization rather than just melting. This sudden
vaporization creates a high-pressure vapor plume that expands outward from the laser
spot. The expansion of this plume generates a recoil pressure sometimes large enough
to induce a shock wave in the gas above the powder bed. This shock front accelerates
the surrounding gas and entrains nearby powder particles, reducing the pressure above
the powder surface due to the Bernoulli effect, which in turn pulls more particles into the
flow. This effect is exacerbated in low pressure environments, making the topic all the
more prevalent for lunar applications.
2.4.3
Melt Pool Dynamics
The Marangoni effect, a thermo-capillary driven flow phenomenon, plays a critical role
in melt pool dynamics during laser powder bed fusion. It arises from surface tension
gradients along the melt pool surface, i.e. flow from the hotter center of the track to the
cooler edges, causing molten material to flow up and outward. In metallic LPBF systems,
this mechanism helps stabilize the melt pool via convection. However, in the case of LRS,
the Marangoni effect is less well understood due to the complex and multiphase nature
of the material. Regolith simulants contain components with variable melting points, and
the overall molten state viscosity is much higher than for metals. One study employing
synchrotron X-ray imaging of an LRS LPBF process found what appeared to be a reversed
Marangoni flow based on movement of pores [44]. Regardless of whether the Marangoni
effect is reversed, weakened, or non-existent, the result is likely a more unstable melt
pool due to heat concentration in the center of the track.
2.4.4
Processability mapping
An alternative approach to energy metrics as a proxy for print quality are processability
maps. This is an empirical method in which print outcomes are categorized and displayed
on a map, typically with laser power and scan speed as the two axes.
Caprio et al. [22] performed a detailed parameter study on LPBF of the highland-type
simulant NU-LHT-2M. The process used laser powers ranging from 50 to 80 W and scan
speeds between 100 and 250 mm/s. Hatch spacing was kept constant at 75 µm, and
layer thickness at 150 µm, resulting in volumetric energy densities (VED) of 19–27 J/mm³.
Parameter maps were used to classify outcomes into ”no adherence”, ”stable deposition”,
and ”excessive energy”, see Figure 2.6.
12
Lunar 3D Construction Printing: Establishing a processability window for laser processing of regolith
simulants
==PAGE:19==
Figure 2.6: a) Multi-layer regolith simulant specimens, b) categorized process outcomes
on parameter chart which is laid out according to the physical layout of the experiment
[22]
Caprio’s samples had a compressive yield strength upwards of 31.4 MPa, comparable
to Portland cement (20–40 MPa). Interestingly, higher energy input led to lower strength
and increased porosity, contrary to typical LPBF trends. This was attributed to melt in-
stability and spatter at high powers. Substrate material significantly influenced results;
refractory clay substrates facilitated bonding and multi-layer growth, while attempts at
self-supporting printing (on loose powder) led to poor wetting and the formation of a sin-
gle, nearly spherical lump instead of the intended disk. A spiral hatching pattern may
have exacerbated this issue. An earlier study by Sitta and Lavagna [41], using similar
parameters and simulant, also observed a negative correlation between energy input and
compressive strength, likely due to overheating and melt instability at the high-energy end
of the feasible process window.
Goulas et al. [38, 33, 45] investigated LPBF of the mare-type simulant JSC-1A. Using a
hatch spacing of 250 µm (much larger than Caprio et al.) and laser power of 100 W with
a scan speed of 200 mm/s, the process operated at significantly lower Ev ( 7.5 J/mm³).
Layer thickness was typically 100–150 µm.
As expected, this resulted in higher porosity and lower mechanical performance, with
compressive yield strength ranging from 0.2 to 4.2 MPa. In contrast to Caprio et al.,
strength positively correlated with energy input within their lower-energy parameter win-
dow. This supports the hypothesis that the Caprio et al.’s window lies near or above the
upper stability threshold, while Goulas et al. operated below it.
Although the strength was lower, values such as 4.2 MPa are still comparable to masonry
bricks and are likely sufficient for lunar construction given the Moon’s 1/6 gravity. Addi-
tionally, low-strength samples failed gradually rather than catastrophically, which may be
beneficial in mitigating damage from impacts or overloads.
2.4.5
3D Additive construction
Mueller et al. [34] at NASA’s Swamp Works explored macro-scale LPBF using BP-1
basaltic simulant, classifying the technology as ”3D Additive Construction”. A 500 W fiber
laser was used to achieve large layer heights (up to 8.9 mm) and a build rate of 10 g/min,
orders of magnitude higher than conventional LPBF systems. Though mechanical test-
ing details are limited, the demonstration of bulk layer consolidation at scale is valuable.
Lunar 3D Construction Printing: Establishing a processability window for laser processing of regolith
simulants
13
==PAGE:20==
This stands as one of few macro LPBF examples, and the only example of >1 mm layers
height printing used to produce a free-standing 3D structure.
a) BP-1 hollow cone structure
b) BP-1 hollow ogive dome structure
Figure 2.7: Bench-top scale freestanding structures created by Swamp Works 3D Regolith
Construction process [34]
The focus here was not geometric fidelity, but proving feasibility of high-throughput regolith-
based additive construction with minimal energy and hardware complexity. Hatch strate-
gies and scan paths were adapted to large-scale geometries, sacrificing surface resolution
for throughput. Mueller defines 3D Additive Construction as the printing of larger struc-
tures, and suggest that such elements should have manufacturing tolerances in the order
of 3 to 6 mm.
Other examples of macro LPBF typically focus on the production of elements for dust
mitigation and VTVL (Vertical Take-off Vertical Landing) pads. These types of projects will
be the first cases of lunar construction while the much more complicated task of providing
shelter is realized by imported deployable habitats. The manufacturing of such elements
serve as a proof of technology which will enable ISRU construction of habitats. Gines-
Palomares et al. [35] demonstrated LPBF of interlocking paving elements using EAC-1A
simulant in ESA’s PAVER project. A 3 kW CO2 laser was employed with a spot diameter
of 45 mm, achieving layer thicknesses of 15 mm. Only three layers were used to produce
full-scale elements of 22 mm height and 250 mm length. Mechanical characterization
included hardness (Vickers hardness 150 HV) and bending strength (not compressive
strength), as the elements were not intended for load-bearing structures but rather for
passive dust mitigation surfaces.
Printing with concentrated sunlight may be a way to bypass the electrical inefficiency of
LPBF and the method has been shown to be feasible on a number of occasions [36]. A
study by Fatari and Meurisse et al. explored a novel method of fabricating interlocking
building elements from lunar regolith simulant (JSC-2A) using concentrated solar energy
in both ambient and vacuum conditions (150 mbar, low vacuum). Using a solar simula-
tor with a flux of 1.2MW/m2, the team produced bricks and components in 100µm tall
layers, which were then assessed via compression, bending tests, X￿ray tomography,
SEM, and density analysis. Under ambient conditions, the sintered samples achieved
densities around 1.70g/cm3 with compressive strength 2.5 MPa and Young’s modulus
14
Lunar 3D Construction Printing: Establishing a processability window for laser processing of regolith
simulants
==PAGE:21==
a) Interlocking geometries
b) Close-up of single track
Figure 2.8: Images of road elements produced as part of ESA’s PAVER study[35]
0.21 GPa—comparable to gypsum. Vacuum-based sintering yielded more porous, foam-
like structures with lower density ( 1.21g/cm3). They attributed this difference between
process outcomes to the lack of air convection in the vacuum environment and expect
better results to be possible with further tuning. This remains the only published study on
solar sintering of LRS in a vacuum environment.
2.4.6
Alternate scanning strategies
The vast majority of LPBF processes use a serpentine or unidirectional scanning strategy.
When printing square elements which are aligned to the scan direction, this simple ap-
proach is reliable. But when this is not the case, the timing between track can be irregular,
and this results in variable thermal conditions across the layer. Furthermore, parameters
tailored to one size of sample can yield entirely different results on another size of sample.
Wang et al. [40] solved this issue with a cell-like scanning pattern which ensures uniform
local area heating.
2.5
In-situ monitoring
In-situ- or operando monitoring such as high speed imaging and thermal imaging is nec-
essary for understanding the fundamental dynamics of laser-material interaction and melt
pool formation and their impact on surface irregularities or internal porosities.
Iantaffi et al. [44] presents the first ever example of synchrotron x-ray imaging depicting
laser-material interaction in a LRS LPBF process. In addition to observing a reverse
Marangoni effect as covered in Section 2.4.3, extreme spatter frequency was also linked
to excessive energy input. Shen et al. [46] used a high-speed camera to observe blob
formation and showed that a continuous track is best achieved when the scan speed is
selected such that the laser spot continuously heats the melt pool, allowing the melt pool
to contribute to the consolidation of new powder via thermal radiation. These are some
of the very few examples of in-situ monitoring in an LRS LPBF process, of which none
apply a quantitative analysis of the results.
In contrast, a large amount of research work has been dedicated to in-situ monitoring
of metal LPBF. Using high speed imagery and blob analysis, Li et al. [47] showed a
clear correlation of laser power to plume size and velocity of spatter, with both increasing
with higher power due to increased recoil pressure. Interestingly, the quantity of spatter
showed a non-linear relationship to laser power, with a dip at around 200W. This was at-
tributed to the fact that at the given layer height, at 200 W, the laser will deeply affect the
substrate, where more thermal energy is dissipated in the substrate, and thus less spatter
Lunar 3D Construction Printing: Establishing a processability window for laser processing of regolith
simulants
15
==PAGE:22==
forms. As the laser power increases further, the spatter frequency rises again. In other
words, they were able to detect the substrate interaction state from in-situ monitoring.
2.5.1
Closed-loop control
Aside from obtaining an understanding of the fundamental dynamics of an LPBF process,
in-situ monitoring is also a prerequisite for closed-loop control. In conventional metal alloy
LPBF manufacturing, the process is fairly predictable and good results can be achieved
with only proper parameter tuning. However, for construction 3D printing, a host of new
variables are altering the process in both the spatial- and time domain. Whether for Earth
based concrete 3D printing or lunar regolith 3D printing, variations in material quality and
environmental factors are unavoidable. Closed-loop control will be a requirement for any
system to produce consistent results.
Extracting data from images is processing-heavy, making it difficult to apply methods like
particle image velocimetry or blob analysis for real-time control [48]. Clever methods for
decoding the state of the process without requiring massive amounts of computational
power include the use of simple sensors or more abstract methods of processing the
data. Montazer and Rao were able to differentiate between a bulk or overhang section of
a printing process with a 79% fidelity, which is very close to the 83% they achieved using
a much more advanced high-speed camera. This was done using a spectral graph theo-
retic approach, wherein sensor data is converted into a lower dimension before performing
classification, which is both more efficient and accurate than using the data directly in a
neural network [49].
16
Lunar 3D Construction Printing: Establishing a processability window for laser processing of regolith
simulants
==PAGE:23==
Table 2.2: List of publications on single- and multi-layer LPBF of lunar regolith simulant which where referenced for the literature review. In
cases of multiple publications on this topic by the same author, the last publication or the one with the best results is selected for the table. For
reference, the results of this work are included.
Lunar 3D Construction Printing: Establishing a processability window for laser processing of regolith
simulants
17
==PAGE:24==
18
Lunar 3D Construction Printing: Establishing a processability window for laser processing of regolith
simulants
==PAGE:25==
3
Experimental Basis
This thesis is dedicates a chapter to each of four experimental topics, in which the method-
ology and results of each topic will be presented. Common for all experiments is the
feedstock and system architecture, which are presented in this chapter.
3.1
Material analysis
3.1.1
Material characteristics
The lunar regolith simulant LHS-1 was chosen due to it being the most available high fi-
delity simulant. LHS-1 is designed to replicate the geomechanical and geochemical char-
acteristics of the lunar highland terrain, which involves combining a number of crushed
rock sources. LHS-1 has been shown to match very well with highlands regolith samples
collected during Apollo and Luna missions [19]. The manufacturer also produces several
other variants of LHS with different particle size distributions and agglomerate content,
however, LHS-1 is the one which best matches the ”key soils” identified by the Lunar Soil
Characterization Consortium, see figure 3.1.
Figure 3.1: The particle size distribution of LHS-1 compared to real lunar soil from the
Lunar Soils Grain Size Catalog [19][50]
Table 3.1: Mineralogy of
LHS-1 [23]
Component
Wt.%
Anorthosite
74.4
Glass-rich Basalt
24.7
Ilmenite
0.4
Bronzite
0.3
Olivine
0.2
Table 3.2: Material Properties
Properties
Value
Mechanical
Mean particle size
87.95 ± 6.83µm [19]
Bulk density
1.34g/cm3 [19]
Maximum density
1.86g/cm3 [19]
Angle of repose
39.5° [19]
Thermal
Thermal Conductivity
0.003W/m · K [51]
Specific heat at 298K
0.75J/kgK [43]
Endothermic peaks
1190°C and 1380°C [52]
Liquidus temperature
1410°C [52]
Lunar 3D Construction Printing: Establishing a processability window for laser processing of regolith
simulants
19
==PAGE:26==
3.1.2
XRD of LHS-1 and Plume Deposit
Method
LHS-1 powder is crushed in an agate mortar until fine enough for suspension. The plume
deposit is collected from the print with a brush and petri dish. Both powders are then
suspended in ethanol and placed on carbon disks to ensure a good distribution of grain
orientation.
Results
Figure 3.2: XRD phase patterns of LHS-1 and condensed plume vapor which has been
collected from the print chamber.
The X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern of the raw LHS-1 simulant displays many low- to
medium-intensity peaks across the full 2θ range. According to the datasheet[23], LHS-1
is composed primarily of anorthosite (74.4 wt%), glass-rich basalt (24.7 wt%), and trace
quantities of olivine, ilmenite, and bronzite. However, the term anorthosite, not to be
confused with anorthite, refers to a rock type rather than a single mineral, and typically
consists of a mix of plagioclase feldspar (mainly anorthite) and minor mafic or oxide inclu-
sions. Additionally, the basaltic glass component may contain microcrystalline domains
or devitrified products that contribute to the complexity of the pattern.
As such, many of the small peaks in the powder scan are not attributable solely to the listed
minor phases but likely originate from a combination of structural variations within the
plagioclase solid solution series, crystalline domains in the glass-rich basalt, and unlisted
trace phases (0.9%wt. is not accounted for in the datasheet).
The plume deposit phase pattern is very similar to the LHS-1 pattern, and differences in
peak heights can potentially be attributed to non uniform distribution of particle orientation.
There is a slight increase in the amorphous hump between 20 and 35 2θ which indicate
vitrification. Most likely, the plume deposit was quenched when mingling with the air and
has recrystallized only partially.
3.2
System Architecture
The printer used for the experimental campaign is a binder-jetting system which has been
modified into a SLS printer. The system is intended for printing in polymer, and uses
a hopper and roller type re-coating system. A comprehensive system overview can be
found in ”Evolving the Landscape of Polymer Laser Powder Bed Fusion: Expanding Fron-
tiers in Process and Materials” by Christian Leslie Budden, the developer of the system. A
drawing of the system architecture can be found in Appendix A. For this work, the system
was modified by removing the bed heating lamps, and installing powder guides to enable
the printing of very tall layers.
20
Lunar 3D Construction Printing: Establishing a processability window for laser processing of regolith
simulants
==PAGE:27==
This section covers a few selected components of the printing system that impact the
printing process. The in-situ monitoring setup is covered in Chapter 6.
3.2.1
Substrate
Printing on loose powder or substrate-less printed was chosen for this experimental cam-
paign as the project focuses LPBF for construction applications. Here, requiring a sub-
strate that must be removed in the post-process step would have over-complicated the
manufacture of construction elements and excluded the option of printing loose elements
in place. Direct sintering of the ground for dust control or mining-less fabrication of con-
struction elements (some prime demands of LRS LPBF) also calls for further research.
Published studies utilize a wide array of different substrate types such as soda lime glass
[33], stainless steel coated with LRS [53], ceramic plates [35], and sintered LRS plates
[22]. Some studies concluded that a substrate is necessary for stable deposition [22]
while others have been successful at printing directly on loose powder [36] [54] [35].
The main challenge when printing directly on powder is achieving stable deposition of the
melt pool without causing denudation or balling effect. The balling effect happens when
surface tension transforms the melt pool into a row of spheres along the printing line,
and the low wettability of the feedstock prevents the melt pool from expanding along the
scanning direction of the laser. In fact, the thermal radiation of the melt pool may cause
the surrounding powder to retreat. When the laser spot no longer has contact with the
ball-shaped melt pool, a new ball can form. If scan speeds are too high, the distance
between the track and newly formed ball is too great for fusion to occur, which results in
a disjoined trace [46].
3.2.2
Re-coating System
Packing density has been observed to have a very major effect on single-layer elements
in previous work by the author, yet it is rarely discussed in the literature. The method
of re-coating, such as by roller or scraper, from a reservoir or hopper, will yield different
results. The system used in this project has a hopper and roller re-coating system with
counter rotation for improved packing density.
In order to ensure consistent coating, each layer is re-coated twice. The packing den-
sity was measured by zeroing the bed, then dosing and re-coating a 1 mm layer, and
weighing the deposited material. This yielded a density of 1.36g/cm3, slightly above the
uncompressed bulk density listed in the datasheet as 1.27g/cm3. This loose packing den-
sity will likely result in a large difference between the nominal layer height and the actual
layer height, as anorthosite has a solid density of about 2.6g/cm3 the 1 mm powder layer
may collapse into a 0.5 mm tall layer if fully melted. As such, the next actual layer height
will be 1.5 mm - a lag that will propagate up through a number of layers until reaching a
steady state.
3.2.3
Laser system
The following laser system has been selected for the sintering and melting process,
throughout the thesis worksLaser type: Nd:YAG 1064 nm fiber laser Beam type:
Gaussian, 150µm Frequency: 100 000 Hz
Lunar 3D Construction Printing: Establishing a processability window for laser processing of regolith
simulants
21
==PAGE:28==
22
Lunar 3D Construction Printing: Establishing a processability window for laser processing of regolith
simulants
==PAGE:29==
4
Parametric Study
The main objective of this part of the thesis was to improve the existing understanding of
the effect of processing parameters on the mechanical properties of LPBF printed LRS
samples. This will be achieved through a parametric study in which a large number of
samples are produced and analyzed. The challenge here lies in properly organizing the
selection of parameters, of which there are many combinations. It is known that mechan-
ical properties cannot be predicted by energy density alone but that each parameter may
have thresholds above which energy saturation occurs or below which a stable deposi-
tion cannot be maintained. The parametric study aims to identify these thresholds and
construct a processability window.
4.1
Design of Experiment
Samples are printed in sets of 8 or 16, in which each parameter set is repeated twice
such that one can be used for destructive compression testing and one is reserved for
light optical microscopy (LOM) analysis and eventually, archiving. For each print, only
one parameter is varied. The parameters to be investigated are: Laser power P, scan
speed v, hatch-spacing hs, and layer height lh.
Table 4.1: Overview of the printing parameters tested in the parametric study with each
row listing the parameters used for the given layer height.
Layer height lh [mm]
Power P [W]
Scan speed v [mm/s]
Hatch-spacing hs [µm]
0.1
120, 150
100
120, 150
0.5
150, 200
100, 200
105, 120, 150, 240
1.0
120-300
100, 200
30-240
1.5
300
100
30-240
2.0
300
100
30-240
2.5
300
100
30-120
An overview of the printing parameters tested are presented in table 4.1. A log book
containing the printing parameters of every individual sample can be found in Appendix
C.
4.2
Parametric study results
Over 200 samples were produced for the parametric study, covering a wide range of
process parameters. Early-stage investigations were focused on laser power and scan
speed, as is typical for LRS LPBF experimental campaigns. However, it was quickly
observed that the maximum power and minimum scan speed of the system, 300W and
100mm/s, were critical system limitations. Accordingly, the campaign was continued with
these parameters kept at their respective maximum and minimum to unlock the highest
possible linear energy density, and focus shifted to mapping the effects of hatch-spacing
and layer height instead. The sample set in which P = 300W and v = 100mm/s comprises
the majority of the parametric study, and unless otherwise stated, all samples discussed
will be using these settings.
Lunar 3D Construction Printing: Establishing a processability window for laser processing of regolith
simulants
23
==PAGE:30==
Figure 4.1 shows samples 1, 3, 5 and 7 from print 12. Their respective volumetric en-
ergy densities are 16.67J/mm3, 22.22J/mm3, 33.33J/mm3 and 66.67J/mm3 and the layer
height for all is 1.5 mm. The samples of a lower energy density have a better geometric
accuracy (based on a qualitative assessment of 4.1), but they also appear more porous.
A higher energy density results in a smooth, fully vitrified top, but very high energy density
also leads to an over-sized geometry.
Figure 4.1: Sample 1,3,5 and 7 from print 12 imaged from the side and top. This selection
of samples is very representative of a typical print outcome
a) Energy density Ev plotted against sam-
ple density ρ
b) Energy density Ev plotted against sam-
ple mass m
Figure 4.2: Energy density plotted against print outcomes
The pattern on the sides of the samples is a result of the 90° rotation per layer. As the
layer is printed, thermal energy builds up and results in a larger melt for the last track
which is apparent on the outside of the sample. This effect is especially prominent for
larger layer-wise energy densities and creates an illusion of very tall layers - in reality it is
just that every fourth layer is more prominent on any given side.
The side image of sample p12_s07 in figure 4.1 shows that the bottom is skewed. It was
not possible to identify the cause of this defect, but it was observed for the majority of
24
Lunar 3D Construction Printing: Establishing a processability window for laser processing of regolith
simulants
==PAGE:31==
samples printed with a high energy density and severity appeared correlated to energy
density. Potentially, the sample sank into the powder bed due to the shrinking of the
underlying powder in the intense residual heat of the sample. Powder shrinkage and
retreat at the sides of the sample could be identified by eye so certainly a similar effect
could be at play below the sample.
In Figure 4.2, energy density is plotted against sample density and weight. It is observed
that the density of the samples is positively correlated to energy density, reaching a
plateau at around 20J/mm3 above which the sample density no longer increases. The
weight of the components, however, continues to increase while going beyond the iden-
tified threshold of 20J/mm3, manifesting as an over-sized geometry.
4.2.1
Creating a Processability Map by Outcome Categorization
Through basic inspection, samples are divided into a number of categories (also visual-
ized in Figure 4.3):
• Unconsolidated: The sample crumbles when subject to light pressure.
• Inter-layer separation: The sample separates between layers when subject to light
pressure (delamination).
• Cracking: The sample exhibits thermal cracking across layers.
• No faults: The sample appears solid and coherent.
• Over-sized: The sample width and height exceed 3 and 5 mm over the input CAD
file dimensions, respectively.
Figure 4.3: Overview of the print outcome categorization based on basic inspections
The density of the sample is estimated by dividing the measured weight by the volume,
and the latter is found by measuring the height, width, and depth of the sample. While
not as accurate as pycnometry, this measurement served well to quickly evaluate a large
quantity of samples. In Figure 4.4, the outcomes are shown in a processability map, which
serves to visualize the processability window. Samples that fulfill the requirements for ge-
ometric accuracy are denoted by round markers. Over-sized samples are denoted by
square markers, as expected these cases appear at lower layer height and lower hatch-
spacing, i.e. for higher energy densities. Moving outward from the origin (lower left corner
of the plot), samples become less dense, denoted by a darker color. Going further out-
wards, samples exhibit layer separation (triangle marker) or are altogether unconsolidated
(X marker). In short, high energy density led to dense samples and lower energy densities
led to more porous samples. These results are in line with literature [38].
Figure 4.5 shows energy density Ev plotted against sample density ρ and uses color
scales to visualize which print parameter contributed to the outcomes.
Figure 4.5 a)
shows that the samples with the highest energy densities were those with a very low
Lunar 3D Construction Printing: Establishing a processability window for laser processing of regolith
simulants
25
==PAGE:32==
Figure 4.4: Processability map of all P = 300W v = 100mm/s samples. Marker shape
corresponds to the outcome category of the sample, color corresponding to the sample
density.
hatch-spacing, and that these samples do not efficiently achieve a high sample density.
Figure 4.5 b) shows that the best-performing samples are those with lower layer height.
a)
b)
Figure 4.5: Energy density Ev plotted against sample density ρ. In figure a), the markers
are color coded according to hatch spacing hs and in figure b) according to layer height
lh.
4.2.2
Internal Structure
Seven selected samples from the parametric study are cut and polished in order to ob-
serve the internal structure, with one being presented in Chapter 5 and the other six here.
The samples all have a layer thickness of 1 mm and represent a range of hatch-spacings
from 30 µm to 180 µm.
Sample Preparation
The samples are embedded in geopolymer in order to create flat surfaces for mounting
in the saw. This preparation was not available to all samples, so some where mounted
26
Lunar 3D Construction Printing: Establishing a processability window for laser processing of regolith
simulants
==PAGE:33==
as-is and suffered damage as a result. The saw uses a diamond blade and the cutting is
conducted at 2000 rpm with a progression of 0.15 mm/s.
Results
Figure 4.6: Parametric study samples cut for LOM. Sample 19_s05 (e) and 19_s07 (f)
were damaged during cutting as they were not embedded.
Figure 4.6 shows the samples ordered by energy density from left to right. The samples
with the lowest energy density, p21_s03 at 16.67J/mm3 shows inter-layer voids due to
lack of fusion. It also has more round pores stemming from keyhole formation or vapor-
ization than the other samples. These features give an indication of layer boundaries in
some places, but mostly there is no distinction between layers. The following samples
become denser as energy density goes up and appear almost completely smooth and
black. Sample p19_s05 is the last in the lineup to exhibit the smooth, black texture at
the sides where the sample touched the powder. At higher energy densities, the samples
begin to form a gray rim with a higher occurrence of spherical pores. Sample p19_s05 is
also the first sample to show formation of a distinct core, also appearing as a gray, opaque
texture which contrasts with the black glassy majority of the sample. The sample with the
highest energy density, p19_s07 at 100J/mm3 has a much larger core feature. This sam-
ple is printed with the same parameters as p11_07 which is analyzed in depth in Chapter 5.
The core feature of sample p19_s07 is shown in Figure 4.7 as a composite panorama
LOM image. The feature has a layered, scalloped texture which does not correspond to
the sample layers. Cracks either originate or terminate at the boundaries of the feature,
indicating that it may be harder than the rest of the sample. The feature is consistent with
sample p11_s07 printed using the same parameters.
4.2.3
Compressive strength testing of select samples
The compressive yield strength of a construction material is a critical measurement. Fol-
lowing the engineering track, compressive strength testing was conducted on a selecting
of samples from the parametric study.
Sample preparation
For compression testing, the samples are not cut but are kept as-is in order to avoid weak-
ening them. A geopolymer interface plate is cast onto the top and bottom of the sample
in order to have flat and parallel faces for mounting the sample in the compressive yield
strength testing machine. The geopolymer recipe and curing procedure is documented in
Appendix B.
Lunar 3D Construction Printing: Establishing a processability window for laser processing of regolith
simulants
27
==PAGE:34==
Figure 4.7: Composite panorama LOM image of Sample 19_s07 showing the core feature.
Results
Sub-optimal interface plates led to uneven strain on many of the samples, causing them
to crumble rather than fail as expected for the material. These are the curves in Figure 4.8
which exhibit no sharp peak. The compression tests which were successful show a clear
pattern, the material has a high compressive yield strength and little to no elasticity, as
expected for a glassy ceramic. The best performing sample p14_s04 had a compressive
yield strength of 67.36 MPa, over twice as high as the best performing LRS LPBF sample
in literature. The fact that the geopolymer is rated for 60MPa calls this result into question,
however it is entirely possible that the geopolymer has a higher compressive strength as
this is only a minimum strength. The other samples from this print, p14_s02, p14_s06, and
p14_s08 also performed very well at respectively 46.72MPa, 34.02MPa, and 54.42MPa.
Print 14 is the only print of the parametric study which uses the same hatch-spacing for all
samples. Instead, the scan strategy was varied with s01 and s02 using 0° layer rotation,
s03 and s04 using 67° rotation (a typical value used in metal LPBF), s05 and s06 using
90° rotation with contour, and s07 and s08 using 67° rotation with contour. The contour
adds a negligible amount of extra energy input. The two samples which performed best
both used 67° rotation, however more data is needed to make a quantitative conclusion.
4.3
Summary
The parametric study showed a clear positive correlation between energy density and
part density. While no upper limit was identified, volumetric energy densities in excess of
20J/mm3 did not further increase part density. Lowering layer height was found to be a
28
Lunar 3D Construction Printing: Establishing a processability window for laser processing of regolith
simulants
==PAGE:35==
Figure 4.8: Curves of all samples subject to compression test. Some a shifted due to
software error. As the data is insufficient for quantitative analysis, the plot is not refined
further and instead serves as an overview of tests.
more economical way of increasing part density than lowering hatching space, in terms
of energy density.
The highest compressive yield strength achieved was 67MPa. 4 samples printed at 300W,
100mm/s, with a hatch spacing of 120µm and layer height of 1mm, resulting in an energy
density of 16.67J/mm3 have an average compressive yield strength of 50.63J/mm3. The
build rate for these samples were around 2g/minute, not accounting for re-coating time.
Lunar 3D Construction Printing: Establishing a processability window for laser processing of regolith
simulants
29
==PAGE:36==
a) Sample mounted in geopoly-
mer for compression testing
b) A sample displaying typical failure patterns after
compression testing
Figure 4.9: Images of compression testing
30
Lunar 3D Construction Printing: Establishing a processability window for laser processing of regolith
simulants
==PAGE:37==
5
Phases and Microstructure of Sample
p11_s07
Sample p11_s07 (sample 7 of print 11), which was produced as part of the parametric
study, was selected for in-depth analysis as preparing it for LOM revealed some interesting
microstructure. The aim of this chapter is to document the exploratory analysis of the
sample. The photo in figure 5.1 shows both halves of sample p11_s07, one hot embedded
in conductive resin (PolyFast, Struers) and polished, having suffered damage as a result,
and the other as-is after cutting.
Figure 5.1: Photos of the cut sample p11_s07. Left: Embedded and polished sample half,
Middle: Other sample half as-is after cutting, Right: Close-up of the core
5.1
Macro structure
Macroscopic examination of the cross-section reveals three distinct regions: A central
crystalline core, an intermediate amorphous ring, and an outer vesiculated rim.
The core region presents as a dark gray with no evident translucency. This zone is inter-
preted as a fine-grained crystalline matrix composed of plagioclase and pyroxene, based
on the XRD results presented in Section 5.4, formed during the relatively slower cooling
phase at the center of the melt pool. The texture of upwards facing scallops could be
indicative of solidification fronts, and their orientation would mean the sample has cooled
from the bottom to the top as expected. The fact that these upwards solidification fronts
are intact would suggest that they were not disturbed by the laser, i.e. the material re-
mained molten for many subsequent layers. Along the boundary, cracks can be seen to
terminate or deflect, suggesting a difference in mechanical integrity.
Surrounding the core is a continuous black, glassy ring. This amorphous layer likely
resulted from more rapid cooling of the outside of the sample, not allowing for crystal
nucleation. In certain lighting conditions this glassy phase appears translucent and green,
revealing the olivine content of the feedstock material. This color is most apparent in the
embedded sample, where internal cracks refract light.
The outermost rim, only present where the sample had been in contact with the powder
bed and particularly prominent near the lower edge of the sample, is characterized by
Lunar 3D Construction Printing: Establishing a processability window for laser processing of regolith
simulants
31
==PAGE:38==
a highly opaque black phase with many spherical pores both large enough to observe
by eye and some microscopic. This zone is theorized to have formed due to the early
printing conditions before a proper substrate is formed, where energy is concentrated in
a smaller volume, insulated by the loose powder below. This could result in more intense
recoil pressure effects and even boiling.
5.2
Microstructure observed by LOM
Backlight polarized light microscopy of thin sections would be ideal type of LOM to ob-
serve the internal microstructure for a glassy material like this, however this was not avail-
able. Reflected light microscopy in bright field mode is instead used to investigate cracks,
porosities, and textures.
5.2.1
Results
The bottom of sample has the highest occurrence of pores, as seen in Figure 5.3b. The
pores are spherical, indicating this is not due to lack of fusion in the first layer but rather
key-holing. The LOM images reveal that the solid parts of the bottom have the same
columnar structure as the core, seen in Figure 5.2a and b, possibly due to unmelted
particles serving as nucleation points. The core exhibits a very low occurrence of pores.
The bright field LOM image reveal the texture of the columnar structure. The glassy rim
appears very smooth in the LOM image in Figure 5.3b and pores are spherical here too.
a) T scallop texture in the sample core
b) Smaller scallop textured area in the
porous zone in the bottom of the sample
Figure 5.2: LOM images of sample p11_s07
5.3
SEM-EDS Analysis - Elemental Mapping
5.3.1
Methodology
EDS is used to investigate the distribution of elements in the sample and better under-
stand the variation in internal structure throughout the layers. The cut sample which had
been prepared for XRD is mounted on a steel sample holder using conductive aluminum
tape, then carbon coated. All presented images are taken with aperture 60, 25x magni-
fication, 15kV voltage. An overview of the SEM images taken of sample p11_07 can be
seen in figure 5.4
32
Lunar 3D Construction Printing: Establishing a processability window for laser processing of regolith
simulants
==PAGE:39==
a) The smooth area and spherical pores
at the top of the sample
b) The high concentration of pores near
the bottom of the sample
Figure 5.3: LOM images of sample p11_s07
5.3.2
Qualitative analysis of EDS images
==PAGE:40==
Figure 5.4: Overview of SEM-EDS images taken and three select regions which represent
the three structure types observed (from top to bottom) Image 14: The smooth, glassy
matrix which comprises most of the sample, image 12: The central anomaly which ap-
pears to be crystalline, identifiable by it’s scalloped structure, image 5: The bottom of the
sample that exhibits a higher frequency of voids and pores.
a)
b)
c)
Figure 5.6: Region 10 SEM image (a) and EDS map for Silicon (b) and Aluminum (c) in
sample p11_07, showing a very even distribution of elements.
nλ = 2d sin θ
(5.1)
where n is an integer, λ is the wavelength of the incident X-ray, d is the inter-planar spac-
ing, and θ is the angle of incidence. By scanning a sample with a spectrum of wavelengths,
it is possible to infer the chemical composition from the peaks of the returned spectrum.
The solid sample was cut and polished to obtain a flat surface suitable for diffraction, then
mounted on a sample holder with putty. To better understand the different zones, XRD
scans were collected from three regions along the vertical cross-section of the sample:
the middle, bottom, and top. These correspond approximately to the dull-gray interior,
the porous lower zone, and the outermost black, translucent rim, as seen in Figure 5.8b.
However, it is important to note that the visual structures are not perfectly aligned with the
scan locations, resulting in some overlap of the results.
XRD measurements were carried out using CuKα radiation (λ = 1.5406 Å) and a 2θ
range from 16° to 60°. An oscillating scan ensures that all scan all phases are captured
34
Lunar 3D Construction Printing: Establishing a processability window for laser processing of regolith
simulants
==PAGE:41==
Figure 5.7: SEM photo with the smooth-scalloped border marked with a white dotted line
and the baseline scan indicated by the yellow arrow (left), and baseline scan plot (right).
regardless of preferred grain orientation.
a) Photo of sample p11_s07 mounted in the
XRD machine
b) Overview of the XRD scans
Figure 5.8: XRD sample
5.4.1
Results
Figure 5.9 displays the resulting phase patterns from the three scans. While the same
peaks appear in each scan, they vary in intensity and show slight shifts in position. This
suggest the presence of similar phases across studied regions, but in different proportions.
Scan 1, core: This scan is placed in the middle of the gray, opaque core of the sample
and displays sharp and intense diffraction peaks, especially at 39.6° and 59.6° 2θ, with
a relatively flat background and minimal indication of an amorphous hump. This pattern
suggests a dominantly crystalline phase composition, likely due to partial recrystallization
following localized overheating.
Scan 2, lower region: shows reduced peak intensity and a slightly elevated background
between approximately 15° and 35° 2θ, indicating the presence of both crystalline and
amorphous material. The peaks are broader and less well-defined compared to Scan 1,
suggesting finer grain sizes or incomplete crystallization.
Lunar 3D Construction Printing: Establishing a processability window for laser processing of regolith
simulants
35
==PAGE:42==
Figure 5.9: The observed phase patterns in three scans of sample p11_s07. From top
to bottom: Scan 1-3 as seen in figure 5.8b. 2BC: show anorthite-augite peak as range
instead + include XRD pattern of powder for comparison
Scan 3, upper region: This scan which is placed entirely in the black, glass-like region,
near the top where the sample was exposed to air during cooling, exhibits a broad diffuse
hump between 18° and 35° 2θ superimposed with low-intensity crystalline peaks. This
is characteristic of a silicate glass with limited recrystallization. The smooth and translu-
cent surface appearance of this region, visible in the optical image, further supports the
presence of a significant amorphous component. While minor crystalline features remain,
the elevated background and reduced peak contrast clearly indicate that this region is the
most glass-dominated among the three.
In summary, although the black, glassy rim structure extends across all scan locations,
the degree of crystallization and glass content varies significantly through the depth of the
sample. The core region is the most crystalline, showing strong peaks; the bottom region
contains a mix of amorphous and crystalline material; and the top region is dominated by a
glassy phase. These findings reflect local variations in cooling rate and thermal exposure
during the SLM process and are consistent with the visual and structural observations of
the sample cross-section.
Table 5.1 shows a list of the identified peaks and the associated phases which are likely
to occur based on the known composition of unprocessed LHS-1. Anorthite ( 39.4–39.5°)
36
Lunar 3D Construction Printing: Establishing a processability window for laser processing of regolith
simulants
==PAGE:43==
and augite ( 39.6–39.8°) are very close in position and also commonly coexist, possibly
resulting in a combined peak in scan 1 and 3. This overlap could be the cause of the slight
right-side shoulder on the 39.6°. In scan 2, the 39.6° peak is slightly right-shifted, with no
right shoulder. This is could be due to a larger ratio of augite, which has a slightly higher
position, as the EDS result confirmed no chemical variations meaning the shift cannot be
attributed to a subcomponent of calcium or iron.
Alternatively, the slight rightward shift of the 39.6° peak in scan 2 may indicate a reduc-
tion in lattice spacing (d-spacing), which can be caused by internal strain or lattice com-
pression. Such strain often results from thermal contraction during rapid cooling, where
the crystal lattice contracts more than in slower-cooled regions. As the molten material
solidifies and cools, the thermal gradient across the melt pool can introduce residual com-
pressive stress, particularly in the core of the sample where heat is retained longer and
cooling is uneven. This internal stress manifests as a measurable shift in peak position
toward higher 2θ values in XRD, as seen in Scan 2. This could be cause for the cracks
which appear to propagate from the core boundary.
It should be noted that all the peaks have a slight right shoulder. This is probably a result
of copper x-ray tubes which emit dual wavelengths, Kα1 and Kα2, which are not filtered
by the Bruker system.
Table 5.1: Overview of phase peaks found in scans
Peak (2θ)
Phase match(es)
Notes
∼28.0°
Anorthite (CaAl2Si2O8)
Primary LHS-1 phase
∼31.2°
Augite (Ca,Mg,Fe)(Si,Al)2O6
Pyroxene, often coexists with pla-
gioclase
∼32.7–33°
Olivine (Fe2SiO4) (minor)
Very weak, expected as LHS-1 con-
tent is 0.2%
∼35.4°
Anorthite/Augite overlap
These often form together. Alterna-
tively spinel, which occurs at high
temperatures
∼37.0°
Augite
Happens
in
recrystallization
(strongest in Scan 3)
∼39.5°
Augite/Anorthite overlap
Strongest in Scan 3
∼44.5°
Ilmenite (FeTiO3)
Weak, expected as LHS-1 content
is 0.4%
∼47–51°
Mixed phases (augite, olivine)
Varies in strength
∼21.8°
Possible feldspar twin/glass
Only seen in Scan 3
Lunar 3D Construction Printing: Establishing a processability window for laser processing of regolith
simulants
37
==PAGE:44==
5.5
Summary of EDS and XRD
The EDS images show a homogeneous chemical distribution as expected, indicating the
internal structure can be attributed to a variation in phases.
Interestingly, other studies conducting XRD on LPBF printed LRS samples have shown a
much higher glassy content in the printed sample versus the raw powder [45], [55]. The
process employed in these two experiments result in sintering or fused melting, which
would indeed induce vitrification and an amorphous structure. The sample analyzed in
this chapter had a much higher energy input, which led to more favorable conditions for
recrystallization.
The XRD results reveal that thermal history has an effect on phase composition. This
dynamic is important to understand, as different phases have different mechanical prop-
erties. For example, while anorthite and augite have similar phase patterns, augite is
tougher and more thermally stable. Amorphous- and crystalline phases also have each
their benefits, glassy materials have poor mechanical strength but can serve as a binder
for crystalline inclusions. Through induction of various phases, it might be possible to
engineer the microstructure of a construction element and achieve advantageous me-
chanical properties.
38
Lunar 3D Construction Printing: Establishing a processability window for laser processing of regolith
simulants
==PAGE:45==
6
In-situ Monitoring
While most studies on laser powder bed fusion (LPBF) of lunar regolith simulants rely on
ex-situ characterization, such methods cannot capture the transient, rapid phenomena
that govern melt pool stability and spatter behavior. In-situ monitoring enables the direct
observation of dynamic events such as denudation, hot spatter, and balling, that influence
build success but cannot be accurately identified after solidification. For macro-scale
LPBF in particular, where laser-material interaction spans millimeters and deposition rates
are elevated, process instabilities may pose even greater risks to part quality. This chapter
outlines the development and deployment of an in-situ monitoring setup, including high-
speed and shortwave infrared (SWIR) cameras, to investigate melt pool behavior and
spatter characteristics under varying process conditions.
6.1
Monitoring setup
The monitoring system consists of three cameras:
• A Photron FASTCAM NOVA S6 Ultra High Speed filming at 5000-100.000 frames
per second with a resolution of 1024x124px. The telephoto lense captures a FoV of
around 100x100mm.
• A Xiris SWIR (short-wave infrared) camera, capturing thermal radiation in the range
of 0.9–1.7µm with a frame rate of 180 fps. The macro lense has a FoV of about
15x15mm.
• A regular infrared camera with a FoV that covers the entire 200x200mm print area.
Figure 6.1: CAD model showing the in-situ monitoring stage with it’s UHS camera (left,
blue FoV), SWIR camera (center in front of hopper, green FoV) and IR camera (right, red
FoV)
Figure 6.1 shows the position of the three cameras. The figure does not show the printer
enclosure, which dictated the placement of the cameras. The yellow object is the ad-
ditional laser window which was installed in the side of the printer in order to achieve a
Lunar 3D Construction Printing: Establishing a processability window for laser processing of regolith
simulants
39
==PAGE:46==
low angle ideal for capturing spatter with the UHS camera. For one UHS experiment, the
camera was placed outside the large window at a similar angle to the IR camera.
6.2
Infrared Video
As discussed in section 2.4.1, a ceramic LPBF process will be prone to high residual heat
due to the low thermal conductivity of the material. The best way to visualize the build up
of residual heat is via IR footage. The two snapshots in Figure 6.4 show print 11 at layer
2 and layer 7, both just after scanning and prior to re-coating. At layer the 7 the samples
are noticeably brighter, indicating an increase in residual heat as expected.
a) Print 11 layer 2
b) Print 11 Layer 7
Figure 6.2: Snapshots of IR footage taken just prior to re-coating
The photo in Figure 6.3 taken of print 12 prior to cleaning visualizes the residual heat in
the parts - Sample 7 and 8 (last two read left-right top-bottom) have the highest energy
density and had a large amount of powder loosely sintered to it.
Figure 6.3: print 12 uncleaned
6.3
Short-Wave Infra Red Video
A short-wave infrared (SWIR) camera is well-suited for monitoring LPBF processes due
to its ability to capture thermal radiation in the 0.9–1.7 µm range. According to Wien’s
displacement law, the liquidus temperature of LHS-1 falls in this range [52]. Standard
IR camera cannot detect wavelengths this short, and would not be useful for melt pool
observations.
40
Lunar 3D Construction Printing: Establishing a processability window for laser processing of regolith
simulants
==PAGE:47==
Two snapshots from print 6 sample 6 layer 1 and 7 show the difference in melt pool for-
mation as a result of the underlying material. In the first layer, the laser is interacting only
with loose powder, it reaches very deep and as a result to energy input is distributed in
a larger volume and only leads to sintering of the powder. At layer 7, the component is
beginning to have some bulk and the energy input is contained in a smaller area. The
cooling capacity (2.4.1) is reduced due to residual heat in the bulk feature. As a result,
melted tracks begin to form. However, the track is still disconnected, due to insufficient
energy input.
a) Print 6 sample 6 layer 1
b) Print 6 sample 6 Layer 7
Figure 6.4: Snapshots of SWIR footage taken during scanning
6.4
Ultra High Speed Imagery
Regular video footage of the parametric study revealed intense spatter expression which
appeared to be linked to the print parameters as well as the layer number, i.e. the thick-
ness of the substrate or the lack thereof. In other words, there are two things to be inves-
tigated:
Spatter correlation to printing parameters: Energy metrics such as volumetric energy
density standalone are not sufficient indicators of part quality. Instead, part quality is fun-
damentally governed by the state of melt pool formation. While a correlation between part
density and energy density may exist under stable deposition conditions, this relationship
becomes significantly more complex in regimes such as denudation or vaporization. By
observing plume dynamics and spatter behavior, these transient states can be identified
and quantified. This enables a more detailed understanding of how individual printing pa-
rameters influence part quality across various process conditions.
Spatter as an indicator of laser-substrate interaction: Two things lead to diminished
part density: Inter-layer voids caused by lack of fusion as a result of insufficient energy
input, and keyhole porosities caused by excessively deep laser-substrate interaction.
These two different conditions should in theory result in different spatter expression due
to the differences in melt pool-substrate connectivity, in other words the differences in the
thermodynamic system of the melt pool. This has been shown for metal LPBF, where
spatter- quantity and area was shown to increase with laser power, but dip when the melt
pool reaches a state of connectivity to the substrate and its viscosity is increased by the
heat transfer through the substrate [47]. If spatter is an indicator of this laser-substrate
Lunar 3D Construction Printing: Establishing a processability window for laser processing of regolith
simulants
41
==PAGE:48==
interaction state, it may be used for closed-loop control of the process - critical to enabling
stable printing in variable conditions.
Quantifying this behavior by spatter frequency, spatter size, spatter brightness, and spat-
ter velocity would require high speed video as spatter in an LRS LPBF process is known
to move at velocities upwards of 4 m/s [44]. A Photron FASTCAM NOVA S6 Ultra High
Speed (UHS) camera is selected for the purpose due to its high frame rate. A 300 mm
telephoto lens ensures a FoV that measures approximately 10x10 cm at the distance of
the sample. The setup is shown as a CAD model in figure 6.1 and the photo in figure 6.5.
Figure 6.5: A picture of Photron FASTCAM NOVA S6 (UHS) situated at the side window
of the SLS printer
6.4.1
Qualitative analysis of high speed footage
The UHS footage revealed intense spatter expression with great variability from the be-
ginning of the layer to the end, and even within individual tracks. The beginning of a track
is often marked by an eruption of spatter, although the eruptions also appear at other,
seemingly random times. The spatter is ejected in the trailing direction of the track at a
45-90° angle to the print bed. The ejecta is comprised of molten spatter which is self-
illuminated and solid particles which are illuminated by the melt pool. The ejecta have
varying velocities, with some tracing parabolic curves within the frames and other exiting
the frame in a straight trajectory. The snapshot of capture p19_s02_L09 can be seen
in Figure 6.6, showing a typical plume, solid spatter (smaller gray particles) and molten
spatter (larger white particles).
42
Lunar 3D Construction Printing: Establishing a processability window for laser processing of regolith
simulants
==PAGE:49==
Figure 6.6: Snapshot of UHS capture p19_s02_L09
6.4.2
Feature Detection and Particle Image Velocimetry
Image analysis is implemented in python using the OpenCV2 and TrackPy libraries for
blob analysis and tracking of particles. The solution uses CuPy for feature detection,
meaning it runs on a GPU which was necessary in order to process the large amounts
of data. Figure 6.7 shows a time series of a video wherein the trajectories have been
annotated. The time series captures a spatter (gray trajectory, right side) the moment it is
hit by the laser in frame 486, highlighting how intense the spatter is and how it may affect
the printing process.
Figure 6.7: Time series of tracked particles.
6.4.3
UHS DOE 1 - Energy density-ejecta correlation and build evolution
A frame rate of 5000 fps was chosen for this series of tests as this frame rate was able
to capture the majority of spatter for trajectory tracking. A minor component of spatter is
significantly faster than the rest and require a higher frame rate to capture, but conducting
a large captures at this frame rate is not practical. A shutter speed of 1/12000 seconds re-
sulted in a near black image where only the melt pool and illuminated spatter was visible,
thus making it easy to separate spatter from background. Each capture is 5000 frames
Lunar 3D Construction Printing: Establishing a processability window for laser processing of regolith
simulants
43
==PAGE:50==
or 1 second long, which was the longest duration that could be processed practically.
For UHS DOE 1, samples are produced one per print and UHS footage is captured for
every layer. The print is oriented such that the scan tracks are perpendicular to the camera
optical axis. The print is paused between layers so that the layer time is in the range
of the typical parametric study prints, such that the results may be compared with less
variables. Each capture will be referred to by its sample number and layer number, e.g.
”p19_s02_L03”.
The aim is to identify a correlation between energy density and ejecta expression, and
to uncover whether ejecta expression depends on the layer number i.e. depends on the
underlying substrate or lack thereof.
Results
In figure 6.8, the average particles per frame, average particle size, average brightness
(summed pixel values of particle) and average particle velocity is plotted against the vol-
umetric energy density Ev. Each dot represents a capture of 5 tracks in the same layer.
Average particles per frame appear to be positively correlated to energy density while av-
erage particle size appears mostly negatively correlated but with an upturn at the highest
energy density. Particle brightness and velocity seem uncorrelated to energy density.
Figure 6.8: Ejecta expression versus energy density for print 24 samples 1-5. 2BC: need
to fix energy density ticks
In Figure 6.9, each of the four ejecta metrics are plotted against layer number. This vi-
sualizes the evolution of ejecta evolution over time. All four metrics show a distinct first
layer, with average particles per frame and particle velocity being lower for the first layer
while the particle size and brightness are higher. In other words, the first layer exhibits
larger, hotter, and slower spatter. After the initial layer, the ejecta expression appears to
44
Lunar 3D Construction Printing: Establishing a processability window for laser processing of regolith
simulants
==PAGE:51==
reach a steady state quickly with indications that there could be an overshoot in the next
layer. For the sample with the highest Ev, the overshoot lasts two layers. Consistent with
Figure 6.8, average particles per frame is most clearly correlated with energy density.
Figure 6.9: Evolution of ejecta expression over layers. 2BC: add energy density to legend
6.4.4
UHS DOE 2: The effect of layer thickness
In this experiment, a sample with variable layer height is printed. Starting at 0.5mm,
the layer height is increased in intervals of 0.25mm every second layer until layer height
reached 3 mm. The second layer of a given layer height is captured with UHS imaging
using the same settings as for DOE 1.
Results
Figure 6.10 shows the four ejecta metrics plotted versus layer thickness. Average par-
ticles per frame is again the most clear indicator of the parameter that was varied, with
average article size also showing signs of correlation to layer thickness. The two other
metrics, brightness and velocity, show little to no correlation. These results are in line
with UHS DOE 1 which showed less particles per frame and larger particle size for the
first layer - a very similar condition to a very deep powder layer such as when the layer
thickness is 2-3mm.
Lunar 3D Construction Printing: Establishing a processability window for laser processing of regolith
simulants
45
==PAGE:52==
Figure 6.10: Ejecta metrics plotted versus layer thickness for UHS DOE 2
The resulting sample p24_s07 is shown in Figure 6.11, with black arrows indicating build
direction. The bottom of the sample which had smaller layer thicknesses exhibit better
geometric accuracy. Halfway up the sample, around the point where the layer thickness
as reached 2 mm, the layer split into two blob formations. A very typical artifact observed
at larger layer thickness with insufficient energy input, which is caused by the balling effect
splitting the track into separate blobs.
Figure 6.11: Photos of sample p24_s07 printed for UHS DOE 2
6.4.5
UHS DOE 3: UHS Melt Pool Observations
In another experiment, the UHS camera was set up to view the print from above at a
50° angle in order to observe the melt pool. Parameters for the four prints were selected
based on the results from the parametric study, such that a range of printing regime from
partial melting to full melting could be observed. These were P = 300W, v = 100mm/s,
lh = 1mm, and hs = (150, 120, 90, 60)µm. Additionally, in order to investigate the effect of
increased track time, a 5th print uses the same parameters as the third print (hs = 90µm),
but is 80x80x20 mm. The UHS captures are conducted at 500 fps in order to capture a
larger number of tracks, 20 versus the 5 tracks per capture in DOE 1. The shutter speed
46
Lunar 3D Construction Printing: Establishing a processability window for laser processing of regolith
simulants
==PAGE:53==
is kept at 1/ 3.000.000 seconds, resulting in a very dark image where the nuances of the
melt pool can be distinguished.
The four prints are documented as time series in Figure 6.12, where each frame is 200
frames or 40 ms apart. Each sequence shows one track of the layer and is aligned with
the beginning and end of that track. In Figure 6.12 a), the time series for sample p25_03
reveals a discontinuous track that begins with a large droplet. This droplet, originating
from prior tracks, is re-melted as the laser passes over it, sustaining its molten state. Due
to re-melting and surface tension, the droplet becomes wider than the rest of the track,
and it propagates transversely with following tracks, ultimately forming a typical balling
artifact, indicative of suboptimal melting conditions (2BC: ref a representative image).
Figure 6.12: Melt pool formation captured at 5000 fps, 1/3.000.000 seconds shutter
speed.
Figures 6.12b and 6.12c show increasing stability of the melt pool formation at higher
energy inputs, although the tracks remain discontinuous. Finally, Figure 6.12d depicts a
fully uninterrupted melt pool across the track. The high shutter speed highlights the ther-
mal gradient across the partially molten layer, where the melt pool connects seamlessly
with the new track. Video inspection reveals that in this case, the laser does not directly
interact with the powder; instead, new powder is incorporated into the melt pool when the
wall collapses onto the track. It is then absorbed or hit by the laser on the next track. The
phenomenon is visible in Figure 6.12d as a dark particle falling onto the track in the first
frame, where it remains in frame 2-3, then hit by the laser in frame 5. This observation
Lunar 3D Construction Printing: Establishing a processability window for laser processing of regolith
simulants
47
==PAGE:54==
aligns with UHS DOE 1 results, which showed reduced spatter frequency at higher en-
ergy inputs. At higher energy densities, the there is a decreased laser-powder interaction
leading to decreased denudation.
This persistent melt pool formation across the track is enabled by the low thermal conduc-
tivity of the material, which results in slower cooling and allows the molten zone to span
the track length—particularly when the track is short or the layer-wise energy input is high.
In such cases, the melt pool remains active and is sustained by both the residual thermal
energy and the continued laser input. Compared to track formation which requires a high
linear energy input, this type of melt pool formation is much more stable. The two melt
pool formation regimes are illustrated in Figure 6.13.
Figure 6.13: Track formation and frontline melt formation
The best-performing samples from the parametric study, in terms of mechanical prop-
erties, demonstrated this sustained frontline melt pool behavior. This suggests that, for
regolith LPBF processes, stable deposition may be better achieved by the continuous
formation of a frontline melt pool rather than track formation. However, at the max linear
energy input of the system as-is, 3J/mm, single track formation could not be achieved,
thus this mode of printing could not be compared to the frontline melt mode.
Accordingly, track length or the time between successive tracks may be critical parame-
ters for part quality-factors not typically emphasized in conventional metal LPBF which is
more akin to welding, or conventional ceramic LPBF which is a sintering process. These
temporal aspects could be optimized using alternative scanning strategies, such as the
cell scanning methods proposed by Wang et al. [40].
6.5
Summary
In this chapter, three types of in-situ monitoring experiments are presented. Infrared imag-
ing proved useful for understanding the thermal energy distribution in the powder bed and
the build up of residual heat. Meanwhile, SWIR imaging was useful for observing the melt
pool formation but was somewhat limited by the frame rate of 180 fps and the small FoV
made it difficult to observe any meaningful area.
High speed footage proved by far the most useful due to its high temporal resolution
capturing spatter reaching 13.6 m/s and even shock waves from recoil pressure. The
high contrast footage of self-illuminated spatter on a dark background lends itself to blob
analysis and several useful metrics could be extracted. Average number of particles per
frame as well as average particle size proved to be the most useful indicators of energy
density, layer number, and layer thickness. There is good evidence that data for use in a
closed-loop control system can be extracted.
48
Lunar 3D Construction Printing: Establishing a processability window for laser processing of regolith
simulants
==PAGE:55==
7
Benchmark Geometries
Benchmark geometries in additive manufacturing are standardized test shapes - usually
combining a number of relevant features such as overhangs, through pipes, and pegs -
used to evaluate and compare the performance of different printers, materials, or process
parameters. They help assess geometric accuracy, surface finish, mechanical behav-
ior, and printability under controlled and repeatable conditions. Open-source benchmark
models are often used by hobbyists and small enterprises, allowing results to be easily
compared globally - a very useful system. Such a benchmark would be useful to regolith
LPBF research efforts yet none exists, and as a result it is difficult to compare results
across the board.
7.1
Design of LRS Macro-LPBF Benchmark Model
The benchmark model shown in Figure 7.1 is designed to capture the results of two im-
portant effects: warpage and dross. Warping is most apparent in disconnected bridges
which deflect with warping due to thermal expansion and contraction of newer layers. In
a real world case, warping would especially affect large, flat elements such as pavers. In
the benchmark model a disconnected bridge, which is prone to warping, is included.
Dross is usually observed in overhangs and pipes so the geometry included overhangs
of various degrees, as well as a pipe feature and some short connected bridges. In order
to observe this effect, the benchmark model has a number of round and square holes, as
well as overhangs of various degrees.
Figure 7.1: Benchmark model
During the parametric study it quickly became apparent that layer time and track time
have large effects on the print outcome, as using the parameters which worked for a
20x20x20mm cube on a footprint larger than 60x60 yielded unstable melt pools and dis-
connected tracks. The highly variable layer time and track length of the benchmark model
would result in extremely inconsistent results; thus, it was abandoned in favor of simpler
tests, such as the dross test presented in Section 7.2, and various smaller or simpler
geometries.
7.1.1
DTU Bunny
A benchmark model often used in the OpenAM lab is the DTU benchmark bunny. This
model printed at a height of 31mm with a surprisingly high fidelity. The parameters used
are P = 300W, v = 100mm/s, hs = 120um, lh = 0.8mm. The outcome can be seen in Figure
7.2
Lunar 3D Construction Printing: Establishing a processability window for laser processing of regolith
simulants
49
==PAGE:56==
a)
b)
Figure 7.2: Photos of the DTU benchmark bunnies printed at 31mm height
7.1.2
Effects of Increasing Track- and Layer Time
A 40x40x10mm samples could be printed with the optimal parameters identified in the
parametric study with much the same results. The internal structure reveals a stark dif-
ference, sample p16_s03 shows in Figure 7.3a shows a clear layer structure in the form
of bands of a black/green smooth texture and the grey/purple structured texture, while
sample p19_s07 in Figure 7.3b which was printed with the same parameters show no
layer structure. In this smaller sample, the smooth phase dominates the sample and the
textured phase forms a blob in the middle, also seen in Figure 4.7.
a) Sample p16_s03, 40x40x10mm, with print 17
printed for the dross experiment on top.
b)
Sample
p19_s07,
20x20x20mm.
Figure 7.3: Photos of two samples printed with the same parameters, yielding different
internal structures due to a difference in part size.
Printing larger yet parts results in an unstable process and no proper track formation. The
image in Figure 7.4a shows the results of attempting to print a Ø100mm disk using the
parameters P = 300W, v = 100mm/s, hs = 30um, lh = 1mm, i.e the same as was used for
the two samples discussed above. The disk exhibits an uneven texture as a result of blobs
which have formed and propagated transverse to the scan direction. The print would fail
50
Lunar 3D Construction Printing: Establishing a processability window for laser processing of regolith
simulants
==PAGE:57==
due to strain in the part causing it to warp and colide with the roller. An image taken
during the printing process (Figure 7.4b) shows extreme dross and denudation during the
first layer. The print was paused after this first layer and the depth of the denudated area
measured to be 8mm deep. At this track time (1 second at the widest part), a frontline
melt can not form, but increasing the linear energy input further would result in even more
denudation.
a) Salvaged Ø100mm disk ge-
ometry sections
b) Disk during print process
Figure 7.4: Photos of the disk print
7.2
Dross Experiment
As a pre-study to more complex benchmark testing, an experiment was designed and
carried out in order to investigating dross depth.
Method
A sample measuring 40x40x10mm is first printed to act as a substrate, then sanded down
to a flat surface which could act as a reference plane. A staircase geometry with 6 steps of
single 1 mm layers is printed on top with the intent of observing the progression of layers,
however due to an error in slicing, the intended empty space for using the substrate as a
reference was not achieved, at the sample had to be cut at another angle to include the
reference. The staircase geometry is overhanging in order to observe the depth of dross
when printing on loose powder.
Results
Figure 7.5a shows the staircase geometry p17_s01 printed on the substrate created from
sample p16_s02. The layers are completely fused together, likely due to the short inter-
layer time, resulting in a slope rather than steps. Figure 7.5b shows a side view of the
unsupported part which protrudes almost 6 mm below the substrate surface (red line) and
1 mm below the powder surface at the first layer.
7.3
Printing on A Substrate
The dross experiment sample is cut in order to use the substrate as a reference point
for layer progression, as well as to observe the interface between the substrate and new
print.
Figure 7.6 shows the two halves of the sample after sawing. A panorama of LOM images
of half b) is shown in Figure 7.7. This image reveals no distinct layer lines in the staircase
Lunar 3D Construction Printing: Establishing a processability window for laser processing of regolith
simulants
51
==PAGE:58==
a) Above view
b) Side view
Figure 7.5: Photos of the dross experiment sample p17_s01. In the second image, part
of the unsupported feature has broken off and the remainder is the part which has two
layers.
geometry, suggesting that it was fully melted. The boundary between the geometry and
the substrate below appears to have been erased and the substrate restructured. The
interface seems to have served as a nucleation point for a crystalline growth much like
the one observed in sample p19_s07 in Figure 4.7, however this time appearing as a long
band.
a)
b)
Figure 7.6: Photos of the dross experiment sample after sawing and polishing
52
Lunar 3D Construction Printing: Establishing a processability window for laser processing of regolith
simulants
==PAGE:59==
Figure 7.7: Composite panorama LOM image of dross experiment sample p17_s01,
showing the boundary between the substrate and the print.
Lunar 3D Construction Printing: Establishing a processability window for laser processing of regolith
simulants
53
==PAGE:60==
54
Lunar 3D Construction Printing: Establishing a processability window for laser processing of regolith
simulants
==PAGE:61==
8
Conclusion
This thesis presents a study on the effect of processing parameters of LPBF processed lu-
nar regolith simulant LHS-1, supported by ex-situ characterization and in-situ monitoring.
Samples produced achieved compressive yield strength in excess of 50MPa, supporting
the use of LPBF processed regolith for construction of lunar habitats and infrastructure.
The layer heights investigated in the parametric study, 0.5-2.5mm, are not represented in
literature. Publications fall into two categories, most in the micro-scale range with layer
heights around 100-300µm and a few in construction scale with layer heights in the order
of 10mm. Closing this research gap might uncover ways in which our understanding of
conventional, well-studied micro-scale LPBF can be applied to the novel lunar construc-
tion application.
The in-situ monitoring experiments showed that spatter expression correlated to energy
density and layer height. This may enable the implementation of a closed-loop control
system to compensate for variable layer height - critical to handling the variable conditions
which are likely to be met in a construction scenario. To the knowledge of the author, no
such correlation between spatter expression and layer height can be found in existing
literature.
Key findings:
• Using an LPBF process, LHS-1 components of 50 MPa could be produced reliably
with an energy input of 16.67J/mm3
• Sample density is linked positively to volumetric energy density, reaching a plateau
after an energy density of 20J/mm3.
• Spatter frequency is positively correlated to energy density and negatively correlated
to layer thickness.
• A ”frontline melt” mode of melt pool formation was identified as a means of achieving
a melt pool without the instability and extreme denudation associated with high linear
energy input.
8.1
Future work
8.1.1
Closed-loop Control
The in-situ monitoring study demonstrated strong potential for enabling closed-loop con-
trol in macro-scale LPBF of lunar regolith. However, the current approach—relying on
high-speed imaging and post-processed particle tracking—is not feasible for real-time im-
plementation due to the computational intensity of feature extraction and data handling.
Among the observed metrics, spatter quantity emerged as the most informative indica-
tor of process stability. This suggests that a simpler sensing strategy, such as the use
of phototransistors, could serve as a viable proxy. A practical in-situ monitoring system
may therefore consist of a small array of phototransistors combined with a low-resolution
infrared camera. When combined with known states of the system - such as energy input
history, underlying geometry, and scan trajectory - this lightweight sensing configuration
could offer sufficient insight to estimate the system state and support adaptive control
strategies.
Lunar 3D Construction Printing: Establishing a processability window for laser processing of regolith
simulants
55
==PAGE:62==
8.1.2
Printing Under High Vacuum
Few studies so far have investigated LRS LPBF under a vacuum, and while results were
positive, there is still a great need for further vacuum trials in order to validate the feasibility
of LPBF 3D construction printing. While writing this thesis, a vacuum stage with several
in-situ monitoring capabilities was conceptualized. The stage is depicted in a CAD sketch
(Figure 8.1) which was made for the Villum YIP application ”Pioneering Lunar Additive
Manufacturing: Uniting Laser Processing, Vacuum Environments, and High-Fidelity Multi-
Scale Simulations”.
Figure 8.1: Proposed vacuum stage for in-situ monitoring with synchrotron x-ray, ultra
high speed video, and large area infra red video.
8.1.3
Mobile Printing System
Vacuum trials and the implementation of a closed-loop control system will prime this tech-
nology for the development of an engineering model mobile printing system which can be
tested in a large scale scenario. Aarhus University has recently been awarded a grant to
fund the construction of a Ø30m ”dirty” vacuum” chamber called SpaceSite Lab, which
will emulate the lunar surface. This facility will be the only one of its kind large enough to
test a construction system at scale. A sketch of a potential 1:5 scale habitat constructed
via print-in-place LPBF in the SpaceSite Lab facility can be seen in figure 8.2.
Figure 8.2: A sketch of a potential 1:5 scale habitat constructed via print-in-place LPBF
in the SpaceSite Lab facility
56
Lunar 3D Construction Printing: Establishing a processability window for laser processing of regolith
simulants
==PAGE:63==
A
System Architecture Figure
Figure A.1: Drawing of SLS printer system architecture from [56]. Aside from the disabling
of the infrared heater, the architecture remains the same for this work.
Lunar 3D Construction Printing: Establishing a processability window for laser processing of regolith
simulants
57
==PAGE:64==
B
Geopolymer recipe
Activator:
• 5.4g NaOH
• 32.2g Na2SiO3 (Waterglass)
• 1.4g H2O
Under constant stirring, NaOH and H2O is added to waterglass. The liquid is stirred until
clear, approximately 20 minutes.
Geopolymer:
• 12g Metakaolin
• 19.5g Activator
• 5.05g Fine white sand
Activator is added to metakaolin and mixed with a vibrating machine. When smooth, sand
is added and the material is vibrated until even and with no air bubbles.
The curing program is as follows:
• 20° ↗75° over 5 minutes.
• 75°, 12 hours
• 75° ↘20° over 6 hours
• 20°, 10 days
The humidity is 98% throughout.
58
Lunar 3D Construction Printing: Establishing a processability window for laser processing of regolith
simulants
==PAGE:65==
C
Log book
Lunar 3D Construction Printing: Establishing a processability window for laser processing of regolith
simulants
59
==PAGE:66==
Print 1
n
P
v
o
hs
El
Ev
time
global
Other settings:
1
120
100
0
0.15
8.00
80.00
240.00
beam width
0.15 mm
2
120
100
20
0.12
10.00
100.00
300.00
layer height
0.1 mm
3
150
100
0
0.15
10.00
100.00
240.00
sample x
20 mm
4
150
100
20
0.12
12.50
125.00
300.00
sample z
20 mm
sample y (height)
0.9 mm
Notes:
The low layer height caused the elements to shift 
during recoating
60
Lunar 3D Construction Printing: Establishing a processability window for laser processing of regolith
simulants
==PAGE:67==
Print 2
n
P
v
o
hs
El
Ev
time
global
Other settings:
1
120
100
0
0.15
8.00
8.00
133.33
beam width
0.15 mm
2
120
100
20
0.12
10.00
10.00
166.67
lh
1 mm
3
150
100
0
0.15
10.00
10.00
133.33
sample x
20 mm
4
150
100
20
0.12
12.50
12.50
166.67
sample z
20 mm
sample y (height)
5 mm
Notes:
No print issues. Samples are porous and brittle.
Lunar 3D Construction Printing: Establishing a processability window for laser processing of regolith
simulants
61
==PAGE:68==
Print 3
n
P
v
o
hs
El
Ev
time
global
Other settings:
1
150
100
20
0.12
12.50
25.00
333.33
beam width
0.15 mm
2
150
100
30
0.105
14.29
28.57
380.95
lh
0.5 mm
3
150
100
20
0.12
12.50
25.00
333.33
sample x
20 mm
4
150
100
30
0.105
14.29
28.57
380.95
sample z
20 mm
5
200
100
20
0.12
16.67
33.33
333.33
sample y (height)
5 mm
6
200
100
30
0.105
19.05
38.10
380.95
7
200
100
20
0.12
16.67
33.33
333.33
8
200
100
30
0.105
19.05
38.10
380.95
Notes:
62
Lunar 3D Construction Printing: Establishing a processability window for laser processing of regolith
simulants
==PAGE:69==
Print 4
n
P
v
o
hs
El
Ev
time
global
Other settings:
1
200
100
0
0.15
13.33
26.67
900.00
beam width
0.15 mm
cube
2
200
100
0
0.15
13.33
26.67
900.00
lh
0.5 mm
cube
3
200
100
20
0.12
16.67
33.33
1125.00
sample x
15 mm
cube
4
200
100
20
0.12
16.67
33.33
1125.00
sample z
15 mm
cube
5
200
100
0
0.15
13.33
26.67
900.00
sample y (height)
30 mm
cylinder
6
200
100
0
0.15
13.33
26.67
900.00
cylinder
7
200
100
20
0.12
16.67
33.33
1125.00
cylinder
8
200
100
20
0.12
16.67
33.33
1125.00
cylinder
9
150
100
20
0.12
12.50
25.00
1125.00
bunny
10
200
100
20
0.12
16.67
33.33
1125.00
bunny
Notes:
Print failure at 20mm
All samples were brittle and several exhibited 
thermal cracking on the bottom surface
Lunar 3D Construction Printing: Establishing a processability window for laser processing of regolith
simulants
63
==PAGE:70==
Print 5
n
P
v
o
hs
El
Ev
time
global
Other settings:
1
125
100
20
0.12
10.42
10.42
beam width
0.15 mm
2
125
100
20
0.12
10.42
10.42
lh
1 mm
3
150
100
20
0.12
12.50
12.50
sample height
20 mm
4
150
100
20
0.12
12.50
12.50
sample x
20 mm
5
175
100
20
0.12
14.58
14.58
sample y
20 mm
6
175
100
20
0.12
14.58
14.58
7
200
100
20
0.12
16.67
16.67
8
200
100
20
0.12
16.67
16.67
9
225
100
20
0.12
18.75
18.75
10
225
100
20
0.12
18.75
18.75
11
250
100
20
0.12
20.83
20.83
12
250
100
20
0.12
20.83
20.83
13
275
100
20
0.12
22.92
22.92
14
275
100
20
0.12
22.92
22.92
15
300
100
20
0.12
25.00
25.00
16
300
100
20
0.12
25.00
25.00
Notes:
Observed significant balling effect
Balling effect or melt ball appears to propergate transverse to the scan direction, in the direction of subsequent lines
Both print A and B stopped after 3 layers
64
Lunar 3D Construction Printing: Establishing a processability window for laser processing of regolith
simulants
==PAGE:71==
Print 6
n
P
v
o
hs
El
Ev
time
global
Other settings:
1
150
100
20
0.12
12.50
12.50
beam width
0.15 mm
2
150
100
20
0.12
12.50
12.50
lh
1 mm
3
150
200
20
0.12
6.25
6.25
sample height
20 mm
4
150
200
20
0.12
6.25
6.25
sample x
20 mm
5
200
100
20
0.12
16.67
16.67
sample y
?
mm
6
200
100
20
0.12
16.67
16.67
7
200
200
20
0.12
8.33
8.33
8
200
200
20
0.12
8.33
8.33
9
250
100
20
0.12
20.83
20.83
10
250
100
20
0.12
20.83
20.83
11
250
200
20
0.12
10.42
10.42
12
250
200
20
0.12
10.42
10.42
13
300
100
20
0.12
25.00
25.00
14
300
100
20
0.12
25.00
25.00
15
300
200
20
0.12
12.50
12.50
16
300
200
20
0.12
12.50
12.50
Notes:
In print 6B, recoating issues resulted in repeated scanning of a sample with no or partial new powder layers. This resulted in a fully melted, shiny surface.
Both print A and B stopped due to recoating issues.
Lunar 3D Construction Printing: Establishing a processability window for laser processing of regolith
simulants
65
==PAGE:72==
Print 7
n
P
v
o
hs
El
Ev
time
global
Other settings:
1
150
100
20
0.24
6.25
12.50
beam width
0.3 mm
2
150
100
20
0.24
6.25
12.50
lh
0.5 mm
3
150
200
20
0.24
3.13
6.25
sample height
20 mm
4
150
200
20
0.24
3.13
6.25
sample x
20 mm
5
200
100
20
0.24
8.33
16.67
sample y
20 mm
6
200
100
20
0.24
8.33
16.67
7
200
200
20
0.24
4.17
8.33
8
200
200
20
0.24
4.17
8.33
9
250
100
20
0.24
10.42
20.83
10
250
100
20
0.24
10.42
20.83
11
250
200
20
0.24
5.21
10.42
12
250
200
20
0.24
5.21
10.42
13
300
100
20
0.24
12.50
25.00
14
300
100
20
0.24
12.50
25.00
15
300
200
20
0.24
6.25
12.50
16
300
200
20
0.24
6.25
12.50
Notes:
(mistake, actual beam 150um but spacing 300um*overlap)
Much trouble with recoating + samples being shifted due to collision with 
recoater or larger particles in new powder layer.
This resulted in unintended re-scanning. In print 7C, recoating was omitted 
purposefully to test re-scanning.
66
Lunar 3D Construction Printing: Establishing a processability window for laser processing of regolith
simulants
==PAGE:73==
Print 8
n
P
v
o
hs
El
Ev
time
global
Other settings:
1
300
100
0
0.15
20.00
20.00
beam width
0.15 mm
2
300
100
0
0.15
20.00
20.00
lh
1 mm
3
300
100
20
0.12
25.00
25.00
sample x
20 mm
4
300
100
20
0.12
25.00
25.00
sample z
20 mm
5
300
100
30
0.105
28.57
28.57
sample y (height)
10 mm
6
300
100
30
0.105
28.57
28.57
7
300
100
40
0.09
33.33
33.33
8
300
100
40
0.09
33.33
33.33
9
300
100
50
0.075
40.00
40.00
10
300
100
50
0.075
40.00
40.00
11
300
100
60
0.06
50.00
50.00
12
300
100
60
0.06
50.00
50.00
13
300
100
70
0.045
66.67
66.67
14
300
100
70
0.045
66.67
66.67
15
300
100
80
0.03
100.00
100.00
16
300
100
80
0.03
100.00
100.00
Notes:
Lunar 3D Construction Printing: Establishing a processability window for laser processing of regolith
simulants
67
==PAGE:74==
Print 9
Pre-scan
n
P
v
o
hs
El
Ev
time
global
Other settings:
1
300
100
0
0.15
20.00
20.00
30.00
beam width
0.15 mm
MAIN
2
300
100
0
0.15
20.00
20.00
30.00
lh
1 mm
3
300
100
0
0.15
20.00
20.00
26.67
4
300
100
0
0.15
20.00
20.00
26.67
sample x
20 mm
5
300
100
20
0.12
25.00
25.00
35.00
sample z
20 mm
6
300
100
20
0.12
25.00
25.00
35.00
sample y
20 mm
7
300
100
20
0.12
25.00
25.00
31.67
8
300
100
20
0.12
25.00
25.00
31.67
1
300
200
0
0.15
10.00
10.00
Pre-scan
2
300
200
0
0.15
10.00
10.00
3
300
300
0
0.15
6.67
6.67
4
300
300
0
0.15
6.67
6.67
5
300
200
0
0.15
10.00
10.00
6
300
200
0
0.15
10.00
10.00
7
300
300
0
0.15
6.67
6.67
8
300
300
0
0.15
6.67
6.67
Notes:
68
Lunar 3D Construction Printing: Establishing a processability window for laser processing of regolith
simulants
==PAGE:75==
Print 10
Pre-scan
n
P
v
o
hs
El
Ev
time
global
Other settings:
1
300
200
0
0.15
10.00
10.00
20.00
beam width
0.15 mm
2
300
200
0
0.15
10.00
10.00
20.00
lh
1 mm
3
300
200
0
0.15
10.00
10.00
16.67
sample x
20 mm
4
300
200
0
0.15
10.00
10.00
16.67
sample z
20 mm
5
300
200
20
0.12
12.50
12.50
22.50
sample y
20 mm
6
300
200
20
0.12
12.50
12.50
22.50
7
300
200
20
0.12
12.50
12.50
19.17
8
300
200
20
0.12
12.50
12.50
19.17
1
300
200
0
0.15
10.00
10.00
2
300
200
0
0.15
10.00
10.00
3
300
300
0
0.15
6.67
6.67
4
300
300
0
0.15
6.67
6.67
5
300
200
0
0.15
10.00
10.00
6
300
200
0
0.15
10.00
10.00
7
300
300
0
0.15
6.67
6.67
8
300
300
0
0.15
6.67
6.67
Notes:
Lunar 3D Construction Printing: Establishing a processability window for laser processing of regolith
simulants
69
==PAGE:76==
Print 11
n
P
v
o
hs
El
Ev
time
global
Other settings:
1
300
100
20
0.12
25.00
25.00
666.67
beam width
0.15 mm
2
300
100
20
0.12
25.00
25.00
666.67
layer height
1 mm
3
300
100
40
0.09
33.33
33.33
888.89
sample x
20 mm
4
300
100
40
0.09
33.33
33.33
888.89
sample z
20 mm
5
300
100
60
0.06
50.00
50.00 1333.33
sample y
20 mm
6
300
100
60
0.06
50.00
50.00 1333.33
7
300
100
80
0.03
100.00
100.00 2666.67
8
300
100
80
0.03
100.00
100.00 2666.67
Layer rotation 90̊                                    Double 
recoating
70
Lunar 3D Construction Printing: Establishing a processability window for laser processing of regolith
simulants
==PAGE:77==
No.
weight
height
x
y
rho
grade
sigY
1
21.06
21.95
21.59
21.66
2.051694752
2
20.5
21.23
21.11
21.24
2.153580555
34
3
24.4
24.19
22.51
22.86
1.960208359
4
23.47
24.07
21.97
21.61
2.053771749
37.5
5
28.57
27.67
23.87
23.24
1.861283548
6
28.87
26.15
23.56
23.54
1.99064284
7
36.91
28.81
25.07
25.5
2.004039478
8
38.63
29.26
26.53
26.22
1.897931129
Lunar 3D Construction Printing: Establishing a processability window for laser processing of regolith
simulants
71
==PAGE:78==
Print 12
n
P
v
o
hs
El
Ev
time
global
Other settings:
1
300
100
20
0.12
25.00
16.67 #
beam width
0.15 mm
2
300
100
20
0.12
25.00
16.67 #
layer height
1.5 mm
3
300
100
40
0.09
33.33
22.22 #
sample x
20 mm
4
300
100
40
0.09
33.33
22.22 #
sample z
20 mm
5
300
100
60
0.06
50.00
33.33 #
sample y
20 mm
6
300
100
60
0.06
50.00
33.33 #
7
300
100
80
0.03
100.00
66.67 #
print time:
7407.41 s
8
300
100
80
0.03
100.00
66.67 #
2.03 am
Notes:
Layer rotation 90̊                                                   
Triple recoating
scene file from print11 resused, only layer height changed.
Print paused between layer 2 and 3 to fix recoating
72
Lunar 3D Construction Printing: Establishing a processability window for laser processing of regolith
simulants
==PAGE:79==
No.
weight
height
x
y
rho
grade
area
1
20
22.15
21.57
21.69
1.929952 o
467.8533
2
20
22.25
22.05
21.48
1.897829
473.634
3
23
24.2
22.22
21.79
1.962959 o
484.1738
4
22
23.96
22.09
21.97
1.891952
485.3173
5
27
26.72
22.93
23.16
1.902763 s
531.0588
6
26
26.59
23.33
23.04
1.819105
537.5232
7
37
29.47
25.41
24.86
1.98754 s
631.6926
8
35
28.33
24
24.2
2.127134
580.8
Lunar 3D Construction Printing: Establishing a processability window for laser processing of regolith
simulants
73
==PAGE:80==
Print 13
n
P
v
o
hs
El
Ev
time
global
Other settings:
1
300
100
20
0.12
25.00
12.50 #
beam width
0.15 mm
2
300
100
20
0.12
25.00
12.50 #
layer height
2 mm
3
300
100
40
0.09
33.33
16.67 #
sample x
20 mm
4
300
100
40
0.09
33.33
16.67 #
sample z
20 mm
5
300
100
60
0.06
50.00
25.00 #
sample y
20 mm
6
300
100
60
0.06
50.00
25.00 #
7
300
100
80
0.03
100.00
50.00 #
print time:
5555.56 s
8
300
100
80
0.03
100.00
50.00 #
1.32 am
Notes:
Layer rotation 90̊                                                   
Double recoating
Scene file from print11 resused, only layer height changed
Print paused between layer 4 and 5 to fix recoating. 
74
Lunar 3D Construction Printing: Establishing a processability window for laser processing of regolith
simulants
==PAGE:81==
No.
weight
height
x
y
rho
grade
area
1
18.1
23.71
21.69
21.36
1.647731 o
463.2984
2
18.23
24.21
21.91
21.08
1.630343
461.8628
3
22.31
24.89
22.22
22.57
1.787307 o
501.5054
4
22.54
25.36
21.82
22.4
1.818452
488.768
5
25.03
26.04
22.31
22.93
1.878954 s
511.5683
6
25.73
26.87
22.47
23.07
1.847232
518.3829
7
36
29.25
26.17
24.72
1.902499 s
646.9224
8
36.91
29.48
26.39
24.53
1.934103
647.3467
Lunar 3D Construction Printing: Establishing a processability window for laser processing of regolith
simulants
75
==PAGE:82==
Print 14
n
P
v
o
hs
El
Ev
time
global
Other settings:
1
300
100
20
0.12
25.00
16.67 #
beam width
0.15 mm
Layer rotation 0̊
2
300
100
20
0.12
25.00
16.67 #
layer height
1.5 mm
Layer rotation 0̊
3
300
100
20
0.12
25.00
16.67 #
sample x
20 mm
Layer rotation 67    
4
300
100
20
0.12
25.00
16.67 #
sample z
20 mm
Layer rotation 67    
5
300
100
20
0.12
25.00
16.67 #
sample y
20 mm
Layer rotation 90̊    , with contour
6
300
100
20
0.12
25.00
16.67 #
Layer rotation 90̊    , with contour
7
300
100
20
0.12
25.00
16.67 #
Layer rotation 67̊    , with contour
8
300
100
20
0.12
25.00
16.67 #
Layer rotation 67̊    , with contour
Notes:
76
Lunar 3D Construction Printing: Establishing a processability window for laser processing of regolith
simulants
==PAGE:83==
No.
weight
height
x
y
rho
grade
area
1
21.17
23.01
21.7
21.03
2.0161
456.351
2
22.97
23.53
21.6
20.76
2.177
448.416
3
23.17
23.97
21.21
21.6
2.1099
458.136
4
24.43
24.75
21.01
21.7
2.165
455.917
5
22.73
25.04
20.76
21.98
1.9893
456.3048
6
22.43
23.67
21.52
22.27
1.9773
479.2504
7
22.45
24.856
21.27
22.55
1.8831
479.6385
8
22.83
25.102
21.03
22.84
1.8935
480.3252
Lunar 3D Construction Printing: Establishing a processability window for laser processing of regolith
simulants
77
==PAGE:84==
Print 15
n
P
v
o
hs
El
Ev
time
global
Other settings:
1
300
100
20
0.12
25.00
16.67 ##
beam width
0.15 mm
2
300
100
40
0.09
33.33
22.22 ##
layer height
1.5 mm
3
0.15
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
##
sample x
20 mm
4
0.15
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
##
sample z
20 mm
5
0.15
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
##
sample y
20 mm
6
0.15
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
##
7
0.15
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
##
print time:
#DIV/0!
s
8
0.15
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
##
#DIV/0!
Notes:
Layer rotation 90̊                                                   
Triple recoating
78
Lunar 3D Construction Printing: Establishing a processability window for laser processing of regolith
simulants
==PAGE:85==
Print 16
n
P
v
o
hs
El
Ev
time
Other settings:
1
300
100
60
0.06
50.00
33.33 ##
beam width
0.15 mm
2
300
100
60
0.06
50.00
33.33 ##
layer height
1.5 mm
3
300
100
80
0.03
100.00
66.67 ##
X
40 mm
4
300
100
80
0.03
100.00
66.67 ##
Z
40 mm
0.15
##
Y (height)
12 mm
0.15
##
0.15
##
0.15
##
Notes:
Layer rotation 90̊                                                   
Double recoating
printing substrates for dross and SWIR tests
Sample 16_03 after preparation
Lunar 3D Construction Printing: Establishing a processability window for laser processing of regolith
simulants
79
==PAGE:86==
Print 18
n
P
v
o
hs
El
Ev
time
global
Other settings:
1
300
100
0
0.15
20.00
20.00 ##
beam width
0.15 mm
2
300
200
0
0.15
10.00
10.00 ##
layer height
1 mm
3
0.15
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
##
sample x
20 mm
4
0.15
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
##
sample z
20 mm
5
0.15
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
##
sample y
1 mm
6
0.15
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
##
7
0.15
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
##
print time:
#DIV/0!
s
8
0.15
#DIV/0!
#DIV/0!
##
#DIV/0!
Notes:
UHS test. Samples are printed individually. p18_02_l02 filmed at 
1/3000s shutter by mistake
80
Lunar 3D Construction Printing: Establishing a processability window for laser processing of regolith
simulants
==PAGE:87==
Print 19
n
P
v
o
hs
El
Ev
time
global
Other settings:
1
300
100
20
0.12
25.00
25.00 ##
beam width
0.15 mm
2
300
100
20
0.12
25.00
25.00 ##
layer height
1 mm
3
300
100
40
0.09
33.33
33.33 ##
sample x
20 mm
4
300
100
40
0.09
33.33
33.33 ##
sample z
20 mm
5
300
100
60
0.06
50.00
50.00 ##
sample y
20 mm
6
300
100
60
0.06
50.00
50.00 ##
7
300
100
80
0.03
100.00
100.00 ##
8
300
100
80
0.03
100.00
100.00 ##
Notes:
p19_s07 LOM
Copy of print 11. sample 02 and 06 filmed with UHS cam
Lunar 3D Construction Printing: Establishing a processability window for laser processing of regolith
simulants
81
==PAGE:88==
No.
weight
height
x
y
rho
grade
area
1
23.17
24.76
22.11
21.98
1.925568 o
485.9778
2
22.97
25.03
21.68
21.12
2.004227
457.8816
3
26.42
26.61
21.94
21.8
2.075845 s
478.292
4
25.34
26.51
22.11
21.88
1.975881
483.7668
5
28.85
28.02
23.44
22.01
1.995722 s
515.9144
6
29.03
30.8
23.59
22.23
1.797335
524.4057
7
37.23
29.32
25.25
24.7
2.035967 s
623.675
8
37.54
29.47
25.82
25.73
1.917424
664.3486
82
Lunar 3D Construction Printing: Establishing a processability window for laser processing of regolith
simulants
==PAGE:89==
Print 20
n
P
v
o
hs
El
Ev
time
global
Other settings:
1
300
100
20
0.12
25.00
10.00 ##
beam width
0.15 mm
2
300
100
20
0.12
25.00
10.00 ##
layer height
2.5 mm
3
300
100
40
0.09
33.33
13.33 ##
sample x
20 mm
4
300
100
40
0.09
33.33
13.33 ##
sample z
20 mm
5
300
100
60
0.06
50.00
20.00 ##
sample y
20 mm
6
300
100
60
0.06
50.00
20.00 ##
7
300
100
80
0.03
100.00
40.00 ##
8
300
100
80
0.03
100.00
40.00 ##
Notes:
continuation of 300W_100mms series
Lunar 3D Construction Printing: Establishing a processability window for laser processing of regolith
simulants
83
==PAGE:90==
No.
weight
height
x
y
rho
grade
area
1
16.35
23.15
21.25
21.45
1.549461 o
455.8125
2
15.97
22.81
20.72
20.96
1.612125
434.2912
3
18.45
23.01
21.18
21.94
1.725509 o
464.6892
4
18.23
23.87
20.73
21.78
1.69152
451.4994
5
23.12
24.91
22.44
21.84
1.89382 o
490.0896
6
22.98
25.39
22.226
22.4
1.817934
497.8624
7
31.21
26.57
24.37
24.43
1.972982 s
595.3591
8
30.17
26.33
23.47
25.07
1.947408
588.3929
84
Lunar 3D Construction Printing: Establishing a processability window for laser processing of regolith
simulants
==PAGE:91==
Print 21
n
P
v
o
hs
El
Ev
time
global
Other settings:
1
300
100
0
0.15
20.00
20.00 ##
beam width
0.15 mm
100
2
300
100
0
0.15
20.00
20.00 ##
layer height
1 mm
100
3
300
100
-20
0.18
16.67
16.67 ##
sample x
20 mm
83.33333333
4
300
100
-20
0.18
16.67
16.67 ##
sample z
20 mm
83.33333333
5
300
100
-40
0.21
14.29
14.29 ##
sample y
1 mm
71.42857143
6
300
100
-40
0.21
14.29
14.29 ##
71.42857143
7
300
100
-60
0.24
12.50
12.50 ##
print time:
169.21 s
62.5
8
300
100
-60
0.24
12.50
12.50 ##
12.02 am
62.5
Notes:
p21_s03
p21_s01
Lunar 3D Construction Printing: Establishing a processability window for laser processing of regolith
simulants
85
==PAGE:92==
No.
weight
height
x
y
rho
grade
area
1
21.07
22.27
21.19
21.5
2.076705 o
455.585
2
20.32
22.64
21
21.2
2.016007
445.2
3
19.56
21.41
21.12
21.47
2.014773 o
453.4464
4
19.35
22
21.92
21.34
1.880283
467.7728
5
17.43
21.84
20.94
20.71
1.840297 o
433.6674
6
17.12
21.67
21.29
20.77
1.786622
442.1933
7
16.87
21.16
21.41
21.27
1.750714 o
455.3907
8
16.99
21.53
21.08
21.52
1.739548
453.6416
86
Lunar 3D Construction Printing: Establishing a processability window for laser processing of regolith
simulants
==PAGE:93==
Print 22
n
P
v
o
hs
El
Ev
time
global
Other settings:
1
300
100
0
0.15
20.00
13.33 ##
beam width
0.15 mm
2
300
100
0
0.15
20.00
13.33 ##
layer height
1.5 mm
3
300
100
-20
0.18
16.67
11.11 ##
sample x
20 mm
4
300
100
-20
0.18
16.67
11.11 ##
sample z
20 mm
5
300
100
-40
0.21
14.29
9.52 ##
sample y
1 mm
6
300
100
-40
0.21
14.29
9.52 ##
7
300
100
-60
0.24
12.50
8.33 ##
print time:
112.80 s
8
300
100
-60
0.24
12.50
8.33 ##
12.01 am
Notes:
continuation of 300W_100mms series
Lunar 3D Construction Printing: Establishing a processability window for laser processing of regolith
simulants
87
==PAGE:94==
No.
weight
height
x
y
rho
grade
1
19
22.34
22.22
22.45
1.704944 o
2
19
22.45
21.29
21.1
1.883992
3
17
21.95
21.25
21.35
1.707095 o
4
17
21.35
21.1
21.2
1.780052
5
15
22
21.15
21
1.535108 o
6
16
21.9
20.9
21.3
1.641156
7
15
22
21.25
21.5
1.492352 o
8
14
21.7
21.55
21
1.425613
88
Lunar 3D Construction Printing: Establishing a processability window for laser processing of regolith
simulants
==PAGE:95==
Print 23
n
P
v
o
hs
El
Ev
time
global
Other settings:
1
300
100
0
0.15
20.00
10.00 ##
beam width
0.15 mm
100
2
300
100
0
0.15
20.00
10.00 ##
layer height
2 mm
100
3
300
100
-20
0.18
16.67
8.33 ##
sample x
20 mm
83.33333333
4
300
100
-20
0.18
16.67
8.33 ##
sample z
20 mm
83.33333333
5
300
100
-40
0.21
14.29
7.14 ##
sample y
1 mm
71.42857143
6
300
100
-40
0.21
14.29
7.14 ##
71.42857143
7
300
100
-60
0.24
12.50
6.25 ##
print time:
84.60 s
62.5
8
300
100
-60
0.24
12.50
6.25 ##
12.01 am
62.5
Notes:
Lunar 3D Construction Printing: Establishing a processability window for laser processing of regolith
simulants
89
==PAGE:96==
No.
weight
height
x
y
rho
grade
1
16
22.5
21
21.4
1.582357 o
2
16
22.1
21.05
21.25
1.618515
3
14
21.45
21.5
21.15
1.43533 o
4
15
20.5
21
21.25
1.63968
5
13
22
21.1
21
1.33358 v
6
13
21.6
21.05
21.3
1.342326
7
13
21.75
21.2
21.25
1.326751 v
8
13
22.1
21.3
21.35
1.293521
90
Lunar 3D Construction Printing: Establishing a processability window for laser processing of regolith
simulants
==PAGE:97==
Print 24
n
P
v
o
hs
El
Ev
time
global
Other settings:
1
300
100
-40
0.21
14.29
28.57 ##
beam width
0.15 mm
71.42857143
2
300
100
-20
0.18
16.67
33.33 ##
layer height
0.5 mm
83.33333333
3
300
100
0
0.15
20.00
40.00 ##
sample x
20 mm
4
300
100
20
0.12
25.00
50.00 ##
sample z
20 mm
5
300
100
40
0.09
33.33
66.67 ##
sample y
1 mm
6
##
7
##
8
##
Notes:
samples printed separately for UHS DOE 1
Lunar 3D Construction Printing: Establishing a processability window for laser processing of regolith
simulants
91
==PAGE:98==
92
Lunar 3D Construction Printing: Establishing a processability window for laser processing of regolith
simulants
==PAGE:99==
Bibliography
[1]
Brian Baker-McEvilly et al. A comprehensive review on Cislunar expansion and
space domain awareness. May 2024. DOI: 10.1016/j.paerosci.2024.101019.
[2]
NASA’s Plan for Sustained Lunar Exploration and Development. Tech. rep.
[3]
Robert P Mueller. Earth and Space 2022 Lunar Base Construction Planning. Tech.
rep. 2023.
[4]
Robert P Mueller and Nathan J Gelino. Engineering Mechanics Institute Conference
2019 (EMI 2019) co. Tech. rep.
[5]
Martha S Clowdsley et al. Radiation Protection for Lunar Mission Scenarios. Tech.
rep.
[6]
G H Heiken, D T Vaniman, and B M French. Lunar sourcebook : a user’s guide to
the Moon. Tech. rep.
[7]
Jae Sung Park and Kenneth Kihm. Micro-Morphology and Toxicological Effects of
Lunar Dust. Tech. rep. 2006. URL: https : / / www . researchgate . net / publication /
259325023.
[8]
Maria I Allende et al. Prediction of Micrometeoroid Damage to Lunar Construction
Materials using Numerical Modeling of Hypervelocity Impact Events. Tech. rep.
URL: https : / / www . sciencedirect . com / journal / international - journal - of - impact -
engineering/special-issue/10MTGP5W4VJ.
[9]
Philip F. Yuan et al. “Robotic 3D printed lunar bionic architecture based on lunar
regolith selective laser sintering technology”. In: Architectural Intelligence 1.1 (Sept.
2022). DOI: 10.1007/s44223-022-00014-9.
[10]
URL: https://www.iconbuild.com/projects/project-olympus.
[11]
Nick Woolf and Roger Angel. “Pantheon habitat made from regolith, with a focusing
solar reflector: Pantheon Habitat”. In: Philosophical Transactions of the Royal So-
ciety A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences 379.2188 (Jan. 2021).
ISSN: 1364503X. DOI: 10.1098/rsta.2020.0142.
[12]
Kevin Farries, Scott Smith, and Phillip Viintin. “Construction of lunar masonry habi-
tats using laser-processed bricks”. In: 2020. URL: https://www.researchgate.net/
publication / 349064673 _ Construction _ of _ lunar _ masonry _ habitats _ using _ laser -
processed_bricks.
[13]
URL: https://www.hassellstudio.com/project/lunar-master-plan-moon-base-for-the-
european-space-agency.
[14]
Vanessa Aulesa. “Architecture of Lunar Habitats”. In: ().
[15]
Paul D. Spudis et al. “Geology of Shackleton Crater and the south pole of the Moon”.
In: Geophysical Research Letters 35.14 (July 2008). ISSN: 00948276. DOI: 10 .
1029/2008GL034468.
[16]
Eloy Peña-Asensio, Álvaro-Steve Neira-Acosta, and Juan Miguel Sánchez-Lozano.
“Evaluating potential landing sites for the Artemis III mission using a multi-criteria
decision making approach”. In: Acta Astronautica 226 (Jan. 2025), pp. 469–478.
ISSN: 00945765. DOI: 10.1016/j.actaastro.2024.10.049. URL: https://linkinghub.
elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0094576524006234.
[17]
James R Gaier, Kenneth W Street, and Robert J Gustafson. Measurement of the
Solar Absorptance and Thermal Emittance of Lunar Simulants. Tech. rep. 2010.
URL: http://www.sti.nasa.gov.
Lunar 3D Construction Printing: Establishing a processability window for laser processing of regolith
simulants
93
==PAGE:100==
[18]
Maxim Isachenkov et al. Regolith-based additive manufacturing for sustainable de-
velopment of lunar infrastructure – An overview. 2021. DOI: 10.1016/j.actaastro.
2021.01.005.
[19]
Jared M. Long-Fox et al. “Geomechanical properties of lunar regolith simulants
LHS-1 and LMS-1”. In: Advances in Space Research 71.12 (June 2023), pp. 5400–
5412. ISSN: 18791948. DOI: 10.1016/j.asr.2023.02.034.
[20]
C Meyer. 68501 and 68510 Soil and rake residue 906 and 17 grams. Tech. rep.
NASA, 2010. URL: https://www-curator.jsc.nasa.gov/lunar/lsc/68501.pdf.
[21]
.
[22]
Leonardo Caprio et al. “Determining the feasible conditions for processing lunar
regolith simulant via laser powder bed fusion”. In: Additive Manufacturing 32 (Mar.
2020). ISSN: 22148604. DOI: 10.1016/j.addma.2019.101029.
[23]
Exolith. LHS-1 Lunar Highlands Simulant | Fact Sheet. Tech. rep. 2024.
[24]
Romit Roy, Dipankar Das, and Prasanta Kumar Rout. A Review of Advanced Mullite
Ceramics. 2022. DOI: 10.30919/es8d582.
[25]
Xiaowei Zheng et al. Lunar Regolith Geopolymer Concrete for In-Situ Construction
of Lunar Bases: A Review. June 2024. DOI: 10.3390/polym16111582.
[26]
Simon Stapperfend et al. Additive Manufacturing with Molten Lunar Regolith un-
der Vacuum Conditions IAC-23,C2,2,12,x76680 Additive Manufacturing with Molten
Lunar Regolith under Vacuum Conditions. Tech. rep. 2023. URL: https://www.
researchgate.net/publication/378587502.
[27]
Houssam A. Toutanji, Steve Evans, and Richard N. Grugel. “Performance of lunar
sulfur concrete in lunar environments”. In: Construction and Building Materials 29
(Apr. 2012), pp. 444–448. ISSN: 09500618. DOI: 10.1016/j.conbuildmat.2011.10.041.
[28]
Richard N. Grugel and Houssam Toutanji. “Sulfur ”concrete” for lunar applications -
Sublimation concerns”. In: Advances in Space Research 41.1 (2008), pp. 103–112.
ISSN: 02731177. DOI: 10.1016/j.asr.2007.08.018.
[29]
Behrokh Khoshnevis’ et al. Lunar Contour Crafting-A Novel Technique for ISRU-
Based Habitat Development. Tech. rep.
[30]
Giovanni Cesaretti et al. “Building components for an outpost on the Lunar soil by
means of a novel 3D printing technology”. In: Acta Astronautica 93 (2014), pp. 430–
450. ISSN: 00945765. DOI: 10.1016/j.actaastro.2013.07.034.
[31]
Vamsi Krishna Balla et al. “First demonstration on direct laser fabrication of lu-
nar regolith parts”. In: Rapid Prototyping Journal 18.6 (2012), pp. 451–457. ISSN:
13552546. DOI: 10.1108/13552541211271992.
[32]
Ana Luisa et al. Laser-based directed energy deposition with mullite: a necessary
step for lunar regolith printing. Tech. rep. URL: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5148174.
[33]
Athanasios Goulas and Ross J. Friel. “3D printing with moondust”. In: Rapid Proto-
typing Journal 22.6 (2016), pp. 864–870. ISSN: 13552546. DOI: 10.1108/RPJ-02-
2015-0022.
[34]
Robert P. Mueller et al. “Additive Construction Using Basalt Regolith Fines”. In:
Earth and Space 2014: Engineering for Extreme Environments - Proceedings of
the 14th Biennial International Conference on Engineering, Science, Construction,
and Operations in Challenging Environments (2014), pp. 394–403. DOI: 10.1061/
9780784479179.042.
[35]
Juan Carlos Ginés-Palomares et al. “Laser melting manufacturing of large elements
of lunar regolith simulant for paving on the Moon”. In: Scientific Reports 13.1 (Dec.
2023). ISSN: 20452322. DOI: 10.1038/s41598-023-42008-1.
[36]
A. Meurisse et al. “Solar 3D printing of lunar regolith”. In: Acta Astronautica 152
(Nov. 2018), pp. 800–810. ISSN: 00945765. DOI: 10.1016/j.actaastro.2018.06.063.
94
Lunar 3D Construction Printing: Establishing a processability window for laser processing of regolith
simulants
==PAGE:101==
[37]
Miranda Fateri et al. “Solar Sintering for Lunar Additive Manufacturing”. In: Journal
of Aerospace Engineering 32.6 (Nov. 2019). ISSN: 0893-1321. DOI: 10.1061/(asce)
as.1943-5525.0001093.
[38]
Athanasios Goulas et al. “Mechanical behaviour of additively manufactured lunar
regolith simulant components”. In: Proceedings of the Institution of Mechanical En-
gineers, Part L: Journal of Materials: Design and Applications 233.8 (Aug. 2019),
pp. 1629–1644. ISSN: 20413076. DOI: 10.1177/1464420718777932.
[39]
M Sc Miranda Fateri, Ing Andreas Gebhardt, and M Sc Maziar Khosravi. EXPER-
IMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF SELECTIVE LASER MELTING OF LUNAR RE-
GOLITH FOR IN-SITU APPLICATIONS. Tech. rep. 2013. URL: http://asmedigitalcollection.
asme.org/IMECE/proceedings- pdf/IMECE2013/56185/V02AT02A008/4263812/
v02at02a008-imece2013-64334.pdf.
[40]
Rui Wang, Guofu Qiao, and Guangping Song. “Additive manufacturing by laser
powder bed fusion and thermal post-treatment of the lunar-regolith-based glass-
ceramics for in-situ resource utilization”. In: Construction and Building Materials 392
(Aug. 2023). ISSN: 09500618. DOI: 10.1016/j.conbuildmat.2023.132051.
[41]
Lorenzo Abbondanti Sitta and MichÃ¨le Lavagna. “3D printing of Moon highlands
regolith simulant”. In: Proceedings of the International Astronautical Congress, IAC.
Vol. 2018-October. 2018.
[42]
Hossein Ghasemi-Tabasi et al. “An effective rule for translating optimal selective
laser melting processing parameters from one material to another”. In: Additive
Manufacturing 36 (Dec. 2020), p. 101496. ISSN: 2214-8604. DOI: 10 . 1016 / J .
ADDMA.2020.101496.
[43]
D H Austen and E Shafirovich. SPECIFIC HEATS AND THERMAL DIFFUSIVITIES
OF LHS-1 LUNAR REGOLITH SIMULANT AT LOW TEMPERATURES. Tech. rep.
[44]
Caterina Iantaffi et al. “Laser additive manufacturing of lunar regolith simulant: New
insights from in situ synchrotron X-ray imaging”. In: Additive Manufacturing 101
(Mar. 2025). ISSN: 22148604. DOI: 10.1016/j.addma.2025.104711.
[45]
Athanasios Goulas, Russell A. Harris, and Ross J. Friel. “Additive manufacturing
of physical assets by using ceramic multicomponent extra-terrestrial materials”. In:
Additive Manufacturing 10 (Apr. 2016), pp. 36–42. ISSN: 22148604. DOI: 10.1016/
j.addma.2016.02.002.
[46]
Tianrun Shen et al. “Single track deposition of lunar regolith without substrate based
on millimeter-sized spot”. In: Construction and Building Materials 433 (June 2024).
ISSN: 09500618. DOI: 10.1016/j.conbuildmat.2024.136537.
[47]
Hong Li, Shaohua Yan, and Yu Fu. “Data-fusion for in-situ monitoring and molten
state identification during LPBF of NiCoCr medium-entropy alloy”. In: Scientific Re-
ports 14.1 (June 2024). ISSN: 20452322. DOI: 10.1038/s41598-024-65545-9.
[48]
Yingjie Zhang et al. “Extraction and evaluation of melt pool, plume and spatter in-
formation for powder-bed fusion AM process monitoring”. In: Materials and Design
156 (Oct. 2018), pp. 458–469. ISSN: 18734197. DOI: 10.1016/j.matdes.2018.07.002.
[49]
Mohammad Montazeri and Prahalada Rao. “Sensor-Based Build Condition Monitor-
ing in Laser Powder Bed Fusion Additive Manufacturing Process Using a Spectral
Graph Theoretic Approach”. In: Journal of Manufacturing Science and Engineering,
Transactions of the ASME 140.9 (Sept. 2018). ISSN: 15288935. DOI: 10.1115/1.
4040264.
[50]
John C Graf and Lyndon B Johnson. NASA Reference Publication 1265 1993 Lunar
Soils Grain Size Catalog. Tech. rep.
[51]
Henning Wahce and Luca Kiewiet. “Investigation on the Thermal Properties of an
Lunar Icy Regolith Simulant”. In: ().
Lunar 3D Construction Printing: Establishing a processability window for laser processing of regolith
simulants
95
==PAGE:102==
[52]
Alexander Niecke¹ et al. Spinning Continuous Fibres from Lunar Regolith Simulants
LHS-1 and LMS-1 Executive Summary Picture. Tech. rep. URL: http://www.esa.
int/act.
[53]
Athanasios Goulas et al. “Assessing extraterrestrial regolith material simulants for
in-situ resource utilisation based 3D printing”. In: Applied Materials Today 6 (Mar.
2017), pp. 54–61. ISSN: 2352-9407. DOI: 10.1016/J.APMT.2016.11.004.
[54]
Jörg Neumann et al. “The MOONRISE: payload for mobile selective laser melting
of lunar regolith”. In: 2021. DOI: 10.1117/12.2600322.
[55]
Miranda Fateri and Andreas Gebhardt. “Process parameters development of se-
lective Laser Melting of lunar regolith for on-site manufacturing applications”. In:
International Journal of Applied Ceramic Technology 12.1 (Jan. 2015), pp. 46–52.
ISSN: 17447402. DOI: 10.1111/ijac.12326.
[56]
Christian Leslie. General rights Evolving the Landscape of Polymer Laser Powder
Bed Fusion Expanding Frontiers in Process and Materials. Tech. rep. 2023.
96
Lunar 3D Construction Printing: Establishing a processability window for laser processing of regolith
simulants
==PAGE:103==
Lunar 3D Construction Printing: Establishing a processability window for laser processing of regolith
simulants
97
==PAGE:104==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Koppels Allé, Building 404
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://construct.dtu.dk/
