==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Master’s Thesis
5G-NR LDPC encoder and decoder for FPGA
implementations
Dóra Keltai (s232744)
Kongens Lyngby 2025
==PAGE:2==
DTU Electro
Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Ørsteds Plads
Bygning 343
2800 Kongens Lyngby
www.electro.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
This Master’s thesis presents the design and implementation of a Low-Density Parity
Check (LDPC) encoder and decoder tailored for Field Programmable Gate Array (FPGA)
applications, within the context of 5G network backhaul. The work is motivated by the
increasing demand for higher bandwidth and throughput in modern telecommunications,
which would require advanced error correction techniques to handle larger data packets
effectively. The thesis begins with a technical overview of 5G and the limitations of existing
error correction codes, leading to the opportunities provided by LDPC codes due to their
superior performance in terms of bit error rate and scalability.
The design phase details the mathematical foundations of the LDPC algorithm, includ-
ing the encoder and decoder structures, and the implementation strategies. The encoder
is designed to eﬀiciently process large data blocks, utilizing a modified compressed sparse
column format for matrix representation to minimize resource usage. The decoder employs
both Sum-Product and Min-Sum algorithms, with a focus on the differences between their
capabilities.
Functional validation is conducted through testing in ModelSIM, with results demon-
strating the effectiveness of the encoder and decoder designs. The thesis concludes with
an evaluation of the results, highlighting the achieved throughput and latency metrics, and
discusses potential improvements for future work. Overall, this research contributes to the
advancement of error correction technologies in 5G networks, providing a robust framework
for further exploration and development.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This Master’s thesis was prepared at the department of Electrical and Fotonics Engineer-
ing at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring
a MSc. degree in Communication Technologies and System Design.
Kongens Lyngby, August 3, 2025
Dóra Keltai (s232744)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my deepest gratitude to my supervisor, Michael Stübert Berger,
for their guidance, support, and patience throughout this project. Their support has been
instrumental in shaping this thesis.
I would also like to thank my boyfriend, Dániel Jakab, for his constant support, under-
standing, and motivation during both the highs and lows of this process. His help with the
my questions during documentation was essential.
I am also profoundly thankful to my family for their unwavering support, patience, and
belief in me throughout this journey. Their love and encouragement have been my foundation
even if they could not be my side during this time.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Technical Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2
Design
7
2.1
Important algorithms and methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Encoder . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Decoder . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3
Implementations
23
3.1
Matrix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.2
Encoder implementations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.3
Decoder implementations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4
Functional validation
35
4.1
Encoder tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.2
Decoder test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5
Results and Evaluation
49
5.1
Encoder Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5.2
Decoder Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
5.3
Discussion and future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
6
Conclusion
63
A Acronyms
65
B Used files
67
Bibliography
69
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Fifth generation network (5G) plays a critical role in the current state of modern telecom-
munications, as there is a growing need for higher bandwidth and higher throughput. As
this comes with larger packages, the backhaul also has to be accustomed to these changes.
However, the huge increase in the package size caused the previous error correction codes
to be ineffective as the block size of their capacity is too small to handle the new package
size within the delay and error rate 5G promises. That is why in addition to being able to
transmit larger packages, the error correction on the backhaul and between nodes also had to
evolve during the deployment of 5G to be able to protect the content of larger blocks. This ar-
ticle will focus on the backhaul perspective of the 5G error correction protocol, Low-Density
Parity Check codes (LDPC) codes.
1.1
Technical Overview
As the 4G error correction code, Turbo codes have a standard code rate of 1/3, but
different rates like 1/2, 2/3, and 3/4 can be achieved via puncturing. They are providing a
bit error rate around 1e-6, which would in theory satisfy the criteria set by 5G. This value
is higher than what is achievable by scaling-up the Turbo codes, as they are only perform
well until moderate block sizes[Pra15]. The reason for this lays in the principals of their
structure: Turbo codes are using multiple encoders to calculate the transmitted block with
different interleaving. By increasing the block size, more of these encoders (and their paired
decoders) are needed to perform at the same error rate.
In conclusion, to solve the scalability issue, to enable higher throughput, and to provide
lower Bit-error-rate (BER), a new forward error code had to be developed. This is LDPC
coding. It achieved a 1e-8 BER and has a larger block size (and package size) compared to
the Turbo codes. Because of its way of working, it is more scalable for longer blocks than
its ancestor.
There are some definitions to which will be referred to during the thesis:
• Block: The segment of the package that needs to be transferred.
• Generation matrix (G): The base matrix used in block codes to calculate codewords.
(G =
[
Im∗m
An∗m
]
)
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
• Parity matrix/matrix (H): The base matrix used in block codes to calculate the syn-
drome.
• Codeword (c): The encoded block resulted by the encoder. (H =
[
AT
n∗m
In∗n
]
)
• Syndrome (s): A vector created by the decoder to check for errors in the transmitted
block or the decoded codeword.
• Error vector (e): It contains bits for each bits in the codeword and each is paired to a
syndrome. These bits are true/false values, which are indicating if their paired bit in
the codeword is correct or not.
• Circular shift size (Zc): Defines the smallest segment size of LDPC matrices. It is
based on the block size of the incoming data as block size is given as k ∗Zc, where k
is defined by the specification of the used LDPC code.
• Loops or cycles: Paths in graphs, which have the same starting and ending node.
• Girth: The length of the shortest loop.
LDPC codes are also a type of block code, which uses matrices to calculate the encoded
word. The calculation is done by multiplying the incoming vector by the matrix to get the
code word, which is the encoded block. This block will be transported through a channel to
the decoder. There, it again uses the matrix for decoding, and after to check if the codeword
is a valid codeword or if it contains errors. By multiplying the codeword by the matrix,
a syndrome is formed as the result of that operation. If the syndrome only contains ’0’
bits, then the codeword is a valid one, otherwise it has errors. Each syndrome has a paired
error vector, which shows the specific place(s) of the error(s), which can be used for further
actions in the decoding process. By adding it to the transmitted vector, the sum will be
a codeword, this is the correction during decoding. Block codes have a certain amount of
resilience against errors; this differs for each type. Each of them can correct up to a specific
number of errors, but if more errors are in the codeword, then the result will be incorrect
after the correction, as a different codeword will be selected.
c = u ∗H
(1.1)
c => v
s = v ∗HT
(1.2)
s => e
v + e = c∗
(1.3)
As most of the block codes, this matrix also has an identity sub-matrix. This means that
the uncoded block will also be part of the codeword, along with the calculated parity bits.
LDPC codes are also behaving that way, and their encoded codeword are constructed by
==PAGE:13==
1.1 Technical Overview
3
catenating the parity bits after the uncoded ones.
The difference between other block codes and LDPC codes is that for them the genera-
tion matrix is not constructed, instead the parity matrix (from here referred to as matrix)
is directly used for the encoding process. This method only calculates the parity bits, and
not recalculates the uncoded block part, as the matrix is constructed in a way so the en-
coded block will contain the uncoded block, so it does not need to use calculation power and
resources to find already accessible information. This makes the method faster and more
effective.
In this method, the process is to use the matrix and the uncoded block to calculate
the parity bits, then construct the encoded block. During the decoding, uses the matrix
to correct the received block using iterations and generating probabilities, until either the
process result in a codeword or runs longer than the set number of iterations. The main
idea behind it is to calculate probabilities for each bit by making a graph from the ma-
trix (Tanner graph representation) and going around it in iterations. The process (called
Sum-Product algorithm) includes four phases: initialization, calculating row-probabilities,
calculating coloumn probabilities, and checking for errors. The iteration is happening be-
tween the second to fourth phase. The flow chart of it is presented here:
Figure 1.1: Phases in the LDPC decoding
Going into a bit more details, the initialization phase calculates the starting probabilities
based on the transmitted block’s bits, the row and coloumn probabilities are calculated by
running through the rows and coloumns of the matrix and using the previously calculated
probabilities, and finally the error checking is being done as in other block codes, by mul-
tiplying the vector with the matrix to get the syndrome. If there are no errors according
to the syndrome, then the decoder reached a codeword. It is possible to stop the decoding
process after reaching a codeword, this is called early stop this point onward. It is useful
on low noise level because it might not require as many iterations to correct as higher noise
level blocks.
==PAGE:14==
4
1 Introduction
1.1.1
Motivation
5G is a rapidly increasing field in the networking sector which is important in the ev-
eryday life. All of our technologies are based somehow on the internet, which makes it to
continuously developed and upgraded. The single channel data rate is higher than 400Gbps
in the current backhaul, with an end-to-end latency 1 ms.[HWC19] To fulfill these require-
ment, it is necessary to have a stable and robust foundation alongside with fast connections.
For networks, this is the fiber optical back-haul. To achieve an effective flow the forward
error correction plays a very important role, because it is not only makes it more robust and
fail-proof, but it also have to be eﬀicient during it’s processing to not disturb the flow.
In my thesis, the main goal to investigate is the latency and the throughput of an imple-
mentation I make for encoding and decoding optical fiber packages and simulating a noisy
channel to also verify the error correction abilities of them.
In my opinion the current 5G would benefit from an eﬀicient encoding and decoding
modules, because with lower latency and higher throughput, we can avoid longer start-ups
and have achieve a better overall throughput.
1.1.2
Research Question
The main question of my thesis is: what is the throughput and latency of LDPC encoding
and decoding, and is it possible to make them more eﬀicient and robust?
To investigate the performance of the LDPC algorithm, we require own implements based
on the LDPC algorithm. For the encoder, during my Special course, we studied an LDPC
code for Wifi, which has the same base algorithm, but is performed with a much smaller
scale.
For the decoder, my software (MATLAB) implementation - learned during the ”Advanced
forward error correction and iterative decoding” course - was used as a base and to clarify
functionality for the hardware implementation.
The knowledge gained during those two courses was used to form and refine the Hypothesis
and during the research and development.
The sub-questions I am focusing on are:
• How can the system be implemented on an Field Programmable Gate Arrays (FPGA)?
What are the requirements?
• How well do different approaches affect the investigated factors? Which are better?
• What is the bit error rate, latency, and throughput?
==PAGE:15==
1.1 Technical Overview
5
• Can it be improved in any aspect? If so, how?
• How well do they perform against existing solutions?
The study includes investigating different approaches for the encoder to have a wider un-
derstanding on how area affects the performance, such as maximum achieved frequency,
throughput, and delay. The decoder is also implemented in two different versions to test the
difference between the Sum-Product and the Min-Sum algorithms. These will also be used
to investigate how overconfidence can affect the outcome, and the bit-error-rates.
The goal here is to achieve a deep understanding of 5G LDPC technology, focused on
the algorithm and the Very High Speed Integrated Circuit (VHSIC) Hardware Description
Language (VHDL) implementation.
The specifics of the project are: an uncoded block size of 8448 bits, with a circular shift
size of 384 bits, a maximum output size of the encoded block is 25344 bits, and code rates
between 1/3 and 8/9. The code rates other than 1/3 are used with different circular shift
sizes, but for the sake of measuring and comparing, they were implemented with the same
circular shift size. The implementation only applies to Base-Graph 1 as Base-Graph 2 has
different size and format requirements.
The motivation is to investigate different approaches for deploying encoding and decod-
ing schemes of the LDPC algorithm, based on several factors. My motivation also includes
to achieve a deeper understanding on 5G LDPC encoding and decoding via VHDL program-
ming and FPGA implementations.
For an overview, the rest of the paper will go into details on the encoding and decod-
ing processes, design choices, the ways of implementation, functionality evaluations and the
achieved results.
Chapter 2: Design
Provides a more detailed explanation for the algorithm’s mathematical background, includ-
ing important methods and algorithms. The chapter is divided into two main parts the
”Encoder” and the ”Decoder” subsections.
The ”Encoder” part focuses on the matrix structure and its storing and usage, as the encod-
ing process is closely connected to the matrix itself.
”Decoder” focuses more on the algorithm and its mathematical background as the process
relays mainly on diﬀicult equations. The main point is to provide an explanation on the
Sum-Product algorithm, which is the key element of the decoding process. The explanation
contains the theoretical- and the technical approach for understanding the base steps and
goals during the algorithm, but also provides a context to incorporate the base algorithm
into a design that is less complex and is more effective.
Both part are also including the design choices and defines the requirements that the imple-
mentation will need to fulfill. These are focused on the process of planning approaches and
==PAGE:16==
6
1 Introduction
diagrams before creating the implementations.
Chapter 3: Implementations
This part focuses on the development of the implementations using Quartus and shows how
the defined algorithms and required part were incorporated into each of them. The different
approaches are explained as being broken down into smaller components and processes. The
explanations are using the block diagrams defined in chapter 2.
Chapter 4: Functional validation
This section explains examples for the functionality of each implementation and examines
the functional correctness. Waveforms are presented as the proof made in ModelSIM.
Chapter 5: Results and Evaluation
Shows the achieved result in Quartus regarding of delay, maximum achieved frequency, and
used resources. The achieved throughput and bit-error-rate is also discussed here based on
graphs and diagrams. These results are compared against other studies and the requirements
of 5G.
Chapter 6: Conclusion
Provides a clear and focused summary of the study’s main findings in relation to the hypoth-
esis. Also addresses the limitations of this study and evaluates the reliability and validity of
the findings. Finally, outlines the possibility and way of application.
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 2
Design
The main principle of LDPC is to take the parity matrix (H) and define it in a compressed
format (the base graphs) and use it to shift the package segment (from here on block) bits
according to the circular shift size (Zc) and use the logical function Excluding or function
(XOR) on all elements of each column to have the coded package. Then, after receiving the
transmitted package, the decoder uses the Sum-Product (SP) Algorithm to get the original
package segment.
2.1
Important algorithms and methods
To understand the main workflow of the LDPC codes [Yan; Kel], it first requires expla-
nation on the techniques and tools used during the protocol. Here, we will explain basic
definitions, puncturing, Tanner graph representation, and the shifting mechanism.
Puncturing
It is the method used to set the output bits according to the code-rate. It is essentially
to leave out or cut the output. For example, in this essay’s case, the input is 8448 bits with a
circular shift of 384, and the coding rate is 1/3, but the matrix produces a 26112-bit output,
which is more than the needed amount. Here, the output should be 25344, which is achieved
by cutting the first 2 ∗Zc = 768 bits. That is the standard code rate, but higher rates can
be achieved by further reducing the number of bits. At the end of the block is being cut
instead of the front. More on the reason at the explanation of the SP Algorithm, the main
method of the decoder.
Shifting and matrix format
The importance of this method comes from the structure the matrix is stored and pro-
cessed in. The parity matrix of LDPC codes can be divided into sub-matrices with both
dimensions of Zc. All of these sub-matrices have a common property: each of them are
shifted identity or empty matrices. This makes it possible to store the matrix in a com-
pressed format by just storing the shifting values, which are used as circular shifts to the left.
This divides the LDPC matrices into two categories: Base-Graph 1 (BG1) and Base-graph
==PAGE:18==
8
2 Design
2. This paper focuses on BG1-type matrices. These ones are 46x68 in size and use different
coding rates from 8/9 to 1/3 based on the puncturing.
Tanner graph representation
This is an important principle for the decoding process, as the SP Algorithm builds on
it. In this representation, the matrix is shown as a graph where the top round nodes are
representing the columns/distributions, which are the variable nodes, and the bottom square
ones are the rows/constraints, these are the check nodes. The connections between the are
indicating that in their cross section, the value of the matrix bit is ’1’. An example of this is
shown in figure 2.1 below. The colours on the variable nodes are showing which check nodes
are connected with them, for better visibility.
H =


1
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
1
0
1
0
1
1
1
0
1
0
0
1
1
0
1
0
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
1
0
1
0
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
1
0
1
0
1
1
1
1


Figure 2.1: Representation of the parity matrix H
■
Additionally to the techniques used in the protocol, another method is also introduced
which acts as a base idea during the storing of the matrix.
Compressed Sparse Coloumn method
This is the main method used in Matlab to storing matrices eﬀiciently. The core princi-
ple of the method is to store the matrix as three different matrices, one that registers the
coloumn indexes, one with the row indexes, and the last that holds the useful values.
Here is an example:
==PAGE:19==
2.2 Encoder
9


47
11
−1
10
−1
18
−1
−1
59
−1
−1
−1
−1
36
81
64
−1
−1
−1
73
−1
−1
49
15
30
−1
−1
24
−1
92


This matrix would be stored as:
• Coloumn indexes: [0, 2, 5, 7, 10, 11, 14],
• Row indexes: [0, 4, 0, 2, 3, 1, 2, 0, 2, 4, 3, 0,
3, 4],
• Values: [47, 30, 11, 36, 73, 59, 81, 10, 64, 24,
49, 18, 15, 92]
The process to rebuild the matrix is to take the value and divide them according to the
coloumn indexes: [(47, 30), (11, 36, 73), (59, 81), (10, 64, 24), (49), (18, 15, 92)], then use
the coloumns indexes to make them into the actual rows: [(47, -1, -1, -1, 30), (11, -1, 36, 73,
-1), (-1, 59, 81, -1, -1), (10, -1, 64, -1, 24), (-1, -1, -1, 49, -1), (18, -1, -1, 15, 92)].
With this the required storage space for low density matrices can be drastically reduced.
2.2
Encoder
The encoder functions as other block codes do, just with a more effective method that
can handle larger block sizes. This is enabled by the shifting method and the format of the
matrices. As in other block codes, the calculation of the encoded block is done by multiply-
ing the incoming data block with the matrix used for the encoding. In this case, the matrix
for a block of 8448 bits would be (46 ∗384) ∗(68 ∗384) = 461.242.368 bits, approximately
440 Mbits. Just running through all these bits requires a long time and is not scaling well
for large numbers, like in this case. That means that the process needs a new method for
storing and processing the matrix itself.
Figure 2.2: Density of the parity matrix H
==PAGE:20==
10
2 Design
First, the format of the matrix needs deeper explanation. As the numbers in the matrix
represent the shifting values, the number 0 represents an identity sub-matrix, and any posi-
tive value represents a shifted identity sub-matrix. But the matrix also contains ’-1’ values,
which indicate that the sub-matrix is an all ’0’ matrix. That means that these parts will
always result in an all ’0’ segment when multiplied by any incoming data segments during
the process. As previously mentioned, the segments produced by these sub-matrices are
XOR-ed together for further calculations. This means that all ’0’ segments do not change
the final result even if left out. That means that there is a possibility for further reducing
the amount of data that needs to be stored.
Figure 2.3: Density of the parity matrix H
2.2.1
Algorithm
Other than the matrices can be split into shifting sizes submatrices, these segments can
be grouped into larger parts that make storing and usage clean.
[
A22x4
E4x4
042x4
B22x42
C4x42
I42x42
]
• A: Contains the shifting values to calculate λ0, λ1, λ2
and λ3, the main components of the encoding process.
• E: Contains the values to make the first four parities
(each is Zc bits)
• B: Contains the values to calculate the rest of the λx
vectors
• C: Uses the values of each λ and adds the required
shifted p0-3 values to return the rest of the parities.
==PAGE:21==
2.2 Encoder
11
The algorithm runs as the following:
• 1. Calculating λ values
• 2. Using λ0−3 to calculate p0−3 parities.
• 3. Using the rest of the λs with the parities p0−3 to calculate the rest of the parities.
• 4. Construct the encoded message: take the incoming data and put the parities in
order after it, then puncture the first 2 ∗Zc bits.
Going more into details, the λ values are calculated with the equation below:
k∗Zc−1
∑
j=0
hi,j ∗uj = λi
(2.1)
where ’i’ refers to the rows and ’j’ to the coloumns. The important part is, that one λ is
calculated for each rows, and they are calculated based on the first k=22 number of coloumns
and on the uncoded block bits.
After getting the λ values, the core parities can be find. As seen in 2.2.2 the parity
matrix has an E submatrix, which gives the equations on how to calculate p0 to p3. The E
submatrix looks like:
E=


1
0
−
−
0
0
0
−
−
0
0
−
1
−
−
0


From this submatrix the following equations are written:
By adding together all lines:
p0 = λ0 + λ1 + λ2 + λ3
(2.2)
Using lines 1, 3, and 4 to find p1,2,3:
p1 = p1
0 + λ1
(2.3)
p2 = p3 + λ2
(2.4)
p3 = p1
0 + λ3
(2.5)
As it is seen, the first parity that has to be calculated is p0, which will be used to find p1
and p3. And at the end p3 is used to find p2.
These parities are important because of the C submatrix, as they are used with their
paired coloumns to calculate the rest of the parities:
px = λx +
3
∑
j=0
Cx,j ∗pj
(2.6)
==PAGE:22==
12
2 Design
After calculating all the parities, the encoded block can be constructed. It is done by
simply concatenating the parity bits behind the uncoded block and performing the punctur-
ing. First, puncture the first 2 ∗Zc bits from the front, then the rest from the back to match
the code rate.
2.2.2
Block design and considerations
2.2.2.1
Storing and circulating through the matrices
The graph above shows that the matrix has a low density. This means that storing the
full content of the matrix is wasteful, considering that each number in the matrix is max-
imum Zc −1 = 383, so it requires 9 bits to store on and the size of the matrix is 46x68,
so there are 3128 of these numbers. That results in 28152 bits = 3519 Bytes. With the
help of my Matlab code, the number of useful values was counted in the matrix, and it
is only 316 out of the 3128. That means that if we store only the useful ones, then the
required memory can be reduced significantly. This method is called Compressed Sparse
Coloumn (CSC) which was modified to better suit the project’s settings. Although it re-
quires other measures, like storing the positions of these values. It still reduces the required
memory amount and also makes the algorithm faster by skipping the unused numbers (’-1’s).
The modified method uses three arrays to represent a matrix: one containing the indexes
from the matrix vector for the elements in the rows in order (ROW_INDEX), one that con-
tains the starting indexes of the coloumns (COL_INDEX), and one that contains the values
of the matrix in order (matrix). This format was chosen because of the clear separation of
the coloumns, which is important as both the encoding algorithm progresses through the
matrix by going through coloumn-by-coloumn.
Because in this project, the decoder also requires a clear separation between the rows as
well, the row arrays are stored in a slightly differently from the original CSC. Instead of just
storing in an array, it is stored as separate arrays with the number of values in each array.
This way the matrix does not need to be reconstructed for the r-message calculations either,
which makes the process more simple and faster.
By using this method, the used memory can be reduced to:
• COL_INDEX: one value for each of the coloumns and an ending value with the max-
imum value of 316, which is 69 numbers, each of which is a 9-bit unsigned vector:
69 ∗9 = 621 bits.
• ROW_INDEX: The maximum number of used values in the matrix is 19. To effectively
be able to run through the rows, the information on them should be stored in one place.
This was achieved by creating a 2D array, with a 19-number-long array for each row,
with the maximum value of 315. 46 ∗19 ∗9 = 7866 bits.
==PAGE:23==
2.2 Encoder
13
• matrix: The number of used values in the matrix is 316, with the maximum value of
383. 316 ∗9 = 2844 bits.
• In total 621 + 7866 + 2844 = 11331 bits, around 1.38 kByte.
Originally, the ROW_INDEX would only require less memory, as there would be 316
indexes with the maximum value of 45: 316 ∗6 = 1896 bits. That gives us 5970 bits=746
Byte difference, but that is a fair trade-off for not needing to reconstruct the full matrix for
every calculation.
2.2.2.2
Block designs
As previously stated, the encoder needs to satisfy certain requirements to function cor-
rectly. These requirements are closely aligned with the explained algorithm.:
• Can receive the data input of at least 384 bits (Zc)
• Provides the input to choose the code rate
• Can process the incoming data with the matrix: Shift and XOR Zc long vectors
• Provides a suitable output for transmission
The encoder was implemented in two versions to test the difference in resource consumption
and latency.
First, for the higher area version, the idea is to use as many resources as needed to
achieve the least clock periods for data processing. According to the algorithm, the first
22 coloumns can be processed together if the full incoming block is received. However, the
calculation of the parities requires λ0−3 as their sum provides p0. The λs can be calculated
in the same period as the p0 is. As previously mentioned, p0 is needed to get p1 and p3, and
either p1 or p3 is necessary for p2. This means that this step requires at least one period to
calculate all shifts for the first 22 coloumns, one to add them and get the lambdas, then one
to calculate p0, then p1 and p3 in the next, and last p2. This is four clock periods to this point.
When we have p0, the matrix processing can continue. As the twenty-third coloumn uses
p0, the twenty-fourth uses p1, etc., these can precede as each needed value is found. As p1
and p3 are found in the same period, and their coloumns do not have elements in the same
row, they can be processed together. After the p2 coloumn is done, all of the parities are
calculated, the encoded block will be ready. Depending on the chosen output format, the
output can be fully transmitted after this point. As the optical layer can transmit a high
amount of data, this version puts out the whole encoded block.
==PAGE:24==
14
2 Design
The block diagram can be seen here:
Figure 2.4: Block diagram of the full version of the encoder
As for the other version, the goal is to prevent hardware duplication as much as possible
and use pipelining to process the data. As seen in the first version, there is a time when the
processing can only continue coloumn-by-coloumn as the calculation of the core parities is
blocking the progression. Based on this, the second version processes the matrix one coloumn
at a time. First, up to the twenty-second, thereafter the same process needs to be done with
calculating the parities p0−3 as in the first version. This takes twenty-two periods for the
first half and five for the second half.
Then, for the output, this version needs to be compatible with FPGAs, so the number
of bits is capped. The shifting size seems to be a suitable number for this, as the processed
information arrives in that size, and it fits into many FPGA Input/Output busses (I/O) sizes.
Next, for outputting the encoded block, the bottleneck would be the core parity calcula-
tions. The reason for this is that the incoming uncoded block is the first part of the output,
and that can be transmitted immediately after arriving. In this version, the parity p0 needs
an additional period, because of the different approach. Here, not only are the shifted vectors
made in every period, but they are also added to the previously calculated ones. This means
that after the first twenty-two periods, there is no need for additions to get the lambda values,
but they are added up already. This also means that p0 cannot be directly calculated after
the shifts, but only after the lambda values are provided. Afterward, the rest of the process
==PAGE:25==
2.3 Decoder
15
is the same and can be processed one coloumn in one cycle. This means that if registers
are added to the input and directed to the output, the added delay bypasses the gap in the
calculation. As for the rest of the parities, the next few (p4,6,7) do not contain any of the core
parities in their calculation, and p5 only contains p0. This can be seen in Figure 2.3, as the
matrix does not have any values other than (5,23) in the rows 4 to 7 and coloumns 23 to 26.
This provides enough time to have the rest of the parities before they need to be transmitted.
The block diagram is seen here:
Figure 2.5: Block diagram of the FPGA version of the encoder
2.3
Decoder
2.3.1
SP algorithm
As the name suggests, the main functions of this algorithm [Yan; Kel] are the additions
and the multiplications. This algorithm is used during the decoding procedure. The main
idea behind the method is that the received word is corrected after iterations, calculating
the probabilities of each bit based on the parity matrix rows and coloumns. Because of this,
the base model of this method relies on the Tanner representation of the parity matrix, H.
As seen in figure 2.1, the structure contains two types of nodes, which in the SP algo-
rithm have their own responsibilities. The variable nodes are responsible for receiving the
transmitted word from which they generate the starting probabilities, and from them, the
q-messages and the check nodes for the generation of the r-messages. These messages are
the key features of the algorithm.
==PAGE:26==
16
2 Design
Q-messages have the information about the probabilities based on the rows and the ini-
tial probabilities. By including the probabilities for all flagged bits, the final probabilities
are obtained. These will be used during the error check to construct the vector for the mul-
tiplication. There are two probabilities connected to each bit, as the sum of them, including
the initial probabilities, might be different than one or 100%, they need to be normalized
so that the final probability pairs sum up to 1, during the vector construction. It is also
important that during iterations, the probabilities are on the same base, so that they can be
used for the row probability calculations without further transformations and do not cause
incorrect data handling.
R-messages contain the information of the checks performed with the arrived bit prob-
abilities without including the initial probabilities.
The message answers how much the
probability of the node’s check being satisfied is based on the q-messages arrived from the
connected variable nodes.
So the base method of the SP algorithm is that it uses the calculation of q and r-messages
up to a maximum number of iterations to correct the errors in the received word.
Going through the mathematical background of the process, first, the interface receives
the word transmitted through the channel, and initializes the Logarithmic-likelihood Ratios
(LLRs), which are the initial probabilities, and calculates the first set of q-messages with the
LLRs. That is given in the following equations:
LLR = exp (−1
2σ2(yn)2)
(2.7)
q0
mn = αmn ∗exp (−1
2σ2(yn −(−1))2) = αmn ∗p0
n
(2.8)
q1
mn = αmn ∗exp (−1
2σ2(yn −(1))2) = αmn ∗p1
n
(2.9)
After this, the variable nodes pass the q-messages to the check nodes, which ones calculate
the r-messages as follows:
r0
mn =
∑
xn′:n′∈N(m)\n
P(zm|xn = 0, xn′ : n′ ∈N(m)\n)
∏
n′∈N(m)\n
qx
mn′n′
(2.10)
r1
mn =
∑
xn′:n′∈N(m)\n
P(zm|xn = 0, xn′ : n′ ∈N(m)\n)
∏
n′∈N(m)\n
qx
mn′n′
(2.11)
These r-messages are then sent back for the variable nodes to calculate the q-messages for
the next iteration. From here, these are also used in the calculation as well as the prior
probabilities:
q0
mn == αn ∗p0
n ∗
∏
m′∈M(n)\m
(r0
m′n)
(2.12)
==PAGE:27==
2.3 Decoder
17
q1
mn == αn ∗p1
n ∗
∏
m′∈M(n)\m
(r1
m′n)
(2.13)
The SP algorithm makes it possible to add an early stop feature to the previously ex-
plained main part. This means that during each q-message calculation, when the final sums
are calculated for the normalization, they are also used to construct the vector for the op-
tional parity check.
If it is satisfied, then the algorithm doesn’t need further iterations,
because the errors have been corrected, or at least reached the point where the answer is a
codeword. To utilize this function, the posterior probabilities or posterior distribution need
to be computed:
q0
n == αn ∗p0
n ∗
∏
m′∈M(n)
(r0
m′n)
(2.14)
q1
n == αn ∗p1
n ∗
∏
m′∈M(n)
(r1
m′n)
(2.15)
From these the αn is chosen so q0
n + q1
n = 1 as previously mentioned. Then the algorithm
makes a hard decision on the obtained probabilities and chooses the bit values to be set to
the higher probability. The obtained vector is the word to be processed during the parity
check. If the here generated syndrome is all ’0’s, then it is satisfied and the decoding process
is completed. If not satisfied then the iterations continue repeating the check during or after
every q-message calculation until there is an all ’0’s syndrome or the maximum number of
iterations is reached.
In short the algorithm consists of the following steps:
• 0. Obtaining the initial probabilities based on the received block
• 1. Calculating the r-messages
• 2. Computing the q-messages for the next iteration
• 3. Optionally checking for an early stop.
• 4. Repeating until one of the exit conditions is fulfilled.
I will introduce an important point: the girths are influencing the performance of the SP
algorithm. If the girth is small, there are small loops in the graph, which cause overconfi-
dence, as these loops are shorter to go around and provide feedback faster than the longer
ones. For a good LDPC code, the girth is at least 8.
This description is for the general understanding of the algorithm, but it is not deployed
this way, because the linear application has a lot of flows, for example that the multiplications
require a large amount of resources. To prevent using multiplications, the implementation
has to have a different base, namely the logarithmic base.
==PAGE:28==
18
2 Design
2.3.1.1
Log-domain implementation
There is a need for the logarithmic domain application, and that is the linear applica-
tion’s complexity. Other than containing several multiplications, there are two probabilities
for each bits, which requires twice as many calculations as well. That also means that the
memory used for that application is significantly higher. In addition to that the early stop
also requires memory worth twice of the length of a codeword. Of course these are reducible
by only keeping half of the q-messages and the posterior probabilities, but that only intro-
duces more operations, which makes the already long runtime even longer.
In the log-domain only half of this memory is needed, because not the individual ’0’ and ’1’
probabilities are used, but the divisions of those. Moreover, the complexity of the operations
is less, as the exponentiations are converted to multiplications, and the multiplication is
converted to additions. Because of these, the run time is also reduced, as the data needs to
be calculated during the iterations is also reduces.
The calculations of each necessary parameters:
Initial probabilities:
Ln = 2yn
σ2
(2.16)
Q-messages:
Lqmn = Lqmn +
∑
m′∈M(n)\m
Lrm′n
(2.17)
R-messages:
Lrmn = −2atanh(
∏
n′∈N(m)\n
(Lqmn
2
))
(2.18)
Final probabilities for the parity check:
Lqn = Ln +
∑
m′∈M(n)
Lrm′n
(2.19)
The early stop is a bit different in this case. Here, as the value of Lqn is stored as the
division of the original probabilities for each bit value, it is checked for being higher (’1’) or
lower (’0’) than 0, to set the bits of the parity check word (v). The flow and steps of the
algorithm is the same as it was in the linear domain.
As introduced in the previous subsection, there is a problem related to the algorithm:
overconfidence. The main cause of the problem is the short loops presenting in the graph.
during the construction of the graph, it is noticible that the first two shift sized parts have
high degrees. Because of that, choosing four point an a shape of a rectangle in these (see
figures 2.2 and 2.3). By doing so, they form a loop of length 4. That means the girth in this
graph is 4, which is heavily influencing the performance.
When a loop is present in the interface, that means that the q and r-messages will have
a ”feedback” after a number of iterations are passed, namely half of the length of the loop.
==PAGE:29==
2.3 Decoder
19
That causes ”overconfidence”, the situation when the system, or rather the check node, was
influenced by this ”feedback” and even after the other messages telling it that there should
be a change in the value, the high influence cannot be countered, and the value remains
unchanged. This can result in errors, which will not be corrected by the algorithm.
To prevent ”overconfidence”, either by puncturing or by eliminating the influence of
the shorter loops. This slows down the convergence these loops are causing, but the local
optimums will still be present as problems. If a local optimum is reached, the r-messages
cannot have a high enough influence to pull the point off of the local optimum. By reducing
the influence of certain messages, the local optimum point can be avoided in most cases. To
do this, they are multiplied by a constant smaller then 1, typically 0.85:
Lqmn = Cq ∗Lqmn, Lrmn = Cr ∗Lrmn
(2.20)
The better method is to construct the parity matrix in a way to have a girth of at least 8 or
by using puncturing to remove the shorter loops.
2.3.2
Min-Sum (MS) algorithm
As for the MS algorithm [Ren24], the r-messages are calculated in a different way, as
it uses an approximation. The approximate value of the r-messages would be the minimal
absolute value in each rows multiplied by the product of their signs excluding the selected
element. The equation present here:
Lrmn = min(Lqmn) ∗
∏
n∈N
sign(Lqmn)
(2.21)
The benefit of the MS algorithm compared to the SP is that the complexity of its calculations
are lower and more suitable for hardware implementation. The downside is that the expected
accuracy in resolving errors is lower and is less resilient.
2.3.3
Block design and considerations
Based on the explained algorithms, the decoder is much more complex than the encoder,
so naturally the requirements are more strict for it as well:
• Can receive the output data provided by the encoder (same data rate)
• Can store the initialization values as the encoded data arrives
• Can store the q- and r-messages
• Can iterate between the calculations of the messages
• Can construct the predicted codeword for the parity check
• Can output the decoded block
==PAGE:30==
20
2 Design
To match the input rate, the decoder receives the whole block. This will also make the
testing easier in ModelSIM. This design is a best-effort one, so if the circuit is busy process-
ing, then it does not accept input.
To store the initialization values, it needs to process them and save the probabilities. As
these values are not always whole numbers, we need an other type to save them. Real type
would be ideal, but it is a kind that is hard to implement in actual hardware. Instead my
choice was sfixed type, which is a fixed point binary type. This type has their boundaries
as there are finite number of bits that can be utilized to store values. This causes quanti-
zation error, but it will always be part of the system, and by providing enough bit, it can
be insignificantly small. As this type is a binary type, the comparisons and sign checks can
easily be done.
The decoder has two different versions according to the two algorithms explained earlier.
The goal is to examine the difference in bit-error-rate and their resource requirements. First,
the general idea for both is to implement a frame that can progress through the matrix, one
by rows and one by coloumns, as the q-messages can be processed more eﬀiciently by calcu-
lating the sum of a chosen coloumn first, and then for each element, subtract its own value
from this sum. The same principle can be used for the r-messages as well, the difference
is the complexity of the equation used. As previously shown, this calculation requires two
additional mathematical functions: the tangent hyperbolic and the arc-tangent hyperbolic.
For these, the cordic system[And98] was chosen as a base. This is because this system can
be used to calculate hyperbolic functions, specificly sinh, cosh and atanh, so it provides the
means to work for both needed functions. The diﬀiculty in this task is the limitations of
the quantization and the limit of how well can the asymptote be approached, so what the
highest value returned by them can be. The problem with the cordic system is that during
my research, no implementation was found, so it could not been explicitly integrated into the
design. Instead, the logic algorithm had been implemented by hand. During this point my
tests showed that the algorithm is not very precise at the edges of the interpretation range.
Also the implementation of the cordic system already requires a table for atanh values for
the 1/2n points, so it was considered to be changed into a look-up table instead. This was
also implemented, with a help of a Matlab code to provide the values for each possible inputs.
This table can be used for the atanh and the tanh functions, for the atanh to output the
value in the correct memory part, and for the tanh to check for the first higher value than
the input, and output the (1/2)index as its answer. Negative inputs are also resolved, as the
functions are central symmetric.
==PAGE:31==
2.3 Decoder
21
Decoder frame - block diagram:
Figure 2.6: Decoder block diagram
==PAGE:32==
22
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 3
Implementations
3.1
Matrix
The matrix is an important part of the designs, as all of the algorithms are heavily relay
on it. Because of this, it requires explanation on how it was implemented and what consid-
erations were taken into account.
As previously discussed, the most optimal choice would be to use unsigned type to store
the elements of the matrix. As for the processes it would be more ideal to have the values
as integers, to be ready to use without needing to cast them into integers. This is because
the shiftings require an integer to perform the left circular shift. So, as a final decision they
were implemented as integers.
An other problem is the way of importing the values. This requires either an file outside
of the design or have to be included into the code somewhere. The file in the design includes
them is the formatting.vhd.
This file contains the types and constants required for the
designs. To include the matrix values in the design not just in formatting, but in other files
where a part of the matrix was needed for eﬀiciency, Matlab codes were written to generate
parts of the code, as Matlab has the matrix value built into one of its many packages. These
code are also attached along with the documentation and are explained in the appendix.
3.2
Encoder implementations
For the base implement of the encoder as the block diagram shown, there are multiple
shift_adders and shifters in the design (see on figure 2.4 and 2.5). These elements’ task is
to shift the incoming circular shift sized vector according to the matrix and if there is a
feedforward vector then XOR their value together with the shifted value then output the
result. The shifter is used in the bigger (first or full) design so that the vector calculations
can happen in the same clock period and summed up in the next. The shift_adder is used in
the FPGA implementation for the pipelining approach. Here the one vector is processed at
each clock period from the uncoded data, and is shifted and added to the already processed
ones, creating a sum for each rows. These will result the λ values.
==PAGE:34==
24
3 Implementations
During the process, the matrix values need to be given for the specific shifters or shift_adders.
This is done by mode_vectors in the full design, where all coloumn values have to be out-
putted in the same time, and only the used values are relayed in each. In the FPGA version,
it is the coloum_sorter or find_element_x that creates the coloumn vectors or elements,
which also include placeholders for the specific places where the vector parts are not used.
This way, it is more clear how the values are handled as there is no second layer in sorting the
values by other means like multiplexers, but they are directly connected and sent to their
paired shifters. A possible other solution would be to also output an other vector which
would contains which specific shifter should be enabled and their shifting values. This would
reduce the number of signals, but introduce one more clock period per coloumns instead and
also makes the design less straightforward.
After calculating these, the core parities are needed to be calculated next. In the first
type, the p0 is already found at the end of the λ calculations, as it can be calculated in
the same period as them. The rest of the parities are calculated with shift_adders as the
core parities are found with forward and backward calculations and these parities are needed
to be used in finding the rest by shifting and adding their values to the specific row’s λ values.
In the FPGA version, p0 is calculated separately from the rest, as it is the sum of the
first four λ values so it requires one more period for the λ values to be outputted before it
can be calculated. The rest of the process is done the same way as in the first type, but in
this design, there is no need to include extra components as the ones used to calculate the
λs can be reused. (see Figure 2.5)
Finally the output can be sent according to the chapter 2: encoder explanation, as the full
encoded block in the first version and starting after the second clock cycle in the FPGA type.
The components and files used for the encoder versions:
• formatting.vhd
• mode_vector_X.vhd
• coloumn_sorter.vhd and find_element_x.vhd
• shifter.vhd
• shift_adder.vhd
• inter_state_reg.vhd
• LDPC_5G_encoder.vhd
• LDPC_5G_encoder_lite_FPGA.vhd
==PAGE:35==
3.2 Encoder implementations
25
The functions of each components:
Formatting.vhd : Contains the constants and formatting types for both the encoder and
the decoder. The ones used in the encoder are:
1 library IEEE ;
2 use IEEE .STD_LOGIC_1164. ALL ;
3 use IEEE .NUMERIC_STD. ALL ;
4 use IEEE .MATH_REAL. ALL ;
5 use
i e e e . fixed_pkg . all ;
6
7 package formatting is
8
constant matrix_size_row
:
integer := 46;
9
constant matrix_size_col
:
integer := 68;
10
constant matrix_ind_max
:
integer := 316;
11
type vector is array ( natural range <>) of unsigned ( bits_no−1 downto 0) ;
12
type vector_int is array ( natural range<>) of integer ;
13
type matrices is array (0 to 7 , 0 to matrix_ind_max−1) of integer ;
14
constant Zc
:
i nteger := 384;
15
constant bits_no :
integer := 9;
16
constant k_main :
integer := 22;
17
constant n_main :
vector_int (0 to 7) :=
. . .
18
constant COL_INDEX :
col_vec :=
. . .
19
constant ROW_INDEX : row_mat :=
. . .
20
constant matrix
:
matrices :=
. . .
21
constant index_size
:
integer := 274;
22
constant matrix_index
:
vector_int (0 to 273) :=
. . .
23 end package ;
Matrix_size_col and matrix_size_row are the dimensions of the parity matrix and ma-
trix_ind_max is the number of used values in it. They are used during the reconstruction
and storing of the matrices. As said before Zc is the circular shift size, bits_no is the required
number of bits to store the shifting values individually. K_main is the coloumns used in
calculating λ values also the used in giving the uncoded length (K) as k_main ∗Zc = K,
and n_main is providing the encoded length (N) as n_main ∗Zc = N.
COL_INDEX, ROW_INDEX and ”matrix” are the stored matrix components according to
the CSC method. From these only the ”matrix is used in the encoders. ”Martix” contains
the values of the used matrices, seven ones of base-graph 1.
Index_size defines number of indexes included in the λ calculation. These indexes are stored
in matrix_index, according to where the ”matrix” values are need to be placed during the
encoding. The coloumn_sorter uses these to generate the vectors for the coloumns.
==PAGE:36==
26
3 Implementations
Components, constants and types used by the different encoders:
Full encoder:
• shifter.vhd and shift_adder.vhd
– Zc
– bits_no
• inter_state_reg.vhd
– Zc
• mode_vector_X.vhd
– type: vector - for the output, the
values for each coloumn.
– Does not uses ”matrix” as the val-
ues are local in each mode_vector
type.
• LDPC_5G_encoder.vhd (top level en-
tity)
– Zc
– bits_no
– k_main
– type:
vector - inputs and out-
puts of the coloumn values from
mode_vectors
to
shifters
and
shift_adders.
FPGA or Lite encoder:
• shift_adder.vhd
– Zc
– bits_no
• coloumn_sorter.vhd
– matrix_size_row
– matrix_index
– index_size
– bits_no
– type: vector - for the outputs of
the coloumn values. The format is
different from the full version as
for the full only the used values are
included, but here the vector needs
padding where there are unused val-
ues, so that each shift_adder gets
the correct value associated with
its row.
• find_element_x.vhd
– bits_no
• LDPC_5G_encoder_lite_FPGA.vhd
(top level entity)
– Zc
– bits_no
– type:
vector - the coloumn val-
ues as inputs and outputs be-
tween the coloumn_sorter and the
shift_adders.
mode_vector_X.vhd: Its inputs are clk, the clock signal, en the enable signal and
mode which is the selector of the matrix. According to the selector the vector associated
with the chosen matrix is sent to the output. Each mode_vector component is paired with
a specific coloumn, and contains the used values for that coloumn from all matrices.
==PAGE:37==
3.2 Encoder implementations
27
coloumn_sorter.vhd: Its inputs are clk -the clock signal-, en -enable signal-, clr -clear
signal-, and mode_in -the mode selector-. The only output is column_out -a vector type
with the with of matrix_size_row as it needs to contain the shift values for each row in a
specific coloumn.
If the enable goes high, the component outputs each coloumn values, one coloumn in one
clock period. It sends out coloumns in every clock period where the enable signal is high
(level triggered). The higher (top) entity resets this component after each cycle of encoding.
This is done by the clear signal, as if it goes high then the components resets its internal
signals and outputs default data, coloumns containing only ones.
The selection and construction of the coloumn is performed as it follows:
If enable is high, then the ”Main_loop” starts. This loop is iterating up to the size of ma-
trix_size_row, and in each iteration sets one value of the coloumn to be outputted. It checks
if the current iterator value is a part of the matrix_index, and if it is uses the associated
with that spot in the matrix. If not then sets the value to all ones. To make the search in ma-
trix_index faster and more clear there is an other counter ”ind” to store which index/place
is the process at in the matrix_index vector. Its maximum value equals to index_matrix. In
each period when a new value from the matrix is copied into the coloumn vector, the value
of ”ind” increased. Once it reaches its maximum value, the automatic output is the default
value, because there is no values left in the matrix to be used.
find_element_x.vhd: This is a different version of coloumn_sorter, to increase eﬀi-
ciency. Only looks up the values for one row, and only outputs one value at a time.
These components has the matrix parts included in itself (these parts were generated by
the Matlab code ”element_M.m”) to make looking up faster.
shifter.vhd: Its input aside from clk, clr and en are data_in and matrix_in. Its func-
tion is to create a shifted vector from the incoming data. It is done by a left circular shift
(rotate left or rol), that is performed on the data_in, with the number of matrix_in as the
shifting number. Finally it outputs the shifted vector to data_out.
Originally there is no need for a clear signal, as the only case where we expect an output
from the component is when the inputs are set and the enable is high. Otherwise the output
would remain the previous output. The component was still given a clear signal to be able to
be set back to default during full system reset and to avoid accidental incorrect data reading
from the top entity.
shift_adder.vhd: In addition to shifter.vhd, this component also has an input for feed-
forward, to be able to sum up the previously processed values. This is done by connecting
the output to the ”feedforward” with a feedback loop. The function addition to shifter is
that after shifting the vector it also XORs the feedforward value with it, before outputting
==PAGE:38==
28
3 Implementations
the result to data_out.
inter_state_reg.vhd: It is a parallel register with the width of the circular shift size.
It stores the incoming value for one clock period. On the technical level it is a delayer, which
only function is to add a specific amount of delay to a signal.
LDPC_5G_encoder.vhd: This is the top level entity of the full version. Its role is to
guide the encoding process. This is done by using registers that are representing the phase
the process is in. These steps of the process are independent, thous the processing of a new
input can start immediately after it arrived.
The mode, enable and input data (uncoded block bits) are stored until the end of the
process, and have their registers in each phase while being pushed forward as the encoding
progresses. When an high enable arrives the mode and data_in values are saved. This
also triggers the mode_vectors which are sending out the matrix values towards to their
specific shifters. In the second phase, after the values arrived, the shifters are rotating the
data segments and sending them back to the top entity. In the third phase the top entity
calculates all the λs and the p0 parity vector. During phases four to six, the rest of the core
parity vectors are calculated alongside with the rest of the parities. These are triggered by
the shifting enable signal, the one that is pair to the block being processed. Then at the end
in phase seven the result is sent to the output together with the mode value.
In this type the idea is to locally store the vector values as it requires less amount of
memory then the CSC method, because they can be stored at the places where they are
needed, even inside the shifter components. My approach is to have a separate component
that does the selection of these and the shifting mechanism only does the mathematical
parts. With local storing, only the values are needed to be stored, because the placement is
already decided for them on output.
The top level entity builds up from shifters in the high places of the parity matrix (same
for each used matrix), and each coloumn has its own mode_vector_(coloumn no.) as well.
The coloumn values are directly wired into the specific shifters. These are providing the
shifted values for the λ value calculations.
After that the top level sums up each row and all rows together to get the λ values and the
p0 core parity. Then uses the shift_adders to add the remaining shifted core parities to the
calculated λ values in each row.
And finally in the correct clock period, the top level outputs the uncoded block and the
calculated parities as the encoded block.
LDPC_5G_encoder_lite_FPGA.vhd: This is the top level entity of the FPGA
version. The components included in it will be explained after the main process of it. The
task of it is to see through the process of encoding. The timing during this is done by a
counter which keeps track of where the process is. A phases are following the flow described
==PAGE:39==
3.3 Decoder implementations
29
in Chapter 2.2.2: Encoder: Block design and considerations.
Compared to the other version, the input is processed in smaller size by the shift_adder
for each row. These components are receiving their shift values from their paired find_element
_x and a circular shift sized block, to sum up the shifted data part into the λ values. After
the λ values are calculated, these components are stopped until the p0 core parity is calcu-
lated and ready to be used for further calculations. Then they are enabled again to continue
the calculations of the final parities. At the end the output is sent as explained at the end
of section 2.2.2: Block design and considerations.
3.3
Decoder implementations
The major difference between the two types of decoders is the algorithm used during the
process. The frame follows the same order in both implementations. First the constants and
formats are explained to provide a better understanding.
3.3.1
Storing and format
As the encoder, the decoder also uses the formatting package to have the types and
constant it needs. The parts used are:
1 constant matrix_size_row
:
integer := 46;
2 constant matrix_size_col
:
intege r := 68;
3 constant matrix_ind_max
:
integer := 316;
4 constant row_ind_max :
integer := 19;
5 constant col_ind_max
:
integer := 30;
6 constant bits_no :
integer := 9;
7 constant prevent_overconf :
s f i x e d ( high_fixed downto low_fixed ) :=
0 . 7 5 ;
8 type vector is array ( natural range <>) of unsigned ( bits_no−1 downto 0) ;
9 type vector_int is array ( natural range<>) of
integer ;
10 constant high_fixed
:
integer := 8;
11 constant low_fixed
:
i nteger := −8;
12 type vector_sfixed is array ( integer
range <>) of
s f i x e d ( high_fixed downto
low_fixed ) ;
13 type matrix_sfixed is array ( integer
range <>, integer
range <>) of
s f i x e d (
high_fixed downto low_fixed ) ;
14 type col_vec is array (0 to matrix_size_col ) of integer ;
15 type row_mat is array (0 to matrix_size_row −1, 0 to row_ind_max) of integer ;
16 type matrices is array (0 to 7 , 0 to matrix_ind_max−1) of
integer ;
17 constant Zc
:
in teger := 384;
18 constant k_main :
i nteger := 22;
19 constant n_main :
vector_int (0 to 7) :=
. . . ;
20 constant COL_INDEX :
col_vec :=
. . . ;
21 constant ROW_INDEX : row_mat
. . .
==PAGE:40==
30
3 Implementations
Here the differences to the encoders constants and types are explained.
• The constants are used in the same way as in the encoder, mostly to reconstruct the
matrix.
• The prevent_overconf is the value that defines the reduction to prevent overconfidence.
This is multiplied by the values in the coloumns and row that have more than 2-to-4
elements.
• high_fixed and low_fixed are defining the size of the sfixed values
• types are used to construct the matrix and the storage units for the decoding
The mainly used type in the decoder is the sfixed, and vectors made with them. The Lq
and Lr values or q- and r-messages are stored in vectors of sfixed values as well. Originally
real values were used, but it was changed because the sfixed type is more closer to hardware
types and easier to manage than real values, in my opinion.
These storage for the messages builds up as the following: there are matrix_ind_max
number of slots to have sfixed vectors in. These are signifying the places where the matrix
contains useful values. The vectors stored in them are circular shift sized as there is one
paired with each contained bits. The sfixed values are in order of the coloumns, so in the Lq
values it is the same order as processed, but in the Lr where the algorithm work according
to the rows, it needs the shifts to know which value is in the same row as another.
The storage is built this way to help the processing and calculation of the q-messages
and to eliminate the reconstruction of the matrix multiple times.
3.3.2
Top-level entity and State Machine
As introduced in Chapter 2: Decoder, both algorithms follow the same principles: ini-
tializing, setting first round of q-messages based on the initial values and then calculating
r-messages, finally repeatedly circling between q- and r-messages until the end of the decod-
ing process. This means that a frame can be created to guide the flow of the process and
work with both algorithms. This frame is explained here with the help of the design.
The flow of the system is overseen by the top level entity with the help of a state machine.
The diagram of the state machine and the explanation of its states are presented below:
==PAGE:41==
3.3 Decoder implementations
31
Figure 3.1: State machine in decoder
• IDLE: Idle state, waits for an enable signal to send out initialization signals and con-
tinues to INIT state.
• INIT: The initialization state, wait for the init_LLR component to finish the initial-
ization and send a done signal to continue to CAL_Lq state and initialize the circular
iteration.
• MUX: Initial waiting phase, for the initial values to arrive.
• CAL_Lq: Waits for the calc_Lq component to calculate the q-messages and perform
a parity check.
If it is correct or reached the maximum number of allowed iterations, then receives an
early signal, and outputs the decoded block, then returns to IDLE state if there is no
enable, and to INIT is there is.
If the check result in an incorrect codeword, then the iteration between r- and q-
messages continues, and it goes to CAL_Lr state.
• CAL_Lr: Starts the calc_Lr component to calculate the r-messages.
• WAIT_Lr: Waits for the calc_Lr to finish the calculation then proceeds to CAL_Lq
state.
As mentioned here the components included in the design are: init_LLR, calc_Lq,
calc_Lr and the top level entity: LDPC_5G_decoder.
The way of work of these com-
ponents is explained here to establish the flow of the design’s algorithms.
==PAGE:42==
32
3 Implementations
3.3.3
Flow of the design
Initialization - init_LLR.vhd
During the initialization, every observation is processed as individual values and the re-
sult is set as the LLR. These are also the starting values in the r-message calculations. Here
my algorithms are skipping the initialization of the q-messages, as those are the same LLRs
which were calculated in the initialization. Instead of multi-copying it to take up a huge
part of the memory, the initial LLRs are directly used to calculate the r-messages. This is
done by the init_LLR component.
The flow of the calculation after setting the initial LLRs, is to go through the matrix
row-by-row, and breaks the block into rows to find the specific bits included into the specific
rows. To do this, it uses the shift values paired with the row of the compressed matrix. After
finding the included places it proceeds to calculate the collective data needed. In the SP this
is the previously introduced product of all non-zero and included bits, and in the MS it is
the first and second lowest absolute value from the included bit values and the product of
the signs of these places. When the result is ready, it runs through the places again to set
the values for each. In the SP the product is divided by the element’s value and then it takes
its arc-tangent-hyperbolic value. In this operation it is important that we cannot divide by
zero, so we have to set up different cases. If there was two or more zeros, then all places will
have their final value as zeros and there is no need for further calculations just setting the
values. If there was one zero, then the zero value’s place is the only one with a non-zero final
value. This is the product calculated previously. The rest is just zeros, so there is no need for
further calculation here either. As for when the product is non-zero, then there was no zero
value between the values, and we can proceed normally, by dividing the values in each places.
As for the MS algorithm, the the two lowest value are needed so that the values of each
places can be set during the second round. For all places except for the lowest values place,
the lowest value is placed with the sign divided by the place’s sign. For the lowest it is the
second lowest value with the same principle on the sign.
When these operations are done for all rows, then the initialization is completed.
Q-messages - calc_Lq.vhd
With the initial phase completed, the algorithm steps into the calculation of the q-
messages phase, the CAL_Lq state. Here the flow in both is to go coloumn-by-coloumn
and sum up the included values to set the final ones in the second round by subtracting the
place’s value from the sum. When this is done, the components initializes a parity check.
That is performed by using the previously calculated sums and if it is negative that the
predicted bit is ’0’, if positive than ’1’. After constructing the block, it is multiplied with
==PAGE:43==
3.3 Decoder implementations
33
the matrix to produce the syndrome. Based on the syndrome it outputs an early signal to
determine that the decoding is finished.
R-messages - calc_Lr.vhd
The calculation of the r-messages only defer in the input. During the initial phase all rows
were paired with the value assigned to their coloumns, but here there are already different
values for most. In this part the design check the specific places with the helps of the shift
values to calculate the new r-messages. When it is finished it outputs a done signal.
With the components combined, the design creates a frame for the algorithms to fit into,
so they can be tested.
==PAGE:44==
34
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 4
Functional validation
The testing of the designs was performed in ModelSIM with the help of generated testing
data. For both the encoder and decoder designs, the test data need to have the uncoded
and the encoded block.
4.1
Encoder tests
For the encoder the uncoded data was sent in from a testbench and the result was com-
pared against the expected output, the encoded data. These information are stored in two
files input_bin.txt and output_matlab_(FPGA_)bin.txt. As the names suggest, the input
file contains the uncoded and the output file contains the encoded data. These files were
generated by my Matlab code with a working implementation. The input data was gener-
ated pseudo-randomly, and the output is generated by passing the input through a verified
implementation.
During the test, the testbench reads in the test data and send it to the encoder implemen-
tation. Until the answer comes from the encoder, it reads in the expected output from the
other file and when the result arrives, it compares the two for any differences. If there is even
a bit difference, the testbench outputs a warning message and a time stamp for verification
and debugging purposes.
4.1.1
Full version test
This test introduced some diﬀiculties as the output is too wide to inspect immediately.
This caused some inconveniences during the testing and debugging, which is why the output
was sliced into smaller part to make it easier and clearer where the issue lays. During the
validation (and the debugging), the output instead was saved to a text file, which can also
be compared with the expected output file.
==PAGE:46==
36
4 Functional validation
Here are the results of the simulation in ModelSIM:
Figure 4.1: Full version - Mode and enable signals
In figure 4.1, the control signal enable and mode are shown. They are passing through
a set of registers to preserve their values even if now input is arriving and being processed
parallel to other data. This was implemented to be able to start processing incoming data
immediately.
Figure 4.2: Full version - Matrix vector outputs
On figure 4.2, the vector outputs are shown, these are outputted in every clock period
according to the processed data mode.
==PAGE:47==
4.1 Encoder tests
37
Figure 4.3: Full version - Shifters
Figure 4.3 shows the working shifters, they are outputting the shifted values in every
period they have been enabled. These components are connected to the ”en2” signal, which
means that after the first enable they activate on the second period. This means that the
shifters output values arriving in the next period, in the third, as shown on the figure.
Figure 4.4: Full version - Core parities
In picture 4.4, the core parity calculations are shown. As it was previously explained,
the p0 is calculated first and from it the p1 and p3 in forward and backward manner, last the
p2 from p3.
Figure 4.5: Full version - Waveform of p0
==PAGE:48==
38
4 Functional validation
Figure 4.6: Full version - Waveform of p1 and p3
Figure 4.7: Full version - Waveform of p2
Here, on figures 4.5 to 4.7, the core parities are being shown with their paired shift_adder
outputs. Each core parity is scheduled on their own enable register signal p0 is to ”en3” and
used on ”en4”, p1 and p3 are to ”en4” and used on ”en5” as there is no overlap in their rows,
and p2 is to ”en5” and used on ”en6”. The final parities are ready at ”en7” and outputted
in the next period (shown on figure 4.8).
Figure 4.8: Full version - Time difference between in- and output
Lastly, on figure 4.8, the difference between the input and the output is shown.
As
presented, the design needs 6 clock periods to process data, this aligns with the originally
sent amount as the first and last periods are for receiving and sending data. This time is
the delay, and afterward can output encoded block in every periods. The
==PAGE:49==
4.1 Encoder tests
39
4.1.2
FPGA version test
Similarly to the full version, this one is also uses result saving for comparison alongside
the output shown during the simulations. Here the result is being send out through a less
wide bus, so it can be inspected in each period for the correct values. This also makes it
easier to find errors and issues.
Here is the result of the simulation in ModelSIM and the comparison:
Figure 4.9: FPGA version - Start-up
Figure 4.10: FPGA version - Starting signals
In this version, the input and the output are read and written periodically, as they arrive
and are being processed. In Figure 4.9, the difference between the first input and output
==PAGE:50==
40
4 Functional validation
fragment can be observed. The delay between input and output is consistently five clock
periods throughout the entire processing. In figure 4.10, the starting signals are more clear
to see. Here, the delay in processing can be observed, as the matrix values have to be looked
up before starting the shift_adders. The en_sort signal starts the look-up and the en_int
starts the shift_adders. And in the processed_data signal the outputs of the shift_adders
can be seen from the next period.
The x_line signals are the reading and writing signals of the in/output files. These just show
when the reading or writing happens.
Figure 4.11: FPGA version - End of first block processing
This figure (4.11) shows the end of the first block’s processing. Here, the done signal
signifies that the processing ended and the output sending was finished. After a successful
sending, the internal clear signal resets the components and prepares for the next input.
Figure 4.12: FPGA version - Core parity calculations
As seen here on figure 4.12, the core parities are calculated in the same way as in the full
version. They are processed in the 24th to the 27th periods according to the counters value.
==PAGE:51==
4.1 Encoder tests
41
Figure 4.13: FPGA version - End of simulation
The end of the simulation shown on figure 4.13, it finishes after sending a hundred blocks.
That provides enough data to investigate the design. The internal clear remains high after
the end, this is because the next enable signal would be the one that sets it to low.
Figure 4.14: FPGA version - Comparison against expected data
Lastly, the comparison is shown on figure 4.14. As there is no green or red part in the
entire file, the two files are containing the same content. This means that all hundred test
resulted in the expected values, so the design is working correctly.
==PAGE:52==
42
4 Functional validation
4.2
Decoder test
To test the decoder, an other component was needed to provide the noise in the simula-
tion. For this a channel component was made, that generates gaussian noise and adds it to
the encoded values, which are read out form a file (output_matlab_bin.txt). This compo-
nent also provides the SNR of the channel, so that the SP can work with that information.
Originally this would have been calculated by inspecting the channel, but for the algorithm
testing, this implementation does not focus on that part.
4.2.1
MS test
During the test the Decoder’s MS algorithm is active with its own Lr_row function. In
the test the frame is also tested for correctly handling the placements and reading of the
values.
Figure 4.15: Iteration in the State machine and signals
The states of the state machine can be seen on figure 4.15. As shown, the state ma-
chine starts form IDLE and on enable goes to INIT, and when the initialization is complete
(done_L0 turns high), continues to iterate between CAL_Lq and CAL_Lr with WAIT_Lr
as a middle step (as previously explained in figure 3.1). The related signals also show correct
behaviour.
==PAGE:53==
4.2 Decoder test
43
Figure 4.16: L0, Lr and Lq values
Here on Figure 4.16, the LLRs are visible. Here calculation were made by hand to ensure
that the values displayed are the correct ones. The Lr and Lq values only show vectors with
non-zero values, as in the first iteration only the first two coloumns get non-zero values, as
there is no row where there is no element is either of the first two coloumns. The LLRs show
correct behaviour.
Figure 4.17: End of the first block
==PAGE:54==
44
4 Functional validation
On this Figure, the end of the first prediction is shown. This shows that there is incorrect
behaviour in the system, as the correct_bits value should have been equal to the all_bits
value. Unfortunately, the issue was not discovered, so the behaviour remained unchanged
and incorrect. Moreover, from the values of Lqs it is seen that some of the places still not
have a finalized value, as the sign of some still changes. This also points towards to incorrect
behaviour as after five iterations should be more than enough on SNR=10dB to find and
correct all places.
4.2.2
SP test
The test where performed on a high enough Sound-Noise ratio (SNR) to provide environ-
ment to achieve approximately zero errors. This algorithm was implemented in two ways:
with a look-up table and with the Cordic system. The results are separated for them to give
greater insight into how well they work.
4.2.2.1
Atanh Table test
Figure 4.18: SP Atanh Table LLRs
This figure shown the initialization values and the first iteration results. There is little
to no difference between the Lq values for the connected places. It was calculated to be the
intended way of work.
==PAGE:55==
4.2 Decoder test
45
Figure 4.19: SP Atanh Table LLRs at the end of the first block decoding
On figure 4.19, the LLRs are shown at the end of the decoding of the first block. This
shows that there are some small uncertainty in the places, as a few still changes sign. That
means that the design is not confident in the place’s value yet or overconfidence prevention
is too high. Unfortunately the issue was not found, and could not been corrected.
Figure 4.20: SP Atanh Table Output
Here the output values are shown of the first block.
It makes it visible that where
there were starting values (coloumns 3-22), the values achieved a permanent output. This is
because the process did not have enough high intermediate values to have greater influence
than the initial values. The other thing clearly visible here is the first two vector of the
output. For debugging reason the output was updated after every iteration, and as seen
here, the first two vector does not have a finalized value. This could been because of the
==PAGE:56==
46
4 Functional validation
quantization error, and its aftermath with the atanh function. This function requires a high
amount of bit to be more precise.
4.2.2.2
Cordic test
Figure 4.21: SP Cordic Table LLRs
Similar to Figure 4.19, this one also shows the LLRs at the end of the decoding. Here
the uncertainty is more visible, as more places have changing signs.
Figure 4.22: SP Cordic first block end
Lastly, the output of the Cordic type. As said above this type is more uncertain. Even
the highly influencing initial values cannot be indifferent to the changes, which causes more
==PAGE:57==
4.2 Decoder test
47
errors to occur.
To sum up the decoder tests, it is huge issue that all types have some issues, which would
led towards to the conclusion that the issue might be laying in the frame itself rather than in
the algorithms themselves. However, time was short to investigate further, and the outcome
is unfavourable, but the data collected during the development is still of use.
==PAGE:58==
48
==PAGE:59==
CHAPTER 5
Results and Evaluation
The result are discussed regarding of the Quartus evaluations. In them the design is
compiled to get a better understanding on how well the designs were make, what can be
improved and most importantly their maximum frequencies.
5.1
Encoder Results
A slight problem arised as the designs are too big to compile on my computer caused by
their high number of signal. To have an approximation on the resource usage and frequencies,
the designs were analyzed with reduced sizes which are collected into the tables below:
Registers
Pins
Block Mem bits
8
4430
713
800
12
6498
1065
1200
16
8566
1417
1600
24
12702
2121
2400
27
14253
2385
2700
32
16838
2825
3200
36
18906
3177
3600
48
25110
4233
4800
54
28212
4761
5400
64
33382
5641
6400
Table 5.1: Full version results continue
FPGA
Regs
Pins
ALMs
Comb ALUTs
D. Logic Regs
Logic util
Fmax
3
2303
16
2991
4939
2715
5%
119.89MHz
4
2380
18
2654
4207
2895
5%
129.02MHz
6
2534
22
3506
5879
2961
6%
103.15MHz
8
2688
26
3019
4983
3184
5%
116.66MHz
12
2996
34
5070
8044
3448
9%
97.49MHz
16
3304
42
4297
6218
4002
8%
104.85MHz
24
3920
58
7687
11669
4353
14%
94.79MHz
Table 5.2: FPGA version results
==PAGE:60==
50
5 Results and Evaluation
FPGA
Regs
Pins
ALMs
Comb ALUTs
D. Logic Regs
Logic util
Fmax
32
4536
74
7265
9819
4903
13%
97.3MHz
36
4844
82
15126
20755
5267
27%
73.93MHz
48
6153
106
14168
19295
7198
25%
85.57MHz
64
7000
138
13472
15378
8188
24%
92.34MHz
72
7616
154
27631
36028
8095
49%
64.95MHz
Table 5.3: FPGA version results
All of the data point are located in the lower quarter of the maximum circular shift size,
which does not provide a good base to estimations. The reason for this is that the size of the
designs are too big to handle by the computer used to run Quartus. Nevertheless estimations
were made to predict a range of properties.
As the full version cannot be able to fit onto any FPGAs in the Quartus software the maxi-
mum frequency cannot be investigated, only be estimated. If the design is given the resources,
than the bottleneck in it would be the shift_adder component as it has to XOR two Zc sized
vector bits in each places. This should be the case in the FPGA version as well, so it could
be estimated. The bigger issue is in the number of registers, memory bits and pins required
for the design. As stated in the table the number of registers are rapidly rising with the
width of the input. By using the table to estimate these:
• Registers: Hyperbolic estimation was done with with Matlab after dividing the number
of registers with their paired width
Figure 5.1: Hyperbolic register estimation
==PAGE:61==
5.1 Encoder Results
51
This means that appr. 198821 registers is the lowest estimation. This is the result as
well for linear estimation on the original data (calculated by the last two data points).
Figure 5.2: Exponential estimation of registers
The highest expected value is 351489.
• Pins: Hyperbolic estimation was done with Matlab after dividing the number of pins
with their paired width
Figure 5.3: Pin Hyperbolic estimation
==PAGE:62==
52
5 Results and Evaluation
This means that appr. 88.02*384=>33800 pins is the lowest estimation. Same as the
linear on the original data.
Figure 5.4: Exponential estimation of pins
The highest expected number of pins would be 50917.
• Block Memory Bits: They are always the input size times hundred, so it would be
38400
These are very high numbers to implement on an FPGA, or in an average design, so this
would require a specific hardware to be made for it. Also this shows that the this full ap-
proach is not scalable for a system this big, especially not for an FPGA.
The FPGA design is more promising as the number of registers and pins are not increasing
as rapidly as in the full version. Regarding of the FPGA version, there is more data to work
with, as it was able to be fitted to a Cyclone V device (5CGXFC7C7F23C8).
The estimations made are:
• Registers: Hyperbolic estimation was done with with Matlab after dividing the number
of registers with their paired width
==PAGE:63==
5.1 Encoder Results
53
Figure 5.5: Hyperbolic register estimation
So the lowest estimation is 384*91.5 => 35135. This is the result as well for linear
estimation on the original data (calculated by the last two data points).
Figure 5.6: Exponential estimation of registers
The highest expected value is 42761.
==PAGE:64==
54
5 Results and Evaluation
• Pins: There is a linear connection between the pins and the width based on the collected
data: 2*width+10. By this the number of pins at 384 width is 778.
• Adaptive Logic Modules: Linear and exponential estimations were done with with
Matlab:
Figure 5.7: Linear and Exponential Adaptive Logic Module (ALM) estimation
The linear shows the lowest estimated boundary (89418) and the exponential shows
the highest. (428292)
==PAGE:65==
5.1 Encoder Results
55
• Combination Arithmetic Logic Units: Linear and exponential estimations were done
with with Matlab:
Figure 5.8: Linear and exponential register estimation
The linear shows the highest estimated boundary (127491) and the exponential shows
the lowest. (65598)
==PAGE:66==
56
5 Results and Evaluation
• Dedicated logic registers: Hyperbolic estimation with the divided data points and
exponential estimation on the originals were done with with Matlab:
Figure 5.9: Hyperbolic and exponential register estimation
The hyperbolic shows the lowest estimated boundary after multiplied by the circular
shift size.(91.4974*384=35135) and the exponential shows the highest. (41676)
==PAGE:67==
5.1 Encoder Results
57
• Maximum frequency: Linear and exponential estimations were done with with Matlab:
Figure 5.10: Hyperbolic frequency estimation
Here linear estimation was out of question as it can be seen from the dots that based
on the even just the last two, the estimated line would rapidly descend and would
cross the x-axis. As the clock frequency cannot be negative, this estimation would not
provide accurate results.
The found estimations are summed up in the table below:
Full version
Low
High
FPGA
Low
High
Registers
198821
351489
Registers
35135
42761
Pins
33800
50917
Pins
778
778
ALMs
-
-
ALMs
89418
428292
Combi. ALUTs
-
-
Combi. ALUTs
65598
127491
D. Logic Regs
-
-
D. Logic Regs
35135
41676
Maximum Freq.
-
-
Maximum Freq.
92.73
92.74
As the explicit connection between the data point are hard to estimate (like linear, hyper-
bolic, logarithmic or exponential) the ranges provide a rough estimation on what is expected
from each design.
The table shows the differences achieved between the two versions in the first two rows.
As mentioned before the full design is much less scalable that the other, which also shows
in these numbers. Moreover, the pins and registers in the FPGA version show that there
==PAGE:68==
58
5 Results and Evaluation
indeed are FPGAs that can host the design.
Regarding of the result on the FPGA version, the most important is the maximum achieved
frequency, as this provides the delay and throughput. In the design, five periods build up
the delay (see Figure 4.9), which with the calculated frequency provide
5
92.73MHz = 53.9ns
of delay.
The design can output the full content of the encoded block in 70 period from the start of
the incoming stream. By this the throughput is:
25344
70 ∗
1
92.73MHz
= 3.36e10bits = 31.27Gb/s = 3.36GB/s
For reference, an optic cable can transmit 10Gbps (up to 100Gbps) for commertial use. The
backhaul would need higher throughput than that approximately around 400-500Gbps[HWC19].
This implementation would provide a good starting point to achieve higher throughput, as
during the output sending, the calculation parts are not in use. This leave room for further
improvements which are discussed in chapter 5.3.1: ”Possible improvements”.
To sum up this part, the full design have been showed to be not scalable and unsuitable
for FPGA use, and the FPGA version was proven to be suitable as well as achieved a high
throughput and a good base for improvements.
5.2
Decoder Results
Regarding of the decoder it faces the same issue as the encoder, it cannot be compiled
as the full design, because of its size ans the number of its signals. However, here the de-
coder’s size is even bigger than the encoders, which was caused my the storing of the q- and
r-messages. Moreover, most of its functionality was made by function, to create a working
implementation before making them into components, but as presented before, there were
issues with the algorithms and they remained as functions.
As for result, the decoder was compiled in Quartus, but unfortunately it was only be
able to be minimal sized. This results in being unable to estimate resources or predict the
maximum achieved frequency.
Here are the results of the synthesis, fitting and time analysis:
==PAGE:69==
5.2 Decoder Results
59
Figure 5.11: Synthesis and Timing Analysis
Figure 5.12: Fitter result
Figure 5.13: Resources of the decoder at Zc=1
The cause of being unable to compile the decoder with any other width is that the design
would contain too much modules. Also the fitter would not be able to find a suitable FPGA
for it, because it is visible from the result that even the one bit width design used up most
of the resources (85%).
This might have been caused by the functions, which could not been simplified and cause
problems with dependencies.
To evaluate the design itself, it is low performing, as the maximum achieved frequency is
8.99MHz. This is because of the functions create long chains (according to the Quartus 3991
long), which cause slow processing. It is the issue with the dependencies, as they cannot
be simplified. To avoid these, the design can be changed to contain components and to not
==PAGE:70==
60
5 Results and Evaluation
process these thing in one period, but more like a pipe line. For example by processing one
row or coloumn in the matrix.
Other than the Quartus compiling, the decoder was tested for bit-error-rate as well. As
the designs are not working correctly, these information are not good comparison against
other work, just to evaluate their performance. Here are the results of the MS algorithm:
MS
SNR
Correct bits
Sum of all bits
Percentage
2dB
716853
836352
85.71%
5dB
716992
836352
85.72%
10dB
717417
836352
85.78%
Table 5.4: MS results
This table shows that the MS is performing close to an uncoded message would. This
verifies the fact, that there is a major flow in the design.
And here are the ones for the SP:
SP
SNR
Correct bits
Sum of all bits
Percentage
Cordic
5dB
7824
8448
92.6%
Atanh Table
5dB
8056
8448
95.36%
Table 5.5: SP Results
As the channel provides the SNR for the initial values, the SP variants are more resilient
than the MS. This is also confirmed by the tables. Otherwise, the results show that there is
an issue in the design. because it shows in each variant, it has a high probability that it is
in the frame.
Overall, implementing the decoder did not yield the expected results, but provided op-
portunities to investigate certain methods.
==PAGE:71==
5.3 Discussion and future work
61
5.3
Discussion and future work
5.3.1
Possible improvements
Both the encoder and the decoder have options to investigate in the future to make
them more eﬀicient or more compact. Here is a collection of the changes proposed to be
investigated:
• Encoder
– Further separate the boundaries of tasks
∗The calculation tasks like shifting and XOR-ing can be separated with would
add in extra processing time, but would provide better pipelining
∗Input and output could be running on different clocks, so that buffers can
be implemented and while the previous block is outputted, the next one’s
process can be started as the calculation part during the sending is inactive.
– Make the matrix element look-up faster
∗Make element look-up just and output, instead of an operation to build sys-
tematically calculate the output.
∗Let coloumn_sorter have the matrix to have it local
∗Include the matrix values into the shifters and shift_adders.
• Decoder
– Change the sfixed type to a sign bit and a ufixed type: makes both algorithm
easier to execute
– Use of a comparison tree: make the decision making faster and less resource
consuming
– Make arc-tangent hyperbolic more precise
The separation of the tasks would help with improving the eﬀiciency as the resources can
better be managed in-between the different tasks and can be reused when not required (for
example registers). It also can increase the throughput by enabling the use of inactive parts.
It is important to make the matrix look-ups as eﬀicient as they can be. My idea is to
instead of making calculations for the elements, have them in the local memory and just
output the one needed. This includes the idea for coloumn_sorter to have the values locally.
As in my implementation of the decoder, the used type for the calculations is sfixed, but
its advantage was to be able to have both algorithms work. Later during the implementation,
we realized that there is a more optimal format for that. This would be to instead of use
sfixed, use a single bit for the sign and a ufixed type to store the absolute value. The both the
==PAGE:72==
62
5 Results and Evaluation
MS and SP algorithms would be more easier to execute this way as the SP mostly relays on
tangent- and ar-tangent hyperbolic functions, which are central symmetric. This means that
during r-message calculations the tangent hyperbolics only need the be calculated with the
absolute values and be multiplied by each other and then done the arch-tangent hyperbolics,
and the signs can be viewed separately. In the MS, it would be easier to find the lowest
ans second lowest absolute value if they are stored that way. In the current implementation
if the value stored is negative, then an absolution is needed before the processing. Also
the sign product can be just produced by XOR-ing the sign bits (just like in the current
implementation).
Currently the SP algorithm is not able to produce correct values, because the arc-tangent
and tangent hyperbolic values are not correct near the edges of its interpretation range. This
needs to be corrected so that the algorithm can run correctly.
5.3.2
Overall evaluation
The results are evaluated based on the original goals of the project, so the question
and sub-questions in Chapter 1.1.2. Regarding of the main question, the latency and the
throughput was investigated in case of the encoder with the worst case scenario, and the
results proved to be according to the 5G standard. In the case of the decoder however,
these parameters could not been investigated, as the design was built much larger than the
Quartus compilation could handle on the chosen computer. Regardless, the obtained data
showed that the decoder’s frame is not scales well, and that it should be pipelined, as well
as it needs for its hardware duplication (mostly in the q- and r-messages calculations) to be
reduced.
As for the sub-questions, the encoder found to be suitable for FPGA implementations,
and its implementation shown better results with the latency of 53.9ns and throughput of
31.27Gbps. According to previously done researches [NNL19; PER21] the achieved max-
imum frequency to existing solutions is much lower (theirs are around 500-600MHz) as
the pipelining is better done in those designs (they have 46 periods for the process), how-
ever in case of [PER21] the scaled throughput is comparable in scale for its BG1 graph’s
(18.51Gbps*2=37.02Gbps), which is a great result. With further compression and pipelining
this value can be improved.
Unfortunately, the decoder could not been compared against other designs because of its
incorrect behaviour.
The sub-question about improvement is expained in the Chapter 5.3.1: ”Possible Improve-
ments”. It shows that the implementations are giving a good base for further improvement.
==PAGE:73==
CHAPTER 6
Conclusion
In conclusion, during the development of the encoder, the approach of the high area im-
plementation proved to be less ideal, than the pipelined version, because of the high volume
of hardware duplication and the long process chains. These issues are solved in the FPGA
version, the duplication is reduced by pipelining, and the process provided more periods for
the calculation to be done. With these changes, the design become scalable and suitable for
FPGA implementations. The delay and the throughput are also in the boundaries of the
requirements of the 5G networks, so it provided great results.
On the other hand, the decoder would needed more time to be thoroughly investigated
and corrected, as the issue most likely lays in the frame. However, the decoder also offered the
opportunity to gain insights into different techniques for the process, and the investigation
of their deployment and way of work. It provided a new perspective for deployment, which
needs more refinement in the future, but is an idea to be picked up.
==PAGE:74==
64
==PAGE:75==
APPENDIX A
Acronyms
5G
Fifth generation network
ALM
Adaptive Logic Module: parameter frovided by the fitter in Quartus.
ALUT
Adaptable Look-up Table:parameter frovided by the fitter in Quartus.
BER
Bit-error-rate: used to measure the amount of errors during transmissions and
coding.
BG1
Base-Graph 1: the first base matrix used to create the parity matrices used in the
encoding and decoding.
CSC
Compressed Sparse Coloumn: a compression method the reduce the storage space
of matrices.
DLR
Dedicated Logic Registers: parameter provided by the Fitter in Quartus.
FPGA
Field Programmable Gate Arrays: a card made to hold electric components, to be
able to run hardware designs.
I/O
Input/Output busses:
LDPC
Low-Density Parity Check codes: the main coding used in 5G.
LLR
Logarithmic-likelihood Ratio: a value that is the division of the chances for a bit
to be ’1’ or ’0’. If positive the bit is more likely to be ’1’, and if negative then to
be ’0’.
MS
Min-Sum: an algorithm used in LDPC coding.
SNR
Sound-Noise ratio: used to provide information about the surrounding noise, its
value is given in dB (deciBel).
SP
Sum-Product: an algorithm used in LDPC coding.
VHSIC Very High Speed Integrated Circuit
VHDL VHSIC Hardware Description Language: coding language that can model the
behavior and structure of digital systems.
XOR
Excluding or function: used in VHDL language and as a part of FPGA designs.
==PAGE:76==
66
==PAGE:77==
APPENDIX B
Used files
Matlab Codes
arctanh_table.m: Provides the arc-tangent hyperblic values in a format suitable to
put into the init_LLR.vhd and calc_Lr.vhd files. The values are calculated for all possible
inputs.
element_M.m: Generates the arrays for the find_element_x components, and writes
them in one file.
encode_5G_NR.m: The encoding frame for the ”Forward Error Correction” course,
to test the decoder during the course.
encode_test_bin.m: Generates two files, one with the input or uncoded binary blocks
and one with the outputs or encoded binary values. These were made to test the encoder
by reading the values from the input and compare the output of the encoder with the other.
extractMatrix.m: Write out the used values from the matrices, in order of coloumns,
and saves them into a file in a suitable format.
fpga_others.m: Used to estimate the fpga fitter and time analysis parameters (Dedicated
Logic Registers (DLR), ALM, Combinational Adaptable Look-up Tables (ALUTs), Max.
Frequency). Includes linear, hyperbolic, exponential and logarithmic estimation, and can be
uncommented to be used.
graph_pic.m: Generates the figures that are representing the matrix, figures 3 and 4.
indexes_M.m: Generates the ROW_INDEX values and format, used in formatting.vhd.
is_p0.m: Was used to test the equation of p0, whether it is the sum of the first four λ
values.
matrix_array.m and matrix_array_incode.m: They were used to generate the
mode_vector_x component vectors. Their output file contains all the vector values in a
suitable but different format.
==PAGE:78==
68
B Used files
pin_estimate.m: Used to estimate the full design pin number. Includes hyperbolic
and exponential and can be uncommented to be used.
project2_2.m: The final project file made for the ”Forward Error Correction” course.
Was used as a base to start the implementation of the VHDL design, and to provide a better
understanding for the design. Was also used for debugging purposes.
reg_estimate.m: Used to estimate the FPGA and full design required register num-
bers. Includes hyperbolic and exponential estimation, and can be uncommented to be used.
row_col_sum.m: Includes a function to find the non ’-1’ values in a matrix and count
them according to rows and coloumns. Also provides the highest number for both rows and
coloumns.
VHDL Test Codes
testbench_channel.vhd: is used to test the decoder, provides the channel to generate
gaussian noise.
testbench_channel_works.vhd: was used to test the channel.
testbench_encoder.vhd: is used to test the full version of the encoder.
testbench_encoder_fpga.vhd: is used to test the FPGA version of the encoder.
==PAGE:79==
Bibliography
[And98]
Ray Andraka. “A survey of CORDIC algorithms for FPGA based computers.”
In: In Proceedings of the 1998 ACM/SIGDA sixth international symposium on
Field programmable gate arrays (1998), (pp. 191–200). url: https://dl.acm.
org/doi/abs/10.1145/275107.275139.
[HWC19]
Yinglu Hu, Yong Wang, and Kuan W. A. Chee. “Optical Communications and
Modulation Techniques in 5G.” In: Smart Grids and Their Communication Sys-
tems. Edited by Ersan Kabalci and Yasin Kabalci. Singapore: Springer Singapore,
2019, pages 401–464. isbn: 978-981-13-1768-2. doi: 10.1007/978-981-13-1768-
2_12. url: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-13-1768-2_12.
[Kel]
Dóra Keltai. “Project 2: Final Report 34251 Advanced Error Coding.” Hand-in
for the Forward-error correction course.
[NNL19]
Tram Thi Bao Nguyen, Tuy Nguyen Tan, and Hanho Lee. “Eﬀicient QC-LDPC
encoder for 5G new radio.” In: Electronics 8.6 (2019), page 668.
[PER21]
Vladimir L Petrović, Dragomir M El Mezeni, and Andreja Radošević. “Flexible
5g new radio ldpc encoder optimized for high hardware usage eﬀiciency.” In:
Electronics 10.9 (2021), page 1106.
[Pra15]
Anjana Jain Pradeep M. Shah Prakash D. Vyavahare. “Modern error correcting
codes for 4G and beyond: Turbo codes and LDPC codes.” In: 2015 Radio and
Antenna Days of the Indian Ocean (RADIO). (2015), pages -.
[Ren24]
et al. Ren Yuqing. “A generalized adjusted min-sum decoder for 5G LDPC codes:
Algorithm and implementation.” In: IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems
I: Regular Papers 71.6 (2024), pages 2911–2924.
[Yan]
Metodi Plamenov Yankov. “34251 Convolutional Codes and Iterative Decoding
Algorithms: Intro to convolutional turbo codes and LDPC codes.” Advanced
Forward-error-Correction and Iterative Decoding Lecture material.
==PAGE:80==
