==PAGE:1==
Bioprinting of Retinal Cell Sheets
Towards Engineering an Advanced Platform
for Modelling Retinal Diseases
Master’s Thesis
DTU Health Tech
Department of Health Technology
==PAGE:2==
Bioprinting of Retinal Cell Sheets
Towards Engineering an Advanced Platform for Modelling Retinal Diseases
Master’s Thesis
July 1, 2025
Student: Lucia-Elena Nichita
Supervisors: Anne Zebitz Eriksen and Johan U. Lind
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include
the customary bibliographic citation, including author attribution,
report title, etc.
Published by:
DTU, Department of Health Technology, Ørsteds Plads, Building
345C, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.healthtech.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
ii
Preface
This thesis has been prepared over five months under the guidance of Anne
Zebitz Eriksen and Johan U. Lind, in the Tailored Materials and Tissues (TMAT)
research group, Department of Health Technology, at the Technical University of
Denmark.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of chemistry,
biology, and biomaterials.
Lucia-Elena Nichita - s233172
Signature
Date
01/07/2025
==PAGE:4==
iii
Abstract
Retinal pathologies are a major cause of blindness worldwide, and understand-
ing their mechanism is crucial for designing therapies. Organoids are in vitro 2D
or 3D structures created using stem cells that serve as platforms for modelling the
physiological and pathological development of the retina. 3D organoids are associ-
ated with the emergence of a necrotic core after prolonged culturing due to limited
oxygen diffusion and the lack of RPE (retinal pigment epithelium) development,
a crucial component of the retina. 2D organoids such as SEAM (Self-formed Ec-
todermal Autonomous Multi-Zone) overcome these limitations, but they lack the
structural complexity of 3D cultures. Our project aims to address this drawback of
SEAM by proposing a strategy for building a 3D model of the first two layers of the
retina, the RPE and photoreceptor layer, that would promote cell-cell interactions.
The strategy involves generating RPE and photoreceptor progenitors from SEAM
organoids, isolating these cells using a label-free, image-guided cell sorting technique,
and finally, embedded 3D bioprinting two distinct layers, containing the isolated
cells.
The development of RPE and photoreceptor progenitors in the SEAM organoids
was confirmed by immunohistochemical analysis, which indicated PAX6, OTX2,
and CRX expression, and the production of pigment. An embedded 3D printing
strategy was developed using fluorescent beads, resulting in the successful printing
of two individual square layers (with sides of 2.8 mm) displaying satisfactory uni-
formity. The small layer size allowed the use of a minimal ink volume. The height
of individual layers was larger than 200 µm, considered the oxygen diffusion limit,
but we hypothesise the layers will shrink after printing due to cells remodelling the
ECM components in the bioink. Finally, two label-free gating strategies were devel-
oped and applied to isolate presumed RPE and photoreceptors from the organoids,
without severely affecting cell viability.
In this study, we successfully developed a multi-step approach that can be applied
in the future to produce a 3D model of the first two segments of the retina. Future
work should address confirming the lineage of the isolated cells, further improving
the printing resolution, and validating the compatibility of the 3D printing strategy
with live cell printing.
==PAGE:5==
iv
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my gratitude to my supervisors, Asst. Prof. Anne Zebitz
Eriksen and Assoc. Prof. Johan U. Lind for their guidance, patience, and insightful
feedback throughout this research. Their expertise and encouragement were invalu-
able.
I am grateful to Sébastien Sebbaha, research manager at the Flow Cytometry and
Imaging Core (FLIC) Facility at DTU Health Tech, without whom the completion
of this thesis would not have been possible.
Special thanks to the members of TMAT for their constant assistance and the
excellent research environment.
Lastly, I am deeply grateful to my family and friends for their unwavering sup-
port. To my boyfriend, Matei, thank you for believing in me and for the hours you
spent troubleshooting Overleaf. I couldn’t have done this without you.
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
4
2.1
3D bioprinting
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
SEAM organoids . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Label-free cell sorting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Materials and Methodos
13
3.1
Generation of SEAM organoids . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
Immunohistochemistry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.3
3D printing with beads . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.4
Imaging and image processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.5
Label-free cell sorting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4
Results
20
4.1
Organoids differentiation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.2
3D printing with beads . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.3
Label-free cell sorting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5
Discussions
37
6
Conclusions
42
Bibliography
43
A Supplementary figures
49
v
==PAGE:7==
List of abbreviations
RPE retinal pigment epithelium
PR photoreceptor
hiPSC human induced pluripotent stem cell
SEAM Self-formed Ectodermal Autonomous Multi-Zone
ECM extracellular matrix
SHAPE Self-Healing Annealable Particle-ECM
AMD age-related macular degeneration
PEDF pigment-epithelium-derived factor
PAX6 paired-box 6
OTX2 orthodenticle homebox 2
CRX cone-rod homebox
RHO rhodopsin
RPE65 retinal pigment epithelium-specific protein 65kDa
BEST1 bestrophin-1
MITF melanocyte-inducing transcription factor
DCT dopachrome tautomerase
PMEL premelanosome protein
TYR tyrosinase
TYRP1 tyrosinase-related protein 1
RCVRN recoverin
NRL neural retinal leucine zipper
PDE6H phosphodiesterase 6H
RXRG retinoid X receptor
FACS fluorescence-activated cell sorting
FSC forward scatter
SSC side scatter
GMEM Glasgow’s minimal essential medium
PBS phosphate buffered saline
DAPI 4￿,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole
BSA bovine serum albumin
DMEM Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium
LAF laminar flow
FBS fetal bovine serum
SD standard deviation
BF bright-field
vi
==PAGE:8==
List of Figures
1.1
The main stages of the project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.1
(a) Direct extrusion printing (b) Embedded printing. Figure from [21]
4
2.2
Print fidelity depending on microparticle packing density and the vis-
cosity of the continuous phase: culture media (low viscosity) in dis-
persed microgels and collagen solution (higher viscosity) in SHAPE;
Scale bar 1 mm; From [23] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
(a) top and (b) side view of the structural design (c) 3D printed RPE
(green) and PR (red) layers; Scale bar: 500 µm; Figure from [26] . . .
7
2.4
H&E staining of an RPE layer printed using microvalve 3D printing
(a) immediately after printing, (b) 7 days after printing, (c) 14 days
after printing; Scale bar: 50 µm; From [27] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.5
Anatomy of the human eye (a) and structure of the retina (b) . . . .
8
2.6
Main stages of the embryonic development of human eye; From [32] .
9
2.7
Cross sections of a 4-week-old SEAM organoid; Scale bar: 500µm;
From [37]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.8
Visual representation of each image feature; Adapted from [39] . . . .
12
3.1
Stages of organoid differentiation; Scale bar: 1000 µm . . . . . . . . .
14
4.1
Zone formation in an 8-week-old organoid; Scale bar: 1000 µm . . . .
20
4.2
Pigmentation of the RPE in organoids derived from different hiPSC
cell lines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.3
PAX6 expression in a 7-week-old organoid; Scale bar: 250 µm (top
row), 500 µm (bottom row)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.4
PAX6 and CRX expression in a 7-week-old organoid; Scale bar: 200
µm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.5
E-cadherin expression in a 7-week-old organoid; Scale bars: 200 µm
(first and second row), 500 µm (third row) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.6
OTX2 and E-cadherin expression in a 4-week-old organoid; Scale bar:
200 µm
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.7
OTX2 expression in a 4-week-old organoid; Scale bar: 200 µm . . . .
25
4.8
OTX2 and E-cadherin expression in a 3-week-old organoid; Scale bar:
200 µm
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.9
A 4 mm line printed at different extrusion rates; Scale bar: 250 µm .
28
4.10 A 4 mm line printed at different print speeds; Scale bar: 250 µm . . .
28
4.11 Printing a sheet using different needle paths; Scale bar: 500 µm . . .
29
4.12 top and side view of two sheets printed using lines (a, b) and squares
(c,d); Scale bar: 1000 µm
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.13 Side view of the bottom (green) and top (red) layer printed at differ-
ent distances; Scale bar: 1000 µm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
vii
==PAGE:9==
viii
List of Figures
4.14 Top view of two layers printed at a distance of 1000 µm (concentric
squares); Scale bar: 1000 µm
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.15 Top view of two layers printed at a distance of 1000 µm; Scale bar:
1000 µm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.16 All recorded events . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.17 Gating strategy for RPE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.18 Gating strategy for presumed PRs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.1
Stacked structure printed using neural stem cells into a SHAPE bath.
From [18]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
A.1
Negative control for Fig. 4.3; Scale bar: 500 µm (top), 200µm (bottom) 49
A.2
Negative control for Fig. 4.4; Scale bar: 200 µm . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
A.3
Negative control for Fig. 4.5; Scale bars: 200 µm (top) and 500 µm
(bottom) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
A.4
Negative control for Fig. 4.6; Scale bar: 200 µm . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
A.5
Negative control for Fig. 4.7; Scale bar: 200 µm . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
A.6
Negative control for Fig. 4.8, Scale bar: 200 µm . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
==PAGE:10==
List of Tables
2.1
Definitions of the image features used in label-free cell sorting [39] . .
11
3.1
SEAM media composition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
Blocking buffer composition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.3
Staining buffer composition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.4
Primary and secondary antibodies and their respective dilution factors 15
3.5
Digestion buffer composition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.6
Preservation buffer composition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.1
Measured filament width and height at different extrusion rates
. . .
27
ix
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Retinal pathologies such as age-related macular degeneration (AMD), diabetes-
related retinopathy, and retinitis pigmentosa affect people across all age groups [1],
and are a major cause of blindness worldwide [2]. In order to find treatments for
these conditions, we need to understand how they develop. Currently, the human
retina development and the underlying mechanisms of retinal pathologies are mainly
studied using animal models and tissues from human subjects, both of which have
several limitations. Human tissues are associated with limited availability, hetero-
geneity between subjects, and rapid degradation [3]. Additionally, often, they do
not allow the study of the early developmental stages of diseases [3]. Animal mod-
els are associated with ethical concerns, and they do not entirely replicate human
anatomy [4].
Over the past two decades, retinal organoids have been extensively researched as
platforms for studying both the physiological and pathological development of the
human retina, as well as drug screening, and regenerative medicine [5]. Organoids
are in vitro structures (often 3-dimensional) formed by stem cells (adult stem cells
or pluripotent stem cells (PSC)), that mimic the in vivo tissue development. Stem
cells are able to differentiate and self-assemble when provided with the right envi-
ronmental factors, creating miniature versions of organs and tissues [6].
After the first attempt to create a 3D retinal organoid by Eiraku et al. [7] using
embryonic PSCs, numerous other systems have been developed, and considerable
progress has been made, resulting in more eﬀicient differentiation of certain cell
types like photoreceptors (PRs) [8, 9] or bipolar cells [10].
While 3D retinal organoids provide valuable information about the retina, mim-
icking its natural architecture, they have several drawbacks. First of all, the current
3D protocols allow the development of the neuroretina, but do not support the for-
mation of retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) [4], whose role will be discussed in the
next chapter. Secondly, they use exogenous factors like growth factors and small
molecule inhibitors, which increase the costs and complexity of the protocols, but
can also interfere with drugs if the organoids are used for drug screening [11]. Lastly,
after prolonged culturing, the oxygen transport to the centre of the organoid is lim-
ited by the thickness of the cell layer, leading to a necrotic core [12], in the case of
retinal organoids, causing ganglion cell death.
SEAM (short for Self-formed Ectodermal Autonomous Multi-Zone, introduced
1
==PAGE:12==
2
Chapter 1. Introduction
by Hayashi et al.[13]) is a 2D in vitro model that enables the study of human
eye development using human induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs). The stem
cells are cultured in differentiation media, which leads to the progressive formation
of a structure where four distinct concentric zones can be identified, resembling the
embryonic development of the whole eye. The central zone is the first one to develop,
followed by the other three. Data from gene expression and immunohistochemical
studies ([14], [13], [15], [11]) shows that every zone is comprised of different cell types:
neuroectoderm (zone 1), optic cup derivatives (zone 2), ocular surface ectoderm
(zone 3), and surface ectoderm (zone 4). SEAM do not need exogenous factors or
pose the problem regarding oxygen transport. Additionally, several papers report
the presence of numerous cell types, such as retinal ganglion cells [15], microglia cells
[16], corneal epithelial cells [13], photoreceptors [11], and most importantly, RPE
[11].
The main limitation of SEAM cultures is their 2D architecture, which does not
reflect the complex structure of the in vivo ocular tissue. The 3D spatial organisation
of tissues allows cell-cell and cell-extracellular matrix (ECM) interactions, which
influence cell differentiation, development, migration, proliferation, and apoptosis
[17]. Our study aims to address this limitation.
The goal is to develop a 3D model of the first two layers of the retina: the
photoreceptor layer and the retinal pigment epithelium. This model will serve as a
basis for creating a comprehensive system that replicates the entire structure of the
retina in the future. We hypothesise that the 3D organisation will facilitate cell-cell
interactions between the photoreceptors and RPE, allowing the in vitro replication of
the visual cycle. To do that, we designed a strategy that combines multidisciplinary
techniques, as presented in Fig. 1.1.
Figure 1.1: The main stages of the project
As the figure shows, the approach consists of four main steps:
1. Generation of SEAM organoids from hiPSCs and monitoring of retinal pro-
genitors development using immunohistochemical staining.
==PAGE:13==
3
2. Isolation of PRs and RPE progenitors from the organoids using an image-based
label-free cell sorting technique.
3. Formulation of bioinks using the isolated cells, and embedded 3D printing
of two layers into a SHAPE (Self-Healing Annealable Particle-ECM) support
matrix [18].
The bioinks will contain live cells (we aim for a cell density
of 1 million cells/mL due to the limited cell source), SEAM culture media,
xanthan gum (prevents cell sedimentation), and Matrigel, which is a mixture of
ECM components (mainly laminin and collagen IV) that ensures the cell-ECM
interactions [19]. Other components that make up the retinal ECM can be
added to the bioink eventually. A few examples are: fibronectin, versican, and
aggrecan [20]. The two bioinks will differ based on the cell type they contain
(either RPE or PRs).
The SHAPE matrix is a gel that contains alginate
microparticles, cell culture media, and collagen I. Two layers (identical in size)
will be 3D printed into this support: the bottom layer will contain the RPE,
and the top layer the PRs. The layer size needs to strike a balance between
minimising the volume of bioink, due to a limited cell supply and maintaining
a size that is within the resolution capabilities of the printer. Our goal is to
obtain a layer smaller than 5 mm in both the x and y directions. The two
layers will be printed at a distance that does not allow them to merge. The
exact size and the distance will be determined experimentally. The integrity
of the construct will be ensured by incubating it at 37◦C. The temperature
will trigger the crosslinking of the Matrigel inside the bioink and the collagen
I inside the support.
4. Digestion of the support matrix using alginase, leading to the collapse of the
photoreceptor layer onto the RPE, ensuring the close contact between the two
cell types. The crosslinked collagen I will support the two layers during this
step, ensuring that they are aligned in the end. The cells will be kept in culture
to monitor long-term viability.
==PAGE:14==
Chapter 2
Background
2.1
3D bioprinting
Embedded 3D bioprinting
3D bioprinting is a technique that allows the precise fabrication of complex
structures that mimic tissues. The most common approach is the direct extrusion
printing (Fig.
2.1 (a)), where the bioink is directly deposited on a surface in a
layer-by-layer manner [21].
Figure 2.1: (a) Direct extrusion printing (b) Embedded printing. Figure from [21]
Bioinks are a mixture of biomaterials and cells, which are used for bioprinting
[21]. Besides having certain biological properties, such as being cell-adhesive, these
bioinks, especially in the case of direct extrusion, must have well-defined mechanical
properties. Some examples include: having a high viscosity or being able to crosslink
to maintain shape after dispensing, and having shear-thinning properties [21]. These
requirements limit the types of materials that can be used for printing. Additionally,
the shear stress cells are exposed to during the extrusion because of the high viscosity
of the bioink leads to reduced viability [22].
Bioinks made of hydrogels that mimic the mechanical properties of soft tissues
(such as the retina) do not meet these requirements. Using these bioinks for direct
4
==PAGE:15==
2.1. 3D bioprinting
5
extrusion printing is challenging because the materials cannot maintain their struc-
tural integrity due to poor mechanical properties [23]. In this case, a more suitable
approach is embedded 3D printing (Fig. 2.1 (b)).
During embedded 3D printing, the bioink is extruded through the needle inside
a support bath. This support bath is often made from a granular gel that is solid-
like when resting, but turns into a fluid when the needle moves through it. This
local fluidisation, due to particle unjamming, allows the precise deposition of the
ink. After the motion stops, the gel resolidifies, keeping the material in place [23].
The SHAPE composite [23] is a supporting bath containing 70% (v/v) granular
phase represented by packed alginate microparticles and 30% (v/v) continuous phase
represented by collagen I solution. The collagen addition allows the annealing of the
constructs after printing, improving their structural integrity while also providing
cell-adhesive properties. This bath has ideal properties that allow the high precision
3D printing of complex structures, and it has been applied to produce human brain
models [23]. The main parameters that determine the resolution of embedded 3D
printing are:
• The viscosity of the bath. It has been observed that a higher viscosity results in
a higher xy resolution [23] (see Fig. 2.2), but lower z resolution [24]. Increased
viscosity can impede needle movement and can affect cell survival because a
higher extrusion force is required (leading to high shear stress)[24].
Figure 2.2: Print fidelity depending on microparticle packing density and the viscosity
of the continuous phase: culture media (low viscosity) in dispersed microgels and collagen
solution (higher viscosity) in SHAPE; Scale bar 1 mm; From [23]
==PAGE:16==
6
Chapter 2. Background
• The size of the particles inside the gel bath. Uniformly dispersed, small parti-
cles (not smaller than 1 µm to avoid colloidal scale diffusion) ensure a higher
resolution [24].
• The yield stress of the granular gel bath, which is the stress required for the
granular gel to transition from solid-like to fluid. This parameter should strike
a balance between allowing nozzle movement and maintaining the filament
structure [24]. The yield stress can be controlled by adjusting the polymer
concentration of the microgel.
• The recovery time, which is the time required for the bath to self-heal and
become solid-like again after the shear stress stops. A fast recovery time, in
the range of several seconds, ensures high resolution [24].
• The printing parameters, such as needle size, printing speed, and extrusion
rate [24]. A smaller needle size leads to higher resolution. The printing speed
and extrusion rate will be investigated later in this study.
State of the art
Various 3D printing techniques have previously been employed in attempts to
replicate the 3D organisation of the RPE and PR layers of the retina.
Masaeli
et al. [25] used inkjet printing to create a double-layered model, without using any
biomaterial as a carrier. First, a layer of ARPE-19 was printed onto a GelMa-coated
surface. Next, the PRs isolated from an animal eye were deposited using the same
procedure on top of the RPE. The two layers were properly aligned and maintained
their integrity, while cells kept expressing their characteristic markers. The RPE
viability did not suffer drastically after printing, but the authors mention that a
long-term assessment is needed to draw a valid conclusion. The viability of the PRs
post-printing was not assessed.
Wang et al. [26] developed a photopolimerisable methacrylated hyaluronic acid
hydrogel for photopolymerisation-based 3D printing. RPE and PRs were encap-
sulated in the hydrogel and printed into a two-layered structure (Fig. 2.3), very
similar to our approach. The hydrogel presented excellent mechanical and biologi-
cal properties. Cell viability after printing was not assessed, but the PRs expressed
rhodopsin and M-opsin 14 days after printing, while the RPE produced growth
factors, indicating that the process did not affect the cells considerably [26].
Shi et al. [27] used microvalve 3D printing to create a similar bi-layer structure,
in a process that did not affect short-term cell viability (7 days for PRs and 14 days
for RPE). The cell sheets were printed using droplets, leading to gaps in the layer
(Fig. 2.4 (a)), that were filled in 14 days by the proliferating RPE (Fig. 2.4(c)). The
RPE developed tight junctions, and cell-cell interactions were identified between the
RPE and PRs.
These studies provide valuable information about the various strategies that can
be applied to produce 3D printed retinal models.
They also prove that the 3D
architecture encourages cell-cell interactions, hinting at the possibility of replicating
the visual cycle in vitro.
==PAGE:17==
2.2. SEAM organoids
7
Figure 2.3: (a) top and (b) side view of the structural design (c) 3D printed RPE (green)
and PR (red) layers; Scale bar: 500 µm; Figure from [26]
Figure 2.4: H&E staining of an RPE layer printed using microvalve 3D printing (a)
immediately after printing, (b) 7 days after printing, (c) 14 days after printing; Scale bar:
50 µm; From [27]
The main limitation of these models is that they employ tumoral [27] or im-
mortalised [25, 26, 27] cell lines. RPE and PRs differentiated from hiPSCs, which
are more genetically and physiologically relevant, may behave differently under the
same conditions. Moreover, the viability of the cells is not monitored over extended
periods of time. Long-term viability is important, as these platforms are designed
for disease development studies, which require culturing over long periods. Addi-
tionally, 3D printing using droplets might be challenging if non-immortalised cell
lines are used. Although hiPSC-derived RPE and PRs can remodel the ECM and
migrate, they cannot proliferate [28], which may prevent them from covering the
gaps between droplets, resulting in a non-homogeneous layer.
2.2
SEAM organoids
Eye anatomy and development
The human eye is a complex organ comprising multiple components, as suggested
in the sagittal section in Fig. 2.5 (a). From a functional point of view, the eye
contains a refractive system which focuses the light and a visual neural system
==PAGE:18==
8
Chapter 2. Background
where the light is converted into signals that are sent to the brain via the optic
nerve [29]. The cornea, crystalline lens, and the vitreous and aqueous humor make
up the refractive apparatus of the eye [30]. The neural system is represented by the
retina.
(a) Figure from [30]
(b) Figure adapted from [31]
Figure 2.5: Anatomy of the human eye (a) and structure of the retina (b)
The components of the eye originate from different embryonic structures: surface
ectoderm (lens, cornea) and neuroectoderm (retina, epithelial layers of the iris, and
the ciliary body) [32].
During embryonic development (Fig. 2.6), the two optic grooves of the neural
tube, an early precursor of the central nervous system, start to grow until they reach
the surface ectoderm [32]. At this point, two optic vesicles are formed, which are
attached to the forebrain by the optic stalk, which will later develop into the optic
nerve. At the same time, the surface ectoderm thickens to form the lens placode. The
optic vesicle invaginates, creating a double-walled optic cup: the inside of the optic
cup becomes the neuroretina, and the outside remains an epithelial cell monolayer
(the RPE). The lens placode invaginates as well, and it later closes to form the lens.
The cornea forms when the lens detaches from the surface ectoderm. Simultaneously,
the other components of the eye are formed from the mesenchyme [32].
The retina is a complex tissue that covers the innermost surface of the eye,
and it has two main components: a neurosensory segment and the retinal pigment
epithelium [31]. The structure of the retina is represented in Fig. 2.5 (b). After
the light is focused by the refractive apparatus, it reaches the photoreceptor layer
of the retina, which contains cones and rods, two cell types that are responsible for
converting the energy of the photons into biochemical signals. Rods are sensitive
to low-intensity light and do not perceive colour. Cones are responsible for colored
vision, and they respond to medium and high-intensity light [31]. Cones are found
mainly in the fovea, the central part of the retina, while rods reside in the peripheral
==PAGE:19==
2.2. SEAM organoids
9
Figure 2.6: Main stages of the embryonic development of human eye; From [32]
retina [31].
Both cones and rods contain opsins [31], a family of membrane proteins that
can detect light. These proteins are attached to a chromophore, which changes its
conformation from 11-cis-retinal to all-trans-retinal when enough energy reaches it.
When the chromophore molecule changes its conformation, the opsin is activated
and a signalling cascade is triggered [31].
Above the PR layer reside three other cell types: horizontal, bipolar and amacrine
cells, which process the signal. Bipolar cells communicate with the most superficial
layer of the retina, comprised of ganglion cells. The signal is hereby transferred to
the ganglion cells, their axons making up the optic nerve, alongside the Müller glial
cells [31].
The RPE is a monolayer of pigmented cells, with their apical membrane fac-
ing the PR segment of the retina, and their basolateral membrane facing Bruch’s
membrane. This cell layer serves multiple functions [33]:
• It supports the visual cycle. The RPE take up the all-trans-retinol shed by the
PRs and isomerises it to 11-cis-retinal, a process that ensures the functionality
of the photoreceptors. Additionally, the RPE can uptake the retinol from the
bloodstream.
• It protects the retina against photo-oxidative damage using three mechanisms:
light absorption by the pigment, production and regulation of enzymatic and
non-enzymatic antioxidants, and the repair of damaged DNA, proteins and
lipids. This is a very important function, as the retina is exposed to high
levels of light and oxygen, which can lead to the production of reactive oxygen
species, contributing to diseases like AMD.
• It transports the water from the subretinal space, ensuring the close contact
between the neuroretina and its neighbouring tissues, including the RPE layer.
Due to the high metabolic turnover in the PRs and neurons, high amounts of
water accumulate in the retina.
• It transports the ions and metabolic end products like lactic acid from the
subretinal space to the blood or the basolateral side, functioning like an ion-
transporting epithelium, that also works as a barrier between the subretinal
space and the choriocapillaris, due to its tight junctions. This ion transport
is crucial to maintain the excitability of the photoreceptors.
==PAGE:20==
10
Chapter 2. Background
• It transports nutrients like glucose from the blood to the photoreceptors.
• It contributes to the recycling of the shed photoreceptor membranes via phago-
cytosis.
• It secretes a large amount of growth factors, like pigment epithelium-derived
factor (PEDF), a neuroprotective factor.
Photoreceptors and RPE are interdependent [33], and co-culturing these two cell
types allows us to observe their interactions.
SEAM organoids as a source of RPE and PRs
Since their discovery in 2016 [13], SEAM organoids have been studied in several
papers, as they offer the advantage of multi-lineage differentiation. In the original
works [13, 34] the authors focused on the isolation of the corneal epithelium pro-
genitors from these cultures and expanding them to form a transplantable corneal
epithelium. These tissues were used in 2019 to treat limbal stem cell deficiency
in a group of patients [35]. Numerous studies on SEAM cultures [13, 14, 15, 11]
confirm that retinal progenitors, including RPE and PRs, can be obtained using
this method. In one study [11], 3D retinal organoids were generated by modify-
ing the original SEAM protocol, in an exogenous factor-free approach. In a more
recent study [36], the authors use pharmacological techniques to accelerate retinal
organoids production in SEAM cultures, obtaining mature PRs.
In a previous project [37], we successfully generated SEAM organoids from hiP-
SCs. The immunohistochemical data showed correct zone formation (PAX6 gradi-
ent) and the presence of retinal progenitor cells (expression of OTX2) (Fig. 2.7).
(a) PAX6 expression
(b) OTX2 expression
Figure 2.7: Cross sections of a 4-week-old SEAM organoid; Scale bar: 500µm; From [37]
==PAGE:21==
2.3. Label-free cell sorting
11
2.3
Label-free cell sorting
Cell sorting is a powerful tool in biomedical research and clinical applications
because it allows the isolation of specific cell types from complex, heterogeneous
samples [38]. The most widely used approach in this sense is Fluorescence-Activated
Cell Sorting (FACS), a specialised type of flow cytometry.
In a regular FACS workflow, cells are labelled with fluorescent antibodies that
bind to specific surface or intracellular proteins.
The machine breaks down the
stream of labelled cell suspension into droplets containing single cells. These droplets
flow through a laser beam used for measuring the emitted fluorescence and the
scattered light. Based on these two parameters, the cells of interest can be sorted
[38]. The challenge with this approach is the need for fluorescent labelling, which
can alter cell biology [38]. This is especially problematic for our application because
the cells will be cultured after sorting, and maintaining their native physiological
state is crucial. Furthermore, fluorescent labelling is only possible when the cellular
markers are well-defined. In our case, the developmental stage of the PRs and RPE
is unknown, and therefore, choosing the right markers is diﬀicult. Nuclear markers
such as CRX for PRs cannot be used because they only work for fixed, dead cells.
Scattered light provides information about cell transparency and size, but these two
parameters offer limited label-free sorting abilities [38].
Image-guided flow cytometry is a novel cell sorting technology that combines
spectral flow cytometry with real-time image analysis [38]. This technique allows
a more advanced label-free analysis of the sample, by incorporating image features
(explained in Table 2.1 and Fig. 2.8) beyond size and transparency. The working
principle is similar to FACS, but in this configuration, the cell sorter acquires im-
ages of every cell using laser beams. The images can be processed using complex
algorithms with specialised softwares like FlowJoTM.
Table 2.1: Definitions of the image features used in label-free cell sorting [39]
Feature
Definition
Eccentricity
ratio between the shortest and the longest axis of the cell
Max intensity
intensity of the brightest pixel in the image
Size
number of pixels (brighter than a threshold defined by
the user) in an image
Radial moment
how spread out pixels are around the cell’s center of mass
Correlation
how well the signals from two channels overlap spatially
within a cell
Delta center of mass
distance between two fluorescent signals within a cell
Forward scatter
correlated to cell size
Side scatter
correlated to optical density or complexity of the particle
Light loss (Imaging)
amount of light from the laser source that was lost
through scattering or absorption (due to the interaction
with the cell); similar to a brightfield image
==PAGE:22==
12
Chapter 2. Background
Figure 2.8: Visual representation of each image feature; Adapted from [39]
==PAGE:23==
Chapter 3
Materials and Methodos
3.1
Generation of SEAM organoids
The hiPSCs (line SCTi004_A) were differentiated into SEAM organoids using a
protocol published by Eriksen et al. [14]. When the stem cells reached proper con-
fluency (see Fig. 3.1 (a)), they were passaged and seeded onto Matrigel (#354230,
Corning)-coated 6-well plates at a density of 5000 cells/well. The cultures were sup-
plied with 2 mL of fresh StemFlex medium (#A3349401, Gibco), supplemented with
Essential 8 Flex 50X (Gibco) every other day. The colonies were monitored using
brightfield microscopy (Fig. 3.1 (b)). Approximately 5 days after seeding, the cells
formed round islands with diameters of around 1-2 mm (Fig. 3.1 (c)). At that point
(Day 0), the differentiation protocol was started by replacing half of the old media
with fresh SEAM media (see Table 3.1). The same procedure was followed on Day
2, and starting on Day 4, the total volume of media was replaced with fresh SEAM
media every second day. The organoids were grown for at least 3 weeks, when zone
formation as well as pigmentation was noticed (Fig. 3.1 (d)) before being sorted or
stained.
Table 3.1: SEAM media composition
Reagent
Final concentration
GMEM (Glasgow’s Minimal Essential Medium,
#11710035, Gibco)
-
Knock-out serum replacement (#10828028, Gibco)
10%
GlutaMAX 100X (#35050061, Gibco)
2 mM
Na-Pyruvate (#11360070, Gibco)
1 mM
Penicillin-Streptomycin (#15140122, Gibco)
1%
Non-essential amino acids (#11140050, Gibco)
0.1 mM
β-Mercaptoethanol (1% v/v in DMEM:F12)
55 µM
13
==PAGE:24==
14
Chapter 3. Materials and Methodos
(a) ready for passaging hiPSCs culture
(b) young hiPSCs culture seeded at 5000
cells/well
(c) hiPSC colony on day 0 of the
differentiation protocol
(d) 5-week-old organoid
Figure 3.1: Stages of organoid differentiation; Scale bar: 1000 µm
3.2
Immunohistochemistry
Whole-well staining
The media was aspirated from a 7-week-old culture, and the wells were washed
with 1 mL of PBS (Phosphate Buffered Saline) three times, allowing a 5-minute rest
between each washing step. 1 mL of cold 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA, #J19943.K2,
Thermo Scientific Chemicals) was added to each well and left to incubate for 30
minutes. The wells were washed again with PBS, as previously described. 500 µL of
fresh blocking buffer (see Table 3.2) was added to each well and left to incubate for
1 hour on a bench rocker at room temperature. In the meantime, dilutions of the
primary antibodies (see Table 3.4) were prepared in staining buffer (see Table 3.3).
The blocking buffer was aspirated and 250 µL of primary antibody solution was
added to each well. The cultures were incubated overnight at 4◦C. The buffer was
aspirated, 250 µL of staining buffer was added, and the plate was placed on a bench
rocker for 5 minutes. This rinsing step was repeated 3 times. Dilutions of secondary
antibodies and DAPI (4￿,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole, #D1306, Invitrogen, 1:1000)
==PAGE:25==
3.2. Immunohistochemistry
15
were prepared in staining buffer (see Table 3.4). 250 µL secondary antibody solution
was added to each well, the plate was covered with aluminium foil and incubated at
room temperature for 1 hour, on a bench rocker. The wells were washed again three
times with PBS. 250 µL of PBS was added to each well, and the plate was stored
at 4◦C until imaging.
Table 3.2: Blocking buffer composition
Reagent
Final concentration
PBS (#10010023, Gibco)
-
BSA (Bovine Serum Albumin, cas. #9048-46-8,
Sigma-Aldrich)
1% (w/v)
Triton-X 100 (#85111, Thermo Fisher)
0.3% (v/v)
Table 3.3: Staining buffer composition
Reagent
Final concentration
PBS
-
Bovine serum albumin
1% (w/v)
Triton-X 100
0.3% (v/v)
Normal donkey serum (#12352203, Sigma-Aldrich)
5% (v/v)
Table 3.4: Primary and secondary antibodies and their respective dilution factors
Primary antibody
Dilution
factor
Secondary antibody
Dilution
factor
anti-CRX mouse mAb
(#H00001406-M06,
Abnova)
1:200
Goat
anti-Mouse
IgG
Alexa Fluor 647 (#A-
21235, Invitrogen)
1:1000
anti-OTX2 mouse mAb
(#A2644501, Abnova)
1:500
anti-PAX6 rabbit pAb
(#PA1-801, Invitrogen)
1:500
Goat
anti-Rabbit
IgG
Alexa Fluor 488 (#A-
11008, Invitrogen)
1:1000
anti-E-cadherin rabbit
pAb (#PA5-95278,
Abnova)
1:200
Individual colony staining
Two cultures (3-week-old and 4-week-old) were fixed using the same procedure
described above. A biopsy punch was used to separate colonies (containing zones
1-3 of the SEAM organoids) from the rest of the cultures. The sections were placed
in a 48-well plate, and the same procedure was followed for staining. After the final
washing step, the samples were placed on a glass slide, mounting media ( #ab104139,
abcam) was added, and a coverslip was placed on top.
==PAGE:26==
16
Chapter 3. Materials and Methodos
3.3
3D printing with beads
Alginate slurry preparation
1% (w/v) alginate (80-120 cP, Wako) was dissolved in 50 mL MilliQ water for
2 hours, at 80◦C, using a magnetic stirrer. In the meantime, a 2mg/mL CaCO3
(PL-CACOU, PlasmaChem GmbH) suspension was prepared by adding the CaCO3
powder to 50 mL of MilliQ water. After the alginate was dissolved, the mixture
was left to cool off, and then mixed in a 1:1 ratio with the CaCO3 suspension. The
mixture was left to stir at room temperature for 1 hour. Acetic acid (99.9%) was
added in a 1:500 ratio, and the mixture was stirred overnight at 650 rpm.
The mixture was homogenised using a T25 Ultra-Turrax (IKA) coupled with an
S25N-10G dispersing tool at 15000 rpm for 10 minutes. The gel was equally divided
into four 50 mL Falcon tubes and centrifuged at 18500 x G for 25 minutes. The
supernatant was removed using a pipette.
The alginate microparticles were resuspended in DMEM (Dulbecco’s Modified
Eagle Medium, #A4192101, Gibco) at a 1:2 ratio. 1M NaOH was used to adjust
the pH of the solution to 7.4. Chloroform was added in a 0.5% (w/v) concentration
for sterilisation. The solution was left to incubate overnight at 4◦C. Starting from
this point, the alginate slurry was handled exclusively under an LAF (laminar flow)
hood to maintain its sterility.
Before printing, the solution was homogenised again for 3 minutes at 15000 rpm,
and centrifuged for 10 minutes at 18500 x G. The supernatant was removed using a
pipette.
SHAPE composite preparation
The SHAPE composite [18] was prepared under a LAF bench, over an ice bath,
by mixing the alginate slurry with a 3 mg/mL collagen I solution in a 2:1 volume
ratio, resulting in a final collagen concentration of 1 mg/mL. The collagen solution
was prepared by mixing Collagen Type I (10.27 mg/mL, 354249, Corning) with
DMEM and adjusting the pH to 7 using 1M NaOH.
The wells of a pre-cooled 48-well plate were filled with 1 mL SHAPE composite
using a positive displacement pipette. The plate was centrifuged at 700 x G for 15
minutes, at 4◦C, to remove any air bubbles.
Embedded 3D printing
The ink was prepared by mixing 375 µL either green or red fluorescent beads (In-
vitrogen FluoSpheres polystyrene, 10 µm) with 125 µL Xanthan gum (cas. #11138-
66-2, Sigma Aldrich) 1% (w/v). The ink was slowly pipetted with a positive dis-
placement pipette for homogenisation.
Before printing, the temperature of the 3D printer’s stage and the printhead was
set to 4◦C, to prevent collagen crosslinking. A 0.1 mL low dead volume Hamilton
syringe, coupled with a small RN 24 gauge needle (length: 18 mm, inner diameter:
==PAGE:27==
3.4. Imaging and image processing
17
0.311 mm, outer diameter: 0.566 mm), was slowly loaded with ink (to avoid bubble
formation) and placed inside the printhead of the printer.
The embedded 3D printing was performed using the RegenHU R-GEN 100 Bio-
printer. Shaper (software) was used to design the print path and set the parameters
(e.g. extrusion rate, print speed), resulting in a .biofile. This file was imported
into the R-GEN Controller Software, where additional parameters, including needle
diameter and syringe size, were set. After printing, the plate was placed in an incu-
bator at 37◦C for 30 minutes to allow the Collagen I to crosslink, and stored at 4◦C
until imaging.
3.4
Imaging and image processing
Two microscopes were used in this study: an inverted Nikon Ti2 coupled with
a Yokogawa CSU-W1 SD system and a Photometrics SCMOS camera, and a Zeiss
Observer Z1 epifluorescence microscope with a mounted Zeiss AxioCam. The two
software programs operating the microscopes were NIS-Elements and Zeiss Zen Blue.
The images were processed using Fiji.
The bright-field (BF) and immunohistochemistry images of the organoids were
taken using the spinning disk microscope and processed in Fiji.
The 3D-printed constructs were mainly imaged using the spinning disk micro-
scope. The front-view images were acquired using the z-stack function with a step
size of 40 µm. The stack was collapsed in Fiji to get the full z projection of the
prints. The side view stacks were acquired using a step size of 5 µm and the 3D
rendering was performed using Fiji.
The epifluorescence microscope was used to acquire z-stacks of the filaments in
the extrusion rate experiment (1 µm step size). The filament width at each extrusion
rate was measured on four replicates. The width of each line was measured in Fiji
at 10 different locations along its length. The mean value and the sample standard
deviation were calculated using MATLAB. On the other hand, the overall height of
a line was measured using epifluorescence microscopy. In short, a z-stack of each line
was acquired, where the interval was set by moving the objective upwards, bringing
the sample in and out of focus. The z value where the filament was slightly in focus
was the starting point of the stack, and the z value where the filament was out of
focus was the end point of the stack. Therefore, the height of a line was the overall
thickness of a stack.
3.5
Label-free cell sorting
Sample preparation
To obtain a sacrificial sample for initial analysis, the following procedure was
used. Samples consisting of zones 1-3 were cut out from a SEAM culture using a
sterile biopsy punch. Approximately 5 colonies were transferred to a 15 mL Falcon
==PAGE:28==
18
Chapter 3. Materials and Methodos
tube, and 400 µL sterile filtered digesting buffer (see Table 3.5) was added. The
tube was incubated at 37 ◦C for 30 minutes, then triturated with a P1000 pipette
and incubated for an additional 30 minutes. The cells were triturated again and
centrifuged at 300 x G for 5 minutes. The supernatant was aspirated, and the pellet
was resuspended in 2 mL sterile filtered preservation medium (see Table 3.6). The
suspension was filtered using a 40 µm cell strainer and transferred to sterile flow
tubes.
To prepare the cell suspension for RPE and PRs sorting, a similar procedure
was followed. 13 SEAM cultures (43 wells in total) between 1 and 4 months old
were digested into single cells by adjusting the previous buffer volumes to the larger
number of colonies. Separating individual colonies from the rest of the culture was
diﬀicult in older organoids. In these cases, the entire well was digested. The rest of
the procedure remained unchanged.
Table 3.5: Digestion buffer composition
Reagent
Final concentration
Ca2+/Mg2+-free PBS
-
Collagenase II (from 0.5% w/v stock) (#17101015,
Gibco)
0.25% (w/v)
RevitaCell 10µg/mL (#A2644501, Gibco)
1% (v/v)
DNase I (2000 U/mL) (#M0303S, NEB)
0.3% (v/v)
Table 3.6: Preservation buffer composition
Reagent
Final concentration
DMEM:F12 (#11320033, Gibco)
-
Bovine serum albumin ( from 25% stock)
0.005% (w/v)
RevitaCell 10µg/mL
1% (v/v)
Defining the gating strategies
A sacrificial sample was used to set the gating strategy for both the RPE and
PRs. The sample was run through the BD FACS DiscovererTM S8 Cell Sorter, and
the acquired images were imported into FlowJoTM. The BD Cell view, Downsample
V3, UMAP, FlowSOM and PeocoQC plugins were used to obtain the gating strategy.
HyperFinder was used to translate the gates into 1D and 2D versions, compatible
with the instrument’s software.
==PAGE:29==
3.5. Label-free cell sorting
19
RPE and PR sorting
The sample obtained from digesting all 13 SEAM cultures was sorted using the
same BD FACS DiscovererTM S8 Cell Sorter. The obtained gating strategies were
imported into the BD FACSChorus Software, and some adjustments were made.
The RPE and PRs were sorted into two different tubes, and the collection me-
dia consisted of SEAM media, supplemented with 10% FBS (Fetal Bovine Serum,
#A5670701, Gibco), 1 % RevitaCell (10 µg/mL), and 10% DMSO (#J66650.AK,
Thermo Scientific Chemicals).
Cell viability was assessed using a cell counter. The cells were frozen at -80◦C
using a Mr. Frosty freezing container. After 24h, the vials were transferred to a
liquid nitrogen freezer.
==PAGE:30==
Chapter 4
Results
4.1
Organoids differentiation
To confirm zone formation, the cultures were monitored using brightfield mi-
croscopy throughout the entire differentiation process. Zone formation was easily
identified in the organoids (Fig. 4.1). On a large scale, the zones appeared as con-
centric rings with varying opacity. The innermost central zone was the first one
to develop, proliferating and forming a considerably thicker layer than the others.
Zone 2 appeared dark due to the high level of pigment expressed by the RPE. Zones
3 and 4 were also identified. This separation into different zones was also confirmed
at a smaller scale by the variation in cell morphology, with cells increasing in size
the further away we moved from the central zone. These results indicate that the
stem cells were undergoing differentiation into several cell types in a manner that
resembled embryonic ocular development.
(a) Zones 1-3
(b) Zones 1-4
Figure 4.1: Zone formation in an 8-week-old organoid; Scale bar: 1000 µm
Pigmentation of the RPE was also noticeable with the naked eye after approxi-
mately 3 weeks of culturing. We identified that pigmentation depends on the stem
cell line. Four different hiPSC lines were used at the beginning of this study (Fig.
20
==PAGE:31==
4.1. Organoids differentiation
21
4.2), but only the SCTi004_A line showed pigment expression (Fig. 4.2 (d)). While
pigmentation of zone 2 is not a definitive indicator of RPE maturity [40], it is a
reliable indicator that the stem cells are differentiating into RPE progenitors [40].
Therefore, this cell line was used further on.
(a)
gCaMP life ACTB-RFP
Clone 14 (4 weeks old)
(b) Gladstone (5 weeks old)
(c) Fucci (5 weeks old)
(d) SCTi004_A (6 weeks old)
Figure 4.2: Pigmentation of the RPE in organoids derived from different hiPSC cell lines
Immunohistochemistry
To better identify the ocular cell lineages present in our organoids and determine
their distribution within the 4 zones, we used immunohistochemical staining. The
expression of five genes was assessed: PAX6, OTX2, CRX, E-cadherin, and RHO.
OTX2 and E-cadherin were evaluated in cultures that were fixed at different devel-
opmental stages: 7, 4, and 3 weeks. PAX6, CRX and RHO were only evaluated in
the 7-week-old sample, due to the limited amount of cultures.
PAX6 (Paired box 6) is a transcription factor that is expressed during eye and
central nervous system development [41]. It is often referred to as a ”master reg-
ulator” for eye development [15] because it is crucial for the correct formation of
several ocular structures, such as the optic cup, lens, and corneal epithelium.
PAX6 staining was used to determine the ocular and neuroectodermal cell fate
in our organoids.
High expression was identified in zone 1 (Fig.
4.3, top row).
The presence of PAX6 in zone 2 appeared to be very limited in the top row of Fig.
==PAGE:32==
22
Chapter 4. Results
4.3, most probably due to the pigment that blocked the fluorescent signal. This
complete lack of signal was identified in the DAPI channel as well. PAX6 expression
in zone 2 was identified more clearly in the colony captured in the bottom row of
Fig. 4.3. This gene was also expressed by some cells in zone 3, while in zone 4 no
expression was identified. These results suggest that the cells in zones 1, 2, and 3
have committed to neuronal and ocular lineages, while the ones in zone 4 are non-
ocular surface ectodermal cells destined to become epidermal keratinocytes. These
observations are consistent with findings in the literature [13, 42, 15], where this
gradient of PAX6 expression from zone 1 to zone 3 has been reported.
Figure 4.3: PAX6 expression in a 7-week-old organoid; Scale bar: 250 µm (top row), 500
µm (bottom row)
CRX (cone-rod homebox) is a PR-specific transcription factor [24] that indicates
early differentiation of PR precursor cells. On the contrary, RHO (rhodopsin) is a
protein found in rod cells [43], and its presence indicates mature PR.
CRX staining was used to confirm the presence of the PRs we hypothesised to
be in zone 1. Fig. 4.4 shows CRX expression alongside PAX6. The intensity of the
nuclear stain was very low in zone 1, a recurring issue within this sample, potentially
caused by the high cell density and multi-layered structure in the area, leading to
fluorophore self-quenching.
The significant thickness of zone 1 was clear during
imaging using confocal microscopy, where numerous focal planes were identified.
This is also shown in the cross-section images in the Background section (Fig. 2.7).
PAX6 was used to confirm the presence of cell nuclei. CRX expression indicates
the early differentiation of PR cells within the neuroectodermal area of the SEAM.
The culture was also stained with RHO to evaluate the maturity of the PRs. No
expression was identified, meaning that the PR cells have not matured yet. The
positive CRX expression in zone 1 contradicts recent findings that suggest that
neuroretinal cells develop in zone 2 [15].
==PAGE:33==
4.1. Organoids differentiation
23
Figure 4.4: PAX6 and CRX expression in a 7-week-old organoid; Scale bar: 200 µm
E-cadherin (epithelial cadherin) is a cell-cell adhesion protein that ensures the
strong adhesion between epithelial cells [44].
We used E-cadherin staining to identify epithelial cells within our organoids,
including corneal epithelial cells and surface ectoderm-derived cells (epidermal ker-
atinocytes). Additionally, this staining would further confirm the correct distribu-
tion of progenitor cells within the four zones of our organoids. Fig. 4.5 shows that
the expression of this marker begins at the border of zone 2 and continues in zone
3. It must be pointed out that DAPI was much clearer in these areas, unlike zones
1 and 2, confirming that the faint signal in the previous images was not caused by
an inadequate staining procedure. This result confirms that epithelial progenitor
cells, most probably corneal epithelial cells, are present in zone 3, and that clear
and correct zone formation has occurred, according to literature [13].
OTX2 (Orthodenticle Homeobox 2), similarly to PAX6, is a transcription factor
that plays an important role in the early embryonic development of the eye. Par-
ticularly, it is involved in the maturation and development of the retina, including
PRs and RPE [45], and therefore is more specific than PAX6.
The 7-week-old culture was stained with OTX2 to evaluate the differentiation of
retinal progenitor cells. No OTX2 expression was observed, most probably due to
a staining error, considering that the CRX staining and the pigmentation confirm
the presence of photoreceptors and RPE.
==PAGE:34==
24
Chapter 4. Results
Figure 4.5: E-cadherin expression in a 7-week-old organoid; Scale bars: 200 µm (first
and second row), 500 µm (third row)
To gain more insight into the developmental stages of our organoids, OTX2
and E-cadherin staining were performed on a 4-week-old and a 3-week-old SEAM
organoid. Fig. 4.6 shows the expression of E-cadherin and OTX2 in the 4-week-
old organoid. E-cadherin was identified in zone 3 again, confirming the presence
of corneal epithelium. We were able to identify OTX2 expression in this sample,
confirming that the previous results were due to a staining error. OTX2 was clearly
expressed by the cells in zone 2, indicating the presence of retinal progenitor cells.
Additionally, OTX2 confirms that the pigmented cell layer is the retinal pigment
epithelium. This is important because in the human eye, the iris pigment epithelium
(IPE), which has the same embryonic origin as the RPE, has a posterior segment
that is made up of heavily pigmented cells [46]. Therefore, some of the pigmented
cells in zone 2 might be IPE cells. Interestingly, OTX2 was also identified in zone
3. Fig. 4.7 shows a clearer transition between zones 2 and 3. OTX2 expression
extends slightly beyond what is assumed to be the border of zone 2. Similarly to
the E-cadherin expression in Fig. 4.5, this figure suggests that there is no clear
separation between two adjacent zones, and that transition areas exist.
==PAGE:35==
4.1. Organoids differentiation
25
Figure 4.6: OTX2 and E-cadherin expression in a 4-week-old organoid; Scale bar: 200
µm
Figure 4.7: OTX2 expression in a 4-week-old organoid; Scale bar: 200 µm
Fig. 4.8 shows the E-cadherin and OTX2 expression in a 3-week-old organoid.
In this case, OTX2 expression was clear in zone 3, indicating that it is not just
a mere transition area. OTX2 expression in zone 3 has not been reported before
in the literature.
One source [47] suggests that OTX2 is naturally secreted by
lens cells (which are believed to be present in zone 3) in very low amounts, but
certain stress factors, such as exposure to UV radiation, can increase it significantly.
Another explanation is that the organoid is young, and what we presume to be
zone 3 is part of zone 2, which has not fully developed yet. This is also suggested
by the lack of E-cadherin expression in this presumed zone 3. It has been shown
that during development, OTX2 expression is maintained throughout adulthood in
photoreceptors, RPE and bipolar cells [48], but downregulated in other retinal cells,
including amacrine and horizontal cells [49]. This would explain the drop in OTX2
signal in the third zone of the older organoid (Fig. 4.6). This result can, therefore,
indicate that neuroretinal progenitors are present in zone 2 as well. OTX2 expression
==PAGE:36==
26
Chapter 4. Results
in zones 1 and 2 indicates the presence of retinal cells in both of these areas, as it
has been previously shown in the literature [11].
Figure 4.8: OTX2 and E-cadherin expression in a 3-week-old organoid; Scale bar: 200
µm
==PAGE:37==
4.2. 3D printing with beads
27
4.2
3D printing with beads
First, we conducted two tests to determine the optimal extrusion rate and print
speed that would yield a continuous cylindrical filament with a diameter of approxi-
mately 300 µm, matching the inner diameter of the needle. The extrusion rate is the
volume of bioink extruded through the needle as it moves 1 mm. The printing speed
is the distance travelled by the needle in a second. Together, these two determine
the quality and size of the filament.
To determine the ideal extrusion rate, we printed a 4 mm line with 4 different
extrusion rates (20, 40, 60, and 80 nl/mm), at a constant print speed of 1 mm/s. The
average size of a filament at varying extrusion rates is presented in Table 4.1. Based
on our calculations using the inner diameter of the syringe, the ideal extrusion rate
was 70 nl/mm. Experimentally, the 60 nl/mm extrusion rate resulted in a filament
that resembled most a cylinder with a diameter of 300 µm. This value is close to
the theoretical one. A representative image for each extrusion rate is included in
Fig. 4.9. We noticed that there is no linearity between extrusion rate and line size.
That can be explained using the principle of embedded 3D printing. The needle
creates a temporary void with a size of 560 µm (the outer diameter of the needle)
that is filled with ink. The ink spreads within this channel created by the needle,
and therefore, a higher extrusion rate will result in a denser line, not necessarily a
larger line. While at 80 nl/mm the line looked denser, with reduced spacing between
beads the height of the filament considerably exceeded 300 µm, indicating that the
ink is overextruded. At 20 nl/mm the size was very inconsistent between replicates
(standard deviation (SD) of 55.6), and the spacing between beads was considerable.
Table 4.1: Measured filament width and height at different extrusion rates
Extrusion rate
[nl/mm]
20
40
60
80
Width [µm] (mean
± SD, n=4)
257.36 ±
55.60
248.27 ±
24.03
312.51 ±
11.83
295.87 ±
16.66
Height [µm] (mean
± SD, n=3)
305.77 ±
31.15
265.30 ±
31.15
308.10 ±
30.29
463.16 ±
15.58
A similar procedure was followed to determine the printing speed, but only
visual evaluation was used to determine the optimal value. Fig. 4.10 indicates that
the 1 mm/s speed is ideal, as it results in a continuous filament with a relatively
consistent diameter. At low printing speeds, the unjamming of the alginate particles
relies predominantly on the extruded ink’s stress application on the support bath,
instead of the needle movement. This results in inconsistent filaments. Therefore,
in the following experiments, the extrusion rate and printing speed were set to 60
nl/mm and 1 mm/s, respectively.
==PAGE:38==
28
Chapter 4. Results
(a) 20 nl/mm
(b) 40 nl/mm
(c) 60 nl/mm
(d) 80 nl/mm
Figure 4.9: A 4 mm line printed at different extrusion rates; Scale bar: 250 µm
(a) 0.1 mm/s
(b) 0.5 mm/s
(c) 1 mm/s
Figure 4.10: A 4 mm line printed at different print speeds; Scale bar: 250 µm
Next, we ran a test to evaluate which needle path results in the most homogenous
sheet.
To do so, we designed different constructs in Shaper, with sizes under 5
mm. Fig. 4.11 shows the obtained sheets with an overlay of the needle path. The
most uniform sheets were obtained using concentric squares (Fig.
4.11 (e)) and
parallel lines (Fig. 4.11 (f)) spaced at 0.4 mm. Nevertheless, gaps were noticed in
these prints after repeating the experiment numerous times. We believe these gaps
are caused by small air bubbles inside the ink. At such low volumes (60 nl/mm),
small bubbles create noticeable defects in the patterns. Air bubble formation in the
SHAPE was a challenge we encountered throughout the entire project, although the
plates were always centrifuged before printing. These air bubbles were introduced
during printing by the needle exiting and entering the support bath. Polyline (Fig.
4.11 (a), (b)) and concentric circles (Fig. 4.11 (c), (d)) did not produce uniform
layers. In the following experiments, 2.8 mm sheets were printed using both parallel
==PAGE:39==
4.2. 3D printing with beads
29
lines and squares.
(a) 2.7 x 2.5 mm polyline;
spacing between lines:
400
µm
(b) 2.2 x 2.7 mm polyline;
spacing between lines:
500
µm
(c) Circle, 3.6 mm diameter;
spacing between circles: 400
µm
(d) Circle, 3.7 mm diameter;
spacing between circles: 500
µm
(e) 2.8 mm square;
spacing between squares: 400
µm
(f) 2.8 mm square;
spacing between lines:
400
µm
Figure 4.11: Printing a sheet using different needle paths; Scale bar: 500 µm
Because the aim was to print two layers on top of each other at a distance that
prevents them from merging, we evaluated the thickness of a layer. Shortly, we
used a confocal microscope to acquire z-stacks of the layers and Fiji to measure
their height. This process was challenging due to the limited axial resolution of
the microscope, causing the 10 µm spherical beads to appear as elongated lines,
approximately 200 µm long, in the xz plane (Fig. 4.12 (e)). This phenomenon,
which can be seen in the side-view pictures in Fig. 4.12, resulted in low-precision
measurements and potentially overestimation of the height. The layers printed using
squares and lines had approximate thicknesses of 400 µm and 300 µm, respectively.
We identified that the height of the layers exceeded the height of single lines. This
is potentially caused by the slight overlap of two adjacent lines, which is necessary
to ensure an even layer. As mentioned before, the needle had an outer diameter
of approximately 560 µm, the width of a line was about 300 µm, and the spacing
between two lines was 400 µm. This means that the needle most likely disturbs the
previous line in its path, causing smears in all three directions. Furthermore, the
beads used to prepare the ink are very lightweight because they are hollow and made
of polystyrene. There is a possibility that they float around the needle, the support
==PAGE:40==
30
Chapter 4. Results
bath being considerably denser, and travel upwards. Nevertheless, the height of the
layers was not considered notably large.
(a) top view
(b) side view
(c) top view
(d) side view
(e) side view of a single layer of beads pipetted on the bottom of a well
Figure 4.12: top and side view of two sheets printed using lines (a, b) and squares (c,d);
Scale bar: 1000 µm
We proceeded to print two layers, at varying distances (500-1000 µm, Fig. 4.13)
and acquired z-stacks to ensure that the layers did not merge, using the same pro-
cedure as before. The same challenge was encountered, and the height of a layer
seemed to approach 1000 µm. The layers appeared to merge slightly, even when
printed 1 mm apart. We identified that a few beads from the bottom layer (green)
contaminated the second layer (red), but generally, the two layers could be dis-
criminated. The presence of green beads in the red layer could be explained by the
phenomenon described in the previous section, where polystyrene beads travel up
==PAGE:41==
4.2. 3D printing with beads
31
the needle. Another explanation could be the motion of the needle during print-
ing. These layers were printed using concentric squares. After printing one square,
the needle was lifted from the SHAPE, moved to the next position, and submerged
again. There is a possibility that some residual material around the needle was
dragged upwards when the needle exited the support bath. When printed 1000 µm
apart, the separation between the two layers was most clear. In this experiment,
the contamination of the red layer with green beads seemed to drop as the distance
between layers increased, with minimal contamination observed in Fig. 4.13 (f). At
first glance, the logical explanation for this would be that the bottom layer was at
least 1000 µm thick, and that contamination was caused by the needle disturbing it
when the second layer was printed. However, this was not a consistent observation
during our study, where the experiment was repeated over 10 times, and no direct
correlation between distance and contamination was identified.
(a) distance=500 µm
(b) distance=600 µm
(c) distance=700 µm
(d) distance=800 µm
(e) distance=900 µm
(f) distance=1000 µm
Figure 4.13: Side view of the bottom (green) and top (red) layer printed at different
distances; Scale bar: 1000 µm
Lastly, we evaluated the quality of the two layers. Fig. 4.14 shows the top view
of two layers printed at a distance of 1000 µm. We repeatedly observed that the top
layer could not form an even sheet, regardless of its distance from the bottom layer.
A potential explanation for this is that the alginate particles need more time to
refill the channels created by the needle when printing the bottom layer, as the top
layer was always printed immediately after the first one. The two layers in Fig. 4.14
were printed using the concentric squares method, meaning that the needle followed
==PAGE:42==
32
Chapter 4. Results
precisely the same path. In a follow-up experiment, we printed the two layers using
parallel lines, and flipped the top layer 90◦, to minimise the overlap between needle
paths (Fig. 4.15). This resulted in a more even-looking top layer, but gaps between
lines were still identified. This issue is clearly caused by the support bath, as all the
other parameters remain unchanged, including ink formulation.
(a)
bottom
layer:
concentric
squares
(b) top layer: concentric squares
Figure 4.14: Top view of two layers printed at a distance of 1000 µm (concentric squares);
Scale bar: 1000 µm
(a) bottom layer: vertical lines
(b) top layer: horizontal lines
Figure 4.15: Top view of two layers printed at a distance of 1000 µm; Scale bar: 1000
µm
==PAGE:43==
4.3. Label-free cell sorting
33
4.3
Label-free cell sorting
Setting a gating strategy
The purpose of this experiment was to obtain two gating strategies that can be
applied later to isolate the RPE and PRs. A gating strategy represents a systematic,
step-by-step process that aims to identify specific cells, in our case, RPE and PRs,
from a heterogeneous mixture of cells, based on their physical characteristics. To
do so, we used a sacrificial sample obtained by digesting a SEAM culture.
First, we set an initial threshold to separate single cells from debris and large cell
clumps, which can be seen in the images on the right side of Fig. 4.16. All the events
(images of individual cells) recorded by the instrument are represented in the graph
in Fig. 4.16. In the side scatter (SSC) as a function of light loss representation,
very small objects that do not absorb a significant amount of light are found at low
x values. At large x values, large objects such as cell clumps or large debris are
present. Therefore, we filtered out the events in these areas. This was a common
step for both gating strategies.
Figure 4.16: All recorded events
Fig. 4.17 shows the series of gates that were used to isolate the RPE. After
the exclusion of debris and large cell clumps, another step to isolate single cells was
needed. The plot in Fig. 4.17 (a) shows the distribution of all the cells based on their
maximum intensity values measured using two modes: 1. light loss, related to cell
transparency and size, and 2. side scatter, related to cell granularity/complexity.
At low x and y values, the cells present are those that transmit most light (lens cells,
very small cells) and at the same time have little internal complexity/granularity.
Knowing that RPE cells are larger and highly pigmented cells, a gate was set at
high x values. This gate already proved very successful (see images in Fig. 4.17
(b)), but at the same time, some clustered small cells were still visible.
The plot in Fig. 4.17 (b) represents the vertical centre of mass from the side
scatter imaging (which indicates where the most granularity is located within the
cell, vertically) as a function of Forward Scatter (FSC) Height, correlated to the
==PAGE:44==
34
Chapter 4. Results
cell size. At low x and y values reside small cells, with complexity concentrated
toward the bottom of the image. In contrast, at high x and y values reside large
cells with complexity centred toward the top of the image. The gate was set to
include medium-sized cells with the most complex features in their centre. Lastly,
eccentricity was applied twice to isolate the most round-looking cells (Fig. 4.17 (c)
and (d)). The final isolated cell population can be seen in Fig. 4.17 (d). The cells
appeared round and dark, resembling RPE cells very well.
(a) Max Intensity(SSC (Imaging)) vs Max In-
tensity(LightLoss(Imaging)))
(b) Center of Mass(Y) (SSC (Imaging)) vs FSC-
H
(c) Eccentricity(R1 FITC) vs Correlation(R1
FITC/R2 PE-B*)
(d) Eccentricity(Light Loss (Imaging)) vs Ec-
centricity(SSC (Imaging))
Figure 4.17: Gating strategy for RPE
In contrast with RPE, PRs are elongated and more transparent. We applied a
similar rationale in this case, resulting in a gating strategy for presumed PR cells,
presented in Fig. 4.18. After debris and clumps were filtered out, cells were clustered
based on opacity and size (Fig. 4.18 (a)). On the x-axis, the total light blocked or
absorbed by the cell gives us information about the total opacity of the cell. The
y-axis represents how long the cell blocks the light, providing information about
the physical length of the cell. We set a gate that included larger, more elongated
cells, with different degrees of transparency. To further remove the small cells, we
used SSC-Width, which is correlated with cell length and complexity and the radial
moment, which shows the distribution of the fluorescence from the centre (Fig. 4.18
(b)). Next, cells were clustered based on elongation (Fig. 4.18 (c)). We set a gate
that included the most elongated cells. Lastly, SSC(Imaging)-H was used to select
==PAGE:45==
4.3. Label-free cell sorting
35
the cells with less internal complexity (Fig.4.18 (d)). This last step resulted in the
isolation of a cell population that resembled PRs (see images in Fig. 4.18 (e)).
(a) LightLoss(Violet)-W vs LightLoss(Violet)-A
(b)
Radial Moment(R2 PE-B*) vs
SSC(Violet)-W
(c) Eccentricity(SSC (Imaging)) vs Ra-
dial Moment(R2 PE-B*)
(d)
Radial Moment(R2 PE-B*) vs
SSC(Imaging)-H
(e) Center of Mass(X)(SSC (Imaging)) vs Long Axis
Moment(Light Loss)
Figure 4.18: Gating strategy for presumed PRs
==PAGE:46==
36
Chapter 4. Results
RPE and PR sorting
The final step of this project was to isolate the RPE and PRs from the organoids
to create bioinks. The two gating strategies set in the previous subsection were used.
Sorting the RPE was straightforward, resulting in a sample with high purity.
On the other hand, isolating the PRs was more diﬀicult, and the gating protocol
suffered several modifications due to sample variation. In contrast with RPE, this
sample had reduced purity.
To ensure that the digestion and sorting process were not damaging to the cells,
we assessed the viability of the RPE and PRs. Both samples showed a viability
greater than 70 %, indicating that most of the cells survived both procedures.
==PAGE:47==
Chapter 5
Discussions
The first objective of this project was to obtain PR and retinal pigment epithe-
lium cells by growing hiPSCs into SEAM organoids, following a published protocol
[14].
Early results from brightfield microscopy suggested that our organoids developed
into the four zones that have already been reported in many studies [13, 14, 15].
The presence of pigment in zone 2, known to be made up of optic cup derivatives,
was a strong indicator that our organoids were producing RPE progenitors and that
the zone formation followed a correct spatial pattern. We observed that pigment
production by hiPSC-derived RPE varies with the cell line. Previous research re-
veals that whether stem cells differentiate into RPE under certain culture conditions
[50] and the timing of pigmentation [51] differ across cell lines. However, another
study shows that the amount of pigment produced by RPE does not correlate with
maturity [52]. Therefore, the lack of pigment in three of the four hiPSC lines we
studied does not indicate the absence of RPE progenitors in the organoids.
The results from the immunohistochemical analysis reveal even more informa-
tion about the differentiation within the four zones of the organoids. The PAX6
expression follows a gradient that has been identified before in literature [13, 14],
with the highest expression in zones 1 and 2, lower expression in zone 3 and no ex-
pression in zone 4. The significant amount of PAX6 expressed in zone 1 proves the
neuroectodermal lineage of the cells in the area. In zones 2 and 3, PAX6 expression
indicates that the cells have committed to an ocular lineage. Absence of PAX6 ex-
pression in zone 4 was expected, since this area has been reported to be non-ocular
surface ectoderm [13]. In our organoids, PAX6 expression was lower than expected
in zone 2, but we believe this is caused by the pigment blocking the fluorescent sig-
nal. The expression pattern of PAX6 confirms that the SEAM cultures have grown
in a manner that spatially resembles embryonic eye development [32]. Addition-
ally, it further indicates the potential presence of PRs and RPE. A more conclusive
marker in this sense is OTX2, which is a factor involved in retinal development.
While OTX2 presence was not identified in the oldest organoid, most probably due
to a practical error, its expression was clear in both of the younger cultures. We
observed that OTX2 was significantly produced in zones 1 and 2, confirming the
presence of retinal progenitor cells. CRX was the marker that definitively confirmed
that the organoids produced PR progenitors. This marker was identified in zone
37
==PAGE:48==
38
Chapter 5. Discussions
1, which contradicts other findings. In the original paper on SEAM cultures [13],
CHX10, which is an early retinogenesis marker, was identified in zone 2 after 7 weeks
of culturing using a protocol that encouraged retinal differentiation. Similar to our
findings, another paper reports identifying CHX10-positive cells in zone 1, and RPE
in zone 2 [11], after modifying the original protocol to favour retinal differentiation.
A more recent study claims that neuroretinal cells coexist with RPE in zone 2 [15].
The authors performed single-cell transcriptomics on fully digested SEAM cultures,
and while they identified RPE and PR markers, their claim is not supported by
the provided data, but rather based on previous findings [13], because they did not
isolate specific zones before performing the analysis. It must be pointed out that
we do not exclude the possibility of PRs or other neuroretinal cells developing in
zone 2. It was clear throughout our experiments that the pigment produced by the
RPE limits the imaging of antibody expression in the area. It is possible that the
CRX signal was also affected in this sense. The incomplete maturation of the PR
cells, suggested by the absence of Rhodopsin, has been reported before [15]. The
incomplete maturation of cells in 2D cultures is a well-known issue. Possibly, the
RPE and PRs could benefit from the 3D architecture of our system, which promotes
cell-cell and cell-ECM interactions that can result in improved maturation [53].
While E-cadherin is an epithelial marker that indicates the presence of corneal
epithelial cells, which are not the focus of this study, the information provided by
this gene is important. We identified E-cadherin expression in zone 3 in two of our
organoids, the 7 and 4-week-old ones. Alongside PAX6, CRX and OTX2, it confirms
that the spatial distribution of different cell types within the four zones follows a
pattern that is reproducible.
The results from the OTX2 staining performed on the 3-week-old organoid are
unexpected, and more research should be conducted in this sense. So far, no studies
have reported the presence of retinal cells in zone 3, which has always been known
as the ocular surface ectodermal zone, containing corneal epithelial cells and lens
cells.
As mentioned in the previous chapter, what seems to be zone 3 may be
an underdeveloped zone 2. Another explanation behind this result is the sample
preparation for immunohistochemistry. The organoids fixed at 3 and 4 weeks were
isolated from the wells using a biopsy punch, stained in a 24-well plate, and mounted
on a glass slide. Potentially, the volume of primary antibody solution used to stain
these single colonies was too high, leading to non-specific binding. Artefacts that
appear as bright speckles can be observed in the images. However, considering that
only nuclei were stained, this hypothesis is very unlikely. Additionally, handling the
isolated colonies was challenging due to their size and fragility. This resulted in local
fragmentation and folding of the organoids, altering the natural zone distribution.
Regardless of the cause, it is clear that repeating the experiment on an intact culture
is necessary. A more sensitive analysis, such as transcriptomics, must be performed
on individual zones to shed more light on their cellular composition.
Our results indicate that zone formation has occurred according to previous
research and, most importantly, that we successfully generated PRs and RPE cells
==PAGE:49==
39
using SEAM cultures.
Another objective of this project was to print a two-layer system using PRs and
RPE. While this was not fully accomplished due to time restraints, we successfully
developed a 3D-printing protocol that can be applied in a future project.
The
smallest layer size we could print was a square with sides of 2.8 mm, as lower sizes
resulted in uneven sheets. The main limiting factor in this sense was the needle that
had an outer diameter of 560 µm, affecting printing resolution. In our case, using a
narrower needle was not possible, as it would expose the cells to higher shear stress,
reducing their viability [22].
Because of the challenges encountered with sample imaging, we believe that
a 1 mm spacing between layers, although extremely large, would surely prevent
them from merging. The poor image quality due to limited axial resolution can
be improved by applying different image processing algorithms.
Addressing this
limitation is very important, as it would allow a more precise visualisation of the
structures, more accurate measurements, and the possibility of printing the two
layers at a much lower distance. We believe that the distance between layers should
be minimal to ensure that they align properly after the digestion of the SHAPE.
Two needle paths that resulted in homogeneous sheets were identified. We ob-
served that the parallel lines approach is more reliable for producing a more even
top layer. The structural inconsistency of the top layer is an issue that should be
addressed in the future, and is potentially caused by the recovery time of the gel
bath. The SHAPE composite used in this project has been researched in this sense
[18], and its mechanical properties, such as the yield stress, have proven to be ad-
equate for embedded 3D printing. Furthermore, the authors successfully printed a
3-layered structure, with a spacing of 20 µm in between layers, without noticeable
defects, proving that the gel had a short recovery time. It must be pointed out that
the authors of the SHAPE protocol printed the 3 sheets using a crosshatch pattern,
with 1 mm spacing between 200 µm lines, angled at different degrees (see Fig. 5.1
(a)). Thus, the three needle paths did not fully overlap. Additionally, in a more
detailed image of the overlapping regions (see Fig. 5.1 (b)), it appears that some
disturbance of the filaments occurred. In our project, it appeared that printing the
top layer at a 90 ◦angle to the bottom layer seemed to alleviate the problem, but
not entirely. The experiment should be replicated to ensure that the same results
are obtained. We believe that the theory about the recovery time of the gel should
be tested in the future, by simply printing the top layer at different time intervals
after the bottom layer.
Another aspect to consider is that collagen I could crosslink during printing,
changing the mechanical properties of the support bath [23]. Collagen I self-assembles
into fibrils at 37◦C and neutral pH [54]. Therefore, before printing, the tempera-
ture of the printer’s stage was always set to 4◦C, but the lowest temperature that
could be reached was 16◦C. It is unclear how fast collagen I crosslinking occurs at
room temperature, but we can assume it is possible, considering that the collagen I
stock solution had been stored in the fridge for two years prior to these experiments,
==PAGE:50==
40
Chapter 5. Discussions
(a) Microscopy image of the construct
(b) Detail of an overlapping region
Figure 5.1: Stacked structure printed using neural stem cells into a SHAPE bath. From
[18]
which might have affected its stability. It is possible that the design of the 24-well
plates we used to print into, which is intended to minimise heat transfer between
surfaces and the wells, prevented the cooling of the SHAPE and allowed the thermal
crosslinking of collagen I. This problem can easily be addressed either by cutting
the edges of the plate or using a different type of dish. Therefore, a combination of
all these factors might have resulted in the collagen crosslinking during the printing
process.
One of the limitations this project aimed to address was the hypoxic regions
that emerge in thick in vitro cultures like 3D organoids. The oxygen diffusion limit
through tissue is considered to be less than 200 µm [55]. Our constructs were at
least 300 µm thick. This size is determined primarily by the needle diameter, which
does not allow major adjustments, as previously discussed. Potentially, a 200 µm
needle could be used in the future. Still, the two layers stacked on top of each other
would exceed 200 µm. However, the size of the layer will not remain constant after
printing because the bioink is designed to contain ECM components, allowing the
cells to remodel it. Cellulose fibers can be added to the SHAPE composite, which
will draw out the water from the printed layers, further decreasing their size.
The final aim of the project was to create two gating strategies for isolating
the RPE and PR cells from the organoids. We successfully developed these gating
strategies, using label-free image-guided flow cytometry. This was possible due to
the unique morphologies of the RPE and PRs.
Using this approach, cell sorting was performed after all the organoids were
digested. A few challenges were encountered due to sample variations.
The sacrificial sample used initially to set up the gating strategies was obtained
by digesting 2-3 colonies cut out from the same well. In contrast, the sample used
for cell sorting was much more heterogeneous, containing cells from organoids at
different developmental stages. Making circular incisions to separate Zones 1-3 from
the rest of the culture was diﬀicult in some cases. In older cultures, the cells have
==PAGE:51==
41
formed a confluent layer covering the entire well. When the biopsy punch was used
to cut out the central zones, the entire layer would detach from the bottom, making
the process very diﬀicult. Therefore, the entire well had to be digested in these cases.
This, combined with the large number of cultures, results in improper digestion. Cell
clumps were still noticeable even after 1.5 h of incubation. This suggests that the
digestion buffer volume must be increased.
Improper digestion of the organoids led to a considerable number of doublets and
triples in the final sample, although a cell strainer was used. This affected PR sorting
in particular because the software was not able to discriminate between elongated
cells and triplets, regardless of the applied parameters. The elongated morphology
of the PRs is an important characteristic that was used to set up a gating strategy,
and without this feature, PRs isolation is not possible. This resulted in a low-purity
sample.
It was confirmed that our initial approach, consisting of separating the zones of
interest from the rest of the culture, is the right one. This lowers the variation be-
tween samples, meaning that the gating strategy will require little to no adjustments,
and prevents unwanted background that prolongs the sorting time considerably.
In this experiment, the purity of the final RPE sample was not affected, but the
yield was low due to numerous RPE cells being filtered out because of clumping.
The viability of the cells after sorting is promising. We are positive that higher
viability can be ensured in the future by speeding up the digestion and the sorting
process. Before formulating bioinks with the two cell types, DNA sequencing or
immunohistochemical analysis should be carried out on the sorted cells to confirm
their lineage. To identify the RPE and assess their maturity, the following genes
could be screened:
• RPE65 (retinal pigment epithelium-specific protein 65kDa), a canonical marker
of mature RPE that encodes an enzyme crucial for the visual cycle [56].
• BEST1 (bestrophin-1), another mature RPE indicator, involved in ion trans-
port [56]
• MITF (melanocyte-inducing transcription factor), a master transcriptional
regulator in RPE cells [57]
• DCT (Dopachrome Tautomerase), PMEL (premelanosome protein), TYR (ty-
rosinase), TYRP1 (tyrosinase-related protein 1), which are involved in melanin
biosynthesis in RPE [56]
For identifying the PRs, the following genes could be targeted:
• CRX and RCVRN (recoverin) as markers for both cones and rods [15]
• RHO, a mature rod marker and NRL (neural retinal leucine zipper), a master
regulator of rod cell fate [15]
• PDE6H (phosphodiesterase 6H) for mature cones, and RXRG (Retinoid X
receptor) for both early and mature cones
==PAGE:52==
Chapter 6
Conclusions
The project sought to address the shortcomings of current retinal organoids by
developing a system that combines the advantages of 2D SEAM organoids with the
complex architecture of 3D cultures. While the end goal of 3D printing using RPE
and PRs was not met, considerable progress was made to create a strategy in this
sense.
We successfully created SEAM organoids from hiPSCs. Our cultures demon-
strated zone formation, with eye-field, neural and epithelial markers expressed in
spatial patterns characteristic of SEAM. The presence of retinal progenitors, indi-
cated by the OTX2 expression, combined with the pigment production and CRX
expression, confirmed the differentiation of the stem cells into RPE and PR progen-
itors.
By tuning the extrusion rate, print speed, needle path, and the distance between
layers, we were able to 3D print a two-layered system using fluorescent beads. Owing
to limited cell supply, each layer measured 2.8 x 2.8 mm, below our 5 mm initial
threshold. We proposed a 1 mm distance between layers to ensure their integrity.
We believe more effort should be put into improving the imaging technique, because
a much lower distance would be beneficial. The thickness of individual layers (300-
400 µm) was greater than the oxygen diffusion limit. We believe the thickness will
decrease post-printing due to ECM remodelling by the cells. We identified several
parameters that can be optimised in the future to obtain more homogeneous, thinner
layers, including the use of a 200 µm needle, modification of the SHAPE composition,
and improved temperature control during printing.
Finally, a protocol for the label-free isolation of RPE and presumed PRs was de-
veloped and applied. To assess the performance of the gating strategy, an additional
analysis is required.
The challenges encountered during this project offer valuable information about
areas that need to be researched more thoroughly in the future. We demonstrated
the need for a more in-depth analysis of the cell lineages in the four zones of the
SEAM organoids. Furthermore, the results of the project suggest that the recovery
time of the SHAPE support should be further investigated.
Ultimately, this study demonstrates that obtaining a 3D model of the RPE and
PR layers of the retina is attainable if the 3D printing strategy is proven compatible
for live cell printing.
42
==PAGE:53==
Bibliography
[1]
Rachael C. Heath Jeffery et al. “Inherited retinal diseases are the most com-
mon cause of blindness in the working-age population in Australia”. In: Oph-
thalmic Genetics 42.4 (May 2021), pp. 431–439. issn: 1744-5094. doi: 10.1080/
13816810.2021.1913610.
[2]
Thomas J Cummings. Ophthalmic Pathology: A Concise Guide. Springer New
York, 2013. isbn: 9781461443940. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4614-4394-0.
[3]
Megan M. W. Straiko et al. “Provision of human ocular tissue for biomedical
research: trends, limitations, and potential solutions from an eye bank”. In:
Scientific Reports 15.1 (Mar. 2025). issn: 2045-2322. doi: 10.1038/s41598-
025-92291-3.
[4]
Avril Watson and Majlinda Lako. “Retinal organoids provide unique insights
into molecular signatures of inherited retinal disease throughout retinogenesis”.
In: Journal of Anatomy 243.2 (Sept. 2022), pp. 186–203. issn: 1469-7580. doi:
10.1111/joa.13768.
[5]
Manuela Völkner et al. “Retinal Organoids from Pluripotent Stem Cells Ef-
ficiently Recapitulate Retinogenesis”. In: Stem Cell Reports 6.4 (Apr. 2016),
pp. 525–538. issn: 2213-6711. doi: 10.1016/j.stemcr.2016.03.001.
[6]
Yaohong Liu et al. ““Armed in-vitro retina”-generating microglial retinal organoids,
where are we now?” In: Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology 13 (May
2025). issn: 2296-634X. doi: 10.3389/fcell.2025.1574283.
[7]
Mototsugu Eiraku et al. “Self-organizing optic-cup morphogenesis in three-
dimensional culture”. In: Nature 472.7341 (Apr. 2011), pp. 51–56. issn: 1476-
4687. doi: 10.1038/nature09941.
[8]
Tasneem Akhtar et al. “Accelerated photoreceptor differentiation of hiPSC-
derived retinal organoids by contact co-culture with retinal pigment epithe-
lium”. In: Stem Cell Research 39 (Aug. 2019), p. 101491. issn: 1873-5061. doi:
10.1016/j.scr.2019.101491.
[9]
Cédric Boucherie et al. “Brief Report: Self-Organizing Neuroepithelium from
Human Pluripotent Stem Cells Facilitates Derivation of Photoreceptors”. In:
Stem Cells 31.2 (Feb. 2013), pp. 408–414. issn: 1549-4918. doi: 10.1002/stem.
1268.
43
==PAGE:54==
44
Bibliography
[10]
Hassan Rashidi et al. “Generation of 3D retinal tissue from human pluripo-
tent stem cells using a directed small molecule-based serum-free microwell
platform”. In: Scientific Reports 12.1 (Apr. 2022). issn: 2045-2322. doi: 10.
1038/s41598-022-10540-1.
[11]
Jinyan Li et al. “Generation and Staging of Human Retinal Organoids Based
on Self-Formed Ectodermal Autonomous Multi-Zone System”. In: Frontiers
in Cell and Developmental Biology 9 (Sept. 2021). issn: 2296-634X. doi: 10.
3389/fcell.2021.732382.
[12]
Nerea Urrestizala-Arenaza et al. “Limitations of human brain organoids to
study neurodegenerative diseases: a manual to survive”. In: Frontiers in Cel-
lular Neuroscience 18 (July 2024). issn: 1662-5102. doi: 10.3389/fncel.2024.
1419526.
[13]
Ryuhei Hayashi et al. “Co-ordinated ocular development from human iPS cells
and recovery of corneal function”. In: Nature 531.7594 (Mar. 2016), pp. 376–
380. issn: 1476-4687. doi: 10.1038/nature17000.
[14]
Anne Z. Eriksen et al. “SARS-CoV-2 infects human adult donor eyes and
hESC-derived ocular epithelium”. In: Cell Stem Cell 28.7 (July 2021), 1205–
1220.e7. issn: 1934-5909. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2021.04.028.
[15]
Laura Howard et al. “Single-cell transcriptomics reveals the molecular basis of
human iPS cell differentiation into ectodermal ocular lineages”. In: Commu-
nications Biology 7.1 (Nov. 2024). issn: 2399-3642. doi: 10.1038/s42003-024-
07130-4.
[16]
Nobuhiko Shiraki et al. “PAX6-positive microglia evolve locally in hiPSC-
derived ocular organoids”. In: Stem Cell Reports 17.2 (Feb. 2022), pp. 221–
230. issn: 2213-6711. doi: 10.1016/j.stemcr.2021.12.009.
[17]
Beatrice Ho, Nicole Pek, and Boon-Seng Soh. “Disease Modeling Using 3D
Organoids Derived from Human Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells”. In: Interna-
tional Journal of Molecular Sciences 19.4 (Mar. 2018), p. 936. issn: 1422-0067.
doi: 10.3390/ijms19040936.
[18]
Janko Kajtez et al. “Embedded 3D Printing in Self‐Healing Annealable Com-
posites for Precise Patterning of Functionally Mature Human Neural Con-
structs”. In: Advanced Science 9.25 (June 2022). issn: 2198-3844. doi: 10.
1002/advs.202201392.
[19]
Elizabeth A. Aisenbrey and William L. Murphy. “Synthetic alternatives to
Matrigel”. In: Nature Reviews Materials 5.7 (May 2020), pp. 539–551. issn:
2058-8437. doi: 10.1038/s41578-020-0199-8.
[20]
Laura Prieto-López, Xandra Pereiro, and Elena Vecino. “The mechanics of
the retina: Müller glia role on retinal extracellular matrix and modelling”. In:
Frontiers in Medicine 11 (Sept. 2024). issn: 2296-858X. doi: 10.3389/fmed.
2024.1393057.
==PAGE:55==
Bibliography
45
[21]
Megan E. Cooke and Derek H. Rosenzweig. “The rheology of direct and sus-
pended extrusion bioprinting”. In: APL Bioengineering 5.1 (Feb. 2021). issn:
2473-2877. doi: 10.1063/5.0031475.
[22]
Edgar Y.S. Tan, Ratima Suntornnond, and Wai Yee Yeong. “High-Resolution
Novel Indirect Bioprinting of Low-Viscosity Cell-Laden Hydrogels via Model-
Support Bioink Interaction”. In: 3D Printing and Additive Manufacturing 8.1
(Feb. 2021), pp. 69–78. issn: 2329-7670. doi: 10.1089/3dp.2020.0153.
[23]
Janko Kajtez et al. “Microgel-Extracellular Matrix Composite Support for the
Embedded 3D Printing of Human Neural Constructs”. In: Journal of Visualized
Experiments 195 (May 2023). issn: 1940-087X. doi: 10.3791/65158.
[24]
Yiqiao Zheng and Shiming Chen. “Transcriptional precision in photoreceptor
development and diseases – Lessons from 25 years of CRX research”. In: Fron-
tiers in Cellular Neuroscience Volume 18 - 2024 (2024). issn: 1662-5102. doi:
10.3389/fncel.2024.1347436.
[25]
Elahe Masaeli et al. “Tissue engineering of retina through high resolution 3-
dimensional inkjet bioprinting”. In: Biofabrication 12.2 (Jan. 2020), p. 025006.
issn: 1758-5090. doi: 10.1088/1758-5090/ab4a20.
[26]
Pengrui Wang et al. “3D bioprinting of hydrogels for retina cell culturing”. In:
Bioprinting 12 (Dec. 2018), e00029. issn: 2405-8866. doi: 10.1016/j.bprint.
2018.e00029.
[27]
Pujiang Shi et al. “A bilayer photoreceptor-retinal tissue model with gradient
cell density design: A study of microvalve-based bioprinting”. In: Journal of
Tissue Engineering and Regenerative Medicine 12.5 (Mar. 2018), pp. 1297–
1306. issn: 1932-6254. doi: 10.1002/term.2661.
[28]
Anna Salas et al. “Cell therapy with hiPSC-derived RPE cells and RPCs pre-
vents visual function loss in a rat model of retinal degeneration”. In: Molecular
Therapy - Methods & Clinical Development 20 (Mar. 2021), pp. 688–702. issn:
2329-0501. doi: 10.1016/j.omtm.2021.02.006.
[29]
Pablo Artal. “Image Formation in the Living Human Eye”. In: Annual Review
of Vision Science 1.1 (Nov. 2015), pp. 1–17. issn: 2374-4650. doi: 10.1146/
annurev-vision-082114-035905.
[30]
Kristina Irsch and David L. Guyton. “Anatomy of Eyes”. In: Encyclopedia of
Biometrics. Springer US, 2009, pp. 11–16. isbn: 9780387730035. doi: 10.1007/
978-0-387-73003-5_253.
[31]
M.J. Morrow. “Retina”. In: Encyclopedia of the Neurological Sciences. Elsevier,
2014, pp. 26–28. isbn: 9780123851581. doi: 10.1016/b978- 0- 12- 385157-
4.00157-3.
[32]
Jochen Graw. “Eye Development”. In: Organogenesis in Development. Elsevier,
2010, pp. 343–386. isbn: 9780123809124. doi: 10.1016/s0070-2153(10)90010-0.
==PAGE:56==
46
Bibliography
[33]
Olaf Strauss. “The Retinal Pigment Epithelium in Visual Function”. In: Physi-
ological Reviews 85.3 (July 2005), pp. 845–881. issn: 1522-1210. doi: 10.1152/
physrev.00021.2004.
[34]
Ryuhei Hayashi et al. “Coordinated generation of multiple ocular-like cell lin-
eages and fabrication of functional corneal epithelial cell sheets from human
iPS cells”. In: Nature Protocols 12.4 (Mar. 2017), pp. 683–696. issn: 1750-2799.
doi: 10.1038/nprot.2017.007.
[35]
Hiroshi Takayanagi and Ryuhei Hayashi. “Status and prospects for the devel-
opment of regenerative therapies for corneal and ocular diseases”. In: Regen-
erative Therapy 26 (June 2024), pp. 819–825. issn: 2352-3204. doi: 10.1016/
j.reth.2024.09.001.
[36]
Tokiyoshi Matsushita et al. “Rapid and eﬀicient generation of mature retinal
organoids derived from human pluripotent stem cells via optimized pharma-
cological modulation of Sonic hedgehog, activin A, and retinoic acid signal
transduction”. In: PLOS ONE 19.8 (Aug. 2024). Ed. by Li-Ping Liu, e0308743.
issn: 1932-6203. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0308743.
[37]
Lucia-Elena Nichita. “Investigating the effects of substrate stiffness on eye-
organoid differentiation”. Unpublished project report, Technical University of
Denmark. 2024.
[38]
Maik Herbig et al. “Label-free imaging flow cytometry for analysis and sorting
of enzymatically dissociated tissues”. In: Scientific Reports 12.1 (Jan. 2022).
issn: 2045-2322. doi: 10.1038/s41598-022-05007-2.
[39]
BD Biosciences. CellView™Image Technology. https://www.bdbiosciences.
com/en- us/learn/campaigns/cell- view- image- technology?tab=Technology.
Accessed: 2025-06-20. 2025.
[40]
A. Bennis et al. “Stem Cell Derived Retinal Pigment Epithelium: The Role of
Pigmentation as Maturation Marker and Gene Expression Profile Comparison
with Human Endogenous Retinal Pigment Epithelium.” In: Stem Cell Reviews
and Reports 13.5 (July 2017), pp. 659–669. issn: 1558-6804. doi: 10.1007/
s12015-017-9754-0.
[41]
Dulce Lima Cunha et al. “The Spectrum of PAX6 Mutations and Genotype-
Phenotype Correlations in the Eye”. In: Genes 10.12 (Dec. 2019), p. 1050.
issn: 2073-4425. doi: 10.3390/genes10121050.
[42]
Anne Zebitz Eriksen et al. “Protocols for SARS-CoV-2 infection in primary
ocular cells and eye organoids”. In: STAR Protocols 3.2 (June 2022), p. 101383.
issn: 2666-1667. doi: 10.1016/j.xpro.2022.101383.
[43]
Cameron Lenahan et al. “Rhodopsin: A Potential Biomarker for Neurodegen-
erative Diseases”. In: Frontiers in Neuroscience Volume 14 - 2020 (2020). issn:
1662-453X. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2020.00326.
==PAGE:57==
Bibliography
47
[44]
Alejandra J. H. Cabrera, Barry M. Gumbiner, and Young V. Kwon. “Re-
modeling of E-cadherin subcellular localization during cell dissemination”. In:
Molecular Biology of the Cell 34.5 (May 2023). Ed. by Elizabeth Chen. issn:
1939-4586. doi: 10.1091/mbc.e23-03-0087.
[45]
Miruna Georgiana Ghinia Tegla et al. “OTX2 represses sister cell fate choices
in the developing retina to promote photoreceptor specification”. In: eLife 9
(Apr. 2020). issn: 2050-084X. doi: 10.7554/elife.54279.
[46]
Gabriele Thumann. “Development and Cellular Functions of the Iris Pigment
Epithelium”. In: Survey of Ophthalmology 45.4 (Jan. 2001), pp. 345–354. issn:
0039-6257. doi: 10.1016/s0039-6257(00)00195-8.
[47]
Yasuo Yoshitomi et al. “Ultraviolet B-induced Otx2 expression in lens epithe-
lial cells promotes epithelial–mesenchymal transition”. In: Biology Open (Jan.
2019). issn: 2046-6390. doi: 10.1242/bio.035691.
[48]
M. Housset et al. “Loss of Otx2 in the Adult Retina Disrupts Retinal Pigment
Epithelium Function, Causing Photoreceptor Degeneration”. In: Journal of
Neuroscience 33.24 (June 2013), pp. 9890–9904. issn: 1529-2401. doi: 10 .
1523/jneurosci.1099-13.2013.
[49]
Michael L. Kaufman et al. “Initiation of Otx2 expression in the developing
mouse retina requires a unique enhancer and either Ascl1 or Neurog2 activ-
ity”. In: Development 148.12 (June 2021). issn: 1477-9129. doi: 10.1242/dev.
199399.
[50]
Lyndsay L. Leach et al. “Induced Pluripotent Stem Cell-Derived Retinal Pig-
mented Epithelium: A Comparative Study Between Cell Lines and Differen-
tiation Methods”. In: Journal of Ocular Pharmacology and Therapeutics 32.5
(June 2016), pp. 317–330. issn: 1557-7732. doi: 10.1089/jop.2016.0022.
[51]
Sanna Toivonen et al. “Comparative Analysis of Targeted Differentiation of
Human Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells (hiPSCs) and Human Embryonic Stem
Cells Reveals Variability Associated With Incomplete Transgene Silencing in
Retrovirally Derived hiPSC Lines”. In: Stem Cells Translational Medicine 2.2
(Jan. 2013), pp. 83–93. issn: 2157-6580. doi: 10.5966/sctm.2012-0047.
[52]
Yoko Nakai-Futatsugi et al. “Pigmentation level of human iPSC-derived RPE
does not indicate a specific gene expression profile”. In: eLife 12 (May 2024).
issn: 2050-084X. doi: 10.7554/elife.92510.
[53]
Benjamin R. Tollitt et al. “A comparison of human skeletal muscle cell matura-
tion in 2D versus 3D culture: A quantitative proteomic study”. In: Physiological
Reports 13.12 (June 2025). issn: 2051-817X. doi: 10.14814/phy2.70420.
==PAGE:58==
48
Bibliography
[54]
Chia-Hui Chuang et al. “Comparison of covalently and physically cross-linked
collagen hydrogels on mediating vascular network formation for engineering
adipose tissue”. In: Artificial Cells, Nanomedicine, and Biotechnology 46.sup3
(Aug. 2018), pp. 434–447. issn: 2169-141X. doi: 10.1080/21691401.2018.
1499660.
[55]
Seema M. Ehsan and Steven C. George. “Nonsteady State Oxygen Transport
in Engineered Tissue: Implications for Design”. In: Tissue Engineering Part A
19.11–12 (June 2013), pp. 1433–1442. issn: 1937-335X. doi: 10.1089/ten.tea.
2012.0587.
[56]
Zongren Xu et al. “A Single-Cell Transcriptome Atlas of the Human Retinal
Pigment Epithelium”. In: Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology 9 (Dec.
2021). issn: 2296-634X. doi: 10.3389/fcell.2021.802457.
[57]
Jo-Ling Liao et al. “Molecular signature of primary retinal pigment epithelium
and stem-cell-derived RPE cells”. In: Human Molecular Genetics 19.21 (Aug.
2010), pp. 4229–4238. issn: 0964-6906. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddq341.
==PAGE:59==
Appendix A
Supplementary figures
Fig. A.1, A.2, A.3, A.4, A.5, and A.6 represent the negative controls for the
images in the Immunohistochemistry subsection in Chapter 4.
Figure A.1: Negative control for Fig. 4.3; Scale bar: 500 µm (top), 200µm (bottom)
Figure A.2: Negative control for Fig. 4.4; Scale bar: 200 µm
49
==PAGE:60==
50
Appendix A. Supplementary figures
Figure A.3: Negative control for Fig. 4.5; Scale bars: 200 µm (top) and 500 µm (bottom)
Figure A.4: Negative control for Fig. 4.6; Scale bar: 200 µm
Figure A.5: Negative control for Fig. 4.7; Scale bar: 200 µm
==PAGE:61==
51
Figure A.6: Negative control for Fig. 4.8, Scale bar: 200 µm
==PAGE:62==
”Expect problems and eat them for breakfast.”
— Alfred A. Montapert
Technical
University of
Denmark
Ørsteds Plads, Building 345C
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Email: healthtech-info@dtu.dk
www.healthtech.dtu.dk
