==PAGE:1==
Hand
Tracking
for
Signifier­Based
Shape
Modeling in Virtual Reality
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Hand Tracking for Signifier­Based Shape Modeling in Virtual Reality
Master Thesis
July, 2025
By
Max Heiberg Bestle
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over 5.5 months at the Section for DTU Compute,
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, at the Technical Uni­
versity of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in
Engineering, MSc Eng.
Max Heiberg Bestle ­ s194574
Signature
Date
ii
Hand Tracking for Signifier­Based Shape Modeling in Virtual Reality
12/07/2025
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This thesis explores the use of hand tracking for signifier­based 3D shape model­
ing in virtual reality (VR), replacing traditional controller input with natural, gesture­
driven interaction. Building on theories of affordances and signifiers from Don
Norman, a system was developed using the Meta XR Software Development Kit
(SDK) for the Meta Quest 3 to solve the challenge of adding hand tracking system
to an existing 3D modeling. Users can manipulate mesh geometry through visual
cues and direct hand contact, including face extrusion, vertex manipulation, and
symmetry­by­sensing. Quantitative testing showed high task success rates, low
error frequency, but still a user preference for controller­based interaction based
on a higher feeling of accuracy. The results support the viability of hand tracking
as a precise, discoverable, and immersive input method for VR modeling inter­
faces.
Hand Tracking for Signifier­Based Shape Modeling in Virtual Reality
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Max Heiberg Bestle, MSc Human Centered Artificial Intelligence, DTU
I’d like to thank my advisors Jeppe Revall Frisvad and Jakob Andreas Bærentzen
for the opportunity to do this project and for the help they’ve given me in the pro­
cess.
I’d also like to thank all the test participants for participating and helping by test­
ing the application and giving feedback: Andreas Birch, Viktor Ørum, Mika Katz,
Christian Witt and Mika Fleischer.
I’d like to thank my family and friends for giving me motivation throughout the last
6 months.
Finally, I’d like to thank my parents, Sarah and Lars, for motivating me and sup­
porting me throughout the project.
iv
Hand Tracking for Signifier­Based Shape Modeling in Virtual Reality
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Problem Definition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Previous solutions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Theory
7
2.1
The Design of Everyday Things . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
The VR Book . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3
Analysis of original system
13
3.1
Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
Meta Interaction Software Development Kit (SDK)
. . . . . . . . .
14
3.3
Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4
Design and Implementation
19
4.1
Hand tracking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.2
Passthrough
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5
Testing
31
5.1
Format . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.2
Tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.3
Quantitative takeaways
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.4
Evaluating tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
6
Discussion
35
6.1
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
7
Conclusion
39
Bibliography
41
A Tests
43
Hand Tracking for Signifier­Based Shape Modeling in Virtual Reality
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Hand Tracking for Signifier­Based Shape Modeling in Virtual Reality
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
In recent years, virtual reality (VR) as a visual medium has matured to the point
where it can be used for more interactive systems. It offers a new paradigm for
user interaction, which allows us to rethink the way certain interfaces have been
designed. On top of the maturation of VR technology, or even in tandem with it,
hand tracking has become more and more accurate and sophisticated. Although
hand tracking has existed in some form since 1969[1], only a few years ago, accu­
rate hand tracking required external gear in the form of gloves, or external cameras
connected to powerful computers to process images. Today, hand tracking can
be achieved using cameras built in VR headsets, using the hardware inside. This
means that hand tracking has become more ubiquitous and common, at the very
least as an option, in many pieces of VR software.
Since the first computers with screens came out, the field of user experience (UX)
design has grown to encompass many different disciplines. Over the years, new
paradigms have appeared, and engineers and designers have had to completely
rethink the way they design and create experiences in the digital space, whether
it was for the internet, mobile phones or tablets. Virtual reality is another new
technology entering this space, and we are still learning how to design systems to
seem intuitive and immersive for the user in VR. What’s especially new with VR
is the ability to emulate and use the real world movements of the user. Up until
recently, the movements of the head and hands has been used, with controllers
being used for the actual interaction.
Many 3D modelling tools still use interactions copied from desktop applications,
such as complicated tool menus. Often times, this creates a steep learning curve
and can inhibit the creative process needed in 3D modelling. This project explores
a 3D modelling system that leverages the natural intuitiveness hands gestures
have, minimizing the steep learning curve and reducing the cognitive load for the
user.
I draw on the concepts of affordances and signifiers defined by Don Norman in
the book ”The Design of Everyday Things”, to guide the design of interactions
needed in the application, using these concepts to ensure visibility and support
user discovery and ease of use. Here the concept of discoverability is especially
important, as dicoverability can be used as an indicator of the intuitiveness of the
application using hand tracking, as opposed to the usual controllers.
The system used in this project is a continuation of the system [2] originally de­
signed by Jakob Andreas Bærentzen, Jeppe Revall Frisvad and Karan Singh,
including many updates to the system from different authors since ([3],[4]). The
original system was simply a 3D modelling system [5] using the GEL mesh library
[6] to facilitate face extrusion and manipulation of the object. This project will not
go into the deeper details of the GEL library, simply make use of the higher level
functions in the library. In the 3D modelling system, different signifiers were used
Hand Tracking for Signifier­Based Shape Modeling in Virtual Reality
1
==PAGE:10==
to show which affordances relate to the object. These can be seen as handles,
pins, and latches in the application.
(a) Edge Latches
(b) Face Handles
(c) Vertex Pins
Figure 1.1: Different Signifiers
Each signifier is used to signify a fundamental action in the system. The edge
latches show how the different edges are locked together when the latches are
touched, meaning the two faces can be moved together. The face handles are
used to show that the specific face can be extruded and manipulated. Finally, the
vertex pins are meant to show how the corners of the mesh can be manipulated.
A final type of feedback used in the system are the highlights. Each time a user
tries to ”hover” over an interactable object in the system, the specific signifier will
light up in some way, as well as a ball located within the user’s hand model. This
is to help show the user that something can interacted with in some way. The
signifiers will also scale according to their distance from the user’s hands, so that
the closer a user gets to a signifier, the more it grows.
1.1
Problem Definition
In VR, most applications strive for more and more immersive experiences. How­
ever, interactions in VR are still mostly bound to physical controllers, where the
user interacts using buttons, joysticks and combinations of buttons, often mimick­
ing the use of the mouse on a personal computer (PC) or controllers on gaming
consoles. In recent years though, hand tracking software has become very good,
and I would like to investigate whether this can be used in 3D modelling instead
of using controllers.
Can hand tracking be more useful for 3D modelling in VR than using controllers,
and does the hand tracking add to immersiveness and feel more natural than
using controllers?
The result of this project can contribute to the further development of this system,
as well as inform future development of similar systems, which implement a 3D
modelling interface for VR.
1.1.1
Subproblems
I have split the project up into a 4 different subproblems, in order to solve the
problem of analyzing the use of hand tracking in a 3D modelling program in VR.
2
Hand Tracking for Signifier­Based Shape Modeling in Virtual Reality
==PAGE:11==
1. How can hand tracking enhance the use of signifiers in a VR­based 3D mod­
eling application compared to traditional VR controllers?
2. How does hand tracking affect the user’s sense of immersion and interaction
in VR?
3. What challenges arise when implementing hand tracking for signifier­based
3D modeling?
4. How does the user’s understanding and utilization of signifiers differ between
controller­based and hand tracking­based interaction?
1.2
Previous solutions
I have identified a few different solutions for the problem of porting 3D modelling
to virtual reality, and will explain them here to point out previous solutions into
this problem. Most of the existing solutions don’t utilize hand tracking very much,
however. Also, many aren’t 3D modelling in the sense of the GEL system, where
an object is manipulated and extruded. Often, 3D modelling solutions are more
of a three­dimensional canvas, where the user can ”paint” into the 3D space.
1.2.1
Gravity Sketch
An example of this is the VR application Gravity Sketch [7], made by the company
of the same name. Gravity Sketch has many advanced features, however it still
mostly uses tool menus to navigate through the system, as well as no possibility
of using the application without controllers, meaning no native hand tracking. Sig­
nifiers in their system include ”holographic” balls on the controllers to show if any
manipulation of an object is possible.
Figure 1.2: Gravity Sketch
The primary target group for Gravity Sketch, as seen in their customer stories[8],
is mostly design teams and concept artists, meaning mostly professionals. It es­
pecially tries to cater to people who are used to sketching, as it tries to mimic the
freehand sketching that these types of industry professionals usually use.
1.2.2
Freebird XR
A plugin exists which aims to allow users to use VR in the 3D modelling program
Blender, made by Shashank Shekhar[9]. The plugin is called Freebird XR and
lets a user view and edit their 3D model in Blender in VR. However, even though
Hand Tracking for Signifier­Based Shape Modeling in Virtual Reality
3
==PAGE:12==
this plugin does include many of the features from Blender, it doesn’t have much
in the way of signifiers, simply using the same signifiers that Blender itself has,
and relies on the fact that most of its users already know Blender and its tools well
[10].
Figure 1.3: Freebird XR
This plugin also doesn’t have the ability to use hand tracking technology to track
the users hand movements.
1.2.3
Minecraft VR
An example of a similar, block based approach is Minecraft. Previous projects in
the GEL system have compared it to the Minecraft style of 3D modelling [3], since
both systems are based in blocks or use a type of box modelling. Minecraft has
now had several open­source, community made modifications which make use of
VR technology, the most popular of which is Vivecraft, which is also community­
made. However, once again, none of these seem to give the capability of using the
program without controllers, meaning no hand tracking. However, as opposed to
the other researched solutions, Minecraft, as a video game, has a much broader
audience. The game uses blocks to build, so while each block can’t be extruded,
nor can vertices on the blocks be manipulated, builds in the game use many blocks
to make objects. This mirrors our system, since we start from a block, and using
extrusion and vertex translation, we usually end up with very blocky models.
Figure 1.4: Vivecraft Building
4
Hand Tracking for Signifier­Based Shape Modeling in Virtual Reality
==PAGE:13==
However, compared to what we have in our system, Minecraft is an entire world,
and includes other gameplay elements, such as survival gameplay, where the
player must collect items to be able to build.
1.3
Motivation
Why do we want to add hand tracking as a feature to this system? A core part
of the motivation for adding hand tracking comes from a need to create a more
immersive, natural and human­centered design for our system[11]. Controllers
add a layer of abstraction between the user and the VR environment, which can
hinder discoverability. Hand tracking allows users to interact with virtual objects
using gestures and movements that closely mirrors the real world, such as grab­
bing or pinching. Direct mappings of the intention of the user and the actions they
take make it easier for users to discover how to use the system without having to
learn abstract button mappings and input schemes. Affordances should become
more self­evident, since users are relying on their knowledge of how to use their
hands, research has shown[12].
Hand tracking also impacts task completion time and accuracy, at least with cer­
tain tasks[13]. This would be a wanted side­effect of adding hand tracking, since
this would logically mean users would be able to spend more time in the applica­
tion.
Hand Tracking for Signifier­Based Shape Modeling in Virtual Reality
5
==PAGE:14==
6
Hand Tracking for Signifier­Based Shape Modeling in Virtual Reality
==PAGE:15==
2
Theory
This chapter will try to lay the theoretical foundation of the design used in this
project, specifically drawing from two primary sources of research and informa­
tion, Don Norman’s ”The Design of Everyday Things”[14] and Jason Jerald’s ”The
VR Book”. The theory discussed here not only has academic significance, but will
also inform the usability, user experience and interaction design within the virtual
reality experience.
Norman’s book provides a proven framework understanding how users interpret
and interact with not just physical products, but digital systems as well. This trans­
lates into the VR world as well, particularly through concepts such as affordances,
signifiers, mapping, and feedback. In designing a system that is both intuitive and
immersive, it is essential that we understand how people perceive and learn to
use new interfaces, especially those as novel as virtual reality systems.
Jason Jerald builds upon Norman’s foundational concepts by adapting them for
immersive virtual reality based environments.
VR introduces interesting chal­
lenges, such as a lack of tactile feedback and different input modalities (for ex­
ample, hand tracking vs. controllers). ”The VR Book” complements Norman’s
theories by considering how they apply to interactive virtual spaces where intu­
ition does not always directly carry over.
By using these two works and applying the principles they present, this project
aims to create a VR experience that leverages well­established human­centered
design practices while addressing the usability concerns of immersive VR tech­
nology.
2.1
The Design of Everyday Things
Don Norman’s ”The Design of Everyday Things” has probably been the definitive
source of literature for everything design related since it was published in 1988. It
describes terms such as affordances, signifiers, and mappings, all things relevant
to this project as they help design for usability.
While the book originally predates VR as we know it today, its focus on perception
and usability is still highly relevant. However, some challenges may appear, as
VR environments do not always follow the same physical laws, and users don’t
have the same sensory cues and feedback mechanisms in VR, causing some
signifiers or feedback to become irrelevant or ineffective. At the same time, it can
be a strength to use such analog theory, where technology isn’t important to the
design. In the end, Norman’s theory centers on the user, emphasizing intuitive
design instead of the technology used to build it. As such, I will describe a few of
the most important takeaways from the book and Don Norman’s own research.
Hand Tracking for Signifier­Based Shape Modeling in Virtual Reality
7
==PAGE:16==
2.1.1
Affordances
In Don Norman’s own words: ”The term affordance refers to relationship between
a physical object and a person...”. What is meant is that an affordance of an object
is what it affords. For example, a chair affords support and hence affords sitting
on. For a more contemporary example, a smartphone affords holding, and there­
fore, affords portability, such as being carried in your hand, or put in a pocket.
These are the relationships between the objects and their users. Any one object
might have many affordances, so we can see how listing every single relationship
for something as complex as a smartphone could be a tiring job.
Since an affordance must be understood as a relationship, whether or not an
object affords something depends on both the object and the interacting user. If a
user does not have hands, then most smartphones won’t afford the same porta­
bility for that user compared to users with hands.
An important aspect of affordances is that, to be at all effective, an affordance must
be visually clear. If the affordance cannot be perceived or experienced somehow,
and the designer wants this affordance to be made clear to the user, it can be
shown using signifiers. Some perceived affordances might not be real, like a door
that looks like it can be pushed. The affordance of pushing does not exist on that
door, and the affordance of pulling can be made clear with a signifier.
2.1.2
Signifiers
Signifiers are used in the designs of objects to signal an affordance. These sig­
nifiers are often used in places where an affordance is an especially important
part of system, but can really be any small signal on an object. For example a
signifier could be something as simple as a sign stating if a door has to be pushed
or pulled. That would demonstrate the affordance of pushing. To reuse the smart­
phone example, a signifier used here could be the volume slider, which appears
when the volume buttons are clicked. This shows that the volume can be con­
trolled by users by pressing the volume buttons on the side of the phone.
The use of signifiers can, however, be its own downfall. Especially the use of
signage often points to a system or object being poorly designed. If the user has
to be notified and taught how to use an object, then surely it isn’t designed very
intuitively? For example, instead of a sign saying ”PUSH” or ”PULL” on a door, the
door might have a clear push bar by which the door can clearly only be opened
by pushing.
8
Hand Tracking for Signifier­Based Shape Modeling in Virtual Reality
==PAGE:17==
Figure 2.1: Door with push bar (or crash bar)
In general, the second you have to add a sign trying to explain how to interact with
an object or use a system, it points toward a poor design.
An important distinction is that affordances are a relationship between the ob­
ject and the user, and not a property of the object. A designer cannot ”add” an
affordance in the same that they can add a signifier. Instead, a designer can add
a signifier to make an affordance more clear.
2.1.3
Mapping and feedback
Mapping refers to when we have to ”map” corresponding objects together. An
example here is the control of a car through its steering wheel. It is an intuitive
mapping. To turn the car left, the driver has to turn the wheel left. The feedback
is immediate, the car turns to the left. Natural mappings can be used to intuitively
teach the user how to operate or interact with an object, instead of having to teach
it directly through lessons or text.
Many mappings may seem natural, but are often steeped in cultural context. For
example, many cultures view temporal contexts differently, as in whether time
moves from left to right, or forward. Perhaps if a left hand is used more often ver­
sus a right hand, then a mapping where the right hand is favored wouldn’t make
sense.
Feedback is how a system lets the user know that things are working as intended.
It communicates the results of the action taken by the user. Definitely, feedback
has to be instant and informative, or else it may cause more confusion than aid the
user. There are many ways to insert feedback in a system, either using audio or
physical feedback. So either a sound plays, for example as an alarm. Or perhaps
a light turns on, indicating an action has occurred or is possible.
Hand Tracking for Signifier­Based Shape Modeling in Virtual Reality
9
==PAGE:18==
2.1.4
Discoverability
In terms of design, discoverability is a fundamental principle to keep in mind. It
refers to how a user identifies what is a possible action just by interacting with a
system or object. Using affordances, signifiers, appropriate mapping and feed­
back, as explained above, the discoverability of a system can either go extremely
smoothly or be a chore for the user. Good discoverability often allows the user to
learn on their own, building their own confidence to use the system themselves,
and contributes to a smooth user experience. A well designed product does not
need an instruction manual or something like a tutorial.
2.2
The VR Book
The VR Book is a book by Jason Jerald, which outlines the history of VR and the
ways of designing VR experiences[15]. Much of the design thinking explained in
the book takes theory from Don Norman’s ”The Design of Everyday Things”, and
applies them in a virtual reality context. The book contains many descriptions of
how to design interactions in a virtual reality experience.
2.2.1
Affordances and Signifiers
According to Don Norman’s definition (2.1.1), affordances are the relationships
between a system and their users. Signifiers can be used to signal these affor­
dances. Such signifiers can be handles, signs, or a button. In a VR experience,
the creator is in control of every element the user sees and uses. This does not
mean that all signifiers are intentional. Sometimes, accidental signifiers appear,
even in VR. For example, a glowing item might indicate that it can be interacted
with, but if no such feature is implemented, then that glowing highlight becomes
an accidental signifier, and contributes confusion to the system.
2.2.2
Direct Interaction
In VR, we often talk about the possibility of interactions. Especially because in
VR, we open up the possibility of more direct interactions with virtual objects.
Here, direct refers to the direct involvement with an object, as opposed to indirect
involvement (for example, by using a remote control to indirectly turn on the TV,
rather than directly using the buttons on the TV). Here, we can see hand tracking
as an example of a much more direct interaction than using controllers. It is also
much higher fidelity interaction than controllers, as hands typically are capable of
much more complex movements than stiff controllers. The user is able to do an
action much closer to how they would do it in a real space compared to using a
controller in a virtual one. We have an example of biomechanical symmetry in
that hand tracking directly mimics the movements of the hand.
2.2.3
Hand tracking
In the book, Jason Jerald explains that bare hand­tracked hands have the ad­
vantage of having completely unencumbered hands, leaving the hands free to
interact with both the real world, and the virtual one, as closely one as would the
real world. However, it doesn’t come without its disadvantages. Losing controllers
means losing any type of feedback these might give the user, such as haptic feed­
back through the Oculus Touch controllers. Often times, hand tracking systems
also require the user to keep their hand in front of the cameras being used to track,
10
Hand Tracking for Signifier­Based Shape Modeling in Virtual Reality
==PAGE:19==
which can be tiring for long sessions. However, many of these have been at least
partially solved for the Meta Quest 3 headset. Here, the cameras are situated on
the front of the headset, with a large field­of­view, allowing the hands to be tracked
even when not directly front of the headset.
Figure 2.2: Properties of hand input device, and non­hand input devices (The VR
Book, chap. 27, table 27.1)
Research has also been done to see if one­handed systems work better or more
effectively than two­handed systems. The research shows[16] that two­handed
systems often work much better than one­handed systems, as well as better than
simple mouse interfaces. I can use this to motivate a two­handed bare hand track­
ing system in this project. Research also shows that users tend to prefer free hand
systems for direct touch interactions, which is what our VR system has[17].
Hand Tracking for Signifier­Based Shape Modeling in Virtual Reality
11
==PAGE:20==
12
Hand Tracking for Signifier­Based Shape Modeling in Virtual Reality
==PAGE:21==
3
Analysis of original system
This system has been worked on by multiple people in many different projects.
This chapter will be a quick analysis of the system as received, identifying which
parts can remain unchanged, and which should be revised in the version imple­
mented in this project.
Here are the features of the program as received:
• Face extrusion
• Vertex translation
• Edge collapsing
• Edge loop subdivision
• Vertex alignment by sensing
• Face alignment by sensing or SBS
• Interlocking faces
• Undo/redo actions
• Load/Save models
• Translate and rotate model
• Scale model
A few things to keep in mind: all of these operations are based on the fact that the
user is only able to use controllers. Some features make use of this, by constrain­
ing the use of a feature to only be possible when touching a button or ”sensing”
with another controller. In a new implementation, where controllers are replaced
with a bare hand tracking system, there are no buttons to use. Thought has to be
put in to how to re­implement features that depend on buttons or joysticks.
3.1
Model
A few different 3D models are used in the system, but one I’ll be using extensively
is the hand model. In the old system, a 3D model of a hand was still used, even
though interaction was only done using controllers. The model had two spheres,
one in the palm and one in the finger. This was to highlight which specific actions
were possible using those areas of the hand.
Hand Tracking for Signifier­Based Shape Modeling in Virtual Reality
13
==PAGE:22==
Figure 3.1: Hand Model
Seeing as this model is modeled after a real human hand, it should be able to be
used in a new version using hand tracking. The spheres used for the highlighting
can probably also be reused.
3.2
Meta Interaction Software Development Kit
(SDK)
Since I am using a Meta Quest 3 while developing this project, research was done
into possible solutions from Meta in the space of hand tracking. A lot of Meta’s
research has gone into VR, and I can use that in this project. Since the first release
of the system this project is based on, the Oculus Integration package has been
deprecated, and work will be done to update the Unity project to a new system,
which Meta has since released, that they call the Meta XR SDKs. This is a whole
suite of SDKs, including the Meta Interaction SDK, which I will be using primarily,
which will help facilitate the development process of the needed features. The
Interaction SDK supports features like:
• Grabbing, both from far away and up close
• Rays
• Poking
• Moving through teleportation
• Rotation
• Custom gestures
• Custom hand models
A video of these features can be seen here on Meta’s Documentation page, https:
//developers.meta.com/horizon/documentation/unity/unity-isdk-interaction-sdk-overview.
All the features are also made to work with both controllers and bare hand track­
ing. Looking at these features, we can see that it covers many use cases for hand
tracking that I will need. However, this does mean that the project has to be up­
14
Hand Tracking for Signifier­Based Shape Modeling in Virtual Reality
==PAGE:23==
dated to a newer version of Unity, as the SDK requires a Unity version of at least
2022.3.15f1, and the current system is in version 2019.4.20f1.
3.3
Architecture
The software architecture is based on a mix of different elements.
However,
mainly a mix of a component­based architecture and a Model­View­Controller ar­
chitecture has been used. Each interactable object in the system has a controller
script, which implements an abstract class called IInteractableObject. This
means we have, for each signifier element:
• FaceHandleController
• EdgeHandleController
• VertexHandleController
Each of these controllers control what happens to the corresponding signifier, both
when grabbing but also frame by frame (this can be controlling the scale of the
GameObject, so it grows as the user gets closer). However, not only the signifiers
implement IInteractableObject. Basically any object which the user can interact
with has its own controller. This means buttons, the turntable menu, and the 3D
modelling object itself:
• ExtrudableController
• UndoRedoButtons
• SaveButton
• LoadButton
IInteractableObject implements a few specific functions the signifiers or objects
need. These are StartInteraction and EndInteraction, which, as the names
might suggest, control what happens when a user interacts with the given object.
In general, these only set some needed variables (colliders and GameObjects for
use in further interactions), and then start or stop the specific implementation of
the interaction for that object via the Interact() and StopInteraction function.
1
public void StartInteraction(SphereCollider controllerCollider ,
MonoBehaviour controller)
2
{
3
_controllerCollider = controllerCollider;
4
_controller = controller;
5
Interact();
6
}
7
8
public void EndInteraction(MonoBehaviour controller)
9
{
10
_controller = controller;
11
StopInteraction();
12
_controllerCollider = null;
13
}
Listing 3.1: Interaction functions
Hand Tracking for Signifier­Based Shape Modeling in Virtual Reality
15
==PAGE:24==
The system also uses manager scripts to manage several related GameObjects.
This works by having the related GameObjects all have the same parent, which
has the given manager script as a component. An example can be seen in figure
3.2.
These managers control the overall global state of the system, especially things
pertaining to their area of expertise. For example, ControlsManager manages
all the controls (meaning the signifiers in the system), and functions as a ser­
vice between the specific signifier and the Manifold class, which controls the 3D
modelling aspect of the system. The manager is the one making the changes to
the actual object, so that when the user extrudes using a face handle, signifiers
update according to the new shape of the object.
Figure 3.2: Example of Service Manager and its children
Finally, the spheres on the hand models have controllers as well. These are called
GrabControl and IndexFingerControl, and primarily control what happens when
the spheres come into contact and interact with the different interactable objects.
This is where most of the work in adding hand tracking will be done, since this is
where the defining functions of the interactions happens. Primarily, GrabControl
has controlled the grab interactions of the system. IndexFingerControl is for the
edge handles, since these work by simply touching the handles with the index
finger sphere.
The system also makes use of layers in Unity. This is to separate the interac­
tions from the index finger sphere and the palm sphere. Specifically, there are
two important layers, InteractableObject and InteractableObjectFinger. Primarily
grabbable objects (meaning interactions with the palm sphere) are relegated to
the InteractableObject layer, while any interactions with the finger sphere are in
the InteractableObjectFinger layer. The latter layer is used for the edge locks,
which are locked by just touching them with the finger sphere.
Further below, you can see a simplified diagram of the relationships between the
most important scripts in figure 3.3.
16
Hand Tracking for Signifier­Based Shape Modeling in Virtual Reality
==PAGE:25==
Figure 3.3: Diagram of Architecture, where dotted lines indicate inheritance from
abstract classes
Hand Tracking for Signifier­Based Shape Modeling in Virtual Reality
17
==PAGE:26==
18
Hand Tracking for Signifier­Based Shape Modeling in Virtual Reality
==PAGE:27==
4
Design and Implementation
This chapter presents the architectural and interaction design of the development
of our hand tracking system. The application was developed using the Unity en­
gine in conjunction with the Meta XR SDK, providing support for hand tracking.
The foundation of the system is a mesh data structure, implemented via the GEL
library. This structure enables robust topological manipulation, including dynamic
mesh updates and face bridging operations, and is encapsulated in the Extrud­
ableMesh class.
Interaction is controlled through a set of controllers, specifically FaceHandleCon­
troller, VertexHandleController, and EdgeHandleController, which map user input
to the corresponding transformations. These controllers serve not only as input
mechanisms but also as visual signifiers, designed in accordance with Don Nor­
man’s theory of affordances and signifiers. For instance, face handles resemble
drawer pulls, suggesting a pulling motion, while edge locks convey toggling be­
havior through visual locking.
To manage the state of these controllers, a centralized ControlsManager dynam­
ically instantiates and updates signifiers in response to changes in the underlying
mesh. Additional components, such as ExtrudableController, enable manipula­
tions of the entire model, including translation, rotation, and scaling.
The interaction design emphasizes discoverability and feedback. Mechanisms
such as snap­based extrusion, symmetry alignment via sensing, and highlighting
contribute to a more intuitive user experience.
The Unity Version Control System (VCS) was used for version control. However,
for ease of distrubution, the newest version has been uploaded to a GitHub repos­
itory. The full code can be seen on the GitHub repository at https://github.com/
maxx1559/VRThesisNew[18].
For a video of the system after the implementation with hand tracking, see a video
on YouTube here https://youtu.be/hQdRFWgJTWg.
4.1
Hand tracking
Bare­hand hand tracking will add a whole new dimension to this project, and how
to implement it is important, as it will guide how the design of the rest of the sys­
tems features will be. For this project, I am developing on a Meta Quest 3 and
can use the Meta Hands [19]. I can therefore make use of the Meta XR SDK for
Unity to implement hand tracking in our project. The Meta XR SDK is a newer,
updated version of the older Oculus Interaction Toolkit, used in previous versions
of the system. So the first step is updating the Unity project to a newer version.
4.1.1
Updating the system
When receiving the system, many different errors arose in the Unity project. Sev­
eral errors were in relation to old DLL’s, which had become deprecated with newer
Hand Tracking for Signifier­Based Shape Modeling in Virtual Reality
19
==PAGE:28==
versions of Unity and the Oculus integration packages. A lot of time was spent
on updating the system to work on a new SDK. So, the first step was identify­
ing which packages had become deprecated, and if any newer solutions exist for
these deprecated packages.
The package with the biggest impact was the Oculus integration package. Since
the last time this project had been updated (which was in 2021), Meta has since
rebranded[20] and focused resources on development for VR. Since then, Meta
has released the Meta XR SDKs, a collection of SDK for development on a Meta
Quest headset and VR in general. It includes the Meta Interaction SDK, which I
will be using in this project. This means I have to upgrade the Unity project to a
newer version, but this is a good idea anyway, since it can be updated to a version
which Unity is keeping in long term service.
After updating the system, a few DLLs and packages were fully removed, such
as the UnityVS plugin. On older versions of Unity, this was required to work with
Unity in Visual Studio, especially for scripting and debugging. However, this inte­
gration has been added automatically now, and there is no need for the explicit
DLLs supporting it in the project anymore. Since it was causing errors, it was
deleted, as was a folder named Handcrafted Mobile, which added unused assets
for a curved VR keyboard.
As part of the transition to the Meta Interaction SDK, the camera in the scene
needed to be updated as well. The older OVRCameraRig only had support for
controllers, which clearly doesn’t help us in our aim to add hand tracking. Luckily,
it is quite easy to add a new updated camera rig, which includes support for all
the interactions I could need.
Figure 4.1: OVRCameraRigInteraction Features
I have to add the spheres to the new hands as well. The spheres are placed in
the palm and the tip of the index finger. According to the theory, when creating
an immersive experience, we want to try and emulate real life, especially with
something like hand tracking. With the spheres, they correspond to where the
20
Hand Tracking for Signifier­Based Shape Modeling in Virtual Reality
==PAGE:29==
”touch” would be when interacting with something. When a user grabs either a
handle or a pin, we can imagine the object pressing against the palm, and equally,
the index finger sphere sits on the tip of the finger, where the touch would be felt.
These sphere are also used as feedback, as they light up when an interactable
object is intersected with. This is an important way of providing feedback, as
explained by both Norman and Jerald in their respective books (see chapter 2)
For this, instead of creating a new model to use, I can simply use a Hand Joint
component to ”glue” a GameObject to the existing hand model. I simply add the
component to the given GameObject, and specify where on the hand it should be
glued to. However, none of the placements are exactly where I want them. So
to fix this, I can add an offset to counteract this. I have to do this for both hands,
and for both spheres, the palm sphere and index finger sphere. These have been
respectively called Grabber_L and Index_L for the left hand, and Grabber_R and
Index_R for the right hand.
(a) Left Palm Sphere ­ Hand Joint compo­
nent
(b) Left Highlight Spheres placement in
scene
Within the Unity scene, these spheres are placed as children under the respective
Hand, within the camera rig. With the project updated to a new version, and the
hand models brought up to date with the highlight spheres, I can start adding the
actual grabbing logic.
4.1.2
Attempt 1: GetFingerPinchStrength
In the first attempt at adding hand tracking, I decided to try and implement it using
what I call the ”finger curl method”. What I mean by this, is that I can look at the
amount a finger is curled to determine whether the user is closing their fist or not.
This can give a large amount of control over when a user specifically is making a
fist, since I can decide the threshold which defines a fist and therefore a grabbing
action.
This can be done by using the GetFingerPinchStrength function. This function
returns how ”curled” a given finger is. The OVRHand object has enumerations
for each finger. I can simply loop through each finger curl and check against a
threshold to see if it should count as a fist. However, this was too unstable, often
incorrectly detecting a finger curl. This is most likely because the
GetFingerPinchStrength function doesn’t detect finger curls, but finger pinches.
A finger pinch is when a finger, such as the index finger, is touching the thumb.
Therefore, when trying to detect a fist, where the fingers aren’t pinching, but rather
curling inwards toward the palm, GetFingerPinchStrength is not going to give a
Hand Tracking for Signifier­Based Shape Modeling in Virtual Reality
21
==PAGE:30==
representative measure of a finger curl. Below is the code as written to check for
a grabbing motion:
1
public bool CheckIfGrabbing(OVRHand hand)
2
{
3
bool isGrabbing = true;
4
// assumes 1 is a finger fully "curled"
5
float grabThreshold = 0.5f;
6
for (int finger = 0; finger < 5; finger++)
7
{
8
float fingerPinchStrength = hand.GetFingerPinchStrength((
OVRHand.HandFinger)finger);
9
if (fingerPinchStrength < grabThreshold)
10
{
11
isGrabbing = false;
12
break;
13
}
14
}
15
return isGrabbing;
16
}
Listing 4.1: GetFingerPinchStrength
4.1.3
Attempt 2: Custom Poses
After the first attempt, I decided to revisit the Meta Documentation to search for
other ways to implement hand tracking. Often, the way to add grab interactions in
Unity using the Meta SDK is using Grab Interactions. However, so many different
objects and scripts work together when a Grab happens that Grab Interactions
aren’t suitable for this case. There isn’t simply one object that can be grabbed
and moved. There are many objects that are grabbable, and once moved, we
must calculate new faces and vertices for that object. For this reason, I’d like to
simply be able to calculate when a Grab happens, and then I can start my own
processes from there. This is where Custom Poses [21] come in.
In the Interaction SDK, it is possible to create your own Custom hand poses (as
well as body poses, but that isn’t relevant for this project). These Custom Poses
basically work by having listeners, which wait for the hands to strike the specific
pose. It compares the real­time state of the users hand (or hands) with pre­defined
pose configurations, using a system of shape recognizers and state providers.
At its core, the system utilizes the ShapeRecognizerActiveState component, which
becomes active when the tracked hand matches the specified criteria for a given
pose. These criteria are defined by a ShapeRecognizer, a ScriptableObject that
encodes a configuration (called Feature Configs) specifying the required positions
and states of each finger, such as curl, flexion, abduction, and opposition[22] (see
figure 4.3 for examples of each of these features).
22
Hand Tracking for Signifier­Based Shape Modeling in Virtual Reality
==PAGE:31==
(a) Curl
(b) Flexion
(c) Abduction
(d) Opposition
Figure 4.3: Each finger feature[22]
The FingerFeatureStateProvider supplies the current state of each finger, en­
abling the system to evaluate whether the hand matches the desired shape. To
capture more complex poses that require not only specific finger configurations
but also particular hand orientations or spatial positions (such as which way the
wrist is pointing, or if the palm is looking up or down), the SDK combines
ShapeRecognizerActiveState with TransformRecognizerActiveState components.
These are grouped using an ActiveStateGroup, which only activates when all rec­
ognizers’ conditions are met. Additionally, the ActiveStateSelector and
SelectorUnityEventWrapper components enable the system to trigger events
when a pose is detected. This architecture allows us to define both simple and
complex hand poses, supporting customizable hand pose detection for interaction
in virtual environments. I can use this to detect a fist pose and trigger an event
once that fist is detected. It gives me the control needed in pose detection, and
uses the built­in features of the Meta SDK.
First, I have to define the poses that I need. For this, I can actually use some
of the pre­defined Shape Recognizers made by Meta, and simply combine them
to detect a fist gesture. For the purposes of detection, I’ve created a GameObject
for each pose, which combines all the different components and scripts needed.
For the fist pose, I can simply use two different finger features, which Meta have al­
ready pre­defined. Specifically, the Shape Recognizers are called FingersThumb­
NotOpen and ThumbClosed, which, in combination, should detect a fist gesture
as it happens. Finally, in TransformRecognizer, I have to define in which direction
I want to detect the fist pose. Here, I used the wrist direction, since after testing,
this revealed itself as the most reliable for detection. This was tested in a test
Hand Tracking for Signifier­Based Shape Modeling in Virtual Reality
23
==PAGE:32==
scene, so that when a fist is detected, the color of a Cube would change.
(a) Before fist action
(b) After fist action
Figure 4.4: Testing custom poses
A pose was made for the right hand as well, since I have to define which hand
I’m listening to for the specific pose. The ShapeRecognizer has a specific hand it
must listen to. This concludes the poses needed to detect grabbing. However, an
interaction exists in the system, which also depends on a specific direction or pose,
and that is when the user has to bring up the worktable menu. In the old system, a
user had to point their controller to the side. This way the ”palm” of the model in the
application was pointing up. This can imitated by a custom pose as well. This time,
I have to use the finger features FingersFlexionAllOpen and FingersAllNotClosed
to represent an open palm. Finally, I can use the TransformRecognizer to only
detect the open palm when the palm is pointing up.
24
Hand Tracking for Signifier­Based Shape Modeling in Virtual Reality
==PAGE:33==
(a) Fist pose
(b) Palm pose
Figure 4.5: Custom poses
This open pose will only be for the left hand, to not cause confusion, and allowing
the user to open the menu with one hand and use the other to interact with the
menu. The left hand was chosen given that the vast majority of the world is right­
handed.
(a) Palm down
(b) Palm up
Figure 4.6: Palm pose
Hand Tracking for Signifier­Based Shape Modeling in Virtual Reality
25
==PAGE:34==
Now that the Custom Poses have been added and tested, I can look at imple­
menting the triggers for the poses.
4.1.4
Grab Interaction
Each of the custom poses can have a trigger added for when the detection of the
pose occurs, and when the pose is detected as ended. These are called the ”On
Selected” function and the ”On Unselected” function. For the grab interaction, I
have a simple toggle that gets called from the GrabControls script. The function
is called SwapGrabState (code shown in listing 4.2), and toggles a boolean flag
named GrabState between true (hand is grabbing) and false (hand isn’t grabbing).
The boolean starts off being false. This flag is what is used in the Update function
to check if the hand is grabbing, and whether I should start a transformation of the
modeling object or not.
1
public bool GrabState = false;
2
3
public void SwapGrabState()
4
{
5
GrabState = !GrabState;
6
return;
7
}
Listing 4.2: SwapGrabState
The Update function runs every frame, and is where I make use of the boolean
flag. The Update function works using a switch case on the HandState flag, which
looks at whether the given Grabber object (the palm spheres, either on the left
hand or the right hand) are touching a signifier or not. In the case where the
Grabber object is simply touching a signifier of some type, I want to check if Grab­
State becomes true and if there are more than 1 interactable objects. Interactable
objects refers to either a vertex handle, face handle or the extrudable mesh in
its entirety. The _interactableObjects list is a list of objects that implement the
IInteractableObject abstract class. In the original system, we would simply
check if the grab button was pressed on the controller. Now, I have to use the
GrabState. If the user is grabbing the interactable object, the code should start
the given interaction for the object, be that an extrusion or movement of it, and
then update the currentInteraction to the given object. Finally, I switch the
HandState to the HOLDING enum.
1
case State.TOUCHING:
2
//Hand is grabbing
3
if (_interactableObjects.Count > 0 && GrabState)
4
{
5
_interactableObjects[_interactableObjects.Count -1].
StartInteraction(controllerSphereCollider , this);
26
Hand Tracking for Signifier­Based Shape Modeling in Virtual Reality
==PAGE:35==
6
currentInteraction = _interactableObjects[
_interactableObjects.Count - 1];
7
HandState = State.HOLDING;
8
}
9
10
break;
Listing 4.3: Update(): State.Touching
In the second case, when the Grabber is in an object and already holding, I want
to check if the GrabState has changed, and therefore that the users want to end
the interaction. This means the end of the interaction for that specific object, and
an update the mesh and its controls must be started. I also want to reset all the
current interaction, so that I can properly track what is going on.
Because of the timing of when the hand tracking system detects that the user
has opened their fist, sometimes, the controls would be calculated using incorrect
mesh coordinates, meaning the different handles would be incorrectly offset from
the mesh. This causes confusion, and needed to be fixed. To fix it, I simply delay
updating controls by a short amount of time, so that the controls use the correct
placement of the mesh, instead of using the earlier coordinates for the mesh.
1
case State.HOLDING:
2
//if holding something and letting go
3
if (!GrabState)
4
{
5
currentInteraction.EndInteraction(this);
6
if (currentInteraction != null && !_interactableObjects.
Contains(currentInteraction))
7
{
8
currentInteraction.EndHighlight();
9
}
10
11
// clean up deleted objects
12
_interactableObjects.RemoveAll(obj => (obj == null));
13
14
HandState = _interactableObjects.Count == 0? State.EMPTY :
State.TOUCHING;
15
controls.DestroyInvalidObjects();
16
StartCoroutine(DelayUpdateControls(1.5f));
17
UpdateHoverColor();
18
currentInteraction = null;
19
}
20
21
break;
Listing 4.4: Update(): State.Holding
After updating the GrabControl script, I have to go through every single script that
happens to check if the buttons on a controller are being pressed. A good place
to start is the signifier scripts. Specifically, two scripts check the controllers for
button presses, the FaceHandleController and VertexHandleController. These
checks happen when determining whether the user is sensing another either face
Hand Tracking for Signifier­Based Shape Modeling in Virtual Reality
27
==PAGE:36==
or vertex and not pressing a button, to do symmetry by sensing (SBS). For both
of these, instead of making sure that a button isn’t being pressed, I just check the
GrabState, and make sure its false.
A final change I have to make to the relevant scripts is change the names that
are used when trying to find the correct GameObjects. There are many differ­
ent places, where the GameObject is found via the GameObject.Find() function,
where I have to input a name for the given GameObject. A lot of work had to be
put in to replacing this, since not only were the names new, but some places use
the Parent of a GameObject, and since I’ve changed the hierarchy of the scene,
especially of the camera rig, I have to refactor the code to use the new names and
be mindful of the new hierarchy.
4.1.5
IndexFingerControl changes
The old worktable, where the button to undo, for example, exists, had the right
hand as the interactor, with the left hand ”holding” the menu. As part of this, the
palm sphere was needed to press the buttons in the worktable, since the layer they
were a part of was the InteractableObject layer. This meant that the user had to
quite awkwardly try to place their right palm on top of their left palm. To recitify this,
I decided to change the layer for the buttons to InteractableObjectFinger instead,
meaning the user could press the button with their index finger, more effectively
mimicking a real­life scenario, where you’re using your index finger to press a
button.
Figure 4.7: Using the menu with Index_R
4.2
Passthrough
A final addition I discussed with my advisors was the addition of passthrough to
the system. Since I was now using bare hand tracking, it can be advantageous to
bring the real world into the application (or vice versa, perhaps), allowing the user
to see the real world around them. The scene in the Unity project provides nothing
else other than scenery. From a 3D modelling perspective, this could also make
it easier to model something. If the user is trying to emulate a real world object,
like a chair, they can place a similar chair into view, and use that as a basis while
modeling. This can be done in Blender, where 3D artists often use an image to
”trace” around the 2D object, before adding extra dimensions. So it was decided
this made sense as an extra feature in the system. To add this, I had to make
28
Hand Tracking for Signifier­Based Shape Modeling in Virtual Reality
==PAGE:37==
some changes to the camera rig. Luckily, the Meta SDK makes this fairly easy
to add. There are settings which control the passthrough of the headset. I have
to add a component to the OVRCameraRig called OVR Passthrough Layer. This
controls where the passthrough renders ­ either it renders on top of the scene
as an overlay, or in the background. I want the elements to render first, with the
passthrough simply existing as the background. This means I choose ”Underlay”
in the settings.
Figure 4.8: Modeling with Passthrough
A thing to keep in mind with Passthrough is that once enabled, the images taken
by the cameras on the headset will be processed by PC running the program, not
the headset. Depending on the computer, this can drain on resources heavily, and
therefore impact the performance. For this reason, a decision was made to split
the program into two scenes, where one has Passthrough enabled, while the other
keeps the scenery of the ”temple”. The latter generally has better performance,
since it does not have to process the images from the cameras.
Hand Tracking for Signifier­Based Shape Modeling in Virtual Reality
29
==PAGE:38==
30
Hand Tracking for Signifier­Based Shape Modeling in Virtual Reality
==PAGE:39==
5
Testing
After implementing hand tracking into the system, we needed to test it to get some
feedback, as well as simply test if the changes had added anything useful to the
system. For this purpose, I decided to use discoverability tests. This way, we
could test if the new system was intuitive at all, and if it was more intuitive than
the old system, where users could only use controllers. Discoverability is critical in
this context, as it refers to how easily users can identify what actions are possible
and how to execute them, based on their instincts and interface cues.
In VR, especially when using hand tracking instead of controllers, there are often
no physical buttons or labeled interfaces to guide the user. As such, users rely
on signifiers like object behaviors, visual highlights, or real­world metaphors (like
grabbing or pinching motions) to infer how they can interact. A system with poor
discoverability breaks immersion and can quickly lead to user frustration. Since
this project aims to assess how intuitive hand tracking is, discoverability testing
was a direct and necessary method to uncover how naturally users understand
the available interactions in the system.
Unlike usability tests, which often evaluate performance once users understand
how a system works, discoverability tests look at the first­contact experience, such
as what users try, expect, and infer when given no guidance at all.
5.1
Format
Testing followed a format of primarily qualitative testing, but included some quanti­
tative elements. Questions were asked both before and after the test. Preliminary
questions pertained to their knowledge or previous experiances with VR and 3D
modelling, while post­test questions were about their experience in the application
and with the system.
5.1.1
Preliminary questions
Participants were first asked for consent to record their session, with assurances
that identifying information would be anonymized in the final project documenta­
tion. However, their names were recorded during the session for the researcher’s
internal use.
Participants then answered a series of preliminary questions, including:
• Name, Age, Gender, and Handedness
• VR experience (ranging from ”None” to ”Expert”), headsets used, and hand
tracking
• 3D modeling experience, related 3D modeling tools (such as Blender or
Maya), and modeling concepts
This background information helped evaluate individual performance and expec­
tations during the test.
Hand Tracking for Signifier­Based Shape Modeling in Virtual Reality
31
==PAGE:40==
Participants were given a very brief explanation: that they would enter a 3D mod­
eling program in VR, where they could manipulate shapes and perform modeling
tasks using their hands. No instructions were provided about how to perform these
tasks, as the goal was to see how users would naturally approach the system.
The headset was shown and adjusted for comfort. Recording was started on both
the headset and a PC to capture user interactions and observer notes.
5.1.2
Test tasks
The users are given a set of tasks, which are mostly there to help guide them to
what they can do in the program. No instructions on how to do anything is given:
• Change the shape of the object.
• Move the object
• Extrude/Lengthen the object
• Change the size of the object
• Undo an action
• Mirror the object
• Merge the mirror
• Make a specific object (if time allows)
The participant’s approach, success, and time to completion are recorded, along­
side observations of gestures tried, any behavior when they’re unsure, and signs
of confusion or breakthroughs.
For the final tests, it was decided to give the participants the chance to try the
system with controllers instead, as a comparison.
5.1.3
Post­test questions
After the VR session, we asked the testee some questions about their experience.
1. What were your initial thoughts upon entering the program?
2. What did you notice, which clued you in to what to do?
(a) Hover highlights
(b) Scaling
(c) Grabbing
3. Was anything specifically confusing or hard to do/figure out?
4. What did you think of the hand tracking?
(a) Would you rather have used controllers?
(b) Would you rather have used a 2D interface?
5. Any suggestions for improvements?
6. Any other comments?
32
Hand Tracking for Signifier­Based Shape Modeling in Virtual Reality
==PAGE:41==
These were written to provide insight into the users’ experience and cover any
points they felt were missing.
5.2
Tests
A few main takeaways came out of the tests. The results of the test shed light on
which gestures and behaviors users naturally attempt, where their assumptions
diverge from the system’s design, and which features lacked clarity. Common dis­
coveries included natural grabbing motions and spatial manipulation, while more
abstract tasks like mirroring or undoing were rarely attempted without prior knowl­
edge. See appendix A for notes taken from testing.
5.2.1
Takeaway 1: Highlights and feedback
All the users reported using the highlights as clues for when something was in­
teractable. This is intended, and points towards them working correctly. How­
ever, a common concern was the lack of feedback when using the buttons in the
worktable. The buttons don’t react other than changing color once ”pressed”. A
suggestion here could be to turn the buttons into physical objects, which go down
when pressed, as feedback as them being touched. It would also act as a natural
cooldown, so that the user doesn’t constantly cause unwanted actions.
5.2.2
Takeaway 2: Gesture feedback
Most testees worked out the gestures after a short amount of time. However, the
gesture recognition was often unclear. Participants noted issues with determining
whether an action was registered. Users had to be shown what pose was the
correct one, as they were otherwise unsure. This can come down to the Shape
Recognizer having too high a threshold for when a pose is accurately recognized.
Sadly, there is yet to be a way to define what this threshold should be. This
is a drawback of the Meta SDK’s Custom Poses. Often, participants preferred
controllers, since it gave a much higher degree of accuracy with actions. They
weren’t as confused over whether they were doing the correct poses, where with
hand tracking they needed to be reassured externally that the pose was correct
and simply had to retry. In general, they felt more in control.
5.2.3
Takeaway 3: Worktable Menu
In general, every participant had to be told that the menu existed and how to
access it. The current implementation of the menu has poor discoverability ­ but
once told, most participants thought that it made sense. A solution could be to
add a UI element like a pop­up to indicate the possibility.
5.3
Quantitative takeaways
Below is a table of the times it took test participants to discover elements in the
hand tracking. In the table, a star (*) indicates that the participant had to be in­
struced how to do an action before understanding how the action was initiated.
The times shown are timestamps from the test sessions in minutes.
Hand Tracking for Signifier­Based Shape Modeling in Virtual Reality
33
==PAGE:42==
Action/Test #
Test 1
Test 2
Test 3
Test 4
Test 5
Vertex translation
2.33
0.40
3.40
1.07
2.43
Face extrusion
3.20
0.55
4.39
1.20
5.30
Locking
X
2.39
5.20
4.38
X
Moving model
3.43
0.33
4.20
0.56
5.26
Scaling
6.30*
4.49
8.09*
X
X
Menu
X
6.45*
11.15*
1.40
8.05*
Table 5.1: Timestamps of Hand Tracking actions
After testing, I decided it would be good to compare with a version of the sys­
tem with only controllers. However, as this was a late decision, only two of the
test participants have this to compare with. Another thing to take into account is
that users had already tried the version with hand tracking first, so going into the
version with controllers, they now would know most of the possible actions.
Action/Test #
Test 1
Test 2
Test 3
Test 4
Test 5
Vertex translation
­
­
­
1.04
0.35
Face extrusion
­
­
­
2.12
1.02
Locking
­
­
­
1.47
1.17
Moving model
­
­
­
3.01
1.49
Scaling
­
­
­
X
2.55
Menu
­
­
­
3.24*
4.14*
Table 5.2: Timestamps of Controller actions
Overall, we can see that users tend to pick up actions much faster in the version
with controllers. However, as mentioned, they had already tried the version of the
system with hand tracking at this point.
5.4
Evaluating tests
While these tests provide interesting insights into the time it took participants to
learn the system and the process of discovery, such as which elements were un­
clear or to catch common frustrations, in the end, they needed more work. To get
results I could analyze, more tests would need to be done. However, implemen­
tation was prioritized, meaning there wasn’t time for more tests.
34
Hand Tracking for Signifier­Based Shape Modeling in Virtual Reality
==PAGE:43==
6
Discussion
This chapter will discuss the findings of the project. I will revisit the different sub­
problems, analyze the effectiveness of the implemented solutions, and evaluate
the design choices with respect to the intuitiveness, immersion and interaction.
Our new system aimed at enhancing the use of signifiers in VR, by more closely
mimicking real life. Norman’s theory of signifiers says that users should be able to
interpret what actions are possible by simply perceiving peceptual cues. Switch­
ing from controller­based interactions to bare hand tracking­based interactions
allowed the system more direct interactions. Jerald talks about this in his book
[15] as the principle of direct interaction vs indirect interaction. Looking at the
fidelity of the interactions, we have a higher degree of biomechanical symmetry
compared to using controllers. Users can perform modeling gestures with their
bare hands much like they would manipulate objects in the physical world. In this
way, I’ve tried to answer sub­problem 1 and 2 in section 1.1.1.
Most users after testing explained that they felt it was more intuitive and immersive
to use the system with hand tracking implemented as compared to controllers. It
helps reduce the cognitive load of the user, as I’ve essentially removed an abstrac­
tion layer from the application. The time needed to learn how to use the system is
lowered, since people can copy knowledge of how to interact with real life objects
into knowledge of how to interact in the application. However, in relation to sub­
problem 3, a few challenges still arose in the implementation of the hand tracking
system, mostly related to the amount of control of the pose recognition.
One of the challenges in the implementation was pose recognition. Often times,
when using the application, to recognize the grabbing pose, the user has to make
a perfect fist. This problem comes from the implementation of the finger features,
since I cannot tweak the threshold of how sure the recognizer has to be of a cer­
tain pose. This meant that users often had to try several times before learning the
precise pose that would be recognized. When testing, the users also got to try the
version with controllers. Here, a common takeaway was that in comparison to the
hand tracking version of the system, the controllers constrained the user to only
use the buttons that exist. With no constraints, the user had access to every pose
that a person can do with their hands. That could actually cause more confusion.
Here the spheres also caused confusion, either because of the lack of spheres
on certain fingers, or the existence of them. This was a difference between the
understanding of signifiers in a controller­based setting and a hand tracking based
situation (see sub­problem 4). For example, the index finger sphere sometimes
meant that users would try to interact and pinch instead of grabbing with a fist.
However, once instructed in how to use the system in hand tracking, users usu­
ally felt more immersed, and understood the possible actions.
Another challenge is the performance of the hand tracking, because of the timing
of the pose detection. The Unselected() function triggers, and the controls take
Hand Tracking for Signifier­Based Shape Modeling in Virtual Reality
35
==PAGE:44==
the location of the hand a little later, meaning the coordinates are outdated by the
time the mesh is recalculated. This causes an offset. For this reason, I use a short
delay before recalculating the mesh. This is especially important when working in
VR, as an incorrect mesh is especially unimmersive and causes a lot of confusion
for the user.
All­in­all, I have worked towards a more human­centered design for the system,
with a basis in Norman’s theory of design and Jerald’s interpretation of these prin­
ciples for VR.
6.1
Future work
The application as is can still be worked upon, and new features can be added or
old features updated. Much of this is based on suggestions from testers but also
based on previous suggestion from other authors of this system.
6.1.1
Thresholding hand tracking
The way pose recognition is implemented currently means that I don’t have much
control over when a pose is recognized. This means that users sometimes expe­
rienced a disconnect between when they felt they had done a pose, and when the
system recognized it. A possible way to fix this disconnect is to work in a threshold
that defines how sure the recognizer is that a pose is being struck. This way, the
threshold can be lowered or heightened. But this requires further work with the
Meta Interaction SDK, and needs Meta to open this up to edit. A type of feedback
could be worked into this, such as the 3D model of the hand changing color, the
closer a user gets to a correct pose.
6.1.2
Tutorial/Constraints
A tutorial goes against Norman’s own theory, since it essentially corresponds to
putting a sign up that says ”Push” for a door. However, I feel especially with hand
tracking, a tutorial would help users learn the system, and give them confidence
in using it. It could be very simple, only showing which poses could be used, so
that the user doesn’t get frustrated with not knowing how to properly interact with
the system. It could also be more complex, and show every possible action in the
system, such as subdivision and explaining the menu.
Another way of solving any frustrations would be to add constraints to the system.
However, in a system using hand tracking, constraints may seem even more frus­
trating for a user. Sounds that play from headset could also be used as feedback.
Previously vibrations have been used in the controllers. These vibrations could
be turned into sounds to play from the headset instead.
A hint system could be worked in as a ”light” tutorial. For example, after a period
of inactivity, an outline of a pose could appear, indicating what is possible to the
user. This could take the place of a full fledged tutorial, where the user is guided
directly to possible actions.
6.1.3
Both interaction modes
An extra feature could be adding the possibility of using both hand tracking and
controllers. The current implementation means the user must use either one or
the other, but using Meta’s SDK should make it relatively easy to use both, even
36
Hand Tracking for Signifier­Based Shape Modeling in Virtual Reality
==PAGE:45==
in tandem, so that the user seamlessly can switch between the two. This could
have the effect of a user discovering that controllers work better for a certain type
of action, compared to hand tracking.
6.1.4
Optimization
As the modelled object gets bigger, it becomes clear that the system gets less and
less performant. For further work, especially once users can spend even longer in
the system and therefore create bigger models, the system must be more effective
and optimized. Previous reports on this system suggest possible optimizations[3].
6.1.5
Overhaul
The system itself could use an overhaul. In general, many of the scripts aren’t
being used and use deprecated libraries. The Unity project could be cleaned of
old, unused packages to be easier for future work to done on it.
Hand Tracking for Signifier­Based Shape Modeling in Virtual Reality
37
==PAGE:46==
38
Hand Tracking for Signifier­Based Shape Modeling in Virtual Reality
==PAGE:47==
7
Conclusion
This thesis has explored how hand tracking can be used to enhance the immer­
siveness and intuitiveness of a virtual reality system for 3D modeling applying
the principles of affordances and signifiers. By replacing the traditional controller­
based mode of interaction with a bare hand­tracked system using the Meta XR
SDK, a new way of interacting has been designed and implemented, now allow­
ing users to manipulate the 3D model in the VR application. The system supports
the same actions, such as extrusion, translation, symmetry­by­sensing and more
using hand tracking alone, allowing for a feasible human­centered design. Refer­
ring back to the presented sub­problems, I have explored how hand tracking can
enhance the use of signifiers in comparison to controllers, as well as how it affect
the users’ sense of immersion. Several challenges arose during the implementa­
tion, and I have suggested ways to solve these challenges, especially using Jason
Jerald and Don Norman’s principles of UX design and discovery in VR, such as
mimicking real­world gestures like grabbing.
Testing showed that participants could work out how to use the system with hand
tracking enabled, indicating a high level of discoverability for the basic ways of in­
teracting with the 3D object. However, more work has to be done in the feedback
for when the custom poses are recognized, as this caused frustration for many
users. Challenges such as gesture recognition, occlusion issues, and fatigue re­
main, but do not detract from the overall potential of bare­hand interfaces in VR
modeling environments.
Ultimately, this work demonstrates that bare hand tracking can serve not just as
a replacement for controllers, but as a foundation for re­designing the modeling
interface altogether. This prototype not only advances the specific GEL­based
modeling tool but also contributes to the growing field of human­centered VR in­
terface design as a study of hand tracking in VR. With careful application of in­
teraction design principles and appropriate affordances, VR systems can become
more natural, immersive, and accessible.
Hand Tracking for Signifier­Based Shape Modeling in Virtual Reality
39
==PAGE:48==
40
Hand Tracking for Signifier­Based Shape Modeling in Virtual Reality
==PAGE:49==
Bibliography
[1]
Wikipedia contributors. Finger tracking. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Finger_
tracking. Accessed July 10, 2025. 2025.
[2]
Andreas Bærentzen, Jeppe Revall Frisvad, and Karan Singh. “Signifier­
Based Immersive and Interactive 3D Modeling”. In: Proceedings of the 25th
ACM Symposium on Virtual Reality Software and Technology. VRST ’19.
Parramatta, NSW, Australia: Association for Computing Machinery, 2019.
ISBN: 9781450370011. DOI: 10.1145/3359996.3364257. URL: https://doi.
org/10.1145/3359996.3364257.
[3]
Magnus Peter Eilersen. “Human Centered 3D Modelling in Virtual Reality,
Menneskeorienteret 3D modellering i VR”. und. 2021.
[4]
Lars Kofod Jensen. “Virtual Reality­Based Interactive 3D Modeling using
Signifiers, Virtual Reality baseret interaktiv 3D modellering med signifiers”.
und. 2019.
[5]
janba. VR­modelling­system. https://github.com/janba/VR-modelling-system.
Accessed July 10, 2025. July 2025.
[6]
janba. GEL. https://github.com/janba/GEL. GitHub repository, accessed
July 10, 2025. July 2025.
[7]
Gravity Sketch. Gravity Sketch. 2025. URL: https://gravitysketch.com/.
[8]
Gravity Sketch. Gravity Sketch ­ Customer Stories. 2025. URL: http : / /
gravitysketch.com/customer-stories/.
[9]
Shashank Shekhar ­ LinkedIn. URL: https://www.linkedin.com/in/shashank-
shekhar-9819548/?originalSubdomain=in.
[10]
Freebird XR. Freebird XR. 2025. URL: https://freebirdxr.com/features/.
[11]
Meta Developers. Unity Hand Tracking Overview. https://developers.meta.
com/horizon/documentation/unity/unity-handtracking-overview/. Accessed
July 10, 2025. 2025.
[12]
Gavin Buckingham. “Hand Tracking for Immersive Virtual Reality: Oppor­
tunities and Challenges”. In: Frontiers in Virtual Reality Volume 2 ­ 2021
(2021). ISSN: 2673­4192. DOI: 10.3389/frvir.2021.728461. URL: https://
www.frontiersin.org/journals/virtual-reality/articles/10.3389/frvir.2021.728461.
[13]
Ólafur Konráð Albertsson. “Moving Air: A Comparative Study of Physical
Controllers and Hand Tracking in Virtual Reality”. Master’s thesis. Stock­
holm, Sweden: KTH Royal Institute of Technology, School of Electrical Engi­
neering and Computer Science (EECS), 2023, p. 23. URL: https://kth.diva-
portal.org/smash/get/diva2:1801210/FULLTEXT01.pdf.
[14]
D. Norman. The Design of Everyday Things: Revised and Expanded Edi­
tion. Basic Books, 2013. ISBN: 9780465050659. URL: https://books.google.
dk/books?id=qBfRDQAAQBAJ.
[15]
Jason Jerald. The VR Book: Human­Centered Design for Virtual Reality.
Association for Computing Machinery and Morgan & Claypool, 2015. ISBN:
9781970001129.
Hand Tracking for Signifier­Based Shape Modeling in Virtual Reality
41
==PAGE:50==
[16]
Udo Schultheis et al. “Comparison of a two­handed interface to a wand in­
terface and a mouse interface for fundamental 3D tasks”. In: 2012 IEEE
Symposium on 3D User Interfaces (3DUI). 2012, pp. 117–124. DOI: 10 .
1109/3DUI.2012.6184195.
[17]
Tiffany Luong et al. “Controllers or Bare Hands? A Controlled Evaluation of
Input Techniques on Interaction Performance and Exertion in Virtual Real­
ity”. In: IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 29.11
(2023), pp. 4633–4643. DOI: 10.1109/TVCG.2023.3320211.
[18]
maxx1559. VRThesisNew. https : / / github . com / maxx1559 / VRThesisNew.
GitHub repository, accessed July 10, 2025. July 2025.
[19]
Meta Developers. Hands – Design. https://developers.meta.com/horizon/
design/hands/. Accessed July 10, 2025. 2025.
[20]
Meta. The Facebook Company Is Now Meta. Accessed: 2025­07­06. Oct.
2021. URL: https://about.fb.com/news/2021/10/facebook-company-is-now-
meta/.
[21]
Meta Developers. Build a Custom Hand Pose. https : / / developers . meta .
com/horizon/documentation/unity/unity-isdk-building-hand-pose-recognizer.
Accessed July 10, 2025. 2025.
[22]
Meta Horizon OS Developers. Hand Pose Detection. Accessed: 2025­07­
06. 2025. URL: https://developers.meta.com/horizon/documentation/unity/
unity-isdk-hand-pose-detection.
42
Hand Tracking for Signifier­Based Shape Modeling in Virtual Reality
==PAGE:51==
A
Tests
Discoverability testing:
Plan:
Ask for consent to record the session and to save their information.
Assure that names will be anonymized in the rest of the project, but for MY sake,
I will take names.
Ask preliminary questions.
Explain (shortly!!!) what the program is. Don’t mention how to do anything. Just
that it is a 3D modelling program, and what they will see when they put the head­
set on.
Give small, short tasks.
Show headset and adjust to fit participants.
Start recording in headset and on PC.
Begin program and test. Monitor progress, set timers and write down time to finish.
Ask post­test questions.
Tasks:
1. Change the shape of the object.
2. Move the object.
3. Extrude/Lengthen the object.
4. Change the size of the object
5. Undo an action.
6. Mirror the object.
7. Merge the mirror.
8. Make a specific object (chair, house, “minecraft” type human.)
Preliminary questions:
1. Name, Age (range?), Gender(?), Handedness (left or right handed)
2. How much experience with VR do you have? What kind of headset? What
Hand Tracking for Signifier­Based Shape Modeling in Virtual Reality
43
==PAGE:52==
experiences? Hand tracking?
a. None, Little(minutes), Medium(hours), Experienced, Expert
b. Meta/Oculus, HTC Vive, Google Cardboard, Other
c. Open answer
d. Open answer
3. How much experience with 3D modelling do you have? Which tools? Famil­
iarity with terms?
a. None, Little(minutes), Medium(hours), Experienced, Expert
b. Blender, Maya, 3DS Max, Paint 3D, Cinema4D
c. Knowledge of: Vertices, Faces, Extrusion, Mirroring, etc.
Post­test questions:
1. What were your thoughts upon seeing the model in the program?
2. What did you notice which clued you in to what to do? (which signifiers)
a. Hover highlights
b. Scaling
c. Grabbing
3. Was anything specifically confusing or hard to do/figure out?
4. What did you think of the use of hand tracking?
a. Do you believe it would be easier using controllers? (mostly if they have expe­
rience with that)
b. Would you rather have used a traditional 2D interface?
5. Any suggestions for improvements?
6. Any other comments?
Test 1:
­ 30 years old, M, Right
­ Experience VR: Very little
­ Experience 3D modelling: none
­ First thoughts: Roman times, lift, pinches
­ Clues: Highlights, colors in menu
­ Possibilities: form the cube by pull and letting go, move, rotate, drag and drop,
open panel to mirror, merge mirror
­ Confusing: touch to interact, menu, mirror, wouldn’t have known without tester
telling, possibly add button to show menu
­ Hand tracking: Accurate, except for the model, letting go suddenly,
­ 2D: More intuitive in VR than on 2D screen
­ Controllers: Not much experience, feels like controllers might be more confusing
­ Suggestions: Roman temple a little useless, easier with empty room to work in,
44
Hand Tracking for Signifier­Based Shape Modeling in Virtual Reality
==PAGE:53==
Test 2:
­ 29 years old, M, Right
­ Experience VR: Much
­ Experience 3D: Much, 3D paint
­ First Thoughts: Throw it, SuperHot
­ Clues: Handles, Highlights
­ Confusion: Signifiers on hand, two felt like too little, for all wanted interactions
­ Hand tracking: fairly accurate, glitched a little
­ Controllers: No ambiguity vs hand tracking, click a button, used to controllers,
would have preferred
­ 2D: preferred this to 2D version
­ Passthrough makes sense, to compare with IRL objects
­ More functions, blending to smooth object, hand track the bones as an indicator
of what type of interaction
Test 3:
­ 26 years old, M, Right
­ Experience VR: Medium, Oculus Quest 1, Gaming
­ 3D modelling: Little, Blender
­ First thoughts:
­ Hard time seeing the model, had to spawn in?, found out in the end
­ Intuitive to see the interactions
­ Confusion around fingers vs palms
­ Had to get used to using fists
­ After learning, made sense
­ Clues:
­ Handles and pins, want to interact with
­ Highlights
­ What gestures do what, how to interact
­ Confusion:
­ Face locking mechanism
­ Hand tracking:
­ Positioning seemed correct
­ Gestures were off
­ Menu needs feedback, for example after doing actions
­ vS 3D
­ Depends on the use
­ The spatial aspect was useful
Hand Tracking for Signifier­Based Shape Modeling in Virtual Reality
45
==PAGE:54==
­ Improvements
­ Undo could be easier or quicker
­ Cooldown on menu
Test 4:
­ 26 years old, M, Right
­ Experience VR: Medium, Meta Quest 3, Playstation VR, Gaming, Basically no
hand­tracking
­ Experience 3D: Little, None, Guess­work
­ First thoughts:
­ Spheres in hand and pins on cube.
­ Highlights indicated
­ Confusing:
­ To move the whole thing, not so intuitive to just grab the object
­ Have to use the undo button to undo, can’t just push back in
­ Wouldn’t have realized the menu without instruction
­ Hand­tracking:
­ Hand tracking was fairly precise (lag was annoying)
­ One wiggly finger
­ 2D:
­ Haven’t used one, wouldn’t know
­ Might know more about using mouse and keyboard than VR
­ More comfortable with traditional interaction modes
­ Improvements:
­ Sphere on thumb
­ Confusing that palm sphere corresponds to grab
­ Lag
­ Locks should grow
­ Comments:
­ Passthrough would be nice
­ Controllers:
­ Spheres are clues
­ Controllers are good as constraints, only as many actions as buttons
­ Undo was unclear unless told (tutorial)
­ Controllers felt better than hand­tracking here, more used to controller interac­
tions
46
Hand Tracking for Signifier­Based Shape Modeling in Virtual Reality
==PAGE:55==
Test 5:
­ 51 years old, M, Left,
­ Experience VR: Experienced, Oculus Quest, Gaming, Not much hand­tracking
­ Experience 3D: Tried Gravity Sketch, No knowledge of terms
­ First thoughts:
­ what can i interact with and how to grab
­ Clues:
­ Handles
­ Highlights
­ things were reacting to my actions
­ Confusing:
­ had to learn the pose for grabbing
­ small tutorial might help
­ Hand­tracking:
­ felt fairly precise
­ sometimes forgot that headset was there
­ Controllers:
­ Used to controllers, but surprisingly easy to use just hands
­ 2D:
­ Cool to have in 3D, and perceive the object from all angles
­ Improvements:
­ Sounds for possible actions, ding for good pose or interaction
­ Comments:
­ Bigger space to walk around
­ Controller version:
­ Had more control, learned quicker, could do more,
­ Was fun
Hand Tracking for Signifier­Based Shape Modeling in Virtual Reality
47
==PAGE:56==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://www.compute.dtu.dk/
