==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Thesis
Software Package for Smartphone-based Assess-
ment of Mobility Disorders
Csaba Hell (s232456)
Dániel Jakab (s232455)
Kongens Lyngby 2025
==PAGE:2==
DTU Health Tech
Department of Health Technology
Technical University of Denmark
Ørsteds Plads
Building 345C
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
healthtech-info@dtu.dk
www.healthtech.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
The thesis presents the design, implementation, and evaluation of a Flutter-based
open-source software package that facilitates standardized mobility assessments using
smartphones and wearable inertial measurement units (IMUs). Aimed at enabling
remote, scalable, and objective evaluation of mobility impairments caused by neu-
rological disorders, musculoskeletal conditions, and age-related decline, the package
integrates four clinically validated tests: Sit-to-Stand (STS), Timed Up & Go (TUG),
Walk Test (WT), and Shoulder Range of Motion (SROM).
The thesis thoroughly reviews existing mobility tests and their digital adaptations,
highlighting gaps in reusable, modular, and clinically robust mobile solutions. The
package was designed with a user-centered approach, emphasizing simplicity, minimal
supervision, and real-time feedback to support both clinical and home-based assess-
ments. It adopts a layered architecture integrating Flutter UI components, signal
processing algorithms, and the CARP Research Package for task orchestration.
Validation was performed through a study involving 21 participants, comparing
sensor-derived metrics against manual clinical measurements. Results demonstrate
good to excellent reliability, with some variance noted in specific tests or devices.
The thesis discusses limitations, including the need for larger clinical validations and
enhancements in sensing precision. Future work proposes expanding the test library,
improving algorithmic robustness, and enhancing usability features such as auditory
cues.
Overall, the thesis contributes a scalable, extensible mobile software platform for
mobility disorder assessment, facilitating remote patient monitoring, research, and
clinical decision-making.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This Master’s thesis was prepared at the Department of Health Technology at the
Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring a
M.Sc. degree in Computer Science and Technology.
Csaba Hell
Dániel Jakab
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank our supervisor, Jakob Bardram, for guiding us through the
project with regular supervision sessions and providing valuable information and con-
nections throughout the entire process. We also extend our gratitude to Christian
Gunge Riberholt and Trine Hørmann Thomsen from Rigshospitalet Glostrup, for
their roles as clinical supervisors and for their valuable insights during the study. For
conducting the validation study, we are grateful to all participants who took part in
the mobility tests and allowed us to collect essential data. Finally, we express our
sincere gratitude to our families and friends for their continuous support during the
months of working on this thesis.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
Acronyms
ix
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation and Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Prior Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Research Question . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Research goals and methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.5
Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Related Work
7
2.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Standardized Mobility Tests: Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Digital Assessment and mHealth Platforms
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4
IMU-Based Implementations of Selected Tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.5
Summary and Gaps
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3
System analysis
19
3.1
Selection Criteria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.2
Selected Tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.3
System Requirements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4
Design
25
4.1
User Interface and Interaction Design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.2
System Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.3
Algorithm and Signal Processing Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.4
Configuration and Extensibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.5
Chapter Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
5
Implementation
35
5.1
Project Structure Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.2
Sensor Integration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.3
Mobility Test Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.4
User Interface Realization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.5
Localization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5.6
Pilot Study and Iterative Improvements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5.7
Publishing and Usage
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
5.8
Chapter Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
6
Evaluation
57
6.1
Demo Application
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
6.2
Validation Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
6.3
Observations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
7
Discussion
65
7.1
Goals and results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
7.2
Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
7.3
Future Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
8
Conclusion
69
A Distribution of Contributions
71
B Appendix to Design
73
B.1
Designed UI Screens in Figma . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
C Appendix to Implementation
80
C.1 Codebase folder structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
C.2 Custom made armbands . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
C.3 Pilot Study user interface (UI)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
C.4 Final application UI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
D Appendix to Evaluation
87
D.1 Informed Consent Sample Documents
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
D.2 System Usability Scale (SUS) survey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
Bibliography
93
==PAGE:11==
Acronyms
DJ
Dániel Jakab
CsH
Csaba Hell
CARP Copenhagen Research Platform
PDR
Project Definition Report
ILO
intended learning objectives
IPR
Intellectual Property Rights
mHealth Mobile Health
TBI
traumatic brain injury
SCI
spinal cord injury
PD
Parkinson’s disease
10MWT 10-Meter Walk Test
WT
Walk Test
STS
Sit-to-Stand
TUG
Timed Up & Go
IMU
inertial measurement unit
4SBT
4-Stage Balance Test
PNP
Peripheral Neuropathy
UX
User Experience
UML
Unified Modeling Language
UCD
User-Centered Design
SROM Shoulder range of motion
==PAGE:12==
x
Acronyms
OMC
Optical Motion Capture
ICC
Intraclass Correlation Coeﬀicient
IRR
Inter-rater reliability
LOA
Limits of Agreement
RMS
Root Mean Square
SD
Standard Diviation
MAE
Mean Absolute Error
UI
user interface
JSON
JavaScript Object Notation
SUS
System Usablity Scale
API
Application Programming Interface
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation and Background
Mobility is a foundational aspect of human independence, yet millions of individuals
worldwide suffer impairments due to neurological disorders, musculoskeletal condi-
tions, and age-related decline.
These impairments affect essential daily activities
such as standing, walking, and reaching, leading to reduced autonomy, increased fall
risk, and diminished quality of life. Conditions such as traumatic brain injury (TBI),
spinal cord injury (SCI), and Parkinson’s disease (PD) are prominent contributors
to motor dysfunction. TBI alone accounts for more than 37 million prevalent cases
globally [Zho+25], while SCI frequently results in chronic mobility limitations, and
PD progressively disrupts gait, balance, and coordination. Additionally, age-related
conditions like sarcopenia and osteoarthritis further accelerate mobility loss among
older adults, increasing the burden on healthcare systems.
To manage and mitigate these effects, rehabilitation plays a central role, often
guided by structured and repeatable mobility assessments. Preventive care also de-
pends on such evaluations to detect early signs of functional decline. Clinicians rou-
tinely employ standardized mobility tests to evaluate patient performance, monitor
recovery, and tailor therapy. Among these, the Sit-to-Stand (STS) test assesses lower
limb strength and endurance through repeated chair rises [Boh95]; the Timed Up &
Go (TUG) test evaluates functional mobility and fall risk by timing a stand-walk-
turn task [Ave20; PR91]; the 10-Meter Walk Test (10MWT) measures short-distance
gait speed as a proxy for general function [PFK12]; and the Shoulder range of mo-
tion (SROM) test evaluates joint mobility through flexion, extension, abduction, and
rotation, frequently used in musculoskeletal rehabilitation [NW16].
While these gold-standard assessments are clinically validated and widely ac-
cepted, they are typically performed in controlled clinical environments under profes-
sional supervision. This model introduces significant constraints: tests are resource-
intensive, limited in frequency, and may fail to capture a patient’s real-world mobility.
Performance may be biased by the clinical setting because patients usually perform
better under clinical observation, and opportunities for early intervention may be
missed.
In response to these limitations, researchers and practitioners are increasingly
adopting mobile and wearable technology.
The widespread availability of smart-
phones equipped with inertial measurement units (IMUs) (accelerometer, gyroscope,
==PAGE:14==
2
1 Introduction
magnetometer) enables Mobile Health (mHealth) solutions to transform traditional
mobility assessments into scalable, digital tools.
Digitizing mobility assessments not only reduces the demand on clinical resources
but also enables long-term tracking of functional mobility under real-life condition.
This approach supports adaptive rehabilitation, enhances adherence to treatment
plans, and offers objective data for clinical decision-making. Furthermore, mobile as-
sessments generate reproducible, high-resolution datasets that can accelerate research
into movement disorders, recovery trajectories, and population-specific intervention
strategies.
1.2
Prior Work
Research related to mHealth technology has increased exponentially between 2000 and
2020 [Cao+21]. Digital self-assessment is an emerging area in mHealth and rehabili-
tation technology [Nus+19; MYS12]. While traditional clinical mobility assessments
such as STS [Boh95], TUG [PR91; Ave20], and 10MWT [PFK12] are well-established,
they rely on in-clinic supervision and equipment, limiting their frequency and scal-
ability. The increasing ubiquity of smartphones equipped with inertial sensors has
enabled researchers to develop digital alternatives that allow mobility assessments to
be performed remotely, objectively, and more frequently [Mad+16a; BF16].
Early systems, such as Madhushri et al.’s mHealth Tool Suite [Mad+16a], demon-
strated the feasibility of using smartphone IMUs for tasks like walking and sit-to-
stand, though they were limited to Android and lacked extensibility. Willemse et
al. [Wil+24] emphasized the need for reusable and interoperable tools in movement
disorder assessment, highlighting fragmentation in current mobile apps. Nussbaum
et al. [Nus+19] conducted a systematic review of over 100 mHealth related studies
and identified 90 applications. Nussbaum et al. found that while many provided
intervention or measurement features, less than half of them had been validated to
ensure they accurately captured the variables they aimed to measure.
A systematic review by Shukla et al. [Shu+20] on instrumented Sit-to-Stand
(iSTS) assessments found that chest-mounted IMUs could reliably segment STS phases
(impulse, standing, sitting) and extract meaningful features like duration, power, and
velocity. These features were shown to correlate with fall risk, frailty, and sarcopenia.
However, segmentation methods varied widely, and no standard framework existed.
Further literature shows that smartphones can accurately measure temporal met-
rics such as sit-to-stand duration and step time [Mad+16b]. Wearable systems using
IMUs have also been explored for monitoring shoulder movement in rehabilitation.
While tools exist for tracking shoulder flexion or abduction, many lack the fidelity
to distinguish between complex rotations or to provide real-time feedback. Gill et
al. [Gil+20] provided normative values for shoulder movements in the general popula-
tion, yet few digital systems have integrated full SROM analysis for home-based use.
Prior work demonstrates that joint angles can be measured using IMUs. However,
implementations are often research prototypes rather than reusable software tools.
==PAGE:15==
1.3 Research Question
3
Corrà et al. [Cor+20] reviewed wearable solutions for Parkinson’s disease and
noted strong potential for using IMUs to monitor functional changes over time. How-
ever, they also observed that most systems were disease-specific, lacked modularity,
and were not open source, limiting their adaptation for broader use in movement
disorders or general geriatric populations.
In summary, the literature supports the feasibility of using IMUs for mobility
assessments, especially for STS, TUG, SROM and gait tests. Yet, despite promising
studies, there remains a gap in comprehensive, reusable, and extensible systems that
support a range of tests that are clinically informed, and work across platforms.
1.3
Research Question
How can standardized mobility assessment tests and rehabilitation exercises be im-
plemented in a Flutter-based software package to be available for the design of
smartphone-based applications for movement disorders?
The research question can be divided into four sub-questions:
• RQ1: What standardized mobility tests and exercises for assessment and reha-
bilitation exists?
• RQ2: Which of these tests and exercises are feasible to support in a smartphone-
based tool?
• RQ3: What is the software and User Experience (UX) design of the Flutter
package containing a set of these tests and exercises?
• RQ4: What is the feasibility of these smartphone-based tests and exercises for
clinical use for clinicians, researchers, and physiotherapists?
1.4
Research goals and methods
From the research question we can formulate the following research goals and meth-
ods:
1.4.1
Research goals
• Research standardized exercises: Review existing standardized exercises
and assess the feasibility for them to be implemented on smartphone technology.
• UX design: Using a User-Centered Design process, create the UX design for
the selected exercises and conduct usability testing for validation.
• Implement Flutter-based software package: Implement the final UX de-
sign as a Flutter package with a set of standardized tests and exercises. Create
documentation and usage examples.
==PAGE:16==
4
1 Introduction
• Release of package: Release the Flutter package on pub.dev.
• Create demo application: Create a standalone application or integrate into
Copenhagen Research Platform (CARP) Studies app for testing purposes.
• Conduct study: Conduct a small study of at least N=21 participants to
validate the package. Compare each test and exercise of the package with the
standardized method.
• Validate results: Validate the smartphone-based test and exercises by inves-
tigating concurrent validity.
1.4.2
Methods
To achieve the research goals, a combination of software engineering, UX design, and
validation study methodologies will be employed.
First, standardized mobility exercises will be reviewed through a literature study,
assessing their feasibility for smartphone implementation. This will include an anal-
ysis of existing clinical mobility tests and how their protocols can be adapted for
mobile-based assessments. This will include examining test procedures, scoring meth-
ods, and their clinical relevance.
For the UX design, a User-Centered Design (UCD) [HP18] process will be followed,
ensuring that the digital implementation of the mobility exercises is intuitive and
accessible. Wireframing and prototyping will be carried out using Figma, followed by
usability testing with users to iteratively refine the design.
1.4.2.1
Software Engineering & System Design
The Flutter-based software package will be developed following software engineering
principles. This involves:
• Requirement Specification: Defining functional and non-functional require-
ments based on mobility assessment standards.
• System Architecture: Designing and illustrating a system structure diagram,
including core modules for mobility tests, data collection, and result visualiza-
tion.
• Implementation: Developing modular components using Flutter and Dart.
• Testing: Conducting manual testing with participants to ensure reliability and
correctness.
• Documentation: Providing detailed API documentation and usage examples.
==PAGE:17==
1.5 Overview
5
The package will be released on pub.dev for public access.
A demo application will be created to demonstrate real-world usability.
This
can be either a standalone app or an integration into the CARP Studies app for field
testing. A Unified Modeling Language (UML) [Obj25] sequence diagram will illustrate
key interactions, such as data collection, processing, and feedback visualization.
For validation, a study with at least N=21 participants will be conducted. Each
test and exercise within the package will be compared against its standardized clinical
equivalent using a concurrent validity method, ensuring that the digital assessments
provide results comparable to traditional mobility tests.
1.5
Overview
The thesis consists of 8 chapters. This chapter describes background information and
general motivation for the project, outlines research questions, goals, and methods,
and the achieved results.
Chapter 2 talks about the related work already conducted in this field of study,
standardized mobility tests, digital counterparts, and studies that used IMU based
solutions.
Chapter 3 presents the selection criteria and requirements for the tests imple-
mented in the package.
Chapter 4 gives an overview of the generalized architecture, algorithms, and signal
processing that are used in the concrete implementation.
Chapter 5 describes the package implementation in Flutter.
Chapter 6 outlines the validation study results and the demo application.
Chapter 7 discusses the goals and results of the thesis, limitations of the package,
and possible future work.
Chapter 8 closes the thesis by giving a conclusion about everything achieved.
==PAGE:18==
6
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 2
Related Work
2.1
Introduction
Digital self-assessment is increasingly explored in mHealth and rehabilitation contexts,
reflecting a broader trend in mobile health research that has grown exponentially be-
tween 2000 and 2020 [Cao+21; Nus+19; MYS12]. This chapter presents an overview
of clinically validated mobility assessment tests and reviews relevant literature on
their digital and IMU-based implementations.
Emphasis is placed on the feasibil-
ity of adapting these tests for smartphone-based use in unsupervised environments,
which directly informs the software design in this thesis.
2.2
Standardized Mobility Tests: Overview
Clinicians commonly use gold-standard functional mobility tests to assess motor func-
tion, fall risk, and rehabilitation progress.
STS tests are used to evaluate lower limb strength and endurance, often applied
in geriatric, neurological, and orthopedic rehabilitation. The patient is asked to rise
from a seated position either once (single STS) or repeatedly (e.g., five times or for
30 seconds), while timing or repetition count is recorded manually [Boh95]. Although
measurement of time is more accurate than the number of repetitions, individuals who
are weak may not be able to complete the required number of repetitions. The nor-
mative results of STS varies based on age and disorders [McK+17]. Numerous studies
shown that STS performance correlates with balance, falls and walking speed [Boh95].
Furthermore, Rikli et al. [RJ13] developed criterion fitness standards to maintain
physical independence into later life for elderly people, fostering prevention.
TUG assesses functional mobility, gait speed, balance and fall risk, particularly
in older adults and individuals with neurological conditions (e.g., Parkinson’s disease,
stroke, traumatic brain injury) [PR91]. The subject stands from a chair, walks 3
meters, turns, walks back, and sits down, with the total time measured using a
stopwatch. Clinical benchmarks define approximately less or equal then 12 seconds
as normal for healthy older adults and times over 13.5 seconds indicate increased fall
risk [TJT07].
10MWT is a widely used clinical assessment to measure walking speed, an im-
portant indicator of functional mobility, fall risk, and overall health status in older
==PAGE:20==
8
2 Related Work
adults and individuals with neurological conditions. During the test the subject walks
a 10-meter straight path at a self-selected or fast pace, with timing typically recorded
over the central 6 meters to account for acceleration and deceleration phases [PFK12].
Hardy et al. have shown that gait speed correlates with community ambulation ability
and is predictive of future health events, hospitalization risk, and mortality. [Har+07].
SROM is used to evaluate the flexibility of the shoulder joint, especially after injury
or surgery. Joint angles during movements such as flexion, extension, abduction, and
rotations are measured using under clinician supervision. Gill et al. [Gil+20] measured
normative values for shoulder movements in the general population with more then
2400 test participants over 11 years, pointing out that range of motion decreases
with age. While the most accurate method for joint angle measurement in laboratory
settings is based on Optical Motion Capture (OMC), the most widely used in clinical
practice is the medical goniometer [Kas+23].
Six-Minute Walk Test (6MWT) measures endurance and aerobic capacity, often
in cardiopulmonary or frailty assessments. The subject walks continuously for six
minutes in a hallway, with total distance measured [SHM02].
Berg Balance Scale (BBS) test evaluates balance across 14 subtests, including
standing on one leg, turning, and picking up an object from the floor. The scale
comprises 14 items, each scored from 0 to 4, resulting in a total score ranging from 0
to 56, where higher scores reflect better balance [Dow15]. Although it is used in stroke
and elderly populations, its ceiling effect limitation should be considered [BK08].
Resting Tremor Test is commonly used in the clinical evaluation of patients with
PD to assess the presence, amplitude, and frequency of involuntary oscillatory move-
ments occurring at rest. Tremors typically affect the hands, arms, legs, and are best
observed when the muscles are relaxed and supported. Clinicians visually assess the
tremor while the patient is seated with arms resting on the lap or supported by arm-
rests. Clinical scoring is typically performed visually or using accelerometers under
controlled conditions.
While many clinical mobility tests exist, not all are feasible for smartphone-based
use in unsupervised environments. Factors such as required equipment, test dura-
tion, sensor placement, and ecological validity influence their applicability. A formal
feasibility screening was conducted and is presented in Chapter 3, which guided the
selection of four tests implemented in this thesis: STS, TUG, 10MWT, and SROM.
2.3
Digital Assessment and mHealth Platforms
Mobile health technologies have expanded the possibilities of monitoring patient func-
tion beyond the clinic. Nussbaum et al. [Nus+19] reviewed over 100 mHealth appli-
cations in rehabilitation, highlighting the lack of validation and clinical integration
in many tools. Bardram and Frost [BF16] introduced a personal health design frame-
work, promoting modular and reusable systems. Willemse et al. [Wil+24] examined
113 apps for movement disorders and emphasized the need for interoperable plat-
==PAGE:21==
2.4 IMU-Based Implementations of Selected Tests
9
forms.
These studies confirm that although many tools exist, few offer validated,
general-purpose solutions with clinical robustness and research extensibility.
2.4
IMU-Based Implementations of Selected Tests
2.4.1
Sit-to-Stand (STS)
Sit-to-Stand Test in Mobility Assessment
The sit-to-stand (STS) test is a widely used clinical assessment of lower-body strength
and mobility in geriatric and neurological impairments. It measures the ability to rise
from a chair, a critical task for independent living. Clinicians commonly administer
STS tests either by timing how long it takes to complete a fixed number of repeti-
tions (e.g., the 5-repetition STS) or by counting how many repetitions are completed
within a fixed interval (e.g., the 30-seconds STS). These simple metrics (total time
or repetition count) have well-established correlations with functional status.
For
instance, slower STS performance (longer time or fewer stands) is associated with
higher fall risk, reduced muscle power, and slower gait speed in seniors. Accordingly,
the STS test is recommended for assessing functional independence, detecting frailty,
and tracking rehabilitation progress.
Traditional manual administration of STS (using a stopwatch and count) has
practical limitations. Human reaction times and judgment can introduce errors in
timing and counting. Moreover, manually recorded STS results may not fully capture
how the movement is performed. Research shows that instrumented STS tests (using
sensors to capture detailed motion data) have greater clinical relevance than manual
tests. One study found that only the instrumented 5xSTS durations (segmenting the
rising and sitting phases) were significantly associated with older adults’ functional
health, whereas the manually recorded total STS time was not [Lum+16].
This
is because sensor-based assessments can quantify dynamic movement characteristics
(e.g., how quickly one stands up or sits down) that provide insight beyond a single
aggregate time or count.
Instrumenting the STS Test with Inertial Sensors
To overcome the limitations of visual observation, researchers have introduced wear-
able inertial sensors to instrument the sit-to-stand movement. Wearable inertial mea-
surement units IMUs and smartphones (equipped with IMUs) can objectively capture
kinematic parameters during STS movements. The advantage of such instrumented
tests is the ability to record how the movement is executed, not just the outcome. For
example, Millor et al. [Mil+13] used a single IMU on the lower back to record STS
performances and extracted features like peak velocity and trunk tilt range. These
sensor-derived metrics were able to distinguish frail, pre-frail, and healthy older adults.
Such differences that were undetectable using only the total repetition count of the
==PAGE:22==
10
2 Related Work
30-seconds STS. This illustrates that sensor-based analyses can reveal subtle deficits
in power, balance, or speed that traditional scoring would miss.
A variety of signal processing approaches have been explored for detecting STS
events from sensor data. A common method is applying threshold-based algorithms
on acceleration or gyroscope signals to identify the start and end of a stand-up or sit-
down phase [Rod+12]. For instance, thresholds on vertical acceleration or trunk tilt
can flag when a person begins standing up or finishes sitting. This simple approach
is computationally lightweight and has been successfully used to automatically count
STS repetitions and measure phase durations.
One limitation of fixed thresholds
is that they may require tuning for different individuals or sensor placements. To
improve robustness, some systems perform peak detection or apply filters to better
isolate the transitions. At the other end of the spectrum, machine learning and pat-
tern recognition techniques (including deep neural networks) have also been applied
to recognize STS motions as part of broader human activity recognition frameworks.
For example, Hassan et al. [Has+18] developed a deep learning-based smartphone
HAR system that included STS transition detection. While such machine-learning
approaches can capture complex movement patterns, they typically require larger
datasets and more processing power. Consequently, many recent studies favor simpler
single-sensor algorithms for STS in order to minimize setup complexity and compu-
tation. In fact, mounting a single IMU on the chest or waist has become a standard
configuration, as it provides a reasonable approximation of full-body motion during
STS without the burden of multiple sensors.
Beyond basic timing and counting, instrumented STS tests can extract detailed
temporal and kinematic parameters of the movement. Madhushri et al. [Mad+16b],
for example, enumerates metrics such as the duration of each sit-to-stand and stand-
to-sit phase, the peak angular velocity during rising, and the maximum trunk angle
achieved. These fine-grained metrics provide detailed insights into STS performance.
For instance, determining whether a slow overall time is due to a prolonged initi-
ation (lean-forward) phase versus a slow ascent (lift-up) phase.
Such insights are
clinically valuable. Van Lummel et al. [Lum+16] noted that the dynamic phase times
obtained from an instrumented 4xSTS were more strongly correlated with measures
of physical function, than the total 4xSTS time. In summary, augmenting the STS
with inertial sensors adds significant value. It provides objective, repeatable measures
(recent work demonstrates excellent test–retest reliability for sensor-derived STS met-
rics [Gor+23]) and can detect subtle impairments that might otherwise go unnoticed.
For instance, Abdollahi et al. [Abd+24] found that stroke survivors exhibit signifi-
cantly slower STS movements (lower trunk angular velocity) than healthy controls
when tested with wearable IMUs, underscoring the sensitivity of instrumented STS
to functional deficits.
Smartphone-Based STS Applications for Home Use
Smartphones offer an attractive platform for instrumented STS testing because they
integrate IMU sensors along with substantial computing power. Researchers have
==PAGE:23==
2.4 IMU-Based Implementations of Selected Tests
11
increasingly utilized smartphones as low-cost, convenient tools to quantify mobility
in older adults. Smartphones are ubiquitous and user-friendly, making them ideal for
at-home assessments without dedicated equipment. Marques et al. [Mar+21] showed
that phone sensors are suﬀiciently accurate to substitute for lab-grade instruments
in certain mobility tests. In their study, a smartphone’s accelerometer (worn at the
waist) was used to measure single STS times in an elderly cohort, and the results
showed excellent agreement with a video-based gold standard (correlation coeﬀicients
r = 0.94–0.98, with timing accuracy >94%). The smartphone measurements also
demonstrated high test–retest reliability (ICC ≈0.95), indicating that simple phone-
derived metrics like stand-up duration and total STS time are both accurate and
consistent for clinical use.
Several prototype mobile applications have been developed to automate standard
mobility tests. For example, Madhushri et al. [Mad+16b] introduced a suite of An-
droid apps for tests including the Timed Up-and-Go and 30-seconds STS.
Their
30-seconds STS app uses the phone’s inertial sensors to automatically count the num-
ber of stand-ups and even segments each repetition into its sub-movements (e.g.,
leaning forward, lifting up, sitting down). The app provides an audible “start” cue
and times a 30-seconds interval, reducing human timing errors. After completion, it
provides immediately feedback by displaying the outcomes on screen, such as total
stands completed and average cycle time. Notably, it was designed for unsupervised
home use, with options to save data locally or upload results to a cloud server for
clinicians.
Another example is the work by Cerrito et al. [Cer+15], who validated a smartphone-
based STS application against force-plate measurements. They showed that a phone’s
accelerometer could reliably capture quantitative metrics like peak ground reaction
force and power during the STS. This suggests that smartphones can even be used
to estimate muscle strength. Chan et al.[Cha+16] similarly developed a mobile appli-
cation to time the 5-repetition STS and TUG tests. They used a beep to prompt the
user and automatic timing to reduce human reaction error and the app demonstrated
excellent measurement consistency. These studies demonstrate the feasibility of at-
home STS assessments: an older adult can simply attach a smartphone or wearable
sensor, perform the test as instructed by an app, and receive immediate, objective
results that can also be stored for later analysis.
Importantly, enabling STS testing at home addresses a key healthcare need. With
a growing elderly population and relatively fewer medical professionals, tools for fre-
quent self-assessment at home are increasingly valuable [Mad+16b]. Mobile and wear-
able technologies allow these tests to be conducted outside the clinic, which can help
detect functional declines sooner and reduce unnecessary clinic visits. Furthermore,
at-home measures may better reflect an individual’s true functional ability (by avoid-
ing the observation effect of clinical settings).
In summary, leveraging smartphones for STS tests aligns with the trend towards
remote patient monitoring and preventive care.
It provides a practical means for
continuous mobility tracking in daily life rather than occasional snapshots in a clinic.
==PAGE:24==
12
2 Related Work
Shoulder Range of Motion (SROM)
This section synthesizes findings from eight studies, including two systematic reviews
and six individual validation studies, focusing on validated movements, sensor se-
tups, algorithms, validation methods, reusability/modularity, and home environment
applicability.
Systematic Reviews
Li et al. [Li+24] conducted a systematic review and meta-analysis of IMU-based up-
per extremity range of motion measurements, evaluating shoulder flexion/extension,
abduction/adduction, internal/external rotation, as well as elbow and wrist move-
ments. The amount of sensors and their placement varied across studies. Typically
the sensors were placed on the upper arm, forearm and thorax. Out of 51 studies,
4 study used one sensor and placed it either on the upper arm or the forearm. For
the one sensor based studies no algorithm details were available. Other algorithms in-
cluded Kalman filters, complementary filters, or proprietary software. 43% of studies
not reported specific algorithms due to commercial systems. Validation against OMC
systems showed excellent results for most movements, except for shoulder internal/ex-
ternal rotation (see Table 2.1). The review noted that validations were conducted in
laboratory settings, limiting generalizability to home environments.
Table 2.1: Concurrent validity metrics for shoulder range of motion using IMUs in
study [Li+24].
Movement
Pearson’s r
ICC
Mean Difference (◦)
Flexion–Extension
0.969
0.935
3.19
Abduction–Adduction
0.919
0.840
7.10
Internal–External Rotation
0.939
—
9.13
Fang et al. [Fan+23] reviewed 52 studies on converting IMU data to joint angles for
shoulder movements (e.g., flexion/extension, abduction/adduction, internal/external
rotation), including tasks like reaching and lifting. IMUs were placed on the upper
arm, forearm, torso (e.g., sternum), or scapula to reduce errors from soft tissue move-
ment. Most studies used a static pose for calibration, and joint angles were estimated
using sensor fusion algorithms such as Kalman or complementary filters combined
with 3D Euler angle decomposition. Validation against OMC systems showed high
accuracy for shoulder flexion, extension, and abduction (Root Mean Square (RMS)
error 4◦), but lower accuracy for other shoulder movements. The portable, wireless
design of IMUs suggests potential for reuse across different users or settings, with
applications for remote monitoring, though magnetic disturbances in home environ-
ments were noted as a challenge.
==PAGE:25==
2.4 IMU-Based Implementations of Selected Tests
13
Individual Validation Studies
Cain et al. [CM25] focused on shoulder motion in free-living environments over long
period of time (>1 hour), using two IMUs on the thorax and upper arm to measure
humerothoracic angles and body segment elevation angles. The algorithm used sensor
fusion with alignment strategies (e.g., functional movements, self-aligning models) to
correct gyroscope drift. Validation was limited for free-living data (>1 hour), with
challenges in drift and alignment noted. The study reviewed 9 out of 33 papers to iden-
tify best practices, highlight challenges and define recommendations for IMU-based
shoulder motion tracking. Specifically, they suggest some IMU-based measurement
strategies that are less sensitive to experimental design and algorithm choices. Al-
though multiple sensors can provide more accurate measurements, they also increase
the sources of uncertainty. Key challenges identified include securing IMUs reliably,
defining sensor-to-segment alignments, computing IMU orientation, aligning measure-
ments in a common reference frame, and synchronizing multiple sensors. Cain et al.
made two recommendations for future researches.
Firstly, to utilize metrics that
contain as little uncertainty as possible.
Calculating metrics such as acceleration
magnitude, angular velocity magnitude, duration of movements based on raw data
carries the source of uncertainty. Specifically, sensor fixation and calibration if we
assume that the sensor is correctly equipped and we do not need to determine the ori-
entation. Lastly, minimum information in documentation of protocol and algorithm
choices.
• IMU hardware: sampling rate, bandwidth, sensor range, synchronization
method (if multiple sensors used)
• Sensor fixation: placement and attachment technique
• Raw data processing: filter types, parameters used for smoothing or drift
correction
• Orientation computation: algorithm type and assumptions
• Alignment method: movement types or calibration poses used to establish
sensor-to-segment relationships
• Joint angle calculation: methods of calculating joint angle
These recommendations provide valuable key information for proper documentation
and deliberate implementation.
Rigoni et al. [Rig+19] evaluated the use of a single IMU worn on the forearm
to measure shoulder flexion, abduction, and internal/external rotation (performed at
90◦shoulder abduction) in a sample of 30 healthy adults. Their algorithm fused data
from the gyroscope, accelerometer, and magnetometer to reduce common sensor er-
rors such as drift, though the sampling rate was not reported. The IMU measurements
were validated against a standard universal goniometer. Results showed excellent re-
liability with high intra-rater reliability (Intraclass Correlation Coeﬀicient (ICC) >
==PAGE:26==
14
2 Related Work
0.90) and narrow limits of agreement (Limits of Agreements (LOAs) < ±5◦), indicat-
ing consistency when the same tester conducted measurements. However, inter-rater
reliability was lower (Inter-rater reliability (IRR) = 0.71–0.89), underlining the need
for consistent test administration. The one IMU-based design suggests potential for
reuse and unsupervised use at home, although the study itself was conducted in a
clinical setting.
Chan et al. [Cha+22] evaluated shoulder range of motion using a single commercial
IMU placed on the forearm. The sensor operated at a sampling rate of 20 Hz, selected
as the optimal frequency to ensure smooth real-time visualization of a human avatar
in the Rebee-Rehab mobile application, without noticeable visual delays. The move-
ments assessed included flexion, extension, external rotation, and abduction, each up
to 90◦. Although the specific algorithm was not detailed, joint angles were estimated
using quaternion-based processing within the Rebee-Rehab software. Validation was
conducted against an OMC system using 19 healthy male participants. The results
showed mean biases within 8◦, with over 60% of the IMU-based measurements falling
within 10◦of the reference. Among the tested movements, extension had the highest
accuracy, while flexion and abduction showed greater deviation, likely due to the com-
bination of low sampling rate and higher range of motion. The system was designed
for remote rehabilitation, indicating good potential for home use. Its portable design
supports reusability, although the modularity of the hardware or software was not
explicitly addressed.
[Kas+23] Kaszyński et al. used two commercial IMU sensors (RSQ Motion), one
on the body and one on the upper arm or forearm (depends on movement) to measure
flexion, abduction, and internal/external rotation in healthy individuals. The IMUs
showed excellent validity for measuring internal and external shoulder rotation against
electronic goniometer. Flexion and abduction measurements demonstrated good cor-
relation but lacked acceptable agreement. However, both inter-rater and intra-rater
reliability were found to be good to excellent across different IMU placement posi-
tions. Hence it is a commercial device and supports motion tracking, analyzing data
on servers using machine learning algorithms, it implies the possibility for using IMUs
in real-world daily activities but also arises the unceartinity
[Mor+17] Morrow et al. validated a six-IMU setup (Opal sensors) on the head,
sternum, bilateral upper arms, and forearms to measure shoulder elevation, elbow
flexion, trunk, and neck movements during a surgical task in six participants. The
algorithm converted quaternion rotation matrices to Euler angles (YXY order) with
a 6 Hz Butterworth filter, processed via Motion Studio and MATLAB. Validation
against a motion capture system showed RMS errors of 6.8±2.7◦for shoulder elevation.
Although study reports acceptable accuracy of a commercially available IMU system
for measuring upper body kinematics, it is not suitable for reuse in home-environment
because of the high number of sensors included.
Höglund et al. [HGÖ21] employed seven IMUs on the sternum, scapula, upper arm,
and forearm to assess the importance of sensor placement in shoulder flexion/exten-
sion, abduction/adduction, internal/external rotation, and compound tasks.
The
algorithm used data fusion with angular conventions via MoLab software. Validation
==PAGE:27==
2.4 IMU-Based Implementations of Selected Tests
15
confirmed that sensor placement significantly impacts accuracy (p < 0.001). To min-
imize the impact of underlying muscle and skin movements, the following placement
of motion sensors are recommended: on the dorsal side, at the distal end of the fore-
arm, the upper arm sensor, laterally, on the distal part of the arm. Based on the
results from this study, certain single plane tasks such as shoulder flexion, extension,
abduction, adduction can be especially recommended for repeated clinical measure-
ments, since they are less affected by sensor placement. In shoulder internal-external
rotation sensor placement had a greater influence on the assessed angle, placement
should be well considered and documented to obtain accurate and reliable clinical
measurements.
This literature review highlights the following key findings on SROM measure-
ment:
• Single IMU Feasibility: A single IMU placed on the forearm or upper arm
can accurately track SROM metrics, offering a simpler alternative to multi-IMU
systems.
• Multiple IMU Accuracy: Most existing SROM measurement solutions use
multiple IMUs, achieving high accuracy but increasing system complexity.
• Calibration and Filtering: Calibration and filtering are essential to ensure
accurate and reliable SROM measurements.
• Validation Standards: Validation typically occurs in clinical or laboratory
settings using gold-standard tools like OMC systems or goniometers, though
goniometer measurements may be subjective due to practitioner variability.
Despite these advancements, current studies often lack comprehensive documen-
tation, hindering reproducibility, and rarely incorporate real-time feedback, limiting
practical applications. Future research should focus on developing modular, reusable
solutions to enhance the scalability and adaptability of SROM measurement systems.
Timed Up and Go (TUG)
The TUG test is widely used in a clinical setting to assess the walking ability and
balance of the patient. Healthcare professionals watch and time how long it takes to
stand up from a chair, walk 3 meters, turn around, walk back, and sit back down in the
chair the participant started. The time it takes to complete this exercise is related to
the risk of falling, the longer it takes, the higher the chance. Traditional observation-
based assessment relies on a single outcome measure (total time taken), which may
not accurately assess specific impairments, such as sit-to-stand, gait, turning, and
turn-to-sit. Using instrumented TUG, could record these segment times accurately
to more accurately assess the risk of each segment.
==PAGE:28==
16
2 Related Work
Instrumenting TUG test
Various studies show that instrumenting the TUG test can accurately capture the
exercise. Many of these studies use different IMU configurations, meaning different
numbers, types, and placements of sensors. IEEE article named iTUG, a Sensitive and
Reliable Measure of Mobility [Sal+10] used 5 sensors, one on each limb and one on the
trunk. These sensors captured small differences between the healthy control group
and early PD patients, which were not measurable with the previous observation-
based method. Paper by Ortega-Bastida et al. [Ort+19] shows that a single IMU
placed on the lower back of the patient showed correlation coeﬀicient of 0.9884 and a
mean error of 0.17 ± 0.13s for young subjects and a correlation coeﬀicient of 0.9878
and a mean error of 0.2 ± 0.22s for older adults. This article provides a detailed
description of the used data processing methods and solution used.
Smartphone-Based solutions
Specialized sensors for mobility assessment can be too expensive and hard to come
by for home use. Smartphones can provide a low-cost solution for data collection and
even for analyzing data on the phone, providing immediate results. Validation study
by Mellone et al.
[MTC12] shows that data collected by a specialized IMU sensor
for movement analysis, and IMU sensors in a smartphone shows excellent correlation,
meaning home assessment for these movement can be implemented by the patient’s
device.
Madhushri et al. [Mad+16b] introduced an Android-based mHealth Tool
Suite that includes an IMU-based TUG module. Their system segments the test into
key phases and computes timing metrics for each, confirming that a single lower-back
or chest-mounted IMU can reliably capture clinically relevant measures.
10-Meter Walk Test (10MWT)
Instrumenting 10MWT
Studies have highlighted that 10MWT gait parameters can be accurately measured
with IMU sensors. Corrà et al. [Cor+20] conducted a systematic review of studies,
highlighting sensor number, placement, measured gait parameters, and more. Studies
in the review shows that a single IMU placed on the trunk or lower limbs was effective
in extracting gait metrics, supporting their use in short-distance walk tests at home.
Kobsar et al. [Kob+20] conducted a systematic review and meta-analysis about IMU
based spatio-temporal gait parameters, including gait speed and step length, during
level walking. The review indicates good to excellent correlation between observation-
based and IMU based measurements.
==PAGE:29==
2.5 Summary and Gaps
17
2.5
Summary and Gaps
The literature confirms the feasibility of using IMUs for home-based mobility assess-
ment in STS, TUG, and gait tests. However, reusable and modular platforms remain
rare. Most existing implementations are study-specific and lack extensibility or in-
tegration with clinical workflows. SROM remains particularly underrepresented in
reusable digital tools, despite early evidence supporting IMU-based approaches. This
thesis addresses these gaps by contributing an open-source Flutter-based package
that supports structured testing, real-time feedback, and cross-sensor compatibility
for use in both clinical research and home environments.
==PAGE:30==
18
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 3
System analysis
This chapter outlines the analytical foundation for the mobility assessment system
developed in this thesis. It defines the scope, selected clinical tests, system require-
ments, and constraints that shaped the system architecture. Emphasis is placed on
feasibility for home-based use, minimal sensor setups, and protocols suitable for un-
supervised environments. These considerations directly inform the software design
presented in the next chapter (Chapter 4).
3.1
Selection Criteria
In Chapter 2 (Related work), a broader set of clinically established mobility tests
was reviewed. The tests implemented in this thesis were chosen through a structured
feasibility screening process. Tests needed to be short, viable to implement with a
limited sensor setup, and clinically meaningful.
The tests selected for implementation were required to meet the following inclusion
criteria:
• Clinical relevance, standardized protocols that requiring minimal supervision or
sensor repositioning
• Feasibility of execution in unsupervised home environments
• Compatibility with smartphone and IMU (Movesense) sensor
• Support in the literature, including reference values or validated implementa-
tions.
• Suitability within the available time, participant population, and project scope
Based on this analysis, four tests were selected for implementation: STS, TUG,
10MWT, and SROM. Other tests, although clinically relevant, were excluded due to
protocol complexity, equipment requirements, validation challenges, long test dura-
tion, or multiple sensor re-positioning requirements. Table 3.1 provides an overview
of this evaluation.
==PAGE:32==
20
3 System analysis
Table 3.1: Feasibility screening of candidate mobility tests.
Test
Reason for
Inclusion / Exclusion
Selected?
Sit-to-Stand
Simple protocol, well-validated,
easily instrumented with chest-
or thigh-mounted IMUs
Yes
Timed Up and Go
Short duration, supports IMU-
based segmentation and timing;
feasible for home use
Yes
10-Meter Walk Test
Widely
used,
adaptable
to
variable-length distances; strong
correlation with gait function
Yes
Shoulder Range of Motion
Can be measured with IMUs on
forearm/upper arm; valuable for
joint rehab
Yes
Resting Tremor Test
Discarded due to lack of access
to PD patients and diﬀiculty in
validating tremor detection in
healthy individuals under time
constraints
No
Six-Minute Walk Test
Too long for home-based use; lim-
ited by physical space; low signal
quality for shorter trials
No
Berg Balance Scale
Involves
14
diverse
subtests;
not feasible due to sensor re-
positioning, test time, and tasks
like object pickup from floor
No
3.2
Selected Tests
3.2.1
Sit-to-Stand (STS)
The STS test evaluates lower-limb strength, endurance, and functional independence.
Among its clinical variants, the five-time STS and the 30-second STS are most widely
used. While time-based tests are more precise, weaker individuals may be unable to
complete five repetitions. Therefore, the 30-second STS was selected, which quantifies
performance as the number of completed repetitions within the time window.
==PAGE:33==
3.2 Selected Tests
21
The primary calculated metric is the total number of sit-to-stand repetitions
within the 30-second test duration.
The test supports two measurement modes. The first uses a smartphone secured
on the top of the thigh to record gyroscope data along the X-axis.
The second
uses a Movesense IMU mounted on the chest via strap, using gravity-compensated
accelerometer Y-axis data. In both modes, signal peaks and troughs are detected
using adaptive thresholds derived from local signal maxima and minima (typically
60–70%). These are paired to determine repetition cycles in post-processing.
This approach is suited for home-based execution, allowing the user to select their
preferred mode. To improve consistency, a 3-second countdown is shown prior to test
initiation. The protocol is designed to be repeatable, easy to execute, and compatible
with both real-time and post-analysis feedback.
3.2.2
Shoulder Range of Motion (SROM)
SROM measures upper-limb flexibility and joint health, often in rehabilitation after
musculoskeletal injuries or surgeries. This thesis implements five active, unilateral
shoulder movements: flexion, extension, abduction, internal rotation, and external
rotation. Adduction was excluded as abduction implicitly captures this range and
adduction is less emphasized clinically.
The primary calculated metric for each movement is the maximum angular dis-
placement in degrees.
Flexion, extension, and abduction are measured using a single IMU mounted on
the lateral distal upper arm. Internal and external rotation are measured with the
IMU placed on the forearm, near the elbow, with the shoulder abducted to 90◦.
The maximum angular displacement is estimated using integrated gyroscope data.
Acceptable RMS error thresholds are <5◦for short-range movements (e.g., internal
rotation) and <10◦for high-range movements (e.g., flexion).
This test is suitable to execute in small indoor environments, requiring no ad-
ditional hardware and maintaining a single-sensor configuration for simplicity. The
setup was chosen to be extensible and compatible with clinical use.
3.2.3
Timed up and go
The TUG test is a clinically validated assessment used to measure functional mobility,
balance, and risk of falling. It has become standardized due to its simplicity and
reliability. It evaluates a wide range of functional movements, including standing up,
walking, turning, and sitting down. These tasks are fundamental in everyday life and
are commonly affected by neurological or physical disorders.
The test can be divided into 5 sections:
• Stand up
• Walk 3 meters
==PAGE:34==
22
3 System analysis
• Turn around
• Walk back to the chair
• Sit down
In a clinical setting, the total time taken in these sections is measured with a
stopwatch. The time it takes to complete the exercise can indicate the participant’s
current capabilities.
• In under 10 seconds: Normal adult condition
• More than 12 seconds: Potential risk of falling in older adults
• More than 20 seconds: Significant mobility impairment
The exercise is measured with the IMU mounted on the participant’s chest. The
detection of sections in the test uses different sensors. Standing up and sitting down
uses the accelerometer to detect Y-axis movement, and rotation uses the gyroscope
data. The test is suitable for a home environment, requiring minimal setup and two
external items. The participant or their helper needs to measure out 3 meters and
place a chair and a marker object 3 meters apart.
3.2.4
Walk test
The 10MWT is a widely used, standardized assessment tool designed to evaluate
walking speed, which is a key indicator of functional mobility, physical performance,
and overall health status. Originally developed for clinical use in patients with neu-
rological or musculoskeletal impairments, it has become a benchmark test in both
research and rehabilitation contexts. The test can be divided into 3 sections:
• 2 meters: Starting and speeding up for the walk test
• 6 meters: Measured section
• 2 meters: Slowing down and stopping
In a clinical setting, the time of the 6 meters in the middle is measured with a
stopwatch, and then the walk speed is calculated with the standard velocity formula.
Gait Speed (m/s) = Distance (meters)
Time (seconds)
In the package 10MWT was modified, based on advice from clinicians 10MWT
was changed to a variable step walk test, as accurately measuring distance with IMUs
proved inaccurate. Detecting steps is much easier and precise, this solution can give
a new objective benchmark for walking tests. The new test has an x value that is
equal to the number of steps the participant has to take for the test. The x value is
==PAGE:35==
3.3 System Requirements
23
divided into 3 sections, just like the original 10MWT. The first 20% is the speed-up
part, the middle 60% is the measured part, and the last 20% is the slowing-down and
stopping part. Converting this new metric back to gait speed can be done manually
if needed, by measuring the step length of the participant and using this formula:
Gait Speed (m/s) = Step Length (meter) * (0.6 * Number of steps))
Time (seconds)
IMU sensor is placed on the trunk of the user and using the Y-axis of the sensor’s
accelerometer to capture signal peaks in the data real time.
3.3
System Requirements
The following requirements define the functional and non-functional aspects of the
mobility assessment system.
They are derived from the analysis of selected tests,
intended use in home environments, and integration with the CARP Research Pack-
age. These requirements serve as the foundation for the software architecture and
implementation described in the following chapters.
Functional Requirements
The system must:
FR1 Support execution of mobility assessments using smartphone or wearable IMU
sensors
FR2 Implement mobility tests based on standardized, clinically validated protocols
FR3 Automatically collect and process raw sensor data to derive test-specific clinical
metrics (e.g., repetitions, duration, joint angles)
FR4 Provide real-time feedback where applicable (e.g., live angle display, count-
down timers)
FR5 Present preparations, instructions and results in an interpretable format for
users
FR6 Integrate with the CARP Research Package for data management and study
orchestration
Non-Functional Requirements
The system should:
NFR1 Be reusable, modular, and extensible as an open-source Flutter package to
support future research and development
==PAGE:36==
24
3 System analysis
NFR2 Operate reliably on both Android and iOS platforms
NFR3 Minimize user interaction to enable unsupervised, home-based use
NFR4 Provide a user-friendly and intuitive interface to support unsupervised use
and correct test execution
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 4
Design
This chapter presents the high-level design of the mobility assessment system, in-
cluding system architecture, test workflows, user interface considerations, and data
processing strategies. The design focuses on modularity, reusability, and suitability
for both clinical and unsupervised home use.
4.1
User Interface and Interaction Design
This section describes how the UI was shaped using Figma [Fig24] prototypes with
input from clinicians and usability insights. Special attention was paid to older adult
users and unsupervised use.
Before designing the UI, we followed the UCD [HP18] and created a Lean Canvas
and User Story Map to explore the core value, and needs of the proposed solution.
Although the project is research-oriented rather than commercial, these methods
helped shape the mobility package from a usability and adoption standpoint. These
artifacts are presented in Appendices B.1 and B.2.
The high-fidelity UI prototype was developed using Figma and follows the CARP
design style to ensure consistent user-friendly integration with CARP-based research
studies. The design emphasizes simplicity, clarity, and minimal user interaction for
better UX. These are essential principles for supporting older adults and individuals
in unsupervised environments. It is diﬀicult to find the balance between simplicity
and adequate information for correct and structured test execution.
Each mobility test follows a standardized and repeatable structure designed to
minimize confusion and ensure accurate execution. This structured lifecycle is illus-
trated in Figure 4.1.
Figure 4.1: Standardized test lifecycle used across mobility assessments.
The first phase, Introduction, provides a concise explanation of the test’s clinical
purpose and overall procedure. This is followed by the Preparation phase, which
informs the user about any equipment requirements (such as a chair) and how to
==PAGE:38==
26
4 Design
position themselves correctly. Next, the Instruction phase gives step-by-step guid-
ance on how to perform the test, tailored to the movement being assessed. The test
then transitions into the Execution phase, which begins with a 3-second countdown
to help the user prepare and ensure consistent timing. During the test, real-time
feedback is provided where applicable. Finally, in the Result Presentation phase,
the system displays test metrics such as duration, number of repetitions, or maxi-
mum joint angle in an easily interpretable format. This structured flow is applied
consistently across all mobility tests to improve usability and standardization.
Figure 4.2: User interface for the preparation and instructions phase of STS test.
During informal testing, we received valuable feedback from five test participants
and two clinical supervisors. One insight was that in the STS test, it is more important
to consistently use the same chair across sessions than to record the exact chair
height. Furthermore, one of the main usability gaps identified was the absence of
clear guidance for sensor placement. Clinicians emphasized that for elderly individuals
or people with neurological impairments, visual illustrations (images or videos) are
essential to reduce cognitive load and ensure correct test execution. While we did
not iterate on the Figma prototype due to time constraints and the technical focus of
the thesis, these recommendations were implemented directly in the application. As
a result, the deployed version includes visual aids and detailed setup instructions to
improve test accuracy and user confidence.
==PAGE:39==
4.2 System Architecture
27
Figure 4.3: User interface for the execution and feedback phase of the STS test.
See all the designed UI screens in Appendix B.1
4.2
System Architecture
The mobility assessment system is designed as a modular, layered architecture to sup-
port reusability, test extensibility, and separation of concerns. Figure 4.4 illustrates
the component structure, which reflects key software responsibilities and interaction
boundaries.
Presentation Layer
The topmost layer is responsible for enabling interaction with the user by presenting
the UI, implemented using Flutter widgets. Each mobility test is divided into five
screens: Introduction, Preparation, Instruction, Test Execution, and Result
Presentation. These screens provide test-specific guidance and feedback to ensure
clarity during test execution. This structure is applied consistently across tests such
as STS, SROM, TUG, and Walk Test (WT).
==PAGE:40==
28
4 Design
Figure 4.4: System architecture: layered component view.
Domain Layer
This layer is responsible for bridging the sensing and presentation layers through
integration of CARP Research Package. It defines the core data models and busi-
ness logic of the system. The Configs, Measures, and Results are data models.
Configs defines the parameters for sensor setup such as sampling rate, specific sensor
type (e.g. gyroscope). Measures describes test specific information (e.g., duration).
Results are responsible for storing the custom test outcomes (e.g., repetition, du-
ration, angle). Tasks’ purpose is to orchestrate the overall test flow by organizing
individual Steps. Each step is tied to a UI screen from the Presentation Layer,
maintaining consistency and modularity across the test lifecycle.
Sensing Layer
The sensing layer is responsible for establishing sensor connection, collecting, prepar-
ing, and processing sensor data.
Sensors provide abstractions for both built-in
==PAGE:41==
4.3 Algorithm and Signal Processing Design
29
smartphone- and external-IMUs, enabling extensibility for future sensor types. The
Probe provides a general structure for handling sensor subscriptions, data buffering
and coordination of raw data collection. Processors includes custom components
for implementing signal processing methods and detection or calculation algorithms.
Each test defines a specific processor pipeline and sensor configuration. The pro-
cessor receives sensor data and produces relevant metrics through test-specific algo-
rithms.
CARP Research Package Integration
The system builds upon the CARP Research Package, which provides a structured
task-and-step framework for orchestrating digital health assessments. In our archi-
tecture, Tasks and Steps from the Domain Layer are extending corresponding CARP
components such as RPNavigableOrderedTask, RPInstructionStep, and RPActivityStep.
Test results are stored in test-specific classes that extend RPActivityResult, ensuring
compatibility with CARP’s JavaScript Object Notation (JSON)-based export model.
By conforming to the CARP ecosystem, the mobility package can be seamlessly in-
tegrated into CARP-compatible studies and reused as a plugin module across broader
mHealth research projects.
4.3
Algorithm and Signal Processing Design
The mobility package applies lightweight signal processing to extract clinically rele-
vant metrics from raw IMU data. All computation runs on the phone, supporting
immediate feedback and offline usability.
All motion data in this thesis follow a consistent three-axis coordinate system:
• X-axis: Points horizontally to the right (associated with roll).
• Y-axis: Points vertically upward (associated with pitch).
• Z-axis: Points outward from the device’s screen or logo face (associated with
yaw).
For rotational motion, angular velocity is measured by the gyroscope along these
axes. The direction of rotation is defined using the right-hand rule, where a rotation
is considered positive if it follows the curl of the fingers when the thumb of the right
hand points in the positive direction of the axis.
These axis conventions apply to both smartphone and wearable IMU configura-
tions and are used consistently throughout the processing algorithms in this chapter.
==PAGE:42==
30
4 Design
4.3.1
Sit-to-Stand (STS)
The 30-second STS test measures how many sit-to-stand cycles the user completes.
In Smartphone mode, gyroscope data along the X-axis is collected from a phone
secured to the thigh. In Movesense mode, gravity-compensated accelerometer data
along the Y-axis is used from a chest mounted sensor.
Despite the difference in
orientation and placement, both configurations follow a common signal processing
workflow: smoothing, adaptive peak-trough detection, and repetition counting.
Repetition Detection Algorithm:
1. Collect motion data from the relevant sensor (gyroscope or accelerometer)
2. Apply a moving average smoothing filter to reduce high-frequency noise
3. Compute the signal’s minimum and maximum to determine dynamic range
4. Define adaptive peak and trough thresholds relative to the signal range
5. Detect peaks and troughs that exceed these thresholds
6. Pair peak–trough–peak segments to define one cycle
7. Count valid cycles as repetitions
4.3.2
Shoulder Range of Motion (SROM)
The SROM test measures maximum joint angles across five active shoulder move-
ments: flexion, extension, abduction, internal rotation, and external rotation. The
test is supported with external IMU (Movesense). Each subtest uses a different axis
or combination of axes, but all follow the same structure: calibration, movement
phase detection and angle estimation.
All SROM algorithms are implemented using strategy design pattern [Ref24], al-
lowing each movement to define its own detection logic and angle computation based
on expected movement axes. This modular approach enables flexibility and reduces
duplication.
Maximum Angle Calculation Algorithm:
1. Calibration: use the initial seconds of the recording (neutral pose) to estimate
gyroscope bias (static calibration phase)
2. Discard pre-calibration samples, use only the post-calibration segment for anal-
ysis
3. Apply movement-specific detection logic (threshold-based movement detection
and forward checking) to isolate the active phase of the motion
==PAGE:43==
4.3 Algorithm and Signal Processing Design
31
4. Integrate corrected gyroscope signals over time to estimate the total angular
displacement
5. Return the final range of motion in degrees
Movement-Specific Strategies:
• Abduction: Calculate resultant vector of all three axes (X, Y, Z) and integrate
it to estimate total angle
• Flexion/Extension: Integrate the resultant angular velocity vector of X and
Z axes
• Internal/External Rotation: Integrate the X-axis (forearm rotation with
arm abducted)
4.3.3
Timed up and go (TUG)
TUG test detects key events during the exercise and measures the time of each section.
The test supports smartphones as well as Movesense devices.
The algorithm and
logic behind the detection is the same for both cases. Before the exercise, there is a
calibration step, measuring a complete rotation. This is then used to determine a half
rotation during the test. The test is using a state machine type solution where each
state is a section from the exercise, and the condition for transition is successfully
detecting the actual section’s end.
Sit down
detected
Half turn
detected
Stand up
detected
End
Sit down
Turn
Stand Up
Turn
Half turn
detected
Timed-Up and Go
State Machine
else / wait 1s
else / wait 1s
else / wait 1s
Figure 4.5: TUG state machine.
==PAGE:44==
32
4 Design
Stand-up and sit-down algorithm:
1. Collect accelerometer data
2. Apply smoothing filter
3. Detect peaks in the vertical direction where the peak is higher than a threshold
4. In case of sit-down detection, make sure there are no more peaks after the last
peak. This is to make sure the vertical movement was not a step, but a sitting
down, followed by a resting period.
Turn detection
1. Collect gyroscope data
2. Integrate gyroscope data over time on the vertical axis
3. When the integrated area under/over the graph exceeds the threshold value
turn is detected. The threshold value is half the calibrated value minus a pre-
determined delta, to make sure sensor inaccuracy doesn’t prevent detection.
For all of the sections except sitting down, the analyzed data timestamp must be
after the previous section’s end timestamp. For sitting down it is possible that during
the turn the participant started lowering their body, so sitting down detection must
be calculated from the turn start instead of the end.
4.3.4
Walk test (WT)
Walk test measures the time it takes for the participant to take a predetermined
number of steps. Accelerometer data collected in the Y-axis from the smartphone or
the Movesense device, making sure the gravity is counteracted and a smoothing filter
is appied. After that a simple peak detection is ran on the data with a cooldown
period where smaller peaks are ignored.
Step detection
1. Collect accelerometer data on the Y-axis
2. Apply a smoothing filter to the correct sample rate.
3. Detect peaks with a simple local maxima algorithm where the peak is larger
than a threshold
4. Ignore other peaks for a delta ”cooldown” period
==PAGE:45==
4.4 Configuration and Extensibility
33
4.4
Configuration and Extensibility
The CARP Mobility Package is built with flexibility and configurability in mind,
making it easy for developers to use it in different use cases.
One example of this is how the package allows mobility tests to be configured with
metadata. For example, in the STS and SROM tests, the test duration can be ad-
justed using the duration property in the corresponding measure classes (StsMeasure,
SromMeasure). In the WT, the number of steps to be taken is set using the numberOf-
Steps field in the WTMeasure class. Detection thresholds, such as those used for iden-
tifying movement events or peaks, can also be configured. These settings are exposed
through classes like StsRealtimeProgressTracker and the SROM strategy classes,
where developers can either pass parameters directly into constructors or use config-
uration classes.
Adding new tests can easily be done. All tests extend a base class called Mobility-
Step, which defines the ordered steps for the test’s lifecycle. Each test also has a dedi-
cated configuration class (e.g. StsConfig), which extends the abstract MobilityCon-
fig base class. When implementing a new test, one simply needs to create a new con-
figuration class following this structure, which helps maintain consistency throughout
the codebase.
After creating the sensor configuration and the measure classes, the result class
(e.g. StsResult) needs to created next. A result class defines what kind of data
is created and returned to the user after a test is completed. It needs to be json
serializable to comply with the CARP Research Package.
A result and configuration class is needed to create a processor class. The processor
is responsible to process the data and return a result, based on the provided sensor
data. Processor functions are called from instances and extensions of MobiltyStep
classes. Each MobiltyStep needs to implement an execute function that starts the
analysis. After all of this the UI classes can be created.
The user interfaces for each test follow the same modular approach. Classes like
StsTestStepUI and WTTestStepUI can be reused or just used as an example when
creating new Widgets. This ensures that users have a consistent experience, even as
new tests are added.
UI classes are used in their relevant step classes. These step classes can be ex-
tensions of MobiltyStep or other step classes from CARP Research Package. These
step classes are used in child class of RPNavigableOrderedTask.
The common Sensor interface and the MobilityProbe abstraction make it pos-
sible to run tests using either a phone’s built-in sensors or external devices like
Movesense. The location of each sensor is also configurable through the configuration
classes, using an enum called SensorLocation. Adding new sensor type consist of
creating a new sensor class that implements Sensor interface. The sensor class should
be able to start and stop the different types of sensors (e.g. accelerometer, gyroscope,
magnetometer) and return a stream of SensorEvents. This makes it easy to switch
between sensor types or positions, depending on the requirements of a particular test.
==PAGE:46==
34
4 Design
4.5
Chapter Summary
This chapter outlines the design of a mobility assessment system developed to be
modular, sensor-agnostic, and easy to use.
The system was designed with home
environments in mind, supports real-time feedback, and can be extended with new
tests or features when needed.
The user interface design was shaped through a user-centered design process,
using feedback from clinicians and test users throughout development. All tests fol-
low a five-phase structure ( Introduction, Preparation, Instruction, Execution, and
Results) to keep the experience consistent across different test types. This structure
also helps to make the system more accessible, especially for older adults and peo-
ple using it without supervision. Visual instructions and setup guidance were added
based on clinical input, with the aim of reducing confusion and improving test quality.
The system architecture follows a three-layer design. The Presentation Layer
includes the Flutter-based interface; the Domain Layer handles data models and busi-
ness logic, using CARP; and the Sensing Layer manages sensor input and processing.
This structure helps to keep different parts of the system separate, which makes the
code easier to maintain and extend. The integration with the CARP Research Pack-
age also ensures that the system can fit into existing mHealth ecosystems and export
data in a standard JSON format.
The signal processing algorithms run directly on the phone, which makes the
system usable without internet access and allows it to give feedback right away. Each
test uses its own algorithm: STS uses adaptive peak-trough detection to count repeti-
tions, SROM uses gyroscope data and angle calculations, TUG uses a state-machine
approach to detect phases, and WT uses simple peak detection with cooldowns for
counting steps. All of these algorithms use the same three-axis coordinate system
and are designed to work across different sensors and placements.
Finally, the configuration and extension capabilities allow developers to adjust
parameters like test duration or thresholds and to add new tests by extending a shared
base class. The system is built around shared sensor interfaces, so it can work with
both phone sensors and external devices like Movesense.
The next chapter will walk through the implementation in Flutter and Dart.
==PAGE:47==
CHAPTER 5
Implementation
This chapter presents the implementation of the mobility assessment system based on
the design presented in Chapter 4. It describes the code structure, sensor integration,
test logic, user interface realization, and the final publishing process. Implementation
was done in Flutter/Dart with a modular architecture for extensibility and real-world
usability.
5.1
Project Structure Overview
The codebase follows a modular structure with separate folders for sensing, domain
logic, and user interface components.
Each mobility test (e.g., SROM, TUG) is
implemented by extending shared abstract base classes located in the domain layer,
including MobilityConfig, MobilityMeasure, MobilityResult, and MobilityStep.
The MobilityStep class is a generic abstraction that enforces consistent test structure
by requiring a matching MobilityMeasure and MobilityResult, ensuring that each
test defines its test specific data and result types explicitly.
The sensing layer includes device abstraction in sensors, real-time data collec-
tion in probes, and test-specific signal processing logic in processors. Each processor
(e.g., StsProcessor) implements test-specific filtering and event detection algorithms.
User interface components are grouped by test under ui/steps, following the
standardized lifecycle structure (Figure 4.1). Screens such as preparation, instruction,
test execution, and result presentation are implemented as reusable widgets. Shared
UI elements are located in ui/widgets for consistency across tests.
The overall architecture supports the addition of new mobility assessments by
subclassing the base abstractions and implementing corresponding steps, processors,
and UI screens. The project’s folder structure is shown in Appendix C.1.
5.2
Sensor Integration
Smartphone sensor integration
For smartphone integration the Mobility Package is using sensor_plus package. The
sensor_plus exposes events for the different sensors, and an easily usable Application
==PAGE:48==
36
5 Implementation
Programming Interface (API) for subscribing to these events as streams. The package
works for both Android and iOS devices. These events are then converted to the Mo-
bility Package’s own SensorEvent implementation for cross-compatibility purposes
between different IMU types. AccelerometerEvent and MagnetometerEvent can be
converted to SensorEvent directly without modification, but for the GyroscopeEvent,
the x, y, and z values need to be converted from radians to degrees for easier calcu-
lation later.
Movesense integration
For Movesense integration, the package is using mds_flutter package. This provides
an API to scan for devices, connect to them, perform HTTP API calls, and subscribe
to event streams. The MovesenseSensor implementation requires a prior connection
to a Movesense device to subscribe to different events. Subscribing to events is done
by using the MdsAsync subscribe functions and listening to them for data. When
data is received, parsing is needed to get the data out of the response body. A single
response body contains a plethora of sensor events, so iterating through them and
saving them is required. Movesense doesn’t provide a timestamp for every sensor
event, only for the first one in a batch, so the approximate timestamp for events is
calculated by calculating a time delta that is the expected sampling rate converted
to milliseconds. This time delta is multiplied by the index of the current sensor data
and added to the provided timestamp in the response body. This gives an acceptable
approximation for each of the sensor events. For the sensor data, there is no need for
any modification, as the gyroscope data is already in degrees per second.
Common interface for sensor abstraction
As previously mentioned, a common abstraction is provided for sensors and sen-
sor events.
Sensor abstract interface provides methods for starting and stopping
the streams of different types of data. All sensors need to implement this interface.
SensorEvent is a common data structure to encapsulate the sensor events from dif-
ferent sensors and devices. It contains the 3-axis values and a timestamp of the event.
Using these common interfaces helps the processors to analyze the data without know-
ing where it came from.
Sampling rates and limitations
The sensors_plus package allows the user to freely specify the sampling rate needed.
It can be done by providing a Duration sampling period argument when subscribing
to the event stream. The package provides predefined constants in the SensorInterval
class. These values are uiInterval, normalInterval, gameInterval, and fastest-
Interval (66.667ms, 200ms, 20ms and 0ms respectively). When the argument is not
==PAGE:49==
5.3 Mobility Test Implementation
37
provided, normalInterval is used. On Android sampling rate is not guaranteed and
is only used as a hint for the OS.
Movesense devices have more limitations on their sampling rates.
One of the
predefined values must be used, or the subscription request will throw an error. These
sampling rates are:
• 13 Hz (76.92 ms)
• 26 Hz (38.46 ms)
• 52 Hz (19.23 ms)
• 104 Hz (9.62 ms)
• 208 Hz (4.81 ms)
• 416 Hz (2.40 ms)
• 833 Hz (1.20 ms)
• 1666 Hz (0.60 ms)
5.3
Mobility Test Implementation
5.3.1
General Test Structure and CARP Integration
Each mobility test is implemented as a custom task extending RPNavigableOrderedTask,
responsible for defining the test steps and orchestrating the test lifecycle. These steps
include sensor selection, preparation, test execution, and result presentation.
The Introduction step is an instance of RPInstructionStep. The tests define
their own Preparation and Instruction steps by extending RPInstructionStep.
These steps are responsible for defining the structure and content of test guidance,
such as sensor placement instructions or execution tips.
The CARP Research Package does not support dynamic updating of step con-
tent after user input (e.g., sensor selection). To overcome this, a custom subscrip-
tion mechanism was implemented within each test task with sensor selection (e.g.,
StsTask, TugTask). These tasks subscribe to the result stream of the step identified
as sensor_selection. When the selected sensor type is detected, the corresponding
test and preparation steps are manually updated to reflect the appropriate configura-
tion and visuals (such as sensor placement guidance).
This logic is handled through a singleton object called blocTask, which handles
communication between RPUITask and the individual RPStep components.
==PAGE:50==
38
5 Implementation
1
void subscribeToSensorSelectionStep() {
2
blocTask.stepResult.listen((RPResult result) {
3
if (result.identifier == 'sensor_selection') {
4
if (result is RPStepResult) {
5
final List<RPChoice >? answerList =
6
result.results['answer'] as List<RPChoice >?;
7
final answer = answerList?.first.value;
8
if (answer != null) {
9
_selectedSensor = (answer == 0) ? 'movesense' : 'smartphone';
10
_updateStsTestStep();
11
_updateStsPreparationStep();
12
}
13
}
14
}
15
});
16
}
Listing 5.1: Listening to sensor selection and updating test configuration.
Each test’s execution step extends the abstract MobilityStep class, which in-
herits from RPActivityStep. This class enforces type constraints through generics
and ensures each step includes its corresponding classes extending MobilityMeasure,
MobilityConfig, and MobilityResult. The result classes (e.g., StsResult) extend
MobilityResult, which itself extends RPActivityResult, ensuring full compatibility
with CARP’s result serialization.
Upon completion of the test, result steps (subclasses of RPCompletionStep) re-
trieve results using the blocTask.lastTaskResult object:
1
StsResult? getTestResult() {
2
final result = blocTask.lastTaskResult?.results['sts_test'] as RPActivityResult?;
3
if (result != null) {
4
for (var stepResult in result.results.values) {
5
if (stepResult is StsResult) {
6
return stepResult;
7
}
8
}
9
return null;
10
} else {
11
if (kDebugMode) {
12
print('[StsResultStep]: blocTask.lastTaskResult is null or key missing.');
13
}
14
return null;
15
}
16
}
Listing 5.2: Retrieving results for display in the result screen.
This solution provides a flexible and modular way to adapt the test flow based on
runtime user input while remaining compliant with the CARP framework.
5.3.2
Sit-to-Stand (STS)
The STS test is implemented by extending the MobilityStep abstract class into
a concrete StsTestStep. This execution step manages the data collection, the real-
time user feedback, and delegates post-processing to the corresponding StsProcessor.
==PAGE:51==
5.3 Mobility Test Implementation
39
When the test starts, the probe is initialized and begins collecting motion data (sam-
pling rate at 104Hz) from the configured sensor. Simultaneously, the probe streams
accelerometer readings for real-time visual feedback. The system records data for
the defined duration (30 seconds now) and then stops the sensor and hands over the
collected data to the processor.
Figure 5.1: Sequence diagram for STS test execution logic.
The StsProcessor is responsible for computing the number of completed sit-
to-stand repetitions using the logic described in Section 4.3.1. The processor first
filters the raw sensor data using a moving average filter, and then computes the
minimum and maximum values of the relevant axis to determine the signal’s dynamic
range. Thresholds for peak and trough detection are calculated relative to this range,
typically using 60–75% margins to account for natural variation in amplitude across
users and sessions.
The core detection algorithm is implemented in the detectCycles function. It
identifies valid peak–trough–peak segments within the smoothed signal using a time-
based debounce filter to avoid false positives.
==PAGE:52==
40
5 Implementation
1 List<Cycle> detectCycles(...){
2
for (int i = 0; i < peaks.length - 1; i++) {
3
int peak1 = peaks[i];
4
int peak2 = peaks[i + 1];
5
final validTroughs = troughs.where((t) => t > peak1 && t < peak2).toList
();
6
if (validTroughs.isNotEmpty) {
7
int troughBetween = validTroughs.first;
8
double durationSec = timestamps[peak2]
9
.difference(timestamps[peak1])
10
.inMilliseconds / 1000;
11
if (durationSec >= minCycleDuration) {
12
final events = filteredAcc.sublist(peak1, peak2 + 1);
13
cycles.add(Cycle(peak1, peak2, events));
14
}
15
}
16
}
17
...
18 }
Listing 5.3: Core of the cycle detection logic.
A cycle is considered valid if the sequence meets a minimum time duration (e.g., 0.3
seconds), which filters out noise and unintended short movements. The algorithm
also handles the edge case of detecting a final incomplete cycle (user only stood up)
when the test duration ends.
Depending on the sensor configuration, the processor uses one of two methods. If
the Movesense sensor is placed on the chest, the countStsCyclesChest function pro-
cesses gravity-compensated Y-axis accelerometer data. If the smartphone is attached
to the thigh, then countStsCyclesThigh is used, which relies on X-axis gyroscope
data. Both methods follow the same algorithmic structure but operate on different
sensor modalities and orientations.
After detecting all valid cycles, the processor constructs a StsResult, which in-
cludes the total number of detected repetitions and the duration of each cycle in
seconds. This result object is then returned to the test step and passed to the Re-
search Package result pipeline through blocTask integration, allowing the result to
be displayed in the Result Presentation step.
5.3.3
Shoulder Range of Motion (SROM)
The SROM test is composed of five subtests: flexion, extension, abduction, internal
rotation, and external rotation. Each designed to estimate the maximum angular dis-
placement of the shoulder joint. All subtests are performed using the Movesense sen-
sor mounted on the upper arm or forearm. The implementation follows a modular ar-
chitecture (similar to the STS test), using a dedicated test step class (SromTestStep)
that inherits from MobilityStep.
==PAGE:53==
5.3 Mobility Test Implementation
41
Figure 5.2: Sequence diagram for SROM test execution logic.
The execute() method of the test step starts the sensor probe, waits for the
configured test duration, and then passes the collected data to the SromProcessor.
The core computation pipeline follows the algorithm described in Section 4.3.2. First,
the processor performs calibration using the neutral pose phase to determine the
gyroscope bias. Then, it applies subtest-specific movement detection logic to isolate
the active movement phase and calculates the total angle of rotation by integrating
the corrected angular velocity. Here, corrected means the measured angular velocity
with the baseline gyroscope bias (estimated drift) subtracted.
To support multiple movement types without duplicating logic, the SromProcessor
delegates all test-specific computations to objects implementing the SromMovement-
Strategy interface. Each strategy defines its own detection and angle computation
logic. This follows the Strategy design pattern (see Figure 5.3, promoting code mod-
ularity and easier maintenance).
==PAGE:54==
42
5 Implementation
Figure 5.3: UML class diagram: Strategy design pattern used in SROM implemen-
tation.
For example, in the ExtensionStrategy, motion detection is implemented using
threshold-based logic with forward checking on the Z-axis, and angular displacement
is computed using the resultant vector of X and Z axes. The strategy also estimates
the direction of motion to determine the active arm side (left/right) based on the net
angular velocity around the main movement axis.
Example: Resultant Angle Computation (Extension Strategy)
1
double _computeExtensionAngleResultantXZ(...) {
2
double angle = 0.0;
3
for (int i = 1; i < gyroData.length; i++) {
4
final dt = (gyroData[i].timestamp.difference(gyroData[i -
1].timestamp)).inMilliseconds / 1000.0;
5
final correctedX = gyroData[i].x - gyroXBias;
6
final correctedZ = gyroData[i].z - gyroZBias;
7
final resultant = sqrt(correctedX * correctedX + correctedZ * correctedZ);
8
angle += resultant * dt;
9
}
10
return angle;
11
}
Listing 5.4: Angle calculation using the X-Z angular velocity components.
5.3.4
Timed Up and Go (TUG)
The TUG test is designed to work with both smartphone and Movesense devices, with
both sensor types using the same strategy. The test implementation follows the same
modular approach as other tests, extending the MobilityStep abstract class. When
the execute method is called, the test step starts the probe to collect accelerometer
and gyroscope data, and waits one second to check the data for standing up detection.
If not detected, it waits another second and checks again. If standing up is detected,
==PAGE:55==
5.3 Mobility Test Implementation
43
the system starts integrating the gyroscope data to determine if a half-rotation is
completed; if not, it waits one second. After the first half-rotation, the system checks
for another one the same way as before. Lastly, the sitting down detection uses a
similar approach to the standing up detection. Each event, except for the sitting
down, needs to be after the end of the previous section, and for sitting down, the
start time to check is the start of the second turn.
step: TugTestStep
execute()
probe:
MobilityProbe
processor:
TUGProcessor
TugResult
PerfomTUG()
start()
detectStandUp()
standUpIndex
detectTurn()
turning
sitDownIndex
detectSitDown()
turning
detectTurn()
loop
loop
tug Timed up and Go test execution
loop
loop
[ standUpIndex == -1 ]
[ turning.startIndex == -1
&&
turning.endIndex == -1 ]
[ sitDownIndex == -1 ]
[ turning.startIndex == -1
&&
turning.endIndex == -1 ]
TugResult
Figure 5.4: TUG sequence diagram.
5.3.5
Walk Test (WT)
The WT test is also designed to work with both smartphone and Movesense devices,
with a shared calculation logic.
==PAGE:56==
44
5 Implementation
step: WTTestStep
WtResult
performWT()
probe:
MobilityProbe
processor:
WtProcessor
execute()
start()
getStepCount(dataFromProbe)
stepCount
   wt Walk test execution
loop
[ stepCount < 15 ]
processData(dataFromProbe)
WtResult
WtResult
Figure 5.5: Walk test sequence graph.
Calling the execute method starts the probe to collect accelerometer data, and
sends it to the WtProcessor to detect the number of steps with a basic peak detection.
Before peak detection, the data is fed through a moving average window smoothing
algorithm to remove the noise from the data. Peak detection is achieved by iterating
through the data and comparing the previous and next data points with the data
point in the current iteration, and if the previous and the next points are smaller
than the current, it is a peak. A peak is only accepted as a step if it is higher than a
threshold and there was no previous step in a 300-ms period.
5.4
User Interface Realization
5.4.1
General UI Workflow
All mobility tests follow a consistent five-screen user interface flow: Introduction,
Preparation, Instruction, Test Execution, and Result Presentation (Figure 4.1).
==PAGE:57==
5.4 User Interface Realization
45
Each test has its own dedicated UI screens for the preparation, instruction, and
execution phases, tailored to the test protocol and sensor setup. Despite test-specific
content, the structure remains consistent across all tests, ensuring a familiar user
experience.
The execution screen of each test is implemented as a Flutter widget that handles
test progress, user feedback, and result submission. All test execution widgets im-
plement the CanSaveResult interface defined in the CARP Research Package. This
interface requires the implementation of a createAndSendResult function, which is
called after the test finishes to submit the result to the shared pipeline. See example
implementation in Code 5.5.
1
@override
2
void createAndSendResult() {
3
if (stsResult != null) {
4
blocTask.sendStepResult(stsResult!);
5
widget.onResultChange(stsResult);
6
}
7
}
Listing 5.5: Example implementation of the createAndSendResult function.
Shared user interface components such as countdown timers, sensor placement
illustrations, and real-time progress indicators are reused across tests.
This unified and modular UI structure ensures visual consistency and provides an
intuitive experience for users.
==PAGE:58==
46
5 Implementation
5.4.2
Test-Specific UI Screens
Sit-to-Stand (STS)
Figure 5.6: STS test-specific screens: Preparation (for smartphone), Instruction,
and Execution.
The preparation screen, implemented in StsPreparationStepUI, presents the re-
quired equipment, sensor placement guidance based on the selected device (smart-
phone on the thigh or Movesense on the chest), the correct starting position, and a
safety tip. The instruction screen (StsInstructionsStepUI) provides an illustration
and textual instructions for correct test performance.
The execution screen is implemented in the StsTestStepUI widget. It visualizes
the real-time progress using two key components: a countdown timer and a repetition
feedback bar. The countdown uses a custom widget called CountdownCircle, which
renders a pie chart indicating the remaining time and displays the remaining seconds
at the center. This was chosen over Flutter’s built-in CircularProgressIndicator
due to its enhanced visibility, particularly beneficial for elderly users performing the
test while observing the screen from a distance.
The repetition feedback is shown using a vertical linear progress bar, combined
with Material icons: a sitting figure at the bottom and a standing figure at the top.
==PAGE:59==
5.4 User Interface Realization
47
This design provides intuitive visual feedback for sit-to-stand motion (see Figure 5.6).
When the widget is initialized, the _startTest function is called.
It starts
the countdown timer and invokes the execute function of the test step, which re-
turns a StsResult.
After test completion, the result is submitted by calling the
createAndSendResult() function.
If an error occurs during test execution, a SnackBar is shown to inform the user. It
displays an error message (“Test execution failed”) along with the specific exception.
Finally, _endTest stops the timer, resets the state, and logs the test end.
Shoulder Range of Motion (SROM)
In this section, the flexion subtest is shown as a representative example, while the
UI for the remaining subtests (extension, abduction, internal, external rotation) is
presented in Appendix C.4.1.
Figure 5.7: SROM flexion test screens: Preparation, Instruction, and Execution.
The preparation screen (FlexionPreparationStepUI) includes visual guidance
for proper sensor placement using the Movesense sensor, along with safety instructions
and correct starting posture. The instruction screen (FlexionInstructionsStepUI)
provides a video and textual instructions for executing the flexion movement.
==PAGE:60==
48
5 Implementation
The execution screen is implemented in SromTestStepUI, which is shared across
all SROM subtests.
It begins with a 2-second calibration phase during which a
circular loading indicator is displayed with a message instructing the user not to
move.
After calibration, the test enters the active movement phase.
During this
phase, two components are shown: a countdown timer and a real-time angle tracker.
The angle tracker uses a CircularProgressIndicator to visualize the user’s an-
gular displacement scaled to 360°, with the numeric angle displayed at the center.
This real-time visualization helps the user understand their shoulder movement range
during the test.
The real-time angle is calculated by the SromRealtimeAngleTracker component
in the SromTestStep. It integrates gyroscope data and exposes the estimated angle
through a ValueNotifier, called liveAngle (variable name), which is displayed in
the UI using a ValueListenableBuilder (Listing 5.6).
The tracker is configured with angleAxes, which defines the axes used in the
magnitude calculation, and a directionAxis, which determines the direction (sign)
of the angular motion. These are provided by the active movement strategy and help
ensure a stable real-time estimate, especially in motions where the dominant axis may
vary during execution (e.g., abduction).
At the bottom of the screen, a dynamic message is shown based on the current
test phase, such as “Move your arm without pain to its maximum range” or “Test
completed!”
After execution, the result is submitted by calling createAndSendResult().
If an error occurs during execution, a SnackBar displays an error message along
with exception details.
1
ValueListenableBuilder <double >(
2
valueListenable: widget.step.liveAngle,
3
builder: (_, angle, __) => Stack(
4
alignment: Alignment.center,
5
children: [
6
CircularProgressIndicator(value: angle.abs() / 360),
7
Text('${angle.abs().toStringAsFixed(0)}°'),
8
],
9
),
10
),
Listing 5.6: Rendering real-time angle with CircularProgressIndicator.
==PAGE:61==
5.4 User Interface Realization
49
Timed Up and Go (TUG)
Figure 5.8: TUG screens: Calibration, Preparation, Instructions, and Test.
The calibration screen TugCalibrationStepUI contains an example video of how the
calibration should be completed, a text version of the instructions, and a button that
starts the calibration phase. The button calls the execute() function for its step
and starts the calibration, pressing it again stops the calibration and calculates the
total turn angle the participant did. The preparation screen TugPreparationStepUI
contains the required equipment (chair and any object used as a marker), how to wear
the device, the starting position, and safety instructions for the test. The instructions
screen TugInstructionsStepUI contains a video about how to complete the test, the
text instructions stating the same, and instructions on what to expect when the test
is started. The TugTestStepUI is an almost empty screen that only has the test name
and to keep moving. This is to encourage the participant not to look at the screen,
as there is no actual information needed during the test, and looking at the phone
would increase the chance of falling during the walk.
==PAGE:62==
50
5 Implementation
Walk Test (WT)
Figure 5.9: WT screens: Preparation, Instructions, and Test.
WTPreparationStepUI includes the sensor placement, the starting position, and safety
instructions for the test. The WTInstructionsStepUI screen provides a video instruc-
tion that shows how to complete the test and the instructions when the next button
is pressed. The test screen WTTestStepUI contains no actual information as it is not
advised to look at the screen while walking, to minimize the chance of tripping and
falling while looking at the phone. The screen’s only purpose is to start the test
execution and send the result to the business logic layer.
5.5
Localization
For localizing the Mobility Package, a new MPLocalizations class was created, which
is an extension of the Research Package’s AssetLocalizations class.
While the
localization could have been done entirely with the RPLocalizations class and
using a loader that loads the Mobility Packages keys and values, during develop-
ment, some of the strings had values inside them, and there is no functionality
in the RPLocalizations class to interpolate a translation with values.
So a new
==PAGE:63==
5.6 Pilot Study and Iterative Improvements
51
translateWithArgs function was added to MPLocalizations that expects a key for
the translation and an argument that maps the argument name to a value.
1
String translateWithArgs(String key, [Map<String, String >? args]) {
2
if (translations.containsKey(key)) {
3
String translation = translations[key]!;
4
if (args != null) {
5
args.forEach((argKey, argValue) {
6
translation = translation.replaceAll('{{$argKey}}', argValue);
7
});
8
}
9
return translation;
10
}
11
return key;
12
}
13
14
// Inside en.json
15
{
16
greeting: "Hello, {{name}}!"
17
}
18
19
// Useage
20
translateWithArgs('greeting', {'name': 'World'});
// Will return Hello, World!
Listing 5.7: Translate with arguments implementation and example.
The interpolation follows the JavaScript implementation of i18n that uses double
brackets for arguments. No other feature of i18n (plurals, currencies, date localiza-
tion, etc.) was needed, and such weren’t implemented.
5.6
Pilot Study and Iterative Improvements
During the development phase, a pilot study was conducted with 7 participants to
gather feedback on algorithm accuracy and usability.
It also provided a valuable
opportunity to refine the structure of the validation study and gain hands-on testing
experience. Although the algorithms showed good accuracy during self-testing, the
pilot revealed weaknesses that did not arise during development. The application’s
state at that time is shown in Appendix C.3. Informed consent was obtained from
all participants prior to their involvement in the study.
To ensure proper sensor attachment during testing of SROM, two custom armband
prototypes were assembled from basic textile materials and modified ECG patch
electrodes, as no suitable commercial option was available (see in Appendix C.2).
To ensure the validity of the analysis, clearly erroneous measurements (e.g., SROM
values below 5° resulting from calibration errors or involuntary movement) were ex-
cluded. These outliers were identified based on physiological implausibility and con-
firmed through manual review.
Measurement accuracy varied across tests. While most showed strong agreement,
the smartphone-based STS test (ICC = 0.85, Bias = -4.52 repetitions), Flexion Right
(Bias = +31.03°) and smartphone-based 10MWT (ICC = 0.81, Bias = -0.52 m/s)
showed significant errors (see Tables 5.1 and 5.2), likely due to incorrect phase detec-
tion, suboptimal algorithm design, or insuﬀicient fine-tuning of variables.
==PAGE:64==
52
5 Implementation
After the validation study, all test algorithms underwent iterative refinement
based on pilot feedback and observed limitations. The most substantial changes were
made to the STS cycle detection logic, which was completely redesigned to improve
repetition accuracy. The SROM algorithms were updated to enhance robustness, and
the calculation of SROM Flexion was specifically revised to provide more accurate
results. Additionally, the 10MWT was restructured into a 15-step walking test to
better accommodate typical home environments, where a 10-meter straight path is
often unavailable.
Test Name
Side/Device
Mean Bias
SD
MAE
RMSE
STS
Movesense
-0.95
3.73
2.43
3.85
STS
Smartphone
-4.52
6.58
5.29
7.99
Flexion
Right
31.05
12.79
31.05
33.59
Flexion
Left
15.58
21.81
17.73
26.69
Extension
Right
-4.32
6.04
5.31
7.39
Extension
Left
-2.65
3.97
3.71
4.79
Abduction
Right
-5.10
10.86
8.33
11.96
Abduction
Left
-8.22
9.55
9.00
12.57
Internal Rotation
Right
-0.81
5.24
3.86
5.29
Internal Rotation
Left
-1.81
5.93
4.14
6.18
External Rotation
Right
-2.85
6.35
4.90
6.94
External Rotation
Left
-3.95
7.49
5.86
8.45
10MWT
Movesense
-0.21
0.31
0.26
0.37
10MWT
Smartphone
-0.52
0.48
0.45
0.61
Table 5.1: Error metrics for sensor vs manual measurements.
5.7
Publishing and Usage
5.7.1
Availability
The developed package is published to pub.dev, and it is available in the following
link:
https://pub.dev/packages/carp_mobility_package
The package received a score of 140 points out of the maximum 160 points. The
package got full marks for following the Dart file convention, so it includes a README,
CHANGELOG, LICENSE files, as it is advised by the Dart team [tea25a; tea25b]. 64.3%
of the API has dartdoc comments, which satisfies the minimum required 20% for the
Provide Documentation and has an example application. Two sections got reduced
scores. One is 77 files doesn’t match the Dart formatted, and an outdated depen-
dency for fl_chart which was only used for debug purposes and could be added to
==PAGE:65==
5.7 Publishing and Usage
53
Test Name
Side/Device
LoA L
LoA U
MAPE (%)
ICC
STS
Movesense
-8.25
6.35
11.30
0.91
STS
Smartphone
-17.42
8.38
28.07
0.85
Flexion
Right
-6.01
68.11
19.31
0.88
Flexion
Left
-27.16
58.32
11.77
0.84
Extension
Right
-16.15
7.52
10.29
0.93
Extension
Left
-10.44
5.14
7.91
0.95
Abduction
Right
-26.38
16.18
4.92
0.89
Abduction
Left
-26.94
10.50
5.67
0.87
Internal Rotation
Right
-11.08
9.46
6.95
0.90
Internal Rotation
Left
-13.44
9.82
7.56
0.91
External Rotation
Right
-15.29
9.59
5.61
0.92
External Rotation
Left
-18.63
10.73
8.26
0.91
10MWT
Movesense
-0.82
0.40
9.12
0.87
10MWT
Smartphone
-1.48
0.44
14.76
0.81
Table 5.2: Agreement metrics for sensor vs manual measurements.
dev_dependencies to exclude from the check. These score reductions would be easy
to fix, but are currently performed due to time constraints.
The package works on both Android and iOS devices, further increasing availabil-
ity among developers.
The public GitHub repository can be accessed with the following link:
https://github.com/jakdan99/carp_mobility_package
After the thesis hand-in, the transfer of the ownership for both the pub.dev package
and the GitHub repository will be completed.
5.7.2
Documentation
Documentation is split into two parts, one is the README.md file that provides an
overview of the features, installation, API, and usage. The other is the example app
that gives a complete example of the package and the ability to try out the tests.
5.7.3
Configuration
Some tasks can be configured to match new use cases a user could have.
These
configurable parts are:
• Walk Test (WT): User can provide a WtMeasure to the WTTask to change the
number of steps needed for the trial.
• Sit-to-Stand (STS): StsMeasure can be provided to the StsTask change the
exercise duration
==PAGE:66==
54
5 Implementation
• Shoulder range of motion (SROM): SromMeasure can be provided to the SromTask
change the exercise duration
5.7.4
Usage
As the package is available on pub.dev, adding the project could be done by writing
the package name and version to the pubspec.yaml file like:
1 dependencies:
2
carp_mobility_package: ^0.1.0
Listing 5.8: Adding the package to pubspec.yaml.
After installing the package, one must make sure the Research Package is initial-
ized by calling this in the main function.
1
void main() {
2
ResearchPackage.ensureInitialized();
3
// ...
4
}
Listing 5.9: Main function example.
The implemented tests can be used by using an RPUITask and setting the task
parameter for one of the Mobility Tasks that extends RPNavigableOrderedTask (e.g.,
WTTask, StsTask, etc.), like:
1
class MobilityTestScreen extends StatefulWidget {
2
@override
3
_MobilityTestScreenState createState() => _MobilityTestScreenState();
4
}
5
6
class _MobilityTestScreenState extends State<MobilityTestScreen > {
7
@override
8
Widget build(BuildContext context) {
9
return Scaffold(
10
body: RPUITask(
11
task: TugTask(identifier: 'tug_assessment'),
12
onSubmit: (RPTaskResult result) {
13
// Handle test results
14
print('TUG Test completed: ${result.toString()}');
15
},
16
),
17
);
18
}
19
}
Listing 5.10: Example to create test screen.
As seen in Listing 5.10, the test result can be accessed by handling it inside the
onSubmit argument. RPTaskResult contains both the result for the sensor selection,
as well as the result of the actual test.
==PAGE:67==
5.8 Chapter Summary
55
5.8
Chapter Summary
In conclusion, the package was developed to maintain consistency over different IMUs
and to provide a wide range of individual mobility tests for clinical and home as-
sessment. The implementation focuses on customizable testcases to provide flexible
configurations for various uses. The currently accessible tests are STS, SROM, TUG,
and WT. The tests are all focused on single-sensor solutions, where the entire data
processing runs directly on the phone.
All test suites follow the shared modular
structure, with easy support for modifying or creating new tests.
The consistency and results for the developed tests are shown in chapter 6.
==PAGE:68==
56
==PAGE:69==
CHAPTER 6
Evaluation
This chapter describes the evaluation of the Mobility Package. The evaluation was to
evaluate the implemented Mobility Assessment tasks with their real-world measures.
After validation a statistical analysis was performed on the results. The second part
of the evaluation was to ask the participants to fill out System Usablity Scale (SUS)
survey, to measure the UX experience of the package.
6.1
Demo Application
The demo application was developed to be an example to the developers and to vali-
date the test results of the implemented tests in Mobility Package. The application
uses the CARP Research Package and the developed Mobility Package. During test-
ing the participants were asked to use the app and complete the tests. The results
were shown on the screen of the phone and logged to the console. The real-world
measures were collected by stopwatch and observation.
6.2
Validation Study
6.2.1
Participants
In the validation study, a total of 21 participants were evaluated for the STS and
SROM tests. Demographic details including age and gender distribution are presented
in Table 6.2.1.
All participants provided informed consent prior to participation (sample consent
form is included in Appendix D.1).
==PAGE:70==
58
6 Evaluation
Characteristic
Value
Number of participants
21
Gender (female)
12 (57.1%)
Gender (male)
9 (42.9%)
Mean age
41.9 years
Standard deviation age
18.17 years
Median age
36 years
Age range
22–81 years
Table 6.1: Participant Demographics for STS and SROM.
Characteristic
Value
Number of participants
18
Gender (female)
9 (50%)
Gender (male)
9 (50%)
Mean age
35.6 years
Standard deviation age
21.27 years
Median age
34 years
Age range
23-86 years
Table 6.2: Participant Demographics for TUG.
Characteristic
Value
Number of participants
19
Gender (female)
9 (44%)
Gender (male)
10 (56%)
Mean age
35 years
Standard deviation age
21.07 years
Median age
34 years
Age range
23-86 years
Table 6.3: Participant Demographics for WT.
6.2.2
Setup
All tests were conducted using the demo application described above. Participants
performed the tests using either a Movesense sensor or a smartphone (Samsung
Galaxy A70, OnePlus 7 Pro, Xiaomi Redmi Note 7, iPhone 12), depending on the test
==PAGE:71==
6.2 Validation Study
59
type. Sensor placement was standardized across participants to ensure consistency.
The tests were performed at home-environment in the test participants home.
6.2.3
Test Validation
6.2.3.1
Sit-to-Stand (STS)
Participants were instructed to perform as many sit-to-stand cycles as possible in
30 seconds, following standardized instructions presented in the app. To simulate
performance variation, certain participants were asked to perform the test at a slower
pace to score lower repetition counts, representing less healthy individuals. The test
was performed with the smartphone attached to the thigh or the Movesense sensor
placed on the chest, depending on the selected sensor. Before each test, a trial run was
performed to familiarize participants with the procedure. Then, two measurements
were taken using the smartphone and two using the Movesense sensor.
To validate the results, the automated repetition counts from the algorithm were
compared to manually counted repetitions for each participant, with the manual
counts serving as the reference. In most cases, the counts matched exactly, differ-
ences were typically small. Most of the discrepancy stems from the last repetition
as it is hard to determine if it should have been included in the result or not. The
algorithm also calculates cycle times for each detected repetition. In this evaluation,
average cycle times from a subset of tests were examined and found to be consistent
with the 30-second test duration, supporting the plausibility of the detected counts.
Examination of these averages also revealed a pattern where higher repetition counts
corresponded to shorter cycle times (often close or less than 1 second), suggesting
minimal sitting time between stands.
Figure 6.2.3.1 shows example images captured during STS testing sessions.
Figure 6.1: Measuring Sit-to-Stand performance during the validation study.
==PAGE:72==
60
6 Evaluation
Metric
Movesense
Smartphone
Mean bias
-0.26
-0.19
SD of differences
2.13
0.50
Mean absolute error (MAE)
0.72
0.19
Root-mean-square error (RMSE)
2.12
0.53
95% LoA (lower, upper)
-4.43, 3.92
-1.17, 0.79
ICC(2,1) (intraclass r)
0.989
0.997
Table 6.4: Sit-to-stand validation metrics.
Both the Movesense and smartphone sensors demonstrated minimal mean bias
(−0.26 and −0.19 repetitions, respectively) and low error metrics, indicating strong
agreement with manual repetition counts. The smartphone showed notably lower
variability (SD of differences = 0.50) compared to the Movesense sensor (SD = 2.13).
Limits of Agreement were narrower for the smartphone (−1.17 to 0.79 repetitions)
than for the Movesense sensor (−4.43 to 3.92 repetitions), indicating that smart-
phone counts typically differed by less than one repetition from the manual reference,
while the Movesense could differ by up to about four repetitions. Both devices ex-
hibited very low MAE (0.19 for smartphone, 0.72 for Movesense) and RMSE (0.53
and 2.12, respectively). The high ICC(2,1) values (0.997 for smartphone and 0.989
for Movesense) confirm excellent reliability and consistency with manual counting.
6.2.3.2
Shoulder Range of Motion (SROM)
Participants were instructed to perform the test following standardized instructions
and video guidance in the application. Before each test, a trial run was performed to
familiarize participants with the procedure after that two measurements were taken.
All the five subtests were tested for both arms, and the involved arm was noted.
During the test, measurement with goniometer was used as the reference standard.
In the validation these manually measured values are compared to the calculated ones
by the application.
6.2.3.2 shows example images captured during SROM testing sessions.
Test
Mean Bias (°)
SD diff (°)
MAE (°)
RMSE (°)
Flexion
-3.4
4.7
4.5
5.8
Extension
-2.2
3.7
3.4
4.3
Abduction
-2.4
5.9
5.1
6.4
Internal rotation
0.1
4.3
3.3
4.3
External rotation
-5.2
4.4
5.6
6.9
Table 6.5: Shoulder Range of Motion (SROM) Error metrics (Combined data from
both arms).
==PAGE:73==
6.2 Validation Study
61
Test
95% LoA (°)
ICC(2,1)
Flexion
-12.7 to 5.8
0.81
Extension
-9.6 to 5.1
0.91
Abduction
-14.0 to 9.3
0.75
Internal rotation
-8.3 to 8.6
0.95
External rotation
-14.0 to 3.5
0.92
Table 6.6: Shoulder Range of Motion (SROM) Agreement metrics (Combined data
from both arms).
Across all tests and both arms, the sensor showed small mean biases (within about
5°) relative to the manual goniometer. Negative bias values indicate the sensor tended
to read slightly lower than manual on average (e.g.≈5.2° lower for external rotation).
The variability of differences was (Standard Diviation (SD) ≈4–6°), translating to
95% limits of agreement on the order of ±10° or slightly more for most movements.
The mean absolute errors (MAE) were on the order of 3–6°, which is relatively low.
The intraclass correlation coeﬀicients demonstrate strong ICC agreement between
sensor and manual measurements: ICC(2,1) values range roughly 0.75–0.95.
Figure 6.2: Measuring shoulder range of motion with goniometer during the valida-
tion study.
==PAGE:74==
62
6 Evaluation
6.2.4
Timed Up & Go (TUG)
Participants were given the phone and the Movesense and were instructed to complete
the TUG test, following the instructions of the app. The assessment was performed
with the phone or the Movesense attached to the chest of the participant.
To validate the test, the automated measure was compared with manually mea-
sured stopwatch data. Most of the time, the measured time and the automatically
measured result on the phone were closely related to each other; most of the time,
the small error came from human error and reaction time. There were times when
the test could not be finished, as it was stuck in one of the states. It was noted for
future development tasks, and the test was repeated.
Metric
Movesense
Smartphone
Mean bias
-0.8386
-1.1158
SD of differences
1.1405
1.0463
Mean Absolute Error (MAE)
1.1091
1.2331
Root Mean Square Error (RMSE)
1.4075
1.5216
95% Limits of Agreement (LoA)
-3.0740 to 1.3968
-3.1665 to 0.9350
Mean Absolute Percentage Error (MAPE)
9.12%
10.09%
Intraclass Correlation (ICC(2,1))
0.8469
0.8288
Table 6.7: TUG validation metrics.
As seen in Table 6.7, the TUG test gave notable systematic bias.
The Error
Percentile rate is good for the Movesense and moderate for the phone. ICC resulted
in good reliability between the real-world measure and the automated metrics.
6.2.5
Walk Test (WT)
Participants were given the phone and the Movesense device and were instructed to
follow the instructions of the WT task. Both devices were attached to the test.
Validation was done by comparing the data from the task to the manually mea-
sured time on a stopwatch. The stopwatch was started when the participant took
their 3rd step and stopped after the 12th. The results from both measures were close
to each other.
As seen in Table 6.8, the WT gave excellent results. Each metric supports the
statement that the automatic measure excellently correlates with the real-world mea-
sure.
6.2.6
Usability Evaluation
During development, efforts were made to create a user-friendly, intuitive, and clearly
understandable design. Although the interface followed the Research Package design
==PAGE:75==
6.2 Validation Study
63
Metric
Movesense
Smartphone
Mean bias
-0.0324
-0.1334
SD of differences
0.3211
0.3413
Mean Absolute Error (MAE)
0.2061
0.2266
Root Mean Square Error (RMSE)
0.3188
0.3610
95% Limits of Agreement (LoA)
-0.6618 to 0.5970
-0.8025 to 0.5356
Mean Absolute Percentage Error (MAPE)
3.78%
4.14%
Intraclass Correlation (ICC(2,1))
0.9576
0.9561
Table 6.8: WT validation metrics.
style, it was not possible to evaluate how well it integrates with the broader CARP
platform, as none of the test participants had prior experience with it.
The System Usability Scale SUS [Bro95] is a widely used, technology-agnostic
questionnaire designed to assess the perceived usability of a system. It consists of
ten items rated on a five-point Likert scale, alternating between positive and negative
statements. The responses are converted to a score between 0 and 100, where higher
values indicate better usability. While there is no absolute pass/fail threshold, scores
above 68 are generally considered above average, and scores above 80 are typically
interpreted as indicating excellent usability.
A total of 16 participants completed the SUS, shown in Appendix D.2.
The
SUS responses are presented in Table 6.9. The overall mean SUS score was 76.4,
which is considered good usability according to common SUS interpretation guide-
lines [BKM09].
Question
1
2
3
4
5
Q1
0
1
0
7
8
Q2
12
3
0
1
0
Q3
0
0
1
3
12
Q4
7
7
1
0
1
Q5
0
0
0
5
11
Q6
14
1
0
0
1
Q7
0
1
1
4
10
Q8
10
4
2
0
0
Q9
0
0
1
6
9
Q10
15
0
1
0
0
Table 6.9: System Usability Scale responses from 16 participants.
It should be noted that most participants were familiar with the testers, which may
have positively influenced their comfort level and SUS ratings.
==PAGE:76==
64
6 Evaluation
6.3
Observations
In the STS test, participants generally understood the task without extra explanation,
as it is a movement they do in daily life. Some participants said that the real-time
progress bar feedback sometimes failed to capture the start of the movement, resulting
in jumps or missed updates, which could be confusing. When the smartphone was
attached to the thigh, detecting the end of the test required glancing at the screen,
which some found distracting. However, the remaining time was clearly visible during
movement via the pie-chart display. All participants agreed that having a sound signal
at the end of the test, would be beneficial.
During the SROM tests, some participants, especially elderly ones, moved their
arms forward or backward during the rotation movements instead of keeping the
correct posture.
During TUG tests, some participants raised the question of where the sensor
should be placed. This was due to an oversight where the calibration phase is before
the preparation, where the sensor placement is shown. Female participants found it
uncomfortable to wear the phone on their chest.
Instructions and sensor placement were generally reported as clear, and partici-
pants felt confident in setting up the equipment and performing the tests.
==PAGE:77==
CHAPTER 7
Discussion
In this chapter, we discuss the validation study results, our observation when con-
ducting the tests, the satisfied research questions, the limitations of the package, and
the possible future work.
7.1
Goals and results
This section will discuss how the research questions that were identified in Section 1.3
are answered. The research question and the four sub-questions were the following
How can standardized mobility assessment tests and rehabilitation exercises be
implemented in a Flutter-based software package to be available for the design of
smartphone-based applications for movement disorders?
The research question can be divided into four sub-questions:
• RQ1: What standardized mobility tests and exercises for assessment and reha-
bilitation exists?
• RQ2: Which of these tests and exercises are feasible to support in a smartphone-
based tool?
• RQ3: What is the software and UX design of the Flutter package containing a
set of these tests and exercises?
• RQ4: What is the feasibility of these smartphone-based tests and exercises for
clinical use for clinicians, researchers, and physiotherapists?
Chapter 2 describes current standardized mobility tests and exercises. There is a
huge variety of tests, assessing different parts of mobility, for example, balance, gait
and range of motion. Each of these tests has advantages and disadvantages. Clinicians
has to choose what exercise suits the patient’s health conditions, capabilities and how
the assessment can be completed. The overview given for these answers RQ1. In
chapter 3, a complete analysis were given that assesses the feasibility of the mobility
tests in a smartphone-based solution.
Tests that take to much time to complete,
need specialized equipment, can not be measured objectively, would took to long to
implement and test or too dangerous to complete without a trained professional, are
evaluated as not feasible in the current scope. This addresses RQ2. Chapters 4 and
5 give detailed design considerations, algorithmic solutions, architectural decisions,
and implementation details.
This answers RQ3.
Lastly, chapter 6 explains the
==PAGE:78==
66
7 Discussion
conducted validation study, analyzes results, and the correlation between real-world
measures and the instrumented tests. The results show that the tests could be used
in a home-assesed manner, and would give suﬀicient results for clinicians, researchers,
and physiotherapists, answering RQ4.
Answering all sub-questions of the research question, the thesis answers the main
research question.
7.2
Limitations
The results demonstrate that the package can, overall, perform the functions it was
designed for. However, there were some limitations in the validation study and its
results.
The SROM validation used manual goniometer measurements as the reference
standard. Although best practices were studied for goniometer use, these readings
remain subjective and involve human error and variation. A larger study with multiple
testers would increase reliability, and the most accurate results could be achieved with
an optical motion capture (OMC) system, which was not available for this study.
For the STS, the automated repetition counts agreed closely with manual counts,
which are straightforward to verify.
However, the calculation of cycle times still
relied on manual stopwatch timing, and the individual phases in the STS test can be
very short (often around one second per movement), making precise manual timing
diﬀicult.
The WT and TUG also relied on manual stopwatch timing as the reference stan-
dard. While common in clinical practice, manual timing introduces a degree of human
error and may not capture small variations in movement duration.
Regarding the SUS, a larger sample size would improve the reliability of the results.
There is also a potential bias in the responses, as some participants were familiar with
me as the tester.
Another limitation is that the study included only healthy individuals. This limits
the scope of the findings, as it is not yet known how the Mobility Package will perform
for participants with diagnosed mobility impairments or other clinical conditions.
7.3
Future Work
During development, several ideas from users and supervisors were identified through
feedback and observations in the validation study, but could not be implemented
within the timeframe of this project. This section outlines possible directions for fu-
ture work that could improve both the accuracy and usability of the Mobility Package,
as well as expand its functionality.
==PAGE:79==
7.3 Future Work
67
7.3.1
Improving Sensing Precision
As with most mobility assessment methods, there is always potential to improve the
precision and robustness of the measurements.
Even small gains in accuracy can
make the results more reliable and clinically useful. For the STS, the accuracy of
the system could be enhanced, particularly for cycle time calculations. Introducing
calibration procedures could improve timing accuracy, and further analysis of the
sit-to-stand repetitions could provide additional metrics, such as peak velocity and
detailed segmentation of the sit-to-stand and stand-to-sit phases.
For the SROM, implementing more complex and robust algorithms could improve
the accuracy of movement detection and angle estimation, particularly in distinguish-
ing small differences between movements.
7.3.2
Larger and More Accurate Validation
The validation study in this thesis included a relatively small sample size and only
healthy participants. A larger study should be conducted to include participants with
a range of mobility impairments as well as healthy controls. This would allow for more
robust conclusions about the system’s performance across different populations and
better reflect real-world clinical use.
Future validation could also incorporate more accurate reference standards. For
example, recording videos during each trial and analysing them afterwards could
provide precise timing data for the walk test (WT), timed up-and-go (TUG), and
sit-to-stand STS. Additionally, validation against an optical motion capture (OMC)
system could provide highly accurate angle measurements for the SROM and further
improve the reliability of the results.
7.3.3
New Features and Possible Tests
Several potential features were identified during testing that could improve the user
experience. For all implemented tests, adding auditory cues to indicate the start and
end of a test could reduce timing errors and the need for participants to look at the
screen during testing.
The package could be extended with additional mobility-related tests to broaden
its application. Examples include a resting and active tremor test, the 6-minute walk
test (6MWT), a step-up test, and balance tests under different conditions, such as
holding an object or standing with eyes closed. These additions would allow the pack-
age to assess a wider range of motor functions and provide clinicians and researchers
with a more versatile toolkit.
==PAGE:80==
68
==PAGE:81==
CHAPTER 8
Conclusion
• STS and SROM tests were validated for functional accuracy and usability.
• The system is suitable for further evaluation in real-world mHealth scenarios.
• Future work: larger sample size, clinical validation, expanded test library.
The Mobility package was successfully designed, implemented, evaluated, and
released. It provides easy integration with existing solutions using the CARP infras-
tructure. The selected tests were chosen to be feasible on a mobile device, using a
single IMU sensor, and can be performed easily and repeatedly in a home environment.
The validation study that were conducted with a varied number of participants (21
for STS and SROM, 19 for the WT and 18 for the TUG) proved that the implemented
tests, by providing good to excellent correlation with the real-world measures.
The implemented package could help researchers, clinicians, and physiotherapists
by enabling fast mobility assessment at home, and can provide information about the
user’s physiological changes.
==PAGE:82==
70
==PAGE:83==
APPENDIX A
Distribution of
Contributions
A.0.1
Empirical work
A.0.2
Theoretical work
Area
Task
Csaba Hell
Dániel Jakab
Software and collaboration
GitHub repo
X
Pull requests
X
X
Merges
X
X
Applicaition design
X
Documentation
X
Publish
X
Tests
STS
X
TUG
X
SROM
X
WT
X
Validation study
X
X
==PAGE:84==
72
A Distribution of Contributions
Chapter
Section
Csaba Hell
Dániel Jakab
Introduction
Background and
motivation
X
X
Prior work
X
X
Research Question
X
X
Research goals and
methods
X
X
Overview
X
Related work
Introduction
X
Standardized Mobility
Tests: Overview
X
Digital Assessment and
mHealth Platforms
X
IMU-Based Implementations
of Selected Tests
X
X
Summary and Gaps
X
System analyzis
Selection Criteria
X
Selected Tests
X
X
System Requirements
X
Design
User Interface and
Interaction design
X
System Architecture
X
Algorithms and Signal
Processing Design
X
X
Configuration and
Extensibilty
X
Chapter Summary
X
Implementation
Project Structure Overview
X
Sensor Integration
X
Mobility Test Implementation
X
X
User Interface Realization
X
X
Localization
X
Pilot Study and
Iterative Improvements
X
Publishing and Usage
X
Chapter Summary
X
Evaluation
Demo Application
X
Validation Study
X
Observation
X
X
Discussion
Goals and results
X
Limitations
X
Future work
X
Conclusion
X
==PAGE:85==
APPENDIX B
Appendix to Design
Figure B.1: Lean Canvas for the mobility package.
B.1
Designed UI Screens in Figma
==PAGE:86==
74
B Appendix to Design
Figure B.2: User Story Map for the mobility package.
==PAGE:87==
B.1 Designed UI Screens in Figma
75
Figure B.3: UI design for 10 meter walk test.
==PAGE:88==
76
B Appendix to Design
Figure B.4: UI design for SROM Flexion test.
==PAGE:89==
B.1 Designed UI Screens in Figma
77
Figure B.5: UI design for timed up and go test.
==PAGE:90==
78
==PAGE:91==
APPENDIX C
Appendix to
Implementation
==PAGE:92==
80
C Appendix to Implementation
C.1
Codebase folder structure
Figure C.1: Folder structure of the mobility package in Flutter.
==PAGE:93==
C.2 Custom made armbands
81
C.2
Custom made armbands
Figure C.2: The finished custom armbands for SROM tests using Velcro.
==PAGE:94==
82
C Appendix to Implementation
==PAGE:95==
C.3 Pilot Study UI
83
C.3
Pilot Study UI
C.3.1
Sit-to-stand
Figure C.3: User interface of Sit-to-Stand at pilot study.
==PAGE:96==
84
C Appendix to Implementation
C.3.2
Shoulder Range of Motion
Figure C.4: User interface of flexion test SROM at pilot study.
==PAGE:97==
C.4 Final application UI
85
Figure C.5: User interface for instructions of SROM at pilot study.
C.4
Final application UI
In this section the additional UI screens are presented that are not included in the
Implementation (Chapter 5).
==PAGE:98==
86
C Appendix to Implementation
C.4.1
Shoulder Range of Motion
Figure C.6: Final user interface for instructions of SROM.
Figure C.7: Preparation screen (left) of the internal and external rotation, calibra-
tion screen (right).
==PAGE:99==
APPENDIX D
Appendix to
Evaluation
D.1
Informed Consent Sample Documents
==PAGE:100==
Informed Consent Form (English)
Project Title
Pilot Study - Sensor Data Collection for Software
Package for Smartphone-Based Assessment of
Mobility Disorders
Researchers
Csaba Hell, Dániel Jakab
Institution
Technical University of Denmark
Contact
Csaba Hell (sz324556@dtu.dk),
Dániel Jakab
(sz324556@dtu.dk)
Purpose of the Study
This pilot study aims to collect motion-related
sensor data and basic demographic information
to support the development and evaluation of a
mobility package for a thesis project.
Procedures
Participants will use a device or mobile applicati-
on that records inertial measurement unit (IMU)
sensor data, including gyroscopes, magnetome-
ters, and accelerometer readings. Additionally,
participants will be asked to provide their age
and gender.
During the test execution, photos
may be taken for documentation purposes. No
name or other personally identifying data will be
collected. The data and photos will be used exc-
lusively for academic research.
Voluntary Participation
Participation is entirely voluntary.
You may
withdraw from the study at any time without
consequences.
Confidentiality
All data and photos will be anonymized and se-
curely stored. Age and gender data will be used
only for statistical analysis. Research results may
be published, but no personal identification will
be possible.
Consent Statement
I have read and understood the above informa-
tion. I voluntarily agree to participate in a study
involving the collection of IMU sensor data, de-
mographic information (age, gender), and photos
for documentation purposes.
Name of Participant:
Signature:
Date:
Beleegyező Nyilatkozat (Magyar)
Projekt címe
Pilot
Tanulmány
-
Szenzoradat
Gyűjtés
Okostelefon-alapú Mobilitási Zavarok Értékelé-
séhez Szükséges Szoftvercsomaghoz
Kutatók
Hell Csaba, Jakab Dániel
Intézmény
Technical University of Denmark
Kapcsolat
Hell Csaba (sz324556@dtu.dk),
Jakab Dániel
(sz324556@dtu.dk)
A kutatás célja
A tanulmány célja mozgással kapcsolatos szen-
zoradatok és alapvető demográfiai adatok gyűj-
tése a mobilitási csomag fejlesztésének és értéke-
lésének támogatására a diplomamunka keretein
belül.
Eljárás
A résztvevők egy olyan eszközt vagy mobilalkal-
mazást használnak, amely inerciális mérőegység
(IMU) szenzoradatokat rögzít, beleértve a girosz-
kópokat, magnetométereket és gyorsulásmérő-
ket. Ezenkívül a résztvevőket arra kérik, hogy
adják meg életkorukat és nemüket. A teszt vég-
rehajtása során dokumentációs célból fényképek
készülhetnek. Semmilyen név vagy egyéb szemé-
lyes azonosításra alkalmas adat nem kerül gyűj-
tésre. Az adatok és fényképek kizárólag tudomá-
nyos kutatás céljára kerülnek felhasználásra.
Önkéntes részvétel
A részvétel teljesen önkéntes. Bármikor követ-
kezmények nélkül kiléphet a tanulmányból.
Bizalmas kezelés
Minden adat és fénykép anonimizálva kerül tá-
rolásra, biztonságos módon. Az életkor és nem
adatok kizárólag statisztikai elemzésre szolgál-
nak. A kutatási eredmények publikálhatók, de
személyes azonosítás nem lesz lehetséges.
Beleegyező nyilatkozat
Elolvastam és megértettem a fenti információ-
kat.
Önkéntesen beleegyezem, hogy részt ve-
gyek a tanulmányban, amely magában foglalja
az IMU szenzoradatok, demográfiai adatok (élet-
kor, nem) és dokumentációs célú fényképek gyűj-
tését.
Résztvevő neve:
Aláírás:
Dátum:
1
==PAGE:101==
Informed Consent Form (English)
Project Title: Pilot Study - Sensor Data Collection for Software Package for Smartphone-
based Assessment of Mobility Disorders
Researchers: Csaba Hell, Dániel Jakab
Institution: Technical University of Denmark
Contact: Csaba Hell (s232456@dtu.dk), Dániel Jakab (s232455@dtu.dk)
Purpose of the Study
This pilot study aims to collect motion-related sensor data and basic demographic
information to support the development and evaluation of a mobility package
for a thesis project.
Procedures
Participants will use a device or mobile application that records Inertial Mea-
surement Unit (IMU) sensor data, including gyroscope, magnetometer, and ac-
celerometer readings. Additionally, participants will be asked to provide their
age and gender. No name or other personally identifying data will be collected.
The data will be used exclusively for academic research.
Voluntary Participation
Participation is entirely voluntary. You may withdraw from the study at any time
without consequences.
Confidentiality
All data will be anonymized and securely stored. Age and gender data will be
used only for statistical analysis. Research results may be published, but no per-
sonal identification will be possible.
Consent Statement
I have read and understood the above information. I voluntarily agree to par-
ticipate in this study and consent to the collection of IMU sensor data and demo-
graphic information (age, gender).
Name of Participant:
Signature:
Date:
1
==PAGE:102==
Beleegyező Nyilatkozat (Magyar)
Projekt címe: Pilot Tanulmány - Szenzoradat Gyűjtés Okostelefon-alapú Mobil-
itási Zavarok Értékeléséhez Szükséges Szoftvercsomaghoz
Kutatók: Hell Csaba, Jakab Dániel
Intézmény: Technical University of Denmark
Kapcsolat: Hell Csaba (s232456@dtu.dk), Jakab Dániel (s232455@dtu.dk)
A kutatás célja
A tanulmány célja mozgással kapcsolatos szenzoradatok és alapvető demográ-
fiai adatok gyűjtése a mobilitási csomag fejlesztésének és értékelésének támo-
gatására a diplomamunka keretében.
Eljárás
A résztvevők egy olyan eszközt vagy mobilalkalmazást használnak, amely IMU
szenzoradatokat rögzít, ideértve a giroszkóp, magnetométer és gyorsulásmérő
méréseit. A résztvevők megadják életkorukat és nemüket is. Nevet vagy más
személyes azonosításra alkalmas adatot nem gyűjtünk. Az adatokat kizárólag
tudományos célokra használjuk.
Önkéntes részvétel
A részvétel teljesen önkéntes. A résztvevő bármikor, következmények nélkül
kiléphet a kutatásból.
Adatvédelem
Minden adat anonim módon és biztonságosan kerül tárolásra. Az életkor és
nem csak statisztikai elemzésre szolgál. A kutatási eredmények közzétehetők,
de személyazonosítás nem lehetséges.
Beleegyező nyilatkozat
Elolvastam és megértettem a fentieket. Önkéntesen hozzájárulok a kutatásban
való részvételhez, valamint az IMU szenzoradatok és demográfiai adataim (életkor,
nem) gyűjtéséhez.
Résztvevő neve:
Aláírás:
Dátum:
2
==PAGE:103==
D.2 System Usability Scale (SUS) survey
91
D.2
System Usability Scale (SUS) survey
==PAGE:104==
92
==PAGE:105==
Bibliography
[Abd+24]
Masoud Abdollahi et al. “Post-stroke functional changes: In-depth anal-
ysis of clinical tests and motor-cognitive dual-tasking using wearable
sensors.” en. In: Bioengineering (Basel) 11.4 (April 2024).
[Ave20]
Dale Avers. “Chapter 7 - Functional Performance Measures and As-
sessment for Older Adults.” In: Guccione’s Geriatric Physical Therapy
(Fourth Edition). Edited by Dale Avers and Rita A. Wong. Fourth Edi-
tion. St. Louis (MO): Mosby, 2020, pages 137–165. isbn: 978-0-323-
60912-8. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978- 0- 323- 60912- 8.
00007-5. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/B9780323609128000075.
[BF16]
Jakob E Bardram and Mads Frost. “The Personal Health Technology
Design Space.” In: IEEE Pervasive Computing 15.2 (2016), pages 70–78.
[BK08]
Lisa Blum and Nicol Korner-Bitensky. “Usefulness of the Berg Balance
Scale in stroke rehabilitation: a systematic review.” en. In: Phys. Ther.
88.5 (May 2008), pages 559–566.
[BKM09]
Aaron Bangor, Phil Kortum, and James Miller. “Determining What
Individual SUS Scores Mean: Adding an Adjective Rating Scale.” In: J.
Usability Stud. 4 (April 2009), pages 114–123.
[Boh95]
Richard W. Bohannon. “Sit-to-Stand Test for Measuring Performance of
Lower Extremity Muscles.” In: Perceptual and Motor Skills 80.1 (1995).
PMID: 7624188, pages 163–166. doi: 10.2466/pms.1995.80.1.163.
eprint: https://doi.org/10.2466/pms.1995.80.1.163. url: https:
//doi.org/10.2466/pms.1995.80.1.163.
[Bro95]
John Brooke. “SUS: A quick and dirty usability scale.” In: Usability Eval.
Ind. 189 (November 1995).
[Cao+21]
Jianfei Cao et al. “Exploring the Shift in International Trends in Mobile
Health Research From 2000 to 2020: Bibliometric Analysis.” In: JMIR
Mhealth Uhealth 9.9 (September 2021), e31097. issn: 2291-5222. doi: 10.
2196/31097. url: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/34494968.
[Cer+15]
Adrien Cerrito et al. “Reliability and validity of a smartphone-based ap-
plication for the quantification of the sit-to-stand movement in healthy
seniors.” en. In: Gait Posture 41.2 (February 2015), pages 409–413.
==PAGE:106==
94
Bibliography
[Cha+16]
Matthew H M Chan et al. “A validation study of a smartphone appli-
cation for functional mobility assessment of the elderly.” en. In: Hong
Kong Physiother. J. 35 (December 2016), pages 1–4.
[Cha+22]
Li Yi Tammy Chan et al. “Assessment of shoulder range of motion
using a commercially available wearable sensor-a validation study.” en.
In: MHealth 8 (October 2022), page 30.
[CM25]
Stephen M Cain and Melissa M B Morrow. “Quantifying shoulder mo-
tion in the free-living environment using wearable inertial measurement
units: Challenges and recommendations.” en. In: J. Biomech. 182.112589
(March 2025), page 112589.
[Cor+20]
Marta Francisca Corrà et al. “Wearable Health Technology to Quantify
the Functional Impact of Peripheral Neuropathy on Mobility in Parkin-
son’s Disease: A Systematic Review.” In: Sensors 20.22 (2020). issn:
1424-8220. doi: 10.3390/s20226627. url: https://www.mdpi.com/
1424-8220/20/22/6627.
[Dow15]
Stephen Downs. “The Berg Balance Scale.” In: Journal of Physiotherapy
61.1 (2015), page 46. issn: 1836-9553. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.jphys.2014.10.002. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S1836955314001465.
[Fan+23]
Zhou Fang et al. “Conversion of upper-limb inertial measurement unit
data to joint angles: A systematic review.” en. In: Sensors (Basel) 23.14
(July 2023), page 6535.
[Fig24]
Figma Inc. Figma — Collaborative Interface Design Tool. https://www.
figma.com. Accessed: 2025-07-25. 2024.
[Gil+20]
Tiffany K. Gill et al. “Shoulder range of movement in the general popula-
tion: age and gender stratified normative data using a community-based
cohort.” In: BMC Musculoskeletal Disorders 21.1 (2020), page 676. doi:
10.1186/s12891-020-03665-9. url: https://doi.org/10.1186/
s12891-020-03665-9.
[Gor+23]
Shaylah Gordon et al. “Between-day reliability of trunk orientation mea-
sured with smartphone sensors during sit-to-stand in asymptomatic indi-
viduals.” In: Musculoskeletal Science and Practice 63 (2023), page 102713.
issn: 2468-7812. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.msksp.2022.
102713. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S2468781222002144.
[Har+07]
Susan E. Hardy et al. “Improvement in Usual Gait Speed Predicts Bet-
ter Survival in Older Adults.” In: Journal of the American Geriatrics
Society 55.11 (2007), pages 1727–1734. doi: https://doi.org/10.
1111/j.1532-5415.2007.01413.x. eprint: https://agsjournals.
onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1111/j.1532-5415.2007.
==PAGE:107==
Bibliography
95
01413.x. url: https://agsjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/
doi/abs/10.1111/j.1532-5415.2007.01413.x.
[Has+18]
Mohammed Mehedi Hassan et al. “A robust human activity recogni-
tion system using smartphone sensors and deep learning.” In: Future
Generation Computer Systems 81 (2018), pages 307–313. issn: 0167-
739X. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.future.2017.11.029.
url: https : / / www . sciencedirect . com / science / article / pii /
S0167739X17317351.
[HGÖ21]
Gustav Höglund, Helena Grip, and Fredrik Öhberg. “The importance of
inertial measurement unit placement in assessing upper limb motion.”
In: Medical Engineering Physics 92 (2021), pages 1–9. issn: 1350-4533.
doi: https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . medengphy . 2021 . 03 . 010.
url: https : / / www . sciencedirect . com / science / article / pii /
S1350453321000333.
[HP18]
Rex Hartson and Pardha Pyla. The UX book: Agile UX design for a
quality user experience. Cited by: 69. 2018, pages 1–888. doi: 10.1016/
C2013-0-19285-9. url: https://www.scopus.com/inward/record.
uri?eid=2-s2.0-85092544143&doi=10.1016%2fC2013-0-19285-
9&partnerID=40&md5=70375ef30746f623f781606b8818c40e.
[Kas+23]
Jakub Kaszyński et al. “Shoulder range of motion measurement using
inertial measurement unit-concurrent validity and reliability.” en. In:
Sensors (Basel) 23.17 (August 2023).
[Kob+20]
Dylan Kobsar et al. “Validity and reliability of wearable inertial sensors
in healthy adult walking: A systematic review and meta-analysis.” In:
Journal of NeuroEngineering and Rehabilitation 17 (May 2020). doi:
10.1186/s12984-020-00685-3.
[Li+24]
Jinfeng Li et al. “Concurrent validity of inertial measurement units in
range of motion measurements of upper extremity: A systematic review
and meta-analysis.” en. In: Wearable Technol. 5 (October 2024), e11.
[Lum+16]
Rob C van Lummel et al. “The instrumented sit-to-stand test (iSTS)
has greater clinical relevance than the manually recorded sit-to-stand
test in older adults.” en. In: PLoS One 11.7 (July 2016), e0157968.
[Mad+16a]
Priyanka Madhushri et al. “An mHealth Tool Suite for Mobility As-
sessment.” In: Information 7 (July 2016), page 47. doi: 10 . 3390 /
info7030047.
[Mad+16b]
Priyanka Madhushri et al. “An mHealth Tool Suite for Mobility As-
sessment.” In: Information 7 (July 2016), page 47. doi: 10 . 3390 /
info7030047.
==PAGE:108==
96
Bibliography
[Mar+21]
Diogo Luís Marques et al. “An experimental study on the validity and
reliability of a smartphone application to acquire temporal variables
during the single sit-to-stand test with older adults.” en. In: Sensors
(Basel) 21.6 (March 2021), page 2050.
[McK+17]
Marnee J McKay et al. “Reference values for developing responsive func-
tional outcome measures across the lifespan.” en. In: Neurology 88.16
(April 2017), pages 1512–1519.
[Mil+13]
Nora Millor et al. “An evaluation of the 30-s chair stand test in older
adults: frailty detection based on kinematic parameters from a single
inertial unit.” en. In: J. Neuroeng. Rehabil. 10.1 (August 2013), page 86.
[Mor+17]
Melissa M B Morrow et al. “Validation of inertial measurement units
for upper body kinematics.” In: J. Appl. Biomech. 33.3 (June 2017),
pages 227–232.
[MTC12]
Sabato Mellone, Carlo Tacconi, and Lorenzo Chiari. “Validity of a Smartphone-
based instrumented Timed Up and Go.” In: Gait Posture 36.1 (2012),
pages 163–165. issn: 0966-6362. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
gaitpost.2012.02.006. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0966636212000574.
[MYS12]
Abu Saleh Mohammad Mosa, Illhoi Yoo, and Lincoln Sheets. “A Sys-
tematic Review of Healthcare Applications for Smartphones.” In: BMC
Medical Informatics and Decision Making 12.1 (July 2012), page 67.
issn: 1472-6947. doi: 10.1186/1472-6947-12-67. url: https://doi.
org/10.1186/1472-6947-12-67.
[Nus+19]
Ryan Nussbaum et al. “Systematic Review of Mobile Health Applica-
tions in Rehabilitation.” In: Archives of Physical Medicine and Reha-
bilitation 100.1 (2019), pages 115–127. issn: 0003-9993. doi: https :
//doi.org/10.1016/j.apmr.2018.07.439. url: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0003999318311754.
[NW16]
C.C. Norkin and D.J. White. Measurement Of Joint Motion: A Guide
To Goniometry. F.A. Davis, 2016. isbn: 9780803658479. url: https:
//books.google.hu/books?id=TSluDQAAQBAJ.
[Obj25]
Object Management Group. Unified Modeling Language (UML). https:
//www.uml.org/. Accessed: 2025-07-31. 2025.
[Ort+19]
Paulina Ortega-Bastidas et al. “Use of a Single Wireless IMU for the
Segmentation and Automatic Analysis of Activities Performed in the
3-m Timed Up Go Test.” In: Sensors 19.7 (2019). issn: 1424-8220. doi:
10.3390/s19071647. url: https://www.mdpi.com/1424-8220/19/7/
1647.
==PAGE:109==
Bibliography
97
[PFK12]
Denise Peters, Stacy Fritz, and Debra Krotish. “Assessing the Reliability
and Validity of a Shorter Walk Test Compared With the 10-Meter Walk
Test for Measurements of Gait Speed in Healthy, Older Adults.” In:
Journal of geriatric physical therapy (2001) 36 (March 2012). doi: 10.
1519/JPT.0b013e318248e20d.
[PR91]
Diane Podsiadlo and Sandra Richardson. “The Timed “Up & Go”: A
Test of Basic Functional Mobility for Frail Elderly Persons.” In: Journal
of the American Geriatrics Society 39.2 (1991), pages 142–148. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1532-5415.1991.tb01616.x. eprint:
https://agsjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.
1111/j.1532-5415.1991.tb01616.x. url: https://agsjournals.
onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/j.1532-5415.1991.
tb01616.x.
[Ref24]
Refactoring.Guru. Strategy Design Pattern. Accessed: 2025-07-27. 2024.
url: https://refactoring.guru/design-patterns/strategy.
[Rig+19]
Michael Rigoni et al. “Assessment of shoulder range of motion using
a wireless inertial motion capture device-A validation study.” en. In:
Sensors (Basel) 19.8 (April 2019), page 1781.
[RJ13]
Roberta E Rikli and C Jessie Jones. “Development and validation of
criterion-referenced clinically relevant fitness standards for maintaining
physical independence in later years.” en. In: Gerontologist 53.2 (April
2013), pages 255–267.
[Rod+12]
D Rodríguez-Martín et al. “Identification of sit-to-stand and stand-to-sit
transitions using a single inertial sensor.” In: Studies in health technology
and informatics 177 (2012), pages 113–117.
[Sal+10]
Arash Salarian et al. “iTUG, a Sensitive and Reliable Measure of Mo-
bility.” In: IEEE Transactions on Neural Systems and Rehabilitation
Engineering 18.3 (2010), pages 303–310. doi: 10.1109/TNSRE.2010.
2047606.
[SHM02]
Teresa M Steffen, Timothy A Hacker, and Louise Mollinger. “Age- and
gender-related test performance in community-dwelling elderly people:
Six-Minute Walk Test, Berg Balance Scale, Timed Up & Go Test, and
gait speeds.” en. In: Phys. Ther. 82.2 (February 2002), pages 128–137.
[Shu+20]
Brajesh Shukla et al. “Instrumented Analysis of the Sit-to-Stand Move-
ment for Geriatric Screening: A Systematic Review.” In: Bioengineering
7.4 (2020). issn: 2306-5354. doi: 10.3390/bioengineering7040139.
url: https://www.mdpi.com/2306-5354/7/4/139.
[tea25a]
Dart team. Creating packages. https://dart.dev/tools/pub/create-
packages. Accessed: 2025-08-03. 2025.
[tea25b]
Dart team. Publishing packages. https : / / dart . dev / tools / pub /
publishing. Accessed: 2025-08-08. 2025.
==PAGE:110==
98
Bibliography
[TJT07]
Gyrd Thrane, Ragnar M Joakimsen, and Eline Thornquist. “The asso-
ciation between timed up and go test and history of falls: The Tromsø
study.” en. In: BMC Geriatr. 7.1 (January 2007), page 1.
[Wil+24]
Ilse H.J. Willemse et al. “Smartphone applications for Movement Dis-
orders: Towards collaboration and re-use.” In: Parkinsonism
Related
Disorders 120 (2024), page 105988. issn: 1353-8020. doi: https : / /
doi.org/10.1016/j.parkreldis.2023.105988. url: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1353802023010672.
[Zho+25]
Huiming Zhong et al. “Global Burden of Traumatic Brain Injury in 204
Countries and Territories From 1990 to 2021.” In: American Journal of
Preventive Medicine 68.4 (2025), pages 754–763. issn: 0749-3797. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.amepre.2025.01.001. url: https://
www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0749379725000017.
