==PAGE:1==
Extending the Attribute Based Access Con­
trol Model (ABAC) with Honey­Attributes for
Insider Threat Detection
A Trust­Aware Framework
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Extending the Attribute Based Access Control Model (ABAC) with Honey­Attributes
for Insider Threat Detection
A Trust­Aware Framework
Master Thesis
July, 2025
By
Anastasia Danai Panagiotopoulou
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, Brovej, Build­
ing 118, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.byg.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis was prepared over a six­month period at the Department of Applied Mathe­
matics and Computer Science (DTU Compute), Technical University of Denmark (DTU), in
partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree Master of Science in Human­Centered
Artificial Intelligence.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic understanding of access control models, cyber­
security fundamentals, and decision making techniques.
Anastasia Danai Panagiotopoulou ­ s230274
Signature
Date
ii
Extending the Attribute Based Access Control Model (ABAC) with Honey­Attributes for Insider Threat
Detection
05/07/2025
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Insider threats continue to challenge traditional access control mechanisms, particularly
in systems that rely on static attributes and rigid policies that fail to account for the evolving
nature of user behavior. This thesis addresses insider threat detection through the lens
of trust dynamics by proposing a trust­aware extension of the Attribute­Based Access
Control (ABAC) model. Unlike conventional approaches that treat access permissions
as fixed, this framework continuously evaluates the trustworthiness of users based on
behavioral evidence and adjusts their access privileges accordingly.
At the core of this approach lies the integration of deceptive honey attributes—decoy
attributes embedded within the system—to serve as triggers for detecting malicious be­
havior. While the framework does not propose new methods for generating or placing
these decoys, it uses them as part of a dynamic feedback loop: interactions with honey
attributes are logged and used as behavioral indicators to recalculate user trust using the
Fuzzy Analytic Hierarchy Process (FAHP).
This trust recalibration affects not only user permissions but also reshapes the perceived
sensitivity of system attributes, influencing which attributes qualify as candidates for honey
attribute protection. The result is a self­adaptive ABAC system that better reflects user be­
havior over time and enables more granular, risk­aware and through trust, access control
decisions.
Extending the Attribute Based Access Control Model (ABAC) with Honey­Attributes for Insider Threat
Detection
iii
==PAGE:6==
iv
Extending the Attribute Based Access Control Model (ABAC) with Honey­Attributes for Insider Threat
Detection
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
2
Insider Threat
2
2.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.2
Defining Insider Threat . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.3
Types of Attack & Motive
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.4
Impact & Damage
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.5
Prevention Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.6
Detection Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Access Control
10
3.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3.2
Access Control Types and Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3.3
Attribute Based Access Control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.4
Positioning ABAC Among Traditional Models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
4
Deception Systems in Cybersecurity
19
4.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.2
Previous work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.3
Insider vs Outsider Threats in Deception . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
4.4
Honey Attributes as Deceptive Sensor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4.5
Design Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
5
Methodology
24
5.1
Previous Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
5.2
Current Approach
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
5.3
Trust Calculation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
5.4
Sensitivity Calculation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
5.5
Policy and Attribute Repositories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
6
Implementation
35
6.1
Dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
6.2
Request Generation Strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
6.3
Trust Estimation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
6.4
Sensitivity Estimation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
7
Evaluation
42
7.1
Attribute Sensitivity Evaluation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
7.2
Risk Evaluation of Attributes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
7.3
Trust Variation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
7.4
Action Threshold Variation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
8
Summary and Future Work
51
8.1
Design Choices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
8.2
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
Extending the Attribute Based Access Control Model (ABAC) with Honey­Attributes for Insider Threat
Detection
v
==PAGE:8==
8.3
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
Bibliography
53
.1
Fuzzy Arithmetic Operations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
.2
Defuzzification and Consistency Ratio . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
.3
Group Aggregation of Expert Opinions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
.4
Trust Model Behavior Under Parameter Variation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
.5
Insider Simulation Parameterization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
vi
Extending the Attribute Based Access Control Model (ABAC) with Honey­Attributes for Insider Threat
Detection
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Cyberthreats posed by insiders are not a new phenomenon; they have existed since the
pre­Internet era, when access was restricted to a limited number of authorized individuals.
According to the 2024 Insider Threat Report [1], 48% of organizations have reported an
increase in insider attacks over the past 12 months. However, the definition of an insider
remains ambiguous, as it is often shaped by a researcher’s dataset, situational context,
biases, and assumptions.
The CISA Insider Threat Mitigation Guide [2] defines an insider as any individual who has
or had authorized access to an organization’s resources, including personnel, facilities,
information, equipment, networks, and systems. This interpretation suggests a binary
classification—one is either an insider threat or not. This oversimplifies the complexity of
organizational access control, assuming a rigid boundary between internal and external
environments. In reality, organizations operate across multiple layers of access, where
progressive levels of privilege determine how deeply a user can penetrate the system.
The closer a user is to the organization’s core resources, the fewer barriers they face in
acquiring elevated privileges.
Given this complexity, insider threats should be assessed in relation to access control
policies that define a subject’s privilege level. That level of privileges, is directly tied to
the permissions a subject has over some set of resources which defines its risk level.
The challenge insider threats pose, is that the permissions assigned to them grant them
legitimate access making it hard to detect when those permissions are illicitly used. Fur­
thermore, overprivileged users often have access to more resources than necessary for
their daily tasks, increasing security risks. While trust is required for employees to per­
form their roles, trustworthiness is never guaranteed as some insiders may misuse their
privileges for malicious purposes.
This thesis addresses the insider threat problem from both prevention and detection per­
spective, aiming to combine these approaches into one, unified security model. It pro­
poses Attribute­Based Access Control (ABAC) as the foundation for access control, em­
phasizing its superior granularity and its ability to adjust permissions on multiple attributes
rather than a single factor. By adding trust as a subject attribute, the access control sys­
tem becomes trust­aware. Since trust is not static, but might change over an individual’s
employment, this thesis integrates real­time trust adjustments based on user behavior and
suspicious activities, allowing access privileges to adapt over time. Furthermore, cyber
deception is suggested as the insider threat detection mechanism by embedding decep­
tive elements within ABAC that reduce a subject’s trust level once it interacts with them.
As a result, the proposed model is an adaptive, deception­enhanced and trust­aware ver­
sion of the ABAC model that servers both as a preventive measure and an early detection
mechanism for insider threats.
Extending the Attribute Based Access Control Model (ABAC) with Honey­Attributes for Insider Threat
Detection
1
==PAGE:10==
2
Insider Threat
2.1
Motivation
When an organization sets up security measures to protect its resources, data, and pri­
vacy, the focus is usually on external adversaries—attackers with clear malicious intent.
Security specialists are brought in to design and implement these defenses, often as­
suming that insiders, whether employees, contractors, or even the security teams them­
selves, can be trusted. But this assumption is flawed. A security threat is not always
about intent—it is about the potential to cause harm, whether deliberately or accidentally.
This is where insider threats become an issue. They are not just about people intentionally
misusing their access but also about those who, due to negligence, carelessness, or lack
of awareness, can still pose a security risk. Understanding what makes an insider threat
is the first step in mitigating it, addressing the ways of detecting it and further limiting the
damage.
2.2
Defining Insider Threat
Different researchers have taken different approaches to define insider threats, depending
on what aspect of security they focus on. However, there is agreement that there is no
single, well­defined definition of what makes someone an insider. The problem is that
insiders and outsiders are not always easy to separate. In reality, the boundary between
them is often blurred. One issue with many definitions is that they assume insiders are
always people with legitimate access. But what about ”outside­inners” [3]—outsiders who
have somehow gained insider access? This could happen through stolen credentials,
social engineering, or vulnerabilities in the system. If an outsider gains the same level of
access as an insider, does that make them an insider?
There’s also the question of former insiders—employees, contractors, or partners who
once had access but no longer do. Should they still be considered insiders? Insider
threats don’t just come from current employees. Ex­employees, consultants, or even
third­party vendors with past access could still pose a threat, whether by keeping sensitive
data or finding ways back into the system.
A bigger challenge is that modern security doesn’t operate within a single clear boundary.
Many organizations rely on cloud services, remote work, and federated access. Thus,
someone might be an ”insider” in one part of the system but an ”outsider” in another.
Probst et al. [4] present several definitions, each focusing on different aspects of the
insider threat. Instead of specifically referring to employees, they use more general terms
like individual or someone, making the definition broader and more flexible.
• An insider is defined with respect to a resource, leading to “degrees of insider­ness”;
• An insider is somebody with legitimate access to resources;
• An insider is a wholly or partially trusted subject;
• An insider is an individual who has or had access to resources;
• An insider is a system user who can misuse privileges;
• An insider is an individual with authorized access who might attempt unauthorized
removal or sabotage of critical assets or who could aid outsiders in doing so;
2
Extending the Attribute Based Access Control Model (ABAC) with Honey­Attributes for Insider Threat
Detection
==PAGE:11==
• An insider is a person or company whom we trust.
While these definitions attempt to capture the nature of insider threats, they also have
some grey areas. Some definitions assume trust is static—that insiders are trusted be­
cause of their role or position. But trust is not permanent. People’s intentions change.
Employees might become disgruntled, coerced, or tempted to misuse their privileges.
Others may simply make mistakes. Moreover, perimeters are often overlapping, porous,
or completely absent, making it harder to determine who should be trusted and when.
So, while these definitions give a starting point, they don’t fully capture the real­world
complexity of insider threats.
2.3
Types of Attack & Motive
To understand the problem, we need to explore the types of attack the insider often per­
forms and the motive behind those attacks. There are different types of attack an insider
can perform. Often, the word ”attack” is not an exact definition of such actions, and the
word ”motive” is better suited, since unlike external threats, the insiders can be both ma­
licious and non­malicious. In the following table 2.1 are listed some common motives for
both malicious and non­malicious insider based on different research.
Type of Insider Motive
Goal
Source
Malicious Insiders
Financial Exploitation
Selling proprietary data for personal gain.
[5], [6], [7]
Revenge
Disgruntled employees sabotaging systems.
[8], [6]
Espionage
Leaking confidential data to competitors.
[8], [9]
Deliberate Sabotage
Intentionally disrupting business operations.
[8], [9]
Non­Malicious Insiders
Accidental Errors
Misconfigurations or unintentional data breaches.
[8], [6]
Policy Circumvention
Bypassing security controls to complete tasks.
[8], [7]
Curiosity
Exploring the system without malicious intent.
[10], [8]
Negligence
Mishandling credentials or downloading malicious
files.
[10], [6]
Testing the System
Checking for vulnerabilities but not reporting them.
[8]
Table 2.1: Classification of Malicious and Non­Malicious Insiders
Due to the different intent and source of threat, one prevention strategy cannot target
all categories. Furthermore, the impact may not depend on motivation­ a non­malicious
accidental act may have devastating consequences to an organisation. The following
section presents real­world examples of insider attacks, detailing their impact and the
damages they caused.
2.4
Impact & Damage
Estimating the annual losses caused by insider threats across industries is difficult due to
incidents being either not reported or not detected. Insider attacks on an organisation’s
electronic resources can result in various forms of damage [7].
• Disruption of IT Services: They may compromise system integrity and availability,
leading to disruptions such as data corruption or denial­of­service incidents.
Extending the Attribute Based Access Control Model (ABAC) with Honey­Attributes for Insider Threat
Detection
3
==PAGE:12==
• Financial Loss: The organisation may experience financial losses, whether through
direct costs or reduced productivity.
• Unauthorised Disclosure: Some insider actions may violate legal regulations,
such as engaging in insider trading or improperly disclosing confidential informa­
tion, potentially resulting in legal penalties and fines.
• Loss of Privacy: Attacks may also breach corporate policies or social norms, in­
cluding unauthorized access to sensitive data, such as a bank employee monitoring
a former partner’s account or hospital staff reviewing the medical records of high­
profile individuals.
Beyond these consequences, insider threats can also lead to further damages as outlined
by the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA) [11]. According to their
Insider Threat Mitigation Guide, additional risks include:
• IP Theft: Theft of intellectual property (IP), trade secrets, or proprietary data, which
can result in loss of competitive advantage.
• Damage to Infrastructure: Damage to physical or digital infrastructure, including
unauthorized modifications to critical systems or destruction of key resources.
• Personal Injury: Harm to individuals due to workplace violence or the exposure of
sensitive personal information.
• Loss of Life: Severe incidents where insider actions contribute to life­threatening
situations, such as sabotage of critical infrastructure or systems affecting public
safety.
Several consequences mentioned above are mapped to real­life incidents as seen in 2.2
4
Extending the Attribute Based Access Control Model (ABAC) with Honey­Attributes for Insider Threat
Detection
==PAGE:13==
Case
Description
Mapped
Conse­
quence(s)
Source
Robert
Hanssen
Former FBI agent sold classified
U.S. intelligence to Russia for over
20 years, compromising national
security.
Unauthorized
Disclo­
sure, IP Theft, Loss of
Life
[12]
Daniel
Ellsberg
Leaked
top­secret
documents
about U.S. involvement in Vietnam,
leading to a political scandal.
Unauthorized
Disclo­
sure, Loss of Privacy
[13]
Tesla
Em­
ployees
Tesla
workers
accessed
and
shared
sensitive
images
and
videos recorded by customer vehi­
cles, violating privacy expectations
and
potentially
breaching
data
protection laws.
Loss of Privacy, Unau­
thorized Disclosure
[14]
Sudhish
Kasaba
Ramesh
A former Cisco employee deliber­
ately deleted hundreds of virtual
machines, causing significant ser­
vice outages and financial losses
for the company.
Disruption of IT Ser­
vices, Financial Loss,
Damage to Infrastruc­
ture
[15]
Table 2.2: Insider Attack Incidents
The damages caused by insiders, along with the few but remarkable past incidents, makes
it clear why protecting against insider attacks is so important. In general, there are two
strategies to handle insider threats: defend against them, and detect them either while
they occur or after the fact. The following section goes over the two strategies, outlining
common methods used.
2.5
Prevention Methods
In general, prevention is vastly preferable to detection and attempted remediation. Some
of the prevention strategies include security architecture principles, security and access
control policies, strenghtening authentication as well as authorisation.
2.5.1
Access Control Mechanisms
In computer security, access control mechanisms provide or limit access to electronic re­
sources based on various factors, including identity, roles, attributes, or predefined poli­
cies. Access control typically consist of the two following components, authorisation and
authentication.
Authorisation
Authorisation determines the actions a subject can perform over a set of resources. How­
ever, authorisation alone is not enough to prevent insider attacks, effective access con­
trols must be in place covering both electronic and physical access. Those controls should
also be fine­grained, adaptable to organisational changes and continuously maintained
as objects, subjects and organisational goals shift.
To ensure security and protect against insider threats, access control mechanisms should
adhere to three key principles:
• Least Privilege: Requires that subject has just enough access rights to perform its
tasks. This principle, if followed, has the ability to reduce the risks of unauthorised
access to the system [16].
Extending the Attribute Based Access Control Model (ABAC) with Honey­Attributes for Insider Threat
Detection
5
==PAGE:14==
• Separation of Duties (SoD): Critical actions should be broken down to individual
processes, for which different subjects have the required privileges for. This way,
responsibilities are being distributed creating accountability.
• Escalation Control: Privilege escalation should be regulated, requiring explicit ap­
proval or auditable processes, such as break­glass mechanisms, especially when
accessing sensitive resources or performing high privilege actions.
Authentication
Authentication determines the level of access by verifying the possession of certain cre­
dentials. Knowledge­based authentication (e.g., passwords, PINs), possession­based
authentication (e.g., security tokens, digital certificates), and inherence­based authenti­
cation (e.g., biometrics such as fingerprints, retinal scans, or voice recognition) are some
common authentication methods. In general, some methods are more secure by default,
since they are harder to compromise. For example, biometric authentication is more re­
sistant to attacks than the traditional password­based authentication.
Regardless of the method used, preventing insiders requires the authentication system
to adhere to the following best practices:
• Multi­Factor Authentication: Authentication should not rely on a single point of fail­
ure. Instead, more than one factor should be required for a subject to authenticate,
reducing the risk of credential­based attacks.
• De­Authentication: The system should log out the subject after a period of inactiv­
ity, protecting other users from using the session illicitly.
• Password Policies: A strong password policy must be in place, taking in mind
password length and complexity, safe storage and transmission as well as credential
rotation.
Beyond those considerations, authentication systems can be further secured by using
passwordless authentication, single sign­on and federated login.
2.5.2
Training and Awareness
To effectively mitigate insider threats, training must be targeted at multiple organizational
levels. First, specialized training for Human Resources (HR) and management person­
nel can facilitate early detection of potential insider threats by raising awareness of psy­
chosocial indicators such as stress, frustration, anger management issues, and lack of
dependability—factors which have been shown to precede insider incidents [17]. Sec­
ond, general security awareness programs for all employees are essential to reduce the
organization’s overall attack surface. These programs should include training on secure
data handling, recognizing social engineering attempts, proper use of access privileges,
and reporting suspicious behavior.
2.5.3
Security Policies
Security policies are essential for insider threat prevention as they define the boundary
between acceptable and unacceptable behavior at both technical and organizational lev­
els [4]. They implicitly shape who is considered an insider and guide how violations are
detected and handled. However, many policies are poorly specified, overly complex, or
fail to reflect actual operational realities. This results in a gap between intended and de
facto policies—a gap that can be exploited by malicious insiders or misunderstood by
well­meaning staff. Ideally, organizations should maintain a minimal and coherent set
of behavior­focused policies that align with business processes, legal requirements, and
organizational values.
6
Extending the Attribute Based Access Control Model (ABAC) with Honey­Attributes for Insider Threat
Detection
==PAGE:15==
Policies must also be evaluated through a human­centric lens. Overly rigid or excessive
rules can lead to disengagement or policy fatigue, undermining compliance. Engaging
employees in policy development and review—through internal exercises or regular feed­
back loops—helps ensure that rules are relevant, understandable, and do not interfere
unnecessarily with workflow. This fosters a sense of ownership and encourages a culture
where security is a shared responsibility rather than an imposed burden.
Context­awareness and dynamic enforcement are also crucial. Certain behaviors may
be acceptable under emergency conditions but classified as violations otherwise. Thus,
policies should incorporate conditional logic, such as defining acceptable actions based
on context, role, or level of trust. Furthermore, organizations must be cautious in inter­
preting policy violations, as many observable indicators of insider threats (e.g., unusual
access times or increased file transfers) may be correlated with, but not causally linked
to, malicious behavior. False positives can harm both the individual and organizational
culture, potentially deterring legitimate users or even pushing them toward resentment.
Decision­making processes for intervention should therefore consider the psychological
and operational consequences of misclassification.
2.5.4
Background Screening
Pre­employment background checks and periodic security screenings are common prac­
tices for evaluating whether individuals pose a risk before being granted access to sensi­
tive systems. These may include criminal history checks, credit evaluations, employment
verification, and reference assessments. However, while background screening is useful
for detecting clear red flags, it cannot reliably predict future insider attacks. Psychological
profiling has been explored as a way to identify individuals at risk of malicious behav­
ior, but research has shown that insider motivations are highly varied, and attempts at
preemptive identification often yield false positives [8].
Rather than rely on profiling, a more promising direction involves using psychology to rein­
force and sustain positive behavior. Encouraging a security­minded culture, recognizing
ethical conduct, and aligning individual goals with organizational values can motivate in­
siders to act in the organization’s best interest. At the same time, organizations should be
cautious not to inadvertently reward risky or unorthodox behavior in ways that normalize
policy violations.
2.5.5
Security Architecture Principles
A secure system architecture forms the foundation of an effective threat prevention strat­
egy. Most of architectural decisions are made early in the system development and have
a significant impact on how well a system can detect threats. Once these decisions are
implemented, modifying the architecture can be time­consuming, costly, and sometimes
infeasible due to backward compatibility requirements. Having that in mind, one should
be aware of the following security principals before deciding on the system architecture:
• Separation of Duties (SoD): Critical tasks not being properly divided across mul­
tiple roles or individuals increases the attack surface of the environment. Thus,
making sure that the system architecture adhere to the SoD principle, reduces the
likelihood of an insider attack by preventing a single threat having control of multiple
sensitive operations.
• Physical and Network Segmentation: Keeping sensitive systems and data in the
same zone increases the risk of lateral movement, where an attacker can move
from a system with broader access to others with more restricted permissions. Seg­
mentation reduces this risk tightening access controls, enforcing stricter boundaries
Extending the Attribute Based Access Control Model (ABAC) with Honey­Attributes for Insider Threat
Detection
7
==PAGE:16==
and thus making it more difficult for unauthorized users to reach high­value targets
within the infrastructure.
• Least Privilege: Broad permissions are often granted to users for administrative
convenience, which can leave systems more vulnerable to insider threats. As a
core principle of security design, users should have just­enough level of access
necessary to perform their daily tasks. This reduces the risk of over­privileging and
acts as a preventive control to limit potential damage, especially in cases where an
account is compromised due to identity theft or misuse.
• Data Encryption and Key Management: Encrypting sensitive data both at rest
and in transit is essential to ensure confidentiality and integrity, even if unautho­
rized access occurs. However, encryption alone is not sufficient without proper key
management. Secure generation, storage, distribution, and regular rotation of cryp­
tographic keys must be in place to prevent insiders from exploiting them to decrypt
or manipulate protected data. Without this, compromised keys could grant attackers
access to high­value assets and significantly expand the attack surface.
2.6
Detection Methods
2.6.1
Rule­Based detection:
Rules can be crafted to cover known insider attacks by profiling the user based on in­
formation gathered by a variety of audit sources. Several researches have been made
so far, about profiling using user and system command data, as well as profiling pro­
gram executions and environments both on Windows and Unix or Linux systems [5]. The
drawback of this approach is that sophisticated attackers adapt their tactics, making it in­
effective against zero­day insider threats. Additionally, keeping detection profiles updated
to new tactics and insider methods it is challenging and requires regular refinement. In
general, real user data is hard to obtain from both normal and malicious users since those
are generally confidential and not available as an open source. Additionally, insider at­
tacks are often not publicly disclosed due to reputational risks and potential damage to
the organization’s public image.
2.6.2
Behavioural­Based detection
By combining user behavior profiling with ongoing monitoring, organizations can spot un­
usual changes in how users normally act. This is especially useful in cases like identity
theft or account compromise, where someone is pretending to be another user. Since
the attacker doesn’t fully know the real user’s habits, their behavior often looks suspicious
compared to the expected patterns.
Machine learning and data analysis help improve this type of detection by building models
of normal behavior. These models can track things like file access, login times, command
use, and web browsing. If a user suddenly starts doing something out of the ordinary—
like working at odd hours or accessing sensitive files—that can be a warning sign of a
possible insider threat.
Beyond system­level activity, contextual signs related to human factors—such as elevated
stress, altered communication styles, or sudden changes in work routines—can enrich
detection. By combining behavioral telemetry with contextual indicators, organizations
gain deeper insight into user intent and improve their threat response.
However, this method has its limits. If a real employee decides to misuse their access,
their actions might still look normal because they’re acting within their usual behavior.
8
Extending the Attribute Based Access Control Model (ABAC) with Honey­Attributes for Insider Threat
Detection
==PAGE:17==
This highlights the importance of combining behavioral analysis with other detection tech­
niques, rather than relying on it in isolation.
2.6.3
Network­Based detection
One class of network­based detection techniques operates on the principle that insiders
may violate the ”need­to­know” principle—accessing data beyond their authorized scope.
These methods monitor network traffic (such as HTTP, SMB, SMTP, and FTP) generated
by user actions within the corporate intranet. By analyzing this intercepted traffic, systems
can track user access patterns and identify anomalies indicative of potential reconnais­
sance or exfiltration. This includes flagging activities like searches containing sensitive
terms observed in network queries, accesses to files outside one’s typical scope detected
via file­sharing protocols (e.g., SMB), large­scale downloads visible in data transfers, or
printing to unauthorized locations identified through network print jobs [5].
A particularly effective extension of this strategy involves detection by deception using
technologies like honeytokens and honeypots.
Honeytokens are fake or decoy data
elements—such as non­existent employee records, credentials, or file paths—strategically
placed in databases, file systems, or even intranet search indexes. These tokens are de­
signed to be enticing to a malicious actor while being irrelevant to any legitimate user.
Any interaction with a honeytoken, such as a read attempt or download, is considered
inherently suspicious and triggers an alert, as no authorized activity should involve those
resources.
Similarly, honeypots are decoy systems or services that mimic real IT assets, such as in­
ternal web servers, file shares, or administrative interfaces. When an insider attempts to
explore or interact with these decoys, the activity is logged and analyzed in real time.
These deception­based methods are particularly effective because they generate low
false positive rates—any access attempt is inherently anomalous—and can be used to
observe attacker behavior in a controlled environment without compromising actual sys­
tems or data.
2.6.4
Forensics and Log Analysis
This approach is usually conducted after the intrusion of an insider attack has been discov­
ered, relying on the analysis of log trails left behind by the attacker. Forensic investigation
involves reconstructing the sequence of events by examining system, network, and ap­
plication logs to understand how the attack unfolded, what systems were affected, and
what data may have been accessed or exfiltrated.
However, a major limitation of this approach is that many insider actions may not gener­
ate detailed or easily accessible audit trails. Actions such as simply viewing files, using
legitimate credentials, copying data to removable storage, or interacting with internal sys­
tems in authorized ways often leave minimal traces in standard logs. In some cases,
logging may not even be enabled for certain user actions, or the logs may lack sufficient
granularity to provide clear evidence of malicious intent.
Additionally, the effectiveness of log analysis depends on the completeness, integrity,
and centralization of logs. Logs stored only locally may be tampered with or deleted by
a knowledgeable insider. Without centralized logging and tamper­evident mechanisms,
critical evidence could be lost or manipulated, making post­incident analysis unreliable.
Extending the Attribute Based Access Control Model (ABAC) with Honey­Attributes for Insider Threat
Detection
9
==PAGE:18==
3
Access Control
3.1
Motivation
The three basic components of computer security that form the CIA Triad are Confiden­
tiality, Integrity and Availability. The principle of confidentiality is the concealment of infor­
mation or resources to protect personal privacy and proprietary information [18]. Access
Control (AC) mechanisms support the goal of confidentiality, by applying policies that
deny a subject access to system resources, or even data hiding. AC also works as a pre­
vention mechanism that protects integrity, the authenticity of data, by blocking any unau­
thorised attempts to change the data. Integrity, unlike confidentiality, not only concerns
the correctness of data but also its trustworthiness—that is, the assurance that the data
has not been tampered with and originates from a reliable source. This makes integrity
more challenging to evaluate in practice, as it often depends on assumptions about the
legitimacy and behavior of users or systems providing or modifying the data. Unlike con­
fidentiality, which can be enforced through strict access restrictions, integrity violations
may occur even when access is authorized—particularly when a trusted user misuses
their privileges. Moreover, availability, the ability to use information and resources when
acquired, requires different type of controls. However, availability can also be threatened
by individuals with the authority to deny access to data or services, whether intentionally
or accidentally, making it another dimension that access control can help protect through
proper enforcement. Thus, it is evident that AC management is a vital part of security in
an organisation as it supports all three pillars of the CIA triad. Yet, the effectiveness of
AC mechanisms depends on several underlying assumptions [7]:
• AC policies grant and constrain access in a manner that is correct for the organisa­
tion’s goals, supporting organisational policies and regulations.
• The organisation correctly identifies and implemented such policies.
• The correctness of the policies and their implementation are maintained over time,
as the resources, users, and organisation’s goal shift.
Those assumptions highlight the need for a structured approach to managing access.
This approach depends on well­defined AC primitives, models and mechanisms. AC
primitives—such as subject, object, action, capability, and privileges—form the founda­
tion of any AC policy [19]. By clearly identifying and specifying these primitives, organi­
zations can build policies that are both correct and aligned with their security objectives.
Moving on to AC models, they are responsible of adding the necessary structure to how
AC primitives and rules are combined, preventing scattered or contradictory policy im­
plementations. This ensures organizational transparency by clarifying exactly who has
access to what and why. Over time, the adaptability of these policies depends critically
on how Access Control Mechanisms (ACMs) are deployed. As the operational core of
policy enforcement, each ACM receives access requests, makes authorization decisions,
and enforces outcomes – essentially serving as the logical enforcement points where
abstract policies translate into concrete actions, as defined in [20].
3.2
Access Control Types and Models
In the evolution of access control, six (6) main types have been defined, each differing in
how control over access decisions is established and enforced. Within each type, vari­
ous models have been developed, and over time, these models have been modified and
10
Extending the Attribute Based Access Control Model (ABAC) with Honey­Attributes for Insider Threat
Detection
==PAGE:19==
extended. Table 3.1 presents a high­level comparison of these access control types and
their representative models, based on prior academic studies [21]. Below is a brief de­
scription of each:
• Identity­Centric Access Control: Governs access to resources by verifying the
credentials of a user or entity to confirm their identity.
• Matrix­Centric Access Control: Organizes access permissions using matrices
that map users to specific resources and associated actions.
• Rule­Centric Access Control: Applies universal, predefined rules to determine
conditional access to resources.
• Role­Centric Access Control: Shifts access decisions from individual users to
roles within an organization, simplifying permission management.
• Content­Centric Access Control: Utilizes resource or user attributes to make ac­
cess decisions, reducing administrative overhead and avoiding overly broad per­
missions.
• Context­Centric Access Control: Grants or denies access based on contextual
information such as time, location, or current system state.
Among the wide range of models, the following are commonly cited in the literature as
foundational and widely adopted:
• Mandatory Access Control (MAC) and Discretionary Access Control (DAC):
MAC enforces access based on system­defined policies involving user clearance
levels and data classification. In contrast, DAC allows resource owners to define
who can access their data, typically using identifiers such as usernames or pass­
words.
• Access Control Lists (ACLs): ACLs specify permissions for individual users or
groups on specific resources, requiring explicit entries for each subject­object pair.
• Role­Based Access Control (RBAC): RBAC assigns permissions based on orga­
nizational roles which reflect job responsibilities rather than individual identities.
• Attribute­Based Access Control (ABAC): ABAC extends earlier models by con­
sidering a broader set of attributes. Attributes including user, object, and environ­
mental characteristics make fine­grained, context­aware access decisions.
Table 3.1: Comparison of Access Control Model Types: Components, Advantages, and
Challenges
ACM Type
Model
Key Elements
Advantages
Limitations
Identity­centric
DAC
Ownership of
resources
Decentralized
decision­making; high
user autonomy
Difficult
mainte­
nance; not
ideal for
regulatory
settings
Continued on next page
Extending the Attribute Based Access Control Model (ABAC) with Honey­Attributes for Insider Threat
Detection
11
==PAGE:20==
ACM Type
Model
Key Elements
Advantages
Limitations
Matrix­centric
Access Control
List (ACL)
User ID,
Permissions list
Straightforward
access structure;
ease of configuration
Becomes
complex in
large
setups;
scalability
issues
Capability List
(CL)
User ID,
Token­based
access
Multidimensional
framework, real­world
use cases
Ambiguity in
definition;
redundancy
issues
View­Based AC
(VBAC)
User ID,
Resource­view
mapping
Adaptability in
implementation
Not suitable
for complex
or dynamic
systems
Rule­centric
MAC
User ID,
Security level
tags
Strong policy
enforcement;
mitigates
unauthorized
disclosure
No
fine­grained
control;
difficult to
manage at
scale
Multilevel
Security Model
(MLS)
User ID,
Classification
hierarchy
Structured and
layered access; high
data
integrity/confidentiality
Complex
rule enforce­
ment;
latency in
decision­
making
Multilateral
Security
User ID, Trust
indicators
Mutual trust and
coordination;
balanced access
control
Coordination
complexity;
overhead in
agreements
Rule­based AC
User ID, Rule
conditions
Easy to deploy;
well­suited to policy
consistency
Flexibility
and
scalability
shortcom­
ings,
Role­centric
RBAC
User ID,
Organizational
role
Efficient privilege
management;
scalable in structured
orgs
Poor
handling of
dynamic
attributes;
role
explosion
Administration
RBAC
Admin roles,
Hierarchy of
roles
Enables scalable
delegation of admin
rights
Hard to
manage
cross­role
access in
complex
systems
Organisation­
based
AC
Roles,
Activities,
Contextual
elements
Semantic modeling
and policy abstraction
Limited in
supporting
cross­
domain
federation
Continued on next page
12
Extending the Attribute Based Access Control Model (ABAC) with Honey­Attributes for Insider Threat
Detection
==PAGE:21==
ACM Type
Model
Key Elements
Advantages
Limitations
Team­based
AC
User, Team
roles, Tasks
Enhances
collaboration via
dynamic access
control
Complexity
in setup and
policy
conflict
resolution
Content­centric
ABAC
User ID,
Environmental
and object
attributes
High flexibility and
fine­grain control;
supports
context­awareness
High compu­
tational
overhead;
policy
formulation
is complex
Task­based AC
Task­based
attributes
Reduces risk of
over­privileged
access; adaptable
Performance
cost; imple­
mentation
challenges
Relation­based
AC
User­Object
relationships
Supports access
based on social and
organizational ties
Difficult to
scale;
complicated
relationship
modeling
Entity­based
AC
Entity
characteristics
Strong privacy
alignment; versatile
access strategies
Performance
bottlenecks
in large en­
vironments
Context­centric
Risk­based AC
Risk levels,
Criteria
thresholds
Dynamically adjusts
access based on
quantified risk
Possibility of
false
negatives;
balancing
strictness is
hard
History­based
AC
Behavior
tracking
Supports behavioral
profiling; useful in
compliance scenarios
Implementation
is intensive;
behavioral
drift may
affect
accuracy
Emotion­based
AC
Emotion/state
cues
Adapts to
emotional/cognitive
cues; user­friendly in
sensitive contexts
Cognitive
modeling is
difficult; in­
terpretation
can be
ambiguous
Usage­based
AC
Usage context,
Continuous
monitoring
Supports real­time
changes and
obligations
High system
load;
complex
runtime
enforcement
Behavior­based
AC
Behavior
context and
intent
Allows intent­driven
and adaptive access;
high accuracy
Data noise
sensitivity;
false
positives
may arise
Extending the Attribute Based Access Control Model (ABAC) with Honey­Attributes for Insider Threat
Detection
13
==PAGE:22==
3.3
Attribute Based Access Control
The access control model used in this thesis builds on Attribute­Based Access Control
(ABAC), incorporating its key concepts and extending its architecture with a dynamic trust­
based component. To ground the reader in this approach, the core components and
mechanisms of ABAC are introduced in this section, followed by a discussion of how
ABAC compares with more traditional access control models.
3.3.1
Policy and Attribute Management
In ABAC, access decisions are made by evaluating a set of policies against the attributes
of the subject, the object, the action, and the environmental conditions present at the
time of the request. These policies define the allowable relationships between attribute
combinations and operations, and are evaluated dynamically at runtime.
Attributes are represented as name­value pairs and are categorized as follows:
• Subject attributes: Describe the entity making the request (e.g., role = “nurse”,
clearance = “confidential”, nationality = “US”).
• Object attributes: Describe the resource (e.g., classification = “confidential”, type
= “medical record”, owner = “OrgA”).
• Action attributes: Define the operation being attempted (e.g., read, write, delete).
While not treated as formal attributes in the NIST model [20], they are necessary for
policy evaluation.
• Environmental attributes: Include context such as time of access, location, or
threat level.
Policies in ABAC define rules that specify which combinations of these attributes result in
access being permitted or denied. These policies can be written in policy languages such
as XACML, and range from simple Boolean conditions to complex logical expressions
involving multiple attributes.
At a higher level, organizations may begin with Natural Language Policies (NLPs), which
are high­level, human­readable rules (e.g., “Only medical staff can access patient records”).
These are then translated into Digital Policies (DPs) that can be evaluated programmati­
cally. In complex environments, policies may be further governed by Metapolicies (MPs),
which define how to manage conflicts, priorities, and policy lifecycle.
3.3.2
Architecture and Functional Components
ABAC follows a modular architectural design, where core components work together to
evaluate policies and make access control decisions. These components can be im­
plemented as part of a centralized system or distributed logically and physically across
different environments, depending on the needs and scale of the organization.
The four primary components are:
• Policy Administration Point (PAP): Responsible for the creation, management,
and publication of access control policies. Administrators define policies here, which
are stored and later retrieved for evaluation.
• Policy Decision Point (PDP): The core evaluation engine that receives access
requests, retrieves the relevant policy from the PAP, and evaluates it against the
attributes provided by the PIP. The PDP produces the final access decision (e.g.,
permit or deny).
14
Extending the Attribute Based Access Control Model (ABAC) with Honey­Attributes for Insider Threat
Detection
==PAGE:23==
• Policy Information Point (PIP): Supplies the PDP with necessary attributes about
the subject, object, action, and environment. These attributes may be retrieved from
internal or external sources, such as identity providers, databases, or directories.
• Policy Enforcement Point (PEP): Acts as the interface between users and re­
sources. It intercepts access requests, sends them to the PDP for evaluation, and
enforces the resulting decision by granting or denying access.
Optionally, an ABAC system may also include a Context Handler, which manages the flow
of information between these components—particularly the order and format of attribute
retrieval, request transformation, and policy interpretation [20].
Together, these components form the logical access control mechanism. When a user
(subject) attempts to access a resource (object), the PEP intercepts the request and for­
wards it to the PDP. The PDP gathers necessary attributes via the PIP and evaluates the
applicable policy obtained from the PAP. Based on this evaluation, the PDP issues an
access decision, which the PEP then enforces.
3.4
Positioning ABAC Among Traditional Models
To understand how ABAC stands between different access control models, it is compared
to the traditional ones, mentioned in 3.2
3.4.1
DAC
Discretionary Access Control (DAC) is one of the earliest and most widely used access
control models. It is identity­centric, meaning that access decisions are based on the iden­
tity of the user. In DAC, the owner or creator of a resource (e.g., a file, table, or database
entry) has the authority to decide who else can access it and with what permissions (such
as read, write, or execute).
Advantages:
• Simple and intuitive: easy to understand and implement, especially for small sys­
tems.
• Flexible: users can freely share resources with others by granting them access
rights.
Limitations:
• Decentralized control: access policies are fragmented and dependent on individual
users, making them difficult to manage at scale.
• Security risks: users can grant permissions without restrictions, increasing the risk
of data misuse, privilege escalation, or propagation of access rights.
• Vulnerability to Trojan Horse attacks: because users can grant rights to others, ma­
licious code can exploit this flexibility to gain unauthorized access. [22]
How ABAC improves on DAC:
ABAC shifts control from individuals to centrally defined policies. Access is not manually
granted to specific identities, but automatically evaluated at request time based on a user’s
and object’s attributes.
This makes ABAC:
• More scalable: no need for manual permissions for every user­object pair.
Extending the Attribute Based Access Control Model (ABAC) with Honey­Attributes for Insider Threat
Detection
15
==PAGE:24==
• More secure: permissions are not arbitrarily granted by users.
• More consistent: centralized policies ensure uniform enforcement across the sys­
tem.
3.4.2
MAC
Mandatory Access Control (MAC) is a rule­centric access control model that enforces
policies based on predefined security labels and clearances. Each object is assigned
a classification label (such as Confidential or Secret), and each subject (user) has an
associated clearance level. Access decisions are made by the system, not the user, and
are strictly based on whether a subject’s clearance meets the requirements of the object’s
classification.
Advantages:
• High security: Data protection is enforced systematically, reducing the risk of unau­
thorized access.
• Strong policy consistency: Users cannot override or modify access rules, which
minimizes insider threats.
• Suitable for sensitive environments: Often used in military, government, or regulated
sectors where data confidentiality is essential.
Limitations:
• Rigid and inflexible: Labels and rules must be predefined and cannot be adapted
dynamically.
• Difficult to manage: Policy creation and label assignment require careful planning
and are burdensome to maintain.
• Limited context awareness: Access decisions do not account for dynamic factors
like user behavior, time, or location. [22]
How ABAC improves on MAC:
ABAC incorporates the concept of classification and clearance as just two among many
possible attributes. Policies can use the same logic while also considering additional,
dynamic attributes.
This allows ABAC to:
• Support flexible and context­aware policies beyond static labels.
• Simplify management by avoiding predefined classification hierarchies.
• Maintain high security while improving adaptability and user experience.
3.4.3
RBAC
Role­Based Access Control (RBAC) is a widely adopted role­centric model that simplifies
access management by assigning permissions to roles rather than to individual users.
Users are granted access by being assigned to one or more roles that reflect their job
responsibilities. RBAC was designed to improve upon the limitations of DAC and MAC
by centralizing control and aligning access rights with organizational structure [23].
Advantages:
• Simplified administration: Access can be managed by adjusting role assignments
instead of modifying individual user permissions.
16
Extending the Attribute Based Access Control Model (ABAC) with Honey­Attributes for Insider Threat
Detection
==PAGE:25==
• Organizational alignment: Roles correspond to actual job functions, making policies
easier to understand and enforce.
• Easier onboarding: New users can quickly gain necessary access by being assigned
to existing roles.
Limitations:
• Manual role assignment: Roles and permissions must be predefined and assigned
in advance, requiring prior knowledge of user needs and resource sensitivity.
• Coarse­grained control: All users in a role receive the same permissions, regardless
of contextual or individual differences.
• Static role definitions: Roles tend to reflect fixed organizational positions. When
users change roles or responsibilities, policies often lag behind.
• Lack of context awareness: RBAC does not inherently support dynamic factors such
as time, location or current threat level [20].
How ABAC improves on RBAC:
ABAC builds upon the RBAC model by treating “role” as just one of many attributes
that can be evaluated in a policy. Instead of assigning access based solely on a user’s
role, ABAC policies can evaluate a combination of subject, object, and environmental
attributes.
This gives ABAC several advantages over RBAC:
• Fine­grained access control: Policies can include more specific conditions beyond
just roles (e.g., department, clearance level, device type).
• Context­aware decisions: Access is evaluated in real time based on dynamic at­
tributes such as time, location, or device type—allowing policies to adapt to chang­
ing contexts.
• No role explosion 1: Since access is not limited to predefined roles, there’s no need
to create a large number of overlapping roles to cover every scenario.
• Cross­organizational support: ABAC supports users who are not pre­registered in
the system, enabling federated access using trusted attributes.
ABAC can also incorporate trust­based metrics, such as risk scores or behavior history,
into access decisions. This makes it particularly effective in zero­trust environments or
systems requiring adaptive access control. While ABAC introduces complexity in policy
management and attribute sourcing, these challenges can be mitigated through structured
policy frameworks and attribute assurance mechanisms [20].
3.4.4
ACLs
Access Control Lists (ACLs) are one of the simplest and most direct ways to enforce ac­
cess control. Each resource maintains a list specifying which users or groups are allowed
to access it, and what operations they are permitted to perform.
Advantages:
1Role explosion refers to the proliferation of roles in RBAC systems when fine­grained or context­specific
access requirements force administrators to create many narrowly scoped or overlapping roles.
Extending the Attribute Based Access Control Model (ABAC) with Honey­Attributes for Insider Threat
Detection
17
==PAGE:26==
• Easy to implement: ACLs are supported by most operating systems and applica­
tions.
• Fine­grained at the object level: Each resource can define exactly who has access
and what operations are allowed.
• Explicit user­to­resource mapping: ACLs clearly specify which users or groups have
access to each resource, making it straightforward to review or audit permissions.
Limitations:
• Poor scalability: Managing separate ACLs for each object becomes overwhelming
as the number of users and resources grows.
• No group abstraction: Permissions are not automatically inherited through group
memberships, limiting reusability.
• Static and identity­based: ACLs depend on knowing users in advance and do not
adapt to changing conditions or contexts.
• Poor visibility: Since permissions are embedded within each resource, there is no
centralized view of who has access across the system.
• Difficult to maintain: Updating or revoking access requires reviewing and editing
every individual ACL entry, which is error­prone and time­consuming.
How ABAC improves on ACLs:
ABAC eliminates the need to attach individual permission lists to each resource. Instead,
access decisions are made by evaluating a centralized set of policies against attributes
of the subject and the object at the time of the request.
This offers several improvements:
• Centralized policy management: Rules are defined once and applied system­wide,
reducing duplication and inconsistency.
• Dynamic decision­making: Access can change depending on real­time conditions
(e.g., location, time, device status).
• Attribute­based flexibility: Access does not require prior knowledge of the user; as
long as attribute conditions are satisfied, access can be granted without manual
configuration.
• Improved maintainability: Changes in access logic are reflected in policies, not by
updating individual ACLs.
18
Extending the Attribute Based Access Control Model (ABAC) with Honey­Attributes for Insider Threat
Detection
==PAGE:27==
4
Deception Systems in Cybersecurity
4.1
Motivation
Among the various detection strategies that are followed for insider threat detection, as
mentioned at 2.6, the most used traditionally are based on behavioral, rule analysis pow­
ered by monitoring, as well as forensics analysis and attribution after an attack has oc­
curred. However, those approaches raise some challenges as insider behaviour can be
unpredictable, making it difficult to establish a reliable baseline for comparison. In other
words, static models fail to incorporate new findings leading to ineffective anomaly detec­
tion. These models require continuous refinement and tuning to adapt to emerging attack
patterns, increasing both the complexity and overhead of maintaining an effective detec­
tion system. At the same time, insider attacks are usually not one­time events. Instead,
they unfold gradually—starting with normal behavior and becoming more suspicious over
time.
This means that detection needs to evolve too. A more effective approach would monitor
different signals continuously and adjust based on changes in a user’s behavior. One
useful signal for early detection is how a user interacts with deceptive resources like de­
coys. Deception is considered as a third line of defense, after authentication and access
control, thus, interactions with decoys can serve as early detection warnings. Moreover,
when combined with behavioral monitoring, deception­based strategies can improve the
evaluation and updating of threat profiles.
This work explores the conceptual integration of deception within the access control model
to support trust­based evaluation. Specifically, decoys take the form of deceptive at­
tributes inside the access policy model. These are referred to as honey attributes. Their
role in helping protect the integrity of the access control model is discussed in more detail
in Section 4.4.
4.2
Previous work
Spitzner was one of the early researchers exploring how deception technologies can be
used to detect insider threats. In his work, ”Honeypots: Catching the Insider Threat” [24],
he introduces a strategy of deploying honeypots specifically aimed to catch insiders, and
analyses three different tactics tailored for different types of insider attacks. His strategy
is based on creating honeytokens to first identify the attacker and then alert the system
to redirect the attacker for further investigation. One important take away from his work
is that interaction with cyber deception sensors should not be the only signal indicating
whether an individual is an insider or not. As outsider threats may discover the instance of
a honeypot, the same applies to the insider. Therefore, more means of detection should
be in place. This conclusion is considered as a cornerstone of this current work, since the
value of a subject’s trust attribute is calculated based on different indicators, including, but
not limited to, interaction with deception systems.
Bowen et al. at [25] introduced an offensive deception technique that would automatically
create and place decoy documents in a file system. In addition to the decoy documents
that are used to detect a malicious presence, stealthy beacons are placed as well to
alert the system once the document is accessed. To support the effectiveness of the
generated decoy files, they introduce a set of properties required to maximise deception
for different types of insiders, classifying them based on their level of sophistication. To
Extending the Attribute Based Access Control Model (ABAC) with Honey­Attributes for Insider Threat
Detection
19
==PAGE:28==
further evaluate their implementation they conducted a study, recruiting participants to
test the platform and assess the effectiveness of the decoy file’s properties.
RBAC is used as the model for access control in [26], which is the first publication to inte­
grate deception into access control by extending RBAC with honey permissions. Honey
permissions are a subset of permissions and they are chosen based on an algorithm that
uses risk calculation. They are assigned to a subset of roles and they point to fake ver­
sions of objects that have no operational value and are luring for the malicious insider.
This subset of roles called ”candidate roles” are formed from the set of roles based on
their level of access to system resources. A monitoring unit is added to track users who
activate honey permissions and sets off an alarm when the permissions are activated.
An extended version of the ABAC model with deception techniques was first introduced in
[27]. In this research, honey attributes are attached on objects based on their estimated
sensitivity value. Their use is monitored, and when it is detected the system, depending on
the access level of the individual, either denies the access or it present the honey object
to the subject and alerts the system of the potential threat. To evaluate their research,
they craft a handmade dataset, the first that can fully evaluate ABAC, based on publically
accessible data from the California Basic Educational Data System (CBES). The present
thesis draws inspiration from this research, employing honey attributes as a sensor to
evaluate the trust of an individual.
A similar approach to [27] took Jangir et al. at [28] where instead of ABAC they used
Function­Based Access Control, which aligns permissions directly with job functions, as
their access control model. They developed an insider threat framework which, in addition
to incorporating a sensitive file marker and a honeytoken generator, introduced a honey
trap factor to assess the effectiveness of deception­based mechanisms.
4.3
Insider vs Outsider Threats in Deception
In the past several years, there has been research into deceptive technologies aimed
primarily at detecting attacks by outsiders. However, limited research has been done
towards the use of such technologies for detecting insider threats. The approach differs
significantly due to variations in scope, objectives, and knowledge between these two
types of attackers. Here, one must keep in mind that the determination of who is an insider
and who is an outsider it is relative to what boundaries might be assumed to exist. As
mentioned, one might be more insider than another when he needs less defense layers to
penetrate. Having said that, the placement of the decoy and its type depend on what type
of an attack needs to be detected. Either way, the below separation refers to the outsider
as the one who does not have knowledge of the organization’s infrastructure prior to the
attack.
• Outsider Threats: They operate from beyond the organisation’s security perimeter.
Their attacks are often exploratory, relying on reconnaissance to identify vulnerabil­
ities before launching an attack.
• Insider Threats: Originate from within the organisation, often from individuals with
authorised access. Unlike external attackers, insiders may already possess detailed
knowledge of the network topology, system configurations, and security measures
in place. This exact knowledge and by necessity access possessed by the insider
enables them to execute more targeted attacks without having to do much explo­
ration prior to the attack.
Other than the difference in the level of knowledge possessed by the attackers, the pri­
20
Extending the Attribute Based Access Control Model (ABAC) with Honey­Attributes for Insider Threat
Detection
==PAGE:29==
mary goal of those two as well as their characteristics vary. An extreme large percentage
of cyber threats, by external threats, are what we would classify as script kiddies, or auto­
mated, random attackers [24]. Their motives can be anything from financial gain, botnet
recruitment, identity theft and hacktivism and as they generally lack detailed organisa­
tional knowledge they tend to use brute­force methods for attacking the target. Because
of this, external threats will also attack and break into honeypots that are on the same
network 1. Thus, when addressing such threats, the strategy for deploying honeypots
is straightforward, deploy the honeypots and the attackers will engage with them. This
approach would also work for common insider threats, like automated attacks, worms or
insider threats taking a brute force approach but they won’t catch a more sophisticated
insider threat. Usually, those insiders, due to their prior knowledge of the environment,
tend to focus on specific target following a path that would likely be less noisy, making the
detection challenging.
Thus, when it comes to insider threats, simply deploying a honeypot or placing a honey­
token randomly within the system will not accomplish much. Instead, the design of the
deceptive resource must take into account the attacker’s perspective and prior knowl­
edge. It becomes important to build decoys that are both realistic and placed in locations
the insider is likely to explore, such as internal tools, mailboxes, or file systems. These el­
ements should not interfere with legitimate usage but must appear authentic enough to be
accessed during malicious activity. The main design considerations for such resources—
such as realism, placement, detectability, and stealth—are introduced later in this chapter
and are especially relevant when deception is used in the context of insider threat detec­
tion.
4.4
Honey Attributes as Deceptive Sensor
The concept of honey attributes was first introduced in [27] as a way to protect sensitive
resources within attribute­based access control (ABAC) systems. In this approach, honey
attributes act as decoy values, a form of honeytokens, designed to lure malicious insiders
into interacting with them. When such an interaction is detected in an access request, the
system can respond by presenting a bait object, provided the policy evaluation would have
permitted the access, as the use of these attribute values is not expected in legitimate
requests.
Like other decoy­based strategies, honey attributes need to be placed strategically. They
should appear in contexts that are both attractive to attackers and hard to distinguish from
real attributes. At the same time, and as mentioned in the decoy properties in the next
section, they should also be easy enough to find during reconnaissance to effectively act
as traps.
One question that had not been clearly addressed in prior work is how an attacker might
use these attributes after detecting them. The answer lies in the nature of modern software
infrastructure, where organizations often rely on third­party services for critical tasks like
authorization. As shown in [29], this opens up a wider attack surface where attackers
may exploit vulnerabilities in external services to forge or manipulate attributes. Such
attacks—referred to as attribute forgery—can lead to unauthorized access or denial of
service, affecting the integrity, confidentiality and availability of sensitive resources.
What makes honey attributes different from other types of decoys (such as fake creden­
1External attackers use automated scanning and exploitation tools that target any vulnerable system within
a network’s IP range. Since honeypots are often deployed within the same network segment (e.g., DMZ) as
real systems, they appear as exploitable targets during these untargeted attacks.
Extending the Attribute Based Access Control Model (ABAC) with Honey­Attributes for Insider Threat
Detection
21
==PAGE:30==
tials or API keys) is their role in policy evaluation. They are embedded directly into access
control rules, not just floating data. For detection to work effectively and for the attacker
to be lured further into other traps (such as honeypots or bait files), these attributes must
be included in policies but never actually assigned to legitimate users or resources. This
design choice supports multiple deception goals, such as increasing variety, ensuring
stealth, and minimizing interference with real operations.
This thesis extends the original idea by integrating honey attributes into a broader insider
threat detection framework. While [27] used attribute sensitivity to guide the placement
of honey attributes, the system described here takes it further. This thesis introduces a
holistic approach that leverages honey attributes as deception signals to evaluate user
trust dynamically. As trust scores fluctuate, they influence the access level granted to
users, which in turn alters the assessed sensitivity of protected resources. This approach
continuously updates object sensitivity based not only on permitted actions, but also on
the number of users authorized to access each resource over time.
4.5
Design Considerations
For any deceptive element to be effective, whether it is a honeypot, a honeytoken, or a
honey attribute, it should follow key design principles. Bowen et al. [25] identified several
important properties that influence the success of decoys. These properties also apply to
honey attributes, though in slightly different ways:
• Realism: Decoys should be indistinguishable from real assets.
• Variety: There should be many different types of decoys to reflect the real environ­
ment.
• Relevance: Decoys need to be placed in locations that make sense for a potential
attacker to find, aligned to his interests.
• Visibility: Decoys should be easy for the attacker to discover.
• Instrumentability: There should be ways to track when decoys are accessed.
• Stealth: Decoys must not interfere with normal user activity or harm any operational
resources and systems.
• Differentiability: Legitimate users should be able to tell decoys apart from real
resources, so they do not interfere with their daily tasks.
Based on these properties, one design approach that ensures realism is to use algorithms
that generate honey attributes from real datasets, ensuring that they resemble real val­
ues through methods like semantic similarity. Honey attributes should not be seen as
a standalone solution, instead it should be considered on architecture level what would
be presented to the user after an access requests including a honey attribute. One ap­
proach would be redirecting the user further to a bait resource such as a honeypot. This
approach of planting a honeytoken to lure a malicious actor to a fully emulated system
is also been suggested by Spitzner [24] in one of the early deception tailored towards
insiders researchers. The level of response should ideally vary depending on the sophis­
tication of the threat, which is why before deploying any deception­based solution, it is
important to perform threat modeling. This helps in designing decoys that target different
attacker profiles­ from opportunistic insiders to more advanced threats [30]. Not every
decoy will work for every type of attacker, thus the modeling process is important to cover
as many cases as possible.
22
Extending the Attribute Based Access Control Model (ABAC) with Honey­Attributes for Insider Threat
Detection
==PAGE:31==
When it comes to the placement of honey attributes, attacker interest should also be
taken into account. This can be supported by analyzing behavioral data—such as access
frequency, attribute usage patterns, or unusual query combinations—to identify which re­
sources are disproportionately targeted or probed. Techniques like clustering or anomaly
detection can help infer which attributes are consistently accessed in suspicious con­
texts, enabling the strategic placement of honey attributes where they are more likely to
be triggered by insider threats. Additionally, these decoys must be visible enough to be
discovered, either by being placed in plain sight or by being detectable during the recon­
naissance phase of the insider.
The ease of discovery should be approached carefully, as it might result to interference
with the user’s daily tasks by causing confusion. This means the attributes should be
designed in such a way that a legitimate user can recognize them as fake and infer what
a real value would look like. Furthermore, honey attributes should not be linked to real
resources, in order to avoid service disruption and to preserve data availability.
Finally, detection and response must be part of the system’s design. Without a monitoring
component, the presence of honey attributes would serve no purpose. Every access at­
tempt involving them should be logged and processed as part of a broader assessment of
the attacker’s techniques and movements. This is also a core element of the framework
presented here, since those interaction logs would be used to generate security evidence
which directly affects the subject’s trust value through the FAHP­based evaluation ex­
plained in the next’s chapter’s section about trust calculation 5.3.
Extending the Attribute Based Access Control Model (ABAC) with Honey­Attributes for Insider Threat
Detection
23
==PAGE:32==
5
Methodology
Access control systems that assume trust is fixed fail to recognize that even a trusted
insider can turn into a threat over time. The addition of trust into access control solutions
can provide dynamic access to the resources, incorporating the aspect of adaptive trust
based on user activities. To support the user of ABAC in this context, trust is defined as
an attribute of a user.
5.1
Previous Work
Singh and Chatterjee [31] explore the integration of trust in access control models, specif­
ically in the ITrust framework for healthcare systems. Their work explores the integration
of trust in Identity Based Access Control (IBAC) systems. They suggest the computation
of trust using beta reputation approach, and further form AC rules that provide access
based on both degree of trust and identity.
Yachana, Kaur, and Sood [32] propose a Trust­based Access Control (TAC) system to
protect patient­centric medical data. Their work focuses on insider threats, particularly
the risk of authorized users misusing or leaking sensitive personal information (SPI). To
address this, they classify personal data into SPI and non­SPI, ensuring stricter controls
over SPI. The system evaluates each user’s trustworthiness based on several factors
and adjusts access permissions accordingly, allowing only highly trusted users to view
sensitive information.
Chakraborty and Ray [33] address the limitations of credential­based access control by
highlighting its static nature. Traditional credential­based models make binary trust deci­
sions, either a user meets the required credentials and gains access, or they don’t, lead­
ing to an all­or­nothing approach. These models fail to consider user behavior history or
evolving trustworthiness over time.
To address this, they propose TrustBAC, an extension of Role­Based Access Control
(RBAC) that incorporates trust levels into the access control model. Instead of directly
mapping users to roles, users are assigned to trust levels, which are then mapped to
roles. These trust levels are determined dynamically based on multiple factors, such as
user credentials, behavioral history, and recommendations from other users or systems.
Further, each trust level grants access to a specific set of resources with predefined priv­
ileges.
Arasteh and Alizadeh [34] propose an enhanced Attribute­Based Access Control (ABAC)
model by incorporating dynamic trust evaluation. They introduce a Fuzzy­Neural based
Trust (FNT) evaluation method, which combines a Fuzzy Inference System (FIS) and
Neural Networks (NN). In their approach, trust is computed dynamically based on prede­
fined behavioral parameters. The FIS component evaluates these parameters individu­
ally, while the NN component integrates them to produce an overall trust score.
Abirami et al. at [35] introduce the ABAC­T model, which introduces trust as a dynamic
attribute in the ABAC model. The overall trust is calculated as a weighted combination of
two components: direct trust, which is derived from real­time observations of a subject’s
behavior, and indirect, which is obtained either from recommendation or reputation as­
sessments. Their evaluation, using organisational data compares traditional ABAC with
the ABAC­T in terms of scalability and access performance. Although ABAC­T requires
24
Extending the Attribute Based Access Control Model (ABAC) with Honey­Attributes for Insider Threat
Detection
==PAGE:33==
a slightly higher storage overhead, it reduces the execution time needed to access re­
sources, thereby improves scalability.
Wang et. al at [36] propose the AU­ZTAC model, which integrates Attribute­Based Ac­
cess Control (ABAC) with Zero Trust principles and incorporates dynamic trust evaluation
using the Fuzzy Analytic Hierarchy Process (FAHP). Their model assesses user trust­
worthiness based on behavioral evidence categorized into performance, reliability, and
security dimensions. Trust scores are dynamically updated using time decay, and access
is only granted when both attribute requirements and trust thresholds are met.
The hierarchical structure proposed in AU­ZTAC, particularly the organization of trust evi­
dence into performance, reliability, and security categories, serves as a reference model.
This structure is extended by incorporating deception­related indicators within the security
dimension and by applying the original FAHP methodology by Chang [37], which intro­
duces fuzzy logic in the pairwise comparison and weight derivation process.
5.2
Current Approach
The proposed access control model this project thesis suggests is, instead of using trust
as an external evaluation parameter for decisions, to place trust as an attribute in the
ABAC model. This approach, is supported in the ABAC model, but the levels of trust are
predefined and not progressively changing based on dynamic behavior. To address this
shortcoming, a trust module is implemented where the observations from user behaviors
and actions are fed and the trust level of the individual is computed. This process dynami­
cally updates the user’s trust attribute, ensuring that access control policies evaluate their
actions based on a trust value that is periodically recalculated. A high level architecture
of the system is seen in 5.1:
Figure 5.1: High­Level Trust­Integrated ABAC Model
Extending the Attribute Based Access Control Model (ABAC) with Honey­Attributes for Insider Threat
Detection
25
==PAGE:34==
As shown in the illustrated architecture, this model represents a modified ABAC architec­
ture, based on the framework described in [20]. The key modification is the integration of a
trust module, which operates between the Policy Information Point (PIP) and the attribute
repository, as well as the environmental conditions. This enables the dynamic adjustment
of the user’s trust attribute, ensuring that access control decisions can adapt to real­time
behavioral changes.
In general, trust can be computed using various methods and can depend on multiple
factors. O’Hara et al. [38] introduced five basic strategies to place trust as listed bellow:
• Optimistic Trust: Assumes that users are trustworthy unless proven otherwise.
• Pessimistic Trust: Assumes that users are untrustworthy unless proven otherwise.
• Centralized Trust: Trust decisions are managed by a single, authoritative entity.
• Investigative Trust: Active evaluation process, where evidence is collected before
granting access.
• Transitive Trust: Trust of a user is calculated by analysing the network and relations
of users.
Here, one must keep in mind that while some strategies, such as optimistic trust, may
initially appear less secure, the choice of trust placement depends heavily on the context of
the system, the sensitivity of the resources, the expected threat model and the operational
environment. For example, systems in highly regulated or adversarial settings may favor
pessimistic or investigative strategies, while more collaborative or low­risk environments
might lean toward optimistic or transitive models. Therefore, no single strategy can be
universally applied and trust placement must be aligned with both security requirements
and usability considerations.
Spitzner in [24] emphasized the importance of including multiple observables to identify
insider threats. Signals like cyber operations, policy violations, foreign travel, and more
are common indicators. Trust, in turn, is closely related to the identification of insider
threats, as many of the signals used to identify insider threats also serve as parameters
in trust evaluation. Since human aspects are at the core of trust assessment, evaluating
risk indicators, such as personal predispositions historically associated with malicious in­
sider behavior, is crucial. These indicators include serious mental health disorders, social
skills and decision­making deficits, and a history of rule violations [9]. However, due to the
sensitive and often inaccessible nature of such human­centric data, this work emphasizes
trust evaluation based on observable system­level behavior, where indicators of insider
threats manifest through measurable actions. In this context, trust can be influenced by
suspicious cyber activities, such as downloading large amounts of data, repeated authen­
tication failures over extended periods, and interactions with decoy resources—behaviors
that can be classified as anomalous activity.
The current approach aligns with Spitzner’s emphasis on multi­dimensional observables
since it is more oriented towards the investigative trust strategy. Here, signals from user
behavior are evaluated in periodic intervals to update one’s value of trust attribute.
5.3
Trust Calculation
Two are the main sources for calculating trust, direct trust which is updated after each
user­object interaction and indirect trust which might come from reputation or colleague
recommendations. In 5.2 is high level of direct and indirect trust is visualised using nodes
as the entities.
26
Extending the Attribute Based Access Control Model (ABAC) with Honey­Attributes for Insider Threat
Detection
==PAGE:35==
• Direct Trust: Is calculated by direct observations between a trustor (Tr) and a
trustee (Te). In this context, the trustor is the system, whereas the trustee is the
subject, the user who is being evaluated for its trustworthiness.
• Indirect Trust: Derived from what the system receives from other. This information
can be evidence from witness, ratings, or feedback provided by other users.
Figure 5.2: Direct and Indirect Trust
The algorithms appearing in the literature for calculating trust are mainly the bayesian ap­
proach, fuzzy logic, weighted sum and machine learning mechanisms [39]. The approach
taken here is inspired by [36] where the suggested model encapsulates user behavior to
calculate trust values through the Fuzzy Analytic Hierarchy Process (FAHP), an extension
of the Analytic Hierarchy Process (AHP). Traditional AHP, as a method of decision­making
based on multiple criteria, is a structured technique for organising and analysing complex
decisions based on mathematics and psychology. AHP decomposes a Multi Criteria De­
cision Making (MCDM) problem into a system of hierarchies where a complex problem
goal is explained to sub problems each of which is analysed independently. Once the
hierarchy is made the criteria are being compared pairwise to determine their relative im­
portance. AHP, effective as it is, induces a problem when facing vagueness coming with
human judgment. Here, fuzzy logic is introduced to handle uncertainty and vagueness
in human perception. Therefore, fuzzy logic replaces the step of pairwise comparisons
using fuzzy numbers. Several functions have been created for this, this current approach
uses triangular function, an implementation followed previously in various research in­
cluding [40]. Using Triangular Fuzzy Numbers (TFN) to represent linguistic evaluations
as shown in table 5.1 the pairwise matrices between criteria and sub­criteria is formed.
Usually, those values are chosen by experts and depend on the system and the different
context or application. A TFN allows uncertainty handling in pairwise comparison and is
defined in formula 5.1 where l is the lower, pessimistic value, m the midpoint, most likely
value and u the optimistic value as the upper bound. 1
1Here, µ ˜
M(x) defines the membership function of the triangular fuzzy number ˜
M, characterized by the
tuple (l, m, u). In subsequent equations, ˜
Mij refers to these triangular fuzzy numbers used in the pairwise
comparison matrices between criteria i and j.
Extending the Attribute Based Access Control Model (ABAC) with Honey­Attributes for Insider Threat
Detection
27
==PAGE:36==
µ ˜
M(x) =
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩
0,
x < l
x−l
m−l,
l ≤x ≤m
u−x
u−m,
m ≤x ≤u
0,
x > u
(5.1)
Table 5.1: Linguistic scale to TFN mapping
Linguistic Judgment
TFN
Reciprocal TFN
Equally Important
(1, 1, 1)
(1, 1, 1)
Between Equal & Moderate
(1, 2, 3)
( 1
3, 1
2, 1)
Moderately Important
(2, 3, 4)
( 1
4, 1
3, 1
2)
Between Moderate & Strong
(3, 4, 5)
( 1
5, 1
4, 1
3)
Strongly Important
(4, 5, 6)
( 1
6, 1
5, 1
4)
Between Strong & Very Strong
(5, 6, 7)
( 1
7, 1
6, 1
5)
Very Strongly Important
(6, 7, 8)
( 1
8, 1
7, 1
6)
Between Very Strong & Extreme
(7, 8, 9)
( 1
9, 1
8, 1
7)
Extremely Important
(8, 9, 9)
( 1
9, 1
9, 1
8)
The goal is to calculate the overall trust score of a user, which is divided into three main
characteristics that influence trust: Performance (P), Reliability (R) and Security (S). Each
of the characteristic is informed by a set of specific behavioral evidence. The performance
reflects how effectively the user interacts with and utilises system resources. It is common
for anomaly based detection to analyse signals as power consumption that comes hand
in hand with CPU utilisation and user throughput as well as packet traffic within a network.
Reliability measures how consistently a user follows normal operational patterns where
fluctuations possibly reflect suspicious behavior. Security evidence relates directly to the
user interaction with system protection and potential violations. To integrate interaction
with decoy elements on the security evidences, the frequency, count of interactions, time
spent on the resources and modification attempts are added. The extended explanation
is shown in figure 5.3
28
Extending the Attribute Based Access Control Model (ABAC) with Honey­Attributes for Insider Threat
Detection
==PAGE:37==
Performance (P)
Reliability (R)
Security (S)
Average user CPU Utilization
Average user throughput
Average IP packet transmission delay
Average IP packet delay jitter time
Average IP packet net­
work bandwidth occupancy
Average IP packet response time
Average user transmission rate
Average user IP packet loss rate
Average connection establishment rate
Average connection
establishment delay
Average number of ille­
gal connection by user
Average number of criti­
cal ports scanned by user
Average number of user at­
tempts to exceed authority
Average number of
user connection failures
Average number of requests
including a honey attribute
Average number of interac­
tion with a decoy resource
Average time spent
on the decoy resource
Average number of attempt mod­
ifications on the decoy resource
Figure 5.3: Hierarchical structure of user behavioral evidence categorized under perfor­
mance, reliability, and security dimensions.
Extending the Attribute Based Access Control Model (ABAC) with Honey­Attributes for Insider Threat
Detection
29
==PAGE:38==
The algorithm shows in 1 where the inputs are the TFNs matrices that are created by
experts based on the requirements of the system. The main function of the algorithm and
the first step is computing fuzzy synthetic extents where ˜
Mij is the TFN for each criterion
i with m TFN evaluations:
Si =
m
%
j=1
˜
Mij ⊗
⎡
⎣
n
%
k=1
m
%
j=1
˜
Mkj
⎤
⎦
−1
(5.2)
Where ⊗2 denotes fuzzy multiplication; * ˜
Mij is computed via fuzzy addition, and the
inverse operation is applied to the aggregated TFNs.
The dominance relationship between synthetic extents
V (Si ≥Sj) =
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩
1
if mi ≥mj
0
if lj ≥mi
lj−ui
(mi−ui)−(mj−lj)
otherwise
(5.3)
Final weights derived from pairwise possibilities:
wi =
min
j
V (Si ≥Sj)
*n
k=1 min
j
V (Sk ≥Sj)
(5.4)
2Definitions for fuzzy multiplication, addition, and inverse operations are provided in Appendix .1.
30
Extending the Attribute Based Access Control Model (ABAC) with Honey­Attributes for Insider Threat
Detection
==PAGE:39==
Algorithm 1 FAHP Trust Calculation
Require: PairwiseMatrices: TFN comparison matrices
RawEvidence: Observed behavioral metrics
γ: Time decay factor ∈[0, 1]
T0: Initial trust score
Ensure: Tl: Updated trust score
1: GlobalWeights ←ComputeGlobalWeights(PairwiseMatrices)
2: for each characteristic C ∈{P, R, S} do
3:
SC ←FuzzySyntheticExtents(PairwiseMatrices[C])
4:
VC ←PossibilityDegrees(SC)
5:
SubWeights[C] ←Normalize(VC)
6: end for
7: for each characteristic C ∈{P, R, S} do
8:
for each evidence E ∈C do
9:
eCE ←Normalize(RawEvidence[C][E])
10:
end for
11: end for
12: CharScores ←{}
13: for each characteristic C ∈{P, R, S} do
14:
FC ←*(SubWeights[C] ⊙NormalizedEvidence[C])
15:
CharScores.add(FC)
16: end for
17: Tnew ←1 −*(GlobalWeights ⊙CharScores)
18: if Tl−1 exists then
19:
Tl ←γTl−1 + (1 −γ)Tnew
20: else
21:
Tl ←Tnew
22: end if
23: return Tl
To further ensure the reliability of the pairwise comparisons between criteria and sub­
criteria (evidence), a Consistency Ratio (CR) can be computed using the method pro­
posed by Saaty [41]. The triangular fuzzy matrices are first defuzzified using the mean of
the lower, middle, and upper bounds3. The defuzzified matrix is then evaluated for con­
sistency by calculating the largest eigenvalue λmax and applying the following formula:
CI = λmax −n
n −1
,
CR = CI
RIn
where RIn is the average random index for a matrix of size n. A CR value below 0.1 is
generally accepted as consistent. If the CR exceeds this threshold, expert inputs should
be revised.
While this implementation assumes equal weights for demonstration purposes, the method
supports group aggregation of expert input. If multiple experts are consulted, their indi­
vidual pairwise matrices can be aggregated by averaging the corresponding TFNs before
computing weights4.
3For details on the defuzzification method used in consistency checks, see Appendix .2.
4For a discussion of aggregation methods in multi­expert settings, see Appendix .3.
Extending the Attribute Based Access Control Model (ABAC) with Honey­Attributes for Insider Threat
Detection
31
==PAGE:40==
The user trust is calculated at periodic intervals to incorporate dynamic behavior over
time. To model this, the standard exponential decay formula was used, introducing a
decay factor γ ∈[0, 1].
At each time step, the new trust score Tnew is computed as:
Tnew = 1 −
%
i
(wi · si)
(5.5)
where wi are the global weights and si are the normalized scores of the user’s character­
istics.
The final trust score Tl at the current time step l is updated using exponential smoothing:
Tl =
+
γTl−1 + (1 −γ)Tnew,
if Tl−1 exists
Tnew,
otherwise
(5.6)
where:
• γ controls how much influence the past trust score has on the current value.
• Tl−1 is the previous trust value (if available).
• Tl is the final smoothed trust score.
5.4
Sensitivity Calculation
Finding the relevant factors that affect the sensitivity of a resource can take either or both
of two approaches [42]:
• Actions that a users can perform to a set of resources.
• How many have access to a resource.
Intuitively, the greater the number of users who can access or modify a resource, the
lower its sensitivity. Conversely, actions that are more destructive, e.g., delete or modify,
increase sensitivity compared to read­only or view operations. The sensitivity assessment
is borrowed from previous research [27] using concepts from information theory, specifi­
cally Shannon’s information content which represents the surprise an event causes. The
idea is that the more unlikely an event is, the higher its surprise value where unlikely di­
rectly links to probability of the event happening. For any given action α, the information,
or surprisal, is given by equation 5.7 where P(a) represents the probability that a user
is authorised to perform action α. When many users are authorised, this probability in­
creases, which in turn makes the event ­action upon a resource­ less likely to happen,
therefore indicating low sensitivity.
I(a) = −log2(P(a))
(5.7)
For a given object attribute, the probability that a user is authorised to perform action α
is given by 5.8, which in turns defines the attribute sensitivity by summing the information
over all actions available for that attribute 5.9. Finally, using the Root Mean Square (RMS)
function 5.10 the overall sensitivity of the object is calculated, where all sensitivity scores
of each attribute are combined.
32
Extending the Attribute Based Access Control Model (ABAC) with Honey­Attributes for Insider Threat
Detection
==PAGE:41==
A high level of the algorithm used can be seen in 2. In [27] the algorithm was evaluated by
exploring the change on sensitivity when (1) increasing the number of authorised users
and (2) specifying the actions upon the object . This thesis takes a different approach, by
introducing the effect of trust variation on a user’s permissions over time effectively chang­
ing the total number of authorised user. Additionally, following the hierarchical structure
of granting access rights to a user, trust levels are added as conditions on the actions
permissions. Thus, different trust values are required for a user to open, edit or delete
an object adjusting that way in real time his permissions. Later on, during evaluation, the
sensitivity will be assessed having as the key culprit the trust values of a user.
PObjattr(a) = (numberOfAuthorisedUsers)/(TotalNumOfUsers)
(5.8)
SObjattr = −
%
a∈A
log PObjattr(a)
(5.9)
SObj =
,
-
-
. 1
n
n
%
i=1
S2
attr,i
(5.10)
Algorithm 2 Sensitivity Assessment
Require: Obj: The object for which the sensitivity is calculated.
Ensure: Sobj: The sensitivity of the object Obj.
1: A ←getAllActions()
2: N ←countUsers()
3: AttributesSensitivity ←[]
4: for each Objattr in Obj.attributes do
5:
AttProbabilities ←[]
6:
for each action a in A do
7:
countAuthorized ←countAuthorizedUsers(Obj, a)
8:
PObjattr(a) ←countAuthorized
N
9:
AttProbabilities.add
/
PObjattr(a)
0
10:
end for
11:
SObjattr ←getEntropy
/
AttProbabilities
0
12:
AttributesSensitivity.add
/
SObjattr
0
13: end for
14: SObj ←getRMS
/
AttributesSensitivity
0
15: return SObj
5.5
Policy and Attribute Repositories
In the current approach, trust is directly added as a user attribute. Thus, it must be embed­
ded in the policy rules themselves to take part on the access control decision process. To
achieve this, rules written in natural language from previous related research [27] are ex­
tended to include conditions based on trust value levels. The policies are then encoded in
JSON­based policy language for Py­ABAC which is the framework used for both defining
policies and enforcing the decisions. In a more formal, real environment, those policies
would be written in a framework that supports ABAC such as eXtensible Access Control
Extending the Attribute Based Access Control Model (ABAC) with Honey­Attributes for Insider Threat
Detection
33
==PAGE:42==
Markup Language (XACML), NIST’S Next Generatrion Acccess Control (NGAC) or Ab­
breviated Language for Authorisation (ALFA), and stored in the policy repository where
they would be fetched from the PDP. In this implementation, the default storage backend
provided by the Py­ABAC framework is used—an in­memory store that keeps policies in
RAM. Both object and subject attributes that are used in this project are taken partly from
the same research, with some modifications to fit the current approach. The initial trust
is assigned to be from 0.5 ­included­ which was in the design by choice and purpose,
so the accepted request after the evalutation would be enough to draw results from and
analyse. The values of the attributes are partly generated using one of Python’s library
to generate synthetic data and using real datasets gathered by educational sources. The
key­value pairs of attributes for both objects and subjects are typically stored in the at­
tribute repository and retrieved by the PIP. However, in this approach, where the value of
the trust attribute of the subject is dynamically generated in time intervals, a trust module
is introduced between the attribute repository and the PIP, allowing it to fetch the initial
trust value and dynamically update it before storing it back in the attribute repository.
34
Extending the Attribute Based Access Control Model (ABAC) with Honey­Attributes for Insider Threat
Detection
==PAGE:43==
6
Implementation
6.1
Dataset
Due to the confidential nature of organizations, access requirements are often not pub­
licly available. In the absence of explicit policies, several studies have been conducted to
derive rules from natural language policies and logs. Notable works include [43], which
extracted attributes from natural language policies, and [44], which focused on the au­
tomatic generation of ABAC policies from natural language documents by extracting at­
tributes from access logs. These studies employ various machine learning algorithms to
automate policy extraction and evaluation. A broader survey extending beyond ABAC to
other access control models was conducted by Mohammad Nur Nobi et al. [45].
In past research, datasets have been widely used to model access control policies and
identify policy sentences. The most commonly referenced datasets, as mentioned in [44],
include iTrust, which focuses on a healthcare system; IBM, which is related to education;
and CyberChair, which is used in conference management. These datasets serve to
extract access control policy sentences from use cases, forming templates for natural­
language policy definitions. While these datasets work well for RBAC due to their role­
centered structure, they must be adapted to fit the requirements of ABAC.
Previous research by Manar Alohaly et al. [27] created the first ABAC dataset by obtain­
ing information from educational datasets, followed by a set of 13 natural language rules
that represent possible mappings of privileges between subjects of staff type administra­
tor and teacher and objects. This thesis project uses those 13 rules to generate policies
in a machine­enforced format by deconstructing the rules to map to the object and sub­
ject collected attributes. Additionally, to enrich the dataset, policies are drawn from other
educational resources to expand the dataset with an additional staff type of student.
Following (16), 16 rules written in natural language are listed.
1. Student enrollment is reviewed by administration staff to ensure that it has been
completed correctly.
2. Academic and nominated administrative staff are able to view and maintain student
course enrollments.
3. An administrator can view, edit, and delete the course enrollment of a student from
the same county.
4. An administrator can view, edit, and delete the course enrollment of a student from
the same district.
5. A teacher can view the record of students from the same school if he hold a tenured
position.
6. A teacher can view the record of students if he hold a tenured position and is as­
signed the same course code as the object.
7. A teacher can view the record of students if he hold a tenured position and is as­
signed the same class ID as the object.
8. A teacher can view the record of students from the same school if he hold a long­
term position.
Extending the Attribute Based Access Control Model (ABAC) with Honey­Attributes for Insider Threat
Detection
35
==PAGE:44==
9. A teacher can view the record of students if he hold a long­term position and is
assigned the same course code as the object.
10. A teacher can view the record of students if he hold a long­term position and is
assigned the same class ID as the object.
11. A teacher can view the record of students from the same school if he hold a proba­
tionary position.
12. A teacher can view the record of students if he hold a probationary position and is
assigned the same course code as the object.
13. A teacher can view the record of students if he hold a probationary position and is
assigned the same class ID as the object.
14. A student, given that he is enrolled to the school, can access course material if he
is enrolled in the course.
15. A student, given that he is enrolled to the school, can submit a course assignment if
he is enrolled in the course and the current date is before the assignment due date.
16. A student, given that he belongs to the school and not previously enrolled, can enroll
in a course if the course limit has not been reached.
Those rules define set of relations associating subject and object attributes with allowable
operations, thus can be deconstructed to those components. For example, taking the first
rule, the relevant components can be recognised as showing in 6.1
Student enrollment
is reviewed
by administration staff
Object Attribute
Action
Subject Attribute
Figure 6.1: Policy Sentence
Following the same principle for the rest of the policies, a list of subject 6.1, object at­
tributes 6.2 and the available actions 6.3 were created. The set of attributes for both
object and subject were chosen to adhere to the rule requirements. Additionally, it has to
be noted that not all of attributes are relevant to all types of objects and subjects.
To create the datasets from the attribute tables, a structured method was approached
where instead of random generated data, real ­ life statistics from the US Institute of Ed­
ucation Sciences were used. The institute offers a tool, a table generator [46], that pro­
vides educational data for either state, district, public or private school by selected years.
The approach followed, was first generating data for all schools, selecting additionally the
state, district id and name, county and name, total number of both teachers and students
and the pupil/teacher ratio. Next, generating for each state the statistics for the number
of administrators and the pupil/teacher ratio as well.
With data collected from both sources, a merging process was applied to unify the school­
level statistics with state­level summaries. This process was implemented using Python,
36
Extending the Attribute Based Access Control Model (ABAC) with Honey­Attributes for Insider Threat
Detection
==PAGE:45==
Table 6.1: Subject Dataset Attributes
Attribute Name
Data Type
Description
subject_id
Character
Unique random 7­digit ID assigned to each subject
role
String
Role of the user; possible values: {Admin, Teacher, Student}
position
Enumerated
Staff position; e.g., for Teachers: {Probationary, Long Term, Tenured}; for Admin: {Academic, Nominated}
trust_value
Float
Trust score for the user
school_code
List[String]
7­digit codes of affiliated schools
school_name
List[String]
Names of affiliated schools
class_id
List[String]
Class IDs assigned to the subject
course_code
List[String]
Course codes assigned to the subject
county_name
List[String]
County affiliation(s)
county_number
List[String]
5­digit county codes
district_name
List[String]
Names of affiliated districts
district_id
List[String]
7­digit district IDs
state
String
State to which the user belongs
Table 6.2: Object Dataset Attributes
Attribute Name
Data Type
Description
object_id
Character
Unique random 7­digit ID assigned to each object
obj_type
Enumerated
Type of object; e.g., {Course enrollment, Student enrollment, Student records, Course assignment, Course material}
school_code
Character
Unique 7­digit code assigned to each school
school_name
Character
The name of the school
district_name
String
District name
district_id
Character
Unique 7­digit code for the school district
county_name
String
County name for each school
county_number
String
Unique 5­digit code for the school county
state
String
U.S. state where the school is located
course_code
String
A 4­digit code mapped to each course (for applicable objects)
class_id
String
Identifier for the class (for applicable objects)
enroll_total
Integer
Number of students currently enrolled (for enrollment objects)
enroll_limit
Integer
Maximum number of students allowed (for enrollment objects)
remaining_seats
Integer
Available seats (computed from enroll_limit ­ enroll_total)
file_created
Integer
Timestamp when the assignment file was created
Table 6.3: Actions and Their Equivalent Verbs in Policies
Action
Equivalent Verbs / Synonyms
Description
Open
View, Access, Read
Allows the subject to see or retrieve the object’s data
Edit
Review, Maintain, Edit, Modify
Allows the subject to change the object’s data
Delete
Remove, Erase
Allows the subject to remove or invalidate the object
Submit
Turn in, Upload, Send
Allows a student to submit a course assignment.
Enroll
Register, Sign up
Allows a student to enroll in a course.
where for each school entry the state, county, district and school attributes were extracted.
Then, for every school, its corresponding state­level administrative data including number
of administrators and the pupil/teacher ratio was extracted and a dictionary was created.
The final dataset was organised in a nested way where the state was the highest in the hi­
erarchy followed by its counties, districts and schools. State­level statistics where merged
using the state name as the key. Within the nested districts, a list of the schools with their
respective statistics was as well held.
This approach was followed so the subject and object data that were then generated could
follow a more realistic scenario where both names, ids but also proportions are taken
from valid sources and not being synthetic. That way, the dataset preserves, as close
as possible, real­world distributions of students, teachers, and administrators since both
number of students and teachers was directly derived from the number of students per
school and the student/teacher ratio. For the administrators, the number was computed by
proportionally distributing the state­level total based on each school’s student population.
Extending the Attribute Based Access Control Model (ABAC) with Honey­Attributes for Insider Threat
Detection
37
==PAGE:46==
The objects, were also strategically generate to reflect realistic proportions of subject­to­
object ratios, specifically, it was selected to generate objects as 20 per cent of the number
of subjects. Secondly, weights were assigned on object based on their type since course
material, for example, would be higher than the course assignments.
6.2
Request Generation Strategy
In order to simulate the authorisation scenario for accessing resources, requests were
generated using the subject and object datasets described in the previous section. The
goal was to create a random but realistic request space, where the attributes would ap­
pear in a plausible frequency as well as contextual relevance. The format followed was
according to the Py­ABAC documentation [47] where each request is a JSON object con­
taining the subject, object, action and context as seen in 6.1. The subjects and objects
were grouped by district to adhere to a real­world educational system where access is
usually referring to a school district. Specifically, for each request:
• A districtnamewasrandomlyselectedfromthesetofvaluesavailable.Asubjectandanobjectwererandomly
• An action was assigned based on the obj_type of the object (e.g., “submit” is only
valid for course assignment).
To avoid inflating policy denials, some constraints were enforced for the object:
• Students can only access objects from their own school. For course­related objects,
they must be enrolled in the respective course_code or class_id depending on the
policy.
• Teachers can only access records from schools they belong to, and must be as­
signed to the relevant course or class.
1
{
2
"subject": {
3
"id": "7701418",
4
"attributes": {
5
"role": "Student",
6
"trust_value": 0.59,
7
"position": null,
8
"district_id": ["3005850"],
9
"county_code": ["30013"],
10
"school_code": ["3000168"],
11
"class_id": ["CLS00744"],
12
"course_code": ["1878", "1216"]
13
}
14
},
15
"resource": {
16
"id": "8183737",
17
"attributes": {
18
"obj_type": "course enrollment",
19
"school_code": "3000168",
20
"class_id": null,
21
"course_code": "1820",
22
"district_id": "3005850",
23
"county_code": "30013",
24
"file_created": null,
25
"remaining_seats": 12
26
}
27
},
38
Extending the Attribute Based Access Control Model (ABAC) with Honey­Attributes for Insider Threat
Detection
==PAGE:47==
28
"action": {
29
"id": "delete_action",
30
"attributes": {
31
"method": "delete"
32
}
33
},
34
"context": {}
35
}
Listing 6.1: Example ABAC Access Request
6.3
Trust Estimation
When a subject is first deployed in the system—and if a trust management mechanism is
present—a trust value is assigned to them by the service provider, or more generally,
the trustor.
This value typically reflects an initial trust assessment, which may incor­
porate both individual and relational considerations, such as the perceived reliability of
the user, their historical behavior, or their role within the organizational structure. Addi­
tionally, this assessment may include a risk evaluation based on uncertainty (e.g., lack
of evidence), vulnerability (e.g., potential harm from granting access), and impact (e.g.,
consequences of misuse). While this initial trust assignment may be thorough, a static
approach will ultimately fail in realistic environments, where user behavior—and therefore
trustworthiness—changes over time. For this reason, a different strategy is followed here,
in which the implemented trust algorithm accounts for behavioral changes, adhering to the
inherently dynamic nature of trust.
To capture this behavior, the trust value is dynamically updated over a series of discrete
time steps based on the standard exponential decay formula 5.6, introduced in the previ­
ous chapter. At each time step, trust is recomputed based on behavioral evidence, which,
in a real deployment, would be collected from a variety of system logs and sensors config­
ured by the security specialist. In this prototype, however, evidence is generated synthet­
ically to enable policy evaluation and sensitivity analysis. Each subject is assessed on 18
behavioral sub­criteria grouped under three top­level categories: Performance, Reliability,
and Security, as proposed in the prior research by Wang et al. [36]. This implementation
extends their approach by formalizing the evidence polarity and applying fuzzy pairwise
comparison for both criteria and sub­criteria levels.
Among the 18 behavioral sub­criteria, some represent cost indicators—metrics where
higher values indicate undesirable or untrustworthy behavior (e.g., number of illegal con­
nections). To ensure a consistent interpretation across all criteria, each sub­criterion is
assigned a polarity flag indicating whether it is a cost or benefit metric. During runtime,
cost­type indicators are inverted so that, after processing, higher values uniformly repre­
sent more trustworthy behavior. This normalization step ensures that all evidence aligns
in the same direction before applying the FAHP weighting.
To quantify the relative importance of each behavioral factor, the FAHP is applied, follow­
ing Chang’s extent analysis method [37]. The implementation leverages the pyfdm library
[48]1 for supporting utilities such as Triangular Fuzzy Number operations, defuzzification,
and consistency checking. However, since the library does not directly implement FAHP
using Chang’s method, the core logic of the algorithm was developed manually. These
custom functions are shown in Listing 6.2.
1In this implementation, in its default set­up, both criteria and sub­criteria were assigned equal importance
to avoid introducing bias in the sensitivity analysis. In practice, these weights would be determined by security
experts based on the specific risk posture and context of the organization.
Extending the Attribute Based Access Control Model (ABAC) with Honey­Attributes for Insider Threat
Detection
39
==PAGE:48==
1
# Step 1: Compute synthetic extent values (Si) for each row of the fuzzy
matrix
2
def compute_synthetic_extents(matrix):
3
row_sums = [sum(matrix[i, :], start=TFN(0, 0, 0)) for i in range(matrix.
shape[0])]
4
total_sum = sum(row_sums , start=TFN(0, 0, 0))
5
return [r / total_sum for r in row_sums]
6
7
# Step 2: Calculate the degree of possibility between two TFNs
8
def possibility_degree(m2: TFN, m1: TFN) -> float:
9
if m2.b >= m1.b:
10
return 1.0
11
elif m1.a >= m2.c:
12
return 0.0
13
else:
14
return (m1.a - m2.c) / ((m2.b - m2.c) - (m1.b - m1.a))
15
16
# Step 3: Use pairwise possibility comparisons to compute final weight vector
17
def compute_final_weights(synthetic_extents):
18
n = len(synthetic_extents)
19
V = np.zeros((n, n))
20
for i in range(n):
21
for j in range(n):
22
if i != j:
23
V[i][j] = possibility_degree(synthetic_extents[i],
synthetic_extents[j])
24
d_prime = np.min(V + np.eye(n), axis=1)
# Take min of possibility degrees
25
return d_prime / np.sum(d_prime)
# Normalize to obtain final
weights
Listing 6.2: Chang’s extent analysis method for computing FAHP weights.
6.4
Sensitivity Estimation
Estimating object sensitivity at the attribute level involves analysing how object attributes
contribute to access decisions across subjects and actions. In particular, attributes that
frequently appear in allowed requests­especially for high­impact actions like edit or delete­
can significantly affect an object’s sensitivity. For this reason, action types were mapped
to trust levels, establishing a connection between trust variations and sensitivity.
Before evaluation, the attributes were filtered so that only those explicitly referenced in the
ABAC policies were considered in the sensitivity calculation. Including attributes that are
irrelevant to the decision logic compromises the accuracy of the analysis. To understand
why, consider how the algorithm handles attributes that have no impact on the PDP’s
decision.
Since sensitivity is calculated based on how often access is granted or denied when a
particular attribute is present, even attributes not used in policy evaluation will be included
in the statistics unless they are filtered out. These irrelevant attributes have no bearing
on the outcome, yet the algorithm still tracks their presence across requests. This can
falsely suggest that such attributes influence access decisions, even though they are
not evaluated by the PDP. As a result, non­policy attributes may appear to have artificial
significance, skewing both object­level and global sensitivity calculations.
To mitigate this, a policy matrix is constructed by parsing the policy set to determine which
attributes are actively uses in each rule, per object type and action. During access eval­
uation, only those relevant attributes are tracked. For each object­attribute pair, the algo­
rithm records how frequently it is involved in access request and how often the access is
40
Extending the Attribute Based Access Control Model (ABAC) with Honey­Attributes for Insider Threat
Detection
==PAGE:49==
allowed. Sensitivity is then calculated based on the negative logarithm of the success rate
as defined in Chapter 5. These scores are aggregated at the object level using the RMS,
and a global sensitivity threshold is derived to identify recognisable sensitive attributes
across the dataset.
A portion of the implementation is shown in Listing 6.3, which highlights how access statis­
tics are collected for object­attribute pairs during policy evaluation. Only policy­relevant
attributes are considered to ensure accurate sensitivity computation.
1
# Partial implementation of compute_object_sensitivity
2
3
def process_requests(batch):
4
stats = defaultdict(lambda: [0, 0])
# (total, allowed) counter
5
for req in batch:
6
res = req["resource"]["attributes"]
7
action = req["action"]["attributes"]["method"]
8
res_type = res.get("obj_type")
9
obj_id = req["resource"]["id"]
10
11
attrs = policy_matrix.get(res_type , {}).get(action, set())
12
if res_type not in policy_matrix or action not in policy_matrix[
res_type]:
13
continue
14
15
relevant_attrs = [a for a in attrs if res.get(a) is not None]
16
if not relevant_attrs:
17
continue
18
19
access_request = AccessRequest.from_json(req)
20
allowed = pdp.is_allowed(access_request)
21
22
for attr in relevant_attrs:
23
key = (obj_id, attr)
24
stats[key][0] += 1
25
if allowed:
26
stats[key][1] += 1
27
return stats
Listing 6.3: Partial implementation of object sensitivity evaluation.
Extending the Attribute Based Access Control Model (ABAC) with Honey­Attributes for Insider Threat
Detection
41
==PAGE:50==
7
Evaluation
As previously discussed, the sensitivity of a resource is closely tied to how access is dis­
tributed among users and what actions those users are permitted to perform. To further
ground this discussion, consider the healthcare domain: while many personnel may view
patient records, only a select few are authorized to modify or delete entries. This sepa­
ration of privileges is essential not just for operational efficiency, but also for maintaining
the integrity and confidentiality of data, aiming to reduce the likelihood of unauthorized
changes or misuse.
However, this raises the question of what happens if the few individuals with privileged
access are no longer trustworthy? In such cases, traditional access control models fall
short. This is precisely where the concept of trust becomes essential. After presenting the
methods and implementation steps followed in chapters 5 and 6, this chapter introduces a
series of experiments aimed at evaluating whether the computed sensitivity meaningfully
reflects the access restrictions and potential misuse risks defined in the ABAC policies,
while also exploring how trust fluctuations influence access decisions and object sensitiv­
ity.
7.1
Attribute Sensitivity Evaluation
Beginning with the first experiment, the dataset is populated as described in chapter 6 and
the a number of 100,000 requests is generated from the same school districts to avoid
a high amount of denied policies as mentioned in section 6.2 of the same chapter. The
objective of this experiment is to assess the influence of both the frequency with which an
attribute appears in access requests and the rate at which access is granted when that
attribute is present. In practice, this means:
• Attributes that frequently appear in access requests and are often allowed tend to
be less sensitive.
• Attributes that appear in fewer requests, especially if they are associated with de­
nials or have high trust requirements, tend to be more sensitive.
The diagnostic plots in Figure 7.1 to Figure 7.4 present a multi­faceted view of how ob­
ject attribute sensitivity is influenced by four key factors: frequency in access requests,
presence in policies, object coverage, and access denial rate.
The attribute file_created stands out as the most sensitive in this experiment. Although
it appears in relatively few policies and is associated with a limited number of objects (Fig­
ures 7.2 and 7.3), it shows a high mean sensitivity due to its strong correlation with de­
nied requests (Figure 7.4) and its lower overall frequency in access requests (Figure 7.1).
This behavior can be attributed to its presence in a single policy that governs content
modification—an action category that is inherently high­risk and requires elevated trust
levels.
Another attribute that also ranks high in sensitivity is course_code. Unlike file_created,
it appears in more requests and policies, yet remains heavily denied. This likely reflects
its role as a key access­enabling attribute across a range of object types, but only under
elevated trust conditions. As shown in Figure 7.4, its denial rate is close to 1.0, reinforcing
this interpretation.
42
Extending the Attribute Based Access Control Model (ABAC) with Honey­Attributes for Insider Threat
Detection
==PAGE:51==
In contrast, school_code is referenced in a significantly larger number of policies, which
may contribute to its high frequency in requests and moderately high sensitivity. Attributes
such as district_id and county_code, while also frequently present in access requests,
are referenced in fewer policies. All three often function as scoping or filtering constraints
— important for narrowing down access but not typically decisive on their own. This likely
contributes to their moderate denial rates and slightly lower sensitivity values compared
to attributes like file_created or course_code.
Finally, class_id stands out as an attribute with low frequency, limited policy usage, and
the lowest mean sensitivity. It appears primarily in policies with minimal trust requirements
and thus contributes very little to access control decisions in this experiment.
Overall, these results validate the hypothesis that attributes which are tightly bound to
access constraints, especially when used in fewer but stricter policies, tend to exhibit
higher sensitivity and denial rates.
Figure 7.1: Sensitivity vs. Attribute Frequency in Access Requests
Figure 7.2: Sensitivity vs. Number of Policies Referencing Each Attribute
Extending the Attribute Based Access Control Model (ABAC) with Honey­Attributes for Insider Threat
Detection
43
==PAGE:52==
Figure 7.3: Sensitivity vs. Number of Objects Containing Each Attribute
Figure 7.4: Sensitivity vs. Denial Rate per Attribute
7.2
Risk Evaluation of Attributes
In the second experiment, the sensitivity of objects is approached differently, introducing a
risk­based scoring model. For each attribute, the likelihood of its usage and the impact of
the actions it is associated with. These are combined into a final score, the risk associated
with each attribute A, which is computed using the following definitions:
• Likelihood (L(A)):
L(A) =
# of access requests using A
# of unique objects containing A
This measures how frequently attribute A appears in access requests relative to its
overall presence in the dataset. A higher value implies that A appears more often
in requests relative to how many objects contain it.
• Impact (I(A)):
I(A) =
*
i severity(ai) · count(ai)
*
i count(ai)
where ai are actions involving attribute A, and count(ai) is the number of requests
involving action ai. The severity is assigned based on the minimum trust required
to perform the action:
severity(a) =
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩
1
if trust(a) ≥0.5 (Low)
2
if trust(a) ≥0.7 (Medium)
3
if trust(a) ≥0.9 (High)
44
Extending the Attribute Based Access Control Model (ABAC) with Honey­Attributes for Insider Threat
Detection
==PAGE:53==
• Risk (R(A)):
R(A) = L(A) · I(A)
For the same set of 100,000 access requests, the risk of each attribute was computed.
The results are presented in Table 7.1. The attributes district_id and county_code
exhibit the highest likelihood values, confirming their frequent and consistent use across
access requests relative to their presence in the dataset. This aligns with the request
frequency patterns observed in Experiment 1 (Figure 7.1).
An interesting observation is that although attributes like file_created and course_code
have lower likelihood compared to the most frequently occurring attributes (e.g., district
_id and county_code), they exhibit higher impact. In this context, impact is closely tied
to sensitivity, as it directly reflects the severity of actions associated with each attribute—
visible also in their higher denial rates shown in Figure 7.4.
A particularly informative comparison can be made between file_created and remaining
_seats. Both attributes are involved in only one policy each (Figure 7.2), are related to
specific object types and appear with similar frequency in access requests (Figure 7.1).
However, their risk scores differ with the attribute file_created having a risk score of
8.54, while remaining_seats reaches a score of 4.79. This divergence arises from the
two following factors.
First, as shown in Figure 7.3, file_created is present in a slightly larger number of unique
objects. According to the likelihood equation (Equation 7.2), this increases the denomi­
nator and results in a slightly lower likelihood L(A) compared to remaining_seats. Sec­
ond the attribute file_created is associated with higher trust actions compared to the
remaining_seats. As a result, the impact I(A) for file_created is significantly higher,
contributing more heavily to its overall risk score. This aligns with its elevated denial rate
observed in Figure 7.4.
A noticeable limitation in the results is that attributes used across many object types—such
as district_id—tend to have higher likelihood values simply due to their widespread
presence, even if they are not involved in critical decisions. On the other hand, attributes
like file_created, which are tied to fewer object types but associated with more sensitive
actions, end up with lower likelihood. As a result, the risk score may disproportionately
highlight broadly used attributes, while undervaluing those that are more targeted but
carry higher security implications.
Table 7.1: Risk evaluation of attributes based on likelihood and action impact
Attribute
Likelihood
Impact
Risk
county_code
15.8688
1.7835
28.3019
district_id
15.8688
1.7835
28.3019
course_code
4.3077
2.0000
8.6154
file_created
4.2706
2.0000
8.5412
school_code
4.2989
1.7040
7.3255
remaining_seats
4.7931
1.0000
4.7931
class_id
3.4115
1.0000
3.4115
Extending the Attribute Based Access Control Model (ABAC) with Honey­Attributes for Insider Threat
Detection
45
==PAGE:54==
7.3
Trust Variation
In order to assess how trust variation affects attribute­level sensitivity, and subsequently
the sensitivity of objects, it was necessary to simulate controlled changes in trust scores
across subjects. To enable this, two complementary experiments were conducted. First,
a randomised approach, in which behavioral evidence was generated using the Beta dis­
tribution where, at each time step, 18 evidence values were generated per subject and
processed through the trust update defined in Equation 5.6, incorporating both the FAHP­
derived weights and the smoothing parameter γ. Second, a more focused approach was
followed where a realistic insider threat was simulated aligned with CERT guidelines for
intellectual property (IP) theft [49].
7.3.1
Randomised Trust Simulation
In the baseline setup, each subject’s behavioral evidence was simulated using a unique
pair of (α, β) parameters that were drawn from the same bounded range [1.5, 6] and re­
main fixed for the twelve month long duration of the simulation. Within this interval, the
Beta distribution produces values that are neither extreme nor highly dispersed; instead,
the evidence is typically centered around 0.5 with limited spread—often between 0.2 and
0.8—depending on the specific combination of α and β. The higher the sum (α + β),
the lower the variance, which leads to more concentrated evidence values. As a result,
even though subjects differ in their evidence patterns, the range of trust input remains
statistically moderate and consistent as shown in 7.5.
Moreover, since the fuzzy weights derived via FAHP (based on Triangular Fuzzy Num­
bers) are fixed throughout the experiment, the influence of each evidence dimension re­
mains constant over time. Combined with the smoothing effect introduced by the decay
parameter γ = 0.85, this setup leads to trust values that evolve in a stable manner.
Further analysis of how the (α, β) distribution choices and category­level skew influence
trust behavior is provided in Appendix .4.2.
Figure 7.5: Trust Evolution for 100 Subjects (Random (α, β) in [1.5, 6])
The resulting trust scores were then used to evaluate their effect on access control out­
comes. Subjects were grouped into those whose trust increased and those whose trust
decreased. While object sensitivity was computed for both groups before and after the
simulation, this global analysis proved limited in its explanatory power. Due to the ran­
domized nature of the access request dataset and the average of all target objects, the
sensitivity scores showed only marginal differences, as shown in 7.6, despite a significant
change in access behavior.
The more informative metric in this context was the change in denial rates. Users with
increased trust saw their denial rate drop from 91.18% to 87.08%, while those with de­
46
Extending the Attribute Based Access Control Model (ABAC) with Honey­Attributes for Insider Threat
Detection
==PAGE:55==
creased trust experienced a rise from 72.30% to 94.21%. These numbers highlight that
trust variation does influence access control decisions. However, the impact on sensi­
tivity is diluted when aggregated across diverse objects and subjects. This motivates a
more targeted approach, as detailed in the next subsection, which focuses on an insider
profile guided by CERT case studies and the sensitivity changes tied to a specific subset
of targeted objects.
Figure 7.6: Sensitivity Impact of Trust Changes
7.3.2
CERT­Guided Insider Simulation
Insider threats are particularly challenging to detect and mitigate due to the legitimate
access and privileges insiders already possess. Additionally, because many insider inci­
dents are never publicly disclosed — often due to reputational concerns or confidential­
ity — understanding the typical behavior of insider adversaries is nontrivial. The CERT
Insider Threat Center has conducted extensive studies to profile insider behavior, cate­
gorizing incidents into three main types: IT sabotage, fraud, and intellectual property (IP)
theft [49].
For this work, the IP theft scenario was selected as the most relevant use case, consider­
ing the structure of the educational ABAC policies and datasets. IP theft typically involves
authorized users exfiltrating information they themselves created or maintained, often just
before or after resigning. Critically, CERT’s findings show that three out of four IP theft
cases involve authorized actions, underscoring the need for dynamic access control mod­
els that adapt over time.
CERT models IP theft using two overlapping behavioral profiles: the entitled independent
and the ambitious leader. This experiment follows the former, an insider acting alone,
motivated by personal gain, which aligns well with direct­based trust decision models.
Notably, many such cases were detected by nontechnical staff, highlighting the impor­
tance of organizational awareness and reporting channels alongside technical controls
(see Section 2.5).
Simulation Design
The experiment targeted a policy tied to course assignment objects, which naturally re­
flect user ownership and intellectual contribution. A student subject with an initial trust
score ≥0.7 and legitimate access to at least one course assignment via the submit ac­
tion was selected as the insider. The simulation spanned two months, with the first month
representing behavior before resignation (internal, privileged access), and the second
month representing post­resignation behavior (external, unauthorized access attempts).
To model the distinct behaviors across these periods:
• Behavioral evidence was generated using Beta distributions, with different parame­
ter sets per month to reflect shifting behavior intensity.
Extending the Attribute Based Access Control Model (ABAC) with Honey­Attributes for Insider Threat
Detection
47
==PAGE:56==
• For each high­level criterion (Performance, Reliability, Security), an inner­layer FAHP
matrix was defined to capture the relative importance of the individual evidence in­
dicators within that category. These matrices differed between months to reflect
behavioral changes.
• An outer­layer FAHP matrix was used to weight the three criteria globally. It empha­
sized performance during the first month (normal behavior) and security during the
second month (post­resignation activity).
• The γ parameter for exponential smoothing was set to 0.4 during employment (more
stable) and lowered to 0.2 post­resignation (more reactive to evidence).
7.3.3
Results and Sensitivity Analysis
To isolate the effect of the insider, a controlled request dataset was generated using a
filtered subject pool. The only change between the “before” and “after” request sets was
the trust score of the insider. All other users and their trust values remained unchanged.
Figure 7.7 visualizes the trust evolution of the insider subject over the 8­week simulation
period. Variability is expected due to stochastic behavioral evidence and FAHP­based
weighting, yet the overall trend reflects progressive trust degradation—particularly after
the simulated resignation point at week 4 (see evidence details in Appendix .5.4). .
Figure 7.7: Insider trust evolution over 8 simulated weeks. Resignation occurs at the end
of week 4.
Following the trust degradation, a sensitivity analysis was conducted on ten course as­
signment objects that were initially accessible to the insider. The object­level sensitivity
was recomputed using the modified access request set. As shown in Figure 7.8, the trust
drop of a single subject resulted in a marked increase in object sensitivity, driven by the
rise in denied access decisions following trust degradation.
48
Extending the Attribute Based Access Control Model (ABAC) with Honey­Attributes for Insider Threat
Detection
==PAGE:57==
Figure 7.8: Comparison of object sensitivity scores before and after the insider’s trust
drop.
The evidence indicators used to simulate behavioral changes across the two months,
as well as the Beta distribution parameters and FAHP matrices, are fully listed in Ap­
pendix .51.
7.4
Action Threshold Variation
The final part of the evaluation explores how policy design—specifically, the trust thresh­
olds required for different actions—affects object sensitivity. In attribute­based access
control, these thresholds define the minimum trust level a user must have to perform a
certain action. Changing these thresholds alters the strictness of access decisions.
Two alternative configurations are tested and compared against the original baseline pol­
icy:
• Relaxed policy: The trust thresholds for all actions are lowered (e.g., view/enroll
from 0.5 to 0.3, edit/submit from 0.7 to 0.5, and delete from 0.9 to 0.7).
• Strict policy: The trust thresholds are increased (e.g., view/enroll from 0.5 to 0.7,
edit/submit/ from 0.7 to 0.9, and delete from 0.9 to 1.0).
The same set of 100,000 access requests was evaluated using all three policies: baseline,
relaxed, and strict. For each, object­level sensitivity was recalculated. The results of this
experiment are shown in Figure 7.9 and summarized in Table 7.2.
Table 7.2: Access decision distribution across trust threshold configurations.
Scenario
Allowed Requests
Denied Requests
Avg. Sensitivity
Strict (0.7)
38,801
287,792
22.9991
Baseline (0.5)
77,638
239,201
20.6765
Relaxed (0.3)
111,191
215,402
21.9597
The results may initially appear counterintuitive: how can the relaxed policy­with the low­
1The complete implementation, including trust simulation and sensitivity analysis scripts, is available at
https://github.com/danae-pan/abac-behavioral-trust-model.
Extending the Attribute Based Access Control Model (ABAC) with Honey­Attributes for Insider Threat
Detection
49
==PAGE:58==
Figure 7.9: Caption: Impact of Trust Threshold Strictness on Sensitivity
est thresholds­not yield the lowest sensitivity? Instead, it produces a higher average ob­
ject sensitivity than the baseline. This outcome can be explained by recognizing that
object sensitivity is influenced not only by the number of authorized users (i.e., policy
strictness), but also by the structure and distribution of the access request space. This
insight aligns with the findings of Experiment 7.1, where sensitivity was shown to increase
for attributes that appeared less frequently but were associated with denials or stricter pol­
icy conditions. Lowering trust thresholds broadens access across the subject population,
including to objects that still contain highly sensitive attributes. As a result, even though
more requests are permitted, they now target a wider—and potentially more sensitive—
range of object attributes, leading to increased sensitivity and denial rates, as shown in
Table 7.2.
50
Extending the Attribute Based Access Control Model (ABAC) with Honey­Attributes for Insider Threat
Detection
==PAGE:59==
8
Summary and Future Work
This chapter concludes the thesis by summarizing the key design decisions, acknowl­
edging the limitations of the current implementation, and outlining opportunities for future
development.
8.1
Design Choices
• Dynamic Trust Attribute: Trust is modeled as a time­varying, behavior­driven at­
tribute rather than a static, credential­based or boolean flag. This allows access
decisions to adapt based on changes in user behavior over time.
• Uncertainty Handling with Fuzzy Logic: Fuzzy logic is used to model the uncer­
tainty and subjectivity involved in trust evaluation. By allowing fuzzy pairwise com­
parisons between criteria, it captures how humans weigh and prioritize different trust
signals — offering a more nuanced and realistic representation of decision­making
under ambiguity.
• Layered Approach to Identifying Insider Threats: Insider threat is approached as
a multi­dimensional problem by combining behavioral inputs with deception­based
triggers.
• Trust­Action Coupling in Policies: Trust is reflected in the policy by assigning
different thresholds per action type. More critical actions like delete require higher
trust than view or edit, replacing static rules with a gradual scale of access privileges.
• Trust­Driven Sensitivity Recalibration: The original sensitivity formula is extended
to reflect changes in the number of authorized users due to trust variation, allowing
object sensitivity to update over time.
8.2
Limitations
The limitations of this work reflect both implementation constraints and broader modeling
trade­offs. They are grouped into three categories: challenges in policy and sensitivity
modeling, issues of generalizability and domain transfer, and integration or scalability
bottlenecks in the current prototype.
8.2.1
Policy and Sensitivity Modeling Gaps
• Handcrafted Policies: There is no public ABAC policy dataset. Policies were man­
ually created, limiting policy diversity and realism.
• Honeytoken Integration Scope: Decoy access (via honey attributes) was inter­
preted as a signal, but the actual generation or strategic placement of honeytokens
was not implemented.
• Missing Contextual Modeling: Access context (e.g., time­of­day, session frequency)
was not included, despite its relevance to behavior­based access control.
8.2.2
Generalizability and Domain Transferability
• Educational Domain Bias: The dataset and policies were tailored to an educational
setting. Deploying in healthcare or finance would require redefinition of both trust
and policy rules.
Extending the Attribute Based Access Control Model (ABAC) with Honey­Attributes for Insider Threat
Detection
51
==PAGE:60==
• Fuzzy Weight Generalization: In the default set­up fuzzy scales were not cali­
brated by domain experts, to keep results general, and only some targeted experi­
ments were analysed.
• Environmental Attribute Use: Although ABAC supports environmental attributes,
they were not modeled or evaluated in this implementation.
• Trust Decay Calibration: For the default set­up the decay parameter γ was held
fixed across users and over time, simplifying implementation. In practical deploy­
ments, however, it may need calibration based on domain­specific dynamics (e.g.,
stricter decay in high­risk environments) or user behavior patterns (e.g., faster decay
under erratic activity).
8.2.3
Scalability and Integration Gaps
• Scalability Constraints: Py­ABAC’s in­memory store limits scalability. While it
worked for testing, it isn’t suited for high­throughput production systems.
• No Integration with Real Policy Engines: The framework does not support XACML
or NGAC, which limits its applicability in environments requiring standardized policy
enforcement.
• No Real Log Access: Real user logs or insider threat data could not be accessed
due to privacy constraints, reducing realism in trust and sensitivity evaluations.
8.3
Future Work
The following directions outline how this work could be extended, focusing on improve­
ments to the trust model, detection capabilities, and real­world applicability:
• Integration of Indirect Trust: To enhance the system’s awareness of insider threats,
future work could extend the trust model to support indirect signals such as peer rec­
ommendations or reputation­based scoring. This would enable more complete and
realistic trust profiles.
• Real Behavioral Logs: Incorporating real user logs (e.g., login events, access pat­
terns, anomaly triggers) would provide a more accurate basis for evaluating trust
variation. It would also help refine how TFN values are selected in practice.
• Honey Attribute Generation and Placement: Honey attributes were used con­
ceptually as detection triggers, but their generation and strategic placement were
not explored due to time constraints. Future work could implement a data­driven
generation method, for example using WGANs as already considered.
• Context­Aware Trust Signals: The model currently excludes contextual inputs
such as access time, device, or location. Introducing environmental attributes and
connecting them to trust dynamics could strengthen detection of subtle insider be­
haviors over time.
• Simulation of Additional Insider Attack Scenarios: The IP theft case study demon­
strated how targeted trust degradation can be linked to sensitivity shifts for specific
objects. Future work could generalize this approach by simulating a broader range
of insider threat scenarios (e.g., sabotage, privilege abuse, fraud) using behavioral
profiles aligned with CERT case studies. This would require extending the policy
set to support new actions and object types, thereby enabling more diverse attack
patterns to be represented within the dataset.
52
Extending the Attribute Based Access Control Model (ABAC) with Honey­Attributes for Insider Threat
Detection
==PAGE:61==
Bibliography
[1]
Cybersecurity Insiders and Gurucul. 2024 Insider Threat Report. Tech. rep. Cyber­
security Insiders, Aug. 2024.
[2]
Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA). Insider Threat Mitigation
Guide. Tech. rep. U.S. Department of Homeland Security, Nov. 2022.
[3]
Peter G. Neumann. “Combatting Insider Threats”. In: Insider Threats in Cyber Se­
curity. Ed. by Christian W. Probst et al. Boston, MA: Springer US, 2010, pp. 17–44.
isbn: 978­1­4419­7133­3. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4419-7133-3_2. url: https://doi.org/
10.1007/978-1-4419-7133-3_2.
[4]
Christian W. Probst et al. “Aspects of Insider Threats”. English. In: Aspects of Insider
Threats. Springer, 2010, pp. 1–16. isbn: 978­1­4419­7132­6.
[5]
Malek Ben Salem, Shlomo Hershkop, and Salvatore J. Stolfo. “A Survey of Insider
Attack Detection Research”. en. In: Insider Attack and Cyber Security. Ed. by Salva­
tore J. Stolfo et al. Vol. 39. Advances in Information Security. Boston, MA: Springer
US, 2008, pp. 69–90. isbn: 978­0­387­77321­6. doi: 10.1007/978-0-387-77322-3_5.
url: http://link.springer.com/10.1007/978-0-387-77322-3_5.
[6]
Michael McCormick. “Data Theft: A Prototypical Insider Threat”. In: Insider Attack
and Cyber Security: Beyond the Hacker. Ed. by Salvatore J. Stolfo et al. Boston,
MA: Springer US, 2008, pp. 53–68. isbn: 978­0­387­77322­3. doi: 10.1007/978-0-
387-77322-3_4. url: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-0-387-77322-3_4.
[7]
Sara Sinclair and Sean W. Smith. “Preventative Directions For Insider Threat Mitiga­
tion Via Access Control”. In: Insider Attack and Cyber Security: Beyond the Hacker.
Ed. by Salvatore J. Stolfo et al. Boston, MA: Springer US, 2008, pp. 165–194. isbn:
978­0­387­77322­3. doi: 10.1007/978-0-387-77322-3_10. url: https://doi.org/10.
1007/978-0-387-77322-3_10.
[8]
Charles P. Pfleeger. “Reflections on the Insider Threat”. In: Insider Attack and Cyber
Security: Beyond the Hacker. Ed. by Salvatore J. Stolfo et al. Boston, MA: Springer
US, 2008, pp. 5–16. isbn: 978­0­387­77322­3. doi: 10.1007/978-0-387-77322-3_2.
url: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-0-387-77322-3_2.
[9]
Andrew P. Moore, Dawn M. Cappelli, and Randall F. Trzeciak. “The “Big Picture”
of Insider IT Sabotage Across U.S. Critical Infrastructures”. In: Insider Attack and
Cyber Security: Beyond the Hacker. Ed. by Salvatore J. Stolfo et al. Boston, MA:
Springer US, 2008, pp. 17–52. isbn: 978­0­387­77322­3. doi: 10.1007/978-0-387-
77322-3_3. url: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-0-387-77322-3_3.
[10]
Ameya Sanzgiri and Dipankar Dasgupta. “Classification of Insider Threat Detection
Techniques”. en. In: Proceedings of the 11th Annual Cyber and Information Security
Research Conference. Oak Ridge TN USA: ACM, Apr. 2016, pp. 1–4. isbn: 978­1­
4503­3752­6. doi: 10.1145/2897795.2897799. url: https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/
2897795.2897799.
[11]
Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA). Insider Threat Mitigation
Guide. 2022. url: https : / / www . cisa . gov / sites / default / files / 2022 - 11 / Insider %
20Threat%20Mitigation%20Guide_Final_508.pdf.
[12]
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI). Robert Hanssen ­ Famous Cases. n.d. url:
https://www.fbi.gov/history/famous-cases/robert-hanssen.
[13]
Famous Trials Project. The Pentagon Papers Trial ­ Daniel Ellsberg. n.d. url: https:
//famous-trials.com/ellsberg/273-home.
Extending the Attribute Based Access Control Model (ABAC) with Honey­Attributes for Insider Threat
Detection
53
==PAGE:62==
[14]
Reuters Staff. “Tesla Workers Shared Sensitive Images Recorded by Customer
Cars”. In: (2023). url: https://www.reuters.com/technology/tesla-workers-shared-
sensitive-images-recorded-by-customer-cars-2023-04-06/.
[15]
U.S. Department of Justice. San Jose Man Pleads Guilty to Damaging Cisco’s Net­
work. 2021. url: https://www.justice.gov/usao-ndca/pr/san-jose-man-pleads-guilty-
damaging-cisco-s-network.
[16]
Joseph Migga Kizza. “Access Control and Authorization”. In: Guide to Computer
Network Security. 6th ed. Springer Cham, 2024. doi: 10.1007/978-3-031-47549-8.
url: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-47549-8.
[17]
Frank L. Greitzer and Deborah A. Frincke. “Combining traditional cyber security
audit data with psychosocial data: Towards predictive modeling for insider threat
mitigation”. eng. In: Advances in Information Security 49 (2010), pp. 85–113. issn:
15682633. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4419-7133-3_5.
[18]
Matt Bishop. Introduction to computer security. en. Boston: Addison­Wesley, 2005.
isbn: 978­0­321­24744­5.
[19]
Vincent C. Hu and Karen Scarfone. Guidelines for Access Control System Evalu­
ation Metrics. NIST Interagency/Internal Report (NISTIR) 7874. National Institute
of Standards and Technology (NIST), 2014. doi: 10.6028/NIST.IR.7874. url: https:
//doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.7874.
[20]
Vincent C. Hu et al. Guide to Attribute Based Access Control (ABAC) Definition and
Considerations. en. NIST SP 800­162. Jan. 2014, NIST SP 800–162. doi: 10.6028/
NIST.SP.800-162. url: https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/SpecialPublications/NIST.
SP.800-162.pdf.
[21]
Nastaran Farhadighalati et al. “A Systematic Review of Access Control Models:
Background, Existing Research, and Challenges”. In: IEEE Access 13 (2025), pp. 17777–
17806. doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2025.3533145.
[22]
Emad Khalaf. “A Survey of Access Control and Data Encryption for Database Se­
curity”. In: Journal of King Abdulaziz University­engineering Sciences 28 (2017),
pp. 19–30. url: https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:211546325.
[23]
Vincent Hu, David Ferraiolo, and D. Kuhn. “Assessment of Access Control Sys­
tems”. In: (Jan. 2007).
[24]
L. Spitzner. “Honeypots: catching the insider threat”. en. In: 19th Annual Computer
Security Applications Conference, 2003. Proceedings. Las Vegas, Nevada, USA:
IEEE, 2003, pp. 170–179. isbn: 978­0­7695­2041­4. doi: 10 . 1109 / CSAC . 2003 .
1254322. url: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/1254322/.
[25]
Brian M Bowen et al. “Baiting Inside Attackers Using Decoy Documents”. en. In: ().
[26]
Parisa Kaghazgaran and Hassan Takabi. “Toward an Insider Threat Detection Frame­
work Using Honey Permissions”. en. In: ().
[27]
Manar Alohaly, Olusesi Balogun, and Daniel Takabi. “Integrating Cyber Decep­
tion Into Attribute­Based Access Control (ABAC) for Insider Threat Detection”. en.
In: IEEE Access 10 (2022), pp. 108965–108978. issn: 2169­3536. doi: 10.1109/
ACCESS.2022.3213645.
[28]
Kartikey Jangir and Dharmendra Prasad Mahato. “An Insider Threat Resilient Frame­
work Based on Honey Traps in a Function­Based Access Control Environment”.
en. In: Advanced Network Technologies and Intelligent Computing. Ed. by Anshul
Verma et al. Vol. 2091. Communications in Computer and Information Science.
Cham: Springer Nature Switzerland, 2024, pp. 3–16. isbn: 978­3­031­64063­6. doi:
10.1007/978-3-031-64064-3_1. url: https://link.springer.com/10.1007/978-3-031-
64064-3_1.
54
Extending the Attribute Based Access Control Model (ABAC) with Honey­Attributes for Insider Threat
Detection
==PAGE:63==
[29]
Carlos E. Rubio­Medrano, Ziming Zhao, and Gail Joon Ahn. “Riskpol: A risk assess­
ment framework for preventing attribute­forgery attacks to ABAC policies”. eng. In:
Abac 2018 ­ Proceedings of the 3rd Acm Workshop on Attribute­based Access Con­
trol, Co­located With Codaspy 2018 2018­ (2018), pp. 54–60. doi: 10.1145/3180457.
3180462.
[30]
Brian M. Bowen et al. “Monitoring Technologies for Mitigating Insider Threats”. In:
Insider Threats in Cyber Security. Ed. by Christian W. Probst et al. Boston, MA:
Springer US, 2010, pp. 197–217. isbn: 978­1­4419­7133­3. doi: 10.1007/978- 1-
4419-7133-3_9. url: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4419-7133-3_9.
[31]
Ashish Singh and Kakali Chatterjee. “ITrust: identity and trust based access control
model for healthcare system security”. en. In: Multimedia Tools and Applications
78.19 (Oct. 2019), pp. 28309–28330. issn: 1380­7501, 1573­7721. doi: 10.1007/
s11042-019-07923-4.
[32]
Yachana, Navroop Kaur, and Sandeep K. Sood. “A trustworthy system for secure
access to patient centric sensitive information”. en. In: Telematics and Informatics
35.4 (July 2018), pp. 790–800. issn: 07365853. doi: 10.1016/j.tele.2017.09.008.
[33]
Sudip Chakraborty and Indrajit Ray. “TrustBAC: integrating trust relationships into
the RBAC model for access control in open systems”. en. In: Proceedings of the
eleventh ACM symposium on Access control models and technologies ­ SACMAT
’06. Lake Tahoe, California, USA: ACM Press, 2006, p. 49. isbn: 978­1­59593­353­
9. doi: 10.1145/1133058.1133067. url: http://portal.acm.org/citation.cfm?doid=
1133058.1133067.
[34]
Majid Arasteh and Somayeh Alizadeh. “Using a Novel Method for Trust Evalua­
tion to Enhance ABAC Capabilities”. en. In: 2020 10th International Conference on
Computer and Knowledge Engineering (ICCKE). Mashhad, Iran: IEEE, Oct. 2020,
pp. 101–106. isbn: 978­1­7281­8566­8. doi: 10.1109/ICCKE50421.2020.9303631. url:
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9303631/.
[35]
G Abirami and Revathi Venkataraman. “Performance Analysis of ABAC and ABAC
with Trust (ABAC­T) in Fine Grained Access Control Model”. en. In: 2019 11th In­
ternational Conference on Advanced Computing (ICoAC). Chennai, India: IEEE,
Dec. 2019, pp. 372–375. isbn: 978­1­7281­5286­8. doi: 10.1109/ICoAC48765.2019.
246870. url: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9087267/.
[36]
Jiuru Wang et al. “Attribute and User Trust Score­Based Zero Trust Access Control
Model in IoV”. en. In: Electronics 12.23 (Nov. 2023), p. 4825. issn: 2079­9292. doi:
10.3390/electronics12234825.
[37]
Da­Yong Chang. “Applications of the extent analysis method on fuzzy AHP”. In:
European Journal of Operational Research 95.3 (1996), pp. 649–655. issn: 0377­
2217. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/0377-2217(95)00300-2.
[38]
Kieron O’Hara et al. “Trust Strategies for the Semantic Web”. en. In: ().
[39]
Warsun Najib, Selo Sulistyo, and Widyawan Widyawan. “Survey on Trust Calcula­
tion Methods in Internet of Things”. In: Procedia Computer Science 161 (Jan. 2019),
pp. 1300–1307. doi: 10.1016/j.procs.2019.11.245.
[40]
Mohammad Hasan Aghdaie. “Data Mining Group Decision­Making with FAHP: An
Application in Supplier Evaluation and Segmentation”. In: Fuzzy Analytic Hierarchy
Process. Ed. by Ali Emrouznejad and William Ho. CRC Press, 2017. Chap. 4. doi:
10.1201/9781315369884-4. url: https://www.taylorfrancis.com/chapters/edit/10.
1201/9781315369884-4/data-mining-group-decision-making-fahp-mohammad-hasan-
aghdaie.
Extending the Attribute Based Access Control Model (ABAC) with Honey­Attributes for Insider Threat
Detection
55
==PAGE:64==
[41]
R. W. Saaty. “The analytic hierarchy process—what it is and how it is used”. In:
Mathematical Modelling 9.3 (1987), pp. 161–176. issn: 0270­0255. doi: https://doi.
org/10.1016/0270-0255(87)90473-8.
[42]
Matt Bishop and Carrie Gates. “Defining the insider threat”. In: Proceedings of the
4th Annual Workshop on Cyber Security and Information Intelligence Research: De­
veloping Strategies to Meet the Cyber Security and Information Intelligence Chal­
lenges Ahead. CSIIRW ’08. Oak Ridge, Tennessee, USA: Association for Comput­
ing Machinery, 2008. isbn: 9781605580982. doi: 10.1145/1413140.1413158. url:
https://doi.org/10.1145/1413140.1413158.
[43]
Manar Alohaly, Hassan Takabi, and Eduardo Blanco. “Automated extraction of at­
tributes from natural language attribute­based access control (ABAC) Policies”. In:
Cybersecurity 2.1 (Jan. 2019), p. 2. issn: 2523­3246. doi: 10.1186/s42400-018-0019-
2.
[44]
Fangfang Shan et al. “Automatic Generation of Attribute­Based Access Control Poli­
cies from Natural Language Documents”. In: Computers, Materials and Continua
80.3 (2024), pp. 3881–3902. issn: 1546­2218. doi: https://doi.org/10.32604/cmc.
2024.055167.
[45]
Mohammad Nur Nobi et al. Machine Learning in Access Control: A Taxonomy and
Survey. 2022. arXiv: 2207.01739 [cs.CR]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2207.01739.
[46]
National Center for Education Statistics. Elementary/Secondary Information Sys­
tem (ELSi) Table Generator. 2024. url: https://nces.ed.gov/ccd/elsi/tableGenerator.
aspx.
[47]
Ketan Goyal. PyABAC: Attribute­Based Access Control in Python. https://github.
com/ketgo/py-abac. 2018.
[48]
Jakub Więckowski, Bartłomiej Kizielewicz, and Wojciech Sałabun. “pyFDM: A Python
library for uncertainty decision analysis methods”. In: SoftwareX 20 (2022), p. 101271.
[49]
Dawn Cappelli, Andrew Moore, and Randall Trzeciak. The CERT guide to insider
threats: how to prevent, detect, and respond to information technology crimes (theft,
sabotage, fraud). en. The Sei series in software engineering. Upper Saddle River,
NJ: Addison­Wesley, 2012. isbn: 978­0­321­81257­5.
56
Extending the Attribute Based Access Control Model (ABAC) with Honey­Attributes for Insider Threat
Detection
==PAGE:65==
.1
Fuzzy Arithmetic Operations
Given two triangular fuzzy numbers ˜A = (l1, m1, u1) and ˜B = (l2, m2, u2):
• Addition:
˜A ⊕˜B = (l1 + l2, m1 + m2, u1 + u2)
• Subtraction:
˜A ⊖˜B = (l1 −u2, m1 −m2, u1 −l2)
• Multiplication:
˜A ⊗˜B = (l1 · l2, m1 · m2, u1 · u2)
• Inverse:
˜A−1 =
1 1
u1
, 1
m1
, 1
l1
2
.2
Defuzzification and Consistency Ratio
.2.1
Defuzzification of Triangular Fuzzy Numbers
A triangular fuzzy number (TFN) ˜A = (l, m, u) can be converted into a crisp value using
the mean of the bounds method:
Defuzzify( ˜A) = l + m + u
3
This defuzzified value is used to construct a crisp pairwise comparison matrix from the
fuzzy input matrix before computing the consistency ratio.
.2.2
Consistency Ratio Calculation (Saaty’s Method)
Once the fuzzy matrix is defuzzified, the consistency of the pairwise comparisons can be
assessed using Saaty’s consistency index (CI) and consistency ratio (CR):
CI = λmax −n
n −1
,
CR = CI
RIn
Where:
• λmax is the largest eigenvalue of the defuzzified matrix.
• n is the matrix size (number of criteria or sub­criteria).
• RIn is the average random consistency index for a matrix of size n.
The RI values are based on values proposed by Saaty [41]:
Extending the Attribute Based Access Control Model (ABAC) with Honey­Attributes for Insider Threat
Detection
57
==PAGE:66==
Table 1: Random Index (RI) Values for Different Matrix Sizes
n
RI
1
0.00
2
0.00
3
0.58
4
0.90
5
1.12
6
1.24
7
1.32
8
1.41
9
1.45
10
1.49
A CR value below 0.10 is generally considered acceptable. If the consistency ratio ex­
ceeds this threshold, experts should revise their pairwise comparisons to reduce incon­
sistency and improve the reliability of the resulting weights.
.3
Group Aggregation of Expert Opinions
When multiple expert judgment matrices are available, fuzzy aggregation can be per­
formed using the geometric mean across each element of the TFNs [40]:
lij =
3 K
4
k=1
lijk
51/K
,
mij =
3 K
4
k=1
mijk
51/K
,
uij =
3 K
4
k=1
uijk
51/K
This results in a consensus matrix that retains the structure of a TFN and can be used as
input to the FAHP procedure.
.4
Trust Model Behavior Under Parameter Variation
.4.1
Effect of γ
The parameter γ in the trust update equation plays a crucial role in controlling the influence
of historical trust versus newly observed behavioral evidence. Specifically, the update
formula is given by:
Tt+1 = γ · Tt + (1 −γ) · Tnew
where Tt is the trust at time t, Tnew is the trust value derived from new evidence at time
t + 1, and γ ∈[0, 1] is the memory factor.
To investigate the effect of γ, a simulation over a 12­month period was conducted using
two different values:
• γ = 0.2, which represents a short memory where recent evidence strongly affects
the trust score.
• γ = 0.8, which represents a long memory where the trust score evolves more slowly
and resists sudden fluctuations.
58
Extending the Attribute Based Access Control Model (ABAC) with Honey­Attributes for Insider Threat
Detection
==PAGE:67==
Figure 1 illustrates how the average trust of all subjects evolves under these two config­
urations. In both cases, a Beta­distributed evidence profile (with α = 2, β = 5) was used
to simulate behavioral observations favoring trust decay.
Figure 1: Average trust evolution under two γ values over 12 months
As shown in the figure, the trust decay is significantly steeper when γ = 0.2, highlighting
how quickly trust reacts to newly observed evidence. Conversely, when γ = 0.8, trust
decays more gradually, smoothing out the effect of negative behavior. This behavior aligns
with the intuition that higher γ values reflect a longer historical memory or more inertia in
trust dynamics.
Choosing a lower γ is appropriate in scenarios where rapid adaptation to behavioral
changes is essential, such as short­term simulations or environments requiring near real­
time detection of insider threats. In these settings, the trust score must react quickly to
sudden anomalies or malicious activity. In contrast, higher γ values are better suited
for long­term trust modeling, where the goal is to assess stability and avoid overreact­
ing to isolated deviations or noise in behavior. In this work, a higher value of γ = 0.85
was selected for the main simulation, as the objective was not immediate threat detection
but rather understanding how trust evolution over an extended period influences access
control and sensitivity dynamics.
.4.2
Effect of α and β Parameters of the Beta Distribution on Evidence
Generation
In this experiment, it was investigated how the parameters of the Beta distribution (α, β)
influence the generation of evidence used in the trust simulation and, by extension, affect
trust values.
In the earlier experiment (see Section 7.3), each subject was assigned a randomly gen­
erated (α, β) pair drawn uniformly from the interval (1.5, 6). This pair remained constant
for the subject across all months, and was used to generate all types of evidence. While
this approach allowed the observation of general patterns of trust fluctuation under ran­
domized behavior, it did not incorporate any domain­informed structure to the evidence
categories.
To study the impact of skewed evidence generation, a second experiment was designed
where the (α, β) parameters were assigned per subject but also varied across evidence
categories. Specifically, the three behavioral categories—performance, reliability,
and security—were given skewed distributions based on prior assumptions about their
behavioral tendencies:
Extending the Attribute Based Access Control Model (ABAC) with Honey­Attributes for Insider Threat
Detection
59
==PAGE:68==
• Performance: Right­skewed Beta distribution (lower evidence values).
• Reliability: Left­skewed Beta distribution (higher evidence values).
• Security: Symmetric Beta distribution (neutral evidence).
Formally, this was implemented using the following rule:
1
if category_skewness[category] == "left":
2
alpha = random.uniform(3, 6)
3
beta = random.uniform(1.5, 3)
4
elif category_skewness[category] == "right":
5
alpha = random.uniform(1.5, 3)
6
beta = random.uniform(3, 6)
7
else:
8
alpha = random.uniform(2, 4)
9
beta = random.uniform(2, 4)
Listing 1: Sampling α and β values for each category based on desired skewness.
This results in subjects having category­specific evidence patterns that are statistically
biased to reflect more realistic or exploratory behavioral tendencies. Figure 2 shows the
average evidence value per category over time. Due to the fixed statistical properties of
the (α, β) assignments, the average evidence remains relatively stable across months for
each category.
Figure 2: Average Evidence per Category Over Time
Figure 3 displays the overall distribution of evidence values per category, aggregated
across all months. As expected, the distribution for performance is skewed toward lower
values, reliability is skewed toward higher values, and security is approximately
symmetric. These outcomes confirm that the parameterization of the Beta distribution
successfully controls the statistical characteristics of the evidence.
Although this skewing alters the trust signal inputs, the final trust scores also depend on
additional factors such as the category weightings (defined via FAHP TFNs) and the decay
parameter γ (see Appendix .4.1). This means that even if the evidence is skewed, the trust
scores do not change in the same way. The effect is balanced out by the fixed weights
and the smoothing from γ, leading to more stable trust values over time. This can be
also derived from the trust evaluation as seen in Figure 4 the trust scores across subjects
converge even more tightly compared to the random (α, β) setup shown in Figure 7.5.
60
Extending the Attribute Based Access Control Model (ABAC) with Honey­Attributes for Insider Threat
Detection
==PAGE:69==
Figure 3: Evidence Value Distribution by Category
This convergence is driven by the structured nature of the evidence generation process,
where each subject receives category­specific Beta distributions with the distinct statistical
tendencies listed in 1. This design introduces a natural balance in the trust computation.
The performance evidence tends to raise trust, reliability tends to reduce it, and security
stabilizes it. Since the trust update is a weighted aggregation of all 18 dimensions—each
consistently influenced by its category’s skew—the opposing forces partially offset one
another. As a result, most subjects’ trust scores settle within a more uniform range over
time.
Figure 4: Trust Evolution for 100 Subjects (Category­specific Evidence Modeling)
.4.3
Effect of α and β Parameter Skew on Trust Evolution via Subject Risk
Profiling
In the previous experiment (Appendix .4.2), the (α, β) parameters of the Beta distribution
were varied per evidence category—performance, reliability, and security—to ex­
plore how statistical skew influences evidence generation at the category level. In this
experiment, the analysis was extended by assigning skewed Beta distributions at the in­
Extending the Attribute Based Access Control Model (ABAC) with Honey­Attributes for Insider Threat
Detection
61
==PAGE:70==
stead, effectively simulating behavioral risk profiles for the subject as benign, malicious,
and neutral.
The skew of the Beta distribution directly affects the evidence values produced, which in
turn influence trust updates in the simulation. Consequently, subjects with different risk
profiles will experience distinct trust evolution trajectories over time—decaying, increas­
ing, or remaining stable depending on their assigned skew. This behavior is modeled by
the following function:
1
def sample_evidence_for_profile(profile):
2
"""Generate 18 evidence values based on subject profile and Beta
distribution skew."""
3
evidence = []
4
for _ in range(18):
5
if profile == "malicious":
6
alpha, beta = random.uniform(6, 9), random.uniform(0.8, 1.2)
7
elif profile == "benign":
8
alpha, beta = random.uniform(0.8, 1.2), random.uniform(6, 9)
9
else:
10
alpha = beta = random.uniform(1.5, 6)
11
val = np.clip(np.random.beta(alpha, beta), 0, 1)
12
evidence.append(val)
13
return evidence
Listing 2: Evidence sampling based on assigned subject profile.
This function ensures that:
• Benign profiles produce consistently low­risk evidence (right­skewed).
• Malicious profiles generate high­risk evidence (left­skewed).
• Neutral profiles yield symmetric evidence with more balanced behavior.
Trust is then updated over a 12­month period using the FAHP­based trust computation
model and the same access request and subject­object dataset used in previous exper­
iments. Figure 5 shows the evolution of trust scores across 100 randomly selected sub­
jects, each assigned a different profile.
Figure 5: Trust trajectories for 100 subjects based on risk profile–dependent evidence
generation.
62
Extending the Attribute Based Access Control Model (ABAC) with Honey­Attributes for Insider Threat
Detection
==PAGE:71==
The results confirm that profile­based skew in evidence generation leads to clearly dis­
tinguishable trust patterns. This experiment demonstrates how varying the (α, β) param­
eters of the Beta distribution per subject enables modeling more realistic and diverse
behavioral scenarios.
.4.4
Effect of TFN­Based Criteria Prioritization on Evidence Weighting for
Trust Computation
This experiment investigates how the choice of Triangular Fuzzy Numbers (TFNs) in the
high­level criteria comparison matrix affects the resulting global weights assigned to each
evidence category. In the trust computation framework, a subject’s final trust score is
computed as a weighted aggregation of evidence values. These weights are derived
via FAHP through two hierarchical layers: the outer layer aggregates high­level criteria
(Performance, Reliability, Security), while the inner layer assigns weights to sub­criteria
(i.e., the 18 evidence dimensions within each category).
To isolate the impact of high­level prioritization, three scenarios were defined, each using
different TFN matrices to reflect distinct importance judgments:
• Performance­Dominant: Performance is deemed more important than Reliability,
which is in turn more important than Security.
• Balanced: All three criteria are equally important.
• Security­Dominant: Security is prioritized above Performance, which is prioritized
above Reliability.
The specific TFN values used in each scenario are summarized in Table 2. These judg­
ments follow the semantic TFN scale introduced earlier in Table 5.1, where larger values
indicate greater perceived importance.
Table 2: Fuzzy pairwise comparison matrices used to prioritize high­level criteria across
the three scenarios. Each entry defines the TFN for the relative importance of the row
criterion over the column criterion.
Scenario
Performance
Reliability
Security
Performance­Dominant
Performance
(1, 1, 1)
(2, 3, 4)
(1, 2, 3)
Reliability
( 1
4, 1
3, 1
2)
(1, 1, 1)
(1, 2, 3)
Security
( 1
3, 1
2, 1)
( 1
3, 1
2, 1)
(1, 1, 1)
Balanced
All pairs
(1, 1, 1) (equal importance)
Security­Dominant
Performance
(1, 1, 1)
( 1
4, 1
3, 1
2)
( 1
3, 1
2, 1)
Reliability
(2, 3, 4)
(1, 1, 1)
( 1
3, 1
2, 1)
Security
(1, 2, 3)
(1, 2, 3)
(1, 1, 1)
These matrices were used to compute the outer­layer weights via FAHP. All sub­criteria
matrices for the 18 evidence dimensions were kept constant (i.e., (1, 1, 1) across all pair­
wise comparisons), ensuring that variation in the global weights is solely attributable to
the high­level prioritization. The resulting global weight distribution across the three cat­
egories is visualized in Figure 6.
The computed FAHP outer­layer weights for each scenario are:
Extending the Attribute Based Access Control Model (ABAC) with Honey­Attributes for Insider Threat
Detection
63
==PAGE:72==
Figure 6: Global weight distribution across evidence categories under three TFN­based
criteria prioritization scenarios.
• Performance­Dominant: [0.548, 0.312, 0.140]
• Balanced: [0.333, 0.333, 0.333]
• Security­Dominant: [0.135, 0.416, 0.449]
These results confirm that modifying the TFNs in the outer­layer pairwise matrix allows
targeted prioritization of specific evidence categories. When performance is emphasized,
its six evidence dimensions receive a proportionally larger share of the total weight. Like­
wise, emphasizing security leads to the eight security­related dimensions receiving the
greatest weight.
While this experiment does not directly quantify the effect on trust scores (as the evidence
values themselves are random and not skewed by category), it demonstrates how the de­
sign of TFN matrices directly modulates the aggregation process, and ultimately controls
the influence of each evidence domain in the trust evaluation pipeline.
.5
Insider Simulation Parameterization
This appendix details the full configuration used in the insider threat simulation described
in Section 7.3.2. It includes all triangular fuzzy number (TFN) matrices and evidence
generation parameters used in the trust model.
.5.1
Evidence Indicator Mapping
The evidence indicators used in trust computation are listed in the order of their index
positions (0–17):
1. Average user CPU Utilization
2. Average user throughput
3. Average IP packet transmission delay
4. Average IP packet delay jitter time
5. Average IP packet network bandwidth occupancy
6. Average IP packet response time
7. Average user transmission rate
64
Extending the Attribute Based Access Control Model (ABAC) with Honey­Attributes for Insider Threat
Detection
==PAGE:73==
8. Average user IP packet loss rate
9. Average connection establishment rate
10. Average connection establishment delay
11. Average number of illegal connection by user
12. Average number of critical ports scanned by user
13. Average number of user attempts to exceed authority
14. Average number of user connection failures
15. Average number of requests including a honey attribute
16. Average number of interaction with a decoy resource
17. Average time spent on the decoy resource
18. Average number of attempt modifications on the decoy resource
.5.2
Outer­layer FAHP TFNs
Month 1 (Performance­Dominant)
⎡
⎣
(1, 1, 1)
(2, 3, 4)
(6, 7, 8)
( 1
4, 1
3, 1
2)
(1, 1, 1)
(5, 6, 7)
( 1
8, 1
7, 1
6)
( 1
7, 1
6, 1
5)
(1, 1, 1)
⎤
⎦
Month 2 (Security­Dominant)
⎡
⎣
(1, 1, 1)
( 1
7, 1
6, 1
5)
( 1
6, 1
5, 1
4)
(5, 6, 7)
(1, 1, 1)
( 1
4, 1
3, 1
2)
(4, 5, 6)
(1, 2, 3)
(1, 1, 1)
⎤
⎦
.5.3
Inner­layer FAHP TFNs
Performance (Month 1)
⎡
⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣
(1, 1, 1)
(3, 4, 5)
(5, 6, 7)
(4, 5, 6)
(3, 4, 5)
(6, 7, 8)
( 1
5, 1
4, 1
3)
(1, 1, 1)
(3, 4, 5)
(5, 6, 7)
(4, 5, 6)
(7, 8, 9)
( 1
7, 1
6, 1
5)
( 1
5, 1
4, 1
3)
(1, 1, 1)
(4, 5, 6)
(3, 4, 5)
(5, 6, 7)
( 1
6, 1
5, 1
4)
( 1
7, 1
6, 1
5)
( 1
6, 1
5, 1
4)
(1, 1, 1)
(3, 4, 5)
(5, 6, 7)
( 1
5, 1
4, 1
3)
( 1
6, 1
5, 1
4)
( 1
5, 1
4, 1
3)
( 1
5, 1
4, 1
3)
(1, 1, 1)
(6, 7, 8)
( 1
8, 1
7, 1
6)
( 1
9, 1
8, 1
7)
( 1
7, 1
6, 1
5)
( 1
7, 1
6, 1
5)
( 1
8, 1
7, 1
6)
(1, 1, 1)
⎤
⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦
Performance (Month 2)
⎡
⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣
(1, 1, 1)
(3, 4, 5)
(3, 4, 5)
(1, 2, 3)
(3, 4, 5)
(1, 2, 3)
( 1
5, 1
4, 1
3)
(1, 1, 1)
(3, 4, 5)
(1, 2, 3)
(3, 4, 5)
(1, 2, 3)
( 1
5, 1
4, 1
3)
( 1
5, 1
4, 1
3)
(1, 1, 1)
(1, 2, 3)
(3, 4, 5)
(1, 2, 3)
( 1
3, 1
2, 1)
( 1
3, 1
2, 1)
( 1
3, 1
2, 1)
(1, 1, 1)
(1, 2, 3)
(1, 2, 3)
( 1
5, 1
4, 1
3)
( 1
5, 1
4, 1
3)
( 1
5, 1
4, 1
3)
( 1
3, 1
2, 1)
(1, 1, 1)
(1, 2, 3)
( 1
3, 1
2, 1)
( 1
3, 1
2, 1)
( 1
3, 1
2, 1)
( 1
3, 1
2, 1)
( 1
3, 1
2, 1)
(1, 1, 1)
⎤
⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦
Extending the Attribute Based Access Control Model (ABAC) with Honey­Attributes for Insider Threat
Detection
65
==PAGE:74==
Reliability (Month 1)
⎡
⎢⎢⎣
(1, 1, 1)
(2, 3, 4)
(1, 2, 3)
(2, 3, 4)
( 1
4, 1
3, 1
2)
(1, 1, 1)
(1, 2, 3)
(1, 2, 3)
( 1
3, 1
2, 1)
( 1
3, 1
2, 1)
(1, 1, 1)
(1, 2, 3)
( 1
4, 1
3, 1
2)
( 1
3, 1
2, 1)
( 1
3, 1
2, 1)
(1, 1, 1)
⎤
⎥⎥⎦
Reliability (Month 2)
⎡
⎢⎢⎣
(1, 1, 1)
(1, 2, 3)
(1, 2, 3)
(1, 2, 3)
( 1
3, 1
2, 1)
(1, 1, 1)
(1, 2, 3)
(1, 2, 3)
( 1
3, 1
2, 1)
( 1
3, 1
2, 1)
(1, 1, 1)
(1, 2, 3)
( 1
3, 1
2, 1)
( 1
3, 1
2, 1)
( 1
3, 1
2, 1)
(1, 1, 1)
⎤
⎥⎥⎦
Security (Month 1)
⎡
⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣
(1, 1, 1)
(3, 4, 5)
(1, 2, 3)
(1, 2, 3)
(3, 4, 5)
(3, 4, 5)
(3, 4, 5)
(3, 4, 5)
( 1
5, 1
4, 1
3)
(1, 1, 1)
( 1
3, 1
2, 1)
( 1
3, 1
2, 1)
(1, 2, 3)
(1, 2, 3)
(1, 2, 3)
(1, 2, 3)
( 1
3, 1
2, 1)
(1, 2, 3)
(1, 1, 1)
(1, 2, 3)
(2, 3, 4)
(2, 3, 4)
(2, 3, 4)
(2, 3, 4)
( 1
3, 1
2, 1)
(1, 2, 3)
( 1
3, 1
2, 1)
(1, 1, 1)
(2, 3, 4)
(2, 3, 4)
(2, 3, 4)
(2, 3, 4)
( 1
5, 1
4, 1
3)
( 1
3, 1
2, 1)
( 1
4, 1
3, 1
2)
( 1
4, 1
3, 1
2)
(1, 1, 1)
(1, 2, 3)
(1, 2, 3)
(1, 2, 3)
( 1
5, 1
4, 1
3)
( 1
3, 1
2, 1)
( 1
4, 1
3, 1
2)
( 1
4, 1
3, 1
2)
( 1
3, 1
2, 1)
(1, 1, 1)
(1, 2, 3)
(1, 2, 3)
( 1
5, 1
4, 1
3)
( 1
3, 1
2, 1)
( 1
4, 1
3, 1
2)
( 1
4, 1
3, 1
2)
( 1
3, 1
2, 1)
( 1
3, 1
2, 1)
(1, 1, 1)
(1, 2, 3)
( 1
5, 1
4, 1
3)
( 1
3, 1
2, 1)
( 1
4, 1
3, 1
2)
( 1
4, 1
3, 1
2)
( 1
3, 1
2, 1)
( 1
3, 1
2, 1)
( 1
3, 1
2, 1)
(1, 1, 1)
⎤
⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦
Security (Month 2)
⎡
⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣
(1, 1, 1)
(2, 3, 4)
(2, 3, 4)
(3, 4, 5)
(6, 7, 8)
(6, 7, 8)
(6, 7, 8)
(6, 7, 8)
( 1
4, 1
3, 1
2)
(1, 1, 1)
(1, 2, 3)
(1, 2, 3)
(4, 5, 6)
(4, 5, 6)
(4, 5, 6)
(4, 5, 6)
( 1
4, 1
3, 1
2)
( 1
3, 1
2, 1)
(1, 1, 1)
(3, 4, 5)
(4, 5, 6)
(4, 5, 6)
(4, 5, 6)
(4, 5, 6)
( 1
5, 1
4, 1
3)
( 1
3, 1
2, 1)
( 1
5, 1
4, 1
3)
(1, 1, 1)
(6, 7, 8)
(6, 7, 8)
(6, 7, 8)
(6, 7, 8)
( 1
8, 1
7, 1
6)
( 1
6, 1
5, 1
4)
( 1
6, 1
5, 1
4)
( 1
8, 1
7, 1
6)
(1, 1, 1)
( 1
4, 1
3, 1
2)
( 1
3, 1
2, 1)
( 1
3, 1
2, 1)
( 1
8, 1
7, 1
6)
( 1
6, 1
5, 1
4)
( 1
6, 1
5, 1
4)
( 1
8, 1
7, 1
6)
(2, 3, 4)
(1, 1, 1)
( 1
3, 1
2, 1)
( 1
4, 1
3, 1
2)
( 1
8, 1
7, 1
6)
( 1
6, 1
5, 1
4)
( 1
6, 1
5, 1
4)
( 1
8, 1
7, 1
6)
(1, 2, 3)
(1, 2, 3)
(1, 1, 1)
( 1
3, 1
2, 1)
( 1
8, 1
7, 1
6)
( 1
6, 1
5, 1
4)
( 1
6, 1
5, 1
4)
( 1
8, 1
7, 1
6)
(1, 2, 3)
(2, 3, 4)
(1, 2, 3)
(1, 1, 1)
⎤
⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦
.5.4
Beta Distribution Parameters for Evidence Generation
The behavioral evidence for the insider simulation was generated using Beta distribu­
tions, where each indicator was mapped to a relevance level (strong, moderate, weak) or
considered irrelevant. The indicator indices refer to the list in Section .5.1.
Month 1 — Indicator Relevance
• Strong: Indicators 1, 4, 6, 9
• Moderate: Indicators 0, 2, 7, 12
• Weak: Indicators 3, 5, 8
• Irrelevant: 10–11, 13–171
Month 2 — Indicator Relevance
1Indicators marked as irrelevant were assigned a uniformly random value between 0.05 and 0.10.
66
Extending the Attribute Based Access Control Model (ABAC) with Honey­Attributes for Insider Threat
Detection
==PAGE:75==
• Strong: Indicators 6, 8
• Moderate: Indicators 7, 9, 10, 12, 13, 14, 15
• Weak: Indicators 11, 16, 17
• Irrelevant: Indicators 0–5 1
Beta Parameters
Table 3: Beta Distribution Parameters per Relevance Level
Relevance
Month 1 (α, β)
Month 2 (α, β)
Expected Mean (approx)
Strong
(2, 6)
(3, 4)
0.25 / 0.43
Moderate
(1.5, 7)
(2.5, 5)
0.18 / 0.33
Weak
(1.2, 8)
(2, 6)
0.13 / 0.25
Extending the Attribute Based Access Control Model (ABAC) with Honey­Attributes for Insider Threat
Detection
67
==PAGE:76==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
