==PAGE:1==
Onboard Carbon Capture and Storage: A Life Cycle
Assessment of a pilot system for shipping at Maersk
Master Thesis
Maarten Ramm
DTU Sustain
Department of Environmental and Resource Engineering
==PAGE:2==
Onboard Carbon Capture and Storage: A Life Cycle Assessment of a pilot system for shipping at
Maersk
Master Thesis
July, 2025
By
Maarten Ramm
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the customary biblio-
graphic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Maersk logo A.P. Møller Mærsk A/S used with permission.
Cover photo:
Maersk, 2025
Published by:
DTU, Department of Environmental and Resource Engineering, Bygningstorvet,
Building 115, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.sustain.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Preface
English title: Onboard Carbon Capture and Storage: A Life Cycle Assessment of a pilot system for
shipping at Maersk
Danish title: Kulstofopsamling og -lagring om bord: En livscyklusvurdering af et pilotsystem til skibsfart
hos Maersk.
Master’s thesis by: Maarten Ramm
DTU supervisors: Alexis Laurent and Sumesh Sukumara
External supervisor: Giovanna Croxatto Vega
Submission date: 3rd of July 2025
Oral defence date: 13th of August 2025
This thesis has been prepared over ﬁve months at the Section of Quantitative Sustainability Assessment,
at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulﬁllment for the degree Master of Science in
Engineering, MSc Eng.
Maarten Ramm - s232807
Signature
Date
Onboard Carbon Capture and Storage: A Life Cycle Assessment of a pilot system for shipping at Maersk
ii
03.07.2025
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
The maritime shipping sector is increasingly under pressure to decarbonize to respond to emerging
international regulations and climate targets.
Onboard Carbon Capture (OCC) is a new pathway to
decrease the greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions from marine vessels that are powered by conventional or
alternative carbon based marine fuels. This study conducts a full attributional Life Cycle Assessment
(LCA) of an Onboard Carbon Capture and Storage (OCCS) pilot system for Maersks EEE-class container
vessels. The environmental performance of three fuel types, heavy fuel oil (HFO), liqueﬁed natural gas
(LNG), and biomethanol, each operated with and without OCCS are assessed in this study. The system
boundaries include a well-to-grave approach. This includes the upstream fuel production, onboard capture
of CO2 via a 70% monoethanolamine (MEA) solvent, onshore desorption and liquefaction of CO2, and
permanent underground sequestration of captured CO2.
The Life Cycle Impact Assessment (LCIA) is conducted in SimaPro, using the ReCiPe 2016 method.
The results show that OCCS consistently is reducing climate impacts but increases all environmental
burdens in other categories due to the additional energy and material requirements. In particular, the
electricity mix for onshore processes and the biomethanol production process are identiﬁed as critical
environmental hotspots.
An endpoint level and weighted impact analyses reveal that trade-oﬀs in the analysis in the areas of
protection, human health, and ecosystems, can outweigh the beneﬁts of global warming, especially if
carbon intensive electricity mixes are used. Sensitivity analyses further show that low impact electricity
sources and an optimized heat supply have the potential to substantially improve the environmental
performance of an OCCS system.
Finally, the study concludes that OCCS has the potential to become an additional solution for maritime
decarbonization. However, this is only the case when the deployment conditions and available infrastruc-
ture are beneﬁcial. The ﬁndings should provide Maersk with a comparative environmental assessment
that oﬀers insights and transparency for future investment and regulatory decisions across diﬀerent fuel
pathways. It should further support Maersk in developing internal policies on a framework for the use of
OCC technologies.
Onboard Carbon Capture and Storage: A Life Cycle Assessment of a pilot system for shipping at Maersk
iii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgement of artiﬁcial intelligence use
During this thesis ChatGPT, Grammarly, and DeepL were used to improve language and readability for
non-conﬁdential content only. Following the use of these tools, the output was critically reviewed and
edited as needed. The researcher takes full responsibility for the content of the thesis.
Onboard Carbon Capture and Storage: A Life Cycle Assessment of a pilot system for shipping at Maersk
iv
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgement of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Use . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
Abbreviations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . viii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Context and problem statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
State-of-the-art OCC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Thesis objective . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Methodology
4
2.1
Overview LCA methodology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Scope of the assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2.1
System boundaries and functional unit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2.2
Scenarios assessed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Data collection and LCI modeling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Life cycle impact assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.5
Sensitivity and uncertainty analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3
Results and Discussion
11
3.1
Fuel combustion and production . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Overall results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.3
Contribution and impact assessment across the life cycle
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.3.1
Contributions per fuel scenario . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.4
Sensitivity analysis based on environmental hotspots
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.4.1
Inﬂuence of electricity mix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.4.2
Inﬂuence of varying heat supply for onshore desorption . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.4.3
Inﬂuence of alternative biomethanol production . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.4.4
Summary of ﬁndings from sensitivity analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.5
Endpoint assessment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.5.1
Interpretation of trade-oﬀs on characterized endpoint level . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.5.2
Weighted endpoint results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4
Conclusion and recommendations
28
References
30
A Appendix - OCCS Maersk appendix.xlsx
32
B
Appendix - Other
33
Onboard Carbon Capture and Storage: A Life Cycle Assessment of a pilot system for shipping at Maersk
v
==PAGE:7==
List of Figures
2.1
Framework of LCA model based on ISO 14040 standard
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
System boundaries covering all life cycle stages and including elementary ﬂows from
ecosphere to technosphere
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.1
Impacts to global warming from HFO, LNG and biomethanol per FU. Contributions from
combustion and production included . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Contribution of all life cycle stages to 18 impact categories for HFO OCCS scenario with
Dutch electricity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.3
Contribution of all life cycle stages to 18 impact categories for LNG OCCS scenario with
Dutch electricity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.4
Contribution of all life cycle stages to 18 impact categories for biomethanol OCCS
scenario with Dutch electricity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.5
Contribution of all life cycle stages to 18 impact categories for all scenarios and variations
in electricity mix, heat source e"ciency or biomethanol production process . . . . . . .
19
3.6
Characterized endpoint results for all sensitivity scenarios in human health, ecosystems
and resources. Contributions of impact categories per damage category per FU
. . . . .
24
3.7
Weighted endpoint results for all sensitivity scenarios. Contribution of damage categories
per FU . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
Onboard Carbon Capture and Storage: A Life Cycle Assessment of a pilot system for shipping at Maersk
vi
==PAGE:8==
List of Tables
2.1
Emission processes for LNG, HFO and biomethanol combustion per MJ of fuel . . . . .
9
3.1
Characterized total impact scores for base scenario, OCCS with liquefaction and OCCS
with pipeline scenarios. Impacts are shown per impact category per FU
. . . . . . . . .
12
3.2
Contribution analysis for global warming. Impacts per life cycle stage per FU . . . . . .
14
Onboard Carbon Capture and Storage: A Life Cycle Assessment of a pilot system for shipping at Maersk
vii
==PAGE:9==
Abbreviations
CCS - Carbon Capture and Storage
CO2 - Carbon Dioxide
CO2 eq. - Carbon Dioxide Equivalent
COP - Coe"cient of Performance
EEE - Economy of Scale, Energy e"ciency, and Environmentally improved Performance
EOR - Enhanced Oil Recovery
EU - European Union
EU ETS - EU Emissions Trading System
FU - Funcional Unit
GHG - Green House Gases
GT - Gross Tonnage
HFO - Heavy Fuel Oil
IMO - International Maritime Organization
LCA - Life Cycle Assessment
LCI - Life Cycle Inventory
LCIA - Life Cycle Impact Assessment
MEA - Monoethanolamine
LNG - Liqueﬁed Natural Gas
N2O - Nitrous Oxide
NOx - Nitrogen Oxides
OCC - Onboard Carbon Capture
OCCS - Onboard Carbon Capture and Storage
PM - Particulate Matter
SOx - Sulfur Oxides
TEU - Twenty-foot Equivalent
VOC - Volatile Organic Compounds
Onboard Carbon Capture and Storage: A Life Cycle Assessment of a pilot system for shipping at Maersk
viii
==PAGE:10==
Introduction
1.1
Context and problem statement
International maritime shipping accounts for approximately 3% of global energy-related Carbon Dioxide
Equivalent (CO2 eq) emissions. In addition, the demand for global trade is projected to continue growing
steadily by up to 50% by 2050 (IMO 2023).
While the industry is transitioning to lower-carbon fuels such as LNG, these measures alone are not
su"cient to meet the mid- and long-term climate and sustainability goals.
This transition towards
the decarbonization of the marine shipping industry comes with signiﬁcant operational and technical
challenges, in particular for long distance vessels which require the storage of large amounts of energy in
a very limited area. This requirement limits the feasibility of electrifying vessels or operating them with
green hydrogen solutions (Wang et al. 2023).
As a response to the urgent need to reduce GHG emissions from shipping, several strategies and regulations
are being developed at a global and national level. Globally, the International Maritime Organization
(IMO) adopted a GHG strategy in 2023 which commits to a net-zero GHG emissions target for all
international shipping "by or around 2050" (IMO 2023). The IMO midterm measure regulations coming
from this are considered a historic leap forward for maritime regulations since it is the ﬁrst globally
applied carbon pricing mechanism in the industry (IMO 2023). Included in this strategy are checkpoints
of a 20 to 30% reduction by 2030 and a 70 to 80% reduction by 2040, compared to 2008 emission levels
(IMO 2023).
In addition, the European Union (EU) is introducing the FuelEU maritime regulatory framework which
came into eﬀect in 2025 on an EU level. It applies to all larger vessels with over 5000 Gross Tonnage
(GT) which are calling at EU ports (DNV 2023). Calling at EU ports refers to ships that either arrive
at, depart from, or make a stop at any port in the EU. The regulation includes a progressive reduction in
GHG intensity of ship operations based on a well-to-wake approach. Targets came into eﬀect in 2025
and will increase up to an 80% GHG reduction in 2050 (DNV 2023).
While the GHG strategy itself by the IMO deﬁnition is a non-binding vision with the purpose to set goals
and a direction, IMO midterm measures as well as the FuelEU maritime regulation are legally binding
laws which impose rules, limits, and enforcement (Forum 2024).
There are several pathways for large marine vessels to decarbonize their operation. First of all, a major
approach is alternative fuels such as biofuels or synthetic fuels. Depending on the production pathway and
the used feedstock, emissions may be reduced signiﬁcantly at the source. In parallel, operational measures
such as slow steaming, operating at a reduced speed, can signiﬁcantly reduce the overall consumption of
fuel and by that the emissions (Wang et al. 2023).
In addition to these pathways, scalable OCC technologies for maritime vessels may present a comple-
mentary solution to reduce the direct Carbon Dioxide (CO2) emissions from combustion of carbon-based
fuels. By capturing the CO2 emissions after combustion onboard the vessel with sequestration or utiliza-
tion of the CO2 afterwards, the whole concept of OCC can enable ship owners to continue operating on
conventional or alternative carbon-based fuels and still reach regulatory decarbonization goals (Ahmed,
Lazakis, and Mallouppas 2025).
1.2
State-of-the-art OCC
For a complete understanding of the research that has been done on the topic of OCC in the maritime
sector, a systematic literature review was conducted to deﬁne the state-of-the-art for OCC. Due to the
novelty of OCC in the marine industry, the literature search was focused on articles and reports published
Onboard Carbon Capture and Storage: A Life Cycle Assessment of a pilot system for shipping at Maersk
1
==PAGE:11==
during the last 5 years. The language considered is English only. The following search string was used
in the search engine Scopus:
Search String Used in Scopus
(TITLE-ABS-KEY (("onboard carbon capture" OR "ship-based carbon capture"
OR "carbon capture on ships" OR "carbon capture and storage" OR "maritime
CCS") AND ("shipping" OR "marine" OR "maritime industry") AND ("life cycle
assessment" OR "LCA" OR "environmental assessment" OR "carbon footprint")))
AND PUBYEAR > 2019 AND (LANGUAGE (english))
Based on this search string, 34 articles were found. Additionally, to the articles found in the literature
review, complementary literature, technical reports, documents, and internal reports from Maersk have
been considered in this study.
Carbon capture itself is not a new technology. CO2 has long been captured from production processes
such as ammonia production or the production of hydrogen from natural gas where CO2 is generated as a
byproduct. This is predominantly done by chemical absorption with amine based solvents, a method still
widely established and used today. In the 1970s, captured CO2 was already used in the oil industry for
enhanced oil recovery (EOR). In EOR, CO2 is injected into depleted oil ﬁelds to increase extraction. This
use case of CO2 became the technical foundation for later CCS projects, which inject CO2 into geological
formations for the purpose of long term storage (Verma 2015). Apart from that, CO2 collected from
carbon capture is needed in the food and beverage industry. In contrast to the mature onshore application
of carbon capture, the application of OCC on a marine vessel is new. While the capture technology with
amine based solvents, is mature and has been used for a long time in onshore applications, the challenge
lies in retroﬁtting existing vessels or implementing OCC in newly built vessels (Ahmed, Lazakis, and
Mallouppas 2025).
Recent scientiﬁc work by Ahmed, Lazakis, and Mallouppas (2025) have systematically analyzed the
technical feasibility and the integration options for OCC onboard of ships.
They found that due to
the maturity, it is primarily post combustion carbon capture via amine based chemical absorption that
is feasible for the OCC application. Studies such as from U.S. Maritime Administration (2024) have
validated the performance of compact carbon capture systems in lab-scaled experiments or comprehensive
modeling studies.
For onboard CO2 storage options, studies found that pressurized tanks, cryogenic liquefaction, or tempo-
rary chemical carriers are feasible to hold the CO2 until the ship reaches a port for oﬄoading the CO2
(Ahmed, Lazakis, and Mallouppas 2025). Additionally, the energy integration regarding heat recovery,
the operation of reboilers, and e"cient compression and liquefaction is assessed.
As a result, Ahmed, Lazakis, and Mallouppas (2025) have found that e"cient energy integration is the
most critical part of the OCC system. When an OCC system is processing the captured CO2 right away,
including cryogenic liquefaction, it can impose additional fuel consumption of 30-40% to provide the
additional energy requirement in terms of heat and electricity. This value includes possible synergies
and waste heat recovery for the main engine. From this energy requirement, desorption, compression,
and liquefaction of CO2 is imposing around 95% of the energy (Ahmed, Lazakis, and Mallouppas 2025).
Another large constraint for OCC is the space and weight used by the installed technology. Especially,
container and bulk carriers by design are operating within small cargo capacity margins (Maersk 2025).
Limitations of previous research are a limited range of evaluated scenarios by mostly lab-scale experiments
and modeling studies that have been conducted. Furthermore, knowledge gaps exist in analyzing how
solvents degrade under real marine conditions. Also, it has not been su"ciently explored what the
volume requirements for CO2 storage capacity in relation to the voyage duration is for diﬀerent scenarios.
Finally, limited research was found on a holistic approach which analyzes the environmental impacts
Onboard Carbon Capture and Storage: A Life Cycle Assessment of a pilot system for shipping at Maersk
2
==PAGE:12==
from implementing an OCC system which includes the downstream utilization or permanent storage of
captured CO2.
Overall, the literature reviewed describes OCC as a promising but still immature technology to decarbonize
the marine shipping sector. While the capture technology itself is well understood, the integration onboard
a marine vessel that sails across the world comes with several challenges which are not yet fully analyzed
and still unresolved. Further research in onboard and onshore integration, energy optimization, and a full
LCA is necessary to qualify OCC as a viable and economically feasible decarbonization solution for the
future.
1.3
Thesis objective
The objective of this study is to assess and compare environmental impacts connected to integrating
the whole concept of OCCS with Maerskťs largest container vessels, the EEE-class. The vessel class
EEE stands for economy of scale, energy e"ciency, and environmentally improved performance (Maersk
2017). The vessel operation with three diﬀerent fuels, HFO, LNG, and biomethanol is analyzed with
and without an OCCS. This study will assess permanent underground storage of captured carbon, carbon
sequestration, as the only option for the end of life phase. This is mainly due to feasibility and the
requirement to limit the scope and focus on the OCC technology.
By conducting a full LCA, this study enables a transparent and comparable environmental assessment
for several OCCS scenarios in comparison to a base case scenario without OCCS.
The study was conducted in close collaboration with A. P. Møller-Mærsk who is also the commissioner
of this study. Ultimately, quantitative insights on the environmental performance of diﬀerent systems
should support Maersk in their process of identifying the most environmentally friendly and economically
feasible pathway for their vessels in the future. An economic assessment of the technologies however is
not part of the study and will be done separately by Maersk (Maersk 2025). The decision making for
Maersk will be about the fuel choice and the implementation of OCCS to reduce direct emissions in order
to comply with international decarbonization regulations such as FuelEU or the IMO midterm measures.
Based on these objectives, the following research questions have been developed:
1. Which scenario oﬀers the most environmentally sustainable solution overall when considering all
environmental impacts?
2. Which fuel and OCCS scenario oﬀers the most proportional environmental improvement compared
to the fuel base case without OCCS?
Onboard Carbon Capture and Storage: A Life Cycle Assessment of a pilot system for shipping at Maersk
3
==PAGE:13==
Methodology
2.1
Overview LCA methodology
LCA is a systematic methodology to evaluate the environmental impacts that are associated with all stages
in a product’s life cycle. It is an iterative process that allows for reﬁning the assessment along the way
when new information becomes available. These iterations ensure the overall robustness of results and
conclusions (Hauschild, Rosenbaum, and Olsen 2018).
The following overview in Figure 2.1 shows the methodological LCA framework which is used to address
the research question and to fulﬁll the research objectives that are outlined in the introduction. The con-
stant reﬁnements and iterations are indicated by the arrows between each section and the interpretation. A
comparative LCA is conducted to explore the environmental impacts associated with integrating OCC on
Maersk’s EEE-class vessels, taking upstream and downstream impacts into account. The methodology
which is used follows the ISO 14040 as outlined by Hauschild, Rosenbaum, and Olsen (2018).
Figure 2.1: Framework of LCA model based on ISO 14040 standard
In the introduction, the goal and objective of the study are deﬁned. Section 2.2 explains the scope of
the assessment in detail, including the system boundaries, the functional unit, and diﬀerent scenarios
assessed. After the scope, the LCI modeling and data collection process is explained which delivers
the basis for a comprehensive life cycle impact assessment (LCIA), see Section 2.3. The chapter ends
by elaborating on how the study applies sensitivity and uncertainty analysis to ensure robust results and
conclusions. An ongoing interpretation and discussion of the results from the LCIA and sensitivity and
uncertainty assessment enables the formation of conclusions that can be used in Maersk strategic planning
process and to support policy makers in the future.
2.2
Scope of the assessment
The scope of this study is on a Maersk EEE container vessel.
One vessel can carrier over 18,000
twenty-foot equivalent units (TEU), commonly known as standard containers. The vessel is designed to
service the trade route between Europe and China through the Suez canal. On this route there are several
ports at which the vessel stops. The scope of this LCA includes the longest voyage of a Maersk EEE
Onboard Carbon Capture and Storage: A Life Cycle Assessment of a pilot system for shipping at Maersk
4
==PAGE:14==
vessel between Singapore and Egypt. Since data on the infrastructure and technology is currently best
available for the Netherlands with the port of Rotterdam, the modeling of onshore processes is limited to
this region for now. The uncertainty of rolling out more infrastructure is assessed through a sensitivity
analysis. Further, all CO2 captured by the OCC system is stored permanently underground through carbon
sequestration, hence making it an OCCS approach.
2.2.1
System boundaries and functional unit
The system boundaries of this study are deﬁned by using a cradle-to-grave approach, also referred to
as well-to-wake with additional carbon sequestration. The assessment begins with the extraction of raw
materials and ends with the permanent storage of the captured CO2 in underground formations, see Figure
2.2).
Figure 2.2: System boundaries covering all life cycle stages and including elementary ﬂows from ecosphere to
technosphere
The following functional unit (FU) was derived to enable a fair comparison between scenarios.
Functional Unit
The average onboard carbon capture and storage of CO2 from fuel combustion corresponding to
17.6 TJ of propulsion energy.
This FU allows comparability between diﬀerent fuels and diﬀerent methods of processing the captured
CO2. The speciﬁc amount of propulsion energy is calculated for a Maersk EEE vessel sailing on the
Onboard Carbon Capture and Storage: A Life Cycle Assessment of a pilot system for shipping at Maersk
5
==PAGE:15==
China-Europe route at 19 knots between the two mentioned ports in Singapore and Egypt. The maximum
amount of CO2 captured during this voyage is based on a 75% average carbon capture rate which is
therefore the benchmark for designing and sizing the OCCS system for each fuel type. In the following,
the four life cycle stages that are displayed in Figure 2.2.1 are explained in detail. The ﬂow of resources
from the ecosphere to the technosphere, as well as the ﬂow of emissions and waste are described in the
next section and are further documented in detail in the conﬁdential Appendix A to F.
Fuel production
First in the life cycle is the fuel production. Depending on the fuel type there is either mineral extraction
of oil and gas or biomass cultivation that precedes the reﬁning and production of the actual marine fuel.
Onboard carbon capture
The applications onboard the vessel involve a state of the art post combustion carbon capture system
which applies chemical absorption with a solvent that consists of water and monoethanolamines, aiming
to capture 75% of the generated carbon emissions from fuel combustion. The rich solvent is stored
onboard the vessel until it can be oﬄoaded at a port. Unlike conventional carbon capture systems that
currently operate onshore and to a small degree as pilot systems on marine vessels, the approach that
Maersk is exploring only performs the CO2 absorption process onboard the vessel, see Figure 2.2. Energy
intensive processes such as desorption of CO2 from the solvent as well as the compression and liquefaction
of CO2 are performed onshore. This represents a novelty in the industry and might oﬀer beneﬁts.
Onshore processing
Once the rich solvent is oﬄoaded at the port, the next step involves the desorption of CO2 from the solvent.
Subsequent steps like puriﬁcation, compression, dehydration, and liquefaction of the CO2 also take place
onshore, see Figure 2.2. As mentioned before desorption, compression, and liquefaction of CO2 are
very energy intensive processes, which makes the use of renewable energies environmentally beneﬁcial.
Liquefaction is a necessary step in the handling of captured CO2 to enable transportation. It involves
cooling of compressed CO2 down to -10°C to -56°C when the pressure is higher. If the desorption,
compression, and liquefaction were executed onboard the vessel, it would result in a high additional fuel
penalty for the additional energy generation necessary. This is because the only available energy source
onboard is fuel. Waste heat recovery systems are not capable of supplying enough additional energy but
can reduce the fuel penalty to a limited extent (GCMD 2025).
CO2 sequestration (carbon sequestration)
Next, the captured CO2 must be transported to the sequestration site where it is permanently stored
oﬀshore in underground geological formations. Transportation is either done by liquid CO2 carrier or
via pipeline, see Figure 2.2. Transportation via pipeline does not require prior liquefaction of the CO2
which means that the CO2 can be transported and injected in a compressed gaseous state. In contrast,
transportation via liquid CO2 carrier requires prior liquefaction due to limited transportation capacity. In
this study the liqueﬁed CO2 is re-expanded into a compressed gaseous state for sequestration (Porthos
2024). Other sequestration projects such as Northern Lights in Norway would require a liqueﬁed state of
CO2 for injection and storage (Northern Lights 2024).
2.2.2
Scenarios assessed
This study compares the impacts of an OCC system on a Maersk EEE vessel using diﬀerent fuels.
Currently, the entire EEE ﬂeet is operating on HFO. In the near future LNG is seen as a viable option
to replace HFO. In the future, Maersk is considering to operate their vessels on bio- and synthetic fuels
(Maersk 2025). Because of this, biomethanol is included as the third fuel alternative, even though it is
not yet economically viable today to use this fuel on EEE-class vessels.
The baseline scenario in this study is the operation of an EEE vessel without an OCC system, operating
on HFO, LNG, or biomethanol. This is compared to a scenario that includes the OCC system as well as
all downstream processes required until the captured CO2 ends in permanent underground storage. For
Onboard Carbon Capture and Storage: A Life Cycle Assessment of a pilot system for shipping at Maersk
6
==PAGE:16==
the base line scenarios the sequestration will take place in Norway as part of the Northern Lights project
(Northern Lights 2024). This will require the transport and liquefaction of processed CO2 via liquid
CO2 carrier. At a later stage, CO2 could be directly sequestrated through pipelines starting at the port of
Rotterdam, not requiring prior liquefaction of CO2 (Porthos 2024).
The trade route of the EEE vessels is between China and Europe. The design storage space for solvent
onboard the vessel requires oﬄoading of CO2 after 11 days of operation. The infrastructure for carbon
sequestration along this route can vary and might require the CO2 to be in a liquid or compressed gaseous
state when sequestrated. Therefore, an additional scenario is assessed in which the CO2 is not liqueﬁed
but directly transported via pipeline for a distance of 200 km to the site of sequestration, see Figure 2.2.
This approach enables a more comprehensive assessment of how diﬀerent infrastructure availabilities
might aﬀect the eﬀectiveness and feasibility of an OCC system.
2.3
Data collection and LCI modeling
Life Cycle Inventory (LCI) is a quantitative description of the elementary ﬂows associated with all life
cycle stages of the system, guided by the previously deﬁned thesis objectives and scope deﬁnition (ILCD
2010). This LCA study is following an attributional modeling approach in accordance with the guidance
outlined in the International Reference Life Cycle Data System (ILCD) handbook (ILCD 2010). The
objective of this study is to compare the environmental impacts of diﬀerent fuel and carbon capture
scenarios for the Maersk EEE-class container vessel during a speciﬁc voyage, the Asia-Europe route.
The results and conclusions of this study are intended to support Maersk in making technology-based
decisions on a vessel or ﬂeet based level. No structural changes in a market system should be induced
as a result. Further, average and marginal data are used, not being aﬀected by wider and future market
developments. Therefore, the attributional approach enables a transparent comparison between baseline
and OCCS scenarios while supporting Maersk in the decision making for future OCCS implementation
strategies.
For this study, most LCI data is primary data which is obtained through the collaboration with Maersk.
Through discussions and conﬁdential internal documents, quantitative data on system parameters, vessel
dimensions, and operating e"ciencies were collected. Where the primary data was incomplete or required
validation, secondary data from publicly available scientiﬁc literature was used. The combination of
primary and secondary data ensures a solid foundation for the following Life Cycle Impact Assessment
(LCIA). Most of this information and data obtained is speciﬁc to the route and conﬁguration of the vessel.
A detailed overview of the processes and elementary ﬂow applied to model the described scenarios, can
be found in the conﬁdential Appendix A to F. As the modeled system, contains conﬁdential data to some
extent, exact input data and speciﬁc conﬁgurations of the OCCS system and the integration with the vessel
are subject to a non-disclosure agreement with Maersk. According to the ILCD handbook there are the
following six steps that should be performed as part of building the LCI (ILCD 2010):
1. Identifying processes for the LCI: From the previous literature review on OCC the processes
required are gathered and understood. An Excel document is used to design and organize all
processes and the LCI.
2. Planning and collecting data: This phase includes an intensiﬁed literature review, focused on
data gathering, and process speciﬁcations. In addition, extensive discussions with multiple Maersk
employees from the ﬂeet technology department provided valuable insights and conﬁgurations
of the OCCS system, most of which, due to conﬁdentiality, are documented in the conﬁdential
Appendix A to F. This step in the LCA was revisited several times because the ﬁrst results marked
speciﬁc processes as more important than others. These processes needed to be revisited and
further discussed internally at Maersk to enhance the data quality.
Onboard Carbon Capture and Storage: A Life Cycle Assessment of a pilot system for shipping at Maersk
7
==PAGE:17==
3. Constructing and quality checking unit processes: All processes are either obtained or modeled
with datasets from Ecoinvent 3.10.
Outputs, emissions, and waste from these processes are
conﬁrmed with public studies such as the International Council on Clean Transportation (Pavlenko
et al. 2020) or the U.S. Department of Transportation (U.S. Department of Transportation, Maritime
Administration 2018).
4. Constructing the LCI model and calculating LCI results: In this step, all the identiﬁed, newly
created, and adapted processes are combined and scaled to align with the reference ﬂow to meet
the FU.
5. Data needs for uncertainty management and sensitivity analysis: To ensure the robustness of
conclusions, sensitivity analysis is fundamental. During planning and collecting the data, several
potential areas were identiﬁed in which a sensitivity analysis must be conducted. From the ﬁrst
step, identifying processes for the LCI, it became evident that the electricity mix and amount of
energy needed for the regeneration of the solvent, are critical factors as they could vary signiﬁcantly
depending on the location where they are performed and the energy sources available.
6. Reporting: The reporting for this LCA includes documentation of the LCI model in the form of
tables, processes created, metadata, LCIA results, assumptions for each life cycle stage, and data
which was collected for sensitivity and uncertainty analysis.
Figure 2.2 displays the full life cycle of an OCCS implementation. The LCI starts with identifying
processes and quantifying the extraction and the production of all three fuels.
A detailed overview
of processes used in SimaPro can be found in the conﬁdential Appendix A to F. For HFO and LNG
extraction of crude oil or natural gas is the ﬁrst step. HFO is produced in a reﬁnery while natural gas is
puriﬁed, compressed and cooled to −162◦C to receive LNG. The processes chosen in Ecoinvent account
for all emissions and waste generated. However, the waste cannot be reused, thus no other environmental
impacts can be avoided (Speight 2019).
The process used for biomethanol production is an Ecoinvent process displaying the methanol production
from biomass gasiﬁcation worldwide. Used feedstocks are palm fruit, soybeans, sugar beet, sugar cane,
potato, barley grain, and bark chips (Ecoinvent 2024).
Biomethanol is produced in several steps. First, syngas, a mixture of hydrogen, carbon monoxide, and
traces of CO2, is generated through gasiﬁcation of cultivated biomass. The composition of the syngas
is then optimized for methanol synthesis in a steam reforming process which introduces heat through
steam and a catalyst. The achieved ratio of hydrogen and carbon monoxide is then ideal for the methanol
synthesis which is done in a synthesis reactor (IEA Bioenergy 2022). No additional CO2 is needed in the
process and additional hydrogen is assumed to be burned during the process (Ecoinvent 2024).
The second stage in the LCA, OCC, includes the combustion of fuel and the capture of a majority of
generated CO2, see Section 2.2.1. For the combustion of fuels a unit process for each fuel is created in
SimaPro, serving as an emission process which shows single emissions per MJ of fuel, see Figure 2.1.
Emission factors are retrieved by cross referencing several diﬀerent literature sources and can be found
in Figure 2.1 below.
Onboard Carbon Capture and Storage: A Life Cycle Assessment of a pilot system for shipping at Maersk
8
==PAGE:18==
Table 2.1: Emission processes for LNG, HFO and biomethanol combustion per MJ of fuel
The carbon capture process requires electricity which is provided by the vessels axillary engines. An
additional amount of fuel is burned for this. Further, the weight of up to 8000 tons of rich solvent and
more than a hundred tons of equipment for the OCC process results in approximately one meter additional
draft for the vessel. The extra draft and electricity requirement leads to a fuel penalty, which must be
accounted for.
For vessels operating on HFO, the high sulfur content of the fuel requires exhaust gas cleaning to reduce
these sulfur oxides (SOx) emissions by around 98%. Next to that, ﬁne particulate matter (PM) formation
and nitrogen oxides (NOx) emissions are reduced as well by around 60% and 3.5% (International Maritime
Organization 2015). A wet open-loop scrubbing system is employed, which achieves that emissions are
transferred from the exhaust gas into sea water, which is then discharged back into the ocean. In the
SimaPro model, the scrubbing process is reﬂected by lowering the SOx, PM, and NOx emissions to air.
The removed emissions are models as transferred to the water compartment. For SOx, the model assumes
that the absorbed SOx reacts in seawater and forms sulfuric acid with a 1.5 times conversion rate. PM
and NOx emissions are directly added as emissions to water (Ma et al. 2020).
In stage three, the onshore processing of captured carbon is modeled by the following processes. First
desorption of CO2 from the solvent is requiring a large amount of heat since the CO2 only separates
from the amines at 130°C. This heat is provided through a heat pump which operates with a performance
coe"cient of two, still requiring very large amounts of electricity. As part of the solvent regeneration
process, small amounts of activated carbon and a neutralizing sodium hydroxide agent are added in order
to remove heat stable salts which have formed during the desorption process. As a result, these residues
are disposed of as hazardous waste through incineration. Afterwards, the compression and liquefaction
of CO2 require electricity to operate. The infrastructure is combined and simpliﬁed in one process.
It contains steel production, polypropylene production, and a number of pumps and compressors. A
lifetime of 20 years and a processing time per FU of 2.5 days is assumed. The impact per FU is therefore
marginal. After onshore processing, the CO2 is either transported to the ﬁnal sequestration site via liquid
CO2 carrier or directly after compression via pipeline, see Section 2.2.1).
Onboard Carbon Capture and Storage: A Life Cycle Assessment of a pilot system for shipping at Maersk
9
==PAGE:19==
Finally, in step four, the captured carbon is injected into the ground for long-term storage. This process
only requires additional electricity to operate pumps and optionally to recompress the CO2 prior to
sequestration (Porthos 2024).
2.4
Life cycle impact assessment
Once all the data for the deﬁned life cycle stages is collected, the Life Cycle Impact Assessment (LCIA)
is carried out in the LCA software SimaPro. For this assessment, the ReCiPe 2016 Midpoint (H) impact
assessment method is selected since it provides a globally applicable baseline that is suitable for an
international comparison. Given that the EEE vessels operate on diﬀerent continents, the ReCiPe Method
allows for an evaluation of the environmental performance under very diﬀerent geographical conditions.
The gained results should provide a baseline to adapt the model to regional diﬀerences along the shipping
route.
ReCiPe 2016 Midpoint (H) is a widely recognized method, providing 18 midpoint impact categories,
covering global warming, eutrophication, ﬁne particulate matter formation, acidiﬁcation, human and
ecotoxicity, resource use, land use, and other categories.
Through applying the ReCiPe midpoint IA method in SimaPro, the elementary ﬂows from the previously
constructed LCI are assigned to the impact categories based on the classiﬁcation scheme that ReCiPe
deﬁnes. This step ensures that each inventory ﬂow is linked to the corresponding environmental eﬀect.
The contribution of every elementary ﬂow to the corresponding impact category was quantiﬁed by
characterization factors set in the ReCiPe method, e.g. for global warming in kilogram CO2 eq. This
step is necessary to allow a consistent and comparable calculation of potential environmental impacts
(Hauschild, Rosenbaum, and Olsen 2018).
In addition, normalization and endpoint analysis were conducted in a later stage of the study to improve
the interpretation and communication of received results. Normalizing midpoint impacts helps to put the
results into context by comparing the characterized values against a reference, in this case against one
European per capita reference. This helps to highlight and understand the relative magnitude of each
impact category to understand their environmental relevance.
Subsequently, an assessment on endpoint level is applied to aggregate the 18 impact categories into
three main damage categories representing the three areas of protection, human health, ecosystems, and
resources. This approach enables the assessment of tradeoﬀs between impact categories and provides an
additional perspective of results. Finally, weighting is applied at the endpoint level. While it introduces
a subjectivity to the assessment, it enables a comparison across impact categories and areas of protection
and by that allows to rank scenarios based on their overall environmental performance.
2.5
Sensitivity and uncertainty analysis
Sensitivity and uncertainty analysis are vital for the LCA to validate and test the robustness of the study
conclusion which are made based on the LCIA results. As explained in the scope of the assessment, the
roll-out of OCC technology has not yet started and will need to be implemented internationally in order to
be viable for Maersk’s operation. For this reason uncertainty is large regarding infrastructure availability
and operation in diﬀerent countries such as China, Egypt, or Singapore. It cannot be determined yet what
the energy mix in diﬀerent countries will be in the future and how or where the CO2 can be sequestrated
or utilized once it is captured. To address these uncertainties, a sensitivity analysis is conducted to
receive a comprehensive overview of potential impacts that arise when parameters change. The diﬀerent
parameters subject to sensitivity analysis are identiﬁed during the LCIA.
Onboard Carbon Capture and Storage: A Life Cycle Assessment of a pilot system for shipping at Maersk
10
==PAGE:20==
Results and Discussion
This chapter presents the results of a comprehensive LCIA conducted in SimaPro, which evaluates the
environmental impacts from the integration of OCCS with Maersk EEE-class vessels. The life cycle
assessed follows a full OCCS approach, starting with the fuel production and ending with the long-term
underground storage of CO2. For each fuel type, a baseline scenario without OCCS and a scenario
with OCCS are modeled, assessed, and discussed. In addition, sensitivity analyses are conducted on key
parameters to ensure the robustness of results with consideration of regional variations in infrastructure
and electricity supply along the vessels trade route from China to the Netherlands. This chapter should
provide insights and a detailed understanding of the technology to help meet the thesis objective and
answer the research questions deﬁned in Section 1.3.
3.1
Fuel combustion and production
Before proceeding with the scenario analysis and interpretation, a brief comparison of the three assessed
fuels regarding their environmental impacts during production and combustion is presented. Figure 2.1
shows each fuel’s contribution to the impact category of global warming in kg CO2 eq per FU. Global
warming is shown because the CO2 emissions from fuel combustion determine the total potential for
captured CO2 through OCCS. Other environmental impacts per fuel are found in Appendix J.
Figure 3.1: Impacts to global warming from HFO, LNG and biomethanol per FU. Contributions from combustion
and production included
Figure 2.1 shows that biomethanol combustion does not have any accounted contribution to global
warming. This outcome reﬂects the carbon accounting principles adopted in this study. The feedstock for
the biomethanol production includes several diﬀerent biomass types such as palm fruit, soybeans, sugar
beet, sugar cane, potato, barley grain and bark chips for the global production process (Ecoinvent 2024).
During the cultivation of the feedstock, the plants transform CO2 from the air through photosynthesis
into biomass. When this biomass is combusted as fuel in a later stage, the CO2 that is released can be
considered carbon neutral. This assumption is common in LCA methodologies. However, this approach
is only valid if the biomass is sourced sustainably, meaning there was no deforestation, excessive land
use, or other environmental burdens. Therefore, it needs to be assessed critically (FII 2024).
Overall, HFOhas the highestdirect CO2 equivalentemissionsduringcombustion, followedbybiomethanol
and LNG. Regarding the production, biomethanol shows the largest impact on global warming followed
by LNG and HFO. The reason for the high impact during the production of biomethanol is the energy
Onboard Carbon Capture and Storage: A Life Cycle Assessment of a pilot system for shipping at Maersk
11
==PAGE:21==
intensive conversion process where biomass is ﬁrst gasiﬁed and then synthesized into biomethanol (FII
2024). This requires high temperatures and pressures which signiﬁcantly contribute to impact categories
such as global warming, fossil resource use, human toxicity, or particular matter formation (Ecoinvent
2024). To illustrate the amount of biogenic CO2 that can potentially be captured through implement-
ing OCCS, the biogenic CO2 from the combustion of biomethanol is included in grey since it is not
contributing to global warming.
This initial assessment of the three fuels provides a foundation for a following in-depth analysis and
helps to put the impacts of the three fuels into perspective. The results show, that HFO has the highest
CO2 eq. emissions while LNG has the lowest. Biomethanol has almost zero CO2 eq. emissions during
combustion. However, the biogenic carbon emissions from its combustion at sea are only slightly lower
than those from HFO.
3.2
Overall results
Figure 3.1 shows the total life cycle impacts in characterized form for the base case and the two scenarios
of OCCS with and without liquefaction. The scenarios without liquefaction transport the CO2 through
pipelines to the sequestration site. The heat map indicates the lowest impacts per category in green and
the highest impacts in red. All scenarios are modeled according to the LCI described in Section 2.3 and
documented in Appendix A to F.
Table 3.1: Characterized total impact scores for base scenario, OCCS with liquefaction and OCCS with pipeline
scenarios. Impacts are shown per impact category per FU
A key observation from this overview of characterized results is that each OCCS scenario, compared
to the base scenario, is consistently achieving better impact scores in global warming while performing
worse in most remaining categories. Some impact categories such as ozone formation or fossil resource
scarcity remain relatively the same. This tradeoﬀis explained by the additional energy and material
requirements for the OCCS system onboard and onshore. While the environmental impacts of materials
and infrastructure are almost negligible, the energy demand for capturing, desorbing, compressing,
liquefying, transporting, and sequestrating the CO2 is substantial, see Appendix G to I. Therefore, all
other impact categories are inevitably increasing when large amounts of additional energy are consumed
while no other impacts except CO2 emissions are reduced. This needs to be discussed in more detail. The
large impact of fuel production and combustion in the baseline scenarios per fuel however, can diminish
the relative impact value per category. Therefore, each increase or decrease in environmental impacts
needs to be assessed thoroughly.
For Maersk, the commissioner of this study, the impact category of global warming, measured in kg
CO2 eq., is a particularly important impact category since regulatory frameworks target GHG emissions
Onboard Carbon Capture and Storage: A Life Cycle Assessment of a pilot system for shipping at Maersk
12
==PAGE:22==
reduction (IMO 2023). Further, the implementation of OCCS focuses on the reduction of carbon dioxide
emissions. Therefore, a reduction of the environmental impact is achieved only in global warming.
Biomethanol, both the base case and the OCCS scenarios, achieve the lowest impacts in global warming
among compared scenarios. At the same time however, it becomes obvious from the heat map, that all
biomethanol scenarios perform worse than HFO and LNG in all impact categories except global warming,
fossil resource scarcity, and marine eutrophication. The reasons for these high impacts in most categories
are the cultivation and production of biomethanol. Section 3.3.1 continues by explaining in more detail
how diﬀerent impact categories are aﬀected. The reason why the HFO scenarios perform even worse than
biomethanol in marine eutrophication is that the scrubber on HFO vessels discharges nitrogen oxides into
the ocean which accounts for approximately 90% of the impact in marine eutrophication.
The comparison of results between the OCCS scenario with liquefaction and with pipeline shows, that
each pipeline scenario follows the same result pattern. The impact on the category of global warming
decreases slightly while all other impact categories remain similar to the liquefaction scenario results.
Considering that the biggest diﬀerence between the scenarios is that liquefaction results in venting losses
during the process and transportation, the obtained results are expected. According to Maersk, the most
likely scenario for the assessed vessel and the route from China to Europe is with liquefaction (Maersk
2025). For this reason, the OCCS scenarios with liquefaction are considered in the following analysis.
The standard OCCS scenario, utilizes the electricity mix from the Netherlands for all onshore processes.
In 2024, the Dutch electricity mix included 48% fossil electricity generation, of which 80% was generated
from natural gas (IEA 2024).
In summary, the following observations are made based on the results in Table 3.1:
• The biomethanol OCCS scenario has the lowest score in global warming from all compared fuel
alternatives.
• A comparison of the base scenarios with the OCCS scenarios shows that global warming is the
only impact category that signiﬁcantly improves, while the other impact categories perform worse.
• The heat map indicates that the LNG baseline scenario without OCCS performs better than all
other scenarios in 14 out of 18 impact categories.
• The biomethanol OCCS scenario which includes the liquefaction step in the life cycle, performs
the worst in 11 out of 18 impact categories, than all other assessed scenarios at this point.
Since the results are absolute characterized results per functional unit, these observations do not allow
for any conclusions yet. No comparison and reference of impact categories is possible at this point.
Therefore, an in-depth analysis into potential trade-oﬀs introduced by OCCS needs to be conducted.
Contribution analysis of the OCCS scenarios can reveal hotspots along the life cycle. This identiﬁcation
of hotspots is crucial to identify the parameters whose inﬂuence on the system must be further explored
through sensitivity analysis.
Since Maersk’s EEE-class vessels operate in many diﬀerent countries
around the world, regional diﬀerences in energy and infrastructure availability will aﬀect the overall
environmental performance.
3.3
Contribution and impact assessment across the life cycle
This section presents a contribution analysis for the three standard OCCS scenarios. For each of the three
standard OCCS scenarios, a graph shows the contribution to all impact categories from ﬁve processes
that represent the full technologies life cycle. In these graphs 100% represents the total emissions in
a speciﬁc impact category before any potential reduction is inﬂicted by carbon capture or a scrubber
system. Additionally, Table 3.2 shows the process contribution per scenario to the impact category of
global warming. The full life cycle includes four main phases: Fuel production, fuel combustion and
Onboard Carbon Capture and Storage: A Life Cycle Assessment of a pilot system for shipping at Maersk
13
==PAGE:23==
carbon capture, onshore processing and carbon sequestration. For illustration purposes, the onboard
combustion and carbon capture process is split into two individual processes.
This analysis should deliver a better understanding of the overall results provided in Figure 3.1. Hotspots
in the life cycle will be identiﬁed and a fundamental understanding of the environmental impacts coming
from the three main scenario is provided.
Table 3.2: Contribution analysis for global warming. Impacts per life cycle stage per FU
3.3.1
Contributions per fuel scenario
HFO OCCS
From the Table 3.2 and Figure 3.2 following key observations are made for the standard OCCS scenario:
• 45% of the total CO2 eq emissions in global warming are captured onboard the vessel. It strikes that
this value is signiﬁcantly lower than the 75% carbon capture rate which the OCC system operates
at, see Appendix A. Reasons for this are the relatively large contributions of fuel production and
onshore processes to global warming, this decreases the proportional overall impact reduction from
carbon capture in global warming.
• The scrubber system reduces the environmental impact from HFO combustion for terrestrial acidiﬁ-
cation and PM formation signiﬁcantly. Ozone formation, terrestrial ecosystems, and human health
are reduced slightly. On the other hand marine eutrophication and marine ecotoxicity increase.
From Section 2.3 it is known, that the scrubber system reduced SOx emission by around 98%,
PM formation by around 60% and NOx emissions by 3.5%. Terrestrial acidiﬁcation is mostly
inﬂuenced by SOx and NOx emissions, which explains the reduction of the impact category by
roughly 55%. Ozone formation for terrestrial ecosystems and human health is slightly reduced
since the impact category is inﬂuenced by NOx emission (ILCD 2010).
• Onshore processes signiﬁcantly aﬀect 13 out of 18 impact categories. Therefore, onshore processes
are further analyzed as hotspots in the next section.
• The impact of carbon sequestration across all categories is relatively small compared to other
processes.
As observed, the impact category marine eutrophication is signiﬁcantly increased by the scrubber system.
This impact on marine eutrophication is caused by the nitrogen oxides that are discharged into the ocean
However, the total normalized results on midpoint level from the appendix, see Appendix G, indicate
that marine eutrophication has a relatively low total impact compared to other categories. This is due to
the small portion of just 3.5% of NOx emissions that are captured and discharged into the ocean by the
scrubber.
Marine ecotoxicity as well, is only inﬂuenced to a small extent by the scrubber discharge. The largest
contributor are the onshore processes. The reason for this is the metal emissions from the Dutch electricity
mix that primarily originate from the treatment of residual materials such as bottom ash and ﬂue gas
Onboard Carbon Capture and Storage: A Life Cycle Assessment of a pilot system for shipping at Maersk
14
==PAGE:24==
cleaning residues. These residues are generated from municipal waste and biomass incineration (B.M.,
Murali Vongole, et al. 2021).
Figure 3.2: Contribution of all life cycle stages to 18 impact categories for HFO OCCS scenario with Dutch
electricity
LNG OCCS
From the Table 3.2 and Figure 3.3 following key observations are made:
• Onshore processes are the biggest contributors in 12 out of 18 impact categories, again the reason
for this is mostly the high electricity consumption from the Dutch grid which still relies heavily on
fossil energy sources.
• The carbon capture process sets oﬀaround 37% of the total impact in global warming generated
by all other processes combined.
• Table 3.2 shows that, when comparing the amount of kg CO2 eq from carbon capture against the
combustion, the share of captured carbon is only around 57% instead of the expected 75% based
on the capture rate. The signiﬁcantly lower share can be explained by high methane emissions
due to methane slip, which account for approximately 20% of the total impact on global warming
from LNG combustion (Ecoinvent 2024). These methane emissions are not part of the scope of
onboard carbon capture and therefore contribute to global warming (Ecoinvent 2024). Additionally,
there is a small share of Nitrous Oxide (N2O). While methane has 30 times the global warming
potential than CO2, N2O has 273 times the global warming potential, which shows that already
small emissions can have huge impact (IPCC n.d.). The methane slip highlights a well know
disadvantage of LNG as a marine fuel.
While LNG emits less CO2 during combustion than
conventional marine fuels, the additional methane emissions have to be considered carefully when
debating an OCCS implementation.
Onboard Carbon Capture and Storage: A Life Cycle Assessment of a pilot system for shipping at Maersk
15
==PAGE:25==
Figure 3.3: Contribution of all life cycle stages to 18 impact categories for LNG OCCS scenario with Dutch
electricity
Biomethanol OCCS
From Figure 3.4 following key observations are made:
• Unlike the HFO and LNG scenarios, for the biomethanol scenarios, the fuel production process is
the biggest contributor in 13 out of 18 impact categories.
• The carbon capture process sets oﬀaround 90% of the total impact on global warming generated
by all other processes combined. This value is higher than the 75% carbon capture rate and is only
possible due to the biogenic CO2 emissions.
• The combustion process of biomethanol in LCA is considered not to aﬀect global warming sig-
niﬁcantly due to biogenic carbon dioxide emitted. However, the combustion process still has a
signiﬁcant impact on four impact categories, terrestrial acidiﬁcation, ozone formation terrestrial
ecosystems, and human health and ﬁne particulate matter formation. These high impacts originate
from relatively high PM emission and Volatile Organic Compounds (VOC) emissions from the
biomethanol combustion and the lack of a scrubber system such as for HFO powered vessels (2.1).
• Onshore processes signiﬁcantly aﬀect 13 of 18 impact categories.
• Carbon sequestration has a relatively small impact in all impact categories.
Onboard Carbon Capture and Storage: A Life Cycle Assessment of a pilot system for shipping at Maersk
16
==PAGE:26==
Figure 3.4: Contribution of all life cycle stages to 18 impact categories for biomethanol OCCS scenario with Dutch
electricity
Previous work from Tan et al. (2021) found similar patterns and in particular conﬁrms the large impact that
the production of biomethanol has compared to other conventional fossil fuel production. According to
Tan et al. (2021) the following three steps in the production of biomethanol have the largest environmental
impacts:
1. Feedstock cultivation: The feedstock which is used to produce biomethanol has a signiﬁcant con-
tribution to several impact categories. Intensive fertilizer use can lead to eutrophication and acidi-
ﬁcation (Tan et al. 2021). The impact category land use is almost solely impacted by biomethanol
production because of land occupation for feedstock cultivation.
2. Energy intensive conversion processes: The gasiﬁcation of biomass and the following synthesis
of biomethanol from syngas requires large amounts of energy inputs and therefore signiﬁcantly
impacts categories such as global warming, fossil resources use, human toxicity, and ﬁne particulate
matter formation (Tan et al. 2021). Since the production process used for biomethanol is a global
process, the energy is provided to a large extent from fossil sources, resulting in higher impacts for
the named categories. In Figure 3.1 it can be seen that the impact of global warming is considerably
larger from biomethanol production than from HFO or LNG production.
3. Scale of production: Regarding scale of production, Tan et. al. argue that "conventional fossil
fuels such as HFO and LNG beneﬁt from highly optimized, mature infrastructure." This is not yet
the case for biomethanol production. (Tan et al. 2021).
3.4
Sensitivity analysis based on environmental hotspots
From the contribution and impact assessment in Section 3.3 several environmental hotspots are identiﬁed
in diﬀerent life cycle stages and within aggregated processes.
Two large contributors to most impact categories are the combustion and production processes.
In
SimaPro, the combustion process is modeled by using ﬁxed emissions factors derived from literature.
Since these factors are considered robust, the combustion process is not subject to sensitivity analysis.
The production processes for HFO, LNG and biomethanol on the other hand are well deﬁned processes
Onboard Carbon Capture and Storage: A Life Cycle Assessment of a pilot system for shipping at Maersk
17
==PAGE:27==
that were selected from the Ecoinvent database. HFO and LNG production is established and scaled up
around the globe. Biomethanol has not been produced in the same vast amounts as HFO and LNG and
also have not been produced for that long. Therefore, a sensitivity analysis is done on the production of
biomethanol.
The next hotspot is found in the onshore processes. The individual contributions of the sub processes in
this stage of the life cycle are shown in Appendix J. It is shown that the desorption of CO2 is a hotspot,
being the biggest contributor in all impact categories, except marine eutrophication in which the MEA
production dominates. The reason for the large contribution of MEA production to marine eutrophication,
is that relatively small total impact in marine eutrophication, see Appendix J. Therefore, even though
there is a relatively large contribution from MEA production to marine eutrophication, it does not identify
MEA production as an environmental hotspot.
In the following, several sensitivity analyses are conducted by focusing on eight key impact categories.
The selection of these categories is done based on their contribution at characterized endpoint level to
each damage category, see Figure 3.6. This ensures that the analysis focuses on those environmental
impacts that are most inﬂuential on the overall damage to the three main areas of protection in LCA. The
eight selected impact categories are:
• Global warming in kilograms of CO2 eq. Measures the contribution of GHG to climate change.
• Fine particulate matter formation in kilograms of particulate matter formation of particles with a
diameter of 2.5 micrometers or less (kg PM2.5 eq). Assesses impacts on human health related to
air quality.
• Human toxicity, carcinogenic and non-carcinogenic in kilograms of 1,4-dichlorobenzene equivalent
(kg 1,4-DCB eq). Expresses the toxic impacts on ecosystems or human health.
• Land use in square meter-years of crop-equivalent land use (m2a crop eq). Refers to the impact of
land occupation or transformation
• Fossil resource scarcity in kilograms of oil equivalent (kg oil eq). Refers to the amount of fossil
energy used.
• Terrestrial acidiﬁcation in kilograms of sulfur dioxide equivalent (kg SO2 eq). It quantiﬁes the
potential of certain airborne pollutants, especially those containing sulfur and nitrogen.
• Ozone formation, terrestrial ecosystems in kilograms of kilograms of nitrogen oxides equivalent
(kg NOx eq). Quantiﬁes the air pollution that leads to smog, damaging plants and ecosystems.
(M. A. Hu%bregts et al. 2017)
Figure 3.5 illustrates the contribution of the diﬀerent aggregated life cycle phases across all described
sensitivity scenarios for the eight key environmental impact categories.
In addition to the three main scenarios, basecase without OCCS, OCCS with liquefaction and OCCS with
pipeline transport instead of liquefaction, a total of 10 other relevant sensitivity analyses are conducted.
For each of the fuels, two scenarios are assessed in which the electricity mix is changed to Norwegian
and Chinese electricity.
This is done for all onshore processes, including the carbon sequestration.
Furthermore, the hotspot of the desorption step in the onshore processes is explored in a scenario with
a more e"cient heat pump, operating with a Coe"cient of Performance (COP) of 3. This requires the
utilization of a heat source of approximately 50°C. Finally, for biomethanol, a fourth sensitivity scenario
with a more sustainable fuel production pathway in Switzerland is included. All sensitivity scenarios are
highlighted by the light red frame in Figure 3.5.
Onboard Carbon Capture and Storage: A Life Cycle Assessment of a pilot system for shipping at Maersk
18
==PAGE:28==
Figure 3.5: Contribution of all life cycle stages to 18 impact categories for all scenarios and variations in electricity
mix, heat source e"ciency or biomethanol production process
Onboard Carbon Capture and Storage: A Life Cycle Assessment of a pilot system for shipping at Maersk
19
==PAGE:29==
General observations are that each of the eight key impact categories is impacted diﬀerently by the
scenarios. Since the amount of fuel burned is very similar among each fuel type, the environmental
impact of fuel production and fuel combustion is similar. This leads to a clustering of all OCCS scenarios
of the same fuel type. For example, in Figure 3.5 for ozone formation, it can be seen that the ﬁrst six
scenarios for HFO have similar high values, while all six LNG scenarios have similar low values and all
seven biomethanol scenarios are having similar values between the extend of HFO and LNG. Further, for
the OCCS scenarios it is seen that the onshore processes with Norwegian electricity mix consistently have
the lowest impact in each impact category. The Chinese electricity mix shows the highest contributions
in onshore processes throughout all eight impact categories.
3.4.1
Inﬂuence of electricity mix
From a detailed process description it is shown, that desorption, compression, and liquefaction are
characterized almost exclusively by electricity consumption, see Section 2.3 and Appendix J. Materials
and infrastructure for all OCCS processes are aggregated in the process onshore infrastructure and have
a marginal to modest contribution in all impact categories. To evaluate the sensitivity of the results
towards variation in the supplied electricity, two other electricity country mixes are considered. The
baseline OCCS scenario uses the Dutch electricity mix, reﬂecting the location of a likely future location
for onshore processing facilities. To account for more possible deployments of the technology around
the world, the Chinese 2023 electricity mix (CN mix) represents electricity generated from fossil energy
sources, while the Norwegian electricity mix (NO mix) represents electricity generated from nearly 100%
renewable sources. This allows to assess the robustness of the results towards deployment of OCCS under
very diﬀerent regional energy availability.
Figure 3.5 shows that the NO mix and CN mix scenarios have very diﬀerent impacts in onshore processes
across the eight impact categories assessed in detail. Independent of the fuel type, the Chinese electricity
scenario has the highest impact in onshore processes in all eight impact categories, while the Norwegian
electricity scenario achieves the lowest impact in all impact categories.
The Norwegian electricity scenario only has a signiﬁcant impact on human carcinogenic and non-
carcinogenic toxicity while the other impact categories are only slightly impacted. This contribution to
human toxicity arises from the end-of-life treatment associated with landﬁlling of electric arc furnace
slag, a residual material that occurs from the infrastructure that is necessary to generate the renewable
electricity, in Norway’s case hydro power. Small amounts of these materials, e.g. chromium or lead,
may leach into the ground. Their high toxicity potential is recognized by the LCA method ReCiPe
with elevated characterization scores which leads to relatively high impacts in human toxicity (Ecoinvent
2024).
The scenario with Chinese electricity however, impacts all impact categories except land use strongly.
In global warming, onshore processes with Chinese electricity are the biggest contributor when the
impacts of carbon capture and fuel combustion are balanced. As a consequence, the total impact in
global warming for the Chinese electricity scenario is approximately the same as the impact of the
baseline scenario without OCCS. This illustrates, that high GHG emissions from fossil energies can
fully cancel out the positive impact on global warming which carbon capture achieves through reducing
CO2 emissions from combustion by 75%. In ﬁne particulate matter formation, human carcinogenic and
non-carcinogenic toxicity as well as in terrestrial acidiﬁcation, the total impact is signiﬁcantly higher for
the Chinese electricity scenario in onshore processes than for all other scenarios. This is explained by
high ﬁne particulate matter formation emissions from coal ﬁred power plants, which alone accounts for
60% of the electricity generation (Ecoinvent 2024). Additionally high SOx emissions from coal ﬁred
power plants lead to high environmental impacts in terrestrial acidiﬁcation when no scrubber system is
installed (Global Energy Monitor 2023).
Limitations of these sensitivity parameters are ﬁxed electricity mixes by country. While they very well
represent the wide range of electricity generation based on a mix of renewable and fossil energy generation,
Onboard Carbon Capture and Storage: A Life Cycle Assessment of a pilot system for shipping at Maersk
20
==PAGE:30==
they lack the ability to represent the environmental inﬂuence per individual energy source such as just
wind, solar, nuclear or coal power. An uncertainty that needs to be considered regarding electricity use
in OCCS are the regional diﬀerences and availability of electricity generation by diﬀerent sources. Based
on this sensitivity analysis renewable electricity, such as from Norway, is the preferred option with the
least impact. However, with rapidly changing and developing energy systems and markets around the
world there is a high uncertainty for availability of renewable electricity based on how far a country has
progressed with the energy transition. Especially, China is a country that is rapidly transitioning towards
renewable energy sources.
Since the Norwegian electricity mix is 98% based on hydropower, an additional sensitivity analysis is
conducted on electricity provided to 100% by wind power, named OCCS (wind). It can be found in the
Appendix A and K, however the results do not reveal any major variation compared to the Norwegian
electricity mix.
Only for human carcinogenic and non-carcinogenic toxicity, the impact of onshore
processes in a sensitivity scenario with OCCS and 100% wind power changes. For human carcinogenic
toxicity it increases to the extent of the baseline OCCS scenario, while for non-carcinogenic toxicity the
impact is reduced compared to the Norwegian electricity scenario. The reason for this is the diﬀerent
materials that are used in the production of hydro power dams and wind turbines. While hydro power
damns require large amounts of concrete and steel, the production of wind turbines requires more metals
such as copper, nickel or chromium for generators, gear boxes or cables. The production and mining of
these metals have a large impact on human carcinogenic toxicity, while production of concrete and steel
are less impact full (Ecoinvent 2024).
3.4.2
Inﬂuence of varying heat supply for onshore desorption
One option to reduce the impact of onshore processes is to reduce the large amount of electricity needed
for the desorption of CO2 from the rich solvent. When a heat pump is used to desorb CO2 from the solvent
at 130°C, a potential heat source, such as waste heat from industrial processes, of 50°C could increase
the COP from two to three based on the ideal Carnot COP formula and the assumption that modern heat
pumps can realistically achieve 40-60% of the ideal Carnot COP:
COPCarnot =
푇hot
푇hot−푇cold
Therefore, the utilization of heat source providing 50°C is explored through sensitivity analysis called
COP3. This means that the electricity demand for supplying the necessary heat could be reduced by
33.33% which would decrease the environmental impact signiﬁcantly. From Figure 3.5 it can be observed
that this measure, reduces the environmental impact in all eight impact categories. The reduction however
is not 33.33% but between 20% and 24% depending on the impact category. This is aligning with the
expectation based on the fact that desorption electricity is about 75% of the total combined electricity
demand for onshore processes.
An important limitation of this approach is the availability of su"cient heat sources at the location of
the onshore processing facilities. If the heat source could potentially be used diﬀerently, this opportunity
cost must be considered in the LCA and thus could reduce the beneﬁt.
Further, an uncertainty that should be considered regarding the use of an air source heat pump is the
variations in ambient temperature. If the temperature varies throughout the year or during heat and
cold periods, the COP will vary accordingly which directly aﬀects the e"ciency and emissions. This
variability can be mitigated by utilizing more stable heat sources such as water-source or ground-source
heat pumps which oﬀer a more consistent performance throughout the year.
3.4.3
Inﬂuence of alternative biomethanol production
As mentioned at the beginning of this chapter, biomethanol production is by far the largest contributor to
most impact categories due to the three main factors of feedstock cultivation, energy intensive conversion
processes, and small scale of production explained in the contribution analysis (Tan et al. 2021).
Onboard Carbon Capture and Storage: A Life Cycle Assessment of a pilot system for shipping at Maersk
21
==PAGE:31==
Therefore, sensitivity analysis should be applied to the biomethanol production process. In addition to
the global production which is used in the analysis, an alternative production process in Switzerland
is used from the Ecoinvent database. The global production process for biomethanol is modeled with
electricity mixes from diﬀerent producing countries and diﬀerent feedstocks such as palm fruit, soybeans,
sugar beet, sugar cane, potato, barley grain, and bark chips (Ecoinvent 2024). The production process
in Switzerland on the other hand uses the Swiss electricity mix and wood chips, municipal solid waste,
palm fruit, and soybeans as feedstocks (Ecoinvent 2024).
The observations based on the key impact categories show that the impact from biomethanol production
on global warming, ﬁne particulate matter formation and fossil resource scarcity is reduced by more than
50% when changing to the Swiss production process. In the other ﬁve impact categories the impact is
reduced by approximately 30-40%.
The observed reduction of more than 50% in global warming, ﬁne particulate matter formation, and fossil
resource scarcity is primarily achieved through Switzerland’s low-carbon electricity mix and the cleaner
feedstocks for biomethanol production. The Swiss electricity grid relies mostly on renewable energy
sources such as hydropower. This results in signiﬁcantly lower GHG emissions and ﬁne particulate
matter formation compared to most electricity grids around the world that still rely to a larger extent on
fossil based electricity generation. The large improvement is mainly due to the absence of coal in the
Swiss mix (International Energy Agency 2023).
The 30-40% reduction in the other impact categories can mainly be attributed to environmental regulations
in Switzerland which enforce clean industrial processes, emissions treatment (e.g. PM, SOx, and NOx)
and strict handling of hazardous waste. The reduction in land use impact can be linked to the use of more
selective feedstock with a lower environmental impact. Municipal solid waste and wood chips have a
signiﬁcantly lower contribution to land occupation and land transformation than soybeans, sugarcane, or
palm fruit which are dominant feedstock in the global production process.
3.4.4
Summary of ﬁndings from sensitivity analysis
In this chapter sensitivity analyses were conducted to test the inﬂuence of diﬀerent key parameters on
environmental impacts throughout the OCCS technology life cycle. The key parameters which were
examined included:
• Electricity generation mix for onshore processes, Norwegian and Chinese electricity mixes.
• Heat source for onshore CO2 desorption. Heat pump with 15°C and 50°C, leading to an increase
in the COP from two to three.
• Alternative production pathways for biomethanol. Substituting the standard global production
process with a lower impact production process in Switzerland.
The sensitivity analysis showed, that each parameter change has altered the magnitude of diﬀerent impacts.
The overall pattern however, of which impact contributors are dominant remained consistent. This shows
that across scenarios, the variation only has limited inﬂuence on the studys main conclusions and impact
category rankings.
For example, shifting to a clean electricity or a low-impact biomethanol production process substantially
reduces global warming, ﬁne particulate matter and fossil resource scarcity, whereas human carcinogenic
and non-carcinogenic toxicity, and land use are less sensitive to this change in parameters, improving
only by 20-30%. Utilizing a heat source in the onshore desorption process to increase the COP of a heat
pump resulted in moderate impact reductions of 20-24%.
Crucially in these changes is that none of the variations have changed the relative importance of processes
or overturned any of the key comparative ﬁndings for the diﬀerent fuel types (see Section 3.2 and 3.3.
Onboard Carbon Capture and Storage: A Life Cycle Assessment of a pilot system for shipping at Maersk
22
==PAGE:32==
This indicates that OCCS LCA results are robust to reasonable changes in the electricity mix, the heat
supply and diﬀerent biomethanol production scenarios.
Overall, no conclusions regarding the thesis objective or the answering of research questions can be made
yet because diﬀerent trade-oﬀs between impact categories have become more visible. These trade-oﬀs
are addressed in the next section by interpreting the characterized results at endpoint level. Additionally,
weighted endpoint results will provide an even better perspective of results.
3.5
Endpoint assessment
This ﬁnal section applies the ReCiPe endpoint method to conduct an analysis on endpoint level for
assessing and interpreting the environmental trade-oﬀs between global warming and the other impact
categories that arose in the exploration of impact categories.
3.5.1
Interpretation of trade-oﬀs on characterized endpoint level
Hauschild, Rosenbaum, and Olsen (2018) describe trade-oﬀs in LCA as a situation in which improvements
in one environmental impact category lead to deterioration in other categories. This makes it necessary
to evaluate competing environmental consequences across the full life cycle. The concept is rooted in the
core purpose of LCA which is to avoid problem shifting, where reducing impacts in one area increases
the impacts in others.
In this study, environmental trade-oﬀs were unavoidable because the existing system is supplemented
with OCCS technology. This inevitably leads to an increased overall energy and material demand. As
established early on in this study, global warming is the only impact category which is consistently
mitigated by OCCS, while most other impact categories show increased values. This represents multiple
shifts in environmental burdens across the life cycle. These trade-oﬀs will be analyzed next, by comparing
midpoint and endpoint level results in characterized form.
The endpoint assessment of characterized results enables the interpretation of observed trade-oﬀs by
aggregating the midpoint impacts into the three areas of protection: human health (DALY), ecosystems
(species.yr) and resources (USD2013).
The unit DALY used for the damage category human health "represents the number of years of healthy
life lost through illness, disability, or premature death" (M. A. Hu%bregts et al. 2017). The unit species.yr,
used for ecosystems, "quantiﬁes biodiversity loss as the number of species lost per year, integrated over
time and space.
It combines species loss in terrestrial, freshwater, and marine ecosystems" (M. A.
Hu%bregts et al. 2017). Finally, USD2013 is a "monetary indicator representing the economic surplus
cost of future mineral and fossil resource extraction, tied to resource depletion" (M. A. Hu%bregts et al.
2017). Its the unit for the damage category resource on endpoint level.
At the characterized endpoint level, the contributions of the diﬀerent scenarios to each area of protection
become clearer, even when the scenarios show diﬀerent impacts on midpoint level.
Through this
aggregated approach, a holistic comparison of scenarios per area of protection is possible which enables
the identiﬁcation of the most environmentally preferable scenario, even if the choice may not have been
obvious from midpoint level results.
Onboard Carbon Capture and Storage: A Life Cycle Assessment of a pilot system for shipping at Maersk
23
==PAGE:33==
Figure 3.6: Characterized endpoint results for all sensitivity scenarios in human health, ecosystems and resources.
Contributions of impact categories per damage category per FU
In the following, the three main areas of protection are assessed in detail. The contributions of the eight
previously assessed key impact categories for each area of protection are shown.
Human health
The characterized endpoint results in Figure 3.6 show that the damage category human health is impacted
the most by ﬁne particulate matter, than by global warming and lastly by human carcinogenic and
non-carcinogenic toxicity.
Before, from the sensitivity analysis no conclusions could be drawn regarding which of the assessed
scenarios have the best environmental performance. Now, the characterized endpoint results, shown in
graph 3.6, translate the impacts per category from midpoint to endpoint and reveal the following: All
HFO and biomethanol scenarios perform similarly, while LNG scenarios perform consistently better.
For ﬁne particulate matter formation, HFO and biomethanol scenarios exhibit comparable impacts while
LNG scenarios show the lowest impact. In human carcinogenic and non-carcinogenic, the biomethanol
scenarios display a signiﬁcantly higher impact compared to HFO and LNG scenarios. Overall, in human
health, LNG scenarios perform best, compared to the two fuel alternatives.
HFO and biomethanol
scenarios have similar impacts for human health, with biomethanol scenarios performing slightly better.
Each fuel OCCS scenario with Norwegian electricity achieves the best DALY score for human health
among the alternatives. This highlights the health related beneﬁts of using low-carbon electricity. All
Onboard Carbon Capture and Storage: A Life Cycle Assessment of a pilot system for shipping at Maersk
24
==PAGE:34==
three OCCS scenarios with Chinese electricity mix achieve the highest DALY damage scores for human
health. This emphasizes that the upstream energy burden from fossil based electricity generation can
outweigh the climate mitigation eﬀect that OCCS has on human health. For biomethanol, the scenario
that includes fuel production in Switzerland achieves the lowest damage score. For all other scenarios, the
implementation of OCCS results an overall small improvement for human health or in a not signiﬁcantly
changed impact in human health compared to the corresponding fuel scenario without OCCS.
Ecosystems
The characterized endpoint results in Figure 3.6 show that the damage category ecosystems is impacted the
most by land use, global warming on terrestrial ecosystems, terrestrial acidiﬁcation and ozone formation
on terrestrial ecosystems.
The previous sensitivity and contribution analysis on these impact categories showed the following:
Land use is almost solely impacted by biomethanol production. Terrestrial acidiﬁcation shows similar
impacts from HFO and biomethanol scenario, while LNG scenarios are performing the best compared
to corresponding alternatives. The analysis on ozone formation from terrestrial ecosystems reveals that
HFO scenarios have the highest impact, followed by biomethanol and LNG. It is again shown, that for
each impact category, scenarios rank diﬀerently.
The translation of these characterized midpoint impacts to characterized endpoint results, show a very
diﬀerent contributions of each midpoint impact category to the area of protection, ecosystems.
All
biomethanol scenarios have signiﬁcantly higher damage scores than the HFO and LNG scenarios. While
the large impacts for the biomethanol scenarios originate to a majority from the impact category land
use, HFO and LNG scenarios are dominated by global warming on terrestrial ecosystems and terrestrial
acidiﬁcation.
This shows the generally diﬀerent environmental impacts to ecosystems, measured in
species loss per year, between fossil fuels and biofuels which are produced from cultivated biomass.
Resources
For the damage category resources, the only contributing midpoint impact category is fossil resource
scarcity. The midpoint assessment revealed that fossil resource scarcity is inﬂuenced by just two life cycle
stages: fuel production and onshore processing.
As a result, both endpoint and midpoint results reﬂect the same pattern across scenarios. Biomethanol
scenarios strictly show the lowest impact scores which can be explained by the low dependency on fossil
fuel, while LNG scenarios display the highest impacts across all scenarios. The HFO scenario falls in
between. One reason for this can be found in the production life cycle of LNG compared to HFO as
the alternative fossil fuel. The production involves more energy intensive steps such as compression and
liquefaction of natural gas. In addition, the transportation of LNG via LNG carriers can lead to losses of
fuel due to evaporation of gas, also called boil-oﬀgas.
In summary, this analysis on endpoint level showed to what extend each impact category inﬂuences the
total damage, done to each of the three areas of protection. Therefore, the implications of trade-oﬀs
were interpreted and conclusions per area of protection could be made. In the following, weighting on
endpoint level will add further perspective and allow for a subjective overall ranking of scenarios.
3.5.2
Weighted endpoint results
After the characterized endpoint results have analyzed the trade-oﬀs and showed the relative importance
and impact per individual impact category, weighting of normalized endpoint results is applied as the
ﬁnal step in this LCA. This is done to support the interpretation of results and decision making. In LCA,
weighting is an additional and optional step which introduces a degree of subjectivity to the assessment
because it assigns relative importance to the diﬀerent impact categories.
This subjectivity must be
considered when interpreting the results (Hauschild, Rosenbaum, and Olsen 2018).
Table 3.7 displays the weighted endpoint results. While characterized results do not allow for a comparison
of impact categories, weighting uses normalized endpoint results and assigns a weighting factor to each
Onboard Carbon Capture and Storage: A Life Cycle Assessment of a pilot system for shipping at Maersk
25
==PAGE:35==
damage category. The received total scores in kilo eco-indicator points (kPt) for each scenario can
allow for a subjective conclusion on which scenario has the best overall environmental performance.
As part of the ReCiPe Endpoint methodology, 1 kPt expresses the total environmental burden per year
per average European citizen (M. A. Hu%bregts et al. 2017). The weighting factors 400 for human
health, 400 for ecosystems and 200 for resources are applied.
These are the default values for the
ReCiPe endpoint weighting in SimaPro. They allocate a higher priority to human health and ecosystems
compared to resource use, because damage to resources is often considered more manageable and
substitutable. Damage to human health or ecosystems is often irreversible and additionally given more
ethical signiﬁcance (M. A. J. Hu%bregts et al. 2017). In addition, please see Appendix L for the exact
values.
Figure 3.7: Weighted endpoint results for all sensitivity scenarios. Contribution of damage categories per FU
The following observations are made from the weighted endpoint results:
• In all scenarios, the damage to human health accounts for the largest share in the total environmental
damage.
Weighted ecosystem and resource damages scores are signiﬁcantly smaller for each
scenario, but are still meaningful contributors. This result is stemming from a very large impact in
human health from ﬁne particulate matter formation and global warming in all scenarios. Therefore,
even though human health and ecosystems are both weighted with a score of 400, human health
has a signiﬁcantly higher contribution to the total weighted score.
• In each of the three fuel scenarios, the standard OCCS implementation with Dutch electricity mix
does not lead to an overall environmental improvement and is therefore not worth implementing
from this standpoint.
• LNG OCCS scenarios, especially with Norwegian electricity and pipeline transportation achieve
the lowest total weighted scores among all alternatives. These scenarios have a particularly low
impact to human health.
• The two scenarios HFO and biomethanol with OCCS under Chinese electricity, achieve the highest
total weighted score. This is because of a large increase in human health, which is caused by the
Chinese fossil energy source based electricity production. For LNG and biomethanol the OCCS
scenarios with Chinese electricity show the same pattern. This highlights the strong inﬂuence of the
Onboard Carbon Capture and Storage: A Life Cycle Assessment of a pilot system for shipping at Maersk
26
==PAGE:36==
electricity mix on the overall results when energy intensive OCCS technology is used, especially
in combination with fossil energy.
• Biomethanol scenarios show the widest range of total weighted damage scores. This is due to
the additional sensitivity scenario which explores a more environmentally friendly biomethanol
production pathway. Due to a signiﬁcantly lower impact in human health, this scenario is the most
environmentally friendly alternative for biomethanol from a weighted endpoint perspective. This
emphasizes, that the available production pathway for biomethanol, especially regarding the used
feedstock can have a very large impact on the overall environmental performance.
Onboard Carbon Capture and Storage: A Life Cycle Assessment of a pilot system for shipping at Maersk
27
==PAGE:37==
Conclusion and recommendations
This study has provided a comprehensive LCA on the integration of OCCS with Maersks EEE-class
container vessel, comparing three diﬀerent fuel scenarios with and without OCCS. The assessment
covered the life cycle from the fuel production to the permanent storage of CO2, carbon sequestration.
The ReCiPe methodology was used to evaluate 18 midpoint impact categories and three endpoint damage
categories. The central ﬁnding is that OCCS consistently reduces the environmental impact in global
warming across all fuels including when reasonable changes in key parameters such as the electricity mix
occur. However, the beneﬁt of reducing the impact in global warming comes with increased environmental
burdens in all other impact categories due to the additional energy and material requirements of OCCS. As
an example, categories such as ﬁne particulate matter formation, human toxicity or terrestrial acidiﬁcation
are showing large increases in impact, mostly due to the electricity demand of the OCCS technology.
The implications of these trade-oﬀs were explored in an endpoint level assessment, which aggregated
the 18 environmental impact categories into three areas of projection, human health, ecosystems, and
resources. Regarding the ﬁrst research question, which scenario oﬀers the most environmentally sustain-
able solution overall, it it found that LNG with OCCS, powered by Norwegian electricity, achieves the
best overall environmental performance. In this case, the generation of 17.6 TJ of propulsion energy to
operate a Maersk EEE vessel between Singapore and Suez for 11 days results in a total environmental
burden, equivalent to the average annual impact of 81 European citizens. Reasons for this were an overall
better performance in the two damage categories human health and ecosystems due to low impacts in
ﬁne particulate matter formation, human toxicity and terrestrial acidiﬁcation. On the other spectrum,
HFO with OCCS under Chinese electricity showed the worst overall environmental performance, closely
followed by the biomethanol OCCS scenario under Chinese electricity. Regarding the second research
question, which OCCS scenario could provide the largest environmental improvement per fuel type, the
biomethanol OCCS scenario with an alternative fuel production in Switzerland is achieving the largest
overall environmental improvement with a 36% burden reduction against the baseline scenario of a ves-
sel operation without OCCS. Reason for this being the cleaner electricity and feedstock, that is used in
Switzerland. This also shows that biomethanols environmental potential as a fuel with and without OCCS
is very dependent on the production pathway of the fuel. This study considered only ﬁrst generation
crops for feedstock due to limited availability of processes in the Ecoinvent database. Therefore, future
research should assess second generation feedstocks, such as waste or agricultural residues, to determine
if biomethanol could potentially outperform LNG from an environmental perspective.
Sensitivity analysis has conﬁrmed robust results and key ﬁndings. While a variation in the electricity
mix, heat supply or biomethanol production can alter the magnitude of environmental impacts, these
variations will not change the overall ranking of scenarios. A last, but very important key ﬁnding is that
even when a majority of the CO2 is captured during vessel operation, the use of fossil based electricity
generation for energy intensive OCCS processes can entirely cancel out the climate beneﬁts by increasing
the impact in other categories. This highlights the importance of upstream emissions and the large beneﬁt
of renewable electricity in OCCS.
To summarize, while OCCS as a technology could eﬀectively reduce the climate impact from maritime
shipping, a broader environmental beneﬁt depends on a clean electricity mix, e"cient complementing
onshore systems and sustainable fuel sourcing. This LCA demonstrated the importance of considering
full life cycle trade-oﬀs when Maersk is exploring new decarbonization technologies. The study should
support Maersk in making strategic decisions on which fuel and decarbonization pathways to explore
further.
Finally, future work should expand the assessment and include more fuel pathways such as synthetic fuels
based on biogenic carbon dioxide. Additionally, alternative end-of-life scenarios such as CO2 utilization
Onboard Carbon Capture and Storage: A Life Cycle Assessment of a pilot system for shipping at Maersk
28
==PAGE:38==
should be explored to introduce a circular carbon solution. Finally, carbon capture onboard of moving
marine vessels is still a new application of carbon capture technology. Therefore, uncertainties regarding
the capture performance under real marine conditions, solvent degradation, or storage and oﬄoading
logistics are remaining.
Onboard Carbon Capture and Storage: A Life Cycle Assessment of a pilot system for shipping at Maersk
29
==PAGE:39==
References
Ahmed, Yaseen Adnan, Iraklis Lazakis, and George Mallouppas (2025). “Advancements and challenges of
onboard carbon capture and storage technologies for the maritime industry: a comprehensive review”.
In: Marine Systems & Ocean Technology. doi: 10.1007/s40868- 024- 00161- w. url: https://link.
springer.com/article/10.1007/s40868-024-00161-w.
B.M., Ramesh, Rahul Murali Vongole, et al. (2021). “Valorization of incinerator bottom ash for the pro-
duction of resource-e"cient eco-friendly concrete: Performance and toxicological characterization”.
In: arXiv.
Balcombe, Paul et al. (2021). “How can LNG-fuelled ships meet decarbonisation targets? An environ-
mental and economic analysis”. In: Energy 227, p. 120462. url: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2021.
120462.
Bengtsson, S., K. Andersson, and E. Fridell (2011). “A comparative life cycle assessment of marine fuels:
liqueﬁed natural gas and three other fossil fuels”. In: Proceedings of the Institution of Mechanical
Engineers, Journal of Engineering for the Maritime Environment. url: https:// doi.org/ 10.1177/
1475090211402136.
DNV (2023). FuelEU Maritime Requirements, Compliance Strategies, and Commercial Impacts. https:
//www.dnv.com/publications/fueleu-maritime-white-paper/. Accessed: 2025-04-04.
Ecoinvent (2024). ecoinvent Database Version 3.10. https://www.ecoinvent.org. Accessed: 2024-04-18.
FII (Aug. 2024). Life Cycle Biogenic Carbon Accounting and Climate Change Mitigation in Wood
Building Products - Forest Innovation Investment (FII). Tech. rep. Naturally:Wood. url: https://www.
naturallywood.com/wp- content/uploads/FII- Life- Cycle- Biogenic- Carbon- Accounting- report- ﬁnal-
aug2024-1.pdf.
Forum, Global Maritime (2024). IMO Policy Measures: Ensuring Certainty for Shippings Energy Transi-
tion. Accessed: 2025-05-01. Global Maritime Forum. url: https://globalmaritimeforum.org/insight/imo-
policy-measures-ensuring-certainty-for-shippings-energy-transition/?utm_source=chatgpt.com.
GCMD Oil and Gas Climate Initiative, Stena Bulk Alfa Laval American Bureau of Shipping Deltamarin
Lloyds Register Seatrium TNO (2025). Project COLOSSUS: Main Report and Executive Summary.
Accessed May 2025. Global Centre for Maritime Decarbonisation (GCMD). url: https://gcformaritime.
org.
Global Energy Monitor (2023). Sulfur Dioxide and Coal. Accessed: 2024-06-17. url: https://www.gem.
wiki/Sulfur_dioxide_and_coal?utm_source=chatgpt.com.
Hauschild, Michael Z., Ralph K. Rosenbaum, and Stig Irving Olsen (2018). Life Cycle Assessment:
Theory and Practice. Cham, Switzerland: Springer. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-56475-3.
Hu%bregts, Mark A. J. et al. (2017). “ReCiPe 2016: a harmonised life cycle impact assessment method at
midpoint and endpoint level”. In: International Journal of Life Cycle Assessment. doi: 10.1007/s11367-
016-1246-y.
Hu%bregts, Mark AJ et al. (2017). “ReCiPe2016: a harmonised life cycle impact assessment method at
midpoint and endpoint level”. In: The International Journal of Life Cycle Assessment 22.2, pp. 138–
147. doi: 10.1007/s11367-016-1246-y.
IEA (2024). The Netherlands - Electricity. Accessed: 2024-05-07. url: https://www.iea.org/countries/the-
netherlands/electricity.
IEA Bioenergy (2022). Case Story 2 Gasiﬁcation for Production of Biomethanol. Tech. rep. Accessed:
2024-05-09. International Energy Agency Bioenergy. url: https://www.ieabioenergy.com/wp-content/
uploads/2022/01/Gasiﬁcation_case_story_02.pdf.
ILCD (2010). ILCD Handbook: General Guide for Life Cycle Assessment - Detailed Guidance. ISBN:
978-92-79-19092-6. Luxembourg: Publications O"ce of the European Union. url: https://eplca.jrc.ec.
europa.eu/uploads/ILCD-Handbook-General-guide-for-LCA-DETAILED-GUIDANCE-12March2010-
ISBN-ﬁn-v1.0-EN.pdf.
IMO (2023). 2023 IMO Strategy on Reduction of GHG Emissions from Ships. https://www.imo.org/en/
OurWork/Environment/Pages/2023-IMO-Strategy-on-Reduction-of-GHG-Emissions-from-Ships.aspx.
Accessed: 2025-04-10.
Onboard Carbon Capture and Storage: A Life Cycle Assessment of a pilot system for shipping at Maersk
30
==PAGE:40==
International Energy Agency (2019). The Future of Hydrogen: Seizing Todays Opportunities. IEA. url:
https://www.iea.org/reports/the-future-of-hydrogen.
– (2023). Switzerland 2023: Energy Policy Review. Accessed 2025. url: https://iea.blob.core.windows.
net/assets/b6451900-e6ef-45a8-922d-117520e09a82/Switzerland2023.pdf.
International Maritime Organization(2015). 2015GuidelinesforExhaustGasCleaningSystems(MEPC.259(68)).
https://wwwcdn.imo.org/localresources/en/OurWork/Environment/Documents/MEPC.259(68).pdf.
Adopted by the Marine Environment Protection Committee at its 68th session.
IPCC (n.d.). Climate Change 2021: The Physical Science Basis.
Krantz, G. et al. (2023). “Assessing the Environmental Impact of Eight Alternative Fuels in International
Shipping: A Comparison of Marginal vs. Average Emissions”. In: Environments. doi: 10 . 3390 /
environments10090155. url: https://doi.org/10.3390/environments10090155.
Ma, Xingzhu et al. (2020). “Experimental Study on SO Removal from Marine Engine Exhaust Using
Seawater and Sodium Hydroxide”. In: Environment Protection Engineering 46.1. Accessed: 2024-04-
01, pp. 5–18. url: https://epe.pwr.edu.pl/2020/1_2020/Ma_1-2020.pdf.
Maersk (May 2017). Maersk Line deploys its ﬁrst 2nd generation TripleE. https://www.maersk.com/news/
articles/2017/05/02/maersk-line-deploys-its-ﬁrst-2nd-generation-triple-e. Accessed: 2025-05-23.
– (2025). Personal communication and internal discussions on onboard carbon capture systems. Per-
sonal communication. Interviews and informal consultations with Maersk sustainability and operations
experts, conducted by the author between January and May 2025.
Northern Lights (2024). Northern Lights - CO Transport and Storage. https://norlights.com/. Accessed:
2024-04-30.
Pavlenko, Nikita et al. (Jan. 2020). The climate implications of using LNG as a marine fuel. Tech. rep.
International Council on Clean Transportation (ICCT). url: https://theicct.org/sites/default/ﬁles/
publications/Climate_implications_LNG_marinefuel_01282020.pdf.
Porthos (2024). Porthos CO Transport and Storage. https://www.porthosco2.nl/en/. Accessed: 2024-04-
19.
Speight, James G. (2019). Heavy Oil Recovery and Upgrading. Gulf Professional Publishing. url:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/book/9780128130266/heavy-oil-recovery-and-upgrading.
State of Green (2023). The world’s ﬁrst net-zerofueled container vessel. https://stateofgreen.com/en/
solutions/the-worlds-ﬁrst-net-zero-fueled-container-vessel/. [Online; accessed 23Jun2025].
Tan, Eric C.D. et al. (2021). Biofuel Options for Marine Applications: Technoeconomic and Life-Cycle
Analyses. Tech. rep. Accessed: 2024-05-16. Golden, CO, USA: National Renewable Energy Laboratory
(NREL). url: https://www.osti.gov/biblio/1811832.
U.S. Department of Transportation, Maritime Administration (Aug. 2018). Life Cycle Analysis of the
Use of Methanol for Marine Transportation. Tech. rep. U.S. Department of Transportation, Maritime
Administration. url: https://www.maritime.dot.gov/sites/marad.dot.gov/ﬁles/docs/innovation/meta/
11056/marine-methanol-report-20180810ﬁnal-002.pdf.
U.S. Maritime Administration (2024). Marine Carbon Capture Techno-economic Analysis. Tech. rep.
Accessed: 2025-04-14. U.S. Department of Transportation, Maritime Administration. url: https :
//www.maritime.dot.gov/sites/marad.dot.gov/ﬁles/2024-11/LCE%20MARAD%20CCS%20TEA%
20Final%20Report%20-%2031%20May%202024%20%283%29.pdf.
Verma, Mahendra K. (2015). Fundamentals of Carbon Dioxide-Enhanced Oil Recovery (CO-EOR):
A Supporting Document of the Assessment Methodology for Hydrocarbon Recovery Using CO-EOR
Associated with Carbon Sequestration. Tech. rep. Scientiﬁc Investigations Report 20155135. Accessed:
2025-04-21. U.S. Geological Survey. url: https://pubs.usgs.gov/sir/2015/5135/sir20155135.pdf.
Wang, Y. et al. (2023). “Challenges of decarbonizing global maritime container shipping toward net-zero
emissions”. In: Nature Communications.
Onboard Carbon Capture and Storage: A Life Cycle Assessment of a pilot system for shipping at Maersk
31
==PAGE:41==
Appendix - OCCS Maersk appendix.xlsx
Please ﬁnd appendix A to L in "Master Thesis OCCS Maersk public appendix.xlsx"
Onboard Carbon Capture and Storage: A Life Cycle Assessment of a pilot system for shipping at Maersk
32
==PAGE:42==
Appendix - Other
Key modeling assumptions
Following key assumptions are made regarding the LCI modeling:
• The vessel is equipped with a heat recovery unit to provide electricity for onboard processes. The
electricity requirement to operate the CO2 absorption process exceeds the supply and requires
additional power from the auxiliary engines.
• A vessel operating on HFO has a ﬂue gas treatment with an open-loop scrubber system. Therefore,
zero sludge residues from fuel combustion occur. Thus, the open-loop scrubber system reduces
emission to air but increases emissions to water.
• Exhaust gas cooling is not necessary for HFO vessels due to the open-loop scrubber system. LNG
and biomethanol vessels do not require scrubbing and thus need exhaust gas cooling prior to CO2
absorption (Ahmed, Lazakis, and Mallouppas 2025). The energy and material requirements for
this process are assumed to be the same to the scrubbing process.
• Following processes are excluded for being very similar for all scenarios and additionally having
an insigniﬁcant environmental contribution: vessel manufacturing and maintenance, energy and
equipment for onshore handling of solvent and CO2.
• During the onshore processing and the transportation a 5% loss of CO2 due to venting is assumed,
mostly during liquefaction (Ahmed, Lazakis, and Mallouppas 2025).
• There are no avoided products in the LCA and the produced CO2 is considered as waste. This is
due to the fact that CO2 is currently abundantly available as a co-product from industry processes
such as conventional hydrogen production or from reﬁneries (International Energy Agency 2019).
Onboard Carbon Capture and Storage: A Life Cycle Assessment of a pilot system for shipping at Maersk
33
==PAGE:43==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Bygningstorvet, Building 115
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 2183
www.sustain.dtu.dk
