==PAGE:1==
The Isoform Analysis Group
Section for Bioinformatics, Health Technology
Technical University of Denmark
Master Thesis
Universal Protein Sequence Annotation Using
Protein Language Models
Author:
Johanne Badsberg Overgaard
Supervisors:
Kristoffer Vitting-Seerup, Associate Professor
Chiao-Yu Hsieh, PhD Student
Student ID: s194691
Date of submission: 24th July 2025
ECTS: 30
==PAGE:2==
DTU
J. B. Overgaard
Preface
In this work, I occasionally used AI tools such as ChatGPT to refine code and language.
All substantive content reflects my own analysis and academic research. The code, along
with acknowledgements related to its development, is available in the project’s GitHub
repository: https://github.com/johanneBiO/AnnoSeq.
The explanatory figures in the Introduction, Methods, and Future Perspectives sections,
as well as Figures 3.13 and 3.15 in the Results section, were created using draw.io
(https://www.drawio.com). References are included in the captions where figures were
inspired by external sources.
2
==PAGE:3==
J. B. Overgaard
DTU
Abstract
Understanding how proteins work at the molecular level is key to advancing fields such
as novel therapeutics and drug development. The gain of these mechanistic insights
relies on accurate annotation of functional regions and sites within the protein amino
acid sequences. However, a large gap exists between sequence availability and biological
interpretation. Current computational tools fail to bridge this gap, as they tend to focus
narrowly on well-characterized sequence elements.
To address this challenge, we investigated the potential of leveraging both embeddings
and attention scores from Evolutionary Scale Modeling 2 (ESM-2) to detect a broader
range of annotation types, including subtypes, in human protein sequences. We trained
XGBoost classifiers on attention-based features to predict annotated positions and com-
puted region-level embeddings by pooling per-residue embeddings of annotated seg-
ments. By clustering these embeddings, we aimed to reveal the underlying biological
roles of annotated regions.
Our results showed that the XGBoost models had limited predictive power. This was
likely due to a combination of information loss when summarizing attention matrices,
noisy attention signals, and smoothing effects that may have impacted the precision of
single-residue annotations. In contrast, region embeddings demonstrated the ability to
capture biologically meaningful distinctions between annotated regions. Although clus-
tering correctly assigned annotation types to only 71.2% of known annotated regions,
many misclassified regions were labeled with biologically related categories. We identi-
fied clusters of intrinsically disordered regions (IDRs) whose amino acid compositions
aligned with biological descriptions of representative IDRs from the DisProt database,
highlighting the promise of embeddings for characterizing these understudied regions.
In conclusion, while certain aspects of the approach call for rethinking of the method-
ology, our findings demonstrate the potential of protein language models (PLMs) to
support a future universal protein sequence annotation framework.
3
==PAGE:4==
DTU
J. B. Overgaard
Acknowledgement
I would like to express my sincere gratitude to my supervisor, Kristoffer Vitting-Seerup,
for the opportunity to work on this interesting project. It has been challenging and
rewarding, and I am very grateful for your clear and concrete supervision, which helped
me navigate difficult decisions throughout the project period. A great thanks to Chiao-
Yu Hsieh for co-supervising the project, especially for your encouragement and support
with many of the technical aspects. Thanks to Isabella Østerlund for valuable insights on
ESM-2. Finally, I wish to thank everyone in the Isoform Analysis Group for welcoming
me to the group. I truly appreciate the genuine interest you have shown in both the
project and in me.
4
==PAGE:5==
J. B. Overgaard
DTU
Abbreviation List
AAM Amino acid modification
ARI Adjusted Rand index
BERT Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers
ESM-2 Evolutionary Scale Modeling 2
ESM-C Evolutionary Scale Modeling Cambrian
GO Gene Ontology
HMM Hidden Markov model
IDR Intrinsically disordered region
LLM Large language model
MLM Masked language model
MP Molecule Processing
MSA Multiple sequence alignment
PC Principal component
PCA Principal component analysis
PLM Protein language model
PTM Post-translational modification
SMOTE Synthetic Minority Over-sampling Technique
SNN Shared nearest neighbor
XGBoost eXtreme Gradient Boosting
5
==PAGE:6==
DTU
J. B. Overgaard
Contents
Preface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
Acknowledgement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
Abbreviation List . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1
Introduction
9
1.1
Protein Sequence Annotation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
1.1.1
Intrinsically Disordered Regions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
1.1.2
Advances in Protein Sequence Annotation . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
1.2
Protein Language Models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
1.2.1
Protein Sequences - A Biological Language
. . . . . . . . . . . .
11
1.2.2
Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers
. . . .
12
1.2.3
The Self-Attention Mechanism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
1.2.4
Interpretation of Attention . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
1.2.5
Evolutionary Scale Modeling 2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2
Methods
16
2.1
Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.1.1
Preprocessing of Annotations and Sequences . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.2
Processing of ESM-2 Attention Scores . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.2.1
Acquiring Attention Signals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.2.2
Z-score Normalization and Smoothing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.3
Classification of Sequence Positions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.3.1
Model Training Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.3.2
Class Imbalance Strategies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.4
Clustering of Region Embeddings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
6
Contents
==PAGE:7==
J. B. Overgaard
DTU
2.4.1
Acquiring Region Embeddings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
2.4.2
Graph-Based Clustering with Seurat
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
2.4.3
Functional Interpretation of IDR Clusters . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3
Results
26
3.1
Exploring Attention Signals for Biologically Relevant Regions
. . . . . .
26
3.1.1
Distribution of Attention Signals
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.1.2
Recapturing Annotations from High Attention Signal Regions
. .
28
3.2
Model Performance for Classification of Sequence Positions . . . . . . . .
32
3.2.1
Model Performance Across Data Types for Selected Annotation Types 32
3.2.2
Model Performance for All Annotation Types . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.3
Evaluating Clustering of Region Embeddings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.3.1
Annotation-Type Driven Clustering of True Regions . . . . . . . .
36
3.3.2
Cluster Optimization on Domain Subtypes with Predicted Regions
40
3.3.3
Assessing Predicted Annotations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
3.3.4
Characterization of IDR Clusters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4
Discussion
47
4.1
The Cost of Summarizing Attention Scores . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.2
Challenges in Classifying Sequence Positions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.3
Opportunities Enabled by Region Embeddings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5
Conclusion
51
6
Future Perspectives
52
6.1
Emerging Models and Fine-Tuning Strategies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
6.2
Using Attention Scores for Graph Representation of Proteins . . . . . . .
53
6.3
Feature Engineering of Embeddings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
References
55
Appendices
62
A
Annotation Types . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
B
Edge Effects in ESM-2 Embeddings for Cropped Sequences . . . . . . . .
64
C
Proportion of Excluded Annotations Across Annotation Types
. . . . . .
65
D
Gradient Boosted Decision Trees with XGBoost
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
Contents
7
==PAGE:8==
DTU
J. B. Overgaard
E
Recapturing Annotated Positions - Remaining Results . . . . . . . . . . .
68
F
Position-Dependent Attention Patterns . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
G
XGBoost Run Details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
H
Annotation Type Frequency
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
I
Clustering Results Optimized for Domain Subtypes
. . . . . . . . . . . .
72
J
GO Enrichment Analysis for IDR Clusters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
K
Distribution of Annotation Coverage Across Sequences . . . . . . . . . .
74
8
Contents
==PAGE:9==
J. B. Overgaard
DTU
1
|
Introduction
Proteins are central to seemingly all biological processes. Understanding these molecular
machines has broad applications in biomedical research, food technology, and environ-
mental sustainability, driving innovative solutions in various fields [1]. Identifying key
components within the amino acid sequence is important for gaining mechanistic in-
sight into protein function at the molecular level [2]. This task is known as sequence
annotation. Such annotations can pinpoint specific areas of interest, e.g., potential drug
targets in disease-relevant proteins. Beyond this, sequence annotations also help clarify
the broader biological role of a protein or its cellular location. For example, identifying
an active site reveals enzymatic activity, while the presence of a transmembrane region
suggests localization of the protein within the cell membrane [3, 4].
Next-generation sequencing has made it possible to generate nucleotide sequences
rapidly and at low cost, leading to the identification of new proteins. Nevertheless,
characterizing the protein sequences experimentally remains labor intensive [5]. Due
to this growing gap between sequence availability and biological interpretation, compu-
tational tools have been developed to accelerate protein sequence annotation. Many of
these methods, however, are limited in their design. Since many tools only target a single
annotation type at a time, we will only get what we are looking for [4, 6, 7]. Most people
focus on well-characterized elements – such as structured domains or known motifs –
and overlook understudied annotation types like intrinsically disordered regions (IDRs)
[8]. In addition, homology-based methods perform poorly on novel proteins because
close sequence matches are absent [9]. In the end, we only find what we already know.
Protein language models (PLMs) have led to great advancements in protein annota-
tion [10]. Being built on the Transformer architecture, PLMs leverage the self-attention
mechanism that weighs the relevance of all amino acids in a protein sequence [11, 12].
Chapter 1. Introduction
9
==PAGE:10==
DTU
J. B. Overgaard
The output is powerful contextualized embeddings commonly used for downstream ma-
chine learning tasks [10]. Yet attention weights are often neglected, despite evidence
that these intermediate computations can provide valuable insights into biologically
important regions of the protein sequence [13, 14].
This thesis proposes a new approach for protein sequence annotation by combining infor-
mation from both embeddings and attention scores from Evolutionary Scale Modeling 2
(ESM-2). The goal is to move beyond traditional methods and support the discovery of
diverse annotation types from a single setup to potentially also reveal new annotation
subtypes. In doing so, this project takes the first step toward future studies to uncover
not only what we are looking for but also what we have yet to know.
1.1 Protein Sequence Annotation
The identification of conserved domains remains one of the most standard approaches
in sequence annotation. This is typically achieved by comparing a protein sequence to
profile hidden Markov models (HMMs) built from multiple sequence alignments (MSAs)
of known domains, such as those in the Pfam database [15]. In recent years, however,
there has been increasing interest in IDRs due to their essential role in most cellular
processes such as cell signaling and transcriptional regulation [16].
1.1.1 Intrinsically Disordered Regions
Approximately 70% of the proteins in the human proteome contain at least one IDR of
30 residues or longer. Most IDRs are found in the terminal regions of proteins or act as
flexible linkers between structured domains. They are typically characterized by a low
proportion of hydrophobic residues, which prevents the formation of a hydrophobic core
necessary to adopt a stable, folded structure [17]. As a result, IDRs exist as dynamic en-
sembles of distinct conformations [16]. These conformational preferences are encoded
in the amino acid sequence, with the distribution of charged residues playing a central
role by mediating repulsive or attractive electrostatic interactions. However, the behav-
ior of IDRs is highly context-dependent due to the absence of stabilizing intramolecular
contacts. Consequently, the properties of an IDR are sensitive to its biochemical environ-
ment, including its solution, post-translational modifications (PTMs), and the proximity
to protein domains and other biomolecules [17].
10
Chapter 1. Introduction
==PAGE:11==
J. B. Overgaard
DTU
In recent years, a large number of IDR predictors have been developed [18, 19]. Many of
these tools are good at predicting where disordered regions occur in a sequence, but not
what they do [20, 21]. DisProt offers a manually curated repository of experimentally
validated IDRs and associates some of these regions with Gene Ontology (GO) terms
to describe their function. However, the database currently covers only 2,649 proteins
from 407 species, with functional annotations available for just 1,297 proteins [22]. By
comparison, the Pfam database contains over 20,000 protein families, most of which are
linked to well-defined functional roles [15]. Thus, both coverage and annotation depth
of IDRs remains limited compared to domain annotation. Therefore, this project places
special emphasis on improving the annotation of IDRs.
1.1.2 Advances in Protein Sequence Annotation
Many of the tools for prediciting IDRs use machine learning methods, as it is the case
for the most recent protein annotation approaches [23, 24, 25]. With the emergence
of PLMs, many existing sequence annotation tools have demonstrated significant per-
formance improvements by leveraging sequence representations obtained from PLM as
input to existing deep learning models [24, 25]. Even in domain homology detection,
new methods utilizing PLMs have demonstrated advancements over conventional HMM-
based approaches [26]. The following section introduces the biological motivation and
key concepts behind PLMs, which are central to this work.
1.2 Protein Language Models
In the early 1960s, Christian B. Anfinsen and his colleagues found that a ribonuklease
would refold spontaneously after the enzyme had been denatured. Anfinsen’s work led to
the postulate that the information required for a protein to fold into its native structure,
and thereby retain its function, is encoded in its amino acid sequence [27]. This property
means that a lot about a protein can be said from its written sequence alone and has
motivated the development of PLMs [11].
1.2.1 Protein Sequences - A Biological Language
PLMs make use of a large language model (LLM) variant originally designed for natu-
ral language processing. There is no doubt that natural language follows specific rules.
Chapter 1. Introduction
11
==PAGE:12==
DTU
J. B. Overgaard
The fact that we are born without the ability to speak demonstrates that language is
something that can be learned. In contrast, the rules and their learnability governing
biological sequences are less obvious. Well-known examples of clear sequence patterns
include conserved active sites in enzymes and the Walker loop (or P-loop), which is
linked to phosphate binding. These conserved residues are often clearly visible in a
MSA [28, 29]. However, not all biologically relevant patterns are easily detectable in
this way. Correlated mutations, for instance, change in a coordinated manner to pre-
serve structural or functional interactions [30]. Similarly, signal peptides often share a
conserved secondary structure despite having variable primary sequences [31]. In this
way, evolution has both restricted certain amino acid patterns and reinforced particular
combinations – some of which are directly observable, while others remain more hidden
within the sequence. It is precisely the ability to capture abstract features that makes
PLMs a valuable tool for decoding the biological language encoded in protein sequences.
Unlike MSAs, where we are restricted to look for patterns among homologous proteins,
PLMs learn from millions of diverse proteins [11].
1.2.2 Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers
Modern PLMs are based on the Transformer architecture [11, 32]. A classic Transformer
consists of an encoder and a decoder. To start with, the sequence is broken into tokens. A
token is the smallest unit of input that a language model processes. In natural language,
a token can be a word, a subword or a letter. In the case of PLMs, each token typically
corresponds to a single residue. The encoder maps the sequence of tokens represented as
x = (x1, ..., xn) to a sequence of new vector representations z = (z1, ..., zn) also termed
as embeddings. From z, the decoder will generate a corresponding output sequence
one element at a time [12]. This autoregressive property of the decoder makes sense
when translating sequences of text from one language to another. However, when the
goal is to extract information from existing biological sequences rather than to generate
new ones, there is only a need for the encoder [11, 32]. Once the protein sequence has
been converted from its amino acid symbols into a numerical representation, traditional
machine learning can be applied for task-specific predictions [10]. That also changes the
training objective. An encoder-decoder is trained to predict the next symbol in the output
sequence from the previously generated symbols. This unidirectional nature can restrict
the power of the resulting embeddings [33]. Thus, PLMs more specifically adopt the
BERT architecture, which stands for Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Trans-
12
Chapter 1. Introduction
==PAGE:13==
J. B. Overgaard
DTU
Figure 1.1: PLM architecture and the MLM objective. The model uses a BERT style encoder-only Trans-
former architecture. By masking out random residues, the model learns to predict masked amino acids
based on the relationship between residues in both directions. The ability to capture context from across
sequences is due to the self-attention mechanism incorporated in multiple attention heads. The figure is
inspired by Figure 2 in Larsen et al. (2024) [10].
formers [11, 32]. As the name implies, BERT is an encoder-only model able to capture
both left-to-right and right-to-left contexts. This is obtained by using a masked language
model (MLM) training objective, where the model is trained to predict randomly masked
elements of the sequence [33]. Figure 1.1 shows the approach for learning protein se-
quence embeddings using the BERT architecture.
The ability to consider the context in which the amino acids appear is what makes
PLMs – and the embeddings they produce – so powerful. This is achieved through the
self-attention mechanism, which forms the core of PLMs.
1.2.3 The Self-Attention Mechanism
The self-attention mechanism within Transformer models determines the relative im-
portance of different tokens (in this case, residues) in a sequence. The output of the
self-attention layer is computed as
Attention(Q, K, V) = softmax
QKT
√dk

V
(1.1)
where the matrices Q, K and V are called the queries, keys, and values, respectively.
These matrices are created by multiplying the token embeddings packed into a matrix
with three trained weight matrices (WQ, WK and WV) as described in Figure 1.2. The
self-attention mechanism computes a weighted sum of values (V) determined by the
Chapter 1. Introduction
13
==PAGE:14==
DTU
J. B. Overgaard
Figure 1.2: The self-attention mechanism computes attention scores from the scaled dot product of the
queries (Q) and keys (K) obtained by projecting the input matrix through learnable weight matrices (WQ,
WK, and WV). Afterwards, the attention scores are passed through the softmax function to compute the
final attention weights. The figure is inspired by the blog post from Sebastian Raschka (2023) [34].
attention obtained from the dot product of the queries (Q) with the keys (K) divided
by the square root of the dimension of the keys (dk). The result is a square matrix that
describes how much each residue attends to another. The scores are normalized by
applying the softmax function to each row, which forces the scores to be in the interval
between 0 and 1, and row elements will add up to 1 [12]. We will from now on denote
the scaled dot product as the raw attention or simply attention scores and scores passed
through the softmax function as normalized scores or attention weights.
As shown in Figure 1.1, PLMs use multi-head attention within each layer of the model.
That means, one layer consists of different attention heads, each producing their own
set of query, key, and value matrices. This allows the input to be represented in different
Figure 1.3: Multi-head attention. Each attention head produces a seperate matrix. The results from all
heads are concatenated and multiplied with an additional weight matrix (WO) to summarize the final
layer output matrix z. The figure is inspired by the blog post from Jay Alammar (2018) [35].
14
Chapter 1. Introduction
==PAGE:15==
J. B. Overgaard
DTU
subspaces. As seen from Figure 1.3, the output embedding matrices from each head are
concatenated and multiplied by a weight matrix WO to obtain the final layer output z.
The matrix z is passed to a feedforward neural network, and will be the input to the next
layer of the BERT model [12, 33].
1.2.4 Interpretation of Attention
Studies of PLMs have shown that attention weights can capture biologically meaningful
properties of proteins. For example, it is possible to predict residue–residue contacts
with high accuracy from the attention matrices, indicating that these weights reflect the
protein structure [11, 36]. In fact, recent studies have shown that these attention-based
contact maps can be used to identify protein domains followed by detection of local
similarities between proteins using domain-level embeddings [26]. Further evidence
from Vig et al. [14] reveals that, besides structure, certain attention heads focus their
attention on other biological features such as binding sites and amino acids associated
with PTMs. These findings suggest that, unlike the abstract nature of embeddings, atten-
tion matrices are more intuitive and interpretable. Thus, attention scores hold potential
for revealing important components of protein sequences, but this opportunity is often
overlooked, as most studies focus solely on using the embeddings.
1.2.5 Evolutionary Scale Modeling 2
To investigate the utility of embeddings and attention scores in protein sequence annota-
tion, this project employs ESM-2 which is the state-of-the-art PLM developed by Meta AI.
ESM-2 comes in different scales ranging from a pretrained 8 million parameter model to
a model with 15 billion trained parameters. As the model has been trained on over 60
million protein sequences across different organisms, it is able to output representations
that generalize across diverse proteins [11]. This property makes ESM-2 a powerful
tool for a variety of tasks within computational protein biology ranging from subcellular
localization prediction to prediction of mutational effects [24, 36]. Due to this great
flexibility, we believe ESM-2 can serve as the foundation for universal protein sequence
annotation.
Chapter 1. Introduction
15
==PAGE:16==
DTU
J. B. Overgaard
2
|
Methods
The methods used in this project were designed to detect and identify functional regions
and sites within protein sequences based on both embeddings and attention scores from
ESM-2. Figure 2.1 describes the overall workflow of the project.
Figure 2.1: Overall workflow. Protein sequences and their associated sequence annotations were collected.
First, the data was preprocessed, including cropping of the sequences (1) before running ESM-2 (2). ESM-
2 produces both sequence embeddings (3a) and attention scores (3b). The attention scores were processed
(4) and used to train decision tree ensemble models with the XGBoost algorithm that classified individual
sequence positions (5). Based on these models, annotated regions and sites were predicted (6). Their
per-residue embeddings were aggregated to obtain one vector representation for each region/site across
the data (7). The vectors were clustered to reveal different annotation types and subtypes (8).
16
Chapter 2. Methods
==PAGE:17==
J. B. Overgaard
DTU
This study considered human protein sequences that benefit from extensive, high-quality
annotation, allowing us to evaluate the suggested approach for protein sequence an-
notation. The process began with data preprocessing including filtering of annotation
types and cropping of the sequences. The processed sequences were passed to ESM-2,
which outputs embeddings and attention scores. The original idea relied on peak finding
from attention signals to locate annotated regions and sites. As it led to a dead end,
this step turned into a machine learning task using gradient boosted decision trees to
classify sequence positions from attention-based features. For the predicted regions and
sites, the corresponding per-residue embeddings from the final layer of ESM-2 were
aggregated to create a single vector representation per region/site. Finally, these vectors
were clustered to uncover the different annotation types and subtypes.
2.1 Data
The project utilized the human proteome from UniProt (Proteome ID: UP000005640)
[37]. The dataset includes one representative (canonical) protein sequence for each
known protein-coding gene. The sequences were obtained from the UniProt FTP server
in FASTA format, and corresponding annotation data was downloaded in XML. Of
the 20,644 sequences, 20,324 were Swiss-Prot entries – manually annotated and non-
redundant protein sequence. They provided a reliable reference while the remaining
320 sequences, which have not been reviewed, were excluded from the analysis.
Initial analyses were conducted on a randomly selected subset of 100 sequences. This
subset was later expanded with 900 additional sequences, resulting in a working dataset
of 1,000 sequences. Due to the computational demands associated with processing the
entire dataset, we limited the scope of the project to this subset of sequences.
2.1.1 Preprocessing of Annotations and Sequences
The sequence annotations from UniProt include detailed information grouped into vari-
ous annotation types. This project did not consider all of them. For example, annotation
types that describe the secondary structure (α-helices, β-strands, turns) were excluded.
As this project aimed to gain mechanistic insights into the sequence as it is, experimental
information, such as descriptions of mutation effects, were also ignored. Appendix A
lists the 19 included annotation types alongside their content.
Chapter 2. Methods
17
==PAGE:18==
DTU
J. B. Overgaard
With the self-attention mechanism, each residue will attend to all other residues within
a protein sequence when processed in a PLM as described in section 1.2.3. As a result,
the time and memory required for ESM-2 to process a sequence scales quadratically
with the length of the sequence [12]. Therefore, the ESM-2 model has been trained
on proteins less than or randomly cropped to 1024 amino acids [11]. Following this
approach, we limited our input to the first 1024 residues for longer proteins to ensure
efficient runtime. If cropping intersected an annotated region, the cut point was placed
earlier to avoid splitting annotations. Among all human proteins, approximately 11.3%
exceed 1024 amino acids in length. For the subset of 1,000 sequences, about 9.4% were
cropped. This raises the concern that trimming longer sequences may have reduced the
quality of the resulting embeddings and attention scores for a relatively large portion of
the dataset. However, internal analysis from the Isoform Analysis Group in the Section
for Bioinformatics at DTU HealthTech indicates that contextual information in ESM-
2 embeddings is mainly local. As shown in Appendix B, per-residue embeddings of
truncated sequences closely resemble those of the full sequences, with average cosine
similarity remaining near 1. These findings support common strategies for handling long
sequences, such as splitting them into overlapping chunks and merging the results. For
this project, however, we left more advanced handling of longer sequences to future
work.
When cropping sequences, approximately 16% of the available annotations were lost
for the 1,000 sequences. Appendix C provides a detailed breakdown of the proportion
of annotations removed across different annotation types. The cropping process did not
eliminate any particular annotation type overall.
2.2 Processing of ESM-2 Attention Scores
After preprocessing, sequences were fed into the pretrained 650 million parameter ESM-
2 model with 33 layers, each containing 20 attention heads. The attention scores were
extracted prior to the softmax operation, which required modification of the original
code. This choice was motivated by the fact that the softmax function rescales all atten-
tion scores to lie between 0 and 1, which could artificially emphasize relatively higher
values. By working with attention scores instead of attention weights, we avoid scenarios
where a region appears strongly attended to simply because all other positions received
lower scores.
18
Chapter 2. Methods
==PAGE:19==
J. B. Overgaard
DTU
2.2.1 Acquiring Attention Signals
We aimed to derive measures of positional importance within each sequence from the
attention scores, given their interpretation as capturing pairwise dependencies between
residues (see Section 1.2.4). This was achieved by summarizing the attention matrices,
as illustrated in Figure 2.2. All heads within a given layer were aggregated by taking the
mean across heads per residue pair or by computing the 90th percentile. This produced
attention matrices representative of each layer. The attention matrices were further
aggregated into vectors by taking the column mean or 90th percentile, or multiple
quantiles to obtain various attention-based features per position. Throughout this work,
we also refer to the feature values across positions within the same sequence as the
attention signal, emphasizing the sequential nature of the data.
Figure 2.2: Steps for extracting per-residue attention-based features from ESM-2. Attention scores from
the 20 heads in each layer were aggregated to form layer-wise attention matrices. These matrices were
further summarized by column-wise aggregation to create a final attention feature vector for each residue.
2.2.2 Z-score Normalization and Smoothing
In the initial phase of the project, the attention signal was normalized from a baseline sig-
nal derived from scrambled sequences. The goal was to highlight meaningful deviations
from the average behavior of the attention signal. For each original protein sequence,
5 scrambled versions were generated by randomly shuffling the amino acid order, pre-
serving the overall composition but disrupting the biological context. The scrambled
sequences were then passed through the ESM-2 model to compute the same attention-
based features as for the original, establishing a null distribution for each feature per
position in the sequence. Afterwards, the z-score for each attention value x of the original
sequence position was calculated as:
Chapter 2. Methods
19
==PAGE:20==
DTU
J. B. Overgaard
z = x −µscr
σscr
(2.1)
where are µscr and σscr are the mean and standard deviation of the position’s feature
value obtained from the scrambled set, respectively.
A Gaussian filter was applied to smooth the signals and reduce noise both for z-score
normalized data and in cases where unnormalized attention-based features were used.
The filter operates by sliding a window along each attention signal and computing
a weighted average within that window. The weights follow a Gaussian distribution
centered on the middle position of the window, assigning higher importance to points
near the center and less to those further away. The resulting average replaces the original
value at the center position. In this project, we employed a window size of 11 with a
Gaussian kernel standard deviation of 1.
2.3 Classification of Sequence Positions
Attempts to detect annotated positions directly from the attention signal did not yield sat-
isfactory results. This limitation motivated a shift towards a machine learning approach
to classify sequence positions from attention-based features. We selected eXtreme Gradi-
ent Boosting (XGBoost) for the task, which is a popular method for a variety of machine
learning challenges [38]. The XGBoost framework builds an ensemble of decision trees,
where each new tree seeks to correct the errors of the previous ones by minimizing a
loss function using gradient descent. Two main factors led to this choice of classification
model:
• Modeling complex feature interactions. Decision trees can effectively capture
interactions between features, for example, when the effect of one attention-based
feature on the prediction depends on the value of another.
• Training efficiency. We needed to train multiple models for a large number of
positions. XGBoost is known for its speed and efficiency in handling large datasets.
The XGBoost algorithm is implemented in the Python package of the same name. We do
not elaborate on the theory behind XGBoost here, as doing so would require an extended
20
Chapter 2. Methods
==PAGE:21==
J. B. Overgaard
DTU
Figure 2.3: Training data partitioning for training XGBoost models. Each model was directed towards
a certain annotation type and considered only positions of that type versus unannotated positions. The
relative position is added to the attention-based features.
introduction to gradient boosting in general. For readers interested in a brief explanation
of the main idea behind gradient boosting with XGBoost, we refer to Appendix D.
2.3.1 Model Training Setup
We trained a separate binary XGBoost model for each annotation type to support over-
lapping annotations, treating annotated positions as the positive class and unannotated
positions as the negative class. The overall setup is illustrated in Figure 2.3. Besides the
attention-based features, we include information about the relative position. To evaluate
model performance, 20% of the sequences were held out from training and used for
model evaluation.
We tuned the XGBoost models using either a grid search or a randomized search over
a defined hyperparameter space described in Table 2.1. To select the best performing
models, we employed cross-validation. Positions from the same sequence, however, will
not be independent. Therefore, the models were trained on three grouped folds, grouping
by protein accession, to select the models which generalize well to positions from unseen
sequences. The best models were selected based on the weighted F1-score. The F1-score
is a metric which balances both precision and recall. Thus, it is useful when we want to
avoid falsely annotated positions and falsely unannotated positions.
F1-score = 2 · Precision · Recall
Precision + Recall
(2.2)
Chapter 2. Methods
21
==PAGE:22==
DTU
J. B. Overgaard
Table 2.1: Hyperparameters used to tune XGBoost models. Further explanations can be found in the
XGBoost documentation available at https://xgboost.readthedocs.io/en/stable/parameter.html.
Parameter
Description
Values
n_estimators
Number of boosting rounds.
200, 400, 600
max_depth
Max depth of each tree.
4, 6, 8
learning_rate
Shrinkage of the step size used in update.
0.01, 0.1, 0.2
colsample_bytree
Fraction of features to consider when building each tree.
0.2, 0.5, 0.8
subsample
Fraction of training samples to use for each tree.
0.4, 0.6, 0.8
lambda
L2 regularization term on weights.
0.1, 1, 5
alpha
L1 regularization term on weights.
0.1, 1, 5
A weighted F1-score combines the F1-scores of each class by weighting them according to
the number of true instances in each class, here the number annotated and unannotated
positions.
2.3.2 Class Imbalance Strategies
The number of positions varied greatly across annotation types, often resulting in severe
class imbalance relative to the large number of unannotated positions. To help the model
learn from the limited annotated examples within each annotation type, we applied a
combination of undersampling and oversampling whenever the class ratio exceeded
10:1 in the training data. Specifically, we downsampled the unannotated positions to be
ten times the number of annotated positions. Afterwards, synthetic annotated examples
were generated using the Synthetic Minority Oversampling Technique (SMOTE), as
implemented in the imbalanced-learn (imblearn) Python package, to achieve a final
class ratio of 5:1 (unannotated to annotated). SMOTE generates synthetic data points
by randomly selecting one of the k nearest neighbors of a given minority example and
placing a new point at a random location along the line connecting the two [39]. We
relied on using the default value of 5 nearest neighbors to define the neighborhood of
positions used to generate the synthetic examples.
In addition, we increased the contribution of annotated positions in the objective func-
tion using the scale_pos_weight parameter, which encouraged the model to focus more
on the minority (positive) class during tree construction. As recommended in the XG-
Boost documentation, this weight was set as the ratio of unannotated positions (negative
class) to annotated positions (positive class) in the balanced training set.
22
Chapter 2. Methods
==PAGE:23==
J. B. Overgaard
DTU
2.4 Clustering of Region Embeddings
While the XGBoost models were trained independently for each annotation type, we
aimed to use the ESM-2 embeddings to also identify annotation subtypes and potentially
account for regions that might have been incorrectly predicted by models targeting other
annotation types.
2.4.1 Acquiring Region Embeddings
After training, the XGBoost models were applied to all sequence positions in the working
dataset. The output from each model was the predicted probability of each position
being annotated. To generate continuous annotated regions, the probability profiles for
each sequence were smoothed using the same Gaussian filter as applied to the attention-
based features (see Section 2.2.2). Regions were then extracted by selecting positions
where the smoothed probability exceeded a threshold of 0.5, indicating a higher-than-
even chance of being part of an annotated region. For each region, the corresponding
per-residue embeddings with an embedding dimension of 1,280 were aggregated by
computing the mean across region positions. This produced a fixed-size vector represen-
tation for each predicted region or site, which we refer to as the region embedding. The
steps are described in Figure 2.4.
Figure 2.4: Overview of the process for detecting regions and aggregating their corresponding per-residue
embeddings. Trained XGBoost models predicted the probability of each position belonging to a given
annotation type. The probabilities profiles were smoothed using a Gaussian filter to reduce noise. Regions
were extracted when the smoothed probability exceeded 0.5. For each such region, residue-level embed-
dings were aggregated by computing the mean across positions, resulting in a single vector representation
per region.
Chapter 2. Methods
23
==PAGE:24==
DTU
J. B. Overgaard
2.4.2 Graph-Based Clustering with Seurat
To identify groups of similar functional regions, we applied graph-based clustering on
region embeddings using the R package Seurat [40]. Originally developed for high-
dimensional single-cell RNA-seq data, we believed Seurat’s clustering algorithms to be
well suited for the high dimensionality and large scale of region embeddings.
The clustering workflow followed similar steps as described in the Seurat clustering
tutorial [41]. We first reduced the dimensionality of the region embeddings via principal
component analysis (PCA) after scaling the embedding features. The PCA space was
defined from region embeddings of known annotated regions to establish a reliable
reference. Using the PCA loadings, we mapped the predicted regions into the same
reduced-dimensional space (see Figure 2.5). Next, a shared nearest neighbor (SNN)
graph was constructed by connecting each region to its 20 nearest neighbors in the
PCA space based on Euclidean distances. Edge weights between regions were calculated
using the Jaccard similarity, reflecting the proportion of shared neighbors between two
regions relative to their total neighbors.
Finally, regions were clustered using the Louvain algorithm, which identifies communi-
ties with dense internal connections. A resolution parameter controls how fine or coarse
the clustering results are. We optimized the resolution parameter based on the adjusted
Rand index (ARI). ARI is a measure, which counts pairs of elements that are grouped
similarly in two clusterings, correcting for agreement expected by random chance. In our
Figure 2.5: Clustering of region embeddings. PCA was performed on the known region embeddings to
define a low-dimensional reference space. Region embeddings of the predicted regions were projected
onto this space using the PCA loadings. A SNN graph was then constructed in the PCA space, and graph-
based clustering was performed by identifying communities using the Louvain algorithm.
24
Chapter 2. Methods
==PAGE:25==
J. B. Overgaard
DTU
case, we compared the cluster labels discovered by the Louvain algorithm with known
ground-truth region annotations. The ARI is computed as:
ARI =
X
i,j
nij
2

−
"X
i
ai
2
 X
j
bj
2
# .n
2

1
2
"X
i
ai
2

+
X
j
bj
2
#
−
"X
i
ai
2
 X
j
bj
2
# .n
2

(2.3)
where nij is the number of elements (i.e., regions) shared between cluster i in the
clustering and cluster j in the ground-truth annotation. We have ai = P
j nij being the
total number of elements in cluster i, bj = P
i nij is the total number of elements in
cluster j, and n is the total number of elements clustered. The ARI ranges from -1 to 1,
-1 indicating worse than random agreement, 0 corresponds to random agreement and 1
is perfect agreement.
2.4.3 Functional Interpretation of IDR Clusters
For the clustering of region embeddings from known annotated regions, we computed
the amino acid composition for sequences within clusters of IDRs to characterize their
biochemical foundations. Furthermore, we compared IDRs with IDRs from the DisProt
database (see Section 1.1.1). The DisProt annotations were downloaded as a CSV file
from https://disprot.org/. DisProt IDRs were matched to IDRs in the working dataset
originating from the same sequence. A region was considered to correspond to a DisProt
IDR if the DisProt region started within or up to 5 residues before, and ended within or
up to 5 residues after the region boundary defined in UniProt.
Chapter 2. Methods
25
==PAGE:26==
DTU
J. B. Overgaard
3
|
Results
This chapter presents the results of the investigation of the suggested approach for
protein sequence annotation based on embeddings and attention scores derived from
the ESM-2 model. The results are divided into three parts. First, we conducted an
exploratory analysis of the attention signal. Second, we evaluated model performance
in predicting annotated positions. Finally, we assessed whether clustering of region
embeddings distinguishes between annotation types, and, in some cases, subtypes.
3.1 Exploring Attention Signals for Biologically Relevant Regions
The original idea behind using attention scores for sequence annotation was based on
the assumption that biologically important regions consistently receive higher attention
compared to less relevant regions. Consequently, annotated regions should be detectable
by identifying peaks in the attention signal.
3.1.1 Distribution of Attention Signals
If the above assumption holds, we would expect to observe a difference in the distribu-
tion of aggregated attention scores between annotated and unannotated positions. To
investigate this, attention scores from 100 sequences were aggregated using different
summarization methods to obtain a 1D attention signal per sequence for each of the 33
layers of the ESM-2 model (see Section 2.2.1). Figure 3.1 presents the distribution of
attention signal values across these 100 sequences, covering a total of 47,169 positions.
The distributions for annotated (25,632) and unannotated (21,537) positions do not
clearly indicate whether the two groups can be easily separated based on the magnitude
of the attention signal.
26
Chapter 3. Results
==PAGE:27==
J. B. Overgaard
DTU
Figure 3.1: Distribution of the at-
tention signal values from 100 se-
quences. The heads within each layer
was aggregated either by taking the
mean across heads (Heads - Mean)
per residue pair or by computing
the 90th percentile (Heads - Q90).
The resulting attention matrices were
summarized into vectors by taking
the column mean (Columns - Mean)
or 90th percentile (Columns - 90) to
obtain an attention signal per posi-
tion per layer.
Figure 3.2 shows how the intensity of the attention signal also changes across the layers
of the model. Thus, the values of the attention signal should be interpreted in the
context of their respective layers, as a low score in one layer may correspond to a high
score in another. When considering each layer separately, there seems to be a trend
with the median attention signal being higher for annotated positions compared to
unannotated positions. However, the substantial overlap between distributions indicates
that distinguishing annotated from unannotated regions will be non-trivial.
Figure 3.2: Distribution of the attention signal values from 100 sequences across the 33 layers of the
model. The attention heads within each layer as well as the layer-wise matrices were aggregated using
the mean. The distribution of the attention signal changes across layers, with a dip in signal strength
approximately one-third into the network depth. There is a trend, with the median in the boxplot being
consistently higher for annotated positions.
Chapter 3. Results
27
==PAGE:28==
DTU
J. B. Overgaard
Additionally, we observe that the attention signal changes with respect to the residue’s
relative position within the sequence. The magnitude of the signal tends to be low at
the beginning, increase toward the middle, and decrease again toward the end, often
forming a bridge-like pattern along the sequence. This trend is illustrated in Figure 3.3,
using layer 11 as an example. Appendix F presents the same pattern across all layers.
Figure 3.3: The relationship be-
tween the relative position of
an amino acid within the se-
quence and its attention signal
for layer 11 from 100 sequences.
The bridge pattern observed
here also appears in other lay-
ers, highlighting a potential po-
sition bias in the model’s atten-
tion.
It is difficult to determine whether the pattern observed in Figure 3.3 reflects biolog-
ically meaningful signals or whether the attention is instead influenced by positional
bias. Transformer models, including ESM-2, incorporate positional encodings to inform
the model of token positions [11, 12]. Studies have shown that LLMs sometimes pri-
oritize content based on its position, regardless of its actual relevance. Notably, Hsieh
et al. (2024) [42] found that LLMs based on decoder-only Transformer architectures
assign high attention to tokens at the beginning and end of the input. This result in a
characteristic U-shaped attention pattern even when the input order was randomized.
Interestingly, the attention signals from our analysis show the opposite behavior but
with a similar symmetry. However, it is plausible that residues in the middle of a protein
sequence are more conserved due to a higher number of structural contacts, making
them more likely to be attended to in order to predict masked tokens during training.
3.1.2 Recapturing Annotations from High Attention Signal Regions
From Figure 3.2, it became clear that identifying peaks in the attention signal required
investigation of the signal from individual layers. PLMs are known to capture short-range
dependencies in the early layers while the later layers encode global information [14].
28
Chapter 3. Results
==PAGE:29==
J. B. Overgaard
DTU
This motivated the interest in identifying which layers capture which type of annotation
and to what extent to potentially select a subset of informative layers. The inconsistency
in the magnitude of the attention signal across layers indicated that normalization of the
signal was necessary if we wanted to find a common threshold for extracting annotated
positions. To also control for the potentially position- and sequence-specific biases (such
as amino acid composition), the attention signal of the 100 sequences was converted
into z-scores based on corresponding scrambled versions and smoothed as described in
Section 2.2.2.
Figure 3.4 shows the proportion of positions recovered for different annotation types by
selecting those with a z-score above 2. According to the definition in equation 2.1, these
positions lie more than two standard deviations away from the mean of the attention
signal distribution estimated from the scrambled sequences. This is a common threshold
for considering a data point significantly different from the mean. It is important to keep
in mind that not all annotation types are well represented among the 100 sequences,
so less emphasis should be placed on those with low abundance. The bars on the left
indicate the total number of positions for each annotation type in the subset, along with
the number of sequences they originate from, shown in red.
In Figure 3.4A, attention heads within each layer, as well as the columns of the layer-wise
matrices, were aggregated by averaging the attention scores. Many sites are recovered in
layer 10-20, 26, and layer 29-33, but the results are based on a relatively small number
of positions for the active sites and additional sites. For domains, where a clear signal is
expected due to their relative conservation, the layers with more than 50% of positions
recovered show a pattern similar to that of unannotated positions. Notably, we observe
that the proportion of detected domain positions is highest in the mid-layers. This is
somewhat unexpected, as Vig et al. (2020) [14] show that the attention in deeper layers
is more aligned with structural features. Thus, we would have thought the last layers to
contribute more prominently to recapturing of domains.
With a special interest in IDRs covered by the annotation type Region of interest, the
poor recovery of this type of annotated positions raised concerns about the peak finding
approach. In addition, signal peptides are nearly impossible to recover. This difficulty
persists in different aggregation strategies, as seen from Figure 3.4B, where heads and
columns are aggregated using the 90th percentile. The remaining results can be found in
Appendix E. Lowering the z-score threshold increased the number of recovered positions
Chapter 3. Results
29
==PAGE:30==
DTU
J. B. Overgaard
(A)
(B)
Figure 3.4: The proportion of detected positions (z-score > 2) for the different annotation types including
unannotated positions. Amino acid modification is abbreviated AAM, and molecule processing is MP. Bars
show the frequency of positions for the different annotation types. The number in red states the number
of sequences they originate from. (A) The attention heads within each layer as well as the layer-wise
matrices were aggregated using the mean value. (B) The attention heads within each layer and the layer-
wise matrices were aggregated using the 90th percentile.
30
Chapter 3. Results
==PAGE:31==
J. B. Overgaard
DTU
overall, but this also resulted in a higher inclusion of unannotated positions, thereby
reducing specificity. To better understand why the peak finding of the attention signal
did not yield satisfactory results, we examined different protein sequences and their nor-
malized and smoothed attention signals, as shown for a selected sequence in Figure 3.5.
The example highlights several issues when considering the magnitude of the attention
signal for detection of annotated regions and sites.
Figure 3.5: The normalized and smoothed attention signal for a protein sequence (UniProt accession:
Q8TDD2) alongside the sequence annotations. The attention heads within each layer as well as the layer-
wise matrices were aggregated using the mean values. The attention signal is noisy, and there is no clear
continuous peak for annotated regions. For the zinc-finger regions (purple), some signals even appear to
consistently point in the negative direction.
Chapter 3. Results
31
==PAGE:32==
DTU
J. B. Overgaard
First, the attention signal remains highly noisy after normalization and smoothing. Sec-
ond, there is a noticeable dip in the attention signal around the zinc-finger regions
(position 294-376), which is particularly evident in the signals from the later layers.
This suggests the need to consider the combined effect across multiple layers, rather
than relying solely on isolated high fluctuations in attention signals within individual
layers. Together, these observations provided the rationale for training machine learning
models aimed at detecting annotated regions, which is the focus of the second part of
the analysis.
3.2 Model Performance for Classification of Sequence Positions
As it can be seen from the example in Figure 3.5, both simple thresholding of the atten-
tion signal values and more sophisticated models to annotate sequences are challenged
by the fact that many annotation types overlap. To address this, separate XGBoost mod-
els were trained to predict annotated positions for individual annotation types to allow
positions to take part in several regions.
3.2.1 Model Performance Across Data Types for Selected Annotation Types
We chose to simplify the problem and trained the XGBoost models on the unnormalized
but smoothed attention-based features combined with information about the relative
position. To determine the most effective aggregation strategy, we analyzed model per-
formance across all four combinations of head and column aggregation methods, using
the same 100 sequences as in the previous section. First, sequences were split into a
training and a test set. Annotation types were selected for modeling if the number of an-
notated positions exceeded 100 in both the training and the test set to ensure sufficient
representation of the annotation type for model training and evaluation. This resulted in
six XGBoost classifiers, trained on positions of the following annotation types: Binding
site, Disulfide bond, Domain, Region of interest, Topological domain, and Transmembrane
region. The ratio of annotated and unannotated positions was modified prior to training
models for binding sites, disulfide bonds and transmembrane regions using over- and
undersampling as described in Section 2.3.2. Hyperparameters were optimized via a
full grid search of the grid in Table 2.1 using three-fold grouped cross-validation on the
training data (see Section 2.3.1).
32
Chapter 3. Results
==PAGE:33==
J. B. Overgaard
DTU
Figure 3.6:
Model
performance for sep-
arate XGBoost mod-
els trained to predict
annotated positions
from different sets of
attention-based fea-
tures. Each model fo-
cus on a specific an-
notation type.
Figure 3.6 reports the precision and recall of the best-performing model for each annota-
tion type on the test set across the four different aggregation strategies for summarizing
attention scores. Overall, no single aggregation method consistently outperforms the
others across annotation types. All models perform poorly on binding site prediction.
For detecting disulfide bonds, aggregating heads and columns using the 90th percentile
yields the highest recall, but the precision is lower than 0.5. In contrast, 90th percentile-
based aggregation improves both precision and recall for domains and shows a similar
trend for regions of interest. However, this pattern changes entirely for predicting topo-
logical domains. For models trained on transmembrane regions, aggregation of heads
using the 90th percentile and columns using the mean performs the worst, while the
other methods show comparable performance. Based on these results, we chose to pri-
oritize performance in predicting positions from domains, regions of interest (including
IDRs), and transmembrane regions when selecting the final aggregation strategy. These
annotation types are expected to be more well-defined compared to disulfide bonds and
topological domains. This led to the choice of using the 90th percentile when aggregating
heads for a larger set of sequences.
Chapter 3. Results
33
==PAGE:34==
DTU
J. B. Overgaard
3.2.2 Model Performance for All Annotation Types
We aimed to train a model for each annotation type. A total of 1,000 sequences were
considered resulting in training datasets containing between 53 and 77,219 annotated
positions, depending on the annotation. To provide richer input to the models, attention-
based features were derived by first aggregating heads using the 90th percentile, fol-
lowed by computing five quantiles (0.1, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, 0.9) for each column. That is,
each position was represented by features from 33 layers · 5 quantiles, plus its relative
position, yielding a total of 166 features.
With more models and larger datasets, hyperparameter tuning was performed from
a random selection of parameters within the defined grid (see Table 2.1) to reduce
runtime. A total of 1,094 combinations were tested, covering approximately 50% of
the parameter space with 2,187 possible combinations. The parameters of the best
performing models as well as the number of positions partitioning in training and test
are reported in Appendix G. The model performance on the test set can be seen in
Figure 3.7. For most of the models, the class imbalance was severe enough to apply over-
and undersampling for the training data. Models trained with these adjustments are
indicated with an asterisk (*) in the figure.
Among the 19 classification models, only 10 achieved a recall greater than 0.5, indicating
they were able to correctly identify more than 50% of the annotated positions. Of these,
only 7 also reached a precision above 50%. Especially, precision tends to be low for
sites and amino acid modifications (AAMs), with the exception of disulfide bonds, even
when the model attains relatively high recall. This may be explained by the nature of
these annotation types, which are defined at the level of individual residues. As a result,
smoothing the attention signal around annotated positions may cause the signal to
expand into neighboring regions, increasing the likelihood of false positive predictions.
The model predicting signal peptides is the best-performing one, achieving a recall of
0.94 and a precision of 0.85. However, this strong performance is not believed to result
solely from informative attention signals. This model is expected to benefit significantly
from the relative position information, as signal peptides are always localized at the
N-terminal of proteins [31]. Therefore, future work could explore the combination of
attention scores with additional positional features, such as solvent accessibility, which
can be predicted from tools such as NetSurfP [25]. This approach may be especially ben-
34
Chapter 3. Results
==PAGE:35==
J. B. Overgaard
DTU
Figure 3.7: Model performance for XGBoost models trained on all annotation types. Abbreviations as
previously defined: AAM (amino acid modification), MP (molecule processing). The red line highlight a
precision and recall above 0.5. An asterisk (*) indicates weather the class imbalance was severe enough
to apply over- and undersampling for the training data.
eficial for improving model performance on AAMs and sites, where residue accessibility
is thought to be an important factor. For example, phosphorylated residues have shown
to be more accessible than their non-phosphorylated counterparts [43].
The model training and evaluation were based on sorted positions to encourage the
models to distinguish between annotated positions of a given annotation type and unan-
notated positions (see Section 2.3.1). However, to predict annotated regions in practice,
the models should be applied to entire sequences. Table 3.1 compares the number of pre-
dicted regions after running all 19 models on the 1,000 sequences. The models predict
a total of 24,369 regions – more than twice the 10,642 known annotated regions within
these sequences. Despite this, the models annotate only about 10.5% more distinct po-
sitions than the true number of annotated positions. This suggests that the XGBoost
models tend to produce many short predicted regions, which is also reflected in the
shorter average length of predicted regions compared to the true regions.
Chapter 3. Results
35
==PAGE:36==
DTU
J. B. Overgaard
Table 3.1: Comparison of true versus predicted annotated regions across 1,000 sequences. The total
number of predicted regions is more than double the number of true regions, while the number of distinct
predicted positions is only slightly higher. Together with shorter average predicted region length, this
indicates that the models tend to generate many short predicted regions.
Number of regions
Number of (distinct)
positions
Average region
length [aa]
True Regions
10,642
247,345
29.9
Predicted Regions
24,369
273,275
23.5
3.3 Evaluating Clustering of Region Embeddings
As stated earlier, the purpose of training a model for each annotation type was to al-
low for overlapping annotations. Additionally, this setup provided insights into which
annotation types were more or less challenging to predict. Afterwards, we were not in-
terested in which model the predicted regions originated from, as we wanted to use the
region embeddings to reveal their true identity. For example, some annotations such as
intramembrane regions and transmembrane regions are similar in their biology and may
also exhibit similar attention signals. Thus, we imagined a model trained on one annota-
tion type may successfully capture features of another. By analyzing the embeddings, we
might still be able to distinguish between them in the end. Second, the categories pro-
vided by UniProt represent broad groupings of annotations. To actually obtain valuable
biological information about a sequence, we need to annotate at a much deeper level.
Fine-grained clustering of region embeddings would allow for more detailed annotation.
3.3.1 Annotation-Type Driven Clustering of True Regions
To explore whether region embeddings are in fact useful for annotating predicted re-
gions, we first evaluated if the known annotated regions from the 1,000 sequences
clustered according to annotation type. The per-region representations were obtained by
average pooling of the corresponding per-residue embeddings. After scaling the region
embeddings, we computed 50 principal components (PCs), of which 40 accounted for
over 90% of the variance (see Figure 3.8A). These 40 PCs were selected for clustering
of regions from a constructed SNN graph as described in Section 2.4.2. Clustering res-
olution was optimized by maximizing the ARI considering the true annotation type as
reference cluster label (see Figure 3.8B).
36
Chapter 3. Results
==PAGE:37==
J. B. Overgaard
DTU
(A)
(B)
(C)
(D)
Figure 3.8: Combined results from clustering of the true region embeddings. (A) Cumulative explained
variance of the 50 generated PCs. 40 are selected with an explained variance above 90%. (B) The ARI
from different resolutions. The optimal ARI is obtained from a resolution of 0.5. (C) UMAP of the region
embeddings after dimensionality reduction colored by their true annotation type. (D) UMAP showing
regions and sites colored by their assigned annotation type after clustering.
The optimal resolution of 0.5 yielded 26 distinct clusters. Figure 3.8C presents a UMAP
visualization of the regions, colored by their true annotation types. Some annotation
types form well-defined groups, suggesting that they can be well-annotated based on
the ESM-2 embeddings. Other types appear more intermixed. However, given that an-
notation types often overlap, it is expected that their aggregated embeddings may also
be similar, leading them to be close in the PCA space. For example, domains and disul-
fide bonds are blended in the UMAP projection. This is not surprising, as domains are
stable structural units, and many disulfide bonds are likely to occur within these regions.
Figure 3.8D shows the assigned annotation type when labeling defined clusters based
on the most prevalent annotation type. Annotating regions based on the cluster label
result in 66.4% of the true regions being correctly annotated. It should be noted that
although only 11 of the 19 annotation types are represented among the cluster labels,
the remaining 8 annotation types account for just 6.4% of all regions. These types are
Chapter 3. Results
37
==PAGE:38==
DTU
J. B. Overgaard
found among the nine least abundant annotation types across the 1,000 sequences in
the working dataset. Therefore, the absence of these annotation types in the cluster
labels cannot explain why approximately one-third of the regions got misclassified. The
complete frequency distribution of annotation types is provided in Appendix H.
To find out when regions are uncorrectly labeled, we looked into the accuracy per an-
notation type shown in Figure 3.9. The red bars represent the baseline accuracy for
individual annotation type, calculated as the median accuracy across 11 random permu-
tations of the true annotation labels. The unrepresented annotation types naturally have
an accuracy of zero. For annotation types with non-zero accuracy, the observed accuracy
is substantially higher than the baseline. This indicates that the clustering of regions is
not due to random chance, but instead reflect that there are meaningful patterns in the
region embeddings that differ across annotation types, which can be captured by the
PCs.
Figure 3.9 suggests that the overall low accuracy may stem from difficulties in cluster-
ing certain annotation types, particularly topological domains, and to a lesser extent,
domains and regions of interest. Figure 3.10 presents the confusion matrix based on
Figure 3.9: The accuracy after annotating regions based on cluster labels. The red bars are the baseline
accuracies found from random permutations of the true annotation type labels. Of the 19 annotation
types, 8 were not represented after labeling the clusters, which results in an accuracy of 0.
38
Chapter 3. Results
==PAGE:39==
J. B. Overgaard
DTU
Figure 3.10: Confusion matrix comparing true region annotations with labels assigned after clustering of
region embeddings. Many misclassifications occur between biologically related annotation types, suggest-
ing that although exact classification may be limited, the embedding space captures underlying similarities
between functionally or structurally related regions.
the assigning cluster-derived labels to regions. It becomes evident that many topological
domains and domains are frequently annotated as disulfide bonds. This highlights a
fundamental issue with including this annotation type in the study. One could argue that
disulfide bonds are structural features and might have been excluded from the project,
like α-helices and β-strands (see Section 2.1.1). However, the main problem is thought
to be in how UniProt annotates disulfide bonds. Rather than indicating the specific cys-
teine pair, the annotation spans the entire region between the cysteines, which likely
confuses the clustering because the regions can resemble a large part of the domains
and topological domains.
Chapter 3. Results
39
==PAGE:40==
DTU
J. B. Overgaard
Though the rare annotation types were not correctly annotated as they were not repre-
sented among the cluster labels, the regions appear to be assigned to related types. For
instance, lipid moiety-binding regions were often grouped as binding sites, which makes
sense given that lipid modifications can facilitate protein–protein interactions [44]. Sim-
ilarly, transit peptides are often classified as signal peptides. Both are N-terminal se-
quences and may exhibit similar patterns in their embeddings, making them difficult to
distinguish. Finally, intramembrane regions are commonly predicted as transmembrane
regions. Both reside within the membrane, and the differences in their features may
be minimal and not retained in the dimensionality reduction. Thus, the embeddings
for these less frequent annotation types still capture meaningful underlying biological
features.
3.3.2 Cluster Optimization on Domain Subtypes with Predicted Regions
The clustering results based on true region embeddings indicated that a higher number
of clusters may be necessary to cover more annotation types. Beyond this, the goal was
also to identify subtypes within annotation types, especially for less deeply annotated
categories. To guide the choice of a higher clustering resolution, we used domain anno-
tations as a reference, since they are among the most well-defined and fine-grained (see
Section 1.1.1). By selecting a resolution that produces clean, distinct clusters for domain
subtypes, we hoped to uncover meaningful substructure in other, less-characterized an-
notation types. In addition, we included the embeddings of predicted regions, as the
final goal was not just to detect but also correctly identify predicted annotated positions.
Given that many of the XGBoost models exhibited low precision, the predicted region
embeddings from the 1,000 sequences were projected onto the PCA space derived from
the true region embeddings as described in Section 2.4.2. This ensures a biologically
grounded lower-dimensional representation and helps prevent the introduction of vari-
ability from unreliable predictions. The combined dataset was clustered by optimizing
the resolution based on 30 domain subtypes, each represented by at least five instances.
This process resulted in an optimal ARI of 0.23 for a resolution of 8, producing a total
of 142 distinct clusters.
The domain subtype regions used for clustering optimization are distributed across 40
clusters, as seen in Figure 3.11. Most subtypes are spread across multiple clusters, with
the exception of the 14 KRAB domains, which are all contained within cluster 42. As
40
Chapter 3. Results
==PAGE:41==
J. B. Overgaard
DTU
shown by Vitting-Seerup (2023) [45], most human protein domains exist in multiple
variants, referred to as domain isoforms, which are expected to exhibit functional dif-
ferences. This raises the exciting possibility that the fine-grained clustering may have
captured such isoform-level distinctions, though further study is needed to confirm it.
Figure 3.11: Heatmap showing the distribution of domain subtypes across the 40 clusters that contained
at least one domain subtype. While all KRAB domains are grouped within a single cluster, the remaining
subtypes are found across several different clusters. This spread may reflect both diversity among domain
subtypes due to the presence of domains isoforms and the presence of sequence-specific patterns captured
by the embeddings.
Chapter 3. Results
41
==PAGE:42==
DTU
J. B. Overgaard
We also observe that many domain subtypes appear in pairs or groups, as indicated
by horizontal bands in the figure. These bands seem to appear for proteins that are
closely related, e.g, the Cadherins and the Ig-like C2-type domains. However, multiple
bands can sometimes be found within the same cluster, as is the case for cluster 84.
Upon closer inspection, the domain subtypes in this cluster all originated from the same
sequence. This suggests that clustering may have grouped regions based not only on
subtype similarity but also on their sequence of origin. This would not be surprising,
as the region embeddings are generated from the per-residue embeddings which are
exactly known to capture the context of the entire protein.
Figure 3.12 shows the ARI when comparing the clustering results for domains to both
domain subtype labels and sequence accession. As clustering resolution increases, the
ARI with respect to sequence origin increases, while the ARI for domain subtypes in
general declines after the peak at resolution 8. This indicates that the clustering is not
purely subtype-driven but also captures sequence-specific patterns. It might be that a
more optimal resolution would be lower, for instance, at resolution 5.5, where there is a
larger gap between the curves but still a high ARI for domain subtype. This resolution
results in 32 clusters closer to the actual number of investigated subtypes of 30.
Figure 3.12: ARI across cluster-
ing resolutions, comparing clus-
ter labels with domain subtypes
and sequence accession for the
domain regions. The grey line
indicates the optimal clustering
resolution, defined as the reso-
lution that maximizes ARI with
respect to domain subtypes.
3.3.3 Assessing Predicted Annotations
To evaluate the finer clustering at resolution 8, we assigned cluster labels based on the
most prevalent annotation type within each cluster as before. In 3 out of the 142 clusters,
there was a tie. In these cases, the labels Modified residue, Region of interest and Domain
was prioritized over Topological domain and Disulfide bond.
42
Chapter 3. Results
==PAGE:43==
J. B. Overgaard
DTU
Figure 3.13: Venn diagram comparing the predicted
set of annotated positions and the true set. Regions
are annoated based on the clustering results opti-
mized on domain subtypes.
With finer clustering at resolution 8, the percentage of the known annotated regions
assigned with the correct annotation type increased from 66.4% to 71.2%. In total,
14 annotation types are present, including 3 more compared with the clustering using
resolution 0.5. The accuracy per annotations type and the confusion matrix can be found
in Appendix I.
Figure 3.13 shows the number of positions shared between the set of predicted positions
and the true annotated positions, accounting for the assigned annotation types. Though
we find that 86.2% of the predicted positions are truly annotated, only 53.9% get the cor-
rect annotation after clustering of the regions. Even when considering only those regions
identified by the models exceeding a recall above 0.5, 57.4% of these positions are cor-
rectly labeled. This low number of correctly annotated position is rather disappointing
and likely roots back to the predicted regions being fragmented, which propagates into
embeddings. However, even the position-wise accuracy of the true regions is only 69.1%.
That means, we need to bear in mind that the cluster-based annotation performed poorly
even for truly annotated regions. Moreover, the percentage of correctly labeled positions
can be heavily penalized by the misclassification of large regions. Optimally, predicted
regions should be evaluated at the region level instead.
3.3.4 Characterization of IDR Clusters
As described in Section 1.1.1, the widespread occurrence and functional importance
of IDRs highlight the need for deeper and biologically meaningful annotation of these
regions. Therefore, we investigated IDR clusters to determine whether the clustering
resolution optimized for domain subtypes also extended to separating distinct IDR char-
acteristics. We focused exclusively on true IDR regions annotated from clusters labeled
Chapter 3. Results
43
==PAGE:44==
DTU
J. B. Overgaard
as Regions of interest that contained more than 10 IDR members.
Since the physicochemical properties encoded in IDR sequences can influence the be-
havior of these regions, our first step was to investigate whether the IDR clusters exhibit
unique amino acid composition patterns. Figure 3.14 displays the proportion of amino
acids for IDRs included in the 23 IDR clusters. The exact proportions are reported for
the top three most frequent amino acids within each cluster. We observe that many IDR
clusters in general contain a large proportion of serine (S) residues, which goes well
in hand with the fact that many IDRs often undergo PTMs, such as phosphorylation
[17]. Many kinases targeting serine (and threonine (T)) residues have shown to have
consensus motifs often including proline residues [46]. Interestingly, we also see a large
proportion of proline (P) residues for serine rich clusters. Glycine (G) is also abundant
in some of the same clusters. Together with proline, glycine is known to promote more
expanded chain conformations [17].
To gain insight into the potential biological functions of the IDRs, we compared IDRs
from the selected clusters with those in the DisProt database that are associated with GO
Figure 3.14: Amino acid composition of IDR sequences across IDR clusters. The exact proportions of
the three most abundant amino acids are reported for each cluster. Notably, Proline and Serine appear
frequently, consistent with previous findings in the literature.
44
Chapter 3. Results
==PAGE:45==
J. B. Overgaard
DTU
terms. In total, six DisProt-annotated IDRs were found across five clusters. The results
are summarized in Figure 3.15, which lists the corresponding GO terms. Although the
small number of matched IDRs limits our ability to draw definitive conclusions about the
biological characteristics of each cluster, we allow ourselves to highlight some interesting
associations between the GO terms and the amino acid compositions of their respective
clusters in Figure 3.14.
Cluster 1 includes DisProt IDRs associated with RNA binding. Together, these IDRs exhibit
a high proportion of positively charged residues, which is prefered for protein–RNA
interactions [47]. Notably, lysine (K) makes up 12% of the amino acids in sequences
from this cluster. Interestingly, lysine is found to be enriched in disordered regions of
proteins found in cytosolic protein/RNA granules [48]. The DisProt IDRs in this cluster
are annotated as being located within intracellular membraneless organelles, which can
include such biomolecular condensates.
Cluster 14 shows a high proportion of serine residues, which aligns well with the DisProt
IDR in this cluster being associated with phosphatase interaction. Cluster 21 contains
Figure 3.15: Clusters including at least one DisProt IDR reported from the number in parenthesis. For
each cluster, the GO terms associated with the IDR(s) are listed alongside the overall ratio between polar
and non-polar amino acids within the cluster. The three aspects of GO terms are molecular function (MF),
biological process (BP) and cellular component (CC).
Chapter 3. Results
45
==PAGE:46==
DTU
J. B. Overgaard
a DisProt IDR annotated with GO terms related to DNA binding. Cluster 21 exhibits a
similar amino acid composition pattern to cluster 14, which could be consistent with
phosphorylation-regulated transcription factors. Thus, it would be interesting to inves-
tigate whether IDRs in this cluster originate from transcription factors, which often
contain disordered regions [17].
Finally, cluster 13 is characterized by a high proportion of negatively charged residues
in its IDRs, which sets it apart from the other clusters. However, it is difficult to relate
this feature to the broad GO terms associated with the DisProt representative. The same
issue also applies to Cluster 10.
To improve functional interpretation of the clusters, GO enrichment analysis was per-
formed based on the genes represented among the IDRs in each of the five clusters.
Although some GO terms showed enrichment, the statistical support was modest, and
the number of contributing genes relatively small. Therefore, the results will not be
discuss in detail, as a more thorough interpretation is required. For the sake of curiosity,
the findings are included in Appendix J.
46
Chapter 3. Results
==PAGE:47==
J. B. Overgaard
DTU
4
|
Discussion
4.1 The Cost of Summarizing Attention Scores
In this project, attention scores were aggregated to reduce the data size per sequence.
Otherwise, the 650 million parameter ESM-2 model generates 20 heads · 33 layers =
660 attention matrices per sequence with a dimension of [472 × 472] on average for
the human proteome after cropping sequences to the input token limit. Thus, these steps
were necessary to enable downstream analysis within the scope of this study. However,
the approach implies that attention heads within the same layer focus on similar features,
enabling meaningful biological signals to be captured through a common, aggregated
layer representation. Findings from Vig et al. [14] show that the proportion of attention
focused on specific features varies both across layers and between individual heads in
five PLMs. This suggests that we are potentially washing out strong head-specific signals
when aggregating attention heads with the mean. On the other hand, we risk ignoring
weaker but biologically meaningful signals that appear consistently across many heads
when using the 90th percentile to summarize the 20 heads per layer. Future work should
therefore utilize attention scores at the level of individual heads.
In addition, summarizing attention matrices using the column-wise mean assumes that
biologically relevant positions are attended to by a broad range of other residues in
the sequence. Consequently, we risk overlooking strongly interacting amino acid pairs,
as their signal might have been diluted in the averaging process. To mitigate this, we
explored the effect of using the 90th percentile to emphasize high-attention signals and
further incorporated multiple quantiles in Section 3.2.2 to avoid biasing the analysis to-
ward isolated strong dependencies. This approach allowed us to obtain a more detailed
characterization of the distribution of the layer-wise attention scores across columns,
rather than relying on a single summary statistic. Nevertheless, the performance of the
Chapter 4. Discussion
47
==PAGE:48==
DTU
J. B. Overgaard
XGBoost models trained on attention-based features remained limited (see Figure 3.7).
While alternative summarization strategies may be explored, there could be a funda-
mental issue in collapsing the 2D attention matrices into 1D signals, as this discards
important relational information between residues. One alternative approach could be
to interpret the attention matrices as adjacency matrices representing weighted, directed
graphs, where nodes represent residues and edge weights are the attention scores. In
this context, so-called centrality measures from graph theory can provide per-node (i.e.,
per-residue) scores that reflect different aspects of each node’s importance within the
attention graph. For example, degree centrality in weighted graphs quantifies the node
strength based on how many other nodes it connects to and to which degree, here
defined by the pairwise attention scores [49].
4.2 Challenges in Classifying Sequence Positions
While the heavy aggregation strategy likely reduced the informativeness of the atten-
tion signal, the downstream processing and model training setup also leave room for
improvement.
It could be argued that the Gaussian smoothing may have been too weak, contributing
to the prediction of fragmented regions, as reflected in Table 3.1. With a window size of
11 and a sigma of 1, the center of the Gaussian kernel carries a weight of approximately
0.4, indicating that the smoothing effect on individual residues was relatively limited.
Smoothing with a larger window or a higher sigma value could potentially have produced
more consistent patterns in the attention signal, making it easier for the model to learn
relevant features that generalize to the whole region. However, there is a trade-off.
Excessive smoothing may obscure local peaks, which is a concern given that we already
observed low precision for predicting annotated sites, as discussed in Section 3.2.2.
Another factor likely affecting model performance was the limited number of posi-
tions available for certain annotation types compared to unannotated positions (see
Appendix G). To address this, we attempted to generate synthetic annotated positions
using SMOTE, as described in Section 2.3.2. However, we only considered the 5 nearest
neighbors, and those neighbors were likely to be positions of the same sequence when
smoothing the signal. Thus, the oversampling might not have sufficiently expanded the
diversity of the attention feature space.
48
Chapter 4. Discussion
==PAGE:49==
J. B. Overgaard
DTU
Moreover, there was a pronounced imbalance when it came to the proportion of positions
being annotated within each sequence. For example, more than 70% of the positions
in the sequence shown in Figure 3.5 are annotated. Appendix K shows the distribution
of the proportion of annotated positions per sequence. The distribution is bimodal with
two distinct peaks close to 0 and 1. This implies that a subset of sequences may account
for the majority of annotated positions, while another group of sequences covers the
unannotated positions. It turns out that among the 1,000 sequences, 170 sequences
account for 50% of the unannotated positions, while less than 500 cover 90% of them.
This concern is further supported by previous studies showing that certain proteins in
the human proteome have been more experimentally studied and better annotated than
others [50]. Such bias raises the critical question of whether most unannotated positions
genuinely lack functional relevance or are simply a consequence of these proteins being
understudied.
As a result, XGBoost models may have learned to distinguish between sequences that
are heavily versus sparsely annotated, rather than accurately separating annotated from
unannotated positions within the same sequence. Consequently, training the classifica-
tion models using only positions from a specific annotation type alongside unannotated
positions may not have been the most effective strategy. Instead, it might have been
more effective to frame the task as distinguishing a given annotation type from all other
positions – including both unannotated regions and regions annotated with different
types. This approach also aligns with how the models were applied since they were used
to predict annotated positions within full protein sequences. The reason for not doing
so was that regions predicted as annotated could belong to annotation types different
from those the model was originally trained to recognize. These regions could then be
identified later by clustering their region embeddings. However, this requires that the
model actually predicts separated regions. If overlapping regions are captured from one
model, we will have a single region of mixed annotation types propagating into the
region embeddings.
In general, it might have been beneficial to use models that account for the sequential
nature of protein sequences, such as convolutional neural networks (CNNs). In addition,
these models could naturally help address the challenges associated with smoothing the
attention signals, as previously discussed.
Chapter 4. Discussion
49
==PAGE:50==
DTU
J. B. Overgaard
4.3 Opportunities Enabled by Region Embeddings
We observed strong potential in clustering region embeddings to uncover biologically
meaningful groupings. An analysis of the assigned region labels suggested that some
misclassifications may stem from certain annotation types being very rare. Thus, they do
not appear among the cluster labels when identifying clusters from the most frequently
occurring annotation type within each cluster. However, this limitation may be mitigated
when considering the full proteome.
Though not investigated here, the embedding space might be used to filter predicted
regions by incorporating reference unannotated or shuffled regions. We hypothesize that
these regions would form diffuse clusters in the embedding space, acting as "garbage
bins" to capture falsely predicted and biologically irrelevant regions.
As discussed by Rogers et al. (2020) [51], the representations of the same word in an
LLM depend on its position within the sentence it occurs, which is not always desirable.
Similarly, we found that region embeddings cause different domain subtypes to cluster
together when originating from the same protein sequence (see Figure 3.11). Given that
protein domains are generally considered to function independently of their broader
sequence context, the global influences inherent to the attention mechanism design may
not always be optimal for distinguishing domain subtypes.
In contrast, IDRs are inherently context-dependent, both in terms of their broader se-
quence environment and the local residues within the IDR itself, as described in Section
1.1.1. As highlighted by Holehouse et al. [17], the function of an IDR can be modified or
even completely redefined through mechanisms such as alternative splicing. Therefore,
the contextualized region embeddings could be particularly valuable for capturing the
functional variability of IDRs across different protein isoforms.
Although our biological interpretation of the IDR clusters was limited, we believe the
analysis can be easily strengthened by including a broader set of IDRs. For instance,
when cropping sequences from the C-terminal end, approximately 13% of annotated
IDRs were removed across the 1,000 analyzed sequences. Expanding the analysis to
include full-length sequences from the entire proteome would likely increase the number
of DisProt-matching IDRs and yield larger gene sets, thereby enabling a more robust GO
enrichment analysis.
50
Chapter 4. Discussion
==PAGE:51==
J. B. Overgaard
DTU
5
|
Conclusion
This thesis aimed to investigate the potential of using both embeddings and attention
scores from ESM-2 to annotate protein sequences. By creating attention-based features,
we trained XGBoost models to predict annotated positions and demonstrated that atten-
tion signals encode information useful for identifying different components of a protein
sequence. Though performance varied across models designed to detect positions of a
specific annotation type, we hypothesize that many false positives for single-residue an-
notations arise from smoothing of the attention signal. In particular, future work should
consider individual attention heads rather than relying solely on aggregated scores.
Region-level embeddings enabled clustering of known annotated regions, reflecting both
differences and meaningful similarities between annotation types and subtypes. The
predicted regions were often fragmented, likely compromising the region embeddings.
As a consequence, the number of accurately annotated positions was not fully satisfactory.
Additionally, the evaluation was limited by the use of broad and sometimes ambiguous
annotation labels, as well as by a position-based rather than a region-based evaluation
strategy.
Despite these challenges, fine-grained clustering of region embeddings highlighted their
promise for capturing nuanced distinctions, such as domain isoforms. In addition, IDR
clusters exhibited distinct amino acid compositions that aligned with the expected pro-
files of their representative IDRs from the DisProt database. These findings highlight the
exciting opportunity of using PLMs to link IDR sequences to molecular function.
In summary, this project demonstrates that attention scores hold promise for enabling
universal protein sequence annotation, while region embeddings can uncover subtypes
in poorly characterized regions.
Chapter 5. Conclusion
51
==PAGE:52==
DTU
J. B. Overgaard
6
|
Future Perspectives
Given the challenges encountered in this project, it may be necessary to take a step
back and rethink the overall strategy for sequence annotation using PLMs. This chapter
therefore presents three directions that represent a greater departure from the existing
approach than those proposed in earlier discussions.
6.1 Emerging Models and Fine-Tuning Strategies
The field of PLMs is rapidly evolving, and the recent release of ESM Cambrian (ESM-C)
promises improvements over earlier models. ESM-C achieves performance comparable
to the ESM-2 model used in this project, while significantly reducing memory usage and
computational resources. Furthermore, ESM-C is trained on proteins with a length of
2048 tokens, doubling the maximum input protein length of ESM-2 [52]. At the time
of writing, no official paper has detailed the architectural changes in ESM-C, making it
difficult to assess its exact advantages. However, future work should leverage the latest
state-of-the-art model.
As discussed by Ding et al. (2024) [53], PLMs are biased toward certain species. In our
case, it could in fact be desirable to direct the model toward human-specific proteins
when focusing solely on human biology. Thus, it should be explored whether fine-tuning
of the model could improve sequence annotation as it has been observed for a variety of
supervised prediction tasks using PLMs [54].
The attention signals were highly noisy (see Figure 3.5), suggesting that the attention
scores themselves also contain considerable noise. One interesting approach to mitigate
this issue is proposed by Ye et al. (2025) [55], who introduces a novel Transformer
architecture known as the Differential Transformer. This model computes two sepa-
52
Chapter 6. Future Perspectives
==PAGE:53==
J. B. Overgaard
DTU
rate attention matrices per head: a primary attention matrix and a secondary matrix
designed to capture noise. The final attention scores are derived by subtracting the noise-
canceling matrix from the primary matrix. This forces the model to prioritize the most
critical context to predict masked tokens. As a result, the attention matrices become
more sparse and potentially more interpretable. While implementing such architectural
changes for PLMs would require a dedicated study in itself, it may still be valuable to
follow developments in this area for inspiration on denoising attention scores.
6.2 Using Attention Scores for Graph Representation of Proteins
As discussed in Section 4.1, aggregating attention score matrices compromises the valu-
able residue-residue interaction information they provide. Therefore, we suggested rep-
resenting proteins as graphs using attention scores as edge weights. While current
graph-based protein annotation approaches such as DeepFRI [56] typically encode spa-
tial proximity between residues via graph edges, attention scores may capture not only
physical interactions but also more abstract, yet still functional relevant, dependencies
between residues. Inspired by the clustering of region embeddings using the Louvain al-
gorithm, the attention graph could be analyzed using graph-based community detection
methods to identify regions of mechanistic importance. However, unlike conventional
clustering techniques, these methods should support overlapping communities, which is
an active area of research in graph theory [57, 58]. The idea is illustrated in Figure 6.1,
along with a proposed analysis for evaluating the optimal PLM layers and method for
constructing region embeddings. This is further elaborated in the following section.
6.3 Feature Engineering of Embeddings
This project relied on the common assumption that embeddings from the final PLM layer
would be the most informative. However, Skeane et al. (2025) [59] show that mid-depth
embeddings can outperform the last layer in downstream tasks. For example, the tool
DCTdomain leverages domain-level vectors derived from per-residue embeddings of the
ESM-2 model to detect homology. Using the 150M parameter ESM-2 model with 30
layers, they found layer 15 and 21 to be the most informative for homology detection
based on prior analysis of homologous and nonhomologous pairs of protein domains
[26]. A similar approach could be adopted by identifying a subset of layers that best
Chapter 6. Future Perspectives
53
==PAGE:54==
DTU
J. B. Overgaard
Figure 6.1: Proposed ideas
for future work on sequence
annotation using PLMs. Left:
To preserve all information
in
the
attention
matrices,
the protein can be repre-
sented as a graph with the
edge features being the at-
tention scores. Functional re-
gions would be found from
community detection
algo-
rithms designed to handle
overlapping regions. Right:
Feature
engineering
of re-
gion embeddings should ex-
plore per-residue embeddings
across multiple layers. In com-
bination with different ag-
gregation methods, it should
be tested which layer-method
combination leads to the best
separation of different anno-
tation types in the final region
embedding space.
distinguish between regions of different annotation types. In addition, concatenating the
embeddings from multiple layers may even lead to more discriminative representations
for the annotated regions.
Moreover, this project employed average pooling to obtain fixed-length region embed-
dings. While this is a standard practice, it may be suboptimal especially for sequence
annotation where the differences in the mean features are likely small for overlapping
annotations. Alternative pooling strategies exist such as max pooling and sum pooling,
but more sophisticated techniques have also been explored. For example, DeepLoc2
employs a learnable vector to generate weights used for a weighted sum of the resid-
ual embeddings optimized to predict subcellular localization [24]. Similarly, the Pool
PaRTI algorithm utilizes attention weight matrices to extract residue importance used for
weighted average pooling [60]. Additionally, NaderiAlizadeh et al. (2025) [61] suggests
54
Chapter 6. Future Perspectives
==PAGE:55==
J. B. Overgaard
DTU
treating the residual embeddings as independent vectors sampled from a probability dis-
tribution over the sequence and applying advanced mathematical techniques to derive a
fixed-length protein representation.
For future work, an initial analysis could be conducted to guide the choice of strategy for
generating region embeddings. As illustrated in Figure 6.1, various pooling techniques
on different embeddings layers could be evaluated on a benchmark of known annotated
regions. The best combination of layer and aggregation method should be assessed either
by measuring the separability of region embeddings in feature space, quantified by the
distance between groups of different annotation types and subtypes, or through direct
clustering performance, analogous to the analysis presented in Section 3.3.1.
Chapter 6. Future Perspectives
55
==PAGE:56==
DTU
J. B. Overgaard
Bibliography
[1]
Giles Obinna Ndochinwa et al. “New advances in protein engineering for indus-
trial applications: Key takeaways”. Open Life Sciences 19 (1 Jan. 2024). D O I:
10.1515/biol-2022-0856.
[2]
Lingyan Zheng et al. “AnnoPRO: a strategy for protein function annotation based
on multi-scale protein representation and a hybrid deep learning of dual-path
encoding”. Genome Biology 25 (1 Dec. 2024). D O I: 10.1186/s13059-024-03166-
1.
[3]
Xiaorui Wang et al. “Multi-modal deep learning enables efficient and accurate
annotation of enzymatic active sites”. Nature Communications 15 (1 Dec. 2024).
D O I: 10.1038/s41467-024-51511-6.
[4]
Jeppe Hallgren et al. “DeepTMHMM predicts alpha and beta transmembrane
proteins using deep neural networks”. (Apr. 2022). D O I: 10.1101/2022.04.08.
487609. U R L: http://biorxiv.org/lookup/doi/10.1101/2022.04.08.487609.
[5]
Michael Y. Galperin and Eugene V. Koonin. “From complete genome sequence to
’complete’ understanding?”: Trends in Biotechnology 28 (8 Aug. 2010), pp. 398–
406. D O I: 10.1016/j.tibtech.2010.05.006.
[6]
Felix Teufel et al. “SignalP 6.0 predicts all five types of signal peptides using
protein language models”. Nature Biotechnology 40 (7 July 2022), pp. 1023–
1025. D O I: 10.1038/s41587-021-01156-3.
[7]
Nikolaj Blom et al. “Prediction of post-translational glycosylation and phospho-
rylation of proteins from the amino acid sequence”. Proteomics 4 (6 June 2004),
pp. 1633–1649. D O I: 10.1002/pmic.200300771.
[8]
Avner Schlessinger et al. “Protein disorder-a breakthrough invention of evolu-
tion?”: Current Opinion in Structural Biology 21 (3 June 2011), pp. 412–418.
D O I: 10.1016/j.sbi.2011.03.014.
56
Bibliography
==PAGE:57==
J. B. Overgaard
DTU
[9]
Yanay Ofran et al. “Beyond annotation transfer by homology: Novel protein-
function prediction methods to assist drug discovery”. Drug Discovery Today 10
(21 Nov. 2005), pp. 1475–1482. D O I: 10.1016/S1359-6446(05)03621-4.
[10]
David Harding-Larsen et al. “Protein representations: Encoding biological infor-
mation for machine learning in biocatalysis”. Biotechnology Advances 77 (Dec.
2024), p. 108459. D O I: 10.1016/j.biotechadv.2024.108459.
[11]
Zeming Lin et al. “Evolutionary-scale prediction of atomic-level protein struc-
ture with a language model”. Science 379 (2023), p. 2025. U R L: https://www.
science.org.
[12]
Ashish Vaswani et al. “Attention Is All You Need”. Proceedings of the 31st Inter-
national Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (June 2017). U R L:
http://arxiv.org/abs/1706.03762.
[13]
Roshan Rao et al. “Transformer protein language models are unsupervised struc-
ture learners”. (Dec. 2020). D O I: 10.1101/2020.12.15.422761.
[14]
Jesse Vig et al. “BERTology Meets Biology: Interpreting Attention in Protein Lan-
guage Models”. (June 2020). U R L: http://arxiv.org/abs/2006.15222.
[15]
Jaina Mistry et al. “Pfam: The protein families database in 2021”. Nucleic Acids
Research 49 (D1 Jan. 2021), pp. D412–D419. D O I: 10.1093/nar/gkaa913.
[16]
Peter E. Wright and H. Jane Dyson. “Intrinsically disordered proteins in cellular
signalling and regulation”. Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology 16 (1 Dec. 2015),
pp. 18–29. D O I: 10.1038/nrm3920.
[17]
Alex S. Holehouse and Birthe B. Kragelund. “The molecular basis for cellular
function of intrinsically disordered protein regions”. Nature Reviews Molecular Cell
Biology 25 (3 Mar. 2024), pp. 187–211. D O I: 10.1038/s41580-023-00673-0.
[18]
Marco Necci et al. “Critical assessment of protein intrinsic disorder prediction”.
Nature Methods 18 (5 May 2021), pp. 472–481. D O I: 10.1038/s41592-021-
01117-3.
[19]
Alessio Del Conte et al. “Critical assessment of protein intrinsic disorder prediction
(CAID) - Results of round 2”. Proteins: Structure, Function and Bioinformatics 91
(12 Dec. 2023), pp. 1925–1934. D O I: 10.1002/prot.26582.
[20]
Mahta Mehdiabadi et al. “MobiDB-lite 4.0: faster prediction of intrinsic protein
disorder and structural compactness”. Bioinformatics 41 (5 May 2025). D O I: 10.
1093/bioinformatics/btaf297.
Bibliography
57
==PAGE:58==
DTU
J. B. Overgaard
[21]
Jeffrey M. Lotthammer et al. “Metapredict enables accurate disorder prediction
across the Tree of Life”. (Nov. 2024). D O I: 10.1101/2024.11.05.622168.
[22]
Maria Cristina Aspromonte et al. “DisProt in 2024: improving function annotation
of intrinsically disordered proteins”. Nucleic Acids Research 52 (D1 Jan. 2024),
pp. D434–D441. D O I: 10.1093/nar/gkad928.
[23]
Jack Hanson et al. “SPOT-Disorder2: Improved Protein Intrinsic Disorder Predic-
tion by Ensembled Deep Learning”. Genomics, Proteomics and Bioinformatics 17
(6 Dec. 2019), pp. 645–656. D O I: 10.1016/j.gpb.2019.01.004.
[24]
Vineet Thumuluri et al. “DeepLoc 2.0: multi-label subcellular localization predic-
tion using protein language models”. Nucleic Acids Research 50 (W1 July 2022),
W228–W234. D O I: 10.1093/nar/gkac278.
[25]
Magnus Haraldson Høie et al. “NetSurfP-3.0: accurate and fast prediction of
protein structural features by protein language models and deep learning”. Nucleic
Acids Research 50 (W1 July 2022), W510–W515. D O I: 10.1093/nar/gkac439.
[26]
Benjamin Giovanni Iovino, Haixu Tang, and Yuzhen Ye. “Protein domain embed-
dings for fast and accurate similarity search”. Genome Research (Sept. 2024),
gr.279127.124. D O I: 10.1101/gr.279127.124.
[27]
Christian B Anfinsen. “Principles that Govern the Folding of Protein Chains”. New
Series 181 (4096 1973), pp. 223–230.
[28]
António J.M. Ribeiro et al. “A global analysis of function and conservation of
catalytic residues in enzymes”. Journal of Biological Chemistry 295 (2 Jan. 2020),
pp. 314–324. D O I: 10.1074/jbc.REV119.006289.
[29]
Peer Bork and Eugene V Koonin. “Protein sequence motifs”. Current Opinion in
Structural Biology 6.3 (1996), pp. 366–376. D O I: https://doi.org/10.1016/
S0959-440X(96)80057-1.
[30]
Florencio Pazos et al. “Correlated mutations contain information about protein-
protein interaction 11Edited by A. R. Fersht”. Journal of Molecular Biology 271.4
(1997), pp. 511–523. D O I: https://doi.org/10.1006/jmbi.1997.1198.
[31]
Hajar Owji et al. “A comprehensive review of signal peptides: Structure, roles, and
applications”. European Journal of Cell Biology 97 (6 Aug. 2018), pp. 422–441.
D O I: 10.1016/j.ejcb.2018.06.003.
[32]
Nadav Brandes et al. “ProteinBERT: a universal deep-learning model of protein
sequence and function”. Bioinformatics 38 (8 Apr. 2022), pp. 2102–2110. D O I:
10.1093/bioinformatics/btac020.
58
Bibliography
==PAGE:59==
J. B. Overgaard
DTU
[33]
Jacob Devlin et al. “BERT: Pre-training of Deep Bidirectional Transformers for
Language Understanding”. (2019), pp. 4171–4186. D O I: 10.18653/v1/N19-
1423.
[34]
Sebastian Raschka. Understanding and Coding the Self-Attention Mechanism of
Large Language Models From Scratch. Blog post. 2023. U R L: https://sebastianraschka.
com/blog/2023/self-attention-from-scratch.html (visited on 06/24/2025).
[35]
Jay Alammar. The Illustrated Transformer. Blog post. 2018. U R L: https : / /
jalammar.github.io/illustrated-transformer/ (visited on 06/24/2025).
[36]
Alexander Rives et al. “Biological structure and function emerge from scaling
unsupervised learning to 250 million protein sequences”. Proceedings of the Na-
tional Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 118 (15 2021). D O I:
10.1073/pnas.2016239118/-/DCSupplemental.
[37]
The UniProt Consortium. “UniProt: the Universal Protein Knowledgebase in 2025”.
Nucleic Acids Research 53.D1 (Nov. 2024), pp. D609–D617. D O I: 10.1093/nar/
gkae1010.
[38]
Tianqi Chen and Carlos Guestrin. “XGBoost: A Scalable Tree Boosting System”.
(June 2016), pp. 785–794. D O I: 10.1145/2939672.2939785.
[39]
Nitesh V Chawla et al. “SMOTE: Synthetic Minority Over-sampling Technique”.
Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research 16 (2002), pp. 321–357.
[40]
Yuhan Hao et al. “Dictionary learning for integrative, multimodal and scalable
single-cell analysis”. Nature Biotechnology 42 (2 Feb. 2024), pp. 293–304. D O I:
10.1038/s41587-023-01767-y.
[41]
Satija Lab and Collaborators. Guided Clustering Tutorial. Toturial. U R L: https://
satijalab.org/seurat/articles/pbmc3k_tutorial.html (visited on 06/12/2025).
[42]
Cheng-Yu Hsieh et al. “Found in the Middle: Calibrating Positional Attention Bias
Improves Long Context Utilization”. (2024). arXiv: 2406.16008. U R L: https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2406.16008.
[43]
Dmitry A. Karasev et al. “Spatial features of proteins related to their phosphory-
lation and associated structural changes”. Proteins: Structure, Function and Bioin-
formatics 86 (1 Jan. 2018), pp. 13–20. D O I: 10.1002/prot.25397.
[44]
Marilyn D. Resh. “Covalent lipid modifications of proteins”. Current Biology 23
(10 May 2013). D O I: 10.1016/j.cub.2013.04.024.
Bibliography
59
==PAGE:60==
DTU
J. B. Overgaard
[45]
Kristoffer Vitting-Seerup. “Most protein domains exist as variants with distinct
functions across cells, tissues and diseases”. NAR Genomics and Bioinformatics 5
(3 Sept. 2023). D O I: 10.1093/nargab/lqad084.
[46]
Francois-Xavier Theillet et al. “The alphabet of intrinsic disorder”. Intrinsically
Disordered Proteins 1 (1 Jan. 2013), e24360. D O I: 10.4161/idp.24360.
[47]
Meredith Corley, Margaret C. Burns, and Gene W. Yeo. “How RNA-Binding Pro-
teins Interact with RNA: Molecules and Mechanisms”. Molecular Cell 78 (1 Apr.
2020), pp. 9–29. D O I: 10.1016/j.molcel.2020.03.011.
[48]
Tina Ukmar-Godec et al. “Lysine/RNA-interactions drive and regulate biomolec-
ular condensation”. Nature Communications 10 (1 Dec. 2019). D O I: 10.1038/
s41467-019-10792-y.
[49]
Tore Opsahl, Filip Agneessens, and John Skvoretz. “Node centrality in weighted
networks: Generalizing degree and shortest paths”. Social Networks 32 (3 July
2010), pp. 245–251. D O I: 10.1016/j.socnet.2010.03.006.
[50]
An Phan et al. “A longitudinal analysis of function annotations of the human
proteome reveals consistently high biases”. Database 2025 (2025). D O I: 10.1093/
database/baaf036.
[51]
Anna Rogers, Olga Kovaleva, and Anna Rumshisky. “A Primer in BERTology: What
we know about how BERT works”. (Nov. 2020). U R L: http://arxiv.org/abs/
2002.12327.
[52]
ESM Team. ESM Cambrian: Revealing the mysteries of proteins with unsupervised
learning. 2024. U R L: https://evolutionaryscale.ai/blog/esm- cambrian
(visited on 12/04/2024).
[53]
Frances Ding and Jacob Steinhardt. “Protein language models are biased by un-
equal sequence sampling across the tree of life”. (Mar. 2024). D O I: 10.1101/
2024.03.07.584001.
[54]
Robert Schmirler, Michael Heinzinger, and Burkhard Rost. “Fine-tuning protein
language models boosts predictions across diverse tasks”. Nature Communications
15 (1 Dec. 2024). D O I: 10.1038/s41467-024-51844-2.
[55]
Tianzhu Ye et al. “Differential Transformer”. (Apr. 2025). U R L: http://arxiv.
org/abs/2410.05258.
[56]
Vladimir Gligorijevi´c et al. “Structure-based protein function prediction using
graph convolutional networks”. Nature Communications 12 (1 Dec. 2021). D O I:
10.1038/s41467-021-23303-9.
60
Bibliography
==PAGE:61==
J. B. Overgaard
DTU
[57]
Vinícius da Fonseca Vieira, Carolina Ribeiro Xavier, and Alexandre Gonçalves
Evsukoff. “A comparative study of overlapping community detection methods
from the perspective of the structural properties”. Applied Network Science 5 (1
Dec. 2020). D O I: 10.1007/s41109-020-00289-9.
[58]
“LazyFox: fast and parallelized overlapping community detection in large graphs”.
PeerJ Computer Science 9 (2023). D O I: 10.7717/PEERJ-CS.1291.
[59]
Oscar Skean et al. “Layer by Layer: Uncovering Hidden Representations in Lan-
guage Models”. (June 2025). U R L: http://arxiv.org/abs/2502.02013.
[60]
Alp Tartici, Gowri Nayar, and Russ B. Altman. “Pool PaRTI: A PageRank-based pool-
ing method for identifying critical residues and enhancing protein sequence rep-
resentations”. Bioinformatics 41 (6 June 2025). D O I: 10.1093/bioinformatics/
btaf330.
[61]
Navid NaderiAlizadeh and Rohit Singh. “Aggregating residue-level protein lan-
guage model embeddings with optimal transport”. Bioinformatics Advances 5 (1
2025). D O I: 10.1093/bioadv/vbaf060.
61
==PAGE:62==
DTU
J. B. Overgaard
Appendices
62
Bibliography
==PAGE:63==
J. B. Overgaard
DTU
A Annotation Types
Table A.1: Included annotation types from UniProt and their content.
Amino acid modification (AAM)
Cross-link
Residue in covalent linkage between proteins.
Disulfide bond
Cysteine residues participating in disulfide bonds.
Glycosylation site
Residue with covalently attached glycan group(s).
Lipid moity-binding region
Residue with covalently attached lipid group(s).
Modified residue
Altered residue (not glycan, lipid, or cross-link).
Molecule processing (MP)
Propeptide
Peptide segment cleaved to activate the protein.
Signal peptide
Peptide targeting proteins to the secretory pathway.
Transit peptide
Peptide directing proteins to a particular organelle.
Regions
DNA-binding region
DNA-binding domains.
Domain
Structural or functional unit within a protein.
Intramembrane region
Region located in a membrane without crossing it.
Region of interest
Characteristic region including IDRs.
Short sequence motif
Conserved sequence motif of biological significance.
Topological domain
Region located in a specific cellular compartment.
Transmembrane region
Membrane-spanning region of the protein.
Zink finger region
Protein motif that binds a zinc ion.
Sites
Active site
The region of an enzyme where substrate binds.
Binding site
Binding site for chemical group (metals, cofactors, ect.).
Site
Single amino acid site not defined in other subsections.
63
==PAGE:64==
DTU
J. B. Overgaard
B Edge Effects in ESM-2 Embeddings for Cropped Sequences
To investigate the impact of sequence cropping on ESM-2 embeddings, Isabella Øster-
lund (unpublished work, DTU HealthTech) prepared a dataset consisting of 50 protein
sequences with a length of 1024 amino acids. Each sequence was split in half, resulting
in 100 non-overlapping subsequences of 512 amino acids. The average cosine similarity
between the embeddings of the full-length sequences and their corresponding cropped
halves was then computed. The results are seen from Figure B.1. Although the cosine
similarity drops within 30–50 amino acids from the sequence edges, it remains relatively
high, indicating that substantial contextual information is still preserved near the cut
point.
(A)
(B)
Figure B.1: Cosine similarity between the embeddings for the original sequences and the cropped se-
quences: (A) left half and (B) right half.
64
==PAGE:65==
J. B. Overgaard
DTU
C Proportion of Excluded Annotations Across Annotation Types
Figure C.1: Proportion of included and excluded annotations per annotation type for the working dataset
of 1,000 protein sequences. AAM = Amino acid modification, MP = Molecule processing.
65
==PAGE:66==
DTU
J. B. Overgaard
D Gradient Boosted Decision Trees with XGBoost
Ensemble of decision trees is a popular method in machine learning for both regression
and classification tasks. We typically distinguish between random forests and boosting
algorithms. While random forest train separate trees, gradient boosted trees are trained
sequentially with each weak tree correcting the mistakes from the previous models.
In this project, we framed the task as distinguishing annotated position of a given annota-
tion type from unannotated positions. For binary classification problems, it is standard to
let the ensemble predict the probability of belonging to the positive class (i.e., annotated
position). In such cases, the ensemble is evaluated from the logistic loss, also known as
the cross-entropy loss defined as
l(yi, ˆyi) = −(yi log pi + (1 −yi) log(1 −pi))
where y ∈{0, 1} is the true label, and p = σ(ˆy) =
1
1+e−ˆy is the predicted probability of
the positive class.
The first predictor in boosted trees is a base learner, typically a constant value that
minimizes the overall loss function. In the case of logistic loss, this initial prediction often
corresponds to the log-odds of the proportion of positive class instances. To improve the
model, one could train subsequent learners on the residuals and add their outputs to
the base learner. However, instead of fitting directly to the residuals, gradient boosting
algorithms train each new tree to predict the negative gradient of the loss function, which
generalizes the residuals. Formally, at iteration t, the model updates its prediction ˆy(t)
by adding a function ft(x) that approximates the negative gradient of the loss function
L with respect to the current prediction:
ˆy(t) = ˆy(t−1) + ηft(x)
where η is the learning rate controlling the contribution of each new tree. XGBoost builds
upon this gradient boosting framework by introducing several tricks which improve
model performance and efficiency. One key feature is the addition of a regularization
term to the loss function, which penalizes model complexity to prevent overfitting. The
final objective function to minimize at iteration t can be written as
66
==PAGE:67==
J. B. Overgaard
DTU
L(t) =
n
X
i=1
l

yi, ˆy(t−1)
i
+ ft(xi)

+ Ω(ft)
where l is the loss function (i.e., logistic loss) and Ω(ft) is the regularization term. In
our setup, the regularization includes L1 and L2 regularization terms applied to the leaf
weights :
Ω(f) = 1
2λ
T
X
j=1
w2
j + α
T
X
j=1
|wj|
where T is the number of leaves in the tree, and wj is the weight assigned to leaf j. This
penalization discourages the creation of overly complex trees to avoid overfitting.
Gradient boosting with XGBoost was introduced in Chein et al. (2016) [38], and fur-
ther documentation is available at the official repository: https://github.com/dmlc/
xgboost.
67
==PAGE:68==
DTU
J. B. Overgaard
E Recapturing Annotated Positions - Remaining Results
(A)
(B)
Figure E.1: The proportion of detected positions (z-score > 2) for the different annotation types including
unannotated positions. (A) The attention heads within each layer were aggregated using the mean while
the layer-wise matrices were aggregated using the 90th percentile. (B) The attention heads within each
layer were aggregated using the the 90th percentile. Layer-wise matrices were aggregated using the mean.
68
==PAGE:69==
J. B. Overgaard
DTU
F Position-Dependent Attention Patterns
Figure F.1: Distribution of the attention signal across all 33 layers of the model in relation to the relative
position of an amino acids within the sequence. Attention scores were aggregated using the mean across
attention heads and columns to obtain a 1D signal per position per layer.
69
==PAGE:70==
DTU
J. B. Overgaard
G XGBoost Run Details
Table G.1: The number of positions (annotated / unannotated) partitioning in model training and testing.
Annotation Type Model
Train Positions
Train Positions (Balanced)
Test Positions
Cross-link
352 / 169,821
704 / 3,520
97 / 40,796
Disulfide bond
15,269 / 169,821
30,538 / 152,690
7,708 / 40,796
Glycosylation site
481 / 169,821
962 / 4,810
164 / 40,796
Lipid moity-binding region
53 / 169,821
106 / 530
19 / 40,796
Modified residue
1,618 / 169,821
3,236 / 16,180
419 / 40,796
Propeptide
1,364 / 169,821
2,728 / 13,640
203 / 40,796
Signal peptide
3,012 / 169,821
6,024 / 30,120
804 / 40,796
Transit peptide
811 / 169,821
1,622 / 8,110
191 / 40,796
DNA-binding region
2,368 / 169,821
4,736 / 23,680
680 / 40,796
Domain
70,254 / 169,821
–
19,761 / 40,796
Intramembrane region
349 / 169,821
698 / 3,490
81 / 40,796
Region of interest
77,219 / 169,821
–
19,771 / 40,796
Short sequence motif
1,187 / 169,821
2,374 / 11,870
383 / 40,796
Topological domain
45,100 / 169,821
–
14,856 / 40,796
Transmembrane region
13,796 / 169,821
27,592 / 137,960
4,754 / 40,796
Zink finger region
10,375 / 169,821
20,750 / 103,750
1,108 / 40,796
Active site
108 / 169,821
216 / 1,080
38 / 40,796
Binding site
2,251 / 169,821
4,502 / 22,510
481 / 40,796
Site
118 / 169,821
236 / 1,180
25 / 40,796
Table G.2: The best parameter combination for each annotation type model found from random search.
Annotation Type Model
estimators
max
depth
learning
rate
col. sample
by tree
subsample
lambda
alpha
Cross-link
400
4
0.2
0.8
0.6
0.1
0.1
Disulfide bond
400
4
0.1
0.2
0.4
0.1
5
Glycosylation site
600
4
0.1
0.5
0.6
0.1
0.1
Lipid moity-binding region
600
8
0.2
0.8
0.8
0.1
0.1
Modified residue
600
8
0.1
0.5
0.8
1
0.1
Propeptide
400
4
0.2
0.2
0.4
5
5
Signal peptide
400
4
0.2
0.2
0.4
0.1
1
Transit peptide
200
4
0.2
0.5
0.4
5
5
DNA-binding region
200
6
0.01
0.2
0.4
5
1
Domain
600
8
0.1
0.8
0.8
5
1
Intramembrane region
400
6
0.1
0.2
0.4
5
5
Region of interest
600
8
0.1
0.2
0.8
5
1
Short sequence motif
200
4
0.1
0.8
0.8
1
5
Topological domain
600
8
0.1
0.5
0.4
5
5
Transmembrane region
200
4
0.1
0.5
0.4
0.1
1
Zink finger region
200
4
0.1
0.5
0.4
1
0.1
Active site
600
4
0.1
0.8
0.6
1
0.1
Binding site
400
4
0.1
0.2
0.8
5
5
Site
200
8
0.1
0.8
0.6
5
1
70
==PAGE:71==
J. B. Overgaard
DTU
H Annotation Type Frequency
(A)
(B)
Figure H.1: Frequency of annotation types among the 1,000 sequences in the working dataset. (A) The
number of regions and sites for each annotation type. (B) The total number of positions covered by
annotated regions for each annotation type.
71
==PAGE:72==
DTU
J. B. Overgaard
I Clustering Results Optimized for Domain Subtypes
Figure I.1: The accuracy after annotating regions based on cluster labels from optimizing clustering of
domain subtypes. The red bars are the baseline accuracies found from random permutations of the true
annotation type labels.
Figure I.2: Confusion matrix comparing true region annotation labels with labels assigned through
clustering optimized for domain subtypes.
72
==PAGE:73==
J. B. Overgaard
DTU
J GO Enrichment Analysis for IDR Clusters
GO enrichment analysis was performed for the five IDR clusters that contained at least
one DisProt-annotated IDR, in order to assess whether specific GO terms were overrep-
resented among the genes represented in each cluster. The analysis was conducted in R
using the clusterProfiler package. The results are summarized in the figure below.
Figure J.1: Enriched GO terms showing the degree of enrichment, and the number of genes involved. GO
terms are categorizes into molecular function (MF), biological process (BP) and cellular component (CC).
73
==PAGE:74==
DTU
J. B. Overgaard
K Distribution of Annotation Coverage Across Sequences
Figure K.1: Distribution of the proportion of annotated residues per sequence among the 1,000 sequences
in the working dataset. The data suggest a bimodal trend, with sequences tending to be either almost
entirely annotated or only sparsely annotated.
74
