==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Software Framework for Streaming of Object-
Centric Process Mining
Jeppe M. Mikkelsen (s204708)
Supervisors:
Andrea Burattin (andbur@dtu.dk)
Andrey Rivkin (ariv@dtu.dk)
Kongens Lyngby 2025
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Process mining has evolved into a vital discipline for extracting insights from event
data in enterprise systems. Traditionally, it assumes a single-case notion where each
event is tied to one process instance, an approach that falls short in capturing the
interconnected behaviours typical of real-world systems like ERPs and CRMs. Object-
Centric Process Mining (OCPM) was introduced to address this limitation by allowing
events to be associated with multiple object types, thereby enabling a richer and more
faithful representation of business processes.
Despite its promise, current OCPM research within stream discovery of object-
centric process models is non-existent, and predominantly assumes static, log-based
data inputs. This is misaligned with modern enterprise needs, where the delay intro-
duced by storing and retrospectively analysing event logs can hinder timely decision-
making, especially in fast-paced or data-intensive environments.
This thesis proposes a novel state-of-the-art framework facilitating Streaming Object-
Centric Process Mining (SOCPM) discovery of process models, by leveraging estab-
lished streaming process mining taxonomies. The framework supports the streaming
discovery of Object-Centric Directly-Follows Graph (OC-DFG) and subsequently in-
troduces a new stream miner, Activity-Entity Relationship Miner with Lossy Count-
ing (AER-LC), with a corresponding model that captures cardinalities between object
types based on co-occurrence within events. The proposed framework has been imple-
mented in the streaming process mining using the open-source pyBeamline library and
evaluated on multiple public object-centric event logs. The framework demonstrates
strong alignment with existing offline discovery methods while effectively adapting to
evolving behaviours caused by concept drift. This work lays the foundation for what
can be considered the start of SOCPM discovery and methodology, aimed at enabling
scalable, configurable real-time object-centric process mining in streams.
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at the Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer
Science (DTU Compute) at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfilment of the
requirements for acquiring a Master of Science In Engineering at ’The Technical Uni-
versity of Denmark’ in Kongens Lyngby, Denmark.
During my M.Sc studies at DTU, I attended the course “Process Mining” and
participated in a guest lecture on Object-Centric Process Mining by Professor Wil van
der Aalst. This experiences sparked my interest in the field and served as the primary
inspiration for this thesis project. The work presented here explores the development
and analysis of a software framework designed to support streaming Object-Centric
Process Mining discovery.
The thesis follows a hierarchical structure, gradually increasing the level of detail.
It begins by introducing the problem domain and reviewing the state-of-the-art, ac-
companied by clearly defined research questions. The subsequent chapters present the
methodology and relevant preliminaries necessary for understanding the proposed work.
The main body of the thesis details the design and implementation of the proposed
solution, followed by a thorough evaluation and a discussion linking the results to the
research questions. The work concludes with a summary of findings and suggestions
for future research.
Kongens Lyngby, July 17, 2025
Jeppe M. Mikkelsen (s204708)
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
First and foremost, I would like to express my sincere gratitude to my supervisors,
Professor Andrea Burattin and Professor Andrey Rivkin, for allowing me to pursue this
project and for their invaluable guidance throughout its development. Their support,
common interest in the subject, and their openness to my ideas in the field of object-
centric process mining have been instrumental to this work. A heartfelt thank you goes
to my girlfriend, Sidse, for her unwavering encouragement during challenging moments.
Finally, I am deeply grateful to my family, Malte, Birgitte, and Søren. Despite the
distance, their constant support and belief in me have been a source of motivation and
strength throughout my journey.
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
ii
Acknowledgements
iii
Contents
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Problem Domain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
The Research Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Thesis Outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
State-of-the-Art
5
2.1
Related Literature
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Research Questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3
Methodology
12
3.1
Development Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.2
Tech Stack . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.3
Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4
Preliminaries
15
4.1
Object-Centric Process Mining
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.2
Data Streams . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.3
Streaming Process Mining . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.4
PyBeamline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5
Solution Design
27
5.1
Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.2
Streaming Object-Centric Process Mining Framework
. . . . . . . . . .
29
5.3
Source . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.4
Flatten
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.5
Routing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.6
Stream Mining
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.7
Inclusion Strategy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.8
Relationship Mining . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
==PAGE:7==
Contents
v
5.9
Merging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
6
Implementation
62
6.1
Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
6.2
Source . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
6.3
Object-Centric Operator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
6.4
Object-Centric Merge Operator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
7
Evaluation
77
7.1
Verification
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
7.2
Validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
7.3
Validation of Activity-Entity Relationship Miner
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
7.4
Visualisation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
93
7.5
Research Question Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
99
8
Discussion
100
9
Conclusion
102
9.1
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102
9.2
Future Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 103
A Appendix
106
A.1 Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 106
A.2 Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 109
Bibliography
114
==PAGE:8==
Acronyms
AER Activity-Entity-Relationship.
AER-LC Activity-Entity Relationship Miner with Lossy Counting.
CRM Customer Relationship Management.
DFG Directly-Follows Graph.
E2E Event-to-Event.
E2O Event-to-Object.
ERP Enterprise Resource Planning.
HM-LC Heuristics Miner with Lossy Counting.
O2O Object-to-Object.
OC-DFG Object-Centric Directly-Follows Graph.
OCBC Object-Centric Behavioural Constraints.
OCEL 1.0 Object-Centric Event Log 1.0 Specification.
OCEL 2.0 Object-Centric Event Log 2.0 Specification.
OCPM Object-Centric Process Mining.
OCPN Object-Centric Petri Net.
P2P Procure-to-Pay.
SOCPM Streaming Object-Centric Process Mining.
SPM Streaming Process Mining.
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
This chapter begins by introducing the problem domain, which encompasses the origins
of object-centric process mining and the rationale for making it streaming compatible.
This is followed by a dedicated section that explains the specific research problem in
detail. It concludes with an outline of the thesis structure, designed to guide the reader
through the subsequent sections.
1.1
Problem Domain
A couple of years before the start of the millennium, process mining emerged as a data
science discipline that, through the utilisation of event data recorded by information
systems, extracts insights into business processes by generating process models. Al-
lowing process analysts to make data-driven assessments of how processes are truly
performed, uncover hidden deviations from intended workflows, and support initia-
tives for optimisation, automation, and compliance monitoring across organisational
operations[Aal23a].
Traditional process mining methodics include process discovery, conformance check-
ing, and enhancement of process models, bridging the gap between data science and
process science[Aal12; Van12]. Since then, it has become a widely used discipline, with
over half of the Fortune 500 companies using the discipline to analyse and improve
their business processes[Aal23a].
Process mining traditionally relies on a single-case notion, where each event is
linked to exactly one process instance (or case), typically defined around objects such as
Order, Item, or Package. While this case-centric approach has proven effective in many
domains, it presents notable limitations. In enterprise systems like Enterprise Resource
Planning (ERP)s and Customer Relationship Management (CRM)s, the underlying
data often reflects complex interdependencies[BMA23].
These complexities become
especially apparent in real-world settings, where multiple entities may be involved in
a single event[Aal23a]. For example, a single Order may involve multiple Item’s, and
Item’s may involve a single Package, each contributing to numerous cases based on
the perspective. Attempting to flatten this already existing complexity into a single
==PAGE:10==
1.2 The Research Problem
2
case notion leads to a loss of otherwise crucial system-wide behavioural and relational
information[BMA23].
To overcome these limitations, Object-Centric Process Mining (OCPM) was intro-
duced to model process behaviour across multiple interrelated process instances[Aal23a;
Aal23b]. OCPM achieves this by recognising that events can be shared across different
objects—implying that objects do not act in isolation but co-participate in common
events[Aal23a]. This enables a more faithful representation of complex, real-world in-
teractions in enterprise systems, as objects and their respective interactions can now
be analysed together. Research within the field of OCPM has gained significant trac-
tion because of the great promises it shows.
However, challenges remain: current
approaches often lack generality, are limited in scope, and have yet to comprehensively
adapt traditional process mining techniques to this richer, object-centric paradigm as
expressed in [BMA23]. Notably, while Berti et al.[BMA23] highlight various limita-
tions and research opportunities within OCPM, they do not address the crucial need
for streaming compatibility.
Both traditional process mining and OCPM discovery
have originally focused on static log files, that is, a finite set of event observations re-
ferring to data collected during a certain time frame in the past. Although in modern
scenarios, analysing events in real-time is increasingly critical, thereby minimising the
latency between their occurrence and extracting actionable insights is crucial. The
delay introduced by storing and retrospectively analysing event logs can hinder timely
decision-making, especially in fast-paced or data-intensive environments.
To address this challenge, event stream processing systems have emerged as pow-
erful alternatives. Rather than collecting and storing all events for deferred analysis,
these systems process events as they occur, enabling immediate processing and timely
reactions. This has been explored for traditional one-case process mining in[Bur22].
However, in the realm of OCPM, this transition remains unexplored. The added com-
plexity of handling multiple interacting object types and shared events poses significant
challenges for adapting OCPM techniques to streaming environments. As processes
evolve continuously and data volumes grow, there is a pressing need for frameworks
that enable scalable, real-time streaming adaptation of Object-Centric Process Mining.
1.2
The Research Problem
This thesis aims to conduct state-of-the-art exploration in the neglected research area
of Streaming Object-Centric Process Mining (SOCPM). While traditional OCPM has
advanced our ability to model and analyse processes involving multiple interacting
objects, its application has predominantly focused on static event logs. In contrast,
many real-world systems produce continuous streams of data that could benefit from
near-real-time analysis.
As previously presented, traditional Streaming Process Mining (SPM) frameworks
operate under the single-case notion, where each event is linked to a single case (e.g.,
an Order or a Customer)[Bur22]. This simplification allows analysts to identify, for
example, that the process flow of Customer cancelling their order is becoming pre-
dominant. Thus, the process analyst can take appropriate remedial actions. However,
==PAGE:11==
1.3 Thesis Outline
3
non-system-wide traditional methods may often overlook complex interactions, such
as those between Order, Item, and Package objects, which are common in Procure-to-
Pay (P2P) information systems. A representative example would be a situation where
“Ship Package” events are expected to always reference one or more Item objects.
If, due to a concept drift in the underlying system, “Ship Package” begins to oc-
cur without any associated Item, the assumed object co-occurrence pattern is violated.
This can lead to packages being shipped without content, resulting in issues such as
inconsistent inventory records, customer disputes, or compliance failures—anomalies
that traditional models may fail to identify in real time.
The proposed solution would be a framework facilitating Streaming Object-Centric
Process Mining (SOCPM), that would address this challenge by enabling real-time
processing of events across multiple object types. Whereas a traditional, static OCPM
approach might detect this only after complete event logs have been processed, po-
tentially after operational or compliance issues have already emerged. In contrast, the
proposed framework facilitating SOCPM would enable continuous monitoring of object
interactions and behaviour, allowing for immediate detection of such deviations and
timely intervention before they escalate. Developing a framework for SOCPM discov-
ery introduces a range of complex challenges. Events must be processed in real time,
with the system maintaining continuously updated views of object interactions across
temporal windows, all while adhering to the inherent constraints of stream processing.
The presence of multiple co-occurring objects within a single event further complicates
state management and the incremental update of models. Addressing these challenges
is critical to ensure the framework achieves scalability, low latency, resilience to concept
drift, and high precision when operating over unbounded data streams.
1.3
Thesis Outline
This thesis is organised into eight subsequent chapters, each addressing a specific stage
in the exploration and development of a framework for Streaming Object-Centric Pro-
cess Mining (SOCPM). The structure is outlined to gradually build up from founda-
tional theory and related work toward design, implementation, and evaluation of the
proposed solution:
• State-of-the-Art: Reviews existing literature on traditional Streaming Process
Mining and Object-Centric Process Mining, as no prior research within Streaming
Object-Centric Process Mining (SOCPM) discovery has been conducted. It aims
to provide research into the two domains, and ends by specifying the research
questions that would facilitate SOCPM.
• Methodology: Describes the research methodology used to address the research
questions, while presenting the tech stack used.
Finalises by specifying how
evaluations are to be considered.
• Preliminaries: Establishes the theoretical and technical background in depth,
which is required for understanding the rest of the thesis; essentially, it covers
fundamental concepts mentioned in the State-of-the-Art, in more detail.
==PAGE:12==
1.3 Thesis Outline
4
• Design: Introduces the proposed SOCPM framework, outlining the overview
and architectural components. Thereafter, to present and formalise the key com-
ponents of the framework individually. Ultimately, it outlines how traditional
object-centric discovery is adapted for stream-based contexts.
• Implementation: Provides a quick overview of the software realisation of the
framework.
It presents the key components developed in the open-source py-
Beamline library and how they interconnect to enable SOCPM.
• Evaluation: Assesses the framework based on behavioural similarity compared
to static offline OCPM discovery, and the framework’s ability to handle concept
drift. The evaluation links back to the research questions and applies metrics
such as Jaccard similarity for behavioural validation.
• Discussion: Reflects on the implications, strengths, and limitations of the pro-
posed solution.
• Conclusion: Summarizes the findings, highlights contributions, and suggests
avenues for future research.
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 2
State-of-the-Art
This chapter begins by reviewing related literature in the fields of Object-Centric Pro-
cess Mining (OCPM) and Streaming Process Mining (SPM). It outlines the founda-
tional work that has shaped current understanding of object-centric process mining,
as well as how the traditional streaming process mining process discovery has been
facilitated previously. By examining these contributions, the chapter highlights the
research gaps that motivate this thesis. Following the literature review, the research
questions that guided the direction and development of this work are introduced. These
questions are discussed in relation to the identified gaps and framed to demonstrate
how the thesis contributes to advancing the state-of-the-art in streaming object-centric
process mining.
2.1
Related Literature
Exploration into the field of Streaming Object-Centric Process Mining (SOCPM) dis-
covery is novel, with no existing literature or prior research directly addressing this
topic. As such, the research and proposed framework represent a state-of-the-art con-
tribution. Consequently, the related literature is limited, and therefore, the related
literature is focused on the two main subjects, namely, OCPM discovery and tradi-
tional SPM.
2.1.1
Object-Centric Process Mining
As quickly presented in the introduction, the field of Object-Centric Process Mining
(OCPM) represents a natural evolution of traditional process mining, tailored to meet
the growing need for system-wide process visibility in complex, real-world systems
where data exists everywhere [Aal23a; VA16]. Unlike traditional process mining, which
relies on a single case identifier to define the process scope, OCPM discards this con-
straint and instead leverages unique object identifiers[Aal23a]. This shift allows OCPM
to trace individual object identifier lifecycles across a log and capture the interactions
between multiple object types as they potentially co-occur within events. This multi-
==PAGE:14==
2.1 Related Literature
6
object reference illustrates the fundamental principle of OCPM. Through such event-
object mappings, OCPM provides a richer, more interconnected view of organisational
processes that are otherwise hidden under traditional single-case abstractions[Aal19;
Aal23b].
Recent research within the field has been governed by which relationships between
events and objects, can be mined from the data provided and thus accurately reflected
it in a process model these include Event-to-Event (E2E), Event-to-Object (E2O), and
Object-to-Object (O2O), each capturing different types of dependencies across events
and objects [Ber+24; Gha+20]:
• E2E (Event-to-Event): Captures direct temporal or logical dependencies be-
tween events, typically within the same object perspective.
Equal to that of
traditional case-specific process mining.
• E2O (Event-to-Object): Describes the participation of objects in events, form-
ing the foundational structure for tracing object lifecycles across processes.
• O2O (Object-to-Object): Encodes relationships or interactions between ob-
jects, such as hierarchical structures, references, or synchronisation across object
types.
The popular standard Object-Centric Event Log (OCEL) format1, with its first
specification Object-Centric Event Log 1.0 Specification (OCEL 1.0), only supported
E2E and E2O relationships. However, the introduction of the new standard, Object-
Centric Event Log 2.0 Specification (OCEL 2.0), expands the available information
significantly, enabling not only comparisons of O2O relationships but also the in-
corporation of qualified relationship logic within E2O relationships[Gha+20; Ber+24;
BMA23].
2.1.1.1
Object-Centric Discovery
Object-Centric process model based on discovery can be broadly classified according
to the types of relationships they capture: (1) ET2ET, denoting event activity-to-
activity relations; (2) ET2OT, linking event activities to participating object types;
and (3) OT2OT, representing inter-object type dependencies and synchronisations.
ET2ET + ET2OT, in the realm of these relationships models, such as Object-
Centric Directly-Follows Graph (OCDFG) [BA23], an extension of the earlier Object-
Centric Directly-Follows Multigraph models in[Aal19] reside. They provide valuable
insights into general process behaviour but lack actual process semantics, such as AND-
joins, XOR splits, etc.
These models were the first proposed models to be lifted
from traditional to object-centric, as they are easily derived from information at hand.
The limitations of process executable models, the Object-Centric Petri Net (OCPN)
was proposed in[AB20b], and extends traditional process mining Petri Nets to the
object-centric setting with multiple object types.
However, they suffer from biases
1https://www.ocel-standard.org/
==PAGE:15==
2.1 Related Literature
7
such as silent transitions, no duplication of labels must be present in the log, and
others [LMA25; AB20b].
For this, a new process model, Causual Nets, has been
proposed that can represent behaviour that can not be discovered and modelled using
object-centric Petri nets[LMA25].
Other models have taken on the challenge of showing OT2OT also, such as the
declarative alternatives such as Object-Centric Behavioural Constraint (OCBC) mod-
els further incorporate both ET2ET, ET2OT and OT2OT semantics, enabling richer
behavioural specifications involving cardinalities and data-aware rules across object
types[LCA17]. Others have tried through object manipulation, in the sense that ob-
ject relationships are implicitly created within activities[Art+19]. Models such as Pro-
clets[Fah19] also support relations such as OT2OT, by these models are constructed
from OCPN.
Object-centric process models can provide valuable insights, but they do not al-
ways necessarily establish a one-to-one correspondence with the actual process from
which they were discovered[Aal23a; BMA23].
In [Bar+23], they infer that process
models should possess the property of re-constructibility; they propose Jackson Nets
and provide a formal foundation for the compositions of block-structured nets, with
the composition of all projections yielding the model of the original system.
2.1.1.2
Outlook
While recent significant academic progress has been made to address the limitations
and possibilities of Object-Centric Process Mining (OCPM), with a growing number of
publications advancing the field [BMA23]. Research has focused on adapting OCPM to
traditional process mining tasks such as process discovery and conformance checking,
while also extending its applicability to novel types of process models [BMA23].
Despite these developments, industrial adoption remains limited.
Transitioning
from a 20-year-old traditional, case-centric process mining to the object-centric paradigm
poses conceptual and practical challenges. As noted by Dirk Fahland [Fah25], many
of the problems that OCPM aims to solve have already been addressed in industry
through workarounds developed within the traditional framework.
Rather than duplicating solutions already available in traditional process mining,
recent perspectives emphasise that OCPM should aim higher: by addressing modelling
and analytical capabilities that traditional approaches inherently cannot support. This
involves leveraging OCPM’s unique strengths, such as multi-object relationships and
dynamic object interactions, to offer value beyond what is feasible in the case-centric
paradigm.
2.1.2
Streaming Process Mining
Streaming Process Mining (SPM) is a research area, as documented in foundational
works such as [Bur22; Bur18]. It bridges the gap between traditional process mining
and data stream processing by enabling the discovery and monitoring of process mod-
els directly from continuous data streams, thereby making the type of analysis online,
==PAGE:16==
2.1 Related Literature
8
rather than from static, finite event logs, which is an offline technique.
This shift
enables more timely insights and reactive process management, as models can be up-
dated incrementally in response to new data, significantly reducing the time required
to extract actionable information.
It incorporates key principles from data streams, that has been developed for tack-
ling problems such as, frequency counting, classification, clustering, approximation,
time series analysis [Agg07; Gam+10; GZK05; WK96]. In [Bur18], they reduce tradi-
tional process mining techniques to match solutions to the data stream principles. Such
as single-pass processing (where each event is observed only once), bounded memory
and time constraints, real-time availability of intermediate results, and adaptability to
changes in the underlying process [Bur22]. These characteristics make SPM particu-
larly well-suited for data stream environments with dynamic data, high throughput,
and concept drift, in which process behaviour is not static but evolves [Bur22].
The evolving nature of process behaviour in a data stream is commonly referred to
as Concept Drift [BMA23; Sat+21]. Initially studied in the context of anomaly detec-
tion and predictive modelling, concept drift has more recently gained attention within
the process mining community as a lens for understanding and adapting to shifts in op-
erational workflows [Sat+21]. Rather than treating drift as purely a problem to detect
or correct, modern SPM approaches view it as a fundamental characteristic of real-
world processes that must be accommodated by adaptive modelling techniques[Sat+21].
In this context, SPM, as explored in [Bur18; Bur22], offers mechanisms for lever-
aging concept drift. This capability is essential when modelling processes that operate
under continuous change, where rigidity in the discovered model may lead to outdated
or misleading insights. The streaming process mining discovery algorithm proposed,
in [Bur18], is based on one of the diversity of approaches researched within the field of
bridging data stream processing and process mining. Figure 2.1 showcase the different
taxonomies normally used to bridge the gap.
Figure 2.1: A taxonomy of various approaches for addressing distinct challenges in
streaming process mining is presented. For each technique, the underly-
ing steps are outlined [Bur18].
==PAGE:17==
2.1 Related Literature
9
Burattin et al. [Bur22] discuss the comparative strengths and limitations of two
dominant approaches in streaming process mining: the Window Model and the Problem
Reduction paradigm. To address challenges such as memory constraints and evolving
behaviour, they propose using a Problem Reduction paradigm that combines an adap-
tation of the Heuristics Miner, a well-known process mining algorithm [WV03], with
the Lossy Counting algorithm, a frequency-based approximation technique from data
stream processing [BSA12b]. In this setup, direct-follows relations between activities
are only retained if their estimated frequencies surpass a given threshold, allowing in-
frequent or obsolete behaviour to be gradually forgotten. The finalised algorithm is
called Heuristic Miner with Lossy Counting (HM-LC).
By merging these two paradigms, the resulting stream mining algorithm effectively
handles concept drift by continuously adapting the model to reflect the most recent
and relevant behaviour patterns.
2.1.2.1
Beamline
Recognising the need for a practical and industry-ready streaming process mining
framework, Burattin introduced the Beamline library2 [Bur23]. This framework opera-
tionalises key findings from earlier work on streaming process discovery, most notably
integrating the Heuristics Miner with Lossy Counting (HM-LC) as proposed in [Bur22;
Bur18].
The library is available in two distinct implementations. The first is a Java-based
version built on top of Apache Kafka, optimised for high-throughput, production-level
use cases. Its integration with Kafka’s event streaming infrastructure makes it partic-
ularly suitable for deployment in distributed systems and real-time analytics pipelines.
The second version, pyBeamline, is a Python-based variant that leverages the Reac-
tiveX programming model. This version is designed with research and rapid proto-
typing in mind, offering flexibility and ease of experimentation at the cost of reduced
performance compared to its Java counterpart [Bur23].
Together, these implementations make Beamline a versatile tool that supports both
industrial deployment and academic exploration, bridging the gap between theory and
practical application in the field of streaming process mining (see Figure 2.2).
2https://beamline.cloud/
==PAGE:18==
2.2 Research Questions
10
Figure 2.2: Overview of Beamline and pyBeamline.
While pyBeamline supports
rapid prototyping for researchers, Beamline targets developers and pro-
duction use, with a typical workflow involving prototyping in pyBeamline
and porting to Beamline for deployment[Bur23].
2.2
Research Questions
The following research questions have been formulated based on the insights gathered
during the initial literature review and exploratory analysis conducted in the early
phases of this thesis. These questions have a clear dependency hierarchy, where an-
swering one question builds foundational knowledge that supports the next question.
This dependency-based formulation adds a logical progression to the investigation.
Specifically, addressing the first research question establishes the theoretical and tech-
nical groundwork necessary to tackle the subsequent ones. By following this layered
approach, the thesis aims to incrementally advance understanding and contribute mean-
ingful solutions within the domain of object-centric process mining and event stream
analysis.
The research questions are designed to consider both conceptual challenges and
practical considerations, thus providing a balanced exploration of theoretical innovation
and real-world applicability.
• Question 1: How can object-centric event data be effectively transformed and
represented in a streaming context to support continuous process discovery?
– Q 1.1: What structural properties must a streaming event exhibit to pre-
serve object-centric semantics?
– Q 1.2: Which types of object-centric process models can be discovered from
such event streams under streaming constraints?
• Question 2: What mechanisms can be employed to perform online discovery of
object-centric process models from event streams?
• Question 3: What architectural design and implementation strategies enable a
scalable, real-time, and adaptable streaming object-centric process mining frame-
work?
==PAGE:19==
2.2 Research Questions
11
• Question 4: How can the quality of object-centric models discovered from event
streams be effectively evaluated in terms of their ability to capture relational
patterns and adapt to concept drift in a streaming context?
The research question and subquestions of RQ1 address key design decisions, par-
ticularly regarding the structure and composition of streaming object-centric event
data.
These decisions directly influence which types of object-centric process mod-
els can be discovered. RQ2 builds upon this by exploring suitable mechanisms for
streaming object-centric process mining discovery, drawing inspiration from existing
techniques in both static and streaming process mining. Subsequently, RQ3 focuses
on the conceptual design of a framework that integrates the data representations de-
fined in RQ1 with the discovery mechanisms identified in RQ2, enabling scalable and
adaptable Streaming Object-Centric Process Mining (SOCPM). Finally, RQ4 turns to
the evaluation of the proposed solution and mined model quality, assessing how well
the discovered model and framework work, by capturing process behaviour, handling
high-throughput data, and adapting to concept drift over time.
==PAGE:20==
CHAPTER 3
Methodology
This chapter outlines the methodological framework applied throughout the thesis. It
begins by describing the overall research methodology and development process used
to structure the work. This is followed by a detailed account of key decisions, including
tool selection, data representation choices, and modelling strategies. Finally, the chap-
ter concludes with an explanation of the evaluation procedures to be taken, detailing
how the proposed approaches are to be assessed in terms of validation and verification.
The methodology is presented to be clear, consistent, and easy to reproduce, staying
aligned with the research questions outlined earlier in section 2.2.
3.1
Development Process
The development process adopted followed an adaptive and iterative approach similar
to what is usually found in agile software development teams. The interactive process
was structured around a set of defined subgoals derived from the central research ques-
tions. These subgoals were decomposed and organised according to their dependencies,
ensuring that the successful completion of all subgoals associated with a given research
question would mark the fulfilment of that question.
The execution of each subgoal was carried out through an iterative structured
development cycle consisting of four primary stages:
1. Requirement Identification: Understanding what is needed to address the
subgoal, both in terms of theoretical grounding and technical constraints.
2. Analysis and Design: Defining the conceptual and architectural design of the
solution, informed by process mining principles and system capabilities.
3. Implementation and Testing: Developing the prototype or model using appro-
priate tools and technologies, followed by systematic testing to ensure correctness
and robustness.
==PAGE:21==
3.2 Tech Stack
13
4. Evaluation: Assessing the outcome of the implementation against criteria such
as functionality, performance, and alignment with the intended research contri-
bution.
Each of these stages provided valuable insights, which often led to refinements of
the current subgoal or the discovery of new dependencies and opportunities.
This
allowed the development to remain adaptive and iterative, ensuring both flexibility
and alignment with the research questions.
3.2
Tech Stack
The development of the proposed streaming object-centric process mining framework
was supported by a carefully selected technology stack, ensuring modularity, scalability,
and testability. The core technologies used include:
• Python: The primary programming language used for implementing the frame-
work due to its rich ecosystem of data processing libraries and ease of rapid
prototyping.
• PyBeamline: A software library designed to support the research and develop-
ment of streaming process mining algorithms, which serves as the foundation for
the thesis work [Bur23].
• ReactiveX (RxPY): Employed for managing data streams and implementing
reactive stream processing pipelines in alignment with streaming principles1.
• Git: Used for version control and collaborative development, ensuring consistent
project tracking and reproducibility.
• CodeCov: Integrated for continuous integration (CI) and test coverage analysis,
helping maintain code quality and verify system behaviour through unit tests2.
• OCEL 2.0 Logs: Used as the data source format for object-centric event rep-
resentation, ensuring compatibility with state-of-the-art object-centric mining
standards [Ber+24].
3.3
Evaluation
The evaluation stage of the framework consisted of two complementary subcategories:
validation and verification. These categories serve different but similar purposes in
assessing the quality and correctness of the methods developed.
1https://github.com/ReactiveX/RxPY
2https://about.codecov.io/
==PAGE:22==
3.3 Evaluation
14
• Validation, focuses on determining whether the proposed solution effectively
addresses the intended problem. This involves assessing whether the implemented
approach fulfils the requirements and goals set forth by the research questions,
and whether it performs satisfactorily under realistic or representative scenarios.
• Verification, on the other hand, is concerned with ensuring that the imple-
mentation is correct. Verification activities include checking the internal logic,
consistency of outputs, and conformance with expected behaviour across edge
cases or controlled conditions.
Together, validation and verification ensure that the developed framework compo-
nents are both functionally relevant and technically accurate.
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 4
Preliminaries
This chapter presents foundational concepts and thoughts essential for understanding
the remainder of the thesis. It is structured into three key sections: Object-Centric
Process Mining, Data Streams, Streaming Process Mining, and pyBeamline, which is
the open-source library in which the proposed solution will be built.
4.1
Object-Centric Process Mining
Outlined previously and now reiterated for clarity, OCPM represents a significant
advancement beyond traditional process mining.
Classic methods typically analyse
processes from a case-centric perspective, where a case (e.g., an Order) is a singular
unit of analysis. While this model suﬀices for certain applications, it fails to capture
the intricate web of interactions between various object types that coexist in real-world
business processes [Aal23a]. OCPM addresses this limitation by introducing the capa-
bility to consider multiple case notions noted as object types, such as Orders, Items,
and Package, thereby enabling a more comprehensive, accurate, and system-wide rep-
resentation of the process[Aal23b].
4.1.1
Object-Centric Data
The evolution of object-centric event log complexity has played a crucial role in en-
abling OCPM discovery, regarding which types of process models can be discovered
[BMA23]. The popular Object-Centric Event Logs (OCEL) format1 allows each event
to be associated with multiple objects of potentially different types [Ber+24]. This
expanded view mirrors the structure of complex processes, such as those found in ERP
systems, where one event with activity “Ship Package” may relate to multiple objects,
including Packages, Items, and Orders. The format has undergone significant devel-
opment, most recently formalised in the Object-Centric Event Log 2.0 Specification
(OCEL 2.0) [Ber+24]. This version enhances expressiveness by supporting object state
changes, Event-to-Object (E2O), and Object-to-Object (O2O), thus forming a richer
1https://www.ocel-standard.org/
==PAGE:24==
4.1 Object-Centric Process Mining
16
and more interconnected event log standard. The specification of OCEL 2.0 handles
the deficit of its predecessor, the OCEL 1.0 specification, which only supported Event-
to-Event (E2E) and simplified E2O relationships without qualifiers.
The universes from which an OCEL 2.0 log is constructed are formalised in Def-
inition 1, based on [Ber+24], and form the essential sets needed for modelling and
interpreting object-centric behaviour.
Each universe contributes a distinct layer of
meaning, whether it be the identification of events, the classification of object types,
or object identifiers, thus enabling object-centric process model discovery[Ber+24].
Definition 1 (Universes [Ber+24]). Let UΣ be the universe of strings. We define the
following pairwise disjoint universes:
• Uev ⊆UΣ is the universe of events.
• Uetype ⊆UΣ is the universe of event types (i.e., activities).
• Uobj ⊆UΣ is the universe of objects identifiers.
• Uotype ⊆UΣ is the universe of object types.
• Uattr ⊆UΣ is the universe of attribute names.
• Uval ⊆UΣ is the universe of attribute values.
• Utime ⊆UΣ is the universe of timestamps (with 0 ∈Utime as the smallest element
and ∞∈Utime as the largest element).
• Uqual ⊆UΣ is the universe of object types.
The universes defined for constructing an OCEL 2.0 log are designed to be disjoint
(i.e, mutually exclusive), meaning that each element belongs to exactly one domain
and cannot serve multiple roles. For example, an entity defined as an object cannot
simultaneously function as an event.
Within this framework, event identifiers are
drawn from the universe Uev, while their associated types (i.e, activities) are elements
of Uetype. Object identifiers reside in Uobj, with corresponding types in Uotype. Both
events and objects may carry attributes from the shared universe Uattr, with values
sourced from Uval. Temporal aspects of events are captured through timestamps in
Utime, and additional metadata can be specified via qualifiers from Uqual. This clear
separation of roles facilitates consistent modelling and reasoning within the object-
centric paradigm [Ber+24; Gha+20]. The object-centric event log in OCEL 2.0 format
is presented in Definition 2.
Definition 2 (OCEL [Ber+24]).
An Object-Centric Event Log (OCEL) is a tuple
L = (E, O, EA, OA, evtype, time, objtype, eatype, oatype, eaval, oaval, E20, O2O)
with:
• E ⊆Uev is the set of events.
• O ⊆Uobj is the set of objects.
==PAGE:25==
4.1 Object-Centric Process Mining
17
• evtype : E →Uetype assigns types to events.
• EA ⊆Uattr is the set of event attributes.
• eatype : EA →Uetype assigns event types to event attributes.
• eaval : (E × EA) ↛Uval assigns values to event attributes (not all the attributes
are mapped for each event).
• objtype : O →Uotype assigns types to objects.
• OA ⊆Uattr is the set of object attributes.
• oaval : (O × OA × Utime) ↛Uval assigns values to object attributes.
• E2O ⊆E × Uqual × O are the qualified event-to-object relations.
• O2O ⊆O × Uqual × O are the qualified object-to-object relations.
To align the concepts developed in this thesis with established industry standards,
a representative subset of an OCEL log from OCEL 2.0 is illustrated in Table 4.1.
This snippet functions as a consistent running example of an object-centric event log,
anchoring the theoretical and design elements that follow. It serves as a stable reference
point to clarify assumptions and demonstrate key principles across the thesis.
Each event is identified by a unique Event ID belonging to the universe Uev, and
is associated with an activity drawn from the universe Uetype. For instance, given an
event identifier e1, the mapping to its activity is defined as evtype(e1) = Place Order.
To simplify analysis and improve readability, the log has been reformatted such
that each object type from Uobj is represented by a dedicated column.
The rows
list corresponding object identifiers, where, for example, o1 ∈Uobj and its type is
given by objtype(o1) = Order.
This tabular presentation facilitates tracing object-
event relationships and understanding the object-centric view adopted throughout the
framework.
Table 4.1: Snippet of an Object-Centric Event Log.
Event ID
Activity
Timestamp
Order
Item
Package
e1
Place Order
2025-05-10T09:05:00
o1
i1, i2
∅
e2
Prepare Package
2025-05-10T09:30:00
o1
i1, i2
p1
e3
Reserve Item
2025-05-10T09:32:00
∅
i1, i2
∅
e4
Pack Item
2025-05-10T11:40:00
o1
i1, i2
p1
e5
Ship Package
2025-06-10T09:25:00
∅
i1, i2
p1
e6
Send Invoice
2025-06-10T11:30:00
o1
∅
∅
e7
Receive Review
2025-10-10T15:35:00
o1
∅
∅
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
==PAGE:26==
4.1 Object-Centric Process Mining
18
4.1.2
Object Centric Process Discovery
The log in which the snippet in Table 4.1 is contained serves as input for various dis-
covery techniques within the OCPM research paradigm. These techniques enable the
construction of object-centric process models, which represent the behaviour and inter-
actions of multiple object types within a process. Notably, a frequently used process
model is Object-Centric Directly-Follows Graph (OC-DFG) [BA23], which highlights
the sequential flow relations between activities for object types involved and serves
ET2ET and ET2OT logical relationship connections [BMA23].
One of the most prominent methodological workflows for conducting OCPM dis-
covery, specifically aimed at generating ET2ET and ET2OT process models [BMA23].
Where ET2ET refers to models that capture relationships, such as the ”directly-follows”
relationship between event types (i.e., activities), in contrast, ET2OT refers to models
that represent relationships between event types and object types, such as being able to
derive object type from an arc (example Figure 4.1). The workflow reflects a standard
step-by-step pipeline used to transform a static object-centric event log to a system-
wide process object-centric process model capable of capturing complex multi-object
interactions [AB20b; Aal23b; BMA23; Aal23a]. The steps are:
1. Input: Given a static object-centric event log that adheres to the correct spec-
ifications, where each event is associated with one or more object identifiers of
potentially diverse object types (e.g., Order, Package, Item) as illustrated in
Table 4.1..
2. Flatten Events: Convert each multi-object event into a set of flattened events,
each tied to a single object identifier. This effectively “clones” the original event
per object identifier, ensuring that only one identifier is retained per instance.
3. Projection: Partition the flattened events into separate logs, one for each ob-
ject type.
This isolates the behaviour of each object class, such as activities
specifically involving Orders or Items
4. Mining: Apply traditional process mining discovery techniques independently
to each object-type-specific log. Since object identifiers are unique, they can serve
as the traditional version of case identifiers, enabling the construction of process
models that capture the lifecycle of each object identifier of a specific object type.
5. Merge: Combine the individually discovered models by aligning activities shared
across object types and incorporating ET2ET and ET2OT interactions. This
results in a cohesive object-centric process model that captures the integrated
behaviour of the entire system across multiple interacting entities.
Ultimately, this workflow yields an OCPM process model, potentially resembling
the structure of an Object-Centric Directly-Follows Graph (OC-DFG) illustrated in
Figure 4.1. This method represents the prevailing approach in object-centric process
analysis [BMA23].
==PAGE:27==
4.1 Object-Centric Process Mining
19
4.1.3
Object-Centric Directly-Follows Graphs
A fundamental process model relevant to this thesis is the Object-Centric Directly-
Follows Graph (OC-DFG). This model extends the traditional, case-specific Directly-
Follows Graph (DFG) by incorporating an object-centric perspective. While a standard
Directly-Follows Graph (DFG) captures the relationship in which activities follow each
other within a single case notion, the OC-DFG links activities across multiple interact-
ing object types[BA23; Aal19].
In an OC-DFG, an event activity may be associated with several objects by co-
occurrence, as seen in Table 4.1 (e.g., activity “Place Order” contains objects of
Order and Item), and the graph reflects transitions between activities through the lens
of these object relations. This results in a more holistic view of the process, revealing
how actions on one object type activity (e.g., “Pack Item”) may influence or be
influenced by actions on another activity (e.g., “Send Invoice”).
The formal definition of an OC-DFG, a model that captures directly-follows rela-
tions across object types, is given by Alessandro Berti and Wil van der Aalst in [BA23]
and can be seen in Def. 3.
Definition 3 (Object-Centric Directly-Follows Graph [BA23]).
An object-centric
directly-follows (OC-DFG) is a tuple (A, OT, N, F, πfreqn, πfreqe) where:
• A is a set of activities.
• OT is a set of object types.
• N = A ∪{ nS,ot | ot ∈OT } ∪{ nE,ot | ot ∈OT } is the set of nodes of the
graph, which includes the set of activities and a start/end node for each object
type (nS,ot and nE,ot respectively).
• F ⊆N × OT × N is the set of typed arcs.
• πfreqn : A ↛N assigns a frequency to the activities.
• πfreqe : F ↛R+ ∪{0} assigns a frequency to the arcs.
The OC-DFG enhances system-wide insight by highlighting cross-object behavioural
patterns, enabling analysts to uncover interdependencies and coordination points be-
tween different object lifecycles[BA23].
However, it is important to note that, like
traditional DFGs, OC-DFGs do not capture concurrency or control-flow semantics
such as splits or joins, which limits their expressiveness in complex process scenar-
ios. Despite this, they remain a valuable exploratory tool in the object-centric process
mining toolkit. A fragmented version of what an OC-DFG would look like based on
Table 4.1 can be seen in Figure 4.1.
==PAGE:28==
4.1 Object-Centric Process Mining
20
Package
Order
Place Order
Prepare
Package
Reserve Item
Pack Item
Ship Package
Send Invoice
Recieve Review
Item
Package
Order
Item
Figure 4.1: Simplified OC-DFG based on object-centric event log in Table 4.1.
In this version of Figure 4.1, the frequency counts of edges and activities have been
left out for simplification. The OC-DFG shows the initial “dummy” start/end nodes of
Order, Item, and Package, each represented by stippled lines with ingoing/outgoing
arrows respectively. This model captures both ET2ET and ET2OT relationships. By
==PAGE:29==
4.2 Data Streams
21
following the colour-coded arrows, one can trace the behavioural flow specific to each
object type across the event log. For example, the activity "Send Invoice" is ob-
served only after "Pack Item", illustrating a direct ET2ET dependency between these
activities. Additionally, since this behavioural link is associated with the Order object
type, it simultaneously establishes an ET2OT connection. This dual representation
allows the model to convey not only the control flow between activities but also the
object-type context, which is the key feature of object-centric process mining.
4.2
Data Streams
A data stream is an unbounded, potentially infinite sequence of data elements made
available over time [Bur22]. Unlike traditional static datasets, where the complete set
of observations is known in advance and can be processed repeatedly, data streams are
generated continuously and often at high velocity. Common sources include event logs
from business processes, transactional systems, sensor networks, and user interaction
logs [Agg07; Bur23].
Advancements in computational processing power and hardware technology have
naturally led organisations and businesses to capture and store vast amounts of data
streams [Agg07]. This includes everything from transactional records to operational
and behavioural data, which are logged for purposes such as process analysis, perfor-
mance monitoring, and business model optimisation. In some cases, these data logs
even become valuable assets in themselves, with organisations monetising their data
by selling it to third parties [Agg07; GZK05].
The field of data stream processing is guided by a set of principles designed to
address the unique challenges of handling unbounded, high-velocity data flows [Agg07;
Bur22; Bur23]:
• Memory Constraints: Due to the continuously increasing volume and velocity
of data, it is no longer feasible to store and process all data using traditional
multi-pass methods. As such, eﬀicient data mining algorithms must operate in a
single-pass fashion, processing each data point only once.
• Temporal Nature: The order and timing of events are integral to stream data.
Algorithms must account for temporal dependencies, sequences, and trends as
the stream evolves.
• Adaptivity to Concept Drift: Data distributions may shift over time—a phe-
nomenon known as concept drift. Effective stream mining systems must detect
and adapt to such changes to remain accurate and relevant.
• Low Latency Requirements: Stream processing systems must provide insights
with minimal delay, allowing for real-time analysis and decision-making.
==PAGE:30==
4.3 Streaming Process Mining
22
4.3
Streaming Process Mining
As introduced in section 2.1, the field of streaming process mining (SPM) has emerged
as a response to the limitations of traditional, log-based discovery techniques in dy-
namic, real-time environments.
In this section, we delve deeper into the founda-
tional concepts and models that are used in streaming process mining [Bur22; Bur18;
BSA12b].
We begin by examining the two primary taxonomy-driven approaches in online
streaming process mining: Window Models and Problem Reduction as presented in
Figure 2.1. These paradigms offer distinct strategies for adapting classical discovery
techniques to the constraints of unbounded event streams.
Window Models, including variants such as sliding windows and tumbling, partition
the continuous stream into finite, manageable segments [Agg07]. This segmentation
enables the repeated application of traditional, offline process discovery algorithms on
each window, thereby providing a conceptually straightforward way to extend exist-
ing techniques to real-time scenarios. While effective for short-term analysis, window
models suffer from several inherent limitations. These include the risk of information
loss due to window sizes, and limited capacity to capture long-term dependencies or
patterns that span across window segments [Bur22].
Problem Reduction, on the other hand, takes a more structural approach. Instead
of slicing the stream, it decomposes the discovery problem into smaller, type-specific
streaming subproblems, and once that is done, relates it to a process mining problem.
This is an effective taxonomy, as common aspects of what was previously considered
process mining techniques are reduced to their streaming equivalent, thereby easing the
understanding between regular process mining analysts and data stream processing.
The work of Burattin et al. [Bur18; Bur22; BSA12b] utilised this taxonomy to
create an adaptation of the traditional Heuristics Miner to the streaming domain by
reformulating it as a frequency approximation problem. The core idea was to replace
exact frequency counting, used in offline process discovery, with an approximate count-
ing technique suitable for unbounded data streams. This transformation enables the
miner to operate under strict memory and time constraints while still capturing domi-
nant behavioural patterns in the process. They applied the Lossy Counting algorithm,
originally proposed for mining frequent items in data streams. The algorithm main-
tains frequency estimates with bounded error guarantees by partitioning the stream
into fixed-size buckets and periodically pruning infrequent elements. The pseudocode
is shown in Algorithm 1.
==PAGE:31==
4.3 Streaming Process Mining
23
Algorithm 1 Lossy Counting
1: Input: S: Data stream, ϵ: Maximal approximation error
2: T ←∅
▷Initially empty set
3: N ←1
▷Number of observed events
4: w ←⌈1
ϵ ⌉
▷Bucket size
5: while true do
6:
e ←observe(S)
7:
bcurr ←⌈N
ϵ ⌉
// Is there a tuple with in T with e as it first component
8:
if e is already in T then
9:
Increment the frequency of e in T
10:
else
11:
Insert (e, 1, bcurr −1) in T
12:
end if
// Periodic cleanup
13:
if N mod w = 0 then
14:
for all (a, f, ∆) ∈T s.t. f + ∆≤bcurr do
15:
Remove (a, f, ∆) from T
16:
end for
17:
end if
18: end while
4.3.1
Heuristic Miner with Lossy Counting (HM-LC)
The actual Heuristics Miner with Lossy Counting (HM-LC), introduced in [Bur22;
Bur18; BSA12b], adapts the classical Heuristics Miner algorithm [WV03] for streaming
environments by leveraging the Lossy Counting approximation technique. It enables
the discovery of process models from an infinite and unbounded stream of events.
In this setup, the directly-follows relations between activities, i.e., the frequency
with which an activity b follows an activity a, are treated as individual variables whose
occurrence frequencies must be monitored. By employing Lossy Counting, the algo-
rithm approximates the frequency of these relations, enabling the estimation of depen-
dency measures over time without requiring exact counts [Bur18; Bur22].
This transformation (Problem Reduction) reframes the problem of streaming pro-
cess discovery as one of stream-based frequency estimation. The approximation prop-
erties of Lossy Counting guarantee that, for any observed variable (in this case, a
directly-follows relation), the estimated observation frequency f satisfies the inequal-
ity[Bur22]:
f ≤F ≤f + ϵN
where F is the true frequency, ϵ is the specified maximum approximation error,
and N is the total number of events seen so far. This ensures both bounded error and
controlled memory usage, making it well-suited for streaming scenarios.
The stream mining algorithm, by Burattin [Bur22], is composed of three main
steps, but before delving into them, let us define the helper function observe(S). This
==PAGE:32==
4.3 Streaming Process Mining
24
function inspects the data stream S and retrieves the next available event for processing.
Essentially, it acts as a streaming observer, enabling sequential, one-pass observation
of events as they arrive in real time [Bur22].
In the work of [Bur18], events are represented as tuples (cN, aN), where cN denotes
the case identifier, which is used for tracing flow through events in traditional process
mining, and aN is the observed activity. The algorithm proceeds as follows [Bur22]:
• Case Activity Tracking: Upon observing an event, the Lossy Counting mech-
anism updates the case- and activity tracking structure DC. If the case identifier
cN has been seen before, its associated activity is updated to the current one. If
it is new, an entry is created. This step ensures that the algorithm maintains a
lightweight summary of the last seen activity for each case.
• Relation Construction: Using the updated DC, the algorithm then updates the
relation-tracking structure DR, which records the directly-follows relationships
between activities. For each new activity associated with a case, a relation from
the previously recorded activity to the new one is added or updated in DR.
• Lossy Cleanup: Periodically, a cleanup step is triggered based on bucket size.
During this phase, entries in both DC and DR that fall below a significance
threshold are removed, ensuring that the memory footprint remains bounded.
This step allows the miner to gradually forget infrequent or outdated behaviour,
making it well-suited for handling concept drift.
==PAGE:33==
4.3 Streaming Process Mining
25
Algorithm 2 Heuristics Miner with Lossy Counting [Bur22]
1: Input: S : event stream of type t, and ϵ : approximation error
2: Initialize Lossy Counting Sets DC and DR
3: N ←1
▷Counter of observed events
4: w ←⌈1
ϵ ⌉
▷Bucket size
5: while true do
6:
(cN, aN) ←observe(S)
7:
bcurr ←⌈N
w ⌉
// Step 1: Update the Lossy Counting Sets
8:
if ∃((c, alast), f, ∆) ∈DC such that c = cN then
9:
Remove the entry ((c, alast), f, ∆) from DC
10:
DC ←DC ∪{((c, aN), f + 1, ∆)}
// Update the Dr data structure
11:
rN ←(alast, aN) // Build relation rn as alast →aN
12:
if ∃(r, f, ∆) ∈DR such that r = rN then
13:
Remove the entry (r, f, ∆) from DR
14:
DR ←DR ∪{(r, f + 1, ∆)}
15:
else
16:
DR ←DR ∪{(rN, 1, bcurr −1)}
17:
end if
18:
else
19:
DC ←DC ∪{((cN, aN), 1, bcurr −1)}
20:
end if
// Step 2: Periodic cleanup
21:
if N mod w ≡0 then
22:
for all ((o, a), f, ∆) ∈DC do
23:
if f + ∆≤bcurr then
24:
Remove ((o, a), f, ∆) from DC
25:
end if
26:
end for
27:
for all (r, f, ∆) ∈DR do
28:
if f + ∆≤bcurr then
29:
Remove (r, f, ∆) from DR
30:
end if
31:
end for
32:
end if
33:
N ←N + 1
// Step 3: Consumption of the data structure to update the model
34:
Update the model using DR
35: end while
The miner is inherently good at adapting to concept drift (i.e., reflecting changing
behaviour within the stream) [Bur22]. The Lossy Counting algorithm supports this by
maintaining frequency-based summaries of observations within a bounded error margin,
gradually discarding infrequent or outdated patterns [Bur22; Bur18; BSA12b]. This
enables the mined process model to focus on the most recent relations, allowing it
to adjust dynamically as the underlying process behaviour evolves, without requiring
explicit detection or retraining. As a result, the miner remains responsive to shifts in
==PAGE:34==
4.4 PyBeamline
26
activity
a →b relationships over time, which is particularly valuable in real-world
scenarios where process structures are not static.
4.4
PyBeamline
This section presents the foundational components of the open-source pyBeamline
streaming process mining library [Bur23], which serves as the implementation base
for this thesis. Built on the ReactiveX paradigm and its Python binding being RxPY,
pyBeamline enables the composition of asynchronous, event-driven data flows using
observable sequences and pipeable query operators. This architectural model enables
high modularity, allowing for the direct integration of custom process mining logic into
the stream processing pipeline [Bur23].
4.4.1
Existing Artifacts
Prior to the extensions introduced in this thesis, pyBeamline was designed for classical
Streaming Process Mining (SPM), assuming a traditional case-centric process structure.
The fundamental unit of streaming data is encapsulated in the BEvent class, which
models a single process event associated with a specific case identifier. This structure
is suﬀicient for conventional SPM but lacks the expressiveness required for handling
multi-object associations inherent in OCPM.
The pyBeamline library consists of two discovery algorithms:
• Heuristics Miner with Lossy Counting as previously presented.
• Heuristics Miner with Lossy Counting Budget is a memory-bounded version.
While both algorithms are based on the same foundational principles of the Heuristics
Miner adapted for streaming contexts, they differ in how they manage memory and
frequency approximation. The former leverages the classical Lossy Counting technique,
while the latter introduces a memory budget constraint to more tightly control resource
usage [Bur23; Bur22].
Despite their differences, both algorithms produce output in the form of a HeuristicsNet,
a process model representation compatible with the PM4PY framework [BZS23]. This
common output format enables interoperability with a broad range of post-processing,
visualisation, and evaluation tools already available in the process mining ecosystem
of PM4PY.
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 5
Solution Design
This chapter begins by providing a high-level overview of the proposed framework, out-
lining the rationale behind the architectural design that will be presented subsequently.
The following sections systematically explore each component of the proposed archi-
tectural design, establishing formal definitions and providing contextual discussions to
ground the approach when necessary, thereby ensuring the framework is both theo-
retically sound and practically applicable. The resulting architecture is modular and
well-suited for a streaming object-centric process discovery framework, adhering to the
taxonomy, constraints, and principles of real-time streaming process mining, which
answers the research questions contextually based on the design.
5.1
Overview
This section outlines the high-level design and reasoning of the proposed framework
for stream-based object-centric process discovery, referred to as SOCPM. The design is
grounded in the research findings, motivations and established in the preliminaries of
the previous chapter. It aims to adapt classical offline Object-Centric Process Mining
(OCPM) discovery procedures to streaming context.
Central to the proposed transformation is the Problem Reduction taxonomy in
streaming process mining, mentioned in prelimaries and seen in Figure 2.1, which
seeks to reframe the original object-centric process mining problem into a reduced
streaming problem, and then the reduced problem to be recontextualised within the
process mining domain.
The proposed solution builds upon the widely adopted multistep procedure for
generating process models supporting ET2ET and ET2OT within OCPM, as outlined
in Preliminaries subsection 2.1.1. This procedure typically involves flattening the event
data, projecting it onto individual object types, applying traditional process mining
discovery algorithms, and finally merging the results. This enables the construction of
object-centric models from multi-object event data, while reusing traditional miners.
==PAGE:36==
5.1 Overview
28
When applying Problem Reduction of traditional OCPM to stream terminology, the
traditional multistep OCPM discovery procedure can be reinterpreted through the lens
of the fan-out/fan-in paradigm, particularly within the context of individual projected
object type log mining. This pattern, commonly employed in parallel computing and
data streams, involves distributing input to multiple parallel processing units (fan-out),
each independently processing a subtask, and then aggregating the outcomes into a
cohesive result (fan-in) [Agg07; GZK05], see Figure 5.1.
Figure 5.1: Illustration of the fan-out/fan-in paradigm where input is distributed to
parallel units and merged in the final stage.
Hence, the proposed framework leverages this paradigm and, through Problem Re-
duction, aims to modularly accommodate each step of the traditional OCPM multistep
discovery procedure, by transforming each step into its streaming equivalent.
Following the adoption of a clear architectural paradigm, the next consideration is
the choice of data representation. As the work aims to employ the Problem Reduction
approach to mutistep procedure of discovering ET2ET and ET2OT process model rela-
tions. The work will focus exclusively on a subset of the object-centric data definitions
provided in the Preliminaries subsection 4.1.1 of the OCEL 2.0 event log specifica-
tion. Omitting the more expressive but structurally complex features introduced in
OCEL 2.0, such as O2O relations and qualifiers for both E2O and O2O [Ber+24]. The
extended semantics, such as qualified relations, etc., pose challenges for initial explo-
ration within the field of SOCPM. In essence, the subset that will be consider is the
Object-Centric Event Log 1.0 Specification (OCEL 1.0), as OCEL1.0 ⊆OCEL2.0,
supporting E2E and E2O relations [Gha+20]. This assumption is particularly suit-
able for streaming contexts, as data is assumed to have a small and fixed number of
attributes, and low-latency processing is required [BSA12a]. Moreover, since it is a
subset, the framework maintains backwards compatibility with a wide range of exist-
ing data sources and use cases, without sacrificing the foundational semantics needed
for object-centric process discovery of ET2ET and ET2OT models. This strategy sim-
plifies the proposed framework to strike a balance between theoretical soundness and
practical applicability.
Based on the research questions posed and the feasibility of mining process mod-
els through the Problem Reduction of the ET2ET and ET2OT multistep discovery
==PAGE:37==
5.2 Streaming Object-Centric Process Mining Framework
29
procedure, the proposed framework focuses on the discovery of the Object-Centric
Directly-Follows Graph (OC-DFG). The OC-DFG is a particularly suitable target, as
it captures behavioural relations and aligns with the streaming objective of minimising
latency in detecting deviations or undesired behaviour.
5.2
Streaming Object-Centric Process Mining
Framework
Having presented the overview and general rationale, this section presents the architec-
tural decisions of the Streaming Object-Centric Process Mining (SOCPM) framework,
breaking down the multistep procedure into individual components by responsibility.
The framework realises stream-based object-centric process mining by decomposing the
traditional offline OCPM pipeline into modular, streaming-friendly stages. Achieved
through the Problem Reduction taxonomy presented in [Bur22].
Figure 5.2 presents the architectural modular pipeline of the framework.
Each
numbered element represents a distinct architectural function that contributes to the
building and maintenance of the global model over time.
Source
1
2
3
Flatten
4 Stream Mining
...
HM-LC
5 Inclusion
Strategy
Merge
6
HM-LC
HM-LC
Relationship
 Mining
AER Miner
7
Routing
Figure 5.2: Architectural overview of streaming object-centric process mining frame-
work that supports discovery of ET2ET and ET2OT models, in which
individual steps have been numbered.
Before formally presenting each step in depth in subsequent sections, a brief overview
is provided that shows how the individual components of the multistep procedure can
be reduced to a streaming problem or operator. The numbered components in the
architectural pipeline, as shown in Figure 5.2, are now presented and discussed indi-
vidually.
• 1) Source: Emits a continuous object-centric event stream based on in OCEL
1.0, containing the necessary activity and object information. This streaming
==PAGE:38==
5.2 Streaming Object-Centric Process Mining Framework
30
input corresponds to the traditional static object-centric event log used in offline
OCPM discovery.
• 2) Flatten: Converts incoming streamed events into flattened events, working as
a stream mapping operator. This step resembles pre-processing in offline OCPM,
where events are flattened, preparing for the application of traditional OCPM
analysis.
• 3) Routing: Takes the flattened stream and partitions it into type-specific sub-
streams by filtering based on object types. This reflects the classical log projection
step in offline OCPM, where a log is split per object class for independent anal-
ysis, thereby facilitating different object views. It reduces the projection step to
a data stream routing problem.
• 4) Stream Mining: Applies an existing stream mining algorithm for the tra-
ditional SPM discovery problem (e.g., HM-LC) to each object-type stream to
build local behavioural models. This parallels how traditional process mining
techniques are applied per object type in projected logs to facilitate offline OCPM
discovery.
• 5) Inclusion Strategy: Monitors the frequency or temporal relevance of object
types in the stream-mined models, maintaining a dynamic set of active types.
This acts as a stream-based analogue of object filtering or selection, and facilitates
object-centric type concept drift. This refers to the dynamic evolution of object
types over time, either through the disappearance of rarely used types or the
introduction of new types not previously observed.
• 6) Relationship Mining:
Proposed parallel stream mining algorithm and
model, that aims to complement typical limitations of an OC-DFG. By observ-
ing the co-participation of object types within each activity on the original event
stream and inferring cardinality between object types based on co-occurrence
observations through object-identifier manipulation. This will be thoroughly pre-
sented in subsequent sections.
• 7) Merging: Integrates the most recent filtered per-type DFG models into
a system-wide OC-DFG of the streamed process, and in parallel includes a co-
occurrence observational model, which is reflected with activities and object types
considered in the OC-DFG. This corresponds to the final synthesis step in offline
OCPM, where the finalised system-wide model would be merged based on indi-
vidually mined object type logs.
Having established the architectural mechanism enabling SOCPM, the remainder
of this chapter presents each component of the framework in detail, justifying design
decisions and theoretical grounding. The subsequent sections follow the numbered se-
quence outlined in Figure 5.2. It begins with the structure of the input event stream
and the preprocessing steps (Steps 1–2), proceeds to the routing and stream mining
logic (Steps 3–4), and then introduces strategies for dynamically selecting relevant ob-
ject types and mining inter-object relationships (Steps 5–6). Finally, it concludes with
==PAGE:39==
5.3 Source
31
the merging phase (Step 7), where the independently discovered models are integrated
into a unified object-centric process model that encapsulates both behavioural and
relational perspectives.
Together, these components constitute a modular and extensible framework, de-
signed to support continuous, interpretable, and scalable object-centric process discov-
ery over unbounded event streams.
5.3
Source
Before designing or constructing any form of object-centric streaming framework that
supports discovery, it is essential first to define what constitutes an object-centric event
stream (i.e., source), while adhering to the specifications and requirements set by the
object-centric and streaming communities.
Therefore, a definition of what constitutes an object-centric event in a data stream
is essential. As previously defined in the Preliminaries subsection 4.1.1, the OCEL 2.0
log format includes standard features such as activity labels, event identifiers, object
types, and object identifiers, which are essential to discovery ET2ET and ET2OT
process models [BMA23; Ber+24], but extends them with additional features such as
relationship qualifiers for both E2O and O2O. As previously said, the thesis considers
a subset of the functionalities provided in OCEL 2.0. Specifically, the log format of
Object-Centric Event Log 1.0 Specification (OCEL 1.0) [Gha+20], which is a subset of
OCEL 2.0 without the E2O, O2O, OA, oaval as seen in Definition 2. By adopting this
design choice, it is acknowledged that our solution will inherit the limitations of OCEL
1.0. However, it will also simplify the initial exploration into the realm of Streaming
Object-Centric Process Mining (SOCPM).
Intuitively, an object-centric event fitted to a stream format must encapsulate sev-
eral core components to support effective process discovery and analysis. At its founda-
tion, each event must include a reference to one or more object types, along with their
corresponding object identifiers, and the event must have a small and fixed number of
attributes [BSA12a; BMA23]. Equally essential is the inclusion of the activity label,
which describes the action being performed, and the event identifier, which ensures
uniqueness and traceability within the event stream. Additionally, event attributes
describe the necessary contextual properties. To align the research with current stan-
dards of the OCEL 2.0 formalisation seen in Definition 1. Definition 4 present the key
object-centric sets compliant with our subset data formal of OCEL 1.0 from which the
object-centric event will be composed and further analysis will be provided.
Definition 4 (Object-Centric Sets).
The key object-centric sets to be considered
throughout the thesis are based on the universes provided in Definition 1, where:
• ID being the countably infinite set of event identifiers where ID ⊆Uev.
• A being a finite set of activities within the process domain where A ⊆Uetype.
• T being the set of timestamps where T ⊆Utime.
==PAGE:40==
5.3 Source
32
• OT being the set of object types where OT ⊆Uotype.
• O is the countable infinite set of object identifiers where O ⊆Uobj.
• Att being the set of attribute names where Att ⊆Uattr.
• V al being the infinite set of attribute values where V al ⊆Uval.
These sets, allows for associations to form the basis for OCPM ET2ET and ET2OT
process discovery, thereby enabling the construction of object-centric process models
[BMA23].
A formalisation of an object-centric event can be found in Definition 5.
By utilising sets comparable to those existing within the OCEL 2.0 formalisation, the
proposed structure aligns well with current community standards.
Definition 5 (Object-Centric Event).
An object-centric event is a tuple
of (eid, act, t, omap, vmap), where:
• eid ∈ID with ID being the countably infinite set of event.
• act ∈A with A being a finite set of activities within the process domain
• t ∈T with T being the set of timestamps of when the event occurred, where
T ⊆Utime
• omap : OT ↛(P(O) \ {∅}) with OT being the set of object types and O is the
countable infinite set of object identifiers, where there exists a function πtype :
O →OT such that ∀o ∈O, πtype(o) ∈OT.
• vmap : Att ↛V al with Att being the set of attribute names and V al being the
infinite set of attribute values.
An object-centric event can then be characterised as:
OCEvent = (eid, act, t, omap, vmap)
From each OCEvent, it is possible to extract the associated object types and ob-
ject identifiers, which together constitute the minimal structure required to enable any
form of OCPM, including approaches analogous to offline process discovery [Aal23a;
BMA23].
This object-event linkage enables the discovery framework to track how
objects identifiers evolves throughout the stream process. Consider a large-scale enter-
prise information system that continuously logs events based on the occurring activity,
along with the objects involved at that specific point in time. This event structure
naturally aligns with the principles of object-centric process mining.
In the context of SOCPM, it is essential to define the nature of the data being pro-
cessed. A stream is an infinite, unbounded sequence of observable units O = ⟨o1, o2, . . .⟩
that evolves through the continuous addition [Bur22; Agg07]. Each observable unit
oi must provide suﬀicient object-centric context to support object-centric discovery.
To this end, a definition of an object-centric event stream as a continuous flow of
==PAGE:41==
5.3 Source
33
object-centric events is needed, linking activities to object types and respective ob-
ject identifiers, with corresponding event attributes.
To align the traditional tem-
poral semantics of event streams, where events are emitted upon occurrence in real
time, as highlighted in [Agg07; Bur18]. The object-centric event stream assumes that
the timestamp associated with each OCEvent corresponds exactly to the moment
the event takes place in the real world.
This assumption ensures consistency with
streaming principles and enables accurate chronological tracking of object identifiers
over the event flow. Initially consider the set containing all object-centric events as
OCEvents = (ID ×A×T ×omap×vmap). From this we can define the object-centric
event stream as in Definition 6.
Definition 6 (Object-Centric Event Stream).
Let O ⊆OCEvents be the universe of
observable units, where each oi ∈O conforms to the event specification in Definition 5.
An object-centric event stream is defined as an infinite sequence:
S : Z≥0 →O
where Z≥0 denotes the set of non-negative integers, i.e., {0, 1, 2, . . .}.
Note, assuming that the timestamp field of each event accurately reflects the real-
world moment at which the event occurred, the stream is required to respect tempo-
ral ordering.
Specifically, for all i < j ∈Z≥0, the following constraint must hold
πt(S(i)) ≤πt(S(j)) where πt denotes the projection function that extracts the times-
tamp component from an event.
This condition permits multiple events to share the same timestamp. Consequently,
the ordering induced by the timestamp relation ⪯, defined as πt(e) ≤πt(e′), constitutes
a reflexive, antisymmetric, and transitive partial order over the object-centric
event stream. It does not guarantee a total order over all events, as some may happen
concurrently.
In reference to the running example from the object-centric event log in Table 4.1,
which from this point forward is treated as a “stream” of events processed sequentially
from top to bottom, consider the event with Event ID = e1, which corresponds to the
activity "Place Order". This event involves multiple object types and their respective
identifiers, specifically an Order, and two Item objects. According to the structure
defined in Definition 5, the event can be represented in the stream as:
e = (e1, Place Order, {Order : {o1}, Item : {i1, i2}}, vmap)
In this example, the timestamp field is omitted under the assumption that it is
implicitly assigned at the moment the event is emitted into the stream. Similarly, vmap
is initially omitted for clarity, but in practice, it would contain contextual attributes
that enhance the semantic richness of the event. For example, the value map might
include:
vmap = {employee : "Alice", total_price : 249.99}
==PAGE:42==
5.4 Flatten
34
Such attributes are not merely metadata—they can serve as the basis for aggre-
gate insights, such as computing average prices, identifying frequent contributors, or
segmenting customer behaviour.
By Definition 6, each event in the stream adheres to a standardised structure,
providing the essential components required for object-centric process discovery. Thus,
this structure provides a consistent foundation for applying streaming mining operators,
algorithms, and enabling stateful analysis over object-centric, temporally ordered data.
5.4
Flatten
Having defined the structure and semantics of object-centric event streams, the first
core operator to be introduced in the object-centric streaming process mining pipeline
is flattening. This transformation plays a foundational role by enabling object-type-
specific discovery through the decomposition of complex, multi-object events. In classi-
cal offline OCPM, such a decomposition is often implicit through projection [BMA23;
Aal19].
However, in streaming settings, where events arrive incrementally, are un-
bounded, and usually refer to multiple object identifiers across different types, this
process must be explicitly defined and performed in real-time [Agg07; Bur22].
By
treating the flattening and projection mechanisms as separate operators, the flattening
can be reduced to a stream mapping operator in this section, and the projection can be
reduced to a routing problem, which will be presented in a later section. The flattening
is essential for facilitating the traditional process discovery techniques, as presented in
the multistep procedure, which typically assumes a single object perspective per trace.
By aligning the stream format with these assumptions, flattening allows established
stream mining algorithms to be reused in an object-centric context.
A single object-centric event, as defined in Definition 5, may reference several object
types and multiple identifiers per type. This poses a challenge for type-specific mining:
an event cannot be directly attributed to a single object type without ambiguity. To
address this, we re-introduce a new operational notion of flattening, inspired by [AB20a;
BMA23; Aal19], which aims to deterministically transform each complex event into a
set of simplified, type-specific event representations, in an object-centric event stream.
Definition 7 (Flattening of an Object-Centric Event). Let e = (eid, act, t, omap, vmap) ∈
OCEvents be an object-centric event. The flattened event set of e is defined as:
ﬂatten(e) = {(eid, act, t, ot 7→{o}, vmap) | ot ∈OT, o ∈omap(ot)}
Each flattened event, as defined in Definition 7, has an object map whose codomain
is a singleton set—i.e., it contains exactly one object identifier. This guarantees that
each flattened event is minimally associated with a single object, ensuring minimal,
unambiguous object type association.
Based on the flattening definition provided in Definition 7 and referring to the
running example in Table 4.1, consider the event e with EVENT ID = e1, corresponding
to the activity Place Order. This event references an Order, and two Item identifiers.
==PAGE:43==
5.5 Routing
35
Applying the flattening function ﬂatten(e), the event is decomposed into the following
set of simplified, object-type-specific events:
ﬂatten(e) = {(e1, Place Order, 2025-05-10T09:05:00, {Order 7→{o1}}, vmap),
(e1, Place Order, 2025-05-10T09:05:00, {Item 7→{i1}}, vmap),
(e1, Place Order, 2025-05-10T09:05:00, {Item 7→{i2}}, vmap)
}
Here, the original complex event has been decomposed into three flattened events,
each referencing exactly one object identifier paired with its corresponding object type,
which can be passed downstream to the next operator.
It is important to notice
that the flattening operation flatten(e), which flattens event e, from Definition 7,
is information-preserving, that is, the original event structure can be reconstructed
through a composition operation over the flattened events.
To formally support this property, we introduce the composition operator ⊗. Given
a set of flattened events ﬂatten(e) ={e1, . . . , en}, where ei = (eid, act, t, omapi, vmap),
we define the composition operator as:
e1 ⊗e2 ⊗· · · ⊗en =
n
⊗
i=1
ei = (eid, act, t, omap, vmap),
where omap(ot) = {o | omapi(ot) = o, dom(omapi) = ot}, for all ot ∈∪n
i=1 dom(omapi).
As one can see from above, the composition operator works only for flattened events
that share the same eid, act, t, and vmap fields. From the framework’s perspective, the
flattening-composition pair thus forms a lossless and reversible transformation, ensur-
ing that the object-centric structure of the events remains intact.
In summary, flattening transforms multi-object events into a format suitable for
modular routing and type-specific mining, serving as a foundational preprocessing step
in the SOCPM architecture.
5.5
Routing
Having defined event flattening in a stream, the next step is to enable the selective
isolation of object-type-specific behaviour, an essential feature of object-centric process
mining. In traditional OCPM, this is achieved through event log projection: a tech-
nique that filters events based on the object types involved, enabling per-type process
analysis[Aal23a]. Thereby allowing analysts to select the object types to be consid-
ered in the finalised object-centric model. In the streaming setting, this is replicated
through a routing mechanism that supports dynamic and selective discovery.
The proposed routing component supports two modes of operation, allowing for
the control of which object types are to be mined. Suppose a routing configuration is
provided as a set R ⊆OT of object types. In that case, the framework activates static
routing, by pre-registering all substreams for all object-types in R, meaning only
events associated with the object types in R are projected into type-specific substreams;
==PAGE:44==
5.5 Routing
36
all events of other types are discarded/suppressed. This gives analysts explicit control
to focus on selected process views.
If no such configuration is supplied, then the
proposed framework defaults to dynamic routing, where all object types encountered
in the stream are considered. Hence, if a new object type is encountered for the first
time, a new substream will be instated, allowing it to be mined. This mode supports
broad discovery without prior assumptions, enabling comprehensive modelling of the
system’s behaviour across all object types when no domain knowledge is available. A
flowchart simplifying the proposed routing, based on routing configuration R with an
event to object type function type(e) →OT, is seen in Figure 5.3.
Recieved flattened
event e
Yes
No
Is routing
config
 R defined?
No
Yes
Is type(e) in R?
Route e to substream
with corresponding
type
Discard event e
Has type(e)
seen before?
Instantiate new
substream
with type(e)
No
Route e to substream
with corresponding type
Yes
Figure 5.3: Flowchart of routing based on routing configuration R, enabling static or
dynamic stream routing and registration.
The routing mechanism situated at the (fan-out) position in the architectural
overview in Figure 5.2 constitute individual substreams based on object-type. This
motivates the definition of a t-type projected stream, which provides a filtered, time-
preserving view of the fan-out substream, containing only events relevant to a specific
object type t ∈OT. These streams form the foundation for per-type online process
discovery and align with the modularity principles of multistep offline approaches.
Definition 8 (t - Type Stream).
Let OT denote the finite set of object types, and let
t ∈OT be a specific object type. Given an object-centric event stream S : Z≥0 →O
matching Definition 6, the t-type stream St is defined as:
==PAGE:45==
5.5 Routing
37
St : Z≥0 →O|t
where:
O|t = {e ∈O | dom(omape) = {t} ∧|omape(t)| = 1}
That is, Ot ⊆O contains only those events in which the object map references
exactly one object identifier, and that identifier is of the single type t.
The stream St preserves the partial order of events from the original stream S,
maintaining their temporal sequence while filtering exclusively for events associated
with object type t.
Relating the t-type stream and the projection/routing configuration R to the run-
ning example in Table 4.1, consider given a routing configuration R = {Order, Package}.
Under this configuration, only flattened events referencing a single object identifier of
type Order or Package will be routed to their respective projected substreams. For in-
stance, a projected substream for Order will include only those events where the object
map contains exactly one Order identifier. The flattened events are filtering according
to the routing configuration, thus isolating type-specific behaviour for further mining.
Formally, the substream of t-Type Stream for the object type Order is defined as:
SOrder : Z≥0 →O|Order
where O|Order denotes the subset of flattened events that involve exactly one object
of type Order. For instance, given the flattened version of event e with Event ID =
e2:
flatten(e) = {(e2, Prepare Package, t, {Order : {o1}}, vmap), . . . }
Only the tuple involving the object types of Order and Package will be routed into
SOrder and SPackage respectively. This ensures that each t-type stream is strictly aligned
with its corresponding object type, thereby enabling type-specific discovery. A simple
routing graph of the example provided is shown in Figure 5.4.
==PAGE:46==
5.6 Stream Mining
38
Order
Package
SPackage
SOrder
e2
e2
e2
Package
Item
Order
Figure 5.4: Graph of the example provided of flattened events of e where Event ID
= E2 from Table 4.1, where R = {Order, Package}, if the type(e) ̸=
Order ∨Package then discard..
This separation is crucial for enabling per-object-type mining, similar to the tra-
ditional OCPM process discovery techniques [BMA23]. Once projected/routed, each
substream can be independently mined to construct partial behavioural models, i.e.,
Directly-Follows Graph (DFG)s. Which later can be merged based on shared activities
to form a holistic view of the overall process.
5.6
Stream Mining
Continuing the trail of adapting the OCPM discovery problem into a stream mining
problem, this section will define what constitutes object-centric stream miners that
will be used on each of the projected t-type streams.
Classical streaming process mining algorithms, particularly those tailored for single-
case streams, provide a foundational basis for this framework. Approaches such as
the Heuristics Miner with Lossy Counting [Bur22] and sliding window techniques
satisfy key criteria for streaming environments, namely, time and memory eﬀiciency,
single-pass processing, real-time responsiveness, and adaptability to evolving behaviour
[Agg07; Bur22; Bur18].
These techniques can be effectively adapted to object-centric settings by replacing
the traditional case identifier with object identifiers. For example, consider HM-LC
in Algorithm 2, where the stream observation function is defined as Observe(S) =
(cN, aN), with cN denoting the case identifier. To support object-centric mining, this
should be adjusted to cN →oN, where oN ∈omap represents the single object identifier
retained after flattening the event. This modification enables the tracking of individual
object lifecycles and facilitates the incremental discovery of behavioural patterns within
each object-type-specific substream.
By the modular decomposed substream design choice, the framework proposes as-
signing a dedicated miner to each projected t-type substream.
This design grants
==PAGE:47==
5.6 Stream Mining
39
process analysts the flexibility to configure approximation parameters—such as error
bounds—on a per-object-type basis, thereby capturing the unique behavioural char-
acteristics of each type.
This level of configurability is critical, as assuming homo-
geneity across object types would be overly simplistic and risk obscuring meaningful
differences [Aal23a; BMA23]. This configurability facilitates the discovery of accurate,
type-specific behavioural models. A formal specification of what is to be considered a
stream miner with configurable parameters is presented in Definition 9.
Definition 9 (Stream Miner). Let mt denote a stream miner adapted for object-centric
discovery, and let St be a t-type event stream as defined in Definition 8.
Given a
configuration Pt (e.g., thresholds, update time, or approximation error), the miner
produces an object-type-specific process model Mt:
mt : St × Pt →Mt
Each independent t-type substream St is processed by a dedicated stream miner
mt, enabling the framework to pair projection logic with object-type-specific discovery
strategies. This is realised through a projection–to–mining binding mechanism: for
every object type included in the routing configuration R, a corresponding miner mt is
instantiated, each with its own configuration Pt tailored to domain-specific knowledge
or behavioural expectations. Suppose no routing configuration is provided (i.e., the
framework operates in dynamic mode). In that case, object types are registered on-
the-fly, and a default miner configuration is assigned for the new substream.
The modular binding approach proposed offers fine-grained control over the discov-
ery process. For instance, in the running example in Table 4.1, if Order exhibits stable
behaviour, its miner mOrder can be tuned with a low approximation error and slower
update rate to favour long-term stability. Conversely, if Item undergoes frequent be-
havioural shifts, mItem might adopt a higher approximation error or even a sliding
window mechanism to prioritise recent changes. Such configurability supports both
accuracy and scalability in heterogeneous environments where object-type dynamics
vary significantly.
A critical requirement for the framework is model Mt compatibility across all stream
miners mt. If the objective is to construct a unified, system-wide object-centric process
model via merging, then all individual miners must produce models of the same type.
Formally, let Mt denote the model produced by miner mt over the t-type stream St
with configuration Pt where t ∈OT. Then, the following constraint must hold:
∀ti, tj ∈OT,
type(Mti) = type(Mtj)
This ensures that the output models Mt belong to a common model class M, such
as DFGs in our proposed framework:
Mt ∈M,
∀t ∈OT
Without this structural uniformity, integration into a coherent object-centric pro-
cess model becomes infeasible.
==PAGE:48==
5.7 Inclusion Strategy
40
SPackage
SOrder
SItem
HM-LC
HM-LC
HM-LC
Stream Mining
DFGs
Figure 5.5: Illustration of object-type-specific stream mining where an individualised
instance of HM-LC is assigned to each t-type substream (Order, Item,
Customer), producing a Directly-Follows Graph (DFG) per object type.
5.7
Inclusion Strategy
At this stage, individual stream miners emit process models Mt tailored to specific
object types based on their local event observations and configurations.
However,
the overall system lacks a mechanism to regulate which of these object types should
contribute to the global model over time. This becomes critical in the presence of
object-type drift or when selective filtering is required to see specific views on the
process.
To address this, the framework proposes an inclusion strategy that defines observer
logic that governs whether an object type t where t ∈OT is considered ACTIVE, i.e.,
its model Mt is to be incorporated into the merged global process model, or INACTIVE,
and thereby excluded.
The observer is situated on the (fan-in) position, yielding an aggregate stream of
the individual projected substreams. Allowing the observer with an inclusion strategy
to operate on a shared stream consisting of events of models Mt’s and their type,
this facilitates cross-type comparison, enabling the identification of inconsistencies,
==PAGE:49==
5.7 Inclusion Strategy
41
redundancies, or drift across interconnected object behaviours. The aggregated stream
is defined as shown in Definition 10.
Definition 10 (Aggregated Model Stream).
Let OT be the finite set of object types.
For each t ∈OT, let mt(St) denote the stream of process models emitted by a stream
miner operating over the t-type event stream St. The aggregated model stream SM is
defined as:
SM =
⊕
t∈OT
mt(St)
where ⊕denotes the fan-in operator that merges all individual model streams
mt(St) into a unified stream.
From the aggregated model stream SM, we define a helper function Observe(SM)
= (type, Mt), which continuously observes and extracts events emitted from this
stream. Each event carries an associated object type and its corresponding partial
model Mt, i.e., a DFG. The core responsibility of the inclusion strategy is to evaluate
these observed events and determine, in real time, whether a given object type should be
considered ACTIVE or INACTIVE. This decision guides whether the model fragment Mt
is incorporated into the evolving global representation (e.g., OC-DFG or the Activity-
Entity-Relationship (AER) to be presented later). Such strategies allow the framework
to adaptively manage relevance and filter noise based on the frequency, recency, or
stability of emissions behaviours from each substream within the aggregated stream.
The inclusion strategy observer operates at the level of the aggregated model
stream—monitoring emissions of models Mt, thereby its control is inherently governed
by the update frequencies of the individual stream miners. This introduces a structural
limitation, as the system’s responsiveness and granularity are tightly coupled with each
miner’s configuration. Nevertheless, this design also promotes the incorporation of do-
main knowledge, empowering analysts to tailor the system’s adaptivity. The inclusion
strategy employs three established paradigms from the data stream processing, to man-
age which object types should be included.
• Relative Frequency: This strategy retains object types in the global model
based on how frequently their corresponding miners emit updates. Object types
that are frequently observed, ensuring that the global view reflects dominant,
ongoing behaviours within the system.
• Sliding Window: The sliding window strategy is based on the window size to
maintain a temporal focus. Only object types that have emitted models within
the window are to be considered active. This approach emphasises recency, mak-
ing it suitable for processes with changing stages.
• Lossy Counting: Leveraging the lossy counting approximation technique, this
strategy tracks object type update frequencies using bounded memory. Object
types with low support (i.e., infrequent model updates) are gradually discarded.
==PAGE:50==
5.7 Inclusion Strategy
42
It strikes a balance between accuracy and scalability, offering robustness in high-
volume streaming environments by ensuring that only statistically significant
patterns persist.
These inclusion strategies offer complementary trade-offs between adaptability, in-
terpretability, and computational overhead.
The subsequent sections present each
strategy in algorithmic form, enabling flexible integration into the broader stream min-
ing framework.
5.7.1
Relative Frequency
This strategy operates on the aggregated model stream SM, which consists solely of
process models Mt emitted by the individual stream miners, where t ∈OT. Its goal
is to dynamically regulate which object types are included in the global process view
based on their relative frequency. The logic of the algorithm unfolds in two continuous
steps:
• Step 1 - Frequency Tracking: Each appearance of a model is counted to keep
an up-to-date frequency profile for every object type. This forms the foundation
for the assessment of relative frequency.
• Step 2 - Active Regulation: Based on the relative frequency of each object
type, the algorithm determines whether a type should remain active.
Active
types are those deemed relevant enough for integration in system-wide merging
operations. If the frequency of a type drops below the threshold, it is removed
from active consideration.
This strategy supports dynamic inclusion and exclusion of object types in the overall
process view, helping manage complexity and adapt to shifting process landscapes in
real time.
The algorithm maintains two core data structures to track its operational state.
First, DF is the counting set where each element is a tuple (type, freq) ∈DF, which
records the number of times each object-type-specific stream miner has emitted a
process model.
This supports real-time computation of relative frequency for each
object type. Second, DA is the active set, containing the object types that are currently
deemed significant enough, based on their relative frequency, to be included in the
merged process model, see Algorithm 3.
==PAGE:51==
5.7 Inclusion Strategy
43
Algorithm 3 Relative Frequency Strategy
1: Input: SM: Aggregated stream of emitted models Mt where t ∈OT, θ: frequency
threshold
2: N ←1
▷Counter of observed models on stream
3: DF ←∅
▷Initial frequency set
4: DA ←∅
▷Initial empty active set
5: while true do
6:
(type, Mt) ←Observe(SM)
// Step 1: Update counting set
7:
if ∃(t, freq) ∈DF such that t = type then
8:
Remove (t, freq) from DF
9:
DF ←DF ∪{(type, freq + 1)}
10:
else
11:
DF ←DF ∪{(type, 1)}
12:
end if
// Step 2: Active regulation
13:
if
DF [type]
N
≥θ and t /∈DA then
14:
DA ←DA ∪{type}
15:
end if
16:
for all t′ ∈DA do
17:
if
DF [t′]
N
< θ then
18:
Remove the entry type from DA
19:
end if
20:
end for
21:
N ←N + 1
22: end while
Based on the active set DA, one obtains the subset of object-types that are both
current and deemed relevant for inclusion. This filtered set provides the operational
foundation for the merging phase, where models of object types are selected based
on whether they are considered active in DA, and thereafter, a unified OC-DFG is
constructed. By focusing only on actively contributing object types.
When choosing to use this relative frequency-based strategy to govern selectiveness
and accommodate concept drift, it is crucial to be mindful of the inherent limitations.
Specifically, the method assumes a consistent and proportional emission pattern across
object types. However, in practical scenarios, some object types may naturally emit
models less frequently due to lower activity levels or longer lifecycle durations. Con-
sequently, these less frequent types may be prematurely removed from the active set,
despite their relevance. It is also possible to have types that continually get added and
subsequently removed from the system-wide view if their relative emission frequency
fluctuates around the frequency threshold θ. Additionally, the strategy’s reliance on a
global emission count can lead to delayed responsiveness to sudden shifts in behaviour,
i.e., concept drift, particularly when the total model volume is high. These factors
must be carefully considered when configuring the threshold parameter θ, as it directly
influences the sensitivity and stability of model retention decisions.
==PAGE:52==
5.7 Inclusion Strategy
44
5.7.2
Sliding Window
Similar to the previous algorithm, the sliding window strategy also operates over the ag-
gregated stream of emitted models, denoted as SM. Its core mechanism is maintaining
a real-time representation of active object types based on their recent presence in the
stream. It tracks the last-seen position of each object type and uses a sliding window
with size W to determine their inclusion status. This approach is conceptually aligned
with the research on streaming process mining, where temporal locality is exploited to
maintain relevance over time [Agg07; Bur22]. The algorithm consists of three phases:
• Step 1 - Observation and Update: For each incoming event, the object
type is recorded with the event index of where it was seen (type, index) ∈DW
representing when it was last observed.
• Step 2 - Pruning: All object types in DW are checked for staleness. If the
difference between the current event index and their last seen index exceeds the
window size W, they are removed from DW and thereby marked as inactive.
The algorithm presented in Algorithm 4 is structured around a single primary data
structure: the working window set DW. This structure maintains a record of object
types and the most recent index N at which each was observed in the model stream. For
instance, (Item, 2) ∈DW such that the object type Item was last seen at observation
2. At any given time, the set of active object types is given based on presence within
the DW set. An object type remains active as long as its last seen index falls within
the bounds of the sliding window [N −W + 1, N]. If this condition is no longer met,
the object type is removed and thereby considered inactive.
Algorithm 4 Sliding Window Strategy
1: Input: SM: Aggregated stream of emitted models Mt where t ∈OT, W: Window size
2: N ←1
▷Counter of observed models on stream
3: DW ←∅
▷Initial empty window tracking set
4: while true do
5:
(type, Mt) ←Observe(SM)
// Step 1: Update window tracking set
6:
if ∃(t, index) ∈DW such that t = type then
7:
Remove (t, index) from DW
8:
DW ←DW ∪{(type, N)}
9:
else
10:
DW ←DW ∪{(type, N)}
11:
end if
// Step 2: Pruning set based on window size
12:
for all (t, index) ∈DW do
13:
if N −index ≥W then
14:
Remove (t, index) from DW
15:
end if
16:
end for
17:
N ←N + 1
18: end while
==PAGE:53==
5.7 Inclusion Strategy
45
As in the previous approach, a system-wide process model can be constructed by
combining the active set of object types residing within DW.
Employing the sliding window strategy for handling the inclusion strategy natu-
rally inherits the typical limitations associated with such approaches, as discussed in
chapter 4. One of the most critical parameters is the window size W. If the window
is too small, it may fail to capture suﬀicient object-type activity, leading to unstable
or fragmented models. Conversely, if the window is too large, the approach risks di-
luting recent changes with outdated information, thereby reducing the sensitivity to
actual drift. Moreover, the method assumes a stationary or slowly evolving process
within each window, which may not hold in highly dynamic environments. Balancing
responsiveness with stability remains a central challenge in streaming process model
adaptation.
5.7.3
Lossy Counting
Lossy Counting is an algorithm to identify elements in a data stream whose frequency
exceeds a user-given threshold, as presented in Algorithm 1. The method approximates
frequency counts over data streams while maintaining bounded memory usage. Orig-
inally proposed for mining frequent elements in unbounded streams, it incrementally
partitions the stream into fixed-size buckets and maintains a frequency estimate with
an associated error margin [Bur22; Bur18]. It has been properly presented in chapter 4.
This algorithm consists of two phases:
• Step 1 - Frequency Approximation: For each observed model in the stream,
the corresponding object type’s frequency count is updated in the Lossy Counting
set DC. If the type is new, it is added with an initial count and error term based
on the current bucket index. If it already exists, its frequency is incremented.
• Step 2 - Periodic Cleanup: After every fixed number of observations (defined
by the bucket width), the algorithm prunes entries from DC whose total estimated
frequency (count plus error) falls below the current bucket index.
This step
ensures memory remains bounded and that only currently relevant object types
are kept.
==PAGE:54==
5.8 Relationship Mining
46
Algorithm 5 Lossy Counting Strategy
1: Input: SM: Aggregated stream of emitted models Mt where t ∈OT, ε: Approximation
error
2: N ←1
▷Counter of observed models
3: w ←⌈1
ε⌉
▷Bucket width
4: DC ←∅
▷Initial lossy counting set
5: while true do
6:
(type, Mt) ←Observe(SM)
7:
bcurr ←⌈N
w ⌉
// Step 1: Update Lossy Counting frequency
8:
if ∃(t, f, ∆) ∈DC such that t = type then
9:
Remove (t, f, ∆) from DC
10:
DC ←DC ∪{(t, f + 1, ∆)}
11:
else
12:
DC ←DC ∪{(t, 1, bcurr −1)}
13:
end if
// Step 2: Periodic cleanup
14:
if N ≡0 mod w then
15:
for all (t, f, ∆) ∈DC do
16:
if f + ∆≤bcurr then
17:
Remove (t, f, ∆) from DC
18:
end if
19:
end for
20:
end if
21:
N ←N + 1
22: end while
The set of system-wide active object types is derived from the frequency map DC,
which maintains approximate counts of object-type occurrences.
The Lossy Counting strategy is well-suited for managing concept drift, as it imposes
a bounded memory constraint while still adapting to shifting activity patterns in the
stream [Bur22]. By pruning infrequent object types based on a tunable approximation
error ϵ, it ensures that only currently dominant or resurging behaviours are retained.
This makes it particularly effective in environments where process dynamics evolve
gradually, or where retaining outdated object types could distort the current system-
wide model. However, its effectiveness is dependent on appropriate parameter tuning,
as a poorly chosen approximation error ϵ may either over-prune relevant behaviours or
retain too much noise.
5.8
Relationship Mining
While the OC-DFG process model effectively captures behavioural relations among
activities through the consideration of object types, it is inherently limited in explicitly
representing whether the associated object types, linked to an activity, actually co-
occurred in the same event. This creates an ambiguity in interpretation: for example,
if two object types have separate relations to the same activity label across different
==PAGE:55==
5.8 Relationship Mining
47
traces, the OC-DFG cannot determine whether the object types appeared together
within the same event, or if they merely share the same activity independently in
separate contexts.
To address these limitations, this section proposes and introduces a parallel stream
miner and a corresponding model, designed to infer object-type association relation-
ships based on observed co-occurrences within the same activity of an event.
The
miner will operate on the raw object-centric event stream as defined in Definition 6,
before any flattening has taken place, as defined in Definition 7, which essentially re-
moves co-participation information. The proposed miner observes how object types
are jointly involved in activities, and through object identifier manipulation and a sim-
ple cardinality heuristic, it approximates structural associations such as (One-to-One),
(Many-to-One), (Many-to-Many).
The resulting model will provide, for each activity, all observed object types and
their most frequently observed cardinality associations relationships. These associa-
tions are interpreted as undirected and non-hierarchical, reflecting the data’s lack of
explicit O2O semantics.
Nonetheless, the inferred structure would provide process
analysts with valuable insights into the typical co-occurrence patterns between object
types within activities. It aims to complement the behavioural lens of the OC-DFG
with an observed co-occurrence relational perspective, which would allow analysts to
detect separate traces when no object types are linked, and enable concept drift detec-
tion within observed relations constructed by the frequent co-occurrence semantics of
object types and their identifiers.
For clarity, this section is divided into three subsections, each highlighting a key
feature and the underlying rationale, essential for understanding the overall concept of
relationship mining within the event stream.
5.8.1
Cardinality
The first key concept to be introduced is the approximation of cardinality structures
among object types at each activity in an unsupervised manner.
From the object-
centric event format proposed in section 5.3, each event may reference multiple object
types, with each kind associated with one or more object identifiers. Consider, for
example, the object-centric stream event with Event ID = e6 from the running ex-
ample in Table 4.1. Ignoring the value map (vmap) for simplicity, the event can be
represented as:
(e6 , Pack Item, 2025-05-10T09:20:00, {Order: {o1}, Item:{i1,i2}}})
By examining the co-occurrence of object types within individual events over time,
it infers cardinality patterns between object types based on the count of object identi-
fiers observed. In the example above, since the activity involves one Order object and
two Item objects, it is possible to approximate an observation of an (One-to-Many)
occurrence association relationship between Order and Item respectively. This could
be particularly useful when monitoring object-type observed cardinality concept drift,
==PAGE:56==
5.8 Relationship Mining
48
where shifts in co-occurrence patterns between object types over time may indicate
structural changes in the underlying process. For example, consider a scenario in an
e-commerce process where initially each Order is associated with multiple Item objects
(One-to-Many). Over time, if the process shifts and each Order begins to reference only
a single Item, the miner would detect this transition toward a (One-to-One) cardinality
pattern. Such a shift could reflect a strategic change in how products are packaged or
sold and would be critical for both operational adaptation and analytical accuracy. By
continuously observing cardinality dynamics, the relational miner enables the detection
of such drifts without requiring predefined knowledge of the process.
The inferred cardinalities are inherently derived from the structure of the observed
event data. Traditionally, in OCPM, object types are treated as classes capable of ex-
pressing a wide range of relational patterns—such as directionality, aggregation, and
composition—and are therefore often modelled using the notation of Unified Modelling
Language (UML) [BMA23]. However, the data in our event stream lacks explicit O2O
(object-to-object) relationship specifiers. Consequently, the relations created by the
proposed inferring are associations based on co-occurrence and not similar to relations
seen in other models such as OCBC [LCA17]. The proposed solution with associa-
tion relationships based on co-occurrence is therefore acknowledged to be based on
observation and approximation, as no real concluding O2O relational data is provided.
By examining every pair of object types that co-occur within an event, the solution
infers cardinalities by analysing the multiplicity of associated object identifiers. Let
(ot, O) denote an object type and the corresponding set of identifiers extracted from an
event’s object map, such that given an object type ot ∈OT, omap(ot) →O yields the
corresponding object identifiers, similar to the Definition 5. The cardinality between
two object types within an event and their respective object identifiers can then be
approximated as follows:
Definition 11 (Cardinality Inference). Let (ot, O) and (ot′, O′) be object type–identifier
pairs co-occurring in a single event, where O and O′ denote sets of object identifiers
for types ot and ot′, respectively. The inferred cardinality between these object types is
defined as:
Cardinality(O, O′) =









1..1
if |O| = 1 and |O′| = 1
1..N
if |O| = 1 and |O′| > 1
N..1
if |O| > 1 and |O′| = 1
N..M
if |O| > 1 and |O′| > 1
This inferred cardinality approximates the nature of the association between ot and
ot′, denoted as ot
(1..N)
←−−→ot′, where the directional arrow represents a logical association
relationship based on co-participation in the event.
Note. The inference is asymmetric with respect to the ordering of (ot, O) and
(ot′, O′). That is, Cardinality(O, O′) may differ from Cardinality(O′, O), as the direc-
tion reflects which object type is considered as the “source” in the relationship.
==PAGE:57==
5.8 Relationship Mining
49
The absence of explicit O2O relations within the event data inherently governs
this approximation. Consider, for example, an event activity labelled "Ship Orders"
with an object map {Package : {p1, p2, p3}, Item : {i1, i2, i3}}.
While the actual
business behaviour might be a strict (One-to-One) mapping between Package and
Item, the inference mechanism, lacking prior domain knowledge, interprets this as a
(Many-to-Many) relation. As a result, the inferred cardinalities represent upper bounds
in association regards: they reflect the maximal observed co-participation patterns
by distinct object identifiers rather than strict cardinal constraints. Therefore, every
cardinality inferred will either match or exceed the true underlying relationship in the
process within that activity. It is a conservative estimate, but it provides valuable
insights into the process.
5.8.2
Activity-Entity Relationship Miner with Lossy Counting
(AER-LC)
Next, the streaming algorithm utilising the now-established cardinality inference rules
is to be presented.
The proposed stream miner is called Activity-Entity Relation-
ship Miner with Lossy Counting (AER-LC), and ingests events from object-centric
event streams, as defined in Definition 6.
It utilises the terminology of the Lossy
Counting algorithm to count observed object type cardinalities per activity in a data
stream whose frequency exceeds an approximation error threshold based on Algorithm
1 [Bur18; Bur22].
By utilising Lossy Counting, the cardinalities observed between object types per
activity gain temporal sensitivity, enabling the miner to reflect the most recent co-
occurrence patterns without needing to store the entire event history. This stream-
appropriate approach ensures that only frequently observed cardinalities between ob-
ject types in activities are retained, while infrequent patterns are gradually discarded.
Consequently, the model adapts to evolving object interaction behaviours, capturing
the concept drift aspect previously present.
Each event can be considered a tuple of (activity, omap), from which it is possible
to extract object types OT and object identifiers O. The algorithm maintains three
central data structures:
• DN : a per-activity counter recording the number of times each activity has been
observed,
• DO: a mapping from activities to the set of object types encountered in relation
to them,
• DC: a lossy counting structure that approximates the frequency of observed
cardinality relations between unordered pairs of object types for each activity.
The algorithm of 6 can be broken into several steps:
==PAGE:58==
5.8 Relationship Mining
50
• Step 1 - Updating Activity Counter: The set DN is maintained to track
how many times each activity has been observed. For every incoming event, the
count for the corresponding activity is incremented or initialised if seen for the
first time.
• Step 2 - Updating Observed Object Types: For each observed activity, the
set DO is updated to include all object types associated with that activity. This
ensures a cumulative view of object-type participation over time.
• Step 3 - Lossy Counting of Cardinalities: For all unordered pairs of object
types within the extracted set of types T .
Derived by extracting the object-
type mapping from the event’s omap, forming the type set T , where it holds
∀ot ∈T , P(omap(ot)) ̸= ∅. Each unordered pair of object types in T is sorted
lexicographically to ensure a consistent ordering. This enforces symmetry (i.e.,
lexicographically), thereby treating (ot1, ot2) and (ot2, ot1) as the same associa-
tion. For every such pair, the cardinality relationship is inferred based on their
respective object identifiers, following the formal definition in Definition 11. The
frequency of this observed cardinality relation is then updated in the set DC, or
a new entry is added if the relation has not been seen before.
• Step 4 - Periodic Cleanup: The cleanup is happening based on whenever
the individual count of activity in DN every w activities, during cleanup, all
entries in DC are evaluated, and any relation where f + ∆≤bcurr where the
activity matches the incoming event activity is pruned. This step enforces the
lossy counting approximation guarantee, removing infrequent or stale entries.
Cleanup is applied periodically based on the bucket width w = ⌈1
ε⌉. For each ac-
tivity, cardinality relations with frequency plus delta below the current bucket index
with corresponding activity seen are pruned from DC. Notably, by maintaining fre-
quency counts on a per-activity basis, the algorithm ensures that both frequently and
infrequently occurring activities are treated proportionally, preventing low-frequency
activities from being overwhelmed by high-frequency ones.
==PAGE:59==
5.8 Relationship Mining
51
Algorithm 6 Activity Entity Relationship Miner with Lossy Counting
1: Input: S: Object-centric event stream, ε: Approximation error.
2: DN ←∅
▷Counter of activity observed
3: DO ←∅
▷Observed object-types per activity
4: DC ←∅
▷Initial lossy counting cardinality
5: w ←⌈1
ε⌉
▷Bucket width
6: while true do
7:
(activity, omap) ←observe(S)
8:
bcurr ←⌈N
w ⌉
// Extract set of object types
9:
T ←OT ∈omap
// Step 1: Update activity counter
10:
if ∃(act, count) ∈DN such that act = activity then
11:
Remove (act, count) from DN
12:
DN ←DN ∪(activity, count + 1)
13:
else
14:
DN ←DN ∪(activity, 1)
15:
end if
// Step 2: Update observed object types
16:
if ∃(act, objects) ∈DO such that act = activity then
17:
Remove (activity, object) from DO
18:
DO ←DO ∪(activity, T ∪objects)
19:
else
20:
DO ←DO ∪(activity, T )
21:
end if
// Step 3: Lossy counting of cardinalities
22:
if |T | ≥2 then
23:
for all unordered pairs {oti, otj} ⊂T do
24:
(ot1, ot2) ←sorted(oti, otj)
25:
O1 ←omap(ot1)
26:
O2 ←omap(ot2)
27:
cardinality ←infer_cardinality(O1, O2)
▷Definition 11
28:
if ∃(act, oti, otj, card, freq, ∆) ∈DC such that card = cardinality ∧
act =
activity ∧
oti = ot1
∧
otj = ot2 then
29:
Remove (activity, oti, otj, card, freq, ∆) from DC
30:
DC ←DC∪(activity, ot1, ot2, card, freq + 1, ∆)
31:
else
32:
DC ←DC ∪{(activity, ot1, ot2, card, 1, bcurr −1)}
33:
end if
34:
end for
35:
end if
// Step 4: Periodic cleanup based on activity count
36:
if ∃(act, count) ∈DN such that act = activity then
37:
if count mod w = 0 then
38:
for all (act, oti, otj, card, freq, ∆) ∈DCsuch that act = activity do
39:
if f + ∆≤bcurr then
40:
Remove (act, oti, otj, card, freq, ∆) from DC
41:
end if
42:
end for
43:
end if
44:
end if
45: end while
==PAGE:60==
5.8 Relationship Mining
52
The key component of the miner is the cardinality-lossy counting set of DC, which
stores entries for each activity, combination of object types, and cardinalities observed.
For instance, given two schema events of "Pack Item" where timestamp is neglected:
e1 =(Pack Item, {Order: {o1}, Item:{i1,i2}}, Package:{p1}})
e2 =(Pack Item, {Order: {o2}, Item:{i3}}, Package:{p2}})
After ingesting event e1, the set DC would contain the following cardinality infer-
ences:
DC = {(Pack Item, Item, Order, One-To-Many, 1, 1),
(Pack Item, Item, Package, Many-To-One, 1, 1),
(Pack Item, Order, Package, One-To-One, 1, 1)}
Now, after observing an arbitrary amount of e1 and e2, the set might evolve to:
DC = {(Pack Item, Item, Order, One-To-Many, 14, 1),
(Pack Item, Item, Package, Many-To-One, 14, 1),
(Pack Item, Order, Package, One-To-One, 14, 1),
(Pack Item, Item, Order, One-To-One, 2, 2),
(Pack Item, Item, Package, One-To-One, 2, 2)}
The set DC retains all combinations of object types and their corresponding car-
dinality observations within their respective activity, provided they remain frequent
according to the Lossy Counting criteria. When determining the most representative
cardinality relationship between two object types within an activity, the framework as-
sumes a simple yet effective heuristic: select the cardinality with the highest observed
frequency. For instance, if both (Many-to-One) and (One-to-One) relationships have
been observed between Item and Package, but (Many-to-One) occurs more frequently
(i.e. 14 times compared to 2) and remains in the set of DC, it will be chosen as the
dominant cardinality representation for that pair.
The periodic cleanup triggered by Lossy Counting removes relationships in DC
that fall below the frequency threshold. As this pruning operates independently for
each activity, the removal of a cardinality relation indicates either a shift in the domi-
nant interaction pattern—i.e., another cardinality type is becoming more frequent—or
a diminishing presence of co-participation between the object types involved. This
mechanism ensures that the model maintains an up-to-date and concise view of the
most relevant and recurring inter-object relationships, thereby adapting dynamically
to evolving behaviours in the stream, ensuring concept drift compatibility.
5.8.3
Activity-Entity Relationship Model
Next is the proposed model, which will serve as output together with the OC-DFG.
Continuously derived from the sets of DC and DO within Algorithm 6 just presented.
==PAGE:61==
5.9 Merging
53
The proposed model is referred to as Activity-Entity-Relationship (AER), where en-
tities are object types, see Definition 12. This model aims to approximate relational
semantics between activities and object types based on co-occurrence observation, en-
coding both unary participations (i.e., activities linked to a single object type) and
binary relations (i.e., co-participation of multiple object types). The AER model pro-
vides a compact and interpretable representation, complementing the behavioural view
offered by the OC-DFG in the complementary goal of the framework.
Definition 12 (Activity-Entity-Relationship Model). The AER model is a tuple (A, E, R),
where:
• A is a finite set of activities.
• E : A →P(OT) is a finite mapping that assigns to each activity act ∈A a set of
associated object types, where OT is the set of object types previously defined.
• R ⊆A × OT × OT × C is the set of typed relations based on an activity, where
C is the set of possible cardinalities (e.g., 1:1, 1:N, N:M).
5.9
Merging
The final phase of the proposed Streaming Object-Centric Process Mining (SOCPM)
framework is the merging operation. Positioned at the end of the architecture pipeline
illustrated in Figure 5.2, this step integrates the outputs of individual object-type-
specific substream miners yielding DFGs presented in section 5.6, dynamic inclusion
strategies in section 5.7, and the AER model from the AER-LC in section 5.8 into a
unified representation of the process. The end result is a comprehensive, system-wide
Object-Centric Directly-Follows Graph (OC-DFG) supported by an aligned Activity-
Entity-Relationship (AER) model, ensuring consistency between behavioural and struc-
tural perspectives.
The merging operator maintains:
• The most recent per-object type DFG process model produced by stream miners.
• The currently ACTIVE object types, filtered by the chosen inclusion strategy.
• The most recent AER model reflecting maximum co-occurrence cardinality rela-
tionships between object types per activity.
The merging operation itself is composed of two main operations:
• OC-DFG Construction:
Consolidates the newest DFGs from each active
object-type substreams into a unified OC-DFG, maintaining the integrity of be-
haviour across object types.
• AER Pruning: Aligns the relational model with the behavioural view of the OC-
DFG by filtering the AER model to include only the object types and activities
that appear in the merged OC-DFG.
==PAGE:62==
5.9 Merging
54
Together, these inputs enable the construction of an OC-DFG that reflects the be-
havioural relations of active object types. The OC-DFG, in turn, informs a pruned
version of the AER model, restricting it to only the object types and activities present
in the behavioural view. The outcome is a unified, system-wide representation given a
stream mined OC-DFG with an additional output of and AER model.
The remainder of this section is structured as follows. First, we describe the merging
procedure used to construct object-type-specific DFGs, which ultimately leads to the
generation of the global OC-DFG. Next, we present the pruning algorithm that aligns
the AER model with the behavioural scope represented in the OC-DFG, ensuring
semantic consistency. Finally, the section concludes with a summarising subsection
that integrates both procedures (i.e, operations) into a high-level algorithm, outlining
the full merging pipeline in terms of construction and pruning operations.
5.9.1
Object-Centric Directly-Follows Graph
The construction of the unified OC-DFG requires merging individual directly-follows
graphs (DFGs) mined per object type. A simplifying assumption inherited from OCEL
specifications is that activity labels are globally unique across object types [Ber+24;
Gha+20]. This ensures that activity nodes can be merged solely based on their label,
without ambiguity or the need for disambiguation logic. As seen in related works such
as [Aal19; Aal23b; BA23], this constraint supports seamless model integration.
Consider the case in the running example where both the Order and Item object
types include an activity labelled "Place Order". Due to the global uniqueness con-
straint, both instances are unified into a single node in the merged OC-DFG, with
their respective incoming and outgoing relations preserved and combined. This shared
representation captures the full behavioural scope of the activity across object types.
The formal definition of the OC-DFG, adapted from Alessandro Berti and Wil van
der Aalst formulation in [BA23], is restated in Definition 13.
However, within the
streaming context, the discovered model is an approximation. Streaming constraints
such as bounded memory, approximate frequency tracking (e.g., Lossy Counting), and
dynamic inclusion strategies inherently limit the model’s completeness. Furthermore,
due to the inherent limitations arising from the fundamental issues of Convergence and
Divergence in object-centric event data presented in [Aal23b; BMA23], together with
the constraint of the availability of results of the individual miners, it is not possible
to associate frequencies with individual activities in the global model reliably.
Definition 13 (Stream Object-Centric Directly-Follows Graph).
An object-centric
directly-follows (OC-DFG) is a tuple (A, OT, N, F, πfreqe) where:
• A is a set of activities.
• OT is a set of object types.
• N = A ∪{ nS,ot | ot ∈OT } ∪{ nE,ot | ot ∈OT } is the set of nodes of the
graph, which includes the set of activities and a start/end node for each object
type (nS,ot and nE,ot respectively).
==PAGE:63==
5.9 Merging
55
• F ⊆N × OT × N is the set of typed arcs.
• πfreqe : F ↛R+ ∪{0} assigns a frequency to the arcs.
The construction itself is similar to works presented in [BA23; Aal19]; the key dif-
ference lies in the data source for model composition. In this framework, the individual
DFGs are continuously emitted from type-specific stream miners, and the set of ACTIVE
object types is dynamically maintained based on the selected inclusion strategy. These
two components drive the merging step, enabling the construction of a live OC-DFG
that reflects the most recent behavioural and structural state of the system.
We now present a construction algorithm for generating an OC-DFG, closely aligned
with previous work [BA23; Aal19; Aal23b], but extended to incorporate a dynamic set
of active object types. The algorithm operates under a few assumptions: the input data
structures include Ddfg, a set of tuples (ot, dfg), that is, (ot, dfg) ∈Ddfg, where each dfg
is a directly-follows set containing triples (src, tgt, freq) such that (src, tgt, freq) ∈dfg,
denoting observed frequency freq of transitions between activities src and tgt for a
given object type ot; and Dactive, which represents the set of currently active object
types to be included in the final OCDFG. Only object types in this active set contribute
to the resulting graph structure. The resulting OC-DFG includes all the structural
components specified in Definition 13, ensuring compliance with the formal definition.
The construction procedure is detailed in Algorithm 7, which consists of three steps:
• Step 1 - Filtering and Initialisation: For each entry (ot, dfg) ∈Ddfg, only
object types ot that are currently active i.e., (ot ∈Dactive) are considered. Each
qualifying object type is added to the set OT, and its directly-follows data is
prepared for integration.
• Step 2 - Graph Construction: Activities and edges from each valid dfg are
merged into the global sets A and F, while arc frequencies are registered in πfreqe.
In parallel, candidate start and end activities are heuristically derived based on
the absence of incoming or outgoing edges.
• Step 3 - Start/End Node Creation: For each object type, synthetic start
and end nodes nS,ot and nE,ot are added.
These are connected to identified
start/end activities, ensuring that the resulting graph adheres to the structural
requirements defined in Definition 13.
• Step 4 - Edge Completion of Start/End Nodes: Edges are inserted from
nS,ot to each start activity and from each end activity to nE,ot, effectively linking
the dummy nodes to the behavioural part of the graph. This step ensures entry
and exit points.
==PAGE:64==
5.9 Merging
56
Algorithm 7 Construct Object-Centric Directly-Follows Graph
1: Input: Ddfg: Set of (ot, dfg) tuples; Dactive: Set of active object types
2: Output: (A, OT, N, F, πfreqe): An OCDFG structure
3: A ←∅, OT ←∅, F ←∅, πfreqe ←∅
4: start ←∅, end ←∅
// Step 1: Filtering and Initlisation
5: for all (ot, dfg) ∈Ddfg do
6:
if ot ∈Dactive then
7:
OT ←OT ∪{ot}
8:
sources ←∅, targets ←∅
// Step 2: Graph Construction
9:
for all (src, tgt, freq) ∈dfg do
10:
A ←A ∪{src, tgt}
11:
F ←F ∪{(src, ot, tgt)}
12:
πfreqe[(src, ot, tgt)] ←freq
13:
if src ̸= tgt then
14:
sources ←sources ∪{src}
15:
targets ←targets ∪{tgt}
16:
end if
17:
end for
18:
start ←start ∪{(ot, sources \ targets)}
19:
end ←end ∪{(ot, targets \ sources)}
// Step 3: Start/End Node Creation
20:
N ←A ∪{nS,ot, nE,ot}
21:
end if
22: end for
// Step 4: Edge Completion of Start/End Nodes
23: for all (ot, starts) ∈start do
24:
for all act ∈starts do
25:
F ←F ∪{(nS,ot, ot, act)}
26:
end for
27: end for
28: for all (ot, ends) ∈end do
29:
for all act ∈ends do
30:
F ←F ∪{(act, ot, nE,ot)}
31:
end for
32: end for
33: return (A, OT, N, F, πfreqe)
To identify starting and ending points for each object type, we apply a simple
heuristic: for a given directly-follows graph, any activity that appears only as a source
(i.e., has outgoing but no incoming edges) is considered a start activity. Conversely,
activities that appear only as targets are treated as end activities. These are connected
to synthetic start/end nodes nS,ot and nE,ot to preserve structural consistency within
the graph model.
Having defined the structure and construction of an OC-DFG in a streaming set-
==PAGE:65==
5.9 Merging
57
ting, it is essential to consider the semantic guarantees that arise from its incremental
and distributed construction. In this architecture, each object type t ∈OT is asso-
ciated with a dedicated stream miner that discovers and maintains a local model Mt
using bounded memory and approximate counting techniques. The global OC-DFG is
formed by merging these per-object-type models, governed by the active object types
determined by the inclusion strategy. This modular merge ensures that for all object
types t ∈OT such that active(t) = true, the behavioural relations discovered in Mt
are retained in the merged output.
Definition 14 (Semantic Consistency of OCDFG).
Let M = {Mt}t∈OT be the set
of per-object-type models, and let G denote the merged OC-DFG. For an inclusion
strategy function active : OT →{true, false}, the merged model G satisfies semantic
consistency if:
∀t ∈OT, active(t) = true ⇒G ⊇Mt
That is, all directly-follows relations and associated frequencies derived in Mt are
preserved in G.
This guarantee ensures that no behavioural knowledge from active object types is
lost during the merging process, preserving interpretability and analytical soundness
in the final model.
Crucially, this semantic consistency remains valid regardless of the specific inclusion
strategy employed, such as Relative Frequency, Sliding Window or Lossy Counting.
Forgetting only excludes behaviours; it never adds spurious ones. Thus, the stream-
derived model remains a proper subset both structurally and behaviourally of the log-
derived model, and it adheres to the constraints of sound approximation even under
dynamic, streaming conditions.
==PAGE:66==
5.9 Merging
58
Figure 5.6: DFGs per object-type mined from Table 4.1, when Merge is applied. Note
that Table 4.1 is just an excerpt of a possible larger stream, and the
resulting OC-DFG has edge frequencies omitted..
5.9.2
Activity-Entity-Relationship Pruning
Having established the construction of a streaming-based OC-DFG, the next step in-
volves aligning the object type relations representation captured in the AER model
with the behavioural subset observed. The purpose of this pruning step is to ensure se-
mantic consistency between the final OC-DFG and the object associations in activities
represented in the AER diagram.
The AER model, as introduced in section 5.8, encodes object-type to activity map-
pings along with their observed cardinalities and co-participation structures. However,
since the OC-DFG produced by the stream miners includes only a subset of object types
and activities, limited by inclusion strategies and streaming constraints, the original
AER model may reference entities that are no longer behaviourally relevant.
The pruning algorithm operates directly on the OCDFG tuple (A, OT, N, F, πfreqe),
as defined in Definition 13. To avoid naming conflicts due to overlapping set identifiers
between the OCDFG and AER models, we use distinct notations: Aaer for activities
and Eaer, Raer for sets and functions in the AER model. To maintain consistency we
define a new definition of what is considered the pruned AER in Definition 15.
Definition 15 (Pruned AER). Given an AER model where sets have been annotated
to avoid clashing sets (Aaer, Eaer, Raer) and an OC-DFG tuple (A, OT, N, F, πfreqe),
the pruned AER model is a tuple (A′, E′, R) such that:
==PAGE:67==
5.9 Merging
59
•
A′ = Aaer ∩A, is the set of activities that are present in the given AER and the
OC-DFG.
• E′ : A′ ↛P(OT) is a partial mapping such that: E′(act) = Eaer(act) ∩OT for
all act ∈A′ such that P(OT) is without the emptyset.
• R′ = {(act, ot1, ot2, c) ∈Raer | act ∈A, ot1 ∈OT, ot2 ∈OT}, thereby only
relationships referencing activities and object types considered in the OC-DFG
are kept.
It is easy to see that the above definition can be realised algorithmically.
The
corresponding pruning procedure is formalised in Algorithm 8, where for simplicity
Eaer is considered a set of tuples (act, ots), representing mappings from activities to
sets of associated object types, rather than a function Eaer : A →P(OT), as the the
mapping function again can be constructed from the tuple set version in a new E′:
The algorithm steps are outlined:
• Step 1 - Prune Activities: Remove any activity act ∈Aaer that is not present
in the activity set A of the OC-DFG i.e., act /∈A.
This ensures that only
behaviourally relevant activities are preserved.
• Step 2 - Prune Entity Mappings: Consider the derived mapping of entity
associations. The pruning results in a new partial mapping E′ : A ↛P(OT)
such that E′(act) = Eaer(act) ∩OT, for all act ∈A with Eaer(act) ∩OT ̸= ∅.
In other words, the pruning retains only mappings for activities in the OC-DFG,
removes object types not present in its object type set OT, and excludes any
activity whose mapping becomes empty.
• Step 3 - Prune Relationships: Remove all relationships (A×OT ×OT ×C) ∈
Raer where act /∈A or ot1 /∈OT or ot2 /∈OT of the OC-DFG. This step ensures
that only valid inter-object cardinalities for the current behavioural scope are
retained.
==PAGE:68==
5.9 Merging
60
Algorithm 8 Prune AER Model Based on OCDFG
1: Input: (A, OT, N, F, πfreqe): The OCDFG, and (Aaer, Eaer, Raer): Original AER model
2: Output: (A′, E′, R′): Pruned AER model
3: A′ ←∅, E′ ←∅, R′ ←∅
// Step 1: Prune activities
4: for all act ∈Aaer do
5:
if act ∈A then
6:
A′ ←A′ ∪{act}
7:
end if
8: end for
// Step 2: Prune entity mappings
9: for all (act, ots) ∈Eaer do
10:
if act ∈A then
11:
ots′ ←ots ∩OT
12:
if ots′ ̸= ∅then
13:
E′ ←E′ ∪{(act, ots′)}
14:
end if
15:
end if
16: end for
// Step 3: Prune relations
17: for all (act, ot1, ot2, c) ∈Raer do
18:
if act ∈A ∧ot1 ∈OT ∧ot2 ∈OT then
19:
R′ ←R′ ∪{(act, ot1, ot2, c)}
20:
end if
21: end for
22: return (A′, E′, R′)
5.9.3
Summary
As outlined, the merging operations are situated at the terminal stage of the stream
pipeline, receiving all downstream emissions. The general pipeline algorithm respon-
sible for constructing the OC-DFG and pruning the AER model is presented below.
This is a high level algorithm, in which observe(S) now observes three different
states, it can observe active object types Dactive, it can also observe Ddfg such that
whenever a new miner of type ot emits its corresponding model it updates the Ddfg set,
such that model (ot, dfg) ∈Ddfg. Lastly, it can observe Daer, which is a model of the
form (Aaer, Eaer, Raer) not to have sets clashing. The algorithm works in three steps:
• Step 1 - Observation and Update: Upon receiving new observations, the
corresponding internal sets (Dactive, Ddfg, Daer) are updated to reflect the latest
state (e.g., removing entries (ot, dfg) ∈Ddfg if the object types clash, and thereby
has been seen before).
• Step 2 - Construct OCDFG: Using the updated sets Ddfg and Dactive, the
OC-DFG is constructed in accordance with Algorithm 7
==PAGE:69==
5.9 Merging
61
• Step 3 - Prune AER: With the current OC-DFG available, the AER model is
pruned to maintain consistency with the behavioural scope, as defined in Algo-
rithm 8.
Algorithm 9 Merge Operator for Constructing OCDFG and Pruned AER
1: Input: Stream S emitting; Dactive Set of active object types, Ddfg: Set of (ot, dfg) tuples,
and Daer: AER model
2: Output: (A, OT, N, F, πfreqe): OCDFG, and (A′, E′, R′): Pruned AER
3: Daer ←∅
4: Ddfg ←∅
5: Dactive ←∅
6: while true do
Step 1: Observation and Update
7:
(Dactive), (Ddfg), (Daer) ←observe(S)
// Step 2: Construct OCDFG
8:
(A, OT, N, F, πfreqe) ←ConstructOCDFG(Ddfg, Dactive)
▷Algorithm 7
// Step 3: Prune AER
9:
(A′, E′, R′) ←PruneAER((A, OT, N, F, πfreqe), Daer)
▷Algorithm 8
10:
Push Onto Stream: (A, OT, N, F, πfreqe), (A′, E′, R′)
11: end while
Ultimately, this merging mechanism yields a comprehensive, system-wide represen-
tation composed of a dynamically constructed OC-DFG and a behaviourally aligned,
pruned AER model. This dual-model output captures both the behavioural relation-
ship aspects of the OC-DFG of active object types and the structural co-occurrence
relations observed through Activity-Entity Relationship Miner with Lossy Counting
(AER-LC). As such, it offers a consistent, interpretable, and up-to-date abstraction of
process behaviour and object interactions. This forms the foundation for real-time anal-
ysis and supports continuous discovery within the proposed streaming object-centric
process mining (SOCPM) framework.
==PAGE:70==
CHAPTER 6
Implementation
Having presented, defined, and formalised the core components required to support
Object-Centric Process Mining Discovery in streaming environments, this chapter pro-
vides a walk-through of the essential aspects of the corresponding implementation. The
focus is on translating the proposed framework, outlined in chapter 5, into a working
software framework that can actively perform OCPM discovery on a data stream.
The implementation is developed within the open-source Python library pyBeam-
line1 [Bur23], which is specifically designed to facilitate research and rapid prototyping
in streaming process mining. The work intends to extend pyBeamline’s capabilities by
introducing new abstractions and operators tailored for object-centric stream process-
ing, while preserving the existing functionality and ensuring full compatibility with the
original framework.
This chapter is organised into four sections: Architecture, Source, Object-Centric
Operator, and Object-Centric Merge Operator. Each section contributes to translating
the conceptual design into a concrete, functioning implementation.
6.1
Architecture
Building on the design architecture and components presented in chapter 5, this section
elaborates on the implementation-level architectural choices made when translating the
proposed design into a functioning system.
The implemented architecture is comprised of three primary components, each re-
sponsible for a distinct phase of the processing pipeline, as illustrated in Figure 6.1.
These are:
• Source: Extends the capabilities of pyBeamline by facilitating object-centric
event streams compatible with the design of the proposed framework.
1https://github.com/beamline/pybeamline
==PAGE:71==
6.2 Source
63
• Object-Centric Operator: Acts as the core orchestrator and the first oper-
ator in the pipeline.
It is responsible for mining co-occurrence relationships,
flattening incoming events, and subsequently routing them to the correct stream
miners based on object types. It also handles the configuration of stream miners,
designed for modularity and ease of use, this operator supports both predefined
and dynamic stream mining strategies.
• Object-Centric Merge Operator: Positioned downstream, this component
collects emitted models, including DFGs, AER models, and the to-be introduced
control Command messages emitted by the inclusion strategy. It maintains a state-
ful repository of active object-type-specific DFGs, from which it incrementally
constructs a global OC-DFG. Similarly, the latest AER diagram is continuously
updated and pruned to reflect only the relevant object types and activities cur-
rently represented in the OCDFG.
Source
1
2
3
Flatten
4
Stream Mining
...
HM-LC
5 Inclusion
Strategy
Merge
6
HM-LC
HM-LC
Relationship
 Mining
AER Miner
7
Routing
Source
Object-Centric Operator
Object-Centric
Merge Operator
Figure 6.1: Architectural overview split in implementation components.
The architectural decision to separate the Object-Centric Operator and Merge Op-
erator offers practical flexibility.
Analysts may choose to employ only the Object-
Centric Operator to perform object-type-specific process mining independently for each
substream, which is valuable when maintaining separate views per process is desired.
Additionally, isolating the merge logic into a dedicated operator simplifies extensibility;
analysts can override or redefine the merging strategy without modifying the upstream
mining configuration. This separation of concerns improves modularity, customizabil-
ity and mining possibilities of the framework.
6.2
Source
This section addresses the implementation of the data source component, based on the
formal definition of an object-centric event stream provided in Definition 5. Two input
formats are supported for stream generation:
==PAGE:72==
6.2 Source
64
• Static OCEL 2.0 Logs: A structured parser reads standard OCEL 2.0-compliant
JSON files and emits their contents as a stream of object-centric events. This
conversion ensures compatibility between static event logs and streaming archi-
tectures.
• Dictionary-Based Format: Designed primarily for testing and validation pur-
poses, this lightweight input method allows developers to define object-centric
events using native Python dictionaries. These are emitted as BOEvents, facili-
tating unit testing, prototyping, and controlled experimentation.
By supporting both standardised and simplified input formats, the source com-
ponent ensures broad applicability, enabling integration with real-world logs while
maintaining flexibility for development and evaluation.
6.2.1
Object-Centric Stream Event
To support the new object-centric event structure, a new data event class named
BOEvent (Beamline Object Event) was introduced as part of this implementation. It
mirrors the existing case-specific BEvent (Beamline Event) class used in traditional
stream mining. Still, it is explicitly designed to accommodate the multi-object asso-
ciation characteristics of what is proposed as an object-centric event in Definition 5.
The implementation is grounded in the insight that many traditional stream mining
algorithms, such as the HM-LC, can be adapted for object-centric scenarios by treating
each object’s lifecycle independently, using its unique identifier. To enable this inter-
operability, an abstract base class AbstractEvent was introduced. This abstraction
serves as a unifying interface for both BEvent and BOEvent, allowing algorithm com-
ponents to operate seamlessly across both types without compromising their internal
logic or requiring extensive refactoring.
1
class BOEvent(AbstractEvent):
2
def __init__(self, event_id: str, activity_name: str,
3
omap: Dict[str, Set[str]], timestamp: Optional[datetime] = None,
4
vmap: Optional[Dict[str, str]] = None):
5
self.event_id = event_id
6
self.activity_name = activity_name
7
self.timestamp = timestamp or datetime.now()
8
self.omap = omap
9
self.vmap = vmap or {}
This abstraction layer not only supports backwards compatibility with traditional
SPM methods of pyBeamline but also lays the groundwork for future enhancements in
multi-perspective and hybrid process mining scenarios, where both case- and object-
centric data may coexist or be compared within the same framework.
==PAGE:73==
6.3 Object-Centric Operator
65
6.2.2
OCEL Source
Support for Object-Centric Event Log 2.0 Specification (OCEL 2.0) is provided by
enabling the ingestion of log files that adhere to its oﬀicial specification, by utilising
the reading and parsing functionalities of PM4Py, resulting in the OCEL data structure,
which offers native compatibility with both OCEL 1.0 and OCEL 2.0.
This dual
support makes it possible to derive an OCEL 1.0 compliant subset from more complex
OCEL 2.0 logs, an approach that aligns with our assumption of log simplicity.
The OCEL log data structure is then sorted by timestamp, aligning with the founda-
tional assumption of temporal ordering within streaming process mining and checked
for duplicates. Then, each event considered in the data structure is subsequently parsed
into the BOEvent data class and placed onto an observable.
6.2.2.1
Dictionary Source
To facilitate quick testing and prototyping without the need for complete OCEL log
files, a secondary source type was developed based on simple Python dictionaries. This
format allows developers and researchers to define sequences of object-centric events
with minimal overhead. Each dictionary entry is parsed into a BOEvent, mirroring
the structure used in the OCEL-based transformation. It utilises a combination of
trace ID generation and suﬀix addition to distinguish object types. This approach is
particularly useful for unit testing, debugging, and exploring edge cases in the process
discovery pipeline. See example of dictionary format below:
1
[
2
{"activity": "Register Customer", "objects": {"Customer": ["c1"]}},
3
{"activity": "Create Order", "objects": {"Customer": ["c1"], "Order": ["o1"]}},
4
{"activity": "Add Item", "objects": {"Order": ["o1"], "Item": ["i1", "i2"]}},
5
{"activity": "Reserve Item", "objects": {"Item": ["i1", "i2"]}},
6
{"activity": "Cancel Order", "objects": {"Customer": ["c1"], "Order": ["o1"]}}
7
]
6.3
Object-Centric Operator
The Object-Centric Operator found in the framework as OCOperator forms the initial
component within steps 1 through 6 of the SOCPM framework, serving as the entry
point for transforming raw object-centric event streams into structured, object-centric
processing pipelines. It contains two primary goals of supporting individual substream
mining and relation mining. This is accommodated by the functionalities of ingest,
flatten, and route incoming BOEvent objects to individual stream miners, supporting
inclusion strategy and AER mining. All the while keeping the complexity minimalistic
and the structure modular.
The implementation is designed with a strong emphasis on modularity and config-
urability to accommodate varying levels of domain knowledge. Analysts with detailed
process insight can tailor the operator’s behaviour through customizable parameters,
==PAGE:74==
6.3 Object-Centric Operator
66
ensuring that the event stream is interpreted in a way that faithfully reflects the under-
lying business process. This includes options for selecting relevant object types, config-
uring individual miner parameters, defining a specific inclusion strategy, and more. To
maintain accessibility and usability in cases where domain knowledge is limited or un-
available, the operator also includes a robust default configuration. This fallback mode
utilises general individual substream miners, enabling the process discovery pipeline to
function effectively.
The OCOperator functions as a stream operator positioned before the merge op-
eration within the source pipeline. As previously presented, this separation enables
process analysts to decouple the merging stage entirely, allowing for the independent
mining of object-type-specific substreams. This effectively treats each object type as
a traditional stream in a standard streaming process mining process. As a result, for
each object type, a separate HeuristicNet can be generated using the PM4Py open-
source library. However, this design also makes it straightforward to substitute the
merge operator with custom downstream processing tailored to specific use cases.
Due to the decoupling between mining and merging components in the framework,
synchronisation events are essential to coordinate the integration of discovered models.
The OCOperator outputs three distinct types of synchronisation events to be captured
and processed by the OCMergeOperator, each of which serves a specific role in aligning
and managing the streaming process mining pipeline:
• DFG: Whenever a substream miner emits a model (according to its configured
update frequency), a DFG synchronisation event with the model is generated in
the following format:
{"type" : "dfg",
"object_type" : <obj_type>,
"model" : <PM4Py.HeuristicNet>}
• AER: When the AER miner emits a synchronisation event of the following struc-
ture is produced:
{"type" : "aer",
"model" : <AER>}
• Commands: Generated by the active inclusion strategy, these events determine
which object types should be considered active following the processing of the pre-
vious DFG event. Proper elaboration of Commands are given in subsection 6.3.4,
but for now the structure is as follows:
{"type" : "command",
"command" : <Command.Enum>,
"object_type" : <obj_type>}
By supporting both high-level customisation and sensible defaults, the OCOperator
strikes a balance between flexibility and usability, making it suitable for both driven
analysis and automated deployments of object-centric stream process discovery.
==PAGE:75==
6.3 Object-Centric Operator
67
6.3.1
Configuration
This subsection presents the configurations within the OCOperator, highlighting how its
parameters govern the initialisation, operation, and adaptability of object-type-specific
mining streams. The design encourages both expert-guided customisation and out-of-
the-box usability, enabling the operator to function effectively across varied deployment
scenarios, from rapid prototyping to real-time, high-throughput applications.
The operator accepts the following configurable parameters:
• Control Flow: A dictionary mapping object types to dedicated miner factory
functions.
This allows for the pre-specification of which mining algorithm to
apply to each object type, enabling object-type-specific behaviour and optimised
control over model generation.
• Inclusion Strategy: Decides the inclusion strategy for when to include ob-
ject types in the system-wide model, presented in chapter 5. Examples include
Relative Frequency, Sliding Window, and Lossy Counting, with their respective
parameters.
• Default Miner: A fallback factory stream miner function that generates stream
miners for object types not explicitly covered by the control flow.
It enables
dynamic extensibility in cases where the structure of incoming data is not fully
known.
• AER Model Update Frequency: Specifies how frequently the Activity-Entity
Relationship (AER) miner emits updated inter-object cardinality models, ex-
pressed in the number of processed events.
• AER Model Max Approximation Error: Configures the maximum permis-
sible approximation error in the AER model’s lossy counting strategy. Smaller
values improve accuracy at the cost of higher memory usage, while larger values
yield more compact representations.
These configuration parameters are designed to accommodate both domain-informed
customisation and exploratory discovery in unknown settings. They allow practition-
ers to inject expert knowledge when available, while still enabling the framework to
operate effectively in data-driven or unsupervised scenarios.
6.3.2
Pipeline
Central to the OCOperator functionality is its reactive pipeline, built using the RxPY
framework.
Designed with modularity and extensibility in mind, this pipeline gov-
erns the flow of events from initial ingestion to the individual stream miners’ outputs,
while governing which object types are considered active. It embodies a sequence of
well-defined transformations that allow the operator to process, route, and evaluate
streaming object-centric events in a simple manner.
The pipeline executes the following key stages:
==PAGE:76==
6.3 Object-Centric Operator
68
• Routing: The route_to_miner method initially routes complete object-centric
events BOEvent to the AER-LC, while it flattens the same event according to
definition Definition 7, instances into type-specific representations and dispatches
them to the appropriate substream miner based on object type.
If dynamic
mode is configured, it dynamically registers substream miners using the provided
default miner, as needed in the absence of a fixed control flow.
• Filtering: BOEvents that remain in the stream after routing are filtered to
remove residual BOEvent instances.
• Merge substreams: The output subject, which aggregates outputs from all
miner substreams (including AER and DFG models), is merged into the pipeline
to produce a unified output observable.
• Strategy Evaluation: The resulting model messages are passed through the
configured inclusion strategy, which evaluates object types when to emit updated
models based on memory constraints or event frequency heuristics as previously
presented.
The compactness and expressiveness of RxPY allow this sequence to be succinctly
implemented as shown in Listing 1.
This architecture shows a clear separation of
concerns, enabling easy extension, debugging, and integration with additional stream
operators.
Listing 1 Reactive pipeline architecture of the OCOperator.
1
@property
2
def operator(self):
3
def pipeline(stream: Observable[BOEvent]):
4
return stream.pipe(
5
ops.do_action(self._route_to_miner),
6
ops.filter(lambda e: not isinstance(e, BOEvent)),
7
ops.merge(self.__output_subject),
8
ops.flat_map(self.__inclusion_strategy.evaluate),
9
)
10
return pipeline
6.3.3
Control Flow
The control flow parameter of OCOperator defines the explicit mapping between object
types and their corresponding stream miners, functioning as the streaming counterpart
to the projection step in traditional OCPM. It determines which object types are
actively monitored and processed, thereby controlling the structure and granularity of
the discovered models.
For instance, if the analyst specifies only the object types Item and Order, the
system will instantiate and maintain dedicated substreams exclusively for those entities.
This allows for targeted analysis, enabling the discovery to be aligned with domain-
specific objectives while ignoring irrelevant or redundant object types.
==PAGE:77==
6.3 Object-Centric Operator
69
Each entry in the control flow is also capable of specifying a custom miner config-
uration per object type. This enables fine-grained tuning of mining parameters, such
as approximation thresholds and update frequencies on a per-type basis. As a result,
object types with different behavioural characteristics can be modelled with miners
optimised for their respective dynamics, enhancing both model accuracy and resource
eﬀiciency.
An example overview of a valid control flow specification and its implications for
substream generation is shown in Listing 2. Note that it is possible to select miners
for specific object types and manually tune them individually.
Listing 2 Example of a valid control flow dictionary
1
{
2
"Package": Lambda: heuristic_miner_lossy_counting(
3
model_update_frequency=10,
4
max_approx_error=0.001,
5
dependency_threshold=0.5,
6
and_threshold=0.8)
7
"Order": Lambda: heuristic_miner_lossy_counting() //Default
8
"Item" : Lambda: heuristic_miner_lossy_counting_budget(
9
model_update_frequency=25,
10
budget=100,
11
dependency_threshold=0.5,
12
and_threshold)
13
}
6.3.4
Inclusion Strategies
The inclusion strategies presented in section 5.7 were implemented following the struc-
ture of the pseudocode provided in that section. A necessary enhancement introduced
during implementation was the use of a dedicated mechanism known as Commands,
which emerged naturally from the modular architecture of the framework, specifically
from the separation of responsibilities between the OCOperator and the OCMergeOperator.
These Commands serve as internal synchronisation signals sent downstream, enabling
dynamic coordination between the two operator components. When an object type is
deemed active (i.e., eligible for inclusion), a corresponding command is propagated
downstream. Each command is a typed signal event, implemented as an enumeration
with two possible values: ACTIVE and INACTIVE.
Listing 3 Structure of an Command event
1
{
2
"type": "command",
3
"command": ACTIVE,
4
"object_type": Order
5
}
==PAGE:78==
6.3 Object-Centric Operator
70
This command-based signalling allows the system to dynamically adjust the com-
position of models over time. The OCMergeOperator listens for these control signals
and uses them to decide which object types to incorporate when composing the evolv-
ing OC-DFG and AER models. As a result, model updates remain consistent with
the current inclusion state of each object type, reflecting real-time adjustments and
preserving semantic accuracy across the streaming pipeline.
The inclusion strategies are connected through a protocol class InclusionStrategy,
which yields the desired effect for each of the proposed inclusion strategies. The Lossy
Counting Strategy can be seen in Listing 4. The other implemented inclusion strategies
can be seen in Appendix A.1.1
==PAGE:79==
6.3 Object-Centric Operator
71
Listing 4 Lossy Counting Strategy based on Algorithm 5 that uses Commands of
ACTIVE/INACTIVE
to synchronize object types considered down stream
1
class LossyCountingStrategy(InclusionStrategy):
2
def __init__(self, max_approx_error: float):
3
self.__max_approx_error = max_approx_error
4
self.__bucket_width = int(math.ceil(1 / self.__max_approx_error))
5
self.__observed_emitted_models = 1
6
self.__D_C: Dict[str, Tuple[int, int]] = {} #{object_type: (frequency, delta)}
7
8
def evaluate(self, model_event: dict) -> Observable[dict]:
9
# Filter passing aer events
10
if model_event.get("type") != "dfg":
11
return just(model_event)
12
13
# Calculates current bucket
14
b_curr = int(math.ceil(self.__observed_emitted_models / self.__bucket_width))
15
16
obj_type = model_event["object_type"]
17
commands = []
18
19
# Updating Lossy Counting
20
if obj_type in self.__D_C:
21
freq, delta = self.__D_C[obj_type]
22
self.__D_C[obj_type] = (freq + 1, delta)
23
else:
24
self.__D_C[obj_type] = (1, b_curr - 1)
25
commands.append(create_command(Command.ACTIVE, obj_type))
26
27
# Periodic Cleanup
28
if self.__observed_emitted_models % self.__bucket_width == 0:
29
to_remove = []
30
for ot, (freq, delta) in self.__D_C.items():
31
if freq + delta <= b_curr:
32
to_remove.append(ot)
33
34
for ot in to_remove:
35
del self.__D_C[ot]
36
commands.append(create_command(Command.INACTIVE, ot))
37
38
commands.append(model_event)
39
self.__observed_emitted_models += 1
40
return from_iterable(commands)
All inclusion strategies operate at the final stage of the OCOperator pipeline. As
illustrated in Listing 4, Lines 10–11, only synchronisation events from substream miners
that yield DFG updates are processed.
When an object type is to be marked as
ACTIVE or INACTIVE, the corresponding command(s) are appended to a list. Finally,
the actual DFG event itself is added to the same list.
This list is returned as an
==PAGE:80==
6.3 Object-Centric Operator
72
iterable sequence, ensuring that the downstream consumer, the OCMergeOperator, first
receive the relevant control Commands before the model update that triggered them.
This ordered emission guarantees that object-type state transitions are applied before
their corresponding models are integrated, preserving semantic consistency within the
streaming pipeline.
6.3.5
Activity-Entity Relationship Miner
Upon initialisation of the OCOperator, the Activity-Entity Relationship Miner with
Lossy Counting (AER-LC) is instantiated as a parallel stream miner within the stream-
ing architecture. This miner receives complete BOEvents before they are decomposed
through flattening. Consistent with the architectural design of other stream miners
in the pyBeamline framework, the AER-LC miner is instantiated via a dedicated fac-
tory function and is configured with two key parameters: the Model Update Frequency,
which determines the number of incoming events after which the current state of the
AER model is re-evaluated by taking the max cardinality based on frequency of the
cardinalities counted for each activity and propagates it downstream. The Approxi-
mation Error defines the acceptable margin of error in the lossy counting mechanism
within each activity. The former ensures a tunable periodic output of the model, while
the latter balances between memory eﬀiciency and fidelity in capturing activity-object
interactions. Listing 5 shows the implemented AER-LC from which the model of AER
is created.
==PAGE:81==
6.3 Object-Centric Operator
73
Listing 5 Activity-Entity Relationship Miner with Lossy Counting (AER-LC) that
contains observed object types for each activity in DO, and stores frequent observed
cardinalities between object types for each activity in DC
1
class ActivityEntityRelationMinerLossyCounting:
2
def __init__(self, max_approx_error: float = 0.001, control_flow: Optional[Set[str]] = None):
3
self.__control_flow = control_flow
4
self.__D_C: Dict[str, Dict[Tuple[str, str], Dict[Cardinality, Tuple[int, int]]]] = {}
5
self.__D_O: Dict[str, Set[str]] = {}
6
self.__D_N: Dict[str, int] = {}
7
self.__observed_events = 1
8
self.__bucket_width = int(1 / max_approx_error)
9
10
def ingest_event(self, event: BOEvent):
11
activity = event.get_event_name()
12
omap = event.get_omap()
13
14
// Update activity counter
15
self.__D_N[activity] = self.__D_N.get(activity, 0) + 1
16
17
current_bucket = math.ceil(self.__D_N[activity] / self.__bucket_width)
18
obj_types = [t for t in omap if not self.__control_flow or t in self.__control_flow]
19
20
// Update observed object-types
21
self.__D_O.setdefault(activity, set()).update(obj_types)
22
23
// Lossy Counting of cardinalities observed
24
if len(obj_types) >= 2:
25
rel_map = self.__D_C.setdefault(activity, {})
26
for i in range(len(obj_types)):
27
for j in range(i + 1, len(obj_types)):
28
type1, type2 = sorted([obj_types[i], obj_types[j]])
29
key = (type1, type2)
30
count1, count2 = len(omap[type1]), len(omap[type2])
31
card = infer_cardinality(count1, count2)
32
33
card_map = rel_map.setdefault(key, {})
34
if card in card_map:
35
freq, delta = card_map[card]
36
card_map[card] = (freq + 1, delta)
37
else:
38
card_map[card] = (1, current_bucket)
39
40
// Periodic cleanup
41
if self.__D_N[activity] % self.__bucket_width == 0:
42
self._cleanup(current_bucket, activity)
43
44
self.__observed_events+= 1
45
46
def _cleanup(self, current_bucket: int, activity: str):
47
if activity not in self.__D_C:
48
return
49
rel_map = self.__D_C[activity]
50
51
for key, card_map in rel_map.items():
52
to_remove_cards = [c for c, (freq, delta) in card_map.items()
53
if freq + delta <= current_bucket]
54
for c in to_remove_cards:
55
del card_map[c]
==PAGE:82==
6.4 Object-Centric Merge Operator
74
6.3.6
Activity-Entity Relationship
The implementation of the proposed AER model adheres to the formal specification
given in Definition 12, where activities are mapped to their associated object types, and
maximum cardinality relationships between pairs of object types are tracked per activ-
ity. The model is implemented using a Python dataclass, capturing the structural
and relational components needed for stream-based object-centric analysis.
Specif-
ically, the activities field holds the set of known activity labels, object_types
maintains a mapping from each activity to the object types that have participated
in it (supporting unary participation), and relations stores the inferred maximum
cardinalities between unordered pairs of object types for each activity. The resulting
implementation is shown in Listing 6.
Listing 6 Activity-Entity Relationship Model
1
@dataclass
2
class AER:
3
activities: Set[str] = field(default_factory=set)
4
object_types: Dict[str, Set[str]] = field(default_factory=lambda: defaultdict(set))
5
relations: Dict[str, Dict[Tuple[str, str], Cardinality]] = field(
6
default_factory=lambda: defaultdict(dict)
7
)
6.4
Object-Centric Merge Operator
The Object-Centric Merge Operator, implemented as OCMergeOperator, functions as
the final downstream component to the OCOperator, forming the critical final stage of
the SOCPM pipeline. Positioned at the edge of the object-centric stream processing
architecture, its primary role is to process events sent downstream by the OCOperator,
and for each event processed a new snapshot yielding the newest version of both models
AER and OC-DFG is pushed downstream in an event structured as such:
{"ocdfg" : "<OCDFG>",
"aer" : <AER>,
}
Beyond processing the downstream events, it has three responsibilities.
• Active Object Types: By the processing of Command events the set of ACTIVE
object types must always be up to date.
• Construction of OC-DFG: Continuously process DFG events and keep a
dictionary that overwrites existing models when a new one arrives.
Beyond structural aggregation, the merge operator is also responsible for processing
Commands model evolution, specifically the “forgetting” of object types. This occurs
in response to Commands propagated downstream by the Concept Drift strategies con-
figured within the upstream OCOperator. By deregistering obsolete or inactive object
==PAGE:83==
6.4 Object-Centric Merge Operator
75
types, the merge operator ensures that the resulting process model remains current,
memory-eﬀicient, and reflective of the ongoing behavioural trends in the event stream.
A further responsibility of the operator is to coordinate synchronisation between
active object types, ensuring that if an object type is deemed inactive, it is not reflected
in the process model of OC-DFG and in the AERModel. This is crucial for preserving
the semantics of shared object types and for accurately representing the interactions
across the object-centric system.
Overall, the OCMergeOperator serves as both an integrative and regulatory com-
ponent, aligning individual discovery results into a coherent system-level model while
dynamically adapting to evolving object-type activity.
6.4.1
Object-Centric Directly-Follows Graph
The implementation of the Object-Centric Directly-Follows Graph (OCDFG), as for-
malized in Definition 3, closely mirrors its theoretical definition. Though it also con-
tains “dummy” start/end activities similar to what has been proposed in [Aal19; BA23].
A key design feature in the implementation is the structured representation of edges,
which are captured using a nested dictionary format. Each object type serves as a
top-level key, mapping to another dictionary that stores pairs of directly-following ac-
tivities along with their observed frequencies. For example, an edge could be stored
as:
"Item": {("Place Order", "Prepare Package"): frequency}
This design ensures eﬀicient lookup and update operations while maintaining the
object-centric perspective of activity transitions.
Listing 7 Object-Centric Directly Follows Graph inspired by [BA23]
1
@dataclass
2
class OCDFG:
3
activities: Set[str] = field(default_factory=set)
4
object_types: Set[str] = field(default_factory=set)
5
edges: Dict[str, Dict[Tuple[str,str], int]] = field(
6
default_factory=lambda: defaultdict(dict)
7
)
8
start_activities: Dict[str, Set[str]] = field(
9
default_factory=lambda: defaultdict(set)
10
)
11
end_activities: Dict[str, Set[str]] = field(
12
default_factory=lambda: defaultdict(set)
13
)
==PAGE:84==
6.4 Object-Centric Merge Operator
76
6.4.2
Merging
The merge pipeline implementation, shown in Listing 8, illustrates how the merging
logic integrates emitted models into a unified system-wide representation. This imple-
mentation reflects the algorithmic flow previously introduced in Algorithm 9, encap-
sulating the behaviour of observing and updating internal state representations from
streamed input messages.
Listing 8 Merge Operator Pipeline
1
def process(self, msg: Dict[str, Any]) -> Optional[Dict[str,Union[OCDFG,AER]]]:
2
msg_type = msg.get("type")
3
obj_type = msg.get("object_type")
4
5
if msg_type == "dfg" and obj_type and isinstance(msg.get("model"), HeuristicsNet):
6
# Overwrite the DFG for the object type
7
self._obj_dfg_repo[obj_type] = msg["model"]
8
if msg_type == "command" and obj_type and isinstance(msg.get("command"), Command):
9
# Handle the command for the object type
10
self._handle_command(msg, obj_type)
11
return None # Suppress the command message
12
if msg_type == "aer" and isinstance(msg.get("model"), AER):
13
# Overwrite the AER diagram with the latest one
14
self._aer_diagram = msg["model"]
15
16
ocdfg = self._build_ocdfg()
17
aer_diagram = self._build_aer_diagram(ocdfg)
18
return {"ocdfg": ocdfg, "aer": aer_diagram}
Command messages are suppressed, because they are emitted as part of the same
pipeline that also includes the corresponding DFG update. Since the DFG reflects the
outcome of the command, processing the DFG alone is suﬀicient to capture the up-
dated behaviour as the Commands are processed first. By this suppression, the Command
message avoids redundant updates and ensures the output stream remains concise. As
both elements are guaranteed to arrive together, suppression does not compromise
correctness and maintains a clean, semantically focused output.
The construction algorithm and the subsequent pruning algorithm can be found in
the Appendix subsection A.1.2.
==PAGE:85==
CHAPTER 7
Evaluation
This chapter is dedicated to evaluating the proposed software framework for Streaming
Object-Centric Process Mining (SOCPM) discovery, aligning the assessment with the
research questions outlined in section 2.2. The evaluation is structured around two fun-
damental metrics, verification and validation, which together provide a comprehensive
view of the framework’s correctness and practical utility. Verification focuses on de-
termining whether the system has been implemented correctly according to its design
specifications, while validation examines whether the framework effectively meets its
intended goals in realistic usage scenarios. Accordingly, the remainder of this chapter
is structured around these two pillars, systematically analysing the strengths and lim-
itations of the proposed solution, concluding with a summary of the research question
that discusses the evaluations based on the research questions.
7.1
Verification
To ensure the correctness and reliability of the proposed framework within the py-
Beamline library [Bur23], verification was conducted through systematic testing using
Python’s built-in unittest framework. This included a combination of white-box and
black-box testing techniques. This ensured that individual components behaved as
intended and that the overall system responded correctly to diverse event streams.
White-box testing focused on the internal logic of the framework. Unit tests were
crafted to validate the correctness of isolated functions and modules, including event
parsing, operator pipelines, and models. These tests provide insight into control paths,
data transformations, and expected outputs for known inputs.
An illustrative example is shown in Listing 9, where the OCEL log source is tested
to ensure that a static log of OCEL 2.0 can be formatted into an observable stream,
where events are emitted correctly and parsed into the expected format.
==PAGE:86==
7.1 Verification
78
Listing 9 White-box test for verifying event emission from OCEL file source
1
def test_generate_ocel_source_from_file(self):
2
# Path to the test file
3
test_file_path = "tests/logistics.jsonocel"
4
# Generate OCEL from the test file
5
ocel_source = ocel_log_source_from_file(test_file_path)
6
# Check if the generated OCEL is not None
7
self.assertIsInstance(ocel_source, Observable)
8
# Capture first 10 events
9
emitted_events = []
10
ocel_source.pipe(
11
ops.map(lambda event: event),
12
ops.take(10),
13
).subscribe(
14
on_next=lambda x: emitted_events.append(x),
15
)
16
# Check if the number of emitted events matches the expected count
17
self.assertEqual(len(emitted_events), 10)
18
# Check if the emitted events are of type BOEvent
19
for event in emitted_events:
20
self.assertIsInstance(event, BOEvent)
Black-box testing examined the system as a whole, treating it as a black box and
verifying output validity without direct access to internal state or structure. These tests
assessed how the framework behaves under various object-centric process configurations
and input streams.
Listing 10 illustrates such a test. It feeds an synthetic object-centric event stream
into the framework (Creation is omitted for simplicity) and validates whether the
merged process model (OC-DFG) contains expected behaviour patterns and activities,
based on what is present in the synthesized source stream, and should be present based
on the operators control flow.
==PAGE:87==
7.1 Verification
79
Listing 10 Black-box test verifying merge operator functionality of OCDFG
1
def setUp(self)
2
...
3
self.combined_log = dict_test_ocel_source([
4
(test_events_phaseflow_ends_early, 5),
5
(test_events_phaseflow, 25)],
6
shuffle=False)
7
8
control_flow = {
9
"Order": lambda :
10
heuristics_miner_lossy_counting(model_update_frequency=10, max_approx_error=0.1),
11
"Item": lambda :
12
heuristics_miner_lossy_counting(model_update_frequency=10),
13
"Customer": lambda :
14
heuristics_miner_lossy_counting(model_update_frequency=10, max_approx_error=0.1),
15
"Shipment": lambda :
16
heuristics_miner_lossy_counting(model_update_frequency=1),
17
"Invoice": lambda :
18
heuristics_miner_lossy_counting(model_update_frequency=1),
19
}
20
21
self.oc_operator = OCOperator(
22
inclusion_strategy=RelativeFrequencyBasedStrategy(frequency_threshold=0.15),
23
control_flow=control_flow)
24
25
def test_oc_merger_with_heuristic(self):
26
# Test the OCDFG merger with the combined log
27
emitted_models = []
28
self.combined_log.pipe(
29
self.oc_operator.operator,
30
oc_merge_operator()
31
).subscribe(lambda merged_ocdfg: emitted_models.append(merged_ocdfg["ocdfg"]))
32
33
for ocdfg in emitted_models:
34
# No empty models should be emitted
35
self.assertTrue(len(ocdfg.edges.keys()) > 0)
36
self.assertTrue(len(ocdfg.activities) > 0)
37
self.assertIsInstance(ocdfg, OCDFG)
38
39
# Check if the merged model contains the expected activities
40
for activity in ocdfg.activities:
41
self.assertIn(activity, {"Register Customer", "Create Order",
42
"Add Item", "Reserve Item", "Cancel Order",
43
"Pack Item", "Ship Item", "Send Invoice", "Receive Review"})
To ensure long-term correctness during development, a Continuous Integration (CI)
pipeline was integrated using GitHub Actions. All tests, white-box and black-box, were
automatically executed on each pull request. This pipeline enforced branch protections,
detected regressions early, and ensured the evolving codebase adhered to correctness
expectations.
The combination of unit-level white-box tests, integration-oriented black-box tests,
and automated CI-based verification forms a comprehensive assurance framework. This
strategy helps guarantee that each change maintains the functional and structural
integrity of the system across different versions and deployment scenarios.
Ultimately, the codebase achieved a coverage of 100% for all files developed as part
of the project. Only five lines were explicitly omitted from coverage calculations, all of
which correspond to protocol abstractions used solely to define shared interfaces across
components. These abstractions are not instantiated directly and thus do not impact
==PAGE:88==
7.2 Validation
80
behavioural testing. Hence the implementation of the proposed framework is verified
in regards to correctness, thereby facilitating the research questions of RQ1, RQ2 and
RQ3 respectively. The final coverage results are illustrated in Figure 7.1.
Figure 7.1: Coverage report of the implemented framework in pyBeamline.
7.2
Validation
This section is divided into two subsections. The first evaluates the discovered OC-
DFG models in relation to Research Question 4, focusing on quantitative metrics
to assess how well the models capture behaviour and respond to concept drift in a
streaming environment. The second subsection validates the proposed AER model,
specifically assessing its capability to accurately reflect observed activity object-to-
object cardinalities in a qualitative manner.
7.2.1
Validation of the Object-Centric Directly-Follows Graph
The validation of the proposed streaming framework is conduction by comparing the
stream mined OC-DFG implemented withing the pyBeamline library. With a similar
process model mined from the established offline OCPM discovery method in PM4Py.
This comparative analysis serves two key purposes: first, to assess how eﬀiciently the
streaming variant captures object-centric relational behaviour as events are incremen-
tally processed from the log, relative to the complete behaviour discovered by the
==PAGE:89==
7.2 Validation
81
offline method; and second, to evaluate how closely the resulting OCDFG aligns with
the reference model in terms of both structural accuracy.
To quantify behavioural similarity, the well-established Jaccard Similarity de-
fined in Equation 7.1 metric is employed. This metric quantifies the degree of overlap
between two sets by comparing the size of their intersection to the size of their union.
In the context of process mining, this facilitates the comparison of directly-follows re-
lations (typed arcs), formally defined as F in Definition 13, between two models. Each
arc is a tuple of the form (N, OT, N), denoting a behavioural dependency conditioned
on object type. For instance, an arc such as (Prepare Package, Item, Reserve Item)
captures a specific object-centric behavioural sequence.
J(A, B) = |A ∩B|
|A ∪B|
(7.1)
Where A and B are sets representing, for example, activity pairs from two process
models. |A∩B| denotes the number of shared elements (intersecting activity relations),
and |A ∪B| denotes the total number of unique elements (union of activity relations).
The Jaccard similarity measures the structural overlap between two models, ranging
from 0 (no overlap) to 1 (perfect match).
The event logs used for conversion into streams and subsequent validation within
the software framework are publicly available at the OCEL website1. The logs to be
considered are:
• Logistics: A synthetic dataset derived from a logistics process simulation, fea-
turing 7 object types and 14 event types, comprising a total of 35, 761 events
[KG23].
• Order Management: Captures the lifecycle of customer order processing within
a company, including order registration and payment. The log includes 11 event
types, 6 object types, and 21, 008 events in total [KA23].
• Procure-to-Pay (P2P): Represents the procure-to-pay process in an organi-
sational setting, from purchase requisition to payment execution. This dataset
contains 10 event types, 7 object types, and 14, 671 events [PL23].
Note. For the next section, the implemented framework has been extended with
a parameter to monitor both the number of events processed and the corresponding
model emissions. This enables the application of the Jaccard similarity metric over
framework ingested events, allowing for a fine-grained assessment of model quality as
the stream progresses. The framework is configured to operate in dynamic mode, where
miners are instantiated on demand for each encountered object type. Specifically, a
uniform configuration is applied using the Heuristics Miner with Lossy Counting, with
a maximum approximation error of ϵ = 0.001 to balance performance and accuracy.
Therefore, all object types are treated uniformly, without tailoring discovery strategies
1https://www.ocel-standard.org/event-logs/overview/
==PAGE:90==
7.2 Validation
82
to each type; this is generally not advised. While this simplifies the experimental setup
and ensures consistency when multiple configurations are available, it inherently limits
the model’s expressiveness in capturing nuanced inter-object type relations, particularly
when variations exist within individual object types.
7.2.1.1
Relative Frequency
This evaluation examines the behaviour of the framework when applying the Relative
Frequency inclusion strategy. For this experiment, frequency thresholds of 0.05, 0.02
are considered. To maintain clarity in visualisation and analysis, all plots are trun-
cated at 9000 processed events, beyond which the stream tends to stabilise and yields
diminishing insights.
Figure 7.2: Jaccard Similarity over events processed in stream for frequency threshold
0.05.
As shown in Figure 7.2, the framework is capable of capturing the core behavioural
patterns of the underlying process models relative to the offline discovery within the
first 2000 events. The P2P process exhibits a near-perfect fit early in the stream, sug-
gesting a high degree of model relational accuracy. Conversely, the Logistics process
underperforms, stabilising at approximately 0.5 Jaccard similarity, indicating limita-
tions in model completeness or miner responsiveness under this threshold.
==PAGE:91==
7.2 Validation
83
Figure 7.3: Jaccard Similarity over events processed in stream for frequency threshold
0.02.
With a reduced threshold of 0.02 as seen in Figure 7.3, the Logistics model demon-
strates notable improvement, reaching a Jaccard similarity of approximately 0.8. Like-
wise, the Order Management process also benefits from this more inclusive threshold.
The performance for P2P also increases, and the similarity even reaches a value of 1,
underscoring that the parameter supplied to the inclusion strategy is valuable.
The observed differences across thresholds can be attributed to the emission spar-
sity of specific object type miners. Miners associated with these types emit models
infrequently; thus, higher thresholds may lead to their premature exclusion. Lower-
ing the threshold ensures their continued presence in the global OC-DFG, thereby
improving overall structural completeness and model accuracy.
7.2.2
Sliding Window
The following inclusion strategy to be evaluated is the Sliding Window strategy. For
this experiment, let’s consider windows of size 50 and 125 respectively. Similar to the
previous strategy, the plots are truncated to 9000 processed events.
==PAGE:92==
7.2 Validation
84
Figure 7.4: Jaccard Similarity over events processed in stream for window size 50.
As seen in Figure 7.4, the observed Jaccard similarities when peaking are compara-
ble to those obtained using the Relative Frequency strategy. The plot displays periodic
fluctuations, a behaviour commonly associated with the use of sliding windows. These
jumps reflect the transient activation and deactivation of object types as they enter
or exit the active window size of 50, depending on their frequency of appearance. No-
tice how the fluctuations are less prone in the Order Management, which signifies a
somewhat even distribution of model emissions from all object types, over a window of
50.
==PAGE:93==
7.2 Validation
85
Figure 7.5: Jaccard Similarity over events processed in stream for window size 125.
In Figure 7.5, we observe that many of the fluctuations present with the smaller
window have been smoothed out. This effect arises because the larger window size
captures more events per object type, reducing the chance of object types being er-
roneously excluded from the active set due to temporary inactivity. However, some
degree of instability remains, likely due to object types that emit infrequently, even
within a 125 event window.
In particular, the Logistics log reveals signs of sparse object type activity, implying
that some entities may not produce events frequently enough to maintain consistent
inclusion. This observation highlights a key challenge in applying fixed-size window
strategies to real-world logs with irregular or skewed distributions of object type emis-
sions. For more plots see Appendix A.2.2
7.2.2.1
Lossy Counting Strategy
The final inclusion strategy evaluated is the Lossy Counting strategy.
Unlike pre-
vious approaches that rely on fixed thresholds or windows, this method maintains
approximate frequency counts of object types with a bounded error margin. For this
evaluation, two values of the maximum approximation error were considered: 0.05 and
0.025. These values represent the upper bound on the estimation error for object-type
frequencies. Lower approximation errors lead to more precise tracking of frequencies,
but at the cost of increased memory usage and computational overhead
==PAGE:94==
7.2 Validation
86
Figure 7.6: Jaccard Similarity over events processed in stream with approximation
error 0.05.
As shown in Figure 7.6, the model quality shows a stable trend with moderate
Jaccard similarity across all logs. The performance of the P2P and Order Management
logs remains relatively high, while Logistics continues to exhibit more variability. The
modest approximation error allows frequent object types to remain active while filtering
out less significant ones eﬀiciently.
==PAGE:95==
7.2 Validation
87
Figure 7.7: Jaccard Similarity over events processed in stream with approximation
error 0.025.
In Figure 7.7, reducing the approximation error improves the accuracy of the model
across all logs. The increased precision allows for better retention of object types that
contribute meaningfully to the process structure. The smoother progression in Jac-
card similarity for Logistics suggests that this log benefits from finer-grained frequency
tracking, likely due to its greater diversity and irregularity in object-type appearances.
7.2.2.2
Behavioural Analysis
The results obtained from the preceding evaluations indicate that the framework is
generally effective at capturing behavioural aspects of processes from event streams.
It performs well in approximating the object-centric process models discovered offline
using PM4Py. Nevertheless, the Logistics log consistently yields lower Jaccard simi-
larity scores when compared to the P2P and Order Management logs, despite some
variations in parameter configurations. This persistent gap suggests that the under-
lying characteristics of the Logistics log pose unique challenges for streaming-based
discovery.
To better understand this behaviour, the Jaccard similarity is decomposed by object
type for the Logistics log. This decomposition enables the assessment of how each object
type individually contributes to the alignment between the streaming-discovered model
and the offline reference model. For this analysis, the Relative Frequency inclusion
strategy is employed with a threshold of 0.02 and 0.01. The breakdown reveals which
object types are insuﬀiciently captured in the discovered model.
==PAGE:96==
7.2 Validation
88
Figure 7.8: Jaccard Similarity for each object type over events processed in a stream
with relative frequency 0.02.
As shown in Figure 7.8, the primary factor behind the lower aggregated similarity
is the Customer Order object type. A closer inspection of the log reveals that events
involving Customer Order occur relatively infrequently and are predominantly concen-
trated at the beginning of the stream. Consequently, even a threshold as low as 0.02
may still filter out this object type prematurely. To evaluate this further, the threshold
is reduced to 0.01 in the subsequent configuration.
Figure 7.9: Jaccard Similarity for each object type over events processed in a stream
with relative frequency 0.01.
==PAGE:97==
7.2 Validation
89
Comparing Figure 7.8 and Figure 7.9, it becomes apparent that lowering the thresh-
old enables the inclusion of the Customer Order object type in the discovered model,
significantly improving its similarity to the offline model. This again underscores the
importance of adaptive parameter setting.
Furthermore, it is worth noting that the Forklift object type consistently exhibits
lower similarity scores than others. This behaviour can be attributed to its role as a
constant object within the log, present in many activities. In PM4Py’s offline approach,
the initial appearance of such objects is preserved, and the resulting initialisation edges
contribute persistently to the discovered model. Although our streaming framework
also registers these initialisation edges, the application of Heuristics Miner with Lossy
Counting leads to their eventual removal as they do not recur. Consequently, this for-
getting mechanism results in a loss of early relational structure, lowering the similarity
of discovered models involving such objects.
This highlights a potential limitation, however, one could argue that an adaptive
framework, as proposed here, may offer a more realistic abstraction for modelling such
constant objects. In environments like packaging facilities, where a Forklift might
continuously operate without a clear behavioural “beginning” the notion of persis-
tent initialisation edges may not align with the actual process semantics. Thus, the
streaming framework’s behaviour could be interpreted not as a failure, but as a more
contextually appropriate modelling of objects that function with a stable, ongoing role
in the system.
Another limitation stems from the design of the HM-LC algorithm itself. Since
it builds process models by capturing directly-follows relations between observed ac-
tivities, it inherently disregards object types that participate in only a single activity.
For example, if the object type Invoice appears exclusively in the activity "Send
Invoice", then no activity-to-activity transition can be established for that type. As
a result, HM-LC produces no meaningful behavioural information for such object types,
effectively excluding them from the discovered model. This leads to an incomplete rep-
resentation of the process, especially in domains where certain object types are involved
in isolated or auxiliary tasks.
7.2.3
Concept Drift
To evaluate the implemented framework ability to adapt to concept drift, with a specific
focus on drift at the object-centric level. This form of drift manifests when object types
either disappear due to infrequent usage or new object types are introduced dynamically
during process execution. We conduct an experiment, in which two distinct event logs:
P2P and Order Management are merged. The combined stream is then constructed
by this, such that the first 14,671 events originate from P2P, followed sequentially by
21,008 events from Order Management. This setup introduces a clear and abrupt drift
in the process behaviour.
Among the available inclusion strategies, Sliding Window and Lossy Counting are
selected for this analysis. The Relative Frequency strategy is deliberately excluded,
as its cumulative nature makes it poorly suited for handling substantial behavioural
==PAGE:98==
7.2 Validation
90
shifts. In a setting with concept drift, frequent patterns from the initial segment (i.e.,
P2P) would persist throughout, making it diﬀicult for subsequent changes (e.g., Order
Management) to be reflected without significantly longer event streams.
Figure 7.10: Sliding Window: Jaccard Similarity across Concept Drift Transition.
As illustrated in Figure 7.10, the Sliding Window strategy effectively forgets the
behaviour associated with P2P and rapidly adapts to the dynamics of the Order Man-
agement log. This demonstrates the strength of window-based approaches in managing
sharp transitions, as the model is continuously rebuilt based on the most recent obser-
vations within a fixed window.
==PAGE:99==
7.3 Validation of Activity-Entity Relationship Miner
91
Figure 7.11: Lossy Counting: Jaccard Similarity across Concept Drift Transition.
In contrast, Figure 7.11 shows the behaviour under the Lossy Counting strategy.
While a significant portion of the P2P process is successfully phased out, traces of it
remain due to the underlying frequency-based approximation. The decay in frequency,
controlled by the error bound ε, does eventually allow the model to shift toward the
new behaviour. However, some residual object-type edges from the earlier log persist,
reflecting the typical behaviour of this strategy under abrupt drift scenarios.
For additional plots, see Appendix A.2.6.
7.3
Validation of Activity-Entity Relationship Miner
The validation of the miner, specifically Activity-Entity Relationship Miner with Lossy
Counting (AER-LC), along with the output of the pruned Activity-Entity-Relationship
(AER) model, is conducted qualitatively, as this is a novel contribution proposed in
this work. The implementation of the miner and model has already been technically
verified to ensure correctness through unit tests within the framework.
The relationships that the miner yields are based on object types and identifiers
observed in events. The model will therefore never reflect relationships of object types
that have not been observed within the seen activities. By limiting the view to activi-
ties, it gives the analysts the possibility to query the activity, for which further analysis
is needed. As Lossy Counting is counting for each activity seen, the relations do not
change due to the frequency of separate activities seen; this is essential as activities
generally tend to have very different frequencies.
==PAGE:100==
7.3 Validation of Activity-Entity Relationship Miner
92
Given events with activities where many object types are present will also clutter
the query, as the algorithm tries to capture cardinality relationships for co-occurrence,
all objects will be related to each other. Such that given n object types there will
be n object types, there will be
(n
2
)
possible pairwise relationships per activity. This
quadratic growth in cardinality associations can lead to a visually and analytically
dense representation, especially for events with many object types.
In such cases,
careful interpretation is needed, as the model reflects syntactic co-occurrence.
However, despite the outlined limitations, the miner demonstrates strong adapt-
ability to concept drift at the activity level. Combined with pruning based on the
currently discovered OC-DFG, it provides the analyst with valuable, contextualized
insights. To illustrate this, consider the following test setup:
1
#
2
log_1 = [
3
{"activity": "Add Item", "objects": {"Order": ["o2"], "Item": ["i3"]}},
4
]
5
# Behaviour is of (One-to-One)
6
log_2 = [
7
{"activity": "Add Item", "objects": {"Order": ["o1"], "Item": ["i1", "i2"]}},
8
]
9
10
# Source 1 contains majority of One-to-One
11
source1 = dict_test_ocel_source([(log_1, 25),(log_2, 10)], shuffle=True)
12
# Source 2 contains majority of Many-To-One
13
source2 = dict_test_ocel_source([(log_1, 10),(log_2, 50)], shuffle=True)
14
source = concat(source1, source2)
In this scenario, the first source primarily reflects a (One-to-One) relationship be-
tween Item and Order in the activity "Add Item" with 35 events in total, while the
second source emphasises a (Many-to-One) pattern with 60 events.
==PAGE:101==
7.4 Visualisation
93
Figure 7.12: Illustration of how the Activity-Entity Relationship Miner with Lossy
Counting is able to conform to concept drift on the relational level
between Item and Order respectively.
As shown in Figure 7.12, the miner effectively adjusts to the shift in data distribu-
tion. Over time, it reflects the increased cardinality of Item objects per Order, demon-
strating the miner’s capability to capture evolving relational semantics in streaming
data.
Regarding the pruning action taking place in the merging aspect between the OC-
DFG and the AER, it results in a complete overview of a synchronised version of the
process in question. It allows the analyst to look deeply into the activities and object-
types seen in the OC-DFG, and help take immediate actions if relations are not what
was expected.
7.4
Visualisation
This section demonstrates how the combined perspectives of the OC-DFG and AER
models complement each other, providing a more holistic understanding of process
behaviour. By inspecting two deliberately designed yet variant traces within a pro-
cess, we illustrate how the proposed framework effectively captures and differentiates
contextual process dynamics.
We begin by presenting the two trace variants used in the test case Listing 11:
• Trace 1: This is considered the good trace, where Customer is registered and
==PAGE:102==
7.4 Visualisation
94
Order is created with two Items. Which is then packaged, shipped, and subse-
quently, a review is received.
• Trace 2: By contrast, this trace variant reflects an exceptional path triggered
by a faulty delivery. This leads to a repackaging based on a Receipt object,
involving a "Fast Track" activity. The trace co-exists within the process and
therefore reuses several activities from the first trace, but in a different context
and structure.
Listing 11 Two distinct workflow traces within a process
1
trace_1 = [
2
{"activity": "Register Customer", "objects": {"Customer": ["c1"]}},
3
{"activity": "Create Order", "objects": {"Customer": ["c1"], "Order": ["o1"]}},
4
{"activity": "Link Order To Shipment", "objects":
{"Order": ["o1"], "Shipment": ["s1"]}},
5
{"activity": "Add Item", "objects": {"Order": ["o1"], "Item": ["i1", "i2"]}},
6
{"activity": "Reserve Item", "objects": {"Item": ["i1", "i2"]}},
7
{"activity": "Pack Item", "objects": {"Item": ["i1","i2"], "Order": ["o1"]}},
8
{"activity": "Ship Item", "objects": {"Item": ["i1","i2"], "Shipment": ["s1"]}},
9
{"activity": "Send Invoice", "objects": {"Order": ["o1"], "Invoice": ["inv1"]}},
10
{"activity": "Receive Review", "objects": {"Customer": ["c1"], "Order": ["o1"]}},
11
]
12
13
trace_2 = [
14
{"activity": "Create Order", "objects": {"Receipt": ["r1"]}},
15
{"activity": "Fast Track", "objects": {"Receipt": ["r1"]}},
16
{"activity": "Add Item", "objects": {"Recept": ["o1"], "Item": ["i3", "i4"]}},
17
{"activity": "Pack Item", "objects": {"Item": ["i3"], "Receipt": ["r1"]}},
18
{"activity": "Pack Item", "objects": {"Item": ["i4"], "Receipt": ["r1"]}},
19
{"activity": "Ship Item", "objects": {"Item": ["i3","i4"], "Shipment": ["s2"]}},
20
{"activity": "Send Invoice", "objects": {"Receipt": ["r1"], "Invoice": ["inv2"]}},
21
{"activity": "Receive Review", "objects": {"Receipt": ["r1"]}},
22
]
After transforming these traces into an event stream and processing them through
the implemented discovery pipeline, the generated models are visualised using graphical
functionalities implemented within the pyBeamline library.
As depicted in Figure 7.13, the OC-DFG highlights object-type-specific behaviour
via directly-follows relationships. The "Fast Track" activity is correctly linked solely
to the Receipt object, indicating precise object-specific behaviour tracking. Notably,
the Invoice object is absent due to its involvement in only a single activity, an arti-
fact of the Heuristics Miner with Lossy Counting (HM-LC) approach, which requires
activity transitions to construct model relations as discussed in 7.2.2.1.
From the OC-DFG, process analysts can infer behavioural patterns such as expected
ordering constraints. For instance, one might expect that all Item objects are reserved
before they are packed, implying that "Reserve Item" should precede "Pack Item".
However, the second (faulty) trace clearly demonstrates a deviation from this pattern,
bypassing the reservation step for some items, and this is clearly seen in the graph.
One important limitation previously discussed, which led to the development of
the AER model and its corresponding AER-LC, is the limitation of the OC-DFG,
specifically its inability to capture whether object types co-occur within the same
event. This distinction is crucial for understanding the composition of activities. For
==PAGE:103==
7.4 Visualisation
95
example, while the graph shows that "Create Order" is linking both Customer, Order,
and Receipt object types, it does not clarify whether these associations stem from joint
occurrences within the same event or separate instances across different traces. As such,
the OC-DFG may obscure insights into object relationships at the event activity level.
==PAGE:104==
7.4 Visualisation
96
Figure 7.13: Visualisation of the OC-DFG produced from the test stream after a
while.
==PAGE:105==
7.4 Visualisation
97
The AER model, as previously presented, serves as an activity-specific Entity-
Relationship (ER) diagram, representing object-type co-occurrences observed per ac-
tivity. The visualised model derived from the test traces is shown in Figure 7.14. Each
stippled box corresponds to an activity, such as "Create Order", and is annotated
with the object types observed in co-occurrence, along with inferred cardinality rela-
tionships.
For instance, consider the "Create Order" activity, where the object types Customer,
Order, and Receipt have been observed. However, the Receipt exhibits unary par-
ticipation, meaning it has only been observed in isolation when this activity occurs.
This complements the limitations from the OC-DFG, further supporting the inter-
pretation that Receipt is a distinct trace within the process. A similar observation
applies to the "Receive Review" activity, where object co-occurrence varies between
traces. The model also reveals the observation cardinalities, such as a (One-to-One)
relationship between Customer and Order in "Create Order", indicating consistent
joint participation.
One of the limitations of the AER-LC, and by extension the AER model, arises
when multiple variant traces involve the same activity but differ in their associated
object types.
For example, consider the activity "Pack Item": in one trace, this
activity involves an Order and an Item, while in another it involves a Receipt and
an Item. Although both traces are valid, they are linked to the same activity label.
The miner aggregates these variants and captures both object relations, resulting in a
(Many-to-One) relation between Item and Order and a (One-to-One) relation between
Item and Receipt.
However, this may lead to misinterpretation—suggesting that
events labeled "Pack Item" typically involve all three object types, when in fact no
such triple co-occurrence ever occurs in a single event. This highlights a modelling
ambiguity rooted in overlapping activity labels across variants, similar to what can not
be inferred from an OC-DFG.
Nevertheless, this scenario also illustrates a unique strength of the AER model: its
ability to capture fine-grained, activity-specific relational patterns that would not be
discernible from an OC-DFG alone. In the "Pack Item" example, no direct relation
exists between Order and Receipt because these objects never co-occurred within
the same event. Instead, each is independently linked to Item in different contexts,
allowing the AER to preserve their distinct cardinalities and structural roles. Such
nuanced insights enable more accurate interpretation of process behaviour, especially
in domains where object interactions vary subtly across activity instances.
==PAGE:106==
7.4 Visualisation
98
Figure 7.14: Activity-Entity-Relationship (AER) model visualisation reflecting the
process of the two test traces.
Together, the models complement each other, providing process analysts with a com-
prehensive, system-wide view that facilitates timely interpretation and action. While
the OC-DFG offers an evolving control-flow perspective segmented by object types,
the AER model enriches this view by detailing how those object types co-occur within
individual activities. This dual representation reduces the latency between behavioural
observation and strategic intervention. As previously discussed, both models exhibit
adaptive responsiveness to concept drift, each in its respective dimension. The OC-
DFG captures evolving activity flows per object type, while the AER reflects relational
==PAGE:107==
7.5 Research Question Summary
99
shifts in activity-object structures over time.
Together, they provide a robust ana-
lytical foundation for understanding complex, evolving object-centric processes in a
streaming context.
7.5
Research Question Summary
Based on the conducted evaluations, both verification of correctness of the implemented
framework and validation against established offline benchmarks, the proposed architec-
ture demonstrates the capability to perform effective Streaming Object-Centric Process
Mining (SOCPM) discovery. Aligned with RQ1, the framework incorporates the struc-
tural properties that allow for object-centric process mining in streams. Through the
mechanism of Problem Reduction of the multistep procedure of ET2ET and ET2OT
process discovery, the framework could perform streaming object-centric process min-
ing discovery, thereby answering RQ2. Addressing RQ3, the system architecture was
designed with modular, scalable components that include strategies to handle outer
object type concept drift, as seen in subsection 7.2.3. Finally, regarding RQ4, the eval-
uation included comparisons with offline baselines, PM4Py, and demonstrated that the
streaming-discovered models retain high accuracy when tuned appropriately, with an
average of 0.8 −1 between the three test logs of OCEL 2.0 format.
==PAGE:108==
CHAPTER 8
Discussion
This chapter reflects on the outcomes of the research by summarising key findings, in-
terpreting their meaning, discussing their implications, and acknowledging limitations.
The primary goal of this thesis was to investigate how Streaming Object-Centric
Process Mining (SOCPM) discovery can be enabled in a stream, by developing a stream-
ing object-centric process mining framework. This involved conceptualising the stream-
ing OCPM, defining its key components and then subsequently developing a framework
supporting the concepts.
The experimental results demonstrate that the proposed framework is capable of
accurately capturing behavioural patterns in a streaming setting.
When compared
to established offline discovery techniques, such as those implemented in PM4Py, the
streaming-discovered models consistently achieve high similarity. In particular, across
multiple event logs, the framework reached a stabilised Jaccard similarity score ranging
from 0.8 to 1.0 given appropriate parameter configurations.
Moreover, the framework exhibited rapid convergence: in many cases, meaningful
and representative models were discovered within the first 2, 000 processed events. This
is a significant improvement in responsiveness compared to offline approaches, which
require the entire event log to be available before discovery can occur. For instance,
processing a complete log such as Logistics, containing 35,761 events, is a prerequisite
in offline methods, whereas the streaming approach delivers early behavioural insights
long before the log is complete.
One of the limitations, as highlighted in the evaluation, arises when an object type
is observed in only a single activity. In such cases, the Heuristics Miner with Lossy
Counting (HM-LC)[Bur22] is not able to derive meaningful relational patterns for that
object type, hence it can not be included in the model.
By incorporating HM-LC and adaptive inclusion strategies, the framework effec-
tively handled concept drifts, as evidenced by its responsiveness to changing behavioural
patterns. However, consistent with the earlier evaluation, lower similarity scores were
observed for constant object types, such as Forklift, that appear uniformly across
many activities. This is attributed to the lossy forgetting mechanism, which prunes
rarely recurring initialisation edges. Rather than viewing this as a limitation, it may
reflect a more realistic abstraction of persistent entities in continuous operations (e.g.,
==PAGE:109==
8 Discussion
101
Forklift object type within Logistics), where the notion of a distinct behavioural
beginning is less meaningful.
The evaluation was conducted by comparing the proposed streaming discovery ap-
proach against the offline discovery capabilities of PM4Py. While this provides a prac-
tical benchmark, we acknowledge its limitations, specifically, the absence of a direct
comparison with the ground truth process model. Such a comparison would require
aligning the discovered OC-DFG models with the original process definitions used to
generate the logs in CPN Tools1 for the logs [KG23; KA23]. As a result, the perfor-
mance insights should be interpreted as relative approximations against established
discovery technologies, rather than absolute correctness measures.
1https://cpntools.org/
==PAGE:110==
CHAPTER 9
Conclusion
The final chapter of this research provides a comprehensive summary of the work
accomplished and reflects on the obtained results. Furthermore, it presents proposals
for future research and development in the field of Streaming Object-Centric Process
Mining (SOCPM).
9.1
Summary
The thesis has in introspective conducted state-of-the-art research within the field of
SOCPM discovery. Leveraging the Problem Reduction taxonomy from [Bur22], the
framework transforms the traditional multistep discovery approach of ET2ET and
ET2OT models into a streaming-compatible fan-out/fan-in structure.
One of the contributions is the design of object-centric stream events, structured
to align closely with the OCEL format, thereby ensuring compatibility with existing
tooling in the process mining community. From the semantics of the events, the pro-
cess model of Object-Centric Directly-Follows Graph (OC-DFG) can be stream mined.
The framework supports per-object-type miner configuration, enabling process analysts
to tailor the stream mining process to each object type, specifically using Heuristics
Miner with Lossy Counting (HM-LC), as introduced by [Bur23]. Additionally, several
inclusion strategies Relative Frequency, Sliding Window, and Lossy Counting were im-
plemented, each offering distinct advantages for managing concept drift and selection
views across object types.
The thesis proposed and introduced an Activity-Entity Relationship Miner with
Lossy Counting (AER-LC) and a corresponding Activity-Entity-Relationship (AER)
model, aimed at complementing the limitations of the OC-DFG, by approximating
observed co-occurrence cardinalities between object types within each activity, by tak-
ing an object-centric event before decomposition by flattening and looking at the co-
occurrence of object types, and inferring cardinality association relations based on
manipulation of object identifiers. In the end, the merging combined all the individ-
ual DFG’s and constructed a streaming-compatible OC-DFG. Based on the OC-DFG,
the resulting AER is pruned to serve the considered object types and activities of the
==PAGE:111==
9.2 Future Work
103
graph, allowing cardinalities of occurrence to be queried alongside graphical relation
information.
The entire framework was implemented in pyBeamline1, featuring robust default
configurations and extensive customisability, allowing for dynamic discovery when do-
main knowledge is limited and vice versa. In the validation phase (section 7.2), the
OC-DFG discovery, utilising the framework, was evaluated on three OCEL-based logs.
It demonstrated rapid convergence toward high accuracy, achieving Jaccard similarity
scores ranging comfortably within the interval [0.8, 1] and after stabilisation within
2,000 events, even across different inclusion strategies when configured correctly. Hav-
ing achieved high model accuracy and thereby gained behavioural insights within 2,000
events, the process analyst reduces the delay introduced by storing and retrospectively
analysing event logs, which is a standard offline discovery approach.
Subsequently,
unit tests ensured correctness and achieved 100% test coverage through a combination
of black-box and white-box testing
Furthermore, both the OC-DFG and AER models demonstrated their capability to
adapt to concept drift, whether in inter-object relations of the AER or object-types in
OC-DFG. By having customisable individual stream miners (i.e., HM-LC) handle the
inter-object type relationship concept drift, and having customisable inclusion strate-
gies on the outer-level handling object type drift based on miner emission observations,
the framework implemented in pyBeamline accurately allows process analysts to use
the library to facilitate SOCPM, achieving fast, accurate stream approximations of
OC-DFG with an AER model that handles concept drift in all stages of the process.
9.2
Future Work
While the presented framework lays a solid foundation for SOCPM, several opportu-
nities remain for further enhancement and exploration. Future work may focus on
extending the model expressiveness, improving eﬀiciency under high-throughput con-
ditions, and incorporating more sophisticated handling of concept drift and semantic
enrichment.
As intuitively done in previous incremental state-of-the-art proposals, one promising
avenue is to broaden the scope of discoverable models. A clear candidate is the Object-
Centric Petri Net (OCPN), which supports both ET2ET and ET2OT relations with
executable semantics.
Integrating OCPN discovery into a streaming setting would
represent an advancement, enabling not only behavioural visualisation but also formal
analysis and conformance checking in real-time.
This, however, would require the
streaming framework to track token semantics and maintain consistency across multiple
interacting object lifecycles, which is a non-trivial task under memory and latency
constraints.
The merging component of the framework also opens for broader possibilities within
object-centric model creation. The combination of OC-DFG and the AER, uncovers
1https://github.com/beamline/pybeamline
==PAGE:112==
9.2 Future Work
104
instances of relations often encoded in object-centric formalism. These could be object-
centric declarative models such as in [Chr+24], OCPN as previously mentioned, or
synchronous Procles based on [Fah19].
Furthermore, enriching the event semantics beyond the current Object-Centric
Event Log 1.0 Specification (OCEL 1.0) toward the Object-Centric Event Log 2.0 Spec-
ification (OCEL 2.0) with increased E2O qualifiers and O2O relations plus qualifiers,
could allow for the mining of models that capture additional behavioural dimensions,
such as role-based access patterns or object attribute evolution. However, this comes
at the trade-off as event data is assumed to have a small and fixed number of attributes,
and low-latency processing is required [BSA12a].
Finally, one could transition the current implementation from the research-oriented
pyBeamline (Python) framework to the production-ready Beamline (Java) framework
built on Apache Flink.
Such an integration would enable deployment in scalable,
distributed environments, suitable for high-throughput industrial applications.
By
leveraging Flink’s robust state management and native support for complex event
processing, the proposed streaming OCPM framework could move beyond prototyping
and into real-time, enterprise-grade usage.
==PAGE:113==
APPENDIX A
Appendix
==PAGE:114==
A.1 Implementation
106
A.1
Implementation
A.1.1
Inclusion Strategies
Listing 12 The implemented Relative Frequency Strategy based on Algorithm 3, with
Commands to be sent downstream
1
class RelativeFrequencyBasedStrategy(InclusionStrategy):
2
def __init__(self, frequency_threshold: float = 0.05):
3
self.__threshold = frequency_threshold
4
self.__D_F: Dict[str, int] = {}
5
self.__N = 0
6
self.__D_A: Set[str] = set() # Set of active object types
7
8
def evaluate(self, model_event: dict) -> Observable[dict]:
9
if model_event.get("type") != "dfg":
10
return just(model_event)
11
12
# Update frequency
13
obj_type = model_event["object_type"]
14
self.__D_F[obj_type] = self.__D_F.get(obj_type, 0) + 1
15
self.__N += 1
16
17
count = self.__D_F[obj_type]
18
total = self.__N
19
20
commands = []
21
# Floating point division to avoid early activation and late de-activation
22
if (count / total) >= self.__threshold and obj_type not in self.__D_A:
23
self.__D_A.add(obj_type)
24
commands.append(create_command(Command.ACTIVE, obj_type))
25
26
for ot in list(self.__D_A):
27
if (self.__D_F.get(ot, 0) / total) < self.__threshold:
28
self.__D_A.remove(ot)
29
commands.append(create_command(Command.INACTIVE, ot))
30
31
commands.append(model_event)
32
return from_iterable(commands)
==PAGE:115==
A.1 Implementation
107
Listing 13 The implemented Sliding Window Strategy based on Algorithm 4, with
Commands to be sent downstream
1
class SlidingWindowStrategy(InclusionStrategy):
2
def __init__(self, window_size: int = 30):
3
self.window_size = window_size
4
self.observed_events = 0
5
self.D_W: Dict[str, int] = {}
# Last seen index for each object type
6
7
def evaluate(self, model_event: dict):
8
if model_event.get("type") != "dfg":
9
return just(model_event)
10
11
self.observed_events += 1
12
obj_type = model_event["object_type"]
13
commands = []
14
15
# Update last seen
16
if obj_type in self.D_W:
17
self.D_W[obj_type] = self.observed_events
18
else:
19
self.D_W[obj_type] = self.observed_events
20
commands.append(create_command(Command.ACTIVE, obj_type))
21
22
23
to_remove = []
24
# Prune inactive object types
25
for obj_type, last_seen in self.D_W.items():
26
if self.observed_events - last_seen >= self.window_size:
27
commands.append(create_command(Command.INACTIVE, obj_type))
28
to_remove.append(obj_type)
29
30
for obj_type in to_remove:
31
del self.D_W[obj_type]
32
33
commands.append(model_event)
34
return from_iterable(commands)
==PAGE:116==
A.1 Implementation
108
A.1.2
Merging
Listing 14 The implemented construction of OC-DFG based on Algorithm 7
1
def _build_ocdfg(self) -> OCDFG:
2
ocdfg = OCDFG()
3
# Rebuild the global OCDFG from all stored DFGs
4
for obj_type, dfg_model in self._obj_dfg_repo.items():
5
if obj_type not in self._active_object_types:
6
continue
7
sources, targets = set(), set()
8
for (a1, a2), freq in dfg_model.dfg.items():
9
ocdfg.add_edge(a1, obj_type, a2, freq)
10
if a1 != a2:
11
sources.add(a1)
12
targets.add(a2)
13
14
# Simple heuristic to determine start and end activities
15
start_activities = (sources - targets)
16
end_activities = (targets - sources)
17
18
ocdfg.start_activities[obj_type] = start_activities
19
ocdfg.end_activities[obj_type] = end_activities
20
return ocdfg
21
==PAGE:117==
A.2 Evaluation
109
Listing 15 The pruning of the AER based on Algorithm 8
1
def _build_aer_diagram(self, ocdfg: OCDFG) -> AER:
2
if not self._aer_diagram:
3
return AER()
4
5
active_object_types = ocdfg.object_types
6
activities = ocdfg.activities
7
pruned_aer = AER()
8
9
# Prune activities
10
for activity in self._aer_diagram.activities:
11
if activity not in activities:
12
continue
13
pruned_aer.add_activity(activity)
14
15
# Prune entities
16
for activity, types in self._aer_diagram.object_types.items():
17
if activity not in activities:
18
continue
19
active_types = types.intersection(active_object_types)
20
if active_types:
21
pruned_aer.add_object_types(activity, active_types)
22
23
# Prune relations
24
for activity, rels in self._aer_diagram.relations.items():
25
if activity not in activities:
26
continue
27
for (source, target), cardinality in rels.items():
28
if source in active_object_types and target in active_object_types:
29
pruned_aer.add_relation(activity, source, target, cardinality)
30
31
return pruned_aer
A.2
Evaluation
A.2.1
Verification
==PAGE:118==
A.2 Evaluation
110
A.2.2
Validation
A.2.3
Relative Frequency
==PAGE:119==
A.2 Evaluation
111
A.2.4
Sliding Window
==PAGE:120==
A.2 Evaluation
112
A.2.5
Lossy Counting
A.2.6
Concept Drift
==PAGE:121==
A.2 Evaluation
113
==PAGE:122==
Bibliography
[Aal12]
Wil van der Aalst. “Process Mining: Overview and Opportunities.” In:
ACM Trans. Manage. Inf. Syst. 3.2 (July 2012). issn: 2158-656X. doi:
10.1145/2229156.2229157. url: https://doi.org/10.1145/2229156.
2229157.
[Aal19]
Wil MP van der Aalst. “Object-centric process mining: dealing with di-
vergence and convergence in event data.” In: Software Engineering and
Formal Methods: 17th International Conference, SEFM 2019, Oslo, Nor-
way, September 18–20, 2019, Proceedings 17. Springer. 2019, pages 3–25.
[Aal23a]
Wil M. P. van der Aalst. “Object-Centric Process Mining: An Introduc-
tion.” In: Formal Methods for an Informal World: ICTAC 2021 Summer
School, Virtual Event, Astana, Kazakhstan, September 1–7, 2021, Tutorial
Lectures. Edited by Antonio Cerone. Cham: Springer International Pub-
lishing, 2023, pages 73–105. isbn: 978-3-031-43678-9. doi: 10.1007/978-
3-031-43678-9_3. url: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-43678-
9_3.
[Aal23b]
Wil M. P. van der Aalst. “Object-Centric Process Mining: Unraveling the
Fabric of Real Processes.” In: Mathematics 11.12 (2023). issn: 2227-7390.
doi: 10 . 3390 / math11122691. url: https : / / www . mdpi . com / 2227 -
7390/11/12/2691.
[AB20a]
Wil M. P. van der Aalst and Alessandro Berti. Discovering Object-Centric
Petri Nets. 2020. arXiv: 2010.02047 [cs.SE]. url: https://arxiv.org/
abs/2010.02047.
[AB20b]
Wil MP van der Aalst and Alessandro Berti. “Discovering object-centric
petri nets.” In: Fundamenta informaticae 175.1-4 (2020), pages 1–40.
[Agg07]
Charu C Aggarwal. Data streams: models and algorithms. Volume 31.
Springer Science & Business Media, 2007.
[Art+19]
Alessandro Artale et al. “Modeling and reasoning over declarative data-
aware processes with object-centric behavioral constraints.” In: Business
Process Management: 17th International Conference, BPM 2019, Vienna,
Austria, September 1–6, 2019, Proceedings 17. Springer. 2019, pages 139–
156.
[BA23]
Alessandro Berti and Wil MP van der Aalst. “OC-PM: analyzing object-
centric event logs and process models.” In: International Journal on Soft-
ware Tools for Technology Transfer 25.1 (2023), pages 1–17.
==PAGE:123==
Bibliography
115
[Bar+23]
Daniël Barenholz et al. “There and back again: on the reconstructability
and rediscoverability of typed Jackson nets.” In: International Conference
on Applications and Theory of Petri Nets and Concurrency. Springer. 2023,
pages 37–58.
[Ber+24]
Alessandro Berti et al. OCEL (Object-Centric Event Log) 2.0 Specification.
2024. arXiv: 2403.01975 [cs.DB]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.
01975.
[BMA23]
Alessandro Berti, Marco Montali, and Wil MP van der Aalst. “Advance-
ments and challenges in object-centric process mining: A systematic liter-
ature review.” In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.08795 (2023).
[BSA12a]
Andrea Burattin, Alessandro Sperduti, and Wil M. P. van der Aalst.
“Heuristics Miners for Streaming Event Data.” In: CoRR abs/1212.6383
(2012). arXiv: 1212.6383. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1212.6383.
[BSA12b]
Andrea Burattin, Alessandro Sperduti, and Wil MP van der Aalst. “Heuris-
tics miners for streaming event data.” In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1212.6383
(2012).
[Bur18]
Andrea Burattin. “Streaming Process Discovery and Conformance Check-
ing.” In: Encyclopedia of Big Data Technologies. Edited by Sherif Sakr and
Albert Zomaya. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2018, pages 1–8.
isbn: 978-3-319-63962-8. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-63962-8_103-1. url:
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-63962-8_103-1.
[Bur22]
Andrea Burattin. “Streaming Process Mining.” In: Process Mining Hand-
book 349 (2022), pages 3–10.
[Bur23]
Andrea Burattin. “Beamline: A comprehensive toolkit for research and de-
velopment of streaming process mining.” In: Software Impacts 17 (2023),
page 100551. issn: 2665-9638. doi: https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j .
simpa.2023.100551. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S266596382300088X.
[BZS23]
Alessandro Berti, Sebastiaan van Zelst, and Daniel Schuster. “PM4Py:
A process mining library for Python.” In: Software Impacts 17 (2023),
page 100556. issn: 2665-9638. doi: https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j .
simpa.2023.100556. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S2665963823000933.
[Chr+24]
Axel K.F. Christfort et al. “Discovery of Object-Centric Declarative Mod-
els.” In: 2024 6th International Conference on Process Mining (ICPM).
2024, pages 121–128. doi: 10.1109/ICPM63005.2024.10680680.
[Fah19]
Dirk Fahland. “Describing Behavior of Processes with Many-to-Many In-
teractions.” In: Application and Theory of Petri Nets and Concurrency.
Edited by Susanna Donatelli and Stefan Haar. Cham: Springer Interna-
tional Publishing, 2019, pages 3–24. isbn: 978-3-030-21571-2.
==PAGE:124==
Bibliography
116
[Fah25]
Dirk Fahland. Why is transitioning to Object-Centric Process Mining non-
trivial? https : / / multiprocessmining . org / 2025 / 06 / 20 / why - is -
transitioning-to-object-centric-process-mining-non-trivial/.
Accessed: 2025-06-24. 2025.
[Gam+10]
Joao Gama et al. “Knowledge discovery from data streams.” In: Web In-
telligence and Security. IOS Press, 2010, pages 125–138.
[Gha+20]
Anahita Farhang Ghahfarokhi et al. “Ocel standard.” In: Process and Data
Science Group, RWTH Aachen University, techreport 1 (2020).
[GZK05]
Mohamed Medhat Gaber, Arkady Zaslavsky, and Shonali Krishnaswamy.
“Mining data streams: a review.” In: ACM Sigmod Record 34.2 (2005),
pages 18–26.
[KA23]
Benedikt Knopp and Wil M.P. van der Aalst. Order Management Object-
centric Event Log in OCEL 2.0 Standard. Zenodo, September 2023. doi:
10.5281/zenodo.8428112. url: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.
8428112.
[KG23]
Benedikt Knopp and Nina Graves. Container Logistics Object-centric Event
Log. Zenodo, August 2023. doi: 10.5281/zenodo.8428084. url: https:
//doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.8428084.
[LCA17]
Guangming Li, Renata Medeiros de Carvalho, and Wil MP van der Aalst.
“Automatic discovery of object-centric behavioral constraint models.” In:
International conference on business information systems. Springer. 2017,
pages 43–58.
[LMA25]
Lukas Liss, Caspar Mensing, and Wil M. P. van der Aalst. “Object-Centric
Causal Nets.” In: Advanced Information Systems Engineering. Edited by
John Krogstie et al. Cham: Springer Nature Switzerland, 2025, pages 94–
110. isbn: 978-3-031-94571-7.
[PL23]
Gyunam Park and genannt Unterberg Leah Tacke. Procure-To-Payment
(P2P) Object-centric Event Log in OCEL 2.0 Standard. Version 1.0. Zen-
odo, October 2023. doi: 10.5281/zenodo.8412920. url: https://doi.
org/10.5281/zenodo.8412920.
[Sat+21]
Denise Maria Vecino Sato et al. “A Survey on Concept Drift in Process
Mining.” In: ACM Comput. Surv. 54.9 (October 2021). issn: 0360-0300.
doi: 10.1145/3472752. url: https://doi.org/10.1145/3472752.
[VA16]
Wil Van Der Aalst and Wil van der Aalst. Data science in action. Springer,
2016.
[Van12]
Wil Van Der Aalst. “Process mining.” In: Communications of the ACM
55.8 (2012), pages 76–83.
[WK96]
Gerhard Widmer and Miroslav Kubat. “Learning in the presence of con-
cept drift and hidden contexts.” In: Machine learning 23.1 (1996), pages 69–
101.
==PAGE:125==
Bibliography
117
[WV03]
Anton JMM Weijters and Wil MP Van der Aalst. “Rediscovering workflow
models from event-based data using little thumb.” In: Integrated Computer-
Aided Engineering 10.2 (2003), pages 151–162.
==PAGE:126==
