==PAGE:1==
Assessing Speech Intelligibility and Privacy
Conditions in Intensive Care Units
Master Thesis
DTU Electro
Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Master Thesis
August, 2025
By
Conn Aiken
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering, Ørsteds Plads
Bygning 343 2800 Kongens Lyngby, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.byg.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the department of DTU Electro Acoustic
Technology group at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the
degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of statistics.
Conn Aiken ­ s232964
Signature
Date
ii
Assessing Speech Intelligibility and Privacy Conditions in Intensive Care Units
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The indoor conditions for speech and privacy were modelled for a laboratory resembling
an ICU using both ODEON and Treble room acoustic software. These models were val­
idated against real measured data and simulated for a variety of screen and room treat­
ments. Overall, a suitable match was obtained for five of the Treble simulations using an
energy­based geometrical acoustic solver. A number of likely scenarios were then simu­
lated based on the use of the space as an ICU. However due to the lack of phase infor­
mation important behaviour and phenomena such as interference and diffraction around
the screens could not be included. Additionally, the lack of accompanying subjective data
makes it difficult to draw concrete conclusions and contextualise these simulated param­
eters with the responses of patients or healthcare professionals.
Assessing Speech Intelligibility and Privacy Conditions in Intensive Care Units
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
My thanks to Cheol­Ho Jeong (DTU), Per Hiselius and Maria Quinn (Ecophon) in providing
support, supervision and guidance during the completion of this project. I would also like
to thank Nicolai Jensen in sharing the data from Hvidovre hospital.
I would also like to extend my thanks and best wishes to ”all the lads” in the acoustics
department who were also completing their projects: Sune, Guilhem, Tianxing, Victor,
Sara, Julie, Melanie, Jono and Hugo. Those invaluable morale boosts, ”enlightening”
discussions and provided biscuits were very much appreciated.
iv
Assessing Speech Intelligibility and Privacy Conditions in Intensive Care Units
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Project Aims & Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2
Theory
3
2.1
Room Acoustic Metrics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Room Acoustic Modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3
Methodology
9
3.1
Measured Quantities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Model Construction and Validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.3
Areas of Investigation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.4
Background Noise of the ICU at Hvidovre Hospital . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
4
Results
15
4.1
Model Validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
4.2
Other room acoustic parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.3
Speech from Nurse Desk to Patient Beds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4.4
Adjacent Bed Investigation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
5
Discussion
24
5.1
Room Acoustic Modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
5.2
Discussion of Simulation Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
5.3
Limitations of this project and further study
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
6
Conclusion
28
Bibliography
29
A Appendix
31
A.1 ODEON Material Values . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
A.2 Treble Simulation Material Coefficients . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
B ODEON and Treble plots
34
C Nurse Desk Table of Values
37
Assessing Speech Intelligibility and Privacy Conditions in Intensive Care Units
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Assessing Speech Intelligibility and Privacy Conditions in Intensive Care Units
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Intensive care units (ICUs) and healthcare facilities present unique acoustic challenges
due to their dual nature as both workplaces and environments aimed towards patient
recovery. Within this it is important to balance these contrasting demands and factors of
the space. One such interdependent factor to be balanced lies in verbal communication.
The need for discernible communication is evident particularly among the healthcare pro­
fessionals working within the space. In some cases, it may be vital that communication
is effective from both speaking and listening perspectives. Consider how routinely long
and often complex names of medicines, drugs, illnesses, and procedures are shared—
alongside technical information such as dosages, timings, and vital statistics. Such impor­
tant information should be readily understood alongside general instructions to patients,
visiting families and other staff in order to coordinate and maximise the level of care that
can be provided. A degradation in the intelligibility of speech has been correlated with
poorer decision making, higher incidence of mistakes and a longer completion time for
complex tasks [1]. In a more general sense, any workplace should not cause undue
stress, strain or fatigue from its indoor environment of which the acoustics for communi­
cation can play a vital role.
Contrary to the requirement for discernible communication however is the need for ade­
quate speech privacy. Speech in ICUs should not be so intelligible that private and con­
fidential information can be readily heard. If a patient can overhear other conversations
they may conclude that their own speech privacy is compromised and be less likely to fully
discuss their issues with the healthcare professionals. Another aspect to consider given
the healthcare setting, is the sounds of a patient in pain or distress. Such audible cues
if perceived at another bed on the ward could negatively impact the emotional well­being
of that patient, increasing anxiety and discomfort.
However, a challenge to good communication within these spaces arises from two fac­
tors. Firstly, extensive research has shown that hospitals, healthcare environments and
ICUs have got busier and noisier over time, with many spaces failing to met the WHO
specification for indoor noise. Secondly, if and when the acoustics of these spaces are
considered, room treatment approaches are generally sparsely applied and mainly con­
fined to treating the ceiling. This is due to hygiene concerns around introducing porous
and absorbent materials which may possibly harbour bacteria into an environment where
sanitation is paramount and surfaces must able to be disinfected regularly [2].
A common problem in trying to assess and quantify the acoustics of healthcare facilities
lies in the disruption that a full course of acoustic measurement would cause to patients
and staff. An opportunity arises in indirectly assessing spaces such as these by using
room acoustic simulations.
1.1
Project Aims & Objectives
The aim of this project was to assess the conditions and factors affecting speech in an
ICU environment. This would be achieved through:
• Using commercially available software to construct a series of room acoustic models
representing an existing space furnished to resemble an ICU with varying degrees
of room acoustic treatment,
Assessing Speech Intelligibility and Privacy Conditions in Intensive Care Units
1
==PAGE:10==
• Validating the accuracy of said models against corresponding measured data of the
space,
• Investigating how the intelligibility of speech varies within the space and with the
application of room acoustic treatment,
An original aim of this investigation was to integrate some subjective testing of the con­
ditions for intelligibility and privacy. However, due to time constraints this aim was not
realised.
2
Assessing Speech Intelligibility and Privacy Conditions in Intensive Care Units
==PAGE:11==
2
Theory
2.1
Room Acoustic Metrics
2.1.1
Speech Transmission Index
The speech transmission index (STI) is used as a measure of how a transmission channel
(such as a room) affects the intelligibility of speech from source to receiver. Human speech
can be represented as being composed of numerous amplitude­modulated signals within
each frequency band. Within each of these frequency bands human speech contains both
a fine structure and a time varying intensity envelope. Important carriers of information in
speech such as the onset and offset of individual words are described by this modulating
envelope.
Detrimental effects on the signal to noise ratio of speech such as background noise and
long reverberation times can be measured by the subsequent reduction in modulation
depth at each frequency band. As the speech is transmitted within the channel this re­
duction corresponds to a degradation in intelligibility and loss of words and phonemes
[3].
Direct measurement of the STI is a time­consuming process wherein the modulation depth
of a signal at a receiver position is compared to an input test signal of known modulating
frequency. The ratio between the modulation depths is termed the modulation transfer
ratio. This process is then repeated for the 7 octave bands from 125 Hz to 8kHz and 14
modulation frequencies with the 98 modulation transfer ratios collected into a modulation
transfer function (MTF).
Alternatively, for assumed linear time invariant systems such as rooms, the STI may be
obtained through indirect measurement. The Schroeder (forward energy) integration of
the room impulse response can be instead used to derive the MTF.
As the effective SNR of speech may also be limited by the human auditory system. A
number of weighting factors are applied to the intensity envelop and MTF to account for
frequency and level dependant auditory masking [4].
In most studies of speech and privacy the metrics of the articulation index (AI) and the
Speech intelligibility index (SII) are used. STI however may also be used as a descriptor
of perceived speech privacy with values below 0.3 indicating ”moderately good” speech
privacy and values below 0.15 required to achieve confidentiality [5]. Single word qualita­
tive STI descriptors of ”bad, poor, fair, good and excellent” [4] are tabulated below in table
2.1 alongside the relationship to percentage of phonetically balanced words understood
[6]:
Table 2.1: Single word qualitative descriptions, percentage meaningful words understood
and colour scheme used to represent different STI ranges
STI
0 ­ 0.3
0.3 ­ 0.45
0.45 ­ 0.6
0.6 ­ 0.75
0.75 ­ 1
Qualitative Descriptor
Bad
Poor
Fair
Good
Excellent
Meaningful Word score (%)
<60
60 ­ 80
80 ­ 93
93 ­98
>98
Assessing Speech Intelligibility and Privacy Conditions in Intensive Care Units
3
==PAGE:12==
2.1.2
Spatial Decay Rate of Speech, D2,s
As defined in ISO 3382­3: Open plan offices the spatial decay rate of speech (D2,s) de­
scribes how much the A­weighted sound pressure level of speech attenuates with distance
doubled from source in an indoor environment.
This metric describes the attenuation arising from the room itself, for a illustrative exam­
ple, free field conditions would have a value of 6 dB. In general higher D2,s values are
associated with greater speech privacy with distance from source. A D2,s value greater
than 8 dB indicates good acoustic conditions whereas a value of less than 5 dB indicates
poor room acoustic conditions for speech [7].
While not specifically developed for hospital wards and healthcare environments, it is a
useful metric in that a lines of measurements are to be taken in each separate workstation.
Thus the affect and influence of partitions between desks or bedsides (in the case of an
ICU) can be investigated, in addition to the attenuation arising from the room itself. In
an investigation of a number of office spaces, the height of screens between partitioned
workstations proved a key factor affecting the spatial decay rate alongside ceiling and
screen absorption [8].
2.2
Room Acoustic Modelling
The development of algorithms and software programs to simulate the complex sound
fields within rooms has been an area of constant research and development. These pro­
grammes represent invaluable tools for acousticians and designers in coordinating design
criteria, testing scenarios and room treatment solutions as well as aiding in the produc­
tion of auralizations for clients and customers. Crucially for this project they represent an
indirect way of capturing and estimating the behaviour of a space where access is limited
and the environment is unsuited to obtrusive room acoustic measurement.
The simulation of the acoustic environment is first realised through the construction of an
energy histogram, from which a simulated impulse response (IR) and decay curve can be
calculated and acoustic metrics extracted.
Most commercially available software programmes may be classified as utilising Geomet­
rical Acoustics, numerical Wave­based methods or a hybrid of the two.
Many different methods, approaches and calculation principles exist in modelling rooms
in both the pressure and energy domains. Briefly discussed below are some of the rel­
evant concepts behind the software programmes used in this project. To each method
and approach there lies an associated number of assumptions, benefits and drawbacks
which should be considered when judging their implementation and suitability to the task
in question.
2.2.1
Geometrical Acoustics
In a sense the most simplistic room simulation approach is that of Geometrical Acoustics
(GA). In this energy based method sound is assumed to propagate in straight lines as
rays with all wave behaviour and phase information ignored. Additionally, energy based
methods such as this are only valid when there is a sufficient modal overlap to achieve a
smooth sound field. Individual modes dominate at low frequencies, with the modal density
(number of modes per Hz) increasing with the square of frequency [9]. This relationship
can be approximated as:
n(f) ≃4πV
c3 f2
(2.1)
The exact number of modes in a rectangular enclosure will have a slightly different form,
yet Eq.2.1 is asymptotically valid for any room geometry.
4
Assessing Speech Intelligibility and Privacy Conditions in Intensive Care Units
==PAGE:13==
The Schroeder Frequency then denotes the frequency at which there is a sufficient modal
overlap (>3) such that energy based methods are valid.
fsch = 2000 ∗
√
RT
V
(2.2)
As a result energy based approaches are best suited for mid to high frequency estimation
where the wavelength of the sound in question is small compared to the dimensions of
the room surfaces and furniture geometry [10].
By neglecting the phase information however, phenomena such room modes and inter­
ference cannot be computed. Diffraction is another such phenomena that is neglected.
Though some software programmes implement a path length difference approach around
screens and barriers in the room geometry.
The main advantage of using GA lies in its accuracy at reproducing high frequency be­
haviour (where wave phenomena is less significant) at a relatively low computational cost
[11].
Image Source Method (ISM)
The early specular reflections within a room can be modelled using the image source
method (ISM). When a ray emitted from a source strikes a surface, a mirror image of that
source is generated relative to the reflecting surface. The image source (IS) generates
an identical wavefront which is analogous to a reflection within the room. Higher order
reflections are realised by iteratively reflecting these wavefronts off the room surfaces and
generating new and higher order image sources.
Given that room models can contain many hundreds of surfaces, in order to limit the
exponential growth in the number of image sources (particularly at high reflection orders)
a number of stop criteria are implemented.
Firstly given that the ISM is used for the computation of early specular reflections a tran­
sition order is specified within the model. This denotes the reflection order above which
new image sources are no longer generated. The ISM requires that all possible combi­
nations of surface reflections be computed up to the transition order. However to save
on computational effort only those visible reflections that can be traced specularly from
receiver to original source are considered and added to the energy histogram to be used
in generating the impulse response. The magnitude of energy contributed from a valid
reflection is dependant on the source directivity and absorption coefficient applied to the
reflecting surfaces.
The validity of a given reflection path is therefore dependant on both the listener location
as well as the selection of the transition order. A reflection path and visibility of the image
source may only be valid under a sufficiently high reflection order, defined by the transition
order within the room model.
Early Scattering Method (ESM)
While the early specular reflections may be modelled effectively using the ISM, to cap­
ture the behaviour of early scattered reflections, programs such as ODEON make use
of the early scattering method (ESM) through implementing ray tracing. At each surface
associated with an IS and an array of spatially separated secondary sources are gener­
ated emitting early scattered rays and generating subsequent secondary sources at each
reflection. These multiple secondary sources emitting in random directions recreate the
phenomena of scattering.
Assessing Speech Intelligibility and Privacy Conditions in Intensive Care Units
5
==PAGE:14==
At higher order secondary sources up until the transition order a directivity pattern (Oblique
Lambert) is applied to the sources, with exact octave­band directivity determined by the
user defined scattering coefficients [12].
By combining the ISM with ESM, programmes are able to model the early specular and
scattered rays.
For the early reflections the ISM allows us to show the reflection path between source
and receiver. Each reflection path corresponds to a line in the reflectogram, an example
of which with given contributions is represented below in Fig2.1.
Figure 2.1: Reflectogram showing contribution type used in ODEON, [12]
Ray Radiosity (RR)
When the ISM is combined with the ESM the number of calculations and generated
sources grow exponentially with increasing reflection order, adding to the computational
complexity. At these higher reflection orders scattered energy begins to dominate and be
of greater significance than that of the specular reflected energy. Therefore beyond the
user defined transition order between early and late reflections software programs such
as ODEON and Treble fully implement methods such as ray tracing and ray radiosity (RR)
to compute these later reflections, under the assumption of a diffuse sound field [13].
In RR, rays are emitted from the source with reflections determined by the user defined
scattering coefficient. This coefficient formulates a weighted vector sum of both specular
and diffuse reflections. Above the ISM to RR transition order a single secondary source
is generated at each reflection with an assigned energy and time delay. A visibility check
is then performed between receiver points and secondary sources with the IR computed
from the energy contributions of those valid and visible source­receivers
The main advantage in specifically using RR over traditional ray tracing techniques lies in
its computational efficiency. The use of secondary sources makes this method receiver
independent, meaning the computationally heavy ray tracing is only performed once per
source. The sound propagation can be pre­processed for each source, with a summation
then quickly performed at any arbitrary receiver point through a simple visibility check [10].
6
Assessing Speech Intelligibility and Privacy Conditions in Intensive Care Units
==PAGE:15==
Contrast this to traditional ray tracing in which an arbitrarily sized detection sphere is as­
signed to each receiver point with the ray tracing repeated and detection count performed
for each and every source­receiver combination.
2.2.2
Wave­Based Methods
While the theories and ideas behind GA can provide a high degree of simulation accuracy
at low computational cost, the lack of phase information and wave behaviour can lead to
uncertainties in specific situations. This is particularly evident when the small wavelength
assumption is no longer met in small to medium sized rooms and when simulating below
the Schroeder frequency of the room where wave phenomena and individual room modes
dominate. [14].
The wave based solver in the Treble acoustic software discretises the model in time and
space then uses the discontinuous Galerkin finite element method to directly solve the
wave equation in the time domain.
∇2p −1
c2 .∂2p
∂t2 = 0
(2.3)
This second order wave equation shown above is implemented by the Treble wave based
solver through directly solving linearised forms of the continuity equation (Eq.2.4) and
Euler’s equation of motion (Eq.2.5) [13] :
∂p
∂t + ρ0c2∇.v = 0
(2.4)
∂v
∂t + 1
ρ0
∇p = 0
(2.5)
By doing so the solver should inherently account for the effects of scattering, diffraction,
interference and room modes.
While theoretically capable of producing highly accurate results given the appropriate
boundary conditions, the operation of wave based methods are computationally very
costly. This computation time increases with frequency by a factor of 16 per additional
octave band resolved [13].
2.2.3
Hybrid Methods
Given the suitability of certain software approaches to specific frequency ranges, room
volume and geometries, as well as the amount of computational effort required to produce
accurate results, often two or more of these energy and wave­based approaches have
been combined to form hybrid models.
In principle this produces precise and accurate results at an efficient cost in computational
power.
ODEON room acoustic software is solely an energy based approach yet utilises some
hybridisation in combining the ISM and ESM with ray radiosity for later reflections.
Treble room acoustic software on the other hand features a wave based solver directly
solving the wave equation and allowing the user to select a transition frequency above
which point the software’s geometrical acoustics solver initiates, using a combination of
the ISM and RR.
Assessing Speech Intelligibility and Privacy Conditions in Intensive Care Units
7
==PAGE:16==
2.2.4
User defined boundary condition parameters
An uncertainty inherent to all software programs are the user selected/defined boundary
conditions for the absorption and scattering coefficients. The accuracy of these simu­
lations are heavily influenced by the quality and availability of boundary condition data.
Additionally, the overall skill, knowledge and experience of the user is important, particu­
larly if estimations of these values are to be made.
Absorption Coefficients
In the simplest terms the sound absorption coefficient is the power ratio of the absorbed
to the incident sound. Within room acoustic software this is realised through a subtraction
of the energy of a ray as it reflects off a surface from source to receiver.
The most commonly available absorption data provided by material manufacturers is the
octave band practical absorption coefficient (αp). This is obtained by averaging the 1/3
octave band (diffuse incidence) Sabine absorption coefficients (αS) measured in a rever­
beration chamber as per ISO 354.
The value of these αS coefficients can vary depending on the mounting condition, with
overestimation in low frequency due to edge diffraction and also exhibiting poor inter­
chamber reproduceability as different chambers are not perfectly diffuse in different ways
[15].
Within room acoustic software absorbing materials are commonly assumed to be locally
reacting wherein the impedance can be assumed to be independent of incident angle. For
porous materials backed by air cavities however, these surfaces will have an impedance
variation with incident angle and exhibit extending or bulk reacting behaviour [14].
Preferably, angle dependant absorption data would be implemented, yet as this is less
readily available and more difficult to measure programs such as ODEON implement al­
gorithms to derive an angle dependant value based on surface hardness [12].
Treble on the other hand requires a pressure based quantities to implement the wave
based solver and derives and uses the surface impedance and reflection coefficient. This
conversion is also performed and used for the GA simulation [16].
Scattering Coefficient
The random incidence scattering coefficient (S) is defined as the ratio of energy reflected
in non specular (diffuse) directions and the total reflected sound energy (ISO 17497­
1:2004). Scattering increases with frequency and depends on size and roughness of
the structure with smoother walls assumed to reflect more specularly than rough or undu­
lating surfaces. The combined scattering coefficient used in room acoustic models takes
the finite size and assumed roughness of the surface into account.
The scattering applied in a model should also depend on the level of geometric detail
maintained in the model. If the level of detail is high, a greater proportion of the scattering
will come automatically from the geometrical detail of smaller surfaces and obstacles. In
models with simplified geometries and details, the user defined scattering coefficient can
be used to compensate for this simplification and comparative lack of detail.
8
Assessing Speech Intelligibility and Privacy Conditions in Intensive Care Units
==PAGE:17==
3
Methodology
An investigation of privacy and speech intelligibility was achieved through the use of room
acoustics software models. During the course of this project, two room acoustic soft­
ware programmes were used attempting to replicate a series of laboratory measurements,
these two programmes being ODEON and Treble.
3.1
Measured Quantities
As gaining access to a working ICU to take a series of room measurements would be
impossible and hugely disruptive, a baseline set of values would have to be established
which would be representative of an ICU space.
As part of previous work [17], conducted as a special course during this Master’s degree
study a number of ISO 3382 room acoustic parameters were measured at a laboratory fur­
nished to resemble an ICU at the facilities of Saint­Gobain Ecophon in Hylligne, Sweden.
Due to the dual nature of an ICU as an environment promoting care, rest and coalescence
while still functioning as a workplace with separate and partitioned workstations, parame­
ters from both ISO 3382­2 Ordinary rooms and 3382­3 Open plan offices were measured.
These included reverberation time (T20), clarity (C50), STI as well as the spatial decay of
speech (D2,s), privacy distance (rD) and the comfort distance (rC).
The laboratory was furnished to resemble a 4 Bed ICU featuring a Nurse’s desk, bedside
furniture and monitors. An advantage of using a laboratory lay in that a range of room
acoustic treatments could then be applied to the space including the installation of a sus­
pended ceiling, the mounting of wall panels as well as an investigation into the behaviour
of different screen types between the bedside areas. With the option of three screen
types, acoustic wall panels and suspended acoustic ceiling tiles, a total of 12 unique room
configurations were tested.
In total three different screen types were tested between the beds including a 1.8 m x
2.3 m polymer curtain material typical of hospital settings made by Specialgardiner AB,
Ecophon Akusto™office screens of dimensions 1.2 m x 1.5 m office as well as 2.25 m
x 1.45 m foldable hospital screens produced by Silentia AB. Respectively these screens
are referred to as ”Curtains, Office, and Hospital screens” in this paper. In order to pro­
vide sufficient visual separation between each bed, when installed two units of the office
screens and curtains were used between each bed.
The wall panels were 1.2 m x 2.7 m Ecophon Hygiene Performance Care Walls of 40 mm
thickness. A total of six of these panels were installed at spatially separated locations
across the room at a height of 1.2 m from the base of the panel to the floor.
The ceiling condition of the laboratory was altered via the installation or removal of 252
Ecophon Hygiene Protec™A tiles (600 x 600 x 20 mm) onto a suspended ceiling grid.
When fully installed the height of the room was lowered from 3.2 m to 2.7 m.
Data collection was achieved by capturing room impulse responses (RIR) at 12 source­
receiver locations for each laboratory setup. A 10.9 s e­sweep excitation signal was fed
into a Nor 276 Norsonic omnidirectional loudspeaker using a Nor 280 power amplifier with
the response captured using a B&K Type 4188 free field microphone. The RIRs were then
processed using B&K Type 7841 Dirac Software to extract the room parameters.
Assessing Speech Intelligibility and Privacy Conditions in Intensive Care Units
9
==PAGE:18==
A plan drawing of the laboratory setup and measurement scheme can be found below
taken from [17]:
Figure 3.1: Plan drawing of the Laboratory setup with source and receiver positions. The
four beds (1:4) and the Nurse’s desk (5) are indicated in blue as are the positions of the
screens (green) and wall panels (orange). With the suspended ceiling installed the room
volume was approximately 250 m3.
To assess the spatial decay of speech, microphone receiver positions were placed to form
a line of measurements at consecutive bedsides. From figure 3.1 the receiver positions
of Source 1 were R1:R5, R6:R10 for Source 2 and for the Source 3 measurement at the
Nurse’s desk the receiver positions were either side of Bed 2 (R2 & R3).
Figure 3.2: The laboratory furnished to resemble a four bed ICU taken from the Nurse’s
desk near the source 3 measurement position. The suspended ceiling, wall panels and
Silentia AB hospital screens are installed.
10
Assessing Speech Intelligibility and Privacy Conditions in Intensive Care Units
==PAGE:19==
3.2
Model Construction and Validation
A model of the laboratory with different room setups were drawn using SketchUp and
exported to the room acoustics software packages of ODEON and Treble. In order to
avoid unnecessary complexity which could add to computational time and in some cases
introduce errors in estimation some of the small or irregular features of the room were sim­
plified or ignored entirely. As a general guideline this applied to objects with dimensions
smaller than 10 cm. Examples of simplification included ignoring the recession of the win­
dows and wall panels, modelling dividing screens, chairs and monitors as thin 2D planes
as well as omitting any of the curved furniture and surfaces. Such complex geometry
would likely result in a longer calculation time and greater propensity for error within that
calculation, curved surfaces in particular can interfere with scattering, as well as disrupt
the early reflections of the ISM [12].
Once exported to the room acoustic software, values for the absorption coefficients were
applied to the various surfaces of the room based on their material properties. Scattering
coefficients were selected based on the assumed surface roughness as well as geometri­
cal size, irregularity of the surface in question and the degree to which its detail had been
simplified.
For most of the room surfaces stated values of the random incidence absorption coeffi­
cients as per ISO 354 for were available online or within the material catalogue of ODEON
or Treble. However, given the uncertainty around the exact construction of the walls (rep­
resenting a significant surface area of the room), the scattering coefficients in general as
well as the behaviour of the materials in­situ, these stated values were used as a “best
guess starting point”.
Broad and frequency specific adjustments were made via by the absorption coefficient
with fine tuning ­particularly in the high frequencies­ controlled by adjusting the scattering
in the room.
The modelling was conducted at the same source receiver positions as in the measure­
ment and the corresponding measured data was imported for comparison. A perfect
match between the model and real­world room would be difficult to achieve and inaccu­
rate given the assumptions and simplifications made in model’s construction. Therefore,
for each of the laboratory setup models an accuracy stop criteria of reaching within ± 2
just noticeable differences (JND) of the corresponding measured reverberation time was
used. A single JND reverberation time corresponds to a difference of 5%.
The aim of achieving a ±2 JND of the measured RT values was deemed a sufficient margin
of error. A model that behaved and returned exactly the same values as the measured
data would likely be unrealistic or impossible to achieve. Especially given the reliance on
random incidence absorption and scattering coefficients as well as the behaviour of many
of the surfaces within the room. Generally, to achieve simulation results to be within a
single JND of the measurement, absorption data measured via ISO 354 is not suitable
[18] and precise knowledge on the room construction, materials and angle dependant
behaviour in situ would be required.
In calibrating these models, the untreated room was simulated and adjusted first. The
argument for this was that in this case the mattresses of the four beds would be the only
significant absorbing material in the room, with the floor, walls and bare concrete ceiling
providing little in the way of absorption. Once the empty condition was calibrated, then
through an iterative approach room treatment methods would then be added starting with
the suspended ceiling then the wall panels. In theory by first calibrating the largely ’un­
Assessing Speech Intelligibility and Privacy Conditions in Intensive Care Units
11
==PAGE:20==
known’ condition then adding quantities with known absorptive properties into the space
the model would match the behaviour of the measured space.
3.2.1
Validating the Treble model
In validating the Treble models a two stage approach was taken. Firstly the mid to high
frequencies were adjusted and checked using the default simulation setting and adjusting
the absorption and scattering coefficients accordingly to achieve a fit with the measured
data to within ±2 JND. An advantage of using Treble over ODEON lay in that frequency
specific scattering coefficients may be applied granting a greater degree of control.
Due to the computational load in simulating the low frequency response a close as fit as
possible was also set in the mid to highs before fine tuning via the wave based solver. It
was necessary to keep the number of wave based fine tuning iterations low due to both
the costs in both computational load and time constraints. Additionally, given how the
Treble software operates, the direct solving of the wave equation is handled externally
via cloud based software. Consequently a finite number of simulation runs were made
available in order to avail of this service, therefore each full hybrid simulation would have
to be justified and done so with an appropriate degree of confidence in the model.
3.2.2
ODEON model difficulties
During the model construction and validating phase, numerous difficulties were encoun­
tered in achieving a match with the measured values using the ODEON software. As a
result the ICU space was investigated and analysed primarily using Treble. The perfor­
mance of the ODEON software is presented in the results section.
3.3
Areas of Investigation
Once the models were calibrated a number of likely scenarios were investigated in Treble
based on the use of this space as an ICU. In addition to the 3 screen types used during the
physical measurement, two further heights for the Office (1.7, 1.9 m) and Hospital screen
(1.65, 1.85 m) setups were simulated.
In terms of simulation settings, the Treble simulation utilised both the wave based solver
for the low frequencies and the GA solver from 125 Hz to 8 kHz. The transition frequency
was set at 177 Hz to fully capture and then stop after the 125 Hz band. The other solver
settings were left at default values including a 35 dB energy decay threshold as the termi­
nation criteria (as opposed to impulse response length), an image source order of 3 and
the use of 20000 rays during the ray radiosity estimation.
In ODEON for each room simulation the impulse response length was re­estimated and
the precision measurement mode selected. The corresponding suggested values for the
transition order (ISM to RR) and number of early scatter rays per image source used were
unchanged as per the recommendations in the user manual [12].
3.3.1
Nurse’s Desk
The Nurse’s Desk is likely to be an area of near constant speech noise as nurses commu­
nicate and coordinate during the working of an ICU. This investigation assessed the STI
of speech originating at 3 points along the desk from the perspective of a patient at each
bedside areas. Two source height conditions representing seated (1.2 m) and standing
(1.8 m) speakers were used with a receiver placed at the head height (0.8 m) within the
four beds.
A screenshot of the simulation setup within Treble is displayed below:
12
Assessing Speech Intelligibility and Privacy Conditions in Intensive Care Units
==PAGE:21==
Figure 3.3: Nurse’s desk investigation within Treble, the source locations are highlighted
in yellow and receivers in Blue. The Nurse’s desk and Beds (1­4) have also been outlined
3.3.2
Patient Bed to Adjacent
Within an ICU the sounds of a patient in pain, discomfort or experiencing a medical emer­
gency may be distressing and upsetting for the other patients in the adjoining beds. Yet it is
vital that nurses and healthcare professionals are able to hear and appropriately respond
to these auditory cues. Conversely, given that private and confidential information is so
often relayed between patients, nurses and visiting families, the speech at one bedside
should not be so readily understandable and intelligible at an adjoining one.
In this test setup, 3 receivers were placed at a seated head height along the nurse desk.
A source was placed in one bed with 3 receivers in each of the other beds.
(a) Bed 1
(b) Bed 2
(c) Bed 3
(d) Bed 4
Figure 3.4: Investigation across multiple beds.
Assessing Speech Intelligibility and Privacy Conditions in Intensive Care Units
13
==PAGE:22==
3.4
Background Noise of the ICU at Hvidovre Hospital
STI metrics when calculated in Treble are expressed in terms of a noise criterion (NC)
curve, from NC 15 to NC 70. These NC curves are standardised values and are used
to categorise the background noise levels of the indoor residential, commercial, indus­
trial and workplace settings. They are primarily applied for buildings in the unoccupied
condition and used to classify noise such as HVAC or building services noise.
In regards, to healthcare environments recommendations for unoccupied settings range
from NC25­30 for private rooms, NC30­35 for wards and NC40­50 for operating rooms [19]
To compare the simulated results against some contextual real­world measurements, two
weeks worth of LZeq,1min background noise level measurements at the ICU of Hvidovre
hospital were provided by another student at DTU in the fulfilment of a Bachelor project.
An average of the noise levels was taken across the full two weeks of measurements, the
working hours of the hospital (07:00­19:00) as well as the nighttime hours (00:00­05:00)
which may be similar to the unoccupied condition that the noise curves represent. The
results of which are plotted below (Fig 3.5).
Figure 3.5: Noise measurements at Hvidovre ICU unit assessed against the NC criteria
The NC rating is determined by the highest curve reached by the noise measurement.
This corresponds to NC55 for the working hours, NC40­45 for the full data average and
around NC35 for the night time measurement.
It was unclear how best to apply this data and contextualise the simulated results. As the
working hours were above the recommended values listed in [19], therefore when collat­
ing the data a decision was made that a range of NC30 to NC50 was to be considered.
Furthermore generally any STI result from NC55 and above was no greater than 0.05.
14
Assessing Speech Intelligibility and Privacy Conditions in Intensive Care Units
==PAGE:23==
4
Results
To improve the readability and coherence of this paper only some of the key and relevant
results of the room simulation software are listed below. Where noted additional results
may be found in the appendices at the reader’s discretion.
4.1
Model Validation
4.1.1
Matching Measured T20 Results
In matching model behaviour with the measured parameters only 1 of the ODEON models
and 5 of the Treble models produced results that were satisfactorily close to the ± 2 JND
T20 limit.
The exact absorption and scattering coefficient values used in the ODEON and Treble
models are located in Appendix A.1 and A.2 respectively.
Room with No Treatment
Figure 4.1: Measured and simulated T20 for the room in the untreated condition.
In the untreated room condition (Fig 4.1) both software models were able to produce
simulations with the ± 2 JND limit. The Treble wave based solver overestimated the 63
Hz band and overall exhibited a large standard deviation in its simulation results. Overall
the Treble GA resembles the closest match to the measured results.
Assessing Speech Intelligibility and Privacy Conditions in Intensive Care Units
15
==PAGE:24==
Suspended Ceiling, No Wall Panels
Figure 4.2: Measured and simulated T20 of the room with only the suspended ceiling
installed.
This room setup scenario represents a well documented and extensively studied chal­
lenge in room acoustic simulation software [20], [21]. The case in question is a room with
non uniform placement of absorption.
The ODEON result remained mostly constant across frequency band but with a large
standard deviation (~0.15 s) relative to the JND target values. The two energy based
models seem to converge at 4 and 8 kHz.
The wave based simulation matched at the 63 Hz band yet grossly underestimated the
reverberation time in the 125 Hz octave band, with a simulated T20 of 0.54 s compared to
a measured value of 1.05 s.
16
Assessing Speech Intelligibility and Privacy Conditions in Intensive Care Units
==PAGE:25==
Addition of Screens Between Beds
The addition of screens into the space did counteract the irregular reverberation pattern
to a degree. As observed from the measured results the addition of the more absorbing
screen types of the office and curtains resulted in a more regular reverberation time result.
Whereas, the setup with the hard reflecting hospital screens was still quite irregular with
a similar ’dip’ at 500 Hz then an increase at 2­4 kHz.
(a) Office Screens
(b) Hospital Screens
(c) Curtains
Figure 4.3: Measured and simulated T20 of the room with the ceiling installed, no wall
panels and the various screens placed between the beds.
The simulation models were unable to replicate the measured conditions with varying
degrees of deviation. The ODEON results presented a somewhat ’flat response’ with little
variation across frequency particularly evident in the office screen result (fig 4.3a) and a
large standard deviation of around 0.2 in the hospital screen simulation.
The Treble wave based simulation underestimated the reverberation time particularly in
the 125 Hz band once again. Treble’s GA solver showed a strong correlation with the
measured results particularly in the office screen and curtain simulations; however it’s
mid frequency estimation of 500 & 1000 Hz exceeded the 2 JND limit.
Assessing Speech Intelligibility and Privacy Conditions in Intensive Care Units
17
==PAGE:26==
Wall Panels Added
(a) No Screens
(b) Office Screens
(c) Hospital Screens
(d) Curtains
Figure 4.4: Measured and simulated T20 of the room with the ceiling installed, wall panels
hung and the various screen conditions between the beds.
With the addition of the wall panels Treble’s GA solver matched with the measured data
to a sufficient degree. Some of the simulated results were slightly outside the 2 JND
limit (e.g., 500 Hz Fig 4.4d and 1 kHz at Fig 4.4b). Yet this slight deviation was deemed
acceptable. The ODEON simulation underestimated the low frequency result but showed
a slight improvement towards the high frequencies, yet still underestimated outside the
acceptable limit. Curiously, in certain setups (Figs.4.4b, 4.4c and 4.4d) the ODEON and
Treble wave based results bare remarkable similarity to eachother in shape despite two
entirely different methods being implemented.
4.1.2
Summary and Naming Convention
Despite being an energy based model the Treble GA solver showed an excellent low fre­
quency estimation for the room setups with acoustic treatment applied. Given the inability
to achieve a satisfactory match with the measured results using ODEON and the poor low
frequency performance of the Treble wave based solver, all subsequent simulations and
investigations were carried out solely using the geometrical acoustics solver in Treble.
Hereafter, in the results and discussion the following naming convention will be used when
referring to setup conditions:
With reference to a setup as ’No Screens’, ’Office’, ’Hospital’ or ’Curtains’ it is inherently
implied that both the ceiling and wall panels are installed in the space, unless otherwise
stated.
18
Assessing Speech Intelligibility and Privacy Conditions in Intensive Care Units
==PAGE:27==
4.2
Other room acoustic parameters
4.2.1
Clarity (C50)
As an additional validation check on the accuracy of the models the C50 Clarity results
were also simulated and compared against measured values.
Figure 4.5: Reverberation time and clarity results for the No Screens setup simulated
using Treble
In general the Treble setups in which a match with the T20 results were achieved also
showed a correlation in the clarity results. The large standard deviation in both the mea­
sured and simulated result is likely the outcome of averaging results over a group with
different source receiver distances.
The reverberation time and clarity results for each the individual setup in ODEON and
Treble may be located in Appendix B.
4.2.2
Spatial Decay rate of speech (D2,s)
The spatial decay of speech as per ISO 3382­3 was simulated using the same source
receiver positions for the model validation as well as testing the increased screen height
conditions for Office and Hospital.
Assessing Speech Intelligibility and Privacy Conditions in Intensive Care Units
19
==PAGE:28==
Figure 4.6: Measured and simulated spatial decay rate of speech results for the 3 screen
heights of the Office setup.
While there is a difference in the simulated SPL of speech to that of the measured value,
this could be rectified by adjusting the source equalizer and applying a reduction within
Treble’s source settings menu. As this is simply an offset error, the decay rates are still
comparable. The measured results indicate a decay rate of around 5.3 dB per doubling
of distance with its directly simulated counterpart (H = 1.5 m ) simulating a slightly higher
decay rate of around 5.5 dB.
In comparing across the different screen height conditions. With increasing screen height
there is an slight increase in the decay rate from 5.5, 6 and 6.1 dB as the screen is
increased from 1.5 m to 1.9 m.
Figure 4.7: Measured and simulated spatial decay rate of speech results for the 3 screen
heights of the Hospital setup.
20
Assessing Speech Intelligibility and Privacy Conditions in Intensive Care Units
==PAGE:29==
A similar pattern can be observed in the hospital screen measurement with the simulated
spatial decay at a screen height of 1.45 m matching its real world measured counterpart
at a decay rate of 5.3 dB. Increasing the screen height further resulted in a slight increase
in at 5.6­5.7 dB for heights 1.65 and 1.85 m.
The spatial decay rate of the curtains with a height of 2.3 m incurred a slightly higher
decay rate at 4.9 dB compared to the measured counterpart of 4.6 dB.
4.3
Speech from Nurse Desk to Patient Beds
In general for this simulation scenario there was little difference observed in changing the
source height from a seated (1.2 m) to standing position (1.8 m). Differences in the STI
results between the two conditions generally fell within in the range of 0.02 ­ 0.03.In some
cases the intelligibility decreased at a standing height compared to that of the seated
condition (e.g. the Bed 4 result in from NC35­50 table 4.1).
Table 4.1: STI results at the four beds with Curtains setup
Source Seated
Source Standing
NC
30
35
40
45
50
NC
30
35
40
45
50
Bed 1
0.66
0.55
0.47
0.29
0.07
Bed 1
0.68
0.57
0.44
0.3
0.09
Bed 2
0.69
0.59
0.46
0.32
0.09
Bed 2
0.68
0.58
0.45
0.32
0.1
Bed 3
0.62
0.5
0.37
0.24
0.05
Bed 3
0.64
0.53
0.39
0.33
0.06
Bed 4
0.53
0.45
0.32
0.19
0.03
Bed 4
0.57
0.42
0.29
0.17
0.03
Speaker LHS of Desk
Speaker at Desk centre
Speaker RHS of Desk
Figure 4.8: STI Surface receiver plot generated within the Treble of Curtains setup with
an NC35 noise level applied.
The setup with the curtains hung between the beds was the only setup with screens in­
stalled to result in a ’good’ rating of STI higher than 0.6 at NC30. Beyond that, for all
setup configurations with NC noise levels of 40 and above the intelligibility of speech from
the Nurse desk deteriorates so as to be classified as either ’poor’ or ’bad’ as per IEC
60268­16.
Comparatively, a greater affect on STI is observed when comparing the source height
to the position of the source along the desk. Source positions with shorter distances to
the receiver bed yielded higher STI results than those at a further end of the desk to the
same bed. As a result the highest intelligibility values on average were observed when the
source was located at the centre of the Nurse Desk irrespective of height. As observed
in fig 4.8 the STI remains at a bad to poor condition (~0.3­0.4) for Bed 4 regardless of´the
source position. Contrastingly, the STI condition for Beds 1 & 3 varies heavily depending
on the source location whereas the condition at Bed 2 remains relatively constant.
A direct line of sight between source and receiver also resulted in high intelligibility of
Assessing Speech Intelligibility and Privacy Conditions in Intensive Care Units
21
==PAGE:30==
Table 4.2: Comparison of the average STI condition at Bed 1 with Office screens of dif­
ferent heights installed between the beds.
Bed 1
HScreen 1.5 m
HScreen 1.7 m
HScreen 1.9 m
NC
STI
STI
∆from
H1.5m
STI
∆from
H1.5m
30
0.57
0.58
­0.01
0.57
0.00
35
0.43
0.44
0.00
0.43
0.00
40
0.29
0.29
­0.01
0.28
0.01
45
0.16
0.17
­0.01
0.16
0.00
50
0.06
0.07
­0.01
0.07
0.00
the source signal. In the room setups in which any type of screen was installed (Office,
Hospital or Curtains) the lowest speech intelligibility conditions were consistently observed
at Bed 4.
This impact of the line of sight may be indicated further by the influence of the screen
height. Increasing the height of the office screens from 1.5 to 1.9 m induced a minor
reduction in the simulated STI by 0.04 ­ 0.06 at the Bed 4 receiver point for moderate
background noise levels. A corresponding decrease was not observed at the other bed
locations with unobstructed source­receiver line of sight. The corresponding change in
STI with the hospital screen heights of 1.45, 1.65 and 1.85 m was minimal with a ∆STI in
the range of 0.01­0.03 (see Appendix C.11).
Table 4.3: Comparison of the average STI condition at Bed 4 with Office screens of dif­
ferent heights installed between the beds.
Bed 4
HScreen 1.5 m
HScreen 1.7 m
HScreen 1.9 m
NC
STI
STI
∆from
H1.5m
STI
∆from
H1.5m
30
0.39
0.35
­0.04
0.33
­0.06
35
0.25
0.20
­0.04
0.19
­0.05
40
0.12
0.08
­0.03
0.08
­0.04
45
0.05
0.03
­0.02
0.03
­0.02
50
0.01
0.00
­0.01
0.00
­0.01
4.4
Adjacent Bed Investigation
The results assessing the transmission of speech from one patient bed to another are
listed below as follows.
Measurement results are grouped based on the number of screens crossed from source
to receiver. The ”one screen crossed” condition represents an average of the results from
a source in one bed directly to the neighbouring bed (Beds 1&2 and Beds 2&3). The ”two
screens crossed” condition is the average of the transmission results between Beds 1&3.
The results from the No Screens setup is included for comparison.
22
Assessing Speech Intelligibility and Privacy Conditions in Intensive Care Units
==PAGE:31==
Table 4.4: STI results at a patient receiver bed with one screen separating the source and
receiver, for comparison the results of the No Screen condition are included
One Screen separating Source and Receiver
Screen Type
NC30
NC35
NC40
NC45
NC50
No Screens
0.64
0.53
0.40
0.27
0.14
H = 1.5 m
0.49
0.34
0.20
0.09
0.03
H = 1.7 m
0.48
0.34
0.19
0.08
0.03
Office
H = 1.9 m
0.48
0.34
0.19
0.09
0.04
H = 1.45 m
0.50
0.36
0.21
0.10
0.03
H = 1.65 m
0.50
0.37
0.22
0.11
0.04
Hospital
H = 1.85 m
0.51
0.37
0.23
0.11
0.04
Curtains
0.48
0.34
0.20
0.09
0.03
Range
0.03
0.04
0.04
0.03
0.01
STD
0.012
0.016
0.016
0.010
0.004
Table 4.5: STI results at a patient receiver bed with Two screens separating the source
and receiver, for comparison the results of the No Screen condition are included
Two Screens separating Source and Receiver
Screen Type
NC30
NC35
NC40
NC45
NC50
No Screens
0.58
0.46
0.32
0.20
0.09
H = 1.5 m
0.42
0.28
0.15
0.06
0.02
H = 1.7 m
0.40
0.26
0.14
0.06
0.02
Office
H = 1.9 m
0.39
0.25
0.13
0.06
0.02
H = 1.45 m
0.44
0.30
0.17
0.07
0.02
H = 1.65 m
0.43
0.30
0.17
0.08
0.03
Hospital
H = 1.85 m
0.41
0.28
0.15
0.06
0.01
Curtains
0.44
0.30
0.17
0.08
0.03
Range
0.05
0.05
0.04
0.02
0.02
STD
0.019
0.020
0.018
0.009
0.006
As would be expected the STI from one bed to another decreases with the addition of
screens, with a decrease in STI of around 0.15 to 0.2 when compared to the condition
with no screens. Though at higher background noise level of NC50 this difference is
less evident. Overall, similar results can be observed in tables 4.4 and 4.5 regardless of
the screen material, construction or height. The range of simulated results did not exceed
0.05, with correspondingly low standard deviations from averaging across multiple source
receiver combinations.
Assessing Speech Intelligibility and Privacy Conditions in Intensive Care Units
23
==PAGE:32==
5
Discussion
5.1
Room Acoustic Modelling
Performance of Modelling Software
Generating room models that accurately described the measured conditions of the labo­
ratory constituted a significant part of the workload and an excessive amount of the time
allocated to this project. The formulation and validation of such models is a skill in itself
with the accuracy dependent on the expertise and experience of the developer. Initially
ODEON would have been used for the entirety of the project, but the inability to achieve
a match with the results beyond the case of the untreated room lead to Treble being
implemented as an alternative. In the ODEON models with room treatment applied a
sufficient estimation could be achieved around the mid to high frequency bands, yet the
low frequency estimation remained consistently far below the target values for all setups.
Adjusting the room setup settings such as number early rays, scattered rays and number
of image sources yielded no improvements. The absorption coefficients of the materials
and layers were also adjusted and tweaked with the aim to get a better match. However,
these models are highly dependant on the user inputted absorption and scattering coeffi­
cients. Lack of reliable data with a reliance on simplified practical absorption coefficients
and particularly for the Ecophon room treatment products, values which were given for
test conditions that varied from the laboratory mounting and installation.
For instance, the values given and used for the Ecophon Hygiene Protec A suspended
ceiling are based on an o.d.s. of 200mm (overall depth of system from backwall to ceiling
tile). Whereas the ceiling when installed in the laboratory had an o.d.s. of 800mm. With
a larger backing air cavity, the in­situ behaviour of the ceiling would likely differ to that of
the stated values, with an expected increase in the low frequency absorption [22].
In regards to the input scattering coefficients uncertainty lies in that reliable data was un­
obtainable or inapplicable to many of the room surfaces. In many cases the assigned
value was estimated purely based on the geometrical size of the surface or in the ap­
parent complexity that was lost when simplifying the details of the room. For example
when simplifying the furniture and TV screens or removing objects smaller than 10 cm a
scattering coefficient was arbitrarily applied to compensate for their absence.
With a low frequency match proving unattainable with ODEON, it was expected that the
Treble wave­based solver for low frequencies would be particularly suited to this exact
scenario. However, this was not the case for almost all setup conditions. Unfortunately,
a limitation of the Wave based solver is that when using the Treble web application, it
acts somewhat like ‘black box’. It is an implementation of a finite element method (DG­
FEM), but the user has very little control beyond setting the termination point with the
transition frequency (Tf). Within the Treble SDK cloud based product there appears to
be a method to view and change these mesh sizes, yet this feature is not available within
the web based application. Analysis of the exact mesh used in these simulations may
have been useful to investigate the WB result and explain the general underestimation of
reverberation time.
It seems unlikely that modes are responsible for this underestimation particularly in the
setups with the ceiling and wall panels installed. Assuming a reverberation time of 0.4
s (Fig 4.4a) the Schroeder frequency would indicate a high modal density above 81 Hz.
24
Assessing Speech Intelligibility and Privacy Conditions in Intensive Care Units
==PAGE:33==
Otherwise, errors in the room geometry and model are always a possibility given the strict
air tight requirements of the WB and sensitivity to small lines and faces within the drawing.
However, a possible source of error and resulting poor performance arises once again
from the user defined absorption coefficients.
For the wave­based simulation Treble
utilises a material conversion engine to estimate the pressure­based quantities of sur­
face impedance and reflection coefficient from an input absorption coefficient. The fact
that the wave­based solver worked well in the room with no treatment could suggest that
the problem arises from the way that the soft, porous materials of the room treatment are
being modelled.
Furthermore, with the prevalence and use of user defined and adjusted materials in the
model, it could be the case that assigning an appropriate material category is significant
importance to aid in this conversion. However, a trial run of the Hospital setup was per­
formed only using the predefined materials found in the Treble material library. The low
WB estimation in comparison to the GA solver is evident with a particular underestima­
tion at 250 Hz, in the case of Fig.5.1 a difference of 0.4 s. Comparatively, the difference
between the wave based and geometrical simulation for 125 and 500 Hz bands shows
somewhat of an agreement.
Figure 5.1: Differences between the two solvers for a trial run replicating the Hospital
screen setup entirely using materials found in Treble’s material catalogue. The Tf was
set at 710 Hz
In converting and estimating the surface impedance from a given random incidence ab­
sorption value there are an infinite combination of real and imaginary surface impedance
values that will satisfy [13], and inherently introducing some degree of uncertainty in the
result. It is recommended for the wave­based solver that if such surface impedance data
is available (i.e. from impedance tube measurement) then it should be used, with Treble
featuring the option to do so.
Overall, the results of the simulation do point to the strength of Treble’s geometrical acous­
tic solver and the use of a pressure rather than energy based calculation [16]. Despite
being an energy­based solver utilising similar principles to ODEON, the comparative per­
formance particularly at low frequencies was much more accurate. In this, the Treble
modelling results were entirely unexpected. The wave­based estimation performed in a
manner expected of an energy­based simulation; with results similar to that of ODEON
in the low frequency estimation. Conversely, the geometrical acoustics solver showed a
precision in the low frequency estimation of parameters in the 125 and 250 Hz bands. A
performance that would be expected from a wave­based estimation.
Assessing Speech Intelligibility and Privacy Conditions in Intensive Care Units
25
==PAGE:34==
Within the models, a doubt in the accuracy could arise in that these simulated values
presented represent averages of 12 source­receiver positions. In some cases there was
a low reproducibility between individual source­receiver reverberation time results by their
simulated counterparts.
Failure to model rooms with uneven application of absorption
Both ODEON and Treble struggled to model the room setups when an uneven distribution
of absorption was applied. This difficulty is most prominent when the suspended ceiling
was installed, without the wall panels. This represents a well­known and studied case that
room acoustic software has difficulty modelling accurately. As the room featured predom­
inately hard reflecting walls, floors and furniture, the installation of the suspended ceiling
concentrates the majority of the absorption along one plane. This inhomogeneous place­
ment creates a non­diffuse sound field and an unequal decay rate between the vertical
and horizontal directions. The rays propagating and reflecting in the vertical direction from
floor to ceiling decay and attenuate at a much fast rate than those reflecting off the hard
pairs of walls. A result of which can be a double sloped or step in the decay curve. This
two part decay can lead to errors in the estimation of acoustical parameters [22].
Additionally, in non­diffuse sound fields certain angles of incidence will be more likely
occur more often than others. Porous media such as the suspended ceiling will exhibit
an angle dependent absorption, with the highest absorption at low incidence (relative to
normal). Minimal absorption occurs at grazing incidences with these rays decaying over a
longer period of time. For simplification purposes many software programs assume a local
reaction and that surface properties such as the scattering and absorption coefficient are
constant across an entire frequency band and are independent of incidence angle [15].
As a result, the simulated grazing incident angled rays are absorbed and attenuated at a
much greater rate leading to an under estimation of the reverberation time. The inclusion
of such angle dependant absorption behaviour is often necessary to model non­diffuse
rooms [20]. It should be noted that angle dependent absorption is implemented in ODEON
through an estimation of the surface’s hardness and material builder whereas Treble relies
on a conversion to the surface impedance.
5.2
Discussion of Simulation Results
The STI results from the simulations showed minimal variation with changes to source
and screen height. Instead, source­to­receiver distance and the presence of a direct line
of sight between the two appeared to be more significant factors. For the Nurse desk
simulation direct line of sight was maintained for all beds except that of Bed 4, with similar
results observed in the other three beds, leading to the lowest estimation of intelligibility
at Bed 4. Results such as this could be used by architects and designers in optimising
an ICU ward, ensuring that adequate screen coverage, distance to nurse desk and work
habits are adopted. Supplementary to this it may have been useful to include and consider
the A­weighted sound pressure of speech (Lp,S,A) at each of the bedsides and investigate
into annoyance and disturbance.
In assessing the speech from an adjacent bedside, increasing the source receiver dis­
tance and number of screens crossed does result in a degradation in intelligibility and an
improvement in the privacy condition. The effect of increasing the source receiver dis­
tance is evident even in comparing the simulated results of the No Screens in Tables 4.4
and 4.5. If an STI of 0.3 is taken to result in ”moderately good” speech privacy [5] then
this condition is satisfied at a background noise level of NC 40 for a directly adjoining
bedside (one screen crossed) and at NC 35 for two screens crossed. By the same metric
for ”adequate confidentiality” at an STI of 0.15 a background noise level of NC 45 for both
26
Assessing Speech Intelligibility and Privacy Conditions in Intensive Care Units
==PAGE:35==
the one and two screens crossed conditions is required for all screen types.
According to the adjacent bed simulation however there is real no discernible difference
in the STI from using screens of different heights or material construction. A difference is
visible however in the spatial decay rate of speech results agreeing with the findings of
Keränen [8] that decay rates increase with screen height. The highest decay results were
simulated for the absorbing office screens, yet at no height or material would the indoor
condition be classified as good as per ISO 3382­3.
Due to the reliance on energy based methods to obtain these results its difficult to draw
concrete conclusions on the influence of the screens. Diffraction is often approximated
in such programs but ideally a wave based result would have be used to account for this
phenomena more exactly.
Generally it could concluded that source receiver distance and line of sight between
source and receiver are the significant factors in determining intelligibility and privacy.
The results also imply that some form of background masking noise is useful in promot­
ing privacy at adjoining bedsides; a solution that has been deployed to an extent in some
healthcare environments. However, the introduction of a noise producing system into an
already noisy environment would need careful consideration. If the average of the noise
results gathered from Hvidovre ICU at NC 40­45 (Fig. 3.5) are to be considered, then the
introduction of such a system may be unnecessary. While the noise results are in agree­
ment that hospitals and ICUs are noisy environments, the introduction of more noise in
the form of a masking system could improve the privacy at the cost of intelligibility and
increased occupant discomfort. Additionally, it must be stated that the suitability of us­
ing the NC curves in this context is debatable. Given their application to building services
noise in unoccupied settings they may be unsuited in characterising the busy and complex
soundscape of an ICU.
5.3
Limitations of this project and further study
It was intended that from these simulation scenarios certain conclusions on working habits,
design criteria and best practices could be drawn or perhaps to what degree sound level
masking may be implemented into these spaces. Based on the real world ICU background
noise results this would be sufficient to maintain a level speech privacy. Yet herein lies the
greatest limitation of this study; the lack of accompanying subjective data to contextualise
these metrics and results.
In hindsight the plan to develop 12 coherent and mutually consistent models for each of
the room setups was too ambitious given the time frame. Of course the need to utilise
two separate modelling programs was impossible to anticipate. However, with a narrower
scope in the modelling construction and validation stage then time may have allowed for
the simulated impulse responses to be extracted, processed and used in testing linking the
numerical data to the more subjective aspects of intelligibility, privacy and confidentiality.
Within this a more representative noise signal perhaps derived from the Hvidovre result
could be generated, then added to the impulse responses with the degradation in STI
measured and assessed.
Assessing Speech Intelligibility and Privacy Conditions in Intensive Care Units
27
==PAGE:36==
6
Conclusion
The construction and validation of room acoustic models to match with a set of measure­
ments can be a time­consuming process. This process is a skill in and of itself, reliant
on a systemic organised and justified approach, particularly when setting and adjusting
boundary conditions. Through an understanding of some of the relevant theories and
assumptions used in these models as well as their applicability to certain situations, this
process may be streamlined and be efficiently implemented in line with the experience of
the modeller.
Through numerous iterations and simulations of the twelve room setups on two separate
modelling programmes, a sufficient and coherent match was only achieved for five of the
room setups. Simulated scenarios within these working models showed very little change
with respect to different conditions of screen height, screen material as well the height of
speakers.
It is unfortunate that the wave­based simulation showed poor coherence with the mea­
sured results. The inclusion of the wave based phenomenon of diffraction is crucial in
modelling the behaviour of screens. Nevertheless, the models that do fit with the mea­
surements could form the basis of a subjective listening test. The extraction of the simu­
lated IRs and the addition of a more representative noise than the NC curves may reveal
some subjective insights into the privacy and intelligibility conditions that the data alone
cannot account for.
28
Assessing Speech Intelligibility and Privacy Conditions in Intensive Care Units
==PAGE:37==
Bibliography
[1]
Erica E. Ryherd, Jr. Moeller Michael, and Timothy Hsu. “Speech intelligibility in
hospitals”. In: The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 134.1 (July 2013),
pp. 586–595. ISSN: 0001­4966. DOI: 10.1121/1.4807034. eprint: https://pubs.
aip.org/asa/jasa/article- pdf/134/1/586/15306128/586\_1\_online.pdf. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1121/1.4807034.
[2]
Ilene Busch­Vishniac et al. “Noise levels in Johns Hopkins Hospital”. In: The Journal
of the Acoustical Society of America 118 (Jan. 2006), pp. 3629–45. DOI: 10.1121/
1.2118327.
[3]
T.Houtgast and H.Steeneken. Past present and future of the Speech Transmission
Index. TNO Human Factors, 2002.
[4]
BS EN 60268­16:2011. Sound system equipment Part 16: Objective rating of speech
intelligibility by speech transmission index. British Standards Institution, 2011.
[5]
J.Rindel C.Pop. “Perceived Speech Privacy in Computer Simulated Open­plan Of­
fices”. In: Proceedings of Inter Noise. Aug. 2005.
[6]
ISO 9921: Ergonomics ­ Assessment of Speech communication. ISO, (2003).
[7]
ISO 3382­3: Acoustics – Measurement of room acoustic parameters – Part 3: Open
plan offices. ISO, (2022).
[8]
Jukka Keränen, Jarkko Hakala, and Valtteri Hongisto. “Effect of sound absorption
and screen height on spatial decay of speech – Experimental study in an open­plan
office”. In: Applied Acoustics 166 (Sept. 2020), p. 107340. DOI: 10.1016/j.apacoust.
2020.107340.
[9]
F.Jacobsen and P.M Juhl. Fundamentals of General Linear Acoustics. Wiley, 1993.
[10]
Lauri Savioja and U.Peter Svensson. “Overview of geometrical room acoustic odel­
ing techniques”. In: The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 138.2 (2015),
pp. 708–730. DOI: 10.1121/1.4926438.
[11]
Lauri Savioja. Room acoustics modeling. 2016. URL: https://interactiveacoustics.
info/html/GA.html.
[12]
C.L.Christensen. ODEON Room Acoustics Software, Version 18 User Manual. ODEON
A/S, 2023.
[13]
Treble Technologies. Treble Technical References. (2025). URL: https://docs.treble.
tech/intro.
[14]
F. K. Pind Jörgensson. “Wave­Based Virual Acoustics.” PhD thesis. Technical Uni­
versity of Denmark., (2020).
[15]
Cheol­Ho Jeong. “Guideline for Adopting the Local Reaction Assumption for Porous
Absorbers in Terms of Random Incidence Absorption Coefficients,” in: Acta Acustica
97 (2011), pp. 779–790. ISSN: 0003­682X. DOI: https://doi.org/10.3813/AAA.
918458.
[16]
Treble Technologies. How Treble handles material data. (2025). URL: https://docs.
treble.tech/user-guide/simulations/materials/how_treble_handles_material_data.
[17]
C.Aiken et al. Assessment of Factors affecting speech in ICU wards. Proceedings of
DAS|DAGA 2025. URL: https://pub.dega-akustik.de/DAS-DAGA_2025/konferenz-
1975.html?article=588.
[18]
Michael Vorländer. “Computer simulations in room acoustics: Concepts and uncer­
taintiesa)”. In: The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 133.3 (Mar. 2013),
pp. 1203–1213. ISSN: 0001­4966. DOI: 10.1121/1.4788978. eprint: https://pubs.
Assessing Speech Intelligibility and Privacy Conditions in Intensive Care Units
29
==PAGE:38==
aip.org/asa/jasa/article-pdf/133/3/1203/14819685/1203\_1\_online.pdf. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1121/1.4788978.
[19]
NTI Audio: Noise Curves, Criteria for evaluating room noise. (2023). URL: https:
//www.nti-audio.com/Portals/0/data/en/NTi-Audio-AppNote-Noise-Curves.pdf.
[20]
Gerd Marbjerg, Jonas Brunskog, and Cheol­Ho Jeong. “The difficulties of simulating
the acoustics of an empty rectangular room with an absorbing ceiling”. In: Applied
Acoustics 141 (2018), pp. 35–45. ISSN: 0003­682X. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.apacoust.2018.06.017. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0003682X17309921.
[21]
Claus Christensen, Gry Nielsen, and Jens Rindel. Round Robin on room acoustic
computer modelling. Tech. rep. Danish Acoustical Society, 2008.
[22]
Z. Maekawa, J Rindel, and P. Lord. Environmental and Architectural Acoustics. CRC
Press, 2010.
30
Assessing Speech Intelligibility and Privacy Conditions in Intensive Care Units
==PAGE:39==
A
Appendix
Found below are tables of the boundary condition values used in the ODEON and Treble
simulations with frequency specific scattering coefficients listed where applicable. The
”Material/Construction” column informed the first estimation on the behaviour of the sur­
faces however exact coefficient values may differ slightly from those found i.e within Tre­
ble’s material library.
Differences between the values assigned to the Ecophon products and their correspond­
ing data sheet values measured from ISO 354, are as a result of Treble’s material con­
version engine which operates when a new user defined material is added to the sim­
ulation. The engine adjusts the input absorption values based on the estimated surface
impedance of the material. Therefore an exact match is difficult to achieve yet differences
between the ISO 354 laboratory measurement and in­situ behaviour are to be expected.
Additionally, data for 63 Hz and 8 kHz was extrapolated.
In cases such as the mattress and the beds where an equivalent material could not be
found, a best guess approach was taken with behaviour assumed to be similar to that of
”Upholstered concert chairs”.
Assessing Speech Intelligibility and Privacy Conditions in Intensive Care Units
31
==PAGE:40==
A.1
ODEON Material Values
Table A.1: Single number scatter and frequency specific absorption values used for the material layers in the ODEON simulation
Frequency Specific Absorption Coefficient
Surface
Material / Construction
Scattering Coefficient
63
125
250
500
1k
2k
4k
8k
Surface Area (m2)
Lab ceiling
Concrete Block, Painted
0.15
0.13
0.12
0.07
0.07
0.07
0.07
0.07
0.07
94.32
Suspended Ceiling
Ecophon Hygiene Protec A
60 x 60 cm Tiles
0.05
0.45
0.45
0.85
0.95
0.9
0.95
0.95
0.95
94.32
Floor
Linoleum on Concrete
0.05
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02
93.62
Walls
Gypsum / Plasterboard
0.05
0.14
0.12
0.1
0.05
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.03
66.19
Wall Panels
Ecophon Hygiene
Performance Care Walls
Six panels of 1.2 x 2.7 m
0.1
0.2
0.2
0.75
0.95
0.95
0.95
0.95
0.95
19.44
Mattress
92 x 186 cm Single
IKEA Mattress
0.2
0.47
0.5
0.58
0.7
0.78
0.81
0.82
0.82
13.87
Doors
Acoustically Certified
Doors
0.15
0.14
0.14
0.1
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.1
0.1
12.91
Cabinets
Wood
0.2
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.05
0.08
0.14
0.2
0.2
12.84
Bed Frame
Wood
0.2
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.05
0.08
0.14
0.2
0.2
12
Windows
Glass
0.1
0.26
0.19
0.14
0.1
0.06
0.05
0.05
0.05
7.17
Furniture
Wood
0.2
0.02
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.08
0.15
0.22
0.22
3.12
TVs
Plastic
0.5
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
1.87
Chairs
Upholstered Office Chairs
0.2
0.35
0.35
0.47
0.63
0.72
0.78
0.86
0.86
1
Office Screens
Ecophon Akusto Office Screens
6 units of 1.2 x 1.5 m
0.5
0.22
0.22
0.42
0.69
0.89
0.97
0.94
0.94
10.8
Hospital Screens
Plastic
0.5
0.06
0.07
0.09
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
8.1
Curtains
”Cotton curtains draped
to 75% area” from Treble
Material Library
0.25
0.05
0.08
0.2
0.42
0.54
0.5
0.43
0.32
12.42
32
Assessing Speech Intelligibility and Privacy Conditions in Intensive Care Units
==PAGE:41==
A.2
Treble Simulation Material Coefficients
Table A.2: Scattering and absorption coefficients used in the Treble simulation
Frequency Specific Absorption Coefficient
Surface
Material / Construction
Source
Scattering Coefficient
63
125
250
500
1k
2k
4k
8k
Surface Area (m2)
Lab ceiling
Concrete Block, Painted
[A]
0.15
0.13
0.12
0.07
0.07
0.07
0.07
0.07
0.07
94.32
Suspended Ceiling
Ecophon Hygiene Protec A
60 x 60 cm Tiles
[B]
0.1
0.32
0.41
0.7
0.89
0.94
0.94
0.9
0.9
94.32
Floor
Linoleum on Concrete
[A]
*See Below
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02
93.62
Walls
Gypsum / Plasterboard
[A]
*See Below
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
66.19
Wall Panels
Ecophon Hygiene
Performance Care Walls
Six panels of 1.2 x 2.7 m
[C]
0.1
0.45
0.22
0.76
0.93
0.93
0.92
0.95
0.95
19.44
Mattress
92 x 186 cm Single
IKEA Mattress
0.2
0.55
0.57
0.63
0.69
0.72
0.73
0.75
0.6
13.87
Doors
Acoustically Certified
Doors
[A]
0.15
0.41
0.41
0.42
0.42
0.44
0.47
0.5
0.5
12.91
Cabinets
Wood
[A]
0.2
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.05
0.08
0.14
0.2
0.2
12.84
Bed Frame
Wood
[A]
0.2
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.05
0.08
0.14
0.2
0.2
12
Windows
Glass
[A]
0.1
0.42
0.33
0.2
0.11
0.08
0.07
0.05
0.04
7.17
Furniture
Wood
[A]
0.2
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.05
0.08
0.14
0.2
0.2
3.12
TVs
Plastic
0.5
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
1.87
Chairs
Upholstered Office Chairs
0.2
0.54
0.56
0.6
0.64
0.65
0.73
0.75
0.6
1
Office Screens
Ecophon Akusto Office Screens
6 units of 1.2 x 1.5 m
[D]
0.5
0.31
0.32
0.48
0.85
0.93
0.94
0.95
0.95
10.8
Hospital Screens
Plastic
0.5
0.06
0.07
0.09
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
8.1
Curtains
”Cotton curtains draped
to 75% area” from Treble
Material Library
[A]
0.25
0.05
0.08
0.2
0.42
0.54
0.5
0.43
0.32
12.42
Frequency Specific Scattering Coefficients
63
125
250
500
1k
2k
4k
8k
Floor
Linoleum on Concrete
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.15
0.1
0.05
0.05
Walls
Gypsum / Plasterboard
0.1
0.1
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.15
0.1
0.05
Sources / Initial Estimates:
[A] = Treble Material library
[B] = Ecophon, https://www.ecophon.com/en/products/modular­ceilings/hygiene/hygiene­protec­a/
[C] = Ecophon, https://www.ecophon.com/en/products/modular­ceilings/hygiene/hygiene­performance­care­wall/
[D] = Ecophon, https://www.ecophon.com/en/products/wall­applications/akusto/akusto­screen­2/
Assessing Speech Intelligibility and Privacy Conditions in Intensive Care Units
33
==PAGE:42==
B
ODEON and Treble plots
Below are the reverberation time and clarity results for ODEON (left hand column) and Treble (right
hand column).
(a) ODEON: No treatment
(b) Treble:No treatment
(c) ODEON: Ceiling In. No Panels, No Screens
(d) Treble: Ceiling In. No wall panels, No Screens
(e) ODEON:Ceiling In., No Panels, Office Screens
(f) Treble: Ceiling In., No Panels, Office Screens
34
Assessing Speech Intelligibility and Privacy Conditions in Intensive Care Units
==PAGE:43==
(a) ODEON:Ceiling In.,
No Panels,
Hospital
Screens
(b) Treble:Ceiling In.,No Panels,Hospital Screens
(c) ODEON:Ceiling In., No Panels, Curtains
(d) Treble:Ceiling In., No Panels, Curtains
(e) ODEON:Ceiling in.,Panels in, No Screens
(f) Treble:Ceiling in.,Panels in, No Screens
Assessing Speech Intelligibility and Privacy Conditions in Intensive Care Units
35
==PAGE:44==
(a) ODEON:Ceiling in.,Panels in, Office Screens
(b) Treble:Ceiling in.,Panels in, Office Screens
(c)
ODEON:Ceiling
in.,Panels
in,
Hospital
Screens
(d) Treble:Ceiling in.,Panels in, Hospital Screens
(e) ODEON:Ceiling in.,Panels in, Curtains
(f) Treble:Ceiling in.,Panels in, Curtains
36
Assessing Speech Intelligibility and Privacy Conditions in Intensive Care Units
==PAGE:45==
C
Nurse Desk Table of Values
Below are the complete STI results from the Nurse desk speech noise to patient beds
with background NC noise.
Table C.1: No Treatment applied
Source Seated
Source Standing
NC
30
35
40
45
50
NC
30
35
40
45
50
Bed 1
0.49
0.45
0.38
0.28
0.18
Bed 1
0.51
0.46
0.39
0.30
0.20
Bed 2
0.49
0.44
0.37
0.28
0.18
Bed 2
0.49
0.45
0.38
0.29
0.19
Bed 3
0.51
0.47
0.39
0.30
0.20
Bed 3
0.51
0.46
0.39
0.29
0.19
Bed 4
0.49
0.45
0.38
0.28
0.18
Bed 4
0.48
0.43
0.36
0.27
0.17
Table C.2: No Screens
Source Seated
Source Standing
NC
30
35
40
45
50
NC
30
35
40
45
50
Bed 1
0.54
0.41
0.27
0.15
0.06
Bed 1
0.57
0.44
0.31
0.18
0.08
Bed 2
0.55
0.42
0.28
0.15
0.06
Bed 2
0.59
0.47
0.33
0.20
0.09
Bed 3
0.56
0.43
0.28
0.16
0.06
Bed 3
0.57
0.45
0.31
0.18
0.07
Bed 4
0.61
0.49
0.35
0.23
0.11
Bed 4
0.58
0.46
0.32
0.19
0.09
Table C.3: Office, Screen Height = 1.5 m
Source Seated
Source Standing
NC
30
35
40
45
50
NC
30
35
40
45
50
Bed 1
0.57
0.43
0.28
0.15
0.06
Bed 1
0.58
0.44
0.29
0.17
0.07
Bed 2
0.50
0.37
0.22
0.12
0.04
Bed 2
0.58
0.44
0.30
0.17
0.08
Bed 3
0.50
0.36
0.22
0.10
0.03
Bed 3
0.54
0.41
0.26
0.14
0.06
Bed 4
0.37
0.23
0.10
0.04
0.01
Bed 4
0.41
0.26
0.13
0.06
0.02
Table C.4: Office Screen, Height = 1.7 m
Source Seated
Source Standing
NC
30
35
40
45
50
NC
30
35
40
45
50
Bed 1
0.58
0.44
0.29
0.17
0.07
Bed 1
0.58
0.44
0.29
0.17
0.07
Bed 2
0.50
0.36
0.21
0.10
0.04
Bed 2
0.58
0.44
0.29
0.16
0.07
Bed 3
0.49
0.35
0.21
0.10
0.03
Bed 3
0.55
0.41
0.27
0.15
0.06
Bed 4
0.35
0.21
0.08
0.03
0.00
Bed 4
0.34
0.20
0.08
0.03
0.01
Assessing Speech Intelligibility and Privacy Conditions in Intensive Care Units
37
==PAGE:46==
Table C.5: Office Screen, Height = 1.9 m
Source Seated
Source Standing
NC
30
35
40
45
50
NC
30
35
40
45
50
Bed 1
0.57
0.43
0.28
0.16
0.07
Bed 1
0.57
0.43
0.28
0.15
0.06
Bed 2
0.51
0.37
0.22
0.11
0.04
Bed 2
0.58
0.44
0.30
0.17
0.08
Bed 3
0.49
0.35
0.21
0.10
0.03
Bed 3
0.55
0.41
0.27
0.15
0.06
Bed 4
0.34
0.21
0.08
0.04
0.00
Bed 4
0.33
0.18
0.08
0.02
0.00
Table C.6: Hospital Screen, Height = 1.45 m
Source Seated
Source Standing
NC
30
35
40
45
50
NC
30
35
40
45
50
Bed 1
0.57
0.43
0.29
0.16
0.07
Bed 1
0.57
0.44
0.29
0.17
0.08
Bed 2
0.54
0.41
0.26
0.14
0.05
Bed 2
0.59
0.46
0.32
0.19
0.08
Bed 3
0.53
0.39
0.25
0.13
0.04
Bed 3
0.56
0.42
0.28
0.16
0.06
Bed 4
0.48
0.35
0.21
0.11
0.05
Bed 4
0.44
0.30
0.17
0.07
0.03
Table C.7: Hospital, Screen Height = 1.65 m
Source Seated
Source Standing
NC
30
35
40
45
50
NC
30
35
40
45
50
Bed 1
0.56
0.43
0.28
0.15
0.06
Bed 1
0.57
0.44
0.30
0.17
0.08
Bed 2
0.55
0.42
0.28
0.15
0.06
Bed 2
0.58
0.46
0.32
0.19
0.09
Bed 3
0.52
0.39
0.25
0.12
0.05
Bed 3
0.55
0.41
0.27
0.15
0.06
Bed 4
0.47
0.33
0.20
0.10
0.04
Bed 4
0.40
0.27
0.13
0.06
0.02
Table C.8: Hospital, Screen Height = 1.85 m
Source Seated
Source Standing
NC
30
35
40
45
50
NC
30
35
40
45
50
Bed 1
0.56
0.43
0.29
0.16
0.07
Bed 1
0.57
0.44
0.29
0.17
0.07
Bed 2
0.54
0.41
0.26
0.14
0.05
Bed 2
0.59
0.46
0.32
0.19
0.08
Bed 3
0.52
0.39
0.25
0.13
0.05
Bed 3
0.56
0.43
0.29
0.16
0.06
Bed 4
0.48
0.34
0.21
0.10
0.05
Bed 4
0.39
0.26
0.13
0.06
0.01
38
Assessing Speech Intelligibility and Privacy Conditions in Intensive Care Units
==PAGE:47==
Table C.9: Curtains Setup
Source Seated
Source Standing
NC
30
35
40
45
50
NC
30
35
40
45
50
Bed 1
0.66
0.55
0.47
0.29
0.07
Bed 1
0.68
0.57
0.44
0.3
0.09
Bed 2
0.69
0.59
0.46
0.32
0.09
Bed 2
0.68
0.58
0.45
0.32
0.1
Bed 3
0.62
0.5
0.37
0.24
0.05
Bed 3
0.64
0.53
0.39
0.33
0.06
Bed 4
0.53
0.45
0.32
0.19
0.03
Bed 4
0.57
0.42
0.29
0.17
0.03
Table C.10: Comparison of the average STI condition at Bed 1 with Hospital screens of
different heights installed between the beds.
Bed 1
HScreen 1.45 m
HScreen 1.65 m
HScreen 1.85 m
NC
STI
STI
∆from
H1.45m
STI
∆from
H1.45m
30
0.57
0.57
0.00
0.57
0.00
35
0.43
0.44
0.00
0.44
0.00
40
0.29
0.29
0.00
0.29
0.00
45
0.16
0.16
0.00
0.16
0.00
50
0.07
0.07
0.00
0.07
0.00
Table C.11: Comparison of the average STI condition at Bed 4 with Hospital screens of
different heights installed between the beds.
Bed 4
HScreen 1.45 m
HScreen 1.65 m
HScreen 1.85 m
NC
STI
STI
∆from
H1.45m
STI
∆from
H1.45m
30
0.46
0.43
0.02
0.43
0.02
35
0.33
0.30
0.03
0.30
0.02
40
0.19
0.16
0.02
0.17
0.02
45
0.09
0.08
0.01
0.08
0.01
50
0.04
0.03
0.01
0.03
0.01
Assessing Speech Intelligibility and Privacy Conditions in Intensive Care Units
39
==PAGE:48==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Ørsteds Plads Bygning 343 2800 Kongens Lyngby
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
