==PAGE:1==
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovas-
cular Data Analysis and Synthesis
Diffusion Based Analysis and Synthesis of 3D Mesh
Data
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
Diffusion Based Analysis and Synthesis of 3D Mesh Data
Master Thesis
July, 2025
Authors
Ludvík Petersen (s194613), student, enrolled in MSc programme, Computer Science and Engi-
neering
Martin Maximilian Ægidius (s194119), student, enrolled in MSc programme, Mathematical Mod-
elling and Computation
Supervisors
Professor Rasmus Reinhold Paulsen
Visual Computing, DTU Compute, Technical University of Denmark
Postdoc Kristine Aavild Sørensen
Visual Computing, DTU Compute, Technical University of Denmark
PhD student Mathias Micheelsen Lowes
Visual Computing, DTU Compute, Technical University of Denmark
PhD student Bjørn Marius Schreblowski Hansen
Visual Computing, DTU Compute, Technical University of Denmark
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the customary
bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, Richard
Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Section for Visual Computing, Department
of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU,
in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of deep learning for computer
vision and statistics.
Ludvík Petersen & Martin Ægidius - s194613, s194119
Signature
Date
ii
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Heart disease remains one of the leading causes of death globally, with geometric variations in
arteries and other cardiac structures being increasingly recognized as contributing risk factors.
However, large, high-quality datasets remain scarce and existing shape analysis methods are
often computationally intensive. This thesis explores the boundaries of organ mesh synthesis
by employing a dual octree-based representation for eﬀicient mesh modeling and shape analysis,
using meshes extracted from only 766 coronary CT angiography (CCTA) scans in the ImageCAS
data set.
A novel pipeline is proposed, combining an octree-based variational autoencoder (VAE) with
a latent diffusion model (LDM) in order to encode and generate key cardiac structures: the
left coronary artery, left myocardium, left atrium and left ventricle. The VAE supports single
and multi class configurations, and a latent interpolation scheme, informed by the properties of
the octree-based latent space, is proposed. Results from latent space structure investigations
indicate that the latent space is interpretable and well-suited for shape classification, outlier
detection and low-pass filtering for noisy meshes.
For mesh-generation, an octree-based UNet discrete denoising probabilistic model (DDPM) is
employed for diffusion, achieving a Chamfer Distance based MMD of 5.42 · 10−3, 89.7% cov-
erage, and a 1-NNA of 67.0% on the left myocardium class over the test set. The pipeline is
highly eﬀicient, with 128 myocardium meshes taking 198 seconds to generate (<2s per mesh on
average). Generated meshes appear visually realistic, but are quantitatively shown to exhibit a
tendency of being overly-spherical. The pipeline is scaled to include all classes using classifier
free guidance. While the setup achieves fair performance across all classes, left coronary arteries
prove challenging in single class and multi class setups, showing octree erosion at higher decoder
stages.
Further experiments investigate direct left coronary artery octree generation using a 3D con-
volutional UNet, which fails to model long branches, but is able to generate realistic octree
semi-structures with novel artery stumps. Finally, a Feature-wise Linear Modulation (FiLM)
conditioned octree diffusion model significantly improves left coronary artery mesh quality when
conditioned on ground truth octree graph structures, but the generalization of the approach re-
mains limited when conditioned on held-out octrees, possibly due to overfitting.
In summary, dual octree-based deep learning offers an attractive and computationally eﬀicient
alternative to voxel-based methods for cardiac mesh modeling, but does not fully resolve chal-
lenges for modeling highly complex or sparse anatomical structures such as LCA when utilizing
an LDM framework with a strong latent compression.
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
First and foremost, we would like to sincerely thank our supervisor Rasmus R. Paulsen for giving
us the opportunity to work under your guidance and to allow us to explore exciting new topics
within the domain of computer vision. Your constructive feedback, deep expertise, and ability
to utter an honest opinion has been highly appreciated by both of us during this period. A big
thank you to your complete division for reminding us that weekly meetings can be a place for
laughter, even when the modeling seems bleak. To Kristine A. Sørensen, a big thank you for
your practical takes on our many-many problems, which we were immensely grateful for. The
cozy chats before and during our weekly meetings were also a blast. A final special thank you
to Andreas W. Aspe, for recommending Rasmus and inspiring us to take on the challenge.
A special thanks to Trine Sun Hee Stengelshøj Andersen for laying ear to incoherent rambles
about latent space navigation, incorrectly drawn with hand-gestures at 11PM, supporting me
throughout this period and giving me leeway to allow academic immersion to a degree I’ve never
had the possibility for before. Your understanding has been of immense importance. Thank you
to Richard Cleyton for ensuring I understood when it mattered the most. A special thanks to
Ludvík for accepting me into his single-man group. It has been an absolute joy working with
you.
- Martin
Likewise, a special thank goes out to Sofie Ølgod for sticking with me, even after the many
nights where I was mentally unreachable after the longest day with my second partner, Martin.
Evening talks, walks and of course Dark really kept me going throughout the process. XoXo.
Lastly, a special thank you to Martin for coming with me on this journey and withstanding my
constant yapping for almost 6 months. It’s truly been a pleasure.
- Ludvík
Finally, a huge shout-out to Peng-Shuai Wang for building very inspiring technology (apart from
your SolverTM). Joke aside, Wang’s work has been of tremendous value to us throughout this
period, which has been a very exciting and educational experience for us.
Peace out,
The once very sad-boys, soon to be turned done-boys.
iv
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
==PAGE:7==
Nomenclature
Metrics
CDL1 Chamfer distance measured using p = 1 norm.
HDL1 Hausdorff distance measured using p = 1 norm.
JI(S1, S2) The Jaccard Index.
JIa(S1, S2) The asymmetric Jaccard Index.
MMD The mean minimum matching distance from reference set to generated set measured
MMDsmp The mean minimum matching distance from generated set to reference set
Dataset partitions
Dtrain The ground truth training data split.
Model architectures
MF
The proposed two-stage diffusion model.
MS
The proposed split-signal model.
MV,lca The proposed VAE model.
MZ
The proposed LDM model.
Octrees
S, ˆS, ˜S Ground truth-, generated and noised depth 4 dual octree split signal matrix, S, ˆS, ˜S ∈
R16×16×16×8
Tk
Octree graph at depth k
T d
k
Dual Octree graph at depth k
Tensors and matrices
M
Bold uppercase: Tensors and matrices
m
Bold lower-case: Vectors
Z, ˆZ, ˜Z Ground truth-, generated and noised latent encoding corresponding to leaf-node fea-
tures, Z, ˆZ, ˜Z ∈R4096×Ld
A
Regular upper-case: Sets
s
Regular lower-case: Scalars
Mesh-related variables
Ω, ˆΩ
Ground truth- and generated mesh.
{ni}N
i=1 A collection of N outward facing surface normal vectors, ni ∈R3
{pi}N
i=1 A point cloud consisting N points, pi ∈R3
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
v
==PAGE:8==
Contents
Preface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
2
Related Work
2
3
Clinical Background
3
3.1
Coronary Arteries
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
3.2
Heart Chambers
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
3.3
Contrast Enhanced Computed Tomography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
4
Dataset
4
5
Technical Background
6
5.1
Graph Convolutional Neural Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
5.2
Octree data structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
5.3
Dual Octree Graph . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
5.4
Variational Autoencoders
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
5.5
Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
6
Methodology
15
6.1
Data Pre-Processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
6.2
VAE Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
6.3
Latent Diffusion Model Architecture, MZ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
6.4
Split Signal Diffusion, MS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
6.5
Two-Stage Approach, MF . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
6.6
Metrics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
7
VAE Results
31
7.1
LCA VAE Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
7.2
Myocardium VAE Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
7.3
Multi Class VAE Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
8
Generative Results
50
8.1
Latent Diffusion Model Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
8.2
Signal Conditional Diffusion Model Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
9
Concluding Discussion
79
9.1
Data Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
9.2
Method Decisions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
9.3
Future Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
10 Conclusion
82
Bibliography
83
A Unused LCA Feature Metrics
89
vi
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
==PAGE:9==
B Methodology
90
B.1
β-VAE Schedules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
90
B.2
Wall Thickness Estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
90
C LCA VAE Results
92
C.1 VAE Sweep Configuration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
93
C.2 Initial Sweep Experiments on Raw ImageCAS data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
94
C.3 Left Coronary Artery VAE (MV,LCA) Experimentation and Model Configuration
95
C.4 Additional Convergence Diagnostics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
96
D Myocardium VAE (MV,myo) Results
98
D.1 MV,myo model hyperparameter and training configuration . . . . . . . . . . . . .
98
D.2 KL-Losses For βlow and βmed
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
99
D.3 KL-Divergence Node Masking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
99
E Multiclass VAE Results
104
E.1
Multi Class VAE (MV,mc) Configuration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104
E.2
Performance Table . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107
E.3
Performance Evaluation Measured by HD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107
F Myocardium LDM (MZ,myo) Diffusion Results
116
F.1
Myocardium LDM UNet (MZ,myo) Training and Model Configuration . . . . . . 116
F.2
Myocardium Single-Sample Overfitting Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 117
G LCA LDM (MZ,lca)
126
G.1 Model configuration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 126
G.2 Reverse Process Samples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 127
H Multiclass LDM (MZ,mc)
130
H.1 Model Configuration for Multi Class Model on Spherical Organs
. . . . . . . . . 130
H.2 Mesh Metrics as a Function of Investigated Guidance scales . . . . . . . . . . . . 131
I
Split Signal (MS) Diffusion Results
143
I.1
Used Model Configuration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 143
I.2
Binned Samples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 147
J
FiLM-Conditional (MF ) Diffusion Results
148
J.1
Model Configuration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 148
J.2
Reverse Process Samples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 150
J.3
Binned MMDsmp Samples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 153
J.4
Mesh Metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 157
K 3D Rotation Fallacy
158
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
vii
==PAGE:10==
viii
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
Ischemic heart disease (IHD) remains a leading cause of mortality worldwide and is in some cases
associated with morphological changes in coronary arteries and cardiac structures [1]. Coronary
Computed Tomography Angiography (CCTA) enables non-invasive imaging of coronary arteries
and the heart, making it a valuable tool in assessing anatomical abnormalities such as steno-
sis, substantial tortuosity and geometric alterations in ventricles or atria. These features are
increasingly recognized as indicators of pathological risk [2, 3, 4].
Recent advances in deep learning have shown great potential in automating image analysis
and disease detection in medical imaging. Compared to traditional machine learning methods,
modern neural networks offer increased representational ability and flexibility across various
tasks. In the context of CCTA, models could be trained to detect disease related morphological
changes.
Training algorithms capable of supporting diagnosis often requires large, diverse datasets of high
quality, which may additionally need large amounts of compute in order to generalize well. This
poses a large problem in the field of medical imaging, where large-scale image acquisition is
notoriously diﬀicult and computational resources are limited. Conventional data augmentation
strategies attempt to artificially expand datasets by employing synthetic transformations on
existing data. However, such methods pose limitation, including a possible inability to capture
the background distribution of anatomical variability. Designing realistic augmentations remains
an open challenge [5, 6].
Generative modeling offers an alternative pathway. If coronary artery and cardiac geometries
could be generated realistically, they could serve as priors for data augmentation, provide insights
into morphological variations or be used to obtain physical organ properties.
For example,
learning distributions of healthy vs. pathological shapes could aid in tasks such as anomaly
detection or radiological diagnosis, and fluid dynamic simulations may be used to identify risk-
related artery geometries.
Nevertheless, generating anatomically valid and topologically plausible shapes is not trivial. An
extreme case is coronary artery shape synthesis, which poses diﬀiculties as coronary arteries
are highly variant and detailed structures with strong constraints: artery surfaces must be
completely closed, span around a valid heart size, not self-intersect or merge, and produce a
realistic number of artery branches. A natural solution is to use hand-crafted priors, but these
may not generalize well to unseen data and are expected to be very organ specific.
Inspired by exciting advances in the field of computer graphics, this thesis explores the feasibility
of adapting such approaches to the medical domain. Specifically, this thesis investigates the use
of dual-octree graphs as a computationally eﬀicient geometric representation for training neural
networks, originally proposed for high-quality 3D shape reconstruction [7].
This thesis proposes two latent diffusion frameworks which operate on dual-octree graphs in
order to synthesize realistic geometries of coronary arteries, left heart chambers and myocardium
tissue. The goal of the thesis is to model anatomical structures without relying on handcrafted
priors, while maintaining anatomical realism and topological validity.
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
1
==PAGE:12==
2
Related Work
Generative cardiac mesh modeling is a highly multidisciplinary field, with many proposed ap-
proaches generally being computationally expensive. Model-based approaches rely heavily on
manually crafted organ-specific shape priors, thus requiring clinical expertise, while data-based
approaches are heavily constrained due to limited data availability. The following is a brief
overview of existing data-driven approaches for mesh generation, organized by 3D representa-
tion type.
Sequential representations.
3D geometry for thin structures such as arteries may be repre-
sented using a sequence of coordinates with associated radii. [8] uses this approach for training
RNN-based GANs, allowing realistic trajectory modeling but but this approach is constrained
to single-branch synthesis.
Voxel based methods.
Early work in deep learning based mesh synthesis utilizes a dense
representation of meshes using regular volumetric grids (voxels). These architectures have been
used for artery shape encoding and generation, but the cubic complexity of the voxel represen-
tation poses diﬀiculties for modern deep learning model architectures in a resource constrained
setting, while also lacking adaptive resolution well-suited for thin geometric structures. In ad-
dition, they yield no guarantees for structural coherence, which is essential for organ modeling.
Point cloud based methods.
Meshes can be modeled by sampling a fixed number of points
from a mesh surface, thus overcoming diﬀiculties with variable numbers of mesh vertices. Whilst
well-suited for diffusion tasks and easing medical data acquisition, the inherent lack of ordering
constrains architectural design and additional steps are needed to convert generated point clouds
to continuous surfaces [9, 10, 11]. As a result, [12] utilize point cloud based diffusion for artery
center line generation only.
Implicit neural fields.
Implicit neural fields (INF) encode 3D geometry within the network
weights, thus allowing novel view synthesis at arbitrarily high resolutions. However, INFs re-
quire fitting a field per sample.
[13] propose using a diffusion model over a set of INFs to
allow generalization to novel arteries, but training the model takes 3 days. [14] use a diffusion
model for tri-plane synthesis, followingly utilizing INFs for rendering the complete mesh surface.
While significantly improving memory-eﬀiciency of the diffusion process, tri-plane methods lack
geometric bias for asymmetric shapes located far away from the tri-plane axes.
Tree based methods.
A variable number of branches is well-represented using tree-like struc-
tures. [15] utilize a recurrent VAE on a binary tree representation of arteries, but formulating
eﬀicient neural networks for a binary tree is no trivial task, and thus models take multiple days
to train.
Sparse voxel representations.
Sparse voxel representations only represent non-empty vox-
els, significantly reducing complexity. [16] propose using VDB as representation for hierarchical
diffusion. While allowing arbitrarily high resolution, hierarchical diffusion poses a problem in
resource-limited settings.
[17] proposes the use of octrees based on hash-tables for allowing
sparse voxel representation for graph convolutional neural networks (GCNs).
Using octrees
reduces complexity to being quadratic, effectively supporting an adaptive representation from
which Signed Distance Field (SDF) are inferred directly from octree leaf node features. How-
ever, the implementation does not allow multi-scale convolutions, limiting the receptive field
and necessitating more layers for high-resolution synthesis.
Dual octrees.
[18] propose a dual octree GCN, enabling eﬀicient multi-resolution convolution
via. linear cross-scale layers. The approach has seen use in e.g. [19], where the dual octree
2
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
==PAGE:13==
representation is adapted to a dual quad-tree, enabling conditional font synthesis using diffusion.
In [20], dual octrees allow high-resolution mesh synthesis, yielding competitive performances on
mesh generation benchmark datasets. However, the approach still lacks to stand the test against
scientific scrutiny and model training is expensive.
While mesh-native methods like MeshCNN exist, they typically require strong downsampling
to an unacceptable degree in some medical domains [21, 22]. Conversely, octree representations
are expected to be especially suited for modeling highly variable and sparse structures such
as coronary arteries, as the octree imposes inductive shape bias without the need for organ-
specific shape-priors.
Similarly, quadratic complexity allows for design and experimentation
with deep neural networks in a thesis context. Whilst the idea of inferring the SDF directly from
the encoded dual octree nodes relates closely to implicit neural fields, the per-node evaluation
imposes geometric awareness into the field-evaluation, thus allowing generalization instead of
relying on expensive per-sample optimizations.
3
Clinical Background
3.1
Coronary Arteries
The coronary arteries supply the myocardium, pericardium and endocardium with oxygenated
blood necessary for maintaining cardiac function. These arteries run along the outside of the
heart from which small ramifications penetrate into the heart muscle to deliver oxygen.
The two primary branches of the coronary artery are the left coronary artery (LCA) and the
right coronary artery (RCA). This thesis focuses mainly on modeling the LCA.
Although the LCA may be partitioned into multiple subbranches, in this work it is considered a
single segment. This segmentation will be used for extracting region-wise features of generated
meshes such as e.g. volumes. Broadly, the LCA travels along the left and anterior surface of
the heart, supplying oxygenated blood to the left ventricle and the left atrium. Additionally, it
gives off branches that supply the posterior heart and parts of the interventricular septum.
3.2
Heart Chambers
The right atrium receives deoxygenated blood from the body via. the vena cava and passes
it to the right ventricle. From the right ventricle, blood is pumped through the pulmonary
circulation and oxygenated blood is carried back to the left atrium. Blood then flows through
the mitral valve to the left ventricle, from which it is carried through the left ventricular outflow
tract (LVOT) to the aorta. The pumping action is generated by muscle tissue surrounding the
ventricles, called the myocardium. This work focuses on modeling the left heart chambers: the
left atrium, left ventricle and the surrounding left ventricular myocardium.
3.3
Contrast Enhanced Computed Tomography
Computed Tomography (CT) is a medical imaging method based on X-rays which allows scan-
ning patients in three dimensions. For contrast enhanced CT, it is based on contrast agents
which are taken up to a varying degree by different tissues allowing discrimination of different
organ systems due to varying degrees of attenuation of X-rays. During scanning, patients are
moved into a tube-like CT Scanner on a rolling bed. A X-ray source typically rotates around
the patient while emitting beams, and detectors positioned opposite of the source measure the
intensity of X-rays after they have penetrated the body. These measurements are used to cal-
culate attenuation values, which are then reconstructed into two-dimensional slices, producing
2D images of the patient’s body. Simultaneous rotation of source and detector enables imaging
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
3
==PAGE:14==
Myocardium
Left Coronary Artery
Left Atrium
Left Ventricle
Axial CT slice
3D slice view with
segmentations
Frontal view of
segmented heart
Left Ventricle
Left Atrium
Left Coronary Artery
Myocardium
Figure 3.1: (left) Axial 2D slice of a CT image, illustrating heart anatomy at a certain cross-section. (middle) The
3D view of the chosen cross-section. (right) Frontal view of a segmented heart and the anatomical segmentations
used for analysis.
from multiple angles. High rotation speeds are necessary for high quality imaging of dynamic
structures, such as heart chambers, especially at elevated heart rates. As the X-ray source and
detector move along the patient’s sagittal plane, multiple slices are gathered. Stacking these
slices allows for a 3D reconstruction, yielding a volumetric dataset. Each element in this 3D
volume, referred to as a voxel, has variable resolution between scans depending on the sensor
system and scanning configuration. Organ meshes may be extracted from 3D volumes using
image analysis tools such as TotalSegmentator [23]. Figure 3.1 showcases an example of such a
data pipeline.
4
Dataset
In order to train and evaluate models, the publicly available ImageCAS dataset by Zeng et al. is
used [24]. It contains 3D CCTA images of the heart from 1000 adult patients, all with a medical
history of either ischemic stroke, transient ischemic attack and/or peripheral artery disease.
Low-quality samples were excluded. Data collection was carried out at Guangdong Provincial
People’s Hospital in the period April 2012 to December 2018. The dataset is skewed towards
the male population: 58.6% of the dataset is gathered from males with mean age 59.9, 41.4%
from females with mean age 57.7. The left and right coronary arteries were manually annotated
by two radiologists.
The images were captured using a Siemens 128-slice dual-source scanner, producing images with
dimensions of 512×512×s where s is the number of slices and s∈[206; 275]. The planar resolution
ranges between 0.29mm to 0.43mm and the slice spacing similarly varies between 0.25mm and
0.45mm.
Segmentations for other organs were extracted using TotalSegmentator [23]. In this work the
focus is on the left part of the heart, specifically the left coronary artery (LCA), left atrium,
left myocardium and left ventricle, primarily due to the availability of refined LCA samples.
As focus is only on the left heart region, abbreviations such as “atrium” will necessarily always
denote the left atrium.
4.0.1
Dataset Issues
As the dataset gathering is based on a contrastive medium, this introduces some natural dif-
ficulties for precise segmentation. This is especially the case for coronary arteries, where the
contrast decreases as the arteries narrow, making exact annotation of end-points in very thin
segments inexact. Likewise, the imaging resolution may exacerbate these effects due to imaging
effects such as partial volume averaging [25]. Due to the limited slice resolution of the 2nd
generation scanner used for acquisition, stair-step artifacts are also naturally present in data
4
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
==PAGE:15==
[26]. For fine structures such as coronary arteries, this can have a large influence on topology,
e.g. by introducing breakage or excessive thinning between slices.
Given these challenges related to data quality, a refined set of LCA segmentations, as generously
provided by supervisor Rasmus Paulsen, is used.
Original segmentations were refined using
modern image analysis tools. The resulting dataset contains 766 samples, where the remaining
234 samples were discarded due to low sample quality, as showcased in Figure 4.1.
Figure 4.1: Cardiac artery meshes for a sample before and after mesh refinement and an example of an excluded
sample in the refined dataset. (left pane): Left and right artery branch meshes before refinement. (center pane):
Left artery branch after refinement. The right branch is excluded in the dataset and in addition presumably
venous parts of the branch are removed. The artery is significantly thinner. (right pane): a sample excluded from
the refined set.
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
5
==PAGE:16==
5
Technical Background
In order to enable computationally eﬀicient generative modeling, employed neural networks
are based on dual octree graphs rather than 3D volumes, and as such are part of the graph
neural network paradigm, which is introduced in Section 5.1. The foundational data structure
is described in Sections 5.2 and 5.3. Section 5.3.1 ties up how the dual octree graph convolution
is carried out, thus allowing implementations of dual octree graph convolutional networks.
5.1
Graph Convolutional Neural Networks
Graphs, G=(V, E), are mathematical objects which offer strong expressiveness of structured,
semi-structured and unstructured data [27].
Graphs consist of nodes V , representing enti-
ties, and edges E ⊆{{x, y} | x, y ∈V ∧x ̸= y}, which model relationships between entities.
Graph neural networks (GNNs) model functions over graphs, which are utilized in tasks such as
graph/vertex classification, vertex feature prediction and graph generation, and are especially
gaining traction in fields such as molecular discovery and prediction [28]. One of the most fun-
damental architectures is graph convolutional neural networks (GCNs), whose aim is to learn
hierarchical representations of irregular data by performing vertex- or edge-convolutions [29].
In this thesis, a graph convolution operation is on node-level. It takes node features F = Fi
as input and updates F based on neighborhood information. In the message-passing paradigm,
this mathematically means:
Fi = A ◦{W(∆pij) × Fj, ∀j ∈Ni}
(5.1)
Where A denotes a differentiable aggregation operation, W is a weight-function that maps
convolution weights to an edge describing the relative positions of two nodes pij, and Ni is the
neighbourhood of vertex i [30]. In our case, the aggregation function is a sum.
5.2
Octree data structure
Processing data in 3D often presents memory and computational challenges, as the size of
volumetric representations grow cubically with increasing resolution.
This renders common
deep learning approaches computationally infeasible. Throughout this thesis, the octree data
structure is used as a foundational building block. Octrees allow hierarchical partitioning of a
dense volumetric space into a sparse-, adaptive graph, facilitating scalable computations.
Given a point cloud P, octrees represent 3D space by recursively subdividing a bounded volu-
metric region into regular-sized octants up to a certain depth or resolution, continuing recursion
only in regions that contain P. This representation can be found to be an approximation of the
geometric shape of an object (e.g. an organ). The idea of partitioning space into a hierarchical
tree based on occupancy is visualized in Figure 5.1, using the 2D-analogous data structure, the
QuadTree.
The figure exemplifies how space is divided for an artery mesh from the input depth T0 to T5.
Each quadrant indicates a node, and sub-quadrants indicate children nodes. The main strength
of octrees is that they are hierarchical; finer voxels are allocated near surfaces, whereas coarser
voxels are allocated away from the surface, thus allowing detail-dependent allocation of compute
[7]. Wang et al. (2017) proposed using octrees as a building block for building GNNs for 3D
shape analysis using mesh normal vectors as initial leaf node features. A standard octree con-
volution enables feature aggregation within same-depth neighborhoods, which is highly eﬀicient
in common octree implementations. Cross-scale convolutions are desirable, as they allow fusion
6
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
==PAGE:17==
Figure 5.1: Visualization of Octree construction, using a quad-tree (2D octree) for illustrative purposes. Here,
the dense depth is d = 2.
of fine-grained local features and global, coarse context within a single convolution, effectively
increasing the receptive field in a computationally effective manner. An octree framework which
allows eﬀicient cross-scale message passing is non-trivial and often highly task specific (e.g. [31]).
5.3
Dual Octree Graph
Research suggests that neural networks built on the dual octree graph perform better in shape
reconstruction tasks, partially due to improved expressiveness in deep learning tasks [7]. Dual
octrees address the message passing limitations of octrees discussed in the last section by building
a graph structure over the octree. Each octree cell corresponds to a node in the dual octree, and
edges are directed between spatially adjacent cells. The result is a sparse, multi-resolution graph
which maintains the hierarchical and adaptive resolution properties of octrees while enabling
eﬀicient message passing across both space and scale.
An octree may be built from any point cloud by partitioning voxel space into octants recursively
based on occupancy of a point cloud point. The recursive procedure stops locally when no point
is present within a node, and globally when the maximum depth of the octree is reached (at
the latest). leaf nodes indicate octants which are not split further, either due to reaching the
maximal allowed depth- or covering purely empty space. The dense depth indicates the depth
up to which the octree is assumed dense; all layers with a larger depth than the dense depth are
sparse. Octree construction is divided into three phases, starting from depth 0:
• Build a dense octree graph, producing a uniform volumetric grid of regular sized octants
recursively up to the dense depth.
• Build sparse octree graphs over deeper layers of the octree by recursion from the dense depth
up to the max depth, utilizing the octree algorithm.
• Convert the octree graph to a dual octree graph.
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
7
==PAGE:18==
The first stage subdivides voxel space recursively and regularly, each time splitting a node from
a lower depth into octants. This grid consumes the whole volumetric area. At each depth d
below the dense depth, the number of nodes per axis may be calculated as Na,d = 2d, producing
a total grid size of N = N3
a,d. An octree with dense depth 4 will thus have 4096 total nodes,
with each axis having a length of 16 nodes. N3
a,d is simultaneously denoted as the resolution
at depth d. Leaf nodes can first be assigned at the dense depth. Sparse graph generation then
proceeds in the same fashion, iteratively assigning nodes as leaves if it is vacant or if the maximal
depth has been reached. If a leaf node is subsequently subdivided, the node itself becomes an
internal node, whilst its children get assigned as leaves. As a result, the number of leaf nodes at
any depth after the dense depth is variable, depending on the point cloud. After construction,
the edge set of a node vi∈V is its adjacent one-ring leaf nodes. This is depicted in Figure 5.2,
showing the enhanced receptive field of the dual octree graph.
The dual octree graph is semi-regular; it has predictable local connectivity (as a function of
depth), which enables eﬀicient construction and memory access using hash-tables [32], allowing
formulation of GPU-eﬀicient convolutions (see Section 5.3.1) [7].
... ...
...
... ...
...
Figure 5.2: Visualization of a dual-quadtree (2D octree), showcasing the excess information passed to parent
nodes (orange nodes indicate direct access). The dense depth is 2. Partially adapted from [7].
5.3.1
Dual Octree Graph Convolutions
An eﬀicient construction algorithm of the dual octree graph yields properties that may be utilized
for eﬀicient graph convolutions due to eﬀicient access. The dual octree graph convolution serves
to aggregate local and cross-scale information. For each node, local directional information and
features are aggregated from neighboring nodes and transformed into a new feature dimension
Co after the convolution.
As input, consider a set of vertex features F ∈RN×Ci, where N=|V | is the total number of
vertices of the dual graph and Ci is the number of channels in the input features for the given
layer.
Since the vertex set V lacks explicit encoding of node depth, which is expected to be of im-
portance for representation, the feature-vector for each neighbor vj is concatenated with a
one-hot-encoding Dj, encoding its depth. The dual octree graph is constructed such that every
8
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
==PAGE:19==
vertex has a semi-regular set of edge directions, meaning that the set of possible edge directions
is finite and fixed. The neighbors consist of the set of possible discrete directions within 3D
space, i.e. ±x, ±y, and ±z, hence K=6 possible directions. Let k=0 denote the center direc-
tion. This bounded directional structure enables the use of a fixed-size kernel (7 directions),
which increases eﬀiciency and minimizes the number of trainable parameters.
The relative direction to node vi is described by ∆pij, and is also concatenated in the form
of a one-hot-vector. This yields the augmented feature matrix form for node vj in relation to
vi, Fij = (F ||Dj| |∆pij), Fij ∈R1×CA, CA = Ci+(dmax−ddense+1)+1 which enables a message
passing scheme of the form in Equation 5.1 by:
Fi =
X
j∈Ni
WI(∆pij)Fij
(5.2)
where I(∆pij) is a matrix indexing operator which gives the matrix corresponding to the di-
rection ∆pij by indexing in a set of matrices W = (W0, W1, . . . , Wk), each slice describing
the mapping from CA to Co per direction.
In practice, this is implemented using a tensor
W ∈RCA×7×Co. Due to the semi-regularity of the dual octree, ensuring that at most 7 direc-
tions are present, W is extremely parameter-eﬀicient.
A vertex vi ∈V may have multiple edges in the same direction, particularly when it faces deeper
leaf nodes that subdivide the neighboring region. In such cases, regional information of a vertex
vi is pooled by averaging all features in the given direction.
To allow eﬀicient mean aggregation, edges must be indexed compactly. Let E′ ⊆E denote
the edge set of a node vi, with |E′| = m being the number of valid edges. To enable message
aggregation, each edge is associated with one of K = 6 spatial directions, indexed by p ∈
{1, . . . , K}, where p = 0 is reserved for the self-loop. A unique integer direction-aware index for
directional aggregation is then computed as:
I(vi, p) = vi · (K + 1) + p,
p ∈{0, 1, . . . , K}
This indexing scheme assigns each node vi a continuous block of K + 1 slots, one per direction,
which are used as keys in a scatter-based aggregation. When applied over all edges, the indices
have shape Rm and map which bins each neighboring node information should be added into.
Directional aggregation is carried out using a custom PyTorch scatter mean operation. The
augmented features from each source vertex vj are added into the index bin I(vi, p) for a given
node vi, producing a feature tensor M ∈RN(K+1)×CA which is reshaped to M ∈RN×CA(K+1)
and averaged by the number of nodes occurring in any of the fixed directions.
The convolution may then be implemented using a weight-tensor W ∈RCA×7×Co by utilizing
a general matrix multiplication on the flattened tensors Fo = MfWf, Fo ∈RN×Co. A single
dual octree graph convolution then has the computational complexity O(7N × CA × Co), which
is significantly cheaper than a naïve 3D convolution with kernel size k which has complexity
O(N3 × k3 × CA × Co) [33, 7].
5.4
Variational Autoencoders
A Variational Autoencoder (VAE) is a Bayesian extension of traditional autoencoder architec-
tures, commonly used for unsupervised representation learning. The goal of traditional autoen-
coders is to learn salient structure of data by encoding high-dimensional observations into a
lower-dimensional latent space, followed by reconstruction [34].
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
9
==PAGE:20==
In VAEs, the latent space is probabilistic rather than deterministic. Its network design can
be perceived as two independently parametrized components: the encoder f and the decoder
g. The encoder maps observations x ∈Rn to the parameters of a latent distribution in Rp,
typically with p ≪n. Formally, the encoder is a function f : Rn →Rp. In variational inference,
it parametrizes an approximate posterior distribution qϕ(z|x), which in this thesis is chosen to
be of the mean-field Gaussian variational family [35]:
qϕ(z|x) = N(z|µ(x), diag(σ2(x))))
(5.3)
Hence, the encoder outputs the suﬀicient statistics f(x) = (µ(x), log σ2(x)). The associated
latent code is then a sample from the approximate posterior distribution, ie. z ∼qϕ(z|x).
As sampling operations generally are not differentiable, posterior sampling is reformulated to
allow backpropagation using the reparametrization gradient estimator. For the mean-field Gaus-
sian variational family, this corresponds to:
z = µ(x) + σ(x) ⊙ϵ, ϵ ∼N(0, I)
(5.4)
This allows backward propagating gradients through the stochastic node [36].
The decoder g : Rp →Rn maps latent variables back into input space. Given a latent code z
it implicitly outputs a distribution over possible reconstructions pθ(x|z). As such, it defines a
generative model over conditional data generation g(z) ∼pθ(x|z).
5.4.1
Optimization
Optimization is carried out using gradient descent. The goal is to maximize the evidence lower
bound (ELBO) LELBO(θ, ϕ; x), which balances the expected log-likelihood (reconstruction qual-
ity) of the data under the generative model and a regularization term which penalizes difference
between the approximate posterior, qϕ(z|x) and the prior, p(z).
The optimization criterion is thus:
(θ∗, ϕ∗) = arg max
θ,ϕ
Eqϕ(z|x) [log pθ(x|z)]
|
{z
}
reconstruction
−βDKL
 qϕ(z|x)||p(z)

|
{z
}
regularization
(5.5)
Using Jensen’s inequality it can be shown that LELBO(θ, ϕ; x) ≤log p(x). Thus, the ELBO
is a lower-bound for the log-likelihood, and maximizing it maximizes the lower bound on the
log-likelihood (and thus likelihood) [36]. Using the mean-field Gaussian approximation and a
standard Gaussian prior, the KL-divergence has a simple form:
DKL(qϕ(z|x)||p(z)) = 1
2
p
X
i=1
 σi(x)2 + µi(x)2 −1 −log(σi(x)2
(5.6)
5.5
Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models
Recently, diffusion models have emerged as the dominant paradigm in generative modelling for
imaging tasks. This popularity in part stems from their ease of training, adaptability across
domains (partially due to architectural agnosticism), and strong theoretical foundations. In this
work, we work with the sub-variant of Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DDPM) [37],
a variant formulation of score-based generative modelling.
The general idea of DDPM is inspired by non-equilibrium thermodynamics and shares strong
connection with continuous-time stochastic differential equations (SDEs). The forward diffu-
sion processs, conceptually akin to the solution trajectory of a forward SDE, models the gradual
10
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
==PAGE:21==
transition from a non-equilibrium data distribution to a equilibrium pure-noise distribution.
Correspondingly, the associated reverse-time process, which can be considered a discrete ap-
proximation of a reverse SDE, can be iteratively solved, allowing the transition from a sample
of the equilibrium noise-distribution to the data-distribution [38, 39]. The training objective in
DDPM is to learn the reverse process by modeling each step as the time-reversal of the forward
process, thus allowing sample generation.
Building on this intuition, let x0 ∼q(x) be a sample from the data generating distribution
which we want to model generatively using the reverse process pθ(x0:T ) where T denotes the
number of discrete time-steps over which diffusion takes place.
Then, the noise-corrupting forward-process may be formulated as a discrete-time Markov chain
which iteratively adds noise to x0:
q(x1:T |x0) =
T
Y
t=1
q(xt|xt−1)
(5.7)
where T is a hyperparameter denoting the number of noising transitions before reaching equi-
librium. In this thesis, a Gaussian distribution is utilized for the transition-distribution:
q(xt|xt−1) = N(xt|
p
1 −βtxt−1, βtI)
(5.8)
where βt defines a variance-schedule which is to be treated as a hyper-parameter in the DDPM.
It defines the noise-variance added as a function of t in order to establish equilibrium at T.
Using the Gaussian parametrization of the forward-process has an advantage, namely that one
can compute the noised sample xt in closed form:
q(xt|x0) = N(xt|√¯αtx0, (1 −¯αt)I)
where αt = 1 −βt and ¯αt = Qt
s=1 αs. In practice, we utilize the ϵt ∼N(0, I) reparametrization
[39], yielding
xt = √αtxt−1 +
√
1 −αtϵt
(5.9)
hence,
xt = √¯αtx0 +
√
1 −¯αtϵ
(5.10)
where ϵ ∼N(0, I). The associated reverse process distribution pθ(x0:T ) is likewise defined as a
discrete Markov chain:
pθ(x0:T ) = p(xT )
T
Y
t=1
pθ(xt−1|xt)
where p(xT ) is the equilibrium-distribution, in this case xT ∼N(xT |0, I), and the single-step
denoising distribution is defined as
pθ(xt−1|xt) = N(xt−1|µθ(xt, t), Σθ(xt, t))
(5.11)
Ie. if a model were able to learn the reverse-process distributional parameters µθ(xt, t), Σθ(xt, t)
as a function of the current data and timestep, the complete reverse process should be able to
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
11
==PAGE:22==
map pθ(xT ) to q(x0) and thus, if xT is easily simulated, the mapping should allow generating
novel samples from q(x0).
In this work, fixed diagonal covariance is assumed for the step-wise reverse-process noise-
distribution, thus omitting the need to learn Σ explicitly, as Σ = βtI.
This simplifies the
task significantly. In order to predict the mean we use the re-parametrization, which may be
derived from the posterior mean of q(xt−1|xt, x0) under assumption of the model approximating
ϵθ ≈ϵ [37]:
µθ(xt, t) =
1
√αt

xt −
βt
√1 −¯αt
ϵθ(xt, t)

(5.12)
where ϵθ(xt, t) is an approximator of the noise ϵ added for the transition x0 →xt as according to
Equation 5.10. As a result, denoising is an iterative process, where a sample from the distribution
in Eq. 5.11 is equivalent to a single denoising step. In practice, this distribution may be sampled
using:
xt−1 ∼µθ(xt, t) +
p
βtϵ, ϵ ∼N(0, I)
(5.13)
As a result, the only missing component is a model which is able to predict the noise which
is needed to denoise a single step of the reverse process. Many input-output symmetric model
architectures are suitable such as UNets and Transformers. In this work we experiment with
graph- and 3D-UNets.
When predicting octree split signals, a x0-prediction framework is utilized. This framework uses
Tweedie’s formula to obtain an estimator for clean data x0 directly from a noisy observation xt
[40, 37, 39]. In the case of additive Gaussian noise, the estimator can be calculated as:
ˆx0 =
1
√¯αt
xt −
√1 −¯αt
√¯αt
ϵθ
(5.14)
This can be interpreted as an estimator for the posterior mean E [x0|xt] [41]. This framework
parametrizes the reverse step by directly predicting the denoised x0 from a single noised ob-
servation, rather than explicitly learning each step-wise reverse posterior mean. This approach
offers some advantages, e.g. fine-grained control of the scale of the output ˆx0 using appropriate
activations. Using this approach changes the mean in Eq. 5.12 by:
µθ(xt, t) =
√¯αt−1βt
1 −¯αt
ˆx0 +
√αt(1 −¯αt−1)
1 −¯αt
ˆxt
(5.15)
and additionally replaces ¯βt = 1−¯αt−1
1−¯αt βt for sampling the reverse process in Eq. 5.13 [37].
The employed DDPMs are trained using an MSE loss, which experimentally has been shown
to result in better sample quality in image-generation tasks [37]. The loss simply is an MSE
between the true sampled noise ϵ and the noise predicted by the model:
Lsimple = Et,x0,ϵ
hϵ −ϵθ
 √¯αtx0 +
√
1 −¯αtϵ, t
2
2
i
(5.16)
Here, the expectation Et,x0,ϵ [·] indicates that the loss is averaged over three stochastic compo-
nents during training:
• t: The timestep t, which is sampled uniformly as t ∼U(1, T) for each sample
12
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
==PAGE:23==
• x0: A sample of posterior samples from the data generating distribution x0 ∼q(x)
• ϵ: A noise sample, ϵ ∼N(0, I). This noise-sample is added to x0 to form xt (Equation
5.10) to form the noisy input for the denoising task
Minimizing this training objective encourages the neural network ϵθ to predict the noise sample
which transformed z0 to zt at any timestep t. Sampling is carried out from t = T to t = 0,
starting out with an initial sample of standard Gaussian noise.
5.5.1
Latent Diffusion Models
A prominent approach in the generative diffusion model landscape is the Latent Diffusion Model
architecture (LDM), proposed by Rombach et al. [42]. This architecture integrates conventional
diffusion models with a learned latent space, reducing the computational complexity by mod-
eling the diffusion process in a compressed latent representation rather than input space. The
addition of a learned latent space necessitates the need for a trained autoencoder to enable the
interpretation and decoding of these latent encodings.
In this work, the DDPM is utilized in a latent space generated by a VAE. This VAE is trained
with a weakly KL-regularized objective (β ≪1 in the VAE’s ELBO). This design choice enforces
that the VAE encoder remains expressive, mapping inputs into a rich, yet compressed, latent
representation which is the domain for the diffusion process. The diffusion model effectively
learns a complex posterior distribution over the latent space. Utilizing a VAE trained with a
weakly-regularized objective with Gaussian prior has mainly three attractive key properties:
• High expressivity: by reducing the weight of the KL-divergence term, the VAE prioritizes
reconstruction accuracy, allowing latent space to be rich and expressive
• Suﬀicient regularization: Despite the reduced KL-weight, regularization is tuned such that
a suﬀicient amount of regularization is present for encouraging continuity and avoiding
degeneracies in latent space (e.g. posterior collapse).
• Computational eﬀiciency: operating in the compressed latent space drastically reduces the
computational requirements during training and inference.
Ie. the goal is to parametrize a latent space which is someplace in between a true VAE (well-
parametrized latent space) and an autoencoder (expressivity). Given the nature of the LDM
framework, a VAE model is consequently trained prior to training the generative model, with
these considerations in mind.
5.5.2
Classifier-Free Guidance
In multi-class generative tasks, class-conditional sampling is often necessary in order to control
outputs during reverse sampling.
In this work, we utilize classifier-free guidance, a commonly used principle for training diffusion
models due to its inherent simplicity and the lack of having to train an additional classifier.
The principle is as follows. Let c represent an abstract class-condition, and let diffusion operate
over latent variable z. The goal is to model pθ(z0|c) which corresponds to predicting ϵθ(z, t, c)
during training. Training a model purely class-conditional raises concerns, as denoising may
begin relying too heavily on class-conditioning, which may damage generalization. Instead, an
unconditional model is expected to learn the general diffusion from noise to the data-distribution
independently of the class of a given sample, acting as a natural regularizer to a purely class-
conditional process. In accordance, Ho et al. (2022) propose to train an unconditional model
pθ(z) and a conditional model pθ(z|c) jointly [43]. In practice this is done by training a single
noise-predicting neural network ϵθ(z, t, c). During training, class labels are dropped with prob-
ability puncond, i.e. in cases where dropping occurs the model receives ci = ∅represented by a
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
13
==PAGE:24==
null class embedding. No other changes are made during training.
At sampling time, the predicted noise is interpolated between unconditional and conditional
model predictions:
ˆϵt(zt, t, c) = (1 + w)ˆϵθ(zt, t, c) −wˆϵθ(zt, t, ∅)
(5.17)
As a result, the predicted mean µθ(zt, t, c) is simply the same as presented in Equation 5.12,
with the only change being the noise-prediction which now is of the form in Equation 5.17, and
puncond and w being hyperparameters. It is common practice to tune w at the inference stage
to obtain optimal sample quality.
14
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
==PAGE:25==
6
Methodology
6.1
Data Pre-Processing
0.4
-0.4
Figure 6.1: Examples of centre-
aligned and scaled LCA meshes.
Notice, that all are within the
global bounds [−0.4, 0.4] and that
their respective bounding box cen-
tre is located at R, being origo.
0.4
-0.4
Figure 6.2: The same samples as
in Figure 6.1 but using aorta-root
alignment. This yields meaningful
frame of reference, being the aorta
root.
The pre-processing comprises of: (i) alignment (centre- or point-
based), (ii) scaling and (iii) bounding box normalization. In the
following subsections, the complete pre-processing pipeline is out-
lined.
6.1.1
Centre-Aligned Surface Pre-Processing
Centre-alignment entails alignment of the mesh bounding box
centres. In practice this is achieved by identifying the centre co-
ordinate of the bounding box on a per-sample basis, and subtract-
ing the centre-vector from all mesh coordinates, i.e. translating
the mesh.
A(i)
T = A(i) −1
2


A(i)
x,max + A(i)
x,min
A(i)
y,max + A(i)
y,min
A(i)
z,max + A(i)
z,min


Centre-alignment is used for left atria, left ventricles and left
myocardia.
6.1.2
Scaling
During pre-processing, all bounding box side-lengths are stored.
Let Lmax denote the maximal found bounding box side length for
a given class. Later employed models generally benefit from coor-
dinates being scale-constrained. As a result, surfaces are scaled to
fit within a cube with side-lengths 0.8 centered in 0, i.e. all mesh
surface coordinates are in the range [−0.4; 0.4]. This is achieved
in practice using the found Lmax:
s =
k
Lmax
(6.1)
with k = 0.8, implying that no surface has a bounding box
side length larger than k, i.e. all meshes reside within the cube
[−0.4, 0.4]. Thus, the normalized data is As=sAT .
6.1.3
Point-Aligned Surface Pre-Processing
Centre-alignment was found inappropriate for the left coronary artery (LCA). LCAs are generally
very sparse and are not evenly distributed within the unit cube. They have highly variable
trajectories, and as such, centre-alignment will produce very few cases where trajectories of
different arteries overlap, yielding a common frame of reference which, while medically somewhat
meaningful, will make model training hard due to a lacking point of reference, as a big part of
modelling an artery is modelling its radius from the centre.
As a result, point-alignment is instead utilized, where registered features are aligned.
For
LCA, a natural fixed point is the stem of the artery tree, being the point a(i) where the
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
15
==PAGE:26==
coronary artery branches out from the aorta.
All shapes are aligned in this point using a
translation which maps the aorta root to origo, i.e.
A(i)
T =A(i) −a(i).
Subsequently, ex-
treme bounding box bounds are computed across the complete dataset. Analogously to centre-
alignment, the worst-case possible side length is then calculated from the extreme bounds:
Lmax=max(xmax−xmin, ymax−ymin, zmax−zmin), and meshes are scaled using Eq.
6.1.
Re-
sulting meshes are not in [−0.4; 0.4], but the largest side length in the normalized dataset
is k=0.8; as a result, another translation is utilized to translate the aligned aorta roots to
p=(−0.4 −xmin, −0.4 −ymin, −0.4, zmin), which ensures bounding box consistency. An example
of aorta-aligned LCAs is presented in Figure 6.2. Point-alignment is only used for LCA, due to
empirical findings suggesting improved performance.
6.1.4
Point Cloud Construction and SDF Labeling
As common octree construction algorithms are based on point clouds, N=100·103 point coordi-
nates are randomly sampled from the surface of each mesh, alongside vertex face normal vectors,
thus creating the point cloud and normal sets P = {pi}N
i=1 with associated face normal vectors
NΩ= {ni}N
i=1 of corresponding dimensionality. In case fewer points are present, the maximal
number of points is sampled. An octree is built based on each point cloud. The construction
recursively partitions the 3D-space into smaller octants, enabling the transition from a volu-
metric space to a graph which encodes the point cloud. For each octree node in a given organ
sample, m = 4 query points are randomly sampled within a node (using a Gaussian distribution
centered in the node centre), on the basis of which a signed-distance field (SDF) of the surface
may be inferred.
6.1.5
Signed Distance Field
Figure 6.3: Example of an SDF
evaluated in query points over a
left coronary artery sample. SDF
value is indicated by the color-bar.
Each SDF sample consists of a point x ∈R3, together with
its associated signed distance SDF(x) ∈R and the gradient
∇xSDF(x) ∈R3.
By definition, the signed distance function
satisfies:
SDF(x) =
(
d(x, ∂Ω)
if
x ∈R3\Ω,
−d(x, ∂Ω)
if
x ∈Ω
where d(xi, ∂Ω) is the euclidean distance from xi to the object
boundary ∂Ω, i.e. the SDF is positive for points outside the sur-
face boundary whereas it is negative when within the boundary.
As a result, the zero-level set of the SDF implicitly defines the
surface of a shape. The SDF is approximated across a random
sample of query points xi ∈R3 in the range [−0.5; 0.5] by identi-
fying the closest surface point pi to xi using a vtkPointLocator
from the Visualization Toolkit [44]. By means of pi, computation
of the gradient and value is possible by constructing a vector pointing from the surface point to
the query point ri = xi −pi as follows:
SDF(xi) = sgn(ri · ni)||ri||2
∇xSDF(xi) = sgn(ri · ni)
ri
||ri||2
where ni denotes the outward oriented surface normal vector. This method approximates the
true SDF under assumption that the surface is locally flat and ri approximately aligned with
ni. In practice, query points consist of four samples per octree node and additionally N = 104
points are sampled uniformly in the unit-cube [−0.5; 0.5]. A visualization of the SDF evaluated
on a LCA mesh at a set of query points is visualized in Figure 6.3.
16
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
==PAGE:27==
6.1.6
Dual Octree Construction
Throughout all modeling tasks, dense depth 4 is used, and an input depth of 7 is used. Point
clouds are transformed into dual octrees using [7]. A 3D example of the octree datastructure is
visualized in Figure 6.4.
Figure 6.4: Visualization of the octree algorithm with dense depth set to 2 and output depth at 5. TD,i indicates
a dense tree, TS,i indicates a sparse tree.
6.2
VAE Architecture
This section elaborates on the model components that make up the main modules of the VAE.
Inspired by Wang et al., a formulation of a graph VAE consisting of fundamental neural network
blocks for the domain of dual octree graphs is constructed [18]. A network schematic of the
proposed VAE architecture is illustrated in Figure 6.5.
Graph convolutional blocks consist of a graph convolution operation, a graph normalization
block followed by a GELU activation function.
Residual blocks consist of a graph convolution block followed by a graph convolution operation
and a graph normalization. A residual connection is added from the input to the output. If
input-channels and output-channels differ, a graph-convolution and graph normalization block
ensure channel number consistency for the residual connection.
Graph upsample blocks are implemented using a linear layer. The linear layer allows aggre-
gation of leaf-node features at the current depth d into their parent nodes at depth d−1.
The Prediction module generates octree node splitting logits via graph convolutions from
which node splitting probabilities are inferred. During training, the logits are only used for loss
evaluation. During validation and inference, the logits are used for growing the octree during
decoding.
Neural Multi-level Partition of Unity (Neural MPU) is employed in order to generate
a continuous volumetric field over decoded octrees. This is achieved by blending locally defined
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
17
==PAGE:28==
Figure 6.5: An illustration The proposed VAE architecture taking as input a depth N sparse dual octree graph
T d
N, going down to a bottleneck (here at depth 4) where the dual octree is forced to be dense. A series of graph-
convolution- and MLP-based neural network blocks form the basis of the architecture. Dark blue boxes contribute
to the loss terms described in Section 6.2.1.
functions over octant features into a global continuous and differentiable function. Each local
function is defined per octree node using a lightweight MLP and query coordinates sampled
from the SDF position point cloud x ∈P, transformed into a local coordinate frame of the
node. Subsequently, the MPU uses locally supported, non-negative B-spline basis functions to
compute blending weights, as well as confidence values (larger values for larger node resolutions)
[7]. This approach allows weighing and smoothing of the local functions to construct a globally
coherent and continuous SDF. During training, |P| = 104 number of points are sampled for
querying the MPU, where half are sampled on-, and the other off the mesh surface. The mesh
corresponding to the SDF zero-surface is extracted using the Marching Cubes algorithm [45].
The Regress module is a single hidden layer MLP which predicts the local SDF value used
in the MPU aggregation. It is evaluated per octree node and query point for all leaf nodes at a
given depth, and thus produces the local function values for MPU blending [7]. During training,
5.0 · 103 points on the mesh-surface and off the mesh-surface, respectively.
6.2.1
VAE Losses
The VAE is trained supervised using a structural octree loss and a regression loss on the SDF
predictions.
Outputs of the prediction module are used to formulate the octree loss (binary cross-entropy):
Loctree =
X
d
1
Nd
X
opred∈Od
CrossEntropy(opred, ogt)
(6.2)
where d is the depth of an octree layer, Nd corresponds to the number of nodes in the d’th layer
and o indicates a node split status. This loss enforces the network to learn leaf node features
which allow correct node-splitting prediction during decoding.
The Neural MPU output is compared to ground-truth SDF values using a composite L2-loss
based on the SDF field values and gradients:
18
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
==PAGE:29==
Lreg =
X
d
1
NP
X
x∈P
(λv||F(x) −G(x)||2
2
|
{z
}
LSDF d
+ ||∇F(x) −∇G(x)||2
2
|
{z
}
Lgradd
)
(6.3)
where x is a sample position, P denotes the set of coordinates where the neural MPU is evaluated,
F(x) and G(x) are the MPU-inferred and ground-truth SDF values, respectively. ∇F(x) is
calculated using automatic differentiation and ∇G(x) is the normalized outward-facing normal
vector from the closest surface to the position evaluated. λv is a balancing constant, empirically
set to 200.
LSDF encourages accurate shape representation by penalizing deviations from the SDF values
at known query locations. However, using this term alone may lead to local consistency without
enforcing global SDF coherence. Specifically, predictions outside of the domain for x /∈P may
be incoherent with the field represented for x ∈P. In order to address this, Lgrad provides an
additional constraint on the direction of the field, which may encourage smoothness and global
consistency for x /∈P, thus improving generalization.
The VAE reconstruction loss Lrec is defined as
Lrec = Loctree + Lreg
(6.4)
A fixed KL-weighting term β=1 is typically used, in order to balance the KL-regularizing and
reconstruction terms in the loss criterion in Equation 5.5. In practice, this is in many cases
found to lead to a latent space collapsing onto the prior distribution. This could cause issues for
diffusion models, which may learn a spuriously entangled latent representation; either producing
a decoder that learns to generate training samples at random, or an underutilized latent space,
which effectively collapses the VAE into a standard auto-encoder.
A common remedy is the employment of a β-VAE formulation, where β̸=1. In this setup, β>1
enforces stronger regularization and promotes disentanglement, while β<1 promotes expressiv-
ity by prioritizing reconstruction [46]. Another common technique to mitigate KL vanishing
is to employ a β annealing schedule, which balances emphasis between weighting latent space
compression (large β) and strong reconstruction (small β) temporally. Several annealing sched-
ules have been proposed; earlier works propose a monotonic schedule that starts training with
β=0, progressively incrementing to finish with β=1 [47]. A monotonic schedule might impose
too hard constraints on the behavior of convergence, however. A cyclical annealing schedule is
an alternative, which monotonically increases and cycles back to β=0 with a period, alternating
the VAE objective between focusing on disentanglement and expressivity [48]. In this thesis,
experimentation with fixed-, monotonically increasing- and cyclical β schemes are all explored
(illustrated in Appendix B.1).
6.2.2
Experiments
A bottleneck depth of 4 was utilized. Input octrees were of depth 7. Hyperparameter sweeps were
initially conducted, with hyperparameters including (1) Architectural parameters: the number
of residual blocks at each encoder/decoder stage, the initial size of convolution, the dimension
of the latent space, (2) Optimizer parameters: the learning rate and schedule, weight decay and
dropout, batch size, and the KL-schedule.
Experiments were conducted using both constant and dynamic KL weighting strategies. Single
class experiments were made for LCA, as this serves as the sparsest task. Fitting was carried
out using centre- and point-aligned data sets. Parameters converged upon followingly utilized
for a myocardium only model and a multi class model.
Model selection was initially based
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
19
==PAGE:30==
on loss convergence in sweeps; later in the process, latent space diagnostics, developed during
evaluation, were increasingly utilized (Section 7.0.1). A full specification of hyperparameters
investigated may be found in Appendix C.1.
6.3
Latent Diffusion Model Architecture, MZ
This section elaborates on the intricacies of the MZ framework, which was initially developed
as a naïve approach intended to act as a cog in a composite model. MZ builds on top of the
LDM framework, attempting to learn navigation in the latent space of the VAE discussed in 6.2.
The model takes as input a noised posterior sample from the VAE at timestep t, ˜Zt ∈R4096×Cz,
together with the encoded octree, and forwards them through a dual octree denoising UNet
with bottleneck depth d=1 with the goal of predicting the noise added for the forward transition
between t −1 and t. For clarity, as the graph is dense at d=4, the subsequently deeper layers
remain dense with lower resolutions. Many of the components are equivalent to those detailed
in section 6.2 (such as the residual block) and are therefore excluded in this section. Similarly,
the architecture design is excluded, as it is a simplification of the VAE schematic depicted
in Figure 6.5 without intermediate loss computations and with the only addition of applying
encoder/decoder skip-connections.
Graph Convolutions were employed instead of conventional 3D convolutions, which is a key
topological discrepancy between MZ and the original LDM architecture. The design decision
reflects the underlying graph domain, intending to learn implicit dual-graph conventions despite
all layers being dense. Employing graph convolutions also have some attractive properties, with
regards to 1. multi-scale feature propagation through layers, as denoted in subsection 5.3.1,
producing a larger receptive field; 2. slightly greater time complexity, O(7N × Ci × Co) vs.
O(9N3 × Ci × Co) for a vanilla 3D convolution; and 3. faster layer compression, as illustrated
by going from d=4 to d=3, which compresses the feature space from R4096×C4 →R512×C3 when
downsampling over a graph, which is a 1/3 compression rate when comparing to downsampling
using downsampling 3D convolutions: R4096×C4 →R2048×C3, which similarly entails, that graph
paradigms are more memory eﬀicient in the dense domain. Note, a downsampling 3D convolution
is assumed for the prior analysis (3x3 kernel, 2x2 stride and 1 padding).
Class-timestep embeddings are employed as proposed by Rombach et al. [42]. Timesteps
{t ∈Z|0 < t ≤T} are embedded using a Fourier series and classes are embedded using a linear
layer. The sum of the two embeddings is the class-time-embedding forwarded through each
residual block. Each residual block of the network has its own embedding projection of the joint
embedding, which is added after the first graph-convolutional block. Class embedding is only
applied when training/evaluating a class-conditional model.
The self-attention block forms query, key and value matrices from the features at depth d,
and computes a weighted sum of attention scores, according to the self-attention mechanism
proposed by Vaswani et al. [49]. Although attention is computationally expensive, with time
complexity O(n2), it has been shown to enhance intermediate feature coherence by modeling
long-range spatial dependencies. The attention layer is applied after the residual connection for
each residual block in the network, and is initially zero-initialized, following the strategy of [42].
6.3.1
Experiments
Coarse tuning was carried out on the myocardium class in order to find fitting noise-schedule and
initial configuration using a single class and multi class VAE. Subsequently, hyperparameters
varied over for experimentation include (1) Architectural parameters: the number of residual
blocks per stage, at which stages self-attention was present, initial convolution channel dimen-
sionality, the time-step embedding dimension, (2) Noise schedule type and parameters (linear
and cosine), (3) Batch size, (4) Regularization (dropout and weight-decay). When model conver-
20
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
==PAGE:31==
gence was established, modeling was transferred to the LCA class, varying between a multi-class
and single class VAE and limiting noise injection. Finally, a multi class LDM was evaluated
using classifier-free guidance, varying the guidance scale. All models were trained using LMSE.
6.4
Split Signal Diffusion, MS
As an alternative to utilizing LDM in a single-stage manner, a hierarchical conditioning scheme
implemented using a two-stage pipeline was proposed. This was investigated due to disappoint-
ing results of MZ for the LCA task due to octrees breaking in the decoder stack. As opposed to
property-based guidance methods such as DiGress [50], where regressors are used to steer gen-
eration toward scalar properties, a hierarchical conditioning scheme is proposed, which imposes
a generated depth 6 octree ˆT 6, with the goal of guiding leaf node diffusion using a structured,
octree-based, generative geometric prior. The intent two-fold; conditioning on such a prior could
bias denoising in a LDM approach such that octrees do not break in the decoder stack (Section
6.5). Additionally, the task is considerably simpler than mesh-generation, thus stress-testing
whether diffusion modeling even is a valid approach for the LCA class.
Similarly to work by [20], the task is to denoise a 8-channel splitting probability signal ˜
Sf ∈
R4096×8 reshaped to ˜S ∈R16×16×16×8 using a 3D convolutional UNet, which as input takes a
noisy sample ˜S and an embedded timestep t. The forward and reverse process is illustrated in
Figure 6.6. Training labels are predicted octrees gathered from the VAEs depth 6 stage, as a
means to ensure that generated split signals are strongly correlated with the decoder represen-
tation. Each column in Sf corresponds to a depth 4 latent node vi, whereas each value in the
8 channels pj corresponds to a probability that child node vi has children, e.g.:
ˆSf =
 
0.8
0.3
0.0
0.9
0.7
0.2
0.1
0.4
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
!
(6.5)
signifies that v0 has 8 children as at least one pj > 0. Likewise, j for which pj ≥0.5 encodes
which children nodes are split at graph depth 5, thus yielding an implicit representation of a
depth 6 tree; in this case v0,0, v0,3 and v0,4 have children. In practice, S is centered around zero
such that Si < 0 indicates no splitting, and vice versa.
Figure 6.6: Illustration of the forward noising process (going from left to right) for a split signal label. (Upper
row): linear schedule using β1 = 2 · 10−5 and βT = 0.01. (Lower row): cosine schedule using s = 0.001. Numbers
indicate the sampled timestep. The goal of the denoising task is to move from right ( ˜ST ) to left ( ˆS0).
The implemented architecture is heavily based on [51]. All concepts are completely the
same as MZ, except that graph-convolutions are substituted by 3D convolutions.
The prediction task was varied between ϵ and S0-prediction (Equation 5.14).
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
21
==PAGE:32==
6.4.1
Experiments
Initial experimentation was based on tuning complexity and the noise schedule for getting con-
vergence signal on the LCA class, which first was established when switching to S0-prediction.
Subsequent experimentation focused on tweaking: (1) Architectural parameters: Tanh or no
output activation, attention resolutions, time step embedding dimension, number of residual
blocks and the initial convolution channel dimensionality, (2) Batch size, (3) Regularization
(dropout and weight-decay). Hyperparameters were transferred to training a myocardium and
multi class model to ensure validity of the approach. All models were trained using LMSE.
6.5
Two-Stage Approach, MF
This section presents the proposed two-stage modeling framework introduced in the previous
section, which fuses the aforementioned diffusion topologies (MZ and MS) to leverage a diffu-
sion model MF with larger performance potential. With inspiration from ControlNet [52], the
generated splitting signals of MS is injected directly into MZ via a Feature-wise Linear Mod-
ulation (FiLM) [53] conditioning, which enables the LDM process to be influenced by features
over an octree-structure, ensuring stronger correlation between the generated latent features and
the decoded octree. This therefore acts as a more sophisticated approach to the LDM model
MZ, as when tasked with intricate geometric properties such as spindle structures, capturing all
local information into local nodes might be too demanding for MZ. This is discussed in further
detail in Section 8.1.3.
FiLM The octree structure is injected into the denoising UNet intermediate latent features after
each residual block in MZ through the following parametrization:
FiLM(X) = γ(τ(S)) ⊙X + β(τ(X))
(6.6)
With ⊙denoting the Hadamard product, τ being a permute-reshape-function which transforms
the S tensor to an 8 channel batched voxel [b × N × 8] →[b × 8 × N] →[b × 8 × 2d × 2d × 2d]
and the scale- and shift-functions (γ(x) and β(x)) are parametrized by 3D-convolutions with
kernels having 8 input channels and CR out-channels, corresponding to the current UNet stage.
This may be considered a locally aware version of FiLM, and closely resembles a cross-attention
mechanism. Ground-truth training signals Strain are employed to condition denoising during
training.
6.5.1
Experiments
Models were only trained on the LCA class. Model complexity was tuned coarsely in order to
establish convergence and allow overfitting. Subsequently, the following hyperparameters were
varied: (1) Architectural parameters (number of residual-blocks, attention resolutions, time-step
embedding), (2) Optimization (biased time-step sampling), (3) Regularization (weight-decay).
All models were trained using LMSE.
6.6
Metrics
Throughout the analysis, several metrics were used in order to quantitatively assess the per-
formance of any given model. This section gives an overview of used metrics, which have been
categorized into four sub-categories.
6.6.1
Distance metrics
To measure the similarity between two sets of data points, three common distance metrics are
employed, for nearest neighbor queries and quantifying similarity between generated and ground
truth sets.
Hausdorff distance The Hausdorff distance (HD) is employed as a measure of computing the
maximal discrepancy between two point clouds. Let A, B ⊂R3 denote sets of points sampled
22
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
==PAGE:33==
from two point clouds. The one-sided (or directed) Hausdorff distance is then:
dH(A →B) = sup
x∈A
inf
y∈B ∥x −y∥p
(6.7)
Diverging slightly from the common definition by allowing a chosen p-norm ∥·∥p. This extends
to the general definition of the Hausdorff distance [54]:
dH(A, B) = max{ d(A →B), d(B →A) }
(6.8)
Intuitively, the Hausdorff Distance represents the worst-case minimal distance between nearest
neighbors in the two sets.
A large HD value might therefore indicate substantial geometric
discrepancy or presence of outliers in either set. In this report, HD is mostly reported using the
L2-norm (p = 2), whilst utilizing the L1-norm (p = 1) in certain experiments when appropriate.
Chamfer distance The Chamfer distance (CD) gives a measure of the average discrepancy
between two sets of points A, B. It is calculated as the mean of squared Euclidean distances
between nearest neighbors in two sets. In this work, a generalized version of CD is adapted
by allowing an arbitrary norm for evaluating the distance between two point clouds [55]. The
one-sided CD from A to B is defined as:
dCD(A →B) = 1
|A|
X
x∈A
min
y∈B ∥x −y∥2
p
(6.9)
Which extends to the more conventional definition of the Chamfer distance:
dCD(A, B) = dCD(A →B) + dCD(B →A)
(6.10)
CD computes the mean pointwise divergence between the two sets, and is particularly effective in
detecting whether a general offset between prediction and ground truth is present, in a squared
error sense. As such, CD complements HD well. Similarly to HD, CD scores are evaluated using
L1 and L2 norms in this work, depending on context.
Cosine distance Cosine Distance is employed in order to measure similarity in a feature space.
Let a, b ∈RN. The cosine distance is then:
dcos(a, b) = 1 −cos(θ) = 1 −
a · b
|a| · |b|
(6.11)
where cos(θ) denotes the cosine of the angle between a and b. If a||b the distance is 0; if a ⊥b
it is 1, and if a = −b it is 2. It is employed to compare flattened latent features.
6.6.2
Generative Mesh Metrics
In order to evaluate the quality and diversity of generated meshes systematically, three commonly
used metrics for mesh generation are utilized. All metrics are based on CD measured on point
clouds sampled from a surface mesh. For each mesh evaluated, 4096 points are randomly sampled
from each mesh for carrying out the comparisons.
Coverage (COV): In order to measure the diversity of the generated meshes, coverage is
computed as compared to ground truth sets. Let A denote a set of point clouds sampled from
mesh surfaces present in Dgt of cardinality N with A = {Xi}i=N
i=1 . Likewise, let Dgen be the
generated data set, and let B denote the set of sampled point clouds B = {Yi}i=M
i=1 . Coverage is
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
23
==PAGE:34==
then calculated by checking which nearest neighbor in A each generated sample Yi is assigned
to using a nearest neighbor search. For each sample Yj ∈B let its nearest neighbor in A be:
NND1(Yj) = arg min
i
dCD(Yj, Xi)
(6.12)
Then, the coverage is the fraction of indices in A which are the nearest neighbor of at least one
sample in B:
COV = 1
N
N
X
i=1
1[i ∈{NND1(Yj) = i)|j = 1, ..., M}]
(6.13)
where 1(·) is an indicator function. In words, the coverage measures the fraction of ground-truth
samples A which have been matched at least once with a generated sample in B as measured
by the neighborhood function, and thus gives a measure of how well generated samples cover
the diversity of the ground truth set [56]. A high coverage is considered better. Note that if
M ≤N, coverage is bounded as COV ≤M
N . A visual interpretation of coverage is presented in
Figure 6.7.
Figure 6.7: A visualization of the coverage metric. A mapping is made from each sample point in Dgen to
its nearest ground truth neighbor as measured by CD, giving one a measure of how well the diversity in Dgt is
covered. In the particular example, the coverage is COV = 5
7.
Minimum Matching Distance (MMD): Coverage allows matches between two distant sam-
ples. As a result, MMD is used to measure how close generated samples B are to samples in
A. In order to do so, the neighbourhood function NNDB(Xi) = arg minj dCD(Xi, Yj) is used to
match every ground truth sample to a single generated sample. MMD then reports the mean of
the minimal distance achieved dCD(Xi, Yj):
MMD = 1
N
N
X
i=1
dCD
 Xi, YNNDB(Xi)

(6.14)
Thus, MMD may be considered a fidelity-metric, quantifying the average quality of generated
meshes. Lower values indicate higher sample quality and high coverage [57]. Note, that the
asymmetry of MMD allows two interpretations; if the assignment is carried out in the other
direction by finding the nearest neighbor in A for each sample in B (using NNDA(Yi)), the cor-
responding metric is denoted MMDsmp. This variant measures generated sample fidelity without
penalizing undercoverage, and thus yields a measure of generated sample plausibility. Lower val-
ues indicate high fidelity, while too low values indicate sample memorization. A visualization of
MMD is presented in Figure 6.8.
24
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
==PAGE:35==
GEN
dk
GT
GT
di
dj
Figure 6.8: An illustration of MMD using a single ”animal” class. For each ground truth sample Xi, the nearest
neighbor in the generated set (middle circle) is assigned using NNDB(Xi) on the two-sided pair-wise Chamfer
distances dCD(Xi, Yj). In the illustration, di < dj < dk, and MMD is reported as a mean over all the distances.
MMDsmp is carried out using NNDA(Yi), and as such would assign the left most generated animal to the closest
”bird” sample (left), and the two right generated animals to the right ground-truth ”dog” class. As such, MMDsmp
will often be lower than MMD, just as in this case, as distances dj and dk would never be matched.
1-Nearest-Neighbor Accuracy (1-NNA): The goal of generative modeling is to generate
data which is indistinguishable from ground-truth data. A simple but informative proxy metric
is 1-NNA. It quantifies how distinguishable Dgen is from Dgt. In order to do so, we assign each
sample in C = A ∪B a class-label corresponding to the dataset a sample is from. Let NC(D)
denote the nearest neighbor of sample D ∈C (excluding D itself) based on CD. Then, the
1-NNA score is computed as:
1-NNA(B, A) =
1
|B| + |A|
 X
Y ∈B
1 [NC(Y ) ∈B] +
X
X∈A
1 [NC(X) ∈A]
!
(6.15)
The optimal generative model as measured by 1-NNA would achieve a classification accuracy
of 0.5, corresponding to the classifier randomly guessing, i.e. having no information present
for classification [16]. If a method perfectly reproduces ground-truth samples, this would also
produce the optimal 1-NNA score, and thus 1-NNA may not be used in isolation. A visualization
of 1-NNA scoring is presented in Figure 6.9. For all 1-NNA comparisons, if |A| ̸= |B|, the larger
dataset is randomly subsampled with no replacement in order to match the size of the smaller
set (i.e. a class-balance of 1:1 is applied). This sampling is repeated over 10 independent trials,
and the average 1-NNA score is reported.
6.6.3
Generative Octree Metrics
In cases where the modeling interest lies in generating dual octree graphs rather than meshes,
the evaluation of generative performance requires metrics tailored to the discrete nature of octree
graphs. This is challenging, as the graphs more often than not differ in the number of nodes
and edges, making direct comparison non-trivial.
A potential solution is to map the graph-based problem into continuous space by uniformly
sampling, for example, 50 points within each octree node, thereby generating pseudo point
clouds. Subsequently, point cloud-based metrics, such as those discussed in the previous sub-
section, could be applied. However, in practice, this approach was found to be unstable during
validation: metrics exhibited large variance, and results were sensitive to the random sampling
procedure, even when multiple sampling rounds were carried out for the same sets of octrees.
This indicates that the stochasticity in the sampling procedure introduces significant noise,
limiting the reliability of point cloud-based evaluations for dual octree graphs.
Instead, a graph-centric approach is proposed, leveraging the discrete structure of the dual octree
graph at a specific resolution. Specifically, a depth 6 dual octree graph T d
6 may be represented
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
25
==PAGE:36==
Figure 6.9: Simulations which aid the interpretation of 1-NNA. (Upper left): 1-NNA of 1.0, clearly showing that
the distributions of Dgen and Dgt are disjoint. (Upper right): a 1-NNA score of 0.68 indicates that some generated
samples lie closely to ground truth samples. (Lower left): An example with 1-NNA of 0.5, which implies that
Dgen and Dgt are indiscernible by the classifier. (Lower right): a simulation exhibiting 1-NNA of 0, indicating
neighbors of meshes in a set with p = 1 have nearest neighbors in the complementary set.
by its dense depth 4 split matrix S, which encodes the split/no-split status of each node at the
dense depth and up to two levels above implicitly (see Section 6.4).
Jaccard Index
In order to evaluate similarity between two split matrices S1 and S2, binary labels 0/1 are
assigned to indicate no-split/split-status. Subsequently, the Jaccard Index (JI, also commonly
referred to as the Intersection over Union) is computed between the flattened binarized split
signals:
JI(S1, S2) = |S1 ∩S2|
|S1 ∪S2|
(6.16)
The Jaccard Index only considers positions where at least one of the split matrices has an active
node, and agreeing inactive nodes present in both matrices are not included in the numerator or
denominator. As a result, the Jaccard Index is well suited for sparse data, where the presence
of split is deemed more informative than the absence of a split. JI(S1, S2) ∈[0; 1], where a
high value indicates high similarity. In practice, for split matrices, this may be evaluated using
logical operations.
Asymmetric Jaccard Index
A limitation of the standard JI arises when comparing sets with significantly different numbers
of active split nodes, or if one set is contained within another.
In these cases, the JI may
26
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
==PAGE:37==
become artificially low, indicating split novelty in a generative context. When these conditions
are suspected, an asymmetrically normalized Jaccard Index is used, by evaluating the overlap
(intersection) and only dividing by the set size of the set which is suspected to be contained in
the other set. Suppose that S1 is expected contained within S2. Then, the asymmetric JI is
defined as:
JIa(S1, S2) = |S1 ∩S2|
|N1|
(6.17)
where N1 is the number of active nodes present in S1. This can be interpreted as the fraction
of active nodes in S1 also contained within S2, and as such, a large score indicates containment
and may be used to diagnose subset reproduction. When used as a generative metric, lower
scores indicate novelty.
Maximum Matching Overlap (MMO)
A JI-inspired variant of MMD is additionally introduced, serving as a heuristic for set as-
signment for split signals.
Here, a sample Sj is matched to another sample Si when j =
arg maxj JI(Si, Sj). This assignment heuristic will be referred to as Maximum Matching Over-
lap (MMO). An asymmetric variant (using 6.17) will also be utilized when appropriate and
denoted AMMO.
Iterative Closest Point
The Jaccard Index, while useful for structural comparison, is inherently limited by its lack of
invariance to rigid transformations, which a generative model may learn. In order to address
this limitation, Iterative Closest Point (ICP) is employed to investigate model overfitting. The
goal of the ICP procedure is to estimate the optimal rigid transformation which aligns one
point cloud to another; in our case aligning generated structures with reference ground truth
samples, performed using an euclidean L2 objective, minimizing point wise distances between
corresponding points.
Since ICP operates on continuous point clouds, discrete octree node
coordinates are transformed into fuzzy pseudo-point clouds. For each active node, points are
sampled using a Gaussian distribution centered in the node centre with small variance. This
process approximates the original spatial distribution while enabling continuous optimization.
As the number of nodes varies, points are sampled uniformly distributed across nodes such that
the point cloud contains N = 4096 points in total, irrespective of the number of active splits.
ICP is also applied directly on point clouds sampled from generated meshes in order to determine
the quality of generated conditional signals as compared to ground truth conditioning signals.
In this case, N = 4096 are used.
ICP is a heuristic, and thus is prone to converging to local optima. As a result, convergence
is monitored using (1) distance metrics pre- and post-alignment, (2) the optimization cost, and
(3) visual inspection of a random sample of optimized alignments.
6.6.4
Anatomical Metrics
Although the generated meshes may yield diverse and novel features as compared to the training
data, it is essential that samples remain anatomically plausible. A series of metrics are introduced
in order to quantify the anatomical plausibility. Common to all but the last metric, is that they
are used to compare feature distributions between ground truth and generated data sets.
Bounding box metrics The bounds of the bounding boxes are recorded for generated meshes
and octrees. From these, the bounding box volume is computed, giving a coarse measure of
the extent of an organ. In addition, all side lengths and the xy-, xz- and yz-plane areas are
recorded.
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
27
==PAGE:38==
Number of components, nc: Measures the number of unconnected components that is gen-
erated by the model. Output will only be valid when nc = 1. nc is in practice measured using
graph algorithms for split signals and using a VTK connectivity filter for meshes.
Volume For octrees, volumes may be computed by multiplying the the number of leaf nodes in
every depth with their resolution. For meshes, volumes are calculated using voxelization with a
fixed spacing of 1.00 · 10−3.
Area Surface areas are estimated using VTK. The pipeline starts out by cleaning the mesh for
artifacts followed by triangulation. Only the largest connected component is extracted using a
connectivity filter to discard noise or isolated components. Holes in the mesh are then filled in
order to ensure a watertight mesh. Subsequently area is evaluated on the processed mesh.
Volumetric eﬀiciency, VE: The volumetric eﬀiciency VE quantifies how eﬀiciently the total
available (bounding box) volume VB is utilized by an organ occupying a volume of Vo. VE is
calculated as:
VE = VB
Vo
(6.18)
True sphericity index, Ψ: This metric evaluates how closely the shape of an object resembles a
perfect sphere. It is estimated using the ratio between the nominal surface area Ssphere (denoting
the surface area of a sphere with equal volume as the reference object) and the true surface area
of an object So [58]:
Ψ = Ssphere
So
=
3p
36πV 2
o
So
(6.19)
A perfect sphere achieves Ψ = 1 and generally Ψ ∈(0, 1].
Elongation, ϵd: Measures the maximal geodesic distance from a reference point x ∈M to
any point y ∈M on the mesh surface M. In practice, the geodesic distance is measured using
Dijkstra’s shortest path algorithm. Formally:
ϵd =
max
y∈M\{x} dgeo(x, y)
(6.20)
Elongation can be used for LCA evaluations, where x is the aorta root coordinate, thus giving a
measure of how stretched the artery tree is. Likewise it is relevant for myocardia for downstream
metrics, such as measuring the tortuosity. In practice, the reference point x is initialized at the
aorta root position, and a point-locator is used to map it to the mesh surface, and ϵd is calculated.
The found y is then either the top-point or bottom point of the mesh. A second iteration is
then using a re-assignment x = y, thus identifying the second point y. The maximal found
geodesic distance is then reported, and x and y are saved for downstream tasks. This heuristic
is validated by manual inspection on a random subset and found outlier distances, totaling
N = 45 samples.
Tortuosity, τg: Is closely related to elongation, and estimates the curvature of an object,
captured by the ratio between the geodesic- and Euclidean distance between two points x and
y:
τg(x, y) = dgeo(x, y)
∥x −y∥2
(6.21)
28
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
==PAGE:39==
This measure is relevant when computing the curvature of coronary arteries, where the maximal
distance between the root and a branch endpoint replace x and y.
τg = dgeo(x, y)
∥x −y∥2
|∀y∈Y \x max{dgeo(x, y)}
(6.22)
Wall thickness: Myocardial wall thickness, a key marker of pathology, is quantified using
raycasting. For each mesh, points are sampled on the surface alongside their surface normals
with a constant spacing factor. The orientation of the normals allows classification of whether
a point belongs to the inner or outer myocardium wall. For each point in the inner myocardium
wall set, a ray is cast in the direction of the corresponding outward facing normal using a small
offset, and the mesh intersection with the outer wall is measured, providing an approximation
of the myocardium L2 thickness as measured orthogonally on the inner wall point set. A mean
across all measurements is reported. A visualization of the process may be inspected in Appendix
B.2.
Principal axes directions: Are measured by sampling a point cloud from a mesh using
N = 1.50 · 103 points. Point cloud coordinates are normalized and scaled, and PCA is then
estimated on the point cloud matrix. For myocardia, the first principal component w(1) ∈R3
is found empirically to be well-aligned with the long-axis of the myocardium, thus allowing
definition of relative up and down directions and allowing height measurements. The azimuthal
angle ϕ(w(1)) and the elevation θ(w(1)) of the first principal component are calculated as:
ϕ(w(1)) = arctan2 
w(1)
2 , w(1)
1

θ(w(1)) = arccos
 
w(1)
3
w(1)
2
!
and give an estimation of the orientation of the long axis of the myocardium.
Hole-detection: A ray-casting pipeline allows recording of rays which do not intersect the
mesh surface in any given direction, which may be used as a measure of mesh holes for spherical
objects. In practice this is only done for myocardia which are expected to have a hole at the
basis (LVOT and left ventricular ostium, LVO) and in many cases, both for the ground-truth
dataset and generated samples, contain anatomically implausible holes at the apex.
In order to detect holes, it is assumed that w(1) roughly points along the longitudinal axis,
which is verified using 30 samples. After estimating principal components we ensure correct
orientation of the coordinate system by computing dot-products to a reference ”up”-direction
and flipping coordinates if w(1) · vref < 0.
Now, letting R be the matrix where each row is a ray-direction of set of N = 20.0·103 rays on a
Fibonacci lattice, the first principal component score t = R·w(1) is calculated. Rays with ti ≤0
are classified as downward-pointing, while rays with ti > 0 are classified as upward-pointing.
This classification allows us to distinguish between the anatomically plausible holes (LVOT and
LVO) and potential invalid holes at the apex. The detecting scheme is visualized in Figure 6.10.
Flux-based Monte Carlo Integration for hole area estimation: The rays escaping from
potential holes may be regarded as a net flux outwards through the surface covering the hole.
As a result, we may approximate the area of the holes using a flux-formulation. To do so, we
employ Monte Carlo integration as follows.
Consider N rays cast from a Fibonacci lattice. At any radius r, the area covered by the sphere
of emission is given by:
A = 4πr2
(6.23)
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
29
==PAGE:40==
Consequently, each ray contributes approximately the same fraction to the total sphere surface
area [59]:
∆A = A
N = 4πr2
N
(6.24)
Under the simplifying assumption that the radius to the hole is constant per mesh.
Thus, if the number of missed rays Nm in a hemispheric direction, i.e. rays that do not intersect
the mesh, are recorded, the area covered by holes may be approximated as:
Aholes ≈Nm∆A = Nm
4πr2
N
(6.25)
But this requires a method to approximate the radius rhole.
To do so, a simplifying assumption is used: the Euclidean distance to the top hole is assumed
equal to the Euclidean distance to the top point maximizing the geodesic distance along the
mesh, ie. r = arg max(x,y) dgeo(x, y). Thus, the top-bottom assignment of x, y is based on the
coordinates themselves.
In practice, we use N = 15.0 · 103. While this provides a reasonable estimate, increasing N
would improve the accuracy of the estimation by reducing the variance of the estimator while
also increasing the uniformity of the area covered by each Fibonacci lattice.
An example of the complete hole estimation pipeline is showcased in Figure 6.10.
1.
4.
2.
3.
PC1
Nm, down
Figure 6.10: PCA and ray-casting in a step-by-step fashion. 1) Principal axis identification using point clouds.
All principal components are aligned using a reference ”up”-direction using PC1 (w(1)).
2) Ray-casting and
hemispheric index selection using found ”up” principal direction. 3) Hemispheric hole-detection and registration
of number of intersecting and non-intersecting rays.
4) Hole areas are approximated using the Monte Carlo
estimator from Eq. 6.25 by considering the number of escaped rays (blue) and the number of contained rays
(yellow) for the hemisphere.
30
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
==PAGE:41==
7
VAE Results
In the ensuing result sections, results for the VAE, LDM, signal and FiLM diffusion pipelines
are presented. Results are analyzed and discussed on a per-experiment basis when relevant.
In Chapter 9, a unifying discussion about the whole methodology and results is presented.
All models are trained on a single NVIDIA Tesla H100-PCIE with 80GB memory, generously
provided by Technical University of Denmark [60]. This chapter solely covers VAE experiments,
whilst the succeeding chapter is dedicated to experiments conducted on diffusion architectures.
Training a VAE model posed significant challenges, requiring extensive effort to reason about
latent feature space. This was largely caused by the dual-octree approach, which compromises of
rare, convoluted graph operations. Experiments were primarily conducted using the refined LCA
dataset due to empirical findings. Initial experiments employed the raw ImageCAS dataset, pre-
processed using center alignment, yet the diﬀiculty of modeling such complex sparse structures –
in addition to the inherent data-quality predicament of ImageCAS – made it necessary to substi-
tute it with the refined artery dataset described in Section 4.0.1; higher quality reconstructions
ensued despite the smaller dataset.
7.0.1
A well-Structured Latent Space
A well-structured latent space is crucial for building an effective diffusion pipeline. Aside from
loss- and accuracy curves, more sophisticated measures are necessary to guide model selection
toward converging on a VAE with a well structured latent space. Several criteria were developed
in order to qualitatively investigate whether the found latent space parametrization adheres to
a predefined set of measurable characteristics:
1. Similar/dissimilar samples in mesh-space, as measured by simple features, assume a similar
mapping in latent space,
2. Location of samples in latent space should encode interpretable organ features systemati-
cally,
3. The posterior has not collapsed onto the prior distribution, ie. information is encoded by
the encoder,
4. Moving along trajectories in the latent space has continuous influence on decoded meshes.
Where sample location in latent space is either represented as inter-related distances, using the
cosine distance dcos as measure, or by its 2D point location when using dimensionality-reduction
techniques, employing either PCA, t-SNE or UMAP to aid analysis. The first characteristic is
measured by employing a Nearest-Furthest-Neighbor (NFN) criterion in latent space, identifying
the 10 closest- and furthest samples in latent space as measured by dcos, before recording pairwise
HD and directed CD for the ground-truth meshes to discover distance discrepancies between
feature domains. Whereas directed CD is inherently asymmetric, closest mapped samples are
expected to produce approximately symmetric output given their similarities in latent space,
discriminated by:
dCD(A→B)
dCD(B→A) ≈1. Neighbour visualization is further employed to qualitatively
determine if the neighborhood classification is related to shape variations, or whether it encodes
extraneous information such as size-variation. The second characteristic is measured using the
aforementioned dimensionality-reduction techniques, investigating whether cluster formations
are assumed in latent space, as inferred by neighboring feature correlations. Cluster formations
are scrutinized visually.
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
31
==PAGE:42==
The third characteristic is diagnosed by leveraging the latent space’ dense dual-octree graph
representation, giving rise to an intuitive interpretation of latent features. Each index in latent
space is found to encode aggregated information for a specific node in the coarse domain, which
propagates through to the finer output mesh domain, essentially encoding
1
23·d of the total
features of the spanned volume. Naïvely computing the histogram over all encoded features was
therefore found to be a red herring within the working domain, as a likely conclusion would be,
that the latent codes display posterior collapse, observed through a collapse onto the gaussian
prior N(0, 1). It was discovered, that nodes that compute empty space assume this property,
and as the vast majority of the volume is empty, only a small subset of nodes truly express
encoded information. An important discovery was to inspect the target subset rather than the
whole code population. As a means of obtaining the target subset, KL-divergence as compared
to a multivariate prior across all code dimensions was employed.
Furthermore, to diagnose
whether individual latent code dimensions have collapsed, a similar approach was used using
channel-wise KL-divergence as compared to a univariate prior, accompanied by population-wide
mean µi and standard deviations σi over each dimension.
The fourth property is measured using a series of latent interpolations, with the goal of estab-
lishing domain structure. The procedure utilizes a source Z0 and target Z1 posterior sample,
making fixed step-wise linear adjustments to compute decoded meshes of intermediate samples
used for visual inspection. Intermediate codes are computed using the following formula:
ˆZ = Z0 · (1 −α) + Z1 · α
(7.1)
whereby α ∈[0, 1] denotes the currently evaluated interpolant. More comprehensive investi-
gation was made by probing the neighbourhood of a single latent code, but this yielded no
significant findings. A more thorough overview of applied methods for all discussed character-
istics can be found in Appendix C.
For later reference, a set of configuration variables is defined, used to guide model selection:
Cin, the number of input channels following the initial convolution; Nr, the number of residual-
block layers per encoder/decoder stage; |B|, the batch size of the experiment; β, the assumed
KL-divergence weight for a particular model; and λ, weight decay (L2-regularization) parameter.
7.1
LCA VAE Results
Extensive experimentation was conducted with the purpose of optimizing LCA reconstruction.
The LCA modeling task is of much greater complexity comparatively to the remaining spher-
ical classes, meaning excessive exertion to optimize the LCA task was conducted under the
assumption, that the best performing model would be able to generalize to any of the sub-
sequent domains. For this reason, this section also inherits general findings throughout VAE
experimentation.
The sparsity of the class further facilitates fast model training, taking about 1 hour when using
300 epochs. The optimization problem is therefore not heavily obstructed by computational
constraints, creating favorable conditions for in-depth tuning. Experimentation revealed that
a small model (S) with Cin = 16 in channels and Nr = 1 residual blocks consisting of only
1.3M parameters achieved the best performance over the LCA dataset. Since point-based align-
ment was only introduced late in experimentation, the best model performance was achieved
using centre-aligned pre-processing. Comparing to the best discovered dual artery branch VAE,
trained on raw ImageCAS data, which consisted of 5.1M parameters, the model sizes differ
significantly showcasing the disparity in modeling diﬀiculty.
Overall, models began overfitting quite early (200 epochs) with smaller models achieving favor-
able performances wrt. training curves. Examples of different model performances are depicted
32
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
==PAGE:43==
0
1
2
log ( )
10
5
0
log (
Octree)
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Epoch
4
2
0
log (
SDF)
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Epoch
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
log (
Grad)
Layer
4
5
6
7
Complete
Model
L
S
Figure 7.1: The training loss curves for the left artery branch VAE as a function of training epochs, exemplified
using a small (S) model with Cin = 16, NR = 1 and a large (L) model with Cin = 32, NR = 3. Note that all y-axes
are log-transformed. Upper row: The VAE training objective L (left) and octree loss Loctree (right). Lower row:
the SDF-loss LSDF (left) and gradient-loss Lgrad (right). The KL-loss term has been omitted in figures but also
influences L.
in Figures 7.1 and 7.2. Importantly, the convergence properties of the two model complexi-
ties exemplify general observed behavior for the setup. For later reference, the models will be
referred to as MV,S and MV,L respectively. Regarding latent examination, result figures over
the best performing model are scattered throughout the section and are scrutinized throughout
Section 7.1.1.
7.1.1
Analysis
Examining the figures, MV,S exhibits stable convergence whilst MV,L produces noticeable spikes
during training across all losses, which was a consistent trend for complex models. The spike
patterns were seemingly random, possibly expressing unstable gradients due to mini-batching
and a large model fitting capacity. The collected loss objective indicates overfitting for both
models, most evidently so for MV,L. The sole contributor for this property can be observed
to be the octree loss Loctree, as neither the SDF loss LSDF nor the gradient loss Lgrad assume
any overfitting tendencies. The KL loss LKL doesn’t have any effect either, as it converges to a
constant in both models within 75 epochs.
Loctree were found to converge in a layer-wise manner, with denser layers (e.g. dense-depth
d=4) converging faster than finer ones (e.g. d=5). Intuitively this behavior is well-founded, as a
correct prediction for d=4 is necessary to compute accurate predictions for finer layers. Similarly,
as observed in the figures, the octree prediction task complexity increases throughout the layers,
producing near-perfect dense layer accuracies. This property is consistent for all layer-wise losses
(Loctree, LSDF and Lgrad). Intriguingly, MV,L exhibits better dense-layer performance for all
layer-wise losses, overtaking MV,S at roughly 100 epochs. Note, these losses are vanishingly
small.
Loctree overfitting was found not to hinder generalization greatly, with validation reconstruction
accuracies improving post occurrence for a large number of epochs. This is likely due to Loctree
being based on a cross-entropy loss over splitting logits, that quantifies adherence to a hard
classification, for which slight under-confidence does not entail imprecise node-splitting status
output. This is particularly demonstrated by the LSDF and Lgrad validation curves (Figure 7.2),
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
33
==PAGE:44==
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
log ( )
10
5
0
log (
Octree)
50
100
150
200
250
300
Epoch
5
4
3
2
1
log (
SDF)
50
100
150
200
250
300
Epoch
2.0
1.5
log (
Grad)
Layer
4
5
6
7
Complete
Model
L
S
Figure 7.2: The validation loss curves for the left artery branch VAE as a function of validation epochs (20 to
300), examplified using a small (S) model with Cin = 16, NR = 1 and a large (L) model with Cin = 32, NR = 2.
Note that all y-axes are log-transformed. Upper row: The VAE training objective L (left) and octree loss Loctree
(right). Lower row: the SDF-loss LSDF (left) and gradient-loss Lgrad (right). Note that the KL-loss term has
been omitted in figures but also influences L.
which continue to improve, suggesting that the model still produces splits accurate enough to
infer correct shape geometry.
This reveals an important observation – VAE losses are inherently vague, giving no clear in-
dication of model overfitting. On this basis, better estimates of guiding model selection were
found to be reconstruction accuracy, as well as the qualitative measures described in the pre-
vious section, revealing better convergence for smaller models (see Appendix C.4). Note, losses
do serve some purpose, as experimentation suggested clear tendencies of a performance plateau
upon overfitting. It was never possible to produce a model which didn’t overfit the training data
within 300 epochs, which is deemed to be caused by the relatively low number of samples for
a class with high variability. A random subset is sampled from each point cloud during train-
ing, which adds some regularization, but it could likely be that after 300 epochs, most possible
permutations of the input point clouds may be exhausted, producing model memorization.
The observed LKL loss curves are indicative of the general pattern observed during model fit-
ting. As explained in the previous section, β schedules were varied extensively to help alleviate
concerns of posterior collapse, with little effect wrt. a vanishing LKL term, and no easily inter-
pretable trend in best achieved validation scores. Qualitative measures and inspecting related
literature were hence found to be the only valuable resources to diagnose this properly. Ex-
periments showed, that a linear/monotonous KL-schedule was inappropriate, whereas a cyclical
KL-schedule was beneficial. The optimal KL-weighting scheme was found to be a cyclical KL-
schedule with β=0.01 and T=4, on the primary basis of qualitative measures depicted in the
ensuing section.
Latent Space Analysis
The following analysis is based on results obtained from the best performing LCA model trained
on centre-aligned LCAs and examines the methods presented in Section 7 in a sequential manner.
Examining the Nearest-Furthest-Neighbour (NFN) results presented in Table 7.1, nearest neigh-
bors (NNs) in latent space are similarly revealed to be much closer in mesh space than corre-
sponding furthest neighbours (FNs), as depicted by the mean-, minimum- and maximum CD
34
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
==PAGE:45==
and HD distance values. Interestingly, the CD ratio behaves more as expected for FNs in ex-
treme cases (min and max), yet on average behaves more as expected for NNs. Overall, the
model passes the NFN criterion. Examples of decoded decoded NNs and FNs can be depicted
in figure 7.3 and 7.4.
Statistic
HD
CDa
CDb
CDa/CDb
NN Mean
10.2
0.832
0.947
1.36
NN Min
7.07
0.258
0.286
0.184
NN Max
16.0
1.46
2.35
5.11
FN Mean
30.3
21.30
15.70
1.49
FN Min
24.6
17.80
8.27
0.857
FN Max
36.6
26.70
24.20
2.31
Table 7.1: Validation statistics for the nearest neigh-
bor (NN) and furthest neighbor (FN) criteria eval-
uated on the ground truth meshes.
CDa indicates
dCD(A →B) whereas CDb is the other direction.
Distances are measured using p = 2.
HD reported
in 10−2, CD reported in 10−3.
Investigating the ground truth meshes of NNs
and FNs, it is very clear, that the latent space
exhibits less structure than expected. NNs are
indeed quite similar, especially when consider-
ing (1) bounding box sizes, (2) mesh volume,
(3) endpoints, and (4) matching ostium loca-
tions.
What is apparent however, is they de-
viate wrt. their number of branches, as depicted
from the leftmost NN artery pair, and there is
an overreliance on ostium/endpoint location, as
seen in the rightmost NN pair. FN meshes exac-
erbate these effects. Inspecting the arteries qual-
itatively, it becomes apparent that these differ-
ences primarily reflect extraneous information,
expressing size difference as well as spatial dispersion. This is especially evident for the right-
most pair in Figure 7.4, showing two topologically similar arteries which qualitatively only
diverge wrt. size, which provokes the spatial dispersion to occur due to centre alignment.
Figure 7.3: The three nearest training set neighbors in latent space for the trained model. The trees are very
similar in size, have the same radial distance to the origin, and share some topology regarding the largest branch
patterns and orgin point but differ in the number of branching points.
Inspecting latent encoding projections over Dtrain and Dval in Figure 7.5, this behavior can
similarly be discerned, especially evident when inspecting PCA and UMAP dimensionality re-
ductions which indicate a linear relationship over bounding box volume in the reduced basis.
The first two principle components explain about 25% of the variance, which is substantial
compared to results achieved over other classes, indicating that the latent space may be low
dimensional. These considerations, paired with the NN and FN criterion suggest that the latent
space is dominated by scale and radial distance rather than topology.
Although the model seems to produce an ill-behaved latent space, Figure 7.6 shows that all latent
dimensions still encode information individually, as measured by evaluating the KL divergence
between each latent dimension and a 1D prior, across the complete training dataset, thus pointing
against posterior collapse.
Inspecting the histograms, mean values are found to be mainly constrained between µi∈[−2.5, 2.5]
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
35
==PAGE:46==
Figure 7.4:
The first, second and third furthest latent neighbors in the training set for the trained model.
Rightmost: a very common furthest neighbor matching for other trained models. It seems that the matching is
dominated by bounding box volume size and radial distance to the origin rather than to topological features.
100
0
100
PC1
50
0
50
100
PC2
6
8
10
12
UMAP1
4
6
8
10
UMAP2
100
0
100
TSNE1
100
0
100
TSNE2
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
Bounding box volume
Figure 7.5: PCA, UMAP and t-SNE projections over LCA encodings for the training and validation set, coloured
by bounding box volume. PCA and UMAP are trained on train encodings. Clear structure is found in the PCA
and UMAP projections, as bounding box volume seems almost linear in the dimensionality reductions. PCA
explained variance is 25%.
with standard deviations σi<0.3 being very small, indicating that the 1D posteriors p(zi,j) is
very different from the prior N(0, 1), but with low variance. Examining the lower pane over
3D DKL, observable spikes are scattered throughout. A key insight was discovered upon this
visualization, allowing a better conceptual understanding of the latent space – detected spikes
are revealed to be either in-, or adjacent to object presence. Empty space was similarly found
to be encoded with a posterior closer to the prior, or collapsing onto the prior when β is large.
Information encoded in nodes with large DKL are therefore shown to coarsely encode organ
placement. This is visualized per example in 7.6, showing a seemingly coherent coarse represen-
tation of a myocardium, exclusively constructed by visualizing octree nodes over a given mean
DKL threshold TKL.
This indicates that the KL divergence in the latent space offers a spatially sparse and structurally
meaningful signal by coarsely but effectively encoding object presence on a per-node basis. This
suggests that the latent dimensions not only compress information in a hardly interpretable way,
but encode a coarse blueprint of mesh geometry directly into each node, and each latent node
may be interpreted considering it’s voxel coordinates, which could prove a beneficial property
for interpretable generative pipelines.
Evidence for the hypothesis was further supported by forwarding only two samples and recording
their KL-divergences, finding that spikes appear approximately in the same nodes, diverging only
by their posterior values. Finally, performing latent interpolations over the masked >TKL nodes
was fascinatingly found to produce superior interpolation results than when interpolating over
all nodes, as shapes grow more continuously. The likely cause for this is that interpolation is
36
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
==PAGE:47==
(i)
(ii)
Figure 7.6: (left upper pane) Histograms of the parameters for the posterior distribution and the corresponding
distribution of KL-divergences when comparing to a univariate standard Gaussian prior zi ∼N(0, 1). Posterior
parameters are collected across the complete training set. Each row corresponds to a single latent dimension and
the columns respectively represent mean µi of µ, standard deviation σi of σ and DKL as compared to a 1D prior.
(left lower pane) Average per-node DKL between the predicted posterior distribution and the 3D Gaussian prior
across the complete training set. Right panes: the concept of KL thresholding, exemplified using results from a
myocardium VAE posteriors. (i): Mesh visualization of the octree found by masking out nodes with an average
per-node KL-divergences less than TKL = 2 for a myocardium VAE yields an octree latent representation of a
myocardium. (ii): The same procedure for a single sample.
conducted over a more meaningful direction in latent space, which is not dominated by empty
space noise.
KL-weighting is quite leniently imposed for the model, β=0.01, with higher values of β inserting
further intuition on latent space structure. As seen in Appendix D.3, when masking over a
DKL threshold TKL, values beneath the threshold are seen to collapse onto the prior N(0, 1),
whilst nodes over the threshold express distributions that have largely degenerated to a Dirac
delta distribution, consisting of a larger mean with vanishingly small standard-deviations. This
illustrates that empty nodes are represented as white gaussian noise, while object-nodes are
almost encoded deterministically.
As a final illustration of an ill-behaved latent space, latent interpolations between two nearest-
neighbor latent codes are depicted in Figure 7.7.
Looking at the top branch across interpolants from left to right, it varies very slowly, suddenly
breaks and quickly locks onto the branch of the right-most sample, indicating that linear latent
traversal is no trivial task. The ”locking” on behavior is symptomatic of the determinism of
latent encodings. Per latent dimension traversals showed inequal influence on the output meshes,
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
37
==PAGE:48==
 = 0.00
 = 0.25
 = 0.50
 = 0.75
 = 1.00
Figure 7.7: Decoded meshes when walking in latent space from one sample z0 (α = 0) to another z1 (α = 1).
Interpolations suddenly become invalid for α ≈0.5, while else being very static.
but else results were similar.
7.1.2
Discussion
Overall, VAE results were discouraging when trained using LCA as input. Although the model
loss-curves seemed non-pathological and reconstructions were reasonable, the latent space ulti-
mately appeared poorly structured, as qualitative measures showed. Without a well-behaved
latent space, the challenge of the diffusion model becomes increasing more complex, and similarly
so for the end-goal of creating a coherent generative model.
Much of the concern is believed to derive from pre-processing choices.
The LCA data was
centre-aligned, which isn’t well-suited for LCA due to their geometric sparsity, meaning (1)
most latent nodes will encode blank space and (2) very few samples of the training set will
have significant overlaps due to spatial dispersion produced by slightly dissimilar bounding box
sizes. Encoding topological features in such a latent space is therefore presumably ineﬀicient.
Observed overfitting is a likely consequence from this, as the decoder may be able to reconstruct
the input simply by learning the radial distance of the artery tree to the origin. Thus it was
found, that point-alignment was more applicable for LCA data, making the modeling task easier
by aligning arteries in the aorta root. Subsequently discussed experiments including LCA are
therefore performed using root-aligned pre-processing for LCA (see section 6.1). In general, this
highlights the importance of thorough consideration of data pre-processing choices.
A key insight for characterizing a well-behaved latent space over an octree data structure was to
consider DKL per node. Without this consideration, premature conclusions of posterior collapse
are probable, leading to training with very small values of β, which may consequently worsen
the latent space structure. The argument follows that one can at any point lower β arbitrarily
much, and thus as a natural consequence of the objective function in Equation 5.5 get increased
per-node DKL with the completely same per-node relative profile as presented in Figure 7.6,
without necessarily encoding more information, which was confirmed empirically.
Importantly, it was found that ostensible collapse of one or more dimensions was usually found to
encode some information, albeit often to a lesser degree, as revealed from latent dimension-wise
interpolations. An example of this behavior can be depicted in Appendix D.3.
As examined in the previous section, seemingly no real structure is imposed over local geometric
divergence when interpolating between samples. The question remains however – what consti-
tutes a semantically valid interpolation? Examining the latent space representation and found
relationship between posterior parameters and node occupancy, the latent space is modeled as
a discrete octree. As a result, latent spaces may lack support for fractional occupancy states.
Expecting visually sound sample interpolation could therefore be misguided. Moreover, while
the persistence of semantic continuity across linear interpolations may implicate that the la-
tent space is extremely structured, there is no argument for this being a necessary property.
38
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
==PAGE:49==
This may possibly be achieved by penalizing KL-divergence by employing an arbitrarily large
β weight, yet this would likely hurt expressiveness immensely – more evidently so when scaling
to multi-class setups with a posterior that approaches the prior. Finally, deep latent spaces
are known to be highly non-linear, better modeled as Riemannian manifolds [61]. As a result,
any employed Euclidean distance metrics over posterior samples may yield inaccurate results
[62], and linear interpolations are better substituted using more sophisticated methods which
approximate the curvature of the manifold (e.g. [63]).
These geometric considerations, paired with the binary structure of the latent code, suggest that
naïve linear interpolation is unlikely to trace meaningful trajectories, and found results may thus
not exclude that such a type of latent space is structured enough for diffusion model navigation.
7.1.3
Conclusion
Overfitting proved a large issue for VAEs based on LCA, irrespective of the alignment-method
utilized. Bounding box-volumes dominated the latent space representation when using centre-
alignment, indicating the necessity for point-alignment. Similarly, finding a valid trajectory for
interpolation in latent space was proven a diﬀicult task for LCA. A KL-based interpretation of
latent space was found to be a measure of encoded information, thus being a means of posterior
collapse diagnosis.
7.2
Myocardium VAE Results
Although LCA results fell short of expectations, there was seemingly enough evidence to suggest,
that a similar model over a less demanding class would be able to produce good results. Im-
portantly, although the myocardium is topologically simpler than the LCA, it is simultaneously
more complicated than the remaining classes, being the left ventricle and the left atria. Testing
convergence over myocardium could therefore be considered as a good baseline to see whether
it is possible to converge over the spherical class set (myocardium, ventricle and atrium).
Myocardium model tuning was coarse, only varying the KL-weighting β, whilst using the best
model found during LCA training as a base.
Models were tuned according to β to find a
reasonable balance over latent space expressiveness and reconstruction quality.
300 training
epochs with validation every twenty epochs took just under 4 hours to finish. Figure 7.8 and
Figure 7.9 show training and validation curves over two exemplar models fitted with βlow=0.0001
and βmed=0.1.
7.2.1
Myocardium Analysis
Training losses reveal much faster convergence compared to the LCA experiments, highlighting
the difference in task complexity. Comparing the two myocardium models, convergence gen-
erally shows no major difference barring the d=4 Loctree and LSDF over βmed, which exhibits
irregularities during training. Interestingly, loss spikes were propagated throughout all network
layers for the LCA models, but they do not influence other layers than d=4 visibly for myocar-
dia. Spikes are related to the period of βmed, indicating that the schedule especially influences
depth 4 optimization, whereas LCA spikes were found to be unrelated to the schedule. Loctree
losses are generally larger than for LCA, likely due to the density imbalance between classes.
LSDF losses are comparable in scale to LCA results, but interestingly d=7 training and valida-
tion losses increase after ∼120 epochs. Still, the values are incredibly low. Lgrad exhibit more
stability and a faster rate of initial convergence. Especially emblematic of the gap in task diﬀi-
culty between classes is the validation convergence, which never displays any domain overfitting
for the myocardium models.
In conclusion, the loss curves exhibit more stable behavior than for LCA, with oscillations
attributed to the KL-schedule. Fitting with theory, the less-regularized model βlow achieves
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
39
==PAGE:50==
0
1
2
3
log ( )
10
5
0
log (
Octree)
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Epoch
5.0
4.5
4.0
3.5
log (
SDF)
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Epoch
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
log (
Grad)
Layer
4
5
6
7
Complete
Model
low
med
Figure 7.8: Training losses for the two myocardium VAEs with βlow = 1.00 · 10−4, βhigh = 1.00 · 10−1. Both
models were trained using a cyclical KL schedule with T = 3 periods. Depth 4 octree losses oscillate for βmed due
to the schedule, and initial convergence is faster than for LCA.
0
1
2
3
log ( )
10
5
0
log (
Octree)
50
100
150
200
250
300
Epoch
5.0
4.5
4.0
3.5
log (
SDF)
50
100
150
200
250
300
Epoch
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
log (
Grad)
Layer
4
5
6
7
Complete
Model
low
med
Figure 7.9: Validation losses for the two myocardium VAEs with βlow = 1.00 · 10−4, βhigh = 1.00 · 10−1. y-axis
shared with the training losses in Figure 7.8. Overfitting is less of an issue than for LCA.
a better octree prediction accuracy during training (i.e. a good reconstruction), but after 300
epochs the two models perform equally well with an octree accuracy of 0.926 for d=7, producing
visibly higher-quality reconstructions as compared to those produced by LCA models. Latent
space metrics (procedurally presented in Section 7) revealed better structure when using βmed,
thus informing a conclusive decision to employ βmed for the generative diffusion task and hoping
the findings translate to other classes.
Latent Space Analysis
Comparing the models by employing latent space metrics, NFN results are significantly better
numerically to those achieved for LCA. This can be observed in Table 7.2, showing the NFN re-
sults for βmed. Note, using LCA as reference is quite flawed, due to topological differences (such
as orthogonal branch formations), which distort distance metrics. In contrast, the myocardial
40
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
==PAGE:51==
topology will in part yield lower HD/CD due to shape-uniformity, however the higher density
contributes to a larger CD. Thus, comparing distance metrics numerically is unreasonable. Lat-
eral comparison between NNs and FNs do however show promise, indicating that NNs are much
closer in the mesh domain than FNs, based on distance metrics (HD and CD), with the CD ratio
also reflecting the theorized expected performance for nearest neighbors, indicating symmetric
proximity between samples. Similarly, the CD ratio indicates a large asymmetric dissimilarity
for FNs, which could indicate that one samples is within the other, also represented by large
HD scores.
Figure 7.10: Linear (naive) interpolations between samples based on latent space nearest neighborhood. (upper
row) the two nearest latent validation samples with dcos = 1.0 · 10−2, (bottom) furthest validation samples with
dcos = 3.90 · 10−1. Mixtures behave more continuously than for LCA, even in the furthest neighbor case.
Statistic
HD
CDa
CDb
CDa/CDb
NN Mean
4.47
0.0824
0.0849
0.964
NN Min
3.89
0.0662
0.0681
0.843
NN Max
4.78
0.109
0.101
1.08
FN Mean
18.7
10.72
4.48
2.40
FN Min
17.2
10.01
4.15
2.38
FN Max
19.7
11.87
4.98
2.41
Table 7.2: Validation statistics for the NFN-criterion
for model βmed. CDa indicates dCD(A →B) whereas
CDb is the other direction.
Distances are measured
using p = 2. HD is reported in 10−2 and CD is reported
in 10−3.
When performing latent interpolations between
reference samples, interpolants show that the
latent space is semantically continuous when
performed over nearest neighbours. Interpolat-
ing over distant samples does not yield similar
results, producing nominated “iceberg-salad”
samples, attributed to rapid sample deteriora-
tion over intermediate interpolants, as exempli-
fied in Figure 7.10. Utilizing the insights from
Section 7, interpolations are carried out using
KL thresholding, and a stronger degree of con-
tinuity is displayed over distant pairs, as de-
picted in Figure 7.11.
Although intermediate
interpolants are not valid along the trajectory, they convey much more structure, showing
Ω(Z0) morphing stabily, and then beginning to grow an outer shell starting at the bottom,
corresponding to Ω(Z1), followingly allowing Ω(Z0) erosion within, as deduced from the sample
at α=0.5. This was achieved by employing the βmed model, which motivated its selection for the
diffusion task, as furthest neighbor interpolations did not change gradually along the trajectory
and became invalid when they suddenly changed.
7.2.2
Discussion
Myocardium results appear to convey a much more rigorous latent space representation com-
pared to LCA, which is somewhat expected, given the complexity discrepancy between classes.
Although reconstructions were of high quality, notable artifacts were present in the form on
floating mesh formations (e.g. α=1 in Figure 7.11) and interestingly large holes at the apex
(bottom) of some structures. It was discovered, that this was a data-quality issue as the arti-
facts were also consistent within the training data, and as such indicate no failure mode of the
VAE. This is expected to translate to downstream generative tasks.
Distance metrics reveal an inherent flaw of HD and CD, namely that between-class comparisons
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
41
==PAGE:52==
Figure 7.11: Distant pair interpolations when masking over a KL-threshold. Interpolant meshes can be observed
to be roughly continuous when excluding α=0.5, and almost anatomically plausible, excepting some high frequency
noise over samples at α=0.625 and α=1.0. At α=0.5, the inner shell begins to deteriorate while the larger (right-
most) myocardium grows on the outside. At α=0.0, a hole at the apex is formed, similarly found for Ω(Z0).
are not possible, which is discussed in much more detail in Chapter 8.
7.2.3
Conclusion
In conclusion, the myocardium VAE shows clear potential, as deduced by the found latent
interpolations and the observed model accuracies. No overfitting is observed, providing similar
evidence for the hypothesis. It is highly likely, that training a single-class model on either the
atria- or ventricle datasets would produce similar conclusions, inciting that modeling simple
structures using the current approach is seemingly feasible, even when data is sparse.
7.3
Multi Class VAE Results
The following section explores whether the VAE framework can eﬀiciently be extended to several
classes with equal numbers of samples. The discussion in this section will also act as a more
general interpretation of generative applicability of the organ datasets. Multi-class models were
trained with a refined LCA dataset (Chapter 3.3), where samples were point-aligned to the aorta
root in order to mitigate the problems observed in Section 7.1.1. Training was highly resource
intensive, taking ∼9 hours to run 300 epochs with validation every 20 epochs, which made model
tweaking diﬀicult. As a result, the exact same model configuration as converged upon in 7.2 is
used. While reusing the same architecture across four classes naturally raises concerns regarding
model capacity, latent analysis results from single class experiments indicated that two latent
dimensions were consistently underutilized. This suggests that the model possesses additional
representational capacity, and given the desirable convergence and found latent space properties,
this practical assumption was deemed appropriate for a proof-of-concept.
Purely considering losses, model convergence was significantly more stable than the LCA VAE.
Employing multiple classes seemingly worked as a regularizer, reducing overfitting on the col-
lective loss-term. Comparing to the LCA-only VAE losses, LSDF are very similar across layers,
whilst Loctree losses show better performance throughout all layers and show no symptoms of
overfitting, while Lgrad losses also are considerably smaller. This results in a halving of the best
validation collected loss term (L=5.71·10−1 vs. L=9.23·10−1). Comparing to the myocardium
model, Lgrad losses are lower, Loctree losses and LSDF losses are approximately equal, and the
best achieved collected validation loss-term L is ∼9.00 · 10−2 lower.
Plots of convergence-
diagnostics may be inspected in Appendix E.1.1.
As demonstrated in the last two sections, models are evaluated using losses, reconstruction
accuracies and latent space metrics. Further qualitative tests were performed by visualizing worst
performing VAE reconstructions over all classes, seeking to identify failure modes for the classes.
Performance as measured by train and validation CDL2 paired with worst-case failure modes
are presented in Figure 7.12. The test set is reserved for the end-point of a generative pipeline.
The per-class validation performances are CDL2 are 7.58·10−5/45.5·10−5/13.2·10−5/25.8·10−5
for LCA/myocardium/atrium/ventricle (see Appendix E.2 for further results).
42
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
==PAGE:53==
  VAE failure modes
 Reconstruction
Ground truth
Figure 7.12: The per-class reconstruction-performance as measured by CDL2 for the multi-class VAE. Row
below: the worst performing reconstructions in the validation-set as measured per CD. Turquoise boxes indicate
identified common modes of failure. Metrics in HD may be inspected in Appendix E.3.
Figure 7.13: The VAE acts like a low-pass filter on myocardium data. This may in some cases be desirable,
although some of the filtered components are actually LCA canals.
7.3.1
Multi Class Analysis
Results reveal much better reconstruction performances on LCA compared to the spherical
classes, despite all having a shared scale. This is assumed to be caused by lower mesh-density,
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
43
==PAGE:54==
yielding a smaller error even though reconstruction quality is not necessarily better.
Inspection of the worst-case LCA performance suggests, that observed failure-modes are caused
by an insuﬀicient SDF-sampling resolution. Examining the predicted d=7 octree (see Appendix
E.3.1, Figure E.6), results would suggest, that the artifacts are present on the octree level, which
clearly indices an insuﬀicient SDF-resolution. This could potentially be mended using a larger
input depth, using intelligent SDF-point cloud sampling schemes and increasing the number of
SDFs used during training.
The atrium dataset is found to contain many outliers, which appear to be caused by meshes
which are not watertight, which artificially inflates reconstruction metrics as the VAE is unable
to reconstruct open surfaces.
The Myocardium dataset shows worst performance on CD. This is likely caused by the larger
surface-area as compared to other classes, which necessitates more precise octree prediction.
Additionally, extracted ground-truth myocardium meshes exhibit another issue: some meshes
contain shallow dents inside of the musculature – which in some cases are anatomically invalid,
and in other cases are LCA canals – and failed reconstruction inflates reconstruction metrics.
The quality problem is caused during myocardium segmentation, as LCA canals are interleaved
within the myocardium structure. Examples are visualized in Figure 7.13, whilst Figure 3.1
shows how LCA produces the artifacts. Intriguingly, the model manages to fill the dents in
several reconstructions, suggesting that the reconstruction-pipeline could be tuned to act as a
well-functioning low-pass filter for noisy segmentations. The conclusion is similar for ventricles,
where some of the extracted meshes contain holes on the interior.
Latent Space Structure
PCA and UMAP projections were employed in order to probe how well-structured the latent
space was. The projections are presented in Figure 7.14. Notably, the UMAP projection achieves
very clear class separation without any class-label information, pointing towards a fairly well-
structured latent space. This is also represented in the PCA, but to a lesser degree, where
classes in general are very nicely separated, barring the myocardium and ventricle classes which
do overlap.
Two PCA components explain 7.09% variance.
In order to quantify the class-
separation, a KMeans classifier was fit on the training set UMAP projections of latent codes
using k=4 clusters. Subsequently, the classifier is evaluated on the validation set. Results are
presented in Table 7.3.
It is worth noting that the simplistic, unsupervised classifier achieves perfect sensitivity (TPR=1.0)
for three of the four anatomical classes in the validation set. The left ventricle class has a small
number of misclassifications, achieving TPR=0.96 and FNR=0.04. This class is also the class
most frequently misclassified on the training set (L. Ventricle→L. Myocardium), seemingly in-
dicating some cases where latent space encodings of the two classes are very similar. This is also
nicely captured by the first two principal components, which examplify a large overlap between
the two classes.
Table 7.3: Validation set confusion matrix for a KMeans classifier on UMAP projections on posterior samples.
UMAP is only fit on posteriors from the train set.
True / Pred
LCA
L. Myocardium
L. Atrium
L. Ventricle
LCA
76
0
0
0
L. Myocardium
0
76
0
0
L. Atrium
0
0
76
0
L. Ventricle
0
2
1
73
In order to validate that these results are no effect of the UMAP method itself, the same approach
is used for principal component scores. Using two principal components yields a similar average
44
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
==PAGE:55==
20
0
20
PC1
20
0
20
PC2
0
10
UMAP1
10
0
10
UMAP2
L. Atrium
L. Ventricle
LCA
L. Myocardium
Figure 7.14:
PCA and UMAP of train and validation posterior samples.
The dimensionality reduction is
fitted on the training set and followingly train and validation are projected. Coloured by bounding class label.
Triangles indicate samples assigned to the wrong cluster based on a KMeans classifier trained on the UMAP
training projections. Associated confusion matrices are presented in Table 7.3
validation TPR = 0.868 and FNR = 0.132.
Here, there are cases for all classes which are
confused to left ventricle, and the most commonly left ventricle is confused with myocardium
(due to the large class overlap). If trained using four principal components, the classifier achieves
an accuracy of 98%. Additional results are in Appendix E.3.3.
Based on the UMAP and PCA results, it is concluded that the VAE learns a class-specific
latent space in an unsupervised fashion. Whether this latent space is related to input meshes
in a simply measurable way is yet to be determined, e.g. by investigating the distribution of
bounding box volumes in latent space.
In order to measure how latent space is structured
as a function of input bounding box volume, the PCA and UMAP projections are visualized
class-wise in Figures 7.16 and 7.15, colored by bounding box volume.
20
0
PC1
10
0
10
PC2
L. Myocardium
0
10
20
30
PC1
10
20
30
PC2
LCA
20
0
PC1
10
0
10
PC2
L. Ventricle
10
0
10
20
PC1
20
0
PC2
L. Atrium
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
Normalized bounding box volume
Figure 7.15: PCA of extracted train and validation encodings. PCA is fitted on train and followingly train and
validation are projected. Coloured by bounding box volume. Triangles: points misclassified by the simple UMAP
classifier.
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
45
==PAGE:56==
1
2
3
4
UMAP1
12
14
UMAP2
L. Myocardium
15
16
17
18
UMAP1
3
4
5
UMAP2
LCA
6
5
4
UMAP1
6
8
UMAP2
L. Ventricle
0
1
2
UMAP1
10
8
UMAP2
L. Atrium
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
Normalized bounding box volume
Figure 7.16: UMAP of extracted train and validation encodings.
UMAP is fitted on train and followingly
train and validation are projected. Coloured by bounding box volume. Projections misclassified using the simple
UMAP KMeans classifier are omitted as they were very distant.
Inspecting the class-wise PCA projections, classes seem to display clear class-specific substruc-
ture wrt. bounding box volume. Atria exhibit the most consistent trend, followed by myocardia
and ventricles. For LCA, generally samples projected close to the origin carry high bounding
box volumes, but samples seem more randomly scrambled in the projection.
These observations carry over to UMAP projections as well. Myocardia volume seems linear in
the first UMAP dimension. Likewise for atria, it almost seems possible to formulate volume as
a function when using only the first UMAP component. For ventricles, projections are more
disorganized, but not not dominated by randomness. For LCA, arteries with small bounding
boxes are found along the brim of the projected cluster whereas larger samples are in the middle
of the cluster as measured by UMAP1, but a significant amount of disorganization seems present,
supporting the PCA considerations on less structure for LCA. From the visualizations it is clear
that UMAP misclassifications are related to bounding box volume; outlier volumes (compared
within the class) are overrepresented in misclassification. This indicates that volume still plays
a role in latent space encodings; however, as all organs are scaled using their own Lmax, they
do not share a meaningful scale (volume ranges overlap between classes), and as such, the good
validation classification accuracy indicates a degree of encoding of topological features, showing
promise for tasks such as shape classification.
This is further supported by the clear class
separation.
Latent Space Continuity
Linear interpolations are carried out in latent space using KL-thresholding for nodes achieving
KL-divergences over 2.0. This value was empirically found to be good for myocardium data.
Interpolations are carried out for each class and are made between nearest posterior samples.
In addition, interpolations are carried out for samples scoring cosine distances in the range
[0.097; 0.1], which was a fairly common measured distance when comparing samples. Nearest
neighbor samples visually seem geometrically for all classes, and interpolations were smooth for
all classes but for LCA, depicted in Figure 7.17. Other classes may be inspected in Appendix
E.3.4.
It is evident that even when using KL-thresholded interpolations, it is impossible to produce
46
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
==PAGE:57==
 = 0.00
 = 0.25
 = 0.50
 = 0.75
 = 1.00
Figure 7.17: The decoded linear KL-threshold interpolation between the two closest posterior samples as mea-
sured by cosine distance, using a threshold of 2.00. The neighbors share the general branches. Along the trajectory,
additional branches present at α = 0.00 shrink as α increases, which may be a meaningful interpolation, as these
branches do not exist at α = 1.00. However, decoded interpolants quickly become invalid along the trajectory.
decoded interpolants which produce valid LCA meshes, as they introduce unconnected compo-
nents for all intermediate interpolations. This is even true for nearest neighbors. Interpolants
do, however, display more structure than for the LCA-only model. Shared geometry in decoded
meshes between Z0 and Z1 are maintained along the interpolation, whilst non-matching geome-
tries appear to be characterized by a gradual deterioration into a common point of reference,
systematically morphing into either one of the valid samples. Deterioration is not smooth, yet
offers some encouragement wrt. latent space structure. This is particularly evident when inter-
polating over further neighbours, which suggests that the samples’ common reference point is
at the aorta root, producing a degenerated interpolant at α=0.5 which exclusively models said
root. The referenced interpolation is depicted in Figure 7.18. Further neighbour interpolation
for the myocardium can also be observed in Figure 7.19.
Interpolant meshes for the myocardia samples exhibit wavy surfaces, both wrt. the endo- and
epicardial surfaces (internal/external), but maintain validity in other respects at all intermediate
steps excluding α = 0.5, where the myocardium appears to open up at the apex. Interestingly,
the inner lumen of the rightmost sample has already taken shape at α = 0.5 whereas the
outer myocardium wall seems mainly dominated by the leftmost sample, showcasing that the
interpolant in some respect decodes semantically meaningfully.
7.3.2
Discussion
There are some clear strengths and weaknesses of the fitted multiclass VAE. Most prominently,
latent spaces over spherical classes seem very structured and also somewhat continuous, two
key features which should ease latent navigation for a diffusion model.
On the other hand,
quite a few issues persist for the LCA class, which would yield the strongest proof-of-concept in
generative tasks due to its variability and sparsity. These issues are expected to make generative
LCA modeling diﬀicult.
Dataset artifacts and evaluation limitations
When inspecting generated LCA meshes,
several artifacts were discovered as exemplified in Appendix E.1.1, Figure E.6.
Contiguous
artery branches have a tendency to fuse on both mesh and octree-level, when branches are close,
which yields anatomically invalid mesh reconstructions. It is suspected, that the issue arises
from two causes: (1) an insuﬀicient number of point samples for neural MPU evaluation to infer
the SDF, and (2) an inadequate maximal octree depth. If point sampling is too sparse, the
volumetric field produced by the neural MPU risks being ill-defined in contiguous areas with
small distances, which need a very high sample resolution to be accurately represented, both
at training and inference time. Geometrically-aware SDF super-sampling during pre-processing
may be a solution. The SDF is also influenced by the predicted octree structure. A deeper
input octree structure could mitigate artifact creation on the octree-level, which subsequently
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
47
==PAGE:58==
 = 0.00
 = 0.25
 = 0.50
 = 0.75
 = 1.00
Figure 7.18: KL-threshold interpolation between two LCA samples which have posterior cosine distance in the
range [0.097; 0.1]. The threshold was set to 2.00. Interpolants deterioate rapidly to produce unconnected mesh
components in the decoded mesh, and the at the mid-point all that is left is the artery root, the point used for
dataset alignment.
 = 0.00
 = 0.25
 = 0.50
 = 0.75
 = 1.00
Figure 7.19:
KL-threshold interpolation between two left myocardium samples which have posterior cosine
distance in the range [0.097; 0.1]. The threshold was set to 2.00. The rightmost myocardium lumen grows on the
inside of the left-most myocardium. The outer shell deteriorates along the trajectory. Additional classes may be
seen in Appendix E.3.5)
influences the generated volumetric field as it utilizes the leaf node features to represent the
field. Utilizing one or both propositions would presumably produce better LCA reconstructions,
but it would similarly necessitate significant increases in compute and memory. Due to time
constraints, this was not investigated further, and as a result fusing artifacts should be considered
within tolerance on the downstream generative task, and thus should not be considered “invalid”.
Noise filtering
An interesting side-effect of the VAE pipeline is its implicit ability to filter
high-frequency noise and minor mesh artifacts in input shapes. This filtering is not explicitly
supervised, which may be beneficial in practical settings where annotated data is noisy, such
as automatically extracted labels or in lacking imaging domains. Similar challenges are tackled
using supervised methods like Dong et al. [64], where a classifier is first used to identify if a label
is noisy, after which explicit self-cleansing modules are employed to suppress training label noise.
In contrast, MV,MC produces geometry-aware filtering effects in an unsupervised fashion, which
could be a complementary mechanism that could serve as pre-processing or post-processing in
organ segmentation pipelines. However, considering LCA canals in the myocardium, the filtering
may be undesirable.
Latent space structure
It was found that the latent space exhibits good structure, at least
for the spherical classes, in part based on UMAP projections and classifier quality in the UMAP.
Classifier quality could, in principle, be a product of the UMAP projection itself rather than a
well-structured latent space, but the property is further validated using a PCA KMeans classifier.
In addition, the UMAP is trained in an unsupervised fashion, i.e. not providing class labels at
any point. As a result, if classification quality is boosted significantly by UMAP, this is still
based on structure only represented in latent space encodings. For scientific rigor, it would be
fitting to build a classifier directly in latent space to support these findings and rule out the
48
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
==PAGE:59==
influence dimensionality reductions.
As the UMAP KMeans classifier works on a latent space which contains multiple classes in
normalized bounding box volume ranges, inter-class separability cannot be attributed to volume
differences alone due to a significant overlap in organ volumes between classes. This raises the
hypothesis that the encoder extracts topologically relevant organ-specific features. Misclassifi-
cations still seem somewhat correlated with outlier bounding box volumes, with only smaller-
than-average myocardia and an outlier atrium with very large volume being misclassified. This,
in part, indicates that the encoder not only encodes topological features, but also is sensitive to
scale. In order to prove topological feature encoding, additional features should be investigated.
Likewise, the outlier atrium sample should be removed, as it dominates the normalization scale
for all other atrium samples, which thus not are on an ”as shared” scale as the other classes.
This may inject organ-specific volume information allowing encoding of spurious information
rather than topological features for the class. As a result, classification results are presumed
optimistic.
The most important finding for latter diffusion models is the weakly structured latent space for
LCA. As discussed in subsection 7.1.2, incompatible interpolation trajectories and the inherent
geometric sparsity are likely contributors for this. Furthermore, latent interpolations could also
be a sub-optimal method to investigate the discrete nature of the dual octree domain, discussed
in the same section. Overall, this foreshadows results of later generative results, explored in the
succeeding chapters.
7.3.3
Conclusion
Results indicate that the multi class VAE produces a well-structured latent space, with strong
class separation, but LCA reconstructions have fusing artifacts which will propagate to down-
stream tasks. A low-pass filtering and outlier-detection property was found. The latent structure
analysis found geometrically similar nearest neighbors, and latent interpolations indicate that
DDPM modeling may be well-suited for myocardium, atrium and ventricle classes. The diﬀi-
culty in establishing valid LCA interpolants, and less structured latent space, are expected to
make the task of fitting a diffusion model very hard, albeit not necessarily impossible. The
existence of latent interpolations and a well-structured latent are not necessary conditions for
successful DDPM modeling, although they may ease the task.
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
49
==PAGE:60==
8
Generative Results
8.1
Latent Diffusion Model Results
Extensive analysis was conducted on a naïve LDM approach, as performance greatly exceeded
expectations. The framework was initially intended to be used as a building block for a more
sophisticated architecture, assuming the simplicity of the approach would hinder its ability to
generate coherent, high-fidelity output. Contrary to preliminary belief, the approach was found
to produce promising results for simple anatomical structures.
During early model training, a bucketized-loss-monitoring-scheme was implemented, employing
three timestep bins: low (t < 200); medium (200 ≤t ≤800); and high (t > 800). This was found
necessary, as validation losses appeared to be uncorrelated with generated samples, frequently
producing large validation losses despite producing valid-, realistic samples during validation.
This is an effect of validation losses being measured using a single forward pass using a uniformly
sampled timestep t∈{1,...,T} per validation sample, whereas noise is iteratively removed during
reverse process sampling.
Aggregated losses therefore become deceitful, with timestep bins
better displaying the underlying behavior. This framework is used throughout the remaining
pipelines.
For future reference, an extension to model parameters is presented:
Ares, employed self-
attention resolution; C×, channel multiplier across layers; db, bottleneck depth of the LDM
UNet; puncond, probability of sampling unconditionally during training, as per Ho et al. [43]; w,
conditional class guidance scale, varying for conditional class reliance; s, cosine schedule offset,
to control the signal to noise ratio (SNR) as a function of timestep [51].
8.1.1
Myocardium Latent Diffusion Model Results
As VAE results over the myocardium data showed largest promise, LDM experiments were ini-
tially performed using the myocardium dataset, for initial experimentation. As the multi-organ
VAE had yet to converge when LDM testing had started and results were simultaneously encour-
aging, experiments were only conducted using the single-organ VAE as base (MV,myo, Section
7.2).
Overfitting experiments were conducted using a small training subset D′
train ⊂Dtrain
(single sample and 10% of Dtrain), converging without any real complications when employed
using a linear schedule. Inspecting the overfit meshes, some inconsistencies were still present, in
the form of floating mesh components and nominated “wavy” surfaces, which was particularly
observed prior to model convergence. This is assumed to be inherent LDM frailties, as reasoning
in a domain that is quite deterministic is complex. Holes at the apex are also observed, yet as
discussed in chapter 7, geometric artifacts such as apex perforations, dents and surface degen-
eracies are all present in the dataset to a large degree, and are thus expected. Likewise, floating
mesh component may also be a result of poor data quality, however not observed in generated
meshes.
Split
MMDa
(↓)
MMDa
smp(↓)
COVb
(↑)
1-NNA
Train
4.58
4.28
0.590
0.565
Val
5.69
6.98
0.882
0.660
Test
5.42
6.76
0.897
0.670
Table 8.1: Generative metrics results for MZ,myo. a: reported
in 10−3. b: evaluated using all generated samples.
Scaling to a full sized dataset, models
converged well after ∼1.5K epochs, tak-
ing less than 2 hours to finish training.
Evaluation suggested exceptional gen-
erative performance, achieving best re-
sults for two nominated medium-sized
models with 4.78M parameters, each
with equal model parameters yet diver-
gent noise schedules; employing a linear- and cosine schedule respectively. The cosine schedule
50
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
==PAGE:61==
was maintained even though overfitting was not possible, as the cosine schedule is in some
domains known to produce faster convergence and higher quality samples [51]. Although the
models exhibited very similar qualitative results, e.g. wrt. fidelity, the linear model was chosen
on a basis basis of it appearing to produce more anatomically correct samples, producing good
validation scores and producing less samples with apex perforations. Upon inspection, how-
ever, the model was discovered to overfit to the training data, which is analyzed in the ensuing
subsection.
100
300
500
700
900
N
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
Coverage
Train
Val
Test
Optimal
Figure
8.1:
Coverage as a func-
tion of the number of generated sam-
ples of MZ,myo using 100 Monte Carlo
sub-sampling iterations.
Shaded areas
around curves are 95%CI. Note that the
validation and test-statistics are very
similar.
“Optimal” indicates optimal
sample-eﬀiciency, ie.
no repeated as-
signments to ground-truth sets.
To mitigate overfitting, models were refitted common reg-
ularization strategies, namely decreasing model complexity,
increasing weight-decay and varying the noise-schedule. This
process was carried out incrementally while closely com-
paring bucketized losses using frequent validation. For all
trained models, losses displayed two properties: (1) losses
showed systematic inflation of tlow, whilst showing more un-
systematic oscillation on tmed and thigh; and (2) losses from
tlow through to thigh display systematic decreases in scale, in-
dicating a lower denoising ability at lower time steps where
the Signal-to-Noise Ratio (SNR) is high. This could indicate
overfitting to noise at later timesteps, but is however also
rather expected, as the model has to make coarse denois-
ing decisions at high timesteps where SNR is low, whereas
precision has to be high at high SNR to achieve the same
loss.
Upon completion of model refitting, a well-behaved model
with only 1.5M parameters was derived (a factor 3 decrease
in size to the aforementioned models), employing a weight-decay of λ=0.05 (factor 5 increase)
together with a cosine variance schedule with offset s=0.08. For later reference, the subjected
models will be referred to as γlin and MZ,myo, using 1024 generated samples, with γlin denoting
the accidentally overfit model with a linear noise schedule. Tables Table 8.1 and 8.2 show the
generative metric results over MZ,myo and γlin respectively, whilst a Monte Carlo sub-sampling
procedure over the coverage for MZ,myo is displayed in Figure 8.1. For the interested reader,
all parameter configurations are in Appendix F.1. Generating and decoding 128 samples using
MZ,myo took 197 seconds (1.54 seconds per mesh).
Overfitting Analysis
The following analysis sheds light onto inherent issues of the generative metrics, which mis-
leadingly led to convergence onto the γlin model.
Inspecting result Table 8.2, γlin exhibits
state of the art performance levels when considering validation metrics (especially coverage
and 1-NNA), as compared to literature. This is highly unexpected given such a small train-
ing dataset and rudimentary architecture. Comparing to e.g. LAS-Diffusion test results, they
achieve MMD = 13.8·10−3, COV = 53.8% and 1-NNA = 64.5%.
Even though γlin results
are immaculate, these raise suspicions of the model simply memorizing training set samples.
Model memorization should, in principle, yield vanishing MMD scores with 1-NNA →0.5 for
the training set, but fail to generalize well, exhibiting significantly worse validation results.
In order to diagnose training set memorization, visualizations of the 16 highest- and lowest
MMDsmp-scoring sample pairs were made. Visual inspection revealed clear overfitting, as low-
scoring pairs were nearly identical.
Novelty behaviour would be assumed, if (1) low-scoring
samples diverge from their NN in Dtrain; and (2) high-scoring samples are both distinct and
anatomically plausible.
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
51
==PAGE:62==
When examining the table statistics, model overfitting is hard to deduce as it is solely indicated
by the gap between MMD performances. This is especially diﬀicult as a lower train MMD is
expected, making it non-trivial to determine whether such a gap is large enough to indicate
overfitting. Consulting literature does not aid, since organ mesh synthesis is highly unexplored,
and most baselines are on ShapeNet or similar object datasets. This disallows comparison to
accepted baselines, as MMD is class-dependent. Specifically, classes with very homogeneous
geometry will naturally yield lower MMDs, even with weak generators, whereas more variable
classes or classes with thin, long structures produce larger MMDs even under good generation
if minor misalignment is present. Consequently, comparing performance across classes (ie. my-
ocardium to a ShapeNet class) is unreliable. As a result, mesh metrics do not support conclusions
about model performance when considered in isolation.
Split
MMDa
(↓)
COVb
(↑)
1-NNA
Train
3.23
0.690
0.490
Val
5.71
0.960
0.530
Table 8.2: Generative metrics results for γlin.
a: reported in 10−3. b: evaluated using all gen-
erated samples; Monte Carlo subsampling com-
parisons as a function of the number of gener-
ated samples may be found in Appendix section
F.2.4.
A common solution is to use shading-image-based
Frechet Inception Distance (FID) for class-agnostic
evaluation [65, 66]. However, this is also infeasible due
to the absence of a pretrained model suitable for the
cardiac mesh domain. As a result, a better, somewhat
manual, approach is to assess MMD relative to intra-
and inter-set baselines, and to additionally consider
the MMDsmp scores, which are very cheaply evalu-
ated as soon as the MMD matrix is available. Train
MMDsmp was 2.82 · 10−3 as opposed to the validation
MMDsmp of 6.33 · 10−3, which indicates clear memo-
rization.
Overall, this reveals two things: (1) validation loss curves cannot be trusted as a proxy for
measuring overfitting to the training set, due to the large amount of noise present due to the
time-step sampling; and (2) validation mesh metrics do not diagnose overfitting robustly except if
MMDsmp is also taken into account using a small validation set. Blindly using validation metrics
to guide model selection and subsequently evaluating on the test set could lead to mistaken
conclusions about generalizability, as such conclusions may reflect metric artifacts rather than
model performance. With this in mind, subsequent analysis is performed on MZ,myo, showing
encouraging signs of generative behaviour.
Latent Code Analysis
In order to gain a qualitative understanding of the distribution covered by the MZ,myo generated
samples, UMAP and PCA dimensionality reductions are utilized to visualize posterior samples.
Note, that the first two PCA components only explain 4.5% of the total variance, which indicates
that posterior samples lack strong low-dimensional linear structure (a scree-plot of the PCA may
be inspected in Appendix F.2.7). As a result, this analysis focuses mainly on the UMAP results.
Inspecting the UMAP, generated samples are shown to lie within the perimeter of ground truth
data, which indicates that the model refrains from generating outlier posterior samples beyond
the support of the training data. Low-density regions in the ground truth distribution are also
low-density in generations.
This suggests that the model does not over-generate samples in
implausible regions, reflecting samples are generated in regions with actual support. Overall,
the complete UMAP space is covered by generated samples, indicating good coverage. Some
distinct generation modes can be discerned, as can be deduced by observing e.g. the lower right
corner at (6.0, 5.8), containing a high concentration of generated samples where few training
samples are present. This is also observed at (3, 7.6), seemingly indicating a mode either not
represented in the dataset or invalid.
Along the left and lower brim, generative modes are
observed. These are also represented in all data-splits, and as such a sign of generalization.
52
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
==PAGE:63==
40
20
0
20
PC1
20
0
20
40
60
PC2
0
2
4
6
8
UMAP1
5
6
7
8
9
10
UMAP2
Gen
Train
Val
Test
Figure 8.2: Dimensionality reductions of generated and ground truth latent codes colored by origin. (Left):
Principal component projections using the first two principal components, which explain 4.5% of the variance.
(Right): UMAP projections using two components.
There are a few cases where generated samples seem to lie very close to validation and test-set
samples, but this cannot be concluded on a UMAP alone, as UMAP is not distance preserving.
If such a trend would translate well into mesh-space, these generated samples could indicate true
generalization. Under the assumption that properties in latent space translate into mesh-space,
this is investigated using a 1-Nearest-Neighbor classifier on the latent codes, where self-matches
are excluded, i.e. disallowing Di →Di matching. The procedure shares likeness to coverage,
with the slight modification of measuring coverage directly in the latent space and using all
split classes. This should produce a high-resolution understanding of modes and whether the
complete feature space is covered.
The procedure is performed both using MMD on the decoded meshes and cosine distance dcos
on posterior samples.
Evaluating the latent coverage for validation yields 47.4% generated,
10.5% test, 40.8% train and 1.32% validation samples.
Likewise for the test-set, this yields
46.2% generated, 6.41% test, 43.6% train and 3.85% validation samples.
A complete table
of the results is presented in Appendix F.2.8.
This is a good sign, as it indicates that the
generated latent codes actually cover all of the datasets, and produces a coverage of ∼46% over
the validation- and test set, but only a bit better than the training set using almost twice the
sample size. Evaluating the mean cosine distance dcos( ˆZ, Zgt), this yields the mean scores:
dcos( ˆZ, ˆZ) = 0.636,
dcos( ˆZ, Ztrain) = 0.654,
dcos( ˆZ, Zval) = 0.693,
dcos( ˆZ, Ztest) = 0.692
The gap to held-out data splits indicates some lack of generalization. Distributions may be
inspected in Appendix F.2.9.
MMD Analysis on MZ,myo
To investigate whether the structure observed in latent space translates to mesh space, MMDsmp
and MMD scores are evaluated over decoded meshes produced from the generated- and ground
truth latent codes.
The scores and training set baselines are presented in Table 8.3.
The
conclusion on the basis of the following analysis is that the model is not solely reproducing
training data, but rather is generalizing with mode-seeking behavior, as measured by the metrics.
Keeping this in mind may ease the interpretation of otherwise complex results.
Ωi →Ωtrain MMDs will be used as the baseline metrics indicating how well the held-out sets
would be covered by the train set (first column in Table 8.3). A generator which generalizes
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
53
==PAGE:64==
From ↓(query set) / To →(reference set)
Train
Val
Test
Gen(b)
Train
5.34
6.70
6.79
4.58
Val
5.62
7.20
(-)
5.69
Test
5.50
(-)
6.44
5.42
Gen(a)
4.28
6.98
6.76
3.46
Table 8.3: All values measured using CD and reported in 10−3 when querying the query set and finding a match
in the reference set. (a): Corresponding to MMDsmp, indicating fidelity, (b): corresponding to MMD, indicating
coverage. The diagonal is the baseline MMD(Di)
should perform better than this, measured by MMD (last column). It is found that the generator
covers the training set better than the training set itself would, indicating strong coverage of
seen data. Generated samples perform worse at covering the validation set than the train set
baseline. Only marginal better performance than the train set baseline is measured on the test
set. This indicates that the model somewhat generalizes. MMD(Di) will be used as a measure
of variability within a class (diagonal). Comparing the MMD scores to these internal baselines,
it is clear that the generator covers the held-out sets more effectively than they themselves do,
but this is presumably caused by small split sizes, which inflates the internal variability.
Comparing the internal variability baselines to the achieved MMDsmp scores gives an understand-
ing of how realistically generated data resembles held-out data (lower row). Train MMDsmp is
notably lower than MMD(Dtrain), indicating very high fidelity towards training samples. This
could indicate overfitting. For held-out sets, MMDsmp scores are approximately as low as dataset
baselines, indicating strong fidelity. Now if one were to consider the training set as a generated
set, i.e. assuming Dtrain ∼MZ,myo, this may be used as a baseline when compared to unseen
data, as it exhibits the inherent expected fidelity across datasets. A good generative model
exhibits lower MMD and MMDsmp than these baselines. MMD scores from train to held-out
sets are then: MMD(Dtrain →Dval) = 6.70 · 10−3 and MMD(Dtrain →Dtest) = 6.79 · 10−3.
Compared to the generator fidelities (lower row, i.e. MMDsmp), the results are fairly alike, with
worse fidelity on the validation set and better fidelity on the test set, suggesting generative
performance is on par with the plausibility of original training samples when evaluated against
unseen data.
The low MMD(Dgen) indicates low diversity within the generated dataset, symptomatic of modal
collapse. These modes would then have to be well-represented in the held-out sets in order to
explain the relatively good coverage and fidelity scores, which was also represented in the UMAP.
Expanding on this, using MMD(Dtrain) = 5.34 · 10−3 as baseline, the lower MMD(Dgen) score
relative to the baseline indicates lower diversity within the generated samples than represented in
the training set, which similarly indicates a larger degree of mode reproduction in the generator
than what is present in the ground truth. Furthermore, the lower-than-baseline train MMDsmp =
4.28·10−3 indicates that generated samples lie closer to training samples than is expected if they
were to follow the training distribution, indicating strong representation of dominant training
modes. This is all symptomatic of at-least-marginal overfitting with mode-seeking behavior.
An analysis cannot rely solely on mean values. In order to gain understanding of the distribution
of MMDsmp values, a kde-plot of the achieved MMDsmp-distributions is presented in Figure 8.3.
Interestingly, there are few sample-pairs between the generated and held-out sets which achieve
MMDsmp values which are reminiscent of the mode of the train MMDsmp scores.
Still, the
held-out distributions are disappointingly disjoint of the generated and training distribution,
indicating significantly lower fidelity on the held out data.
54
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
==PAGE:65==
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
MMDsmp
(10
3)
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
Density
Train
Val
Test
Gen
Figure 8.3: MMDsmp scores for generated samples measured across splits using CD, reported in 10−3.
8.1.2
Qualitative Feature Investigation
In order to assess both novelty and generation quality, visualizations are made using the same
“best-matching” assignment as before of MMDsmp, that is; for each generated mesh, the closest
training sample is assigned. The visualizations are carried out to characterize how generated
samples relate to the training data distribution. MMDsmp are bucketized into lowest-, median-
and highest-scoring samples, in order to make an overall assessment by using a qualitative
spectrum from potentially memorized examples to highly novel or out-of-distribution samples.
The median should correspond to typical generation quality. The bucketized MMD samples are
presented in Figure 8.4.
For the lowest bucket, some discrepancy can be observed between the myocardium lumen ori-
entation, particularly noticeable at the structural base in terms of location and orientation.
Nevertheless, generated samples are in general very close to training samples, which is also indi-
cated by the metrics. Investigating the median, larger discrepancies can be deduced; mainly in
the curvature of the lumen, manifested as ˆDgen samples assume either more pronounced or at-
tenuated inner-wall shapes compared to matched Dtrain samples. Likewise, larger than marginal
discrepancies in the outer wall radius begin to arise, which, qualitatively, seems correlated with
the shape of the myocardium lumen. This indicates that the model may respect the myocardium
thickness in the training distribution. Discrepancies in orientation of the basis and extension of
“lobes” are intensified. Generated samples in the largest bucket are deemed as outliers, on the
basis of MMD values and comparisons to the distribution in Figure 8.3. Changes in the global
orientation of the myocardium are noticeable, as measured by the base to apex axis, the shape
of the lumen, and prominently the outer wall. In addition, degenerate surfaces are found in
some of the generated meshes and on certain samples a “wavy surface” artifact is found.
This gives hope; median and mean train MMDsmp scores coincide near 4.0 · 10−3, and these
samples, qualitatively speaking, seem somewhat novel and realistic, as is also supported by the
metrics.
Quantitative Feature Investigations
In order to quantitatively measure the observations from the previous analysis, feature distribu-
tions of a selected palette of key myocardium features are measured for the ground truth splits
and the generated samples. This is intended to aid the analysis within four areas: (1) identifying
suspected mode-seeking behavior, expecting an over-representation of specific feature combina-
tions, (2) quantifying generalization to test and validation splits, (3) measuring split-imbalances,
which may influence validation and test mesh metrics, and importantly (4) quantify whether
generated samples follow the distribution of anatomically realistic left myocardia. Kernel Den-
sity Estimates of the feature palette are presented in Figure 8.5 (the corresponding histogram
may be inspected in Appendix F.2.6).
Generated myocardia seemingly follow the ground truth volume distribution quite well, whilst
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
55
==PAGE:66==
Training sample
Generated
Intersection
Figure 8.4: Bucketized MMD matches between generated and train set meshes. Upper row: minimum 4 MMD
matched meshes (”least novel”) with MMDsmp ∈[2.13 · 10−3; 2.35 · 10−3], middle row: meshes around the MMD
median (”typical generations”) with with MMDsmp ∈[4.10 · 10−3; 4.10 · 10−3], lower row: maximum 4 MMD
scoring samples (”most novel”) with MMDsmp ∈[9.16 · 10−3; 10.1 · 10−3]. Cyan is ground truth, red is generated.
The mixture between red and blue indicates overlap in produced meshes whereas solely pure blue or red indicates
regions of mesh union. The perceived difference is more clear in interactive 3D visualizations.
having fairly small bounding box volumes and surface area modes.
Interestingly, generated
myocardia exhibit larger volumetric eﬀiciency, indicating that the correlation between organ
volume Vo and bounding box volume VB may be modeled differently in the generator than
in the ground-truth. This could also be explained by altered principal axes, but this is not
obviously clear from measured principal directions.
Generated samples generally underestimate the surface area distribution, which is also measured
in the sphericity index Ψ. Generated samples are unrealistically sphere-like with only a small
area of overlap to ground-truth samples. This shows that object volumes seem more weakly
coupled to surface areas than in real myocardia.
The tortuosity seems to lock onto the high mode for ground-truth samples, indicating that
the outer-wall of the generated myocardia are fairly round, the height of the long-axis of the
myocardium is fairly low or the surface is overly ”wavy”. Investigating the L2-distances from
apex-to-base, the large sphericity may indeed be caused myocardia being squashed, exhibiting
56
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
==PAGE:67==
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0
10
20
30
40
50
Density
Volume, Vo
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0
2
4
6
8
10
Density
Bounding box volume VB
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
17.5
20.0
Density
Volumetric Efficiency, VE
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25
1.50
1.75
2.00
Density
Surface Area, So
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
17.5
20.0
Density
True sphericity index, 
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
Density
Tortuosity, 
g
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
0.40
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
Density
L2 Distance Centre to Base
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
0.40
0.45
0.50
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Density
L2 Distance Centre to Apex
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Density
Long axis L2 Distance, ||x
y||2
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Density
Base Hole Area
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Density
Lower Quartile Thickness
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Density
Median Thickness
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.09
value
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Density
Mean Thickness
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
value
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25
1.50
1.75
2.00
Density
PC1 Azimuth angle, 
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
value
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
Density
PC1 Elevation, 
Dataset
Gen
Test
Train
Val
Figure 8.5: Kernel Density Estimates of a selection of left myocardium features for generated, train, validation
and test splits. Units are provided as calculated in the normalized coordinate-system.
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
57
==PAGE:68==
a low distance to the top-point (base) whilst respecting the distance-to-apex distribution well
but in total exhibiting a lower long axis length. This could partially explain the large sphericity
index and tortuosity – myocardia with a low long axis length but similar radius would be more
round, potentially inflating both metrics. In general, all wall thickness distributions respect
ground truth distributions very well, which is encouraging given that this is a key marker of
pathology. The mode of the base hole area distribution is significantly lower than for the ground
truth samples, whereas general orientation as measured by the first principal component seem
consistent with ground-truth samples.
Split
Train
Val
Test
Gen
Holes
133
18
12
258
Fraction
0.217
0.237
0.154
0.252
Table 8.4: Number and fractions of holes
detected in the utilized splits.
It could seem that the base hole area estimator is corre-
lated with the lower L2 distance to the myocardium base,
and hole areas are in general measured to be smaller for
generated myocardia. When compared to qualitative in-
vestigations, this seems somewhat dubious, as this was
not confirmed by qualitative investigations. This could
indicate lacking robustness of the estimator, being biased
by the myocardia having a lower long-axis length. The
apex-hole detection procedure yields results across splits as presented in Table 8.4, and indi-
cates that generated samples have a slightly larger probability of containing apex holes than the
ground truth sets.
Discussion
LDM considerations
The LDM exhibits clear flaws, both due to its rudimentary design and
the inherent restrictions of the coarse domain. As illustrated in 8.1.1, even during overfitting the
model struggles to aptly produce realistic samples, only converging well after a larger time-frame.
The unexpressive nature of the latent space is likely a contributor for this, possibly decelerating
convergence. Looking at the generative features, a reason for the apparent round modes could be
due to constraints produced by the domain. As bottleneck features are coarse shape descriptors,
it could be that the model struggles generating latent features which propagate in a way that
produces more oval structures. Note, part of feature divergence may potentially be described
by feature modulation caused by smoothing VAE reconstruction artifacts.
Absence of a good baseline
Model analysis revealed the volatility of generative evaluation;
without an adequate baseline, it is diﬀicult to discern whether a model is truly generative or
reproducing when held-out splits are small. Indicators of overfitting can be hard to pinpoint,
requiring diligent qualitative probing in order to satisfy the criteria, which naturally decelerates
the model selection process immensely.
Loss interpretation
Loss inconsistencies is a further limitation for model training. With-
out a fixed noise-schedule, similar generated sample qualities did not transfer to loss values,
with losses conforming to different loss levels. This makes reasoning about model performance
diﬀicult, which necessitates both sampling and computing of MMD scores during validation
to determine output quality, slowing down the process drastically.
It is believed that using
the found latent space interpretation advantageously, more representative validation criteria
could be evaluated directly on bottleneck posterior samples. One example could be to train a
lightweight discriminator GCN on posterior samples, and employ the network during validation
to monitor the generated output quality. This doesn’t relieve all issues, still requiring sample
generation, yet MMD computation and decoding is no longer required since sample quality is
inferred from the discriminator’s prediction.
Model performance
The best found model displays acceptable performance, yet still with
some flaws. It is expected, that further model tuning would induce even better performances, as
this was not performed to its full potential, given the constraints of the project scope. One such
consideration is to utilize the multi-organ VAE MZ,mc as the base for the generative model,
58
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
==PAGE:69==
which is theorized would impose some implicit regularization during training. Later results over
LCA show contrasting evidence, however, given the class discrepancy, it is thought it may still
be possible when employing the myocardium dataset during training.
Conclusion
In conclusion, a degree if novelty is present in generated samples, but they do not follow the
ground truth distribution as well as hoped, as specific modes seem overly common. This is
also somewhat represented in generative metrics. Finetuning or a sophisticated feature-based
resampling is necessary for establishing a synthetic anatomically representative dataset.
8.1.3
Latent Diffusion Model LCA Results
Early attempts at testing the applicability of the network on LCA raised clear feasibility con-
cerns. Overfitting experiments were conducted using a small training subset D
′
train ⊂Dtrain,
employing either an organ-dependent- or a multi-organ VAE as base (i.e. MV,lca and MV,mc),
whilst varying model complexities and variance schedules accordingly. Samples generated with
MV,mc were severely invalid irrespective of the model complexity investigated, whereas using
MV,lca as base produced valid-yet-overfitted samples when employing the same architecture.
Experiments were thus only scaled up using MV,lca as base. Greatest model convergence was
displayed using a model with 1.80M parameters after 10.0·103 epochs, taking ∼7 hours to finish.
Full-scale model experiments never managed to converge adequately, generating clear shape de-
fects, most notably in the form of multiple unconnected mesh-components and merged branches,
examples of which are provided in Figure 8.6. Note, the meshes portrayed in the figure show
defect samples over an overfit model using MV,lca as base, which produces significantly higher
quality than those generated by the full-scale model. This points towards a fundamental inability
to represent the diffusion task for LCA using MZ.
Figure 8.6: The best achieved decoded reverse samples from a model trained on encodings from the LCA VAE
(MV,lca). Sampled after 19400 training epochs. Dark boxes showcase defects, all of which are floating mesh
components.
Due to mesh invalidity being common, a resampling scheme was introduced in order to ensure
valid output meshes and using validity as a validation criterion. The best found model based on
MV,lca was able to produce 100 valid single-connected-component samples using 6 resampling
iterations with batch size 100 in 20 minutes, achieving a mean of ∼17 valid samples per iteration.
Generated meshes are visually very reminiscent of LCA but exhibit anatomically implausible
features in the form of chunky branches, overly curvy surfaces and branches merging in a manner
unlike what is expected considering the VAE reconstruction quality. Figure 8.7 shows a subset
of MZ generated meshes using resampling and clearly illustrates the lack of anatomical realism.
This conclusion is further backed by MMD metrics, which indicate strong overfitting, as evalu-
ation produced train scores: MMD = 27.9 · 10−4, MMDsmp = 11.0 · 10−4 and validation scores:
MMD = 29.1 · 10−4, MMDsmp = 24.5 · 10−4, making further assessment redundant. Evidence of
model overfitting may be inspected in Appendix G.
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
59
==PAGE:70==
Figure 8.7: A subset of decoded meshes sampled from the most promising LCA LDM model showcasing low di-
versity and quality. Branches are overly wavy, merge at unrealistic points, and branch segments are unrealistically
thick.
Analysis
As depicted in section 8.1.3, even the best found model has a low sample eﬀicacy, requiring 6 re-
sampling iterations to produce 100 single component samples. In order to gain an understanding
of where in the decoder chain the artery tree breaks and becomes defect, decoded octrees were
exported and visualized at all decoder depths, with the intention of determining whether the
generated octree structure itself breaks during decoding or if the error lies in SDF-imputation
from decoded leaf-node features due to excess noise. The results are presented in Figure 8.8.
Figure 8.8: Generated LCA octrees at each step of the VAE decoder. Each row corresponds to outputs from a
generated sample ˆZ. For each sample ˆZi, from left to right: ˆT 5, ˆT 6, ˆT 7 and the resultant mesh ˆΩ. The branch
structure erodes rapidly between ˆT 5 and ˆT 6, which produces floating nodes directly in ˆT 6 or seemingly creating
voxel-width nodes which produce floating nodes when upsampled to ˆT 7 (dark blue sample). Some excessively
thick segments remain at ˆT 7.
The upsampled octrees are shown to exhibit a tendency to erode catastrophically at depth 6
which is represented in the defect output meshes. Interestingly, the mesh output ˆΩrespects ˆT 7
quite well, showcasing out-of-distribution robustness of the neural MPU. Regions with a thin
string of nodes in ˆT 7 can also be observed to be inferred as blank space by the neural MPU.
Discussion
The results did not achieve the desired outcome and highlight limitations of the proposed LDM
approach for LCA modeling, as sample quality was so low even when utilizing a lax resampling
policy. Potential reasons are discussed in the following paragraphs.
Decoder breakage
The observed ˆT 6 and ˆT 7 breakage tendency points to the diffusion pro-
cess being too error-prone at depth 4. Due to the nonlinearities in the VAE decoder design, depth
4 latent feature errors are expected to propagate non-linearly as a function of the depth-distance
between the current decoder stage and the bottleneck. An alternative explanation could be the
relatively low SDF sampling used during VAE training. Consider a single string of nodes at
depth ˆT 5, which break when propagated to ˆT 7 as showcased in Figure 8.8. Such fine segments
60
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
==PAGE:71==
could, in principle, be considered out-of-distribution for the VAE decoder, if the training SDF
resolution is not large enough to enforce existence of thin segments during optimization; those
single-file segments, occuring during generation, would then render as empty, as they are not
enforced to contribute to the active-node leaf node features at depth 7.
An overly compressed latent
A depth 4 latent space corresponds to a worst-case com-
pression rate of 23·7
23·4 = 29 = 512 (assuming T7 is dense). This is a rather extreme compression
rate, especially considering the nature of the LCA topology, which contains high frequency fea-
tures and fine segments. As a result, it is expected that the latent space is underutilized for
LCA, as most of Z will encode blank space information. This is not necessarily an issue in the
VAE-setting, but for diffusion this means that the nodes of Z which encode the artery branch
structure are sparse. In the case of imprecise diffusion, a small error in what is supposed to be
an active node in ˆZ may not be corrected by neighboring nodes due to the over-compression, as
blank space dominates the neighboring nodes receptive field. Possibly, results could be better
using a lower compression rate, but this was deemed infeasible due to a large expected increase
in compute.
VAE performance disparity
The observed behavior was contrary to initial belief, as it was
anticipated that the implicit regularization of MV,mc with respect to the LCA class would enforce
a better-behaved latent space and thus ease diffusion. The contrary was found; significantly
better results were obtained when trained on MV,lca posterior samples.
This may indicate
that the manifold navigation task is harder in MV,mc, although clear structure was found using
methods of latent probing. Authors in [67] demonstrate that diffusion models trained on datasets
with larger complexity exhibit less consistent local tangent spaces in their latent space. By
analogy, the increased latent space utilization necessary for achieving good reconstruction quality
in a multiclass setting could introduce an increasingly complicated latent manifold when using
the same parameter budget.
This increased complexity would likely propagate to the noisy
latent states, making the diffusion task significantly more challenging. In this case, shortest
paths on the latent manifold could be increasingly curved while a close class clustering could
still be maintained.
Conclusion
LCA modeling results were highly disappointing. Although it was achievable to generate joint
samples, trials revealed a success-rate of below 20% whilst the induced output was qualitatively
below standard, which effectively rules out the modeling similarly intricate structures using the
simple LDM approach.
8.1.4
Multiclass Latent Diffusion Model Results
Due to the computational and narrative constraints of the thesis setting, only the myocardium
LDM was subjected to full hyperparameter and generalization analysis. The multiclass evalua-
tion presented here is therefore meant to give a conservative estimate of performance, assuming
minimal tuning, and serves to test the LDM framework extensibility beyond single-organ setups.
As an informed guess for a functioning multi-organ network, the same general model architecture
as the myocardium model MZ,myo converged upon in subsection 8.1.1 was employed to learn
to navigate diffusion in the latent space of the MV,mc model. Given the multi-class setup, the
model was extended with a self-attention mechanism at the end of lower UNet stages. This was
primarily done to allow the model to capture long-range dependencies and global contextual
relationships in feature maps. In our multi-class setup, class information is globally infused via.
a combined class and timestep embedding. In this case, self-attention allows effective modulation
and integration of global dependencies in a class-conditional manner.
Two models were trained: one using spherical organs (left myocardia, atria and ventricles) and
another which additionally included the LCA class. These models will be referred to as MZ,1
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
61
==PAGE:72==
and MZ,2, respectively. MZ,2 was trained in order to determine the robustness against the
presence of a very dissimilar class, which might never aptly converge, while also investigating
whether a larger dataset (with no octree snappage) would improve LCA sample quality.
Training a model with validation every 200 epochs took 8 hours. Convergence was stable in
all classes, generally following the trend of significantly larger loss values in the low timestep
(∈[0.82; 0.85]) than in medium (∈[0.26; 0.29]) and high buckets (∈[0.01; 0.03]). In general,
losses are largest for LCA (when present) and myocardia, followed by ventricles, and atria
achieving the lowest losses.
Post-fitting, 100 samples were generated per class at guidance scales w ∈{3.0, 5.0, 7.0} and mesh-
metrics were evaluated. Generating 100 samples per class took approximately one hour. Notably,
generation is significantly slower for spherical classes given their dense nature. Evaluation was
carried out on all three splits for MZ,1, omitting test set evaluations for MZ,2 as it showed
marginally worse performances when considering all metrics jointly. For both models, the lowest
guidance scale investigated produced the highest quality generated meshes when considering
metrics. Peak performance metrics are presented in Table 8.5, with all spherical organ values
found from MZ,1. As in previous experiments, COV and 1-NNA scores over unseen data splits
were obtained via bootstrapping. For the interested reader, the metrics as a function of guidance
scale may be found in Appendix H.2.
In order to fairly assess MMD scores obtained in Table 8.5, MMD scores are matched relative
to intra- and inter-set baselines as demonstrated in the myocardium case (Section 8.1.1). Mean
intra-set MMD scores are presented in Table 8.6.
While a full multi-class analysis is time-
prohibitive, visualizations of low- and high-scoring generated samples per class are provided in
Appendix H.2.2. These reveal no obvious signs of training set memorization and are further
supported by the large relative training set coverage across all classes. Some class inconsistency
is found for atria, where the low guidance scale actually generates ventricle samples (3%) when
using atrium class embeddings.
As a visual guide for the analysis, a small sample of generated meshes can be inspected in
Appendix H.2.1 and a similar visualization for the closest and furthest MMDsmp(train) matches
are presented in Appendix H.2.2.
Analysis
The conclusions on the basis of the following analysis is that the model displays generative
capabilities whilst producing under-coverage: conservative sampling with relatively high fidelity.
This is again presented beforehand for ease of interpretation, as the analysis is akin to the MMD
analysis in subsection 8.1.1. As is revealed, the conclusions are only based on spherical-organ
generation, as LCA generation was unfeasible.
From Table 8.5 it is evident that the generator struggles to produce coherent LCA samples, repre-
sented by high MMD scores and further highlighted under visual inspection, exhibiting severely
invalid meshes with many connected components, resembling small islands of mesh presence
rather than arteries (see Appendix H.2.1). Conforming to the findings in subsection 8.1.3, the
LDM is incapable of learning a meaningful LCA representation, even at the highest guidance
scale. This is further emphasized in Appendix H.2.3, employing s = 12 (large). LCA results are
therefore not subject to further analysis.
Examining Table 8.5 results laterally, atria are found to produce lower MMD scores, which
could indicate that the class may be very simple to model, presumably due to their simpler
geometry. Conversely, ventricles exhibit the largest MMD scores whilst simultaneously achieving
the lowest 1-NNA score, indicating that ventricles are scrutinized more heavily wrt. MMD,
likely due to the geometry of the outflow tract. Test COV results are overall inferior when
62
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
==PAGE:73==
compared to benchmarks (MZ,myo and results on ShapeNet benchmarks [68, 65, 69]), which
may indicate mode-seeking behaviour or under-coverage.
Investigating MMDsmp scores, the
test scores are systematically larger than their train counterparts, indicating a lower fidelity
as measured to the test-set, which could indicate that generalization gaps are present or some
degree of memorization is taking place.
Metric↓/ Class →
LCAc
L. Myocardium
L. Atrium
L. Ventricle
MMDa
(↓)
52.5 / 53.0
7.04 / 7.07
4.85 / 4.41
8.31 / 8.58
MMDsmp(↓)
43.5 / 56.7
4.58 / 5.62
3.40 / 4.50
4.18 / 5.71
COVb
(↑)
0.093 / 0.408
0.124 / 0.359
0.127 / 0.436
0.136 / 0.423
1-NNA
0.873 / 0.860
0.693 / 0.724
0.643 / 0.636
0.605 / 0.595
Table 8.5: The best found mesh performances when generating 100 samples at guidance scale w = 3.0 in format
train/validation for LCA and train/test for other classes. a: reported in 10−4. b: evaluated using 100 generated
samples. Optimal sample eﬀiciency is 0.163 for train and 1.0 for test. c: for the w = 3.0 model which included
LCA, and is reported in format train/validation.
Class
MMD(Dtrain)
MMD(Dval)
LCA
20.3
32.1
Myocardium
5.34
7.17
Atrium
3.41
4.87
Ventricle
6.11
9.44
Table 8.6: Mean MMD values over train and vali-
dation point clouds respectively, expressed in 10−4.
Inspecting myocardium results explicitly using
MZ,myo as a benchmark (Table 8.1), significantly
larger MMD scores are obtained in the multi-class
setup, indicating either lower fidelity- or a larger di-
versity in generated samples. Simultaneously, the
difference between train and test MMD and 1-NNA
scores is smaller, suggesting stronger generalization
for MZ,1. Combined with visual assessments, this
points toward more robust generalization capabili-
ties in the multi-class setup, possibly due to inher-
ent regularization. Training COV has comparatively similar performance to MZ,myo whilst test
COV is notably lower than the Monte Carlo resampled results in figure 8.1 (COVtrain=0.136
([0.124; 0.147]), COVtest=0.558 ([0.500; 0.618])), indicating notably weaker generalization cov-
erage than the baseline method. The train set 1-NNA is significantly larger than the baseline
model (difference of 0.128), but only marginally larger measured on the test set (0.054 differ-
ence), possibly indicating some degree of underfitting (or the baseline model overfitting).
Relating to the intra-set scores of Table 8.6, generated samples overall achieve MMD values
comparable with MMD(Dval) scores, and substantially higher than MMD(Dtrain). If the model
were memorizing or mode-seeking, MMDsmp scores on the train set would be expected to be
significantly lower than MMD, due to sample reproduction. This pattern is indeed observed.
However, MMDsmp scores are not pathologically low, which would be expected under strong
memorization. It is hypothesized that rather than overfitting the model exhibits under-coverage.
The following paragraph attempts to add further evidence to support the hypothesis.
Inspecting the results laterally, test-set MMDsmp scores are all larger than their training coun-
terparts, meaning generated samples on average have higher fidelity to the training set, which
either indicates memorization or under-coverage. In the scenario that memorization occurs, the
following behavior would be expected: (1) training 1-NNA would collapse towards 0.5, (2) Train-
ing set MMDsmp would go towards zero, and (3) test coverage would become very low, which
are all not measured. Under-coverage is therefore a more likely outcome. Further lateral inves-
tigation on MMDsmp scores could also indicate under-coverage, as these are generally notably
smaller for all classes as compared to their MMD counterpart. Note, this could also be a natural
consequence of under-sampling. Visual inspection of aforementioned Appendixes show closest
pairs to be visually quite different across the class spectrum, indicating that memorization does
not take place to a pathological degree. High-scoring MMD matches are overall still realistic, fur-
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
63
==PAGE:74==
ther emphasizing likely under-coverage. Lastly, visual results for the low-scoring MMD bucket
of the ventricle class also alleviate overfitting concerns (high MMD vs low MMDsmp), seemingly
expressing considerable variance wrt. the length and angle of the left ventricular outflow tract.
Interestingly, MMD scores over both splits universally across the organ-classes match better
to baseline MMD(Dval) scores rather than MMD(Dtrain), suggesting realistic variability and
diversity comparable to the natural variation in the validation set, and capture characteristics
of unseen data with a similar amount of fidelity as within the validation set. This could be
a marker of true generative performance. This trend is consistent with obtained train MMD
results over MZ,myo (5.62 · 10−4), and deserves deeper exploration via a larger sample size and
feature-level evaluation to rule out under-fitting as an alternative cause.
For the myocardium and atrium classes, test MMDsmp scores are consistently observed to be
close to (or somewhat lower than) their respective MMD(Dval) baselines. This closeness, while
maintaining a larger value than train MMDsmp scores, suggests that generated samples exhibit
a level of fidelity to the test-set comparably to the inherent variability in the baseline validation
set. Overfitting could also be an explanation, which could, under assumptions, explain why
the MMDsmp scores across the board are systematically lower than MMD(Dval), elaborated for
the left ventricle in the following.
Here, a large deviation between test MMDsmp score and
the corresponding MMD(Dval) baseline (difference 3.73 · 10−4) is observed. This suggests that
generated samples on average are closer to test samples than validation samples are to each
other. Assuming that MMD(Dval) approximates MMD(Dtest) adequately, three interpretations
are possible:
• 1. The generator behaves especially well for ventricles, seemingly generalizing incredibly
well.
• 2. The test-set happens to exhibit low diversity or has fewer complex modes than the
validation set.
• 3. The model is train-set mode-seeking, and the training modes covered are highly repre-
sented in the test set.
The latter scenario should typically result in a low test- and train-coverage. Although coverage
results are not amazing, they are still not pathologically low, making overfitting an unlikely
cause. This suggests that favorable generalization remains a plausible explanation for ventricle
and atrium classes, when also considering the train MMDsmp minimizing generated samples as
compared to their matches. For the myocardium class, indications of mode-seeking overfitting
are present.
Discussion
When comparing to the myocardium-only model MMD scores, the numerically worse perfor-
mance over point cloud metrics may be explained by a number of factors.
Sample Size Limitations
Only 100 samples were utilized per class during evaluation, con-
siderably smaller to the 1024 samples used in during MZ,myo feature evaluations. Generating
more samples is expected to lower MMD, as a larger sample population increases the odds of
close matches, meaning the multi-class MMD estimators exhibit a pessimistic bias as a conse-
quence. Monte Carlo resampling was used in order to minimize the impact of different sample
sizes when evaluating 1-NNA and coverage. For drawing a strong conclusion, a larger sample
should be drawn from the multiclass model. This was decided against due to computational
impracticability; generating samples for spherical organs was a slow process, and the additional
quadratic scaling of MMD evaluation made it infeasible.
Architectural Generalization
The MZ,myo architecture was roughly transferred to the mul-
ticlass setup, with the only difference being additional class embeddings and self-attention blocks.
64
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
==PAGE:75==
The tuning of puncond and the guidance scale was very coarse, and there is no guarantee that
architectural parameters, optimization, or diffusion parameters are generalizable to a multiclass
setup. In order to mitigate the influence of the guidance scale, multiple scales were evaluated at
inference time, yet the best performing scale was the one used in the test-phase during model
training. The leading hypothesis was that similar classes, such as spherical classes, would require
lower guidance scales whereas dissimilar classes, such as LCA, would benefit from stronger con-
ditioning. Despite this, valid LCA meshes were never generated at any tested scale, observing no
systematic benefit to increasing the scale. Regardless, it is believed that a class-wise guidance-
scale tuning schema should be considered during training and inference, especially when tasked
with a diverse set of classes. Comparing to single-class models trained on LCA MZ,lca, per-
formance was notably worse, as described in the previous section. Likewise, it remains to be
determined whether the lower myocardium performance may be caused by the underlying as-
sumption that the latent space of Mv,mc is as easily navigable as the the latent space of Mv,myo,
which when considering that the same parameter budget was utilized, is by no means a rigorous
assumption.
Split Bias
Many results are compared to val baselines MMD(Dval)(N = 76), which are as-
sumed a valid proxy for the test set MMD(Dtest) (N = 78). Splits were assigned randomly,
and as a result, due to the small sample sizes, split imbalance may not be rejected, which could
in part explain the ventricle results. A more rigorous analysis should include comparisons to
MMD(Dtest) results. This was decided against due to time constraints. As such, results are
based on the assumption that the validation set is a good proxy. Ideally, consistency between
class-wise feature distributions should be verified using explicit metrics in order to ensure rep-
resentativity of validation and test splits. However, this was not pursued, due to computational
constraints and the diﬀiculty of defining meaningful, anatomically grounded metrics for highly
variable structures like ventricles.
Implicit Regularization
Interestingly, the higher MMD scores observed in the multi-class
model could reflect improved generalization, not worse performance. Multi-class learning could
act as an implicit regularizer by encouraging learning of shared organ structure (e.g. atria and
ventricles), which may improve generalization across classes.
This effect could be especially
relevant for classifier-free guided diffusion models, where lower guidance scales allow for more
mixing between class embeddings, encouraging a wider coverage of latent space. This should be
evaluated using feature evaluations and comparing to single-class baselines.
Conclusion
For a proof of concept this simplistic approach was deemed adequate, as this showcases worst-
case performances whilst balancing computational overhead, while still yielding somewhat promis-
ing results. Despite limitations, the model shows encouraging signs across three spherical classes,
albeit disappointment wrt. LCA output, irrespective of the utilized guidance scale. A thorough
anatomical feature assessment should be invoked. Measured by score metrics and visual in-
spections, the qualitative difference between the model including LCA as compared to the one
without is minuscule, indicating robustness over divergent class extensions. The assumed in-
creased implicit regularization from the multi-class model is intriguing for future single-class
learning objectives over simple organs, which could conceivably out-perform single-class models
such as the myocardium LDM model.
8.2
Signal Conditional Diffusion Model Results
To combat the fragmented tendency of generated samples produced by the proposed LDM model,
it was found necessary to modify the network topology to include structural model conditioning
to help guide the generated latent code using a representation of a depth 6 octree graph. The
complete pipeline evaluation is thus parted in two: Section 8.2.1 analyses and discusses the
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
65
==PAGE:76==
results of the splitting signal network MS which generates octree structural representations,
whilst Section 8.2.2 further examines the performance of the conditional LDM architecture
MF . With spherical-organs obtaining promising results, this section is exclusively concerned
with modeling the LCA dataset.
8.2.1
Split Signal Diffusion Results
Experiments over the split-signal diffusion network MS were conducted using standard param-
eter tuning (e.g. model complexity, weight-decay and noise schedule), and altering the diffusion
objective, either employing the common ϵ objective (noise prediction), or S0 (input signal pre-
diction), as described in section 6.4. Training MS for 5000 epochs takes ∼4 hours to finish,
providing a significant speed-up as compared to the FiLM-conditional and LDM approaches.
Employing ϵ-prediction proved detrimental to quality, as models were unable to learn any mean-
ingful representation of the bounded split signal range (values between [−1; 1]), yielding pure
noise signals at the end of the reverse process. Efforts to solve this were in the form of (1)
applying tanh-activation to model outputs, as a means of constraining them within the desired
range; (2) varying the noise schedule; and (3) varying model complexity – all with diminishing
returns. Tanh failure was especially mystifying, yet is thought to be due to gradient saturation
within the tanh activation, hindering effective backpropagation. Overall it was found that the
diffusion task was exclusively solvable when employing the S0-prediction task, allowing the de-
noising network to converge during optimization, omitting output-activations due to the direct
scale control. It was therefore empirically found, that bounded output generation was more
easily achieved using S0-prediction. This is also suggested in other works which use the same
task [20].
Irrespective of complexity and noise schedule, all models exhibited a strong tendency for over-
fitting, as measured by validation losses. This was especially evident in low (t ≤200) and mid
(t ∈]200; 800]) time-step buckets where the denoising-task is easier, due to a high SNR and the
nature of the S0-task. To combat this, multiple forms of regularization were applied. Exper-
iments were conducted on models with parameters ranging between 1-60M, varying between
cosine and linear variance schedules. A cosine schedule with s=4.00·10−3 was shown to produce
qualitatively more varying samples with faster convergence.
Analysis showed that the largest models were able to produce octrees which visually appeared
very complicated, yet when investigating the quality of produced octrees using a graph connec-
tivity metric, most octrees turned out defect, consisting of two or more components even when
evaluating after 17000 epochs. In addition, the largest models overfitted severely, as measured
by validation losses. In stark contrast, the smallest 1M model produced non-defect octrees after
only 1500 epochs, yet failed to generate expressive samples; generated octrees exhibited under-
representation in the number of artery branches, implying octrees were rudimentary in structure.
This can be seen in Appendix I, Figure I.1. An effective compromise of these was found, using a
model with 4M parameters which was selected using qualitative investigations on visualizations
of generated octrees, as losses did not necessarily translate to high fidelity samples.
Challenges in Model Selection and Metric Refinement
Due to inevitable overfitting at late epochs, it was found necessary to formulate an early-stopping
criterion. To aid selection, a pseudo application of point cloud/mesh metrics (Section 6.6.3) was
initially employed, using a Monte-Carlo sampling approach to improve robustness by running 5
evaluation rounds per validation epoch. In order to employ these, point clouds were constructed
by sampling a total of 4096 points within octree nodes. This approach proved insuﬀicient, as
samples from the suggested stopping epoch proved to be reproductions of training data. This
was further supported by Maximum Matching Overlap (MMO, subsection 6.6.3): training scores
ranged between [0.989; 1], suggesting that point cloud metrics are not robust for detecting octree
66
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
==PAGE:77==
overfitting. In comparison, mean validation MMO was 0.281, indicative of generated samples
being out-of-distribution as compared to the held-out set, thus making MMO a metric sensitive
to overfitting.
As a result, point-cloud metrics were substituted by visual monitoring of
ˆ
T 6 during valida-
tion, supported by MMO evaluation. Likewise, a resampling approach was introduced; during
validation, 5 resampling iterations were allowed in order to achieve the total number of valid
samples requested in order to potentially be able to end training at an earlier point. Validity was
measured by converting each generated split matrix into a 3D graph, counting the number of
connected components. This allowed evaluation of the sample eﬀiciency per epoch. Metrics were
re-evaluated at all checkpoints for all fitted models which produced visually accurate octrees.
An interesting finding was made: the epoch where models begin to consistently generate singly
connected components in the first sampling iteration, is also approximately the point at which
overfitting occurs, irrespective of model parameters, as indicated by MMO. This may be due to
the inherent variability, sparsity and small sample of LCAs. An alternative explanation could
be that MS lacks inductive bias due to the 3D UNet architecture; some degree of overfitting
may be necessary for being able to model the dual octree data structure.
Using the new palette of metrics, model selection converged to the same 4M model. Overfitting
was indicated already at 1.50·103 epochs, at a point where the model had yet not learned the
distribution of the ground truth data. This could be inspected visually, where the branching
pattern was overly simplistic and the sample diversity was low as compared to the ground truth
set, but the next checkpoint was overfit so much that it was deemed unusable. As a result,
the model at 1.50·103 epochs was chosen, well-knowing that it was not capable of producing
realistic, complex artery trees, showcasing how MMO is neither a robust selection criterion.
The key issue lies in the fact that samples which are not novel can still score MMO JI ≪1.0,
as a model may still heavily rely on training data for generation. This is caused by the metric:
(1) not being invariant under rigid transformations, or single-node insertions on training data;
and (2) becoming artificially low when one (simple) graph is contained within another, larger
graph, i.e. a graph with many splits.
Quantified Novelty Results
As a result of the diﬀicult model selection, the focus of analysis quickly switched from asserting
absolute generative capability to discern whether sub-elements of the model output could be con-
sidered
generative
as
a
minimally
viable
test
for
LCA
octree
generation.
COV(↑)
JIa
Train
0.462
0.699
Val
0.816
0.549
Test
0.756
0.569
Table 8.7:
The generated
split signal assignment using
AMMO matching on N =
1024 samples.
In order to quantify generative properties, the following evaluation
pipeline is proposed:
(1) Training set reproduction identification
and matching using AMMO, (2) Evaluation of pre-alignment (pose-
variant) one-sided CD and HD on point clouds, serving as a baseline
measure of similarity before pose normalization for matched samples,
(3) Pose normalization using ICP, and (4) Estimation of pose-invariant
similarity by recomputing one-sided CD and HD on aligned point
clouds.
N = 1024 samples were generated for AMMO evaluation,
yielding the results outlined in Table 8.7.
The results clearly indicate high subset-fidelity toward the training
set, less so for the held-out splits, indicating overfitting.
Still, on
average, JIa scores indicate that 30.1% of generated signals contain novel nodes as compared
to the training set when matched using AMMO, which is a significant amount considering that
the average number of nodes in the generated set is 115 vs. 188 in the training set. ICP is
only utilized on AMMO-matched pairs.
In order to allow comparison to later MF results,
only the subset of signals which yielded valid MF -output meshes are investigated. This subset
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
67
==PAGE:78==
mapped to 482 unique training samples using AMMO, with subset JIa scores 0.714/0.593/0.609
for train/validation/test and corresponding coverages 0.788/0.671/0.628.
ICP evaluation is carried out by sampling 4096 points equally across all active octree nodes with
a narrow Gaussian centered at the node-centre. The large number (compared to the number of
active nodes) is used to introduce redundancy into point clouds, which is expected to improve
convergence of ICP, while also modeling the inherent uncertainty of the implicitly generated
volume wrt. point position within a node. L2 CD is primarily used for measuring improved
alignment after ICP, and results were manually validated on 50 samples by visualization, being
a major weakness of the analysis. The initial transformation proposal used for ICP is assumed
unitary due to the point-alignment used for model training.
CD and HD are evaluated one-way d( ˆP →Pgt) in order account for the fact that generated
samples are biased towards being substructures. L1 distance is employed for reporting HD, as
this models the discrete grid nature of octree nodes better, whilst CD is reported both in L1
and L2. Figure 8.9 shows the results.
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25
1.50
Value
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Density
CDL2 pre-alignment
Test (M = 0.433)
Val (M = 0.494)
Train (M = 0.264)
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25
1.50
Value
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Density
CDL2 post-alignment
Test (M = 0.240)
Val (M = 0.251)
Train (M = 0.186)
0
5
10
15
20
25
Value
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
Density
Mean CDL2 pre-alignment (non-overlap)
Test (M = 1.395)
Val (M = 1.490)
Train (M = 1.161)
0
1
2
3
Value
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
Density
CDL1 pre-alignment
Test (M = 0.532)
Val (M = 0.568)
Train (M = 0.379)
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25
1.50
Value
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
Density
CDL1 post-alignment
Test (M = 0.564)
Val (M = 0.583)
Train (M = 0.454)
1
2
3
4
5
Value
0
1
2
3
4
Density
Mean CDL1 pre-alignment (non-overlap)
Test (M = 1.294)
Val (M = 1.321)
Train (M = 1.141)
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
Value
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
Density
HDL1 pre-alignment
Test (M = 3.025)
Val (M = 3.096)
Train (M = 2.165)
0
2
4
6
Value
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Density
HDL1 post-alignment
Test (M = 1.985)
Val (M = 2.059)
Train (M = 1.879)
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Value
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Density
JI Scores pre-alignment
Test (M = 0.608)
Val (M = 0.585)
Train (M = 0.710)
Figure 8.9: Histograms of results from the generative evaluation pipeline when comparing to train, validation
and test sets using N = 482 generated samples. Distances are measured in units of node-length when comparing
point clouds sampled from octree nodes, and are evaluated between AMMO matched samples. All distances are
asymmetric, measuring the distance d( ˆP →Pgt). (upper row): Pre-alignment CD and HD scores, (Middle row):
CD and HD scores post-alignment, (bottom row, from left to right): AMMO matched JIa-scores, L2 CD on nodes
which do not overlap before alignment, L1 CD on nodes which do not overlap before alignment. M indicates the
median.
68
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
==PAGE:79==
Analysis
Investigating the results presented in Figure 8.9, all metrics consistently yield highest similarity
to the training set as compared to the held-out sets (lower distances and larger JI scores),
indicating a degree of aﬀinity towards training set octrees, which similarly indicates overfitting.
Held together with the qualitative assessment, which indicated structural underfitting, it seems
that the model is underfitting the complexity of artery trees while generating samples that
are highly similar to the low-variability structures surrounding the aorta root in the training
data. This intricate behavior, however, does not directly support a conclusion against generative
capability.
Investigating the lower row of Figure 8.9, the non-overlapping octants before alignment, i.e.
the nodes which are active on the generated sample and not on the ground truth sample, are
exhibiting aﬀinity towards training data, possibly indicating that training data serves as a sketch
for generations. Approximately 10%, 29% and 25% of samples, when comparing to Dtrain, Dval
and Dtest respectively, have a CDL1 value exceeding 1.5 node lengths. This could possibly point
toward the existence of a small, novel branch, due to it being a measure of mean distance for a few
training samples. This is further supported by the pre-alignment distance scores for the complete
trees (upper row of 8.9). Approximately 12%, 30% and 27% for the same listing respectively
produce pre-alignment HD scores larger than 4 node lengths, which is quite significant given the
coarse domain, an example of which may be investigated in Figure 8.10.
Figure 8.10: A generated ˆ
T 6 sample (left) and its corresponding AMMO paired training set signal (right). The
middle pane shows the two samples overlaid before alignment (magenta is the intersection of the two octrees).
Yellow boxes indicate uniquely generated elements. The two samples have HDL1 ≈4, and a non-overlap CDL1 =
1.54 measured in normalized voxel side-lengths.
Remembering that HD measures worst-case distance, these results point towards presence of
novel branches both in measured on average and in worst-case, albeit on a small subset of
generated samples.
Considering ICP results, CDL2 and HDL1 distances become smaller for all splits after ICP-
alignment. This is to be expected, as even very aligned point clouds sampled in the discrete
voxel grid can be aligned closer when operating in a continuous domain, allowing for sub-voxel,
grid-breaking adjustments. For both metrics, gaps between split distributions are minimized
after ICP-alignment, but the aﬀinity towards training data remains, yielding significantly lower
median values than for held-out splits. While any optimization process like ICP will inherently
reduce measured distance, this is still somewhat informative; the large reduction between pre-
alignment and post-alignment median values could indeed indicate that part of the difference
between generated samples and held-out samples may, in part, be accredited to rigid transforma-
tions. This could indicate some degree of pose-invariant sub structural generalization, although
larger aﬀinity toward training data remains. It is interesting that the median over both Dval and
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
69
==PAGE:80==
Dtest for CDL2 post-alignment is comparable to those of Dtrain pre-alignment, suggesting that
the model is able to generalize as well to held-out splits if rigid transformations are accounted
for.
Interestingly, an increase in train CDL1 is measured after ICP. The same is measured for held-out
sets, but to a smaller extent. ICP uses an L2 objective, which may not simultaneously optimize
CDL1. This is a simple consequence of the norms; the L2 objective prioritizes penalizing larger
discrepancies more strongly than the L1 objective. As a result, the increase may indicate that
ICP is focusing on minimizing errors between divergent generated branch and ground truth
branches, introducing small errors as measured in L1. This entails, that structure is more well-
aligned on average, but node-to-node translations are increased. This effect is less pronounced
for held-out sets, which suggests that an initial shape misalignment produces a distribution of
errors that differs when aligning to training-, and unseen data respectively, which could indicate
a lessened fidelity post-alignment to held-out sets.
Figure 8.11: Point cloud ICP transformation. (Upper row): Pseudo point clouds before ICP alignment for
samples matched using AMMO with their associated CDL2-distances measured in units of normalized node side-
lengths. (Lower row): the point clouds after ICP alignment, with the associated remaining CDL2 distance. Red
are generated samples, blue are training set samples.
In order to gain sense of the scale, Figure 8.11 shows point clouds pre- and post-alignment
together with their corresponding CDL2 values. As illustrated, even for smaller values of CDL2 =
1.80·10−1 (approximately the train set median post alignment), there are still notable differences
between the two inspected point clouds after alignment, clearly indicating that larger distances
entail no complete engulfment of the generated signal even after ICP. The figure also showcases
some of the pitfalls using ICP, as the right-most column allows movement of the aorta root
deeper into the paper-plane (i.e. away from the reader).
Discussion
As preliminarily stated, generated trees are rudimentary, which could indicate mode-seeking
behavior to simple training modes or indicate lack of generalization to root-distant branches, i.e.
70
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
==PAGE:81==
being out-of-distribution. However, visual analysis and comparison of pre- and post-alignment
distance scores point towards MS synthesizing new, but small, branch roots.
Semantically, this makes sense; LCAs exhibit large variance in the space covered. As a result,
very few branches have exact overlaps in input-space, which makes mixture synthesis a diﬀicult
task. This is well supported by the diﬀiculty of establishing meaningful latent interpolations
during VAE experimentation. Two steps were taken in order to increase overlap; root-alignment
and a harsh VAE compression scheme to depth 4. This, seemingly, does not allow modeling dis-
tant branches adequately. The diﬀiculty in predicting branch trajectories accurately is expected
to be a function of distance to the shared reference-point (the aorta root). As a result, using
the most common denominator of the variant structures, i.e. the roots and surrounding area,
as a building block for synthesis is reasonable from a semantic standpoint. A larger amount
of training data is expected to increase the overlap of space covered, and thus is expected to
increase performance on distant branches. Beyond these semantic considerations, a thorough
examination of the methodological choices in the MS pipeline reveal several points which need
to be addressed critically.
Model selection.
Due to the diﬀiculty with establishing a good model checkpoint, an early
model was chosen. The use of Jaccard based metrics on-the-fly instead of post-hoc would also
have been preferable, as they turned out to yield better diagnostic insight. Such an evaluation
is more computationally eﬀicient as compared to mesh metrics, while also suiting the domain
better, possibly allowing frequent validation and better tuning. In-between the point of under-
fitting and overfitting, a good model may exist, but Jaccard based metrics are also error-prone,
and therefore a refined search was omitted. Similarly, the AMMO criterion, whilst more robust
than MMO, is not able to assign correct similarity matches in presence of rigid transformation,
which is an underlying assumption for the complete analysis. The use of a graph native metric
would hence have been appropriate both for diagnosing underfitting, memorization and nov-
elty in a rigorous manner, but no such practically usable metrics were found for octrees when
investigating literature.
Resampling.
The necessity for resampling generated signals for ensuring validity poses prob-
lems. On one hand, a reverse process sample with 100 LCA samples takes ∼10 seconds, thus
yielding a minimal computational impact. On the other hand, resampling may introduce mod-
eness in generated samples if validity is correlated with a sample type, and will presumably also
bias generated signals to be simpler. In order to omit resampling, overfitting is necessary in all
configurations investigated. This could indicate a fundamental issue with the investigated ar-
chitecture, model selection, denoising task, or point towards data limitations. The justification
for the resampling approach is based on the overarching objective of the complete pipeline –
in order to produce valid ˆΩsamples, the condition ˆS must necessarily be anatomically consis-
tent to guide the reverse process accurately in MF . As a result, octree snappage must not be
allowed in the conditioning signal. This could, however, be alleviated by other methods such
as graph completion, implying interleaving intermediate nodes between snapped components,
which could either be achieved by naïvely using VTK primitives or by training a VAE network
with an inpainting objective.
Pseudo point cloud based evaluation.
A graph-based metric would also make graph-
similarity comparisons easier. Variants such as graph gap edit distance were investigated, but not
practical. As a result, point cloud methods were used, and results of these are expected heavily
influenced by (1) the tuning of the variance of the gaussian distribution for sampling and (2) ICP
convergence properties. ICP is prone to identifying local optima, and formulating a well-posed
optimization problem is detrimental when using ICP in settings such as graph-comparisons.
Issues regarding broken/incomplete point clouds are relieved through the resampling procedure,
thus ensuring consistent input trees; however, ICPs inherent sensitivity to local optima risks not
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
71
==PAGE:82==
producing correct shape alignment. The risk is presumably exacerbated for artery trees, where
topologies differ much and the density of points is spread out over long branches, even more so
when topologies are very different (rudimentary signals vs full artery trees, c.f. Figure 8.11).
The observed increase of post-alignment CDL1 may be a measure of this, with the interpretation
of outliers (far branches) potentially dominating optimization. As a result, ground truth long
branches should either not be penalized or sampled in the pseudo point cloud, but the cut-off
threshold is an optimization problem in itself. Likewise, ICP is designed for continuous data,
not discrete grids. In order to mitigate these effects, a large number of points were sampled
per node in order to generate fuzzy point clouds, and visual validation was carried out while
monitoring optimization cost and other distance metrics.
Still, it is not trivial to conclude
whether a solution is globally optimal, especially for discrete voxels, when one artery is not very
similar of another. An identity initial transformation was assumed to be a good initial guess
due to the pre-processing root alignment. Principally, this is a bad assumption; if the generated
signals come from an overfit model, an identity initial transformation is expected to be a better
approximation for the training set, possibly not generalizing to held-out splits. This being a
potential issue is represented by the large median initial AMMO JIa of 71% for training data,
being at least 10% smaller for held-out sets, indicating a larger initial overlap which may be
caused by e.g. rotation of the root segment. Possibly, aligning the aorta surface normal vector
would be a better alignment scheme for ensuring consistency in initial condition robustness of
ICP.
In effect, measured effects could be an artifact of a systematic difference in ICP convergence,
due to initial conditions on different splits. As such, a more sophisticated instantiation should
be used, possibly using multiple start configurations, in order to rule out these effects. While
the approach is not perfect, L2-monitoring of pre- and post-alignment distances indicates that
samples are at least more closely aligned after ICP than before, supported by visual inspection,
which still allows ruling out a partial effect of rigid transformation to a larger degree than
omitting ICP completely.
A formal proof-of-concept of MS should in principle be made on simpler data (e.g. myocardia)
in order to ensure that modeling other organ structures is possible. Whilst experimentation
on myocardia was carried out, and results were visually promising, the lack of proper metrics
disallowed quick analysis, and thus was not possible within the project period.
Conclusion
Holistically, the proposed two-layer architecture heavily relies on having produced a robust
MS which is able to generate new within-distribution splitting signals. The best achieved MS
generates rudimentary signals with minor generative aspects, and as such may not be considered
robust enough for realizing the MF pipeline.
8.2.2
FiLM-Conditioned Latent Diffusion Model Results
By extension, the following section conveys the applicability of signal generation, as they only
serve to impose additional structural information into the LDM network. Results suggest im-
provement, yet further development is still needed. FiLM-conditioned experiments were con-
ducted using MF models in the [1M; 8M] parameter range, achieving best performances using
a model with 4M parameters, taking ∼10 hours to train for 5000 epochs when evaluating every
500 epochs and employing 5 resampling iterations per validation step. Running time is far longer
than observed when employing MZ using the LCA dataset, however, much is owed to frequent
resampling (∼3 hours), exhibiting similar running time to LDM when omitted. During training,
sampling was performed using Dtrain signals as conditioning, whilst loss convergence was stable
for all models. Larger model complexities (> 8M parameters) were rejected due to previous
findings indicating overfitting.
72
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
==PAGE:83==
To guide model selection, single-component mesh generation performance was first employed,
acting as a lower bound when assessing model performance. Having obtained a set of candidate
models, mesh metrics were subsequently used for cross comparison. Throughout, experiments
were conducted either employing MV,lca or MV,mc as base, with the latter being the predominant
base given the finding in Section 7.3. Better single-component rates were achieved using MV,lca
(84%) when conditioned on Dtrain signals, only achieving a peak of 58% when employing MV,mc.
Qualitative inspection displayed inferior performances for MV,lca models however, exhibiting
considerably more dense and incoherent meshes. Interestingly, whilst unrealistic, the meshes
were far more complex than those observed using MV,mc as base, expected to be a product of
a more expressive latent space. Experimentation hence revealed, that an LCA model trained to
predict MV,mc features was most suitable. Figure 8.12 illustrates model performance, showing
generated meshes when conditioned on Dtrain and Dval respectively.
Figure 8.12: Examples of MMDsmp matched samples for generated LCA output for the best performing MF
model when conditioned on Dtrain (left) and Dval (right). Results portray MF ’s ability to produce realistic-,
complex arteries, showing potential for the FiLM approach. Issues still persist even when conditioned on Dtrain,
as depicted in the right Dtrain sample, where the highlighted training branch has snapped, yet is joint to another
branch. The seemingly novel artery when conditioned over Dval is also encouraging.
Having selected a model, evaluation was primarily based on MF ’s ability to be conditioned by
held-out signal conditions. Two types of conditioning was tested: (1) signals from each ground-
truth split respectively, using a batch size of 100; and (2) generated signals produced by MS,
using 1100 generated ˆS samples, as mentioned in Section 8.2.1. In principle, this measures the
models’ ability to generalize. During evaluation, resampling was utilized in order to evaluate
model valid sampling eﬀicacy. As a single sampling iteration takes ∼200s for 100 samples when
using the same resampling policy as in Section 8.2.1, a good candidate model needs high valid
sample eﬀicacy.
A thorough examination of MF ’s performance when conditioned by MS signals was conducted,
in view of making cross comparisons between signal performances in Figure 8.9.
For each
generated mesh ˆΩ∈ˆΩand conditioned signal ˆS ∈ˆS, the following metrics were measured:
1. AMMO, CDL2 and HDL1 scores between conditioning MS-generated signal ˆS and FiLM-
decoded signal ˆSF ( ˆΩ), in order to determine signal adherence,
2. CDL2 and HDL1 comparison between ˆΩnearest-neighbour in mesh space Ω, where ˆΩ7→CD
Ωand the corresponding signal-associated mesh ΩS, where ˆS 7→JI S(ΩS), measuring the
disparity between the two generated sets to determine possible overfitting, and
3. ICP distance results (CDL2 and HDL1) when aligning ˆΩ/ ˆΩ/ ˆSF with Ω, ΩS and ˆS respec-
tively, to determine whether a mismatch (Ω̸= ΩS) stems from the model having learned
to produce rigid transformations.
Overall, the success criteria for MF are the following: (1) The validity and quality of generated
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
73
==PAGE:84==
meshes should be approximately as high for held-out/generated samples as for training samples;
(2) The output mesh ˆΩshould be positively correlated with the conditioning split signal ˆS; and
(3) The generated mesh ˆΩshould be suﬀiciently dissimilar from all training meshes ˆΩi where
i ∈Dtrain, as measured by generative mesh metrics. Figure 8.13 shows results used in order to
evaluate these criteria. Per split mesh metrics may be inspected in Appendix J.4.
Figure 8.13:
Histograms and kde-plots of mesh-distances for the FiLM-output ˆΩ.
Pre-alignment indicates
before ICP; post-alignment indicates after ICP between two matched samples. Units are in node lengths. (Left
column): SF is a point cloud sampled from the FiLM-generated
ˆ
T 6, whereas SS is a point cloud sampled from
the conditioning signal used during generation. (Middle column): Disregarding conditioning signal, a mesh-based
nearest neighbor matching based on CD is utilized, corresponding to MMDsmp matching. Generated meshes Ω
are compared to the three dataset splits using mesh-distances. (Right column): Mesh-comparisons between the
ground truth mesh associated with the conditioning signal ΩS and the FiLM-generated output mesh ˆΩ. JI-scores
are computed asymmetrically after AMMO-matching, i.e.
only normalizing with the number of active nodes
present in ˆSF . Note that scales on axes are not equal.
74
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
==PAGE:85==
Analysis
Inspecting the performance of the MF network, overall it is clear that feeding a structural
condition from the training set to the model is of benefit for mesh generation, as the model
is able to produce singly connected LCA meshes at a much higher rate than previous experi-
ments, achieving a peak 58% sample-validity success rate for the best performing MF model
in comparison to MZ’s peak at 17%. A considerable factor for the performance-disparity is
the conditioning (Dtrain), as when conditioned on validation signals the sample validity drops
substantially (29%), showing more comparable performances to MZ.
This demonstrates at
least partial model overfitting. Inspecting meshes qualitatively, MF meshes still produce small,
frequently anatomically implausible arteries containing artifacts which are not considered to be
part of the mesh-training set, e.g. “eye”-formations and invalid branches, but which in part are
present in the decoded VAE samples. Significantly however, meshes of MF are of much higher
quality in comparison to MZ, even when conditioned on held-out signals as seen in Figures 8.12
and 8.14. Additional samples are presented in Appendix J.2, Figure J.2.
Figure 8.14: Generated meshes using the FiLM-conditional pipeline. (upper row): generated using training
signals, (lower row): generated using test signals
A comprehensive results table of mesh metrics may be inspected in Appendix J.4, for which
the findings are summarized in the following. Mesh metrics evaluated when conditioning on
Dval and Dtest signals reveal that the model does obey the conditioning signal somewhat. This
is illustrated when conditioned on Dtest signals, where MMDsmp over Dtest outperforms Dtrain
(9.11·10−3 vs. 10.4·10−3). This shows a higher fidelity toward test samples when using test
conditioning, which is additionally much lower than the baseline MMD(Dval) score of 32.1·10−3.
Simultaneously, a high MMD score of 42.9·10−3 indicates over-conformance to specific struc-
tures, likely due to the tendency to produce small output meshes – where complex signals
mostly produces invalid meshes when conditioned on unseen data – and mapping redundancy
introduced by the resampling approach. The redundant mapping is reflected in the low sam-
pling eﬀiciency; 5 sampling rounds with 100 samples produce 42 valid samples in total, yielding
a sample eﬀiciency of 8.4%. Of these, 23 samples are repetitively mapped to the same condition-
ing signal, yielding a unique sample eﬀiciency of 4.6%. Correspondingly, the test COV=17.9%
(optimal with N=42 is 53.8%). Results are notably better when using validation condition-
ing (validation MMDsmp=9.32·10−3 vs. train MMDsmp=14.5·10−3), but signal under-coverage
persists (24 unique signals out of N=44 samples).
When investigating the resulting output
meshes, repeat assignments offer a marginal degree of variation between samples, indicating
that the FiLM-generation behaves almost deterministically when the conditioning signal is kept
constant.
This modeness is supported by train set metrics revealing clear overfitting. When conditioned
on Dtrain, N=100 samples are generated in the same setup within only 3 rounds, where 65
are generated by unique conditioning signals. Train MMDsmp drops to 4.70 · 10−4, meaning
the model effectively reproduces training samples with extremely high fidelity, whilst the cor-
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
75
==PAGE:86==
responding MMD = 28.9·10−3 indicates a relatively low coverage, which is also measured by
COV=10.6% (optimal 16.3%). This is presumably caused by only 65 unique signals being used
for conditioning, which, if translated directly to mesh-space, indeed would yield a coverage of
65
612=10.6%. Similarly, this suggests a form of determinism when conditioned by identical sig-
nals. Binned MMDsmp scoring samples are presented in Appendix J.3, clearly showcasing a high
aﬀinity towards reproducing training data.
Examining results when conditioned on ˆS, results are similarly discouraging. When assigning
nearest-neighbours of ˆΩby employing a minimum-matching scheme using dcd( ˆΩ→Ω) ( ˆΩ7→CD
Ω), only 1/482 FiLM- and signal-associated meshes match, implying Ω̸= ΩS almost exclusively
holds. Only a slight improvement is observed when employing maximum-matching assignment
based on AMMO, yielding 20 cases of correct assignment. This displays disappointingly low
adherence towards the conditioning signal.
When inspecting Figure 8.13, the distribution of CD and HD over the respective generated sig-
nals (left column) clearly indicates poor pre-alignment results (median HDL1=4.62 and CDL2=3.02),
producing much larger scores than compared to those found in Section 8.2.1. Intriguingly, after
ICP alignment (median HDL1=1.19 and CDL2=2.11·10−1), HDL1 is smaller than those previ-
ously achieved, whilst CDL2 is comparable. This could indicate structural correlation between
the MF output and MS condition, with MF possibly having learned conditional mesh gen-
eration with rigid transformations (measured by lacking alignment pre-ICP). This behavior is
qualitatively exemplified in Figure 8.15. Inspecting the sample in the middle column, an over-
reliance on training data is suspected, as the FiLM output is a rotated variant of the conditioning
signal (with a new branch split). This suggests that MF has learned to represent the signal
somewhat, or could indicate overfitting.
Figure 8.15: Three FiLM generated meshes ˆΩ, with the associated conditioning split signal ˆS (blue). Red
signals indicate the corresponding FiLM output signal SF (Ω) at depth 6. Yellow: the mesh of the closest Dtrain
neighbor for the conditioning signal, assigned using AMMO. Signal to ground-truth-mesh ( ˆS 7→ΩS) JIa scores
are presented here. Left: JIa = 0.59; mid: JIa = 0.78 (low JI over ˆSF = 7% over ˆS); right: JIa = 0.75. The
output mesh correlates somewhat with the conditioning signal if rotation is allowed.
76
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
==PAGE:87==
This could explain the consistent offset seen between the train and held-out for the mesh-matched
neighbor of ˆΩ(Figure 8.13, middle column) with similar attributes being conceived through
model overfitting. Comparing results for mesh alignment over Ω(middle column) and ΩS (right
column) respectively, a greater similarity between ˆΩis measured to ground-truth sets than ΩS
regardless of assumed rigid transformation. This is quantified by comparing the optimization
cost between nearest-neighbor mesh alignment and conditioning signal mesh alignment, which
is notably lower for Ω, especially for the training set. This is somewhat expected, as samples are
matched based on the minimizing distance. However, post-alignment, ΩS matches consequently
score larger HDL1 and CDL2 distances than corresponding Ωmatches, indicating that the FiLM-
output more closely resembles ground-truth samples than the conditioning signal, even when
taking rigid transformations into account.
Discussion
Result interpretability
The results are diﬀicult to interpret. It seems that some degree of
signal adherence exists if rotation is allowed. An alternative explanation however, is that the
model is severely overfitted, and any novel split signal conditioning is simply mapped back to
a similar training set signal. Figure 8.12 suggests the opposite, as it seemingly expresses an
ability to produce novel output when conditioning on a held-out signal (right-most sample).
Whilst FiLM-conditioning has improved the fraction of valid samples, there is still low variance
in produced meshes when conditioning on held-out signals, a result completely analogous to the
split-signal results, indicating an inherent inability to model the large variability present in the
LCA dataset. When using held-out sets, it is clear that only very distinct and simple modes of
branching patterns result in valid generation. Analogous to the LDM results, generated branches
are occasionally excessively dense, yet less systematically so.
Balancing fidelity, anatomical
plausibility and novelty in produced samples proved a hard task.
MF generative performance
The assessment of generative capability is increasingly hard
due to multiple factors. The diﬀiculty in establishing adherence to the conditioning signal makes
analysis diﬀicult due to the necessity of matching. This is further exacerbated if generation is not
pose-consistent. Such inconsistencies require post-hoc alignment, using methods like ICP which,
as discussed in Section 8.2.1, introduces its own set of challenges and potential inaccuracies. An
alternative explanation for the pose-inconsistencies is that the generative process disproportion-
ately maps held-out conditioning signals to specific, learned modes within the training data
manifold. The ’successful’ training modes may yield anatomically plausible shapes resembling
the held-out condition, but they are implicitly associated with a fixed, potentially inconsistent,
training pose. This could make sense; some specific modes of the train set are expected to model
at least some modes in the held-out sets, and possibly these modes are exactly the samples which
produce valid output. This directly translates to the model being overfitted, which, considering
the inherent variability in the LCA class, is a very probable cause. In principle, this should
be assessed by binning train MMDsmp scores when conditioned on a held-out split (which has
been done), whilst simultaneously considering how much the conditioning signal resembles the
corresponding matched train sample. Due to time constraints, this was not possible.
Mesh metric evaluation
Mesh metrics were estimated using very small sample sizes for
held-out sets (N ≤44) due to a low sampling eﬀiciency. Likewise, repetitions are present in the
generated sets due to mode-seeking behavior. As a result, this biases mesh metrics, and their
support is weak. The main goal of the analysis, however, was to assess whether MF was steerable
by unseen data, which the qualitative and quantitative results do reveal is possible. Due to the
computational expense of sample generation, caused by low sample validity, generating further
samples was impractical.
Resampling flaws
The utilized resampling scheme should be scrutinized. 100 signals were
either generated- or chosen at random from a ground-truth split as condition, which were never
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
77
==PAGE:88==
themselves resampled during execution. This implicitly infers bias in the form of under-coverage,
as valid entries from the first iteration may be subsequently more susceptible to generate valid
samples for later iterations. In principle, with inspiration from rejection sampling, split condi-
tions corresponding to valid FiLM-outputs could be omitted in following sampling rounds, and
invalid samples could thus be super-sampled in order to increase the probability of obtaining a
larger coverage on held-out sets. The employed sampling approach was used for diagnostic in-
sight rather than generating a representative dataset. Specifically, the repeated inclusion makes
measurement of consistency and preferred modes of the FiLM process possible, and as such the
resampling scope should be considered through a different lens than the expected use during
deployment.
MF vs. MZ
From the analysis, it may be concluded that the FiLM framework is not capable
of generating sound, anatomically plausible output to a satisfactory degree. However, the added
complexity of the model structure still yields measurable benefits. Considering the performance
discrepancy between MF and MZ, MF is found to have larger potential to fit complicated
structures from a fidelity point of view. Still, the model seemingly produces close reproductions
of training data, caused by inadequate regularization or lack of training data, indicating lack of
generalization.
Applicability for spherical-organs
The injection of structural information from the FiLM
network is considered to be of possible benefit for spherical-organ modeling. The myocardium
results showed large promise, yet as results suggest some mode seeking behaviour, possible
improvements could be made through the use of more sophisticated architectures. Employing
the FiLM network over such data would likely realize some of this potential. Fitting a MS
network which doesn’t invoke overfitting is thought to be possible, as the lower task complexity
is thought to translate well to the MS domain.
Conclusion
The refined LDM network exhibits clear performance gains relative to results found using the
base LDM. The model is able to produce output with moderate consistency and adherence when
conditioned on unseen data, but with a rather low sample eﬀiciency. The goal-state is likely
within reach provided a larger dataset or classes with lower inherent variability.
78
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
==PAGE:89==
9
Concluding Discussion
Considering all obtained results, four main conclusions were drawn: (1) VAE results show
promise, both considering single and multiple classes, but their latent spaces are challenging to
traverse; (2) the implemented LDM approach is well-suited for simple organ synthesis (atria, ven-
tricles and myocardia), also in multi-class setups, whereas LCA synthesis could not be achieved
in investigated single- or multi class setups; (3) the generative LCA split-signal model is able
to generate novel albeit simple artery stumps, lacking generalization to long branches for LCA,
and lastly (4) the FiLM-conditional pipeline improves the LDM LCA performance, but lacks
generalizability to held-out data sets. These findings suggest that high-fidelity LCA synthesis
is remains a challenge using the investigated architectures. The core challenge appears to be a
combination of high intra-class variability paired with a low sample size.
9.1
Data Limitations
Data quality
The utilized ImageCAS dataset contains 766 samples. The LCA sampled have
undergone refinement while other organ meshes were extracted using TotalSegmentator. Some
of the meshes are known to be erroneous, e.g. presence of myocardium perforations, inaccurate
LCA labeling and cut-off lines in certain atria. Similarly, all meshes are affected by physical
imaging artifacts due to the imaging modality, and some meshes are implausibly large, indicating
that scanner-misregistration is present, disproportionally affecting the normalizing scale within
respective organ classes. These types of imperfections are commonly encountered in medical
imaging datasets. An argument may be made that outlier samples should be discarded from
the dataset prior to modeling, but identifying outliers without apriori domain knowledge is non-
trivial, and similarly, outlier samples may contain relevant topological information, especially
considering the relatively low sample size.
Size
Considering the size of other public medical datasets, ImageCAS is very large, even
after discarding invalid LCA samples.
Simultaneously, commonly used datasets in state-of-
the-art mesh generative modeling contain significantly more samples per class, exemplified by
the commonly used ShapeNet, which contains 5.8 · 103 samples per class on average, with no
class having less than 2.37·103 samples [70]. Additionally, most of the classes have semantically
meaningful centres for normalization, no physical imaging artifacts, and exhibit lower variability
than LCA. Reported performance in literature appears to correlate positively with the number
of samples per class [68, 16, 20], which could indicate that a larger dataset could be beneficial
for the proposed approaches.
Augmentations
One potential solution to address data scarcity is dataset augmentation. For-
mulating realistic augmentations is an active field of research, and found augmentation schemes
are often very domain-specific and laborious (e.g. [71, 72]). Naively rotating and scaling point
cloud data is possible, but requires re-approximation of SDF values (see Appendix K), hindering
on-the-fly computations in settings with limited compute. Consequently, augmentation was not
pursued in this study.
9.2
Method Decisions
Depth and bottleneck design
Multiple architectural decisions could potentially increase
model performance, many of which not extensively explored in this study. As discussed in sub-
section 7.3.2, increasing either the input depth to d=8, or using a more thought-through point
sampling scheme for SDF evaluation, is expected to yield better reconstruction quality. Effects
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
79
==PAGE:90==
are expected to propagate into latent space structure, as poor reconstruction losses from in-
evitable artifact generation may disrupt model convergence, conforming at a local minima. This
is hypothetical, and due to the increase in computational cost, increasing the depth was decided
against. However, the choice of the dense depth (the bottleneck) is expected to be of utmost
importance: utilizing diffusion on depth 5 latent space increases the available number of leaf
nodes for high-frequency feature encoding, possibly both mitigating snappage at larger decoder
stages for LCA due to a lower decoding distance, and allowing a more diverse representation
for round organ meshes. Likewise, VAE reconstructions would presumably have higher quality
due to the lower compression, thus allowing reconstruction of finer features such as LCA canals
in myocardium walls. This would yield 25·3 = 32768 latent nodes (8x the current setup), mak-
ing multi-class VAE and diffusion training computationally prohibitive. Consider the attention
mechanism employed in MZ, which scales quadratically O(n2). While all investigated models
were trained within constraints of 6GB memory, such scaling would make both model training
and the sampling objective infeasible unless substantial computational resources are accessible,
even for sparse, spindle structures, and as a result, was not considered an option.
Latent dimensionality and posterior collapse Throughout the generative modeling pipeline,
the number of latent feature dimensions was held fixed at 3, as VAE experiments suggested par-
tial posterior collapse or degrees of latent underutilization when n=3 latent dimensions were
used. However, these conclusions were drawn before the discovery of KL-guided latent space
interpretation. As a result, individual dimensions could still express some behavior individually
which was not identified due to ignorance.
VAE parameter transferability
As argued in chapter 7, MV,lca was generalized to the
subsequent single- and multi class tasks, using the argument that LCA is the hardest learning
task. This practical assumption was primarily a means to save time guided by intuition, however,
there is no guarantee that such an assumption holds. Spherical classes may be less complex
geometrically, but are simultaneously much more dense, which could signify the need for more
parameters, especially as only a slight subset of latent nodes were found to encode any tangible
feature information. Parameter starvation may especially be relevant for MV,mc, as an expanded
class set with proportionally more data may need more proportionally more parameters for
producing a well-structured latent, e.g. by increasing the latent channel dimensionality in multi
class setups. Finer model tweaking over spherical classes likely could produce higher quality
generative output than has been achieved in this study. In addition, the discrete nature of the
latent space may be well-represented using a VQVAE instead.
Metric no man’s land
Metric-based analysis suffers from inconsistency and low interpretabil-
ity. Qualitative metrics are scattered throughout the analyses, which were found necessary in
order to make adequate verdicts in specific tasks, as many of the quantifiable metrics were found
to be misleading – most notably MMD, with distance metrics generally found to be highly sen-
sitive to class differences (subsection 7.2.1), being insensitive to overfitting for small validation
splits (subsection 8.1.1), or not being robust when used for split signals (subsection 8.2.1). Fur-
thermore, as many of the thesis subjects are niche, there is a very limited amount of literature for
metric and baseline comparison. If the modeling task were e.g. ShapeNet, much of the concern
would be relieved due to baseline comparisons and the validity of using variants of Fréchet incep-
tion distance [66]. While artery synthesis is a field in development, found references were based
on aneurysm synthesis in cerebral arteries, which would constitute a misleading baseline [15,
12]. The use of lateral ground-truth baselines, i.e. computing MMD between train and held-out
sets was an attempt to contextualize the mesh metrics into the ImageCAS context. However,
standard mesh generative metrics are poorly calibrated for small, anatomically diverse datasets.
In small validation sets, such baselines become unreliable; e.g. if the validation set represents a
frequent mode, MMD(train →val) becomes inflated whereas MMD(val →train) would become
80
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
==PAGE:91==
deflated. As a result, model comparison to such baselines may lead to misleading conclusions. A
proposal for establishing a baseline less influenced by sample-imbalance, the training set could
be subsampled N times and baselines could be estimated using a 1:1 pairing, averaging over all
trials. Whilst reducing the influence of sample imbalance, the baseline still requires a represen-
tative validation split to be useful. In addition, in a small-sample setting where overfitting may
be a problem, the quadratic scaling of MMD evaluations makes frequent evaluation prohibitive.
As a result, alternative methods were utilized, but all suffered from shortcomings.
Generative architecture decisions
An LDM based on a DDPM was utilized for the gen-
erative task. This decision, in part, was due to promising results for DDPMs on 3D and 2D
image generation tasks as compared to other architectures [73, 74, 75]. Furthermore, diffusion-
based models have become increasingly prevalent in state-of-the-art mesh literature [68, 16, 20].
DDPMs are known for their stable training behavior, and suffer less from modal collapse as
compared to GANs, which is a natural concern for small datasets. Transformer-based archi-
tectures require auto-regressive inference and scale quadratically, thus being computationally
prohibitive, and attention is well-known to be data-intensive, which is the exact reason why
FiLM-conditioning was utilized. In addition, generation is based on a fixed-length sequential
order of tokens, which is not naturally present in 3D data [76]. However, DDPM training often
requires many training epochs, making high-resolution parameter tuning unfeasible. Paired with
the discrepancy between the denoising L2 objective and perceptual generation quality, this work
has made use of extremely coarse parameter tuning. Consequently, the parameters converged
upon are presumably sub-optimal due to the expense of mesh-metric evaluation and hardships
with quantifying octree novelty for split signals. DDPMs are known to be data-hungry, requiring
a large amount of training data for achieving high fidelity generations. High variablity classes
in a small-sample setting may produce noisy score estimators, which could explain the LCA
modeling issues [77]. Seemingly, using a LDM framework did not mitigate this issue. Similarly,
empirical findings indicate that DDPMs have a tendency of covering frequent training modes,
partially explaining the biased myocardium samples [78]. Another diﬀiculty is the reverse pro-
cess sampling is slow, but this may be improved upon using samplers post-hoc [79], or during
training [80], to achieve considerable faster reverse process sampling speed.
9.3
Future Work
Acquire more and better data
Many of the issues faced are partially explainable due to the
small dataset. High class variability, data scarcity are expected to be the primary impediments
of the models’ inability to generalize to the LCA domain, and as such, evaluation on larger
datasets is necessary, whether synthetic or clinical.
Establish a robust ImageCAS baseline
In order to accurately assess novelty of generated
meshes, establishing per-class baselines is of upmost importance. Part of this work would be
graph based, as novel metrics suitable for artery tree octrees are necessary. Developing a well-
balanced dataset split likewise is expected to aid further development on ImageCAS by allowing
standardized comparisons.
Architectural exploration and shape priors
Parameter tuning, which was not exhaus-
tively carried out in this work, may uncover undiscovered potential. Especially increasing the
dense depth (d>4) should be investigated, as it may allow ample expression for LCA modeling.
Other architectural considerations should be: 1. increasing the number of latent dimensions dz;
2. training a LDM using 3D convolutions instead of dense graph convolutions; and 3. training
a diffusion model with a significantly more expressive latent space, achieved by training a VAE
with a very small β value, β ≪0.1. The shape-based interpretability of latent space may allow
formulation of structural priors (e.g. numbers of branches) for VAE training, which would be
an interesting direction for research.
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
81
==PAGE:92==
10
Conclusion
This thesis investigated the use of dual octrees for generative mesh modeling of cardiac sub-
structures.
The proposed pipelines include a combination of geometric learning models and
evaluation metrics, intended to serve as a foundation for future work in this domain.
Variational Autoencoder
A dual octree GCN-based VAE was implemented and optimized
for latent space modeling. Through iterative tuning and probing, a multiclass VAE was de-
veloped that reconstructs left myocardia, atria and ventricle well, while LCA reconstructions
remain imperfect and occasionally artifact-prone. Reconstructions exhibit low-pass filtering be-
havior. The latent space is well-structured, as shown by UMAP and PCA, and supports shape
classification. A method for interpreting latent structure was proposed, enabling higher quality
latent interpolation and easing latent space diagnosis. For LCA, single-class VAEs reduced ar-
tifacts, but yielded a latent space dominated by bounding box volume under centre-alignment;
point-alignment offered more stable interpolants, but did not improve latent structure as com-
pared to a multi class setup.
LDM and DDPM
Single- and multi-class latent diffusion pipelines were developed using a
dual octree GCN denoising UNet. While the setup failed to generate valid LCA structures due
to decoder-induced octree-erosion, it achieved realistic and diverse generations for myocardia.
However, evaluations revealed a degree of mode collapse, biasing samples toward overly-spherical
shapes. A new metric suite was introduced to monitor overfitting and asess generalizability.
Scaling to a multi-organ setup using classifier-free guidance and self-attention was sucessful, but
requires further evaluation.
Octree generation
A 3D UNet DDPM was explored for directly generating LCA octrees
at depth 6. Despite all models exhibiting overfitting, producing structurally plausible octrees
appears to require some degree of structural overfitting. Modified Jaccard metrics supported
model selection.
While full LCA trees could not be reliably generated, realistic LCA semi-
structures were achieved. MMO and ICP were used to determine that generative capabilities
are present.
Conditional LCA mesh generation
Graph-conditioned mesh generation was attempted
using a 3D UNet LDM DDPM, with FiLM-based injection of depth-6 LCA octrees. Paired with
resampling, the rate of generated single-component meshes was increased. However, conditioning
on unseen samples produced unrealistic meshes and indications of overfitting, indicating a lack
of generalization.
Despite progress, developing a dual octree pipeline which allows generation of realistic LCA
meshes remains an open challenge. However, the dual octree representation shows promising
results for parameter- and compute-eﬀicient deep generation of dense shapes and shape classifi-
cation.
82
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
==PAGE:93==
Bibliography
[1]
Seth S Martin et al. “2024 heart disease and stroke statistics: a report of US and global
data from the American Heart Association”. In: Circulation 149.8 (2024), e347–e913 (cit.
on p. 1).
[2]
Petra Zebic Mihic et al. “The association of severe coronary tortuosity and non-obstructive
coronary artery disease”. In: Medicina 59.9 (2023), p. 1619 (cit. on p. 1).
[3]
Shuman Jia et al. “Left atrial shape is independent predictor of arrhythmia recurrence
after catheter ablation for atrial fibrillation: A shape statistics study”. In: Heart Rhythm
O2 2.6, Part A (2021), pp. 622–632. issn: 2666-5018. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.hroo.
2021.10.013. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2666501821002105
(cit. on p. 1).
[4]
Yunsun Song et al. “Geometric predictors of left ventricular outflow tract obstruction
in patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: a 3D computed tomography analysis”. In:
European Heart Journal-Cardiovascular Imaging 19.10 (2018), pp. 1149–1156 (cit. on p. 1).
[5]
Evgin Goceri. “Medical image data augmentation: techniques, comparisons and interpre-
tations”. In: Artificial Intelligence Review 56.11 (2023), pp. 12561–12605 (cit. on p. 1).
[6]
Jelmer M. Wolterink, Tim Leiner, and Ivana Isgum. “Blood Vessel Geometry Synthesis
using Generative Adversarial Networks”. In: arXiv e-prints, arXiv:1804.04381 (Apr. 2018),
arXiv:1804.04381. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.1804.04381. arXiv: 1804.04381 [cs.CV] (cit. on
p. 1).
[7]
Peng-Shuai Wang, Yang Liu, and Xin Tong. “Dual octree graph networks for learning
adaptive volumetric shape representations”. In: ACM Transactions on Graphics 41.4 (July
2022), pp. 1–15. issn: 1557-7368. doi: 10.1145/3528223.3530087. url: http://dx.doi.org/
10.1145/3528223.3530087 (cit. on pp. 1, 6–9, 17, 18, 98).
[8]
Jelmer M Wolterink, Tim Leiner, and Ivana Isgum. “Blood vessel geometry synthesis using
generative adversarial networks”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.04381 (2018) (cit. on p. 2).
[9]
Xiaohui Zeng et al. LION: Latent Point Diffusion Models for 3D Shape Generation. 2022.
arXiv: 2210.06978 [cs.CV]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.06978 (cit. on p. 2).
[10]
Zhaoyang Lyu et al. “Controllable Mesh Generation Through Sparse Latent Point Diffusion
Models”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR). June 2023, pp. 271–280 (cit. on p. 2).
[11]
Marcel Beetz et al. “3D cardiac shape analysis with variational point cloud autoencoders
for myocardial infarction prediction and virtual heart synthesis”. In: Computerized Medical
Imaging and Graphics 124 (2025), p. 102587. issn: 0895-6111. doi: https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.compmedimag.2025.102587. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0895611125000965 (cit. on p. 2).
[12]
Thijs P. Kuipers et al. “Generating Cerebral Vessel Trees of Acute Ischemic Stroke Patients
using Conditional Set-Diffusion”. In: Proceedings of The 7nd International Conference on
Medical Imaging with Deep Learning. Ed. by Ninon Burgos et al. Vol. 250. Proceedings of
Machine Learning Research. PMLR, July 2024, pp. 782–792 (cit. on pp. 2, 80).
[13]
Ashish Sinha and Ghassan Hamarneh. “Representing Anatomical Trees by Denoising Dif-
fusion of Implicit Neural Fields”. In: CoRR abs/2403.08974 (2024). url: https://doi.org/
10.48550/arXiv.2403.08974 (cit. on p. 2).
[14]
Yushi Lan et al. “LN3Diff: Scalable Latent Neural Fields Diffusion for Speedy 3D Gener-
ation”. In: ECCV. 2024 (cit. on p. 2).
[15]
Paula Feldman et al. “Recursive variational autoencoders for 3D blood vessel generative
modeling”. In: Medical Image Analysis (2025), p. 103703 (cit. on pp. 2, 80).
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
83
==PAGE:94==
[16]
Xuanchi Ren et al. “XCube: Large-Scale 3D Generative Modeling using Sparse Voxel Hi-
erarchies”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition. 2024 (cit. on pp. 2, 25, 79, 81).
[17]
Peng-Shuai Wang et al. “O-CNN: Octree-based Convolutional Neural Networks for 3D
Shape Analysis”. In: ACM Transactions on Graphics (SIGGRAPH) 36.4 (2017) (cit. on
p. 2).
[18]
Peng-Shuai Wang, Yang Liu, and Xin Tong. “Dual octree graph networks for learning
adaptive volumetric shape representations”. In: ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG)
41.4 (2022), pp. 1–15 (cit. on pp. 2, 17).
[19]
Yitian Liu and Zhouhui Lian. “QT-Font: High-eﬀiciency Font Synthesis via Quadtree-
based Diffusion Models”. In: ACM SIGGRAPH 2024 Conference Papers. SIGGRAPH ’24.
Denver, CO, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2024. isbn: 9798400705250. doi:
10.1145/3641519.3657451. url: https://doi.org/10.1145/3641519.3657451 (cit. on p. 2).
[20]
Bojun Xiong et al. “Octfusion: Octree-based diffusion models for 3d shape generation”. In:
arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.14732 (2024) (cit. on pp. 3, 21, 66, 79, 81, 98).
[21]
Rana Hanocka et al. “Meshcnn: a network with an edge”. In: ACM Transactions on Graph-
ics (ToG) 38.4 (2019), pp. 1–12 (cit. on p. 3).
[22]
Lisa Schneider et al. “Medmeshcnn-enabling meshcnn for medical surface models”. In:
Computer Methods and Programs in Biomedicine 210 (2021), p. 106372 (cit. on p. 3).
[23]
Jakob Wasserthal et al. “TotalSegmentator: robust segmentation of 104 anatomic struc-
tures in CT images”. In: Radiology: Artificial Intelligence 5.5 (2023), e230024 (cit. on p. 4).
[24]
An Zeng et al. “ImageCAS: A large-scale dataset and benchmark for coronary artery seg-
mentation based on computed tomography angiography images”. In: Computerized Medical
Imaging and Graphics 109 (2023), p. 102287. issn: 0895-6111. doi: https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.compmedimag.2023.102287. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0895611123001052 (cit. on p. 4).
[25]
Kevin Kalisz et al. “Artifacts at Cardiac CT: Physics and Solutions”. In: RadioGraphics
36.7 (2016). PMID: 27768543, pp. 2064–2083. doi: 10.1148/rg.2016160079. eprint: https:
//doi.org/10.1148/rg.2016160079. url: https://doi.org/10.1148/rg.2016160079 (cit. on
p. 4).
[26]
Liang Jin et al. “Reduction of cardiac motion artifact in step-and-shoot coronary CT
angiography with third-generation as compared with second-generation dual-source CT
scanners”. In: Diagnostic and Interventional Radiology 27 (June 2021). doi: 10.5152/dir.
2021.19473 (cit. on p. 5).
[27]
Franco Scarselli et al. “The Graph Neural Network Model”. In: IEEE Transactions on
Neural Networks 20.1 (2009), pp. 61–80. doi: 10.1109/TNN.2008.2005605 (cit. on p. 6).
[28]
Gabriele Corso et al. “Graph neural networks”. In: Nature Reviews Methods Primers 4.1
(2024), p. 17 (cit. on p. 6).
[29]
Yu Zhou et al. “Graph neural networks: Taxonomy, advances, and trends”. In: ACM Trans-
actions on Intelligent Systems and Technology (TIST) 13.1 (2022), pp. 1–54 (cit. on p. 6).
[30]
Justin Gilmer et al. “Neural Message Passing for Quantum Chemistry”. In: Proceedings
of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning. Ed. by Doina Precup and
Yee Whye Teh. Vol. 70. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research. PMLR, Aug. 2017,
pp. 1263–1272 (cit. on p. 6).
[31]
Moritz Ibing, Gregor Kobsik, and Leif Kobbelt. “Octree Transformer: Autoregressive
3D Shape Generation on Hierarchically Structured Sequences”. In: Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) Workshops.
June 2023, pp. 2698–2707 (cit. on p. 7).
[32]
Thomas Lewiner et al. “Fast generation of pointerless octree duals”. In: Computer Graphics
Forum. Vol. 29. 5. Wiley Online Library. 2010, pp. 1661–1669 (cit. on p. 8).
84
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
==PAGE:95==
[33]
Alexandr Notchenko, Yermek Kapushev, and Evgeny Burnaev. “Large-scale shape retrieval
with sparse 3d convolutional neural networks”. In: Analysis of Images, Social Networks
and Texts: 6th International Conference, AIST 2017, Moscow, Russia, July 27–29, 2017,
Revised Selected Papers 6. Springer. 2018, pp. 245–254 (cit. on p. 9).
[34]
Dor Bank, Noam Koenigstein, and Raja Giryes. Autoencoders. 2021. arXiv: 2003.05991
[cs.LG]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2003.05991 (cit. on p. 9).
[35]
David M Blei, Alp Kucukelbir, and Jon D McAuliffe. “Variational inference: A review for
statisticians”. In: Journal of the American statistical Association 112.518 (2017), pp. 859–
877 (cit. on p. 10).
[36]
Diederik P. Kingma and Max Welling. “Auto-Encoding Variational Bayes”. In: 2nd Inter-
national Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2014, Banff, AB, Canada, April
14-16, 2014, Conference Track Proceedings. Ed. by Yoshua Bengio and Yann LeCun. 2014.
url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1312.6114 (cit. on p. 10).
[37]
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. “Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models”.
In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. Ed. by H. Larochelle et al. Vol. 33.
Curran Associates, Inc., 2020, pp. 6840–6851. url: https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_
files/paper/2020/file/4c5bcfec8584af0d967f1ab10179ca4b-Paper.pdf (cit. on pp. 10, 12).
[38]
Jascha Sohl-Dickstein et al. “Deep Unsupervised Learning using Nonequilibrium Thermo-
dynamics”. In: Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on Machine Learning. Ed.
by Francis Bach and David Blei. Vol. 37. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research. Lille,
France: PMLR, July 2015, pp. 2256–2265. url: https://proceedings.mlr.press/v37/sohl-
dickstein15.html (cit. on p. 11).
[39]
Zihan Ding and Chi Jin. “Generative Diffusion Modeling: A Practical Handbook”. In:
arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.17162 (2024) (cit. on pp. 11, 12).
[40]
Bradley Efron. “Tweedie’s formula and selection bias”. In: Journal of the American Sta-
tistical Association 106.496 (2011), pp. 1602–1614 (cit. on p. 12).
[41]
Kwanyoung Kim and Jong Chul Ye. “Noise2score: tweedie’s approach to self-supervised
image denoising without clean images”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems 34 (2021), pp. 864–874 (cit. on p. 12).
[42]
Robin Rombach et al. “High-resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models”. In:
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. 2022,
pp. 10684–10695 (cit. on pp. 13, 20, 98).
[43]
Jonathan Ho and Tim Salimans. “Classifier-free diffusion guidance”. In: arXiv preprint
arXiv:2207.12598 (2022) (cit. on pp. 13, 50).
[44]
Will Schroeder, Ken Martin, and Bill Lorensen. The Visualization Toolkit (4th ed.) Kit-
ware, 2006. isbn: 978-1-930934-19-1 (cit. on p. 16).
[45]
William E Lorensen and Harvey E Cline. “Marching cubes: A high resolution 3D surface
construction algorithm”. In: Seminal graphics: pioneering efforts that shaped the field. 1998,
pp. 347–353 (cit. on p. 18).
[46]
Irina Higgins et al. “beta-vae: Learning basic visual concepts with a constrained variational
framework”. In: International conference on learning representations. 2017 (cit. on p. 19).
[47]
Samuel R. Bowman et al. Generating Sentences from a Continuous Space. 2016. arXiv:
1511.06349 [cs.LG]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/1511.06349 (cit. on p. 19).
[48]
Hao Fu et al. “Cyclical annealing schedule: A simple approach to mitigating kl vanishing”.
In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.10145 (2019) (cit. on pp. 19, 94).
[49]
Ashish Vaswani et al. “Attention Is All You Need”. In: CoRR abs/1706.03762 (2017).
arXiv: 1706.03762. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1706.03762 (cit. on p. 20).
[50]
Clement Vignac et al. “Digress: Discrete denoising diffusion for graph generation”. In:
arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.14734 (2022) (cit. on p. 21).
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
85
==PAGE:96==
[51]
Alexander Quinn Nichol and Prafulla Dhariwal. “Improved Denoising Diffusion Probabilis-
tic Models”. In: Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning. Ed.
by Marina Meila and Tong Zhang. Vol. 139. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research.
PMLR, July 2021, pp. 8162–8171. url: https://proceedings.mlr.press/v139/nichol21a.html
(cit. on pp. 21, 50, 51).
[52]
Lvmin Zhang, Anyi Rao, and Maneesh Agrawala. “Adding Conditional Control to Text-
to-Image Diffusion Models”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference
on Computer Vision (ICCV). Oct. 2023, pp. 3836–3847 (cit. on p. 22).
[53]
Ethan Perez et al. “Film: Visual reasoning with a general conditioning layer”. In: Proceed-
ings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence. Vol. 32. 1. 2018 (cit. on p. 22).
[54]
Daniel Kraft. “Computing the Hausdorff Distance of Two Sets from Their Distance Func-
tions”. In: International Journal of Computational Geometry amp; Applications 30.01
(Mar. 2020), pp. 19–49. issn: 1793-6357. doi: 10.1142/s0218195920500028. url: http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1142/S0218195920500028 (cit. on p. 23).
[55]
Tong Wu et al. Density-aware Chamfer Distance as a Comprehensive Metric for Point
Cloud Completion. 2021. arXiv: 2111.12702 [cs.CV]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2111.
12702 (cit. on p. 23).
[56]
Muhammad Ferjad Naeem et al. “Reliable Fidelity and Diversity Metrics for Generative
Models”. In: Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning. Ed.
by Hal Daumé III and Aarti Singh. Vol. 119. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research.
PMLR, July 2020, pp. 7176–7185. url: https://proceedings.mlr.press/v119/naeem20a.html
(cit. on p. 24).
[57]
Panos Achlioptas et al. “Learning representations and generative models for 3d point
clouds”. In: International conference on machine learning. PMLR. 2018, pp. 40–49 (cit. on
p. 24).
[58]
Hakon Wadell. “Volume, Shape, and Roundness of Rock Particles”. In: The Journal of
Geology 40.5 (1932), pp. 443–451. issn: 00221376, 15375269. url: http://www.jstor.org/
stable/30058012 (visited on 06/16/2025) (cit. on p. 28).
[59]
Álvaro González. “Measurement of areas on a sphere using Fibonacci and latitude–longitude
lattices”. In: Mathematical geosciences 42 (2010), pp. 49–64 (cit. on p. 30).
[60]
DTU Computing Center. DTU Computing Center resources. 2024. doi: 10.48714/DTU.
HPC.0001. url: https://doi.org/10.48714/DTU.HPC.0001 (cit. on p. 31).
[61]
Georgios Arvanitidis, Lars Kai Hansen, and Søren Hauberg. “Latent space oddity: on the
curvature of deep generative models”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.11379 (2017) (cit. on
p. 39).
[62]
Line Kuhnel et al. “Latent space non-linear statistics”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.07632
(2018) (cit. on p. 39).
[63]
Hang Shao, Abhishek Kumar, and P Thomas Fletcher. “The riemannian geometry of deep
generative models”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition Workshops. 2018, pp. 315–323 (cit. on p. 39).
[64]
Jiahua Dong et al. “Deep Self-Cleansing for Medical Image Segmentation with Noisy La-
bels”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.05024 (2024) (cit. on p. 48).
[65]
Xinyang Zheng et al. “SDF-StyleGAN: implicit SDF-based StyleGAN for 3D shape gen-
eration”. In: Computer Graphics Forum. Vol. 41. 5. Wiley Online Library. 2022, pp. 52–63
(cit. on pp. 52, 63).
[66]
Martin Heusel et al. “Gans trained by a two time-scale update rule converge to a local
nash equilibrium”. In: Advances in neural information processing systems 30 (2017) (cit. on
pp. 52, 80).
86
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
==PAGE:97==
[67]
Yong-Hyun Park et al. “Understanding the latent space of diffusion models through the
lens of riemannian geometry”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36
(2023), pp. 24129–24142 (cit. on p. 61).
[68]
Xin-Yang Zheng et al. “Locally attentional sdf diffusion for controllable 3d shape genera-
tion”. In: ACM Transactions on Graphics (ToG) 42.4 (2023), pp. 1–13 (cit. on pp. 63, 79,
81).
[69]
Ka-Hei Hui et al. “Neural Wavelet-domain Diffusion for 3D Shape Generation”. In: SIG-
GRAPH Asia 2022 Conference Papers. SA ’22. Daegu, Republic of Korea: Association for
Computing Machinery, 2022. isbn: 9781450394703. doi: 10.1145/3550469.3555394. url:
https://doi.org/10.1145/3550469.3555394 (cit. on p. 63).
[70]
Angel X. Chang et al. ShapeNet: An Information-Rich 3D Model Repository. Tech. rep.
arXiv:1512.03012 [cs.GR]. Stanford University — Princeton University — Toyota Techno-
logical Institute at Chicago, 2015 (cit. on p. 79).
[71]
Karen López-Linares Román et al. “3D pulmonary artery segmentation from CTA scans
using deep learning with realistic data augmentation”. In: International Workshop on Re-
construction and Analysis of Moving Body Organs. Springer. 2018, pp. 225–237 (cit. on
p. 79).
[72]
Steffen Bruns et al. “Improving myocardium segmentation in cardiac CT angiography using
spectral information”. In: Medical Imaging 2019: Image Processing. Vol. 10949. SPIE. 2019,
pp. 662–667 (cit. on p. 79).
[73]
Firas Khader et al. “Denoising diffusion probabilistic models for 3D medical image gener-
ation”. In: Scientific Reports 13.1 (2023), p. 7303 (cit. on p. 81).
[74]
Sam Bond-Taylor et al. “Deep generative modelling: A comparative review of vaes, gans,
normalizing flows, energy-based and autoregressive models”. In: IEEE transactions on
pattern analysis and machine intelligence 44.11 (2021), pp. 7327–7347 (cit. on p. 81).
[75]
Prafulla Dhariwal and Alexander Nichol. “Diffusion models beat gans on image synthesis”.
In: Advances in neural information processing systems 34 (2021), pp. 8780–8794 (cit. on
p. 81).
[76]
Si-Tong Wei et al. “Octgpt: Octree-based multiscale autoregressive models for 3d shape
generation”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.09975 (2025) (cit. on p. 81).
[77]
Zhaoyu Zhang et al. “Training diffusion-based generative models with limited data”. En-
glish. In: ICML’25: Proceedings of the 42nd International Conference on Machine Learn-
ing. ICML 2025: Forty-Second International Conference on Machine Learning ; Conference
date: 13-07-2025 Through 19-07-2025. United States: Association for Computing Machin-
ery, Apr. 2025 (cit. on p. 81).
[78]
Shin’ya Yamaguchi. “Analyzing Diffusion Models on Synthesizing Training Datasets”. In:
Proceedings of the 16th Asian Conference on Machine Learning. Ed. by Vu Nguyen and
Hsuan-Tien Lin. Vol. 260. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research. PMLR, Dec. 2025,
pp. 335–350. url: https://proceedings.mlr.press/v260/yamaguchi25a.html (cit. on p. 81).
[79]
Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. “Denoising diffusion implicit models”.
In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.02502 (2020) (cit. on p. 81).
[80]
Kevin Frans et al. “One step diffusion via shortcut models”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.12557
(2024) (cit. on p. 81).
[81]
Martin Ægidius and Ludvík Petersen. CardioOctreeNN. https://github.com/martinaegidius/
CardioOctreeNN. 2025 (cit. on p. 89).
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
87
==PAGE:98==
88
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
==PAGE:99==
A
Unused LCA Feature Metrics
The following depicts two LCA feature metrics, which were never used as a consequence of poor
generative results. For the interested reader, these would be applicable when having trained a
model that generalizes well to the LCA domain. Similarly, these have also been implemented
within the code-base [81].
Maximal tortuosity, τgm: Maximal tortuosity τgm, quantifies the highest curvature across a
tree-like structure, computed as the ratio between the geodesic distance between the root node
x and a branch end-point y from the set of branch end-points Y and the Euclidean distance
between the two points. Formally:
τgm = max
y∈Y\x
dgeo(x, y)
∥x −y∥2

(A.1)
This in practice only makes sense for LCA where each branch may yield different tortuosities.
Degree of tree-like object, deg(V ): Computes the number of branches of a tree-like object.
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
89
==PAGE:100==
B
Methodology
B.1
β-VAE Schedules
In this thesis we experimented with different scheduling schemes which are visualized in Figure
B.1.
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
200
Epoch
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
Schedule
Flat
Linear
Cyclical
Figure B.1: The cyclical and linear KL-schedules for β = 0.1 and 200 epochs using a period of T = 4 for the
cyclical schedule.
B.2
Wall Thickness Estimation
90
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
==PAGE:101==
Figure B.2: The process for wall-thickness estimation. (Upper left): point cloud sampling and inside/outside
classification using normal vectors, (Upper right): raycasting alongside the outward pointing normal from the
inside set. Ray is the magenta arrow, intersection is the circle. (Lower left): visualization of all rays which found
an intersection for a sample, colored by thickness, (Lower right): A mean render using 1 nearest neighbor, using
the same colorscale as lower left.
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
91
==PAGE:102==
C
LCA VAE Results
Posterior Collapse Diagnostics
In order to diagnose for posterior collapse, posterior distributions of the encodings for the pooled
train and validation set are analyzed.
Initially, we simply checked histograms of the mean and variances for the posterior distribution
and compared them to what simulated samples from the prior would look like.
We’ve learned that this check is not robust due to the latent space being defined as a dense
dual octree graph. Thus, each index in latent space encodes information for a specific node
in the mesh-space. As a result, it is quintessential to maintain node-status, as there may be
systematic difference in encodings for empty space vs. organ-occupied space, i.e. sequential
position contains information, which is lost when using histograms.
As a result of this, the initial posterior collapse investigations have led us very much astray in
terms of diagnosing posterior collapse prematurely for models which actually seem to have a
well-structured latent space. The solution is to maintain per-node resolution when checking for
posterior collapse, ie. we plot the mean of means and variances per node across the train- and
validation-split. Additionally, we calculate the KL-divergence per dimension as compared to a
univariate prior which aids in diagnosing whether a specific latent dimension seems to collapse.
Followingly we calculate the mean KL-divergence per node (comparing to the 3-dimensional
Mean-field Gaussian prior), hoping to learn if there is a systematicity in node encodings.
We ensure the property of scale consistency by monitoring minimal and maximal encoding values
per dimension while training, which allows catching if any drift. If the minimum and maximum
begin squeezing very closely towards zero, we begin suspecting posterior collapse. If extreme
values begin covering a too large scale in some dimension this may be indicative of the latent
dimension carrying too much information as opposed to others, ie. the decoder begins to depend
on a subset of latent dimensions (latent underutilization).
Unsuccessful latent dimension interpolations investigated
In order to investigate whether the latent space is continuous and well-structured we make a
series of latent interpolation experiments. In this section, the variants of interpolations inspected
which were unsuccessful are outlined.
In all used interpolations the general idea is to start somewhere well-defined (e.g. an encoded
source sample or a mean) and move along a fixed latent dimension or data-defined trajectory in
latent space, as mean encodings were found to yield bad results in all cases.
PCA mode-synthesis Initially, we tried to interpolate latent encodings by fitting a PCA with
nc = 10 in the flattened data matrix Zf ∈RN×24576. Followingly, we calculate the per-node-
per-feature mean of encodings ¯Zf ∈R1×24576 and interpolate:
˜Z = ¯Z ± 3σmwm
(C.1)
where wm is the direction of the m’th principal component and σm is the corresponding explained
standard deviation of the m’th mode.
We also explore a variant where we substitute ¯Z with a specific sample Zi.
Results
PCA mode synthesis did yield interpretable results for any LCA model, and was
not investigated for round organs. Using a mean principal score as the starting point produced
incoherent meshes, whereas traversal from a source sample quickly produced deterioating meshes.
92
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
==PAGE:103==
Mean interpolation
It was decided to now try and treat the VAE deterministically, ie.
assuming zero variance and simply interpolating over the mean dimensions of the predicted
posterior. Thus interpolation is carried out over the means of an encoding on a per-dimension
basis:
Zi,µ = Zi,µ ± α · 1T
d (µ),
d ∈{1, 2, 3}
(C.2)
where 1d(µ) denotes the indicator-function for µi = d and letting α ∈[−2.96; 2.96].
If all
latent dimensions capture information, we would expect that the decoded mesh should change
drastically as a result of this interpolation.
Results
This type of interpolation generally yielded no change in two latent dimensions for
a large range of α whereas a single dimension produced very large changes, but at no point
continuous or well-interpretable. Traversing along all values rapidly deterioated meshes.
Varmax interpolation
We investigate what happens if we interpolate along the direction of
maximal per-node posterior variance, i.e.:
Zi,µ = Zi,µ ± α · 1T
d (arg max
d
σ),
d ∈{1, 2, 3}
(C.3)
Note that this is an extremily unrealistic interpolation if the predicted variance of the posterior
of a node is small, as we use the reparametrization for the decoder. As a result, there is a large
danger in this trajectory being completely out-of-distribution for the posterior and creating
defect decoded meshes.
Results
Were very similar to mean interpolation experiments, but decoded meshes were static
for a larger range of α until suddenly deteriorating, indicating that all latent dimensions must
change at the same time for valid traversals.
Variance-respecting interpolations
Experiments are carried out with interpolations taking
into account the posterior variance:
Zi,µ = Zi,µ ± α · 1T
d (arg max
d
σ) ⊙σ,
d ∈{1, 2, 3}
(C.4)
with ⊙denoting the Hadamard product such that the indicator function picks out the mean
with corresponding maximal predicted posterior variance and α ∈[−1.96; 1.96]. We consider
this interpoaltion more realistic, as it samples the posterior distribution around a sample in
areas which are actually probable during posterior sampling. This also allows us to learn how
mode-locking the VAE is. If interpolations along a large range of α’s does not produce changes in
output, we know that the variance is either very small (ie. the VAE is acting as an autoencoder)
or the scale of the latent space is too unregularized.
Results
Decoded meshes were not influenced whatsoever, effects first appearing at α > 7,
clearly indicative of the fact that posterior variances are very small. This insight supported the
development of the KL-thresholding scheme.
C.1
VAE Sweep Configuration
Experimentation consisted of vast tweaking. This included the employment of multiple model
sweeps, which collectively varied over the parameters:
• Initial convolution channels Cin ∈{16, 24, 32}
• Number residual blocks per stage Nr ∈{1, 2, 3}
• Batch size |B| ∈{16, 32, 64}
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
93
==PAGE:104==
• A continuous range of KL-regularization strengths β : [0.001, 1.0]
• Weight decay (L2-penalty) λ ∈[0.01, 0.1]
• KL annealing schedules: flat, linear or cyclical (period T ∈[2, 3, 4]) [48].
Sweeps are progressive in three stages. First, architectural parameters and batch-size and learn-
ing rate are tuned using constant KL-regularization β = 0.1. The model selection criterion is
minimizing compound validation loss. Followingly, a sweep over KL schedule and β is made.
Model selection criterion is enforcing latent space structure. Lastly, weight-decay is tuned to
mitigate overfitting, with the model selection criterion of minimizing validation loss.
C.2
Initial Sweep Experiments on Raw ImageCAS data
This section outlines the initial experiments carried out on the bounding box center aligned
raw ImageCAS dataset for LCA and RCA, thus consisting of N = 951 samples, each of which
contained both artery trees.
Whilst not explicitly used in the work, this process may have
biased the parameter search for the single branch VAE model and thus all downstream tasks.
Initially, models were trained to overfit, which was possible irrespective of the architecture used.
Followingly the sweep-palette from C.1 were used.
Results
The main results of the initial sweep over architectural parameters indicate that the
largest models (Cin = 32, Nr = 3) were prone to overfitting quite quickly. Smaller models were
unable to converge on a satisfying training loss, ie.
they underfitted.
The best performing
models had a somewhat intermediary complex architecture (Cin = 24, NR = 2) which was
thus used going forward. Other parameters had no measurable effect. Irrespective of batch-
size and learning rates, loss curves indicated instabilities at random timesteps, presumably to
irrepresentative batches due to a large sample variability. KL-sweeps made all models overfit
at some point.
We found that increasing β made the models overfit way earlier before any
sort of convergence, which is cumbersome. Smaller β-values made the posterior distributions
highly unregulated which was also indicated by latent space interpolations which were completely
discontinuous. Using annealing vs. no annealing showed no general trend in performance except
that linear schedules were detrimental. In order to investigate the structure of latent space in the
best model, we utilized latent interpolations. They were highly invariant to high interpolation
values α and suddenly deteriorated into invalid meshes, indicating that the latent space is very
unstructured.This makes sense, as all models show trends of overfitting - the dataset may be
so hard to encode that it is easier to map training samples completely deterministically to
latent space with no clear structure. PCA and UMAP were utilized to see whether structure
was present when coloring by: left coronary artery volume, right coronary artery volume, the
number of decoded connected components and the total organ volume, per dimension and for
all latent dimensions at once. There was no indicated structure for any of the features. As a
result, regularization was investigated using a range of weight-decays to see if overfitting may
be mitigated, but gains were small and never improved latent space structure. As a result, the
dataset was replaced using the refined artery dataset on the basis of the data being (1) badly
aligned, (2) having a low quality and (3) the task of modeling two branches at the same time
being too hard.
94
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
==PAGE:105==
C.3
Left Coronary Artery VAE (MV,LCA) Experimentation and
Model Configuration
In order to ensure that the cleaned data does not introduce training instabilities, we again
overfit the training set on purpose, which was possible irrespective of the model configurations
investigated.
Therefore, we again apply the same experimental procedure as described in section C.2.
The model converged upon is outlined in Table C.1.
Table C.1: MV,LCA model hyperparameter and training configuration
Parameter
Value
Model Architecture
Model Name
octdiff_graph_vae
Latent Dimension
3
Initial Channels (init_dim)
24
Bottleneck Depth
4
Residual Blocks
2
Input Channels
4
Output Channels
4
Training Configuration
Optimizer
AdamW
Learning Rate
0.001
Learning Rate Minimum
0.0001
Learning Rate Schedule
Polynomial Decay (power = 0.9)
Warm-up Epochs
20
Warm-up Initial LR
0.001
Max Epochs
500
Batch Size (Train)
16
Batch Size (Val)
4
Weight Decay
0.01
Validation Interval (Epochs)
20
Loss Settings
KL Weight (β)
0.01
Annealing Enabled
True
Number of Cycles (ncycles)
4
Loss Type
sdf_reg_loss
Data / SDF Settings
SDF Resolution
128
SDF Scale
0.9
Determinism
PyTorch Seed
42
Followingly β-tuning was utilized, but latent interpolations were at no point stable, and beta
seemed to have low influence on latent space structure for LCA.
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
95
==PAGE:106==
C.4
Additional Convergence Diagnostics
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Epoch
0.70
0.75
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
Accuracy
Layer 4
Layer 5
Layer 6
Layer 7
Train
Val
Figure C.1: Per-layer accuracy curves for train and validation sets for the LCA only VAE with aligned LCAs.
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
log ( )
10
5
0
log (
Octree)
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Epoch
4
2
0
log (
SDF)
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Epoch
3
2
1
0
log (
Grad)
Layer
4
5
6
7
Complete
Model
LCA aligned
multiclass
Figure C.2: Per layer losses for train and validation sets for the LCA only VAE with aligned LCAs. They are
a bit worse than the unaligned case.
96
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
==PAGE:107==
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Epoch
10
5
log (
KL)
Loss Type
Train
Val
Model
LCA aligned
Figure C.3: KL-loss on train and validation sets for the LCA only VAE.
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
97
==PAGE:108==
D
Myocardium VAE (MV,myo) Results
D.1
MV,myo model hyperparameter and training configuration
As results for tuning β remain inconclusive, we fall back to literature as our guide. Rombach
et. al. use a very weak KL-weight of 1e-06, thus making the VAE effectively act as a pure
autoencoder with scale-constraints [42], whereas Xiong et al. and Wang et al. both use constants
β = 0.1 in a large-sample setting [20, 7]. As we have already investigated larger values of β
and none of these produced well-structured latent-spaces, and due to time-constraints we only
test two values, namely 0.001 and 0.1, both with cyclical annealing using T = 4 and compare
the latent space produced by these two models in order to use the model which exhibits the
best latent space structure. The larger β = 0.1 achieved better latent interpolations for farther
neighbors, and thus was deemed optimal. The configuration is in Table D.1.
Table D.1: MV,myo configuration.
Parameter
Value
Model Architecture
Model Name
octdiff_graph_vae
Latent Dimension
3
Initial Channels (init_dim)
24
Bottleneck Depth
4
Residual Blocks
2
Input Channels
4
Output Channels
4
Training Configuration
Optimizer
AdamW
Learning Rate
0.001
Learning Rate Minimum
0.0001
Learning Rate Schedule
Polynomial Decay (power = 0.9)
Warm-up Epochs
20
Warm-up Initial LR
0.001
Max Epochs
500
Batch Size (Train)
16
Batch Size (Val)
4
Weight Decay
0.01
Validation Interval (Epochs)
20
Loss Settings
KL Weight (β)
0.1
Annealing Enabled
True
Number of Cycles (ncycles)
4
Loss Type
sdf_reg_loss
Data / SDF Settings
SDF Resolution
128
SDF Scale
0.9
Determinism
PyTorch Seed
42
98
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
==PAGE:109==
D.2
KL-Losses For βlow and βmed
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Epoch
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
log (
KL)
Loss Type
Train
Val
Model
low
med
Figure D.1: KL losses for the two myocardium VAEs
D.3
KL-Divergence Node Masking
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
99
==PAGE:110==
Figure D.2: Histograms over flattened train and validation latent codes, with no masking. Seemingly, dimension
1 and 2 have collapsed.
100
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
==PAGE:111==
Figure D.3: Histograms over flattened train and validation latent codes, with max masking. Contrary to the
no masking case in figure D.2, when masking over a KL-threshold, it clearly indicates that some node to encode
information.
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
101
==PAGE:112==
Figure D.4: Histograms over flattened train and validation latent codes, with min masking. Following figure
D.3, when masking over a KL-threshold, it clearly indicates that nodes under the threshold collapse to N(0, 1),
only producing noise. Furthermore, the scales suggest that most nodes are under the threshold, suggesting blank
space computation.
102
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
==PAGE:113==
Figure D.5: Mean KL-divergence for all nodes used for extracting a mean myocardium.
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
103
==PAGE:114==
E
Multiclass VAE Results
In the following subsections, supplementary graphs for the multiclass VAE model are shown. It
is trained on LCA, left myocardium, left atrium and left ventricle.
E.1
Multi Class VAE (MV,mc) Configuration
Table E.1: MV,mc configuration.
Parameter
Value
Model Architecture
Model Name
octdiff_graph_vae
Latent Dimension
3
Initial Channels (init_dim)
24
Bottleneck Depth
4
Residual Blocks
2
Input Channels
4
Output Channels
4
Training Configuration
Optimizer
AdamW
Learning Rate
0.001
Learning Rate Minimum
0.0001
Learning Rate Schedule
Polynomial Decay (power = 0.9)
Warm-up Epochs
20
Warm-up Initial LR
0.001
Max Epochs
500
Batch Size (Train)
16
Batch Size (Val)
4
Weight Decay
0.01
Validation Interval (Epochs)
20
Loss Settings
KL Weight (β)
0.1
Annealing Enabled
True
Number of Cycles (ncycles)
4
Loss Type
sdf_reg_loss
Data / SDF Settings
SDF Resolution
128
SDF Scale
0.9
Determinism
PyTorch Seed
42
104
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
==PAGE:115==
E.1.1
Model Convergence diagnostics
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
log ( )
10
5
0
log (
Octree)
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Epoch
4
2
0
log (
SDF)
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Epoch
3
2
1
0
log (
Grad)
Layer
4
5
6
7
Complete
Model
multiclass
Figure E.1: Training loss curves for the multiclass VAE. We notice more stable convergence than in the single-
class case.
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
log ( )
10
5
0
log (
Octree)
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Epoch
4
2
0
log (
SDF)
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Epoch
3
2
1
0
log (
Grad)
Layer
4
5
6
7
Complete
Model
multiclass
Figure E.2: Validation loss curves for the multiclass VAE. We notice a significantly lower collected loss which
may potentially show symptoms of overfitting when reaching the 250-300 epoch range. We notice that octree
losses do not indicate overfitting anymore.
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Epoch
10
5
log (
KL)
Loss Type
Train
Val
Model
multiclass
Figure E.3: The KL-loss as a function of training epoch number using the annealing schedule
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
105
==PAGE:116==
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Epoch
0.90
0.92
0.94
0.96
0.98
1.00
Accuracy
Layer 4
Layer 5
Layer 6
Layer 7
Train
Val
Figure E.4: Accuracy curves per layer, indicating the accuracy of leaf node split predictions at each octree layer.
106
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
==PAGE:117==
E.2
Performance Table
Split
LCA
Myocardium
L. Atrium
L. Ventricle
Train
7.3329
44.7580
13.2664
25.3871
Validation
7.5832
45.4881
13.1748
25.7745
Table E.2: Mean CDL2 values for each class across training and validation splits.
E.3
Performance Evaluation Measured by HD
LCA
L. Atrium
Myocardium
L. Ventricle
class
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
HD
train
val
median
Figure E.5: Per-class performances of the VAE as measured by Hausdorff Distances.
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
107
==PAGE:118==
E.3.1
LCA Failure Modes
Figure E.6: LCA failure modes. Below depth 7 octrees produced during VAE decoding. We notice that what
could seem a SDF sampling issue is actually an error in the inferred octree, indicating that the SDF should have
a higher resolution during training. Likewise, deeper octrees could mitigate the issue.
108
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
==PAGE:119==
E.3.2
PCA Scree Plot
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10
Number of PCA components
0.005
0.010
0.015
0.020
0.025
0.030
0.035
Explained variance ratio
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10
Number of PCA components
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
Cumulative explained variance ratio
Figure E.7: Scree plots for a PCA on the multi class VAE using 10 principal components. 2 components explain
7.09%.
E.3.3
Latent Classifier Performances
In the following three tables, training and validation confusion matrices are shown for KMeans
shape classifiers trained on dimensionality reductions of latent space.
Table E.3: Train Confusion Matrix for a KMeans classifier trained UMAP projections of latent encodings using
two components.
True / Pred
LCA
L. Myocardium
L. Atrium
L. Ventricle
LCA
612
0
0
0
L. Myocardium
0
609
1
2
L. Atrium
0
1
611
0
L. Ventricle
0
10
0
602
Table E.4: Train Confusion Matrix for a KMeans classifier fitted using PCA projections of latent encodings
using two principal components.
True / Pred
LCA
L. Myocardium
L. Atrium
L. Ventricle
LCA
606
0
0
6
L. Myocardium
0
538
0
74
L. Atrium
0
0
604
8
L. Ventricle
0
220
3
389
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
109
==PAGE:120==
Table E.5:
Validation Confusion Matrix for a KMeans classifier fitted using PCA projections on posterior
samples using two principal components.
True / Pred
LCA
L. Myocardium
L. Atrium
L. Ventricle
LCA
74
0
0
2
L. Myocardium
0
65
0
11
L. Atrium
0
0
74
2
L. Ventricle
0
25
0
51
110
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
==PAGE:121==
Figure E.8: The validation accuracy as a function of the number of principal components used in the KMeans
classifier. PCA is fitted on the train set posterior samples.
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
111
==PAGE:122==
E.3.4
Nearest Neighbor Latent interpolations
The nearest found neighbors per class are presented in Figure E.12. In general, nearest neighbors
seem very similar topologically, which indicates a well-structured latent. All interpolations are
carried out over nodes with a KL-divergence larger than 2.0, which tuned empirically for the
myocardium class. Nearest neighbor interpolations without the KL-thresholding still produce
smooth results.
112
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
==PAGE:123==
 = 0.00
 = 0.25
 = 0.50
 = 0.75
 = 1.00
Figure E.9: LCA interpolation. Branches not present in α = 1.00 regress, but even using thresholding, they are
not valid along the trajectory.
 = 0.00
 = 0.25
 = 0.50
 = 0.75
 = 1.00
Figure E.10: Myocardium interpolation
 = 0.00
 = 0.25
 = 0.50
 = 0.75
 = 1.00
Figure E.11: Atrium interpolation. Note the angle is strange in the visualization but alignment matches ground
truth samples.
 = 0.00
 = 0.25
 = 0.50
 = 0.75
 = 1.00
Figure E.12: Ventricle interpolation. We notice a small empty triangle which is not present in the ground truth
(the right most sample). This is an effect of the KL-thresholding, and is not present in the pure reconstruction
of the same sample.
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
113
==PAGE:124==
E.3.5
Banded Neighbor Latent interpolations
Interpolations between a subsample of neighbors which achieve a cosine distance in the range
between 0.097 and 0.100 are presented per class in Figure E.16. All interpolations are carried out
over nodes with a KL-divergence larger than 2.0, which tuned empirically for the myocardium
class. We notice that there is a large topological difference between the samples. The inter-
polations exhibit semantic meaningful behaviour at midpoints, where larger organs shrink and
rotate for atria and ventricles; for myocardium, lumen growing and outer-shell deterioation oc-
curs just as found in Section 7.2. In the case of LCA, the midpoint resembles the only common
mesh-overlap, namely the aorta root.
114
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
==PAGE:125==
 = 0.00
 = 0.25
 = 0.50
 = 0.75
 = 1.00
Figure E.13: LCA interpolation.
 = 0.00
 = 0.25
 = 0.50
 = 0.75
 = 1.00
Figure E.14: Myocardium interpolation
 = 0.00
 = 0.25
 = 0.50
 = 0.75
 = 1.00
Figure E.15: Atrium interpolation. Note the angle is strange in the visualization but alignment matches ground
truth samples.
 = 0.00
 = 0.25
 = 0.50
 = 0.75
 = 1.00
Figure E.16: Ventricle interpolation. We notice a small empty triangle which is not present in the ground truth
(the right most sample). This is an effect of the KL-thresholding, and is not present in the pure reconstruction
of the same sample.
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
115
==PAGE:126==
F
Myocardium LDM (MZ,myo) Diffusion
Results
F.1
Myocardium LDM UNet (MZ,myo) Training and Model
Configuration
Table F.1: Final used configuration for 1.5M param MZ,myo
Parameter
Value
Model Architecture
Model Name
naive_graph_unet
Feature Type
F
Initial Channels (init_conv)
32
Input Channels
3
Input Depth
4
Number of Classes
1
Channel Multipliers
[1, 2, 4, 4]
Residual Blocks
[1, 1, 1, 1]
Bottleneck Depth
1
Activation Type
silu
Normalization Type
group_norm
Attention Resolutions
null
VAE base
Model
MV,myo
Training Configuration
Optimizer
AdamW
Learning Rate
0.001
Learning Rate Minimum
0.0001
Learning Rate Schedule
Polynomial Decay (power = 0.9)
Warm-up Epochs
20
Warm-up Initial LR
0.001
Max Epochs
25000
Batch Size (Train)
64
Batch Size (Validation)
1
Weight Decay
0.05
Validation Interval (Epochs)
1
Early Stopping
5000
Gradient Clipping
-1 (disabled)
Loss Settings
Diffusion Process
Noise Schedule
Cosine
Diffusion Timesteps
1000
Scale
0.08
Biased Sampling
False
Data / SDF Settings
SDF Resolution
128
SDF Scale
0.9
Depth
7
Full Depth
4
Point Scale
0.5
Determinism
PyTorch Seed
42
116
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
==PAGE:127==
F.2
Myocardium Single-Sample Overfitting Results
F.2.1
Linear Overfit
The 1.77M model with linear schedule using βs = 0.0001, βe = 0.02 was fitted to a single sample
for 18000 epochs and produced valid meshes at the end. Visualizations of reverse samples may
be seen in Figure F.1, and they give us some insight into which sorts of generative artifacts may
be produced by the LDM method; namely, holes in the bottom and other places, wavy surfaces
and floating mesh-components.
Figure F.1: Decoded samples from the reverse process after 3000 (left), 6000 (middle) and 15000 epochs (right).
F.2.2
Myocardium single-sample overfitting with cosine schedule
The 1.77M model with cosine schedule using s = 0.008 was fitted to a single sample for 18000
epochs, and at no point was able to produce valid meshes. Visualization of 4 reverse process
samples taken at 18000 epochs may be seen in Figure F.2.
Figure F.2: Four decoded samples from the reverse process after 18000 epochs. None of them are valid, but
organ-structure can be perceived behind the noise.
It stands out that the model is still able to learn to generate the organ-structure, but seems to
miss fidelity at denoising blank-space.
F.2.3
Artifacts for the LDM models fit to the full dataset
Some decoded generated posterior samples for the model trained with linear variance schedule
are presented in Figure F.3.
We notice that in general many dents/holes are present at 2000 epochs even though we found
that the VAE decoder usually smoothes these out. They are present at a lower degree at 8000
epochs, but still present. In principle, some of these artifacts are part of the training data meshes
which are very noisy, and as a result this is no bad sign.
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
117
==PAGE:128==
Figure F.3: A selection of decoded generated posterior samples. Green meshes are sampled at 2000 epochs
whereas the yellow mesh is sampled at 8000 epochs.
118
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
==PAGE:129==
F.2.4
Coverage Monte Carlo subsampling for the myocardium LDM model
with linear schedule
The monte carlo subsampled coverage is evaluated as a function of N = 100 Dgen sampling
iterations. Results are presented in Figure F.4. Sampling is without replacement.
0
200
400
600
800
1000
N samples
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Coverage
Train
Val
Optimal
Figure F.4: The bootstrapped coverage evaluated using N = 100 bootstrap iterations.
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
119
==PAGE:130==
F.2.5
MMD mesh analysis - smallest 16 scoring and largest 16 scoring
samples
Binned ascending and descending train set MMDsmp scoring samples are presented in Figures
F.5 and F.6.
1.0
Figure F.5: Ascending train MMDsmp comparisons. Red are generated, blue are training set samples. Strong
memorization is taking place.
120
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
==PAGE:131==
1.0
Figure F.6: Descending train MMDsmp comparisons. Red are generated, blue are training set samples. Some
of the samples seem novel, but in general they are very close to the train samples.
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
121
==PAGE:132==
F.2.6
Feature histograms
122
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
==PAGE:133==
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Density
Volume, Vo
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
0.40
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Density
Bounding box volume VB
0.175
0.200
0.225
0.250
0.275
0.300
0.325
0
5
10
15
20
Density
Volumetric Efficiency, VE
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25
1.50
1.75
2.00
Density
Surface Area, So
0.30
0.35
0.40
0.45
0.50
0.55
0
5
10
15
20
25
Density
True sphericity index, 
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25
1.50
1.75
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
Density
Tortuosity, 
g
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
0.40
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
17.5
Density
L2 Distance Centre to Base
0.25
0.30
0.35
0.40
0.45
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Density
L2 Distance Centre to Apex
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0
2
4
6
8
Density
Long axis L2 Distance, ||x
y||2
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
0.14
0.16
0.18
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Density
Base Hole Area
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Density
Lower Quartile Thickness
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.09
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Density
Median Thickness
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.09
value
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Density
Mean Thickness
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
value
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Density
PC1 Azimuth angle, 
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25
1.50
1.75
value
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25
1.50
1.75
Density
PC1 Elevation, 
Figure F.7: The evaluated anatomical features for the generated, train-, validation- and test-set.
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
123
==PAGE:134==
F.2.7
PCA scree plot
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10
Number of PCA components
0.005
0.010
0.015
0.020
0.025
0.030
Explained variance ratio
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10
Number of PCA components
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.09
0.10
Cumulative explained variance ratio
Figure F.8: A scree-plot for the utilized PCA with the first 10 principal components. Note that the y-axis is
explained-variance ratio, ie.
λi
∑N
j=1 λj
We notice that the scree plot in principle shows we should use 4 principal components, but using
5 principal components only explain 6.8% of the total variance. Thus, PCA visualizations are
not ideal, and as a result we favour UMAP visualization.
124
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
==PAGE:135==
F.2.8
Generated latent codes nearest neighbourhood data
For all samples, we find the class label corresponding to the cosine distance minimizing posterior
sample and count the number of assignments to the generated dataset in order to quantify how
eﬀiciently the generator produces samples akin to the test and validation set.
Results are
presented in Tables F.2 and F.3.
Train
Val
Test
Gen
Train
0.0
4.41
4.41
91.2
Val
42.1
0.0
10.5
47.4
Test
47.4
5.13
0.0
47.4
Gen
97.5
0.879
1.66
0.0
Table F.2: Nearest neighbour assignment for latent codes using cosine distance when disallowing self-inclusion.
Columns indicate the composition of the row. Values are in percent. Note all 1024 generated samples are used.
Train
Val
Test
Gen
Train
17.2
2.94
2.12
77.8
Val
40.8
1.32
10.5
47.4
Test
43.6
3.85
6.41
46.2
Gen
11.8
0.10
0.00
88.1
Table F.3: Nearest neighbour assignment for latent codes using cosine distance when allowing self-inclusion.
Columns indicate the composition of the row. Values are in percent. Note all 1024 generated samples are used.
F.2.9
Minimizing cosine distance distributions
0.55
0.60
0.65
0.70
0.75
0.80
0
50
100
150
Count
gen->train
gen->val
gen->test
gen->gen
Figure F.9: The distribution of cosine distances between latent codes when assigning for each generated sample
the cosine distance minimizing latent code in the ”other” set.
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
125
==PAGE:136==
G
LCA LDM (MZ,lca)
G.1
Model configuration
Table G.1: Example of a found configuration for the LCA model. No configurations proved optimal.
Parameter
Value
Model Architecture
Model Name
naive_graph_unet
Feature Type
F
Initial Channels (init_conv)
32
Input Channels
3
Input Depth
4
Number of Classes
1
Channel Multipliers
[1, 2, 4, 4]
Residual Blocks
[1, 1, 1, 1]
Bottleneck Depth
1
Activation Type
silu
Normalization Type
group_norm
Attention Resolutions
[4, 3, 2]
Unconditional Probability
0.15
Guidance Strength
3
Training Configuration
Optimizer
AdamW
Learning Rate
0.001
Learning Rate Minimum
0.0001
Learning Rate Schedule
Polynomial Decay (power = 0.9)
Warm-up Epochs
20
Warm-up Initial LR
0.001
Max Epochs
25000
Weight Decay
0.05
Validation Interval (Epochs)
1
Early Stopping
10503
Gradient Clipping
-1 (disabled)
Gamma
0.1
Step Size
[160, 240]
Milestones
[120, 180]
AMP Usage
false
Empty Cache Frequency
50
Log Per Iteration
500
Validate Every Epoch
500
Batch size
64
Diffusion Process
Noise Schedule
Cosine
Diffusion Timesteps
1000
Scale
0.02
Data / SDF Settings
SDF Resolution
128
SDF Scale
0.9
With Color
false
Save SDF
false
Resample
true
N Resamples
0
Sample Threshold
1200
N Metric Iterations
5
Determinism
PyTorch Seed
42
126
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
==PAGE:137==
G.2
Reverse Process Samples
A selection of reverse process samples are presented in Figure G.1.
Figure G.1:
Reverse process samples from the best LCA LDM model.
Most samples are overly simple in
branching structure, exhibiting merged branches and too thick segments.
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
127
==PAGE:138==
Binned MMDsmp scores for the train set are presented in Figures G.2 to G.3. It is clear that
Figure G.2:
MMD matching samples from gen→train sorted in ascending fashion.
Numbers indicate the
corresponding MMDsmp scores.
the generated meshes overfit substructures (and complete structures) of the training set, and in
general do so with very low anatomical realism. In addition, the highest fidelity samples seem
to be quite similar, indicating mode-seeking behavior.
128
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
==PAGE:139==
Figure G.3:
MMD matching samples from gen→train sorted in descending fashion.
Numbers indicate the
corresponding MMDsmp scores.
The most novel (or defect) results as shown by the high MMD bin are in general anatomically
implausible and extremely simple. In addition, there seem to be specific archetypes present,
which are reminiscent of a single branch of the LCA. This points towards mode-seeking behavior
with low quality.
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
129
==PAGE:140==
H
Multiclass LDM (MZ,mc)
H.1
Model Configuration for Multi Class Model on Spherical
Organs
Table H.1: Configuration parameters for the spherical multiclass LDM model.
Parameter
Value
Model Architecture
Model Name
naive_graph_unet
Feature Type
F
Initial Channels (init_conv)
32
Input Channels
3
Input Depth
4
Number of Classes
3
Channel Multipliers
[1, 2, 4, 4]
Residual Blocks
[1, 1, 1, 1]
Bottleneck Depth
1
Activation Type
silu
Normalization Type
group_norm
Attention Resolutions
[4, 3, 2]
Unconditional Probability
0.15
Guidance Strength
3
Class Labels
[Myocardium, L.Atrium, L.Ventricle]
Training Configuration
Optimizer
AdamW
Learning Rate
0.001
Learning Rate Minimum
0.0001
Learning Rate Schedule
Polynomial Decay (power = 0.9)
Warm-up Epochs
20
Warm-up Initial LR
0.001
Max Epochs
25000
Weight Decay
0.05
Validation Interval (Epochs)
1
Early Stopping
1403
Gradient Clipping
-1 (disabled)
Gamma
0.1
Step Size
[160, 240]
Milestones
[120, 180]
AMP Usage
false
Empty Cache Frequency
50
Log Per Iteration
500
Validate Every Epoch
200
Batch size
64
Diffusion Process
Noise Schedule
Cosine
Diffusion Timesteps
1000
Scale
0.08
Data / SDF Settings
SDF Resolution
128
SDF Scale
0.9
With Color
false
Save SDF
false
Determinism
PyTorch Seed
42
130
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
==PAGE:141==
H.2
Mesh Metrics as a Function of Investigated Guidance
scales
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
131
==PAGE:142==
Figure H.1: Mesh metrics evaluated as a function of guidance scale. Upper row are metrics for model which
was fitted on all four classes, whereas the lower row is for a model only fitted on myocardium, left atrium and left
ventricle. Legend colors: 0 is LCA, 1 is left myocardium, 2 is left atrium and 3 is left ventricle. Note that MMD
for LCA was > 50 in all cases and thus omitted from the results for visual clarity.
132
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
==PAGE:143==
H.2.1
Generated meshes
Per-class meshes are visualized in Figures H.2a-H.3b
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
133
==PAGE:144==
(a) Left coronary artery samples
(b) Myocardium samples
134
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
==PAGE:145==
(a) Left atrium samples
(b) Ventricle samples
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
135
==PAGE:146==
H.2.2
MMD Matches to Train from Generated Data per Class
On the following pages the per-class closest matches when comparing minimum and maximum
scoring gen→train MMDs. The results are presented in Figures H.4 to H.9.
Figure H.4: Ascending train set matches for myocardium data. Red is generated, cyan is ground truth match.
Text indicates achieved MMDsmp value
136
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
==PAGE:147==
Figure H.5: Descending train set matches for myocardium data. Red is generated, cyan is ground truth match.
Text indicates achieved MMDsmp value
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
137
==PAGE:148==
Figure H.6: Ascending train set matches for atrium data. Red is generated, cyan is ground truth match. Text
indicates achieved MMDsmp value
138
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
==PAGE:149==
Figure H.7: Descending train set matches for atrium data. Red is generated, cyan is ground truth match.
Text indicates achieved MMDsmp value. In three cases, the model generates ventricles, which indicates that the
guidance scale may be a bit too low.
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
139
==PAGE:150==
Figure H.8: Ascending train set matches for ventricle data. Red is generated, cyan is ground truth match. Text
indicates achieved MMDsmp value
140
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
==PAGE:151==
Figure H.9: Descending train set matches for atrium data. Red is generated, cyan is ground truth match. Text
indicates achieved MMDsmp value
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
141
==PAGE:152==
H.2.3
Multiclass LCA Results using a Large Guidance Ccale
Table H.2 illustrates the unfruitful generative behaviour for LCA output over the model MZ,2.
Metric↓/ Class →
LCAc
MMDa
(↓)
115.4 / 56.6
MMDsmp(↓)
16.4 / 51.7
COVb
(↑)
0.005 / 0.316
1-NNA
0.985 / 0.873
Table H.2: Guidance scale is set to s = 12 and results follow the interpretation (train / val). Results show, that
the model is still incapable of producing coherent output, even when using a large guidance scale.
142
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
==PAGE:153==
I
Split Signal (MS) Diffusion Results
I.1
Used Model Configuration
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
143
==PAGE:154==
Table I.1: Configuration parameters for signal diffusion model
Parameter
Value
Model Architecture
Model Name
diff_lr
Initial Channels (init_conv)
32
Input Channels
8
Output Channels
8
Input Depth
4
Number of Classes
4
Channel Multipliers
[1, 2, 4]
Number of Residual Blocks
1
Bottleneck Depth
2
Activation Type
silu
Normalization Type
group_norm
Dropout
0.3
With Attention
true
Number of Attention Heads
4
Attention Resolutions
[2, 4]
Timestep Embedding Dimension
256
Unconditional Probability
0.1
Guidance Strength
2
Class Labels
[LCA, Myocardium, L.Atrium, L.Ventricle]
Training Configuration
Optimizer
AdamW
Learning Rate
0.001
Learning Rate Minimum
0.0001
Learning Rate Schedule
Polynomial Decay (power = 0.9)
Warm-up Epochs
20
Warm-up Initial LR
0.001
Max Epochs
25000
Weight Decay
0.2
Validation Interval (Epochs)
1
Early Stopping
5000
Gradient Clipping
-1 (disabled)
Gamma
0.1
Step Size
[160, 240]
Milestones
[120, 180]
AMP Usage
false
Empty Cache Frequency
50
Log Per Iteration
500
Test Every Epoch
300
Checkpoint Number
25
Batch size
64
Diffusion Process
Noise Schedule
Cosine
Diffusion Timesteps
1000
Scale
0.04
Biased Sampling
false
Diffusion Type
x0
Data / SDF Settings
SDF Resolution
128
SDF Scale
0.9
With Color
false
Save SDF
false
Resample
true
N Resamples
5
N Metric Iterations
5
Determinism
PyTorch Seed
42
144
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
==PAGE:155==
Figure I.1: The smallest model at the overfitting point of 1500 epochs. We notice that the model seems to
produce an overweight of rudimentary LCA trees.
Reverse samples for two different model complexities
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
145
==PAGE:156==
Figure I.2: A larger model is clearly able to model more complex trees, but also quickly overfits. Example
snapshot taken at 4800 epochs.
146
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
==PAGE:157==
I.2
Binned Samples
0.280
0.279
0.279
0.264
0.246
Ground Truth
Generated
Intersection
Figure I.3: Some samples showcasing the degree of novelty possible with the small model identified using AMMO.
0.731
0.403
0.402
0.402
0.693
0.660
Ground Truth
Generated
Intersection
Figure I.4: (Upper row): Least novel samples, measured by high AMMO. (Lower row): Median samples as
measured by AMMO.
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
147
==PAGE:158==
J
FiLM-Conditional (MF) Diffusion
Results
J.1
Model Configuration
148
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
==PAGE:159==
Table J.1: Configuration parameters for FiLM-conditioned diffusion model
Parameter
Value
Model Architecture
Model Name
film_unet
Feature Type
F
Initial Channels (init_conv)
64
Input Channels
3
Output Channels
8
Conditioning Channels
8
Input Depth
4
Number of Classes
4
Channel Multipliers
[1, 2, 4, 4]
Residual Blocks
[1, 1, 1, 1]
Bottleneck Depth
1
Activation Type
silu
Normalization Type
group_norm
Pooling Type
max
Use Convolution
true
Attention Resolutions
[4, 3, 2]
Timestep Embedding Dimension
1024
Guidance Strength
3
Class Labels
[LCA, Myocardium, L.Atrium, L.Ventricle]
Training Configuration
Optimizer
AdamW
Learning Rate
0.001
Learning Rate Minimum
0.0001
Learning Rate Schedule
Polynomial Decay (power = 0.9)
Warm-up Epochs
20
Warm-up Initial LR
0.001
Max Epochs
25000
Weight Decay
0.05
Validation Interval (Epochs)
1
Early Stopping
30000
Gradient Clipping
-1 (disabled)
Gamma
0.1
Step Size
[160, 240]
Milestones
[120, 180]
AMP Usage
false
Empty Cache Frequency
50
Log Per Iteration
500
Test Every Epoch
500
Checkpoint Number
25
Diffusion Process
Noise Schedule
Cosine
Diffusion Timesteps
1000
Scale
0.02
Biased Sampling
true
Data / SDF Settings
SDF Resolution
128
SDF Scale
0.9
N Resamples
5
Determinism
PyTorch Seed
42
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
149
==PAGE:160==
J.2
Reverse Process Samples
Figures J.1, J.2 and J.3 show generated meshes when using train, validation and test signal
conditions, respectively. The meshes are in most cases of significantly higher quality than the
naive LDM case, and segments are thinner. Still, some modes seem overly represented.
Figure J.1: Generated meshes when using training set conditioning signal for latent leaf node feature generation.
Note the last row is cropped, but all samples were valid as measured by the connected component criterion.
150
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
==PAGE:161==
Figure J.2: Generated meshes when using validation set conditioning signal for latent leaf node feature genera-
tion.
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
151
==PAGE:162==
Figure J.3: Generated meshes when using test set conditioning signal for latent leaf node feature generation.
152
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
==PAGE:163==
J.3
Binned MMDsmp Samples
In Figures J.4-J.5 and J.6-J.7 samples in low and high MMDsmp bins are visualized for train
and test conditioning signals.
Figure J.4: Generated samples (red) and ground truth samples (blue) assigned using MMDsmp visualized in
ascending fashion. Conditioning signal was from the train set. Note the condition is hard to see due to the large
overlap of the meshes.
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
153
==PAGE:164==
Figure J.5: Generated samples (red) and ground truth samples (blue) assigned using MMDsmp visualized in
descending fashion. Conditioning signal was from the train set. Note that the condition is hard to see due to the
large mesh-overlap.
154
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
==PAGE:165==
Figure J.6: Generated samples (red) and ground truth samples (blue) assigned using MMDsmp visualized in
ascending fashion. Conditioning signal was from the test set. Repetitions occur due to resampling. The high
number of repetitions indicate clear mode-seeking behavior.
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
155
==PAGE:166==
Figure J.7: Generated samples (red) and ground truth samples (blue) assigned using MMDsmp visualized in
descending fashion. Conditioning signal was from the test set. Repetitions occur due to resampling. The high
number of repetitions indicate clear mode-seeking behavior.
156
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
==PAGE:167==
J.4
Mesh Metrics
Conditioning Signal: Train
N = 100, sampling eﬀiciency = 100%, uniquely mapped samples: 65, optimal coverage = 0.163
Split
MMDa
(↓)
MMDa
smp(↓)
COVb
(↑)
1-NNA
Train
28.9
0.470
0.106
0.690
Val
32.2
30.4
0.526
0.630
Test
31.3
29.2
0.513
0.592
Conditioning Signal: Val
N = 44, sampling eﬀiciency = 8.8%, uniquely mapped samples: 24, optimal coverage = 0.579
Split
MMDa
(↓)
MMDa
smp(↓)
COVb
(↑)
1-NNA
Train
39.5
14.5
0.0359
0.745
Val
33.2
9.32
0.276
0.653
Test
39.5
27.4
0.231
0.722
Conditioning Signal: Test
N = 42, sampling eﬀiciency = 8.4%, uniquely mapped samples: 19, optimal coverage = 0.538
Split
MMDa
(↓)
MMDa
smp(↓)
COVb
(↑)
1-NNA
Train
49.1
10.4
0.0229
0.836
Val
46.0
31.2
0.197
0.831
Test
42.9
9.11
0.179
0.764
Table J.2: Generative mesh metric results for different conditioning signals as compared to all splits. a: reported
in 10−3. b: evaluated using all generated samples. Sampling eﬀiciency reported when using 5 sampling rounds,
i.e. the 5-round-sample-eﬀiciency. Optimal coverage reported as if 100 samples were generated.
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
157
==PAGE:168==
K
3D Rotation Fallacy
Figure K.1: SDF points are shown to not be invariant to rotation, as rotation produces missing SDF points at
unit-cube corners.
158
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
==PAGE:169==
3D Diffusion Based Methods for Cardiovascular Data Analysis and Synthesis
159
==PAGE:170==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
