==PAGE:1==
Automatic Quality Control for Medical Image
Segmentation
Master’s Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
Automatic Quality Control for Medical Image Segmentation
Master’s Thesis
July, 2025
By
Katja Valérie Bonvin
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads Building 324, DK­2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
https://www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared at the Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer
Science at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, over five months. It represents a
partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of MSc Eng in Mathematical Modeling
and Computation.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in computer vision and deep learning.
Katja Valérie Bonvin ­ s233494
Signature
Date
ii
Automatic Quality Control for Medical Image Segmentation
01/07/2025
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
This Thesis explores automatic quality control (QC) in medical image segmentation.
It provides a comprehensive overview and comparison of existing methods for automatic
QC of medical image segmentations, and a categorization of QC methods into three main
categories: reference­based, learning­based, and uncertainty­based. A key gap of miss­
ing research in applying QC to computed tomography (CT) is discovered, and a learning­
based method for QC, identified as the best, is applied on a CT dataset compromising of
scans acquired under a wide variety of imaging conditions. A novel approach is used to
generate a training dataset for QC by leveraging a target Dice loss to produce segmen­
tations of varying quality.
The results show that the method generalizes well to CT. At the subject level, mean ab­
solute errors (MAE) ranged from 0.017 to 0.037, with Pearson correlation coefficients be­
tween 0.987­0.994 and accuracies from 96.2% to 100.0%. Inference times were between
1.165–2.180 seconds per subject. At the slice level, MAEs ranged from 0.034–0.056,
correlation coefficients from 0.962–0.979, and accuracies from 93.9% to 96.7%, with in­
ference times under 11 milliseconds per slice.
This work fills a key gap in the literature by extending DL­based QC to CT imaging. Fur­
thermore, this shows how one can generate a balanced dataset of segmentations quality,
for training QC model, by using the target Dice loss.
Automatic Quality Control for Medical Image Segmentation
iii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
Katja Valérie Bonvin, MSc Eng in Mathematical Modelling and Computation, DTU, Au­
thor
Aasa Feragen, Professor, Supervisor
Joris Fournel, Postdoc, Supervisor
iv
Automatic Quality Control for Medical Image Segmentation
==PAGE:6==
Use of Generative AI in This Thesis
Throughout the development of this thesis, generative AI (ChatGPT) has been used for:
• Language editing and proofreading
• Code optimization and debugging: During the implementation phase, I used Chat­
GPT to help identify bugs, improve performance, and streamline my Python code,
particularly in relation to data handling, model training, and evaluation pipelines.
• Visualization improvement: I used ChatGPT to enhance the visual presentation of
plots created with Python.
• BibTeX entry generation: In cases where citation data was unavailable in BibTeX
format, I used ChatGPT to generate BibTeX entries based on publication metadata.
Automatic Quality Control for Medical Image Segmentation
v
==PAGE:7==
Abbreviations
If an abbreviation is in plural, there is added “s” at the end when the abbreviation consists
of upper­case letters and “ ’s” if the abbreviation consists of lower­case letters.
Abbreviation
Meaning
DSC
Dice Similarity Coefficient
CNN
Convolutional Neural Network
MAE
Mean Absolute Error
QC
Quality Control
GT
Ground Truth
MVSF
Mean Volume Similarity Fraction
Table 1: List of abbreviations used in the thesis.
vi
Automatic Quality Control for Medical Image Segmentation
==PAGE:8==
Nomenclature
Symbol
Meaning
ρ
Pearson Correlation Coefficient
s
Seconds
ms
Milliseconds
Table 2: List of important symbols used in the thesis.
Automatic Quality Control for Medical Image Segmentation
vii
==PAGE:9==
viii
Automatic Quality Control for Medical Image Segmentation
==PAGE:10==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
2
1.1
Medical Image Segmentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Applications of Medical Image Segmentation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
The Possibilities of Deep Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.4
Challenges in using Deep Learning for Medical Image Segmentation . . . .
5
1.5
Project Scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Related Work
8
2.1
Evaluation Framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2
Reference­based Quality Control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Learning­based Quality Control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.4
Uncertainty­based Quality Control
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.5
Comparative Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Methodology
15
3.1
Integration of 2D CNN­Based Quality Control in a CT Segmentation Pipeline 15
3.2
Dataset Description
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.3
Generating Segmentations of Varying Quality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3.4
Quality Control Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
4
Results
24
4.1
Quality Control Dataset
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
4.2
Quality Control Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
5
Discussion
33
6
Conclusion
35
7
Future Work
38
Bibliography
39
A Additional Figures and Results
43
A.1 Quality Control Neural Network Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
A.2 Quality Control Dataset
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
Automatic Quality Control for Medical Image Segmentation
1
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
Our world is full of data, and with the invention of artificial intelligence (AI) we are suddenly
able to analyze it an unprecedented scale. This has allowed us to uncover new patterns,
and extract insights which has fostered remarkable advancements in various fields. AI is
not only a technological phenomenon but a pop culture icon. Yet despite its widespread
presence, AI remains mystic, both in how it works and in how it is perceived. This sense
of mystery often creates unease. We tend to fear what we do not fully understand, and AI
is no exception. Popular narratives oscillate between fascination and fear, portraying AI
as both a solution and a threat. This ambiguity is even reflected in the lack of one single
clear definition of AI. However, one of the most influential and widely cited definitions
comes from pioneering AI scientist Marvin Lee Minsky, who defined AI as: “The science
of making machines do things that would require intelligence if done by men” [1], and
combining this with the Cambridge Dictionary’s definition of intelligence: ”The ability to
learn, understand, and make judgments or have opinions that are based on reason” [2],
this paper defines AI as:
”The science of making machines that possess the ability to learn, understand, and
make judgments that are based on reason”
We cannot deny the possibilities AI brings, and for this reason there is also a growing
interest in applying AI to healthcare, where its potential to enhance diagnostic accuracy,
support clinical decision­making, and alleviate the workload on medical professionals is
widely recognized [3]. In particular, AI­driven solutions in medical imaging have shown
impressive results, with some models even surpassing human performance in specific
diagnostic tasks [4].
Governments and policymakers have also acknowledged AI’s transformative potential in
healthcare, leading to increased investment in automation and technology. In Denmark,
for instance, funding initiatives have been allocated to accelerate AI adoption in the pub­
lic healthcare system, aiming to improve efficiency and address resource constraints.[5]
However, while there is strong momentum to integrate AI into medical practice, significant
challenges remain regarding its reliability and fairness.
One of the major concerns is the lack of transparency and explainability in AI models (XAI).
Many AI systems operate as black boxes, making it difficult for clinicians to understand
the rationale behind their predictions. Furthermore, studies have shown that AI models
can exhibit performance disparities across different demographic and clinical subgroups,
potentially reinforcing existing health inequalities [4].
Recognizing these challenges, there has been a significant emphasis on the importance
of developing trustworthy AI in healthcare. The FUTURE­AI Consortium, founded in 2021,
brings together 117 interdisciplinary experts from 50 countries across all continents, in­
cluding AI scientists, clinical researchers, biomedical ethicists, and social scientists. This
initiative provides structured guidelines to ensure AI models are transparent, fair, and gen­
eralizable across diverse populations. Among the core principles outlined in the FUTURE­
AI framework is traceability. The principle of traceability emphasizes the need for continu­
ous quality control (QC) of AI inputs and outputs. This includes implementing mechanisms
to detect missing or out­of­range variables, inconsistent data formats or units, and incor­
rect annotations or preprocessing steps. In addition, AI systems should be capable of
identifying implausible or erroneous outputs. To ensure transparency in clinical settings,
2
Automatic Quality Control for Medical Image Segmentation
==PAGE:12==
the AI models should provide uncertainty estimates that are properly calibrated, allowing
users to assess the confidence level of predictions and make informed decisions. [3]
1.1
Medical Image Segmentation
Medical imaging refers to the visualization of a patient’s body, acquired through vari­
ous modalities such as computed tomography (CT), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI),
positron­emission tomography (PET) and X­ray. Medical imaging provide crucial insights
into a patient’s condition and often serve as the primary basis for a doctor’s clinical di­
agnosis. Among these, CT and MRI are particularly valuable for their ability to produce
detailed visualizations of internal structures. [6]
Radiology is the medical specialty that uses medical imaging to diagnose diseases and
guide treatment, and it relies on accurate image segmentations for this. Image segmen­
tation is a fundamental task in computer vision that refers to the classification of each
pixel within a predefined set of classes. Segmentation of medical images enables the
isolation of relevant anatomical structures and pathological regions, that can be used
as imaging biomarkers, which serve as objective indicators of biological processes. It
involves processing 2D and 3D medical images to achieve segmentation, feature extrac­
tion, three­dimensional reconstruction, and visualization of human organs, soft tissues,
and pathological structures. These biomarkers can then be used for risk stratification,
which is the process of assessing and categorizing patients based on their risk level for
primary prevention. [6]
Medical image segmentation has traditionally been performed by clinicians, who manually
delineates regions of interest. However human organs, soft tissues, and pathological
structures often have indistinct boundaries and exhibit similar intensity values, making
accurate segmentation particularly challenging [7]. As a results, manual segmentation is
highly time­consuming and prone to both inherent between­ and within­operator variability,
making it less reliable for consistent analysis across different cases. Unfortunately, this
may prevent some imaging centers from offering risk stratification through medical image
segmentation, due to a lack of human and capital resources, even though the imaging
biomarkers obtained through this could lead to much better patient care[8] [9]
Recognizing these limitations, researchers developed automated segmentation algorithms
to streamline the process. These traditional methods, often referred to as ”old­school”
algorithms, include techniques such as active shape models, threshold­based segmen­
tation, region­based segmentation, and edge detection. [6] While these approaches pro­
vided a foundation for medical image segmentation, they struggle to handle the complexity
of modern medical imaging data. In particular, handcrafted algorithms fail to meet the re­
quirements of efficiency and accuracy when dealing with large datasets, making them
impractical for clinical applications that demand fast and precise segmentation. [10]
1.2
Applications of Medical Image Segmentation
The leading cause of death worldwide is cardiovascular disease (CVD), a group of dis­
eases affecting the heart and blood vessels. In 2021, CVD claimed a devastating 20.5
million lives, accounting for approximately one­third of all global deaths. Alarmingly, 50%
of individuals experience their first symptoms of CVD as a heart attack or sudden cardiac
death, emphasizing the urgent need for early detection before clinical manifestation. This
detection can be achieved through effective risk stratification, and if successful, advance­
ments in cardiovascular medicine suggest that up to 80% of premature heart attacks and
strokes can be prevented. [11] [12]
Automatic Quality Control for Medical Image Segmentation
3
==PAGE:13==
Aortic dissection is a CVD that have 1 to 2 % mortality rate per hour after diagnosed,
which is caused by the separation or bleeding of aortic wall. It is vital to detect for earlier
interventions and healing prognosis. CT with contrast can provide detailed assessment
of extension of the dissection, if left unnoticed, it could potentially have life­threatening
consequences. It can be diagnosed by segmentation and aortic diameter measurement
[13] [14]
Coronary artery calcium (CAC) score is a biomarker, which quantifies calcified plaque in
the coronary arteries. CAC scoring using CT is one of the most powerful independent
noninvasive predictors of coronary artery disease, which is the most common form of
CVD. Given that coronary artery disease often has a long asymptomatic latency period,
early detection is vital, as left untreated can lead to severe outcomes, including stroke and
cardiac death. Millions of patients undergo routine chest CT exams and show coronary
artery calcification, but this finding is not always reported or quantified, leading to missed
opportunities for early intervention. [9]
Integrating these imaging biomarkers into routine risk stratification could significantly en­
hance early detection, leading to better prevention and management of CVD.
Beyond CVD, Abnormal body composition (BC) phenotypes, particularly muscle loss, is
a strong predictor of cancer outcomes such as survival and postoperative complications.
BC can be quantified through whole body segmentation of CT or MRI scans, however this
is time­consuming, and a common workaround is 2D segmentation of a single CT slice.
[15]
1.3
The Possibilities of Deep Learning
The rapid advancement of AI, particularly deep learning (DL), has significantly improved
medical image segmentation. DL, a prominent research trend in AI, utilizes deep neural
networks to simulate human brain learning and extract features from large­scale data,
such as images, in an unsupervised manner. Compared to traditional methods, DL offers
distinct advantages in segmentation accuracy, scalability, and speed, surpassing conven­
tional segmentation techniques. [6] Techniques such as convolutional neural networks
(CNNs), autoencoders, generative adversarial networks (GANs), and recurrent neural
networks (RNNs) have been widely adopted for segmenting medical images in different
medical imaging modalities, including MRI and CT scans. [16] These advancements not
only improve segmentation accuracy but also eliminate human errors and reduce inter­
clinician variability, making them particularly valuable in clinical applications
For example, aortic CT with contrast is widely used for diagnosing aortic dissection in
patients with atypical chest pain. However, the turnaround time for radiologist reports
varies significantly from 0.4 to 628.5 hours, due to diagnostic complexity and workload
constraints [13]. In contrast, a DL model can process a CT scan in under 10 seconds and
accurately detect aortic dissection, enabling faster intervention.
Similarly, the study by [9] introduced DL models capable of automating CAC scoring in
both dedicated and routine CT scans with an average processing time of less than 6 sec­
onds, compared to 261 seconds for manual scoring. This enables opportunistic screening
for millions of patients undergoing unrelated chest imaging.
Moreover, entire CT volumes can now be segmented in 12 to 75 seconds using DL mod­
els, compared to 25 minutes for traditional methods [15]. This level of efficiency allows
segmentation to be integrated more seamlessly into routine clinical workflows.
4
Automatic Quality Control for Medical Image Segmentation
==PAGE:14==
1.4
Challenges in using Deep Learning for Medical Image
Segmentation
While DL models have demonstrated impressive performance in medical image segmen­
tation, their reliability remains a major concern, particularly in high­stakes clinical settings
where errors can directly impact patient outcomes. Addressing these challenges is crucial
to ensuring the robustness of these models before full clinical adoption.
One of the primary challenges in training DL models is the need for large amounts of anno­
tated data. Although extensive medical image databases exist, obtaining expert­labeled
annotations remains a time­consuming and costly process, significantly limiting their avail­
ability. [17] Additionally these annotated dataset, which do exist, were not collected with
the application to training DL models in mind. This data limitation contributes to a major
drawback of DL, which is their inherent tendency to overfit. Overfitting occurs when a
model becomes overly specialized to the training data, reducing its ability to generalize
to unseen cases while artificially inflating performance on the training dataset. Addition­
ally, data limitations can result in spectrum bias, which refers to a situation in which the
spectrum of patient manifestations in the data used for model development does not ade­
quately represent the spectrum of patients in the target population for clinical application.
[18] This can lead to DL models that perform well in specific cases but fail when applied
to new, unseen data. For example, if a model is trained on a dataset heavily skewed
towards severe cases of a disease, it may perform poorly when applied to a population
with a wider range of disease severity.
When evaluating DL models, recent studies have shown that models for anatomical seg­
mentation in medical images can exhibit biases against certain subgroups based on pro­
tected attributes like sex or ethnicity. These biases may go undetected if the model’s
performance is not assessed on diverse subgroups, potentially leading to overconfident
results [17]. Consequently, external validation — using data that was not part of the
model’s development process and was specifically collected to minimize overfitting and
spectrum bias — becomes essential for the clinical evaluation of DL models for medi­
cal diagnosis and prediction [18]. However, the collection of new datasets for external
validation is often costly.
Another significant challenge is that, unlike clinicians, DL models are unable to recognize
their own limitations. A clinician is aware when their expertise is insufficient and will seek
additional opinions or alternatives. In contrast, a DL model will always produce a result,
as it is unaware of its own limitations. Blindly trusting these models without recognizing
their potential shortcomings can be dangerous.
Using DL models for CVD risk assessment carries substantial risks, as incorrect diag­
noses or prognoses can have devastating consequences, including cardiac death and
stroke. Furthermore, model bias poses a significant threat, as it can result in systematic
misdiagnosis and ineffective treatment for specific patient subgroups. Thus, to deploy DL
models in clinical practice for tasks like CAC scoring and aortic diameter measurement, it
is essential to establish methods for evaluating the quality of the segmentations, ensuring
their accuracy and reliability before clinical use. Unawareness of quality is dangerous
Moreover, deep learning models are already being deployed in clinical practice, making
it essential to ensure the quality and reliability of their outputs . A 2024 survey conducted
by the European Society of Radiology (ESR), which included 572 respondents, showed
that 48% were already using AI in clinical settings, 25% planned to implement it soon, and
27% had not yet adopted it.[19]
Automatic Quality Control for Medical Image Segmentation
5
==PAGE:15==
However, if AI­driven segmentation is erroneous, an incorrect diagnosis or treatment
choice could put patient integrity at risk.
Conversely, if the segmentation is accurate
but distrusted, the practitioner loses access to a key clinical parameter. Therefore, the
ability to discriminate between good and bad segmentations is critical for clinical practice,
highlighting the need for robust QC mechanisms.
How can we ensure that we can trust the output of our DL models? We cannot with good
conscience deploy these in clinical practices knowing all of these pitfalls. Hence there is
an urgent need for QC.
Evaluating the performance of DL models in image segmentation relies on several key
metrics. Among the most commonly used indicators of segmentation quality are the Dice
Similarity Coefficient (DSC) [20].
DSC quantifies the similarity between two sets, typically the predicted segmentation and
the ground truth (GT) segmentation:
Dice(A, B) = 2 |A ∩B|
|A| + |B|
(1.1)
where A represents the predicted segmentation and B represents the GT. It ranges from
0 to 1, with a value of 1 indicating perfect overlap and a value of 0 indicating no overlap.
[6] [10]
This evaluation metrics rely on GT data, but in clinical settings GT data is not available for
evaluating model performance. As outlined in the previous section, using DL for medical
image segmentation presents several challenges, complicating the deployment of these
models in real­world clinical scenarios. To overcome these challenges, alternative ap­
proaches are necessary to ensure reliable evaluation without GT data, enabling the safe
and effective use of these models in clinical decision­making.
1.5
Project Scope
Medical image segmentation is a crucial tool for diagnosing and predicting diseases in
patients. However, manual segmentation is a time­consuming process that requires spe­
cialized expertise. Fortunately, DL models for image segmentation offer a promising al­
ternative. Their deployment could significantly reduce the time spent on manual seg­
mentation and potentially eliminate human errors. However, ensuring the quality of the
segmentations produced by these models is essential, as erroneous segmentations can
have serious consequences in medical decision­making.
Training and fine­tuning deep learning models require ground truth data—manually seg­
mented images created by experts. Once a model is trained and tested, the goal is to
deploy it in real­world settings, such as hospitals. However, a critical challenge arises:
how can we ensure the quality of the segmentations provided by the model when no
manually segmented ground truth is available for comparison?
A model might perform well during testing on a given dataset, but if the dataset does
not represent the diversity and complexity of real­world data, its performance could be
misleading. Discrepancies can arise from factors such as gender imbalances or datasets
that are overly simplified, dividing cases into clear disease and non­disease categories.
These limitations fail to account for the complexities of actual clinical scenarios.
This is where we would need automatic QC, to ensure that the segmentations the model
provides has a good enough quality to be able to use in a diagnosis or prediction of
6
Automatic Quality Control for Medical Image Segmentation
==PAGE:16==
disease. These methods should assess the reliability of model­generated segmentations
without relying on manual ground truth segmentations.
1.5.1
Problem Statement
How can we automatically ensure the reliability of deep learning model­generated seg­
mentations without relying on manual ground truth segmentations?
Automatic Quality Control for Medical Image Segmentation
7
==PAGE:17==
2
Related Work
In this chapter, we review existing automatic QC methods for medical image segmen­
tation with the aim of understanding current approaches, identifying their strengths and
limitations, and highlighting areas for improvement.
2.1
Evaluation Framework
We adopt the approach in [21], and group automatic QC methods into three main cat­
egories: reference­based, learning­based, and uncertainty­based. We use this classifi­
cation to provide a structured overview of the field and to better compare the different
approaches that have been proposed. This review focuses on recently published pa­
pers that demonstrate strong performance and collectively cover a diverse range of QC
categories, imaging modalities, and anatomical regions.
In all papers reviewed during this research, the DSC is used as the measure for segmen­
tation quality, and the goal of the automatic QC methods is to approximate this score.
This choice is logical, as the DSC provides a continuous measure of quality that enables
thresholding tailored to specific segmentation tasks, which then allows segmentations to
be classified as good or bad. To evaluate the performance of these automatic QC meth­
ods, the most commonly used metrics include:
• Pearson correlation coefficient (ρ) between the predicted quality score and the real
DSC. This metric captures the strength of the linear relationship between the two,
even if the mapping is not one­to­one.
• Mean absolute error (MAE), which directly measures how close the predicted qual­
ity score is to the real DSC. A lower MAE indicates more accurate estimation of
segmentation quality.
• Accuracy measures how well the method can classify segmentations into predefined
quality levels e.g., good or bad. This is especially useful for clinical comparison, as
predicted labels can be directly evaluated against clinical experts.
Each of these metrics serves different purposes. Correlation assesses trend alignment,
MAE measures absolute accuracy, and classification accuracy addresses real­world us­
ability. Together, they provide a more complete picture of how well a QC method performs
both in theory and in practice.
2.2
Reference­based Quality Control
In reference­based methods, a test image is compared to one or more reference images
to estimate segmentation quality. In our research, we identified two main approaches
within this category.
2.2.1
Reverse Classification Accuracy [22]
Reverse Classification Accuracy (RCA), introduced by [22], is a reference­based method
for estimating segmentation quality. It relies on image registration, the process of aligning
a test image to one or more reference images by computing deformation fields. The test
segmentation is warped using these deformation fields, and DSCs are computed between
the warped segmentations and the GT segmentations of the reference images. The max­
imum DSC obtained from these comparisons is used as an estimate of the segmentation
8
Automatic Quality Control for Medical Image Segmentation
==PAGE:18==
accuracy. Hence, the method requires reference images with high­quality GT annotations
to evaluate segmentation quality.
The authors of [23] applied RCA to cardiac MRIs to asses how well it distinguishes be­
tween good and bad segmentations. They found that while the predicted and actual DSCs
did not exhibit a precise one­to­one mapping, they showed a high correlation. Additionally,
their approach achieved 95% classification accuracy for whole heart segmentation using
an arbitrary DSC threshold of 0.7. However, the accuracy for different classes ranged
from 45% to 96%, raising concerns about the robustness of their method. They further
report MAE between the real and predicted DSC to be 0.035 for whole heart segmenta­
tion, and for the different classes this ranged from 0.042 to 0.125. The authors note, that
the results for the whole heart usually are higher due to a voxel attributed to an incorrect
class will reduce the mean calculated across the classes, but will actually be considered
correct in the single whole heart case. For one class, they also compared predicted DSCs
with clinical expert assessments, which ranked the quality of the segmentations from 1 to
6, resulting in a Pearson correlation coefficient of 0.454 between the DSC and rankings.
The authors of [17] expanded upon the RCA framework to detect bias in segmentation
models based on sex (male vs. female). Their method was specifically applied to lung
and heart segmentation using chest X­ray images. Unlike the original RCA approach,
which estimates segmentation accuracy using the maximum DSC, they instead used the
average DSC from the top­k most similar reference images. They found that estimated
performance gaps via RCA correlate with true gaps both for lung and heart segmentation
with a Pearson correlation coefficient of 0.77 and 0.93 respectively, and conclude that
their framework serves as as valid estimator of biases in the absence of GT data.
While these methods show good results, RCA analysis of a single segmentation is 11
minutes. Additionally, RCA requires high­quality GT annotations that are representative
of the test data. The authors of [22] however argue that this is not a limitation, as the
same data used to train the segmentation model can be reused as reference images.
Moreover, if the test data differs substantially from the training distribution, resulting in a
poor segmentation quality prediction, it is likely that the model would also fail to perform
well on the segmentation task itself.
2.2.2
Self­reflective References [24]
The authors of [24] proposed an alternative reference­based method aimed at predict­
ing both image­level segmentation quality and pixel­level quality, arguing that it is ben­
eficial for clinical settings, as it visually highlights misclassified regions and thereby fa­
cilitates easier inspection by clinicians. The framework consists of two components: a
self­reflective reference generator and a difference investigator. The reference generator
reconstructs the input image from the predicted segmentation, and this reconstructed im­
age then serves as a reference. The difference investigator then compares the reference
image to the original input image, identifying inconsistencies that indicate segmentation
failures. On one dataset, it achieved an MAE of 0.0426 and a Pearson correlation coeffi­
cient of 0.8879; on the other, the MAE was 0.0333 and the correlation coefficient 0.8785.
These MAE values were averaged across segmentation classes. When applied to seg­
mentations of varying quality, performance ranged from MAEs of 0.0415 to 0.0511 and
correlation coefficients between 0.8871 and 0.9376. However, performance declined un­
der severe domain shift, suggesting some sensitivity to variations in data distribution. The
authors did not report computation time, but given that the method involves both semantic
image reconstruction and image­level comparison, it may be computationally demanding
in practice.
Automatic Quality Control for Medical Image Segmentation
9
==PAGE:19==
2.3
Learning­based Quality Control
The learning­based methods use ML models to estimate segmentation quality by framing
it as a regression problem. Hence, they require a large dataset covering a wide range of
segmentation qualities, from poor to high.
2.3.1
2D CNN­Based [8]
The authors of [8] proposed a learning­based approach using a 2D CNN to predict the
DSC given an image and its corresponding segmentation. The method was applied to
cardiac MRI, and provides quality assessment at both 2D (slice) and 3D (subject) levels,
with the latter derived from a mathematical combination of 2D predictions. The authors
argue, that this multi­level QC is necessary as segmentation errors can occur at the 2D
level and be fully ignored at a 3D level thereby overestimating the segmentation quality.
Furthermore, they argue that by evaluating errors at 2D level there is the opportunity for a
targeted corrective process, which could yield more accurate volumetric measurements
and potentially improved diagnosis. Their best results yielded Pearson correlation coef­
ficients between predicted and true DSCs ranging from 0.965 to 0.996 in 3D and 0.96 to
0.994 in 2D across segmentation classes, and MAE values ranging from 0.011 to 0.040 in
3D and 0.019 to 0.047 in 2D. They used different thresholds for distinguishing good and
bad segmentations based on the specific anatomical structure being segmented, resulting
in a classification accuracy of 97.2% to 97.7% in 3D and 92.8% to 98.8% in 2D. Compared
to RCA, it was significantly faster, with a processing time of 300 ms per subject. The
authors also validated their model against clinical expert assessments and found it to be
robust, generalizing well to unseen data.
2.3.2
Radiomics­Based [25]
Another learning­based method was introduced in [25], where the authors extracted ra­
diomics features from cardiac MRIs at both the 2D and 3D level to assess segmentation
quality. The study utilized a random forest classifier and a gradient boost regressor to
predict DSCs and classify segmentations as good or bad. The classification was based
on arbitrary predefined DSC thresholds of 0.7 for 2D and 0.85 for 3D. The model’s abil­
ity to detect poor­quality segmentations was assessed using the negative detection rate,
which measures the proportion of correctly identified bad­quality segmentations, as the
authors argued that a QC system should prioritize detecting bad­quality segmentations
over improving overall classification accuracy. The study reported high negative detec­
tion rates across all 2D classes, exceeding 85%. However, in one 3D classification task it
was 16.7%, highlighting a limitation in identifying bad quality segmentations for that spe­
cific structure. In terms of overall classification accuracy, the method achieved 74.9% to
88.6% at the 2D slice level and 47.7% to 85.4% at the 3D subject level. The MAE ranged
from 0.011 to 0.027 in 3D and 0.021 to 0.060 in 2D, however it is important to note that
these MAE values reflect predictions only for DSC between 0.7 and 1. The classification
model was afterwards used to remove segmentations classified as bad, resulting in an
average improvement of the MAE of 0.004. The method achieved a computation time of
under 10 s per subject.
2.4
Uncertainty­based Quality Control
Lastly, there is the uncertainty­based methods, which captures data uncertainty or model
uncertainty by generating multiple predicted segmentations and deriving uncertainty mea­
sures from the variability in these predictions. This is typically achieved using Monte Carlo
(MC) simulations, where the segmentation model produces multiple outputs for the same
input, and the variability among these outputs serves as a measure of uncertainty.
10
Automatic Quality Control for Medical Image Segmentation
==PAGE:20==
2.4.1
Bayesian QuickNAT [26]
The authors of [26] used an uncertainty­based approach for QC in whole­brain segmen­
tation from MRI. They used a Bayesian CNN, which, alongside the segmentation, esti­
mates the uncertainty in the segmentation. Additionally they applied MC simulations to
capture prediction variability. The mean segmentation serves as the final output, while
the variance across samples quantifies model uncertainty. The authors found that the
intersection over union (IoU) of MC samples closely approximates the DSC score. The
method was evaluated on four brain MRI datasets, varying in quality, scanner type, and
pathology, with only one dataset used for training. Segmentations were classified based
on DSC values: bad ([0.0, 0.6)), medium ([0.6, 0.8)), and good ([0.8, 1.0]). The approach
achieved 80–88% classification accuracy and a Pearson correlation of 0.78–0.91 between
the IoU of MC samples and real DSC. Additionally, the MAE was reported to range from
0.02 to 0.07.
2.4.2
Fuzzy Sets [21]
The authors of [21] also proposes an uncertainty­based method. Given a test image and
a trained segmentation model, they perform test­time augmentation and MC dropout to
obtain N predicted segmentations. This allows them to capture both data and model un­
certainties. They then use these predictions to create a fuzzy set, which is a set where
the elements have degrees of membership rather than binary inclusion. The member­
ship value for each pixel is based on its distance to the segmentation boundary, with the
assumption that pixels closer to the boundary are more uncertain. The overall fuzziness
of the set is then used to compute an uncertainty value, which serves as an approxi­
mation of segmentation quality. The method was evaluated on five medical image seg­
mentation tasks, including skin lesion, nuclei, lung, breast, and cell segmentation, intro­
ducing variation in imaging modalities, segmentation tasks, and scanners. Experimental
results showed correlations between estimated uncertainties and DSC values, with ab­
solute Pearson correlation coefficients ranging from 0.60 to 0.92. For classification they
used a DSC threshold of 0.8 and a process of searching the optimal threshold for the
uncertainty measure. When this was found, their method achieved an AUC above 0.92.
The approach requires just under 25 s per image.
2.5
Comparative Analysis
In this section, we compare the prediction performance, generalizability, and computa­
tional efficiency of the reviewed QC methods. The purpose of this comparative analysis
is not only to summarize the current landscape of automatic QC methods but also to as­
sess which approach is best suited for integration into our own study. A summary of the
different proposed methods is presented in Table 2.1.
Learning­based methods generally achieve the best trade­off between prediction accu­
racy and computation time. The 2D CNN­based method by [8] achieves strong results,
with correlation coefficients between predicted and GT DSC ranging from 0.96 to 0.996,
MAE from 0.011 to 0.047, classification accuracy between 92.8% and 98.8%, and a com­
putation time of only 300 ms per subject. However, it was only evaluated on cardiac MRIs,
which raises concerns about generalizability, and the method also relies on constructing a
large dataset with varying segmentation qualities training the CNN. The radiomics­based
method by [25] reports the lowest MAE values, 0.011 to 0.027, for 3D segmentations and
shows competitive performance in 2D. However, it is important to note that the reported
MAE and correlation values were only computed for segmentations with a DSC above 0.7,
raising concerns about the method’s ability to accurately assess low­quality cases. Addi­
tionally, classification accuracy at the 3D level varies significantly and is generally lower
Automatic Quality Control for Medical Image Segmentation
11
==PAGE:21==
than in 2D.Furthermore, [8] showed that directly estimating the 3D DSC is more prone to
overlooking poor­quality segmentations, as slice­level errors may be diluted when aggre­
gated into a single 3D score. This is reflected in the lower classification accuracy reported
by [25], especially for poor­quality segmentations.
Reference­based methods such as RCA offer reasonable performance for specific cases
like whole­heart segmentation with MAE of 0.035, but with substantial variability across
classes with MAE values reaching up to 0.125 and long computation times of approxi­
mately 11 minutes per image it limits real­time usage. The self­reflective method by [24]
enhances interpretability by providing both image­ and pixel­level QC and demonstrates
strong correlation values ranging from 0.887 to 0.938 and MAE ranging from 0.033 to
0.051. While this method was evaluated across cardiac MRI datasets and scanners, its
applicability to other modalities remains unclear. The runtime is also not reported and
may be high due to the reconstruction­based pipeline.
Bayesian QuickNAT [26] integrates QC directly into the segmentation model, providing un­
certainty estimates alongside the segmentation output. It has been evaluated on several
brain MRI datasets that vary in quality, scanner type, and pathology, and demonstrates
consistent performance with a correlation ranging from 0.78 to 0.91, MAE from 0.02 to
0.07 and classification accuracy up to 88%. In contrast, the fuzzy set approach by [21]
was applied across a broad range of segmentation tasks and modalities, including ultra­
sound, microscopy, and chest X­rays. However, it showed poor performance on simpler
tasks like lung segmentation, likely due to their more homogeneous boundary structure.
Moreover, this method depends on a task­specific optimization process to determine the
optimal uncertainty threshold. Despite this broad applicability, its best reported perfor­
mance metrics remain below those of [8].
The learning­based methods dominate in performance metrics. [8] achieves the best cor­
relation and classification scores with minimal computation time, while [25] reports excel­
lent MAE values, however only for segmentations already known to be good. The lack of
evaluation on lower­quality segmentations limits the reliability of this method. Reference­
based methods show good performance but suffer from high computation times. Uncertainty­
based methods do not achieve the same level performance as the best performing learning­
based approaches, but they are tested across a wider variety of tasks, imaging modalities,
and scanners. In contrast, most learning­based and reference­based QC methods have
been developed and evaluated primarily on cardiac MRI data, likely due to its clinical
importance, as cardiovascular disease remains the leading cause of death globally.
Based on the reviewed methods, we deem the learning­based 2D CNN approach by [8]
the most promising for further use in our studies. It consistently outperforms other meth­
ods in terms of correlation, classification accuracy, and runtime efficiency. While its ap­
plication has so far been limited to cardiac MRI, its strong performance and architectural
simplicity suggest good potential for adaptation to other segmentation tasks. Its ability to
provide rapid and interpretable quality estimates at both the slice and volume level makes
it particularly well­suited for clinical deployment and further exploration.
12
Automatic Quality Control for Medical Image Segmentation
==PAGE:22==
Table 2.1: Comparison of existing methods for automatic quality control of medical image
segmentations.
Method
Type
Computation
Time
Data Type
Performance:
DSC­
Based MAE, Correla­
tion and Accuracy
RCA [22]
Aligns two reference
images and uses max­
imum DSC as QC es­
timate
Reference
11 min/image
Cardiac MRI
MAE:
0.035
(whole
heart, 3D), 0.042−0.125
(other classes, 3D); Ac­
curacy:
95%
(whole
heart,
3D), 45%–96%
(other classes, 3D)
RCA
(Bias
Discov­
ery) [17]
Modified RCA using
average DSC of top­
k references to detect
bias
Reference
11 min/image
Chest X­ray
Correlation: ρ = 0.77
(lung, 2D), ρ
=
0.93
(heart, 2D)
Self­Reflective
Ref­
erence [24]
Reconstructs
input
from
segmentation
and
compares
to
original
to
localize
errors
Reference
N/A
Cardiac MRI
MAE:
0.033
−
0.051
(average
across
all
classes, 3D); Correla­
tion: ρ = 0.887–0.938
(all classes, 3D)
2D CNN­Based [8]
CNN
predicts
DSC
from
image
and
segmentation
Learning
300
ms/sub­
ject
Cardiac MRI
MAE:
0.011
−
0.042
(3D), 0.019−0.047 (2D);
Correlation: ρ = 0.965–
0.996 (3D), ρ = 0.96–
0.994 (2D); Accuracy:
97.2% −97.7% (3D),
92.8% −98.8%
(2D)
across classes
Radiomics­Based
[25]
Uses radiomics fea­
tures + ML models
Learning
<10 s/subject
Cardiac MRI
MAE: 0.011−0.027 (3D),
0.021 −0.060 (2D); Ac­
curacy:
47.7%–85.4%
(3D),
74.9%–88.6%
(2D) across classes
Bayesian QuickNAT
[26]
Bayesian
CNN
with
MC
sampling
for
uncertainty estimation
Uncertainty
Inline
with
segmentation
Brain MRI
MAE: 0.020 −0.07; Cor­
relation: ρ = 0.78–0.91;
Accuracy:
80%–88%
(3D) across datasets
(continued on next page)
Automatic Quality Control for Medical Image Segmentation
13
==PAGE:23==
(continued from previous page)
Method
Type
Computation
Time
Data Type
Performance:
DSC­
Based MAE, Correla­
tion and Accuracy
Fuzzy Sets [21]
Uses MC dropout +
test­time
augmenta­
tion to compute fuzzy
set­based uncertainty
Uncertainty
25 s/image
Multi­modality:
chest
X­ray
(lung),
ultra­
sound
(breast
tumor), dermo­
scopic
(skin),
microscopy
(nuclei),
HCS
(cell)
Correlation: ρ = 0.60–
0.92 (across tasks, 2D)
14
Automatic Quality Control for Medical Image Segmentation
==PAGE:24==
3
Methodology
In this chapter, we present the methodology behind our recreation and extension of the
2D CNN­based quality control (QC) method originally proposed by [8], which predicts
segmentation quality by estimating the Dice Similarity Coefficient (DSC) from paired input
images and their corresponding segmentations. While the original study focused on car­
diac MRI, we adapt the approach to computed tomography (CT), targeting both abdominal
organs and bones to assess its generalizability across different segmentation tasks and
imaging modalities.
Compared to cardiac MRIs, CT scans contain more slices per volume, which introduces
greater computational demands. We evaluate how this affects both computation time and
performance to determine whether the 2D CNN­based method remains practical for use
in CT­based applications.
A key requirement for training such a QC model is the construction of a dataset containing
segmentations of varying quality. In this work, we introduce a novel strategy for dataset
construction. Previous approaches, including [8], generated quality variation by perform­
ing inference at different training epochs of a segmentation model. However, this method
is inherently stochastic and does not guarantee a balanced distribution of segmentation
quality. As a result, mid­quality segmentations may be underrepresented, which can limit
the robustness of the trained QC model. To overcome this limitation, we propose a more
controlled and reproducible strategy. Instead of relying on one model’s training curve, we
generate segmentations using a diverse set of independently trained models, each with
varying loss functions. This enables us to deliberately sample a wide and balanced range
of segmentation quality levels.
This chapter details the components of our methodology, including the overall integration
of the QC method into a CT segmentation pipeline, dataset construction, preprocessing,
model architecture, and training setup. The following chapter presents the results ob­
tained from this methodology. In the subsequent chapter, we present the results derived
from these methods.
3.1
Integration of 2D CNN­Based Quality Control in a CT
Segmentation Pipeline
To illustrate the potential real­world application of the 2D CNN­based QC method, we
outline how it could be integrated into a clinical CT segmentation pipeline.
As shown in Figure 3.1, the QC model acts as a post­processing module, applied directly
after the segmentation model outputs a predicted mask. Its short runtime enables real­
time slice­level quality assessment, making it practical for deployment during the scanning
session itself. This capability opens up multiple clinical advantages. Clinicians can inspect
and correct flagged segmentations in real time while the patient is still in the scanner.
Targeted rescans or interventions can be initiated immediately if necessary. Moreover, the
clinician can directly communicate quality feedback to the patient before they leave the
examination room, improving the efficiency of the diagnostic workflow. The method also
supports quality prediction at both the slice and volume level, enabling fine­grained QC.
Instead of discarding entire volumes due to localized segmentation errors, clinicians can
focus their review only on low­quality regions, improving throughput and clinical accuracy.
Automatic Quality Control for Medical Image Segmentation
15
==PAGE:25==
The pipeline highlights a critical shortcoming of typical DL­based segmentation systems
when deployed without integrated QC, that is segmentation errors may go undetected and
uncorrected. This is particularly concerning in high­risk contexts. By embedding QC into
the inference pipeline, the system gains the ability to flag bad segmentations, improving
overall trust, safety, and usability of DL in medical imaging.
Figure 3.1: Pipeline for multi­level QC applied to CT scans using the Dice similarity co­
efficient (DSC) as a measure of segmentation quality. The bad segmentations will be
flagged such that the clinician can correct any segmentations errors while the patient is
still in the scanner. The U­Net image is from [27], and the image in the upper­left corner
is generated by ChatGPT based on the prompt: ”Create an illustration of a patient in a
CT scanner with a doctor surveying.”.
3.1.1
Recovering 3D DSC from 2D DSC and MVSF
Rather than predicting the 3D DSC directly, the authors of [8] demonstrated that it can
be effectively recovered by combining slice­wise DSC predictions with the Mean Volume
Similarity Fraction (MVSF). This enabled the use of more easily trainable 2D CNNs while
also providing quality assessment at the slice level, allowing erroneous segmentations to
be localized. They also found that recovering the 3D DSC in this manner proved to be
more exact than predicting the 3D DSC directly.
The DSC is defined in Equation 1.1 as:
DSC(Y, Z) = 2|Y ∩Z|
|Y | + |Z|,
(3.1)
16
Automatic Quality Control for Medical Image Segmentation
==PAGE:26==
where Y = (yi)i ∈[1, n] denotes the GT 3D segmentation and Z = (zi)i ∈[1, n] the pre­
dicted 3D segmentation, composed of n 2D segmentations. In real­world clinical settings,
however, the GT segmentation Y is not available, making direct computation of the 3D
DSC infeasible. Instead, an estimated 3D DSC can be formulated as:
[
DSC(Y, Z) = 2 \
|Y ∩Z|
c
|Y | + |Z|
(3.2)
where c
|Y | = Pn
i=1 c
|yi|, |Z| = Pn
i=1 |zi| and \
|Y ∩Z| = Pn
i=1 \
|yi ∩zi|. To estimate c
|yi|, the
authors used the MVSF, defined as:
MVSF(yi, zi) = 2(|yi| −|zi|)
|yi| + |zi| .
(3.3)
Solving for |yi| , the GT area can be estimated as:
c
|yi| = |zi|2 + \
MVSF(yi, zi)
2 −\
MVSF(yi, zi)
,
(3.4)
and by combining Equation 3.4 and the predicted DSC, the intersection term can be de­
rived as:
[
DSC(yi, zi) = 2 \
|yi ∩zi|
c
|yi| + |zi|
⇔\
|yi ∩zi| = 1
2
[
DSC(yi, zi)
 c
|yi| + |zi|

.
(3.5)
Since MVSF ranges from [−2, 2], it is normalized to [0, 1] to match the output range of a
NN with sigmoid activation:
MVSFnormalized = MVSF + 2
4
(3.6)
Therefore, for each slice, the DL model M is trained to output:
M(xi, zi) =
h
[
DSC(yi, zi), \
MVSFnormalized(yi, zi)
i
(3.7)
where the inputs are the image xi and predicted segmentation zi. The outputs are the
predicted 2D DSC and normalized MVSF, which are used to estimate the full 3D DSC
score.
3.2
Dataset Description
We chose to use the publicly available CTORG dataset [28], which consists of cross­
sectional CT scans provided by various clinical sites around the world. The scans are
acquired under a wide variety of imaging conditions, including both high­ and low­dose
protocols, with and without contrast, and with varying anatomical coverage such as ab­
dominal, neck­to­pelvis, and whole­body. In total, the dataset includes 131 dedicated CT
scans and 9 CT components taken from PET­CT exams, amounting to 63,503 2D CT
scans or slices across 140 cases. The gender distribution is 62.5% male and 37.5% fe­
male. The dedicated CT scans originate from several clinical centers, including Ludwig
Maximilian University of Munich, Radboud University Medical Center, Polytechnique and
Automatic Quality Control for Medical Image Segmentation
17
==PAGE:27==
CHUM Research Center Montreal, Tel Aviv University, Sheba Medical Center, IRCAD
Institute Strasbourg, and the Hebrew University of Jerusalem. All PET­CT scans were
collected at Stanford Healthcare.
Each scan includes segmentation masks for up to six possible labeled organ segmenta­
tions: (0) Background (None of the following organs), (1) Liver, (2) Bladder, (3) Lungs,
(4) Kidneys, (5) Bone and (6) Brain. Most scans exhibit liver lesions, both benign and
malignant, with the number of distinct lesions per patient ranging from 0 to 75 and lesion
volumes varying between 38 mm3 and 349 mm3. Several scans also include metastatic
disease originating from primary cancers in the breast, colon, bones, and lungs. The
dataset spans both pre­ and post­treatment stages.
Visualizations of the segmentation masks alongside their corresponding CT scans, for
each organ, are provided in Figure 3.2, clearly demonstrating the variability within the
dataset.
Figure 3.2: Representative cross­sectional 2D Computed tomography (CT) scans and
their corresponding manual segmentations from the CTORG dataset [28]. Each column
shows a different pair, highlighting anatomical variability and imaging diversity across
cases. Segmentations illustrate the labeled classes: (0) Background (None of the follow­
ing organs), (1) Liver, (2) Bladder, (3) Lungs, (4) Kidneys, (5) Bone and (6) Brain.
All files are stored in Nifti­1 format with 32­bit floating point data. Images are stored as
’volume­XX.nii.gz’ where XX is the case number. Numeric values are in Hounsfield units
(HU). Segmentations are stored as ’labels­XX.nii.gz’, where XX is the same number as
the corresponding volume file. The data are divided into a testing set of 21 cases, and a
training set of the remaining 119. For the training set, the lungs and bones were automat­
ically segmented by morphological image processing. For the testing set, the lungs and
bones were segmented manually. All other organs were segmented manually in both the
training and testing sets.
The wide range of imaging conditions is ideal for our scenario, as it reflects the real­
world variability encountered in clinical practice. This diversity enables us to evaluate
the robustness and generalizability of the method across different acquisition settings,
anatomical structures, organ segmentations, and lesion types.
3.2.1
Subset Selection
For our studies, we selected a subset of labeled organs, specifically the Liver (1), Kidney
(4), and Bone (5). These were chosen based on how often they appear across cases and
18
Automatic Quality Control for Medical Image Segmentation
==PAGE:28==
how much they vary in shape and attenuation, both across and within each organ type.
Attenuation is the ability to block X­rays, and it is measured in Hounsfield units (HUs),
ranging from ­1000 to +1000. The higher the number, the more X­rays are blocked. Fig­
ure 3.3 shows the HU ranges for different kinds organs and tissues.
Figure 3.3: Hounsfield unit (HU) scale for different kinds of organs and tissues from [29].
We initially excluded the bladder and brain due to their inconsistent representation across
cases, as all other organs were present in every case.
Both bone and lungs have distinct attenuation values at opposite ends of the spectrum,
as shown in Figure 3.3 bone ranges from approximately +100 to +1000 HU, while lung
ranges from ­900 to ­500 HU. These well­separated intensity values with large ranges re­
sult in clearly defined boundaries in CT scans, making both structures easier for segmen­
tation models to handle. Moreover, the lungs have a relatively consistent shape across
patients, which further simplifies the segmentation task. Due to this distinct separation
and low anatomical variability, we assume that the lungs are also easier for a DL­based
QC model to assess. For this reason, we consider them less suitable for evaluating the
performance of the QC method. Bone, on the other hand, was included despite its distinct
boundaries because it exhibits high internal shape variability, making it a more challenging
and informative target for assessing segmentation quality.
Lastly, we chose to focus on the liver and kidneys, as these organs have narrower attenu­
ation ranges, approximately +50 to +70 HU for the liver and +20 to +40 HU for the kidneys,
which overlap with surrounding tissues. This overlap makes their boundaries more dif­
ficult to segment, making their boundaries harder to segment and thus more useful for
evaluating QC methods. Additionally, the liver often contains lesions, both benign and
malignant, which introduces further shape irregularities and makes quality assessment
more complex. The kidneys also show notable anatomical variability, with some cases
Automatic Quality Control for Medical Image Segmentation
19
==PAGE:29==
including only one kidney.
3.2.2
Dataset Preprocessing
To reduce computational cost, all 2D CT scans or slices were resized from their original
resolution of 512×512 pixels to 256×256 pixels using the torchvision.transforms.Resize
function in textttPython [30]. In Figure 3.4 five slices from different cases is shown along­
side their corresponding resized versions.
Figure 3.4: Example of resized 2D CT scans from their original size of 512 × 512 pixels to
256 × 256 pixels.
To further reduce computation time, the files originally stored in NIfTI­1 format were con­
verted to .npy format.
The 2D CT scans were normalized to the range [0, 1] to ensure stable training. For each
segmentation, a binary mask was generated per class and during training, only slices
containing the target organ were used, reducing the number of scans required and thereby
lowering the overall computational cost for both training and inference. In total, 63,171
slices include bone, 19,543 include liver, and 14,102 contain kidneys.
The final slice of some 3D scans contained corrupted label data, therefore all final slices
were excluded from the dataset to ensure consistency.
3.3
Generating Segmentations of Varying Quality
Since the chosen approach is learning­based, it requires a large dataset containing seg­
mentations of varying quality for training. To ensure that the model learns to predict DSC
scores across the full range from 0 to 1, the dataset must be balanced with respect to
segmentation quality. This section describes the architecture, training procedure, and
inference setup used to construct such a dataset.
An overview of the complete pipeline is shown in Figure 3.5. The process begins with a
2D CT scan and its corresponding GT segmentation mask for a given organ. The CT scan
serves as input to a segmentation model, while the GT mask is used for supervision in a
supervised learning setup. We train ten individual segmentation models, each guided by
a different target DSC in the range {0.1, 0.2, . . . , 1.0}. These models are then applied to
the same dataset to generate predicted segmentations of varying quality. Each predicted
mask is paired with its GT counterpart to compute the 2D DSC and the MVSF. The re­
sulting collection of input images, predicted segmentations, and quality scores forms the
dataset used to train the quality control model.
20
Automatic Quality Control for Medical Image Segmentation
==PAGE:30==
Figure 3.5: Overview of the quality control (QC) dataset generation pipeline. X denotes
the input to the QC model, and Y the ground truth. The U­Net images are from [27].
3.3.1
Network Architecture
In [8], the authors employed twelve versions of the same CNN model to generate the QC
dataset, using a DenseNet architecture as proposed by [31]. Their choice was motivated
by DenseNet’s reduced parameter count and lower risk of overfitting compared to U­Net.
In our case, overfitting is less of a concern, since the segmentation models are not in­
tended for inference on unseen data. Their purpose is solely to generate segmentations
of varying quality on a fixed dataset. Therefore, we opted for the commonly used U­Net
architecture from [27], which was easy to implement and sufficient for our purposes. Al­
though the version we implemented is not identical to the one presented in the original
paper, it is inspired by it.
A summary of the model architecture is presented in Listing 3.1.
1
----------------------------------------------------------------
2
Layer (type)
Output Shape
Param #
3
================================================================
4
Conv2d -1
[-1, 64, 256, 256]
640
5
MaxPool2d -2
[-1, 64, 128, 128]
0
6
Conv2d -3
[-1, 64, 128, 128]
36,928
7
MaxPool2d -4
[-1, 64, 64, 64]
0
8
Conv2d -5
[-1, 64, 64, 64]
36,928
9
MaxPool2d -6
[-1, 64, 32, 32]
0
10
Conv2d -7
[-1, 64, 32, 32]
36,928
11
MaxPool2d -8
[-1, 64, 16, 16]
0
12
Conv2d -9
[-1, 64, 16, 16]
36,928
13
Upsample -10
[-1, 64, 32, 32]
0
14
Conv2d -11
[-1, 64, 32, 32]
73,792
15
Upsample -12
[-1, 64, 64, 64]
0
16
Conv2d -13
[-1, 64, 64, 64]
73,792
17
Upsample -14
[-1, 64, 128, 128]
0
18
Conv2d -15
[-1, 64, 128, 128]
73,792
19
Upsample -16
[-1, 64, 256, 256]
0
Automatic Quality Control for Medical Image Segmentation
21
==PAGE:31==
20
Conv2d -17
[-1, 64, 256, 256]
73,792
21
Conv2d -18
[-1, 1, 256, 256]
65
22
================================================================
23
Total params: 443,585
24
Trainable params: 443,585
25
Non-trainable params: 0
26
----------------------------------------------------------------
27
Input size (MB): 0.25
28
Forward/backward pass size (MB): 138.75
29
Params size (MB): 1.69
30
Estimated Total Size (MB): 140.69
31
----------------------------------------------------------------
Listing 3.1: U­Net architecture used to generate segmentations of varying quality. The
model consists of an encoder with four convolutional and pooling layers, followed by a
decoder with four upsampling and convolutional layers. The final layer outputs a single­
channel binary segmentation mask.
3.3.2
Loss function
The purpose is to generate segmentations with varying quality that is measured by the
DSC score, hence therefore it would make sense to use the Dice loss for training:
LDice(x, y) = 1 −
2 PN
i yixi + ϵ1
PN
i y2
i + PN
i x2
i + ϵ2
(3.8)
as defined in [6, p. 5]. Here x ∈[0, 1]N are the predicted probabilities for each pixel
that are outputted from the model and y ∈{0, 1}N are the GT pixels. The constants ϵ1
and ϵ2 are smoothing factors that prevent division by zero. In our training we used the
Dice loss implementation from the segmentation_models.pytorch library in Python [32],
which proved robust and straightforward to use.
To produce a dataset with segmentations of varying quality, we implemented a method
proposed by [33]. This method uses a target Dice loss during training, defined as:
LD(x, y) = |LDice(x, y) −(1 −D)|
(3.9)
where D denotes the target DSC.
3.3.3
Training and Inference
We trained ten U­Net models, one for each target DSC value D ∈{0.1, 0.2, . . . , 1.0}. All
models shared the same architecture and training data but differed in their loss functions
based on the target DSC. Each model was trained on 2D CT slices for a specific organ,
using only slices where that organ was present. The output was a binary segmentation
mask, and the input was a single normalized CT slice.
After training, each model was used to perform inference on all slices containing the target
organ, resulting in a final dataset that is ten times the size of the original organ­specific
subset. The full pipeline is illustrated in Figure 3.5.
We used the Adam optimizer with a learning rate of 10−4, trained each model for 10 epochs
with a batch size of 40, and initialized the network weights using Kaiming He initialization.
3.4
Quality Control Model
The QC model is designed to predict the quality of a given segmentation, based on the
corresponding CT slice and binary mask. Specifically, the model receives a single­slice
22
Automatic Quality Control for Medical Image Segmentation
==PAGE:32==
CT image and the associated binary segmentation mask as input and outputs a predicted
segmentation quality score. The QC model is multi­level, meaning it predicts metrics
at the 2D level, that is for each slice, and reconstructs the 3D­level score from the 2D
predictions.
3.4.1
Network Architecture
We implemented the same U­Net architecture used in [8] for QC. A detailed summary of
the architecture is provided in Listing A.1. The U­Net takes a two­channel input of size
256 × 256, comprising the CT slice and the corresponding predicted binary segmentation
mask from the QC dataset. The network outputs two channels, representing the predicted
DSC and the normalized MVSF, both passed through a sigmoid activation function.
3.4.2
Loss Function
We use the MAE loss via torch.nn.L1Loss [34], as it aligns with our evaluation metric
described in section 2.1, thereby improving interpretability during both training and vali­
dation.
3.4.3
Training and Inference
We trained one QC model per organ, as not all CT slices contain every organ. Each
model was therefore trained exclusively on slices where the respective organ is present.
Each QC network was trained using the Adam optimizer with a learning rate of 10−4 until
no significant improvement was observed on the validation set. We adopt the same train
and test split described in section 3.2. Hence, cases 0 to 20 comprise the test set, while
cases 21 to 139 are used for training. The training set is further split into training subset,
cases 21 to 120, and validation subset, cases 121 to 139. All splits are performed at the
case level to prevent cross­contamination between sets.
After predicting the 2D DSC and MVSF values, the equations provided in subsection 3.1.1
are used to recover the 3D DSC for the entire volume.
Automatic Quality Control for Medical Image Segmentation
23
==PAGE:33==
4
Results
This chapter presents the results of our experiments, divided into two main components,
namely the construction of the QC dataset and the performance of the QC models. First,
we show that segmentation models trained with varying target DSCs successfully gen­
erate segmentations across a wide range of quality levels, validating our approach for
creating a diverse and balanced QC dataset.
Next, we evaluate the performance of the trained QC models in predicting segmentation
quality from individual CT slices and binary masks. The results follow the evaluation
metrics outlined in section 2.1, with separate results provided for each organ.
All code used to generate these results is available in the GitHub Repository.
4.1
Quality Control Dataset
The following results are from the ten trained U­Net models, trained with target DSC values
D ∈{0.1, 0.2, . . . , 1.0}. We generate a QC dataset by evaluating each model on the full
dataset.
Figure 4.1 shows how the DSC distributions for liver segmentations evolve as the target
DSC increases. Each model learns to produce segmentations centered around its respec­
tive target DSC, demonstrating that the training pipeline effectively controls segmentation
quality via the loss function.
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
DSC
0
2000
4000
6000
Frequency
Target DSC = 0.1
=0.08, =0.04
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
DSC
Target DSC = 0.2
=0.24, =0.15
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
DSC
Target DSC = 0.3
=0.35, =0.16
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
DSC
Target DSC = 0.4
=0.36, =0.21
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
DSC
Target DSC = 0.5
=0.46, =0.20
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
DSC
0
2000
4000
6000
Frequency
Target DSC = 0.6
=0.55, =0.24
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
DSC
Target DSC = 0.7
=0.62, =0.24
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
DSC
Target DSC = 0.8
=0.70, =0.24
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
DSC
Target DSC = 0.9
=0.80, =0.25
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
DSC
Target DSC = 1.0
=0.85, =0.21
Figure 4.1: Evolution of DSC distributions per target for the liver segmentations.
Figure 4.2 shows a combined histogram of all liver segmentations across all target DSCs,
this is our QC dataset. The resulting distribution is balanced across the full range of the
DSC from 0 to 1.
24
Automatic Quality Control for Medical Image Segmentation
==PAGE:34==
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
DSC
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
14000
Frequency
Target DSC
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Figure 4.2: Combined DSC histogram for the liver segmentations across all target DSCs.
As described in subsection 3.4.3 the QC dataset was split into a training set and a test set
at the case level. Figure 4.3 compares the DSC distributions across the two sets. The
consistency between training and test distributions confirms that the same distribution of
segmentations qualities are preserved across splits, enabling fair performance evaluation.
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
DSC
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
Frequency
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
DSC
0
500
1000
1500
2000
Target DSC
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Figure 4.3: Stacked histograms of DSC distributions in the training and test sets for the
liver dataset. The left figure shows the training set for cases 21 to 139, and the right figure
shows the test set for cases 0 to 20.
A qualitative example is shown in Figure 4.4, which displays predicted liver segmenta­
tions for a single CT slice across all target DSCs. The predictions become progressively
more accurate as the target DSC increases, both visually and quantitatively. At lower
target DSCs, the segmentations are anatomically implausible and poorly aligned with the
ground truth, whereas at higher DSCs, the organ boundaries become more precise and
realistic. This illustrates the effectiveness of the target Dice loss in generating a range of
segmentation qualities suitable for training slice­level QC models.
All of the presented results for the liver demonstrate the general applicability of the target
Dice loss. The corresponding plots for the kidney and bone segmentations show similar
trends and are included in section A.2. For the kidney, the QC dataset generated with
target DSC 0.1 was excluded, as its removal led to a more balanced combined QC dataset
distribution.
Automatic Quality Control for Medical Image Segmentation
25
==PAGE:35==
Figure 4.4: Segmentations for a CT slice of the liver (case 0, slice 55) generated by models
trained with varying target Dice loss. The CT slice and ground truth segmentation are
shown alongside predicted segmentations for target DSC values D ∈{0.1, 0.2, . . . , 1.0}.
The DSC values between the predicted and GT segmentations are listed below each
prediction.
4.2
Quality Control Model
This section presents the performance of our trained QC models, which estimate seg­
mentation quality by predicting the DSC based on the CT slice and a binary segmentation
mask. The models were trained on the QC datasets generated in the previous section
and are evaluated at both the subject­level (3D) and slice­level (2D).
We report the same evaluation metrics as were outlined in section 2.1, namely MAE,
Pearson correlation coefficient, accuracy, and computation time. Following the convention
adopted in many of the studies reviewed in chapter 2, we use a threshold of 0.7 to classify
segmentations as either “good” or “bad”, enabling us to compute the accuracy score.
As outlined in subsection 3.4.3, the QC models were intended to be trained until no signif­
icant improvement was observed on the validation set. However, due to time constraints
and the size of the QC datasets, training was limited. The kidney and liver QC models
each required 24 hours to train for two epochs, and given that the bone QC dataset is
more than three times the size of the liver QC dataset, it took 48 hours per epoch to train
the bone QC model. The liver and kidney QC models were trained for 9 epochs each,
resulting in MAE: 0.0502 ± 0.067 and MAE: 0.090 ± 0.087, respectively, on the validation
set. The bone model was trained for only two epochs resulting in a MAE: 0.0804 ± 0.080
on the validation set.
Figure 4.5 shows scatter plots comparing the GT 3D DSC and the predicted 3D DSC for
liver, kidney, and bone segmentations. Overall, the QC models are able to predict DSC
scores across the full range of values.
As seen in Figure 4.5a, the liver QC model achieves the best performance with a Pear­
son correlation coefficient of 0.994 and an MAE of 0.017 with standard deviation 0.027.
Although it shows a few outliers where the predicted DSC exceeds the GT, its predictions
are otherwise tightly clustered around the ideal red dashed line.
Figure 4.5b shows the results for the kidney QC model, which yields a Pearson correlation
coefficient of 0.993 and an MAE of 0.026 with standard deviation 0.024. The DSC pre­
dictions for GT DSC below 0.15 are more dispersed, indicating that the model struggles
26
Automatic Quality Control for Medical Image Segmentation
==PAGE:36==
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Ground Truth DSC
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Predicted DSC
(a)
(b)
(c)
 = 0.994
MAE = 0.017 ± 0.027
Liver
(a)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Ground Truth DSC
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Predicted DSC
(a)
(b)
(c)
 = 0.993
MAE = 0.026 ± 0.024
Kidney
(b)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Ground Truth DSC
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Predicted DSC
(a)
(b)
(c)
 = 0.987
MAE = 0.037 ± 0.032
Bone
(c)
Figure 4.5: Scatter plots between the GT 3D DSC and predicted 3D DSC for segmenta­
tions of the liver (a) , kidney (b), and bones (c). The red dashed line represents the ideal
relationship, namely a one to one mapping. The red dots highlight the segmentations
displayed in Figure 4.7, 4.8, and 4.9.
Automatic Quality Control for Medical Image Segmentation
27
==PAGE:37==
slightly with these DSCs below. However, this QC model avoids large outliers, resulting
in a lower standard deviation than the liver model.
The bone QC model, shown in Figure 4.5c, performs slightly worse, with a Pearson cor­
relation coefficient of 0.987 and an MAE of 0.037 with standard deviation 0.032 seen
in Figure 4.5c. The model tends to underestimate the DSC across most cases, with a
few outliers where the DSC is predicted too high. These less consistent predictions are
reflected in its higher MAE and standard deviation.
Liver
Kidney
Bone
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
3D DSC Absolute Error
Figure 4.6: Boxplots of the 3D DSC absolute errors for each class.
To further analyze the variability in the QC model predictions, Figure 4.6 presents boxplots
of the absolute 3D DSC errors for each organ. The bone class shows the greatest dis­
persion, with the largest interquartile range and a maximum error around 0.1, indicating
higher prediction variability. In contrast, the liver has the most compact error distribution,
with a maximum absolute error below 0.05, and the few large overestimations are treated
as outliers. The kidney results fall between the two, with moderate interquartile range and
a maximum error slightly above 0.05, along with small­valued outliers.
Figure 4.7 show three DSC predictions with corresponding segmentation from the QC
dataset and the GT segmentation for three different target Dice loss. These examples
are marked as red dots in the scatter plot in Figure 4.5a, and the predicted DSC values
are all close to their respective GT DSCs. The segmentations generated with target DSC
values of 0.2 and 0.5, shown in Figure 4.7b and Figure 4.7c, do not resemble the liver
anatomy at all. In contrast, the segmentation generated with target DSC 1.0 in Figure 4.7a
does resemble a liver, although some shape differences remain even with a GT DSC of
0.939.
Similarly, Figure 4.8 presents three kidney segmentation examples, marked as red dots
in Figure 4.5b. The same pattern is observed, that is segmentations with target DSCs
of 0.2 and 0.5 appear anatomically implausible, while the segmentation generated with a
target DSC of 1.0 Figure 4.8a resembles the kidney more closely. The segmentation is
slightly noisier than in the liver example, but the overall kidney shape is more accurately
preserved.
Lastly, the same analysis was carried out for bone segmentations, shown in Figure 4.9,
28
Automatic Quality Control for Medical Image Segmentation
==PAGE:38==
(a) Case 13 – Target DSC: 1.0, GT DSC: 0.939,
Predicted DSC: 0.932
(b) Case 3 – Target DSC: 0.5, GT DSC: 0.524,
Predicted DSC: 0.522
(c) Case 9 – Target DSC: 0.2, GT DSC: 0.2 Pre­
dicted DSC: 0.201
Figure 4.7: Examples showing accurate prediction of DSCs for liver segmentations. The
left image is the reference GT segmentation and the right image is the segmentation for
which quality is estimated.
(a) Case 11 – Target DSC: 1.0, GT DSC: 0.913,
Predicted DSC: 0.907
(b) Case 8 – Target DSC: 0.5, GT DSC: 0.418,
Predicted DSC: 0.406
(c) Case 13 – Target DSC: 0.2, GT DSC: 0.186, Predicted
DSC: 0.182
Figure 4.8: Examples showing accurate DSC predictions for kidney segmentations The
left image is the reference GT segmentation and the right image is the segmentation for
which quality is estimated.
Automatic Quality Control for Medical Image Segmentation
29
==PAGE:39==
with the three examples marked as red dots in Figure 4.5c. In this case, only the segmen­
tation generated with a target DSC of 0.2 (??) fails to resemble the bone anatomy. The
segmentations corresponding to target DSCs of 0.6 (Figure 4.9b) and 0.9 (Figure 4.9a)
show good anatomical alignment with the GT, with the 0.9 example appearing particularly
accurate and nearly noise­free.
(a) Case 12 – Target DSC:
0.9, GT DSC: 0.912, Pre­
dicted DSC: 0.932
(b) Case 15 – Target DSC:
0.6, GT DSC: 0.537, Pre­
dicted DSC: 0.550
(c) Case 0 – Target DSC: 0.2,
GT DSC: 0.240, Predicted
DSC: 0.223
Figure 4.9: Examples showing accurate DSC predictions for bone segmentations. The
left image is the reference GT segmentation and the right image is the segmentation for
which quality is estimated.
As the applied method for QC is based on slice­level DSC and MVSF prediction, we will
also look at boxplots of the absolute error between the predicted and GT values, seen
in Figure 4.10. The plots reveal that both DSC and MVSF predictions contain outliers.
The liver has the smallest interquartile range, indicating the most consistent predictions,
while the kidney and bone exhibit similar interquartile ranges for both metrics. For 2D
MVSF, the liver and kidney show larger outliers compared to the 2D DSC. In contrast, the
maximum outlier values for bone are approximately the same for both metrics. Overall,
the interquartile ranges are narrower for MVSF than for DSC, suggesting slightly more
stable MVSF predictions across slices.
Liver
Kidney
Bone
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
2D DSC Absolute Error
(a) 2D DSC absolute errors by class.
Liver
Kidney
Bone
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
2D MVSF Absolute Error
(b) 2D MVSF absolute errors by class.
Figure 4.10: Boxplots showing the distribution of absolute prediction errors for DSC and
MVSF for each class. Note that the MVSFs are kept normalized for easier comparison.
As our described QC pipeline (Figure 3.1) requires evaluating segmentations at slice­
level if the subject­level segmentation is marked as ”bad”, the QC model should predict
accurate 2D DSCs. This can be seen in the scatter plots inFigure 4.11. The liver QC
model shows the strongest performance, achieving a Pearson correlation coefficient of
0.979 and an MAE of 0.034 with a standard deviation of 0.055. However, the plot reveals
30
Automatic Quality Control for Medical Image Segmentation
==PAGE:40==
a slight tendency to overestimate the DSC compared to the ground truth. The kidney
QC model achieves an MAE of 0.048 with a standard deviation of 0.050 and a Pearson
correlation coefficient of 0.973. Notably, both the kidney and bone QC models incorrectly
predict many slices as having a DSC of 0. The bone QC model struggles in predicting
DSCs in the range 0.4 to 0.8, and it achieves the lowest performance, with a Pearson
correlation coefficient of 0.962, an MAE of 0.056, and a standard deviation of 0.058.
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Ground Truth DSC
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Predicted DSC
 = 0.979
MAE = 0.034 ± 0.055
Liver
(a)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Ground Truth DSC
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Predicted DSC
 = 0.973
MAE = 0.048 ± 0.050
Kidney
(b)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Ground Truth DSC
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Predicted DSC
 = 0.962
MAE = 0.056 ± 0.058
Bone
(c)
Figure 4.11: Scatter plots between the GT 2D DSC and the predicted 2D DSC for seg­
mentations of the liver (a) , kidney (b), and bones (c). The red dashed line represents the
ideal relationship, namely a one to one mapping.
Lastly, all evaluation metrics are summarized in Table 4.1, both for subject­ and slice­
level predictions. The liver QC model achieves an accuracy of 100.0% at subject­level
and 96.7% at slice­level, requiring 1.322 seconds to compute a subject­level prediction
and 8.869 milliseconds for a slice­level prediction. The kidney QC model also performs
well, with a subject­level accuracy of 98.4% and slice­level accuracy of 96.1%, and slightly
faster computation times of 1.165 seconds and 10.978 milliseconds , respectively. The
bone QC model shows slightly lower accuracy, with 96.2% at subject­level and 93.9% at
slice­level. It has the slowest subject­level computation time of 2.180 seconds, but the
fastest slice­level prediction time of 4.402 milliseconds .
Computation times were measured using the Python time module on a single NVIDIA
Tesla V100 GPU with 16 GB of memory, averaging over 21 cases.
Automatic Quality Control for Medical Image Segmentation
31
==PAGE:41==
Subject­level
Organ
MAE
Pearson Correlation Coefficient (ρ)
Accuracy
Computation Time
Liver
0.017 ± 0.027
0.994
100.0 %
1.322 s
Kidney
0.026 ± 0.024
0.993
98.4 %
1.165 s
Bone
0.037 ± 0.032
0.987
96.2 %
2.180 s
Slice­level
Liver
0.034 ± 0.055
0.979
96.7 %
8.869 ms
Kidney
0.048 ± 0.050
0.973
96.1 %
10.978 ms
Bone
0.056 ± 0.058
0.962
93.9 %
4.402 ms
Table 4.1: Summary of results of QC of liver, kidney, and bone segmentation.
32
Automatic Quality Control for Medical Image Segmentation
==PAGE:42==
5
Discussion
The results of this thesis demonstrate that it is possible to generate a diverse QC dataset
and train models capable of predicting segmentation quality from individual CT slices and
associated binary masks. Nonetheless, several limitations and open questions remain
regarding both the construction of the dataset and the validity of the QC model predictions.
When generating the QC dataset the models where only trained for 10 epochs, maybe
training for longer could result in a more uniform distribution of the QC dataset. This does
seem to be the case as the QC dataset for the bone seen in Figure A.6 do show the
closest resemble to a uniform distribution, and the mean of each dataset generated with
each target DSC are also closer to the target DSC, as seen in Figure A.8. This is likely
due to the fact that bone is present in nearly all slices, resulting in the largest QC dataset
of 630.413 binary 2D segmentations. In contrast, kidney is the least represented organ,
and its corresponding QC dataset required the exclusion of the target DSC 0.1 subset to
avoid excessive skewness in the distribution.
Another key concern is the distribution of DSC scores within the dataset. While the com­
bined QC dataset is reasonably balanced across the full DSC range, the distribution is
not perfectly uniform. The outer DSC intervals 0 to 0.2 and 0.8 to 1.0 are slightly overrep­
resented, while the remaining range is slightly underrepresented. This imbalance could
potentially introduce bias in the QC model, particularly in how it predicts quality in those re­
gions. This does not show up in the scatter plots for the 3D DSC predictions in Figure 4.5,
however when investigating the scatter plots for the 2D DSC predictions in Figure 4.11,
we see that the bone QC model struggles in predicting DSCs in the range 0.4 to 0.8. Ad­
ditionally, across all three scatter plots in Figure 4.11 the points becomes less disperse as
the GT DSC goes to 1.0, indicating more consistent performance at higher quality levels.
This could suggest that the models may be biased toward DSC in the range 0.8 to 1.0,
due to our unbalanced training distribution.
More critically, it remains an open question whether the generated QC dataset truly re­
flects the types of poor segmentations encountered in real­world clinical settings. Al­
though the use of a target Dice loss enables controlled degradation of segmentation
quality, it is uncertain whether these artificially created “bad” segmentations accurately
represent the kinds of errors typically observed in clinical practice. Indeed, some of the
generated 3D segmentations appear too anatomically implausible to be considered real­
istic failures, as shown in Figure 4.7 and Figure 4.8. However, clinical validation would
be needed to confirm this assumption.
Furthermore, as done in the Radiomics­Based method [25], a two­step approach could
be considered, by first classifying segmentations as “good” or “bad,” and then applying
regression only to those classified as “good” to estimate the DSC. Such an approach
would reduce the clinical burden by avoiding manual inspection of segmentations that
are clearly unusable. For example, when a segmentation is as poor as those shown in
Figure 4.7 and Figure 4.8, correcting individual slices would be impractical, instead, a
complete re­segmentation would likely be required.
The QC models were trained for only 9 epochs for liver and kidney, and 2 epochs for
bone. On the validation set, the 2D DSC predictions yielded MAEs ranging from 0.0502
to 0.090, which are notably worse than the performances reported in Table 2.1. However,
when evaluated on the test set, the models achieved significantly better results, with MAEs
Automatic Quality Control for Medical Image Segmentation
33
==PAGE:43==
ranging from 0.034 to 0.056 for 2D predictions and 0.017 to 0.037 for 3D predictions. This
suggests that the test set more closely resembles the training data than the validation set.
It is likely that extended training and further hyperparameter tuning could have improved
performance, particularly given the moderate dataset size and the challenge of modeling
segmentation quality across a wide range of DSC values. Due to time constraints, we
were also unable to experiment with additional regularization techniques such as dropout.
It is possible that these modifications, combined with longer training times, would have
led to better performance.
We applied the commonly used threshold of 0.7 to classify predictions as ”good” or ”bad,”
as identified in our review in chapter 2. However, using a single threshold across all
classes may not be ideal. As illustrated in Figure 4.7, Figure 4.8, and Figure 4.9, seg­
mentations with similar 3D DSC values can differ significantly in anatomical plausibility.
This suggests that a fixed threshold may not be equally applicable across organs. In [8],
class­specific thresholds were adopted, which appears more appropriate and should be
considered in future work.
Considering the variability of the CTORG dataset, as described in section 3.2, this diversity
supports the generalizability of our QC models. However, the noticeable performance gap
between validation and test set evaluations highlights the need for further testing on an
independent dataset, to ensure that the model is not overfitted to that particular dataset.
It should be robust and invariant to variations in scanner types, acquisition protocols,
gender, anatomical coverage, and underlying pathologies. External validation is therefore
essential to confirm the model’s generalizability.
For the QC models we use the MAE loss as our loss function during training, as it aligned
directly with our evaluation metrics. However, given the presence of notable outliers ob­
served in Figure 4.10 and Figure 4.11, it may have been more appropriate to use the
Mean Squared Error (MSE), which penalizes larger errors more heavily.
34
Automatic Quality Control for Medical Image Segmentation
==PAGE:44==
6
Conclusion
The problem statement addressed in this thesis was:
How can we automatically ensure the reliability of deep learning model­generated seg­
mentations without relying on manual ground truth segmentations?
To answer this, we first provided a comprehensive overview and comparison of existing
methods for automatic QC of medical image segmentations. Then, we implemented and
evaluated one of the most promising methods on a dataset consisting of cross­sectional
CT scans. Additionally, we used a novel method for generating a training dataset for
learning­based QC methods using a target Dice loss.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study to apply a segmentation QC method
to CT data. While previous work has focused primarily on MRI, we addressed a notable
gap in the literature by extending automatic QC to cross­sectional CT scans. This shift is
highly relevant, as CT is widely used in clinical settings for tasks such as CAC scoring,
aortic dissection detection, and body composition analysis, as detailed in section 1.2.
Furthermore, we addressed the issue of generalizability by evaluating our model on a di­
verse, multi­organ dataset comprising liver, kidney, and bone segmentations from imag­
ing centers around the world. This dataset diversity supports model robustness across
scanner types, anatomy, and segmentation quality.
For a clearer comparison of performance, we updated the summary table from chapter 2
to include our results, as shown in Table 6.1. By applying the method on CT, we achieved
MAE ranging from 0.017 to 0.037 and Pearson correlation coefficients ranging from 0.97 to
0.994, which are comparable to the results reported by [8] on cardiac MRI. This suggests
that the method generalizes well across imaging modalities and can be applied effectively
beyond its original domain.
We observed slightly longer computation times compared to the original study, which may
be attributed to the larger number of slices per subject in CT scans relative to cardiac MRI.
Nevertheless, it is still faster than the other methods.
Table 6.1: Updated Comparison of existing methods for automatic quality control of med­
ical image segmentations.
Method
Type
Computation
Time
Data Type
Performance:
DSC­
Based MAE, Correla­
tion and Accuracy
RCA [22]
Aligns two reference
images and uses max­
imum DSC as QC es­
timate
Reference
11 min/image
Cardiac MRI
MAE:
0.035
(whole
heart, 3D), 0.042−0.125
(other classes, 3D); Ac­
curacy:
95%
(whole
heart,
3D), 45%–96%
(other classes, 3D)
(continued on next page)
Automatic Quality Control for Medical Image Segmentation
35
==PAGE:45==
(continued from previous page)
Method
Type
Computation
Time
Data Type
Performance:
DSC­
Based MAE, Correla­
tion and Accuracy
RCA
(Bias
Discov­
ery) [17]
Modified RCA using
average DSC of top­
k references to detect
bias
Reference
11 min/image
Chest X­ray
Correlation: ρ = 0.77
(lung, 2D), ρ
=
0.93
(heart, 2D)
Self­Reflective
Ref­
erence [24]
Reconstructs
input
from
segmentation
and
compares
to
original
to
localize
errors
Reference
N/A
Cardiac MRI
MAE:
0.033
−
0.051
(average
across
all
classes, 3D); Correla­
tion: ρ = 0.887–0.938
(all classes, 3D)
2D CNN­Based [8]
CNN
predicts
DSC
from
image
and
segmentation
Learning
300 ms/subject
Cardiac MRI
MAE:
0.011
−
0.042
(3D), 0.019−0.047 (2D);
Correlation: ρ = 0.965–
0.996 (3D), ρ = 0.96–
0.994 (2D); Accuracy:
97.2% −97.7% (3D),
92.8% −98.8%
(2D)
across classes
2D
CNN­Based
on
CT
Uses QC dataset gen­
erated
using
target
Dice loss for training
Learning
<2.2
s/subject,
<11 ms/slice
Whole­body CT
(liver,
kidney,
bone)
MAE: 0.017−0.037 (3D),
0.034 −0.056 (2D); Cor­
relation: ρ = 0.97–0.994
(3D),
ρ
=
0.962–
0.979 (2D); Accuracy:
96.2% −100.0% (3D),
93.9% −96.7%
(2D)
across classes
Radiomics­Based
[25]
Uses radiomics fea­
tures + ML models
Learning
<10 s/subject
Cardiac MRI
MAE: 0.011−0.027 (3D),
0.021 −0.060 (2D); Ac­
curacy:
47.7%–85.4%
(3D),
74.9%–88.6%
(2D) across classes
Bayesian QuickNAT
[26]
Bayesian
CNN
with
MC
sampling
for
uncertainty estimation
Uncertainty
Inline with seg­
mentation
Brain MRI
MAE: 0.020 −0.07; Cor­
relation: ρ = 0.78–0.91;
Accuracy:
80%–88%
(3D) across datasets
(continued on next page)
36
Automatic Quality Control for Medical Image Segmentation
==PAGE:46==
(continued from previous page)
Method
Type
Computation
Time
Data Type
Performance:
DSC­
Based MAE, Correla­
tion and Accuracy
Fuzzy Sets [21]
Uses MC dropout +
test­time
augmenta­
tion to compute fuzzy
set­based uncertainty
Uncertainty
25 s/image
Multi­modality:
chest
X­ray
(lung),
ultra­
sound
(breast
tumor), dermo­
scopic
(skin),
microscopy
(nuclei),
HCS
(cell)
Correlation: ρ = 0.60–
0.92 (across tasks, 2D)
Automatic Quality Control for Medical Image Segmentation
37
==PAGE:47==
7
Future Work
If we are able to accurately estimate the quality of segmentation outputs, this opens the
door to broader applications, particularly in the context of fairness and bias detection. One
promising direction is the identification of bias in segmentation models, as demonstrated
by [17], where systematic performance degradation was observed across protected at­
tributes. In our case, quality control could be extended to detect similar disparities. If a
segmentation model consistently produces lower­quality outputs for specific patient sub­
groups, this may serve as an indicator of spectrum bias.
Another important area for future investigation is whether the QC dataset generated through
synthetic variation of segmentation quality is representative of what would actually be seen
in real­world applications. While our results suggest that the target Dice loss successfully
generates segmentations spanning the quality spectrum, further validation—potentially in­
volving expert clinicians—would be needed to assess how closely these generated errors
resemble clinically occurring ones. Understanding this alignment is essential for ensuring
the practical value of the trained QC models.
Finally, the acceptable threshold for segmentation quality likely differs between organs
and may also depend on whether it is assessed at the 2D slice level or over full 3D vol­
umes. Some anatomical structures may tolerate greater variation in segmentation qual­
ity, while others require precise delineation throughout. Analyzing organ­specific quality
thresholds in both 2D and 3D contexts could improve the interpretability and clinical rele­
vance of QC predictions.
38
Automatic Quality Control for Medical Image Segmentation
==PAGE:48==
Bibliography
[1]
The Editors of Encyclopaedia Britannica. Marvin Minsky. https://www.britannica.
com/biography/Marvin-Minsky. Accessed: 2025­06­24. 2025. URL: https://www.
britannica.com/biography/Marvin-Minsky.
[2]
Cambridge University Press. Intelligence. Accessed June 23, 2025. 2025. URL:
https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/intelligence.
[3]
Karim Lekadir et al. “FUTURE­AI: international consensus guideline for trustworthy
and deployable artificial intelligence in healthcare”. In: BMJ 388 (2025). Ed. by and
FUTURE­AI Consortium et al. DOI: 10.1136/bmj-2024-081554. eprint: https://www.
bmj.com/content/388/bmj- 2024- 081554.full.pdf. URL: https://www.bmj.com/
content/388/bmj-2024-081554.
[4]
Anne Gerdes, Iben Fasterholdt, and Benjamin S. B. Rasmussen. “AI­etik i sund­
hedsvæsenet”. In: Ugeskrift for Læger (June 2024). Accessed: 2025­02­13. URL:
https://ugeskriftet.dk/videnskab/ai-etik-i-sundhedsvaesenet.
[5]
Karen Klærke and Pernille Stiesdal. Danske regioner: Kunstig intelligens skal prior­
iteres højt på hospitalerne. Accessed: 2025­02­13. June 2023. URL: https://www.
dr.dk/nyheder/indland/danske-regioner-kunstig-intelligens-skal-prioriteres-hoejt-paa-
hospitalerne.
[6]
Xiangbin Liu et al. “A Review of Deep­Learning­Based Medical Image Segmentation
Methods”. In: Sustainability (2021). URL: https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:
234003524.
[7]
Sanguk Park and Minyoung Chung. “Cardiac segmentation on CT Images through
shape­aware contour attentions”. In: Computers in Biology and Medicine 147 (2022),
p. 105782. ISSN: 0010­4825. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compbiomed.2022.
105782. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0010482522005443.
[8]
Joris Fournel et al. “Medical image segmentation automatic quality control: A multi­
dimensional approach”. In: Medical Image Analysis 74 (2021), p. 102213. ISSN:
1361­8415. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.media.2021.102213. URL: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1361841521002589.
[9]
David Eng et al. “Automated coronary calcium scoring using deep learning with
multicenter external validation”. English (US). In: npj Digital Medicine 4 (Dec. 2021).
Publisher Copyright: © 2021, The Author(s). ISSN: 2398­6352.
[10]
Wenjian Yao et al. From CNN to Transformer: A Review of Medical Image Segmen­
tation Models. 2023. arXiv: 2308.05305 [eess.IV]. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.
05305.
[11]
Mariachiara Di Cesare et al. World Heart Report 2023. Ed. by Edward Fox. This is an
official publication of the World Heart Federation (WHF). The report was reviewed
by Victor Aboyans, Álvaro Avezum, Rick Chazal, Jean­Luc Eiselé, Naomi Herz,
Andre Pascal Kengne, Angela Koh, Amam Mbakwem, Jagat Narula, Gregory Roth,
and Saate Shakil. The report was made possible through support from Novartis
Foundation. 2023. URL: https://world-heart-federation.org/wp-content/uploads/
World-Heart-Report-2023.pdf.
[12]
Francesco Perone et al. “Role of Cardiovascular Imaging in Risk Assessment: Re­
cent Advances, Gaps in Evidence, and Future Directions”. In: Journal of Clinical
Medicine 12.17 (2023). ISSN: 2077­0383. DOI: 10.3390/jcm12175563. URL: https:
//www.mdpi.com/2077-0383/12/17/5563.
Automatic Quality Control for Medical Image Segmentation
39
==PAGE:49==
[13]
Hsiao­Hsuan Liu et al. “Automated Detection and Differentiation of Stanford Type A
and Type B Aortic Dissections in CTA Scans Using Deep Learning”. In: Diagnostics
(Basel) 15.1 (Dec. 2024), p. 12. DOI: 10.3390/diagnostics15010012.
[14]
Hatice Koç, Nilgün Bozbuğa, and Sevinç Gülseçen. “A Systematic Review on De­
tection of Aortic Dissection by Utilizing Deep Learning”. In: 2024 International Con­
ference Automatics and Informatics (ICAI). 2024, pp. 531–538. DOI: 10 . 1109 /
ICAI63388.2024.10851515.
[15]
Dinh Van Chi Mai et al. “A systematic review of automated segmentation of 3D
computed­tomography scans for volumetric body composition analysis”. In: Journal
of Cachexia, Sarcopenia and Muscle 14.5 (2023), pp. 1973–1986. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1002/jcsm.13310. eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/
jcsm.13310. URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/jcsm.13310.
[16]
Eshmam Rayed et al. “Deep learning for medical image segmentation: State­of­the­
art advancements and challenges”. In: Informatics in Medicine Unlocked 47 (Apr.
2024), p. 101504. DOI: 10.1016/j.imu.2024.101504.
[17]
Nicolás Gaggion et al. Unsupervised bias discovery in medical image segmentation.
2023. arXiv: 2309.00451 [cs.CV]. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.00451.
[18]
Seong Ho Park and Kyunghwa Han. “Methodologic Guide for Evaluating Clinical
Performance and Effect of Artificial Intelligence Technology for Medical Diagnosis
and Prediction”. In: Radiology 286.3 (Mar. 2018), pp. 800–809. ISSN: 0033­8419.
DOI: 10.1148/radiol.2017171920. URL: https://pubs.rsna.org/doi/pdf/10.1148/radiol.
2017171920.
[19]
M. Zanardo, J. J. Visser, A. Colarieti, et al. “Impact of AI on radiology: a EuroAIM/Eu­
SoMII 2024 survey among members of the European Society of Radiology”. In: In­
sights into Imaging 15 (2024), p. 240. DOI: 10.1186/s13244- 024- 01801- w. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1186/s13244-024-01801-w.
[20]
Ling Huang, Su Ruan, and Thierry Denœux. “Application of belief functions to med­
ical image segmentation: A review”. In: Information Fusion 91 (Mar. 2023), pp. 737–
756. ISSN: 1566­2535. DOI: 10.1016/j.inffus.2022.11.008. URL: http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.inffus.2022.11.008.
[21]
Qiao Lin et al. “A Novel Quality Control Algorithm for Medical Image Segmentation
Based on Fuzzy Uncertainty”. In: IEEE Transactions on Fuzzy Systems 31.8 (2023),
pp. 2532–2544. DOI: 10.1109/TFUZZ.2022.3228332.
[22]
Vanya V. Valindria et al. Reverse Classification Accuracy: Predicting Segmentation
Performance in the Absence of Ground Truth. 2017. arXiv: 1702.03407 [cs.CV].
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1702.03407.
[23]
Rob Robinson et al. “Automated quality control in image segmentation: Application
to the UK Biobank cardiovascular magnetic resonance imaging study”. In: Journal
of Cardiovascular Magnetic Resonance 21 (Dec. 2019). DOI: 10.1186/s12968-019-
0523-x.
[24]
Kang Li, Lequan Yu, and Pheng­Ann Heng. “Towards reliable cardiac image seg­
mentation: Assessing image­level and pixel­level segmentation quality via self­reflective
references”. In: Medical Image Analysis 78 (2022), p. 102426. ISSN: 1361­8415.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.media.2022.102426. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S1361841522000779.
[25]
Qiming Liu et al. “Radiomics­Based Quality Control System for Automatic Cardiac
Segmentation: A Feasibility Study”. In: Bioengineering 10.7 (2023). ISSN: 2306­
5354. DOI: 10.3390/bioengineering10070791. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/2306-
5354/10/7/791.
40
Automatic Quality Control for Medical Image Segmentation
==PAGE:50==
[26]
Abhijit Guha Roy et al. Bayesian QuickNAT: Model Uncertainty in Deep Whole­Brain
Segmentation for Structure­wise Quality Control. 2018. arXiv: 1811.09800 [cs.CV].
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1811.09800.
[27]
Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. “U­Net: Convolutional Net­
works for Biomedical Image Segmentation”. In: Medical Image Computing and Computer­
Assisted Intervention – MICCAI 2015. Ed. by Nassir Navab et al. Cham: Springer
International Publishing, 2015, pp. 234–241. ISBN: 978­3­319­24574­4.
[28]
B. Rister et al. CT­ORG: A Dataset of CT Volumes With Multiple Organ Segmen­
tations (Version 1). The Cancer Imaging Archive. DOI: 10.7937/tcia.2019.tt7f4v7o.
2019. URL: https://doi.org/10.7937/tcia.2019.tt7f4v7o.
[29]
Michael P. Hartung and Adam Brown. Abdominal CT Attenuation – Life in the Fast
Lane. https://litfl.com/abdominal- ct- attenuation/. Accessed: 2025­05­28. Aug.
2024.
[30]
TorchVision Contributors. torchvision.transforms.Resize. https://pytorch.org/vision/
main/generated/torchvision.transforms.Resize.html. Accessed: 2025­05­26.
[31]
A. Bartoli et al. “Deep Learning­based Automated Segmentation of Left Ventricu­
lar Trabeculations and Myocardium on Cardiac MR Images: A Feasibility Study”.
In: Radiology: Artificial Intelligence 3.1 (Nov. 2020), e200021. DOI: 10.1148/ryai.
2020200021.
[32]
Pavel Iakubovskii. segmentation_models.pytorch: DiceLoss Documentation. https:
//smp.readthedocs.io/en/latest/losses.html#diceloss. Accessed: 2025­05­28.
[33]
J. Fournel et al. “Medical image segmentation; model bias discovery; model bias
mitigation; automatic quality control”. In: Medical Image Analysis (2025). Under re­
view, Manuscript ID: MEDIA­D­25­00900.
[34]
PyTorch Contributors. torch.nn.L1Loss — PyTorch documentation. Accessed: 2025­
06­27. 2024. URL: https://pytorch.org/docs/stable/generated/torch.nn.L1Loss.html.
Automatic Quality Control for Medical Image Segmentation
41
==PAGE:51==
42
Automatic Quality Control for Medical Image Segmentation
==PAGE:52==
A
Additional Figures and Results
A.1
Quality Control Neural Network Architecture
1
----------------------------------------------------------------
2
Layer (type)
Output Shape
Param #
3
================================================================
4
Conv2d -1
[-1, 40, 256, 256]
760
5
BatchNorm2d -2
[-1, 40, 256, 256]
80
6
PReLU -3
[-1, 40, 256, 256]
1
7
Conv2d -4
[-1, 40, 256, 256]
14,440
8
BatchNorm2d -5
[-1, 40, 256, 256]
80
9
PReLU -6
[-1, 40, 256, 256]
1
10
ConvBlock -7
[-1, 40, 256, 256]
0
11
MaxPool2d -8
[-1, 40, 128, 128]
0
12
EncoderBlock -9
[[-1, 40, 128, 128], [-1, 40, 256, 256]]0
13
Conv2d -10
[-1, 40, 128, 128]
14,440
14
BatchNorm2d -11
[-1, 40, 128, 128]
80
15
PReLU -12
[-1, 40, 128, 128]
1
16
Conv2d -13
[-1, 40, 128, 128]
14,440
17
BatchNorm2d -14
[-1, 40, 128, 128]
80
18
PReLU -15
[-1, 40, 128, 128]
1
19
ConvBlock -16
[-1, 40, 128, 128]
0
20
MaxPool2d -17
[-1, 40, 64, 64]
0
21
EncoderBlock -18
[[-1, 40, 64, 64], [-1, 40, 128, 128]]
0
22
Conv2d -19
[-1, 80, 64, 64]
28,880
23
BatchNorm2d -20
[-1, 80, 64, 64]
160
24
PReLU -21
[-1, 80, 64, 64]
1
25
Conv2d -22
[-1, 80, 64, 64]
57,680
26
BatchNorm2d -23
[-1, 80, 64, 64]
160
27
PReLU -24
[-1, 80, 64, 64]
1
28
ConvBlock -25
[-1, 80, 64, 64]
0
29
MaxPool2d -26
[-1, 80, 32, 32]
0
30
EncoderBlock -27
[[-1, 80, 32, 32], [-1, 80, 64, 64]]
0
31
Conv2d -28
[-1, 160, 32, 32]
115,360
32
BatchNorm2d -29
[-1, 160, 32, 32]
320
33
PReLU -30
[-1, 160, 32, 32]
1
34
Conv2d -31
[-1, 160, 32, 32]
230,560
35
BatchNorm2d -32
[-1, 160, 32, 32]
320
36
PReLU -33
[-1, 160, 32, 32]
1
37
ConvBlock -34
[-1, 160, 32, 32]
0
38
MaxPool2d -35
[-1, 160, 16, 16]
0
39
EncoderBlock -36
[[-1, 160, 16, 16], [-1, 160, 32, 32]]
0
40
Conv2d -37
[-1, 320, 16, 16]
461,120
41
BatchNorm2d -38
[-1, 320, 16, 16]
640
42
PReLU -39
[-1, 320, 16, 16]
1
43
Conv2d -40
[-1, 320, 16, 16]
921,920
44
BatchNorm2d -41
[-1, 320, 16, 16]
640
45
PReLU -42
[-1, 320, 16, 16]
1
46
ConvBlock -43
[-1, 320, 16, 16]
0
47
MaxPool2d -44
[-1, 320, 8, 8]
0
48
EncoderBlock -45
[[-1, 320, 8, 8], [-1, 320, 16, 16]]
0
49
Conv2d -46
[-1, 640, 8, 8]
1,843,840
50
BatchNorm2d -47
[-1, 640, 8, 8]
1,280
51
PReLU -48
[-1, 640, 8, 8]
1
52
Conv2d -49
[-1, 640, 8, 8]
3,687,040
53
BatchNorm2d -50
[-1, 640, 8, 8]
1,280
54
PReLU -51
[-1, 640, 8, 8]
1
55
ConvBlock -52
[-1, 640, 8, 8]
0
Automatic Quality Control for Medical Image Segmentation
43
==PAGE:53==
56
ConvTranspose2d -53
[-1, 320, 16, 16]
819,520
57
BatchNorm2d -54
[-1, 640, 16, 16]
1,280
58
PReLU -55
[-1, 640, 16, 16]
1
59
Conv2d -56
[-1, 320, 16, 16]
1,843,520
60
BatchNorm2d -57
[-1, 320, 16, 16]
640
61
PReLU -58
[-1, 320, 16, 16]
1
62
Conv2d -59
[-1, 320, 16, 16]
921,920
63
BatchNorm2d -60
[-1, 320, 16, 16]
640
64
PReLU -61
[-1, 320, 16, 16]
1
65
DecoderBlock -62
[-1, 320, 16, 16]
0
66
ConvTranspose2d -63
[-1, 160, 32, 32]
204,960
67
BatchNorm2d -64
[-1, 320, 32, 32]
640
68
PReLU -65
[-1, 320, 32, 32]
1
69
Conv2d -66
[-1, 160, 32, 32]
460,960
70
BatchNorm2d -67
[-1, 160, 32, 32]
320
71
PReLU -68
[-1, 160, 32, 32]
1
72
Conv2d -69
[-1, 160, 32, 32]
230,560
73
BatchNorm2d -70
[-1, 160, 32, 32]
320
74
PReLU -71
[-1, 160, 32, 32]
1
75
DecoderBlock -72
[-1, 160, 32, 32]
0
76
ConvTranspose2d -73
[-1, 80, 64, 64]
51,280
77
BatchNorm2d -74
[-1, 160, 64, 64]
320
78
PReLU -75
[-1, 160, 64, 64]
1
79
Conv2d -76
[-1, 80, 64, 64]
115,280
80
BatchNorm2d -77
[-1, 80, 64, 64]
160
81
PReLU -78
[-1, 80, 64, 64]
1
82
Conv2d -79
[-1, 80, 64, 64]
57,680
83
BatchNorm2d -80
[-1, 80, 64, 64]
160
84
PReLU -81
[-1, 80, 64, 64]
1
85
DecoderBlock -82
[-1, 80, 64, 64]
0
86
ConvTranspose2d -83
[-1, 40, 128, 128]
12,840
87
BatchNorm2d -84
[-1, 80, 128, 128]
160
88
PReLU -85
[-1, 80, 128, 128]
1
89
Conv2d -86
[-1, 40, 128, 128]
28,840
90
BatchNorm2d -87
[-1, 40, 128, 128]
80
91
PReLU -88
[-1, 40, 128, 128]
1
92
Conv2d -89
[-1, 40, 128, 128]
14,440
93
BatchNorm2d -90
[-1, 40, 128, 128]
80
94
PReLU -91
[-1, 40, 128, 128]
1
95
DecoderBlock -92
[-1, 40, 128, 128]
0
96
ConvTranspose2d -93
[-1, 40, 256, 256]
6,440
97
BatchNorm2d -94
[-1, 80, 256, 256]
160
98
PReLU -95
[-1, 80, 256, 256]
1
99
Conv2d -96
[-1, 40, 256, 256]
28,840
100
BatchNorm2d -97
[-1, 40, 256, 256]
80
101
PReLU -98
[-1, 40, 256, 256]
1
102
Conv2d -99
[-1, 40, 256, 256]
14,440
103
BatchNorm2d -100
[-1, 40, 256, 256]
80
104
PReLU -101
[-1, 40, 256, 256]
1
105
DecoderBlock -102
[-1, 40, 256, 256]
0
106
Conv2d -103
[-1, 2, 256, 256]
82
107
AdaptiveAvgPool2d -104
[-1, 2, 1, 1]
0
108
================================================================
109
Total params: 12,212,349
110
Trainable params: 12,212,349
111
Non-trainable params: 0
112
----------------------------------------------------------------
113
Input size (MB): 0.50
114
Forward/backward pass size (MB): 14194631.34
115
Params size (MB): 46.59
116
Estimated Total Size (MB): 14194678.43
117
----------------------------------------------------------------
44
Automatic Quality Control for Medical Image Segmentation
==PAGE:54==
Listing A.1: U­Net used in the quality control models.
A.2
Quality Control Dataset
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
DSC
0
5000
10000
Frequency
Target DSC = 0.1
=0.01, =0.04
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
DSC
Target DSC = 0.2
=0.19, =0.11
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
DSC
Target DSC = 0.3
=0.29, =0.15
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
DSC
Target DSC = 0.4
=0.38, =0.19
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
DSC
Target DSC = 0.5
=0.43, =0.20
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
DSC
0
5000
10000
Frequency
Target DSC = 0.6
=0.57, =0.23
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
DSC
Target DSC = 0.7
=0.66, =0.24
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
DSC
Target DSC = 0.8
=0.74, =0.22
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
DSC
Target DSC = 0.9
=0.81, =0.20
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
DSC
Target DSC = 1.0
=0.86, =0.19
Figure A.1: Evolution of DSC distributions per target for the kidney.
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
DSC
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
Frequency
Target DSC
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Figure A.2: Combined DSC histogram for the kidney segmentations across all target
DSCs.
Automatic Quality Control for Medical Image Segmentation
45
==PAGE:55==
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
DSC
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
Frequency
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
DSC
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
Target DSC
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Figure A.3: Stacked histograms of DSC distributions in the training and test sets for the
liver dataset. The left figure shows the training set for cases 21 to 139, and the right figure
shows the test set for cases 0 to 20..
Figure A.4: Segmentations for a CT slice of the kidney (case 134, slice 407) gener­
ated by models trained with varying target dice loss.
The CT slice and ground truth
segmentation are shown alongside predicted segmentations for target DSC values D ∈
{0.1, 0.2, . . . , 1.0}. The DSC values between the predicted and GT segmentations are
listed below each prediction.
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
DSC
0
5000
10000
15000
Frequency
Target DSC = 0.1
=0.15, =0.08
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
DSC
Target DSC = 0.2
=0.19, =0.10
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
DSC
Target DSC = 0.3
=0.38, =0.16
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
DSC
Target DSC = 0.4
=0.40, =0.12
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
DSC
Target DSC = 0.5
=0.50, =0.13
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
DSC
0
5000
10000
15000
Frequency
Target DSC = 0.6
=0.59, =0.12
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
DSC
Target DSC = 0.7
=0.67, =0.13
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
DSC
Target DSC = 0.8
=0.79, =0.14
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
DSC
Target DSC = 0.9
=0.84, =0.11
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
DSC
Target DSC = 1.0
=0.87, =0.11
Figure A.5: Evolution of DSC distributions per target for the class (5) Bone.
46
Automatic Quality Control for Medical Image Segmentation
==PAGE:56==
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
DSC
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
30000
35000
Frequency
Target DSC
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Figure A.6: Combined DSC histogram for the kidney segmentations across all target
DSCs.
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
DSC
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
30000
Frequency
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
DSC
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
Target DSC
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Figure A.7: Stacked histograms of DSC distributions in the training and test sets for the
liver dataset. The left figure shows the training set for cases 21 to 139, and the right figure
shows the test set for cases 0 to 20.
Automatic Quality Control for Medical Image Segmentation
47
==PAGE:57==
Figure A.8: Segmentations for a CT slice of the bones (case 60, slice 108) generated
by models trained with varying target dice loss.
The CT slice and ground truth seg­
mentation are shown alongside predicted segmentations for target DSC values D ∈
{0.1, 0.2, . . . , 1.0}. The DSC values between the predicted and GT segmentations are
listed below each prediction.
(a) GT segmentation.
(b) GT DSC: 0.943,
Pred DSC: 0.920
(c) GT DSC: 0.905,
Pred DSC: 0.891
(d) GT DSC: 0.819,
Pred DSC: 0.800
(e) GT DSC: 0.785,
Pred DSC: 0.766
(f) GT DSC: 0.689,
Pred DSC: 0.660
(g) GT DSC: 0.556,
Pred DSC: 0.543
(h) GT DSC: 0.445,
Pred DSC: 0.414
(i) GT DSC: 0.345,
Pred DSC: 0.332
(j) GT DSC: 0.289,
Pred DSC: 0.268
(k) GT DSC: 0.070,
Pred DSC: 0.072
Figure A.9: Predicted (Pred) DSC vs ground truth (GT) for liver CT slices
48
Automatic Quality Control for Medical Image Segmentation
==PAGE:58==
Automatic Quality Control for Medical Image Segmentation
49
==PAGE:59==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads Building 324
DK­2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://www.compute.dtu.dk
