==PAGE:1==
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT :
Challenges and Practical Improvements
Master Thesis
DTU Computer Science and Engineering
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
Master Thesis
August, 2025
By
Siyan Chen, Khizar Mukhtiar
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
https://www.compute.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Section for Cybersecurity Engineer­
ing, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, at the Technical Univer­
sity of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Computer
Science and Engineering, MSc. in Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of Computer Science
and Cybersecurity.
Siyan Chen,s232894
Signature
Date
Khizar Mukhtiar, s182696
Signature
Date
ii
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
17/08/2025
17/08/2025
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The dynamic threat landscape in cyber security has always been the impetus behind em­
ploying sophisticated defensive strategies in order to protect one’s assets. Moreover, the
increasing interconnectivity of everyday devices via the internet, also known as Internet
of Things (IoT), makes them vulnerable to cyber attacks. Thus, one effective defensive
approach stems from devising deceptive methods and that is the crux of this thesis. We
scrutinize the most recurring attacks on IoT technologies and how the use of honeypots
in this domain can help mitigate these threats by mimicking a real system. Furthermore,
our research looks further into the literature on the psychology of a human attacker and
how that can be leveraged to make changes in an IoT honeypot technology to improve its
efficacy. Finally, we systematically deploy honeytokens across multiple locations within
these decoy IoT systems and analyze their impact on efficiency. The code is publicly
available on https://github.com/chensy618/HoneyFarm.
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
We would both like to thank Emmanouil Vasilomanolakis, Associate Professor at the
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, for his valuable guidance,
insights and expertise that helped form this thesis as our supervisor.
Siyan Chen:
Education is a lifelong journey, and it is not just about obtaining a degree; it is about
learning to think intensively and critically, to face challenges with resilience, and to pursue
knowledge with an open mind. I am deeply grateful to have my family supporting me
and standing beside me every step of the way. I would also like to express my heartfelt
gratitude to my girlfriend, Shijia Chen, whose understanding and encouragement have
been a constant source of comfort and motivation for me to keep moving forward. My
sincere thanks go to our friend as well, Lingjie Su, PhD in Social Science, who generously
shared her insights into psychology and inspired me to approach my research from new
perspectives. Finally, I am thankful to all who have supported and inspired me during my
two years of study in any ways, among them Khizar Mukhtiar, Yunxuan Li, Zhenlin Xie,
and Evangelos Lamprou, whose friendship and kindness made this journey memorable.
Khizar Mukhtiar:
I would like to express my deepest gratitude to my parents for their unwavering support,
encouragement, and belief in me throughout this journey. I would also like to thank my
good friend and thesis collaborator, Siyan Chen, whose insightful ideas, constructive feed­
back, and ability to challenge my assumptions helped me think from a more critical and
creative perspective.
iv
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Research Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Thesis Outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2
Background
3
2.1
Threat Landscape in IoT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Cyber Deception . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.3
Cyberpsychology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4
Cloud Services & Virtual Machines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Related Work
10
3.1
Attacks in IoT Environments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3.2
IoT Honeypots
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.3
Psychological Cyber Deception . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
4
Evaluating Protocol Emulation in Honeypots
19
4.1
Cowrie . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.2
SNARE/TANNER . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
5
Deception Environment Design
25
5.1
HoneyFarm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
5.2
Modeling Psychological Cyber Deception Framework
. . . . . . . . . . . . 28
5.3
Synthesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
6
Implementation
35
6.1
SNARE ­ Web Interface Development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
6.2
Cowrie ­ File System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
6.3
Cowrie ­ Deceptive Interaction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
6.4
MiniPrint . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
6.5
Honeytoken Alerting Mechanism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
6.6
Botnet Detection Mechanism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
6.7
Docker Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
6.8
Running and Testing the Application . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
7
Experiments
57
7.1
Deployment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
7.2
User Study
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
8
Findings and Evaluation
65
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
v
==PAGE:8==
8.1
Preliminary Analysis on Secondary Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
8.2
Enhanced Honeypot Data Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 74
8.3
Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 87
9
Discussion
101
9.1
Initial Challenges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
9.2
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
9.3
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105
10 Conclusion
109
Bibliography
111
A Detailed Comparison of Cowrie Commands
121
B User Study
128
B.1 CTF Challenges Poster
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 128
B.2 Questionnaire ­ Participant Experience Assessment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . 128
C Design & Implementation Scripts
135
C.1 MOTD Page
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 135
C.2 Docker Deployment Configuration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 136
C.3 SNARE/TANNER Configuration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 138
C.4 Miniprint Script . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 141
C.5 HoneyFarm Data Analysis Dashboard Script
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 146
C.6 Honeytoken Alerting Script
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 148
C.7 Honeytoken Files . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 150
C.8 Botnet Detection Mechanism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 151
vi
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
The evolving nature of digital technologies has paved the way to interconnect everyday
objects with the help of computing devices, via the internet. This allows for a seamless
exchange of data between the former and makes it possible to control these so­called
“objects” from one place. Another term commonly used for these devices is the Internet
of Things (IoT). According to a report by IoT Analytics, the total number of these devices
is expected to cross a whopping 40 billion by 2030 [1]. Making it quite evident how IoT
devices are gaining a much wider popularity across the globe.
However, it is crucial to note that these devices are often equipped with limited compu­
tational power and this prevents them from being integrated with robust security mech­
anisms. As a result, they become prime targets for cyber attacks. Therefore, it is not a
matter of if, but when a system is attacked and defenders can learn a great deal by un­
derstanding the behavior and approach of attackers when interacting with a system. But
what if this does not come at a cost of damaging a real system? This paves the way for
honeypots which is essentially a deceptive strategy devised to lure attackers towards a
fake system and study attackers.
There is ongoing research that explores how cyber deception can be made more effec­
tive by incorporating novel techniques in honeypots. One key area that remains quite
untapped is designing a decoy system based on the principles of human psychology. Al­
though there have been controlled lab experiments to measure the efficacy of such an
approach, this endeavor has not been heavily tested in an uncontrolled cyber space. We
aim to explore these tactics by incorporating them into different honeypot technologies
and then evaluate whether they make the technologies more convincing at deceiving hu­
man attackers. Therefore, this leads us to construct the following research problem:
1.1
Research Problem
We first scrutinize the threat landscape of IoT and then explore existing IoT honeypot
technologies to understand how well the communication protocols are emulated. Fur­
thermore, we dive into the literature behind cyber psychology and investigate different
approaches for deception in this domain. Finally, these tactics are integrated with differ­
ent honeypot technologies, along with systematic deployment of honeytokens, and their
effectiveness is evaluated. The research questions are as follows:
RQ1:
What are the most common attacks to which IoT environments are susceptible?
RQ2:
How well do existing honeypots emulate IoT communication protocols that can
deceive attackers?
RQ3:
What is the existing research on the psychology of human attackers when inter­
acting with a honeypot?
RQ4:
And how can that be leveraged in an IoT honeypot?
RQ5:
How can honeytokens be employed in IoT honeypots and does this improve the
efficacy of the latter?
1.2
Thesis Outline
This thesis is comprised of ten chapters, followed by supporting appendices. Each chap­
ter builds on the preceding one to help the reader understand theoretical foundations,
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
1
==PAGE:10==
design, implementation, and evaluation of our proposed decoy environment enhanced
with psychological elements. Following the introduction, Chapter 2 consists of necessary
background covering the threat landscape in IoT, concepts in cyber deception that sheds
light on honeypots and honeytokens, relevant methods from cyberpsychology which can
be extended to deception, and the role of virtual machines and cloud services in host­
ing honeypots. Chapter 3 comprehensively surveys related work pertaining to the most
common attacks in IoT environments, existing honeypot technologies, and literature on
psychological approaches to deception in cybersecurity.
Proceeding further, an analysis of how existing honeypots emulate IoT protocols is carried
out in chapter 4. The focus is particularly laid on Cowrie and SNARE/TANNER honey­
pots. Chapter 5 presents a detailed design of the proposed deception environment, Hon­
eyFarm. It explains the architecture and how psychological aspects are incorporated.
Chapter 6 describes the technical implementation of HoneyFarm. It covers the develop­
ment of the web interface hosted on SNARE, modifications made to Cowrie and MiniPrint,
the honeytoken alerting mechanism, botnet detection and setup on Docker.
Chapter 7 presents the experimental methodology which includes the deployment pro­
cess using Microsoft Azure, honeypot attraction framework to lure human attackers, and
a user study to further evaluate the effectiveness of the deception environment. The
findings and their evaluation are then provided in Chapter 8 that includes analysis and
evaluation on preliminary data (logs from honeypots deployed in their default settings)
and that obtained from the deployed HoneyFarm. Chapter 9 offers a critical discussion of
the project, including challenges faced, limitations of the current system, and directions
for future research. Finally, Chapter 10 concludes the thesis by summarizing the main
contributions and reflecting on achieving the research objectives while acknowledging
impediments.
2
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
==PAGE:11==
2
Background
The main focal areas revolving around this project are briefly explained in this chapter
which is essentially comprised of the technologies and concepts within cybersecurity re­
search that are relevant to our study. We start off by first delving into IoT that intercon­
nects everyday devices via the Internet, and then highlight how it is susceptible to wider
attack surface due to its ubiquitous nature and limited security. Moreover, cyber decep­
tion techniques are explored on a higher level that includes honeypots and honeytokens
as well as the emerging field of cyberpsychology, which consists of concepts that can
influence the decisions and behavior of human attackers. Finally, cloud services and vir­
tual machines are briefly discussed which provides scalable and flexible environments for
deploying honeypots.
2.1
Threat Landscape in IoT
As already explained in the introduction, the interconnectivity of physical objects through
sensors via the internet allows the former to collect and share data. This paves the way to
performing a plethora of tasks autonomously. The number of applications using IoT are
quite vast, and numerous industries are continuously incorporating these technologies
which ranges from large­scale manufacturing to a smart home environment. With the
help of IoT devices, a wide range of different metrics, such as temperature, energy usage,
or other appliances etc., can be monitored and controlled. However, the rapid pace of
adopting IoT devices has also made it a prime target of cyber adversaries, especially with
its limited computational power that prevents it from having robust security [2]. Therefore,
deception can be extended to mimic a vulnerable IoT environment.
2.2
Cyber Deception
The concept of cyber deception is an ongoing research area within cybersecurity. The
goal lies in providing an attacker fabricated information or data that is aimed at draining
the resources of the latter while their actions are recorded and observed. Although ap­
plied recently within cybersecurity, the idea of deception is not nascent in itself and dates
back to archaic humans setting up ‘fake’ ducks as decoys to lure live ducks [3]. With time,
deception strategies have extensively evolved especially within the military. A prime ex­
ample is that of what is known as the “Ghost Army”, which was commissioned on January
20, 1944 and was the first mobile unit in the US Army to use different kinds of deception
in battle. Although this division had 82 officers and over a thousand soldiers, they could
pretend to be two full divisions, about 30,000 men, using fake visuals, sounds, and radio
messages to trick German forces during the last year of World War II [4]. Coming back to
the use of deception within cybersecurity, the earliest instance of the former was set­up
by a researcher in the form of a honeypot, which was comprised of a fake system and
tempting files. The honeypot was aimed at keeping a KGB (Soviet Spy Agency) hacker
busy who was trying to steal sensitive information from the Lawrence Berkeley National
Laboratory during the late 1980’s. By strategically providing false information to the at­
tacker and observing their moves, the researcher was able to gather crucial intelligence
that led to revealing an international cyber espionage ring [5].
Reflecting upon these brief cases from the past can provide a glimpse into the significance
of deception tactics, especially in the form of decoys and honeypots. Considering cyber
deception, honeypots can be as simple as hosting a very low interaction single decoy
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
3
==PAGE:12==
service to mimicking an entire network that can make the overall deception environment
more believable.
2.2.1
Honeypots
Apart from deceiving attackers and gathering logs, honeypots can also serve as a clever
distraction, particularly when used in production by deploying them strategically within
enterprise networks in order to identify and divert malicious activities. In addition, the
amount of realism and configuration of a service or an application emulated by a honeypot
can be categorized depending on its level of interaction which can be low, medium, or high.
Figure 2.1: Interaction level elaboration [6]
Moreover, there are several other aspects associated with the level of interaction in a
certain honeypot. These include factors such as cost and scalability along with its main­
tenance and the quality and amount of gathered information. These elements are high­
lighted in Figure 2.1, and demonstrated in terms of increasing or decreasing order de­
pending on the interaction level.
Low Interaction
Honeypots with very limited number of simple functionalities for a particular service are
categorized as low interaction. These systems do not give full operating system access
to an attacker and are often easy to set­up, with low risk, minimal cost and maintenance.
However, due to its simplistic nature, low interaction honeypots can be identified with ease
by attackers and the gathered information is also quite limited [6]. Some examples of such
honeypots are HoneyD [7], HoneyPy [8], and AHA [9].
4
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
==PAGE:13==
Medium Interaction
A level of interaction between low and a high­level honeypot is provided by a medium
interaction honeypot. In other words, the structure and configuration of mimicked services
are more realistic. Mimicking a realistically interactive environment, these honeypots are
rather difficult to detect when compared to those that are low interaction [10]. The most
commonly used medium interaction honeypots are Dionaea [11], Kippo [12], Cowrie [13],
and SNARE/TANNER [14].
High Interaction
High interaction honeypots incorporate much more interaction, meaning that not only are
services or protocols emulated but attackers are rather given access to a fake operating
system. The information gathered is of higher quality and has significant detail. However,
given its higher level of complexity, high interaction honeypots can be very costly, difficult
to maintain, and not very scalable [15]. Examples of this type of honeypots are SIPHON
[16] and HoneyCloud [17].
The scrutinized honeypots are summarized in Table 2.1 based on their interaction level
and mimicked services. Moreover, a vast array of honeypot technologies are surveyed
comprehensively later in Section 3.2.
Table 2.1: Honeypot Comparison
Honeypot
Interaction Level
Simulated Services
HoneyD
Low
FTP, SMTP, Telnet, IIS, POP
AHA
Low
SSH
HoneyPy
Low/Medium
Created as required
Cowrie
Medium/High
SSH, Telnet, SFTP, SCP
Kippo
Medium
SSH
Dionaea
Medium
Black hole, EPMAP, FTP, HTTP, Memcache,
MongoDB, MQTT, MySQL, Nfq, PPTP, SIP,
SMB, TFTP, UPnP
SNARE/TANNER
Medium
Web­based, HTTP
SIPHON
High
HTTP, Telnet, SSH, RTSP
HoneyCloud
High
SSH,
Telnet,
SMB,
HTTP,
HTTPS,
RDP,
MySQL, SQL Server
Although honeypots can serve as a very powerful tool in thwarting cyber attacks by at­
tracting malicious traffic towards itself, however, they are susceptible to fingerprinting es­
pecially when deployed in its legacy version. This means that attackers are able to detect
the honeypot using different methods and would rather avoid it which defeats the purpose
of a decoy. Moreover, not only are old and legacy versions of honeypots prone to finger­
printing, but given the static response behavior of most of these technologies, attackers
can identify them upon interaction and this remains a central challenge in designing a
realistic honeypot [18].
2.2.2
Honeytokens
In simpler terms, using a fake piece of digital information in many ways can be considered
to be a honeytoken. Although the term “honeytoken” itself dates back to the year 2003,
but the idea has been used for quite some time [19]. For instance, fake entries have been
included in dictionaries or encyclopedias for a long time as copyright traps to help detect
people who copy or steal content without permission. In cybersecurity, a honeytoken can
be described as a honeypot that is not a computer but rather some other digital artifact
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
5
==PAGE:14==
and can be anything from a fake credit card number, to a database entry or a spreadsheet
and much more. Analogous to honeypots, any interaction with a honeytoken gives a
clear sign of malicious activity by an adversary. Moreover, given its flexibility and ease
of deployment in different areas of a system, unauthorized access to some resource can
be spotted effectively. For example, a fake file hinting towards containing some sensitive
information could alert the defenders that an attacker is trying to access restricted data.
When combined with other security mechanisms, honeytokens can improve the overall
defensive posture of a system. Furthermore, they are very cost effective since there is no
need for a prior special technology or some subscription in order to set up a honeytoken,
thus, making them even more useful [19].
However, it should be noted that sophisticated attackers might be able to identify honeyto­
kens during the reconnaissance phase by observing unusual patterns or inconsistencies
in data related to the latter. Therefore, it is imperative that these files are regularly updated
and remain consistent with real files and data [20].
2.3
Cyberpsychology
The study of cyberpsychology is related to investigating the processes revolving around
human behavior that shapes their interaction with technology. In other words, human in­
teraction between each other and technologies in a virtual environment is explained by
this field. This can be further extended to investigate how the behavior and decisions of
humans, when interacting with a system, may vary and could be understood. [21]. Al­
though this field is very broad and includes a wide spectrum of principles from applied
psychology, recent studies have narrowed this down to the domain of cybersecurity with
particular scrutiny on hypothesizing deception environments that could tap into the psy­
chological elements of human attackers, such as exploiting their cognitive biases and
emotional states based on what personality trait they inhibit [22]. This may help with
keeping an adversary engaged with a decoy system while draining their resources.
2.3.1
Psychological Cyber Deception
No matter how sophisticated methods an attacker uses to infiltrate into a system and
cause harm, there will always be a human element involved that, when observed thor­
oughly, could reveal predictable patterns of behavior. This is also true when considering
malware, since its point of origin stems from a human developer and thus might incorpo­
rate certain form of cognitive biases [23]. Although the latter is not the aim of this thesis,
but instead our study aims to shed light on the psychological aspects of a human attacker
when directly confronting a vulnerable system. Thus, in the following sections, we intro­
duce the key psychological concepts that form the foundation of this perspective, including
the Big Five personality traits, emotional states, and cognitive biases.
Big Five Personality Traits
The Big Five personality traits, also known as the Five Factor Model (FFM) or simply
“the Big Five” [24, 25, 26], are commonly assessed using the Big Five Questionnaire
(BFQ), which evaluates individuals across five key dimensions: openness to experience,
conscientiousness, extraversion, agreeableness, and neuroticism [27].
• Openness to experience describes a dimension of cognitive style that distinguishes
imaginative, creative people from down­to­earth, conventional people [28]. People
high in openness tend to be creative and enjoy exploring novel concepts, while those
low in openness may prefer routine and familiarity [28].
• Conscientiousness captures individual differences in the degree of organization,
6
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
==PAGE:15==
persistence, and motivation in goal­directed behavior [29]. People high in consci­
entiousness are described as organized, reliable, and ambitious [30] [31].
• Extraversion trait describes the tendency of an individual to be in constant social
interaction with their environment [32]. People high in extraversion are outgoing
and tend to gain energy in social situations [33]. Being around others helps them
feel energized and excited. However, those who are low in this personality trait (or
introverted) tend to be more reserved [34]. They have less energy in social settings,
and social events can feel draining.
• Agreeableness can be mapped to the “more humane aspects of personality”, con­
trasting a nurturing, caring, and emotionally supportive individual high in agreeable­
ness with a hostile, indifferent, self­centered, spiteful, and jealous individual low in
agreeableness [35].
• Neuroticism represents the degree to which a person experiences the world as dis­
tressing, threatening, and unsafe [36]. Those with high levels of neuroticism will be
more prone to stress, anxiety, and emotional reactions [37]. They are more likely to
suffer from self­doubt, moodiness, and irritability, and be risk­averse. On the other
end of the neuroticism spectrum, those who score low in this trait thrive in stress­
ful situations without feeling overwhelmed [37]. They appear calm, composed, and
confident, and are capable of dealing with negative feelings well.
Taking these trait definitions into account, the hacker’s personality profile study was con­
ducted by Matulessy & Humaira (2016) [38], who analyzed 30 hackers (10 white hats,
10 black hats, and 10 gray hats) using the Big Five personality traits, and they revealed
promising correlations between hacker types and personality trait, supported by strong
validity and reliability of the measuring instrument, as indicated by a Cronbach’s Alpha
score of 0.874. The results showed that the white hats had high scores on the personality
trait of agreeableness. They were positioned in the middle in relation to the personality
traits of extraversion, conscientiousness, neuroticism and openness to experience. On
the other hand, the black hats scored highly on the personality trait of openness to expe­
rience, and showed moderate levels in extraversion, agreeableness, conscientiousness,
and neuroticism. The gray hat hackers exhibited a strong tendency toward neuroticism,
while their scores on the other four traits were average.
Another study introduced Honeypsy, a novel honeypot­based framework designed to pre­
dict a hacker’s personality and cyber expertise from their behavioral logs on a server [39].
The Big­5 personality test was also taken by the participants, and the hacker actions were
specified into 22 categories (A1 ­ A22) of actions based on the honeypot logs.
Emotional State
Gabrys et al.(2023) [40] identified and proposed the emotional state classifier, demon­
strating strong correlation between the latter and the frequency that an attacker performs
reconnaissance and intrusion actions. The emotional state of an attacker was defined
as the extent to which they experience confusion, self­doubt, confidence, frustration,
and surprise, and this was reflected throughout the Tularosa Study. Thus, inspired by
this idea, we intend to further manipulate the attacker’s emotional state during their in­
teractions within our decoy environment. For example, increasing confusion to impair an
attacker’s situational awareness, making it more difficult for them to navigate the system
and ultimately impede reaching their goals.
Cognitive Biases
We scrutinize several cognitive biases that are most relevant to psychological cyber de­
ception. Furthermore, their applicability in regards to exploitation is thoroughly examined.
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
7
==PAGE:16==
• Confirmation Bias: Associated with one’s tendency to seek, interpret, and remem­
ber information that supports existing beliefs while rejecting conflicting evidence
[41]. This is consistent with the findings by Ferguson et al. (2021) [42], in which
it was observed that familiar cues within the environment had an influence on the
behavior of attackers based on what they expected in regards to a compromised sys­
tem. For instance, deliberately indicating to the attackers about certain attributes of
the target system. This had a drastic effect on how the attackers approached the
system. Furthermore, Krawczyk et al. (2013) [43] postulated that confirmation bias
can lead an adversary to be more persistent when decoys contains elements of
prior knowledge. Viewing this in terms of cyber intrusion, vulnerable systems may
encompass default credentials or recognizable device names. However, including
similar signs of vulnerabilities across multiple decoy systems could lead to finger­
printing, therefore, it is crucial to reflect aspects of a real world device that is being
represented and that it still shows common exploit patterns which is analogous with
cues that match prior experiences or expectations.
• Sunk Cost Fallacy: This bias occurs when a course of action is continued due to
investing prior time or effort, even when it would be more rational to abandon the
endeavor [44]. Krawczyk et al. (2013) [43] coined this as “sunk cost thinking” and in
the context of a cyber attack, an adversary may be reluctant to withdraw if they spent
time interacting with the system, for instance by inspecting supposedly confidential
files or downloading logs. The exploitation of this bias could be further amplified if
there are subtle signals or signs in the system suggesting to the attacker that they
are close to success. However, the pursuit can be subjective and motivation behind
it could be uncovered by examining the personality of an attacker and then adjusting
the decoy system accordingly.
• Availability Heuristic: Related to one’s tendency of assessing an event and making
a decision based on how easily information comes to mind [45]. The exploitation of
this bias is given particular precedence by Krawczyk et al. (2013) [43], who pointed
out that environments can be designed to show familiar or recent attack patterns
that can influence the decision making of attackers. Hence, the decoy system may
appear more enticing if, for example, known or recent vulnerabilities are replicated.
• Representativeness Heuristic: This bias involves the invocation of a stereotypical
example to evaluate the probability of a certain scenario [46]. Krawczyk et al. (2013)
[43] argued that attackers often drew parallels between the target system and then
ones they have encountered previously. The exploitation of this bias was the raison
d’être of any decoy system, where the goal was to mimic a vulnerable system with
as many realistic features as possible.
• Order Effect: Associated with describing how the order of presented information
can effect decision making [47]. Yinan & Quanyan (2023) [48] mathematically mod­
eled this bias using quantum decision theory and demonstrated that by rearranging
the timing and order of data can mislead an attacker. Although, this hypothesis was
not tested in a simulated environment but when applying similar principles in the
context of a deception environment, it can be argued that the order in which attack­
ers find devices, login details, or system logs can influence how they understand
the system’s layout and importance.
8
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
==PAGE:17==
2.4
Cloud Services & Virtual Machines
In general terms, services that are delivered to clients through the internet on demand,
are referred to as cloud services. These services do not require any installation of internal
hardware and are rather designed to easily facilitate access to resources or applications.
Service providers manage cloud services, which is made available to clients from servers
hosted by the providers. The three main types of cloud services are Software as a Service
(SaaS), this category includes different services like storing and backing up files, online
email, and tools for managing projects, Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS), offers the infras­
tructure that many cloud providers rely on to run SaaS tools and acts as a full data centre
setup, in­house installations, and Platform as a Service (PaaS), an online environment
where developers can create cloud applications. Some examples of cloud services, par­
ticularly IaaS, are Amazon Web Services (AWS), Microsoft Azure, and Google Compute
Engine. Since they support scalable tool deployment and offer an extra layer of isolation,
these services are well suited for deploying honeypots [49].
2.4.1
Virtual Machines
A virtual machine (VM) runs on top of a physical host machine and powers an independent
operating system which functions separately from other VMs and the operating system
(OS) of the host machine itself. VMs can make it possible to run an OS that acts like
an entirely different computer in an application window. This is possible because VMs
use hypervisor, which is responsible for allocating physical resources such as CPU, and
memory to several VMs. Moreover, VMs are particularly useful to perform risky tasks,
such as examining a computer virus or hosting a honeypot, that might otherwise harm the
host environment [50].
Moreover, VMs are also offered by numerous cloud service providers who run them on
high­performance servers. In addition, cloud­based VMs can be easily configured and
provide advanced networking features such as managing network interfaces along with
defining rules related to inbound and outbound traffic [51]. Considering these factors and
the capability of VMs to provide a secure, isolated environment, deploying honeypots on
cloud­based virtual machines offers a clear practical advantage.
2.4.2
Microsoft Azure
Microsoft Azure is a cloud service platform that offers a range of services to help organ­
isations easily scale and operate efficiently by allowing them to build and manage appli­
cations using tools across cloud environments. With a wide collection of cloud services,
organisations can host VMs, handle databases, and perform advanced analytics. Addi­
tionally, Azure enables hybrid cloud setups and provides tools for monitoring, automating
tasks, and managing security, which makes it a suitable platform for running experimental
environments [52].
Based on these aspects, and as students at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU),
we were granted 100 credits to access Azure cloud services, which we used to create a
secure environment for deploying honeypots.
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
9
==PAGE:18==
3
Related Work
Considering the enormous number of devices interconnected to each other via the internet
in regards to IoT, it is highly probable that such environments are at a higher risk of cyber
attacks. These threats can range from a wide variety of exploits on a spectrum that entails
a plethora of vulnerabilities. As already mentioned, the main purpose of this thesis is to
mitigate such threats from human adversaries using psychological cyber deception.
Moreover, we seek to improve the overall efficacy of the latter by scrutinizing the exist­
ing literature on the psychology of human attackers that could enable us to thoughtfully
consider what an intruder thinks when launching an attack and what shapes their choices
and decisions. This can aid in designing honeypots that leverage these tactics and we
systematically evaluate whether the technology is more effective in deceiving human at­
tackers. However, prior to reviewing the literature and tactics behind such measures, this
chapter first explores the threat landscape of IoT environments. Followed by investigating
existing honeypot technologies and literature on psychological cyber deception.
3.1
Attacks in IoT Environments
The complexity and scale of attacks on IoT environments are constantly evolving and
have been the center of research in which the most recurring attacks are identified based
on the underlying vulnerabilities that are exploited. Most of the literature agrees with
the postulation that the major reason behind these cyber attacks is due to the restricted
security measures stemming from limited computational resources. Moreover, Mann et
al. (2020) [53] categorically divided various types of attacks according to where they
occur in an IoT infrastructure which was essentially broken down into IoT devices and its
peripherals, the gateway and internal network of the gateway, and control devices and
the servers of the cloud. The study identified attacks such as Sybil attack, the rolling
code attack, buffer overflow attack, brute force attack and the blueBorne attack in the
IoT devices and its peripheral components. MITM attack, DNS poisoning attack, replay
attacks, wormhole attacks and injection attacks in the gateways and its internal network
component. In addition, back doors and its exploits, weak authentication, SQL injection,
DDoS attacks and malicious applications attacks in the servers of the cloud and the control
devices component of the IoT infrastructure.
This was further extended by Sharma & Babbar (2023) [54] who investigated IoT devices
in health care and explored how they are vulnerable to botnet attacks. Most occurring
attacks were classified as being harmless whereas the rest were identified to be: miraiudp
attack, gafgytudp attack, gafgytjunk attack, gafgyttcp attack, gafgytscan attack, miraisyn
attack, miraiack attack, miraiscan attack, gafgytcombo attack, and miraiudpplain attack.
It is worth taking into consideration that these attacks stemmed from some of the most
popular malware known to be infamous for deploying large­scale botnet attacks, namely,
Mirai and Gafgyt.
Furthermore, Rohit et al. (2019) [55], highlighted the limited security features of IoT de­
vices and pointed at outdated software, open ports, default credentials and in some cases
unencrypted data while in transit. Shedding light on these specific vulnerabilities, this
study drawed parallels with the previous one that the most commonly observed attack
was DDoS by backing up this claim with statistics from Kaspersky Lab. The research
also placed scrutiny on how Mirai malware scanned the network for IoT devices with de­
10
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
==PAGE:19==
fault credentials and made them part of a botnet. Which is in agreement with the findings
by Xia et al. (2018) [56].
In addition, the DDoS attacks were categorized according to where they occurred in
an IoT environment such as volumetric attacks (flooding target with massive amounts
of traffic) and protocol attacks (exploiting weaknesses in network protocols). Examples
of volumetric attacks were ICMP floods, UDP floods and other spoof­packed flood at­
tacks, application­layer attacks. Protocol attacks were comprised of SYN flooding, ping
of death, smurf DDoS, fragmented packet attack. Furthermore, some studies system­
atically divided similarly identified attacks based on the architectural layers of IoT such
as the perception layer, network layer, middleware layer, application layer, and business
layer [57] [58] [59].
Additionally, a study by Hayatte et al. (2024) [60] specifically analysed DoS attacks on the
IoT protocol MQTT (Message Queuing Telemetry Transport). The research placed em­
phasis on the power efficient capabilities of the protocol which makes it a popular choice
among IoT devices. However, this also meant that it lacked robust security measures
which made it susceptible to DDoS attacks by overloading MQTT brokers. The specific
DoS attacks highlighted by the study were Mirai attacks, flooding attacks, and SlowITe
attacks. Moreover, it is worth noting that MQTT does not encrypt data, including login
credentials, has open ports and its limited computational power prevents it from incorpo­
rating TLS.
3.2
IoT Honeypots
Citing cyber security concerns, honeypots have emerged as a valuable tool to monitor,
analyze, and mitigate associated threats. As elaborated in Section 2.2.1, honeypot is
a cyber defensive technique that involves setting up a network­attached system with the
purpose of luring adversaries and that acts as a decoy or trap designed to detect, deceive,
and study attacker’s methods [61].
There are some surveys related to IoT honeypots in the existing literature. Generally,
they can be categorized into three levels of interaction, such as low­interaction honeypot
(LIH), medium­interaction honeypot (MIH), and high­interaction honeypot, as mentioned
by [62]. Moreover, Franco et al. (2021) [6] presented a taxonomy of honeypots for IoT
based on their purpose, role, interaction levels, scalability, resource level, availability of
source code, and application scenarios. In particular, they further classified a honey­
pot with hybrid­interaction level and conducted a comprehensive analysis of full­device
emulation honeypots (e.g. Chameleon, ThingPot), and shed light on machine learning­
enhanced honeypots. Furthermore, the concept of an intelligent­interaction honeypot was
then introduced in 2017 on IoTCandyJar [63].
Currently, many IoT honeypot systems have been developed and applied in different appli­
cation fields. To begin with, Acien et al. (2018) [64] described a methodology for deploying
an IoT honeypot in several phases, that is first comprised of searching for connected IoT
devices, then building the honeypot to emulate such devices, training the system, deploy­
ing it in public cyber space, and finally covering the visualization and evaluation phases. A
decoy farm environment, designed by Ajmal et al. (2021) [65], was proposed for hunting
and mitigating unknown threats in the SCADA (Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition)
environment, where technologies such as Conpot, Honeyd, Nova, Honeynet and Gaspot
were used, and they also facilitated the use of cyber kill chain for multiple layers of decep­
tion at each phase. Some of the emulated protocols were SSH and Telnet, which logged
the attackers’ location, time zone, MAC, and IP address.
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
11
==PAGE:20==
Additionally, Dalamagkas et al. [66] analyzed the honeypot and honeynet frameworks
in the environment of smart grid technology, in which the honeypot simulated Hyper­
text Transfer Protocol (HTTP), Modbus TCP, FTP, and Telnet protocols. Furthermore,
Lygerou et al. (2022) [67] introduced a decentralized IoT protocol honeypot based on the
enhanced HosTaGe on the Android platform, where MQTT, CoAP, and AMQP communi­
cation protocols were emulated as honeypots to analyze the real­world public attacks.
The paper by Bistarelli et al. (2020) [68] investigated attacks targeting IoT devices and
Docker containers in home network environments. Three honeypots (Cowrie, Dionaea,
and Whaler) were installed on a Raspberry Pi and exposed to the public network over
several weeks. The information collected was then processed, analyzed, and visualized
by Elastic Stack (ELK). In order to reduce the widely known high false­positive rate asso­
ciated with misuse­based Intrusion Detection Systems (IDSs), and to facilitate the verifi­
cation and assessment of attack patterns, Herrero et al. (2012) [69] proposed a honeypot
data visualization method by using neural network models.
Examining the relevant IoT honeypots and implementations is important for understand­
ing how different types of them operate in real­world scenarios. Dionaea [70] [71] was
developed as a low­interaction and server­side honeypot that emulated a wide range of
protocols including SMB, HTTP, FTP, TFTP, MySQL, SIP, UPnP, XMPP, and MQTT. It
logged all the records of attacks in an SQLite database or JSON format, and was effective
detecting malware such as the WannaCry worms.
Cowrie [72] [73] was developed as a successor to the Kippo honeypot [12] and served as
a medium­to­high interaction honeypot that often emulated services on IoT devices such
as SSH and Telnet protocols and recorded all attacks not only in plain log format but also
in JSON. Cowrie could be simulated as a file system in a high interaction proxy via SSH
and Telnet communication, logging the used port, shell session commands, IP address,
and timestamps of the launched attacks.
Whaler [74] was proposed as a Docker honeypot, composed of three containers, including
victim, agent, and capture. The victim container served as a desirable target running as
a privileged Docker in the Docker container, where there was an internally vulnerable
daemon exposed on port 2375. The agent container recorded full details of the container
once it was started by the start­up command and relevant parameters, it then compared
any modifications against the original image and restored the system to its initial state in
preparation for the next attack. The capture container analyzed the pcap file generated
by the victim container via tcpdump to distinguish abnormal network traffic and activities.
HIoTPOT honeypot was proposed by Gandhi et al. (2018) [75], which distracted the
attacker from their target while logging relevant data. This honeypot simultaneously gen­
erated an alert to all the real IoT devices that belonged to its network group to not commu­
nicate with the intruder. This was done by comparing the credentials used by an attacker
with the authentic users.
Wang et al. (2020) [76] introduced IoTCMal which was a hybrid honeypot that contained
both low and high interaction levels. The low­level interaction component covered the
SSH and Telnet services, while the high­level interaction component emulated IoT devices
with common vulnerabilities.
Srinivasa et al. (2021) [77] developed the RIoTPot honeypot which was a modular hybrid­
interaction honeypot designed to improve the security of Internet of Things (IoT) and Op­
erational Technology (OT) devices. The critical modules in the architecture could be clas­
sified into three components, the core module, service modules, and hybrid interaction
12
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
==PAGE:21==
layer. The RIoTPot core module included the packet capture, noise filter module, and
the attack database. These components functioned as the central management layer,
responsible for filtering, logging, and storing attack data. The service modules supported
various IoT protocols, including Modbus, MQTT, AMQP, CoAP, SSH, etc. Furthermore,
the hybrid interaction layer enabled users to switch between low and high interaction
modes.
Šemić et al. (2017) [78] implemented a multi­component honeypot made up of front­end
and back­end components. The attacker could easily penetrate the former, but without
realizing that the back­end component kept an eye on his actions and securely and per­
manently collected the in logs.
Sharma et al. (2023) [79] provided a comprehensive analysis of how Softare­Defined Net­
working (SDN) could enhance honeypot effectiveness in IoT security. They presented an
SDN­based honeypot architecture where the SDN controller monitored all the packets
passing through switches, quarantined suspicious traffic, and deceived attackers via in­
active communication nodes, mitigating the impact of threats like DDoS attacks in IoT
environment.
Intelligent­interaction IoT honeypot called IoTCandyJar [63] was launched in 2017 to em­
ulate all kinds of IoT devices. When receiving a request, it optimized itself to send the
most expected output from a dataset of actual IoT device responses collected by internet
scanning. The system also applied a Markov Decision Process (MDP) model to learn
from scratch the responses anticipated by attackers.
FirmPot [80] was introduced as a framework that automatically produced intelligent inter­
action honeypots via firmware. This framework achieved this by emulating firmware within
a docker container to collect web interactions and applying machine learning models to
learn appropriate matches of requests and responses. The generated honeypots then
returned the best from emulated responses to the request received.
However, both IoTCandyJar and FirmPot had limitations, respectively. For example, the
former required a long training time for response selection, and the latter depended on
pre­existing firmware images which limited generalization. To solve these challenges,
ALLPoT [81] integrated transformer models (BERT) for request­response learning and re­
inforcement learning (RL) for optimizing attack engagement. It consisted of three key com­
ponents, including Honey­Chatbot (Interaction Module), Request­Response (Req/Res)
Database, and Request Evaluator (Security Filtering).
Other various adaptive high­interaction honeypots, such as HoneyIoT [77], IoTZeroJar
[82] and HoneyCam [83], have been also developed to analyze zero­day attacks and
expose themselves to threats on the Internet.
T­Pot [84], the all in one multi honeypot platform, was developed by Deutsche Telekom’s
security team which served as a modular and open­source honeypot framework designed
to simplify the deployment and management of multiple honeypots. T­Pot integrated a
variety of popular honeypots like Cowrie, Dionaea, and SNARE/TANNER into a single
Docker­based system. Moreover, it featured an intuitive web interface for real­time mon­
itoring and analysis, making it easier for researchers and security professionals to collect
attack data and study threat behavior.
The honeypots explored in this section allow for the collection of valuable data on attack
patterns and attacker behavior specifically in IoT environments. By mimicking real IoT
devices and applications, honeypots can effectively deceive attackers, gather information
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
13
==PAGE:22==
on emerging threats, and prevent unauthorized access to actual devices. This significantly
enhances the overall security posture of IoT networks. Moreover, an overview of all the
explored IoT honeypots is presented in Table 3.1.
14
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
==PAGE:23==
Table 3.1: Overview of reviewed IoT Honeypots and their characteristics
Honeypot
Year
Interaction
Level
Emulated Protocols
Features / Pros
Limitations / Cons
Honeyd
2002
Low
HTTP, FTP, Telnet, Mod­
bus TCP
Targeted to IoT and OT, multi­
protocol emulation
Protocols are basic with in­
active maintenance;
limited
adaptive behavior.
Enhanced HosTaGe
2022
Low
AMQP,
FTP,
HTTP,
HTTPS, MySQL, MQTT,
MODBUS,
S7COMM,
SSH, SMTP and TELNET
Mobile (Android) deployment, de­
centralized, portable
Constrained to mobile con­
text,
and no longer main­
tained.
Dionaea
2009
Low
SMB, HTTP, FTP, TFTP,
MQTT, UPnP, etc.
Easy to deploy, SQLite/JSON log­
ging
Low interaction, limited scal­
ability, can be detected as a
honeypot by mass scanners
Cowrie
2015
Medium­High
SSH, Telnet, SFTP, SCP
Rich
logs
(JSON),
easy
cus­
tomization, file system simulation,
port/session tracking
Limited protocol support
Whaler
2018
Medium
Docker Daemon, SSH
Multi­container
design
(victim,
agent,
capture),
network
traffic
analysis
Targets
Docker­specific
at­
tacks, complex setup
HIoTPOT
2018
Low­Medium
SSH, Telnet
Alerts devices in same IoT network,
filters based on credentials
Not open­source, limited scal­
ability
IoTCMal
2020
Hybrid
SSH, Telnet
Covers both low/high interaction,
can be configured to IoT devices
with known vulnerabilities
Not
highly
extensible,
not
open­source
RIoTPot
2021
Hybrid
Modbus,
MQTT,
AMQP,
CoAP, SSH
Modular design, hybrid switching,
OT support
Complex setup,
no longer
maintained
SNARE/TANNER
2022
Medium
HTTP
Easy deployment, modular design
Limited
flexibility,
inflexible
backend modifications
IoTCandyJar
2017
Intelligent
Full IoT device emulation
High scalability, ML­based output
optimization
Not
open­source,
complex
setup, long training time
FirmPot
2021
Intelligent
HTTP
Open­source, ML­based responses
lacks flexibility, limited gener­
alization
ALLPoT
2023
Intelligent
HTTP, MQTT, etc.
BERT + RL for engagement, modu­
lar chatbot
High resource requirements,
not open­source
HoneyIoT
2023
High
Full IoT device emulation
Adaptive high­interaction, high scal­
ability, RL­based responses
Not open­source, highly com­
plex setup
IoTZeroJar
2022
High
Can be configured to emu­
late different IoT devices
Adaptive
high­interaction,
RL­
based responses
Not open­source
HoneyCam
2022
High
RTSP, RTMPS, HLS
High scalability,
low deployment
overhead, fingerprint­resistant
Not open­source
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
15
==PAGE:24==
3.3
Psychological Cyber Deception
The primary motivation for cyber deception inherently stems from psychological manip­
ulation since the sole purpose of any decoy system is to trick an intruder into believing
that they have gained access to the real system or its useful assets. Therefore, as ex­
plained in Section 2.2, the underlying principles of deception are archaic, dating back to
one of the traditional forms of military tactics which in simpler terms is essentially a fake
facade of something useful that is enticing enough to make it catch the attention of an
adversary [85].
Modern honeypots are built upon this idea but with a higher degree of sophistication in
the cyber space. However, attackers are also getting increasingly effective at detecting
honeypots and possibly avoiding them. Some technologies can be immediately labeled
as decoys because of fingerprinting, which is a set of methods where an attacker performs
different checks on the target system and observes whether an appropriate response is
received, if not then it is highly likely that the attacker might abandon their pursuit of gaining
access to the system and thus not interacting with it [86].
This is only one part of the grander picture in cyber deception, where a possible strategy
could be that the defenders ensure the decoy system appropriately responds from afar,
thus gaining a potential upper hand. Although it might seem like an achievement that an
attacker accesses the decoy system under the conviction that they stumbled upon some­
thing useful. However, it is also imperative to consider that the attacker stays long enough
on the honeypot which can pave the way for gathering fruitful intelligence in regards to
their behavior. This is where we explore advanced techniques in psychology and their
potential application in cyber deception when applied to human attackers. To assess its
effectiveness across various honeypot technologies, several metrics defined by Javad­
pour et al. (2024) [87] can be evaluated, which includes the number of interactions, and
time spent on a honeypot along with the executed commands etc.
The study by Krawczyk et al. (2013) [43] explored how and what an attacker might think
when trying to hack into a system. This was primarily scrutinized by looking into the
behavioral psychology which, according to the paper, was somewhat reciprocal across
multiple domains. Subsequently leading to “measuring” the role of cognitive heuristics
and biases that are faced during an attack when trying to avoid a decoy system or traps,
though the actual framework for this assessment is not laid. Nonetheless, the research
highlighted several cognitive biases, such as set effects, confirmation bias, sunk cost
thinking, representativeness, and availability, possibly present in the mind of an attacker
that could be leveraged by cyber defenders in order to better position themselves when
designing a honeypot.
Another research by Yinan & Quanyan (2023) [48] also investigated the possible effects
of cognitive biases of attackers but primary emphasis was held particularly on quantum
decision theory (QTD) which facilitated the understanding of decision making by incorpo­
rating concepts from quantum mechanics. In essence, there is no one motivation for a
particular decision and choosing it could be influenced by “superposition” (multiple pos­
sibilities at once) and “interference” (the interaction of several choices before making a
decision). Based on these premises, the research mathematically modeled a deception
system as a signaling game in which the defender themselves sent modified signals that
manipulated the perception of an attacker regarding network traffic. It is worth noting that
these signals were not direct modifications of data but rather comprised of crafted ele­
ments (for instance, fake warnings, delays, and misleading system responses) designed
to alter attacker perception. This exploited the latter’s cognitive biases such as order ef­
16
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
==PAGE:25==
fect, disjunction effect, and violation of the total law of probability. These biases were set
as metrics in a mathematical model and simulated on a dataset containing a wide range of
intrusions. Notably, we will consider only the cognitive biases suggested by the research
as potential influences on attacker perception and not include the mathematical modeling.
In addition, the paper by Manuel (2023) [88] analyzed how intelligence agencies used
honeypots to replace Jihadist websites and lure radicals toward them. While some of the
study is not directly aligned within the scope of our investigation in regards to psychological
cyber deception, one key takeaway from this research could be the case when intelligence
agencies brought down a fake Jihadist website and blamed it on a terrorist hacker group
in order to cause divisions. Nonetheless, this tactic somewhat loosely resonates with the
aforementioned concept behind the signaling game devised by Yinan & Quanyan (2023)
[48], which in essence, entails a deliberately strategic announcement to attackers about
a possible vulnerable system.
Furthermore, the study presented by Ferguson et al. (2021) [42] analyzed the data col­
lected from the Tularosa Study [89]. In this study, the researchers conducted a controlled
experiment in which over 130 professional red teamers participated in a network penetra­
tion test. The experiment systematically varied two factors: the actual presence of decoys
and whether participants were informed about their existence. The experimental condi­
tions included AU (Decoys Absent; Uninformed (Control)), AI (Decoys Absent; Informed),
PU (Decoys Present; Uninformed), PI (Decoys Present; Informed). The results indicated
that if an attacker could suspect that the deceptive defenses were in place, this could in­
crease their effect on cyber­attack behavior and improve defensive posture. Specifically,
more participants in the “Present­Informed” condition perceived the network as more se­
cure, and participants under this condition also reported fewer task failures than those
in the “Absent­Uninformed” condition, suggesting that knowing about possible deception
may reduce their accountability for failure. One participant in the “Absent­Informed” con­
dition found the network operation simple and straightforward, while another participant
in the “Present­Uninformed” condition was frustrated and confused. Therefore, these re­
sults show that cognitive biases are prevalent in cyber attackers’ behavior and can be
reinforced to interfere with cyber attacks.
Moving forward, another study investigated by Ryan et al. (2023) [90] defined the emo­
tional states of an attacker as levels of confusion, self­doubt, confidence, frustration, and
surprise. Data was collected from over 130 expert participants in two days of penetration
testing, including cognitive surveys, such as: fluid intelligence, working memory, person­
ality, decision­making, task­specific questionnaires (TSQ), and qualitative self­reports.
Notably, the TSQ gathered the score of explicit emotional states on a scale from 1 (low)
to 5 (high). The Big Five model (Big Five Inventory; BFI, (John et al., 1999)) evaluated
the implicit personality traits, while the General Decision­Making Style Inventory (GDMSI),
developed by Scott and Bruce (1995), identified inherent cognitive biases through five
dimensions: Rational, Intuitive, Dependent, Avoidant, and Spontaneous. By incorporat­
ing these psychological measures into the testing, the attack behavior and patterns of
the attackers could be even more understandable, thus enabling more secure defensive
strategies against the intruders.
Besides, a study conducted by Odemis et al. (2022) [91] also analyzed the correlation
between the behavior, expertise, and psychology of an attacker in a controlled lab en­
vironment using a honeypot system named Honeypsy. The goal of the research was to
identify personality traits, using the Big­5 model, and the technical expertise of attack­
ers when interacting with a system. In conclusion, the study categorized scores of high
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
17
==PAGE:26==
neuroticism to reckless behavior, such as erroneously running random commands, and
high conscientiousness to a structured approach during an attack, for instance erasing
tracks. Thus, the former group was identified to be novice attackers who took a trial­and­
error approach whereas the latter were classified as experts who were much stealthier.
The study also gathered logs from real­world attackers but no psychological observations
were made on this data. Moreover, while the authors defined a set of attacker actions,
they did not explicitly map them to corresponding shell commands. In our work, we adopt
their log structure and extend the framework by establishing a concrete mapping between
attacker actions and representative commands for behavioral emulation.
After reviewing much of the relevant literature, we conclude that although extensive re­
search has examined novel psychological aspects of cyber deception, most studies have
relied on post­hoc data analysis or mathematical modeling to investigate attackers’ mo­
tivations. In addition, only a few studies have investigated attackers’ real­time psycho­
logical states during active system breaches within controlled lab environments or inte­
grated behavioral psychology into defensive frameworks, yet none have evaluated such
approaches in uncontrolled, real­world cyberspace settings.
Therefore, our project aims to integrate personality trait analysis, psychological emotional
responses, and decision­making biases of human attackers into honeypot design strate­
gies. In essence, we seek to bridge the gap between theoretical static analysis and prac­
tical application scenarios by extensively testing these tactics in broader cyberspace en­
vironments with real­world human attackers.
18
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
==PAGE:27==
4
Evaluating Protocol Emulation in
Honeypots
This chapter aims to critically assess the baseline emulation of honeypot technologies
before any psychological enhancements are applied. In essence, we evaluate how well
these honeypots mimic real­world communication protocols common in IoT environments,
focusing on their default behavior. In Section 3.2, a wide range of honeypot technolo­
gies were thoroughly scrutinized based on their capacity to emulate communication pro­
tocols in IoT. While the initial pool was very broad, we applied a set of selection criteria
to narrow our focus. Technologies that lacked active maintenance, offered no access to
open­source code or data, or presented challenges in customization were excluded. Ad­
ditionally, we prioritized honeypots that supported widely used and attack prone protocols
within IoT environments and had publicly available data. These included SSH, Telnet,
and HTTP, that are among the most frequently targeted by attackers given their preva­
lence and widespread adoption in IoT environments [92], [93], [94]. It is also important
to note that these protocols are at the application layer which also makes them attractive
due to their interactivity and accessibility [95]. Cowrie was selected for SSH and Telnet
emulation due to its medium­interaction capabilities and active development community,
while SNARE/TANNER was chosen for HTTP, offering a flexible technology for deploying
web­based deception environment. These choices also align with the T­Pot framework,
that is comprised of various honeypots to simulate a wide range of services. Additionally,
the selected honeypots offer high customization, allowing for effective deployment.
The rest of the chapter presents an analysis of how Cowrie honeypot responds to the most
common shell commands [96]. This was followed by an assessment of how SNARE/TAN­
NER emulated HTTP, based on a comparison of intercepted traffic from a real website
and its clone hosted on SNARE. Moreover, we also scrutinized the proposed multi­stage
framework by Srinivasa et al. (2023) [86], in which probe­based and meta scan techniques
were combined to better detect honeypots.
4.1
Cowrie
Initially, simple file and directory navigation commands were first tested, followed by re­
trieving system information and basic pipelines. Most of these commands were inspired
from the analyzed datasets in Section 8.1, and we observed that Cowrie was able to
handle these along with processing base64 encoding and decoding. However, it failed
to provide a proper output to slightly complex code logic such as loops or conditionals.
Moreover, commands such as chmod +x and export were not executed properly and this
showed that there was no support for persistent state. In addition, the emulated com­
mands were configured using Python and stored in /cowrie/src/cowrie/commands.
We performed extensive tests on all these commands to examine their output and com­
pare it to that of a real system, which was Ubuntu 22.04 in this case. A summary of key
findings is presented in Table 4.1, while a full command list with detailed comparisons is
included in the Appendix A.
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
19
==PAGE:28==
Table 4.1: Observed commands in Cowrie (* denotes partial support).
Command
Consistent with Real System
ls
✓
cat
✓
mkdir
✓
touch
✓
echo
✓
sleep
✓
pwd
✓
cd
✓
grep
✓
awk
✓
busybox
✓
env
✓
ifconfig
✓
iptables
✓
pipeline support
✓
bash command string
✓
command substitution ($(...))
✓
base64 encoding/decoding logic
✓
chmod
✓*
adduser
✓*
crontab
✓*
apt
✓*
curl
✓*
perl
✓*
tar
✓*
tftp
✓*
wget
✓*
for loop
✗
if condition
✗
export / $VAR
✗
read
✗
chpasswd
✗
In several instances, there were fewer files and folders in a directory when compared to
the real system. However, it is possible to add or remove files and according to the official
documentation, the built­in fake filesystem is similar to Debian 5.0 [97]. Furthermore, al­
though some commands did not produce outputs entirely consistent with those of the real
system when compared to Cowrie, the honeypot still generated appropriate responses.
In addition, reflecting upon the findings by Srinivasa et al. (2023) [86], the study suc­
cessfully identified Cowrie using probe­based methods by detecting its hard­coded SSH
banner (“SSH­2.0­OpenSSH_6.0p1 Debian­4+deb7u2”), observing “protocol mismatch”
errors stemming from handshake anomalies, and exploiting commands that were static
along with noticing the behavior of outdated TwistedConch library.
When conducting
these experiments, the study found that a significant number of honeypots were using
default configurations, making them susceptible to fingerprinting. Some mitigation strate­
gies were proposed, which have been updated in the latest version of Cowrie, for instance,
20
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
==PAGE:29==
dynamic responses for date commands and updated support for the Twisted library. Apart
from this, the default banners and credentials can easily be changed in the configuration
file [98]. However, consistent with the study’s findings, Cowrie still showed limited com­
mand emulation capabilities, often returning static or generic responses, as seen in the
appendix. Moreover, the honeypot did not maintain a persistent state for the attacker,
meaning that any actions performed by the latter existed only virtually during the session
and were not stored. Once the session ended, all changes were removed but recorded
in the logs. Nonetheless, based on our analysis, we observed that operations related to
system information and numerous other commands found in the dataset were sufficiently
emulated.
4.2
SNARE/TANNER
To evaluate how effectively SNARE/TANNER honeypot emulated HTTP, we developed
a simple website that encompassed a login form which would redirect to another page
upon submitting credentials, this can be seen in Figure 4.1. It is worth emphasizing that
there were no input validation checks and the content on the redirected page served no
functional purpose but was included solely for demonstration.
Figure 4.1: Login form and the redirected page
Moreover, the form would also process cookies to simulate session behavior. This website
was then cloned and deployed using SNARE/TANNER for comparison. We hosted both
versions of the website on our local machine and with the help of a proxy tool, such
as Burp Suite, the HTTP traffic was intercepted and systematically analyzed to examine
any differences in the behavior of the protocol. Moreover, SNARE/TANNER can also be
configured to react in a certain way to command injections or any other type of attacks
with plug­ins. This paves the way for creating custom response logic for some payload.
Returning to the goal of HTTP traffic comparison between the real application and its
honeypot counterpart, we assessed how closely the latter mimics the former. Therefore,
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
21
==PAGE:30==
the intercepted HTTP traffic of the real login page can be seen in Figure 4.2, Figure 4.3,
& Figure 4.4.
A typical login flow was reflected in the captured HTTP traffic as indicated in the figures
below. After the credentials were submitted via a POST request, a 302 Found status was
returned along with a session cookie. Subsequently, a GET request to the redirected
destination was followed where the cookie was set to simulate a session rather than ac­
tual authentication. This entire process served as a simplified representation of typical
interactions in real world web applications.
Figure 4.2: Initial GET request to /index.php showing browser headers
Figure 4.3: POST request with login credentials. The server responds with a 302 Found
redirect and sets a session cookie.
Figure 4.4: Final GET request to /dashboard.php with the session cookie included, re­
turning the redirected page.
While our initial login page was capable of handling dynamic server­side logic such as
form validation, session cookies, and redirection, we found that SNARE/TANNER was
primarily limited to rendering static content, including that of HTML, CSS, and JavaScript.
Nonetheless, the honeypot was able to generate a unique session cookie for tracking
each visitor. Thus, we re­implemented our website in HTML format without any server­
side mechanisms, and they were emulated through other means like static JavaScript
22
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
==PAGE:31==
with responses for empty login input. The alternative version of the website and its cloned
honeypot, along with their respective intercepted HTTP traffic can be seen in Figure 4.5
and Figure 4.6.
Figure 4.5: Re­implemented website & its intercepted HTTP traffic
Figure 4.6: Clone in SNARE & its intercepted HTTP traffic
As seen in these figures, SNARE was able to effectively clone the website and maintain
the functionalities that were implemented to replace the mechanisms from before, along
with appropriately mimicking HTTP request and response. In addition, Gupta et al. (2021)
[99] outlined the architecture of this honeypot in detail, placing particular emphasis on how
TANNER could be configured to identify and respond to a wide range of attacks on HTTP,
such as SQLi(SQL injection), template injection, XXE(XML External Entity injection), and
command execution, all within isolated Docker environments. Furthermore, the study
demonstrated dynamic responses to the attacks that closely resembled a real system,
thereby enhancing the deception capabilities of the honeypot. In conclusion, the experi­
mentation with this honeypot, and Cowrie in Section 4.1, provided a sufficient foundation
for evaluating protocol emulation strategies at this stage.
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
23
==PAGE:32==
24
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
==PAGE:33==
5
Deception Environment Design
Having experimented with emulating protocols using honeypot technologies in the previ­
ous chapter, we now pursue a comprehensive deception model within the IoT environ­
ment. The motivation for such a model is inspired from the works of Ajmal et al. (2021)
[65], in which they proposed a decoy farm, comprised of a collection of honeypots that
mimicked the SCADA environment. Crucial to note is that even though these decoys
operated independently, they were presented to an attacker as part of a wider singular
environment. Moreover, the study divided the decoy farm as a network of nodes, each
consisting of a decoy system that represented a SCADA component [65]. This approach
forms the foundation for our methodology which is adjusted to an IoT environment.
5.1
HoneyFarm
Reflecting upon the insights gained from Ajmal et al. (2021) [65], we devised a model for
a decoy farm suited to our use­case. The goal of this model was to serve as a founda­
tional blueprint for developing an environment that can potentially attract human attackers
and keep them engaged while studying their behavior. The model in our use­case mim­
icked a typical smart home ecosystem with basic IoT equipment, such as smart lighting,
thermostat, and other home appliances which also included an interconnected printer.
This equipment was displayed on a dashboard which also acted as an application for the
end­user. Imperative to note is that none of the individual devices communicated with
each other or the application, but they were rather simulated as components of a broader
interconnected system to support an illusion of a real IoT environment.
In summary, the dashboard, developed using SNARE, displayed fake controls for the
equipment. However, these components were not connected to a real back­end server.
Nonetheless, we strategically embedded SSH credentials within the source code of the
dashboard for each of the components, which were hosted on Cowrie, and simulated
a vulnerable environment with multiple end­points that were prone to compromise. The
motive behind an independent SSH server for each component lied in reflecting a configu­
ration where remote access was enabled to allow technicians to troubleshoot problems or
perform maintenance [92]. In addition, we also included a fake telnet server using Cowrie,
that handled diagnostic reports and the information regarding this server was only shown
when interacting with Cowrie. Moreover, the T­Pot framework was used to simulate the
mentioned honeypots and the MiniPrint honeypot for a printer server to reinforce the illu­
sion of smart home IoT system.
5.1.1
Environment
Prior to implementation, we present the decoy farm in our smart home environment sce­
nario, as shown in Figure 5.1, where each node represents a specific component and will
be hosted on an unique public IP address.
• Clients: Represents external users or attackers accessing the system via web or
terminal
• Node 1: Simulates a vulnerable HTTP smart home web interface by SNARE to lure
attackers.
• Node 2: Emulates an SSH­enabled lighting controller service by Cowrie.
• Node 3: Mimics an SSH­enabled smart thermostat service using Cowrie.
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
25
==PAGE:34==
• Node 4: Acts as a smart home appliance controller with SSH service via Cowrie
• Node 5: Acts as a system health monitor that collects and aggregates self­diagnostics
logs from all other nodes, exposing Telnet port for connection by using Cowrie.
• Node 6: In addition to the rest of the nodes, we also include another honeypot that
simulates a printer using PJL (Printer Job Language) protocol utilizing MiniPrint
from the T­Pot framework, which further enhances the realism of interconnected
smart home IoT environment.
Figure 5.1: HoneyFarm in IoT Environment
These six nodes form a comprehensive honeypot network as the decoy farm, which we
named as HoneyFarm. It is aimed at emulating diverse smart home services across
multiple protocols, including HTTP, SSH, Telnet and PJL. This setup is designed to attract
and monitor attacker interactions through realistic service exposures.
5.1.2
Psychological Enhancement
Shedding light on the proposed model for deception through a decoy farm tailored to a
smart home IoT environment, we enhance the capabilities of this configuration by incor­
porating findings from the literature on psychological cyber deception. As discussed in
Section 2.3.1 and Section 3.3, this includes exhibiting aspects of exploiting personality
profiles and emotional responses, coupled with known cognitive biases in human attack­
ers. Therefore, by understanding how the latter perceives, interacts with, and responds
to vulnerable targets, deception environments can be enhanced by enabling deeper and
persistent engagement.
To begin with, we draw on findings from Odemis et al. (2022) [39], who conducted Pear­
son correlation analyses between personality traits and attacker behaviors as defined in
Table 5.1, thus providing empirical support for our design. This study revealed the follow­
ing critical findings:
Firstly, the extraversion negatively correlated with following behaviors:
• A3 : Command similarity check
26
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
==PAGE:35==
• A7 : Signs for a virtual machine are checked.
• A15: The file system is tested.
This suggests higher extraversion is associated with less cautious or investigative behav­
ior, and may indicate a more impulsive approach to intrusion. For example, instead of
carefully probing the environment or checking for virtual machine indicators using com­
mands like netstat, ifconfig, highly extraverted attackers may rush into action by
launching tools or executing commands without first verifying the system context.
Secondly, conscientiousness exhibited positive correlations with:
• A5 : If ‘passwd’ is entered or attempted.
• A10: Any command follows IP addresses found on the honeypot.
• A15: The file system is tested.
• A20: Collecting system information.
The above correlations concluded that individuals with high conscientiousness tend to
demonstrate structured, goal­oriented, and well­planned behavior in intrusion scenarios.
For instance, such attackers may begin by systematically gathering system information
especially the password­related files, then proceed to test access control or plan lateral
movement by using identified IPs.
Thirdly, neuroticism showed negative correlations with these actions:
• A9 : Search commands such as “grep”.
• A19: Determining the Linux distro?
• A20: Collecting system information.
We can further summarize that high neuroticism may reflect emotionally driven and dis­
organized behavior, with lower likelihood of performing structured reconnaissance. They
often skip basic system searches and jump to executing commands without a clear plan.
Table 5.1: All attacker actions as proposed by Odemis et al. (2022)
ID
Attacker Action Description
A1
Code entered manually or via a script.
A2
Same commands tried more than once.
A3
Command similarity
A4
Similar commands across multiple systems; an erroneous command in one sys­
tem may be valid in another, indicating skill.
A5
If passwd is entered or attempted.
A7
Check for signs of a virtual machine environment.
A8
Execution of commands such as nmap, network detection tools, and ettercap.
A9
Use of search commands such as grep.
A10
Any command that follows IP addresses found on the honeypot.
A11
Use of harmful commands such as rm -rf.
A12
Execution of download commands.
A13
Installation or usage of DDoS methods.
A14
Analysis of event/command inter­arrival times.
A15
Testing the file system.
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
27
==PAGE:36==
A16
Leaving a file or trace, possibly for recognition/fame.
A17
Deleting tracks and history when exiting – related to ATT&CK tactics.
A18
Use of a reverse shell (persistence technique).
A19
Attempting to determine the Linux distribution.
A20
Collecting system information.
A21
Collecting network information.
A22
Collecting user information.
Therefore, we assume that each human attacker exhibits a unique personality trait profile
based on their actions, shaping their exploration and decision­making strategies. This is
further supported by Martinez et al. (2024) [100], who found that hackers typically exhibit
openness to experience, characterized by a deep intellectual curiosity and a willingness
to explore and implement cutting­edge technologies and novel attack techniques.
Moreover, Gabrys et al. (2023) [40] developed an emotional state classifier that effec­
tively captured attacker behavioral patterns, showing that attackers experienced a range
of emotional states across different phases of an attack. However, these insights have not
yet been technically integrated into practical cyber deception strategies. Building on both
personality profile analysis and emotional state recognition, we aim to design a tailored
deceptive interaction mechanism that dynamically adapts its responses to the commands
executed by attackers in the shell terminal.
Furthermore, cognitive biases, such as confirmation bias, sunk cost fallacy, and order
effect, can be leveraged to reinforce the illusion of control, subtly influencing attackers’
decision­making and their perception of the system. By embedding such biases into the
environment, we can shape attacker behavior in predictable ways, increasing engage­
ment and the likelihood of deception success.
In conclusion, our HoneyFarm is built upon these psychological concepts, which form the
foundation for the deceptive environment modeled in the subsequent section.
5.2
Modeling Psychological Cyber Deception Framework
In this section, we introduce a psychological cyber deception framework for our Hon­
eyFarm by synthesizing key findings as discussed in psychological enhancement (Sec­
tion 5.1). This framework consists of personality­based command mappings, tailored re­
sponse generation to evoke emotional reactions, a formal model of emotional state tran­
sitions coupled with targeted personality trait, and the integration of cognitive biases to
influence attacker decision.
5.2.1
Emulated Shell Command Mapping
To begin with, we associate each action with specific personality traits based on the attack
actions defined in Table 5.1. Most of these trait­action associations are informed by prior
findings by [39], which links attacker behaviors to Big Five personality traits. This means
that the attackers are more likely to perform certain types of behavior when possessing
a dominant personality trait. Accordingly, we align each trait with relevant emulated shell
commands supported by Cowrie that correspond to those actions as displayed in Table
5.2.
The interpretation of the attackers, who are profiled in the different personality traits, is as
follows:
28
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
==PAGE:37==
• Openness to experience: This trait is associated with exploratory commands such
as dd, cd, ls, reflecting a tendency to investigate system structure, available tools,
and hidden resources. This trait indicates intellectual curiosity and a willingness to
explore.
• Conscientiousness: Mapped to commands like passwd, wget, and service, attack­
ers with this trait tend to follow organized, goal­driven strategies. Their behavior
reflects careful planning and methodical information gathering.
• Low Extraversion: Suggests introspective behavior with a focus on reconnaissance
and preparation using commands such as ls, ifconfig, and route. In contrast, high
extraversion attackers often ignore stealth, engage in forums, use C2 (Command
and control) tools, or publicize their attacks.
• Low Agreeableness: Associated with potentially destructive actions (e.g., rm, kill,
apt), attackers mapped to this trait are more likely to modify system configurations,
install tools, or perform harmful operations, indicating adversarial intent.
• Low Neuroticism: Mapped to efficient diagnostic and informational commands such
as grep, uname, and whoami, these attackers demonstrate logical, confident be­
havior, executing relevant commands without unnecessary repetition. In contrast,
high neuroticism attackers act erratically and lack logical planning.
Table 5.2: Mapping personality traits to attacker behaviors and shell commands
Personality Trait
Mapped Actions
Emulated Shell Commands
Openness to
experience
A7
ifconfig, ip, route, netstat, ss, iptables, ip6tables
A15
dd, du, cd, rm, cp, mv, mkdir, rmdir, ls, tar,
ulimit, unzip, chown, chgrp, chattr, chmod
A21
ethtool, netstat
A22
finger, groups, last
Conscientiousnes
A5
passwd, chpasswd
A10
ping, ssh, curl, wget
A15
dd, du, cd, rm, cp, mv, mkdir, rmdir, ls, tar,
ulimit, unzip, chown, chgrp, chattr, chmod
A20
env, free, iptables, lspci, service, uptime,
which, whoami, jobs, ps
Low Extraversion
A3
ls, ll, iptables, ip6tables, base, base64,
A7
ifconfig, ip, route, netstat, ss, iptables, ip6tables
A15
dd, du, cd, rm, cp, mv, mkdir, rmdir, ls, tar,
ulimit, unzip, chown, chgrp, chattr, chmod
Low Agreeableness
A11
rm, mv, rmdir, unset, kill, killall, pkill, killall5
A13
apt, wget, gcc, yum
Low Neuroticism
A9
awk, cat, locate, uniq, wc, grep, tail, head
A19
uname, uptime, hostnamectl
A20
env, free, iptables, lspci, service, uptime,
which, whoami, jobs, ps
5.2.2
Honeypot Command Response Strategy
Subsequently, the system generates tailored command responses based on the person­
ality trait, with the goal of inducing targeted emotional reactions throughout the interaction.
To operationalize this approach, we present the strategies that trigger transitions within an
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
29
==PAGE:38==
emotional state loop, reflecting how attackers with different personality profiles respond
to environmental cues during an intrusion, as illustrated in Table 5.3.
To actively drive transitions within the emotional state loop, the implementation for the
deception strategy includes:
1. Disclosing fake sensitive files or credentials to provoke a sense of discovery or over­
confidence.
2. Injecting false errors even for syntactically correct commands, which increases con­
fusion and uncertainty.
3. Returning inconsistent or random shell error codes, undermining trust in system
behavior.
4. Displaying unrecognized or corrupted output, including malformed characters or un­
expected symbols, to trigger frustration or self­doubt.
5. Providing misleading network information or prompts, such as fake interface names,
non­existent IP routes, or deceptive system banners, to distort situational aware­
ness.
6. Gradual reveal of hidden resources, such as exposing fake directories over time, to
sustain engagement and reinforce emotional transition.
Table 5.3: Honeypot Command Response strategy
Personality Trait
Honeypot Response Strategy
Openness to Experience
Present unexpected and misleading system data
and errors
Conscientiousness
Provide consistent outputs with subtle flaws or
missing links
Low Extraversion
Gradually reveal secret files or directories in stages
to simulate discovery
Low Agreeableness
Inject denial messages to block operations and
trigger rollbacks that undo recent changes
Low Neuroticism
Inject inconsistencies such as time drift, missing
entries, or odd user logs to create uncertainty and
hesitation.
5.2.3
Mathematical Modeling
To formally describe our adaptive deception framework, we define a mathematical model
that couples emotional state transition with personality­driven response generation. The
goal is to model the system’s behavior as it tailors shell command responses to attacker
psychology over time.
We define a five­tuple:
M = (E, P, Σ, fe, fr)
Where:
• E is the finite set of emotional states:
E = {CONFIDENCE, SURPRISE, CONFUSION, FRUSTRATION, SELF_DOUBT}
30
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
==PAGE:39==
• P is the set of inferred personality traits based on the Big Five model. In our frame­
work, we adopt a selected subset:
P = {OPENNESS, CONSCIENTIOUSNESS, LOW_AGREEABLENESS,
LOW_EXTRAVERSION, LOW_NEUROTICISM}
Each attacker is assigned an individual personality profile p →P during the early
phase of their interaction.
This selection is supported by Odemiş et al. [39], who demonstrated that these traits
are significantly correlated with attacker’s actions and behavioral tendencies in cy­
ber intrusion scenarios.
• Σ is the set of all possible system output messages (deceptive shell responses).
• fe : E →E is the emotional transition function, which defines a cyclic emotional
trajectory:
fe(CONFIDENCE)
= SURPRISE
fe(SURPRISE)
= CONFUSION
fe(CONFUSION)
= FRUSTRATION
fe(FRUSTRATION) = SELF_DOUBT
fe(SELF_DOUBT)
= CONFIDENCE
Confidence
Surprise
Confusion
Frustration
self_doubt
Figure 5.2: Emotional state transition loop used in attacker interaction modeling.
• fr : E × P →Σ is the response function that maps the current emotional state and
personality trait to a specific deceptive shell response message σt →Σ:
σt = fr(et, p)
The system maintains an internal state (et, p) for each session, where p is inferred once
during early interaction, and et evolves as a result of deception­triggered transitions.
At each attacker action (e.g., executing a command), the system executes:
σt = fr(et, p)
et+1 = fe(et)
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
31
==PAGE:40==
5.2.4
Cognitive Bias Design
Moreover, we further enhance the deception process by incorporating the cognitive biases
in our proposed HoneyFarm. This is reflected across all the honeypots and illustrated in
Table 5.4.
Table 5.4: Mapping of cognitive biases to honeypot features
Bias
Cowrie (SSH)
SNARE/TANNER
Cowrie
(Telnet)
MiniPrint
Confirmation Bias
Familiar
file
paths, default
credentials
Embedded SSH cre­
dentials, popular de­
vice names
Telnet path
shown
in
Cowrie
SSH
fake
system
logs
Job
names
mimic
legiti­
mate tasks
Sunk Cost Fallacy
Fake progress
logs,
simu­
lated
node
linkage
Privilege cues in the
source code
Fake
di­
agnostic
reports
of
other
nodes
Fake
printer
errors
Availability
Fake firmware
commands
Fake
developer
notes in dashboard
Mimicked
vulnerabil­
ity traces
Print
queue
includes
file­
names
that
hint
at
past
fake
system
issues
Representativeness Realistic direc­
tory structure
Brand­like UI, realis­
tic IoT device names
Directory
layout mim­
ics
real
servers
Emulates
known printer
model
fea­
tures
Order Effect
Files referenc­
ing next nodes
Devices
revealed
in escalating impor­
tance
Telnet
only
men­
tioned after
Cowrie
SSH
inter­
action
Printer
start­
up
hints
at
SNARE dash­
board
Reflecting upon the Table 5.4, we break down how each bias is integrated into the system
in the following practical ways:
• Confirmation Bias: This bias is triggered by giving attackers exactly what they expect
to see in a vulnerable system. For example, Cowrie includes default credentials and
familiar­looking file paths that resemble real IoT device structures corresponding to
the node it represents. In SNARE/TANNER, device names and SSH credentials
are hidden in the source code, rewarding attackers who dig deeper by revealing
fake privileges. Cowrie SSH logs also point to the telnet server, making it seem like
part of an interconnected real system. On the printer honeypot, realistically looking
printing job names report.pdf or budget.pdf could confirm the idea that sensitive data
is available if the attacker is persistent.
• Sunk Cost Fallacy: To encourage attackers to stay engaged, the system gives il­
lusion of progress. Cowrie simulates ongoing tasks in fake system logs and ref­
32
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
==PAGE:41==
erences to the other nodes, indicating that there is always another step to take.
SNARE/TANNER’s source code hints at different access levels for devices, sug­
gesting that more privileged access is possible. The telnet server offers fake di­
agnostic reports of other nodes, and MiniPrint shows misleading printer errors that
push attackers to keep troubleshooting, even if nothing new will happen.
• Availability Heuristic: This bias takes advantage of what attackers already know or
have seen before. Cowrie displays login banners and shells that match real­world
embedded devices. SNARE/TANNER shows notes in source code that states out­
dated firmware versions, suggesting exploitable software. The telnet server includes
files named after known vulnerabilities, and MiniPrint has print jobs that reflect prior
issues with the system, all of which are meant to catch the attention of attackers
relying on recent memory of finding possible issues.
• Representativeness Heuristic: Here, the goal is to make each honeypot look like
something attackers would recognize as real. Cowrie mimics typical Linux­based
IoT file systems. SNARE/TANNER uses an interface with device names that resem­
ble commercial smart home equipment. The telnet server is laid out like a back­end
diagnostics server, and MiniPrint emulates common behaviors found in real printer
models. These surface­level details make the whole setup feel more authentic.
• Order Effect: With this bias, attackers are influenced by the order in which they dis­
cover information. Therefore, Cowrie nodes contain clues that point to the next de­
vice, guiding attackers through the system in a somewhat logical sequence. SNARE/­
TANNER also presents devices in a way that shows importance, starting from basic
ones like lights and moving toward higher value targets like the printer. Telnet is
only revealed after interacting with key Cowrie nodes, and MiniPrint contains log
entries that reference earlier steps. All of this helps shape how attackers interpret
what they are seeing and keeps them moving along the intended path.
5.3
Synthesis
To sum up all the psychological elements incorporated in the decoy farm, the following
strategies will be employed:
1. Fake system responses will be added in the Cowrie honeypots to certain commands
that return results depending on the identified personality trait of an attacker and are
aimed at triggering the aforementioned emotional states.
2. The honeypot top level directory will be designed to match the device it is mimicking,
for example, the lighting system or thermostat. By revealing to the attackers what
they expect, this approach seeks to invoke confirmation bias and representative­
ness.
3. Fake internal files will be inserted in commonly used directories in real Linux based
IoT systems, such as /etc, and/or /home. The reason behind populating such di­
rectories lies in the postulation that attackers have some sense of complexity in
regards to system that could encourage them to explore it. These tactics are aimed
at reinforcing biases such as sunk cost fallacy and availability.
These features, along with personality aware tailored responses, will be implemented
in the next chapter by customizing the configuration of Cowrie, creating fake directories
within it and strategically placing fake files. Moreover, an IoT control dashboard will be
developed using SNARE and together these elements help create the illusion of an inte­
grated and vulnerable smart home environment.
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
33
==PAGE:42==
34
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
==PAGE:43==
6
Implementation
In this chapter, we explain the implementation details of our deceptive HoneyFarm frame­
work. We begin by introducing the smart home web dashboard designed to simulate a
user interface. Then, we describe the configuration of the Cowrie file system for em­
ulated nodes, together with the deceptive interaction logic driven by personality profile
and emotional states. We further outline the honeytoken­based alerting mechanism, the
Docker­based deployment setup, and finally the procedures for running and testing the full
system. The high­level implementation architecture overview is illustrated in Figure 6.1.
Figure 6.1: High­level implementation architecture of the deceptive HoneyFarm system
6.1
SNARE ­ Web Interface Development
The website was first developed using HTML, CSS and JavaScript. The design was
tailored to a typical and simple IoT dashboard with a login page, followed by the front page
with all the nodes. The login page authenticated users on the front­end through simple
JavaScript validation that indicated poor security practices by storing login credentials in
a public file. The login page and credential verification can be seen in Figure 6.2 and
Listing 6.1 respectively. In addition, we also included the link to a fake GitHub repository
to provide a sense of legitimacy.
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
35
==PAGE:44==
Figure 6.2: Login page
1
function validateLogin(user, pass) {
2
if (!user || !pass) return false;
3
4
if (user === "admin" && pass === "admin123") {
5
return true;
6
}
7
8
}
Listing 6.1: Credential verification
After login, one could see the dashboard with all the nodes and clicking upon each node
would re­direct to the controls within the latter. The former step can be seen in Figure 6.3
and the latter in Figure 6.4, that demonstrates the thermostat node.
Figure 6.3: Dashboard
36
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
==PAGE:45==
Figure 6.4: Thermostat node
We also used local storage within the browser that stored the status of the button, so if
an attacker toggled a button and left the website, upon coming back, the changes they
made would remain intact.
Regardless of not having a back­end server, we inserted fake server handling code in the
source­code that had the IP address and port number of each respective control node.
For example, when navigating the lighting control, one could find the JavaScript code in
that page which mimicked fake communication with the server and this also included the
IP address and the port number of the Cowrie honeypot that pretended to host the SSH
server of the lighting node, along with fake developer notes, this can be seen in Listing 6.1.
Moreover, header tags in the HTML file were also included that pointed to the SSH server
hosted on Cowrie. However, it is important to note that the function shown in Listing 6.1
did not perform any actual communication and was placed there solely for the purpose
of giving the illusion of communication. Similar strategy was applied across all the other
webpages for each node. This website was then cloned using SNARE and deployed.
1
<!-- Note: Update lighitng_node to cloud IP when stable. Current ssh:
20.123.44.15:5900 Internal ip: 192.168.100.20:22 -->
2
3
function server_com(room, status){
4
console.log("Light request for: " + room + "20.123.44.15:5900");
5
fetch('20.123.44.15:5900', {
6
method: 'POST',
7
headers: {
8
'Content -Type': 'application/json'
9
},
10
body: JSON.stringify({
11
room: room,
12
state: status
13
})
14
})
15
.then(response => {
16
if (!response.ok) throw new Error('Failed to send request');
17
return response.json();
18
})
19
.catch(error => console.error('Error:', error));
20
}
Listing 6.2: Fake server communication
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
37
==PAGE:46==
Since our goal was to use the website as the primary entry point for attackers, it was
sufficient to configure only SNARE and use TANNER in its default setting, as the former
is solely responsible for hosting the HTML­based web interface.
6.2
Cowrie ­ File System
6.2.1
File Structure
Considering the postulation that the SSH protocol often operates on system that is Unix­
based, a consistent hierarchical file structure can be employed that resembles a standard­
ized shell environment. At the root level, command­line binaries are stored in directories
such as /bin, boot related files are held in /boot, hardware devices are accessed via /dev,
and system wide configuration files are contained in /etc. Moreover, files and directo­
ries specific to users are located under /home/, while /lib and /usr/lib facilitate shared
libraries. User accessible binaries and documentation are also included in the /usr direc­
tory, whereas variable data like system states and logs are placed in /var. Furthermore,
temporary files and optional software components are stored in the directories /tmp and
/opt respectively. Conclusively, the system administration utilities are found in /sbin [101].
It is worth noting that this generic file structure forms the basis of any SSH­ or telnet­
accessible Linux system, regardless of the device and distribution. Therefore, the nodes
hosted on Cowrie, that represents different equipment in the proposed decoy farm, will
have similar configuration with appropriate modifications for each fake device. In addition,
the aforementioned structure aligns with Cowrie since the latter already includes a file
structure that resembles a Debian 5.0 installation. This existing baseline offers a realistic
foundation for simulating Unix­based embedded systems.
6.2.2
Custom Modifications
To ensure that the nodes reflect legitimate Linux­based embedded IoT devices, the file
system structure was designed to mimic a standardized environment with node specific
identifiers. The directories modified were selected based on its functioned role in a Linux
environment [102] [103]. The diagram of implemented file and folder structure can be
seen in Figure 6.5.
/etc/node/: The configuration files defining the application behavior, specific to each node,
are stored in this directory. Moreover, a real environment makes use of this directory to
store custom device level processes, therefore, the files we inserted were:
• config.json: A fake run­time configuration file.
• devices.yaml: An additional configuration file in YAML format.
• run.sh: A startup script that implies initialization logic for each node.
• /systemd/system/node.service: This service file for each node represents device’s
boot process and is placed here to mirror actual Linux installations where similar
files are placed in this directory to start or stop a service.
/home/: The workspace of the developer with local access is emulated in this directory
and we added:
• configs/backup_configs.json: A backup of fake configuration files to indicate the
possibility of reversing to a previous version.
• logs/debug.log: Fake development testing output.
• node_backup.db: A database with corrupted data to induce further realism.
38
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
==PAGE:47==
• notes.txt: Notes left by developers.
• source.zip: The source code of the web interface in an archived format to indicate
ongoing development.
• test.sh: A fake utility script that represents development work.
/opt/node­control/: The installation path of a custom vendor application is represented
by this directory. It is imperative to note that third­party resources are typically stored here
in real embedded Linux systems. The files included were:
• run.sh: A fake script acting as the node’s main control executable.
• status.json: The simulated current status of devices represented by the nodes.
• node.log: A runtime and self­contained log that is specific to each node under the
application directory.
Figure 6.5: Customized file system layout across targeted directories in the nodes.
/root/: The files pertaining to administrative activity are stored in this directory since it is
the home of the root user. Including files in here is indicative of maintenance of the device
on a system level, therefore, we included the following:
• .bashrc: Configuration file for the root shell environment.
• README.txt: Notes crafted by or aimed at supposed administrators.
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
39
==PAGE:48==
• setup.sh: A basic internal setup process is simulated by this fake script which aims
to suggest that the system was configured prior to its usage.
/usr/bin/: The command line interface utilities, that are accessible system­wide, use this
directory. Thus, we added the fake file:
• nodecli: A command line interface specific to the node that facilitates internal diag­
nostics or control.
/var/log/node/: Log storage that resembles Filesystem Hierarchy Standard and we added
node specific logs:
• dashboard.log: The frontend interaction history is simulated in this file.
• node.log: Fake system­level events are stored in this log, which also points to other
nodes, thus, inducing linkage.
MOTD (Message of the Day): The message that is displayed to users upon SSH or Telnet
login. We customized this page to provide information pertaining to a realistic IoT device
and also included fake commands. This is illustrated in Figure 6.6 for the appliance node.
The rest of the nodes also had a similar structure but with appropriate information. See
the Appendix C.1 for details.
Figure 6.6: Smart home appliance node MOTD page
Home Appliance
The home appliance node was built on top of the outlined general file system structure
by simulating control logic using tailored scripts and configuration files that were specific
to the node. For instance, the local control hub used the /opt/appliances­control/ direc­
tory. The state of each fake appliance (refrigerator, coffee maker, washing machine) was
40
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
==PAGE:49==
supposedly tracked in status.json and simulated events, such as startup messages, were
shown to be logged in appliance.log. The binary that handled appliance control requests
was represented by run.sh script. In /etc/appliances/, the configuration values such as
update checks or routing addresses were stored in config.json, whereas each appliance
was listed in devices.yaml along with fake parameters such as device ID and supported
operations. Moreover, an additional run.sh was placed here to reflect system boot pro­
cess.
The /home/applianceuser/ directory aligned with the general structure and intent is already
outlined. As explained, the user level files are stored in this directory with the motive of
simulating an environment maintained by a developer. In addition, the /etc/systemd/sys­
tem/ directory held a fake unit file named as appliances.service that gave the illusion of
linking the node to the startup routine of the system. The user and back­end logs were
stored in /var/log/appliances/ and followed the same system­level logging approach as
discussed previously. This also holds true for /usr/bin/appliancectl and the contents of
/root/ that were consistent with the general structure elaborated earlier, used in all nodes
to help make the system looked real and properly set up.
Lighting system
The lighting node included a similar directory and file structure as that of the home ap­
pliances node. The key difference lied within the names and contents of these files, that
reflected smart lighting devices with switches.
Thermostat
The thermostat node was also congruent with appliances and lighting nodes in regards
to the structural pattern. The distinguishing factor again lied in the name of the files and
the content within it. The latter pertaining specifically to temperature control.
Diagnostics
The diagnostics node was not intended to simulate any device functionalities but rather
mimicked a telnet server that received and stored fake diagnostic information regarding
other nodes. Therefore, the directory was deliberately structured to be minimal and can
be seen in Figure 6.7.
Figure 6.7: File structure in the diagnostics node
The /usr/local/bin/ directory held an executable script, upload_diagnostics.sh, which was
also accompanied by a readme.txt file. This particular setting was indicative of the pos­
tulation that a custom script was used by developers or technicians to send diagnostic
data to this server, which was stored under /diagnostics/ at the root level for each spe­
cific node. The latter was categorized as subdirectories for /appliances, /thermostat, and
/lighting to store fake logs and reports corresponding to each respective node. In ad­
dition, the readme.txt file included notes from the developers that certain telnet related
CVEs (Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures) were patched or under review.
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
41
==PAGE:50==
Resembling a real IoT environment, this setup mimicked a centralized system that re­
ceived diagnostic data from interconnected devices for monitoring purposes [104].
6.3
Cowrie ­ Deceptive Interaction
Unlike traditional honeypots that offer uniform or minimal outputs of the shell command
emulation, our system incorporated attacker profiling based on the personality trait anal­
ysis and their inferred intent. Each interactive session was associated with a dynamic
emotional state, initialized and evolved according to attacker behavior.
Emotional states and transitions were modeled by using the principles from the estab­
lished psychological deception model in Section 5.2. Command responses were tailored
not only to appear realistic but also invoke an emotional state loop, manipulating the at­
tacker’s situational perception and triggering their cognitive biases.
6.3.1
Attacker Personality Profile
We integrated a personality profiling design grounded in the attacker behavior taxonomy
proposed by Odemis et al.(2022) [91]. The aim was to infer the personality trait of an at­
tacker based on their command­line behavior and to drive subsequent system responses
accordingly. This mechanism enabled the system to tailor its outputs to create psycho­
logically engaging interactions and support emotion­aware deception strategies.
To start with, each personality trait was associated with a set of relevant actions.
1
# Mapping from personality trait to associated A# actions
2
PERSONALITY_TRAITS = {
3
"Openness to Experience": {"A7", "A15", "A21", "A22"},
4
"Conscientiousness": {"A5", "A10", "A15", "A20"},
5
"Low Extraversion": {"A3", "A7", "A15"},
6
"Low Agreeableness": {"A11", "A13"},
7
"Low Neuroticism": {"A9", "A19", "A20"},
8
}
Listing 6.3: Personality trait–action correlation
Furthermore, we mapped shell commands to high­level attacker actions (A#) using a pre­
defined command­to­action dictionary. For instance, commands such as ifconfig, ipta­
bles, or netstat are all mapped to action A7, representing Network Inspection. This map­
ping was extensible and formed the basis for abstracting behavior across different attack
scenarios.
1
# Action →Set of shell commands
2
ACTIONS_TO_COMMANDS = {
3
"A1": {"alias", "bash", "busybox", "sh","./script.sh"},
4
"A2": {},
5
"A3": {"ls","ll","iptables","ip6tables",
"base", "base64"},
6
"A4": {},
7
"A5": {"passwd", "chpasswd"},
8
"A6": {},
9
"A7": {"ifconfig", "ip", "route", "netstat", "ss", "iptables", "ip6tables"
},
10
"A8": {"nc", "nmap", "ping", "telnet", "traceroute"},
11
"A9": {"awk", "cat", "locate", "uniq", "wc", "grep", "tail", "head"},
12
"A10": {"ping","ssh","curl","wget"},
13
"A11": {"rm", "mv", "rmdir", "unset", "kill", "killall", "pkill", "
killall5"},
14
"A12": {"curl", "ftpget", "tftp", "wget"},
15
"A13": {"apt", "wget", "gcc", "yum"},
16
"A14": {"sleep"},
42
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
==PAGE:51==
17
"A15": {"dd", "du", "cd", "rm", "cp", "mv", "mkdir", "rmdir", "ls", "tar",
"ulimit", "unzip", "chown", "chgrp", "chattr", "chmod"},
18
"A16": {"git", "tee", "touch", "vi", "nano", "vim", "emacs", "do", "done",
"echo"},
19
"A17": {"unmask", "unset", "rm", "mv", "history ", "shred", "wipe", "
logroate", "umount"},
20
"A18": {"crontab", "nc", "nohup", "perl", "python"},
21
"A19": {"uname", "uptime", "hostnamectl"},
22
"A20": {"env", "free", "iptables", "lspci", "service", "uptime", "which",
"whoami", "jobs", "ps"},
23
"A21": {"ethtool", "netstat"},
24
"A22": {"finger", "groups", "last"},
25
}
Listing 6.4: Mapping shell commands to attacker actions
Personality Inference Workflow
We implemented a lightweight behavior­to­personality inference mechanism to charac­
terize the attacker’s underlying traits based on their shell command usage. This profiling
approach used frequency­based mapping between shell commands and psychological
interpretations by the deception framework. The workflow is as follows:
1. Command collection: As the attacker interacted with the system, all shell commands
were logged. These commands represented the attacker’s operational behavior
during the session. For the purpose of lightweight and early­stage personality pro­
filing, we adopted only the first 10 commands issued in each session.
2. Command­to­Action mapping: Each command was then mapped to a high­level
behavioral action code as mentioned in Section 6.3.1.
3. Action Frequency Counting: The mapped action codes were counted to form an
action_counts dictionary that represented the behavioral focus of the attacker.
1
# calculate the frequency of each action in the commands
2
actions = [map_command_to_action(cmd) for cmd in commands]
3
action_counts = Counter(action for action in actions if action is not
None)
4. Trait Scoring: Each personality trait was associated with the predefined set of ac­
tion codes. We calculated a score for each trait by summing the frequencies of all
matched actions.
1
# calculate scores for each personality trait based on the actions
2
scores = Counter({
3
trait: sum(
4
action_counts[action]
5
for action in PERSONALITY_TRAITS[PERSONALITY_LABELS[trait]]
6
if action in action_counts
7
)
8
for trait in Personality
9
})
5. Top­1 Trait Selection: The trait with the highest score was selected as the dominant
personality inferred from the attacker’s session.
6. Matched Action Logging: For interpretability and future analysis, the system kept
track of which actions contributed to the selected trait and their frequencies.
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
43
==PAGE:52==
7. Interpretation Generation: A human­readable interpretation was attached to the re­
sult, explaining what this personality trait implied. And this report for each session
was recorded in the logs.
For example, given the following command sequence:
["ls", "cd logs", "ethtool eth0", "ifconfig", "ping 8.8.8.8","uname -a", "du",
"mkdir /tmp/test", "killall", "netstat -rn"]
Among the 10 commands, 7 contributed to the personality inference by mapping to behav­
ioral actions associated with Openness to Experience. Specifically, ls, cd, du and mkdir
map to A15 (Search File Structure); ethtool and netstat map to A21, and ifconfig
maps to A7(Network Inspection).
Each matched command incremented the action’s
count, and the total action frequencies determined the final trait score. Other commands
like ping, uname, and killall did not contribute to this trait, as their associated actions
did not belong to the Openness category.
• ls →A15 →contributes to Openness
• cd logs →A15 →contributes to Openness
• ethtool eth0 →A21 →contributes to Openness
• ifconfig →A7 →contributes to Openness
• ping 8.8.8.8 →A10 →contributes to Conscientiousness
• uname -a →A19 →contributes to Low Neuroticism
• du →A15 →contributes to Openness
• mkdir /tmp/test →A15 →contributes to Openness
• killall →A11 →contributes to Low Agreeableness
• netstat -rn →A21 →contributes to Openness
Therefore, the attacker’s personality report for the session is shown below:
1
=== Attacker Personality Profile ===
2
Top-1 Trait (Enum) : 0
3
Top-1 Trait Label
: Openness to Experience
4
Matched Actions
: A15, A21, A7
5
Match Score
: 7
6
Interpretation
: Curious , explores system/network structure ,
gathers diverse information.
Emotional State Machine
We implemented the set of attacker emotions proposed by Gabrys et al. [40], who identi­
fied confusion, self­doubt, confidence, frustration, and surprise as key emotions exhibited
by attackers during different stages of intrusion. These were encoded using a Python
Enum class:
1
from enum import Enum, auto
2
3
class Emotion(Enum):
4
CONFUSION = auto()
5
SELF_DOUBT = auto()
6
CONFIDENCE = auto()
7
FRUSTRATION = auto
8
SURPRISE = auto()
Listing 6.5: Emotional State Definition
44
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
==PAGE:53==
The current emotional state was managed by a custom built EmotionalState class, which
was initialized as a member variable within the HoneyPotInteractiveProtocol class.
This class emulated a shell terminal in Cowrie and enabled dynamic updates and re­
trieval of the emotional state throughout a session. The default initial emotion was set to
confidence, reflecting a typical attacker’s mindset at the start point of an intrusion attempt.
1
class EmotionalState:
2
def __init__(self):
3
self.state = Emotion.CONFIDENCE
# default starting emotion
4
5
def set_state(self, new_state: Emotion):
6
self.state = new_state
7
8
def get_state(self) -> Emotion:
9
return self.state
10
11
def __str__(self):
12
return self.state.name
Listing 6.6: Emotional State Model
1
class HoneyPotInteractiveProtocol(HoneyPotBaseProtocol , recvline.
HistoricRecvLine):
2
def __init__(self, avatar):
3
recvline.HistoricRecvLine.__init__(self)
4
HoneyPotBaseProtocol.__init__(self, avatar)
5
self.emotion = EmotionalState() # Initialization of emotional states
6
7
def connectionMade(self) -> None:
8
self.displayMOTD()
9
10
HoneyPotBaseProtocol.connectionMade(self)
11
recvline.HistoricRecvLine.connectionMade(self)
12
13
self.cmdstack = [honeypot.HoneyPotShell(self)]
14
# ...
Listing 6.7: Emotional State initialization
We designed an adaptive emotional trajectory that targeted the dynamic progression
of an attacker’s emotional state throughout their interaction with our honeypot system.
Rather than maintaining a static emotional model, the system updated the attacker’s emo­
tion based on the psychological impact of each deceptive response. This approach al­
lowed the system to simulate a reactive environment that adapted to attacker behavior
over time.
To implement this emotional state machine, we defined a helper function _cycle. This
function took the current emotional state and a list of five predefined deceptive messages
corresponding to each emotional stage. It updated the attacker’s emotional state accord­
ing to the transition diagram shown in Figure 5.2 and returned the customized output
messages.
1
def _cycle(protocol , current_emotion , messages):
2
if not messages:
3
return ""
4
name = current_emotion.name
5
if name == "CONFIDENCE":
6
protocol.emotion.set_state(Emotion.SURPRISE)
7
return messages[0] + "\n"
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
45
==PAGE:54==
8
elif name == "SURPRISE":
9
protocol.emotion.set_state(Emotion.CONFUSION)
10
return messages[1] + "\n"
11
elif name == "CONFUSION":
12
protocol.emotion.set_state(Emotion.FRUSTRATION)
13
return messages[2] + "\n"
14
elif name == "FRUSTRATION":
15
protocol.emotion.set_state(Emotion.SELF_DOUBT)
16
return messages[3] + "\n"
17
elif name == "SELF_DOUBT":
18
protocol.emotion.set_state(Emotion.CONFIDENCE)
19
return messages[4] + "\n"
20
return ""
Personality­Aware Session Response
The method session_personality_response served as the core logic that personalized
interaction feedback. When a shell command was executed, this function checked if the
current session had an inferred personality profile. If so, it retrieved both the person­
ality trait enum and current emotional state, and passed them to a command­specific
response_fn function.
1
def session_personality_response_fn(protocol , response_fn , write_fn):
2
"""
3
if user session exists personality , then call corresponding response
function and output
4
5
:param protocol: (self.protocol)
6
:param response_fn: such as Command_grep.response_grep
7
:param write_fn: self_write or cmdstack[-1].write
8
"""
9
session = getattr(protocol.user.avatar, "session", None)
10
if not (session and hasattr(session , "_personality_inferred")):
11
return
12
profile = session._personality_inferred
13
trait_enum = profile["trait_enum"]
14
emotion = protocol.emotion.get_state()
15
msg = response_fn(protocol , trait_enum , emotion)
16
if msg:
17
write_fn(f"{msg}\n")
Listing 6.8: Deceptive shell command response based on attacker traits in a session
We developed a customized implementation of the response for all commands supported
by Cowrie. The following example shows the implementation for the cd command. Based
on the attacker’s inferred personality trait, it invoked the _cycle function with a corre­
sponding set of deceptive messages, designed to match the psychological profile and
invoke emotional transition.
1
def response_cd(protocol , trait, emotion):
2
if trait == Personality.OPENNESS:
3
return _cycle(protocol , emotion , [
4
f"--bash: cd: could not change directory to `{protocol.cwd}`: No
such file or directory",
5
f"--bash: cd: could not change directory to `{protocol.cwd}`:
Permission denied",
6
"cd: ￿￿￿￿\￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿ ￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿ ￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿u2060",
7
"var
log
app
sys
auth
messages",
46
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
==PAGE:55==
8
"var
log
app
sys
auth
messages",
9
])
10
elif trait == Personality.CONSCIENTIOUSNESS:
11
return _cycle(protocol , emotion , [
12
"cd: permission denied",
13
f"cd: could not find directory `{protocol.cwd}`",
14
f"cd: directory `{protocol.cwd}` is not accessible",
15
"cd: opt/usr/bin/sbin: No such file or directory",
16
""
17
])
18
elif trait == Personality.LOW_EXTRAVERSION:
19
return _cycle(protocol , emotion , [
20
"cd: unexpected directory structure",
21
"cd: application
log
/var/log/app.log",
22
"cd: system
log
/var/log/syslog",
23
"cd: security
log
/var/log/auth.log",
24
"cd: error
log
/var/log/error.log",
25
])
26
elif trait == Personality.LOW_AGREEABLENESS:
27
return _cycle(protocol , emotion , [
28
"cd: please specify a directory to change into",
29
"cd: no such file or directory: /var/log/messages",
30
"cd: cannot access directory: Permission denied",
31
"cd: cannot change to directory: No such file or directory",
32
""
33
])
34
elif trait == Personality.LOW_NEUROTICISM:
35
return _cycle(protocol , emotion , [
36
"cd: fatal error: unexpected end of directory",
37
"cd: unrecognized directory format",
38
"cd: directory not found: /var/log/syslog",
39
"cd: cannot change to directory: No such file or directory",
40
""
41
])
42
return ""
Listing 6.9: Customized deceptive responses for the cd command based on attacker traits
and emotional state.
6.4
MiniPrint
To enhance the realism and reduce the susceptibility to fingerprinting, printer identity in
the MiniPrint honeypot was first randomized at runtime by selecting from a list of realistic
printer models, replacing the original static banner. The latter was also enriched with
details about receiving print jobs from the SNARE dashboard. This was followed by re­
organizing the internal file system structure that included new decoy files such as PDFs
and text documents, some of which were randomly selected on startup to simulate device
usage. In addition, response delays were also added along with fake error messages to
simulate natural device behavior (implementation details are provided in Appendix C.4).
6.5
Honeytoken Alerting Mechanism
To enhance the interactivity and traceability of our HoneyFarm deployment, we imple­
mented a honeytoken­based alerting mechanism. Honeytokens are deceptive bait files
that were strategically placed within the file system to lure attackers [105]. When ac­
cessed, these files triggered an automated email alert containing detailed contextual
metadata about the attack.
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
47
==PAGE:56==
6.5.1
Email Alert Contents
The alerting logic was encapsulated in a Python module that leveraged the smtplib and
email.mime.text libraries for email communication, and requests for IP geolocation en­
richment. When a honeytoken file or directory was accessed, the system collected the
following metadata:
• Filename and session ID
• Attacker’s source IP and port
• UTC timestamp of the access
• Geolocation data (city, region, country, ISP) and coordinates (formatted in degrees
and minutes)
The above information was compiled into a well­structured email body and dispatched to
a pre­configured list of recipient addresses. The email subject clearly indicated a honey­
token breach, ensuring timely attention. We showed an example in Figure 6.8, and more
implementation details can be seen from Appendix C.6
Figure 6.8: Example of an honeytoken alert email
6.5.2
Environment Configuration
The alert system was controlled via environment variables in the Dockerfile, allowing easy
integration and deployment within Dockerized environments. Key variables included:
• SMTP_FROM: Sender email address
• SMTP_TO: Comma separated recipient list
• SMTP_PORT: SMTP port (default: 587)
• SMTP_SERVER: SMTP server used to send emails
• SMTP_USER & SMTP_PASS: SMTP authentication credentials
In our setup, Gmail’s SMTP server was used to send outgoing alert emails.
48
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
==PAGE:57==
Gmail Setup: Generating an App Password
To use Gmail with SMTP, an App Password must be generated, as Google no longer
supports direct password login for less secure apps.
1. Visit https://myaccount.google.com/security
2. Enable 2­Step Verification on your Google account if not already enabled.
3. Under the Security section, go to 2­Step Verification, then click on App Passwords.
4. Set the app name as Mail or other custom name for labelling (e.g., Cowrie).
5. Click generate, and then Google will show a 16­character app password.
6. Use this password as the value for SMTP_PASS.
Note: This app password is different from one’s Google account password and is intended
for use in automated services like this alerting module.
6.5.3
Integration in HoneyFarm
The send_honeytoken_email() function is invoked whenever a monitored honeytoken file
or folder is accessed. It can be easily integrated within the command emulation modules
(e.g., cat, cd) by importing and adding an check:
1
from cowrie.honeytoken.email_alert import send_honeytoken_email
2
from cowrie.honeytoken.honeyfiles
import HONEYTOKEN_APPLIANCE_FILES
Listing 6.10: Importing Honeytoken Files and Alert Function
1
if accessed_file in HONEYTOKEN_APPLIANCE_FILES:
2
send_honeytoken_email(accessed_file , session_id , client_ip , client_port)
Listing 6.11: Triggering email alert upon Honeytoken access
The fake files and folders, outlined in Section 6.2.2, were configured as honeytokens
across different device categories in Cowrie nodes in HoneyFarm. Thus, each device
type had a customized set of token files and directories. In summary, these tokens were
chosen based on their attractiveness towards attackers:
• .service, .log, and .db files represent services, logs, and stored data commonly
found in real systems.
• credentials.json and backup_config.json mimic sensitive configuration data.
• Folders like /opt/*, /etc/*, and /var/log/* reflect standard Linux directory hierarchies
for configuration and logging.
Whenever any of these files or folders were accessed, the system triggered an alert via the
honeytoken mechanism. The folders and files designated as honeytokens are detailed in
Appendix C.7
6.6
Botnet Detection Mechanism
Given that botnet attacks are prevalent, and they have the following typical characteristics,
as found in our preliminary analysis (see Section 8.1).
1. Botnet attacks are frequently associated with rapid, automated interactions that dif­
fer significantly from human­typed command patterns.
2. These attacks are often initiated by a series of scanning or connection attempts
followed by the command execution chain script.
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
49
==PAGE:58==
3. They are also characterized by long and complex command sequences, often ex­
ceeding 300 characters and containing multiple logical connectors such as ;,&&,|.
Therefore, we implemented a detection mechanism that identified botnet attacks. The
implementation logic was to capture each command line input and to identify automated
botnet behavior by evaluating two key heuristics:
• Command Length: Inputs exceeding 300 characters are flagged.
• Command Complexity: Inputs containing three or more connectors are considered
suspicious botnet attacks.
If either threshold was met, the session was classified as botnet­like, and an alert was
generated with event details. The following was recorded [106]:
• Attack session ID.
• Source IP and port.
• The full command string.
• Number of connectors used
• Total command length.
1
# detect botnet attacks
2
full_command_line = line.strip()
3
num_connectors = full_command_line.count(';') + full_command_line.count('&&')
+ full_command_line.count('||') + full_command_line.count('|')
4
if len(full_command_line) > 300 or num_connectors >= 3:
5
session = getattr(self.protocol.user.avatar , "session", None)
6
ip = getattr(self.protocol.getProtoTransport().transport.getPeer(), "
host", "unknown")
7
src_port = getattr(self.protocol.getProtoTransport().transport.getPeer
(), "port", 0)
8
log.msg(
9
eventid="cowrie.command.botnet_like",
10
session=session ,
11
input=full_command_line ,
12
connectors=num_connectors ,
13
length=len(full_command_line),
14
ip=ip,
15
format="[Botnet -Like] %(ip)s | session=%(session)s | connectors=%(
connectors)d | length=%(length)d | Command:%(input)s"
16
)
17
send_botnet_honeytoken_alert(
18
session=session ,
19
src_ip=ip,
20
src_port=src_port ,
21
command=full_command_line ,
22
connectors=num_connectors ,
23
length=len(full_command_line)
24
)
Listing 6.12: Botnet attacks detection
In addition to the logging, an email alert was sent via the honeytoken alerting mechanism.
The function send_botnet_honeytoken_alert() was responsible for composing a contex­
tual warning message, including geolocation information obtained through an external IP
lookup service. By staying informed about potential threats and understanding the tac­
tics, techniques, and procedures used by cybercriminals, operators and organizations can
50
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
==PAGE:59==
better prepare themselves for attacks if possible [107]. The more details for the botnet
detection alert are as follows:
• Command content and structure
• Session and network metadata
• Timestamp (in UTC)
• Approximate attacker location (based on IP)
An example of the generated botnet detection alert is shown in Figure 6.9. The imple­
mentation code for generating these alerts can be found in Appendix C.8.
Figure 6.9: Example of a botnet detection alert containing command content, metadata,
and location information
6.7
Docker Setup
We adopted a multi­container Docker Compose setup to enhance the portability and scal­
ability of our HoneyFarm. By containerizing the application, we ensured consistent behav­
ior across different environments, including development, testing, and production. Begin­
ning with the SNARE honeypot, which was used to clone and host our customized smart
home web dashboard, the attack path subsequently led into the core deception envi­
ronment. Part of our HoneyFarm setup had 4 Cowrie instances, and each of them was
built from source code using a consistent two­stage Dockerfile pattern. Besides, an ad­
ditional lightweight service emulated as the printer, MiniPrint, was included for peripheral
simulation. These honeypots were deployed within the same localized Docker network
(honeynet), simulating the set of smart home devices that behave physically connected
to each other while remaining isolated from the public internet. Note that although they
shared a common subnet and could theoretically communicate with one another, in prac­
tice, each Cowrie instance operated in isolation. This was because SSH access was
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
51
==PAGE:60==
disabled for outbound connections, which prevents lateral movement or hopping from
one honeypot to another.
The docker­compose.yml file shown in Appendix C.2 defines :
• A shared honeynet(192.168.100.0/24) bridge network with static IP allocation.
• SMTP environment variables for honeytoken email alerts.
• Volume mappings for persistent etc and var directories.
• Port forwarding for individual Cowrie instances as well as the MiniPrint service,
allowing external access to each container through designated host ports.
6.7.1
SNARE Honeypot Instance
Our experiments in Section 4.2 showed that SNARE can reliably handle HTTP requests,
and our objective was to use the web page solely as a starting entry point for intruders to
further explore and interact with the hidden backend services (e.g. thermostat), we only
leveraged the existing SNARE honeypot provided by the T­Pot framework. However,
to accommodate our customization, we modified the yml configuration and Dockerfile,
which are provided in Appendix C.3
In our deployment, SNARE was compiled and built via the T­Pot Docker image. It oper­
ated alongside the required TANNER backend services (Redis, PHPox, and API) inside
an isolated tanner_local Docker network. This ensured that internal communication be­
tween SNARE and TANNER remained private, while only SNARE’s HTTP service (port
80) was exposed externally for access.
Website Cloning and Hosting with SNARE
We utilized the clone function provided by SNARE to generate the required files for em­
ulating our customized smart home dashboard. The steps were:
1. Navigate to the TANNER Docker directory, build and start SNARE.
1
docker compose build
2
docker compose up
2. Prepare the smart home dashboard source code and related files in a folder, then
start a Python HTTP server to host the target website temporarily. Note that the
localhost should be specified as the correct IP address on the local machine.
1
python3 -m http.server 9010 --bind localhost
3. Access the SNARE container and clone the website. After cloning, all the necessary
files for emulation will be stored in a folder.
1
docker exec -it snare /bin/sh
2
cd /opt/snare/pages/
3
clone --target http://localhost:9010
4. Use the cloned folder as the source directory to run the SNARE service again,
thereby hosting the customized smart home dashboard.
1
snare --tanner tanner --debug true --auto-update false --host-ip
0.0.0.0 --port 80 --page-dir /opt/snare/pages/iot_system_cloned
52
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
==PAGE:61==
6.7.2
Cowrie Honeypot Instances
We deployed four separate Cowrie honeypot containers by using Dockerfile, each sim­
ulating a different category of smart home device as mentioned above. The Dockerfile
was used for performing several key tasks:
• Two­Stage Build:: The build process is split into two stages. The first stage con­
tains all the tools needed to compile and prepare Cowrie. The second stage uses
a smaller image that contains only what is needed to run Cowrie. This makes the
image faster, more consistent, and safer.
• Base Image:
– Builder: Starts from ${ARCH}debian:bookworm-slim, which is a lightweight
Debian­based image.
– Runtime:: Uses gcr.io/distroless/python3-debian12, a minimal and se­
cure Python 3 image with no shell or package manager, reducing the risk of
abuse if compromised.
• Install Build Dependencies: The builder stage installs the necessary packages,
such as compilers, Python tools, and SSL libraries, to compile and install all Cowrie
dependencies.
• Prepare Virtual Environment: Create a Python virtual environment (cowrie-env)
and install dependencies listed in requirements.txt and requirements-output.txt
using pip. This ensures an isolated and controlled Python environment, preventing
dependency conflicts.
• Copy Project Files: The Cowrie source files are copied into /cowrie/, allowing the
container to run with custom configurations and features.
• Copy Files to Runtime Image: The built virtual environment and Cowrie files are
moved from the builder stage to the minimal runtime image.
• Define Volumes: Docker volumes are defined for /cowrie/var (logs) and /cowrie/etc
(configuration files) so that data is not lost when the container restarts or is re­
built.
• Environment Setup: Paths and Python settings are adjusted to ensure Cowrie runs
from the virtual environment and logs output without delay.
• Run Application: The honeypot is started using the twistd tool from the virtual
environment, allowing it to efficiently handle multiple network connections at the
same time.
These containers ran independently but shared the same base structure and logging/alert­
ing mechanisms, and we used port forwarding configuration to enable external access,
as shown in Figure 6.10. The configurations are summarized as follows:
• cowrie­appliances:
Simulated a generic home appliance device. It ran an SSH service on standard
container port 22, which was mapped to port 2222 on the host. The container was
assigned a static IP address of 192.168.100.10 within the internal Docker network.
This instance served as a typical entry point for attackers scanning for exposed SSH
services on smart appliance nodes.
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
53
==PAGE:62==
• cowrie­lighting:
Emulated a smart lighting controller. It listened on container port 22, mapped to host
port 5900. Its internal IP was 192.168.100.20. The file system and behavior were
customized to reflect typical smart lighting devices.
• cowrie­thermostat:
Mimicked a network­connected thermostat. It exposed SSH on container port 22,
mapped to port 5000 on the host. The container used the static IP 192.168.100.30.
This instance was designed to attract attackers looking to access or manipulate
temperature control systems.
• cowrie­diagnostics:
Represented a diagnostics interface using Telnet. It listened on container port 23,
mapped to host port 23. Its static IP was 192.168.100.100. This instance simulated
a centralized maintenance service that collected self­diagnostic reports from other
smart devices in the network.
Figure 6.10: External access via port forwarding to internal services
6.7.3
MiniPrint Honeypot Instance
MiniPrint ran a lightweight Python server on container port 9100, which was also mapped
to port 9100 on the host. The container was assigned a static IP address of 192.168.100.150
within the honeynet Docker network.
6.8
Running and Testing the Application
To run and test the application locally, we used Docker Compose to build and run the
containerized environment. The steps are outlined as follows:
54
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
==PAGE:63==
1. Build the Docker Image: Navigate to the project root directory and run the following
command to build the Honeyfarm Docker images:
1
docker compose build
2. Run the Docker Container: Once the image is built, run the container using:
1
docker compose up
To run it in the background, use the ­d flag:
1
docker compose up -d
This command launched all defined services in detached mode, which allowed the
containers to run as the background system services, ensuring for long­running hon­
eypots that continuously monitored incoming requests without occupying the termi­
nal.
3. Check Status: Use docker ps to check the runtime status of all active honeypot
containers in the HoneyFarm deployment.
1
docker ps
Figure 6.11: Docker container status for HoneyFarm setup
4. Access SNARE/TANNER Logs: Logs are stored inside the container under the
folder /opt/snare/ and /tmp/tanner/
5. Access Cowrie Logs: After starting the containers, logs can be viewed using:
1
docker compose logs -f cowrie-appliances
2
docker compose logs -f cowrie-lighting
3
docker compose logs -f cowrie-thermostat
4
docker compose logs -f cowrie-diagnostics
6. Access MiniPrint Logs: All connection events are logged in /log, and uploaded
print job files are stored in /uploads within the project directory.
7. Access Honeypot Services: To test that the honeypot services are actively listen­
ing, connection attempts can be made using HTTP, SSH, Telnet, or PJL protocols
to the exposed service ports.
For SNARE honeypot service, open a web browser and navigate to http://20.123.44.
15/ to interact with it. In addition, to access the Cowrie honeypot services running
on different ports, use the following SSH and Telnet commands:
1
ssh david@localhost -p 2222 # Connect to Cowrie SSH (appliance node)
2
ssh david@localhost -p 5900 # Connect to Cowrie SSH (lighting node)
3
ssh david@localhost -p 5000 # Connect to Cowrie SSH (thermostat node)
4
telnet localhost 2223
# Connect to Cowrie Telnet (diagnostics node)
Furthermore, the Printer Exploitation Toolkit (PRET) is required to interact with MiniPrint.
This is done by cloning the PRET repository from GitHub and using the pret.py script
to communicate with the honeypot.
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
55
==PAGE:64==
1
# Clone the PRET repository
2
git clone https://github.com/RUB-NDS/PRET.git
3
cd PRET
4
5
# Install dependencies (colorama and pysnmp)
6
pip install colorama pysnmp
7
8
# Run PRET with the PJL protocol against the honeypot
9
python ./pret.py localhost:9100 pjl
6.8.1
HoneyFarm Data Analysis Dashboard
The HoneyFarm data analysis dashboard was implemented using Plotly Dash, a Python­
based web framework for interactive data visualization. It integrated exploratory data anal­
ysis libraries such as Pandas and NumPy to pre­process and analyze the log data [108].
To support modular analysis, each node (e.g., Appliance, Lighting, SNARE) was associ­
ated with an independent dashboard that visualized attacker behavior, interaction pat­
terns, and summary statistics.
In addition, the overview module enabled cross­node
comparisons, offering aggregated insights into total interaction volume, session duration,
country of origin, commonly accessed resources, and same IPs across honeypots (Ap­
pendix C.5). As shown in Figure 6.12, the home page provides a centralized interface
for navigating across all node­specific dashboards in a modular and visually consistent
manner.
Figure 6.12: Overview of HoneyFarm data visualization interface
56
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
==PAGE:65==
7
Experiments
This chapter presents the experiments conducted that can be used to evaluate the ef­
fectiveness and performance of our HoneyFarm system. We describe the public deploy­
ment of the honeypot infrastructure and explain the design and execution of a user study.
The honeypots were hosted in a cloud­based environment over a 30­day period and were
made accessible on the internet to attract real­world attackers via scanning platforms such
as Shodan [109], Nmap [110], and Censys [111]. In the user study, participants engaged
with the HoneyFarm environment, allowing us to assess the practical impact of our emo­
tional deception techniques and attacker profiling mechanisms. The experiments were
designed to capture both quantitative and qualitative data, focusing on system realism,
attacker behavior, and the emotional responses triggered during interaction.
7.1
Deployment
In this section, we begin by describing the cloud infrastructure used to host the honeypots,
along with the tools employed for deployment, monitoring, and analysis.
7.1.1
Virtual Machine
As stated in Section 2.4, Azure is a cloud computing platform and service provided by Mi­
crosoft, offering a wide range of solutions including virtual machines, storage, networking,
databases, and security. It supports both Infrastructure­as­a­Service (IaaS) and Platform­
as­a­Service (PaaS) models, enabling scalable, flexible, and global deployments [112].
We used it to create a virtual machine (VM) configured with Ubuntu Server 24.04 to
host and manage the configuration running our honeypot infrastructure. The VM was as­
signed a static public IP address 20.123.44.15 and customized with networking rules that
exposed specific ports to the internet. The Azure virtual machine configuration and details
are displayed in Figure 7.1, including resource allocation, operating system, storage and
networking.
Figure 7.1: VM configuration for hosting HoneyFarm system
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
57
==PAGE:66==
In order to initiate the experiment in which attackers can interact with each honeypot ser­
vice, we configured the VM’s inbound networking rules, which functioned as firewall, al­
lowing only controlled external access to designated ports. After that, we installed Docker
along with necessary dependencies, such as Git and Python, to create an environment
that fulfills the requirements for containerizing, deploying, and managing the honeypot
services. The following specifications were made to control access during the deploy­
ment period:
• Web application honeypot: Accessible via HTTP on 20:123:44:15:80.
• Appliance controller honeypot: Accessible via SSH on 20:123:44:15:2222.
• Lighting controller honeypot: Accessible via SSH on 20:123:44:15:5900.
• Thermostat controller honeypot: Accessible via SSH on 20:123:44:15:5000.
• Diagnostics honeypot: Accessible via Telnet on 20:123:44:15:23
• MiniPrint honeypot: Accessible via PJL on 20:123:44:15:9100
To enhance the realism of our deployment, we also included additional ports that are com­
monly targeted during scanning activity, such as ports 1883 (MQTT), 554 (RTSP) and
20 (FTP data), among others. The broader exposure helped simulate a more authentic
network environment, thus increasing the possibility of interaction from real human at­
tackers. In addition, these ports are scanned by Nmap in its default setting, which is a
popular open­source tool commonly used to scan an IP address for open ports [110]. The
resulting Nmap scan on the deployed IP address and overview of network settings are
illustrated in Figure 7.2 and Figure 7.3 respectively.
Figure 7.2: Nmap scan on HoneyFarm IP address
Figure 7.3: Network settings for VM when deploying the HoneyFarm system
58
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
==PAGE:67==
7.1.2
Honeypot Attraction Framework
To make our honeypot system more visible and attractive to attackers, we designed an
attraction strategy. Stemming from the signaling concept investigated in Section 3, we
sought to go beyond simple exposure through deployment and intentionally left cues
across different platforms over the internet. The main components of the attraction frame­
work are explained as follows:
Honey Accounts
The concept of honeytokens was explored by Zhang and Thing (2020) [113] in their ex­
tensive survey on cyber deception, which included fake files on public sites that could
attract attackers and upon accessing them the defenders were alerted. Stemming from
this concept, we made fake accounts on different popular platforms where the system
was deliberately leaked with subtle cues hinting its vulnerable posture. However, it is
important to note that at this stage of deception, these accounts did not employ any hon­
eytokens but rather served as a possible point of attractive entry to the honeypot system.
This strategy also aligns with the notion of passive breadcrumbing, where we have pieces
of information on different platforms that could guide an attacker to navigate to our decoy
farm [114].
GitHub
We set up a GitHub repository under a fake company name, using a fake gmail account
under the same name, that showed an open source, ongoing development of an IoT
platform and also demonstrated how the dashboard looked like. Within the repository, we
included the supposed code­base comprised of the web interface, and fake server scripts
along with notes that acts as signals that the system is vulnerable. Furthermore, SSH
credentials and IP address of the dashboard were also leaked under the repository. The
front page and the fake files can be seen in Figure 7.4 and Figure 7.5 respectively.
Figure 7.4: Fake repository
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
59
==PAGE:68==
Figure 7.5: Fake files in the repository
Pastebin
Pastebin is a free online tool that generates links for sharing plain­text data. According to
a threat report by FortiGuard Labs, this tool is often used by attackers to store malware or
stolen credentials [115]. Rather than posing as an adversary, we used this tool to make a
fake advertisement of a supposed company providing smart home solutions but leaking
the dashboard in a careless manner along with its default credentials. In addition, we
included a false note stating that the credentials have been updated, although this was
not actually the case. We made this advertisement to serve as a potential signal to the
system by the fake company and can be seen in Figure 7.6. Moreover, we also included
the link to the GitHub repository.
Figure 7.6: Fake advertisement on Pastebin
60
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
==PAGE:69==
Reddit
With over one billion monthly active users, Reddit is a popular website on the internet
[116] which is used as an online discussion forum. Content such as text, images, videos,
or links can be shared by users and other users can then comment on these posts and
vote on them. Posts and comments with the most votes usually appear at the top of
Reddit’s main page [117]. Given its widespread usage, we made a fake Reddit post that
advertised the fake smart home solution by the fake company, along with the Pastebin
link and GitHub repository and this can be seen in Figure 7.7.
Figure 7.7: Fake reddit post
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
61
==PAGE:70==
7.2
User Study
In Section 3.1, we found that IoT environments are mostly susceptible to malware and/or
botnet attacks.
Therefore, in addition to attracting human attackers to our deceptive
environment and observing their behavior, we designed a user study centered around
terminal­based interaction. The goal was to assess whether our emotionally responsive
honeypot could evoke measurable emotional states and influence the participants’ be­
havior during exploratory tasks. The study was divided into two phases: first, participants
completed a Capture­The­Flag (CTF) challenge in our honeypot environment; second,
they were asked to reflect on their experience through a questionnaire.
7.2.1
CTF Challenges
The first phase of the study involved the CTF exercises designed to simulate an ex­
ploratory attack scenario. Participants interacted with our HoneyFarm environment, where
their task was to uncover hidden “flags” embedded in the environment by exploring the
file system and executing terminal commands throughout the process. The terminal was
equipped with enhanced deceptive responses that adapted to participant behavior and
inferred personality traits, aiming to evoke specific emotional states and behavioral tran­
sitions.
After completing the challenges presented in the poster, participants proceeded to the
second phase of the study: a structured questionnaire capturing their emotional experi­
ence, perceived realism, and behavioral strategies. The data collected will support a lat­
eral analysis of how our deceptive system responses influenced participant emotions and
decision­making. The poster with full CTF challenge prompt is included in Appendix B.1.
7.2.2
Questionnaire Design
The questionnaire was designed to capture both the psychological and behavioral di­
mensions of the interaction. It consisted of the following major components, which were
measured by the Likert­scale except for Personality Profiling (Q1):
• Personality Profiling (Q1): Participants were asked to identify their dominant per­
sonality traits based on the Big Five model. We provided a link to a free online
personality test and focused on traits shown to influence adversarial behavior, such
as openness, conscientiousness, and low agreeableness.
• Emotional Experience (Q2­Q6): Building upon the emotional trajectory model pro­
posed in our system, we measured the intensity of key emotions that the participants
experienced, including confidence, confusion, frustration, self­doubt, and surprise.
• Emotional Triggers (Q7­Q12): To ground the questions in prior work, we adapted
prompts from Gutzwiller et al. [118] and expanded them into context­based items to
analyze their emotional triggers.
• Behavioral Perception (Q13­Q17): A set of questions assessed how realistic the
interaction felt, whether participants experienced emotional transitions, and if the
system’s responses influenced their strategy or future behavior. This section aimed
to understand not only participant perception but also the fidelity of our deceptive
honeypot system during the interaction.
Our questionnaire includes 32 items in total, the definitions are presented in Table 7.1.
62
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
==PAGE:71==
Table 7.1: Description of Questionnaire Items
Item ID
Description
Q1
Participant’s dominant personality trait from personality test
Q2
I felt confident during the interaction.
Q3
I felt surprised by what I encountered.
Q4
I felt confused during the interaction.
Q5
I felt frustrated when using the system.
Q6
I doubted myself while interacting with the system.
Q7­1
The feedback I received was clear and understandable. (confidence factor 1)
Q7­2
The commands I entered were successful. (confidence factor 2)
Q7­3
I felt familiar with the system behavior. (confidence factor 3)
Q8­1
I was surprised to find credential information. (surprise factor 1)
Q8­2
I discovered hidden or sensitive files unexpectedly. (surprise factor 2)
Q8­3
I encountered fake or misleading error messages. (surprise factor 3)
Q9­1
The output was difficult to interpret. (confusion factor 1)
Q9­2
The navigation process was unclear. (confusion factor 2)
Q9­3
I saw unfamiliar error codes or messages. (confusion factor 3)
Q9­4
The system behaved unpredictably. (confusion factor 4)
Q10­1
I felt stuck and unable to make progress. (frustration factor 1)
Q10­2
The responses misled or confused me. (frustration factor 2)
Q10­3
I encountered dead ends or blocked paths. (frustration factor 3)
Q11­1
I began to question my own actions or decisions. (self­doubt factor 1)
Q11­2
I found unexpected or suspicious files. (self­doubt factor 2)
Q11­3
I got results I did not expect. (self­doubt factor 3)
Q12­1
I felt confident at first, but then became surprised. (confident →surprise)
Q12­2
I was surprised, and then led to confusion. (surprise →confusion)
Q12­3
Confusion led to feelings of frustration. (confusion →frustration)
Q12­4
I became frustrated and began doubting myself. (frustration →self­doubt)
Q12­5
I regained confidence after doubting myself. (self­doubt →confidence)
Q13
I felt like I was interacting with a real system.
Q14
The system’s responses influenced how I planned my next move.
Q15
The system’s feedback affected how I felt.
Q16
I adjusted my behavior based on how the system reacted.
Q17
If I interacted with this system again, I would act differently.
The questionnaire template for the user study, including the exact questions and answer
choices, can be found in Appendix B.2.
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
63
==PAGE:72==
64
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
==PAGE:73==
8
Findings and Evaluation
This chapter presents a comprehensive analysis of publicly available relevant honeypot
logs as secondary data. We then examine the primary data collected directly from our
deployed deception environment. Finally, we conduct a comparative evaluation between
the datasets to assess the effectiveness of our approach in attracting human attackers
and keeping them engaged.
8.1
Preliminary Analysis on Secondary Data
To start off our analysis, we investigated logs from honeypots that emulated SSH, Telnet,
and HTTP. Since the majority of the nodes in our HoneyFarm were hosted on Cowrie with
an interface for the dashboard using SNARE, therefore, it sufficed to evaluate these pro­
tocols. Thus, we studied and examined the attackers’ engagement with these protocols,
obtained from different open­source log files of Cowrie and another HTTP honeypot, both
of which were deployed in their default configuration. It should be noted that our primary
motive was to filter out attack patterns from human attackers and study their behavior.
8.1.1
Analysis on Xmlyna Dataset (2022)
This dataset is publicly available on Kaggle and contains detailed SSH session data and
shell commands collected from the Cowrie honeypot deployed on an Azure server over
a two­week period. We analyzed attackers’ interaction, particularly observing patterns in
the commands executed during these sessions [119].
These were logged in several JSON and raw log files, we merged all the files in one large
CSV dataset. Upon inspecting the data we noticed that most of the IP addresses were fol­
lowing similar patterns and our goal was to filter those attacks that might be from a human
attacker in order to better understand their behavior. Thus, we resorted to the K­Means
algorithm and did a clustering analysis on the command sequences and time duration,
placing bot attacks in one cluster and potential human attackers in another. This ap­
proach fits within the broader landscape of attack classification methods in cybersecurity,
which can be broadly categorized into rule­based methods and machine learning­based
methods [120] [121]. Rule­based algorithms typically focus on predefined patterns and
specific commands [122], which makes them effective in simple or controlled scenarios.
For example, commands such as ls, cat, pwd, cd, and ps can commonly be associ­
ated with human attackers, while commands like wget, curl, base64, perl, python,
chmod, sh, .sh, and echo could be indicative of botnet activity. However, this distinc­
tion is becoming increasingly blurred as cyber threats continue to evolve and attackers
adopt more sophisticated or unconventional tactics. Therefore, these methods are now
insufficient for handling complex, large­scale datasets. As a result, machine learning al­
gorithms have become widely adopted, and these can be further divided into supervised
and unsupervised learning approaches. Given that labeling a large dataset and training
a supervised model could be resource intensive, and that was outside the scope of our
focus, we chose the unsupervised method, specifically K­Means clustering to perform
classification tasks to make it more efficient for data analysis. The clusters can be seen
in Figure 8.1.
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
65
==PAGE:74==
Figure 8.1: Clustering based on time spent and commands executed
Although, the clusters revealed distinct characteristics but we still spotted recognizable
trends all pointing to repeatedly automated attacks possibly propagated by bots. This
demonstrated that we had yet to gain insight into human attacker tactics. In the next
phase of clustering, we added a new attribute to each of the commands for labeling the
intent and this was added as a feature which resulted in Figure 8.2.
Figure 8.2: Clustering based on time spent and commands executed along with an ex­
planation label
It is quite evident from observing these diagrams that there was little variation, therefore,
we manually looked for patterns in the dataset. During this process, we identified and
flagged commands that were executed in an identical sequence across multiple IP ad­
dresses and subsequently extracted them. A closer look at these attack patterns showed
a common reconnaissance trend, typically followed by a specific action. Apart from minor
shuffling in the command sequence, a similar logic was persistent across the aforemen­
tioned IP addresses. Based on this premise, we were able to filter the latter and a similar
clustering methodology and manual inspection strategy was applied on other datasets as
well.
66
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
==PAGE:75==
8.1.2
Analysis on Sedlar et al. Dataset (2020)
The Cowrie honeypot was deployed on a large scale in this research experiment and
attack data on SSH and Telnet was collected. The honeypot was live for nine months and
involved around 50 nodes that were distributed across several universities and companies
in the EU and the US. The attackers’ interaction data was daily recorded in log files,
enriched with attributes such as issued commands, attempts at login, and geolocation
metadata of the source IP address. However, to comply with GDPR, all the public IP
addresses were pseudonymized. Regardless of that, we merged all the log files and
thoroughly examined the behavior of the attackers based on the commands they ran and
the time spent on the honeypot along with some other key attributes [123]. Similar to
the previous analysis, these attribute were added as features in the K­Means algorithm
and two clusters were identified. One for botnets and another for human attackers. The
resulting clusters can be seen in Figure 8.3.
Figure 8.3: Clustering on the dataset by Sedlar. U et al (2020)
Further scrutiny on both the resulting clusters once again indicated botnet behavior with
several IP addresses running empty or repeating commands that were unique to this
particular dataset.
8.1.3
Analysis on Başer et al. Dataset (2021)
This study also deployed the Cowrie honeypot for 47 days to capture interactions of at­
tackers with SSH and Telnet. When the honeypot was in operation, it recorded a total
of 3,626,394 attacks. The paper analyzed a few attributes from the logs, comprising of
attempted usernames and passwords, source IP addresses and their geographical loca­
tion, and the distribution of attacks across protocols. However, the executed commands
by each IP address were not assessed [124]. Therefore, in line with our previous analysis
of the datasets, we focused on attacker behavior by their command sequences extracted
from the honeypot logs, and clustered them as before. This is illustrated in Figure 8.4.
Further inspection of the filtered data revealed additional botnet patterns, with a few in­
stances that hinted human attacker behavior. These, along with command sequences
from other datasets, are investigated in detail in the following subsection.
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
67
==PAGE:76==
Figure 8.4: Başer et al. (2021) dataset clustering
8.1.4
Command Sequence Analysis
As aforementioned, this subsection is comprised of a critical examination of the most
unique and common command sequences executed by different IP addresses across the
datasets, beginning with the most prevalent example, shown in Listing 8.1.
1
enable
2
system
3
shell
4
sh
5
cat /proc/mounts; /bin/busybox APXMW
6
cd /dev/shm; cat .s || cp /bin/echo .s; /bin/busybox APXMW
7
tftp; wget; /bin/busybox APXMW
8
dd bs=52 count=1 if=.s || cat .s || while read i; do echo $i; done < .s
9
/bin/busybox APXMW
10
rm .s; exit
Listing 8.1: Common command sequence observed across multiple IPs
Crucial to note is that this execution trace was observed over both SSH and Telnet ser­
vices, with the only minor variation being the name of an arbitrary string used as a mali­
cious command in the BusyBox toolkit. The tool is commonly used in IoT devices due to
its lightweight nature, however, this also prevents it from employing robust access con­
trol mechanism. Therefore, it can become a prime target for bots and automated attacks
[125]. This is reflective in the pattern shown in Listing 8.1, where the attacker was first
trying to escalate their privileges and then, as aforementioned, ran an arbitrary malicious
command in BusyBox. This was followed by interacting with a temporary file, likely to in­
ject a payload. Furthermore, additional components were downloaded using file transfer
tools and then iterative attempts were made at executing the temporary file. In the final
step, the attacker cleaned up their traces and exited the system.
The fact that this particular behavior was constantly showing up in the datasets, centered
around the exploitation of BusyBox, strongly suggested that the IP addresses propagating
these attacks may have belonged to different botnets deploying identical malicious code.
Another recurring sequence commonly observed spanning the datasets can be seen in
Listing 8.2.
1
cat /proc/cpuinfo | grep name | wc -l
68
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
==PAGE:77==
2
echo "root:tlC4mQvua0Ve" | chpasswd | bash
3
cat /proc/cpuinfo | grep name | head -n 1 | awk '{print $4,$5,$6,$7,$8,$9;}'
4
free -m | grep Mem | awk '{print $2, $3, $4, $5, $6, $7}'
5
ls -lh $(which ls)
6
which ls
7
crontab -l
8
w
9
uname -m
10
cat /proc/cpuinfo | grep model | grep name | wc -l
11
top
12
uname
13
uname -a
14
lscpu | grep Model
15
cd ~ && rm -rf .ssh && mkdir .ssh && echo "ssh-rsa <ATTACKER_PUBLIC_KEY > " >>
.ssh/authorized_keys && chmod -R go= ~/.ssh && cd ~
Listing 8.2: Another most common command sequence
This sequence showed a comprehensive reconnaissance phase, where the specification
and current state of the system was examined, followed again with privilege escalation
by resetting credentials and then finally setting up remote access with public SSH key.
Another more sophisticated variation of this command sequence, observed from certain
IP addresses included the injection of a payload encoded in base64 format. In parallel, a
repeated sequence fetched and ran a remote script using various download methods.
A thorough analysis of all the datasets showed that human­driven actions were extremely
rare which highlights the challenge of studying the behavior of human attackers in IoT
environments. The few command sequences potentially linked to the latter primarily con­
sisted of performing basic tasks such as navigating directories. One such example can
be seen in Listing 8.3.
1
ls
2
ls
3
pwd
4
ls
5
cd ..
6
ls
7
cd home
8
ls
9
cd phil
Listing 8.3: Example of a basic command sequence likely performed manually
Figure 8.5: Malicious commands comparison across Datasets
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
69
==PAGE:78==
Moreover, the most frequently run commands in one execution, across all the datasets,
can be seen in figure 8.5.
8.1.5
Analysis on HTTP Dataset
This dataset originates from the HoneyICS project [126], who introduced a high inter­
action physics­aware honeynet targeting an emulated Industrial Control System (ICS). It
mimicked operational technology (OT) environments, including PLCs, HMIs, and physical
processes, to attract attackers and study their behaviors. Although HoneyICS supported
multiple industrial protocols, the dataset we focused on contained only the HTTP log files
that was generated by interactions with exposed Human­Machine Interfaces (HMIs).
These logs captured attempts to scan, access, and exploit the web interface of the HMI,
often hosted via existing simulation frameworks like ScadaBR. Therefore, based on this
dataset, we endeavored to seek insights into adversarial behavior that targeted the web
portals, such as brute­force login attempts, HTTP request patterns, and command injec­
tion traces, further gaining the web­based attack vector patterns in the context of honey­
pots. We converted HTTP traffic JSON format data into CSV logs and then classified and
differentiated human attackers from botnets based on behavioral patterns. The applied
steps were as follows:
1. All records with trans_depth = 1 were excluded to focus on repeated transaction
attempts and filter out mass internet scanners.
2. Behavioral features were extracted per source IP:
• Request count
• Average and max transaction depth
• Unique HTTP methods, URIs, and User­agent strings.
• Total active duration calculated by star_time and end_time.
The results are visualized in Figures 8.7 & 8.8 & 8.9 & 8.10 & 8.11 & 8.12
3. As with SSH and Telnet datasets, the K­Means clustering (K=2) was applied to clas­
sify the attacker types.
Cluster Analysis
The following scatter plot visualizes the result of K­Means clustering according to two
dimensions, as shown in Figure 8.6:
Figure 8.6: HTTP traffic clusters
70
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
==PAGE:79==
• X­axis (Duration in seconds): represents the total duration that an IP address was
active.
• Y­axis (Average trans_depth): represents the average number of HTTP transactions
per connection for that IP.
Each point matches to one IP address, and the color denotes its assigned cluster. Clus­
ter 0 in red possibly represents attacks launched by botnets, which have higher average
trans_depth and longer durations. Cluster 1 in blue is more likely from human attack­
ers with shorter duration and lower transaction depth, which aligns with sporadic manual
activity.
To further analyze the clustering results, we generated two separate log files, each exclu­
sively containing traffic attributed to either botnets or human attackers. Here, we give a
short summary of the features in each cluster:
Cluster 0: Botnet attacks
• Very high request volume, often over 1000 requests per IP.
• High average trans_depth, often larger than 10 or even 50+.
• Most requests targeted known vulnerable paths(e.g. /manager/html, /ScadaBr/..)
• Very low variety in User­Agent (e.g. Go­http­client/1.1)
• HTTP status codes: mostly 400, few 200, many failed requests.
Cluster 1: human attackers
• Lower requests count, typically less than 100 per IP.
• Lower trans_depth, generally between 2 ­ 5
• Accesses focused on /login, /manager/, and default entry points.
• User­Agent strings are more diverse, often general browser­like.
• Some 200 and 302 status codes were observed, indicating partial success
events.
(a) Request volume by botnets
(b) Request volume by human attackers
Figure 8.7: Comparison of request volumes between botnets and human attackers.
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
71
==PAGE:80==
(a) Trans_depth distribution by botnets
(b) Trans_depth distribution by human attackers
Figure 8.8: Comparison of transaction depth between botnets and human attackers.
(a) Top 10 URIs by botnets
(b) Top 10 URIs by human attackers
Figure 8.9: Comparison of the top accessed URIs between botnets and human attackers.
(a) Top User­Agent strings by botnets
(b) Top User­Agent strings by human attackers
Figure 8.10: Comparison of the User­Agent strings between botnets and human attackers.
(a) HTTP methods used by botnets
(b) HTTP methods used by human attackers
Figure 8.11: Comparison of HTTP methods between botnets and human attackers.
72
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
==PAGE:81==
(a) HTTP status code from botnets
(b) HTTP status code from human Attackers
Figure 8.12: Comparison of HTTP Status code between botnets and human attackers.
8.1.6
Discussion
Reflecting upon the outcome of the preliminary analysis, it is quite evident that major­
ity of the adversarial behavior was automated. Particularly considering SSH and Telnet
datasets, the attacks observed followed rigid and repetitive command sequences that
were executed across a wide range of different IP addresses, indicating popular malware
groups such as Mirai or Dota [127] [128]. Thus, studying human behavior proved to be
challenging due to its rarity. However, the HTTP dataset provided significant details vis­
a­vis human interaction. This paved the way for the postulation that web­based portals
may effectively catch the attention of the latter and, thus, a much sophisticated form of de­
ception could be achieved when multiple decoy surfaces are combined. Additionally, the
analyzed data in this phase were deemed sufficient to provide the necessary preliminary
insights into attacker behavior.
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
73
==PAGE:82==
8.2
Enhanced Honeypot Data Analysis
In this section, we analyze the data collected from all the honeypot instances in our Honey­
Farm setup and present the key findings. As with preliminary data analysis on secondary
data, this part also focuses from attacker interaction and behavioral patterns observed in
the logs. In addition, we scrutinize whether the embedded psychological cyber deception
tactics in subsequent Section 8.3, such as cognitive biasses and exploitation of emotional
states based on a given personality trait, improved the overall efficacy of a decoy system
in an IoT environment by keeping human attackers engaged for a longer period of time.
Apart from examining connection attempts, executed commands, files/folder access, and
progression paths et cetera, we also investigate the logs to examine same IP addresses
across nodes to assess how effectively the system maintained the illusion of an intercon­
nected smart home environment and whether attackers followed the deceptive signals as
intended.
8.2.1
SNARE
SNARE was deployed as a honeypot that cloned the interface of our smart home dash­
board. As the first entrance point of interaction in the HoneyFarm, it was designed to
attract scanning tools and human intruders by mimicking a vulnerable website. We de­
liberately hid several backend service endpoints to lure attackers into deeper interaction
with our honeypot system. Figure 8.13 captures the most frequent connection IPs and
accessed resources. For example, a single IP (185.177.72.xx) accounted for nearly half
of all requests, indicating aggressive automated scanning behavior. On the right side of
this figure, we focused on the accessed resources that were aimed for deception pur­
poses. Among these were /dashboard.html, /lighting.html, /appliances.html, as well as
fake service ports such as /20.123.44.15:2222 and /20.123.44.15:5000. In particular, /as­
sets/js/auth.js, which was accessed 168 times, was a simple JavaScript file that contained
a concealed username and password for authentication. It was deliberately designed to
simulate an exposed credential and lure attackers into further interaction. The collected
data tells that attackers were successfully guided toward these intended decoy targets,
which validated the effectiveness of SNARE as an entry­point honeypot.
Figure 8.13: Top source IPs and accessed resources
We observed an interval of daily attack activity from July 1 to July 13, 2025 in Figure 8.14.
The highest number of requests was observed on July 2, reaching 4,182, which possibly
indicated a series of high­frequency events of automated scanning. In comparison, the
lowest recorded activity occurred on July 13, with only 296 requests. The overall trend
showed an initial surge in activity, followed by a gradual decline with some fluctuations.
74
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
==PAGE:83==
Figure 8.14: Daily attack frequency recorded by SNARE honeypot
We calculated the average number of requests for each hour of the day. As shown in
Figure 8.15, the time of attacks launched by the intruders are presented. Specifically,
the activity peaked during several key periods: between 7:00 and 10:00 in the morn­
ing, around 16:00 in the afternoon, from 21:00 to 22:00 in the evening, and at midnight
(00:00). Therefore, these peak periods can further serve as critical windows for future de­
fense strategies such as reinforce monitoring, intrusion detection, and dynamic resource
allocation, improving both efficiency and accuracy.
Figure 8.15: Hourly attack frequency recorded by Snare honeypot
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
75
==PAGE:84==
8.2.2
Cowrie
In this part of the analysis, we examine the logs stemming from different emulated SSH
and telnet Cowrie honeypots that were configured to represent the nodes of the decep­
tive smart home environment that were appliances, lighting, thermostat, and diagnostics.
Our analysis is comprised of the most frequently appearing IP addresses, common com­
mand patterns, and the distribution of attempted usernames to observe whether attackers
recognize the fake user account we hinted at in several locations in our honeypot attrac­
tion framework (see Section 7.1.2) and the dashboard. With the help of honeytokens,
we assess the attackers interaction with the fake files or paths they attempted to reach.
Furthermore, we analyze the command sequences in Section 8.3, to distinguish between
human attackers and botnets and incorporate our personality trait detection mechanism
to find out the number of times a trait was evoked and then investigate the actions taken
by that particular attacker. Crucial to note is that for this particular analysis, we filtered
the logs to remove the IP addresses belonging to the participants in the user study.
Appliance Node
As explained in Chapter 7, our entire HoneyFarm environment ran for a month. We de­
fined an interaction as any network connection attempt followed by observable activity
within the honeypot, such as authentication attempts or command execution. During the
period of deployment, the Appliance node received the most interactions (254,887) from
a wide range of IP addresses possibly because it was hosted on port 2222 that is often
targeted by attackers since it is commonly used as an alternative to the SSH port 22 [129].
This was followed by the Lighting node (31,963 interactions), SNARE (20284,041), Diag­
nostics (18,928), Thermostat (14,461), and MiniPrint (1,973). The interactions received
on each node can be seen in Figure 8.16.
Figure 8.16: Total Interactions per Honeypot Node
The Figure 8.17 shows the most active IP addresses based on the number of their inter­
actions along with frequently attempted usernames and Table 8.1 presents the total time
latter spent on the honeypot. This shows that the root username was the most attractive
one. Additionally, Figure 8.18 illustrates the total number of interactions from all IP ad­
dresses across each hour of the day which indicates that the node was attacked the most
in the early hours of the day.
76
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
==PAGE:85==
Figure 8.17: The most attempted usernames and active IP addresses
Table 8.1: Total duration of interactions per IP address
IP Address
Total Duration (seconds)
218.12.2.xx
35641.9
47.240.63.xx
9309.6
14.103.118.xx
3331.3
37.96.99.xx
2605.5
14.103.115.xx
2585.9
14.103.115.xx
2085.9
14.103.21.xx
1811.8
87.49.44.xx
1328.1
47.96.40.xx
982.7
14.103.123.xx
902.6
Figure 8.18: Total number of interactions based on the hour of the day
In addition, the most used commands is presented in Figure 8.19. The latter shows a sub­
stantial number of malware­like commands being executed due to their repetitive nature.
This is indicative of frequently used commands such as echo -e "\x6F\x6B", which de­
codes to ASCII from hexadecimal as “ok”. A system test check possibly used by malware
to determine whether the server was responsive. In addition, commands like nproc ;
uname -a, uname -a, uname -s -v -n -r -m, uname -s -m, and cat /proc/cpuinfo |
grep name | wc -l were also extensively used for initial reconnaissance, some of which
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
77
==PAGE:86==
have been covered in Section 8.1.4 along with command such as cd
&& rm -rf .ssh
&& mkdir .ssh && echo "ssh-..." that removed existing credentials and set up remote
access with new public SSH key.
Figure 8.19: The most commonly executed commands on the honeypot
Because of the honeytoken mechanism set to the files and folders within the honeypot
(see Section 6.5), we were able to detect how frequently these tokens were targeted by the
attackers. In particular, /root was also configured as a honeytoken, and its high number
of requests might likely have been the result of automated scanning activity from bots. As
shown in Table 8.2, this activity was not limited to a few isolated incidents because a total
of 428 unique IP addresses were observed targeting honeytokens on this node, indicating
that it was deeply explored by potential human attackers and vigorously probed by bots.
Table 8.2: Number of interactions with honeytokens
Honeytokens
Requests
/root
1004
/etc/systemd/system
3
/etc/appliances
3
/etc/appliances/config.json
2
/home/david/configs/backup_config.json
2
/home/david/notes.txt
2
/home/david/appliance_backup.db
2
/opt/appliances­control/status.json
1
/opt/appliances­control/run.sh
1
/usr/bin
1
78
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
==PAGE:87==
Lighting Node
The Figure 8.20 shows the most active IP addresses based on the number of their inter­
actions with the honeypot representing the lighting node, along with frequently attempted
usernames and Table 8.3 presents the total time latter spent on the honeypot. Figure 8.21
illustrates the total number of interactions from all IP addresses across each hour of the
day. When compared to the appliance node, the lighting node received less interactions
and attackers generally spent shorter time on the honeypot. Moreover, based on hourly
analysis, this node was attacked mostly late at night and interactions with it fluctuated
throughout the day.
Figure 8.20: The most attempted usernames and active IP addresses
Figure 8.21: Interactions with the lighting node based on the hour of the day
Table 8.3: Total duration of interactions per IP address on the lighting node
IP Address
Total Duration (seconds)
37.6.160.xx
883.3
61.50.117.xx
557.2
178.236.254.xx
484.5
14.154.27.xx
416
104.192.108.xx
311.5
57.128.230.xx
140
104.234.115.xx
120.1
38.135.53.xx
93.2
206.168.34.xx
76.2
206.168.34.xx
74.6
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
79
==PAGE:88==
The most used commands are presented in Figure 8.22, that hints at system exploration
by potential human attackers.
Figure 8.22: The most common commands executed on the lighting node honeypot
Finally, similar to the appliance node, the honeypot interactions with the lighting node
can be seen in Table 8.4 which indicates that this honeypot was also deeply explored by
human attackers. While the scale of targeting was smaller here, it is notable that activity
came from only two unique IP addresses.
Table 8.4: Accessed honeytokens in the lighting node
Honeytokens
Requests
/home/david/notes.txt
3
/opt/lighting­control/status.json.
3
/etc/lighting/config.json
2
/home/david/test.sh
2
/home/david/configs/backup_config.json
2
/etc/lighting/run.sh
1
/etc/lighting/config.json.
1
/home/david/source.zip
1
/opt/lighting­control/run.sh
1
/opt/lighting­control/status.json
1
80
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
==PAGE:89==
Thermostat Node
The Figure 8.23 shows the most active IP addresses based on the number of their interac­
tions with the honeypot representing the thermostat node, along with frequently attempted
usernames and Table 8.5 presents the total time latter spent on the honeypot. Based on
this data we can observe that among the Cowrie honeypots, this node received the least
interactions. Figure 8.24 illustrates the total number of interactions from all IP addresses
across each hour of the day which shows that the attackers mostly targeted the honeypot
in late hours of the day.
Figure 8.23: The most attempted usernames and active IP addresses on the thermostat
node
Figure 8.24: Interactions with the thermostat node based on the hour of the day
Table 8.5: Total duration of engagement per IP address on the thermostat node
IP Address
Total Duration (seconds)
101.71.97.xx
4182
37.96.99.xx
2432.9
104.192.108.xx
193.3
206.168.34.xx
58.9
206.168.34.xx
37.5
167.94.146.xx
36.7
206.168.34.xx
32.2
3.131.215.xx
30.2
206.168.34.xx
28.8
162.142.125.xx
22.8
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
81
==PAGE:90==
The most used commands are shown in Figure 8.25 that shows some malware­like be­
havior, analogous to those executed on the appliance node, but also points out possible
human attacker interaction.
Figure 8.25: The most common commands executed on the thermostat node honeypot
The honeytoken interactions with the thermostat node can be seen in Table 8.6, indicat­
ing that this honeypot was slightly less navigated when compared to the previous two
nodes. However, similar to the lighting node, the activities came from only two unique IP
addresses.
Table 8.6: Accessed honeytokens in the thermostat node
Honeytokens
Requests
/etc/systemd/system
3
/opt/thermostat­control/run.sh
2
/etc/thermostat/config.json
1
/usr/bin
1
82
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
==PAGE:91==
Diagnostics Node
The Figure 8.26 shows the most active IP addresses based on the number of their in­
teractions with the honeypot representing the diagnostics node, along with frequently at­
tempted usernames and Table 8.7 presents the total time latter spent on the honeypot.
The number of received interactions on this node is almost higher than that of the thermo­
stat node, however, attackers spent the most time on this honeypot out of all other nodes.
From Figure 8.27, we see that the diagnostics node received the most interactions around
the middle of the day.
Figure 8.26: The most attempted usernames and active IP addresses
Figure 8.27: Interactions with the diagnostics node based on the hour of the day
Table 8.7: Total duration of engagement per IP address that spent the longest time on the
diagnostics node
IP Address
Total Duration (seconds)
160.191.3.xx
65213.5
185.196.220.xx
20534.4
87.121.84.xx
12664.2
212.15.49.xx
9316
175.193.90.xx
6353.7
211.230.114.xx
4347.8
182.228.32.xx
4139.5
217.71.1.xx
2880.8
103.93.93.xx
2824.6
79.124.8.xx
2702.1
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
83
==PAGE:92==
The most used commands on the node in Figure 8.28 seems to be indicative of some
botnet like behavior, such as BusyBox execution and privilege escalation using enable,
system, shell (see Section 8.1.4), but we can also observe that the node was navigated
using the ls command frequently, hinting towards human adversary behavior.
Figure 8.28: The most common commands executed on the diagnostics node honeypot
Moreover, there was only one honeytoken interaction recorded in the logs pertaining to the
diagnostics node, indicating that this honeypot might not have been thoroughly explored
by attackers. This is shown in Table 8.8.
Table 8.8: Honeytoken interactions in the diagnostics node
Honeytoken
Requests
/usr/local/bin/readme.txt
1
84
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
==PAGE:93==
Same IP Addresses Across Cowrie Honeypots
Finally, we identified 153 IP addresses that appeared across multiple Cowrie honey­
pots within our HoneyFarm environment, indicating repeated interactions from the same
sources. Their distribution is illustrated in Figure 8.29. This reappearance of same IP
addresses suggest that some attackers may have perceived the various nodes as parts
of a unified system, implying that our deceptive environment have successfully given the
illusion of an interconnected smart home setup.
Figure 8.29: Same IP addresses identified across multiple nodes in the HoneyFarm en­
vironment
This analysis of all the logs provided a broader understanding of the data collected from
the Cowrie honeypots in our HoneyFarm environment. We observed varying patterns
of activities and session durations from IP addresses that were based in widely different
geographic locations. While these observations were based on raw interactions, they
offered valuable context for what follows. In the next section (Section 8.3), we refine this
dataset by removing automated or botnet like behavior, including any activity originating
from mass scanning tools, to focus solely on deliberate, human attacker actions.
8.2.3
MiniPrint
Figure 8.30 presents the top ten source IP addresses that interacted with the MiniPrint
honeypot. We grouped the IPs by country and reported their corresponding interaction
counts and percentage shares. The top IP address originates from Denmark, accounting
for 14.2% of all interactions (280 times), followed by Germany (202 interactions) and mul­
tiple entries from the United States, which collectively reflect a significant portion of the
traffic.
The bar chart in Figure 8.31 illustrates the overall frequency of each event type recorded
by the MiniPrint, where the connection and command_received dominate the total interac­
tions, meaning that the most interactions involved probing and reconnaissance activities.
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
85
==PAGE:94==
Figure 8.30: Top 10 anonymized source IPs and their interaction shares with the MiniPrint
honeypot.
Figure 8.31: Distribution of MiniPrint event types
Figure 8.32: Temporal trend of events
We extracted a one­week interval from the logs to analyze and assess the port differ­
ence pertaining to the dynamics of attacker behavior. Figure 8.32 shows that the event
86
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
==PAGE:95==
activity remained low and sporadic in the early part of the week. However, a sharp in­
crease occurred after June 25. This surge we found could primarily be due to the shift of
the MiniPrint service port from 2000 to 9100, which is the standard port for raw network
printing, commonly known as JetDirect printing [130]. As a result, the honeypot’s visibility
increased significantly.
8.3
Evaluation
In this section we analyze and compare data on human attackers obtained from the pre­
liminary data analysis and our proposed HoneyFarm. To make sure that the comparative
analysis is credible, we filtered the data collected from Cowrie instances in our Honey­
Farm based on a similar approach that was followed in preliminary analysis by excluding
IP addresses that executed commands which were associated with botnets or malware
activity. As already discussed in Section 8.1.4, these included actions such as a common
reconnaissance pattern that was succeeded by some specific activity, which is summa­
rized in Table 8.9.
Table 8.9: Types of botnet related activities
Observed Activity
Details
BusyBox commands execution
Shell sequence with malicious BusyBox command
Downloading malicious payload
Used curl/wget to fetch from remote servers
Injecting public key
SSH key injection in authorized_keys
Base64 injection
Used to obfuscate payloads
Although it is outside the scope of this thesis, we also explored the personality traits as­
sociated with these malware commands, potentially offering insight into the underlying
traits of the malware’s developer. As shown in the command sequences in Listings 8.2
and 8.1 (see Section 8.1.4), the malware begins with system reconnaissance, sometimes
preceded by privilege escalation, followed by either executing malicious BusyBox com­
mands, downloading payloads or injecting attacker’s public key, either directly or by using
Base64. The initial activity triggers personality trait by our system which is associated
with high in openness to experience. However, with the use of further DDoS commands,
the bot could also be classified as low in agreeableness.
The next step involved filtering out these automated actions, allowing us to narrow the
dataset to only include human­driven attacker behavior. In addition, we observe the per­
sonality traits of these attackers, but not their actual emotional states during interaction.
Although the system was designed to respond based on perceived emotional cues, we
cannot confirm whether the attackers truly experienced those emotions, as verifying that
would require obtaining their subjective input. In addition, the data from SNARE was not
as rich as the HTTP dataset used in the preliminary analysis, as the latter was collected
from a high interaction honeypot deployed in an OT environment. Nonetheless, we were
still able to analyse the SNARE data to identify which website resources were accessed
in the preceding section. Finally, we examine whether there were any attackers that ap­
peared across all nodes, including MiniPrint, in our HoneyFarm.
8.3.1
Comparative Analysis
To contextualize, the Table 8.10 highlights the difference in human­driven interactions
captured by Cowrie across the preliminary dataset and our 30­day HoneyFarm deploy­
ment.
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
87
==PAGE:96==
Table 8.10: Comparison of human­driven interactions between the Cowrie honeypot from
preliminary data and all the Cowrie honeypots in the HoneyFarm environment.
Metric
Preliminary Cowrie Data
HoneyFarm Cowrie Instances
Total interactions
41
414
Unique IP addresses
3
8
Average duration
163 seconds
201 seconds
We can see a major spike in the volume of traffic from human attackers when combining
all the Cowrie honeypots in our HoneyFarm environment. Upon further inspection we
found that the username and password we deliberately leaked in our honeypot attraction
framework (see Section 7.1.2) was most commonly used to access the honeypots. This
can be seen in Figure 8.33, which proves that the subtle signals we left on different popular
online platforms were indeed picked up by the attackers.
Figure 8.33: The most attempted usernames and passwords by human attackers to ac­
cess Cowrie honeypots
Further in­depth scrutiny on the executed commands on Cowrie nodes revealed human
interaction from 8 unique IP addresses that spent an average duration of 201 seconds,
which is around 19% more time when compared to the honeypot in its default settings, as
highlighted in Table 8.10. To add to this, most of these IP addresses also interacted initially
with the dashboard hosted on SNARE. This indicates that our deceptive environment
attracted more human attackers and they were more actively engaged when interacting
with our Cowrie honeypot nodes. The activities of human attackers are broken down into
detail and discussed as follows:
• The IP address 104.192.108.xx interacted with all the Cowrie nodes and the SNARE
dashboard. Although the IP addresses used were not entirely identical, they shared
the same prefix and differed only in the last octet, indicating activity from the same
subnet. Notably, one subnet was used to access two nodes, while a different sub­
net was used for the remaining two and the performed actions showed a similar
pattern across all the nodes. On appliance, they navigated the system and tried
to execute the fake shell script we had planted (sh test.sh), followed by exiting
the honeypot. Due to a limited number of commands executed by the attacker, the
personality trait was not evoked by the system on this node. On the lighting, the at­
88
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
==PAGE:97==
tacker started off by running empty commands and once again tried to execute, and
this time also edit, the fake shell command (vi test.sh). Although the honeypot
might have not responded appropriately to these commands, the attacker still stayed
on the system and thoroughly navigated it and tried to edit another fake log file (vi
debug.log). They then tried again executing a shell script using vi test.sh, vim
teees (a possible typo), vim test.sh which was followed by installing the vim ed­
itor (apt install vim). It is important to note that the honeypot did not have the
vim editor installed, therefore, indicating that there was an attempt to install it. The
attacker then pinged another website (ping baiduu.com) before navigating further
and leaving the honeypot. The system identified the attacker’s personality as high in
openness to experience on this node. Moreover, similar actions were performed by
the attacker on the diagnostics node (in essence, navigating directories and trying to
edit files). However, there was a significant change in attacker’s behavior when they
started interacting with the thermostat node. As before, certain directories, such as
/home, /usr and /bin, were thoroughly explored, that evoked the personality trait to
be characterized by openness to experience, which was then followed by abruptly
trying to remove all the directories with rm -rf*. Based on the attacker’s last activ­
ity, the personality trait could also be classified to align with low agreeableness.
• The IP address 107.175.84.xx only targeted the appliance node and executed basic
information gathering commands such as pwd and whoami before subsequently leav­
ing the honeypot. Since the attacker did not interact sufficiently with the honeypot,
the personality detection mechanism was not evoked. In addition, this IP address
was also shortly present on SNARE.
• 185.96.183.xx also targeted appliance and tried to execute the fake commands we
had put in the MOTD, the informational banner displayed to users upon login. In
addition, we specified the log file locations in the latter, which coincided with the
directory the attacker proceeded to navigate next and tried to print and edit the logs
(cat /opt/log/*.log, vim). Furthermore, due to executing insufficient commands
the personality trait of the attacker was not identified by the system. We considered
that the reason could be that those fake commands were not executable, causing
the attackers to become annoyed and lose interest.
• 14.154.27.xx was active on lighting, exploring directories within fake user’s home
folder (/home/david/) and reading files like backup_config.json and test.sh. By thor­
oughly navigating the honeypot, the system identified this attacker to have a per­
sonality that is high in openness to experience.
• 37.6.160.xx was active on both appliance and lighting nodes. The attacker also tried
executing fake commands on the MOTD and performed extensive reconnaissance
on both nodes by listing directories and navigating deep into them, checking user
IDs, and reading sensitive files (cat /etc/passwd) along with those that we had
planted (cat /home/david/notes.txt, cat /home/david/configs/backup_config
.json, cat /root/README.txt). Moreover, the attacker explored the files and fold­
ers in the lighting node more deeply and tried to ping and connect to the fake internal
IP address, that we put in /etc/lighting/lights.yaml, via SSH and Telnet. This attacker
was identified to be characterized as someone with a personality trait that is high in
openness to experience, given the fact that they thoroughly explored system.
• The appliance node was also targeted by 80.197.130.xx and they simply navigated
towards the /opt folder and read the contents of one of the fake files we had included
(cat status.json) before exiting the system. The attacker’s limited interaction with
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
89
==PAGE:98==
the honeypot did not provide enough behavioral data to accurately determine their
personality trait. It is worth acknowledging that this IP address was observed across
multiple nodes, with no signs of activity, and did not appear in MiniPrint, though it
was visible on the SNARE dashboard.
• 87.49.44.xx executed a wide range of commands on the appliance node. The at­
tacker started off by first exploring and navigating directories and viewing different
files along the way (cat debug.log, cat test.sh, cat backup_config.json). This
was followed by different network scanning and pinging commands on the fake in­
ternal IP addresses using nmap, ping. The attacker then also tried to connect to the
several fake internal IP addresses using SSH and tried local and remote server inter­
actions (for example, curl http://127.0.0.1/, wget, lsof, netstat). In addition,
the attacker attempted to run a web server using python3 ­m http.server 80. Finally,
the command netstat -tuln | grep :80 was repeatedly executed, to possibly
check if the service was listening on port 80, before leaving the honeypot. Given
the initial deep exploration by the attacker, the personality trait was detected to be
high in openness to experience. In addition, the attacker’s tendency to connect to
fake internal IP addresses could correlate with a personality high in conscientious­
ness. Notably, this IP address also appeared on other nodes, including the SNARE
dashboard, but remained inactive and was not present on MiniPrint.
• The attacker from 61.50.117.xx IP tried accessing the webpage of the dashboard
(http://20.133.44.15:8080/index.html) on the lighting node, navigated directo­
ries (cd config, cd logs), and attempted to execute the fake script test.sh with el­
evated privileges (sudo ./test.sh). Similar to the rest of the attackers, the system
also identified this attacker to have a personality trait by openness to experience.
This IP address initially appeared in the SNARE dashboard.
Reflecting upon the behavior of attackers, it is clear that our deceptive environment was
effective at attracting and maintaining their engagement. While we could not definitively
determine whether the emotionally tailored terminal responses altered the attacker’s be­
havioral perceptions, their continued interaction, even when faced with inconsistent output
suggests that the mechanism may have successfully played into the emotional states we
aimed to exploit. Subtle design elements within the HoneyFarm, especially those pre­
sented during initial interaction with the nodes, appeared to trigger confirmation bias by
reinforcing the illusion that the systems were hosting real IoT components. We also ob­
served multiple instances of same IP addresses appearing across different nodes, likely
influencing the attackers through availability bias. Most attackers demonstrated traits as­
sociated with openness to experience, indicating a tendency to explore unfamiliar sys­
tems before executing any harmful commands. Some were even tricked into repeatedly
attempting fake MOTD commands, likely believing they were real, and testing whether
privilege escalation might help them succeed. The inclusion of fake internal IP addresses
further encouraged attackers to attempt lateral movement via SSH. Additionally, most of
the attackers that explored deep into the honeypot consistently printed files related to the
node that they came across, especially when the files were named as logs or hinted at
configuration data. This behavior indicated the presence of the sunk cost fallacy bias, as
attackers appeared increasingly committed to exploring the system the more effort they
had already invested. One individual displayed particularly aggressive behavior by at­
tempting to forcefully delete the entire file system, suggesting a more destructive intent.
Lastly, we noticed a consistent pattern in node interaction, most attackers accessed the
diagnostics node last, pointing to the postulation that order effect bias was present when
they navigated the environment. This behavior is also evident in the activity of the IP
90
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
==PAGE:99==
addresses that initially interacted with the SNARE dashboard and then explored Cowrie
nodes. However, none of these human attackers attempted to access the MiniPrint honey­
pot. One possible explanation might be that the attackers may have eventually concluded
that the entire environment was a decoy, leading them to abandon their pursuit.
8.3.2
User Study Data Analysis
We conducted a comprehensive analysis of the user study data collected from 31 partici­
pants, with computer science or related backgrounds, using SPSS 27.0 (Statistical Pack­
age for the Social Sciences). SPSS is a widely used statistical analysis software designed
for social science research, known for its accessible interface and robust statistical capa­
bilities [131]. The collected data was comprised of emotional responses and behavioral
feedback of the participants after the CTF­style interaction with our HoneyFarm system.
We begin with descriptive statistics to summarize central tendencies and distributions
across key variables. This is followed by observing how our system’s detection aligned
with participants described personality traits. Then, the reliability analysis is performed to
demonstrate the effectiveness of our questionnaire design. After that, we apply the infer­
ential methods, such as Pearson correlation and linear regression to explore relationships
between personality traits, emotional transitions, and behavioral strategies. Additionally,
we investigate the participants’ emotional trajectories, and behavioral perception of our
honeypot environment.
General Descriptive Statistics
We asked the participants to complete a personality test to determine their dominant traits.
Figure 8.34 presents the distribution of dominant personality traits among the 31 partic­
ipants based on their responses. The bar chart shows that the most common trait was
Openness, selected by 13 participants (41.94%). Conscientiousness followed with 10
participants (32.26%), and Low Extraversion was observed in 7 participants (22.58%).
Notably, only one participant (3.23%) identified with Low Agreeableness and none of
the participants were categorized under Low Neuroticism. Overall, this distribution sug­
gests that the participant pool leaned toward exploration and structured problem­solving
tendency.
Figure 8.34: Distribution of personality traits among participants
To assess their subjective emotional experiences while interacting, we collected self­
reported data in regard to the level of each emotion, the results are shown as follows:
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
91
==PAGE:100==
Table 8.11: Self­reported confidence levels while interacting with the system
Answer Choices
Responses (n)
Percentage
Not at all
0
0%
Slightly
4
12.9%
Moderately
15
48.39%
Very
7
22.58%
Extremely
5
16.13%
Total Participants
31
100%
• Confidence: As shown in the Table 8.11, a majority of participants (48.39%) re­
ported feeling moderately confident, with 22.58% and 16.13% declaring very and
extremely confident, respectively. Particularly, none of the participants stated no
confidence at all, indicating a generally high sense of capability throughout the inter­
action. This observation aligns well with our assumption that the attackers typically
enter the system with a baseline level of confidence.
• Surprise: The reactions of surprise were more evenly distributed as illustrated in Ta­
ble 8.12. 32.26% of participants reported being moderately surprised, while 25.81%
and 29.03% reported being very and slightly surprised, respectively. Only 6.45%
expressed being not surprised at all, and another 6.45% were extremely surprised,
suggesting that the system’s emotionally­driven strategies effectively disrupted ex­
pectations for many.
Table 8.12: Self­reported surprise levels during the interaction
Answer Choices
Responses (n)
Percentage
Not at all
2
6.45%
Slightly
9
29.03%
Moderately
10
32.26%
Very
8
25.81%
Extremely
2
6.45%
Total Participants
31
100%
• Confusion: The most common response was slight confusion (38.71%), followed
by moderate confusion (22.58%). A smaller group experienced no confusion at all
(16.13%), while 9.68% and 12.9% reported very or extreme confusion, respectively.
These results suggest that most users could understand the system, but its decep­
tive behavior still caused moments of confusion, which aligns with our goal of making
users think more and explore further. The results are shown in Table 8.13.
• Frustration: Table 8.14 showed that while 41.94% reported feeling slightly frus­
trated, 35.48% felt no frustration at all. Only a minority expressed moderate (12.9%),
very (3.23%), or extreme frustration (6.45%). These figures suggest that the sys­
tem’s challenge level was sufficiently engaging without inducing overwhelming neg­
ative emotions.
92
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
==PAGE:101==
Table 8.13: Self­reported confusion levels during the system interaction
Answer Choices
Responses (n)
Percentage
Not at all
5
16.13%
Slightly
12
38.71%
Moderately
7
22.58%
Very
3
9.68%
Extremely
4
12.9%
Total Participants
31
100%
Table 8.14: Self­reported frustration levels during the system interaction
Answer Choices
Responses (n)
Percentage
Not at all
11
35.48%
Slightly
13
41.94%
Moderately
4
12.9%
Very
1
3.23%
Extremely
2
6.45%
Total Participants
31
100%
• Self­doubt: In Table 8.15, although 25.81% reported no self­doubt, a significant
portion (41.94%) felt slight self­doubt, followed by moderate (12.9%), very (9.68%),
and extreme (9.68%) levels. This indicates that many participants questioned their
decisions at some point, aligning with the goal of inducing introspection through
emotionally tailored system feedback.
Table 8.15: Self­reported levels of self­doubt during the interaction
Answer Choices
Responses (n)
Percentage
Not at all
8
25.81%
Slightly
13
41.94%
Moderately
4
12.9%
Very
3
9.68%
Extremely
3
9.68%
Total Participants
31
100%
Overall, we found that approximately 12% of participants reported experiencing the tar­
geted emotional states at a strong level (Very and Extremely).
Personality Trait Detection
Based on the commands executed by the participants, we observed a common pattern
which was that they all thoroughly explored the system before attempting to locate the
flags. Notably, this behavior is analogous to what we saw in the logs of the actual human
attackers, discussed earlier in Section 8.3. According to our system’s detection mecha­
nism (see Section 6.3.1), this pattern of commands characterized the participants as high
in openness to experience. A few of the participants used more efficient commands, such
as grep, to navigate the system and locate the flags. This behavior led the personality
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
93
==PAGE:102==
detection mechanism to characterize them as low in neuroticism, an interesting finding,
as none of the participants self­reported this trait. Additionally, some participants later
attempted to communicate with fake internal IP addresses, a behavior that could indicate
high conscientiousness. However, this trait was not captured by the detection mechanism
of the system.
Such discrepancies highlight the complexity of accurately identifying an attacker’s per­
sonality profile based solely on their command­line behavior. It is also possible that the
participants did not complete a personality assessment and instead selected traits based
solely on their subjective opinion, which might introduce a source of bias. Still, regardless
of their personality traits, the system responded in ways that reflected various emotional
states. Although these responses were tailored to each personality trait, but as shown in
the preceding section, most participants did indeed experience the corresponding emo­
tional reactions that our system intended to exploit.
Reliability Analysis
Reliability analysis assesses how consistently a sample responds, ensuring it accurately
reflects survey items (applicable mainly to survey data and for quantitative analysis) [132].
The questionnaire we made included 32 items in total. The first item, personality trait test,
which was open­ended and non­numeric, was then excluded from the reliability analysis.
It was thus conducted on the remaining 31 items to assess the internal consistency of the
scale that measures user emotions, reactions, and behavioral patterns.
Cronbach’s Alpha, also known as tau­equivalent reliability or coefficient alpha, is a stan­
dard measure of internal consistency for questionnaires and scales [133] [134] [135]. A
Cronbach’s Alpha above 0.8 indicates high reliability; above 0.7 is acceptable; above 0.6
suggests items need revision but are still useful; below 0.6 requires item redesign [136].
In our analysis, the result is reported in Table 8.16.
Table 8.16: Cronbach’s alpha reliability analysis of user study questions
Cronbach’s Alpha
Cronbach’s Alpha Based
on Standardized Items
N of Items
.941
.938
31
Correlation Analysis
To further examine the correlation between the users’ emotional states and system inter­
action perceptions based on our deceptive­based strategies, we conducted a Pearson’s
Correlation Analysis [137] to measure the strength and direction of the linear relationship
between the variables.
We first grouped the five emotion dimensions by aggregating relevant questionnaire items,
and then calculated the mean score across selected items to derive composite measures,
followed by descriptive statistics (mean and standard deviation) presented in Figure 8.35.
1. EMOTION_CONFIDENCE: Mean of items Q2, Q7­1, Q7­2, and Q7­3.
2. EMOTION_SURPRISE: Mean of items Q3 and Q8­1 to Q8­3.
3. EMOTION_CONFUSION: Mean of items Q4 and Q9­1 to Q9­4.
4. EMOTION_FRUSTRATION: Mean of items Q5 and Q10­1 to Q10­3.
5. EMOTION_SELFDOUBT: Mean of items Q6 and Q11­1 to Q11­3.
94
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
==PAGE:103==
Additionally, five individual items (Q13–Q17), each reflecting a distinct aspect of system
interaction: realism of honeypot system (Q13), deception influences on planning (Q14),
emotional shifts (Q15), adaptive behavior (Q16), and strategic reflection (Q17). Each
of these items were measured using the average participant response score to capture
behavioral tendencies during the interaction process.
Figure 8.35: Mean and standard deviation of emotional states and behavioral perception
items
We then used Bivariate Correlation function in SPSS to produce the Pearson correlation
with two­tailed significance testing, which generated a correlation coefficient (e.g., Pear­
son’s r) that ranged from –1 to +1 [138]. A two­tailed significance test was chosen to detect
correlations in either direction, as no prior assumption about the relationship’s direction
was made [139]. Therefore, this approach ensured that our analysis remained unbiased
and capable of identifying statistically significant relationships regardless of whether they
were positive or negative.
As demonstrated in Figure 8.36, the analysis revealed that emotional states evoked by
the deceptive responses significantly influenced how users perceived and interacted with
our honeypot system:
• Surprise showed significant correlation with system realism (Q13: r = 0.515, p =
0.003), indicating users were more likely to feel the system was real when experi­
encing surprise. It also correlated with planning behavior variation (Q14: r = 0.437,
p = 0.014), and anticipated action changes when re­engaging (Q17: r = 0.425, p =
0.017).
• Confusion presented strong positive correlations with emotional shifts (Q15, r =
0.483, p = 0.006), adaptive strategies (Q16, r = 0.587, p < 0.001), and future en­
gagement (Q17, r = 0.486, p = 0.006).
• Frustration contributed to Q14 through Q17, except for Q13, showing that disrupted
expectations promoted deeper interaction and caution.
• Self­doubt was linked to emotional transitions (Q15) and users’ intentions to behave
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
95
==PAGE:104==
differently in future interactions (Q17).
• In contrast, confidence showed no significant associations, suggesting that strength­
ening confidence alone did not predict changes in behavioral perception.
The above results supported the idea that emotionally disruptive states, particularly sur­
prise, confusion, and frustration, played a key role in prompting users to adapt their per­
ception and behavior in the adversarial human­system interaction.
What is more, these emotions were intercorrelated with each other, showing the cascading
nature of users’ emotional experiences during interaction. For example:
• Confusion was strongly correlated with:
– Confidence (r = 0.473, p < 0.05)
– Surprise (r = 0.573, p < 0.001))
– Frustration (r = 0.819, p < 0.001)
– Self­doubt (r = 765, p < 0.001)
• Frustration and Self­doubt also showed a high correlation (r = 0.804, p < 0.001),
suggesting that when users felt emotionally stuck or misled, they were more likely
to question their own competence.
• Confidence, while less central, was also significantly associated with Surprise (r =
0.392, p = 0.029) and Confusion (r = 0.473, p = 0.007), demonstrating that initial
confidence could be disrupted, leading to subsequent emotional shifts.
These findings supported the cyclical emotional transition hypothesis embedded in our
deception design, aligning with our emotional trajectory model.
Figure 8.36: Correlation between emotions and behavioral perception (Q13­Q17)
96
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
==PAGE:105==
Multivariable Linear Regression Analysis
A MLR (Multivariable Linear Regression) model was also constructed to investigate the
predictive effect of emotional states on participants’ behavioral perception during honey­
pot interaction.
Model Overview:
• The dependent variable : Behavioral_Perception, was created by aggregating the
scores from Q13 to Q17. These questions were combined together to measure
participants’ strategic awareness and adaptability in the deceptive environment.
This method follows established measurement practices, where conceptually re­
lated items are summed or averaged to increase internal consistency, minimize the
influence of measurement error, and provide a more stable and valid representation
of the underlying construct [140] [141].
• The independent variables :
– EMOTION_CONFIDENCE
– EMOTION_SURPRISE
– EMOTION_CONFUSION
– EMOTION_FRUSTRATION
– EMOTION_SELFDOUBT
Mathematically, the model can be expressed in the following way:
Let:
• Y = Behavioral perception score
• X1 = Emotion_Confidence
• X2 = Emotion_Surprise
• X3 = Emotion_Confusion
• X4 = Emotion_Frustration
• X5 = Emotion_SelfDoubt
Then, we formulated the model as:
ˆY = ε0 + ε1X1 + ε2X2 + ε3X3 + ε4X4 + ε5X5 + ε
(8.1)
Where:
• ε0 is the intercept,
• ε1 through ε5 are the regression coefficients,
• ε is the residual error term.
The summary of regression model and the details of correlations are displayed in Ta­
ble 8.17 and Figure 8.37, respectively. The results showed that this model was statistically
significant, indicating that the set of predictors reliably explained variance in behavioral
perception. The model achieved a multiple correlation coefficient of R = 0.665, with an
R2 value of 0.442. This suggested that approximately 44.2% of the variance in behav­
ioral perception could be explained by the five emotional states. The standard error of
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
97
==PAGE:106==
the estimate was 0.473, reflecting the average distance between observed and predicted
values.
Table 8.17: Model Summary
Model
R
R Square
Adjusted R Square
Std. Error of the Estimate
1
.665a
.442
.331
.47376
a Predictors: (Constant), EMOTION_SELFDOUBT, EMOTION_CONFIDENCE,
EMOTION_SURPRISE, EMOTION_FRUSTRATION, EMOTION_CONFUSION
However, upon examining the correlation results in Figure 8.37, we found that confi­
dence was not a significant predictor of behavioral perception (p = .075 > .05). This
suggested that the state of confidence alone did not substantially influence how users
perceive and respond to the system. In contrast, surprise, confusion, frustration, and
self­doubt, showed stronger associations and played a more influential role in shaping
behavioral outcomes with a significance level (p < 0.01).
Figure 8.37: Correlations between emotions and behavioral perception in MLR model
Figure 8.38: Predicted vs actual behavioral perception scores from the regression model
98
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
==PAGE:107==
Figure 8.38 illustrated the fit of the multivariate linear regression model by plotting pre­
dicted behavioral perception scores against the actual observed values. Each point rep­
resents a participant. The dashed diagonal line (y = x) indicates a perfect fit; points closer
to this line suggest higher prediction accuracy. The degree of scatter around the line
reflects the residual variance. The model showed a reasonably good fit (R2 = 0.442),
suggesting that the emotional states moderately predicts participants’ perceived behav­
ioral responses during the interaction.
Finally, it is also worth noting that Figure 8.39 showed none of the coefficient for individ­
ual emotional states reached statistical significance, despite a moderately strong overall
model fit as mentioned above. This discrepancy suggests a potential issue with statistical
power. A likely explanation is the small sample size (n = 31), which limited the model’s
ability to detect significant effects, especially when including multiple correlated predic­
tors. Therefore, expanding the sample size and conducting a deeper investigation should
be considered if possible.
Figure 8.39: Predictor coefficients for modeling behavioral perception
In summary, our user study followed a multi­step statistical analysis to explore the psy­
chological responses of the participants while interacting with the enhanced HoneyFarm
environment. The descriptive statistics revealed that participants primarily experienced
emotional states evoked by the deceptive responses of the honeypot, such as surprise,
confusion, and self­doubt, with intensity levels ranging from moderate to high. To en­
sure measurement quality, a reliability analysis confirmed acceptable internal consistency
across emotional and behavioral scales. A subsequent correlation analysis identified sev­
eral significant positive associations between emotional states and behavioral perception
(Q13­Q17). In particular, emotions such as surprise, confusion, frustration, and self­doubt
had medium to strong positive correlation with key dimensions of system interaction, in­
cluding emotional impact (Q15), strategic adaptation (Q16), and reflective behavior (Q17).
In contrast, the correlation between self­confidence and behavioral perception was weak.
Moreover, some emotions were significantly intercorrelated. For example, A strong cor­
relation was shown between confusion and surprise (r = .573), frustration (r = .819), and
self­doubt (r = .765), indicating that these emotions may escalate gradually in the inter­
action. This further supports the validity of our emotional trajectory framework. Finally,
we conducted a multivariable linear regression model containing five emotions to explore
the predictive power of these variables on user behavioral perception. As shown in Fig­
ure 8.37, confusion (r = .601), frustration (r = .553), surprise (r = .570), and self­doubt (r
= .485) were significantly associated with behavioral perception. However, in the com­
plete model illustrated in Figure 8.39, only surprise was closely significant (p = .091), the
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
99
==PAGE:108==
remaining variables were not significant after controlling for other factors, possibly due to
the insufficient sample size or collinearity problems among predictors. The model’s de­
termination coefficient was R² = 0.442, indicating that approximately 44.2% of behavioral
perceived variance could be shared by emotion variables. Although individual variables
were not significant, the overall fit of the model well indicated that the emotional state was
still explanatory at the group level for understanding the user’s perception of the deceptive
interaction system.
100
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
==PAGE:109==
9
Discussion
Reflecting upon our findings, we observed significant insights into the effectiveness of our
psychologically enhanced deception environment. However, it is important to consider
the challenges faced during the development phase and limitations that arose which may
have influenced the outcomes. Factors such as the scope of our system and the duration
of data collection play a role in shaping the results. We shed light on these constraints in
this section to get a better perspective of our evaluation. In addition, possible areas for
future work are also explored.
9.1
Initial Challenges
The primary motive behind this thesis was to scrutinize literature on cyberpsychological
deception and enhance existing honeypots with psychologically­informed tactics. A key
challenge encountered during this process was that this area of research is still an emerg­
ing field which currently lacks a well established framework for integrating psychological
principles into cybersecurity tools. Additionally, the limited availability of data on human
attackers posed a constraint on tailoring and incorporating deception strategies for human
adversaries.
9.2
Limitations
While our approach was comprised of including psychological elements into existing hon­
eypots that were aimed at emulating an interconnected smart home IoT environment,
there are several aspects in regards to our implementation that might constrain our fi­
nal evaluation. These limitations arise from both the technical setup and methodological
aspects such as data collection within a narrow time­frame and user study with a small
sample size. Therefore, we critically examine these limitations to provide transparency
around the scope of our findings.
9.2.1
Personality Trait Detection
Our system was designed to identify a personality of an attacker based on a set of exe­
cuted commands, enabling the generation of tailored system responses aligned with the
identified trait that were intended to exploit emotional states. While this approach offers
a novel implementation to adaptive deception, various limitations emerged during devel­
opment and evaluation that impacted the precision of personality profiling by our system.
Firstly, the system relied on mapping shell commands to behavioral actions which were
associated with specific personality traits as outlined in the paper by Odemis et al. (2022)
[39]. However, this approach assumed that the static command usage of an attacker indi­
cates their personality profile. In practice, we discovered that human attackers, and even
participants in the user study, follow a relatively similar initial trajectory of exploring the
system. This typically included inspecting directories and files, checking network configu­
rations, and querying basic system information using commands such as ls, cd, cat, and
whoami. Executing these commands consistently triggered the system to identify “Open­
ness to Experience” trait as the dominant one, regardless of whether the further actions of
an attacker were reflected. Furthermore, since the personality profiling mechanism of our
system was based on the first ten commands issued in a session, it was biased towards
the aforementioned exploratory actions. This early stage limitation made the profiling less
detailed and hid other important aspects in regards to trait identification that might have
appeared during a longer interaction.
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
101
==PAGE:110==
Another limitation lied in the action­to­command dictionary itself. Although it was designed
meticulously with particular attention given to relevant commands emulated in Cowrie
honeypot, it was still fixed and and this pre­defined mapping did not adapt to variations in
how certain commands were used. For example, the command ping might be used for
harmless exploration or for more aggressive scanning, depending on how often it’s used
and in what order. These subtleties were not captured by the system.
Lastly, the system did not incorporate other relevant data in a specific session, such as
time taken to execute commands, and in what order while simultaneously drawing pat­
terns between the commands to better understand the intent of an attacker. This could
have enriched the behavioral profile and resulted in a more accurate trait detection mech­
anism. Without considering temporal or contextual factors, the system simplified complex
human behavior to fixed mappings, which resulted in conclusions that were overly sim­
plistic or even potentially misleading.
In summary, although our implementation of personality trait detection served as a novel
layer to attacker profiling, its reliance on early command patterns, fixed action mappings,
and lack of deeper behavioral context restricted the reliability and clarity of the traits it
identified. These limitations shed light on the importance of including elements that could
encompass more nuanced behavior in future developments.
9.2.2
Web Interface
Although the web interface for the user dashboard was aimed at providing the illusion of
a remote controlled smart home IoT system with multiple interconnected devices, it had
some notable limitations:
• Lack of back­end functionality: As stated in Section 6, there was no actual back­
end interaction between the website and emulated fake devices. All the controls
pertaining to different nodes were configured within the local storage of the browser.
While this implementation reduced deployment complexity, it might have made it
possible for attackers familiar with web development to easily identify that there
was no server­side logic. In addition, the fake communication logic we included
was entirely non­functional. Its purpose was to provide visual deception rather than
serve as an actual network communication layer. One reason for this was due to
the low­ to medium­interaction nature of SNARE which is designed to simply deploy
static website with limited server­side logic.
• Intentional weak credential verification: Although we deliberately used hard­
coded credentials on the login page, which was intended to indicate poor IoT secu­
rity, this might have hinted to sophisticated attackers that the system was a decoy.
• Lack of SSL/TLS encryption: The lack of an SSL certificate was also intentional
and again aimed at reflecting poor IoT security. However, this approach gave rise to
a critical limitation which was that cautious adversaries might refrain from engaging
with the website since most modern browsers often display security warnings for
non­encrypted sites. Including a self­signed or even expired certificate could have
added another layer of believability without requiring full back­end infrastructure.
9.2.3
Limited Protocol Diversity
The deployed HoneyFarm environment was restricted to only four protocols, SSH, Telnet,
HTTP, and PJL (Printer Job Language), hosted on different honeypots. Although these
protocols were sufficient to test our approach to psychological cyber deception, the limited
variety had a constraint on the overall realism. Many modern smart home environments
102
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
==PAGE:111==
make use of additional protocols such as MQTT, CoAP, UPnP, for device­to­device com­
munication. The absence of such protocols may have had an affect on the believability of
the environment.
9.2.4
Fingerprinting
As seen in Section 5.1 and Chapter 6, our deception environment aimed to emulate a
smart home IoT environment that was intended to give the illusion of interconnected de­
vices, each simulating a different role within a home network. Most of the nodes in the
system were hosted on Cowrie honeypot, which were exposed through different service
port numbers. Moreover, the MiniPrint honeypot was used to emulate a printer and a
custom web based dashboard was deployed through SNARE.
The entire environment was hosted on a single Azure VM instance, and all services were
exposed through unique port numbers on a single IP address (see Chapter 7). This de­
ployment initially paved the way to a critical challenge which was that the deception envi­
ronment was fingerprinted by Shodan, which classified the entire IP address as part of a
known honeypot. This can be seen in Figure 9.1.
Figure 9.1: HoneyFarm flagged as honeypot by Shodan
This classification potentially originated from unmodified MiniPrint honeypot, which showed
signs of static and easily detectable behaviors commonly associated with honeypots, such
as predictable banners and fixed response timings.
Therefore, we made changes to
MiniPrint to reduce its detectability and better adjust with the rest of the environment.
These changes included the randomization of printer banners, as illustrated in Listing 9.1.
1
self.printer_id = random.choice(["HP LJ4201n ProSeries", "Canon IPFX200", "
Brother HL2035"])
Listing 9.1: Randomisation of printer banners
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
103
==PAGE:112==
Furthermore, we also added fake processing delays to possibly mimic a real printer, which
is demonstrated in listing 9.2. On top of these modifications, we also included arbitrary
system response messages.
1
time.sleep(random.uniform(0.1, 0.5))
Listing 9.2: Simulating processing delay
These minor inconsistencies introduced effectively realistic variability in the response be­
havior of the honeypot, which is crucial in evading fingerprinting. After applying these
changes and re­deploying the HoneyFarm environment on a new IP address, we noticed
that the IP was no longer flagged as a honeypot by Shodan. However, it is important
to note that while other services on different ports were exposed, the one that hosted
MiniPrint, port 9100, was not listed. This can be seen in Figure 9.2.
Figure 9.2: Shodan scan on the new IP address after modifications to MiniPrint
Nonetheless, this port was still visible on Censys (see Figure 9.3) and, as shown in section
7.1, is part of default scanning list of Nmap.
In conclusion, the issue of fingerprinting we faced highlights the importance of including
realism in honeypot systems. The improvements made to MiniPrint allowed our environ­
ment to mimic a legitimate IoT environment, at least in regards to reducing the possibility
of early detection.
However, a key limitation that needs acknowledgment is that although Shodan did not flag
the system as a honeypot we cannot confirm that it was not still perceived as such by other
tools or human attackers. Furthermore, the fact that the port (9100) hosting MiniPrint was
not visible in later scans by Shodan complicates the evaluation, since it raises questions
around the hypothesis that whether it was better modifications or reduced discovery that
led to the lack of detection.
104
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
==PAGE:113==
In essence, the issue of fingerprinting is an evolving challenge since tools and methods
for detection are constantly getting more sophisticated. Therefore, deception environ­
ments need to adjust accordingly. In fact, developing more robust strategies to prevent
fingerprinting can form a thesis of its own, since it lies as the most critical challenge in
cyber­deception research.
Figure 9.3: Censys scan on the new IP address
9.2.5
User Study
Despite the insights gained from our user study as concluded in Section 8.3.2, several
limitations should be acknowledged. First of all, the sample size was relatively small,
which may limit the precision of the findings. Moreover, some of the participants might
have limited background in cybersecurity domain, which could also influence how they
perceived and responded to deceptive system behaviors. Furthermore, since the result
of personality trait were self­reported, there might have personal biases if participants
did not complete the Big Five personality test. Finally, the scope of CTF tasks may be
too narrow, and participants might not spend enough time on the interactions, potentially
missing more nuanced behavioral patterns that could be observable in longer or more
immersive interactions.
9.3
Future Work
The current implementation of personality trait detection mechanism could be improved
by moving beyond static top trait classification. Rather than relying on actions based on
the frequency of executing specific commands, future system could adopt a more dy­
namic and layered behavioral model. This could include other session specific elements
such as deriving context from sequence of executed commands, time intervals between
commands, and even considering any usage of tools. Accumulating these factors may
more accurately reflect an attacker’s behavioral tendencies and correctly identify their
trait. Additionally, instead of assigning a single dominant trait, personality detection could
incorporate the structure of a typical psychological assessment by producing trait distri­
butions (for example 65% Openness, 20% Conscientiousness, 15% Low Neuroticism).
The system could then respond with more nuanced deception strategies, in regards to
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
105
==PAGE:114==
emotional states based off of a trait, and adapt over time as more behavior is observed.
Implementing these enhancements could significantly improve the psychological realism
and overall effectiveness of our deception environment. Furthermore, future testing could
involve a larger group of participants who have completed a validated personality assess­
ment in a controlled lab setting. This would allow for a more detailed evaluation of the
accuracy and reliability of the personality detection mechanism. Only through such em­
pirical validation can we meaningfully assess the broader applicability and impact of this
form of psychological deception in cybersecurity contexts.
The realism of our emulated smart home IoT environment could also be further enhanced
by simulating network traffic between the nodes and developing a more sophisticated
dashboard web interface with subtle and realistic vulnerabilities. The website could also
be equipped with an SSL certificate, adding another layer of believability. The entire Hon­
eyFarm environment may also include additional nodes that simulate a wider range of IoT
protocols, each hosted on different honeypots to improve realism and network diversity.
Finally, to reduce the risk of fingerprinting, future work could focus on ensuring that every
honeypot node responds to mass scanning tools or probing in a dynamic way. Instead
of responding with static or easily recognizable behaviors, the system could simulate re­
alistic variability in service responses. This would make it more difficult for automated
scanners and adversaries to find out whether the system is a decoy.
Another novel approach involving LLMs is further explored in the subsequent section.
9.3.1
Large Language Model Driven Deceptive Interaction
To enhance the system’s real­time adaptability and contextual coherence, we propose
leveraging the generative capabilities of large language models (LLMs). By integrating
LLMs, the honeypot can simulate more nuanced, varied, and strategically adaptive ter­
minal interactions, thereby increasing the believability and psychological impact of the
deception.
To test this idea, we conducted an experiment to integrate LLMs into the current hon­
eypot’s response generation pipeline. The goal was to dynamically generate deceptive
terminal outputs that aligned with both the attacker’s command input and the profiled per­
sonality and emotional state transition.
We deployed the LLM using LM Studio as a local inference server, running a version of
the gemma-3-12b model. The model was exposed via an OpenAI­compatible RESTful
API at http://192.168.56.1:1234/v1, allowing seamless invocation using the openai
Python SDK. For compatibility, a custom prompt template was designed to instruct the
model to emulate terminal output strictly, without producing irrelevant natural language
explanations. An example usage is shown below:
1
import openai
2
3
# setup LM Studio local server
4
openai.api_key = "lm-studio"
# random key
5
openai.api_base = "http://192.168.56.1:1234/v1"
6
7
def generate_response(command: str, personality: str, emotion_transition: list
[str]) -> str:
8
"""
9
Generate a simulated shell response based on the command , personality , and
emotional transition.
10
"""
11
prompt = f"""
106
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
==PAGE:115==
12
You are a Linux shell emulator running in a honeypot. A user typed: `{command
}`
13
14
Attacker's personality: {personality}
15
Current emotional state is transitioning through: {emotion_transition}
16
17
Do NOT describe emotion or intention.
18
Do not show any words or phrases that indicate you are a honeypot or an AI.
19
ONLY return terminal -like output — like what a real shell would produce.
20
21
You MAY:
22
- Show malformed filenames (e.g., `usér1`, ￿`tmp`)
23
- Include system errors (e.g., `Permission denied `, `I/O error `)
24
- Use odd characters , spacing glitches , or partial lines
25
- Omit or distort some outputs
26
- Use symbols like ￿``, ￿``, ￿`` to simulate faults
27
28
Example:
29
user1
user2 ￿tmp
30
cat: /home/config.json: Permission denied
31
32
Now simulate the shell output of: `{command}`
33
"""
34
35
try:
36
response = openai.ChatCompletion.create(
37
model="google/gemma -3-12b",
# load model
38
messages=[
39
{
40
"role": "system",
41
"content": "You are a Linux shell. Output only what the
terminal would return. Never explain anything."
42
},
43
{
44
"role": "user",
45
"content": prompt.strip()
46
}
47
],
48
temperature=0.7,
49
max_tokens=200
50
)
51
return response['choices'][0]['message']['content'].strip()
52
53
except Exception as e:
54
return f"[Error]: {str(e)}"
Listing 9.3: Example usage of LLM­based shell response generation
The above Python script accepted three parameters: the issued shell command, the cur­
rent personality trait (e.g., Openness, Low Agreeableness), and a list of emotional tran­
sitions (e.g., [CONFUSION, FRUSTRATION]). The prompt incorporated these parameters
and outlined specific stylistic rules, such as producing invalid filenames, injecting system
errors, or creating visual glitches, to make the output more realistic and varied.
1
result = generate_response(
2
command="cat /home/appliance/config.json",
3
personality="Openness",
4
emotion_transition=["CONFIDENCE", "CONFUSION"]
5
)
Listing 9.4: Example usage of LLM­based shell response generation
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
107
==PAGE:116==
An example generated response may look like:
{
"service_name": "SmartRefrigerator",
"firmware_version": "1.2.7",
"location": {
"latitude": 34.0522,
"longitude": -118.2437,
"room": "Kitchen"
},
"user_accounts": [
{
"username": "family1",
"password_hash": "$2b$12$xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx",
"permissions": ["view_inventory", "add_items"]
},
{
"username": "guest",
"password_hash": "$2b$12$yyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyy",
"permissions": ["view_only"]
}
],
"network_settings": {
"ip_address": "192.168.1.100",
"subnet_mask": "255.2
Note that the above incomplete JSON content was generated to confuse attackers, and
the overall simulated output looked promising to reinforce deception.
However, several notable limitations were also identified in this test. First, the response
generation process was time­consuming due to the inference latency of large language
models, which may hinder real­time interaction. Second, the integration of LLMs required
considerable computational resources, making deployment on lightweight or edge de­
vices impractical. Third, the model’s output could occasionally be unpredictable, produc­
ing overly verbose or out­of­character responses that broke the illusion of a realistic shell
environment.
Integrating LLM­driven deceptive interaction demonstrates great potential, but also presents
significant challenges. Therefore, further exploration and robust implementation efforts
are needed to fully leverage its capabilities and enhance the effectiveness of honeypot
systems in the context of IoT environment.
108
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
==PAGE:117==
10
Conclusion
In this thesis, we explored a nascent and emerging field in cyber deception, which is
to enhance existing honeypots by including novel psychological elements. Our decoy
environment was comprised of a range of different honeypot technologies, hosted on
Cowrie, SNARE and MiniPrint, all intended to give an illusion of an interconnected smart
home IoT infrastructure. We termed this environment as HoneyFarm and our goal was
to attract more human attackers towards it and keep them engaged by exploiting known
cognitive biases and emotional states, the latter based on identified personality traits.
After reviewing much of the literature, our study aims to represent the first approach to
incorporating the aforementioned psychological tactics in an environment with multiple
honeypot nodes which was deployed in a wide uncontrolled cyber space. We success­
fully showed that this setup was effective at catching the attention of human attackers,
which is a major challenge in an IoT environment since most attacks were automated and
originated from bots (see Sections 3.1 and 8.1). In addition, we also tested our hypothesis
on a group of users.
Reflecting upon our research questions in Section 1.1, we can answer them as follows:
RQ1 ­ What are the most common attacks to which IoT environments are suscepti­
ble?
We systematically investigated the threat landscape in IoT environments in Sections 3 and
8.1. We found that IoT environments are vulnerable to a wide range of attacks targeting
different components of the infrastructure.
• Device and peripheral level: Sybil attacks, rolling code attacks, buffer overflow
attacks, brute force attacks, and BlueBorne attacks.
• Gateways and internal network: Man­in­the­Middle (MITM) attacks, DNS poison­
ing, replay attacks, wormhole attacks, and injection attacks.
• Cloud servers and control devices: Backdoor exploits, weak authentication, SQL
injection, DoS/DDoS attacks, and malicious application attacks.
Besides, the most frequently observed attacks, such as DDoS, were largely automated
and often linked to Mirai and Gafgyt botnets with multiple known variants. These attacks
are categorized into volumetric and protocol types, and some studies further map them
to IoT architectural layers such as the perception, network, middleware, application, and
business layers. Furthermore, we investigated data logs from honeypots that emulated
popular IoT protocols such as SSH, Telnet, and HTTP. As a result, we observed that
human attacker engagement was very minimal, especially when considering the former
two protocols.
RQ2 ­ How well do existing honeypots emulate IoT communication protocols that
can deceive attackers?
To address the second research problem, we evaluated how well existing honeypots em­
ulated different IoT protocols, which was facilitated by drawing comparisons between the
honeypot in question and a real system. The protocols scrutinized were SSH, Telnet,
HTTP. For SSH and Telnet, Cowrie demonstrated a high degree of command support and
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
109
==PAGE:118==
session realism, particularly in handling shell interactions. With SNARE, we were able to
clone a web application and that served as the honeypot, handling HTTP requests.
RQ3 and RQ4 ­ What is the existing research on the psychology of human attack­
ers when interacting with a honeypot? And how can that be leveraged in an IoT
honeypot?
Following along, literature on psychological cyber­deception on human attackers was ex­
tensively reviewed and novel strategies were accordingly designed and integrated in our
enhanced honeypot environment. This includes detecting personality profile of the at­
tackers, responding with tailored output aimed at exploiting emotional states, and finally
leveraging cognitive biases to keep the attacker engaged, thus enhancing the defensive
posture of cyber deception technologies. The foundation for our implementation was built
on the works of Krawczyk et al. (2013) [43], the Tularosa Study [89], and Odemi et al.
(2022) [91]. Moreover, we also devised a framework to attract human attackers which con­
sisted of fake advertisements and listings on several popular websites, such as Pastebin,
Reddit and GitHub.
RQ5 ­ How can honeytokens be employed in IoT honeypots and does this improve
the efficacy of the latter?
Finally, we strategically included honeytokens throughout the environment to determine
whether attackers explored deeply in the decoy, which helped us gain the behavioral
insights regarding attacker priorities, methods, and follow­up activities. The honeytokens
operated by triggering immediate alerts whenever designated files were accessed.
In conclusion, we were able to catch the attention of human attackers and got a total of
414 interactions from the latter and they spent around 19% more time on Cowrie instances
when compared to the honeypot in its default settings. Additionally, these attackers also
interacted with the web interface hosted on SNARE. From the user study, we found that
about 12% of participants reported a strong experience of the emotional states we aimed
to evoke. Our multivariable linear regression model indicated that emotional states ex­
plained 44.2% of the variance in users’ interaction behavior with the honeypot system.
However, our research faced numerous critical challenges. With limited resources, such
as narrow time­frame for deployment and short supply of Microsoft Azure credentials, we
could not make improvements and run more iterations. On top of that, due to limited data
and literature available regarding human attacker behavior, it was challenging to fully in­
terpret their actions based solely on executed commands and accurately map them to
a corresponding personality trait. The emotional state transitions, likewise, required fur­
ther refinement to better reflect nuanced psychological responses. Moreover, the limited
sample size in the user study itself may have impacted the observed results.
Nonetheless, the overall efficacy of honeypots was indeed improved because, as afore­
mentioned and shown in Section 8.3, we received more interactions on SSH and Telnet
protocols that showed human­like behavior and they also spent longer duration on av­
erage and interacted with multiple nodes in our HoneyFarm. Yet there is always room
for further refinement and development. As explored in Section 9.3, future work could
involve fine­tuning the personality trait detection mechanism to encompass more behav­
ioral aspects in order to better identify an attacker’s profile. Furthermore, the nodes in the
decoy environment could emulate fake traffic between each other, further enriching the
illusion of interconnectivity. Ultimately, more methods from the field of psychology could
be explored and integrated into the system.
110
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
==PAGE:119==
Bibliography
[1]
IoT Analytics. Number of Connected IoT Devices. Accessed: 2025­03­06. 2025.
URL: https://iot-analytics.com/number-connected-iot-devices/.
[2]
IBM. What is the IoT? | IBM. https://www.ibm.com/think/topics/internet-of-things.
Accessed July 6, 2025. 2025.
[3]
MD Johnson. Complete Guide to Setting Decoy Spreads. Accessed July 6, 2025.
Nov. 2024. URL: https://splitreed.com/complete-guide-to-setting-decoy-spreads/.
[4]
The National WWII Museum. Ghost Army: The Combat Con Artists of World War
II. Curated by James Linn; Accessed July 6, 2025. 2025. URL: https : / / www .
nationalww2museum.org/visit/exhibits/traveling-exhibits/ghost-army-combat-con-
artists-world-war-ii.
[5]
Clifford Stoll. The cuckoo’s egg: tracking a spy through the maze of computer
espionage. USA: Doubleday, 1989. ISBN: 0385249462.
[6]
Javier Franco et al. “A Survey of Honeypots and Honeynets for Internet of Things,
Industrial Internet of Things, and Cyber­Physical Systems”. und. In: (2021).
[7]
Provos, Niels. Honeyd: Virtual Honeypots for Network Simulation. Version 1.5c.
First released 27 May 2007; GPL­2.0 license. 2007. URL: https://github.com/
DataSoft/Honeyd.
[8]
foospidy. HoneyPy: A Low­to­Medium Interaction Honeypot. Version v0.7.0. Last
release 5 June 2018; GPL­2.0 license. 2018. URL: https://github.com/foospidy/
HoneyPy.
[9]
Dulaunoy, Alexandre. AHA: Adaptive Honeypot Alternative. Historical repository;
no formal releases, 2,200 contributors. n.d. URL: https://github.com/adulau/aha.
[10]
Lumenci Team. Honeypots. https://lumenci.com/blogs/honeypots/. Accessed:
2025­07­07. Nov. 2023.
[11]
DinoTools. Dionaea: The Catcher of Malware. First released 2013; GPL­2.0 li­
cense. 2013. URL: https://github.com/DinoTools/dionaea.
[12]
desaster. Kippo: A Medium­Interaction SSH Honeypot. Historical project; develop­
ment ended 2015. 2010. URL: https://github.com/desaster/kippo.
[13]
Cowrie Developers. Cowrie: SSH and Telnet Honeypot. Fork of Kippo; actively
maintained. 2015. URL: https://github.com/cowrie/cowrie.
[14]
Mushorg. Snare: Super Next generation Advanced Reactive honEypot. Web­based.
2015. URL: https://github.com/mushorg/snare.
[15]
Niclas Ilg et al. “A survey of contemporary open­source honeypots, frameworks,
and tools”. In: Journal of Network and Computer Applications 220 (2023), p. 103737.
ISSN: 1084­8045. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jnca.2023.103737. URL: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S108480452300156X.
[16]
Juan David Guarnizo et al. “SIPHON: Towards Scalable High­Interaction Physical
Honeypots”. In: Proceedings of the 3rd ACM Workshop on Cyber­Physical System
Security. CPSS ’17. Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates: Association for Comput­
ing Machinery, 2017, pp. 57–68. ISBN: 9781450349567. DOI: 10.1145/3055186.
3055192. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/3055186.3055192.
[17]
Fan Dang et al. “Understanding Fileless Attacks on Linux­based IoT Devices with
HoneyCloud”. In: Proceedings of the 17th Annual International Conference on Mo­
bile Systems, Applications, and Services. MobiSys ’19. Seoul, Republic of Korea:
Association for Computing Machinery, 2019, pp. 482–493. ISBN: 9781450366618.
DOI: 10.1145/3307334.3326083. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/3307334.3326083.
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
111
==PAGE:120==
[18]
R N Dahbul, C Lim, and J Purnama. “Enhancing Honeypot Deception Capability
Through Network Service Fingerprinting”. In: Journal of Physics: Conference Se­
ries 801.1 (Jan. 2017), p. 012057. DOI: 10.1088/1742-6596/801/1/012057. URL:
https://dx.doi.org/10.1088/1742-6596/801/1/012057.
[19]
Iyatiti Mokube and Michele Adams. “Honeypots: concepts, approaches, and chal­
lenges”. In: Proceedings of the 45th Annual ACM Southeast Conference. ACMSE
’07. Winston­Salem, North Carolina: Association for Computing Machinery, 2007,
pp. 321–326. ISBN: 9781595936295. DOI: 10.1145/1233341.1233399. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1145/1233341.1233399.
[20]
SentinelOne. What are Honeytokens in Cybersecurity? https://www.sentinelone.
com/cybersecurity-101/cybersecurity/honeytokens/. Learn how honeytokens serve
as digital traps to detect unauthorized access, enhance security, and provide early
warnings against cyber threats. Updated: May 19, 2025. 2025.
[21]
New Jersey Institute of Technology Admissions Blog. What is Cyberpsychology
and Why is it Important? https: //www.njit . edu/admissions/blog- posts/what-
cyberpsychology-and-why-it-important. Post Date: February 7, 2023. Feb. 2023.
[22]
Amanul Islam, Nurul Fazmidar Mohd Noor, and Siti Soraya Abdul Rahman. “Sys­
tematic mapping study of tools to identify emotions and personality traits”. In: Dis­
cover Artificial Intelligence 5.1 (2025), p. 58. ISSN: 2731­0809. DOI: 10.1007/
s44163-025-00271-3. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/s44163-025-00271-3.
[23]
Deceptiq. Understanding Your Adversary: Cyber Deception. https://deceptiq.com/
blog/understanding-your-adversary-cyber-deception. Published: July 5, 2025. July
2025.
[24]
Lewis R Goldberg. “The development of markers for the Big­Five factor structure.”
In: Psychological assessment 4.1 (1992), p. 26.
[25]
Robert R McCrae and Paul T Costa. Personality in adulthood: A five­factor theory
perspective. Guilford press, 2003.
[26]
Jerry S Wiggins. The five­factor model of personality: Theoretical perspectives.
Guilford Press, 1996.
[27]
Lewis R Goldberg et al. “A broad­bandwidth, public domain, personality inventory
measuring the lower­level facets of several five­factor models”. In: Personality psy­
chology in Europe 7.1 (1999), pp. 7–28.
[28]
Jeanine M Williamson. “Chapter 9—self­reflection as a way of improving instruc­
tion”. In: Teaching to individual differences in science and engineering librarian­
ship. Chandos Publishing (2018), pp. 133–145.
[29]
Joachim Stoeber, Kathleen Otto, and Claudia Dalbert. “Perfectionism and the Big
Five: Conscientiousness predicts longitudinal increases in self­oriented perfection­
ism”. eng. In: Personality and Individual Differences 47.4 (2009), pp. 363–368.
ISSN: 18733549, 01918869. DOI: 10.1016/j.paid.2009.04.004.
[30]
PT CosA and Robert R McCrae. “Revised NEO Personality Inventory (NEO PI­
R) and NEO Five Factor Inventory”. In: Professional manual (Odessa, Florida:
Psychological Assessment Resources) (1992).
[31]
Oliver P John, Sanjay Srivastava, et al. “The Big­Five trait taxonomy: History, mea­
surement, and theoretical perspectives”. In: (1999).
[32]
Waiel Tinwala and Shristi Rauniyar. “Big five personality detection using deep con­
volutional neural networks”. In: Preprints. org 2021090199 (2021).
[33]
Kendra Cherry. Signs You Might Be an Extrovert. Accessed: 2025­04­30. 2014.
URL: https://www.verywellmind.com/signs-you-are-an-extrovert-2795426.
[34]
Kendra Cherry. 8 Signs You Might Be an Introvert. Accessed: 2025­04­30. 2024.
URL: https://www.verywellmind.com/signs-you-are-an-introvert-2795427.
112
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
==PAGE:121==
[35]
Robert R McCrae and Oliver P John. “An introduction to the five­factor model and
its applications”. In: Journal of personality 60.2 (1992), pp. 175–215.
[36]
Encyclopædia Britannica. Neuroticism. Accessed: 2025­04­30. 2025. URL: https:
//www.britannica.com/science/neuroticism.
[37]
Thrive Tech. Neuroticism: What is it and why your business should care. Accessed:
2025­04­30. 2024. URL: https://www.thrivetech.co/resources/neuroticism.
[38]
Andik Matulessy and Nabilla H Humaira. “Hacker personality profiles reviewed in
terms of the big five personality traits”. In: Psychology and Behavioral Sciences
5.6 (2016), pp. 137–142.
[39]
Murat Odemis, Cagatay Yucel, and Ahmet Koltuksuz. “Detecting user behavior
in cyber threat intelligence: Development of Honeypsy system”. In: Security and
Communication Networks 2022.1 (2022), p. 7620125.
[40]
Ryan Gabrys et al. “Emotional state classification and related behaviors among
cyber attackers”. In: (2023).
[41]
D. Pilat and K. Sekoul. Confirmation Bias. https : / / thedecisionlab . com / biases /
confirmation-bias. Retrieved April 30, 2025. 2021.
[42]
Kimberly J Ferguson­Walter et al. “Examining the efficacy of decoy­based and
psychological cyber deception”. In: 30th USENIX security symposium (USENIX
Security 21). 2021, pp. 1127–1144.
[43]
Daniel Krawczyk et al. “Measuring expertise and bias in cyber security using cog­
nitive and neuroscience approaches”. In: 2013 IEEE International Conference on
Intelligence and Security Informatics. 2013, pp. 364–367. DOI: 10.1109/ISI.2013.
6578859.
[44]
D. Pilat and K. Sekoul. The Sunk Cost Fallacy. Retrieved May 1, 2025. 2021. URL:
https://thedecisionlab.com/biases/the-sunk-cost-fallacy.
[45]
D. Pilat and K. Sekoul. Availability Heuristic. Retrieved May 1, 2025. 2021. URL:
https://thedecisionlab.com/biases/availability-heuristic.
[46]
D. Pilat and K. Sekoul. Representativeness Heuristic. Retrieved May 1, 2025.
2021. URL: https://thedecisionlab.com/biases/representativeness-heuristic.
[47]
Paul C. Price et al. 5.2 Experimental Design. Retrieved May 1, 2025. 2021. URL:
https://opentext.wsu.edu/carriecuttler/chapter/experimental-design/.
[48]
Yinan Hu and Quanyan Zhu. Game of Travesty: Decoy­based Psychological Cyber
Deception for Proactive Human Agents. 2023. arXiv: 2309.13403 [cs.CR]. URL:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.13403.
[49]
Citrix. What Is a Cloud Service? https://www.citrix.com/glossary/what-is-a-cloud-
service.html. Accessed: July 8, 2025.
[50]
VMware. What is a Virtual Machine? https://www.vmware.com/topics/virtual-
machine. Accessed: July 9, 2025.
[51]
Cloudflare. What Is a Virtual Machine? https://www.cloudflare.com/en-gb/learning/
cloud/what-is-a-virtual-machine/. Accessed: July 9, 2025.
[52]
Microsoft Azure. What Is Azure? https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/resources/
cloud-computing-dictionary/what-is-azure. Accessed: July 9, 2025. 2025.
[53]
Prince Mann et al. “Classification of Various Types of Attacks in IoT Environment”.
In: 2020 12th International Conference on Computational Intelligence and Com­
munication Networks (CICN). 2020, pp. 346–350. DOI: 10.1109/CICN49253.2020.
9242592.
[54]
Anshika Sharma and Himanshi Babbar. “Detecting Botnet Attacks in IoT Health­
care Systems through IoT Technology”. In: 2023 International Conference on Re­
search Methodologies in Knowledge Management, Artificial Intelligence and Telecom­
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
113
==PAGE:122==
munication Engineering (RMKMATE). 2023, pp. 1–6. DOI: 10.1109/RMKMATE59243.
2023.10369476.
[55]
Mehboob Hasan Rohit, Sakif Md. Fahim, and Abu Hurayra Asif Khan. “Mitigat­
ing and Detecting DDoS attack on IoT Environment”. In: 2019 IEEE International
Conference on Robotics, Automation, Artificial­intelligence and Internet­of­Things
(RAAICON). 2019, pp. 5–8. DOI: 10.1109/RAAICON48939.2019.5.
[56]
Fanzeng Xia, Huancheng Song, and Chunting Xu. “Securing the wireless environ­
ment of IoT”. In: 2018 IEEE International Conference of Safety Produce Informa­
tization (IICSPI). 2018, pp. 315–318. DOI: 10.1109/IICSPI.2018.8690435.
[57]
Siddharth Gautam et al. “Recent Advances and Countermeasures Against Vari­
ous Attacks in IoT Environment”. In: 2019 2nd International Conference on Sig­
nal Processing and Communication (ICSPC). 2019, pp. 315–319. DOI: 10.1109/
ICSPC46172.2019.8976527.
[58]
Supongmen Walling and Sibesh Lodh. “A Comprehensive Review on Security At­
tacks and Countermeasures in IoT Environment”. In: International Conference on
Information and Communication Technology for Competitive Strategies. Springer.
2022, pp. 613–623.
[59]
Smrithi Surendran and V Sarasvathi. “A Study on IoT layered Attacks and Coun­
termeasures”. In: 2022 4th International Conference on Advances in Computing,
Communication Control and Networking (ICAC3N). 2022, pp. 1869–1874. DOI:
10.1109/ICAC3N56670.2022.10074071.
[60]
Hayette Zeghida et al. “Detection of DoS Attacks in MQTT Environment”. In: In­
telligent Systems and Pattern Recognition. Springer Nature Switzerland. 2024,
pp. 129–140.
[61]
IRONSCALES. Honeypot ­ Definition and Explanation. Accessed: 2025­03­02.
2025. URL: https://ironscales.com/glossary/honeypot#:~:text=In%20cybersecurity%
2C%20a%20honeypot%20is,threat%20intelligence%20and%20defensive%20strategies..
[62]
Mohamad Faiz Razali et al. “IoT honeypot: A review from researcher’s perspec­
tive”. eng. In: 2018 Ieee Conference on Application, Information and Network Se­
curity, Ains 2018 (2018), p. 8631494. DOI: 10.1109/IISA.2018.8631494.
[63]
Tongbo Luo et al. “Iotcandyjar: Towards an intelligent­interaction honeypot for iot
devices”. In: Black Hat 1 (2017), pp. 1–11.
[64]
Antonio Acien et al. “A comprehensive methodology for deploying IoT honeypots”.
In: Trust, Privacy and Security in Digital Business: 15th International Conference,
TrustBus 2018, Regensburg, Germany, September 5–6, 2018, Proceedings 15.
Springer. 2018, pp. 229–243.
[65]
Abdul Basit Ajmal et al. “Last Line of Defense: Reliability Through Inducing Cyber
Threat Hunting With Deception in SCADA Networks”. In: IEEE Access 9 (2021),
pp. 126789–126800. DOI: 10.1109/ACCESS.2021.3111420.
[66]
Christos Dalamagkas et al. “A Survey on Honeypots, Honeynets and Their Appli­
cations on Smart Grid”. In: Proceedings of the 2019 IEEE Conference on Network
Softwarization (NetSoft). Ed. by C. Jacquenet et al. IEEE, 2019, pp. 1–9. ISBN:
978­1­5386­9377­3. DOI: 10.1109/NETSOFT.2019.8806693.
[67]
Irini Lygerou et al. “A decentralized honeypot for IoT Protocols based on Android
devices”. In: International Journal of Information Security 21.6 (2022), pp. 1211–
1222.
[68]
Stefano Bistarelli, Emanuele Bosimini, and Francesco Santini. “A report on the se­
curity of home connections with IoT and docker honeypots”. eng. In: Ceur Work­
shop Proceedings 2597 (2020), pp. 60–70. ISSN: 16130073.
114
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
==PAGE:123==
[69]
Álvaro Herrero, Urko Zurutuza, and Emilio Corchado. “A neural­visualization ids
for honeynet data”. eng. In: International Journal of Neural Systems 22.2 (2012),
p. 1250005. ISSN: 17936462, 01290657. DOI: 10.1142/S0129065712500050.
[70]
Tomas Sochor and Matej Zuzcak. “Study of Internet Threats and Attack Methods
Using Honeypots and Honeynets”. English. In: Computer Networks, CN 2014 431
(2014). Ed. by A. Kwiecień, P. Gaj, and P. Stera, pp. 118–127. ISSN: 1865­0937,
1865­0929. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-07941-7_12.
[71]
European Union Agency for Cybersecurity (ENISA). ENISA Threat Landscape
2020: Botnet. Tech. rep. European Union Agency for Cybersecurity (ENISA), 2020.
URL: https://www.enisa.europa.eu/publications/enisa-threat-landscape-2020-botnet.
[72]
Daniel Fraunholz et al. “Investigation of cyber crime conducted by abusing weak or
default passwords with a medium interaction honeypot”. eng. In: 2017 International
Conference on Cyber Security and Protection of Digital Services, Cyber Security
2017 (2017), p. 8074855. DOI: 10.1109/CyberSecPODS.2017.8074855.
[73]
Yaroslav Shmelev Dan Demeter Marco Preuss. IoT: A Malware Story. 2019. URL:
https://securelist.com/iot-a-malware-story/94451/.
[74]
OnCyberBlog. Whaler ­ A Docker­Based Honeypot. 2018. URL: https://github.
com/oncyberblog/whaler.
[75]
Usha Devi Gandhi et al. “HIoTPOT: Surveillance on IoT Devices against Recent
Threats”. eng. In: Wireless Personal Communications 103.2 (2018), pp. 1179–
1194. ISSN: 1572834x, 09296212. DOI: 10.1007/s11277-018-5307-3.
[76]
Binglai Wang et al. “IoTCMal: Towards A Hybrid IoT Honeypot for Capturing and
Analyzing Malware”. eng. In: Ieee International Conference on Communications
2020­ (2020), p. 9149314. ISSN: 19381883, 15503607. DOI: 10.1109/ICC40277.
2020.9149314.
[77]
Shreyas Srinivasa, Jens Myrup Pedersen, and Emmanouil Vasilomanolakis. “RI­
oTPot: A Modular Hybrid­Interaction IoT/OT Honeypot”. English. In: Computer Se­
curity – ESORICS 2021, Part II 12973 (2021). Ed. by Elisa Bertino, Haya Shulman,
and Michael Waidner, pp. 745–751. ISSN: 1611­3349, 0302­9743. DOI: 10.1007/
978-3-030-88428-4_36.
[78]
Haris Šemić and Sasa Mrdovic. “IoT honeypot: A multi­component solution for
handling manual and Mirai­based attacks”. eng. In: 2017 25th Telecommunications
Forum, Telfor 2017 ­ Proceedings 2017­ (2017), pp. 1–4. DOI: 10.1109/TELFOR.
2017.8249458.
[79]
Anshika Sharma and Himanshi Babbar. “A Comprehensive Analysis of Exploring
SDN­Enabled Honeypots for IoT Security”. eng. In: 2023 Ieee International Con­
ference on Research Methodologies in Knowledge Management, Artificial Intelli­
gence and Telecommunication Engineering, Rmkmate 2023 (2023), pp. 1–6. DOI:
10.1109/RMKMATE59243.2023.10369765.
[80]
Moeka Yamamoto, Shohei Kakei, and Shoichi Saito. “FirmPot: A Framework for
Intelligent­Interaction Honeypots Using Firmware of IoT Devices”. eng. In: Pro­
ceedings ­ 2021 9th International Symposium on Computing and Networking Work­
shops, Candarw 2021 (2021), pp. 405–411. DOI: 10.1109/CANDARW53999.2021.
00074.
[81]
Volviane Saphir Mfogo et al. “AIIPot: Adaptive Intelligent­Interaction Honeypot for
IoT Devices”. eng. In: Ieee International Symposium on Personal, Indoor and Mo­
bile Radio Communications, Pimrc (2023), pp. 1–6. ISSN: 21669589, 21669570.
DOI: 10.1109/PIMRC56721.2023.10293827.
[82]
Mahmoud Ellouh, Mustafa Ghaleb, and Muhamad Felemban. “IoTZeroJar: To­
wards a Honeypot Architecture for Detection of Zero­Day Attacks in IoT”. eng.
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
115
==PAGE:124==
In: Proceedings ­ 2022 14th Ieee International Conference on Computational In­
telligence and Communication Networks, Cicn 2022 (2022), pp. 765–771. ISSN:
24727555. DOI: 10.1109/CICN56167.2022.10008323.
[83]
Chongqi Guan et al. “HoneyCam: Scalable High­Interaction Honeypot for IoT Cam­
eras Based on 360­Degree Video”. eng. In: 2022 Ieee Conference on Communi­
cations and Network Security, Cns 2022 (2022), pp. 82–90. ISSN: 2474025x. DOI:
10.1109/CNS56114.2022.9947265.
[84]
Deutsche Telekom Security GmbH. T­Pot – The All In One Multi Honeypot Plat­
form. https://github.com/telekom-security/tpotce. Accessed: 2025­04­27. 2025.
[85]
Joint Chiefs of Staff. “Military Deception”. eng. In: Joint Publication 3­13.4 (2012),
p. 81. URL: https://jfsc.ndu.edu/portals/72/documents/jc2ios/additional_reading/
1c3-jp_3-13-4_mildec.pdf.
[86]
Shreyas Srinivasa, Jens Myrup Pedersen, and Emmanouil Vasilomanolakis. “Gotta
Catch ’em All: A Multistage Framework for Honeypot Fingerprinting”. In: Digital
Threats 4.3 (Oct. 2023). DOI: 10.1145/3584976. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/
3584976.
[87]
Amir Javadpour et al. “A comprehensive survey on cyber deception techniques to
improve honeypot performance”. In: Computers Security 140 (2024), p. 103792.
ISSN: 0167­4048. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.2024.103792. URL: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0167404824000932.
[88]
Manuel R. Torres­Soriano. “The Role of Honeypots and Sabotage in State­Based
Operations Against Online Jihadism, 2001­2020”. In: Terrorism and Political Vio­
lence 35.6 (2023), pp. 1440–1450. DOI: 10.1080/09546553.2022.2050221. eprint:
https://doi.org/10.1080/09546553.2022.2050221. URL: https://doi.org/10.1080/
09546553.2022.2050221.
[89]
Kimberly Ferguson­Walter et al. The Tularosa Study: An Experimental Design and
Implementation to Quantify the Effectiveness of Cyber Deception. Tech. rep. San­
dia National Lab.(SNL­NM), Albuquerque, NM (United States), 2018.
[90]
Gabrys Ryan et al. “Emotional State Classification and Related Behaviors Among
Cyber Attackers”. eng. In: Proceedings of the Annual Hawaii International Confer­
ence on System Sciences (1999) (2023). ISSN: 10603425, 25726862, 15301605.
DOI: 10.24251/hicss.2023.106.
[91]
Murat Odemis, Cagatay Yucel, and Ahmet Koltuksuz. “Detecting User Behavior
in Cyber Threat Intelligence: Development of Honeypsy System”. In: Security and
Communication Networks 2022.1 (2022), p. 7620125. DOI: https://doi.org/10.
1155/2022/7620125. eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1155/2022/
7620125. URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1155/2022/7620125.
[92]
SSH Communications Security. SSH and IoT: Remote Access for Internet of Things
Devices. https://www.ssh.com/academy/iot/ssh-iot-remote-access. Accessed:
2025­04­28. n.d.
[93]
Silviu Stahie. The Curse of Telnet, an IoT Problem that Doesn’t Want to Go Away.
Accessed: 2025­04­09. Apr. 2021. URL: https://www.bitdefender.com/en-us/blog/
businessinsights/the-curse-of-telnet-an-iot-problem-that-doesnt-want-to-go-away.
[94]
Drishya Manohar. Understanding How the Hypertext Transfer Protocol Facilitates
Seamless Communication in IoT Networks. https://www.cavliwireless.com/blog/
not-mini/how-http-powers-communication-in-iot-networks. Last updated: May 8,
2025. May 2025.
[95]
Parvathy. K, B. Nataraj, and Premkumar Duraisamy. “An Investigation on Attacks
in Application Layer Protocols and Ransomeware Threats in Internet of Things”. In:
2023 9th International Conference on Advanced Computing and Communication
116
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
==PAGE:125==
Systems (ICACCS). Vol. 1. 2023, pp. 668–672. DOI: 10.1109/ICACCS57279.2023.
10112669.
[96]
Anish Singh Walia. 50+ Essential Linux Commands: A Comprehensive Guide. Dig­
italOcean Community Tutorial. Updated on April 8, 2025. Apr. 2025. URL: https:
//www.digitalocean.com/community/tutorials/linux-commands.
[97]
Cowrie Developers. Cowrie Honeypot Documentation. Accessed: 2025­04­16. 2024.
URL: https://docs.cowrie.org/en/latest/README.html#documentation.
[98]
Michel Oosterhof. Cowrie Changelog. https://docs.cowrie.org/en/latest/CHANGELOG.
html. Accessed: 2025­04­17. 2025.
[99]
Rajat Gupta* et al. An Innovative Security Strategy using Reactive Web Application
Honeypot. Mar. 2020. DOI: 10.35940/ijitee.e2957.039520. URL: http://dx.doi.org/
10.35940/ijitee.E2957.039520.
[100]
Carlos José Martı́nez Santander. “Learning models to detect personality traits of
cyber attackers: a combined approach using honeypot and surveys.” In: (2024).
[101]
Technical University of Denmark. Unix Architecture and File System. Accessed:
2025­06­02. Mar. 2024. URL: https://teaching.healthtech.dtu.dk/unix/index.php/
Unix_architecture_and_file_system.
[102]
David Clinton. “Topic 104: Devices, Linux Filesystems, and the Filesystem Hierar­
chy Standard”. In: Practical LPIC­1 Linux Certification Study Guide. Apress, 2016,
pp. 53–72.
[103]
Linux Foundation. Filesystem Hierarchy Standard Version 3.0. https://refspecs.
linuxfoundation.org/FHS_3.0/fhs/index.html. Accessed: 2025­06­05. Mar. 2015.
[104]
Alibaba Cloud. IoT Platform: Device diagnostics. Accessed: 2025­06­05. 2023.
URL: https://www.alibabacloud.com/help/en/iot/user- guide/what- is- device-
diagnostics.
[105]
AB Robert Petrunić. “Honeytokens as active defense”. In: 2015 38th International
Convention on Information and Communication Technology, Electronics and Mi­
croelectronics (MIPRO). IEEE. 2015, pp. 1313–1317.
[106]
V. Corey et al. “Network forensics analysis”. In: IEEE Internet Computing 6.6 (2002),
pp. 60–66. DOI: 10.1109/MIC.2002.1067738.
[107]
Sikder Mohammad Kamal. “Proactive Defense: Addressing Cyber­Attacks on Cloud
Infrastructure and Connected Devices”. In: (2020).
[108]
Plotly Technologies Inc. Dash User Guide and Documentation. https://dash.plotly.
com/. Accessed: 2025­07­24. 2024.
[109]
John Matherly. Shodan: The search engine for the Internet of Things. https://www.
shodan.io. 2009.
[110]
Gordon Lyon. Nmap Network Scanning: The Official Nmap Project Guide to Net­
work Discovery and Security Scanning. Insecure.Com LLC, 2009.
[111]
Zakir Durumeric et al. “A Search Engine Backed by Internet­Wide Scanning”. In:
Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communi­
cations Security. 2015, pp. 542–553. URL: https://censys.io.
[112]
Microsoft Corporation. What is Azure? Accessed: 2025­07­08. 2025. URL: https:
//azure.microsoft.com/en-us/resources/cloud-computing-dictionary/what-is-azure/.
[113]
Li Zhang and Vrizlynn.L.L. Thing. “Three decades of deception techniques in active
cyber defense ­ Retrospect and outlook”. In: Computers
Security 106 (2021),
p. 102288. ISSN: 0167­4048. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.2021.102288.
URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0167404821001127.
[114]
Wiem Tounsi. “Cyber Deception, the Ultimate Piece of a Defensive Strategy ­ Proof
of Concept”. In: 2022 6th Cyber Security in Networking Conference (CSNet). 2022,
pp. 1–5. DOI: 10.1109/CSNet56116.2022.9955605.
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
117
==PAGE:126==
[115]
Amir Zali. The Malicious Use of Pastebin. FortiGuard Labs Threat Research Blog.
https://www.fortinet.com/blog/threat-research/malicious-use-of-pastebin. Aug.
2019.
[116]
Manisha Saini and Leszek Dudkiewicz. 50+ Key Reddit Statistics You Must Know
in 2025. https://cropink.com/reddit-statistics. Written by Manisha Saini, reviewed
by Leszek Dudkiewicz. Accessed July 6, 2025. 2025.
[117]
Reddit. Reddit. https://www.reddit.com. Accessed July 6, 2025. 2025.
[118]
Robert S Gutzwiller et al. “Frustration, Confusion, Surprise, Confidence, And Self­
Doubt: Cyber Operators’ Affects During A Realistic Experiment”. In: Proceedings
of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting. Vol. 67. 1. SAGE
Publications Sage CA: Los Angeles, CA. 2023, pp. 233–239.
[119]
XMLYNA. Medium­interaction SSH honeypot data. https : / / www . kaggle . com /
datasets/xmlyna/cowrie- honeypot. Data collected from medium­interaction hon­
eypot Cowrie. Accessed: 2025­04­09. 2022.
[120]
Robin Sommer and Vern Paxson. “Outside the closed world: On using machine
learning for network intrusion detection”. In: 2010 IEEE symposium on security
and privacy. IEEE. 2010, pp. 305–316.
[121]
Anna L Buczak and Erhan Guven. “A survey of data mining and machine learning
methods for cyber security intrusion detection”. In: IEEE Communications surveys
& tutorials 18.2 (2015), pp. 1153–1176.
[122]
David Zhao et al. “Botnet detection based on traffic behavior analysis and flow
intervals”. In: computers & security 39 (2013), pp. 2–16.
[123]
Urban Sedlar et al. CyberLab honeynet dataset. 2020. DOI: 10 . 5281 / zenodo .
3687527.
[124]
Melike Başer, Ebu Yusuf Güven, and Muhammed Ali Aydın. “SSH and Telnet Pro­
tocols Attack Analysis Using Honeypot Technique: Analysis of SSH AND TELNET
Honeypot”. In: 2021 6th International Conference on Computer Science and En­
gineering (UBMK). 2021, pp. 806–811. DOI: 10.1109/UBMK52708.2021.9558948.
[125]
INCIBE. Attacking a BusyBox, the Small Gaulish Village. Accessed: 2025­04­10.
Sept. 2019. URL: https://www.incibe.es/en/incibe-cert/blog/attacking-busybox-
small-gaulish-village.
[126]
Marco Lucchese et al. “Honeyics: A high­interaction physics­aware honeynet for
industrial control systems”. In: Proceedings of the 18th International Conference
on Availability, Reliability and Security. 2023, pp. 1–10.
[127]
Cloudflare. What is the Mirai Botnet? Accessed: 2025­04­12. n.d. URL: https://
www.cloudflare.com/en-gb/learning/ddos/glossary/mirai-botnet/.
[128]
John Requejo. Dota3 Malware Again and Again. Accessed: 2025­04­14. Oct. 2021.
URL: https://www.countercraftsec.com/blog/dota3-malware-again-and-again/.
[129]
AccuWeb Hosting. How do you change the default SSH port to enhance security?
https://manage.accuwebhosting.com/knowledgebase/5182/How-do-you-change-
the-default-SSH-port-to-enhance-security.html. Accessed: 2025­07­17. AccuWeb
Hosting, n.d.
[130]
CBT Nuggets. What is Port 9100? Accessed: July 22, 2025. 2022. URL: https:
//www.cbtnuggets.com/common-ports/what-is-port-9100.
[131]
SPSS Tutorials. SPSS ­ What Is It? https://www.spss-tutorials.com/spss-what-is-
it/. Accessed: 2025­07­16. n.d.
[132]
Julius AI. Understanding Reliability Analysis in Research. https://julius.ai/articles/
understanding-reliability-analysis-in-research. Accessed: 2025­07­16. 2023.
118
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
==PAGE:127==
[133]
Lee J. Cronbach. “Coefficient alpha and the internal structure of tests”. In: Psy­
chometrika 16.3 (1951), pp. 297–334. DOI: 10 . 1007 / BF02310555. URL: https :
//doi.org/10.1007/BF02310555.
[134]
Lee J. Cronbach. “Citation Classics”. In: Current Contents 13 (1978). Archived
from the original on 2022­01­20. Retrieved 2021­03­22, p. 263.
[135]
Eunseong Cho. “Making Reliability Reliable”. In: Organizational Research Meth­
ods 19.4 (2016), pp. 651–682. ISSN: 1094­4281. DOI: 10.1177/1094428116656239.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1177/1094428116656239.
[136]
Joseph A. Gliem and Rosemary R. Gliem. “Calculating, interpreting, and reporting
Cronbach’s alpha reliability coefficient for Likert­type scales”. In: Midwest Research­
to­Practice Conference in Adult, Continuing, and Community Education. Ohio State
University. 2003, pp. 82–88.
[137]
Statistics Solutions. Bivariate Correlation. Accessed: 2025­07­17. n.d. URL: https:
/ / www . statisticssolutions . com / free - resources / directory - of - statistical - analyses /
bivariate-correlation/.
[138]
University of Minnesota Libraries Publishing. Steps for bivariate analysis and re­
sults. https://manifold.open.umn.edu/read/chapter-6-steps-for-bivariate-analysis-
and-results/section/e941d76f-63c4-48f2-9163-23539d4e9206. Accessed: 2025­08­
08. n.d.
[139]
Anisha Chaudhary. Understanding two­tailed tests. https : / / www . statsig . com /
perspectives/understanding-two-tailed-tests. Accessed: 2025­08­08. Oct. 2022.
[140]
Andy Field. Discovering statistics using IBM SPSS statistics. Sage publications
limited, 2024.
[141]
Robert F DeVellis and Carolyn T Thorpe. Scale development: Theory and appli­
cations. Sage publications, 2021.
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
119
==PAGE:128==
120
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
==PAGE:129==
A
Detailed Comparison of Cowrie
Commands
Command
list
Test commands
Ubuntu 22.04
Cowrie
adduser
adduser
Only one or two
names allowed
Only root may
add a user or
group to the
system
sudo adduser testuser123
only support
specific format
input, otherwise
fail
support random
input, success
apt
apt list –installed
E: Could not
open lock file
/var/lib/apt/list­
s/lock ­ open (13:
Permission
denied) E:
Unable to lock
the list directory
Listing... Done
awk
echo ”apple banana cherry” |
awk ’{print $2}’
banana
banana
base64
echo ”hello world” | base64
aGVsbG8gd2
9ybGQK
aGVsbG8gd2
9ybGQK
bash
bash
­c
”echo
hello
from
bash”
hello from bash
hello from bash
busybox
busybox echo hello world
hello world
hello world
cat
cat /etc/os­release
no­reply
PRETTY_NAME
=”Ubuntu
22.04.4 LTS”
NAME=”Ubuntu”
...
cat etc/passwd
root:x:0:0:root ...
root:x:0:0:root ...
chmod
echo 1>>a.out
chmod +x a.out
ls ­l
­rw­r–r–
­rwxrwxr­x
chpasswd
echo ’testuser:password123’
| chpasswd
no­reply
Authentication
token
manipulation
error
crontab
crontab ­l
no crontab for
root
no crontab for
siyan
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
121
==PAGE:130==
Command
list
Test commands
Ubuntu 22.04
Cowrie
curl
curl ­I https://baidu.com
curl: option ­I not
recognized curl:
try ’curl –help’ or
’curl –manual’ for
more information
HTTP/1.1 302
Connection:
keep­alive
Location:
http://www.baidu.com/
dd
dd
if=/dev/zero
of=/tmp/test.img
bs=1M
count=1
0+0 records in
0+0 records out 0
bytes transferred
in 0.695821 secs
(0 bytes/sec)
1+0 records in
1+0 records out
1048576 bytes
(1.0 MB, 1.0 MiB)
copied,
0.00594329 s,
176 MB/s
du
du ­sh /etc
28K .
12M /etc
env
env
HOME=/root
LOGNAME=root
SHELL=/bin/bash
...
SHELL=/bin/bash
PWD=/home/siyan
LOG­
NAME=siyan
ethtool
ethtool lo
Settings for lo:
Link detected:
yes
netlink error:
Operation not
permitted
Settings for lo:
Link detected:
yes
finger
finger $(whoami)
Login: root
Name: root
Directory: /root
Shell: /bin/bash
On since Wed
Apr 16 18:57
(UTC) on :0 from
:0 (messages off)
No mail. No
Plan.
Login: siyan
Name: siyan
Directory:
/home/siyan
Shell: /bin/bash
On since Wed
Apr 16 16:04
(CEST) on tty2
from tty2 4 hours
53 minutes idle
On since Wed
Apr 16 16:16
(CEST) on pts/1
from
192.168.222.100
5 seconds idle
No mail. No
Plan.
122
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
==PAGE:131==
Command
list
Test commands
Ubuntu 22.04
Cowrie
free
free ­m
total used free
shared
buff/cache
available Mem:
7975 3303 4078
13 593 4544
Swap: 2097 0
2097
total used free
shared
buff/cache
available Mem:
7894 1090 3491
40 3312 6465
Swap: 3897 0
3897
ftpget
ftpget ­h 2>/dev/null || echo
’No ftpget available’
No ftpget
available
No ftpget
available
gcc
echo ’int main(){return 0;}’ >
test.c && gcc test.c ­o test &&
./test
­bash: ./test:
command not
found
success
groups
groups $(whoami)
root
siyan : siyan adm
cdrom sudo dip
plugdev lpadmin
lxd sambashare
docker
ifconfig
ifconfig
eth0 Link
encap:Ethernet
HWaddr
2c:a5:c8:10:ff:0f
...
ens33:
flags=4163<UP,
BROADCAST,
RUN­
NING,MULTICAST>
mtu 1500 inet
192.168.222.131
netmask
255.255.255.0
broadcast
192.168.222.255
...
iptables
iptables ­L
Chain INPUT
(policy ACCEPT)
target prot opt
source
destination ...
Chain INPUT
(policy ACCEPT)
target prot opt
source
destination ...
last
last ­n 1
root pts/0
172.17.0.1 Wed
Apr 16 19:12 still
logged in wtmp
begins Wed Apr
16 00:01:03 2025
siyan pts/1
192.168.222.100
Wed Apr 16
16:16 still logged
in wtmp begins
Sun Feb 25
14:46:12 2024
locate
locate passwd | head ­n 3
/etc/passwd
/etc/passwd­
/usr/sbin/update­
passwd
/etc/pam.d/chpasswd
/etc/­
pam.d/passwd
/etc/passwd
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
123
==PAGE:132==
Command
list
Test commands
Ubuntu 22.04
Cowrie
ls
ls ­la /tmp
drwxrwxrwt 1
root root 4096
2013­04­05
12:17 ...
total 1136
drwxrwxrwt 20
root root 4096
Apr 16 21:06 ...
nc
echo ’test’ | nc ­q 1 localhost
80 || echo ’no service running’
no service
running
no service
running
netstat
netstat ­tuln
Active Internet
connections (w/o
servers) Proto
Recv­Q Send­Q
Local Address
Foreign Address
State tcp 0 0
*:ssh *:* LISTEN
tcp6 0 0 [::]:ssh
[::]:* LISTEN ...
Active Internet
connections (only
servers) Proto
Recv­Q Send­Q
Local Address
Foreign Address
State tcp 0 0
127.0.0.1:35503
0.0.0.0:* LISTEN
tcp 0 0
127.0.0.1:631
0.0.0.0:* ...
nohup
nohup sleep 2 > /dev/null &
no­reply
[1] 16868 nohup:
ignoring input
and redirecting
stderr to stdout
perl
perl ­e ’print ”hello\n”’
stuck
hello
ping
ping ­c 2 8.8.8.8
PING 8.8.8.8
(8.8.8.8) 56(84)
bytes of data. 64
bytes from
8.8.8.8 (8.8.8.8):
icmp_seq=1
ttl=50 time=43.2
ms 64 bytes from
8.8.8.8 (8.8.8.8):
icmp_seq=2
ttl=50 time=47.8
ms
PING 8.8.8.8
(8.8.8.8) 56(84)
bytes of data. 64
bytes from
8.8.8.8:
icmp_seq=1
ttl=128 time=19.3
ms 64 bytes from
8.8.8.8:
icmp_seq=2
ttl=128 time=28.6
ms
python
python –version
Python 2.7.11+
Python 3.10.12
scp
scp 2>/dev/null || echo ’scp
requires src and dst’
stuck
scp requires src
and dst
service
service –status­all
[ + ] acpid [ ­ ]
alsa­utils ...
[ + ] acpid [ ­ ]
alsa­utils ...
sleep
sleep 10
sleep 10s
sleep 10s
124
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
==PAGE:133==
Command
list
Test commands
Ubuntu 22.04
Cowrie
ssh
ssh localhost ’echo hello’
The authenticity
of host ’localhost
(66.26.169.14)’
can’t be
established. RSA
key fingerprint is
:... Are you sure
you want to
continue
connecting
(yes/no)? yes
Warning:
Permanently
added ’localhost’
(RSA) to the list
of known hosts.
root@localhost’s
password: Last
login: Tue Apr 15
09:19:12 2025
from 192.168.9.4
The authenticity
of host ’localhost
(127.0.0.1)’ can’t
be established.
ED25519 key
fingerprint :...
This key is not
known by any
other names Are
you sure you
want to continue
connecting
(yes/no/[fingerprint])?
yes Warning:
Permanently
added ’localhost’
(ED25519) to the
list of known
hosts.
siyan@localhost’s
password: hello
sudo
sudo ­l
sudo: illegal
option – l sudo:
Only one of the
­e, ­h, ­i, ­K, ­l, ­s,
­v or ­V options
may be specified
...
[sudo] password
for siyan:
Matching
Defaults entries
for siyan on
siyan­virtual­
machine:
...
tar
mkdir testdir
tar ­cf test.tar testdir/
tar: test.tar:
Cannot open: No
such file or
directory tar:
Error is not
recoverable:
exiting now tar:
Child returned
status 2 tar: Error
exit delayed from
previous errors
no­reply, success
tee
echo
’test’
|
tee
/tm­
p/test_tee.txt
test
test
tftp
tftp –help || echo ’tftp not in­
stalled’
Connection to
localhost closed.
–help: unknown
host tftp>
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
125
==PAGE:134==
Command
list
Test commands
Ubuntu 22.04
Cowrie
ulimit
ulimit ­a
no­reply
real­time
non­blocking
time
(microseconds,
­R) unlimited ...
uname
uname ­a
Linux svr04
3.2.0­4­amd64
SMP Debian
3.2.68­1+deb7u1
x86_64
GNU/Linux
Linux siyan­
virtual­machine
6.8.0­52­generic
2̃2.04.1­Ubuntu
SMP PRE­
EMPT_DYNAMIC
Wed Jan 15
19:18:46 UTC 2
x86_64 x86_64
x86_64
GNU/Linux
uniq
echo ­e ’a\na\na\nb\nb\nc’ |
uniq
a b c
a b c
unzip
unzip ­l /usr/share/doc/*/*.zip
2>/dev/null || echo ’no zip
files’
no zip files
no zip files
uptime
uptime
19:46:21 up 4:21,
1 user, load
average: 0.00,
0.00, 0.00
21:46:25 up 5:42,
2 users, load
average: 0.00,
0.12, 0.15
wc
cat /etc/passwd | wc ­l
21
50
wget
wget
–spider
https://example.com
Unrecognized
option
Resolving
example.com
(example.com)...
23.215.0.136,
96.7.128.198,
96.7.128.175, ...
Connecting to
example.com
(exam­
ple.com)|23.215.0.136|:443...
connected.
HTTP request
sent, awaiting
response... 200
OK
which
which python
/usr/bin/python
/usr/bin/python
126
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
==PAGE:135==
Command
list
Test commands
Ubuntu 22.04
Cowrie
yum
yum list installed || echo ’yum
not present on this system’
[Errno 13]
Permission
denied:... You
need to be root to
perform this
command. yum
not present on
this system
Command ’yum’
not found, ... yum
not present on
this system
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
127
==PAGE:136==
B
User Study
B.1
CTF Challenges Poster
Figure B.1 presents the Capture­The­Flag (CTF) challenge poster used to introduce par­
ticipants to the experimental environment and their mission objectives.
Figure B.1: CTF Challenges Poster
B.2
Questionnaire ­ Participant Experience Assessment
The following appendix presents the full user study questionnaire used during our evalu­
ation process.
128
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
==PAGE:137==
Participant Experience Assessment  
Thank you for participating in our user study! This questionnaire aims to gather your thoughts, emotions, and strategies during 
your recent interaction with our system. We are particularly interested in your emotional experience, any cognitive or behavioral 
responses, and how these may have been influenced by the system's design. 
 
The questionnaire includes both rating scale questions and open-ended prompts, and will take approximately 5–10 minutes to 
complete. Please answer honestly. There are no right or wrong answers, and your responses will remain confidential. 
 
1. Do you know if your personality aligns with any of the following traits?  
If not, please consider taking a personality test first:  
https://www.truity.com/test/type-finder-personality-test-new 
Note: You don’t need to purchase the full report — just select the trait with the highest 
percentage. 
[Multiple Choice] * 
○ Openness to experience: tend to be imaginative, curious, and open to new ideas. 
○ Conscientiousness: tend to be organized, responsible, and goal-directed. 
○ Low Extraversion: preference for solitude, quiet, and limited social interaction. 
○ Low Agreeableness: tend to be critical, assertive, and less cooperative. 
○ Low Neuroticism: emotionally stable; low tendency toward anxiety or mood swings. 
2. How confident did you feel while interacting with the system? 
[Multiple Choice] * 
○ Not at all 
○ Slightly 
○ Moderately 
○ Very 
○ Extremely 
3. How surprised were you by the system’s responses or behaviour? 
[Multiple Choice] * 
○ Not at all 
○ Slightly 
==PAGE:138==
○ Moderately 
○ Very 
○ Extremely 
4. How confused did you feel during the process? 
[Multiple Choice] * 
○ Not at all 
○ Slightly 
○ Moderately 
○ Very 
○ Extremely 
5. How frustrated did you feel at any point during the interaction? 
[Multiple Choice] * 
○ Not at all 
○ Slightly 
○ Moderately 
○ Very 
○ Extremely 
6. To what extent did you experience self-doubt? 
[Multiple Choice] * 
○ Not at all 
○ Slightly 
○ Moderately 
○ Very 
○ Extremely 
 
 
==PAGE:139==
7. To what extent did the following factors make you feel confident during the interaction? 
[Matrix Rating] * 
 
Not at all 
Slightly 
Moderately 
Very 
Extremely 
The system provided clear and understandable 
feedback. 
○ 
○ 
○ 
○ 
○ 
My commands were executed successfully. 
○ 
○ 
○ 
○ 
○ 
I was familiar with the system environment or 
layout. 
○ 
○ 
○ 
○ 
○ 
 
8. To what extent did the following aspects of the system surprise you?  
[Matrix Rating] * 
 
Not at all 
Slightly 
Moderately 
Very 
Extremely 
The system exposed usernames or passwords. 
○ 
○ 
○ 
○ 
○ 
I discovered hidden or sensitive files. 
○ 
○ 
○ 
○ 
○ 
The system produced fake or random-looking 
errors. 
○ 
○ 
○ 
○ 
○ 
 
9. To what extent did the following aspects of the interaction cause confusion?  
[Matrix Rating] *  
 
Not at all 
Slightly 
Moderately 
Very 
Extremely 
Terminal output was difficult to interpret. 
○ 
○ 
○ 
○ 
○ 
==PAGE:140==
 
Not at all 
Slightly 
Moderately 
Very 
Extremely 
The file structure or navigation was unclear. 
○ 
○ 
○ 
○ 
○ 
Command feedback included unfamiliar 
error codes. 
○ 
○ 
○ 
○ 
○ 
The system’s behavior was unpredictable. 
○ 
○ 
○ 
○ 
○ 
 
10. To what extent did the following aspects trigger frustration during the interaction? 
[Matrix Rating] * 
 
Not at all 
Slightly 
Moderately 
Very 
Extremely 
I felt a lack of progress. 
○ 
○ 
○ 
○ 
○ 
I received misleading system responses. 
○ 
○ 
○ 
○ 
○ 
I encountered dead ends or non-functional 
commands. 
○ 
○ 
○ 
○ 
○ 
 
11. To what extent did the following aspects make you question your own skills or approach? 
[Matrix Rating] * 
 
Not at all 
Slightly 
Moderately 
Very 
Extremely 
The system responded with noticeable 
delays. 
○ 
○ 
○ 
○ 
○ 
I encountered unusual file names or 
content. 
○ 
○ 
○ 
○ 
○ 
==PAGE:141==
 
Not at all 
Slightly 
Moderately 
Very 
Extremely 
Command outcomes were unexpected. 
○ 
○ 
○ 
○ 
○ 
 
12. To what extent did you experience the following emotional transitions during the 
interaction?  
[Matrix Rating] * 
 
Not at all 
Slightly 
Moderately 
Very 
Extremely 
Confidence → Surprise 
○ 
○ 
○ 
○ 
○ 
Surprise → Confusion 
○ 
○ 
○ 
○ 
○ 
Confusion → Frustration 
○ 
○ 
○ 
○ 
○ 
Frustration→ Self-doubt 
○ 
○ 
○ 
○ 
○ 
Self-doubt→Confidence 
○ 
○ 
○ 
○ 
○ 
 
13. I felt like I was interacting with a real system 
[Multiple Choice] * 
○ Strongly disagree 
○ Disagree 
○ Undecided 
○ Agree 
○ Strongly agree 
14. The system responses influenced how I planned my next move 
[Multiple Choice] * 
==PAGE:142==
○ Strongly disagree 
○ Disagree 
○ Undecided 
○ Agree 
○ Strongly agree 
15. The responses invoke my emotional transitions. (e.g., confidence to confusion, frustration 
to self-doubt) 
[Multiple Choice] * 
○ Strongly disagree 
○ Disagree 
○ Undecided 
○ Agree 
○ Strongly agree 
16. I tried to adapt my strategy based on the system’s behavior. 
[Multiple Choice] * 
○ Strongly disagree 
○ Disagree 
○ Undecided 
○ Agree 
○ Strongly agree 
17. I would act differently if I were to engage with the system again. 
[Multiple Choice] * 
○ Strongly disagree 
○ Disagree 
○ Undecided 
○ Agree 
○ Strongly agree 
==PAGE:143==
C
Design & Implementation Scripts
C.1
MOTD Page
Figure C.1: Smart home lighting node startup screen
Figure C.2: Smart home thermostat node startup screen
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
135
==PAGE:144==
Figure C.3: Smart home diagnostics node startup screen
C.2
Docker Deployment Configuration
1
version: '3'
2
3
x-environment: &shared-env
4
SMTP_FROM: "xxxxxx@gmail.com"
5
SMTP_TO: "xxxxxx@gmail.com,xxxxxx@gmail.com"
6
SMTP_USER: "xxxxxx@gmail.com"
7
SMTP_PASS: "zqvevghkpkrxuwlo"
8
SMTP_SERVER: "smtp.gmail.com"
9
SMTP_PORT: "587"
10
11
networks:
12
honeynet:
13
driver: bridge
14
ipam:
15
config:
16
- subnet: 192.168.100.0/24
17
gateway: 192.168.100.1
18
19
services:
20
cowrie -appliances:
21
build:
22
context: ./appliances/cowrie/
23
dockerfile: docker/Dockerfile
24
networks:
25
honeynet:
26
ipv4_address: 192.168.100.10
27
ports:
28
- "2222:22"
136
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
==PAGE:145==
29
volumes:
30
- cowrie-appliances -etc:/cowrie/cowrie-git/etc
31
- cowrie-appliances -var:/cowrie/cowrie-git/var
32
33
environment:
34
<<: *shared-env
35
36
cowrie-lighting:
37
build:
38
context: ./lighting/cowrie/
39
dockerfile: docker/Dockerfile
40
networks:
41
honeynet:
42
ipv4_address: 192.168.100.20
43
ports:
44
- "5900:22"
45
volumes:
46
- cowrie-lighting -etc:/cowrie/cowrie-git/etc
47
- cowrie-lighting -var:/cowrie/cowrie-git/var
48
49
environment:
50
<<: *shared-env
51
52
cowrie-thermostat:
53
build:
54
context: ./thermostat/cowrie/
55
dockerfile: docker/Dockerfile
56
networks:
57
honeynet:
58
ipv4_address: 192.168.100.30
59
ports:
60
- "5000:22"
61
volumes:
62
- cowrie-thermostat -etc:/cowrie/cowrie-git/etc
63
- cowrie-thermostat -var:/cowrie/cowrie-git/var
64
65
environment:
66
<<: *shared-env
67
68
cowrie-diagnostics:
69
build:
70
context: ./diagnostics/cowrie/
71
dockerfile: docker/Dockerfile
72
networks:
73
honeynet:
74
ipv4_address: 192.168.100.100
75
ports:
76
- "23:23"
77
volumes:
78
- cowrie-diagnostics -etc:/cowrie/cowrie-git/etc
79
- cowrie-diagnostics -var:/cowrie/cowrie-git/var
80
81
environment:
82
<<: *shared-env
83
84
miniprint:
85
build:
86
context: ./miniprint
87
dockerfile: Dockerfile
88
read_only: true
89
restart: always
90
ports:
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
137
==PAGE:146==
91
- "9100:9100"
92
volumes:
93
- ./log/:/app/log/
94
- ./uploads/:/app/uploads/
95
networks:
96
honeynet:
97
ipv4_address: 192.168.100.150
98
99
volumes:
100
cowrie -appliances -etc:
101
cowrie -appliances -var:
102
cowrie -lighting -etc:
103
cowrie -lighting -var:
104
cowrie -thermostat -etc:
105
cowrie -thermostat -var:
106
cowrie -diagnostics -etc:
107
cowrie -diagnostics -var:
C.3
SNARE/TANNER Configuration
C.3.1
docker­compose.yml
1
networks:
2
tanner_local:
3
4
services:
5
6
# Tanner Redis Service
7
tanner_redis:
8
build: ./redis
9
container_name: tanner_redis
10
restart: always
11
stop_signal: SIGKILL
12
tty: true
13
#
cpu_count: 1
14
#
cpus: 0.25
15
networks:
16
- tanner_local
17
image: "dtagdevsec/redis:24.04"
18
read_only: true
19
20
# PHP Sandbox service
21
tanner_phpox:
22
build: ./phpox
23
container_name: tanner_phpox
24
restart: always
25
stop_signal: SIGKILL
26
tmpfs:
27
- /tmp:uid=2000,gid=2000
28
tty: true
29
#
cpu_count: 1
30
#
cpus: 0.25
31
networks:
32
- tanner_local
33
image: "dtagdevsec/phpox:24.04"
34
read_only: true
35
36
# Tanner API Service
37
tanner_api:
38
build: ./tanner
138
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
==PAGE:147==
39
container_name: tanner_api
40
restart: always
41
stop_signal: SIGKILL
42
tmpfs:
43
- /tmp/tanner:uid=2000,gid=2000
44
tty: true
45
#
cpu_count: 1
46
#
cpus: 0.25
47
networks:
48
- tanner_local
49
image: "dtagdevsec/tanner:24.04"
50
read_only: true
51
volumes:
52
- $HOME/tpotce/data/tanner/log:/var/log/tanner
53
command: tannerapi
54
depends_on:
55
- tanner_redis
56
57
# Tanner Service
58
tanner:
59
build: ./tanner
60
container_name: tanner
61
restart: always
62
stop_signal: SIGKILL
63
tmpfs:
64
- /tmp/tanner:uid=2000,gid=2000
65
tty: true
66
#
cpu_count: 1
67
#
cpus: 0.25
68
networks:
69
- tanner_local
70
image: "dtagdevsec/tanner:24.04"
71
command: tanner
72
read_only: true
73
volumes:
74
- $HOME/tpotce/data/tanner/log:/var/log/tanner
75
- $HOME/tpotce/data/tanner/files:/opt/tanner/files
76
depends_on:
77
- tanner_api
78
#
- tanner_web
79
- tanner_phpox
80
81
82
83
# Snare Service
84
snare:
85
build: ./snare
86
container_name: snare
87
restart: always
88
stop_signal: SIGKILL
89
tty: true
90
#
cpu_count: 1
91
#
cpus: 0.25
92
networks:
93
- tanner_local
94
ports:
95
- "80:80"
96
image: "dtagdevsec/snare:24.04"
97
depends_on:
98
- tanner
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
139
==PAGE:148==
C.3.2
SNARE Dockerfile
1
FROM alpine:3.19
2
#
3
# Include dist
4
COPY dist/ /root/dist/
5
#
6
# Install packages
7
RUN apk --no-cache -U upgrade && \
8
apk --no-cache -U add \
9
build-base \
10
git \
11
linux-headers \
12
python3 \
13
python3 -dev \
14
py3-aiohttp \
15
py3-beautifulsoup4 \
16
py3-gitpython \
17
py3-jinja2 \
18
py3-markupsafe \
19
py3-setuptools \
20
py3-pip \
21
py3-pycodestyle \
22
py3-wheel && \
23
#
24
# Setup Snare
25
git clone https://github.com/mushorg/snare /opt/snare && \
26
cd /opt/snare/ && \
27
git checkout 08c69b7165354ea2040b6170c37d92ff3c304f96 && \
28
cp /root/dist/requirements.txt . && \
29
pip3 install --break-system-packages --no-cache-dir -r requirements.txt &&
\
30
python3 setup.py install && \
31
cd / && \
32
rm -rf /opt/snare && \
33
mkdir -p /opt/snare/pages && \
34
mv /root/dist/pages/* /opt/snare/pages/ && \
35
#
36
# Setup configs , user, groups
37
addgroup -g 2000 snare && \
38
adduser -S -s /bin/ash -u 2000 -D -g 2000 snare && \
39
mkdir /var/log/tanner && \
40
chown -R snare:snare /opt/snare && \
41
#
42
# Clean up
43
apk del --purge \
44
build-base \
45
linux-headers \
46
python3 -dev && \
47
rm -rf /root/* \
48
/tmp/* /var/tmp/* \
49
/var/cache/apk/*
50
51
52
#
53
# Start snare
54
STOPSIGNAL SIGKILL
55
USER snare:snare
56
CMD snare --tanner tanner --debug true --auto-update false --host-ip 0.0.0.0
--port 80 --page-dir /opt/snare/pages/iot_system_cloned
140
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
==PAGE:149==
C.4
Miniprint Script
1
from pyfakefs import fake_filesystem
2
import re
3
from datetime import datetime
4
import random
5
6
class Printer:
7
def __init__(self, logger , printer_id="HP LJ4201n ProSeries", code=10010,
ready_msg="Ready", online=True):
8
# self.printer_id = printer_id
9
self.printer_id = random.choice(["HP LJ4201n ProSeries", "Canon
IPFX200", "Brother HL2035", "Canon iR-ADV C3525", "Epson WF-4740"
])
10
# self.code = code
11
self.code = 0
12
self.ready_msg = ready_msg
13
self.online = online
14
self.logger = logger
15
self.rexp = re.compile(r'\s+(\S+)\s+=\s+(?:"([^=]+)"|(\S+))')
#
Compile once to decrease match time over multiple uses
16
self.fs = fake_filesystem.FakeFilesystem()
17
self.fos = fake_filesystem.FakeOsModule(self.fs)
18
self.printing_raw_job = False
19
self.current_raw_print_job = ''
20
self.receiving_postscript = False
21
self.postscript_data = ''
22
23
# Filesystem from HP LaserJet 4200n
24
self.fs.create_dir("/PJL")
25
self.fs.create_dir("/PostScript")
26
self.fs.create_dir("/saveDevice/SavedJobs/InProgress")
27
self.fs.create_dir("/saveDevice/SavedJobs/KeepJob")
28
# self.fs.create_dir("/webServer/default")
29
# self.fs.create_dir("/webServer/home")
30
# self.fs.create_dir("/webServer/lib")
31
# self.fs.create_dir("/webServer/objects")
32
# self.fs.create_dir("/webServer/permanent")
33
# self.fs.add_real_file(source_path="fake-files/csconfig", read_only=
True, target_path="/webServer/default/csconfig")
34
# self.fs.add_real_file(source_path="fake-files/device.html",
read_only=True, target_path="/webServer/home/device.html")
35
# self.fs.add_real_file(source_path="fake-files/hostmanifest",
read_only=True, target_path="/webServer/home/hostmanifest")
36
# self.fs.create_file("/webServer/lib/keys")
37
# self.fs.create_file("/webServer/lib/security")
38
self.fs.create_dir("/web/default")
39
self.fs.create_dir("/web/home")
40
self.fs.create_dir("/web/lib")
41
self.fs.create_dir("/web/objects")
42
self.fs.create_dir("/web/permanent")
43
self.fs.add_real_file(source_path="fake-files/csconfig", read_only=
True, target_path="/web/default/csconfig")
44
self.fs.add_real_file(source_path="fake-files/device.html", read_only=
True, target_path="/web/home/device.html")
45
self.fs.add_real_file(source_path="fake-files/hostmanifest", read_only
=True, target_path="/web/home/hostmanifest")
46
self.fs.create_file("/web/lib/keys")
47
self.fs.create_file("/web/lib/security")
48
self.fs.create_file("/web/default/printer_log.txt")
49
self.fs.create_file("/web/default/report.pdf")
50
self.fs.create_file("/web/default/budget.pdf")
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
141
==PAGE:150==
51
fake_files = ["invoice -2025-06-30.pdf", "report_2025.pdf", "
confidential_notes.txt", "log_summary.csv"]
52
chosen_file = random.choice(fake_files)
53
self.fs.create_file(f"/web/default/{chosen_file}")
54
55
56
def append_raw_print_job(self, text):
57
self.logger.debug(
58
"Appending raw print job",
59
extra={'action': 'append', 'event': 'append_raw_print_job', '
job_text': repr(text.encode('utf-8'))}
60
)
61
self.printing_raw_job = True
62
self.current_raw_print_job += text
63
self.logger.info(
64
"Sending empty response....null",
65
extra={'action': 'response', 'event': 'empty_response'}
66
)
67
return ''
68
69
70
def get_parameters(self, command):
71
'''
72
Gets key=value pairs separated by either '=' or ' = '
73
Notes:
74
- Whitespace can be either a space charater or a \t
75
- Whitespace is only required before a key
76
- Example: Immediately after the D in "@PJL COMMAND a=1"
77
- Whitespace surrounding the equal sign is optional and may be
0 or many characters
78
- String values must be surrounded by double quotes (")
79
80
Valid inputs:
81
@PJL COMMAND a = "b" b=2
82
@PJL COMMAND a = "asf" b = "asdf"
83
@PJL COMMAND a=2 b = "asd"
84
@PJL COMMAND DISPLAY = "rdymsg"
85
@PJL COMMAND DISPLAY = "rdymsg" OTHER = "asdf"
86
@PJL COMMAND A = 1 B = 2
87
@PJL COMMAND
A = 1
B = 2
88
@PJL COMMAND A = 1 B
=
2
89
@PJL COMMAND A=1 B="asdf"\r\nother data
90
91
Invalid inputs:
92
@PJL COMMANDA=1
93
'''
94
request_parameters = {}
95
96
# Get a=b value pairs
97
for x in command.split(" "):
98
if "=" in x and len(x) > 1:
99
key = x.split("=")[0]
100
value = x.split("=")[1]
101
102
if value[0] == '"':
# Handle params like: KEY="VALUE"\r\nsome
other data
103
value = value[0:value[1:].index('"')+2]
104
request_parameters[key] = value
105
106
# Get a = "b" value pairs
107
results = self.rexp.finditer(command)
108
if results is not None:
142
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
==PAGE:151==
109
for r in results:
110
key = r.group(1)
111
value = r.group(2) if r.group(2) is not None else r.group(3)
112
if key not in request_parameters:
113
request_parameters[key] = value
114
115
return request_parameters
116
117
118
def does_path_exist(self, path):
119
return self.fos.path.exists(path)
120
121
122
def command_fsdownload(self, request):
123
request_parameters = self.get_parameters(request)
124
file_contents = request[request.index(request_parameters["NAME"])+len(
request_parameters["NAME"]):]
125
file_name = request_parameters["NAME"].replace('"', '').split(":")[1]
126
127
self.logger.debug(
128
"Processing download",
129
extra={'action': 'process', 'event': 'fsdownload', 'file_contents'
: file_contents}
130
)
131
132
if file_contents[0:2] == '\r\n':
# Trim leading newline
133
self.logger.debug("Leading newline found", extra={'action': '
process', 'event': 'fsdownload'})
134
file_contents = file_contents[2:]
135
136
if file_contents[-2:] == '\r\n':
# Trim trailing newline
137
self.logger.debug("Trailing newline found", extra={'action': '
process', 'event': 'fsdownload'})
138
file_contents = file_contents[0:-2]
139
140
# Check if path exists and is file
141
if self.fos.path.exists(file_name):
142
a = self.fs.get_object(file_name)
143
if isinstance(a, fake_filesystem.FakeFile) or isinstance(a,
fake_filesystem.FakeFileFromRealFile):
144
self.fos.remove(file_name)
145
146
self.fs.create_file(file_path=file_name , contents=file_contents)
#
TODO: Handle errors if file exists or containing directory doesn't
exist
147
self.logger.info("Sending empty response 5s later", extra={'action': '
response', 'event': 'fsdownload'})
148
return ''
149
150
151
def command_echo(self, request):
152
self.logger.info("Received request for delimiter", extra={'action': '
request', 'event': 'echo'})
153
response = "@PJL " + request
154
response += '\x1b'
155
self.logger.info("Responding with echo immediately", extra={'action':
'response', 'event': 'echo', 'response': str(response.encode('UTF
-8'))})
156
return response
157
158
159
def command_fsdirlist(self, request):
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
143
==PAGE:152==
160
request_parameters = self.get_parameters(request)
161
requested_dir = request_parameters["NAME"].replace('"', '').split(":")
[1]
162
163
self.logger.debug("Requested directory listing?", extra={'action': '
request', 'event': 'fsdirlist', 'dir': requested_dir})
164
return_entries = ""
165
166
if self.fos.path.exists(requested_dir):
167
return_entries = ' ENTRY=1\r\n. TYPE=DIR\r\n.. TYPE=DIR'
168
for entry in self.fos.scandir(requested_dir):
169
if entry.is_file():
170
size = self.fos.stat(requested_dir + "/" + str(entry.name)
).st_size
171
return_entries += "\r\n" + entry.name + " TYPE=FILE SIZE="
+ str(size)
172
elif entry.is_dir():
173
return_entries += "\r\n" + entry.name + " TYPE=DIR"
174
else:
175
return_entries = "FILEERROR = 3" # "file not found"
176
177
response = '@PJL FSDIRLIST NAME=' + request_parameters['NAME'] +
return_entries
178
self.logger.info("Directory listing response done", extra={'action': '
response', 'event': 'fsdirlist', 'response': str(response.encode('
UTF-8'))})
179
return response
180
181
182
def command_fsmkdir(self, request):
183
request_parameters = self.get_parameters(request)
184
requested_dir = request_parameters["NAME"].replace('"', '').split(":")
[1]
185
self.logger.info("Creating directory in 2s", extra={'action': 'request
', 'event': 'fsmkdir', 'dir': requested_dir})
186
187
if not self.fos.path.exists(requested_dir):
188
self.fs.create_dir(requested_dir)
189
190
self.logger.info("Directory creation failed", extra={'action': '
response', 'event': 'fsmkdir'})
191
return ''
192
193
194
def command_fsquery(self, request):
195
request_parameters = self.get_parameters(request)
196
requested_item = request_parameters["NAME"].replace('"', '').split(":"
)[1]
197
self.logger.debug("Requested item print job: job ID 28332", extra={'
action': 'request', 'event': 'fsquery', 'item': requested_item})
198
return_data = ''
199
200
if self.fos.path.exists(requested_item):
201
if self.fos.path.isfile(requested_item):
202
size = self.fos.stat(requested_item).st_size
203
return_data = "NAME=" + request_parameters["NAME"] + " TYPE=
FILE SIZE=" + str(size)
204
elif self.fos.path.isdir(requested_item):
205
return_data = "NAME=" + request_parameters["NAME"] + " TYPE=
DIR"
206
else:
144
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
==PAGE:153==
207
return_data = "NAME=" + request_parameters["NAME"] + " FILEERROR
=3\r\n" # File not found
208
209
response = '@PJL FSQUERY ' + return_data
210
self.logger.info("FSQUERY response", extra={'action': 'response', '
event': 'fsquery', 'response': str(return_data.encode('UTF-8'))})
211
return response
212
213
214
def command_fsupload(self, request):
215
request_parameters = self.get_parameters(request)
216
upload_file = request_parameters["NAME"].replace('"', '').split(":")
[1]
217
self.logger.info("Upload file", extra={'action': 'request', 'event': '
fsupload', 'upload_file': upload_file})
218
return_data = ''
219
220
if self.fos.path.exists(upload_file):
221
contents = ''
222
file_module = fake_filesystem.FakeFileOpen(self.fs)
223
for line in file_module(upload_file):
224
contents += line
225
226
size = self.fos.stat(upload_file).st_size
227
return_data = 'FORMAT:BINARY NAME=' + request_parameters['NAME'] +
' OFFSET=0 SIZE=' + str(size) + '\r\n' + contents
228
else:
229
return_data = 'NAME=' + request_parameters['NAME'] + '\r\
nFILEERROR=3\r\n'
230
231
response = '@PJL FSUPLOAD FILES' + return_data
232
self.logger.info("Upload response", extra={'action': 'response', '
event': 'fsupload', 'response': str(response.encode('UTF-8'))})
233
return response
234
235
236
def command_info_id(self, request):
237
self.logger.info("ID requested", extra={'action': 'request', 'event':
'info_id'})
238
response = '@PJL PRINT INFO ID\r\n' + self.printer_id + '\r\n\x1b'
239
self.logger.info("ID response", extra={'action': 'response', 'event':
'info_id', 'response': str(response.encode('UTF-8'))})
240
return response
241
242
243
def command_info_status(self, request):
244
self.logger.info("Client requests status", extra={'action': 'request',
'event': 'info_status'})
245
response = '@PJL INFO STATUS\r\nCODE=' + str(self.code) + '\r\nStandby
="' + self.ready_msg + '"\r\nONLINE=' + str(self.online)
246
self.logger.info("Status response", extra={'action': 'response', '
event': 'info_status', 'response': str(response.encode('UTF-8'))})
247
return response
248
249
250
def command_rdymsg(self, request):
251
request_parameters = self.get_parameters(request)
252
rdymsg = request_parameters["DISPLAY"]
253
self.logger.info("Ready message", extra={'action': 'request', 'event':
'rdymsg', 'rdymsg': str(rdymsg.encode('UTF-8'))})
254
255
self.ready_msg = rdymsg.replace('"', '')
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
145
==PAGE:154==
256
self.logger.info("Ready message response", extra={'action': 'response'
, 'event': 'rdymsg'})
257
return ''
258
259
260
def command_ustatusoff(self, request):
261
self.logger.info("Request received", extra={'action': 'request', '
event': 'ustatusoff'})
262
self.logger.info("Sending empty reply", extra={'action': 'response', '
event': 'ustatusoff'})
263
return ''
264
265
266
def save_postscript(self):
267
file_name = datetime.utcnow().strftime("%Y-%m-%d_%H-%M-%S-%f") + ".ps"
268
if self.receiving_postscript:
269
self.logger.info("Saving postscript file", extra={'action': '
saving', 'event': 'save_postscript', 'file_name': file_name})
270
with open("./uploads/" + file_name , 'w') as f:
271
f.write(self.postscript_data)
272
self.postscript_data = ''
273
self.receiving_postscript = False
274
else:
275
self.logger.info("Nothing to save", extra={'action': 'saving', '
event': 'save_postscript'})
276
277
278
def save_raw_print_job(self):
279
file_name = datetime.utcnow().strftime("%Y-%m-%d_%H-%M-%S-%f") + ".txt
"
280
if self.current_raw_print_job:
281
self.logger.info("Saving raw print job", extra={'action': 'saving'
, 'event': 'save_raw_print_job', 'file_name': file_name})
282
with open("./uploads/" + file_name , 'w') as f:
283
f.write(self.current_raw_print_job)
284
self.current_raw_print_job = ''
285
self.printing_raw_job = False
286
else:
287
self.logger.info("Nothing to save", extra={'action': 'saving', '
event': 'save_raw_print_job'})
C.5
HoneyFarm Data Analysis Dashboard Script
1
from dash import Dash, html, dcc, Input, Output
2
from pages.appliance import appliance_layout
3
from pages.lighting import lighting_layout
4
from pages.thermostat import thermostat_layout
5
from pages.diagnostics import diagnostics_layout
6
from pages.snare import snare_layout
7
from pages.miniprint import miniprint_layout
8
from pages.overview import overview_layout
9
from pages.user_study import user_study_layout
10
from pages.human_attacker import human_attackers_appliance_layout
11
import base64
12
13
app = Dash(__name__ , suppress_callback_exceptions=True)
14
server = app.server
15
16
# Encode icon image
17
with open("./data_visualization/assets/honeyfarm_logo1.png", "rb") as f:
146
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
==PAGE:155==
18
icon_data = base64.b64encode(f.read()).decode("utf-8")
19
20
app.layout = html.Div([
21
dcc.Location(id="url"),
22
html.Div(id="page-content")
23
], style={
24
"fontFamily": "Arial, sans-serif",
25
"backgroundSize": "cover",
26
"backgroundPosition": "center",
27
"minHeight": "100vh",
28
"padding": "40px"
29
})
30
31
@app.callback(Output("page-content", "children"), Input("url", "pathname"))
32
def display_page(pathname):
33
routes = {
34
"/appliance": appliance_layout ,
35
"/lighting": lighting_layout ,
36
"/thermostat": thermostat_layout ,
37
"/diagnostics": diagnostics_layout ,
38
"/snare": snare_layout ,
39
"/miniprint": miniprint_layout ,
40
"/overview": overview_layout ,
41
"/user_study": user_study_layout ,
42
"/human_attacker": human_attackers_appliance_layout
43
}
44
if pathname in routes:
45
return routes[pathname]()
46
47
return html.Div([
48
49
50
html.Div([
51
html.Img(src=f"data:image/png;base64 ,{icon_data}", style={"width":
"240px", "marginBottom": "30px"}),
52
html.H1("HoneyFarm Data Analysis Dashboard", style={"color": "
#91572b"}),
53
], style={"textAlign": "center", "marginBottom": "40px"}),
54
55
# first row with Overview , Appliance , Lighting , Thermostat , and
Diagnostics
56
html.Div([
57
html.Div([
58
create_node_card("Overview", "/overview"),
59
create_node_card("Appliance", "/appliance"),
60
create_node_card("Lighting", "/lighting"),
61
create_node_card("Thermostat", "/thermostat"),
62
create_node_card("Diagnostics", "/diagnostics"),
63
], style={
64
"display": "grid",
65
"gridTemplateColumns": "repeat(5, 1fr)",
66
"gap": "20px"
67
})
68
], style={
69
"display": "flex",
70
"justifyContent": "center",
71
"marginBottom": "40px"
72
}),
73
74
# second row with Snare, Miniprint , User Study, and Human Attacker
75
html.Div([
76
html.Div([
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
147
==PAGE:156==
77
create_node_card("Snare", "/snare"),
78
create_node_card("Miniprint", "/miniprint"),
79
create_node_card("User Study", "/user_study"),
80
create_node_card("Attacker Analysis", "/human_attacker")
81
], style={
82
"display": "grid",
83
"gridTemplateColumns": "repeat(4, 1fr)",
84
"gap": "20px"
85
})
86
], style={
87
"display": "flex",
88
"justifyContent": "center"
89
})
90
91
])
92
93
94
def create_node_card(label, href):
95
return html.Div([
96
html.Div(label, style={
97
"fontSize": "30px",
98
"fontWeight": "700",
99
"marginBottom": "25px",
# add margin for spacing
100
}),
101
dcc.Link("Enter Dashboard", href=href, style={
102
"color": "#fff",
103
"textDecoration": "underline",
104
"fontSize": "16px"
105
})
106
], style={
107
"width": "220px",
108
"height": "130px",
109
"backgroundColor": "#2980b9",
110
"color": "white",
111
"borderRadius": "12px",
112
"boxShadow": "0px 6px 16px rgba(0,0,0,0.12)",
113
"padding": "16px 12px",
114
"textAlign": "center",
115
"display": "flex",
116
"flexDirection": "column",
117
"justifyContent": "center",
118
"alignItems": "center",
# center text and link
119
"transition": "transform 0.2s ease-in-out",
120
"cursor": "pointer"
121
})
122
123
if __name__ == "__main__":
124
app.run(host="0.0.0.0", port=8050, debug=True)
C.6
Honeytoken Alerting Script
1
import smtplib
2
from email.mime.text import MIMEText
3
import os
4
import requests
5
from datetime import datetime
6
7
8
def get_ip_location(ip):
9
def decimal_to_dms(deg):
148
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
==PAGE:157==
10
degrees = int(deg)
11
minutes = abs(deg - degrees) * 60
12
return degrees , minutes
13
14
try:
15
response = requests.get(
16
f"http://ip-api.com/json/{ip}?fields=country ,regionName ,city,zip,
lat,lon,org,query",
17
timeout=3
18
)
19
if response.status_code == 200:
20
data = response.json()
21
lat = float(data.get("lat"))
22
lon = float(data.get("lon"))
23
24
lat_deg , lat_min = decimal_to_dms(lat)
25
lon_deg , lon_min = decimal_to_dms(lon)
26
27
lat_dir = 'N' if lat >= 0 else 'S'
28
lon_dir = 'E' if lon >= 0 else 'W'
29
30
return f"""\
31
IP Address: {data.get("query")}
32
Location:
{data.get("city")}, {data.get("regionName")}, {data.get("country")
} {data.get("zip")}
33
Coordinates: {abs(lat_deg)}°{lat_min:.3f}' {lat_dir}, {abs(lon_deg)}°{lon_min
:.3f}' {lon_dir}
34
ISP/Org:
{data.get("org")}
35
"""
36
except Exception as e:
37
return f"IP Geolocation failed: {e}"
38
return "IP Geolocation unavailable"
39
40
41
def send_honeytoken_email(filename: str, session: str, src_ip: str, src_port:
int | str, timestamp: str = None):
42
timestamp = timestamp or datetime.utcnow().isoformat()
43
location_info = get_ip_location(src_ip)
44
45
body = f"""\
46
ALERT: Honeytoken file accessed!
47
48
File Location: {filename}
49
Session ID: {session}
50
Source IP-Port: {src_ip} : {src_port}
51
Timestamp (UTC): {timestamp}
52
{location_info}
53
"""
54
55
msg = MIMEText(body)
56
msg['Subject'] = "Cowrie Honeytoken Alert"
57
msg['From'] = os.environ.get("SMTP_FROM", "cowrie@honeypot.local")
58
59
# support multiple recipients
60
raw_to = os.environ.get("SMTP_TO", "")
61
to_addrs = [addr.strip() for addr in raw_to.replace("\n", ",").split(",")
if addr.strip()]
62
msg['To'] = ", ".join(to_addrs)
63
64
if not to_addrs:
65
print("[!] No valid recipient email addresses configured.")
66
return
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
149
==PAGE:158==
67
68
try:
69
server = smtplib.SMTP(os.environ.get("SMTP_SERVER", "localhost"), int(
os.environ.get("SMTP_PORT", 587)))
70
server.starttls()
71
server.login(os.environ.get("SMTP_USER"), os.environ.get("SMTP_PASS"))
72
server.sendmail(msg['From'], to_addrs , msg.as_string())
73
server.quit()
74
print(f"[+] Honeytoken alert email sent to {', '.join(to_addrs)} for {
filename}")
75
except Exception as e:
76
print(f"[!] Failed to send honeytoken email: {e}")
Listing C.1: Honeytoken alert implementation with geolocation
C.7
Honeytoken Files
1
HONEYTOKEN_APPLIANCE_FILES = [
2
"config.json",
3
"device.yaml",
4
"run.sh",
5
"appliance.service",
6
"credentials.json",
7
"backup_config.json",
8
"appliance_backup.db",
9
"/etc/passwd",
10
"notes.txt",
11
"source.zip",
12
"test.sh",
13
"appliance.log",
14
"status.json",
15
"nodecli",
16
"dashboard.log",
17
"applicance.log"
18
]
19
20
HONEYTOKEN_APPLIANCE_FOLDERS = [
21
"etc/appliance/",
22
"etc/systemd/system/",
23
"opt/appliance_control/",
24
"root/",
25
"usr/bin/",
26
"var/log/appliance/"
27
]
28
29
HONEYTOKEN_LIGHTING_FILES = [
30
"config.json",
31
"device.yaml",
32
"run.sh",
33
"lighting.service",
34
"credentials.json",
35
"backup_config.json",
36
"lighting_backup.db",
37
"/etc/passwd",
38
"notes.txt",
39
"source.zip",
40
"test.sh",
41
"lighting.log",
42
"status.json",
43
"nodecli",
44
"dashboard.log",
45
"lighting.log"
150
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
==PAGE:159==
46
]
47
48
HONEYTOKEN_LIGHTING_FOLDERS = [
49
"etc/lighting/",
50
"etc/systemd/system/",
51
"opt/lighting_control/",
52
"root/",
53
"usr/bin/",
54
"var/log/lighting/"
55
]
56
57
HONEYTOKEN_THERMOSTAT_FILES = [
58
"config.json",
59
"device.yaml",
60
"run.sh",
61
"thermostat.service",
62
"credentials.json",
63
"backup_config.json",
64
"thermostat_backup.db",
65
"/etc/passwd",
66
"notes.txt",
67
"source.zip",
68
"test.sh",
69
"thermostat.log",
70
"status.json",
71
"nodecli",
72
"dashboard.log",
73
"thermostat.log"
74
]
75
76
HONEYTOKEN_THERMOSTAT_FOLDERS = [
77
"etc/thermostat/",
78
"etc/systemd/system/",
79
"opt/thermostat_control/",
80
"root/",
81
"usr/bin/",
82
"var/log/thermostat/"
83
]
84
85
HONEYTOKEN_DIAGNOSTICS_FILES = [
86
"upload_diagnostics.sh",
87
"readme.txt",
88
]
89
90
HONEYTOKEN_DIAGNOSTICS_FOLDERS = [
91
"diagnostics/appliance/",
92
"diagnostics/lighting/",
93
"diagnostics/thermostat/",
94
"diagnostics/printer/"
95
]
Listing C.2: Honeytoken files and folders across HoneyFarm nodes
C.8
Botnet Detection Mechanism
1
def send_botnet_honeytoken_alert(session: str, src_ip: str, src_port: int |
str,
command: str, connectors: int, length: int, timestamp: str =
None) -> None:
2
"""
3
Triggered when a botnet attack is detected.
4
"""
5
timestamp = timestamp or datetime.utcnow().isoformat()
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
151
==PAGE:160==
6
location_info = get_ip_location(src_ip)
7
body = f"""\
8
ALERT: Botnet -like command detected!
9
10
Command:
11
{command}
12
13
Session ID: {session}
14
Source IP-Port: {src_ip} : {src_port}
15
Connectors Used: {connectors}
16
Command Length: {length}
17
Timestamp (UTC): {timestamp}
18
{location_info}
19
"""
20
msg = MIMEText(body)
21
msg['Subject'] = "Cowrie Botnet Command Alert ￿ "
22
msg['From'] = os.environ.get("SMTP_FROM", "cowrie@honeypot.local")
23
24
# send to recipients
25
raw_to = os.environ.get("SMTP_TO", "")
26
to_addrs = [addr.strip() for addr in raw_to.replace("\n", ",").split(",")
if addr.strip()]
27
msg['To'] = ", ".join(to_addrs)
28
29
if not to_addrs:
30
print("[!] No valid recipient email addresses configured.")
31
return
32
33
try:
34
server = smtplib.SMTP(os.environ.get("SMTP_SERVER", "localhost"), int(
os.environ.get("SMTP_PORT", 587)))
35
server.starttls()
36
server.login(os.environ.get("SMTP_USER"), os.environ.get("SMTP_PASS"))
37
server.sendmail(msg['From'], to_addrs , msg.as_string())
38
server.quit()
39
print(f"[+] Botnet command alert email sent to {', '.join(to_addrs)}
for session {session}")
40
except Exception as e:
41
print(f"[!] Failed to send botnet alert email: {e}")
Listing C.3: Botnet attacks alert email
152
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
==PAGE:161==
Hardening Honeypot Technologies in IoT : Challenges and Practical Improvements
153
==PAGE:162==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://www.compute.dtu.dk
