==PAGE:1==
Architecting and Designing a didactic com-
piler in Modern Functional Java for the
’hygge’ programming language
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Architecting and Designing a didactic compiler in Modern Functional Java for the
’hygge’ programming language
Master Thesis
July, 2025
By
Tomas Hagenau Andersen
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Section for Software Systems En-
gineering, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, at the Technical
University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfillment for the degree Master of Science in En-
gineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of computer science.
Tomas Hagenau Andersen - s233489
Signature
Date
ii
Architecting and Designing a didactic compiler in Modern Functional Java for the ’hygge’ programming
language
2025-06-25
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The Hygge programming language[1] is a didactic functional programming language de-
signed by A. Scalas for use in the course “02247 - Compiler Construction”[2] at the Tech-
nical University of Denmark (DTU). A reference compiler, called hyggec[3], is written in
the F# programming language and generates assembly for the RISC-V instruction set
architecture as its target language. This presents a challenge, as DTU admits many in-
ternational students to the MSc programmin in Computer Science and Engineering and
only some of them are familiar with functional programming and RISC-V. In an attempt to
increase accessibility and ease the learning curve for students without said experience,
this paper presents a redesign of hyggec written in the Java programming language called
JHygge. Aside from being written in Java, this new compiler will also generate bytecode
for the Java Virtual Machine (JVM) as its target language instead of RISC-V, as incoming
students are required to have experience with Java and thus should have some level of
familiarity with the JVM. Yet, the functional design of hyggec has many properties that
are desirable to retain. At the time of writing, the latest release of Java, version 24, of-
fers improved support for functional programming, so this thesis will investigate relevant
new features and apply them to JHygge. Another new feature of Java 24 is the Class-
File API[4], which allows the programmer to manipulate .class-files will also be used
in JHygge to generate bytecode for the JVM. After having specified functional and non-
functional requirements, proposed a redesigned architecture, implemented and tested
each of the compilation phases and Hygge language features, the final implementation of
JHygge showed the ability to generate JVM bytecode correctly implementing the seman-
tics of all the Hygge language features that should be supported using the Class-file API.
Although having conducted an end-user test with ca. 200 current and former students of
the course “02247”, the attempts to improve flexibility, extensibility and user-friendliness
with the new redesign could not be assessed as none of the invited students chose to
participate.
Architecting and Designing a didactic compiler in Modern Functional Java for the ’hygge’ programming
language
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Tomas Hagenau Andersen, MSc Computer Science and Engineering, DTU
Alceste Scalas, Associate Professor, Technical University of Denmark (DTU)
For agreeing to take on this project idea and for most excellent supervision along the way,
always pointing out potential improvements and suggesting ways to challenge the project.
Also, a huge thank you for writing me a recommendation for my Ph.D.-application.
Jens Kanstrup Larsen, Ph.D.-student, Technical University of Denmark (DTU)
For providing valuable feedback as a co-supervisor on the JHygge project.
iv
Architecting and Designing a didactic compiler in Modern Functional Java for the ’hygge’ programming
language
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Background and Prerequisite Knowledge
3
2.1
Programming Languages and Paradigms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Programming language theory and Compiler Construction . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.3
Java and the JVM ecosystem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.4
Compiler Architecture and Design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Requirements and Goals
12
3.1
Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.2
Goals
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.3
Non-goals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
4
Architecture and Design of JHygge
15
4.1
Gradle as an easy-to-use build system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
4.2
ANTLR4 for parsing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
4.3
A flexible design for the typechecking, interpretation and code generator
stages . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
4.4
Java 24 Class-file API for JVM bytecode generation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
4.5
PicoCLI for a user-friendly CLI
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
5
Implementation
22
5.1
Use of Functional Java: Records, Sealed Interfaces, Pattern matching and
Monads . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
5.2
Parsing Hygge source files with ANTLR4
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
5.3
Generating JVM bytecode with the Class-file API from Java 24 . . . . . . . 28
6
Testing
36
6.1
Functionality testing of JHygge
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
6.2
End-user testing of JHygge
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
7
Evaluation
38
7.1
Does JHygge fulfil the requirements? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
7.2
What about the Goals for the JHygge project? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
8
Conclusion
42
Bibliography
43
A Appendix A - ANTLR4 grammar for Hygge
45
B Appendix B - Proposal for an implementation of the Result monad in Java 24 49
C Appendix C - Additional functional utilities missing from Java 24
52
Architecting and Designing a didactic compiler in Modern Functional Java for the ’hygge’ programming
language
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Architecting and Designing a didactic compiler in Modern Functional Java for the ’hygge’ programming
language
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Today, compilers, interpreters, higher-level languages and many other forms of program-
ming language technologies are found in all sorts of software toolchains and applications.
From compilers and build systems to embedded interpreters in user applications, pro-
gramming language technologies have become ubiquitous in the computing landscape.
Due to this fact, it is more important than ever to teach students, aspiring programmers
and software engineers how they themselves can create their own compilers from the
ground up. That is exactly the purpose of the course “02247 - Compiler Construction”[2]
at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU), where graduate students are taught the
basics of how to build a programming language. The course prerequisites assumes that
the students are familiar with basic programming, data structures and algorithms and the
fundamentals of the theory of computation (mostly inference rules, regular expressions
and context-free grammars), but other than that there are no further requirements.
In the course, the students goes through a project, where they have to design and im-
plement iterations of the Hygge programming language. The Hygge programming lan-
guage is a toy language designed by A. Scalas for didactic purposes. A the beginning of
the course, the students can either choose to be adventurous and build everything from
scratch, using their programming language of choice, or to follow a more standardized
route by receiving a basic compiler, called hyggec[3], and extending it with new language
features as the course progresses.
This basic compiler, hyggec, which we may also refer to as “the reference implementation”,
is written in F#, an ML-based functional programming language, and the Hygge language
employs a design that makes use of some functional programming concepts. Here is the
issue: far from every student has experience with a functional programming language
and even fewer with F# in particular. This means that the student has an even steeper
learning curve having to learn a new language and paradigm in addition to the compiler
construction curriculum. Also, hyggec emits RISC-V assembly as its target language[1],
which the student may not have been exposed to either.
The official programming language of DTU Compute, the Department of Applied Mathe-
matics and Computer Science at DTU, is Java, so all incoming students for the Master’s
programme in Computer Science and Engineering (CSE) are expected to have experi-
ence with it. So too is a course in algorithms and data structures, as the students should
be familiar with basic data structures like stacks, trees and lists.
Given this knowledge, a way to improve the availability of the course 02247 to more stu-
dents would be to write a new Hygge compiler in Java. This would get rid of having to
learn a new language to write the compiler, but the challenge of learning assembly and
machine architecture remains, so what would be a suitable target language to replace
RISC-V? The students already know Java and thus have some experience working with
the Java Virtual Machine (JVM). The JVM is stack-based and sits at a higher level of ab-
straction compared to assembly[5], so it should be much simpler to learn for someone
with no exposure to machine languages and embedded development. The last issue is
that the functional programming features of F# allows for a concise, succinct and exten-
sible implementation of the compiler, which would be desirable traits to retain. Although
being know as an Object-Oriented language, the later releases of Java since version 21
has added a number of functional programming features.
Architecting and Designing a didactic compiler in Modern Functional Java for the ’hygge’ programming
language
1
==PAGE:10==
As mentioned, the JVM is a stack-based virtual machine[5], but what does that mean for
code generation? Is is possible to implement all of the semantics and the type system
such that it will run on the JVM just like in RISC-V? Or will the nature of the JVMs design
impose restrictions on the Hygge language? Just like code generation is the emphasis of
the course “02247 - Compiler Construction”[2], so will it be the emphasis for this Master’s
Thesis project. To summarize, this project has two goals. Firstly, explore the latest ver-
sions of Java (JDK 21 and newer) with an emphasis on Functional Programming features
and then re-architect, redesign and rewrite the reference implementation in Java for an ex-
tensible, flexible and user-friendly compiler. Secondly, explore the JVM and its bytecode
target language and attempt to implement as many features of the Hygge programming
language as possible on the JVM.
2
Architecting and Designing a didactic compiler in Modern Functional Java for the ’hygge’ programming
language
==PAGE:11==
2
Background and Prerequisite
Knowledge
In order to get the most out of the thesis, we recommend that the reader is familiar with
a quite wide variety of topics. In this section, we will go through some of the required
background and prerequisite knowledge at varying degrees of detail, perhaps only at
a glance if other sources already provide an appropriate in-depth explanation of well-
established knowledge.
The knowledge used in this thesis project spans from rigid maths-based topics such as
programming language theory[6] to softer subjects such programming paradigms, design
patterns[7] and compiler architecture. For some of these topics, the reader is only required
to have a basic knowledge.
2.1
Programming Languages and Paradigms
We recommend that the reader has knowledge of and experience with programming lan-
guages and programming paradigms. That is, we suggest that the reader knows at least
one Object-Oriented language, preferably Java, and at least one Functional language,
preferably F#. This includes knowing the four core principles/the four pillars of Object-
Oriented programming[7]: Abstraction, Encapsulation, Inheritance and Polymorphism.
From the Functional programming paradigm, we assume that the reader is familiar with
principles such as immutability, referential transparency, higher-order functions.
This
roughly corresponds to the curriculum of the course “02157 - Functional Programming”[8]
at the Technical University of Denmark. Advanced Functional Programming concepts
such as functors, applicative functors and monads[9], most notably the Maybe/Option
monad and the Result/Either monad, may be helpful, but not essential to understand the
work of this thesis.
Furthermore, topics from Object-Oriented Design and Architecture such as “Low-coupling,
High cohesion”[7], “Gang of Four” (GoF)[10] design patterns and the “SOLID” principles[7]
are also useful to know.
2.2
Programming language theory and Compiler
Construction
As this project is mainly about writing a compiler, some knowledge of programming lan-
guage theory is needed. Most notably, we recommend a basic understanding of syntax
trees, regular expressions and Context-Free Grammars (CFG) from Theory of Computa-
tion[6]. For describing to rules of the Hygge programming language, we recommend a
basic understanding of structural operational semantics, substitutions and inference rules
from logic. With regards to type systems, it is helpful to be knowledgable about typing
rules and the different typing disciplines: strong vs. weak, nominal vs. structural and
static vs. dynamic[11].
That is, knowledge corresponding to the curriculum of the course “02247 - Compiler Con-
struction”[2] covers all of the above-mentioned prerequisites.
Architecting and Designing a didactic compiler in Modern Functional Java for the ’hygge’ programming
language
3
==PAGE:12==
2.3
Java and the JVM ecosystem
In this section, we introduce the relevant material regarding the Java platform mainly
focusing on the functional language features of “modern” Java (version 21 and newer)
and the Java Virtual Machine.
2.3.1
Modern Java (JDK 21+)
When Java was initially released in 1995, it mainly had support for Object-oriented pro-
gramming with language features like classes, objects, inheritance in the form of both
abstract classes and interfaces and method overloading. Since Java 8, there has been
a shift towards providing support for more Functional programming features like anony-
mous functions (lambdas), higher-order functions, immutable structures (records), pattern
matching and discriminated unions in the form of sealed interfaces.
The most relevant features from newer versions of Java, described in their respective
“Java Enhancement Proposals” (JEP), which will be investigated throughout this thesis,
are as follows:
• JEP 488 (JDK 24)[12]: Primitive Types in Patterns, instanceof, and switch
• JEP 484 (JDK 24)[4]: Class-File API
• JEP 441 (JDK 21)[13]: Pattern Matching for switch
• JEP 443 (JDK 21)[14]: Unnamed Patterns and Variables
• JEP 440 (JDK 21)[15]: Record Patterns
• JEP 395 (JDK 17)[16]: Records
• JEP 409 (JDK 17)[17]: Sealed Classes
Some of these JEPs may have predecessor JEPs for earlier releases of Java, but we
have omitted those and only referenced the latest refinements.
2.3.2
The Java Virtual Machine (JVM) and JVM bytecode
The Java platform is more than the Java language. It consists of its own virtual ma-
chine, the Java Virtual Machine (JVM), which can execute “class”-files with JVM bytecode,
among other things. According to the Java SE 24 “Java Virtual Machine Specification”[5],
the JVM is an abstract computing machine and does not assume anything about the un-
derlying hardware platform that it runs on. This is the basis for the “WORA - Write Once,
Run Anywhere” principle.
The architecture of the JVM is based on a stack machine, where every frame is pushed
on and popped from a stack to perform computations. There are multiple different stacks
at play in the JVM, one for each thread in the JVM, as well as native method stacks.
A stack stores frames, which themselves store data and partial results associated with
computation of a method. A frame is created upon method invocation and destroyed upon
method termination no matter the cause (normal or abrupt). Every frame has an array of
local variables (also called local storage), its own operand stack and a reference to the
run-time constant pool of the class of the associated method. A run-time constant pool is
a table of constant values contained within every class for sharing constants among the
methods of the class. The JVM also manages its own heap which is shared among all
java virtual threads. Both JVM stacks and the heap are user configurable; they may either
be of a fixed size or dynamic only limited by the memory of the machine that it runs on.
JVM bytecode is rather simple in the sense that every instruction is only one byte (except
for longs and doubles, which are two bytes, or one word). The bytecode in a “class”-file is
4
Architecting and Designing a didactic compiler in Modern Functional Java for the ’hygge’ programming
language
==PAGE:13==
also grouped, first by class then by method, to reflect the structure of the JVM discussed
earlier. To illustrate this, let’s go through a small example. In the code snippet on figure
2.1, we show a simple Java program containing a static main()-method, an instance
method and a constructor:
1
class Main {
2
private int foo;
3
private boolean bar;
4
5
public Main(int foo, boolean bar) {
6
this.foo = foo;
7
this.bar = bar;
8
}
9
10
public void whatTheFoo() {
11
if (foo == 42) {
12
System.out.println("This is very meaningful!");
13
} else {
14
System.out.println("This makes no sense at all!");
15
}
16
}
17
18
public static void main(String[] args) {
19
var main = new Main(1, true);
20
main.whatTheFoo();
21
}
22
}
Figure 2.1: Example Java code. The purpose of this code snippet is only to showcase its
corresponding JVM bytecode.
What the code in figure 2.1 does is not important. If one then compiles the code with
javac (OpenJDK 24.0.0) and then disassembles the resulting .class-file with javap, one
obtains (depending on JDK release and compiler flags) the JVM bytecode in human-
readable form, which is shown on figure 2.2:
Architecting and Designing a didactic compiler in Modern Functional Java for the ’hygge’ programming
language
5
==PAGE:14==
1
class Main {
2
private int foo;
3
4
private boolean bar;
5
6
public Main(int, boolean);
7
0: aload_0
8
1: invokespecial #1
// Method java/lang/Object."<
init >":()V
9
4: aload_0
10
5: iload_1
11
6: putfield
#7
// Field foo:I
12
9: aload_0
13
10: iload_2
14
11: putfield
#13
// Field bar:Z
15
14: return
16
17
18
public void whatTheFoo();
19
0: aload_0
20
1: getfield
#7
// Field foo:I
21
4: bipush
42
22
6: if_icmpne
20
23
9: getstatic
#17
// Field java/lang/System.out:
Ljava/io/PrintStream;
24
12: ldc
#23
// String This is very
meaningful!
25
14: invokevirtual #25
// Method java/io/PrintStream.
println:(Ljava/lang/String;)V
26
17: goto
28
27
20: getstatic
#17
// Field java/lang/System.out:
Ljava/io/PrintStream;
28
23: ldc
#31
// String This makes no sense at
all!
29
25: invokevirtual #25
// Method java/io/PrintStream.
println:(Ljava/lang/String;)V
30
28: return
31
32
33
public static void main(java.lang.String[]);
34
0: new
#8
// class Main
35
3: dup
36
4: iconst_1
37
5: iconst_1
38
6: invokespecial #33
// Method "<init >":(IZ)V
39
9: astore_1
40
10: aload_1
41
11: invokevirtual #36
// Method whatTheFoo:()V
42
14: return
43
44
}
Figure 2.2: Corresponding JVM bytecode for the code from figure 2.1
Note, that in this example, the run-time constant pool for Main has been removed for the
sake of brevity and readability. Comparing this bytecode with its equivalent Java source
program, they are quite similar in terms of structure. Syntactically, one can say that it
6
Architecting and Designing a didactic compiler in Modern Functional Java for the ’hygge’ programming
language
==PAGE:15==
is a mix of Java and assembly-like instructions. Every instruction belongs to a method
and every method is part of a class. Notice that a constructor for a class is not that
different from a method at the bytecode level; both constructors and instance methods
have a reference to the object at local storage byte offset zero. The primary difference
is that the constructor invokes the Object[18] constructor and calls for invoking the Main
constructor itself must be done using the invokespecial[5] instruction. On the other
hand, calling instance methods and static methods are done using the invokevirtual
and invokestatic instructions, respectively. The hash-marks with numbers, i.e. #33,
are references to the run-time constant pool.
2.4
Compiler Architecture and Design
From a birds eye perspective, a compiler is a program that transforms textual input data
to some other representation in the form of a target language. The target language can
be many different types of languages: from low-level machine languages to other high-
level programming languages. The textual input data usually comes in the form of a
data stream, either as a file stream when reading a source file or as a character stream
when reading user input from a console. The most generic way to describe the typical
architecture of a compiler would be the “Pipes and Filters” architectural pattern[19]. In this
pattern, the program consists of independent stages of data transformations, which are
connected as a unified system. As the name of the pattern suggests, there are two types of
elements in this architecture: pipes and filters. Filters are stages of data transformations,
and the pipes are the connections between filters, which acts as data adapters.
The important part about the “Pipes and Filters” architectural pattern is that filters are
completely independent of each other. One could consider every filter to be a separate
program. Thus, with the right pipe, or data adapter, any two filters could be connected. If
one considers the architecture of the hyggec compiler, it has a lexer/parser, a typechecker,
an interpreter, an optimizer and a code generator. All of these are filters, as they are
still independent. For example, the interpreter takes an untyped AST as its input and
produces an evaluation in the form of a reduced AST and the associated side-effects.
The point is that it doesn’t matter how the untyped AST input is produced as this is not the
responsibility of the interpreter. Another example is the typechecker. It takes an untyped
AST and produces a typed AST. It doesn’t care where the untyped AST input comes
from nor where the resulting typed AST goes. This means that when viewing the hyggec
compiler through the perspective of “Pipes and Filters”, any filter can be placed at any
point in the pipeline, where the input and output types match. In functional programming,
one could say that this is essentially just function composition at the architectural level,
as every filter can be viewed as a function with input and output types.
Architecting and Designing a didactic compiler in Modern Functional Java for the ’hygge’ programming
language
7
==PAGE:16==
Figure 2.3: Basic phases of a Compiler made by A. Scalas.
If we consider the general architecture of a compiler as illustrated by A. Scalas on fig-
ure 2.3, a compiler consists of four overall phases: lexing, parsing, analysis and code
generation. On figure, we also see the respective inputs and outputs of each phase. If
one were to look at this from the perspective of “pipes and filters”, the input and outputs
would be the pipes and the phases would be the filters. Going a step further, a functional
programmer would perhaps claim that a general compiler is a program that consists of
four functions:
• Lexing : SourceProgram →TokenStream
• Parsing : TokenStream →AbstractSyntaxTree
• Analysis : AbstractSyntaxTree →IntermediateRepresentation
• CodeGeneration : IntermediateRepresentation →TargetProgram
As such, the definition for the function Compiler would be:
Compiler : SourceProgram →TargetProgram
Compiler = Lexing ◦Parsing ◦Analysis ◦CodeGeneration
where ◦is the function composition operator. From an Object-Oriented Design perspec-
tive, one wouldn’t necessarily be thinking about the structure of a compiler in terms of
function definitions, but instead be concerned with the properties of this architecture. To
achieve independent phases, or filters, is essential that the system has low coupling (mini-
mal dependence between unrelated components) and high cohesion (related functionality
is grouped together).
2.4.1
Compilation phases in detail
Now that we have been acquainted with the overall structure of a general compiler, we
take a closer look a each of the compilation phases in greater detail, high-lighting both
the purpose as well as some of the challenges associated with each stage.
Lexing and Parsing
The purpose of the lexing and parsing is to transform a source file, or character stream,
into some form of syntax tree at a suitable representation of the program contained within
the source file. There are different kinds of syntax trees, but here we’ll consider Abstract
8
Architecting and Designing a didactic compiler in Modern Functional Java for the ’hygge’ programming
language
==PAGE:17==
Syntax Trees (AST) to be the most common form. Lexing and Parsing may either be
considered as separate or combined phases in the architecture of a compiler.
To specify the syntax of a programming language, one can use a formal grammar. There
are different kinds of grammar, but we’ll mainly consider Context-Free Grammars (CFG),
as this kind of grammar is usually sufficient to express all the valid strings of the language.
A CFG describes a Context-Free Language (CFL). A Push-Down Automata (PDA) is ca-
pable of recognizing a CFL. For an in-depth explaination of CFGs, CFLs, PDAs, and the
associated challenges, we recommend “Introduction to the Theory of Computation, 3rd
Edition” by M. Sipser[6].
After having specified the syntax of the programming language to implement, one needs
a lexer/parser to recognize it. While some may choose to write a lexer/parser from scratch
to suit their particular needs, it may be quite time-consuming to implement and verify its
correctness, especially when the language evolves with frequent changes to the syntax
rules. A parser generator is a program that can generate the source code for a parser
program given a language syntax specification. This can save a lot of development time,
especially when prototyping with new language features which require syntax alterations.
There exists many parser generators with support for different programming languages to
generate parser programs for. Examples include ANTLR4[20], GNU Bison[21], JavaCC[22]
and FsLexYacc[23]. Aside from supporting different programming languages, the most
distinguishing feature among parser generators are their parsing algorithms. There are
different parsing algorithms. For the previously mentioned parser generators, ANTLR4
uses “Adaptive LL(*)”, FsLexYacc uses “LALR” and JavaCC uses “LL(k)” parsing. These
algorithms impose restrictions on the form of the grammar of the programming language.
For example, a CFG may have to be free of left-recursion for an “LL(1)” algorithm to
recognize the language correctly.
Analysis
Analysis is an umbrella term for different kinds of program analysis that may be performed
at this phase of a compiler. Examples of this includes typechecking, optimizations at the
AST-level, static analysis, etc. It is also possible that a compiler may perform multiple
kinds of analysis. While there are many interesting topics in the field of program analysis,
we will only discuss mostly typechecking and briefly optimization for the sake of keep this
discussion in scope of the thesis goals.
Typechecking is the process of checking that the structure of an AST abides to the rules
of a type system. There are different type systems with different typing disciples: strong
vs. weak, static vs. dynamic (and duck), nominal vs. structural. For some programming
languages, typechecking is only partial or skipped entirely. Instead, an error is generated
at runtime when the typing rules are violated. This is typical of languages with dynamic
type systems such as Python, Ruby and JavaScript. Other programming languages with
weak type systems, such as C or JavaScript, perform implicit conversions to make a
value “fit”. Languages with static type systems, such as F#, Haskell and Rust, enforce
their typing rules at compile-time using typechecking.
The type system for Hygge is static, strong and structural: Typechecking is enforced at
compile-time, primitive types cannot be interchanged, and type equivalence for compos-
ite types (i.e. structures and discriminated unions) are determined by their underlying
structure rather than their names.
Code generation
The code generation phases of a compiler does exactly that. It converts a well-typed
AST to its target-language form by traversing it and generating code. Code generation
Architecting and Designing a didactic compiler in Modern Functional Java for the ’hygge’ programming
language
9
==PAGE:18==
strategies vary depending on quite a few parameters and issues: the intended target
language, the IR and semantics of the language to generate code for, instruction selection,
register allocation and assignment, memory management, etc. While there are templating
engines and source-to-source compilers, also referred to as transpilers, we will focus
solely on code generation for Instruction Set Architectures (ISA) in the form of assembly,
bytecode or the like. For machine languages, such as RISC-V, M68k, Intel x86, etc.,
all of the previously mentioned issues apply. For targets such as JVM bytecode, the
programmer doesn’t have to take registers and memory management into account as the
JVM doesn’t have the concept of registers and the underlying virtual machine implements
automatic memory management in the form of garbage collection. Instruction selection
and the internal representation of the language are still important as the JVM is stack-
based and thus compiler has to generate the bytecode instructions in the correct order on
the stack for arithmetic and logical operations as well as method invocations.
2.4.2
The hyggec architecture and design
In this section, we briefly present the architecture and design of the reference compiler,
hyggec. As hyggec is a didactic compiler, some compiler phases may be simpler and
fewer compared to that of a compiler for programming languages intended for real-world
use.
In figure 2.4, we see the compiler architecture for hyggec by A. Scalas. If we compare
it to figure 2.3, we observe that each stage has been concretized. For lexical analysis
and parsing, FsLexYacc is used to auto-generate a lexer and a parser to convert a source
file into an Intermediate Representation (IR) in the form of an untyped AST. This untyped
AST is then undergoing an analysis in the form of typechecking, converting the untyped
AST into a typed one. At the final phase of the hyggec compiler architecture pipeline,
RISC-V code is being generated. Although not illustrated on figure 2.4, hyggec also has
an interpreter that can consume an AST, typed or not. There is also a small degree of op-
timization in hyggec, most of which the students are asked to implement at the appropriate
phases during the later part of “02247 - Compiler Construction”[2].
Figure 2.4: The compiler architecture of hyggec made by A. Scalas.
10
Architecting and Designing a didactic compiler in Modern Functional Java for the ’hygge’ programming
language
==PAGE:19==
Looking at the code itself for hyggec, the layout is quite simple; one file per compila-
tion stage as well as a few extra files for miscellenious utilities. The AST is modelled in a
functional style using mutually recursively-defined records and discriminated unions, Node
and Expr. A Node represents a node in the syntax tree and contains information about
the position in the source file, the typing environment, the type, and most importantly the
expression at this node. An Expr represents the all posible expressions in the Hygge
language, which may be either a terminal expression such as a value or identifier or com-
posite expression which have child nodes. Since the Hygge language consists exclusively
of expressions, this kind of model is able to capture the entire language. The lexer and
parser defined in Lexer.fsl and Parser.fsy, respectively, constructs instances of Nodes
and Exprs to form an AST upon successfully parsing a source file.
The AST instances constructed by the generated parser are untyped as they contain no
type information and no typing environment. To annotate the AST with typing information,
the typechecker implements the typer function, which updates every Node with a Type and
a TypingEnv according to the typing rules. There are a few utility functions, but the typer
function does most of work for typing judgements case-by-case through pattern matching
on the expression of a Node. This approach of having a single function to do (almost) all of
the work, then use pattern matching to work the different cases and finally return a Result
monad also applies to the interpreter and code generator phases. While these functions
many have different inputs and produce different outputs, the overall design is the same.
Architecting and Designing a didactic compiler in Modern Functional Java for the ’hygge’ programming
language
11
==PAGE:20==
3
Requirements and Goals
In this section we state and explain the requirement and the goals of this thesis project as
well as some non-goals to help clarify the scope of the project.
We distinguish between requirements and goals. A requirement specifies features, func-
tionality and properties of the compiler to be written. This is a classic systems engineering
approach to describe the things that a system can do (functional requirements) and adding
constraints as to how it should do the things (non-functional requirements). This is very
product-centric.
A goal on the other hand is about obtaining an answer a research question. That is, the
success of the project does depend on whether the research question yields a desirable
answer, but only that more insights are gained about the problem that the question is
concerned with. In other words, we seek to get closer to an answer or gain a more refined
perspective.
3.1
Requirements
In this section, we use the words “must”, “should”, “could” and “won’t” in accordance with
their meaning defined by the MoSCoW prioritization technique[24]. To briefly explain,
“must” mean that the requirement is critical for the success of the project and thus must
be achieved. The word “should” means that although the requirement is not critical its
completion will bring a lot of value to the project, which could impact the result, but is not
essential. “Could” means that there is some value to be gained by fulfilling the require-
ment, but far less than “should” and is entirely optional. Finally, “won’t” is the same as
declaring a requirement as “could”, yet there is no way that it is doable within the allo-
cated time frame for the project. As a final note, the set of “must”-requirements form the
Minimum-Viable-Product (MVP) in the sense that the project won’t be a success unless
these requirements are met by the final implementation of the new Hygge compiler, which
should henceforth be known by the name JHygge.
The requirements specification is informal in the sense that requirements are specified
using natural language rather than rigid unambiguious mathematics.
For the requirements, we must write a compiler for the Hygge programming language,
which as a minimum supports the Hygge0 version of the language, but should support all
the features of the reference implementation, hyggec. To validate and verify the imple-
mentation of the Hygge programming language, JHygge must include an extensive and
rigid test suite.
To summarize, the JHygge compiler has the following functional requirements:
12
Architecting and Designing a didactic compiler in Modern Functional Java for the ’hygge’ programming
language
==PAGE:21==
• NF1: JHygge must be written in the Java programming language version 24 and
make use of functional programming features and design.
• NF2: JHygge must have a test suite that can run unit and integration tests for the
compile pipeline stages.
• NF3: JHygge must make use of a parser generator for implementing the parser, for
example ANTLR4, JavaCC, etc.
• NF4: JHygge must make use of a framework for generating JVM bytecode, for ex-
ample ASM, Class-file API, ByteBuddy, etc.
• NF5: JHygge should make use of a build and dependency management system, for
example Maven, Gradle, Bazel, etc.
Figure 3.2: Non-functional requirements for the JHygge compiler
• F01: JHygge must implement all of the Hygge 0 language specification.
• F02: JHygge should implement mutable variables.
• F03: JHygge should implement “while-do” loops.
• F04: JHygge should implement functions.
• F05: JHygge should implement structures and field selections.
• F06: JHygge should implement discriminated unions and recursive types.
• F07: JHygge could implement peephole optimization.
• F08: JHygge could implement ANF optimization.
• F09: JHygge won’t implement Register Allocation.
• F10: JHygge won’t implement Closures.
• F11: JHygge should implement a CLI interface akin to that of hyggec.
Figure 3.1: Functional requirements for the JHygge compiler
With the use of the word “implement” in the requirements, we mean that the implementa-
tion will provide the same level of support for the given feature as the reference compiler
hyggec without student modifications. For example, discriminated unions and recursive
types are only supported by the typechecker and the interpreter, but not the code gen-
erator, whereas all the phases are supported for functions. We suggest that the reader
inspects the source code of hyggec to gain insight as to degree of which each Hygge
language feature is supported by default.
Additionally, the JHygge compiler has the following non-functional requirements:
Together, these fifteen requirements form the specification for the JHygge compiler.
3.2
Goals
There are two primary goals of this MSc thesis project:
• G01: To explore the functional language features of newer Java releases and re-
architect, redesign and rewrite hyggec in the form of JHygge for an extensible, flex-
ible and user-friendly compiler.
• G02: To explore the Java Virtual Machine along with its bytecode target language
and attempt to implement as many features of the Hygge programming language
as possible on the JVM.
Figure 3.3: Goals, or research questions, of the MSc thesis project.
Architecting and Designing a didactic compiler in Modern Functional Java for the ’hygge’ programming
language
13
==PAGE:22==
The first goal is about trying to figure out how to create a balanced architecture in the
sense that it should be flexible enough for students to easily add new language features
or swap out alternative implementations for parts of the compiler while at the same time
being simple enough to comprehend and navigate. This is something that is hard to
quantify, so to evaluate it, we will employ a qualitative method, where the end-user (the
students) will be given a usability test. In this usability test, the students will attempt to
extend the finished compiler with a simple language feature in a structured fashion. At
the end, the students will describe there experiences using the new JHygge compiler with
an emphasis on user-friendliness.
The second goal concerns the other value-creating aspect of this project, namely code
generation for the JVM. While it should be possible to perform the same computations
on the JVM as on a RISC-V machine, whether it is straight-forward in practise is another
question. Will the design of the JVM impose restrictions on the Hygge language spec-
ification as implementing some parts of the language may prove impractical due to an
unforseen amount of “boiler-plate code”?
3.3
Non-goals
To create a successor language to Hygge or vastly alter its specification is not a goal of
the project. Rather, we want to create a “playground” framework of sorts that allows the
students to easily extend the Hygge language as part of the course work in 02247. It
is also not a goal to implement a parser or parser generator, as many well-tested and
proven tools already exist as well as the fact that parsing is not an emphasis in neither the
course “02247 - Compiler Construction”[2] nor in this thesis. Although code generation
for the JVM platform is very much the emphasis of this thesis, it is not a goal to create
a framework to read, write and update Java class-files, as this kind of software already
exists (most notably ASM and the Class-file API[4] from Java 24).
For a formal specification of the syntax, operational semantics, reduction rules, substitu-
tion rules, typing rules, etc. we refer to the lecture notes of the course “02247 - Compiler
Construction”[1].
14
Architecting and Designing a didactic compiler in Modern Functional Java for the ’hygge’ programming
language
==PAGE:23==
4
Architecture and Design of JHygge
Now that we’ve discussed the architecture and design of the reference compiler, hyggec,
in 2.4.2, we’ll attempt to come up with a refined architecture and design for the new com-
piler, JHygge. The reason we call it a refined architecture is due to the fact that hyggec
has many good design points for its intended purpose. The design is simple and minimal;
very few types and functions that form a straight-forward pipeline. There are however
some less desirable consequences of this.
The design is not very flexible as there is a lot of coupling, some code duplication and
deeply nested code. The different phases depend on concretizations rather than inter-
faces and they are monoliths; for example, the interpreters reduce implements the entire
set of reduction rules, aside from a few miscellaneous utilities. If a student wants to com-
pare two different implementation strategies for a while loop, for example, they have to
change to overwrite the existing code and then test it, potentially getting confused along
the way. The same principle applies for the typechecker and code generator as well.
So, overall there are a lot of good things that we want to keep. We want to keep the
same compiler phases: Lexing/Parsing, Typechecking, Interpretation and Code Gener-
ation. We want to keep the user-friendly CLI and the same kind of testing suite. The
things that we want to change is the implementation language (F# to Java), the specific
build system and parser generator, the target language (RISC-V assembly to JVM byte-
code), and most profoundly, the internal design of the typechecking, interpretation and
code generator phases.
4.1
Gradle as an easy-to-use build system
When using F#, the dotnet CLI provides a simple build and project management tool
which comes by default with the installation of the .NET-platform. In the Java world,
the choice is a little more nuanced as there is no standard build system supplied with
an installation of a JDK. There are, however, quite a few choices, with some of the most
popular choices being Apache Maven[25], Gradle[26] and Googles Bazel[27] built system.
Assuming that the incoming students don’t have any experience with any particular build
system, it is desirable that the build system of choice for JHygge is as easy to learn and use
to lessen the burden. Maven is very powerful; it uses a declarative approach to specify
a project and its build tasks using the Project Object Model (POM, written in an XML
file). However, it is also quite complicated with concepts like “Archetypes”, “Extensions”,
workflow, lifecycle and more, which will be a barrier to entry for students.
Bazel is a newer offering from Google, which is meant to be a scalable, multi-platform
and multi-language open source build system. To use Bazel, one has to initial a project
“workspace” and then specify what to build using a BUILD file written in a Domain-Specific
Language (DSL) called starlark. This may sound simple, but we find that there are a few
issues for our case: in every build file, one has to specify all source files explicitly using
Bazels own query language, which is different from that of both Maven and Gradle. Also,
installing Bazel itself is quite strange, as the Bazel authors recommend that one uses the
bazelisk installation tool, which itself must be installed using the Node Package Manager,
npm, which is a tool for javascript packages. So, there are a lot of dependencies required
to install the build tool in the first place. This is likely to confuse students that are not
familiar with all of these tools.
Architecting and Designing a didactic compiler in Modern Functional Java for the ’hygge’ programming
language
15
==PAGE:24==
Lastly, there is Gradle, which as the title of this subsection suggests is our choice of build
system. Why? Gradle is easy to install, or rather to not install, as one can simply place
a self-containing wrapper inside the project (gradle-wrapper.jar executable, plus some
gradlew wrapper scripts). So, the students don’t have to install anything this way. The
gradlew wrapper script provides a CLI similar to that of the dotnet CLI tool. In terms of
required configuration files, Gradle requires a build.gradle (or build.gradle.kts) file,
where the user can specify the project metadata, plugins, dependencies and tasks in ei-
ther the Groovy or the Kotlin programming language. This build.gradle file is written in a
concise and declarative style, where the Gradle framework provides an easy to use DSL.
For version management of dependencies, one can optionally use a libs.versions.toml
file to separate dependency versioning from task specification. That’s it, the student won’t
have to install anything besides Java and they can build the project in one simple com-
mand: gradlew build.
4.2
ANTLR4 for parsing
Similar to hyggec, we want to use a parser generator tool for ease-of-use as the course
“02247”, as well as this thesis itself, focuses mostly on the later phases of compilation.
We have explored two options, JavaCC[22] and ANTLR4[20], which both looked promising
initially. We started out using JavaCC as it is quite similar to FsLexYacc[23] used by hyggec
in the hope that we could maintain a similar design. This turned out to be disappointing,
as the parser file grew fast when adding language features: before reaching the Hygge0
specification, the parser file had grown to 563 lines of code, which by comparison is ap-
proximately 89 percent more than the combined 298 lines of code for the lexer and parser
in hyggec (Hygge0 branch). However, the worst part was that JavaCC generated invalid
Java code for the parser; it couldn’t compile and the author was unable to resolve the is-
sue. Upon encountering these issues, we realised that JavaCC would incur a high degree
of complexity as well as a buggy code generation, which will degrade user experience
and increase the maintenance burden.
So, we tried out ANTLR4 instead. ANTLR4 is quite different from JavaCC; it uses a .g4
grammar file to specify the syntax of the language in a format similar to E-BNF[28]. ANTLR4
will then generate a parser that converts an input stream to an AST of its own. This
AST is intended to be consumed by visitors and listeners[29]; a visitor will transform and
compute a result from an AST, whereas a listener will only perform some kind of side-
effect without returning a result. As we intend to keep the AST model from hyggec, we
can use a visitor to generate Nodes and Exprs from the ANTLR4 AST. We will discuss the
implementation and its evaluation later. Another bonus benefit is that ANTLR4 is capable
of generating parsers in other languages such as python, c++ and go. While this doesn’t
impact the development of JHygge, one could reuse the .g4 grammar file for the base
Hygge language if some students wanted to do a custom project in another language.
4.3
A flexible design for the typechecking, interpretation and
code generator stages
As mentioned earlier when high-lighting the weak points of the architecture of the hyggec
compiler, the design is inflexible as it depends on concretizations rather than abstractions.
So, we seek a design that is more aligned with the SOLID principles to increase flexibility,
extensibility and decoupling. Our proposed solution is that we split up the typer, reduce
and codeGen functions by grouping the expressions of the Hygge language by feature.
We then define interfaces that the different components can depend on.
In figure 4.1 we provide an overview of the most important classes of JHygge and their
16
Architecting and Designing a didactic compiler in Modern Functional Java for the ’hygge’ programming
language
==PAGE:25==
internal relations. On its own, this is not enough to explain or proposed design changes,
but is serves as a reference for the classes, interfaces, exceptions, etc. that we will be
discussing.
Figure 4.1: All classes of JHygge and their relations. Made using the Diagrams plugin in
JetBrains IntelliJ.
Rather than following the hyggec approach of, for the most part, putting every related
function and type in the same source file for each compiler phase, we have decided to
split up each phase into multiple files for a few reasons. Firstly, we assume that the Java
implementation will be lengthier than the F# one due to Javas presumably more verbose
syntax, and it is generally good practice to put every class, interface, exception, etc. in
its own source file. Also, this distribution over multiple files and packages means that
every file will follow the separation of concerns principle and improve rigidity (as defined
in “Clean Code” by R. C. Martin)[30].
Looking solely at the components of the ast package shown in 4.2, it contains almost the
same constructs as AST.fs in hyggec, so not much has changed except for the introduc-
tion of the ANTLRHyggeNodeVisitor and the ANTLRHyggeErrorListener, which is due to
the dependency on ANTLR4.
Figure 4.2: The classes of ast package in JHygge and their relations. Made using the
Diagrams plugin in JetBrains IntelliJ.
In the interpreter is where we begin to see some significant changes in design com-
Architecting and Designing a didactic compiler in Modern Functional Java for the ’hygge’ programming
language
17
==PAGE:26==
pared to hyggec; there are interfaces for every grouping of language features and there is
a HyggeInterpreterFactory for creating instances of HyggeInterpreters. The impor-
tant part is that one is no longer intended to directly create concrete instances of some in-
terpreter, that is all handled by the factory, which also constructs and injects the correct de-
pendencies of the concrete interpreter. This gives the students more flexibility if they, for
example, would want to compare different implementations of the same language feature,
they can easily swap between implementations due to dependency injection and the fac-
tory class. Perhaps, the students may want to change the interpretation strategy, so with
this design the students can keep the default interpreter as a reference, while implement-
ing the new strategy incrementally. It is important to note that from a technical standpoint,
this design only requires the programmer to implement the HyggeInterpreter-interface,
so the programmer is completely free to use the remaining interfaces that partially define
the interpretation for a grouping of language features. Note also, that there is a standard
package which implements the same interpretation strategy from hyggec.
Figure 4.3: The classes of the interpreter package in JHygge and their relations. Made
using the Diagrams plugin in JetBrains IntelliJ.
Overall, we repeat this pattern for both the typechecker and the code generator phases as
they share the same structure albeit providing different transformations and effects. On
figure 4.4, we see the exact same structure and separation of concerns for the typechecker
as we saw for the interpreter.
18
Architecting and Designing a didactic compiler in Modern Functional Java for the ’hygge’ programming
language
==PAGE:27==
Figure 4.4: The classes of the typechecker package in JHygge and their relations. Made
using the Diagrams plugin in JetBrains IntelliJ.
The code generator design is slightly different as shown on figure 4.5. The premise is
different to that of the typechecker and interpreter because we don’t define exact rules
for the code generation strategy except for the semantics and we expect that there will
not only be potentially many code generator back-ends, but the target languages of the
back-end may differ greatly. For example, RISC-V assembly and JVM bytecode are not
only different from a syntactic point of view, but the underlying machines/hardware have
almost nothing in common, so it doesn’t make sense to try to create some generalized
abstractions; the JVM is stack-based with managed memory[5] which isn’t the case for
RISC-V. By adding another back-end, say LLVM IR, this would make generalization even
more difficult. So, rather than coming up with fragile abstractions, we decided to only
provide a basic HyggeCodeGenerator interface along with a factory and then let the pro-
grammer decide the best strategy for each back-end. There is also a jvm package, which
will be discussed in the following subsection.
Figure 4.5: The classes of the codegenerator package in JHygge and their relations.
Made using the Diagrams plugin in JetBrains IntelliJ.
Architecting and Designing a didactic compiler in Modern Functional Java for the ’hygge’ programming
language
19
==PAGE:28==
4.4
Java 24 Class-file API for JVM bytecode generation
The hyggec compiler implements its own abstraction layer for RISC-V assembly to ease
the implementation of the code generation phase. This is one the good points about the
hyggec compiler, which we want to maintain in the JHygge compiler. Instead of writing an
abstraction layer from scratch, we seek to utilize an existing framework for manipulating
JVM bytecode.
Luckily, there are a few well-maintained frameworks out there. Perhaps, the most inter-
esting framework is the introduction of the Class-file[4] API with the release of Java 24.
This is a built-in framework for performing CRUD operations on Java ‘.class‘-files that
comes with every JDK from Java 24 onwards. As an alternative, there is the ASM frame-
work[31], which is widely used in compilers and related projects such as OpenJDK, the
Groovy compiler and the Kotlin compiler. While both provide the same functionality that
we seek, the Class-file API has two advantages: it comes with the JDK out-of-box, so
there is no need to manage any additional dependencies, and it has a declarative API
which fits in with the function programming style.
As a counter argument, one could say that ASM has seen more real-world use, and that
there is nothing wrong with a more imperative API, but the declarative style employed
by the Class-file API and the reduction in the number of external dependencies is very
appealing. As such, we have selected the Java 24 Class-file API as the framework of
choice for JVM bytecode generation.
Figure 4.6: Implementation classes of the code generator interfaces for the JVM back-end
in JHygge. Made using the Diagrams plugin in JetBrains IntelliJ.
Following our design approach outlined in the previous subsection, we propose a design
for the JVM code generation back-end to consist of the classes shown in figure 4.6. This
design still follows the separation of concerns principle, however we have chosen to not
make interfaces for everything as we assume that there will only be one code generation
back-end for JVM bytecode, where potential improvements will be implemented in-place.
This is also due to the fact that the code generation strategies may be very different for
different target languages.
20
Architecting and Designing a didactic compiler in Modern Functional Java for the ’hygge’ programming
language
==PAGE:29==
4.5
PicoCLI for a user-friendly CLI
The hyggec compiler has a CLI for invoking the different compiler phases on a source
file. This is a very useful feature, when the student want to quickly test an arbitrary hygge
program, so we want to maintain a similar CLI in the JHygge compiler. hyggec uses the
CommandLineParser[32] library. In the Java world, there is a similar framework called
PicoCLI[33], which provides a flexibility in creating a custom command-line argument
parser for multiple different JVM languages. This project is well maintained and is used
by some of the Apache projects, like Groovy, Hive and Hadoop, at the time of writing.
Architecting and Designing a didactic compiler in Modern Functional Java for the ’hygge’ programming
language
21
==PAGE:30==
5
Implementation
At this point, we have arrived at a suitable architecture and design for JHygge, the new
Hygge compiler, so this chapter concerns the actual implementation. Here, we emphasize
the use of the new functional features of modern Java (JDK 21 and up) and present the
highlights of the final implementation of JHygge.
5.1
Use of Functional Java: Records, Sealed Interfaces,
Pattern matching and Monads
As the purpose of this thesis is also to explore the newer functional features of Java.
The existing implementation of hyggec is indeed very functional, so we attempted to write
the implementations of both the AST, typechecker and interpreter in such a way that the
JHygge versions are as close to those of hyggec, disregarding the architectural and design
differences. Some of the newer functional features of Java we wanted to investigate in-
clude records[34][16] (immutable classes), sealed interfaces (discriminated unions)[17],
switch expressions (pattern matching) and the introduction of some monads, most no-
tably Optional. In the following sections, we show concrete examples of implementation,
where we have attempted to use said features and compare them to the corresponding
code in hyggec.
5.1.1
Records and Sealed Interfaces for functional data modelling
The Node and Expr data model for the AST from hyggec is one of the parts that we wish
to carry over in JHygge. This requires support for discriminated unions and recursive data
type, the former of which was introduced in JDK 17 in the form of sealed interfaces; one
declares a finite number of exact specializations upon defining the interface itself. This
gives the Java compiler information about the possible specialization, which it can use to
perform case analysis and thus enforce exhaustive pattern matching. Let’s see records
and sealed interfaces in action in the form of JHygges implementation of Expr in figure
5.1.
1
// From Expr.java, reformatted to be more compact and fit within the margins
2
public sealed interface Expr<E, T>
3
permits Expr.UnitVal , Expr.BoolVal , Expr.IntVal , Expr.FloatVal ,
4
Expr.StringVal , Expr.Var, Expr.BinaryOperator , Expr.Not,
5
Expr.ReadInt , Expr.ReadFloat , Expr.Print, Expr.PrintLn ,
6
Expr.If, Expr.Seq, Expr.Type, Expr.Ascription ,
7
Expr.Assertion , Expr.Let, Expr.Assign, Expr.While,
8
Expr.Lambda, Expr.Application , Expr.StructCons ,
9
Expr.FieldSelect , Expr.Pointer , Expr.UnionCons ,
10
Expr.Match {
11
// ...
12
}
Figure 5.1: The implementation of Hygge expressions as a sealed interface specifying
the exact allowed specializations.
Similar to discriminated unions in F#, all cases are declared for the sealed interface Expr.
However, unlike F#, the cases have to be defined as separate classes, records or inter-
22
Architecting and Designing a didactic compiler in Modern Functional Java for the ’hygge’ programming
language
==PAGE:31==
faces. In the case that a specialization is a class, they have to be final. Let us examine
an example of one of the mutually-recursive specializations of Expr, which also happens
to be a record[34], namely the Not-expression for which the code is shown in figure 5.2.
1
// From Expr.java, Not<E, T> is an inner class of Expr<E, T>
2
record Not<E, T>(Node<E, T> arg) implements Expr<E, T> {
3
@Override
4
public String prettyPrint(int indentation) {
5
indentation += 2;
6
return "Not(arg=" + arg.expr().prettyPrint(indentation) + ")";
7
}
8
}
Figure 5.2: An implementation of the Hygge Not expression in the form of a record.
Declaring Not<E, T> as a record has the same effect as if it had been declared as a
class with private final attributes that inherit from the java.lang.Record, where each
attribute only has a getter, but not a setter, along with implicit declarations of some utility
methods, such as the Object.equals()-, Object.hashCode()- and Object.toString()-
method. Now, this example uses the record declaration syntax, which does all of the
things mentioned above to remove boilerplate to ease the burden of the programmer.
Another important thing to note about the immutability of Java records is that they are
shallowly immutable, meaning that although that the record attributes, also called compo-
nents, cannot be altered, the attributes of the record components can be mutable. That is,
this Not<E, T> record has an arg component of type Node<E, T>, which is also a record,
but had arg been declared as a class with mutable attributes, the programmer could still
change the value of those attributes even though Not<E, T> is a record.
A record is also final in the sense that extending record types through inheritance is
prohibited; it cannot be used as a base for further specialization. This makes sense in the
context of sealed interfaces and pattern matching, where it would otherwise be difficult
to perform case analysis and reason about pattern exhaustion had some variant in the
discriminated union been a regular class that could have had an unknown number of
specializations.
5.1.2
Switch expressions for case-by-case definitions and dispatching
In the preceding section, we mentioned pattern matching when discussing the use of
discriminated unions. In order to handle the different variants of a discriminated union,
pattern matching gives the programmer a way to not only branch based on the value
of the active variant, but also on the properties and the structure of the value (in some
languages). With JEP 441[13], the switch-expression was introduced in Java, which
behaves similarly to the match-expressions in languages like F# and Rust. Unlike the
existing switch-statement, the newer switch-expression returns a value and one can use
the when-clause to branch to multiple different cases for the same variant in a discriminated
union. This is useful in multiple compiler phases every time the Expr-type is involved.
Take the reduce-method as an example; in order to reduce each variant of the Expr-
type, the switch-expression is used to delegate the responsibility of expression reduction
to the appropriate reducer as per our design proposal. An excerpt for the code for the
reduce-method from StandardHyggeInterpreter is shown on figure 5.3:
Architecting and Designing a didactic compiler in Modern Functional Java for the ’hygge’ programming
language
23
==PAGE:32==
1
// From StandardHyggeInterpreter.java, slightly reformatted
2
@Override
3
public Optional <InterpreterResult <E, T>> reduce(RuntimeEnvironment <E, T> env
, Node<E, T> node) {
4
return switch (node.expr()) {
5
case UnitVal <E, T> _,
6
BoolVal <E, T> _,
7
IntVal <E, T> _,
8
FloatVal <E, T> _,
9
StringVal <E, T> _,
10
Pointer <E, T> _ ->
11
Optional.empty();
12
case Var<E, T> v when env.isMutable(v.name()) ->
13
InterpreterResult.of(env, env.mutables().get(v.name()));
14
case Var<E, T> _ -> Optional.empty();
15
case BinaryOperator <E, T> v -> binaryOperatorReducer.reduce(this, env,
node, v);
16
case Not<E, T> v ->
17
(v.arg().expr() instanceof BoolVal <E, T> b)
18
? InterpreterResult.of(env, node.with(b.not()))
19
: reduce(env, v.arg())
20
.map(a -> new InterpreterResult <>(env, node.with(new Not<>(a
.node()))));
21
// Remaining cases redacted for conciseness...
22
};
23
}
Figure 5.3: A simple use of a switch-expression to branch based on the Hygge expression
contained in a Node. Undiscussed cases have been removed for the sake of brevity.
As we can see in the listing, the cases can group multiple variants to branch to the same
single expression, as with the value variants UnitVal<E, T>, etc., which is implicitly re-
turned/yielded. For variants like Var<E, T>, there are two different cases to handle, where
the when-clause is used to distinguish between these cases without having to resort to ad-
ditional constructs for control flow creating unwanted nesting. One might point out, that
this essentially a functional programming version of the Visitor pattern known from Object-
oriented design. So, this is a case, where both FP and OOP style want to solve the same
problem, but do it in different yet still somewhat similar ways.
However, while pattern matching with switch-expressions can be useful, there is still
limited support for it as one can only pattern match on reference types (classes, inter-
faces, enums, etc.) as of Java 24 (a proposal for use with primitives is in preview with
JEP 488[12]). That is, one cannot easily do pattern matching on the structure or value
of a type. Take the list data structure as an example; in F#, one can match not only
against the type, but also the value and patterns of values, i.e. matching against x :: xs
would mean that there is at least one element in the list and maybe more. These kinds
of patterns are not supported in Java 24, so working with lists and map types are less
straight-forward. Take the Seq-record for the sequencing expression as an example; it
has a record component, nodes, which is of type List<Node<E, T>>. There is a case dur-
ing interpretation, where the interpreter should apply different reductions for a sequence
expression depending on the number of successive expressions, namely none, one and
more than one. While one could use a switch-expression with when-clauses, this would
create deep and nested code impairing readability due to indentation. Instead, it is sim-
24
Architecting and Designing a didactic compiler in Modern Functional Java for the ’hygge’ programming
language
==PAGE:33==
pler to branch on the size of the list using if-statements as shown in figure 5.4, which
contains the Java-implementation of the reduction rules for the sequencing expression.
1
// From StandardHyggeControlFlowReducer.java
2
@Override
3
public Optional <InterpreterResult <E, T>> reduce(
4
HyggeInterpreter <E, T> interpreter ,
5
RuntimeEnvironment <E, T> env,
6
Node<E, T> node,
7
Seq<E, T> seqExpr) {
8
var nodes = seqExpr.nodes();
9
10
if (nodes.isEmpty()) {
11
return InterpreterResult.of(env, node.with(new UnitVal <>()));
12
}
13
14
if (nodes.size() == 1) {
15
var last = nodes.getFirst();
16
return ASTUtility.isValue(last)
17
? InterpreterResult.of(env, node.with(last.expr()))
18
: interpreter
19
.reduce(env, last)
20
.flatMap(
21
result -> InterpreterResult.of(result.env(), node.with(
result.node().expr())));
22
}
23
24
var first = nodes.getFirst();
25
var rest = nodes.subList(1, nodes.size());
26
return !ASTUtility.isValue(first)
27
? interpreter
28
.reduce(env, first)
29
.flatMap(
30
result ->
31
InterpreterResult.of(
32
result.env(),
33
node.with(
34
new Seq<>(
35
Stream.concat(Stream.of(result.node()), rest.
stream()).toList()))))
36
: InterpreterResult.of(env, node.with(new Seq<>(rest)));
37
}
Figure 5.4: Implementation for the reduction rules of Seq-expressions without the use of
a switch-expression
This implementation is not written in a style that is as functional as the hyggec counterpart
and it seems that this is one of the compromises of a language like Java, which was not
designed to be functional from the beginning. Also, notice that there is a need to create a
local variable, nodes, to seqExpr.nodes() because pattern matching isn’t supported for
method arguments as it is in F#.
5.1.3
Optional for monadic error handling
The Option/Maybe and Result/Either types are ways to handle errors for effectful/impure
code in a way that resembles pure code. This is in contrast to exceptions, which is the
de facto default approach to error handling in Java. The benefit of using monadic error
Architecting and Designing a didactic compiler in Modern Functional Java for the ’hygge’ programming
language
25
==PAGE:34==
handling is that it becomes immediately obvious that a function can fail from its type sig-
nature. Furthermore, the type also communicates the kind of errors that can occur. The
Option/Maybe type indicates that the function may produce something or nothing, and in
the case of nothing, there is no information about why. This is useful in cases, where
when a failure occurs, the programmer should not be concerned about why it failed. On
the other hand, the Result/Either type is used when the programmer is interested in the
cause of failure and want to act on it.
In Java, there is the java.lang.Optional[35] type, which is an implementation of the
Option/Maybe monad. It supports the >>= (pronounced: “bind”) and return operations
in the form of the .flatMap()-method and Optional.of(), respectively. In JHygge, this
has been used for the implementation of the interpreter reduction rules based on the
algorithm from hyggec as reduction is applied until it is impossible to reduce further. At that
point, the last successful reduced Node is returned. In figure 5.5, we show an excerpt from
StandardStructReducer.java, which showcases the use of Optional in the reduce()-
method.
1
// From StandardStructReducer.java, all other methods have been redacted ...
2
public class StandardStructReducer <E, T> implements StructReducer <E, T> {
3
4
@Override
5
public Optional <InterpreterResult <E, T>> reduce(
6
HyggeInterpreter <E, T> interpreter ,
7
RuntimeEnvironment <E, T> env,
8
Node<E, T> node,
9
FieldSelect <E, T> fieldSelectExpr) {
10
11
if (fieldSelectExpr.target().expr() instanceof Expr.Pointer <E, T>(int
address))
12
return FunctionalUtilities.tryFind(env.ptrInfo(), address)
13
.flatMap(
14
fields -> {
15
var offset = fields.indexOf(fieldSelectExpr.field());
16
return InterpreterResult.of(env, env.heap().get(address +
offset));
17
});
18
19
if (!ASTUtility.isValue(fieldSelectExpr.target()))
20
return interpreter
21
.reduce(env, fieldSelectExpr.target())
22
.map(result -> result.with(new FieldSelect <>(result.node(),
fieldSelectExpr.field())));
23
24
return Optional.empty();
25
}
26
27
}
Figure 5.5: Implementation of the reduction rules for Hygge structs making use of the
Optional monad.
As shown in the listing above, the both the .flatMap() and .map() operations as well as
Optional.of() indirectly (this is hidden in InterpreterResult.of() and FunctionalUtilities.tryFind()).
Notice how using this technique emphasizes the “happy path” of the program as er-
26
Architecting and Designing a didactic compiler in Modern Functional Java for the ’hygge’ programming
language
==PAGE:35==
ror propagation becomes implicit due to the functor and monad operations .map() and
.flatMap() allow the programmer to focus on the data transformations instead of error
handling.
5.2
Parsing Hygge source files with ANTLR4
As mentioned in the chapter on Architecture and Design, we have selected ANTLR4 as
the parser generator of choice. For starters, we have translated the FsLexYacc lexer and
parser files, Lexer.fsl and Parser.fsy, to ANTLR4 .g4-format. In appendix A, we show
the complete .g4 grammar file for the final version of JHygge.
Initially, this grammar file was syntactically more similar to the E-BNF[28] for the Hygge
specification[1] as an attempt to simplify the grammar file as much as possible. How-
ever, the Hygge grammar specification does not take operator precedence into account,
so it was later decided to factor out left-recursion and enforce operator precedence by
separating production rules similar to that of Parser.fsy in hyggec[3].
By default, ANTLR4 generates both a lexer and a parser along with classes for implement-
ing listeners and visitors[29]. One could implement the rest of JHygge using the ANTLR4
AST representation, but this AST is intended to be consumed or transformed by listeners
and visitors, respectively. Instead, we want a more functional model of an AST. In order
to breach the gap between the ANTLR4 representation and our desired Node and Expr data
model, we decided to create a visitor, AntlrHyggeNodeVisitor, that provides this trans-
formation. In the listing below, we see an excerpt of AntlrHyggeNodeVisitor, namely
the visitAssertion, which transforms a HyggeParser.AssertionContext to a Node with
an Expr.Assertion-expression, as well as the code for the Expr.Assertion record. This
implementation is shown in figure 5.6.
1
2
// From AntlrHyggeNodeVisitor.java
3
@Override
4
public Node<Object, Object> visitAssertion(HyggeParser.AssertionContext ctx)
{
5
return new Node<>(
6
new Expr.Assertion <>(ctx.simpleExpr().accept(this)),
7
Position.from(ctx.start, ctx.stop),
8
null,
9
null);
10
}
11
12
// From Expr.java
13
record Ascription <E, T>(PreTypeNode tpe, Node<E, T> node) implements Expr<E,
T> {
14
@Override
15
public String prettyPrint(int indentation) {
16
return "Ascription(node="
17
+ node.expr().prettyPrint(indentation + 2)
18
+ ", tpe="
19
+ tpe.preType().toString()
20
+ ")";
21
}
22
}
Figure 5.6:
Combined excerpts from AntlrHyggeNodeVisitor.java and Expr.java
showing the visitor and the definition for the Ascription-expression.
Architecting and Designing a didactic compiler in Modern Functional Java for the ’hygge’ programming
language
27
==PAGE:36==
The creation of Node- and Expr-objects is mostly straight forward even though they are mu-
tually recursive. To parse the argument for the assertion, one simply calls the accept()-
method on the sub-expression for the visitor context, which will recursively traverse and
transform the AST to Node-instances. Most of the expression types follow a similar imple-
mentation style as the one for assertions. There are some of these transformations that
are more complicated, like function declarations, structs, unions, etc., but it is the same
case for declaring the equivalent parser for hyggec using FsLexYacc.
To compare the two parser implementations in a more quantitative way, the parser in
JHygge takes up 159 lines (hygge.g4) and 440 lines (AntlrHyggeNodeVisitor) for a total
of 599 lines, where the lexer and parser for hyggec is 100 lines (Lexer.fsl) and 305 lines
(Parser.fsy) totalling 405 lines. The Java implementation takes up approx. 48% more
lines than the F# version, where the AntlrHyggeNodeVisitor is the largest contributor.
5.3
Generating JVM bytecode with the Class-file API from
Java 24
The Class-file API[4] promises a declarative approach to reading, modifying and writing
.class-files. The main parts of the API used in the implementation of the JVM back-end
in JHygge is the ClassBuilder[36] and the CodeBuilder[37]. A ClassBuilder is intended
for modifying classes at a higher-level, such as adding attributes/fields, constructors and
methods, without directly handling bytecode. A CodeBuilder is then used to construct
the sequence of bytecode instructions in a method or a constructor. Both the APIs for
ClassBuilders and CodeBuilders make use of the builder pattern, which is one of the
classic creational OOP design patterns[10].
Let’s walk through an example to show, how the Class-file API is used concretely in
JHygge. The code listing on figure 5.7 shows the implementation of the generateCode()-
method for the JVMCodeGenerator-class. This is the minimal requirement for implement-
ing the HyggeCodeGenerator-interface. As we see in figure 5.7, we initially generate an
empty .class-file, which is always HyggeMain.class, containing the HyggeMain class.
The ClassBuilder-API is then used to generate the static main()-method, which the JVM
will look for and use as an entry-point. To generate the code for the body of the main()-
method, we use the CodeBuilder-API. Similar to the typechecker and the interpreter, code
generation is split across different classes and methods by grouping language features
together, so the overloaded and private generateCode()-method will then dispatch to the
correct code generator method depending on the top-level node in the AST. Note also, that
the JVMCodeGeneratorEnvironment-class keeps a reference to the parent ClassBuilder
for the HyggeMain-class. This will come in handy later, when generating code for func-
tions, for example.
28
Architecting and Designing a didactic compiler in Modern Functional Java for the ’hygge’ programming
language
==PAGE:37==
1
// From JVMCodeGenerator.java
2
@Override
3
public void generateCode(Node<E, T> ast, String fileName) throws IOException
{
4
var filePath = Path.of("HyggeMain.class").toAbsolutePath();
5
System.out.println("Compiling '" + fileName + "' to: " + filePath);
6
ClassFile.of()
7
.buildTo(
8
filePath ,
9
ClassDesc.of("HyggeMain"),
10
classBuilder -> {
11
var codeGeneratorEnvironment = new JVMCodeGeneratorEnvironment(
classBuilder);
12
classBuilder.withMethodBody(
13
"main",
14
ofDescriptor("([Ljava/lang/String;)V"),
15
ClassFile.ACC_PUBLIC | ClassFile.ACC_STATIC ,
16
codeBuilder ->
17
generateCode(ast, codeGeneratorEnvironment , codeBuilder)
.return_());
18
});
19
}
Figure 5.7: Entry point for the JVM code generator backend
Depending on the nodes in the AST, we then end up in the appropriate case. For a simple
case, let us consider the case for value-expressions for the basic built-in types of Hygge,
UnitVal, BoolVal, etc. For the UnitVal-case, the simplest thing is to do nothing and
return an unmodified code builder. The rest of the value expressions all follow a similar
approach, loading a constant onto the stack with the ldc[5] instruction, except for the
BoolVal expression which makes use of the iconst instructions instead. With the ldc()-
method, the Class-file API places the value in the run-time constant pool of the HyggeMain
class and automatically inserts the correct reference to the constant in the pool. This is one
of the ways that the Class-file API provides abstraction while still giving the programmer
control over exactly which instructions are generated. In figure 5.8, we show the simple
implementation of JVM bytecode generation for Hygge values.
Architecting and Designing a didactic compiler in Modern Functional Java for the ’hygge’ programming
language
29
==PAGE:38==
1
// From JVMCodeGenerator.java
2
public CodeBuilder generateCode(
3
Node<E, T> ast, JVMCodeGeneratorEnvironment env, CodeBuilder codeBuilder
) {
4
return switch (ast.expr()) {
5
case UnitVal <E, T> _ -> codeBuilder;
6
case BoolVal <E, T> v -> v.value() ? codeBuilder.iconst_1() : codeBuilder
.iconst_0();
7
case IntVal <E, T> v -> codeBuilder.ldc(v.value());
8
case FloatVal <E, T> v -> codeBuilder.ldc(v.value());
9
case StringVal <E, T> v -> codeBuilder.ldc(v.value());
10
// Remaining cases ...
11
}
12
}
Figure 5.8: An excerpt from JVMCodeGenerator.java for the simple case of generating
JVM bytecode for Hygge values using the Class-file API.
This is rather simple, but it doesn’t show the full potential of the Class-file API. A more
intriguing example would be the code generation for if-expressions for which the code
is shown in figure 5.9. To implement Hygge if-expressions on the JVM, labels are used.
Similar to assembly, JVM bytecode has branching instructions such as ifne and goto[5].
However, these branching instructions don’t jump to a label, but rather an offset in bytes.
This offset is calculated from the number bytes taken up by every instruction and operand
since the beginning of a method body.
Calculating these offsets manually would in-
cur some bookkeeping on the programmer, but luckily the Class-file API provides the
Label[38] abstraction, which accounts for the offsets automatically relieving this burden.
Still, the Class-file API offers control as the methods for generating branching instructions
accept a Label as an argument and the labelBinding()-method[37] allows the program-
mer to arbitrarily set the target for a label. This makes for a straight-forward, concise and
declarative implementation of Hygge if-expressions.
30
Architecting and Designing a didactic compiler in Modern Functional Java for the ’hygge’ programming
language
==PAGE:39==
1
// From JVMControlFlowCodeGenerator.java
2
public class JVMControlFlowCodeGenerator <E extends TypingEnvironment , T
extends Type> {
3
public CodeBuilder generateCode(
4
JVMCodeGenerator <E, T> codeGenerator ,
5
JVMCodeGeneratorEnvironment env,
6
CodeBuilder codeBuilder ,
7
Node<E, T> node,
8
If<E, T> ifExpr) {
9
Label labelTrue = codeBuilder.newLabel();
10
Label labelFalse = codeBuilder.newLabel();
11
// Generate code for the condition expression and jump to true branch
12
// if condition is not 0
13
codeBuilder = codeGenerator.generateCode(ifExpr.condition(), env,
codeBuilder).ifne(labelTrue);
14
// Generate code for false branch
15
codeBuilder =
16
codeGenerator
17
.generateCode(ifExpr.ifFalse(), env, codeBuilder)
18
.goto_(labelFalse)
19
.labelBinding(labelTrue);
20
// Generate code for true branch
21
return codeGenerator.generateCode(ifExpr.ifTrue(), env, codeBuilder).
labelBinding(labelFalse);
22
}
23
// Remaining methods ...
24
}
Figure 5.9: An excerpt from JVMControlFlowCodeGenerator.java showing code gener-
ation for Hygge if-expressions
Generating JVM bytecode for functions becomes a bit trickier. The issue being that one
cannot really create methods inside a method in the JVM, at least not at the bytecode
level. Here, what would be a lambda function in Java becomes a private static method
on the parent class of the current scope. Holding a reference to a function is also not
as easy as one must use a java.util.function.Function[39] instance and this generic
class cannot have primitive types as its type parameters, so this requires some boxing and
unboxing with wrapper-classes such as Integer. Additionally, when one wants to apply
the function to some arguments one must push the reference to the Function instance to
the top of the stack and then invoke the apply()-method on it.
This is a lot of hoops to jump through. Rather than using all sorts of abstractions like
Function, it is simpler to just generate static methods and attach them to the parent class
and register the function name and type signature in the JVMCodeGeneratorEnvironment,
which keeps track of information for JVM bytecode generation. This JVMCodeGeneratorEnvironment
should also provide a way to reference the parent class. Since a ClassBuilder is muta-
ble, it is sensible to let the JVMCodeGeneratorEnvironment keep a reference to the builder
for the parent class. When encountering an application of the function/method, one can
simply use the invokestatic[5] instruction without first having to push a reference to
some class to the top of the stack as all Hygge functions are compiled to static methods
on the JVM. In figure 5.10, the generateCode()-method is shown.
Architecting and Designing a didactic compiler in Modern Functional Java for the ’hygge’ programming
language
31
==PAGE:40==
1
public CodeBuilder generateCode(
2
JVMCodeGenerator <E, T> codeGenerator ,
3
JVMCodeGeneratorEnvironment env,
4
CodeBuilder codeBuilder ,
5
Node<E, T> node,
6
Lambda <E, T> lambdaExpr) {
7
var methodEnv = env.with(new HashMap <>());
8
for (var arg : lambdaExpr.args()) {
9
methodEnv.store(
10
arg.name(),
11
pretypeResolver.resolvePretype(methodEnv.getTypingEnvironment(), arg
.preType()));
12
}
13
env.getParentClass()
14
.withMethodBody(
15
env.getNameStack().peek(),
16
ofDescriptor(
17
JVMCodeGenerationUtility.makeDescriptor(
18
lambdaExpr.args().stream()
19
.map(
20
arg ->
21
pretypeResolver.resolvePretype(
22
env.getTypingEnvironment(), arg.preType())
)
23
.toList(),
24
lambdaExpr.body().type(),
25
env)),
26
ClassFile.ACC_PUBLIC | ClassFile.ACC_STATIC ,
27
methodCodeBuilder ->
28
JVMCodeGenerationUtility.inferReturn(
29
codeGenerator.generateCode(lambdaExpr.body(), methodEnv ,
methodCodeBuilder),
30
lambdaExpr.body().type(),
31
env));
32
return codeBuilder;
33
}
Figure 5.10: Excerpt of the implementation of the generateCode()-method handling
Hygge Lambda-expressions in JVMFunctionCodeGenerator.java.
Aside from that, all that is needed is to format some method and class descriptors in
the form of strings. This is done using the pre-type resolution strategy implemented as
part of the typechecking phase to infer the argument and return types of the function.
Generating the JVM bytecode for the function body is also easy as the code generator
can be invoked on the lambdas body expression. As a final step, an appropriate return
instruction is inferred from the resolved function return type and is appended.
For the final high-light, we showcase the implementation of code generation for Hygge
structs in figure 5.11. This is the most problematic of all the Hygge expressions because
of the structural type system of Hygge. In the Java language, and consequently the JVM,
type equivalence is determined nominally, i.e. on the name of two types. A type with
some name can only be declared once and is thus unique, enabling a simple check for
equivalence. In a structural type system, equivalence is determined by the contents of
a type; if two structs have the same fields with the same types, regardless of the name
of the structs, they are considered equivalent and thus interchangeable[11]. So how can
32
Architecting and Designing a didactic compiler in Modern Functional Java for the ’hygge’ programming
language
==PAGE:41==
this be reconciled?
The solution is simple: everything in Java is an java.lang.Object[18] (except for prim-
itives, of course). A struct is really nothing more than a mapping between names and
values, and such an abstraction already exists: the java.util.HashMap[40]. Exploit-
ing the fact that all classes in Java implicitly inherits from java.lang.Object means that
we can model structs as HashMap<String, Object> instances. To make this work with
primitives whose types cannot be used for generics, the solution is to “box” and “un-
box” these values with wrapper classes like java.lang.Integer and java.lang.Boolean.
In figure 5.11, we show the implementation of the JVM bytecode generator for Hygge
structs. This utilizes the Map.of() method and the HashMap copy constructor for ini-
tialization along with the mentioned wrapper classes to “box” any primitives provided by
the JVMCodeGenerationUtility.boxPrimitive() utility method to effectively implement
struct construction.
1
public CodeBuilder generateCode(
2
JVMCodeGenerator <E, T> codeGenerator ,
3
JVMCodeGeneratorEnvironment env,
4
CodeBuilder codeBuilder ,
5
Node<E, T> node,
6
StructCons <E, T> structConsExpr) {
7
codeBuilder = codeBuilder.new_(ClassDesc.ofInternalName("java/util/HashMap
")).dup();
8
9
var numberOfFields = structConsExpr.fields().size();
10
for (var field : structConsExpr.fields().entrySet()) {
11
codeBuilder = codeBuilder.ldc(field.getKey());
12
codeBuilder = codeGenerator.generateCode(field.getValue(), env,
codeBuilder);
13
var fieldType = TypeUtility.expandType(field.getValue().env(), field.
getValue().type());
14
codeBuilder = JVMCodeGenerationUtility.boxPrimitive(codeBuilder ,
fieldType);
15
}
16
17
return codeBuilder
18
.invokestatic(
19
ClassDesc.ofInternalName("java/util/Map"),
20
"of",
21
MethodTypeDesc.ofDescriptor(
22
"("
23
+ "Ljava/lang/Object;Ljava/lang/Object;".repeat(
numberOfFields)
24
+ ")Ljava/util/Map;"),
25
true)
26
.invokespecial(
27
ClassDesc.ofInternalName("java/util/HashMap"),
28
"<init>",
29
MethodTypeDesc.ofDescriptor("(Ljava/util/Map;)V"));
30
}
Figure 5.11: Excerpt of the implementation of code generation for Hygge structs from
JVMStructCodeGenerator.java.
This makes the subsequent implementation of Hygge field selections straight-forward as
Architecting and Designing a didactic compiler in Modern Functional Java for the ’hygge’ programming
language
33
==PAGE:42==
1
public CodeBuilder generateCode(
2
JVMCodeGenerator <E, T> codeGenerator ,
3
JVMCodeGeneratorEnvironment env,
4
CodeBuilder codeBuilder ,
5
Node<E, T> node,
6
FieldSelect <E, T> fieldSelectExpr) {
7
codeBuilder = codeGenerator.generateCode(fieldSelectExpr.target(), env,
codeBuilder);
8
codeBuilder =
9
codeBuilder
10
.ldc(fieldSelectExpr.field())
11
.invokevirtual(
12
ClassDesc.ofInternalName("java/util/HashMap"),
13
"get",
14
MethodTypeDesc.ofDescriptor("(Ljava/lang/Object;)Ljava/lang/
Object;"));
15
var fieldType = TypeUtility.expandType(node.env(), node.type());
16
return JVMCodeGenerationUtility.checkAndUnbox(codeBuilder , fieldType);
17
}
Figure
5.12:
Implementation
of
the
code
generator
for
field
selections
from
JVMStructCodeGenerator.java.
the HashMap-API provides the convenient get method for retrieving values and the Object
instance can accurately be cast using the typing information ascribed to each Node during
the typechecking phase. In figure 5.12, we show the implementation of code generation
for Hygge field selections.
Similarly, the case for assigning values to a field in a struct is solved by using the put()-
method provided by the HashMap-API[40]. One thing to note is that the semantics of the
Hygge language require that the right-hand side of an assignment is the result of such
an expression. Doing so is luckily also simple as the code generation for field selection
retrieves the value using the get()-method. One thing to be aware of it that the put()-
method returns the old value corresponding to a key, or null in the case that the key wasn’t
in the map before. This value is of no use, so it must be popped of the stack using the
pop-instruction[5]. An excerpt of the implementation of code generation for assignment
expressions can be seen on figure 5.13.
34
Architecting and Designing a didactic compiler in Modern Functional Java for the ’hygge’ programming
language
==PAGE:43==
1
// From JVMCodeGenerator.java
2
private CodeBuilder generateCode(
3
Node<E, T> ast,
4
JVMCodeGeneratorEnvironment env,
5
CodeBuilder codeBuilder ,
6
Assign<E, T> assignExpr) {
7
return switch (assignExpr.target().expr()) {
8
case Var<E, T> v -> // Redacted
9
case FieldSelect <E, T> v -> {
10
codeBuilder = generateCode(v.target(), env, codeBuilder).ldc(v.field()
);
11
codeBuilder = generateCode(assignExpr.rhs(), env, codeBuilder);
12
var rhsType = TypeUtility.expandType(assignExpr.rhs().env(),
assignExpr.rhs().type());
13
codeBuilder = JVMCodeGenerationUtility.boxPrimitive(codeBuilder ,
rhsType);
14
codeBuilder =
15
codeBuilder
16
.invokevirtual(
17
ClassDesc.ofInternalName("java/util/HashMap"),
18
"put",
19
MethodTypeDesc.ofDescriptor(
20
"(Ljava/lang/Object;Ljava/lang/Object;)Ljava/lang/
Object;"))
21
.pop();
22
yield structCodeGenerator.generateCode(this, env, codeBuilder , ast, v)
;
23
}
24
default -> // Redacted
25
};
26
}
Figure 5.13: Excerpt of the implementation of code generation for assignment expressions
with an emphasis on field selections.
Architecting and Designing a didactic compiler in Modern Functional Java for the ’hygge’ programming
language
35
==PAGE:44==
6
Testing
In this chapter, we discuss the testing strategy and the test results for the final version
of JHygge. There are two parts to testing JHygge; one is a functionality test to validate
requirement stated in 3, and the other is an end-user test, where the end-user is a current
or former student of the course “02247 - Compiler Construction” is asked to implement
a simple extension to the Hygge language in JHygge and provide feedback about their
experience.
6.1
Functionality testing of JHygge
For testing the functionality of the new JHygge compiler, a test suite akin to that of hyggec
has be made. Here, hygge source files for testing are placed in folders marked for testing.
These folders are divided first by compiler stage/phase and subsequently by whether
the program should pass or fail the test. One thing to note is that the test for the code
generation phase will only check that the test program compiles, but not whether it runs
correctly as the test code does not invoke the JVM on the compiled bytecode.
In addition to the automated test suite, a lot of manual testing of each compiler phase has
been done during prototyping. In this endeavour, the JHygge CLI made using the PicoCLI-
framework[33] proved to valuable as it provides a quick and easy-to-use interface with
access to each individual compiler phase with a single command.
6.2
End-user testing of JHygge
For the end-user test, current and former students are given a task to implement a simple
language feature in JHygge: a subtraction operator for numerical values. The students
are presented with eight subtasks in which they set up the compiler project and toolchain
and subsequently implement the subtraction operator at the different stages of the com-
piler. After each task, the student is asked to describe their experience implementing the
particular stage in JHygge. For the final question, the student is asked to give their closing
remarks. On figure 6.1, the form with subtasks that was shared with current and former
students of the compiler construction course is shown.
* This form will record your name, please fill your name.
The Grand JHygge end-user test
This is an end-user test for the MSc Thesis project: "Architecting and Designing a didactic compiler in 
Modern Functional Java for the ’hygge’ programming language" by Tomas Hagenau Andersen (s233489). 
In this test, current and former students of the course "02247 - Compiler Construction" at the Technical 
University of Denmark (DTU).
In this test, the students (that's you) are going to familiarize themselves with 'JHygge', a new hygge 
compiler written in Java that targets the JVM, and implement a very simple language feature: the '-' 
subtraction operator.
Please, don't spend hours or days trying to complete this. Do as much as you can in 1 hour and leave it at 
that.
Estimated time: 1 hour
Setting up the project:
You'll need to unzip the project somewhere on your machine.
You'll also need to install the Java SDK version 24. You may find SDKMAN! 
useful: https://sdkman.io/
Finally, you'll need an IDE or Text Editor with support for Java, Gradle and 
preferably ANTLR4. You can use whatever you like, but if you don't know where to 
begin, I'd suggest JetBrains IntelliJ community edition with the ANTLR4 plugin.
Once you have those installed, you are ready to go!
Have a look at the 'README.md' to see if you can compile JHygge.
If you want to add test cases as you go through this, you can add hygge source 
files in the `src/test/hygge/<stage>/<pass-or-fail>` directories similar to `hyggec` 
that you already know.  
Estimated time: varies depending on what's already installed on your machine.
Describe your experience setting up the project:
1.
Figure 6.1: The questionnaire for the end-user test handed out to students
36
Architecting and Designing a didactic compiler in Modern Functional Java for the ’hygge’ programming
language
==PAGE:45==
The end-user test ran from May 28th to June 18th 2025. During this period, the students
had finished the course “02247 - Compiler Construction”, so they should have been avail-
able although some may have chosen to take a course in the 3-week period in June.
Unfortunately, none of the more than 200 students chose to participate in the end-user
test, meaning that we do not have any test results to present despite our efforts. Therefore,
we cannot say anything conclusive about the user-friendliness of the new JHygge compiler
nor can we in any reasonable way compare it to the user-friendliness of the existing hyggec
compiler.
Architecting and Designing a didactic compiler in Modern Functional Java for the ’hygge’ programming
language
37
==PAGE:46==
7
Evaluation
In this chapter, we discuss the findings and the lessons learned during this MSc Thesis
project. We evaluate the final implementation of the JHygge compiler based on the re-
quirements stated in the 3 chapter and the results achieved in 6. Finally, we discuss the
goals of this MSc Thesis project and the degree to which they have been achieved.
7.1
Does JHygge fulfil the requirements?
In this section, we discuss the degree to which the new JHygge compiler fulfils the func-
tional and non-functional requirements stated in figures 3.1 and 3.2. In table 7.1, we
provide an overview of Hygge language feature support for each of the four compilation
phases of JHygge along with a summary of whether the level of support for a given feature
matches that of hyggec.
Parsing
Typechecker
Interpreter
Codegen
hyggec compatible?
Primitive values
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
Variables
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
Basic Arithmetic
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
Basic Logic
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
Typing
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
Let-bindings
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
Assignments
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
Assertions
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
Read and Print I/O
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
If-Then-Else
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
Mutable
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
While do
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
Functions
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
Structs and Fields
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
Unions and match
yes
yes
yes
no
yes
Table 7.1: Overview of feature support for each of the compilation stages along with a
summarizing column showing compatibility with hyggec.
Note that although code generation is not supported for unions and pattern matching as
shown in Table 7.1, JHygge is still compatible with hyggec as this is a project option for
the students of the course “02247 - Compiler Construction” and therefore not supported
out-of-box for hyggec either. Aside from that, the table shows that JHygge implements
the same level of support for each feature as hyggec. When comparing this result with
the functional requirements stated in figure 3.1, this shows fulfilment of all requirements
related to support for features of the Hygge language. That is, functional requirements
F01 to F06. F09 and F10 are also met as JHygge does not support neither closures nor
register allocation.
Administrative-Normal-Form (ANF), F08, and “peephole” optimization, F07, have not been
implemented, but they were also prioritised as low and as optional extras not essential
to the success of JHygge. Besides, one of the purposes of ANF in hyggec is to optimize
register allocation for the RISC-V, where there is a limited number of registers available
38
Architecting and Designing a didactic compiler in Modern Functional Java for the ’hygge’ programming
language
==PAGE:47==
(Module 11 of [1]), but since the JVM doesn’t have the concept of registers this partially
justifies assigning it to a lower priority. As for optimization in general, while it is part of the
course curriculum of “02247 - Compiler Construction”[2], one could say that this may not
be as beneficial, since the JVM utilizes a Just-In-Time (JIT) compiler for optimizations at
run-time[5], so some attempts to optimize at compile-time may be in vain. Optimizations
like constant folding and constant propagation would still be useful, however. As stated,
register allocation has not been implemented as the JVM does not have this concept, so
this aligns with the functional requirements.
Regarding the last of the functional requirements, F11, we can also affirm that a CLI akin to
that of hyggec has been implemented. As mentioned in the chapter on testing 6, this CLI
proved useful when testing the various compilation phases. As such, we have asserted
that this requirement for a CLI has been fulfilled by the JHygge compiler.
As for the non-functional requirements stated in figure 3.2, we can conclude that JHygge
is indeed written in the Java programming language and does make use of functional
programming features and design, thus fulfilling NF1. An evaluation as to, how well Java
24 supports functional programming is discussed later in this chapter. From the 6, we
saw the use of the automated testing suite, so NF2 has also been covered. During the
design stage described the 4, it was already chosen to make use of ANTLR4 for parsing
(NF3), Gradle for build and dependency management (NF5), and the Java 24 Class-file
API[4] for JVM bytecode generation (NF4) at this point. Hence, we can conclude that the
JHygge compiler meets all the non-functional requirements.
7.2
What about the Goals for the JHygge project?
In this section, we reflect on the two goals, or research questions, of the JHygge project,
G01 and G02, to see if we have gained any new knowledge and have come closer to
answering these questions.
7.2.1
G01: Modern Java is not quite functional, yet
In this thesis, we have investigated the newer versions of Java specifically with an empha-
sis on functional programming features. Although, some of the functional features have
been added to the language, Java is still primarily an Object-Oriented language. It lacks
a lot of the more powerful features of other functional languages such as Haskell, F# and
Rust, most notably, functions as first-class citizens, support for monads and functors,
algebraic data types.
Regarding monads, the Java standard library does provide the Optional[35] monad,
but there are a few problems such as the fact that it is not implemented as a discrimi-
nated union (sealed interface) and thus is not supported by pattern matching in switch-
expressions. Also, instances of Optional are not type-safe as one can still assign null
to them.
Another very useful and common monad, which is also used in hyggec, is the Result-
monad. This is useful for monadic and explicit error handling in functional languages,
but it is simply lacking in Java 24. Instead, Java relies on exceptions as its primary way
of handling errors. As such, the JHygge implementation relies on exceptions for error
handling. When comparing the implementation of JHygge to that of hyggec, hyggec does
make reasonable use of the Result monad as it is properly supported in F#. This would
have made implementing the typechecking easier. Instead, due to the lack of Result, we
chose to use exceptions instead for the typechecking and (JVM) code-generation phases.
Exceptions do produce a side-effect, which isn’t desirable, but it does make the code
simpler to understand for students who primarily have experience using Java in the more
Architecting and Designing a didactic compiler in Modern Functional Java for the ’hygge’ programming
language
39
==PAGE:48==
common OOP style. As a final note on the Result monad, while it is not the goal of this
thesis to attempt to “complete” support for functional programming features in Java, it is
baffling to see that this type has not been implemented in Java when Optional has. As
a minor experiment, a proposed implementation for discriminated union-based Result
monad has been made and it can be found in Appendix B.
Furthermore, Java also lacks support for tuples as a built-in data type; this means that
one is forced to create small ad-hoc classes for grouping related data in situations where
one does not care about naming a new type. One example of this is InterpreterResult,
which only serves the purpose of storing a RuntimeEnvironment and a Node. The same
goes for LeftRightReductionResult. Both of these are single use, single purpose con-
struction whose names are not important.
The redesign of a Hygge compiler
Regarding the architecture and design part of the goal, it becomes difficult toobtain a
clear-cut and definitive answer. With the new architecture and design for JHygge, we have
attempted to improve extensibility and flexibility foremost by combining design patterns
and principles from both Functional and Object-Oriented programming. However, whether
the new design achieves the promises of greater extensibility and flexibility remains to be
seen. These architectural and design properties can only be tested qualitatively by its
intended users. Unfortunately, although an end-user test has been planned, none of the
students invited chose to participate. Therefore, we cannot say nor conclude anything
about these properties.
7.2.2
G02: The Class-file API in action
Although the previous section evaluating our experiences with Java as a functional pro-
gramming language came out as rather disappointing, this section will be a lot more pos-
itive as we find that the Java 24 Class-file API[4] to not just work as advertised, but also
to provide a reasonably intuitive and declarative API. As shown throughout the 5.3, it is
indeed possible to achieve JVM bytecode generation for the Hygge language semantics.
With the implementation of JHygge, as specified in table 7.1, JVM bytecode generation
has been implemented for all Hygge language features, where the reference compiler,
hyggec, also supports code generation for RISC-V.
The question on whether it is easier for the programmer to work with code generation
for the JVM rather than RISC-V is a subjective one. As none of the invited students
participated in the end-user test, we cannot provide any statistical insight into the preferred
target language for the intended audience. However, it is the authors own opinion and
experience that working with JVM bytecode as a target language is easier than working
with RISC-V for a few reasons. The primary reason is the additional abstractions, such as
methods and classes, that are built in to the JVM from its inception. Automatic memory
management in the form of Garbage Collection also relieves the programmer of having
to remember to free all heap-allocated manually, which is especially useful when working
with Hygge structs. Finally, the authors find that the stack machine of the JVM is easier
to comprehend as a mental model than the RISC-V instruction set architecture; there are
no registers to keep track of, only an array for local storage, which can store any type, be
it either a primitive or a reference type.
Since code generation for unions and pattern matching is not supported by hyggec as this
is one of the project ideas for the students to do and thus it has not been implemented
in JHygge. However, if one were to provide a few hints for a prospective student on how
to implement unions and pattern matching in JHygge, it would be an idea to exploit the
new sealed interface[17]- and record[16]-features as the Hygge syntax requires that
40
Architecting and Designing a didactic compiler in Modern Functional Java for the ’hygge’ programming
language
==PAGE:49==
a union is declared as a type with a name and all labels/variant before use. In turn, this
would enable the use of switch-expressions to enforce exhaustive patterns. Another
feature for a student project would be to implement closures; from the description of the
project idea in the lecture notes[41], there are different closure “styles” that can be imple-
mented. In this case, a hint for the student could be to make all variables and let-bindings
public attributes of the parent class HyggeMain. In the current implementation of JHygge,
the value of a variable is simply stored in the local storage array and is thus only accessible
in the current stack frame.
Structural typing on the nominal JVM
During the implementation of JVM bytecode generation for structs and field selections,
an interesting problem arose. As per the Hygge language specification, the typing sys-
tem for Hygge is structural. With hyggec it has been shown that implementing this typing
system in RISC-V is possible. The story for the JVM back-end in JHygge is somewhat
different; we found that implementing the structural Hygge typing system on the JVM re-
quires some additional layer of abstraction, as the JVM primarily enforces its own nominal
sub-typing rules based on inheritance at the bytecode level. However, the solution turned
out to be simple as HashMap<String, Object>[40] provided a suitable abstraction.
In the Scala programming language, it is also possible to imitate structural typing using
the trait scala.Selectable[42], but this is due to the additional abstractions provided by
the Scala standard library and does not change anything about the nominal type system
at the bytecode level of the JVM.
Architecting and Designing a didactic compiler in Modern Functional Java for the ’hygge’ programming
language
41
==PAGE:50==
8
Conclusion
To summarise, in this MSc Thesis project we have gone through the phases of defin-
ing requirements, architecting, designing, implementing and testing a new compiler for
the Hygge programming language called JHygge for use in the course “02247 - Compiler
Construction”[2] at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU), which is written in the
Java programming language (JDK 24) and generates bytecode for the JVM as its target.
Analysing the existing reference compiler, hyggec, written in F#, generating RISC-V as-
sembly, also revealed opportunities for improvement with regards to the extensibility and
flexibility of the design. This analysis allowed the authors to define 11 functional require-
ments (Figure 3.1) and 5 non-functional requirements (Figure 3.2) as well as state two
goals, or research questions, for the JHygge project centered around functional program-
ming and design in “modern” Java (G01), and code generation for the Hygge language
on the Java Virtual Machine (G02). With requirements and goals set, a new architecture
and design has been proposed based on an intersection of principles from the Object-
Oriented and Functional programming paradigms. Aside from the requirement to use
Java release version 24, in this architecture, it was also decided to use Gradle[26] for
build and dependency management, ANTLR4[20] for parser generation, and the Class-file
API[4] to manipulate .class-files to generate JVM bytecode. For testing, an automated
testing suite akin to that of hyggec[3] was developed, which tests each of the compilation
phases with user-defined Hygge test programs organized in a directory structure. Further-
more, an end-user test was conducted, where current and former students of the course
“02247 - Compiler Construction” were invited to text the extensibility and user-friendliness
of JHygge by extending it with an expression for arithmetic subtraction. Unfortunately,
none of the ca. 200 invited students chose to participate in the test, so there is no data
to assess whether or not the newly designed JHygge achieves better flexibility, exten-
sibility and user-friendliness. However, it was possible to assess the degree to which
JHygge achieves its functional and non-functional requirements; the final implementation
of JHygge was deemed to fulfil 9 out of 11 functional requirements and all 5 non-functional
requirements. The two functional requirements not met by JHygge, F07 and F08 regarding
“peephole” optimization and Administrative-Normal-Form (ANF), respectively, were also
prioritized low and as optional extras not essential to the success of the project as indi-
cated by the initial MoSCoW[24] analysis. Regarding the goals of the project, it was found
that support for Functional programming in Java (G01) has indeed improved in the recent
releases, yet there are still a lot of room for improvement as some of the more advanced
functional programming features are poorly supported or missing entirely. On a more pos-
itive note, bytecode generation for the Hygge programming language on the JVM (G02)
turned out to be a success using the new Class-file API from Java 24; it was possible
to generate JVM bytecode for every language feature of Hygge in declarative style, and
even emulate the structural type system of Hygge on the nominally-typed JVM.
42
Architecting and Designing a didactic compiler in Modern Functional Java for the ’hygge’ programming
language
==PAGE:51==
Bibliography
[1]
Alceste Scalas. 02247 Compiler Construction — Spring 2024. 2024. URL: https:
//courses.compute.dtu.dk/02247/f24/index.html.
[2]
Alceste Scalas. 02247 Compiler Construction. 2024. URL: https://kurser.dtu.dk/
course/02247.
[3]
Alceste Scalas. 02247 / f24 / hyggec - The Didactic Compiler for the Hygge pro-
gramming language. Source code repository for hyggec. Requires DTU account.
2024. URL: https://gitlab.gbar.dtu.dk/02247/f24/hyggec.
[4]
Brian Goetz, Adam Sotona, and Paul Sandoz. JEP 484: Class-File API. 2025. URL:
https://openjdk.org/jeps/484.
[5]
Tim Lindholm et al. The Java Virtual Machine Specification. 2025. URL: https://
docs.oracle.com/javase/specs/jvms/se24/html/index.html.
[6]
Michael Sipser. Introduction to the Theory of Computation, 3rd Edition. Cengage
Learning, 2013. ISBN: 1-133-18779-X.
[7]
Robert C. Martin. Clean Architecture: A Craftsman’s Guide to Software Structure
and Design. Prentice Hall, 2017. ISBN: 0134494326.
[8]
Michael Reichhardt Hansen and Sebastian Alexander Mödersheim. 02157 Func-
tional Programming. 2024. URL: https://kurser.dtu.dk/course/02157.
[9]
Grahan Hutton. Programming in Haskell - Second Edition. Cambridge University
Press, 2016. ISBN: 978-1316626221.
[10]
Erich Gamma et al. Design Patterns: Elements of Reusable Object-Oriented Soft-
ware. Addison-Wesley, 1994. ISBN: 0-201-63361-2.
[11]
Benjamin C. Pierce. Types and Programming Languages. MIT Press, 2002. ISBN:
9780262162098.
[12]
Angelos Bimpoudis et al. JEP 488: Primitive Types in Patterns, instanceof, and
switch (Second Preview). 2025. URL: https://openjdk.org/jeps/488.
[13]
Gavin Bierman and Brian Goetz. JEP 441: Pattern Matching for switch. 2023. URL:
https://openjdk.org/jeps/441.
[14]
Angelos Bimpoudis, Alex Buckley, and Brian Goetz. JEP 443: Unnamed Patterns
and Variables (Preview). 2023. URL: https://openjdk.org/jeps/443.
[15]
Gavin Bierman and Brian Goetz. JEP 440: Record Patterns. 2023. URL: https://
openjdk.org/jeps/440.
[16]
Gavin Bierman, Alex Buckley, and Brian Goetz. JEP 395: Records. 2024. URL:
https://openjdk.org/jeps/395.
[17]
Gavin Bierman, Alex Buckley, and Brian Goetz. JEP 409: Sealed Classes. 2024.
URL: https://openjdk.org/jeps/409.
[18]
Oracle. Object (Java SE 24 & JDK 24). 2025. URL: https://docs.oracle.com/en/
java/javase/24/docs/api/java.base/java/lang/Object.html.
[19]
H. Conrad Cunningham. Notes on Software Patterns: Pipes and Filters Architectural
Pattern. 2022. URL: https://john.cs.olemiss.edu/~hcc/docs/Patterns/Pipes/Pipes.
html.
[20]
Terence Parr/ANTLR. ANTLR. 2025. URL: https://www.antlr.org/.
[21]
Free Software Foundation. Bison - GNU Project - Free Software Foundation. 2014.
URL: https://www.gnu.org/software/bison/.
[22]
JavaCC Community. JavaCC | The most popular parser generator for use with Java
applications. URL: https://javacc.github.io/javacc/.
Architecting and Designing a didactic compiler in Modern Functional Java for the ’hygge’ programming
language
43
==PAGE:52==
[23]
Don Syme and the F# Community. FsLex, FsYacc. 2019. URL: https://fsprojects.
github.io/FsLexYacc/.
[24]
Dai Clegg and Richard Barker. Case Method Fast-Track: A RAD Approach. Addison-
Wesley, 1994. ISBN: 978-0-201-62432-8.
[25]
The Apache Software Foundation. Welcome to Apache Maven - Maven. 2025. URL:
https://maven.apache.org/.
[26]
Hans Dockter et al. Gradle User Manual. 2025. URL: https : / / docs . gradle . org /
current/userguide/userguide.html.
[27]
Google. Bazel. 2025. URL: https://bazel.build/.
[28]
ISO/IEC JTC 1/SC 22. “ISO/IEC 14977:1996 - Information technology — Syntactic
metalanguage — Extended BNF”. In: (1996).
[29]
Terence Parr. The Definitive ANTLR4 Reference. The Pragmatic Programmers,
2013. ISBN: 9781934356999.
[30]
Robert C. Martin. Clean Code: A Handbook of Agile Software Craftsmanship. Pear-
son, 2008. ISBN: 9780136083238.
[31]
Eric Bruneton and France Telecom INRIA. ASM. 2025. URL: https://asm.ow2.io/
index.html.
[32]
Alexander Fast et al. Command Line Parser Library for CLR and NetStandard. 2022.
URL: https://github.com/commandlineparser/commandline.
[33]
Remko Popma et. al. picocli - a mighty tiny command line interface. 2025. URL:
https://picocli.info/.
[34]
Oracle. Record (Java SE 24 & JDK 24). 2025. URL: https://docs.oracle.com/en/
java/javase/24/docs/api/java.base/java/lang/Record.html.
[35]
Oracle. Optional (Java SE 24 & JDK 24). 2025. URL: https://docs.oracle.com/en/
java/javase/24/docs/api/java.base/java/util/Optional.html.
[36]
Oracle. ClassBuilder (Java SE 24 & JDK 24. 2025. URL: https://docs.oracle.com/
en/java/javase/24/docs/api/java.base/java/lang/classfile/ClassBuilder.html.
[37]
Oracle. CodeBuilder (Java SE 24 & JDK 24. 2025. URL: https://docs.oracle.com/
en/java/javase/24/docs/api/java.base/java/lang/classfile/CodeBuilder.html.
[38]
Oracle. Label (Java SE 24 & JDK 24. 2025. URL: https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/
javase/24/docs/api/java.base/java/lang/classfile/Label.html.
[39]
Oracle. Function (Java SE 24 & JDK 24. 2025. URL: https://docs.oracle.com/en/
java/javase/24/docs/api/java.base/java/util/function/Function.html.
[40]
Oracle. HashMap (Java SE 24 & JDK 24). 2025. URL: https://docs.oracle.com/en/
java/javase/24/docs/api/java.base/java/util/HashMap.html.
[41]
Alceste Scalas. Module 9: Closures - 02247 Compiler Construction - Spring 2024.
2024. URL: https://courses.compute.dtu.dk/02247/f24/closures.html#project-ideas.
[42]
The Scala Contributers. Structural Types - Scala 3 Book. 2025. URL: https://docs.
scala-lang.org/scala3/book/types-structural.html.
44
Architecting and Designing a didactic compiler in Modern Functional Java for the ’hygge’ programming
language
==PAGE:53==
A
Appendix A - ANTLR4 grammar for
Hygge
1
grammar Hygge;
2
3
@header {
4
package io.github.hacktheoxidation.hygge;
5
}
6
7
prog: expression EOF;
8
9
expression: TYPE ID EQUAL pretype SEQ expression
# TypeAlias
10
| LET (MUTABLE)? variable (ASCRIPTION pretype)? EQUAL simpleExpr SEQ
expression
# LetDeclare
11
| FUN variable parenArgTypesSeq ASCRIPTION pretype EQUAL simpleExpr SEQ
expression
# FunDeclare
12
| curlyExpr expression
# Curly
13
| sequenceExpr
#
Seq
14
;
15
16
curlyExpr: LCURLY expression RCURLY
#
Scope
17
;
18
19
sequenceExpr: simpleExpr SEQ expression
#
Sequence
20
| simpleExpr
#
Simple
21
;
22
23
simpleExpr: ifExpr
# If
24
| curlyExpr
#
Brackets
25
| WHILE simpleExpr DO simpleExpr
#
While
26
| primaryExpr LARROW simpleExpr
#
Assignment
27
| FUN parenArgTypesSeq RARROW simpleExpr
#
Lambda
28
| MATCH simpleExpr WITH LCURLY matchCases RCURLY
#
Match
29
;
30
31
ifExpr: IF simpleExpr THEN simpleExpr ELSE simpleExpr
#
IfThenElse
32
| orExpr
# Or
33
;
34
35
orExpr: orExpr OR andExpr
#
LogicalOr
36
| andExpr
#
And
37
;
38
Architecting and Designing a didactic compiler in Modern Functional Java for the ’hygge’ programming
language
45
==PAGE:54==
39
andExpr: andExpr AND relExpr
#
LogicalAnd
40
| relExpr
#
Rel
41
;
42
43
relExpr: addExpr EQUAL addExpr
#
Equality
44
| addExpr LESS addExpr
#
RelLess
45
| addExpr
#
Add
46
;
47
48
addExpr: addExpr ADD multExpr
#
ArithAdd
49
| multExpr
#
Mult
50
;
51
52
multExpr: multExpr MUL unaryExpr
#
ArithMul
53
| unaryExpr
#
Unary
54
;
55
56
unaryExpr: NOT unaryExpr
#
LogicalNot
57
| READINT ('(' ')' | '()')
#
ReadInt
58
| READFLOAT ('(' ')' | '()')
#
ReadFloat
59
| PRINT '(' simpleExpr ')'
#
Print
60
| PRINTLN '(' simpleExpr ')'
#
PrintLine
61
| ASSERT '(' simpleExpr ')'
#
Assertion
62
| ascriptionExpr
#
Ascription
63
| primaryExpr parenExprCommaSeq
#
Application
64
;
65
66
ascriptionExpr: primaryExpr ASCRIPTION pretype
#
TypeAscription
67
| primaryExpr
#
Primary
68
;
69
70
primaryExpr: LPAREN simpleExpr RPAREN
#
Parens
71
| value
#
Val
72
| variable
#
Var
73
| STRUCT LCURLY structFieldInitSeq RCURLY
#
StructCons
74
| primaryExpr DOT field
#
FieldSelect
75
| label LCURLY expression RCURLY
#
UnionCons
46
Architecting and Designing a didactic compiler in Modern Functional Java for the ’hygge’ programming
language
==PAGE:55==
76
;
77
78
79
value : INT | FLOAT | BOOL | STRING | UNIT ;
80
variable : ID ;
81
field : ID ;
82
label: ID ;
83
84
pretype : parenTypesSeq RARROW pretype
85
| STRUCT LCURLY structFieldTypeSeq RCURLY
86
| UNION LCURLY unionLabelTypeSeq RCURLY
87
| ID
88
;
89
90
91
parenArgTypesSeq: UNIT
92
| LPAREN (variable ASCRIPTION pretype (COMMA variable ASCRIPTION pretype)
*) RPAREN
93
;
94
95
parenTypesSeq: UNIT
96
| LPAREN (pretype (COMMA pretype)*) RPAREN
97
;
98
99
parenExprCommaSeq: UNIT
100
| LPAREN (simpleExpr (COMMA simpleExpr)*) RPAREN
101
;
102
103
structFieldInitSeq: field EQUAL simpleExpr (SEQ field EQUAL simpleExpr)*;
104
105
structFieldTypeSeq: field ASCRIPTION pretype (SEQ field ASCRIPTION pretype)*;
106
107
unionLabelTypeSeq: label ASCRIPTION pretype (SEQ label ASCRIPTION pretype)*;
108
109
matchCases: label LCURLY variable RCURLY RARROW simpleExpr (SEQ label LCURLY
variable RCURLY RARROW simpleExpr)*;
110
111
// Reserved keywords and operators
112
ASSERT : 'assert' ;
113
READINT : 'readInt ' ;
114
READFLOAT : 'readFloat ' ;
115
PRINT : 'print' ;
116
PRINTLN : 'println ';
117
NOT : 'not' ;
118
ADD : '+' ;
119
SUB : '-' ;
120
MUL : '*' ;
121
LESS : '<' ;
122
AND : 'and' ;
123
OR : 'or' ;
124
IF : 'if' ;
125
THEN : 'then' ;
126
ELSE : 'else' ;
127
LET : 'let' ;
128
TYPE : 'type' ;
129
EQUAL : '=' ;
130
LPAREN : '(' ;
131
RPAREN : ')' ;
132
LCURLY : '{' ;
133
RCURLY : '}' ;
134
ASCRIPTION : ':' ;
135
SEQ : ';' ;
Architecting and Designing a didactic compiler in Modern Functional Java for the ’hygge’ programming
language
47
==PAGE:56==
136
COMMA : ',' ;
137
DOT : '.' ;
138
LARROW : '<-' ;
139
RARROW : '->' ;
140
MUTABLE : 'mutable ' ;
141
WHILE : 'while' ;
142
DO : 'do' ;
143
FUN : 'fun' ;
144
STRUCT : 'struct' ;
145
UNION : 'union' ;
146
MATCH : 'match' ;
147
WITH : 'with' ;
148
149
// Values and Names
150
INT : [0-9]+ ;
151
FLOAT : INT '.' INT ('f' | 'F') ;
152
BOOL : 'true' | 'false' ;
153
STRING : '"' (~["\\\r\n] | EscapeSequence)* '"' ;
154
UNIT : '()' ;
155
ID: [a-zA-Z_][a-zA-Z_0-9]* ;
156
WS: [ \t\n\r\f]+ -> skip ;
157
LINE_COMMENT: '//' ~[\r\n]* -> skip ;
158
159
fragment EscapeSequence: '\\' [btnfr"'\\] ;
48
Architecting and Designing a didactic compiler in Modern Functional Java for the ’hygge’ programming
language
==PAGE:57==
B
Appendix B - Proposal for an
implementation of the Result monad in
Java 24
1
package io.github.hacktheoxidation.util;
2
3
import java.util.function.Function;
4
5
/**
6
* An implementation of the Result/Either monad in Java
7
* @param <ValueType > The type of the Ok type constructor
8
* @param <ErrorType > The type of the Error type constructor
9
*/
10
public sealed interface Result <ValueType , ErrorType > permits Result.Ok, Result
.Error {
11
12
/**
13
* The functor map operation for the Result functor
14
* @param function The mapping function which acts on the Ok type
constructor
15
* @return A new result instance
16
* @param <NewValueType > The new polymorphic type for the Ok type
constructor
17
*/
18
<NewValueType > Result<NewValueType , ErrorType > map(Function <ValueType ,
NewValueType > function);
19
20
/**
21
* The monadic 'bind' (flatMap) operation for the Result monad
22
* @param function A function from the Ok constructors value type to a new
Result
23
* @return A new result instance with the mapping applied
24
* @param <NewValueType > The new polymorphic type for the Ok type
constructor
25
*/
26
<NewValueType > Result<NewValueType , ErrorType > flatMap(Function <ValueType ,
Result<NewValueType , ErrorType >> function);
27
28
/**
29
* The applicative functor 'liftA2' operation for the Result applicative
30
* @param applicative A result applicative whose polymorphic type is a
mapping function
31
* @return A new result instance with the mapping applied
32
* @param <NewValueType > The new polymorphic type for the Ok type
constructor
33
*/
34
<NewValueType > Result<NewValueType , ErrorType > lift(Result <Function <
ValueType , NewValueType >, ErrorType > applicative);
35
36
/**
37
* Check if the result is an Ok instance
38
* @return whether this is an Ok instance
39
*/
40
default boolean isOk() {
41
return this instanceof Result.Ok<?, ?>;
42
}
43
Architecting and Designing a didactic compiler in Modern Functional Java for the ’hygge’ programming
language
49
==PAGE:58==
44
/**
45
* Check if the result is an Error instance
46
* @return wheterh this is an Error instance
47
*/
48
default boolean isError() {
49
return this instanceof Result.Error <?, ?>;
50
}
51
52
/**
53
* Apply a procedure if this is an instance of the Ok constructor.
54
* @param procedure A procedure/method that acts on the value of the Ok
constructor
55
*/
56
default void ifPresent(Function <ValueType , Void> procedure) {
57
if (this instanceof Ok<ValueType , ErrorType >(ValueType value)) {
58
procedure.apply(value);
59
}
60
}
61
62
/**
63
* The Ok type constructor for the Result monad signaling that a
computation succeeded
64
* @param value The value of the successful computation
65
* @param <ValueType > The type of the value in the Ok constructor
66
* @param <ErrorType > The type of the error in the Error constructor
67
*/
68
record Ok<ValueType , ErrorType >(ValueType value) implements Result <
ValueType , ErrorType > {
69
@Override
70
public <NewValueType > Result<NewValueType , ErrorType > map(Function <
ValueType , NewValueType > function) {
71
return new Ok<>(function.apply(value));
72
}
73
74
@Override
75
public <NewValueType > Result<NewValueType , ErrorType > flatMap(Function
<ValueType , Result<NewValueType , ErrorType >> function) {
76
return function.apply(value);
77
}
78
79
@Override
80
public <NewValueType > Result<NewValueType , ErrorType > lift(Result <
Function <ValueType , NewValueType >, ErrorType > applicative) {
81
return switch (applicative) {
82
case Result.Ok<Function <ValueType , NewValueType >, ErrorType >
ok -> new Ok<>(ok.value.apply(value()));
83
case Result.Error <?, ErrorType > error -> new Error <>(error.
error());
84
};
85
}
86
}
87
88
/**
89
* The Error type constructor for the Result monad signaling that a
computation failed
90
* @param error The error of the failed computation
91
* @param <ValueType > The type of the value in the Ok constructor
92
* @param <ErrorType > The type of the error in the Error constructor
93
*/
94
record Error<ValueType , ErrorType >(ErrorType error) implements Result <
ValueType , ErrorType > {
95
@Override
50
Architecting and Designing a didactic compiler in Modern Functional Java for the ’hygge’ programming
language
==PAGE:59==
96
public <NewValueType > Result <NewValueType , ErrorType > map(Function <
ValueType , NewValueType > function) {
97
return new Error <>(error);
98
}
99
100
@Override
101
public <NewValueType > Result <NewValueType , ErrorType > flatMap(Function
<ValueType , Result <NewValueType , ErrorType >> function) {
102
return new Error <>(error);
103
}
104
105
@Override
106
public <NewValueType > Result <NewValueType , ErrorType > lift(Result <
Function <ValueType , NewValueType >, ErrorType > applicative) {
107
return new Error <>(error);
108
}
109
}
110
}
Architecting and Designing a didactic compiler in Modern Functional Java for the ’hygge’ programming
language
51
==PAGE:60==
C
Appendix C - Additional functional
utilities missing from Java 24
1
package io.github.hacktheoxidation.util;
2
3
import java.util.*;
4
import java.util.AbstractMap.SimpleEntry;
5
import java.util.function.BiFunction;
6
import java.util.stream.Collectors;
7
import java.util.stream.IntStream;
8
import java.util.stream.Stream;
9
10
/**
11
* A collection of functions and utilities for Functional Programming (FP) in
Java. Mostly for
12
* manipulating collections in a more functional and immutable manor.
13
*/
14
public class FunctionalUtilities {
15
private FunctionalUtilities() {}
16
17
/**
18
* Computes the union of two sets without modifying them.
19
*
20
* @param s1 The left-hand set operand
21
* @param s2 The right-hand set operand
22
* @return The union of 's1' and 's2'
23
* @param <T> The type of elements in the sets
24
*/
25
public static <T> Set<T> union(Set<T> s1, Set<T> s2) {
26
return Stream.concat(s1.stream(), s2.stream()).collect(Collectors.toSet())
;
27
}
28
29
/**
30
* Computes the union of multiple sets without modifying them.
31
*
32
* @param s1 The initial set operand
33
* @param sets A variadic number of sets
34
* @return The union of all set arguments
35
* @param <T> The type of elements in the sets
36
*/
37
@SafeVarargs
38
public static <T> Set<T> union(Set<T> s1, Set<T>... sets) {
39
return Arrays.stream(sets).reduce(s1, FunctionalUtilities::union);
40
}
41
42
/**
43
* Computes the intersection of two sets without modifying them.
44
*
45
* @param s1 The left-hand set operand
46
* @param s2 The right-hand set operand
47
* @return The intersection of 's1' and 's2'
48
* @param <T> The type of elements in the sets
49
*/
50
public static <T> Set<T> intersection(Set<T> s1, Set<T> s2) {
51
return s1.stream().filter(s2::contains).collect(Collectors.toSet());
52
}
53
52
Architecting and Designing a didactic compiler in Modern Functional Java for the ’hygge’ programming
language
==PAGE:61==
54
/**
55
* Computes the difference of two sets without modifying them.
56
*
57
* @param s1 The left-hand set operand
58
* @param s2 The right-hand set operand
59
* @return The difference of 's1' and 's2'
60
* @param <T> The type of elements in the sets
61
*/
62
public static <T> Set<T> difference(Set<T> s1, Set<T> s2) {
63
return s1.stream().filter(val -> !s2.contains(val)).collect(Collectors.
toSet());
64
}
65
66
/**
67
* Tries to look up a key in a map
68
*
69
* @param m The map to search
70
* @param key The key to look up
71
* @return An optional with the corresponding value
72
* @param <K> The type of the key in the map
73
* @param <V> The type of the value in the map
74
*/
75
public static <K, V> Optional <V> tryFind(Map<K, V> m, K key) {
76
return m.containsKey(key) ? Optional.of(m.get(key)) : Optional.empty();
77
}
78
79
/**
80
* Tries to look up a value in a set
81
*
82
* @param s The set to search
83
* @param value The value to look up
84
* @return An optional with the corresponding value
85
* @param <V> The type of the value in the set
86
*/
87
public static <V> Optional <V> tryFind(Set<V> s, V value) {
88
return s.contains(value) ? Optional.of(value) : Optional.empty();
89
}
90
91
/**
92
* Adds an element to a set
93
*
94
* @param s the set to add an element to
95
* @param value the element to add
96
* @return a new set with the element added
97
* @param <V> the type of elements in the set
98
*/
99
public static <V> Set<V> add(Set<V> s, V value) {
100
var newSet = new HashSet <>(s);
101
newSet.add(value);
102
return newSet;
103
}
104
105
/**
106
* Removes an element for a set
107
*
108
* @param s the set to remove an element from
109
* @param value the element to remove
110
* @return a new set with the element removed
111
* @param <V> the type of elements in the set
112
*/
113
public static <V> Set<V> remove(Set<V> s, V value) {
114
var newSet = new HashSet <>(s);
Architecting and Designing a didactic compiler in Modern Functional Java for the ’hygge’ programming
language
53
==PAGE:62==
115
newSet.remove(value);
116
return newSet;
117
}
118
119
/**
120
* Adds an element to the head of a list
121
*
122
* @param l the list to add an element to
123
* @param value the element to add
124
* @return a new list with an element added to the head of the list
125
* @param <V> the type of elements in the list
126
*/
127
public static <V> List<V> add(List<V> l, V value) {
128
return Stream.concat(Stream.of(value), l.stream()).toList();
129
}
130
131
public static <K, V> Map<K, V> put(Map<K, V> m, K key, V value) {
132
var newMap = new HashMap <>(m);
133
newMap.put(key, value);
134
return newMap;
135
}
136
137
public static <K, V> Map<K, V> remove(Map<K, V> m, K key) {
138
var newMap = new HashMap <>(m);
139
newMap.remove(key);
140
return newMap;
141
}
142
143
public static <A, B> Stream<SimpleEntry <A, B>> zip(List<A> as, List<B> bs) {
144
return IntStream.range(0, Math.min(as.size(), bs.size()))
145
.mapToObj(i -> new SimpleEntry <>(as.get(i), bs.get(i)));
146
}
147
148
public record Triple <A, B, C>(A first, B second , C third) {}
149
150
public static <A, B, C> Stream<Triple <A, B, C>> zip(List<A> as, List<B> bs,
List<C> cs) {
151
return IntStream.range(0, Math.min(as.size(), Math.min(bs.size(), cs.size
())))
152
.mapToObj(i -> new Triple <>(as.get(i), bs.get(i), cs.get(i)));
153
}
154
155
public static <T> boolean hasDuplicates(Collection <T> collection) {
156
return collection.stream().anyMatch(arg -> Collections.frequency(
collection , arg) > 1);
157
}
158
159
public static <A, B> A foldRight(
160
A initial , BiFunction <A, B, A> folder, Collection <B> collection) {
161
var result = initial;
162
for (var element : collection) {
163
result = folder.apply(result, element);
164
}
165
return result;
166
}
167
}
54
Architecting and Designing a didactic compiler in Modern Functional Java for the ’hygge’ programming
language
==PAGE:63==
Architecting and Designing a didactic compiler in Modern Functional Java for the ’hygge’ programming
language
55
==PAGE:64==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
