==PAGE:1==
Electrochemical
carboxylation
of
furanics
with CO2 in ionic liquids
Master Thesis
DTU Chemistry
Center for Catalysis and Sustainable Chemistry
==PAGE:2==
Electrochemical carboxylation of furanics with CO2 in ionic liquids
Master Thesis
July, 2025
By
Aksel Lykke Helding
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Center for Catalysis and Sustainable Chemistry, Kemitorvet, Build­
ing 206, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This thesis has been prepared over seven months at DTU Chemistry, Center for Catalysis
and Sustainable Chemistry, the Technical University of Denmark from January 2025 to
July 2025. The Master Thesis of 35 ECTS is submitted in partial fulfillment to obtain a
Master of Science in Engineering in Applied Chemistry, MSc Eng.
The project was carried out under the supervision of Professor Anders Riisager and Ph.d
student Astrid Kjær Steffensen. I would like to thank them for their guidance, feedback,
and support.
I would also like to thank the members of Anders Riisager group and my fellow master
students for support, encouragement, and sparring.
Aksel Lykke Helding ­ s233417
Signature
Date
ii
Electrochemical carboxylation of furanics with CO2 in ionic liquids
27/07/2025
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Hello, here is some text without a meaning. This text should show what a printed text
will look like at this place. If you read this text, you will get no information. Really? Is
there no information? Is there a difference between this text and some nonsense like
“Huardest gefburn”? Kjift – not at all! A blind text like this gives you information about the
selected font, how the letters are written and an impression of the look. This text should
contain all letters of the alphabet and it should be written in of the original language. There
is no need for special content, but the length of words should match the language. The
adverse effects of emission of greenhouse gasses, as well as the growing demand for
plastics and other chemicals, call for an alternative to production of chemicals from fos­
sil resources. Chemical production from biomass feedstock is a promising alternative to
petrochemical production. Furfural, which is derived from lignocellulosic biomass, is con­
sidered a promising platform chemical for biobased chemical production. Especially its
ability to undergo carboxylation to 2,5­furandicarboxylic acid, which has shown the ca­
pacity to substitute TPA in PET. Carboxylation can be done electrochemically as a green
alternative to the original thermo­oxidative route. Organic electrosynthesis often requires
an electrolyte solution consisting of DMF as a solvent and tetrabutylammonium hexaflu­
orophosphate as an electrolyte. An environmental alternative is to use ionic liquids as
the electrolyte solution instead. The focus of this project was to test several ionic liquids
as electrolyte solutions for the electrochemical carboxylation of furfural derivatives. Two
furfural derivatives were investigated as substrates for the reaction, and HPLC analysis
showed conversions of the substrate of up to 89% in the ionic liquids. However, the car­
boxylated product was not isolated and identified during this project.
Electrochemical carboxylation of furanics with CO2 in ionic liquids
iii
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
4
2.1
2,5­Furandicarboxylic acid ­ A platform for biobased plastics . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Electrochemistry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Ionic liquids . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3
Experimentals
14
3.1
Preparation of Ionic liquids
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.2
Electrochemical reaction with CO2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3.3
Cyclic voltammetry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3.4
Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
4
Results & Discussion
22
4.1
Screening of substrate electrochemical reactivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
4.2
Characterization of ionic liquids . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
4.3
Electrochemical reaction of Methyl 5­(chlormethyl)­2­furoate (Sub1)
. . . . 27
4.4
Elecrochemical reaction of 5­bromo­furoic acid (sub2) . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
5
Conclusion
38
6
Future Work
39
Bibliography
40
A Appendix
49
A.1 HPLC Chromatograms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
A.2 Calibration curves
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
A.3 NMR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
iv
Electrochemical carboxylation of furanics with CO2 in ionic liquids
==PAGE:6==
1
Introduction
For almost a century, oil, coal, and gas have been the dominant energy sources in the
world, and since the first catalytic cracking of oil was developed in 1937 [1], petrochemi­
cals have become an important part of society. A Petrochemical is defined as a chemical
species isolated by the refinement of crude oil or natural gas, and they are used daily in
dyes, plastics, and pharmaceuticals [2]. Two of the most used petrochemicals are Tereph­
thalic acid (TPA) and ethylene glycol (EG) to make the highly popular engineering plastic
PET when polymerized (Figure 1.1). PET is most notably found in packaging for food
Figure 1.1: The condensation polymerization of TPA and EG to form PET
and drinks, but is also found in textiles. In 2024, it was estimated that approximately 35
million metric tons of PET were produced worldwide [3], and are expected to increase
approximately 10 million metric tons by 2035. One of the main challenges that is insti­
gated from the use of PET rests in the plastic itself, as its high stability and strength make
it difficult to recycle properly. Furthermore, as the fossil fuel reserves are shrinking and
the air pollution from GHG is becoming more detrimental, it is vital to find alternatives
to fossil resources such as PET. A very promising alternative is a polymer consisting of
2,5­furandicarboxylic acid (FDCA) and EG, called PEF, that can be synthesized with the
same condensation polymerization already used for PET (Figure 1.2).
Figure 1.2: Polymerization reaction of FDCA and EG to form PEF
In some regards, PEF is an improvement over PET, furthermore, FDCA can be produced
from the lignocellulose biomass, which has significant interest in bioeconomy, as it can
not be used for food, found in trees. Currently, around 170 billion tons of plant biomass
are produced by nature, only 3.5% is utilized for human needs [4]. Furthermore, it has
been estimated that 40 billion tons would be enough to generate and sustain a bio­based
economy, and if correctly done, chemical pathways from biomass to useful chemicals
could have a neutral carbon footprint.
The carbon footprint neutrality achieved when
using biomass as a feedstock for chemicals comes from the short­term carbon cycle,
Electrochemical carboxylation of furanics with CO2 in ionic liquids
1
==PAGE:7==
wherein the CO2 released during refinement is absorbed and converted via photosynthe­
sis. Whereas the CO2 released through fossil­based resources has a long­term carbon
cycle which takes millions of years, whereas plant­based biomass is converted into oil
under certain conditions. Looking at the two simple life cycles in figure 1.3, the steps are
similar, but the difference in timescale for the two carbon cycles is what makes chemicals
based on biomass very attractive [5] [6].
Figure 1.3: Carbon cycle of crude oil and biomass, adapted from [5]
In theory, most chemicals derived from fossil­based resources can be synthesized us­
ing biomass, there are, however several limitations and challenges regarding technique
and economy [7]. From a chemical point of view, biomass is very different from the hy­
drocarbons and aromatics derived from crude oil, whereas biomass contains a lot more
oxygen. This results in very different refinement methods and as a consequence, the
development of new and efficient processes is essential for bioeconomy. Concurrently,
these processes also need to be environmentally benign for the utilization of biomass
[8]. The 12 principles of green chemistry, developed by Anastas and Warner in 1998,
provide a set of guidelines for generating green chemical processes. The guidelines are
built upon the principle of reducing waste and maximizing economy[9]. These principles
are embodied by electrochemical synthesis, which has developed very quickly over the
last decade [10]. Electrochemical synthesis is basically heterogeneous metal catalysis,
with electricity as the energy source instead of heat. This is especially usable in organic
chemistry, with the use of electricity providing ”clean” electrons to either reduce or oxidize
one of two chemical species, instead of the typical reducing or oxidizing agents that are
used in many organic reactions minimizing waste [11]. Furthermore, electrochemical syn­
thesis may be utilized at room temperature and in general lower temperatures than their
thermocatalyzed counterparts. Another advantage is that electrochemistry often occurs
in low­volatility and non­toxic reaction media, such as ionic liquids. Lastly, electrochemi­
cal synthesis is very flexible and can easily be adjusted to produce a designated species
2
Electrochemical carboxylation of furanics with CO2 in ionic liquids
==PAGE:8==
[12].
The traditional route to synthesizing FDCA from biomass through an oxidation of HMF
into FDCA. A new route has emerged where Furioc acid undergoes a carboxylation of its
unoccupied α­carbon [13]. A schematic overview of the two pathways is shown in Figure
1.4. As seen in Figure 1.4, FDCA is versatile and can be used in many different poly­
Figure 1.4: Schematic overview of the two pathways from biomass to FDCA, adapted
from [13]
mers. In 2025, the global market value for FDCA was estimated to be 770 million EUR
with a growth rate of 11% [13]. In principle, both steps in the ”new route” pathway shown
in Figure 1.4 can be done electrochemically, but this project will only focus on carboxyla­
tion of furanics using ionic liquids. The carboxylation of other organics has been proven
successful in ionic liquids [14]. The challenge of using ionic liquids in a carboxylation of
furanics is a fairly novel area of research.
The aim of this project is to investigate the electrochemical reaction between CO2 and
furfural derivatives in ionic liquids by (i) testing three different types of ionic liquids and
(ii) introduce furfural derivatives with different sidegroups. 5 different ionic liquids will be
synthesized and used for the electrochemical carboxylation of furanics to investigate their
suitability towards the reaction. The ionic liquids will be characterized with NMR and Karl­
Fischer Titration. Three different furfural derivatives will be examined to investigate the
effect of the side­groups placed on the furan­ring. The products from electrochemical
conversion will analyzed using HPLC, NMR, to determine conversion.
Electrochemical carboxylation of furanics with CO2 in ionic liquids
3
==PAGE:9==
2
Background
2.1
2,5­Furandicarboxylic acid ­ A platform for biobased
plastics
FDCA can be produced from biomass, the industrial way of producing it requires a conver­
sion of biomass into C6 carbohydrate and then into the more versatile 5­Hydroxymethylfufural
(HMF). The pathway from lignocellulosic biomass into HMF can be seen in figure 2.1
[15][16][17]
Figure 2.1: The chemical way of producing FDCA from biomass
From HMF, one of two pathways is usually chosen, either a hydrogenation/ring­opening of
HMF with the end product being 2,5­hexanediol. The other way, which HMf can be used
is through continuous oxidation into 2,5­furandicarboxylic acid (FDCA), see figure 2.2.
Figure 2.2: Oxidation of HMF to FDCA
The most simplistic way of oxidizing HMF into FDCA is to react HMF with pure O2 or air
in the presence of a strong oxidizing agent such as KMnO4 [15] [18]. This is also the
oldest method for oxidizing HMF, and as with most direct oxidation of organics at high
temperatures, the reaction also needs to be under high pressure [18]. Furthermore, the
oxidation of HMF to FDCA has multiple transition states, decreasing the yield. Combining
this with the high energy consumption from the needed temperature and pressure, other
pathways were investigated with great success. One method that has been studied is
a biocatalytic production of FDCA from HMF, where an enzyme cascade catalysis with
multiple enzymes has been examined reaching very high conversions of HMF to FDCA
[19]. The two biggest problems for this form of catalyst are that the reaction takes a long
4
Electrochemical carboxylation of furanics with CO2 in ionic liquids
==PAGE:10==
time, >24h, with the second problem being HMF itself. HMF is an aldehyde, making it
toxic to many biological microorganisms and therefore, it is difficult to find an efficient
synthesis route that is robust enough [19]. The biocatalytic production of FDCA is not
as well researched as the use of transition metal catalysts. These generally use air or
pure oxygen as the oxidizing agent and can be either homogeneous or heterogeneous.
Homogeneous catalysis is not preferable as it suffers from low selectivity towards FDCA
reporting lower yields than their heterogeneous counterparts [18] [20], and that is before
FDCA is extracted from the reaction media. The most researched and used are of het­
erogeneous transition metal catalysts are with the use of noble metals, Au, Pt, Pd, and
Ru [15] [21][22][23] [24], as they have been proven to activate molecular oxygen. But as
always with the noble metals, they are among the rarest metals found, as can be seen in
figure 2.6, and they are therefore a very limited resource that industrial production expen­
sive. Some people have used iron­based catalysts, with good yields [16][25]. Similarly for
all the transition metal catalysts mentioned is that they still need elevated temperatures,
> 70◦C, elevated pressures, and a long reaction time >8h to function and give good yields
of FDCA. Looking for a more cost­efficient and greener way to enable chemical oxidation­
s/reductions people have begun using electrochemistry. These electrochemical methods
can in general be applied at moderate conditions when compared to the traditional ther­
mocatalytic oxidations, as an electrochemical reaction depends on the applied potential
difference or charge applied to the reactants. Research has shown that the electrochem­
ical oxidation of HMF into FDCA is strongly dependent on the type of electrodes used
and pH of the reaction solvent [26][27][28]. The best selectivity has been obtained at pH
> 10 and with either a copper or silver cathode, if an organic solvent and pure O2 or air
are used as oxygen source [26]. Some have used hydrogen evolution at the cathode to
drive reaction with water as an oxygen source, where nickel has shown to be the pre­
ferred electrode [28]. But using electrochemistry and HMF is still just an oxidation, so as
an alternative furfural can be used as a substrate in an electrochemical carboxylation to
create FDCA.
Electrochemical carboxylation of furanics with CO2 in ionic liquids
5
==PAGE:11==
2.2
Electrochemistry
Electrochemistry studies the phenomena and processes caused by chemical reactions
producing electricity or the opposite, when electricity facilitates chemical reactions [29].
An electrochemical reaction always consists of two half­cell reactions, namely an oxida­
tion reaction and a reduction reaction. Oxidation and reduction of the chemical species
take place at the surfaces of conducting electrodes, often made of transition metals, and
the process is called heterogeneous electron transfer. Electrochemistry is performed in
a closed system, called the electrochemical cell, see Figure 2.3. The cell consists of
two electrodes immersed in a liquid solution containing electrolytes, by convention, the
electrode facilitating reduction is called the cathode, and the one facilitating oxidation is
called the anode. The electrodes are also connected through an external circuit where
the electrons move. The electrolyte consists of both anions and cations and has the task
of balancing charge and enabling the movement of ions formed at the electrode surfaces
[29] [30].
Figure 2.3: Schematic overview of a open electrochemical cell
In general, all electrochemical cells have this format, the electrolyte can be changed to
a solid, eg. a polymer or a metaloxide [29]. The simplicity of the cell on paper is always
what gives electrochemical synthesis a high potential to make scalable solutions to the
industry, as has already been done with technology such as fuel cells and producing
smaller organic molecules [31] [32] [33].
6
Electrochemical carboxylation of furanics with CO2 in ionic liquids
==PAGE:12==
2.2.1
Valorisation of CO2
The definition of valorization is to take a waste material and convert it into something
useful, such as fuel, or chemicals which can be used as reactants in other reactions
[34]. Valorisation of CO2 is possible, but because the carbon in CO2 is fully oxidized
and the octet­rule fulfilled for all three atoms, it’s a very stable molecule, making it inert
under most conditions. This results in the valorization of CO2 being an endergonic and
endothermic process requiring a high energy input to succeed [35]. Despite this, electro­
chemical reduction of CO2 is a well­researched and promising topic, as many reports of
successful reduction to other C1 chemicals such as CO, or in the presence of a proton
source, methane, methanol, and even formic acid. With the correct conditions ethylene
which is a C2 molecule has been produced electrochemically from CO2 [36][37][38]. A
schematic overview of reported reactions can be seen in Figure 2.4. This aligns perfectly
Figure 2.4: POssible reactions for the valorisation of CO2
with the aforementioned 12 principles of green chemistry. However, fully utilizing this way
of valorisation for CO2 requires a green source of hydrogen, eg. water splitting by elec­
trolysis via a green source of energy. Using CO2 in this way to produce C1 products will
help to achieve a reduction in CO2 emissions and reduce the environmental impact of the
production of the respective C1 products, especially the production of formic acid [39].
Because of this, the attention has shifted from converting CO2 directly into usable C1 to
the fixation of CO2 onto bigger molecules like alkenes or aromatics [40][41]. One type of
CO2 fixation onto bigger molecules is called carboxylation, and is the chemical reaction
where a carboxylic acid group is introduced through a substitution of a side­group with
CO2, see figure 2.5. The carboxylic acid is often formed as a carboxylate and protonated
by acidic treatment. The leaving group, X in Figure 2.5, is most often a hydrogen atom,
but can also be a halide [41].
Figure 2.5: Carboxylation fixating CO2 onto a bigger molecule
Due to the aforementioned inertness of CO2, a catalyst is generally required to under­
Electrochemical carboxylation of furanics with CO2 in ionic liquids
7
==PAGE:13==
take carboxylation reactions. These catalysts are often made from a transition metal,
and require elevated temperatures and pressure [42][43]. Looking specifically at the car­
boxylation of FA into FDCA there are complications to using a metal catalyst. The current
method comprise of using a metal­carbonate, M2CO3 as a catalyst, with the most efficient
catalyst being a co­catalyst of Cs2CO3 and K2CO3 [44][45]. Then the reaction needs to
be heated above 260◦C, making it a high energy­cost reaction. Secondly, looking at Fig­
ure 2.6, Cs is a rare earth metal, adding to the production cost, and lastly, regeneration
of the catalyst is necessary, which is done with a strong acid and more CO2 [44] [45].
Other catalytic pathways use a ligand­bonded palladium catalyst, and a starting material
Figure 2.6: Map over the abundance of Rare­earth elements, adapted from [46]
of 5­bromofuroic acid has also been investigated, leading to a successful carboxylation
of the starting material [44][47]. For a greener and more energy efficient alternative, car­
boxylation of furanics can also be done using electrochemistry.
8
Electrochemical carboxylation of furanics with CO2 in ionic liquids
==PAGE:14==
2.2.2
Electrochemical carboxylation
The conspicuous benefit when using electrochemistry vs. metal catalysts is that electro­
chemical carboxylation can be done at ambient pressure and much lower temperatures
[48]. The precise mechanism steps for electrochemical carboxylation general mecha­
nism of electrochemical carboxylation are not known, but the general mechanism revolves
around a radical anion being formed either on the substrate or on CO2, see figure 2.7. The
Figure 2.7: Electrochemical pathways for carboxylation using CO2
first pathway shows a substrate activation through partial reduction of the substrate, which
then undergoes nucleophilic substitution through an attack on CO2, yielding the carboxy­
late anion on the substrate. The other way is through CO2 being partially reduced, and
activated then followed by a nucleophilic attack on the substrate [49]. Due to its stability,
the reduction potential for CO2 which has been reported as very low, −3.0V vs Fc+/0 [50].
Therefore, it is expected that the radical anion will more often than not be formed on the
substrate [48]. There have been reports of successful electrochemical carboxylations of
both a wide selection of alkenes and aromatic benzene compounds with varying success
[48] [51], a segment of the reactions is shown in Figure 2.8.
The electrochemical carboxylation of furfural and its derivatives is not as well defined
as the one for benzene and alkene substrates with very few reports on it. One group
has reported a successful reaction, using 5­bromo furoate as the substrate with DMF as
solvent and an electrolyte of tetrabutylammonium hexafluorophosphate (TBAPF6) and a
sacrificial Mg anode [52]. A schematic representation of their open electrochemical cell
setup is pictured in Figure 2.9
Common for nearly all of the electric carboxylation reactions is the usage of DMF as
a solvent and an electrolyte of TBAPF6 (Figure 2.10), DMF is a good solvent due to
its large electrochemical window [53]. But DMF is a highly volatile, not environmentally
friendly, and toxic solvent [54][55]. To counter this, ionic liquids can be used in organic
electrochemistry as the solvent. Ionic liquids also bring the advantage of not having to
Electrochemical carboxylation of furanics with CO2 in ionic liquids
9
==PAGE:15==
Figure 2.8: Overview of some reported successful carboxylations using electrochemistry,
adapted from [48]
add an electrolyte, as they themselves can act as the electrolyte during the reaction.
2.3
Ionic liquids
The first recorded efforts to synthesize ionic liquids were first discovered in 1914 by Paul
Walden [56], who successfully synthesized an ionic liquid of [EtNH3][NO3]. Since then,
research of ionic liquids has expanded exponentially, due to the versatility of ionic liquids
combined with their potential as green solvents. Ionic liquids are in their essence molten
salts, but are not classified as such due to their very low melting points compared to
regular molten salts. No clearcut definition of ionic liquids is currently known, but what
most scientists agree upon is that an ionic liquid is a salt with a melting point of lower than
mp < 100◦C [56][57][58].
Ionic liquids are typically comprised of a bulky organic cation and a much smaller inorganic
anion, making them semi­organic salts. The size difference between cation and anion is
weakening the ionic bond between the two species and makes it liquid under 100◦C [56].
Some of the most common cations and anions are shown in Figure 2.11.
The cations are most often centered around a quaternary ammonium ion, but phospho­
nium ions have also seen some use [59]. The quaternization reactions are, in principle,
very straightforward and can be performed at reasonable temperatures, < 80◦C. All that
is needed is the tertiary amine of choice and a halogenated alkylating agent, with the re­
activity of the alkylating agent dependent on the halogen as follows I>Br>Cl. The limiting
10
Electrochemical carboxylation of furanics with CO2 in ionic liquids
==PAGE:16==
Figure 2.9: Schematic representation of a cell setup performing electrochemical carboxy­
lation
Figure 2.10: Molecular structure of the electrolyte tetrabutylammonium hexafluorophos­
phate
factor here is time, as quaternization will take at least 24h [60]. The halide salt now cre­
ated can undergo anion metathesis if another anion than a halide is desired [60]. This
simple synthesis process is also what makes ionic liquids very versatile, as it is easy to
tune the properties of the ionic liquid, for example: having longer alkyl chains on the cation
will result in a decrease of surface tension, whilst changing the anion impacts the ion con­
ductivity [56]. This tuneability has resulted in a plethora of underclassifications seeing the
light of day, see figure 2.12. Therefore, ionic liquids have the potential to be introduced
into many applications, with some of the more promising being electrochemistry [56][57]
and carbon capture [61][62]. It is worth noting that the label green solvent mainly comes
from the negligible to non­existent vapor pressure of ionic liquids and their high thermal
stability, compared to the organic solvents they are meant to replace [63][64].
Electrochemical carboxylation of furanics with CO2 in ionic liquids
11
==PAGE:17==
Figure 2.11: A small selection of the most common cations and anions used for synthe­
sizing ionic liquids
Figure 2.12: Classifications of ionic liquids based on their structure and purpose, adapted
from [57]
2.3.1
Carbon capture using ionic liquids
One of the main carbon capture techniques employed for post­combustion carbon cap­
ture, for large­scale fuel consumption plants, is the use of amine­based solvents [65]. Of­
ten in the form of a ethanol amine [66]. CO2 is separated from flue gasses in an absorber
where the flue­gas stream is introduced at 40 −60◦C, where CO2 is chemically bonded
to the amine solvent. To release the CO2, the solvent must be heated to 100 −140◦C
and stripped in a column [65]. The regeneration of the ethanol amine solvent is a very
costly procedure, and the solvents themselves are very volatile, sensitive towards degra­
dation, and can cause corrosion for the unit operators. Retrofitting an amine solvent based
scrubbing unit to an existing power plant and using energy from the power plant to run the
scrubbing unit could lower the energy output of the power plant by up to 40% [66]. Ionic
12
Electrochemical carboxylation of furanics with CO2 in ionic liquids
==PAGE:18==
liquids can act as a substitute for the amine­based solvents in carbon capture. It has been
reported that CO2 has a high solubillity in ionic liquids due to both physical and chemical
interactions [67][61][62][66], with the absorption of CO2 into the ionic liquid reaching a 1:1
mass ratio [61]. The solubility of CO2 can be tuned in many ways, the physical absorption
changes a lot through the viscosity and free volume. Therefore, if longer alkyl chains or
ether groups are introduced into the cation, the amount of absorbed CO2 increases [62],
but the cation itself only plays a minor influence in the dissolution of CO2. The anion is
regarded to play the bigger role, as CO2 coordinates to the anionic part of the ionic liquid
furthermore, fluorinated anions have shown to increase solubility [66][61]. This high affin­
ity towards CO2 compared to other organic solvents and the ability to act as both solvent
and electrolyte in an electrochemical process make ionic liquids ideal for electrochemical
reactions involving CO2.
Electrochemical carboxylation of furanics with CO2 in ionic liquids
13
==PAGE:19==
3
Experimentals
3.1
Preparation of Ionic liquids
An overview of the ionic liquid synthesis, using Piperidine and Bromo­propane, is shown in
Figure 3.1. When working with both 4­methylmorpholine and Bromomethyl methyl ether,
milder reaction conditions were needed. The six synthesized ionic liquids made for this
project are shown in Figure 3.2
Figure 3.1: overview of the ionic liquid synthesis
3.1.1
Materials
Bis(trifluoromethane)sulfomide (> 99%) was purchased from Chemodex AG. Potassium
Bis(flurosulfonyl)imide (> 95%), Bromomethyl Methyl Ether (> 95%) was purchased from
Tokyo Chemical Industries. 1­Bromopropane (> 99%), 4­Methylmorpholine (> 99%), 1­
Methylpiperidine (> 98%) was purchased from Sigma­Aldrich. Ethyl Acetate (> 99.8%,VWR)
and milliQ water were used as solvents for quaternization and Anion Metathesis, respec­
tively. All chemicals were used without further purification
3.1.2
Ionic liquid synthesis method A
Synthesis procedure reported by Yim, Taeeun, et al [68], was used to create [PMPyrr][TFSI]
(IL1) and [PMPyrr][FSI] IL2.
Quaternization
First, a 1.4 M solution of N­methylpiperidine and acetonitrile was created by adding 0.2 mol
N­methylpiperidine together with 170 mL Acetonitrile. The solution was then cooled down
in an ice bath, and 0.22 mol of bromopropane was added dropwise to the solution. The
reaction was stirred at 80◦C and left for 72 hours. The solid halide product was obtained
as a white salt.
Anion exchange
Anion exchange was done by dissolving the halide salt alongside the anion salt (LiTFSI
or KFSI) in 100 mL milliQ water at a 1:1 molar ratio. The mixture was stirred at room
14
Electrochemical carboxylation of furanics with CO2 in ionic liquids
==PAGE:20==
temperature overnight until two phases were present. The heavier organic phase was
washed with milliQ water until no halogens could be detected with AgNO3. Lastly, the ionic
liquid was dried on a Schlenk line for 12 hours at 80◦C. The final product was obtained as
a slightly yellow liquid.
3.1.3
Ionic liquid Synthesis method B
Synthesis procedure reported by Varela, et al [69] was used to create [MOMPyrr][TFSI]
(IL3) and [MOMPyrr][FSI] IL4 and [MOMmorph][TFSI] (IL6)
Quaternization
First, a 1 M solution of N­methylpiperidine and Ethyl Acetate was created by adding 0.12
mol N­methylpiperidine together with 120 mL Ethyl Acetate. The solution was cooled
down using an ice bath, and then 0.12 mol of bromomethyl­methylether was added drop­
wise to the solution through a septum. The reaction was stirred overnight at room tem­
perature, solid halide product was obtained as a lightly yellow coloured salt.
Anion exchange
Anion exchange was done by dissolving the halide salt alongside LiTFSI in milliQ water at
a 1:1 molar ratio. The mixture was stirred at room temperature overnight until two phases
were present. The heavier organic phase was washed with milliQ water until no halogens
could be detected with AgNO3. Lastly, the ionic liquid was dried on a Schlenk line for 12
hours at 80◦C. The final product was obtained as a yellow liquid
3.1.4
Ionic liquid Synthesis method C
A slightly adjusted version of synthesis procedure reported by Varela, et al [69] was used
to create [PMmorph][TFSI] (IL5)
Quaternization
First a 1.4 M solution of 4­methylmorpholine and Ethyl Acetate was created by adding
0.2 mol N­methylpiperidine together with 170 mL Ethyl Acetate. The solution was cooled
down using an ice bath, and then 0.22 mol of bromopropan was added dropwise to the
solution through a septum. The reaction was stirred overnight at room temperature, solid
halide product was obtained as a dark yellow coloured salt.
Anion exchange
Anion exchange was done by dissolving the obtained halide salt alongside LiTFSI in milliQ
water at a 1:1 molar ratio. The mixture was stirred at room temperature overnight until
two phases were present. The heavier organic phase was washed with milliQ water until
no halogens could be detected with AgNO3. The ionic liquid was obtained as a brown
liquid. Lastly, the ionic liquid was dried on a Schlenk line for 12 hours at 80◦C.
Electrochemical carboxylation of furanics with CO2 in ionic liquids
15
==PAGE:21==
Figure 3.2: Overview of the ionic liquids synthesized for this project
3.2
Electrochemical reaction with CO2
3.2.1
Materials
5­Hydroxymethyl­2­furancarboxylic acid (99.85%), Methyl 5­(chlormethyl)­2­furoate (99.73%),
5­Bromofuran­2­carboxylic acid (99.55%) was purchased from AmBeed. N,N­Dimethylformamid
(99.8%) was purchased from Thermo Scientific. Tetrabutylammonium Hexafluorophos­
phate (> 98%) was purchased from Tokyo Chemical Industries. Reference compounds
used for HPLC include 2,5­furandicarboxylic acid (> 98%, TCI), 2­Furoic acid (98%, Sigma­
Aldrich), Methyl 5­methyl­2­furoate (97%, Thermo Scientific). Dimethylsulfoxide­d6 (DMSO­
d6, 99.8%, Deutero GMBH) was used as a solvent for NMR samples. All reagents were
used without further purification.
16
Electrochemical carboxylation of furanics with CO2 in ionic liquids
==PAGE:22==
3.2.2
Electrochemical carboxylation in DMF
First, 0.3 mmol substrate, 2.75 equivalent of TBAP6 electrolyte, and 60 mg of activated
powdered 4Å molecular sieves, were added to an oven­dried vial. The vial was then as­
sembled into the IKA ElectrSyn electrochemical cell shown in Figure 3.3, the electrodes
were polished, a magnesium electrode was used as a sacrificial anode, and a carbon
electrode was used as cathode. All parts that were screwed together were sealed with
teflon tape. Before adding any DMF, the sealed cell was flushed with CO2 for 15 minutes
with a gas inlet from a CO2 and an outlet needle. Then 3 mL of DMF was added to the
reaction vial with a syringe. The solvent was degassed for 10 minutes under stirring and
at the reaction temperature. The outlet needle was removed, and the current turned on,
the reaction was performed with a constant current of 10 mA for 2 hours, transferring a
total charge of 2.5 F during the reaction. After electrolysis, the current turned off, 20 µL of
internal standard was added to the reaction mixture using a 50µL Hamilton syringe and
stirred for 5­10 minutes. Next 40 µL of reaction mixture was transferred to a HPLC filter
vial and dissolved in 0.5 mL Acetonitrile. A reference sample of the internal standard was
also prepared. All samples were examined using High­performance liquid chromatogra­
phy (HPLC).
3.2.3
Electrochemical carboxylation in ionic liquids
First, 0.3 mmol substrate and 60 mg of activated powdered 4Å molecular sieves were
added to an oven­dried vial. The vial was then assembled into the IKA ElectrSyn electro­
chemical cell shown in Figure 3.3, the electrodes were polished, a magnesium electrode
was used as a sacrificial anode, and a copper electrode was used as cathode. All parts
that were screwed together were sealed with teflon tape. Before adding any ionic liquid
the sealed cell was flushed with CO2 for 15 minutes with a gas inlet from a CO2 and an
outlet needle. Then 3 mL of ionic liquid was added to the reaction vial with a syringe. The
solvent was degassed for 10 minutes under stirring and at the reaction temperature. The
outlet needle was removed, and the current turned on, the reaction was performed with
a constant current of 10 mA for 2 hours, transferring a total charge of 2.5 F during the
reaction. After electrolysis, the current turned off, 20 µL of internal standard was added
to the reaction mixture using a 50µL Hamilton syringe and stirred for 5­10 minutes. Next
40 µL of reaction mixture was transferred to a HPLC filter vial and dissolved in 0.5 mL
Acetonitrile. A reference sample of the internal standard was also prepared. All samples
were examined using High­performance liquid chromatography (HPLC).
Electrochemical carboxylation of furanics with CO2 in ionic liquids
17
==PAGE:23==
Figure 3.3: Setup used for electrochemical carboxylation
3.2.4
Extraction for NMR samples
The reaction mixture was transferred to a separation funnel and dissolved in ethyl acetate
(60 mL). To separate the electrolyte from the products, the organic solution was washed
with 0.1 M HCl (20 mL), milliQ water (5x40 mL), and lastly washed with brine (20 mL) with
the organic phase on top and the water phase on the bottom (see figure 4.13). The organic
was then added to a beaker alongside Na2SO4 (drying agent) and stirred for 15min. to
dry the organic phase of water. The drying agent was removed from the solution through
vacuum filtration, with the filtrate going straight into a round­bottomed flask. The organic
solvent left was evaporated at 100 mbar using a rotary evaporator and a Schlenk line.
Samples of the sediment left in the round­bottomed flask were then taken and dissolved
in either DMSO­d6, for NMR testing.
Figure 3.4: Extraction setup used
18
Electrochemical carboxylation of furanics with CO2 in ionic liquids
==PAGE:24==
3.3
Cyclic voltammetry
Cyclic voltammetry measurements were performed using a three­electrode configura­
tion, consisting of three electrodes connected through a potentiostat, a working electrode
(glassy carbon disc), a counter electrode (platinum wire), and a reference electrode (Sat­
urated calomel, SCE). Both a schematic representation are shown in Figure 3.5 and the
practical test set­up are shown in Figure 3.6.
Figure 3.5: Schematic overview of the setup used to measure cyclic voltammetry
All cyclic voltammetry scans have been performed with a scan rate of 100 mV/s, starting
in the positive direction from OCP.
Determination of electrochemical windows
Before starting the experiment and assembling the cell, the working electrode was pol­
ished in a figure­of­8 pattern on a polishing cloth with a slurry of Milli­Q water and 0.05 µ
mol alumina powder. The working electrode was rinsed with water alongside the counter
and reference electrode before being inserted into the glass cell. After the cell had been
assembled, it was purged with argon for 10 min., and 2 ml of ionic liquid or DMF was
added to the cell. For the measurements using DMF, 73.5 mg of electrolyte (TBAP6)
was also added. The solvent­filled cell was then flushed with argon for 5 min. After
flushing, the electrodes were rearranged to be immersed approximately. 1 cm into the
electrolyte solution. To determine the cathodic and anodic limit of TBAP6 and DMF, mul­
tiple cyclic voltammetry scans, between increasing/decreasing potentials until the limits
were reached.
Determination of Substrate reduction potential
First, 1 mL of DMF electrolyte solution was transferred to a 1,5 mL vial, and 0.2 mmol sub­
strate was dissolved in the solution. The solution was then transferred back into the cell,
giving a substrate concentration of 0.1 mM. 5 scans were performed, with the substrate
reduction potential being determined from the last scan.
Electrochemical carboxylation of furanics with CO2 in ionic liquids
19
==PAGE:25==
Figure 3.6: Experimental setup used to measure cyclic voltammetry
3.4
Analysis
High­performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) was used to separate and quantify an­
alytes in the reaction mixture after the electrochemical reactions. Analysis was performed
on an Agilent 1200 instrument, equipped with an inline degasser, a MWD detector, and
an Agilent ecplise­ XDB­C18 column (150 x 4.6 mm). Optimal product separation was
obtained with a mobile phase flow rate of 1 mL/min and a sample injection volume of 30
μL. The mobile phase composition, a mixture of 0.1 wt% formic acid in milliQ water and
acetonitrile, over time is shown in table 3.1, two different acquisition methods are methods
for HPLC analyses were used throughout the project, with the mobile phase composition
of the second method shown in table 3.2
Table 3.1: Mobile phase composition of the ”Carboxy 1” acquisition method
Time [min.]
Formic acid in MQ­water [%]
Acetonitrile [%]
0
95
5
3
95
5
10
40
60
20
5
95
25
5
95
30
95
5
20
Electrochemical carboxylation of furanics with CO2 in ionic liquids
==PAGE:26==
The column temperature was 30◦C, and the temperature of the MWD optical unit was
35◦C. Additional information about HPLC analysis, including a sample chromatogram,
retention times of relevant analytes, and calibration curves, is collected in Appendix A.1.
Conversion, yield, and selectivity were determined by:
Table 3.2: Mobile phase composition of the ”Carboxy 1” acquisition method
Time [min.]
Formic acid in MQ­water [%]
Acetonitrile [%]
0
80
20
3
80
20
10
40
60
20
5
95
25
5
95
30
80
20
Substrate conversion = n0
sub −nsub
n0
sub
Where n0
sub denotes the amount of substrate added initally in moles, and nsub and nproduct
respectively denote the amount of moles of substrate and product(s) measured in the
mixture after reaction.
Karl­Fisher titration and Nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy
Water content of the ionic liquids was measured using a Metrohm eco coulometer. All
Nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy was performed using either a Bruker Ascend
400 MHz spectrometer, and a Bruker Ultrashield plus 400 MHz spectrometer, NMR sam­
ples were analyzed in MestReNova v15.0.0, all recorded shifts are reported in appendix
Figure XX.
Electrochemical carboxylation of furanics with CO2 in ionic liquids
21
==PAGE:27==
4
Results & Discussion
4.1
Screening of substrate electrochemical reactivity
Three furfural derivatives (figure 4.1) were investigated as substrates for electrochemical
carboxylation, in an electrolyte solution of DMF and TBA6P as described in section XX.
Figure 4.1: Molecular structure of the three substrates used in the screening for electro­
chemical reactivity in an electrolyte solution of DMF and TBAP6
Retention times for significant analyte peaks observed in the HPLC chromatograms for
both the product solution and the starting materials are shown in Table 4.1.
Table 4.1: Retention times of starting materials and product analytes determined in the
HPLC analysis, with the use of HPLC method: Carboxy1
Sample
After reaction tret,
tret Starting material
Reaction happened
Sub1
5.93, 10.93
12.55
Yes
Sub2
3.01, 6.95
7.00
Yes
Sub3
1.977
1.977
No
Sub3 undergoes no reaction at all with the experimental setup used. This is most likely due
to the furan ring being a very stable molecule in itself. It is assumed that the mechanism of
the carboxylation is similar to a SN1 nucleophilic aromatic substitution with the elimination
of a substituted group first and then the addition of CO2 onto the ring. This could explain
the missing reactivity for Sub3 as the alcohol group is electron withdrawing, making it a
poor leaving group in a SN1 reaction. For a SN1 reaction, the better leaving groups are
the weaker bases, and OH – is a very strong base. Transferring this to electrochemistry,
the reactivity of the leaving group, probably depends on the stability of the radical formed
when leaving. With bigger radicals being the more stable ones, resulting in a reactivity
of Br > Cl > OH. This is likely the main reason that no reaction is seen for Sub3, and
22
Electrochemical carboxylation of furanics with CO2 in ionic liquids
==PAGE:28==
since no reaction was observed, no further work was done with this substrate. Both Sub1
and Sub2 show a reaction when exposed to the reaction conditions, with a qualitative
observation concluding that Sub1 is more reactive than Sub2, based on the amount of
starting material left (see chromatograms in Appendix A). The higher reactivity of Sub1 is
likely from the radical being formed on the methyl group instead of directly on the ring as
on Sub2, as the Br­radical should be more stable than the Cl­radical. On account of both
substrates reacting, both substrates are tested in ionic liquids.
4.1.1
Reduction potentials of substrates
Table 4.2: Reduction potentials of substrates used in carboxylation reactions measured
through cyclic voltammetry using a glassy carbon disc cathode and a platinum wire anode
Substrate
Abbreviation
Reduction potential [V vs SCE]
Methyl 5­(chlormethyl)­2­furoate
Sub1
­1.85
5­bromofuran­2­carboxylic acid
Sub2
­2.05
Comparing the reduction potentials of IL1­IL3 and IL6 (Table 4.3) with the reduction poten­
tials obtained for the substrates, they are all theoretically usable for the electrochemical
carboxylation. Also looking at the values for Sub1 and Sub2, a potential electrochemical
carboxylation is presumably happening through pathway 1 shown in figure 2.7, because
their reduction potentials are higher than the value, < −3 V vs. SCE, for CO2 [50]. The
expected radicalization reactions of the substrates are shown in Figure 4.2 alongside the
obtained voltammograms.
Figure 4.2: Negative end of cyclic voltammograms used to determine the reduction po­
tentials of Sub1 and Sub2, with the most likely radicalization reactions indicated at the
reduction peaks. The cyclic voltammograms were measured in an electrolyte solution of
DMF witha glassy carbon disc cathode and a platinum wire anode.
Electrochemical carboxylation of furanics with CO2 in ionic liquids
23
==PAGE:29==
The voltammogram for sub­1 shows a second reduction peak starting around −2.55 V vs.
SCE. As this reduction peak does not show for Sub­2, a reduction of the furan ring or the
oxygen in the ring can be excluded. There are two possibilities for this second reduction.
Either it is a radical being formed on the ester group opposite the alkyl halide or a further
reduction of the methyl radical, formed after the chloride has left. This could also explain
the very small peak around −1.5 V vs. SCE, which could be a polymerization of the
species being formed at the second reduction. However, this extra reduction and oxidation
shouldn’t be relevant during the carboxylation, as the first reduced species formed should
react with CO2 before being further reduced.
4.2
Characterization of ionic liquids
4.2.1
Cyclic voltammetry of solvents
The electrochemical windows (table 4.3) of IL1, IL2, IL3, and IL6 has been determined
from cyclic voltammetry (figure 4.3). The reduction and oxidation potential limits have
been determined using the linear­fit method as described by Mousavi, et. al. [70]. De­
termining the electrochemical window for ionic liquids is complex, as several factors can
impact the reduction and oxidation potentials of the ionic liquids. Those factors include
the water content, which will make the ECW narrower [71], the choice of electrodes, the
electrodes work as a catalyst during electrochemical reaction, and their different catalytic
properties towards the liquids or substrates tested might influence the reduction and/or
oxidation potential [72]. The most influential factor is the method used to ascertain reduc­
tion and oxidation potentials [70][73]. The two main methods used are either the linear­fit
method or the current cutoff method. Fairly different ECWs can be obtained using the cur­
rent cut­off method, as the cut­off current density is reported as an arbitrary value chosen
between 0.01 to 5mA·cm−2 [70][73]. Both methods were tested during this project, and it
was observed that the linear­fit method gave more consistent results due to the relatively
high scan rate used when performing CV. The scan rate of 100 mV/s meant that the data
points around the potential cut­off values were imprecise and difficult to determine. As
a result of these aforementioned factors, combined with a lack of an ionic liquid ECW
database, the values for reduction potentials, oxidation potentials, and ECWs obtained in
this project can only be references for the specific setup used.
Anions in ionic liquids usually affect the oxidation potential, with ionic liquids containing
TFSI showing higher oxidation potentials than ones with FSI [72]. This trend is not ob­
served for the ECWs determined in this project (Table 4.3) as IL2 shows a higher oxidative
potential than IL1. This can either be a consequence of some unknown interactions be­
tween the propyl group on piperidinium and FSI, stabilizing the anion, or it could simply be
that during the measurements of the CV for IL1, the oxidation potential wasn’t reached.
Looking at Figure 4.3, the latter seems more plausible. The same can be said for IL6, as
24
Electrochemical carboxylation of furanics with CO2 in ionic liquids
==PAGE:30==
Table 4.3: Negative potential limit and positive potential limits, alongside ECW for IL1­IL3
and IL6 obtained through cyclic voltammetry with a glassy carbon disc cathode and a
platinum wire anode.
Ionic liquid
Reduction limit [V vs. SCE]
Oxidation limit [V vs. SCE]
ECW [∆V]
IL1
­3.1
2.5
5.6
IL2
­3.05
2.75
5.8
IL3
­2.95
2.8
5.75
IL6
­2.6
2.5
5.1
they both share the TFSI anion with IL3, where the oxidative potential clearly has been
reached at 2.8 V vs SCE. This is not a problem, as the important part for carboxylation
is the reductive potential limit for the ionic liquids, which has been reached for IL1. The
reduction potential for IL6 might not have been reached, as the peak is broad at the end of
measuring around ­2.8 V vs. SCE, while it should be narrower. However, figure 4.3 also
shows that some reduction is happening in IL6 between −1.25 V vs. SCE and & −1.30
V vs. SCE, indicating that the ionic liquid might not be stable at the reduction potential
deduced through the Linear­fit method. This could be a hydrolysis of the ether group in­
corporated into the ring structure, as the ionic liquid contains water, small oxidation peak
around 1.2 V vs. SCE.
Figure 4.3: Cyclic voltammograms of IL1, IL2, IL3, and IL6, obtained using a glassy carbon
disc cathode and a platinum wire anode
Overall, the piperidinium­based ionic liquids (IL1, IL2, IL3) all show similar ECWs and
reduction potential limits.
They also show a higher electrochemical window than the
Electrochemical carboxylation of furanics with CO2 in ionic liquids
25
==PAGE:31==
morpholine­based one (IL6). This is most likely due to the oxygen being introduced into
the ring structure, making it easier to reduce, as this is the only structural difference be­
tween IL1 and IL6. Similarly, IL3 shows a marginally higher reduction potential when
compared to IL1 and IL2, which is probably a result of the ether group introduced as a
side group onto the cation. This kind of trend has been observed before with the cation
having been reported to influence the reduction potential the most [72]. But it could also
just be a consequence of the uncertainty introduced by the CVs being measured against
the OCP.
4.2.2
Water content of the ionic liquids
The water content for IL1­IL5 (table 4.4) after approximately two weeks of storage is in
the range of 400­1200 ppm, with IL6. Due to the nature of ionic liquids, water will always
be present. It is possible to dry the ionic liquids to a water content of < 100ppm but this
requires vacuum­drying at 90◦C for a week [74], which is not ideal conditions. Changing
the side­group on the cation from a propyl in IL1 to an ether in IL3 does increase the water
content by approximately. 100 ppm after the same drying process and storage time. This
effect is 10 times higher when comparing IL5 and IL6, where the only structural difference
is also a methyl methoxy group (on IL6) instead of the propyl group (on IL5). This was
expected because ether is more hydrophilic than an alkyl, as oxygen in the ether can link
with the hydrogens in water, but the very big increase in water uptake from IL5 to IL6
does indicate that the water absorption, like for CO2, is a physical process. Introducing
an ether group onto the morpholine base would make the ionic liquid less viscous, and
give the water two oxygen molecules to hydrogen bond instead of just the one in IL5.
Table 4.4: Water content for the synthesized ionic liquids
Ionic liquid
Water content [ppm]
IL1
410 ± 5
IL2
1013 ± 30
IL3
543 ± 11
IL4
1147 ± 24
IL5
1272 ± 17
IL6
2567 ± 71
It is also observed that the anion of the ionic liquids has a greater effect on water affinity
than the cation, as the water content of IL2 and IL4 is much higher than that of their
respective counterparts in IL1 and IL3. The water content is more than doubled from IL1
to IL2 and from IL3 to IL4. Where the only structural difference is a change in anion from
TFSI to FSI. The molecular structures can be seen in Figure 2.11. The bulkier anion in
TFSI is the more hydrophobic one of the two, as the two methane groups introduced in
26
Electrochemical carboxylation of furanics with CO2 in ionic liquids
==PAGE:32==
between the sulfur and fluor molecules give two extra hydrophobic groups to the ionic
liquid [75].
4.3
Electrochemical reaction of Methyl
5­(chlormethyl)­2­furoate (Sub1)
Two different analytical methods have been used to analyze the reaction mixtures for
carboxylation products. Table 4.5 shows the retention times for Sub1 for both of those
methods.
Table 4.5: HPLC retention times for sub1 in the two different methods used.
Compound
tret [min]
HPLC Analysis Method
Sub1
12.57
Carboxy 1
Sub1
11.98
Carboxy 2
MMF
11.44
Carbox 2
HPLC analysis (table 4.6, HPLC method 1) indicates that some of the ionic liquids do
indeed work as an alternative to an electrolyte solution of DMF and TBAP6. For IL3 and
IL6, HPLC chromatograms of reaction mixtures show the same products as the ones
obtained through reaction in DMF with TBAP6, with lower conversions. Both IL1 and
IL2 only show a peak corresponding to sub1. Without looking at the conversions, the
conclusion of this would be that no reaction is happening. However, the reactions show
a very good conversion of substrate, with IL2 showing a higher conversion than IL1.
Table 4.6: Retention time peaks for the reaction mixture after reaction
Reaction
tret,product [min]
tret,substrate [min]
conversion
Method
DMF/TBPA6
8.95, 9.26, 11.49
11.98
99.6%
carboxy 2
IL1
11.99
11.98
85.9%
Carboxy 2
IL2
12.55
12.57
91%
Carboxy 1
IL3
11.49, 12.03
11.98
81.6 %
Carboxy 2
IL5
13.99, 14.18
12.57
98.7%
Carboxy 1
IL6
10.93 12.55
12.57
N/A
Carboxy 1
The absence of a product peak could be a result of side reactions that break down
the substrate into smaller molecules that are undetectable with the MW detector, which
seems very unlikely. Instead, if a carboxylation reaction has taken place, and formed
2­[5­(methoxycarbonyl)furan­2­yl]acetic acid (MFA, Figure 4.4). It is then likely that the
produced MFA would be insoluble in ionic liquid, like FDCA and other furfural derivatives
Electrochemical carboxylation of furanics with CO2 in ionic liquids
27
==PAGE:33==
[76]. The product furanics would then be filtered out during sampling. This could explain
the high conversion even though no product is showing up in the HPLC analysis.
Figure 4.4: Chemical structure of 2­[5­(methoxycarbonyl)furan­2­yl]acetic acid
Common for all of the piperidinium­based ionic liquids (IL1­IL4) is that they generally show
a lower conversion of Sub1 when compared to the tests made in DMF with TBAP6. This is
probably a result of the ionic liquids being much more viscous than DMF, making the mass
transfer slower in ionic liquids. Even though ionic liquids can facilitate ion transport, this is
limited by mass transfer and their high viscosity compared to DMF. It is also observed that
inserting an ether onto the piperidinium cation makes very little difference in the ability to
act as an electrolyte for the ionic liquids. It was expected that the ether­functionalized ionic
liquids would show a better conversion than the propyl­functionalized ones. Because the
ether­group makes the ionic liquid less viscous, as the oxygen will repel other ether groups
and the negatively charged anion. Contrary to the propyl groups on IL1 and IL2, which
make the ionic liquids denser through intermolecular forces of London forces and Van der
Waals bonds. Suggesting that the limiting factor for electrochemical carboxylation in ionic
liquids is the mass transfer, ionic liquids that are less dense would increase the reaction
rate. Because the molecules that will react are the ones that start near the electrode
surface, they then react and can’t move through the dense ionic liquid without having the
driving factor of being charged anymore. The convection created by the magnet added
to the reaction vial is then not enough to move the bigger and bulkier furanics around.
Theoretically, this would lead to IL6 being a better electrochemical medium than IL3, due
to the oxygen in the morpholinium ring reducing density and viscosity even more. With this
not showing from the electrochemical reactions performed (table 4.6), this could be due
to the higher water content that would inhibit carboxylations and promote side reactions,
thus decreasing the faradaic efficiency.
Side reactions
An unwanted side reaction could be the exchange of the chloride on Sub1 for a hydrogen
created by the oxidation of water at the anode. The protons will have an easier time
moving around in the ionic liquid. The same side reaction can happen in DMF where
the electrolyte TBAP6 can act as a proton donor [50]. This is probably the reaction seen
at 11.49 min. for IL3 and DMF plus at 10.93 min. for IL6 as this matches the retention
28
Electrochemical carboxylation of furanics with CO2 in ionic liquids
==PAGE:34==
time of 11.44 min. for the reference compound MMF (Table XX). The marginally lower
conversions compared to the electrolyte solution of DMF could therefore be attributed to
the higher viscosity and slower mass transport of the ionic liquids. The limitations of mass
transfer can be solved through higher reaction temperatures, as this will decrease the
viscosity of the ionic liquids. Increasing the temperature has also been shown to increase
the ionic conductivity of ionic liquids based on imidazolium and pyridine [77][78][79]. The
problem with raising the reaction temperatures is that the CO2 solubility will decrease
with increasing temperatures, and probably decrease the selectivity alongside it. The
main reason for IL1 not showing any sign of forming MMF is due to its low water content
compared to the other ionic liquids. The other reaction peaks at 8.95 min and 9.26 min.
appearing in the DMF reaction are not desired products either, as NMR analysis proved
them to likely be a kind of ring­opening product.
IL5
IL5 is an outlier, most likely due to degradation of the ionic liquid. This was unexpected,
as the CV for the very similar IL6 (figure 4.3) showed that it should be somewhat stable.
The degradation could be due to a defect introduced during the synthesis of the ionic liq­
uid, as morpholine proved to be more fragile towards temperatures during synthesis than
anticipated. This could explain why IL5 shows signs of degradation after electrochemical
reaction, whilst IL6, which is very similar in structure to IL5. Although it showed a smaller
electrochemical window (table 4.3), IL6 shows no sign of degradation in the HPLC anal­
ysis. But due to the difficulties revealed for the synthesis of the two morpholine­based
ionic liquids, and their tendency to absorb more water than the piperidinium­based ionic
liquids, no further work has been done with IL5 and IL6.
Electrochemical carboxylation of furanics with CO2 in ionic liquids
29
==PAGE:35==
Potential profile
This is seen in the potential profiles for the cell during the reaction (Figure 4.5). The
potential in the cell follows Ohm’s law
V = R · I
With V being the potential, I the current, and R the resistance. The electrochemical cell
used in this project has a set potential limit of 35V, and when that is reached, the current will
drop. For IL1, the limit is reached very quickly after around 10 min., for IL3, the potential
limit is reached after approximately 1.5 hours, and the reaction in DMF is never close to
the limit. To reach the maximum potential, resistance through the solution increases, until
the limit is reached, according to Ohm’s law as the current is held constant.
Figure 4.5: Potential profiles of the potential through the cell as a function of elapsed time
during the electrochemical reactions.
IL1 and IL3 probably reaches the potential limit compared to DMF because of their higher
viscosity. Looking at the conversions in Table 4.6, nearly all of the substrate in DMF is
converted, which means that the reactants can easily move to the electrodes. Whereas
in the ionic liquids, conversion is lower, but the reaction looks very quick, especially in
IL1. Then after the initial reaction, the remaining substrate meets very strong resistance
through the liquid towards the electrodes. If it actually is a very quick reaction for IL1 that
shows no side reactions (Table 4.6), then the ionic liquid also acts as a form of catalyst,
which lowers the energy barrier and stabilizes the formed radicals, schematic illustration
shown in Figure 4.6, even better than the electrolyte system of DMF and TBAP6.
30
Electrochemical carboxylation of furanics with CO2 in ionic liquids
==PAGE:36==
Figure 4.6: Schematic illustration of ionic liquids catalyzing a reaction
4.3.1
Effect of CO2 and water
Water has been known to inhibit the carboxylation and lead to unwanted side products
[52], and as seen in Table 4.4, water is present in the ionic liquids. The exchange of the
halogen with a hydrogen could be made possible from the formation of HCO3 – during
flushing of CO2 through the ionic liquid (Figure 4.7. To examine the effect of water, when
Figure 4.7: The acid­base reaction between water and CO2
present during electrochemical reaction, water was purposely added to a DMF electrolyte
solution. The exchange could also happen between a hydrogen from TBAP6 and the
chloride. Retention times (Table 4.7) acquired through HPLC analysis indicate that wa­
ter in the reaction media does not affect the type of reaction happening, as the reaction
products have the same retention times for both with and without water. But having wa­
ter in the electrolyte solution during reaction does inhibit the desired reaction, as starting
materials are still present after the 2.5 F has been passed through, unlike after reaction
with a dry DMF solution. The presence of water does promote unwanted side reactions.
The experiments show that when excess water is present, the side reactions do not only
involve the exchange of the halide to a proton, and in general don’t involve the substrate.
This could indicate that the excess water gets split at the anode and reacts with CO2 to
Electrochemical carboxylation of furanics with CO2 in ionic liquids
31
==PAGE:37==
Table 4.7: The retention time for products obtained through electrochemical reactions of
sub1 in the DMF electrolyte solution
Reaction
tret,product [min]
tret,substrate [min]
HPLC Method
Sub1, normal
5.90, 10.92,
12.57
carboxy 1
Sub1, With water
5.90, 10.92, 12.57
12.57
carboxy 1
Sub1, WO. CO2
5.22, 10.93
12.57
carboxy 1
form C1 chemicals, or just escapes as H2 and O2, which can’t be detected in the HPLC
analysis. Surprisingly, running the reaction under inert atmosphere instead of under CO2
and flushing the reaction media with CO2 yields the same products with 100% conversion.
The two products made under inert atmosphere matches the two types of side­reaction
products obtained, a dehalogenation followed by protonation and a ring­opening. The
total conversion of the substrate shows that either sub1 will react if current is passed
through.
To examine if the reaction product, observed at 5­6 min in the HPLC chromatograms,
is from an acid­catalyzed hydrolysis/ring­opening, electrochemical reactions were per­
formed without running current through the cell. A deliberate hydrolysis of the substrate
was also performed. Comparing the retention times obtained for these experiments (ta­
ble 4.8) to the ones obtained where the current is turned on (table 4.7), it is observed
that the current is the driving factor behind the reaction happening and neither H2O or
CO2 can facilitate a reaction on their own. An acid­catalyzed hydrolysis can also be ex­
cluded, due to the HPLC analysis showing that the hydrolysis product has a retention time
of 4.041 min. (table 4.8), which doesn’t match any of the other products obtained using
electrochemistry.
Table 4.8: Retention times from HPLC analysis for reactions without current and a com­
plete hydrolysis of sub1
Reaction
tret,product [min]
tret,substrate [min]
HPLC Method
Sub1, normal
5.90, 10.92,
12.57
Carboxy 1
Sub1, W. H2O, WO current
12.58
12.57
Carboxy 1
Sub1, No Current, No CO2
12.59
12.57
Carboxy 1
Sub1, Hydrolysis in HCL
4.01
12.57
Carboxy 1
32
Electrochemical carboxylation of furanics with CO2 in ionic liquids
==PAGE:38==
4.3.2
Effect of temperature and Anode
To investigate the effect of a temperature increase, samples were made using Sub1 (Pro­
cedure B), with a reaction temperature of 70◦C in IL1. Furthermore, the samples in IL1
were used to investigate Zn as an alternative to Mg as a cathode (table 4.9). The dif­
ference in conversion is very large. As the conversion using the Mg cathode is almost
90%, with the Zn cathode giving a conversion of 41.5%. The anode for carboxylation is
often sacrificial, with the metal ions diffusing into the solution and helping to stabilize the
anionic species being formed [52]. The most used is magnesium, therefore, a cheaper
alternative in Zn could be preferable. Two things were tested with these experiments, first,
the cathode dependency shows that using the Mg cathode is much more effective than
the Zn cathode. This could be due to Mg being easier oxidizes than Zn, therefore more
Mg will be present in the solution to stabilize and counteract the negative charges of the
radicals formed.
Table 4.9: Retention times for products obtained by performing carboxylation in IL1 at
70◦C with two different Anodes.
Reaction
tret,product [min]
tret,substrate [min]
conversion
Method
Sub1, Zn Cathode
12.55
12.57
41.5%
Carboxy 1
Sub1, Mg Cathode
10.92, 12.58
12.57
89.6%
Carboxy 1
The temperature dependency can be investigated by comparing the conversions in Table
4.9 with the ones in Table 4.6. The conversion does increase slightly from 85.9% at
50◦C to 89.6% at 70◦C, but a peak at 10.92 min also emerges after reaction at the latter
temperature, indicating that the extra conversion is a result of side­reactions happening
at higher temperatures. The side reaction is most likely a consequence of the enhanced
mobility of water through the ionic liquid due to decreased viscosity.
Electrochemical carboxylation of furanics with CO2 in ionic liquids
33
==PAGE:39==
4.4
Elecrochemical reaction of 5­bromo­furoic acid (sub2)
Retention times of relevant reference compounds are shown in Table 4.10, all results
shown in this section is made with HPLC method carboxy 2.
Table 4.10: HPLC retention times for relevant reference compounds to sub2
Compound
tret [min]
HPLC Analysis Method
Sub2
9.68
Carboxy 2
FA
6.86
Carboxy 2
FDCA
4.20
Carbox 2
5­bromo­2­furoic acid has also been investigated as a possible substrate for carboxyla­
tion. HPLC analysis does show a reaction for both IL1, and IL3, with varying conversions
(table 4.11). The obtained product with a retention time of around 6.8 min. is furoic acid
(table 4.10), which is the result of a substitution between the Br­atom on the ring with a
Hydrogen. Like with Sub1, the substitution between halogen and proton is probably a con­
sequence of the water absorbed from the air into the solvent before reaction or a proton
exchange with TBAPF6. The water could also be from the substrates, or TBAP6, absorb­
ing a little bit of water when being weighed, and the cell parts themselves are stored in an
oven or vacuum chamber, but do spend time exposed to the air before use. Water could
also be introduced via the electrodes, which are washed before use, and water could stick
to the surfaces of the metals. What can be concluded is that the molecular sieves only
work to a degree, if at all. This is maybe because not enough molecular sieves are added
to the reaction solutions. In the case of the ionic liquids, it could also be a case of them
being too viscous for the molecular sieves to move around and bind the water. Even if
the water content is only traces of mass, the water concentration could easily surpass the
substrate concentration [80]. A surplus of water will inhibit any carboxylation reactions,
as seen in section 4.3.1. Like with sub1, IL1 show better conversion than IL3, what is
surprising is that the electrolyte solution of DMF and TBAPF6 show the least conversion.
This could substantiate as evidence of the ionic liquids showing catalytic properties for
the electrochemical reactions as described with Figure 4.6. Furthermore, with the results
once again showing IL1 to be the better catalyst compared to IL3, it suggests that non­
polar side groups on the cation are preferred to polar ones. This makes sense as the
more negative oxygen in the ether group is repelling the anionic radical species formed
during reaction, which needs to be stabilized by the cation in the ionic liquid. This repelling
effect could also be part of why the conversion using IL3 is lower this time as the radical
on the substrate is formed directly on the ring, eg. closer to more electronegative groups
that will pull away from the ether compared to the alkyl on IL1.
The furoic acid observed through HPLC analysis does not show up on the NMR spectra of
34
Electrochemical carboxylation of furanics with CO2 in ionic liquids
==PAGE:40==
Table 4.11: Retention times of products obtained through electrochemical reaction with
sub2
Sample
After reaction tret,
tret Starting material
Conversion
Sub2, DMF
6.91, 9.68
9.71
62%
Sub2, IL1
6.82, 9.63
9.71
87%
Sub2, IL3
6.86, 9.67
9.71
65%
samples procured from the DMF reactions. This is probably due to the extraction method,
wherein any furoic acid still present in the ionic liquid is washed out with the water. But
again, like with Sub1, the ionic liquids can act as a substitute for an electrolyte solution
using DMF.
Potential profile
Looking at the Potential profiles for the reaction of sub2 in DMf, IL1 and IL3, it is more or
less the same picture as observed for sub1. With the reaction in IL1 reaching maxmimum
potential even quicker.
Figure 4.8: Potential profiles of the cells during the reaction with sub2 in DMF, IL3 and IL1
4.4.1
Effect of CO2 for sub2 in ionic liquid
The conversion fall drastically in IL3 when CO2 are not present, this loss in conversion
is most likely from a carboxylation of the substrate not being performed. Furthermore,
a qualitative analysis of the ratio between the FA peak at 7.2 min and starting material
at 9.73 min. doubles when going from reaction without CO2 to reaction with CO2. The
fact that the FA peak is different from the other ones observed in Table 4.11, the small
change in retention is probably due the formic acid solution in the mobile weren’t made
properly and the concentration of formic acid slightly differs from the 0.1 wt%. This is not
conclusive evidence that the carboxylation happens, but it could indicate that some sort of
Electrochemical carboxylation of furanics with CO2 in ionic liquids
35
==PAGE:41==
other reaction than the production of FA is happening when CO2 is present in the reaction
solution.
Table 4.12: Retention time and conversion for electrochemical reaction in IL3 with sub3,
with and without CO2
Sample
After reaction tret,
tret Starting material
conversion
Sub2, IL3 W CO2
7.21, 9.73
9.71
65%
Sub2, IL3 WO CO2
7.22, 9.72
9.71
38%
4.4.2
Extraction test IL3
After not observing FA on the NMR analysis performed on the reaction sample it further
confirmed the suspicion that the reaction products disappeared during extraction, primarily
FA, or got filtered away from the HPLC samples, a potential carboxylation product. Com­
bined with amount of precipitate the samples showed after being left for a day (Figure
4.9), HPLC samples were taken from the water­phase and the organic­phase during the
extraction of reaction sample containing sub2 to investigate the possibility of the products
not getting into the analytical samples.
Figure 4.9: The reaction mixture of sub2 in IL1 (right) and IL (left) after 24 h
36
Electrochemical carboxylation of furanics with CO2 in ionic liquids
==PAGE:42==
The results of the extract investigation show peaks with a retention time of 7.21 min.
and 4.21 min respectively. This confirms that the Furoic acid produced probably is being
washed away with so little left in the organic phase that it can not be detected with NMR.
The peak at 4.21 min. corresponds with the reference sample made for pure FDCA. It was
observed during creation of the reference sample that FDCA was insoluble in almost any
solvent, so it is very likely that any FDCA produced are filtered out during HPLC sampling.
Table 4.13: Retention times for products extracted into the water and organic phase
Sample
tret,
Sub2, Extract, w­phase
7.21, 9.71
Sub2, Extract, org­phase
4.21, 7.22, 9.70, 12.35
Electrochemical carboxylation of furanics with CO2 in ionic liquids
37
==PAGE:43==
5
Conclusion
In this project, 6 different ionic liquids were successfully synthesized, using N­methylpiperidine
and 4­methylmorpholine as bases for the cations and [FSI] and [TFSI] as anions. The wa­
ter content for the ionic liquids was measured using Karl Fisher Titration and showed water
content ranging between 410 −2600ppm. Furthermore, the electrochemical windows of
four of the ionic liquids were measured giving values between 5.1V to 5.8V. Three different
furfural derivatives, Methyl 5­(chlormethyl)­2­furoate (sub1), 5­Bromofuran­2­carboxylic
acid (sub2), and 5­Hydroxymethyl­2­furancarboxylic acid (sub3), were tested for electro­
chemical reactivity in an electrolyte solution of DMF and tetrabutylammonium hexafluo­
rophosphate (TBAPF6), with sub1 and sub2 showing reactions. The reduction potentials
of sub1 and sub2 were determined to −1.85 V vs. SCE and −2.05V vs. SCE respec­
tively. Making them suitable for electrochemical carboxylation Electrochemical carboxyla­
tion was then attempted with two reactive substrates were then tested with two of the ionic
liquids functioning as electrolyte solution. Conversion calculations revealed that reactions
had happened, but HPLC chromatograms only showed what looks like small amounts of
side reaction or no reaction. Therefore, a sample of reaction mixture containing sub2 was
extracted in ethyl acetate and water, and a HPLC analysis of both phases were performed
revealed that the water phase could cotain the desired 2,5­furandicarboxylic acid.
38
Electrochemical carboxylation of furanics with CO2 in ionic liquids
==PAGE:44==
6
Future Work
In this project, testing showed that [PMPyrr][TFSI] and [MOMPyrr][TFSI] can function as
solvents in electrochemical reactions with very conversion of furfural derivatives. How­
ever, the reason why they work could not be elucidated by the chosen analytical methods.
The mechanism behind the reactions could be examined using cyclic voltammetry com­
bined with NMR or FTIR. Further studying the mechanism could be beneficial for designing
the ionic liquid. It could also be investigated if performing the reactions in either acidic or
basic environment will change the conversion or selectivity of the carboxylations. Another
possibility is to study mixtures of the different ionic liquids to see if it could improve con­
version/selectivity. To see if the electrochemical reactions actually are carboxylations it
would be beneficial to develop an analytical method to identify and quantify. This could be
through precipitation with water [76] or by an esterfication of the insoluble products, which
would make it possible to detect in MS or HLPC analysis [52]. When identification of the
products have been successfully performed and quantification possible, the optimum re­
action could be determined through a Design­of­experiment setup, investigating factors,
such as substrate concentration, reaction temperature, charge passed through the solu­
tion, and choice of electrodes. Lastly, it could be favorable to examine if the ionic liquids
are reusable, and how much of the ionic liquid that is lost through a cleaning process.
Electrochemical carboxylation of furanics with CO2 in ionic liquids
39
==PAGE:45==
Bibliography
[1]
American Chemical Society National Historic Chemical Landmarks. Houdry Pro­
cess for Catalytic Cracking. 2025. URL: https://www.acs.org/education/whatischemistry/
landmarks/houdry.html (visited on 07/09/2025).
[2]
John T. Boepple. “Petrochemicals, Feedstocks”. In: Kirk￿Othmer Encyclopedia of
Chemical Technology. John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, 2005. ISBN: 9780471238966. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1002/0471238961.1605201801210218.a01.pub2. eprint: https:
//onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/0471238961.1605201801210218.a01.pub2.
URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/0471238961.1605201801210218.
a01.pub2.
[3]
Statista. PET production capacity worldwide. https://www.statista.com/statistics/
242764/global-polyethylene-terephthalate-production-capacity/. Accessed: 2025­02­
03. 2020.
[4]
American Chemical Society National Historic Chemical Landmarks. 12 Principles of
Green Chemistry. https://www.acs.org/green-chemistry-sustainability/principles/12-
principles-of-green-chemistry.html. Accessed: 2025­07­09. 2013.
[5]
L.A. Pfaltzgraff and J.H. Clark. “1 ­ Green chemistry, biorefineries and second gen­
eration strategies for re­use of waste: an overview”. In: Advances in Biorefineries.
Ed. by Keith Waldron. Woodhead Publishing, 2014, pp. 3–33. ISBN: 978­0­85709­
521­3. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1533/9780857097385.1.3. URL: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780857095213500016.
[6]
Roger A. Sheldon. “Green chemistry, catalysis and valorization of waste biomass”.
In: Journal of Molecular Catalysis A: Chemical 422 (2016). Contributions of Ho­
mogeneous and Heterogeneous Catalysis in Biorefining: Special Issue in Honor of
Prof. Ulf Schuchardt, pp. 3–12. ISSN: 1381­1169. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.molcata.2016.01.013. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S1381116916300127.
[7]
Siew Ping Teong, Xiukai Li, and Yugen Zhang. “Hydrogen peroxide as an oxidant
in biomass­to­chemical processes of industrial interest”. In: Green Chem. 21 (21
2019), pp. 5753–5780. DOI: 10.1039/C9GC02445J. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1039/
C9GC02445J.
[8]
Julie B. Zimmerman et al. “Designing for a green chemistry future”. In: Science
367.6476 (2020), pp. 397–400. DOI: 10.1126/science.aay3060. eprint: https://www.
science.org/doi/pdf/10.1126/science.aay3060. URL: https://www.science.org/doi/
abs/10.1126/science.aay3060.
40
Electrochemical carboxylation of furanics with CO2 in ionic liquids
==PAGE:46==
[9]
Paul Anastas and Nicolas Eghbali. “Green Chemistry: Principles and Practice”. In:
Chem. Soc. Rev. 39 (1 2010), pp. 301–312. DOI: 10.1039/B918763B. URL: http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1039/B918763B.
[10]
Yulia H. Budnikova et al. “Electrochemistry in organics: a powerful tool for “green”
synthesis”. In: Journal of Solid State Electrochemistry 28.3 (2024), pp. 659–676.
ISSN: 1433­0768. DOI: 10.1007/s10008-023-05507-9. URL: https://doi.org/10.
1007/s10008-023-05507-9.
[11]
Najoua Sbei, Tomas Hardwick, and Nisar Ahmed. “Green Chemistry: Electrochem­
ical Organic Transformations via Paired Electrolysis”. In: ACS Sustainable Chem­
istry & Engineering 9.18 (2021), pp. 6148–6169. DOI: 10 . 1021 / acssuschemeng .
1c00665. URL: https://doi.org/10.1021/acssuschemeng.1c00665.
[12]
Jorge G. Ibanez et al. “Green Electrochemistry”. In: Encyclopedia of Applied Elec­
trochemistry. Ed. by Gerhard Kreysa, Ken­ichiro Ota, and Robert F. Savinell. New
York, NY: Springer New York, 2014, pp. 964–971. ISBN: 978­1­4419­6996­5. DOI:
10.1007/978-1-4419-6996-5_132. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4419-6996-
5_132.
[13]
Hanyu Cong et al. “Recent Advances in Catalytic Conversion of Biomass to 2,5­
Furandicarboxylic Acid”. In: Catalysts 11.9 (2021). ISSN: 2073­4344. DOI: 10.3390/
catal11091113. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/2073-4344/11/9/1113.
[14]
Silvia Mena, Jessica Sanchez, and Gonzalo Guirado. “Electrocarboxylation of 1­
chloro­(4­isobutylphenyl)ethane with a silver cathode in ionic liquids: an environ­
mentally benign and efficient way to synthesize Ibuprofen”. In: RSC Adv. 9 (26
2019), pp. 15115–15123. DOI: 10.1039/C9RA01781J. URL: http://dx.doi.org/
10.1039/C9RA01781J.
[15]
Chunlin Chen et al. “2,5­Furandicarboxylic acid production via catalytic oxidation of
5­hydroxymethylfurfural: Catalysts, processes and reaction mechanism”. In: Jour­
nal of Energy Chemistry 54 (2021), pp. 528–554. ISSN: 2095­4956. DOI: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.jechem.2020.05.068. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S2095495620304125.
[16]
Basudeb Saha et al. “Porphyrin­based porous organic polymer­supported iron(III)
catalyst for efficient aerobic oxidation of 5­hydroxymethyl­furfural into 2,5­furandicarboxylic
acid”. In: Journal of Catalysis 299 (2013), pp. 316–320. ISSN: 0021­9517. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcat.2012.12.024. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0021951712004174.
[17]
Matthew G. Davidson et al. “Production of HMF, FDCA and their derived products:
a review of life cycle assessment (LCA) and techno­economic analysis (TEA) stud­
ies”. In: Green Chem. 23 (9 2021), pp. 3154–3171. DOI: 10.1039/D1GC00721A.
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1039/D1GC00721A.
Electrochemical carboxylation of furanics with CO2 in ionic liquids
41
==PAGE:47==
[18]
Muhammad Sajid, Xuebing Zhao, and Dehua Liu. “Production of 2,5­furandicarboxylic
acid (FDCA) from 5­hydroxymethylfurfural (HMF): recent progress focusing on the
chemical­catalytic routes”. In: Green Chem. 20 (24 2018), pp. 5427–5453. DOI:
10.1039/C8GC02680G. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1039/C8GC02680G.
[19]
Haibo Yuan et al. “Biocatalytic production of 2,5­furandicarboxylic acid: recent ad­
vances and future perspectives”. In: Applied Microbiology and Biotechnology 104.2
(2020), pp. 527–543. ISSN: 1432­0614. DOI: 10.1007/s00253-019-10272-9. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00253-019-10272-9.
[20]
Basudeb Saha, Saikat Dutta, and Mahdi M. Abu­Omar. “Aerobic oxidation of 5­
hydroxylmethylfurfural with homogeneous and nanoparticulate catalysts”. In: Catal.
Sci. Technol. 2 (1 2012), pp. 79–81. DOI: 10.1039/C1CY00321F. URL: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1039/C1CY00321F.
[21]
Leandro Ardemani et al. “Solid base catalysed 5­HMF oxidation to 2,5­FDCA over
Au/hydrotalcites: fact or fiction?” In: Chem. Sci. 6 (8 2015), pp. 4940–4945. DOI:
10.1039/C5SC00854A. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1039/C5SC00854A.
[22]
Muhammad Sajid, Xuebing Zhao, and Dehua Liu. “Production of 2,5­furandicarboxylic
acid (FDCA) from 5­hydroxymethylfurfural (HMF): recent progress focusing on the
chemical­catalytic routes”. In: Green Chem. 20 (24 2018), pp. 5427–5453. DOI:
10.1039/C8GC02680G. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1039/C8GC02680G.
[23]
Tuo Ji et al. “Coupled Chemical and Thermal Drivers in Microwaves toward Ultrafast
HMF Oxidation to FDCA”. In: ACS Sustainable Chemistry & Engineering 6.9 (2018),
pp. 11493–11501. DOI: 10.1021/acssuschemeng.8b01630.
[24]
Baraa Siyo et al. “Influence of support on the aerobic oxidation of HMF into FDCA
over preformed Pd nanoparticle based materials”. In: Applied Catalysis A: General
478 (2014), pp. 107–116. ISSN: 0926­860X. DOI: https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j .
apcata . 2014 . 03 . 020. URL: https : / / www . sciencedirect . com / science / article / pii /
S0926860X14001732.
[25]
Priyanka Pal et al. “Oxidation of 5­hydroxymethylfurfural to 5­formyl furan­2­carboxylic
acid by non­precious transition metal oxide­based catalyst”. In: The Journal of Su­
percritical Fluids 160 (2020), p. 104812. ISSN: 0896­8446. DOI: https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.supflu.2020.104812. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0896844620300632.
[26]
David Carvajal et al. “Electrochemical reduction of HMF to synthesize added value
compounds using CuAg electrodes”. In: Electrochimica Acta 475 (2024), p. 143676.
ISSN: 0013­4686. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.electacta.2023.143676. URL: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0013468623018443.
[27]
Yuechao Yang and Tiancheng Mu. “Electrochemical oxidation of biomass derived
5­hydroxymethylfurfural (HMF): pathway, mechanism, catalysts and coupling reac­
42
Electrochemical carboxylation of furanics with CO2 in ionic liquids
==PAGE:48==
tions”. In: Green Chem. 23 (12 2021), pp. 4228–4254. DOI: 10.1039/D1GC00914A.
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1039/D1GC00914A.
[28]
Moritz Lukas Krebs et al. “Stabilization of alkaline 5­HMF electrolytes via Canniz­
zaro reaction for the electrochemical oxidation to FDCA”. In: Green Chem. 25 (5
2023), pp. 1797–1802. DOI: 10.1039/D2GC04732B. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.
1039/D2GC04732B.
[29]
Slobodan Petrovic. “Basic Electrochemistry Concepts”. In: Electrochemistry Crash
Course for Engineers. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2021, pp. 3–10.
ISBN: 978­3­030­61562­8. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-030-61562-8_2. URL: https://doi.
org/10.1007/978-3-030-61562-8_2.
[30]
Thomas F. Harb John N. Fuller. 1.1 Electrochemical Cells. 2018. URL: https://app.
knovel.com/hotlink/khtml/id:kt011IB4F1/electrochemical-engineering/electrochemical-
cells.
[31]
Ming Yan, Yu Kawamata, and Phil S. Baran. “Synthetic Organic Electrochemistry:
Calling All Engineers”. In: Angewandte Chemie International Edition 57.16 (2018),
pp. 4149–4155. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/anie.201707584. eprint: https://
onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/anie.201707584. URL: https://onlinelibrary.
wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/anie.201707584.
[32]
Gerardine G. Botte. “Electrochemical Manufacturing in the Chemical Industry”. In:
The Electrochemical Society Interface 23.3 (2014), p. 49. DOI: 10.1149/2.F04143if.
URL: https://dx.doi.org/10.1149/2.F04143if.
[33]
A Boudghene Stambouli and E Traversa. “Fuel cells, an alternative to standard
sources of energy”. In: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 6.3 (2002),
pp. 295–304. ISSN: 1364­0321. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/S1364- 0321(01)
00015-6. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1364032101000156.
[34]
German Gemar, Ismael P. Soler, and Eva M. Sánchez­Teba. “Waste Management:
Valorisation Is the Way”. In: Foods 10.10 (2021). ISSN: 2304­8158. DOI: 10.3390/
foods10102373. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/2304-8158/10/10/2373.
[35]
Hilmar Guzmán, Nunzio Russo, and Simelys Hernández. “CO2 valorisation towards
alcohols by Cu­based electrocatalysts: challenges and perspectives”. In: Green
Chem. 23 (5 2021), pp. 1896–1920. DOI: 10 . 1039 / D0GC03334K. URL: http : / /
dx.doi.org/10.1039/D0GC03334K.
[36]
Remko J. Detz et al. “Electrochemical CO2 conversion technologies: state­of­the­
art and future perspectives”. In: Sustainable Energy Fuels 7 (23 2023), pp. 5445–
5472. DOI: 10.1039/D3SE00775H. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1039/D3SE00775H.
[37]
Xin­Ming Hu et al. “Electrochemical valorization of captured CO2: recent advances
and future perspectives”. In: Chem. Soc. Rev. 54 (3 2025), pp. 1216–1250. DOI:
10.1039/D4CS00480A. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1039/D4CS00480A.
Electrochemical carboxylation of furanics with CO2 in ionic liquids
43
==PAGE:49==
[38]
Hilmar Guzmán, Nunzio Russo, and Simelys Hernández. “CO2 valorisation towards
alcohols by Cu­based electrocatalysts: challenges and perspectives”. In: Green
Chem. 23 (5 2021), pp. 1896–1920. DOI: 10 . 1039 / D0GC03334K. URL: http : / /
dx.doi.org/10.1039/D0GC03334K.
[39]
André Sternberg, Christian M. Jens, and André Bardow. “Life cycle assessment
of CO2­based C1­chemicals”. In: Green Chem. 19 (9 2017), pp. 2244–2259. DOI:
10.1039/C6GC02852G. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1039/C6GC02852G.
[40]
Laura Faba, Paula Rapado, and Salvador Ordóñez. “Carboxylation reactions for
integrating CO2 capture with the production of renewable monomers”. In: Green­
house Gases: Science and Technology 13.2 (2023), pp. 227–244. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1002/ghg.2175. eprint: https://scijournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.
1002/ghg.2175. URL: https://scijournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/
ghg.2175.
[41]
Laura Faba and Salvador Ordóñez. “Carboxylation reactions for the sustainable
manufacture of chemicals and monomers”. In: RSC Sustainability 2 (11 2024),
pp. 3167–3182. DOI: 10.1039/D4SU00482E. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1039/
D4SU00482E.
[42]
Man Zhao, An­Guo Wu, and Liang­Nian He. “Transition Metal­Promoted Carboxyla­
tion of Unsaturated Compounds with CO2”. In: Advances in CO2 Utilization: From
Fundamentals to Applications. Ed. by Guoliang Zhang et al. Singapore: Springer
Nature Singapore, 2024, pp. 245–285. ISBN: 978­981­99­8822­8. DOI: 10.1007/
978-981-99-8822-8_11. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-99-8822-8_11.
[43]
Jacob Davies et al. “The road to industrialization of fine chemical carboxylation
reactions”. In: Chem 7.11 (2021), pp. 2927–2942. ISSN: 2451­9294. DOI: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.chempr.2021.10.016. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S2451929421005222.
[44]
Graham R. Dick et al. “A scalable carboxylation route to furan­2,5­dicarboxylic acid”.
In: Green Chem. 19 (13 2017), pp. 2966–2972. DOI: 10.1039/C7GC01059A. URL:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1039/C7GC01059A.
[45]
Yahui Zhang, Haowen Cui, and Haian Xia. “Recent Advances in the Synthesis of 2­
Furoic Acid and 2,5­Furandicarboxylic Acid from Furfural”. In: ChemSusChem 18.3
(2025), e202401390. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/cssc.202401390. eprint: https:
//chemistry-europe.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/cssc.202401390. URL:
https://chemistry-europe.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/cssc.202401390.
[46]
E­TECH RESOURCES. What are Rare Earth Elements (REEs), where are they
found and how are they mined? https://etech-resources.com/what-are-rare-earth-
elements-rees-where-are-they-found-and-how-are-they-mined/. Accessed: 2025­07­
26. 2021.
44
Electrochemical carboxylation of furanics with CO2 in ionic liquids
==PAGE:50==
[47]
Guanfei Shen et al. “Catalytic carbonylation of renewable furfural derived 5­bromofurfural
to 5­formyl­2­furancarboxylic acid in oil/aqueous bi­phase system”. In: Molecular
Catalysis 463 (2019), pp. 94–98. ISSN: 2468­8231. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/
j . mcat . 2018 . 11 . 021. URL: https : / / www . sciencedirect . com / science / article / pii /
S2468823118304747.
[48]
Silvia Mena, Jose Peral, and Gonzalo Guirado. “Use of CO2 for electrosynthesis”.
In: Current Opinion in Electrochemistry 42 (2023), p. 101392. ISSN: 2451­9103.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.coelec.2023.101392. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S2451910323001850.
[49]
D. F. Bruggeman, M. Zwart, and A. C. Garcia. “Tailoring Electrocarboxylation Path­
ways on Lead Cathodes: Insights into Electrolysis Mode”. In: ChemElectroChem
12.4 (2025), e202400580. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/celc.202400580. eprint:
https://chemistry-europe.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/celc.202400580.
URL: https : / / chemistry - europe . onlinelibrary . wiley . com / doi / abs / 10 . 1002 / celc .
202400580.
[50]
Piret Villo et al. “Electroreductive Deoxygenative C−H and C−C Bond Formation
from Non­Derivatized Alcohols Fueled by Anodic Borohydride Oxidation”. In: Chem­
ElectroChem 10.22 (2023), e202300420. DOI: https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / celc .
202300420. eprint: https://chemistry- europe.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.
1002/celc.202300420. URL: https://chemistry-europe.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/
10.1002/celc.202300420.
[51]
Xiao­Fei Liu et al. “Recent advances in electrochemical carboxylation reactions
using carbon dioxide”. In: Green Chemical Engineering 3.2 (2022), pp. 125–137.
ISSN: 2666­9528. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gce.2021.12.001. URL: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2666952821000911.
[52]
Moo Young Lee et al. “Electrochemical Synthesis of 2,5­Furandicarboxylic Acid from
Furfural Derivative and Carbon Dioxide”. In: ACS Sustainable Chemistry & Engi­
neering 13.7 (2025), pp. 2845–2852. DOI: 10.1021/acssuschemeng.4c08861. eprint:
https://doi.org/10.1021/acssuschemeng.4c08861. URL: https://doi.org/10.1021/
acssuschemeng.4c08861.
[53]
Kazuo Sasaki et al. “Solvent Effect in the Electrochemical Reduction of p￿Quinones
in Several Aprotic Solvents”. In: Journal of The Electrochemical Society 137.8 (1990),
p. 2437. DOI: 10.1149/1.2086957. URL: https://dx.doi.org/10.1149/1.2086957.
[54]
Debora Procopio et al. “Green solvents for the formation of amide linkages”. In:
Org. Biomol. Chem. 20 (6 2022), pp. 1137–1149. DOI: 10.1039/D1OB01814K. URL:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1039/D1OB01814K.
[55]
A. Figoli et al. “Towards non­toxic solvents for membrane preparation: a review”.
In: Green Chem. 16 (9 2014), pp. 4034–4059. DOI: 10.1039/C4GC00613E. URL:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1039/C4GC00613E.
Electrochemical carboxylation of furanics with CO2 in ionic liquids
45
==PAGE:51==
[56]
Pooja Sharma, Shubham Sharma, and Harsh Kumar. “Introduction to ionic liquids,
applications and micellization behaviour in presence of different additives”. In: Jour­
nal of Molecular Liquids 393 (2024), p. 123447. ISSN: 0167­7322. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.molliq.2023.123447. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0167732223022535.
[57]
Sandip K. Singh and Anthony W. Savoy. “Ionic liquids synthesis and applications:
An overview”. In: Journal of Molecular Liquids 297 (2020), p. 112038. ISSN: 0167­
7322. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molliq.2019.112038. URL: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0167732219333719.
[58]
Gonçalo A. O. Tiago et al. “Application of Ionic Liquids in Electrochemistry—Recent
Advances”. In: Molecules 25.24 (2020). ISSN: 1420­3049. DOI: 10.3390/molecules25245812.
URL: https://www.mdpi.com/1420-3049/25/24/5812.
[59]
Rebecca K. Blundell and Peter Licence. “Quaternary ammonium and phosphonium
based ionic liquids: a comparison of common anions”. In: Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys.
16 (29 2014), pp. 15278–15288. DOI: 10.1039/C4CP01901F. URL: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1039/C4CP01901F.
[60]
Charles M. Gordon et al. “Synthesis and Purification”. In: Ionic Liquids in Synthesis.
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, 2007. Chap. 2, pp. 7–55. ISBN: 9783527621194. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1002/9783527621194.ch2. eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/
doi/pdf/10.1002/9783527621194.ch2. URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/
10.1002/9783527621194.ch2.
[61]
Ferdi Karadas, Mert Atilhan, and Santiago Aparicio. “Review on the Use of Ionic
Liquids (ILs) as Alternative Fluids for CO2 Capture and Natural Gas Sweetening”.
In: Energy & Fuels 24.11 (2010), pp. 5817–5828. DOI: 10.1021/ef1011337. eprint:
https://doi.org/10.1021/ef1011337. URL: https://doi.org/10.1021/ef1011337.
[62]
Guocai Tian. “Chapter 17 ­ Carbon dioxide capture and utilization in ionic liquids”.
In: Green Sustainable Process for Chemical and Environmental Engineering and
Science. Ed. by Dr. Inamuddin and Tariq Altalhi. Elsevier, 2023, pp. 345–426. ISBN:
978­0­323­99429­3. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-323-99429-3.00019-9.
URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780323994293000199.
[63]
Yi Zhang, Bhavik R. Bakshi, and E. Sahle Demessie. “Life Cycle Assessment of an
Ionic Liquid versus Molecular Solvents and Their Applications”. In: Environmental
Science & Technology 42.5 (2008). PMID: 18441827, pp. 1724–1730. DOI: 10 .
1021/es0713983. eprint: https://doi.org/10.1021/es0713983. URL: https://doi.org/
10.1021/es0713983.
[64]
Almudena Hospido and Héctor Rodríguez. “Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) of Ionic
Liquids”. In: Encyclopedia of Ionic Liquids. Ed. by Suojiang Zhang. Singapore: Springer
Nature Singapore, 2022, pp. 813–821. ISBN: 978­981­33­4221­7. DOI: 10.1007/
978-981-33-4221-7_54. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-33-4221-7_54.
46
Electrochemical carboxylation of furanics with CO2 in ionic liquids
==PAGE:52==
[65]
Tabbi Wilberforce et al. “Progress in carbon capture technologies”. In: Science of
The Total Environment 761 (2021), p. 143203. ISSN: 0048­9697. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.143203. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0048969720367346.
[66]
Mahinder Ramdin, Theo W. de Loos, and Thijs J.H. Vlugt. “State­of­the­Art of CO2
Capture with Ionic Liquids”. In: Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research 51.24
(2012), pp. 8149–8177. DOI: 10.1021/ie3003705. eprint: https://doi.org/10.1021/
ie3003705. URL: https://doi.org/10.1021/ie3003705.
[67]
Joan F. Brennecke and Burcu E. Gurkan. “Ionic Liquids for CO2 Capture and Emis­
sion Reduction”. In: The Journal of Physical Chemistry Letters 1.24 (2010), pp. 3459–
3464. DOI: 10.1021/jz1014828. eprint: https://doi.org/10.1021/jz1014828. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1021/jz1014828.
[68]
Taeeun Yim et al. “Synthesis and properties of pyrrolidinium and piperidinium bis
(trifluoromethanesulfonyl) imide ionic liquids with allyl substituents”. In: (2007).
[69]
Jennifer Chapman Varela et al. “Piperidinium ionic liquids as electrolyte solvents for
sustained high temperature supercapacitor operation”. In: Chem. Commun. 54 (44
2018), pp. 5590–5593. DOI: 10.1039/C8CC01093E. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1039/
C8CC01093E.
[70]
Maral P. S. Mousavi et al. “Unbiased Quantification of the Electrochemical Stability
Limits of Electrolytes and Ionic Liquids”. In: Journal of The Electrochemical Society
162.12 (2015), A2250. DOI: 10.1149/2.0271512jes. URL: https://dx.doi.org/10.
1149/2.0271512jes.
[71]
Aoife M. O’Mahony et al. “Effect of Water on the Electrochemical Window and Po­
tential Limits of Room­Temperature Ionic Liquids”. In: Journal of Chemical & Engi­
neering Data 53.12 (2008), pp. 2884–2891. DOI: 10.1021/je800678e. eprint: https:
//doi.org/10.1021/je800678e. URL: https://doi.org/10.1021/je800678e.
[72]
Maan Hayyan et al. “Investigating the electrochemical windows of ionic liquids”. In:
Journal of Industrial and Engineering Chemistry 19.1 (2013), pp. 106–112. ISSN:
1226­086X. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jiec.2012.07.011. URL: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1226086X12002353.
[73]
Paweł Gancarz, Edward Zorębski, and Marzena Dzida. “Influence of experimental
conditions on the electrochemical window. Case study on bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide­
based ionic liquids”. In: Electrochemistry Communications 130 (2021), p. 107107.
ISSN: 1388­2481. DOI: https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . elecom . 2021 . 107107. URL:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1388248121001910.
[74]
Sourav Bhowmick et al. “Structurally flexible pyrrolidinium­ and morpholinium­based
ionic liquid electrolytes”. In: Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 25 (29 2023), pp. 19815–
19823. DOI: 10.1039/D3CP01190A. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1039/D3CP01190A.
Electrochemical carboxylation of furanics with CO2 in ionic liquids
47
==PAGE:53==
[75]
Bożena Bittner, Rafal J. Wrobel, and Eugeniusz Milchert. “Physical properties of
pyridinium ionic liquids”. In: The Journal of Chemical Thermodynamics 55 (2012),
pp. 159–165. ISSN: 0021­9614. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jct.2012.06.018.
URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0021961412002509.
[76]
Amir Al Ghatta, James D. E. T. Wilton­Ely, and Jason P. Hallett. “Strategies for
the Separation of the Furanic Compounds HMF, DFF, FFCA, and FDCA from Ionic
Liquids”. In: ACS Sustainable Chemistry & Engineering 7.19 (2019), pp. 16483–
16492. DOI: 10.1021/acssuschemeng.9b03613. eprint: https://doi.org/10.1021/
acssuschemeng.9b03613. URL: https://doi.org/10.1021/acssuschemeng.9b03613.
[77]
J. Vila, L.M. Varela, and O. Cabeza. “Cation and anion sizes influence in the temper­
ature dependence of the electrical conductivity in nine imidazolium based ionic liq­
uids”. In: Electrochimica Acta 52.26 (2007), pp. 7413–7417. ISSN: 0013­4686. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.electacta.2007.06.044. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S0013468607008225.
[78]
J. Vila et al. “Temperature dependence of the electrical conductivity in EMIM­based
ionic liquids: Evidence of Vogel–Tamman–Fulcher behavior”. In: Fluid Phase Equi­
libria 242.2 (2006), pp. 141–146. ISSN: 0378­3812. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/
j . fluid . 2006 . 01 . 022. URL: https : / / www . sciencedirect . com / science / article / pii /
S0378381206000793.
[79]
Safak Bulut et al. “Temperature Dependence of the Viscosity and Conductivity of
Mildly Functionalized and Non­Functionalized [Tf2N]−Ionic Liquids”. In: ChemPhysChem
12.12 (2011), pp. 2296–2310. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/cphc.201100214. eprint:
https://chemistry-europe.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/cphc.201100214.
URL: https://chemistry- europe.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/cphc.
201100214.
[80]
Yanlan Hui and Richard D. Webster. “Absorption of Water into Organic Solvents
Used for Electrochemistry under Conventional Operating Conditions”. In: Analytical
Chemistry 83.3 (2011). PMID: 21214192, pp. 976–981. DOI: 10.1021/ac102734a.
eprint: https://doi.org/10.1021/ac102734a. URL: https://doi.org/10.1021/ac102734a.
48
Electrochemical carboxylation of furanics with CO2 in ionic liquids
==PAGE:54==
A
Appendix
A.1
HPLC Chromatograms
Figure A.1: HPLC Chromatogram of sub1 in DMF from screening
Figure A.2: HPLC Chromatogram of sub2 in DMF from screening
Figure A.3: HPLC Chromatogram of sub3 in DMF from screening
A.2
Calibration curves
A.3
NMR
Electrochemical carboxylation of furanics with CO2 in ionic liquids
49
==PAGE:55==
Figure A.4: HPLC Chromatogram of sub1
Figure A.5: HPLC Chromatogram of sub2
Figure A.6: HPLC Chromatogram of FDCA
Figure A.7: HPLC Chromatogram of Furoic acid
Figure A.8: HPLC Chromatogram of sub1 in DMF from screening
Figure A.9: HPLC Chromatogram of sub1 in IL1 using Ag electrode
50
Electrochemical carboxylation of furanics with CO2 in ionic liquids
==PAGE:56==
Figure A.10: HPLC Chromatogram of sub1 in IL1 using Zn electrode, 70C
Figure A.11: HPLC Chromatogram of sub1 in IL1 using Mg electrode, 70C
Figure A.12: HPLC Chromatogram of sub1 in IL1 using Cu electrode
Figure A.13: HPLC Chromatogram of sub1 in IL5
Figure A.14: HPLC Chromatogram of sub1 in IL6
Electrochemical carboxylation of furanics with CO2 in ionic liquids
51
==PAGE:57==
Figure A.15: HPLC Chromatogram of hydrolysis of sub1
Figure A.16: HPLC Chromatogram of sub1 in DMF with no current or CO2
Figure A.17: HPLC Chromatogram of sub1 in DMF with no CO2
Figure A.18: HPLC Chromatogram of sub1 in DMF with no current or CO2
Figure A.19: HPLC Chromatogram of sub1 in DMF with no current and extra water
Figure A.20: HPLC Chromatogram of sub1 in DMF
52
Electrochemical carboxylation of furanics with CO2 in ionic liquids
==PAGE:58==
Figure A.21: HPLC Chromatogram of sub2 in DMF
Figure A.22: HPLC Chromatogram of sub1 in DMF without CO2
Figure A.23: HPLC Chromatogram of sub1 in IL1
Figure A.24: HPLC Chromatogram of sub2 in IL1
Figure A.25: HPLC Chromatogram of sub1 in IL3
Electrochemical carboxylation of furanics with CO2 in ionic liquids
53
==PAGE:59==
Figure A.26: HPLC Chromatogram of sub2 in IL3
Figure A.27: HPLC Chromatogram of sub2 in IL3
Figure A.28: HPLC Chromatogram of sub2 in IL3 without CO2
Figure A.29: HPLC Chromatogram of organic phase from extraction
Figure A.30: HPLC Chromatogram of water phase from extraction
54
Electrochemical carboxylation of furanics with CO2 in ionic liquids
==PAGE:60==
Figure A.31: Calibration curves for internal std. dtbb and sub1, equations are shown at
the curves
Figure A.32: C­NMR (left) and H­NMR (right) of the extracted compound(s) from reaction
with sub1 in DMF
Figure A.33: HBQC NMR of the extracted compound(s) from reaction with sub1 in DMF
Electrochemical carboxylation of furanics with CO2 in ionic liquids
55
==PAGE:61==
Figure A.34: C­NMR (left) and H­NMR (right) of the extracted compound(s) from reaction
with sub2 in DMF
Figure A.35: HBQC NMR of the extracted compound(s) from reaction with sub2 in DMF
56
Electrochemical carboxylation of furanics with CO2 in ionic liquids
==PAGE:62==
Electrochemical carboxylation of furanics with CO2 in ionic liquids
57
==PAGE:63==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Kemitorvet, Building 206
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
