==PAGE:1==
Assessing the stimulated dynamic response
of cutaneous micro vasculature using OCTA
Lydia Haggard
Master Thesis
DTU Health Tech
Department of Health Technology
==PAGE:2==
Assessing the stimulated dynamic response of cutaneous micro vasculature using
OCTA
A clinical study on vasoreflexivity
Master Thesis
August, 2025
By Lydia Haggard
MSc in Biomedical Engineering
Published by:
Technical University of Denmark (DTU), Department of Health Technol­
ogy Ørsteds Plads, Building 345C, DK2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Diabetic peripheral neuropathy (DPN) is a complication of chronic hyperglycemia that ini­
tiates a cascade of metabolic, vascular, and neurodegenerative processes, leading to
progressive damage to the nerves and microvasculature in the extremities. It is a leading
cause of morbidity and mortality in diabetic patients. However, current diagnostic meth­
ods heavily rely on patient symptoms and medical history, limiting detection in the early,
asymptomatic stage. Current imaging methods cannot non­invasively quantify nerve and
microvascular damage due to their limited spatial resolution.
In this study, we combine stimulation based vasoreflexivity testing and a novel algorithm
for analyzing the skin’s reticular and papillary plexus using optical coherence tomography
angiography (OCTA) in order to determine small nerve fiber function. We recorded OCTA
scans before and after applying heat, capsaicin, histamine, and cowhage to the skin of 20
healthy participants. Our results indicate that localized heating and histamine caused a
strong, consistent vascular response while being easy to administer. These findings sug­
gest that our method could effectively asses small fiber nerve function and microvascular
integrity.
We propose that this technique is a non­invasive, label­free methods for early detection of
nerve and vascular dysfunction in diabetic patient, potentially enabling early interventions
that reduce the risk of severe outcomes.
ii
Assessing the stimulated dynamic response of cutaneous micro vasculature using OCTA
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Biological Imaging Group, Depart­
ment of Health Technology, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfil­
ment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of statistics.
All diagrams were created in BioRender.com
Acknowledgments
I would like to extend my sincere thanks to Gavrielle Untracht and Peter E. Andersen for
their invaluable supervision during my project. Their expertise, enthusiasm, and construc­
tive challenges played a crucial role in shaping this thesis.
Special thanks to Carsten Mørch and Trine Andersen from Aalborg University, their as­
sistance in answering questions and organizing the data collection process. I am also
deeply thankful to Victoria Englund­Sørensen, Emilie Brandt, Katrine Behrentzs, Stine
Frederiksen for their efforts in collecting the data.
I would also like to thank the entire BIG group for their support and creating a collaborative
and inspiring working environment.
Finally, heartfelt thanks to my friends and family for always supporting me.
Assessing the stimulated dynamic response of cutaneous micro vasculature using OCTA
iii
==PAGE:5==
Abbreviations
AIP
Average Intensity Projection
BD
Branchpoint Density
BMI
Body Mass Index
C_MIA
Mechanical insensitive C­type nerve fibers
CMH
Mechanoheat sensitive C­type nerve fibers
CNN
Convolutional Neural Network
DICOM
Digital Imaging and Communications in Medicine
DPN
Diabetic Peripheral Neuropathy
EC
Endothelial Cells
FD
Fractal Dimension
ICC
Intraclass Correlation
IoU
Intersection over union
MIP
Maximum Intensity Projection
mTort
Mean Vessel Tortuosity
OCT
Optical Coherence Tomography
OCTA
Optical Coherence Tomography Angiography
OCTAVA
OCTA Vascular Analyzer
PAR2
Proteinase activated receptors 2
PIP
Percentile Intensity Projection
PP
Papillary Plexus
QC
Quick Conducting Nerve Fibers
RP
Reticular Plexus
SC
Slow Conducting Nerve Fibers
SD­OCT
Spectral Domain OCT
SMC
Smooth Muscle Cells
T1D
Type 1 Diabetes
T2D
Type 2 Diabetes
TRPV1
Transient receptor potential channel vanilloid type 1
VAD
Vessel Area Density
iv
Assessing the stimulated dynamic response of cutaneous micro vasculature using OCTA
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Abbreviations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Context . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Study Objectives and Hypothesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2
Background
2
2.1
Diabetic Neuropathy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.2
OCTA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.3
Microvascular Vasoreflexivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3.1
Skin Anatomy and Physiology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3.2
Effect of Aging on Skin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3.3
Stimulation Treatments
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Methods
10
3.1
Study Design and Data Collection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3.2
Data Processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2.1
Reticular Plexus
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2.2
Papillary Plexus
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.3
Statistical Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3.4
Ethics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
4
Results
21
4.1
Study Demographics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4.2
Vascular Metrics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4.3
Measurement Reliability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
4.4
Key Findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
5
Discussion
28
5.1
Interpretation of Key Findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
5.2
Clinical Viability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
5.3
Strengths and Limitations of the Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
5.4
Future Directions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
6
Conclusion
32
Bibliography
33
A Appendix
38
A.1 Code Repository . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
A.2 Code Diagrams . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
A.3 Frequency Filter
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
A.4 Statistics Code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
A.5 Complete Data Table . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
A.6 Additional Figures
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
Assessing the stimulated dynamic response of cutaneous micro vasculature using OCTA
v
==PAGE:7==
vi
Assessing the stimulated dynamic response of cutaneous micro vasculature using OCTA
==PAGE:8==
1
Introduction
1.1
Context
Diabetic Peripheral Neuropathy (DPN) is a common complication of diabetes that is char­
acterized by damage to the peripheral nerves. The main symptoms of DPN are numbness,
tingling, pain, and muscle weakness [1]. DPN is a leading cause of morbidity and mortality
in diabetic patients because of an increased risk of slow­healing foot ulcers and amputa­
tions. The nerve damage triggers a feedback loop that further damages both peripheral
nerves and peripheral blood vessels [2]. Currently, there is no cure for DPN, so treat­
ments aim to prevent further damage, relieve pain, and manage complications related to
the disease [1, 3]. Early identification of biomarkers of vascular and nerve damage could
accelerate patient diagnosis and treatment, preventing more serious symptoms. How­
ever, diagnosis is based heavily on patient symptoms, physical examination, and medical
history, increasing the risk of morbidity and mortality [3].
One emerging approach to overcoming these challenges and visualizing early microvas­
cular abnormalities is Optical Coherence Tomography Angiography (OCTA). OCTA is a
non­invasive, label­free imaging technique that can visualize the microvascular system
in high resolution on the micrometer scale [4]. It could detect early biomarkers of DPN
vessel and nerve damage before symptoms begin and disease progresses.
Building on OCTA’s ability to detect microvascular changes, this study evaluates how
different stimulation treatments influence OCTA derived vascular flow metrics in healthy
adults, an essential step towards developing non­invasive assessments of small nerve
fiber function.
1.2
Study Objectives and Hypothesis
This study aims to assess the effects of different stimulation techniques on OCTA­derived
microvascular flow metrics in healthy adults, in order to further develop non­invasive small
nerve fiber function evaluation methods. The primary objectives of this study are to:
­ Determine which stimulation treatment produces the greatest change in vascular
flow metrics as measured by OCTA.
­ Identify potential biomarkers of nerve and vascular damage.
The secondary objective of this study is to:
­ Assess how age effects vascular responses.
These objectives will be achieved by comparing vascular metrics derived from OCTA en
face percentile intensity projections (PIPs) of the reticular and papillary plexuses, using
OCTAVA and a custom papillary plexus analyzer software. The primary goal of this project
is to use optimal stimulation methods and age trends to advance DPN early diagnosis.
Hypothesis
I hypothesize that heat stimulation will produce the greatest change in vascular metrics
and that vasoreflexivity biomarkers will decrease with age.
Assessing the stimulated dynamic response of cutaneous micro vasculature using OCTA
1
==PAGE:9==
2
Background
2.1
Diabetic Neuropathy
Diabetic Peripheral Neuropathy (DPN) is a common diabetes complication caused by
chronic hyperglycemia (elevated blood sugar) [5]. Chronic hyperglycemia causes a cas­
cade of metabolic, vascular, and neurodegenerative processes that preferentially damage
the nerves in the extremities [5, 6]. Risk factors for developing DPN include long­term
diabetes, advanced age, high blood pressure, metabolic syndrome, dyslipidemia (high
blood lipid levels), poor glucose control, obesity, smoking, and alcohol consumption [1,
5]. These factors interact to damage the peripheral nerves, leading to pain and sensory
loss [3].
Pathophysiology
The development of DPN is complex, involving not only chronic hyperglycemia but also
dyslipidemia, oxidative stress (type of cell damage), mitochondrial dysfunction, microvas­
cular dysfunction, and inflammation [6]. Chronic hyperglycemia causes insulin resistance,
promotes dyslipidemia, and disrupts the homeostasis of the endoplasmic reticulum and
mitochondria [1]. The endoplasmic reticulum and mitochondria are cellular components
that play a key role in protein and energy production and transport. These disruptions
cause the accumulation of reactive oxygen species, which in turn trigger oxidative stress,
inflammation, and cellular damage [7]. Elevated levels of inflammatory molecules like
cytokines promote demyelination and axonal degradation of nerves [8].
Figure 2.1: (Left) A labeled myelinated and unmyelinated neuron. (Right) A dia­
gram of the peripheral nervous system and the ”stocking and glove” presentation
of DPN highlighted in red
Microvascular dysfunction is another key contributor to DPN development [1, 6]. Diabetes
induced endothelial dysfunction leads to vasoconstriction, reducing blood and nutrient de­
livery to the peripheral nerves, exacerbating oxidative stress [9]. Capillary abnormalities,
such as increased capillary density, are found early in DPN and are associated with clin­
ical abnormalities [10]. Additionally, DPN nerves have inhibited vasodilation, limiting the
body’s ability to regulate blood flow [11]. Crucially, decreases in vasodilatory response
appear before decreases in nerve conduction velocity [6].
2
Assessing the stimulated dynamic response of cutaneous micro vasculature using OCTA
==PAGE:10==
Diagnosis
DPN is common: 40­60% of type 2 diabetes (T2D) patients and 20­30% of type 1 diabetes
(T1D) patients develop it over their lifetime [5, 12, 6]. The average age of a DPN patient
is 65 [12]. Current diagnosis relies on clinical history and physician examination, both of
which rely on the patient having symptoms [5]. In atypical cases and research environ­
ments, nerve conduction studies, and epidermis nerve fiber density tests can be done [5,
3]. However, nerve conduction studies do not detect small fiber neuropathy, and nerve
fiber density testing requires an invasive punch biopsy of the skin [3]. An potential alter­
native is corneal confocal microscopy, which has been used as a noninvasive diagnostic
method in research settings to detect corneal small fiber loss in patients with both early
and established DPN [13, 14]. Currently approved diagnostic methods are not sensitive
enough for early diagnosis, which could improve patient prognosis [3].
Treatment
No current treatment can stop or reverse DPN [6]. Glucose control slows DPN progres­
sion in T1D patients, but not T2D patients [3]. DPN treatment is focused on symptom
management and pain relief [5]. Early lifestyle changes and treatments have the poten­
tial of slowing DPN progression, making early diagnosis critical [3].
2.2
OCTA
Optical coherence tomography (OCT) creates high­resolution cross sections of biological
tissues using backscattered light. Conceptually, it is similar to ultrasound: light is sent
into the tissue and the time delay and intensity of backscattered near­infrared light, rather
than sound, create the signal [15]. While ultrasound penetrates deeper into tissue, the
resolution of OCT is one to two orders of magnitude higher than conventional ultrasound,
with an axial resolution of 1­15 μm and an imaging depth of 1­2 mm in scattering tissue
[15]. OCT’s high resolution opens the door to many interesting applications that traditional
medical imaging is too coarse to visualize, like analyzing the microvasculature using opti­
cal coherence tomography angiography (OCTA) [16]. OCTA uses motion­based contrast
to separate moving tissues, like blood, from static ones.
Figure 2.2: A SD­OCT where interference is measured with a spectrometer.
Longer time delays cause higher frequency signals. Reproduced from Fujimoto
et Al. [15].
Fundamentals of OCT
OCT is based on low­coherence interferometry. Light from a broadband source, which
emits a continuous spectrum of wavelengths, is divided into a reference path and a sample
Assessing the stimulated dynamic response of cutaneous micro vasculature using OCTA
3
==PAGE:11==
path (Figure 2.2). The sample path light enters the tissue and reflects and backscatters
Figure 2.3: A 1D ”A scan”, 2D ”B scan”, and 3D ”C scan” and their scan paths.
Reproduced from Fujimoto et Al. [15].
depending on the tissue’s internal microstructure. After interacting, the sample path and
reference path recombine, generating an interference signal. Interferometry is based on
the principle that the time delay of the reference light is known and fixed. Therefore,
interference only occurs when the optical path length, and therefore the time delays of the
sample and reference arms, match. In spectral domain OCT (SD­OCT), this interference
is recorded for many wavelengths simultaneously and transformed via Fourier analysis to
resolve depth information across all axial positions (depths) simultaneously.
An axial scan or ”A scan” represents the backscattered light intensity as a function of
depth along a single line of sight into the tissue [15]. Transverse scanning is used to
generate a 2D ”B scan”, or “slice” from multiple A scans (Figure 2.3). Raster scanning
creates multiple B scans, which can be combined to create a 3D ”C scan” or ”volume”
[15].
OCTA
OCT angiography (OCTA) is based on the principle that the reflected and backscattered
light from static tissues is relatively constant, while moving tissues, like blood, will change
over time [4]. Repeated B scans are taken in the same location, and flow magnitude is
located based on the differences between the scans (Figure 2.4).
The interscan time is the time it takes the instrument to take a scan and return to its original
position. Interscan time determines how sensitive the instrument is to noise, with longer
interscan times being more sensitive to slower blood flow, but also “bulk” motion, which
can obscure the signal [4]. The interscan time is tuned to capture a range of blood flows
[4].
OCTA is limited to small fields of view due to the processing time required to take multiple
A scans of every location. Additionally, OCTA signals have a limited dynamic range, and
their appearance is highly dependent on the specific instrument and software used to
create an image [4]. Despite its limitations, OCTA is a label­free (no added stains or
dyes), high­resolution imaging method that can provide quantitative information on the
vascular system [4].
Intensity Projections
OCTA data can be visualized in a variety of ways, from looking at individual B scans to
4
Assessing the stimulated dynamic response of cutaneous micro vasculature using OCTA
==PAGE:12==
Figure 2.4: The differences between repeated B scans (N1­3) are used to detect
flow and create an en face projection. Reproduced from Spaide et Al. [4].
3D renders of the vascular plexus [4]. In this study, the data will primarily be analyzed
in the form of B scans and intensity projections. Intensity projections are a type of en
face projection, where instead of looking at the surface or a depth slice of the skin, the
maximum, average, or percentile is taken for each A scan (Figure 2.5). This process
projects the vessels onto a flat image and makes small vessels more visible, and is a
more familiar view to clinicians. However, intensity projections are sensitive to noise due
to outlier pixels.
Figure 2.5: A percentile intensity projection (PIP), maximum intensity projection
(MIP), and average intensity projection (AIP) with their corresponding intensity
histograms. The MIP has a characteristic intensity spike at the maximum inten­
sity.
Assessing the stimulated dynamic response of cutaneous micro vasculature using OCTA
5
==PAGE:13==
Maximum intensity projections (MIP) are the most common projection method, selecting
the brightest pixel in a column. While MIPs are good at preserving faint signals, they are
particularly sensitive to noise from high­intensity outliers (Figure 2.5). Average intensity
projections (AIP) reduce noise, but also obscure small vessels [4]. Percentile intensity
projections (PIP) are a novel projection method, where a specific percentile, like the 99th,
is taken instead of the maximum. This approach reduces noise while preserving small
vessels. Given that blood vessel diameters are typically 31­70 µm, and pixels in this study
are 4.4 µm each, vessels are multiple pixels wide [17]. This means that by selecting
an optimal percentile, noise from outliers can be removed without losing small vessel
definition.
2.3
Microvascular Vasoreflexivity
2.3.1
Skin Anatomy and Physiology
The skin acts as a barrier against foreign materials, ultraviolet light, and infection while
also serving as a significant sensory organ, regulating temperature, and maintaining fluid
homeostasis [18]. This barrier consists of three layers: the epidermis, dermis, and hypo­
dermis (also known as the subcutis layer). The epidermis protects the body with stacked
layers of keratin­producing cells. The dermis is made of fibroblasts and collagen, which
strengthen and elastify the skin, while the subcutaneous layer contains more fat cells and
fewer fibroblasts [18]. Skin’s thickness varies by body region and the thickness of the
epidermis and dermis layers, with the soles of the feet and palms being the thickest (see
Table 2.1) [18].
Figure 2.6: A diagram of the skin with the layers of the skin and the vascular
layers and nerves labeled.
The dermis is fully vascularized, while the epidermis is unvascularized. Vessels are es­
sentially hollow tubes lined with endothelial cells (ECs). Arterioles have three layers: an
intima made of ECs, surrounded by a media made of smooth muscle cells (SMCs), and
an adventitia containing connective tissue like cells [18]. Venules have a similar struc­
6
Assessing the stimulated dynamic response of cutaneous micro vasculature using OCTA
==PAGE:14==
Table 2.1: The size range of skin layers and components. Arterioles and venules narrow
as they approach the capillary loops [18, 19].
Skin Layer
Thickness
Vasculature
Diameter
Epidermis
60 ­ 600 μm
Capillary
8 ­ 10 μm
Dermis
1000 ­ 4000 μm
Venules
10 ­ 200 μm
Subcutis
5000 ­ 20000 μm
Arterioles
10 ­ 100 μm
ture, but they have a larger diameter lumen and a thinner SMC layer. Capillaries only
have an EC layer and a basement membrane. The microvascular system perfuses the
skin with blood and nutrients. The blood flow velocity is determined by the ECs signaling
SMCs, which control the vessel lumen size and the vessel’s resistance to dilation [18].
The ECs synthesize both vasoconstrictors and vasodilators, which constrict and dilate
SMCs, respectively.
The skin senses external stimuli through afferent nerves and responds to these sen­
sations using efferent nerves, which, when activated, release neuropeptides (signaling
molecules) that initiate vascular and inflammatory responses [18]. The skin’s dense and
region specific nervous system spans all three layers. Sensations like burning, pain, pru­
ritus (itch), warmth, and touch are transmitted by C­type nerve fibers which, are unmyeli­
nated, slow­conducting fibers found in the epidermis[18]. In contrast, Aδ fibers are thinly
myelinated nerve fibers which transmit pain, pressure, and cold sensed in the dermis [18].
The vasoreflexivity of the microvascular system represents the ability of the body to react
to changes in stimuli using vasoconstriction and vasodilation. The skin’s blood flow is
typically 250­300 mL/min, but can vary from nearly zero to 6­8 L/min [18].Vasoreflexiv­
ity is essential for wound healing, thermoregulation, controlling inflammatory responses,
and protection against ischemia. This responsiveness is mediated by a complex interplay
between the nervous system, endothelial signaling, and smooth muscle activity. Dys­
regulation of this process can lead to chronic inflammation, tissue hypoxia, and impaired
healing. In diabetic micropathology, the loss of normal vasoreflexivity behavior contributes
to poor wound healing and increased risk of infection [18].
2.3.2
Effect of Aging on Skin
Aging is associated with a loss of myelinated and unmyelinated nerve fibers, nerve de­
myelination, and axonal atrophy [20]. This causes a decrease in nerve conduction ve­
locity, muscle strength, sensory discrimination, autonomic responses, and endoneurial
blood flow [20]. These age­related changes do not progress linearly, but instead increase
in severity after the age of 60 and 80 [20].
The epidermis thins with age, the vessels in the skin decrease in density, and are irreg­
ular and disorganized [21, 22, 23]. People over 65 experience a significant increase in
vascular aging, as well as an increase in blood pressure, which causes the vascular walls
to stiffen and reduces vessel and capillary loop density [23]. This decreases the blood
supply to the skin and is related to a decrease in the total fibroblast population in the
dermis [21]. The age­associated nerve damage contributes to a decreased vasodilation
response to stimuli [20, 24].
2.3.3
Stimulation Treatments
The stimulation treatments using in this study all have a broadly vasodilatory effect. An
overview of the treatments is shown in Table 2.2.
Assessing the stimulated dynamic response of cutaneous micro vasculature using OCTA
7
==PAGE:15==
Table 2.2: The stimulation treatments used in this study and their tissue targets and main
sensation. The waiting time is how long they were applied before the post­treatment
recordings were taken.
Targets
Sensation
Peak
Time
Capsaicin
Smooth muscle receptors and afferent C­
type nerve fibers and Aδ nerve fibers
Burning
30 min
Cowhage
Unmyelinated
C­type
fibers,
non­
histaminergic
Itch
5 min
Heat
Smooth muscle receptors, afferent C­type
nerve fibers and Aδ nerve fibers
Warmth
20 min
Histamine
Unmyelinated C­type fibers and Aδ nerve
fibers
Itch
15 min
Heat
Local heating­induced vasodilation is primarily caused (up to 90%) by sympathetic active
vasodilator nerves, a subset of the nervous system that responds to stressful, threatening,
or high demand situations [25, 26]. This neurogenic (controlled by the nervous system) di­
lation involves a complex process with many vasodilation signaling molecules. Aδ fibers,
which are lightly myelinated and fast conducting, contribute to the initial fast phase of the
vasodilatory response to heat, potentially triggering protective reflexes [25]. Conversely,
C­type nerve fibers, which are unmyelinated and slow, sustain vasodilatation during pro­
longed local heating and help the body thermoregulate [25]. SMCs are not only the end
targets of these neural signals, but also actively sense and respond to stimuli using their
own receptor pathways [25].
Aging is associated with decreased reflex vasodilation due to attenuated sympathetic ner­
vous system activity, reduced vascular tone, and impaired signaling [27, 28].
Capsaicin
Topical capsaicin is clinically used to alleviate arthritic and neuropathic pain [29, 30]. It
produces a painful burning sensation by selectively activating transient receptor potential
channel vanilloid type 1 (TRPV1), particularly in unmyelinated C­fibers, which respond to
heat, pain, acidity, and chemical irritants [31]. Additionally, capsaicin activation of TRPV1
stimulates the release of CGRP, a potent vasodilator, and other neurotransmitters asso­
ciated with vascular regulation and antihypertensive effects [31].
Histamine
Histamine is a chemical released from mast cells when tissues are inflamed or stimulated
by allergens which excites two subsets of C­type nerve fibers [32, 18]. Mechanical in­
sensitive nerve fibers (CMIA) are activated by histamine via 4 types of histamine receptor
and the TRPV1 signaling pathway [32], Additionally, Aδ fibers and mechano­heat sensi­
tive C­type nerve fibers (CMH) which express TRPV1 in the presence of histamine are
activated. The presence of capsaicin or localized heating can ”override” the itch caused
by histamine [18, 32].
Cowhage
Cowhage is a tropical legume with spicules, small needle­like spines, which cause a non­
histaminergic itch reaction [33]. Cowhage spicules are 1­2 mm long and have a diameter
of 1­3 µm at the spine’s tip [34]. The spicules release mucunain upon contact with the
8
Assessing the stimulated dynamic response of cutaneous micro vasculature using OCTA
==PAGE:16==
skin, which activates proteinase activated receptors 2 (PAR2) on C fibers and causes a
strong ”itch without a flare” sensation. The CMH nerve fibers used to signal cowhage
induced itch are separate from the CMIA nerve fibers used to signal histamine induced
itch [35]. The brain signal processing of cowhage and histamine itch in healthy subjects
is similar, but not identical [35].
Figure 2.7: Sensory nerve fibers involved in itch transmission. Polymodal noci­
ceptors sense many types of stimuli. Reproduced from the 9th Edition of Fitz­
patrick’s Dermatology [18].
Assessing the stimulated dynamic response of cutaneous micro vasculature using OCTA
9
==PAGE:17==
3
Methods
3.1
Study Design and Data Collection
Aalborg University collected the data for this study, which was a subproject of ”Optical
imaging for investigation and early diagnosis of neuropathy and microvascular dysfunc­
tion in diabetes ­ The optical skin biopsy study” [34]. This subproject is a clinical trial
investigating the effect of different types of nerve stimulation methods on healthy adults.
Twenty healthy participants were recruited for the study through notices at Aalborg Uni­
versity, on www.forsog.dk, on Facebook, and in the press [34]. The participants’ age,
sex, height, and weight were recorded. Each participant’s body mass index (BMI) was
calculated from their height and weight.
Figure 3.1: (Left) The marked areas on the volar forearm where A1­4 are treat­
ment areas and P1­2 are control areas. (Right) A participant is seated with the
forearms facing up and resting on a pillow on a table.
Participants were seated with their volar forearm resting facing up (Figure 3.1). Two 5 x 5
cm areas were drawn on each forearm using a marker as shown in Figure 3.1. The area
between the marked squares was designated as a control area. At each site, 3­5 con­
secutive OCTA recordings were taken using the VivoSight Dx. Then histamine, cowhage,
capsaicin, and local heat were applied to the sites. The order and site of application were
randomized by balanced block randomization. After 15, 5, 30, and 20 minutes, respec­
tively, an additional 3­5 consecutive OCTA recordings were taken at each site.
The heat is applied using a thermal probe (moorVMS­HEAT skin heater controller, Moor
Instruments, UK), the cowhage spicules are rubbed into the skin, and capsaicin is applied
topically using a patch. Histamine is delivered using a skin allergy prick lancet with a 1
mm shouldered tip [34].
The study was conducted between March 3rd and July 1st of 2025.
10
Assessing the stimulated dynamic response of cutaneous micro vasculature using OCTA
==PAGE:18==
Vivosight Dx System
All of the OCTA scans were acquired using a commercially available Vivosight Dx (Michel­
son Diagnostics Ltd, Maidstone, Kent, UK). The Vivosight has a 6 x 6 mm field of view
with 1.5 mm of penetration depth in skin [36, 17]. System specifications are listed in Table
3.1. The scan files were saved as structural (intensity) and dynamic (flow) Digital Imaging
and Communications in Medicine (DICOM) file pairs along with an image of the scanned
region of skin.
Table 3.1: Technical specifications for the Vivosight Dx. [36]
Specifications
Model
Vivosight Dx
Manufacturer
Michaelson Diagnostics Ltd.
OCT System Type
Multi­beam Swept­source SD­OCT
Central Wavelength
1305 ± 10 nm
Bandwidth
140 nm
Field of View (mm)
6 mm x 6 mm
Field of View (pixels)
1355 x 1355
Imaging Depth
1 ­ 2 mm
Axial Resolution
5.5 μm
Lateral Resolution
7.5 μm
Imaging Speed
20 kHz
Interscan Time
3.5 ms
3.2
Data Processing
Scans were excluded if they had incomplete scan information (such as the scan area),
incomplete scans, or motion artifacts covering more than 50% of the scan area.
3.2.1
Reticular Plexus
The reticular plexus (RP) of the OCTA recordings was analyzed using OCTA Vascular An­
alyzer (OCTAVA). Percentile intensity projections (PIPs) were generated from the OCTA
recordings.
Percentile Intensity Projection Generation
Python was used for all processing steps. The main steps are summarized in Figure 3.2.
Initial Input
Extract DICOM 
pairs
Surface 
Cleaning
Flatten
Crop
np.percentile
Resize and 
Interpolate
Normalize
Save as 8bit
Final Output
Reticular 
Plexus MIP
Raw Vivosight 
Data
Crop Depth
Percentile
Figure 3.2: A flowchart of the simplified PIP generation steps.
First, the recording folders were checked to make sure both the intensity and flow files
were present. The DICOM files were read using Pydicom to extract pixel data.
Assessing the stimulated dynamic response of cutaneous micro vasculature using OCTA
11
==PAGE:19==
Figure 3.3: An original intensity slice (left) and its vertical gradient (right).
Next, the surface of the skin was detected in the intensity file using a 1D vertical gradient.
The maximum gradient corresponds to the surface because of the intensity difference be­
tween the surface reflected light and the background. To remove hairs and other surface
artifacts, all pixels above the detected surface were masked.
Figure 3.4: An intensity and flow slice with the surface marked in red.
Following surface detection, the flow image was flattened by aligning the pixel columns of
the slices based on the detected surface index. Finally, the PIP was generated by defining
a depth range for the region of interest. In this case, the area of interest is set at 250­350
μm, as has previously been used for the RP [37]. For each pixel column, the percentile
intensity was calculated along the specified depth range to construct the PIP. This process
was repeated for every slice in the image.
Figure 3.5: An example percentile intensity projection (PIP).
Finally, interpolation was used to resize the image back to a square format, matching the
original 6 × 6 mm field of view.
Percentile Intensity Projection Optimization
Decreasing the PIP percentile reduces the amount of noise; however, it also reduces the
visibility of small vessels. The optimal settings for this dataset and application were deter­
mined using a percentile optimization code that maximizes ”vesselness” while minimizing
high­intensity noise. The optimization steps are summarized in Figure 3.6. Five OCTA
12
Assessing the stimulated dynamic response of cutaneous micro vasculature using OCTA
==PAGE:20==
Initial Input
Extract DICOM 
pairs
Surface 
Cleaning
RP PIP Slicer
Calculate 
Entropy
Calculate 
Vesselness
Calculate IoU
Set Percentile
 Normalize 
Scores
Calculate 
Linear 
Percentile Bias
Generate 
Quality Score
Max Quality 
Score
Final Output
Average Best 
Percentile
Increase 
Percentile
Raw Vivosight 
Data
Baseline 
Masks
Percentile 
Search Range
Function
For Loop 
Incrementer
Decision
For Loop 
Initialization
Key
Figure 3.6: A flowchart with the simplified PIP optimization steps.
recordings and their manual segmentation were used for optimization. Manual segmenta­
tion of the PIPs was performed using Matlab’s Image Labeler App [38]. The same process
as in PIP generation is used to extract and clean the surface of the DICOM pairs. Then,
the DICOM pixel arrays are converted into PIPs using varying percentile thresholds
The PIP is evaluated first by calculating its ”vesselness”, a confidence map indicating
vessel­like structures, using a Sato filter. Vesselness (also known as ridge­dectection)
filters using information like the second derivative or eigen value analysis to detect tubular
structures automatically [39]. A Sato filter was used because, during testing, it provided
stronger vessel enhancement and fewer false detections in small and low­contrast vessels
than a Frangi or Meijering filter [39]. The vesselness map is thresholded to generate a
binary vessel mask, which is then compared to the manually segmented baseline mask
using the intersection over union (IoU). IoU quantifies how similar two image masks are.
Next, the entropy of the PIP is calculated as a reference­free proxy for image noise. Unlike
traditional noise metrics, which require comparison against an ”ideal” or noiseless image,
entropy quantifies the complexity or randomness within the image itself [40]. Higher en­
tropy indicates increased noise or structural uncertainty.
Afterwards, the percentile is increased and the whole process is repeated for the specified
Assessing the stimulated dynamic response of cutaneous micro vasculature using OCTA
13
==PAGE:21==
Figure 3.7: Example optimizer outputs for a PIP: Sato filter vessel map and mask,
entropy map, and the quality score plotted across percentile thresholds. The
quality score formula is: Quality Score = Entropyn −Vesseln + Percentile Bias.
percentile search range. The entropy and vessel scores are normalized into Z scores for
better comparison. A Z score is the number of standard deviations a number is from
the mean. A linear percent bias counteracts the quality score’s tendency to go to the
minimum of the search range. The percentile with the average maximum quality score
was selected. For this study, the best percentile was 97%.
OCTAVA
OCTAVA generates quantitative vascular metrics for the PIPs. OCTAVA is an open­source
toolbox that automates the preprocessing, segmentation, and data analysis of RP PIPs
[17, 37]. The program characterizes the microvasculature of RP images using binarization
and skeletonization followed by feature identification and statistical analysis [37]. The RP
vascular metrics used in this project are shown in Table 3.2. The metrics were chosen
based on a previous literature review by Untracht et al. [37].
Table 3.2: Selected OCTAVA metrics. Adapted from [37].
Metric
Unit
Description
Vessel area density (VAD)
%
Percentage of area with blood vessels
Total vessel length
µm
Total length of blood vessels measured along the vessel centerline
Mean vessel diameter
µm
Mean diameter of each blood vessel
Fractal dimension (FD)
1
Method of calculating shape complexity
Branchpoint density (BD)
nodes/mm2
Number of identified branches on a vessel divided by the tVL
Mean tortuosity (mTort)
1
Measure of how ”twisted” the vessel is.
OCTAVA Setting Optimization
OCTAVA’s twig size and frangi filter range are selected by the user [37]. Twig size is the
minimum size that is considered a vessel feature. The range of a frangi filter determines
how connected components need to be, with larger ranges corresponding to features
needing to be more connected to be considered vessels.
The optimal settings for this dataset were determined by manually segmenting the ves­
sels in 5 random PIPs from the dataset, then comparing the VAD to a range of settings.
The dataset was processed using the settings with the closest VAD to the manual seg­
mentation. I used a twig size of 20 and a (1, 4) frangi filter range.
14
Assessing the stimulated dynamic response of cutaneous micro vasculature using OCTA
==PAGE:22==
Figure 3.8: Effect of filter size (left) and twig size (right) on vessel area density
(VAD) compared to the manually calculated baseline. The selected setting is
highlighted in orange.
3.2.2
Papillary Plexus
I designed an algorithm which isolates and analyzes the papillary plexus based on previ­
ous work by Grønbeck et al. [41]. The Papillary Plexus Analyzer focused on biomarkers
related to the epidermis and capillary loops in the PP. Capillary loops produce a fainter
signal due to their relatively slower blood flow compared to larger vessels. To isolate the
weaker signal from the capillary loops, a segmentation model was trained to separate the
papillary plexus from the reticular plexus. The papillary plexus flow DICOM was then used
to generate and analyze a PP PIP. Batch processing and tensors were used to reduce
processing time per image.
Input 
Image
Output 
Segmentation
460 x 1355
1
32
32
64
64
32
2
460 x 1355
2
Key
Conv 3x3, Batch Normalization, 
ReLU, Droupout
Max pool 2x2
Up-​conv 2x2
Copy and crop
Conv 1x1
Resize and 
Interpolate
128
128
32+32
16+16
32
256
128
460 x 1355
115 x 338
115 x 338
230 x 677
230 x 677
57 x 169
57 x 169
128+128
114 x 338
114 x 338
456 x 1352
460 x 1355
456 x 1352
228 x 676
228 x 676
Figure 3.9: The U­Net architecture with the image size after every convolution.
Assessing the stimulated dynamic response of cutaneous micro vasculature using OCTA
15
==PAGE:23==
Segmentation Model
I created a U­Net convolutional neural network (CNN) to segment the papillary plexus. U­
Nets, developed for image segmentation tasks, typically outperform other types of CNNs
at pixel­wise segmentation [42]. The network design is U­shaped, with an encoder block,
a bottleneck, and a decoder block (Figure 3.9). The encoder uses convolution and max
pooling to decrease the spatial dimensions of the image while learning the image’s fea­
tures. The decoder uses convolution and up­convolution to upsample the resulting feature
map to produce a segmentation map that is the size of the original image. U­Net’s use
skip­connections to combine high­level features with low­level spatial details, improving
segmentation accuracy [42].
Our U­Net has four convolutional layers as shown in Figure 3.9. In this model, we also
incorporated batch normalization and dropout. Batch normalization normalizes the output
of each convolutional layer to stabilize training [43]. Dropout randomly disables neurons
during training to reduce model overfitting [44].
Model Training
Datasets with a ”ground truth”, also known as an annotated image, are needed to train
CNNs. However, large expert­annotated datasets are rare in medical image analysis [45].
For this project, I manually annotated binary segmentation masks using Matlab’s Image
Labeler. The papillary plexus was marked as shown in Figure 3.10. A subset of the masks
was reviewed by an expert for validation.
Figure 3.10: An example center slice of an OCTA recording (left) and its hand
drawn mask (right).
During training, the randomly initialized U­Net predicts a mask, which is compared to the
ground truth. The difference between the predicted and ground truth masks, is quantified
using a loss function. The model’s weights are iteratively updated to minimize this loss.
For this project, we used Dice Loss as the loss function and the ADAM optimizer for weight
updating.
Dice scores quantify the overlap between the predicted mask and the ground truth mask.
They range from 0 (no overlap) to 1 (perfect overlap). Dice loss, derived from the Dice
score, measures dissimilarity instead and performs well in segmentation tasks with class
imbalances.
Raw Vivosight 
Data
Initial Input
Segmentation 
Model
Final  Output 
Model Trainer
Extract 
Intensity and 
Flow Images
 Intensity DICOM
Flow DICOM
Extract 
Images Center 
Slice
Hand Draw 
Epidermis 
Mask
Randomly 
Select Dataset
Surface 
Cleaning
Background 
Removed 
Intensity DICOM
Epidermis Masks
Figure 3.11: A simplified flow chart of the steps to create the annotated dataset.
To assess the effect of dataset size, 120 OCTA recordings were annotated. Training was
done with random subsets of 20, 60, 80, and 120 images. Model accuracy increased with
16
Assessing the stimulated dynamic response of cutaneous micro vasculature using OCTA
==PAGE:24==
Figure 3.12: (Left) The effect of dataset sizes on mean dice score (Right) The
effect of batch size and learning rate on the mean dice score.
the dataset size, but with diminishing returns beyond 80 images (Figure 3.12). The final
dataset of 120 images was partitioned into training (80%), validation (10%), and testing
(10%) sets.
Hyperparameter optimization was performed to optimize the Dice score, and thereby ac­
curacy of the model. Models were trained using different learning rates (how much the
model weights are updated) and the batch sizes (number of training images processed si­
multaneously). Lower learning rates and batch sizes produced higher Dice scores (Figure
3.12).
Figure 3.13: The ground truth mask, predicted mask and error map for three
images from the testing set.
The six models with the highest Dice scores were further evaluated qualitatively. Predicted
masks were compared against ground truth masks using error maps on the testing set
(Figure 3.13). Based on a visual inspection of the error maps, the final model was selected
with a learning rate of 0.0006, a batch size of 2, and a Dice score of 0.926. This model’s
segmentation qualitatively had the highest quality masks, with no missing regions.
Assessing the stimulated dynamic response of cutaneous micro vasculature using OCTA
17
==PAGE:25==
Papillary Plexus Analyzer
The first steps of the PP Analyzer algorithm (Figure 3.14) are similar to the PIP Generation
algorithm (See Figure 3.2).
Data Manager
Surface 
cleaning
Predict and 
Save Masks
Find Mask 
Boundaries
PIP 
Optimization
Identify 
Capillary 
Loops
Calculate 
Capillary 
Metrics
Initial Input
PP Masks
Capillary 
Mask
 Epidermis
Boundaries
Capillary PIP
Function
Key
Function Output
Final Output 
Calculate 
Epidermis 
Metrics
Analyzer 
Output
Raw Vivosight 
Data
Segmentation 
Model
Metrics Excel 
File
Figure 3.14: The simplified flow chart of the PP Analyzer algorithm. An complete
flow chart is in Appendix A.2.
Next the trained U­Net is used to segment the papillary plexus in every slice of the OCTA
image. The upper and lower boundaries are then detected and used to separate the
papillary plexus from the reticular plexus. At this point the mean epidermal thickness was
calculated.
Figure 3.15: (Left) PIP objects colored by size (Center) Histogram of objects size
(Right) Histogram of PP PIP intensity.
The PP OCTA recording is then used to generate a PP PIP. A similar PIP optimization
algorithm is used, but instead of vesselness and entropy, objects are labeled and cate­
gorized by size. Objects are categorized as noise (<1.5 μm), capillaries (1.5­14 μm), or
artifacts (>14 μm) based on their area. The code seeks to minimize the amount noise and
artifacts while maximizing the number of capillaries (Figure 3.15). The best percentile was
100%.
After PIP generation, vertical and horizontal motion artifacts were removed using a fre­
quency mask (see Appendix A.3). Subsequently, objects within the PIP were labeled. To
distinguish capillary loops from noise, objects that were irregular in shape, excessively
large or small, or too faint were excluded. Since capillary loops typically appear as dot­
like structures when viewed from above, only relatively circular dots were classified as
capillaries. Finally, the filtered PIP was converted into a binary mask
Following identification the total number of capillary loops their area, diameter, and density
was calculated and stored to an excel file (see Table 3.3). Additionally, the center slice
epidermis mask, PP PIP, capillary mask, and all of the metrics are saved to a folder with
18
Assessing the stimulated dynamic response of cutaneous micro vasculature using OCTA
==PAGE:26==
the name of the original recording. An overview file is saved with the entire dataset’s
metrics in the save location.
Figure 3.16: An example capillary mask (left) and its PP PIP with the capillary
loops highlighted in yellow. The vertical motion artifacts (long lines) have been
removed from the mask, but the curved artifact is still present.
Table 3.3: The PP analyzer metrics used in this study.
Metric
Unit
Description
Epidermal Thickness (Epi_Thk)
μm
Mean thickness of the epidermis
Total Capillaries (Total_Cap)
1
Count of capillaries
Total Capillary Area (Total_Cap_Area)
µm2
Total area of all capillaries
Mean Capillary Diameter (Mean_Cap_Diam)
μm
Mean capillary diameter
Capillary Density (Cap_Density
%
Percentage of area with capillaries
3.3
Statistical Analysis
All statistical analyses were done in Python using the Pandas, Statsmodels, and Pingouin
libraries with the significance level set to 0.05 (Code in Appendix A.4). Participants were
scanned both before and after treatment, 3­5 times for each area. Only complete pre­post
treatment matching pairs were included in the analysis.
Linear Regression A multiple linear regression model was used to assess the mean per­
cent change of each of the treatment metrics compared to the control. This is statistically
equivalent to running an unpaired t­test [46].
A multiple linear regression with interaction terms was used to assess the impact of age,
sex, BMI, and area on the percent change in metrics. The metrics were the dependent
variable, and the treatment group and interaction terms were then independent variables.
Cohen’s d Effect Size Cohen’s d effect size was used to assess the standardized mean
difference of the percent change of each treatment compared to the controls [47]. Effect
size measures the magnitude of a relationship, which can help with determining the prac­
Assessing the stimulated dynamic response of cutaneous micro vasculature using OCTA
19
==PAGE:27==
tical importance of a result [47, 46]. For this test, small effect sizes were (d=0.2), medium
(d=0.5), and large (d=0.8) as suggested by Cohen [47].
Partial Eta Squared Partial eta squared effect size was used to assess the proportion of
variance in a dependent variable explained by the variance in an independent interaction
variable [47]. For this test, small effects were (η2 = 0.01), medium (η2 = 0.06), and large
(η2 = 0.14) as suggested by Cohen [47].
Intraclass Correlation Intraclass correlation (ICC) assesses the reliability of measure­
ments by looking at their consistency across multiple samples [48]. This study used the
two­way, mixed effects, absolute agreement, single rater formula: ICC(3,1) [48]. For this
test, values less than 0.5 indicate poor reliability, 0.5­0.75 indicates moderate reliability,
0.75­0.9 indicates good reliability, and >0.9 indicates excellent reliability [48]. Reliability
of metrics was assessed for the post­treatment scans and all control scans.
3.4
Ethics
The study complies with the Helsinki Declaration and was submitted to the North Den­
mark Region Committee on Health Research Ethics. The study’s approval number is
N­20240030. Written consent was obtained from all participants prior to the study. This
study involves minimal risks and is minimally invasive. All of the substances and instru­
ments used have been tested on humans and are considered safe and well tolerated.
There are no direct benefits to the healthy volunteers, but the results of the study may
help advance DPN diagnostics.
20
Assessing the stimulated dynamic response of cutaneous micro vasculature using OCTA
==PAGE:28==
4
Results
A total of 1080 OCTA recordings were taken. After sorting, 1050 recordings were used
for further data processing.
4.1
Study Demographics
Figure 4.1: (Left) Age vs BMI for the study participants. (Right) Comparison of
Denmark and the study’s population distribution.
Aalborg University recruited twenty healthy participants. The study’s sex ratio was 1:1,
the average age was 35.6, and the average BMI was 23.2. The study age distribution
did not reflect Denmark’s population distribution (Figure 4.1). The 20­29 age group was
overrepresented, while ages 30­39 and 60­90 were unrepresented.
4.2
Vascular Metrics
Treatment Strength
The metrics were analyzed as percent changes from pre­ to post­treatment. Both the retic­
ular plexus (RP) and papillary plexus (PP) metrics indicated that heat caused the highest
overall percent change to all metrics (see Figures 4.2 and 4.3). For RP metrics, histamine
produced the second highest percent change, whereas for PP metrics, Cowhage ranked
second overall. Capsaicin had the lowest percent change for the PP metrics.
Substantial variance was observed across all metrics in both treatment and control groups.
Among the metrics, epidermal thickness (Epi_Thk) showed the smallest percent change
and the lowest variance. In contrast, total capillaries (Total_Cap) showed the highest
percent change, while branchpoint density (BD) displayed the greatest variance.
Assessing the stimulated dynamic response of cutaneous micro vasculature using OCTA
21
==PAGE:29==
Figure 4.2: The percent change in selected RP metrics for the treatments com­
pared to the control.
Figure 4.3: The percent change in the PP metrics for the treatments compared
to the control.
22
Assessing the stimulated dynamic response of cutaneous micro vasculature using OCTA
==PAGE:30==
Figure 4.4: (Left) The significance of the percent change in RP metrics for the
treatments compared to the control where a p­value <0.05 is considered signif­
icant. (Right) The Cohen’s d effect size of the treatments on the metrics where
>0.8 is considered a large effect.
Figure 4.5: (Left) The significance of the percent change in PP metrics for the
treatments compared to the control. (Right) The Cohen’s d effect size of the
treatments on the metrics.
The percent change was significant for almost all RP metrics, with the exception of mean
length change for cowhage (Figure 4.4). Cohen’s d effect size makes it more obvious that
heat has the strongest effect while histamine has the second strongest effect on the RP
metrics. The percent change of mean length was not found to be strongly effected by any
treatment compared to the control.
For the PP metrics, total capillaries, total capillary area (Total_Cap_Area), mean capillary
diameter (Mean_Cap_Diam), and capillary density (Cap_Density) were found to be sig­
nificant for most metrics (Figure 4.5). Epidermal thickness (Epi_Thk) was only significant
for histamine. The Cohen’s d effect size highlighted as heat had the strongest effect on
the percent change of metrics. Cowhage had the second strongest effect overall.
Interaction Effects
The interaction effect of age, sex, BMI, and treatment area on the percent change of the
metrics was analyzed using partial eta squared effect size and significance (p­values).
Assessing the stimulated dynamic response of cutaneous micro vasculature using OCTA
23
==PAGE:31==
Figure 4.6: The percent change in selected RP metrics for the treatments by
participant age with a linear regression trend line for each treatment.
Figure 4.7: The percent change in PP metrics for the treatments by participant
age with a linear regression trend line for each treatment.
24
Assessing the stimulated dynamic response of cutaneous micro vasculature using OCTA
==PAGE:32==
Figure 4.8: The significance of the percent change in RP metrics for age and
treatment interaction compared to the control where a p­value <0.05 is consid­
ered significant.
Figure 4.9: The significance of the percent change in PP metrics for age and
treatment interaction compared to the control.
Overall, the percent change in metrics decreased with age in both treatment and control
groups for the RP (Figure 4.6) and PP (Figure 4.7). In contrast, for capsaicin, the percent
change increased with age. P­values indicated significant age × treatment interactions
for some metrics in both the RP (Figure 4.8) and PP (Figure 4.9). However, these inter­
action effects were negligible (See Figure A.10 and A.11 in Appendix A.6). The partial eta
squared values were below the threshold for a small effect (>0.01).
Similarly, sex, BMI, and area showed no meaningful interaction effects on the metrics,
despite some statistically significant results in the t­tests (see Appendix A.6).
Assessing the stimulated dynamic response of cutaneous micro vasculature using OCTA
25
==PAGE:33==
4.3
Measurement Reliability
The intraclass correlation coefficient (ICC(3,1)) values for the pre­ and post­ treatment
control recordings are shown in Figure 4.10. Overall, several metrics had good reliability
(ICC>0.75), as indicated by bars between the upper two dashed blue lines, while others
had moderate (ICC>0.5), and poor (ICC<0.5) reliability.
Metrics like capillary density (Cap_Density), epidermal thickness (Epi_Thk), fractal dimen­
stion (FD), total capillaries (Tot_Cap), total capillary area (Total_Cap_Area), vessel area
density (VAD), mean tortuosity (mTort), and total vessel length (totalLength) have good
reliability.
The variance of the ICC vales varied significantly between metrics. Mean capillary diam­
eter (Mean_Cap_Diam) had a particularly high variance, in addition to a lower ICC value,
suggesting that these metrics are less reliable. In contrast, FD, VAD, and totalLength had
the lowest variance, indicating that the measurements were more reliable.
Figure 4.10:
The intraclass correlation coefficients (ICC(3,1) for the control
recordings. Values less than 0.5 indicate poor reliability, 0.5­0.75 indicates mod­
erate reliability, 0.75­0.9 indicates good reliability, and >0.9 indicates excellent
reliability.
Among the treatments, only mean vessel length (MeanLength) demonstrated excellent
reliability for both histamine and control groups. Overall, histamine and control treat­
ments exhibited higher ICC values across most metrics compared to heat, capsaicin, and
cowhage, although variability between metrics remained evident. An exception was the
epidermal thickness (Epi_Thk), which showed notably lower ICC values for histamine.
26
Assessing the stimulated dynamic response of cutaneous micro vasculature using OCTA
==PAGE:34==
Figure 4.11:
The intraclass correlation coefficients (ICC(3,1)) for the post­
treatment recordings. In this analysis, only the post­treatment control recordings
were used for the control dataset.
4.4
Key Findings
The heat treatment caused the largest increases in reticular plexus and papillary
plexus metrics. All of the treatments caused a statistically significant percent increase
in the metrics compared to the control. Notably, heat had the strongest Cohen’s d effect
size as displayed in Figure 4.4 and Figure 4.5.
The second strongest treatment was dependent on the vascular plexus layer. His­
tamine had the 2nd strongest effect on the reticular plexus metrics, while cowhage had
the second strongest effect on papillary plexus metrics.
Age was a significant interaction, but did not have a meaningful partial eta squared
effect size. Overall metrics decreased moderately with age (Figure 4.6 and Figure 4.7).
Sex, BMI, and treatment area also had no meaningful interaction effect.
The reticular and papillary plexus metrics ranged in reliability. Histamine and the
control had the most metrics with good reliability (Figure 4.11). Mean vessel length, ves­
sel area density, total capillaries, and capillary density were the metrics with the highest
reliability among the control recordings (Figure 4.10).
Assessing the stimulated dynamic response of cutaneous micro vasculature using OCTA
27
==PAGE:35==
5
Discussion
The Papillary Plexus Analyzer and OCTAVA algorithms successfully visualized and quan­
tified both the reticular plexus (RP) and papillary plexus (PP) of the skin. After the ap­
plication of stimulation treatments, we observed significant increases in vascular metrics
across both plexuses (Figure 4.2 and Figure 4.3), indicating a strong vasodilatory re­
sponse. These findings are consistent with the expected physiological effects of these
stimulation treatments. Importantly, the ability to detect and quantify these changes non­
invasively suggests that this method may serve as a practical tool for assessing microvas­
cular function in both research and clinical settings.
5.1
Interpretation of Key Findings
The primary aim of this study was to determine which stimulation treatment caused most
substantial changes to the RP and PP vascular metrics. As hypothesized, localized heat­
ing caused the largest percent increase across both plexus layers (Figure 4.4 and Figure
4.5). This strong effect is likely due to heat’s ability to activate many sensory units si­
multaneously, including C type fibers, Aδ fibers, and SMC. Unlike chemical stimuli, which
relies on slower, localized diffusion to reach target receptors, heat diffuses rapidly across
the skin, reaching both superficial and deeper structures quickly. This broader penetra­
tion likely amplifies heat’s ability to activate a wide range of cutaneous nerve fibers and
vascular receptors, leading to a stronger vasodilatory response.
The second most effective treatment varied by vascular plexus layer. Histamine pro­
duced a stronger response in the RP, while cowhage had a stronger response in the PP
(Figure 4.4 and Figure 4.5). This depth dependent response likely reflects differences in
the treatments’ application methods. Histamine was injected near the dermal­epidermal
junction, allowing the compound to penetrate into the deeper tissue layers closer to the
RP. In contrast, cowhage spicules were rubbed into the epidermis and remained embed­
ded throughout the post­treatment recordings. The superficial location of the needle­like
spicules may have resulted in a higher local concentration of mucunain, the active prurito­
gen in cowhage, near the PP compared to histamine. Supporting this, Men et Al. reported
that mechanical stimulation had a greater impact on the papillary dermis than the reticular
dermis, when comparing physical rubbing and local heating [49]. This suggests that the
spicules’ presence in the epidermis increases receptor activation specifically in the PP.
Together, these findings highlight the critical role that delivery method and tissue pene­
tration depth play in shaping the vascular response to different stimuli.
Another explanation for the plexus specific responses may be the distinct receptor and
afferent pathway profiles activated by cowhage and histamine. Although, both stimuli
engage unmyelinated C fibers and Aδ fibers, they activate different receptors and C
fiber subtypes [18, 50]. Primate studies have shown that mechano­heat sensitive C­type
nerve fibers (CMHs) can be further classified into quick (QC) or slow (SC) response sub­
types, potentially reflecting differences in their skin depth or receptors populations [51,
52]. Cowhage spicules have been shown to preferentially activate QCs [52]. In contrast,
histamine coated spicules show a similar QC biased activation pattern, but with lower
CMH activity and greater mechanical insensitive C type nerve fibers CMIA involvement
[52]. These differences in C­fiber subtype recruitment could contribute to the layer spe­
cific vascular response observed in this study by regulating neurogenic vasodilation in a
depth dependent manner.
28
Assessing the stimulated dynamic response of cutaneous micro vasculature using OCTA
==PAGE:36==
Although age emerged as a statistically significant interaction term, it did not have
a meaningful effect size for any vascular metric, as indicated by low partial eta squared
values (Figure 4.8 and Figure A.15). A moderate decline in percent change with increasing
age was observed (Figure 4.6 and Figure 4.7), which is consistent with known age related
reductions in vasoreflexivity. Interestingly, the capsaicin treatment shows the opposite
trend, with percent change increasing with age. This may be due to age related reductions
in epidermal thickness, which could enhance the absorption of capsaicin when applied as
a topical patch, leading to a stronger vascular response in older individuals. That said,
no significant trend in epidermal thickness was observed in our study population, so this
is speculative.
The limited effect size of age as an interaction term is likely influenced by the characteris­
tics of the study population. The mean participant age was 35.6, and the oldest participant
was 59 years old. In contrast, previous studies examining the impact of aging on nerve
conduction velocity and vascular structure and function typically define ”older” individuals
as 60­65 years and above [20, 21, 22, 23, 24]. This gap in representation highlights a
key limitation: without a clearer understanding of normal age related decline, it becomes
difficult to distinguish between healthy aging and early DPN­related dysfunction. Future
studies should prioritize including a broader and more representative age range in order
to better characterize normative aging effects and ensure that vasoreflexivity metrics can
reliably differentiate pathological changes from expected physiological variation.
The reliability of the RP and PP metrics varied (Figure 4.10) with the majority of met­
rics falling in the moderate to good reliability range, though with some outliers. Treatment
type appeared to influence metric reliability as well, with certain stimuli producing a more
consistent response than others (Figure 4.11). Intra participant variability was particu­
larly high in the control recordings, suggesting that baseline measurements may be more
susceptible to noise or technical artifacts.
However, the small sample size (n = 20) and unbalanced age distribution limit the gen­
eralizability of these these findings. Larger, more demographically diverse studies are
needed to accurately characterize the intra­ and inter­ participant variability. While similar
OCTA studies have demonstrated that vascular metrics have good reliability under con­
trolled conditions, several technique factors likely contributed to the variability observed
here [2, 17, 53, 54]. These include different physiological responses, OCTA’s sensitivity
to recording location, and limitations of data analysis software used.
Although stimulation areas and order were randomized and the spatial location did not sig­
nificantly affect vascular changes, the inconsistency of the control data suggests that tech­
nical factors, rather than physiological variability, is the source of the reduced reliability.
The OCTA’s 6 x 6 mm field of view means that small deviations in scan placement could
notably impact results, especially for inter­participant comparisons. Additionally, variabil­
ity introduced by the OCTAVA and Papillary Plexus Analyzer algorithms, especially size
and shape thresholding decisions and segmentation inconsistencies, likely contributes to
the poor reliability of certain metrics. Improving the algorithms, automation, alignment
accuracy, and motion artifact detection in future software updates could mitigate these
issues.
5.2
Clinical Viability
Clinical viability depends on the practicality of using these treatments routinely in clinic and
depends on its effectiveness (effect strength, consistency (reliability), the time for the ef­
fects to manifest (wait time), and the ease or feasibility of application (application method.
Assessing the stimulated dynamic response of cutaneous micro vasculature using OCTA
29
==PAGE:37==
These characteristics are summarized in Table 5.1. The treatments with the exception of
cowhage are regularly used in clinical settings. Cowhage, while having a short wait time
and relatively strong effects, is more experimental and less established. Capsaicin, is
less reliable and requires a longer waiting period, limiting its practicality. Localized heat­
ing produces the strongest effect, but suffers from low reliability and longer wait times,
which may reduce its clinical utility. Histamine offers a balance among wait time, effect
strength, and reliability, making it a potentially dependable option. However, the over­
all viability of these treatments for vasoreflexivity testing is contingent upon whether the
observed trends are consistent in future, larger scale studies.
Table 5.1: An overview of the treatments, their effect strength, and reliability.
Heat
Capsaicin
Histamine
Cowhage
Application Method
Thermal probe
Topical patch
Injection
Coated spicules
Wait Time (min)
20
30
15
5
Effect Strength
High
Low
Moderate
Moderate
Reliability
Low
Moderate
High
Moderate
Selecting a small number of key metrics simplifies interpretation for clinicians interpreta­
tion and supports the development of clear, implementable clinical guidelines. Capillary
density and vascular area density (VAD) are strong candidates for quantifying RP and PP
vascular responses, because they have a strong effect size for all treatments and good
reliability. These factors support their potential use as primary indicators of vasoreflexivity
in future diagnosis applications.
In the context of diabetic peripheral neuropathy (DPN), we would expect patients to have
a reduced percent change in flow related vascular metrics compared to the age adjusted
mean percent change. This expectation aligns with findings showing impaired nerve and
vascular responses in DPN patients [1, 6, 9, 10, 11]. Conversely, mean tortuosity might
increase, because of disorganized or maladaptive vascular remodeling. Additionally, early
DPN may effect the plexuses differentially, potentially revealing
5.3
Strengths and Limitations of the Study
This study presents a potential vasoreflexivity test that could be used for early non­invasive
DPN diagnosis.
­ Quantifiable, reproducible, and non­invasive method of visualizing analyzing the
vascular plexus.
­ Depth specific vascular analysis by separating the effects in the papillary plexus
from the reticular plexus.
­ Practical clinical method to assess vasoreflexivity using the percent change in
vascular metrics following stimulation treatments. The procedure is quick, and safe.
­ Novel insights on itch nerve activation differences between Cowhage and His­
tamine.
However, the study has limitations:
­ Small and unrepresentative sample size, where the mean and distribution of ages
does not reflect the target diabetic population.
­ Inconsistent number of replicates. The first seven participants had three repli­
cates for each measurement, while later participants had five.
30
Assessing the stimulated dynamic response of cutaneous micro vasculature using OCTA
==PAGE:38==
­ Segmentation model was only trained on healthy participant data, and only a
small subset of the ground truth dataset was validated by an expert.
­ Lack of automated outlier detection. The algorithm does not currently detect
or correct for outliers. Post­processing (e.g., checking PP PIPs) requires manual
validation, which can be time­consuming.
­ Low reliability of some metrics due to technical limitations like the OCTA’s sensi­
tivity to recording location, motion artifacts, and variability in algorithm thresholding
and segmentation.
5.4
Future Directions
Further research is needed to provide insight into vasoreflexivity in individuals over 60,
as well as pre­diabetic and DPN patients, using the stimulation methods and analysis al­
gorithms described in this study. Recordings from pre­diabetic and DPN patients could
be used to refine the segmentation model’s database and improve its accuracy. Addition­
ally, inter­ patient reliability could be better assessed by expanding the dataset. Future
research could also explore alternative stimulation methods and examine the impact of
application technique on vascular metrics. Finally, the algorithm’s ability to identify and
correct improperly segmented or thresholded PIPs could be enhanced to make the pro­
cess more hands­free.
Assessing the stimulated dynamic response of cutaneous micro vasculature using OCTA
31
==PAGE:39==
6
Conclusion
Early diagnosis and patient intervention is crucial for reducing the risks and symptoms
associated with diabetic peripheral neuropathy. Additionally, visual aids are a powerful
tool for clinicians when they are educating patients on disease pathology and risks [55].
This study demonstrates the potential of using stimulation­based vasoreflexivity testing
and papillary plexus analysis in conjunction with OCTAVA to detect changes in nerve
function.
I developed an effective algorithm for detecting and quantifying capillary loops in the pap­
illary plexus and optimizing and generating reticular plexus intensity projections. Healthy
participant testing demonstrated that vasoreflexivity could be quantified using vascular
metrics and highlighted localized heating and histamine and potential stimulation methods
for clinical use. The stimulation treatments and age trends were consistent with previous
vascular and nerve studies. However, further testing and algorithm improvements are
needed to fully characterize the reliability of the metrics and the effect of the treatments
on older adults and patients with DPN.
32
Assessing the stimulated dynamic response of cutaneous micro vasculature using OCTA
==PAGE:40==
Bibliography
[1]
Stephanie A. Eid et al. “New perspectives in diabetic neuropathy”. In: Neuron 111
(17 Sept. 2023), pp. 2623–2641. ISSN: 0896­6273. DOI: 10.1016/J.NEURON.2023.
05.003. URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/37263266/.
[2]
Raden Argarini et al. “Optical coherence tomography: a novel imaging approach to
visualize and quantify cutaneous microvascular structure and function in patients
with diabetes”. In: BMJ Open Diabetes Research & Care 8 (1 Aug. 2020). ISSN:
2052­4897. DOI: 10.1136/BMJDRC-2020-001479. URL: https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/articles/PMC7451490/.
[3]
Melissa A. Elafros et al. “Towards prevention of diabetic peripheral neuropathy: clin­
ical presentation, pathogenesis, and new treatments”. In: The Lancet Neurology 21
(10 Oct. 2022), pp. 922–936. ISSN: 1474­4465. DOI: 10.1016/S1474-4422(22)00188-
0. URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/36115364/.
[4]
Richard F. Spaide et al. “Optical coherence tomography angiography”. In: Progress
in Retinal and Eye Research 64 (May 2018), pp. 1–55. ISSN: 1350­9462. DOI:
10.1016/J.PRETEYERES.2017.11.003. URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
29229445/.
[5]
Myron A. Bodman, Mark A. Dreyer, and Matthew A. Varacallo. “Diabetic Peripheral
Neuropathy”. In: The Diabetes Textbook (Feb. 2024), pp. 923–937. DOI: 10.1007/
978-3-031-25519-9_56. URL: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK442009/.
[6]
Yang Yang et al. “Diabetic neuropathy: cutting­edge research and future directions”.
In: Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy 10 (1 Apr. 2025), pp. 1–36. ISSN:
2059­3635. DOI: 10.1038/s41392-025-02175-1. URL: https://www.nature.com/
articles/s41392-025-02175-1.
[7]
Shang Ye et al. “Different Types of Cell Death in Diabetic Neuropathy: A Focus on
Mechanisms and Therapeutic Strategies”. In: International Journal of Molecular Sci­
ences 25 (15 Aug. 2024), p. 8126. ISSN: 1422­0067. DOI: 10.3390/IJMS25158126.
URL: https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC11311470/.
[8]
Nádia Pereira Gonçalves, Christian Bjerggaard Vægter, and Lone Tjener Pallesen.
“Peripheral Glial Cells in the Development of Diabetic Neuropathy”. In: Frontiers in
neurology 9 (May 2018). ISSN: 1664­2295. DOI: 10.3389/FNEUR.2018.00268. URL:
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29770116/.
[9]
Rebecca E. Hill and Pamela E. Williams. “Perineurial cell basement membrane
thickening and myelinated nerve fibre loss in diabetic and nondiabetic peripheral
nerve”. In: Journal of the Neurological Sciences 217 (2 Feb. 2004), pp. 157–163.
ISSN: 0022­510X. DOI: 10.1016/j.jns.2003.09.011. URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.
nih.gov/14706218/.
[10]
Soley Thrainsdottir et al. “Endoneurial capillary abnormalities presage deterioration
of glucose tolerance and accompany peripheral neuropathy in man”. In: Diabetes
52 (10 Oct. 2003), pp. 2615–2622. ISSN: 0012­1797. DOI: 10.2337/DIABETES.52.
10.2615. URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/14514647/.
[11]
Norman E. Cameron et al. “Inhibitors of advanced glycation end product formation
and neurovascular dysfunction in experimental diabetes”. In: Annals of the New
York Academy of Sciences 1043 (2005), pp. 784–792. ISSN: 0077­8923. DOI: 10.
1196/ANNALS.1333.091. URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16037306/.
Assessing the stimulated dynamic response of cutaneous micro vasculature using OCTA
33
==PAGE:41==
[12]
André Pfannkuche et al. “Prevalence and risk factors of diabetic peripheral neuropa­
thy in a diabetics cohort: Register initiative “diabetes and nerves””. In: Endocrine
and Metabolic Science 1 (1­2 2020). ISSN: 2666­3961. DOI: 10.1016/j.endmts.
2020.100053.
[13]
Hoda Gad et al. “Corneal confocal microscopy for the diagnosis of diabetic periph­
eral neuropathy: A systematic review and meta­analysis”. In: Journal of diabetes
investigation 13 (1 Jan. 2022), pp. 134–147. ISSN: 2040­1124. DOI: 10.1111/JDI.
13643. URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34351711/.
[14]
Jeremy Chung Bo Chiang et al. “In­vivo corneal confocal microscopy: Imaging anal­
ysis, biological insights and future directions”. In: Communications Biology 2023 6:1
6 (1 June 2023), pp. 1–7. ISSN: 2399­3642. DOI: 10.1038/s42003-023-05005-8. URL:
https://www.nature.com/articles/s42003-023-05005-8.
[15]
James G. Fujimoto and Wolfgang Drexler. “Introduction to OCT”. In: Optical Co­
herence Tomography: Technology and Applications, Second Edition (Jan. 2015),
pp. 3–64. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-06419-2_1/FIGURES/41. URL: https://www.
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK554044/.
[16]
Liang Wang et al. “Emerging Applications of Optical Coherence Tomography An­
giography (OCTA) in neurological research”. In: Eye and Vision 5 (1 Dec. 2018),
pp. 1–11. ISSN: 2326­0254. DOI: 10.1186/S40662-018-0104-3/TABLES/1. URL:
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29796403/.
[17]
Gavrielle R. Untracht et al. “Pilot study of optical coherence tomography angiography­
derived microvascular metrics in hands and feet of healthy and diabetic people”. In:
Scientific Reports 13 (1 Jan. 2023), pp. 1–12. ISSN: 2045­2322. DOI: 10.1038/
s41598-022-26871-y. URL: https://www.nature.com/articles/s41598-022-26871-y.
[18]
S Kang et al. Fitzpatrick’s Dermatology. Vol. 1­2. McGraw Hill, 2019, pp. 116–129,
351–362, 1779–1791, 2493–2500.
[19]
Anthony J. Deegan and Ruikang K. Wang. “Microvascular Imaging of the Skin”. In:
Physics in medicine and biology 64 (7 Mar. 2019). ISSN: 13616560. DOI: 10.1088/
1361-6560/AB03F1. URL: https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC7787005/.
[20]
Enrique Verdú et al. “Influence of aging on peripheral nerve function and regener­
ation”. In: JPNS 5 (4 2000), pp. 191–208. ISSN: 1085­9489. DOI: 10.1046/J.1529-
8027.2000.00026.X. URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11151980/.
[21]
A. G. Gunin et al. “Age­related changes of blood vessels in the human dermis”.
In: Advances in Gerontology 5 (2 Apr. 2015), pp. 65–71. ISSN: 20790589. DOI:
10.1134/S2079057015020058/METRICS. URL: https://link.springer.com/article/10.
1134/S2079057015020058.
[22]
Yusuke Hara et al. “Visualization of age­related vascular alterations in facial skin
using optical coherence tomography­based angiography”. In: Journal of Dermato­
logical Science 90 (1 Apr. 2018), pp. 96–98. ISSN: 0923­1811. DOI: 10.1016/J.
JDERMSCI.2017.11.018.
[23]
Michael Wang­Evers et al. “Assessing the impact of aging and blood pressure on
dermal microvasculature by reactive hyperemia optical coherence tomography an­
giography”. In: Scientific Reports 2021 11:1 11 (1 June 2021), pp. 1–11. ISSN: 2045­
2322. DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-92712-z. URL: https://www.nature.com/articles/
s41598-021-92712-z.
[24]
C. P. Barrera­Patiño et al. “Skin microvasculature determined using OCT angiog­
raphy: first evidence of its relation with aging”. In: Laser Physics Letters 20 (2
Jan. 2023). ISSN: 1612­202X. DOI: 10. 1088/1612- 202X/ACB1AC. URL: https:
//iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/1612-202X/acb1ac%20https://iopscience.iop.
org/article/10.1088/1612-202X/acb1ac/meta.
34
Assessing the stimulated dynamic response of cutaneous micro vasculature using OCTA
==PAGE:42==
[25]
Nisha Charkoudian. “Mechanisms and modifiers of reflex induced cutaneous va­
sodilation and vasoconstriction in humans”. In: Journal of Applied Physiology 109
(4 Oct. 2010), pp. 1221–1228. ISSN: 8750­7587. DOI: 10.1152/JAPPLPHYSIOL.
00298.2010/ASSET/IMAGES/LARGE/ZDG0101091400001.JPEG. URL: https://
journals.physiology.org/doi/10.1152/japplphysiol.00298.2010.
[26]
Meral Ciplak et al. “The Vasodilatory Response of Skin Microcirculation to Local
Heating is Subject to Desensitization”. In: Microcirculation 16 (3 Apr. 2009), pp. 265–
275. ISSN: 1073­9688. DOI: 10.1080/10739680802595880. URL: https://onlinelibrary.
wiley.com/doi/10.1080/10739680802595880.
[27]
Lacy A. Holowatz and W. Larry Kenney. “Peripheral mechanisms of thermoregula­
tory control of skin blood flow in aged humans”. In: Journal of Applied Physiology
109 (5 Nov. 2010), pp. 1538–1544. ISSN: 8750­7587. DOI: 10.1152/JAPPLPHYSIOL.
00338.2010/ASSET/IMAGES/LARGE/ZDG0101091270003.JPEG. URL: https://
journals.physiology.org/doi/10.1152/japplphysiol.00338.2010.
[28]
Anna E. Stanhewicz et al. “Blunted increases in skin sympathetic nerve activity are
related to attenuated reflex vasodilation in aged human skin”. In: Journal of Applied
Physiology 121 (6 Dec. 2016), pp. 1354–1362. ISSN: 1522­1601. DOI: 10.1152/
JAPPLPHYSIOL.00730.2016/ASSET/IMAGES/LARGE/ZDG0181620240004.JPEG.
URL: https://journals.physiology.org/doi/10.1152/japplphysiol.00730.2016.
[29]
Robert L. Barkin. “The pharmacology of topical analgesics”. In: Postgraduate medicine
125 (July 2013), pp. 7–18. ISSN: 1941­9260. DOI: 10.1080/00325481.2013.1110566911.
URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24547599/.
[30]
Victor Fattori et al. “Capsaicin: Current Understanding of Its Mechanisms and Ther­
apy of Pain and Other Pre­Clinical and Clinical Uses”. In: Molecules 21 (7 July
2016), p. 844. ISSN: 1420­3049. DOI: 10.3390/MOLECULES21070844. URL: https:
//pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC6273101/.
[31]
Jun Peng and Yuan Jian Li. “The vanilloid receptor TRPV1: Role in cardiovascular
and gastrointestinal protection”. In: European Journal of Pharmacology 627 (1­3
Feb. 2010), pp. 1–7. ISSN: 0014­2999. DOI: 10.1016/J.EJPHAR.2009.10.053.
[32]
Won Sik Shim and Uhtaek Oh. “Histamine­induced itch and its relationship with
pain”. In: Molecular Pain 4 (July 2008), p. 29. ISSN: 1744­8069. DOI: 10.1186/1744-
8069-4-29. URL: https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2519061/.
[33]
R. H. LaMotte et al. “Pruritic and nociceptive sensations and dysesthesias from a
spicule of cowhage”. In: Journal of Neurophysiology 101 (3 Mar. 2009), pp. 1430–
1443. ISSN: 0022­3077. DOI: 10.1152/JN.91268.2008/ASSET/IMAGES/LARGE/
Z9K0030993640010.JPEG. URL: https://journals.physiology.org/doi/10.1152/jn.
91268.2008.
[34]
Carsten Dahl Mørch et al. Optical imaging for investigation and early diagnosis
of neuropathy and microvascular dysfunction in diabetes ­ The optical skin biopsy
study. Tech. rep. Aalborg University, July 2024.
[35]
Alexandru D.P. Papoiu et al. “A tale of two itches. Common features and notable
differences in brain activation evoked by cowhage and histamine induced itch”. In:
NeuroImage 59 (4 Feb. 2012), pp. 3611–3623. ISSN: 1053­8119. DOI: 10.1016/J.
NEUROIMAGE.2011.10.099.
[36]
VivoSight – World leading medical imaging technology. URL: https://vivosight.com/.
[37]
Gavrielle R. Untracht et al. “OCTAVA: An open­source toolbox for quantitative anal­
ysis of optical coherence tomography angiography images”. In: PLOS ONE 16 (12
Dec. 2021), e0261052. ISSN: 1932­6203. DOI: 10.1371/JOURNAL.PONE.0261052.
URL: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0261052.
Assessing the stimulated dynamic response of cutaneous micro vasculature using OCTA
35
==PAGE:43==
[38]
Image Labeler ­ Label images for computer vision applications ­ MATLAB. URL:
https://www.mathworks.com/help/vision/ref/imagelabeler-app.html.
[39]
Yoshinobu Sato et al. “Three­dimensional multi­scale line filter for segmentation
and visualization of curvilinear structures in medical images”. In: Medical Image
Analysis 2 (2 June 1998), pp. 143–168. ISSN: 1361­8415. DOI: 10.1016/S1361-
8415(98)80009-1.
[40]
Zuzana Krbcova and Jaromir Kukal. “Relationship between entropy and SNR changes
in image enhancement”. In: Eurasip Journal on Image and Video Processing 2017
(1 Dec. 2017), pp. 1–8. ISSN: 1687­5281. DOI: 10.1186 /S13640- 017 - 0232- Z/
TABLES/7. URL: https://jivp-eurasipjournals.springeropen.com/articles/10.1186/
s13640-017-0232-z.
[41]
Mads Grønbeck and Magnus Borge. “Pattern recognition towards early detection of
diabetic small­fibre neuropathy using optical coherence tomography angiography”.
MA thesis. Technical University of Denmark, 2024.
[42]
Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. “U­Net: Convolutional Net­
works for Biomedical Image Segmentation”. In: CoRR (2015). ISSN: 1611­3389.
DOI: 10.48550/arXiv.1505.04597. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1505.04597.
[43]
Sergey Ioffe and Christian Szegedy. “Batch Normalization: Accelerating Deep Net­
work Training by Reducing Internal Covariate Shift”. In: CoRR abs/1502.03167 (2015).
DOI: arXiv.1502.03167. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1502.03167.
[44]
Nitish Srivastava et al. “Dropout: A Simple Way to Prevent Neural Networks from
Overfitting”. In: Journal of Machine Learning Research 15.56 (2014), pp. 1929–
1958. URL: http://jmlr.org/papers/v15/srivastava14a.html.
[45]
Xiangbin Liu et al. “A review of deep­learning­based medical image segmentation
methods”. In: Sustainability (Switzerland) 13 (3 2021). ISSN: 2071­1050. DOI: 10.
3390/su13031224.
[46]
Gail M. Sullivan and Richard Feinn. “Using Effect Size—or Why the P Value Is Not
Enough”. In: Journal of Graduate Medical Education 4 (3 Sept. 2012), p. 279. ISSN:
1949­8349. DOI: 10.4300/JGME-D-12-00156.1. URL: https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
articles/PMC3444174/.
[47]
Daniël Lakens. “Calculating and reporting effect sizes to facilitate cumulative sci­
ence: A practical primer for t­tests and ANOVAs”. In: Frontiers in Psychology 4 (NOV
2013), p. 863. ISSN: 1664­1078. DOI: 10.3389/FPSYG.2013.00863/ABSTRACT.
URL: https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3840331/.
[48]
Terry K. Koo and Mae Y. Li. “A Guideline of Selecting and Reporting Intraclass Cor­
relation Coefficients for Reliability Research”. In: Journal of Chiropractic Medicine
15 (2 June 2016), p. 155. ISSN: 1556­3707. DOI: 10.1016/J.JCM.2016.02.012. URL:
https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4913118/.
[49]
Shaojie Men et al. “OCT­based angiography of human dermal microvascular reac­
tions to local stimuli: Implications for increasing capillary blood collection volumes”.
In: Lasers in Surgery and Medicine 50 (9 Nov. 2018), pp. 908–916. ISSN: 1096­
9101. DOI: 10.1002/LSM.22944. URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.
1002/lsm.22944%20https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/lsm.22944%
20https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/lsm.22944.
[50]
Matthias Ringkamp and Richard Meyer. “Pruriceptors”. In: ITCH: Mechanisms and
Treatment (Jan. 2014), pp. 129–142. DOI: 10.1201/b16573-13. URL: https://www.
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK200917/.
[51]
Lisa M. Johanek et al. “A Role for Polymodal C­Fiber Afferents in Nonhistaminergic
Itch”. In: Journal of Neuroscience 28 (30 July 2008), pp. 7659–7669. ISSN: 0270­
36
Assessing the stimulated dynamic response of cutaneous micro vasculature using OCTA
==PAGE:44==
6474. DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1760-08.2008. URL: https://www.jneurosci.org/
content/28/30/7659%20https://www.jneurosci.org/content/28/30/7659.abstract.
[52]
Matthew Wooten et al. “Three functionally distinct classes of C­fiber nociceptors in
primate”. In: Nature communications 5 (June 2014), p. 4122. ISSN: 2041­1723. DOI:
10.1038/NCOMMS5122. URL: https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4072246/.
[53]
S. J. Men et al. “Repeatability of vessel density measurement in human skin by OCT­
based microangiography”. In: Skin Research and Technology 23 (4 Nov. 2017),
pp. 607–612. ISSN: 1600­0846. DOI: 10.1111/SRT.12379. URL: https://onlinelibrary.
wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/srt.12379%20https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.
1111/srt.12379%20https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/srt.12379.
[54]
Raden Argarini et al. “Visualizing and quantifying the impact of reactive hyperemia
on cutaneous microvessels in humans”. In: Journal of Applied Physiology 128 (1
Jan. 2020), pp. 17–24. ISSN: 1522­1601. DOI: 10.1152/JAPPLPHYSIOL.00583.
2019/ASSET/IMAGES/LARGE/ZDG0121932310008.JPEG. URL: https://journals.
physiology.org/doi/10.1152/japplphysiol.00583.2019.
[55]
Catherine Hafner et al. “Visual aids in ambulatory clinical practice: Experiences,
perceptions and needs of patients and healthcare professionals”. In: PLOS ONE
17 (2 Feb. 2022). ISSN: 19326203. DOI: 10.1371/JOURNAL.PONE.0263041. URL:
https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC8809598/.
Assessing the stimulated dynamic response of cutaneous micro vasculature using OCTA
37
==PAGE:45==
A
Appendix
A.1
Code Repository
The code and segmentation model used in this thesis is available on GitHub at the follow­
ing repository: https : //github.com/lydiaha11/OCTA_V ascular_Analysis
38
Assessing the stimulated dynamic response of cutaneous micro vasculature using OCTA
==PAGE:46==
A.2
Code Diagrams
Raw Vivosight 
Data
Initial Input
RP Percentile
Segmentation 
Model
Final  
Output 
Reticular 
Plexus PIP 
Optimizer
Model Trainer
Extract 
Intensity and 
Flow Images
 Intensity DICOM
Flow DICOM
Extract 
Images Center 
Slice
Set Percentile 
=100
MIP Generator
Draw 
Epidermis 
Mask
Randomly 
Select Dataset
Remove 
Background
Background 
Removed OCT
Epidermis Masks
RP MIPs
Draw Vessel 
Mask
Vessel Masks
Randomly 
Select Dataset
Figure A.1: Flowchart showing the steps to run the Papillary Plexus analyzer
algorithm.
Assessing the stimulated dynamic response of cutaneous micro vasculature using OCTA
39
==PAGE:47==
Initial Input
Raw Vivosight 
Data
Segmentation 
Model
Open Folder
 OCT Data
OCTA Data
Smooth 
Vertically
 Calculate 
Vertical 
Gradient
 Find max 
column 
gradient
Increase 
slice 
index
Slice yy
Smooth 
Surface 
Indexes
pixel index > 
surface
Skip
Set pixel to 0
Increase 
slice 
index
Yes
No
Slice xx
Increase 
slice 
index
Transpose
Slice yy
Surface Indexes
Background 
Removed OCTA 
Initial Input
Apply model
Sigmoid 
Function
Resize and 
Interpolate
Binarize
Get Column
Any values 
> 0
Increase 
Column 
Index
Index Size
Lower Boundary 
Index
Upper Boundary 
Index
Smallest 
Index
Largest Index
Set to -1
Gaussian 
Filter
Calculate 
Thickness
Lower Boundary
Upper Boundary
Upper - 
Surface
Shift Amount
Upper = 
Surface
Lower + Shift 
Smount
Calculate Pixel 
Area
Threshold
 Label Obejcts
Noise
Artifacts
Capillary Loops
Pixel Area
MIP Percentile 
Optimizer
PP MIP Slicer
Categorize 
Objects
Capillary Mask
Set Percentile
Save 
Percentile's 
Objects 
Foreground
Background
>25
MIP Stats
Noise < Min
Capillaries 
>= 0.95 * Max
Artifacts < 
Min
Update Best 
Stats
Increase 
Percentile
Set Percentile
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
Save Best MIP
Final Output
<5
>15
Increase 
Percentile
Capillary 
MIP
Tourtuosity
Best MIP
Best  Percentile
Max Capillaries
Min Artifacts
Min Noise
Capillary MIP
Tourtuosity
Boundaries 
Epidermis
Epidermis 
Thickness
Percentile 
Search 
Criteria
Epidermis 
Masks
Capillary 
Mask
Final  Output 
Normalize
Threshold 
Background
Binarize
Remove Noise
Label Objects
Get Properties 
of Objects
Raw Capillary 
Mask
Get Object
Perimeter 
Size
Increase 
Object 
Index
Calculate
Circularity
Circularity 
>= Threshold
Keep Object
Remove
Binarize
Yes
No
=0
Capillary 
Coordinates
Both OCT and 
OCTA file 
present?
Move to 
Next 
folder
No
Read Files
Yes
Spacing 
Metadata
Initial 
Input
Percentile 
Search 
Criteria
Key
Initial Input
Final Output
Function
For Loop 
Incrementer
Decision
Optional Plotting
For Loop 
Initialization
Function Output
Sum Dot Area
Count Dots
Total Dot Area / 
Total Dots
Calculate 
Average 
Diameter
Total Dot Area / 
MIP Area
Sum Dot Area
MIP Area
Total Dot Size
Total Dot Area
Average Dot 
Diameter
Dot Density
Define Column 
Names
Final 
Output 
Metrics Excel 
File
Assemble Rows
Generate Excel 
File
Figure A.2: Flowchart showing Papillary Plexus analyzer algorithm’s process
steps.
40
Assessing the stimulated dynamic response of cutaneous micro vasculature using OCTA
==PAGE:48==
A.3
Frequency Filter
Horizontal and vertical motion artifacts were removed using a frequency­domain filtering
approach. Each capillary mask was first converted to the frequency domain via a Fourier
transform. The mask in Figure A.3, was applied to suppress artifact­related frequencies.
The filtered image was then transformed back to the spatial domain using an inverse
Fourier transform, and then re­thresholded.
Figure A.3: (Left) A capillary mask with motion artifacts (Center) A capillary mask
in the frequency domain. (Right) The frequency mask where the black areas are
masked.
The shape of the frequency mask was determined by comparing the frequency domain
capillary masks with and without motion artifacts. Only long vertical and horizontal artifacts
are removed by the filter.
Figure A.4: (Left) Capillary mask after motion artifact removal (Right) Masked
capillary mask in the frequency domain.
Assessing the stimulated dynamic response of cutaneous micro vasculature using OCTA
41
==PAGE:49==
Frequency Filter Code
1
def linear_artifact_remover(image):
2
# Fourier transform
3
image_fft = np.fft.fftshift(np.fft.fft2(image))
4
5
rows, cols = image.shape
6
7
# Vertical artifact mask parameters
8
mask_height , center_offset , dist_edge = 8, 15, 300
9
10
# Define boundaries
11
top_row = rows//2 + mask_height//2
12
bottom_row = rows//2 - mask_height//2
13
l_mask_right_edge = cols//2 + center_offset
14
r_mask_left_edge = cols//2 + center_offset
15
r_mask_right_edge = cols - dist_edge
16
17
# Generate vertical mask
18
mask = np.ones(image.shape)
19
mask[bottom_row:top_row , dist_edge:l_mask_right_edge] = 0
20
mask[bottom_row:top_row , r_mask_left_edge:r_mask_right_edge] = 0
21
22
# Horizontal mask parameters
23
mask_height , center_offset , dist_edge = 10, 10, 750
24
25
# Define boundaries
26
u_top_row = dist_edge
27
u_bottom_row = rows//2 + center_offset
28
b_top_row = rows//2 - center_offset
29
b_bottom_row = rows - dist_edge
30
mask_left_edge = cols//2 - mask_width//2
31
mask_right_edge = cols//2 + mask_width//2
32
33
# Generate horizontal mask
34
mask[u_bottom_row:u_top_row , mask_left_edge:mask_right_edge] = 0
35
mask[b_bottom_row:b_top_row , mask_left_edge:mask_right_edge] = 0
36
37
# Apply mask
38
clean_image_fft = image_fft * mask
39
40
# Inverse fourier transform
41
clean_mip = np.fft.ifft2(np.fft.ifftshift(clean_image_fft)).real
42
clean_mip = clean_mip > 0.5
43
44
return clean_mip
42
Assessing the stimulated dynamic response of cutaneous micro vasculature using OCTA
==PAGE:50==
A.4
Statistics Code
1
import numpy as np
2
import pandas as pd
3
import pingouin as pg
4
import statsmodels.api as sm
5
import statsmodels.formula.api as smf
6
from statsmodels.formula.api import ols
7
from statsmodels.stats.anova import anova_lm
8
9
# Load the data
10
file_path = '' # path to excel file
11
df = pd.read_excel(file_path)
12
13
# Define metrics
14
metrics = ["VAD", "totalLength", "MeanLength", "MeanDiam", "BD", "FD", "mTort
"] # RP
15
# metrics = ['Epi_Thk ', 'DEJ_Tort ', 'Total_Cap ', 'Total_Cap_Area ', '
Mean_Cap_Diam ', 'Cap_Density '] # PP
16
17
# Sort and split scans
18
df = df.sort_values(by=['Name', 'Area', 'Treatment ', 'Time', 'Scan '])
19
before_df = df[df['Time'] == 'Before '].copy()
20
after_df = df[df['Time'] == 'After '].copy()
21
22
# Add pairing index
23
before_df['pair_id '] = before_df.groupby(['Name', 'Area', 'Treatment ']).
cumcount()
24
after_df['pair_id '] = after_df.groupby(['Name', 'Area', 'Treatment ']).cumcount
()
25
26
# Match scans
27
merged = pd.merge(
28
before_df , after_df ,
29
on=['Name', 'Area', 'Treatment ', 'pair_id '],
30
suffixes=('_Before ', '_After ')
31
)
32
33
# Calculate percent change
34
for metric in metrics:
35
merged[f'{metric}'] = ((merged[f'{metric}_After '] - merged[f'{metric}
_Before '])/((merged[f'{metric}_After '] + merged[f'{metric}_Before '])
/2))*100
36
37
# Final columns
38
columns_to_keep = ['Name', 'Area', 'Treatment ', 'Sex_Before ', 'Age_Before ', '
BMI_Before ']
39
columns_to_keep += [f'{m}_Before ' for m in metrics] + [f'{m}_After ' for m in
metrics]
40
columns_to_keep += [f'{m}_Change ' for m in metrics]
41
columns_to_keep += [f'{m}_Max' for m in metrics] + [f'{m}_Min' for m in
metrics]
42
43
comparison = merged[columns_to_keep]
44
comparison = merged[columns_to_keep].rename(columns={
45
'Sex_Before ': 'Sex',
46
'Age_Before ': 'Age',
47
'BMI_Before ': 'BMI'
48
})
49
50
# Center age and BMI
51
comparison['Age_centered '] = comparison['Age'] - comparison['Age'].mean()
52
comparison['BMI_centered '] = comparison['BMI'] - comparison['BMI'].mean()
Assessing the stimulated dynamic response of cutaneous micro vasculature using OCTA
43
==PAGE:51==
53
54
# Calculating % change significance for all metrics
55
56
# Make sure control is the reference
57
comparison['Treatment '] = pd.Categorical(
58
comparison['Treatment '],
59
categories=['Control ', 'Heat', 'Cowhage ', 'Capsaicin ', 'Histamine '],
60
ordered=True
61
)
62
63
# Collect p-values
64
p_values = []
65
66
for metric in metrics:
67
# Change to fit interaction (* Age )
68
model = smf.ols(f"{metric} ~ C(Treatment)", data=comparison).fit()
69
p_values.append(model.pvalues[1:])
# Skip intercept
70
71
#
Create data frame
72
p_df = pd.DataFrame(p_values , index=[m.replace('_', ' ') for m in metrics],
columns=model.pvalues.index[1:])
73
74
# Repeat for interactions: Age_centred , BMI_centered , Sex, and Area
75
76
# Calculating Cohen's D effect size for all metrics
77
78
def cohens_d(group1 , group2):
79
diff = group1.mean() - group2.mean()
80
pooled_sd = np.sqrt(((group1.std() ** 2) + (group2.std() ** 2)) / 2)
81
return diff / pooled_sd
82
83
cohen_d_results = {}
84
for metric in metrics:
85
control = comparison[comparison['Treatment '] == 'Control '][metric].dropna
()
86
d_vals = {}
87
for treatment in ['Heat', 'Cowhage ', 'Capsaicin ', 'Histamine ']:
88
treated = comparison[comparison['Treatment '] == treatment][metric].
dropna()
89
if not control.empty and not treated.empty:
90
d_vals[treatment] = cohens_d(treated , control)
91
else:
92
d_vals[treatment] = np.nan
93
cohen_d_results[metric.replace('_', ' ')] = d_vals
94
cohen_d_df = pd.DataFrame(cohen_d_results).T
95
96
# Calculating Partial Eta Squared interaction effect size for all metrics
97
eta_results = []
98
99
for metric in metrics:
100
formula = f"{metric} ~ C(Treatment) * Age_centered" # change to match
interaction term
101
model = ols(formula , data=comparison).fit()
102
aov = anova_lm(model, typ=3)
103
ss_resid = aov.loc['Residual ', 'sum_sq ']
104
105
# Loop through individual treatment × Age terms
106
for treatment in ['Heat', 'Cowhage ', 'Capsaicin ', 'Histamine ']:
107
term = f'C(Treatment)[T.{treatment}]:Age_centered ' # change to match
interaction term
108
if term in model.params.index:
109
# Calculate SS
44
Assessing the stimulated dynamic response of cutaneous micro vasculature using OCTA
==PAGE:52==
110
coef = model.params[term]
111
se = model.bse[term]
112
t_val = coef / se
113
df_effect = 1
114
ss_term = (t_val ** 2) * se**2 * df_effect
115
116
# Partial eta squared
117
eta_sq = ss_term / (ss_term + ss_resid)
118
119
eta_results.append({
120
'Metric ': metric.replace('_Change ', ''),
121
'Metric ': metric.replace('_', ' '),
122
'Treatment ': treatment ,￿
123
'²': eta_sq
124
})
125
126
# Calculating Intraclass correlation (ICC(3,1))
127
128
metrics = ["VAD", "totalLength", "MeanLength", "MeanDiam", "BD", "FD", "mTort
", 'Epi_Thk ',
129
'DEJ_Tort ', 'Total_Cap ', 'Total_Cap_Area ', 'Mean_Cap_Diam ', '
Cap_Density '] # All metrics
130
131
# For all control data
132
icc_results = []
133
134
control_comparison = comparison[comparison['Area '].isin(['P1', 'P2'])].copy()
135
136
for metric in metrics:
137
# Build ICC input format
138
icc_data = pd.DataFrame({
139
'subject ': pd.concat([control_comparison['Name'], control_comparison['
Name ']]),
140
'rater ': ['Before '] * len(control_comparison) + ['After '] * len(
control_comparison),
141
'score ': pd.concat([control_comparison[f'{metric}_Before '],
control_comparison[f'{metric}_After ']])
142
})
143
144
# Drop missing values
145
icc_data = icc_data.dropna()
146
147
# Compute ICC
148
icc = pg.intraclass_corr(data=icc_data , targets='subject ', raters='rater',
ratings='score ')
149
150
# Filter ICC(3,1)
151
icc_row = icc.query("Type == 'ICC3 '")
152
icc_row['metric '] = metric
153
154
# Append
155
icc_results.append(icc_row)
156
157
# Concatenate all results
158
icc_df = pd.concat(icc_results , ignore_index=True)
159
160
# For Post-treatment data
161
icc_results = []
162
163
for metric in metrics:
164
for treatment in comparison['Treatment '].unique():
165
# Subset by treatment
Assessing the stimulated dynamic response of cutaneous micro vasculature using OCTA
45
==PAGE:53==
166
subset = comparison[comparison['Treatment '] == treatment].copy()
167
168
# Skip if not enough data
169
if subset['Name '].nunique() < 2:
170
continue
171
172
# Prepare ICC data
173
icc_data = pd.DataFrame({
174
'subject ': subset['Name'],
175
'rater ': subset['pair_id '],
176
'score ': subset[f'{metric}_After ']
177
})
178
179
# Calculte ICC
180
icc = pg.intraclass_corr(data=icc_data , targets='subject ', raters='
rater', ratings='score', nan_policy='omit ')
181
icc_row = icc.query("Type == 'ICC3 '")
182
183
if not icc_row.empty:
184
icc_row = icc_row.copy()
185
icc_row['metric '] = metric
186
icc_row['Treatment '] = treatment
187
icc_results.append(icc_row)
46
Assessing the stimulated dynamic response of cutaneous micro vasculature using OCTA
==PAGE:54==
A.5
Complete Data Table
The full dataset is shown below for reference.
Assessing the stimulated dynamic response of cutaneous micro vasculature using OCTA
47
==PAGE:55==
Name
Sex
Age
BMI
Scan
Area
Treatment
Time
nodes
VAD
totalLength
VLD_pct
VLD_mminv
MeanLength
MedianLength
varLengths
skewLengths
kurtLengths
MeanDiam
MedianDiam
varDiams
skewDiams
kurtDiams
BD
FD
mTort
varTort
skewTort
kurtTort
Epi_Thk
Total_Cap
Total_Cap_Area
Mean_Cap_Diam
Cap_Density
S01
Female
24
23
765 A1
Capsaicin
Before
76
11.68
101.88
1.24
2.83
165
129
37131
13.52
253.79
24.43000031
22.92000008
63
1.100000024
4.650000095
0.746
1.3212
1.1727
0.226
10.57
155
0.05348243
497
40783
10.22154276
0.021856357
S01
Female
24
23
766 A1
Capsaicin
Before
82
11.08
100.6
1.23
2.7944
152
123
36912
16.2
345.75
24.01000023
22
74
1.24000001
4.619999886
0.8151
1.3198
1.1348
0.084
8.92
99
0.05451904
417
31308
9.777204397
0.016778531
S01
Female
24
23
768 A1
Capsaicin
Before
89
11.79
106.11
1.29
2.9475
171
130
62005
13.95
241.71
24.69000053
22.85000038
66
1.100000024
4.739999771
0.8388
1.3227
1.1345
0.064
10.44
153
0.0546369
526
43192
10.22501243
0.023147384
S01
Female
24
23
769 P1
Control
Before
25
11.55
104.22
1.27
2.895
166
129
59260
15.12
266.58
21.44000053
20.47999954
36
1.49000001
7.059999943
0.2399
1.3203
1.1351
0.117
10.76
150
0.05687994
214
13985
9.1217761
0.007494818
S01
Female
24
23
770 P1
Control
Before
156
13.02
107.03
1.31
2.9731
163
127
21427
4.71
48.74
27.90999985
27.03000069
91
0.540000021
3.039999962
1.4575
1.3339
1.154
0.049
5.69
46
0.05557467
346
30691
10.62728994
0.016447869
S01
Female
24
23
771 P1
Control
Before
107
12.47
97.35
1.19
2.7042
161
128
16021
2.75
13.27
26.55999947
24.82999992
85
0.939999998
4.050000191
1.0991
1.3254
1.1615
0.101
7.26
68
0.05553368
344
29572
10.46203544
0.015848176
S01
Female
24
23
772 A2
Heat
Before
30
11.13
105.21
1.28
2.9225
155
128
12968
9.33
153.96
20.95999908
20.01000023
37
1.350000024
5.75
0.2851
1.3285
1.1051
0.038
11.23
158
0.05554612
411
30008
9.641679122
0.016081837
S01
Female
24
23
773 A2
Heat
Before
86
13.14
117.7
1.44
3.2694
157
133
9753
2.51
14.17
23.44000053
22.22999954
59
1.24000001
4.940000057
0.7307
1.3551
1.1538
0.139
9.23
107
0.05638141
431
34480
10.09253009
0.018478464
S01
Female
24
23
774 A2
Heat
Before
37
10.97
99.55
1.21
2.7653
158
127
23980
12.37
214.85
21.82999992
20.42000008
48
1.340000033
5.739999771
0.3717
1.3186
1.1237
0.057
7.25
64
0.05536823
330
21745
9.159627143
0.011653544
S01
Female
24
23
775 A3
Histamine
Before
42
10.54
90.31
1.1
2.5086
152
125
16389
8.42
115.67
21.52000046
19.78000069
47
1.360000014
5.309999943
0.4651
1.3036
1.14
0.101
8.44
91
0.05354905
538
34926
9.091558683
0.018717483
S01
Female
24
23
776 A3
Histamine
Before
40
10.95
94.9
1.16
2.6361
151
130
14820
13.61
271.74
21.27000046
19.90999985
45
1.200000048
4.610000134
0.4215
1.3137
1.1171
0.069
11.83
161
0.05585139
268
17398
9.091537315
0.009323907
S01
Female
24
23
777 A3
Histamine
Before
100
11.38
88.78
1.08
2.4661
153
128
12069
3.94
31.2
25.61000061
24.01000023
75
0.839999974
3.410000086
1.1264
1.3066
1.1618
0.178
11.36
163
0.05583382
339
25908
9.864433614
0.013884572
S01
Female
24
23
778 P2
Control
Before
32
8.98
72.3
0.88
2.0083
141
121
7439
4.81
48.98
21.85000038
20.37000084
49
1.399999976
5.829999924
0.4426
1.2669
1.1286
0.096
10.64
144
0.05634041
207
13406
9.080703472
0.007184521
S01
Female
24
23
779 P2
Control
Before
24
11.11
99.17
1.21
2.7547
156
133
7161
2.39
12.6
21.42000008
20.93000031
28
0.99000001
5.03000021
0.242
1.3244
1.1025
0.019
8.35
86
0.05806735
118
6841
8.591596074
0.003666217
S01
Female
24
23
780 P2
Control
Before
58
9.89
87.03
1.06
2.4175
161
124
56606
11.76
160.14
23.81999969
22.02000046
65
1.190000057
4.480000019
0.6664
1.2836
1.1318
0.079
8.37
87
0.05573134
261
19071
9.645428782
0.010220498
S01
Female
24
23
782 A4
Cowhage
Before
46
10.47
93.42
1.14
2.595
145
127
6335
2.87
18.07
21.62999916
20.32999992
45
1.5
5.71999979
0.4924
1.313
1.1102
0.073
12.13
160
0.05581259
326
23614
9.603533126
0.012655175
S01
Female
24
23
783 A4
Cowhage
Before
60
12.49
124.95
1.52
3.4708
171
140
18094
7.55
97.04
22.51000023
21.89999962
40
1.090000033
5.059999943
0.4802
1.3565
1.1578
0.307
14.91
286
0.0573653
285
19124
9.243192479
0.010248902
S01
Female
24
23
784 A4
Cowhage
Before
70
12.49
122.1
1.49
3.3917
165
136
16698
6.81
85.12
22.78000069
21.54999924
50
1.559999943
7.059999943
0.5733
1.3539
1.1412
0.13
8.79
90
0.05749634
241
17479
9.60958935
0.009367316
S01
Female
24
23
785 A3
Histamine
After
471
23.07
226.7
2.77
6.2972
161
123
39346
9.54
139.79
28.11000061
27.25
66
0.709999979
3.920000076
2.0776
1.4562
1.1871
0.147
8.25
96
0.0552921
736
68756
10.90614967
0.0368476
S01
Female
24
23
786 A3
Histamine
After
571
26.07
266.21
3.25
7.3947
162
130
27672
9.19
161.63
28.06999969
27.53000069
59
0.519999981
3.710000038
2.1449
1.4849
1.2337
0.363
9.36
123
0.05639898
705
72965
11.47936313
0.03910328
S01
Female
24
23
787 A3
Histamine
After
749
28.22
281.11
3.43
7.8086
150
123
19523
6.09
78.11
28.94000053
28.25
63
0.540000021
4.190000057
2.6644
1.4969
1.197
0.218
13.06
243
0.05524451
755
81164
11.69939232
0.043497274
S01
Female
24
23
788 A4
Cowhage
After
1132
32.45
335.57
4.09
9.3214
141
113
13731
3.56
34.39
29.52000046
28.86000061
61
0.469999999
3.849999905
3.3734
1.5265
1.2177
0.282
13.38
279
0.05420498
669
76245
12.04613386
0.040861092
S01
Female
24
23
789 A4
Cowhage
After
1232
33.74
380.15
4.64
10.5597
150
112
60095
12.95
215.61
29.52000046
29.06999969
60
0.419999987
4.090000153
3.2408
1.5332
1.2108
0.239
13
278
0.05597877
679
81894
12.39213723
0.043888495
S01
Female
24
23
790 A4
Cowhage
After
1201
33.76
358.84
4.38
9.9678
146
114
24415
13.24
369.44
29.40999985
28.81999969
55
0.540000021
4.139999866
3.3469
1.5352
1.1985
0.164
9.56
138
0.05620132
681
76452
11.95572533
0.040972027
S01
Female
24
23
791 P2
Control
After
130
12.43
104.15
1.27
2.8931
153
123
20314
9.01
145.29
26.12999916
25.04999924
74
0.709999979
3.720000029
1.2482
1.3291
1.1677
0.179
12.12
191
0.05552782
453
39800
10.57663445
0.021329549
S01
Female
24
23
792 P2
Control
After
63
10.48
88.12
1.08
2.4478
150
124
9211
2.4
12.3
23.19000053
21.77000046
61
1.080000043
4.349999905
0.7149
1.3034
1.1309
0.054
7.31
66
0.05525256
352
29578
10.34351455
0.015851392
S01
Female
24
23
793 P2
Control
After
52
9.88
81.86
1
2.2739
148
125
10517
5.12
54.48
22.72999954
20.92000008
63
1.50999999
6.210000038
0.6352
1.2886
1.1335
0.095
11.62
163
0.0544268
258
18568
9.57255279
0.009950931
S01
Female
24
23
794 A2
Heat
After
735
27.79
281.66
3.44
7.8239
153
120
31861
12.83
258.67
28.44000053
27.62000084
62
0.439999998
3.519999981
2.6095
1.4961
1.1905
0.255
15.85
334
0.05532065
739
84749
12.08370547
0.045418541
S01
Female
24
23
795 A2
Heat
After
753
28.04
288.98
3.53
8.0272
153
119
27595
9.44
175.35
28.20999908
27.56999969
69
0.469999999
3.779999971
2.6057
1.4985
1.2151
0.531
27.59
988
0.05642094
777
78927
11.37253672
0.042298425
S01
Female
24
23
796 A2
Heat
After
938
30.64
337.92
4.12
9.3867
158
121
30804
8.1
116.22
28.57999992
27.87999916
59
0.49000001
3.589999914
2.7758
1.5211
1.196
0.211
11.52
199
0.05641728
704
75249
11.66592275
0.040327317
S01
Female
24
23
797 A1
Capsaicin
After
21
9.64
87.33
1.07
2.4258
153
127
16242
10.56
169.47
20.76000023
19.77000046
34
1.450000048
6.510000229
0.2405
1.2969
1.1136
0.058
9.4
102
0.05615008
213
18433
10.4969534
0.009878582
S01
Female
24
23
798 A1
Capsaicin
After
15
10.49
94.09
1.15
2.6136
158
130
14818
9.74
157.5
21.09000015
20.34000015
37
1.590000033
7.880000114
0.1594
1.3116
1.1558
0.687
17.86
357
0.05687189
226
18162
10.11539102
0.009733348
S01
Female
24
23
799 A1
Capsaicin
After
92
14.83
125.56
1.53
3.4878
157
128
10292
2.17
10.62
23.75
22.79999924
49
0.920000017
4.369999886
0.7327
1.3691
1.1731
0.173
7.76
74
0.05692899
587
59827
11.39159724
0.032062385
S01
Female
24
23
800 P1
Control
After
24
10.65
96.22
1.17
2.6728
143
123
4799
2.07
10.19
20.60000038
19.55999947
36
1.99000001
9.510000229
0.2494
1.3184
1.0948
0.047
17.31
331
0.05624598
159
10350
9.103883092
0.005546755
S01
Female
24
23
801 P1
Control
After
50
11.65
105.49
1.29
2.9303
152
131
6180
1.67
7.93
21.55999947
20.73999977
39
1.539999962
6.940000057
0.474
1.3354
1.1163
0.062
13.34
218
0.05622475
188
13267
9.478999476
0.007110028
S01
Female
24
23
802 P1
Control
After
24
11.9
109.09
1.33
3.0303
155
131
7166
3.36
27.17
21.14999962
20.54999924
30
1.139999986
6.260000229
0.22
1.3439
1.1252
0.151
13.54
224
0.0570227
238
17730
9.739147619
0.009501832
S02
Female
25
20
803 A1
Heat
Before
51
13.59
137.87
1.68
3.8297
159
135
7772
2.12
10.78
21.65999985
20.78000069
36
1.330000043
6.329999924
0.3699
1.3798
1.1187
0.098
11.88
169
0.05908273
221
14076
9.005307593
0.007543586
S02
Female
25
20
805 A1
Heat
Before
169
16.83
166.36
2.03
4.6211
170
135
33304
10.1
152.76
23.98999977
22.68000031
57
1.00999999
4.230000019
1.0159
1.4038
1.1442
0.109
9.16
103
0.05631552
908
59737
9.152375699
0.032014153
S02
Female
25
20
806 A1
Heat
Before
204
17.4
169.38
2.07
4.705
166
132
24716
12
251.8
24.78000069
23.45999908
58
0.99000001
4.110000134
1.2044
1.412
1.1518
0.158
14.62
295
0.05759517
801
57371
9.54959627
0.03074617
S02
Female
25
20
807 P1
Control
Before
70
10.84
93.76
1.14
2.6044
148
127
7639
2.1
11.14
23.34000015
21.86000061
54
1.070000052
4.309999943
0.7466
1.3128
1.1399
0.115
8.26
83
0.05764129
287
21944
9.866701924
0.011760192
S02
Female
25
20
809 P1
Control
Before
81
12.82
113.13
1.38
3.1425
162
130
16068
7.28
107.17
24.01000023
22.53000069
60
1.279999971
5.550000191
0.716
1.3434
1.1584
0.137
7.73
75
0.05807687
305
24355
10.08321916
0.013052291
S02
Female
25
20
810 P1
Control
Before
127
13.93
121.56
1.48
3.3767
158
125
13206
2.68
16.04
25.45000076
23.87999916
73
0.949999988
4.010000229
1.0448
1.361
1.1525
0.149
10.05
128
0.05812738
450
37567
10.30984319
0.020132843
S02
Female
25
20
811 A2
Histamine
Before
87
12.99
125.17
1.53
3.4769
159
135
9075
1.94
8.73
23.46999931
22.09000015
52
1.25999999
4.940000057
0.6951
1.3608
1.1719
0.271
8.77
94
0.05847218
330
23944
9.611616655
0.012832028
S02
Female
25
20
812 A2
Histamine
Before
209
16.98
169.11
2.06
4.6975
166
130
44451
15.65
343.09
25.75
23.96999931
75
1.080000043
4.409999847
1.2359
1.4062
1.1552
0.124
8.05
79
0.05836896
445
35728
10.11065768
0.01914729
S02
Female
25
20
813 A2
Histamine
Before
105
12.56
115.07
1.4
3.1964
162
128
22420
9.35
155.52
24.26000023
22.32999992
71
1.360000014
5.360000134
0.9125
1.3427
1.1285
0.043
9.43
125
0.05722401
292
21931
9.778964084
0.011753225
S02
Female
25
20
814 A3
Cowhage
Before
40
9.48
83.11
1.01
2.3086
152
130
7707
3.33
23.11
22.53000069
21.19000053
49
1.75999999
9.260000229
0.4813
1.2916
1.1195
0.053
7.32
62
0.05666032
204
12913
8.977461496
0.006920313
S02
Female
25
20
815 A3
Cowhage
Before
27
10.85
99.27
1.21
2.7575
160
134
8331
3.22
20.93
22.04000092
21.06999969
35
1.350000024
5.940000057
0.272
1.3219
1.1247
0.068
7.74
74
0.05678917
243
16934
9.419583499
0.009075241
S02
Female
25
20
816 A3
Cowhage
Before
97
12.43
122.22
1.49
3.395
157
129
28639
15.65
328.15
24.06999969
22.64999962
59
1.330000043
5.510000229
0.7937
1.3509
1.1524
0.211
11.71
167
0.05642021
410
32594
10.06078716
0.017467722
S02
Female
25
20
817 P2
Control
Before
99
12.76
113.5
1.38
3.1528
154
132
7450
1.74
8.02
24.04999924
22.37999916
71
1.480000019
6.070000172
0.8722
1.3482
1.1633
0.498
17.35
334
0.06123646
319
24034
9.794285202
0.012880261
S02
Female
25
20
818 P2
Control
Before
105
12.83
115.92
1.41
3.22
151
127
21631
9.46
134.71
24.87999916
22.86000061
78
1.289999962
4.940000057
0.9058
1.3434
1.1284
0.046
7.14
67
0.05899122
276
20684
9.76827287
0.011084934
S02
Female
25
20
819 P2
Control
Before
162
14.42
136.08
1.66
3.78
173
131
58764
12.4
203.24
26.22999954
25.10000038
72
0.769999981
3.460000038
1.1905
1.3636
1.1627
0.119
6.59
52
0.0574268
550
44338
10.13122042
0.023761546
S02
Female
25
20
820 A4
Capsaicin
Before
129
14.91
149.45
1.82
4.1514
163
137
10494
1.83
8
23.95999908
22.67000008
52
1.190000057
5.329999924
0.8632
1.3941
1.1248
0.043
7.6
75
0.06095754
376
25610
9.312492288
0.013724868
S02
Female
25
20
821 A4
Capsaicin
Before
122
16.81
172.56
2.11
4.7933
176
145
30896
15.24
353.48
23.69000053
22.10000038
59
1.519999981
6.809999943
0.707
1.4152
1.1423
0.083
7.39
68
0.06012519
458
34412
9.780865289
0.018442021
S02
Female
25
20
823 A3
Cowhage
After
292
20.53
179.85
2.19
4.9958
152
124
30328
12.52
252.61
27.81999969
26.79000092
73
0.829999983
4.239999771
1.6236
1.4242
1.2005
0.377
12.75
210
0.05956662
729
77231
11.6141418
0.041389508
S02
Female
25
20
824 A3
Cowhage
After
422
23.78
211.18
2.58
5.8661
152
123
21867
9.81
181.32
27.95000076
27.21999931
69
0.519999981
3.630000114
1.9983
1.4554
1.2029
0.176
7.09
69
0.05912519
769
88432
12.10031324
0.047392329
S02
Female
25
20
825 A3
Cowhage
After
855
29.48
314.29
3.83
8.7303
154
121
25917
9.03
156.77
28.62000084
27.95000076
61
0.479999989
3.670000076
2.7204
1.5123
1.1884
0.172
8.4
98
0.05934773
638
71056
11.90817197
0.038080212
S02
Female
25
20
826 A2
Histamine
After
628
26.1
228.56
3.35
9.1424
132
103
34575
15.36
318.96
23.31999969
22.60000038
44
0.709999979
4.119999886
2.7476
1.4876
1.1835
0.22
14.32
283
0.05975403
588
56723
11.08271059
0.030398895
S02
Female
25
20
827 A2
Histamine
After
758
28.27
248.19
3.63
9.9276
130
101
26523
10.32
156.18
23.73999977
23.10000038
44
0.610000014
4.21999979
3.0541
1.4996
1.1832
0.188
13.03
259
0.05891142
677
71104
11.56399091
0.038105936
S02
Female
25
20
828 A2
Histamine
After
740
28.1
235.4
3.45
9.416
123
100
9828
3.01
24.66
23.72999954
23.02000046
46
0.629999995
4.090000153
3.1436
1.5005
1.1816
0.231
11.87
193
0.05893705
710
71931
11.35753108
0.03854914
S02
Female
25
20
829 A1
Heat
After
1270
33.89
382.63
4.67
10.6286
149
115
31597
10.67
209.57
29.54999924
29.09000015
61
0.589999974
4.210000038
3.3191
1.5397
1.2151
0.227
11.12
224
0.05938653
651
76485
12.23073906
0.040989713
S02
Female
25
20
830 A1
Heat
After
1424
35.28
408.66
4.99
11.3517
145
112
37733
12.75
240.36
29.10000038
28.48999977
61
0.49000001
4.320000172
3.4846
1.5499
1.1958
0.168
7.99
93
0.05907101
598
70421
12.24490898
0.037739904
S02
Female
25
20
831 A1
Heat
After
1372
35.45
412.21
5.03
11.4503
152
117
27992
7.86
115.06
29.28000069
28.71999931
54
0.430000007
3.900000095
3.3284
1.5508
1.2078
0.289
17.13
469
0.05854978
602
76488
12.71901461
0.04099132
S02
Female
25
20
832 P1
Control
After
195
16.55
149.6
1.83
4.1556
156
128
12375
3.7
39.35
25.64999962
23.87000084
64
1.070000052
4.46999979
1.3035
1.3943
1.1886
0.295
9.52
119
0.05894437
395
32576
10.24720418
0.017458075
S02
Female
25
20
833 P1
Control
After
333
20.09
192.31
2.35
5.3419
161
129
37009
18.06
482.77
27.04000092
25.77000046
70
0.610000014
3.410000086
1.7316
1.4309
1.1889
0.318
14.32
277
0.05899341
545
50343
10.84492004
0.026979736
S02
Female
25
20
834 P1
Control
After
391
21.08
196.45
2.4
5.4569
158
126
16534
3.17
21.7
28.61000061
27.15999985
77
0.680000007
3.559999943
1.9903
1.4374
1.2075
0.53
18.26
442
0.05927746
525
48759
10.87433737
0.026130841
S02
Female
25
20
835 A4
Capsaicin
After
1151
32.83
315.9
4.63
12.636
129
97
33126
12.7
239.25
24.12999916
23.52000046
44
0.629999995
3.920000076
3.6436
1.534
1.1888
0.326
15.12
291
0.05885798
719
74330
11.47288606
0.039834809
S02
Female
25
20
836 A4
Capsaicin
After
1196
33.86
313.18
4.59
12.5272
125
98
19393
10.63
212.06
24.17000008
23.75
40
0.439999998
3.880000114
3.8189
1.5409
1.1885
0.235
14.78
321
0.05874305
716
72649
11.36614962
0.03893393
S02
Female
25
20
837 A4
Capsaicin
After
1147
33.34
314.5
4.6
12.58
128
98
34023
12.98
241.48
24.44000053
23.88999939
45
0.540000021
4.059999943
3.6471
1.5349
1.1922
0.218
13.45
291
0.05827526
744
77346
11.50502379
0.041451138
S02
Female
25
20
838 P2
Control
After
43
13.09
124.96
1.52
3.4711
159
132
8807
3.13
21.99
21.95000076
20.87000084
36
1.480000019
7.070000172
0.3441
1.3648
1.1327
0.141
10.09
114
0.05959444
232
14438
8.901528479
0.007737589
S02
Female
25
20
839 P2
Control
After
169
15.36
151.3
1.85
4.2028
157
129
11063
3.36
27.93
24.79999924
22.82999992
65
1.139999986
4.409999847
1.117
1.392
1.1399
0.084
8.71
98
0.05978844
363
28177
9.941436041
0.01510057
S02
Female
25
20
840 P2
Control
After
88
14.47
141.06
1.72
3.9183
158
128
18022
13.27
288.23
22.62999916
21.55999947
39
1.340000033
6.070000172
0.6238
1.3813
1.1252
0.084
11.14
151
0.05998609
285
19776
9.399437317
0.010598321
S03
Male
22
22.2
842 A1
Cowhage
Before
29
12.74
119.48
1.46
3.3189
170
138
12783
4.34
38.73
22.37999916
21.60000038
35
1.120000005
5.429999828
0.2427
1.3573
1.1343
0.097
7.51
65
0.05860835
140
9908
9.492575072
0.005309879
S03
Male
22
22.2
843 A1
Cowhage
Before
151
16.19
152.69
1.86
4.2414
158
127
26051
11.81
223.66
25.01000023
23.87000084
59
0.99000001
4.53000021
0.9889
1.3942
1.1535
0.161
11.52
174
0.05895828
385
31756
10.247964
0.017018622
S03
Male
22
22.2
844 A1
Cowhage
Before
134
14.92
145.9
1.78
4.0528
158
128
22684
8.32
111.04
24.87000084
23.15999985
65
1.279999971
5.21999979
0.9184
1.3842
1.1365
0.117
11.05
158
0.0589795
328
29083
10.6252153
0.015586112
S03
Male
22
22.2
845 P1
Control
Before
29
12.23
106.76
1.3
2.9656
156
130
7367
2.55
16.21
22.51000023
21.70000076
43
1.549999952
6.940000057
0.2716
1.3404
1.143
0.257
13.78
234
0.06008565
122
8176
9.23731142
0.004381668
S03
Male
22
22.2
846 P1
Control
Before
167
15.66
137.76
1.68
3.8267
149
127
10286
2.56
14.25
25.62000084
23.87999916
74
1.080000043
4.599999905
1.2123
1.384
1.1653
0.144
8.14
87
0.06012226
455
37014
10.17729519
0.019836481
S03
Male
22
22.2
847 P1
Control
Before
600
24.58
241.93
2.95
6.7203
152
121
27053
11.41
225.13
29.32999992
28.44000053
84
0.670000017
3.75999999
2.4801
1.4685
1.1791
0.146
9.65
135
0.05807541
671
61207
10.77691223
0.032801952
S03
Male
22
22.2
848 A2
Capsaicin
Before
40
9.79
80.85
0.99
2.2458
157
128
10339
3.7
30.16
22.37000084
21.20000076
52
1.340000033
5.309999943
0.4947
1.2899
1.1411
0.152
10.82
138
0.05613104
309
20582
9.209151265
0.011030271
S03
Male
22
22.2
849 A2
Capsaicin
Before
35
9.69
80.64
0.98
2.24
142
119
8029
5.19
51.45
21.87999916
20
62
1.850000024
7.289999962
0.434
1.2871
1.1124
0.051
13.29
228
0.05543705
391
26173
9.231949777
0.01402659
S03
Male
22
22.2
850 A2
Capsaicin
Before
11
10.17
96.76
1.18
2.6878
155
125
22867
14.58
282.97
19.97999954
18.96999931
31
2.130000114
10.47999954
0.1137
1.3133
1.1036
0.102
18.21
372
0.05489239
355
22607
9.004556966
0.012115505
S03
Male
22
22.2
851 A3
Heat
Before
81
10
78.36
0.96
2.1767
145
126
7216
1.8
8.48
25.71999931
23.77000046
72
1.070000052
4.650000095
1.0337
1.283
1.1623
0.212
12.98
214
0.05808346
192
14177
9.696089479
0.007597714
S03
Male
22
22.2
853 A3
Heat
Before
219
14.1
114.53
1.4
3.1814
146
124
9727
1.84
8.21
28.44000053
27.70000076
84
0.569999993
3.369999886
1.9122
1.3489
1.2319
1.607
23.17
595
0.05820571
336
28303
10.35622927
0.015168096
S03
Male
22
22.2
854 A3
Heat
Before
492
20.32
185.51
2.26
5.1531
147
119
28202
15.82
395
30.29999924
29.78000069
81
0.409999996
3.410000086
2.6521
1.4203
1.2115
0.258
10.85
163
0.05725183
496
48494
11.15727725
0.025988823
S03
Male
22
22.2
855 P2
Control
Before
141
13.51
117.21
1.43
3.2558
152
127
11233
2.33
12.74
25.34000015
23.71999931
68
0.99000001
4.460000038
1.203
1.3555
1.1442
0.066
6.86
62
0.05826135
333
26212
10.01112818
0.014047491
S03
Male
22
22.2
856 P2
Control
Before
372
18.96
170.86
2.08
4.7461
149
123
14418
3.76
34.35
28.94000053
28.06999969
83
0.529999971
3.200000048
2.1772
1.4132
1.1834
0.217
12.66
231
0.05875842
516
45987
10.65240692
0.024645276
S03
Male
22
22.2
857 P2
Control
Before
197
17.53
158.5
1.93
4.4028
166
127
63781
13.29
225.2
26.81999969
25.18000031
78
0.889999986
3.869999886
1.2429
1.3926
1.1776
0.14
7.22
66
0.05937921
478
44175
10.84749329
0.023674192
S03
Male
22
22.2
858 A4
Histamine
Before
23
9.29
75.82
0.93
2.1061
146
128
5307
2.02
10.07
21.17000008
20.37999916
32
1.179999948
4.900000095
0.3034
1.2783
1.0964
0.015
7.99
81
0.05704978
303
19848
9.132551305
0.010636907
S03
Male
22
22.2
859 A4
Histamine
Before
77
11.43
101.3
1.24
2.8139
161
133
21020
11.34
205.12
23.79000092
22.69000053
53
1.190000057
4.989999771
0.7601
1.321
1.1288
0.044
6.13
48
0.05725183
495
38296
9.924969186
0.020523528
S03
Male
22
22.2
860 A4
Histamine
Before
46
9.79
79.25
0.97
2.2014
151
129
7762
2.31
11.89
23.92000008
22.07999992
67
1.299999952
5.119999886
0.5804
1.2879
1.1431
0.132
9.97
120
0.05663836
632
47618
9.794496052
0.025519358
S03
Male
22
22.2
861 A1
Cowhage
After
99
13.08
121.18
1.48
3.3661
153
130
11553
4.12
33.9
23.87000084
22.44000053
55
1.24000001
5.230000019
0.817
1.3565
1.1412
0.099
7.84
73
0.05966179
286
23116
10.14444719
0.012388288
S03
Male
22
22.2
862 A1
Cowhage
After
947
28.71
301.83
3.68
8.3842
142
114
25994
17.38
536.11
28.82999992
28.03000069
64
0.50999999
3.829999924
3.1375
1.5063
1.1838
0.154
9.12
119
0.05843705
647
65489
11.35238467
0.035096755
==PAGE:56==
S03
Male
22
22.2
863 A1
Cowhage
After
831
27.93
290.67
3.55
8.0742
149
117
23825
10.28
211.99
29.10000038
28.26000023
66
0.660000026
4.28000021
2.8589
1.4993
1.1934
0.19
9.99
159
0.05645022
742
75917
11.4135994
0.040685311
S03
Male
22
22.2
865 A4
Histamine
After
1133
32.96
368.76
4.5
10.2433
155
118
41511
11.44
195.36
29.27000046
28.87000084
55
0.400000006
4
3.0725
1.5334
1.187
0.253
17.97
438
0.05919327
648
69753
11.70709121
0.03738191
S03
Male
22
22.2
868 A4
Histamine
After
1059
32.37
360.44
4.4
10.0122
158
119
40112
11.13
197.31
28.61000061
28.17000008
55
0.270000011
3.940000057
2.9381
1.5285
1.2216
0.503
16.05
335
0.05883236
929
95770
11.45676344
0.051324897
S03
Male
22
22.2
869 A4
Histamine
After
809
30.37
304.64
3.72
8.4622
153
121
33706
14.08
300.11
29.19000053
28.43000031
57
0.519999981
4.079999924
2.6556
1.5104
1.214
0.342
12.73
217
0.05690776
877
93605
11.65748288
0.050164634
S03
Male
22
22.2
870 A3
Heat
After
1260
34.24
326.1
4.77
13.044
127
96
35310
14.43
292.14
24.62000084
24.36000061
40
0.379999995
4.210000038
3.8638
1.5404
1.2011
0.208
10.01
148
0.05855198
578
71471
12.54746721
0.038302618
S03
Male
22
22.2
872 A3
Heat
After
1331
34.2
317.89
4.65
12.7156
120
93
23095
14.34
327.86
24.45000076
23.92000008
42
0.49000001
4.090000153
4.187
1.5417
1.1915
0.256
16.28
399
0.05743924
635
73628
12.15037546
0.039458594
S03
Male
22
22.2
873 A3
Heat
After
1189
32.96
299.07
4.38
11.9628
122
94
23550
11.88
222
24.61000061
24.11000061
44
0.439999998
4.289999962
3.9757
1.5297
1.1931
0.216
12.86
237
0.0563858
660
69501
11.57920168
0.037246859
S03
Male
22
22.2
874 P2
Control
After
133
13.67
117.42
1.43
3.2617
153
128
15737
7.49
111.74
26.26000023
24.29000092
80
1.139999986
4.710000038
1.1327
1.3501
1.1756
0.572
18.08
380
0.05989825
338
24626
9.631493741
0.013197524
S03
Male
22
22.2
875 P2
Control
After
258
16.39
145.86
1.78
4.0517
153
124
21670
8.99
134.31
27.62000084
26.25
83
0.569999993
3.059999943
1.7688
1.3834
1.1842
0.15
8.3
96
0.06083675
308
23348
9.824366225
0.012512621
S03
Male
22
22.2
876 P2
Control
After
572
22.83
220.19
2.69
6.1164
149
116
38588
14.22
313.82
29.65999985
29.29000092
79
0.400000006
3.200000048
2.5978
1.4483
1.1887
0.163
11.07
199
0.06020864
553
48864
10.60686402
0.026187113
S04
Female
24
20
887 A1
Histamine
Before
41
11.52
109.75
1.34
3.0486
160
134
7522
1.75
7.07
22.15999985
21.05999947
45
1.539999962
6.380000114
0.3736
1.3412
1.1358
0.123
7.72
68
0.05881406
390
28064
9.57188653
0.015040012
S03
Male
22
22.2
877 A2
Capsaicin
After
1265
33.7
306.21
4.48
12.2484
119
93
16090
11.23
266.47
24.4799995
23.97999954
38
0.460000008
3.83999991
4.131
1.538
1.188
0.201
12.38
221
0.05549268
665
73657
11.87548211
0.039474136
S04
Female
24
20
888 A1
Histamine
Before
96
12.91
121.45
1.48
3.3736
159
130
19777
12.05
239.32
23.40999985
22.22999954
51
1.019999981
4.510000229
0.7904
1.3562
1.1354
0.09
9.03
101
0.05764202
569
42587
9.76196958
0.022823153
S04
Female
24
20
879 A2
Capsaicin
After
1147
33.5
301.11
4.41
12.0444
124
98
18231
12.53
327.61
24.3600006
23.84000015
42
0.639999986
4.53999996
3.809
1.536
1.188
0.206
13.88
278
0.0557511
754
77713
11.45555735
0.04164782
S04
Female
24
20
889 A1
Histamine
Before
62
11.21
102.71
1.25
2.8531
152
128
11634
8.63
140.31
22.70999908
21.05999947
56
1.74000001
7.360000134
0.6036
1.3264
1.1414
0.137
9.02
97
0.05769327
673
48532
9.58212036
0.026009188
S03
Male
22
22.2
880 A2
Capsaicin
After
1160
32.8
298.57
4.37
11.9428
122
96
18613
10.51
211.42
24.3600006
24.01000023
43
0.430000007
4.13000011
3.885
1.532
1.192
0.182
9.88
143
0.05475769
719
71878
11.28206523
0.038520737
S04
Female
24
20
890 P1
Control
Before
47
10.22
92.66
1.13
2.5739
159
129
14797
6.93
81.88
22.12000084
20.97999954
45
1.320000052
5.320000172
0.5072
1.3083
1.1192
0.079
12.29
185
0.05745022
330
23794
9.581462805
0.01275164
S03
Male
22
22.2
882 A2
Capsaicin
After
181
15.1
113.06
1.66
4.5224
135
105
23563
9
122.61
22.4500008
21.04000092
53
0.810000002
3.66000009
1.601
1.37
1.179
0.393
13.8
231
0.05943997
338
28371
10.33794057
0.015204539
S04
Female
24
20
891 P1
Control
Before
74
11.58
107.47
1.31
2.9853
163
134
24834
9.92
147.89
23.93000031
22.55999947
62
1.25999999
5.369999886
0.6886
1.3313
1.1494
0.188
10.15
122
0.05708273
334
27710
10.27779826
0.014850297
S03
Male
22
22.2
883 P1
Control
After
184
15
110.92
1.62
4.4368
137
106
14506
6.85
96.76
22.2600002
20.59000015
58
0.720000029
3.06999993
1.659
1.369
1.171
0.134
6.72
57
0.06033309
404
33052
10.2061806
0.017713172
S04
Female
24
20
892 P1
Control
Before
82
12.13
108.03
1.32
3.0008
168
135
14083
4.16
38.99
23.62999916
22.40999985
55
1
4.329999924
0.759
1.339
1.1415
0.075
8.76
105
0.05743924
393
30069
9.870025545
0.016114528
S03
Male
22
22.2
885 P1
Control
After
494
21.3
161.79
2.37
6.4716
122
99
8948
2.63
17.56
25.2099991
24.65999985
63
0.519999981
3.5
3.053
1.434
1.195
0.434
21.67
607
0.05969107
445
41375
10.88037984
0.02217362
S04
Female
24
20
893 A2
Capsaicin
Before
35
11.89
111.34
1.36
3.0928
154
131
6903
2.06
10.56
21.88999939
20.65999985
45
1.75
7.949999809
0.3144
1.3456
1.144
0.308
13.65
214
0.06023426
343
26123
9.84735341
0.013999794
S04
Female
24
20
895 A2
Capsaicin
Before
45
12.45
121.9
1.49
3.3861
161
132
8374
2.03
8.84
21.5
20.64999962
33
1.549999952
7.630000114
0.3692
1.359
1.1317
0.119
10.84
137
0.05837409
551
45619
10.2672028
0.024448058
S04
Female
24
20
896 A2
Capsaicin
Before
19
11.58
108.75
1.33
3.0208
162
138
6655
2.11
9.7
21
20.67000008
28
1.269999981
6.429999828
0.1747
1.3392
1.1288
0.115
8.46
81
0.05837116
502
37562
9.760623366
0.020130164
S04
Female
24
20
897 A3
Heat
Before
53
10.54
90.18
1.1
2.505
158
130
9354
1.95
8.84
23.34000015
22.27000046
46
0.910000026
4.179999828
0.5877
1.31
1.1429
0.103
8.36
89
0.05664788
388
31410
10.15250389
0.016833194
S04
Female
24
20
898 A3
Heat
Before
51
10.66
100.4
1.22
2.7889
171
132
40739
13.57
237.8
23.57999992
22.54999924
49
1.110000014
4.989999771
0.508
1.317
1.1324
0.076
9.5
112
0.05667423
498
40910
10.22716182
0.021924418
S04
Female
24
20
899 A3
Heat
Before
48
9.32
81.27
0.99
2.2575
161
128
15866
5.65
63.99
23.25
21.68000031
54
1.230000019
5.010000229
0.5906
1.2835
1.1554
0.11
5.59
36
0.05571743
440
37161
10.36984864
0.019915261
S04
Female
24
20
900 P2
Control
Before
15
10.14
90.67
1.11
2.5186
151
132
5467
1.98
10.51
20.64999962
19.80999947
33
2.099999905
11.55000019
0.1654
1.308
1.1213
0.145
13.62
222
0.05727233
467
35126
9.786129704
0.018824667
S04
Female
24
20
901 P2
Control
Before
51
10.24
87.84
1.07
2.44
151
131
8532
2.3
11.71
22.68000031
21.54000092
53
1.419999957
5.809999943
0.5806
1.3014
1.1261
0.058
8.41
96
0.05726867
525
39641
9.805002493
0.021244338
S04
Female
24
20
902 P2
Control
Before
37
10.4
91.57
1.12
2.5436
157
134
8343
2.85
18.93
22.31999969
21.20999908
41
1.340000033
5.579999924
0.4041
1.3086
1.167
0.228
6.69
50
0.05706516
569
46878
10.24196915
0.025122779
S04
Female
24
20
903 A4
Cowhage
Before
72
13.03
126.27
1.54
3.5075
166
136
28965
12.53
214.02
23.22999954
21.97999954
50
1.470000029
6.670000076
0.5702
1.3584
1.1357
0.096
8.57
92
0.05930747
515
40426
9.99727942
0.021665034
S04
Female
24
20
904 A4
Cowhage
Before
67
12.23
121.17
1.48
3.3658
164
130
37978
14.04
247.16
22.53000069
21.45999908
41
1.289999962
6.260000229
0.5529
1.3498
1.1223
0.054
8.98
105
0.05943192
306
22141
9.59826999
0.011865767
S04
Female
24
20
906 A4
Cowhage
After
823
30.44
316.16
3.86
8.7822
152
123
21386
9.13
176.84
28.18000031
27.42000008
55
0.49000001
3.730000019
2.6031
1.5175
1.1815
0.199
13.84
263
0.06077892
849
94255
11.88922136
0.050512981
S04
Female
24
20
908 A4
Cowhage
After
779
30.05
314.29
3.83
8.7303
159
124
28500
7.4
99.21
28.54000092
27.95000076
58
0.589999974
4.28000021
2.4786
1.5115
1.2043
0.201
11.35
214
0.05718741
697
66828
11.04887098
0.035814349
S04
Female
24
20
911 A4
Cowhage
After
719
28.49
299.46
3.65
8.3183
161
121
57708
14.28
271.86
28.70999908
27.95000076
57
0.50999999
3.779999971
2.401
1.5
1.1963
0.205
9.32
128
0.05641728
846
82321
11.13076968
0.044117332
S04
Female
24
20
919 A1
Histamine
After
1329
35.17
318.23
4.66
12.7292
119
93
19476
12.7
277.17
24.93000031
24.55999947
42
0.330000013
3.789999962
4.1762
1.5416
1.1841
0.113
6.36
56
0.05783456
710
86233
12.43548227
0.046213844
S04
Female
24
20
920 A1
Histamine
After
1370
34.53
315.42
4.62
12.6168
117
93
15488
9.91
190.96
24.70999908
24.39999962
40
0.300000012
3.769999981
4.3434
1.5413
1.2045
0.326
13.9
286
0.05908419
706
90514
12.77646141
0.048508111
S04
Female
24
20
923 A1
Histamine
After
1175
32.6
291.04
4.26
11.6416
120
93
22373
11.6
207.94
24.96999931
24.60000038
43
0.419999987
3.930000067
4.0372
1.5262
1.19
0.253
21.95
722
0.05849707
739
99803
13.11307781
0.053486256
S04
Female
24
20
924 P2
Control
After
21
11.51
108.21
1.32
3.0058
157
131
7537
3.09
22.63
21.29000092
20.76000023
28
0.860000014
4.78000021
0.1941
1.3369
1.0959
0.023
13.19
216
0.06027892
472
36645
9.942404383
0.019638727
S04
Female
24
20
925 P2
Control
After
23
11.13
107.92
1.32
2.9978
153
131
5935
1.76
8.06
20.77000046
20.10000038
28
1.340000033
7.570000172
0.2131
1.3378
1.1079
0.086
14.63
243
0.06030235
154
9961
9.074990288
0.005338282
S04
Female
24
20
927 P2
Control
After
36
12.68
121.31
1.48
3.3697
162
135
8162
2.3
12.26
21.88999939
21.20999908
32
1.129999995
5.679999828
0.2968
1.3591
1.1367
0.147
8.72
83
0.06007028
541
44117
10.18965343
0.023643108
S04
Female
24
20
928 A2
Capsaicin
After
32
11.22
101.71
1.24
2.8253
151
128
5900
1.99
9.62
21.27000046
20.29000092
36
1.610000014
7.090000153
0.3146
1.3275
1.126
0.12
11.57
167
0.06020205
344
28064
10.19179369
0.015040012
S04
Female
24
20
930 A2
Capsaicin
After
53
13.16
121.96
1.49
3.3878
152
131
6711
2.11
10.39
22.14999962
21.20000076
38
1.419999957
6.940000057
0.4346
1.3612
1.124
0.052
7.34
65
0.06036823
673
59708
10.62829963
0.031998611
S04
Female
24
20
931 A2
Capsaicin
After
65
14.4
138.77
1.69
3.8547
169
130
45084
12.23
185.94
22.45999908
21.45999908
39
1.169999957
5.840000153
0.4684
1.3705
1.1312
0.099
10.1
116
0.06129429
817
76566
10.92350497
0.041033122
S04
Female
24
20
932 P1
Control
After
54
10.92
99.43
1.21
2.7619
159
131
14462
8.63
133.92
22.03000069
20.85000038
43
1.360000014
5.860000134
0.5431
1.3235
1.1263
0.135
13.21
200
0.05943851
422
32610
9.91914487
0.017476296
S04
Female
24
20
934 P1
Control
After
37
11.05
98.52
1.2
2.7367
152
131
6283
2.16
11.41
21.47999954
20.82999992
32
0.949999988
4.690000057
0.3756
1.3231
1.1223
0.085
9.67
108
0.059694
452
36021
10.07311343
0.019304314
S04
Female
24
20
935 P1
Control
After
23
11.65
112.68
1.37
3.13
160
132
13762
7.36
88.68
20.29000092
19.47999954
28
1.710000038
9.829999924
0.2041
1.34
1.1061
0.054
12.8
190
0.05797804
806
62723
9.954075936
0.033614405
S05
Female
24
19
937 A1
Cowhage
Before
30
11.91
115.39
1.41
3.2053
160
137
7783
2.36
13.08
21.70000076
20.96999931
35
1.159999967
5.590000153
0.26
1.3502
1.1116
0.069
11.6
158
0.060208
275
20312
9.697618
0.010886
S05
Female
24
19
938 A1
Cowhage
Before
57
13.03
128.82
1.57
3.5783
161
135
16852
11.89
238.97
22.51000023
21.88999939
39
0.870000005
4.480000019
0.4425
1.3649
1.115
0.036
9.53
124
0.060434
426
33840
10.05693
0.018135
S05
Female
24
19
939 A1
Cowhage
Before
48
12.39
125.98
1.54
3.4994
167
136
17216
7.17
84.4
22.82999992
21.93000031
44
1.700000048
8.529999733
0.381
1.3555
1.1279
0.087
9.66
111
0.060097
435
32362
9.732583
0.017343
S05
Female
24
19
940 P1
Control
Before
37
10.2
91.85
1.12
2.5514
148
126
7220
3.06
18.88
21.54999924
20.31999969
43
1.440000057
6.320000172
0.4028
1.3089
1.1157
0.043
8.36
87
0.056381
357
26358
9.695656
0.014126
S05
Female
24
19
941 P1
Control
Before
39
11.53
99.66
1.22
2.7683
158
131
8729
2.12
9.94
22.53000069
21.27000046
47
1.409999967
6.159999847
0.3913
1.3251
1.1091
0.032
9.45
103
0.057791
435
32022
9.681322
0.017161
S05
Female
24
19
942 P1
Control
Before
23
10.8
94.52
1.15
2.6256
163
137
8573
2.79
16.27
22.05999947
21.29000092
36
1.519999981
7.389999866
0.2433
1.3167
1.1087
0.035
10.64
137
0.05766
340
24541
9.586536
0.013152
S05
Female
24
19
943 A2
Heat
Before
138
15.08
140.78
1.72
3.9106
165
131
54484
15.06
282.17
25.20999908
23.56999969
65
1.110000014
4.789999962
0.9803
1.3741
1.1499
0.133
10.72
138
0.058266
470
36243
9.908735
0.019423
S05
Female
24
19
944 A2
Heat
Before
120
16.4
157.89
1.93
4.3858
174
130
68287
13.3
212.64
24.95000076
23.45999908
57
0.980000019
4.050000191
0.76
1.3926
1.1713
0.202
9.59
127
0.059388
445
33412
9.777465
0.017906
S05
Female
24
19
945 A2
Heat
Before
130
15.08
142.43
1.74
3.9564
166
128
42628
13.08
232.34
25.14999962
23.52000046
63
1.190000057
5.590000153
0.9127
1.3768
1.1568
0.113
8.42
95
0.058115
529
39532
9.754424
0.021186
S05
Female
24
19
946 A3
Capsaicin
Before
87
11.05
90.12
1.1
2.5033
158
132
12438
4.85
52.04
24.88999939
23.37999916
66
0.860000014
3.74000001
0.9654
1.305
1.1594
0.119
7.16
62
0.058528
321
23592
9.673529
0.012643
S05
Female
24
19
947 A3
Capsaicin
Before
113
12
105.79
1.29
2.9386
168
126
66779
11.52
167.38
27.04999924
25.20000076
80
0.839999974
3.5
1.0682
1.318
1.1637
0.276
14.55
257
0.058761
357
28100
10.01092
0.015059
S05
Female
24
19
948 A3
Capsaicin
Before
142
13.07
114.65
1.4
3.1847
151
120
43098
15.11
290.97
25.65999985
23.75
76
0.939999998
4.400000095
1.2386
1.3396
1.1634
0.276
17.12
372
0.059418
448
33749
9.793693
0.018087
S05
Female
24
19
949 P2
Control
Before
40
11.03
95.51
1.17
2.6531
152
128
9857
5.24
64.99
22.62999916
21.87999916
48
1.419999957
6.769999981
0.4188
1.3169
1.1314
0.088
7.75
70
0.059015
341
24085
9.483119
0.012908
S05
Female
24
19
950 P2
Control
Before
74
13.67
117.19
1.43
3.2553
155
134
8163
2.2
11.78
23.45999908
22.19000053
51
1.25
5.880000114
0.6315
1.3536
1.1232
0.06
13.6
252
0.060804
422
33324
10.02715
0.017859
S05
Female
24
19
951 P2
Control
Before
41
12.72
109.24
1.33
3.0344
149
128
5751
1.98
8.86
22.89999962
22.12999916
41
1.149999976
5.159999847
0.3753
1.3443
1.1242
0.092
12.85
199
0.060233
336
25197
9.771469
0.013504
S05
Female
24
19
952 A4
Histamine
Before
70
14.54
121.66
1.48
3.3794
159
134
8532
1.81
8.74
23.92000008
22.71999931
52
1.139999986
4.929999828
0.5754
1.3655
1.1601
0.178
9.48
108
0.058955
401
28933
9.584724
0.015506
S05
Female
24
19
953 A4
Histamine
Before
70
13.67
112.76
1.38
3.1322
153
130
9189
2.78
17.78
23.98999977
23
53
1.230000019
6.25
0.6208
1.351
1.165
0.185
8.36
88
0.058258
580
44215
9.852033
0.023696
S05
Female
24
19
954 A4
Histamine
Before
74
14.94
137.86
1.68
3.8294
159
133
11289
4.49
43.67
23.20000076
21.90999985
51
1.350000024
5.519999981
0.5368
1.3817
1.1445
0.125
8.65
88
0.058791
652
48920
9.774048
0.026217
S05
Female
24
19
956 A1
Cowhage
After 
886
30.72
318.93
3.89
8.8592
155
120
28735
8.83
141.9
29.43000031
28.95000076
60
0.449999988
4.269999981
2.778
1.5145
1.2043
0.385
17.15
431
0.057871
709
77523
11.79906
0.041546
S05
Female
24
19
957 A1
Cowhage
After 
980
31.11
346.83
4.23
9.6342
156
116
56590
11.56
179.93
29.27000046
28.67000008
60
0.330000013
3.859999895
2.8256
1.5192
1.1953
0.256
9.73
119
0.059232
706
75949
11.70345
0.040702
S05
Female
24
19
958 A1
Cowhage
After 
998
31.44
334.84
4.09
9.3011
149
117
30556
15.91
436.6
29.01000023
28.53000069
55
0.430000007
3.859999895
2.9805
1.5235
1.1993
0.263
11.76
211
0.0601
664
70858
11.65643
0.037974
S05
Female
24
19
959 A4
Histamine
After 
999
31.72
339.47
4.14
9.4297
152
118
25801
7.07
88.19
29.21999931
28.51000023
60
0.610000014
4.130000114
2.9428
1.5232
1.1854
0.142
7.75
84
0.058045
644
63019
11.16215
0.033773
S05
Female
24
19
960 A4
Histamine
After 
992
32.12
334.57
4.08
9.2936
152
118
25037
7.77
117.4
29.45000076
28.94000053
62
0.5
4.210000038
2.965
1.5238
1.1992
0.264
14.09
273
0.058654
670
62456
10.89444
0.033471
S05
Female
24
19
961 A4
Histamine
After 
970
32.18
354.03
4.32
9.8342
160
119
39444
9.45
137.41
29.03000069
28.28000069
58
0.479999989
3.799999952
2.7399
1.5261
1.1878
0.148
8.05
91
0.057957
690
63528
10.82712
0.034046
S05
Female
24
19
962 A2
Heat
After 
1365
35.64
395.7
4.83
10.9917
145
114
33155
14.07
301.86
29.39999962
28.85000038
60
0.50999999
4.429999828
3.4496
1.5477
1.2005
0.387
24.51
805
0.058929
801
82089
11.42303
0.043993
S05
Female
24
19
963 A2
Heat
After 
1385
36.02
389.08
4.75
10.8078
141
113
16562
6.47
99.92
29.23999977
28.67000008
56
0.49000001
3.970000029
3.5597
1.5513
1.2008
0.235
11.95
209
0.059889
814
87476
11.69735
0.04688
S05
Female
24
19
964 A2
Heat
After 
1439
36.19
401.69
4.9
11.1581
140
109
24628
10.42
196.46
29.39999962
28.81999969
60
0.419999987
4.010000229
3.5824
1.5516
1.188
0.172
9.57
125
0.060261
871
92963
11.65738
0.049821
S05
Female
24
19
965 P1
Control
After 
53
11.94
110.48
1.35
3.0689
159
133
28576
16.08
347.29
22.69000053
21.79000092
44
1.539999962
6.940000057
0.4797
1.336
1.1368
0.122
8.97
99
0.057375
405
29057
9.55769
0.015572
S05
Female
24
19
966 P1
Control
After 
104
13.66
126.02
1.54
3.5006
159
128
22809
12.95
266.79
24.19000053
22.64999962
63
1.320000052
5.400000095
0.8253
1.3603
1.1568
0.165
9.39
105
0.058761
460
36465
10.04649
0.019542
S05
Female
24
19
967 P1
Control
After 
95
14.09
128.48
1.57
3.5689
154
127
8191
1.99
9
23.89999962
22.57999992
55
1.529999971
6.710000038
0.7394
1.3694
1.1408
0.253
22.47
582
0.058612
467
36773
10.01293
0.019707
S05
Female
24
19
968 A3
Capsaicin
After 
38
9.61
76.27
0.93
2.1186
154
128
8301
2.09
9.31
22.97999954
21.75
49
1.279999971
5.420000076
0.4982
1.2804
1.1684
0.232
9.01
100
0.055869
306
20340
9.199619
0.010901
S05
Female
24
19
969 A3
Capsaicin
After 
95
11.43
103.94
1.27
2.8872
160
128
35685
16.72
366.04
24.98999977
23.45000076
63
1.139999986
4.639999866
0.914
1.3235
1.1462
0.177
11.43
166
0.057187
313
22090
9.479398
0.011838
S05
Female
24
19
970 A3
Capsaicin
After 
107
12.29
109.08
1.33
3.03
158
133
9131
2.12
10.23
24.95999908
23.59000015
58
0.819999993
3.569999933
0.9809
1.3398
1.1671
0.268
11.61
166
0.056787
436
31543
9.597615
0.016904
S05
Female
24
19
971 P2
Control
After 
57
12.33
107.97
1.32
2.9992
154
127
12238
5.04
46.38
22.31999969
21.51000023
47
1.470000029
6.559999943
0.5279
1.3384
1.1447
0.264
18.43
400
0.059311
356
25407
9.532499
0.013616
S05
Female
24
19
972 P2
Control
After 
39
12.12
110.3
1.35
3.0639
154
131
7107
3.35
30.47
22.46999931
21.70000076
40
1.24000001
5.96999979
0.3536
1.3415
1.1258
0.081
14.19
272
0.059879
340
23748
9.430378
0.012727
S05
Female
24
19
973 P2
Control
After 
261
17.22
161.68
1.97
4.4911
170
128
36534
8.33
114.53
26.67000008
25.21999931
75
0.519999981
2.630000114
1.6143
1.3988
1.172
0.205
10.81
159
0.057889
523
37780
9.590366
0.020247
S06
Male
24
28
976 A1
Histamine
Before
841
29.14
307.11
3.75
8.5308
159
119
42022
8.98
119.83
29.52000046
29.12999916
60
0.280000001
3.630000114
2.7384
1.5012
1.1852
0.124
8
95
0.05693485
288
19402
9.261515663
0.010397887
S06
Male
24
28
977 A1
Histamine
Before
803
29.21
305.16
3.72
8.4767
160
124
39609
12.02
226.25
29.21999931
28.68000031
56
0.430000007
3.690000057
2.6314
1.5031
1.2139
0.314
12.8
245
0.05747438
409
32430
10.04770509
0.017379831
S06
Male
24
28
978 A1
Histamine
Before
873
29.3
311.72
3.8
8.6589
157
117
55015
12.93
230.01
29.28000069
28.71999931
58
0.419999987
3.660000086
2.8006
1.5038
1.199
0.158
7.37
78
0.0572328
395
31373
10.05621468
0.016813365
S06
Male
24
28
979 P1
Control
Before
900
31.02
315.76
3.85
8.7711
148
121
21996
12.54
326.98
28.97999954
28.34000015
60
0.579999983
4.119999886
2.8503
1.5173
1.1958
0.142
6.82
65
0.05699707
199
13267
9.213293062
0.007110028
S06
Male
24
28
980 P1
Control
Before
1170
33.09
364.81
4.45
10.1336
149
112
50034
13.55
253.12
29.32999992
28.88999939
60
0.349999994
4.070000172
3.2071
1.5297
1.2052
0.253
12.58
221
0.05797731
283
18554
9.13651597
0.009943428
S06
Male
24
28
981 P1
Control
Before
1232
33.2
359.58
4.39
9.9883
140
112
23464
11.48
251.19
29.15999985
28.56999969
59
0.49000001
4.409999847
3.4262
1.5334
1.1922
0.18
10.76
166
0.05831772
306
22509
9.677706494
0.012062985
S06
Male
24
28
982 A2
Capsaicin
Before
99
15.18
144.03
1.76
4.0008
167
135
17369
6.17
81.01
23.38999939
22.38999939
45
1.440000057
7.400000095
0.6874
1.3902
1.1343
0.06
7.53
71
0.05676647
241
15797
9.135532082
0.008465902
S06
Male
24
28
983 A2
Capsaicin
Before
56
14.41
138.38
1.69
3.8439
183
140
22951
4.39
31.63
22.82999992
22.17000008
39
1.399999976
7.070000172
0.4047
1.3801
1.1565
0.39
15.81
302
0.05572621
320
20615
9.056736653
0.011047956
==PAGE:57==
S06
Male
24
28
984 A2
Capsaicin
Before
31
11.85
103.68
1.27
2.88
178
140
21120
7.1
96.11
22.63999939
21.80999947
38
1
4.769999981
0.299
1.3317
1.1162
0.033
9.07
109
0.05613031
459
35558
9.931557912
0.019056184
S06
Male
24
28
985 A3
Cowhage
Before
40
11.82
114.15
1.39
3.1708
167
140
21526
11.42
198.19
22.20000076
21.5
36
1.25
5.75
0.3504
1.3442
1.1443
0.788
24.45
621
0.05829502
317
24048
9.827994615
0.012887764
S06
Male
24
28
986 A3
Cowhage
Before
50
12.6
125.52
1.53
3.4867
170
134
16448
6
66.87
22.36000061
21.47999954
39
1.49000001
7.519999981
0.3983
1.3606
1.1295
0.065
8.97
103
0.05949634
479
36483
9.847649308
0.019551908
S06
Male
24
28
987 A3
Cowhage
Before
98
14.43
146.54
1.79
4.0706
165
135
21279
9.27
135.57
23.40999985
22.29999924
49
1.700000048
8.550000191
0.6688
1.3858
1.1232
0.059
11.66
183
0.05951611
389
27906
9.557164332
0.014955337
S06
Male
24
28
988 P2
Control
Before
40
12.95
108.25
1.32
3.0069
163
138
9782
3.31
25.72
23.04999924
22.31999969
44
1.779999971
8.949999809
0.3695
1.3428
1.1399
0.195
14.23
255
0.05786091
152
11083
9.635226582
0.005939583
S06
Male
24
28
989 P2
Control
Before
71
14.75
135.51
1.65
3.7642
169
136
13928
3.73
29.86
23.02000046
22.60000038
37
1.360000014
7.489999771
0.5239
1.3778
1.1761
0.205
7.19
64
0.05967497
180
11853
9.156572722
0.00635224
S06
Male
24
28
990 P2
Control
Before
53
15.28
142.33
1.74
3.9536
166
136
18688
11.66
231.55
22.87999916
22.05999947
41
1.419999957
6.840000153
0.3724
1.3863
1.181
0.763
21.49
542
0.05976428
375
30892
10.24147333
0.016555589
S06
Male
24
28
991 A4
Heat
Before
16
10.56
101.24
1.24
2.8122
165
136
11189
3.77
26.6
21.51000023
20.97999954
29
0.819999993
4.510000229
0.158
1.3235
1.1179
0.07
9.24
99
0.05963324
433
33477
9.921660844
0.017940938
S06
Male
24
28
992 A4
Heat
Before
26
11.53
105.2
1.28
2.9222
160
134
8635
2.64
15.87
22.05999947
21.28000069
37
1.49000001
7.130000114
0.2471
1.3347
1.1242
0.146
12.69
189
0.05985066
634
57583
10.75369152
0.030859784
S06
Male
24
28
993 A4
Heat
Before
39
12.16
111.43
1.36
3.0953
162
132
11686
4.53
42.38
22.28000069
21.44000053
36
1.25
6.329999924
0.35
1.3416
1.1195
0.05
9.23
108
0.05972767
679
57852
10.41548172
0.031003947
S06
Male
24
28
995 A3
Cowhage
After
48
10.51
95.58
1.17
2.655
157
130
11247
4.35
34.3
22.34000015
20.95000076
48
1.429999948
6.119999886
0.5022
1.317
1.1282
0.083
8.83
95
0.05953148
715
67551
10.96775978
0.036201818
S06
Male
24
28
997 A3
Cowhage
After
84
13.09
136.02
1.66
3.7783
173
137
26205
11.38
217.14
23.38999939
22.04999924
54
1.580000043
7.360000134
0.6176
1.3708
1.1352
0.192
12.74
196
0.05864056
759
81572
11.6978144
0.043715929
S06
Male
24
28
998 A3
Cowhage
After
116
14.93
149.36
1.82
4.1489
167
140
11039
2.44
14.18
23.80999947
22.62000084
52
1.190000057
4.940000057
0.7766
1.3933
1.1493
0.135
8.55
88
0.05803807
696
76874
11.85878456
0.041198185
S06
Male
24
28
1000 A1
Histamine
After
821
28.53
236.39
3.46
9.4556
123
95
14659
6.8
100.94
24.98999977
24.62000084
41
0.289999992
3.299999952
3.4731
1.4964
1.2007
0.332
19.31
557
0.05993558
655
67914
11.48984221
0.036396357
S06
Male
24
28
1001 A1
Histamine
After
835
28.79
235.95
3.45
9.438
121
96
15537
9.28
173.24
24.67000008
24.19000053
45
0.479999989
3.849999905
3.5389
1.498
1.1817
0.12
6.78
61
0.06019912
630
68628
11.77702117
0.036779002
S06
Male
24
28
1002 A1
Histamine
After
881
28.96
239.7
3.51
9.588
117
94
15438
11.06
252.86
24.54000092
24.26000023
43
0.25999999
3.559999943
3.6754
1.4998
1.1892
0.182
10.37
172
0.05896413
546
60991
11.9259124
0.032686194
S06
Male
24
28
1004 A4
Heat
After
33
10.85
87.7
1.07
2.4361
164
129
33341
11.31
180.15
23.01000023
22.20999908
43
1.110000014
4.769999981
0.3763
1.2983
1.1549
0.284
11.09
142
0.05987189
610
58665
11.06572006
0.031439648
S06
Male
24
28
1006 A4
Heat
After
55
12.61
109.66
1.34
3.0461
158
131
18484
7.85
101.49
23.38999939
22.04999924
59
1.970000029
9.699999809
0.5016
1.341
1.1369
0.14
12.67
193
0.05980161
777
83310
11.68404221
0.044647355
S06
Male
24
28
1008 A4
Heat
After
29
12.36
106.21
1.3
2.9503
155
128
10044
4.07
35.29
22.46999931
21.39999962
40
1.570000052
6.940000057
0.273
1.3417
1.1267
0.073
9.41
113
0.05760835
678
72938
11.70353714
0.03908881
S06
Male
24
28
1009 A2
Capsaicin
After
50
13.46
122.21
1.49
3.3947
158
133
8223
3.15
24.66
22.67000008
22.28000069
31
0.850000024
4.639999866
0.4091
1.3628
1.1333
0.164
14.63
255
0.05792826
259
16927
9.122107258
0.009071489
S06
Male
24
28
1010 A2
Capsaicin
After
55
13.96
132.06
1.61
3.6683
160
132
18398
11.21
216.04
22.75
21.95000076
41
1.360000014
6
0.4165
1.3723
1.1317
0.101
7.98
73
0.05778697
330
21878
9.187596177
0.011724821
S06
Male
24
28
1011 A2
Capsaicin
After
72
15.4
147.68
1.8
4.1022
168
140
16118
7.52
119.78
23.29999924
22.21999931
49
1.49000001
7.360000134
0.4875
1.3911
1.1444
0.098
7.15
63
0.05579576
346
25313
9.65136676
0.0135657
S06
Male
24
28
1012 P1
Control
After
66
13.83
140.72
1.72
3.9089
166
131
61865
14.32
243.54
23.21999931
21.92000008
50
1.299999952
5.539999962
0.469
1.3709
1.1329
0.126
11.71
163
0.05805637
145
9650
9.205231499
0.005171612
S06
Male
24
28
1013 P1
Control
After
213
19.44
176.34
2.15
4.8983
161
133
13318
2.97
25.63
25.95000076
24.63999939
67
0.860000014
4.03000021
1.2079
1.4238
1.1798
0.279
17.03
398
0.05832724
165
10551
9.02318577
0.005654474
S06
Male
24
28
1014 P1
Control
After
131
18.3
176.95
2.16
4.9153
177
136
40555
12.25
214.98
24.29000092
23.21999931
53
1.25999999
6.409999847
0.7403
1.4173
1.1699
0.213
10.01
132
0.05873792
208
14417
9.394222477
0.007726334
S06
Male
24
28
1015 P2
Control
After
199
16.99
157.52
1.92
4.3756
151
125
17045
8.04
127.7
25.20999908
23.94000053
63
0.970000029
4.670000076
1.2633
1.4014
1.1769
0.168
7.03
64
0.05908639
203
13477
9.193982114
0.007222571
S06
Male
24
28
1016 P2
Control
After
775
28.11
287.58
3.51
7.9883
150
115
53864
13.23
229.21
29.29999924
28.32999992
71
0.660000026
4.039999962
2.6949
1.4919
1.203
0.259
12.84
257
0.05880527
432
33421
9.924826105
0.017910926
S06
Male
24
28
1017 P2
Control
After
745
26.45
265.95
3.24
7.3875
146
116
28497
10.24
164.93
28.70000076
28.07999992
63
0.449999988
3.5
2.8013
1.4821
1.2214
0.294
9.17
116
0.05842972
438
32597
9.734346929
0.017469329
S07
Female
45
19
1021 A1
Heat
Before
18
11.96
120.71
1.47
3.3531
157
135
6352
2.04
9.57
20.87999916
20.36000061
27
1.269999981
7.230000019
0.1491
1.357
1.1134
0.113
13.29
205
0.0584795
155
9917
9.025668259
0.005314702
S07
Female
45
19
1022 A1
Heat
Before
18
12.2
125.57
1.53
3.4881
166
137
26097
13.34
238.96
20.95000076
20.37999916
25
1.340000033
7.880000114
0.1433
1.355
1.1076
0.092
15.56
293
0.05860688
185
11741
8.989214407
0.006292217
S07
Female
45
19
1023 A1
Heat
Before
28
12.62
126.2
1.54
3.5056
160
136
7284
2.08
10.48
21.09000015
20.57999992
25
1.019999981
5.340000153
0.2219
1.3635
1.1307
0.165
10.3
124
0.05875476
191
11776
8.86007247
0.006310974
S07
Female
45
19
1024 A1
Heat
Before
28
13.13
130.65
1.59
3.6292
168
139
8736
2.06
10.17
21.07999992
20.71999931
25
1.169999957
6.550000191
0.2143
1.3712
1.1132
0.092
12.93
194
0.05876867
267
17544
9.146685319
0.009402151
S07
Female
45
19
1025 A1
Heat
Before
37
13.69
138.93
1.7
3.8592
160
137
10723
7.91
131.48
21.62000084
21.17000008
27
1.200000048
6.579999924
0.2663
1.3799
1.1229
0.094
9.9
117
0.05936164
241
14949
8.886947386
0.008011443
S07
Female
45
19
1026 P1
Control
Before
119
16.27
166.92
2.04
4.6367
174
133
33802
12.91
252.17
23.55999947
22.20000076
48
1.389999986
6.329999924
0.7129
1.4041
1.1272
0.069
9.6
113
0.05825403
263
22504
10.4377537
0.012060306
S07
Female
45
19
1027 P1
Control
Before
308
19.14
195.65
2.39
5.4347
155
126
18797
8.23
134.03
25.55999947
24.03000069
64
1.029999971
4.849999905
1.5742
1.4346
1.1542
0.153
15.28
332
0.05938946
354
31073
10.57170464
0.01665259
S07
Female
45
19
1029 P1
Control
Before
232
18.36
189.51
2.31
5.2642
164
135
18913
7.35
98.12
25.03000069
23.45999908
59
0.970000029
4.019999981
1.2242
1.4302
1.1616
0.446
22.9
636
0.05984188
369
30056
10.18374386
0.016107561
S07
Female
45
19
1030 P1
Control
Before
263
19.35
200.65
2.45
5.5736
162
132
16045
4.5
44.91
25.12999916
23.40999985
64
0.949999988
3.960000038
1.3107
1.4403
1.1617
0.194
10.28
138
0.05994949
383
31191
10.18287287
0.016715828
S07
Female
45
19
1031 P1
Control
Before
287
19.22
198.04
2.42
5.5011
157
126
30126
13.5
275.34
25.75
24.10000038
68
0.879999995
3.720000029
1.4492
1.4349
1.1601
0.276
18.01
437
0.05920644
377
30586
10.16355698
0.016391598
S07
Female
45
19
1032 A2
Histamine
Before
119
14.51
132.97
1.62
3.6936
152
123
10020
2.26
10.72
23.85000038
21.98999977
58
0.939999998
3.440000057
0.8949
1.3753
1.1506
0.211
15.09
303
0.05809883
315
23529
9.752175703
0.012609622
S07
Female
45
19
1033 A2
Histamine
Before
115
15.97
155.7
1.9
4.325
172
135
29031
11.3
186.58
23.75
22.20999908
58
1.100000024
4.25
0.7386
1.3969
1.1436
0.114
11.24
165
0.059541
305
23010
9.800843377
0.01233148
S07
Female
45
19
1034 A2
Histamine
Before
97
14.43
131.89
1.61
3.6636
160
131
15818
5.83
64.59
24.20000076
22.62999916
63
1.159999967
4.820000172
0.7355
1.3692
1.1577
0.144
8.48
94
0.0578836
541
39494
9.640997887
0.021165558
S07
Female
45
19
1035 A2
Histamine
Before
101
14.2
127.9
1.56
3.5528
158
132
10141
2.47
14.04
23.71999931
22.62999916
56
1.320000052
5.679999828
0.7897
1.3682
1.1379
0.074
8.36
90
0.05718229
467
34043
9.634086281
0.018244267
S07
Female
45
19
1036 A2
Histamine
Before
148
16.91
162.09
1.98
4.5025
160
131
10855
2.5
12.84
24.19000053
22.69000053
59
1.379999995
6.5
0.9131
1.4098
1.1517
0.136
9.65
125
0.05781333
368
29615
10.12248212
0.015871221
S07
Female
45
19
1037 A3
Capsaicin
Before
22
11.04
108.86
1.33
3.0239
151
132
5417
2.43
14.33
21.12000084
20.31999969
33
1.669999957
8.5
0.2021
1.338
1.1059
0.058
12.1
185
0.05746413
143
7810
8.338972805
0.004185522
S07
Female
45
19
1038 A3
Capsaicin
Before
21
11.32
112.09
1.37
3.1136
160
134
11913
8.56
141.41
21.51000023
20.88999939
29
1.519999981
8.359999657
0.1873
1.3403
1.1101
0.093
14.16
244
0.05783236
159
8875
8.430254351
0.004756275
S07
Female
45
19
1039 A3
Capsaicin
Before
14
11.48
117.14
1.43
3.2539
162
137
7006
2.19
10.08
21
20.47999954
23
0.629999995
3.430000067
0.1195
1.35
1.1248
0.148
11.82
171
0.05806003
201
12131
8.766078026
0.006501225
S07
Female
45
19
1040 A3
Capsaicin
Before
21
11.56
118.84
1.45
3.3011
163
138
6997
2.11
9.52
21.18000031
20.68000031
25
1.100000024
6.440000057
0.1767
1.3511
1.1026
0.077
14.54
229
0.05804978
123
6905
8.454430241
0.003700516
S07
Female
45
19
1041 A3
Capsaicin
Before
17
12.11
123.58
1.51
3.4328
160
137
5965
1.8
7.48
21.17000008
20.79999924
23
0.970000029
5.929999828
0.1376
1.3594
1.1103
0.096
12.68
175
0.05828478
161
9078
8.47300008
0.004865066
S07
Female
45
19
1042 P2
Control
Before
43
14.45
148.65
1.81
4.1292
171
143
9262
2.08
9.47
21.95999908
21.57999992
29
1.049999952
6.070000172
0.2893
1.3923
1.1284
0.113
10.32
121
0.06024451
180
13260
9.684798043
0.007106277
S07
Female
45
19
1043 P2
Control
Before
297
18.86
197.8
2.41
5.4944
168
130
30973
8.97
124.84
26.46999931
24.55999947
72
0.99000001
4.170000076
1.5015
1.4298
1.1758
0.296
12.41
211
0.06113324
414
37362
10.71938691
0.02002298
S07
Female
45
19
1044 P2
Control
Before
203
18.26
176.45
2.15
4.9014
166
136
14855
5.79
81.35
25.37000084
23.79999924
67
0.959999979
4.230000019
1.1505
1.4205
1.1533
0.11
9.03
105
0.06
375
32647
10.52836821
0.017496125
S07
Female
45
19
1045 P2
Control
Before
130
16.44
166.17
2.03
4.6158
165
138
11241
2.39
12.36
23.61000061
22.37999916
49
1.100000024
5.010000229
0.7823
1.4119
1.1487
0.218
15.01
296
0.06016838
380
30232
10.0646042
0.016201883
S07
Female
45
19
1046 P2
Control
Before
151
15.1
152.46
1.86
4.235
166
131
31805
15.61
365.6
24.26000023
22.61000061
63
1.200000048
4.699999809
0.9904
1.3885
1.1389
0.087
10.47
140
0.05821596
459
38406
10.32162925
0.020582479
S07
Female
45
19
1047 A2
Histamine
After
748
29.15
314.74
3.84
8.7428
162
125
30638
8.59
124.31
28.01000023
27.12000084
60
0.600000024
3.779999971
2.3766
1.5114
1.1923
0.218
11.59
209
0.05916252
814
73816
10.74528925
0.039559347
S07
Female
45
19
1049 A2
Histamine
After
807
29.65
309.77
3.78
8.6047
156
123
22195
7.65
127.97
28.59000015
27.87999916
61
0.579999983
3.599999905
2.6052
1.5113
1.1976
0.277
13.98
268
0.06041362
584
53571
10.80720806
0.02870968
S07
Female
45
19
1050 A2
Histamine
After
803
29.09
299.6
3.66
8.3222
147
121
13386
2.6
17.3
28.34000015
27.69000053
61
0.449999988
3.460000038
2.6802
1.5092
1.1846
0.172
8.57
99
0.06007833
596
53527
10.69346325
0.0286861
S07
Female
45
19
1051 A2
Histamine
After
856
29.63
314.3
3.83
8.7306
155
121
24330
7.29
105.05
29.34000015
28.54000092
65
0.529999971
3.529999971
2.7235
1.51
1.1855
0.185
13.3
281
0.06036457
722
73661
11.39738623
0.039476279
S07
Female
45
19
1052 A2
Histamine
After
964
31.25
338.86
4.13
9.4128
152
121
30525
11.8
232.14
28.96999931
28.26000023
63
0.50999999
3.640000105
2.8448
1.5224
1.1887
0.156
9.08
127
0.06122548
822
77174
10.93338537
0.04135896
S07
Female
45
19
1053 A2
Histamine
After
1024
31.27
328.91
4.01
9.1364
145
117
16996
6.28
94.99
29.21999931
28.40999985
65
0.639999986
3.99000001
3.1133
1.5217
1.1894
0.159
9.09
121
0.06108931
682
64634
10.98483123
0.034638545
S07
Female
45
19
1054 A1
Heat
After
241
17.87
172.78
2.11
4.7994
154
132
11491
2.83
19.69
25.80999947
24.30999947
70
1.080000043
4.699999809
1.3948
1.4172
1.157
0.14
10.79
163
0.05753148
487
47906
11.19142874
0.025673703
S07
Female
45
19
1055 A1
Heat
After
426
21.65
207.55
2.53
5.7653
146
125
10271
1.88
9.39
27.17000008
25.63999939
76
1.019999981
4.659999847
2.0525
1.4528
1.1738
0.176
12.16
227
0.05822987
588
58991
11.30210338
0.031614357
S07
Female
45
19
1056 A1
Heat
After
525
24.52
247.77
3.02
6.8825
152
125
15430
4.76
55.88
27.40999985
26.13999939
71
0.949999988
4.679999828
2.1189
1.4759
1.1915
0.226
9.72
134
0.05895242
793
84935
11.67782092
0.045518222
S07
Female
45
19
1057 A1
Heat
After
336
21.39
211.82
2.58
5.8839
152
127
16895
9.39
195.08
25.79000092
24.64999962
62
0.889999986
4.300000191
1.5863
1.4527
1.181
0.175
7.82
81
0.05862079
685
69470
11.36340336
0.037230246
S07
Female
45
19
1058 A1
Heat
After
238
20.28
197.75
2.41
5.4931
162
135
19544
8.56
144.92
25.46999931
24.40999985
59
1.220000029
5.639999866
1.2035
1.4393
1.1918
0.247
8.98
113
0.058153
652
69180
11.62308838
0.037074829
S07
Female
45
19
1059 P1
Control
After
46
14.94
155.85
1.9
4.3292
171
137
18113
8.36
119.22
21.96999931
21.48999977
35
1.50999999
8.229999542
0.2952
1.397
1.1182
0.087
13.32
211
0.05905491
160
10960
9.338999348
0.005873665
S07
Female
45
19
1060 P1
Control
After
77
13.82
132.75
1.62
3.6875
163
138
17507
10.81
178.98
22.90999985
22.11000061
43
1.379999995
6.110000134
0.58
1.3684
1.1288
0.091
12.45
198
0.0569063
288
18238
8.979402127
0.009774078
S07
Female
45
19
1061 P1
Control
After
165
17.84
180.56
2.2
5.0156
161
135
9578
1.84
8.81
23.60000038
22.62000084
44
1.24000001
6.440000057
0.9138
1.427
1.1625
0.171
8.11
82
0.05991874
365
28038
9.889677801
0.015026078
S07
Female
45
19
1062 P1
Control
After
327
21.07
220.28
2.69
6.1189
161
131
20708
9.49
178.06
25.68000031
23.90999985
64
1
4.019999981
1.4845
1.4557
1.1609
0.157
11.11
179
0.06033895
452
39289
10.5201354
0.021055695
S07
Female
45
19
1063 P1
Control
After
291
20.59
211.65
2.58
5.8792
162
130
22387
9.92
192.56
25.51000023
24.12000084
61
0.930000007
4.119999886
1.3749
1.4477
1.1634
0.135
9.43
129
0.05915813
439
33668
9.881695302
0.018043298
S07
Female
45
19
1064 A4
Cowhage
Before
87
14.46
139.54
1.7
3.8761
162
133
12570
6.83
102.11
23.36000061
22.15999985
55
1.450000048
6.289999962
0.6235
1.3814
1.122
0.037
7.14
66
0.06108712
218
17002
9.964988881
0.009111683
S07
Female
45
19
1065 A4
Cowhage
Before
155
16.4
158.52
1.93
4.4033
159
133
10170
2.01
10.04
24.71999931
23.10000038
64
1.159999967
4.920000076
0.9778
1.4049
1.1548
0.132
8.81
104
0.06054539
404
34677
10.45406355
0.018584039
S07
Female
45
19
1066 A4
Cowhage
Before
154
16.01
158.8
1.94
4.4111
164
137
11497
2.1
10.74
24.27000046
22.77000046
65
1.379999995
6.179999828
0.9698
1.4039
1.1363
0.084
10.09
136
0.06040849
486
38659
10.06380545
0.020718066
S07
Female
45
19
1067 A4
Cowhage
Before
196
17.56
168.97
2.06
4.6936
164
136
14829
5.29
69.21
25.17000008
23.78000069
62
1.179999948
5.090000153
1.16
1.4137
1.1635
0.175
9.77
123
0.06063763
541
42163
9.961441273
0.022595924
S07
Female
45
19
1068 A4
Cowhage
Before
120
17.03
180.9
2.21
5.025
177
146
26178
14.74
349.14
23.19000053
22.53000069
38
1.230000019
6.389999866
0.6633
1.4221
1.1224
0.053
12.74
224
0.06024378
436
31244
9.552017936
0.016744232
S07
Female
45
19
1069 A4
Cowhage
After
202
18.39
183.58
2.24
5.0994
164
138
9699
1.77
8.65
24.67000008
23.68000031
51
0.949999988
4.159999847
1.1003
1.4298
1.1533
0.089
7.88
83
0.06080454
411
32729
10.06932866
0.017540071
S07
Female
45
19
1070 A4
Cowhage
After
359
20.94
224.02
2.73
6.2228
165
130
36118
13.1
268.92
26.15999985
24.54000092
68
0.899999976
4.25
1.6025
1.4535
1.1721
0.216
12.78
237
0.0610183
567
50349
10.63307689
0.026982951
S07
Female
45
19
1071 A4
Cowhage
After
250
19.44
204.73
2.5
5.6869
172
134
38051
13.58
265.23
25.22999954
24.02000046
54
0.930000007
4.179999828
1.2211
1.4397
1.163
0.185
12.09
204
0.06030308
581
47084
10.15789381
0.025233178
S07
Female
45
19
1072 A4
Cowhage
After
166
18.37
186.29
2.27
5.1747
167
138
11875
2.31
14.2
24.03000069
22.92000008
49
1.049999952
5.079999924
0.8911
1.4319
1.1404
0.097
12.37
214
0.06025183
529
41864
10.03800908
0.022435684
S07
Female
45
19
1073 A4
Cowhage
After
214
19.1
192.44
2.35
5.3456
167
136
17616
5.93
84.83
24.98999977
23.70000076
57
0.959999979
4.289999962
1.112
1.4355
1.1703
0.369
21.18
574
0.06026208
610
52140
10.43219401
0.027942781
S07
Female
45
19
1074 A3
Capsaicin
After
109
12.98
122.15
1.49
3.3931
160
129
13379
3.97
31.42
24.04999924
22.78000069
53
1.029999971
4.260000229
0.8923
1.3551
1.145
0.088
7.66
75
0.0561369
368
31928
10.51034586
0.0171108
S07
Female
45
19
1075 A3
Capsaicin
After
311
19.15
198.02
2.42
5.5006
166
131
35362
12.34
240
26.01000023
24.79000092
62
0.910000026
4.130000114
1.5705
1.433
1.1738
0.159
8.09
85
0.05699781
656
64840
11.21823782
0.034748944
S07
Female
45
19
1076 A3
Capsaicin
After
631
25.61
288.28
3.52
8.0078
174
129
68822
10.99
157.11
27.93000031
27.21999931
63
0.579999983
3.930000067
2.1888
1.4846
1.1842
0.182
9.63
129
0.05693485
766
78519
11.42425937
0.04207977
S07
Female
45
19
1077 A3
Capsaicin
After
661
25.52
272.5
3.32
7.5694
155
123
26129
12.91
317.23
27.44000053
26.70999908
63
0.600000024
3.5
2.4257
1.4889
1.1882
0.369
12.97
224
0.05738141
765
76972
11.31854827
0.041250705
S07
Female
45
19
1078 A3
Capsaicin
After
541
25.4
281.57
3.44
7.8214
178
135
44688
10.15
153.66
27.18000031
26.07999992
63
0.829999983
4.079999924
1.9214
1.4881
1.1794
0.236
13.62
261
0.05791582
720
73563
11.40561026
0.039423759
S08
Female
24
23
1085 A1
Capsaicin
Before
60
12.88
124.82
1.52
3.4672
154
132
17366
16.44
383.52
22.36000061
21.30999947
45
1.330000043
5.849999905
0.4807
1.3596
1.1144
0.121
20.66
501
0.05944729
261
17703
9.293049283
0.009487362
S07
Female
45
19
1079 P2
Control
After
28
13.06
113.27
1.66
4.5308
140
117
5295
1.69
7.03
17.79999924
17.70999908
15
0.49000001
3.680000067
0.2472
1.3764
1.1096
0.066
12.72
191
0.06056296
237
15515
9.129705662
0.008314773
S08
Female
24
23
1086 A1
Capsaicin
Before
95
13.82
133.96
1.63
3.7211
155
127
24366
16
370.87
23.47999954
22.03000069
61
1.460000038
5.71999979
0.7092
1.3719
1.1557
0.16
7.42
65
0.06022694
348
23425
9.257745489
0.012553887
S07
Female
45
19
1080 P2
Control
After
173
16.49
140.89
2.06
5.6356
142
118
8437
2.13
12.25
20.73999977
19.40999985
44
1.169999957
5.050000191
1.2279
1.4114
1.1402
0.14
11.44
156
0.06047877
417
33204
10.06890479
0.017794632
S08
Female
24
23
1087 A1
Capsaicin
Before
100
14.28
139.36
1.7
3.8711
164
131
22434
9.41
134.73
23.61000061
22.09000015
59
1.299999952
5.210000038
0.7176
1.3726
1.1513
0.178
10.29
132
0.05995974
416
29562
9.512075754
0.015842817
S07
Female
45
19
1081 P2
Control
After
386
20.01
160.76
2.35
6.4304
127
106
10778
5.91
80.79
23.37999916
21.79000092
59
0.74000001
3.420000076
2.4011
1.4337
1.171
0.159
8.21
83
0.0600388
567
47474
10.32503286
0.025442186
S08
Female
24
23
1088 A1
Capsaicin
Before
121
14.26
134.53
1.64
3.7369
155
130
12700
6.08
73.09
23.93000031
22.52000046
62
1.309999943
5.619999886
0.8994
1.3721
1.1559
0.108
6.61
54
0.05970864
362
26031
9.568551532
0.01395049
S07
Female
45
19
1083 P2
Control
After
110
14.98
122.16
1.79
4.8864
138
114
12635
10.33
192.93
19.62999916
18.51000023
34
1.200000048
5.059999943
0.9005
1.3874
1.1449
0.131
10.39
137
0.06010322
285
21653
9.83539185
0.011604239
==PAGE:58==
S08
Female
24
23
1089 A1
Capsaicin
Before
74
13.29
132.19
1.61
3.6719
163
132
19487
11.81
224.07
22.98999977
21.53000069
52
1.5
6.059999943
0.5598
1.3662
1.151
0.224
11.69
166
0.0588265
291
19416
9.216975785
0.01040539
S07
Female
45
19
1084 P2
Control
After
218
18
158.27
2.32
6.3308
138
110
25187
10.43
150.18
20.89999962
19.44000053
46
1.169999957
4.650000095
1.3774
1.4229
1.1523
0.137
10.45
148
0.0608287
444
37538
10.37526359
0.020117302
S08
Female
24
23
1090 P1
Control
Before
61
14.22
132.67
1.62
3.6853
165
135
12278
5.98
83.86
22.65999985
21.47999954
43
1.309999943
5.71999979
0.4598
1.3754
1.1403
0.094
8.21
88
0.05986604
506
42346
10.32252629
0.022693997
S08
Female
24
23
1091 P1
Control
Before
63
14.27
127.49
1.56
3.5414
157
133
8339
1.72
7.49
23.20000076
22
43
1.25
5.489999771
0.4942
1.37
1.1641
0.241
8.88
93
0.05908931
496
38818
9.982304166
0.020803277
S08
Female
24
23
1092 P1
Control
Before
76
14.06
134.89
1.65
3.7469
159
136
8467
2.48
15.68
22.35000038
21.04999924
44
1.379999995
6.059999943
0.5634
1.3759
1.1332
0.091
9.26
103
0.05869546
520
42460
10.19631825
0.022755092
S08
Female
24
23
1093 P1
Control
Before
83
14.73
139.19
1.7
3.8664
165
137
19762
11.61
212.99
22.95000076
22.04000092
41
1.159999967
5.239999771
0.5963
1.3785
1.155
0.161
9.26
103
0.05872694
840
71561
10.41486432
0.038350851
S08
Female
24
23
1094 P1
Control
Before
69
14.22
128.82
1.57
3.5783
154
130
7841
2.46
17.13
22.77000046
21.73999977
44
1.110000014
4.590000153
0.5356
1.3719
1.1331
0.091
8.38
84
0.06068814
619
50017
10.14304972
0.026805026
S08
Female
24
23
1095 A2
Heat
Before
112
15.76
152.9
1.87
4.2472
160
136
9533
2.18
11.28
23.09000015
21.69000053
48
1.309999943
5.269999981
0.7325
1.3983
1.1424
0.144
12.27
200
0.05912006
542
40740
9.782862025
0.021833312
S08
Female
24
23
1096 A2
Heat
Before
67
14.89
143.99
1.76
3.9997
160
133
13842
9.78
186.96
22.48999977
21.48999977
41
1.590000033
7.289999962
0.4653
1.3885
1.1233
0.062
10.83
143
0.05939971
476
34118
9.553078916
0.018284461
S08
Female
24
23
1097 A2
Heat
Before
56
14.31
138.61
1.69
3.8503
161
136
14956
12.18
253.07
22.11000061
21.26000023
34
1.25999999
5.820000172
0.404
1.3801
1.1347
0.099
8.14
78
0.05938434
446
31212
9.439487791
0.016727083
S08
Female
24
23
1098 A2
Heat
Before
18
12.95
123.46
1.51
3.4294
164
137
9092
4.48
41.54
21.32999992
20.92000008
27
1.059999943
5.400000095
0.1458
1.3593
1.1237
0.092
10.74
134
0.05812372
179
10993
8.842735969
0.00589135
S08
Female
24
23
1099 A2
Heat
Before
36
13.73
137.6
1.68
3.8222
160
136
6430
1.63
6.52
21.25
20.55999947
30
1.179999948
5.78000021
0.2616
1.38
1.1314
0.142
10.61
131
0.05882138
313
19909
8.999276878
0.010669598
S08
Female
24
23
1100 A4
Cowhage
Before
44
14.35
138.23
1.69
3.8397
161
135
7232
1.7
7.01
22
20.98999977
36
1.710000038
8.75
0.3183
1.3817
1.1237
0.109
12.79
189
0.05977526
604
47485
10.00494743
0.025448081
S08
Female
24
23
1101 A4
Cowhage
Before
94
14.71
144.95
1.77
4.0264
163
134
12446
4.52
51.85
22.89999962
21.79999924
44
1.220000029
5.789999962
0.6485
1.3859
1.1378
0.172
16.29
338
0.06019839
513
37404
9.635081686
0.020045489
S08
Female
24
23
1102 A4
Cowhage
Before
89
15.13
155.83
1.9
4.3286
168
137
15426
6.65
91.56
22.44000053
21.69000053
39
1.169999957
4.989999771
0.5711
1.3962
1.1137
0.025
7.74
78
0.05892899
555
43168
9.951522557
0.023134522
S08
Female
24
23
1103 A4
Cowhage
Before
37
13.48
132.38
1.62
3.6772
162
135
7987
1.91
7.54
21.51000023
20.98999977
32
1.389999986
7
0.2795
1.3738
1.1449
0.247
13.5
226
0.05959298
371
26912
9.610391757
0.014422634
S08
Female
24
23
1104 A4
Cowhage
Before
44
13.51
141.08
1.72
3.9189
164
138
23748
15.38
346.92
21.04000092
20.37000084
29
0.920000017
4.690000057
0.3119
1.3804
1.1246
0.101
12.33
187
0.06020352
444
33438
9.792277696
0.017920037
S08
Female
24
23
1105 P2
Control
Before
69
12.74
124.28
1.52
3.4522
165
131
20841
7.55
95.23
22.43000031
21.59000015
34
1.029999971
4.840000153
0.5552
1.3563
1.1475
0.083
5.99
44
0.05747658
447
36940
10.25769409
0.019796823
S08
Female
24
23
1106 P2
Control
Before
50
12.92
121.53
1.48
3.3758
161
133
11990
4.14
38.33
23.03000069
21.87000084
44
1.389999986
6.139999866
0.4114
1.3576
1.1384
0.136
11.96
170
0.05745022
384
29413
9.875500347
0.015762965
S08
Female
24
23
1107 P2
Control
Before
80
14.61
134.66
1.64
3.7406
161
137
9256
2.51
14.65
23.39999962
22.09000015
49
1.24000001
5.460000038
0.5941
1.3799
1.1345
0.062
6.7
56
0.05833748
435
33999
9.975702814
0.018220687
S08
Female
24
23
1108 P2
Control
Before
87
14.65
133.05
1.62
3.6958
159
134
9004
1.99
9.22
23.77000046
22.46999931
50
1.129999995
4.510000229
0.6539
1.3751
1.1304
0.057
7.93
84
0.05863983
527
39432
9.760546938
0.021132331
S08
Female
24
23
1109 P2
Control
Before
32
13.17
122.04
1.49
3.39
160
133
8505
2.33
11.88
22.18000031
21.30999947
39
1.529999971
7.489999771
0.2622
1.3611
1.1194
0.093
12.34
185
0.05913543
428
31650
9.703312806
0.016961815
S08
Female
24
23
1110 A2
Histamine
After
812
29.67
310.22
3.79
8.6172
151
120
24372
10.29
218.13
27.93000031
27.06999969
55
0.540000021
3.549999952
2.6175
1.5135
1.2031
0.227
8.45
101
0.05639971
681
71593
11.56955844
0.038368
S08
Female
24
23
1111 A2
Histamine
After
869
30.25
323.61
3.95
8.9892
154
117
27656
7.65
101.19
28.27000046
27.73999977
57
0.460000008
4.03000021
2.6853
1.5146
1.2
0.266
14.57
295
0.05708199
661
68014
11.44599332
0.036449948
S08
Female
24
23
1112 A2
Histamine
After
747
28.88
310.81
3.79
8.6336
159
123
41945
11.8
208.73
27.88999939
27.32999992
58
0.439999998
3.720000029
2.4034
1.5075
1.1918
0.196
10.21
148
0.05924378
680
59716
10.57416195
0.032002898
S08
Female
24
23
1113 A2
Histamine
After
515
26.82
280.42
3.42
7.7894
174
132
38110
9.09
138.61
27.32999992
26.21999931
57
0.629999995
3.859999895
1.8365
1.4935
1.224
0.362
7.99
84
0.05799781
771
76253
11.22164014
0.040865379
S08
Female
24
23
1114 A2
Histamine
After
548
27.1
276.36
3.37
7.6767
166
133
20958
4.43
44.9
27.20000076
26.65999985
52
0.469999999
3.630000114
1.9829
1.4951
1.2149
0.325
10.8
166
0.05920644
769
69474
10.72514177
0.037232389
S08
Female
24
23
1115 A2
Histamine
After
935
30.99
326.84
3.99
9.0789
150
120
27406
10.21
187.68
28.82999992
28.18000031
61
0.370000005
3.49000001
2.8607
1.5184
1.204
0.312
14.42
279
0.05915593
667
67184
11.32465736
0.036005136
S08
Female
24
23
1116 A3
Cowhage
Before
18
9.32
75.65
0.92
2.1014
159
126
26821
8.18
85.38
21.77000046
21.19000053
35
1.159999967
5.909999847
0.2379
1.2803
1.1138
0.053
9.36
101
0.05879063
433
32696
9.805244408
0.017522385
S08
Female
24
23
1117 A3
Cowhage
Before
25
11.05
94.75
1.16
2.6319
164
130
19342
6
54.06
22.59000015
21.71999931
39
1.360000014
6.659999847
0.2639
1.3182
1.1526
0.26
12.67
196
0.05879576
583
47767
10.21373922
0.02559921
S08
Female
24
23
1118 A3
Cowhage
Before
32
11.6
103.45
1.26
2.8736
162
133
16801
6.36
69.61
22.65999985
21.90999985
40
1.25
6.079999924
0.3093
1.3303
1.1288
0.083
8.18
76
0.059388
561
44423
10.04101396
0.023807099
S08
Female
24
23
1119 A3
Cowhage
Before
82
13.02
121.84
1.49
3.3844
173
134
35431
11.01
187.4
24.17000008
23.12000084
50
1.120000005
4.860000134
0.673
1.3495
1.1461
0.142
9.67
114
0.05930454
595
47907
10.12502407
0.025674239
S08
Female
24
23
1120 A3
Cowhage
Before
80
12.61
115.75
1.41
3.2153
157
127
14728
4.4
34.94
23.39999962
22.11000061
50
1.25
5.360000134
0.6911
1.3489
1.1434
0.145
10.25
124
0.05905125
583
51265
10.58111082
0.027473853
S08
Female
24
23
1121 A3
Cowhage
After
383
19.06
190.6
2.33
5.2944
154
124
16572
6.03
85.73
26.89999962
25.95999908
63
0.699999988
3.950000048
2.0094
1.4292
1.2039
0.553
15.78
340
0.05945461
542
54721
11.33789495
0.029325986
S08
Female
24
23
1122 A3
Cowhage
After
324
17.28
170
2.07
4.7222
146
124
14688
5.84
79.03
26.29000092
25.20000076
65
0.769999981
3.970000029
1.9059
1.412
1.152
0.109
9.51
117
0.05951172
500
46936
10.93259084
0.025153862
S08
Female
24
23
1123 A3
Cowhage
After
576
23.09
243.79
2.97
6.7719
157
123
28569
8.64
125.32
28.11000061
27.25
64
0.720000029
3.960000038
2.3627
1.4645
1.1703
0.178
14.74
319
0.05917131
699
69841
11.27902855
0.037429071
S08
Female
24
23
1124 A3
Cowhage
After
598
23.62
243.16
2.97
6.7544
152
120
16727
3.99
38.61
28.07999992
27.05999947
71
0.75
4.230000019
2.4593
1.4694
1.2053
0.406
11.7
175
0.05947145
621
59579
11.05238142
0.031929477
S08
Female
24
23
1125 A3
Cowhage
After
531
23.13
236.5
2.89
6.5694
155
127
20450
7.08
104.07
27.86000061
27.26000023
63
0.569999993
3.769999981
2.2452
1.4636
1.1584
0.06
6.28
56
0.05879063
620
56832
10.8032813
0.03045731
S08
Female
24
23
1126 A1
Capsaicin
After
100
14.37
134.2
1.64
3.7278
162
134
18686
8.36
124.92
24.06999969
22.86000061
58
1.059999943
4.630000114
0.7452
1.3728
1.1716
0.143
6.37
52
0.06011201
296
23616
10.07888231
0.012656247
S08
Female
24
23
1127 A1
Capsaicin
After
271
17.6
166.07
2.03
4.6131
152
129
9893
1.66
7.5
26.15999985
25.09000015
70
0.75
3.799999952
1.6318
1.4124
1.1832
0.179
7.85
82
0.05957394
406
31814
9.988520859
0.017049705
S08
Female
24
23
1128 A1
Capsaicin
After
426
20.7
210.83
2.57
5.8564
157
121
53243
13.55
240.02
27.47999954
26.45999908
71
0.680000007
3.75
2.0206
1.44
1.1824
0.14
6.75
62
0.05999781
483
42110
10.53596004
0.02256752
S08
Female
24
23
1129 A1
Capsaicin
After
411
20.7
205.25
2.5
5.7014
152
124
19656
7.2
103.88
27.43000031
26.17000008
67
0.579999983
3.390000105
2.0024
1.4428
1.2003
0.248
8.41
100
0.06009444
586
51063
10.53317779
0.027365597
S08
Female
24
23
1130 A1
Capsaicin
After
217
17.21
158.18
1.93
4.3939
150
126
13164
5.45
63.6
25.68000031
24.25
67
0.810000002
3.700000048
1.3719
1.4034
1.1775
0.199
7.46
66
0.05972621
466
39619
10.40432371
0.021232548
S08
Female
24
23
1131 A4
Heat
After
1149
33.49
362.67
4.42
10.0742
148
117
23063
8.42
139.53
28.79999924
28.25
57
0.49000001
3.900000095
3.1682
1.537
1.1819
0.157
11.92
215
0.05997365
743
84519
12.03477091
0.04529528
S08
Female
24
23
1132 A4
Heat
After
1263
35
386.97
4.72
10.7492
148
116
29147
11.57
238.04
29.04999924
28.56999969
55
0.419999987
3.99000001
3.2638
1.544
1.1984
0.192
9.13
114
0.05830161
685
76665
11.93736144
0.041086178
S08
Female
24
23
1133 A4
Heat
After
1176
34.73
369.54
4.51
10.265
150
119
22408
9.08
179.69
29.19000053
28.89999962
53
0.400000006
3.920000076
3.1823
1.5418
1.2286
0.441
14.24
313
0.05732431
726
86487
12.31578689
0.046349968
S08
Female
24
23
1134 A4
Heat
After
1183
34.26
375.99
4.59
10.4442
151
118
29902
9.98
175.1
29.07999992
28.63999939
55
0.449999988
3.99000001
3.1464
1.5396
1.2247
0.405
13.68
281
0.05727892
678
80068
12.26223691
0.042909908
S08
Female
24
23
1135 A4
Heat
After
1075
33.48
355.94
4.34
9.8872
152
118
26528
11.52
256.47
28.95999908
28.29000092
55
0.430000007
3.769999981
3.0202
1.5346
1.2133
0.226
8.92
130
0.0572694
740
85468
12.12665355
0.045803867
S08
Female
24
23
1136 P2
Control
After
39
12.45
116.74
1.42
3.2428
166
136
17782
7.89
104.94
22.09000015
21.35000038
35
1.350000024
6.619999886
0.3341
1.3499
1.1256
0.113
12.95
207
0.05892899
319
22429
9.461601949
0.012020112
S08
Female
24
23
1137 P2
Control
After
94
14.58
135.52
1.65
3.7644
164
135
12897
3.98
36.6
23.79999924
22.38999939
48
1.25999999
5.570000172
0.6936
1.3796
1.1786
0.246
9.05
113
0.05840703
427
32668
9.869664621
0.01750738
S08
Female
24
23
1138 P2
Control
After
79
13.96
129.96
1.59
3.61
159
133
10696
3.68
29.07
23.40999985
22.14999962
52
1.75
8.399999619
0.6079
1.3709
1.1498
0.137
8.23
84
0.0588858
432
33325
9.910561593
0.017859478
S08
Female
24
23
1139 P2
Control
After
70
13.81
128.78
1.57
3.5772
168
132
43019
14
252.01
23.31999969
22.03000069
55
1.419999957
5.980000019
0.5436
1.3642
1.1356
0.093
9
97
0.05898317
434
33102
9.854561671
0.017739968
S08
Female
24
23
1140 P2
Control
After
55
13.33
125.45
1.53
3.4847
164
137
12827
4.33
38.03
22.72999954
21.79000092
46
1.570000052
7.289999962
0.4384
1.3655
1.1179
0.054
9.6
117
0.0584656
420
32550
9.933582673
0.017444141
S08
Female
24
23
1141 P1
Control
After
28
11.45
109.29
1.33
3.0358
153
132
5545
2.11
10.75
20.90999985
20.22999954
26
1.049999952
5.349999905
0.2562
1.3421
1.1357
0.168
10
113
0.05961128
130
7473
8.555213938
0.004004918
S08
Female
24
23
1142 P1
Control
After
18
11.87
109.62
1.34
3.045
151
129
11106
9.35
158.12
21.01000023
20.29999924
32
1.470000029
7.190000057
0.1642
1.3396
1.107
0.069
13.27
197
0.05814715
177
12583
9.513942546
0.00674346
S08
Female
24
23
1143 P1
Control
After
29
11.8
110.62
1.35
3.0728
152
134
5549
2.37
14.64
21.01000023
20.07999992
31
1.440000057
7.170000076
0.2622
1.3421
1.1094
0.047
10.36
128
0.05835213
213
13133
8.860275576
0.007038215
S08
Female
24
23
1144 P1
Control
After
27
11.4
110.02
1.34
3.0561
152
130
11237
8.75
140.44
20.94000053
20.28000069
30
1.559999943
8.140000343
0.2454
1.3376
1.1223
0.128
10.35
118
0.05737702
257
18874
9.669866381
0.010114922
S09
Female
23
23
1148 A1
Histamine
Before
36
9.63
91.55
1.12
2.5431
150
124
19194
16.15
342.48
21.15999985
19.29999924
60
2.210000038
9.289999962
0.3932
1.3016
1.1316
0.417
21.67
507
0.05898683
379
30235
10.07837331
0.01620349
S09
Female
23
23
1149 A1
Histamine
Before
119
13.84
126.09
1.54
3.5025
157
128
10927
2.53
14.55
24.77000046
23.42000008
67
1.059999943
4.480000019
0.9438
1.3625
1.1582
0.176
9.25
105
0.05943997
422
32859
9.956942635
0.01760974
S09
Female
23
23
1150 A1
Histamine
Before
198
14.84
142.46
1.74
3.9572
150
126
10887
3.16
25.67
25.15999985
23.72999954
63
0.810000002
3.519999981
1.3899
1.3835
1.1401
0.113
10.91
149
0.05929502
465
38468
10.26309589
0.020615706
S09
Female
23
23
1151 A1
Histamine
Before
213
15.73
143.41
1.75
3.9836
154
129
10636
2.64
18.19
26.28000069
24.93000031
71
1.00999999
4.389999866
1.4853
1.3859
1.1525
0.07
7.03
73
0.05975257
569
48274
10.3933504
0.025870921
S09
Female
23
23
1152 A1
Histamine
Before
240
16.52
154.04
1.88
4.2789
154
130
10041
1.91
8.8
26.57999992
25.26000023
73
1.059999943
4.820000172
1.558
1.3976
1.1554
0.118
9.05
110
0.05956735
466
37659
10.14370225
0.020182148
S09
Female
23
23
1153 P1
Control
Before
199
15.4
146.7
1.79
4.075
156
128
18384
8.78
133.09
25.54000092
24.22999954
64
0.829999983
3.700000048
1.3565
1.3831
1.137
0.045
7.47
84
0.0575
174
10865
8.916518203
0.005822753
S09
Female
23
23
1154 P1
Control
Before
30
11.9
128.07
1.56
3.5575
166
131
62506
15.01
255.24
21.42000008
20.5
35
1.779999971
8.909999847
0.2342
1.3506
1.1263
0.211
14.43
233
0.05765374
322
24486
9.839794898
0.013122496
S09
Female
23
23
1155 P1
Control
Before
97
14.01
131.97
1.61
3.6658
156
128
9136
2.08
9.45
23.27000046
21.68000031
55
1.230000019
4.78000021
0.735
1.3733
1.1449
0.109
8.13
85
0.05812153
314
23023
9.662092525
0.012338447
S09
Female
23
23
1156 P1
Control
Before
84
14.88
144.09
1.76
4.0025
161
136
14873
8.41
130.92
23.01000023
21.69000053
49
1.230000019
4.730000019
0.583
1.3858
1.143
0.097
7.38
65
0.05767643
420
32412
9.912502942
0.017370185
S09
Female
23
23
1157 P1
Control
Before
92
15.35
152.1
1.86
4.225
162
133
14205
5.12
55.34
22.86000061
21.47999954
47
1.519999981
6.909999847
0.6049
1.3947
1.1515
0.174
9.73
118
0.05877599
419
33658
10.11328395
0.018037939
S09
Female
23
23
1158 A2
Heat
Before
120
15.85
157.41
1.92
4.3725
159
130
19448
13.03
287.2
23.92000008
22.28000069
65
1.659999967
7.159999847
0.7623
1.4004
1.1218
0.061
10.17
125
0.05869546
188
11165
8.695719024
0.005983528
S09
Female
23
23
1159 A2
Heat
Before
32
12.18
110.01
1.34
3.0558
153
134
5888
1.75
7.91
21.79999924
21.17000008
35
1.50999999
8.640000343
0.2909
1.3435
1.1273
0.102
8.83
93
0.059153
342
25124
9.671334372
0.013464412
S09
Female
23
23
1160 A2
Heat
Before
89
15.25
148.99
1.82
4.1386
159
135
7221
1.81
9.43
22.47999954
21.78000069
36
1.169999957
5.53000021
0.5974
1.3954
1.1652
0.266
8.89
92
0.05921377
267
17906
9.240569094
0.009596153
S09
Female
23
23
1161 A2
Heat
Before
59
14.39
140.47
1.71
3.9019
161
136
7865
1.9
8.61
22.28000069
21.71999931
33
1.360000014
7.329999924
0.42
1.3865
1.1271
0.105
12.44
192
0.05930161
370
25354
9.340657338
0.013587673
S09
Female
23
23
1162 A2
Heat
Before
72
15.27
156.02
1.9
4.3339
163
136
9746
3.44
29.64
22.18000031
21.45000076
35
1.5
7.170000076
0.4615
1.4021
1.1253
0.098
12.44
184
0.05932797
278
18136
9.113882285
0.009719415
S09
Female
23
23
1163 A3
Capsaicin
Before
78
15.16
153.21
1.87
4.2558
157
132
12868
9.55
182.65
22.37000084
21.18000031
44
1.360000014
5.96999979
0.5091
1.3981
1.1387
0.189
13.9
239
0.05729136
268
19136
9.534836349
0.010255333
S09
Female
23
23
1164 A3
Capsaicin
Before
56
9.28
79.26
0.97
2.2017
149
125
27567
14.33
275.48
23.45000076
21.59000015
65
1.309999943
5.269999981
0.7065
1.2776
1.1201
0.076
13.52
233
0.0578697
382
27799
9.625825062
0.014897993
S09
Female
23
23
1165 A3
Capsaicin
Before
90
10.06
89.8
1.1
2.4944
158
127
39151
12.34
185.65
24.42000008
22.26000023
73
1.289999962
5.139999866
1.0022
1.2939
1.1585
0.113
6.6
53
0.05827526
390
28785
9.694063779
0.015426409
S09
Female
23
23
1166 A3
Capsaicin
Before
67
10.34
85.64
1.04
2.3789
149
128
7446
2.11
11.44
24.14999962
21.92000008
71
1.110000014
3.880000114
0.7823
1.3009
1.1415
0.128
9.44
105
0.05844803
404
30950
9.876309778
0.016586672
S09
Female
23
23
1167 A3
Capsaicin
Before
127
11.25
103.53
1.26
2.8758
148
125
12676
7.04
103.72
25.06999969
23.18000031
76
1.190000057
4.679999828
1.2267
1.3279
1.1643
0.159
7.68
76
0.05889605
349
27237
9.968320232
0.014596807
S09
Female
23
23
1168 P2
Control
Before
87
10.86
96.68
1.18
2.6856
150
126
22948
15.12
316.74
24.64999962
22.61000061
77
1.24000001
4.739999771
0.8999
1.313
1.1368
0.11
9.62
111
0.05790703
98
5312
8.30751348
0.002846798
S09
Female
23
23
1169 P2
Control
Before
22
10.48
99.92
1.22
2.7756
156
130
21611
16.08
338.36
20.37000084
19.56999969
29
1.5
7.829999924
0.2202
1.3169
1.0895
0.008
6.88
69
0.05801391
163
9300
8.52320102
0.00498404
S09
Female
23
23
1170 P2
Control
Before
34
10.27
90.57
1.11
2.5158
146
129
4643
1.37
6.15
21.60000038
20.81999969
43
1.909999967
9.279999733
0.3754
1.3098
1.1127
0.054
9.51
110
0.05842021
206
12748
8.876514698
0.006831887
S09
Female
23
23
1171 P2
Control
Before
27
10.58
97.12
1.18
2.6978
148
128
4640
1.56
6.73
21.45000076
20.77000046
34
1.49000001
7.789999962
0.278
1.3177
1.1261
0.163
11.77
156
0.05836677
163
9790
8.744854804
0.00524664
S09
Female
23
23
1172 P2
Control
Before
29
10.42
95.07
1.16
2.6408
153
130
9896
6.14
74.82
21.61000061
20.45999908
44
1.840000033
8.119999886
0.305
1.3135
1.1094
0.069
12.14
172
0.05826721
201
12442
8.877734017
0.006667896
S09
Female
23
23
1173 A1
Histamine
After
42
10.74
95.53
1.17
2.6536
150
130
6255
1.85
8.41
22.20000076
20.93000031
48
1.629999995
6.590000153
0.4397
1.3193
1.1348
0.214
12.95
201
0.05810835
675
67960
11.32217486
0.036421009
S09
Female
23
23
1174 A1
Histamine
After
826
28.03
293.7
3.58
8.1583
147
119
21488
8.48
153.78
28.46999931
27.77000046
67
0.50999999
3.75999999
2.8124
1.5005
1.2008
0.208
8.62
104
0.05878258
636
67467
11.62176799
0.036156801
S09
Female
23
23
1175 A1
Histamine
After
948
30.1
331.78
4.05
9.2161
154
119
31317
9.18
149.48
28.68000031
28.01000023
64
0.5
3.670000076
2.8573
1.5155
1.2076
0.501
20.8
557
0.05876428
610
66224
11.75703595
0.035490655
S09
Female
23
23
1176 A1
Histamine
After
1046
31.21
349.02
4.26
9.695
154
117
47231
14.64
307.13
28.95000076
28.43000031
55
0.460000008
3.809999943
2.997
1.5236
1.1948
0.207
10.4
165
0.05832431
548
68034
12.57267771
0.036460667
S09
Female
23
23
1177 A1
Histamine
After
1023
31.32
332.35
4.06
9.2319
150
121
18653
6.55
105.9
29.19000053
28.47999954
61
0.589999974
4.340000153
3.0781
1.5225
1.2037
0.291
9.61
114
0.05805637
566
67820
12.3516716
0.03634598
S09
Female
23
23
1178 A4
Cowhage
Before
1090
31.89
353.39
4.31
9.8164
153
117
37692
13.03
286.31
29.34000015
28.62999916
62
0.439999998
3.869999886
3.0844
1.5265
1.1871
0.156
10.86
189
0.05773719
154
8824
8.541368295
0.004728943
S09
Female
23
23
1179 A4
Cowhage
Before
21
9.74
90.25
1.1
2.5069
147
128
6697
6.51
88.82
20.76000023
19.79999924
33
1.659999967
8.369999886
0.2327
1.3037
1.1445
0.43
15.92
292
0.05821377
293
20497
9.437705032
0.010984718
S09
Female
23
23
1180 A4
Cowhage
Before
72
11.5
105.73
1.29
2.9369
159
128
25713
9.29
117.49
22.93000031
21.62000084
53
1.289999962
5.730000019
0.681
1.3261
1.1319
0.084
10.32
143
0.0580183
373
29890
10.10098209
0.016018599
S09
Female
23
23
1181 A4
Cowhage
Before
183
13.62
121.2
1.48
3.3667
145
125
9477
2.16
13.1
25.54000092
23.84000015
71
0.850000024
3.779999971
1.5099
1.3578
1.1768
0.329
15.31
294
0.05839166
455
38624
10.39628042
0.020699309
S09
Female
23
23
1182 A4
Cowhage
Before
194
14.29
129.02
1.57
3.5839
153
125
12649
2.42
13.18
26.15999985
24.63999939
77
0.839999974
3.599999905
1.5036
1.3666
1.1623
0.106
7.62
77
0.05863177
311
21214
9.319361256
0.011368971
==PAGE:59==
S09
Female
23
23
1183 A2
Heat
After
126
12.63
115.77
1.41
3.2158
149
124
9996
3.39
26.56
24.56999969
22.57999992
65
1.299999952
5.199999809
1.0884
1.3489
1.1545
0.148
8.44
89
0.05680527
763
76986
11.33440347
0.041258208
S09
Female
23
23
1184 A2
Heat
After
1005
30.65
347.75
4.24
9.6597
152
119
23632
6.78
89.4
28.47999954
27.62999916
63
0.639999986
3.900000095
2.89
1.5247
1.1907
0.219
9.51
122
0.0586142
772
81418
11.58795031
0.043633398
S09
Female
23
23
1185 A2
Heat
After
1101
31.93
355.26
4.33
9.8683
148
116
28396
13.86
353.78
28.56999969
28.03000069
57
0.449999988
3.910000086
3.0991
1.5321
1.1823
0.161
10.03
151
0.05850806
797
88703
11.90405851
0.047537563
S09
Female
23
23
1186 A2
Heat
After
1110
32.89
373.41
4.56
10.3725
155
121
31296
11.91
248.12
28.5
27.77000046
60
0.649999976
4.550000191
2.9726
1.5375
1.1887
0.161
10.71
174
0.05889751
764
84702
11.88106064
0.045393353
S09
Female
23
23
1187 A2
Heat
After
1103
33.17
394.02
4.81
10.945
167
123
40541
8.63
116.9
28.05999947
27.47999954
53
0.419999987
3.869999886
2.7994
1.5423
1.1975
0.262
17.27
471
0.05937189
729
80330
11.84486673
0.043050318
S09
Female
23
23
1188 P1
Control
After
21
10.86
84.88
1.24
3.3952
124
106
4050
2.3
11.66
17.29999924
16.67000008
22
1.429999948
7.329999924
0.2474
1.3271
1.1186
0.142
14.01
236
0.05783822
278
18859
9.293771523
0.010106884
S09
Female
23
23
1189 P1
Control
After
107
14.09
105.39
1.54
4.2156
126
106
6400
2.98
19.76
20.45000076
19.22999954
42
1.149999976
5.050000191
1.0153
1.3668
1.1358
0.082
8.34
87
0.05761054
377
34801
10.84127213
0.018650493
S09
Female
23
23
1190 P1
Control
After
77
13.32
107.92
1.58
4.3168
143
111
31901
10.15
128.17
19.67000008
18.70000076
35
1.190000057
4.880000114
0.7135
1.3555
1.1345
0.127
12.9
208
0.05808126
376
31170
10.27376288
0.016704574
S09
Female
23
23
1191 P1
Control
After
29
12.76
94.68
1.39
3.7872
133
110
6034
3.04
20.49
18.54000092
17.62999916
30
1.230000019
5.340000153
0.3063
1.3495
1.1494
0.144
9.24
111
0.05762226
342
28606
10.3197832
0.015330479
S09
Female
23
23
1192 P1
Control
After
69
13.35
104.35
1.53
4.174
135
112
10558
10.15
187.53
19.12999916
18.15999985
30
1.230000019
5.25
0.6612
1.3607
1.158
0.209
8.81
91
0.05803441
381
32475
10.41758737
0.017403947
S09
Female
23
23
1193 A4
Cowhage
After
66
13.97
134.31
1.64
3.7308
161
132
15603
9.52
172.53
22.95999908
21.47999954
48
1.330000043
5.510000229
0.4914
1.374
1.1183
0.049
8.69
93
0.05964495
646
62680
11.11484202
0.03359136
S09
Female
23
23
1194 A4
Cowhage
After
524
22.6
229.09
2.8
6.3636
155
125
38894
16.46
405.66
28.15999985
27.27000046
66
0.589999974
3.599999905
2.2873
1.4567
1.1853
0.229
12.89
242
0.0596757
747
72215
11.09451869
0.038701341
S09
Female
23
23
1195 A4
Cowhage
After
597
23.86
249.33
3.04
6.9258
157
123
39020
13.42
283.51
28.31999969
27.18000031
69
0.720000029
4.050000191
2.3944
1.4688
1.1917
0.192
9.88
150
0.05870571
745
76789
11.45582654
0.041152632
S09
Female
23
23
1196 A4
Cowhage
After
827
28.48
305.57
3.73
8.4881
156
117
31821
10.4
196.23
29
28.04999924
65
0.660000026
4.119999886
2.7064
1.5036
1.1818
0.191
13.07
243
0.05880527
750
77595
11.4773413
0.041584582
S09
Female
23
23
1197 A4
Cowhage
After
896
29.99
326.53
3.98
9.0703
154
121
28153
8.55
120.61
28.60000038
27.95000076
59
0.620000005
4.239999771
2.744
1.5152
1.1896
0.316
20.67
615
0.05880601
749
79311
11.61130046
0.042504218
S09
Female
23
23
1198 A3
Capsaicin
After
911
30.23
325.4
3.97
9.0389
153
123
27113
9.37
152.96
28.54999924
27.68000031
63
0.730000019
4.599999905
2.7996
1.5175
1.1827
0.14
8.09
90
0.0572489
400
31711
10.04685264
0.016994506
S09
Female
23
23
1199 A3
Capsaicin
After
73
11.81
105.49
1.29
2.9303
149
133
6159
1.52
7.06
23.03000069
21.70999908
60
1.529999971
6.099999905
0.692
1.3354
1.1275
0.05
7.03
70
0.05849268
381
30595
10.11155155
0.016396421
S09
Female
23
23
1200 A3
Capsaicin
After
202
14.17
125.78
1.53
3.4939
148
124
10081
3.63
37.31
26.29999924
24.73999977
77
0.75999999
3.380000114
1.606
1.3618
1.1722
0.158
8.44
91
0.05827013
439
37051
10.36627597
0.01985631
S09
Female
23
23
1201 A3
Capsaicin
After
304
15.91
150.56
1.84
4.1822
151
121
25340
9.72
152.24
27.67000008
26.5
82
0.680000007
3.359999895
2.0191
1.385
1.1694
0.144
9.69
138
0.05882943
455
35624
9.984370813
0.019091554
S09
Female
23
23
1202 A3
Capsaicin
After
284
15.95
150.36
1.83
4.1767
148
125
11478
3.54
32.18
27.29999924
26.18000031
72
0.680000007
3.5
1.8888
1.3911
1.1855
0.241
8.94
99
0.05710762
546
43609
10.08432426
0.023370862
S10
Female
52
29
1210 A1
Histamine
Before
17
10.02
88.49
1.08
2.4581
154
133
5464
1.78
7.99
21.30999947
20.82999992
30
1.580000043
8.840000153
0.1921
1.3057
1.1137
0.074
10.66
133
0.05676135
312
19861
9.002814837
0.010643874
S09
Female
23
23
1203 P2
Control
After
40
9.63
72.55
1.06
2.902
129
105
5254
1.94
8.34
18.12000084
17.23999977
32
2.430000067
16.84000015
0.5513
1.297
1.1251
0.167
12.67
184
0.0578309
215
14899
9.393217736
0.007984647
S10
Female
52
29
1211 A1
Histamine
Before
26
10.84
96.38
1.18
2.6772
160
134
13587
8.41
125.7
21.72999954
21.04000092
37
1.679999948
8.31000042
0.2698
1.3132
1.1258
0.108
9.17
98
0.05746267
377
24874
9.165521895
0.013330432
S09
Female
23
23
1204 P2
Control
After
113
11.82
86.72
1.27
3.4688
121
101
10579
8.76
137.24
21.27000046
19.20000076
63
1.340000033
5.360000134
1.303
1.3294
1.1385
0.172
17.2
368
0.05859444
298
21240
9.526298451
0.011382905
S10
Female
52
29
1212 A1
Histamine
Before
28
11.7
111.89
1.37
3.1081
162
133
25361
13.24
232.2
22.09000015
21.47999954
38
1.570000052
8.270000458
0.2502
1.3375
1.1131
0.041
9.54
106
0.05720352
511
39440
9.913181606
0.021136618
S09
Female
23
23
1205 P2
Control
After
144
11.8
84.81
1.24
3.3924
115
99
6879
6.91
105.26
21.72999954
19.82999992
63
1.149999976
4.53000021
1.6979
1.3254
1.1525
0.139
8.3
90
0.05904027
307
24345
10.04825762
0.013046931
S10
Female
52
29
1213 A1
Histamine
Before
84
14.55
122.34
1.49
3.3983
154
127
8505
1.95
8.84
24.12999916
23.06999969
57
1.289999962
6.429999828
0.6866
1.3664
1.1641
0.213
9.19
100
0.05706516
706
62635
10.62823748
0.033567244
S10
Female
52
29
1214 A1
Histamine
Before
85
14.41
126.37
1.54
3.5103
158
131
18839
8.59
121.08
24.53000069
23.45999908
61
1.080000043
4.739999771
0.6726
1.3642
1.1939
0.753
15.68
280
0.0569817
683
57165
10.32309232
0.030635771
S10
Female
52
29
1215 P1
Control
Before
84
13.97
135.94
1.66
3.7761
165
130
18120
7.77
115.27
22.81999969
21.70000076
47
1.340000033
5.699999809
0.6179
1.3751
1.1537
0.251
13.01
201
0.05786384
557
41895
9.786075434
0.022452298
S10
Female
52
29
1216 P1
Control
Before
79
15.63
143.1
1.75
3.975
169
139
15988
7.45
116.58
23.68000031
22.55999947
48
1.070000052
4.699999809
0.5521
1.3872
1.1394
0.097
10.86
163
0.05785798
622
48634
9.977686683
0.026063851
S10
Female
52
29
1217 P1
Control
Before
74
16.1
149.14
1.82
4.1428
163
138
9164
1.94
9.03
23.05999947
22.25
39
1.210000038
5.789999962
0.4962
1.3961
1.1462
0.094
6.85
56
0.05809664
652
49458
9.827646727
0.026505448
S10
Female
52
29
1218 P1
Control
Before
155
18.73
180
2.2
5
161
136
10801
2.59
22.33
24.02000046
22.97999954
49
1.090000033
5.159999847
0.8611
1.4284
1.1661
0.24
15.76
345
0.0584451
757
60827
10.11475385
0.032598303
S10
Female
52
29
1219 P1
Control
Before
195
19.8
191.7
2.34
5.325
167
134
19854
8.48
144.43
24.84000015
23.85000038
52
0.839999974
3.980000019
1.0172
1.4354
1.2035
0.345
9.35
114
0.05815227
759
61240
10.13565367
0.032819638
S10
Female
52
29
1220 A2
Capsaicin
Before
57
12.95
118.99
1.45
3.3053
151
121
31893
19.06
462.81
22.63999939
21.17000008
53
1.200000048
4.769999981
0.479
1.3516
1.1468
0.193
11.91
186
0.05626721
699
56941
10.18424917
0.030515725
S10
Female
52
29
1221 A2
Capsaicin
Before
82
16.29
164.66
2.01
4.5739
176
141
43139
11.79
183.7
22.96999931
22.17000008
38
1.169999957
5.619999886
0.498
1.4003
1.149
0.119
9.52
112
0.05749268
736
55497
9.798303911
0.029741859
S10
Female
52
29
1222 A2
Capsaicin
Before
126
18.21
180.17
2.2
5.0047
167
136
25150
12.57
247.46
23.55999947
22.46999931
44
1.24000001
5.260000229
0.6993
1.4238
1.1339
0.055
8.78
106
0.05833529
785
65079
10.27402614
0.034877028
S10
Female
52
29
1223 A2
Capsaicin
Before
138
19.2
193.52
2.36
5.3756
171
136
20579
6.25
71.18
23.22999954
22.45999908
38
0.889999986
4.559999943
0.7131
1.435
1.185
0.256
8.49
92
0.05874305
859
71459
10.29169589
0.038296187
S10
Female
52
29
1224 A2
Capsaicin
Before
117
18.81
188.9
2.3
5.2472
171
140
14377
4.6
47.62
22.94000053
22.19000053
35
1.149999976
5.880000114
0.6194
1.4337
1.1422
0.061
6.33
49
0.05885725
842
68767
10.19739055
0.036853495
S10
Female
52
29
1225 A3
Heat
Before
113
15.18
121.56
1.48
3.3767
152
130
8564
1.65
7.52
25.04999924
23.90999985
59
0.860000014
4.150000095
0.9296
1.3657
1.1854
0.222
8.38
90
0.05813324
374
32632
10.54001198
0.017488087
S10
Female
52
29
1226 A3
Heat
Before
246
18.4
162.47
1.98
4.5131
155
128
19890
9.21
162
27.12000084
26.01000023
70
0.610000014
3.519999981
1.5141
1.4065
1.1929
0.213
9.28
120
0.05804832
582
54762
10.94543982
0.029347959
S10
Female
52
29
1227 A3
Heat
Before
264
19.65
172.96
2.11
4.8044
155
126
24417
9.67
158.1
27.57999992
26.54000092
75
0.660000026
3.640000105
1.5264
1.4164
1.2026
0.363
15.54
340
0.05758712
656
60172
10.80688085
0.032247277
S10
Female
52
29
1228 A3
Heat
Before
234
18.78
168.71
2.06
4.6864
161
128
34318
10.77
168.67
27.10000038
25.98999977
68
0.680000007
3.299999952
1.387
1.4093
1.2218
0.462
10.34
143
0.05731186
676
60790
10.70034506
0.032578475
S10
Female
52
29
1229 A3
Heat
Before
207
18.58
166.91
2.04
4.6364
163
128
44223
14.22
272.99
26.95999908
25.63999939
67
0.639999986
3.289999962
1.2402
1.4085
1.2025
0.233
7.58
77
0.05678697
734
65689
10.67464288
0.035203938
S10
Female
52
29
1230 P2
Control
Before
145
17.13
157.75
1.92
4.3819
157
132
14853
8.73
160.41
24.48999977
22.79999924
61
1.169999957
4.489999771
0.9192
1.4041
1.1867
0.219
7.98
88
0.05981479
530
41555
9.991455716
0.022270086
S10
Female
52
29
1231 P2
Control
Before
193
18.38
174.28
2.13
4.8411
157
132
22319
12.58
254.5
24.95999908
23.26000023
62
1.039999962
4.199999809
1.1074
1.4185
1.1639
0.109
6.91
62
0.05768009
780
67988
10.53474168
0.036436015
S10
Female
52
29
1232 P2
Control
Before
123
17.16
157.87
1.93
4.3853
156
131
9303
2.14
10.93
23.89999962
22.28000069
64
1.409999967
6.170000076
0.7791
1.4088
1.145
0.109
9.41
108
0.05739459
732
63417
10.50273398
0.033986332
S10
Female
52
29
1233 P2
Control
Before
93
16.14
146.56
1.79
4.0711
157
136
7315
1.56
6.81
23.45999908
22.45999908
52
1.340000033
5.619999886
0.6346
1.3948
1.1826
0.213
6.66
54
0.05707467
755
64740
10.44883644
0.034695352
S10
Female
52
29
1234 P2
Control
Before
333
17.37
156.93
1.91
4.3592
151
122
33421
13.78
276.21
28.12000084
27.67000008
71
0.340000004
2.940000057
2.122
1.3958
1.1798
0.121
7.22
72
0.05902196
424
30238
9.529029301
0.016205098
S10
Female
52
29
1241 A4
Cowhage
Before
77
14.33
141.96
1.73
3.9433
164
132
27614
10.81
161.99
22.5
21.70999908
37
1.190000057
5.739999771
0.5424
1.3772
1.1524
0.164
8.96
99
0.05877379
307
20776
9.282540225
0.011134239
S10
Female
52
29
1242 A4
Cowhage
Before
132
17.4
172.6
2.11
4.7944
169
137
26511
8.68
113.2
23.29999924
22.10000038
50
1.279999971
5.78000021
0.7648
1.412
1.1651
0.212
8.71
90
0.0590615
523
42473
10.16858876
0.022762059
S10
Female
52
29
1243 A4
Cowhage
Before
239
20.54
206.44
2.52
5.7344
165
132
34316
10.96
166.34
25.15999985
23.81999969
60
1.00999999
4.320000172
1.1577
1.4432
1.1713
0.18
7.77
73
0.05923207
602
52879
10.57543963
0.028338825
S10
Female
52
29
1244 A4
Cowhage
Before
187
19.36
187.14
2.28
5.1983
161
131
15616
6.04
85.28
24.79000092
23.39999962
60
1.220000029
4.929999828
0.9993
1.4328
1.1601
0.224
16.94
394
0.05939312
516
38227
9.712148558
0.02048655
S10
Female
52
29
1236 A1
Histamine
After
605
27.03
218.12
3.19
8.7248
128
101
28341
15.56
347.77
24.21999931
23.45999908
44
0.400000006
3.200000048
2.7737
1.4831
1.2242
0.372
15.3
362
0.0595798
574
59033
11.44317502
0.031636866
S10
Female
52
29
1245 A4
Cowhage
Before
254
21.27
207.38
2.53
5.7606
159
132
19396
10.71
223.95
25.17000008
23.57999992
62
1.190000057
5.03000021
1.2248
1.4496
1.1681
0.141
7.37
69
0.05967643
688
57710
10.33442642
0.030927846
S10
Female
52
29
1237 A1
Histamine
After
647
27.42
222.57
3.26
8.9028
128
101
19861
8.78
130.66
23.60000038
23.26000023
41
0.289999992
3.660000086
2.907
1.4869
1.2046
0.193
7.8
82
0.05967057
582
57242
11.19053801
0.030677036
S10
Female
52
29
1238 A1
Histamine
After
945
30.96
257.89
3.78
10.3156
120
97
10041
4.36
53.06
24.62999916
24.25
42
0.469999999
4.190000057
3.6644
1.5141
1.2042
0.189
7.77
88
0.0559839
721
69859
11.10704699
0.037438718
S10
Female
52
29
1239 A1
Histamine
After
1000
31.48
285.54
4.18
11.4216
127
96
39471
12.09
191.78
24.64999962
24.12000084
42
0.400000006
3.630000114
3.5021
1.5166
1.1967
0.208
12.06
249
0.05834041
720
80382
11.92252426
0.043078186
S10
Female
52
29
1240 A1
Histamine
After
942
31.06
261.83
3.83
10.4732
121
95
16973
8.2
131.77
24.61000061
24.14999962
44
0.449999988
3.690000057
3.5978
1.5129
1.2138
0.386
20.65
653
0.05829869
718
72372
11.32864909
0.03878548
S10
Female
52
29
1246 A2
Capsaicin
After
358
22.85
217.2
2.65
6.0333
157
131
18956
9.22
187.74
26.26000023
25.26000023
54
0.75999999
3.799999952
1.6483
1.4584
1.1879
0.166
7.67
85
0.05710615
975
92755
11.00579493
0.049709104
S10
Female
52
29
1247 A2
Capsaicin
After
547
25.42
264.28
3.22
7.3411
153
121
29897
12.11
237.07
26.57999992
25.29000092
59
0.74000001
3.660000086
2.0698
1.4862
1.1877
0.265
13.45
252
0.0582511
903
85223
10.96199484
0.045672567
S10
Female
52
29
1248 A2
Capsaicin
After
567
25.91
285.2
3.48
7.9222
160
130
30325
11.22
214.51
26.30999947
25.10000038
53
0.75999999
3.690000057
1.9881
1.4961
1.1838
0.171
9.19
117
0.05856882
914
87599
11.04667395
0.046945909
S10
Female
52
29
1249 A2
Capsaicin
After
451
24.83
257.64
3.14
7.1567
157
131
15564
7.55
148.66
25.93000031
24.53000069
58
0.949999988
4.170000076
1.7505
1.4872
1.2021
0.226
6.8
60
0.05870498
866
79926
10.84027133
0.042833807
S10
Female
52
29
1250 A2
Capsaicin
After
411
25
267.51
3.26
7.4308
167
136
25218
8.14
119.75
25.27000046
24.28000069
54
0.689999998
3.460000038
1.5364
1.4889
1.2017
0.238
7.25
68
0.05912445
778
71072
10.78486043
0.038088787
S10
Female
52
29
1251 A3
Heat
After
523
24.79
224.29
2.74
6.2303
151
121
22508
9.02
154.3
29.47999954
28.79000092
67
0.439999998
3.359999895
2.3318
1.4614
1.2107
0.249
9.02
112
0.05720718
824
93420
12.01465722
0.050065489
S10
Female
52
29
1252 A3
Heat
After
588
25.06
230.06
2.81
6.3906
149
118
21220
5.41
57.42
29.54000092
28.94000053
68
0.439999998
3.549999952
2.5559
1.4629
1.2023
0.302
11.67
177
0.05732797
845
96947
12.08631453
0.051955673
S10
Female
52
29
1253 A3
Heat
After
531
25.34
235.5
2.87
6.5417
149
122
30738
17.01
450.68
28.90999985
27.97999954
68
0.519999981
3.200000048
2.2548
1.4684
1.1968
0.198
10.35
159
0.05853441
876
95379
11.77414524
0.051115353
S10
Female
52
29
1254 A3
Heat
After
472
24.33
219.86
2.68
6.1072
146
122
13267
3.96
43.38
28.04000092
26.98999977
64
0.600000024
3.49000001
2.1468
1.4615
1.2142
0.283
10.35
159
0.05883602
861
88991
11.47166688
0.047691907
S10
Female
52
29
1255 A3
Heat
After
795
28.87
302.55
3.69
8.4042
152
122
39909
10.66
164.78
28.90999985
28.18000031
66
0.449999988
3.5
2.6277
1.5008
1.2072
0.323
11.82
188
0.05893924
896
105603
12.25008726
0.056594582
S10
Female
52
29
1256 P1
Control
After
49
15.39
127.46
1.56
3.5406
156
136
7427
1.94
9.48
23.03000069
22.14999962
35
1.110000014
5.179999828
0.3844
1.3761
1.159
0.229
13.25
230
0.05882943
561
39206
9.433001348
0.021011214
S10
Female
52
29
1257 P1
Control
After
457
28.88
297.25
3.63
8.2569
164
131
37029
12.35
235.32
27.35000038
26.15999985
73
0.99000001
4.710000038
1.5374
1.5039
1.195
0.314
10.81
149
0.05789751
732
59585
10.1804738
0.031932693
S10
Female
52
29
1258 P1
Control
After
172
20.16
194.39
2.37
5.3997
168
133
32886
11.9
213.11
24.35000038
23.20999908
54
1.049999952
4.940000057
0.8848
1.4357
1.1785
0.175
7.67
76
0.05854759
754
61789
10.21468479
0.033113857
S10
Female
52
29
1259 P1
Control
After
189
21.08
194.97
2.38
5.4158
162
132
18330
6.97
99.12
24.79000092
23.72999954
51
1.039999962
4.659999847
0.9694
1.4422
1.1713
0.256
18.49
465
0.05798609
873
72699
10.29703422
0.038960726
S10
Female
52
29
1260 P1
Control
After
179
21.24
196.36
2.4
5.4544
159
135
9487
1.86
8.3
24.27000046
23.37000084
43
1.080000043
5.150000095
0.9116
1.447
1.206
0.38
10.02
127
0.05856662
878
71473
10.18072736
0.03830369
S10
Female
52
29
1261 A4
Cowhage
After
44
14.41
138.88
1.69
3.8578
164
133
18729
9.95
152.94
22.01000023
21.12999916
35
1.559999943
7.269999981
0.3168
1.3794
1.1586
0.251
11.9
192
0.05872328
535
39953
9.751083288
0.021411545
S10
Female
52
29
1262 A4
Cowhage
After
109
17.04
168.11
2.05
4.6697
168
138
22022
14.22
330.51
22.89999962
22.04000092
41
1.659999967
7.670000076
0.6484
1.4112
1.1685
0.237
9.09
103
0.05940264
561
44592
10.06009552
0.02389767
S10
Female
52
29
1263 A4
Cowhage
After
132
18.77
178.34
2.18
4.9539
165
139
9058
1.42
5.69
23.44000053
22.47999954
45
1.330000043
5.909999847
0.7402
1.4286
1.1649
0.163
8.29
85
0.05954685
695
59364
10.42855738
0.031814255
S10
Female
52
29
1264 A4
Cowhage
After
180
19.6
187.88
2.29
5.2189
163
135
10988
1.8
7.55
24.06999969
22.98999977
51
1.220000029
5.199999809
0.9581
1.4358
1.1958
0.371
10.43
131
0.05999195
801
67232
10.33776884
0.03603086
S10
Female
52
29
1265 A4
Cowhage
After
305
22.69
228.7
2.79
6.3528
165
132
29041
10.73
182.83
25.45000076
23.93000031
59
0.920000017
3.890000105
1.3336
1.4615
1.1828
0.216
9.65
123
0.05949707
930
87856
10.96728926
0.04708364
S10
Female
52
29
1266 P2
Control
After
72
14.81
143.45
1.75
3.9847
162
136
9175
1.97
9.32
22.26000023
21.25
35
1.370000005
6.239999771
0.5019
1.3883
1.1216
0.067
10.46
134
0.05976208
384
25488
9.193001402
0.013659486
S10
Female
52
29
1267 P2
Control
After
78
16.56
160.44
1.96
4.4567
164
135
12658
6.3
92.83
22.42000008
21.54999924
39
1.179999948
5.510000229
0.4862
1.4062
1.1375
0.077
7.63
72
0.05979649
486
34762
9.543096211
0.018629593
S10
Female
52
29
1268 P2
Control
After
203
19.2
186.99
2.28
5.1942
159
134
13855
5.95
83.14
24.65999985
23.27000046
59
1.330000043
6.130000114
1.0856
1.4323
1.1714
0.203
9.1
105
0.05951538
556
44714
10.11904261
0.023963052
S10
Female
52
29
1269 P2
Control
After
287
20.81
202.47
2.47
5.6242
155
126
18184
8.09
134.85
25.18000031
23.93000031
64
0.949999988
4.21999979
1.4175
1.4421
1.1726
0.148
8.5
106
0.05955271
644
49926
9.935174784
0.026756258
S10
Female
52
29
1270 P2
Control
After
271
20.87
209.84
2.56
5.8289
165
132
23454
9.87
169.41
25.12000084
23.52000046
62
1.090000033
4.400000095
1.2915
1.4487
1.181
0.229
10.55
159
0.05961128
677
55495
10.21615922
0.029740787
S11
Male
50
29
1272 A1
Cowhage
Before
35
10.9
99.59
1.22
2.7664
157
130
11956
8.67
136.4
21.40999985
20.28000069
40
1.120000005
4.349999905
0.3514
1.3224
1.1256
0.15
14.31
227
0.05675989
266
21380
10.11621595
0.011457934
S11
Male
50
29
1273 A1
Cowhage
Before
32
11.64
113.55
1.39
3.1542
160
135
10551
7.63
115.92
21.40999985
20.52000046
41
1.909999967
9.75
0.2818
1.3441
1.0997
0.021
14.4
274
0.05726135
268
19530
9.632494816
0.010466485
S11
Male
50
29
1274 A1
Cowhage
Before
39
12.39
120.23
1.47
3.3397
162
136
7689
1.97
8.63
21.81999969
21.12999916
31
1.519999981
8.020000458
0.3244
1.3554
1.1193
0.076
9.87
113
0.05734188
334
21762
9.108172117
0.011662654
S11
Male
50
29
1275 A1
Cowhage
Before
70
13.63
139.48
1.7
3.8744
164
136
17471
10.29
186.7
22.60000038
21.62000084
41
1.360000014
6
0.5019
1.3779
1.1259
0.091
12.19
196
0.05811128
357
27671
9.934210963
0.014829396
S11
Male
50
29
1276 A1
Cowhage
Before
88
15.17
151.49
1.85
4.2081
169
141
16334
7.22
107.91
23.32999992
22.26000023
44
1.340000033
5.869999886
0.5809
1.3933
1.1506
0.173
9.87
123
0.05800879
443
33960
9.879547122
0.018199786
S11
Male
50
29
1277 P1
Control
Before
102
14.92
146.85
1.79
4.0792
162
139
9397
2
9.71
23.54999924
21.80999947
58
1.389999986
4.989999771
0.6946
1.3911
1.1287
0.061
7.51
72
0.06084041
230
15546
9.276848688
0.008331386
S11
Male
50
29
1278 P1
Control
Before
140
16.17
172.35
2.1
4.7875
177
136
38753
11.09
173.94
24
22.35000038
59
1.419999957
5.710000038
0.8123
1.4089
1.1341
0.087
9.54
109
0.06093192
247
17010
9.363942528
0.009115971
S11
Male
50
29
1279 P1
Control
Before
194
17.18
181.4
2.21
5.0389
169
135
21310
8
118.72
24.19000053
22.64999962
59
1.289999962
5.269999981
1.0695
1.4203
1.1437
0.115
10.33
144
0.06075403
342
24089
9.470030813
0.012909736
S11
Male
50
29
1280 P1
Control
Before
185
17.31
188.45
2.3
5.2347
177
134
41584
12.85
246.75
24.40999985
22.68000031
64
1.279999971
4.809999943
0.9817
1.423
1.1445
0.129
10.16
132
0.06133748
356
24856
9.428566759
0.013320786
==PAGE:60==
S11
Male
50
29
1281 P1
Control
Before
211
18.16
191.7
2.34
5.325
173
133
28698
9.12
138.8
24.85000038
23.12000084
62
1.169999957
4.440000057
1.1007
1.4289
1.1555
0.118
7.57
73
0.06143485
406
28023
9.374526821
0.015018039
S11
Male
50
29
1282 A2
Heat
Before
20
10.78
103.02
1.26
2.8617
162
136
12449
8.64
134.56
21.07999992
20.54999924
31
1.179999948
5.929999828
0.1941
1.3265
1.1028
0.061
16.01
275
0.05872914
345
22131
9.037452566
0.011860408
S11
Male
50
29
1283 A2
Heat
Before
90
14.37
149.81
1.83
4.1614
171
141
10010
1.93
8.55
22.53000069
21.92000008
36
1.200000048
6.050000191
0.6008
1.3925
1.1105
0.037
12.29
190
0.05939532
387
26815
9.39265731
0.01437065
S11
Male
50
29
1284 A2
Heat
Before
218
17.69
190.05
2.32
5.2792
172
138
22266
7.43
108.26
24.68000031
23.25
60
1.070000052
4.590000153
1.1471
1.4263
1.1582
0.13
7.51
68
0.0597489
408
30859
9.81331867
0.016537903
S11
Male
50
29
1285 A2
Heat
Before
278
19.27
198.43
2.42
5.5119
167
137
12903
1.74
7.65
25.27000046
23.73999977
61
0.920000017
3.849999905
1.401
1.4405
1.1478
0.105
10.13
135
0.05995754
501
42442
10.38566038
0.022745445
S11
Male
50
29
1286 A2
Heat
Before
290
19.84
212.73
2.6
5.9092
171
136
24899
7.93
112.02
25.29999924
23.70000076
64
1.070000052
4.579999924
1.3632
1.4466
1.1696
0.308
13.97
264
0.05986823
548
46225
10.36342336
0.024772824
S11
Male
50
29
1287 A1
Cowhage
After
132
15.91
153.09
1.87
4.2525
161
132
12882
3.9
33.58
24.09000015
23.01000023
54
1.269999981
5.639999866
0.8622
1.3995
1.1298
0.079
10.55
138
0.05864861
540
47769
10.61283114
0.025600282
S11
Male
50
29
1288 A1
Cowhage
After
330
20.58
209.61
2.56
5.8225
159
130
12894
2.62
16.84
25.65999985
24.76000023
58
0.860000014
4.429999828
1.5744
1.452
1.1675
0.122
7.68
79
0.05947804
582
58551
11.31776639
0.031378553
S11
Male
50
29
1289 A1
Cowhage
After
406
22.72
248.06
3.03
6.8906
173
135
46684
12.71
230.33
26.48999977
25.55999947
58
0.74000001
3.970000029
1.6367
1.4695
1.1983
0.581
22.1
626
0.05937262
633
62048
11.17164426
0.03325266
S11
Male
50
29
1290 A1
Cowhage
After
541
25.05
252.74
3.08
7.0206
157
130
16073
3.72
38.21
27.12999916
26.38999939
59
0.519999981
3.450000048
2.1405
1.4844
1.1839
0.193
10.77
172
0.05954246
707
68509
11.10757276
0.036715228
S11
Male
50
29
1291 A1
Cowhage
After
659
26.25
282.66
3.45
7.8517
158
121
38143
11.37
198.39
27.63999939
27
69
0.639999986
3.970000029
2.3314
1.4917
1.184
0.181
8.38
96
0.05970205
657
69069
11.56948317
0.037015342
S11
Male
50
29
1292 A3
Capsaicin
Before
30
10.67
97.3
1.19
2.7028
155
129
8215
2.69
15.18
21.53000069
20.70999908
39
1.409999967
5.630000114
0.3083
1.3182
1.1143
0.053
11.5
160
0.0591735
146
9800
9.244675453
0.005252
S11
Male
50
29
1293 A3
Capsaicin
Before
49
12.01
116.65
1.42
3.2403
163
134
20332
13.05
264.64
22.27000046
21.40999985
35
1.580000043
7.71999979
0.4201
1.347
1.1187
0.105
15.8
299
0.06089825
217
14187
9.123689079
0.007603073
S11
Male
50
29
1295 A3
Capsaicin
Before
448
20.71
200.98
2.45
5.5828
159
122
33723
10.65
184.67
29.03000069
27.87999916
80
0.550000012
3.210000038
2.2291
1.4338
1.156
0.087
9.84
142
0.05988507
582
57272
11.19347005
0.030693114
S11
Male
50
29
1296 A3
Capsaicin
Before
356
18.26
179.01
2.18
4.9725
158
123
34384
10.54
164.54
27.77000046
26.17000008
86
0.600000024
3.200000048
1.9887
1.413
1.1706
0.184
10.97
160
0.06063324
593
53029
10.67049168
0.028419212
S11
Male
50
29
1297 A3
Capsaicin
Before
147
13.97
131.37
1.6
3.6492
158
131
17596
9.9
178.94
25.06999969
23.20999908
72
1.029999971
4.059999943
1.119
1.3646
1.153
0.124
8.44
90
0.05963251
384
31449
10.2115782
0.016854095
S11
Male
50
29
1298 P2
Control
Before
61
11.16
108.36
1.32
3.01
158
130
16354
7.97
101.91
21.79000092
20.81999969
41
1.830000043
8.31000042
0.5629
1.3324
1.1282
0.123
12
168
0.05809517
170
9918
8.618717594
0.005315238
S11
Male
50
29
1299 P2
Control
Before
49
13.27
131.89
1.61
3.6636
160
137
7419
1.85
8.89
21.80999947
21.10000038
34
1.299999952
6.190000057
0.3715
1.3734
1.1149
0.059
9.91
116
0.05956223
146
9050
8.883884856
0.004850061
S11
Male
50
29
1300 P2
Control
Before
48
14.15
145.23
1.77
4.0342
165
136
14502
9.35
168.67
21.73999977
21.04999924
30
1.340000033
7.269999981
0.3305
1.3862
1.1616
0.37
11.11
147
0.05980967
148
9254
8.922549155
0.004959388
S11
Male
50
29
1301 P2
Control
Before
68
15.07
151.31
1.85
4.2031
161
135
8299
2.41
14.74
21.84000015
20.98999977
36
1.730000019
9.340000153
0.4494
1.3969
1.1375
0.115
8.28
80
0.0599839
248
18040
9.623819866
0.009667966
S11
Male
50
29
1302 P2
Control
Before
252
18.67
176.28
2.15
4.8967
151
130
9479
1.76
8.27
25.12000084
23.54000092
70
1.139999986
5.139999866
1.4295
1.4246
1.1604
0.125
10.06
154
0.06032431
435
37989
10.54482464
0.020359001
S11
Male
50
29
1303 A4
Histamine
Before
59
10.7
91.36
1.11
2.5378
151
130
9568
4.84
47.83
22.25
21.20999908
47
1.179999948
5.260000229
0.6458
1.3108
1.1322
0.082
10.18
131
0.05716765
529
36617
9.38790321
0.019623721
S11
Male
50
29
1304 A4
Histamine
Before
61
11.48
101.61
1.24
2.8225
149
123
7984
2.58
15.51
22.27000046
21.35000038
41
1.25999999
5.599999905
0.6003
1.3309
1.1343
0.108
9.28
104
0.05747511
472
31662
9.241729063
0.016968246
S11
Male
50
29
1305 A4
Histamine
Before
145
16.57
149.49
1.82
4.1525
161
132
15180
4.51
46.61
24.94000053
23.30999947
60
0.980000019
4.039999962
0.97
1.3944
1.1589
0.124
7.8
75
0.05767204
621
47489
9.867469018
0.025450225
S11
Male
50
29
1306 A4
Histamine
Before
260
18.4
171.46
2.09
4.7628
151
128
12154
3.89
31.57
26.45999908
24.62000084
71
0.810000002
3.450000048
1.5164
1.4153
1.1492
0.08
11.54
204
0.0576347
618
51074
10.25795425
0.027371492
S11
Male
50
29
1307 A4
Histamine
Before
166
17.42
168.04
2.05
4.6678
164
131
25257
9.66
151.31
24.81999969
23.14999962
61
1.00999999
3.930000067
0.9879
1.4085
1.1588
0.127
8.89
107
0.05904759
628
47845
9.849031284
0.025641012
S11
Male
50
29
1308 A2
Heat
After
944
29.35
327.55
4
9.0986
152
123
20976
7.32
112.72
28.12000084
27.27000046
56
0.579999983
3.670000076
2.882
1.5174
1.178
0.143
9.02
114
0.05920791
773
75426
11.14617483
0.040422175
S11
Male
50
29
1309 A2
Heat
After
637
26.73
286.87
3.5
7.9686
159
125
24200
7.13
94.42
27.23999977
26.40999985
63
0.610000014
3.730000019
2.2205
1.499
1.1849
0.189
8.31
91
0.06057248
802
76121
10.99309846
0.040794638
S11
Male
50
29
1310 A2
Heat
After
848
29.58
326.14
3.98
9.0594
159
125
22077
4.82
50.11
27.54000092
26.62999916
62
0.74000001
4.380000114
2.6001
1.5193
1.1976
0.218
9.63
134
0.06058785
736
70048
11.00814197
0.037540006
S11
Male
50
29
1311 A2
Heat
After
963
31.03
343.05
4.19
9.5292
153
118
22268
9.66
221.32
28.02000046
27.43000031
54
0.579999983
3.670000076
2.8072
1.5284
1.2102
0.368
12.71
226
0.0601142
751
76237
11.36888805
0.040856805
S11
Male
50
29
1312 A2
Heat
After
1044
31.94
363.95
4.44
10.1097
156
118
29818
9.27
156.64
28.55999947
27.63999939
57
0.610000014
3.599999905
2.8685
1.534
1.1848
0.392
28.33
1066
0.06042606
761
72069
10.98087579
0.038623097
S11
Male
50
29
1313 P1
Control
After
90
15.45
155.43
1.9
4.3175
167
136
10413
2.18
9.89
22.5
21.65999985
42
1.25
5.590000153
0.579
1.4007
1.1353
0.105
9.77
121
0.06015886
197
13431
9.317000543
0.007197919
S11
Male
50
29
1314 P1
Control
After
108
16.11
168.78
2.06
4.6883
168
138
10807
2.34
13.01
22.86000061
21.87000084
42
1.330000043
5.619999886
0.6399
1.4141
1.1439
0.182
10.5
128
0.06075183
282
19257
9.324484264
0.010320179
S11
Male
50
29
1315 P1
Control
After
63
15.71
161.4
1.97
4.4833
177
145
11322
2.04
8.65
22.20999908
21.78000069
30
1.230000019
6.03000021
0.3903
1.4078
1.1507
0.227
10.55
134
0.06025696
245
17902
9.645456651
0.00959401
S11
Male
50
29
1316 P1
Control
After
111
16.85
177.4
2.16
4.9278
170
143
9919
1.87
9.16
22.51000023
21.64999962
35
1.700000048
10.72999954
0.6257
1.4229
1.1545
0.357
18.49
437
0.06040191
321
24350
9.827703058
0.013049611
S11
Male
50
29
1317 P1
Control
After
189
17.97
186.79
2.28
5.1886
168
138
15069
3.43
28.8
24.10000038
22.65999985
60
1.330000043
5.559999943
1.0118
1.4289
1.141
0.15
15.86
330
0.06053587
325
22722
9.43488599
0.012177136
S11
Male
50
29
1323 A4
Histamine
After
239
18.66
183.14
2.23
5.0872
166
133
21071
7.07
100.75
25.53000069
24.62000084
55
0.639999986
3.549999952
1.305
1.4258
1.1899
0.262
12.03
208
0.05954466
302
26972
10.66370601
0.014454789
S11
Male
50
29
1324 A4
Histamine
After
309
19.39
194.68
2.38
5.4078
163
130
41113
16.01
337.25
26.23999977
25.20000076
61
0.75999999
3.920000076
1.5872
1.432
1.1836
0.276
11.49
157
0.06034261
314
31249
11.25662756
0.016746912
S11
Male
50
29
1325 A4
Histamine
After
405
21.83
231
2.82
6.4167
169
130
46582
10.16
139.52
26.93000031
25.87999916
62
0.850000024
4.900000095
1.7532
1.4555
1.1748
0.194
11.31
171
0.06034334
452
42588
10.95290863
0.022823689
S11
Male
50
29
1326 A4
Histamine
After
453
22.64
235.11
2.87
6.5308
162
129
34420
14.18
326.97
26.70000076
25.84000015
58
0.670000017
4.119999886
1.9268
1.4643
1.1835
0.184
11.39
201
0.06079063
433
42466
11.17459492
0.022758307
S11
Male
50
29
1327 A4
Histamine
After
384
21.95
222.34
2.71
6.1761
167
129
31775
10.11
172.7
26.59000015
25.73999977
56
0.680000007
4.239999771
1.7271
1.4547
1.1887
0.306
14.13
260
0.06021011
380
36317
11.03108533
0.019462946
S11
Male
50
29
1328 A3
Capsaicin
After
82
11.98
116.74
1.42
3.2428
164
130
37102
14.09
280.04
23.52000046
21.87000084
62
1.320000052
5.139999866
0.7024
1.342
1.1612
0.401
17.28
366
0.05778478
195
13537
9.401539349
0.007254726
S11
Male
50
29
1329 A3
Capsaicin
After
32
13.23
130.43
1.59
3.6231
168
145
10225
5.65
73.55
21.51000023
20.79000092
33
1.75
8.739999771
0.2453
1.3679
1.1362
0.138
10.17
122
0.05925769
154
9144
8.694864284
0.004900437
S11
Male
50
29
1330 A3
Capsaicin
After
326
18.28
185.95
2.27
5.1653
151
125
21677
13
292.28
25.87999916
24.06999969
82
0.879999995
3.779999971
1.7532
1.4236
1.1822
0.274
10.84
163
0.05909078
500
43678
10.54633176
0.02340784
S11
Male
50
29
1331 A3
Capsaicin
After
554
23.34
243.92
2.98
6.7756
157
121
37458
10.39
160.3
27.92000008
26.70000076
79
0.829999983
4.070000172
2.2712
1.464
1.1738
0.359
22.98
687
0.05860762
717
72436
11.34155783
0.038819779
S11
Male
50
29
1332 A3
Capsaicin
After
698
25.39
265.67
3.24
7.3797
147
120
25726
10.92
193.67
28.62000084
27.76000023
75
0.629999995
3.640000105
2.6273
1.4813
1.1773
0.244
13.72
248
0.05803587
765
78338
11.4185401
0.041982769
S11
Male
50
29
1333 P2
Control
After
58
12.91
121.7
1.48
3.3806
163
134
9909
2.37
11.63
22.25
21.64999962
38
1.230000019
6.309999943
0.4766
1.3601
1.1562
0.158
7.45
66
0.05810615
109
7726
9.499902811
0.004140505
S11
Male
50
29
1334 P2
Control
After
66
14.02
141.68
1.73
3.9356
166
138
13827
7.64
119.83
21.80999947
21.29000092
31
1.139999986
5.489999771
0.4658
1.383
1.1462
0.158
8.9
94
0.05963104
118
7544
9.022250802
0.004042968
S11
Male
50
29
1335 P2
Control
After
49
14.53
143.11
1.75
3.9753
165
133
11343
3.95
34.67
21.90999985
21.21999931
34
1.480000019
9.010000229
0.3424
1.3881
1.1779
1.098
23.04
603
0.05975476
154
9724
8.96638069
0.00521127
S11
Male
50
29
1336 P2
Control
After
76
14.81
152.49
1.86
4.2358
162
134
13534
7.97
134.25
21.87000084
21.21999931
32
1.179999948
5.420000076
0.4984
1.396
1.1526
0.196
8.39
83
0.05957833
156
8810
8.479704423
0.00472144
S11
Male
50
29
1337 P2
Control
After
115
16.57
169.52
2.07
4.7089
170
138
16106
5.16
58.06
23.12000084
21.84000015
50
1.340000033
5.739999771
0.6784
1.411
1.169
0.2
8.21
83
0.05958931
319
24341
9.856640706
0.013044788
S12
Male
27
22
1338 A3
Capsaicin
Before
92
12.6
109.93
1.34
3.0536
153
127
8774
2.45
18.07
24.29000092
22.80999947
59
1.019999981
4.119999886
0.8369
1.3419
1.1694
0.242
11.32
165
0.0599268
628
55546
10.6121073
0.029768119
S12
Male
27
22
1339 A3
Capsaicin
Before
205
16.32
145.42
1.77
4.0394
155
126
13284
3.5
27.91
26.15999985
24.60000038
69
0.899999976
3.940000057
1.4097
1.3882
1.1758
0.129
7.76
93
0.06124158
750
70517
10.94136085
0.037791352
S12
Male
27
22
1340 A3
Capsaicin
Before
248
16.88
144.53
1.76
4.0147
146
122
15759
7.41
108.12
27.11000061
26
72
0.600000024
3.24000001
1.7159
1.3872
1.1768
0.208
15.74
348
0.06074964
661
60895
10.83041622
0.032634746
S12
Male
27
22
1341 A3
Capsaicin
Before
219
16.05
139.92
1.71
3.8867
143
123
7717
1.48
6.53
26.48999977
25.59000015
70
0.680000007
3.549999952
1.5652
1.3853
1.173
0.133
6.74
59
0.06077599
713
63726
10.6676467
0.034151931
S12
Male
27
22
1342 A3
Capsaicin
Before
257
17.71
170.18
2.08
4.7272
163
128
37614
12.86
230.44
26.62999916
25.56999969
61
0.720000029
3.75999999
1.5102
1.4072
1.2029
0.462
16.09
333
0.06072621
728
70157
11.07706935
0.037598421
S12
Male
27
22
1343 P2
Control
Before
113
14.08
125.87
1.54
3.4964
157
130
13340
5.36
64.85
24.72999954
23.38999939
60
1.080000043
4.760000229
0.8978
1.3619
1.1704
0.191
10.85
156
0.05796999
801
71644
10.67157974
0.038395332
S12
Male
27
22
1344 P2
Control
Before
149
15.96
139.31
1.7
3.8697
156
132
12190
5.15
66.71
25.67000008
24.34000015
63
0.959999979
4.360000134
1.0696
1.3831
1.1794
0.356
18.13
423
0.05920132
706
65504
10.86892568
0.035104793
S12
Male
27
22
1345 P2
Control
Before
76
13.74
119.8
1.46
3.3278
153
128
10412
3.66
31.55
23.87999916
22.45000076
54
1.169999957
5.21999979
0.6344
1.3568
1.153
0.187
10.01
120
0.05977013
602
49719
10.25458304
0.026645323
S12
Male
27
22
1346 P2
Control
Before
93
14.34
121.28
1.48
3.3689
149
127
7951
2.04
9.81
24.02000046
22.90999985
55
1.24000001
5.769999981
0.7668
1.3633
1.1336
0.099
13.67
243
0.0597489
720
62620
10.52313987
0.033559205
S12
Male
27
22
1347 P2
Control
Before
108
14.75
131.27
1.6
3.6464
154
130
11368
6.52
98.02
23.95999908
22.64999962
52
1.100000024
4.739999771
0.8227
1.3714
1.1622
0.345
20.37
501
0.05957614
691
57521
10.29506871
0.030826558
S12
Male
27
22
1348 A4
Cowhage
Before
190
16.38
150.78
1.84
4.1883
151
127
20665
14.73
349.74
25.48999977
24.07999992
68
1.149999976
5.039999962
1.2601
1.3938
1.1645
0.144
7.15
63
0.05871377
693
61085
10.59389663
0.03273657
S12
Male
27
22
1349 A4
Cowhage
Before
121
15.45
147.02
1.79
4.0839
161
130
39700
13.32
219.23
24.15999985
22.81999969
60
1.190000057
4.929999828
0.823
1.3829
1.1518
0.15
10.05
129
0.05985652
555
45418
10.20757479
0.024340338
S12
Male
27
22
1350 A4
Cowhage
Before
162
16.58
146.07
1.78
4.0575
153
130
9847
4.17
51.34
25.23999977
23.45000076
66
1.129999995
4.489999771
1.1091
1.3913
1.1494
0.195
15.09
296
0.05969986
593
49838
10.34446455
0.026709097
S12
Male
27
22
1351 A4
Cowhage
Before
169
17.14
155.74
1.9
4.3261
151
129
9228
2.09
10.44
24.80999947
23.13999939
61
1.070000052
4.71999979
1.0851
1.4048
1.1839
0.269
8.73
96
0.05935066
743
63241
10.41022262
0.03389201
S12
Male
27
22
1352 A4
Cowhage
Before
135
17.13
153.08
1.87
4.2522
162
135
22570
13.3
294.86
24.88999939
23.43000031
62
1.090000033
4.429999828
0.8819
1.4007
1.1664
0.194
9.48
111
0.05893119
771
69603
10.72116179
0.037301523
S12
Male
27
22
1353 A2
Heat
Before
32
12.95
125.1
1.53
3.475
166
135
18378
7.92
114.75
21.82999992
21.21999931
35
1.549999952
7.730000019
0.2558
1.3601
1.1239
0.113
10.3
117
0.05960249
371
27462
9.708098764
0.014717389
S12
Male
27
22
1354 A2
Heat
Before
41
13.9
129.77
1.58
3.6047
169
141
11533
3.6
25.04
22.56999969
22.02000046
36
1.409999967
6.53000021
0.3159
1.3696
1.1355
0.136
10.11
122
0.05993192
350
24479
9.436650558
0.013118744
S12
Male
27
22
1355 A2
Heat
Before
190
15.94
150
1.83
4.1667
154
132
13102
3.84
30.8
24.81999969
23.44000053
62
1
4.239999771
1.2667
1.3919
1.154
0.167
11.9
190
0.05945901
391
28840
9.690904385
0.015455884
S12
Male
27
22
1356 A2
Heat
Before
102
15.06
141.95
1.73
3.9431
160
131
13680
4.68
52.6
23.92000008
22.45000076
52
1.299999952
5.440000057
0.7186
1.3846
1.1737
0.376
12.25
181
0.06004027
448
33168
9.709026684
0.017775339
S12
Male
27
22
1357 A2
Heat
Before
103
14.89
136.65
1.67
3.7958
157
131
9848
2.41
11.67
23.68000031
22.37999916
53
1.519999981
7.539999962
0.7538
1.3808
1.1481
0.127
9.94
131
0.06048097
446
34760
9.961563641
0.018628521
S12
Male
27
22
1358 P1
Control
Before
38
10.4
89.58
1.09
2.4883
151
128
15984
13.09
251.24
22.44000053
21.04000092
52
1.730000019
7.610000134
0.4242
1.302
1.1393
0.16
9.75
116
0.05811787
344
24309
9.485481576
0.013027638
S12
Male
27
22
1359 P1
Control
Before
54
11.7
101.17
1.23
2.8103
150
131
7266
2.65
17.29
22.82999992
21.13999939
51
1.590000033
6.630000114
0.5338
1.3304
1.1404
0.118
9.16
111
0.05903514
308
21076
9.334128943
0.011295014
S12
Male
27
22
1360 P1
Control
Before
63
12.71
117.06
1.43
3.2517
154
133
12182
9.49
166.91
22.62999916
21.54000092
52
1.5
6.630000114
0.5382
1.3494
1.1134
0.032
7.76
77
0.05966765
366
26871
9.668440549
0.014400661
S12
Male
27
22
1361 P1
Control
Before
97
13.33
115.83
1.41
3.2175
146
124
7290
1.7
7.13
24.20999908
22.64999962
63
1.429999948
5.889999866
0.8374
1.3537
1.1772
0.573
13.1
198
0.05936677
482
37989
10.01752583
0.020359001
S12
Male
27
22
1362 P1
Control
Before
70
13.28
116.33
1.42
3.2314
151
127
8024
2.28
11.54
23.88999939
22.27000046
64
1.379999995
5.210000038
0.6017
1.3519
1.1384
0.103
10.15
145
0.05954319
400
29669
9.717991569
0.015900161
S12
Male
27
22
1363 A1
Histamine
Before
114
11.38
103.57
1.26
2.8769
158
121
52264
15.32
305.74
25.28000069
23.62000084
67
0.930000007
3.779999971
1.1007
1.3176
1.1541
0.163
9.24
110
0.05801245
469
35162
9.770244291
0.01884396
S12
Male
27
22
1364 A1
Histamine
Before
167
15.09
129.09
1.58
3.5858
161
131
26238
10.03
159.69
27.02000046
25.89999962
77
0.639999986
3.269999981
1.2937
1.3649
1.172
0.12
6.89
61
0.05828551
745
63507
10.41808081
0.034034565
S12
Male
27
22
1365 A1
Histamine
Before
172
15.33
135.96
1.66
3.7767
159
130
23219
10.9
212.69
26.47999954
24.93000031
72
0.730000019
3.539999962
1.2651
1.3746
1.1442
0.086
9.34
107
0.05841801
585
51354
10.57217308
0.027521549
S12
Male
27
22
1366 A1
Histamine
Before
237
16.37
144.06
1.76
4.0017
154
124
18108
4.53
39.63
27.80999947
26.37000084
86
0.819999993
3.859999895
1.6451
1.382
1.168
0.166
10.63
155
0.05822694
695
62217
10.67621203
0.03334323
S12
Male
27
22
1367 A1
Histamine
Before
216
16.9
153.54
1.87
4.265
163
130
20363
5.97
69.58
27.20000076
25.95000076
76
0.689999998
3.710000038
1.4068
1.3957
1.2016
0.568
18.81
439
0.05880674
678
61186
10.71929551
0.032790698
S12
Male
27
22
1368 A4
Cowhage
After
94
14.74
136.99
1.67
3.8053
160
132
32204
19.28
484.7
23.95000076
22.34000015
57
1.309999943
5.260000229
0.6862
1.3769
1.1751
0.49
21.29
540
0.05940923
693
59608
10.46503577
0.031945019
S12
Male
27
22
1369 A4
Cowhage
After
201
17.94
164.2
2
4.5611
154
131
10570
2.46
15.69
26.02000046
24.40999985
73
1.179999948
5.130000114
1.2241
1.4108
1.1788
0.233
10.48
145
0.06022914
849
84202
11.23731145
0.045125394
S12
Male
27
22
1370 A4
Cowhage
After
234
18.33
165.94
2.02
4.6094
152
128
11237
2.9
20.92
26.45000076
24.78000069
74
1.059999943
4.880000114
1.4101
1.4123
1.1803
0.234
10.02
122
0.0600022
841
79191
10.94951732
0.042439907
S12
Male
27
22
1371 A4
Cowhage
After
234
19.03
176.04
2.15
4.89
160
128
26671
14.31
337.22
26.15999985
24.95000076
71
0.879999995
4.070000172
1.3292
1.4195
1.1833
0.244
12.31
209
0.05932797
814
78332
11.06910391
0.041979554
S12
Male
27
22
1372 A4
Cowhage
After
225
18.83
180.08
2.2
5.0022
156
128
20172
13.17
304.15
25.84000015
24.37000084
70
1.070000052
4.449999809
1.2494
1.4248
1.1776
0.174
8.75
105
0.05956296
787
74830
11.00285946
0.040102768
S12
Male
27
22
1373 A1
Histamine
After
693
27.17
297.38
3.63
8.2606
168
126
72389
13.09
218.98
28.35000038
27.62999916
56
0.629999995
3.890000105
2.3304
1.4932
1.1882
0.176
10.6
171
0.05763983
605
73612
12.44662717
0.039450019
S12
Male
27
22
1374 A1
Histamine
After
832
28.84
318.75
3.89
8.8542
160
122
47512
11.86
203.47
28.43000031
27.63999939
56
0.680000007
4.289999962
2.6102
1.5073
1.1925
0.195
9.44
134
0.0586918
559
70822
12.70086351
0.037954807
S12
Male
27
22
1375 A1
Histamine
After
728
28.32
300.58
3.67
8.3494
162
125
38760
12.24
251.06
28
27.25
61
0.680000007
4.619999886
2.422
1.5014
1.199
0.184
8.24
93
0.05856662
531
66148
12.59407159
0.035449925
S12
Male
27
22
1376 A1
Histamine
After
778
29.22
304.71
3.72
8.4642
161
124
22973
4.83
53.28
28.31999969
27.60000038
54
0.589999974
3.930000067
2.5532
1.5092
1.2087
0.227
8.12
95
0.0586918
563
68986
12.49054372
0.036970861
S12
Male
27
22
1377 A1
Histamine
After
776
29.35
320.62
3.91
8.9061
164
130
48139
12.63
230.07
27.82999992
27.54000092
54
0.289999992
3.660000086
2.4203
1.5123
1.2224
0.443
13.37
248
0.05883163
539
64725
12.36507362
0.034687313
S12
Male
27
22
1378 A3
Capsaicin
After
52
10.58
71.96
1.05
2.8784
120
105
4269
1.73
8.07
19.60000038
18.30999947
43
1.570000052
6.28000021
0.7226
1.3021
1.1492
0.185
10.37
131
0.05998609
245
15728
9.040839667
0.008428923
==PAGE:61==
S12
Male
27
22
1379 A3
Capsaicin
After
173
13.81
98.46
1.44
3.9384
125
107
6813
2.21
11.32
22.48999977
21.27000046
57
0.910000026
4.46999979
1.7571
1.3498
1.1521
0.088
10.07
148
0.06013031
323
27379
10.38873311
0.014672908
S12
Male
27
22
1380 A3
Capsaicin
After
335
17.75
132.01
1.93
5.2804
123
101
14939
9.94
181.78
23.64999962
22.80999947
59
0.75999999
3.960000038
2.5377
1.3982
1.1787
0.249
13.72
248
0.06005198
449
41868
10.89614808
0.022437828
S12
Male
27
22
1381 A3
Capsaicin
After
533
22.16
177.33
2.6
7.0932
121
101
8970
3.77
42.17
23.78000069
23.04000092
48
0.49000001
3.299999952
3.0057
1.4507
1.19
0.177
10.49
169
0.05970571
578
60966
11.58870722
0.032672796
S12
Male
27
22
1382 A3
Capsaicin
After
733
24.73
211.8
3.1
8.472
117
95
14819
8.51
128.26
23.85000038
23.19000053
47
0.579999983
3.890000105
3.4608
1.4738
1.189
0.206
11.55
199
0.05957321
615
68028
11.86755773
0.036457451
S12
Male
27
22
1383 P2
Control
After
21
10.47
92.75
1.13
2.5764
153
127
41767
15.85
284.11
22.13999939
21.52000046
34
1.120000005
6.039999962
0.2264
1.3017
1.1179
0.1
12.53
180
0.05841508
204
12326
8.771039307
0.006605729
S12
Male
27
22
1384 P2
Control
After
10
10.11
84.56
1.03
2.3489
145
126
5366
2.32
12.4
21.45999908
20.84000015
33
1.5
8.170000076
0.1183
1.298
1.1241
0.221
16.49
315
0.05765959
306
21612
9.482914295
0.011582267
S12
Male
27
22
1385 P2
Control
After
25
10.56
89.29
1.09
2.4803
144
126
6696
5.06
62.13
22.14999962
21.59000015
36
1.460000038
7.46999979
0.28
1.3058
1.1296
0.087
7.79
72
0.0574656
323
23286
9.580788316
0.012479394
S12
Male
27
22
1386 P2
Control
After
58
12.58
118.12
1.44
3.2811
157
126
39131
16.67
352.98
22.87999916
21.96999931
45
1.24000001
5.769999981
0.491
1.3481
1.1469
0.146
8.93
97
0.05740703
507
47551
10.92775393
0.025483452
S12
Male
27
22
1387 P2
Control
After
137
14.3
132.28
1.61
3.6744
157
127
22449
10.3
172.11
24.96999931
23.72999954
62
1.100000024
4.559999943
1.0357
1.3679
1.1647
0.235
10.68
142
0.05799781
511
45249
10.61815601
0.024249768
S12
Male
27
22
1388 A2
Heat
After
864
29.48
311.77
3.8
8.6603
147
115
41152
16.42
382.78
27.87999916
27.18000031
58
0.439999998
3.730000019
2.7713
1.5103
1.2047
0.217
8.69
103
0.05910103
759
83773
11.85458092
0.044895485
S12
Male
27
22
1389 A2
Heat
After
948
31.97
343.7
4.19
9.5472
151
124
25345
13.21
342.75
27.93000031
27.28000069
55
0.579999983
4.210000038
2.7582
1.5293
1.1902
0.157
8.46
99
0.0591164
739
88014
12.31427136
0.047168315
S12
Male
27
22
1390 A2
Heat
After
1103
32.94
369.49
4.51
10.2636
151
117
28308
9.01
149.5
28.15999985
27.36000061
55
0.529999971
4.119999886
2.9852
1.5378
1.1893
0.184
10.93
170
0.05868595
732
83586
12.05775041
0.044795268
S12
Male
27
22
1391 A2
Heat
After
977
31.61
356.44
4.35
9.9011
157
120
41598
10.55
161.51
27.75
27.35000038
55
0.419999987
3.940000057
2.741
1.5289
1.2119
0.309
11.37
179
0.05930674
777
88006
12.00882984
0.047164027
S12
Male
27
22
1392 A2
Heat
After
999
31.43
340.71
4.16
9.4642
147
116
25901
11.15
225.94
27.85000038
27.12999916
56
0.589999974
4.440000057
2.9321
1.5277
1.1763
0.09
6.14
52
0.05919107
745
82840
11.89863022
0.044395473
S13
Male
51
22
1399 A3
Capsaicin
Before
112
16.18
155.27
1.89
4.3131
164
138
10370
1.78
7.36
23.46999931
22.62000084
48
1.059999943
4.730000019
0.7213
1.4004
1.1568
0.19
9.62
116
0.06003221
450
31524
9.44429321
0.016894289
S12
Male
27
22
1393 P1
Control
After
112
13.61
104.67
1.53
4.1868
131
107
26586
16.55
352.91
20.70000076
19.07999992
49
1.529999971
6.769999981
1.07
1.3551
1.1326
0.115
17.77
396
0.05930967
456
35174
9.910225065
0.018850391
S13
Male
51
22
1401 A3
Capsaicin
Before
99
15.66
149.81
1.83
4.1614
172
134
19451
5.8
61.4
23.37000084
22.15999985
50
1.24000001
5.480000019
0.6608
1.3906
1.1396
0.086
8.41
83
0.05825696
440
34484
9.989357116
0.018480607
S12
Male
27
22
1394 P1
Control
After
236
17.67
139.97
2.05
5.5988
130
106
15985
9.25
137.99
22.11000061
20.62000084
50
1.029999971
4.760000229
1.6861
1.4079
1.2009
0.466
16.68
381
0.05970132
723
65050
10.70309946
0.034861487
S13
Male
51
22
1403 A3
Capsaicin
Before
104
15.23
148.84
1.82
4.1344
159
134
8899
1.83
8.38
22.46999931
21.51000023
39
1.039999962
4.949999809
0.6987
1.3932
1.1355
0.087
9.07
102
0.05809297
330
22348
9.285759274
0.011976703
S12
Male
27
22
1395 P1
Control
After
355
20.13
169.71
2.48
6.7884
131
104
21044
7.25
73.88
22.61000061
21.15999985
56
0.959999979
4.730000019
2.0918
1.4342
1.1863
0.339
14.01
257
0.05921743
770
75177
11.14941786
0.040288731
S13
Male
51
22
1404 A3
Capsaicin
Before
77
14.46
141.4
1.73
3.9278
162
136
8690
2.18
10.6
22.03000069
21.04000092
40
1.50999999
6.71999979
0.5446
1.384
1.1394
0.124
10.43
135
0.05658639
458
36305
10.04628608
0.019456515
S12
Male
27
22
1396 P1
Control
After
289
19.23
147
2.15
5.88
126
104
8780
3.36
33.46
22.12999916
21.10000038
50
0.800000012
3.930000067
1.966
1.423
1.2092
0.301
9.1
119
0.05863617
764
69291
10.74599897
0.037134316
S13
Male
51
22
1405 A3
Capsaicin
Before
93
15.02
144.49
1.76
4.0136
166
135
19609
10.26
188.05
23.06999969
21.88999939
49
1.450000048
6.559999943
0.6436
1.3848
1.1386
0.147
18.74
438
0.05738434
391
29463
9.79501631
0.015789761
S12
Male
27
22
1397 P1
Control
After
216
17.57
134.51
1.97
5.3804
130
107
18916
13.72
265.27
21.78000069
20.30999947
47
0.920000017
3.789999962
1.6058
1.4029
1.2189
0.446
9.88
126
0.05962006
647
56835
10.57574209
0.030458918
S13
Male
51
22
1406 P2
Control
Before
58
14.91
143.28
1.75
3.98
168
137
12693
3.34
20.99
22.04000092
21.22999954
34
1.029999971
4.619999886
0.4048
1.3885
1.1465
0.264
13.03
195
0.05772475
593
45283
9.8604176
0.024267989
S13
Male
51
22
1407 P2
Control
Before
56
15.42
148.99
1.82
4.1386
165
136
11858
3.54
25.02
22.01000023
21.27000046
35
1.159999967
5.960000038
0.3759
1.397
1.1308
0.113
11.29
150
0.05900952
553
43002
9.950314806
0.023045559
S13
Male
51
22
1410 P2
Control
Before
52
13.41
123.39
1.51
3.4275
169
136
10188
2.37
12.57
22.09000015
20.95999908
41
1.25999999
5.389999866
0.4214
1.3621
1.1495
0.174
10.06
119
0.05647365
491
39051
10.06306767
0.020928146
S13
Male
51
22
1411 P2
Control
Before
86
14.1
130.36
1.59
3.6211
159
130
12631
4.17
31.6
22.40999985
20.70000076
58
1.649999976
6.599999905
0.6597
1.3701
1.1344
0.117
10.81
147
0.05688214
605
44777
9.707443433
0.023996815
S13
Male
51
22
1412 P2
Control
Before
72
11.86
97.29
1.19
2.7025
176
128
36857
6.19
59.14
24.06999969
21.78000069
74
1.090000033
3.369999886
0.7401
1.3143
1.12
0.1
10.85
141
0.05450147
455
32876
9.591551144
0.017618851
S13
Male
51
22
1413 A4
Cowhage
Before
39
12.26
114.81
1.4
3.1892
153
131
6914
2.45
13.02
21.38999939
20.34000015
39
1.559999943
7.090000153
0.3397
1.3486
1.0955
0.011
10.76
165
0.05403002
506
35226
9.414807969
0.018878259
S13
Male
51
22
1414 A4
Cowhage
Before
35
13.21
122.99
1.5
3.4164
159
135
7795
2.44
15.21
21.15999985
20.54999924
34
1.830000043
9.56000042
0.2846
1.3632
1.1238
0.177
17.4
365
0.05556882
535
39398
9.683118713
0.02111411
S13
Male
51
22
1415 A4
Cowhage
Before
41
11.14
97.05
1.18
2.6958
161
130
16447
6.9
85.92
22.19000053
19.90999985
73
1.669999957
5.96999979
0.4225
1.3184
1.1352
0.143
8.12
73
0.05468741
544
38668
9.51330596
0.02072289
S13
Male
51
22
1416 A4
Cowhage
Before
74
11.12
85.72
1.05
2.3811
171
127
22103
3.56
19.97
25.43000031
22.40999985
90
0.860000014
2.549999952
0.8633
1.2974
1.1064
0.024
7.21
71
0.05359737
675
42874
8.992908502
0.022976962
S13
Male
51
22
1417 A4
Cowhage
Before
77
13.08
118.62
1.45
3.295
161
133
11293
2.82
19.29
23.11000061
21.52000046
59
1.399999976
5.309999943
0.6491
1.353
1.1302
0.086
9.37
109
0.0549795
338
24905
9.685900028
0.013347046
S13
Male
51
22
1419 A4
Cowhage
After
179
17.41
162.64
1.98
4.5178
166
131
21671
6.59
87.82
25.54000092
24.44000053
58
0.810000002
3.930000067
1.1006
1.4065
1.1592
0.089
8.12
92
0.05658273
792
65050
10.22624325
0.034861487
S13
Male
51
22
1421 A4
Cowhage
After
191
15.63
136.11
1.66
3.7808
160
124
19001
5.46
65.78
27
25.31999969
77
0.670000017
2.910000086
1.4033
1.3742
1.1484
0.074
7.78
92
0.05655198
699
56467
10.14177168
0.0302617
S13
Male
51
22
1422 A4
Cowhage
After
157
17.43
157.01
1.92
4.3614
168
133
15850
2.55
13.11
25.13999939
23.89999962
58
0.769999981
3.359999895
0.9999
1.4031
1.156
0.102
7.49
75
0.05670791
835
74003
10.62273835
0.039659563
S13
Male
51
22
1423 A4
Cowhage
After
34
11.58
92.57
1.13
2.5714
154
124
19716
11.92
218.47
23.59000015
21.89999962
61
1.629999995
7.139999866
0.3673
1.3133
1.1151
0.034
7.57
72
0.05345169
814
57665
9.497274816
0.03090373
S13
Male
51
22
1424 A4
Cowhage
After
130
16.38
150.88
1.84
4.1911
169
134
25637
12.13
252.3
24.54999924
23.32999992
55
0.819999993
3.779999971
0.8616
1.3948
1.1861
0.441
13.18
218
0.0576757
646
52146
10.13793029
0.027945997
S13
Male
51
22
1425 A1
Heat
Before
92
16.74
172.2
2.1
4.7833
175
143
13589
3.17
24.69
23.04000092
22.35000038
42
1.399999976
7.420000076
0.5343
1.4179
1.1579
0.141
7.92
79
0.05968155
410
31311
9.860787504
0.016780138
S13
Male
51
22
1426 A1
Heat
Before
102
17.4
179.4
2.19
4.9833
176
143
15244
3.44
25.45
22.94000053
22.27000046
38
1.220000029
6.559999943
0.5686
1.4231
1.158
0.194
11.22
172
0.05953807
452
33499
9.714081958
0.017952728
S13
Male
51
22
1427 A1
Heat
Before
103
16.58
164.99
2.01
4.5831
167
141
9765
1.74
7.38
23.28000069
22.5
41
1.220000029
5.710000038
0.6243
1.4101
1.1379
0.104
11.99
199
0.05880235
439
33119
9.80079729
0.017749079
S13
Male
51
22
1428 A1
Heat
Before
108
16.43
166.74
2.03
4.6317
178
139
22722
7.4
98.88
23.80999947
22.89999962
43
1.070000052
4.619999886
0.6477
1.4079
1.1578
0.211
13.66
245
0.05805857
496
39600
10.08235103
0.021222365
S13
Male
51
22
1429 A1
Heat
Before
113
15.34
152.25
1.86
4.2292
169
140
12661
3.21
25.16
23.54000092
22.44000053
47
1.279999971
5.570000172
0.7422
1.3958
1.1316
0.081
8.85
93
0.05762665
475
38478
10.15580842
0.020621065
S13
Male
51
22
1430 P1
Control
Before
146
19.16
197.97
2.42
5.4992
171
139
19478
10.3
209.45
23.80999947
22.78000069
47
1.139999986
5.019999981
0.7375
1.4406
1.1463
0.141
10.82
162
0.05962592
364
29747
10.20060555
0.015941962
S13
Male
51
22
1431 P1
Control
Before
196
19.84
204.41
2.49
5.6781
171
135
20116
6.53
88.5
24.62999916
23.42000008
49
0.899999976
4.159999847
0.9589
1.4433
1.1503
0.113
9.24
108
0.05902709
452
34176
9.811749625
0.018315544
S13
Male
51
22
1432 P1
Control
Before
170
19.36
196.54
2.4
5.4594
174
140
25201
10.6
212.43
24.37999916
23.29999924
49
1.090000033
4.869999886
0.865
1.4382
1.1656
0.168
7.42
66
0.0592145
373
27564
9.700000665
0.014772053
S13
Male
51
22
1433 P1
Control
Before
163
19.7
208.58
2.54
5.7939
185
146
41521
9.41
122.63
23.88999939
22.81999969
42
0.959999979
4.400000095
0.7815
1.4412
1.1689
0.219
12.92
220
0.05942094
477
39135
10.22065053
0.020973163
S13
Male
51
22
1434 P1
Control
Before
174
20
200.51
2.45
5.5697
169
143
11421
2.28
12.89
23.96999931
23.37999916
41
0.910000026
4.789999962
0.8678
1.4455
1.1661
0.167
7.6
67
0.05924744
425
33185
9.970834444
0.017784449
S13
Male
51
22
1435 A2
Histamine
Before
114
16.88
162.83
1.99
4.5231
172
138
20995
8.93
150.76
23.80999947
22.43000031
49
1.059999943
4.690000057
0.7001
1.4048
1.1303
0.047
8.84
103
0.05879429
650
52664
10.15676261
0.028223602
S13
Male
51
22
1436 A2
Histamine
Before
150
19.02
184.62
2.25
5.1283
175
140
19549
4.71
45.63
24.26000023
23.39999962
49
0.99000001
5.599999905
0.8125
1.4299
1.1755
0.159
8.39
94
0.05941508
709
58658
10.26350191
0.031435897
S13
Male
51
22
1437 A2
Histamine
Before
180
19.3
195.03
2.38
5.4175
175
139
40024
11.31
183.39
24.65999985
23.53000069
53
0.970000029
4.260000229
0.9229
1.4341
1.1639
0.179
9.7
129
0.05979502
617
50547
10.2131608
0.027089063
S13
Male
51
22
1438 A2
Histamine
Before
173
19.1
194.46
2.37
5.4017
179
140
32995
10.04
172.17
24.45999908
23.29999924
52
0.850000024
3.849999905
0.8896
1.4322
1.1684
0.2
9.63
115
0.05915666
622
50434
10.16065193
0.027028504
S13
Male
51
22
1440 A2
Histamine
Before
286
21.35
190.24
2.32
5.2844
171
133
20543
4.18
43.89
27.54000092
26.75
64
0.430000007
2.809999943
1.5034
1.4353
1.1787
0.166
10.55
161
0.06041728
607
53509
10.59434548
0.028676453
S13
Male
51
22
1442 A3
Capsaicin
After
983
30.48
313.4
3.82
8.7056
147
116
28386
14.09
333.89
29.54999924
29.45000076
61
0.25
3.670000076
3.1366
1.511
1.1912
0.153
8.78
120
0.05670059
828
85411
11.46032132
0.045773319
S13
Male
51
22
1443 A3
Capsaicin
After
1087
31.7
335.41
4.09
9.3169
146
115
29680
11.2
208.86
29.89999962
29.37999916
60
0.389999986
3.559999943
3.2408
1.5203
1.1768
0.097
7.31
79
0.05615959
796
84668
11.63745932
0.045375132
S13
Male
51
22
1444 A3
Capsaicin
After
1063
31.86
332.54
4.06
9.2372
145
117
21009
10.35
216.58
29.38999939
28.82999992
61
0.460000008
3.809999943
3.1966
1.5233
1.1923
0.155
8.52
100
0.05621303
822
88218
11.68954896
0.047277642
S13
Male
51
22
1445 A3
Capsaicin
After
1056
31.83
331.66
4.05
9.2128
146
115
25775
12.22
280.61
29.30999947
28.70999908
61
0.449999988
3.970000029
3.184
1.5221
1.2272
0.462
15.44
356
0.05572255
737
73690
11.28302612
0.039491821
S13
Male
51
22
1447 A3
Capsaicin
After
1034
30.88
332.91
4.06
9.2475
151
115
39496
13.17
257.42
29.57999992
29.07999992
67
0.469999999
4.110000134
3.1059
1.5162
1.1967
0.145
6.61
58
0.05570644
790
85780
11.75802921
0.045971073
S13
Male
51
22
1448 P2
Control
After
70
13.93
124.55
1.52
3.4597
161
134
13754
7.01
102.39
23.14999962
21.84000015
51
1.480000019
6.170000076
0.562
1.3629
1.138
0.091
8.48
88
0.05747438
426
31141
9.64753887
0.016689032
S13
Male
51
22
1449 P2
Control
After
108
13.77
114.43
1.4
3.1786
157
130
11952
2.55
12.83
24.90999985
22.94000053
70
0.939999998
3.630000114
0.9438
1.349
1.1522
0.115
7.87
77
0.05618668
446
39981
10.68352218
0.02142655
S13
Male
51
22
1450 P2
Control
After
62
12.94
115.53
1.41
3.2092
159
127
13008
3.76
27.27
23.05999947
21.31999969
61
1.279999971
4.590000153
0.5367
1.3503
1.1069
0.022
7.62
78
0.05535432
441
36059
10.20334576
0.019324679
S13
Male
51
22
1451 P2
Control
After
124
13.67
111.34
1.36
3.0928
159
129
11970
2.21
10.03
25.70000076
24.12000084
71
0.879999995
4.059999943
1.1137
1.3475
1.1345
0.034
6.3
59
0.05501757
470
38600
10.22585859
0.020686447
S13
Male
51
22
1452 P2
Control
After
93
12.82
118.24
1.44
3.2844
163
126
39013
9.92
124.52
24.29000092
22.01000023
81
1.24000001
4.400000095
0.7865
1.3398
1.1397
0.171
13.66
211
0.05517716
509
37941
9.742054499
0.020333277
S13
Male
51
22
1454 A2
Histamine
After
86
13.57
132.36
1.61
3.6767
162
131
18420
10.1
182.74
22.84000015
21.81999969
49
1.610000014
8.079999924
0.6497
1.3701
1.1459
0.149
10.15
133
0.0575205
224
13451
8.743963509
0.007208637
S13
Male
51
22
1455 A2
Histamine
After
41
13.08
126.26
1.54
3.5072
162
134
8236
1.69
6.82
21.54999924
21.02000046
34
1.50999999
8.220000267
0.3247
1.3672
1.1633
0.338
12.62
213
0.05858639
145
7961
8.360935443
0.004266446
S13
Male
51
22
1456 A2
Histamine
After
34
12.66
122.56
1.5
3.4044
168
138
12255
4.86
58.48
22.01000023
21.21999931
34
1.529999971
8.43999958
0.2774
1.3587
1.1203
0.095
11.67
166
0.05881333
131
7519
8.548687742
0.00402957
S13
Male
51
22
1457 A2
Histamine
After
39
12.89
127.92
1.56
3.5533
166
132
15100
7.32
110.35
21.26000023
20.81999969
28
1.309999943
7.75
0.3049
1.366
1.1274
0.095
10.06
124
0.05946999
132
7670
8.601333278
0.004110493
S13
Male
51
22
1458 A2
Histamine
After
38
13.01
127.92
1.56
3.5533
162
135
10242
4.36
45.27
21.39999962
21
29
1.220000029
7.590000153
0.2971
1.3671
1.1167
0.062
10.13
126
0.06010835
152
9913
9.11246385
0.005312558
S13
Male
51
22
1459 A1
Heat
After
945
31.3
336.64
4.11
9.3511
152
122
26070
12.29
281.41
28.42000008
27.78000069
56
0.50999999
4.050000191
2.8072
1.5239
1.204
0.365
16
341
0.06035871
731
76469
11.54088401
0.040981138
S13
Male
51
22
1460 A1
Heat
After
1047
32.13
350.8
4.28
9.7444
148
120
18419
6.83
119.74
28.38999939
27.45999908
56
0.519999981
3.710000038
2.9846
1.5327
1.2025
0.284
11.87
197
0.05913324
632
65372
11.47604932
0.035034052
S13
Male
51
22
1461 A1
Heat
After
1056
31.91
348.17
4.25
9.6714
149
118
28197
10.49
180.58
28.61000061
27.97999954
57
0.529999971
3.950000048
3.033
1.5271
1.1925
0.184
12.17
247
0.06125769
795
85724
11.7171694
0.045941062
S13
Male
51
22
1462 A1
Heat
After
964
31.78
353.73
4.32
9.8258
159
121
38472
10.02
160.4
28.39999962
27.82999992
59
0.610000014
4.260000229
2.7252
1.5268
1.2
0.194
10.45
168
0.0602921
780
83541
11.67770749
0.044771152
S13
Male
51
22
1463 A1
Heat
After
1003
31.07
349.41
4.26
9.7058
154
117
42873
10.63
157.49
28.62000084
27.65999985
64
0.720000029
4.239999771
2.8706
1.5233
1.2121
0.293
9.51
123
0.06114861
745
77775
11.52914053
0.041681047
S13
Male
51
22
1464 P1
Control
After
141
18.87
196.65
2.4
5.4625
176
136
26729
7.91
101.33
23.84000015
22.82999992
45
1.00999999
4.619999886
0.717
1.4355
1.1485
0.138
9.82
113
0.06044656
501
39189
9.979718407
0.021002103
S13
Male
51
22
1465 P1
Control
After
127
17.71
179.92
2.2
4.9978
176
140
28483
11.08
184.99
23.75
22.59000015
46
1.299999952
5.579999924
0.7059
1.4202
1.1567
0.19
13.25
231
0.06066032
488
39476
10.14873047
0.021155912
S13
Male
51
22
1466 P1
Control
After
98
16.57
161.3
1.97
4.4806
167
136
12044
2.4
11.75
23.07999992
22.20000076
40
1.00999999
4.659999847
0.6076
1.4079
1.1488
0.098
6.62
52
0.05889898
452
32677
9.594159429
0.017512203
S13
Male
51
22
1467 P1
Control
After
151
18.34
191.41
2.34
5.3169
173
136
42907
12.9
215.74
23.69000053
22.52000046
49
1.080000043
4.760000229
0.7889
1.4295
1.1387
0.059
6.72
59
0.06129356
538
39303
9.644434594
0.021063198
S13
Male
51
22
1468 P1
Control
After
138
17.81
189.61
2.31
5.2669
175
136
40552
12.1
211.92
23.39999962
22.18000031
45
1.190000057
4.920000076
0.7278
1.4246
1.1394
0.095
8.16
82
0.05895828
657
46744
9.517772311
0.025050966
S14
Female
59
24
1469 A3
Capsaicin
Before
150
16.02
138.86
1.69
3.8572
160
129
36064
16.59
387.93
26.35000038
24.72999954
70
1.029999971
4.050000191
1.0802
1.3781
1.1541
0.209
14.34
255
0.05981406
449
39447
10.57642463
0.02114037
S14
Female
59
24
1470 A3
Capsaicin
Before
164
17.49
147.61
1.8
4.1003
164
131
27797
11.24
212.76
26.75
25.35000038
71
0.850000024
3.730000019
1.111
1.3903
1.1946
0.255
7.39
65
0.05999488
511
46728
10.79029221
0.025042391
S14
Female
59
24
1471 A3
Capsaicin
Before
180
17.48
156.22
1.91
4.3394
163
133
27830
13
267.87
26.12000084
24.29999924
67
0.959999979
3.809999943
1.1522
1.3996
1.1536
0.105
9.54
118
0.06070132
474
42667
10.70562292
0.022866027
S14
Female
59
24
1472 A3
Capsaicin
Before
205
18.31
162.27
1.98
4.5075
163
130
26393
10.99
200.7
26.96999931
25.37000084
74
0.949999988
3.99000001
1.2633
1.4057
1.1791
0.285
13
197
0.06006003
519
43019
10.27310048
0.02305467
S14
Female
59
24
1473 A3
Capsaicin
Before
221
18.61
167.92
2.05
4.6644
165
126
30932
8.81
121.32
27
25.03000069
78
0.959999979
3.769999981
1.3161
1.4085
1.1778
0.623
24.48
689
0.05999561
495
42543
10.46083894
0.022799573
S14
Female
59
24
1474 P2
Control
Before
272
18.85
184.64
2.25
5.1289
172
136
20963
4.84
55.68
27.20000076
25.95000076
67
0.689999998
3.349999905
1.4731
1.4253
1.1489
0.07
7.52
78
0.06126208
548
45876
10.32422717
0.024585789
S14
Female
59
24
1475 P2
Control
Before
278
19.76
195.36
2.38
5.4267
171
138
18297
4.61
55.54
26.40999985
25.03000069
66
0.910000026
4.03000021
1.423
1.4383
1.1761
0.269
12.93
226
0.06167497
518
44815
10.49546972
0.024017179
S14
Female
59
24
1476 P2
Control
Before
257
20.08
198.09
2.42
5.5025
177
137
21245
3.99
38.11
26.70999908
25.43000031
63
0.779999971
3.549999952
1.2974
1.4384
1.1512
0.096
8.72
102
0.06154319
552
46902
10.40114622
0.025135641
S14
Female
59
24
1477 P2
Control
Before
233
20.1
204.62
2.5
5.6839
190
139
48448
11.55
222.33
26.21999931
25.13999939
58
0.709999979
3.440000057
1.1387
1.4409
1.1775
0.183
8.35
93
0.06238141
662
55447
10.32678395
0.029715063
S14
Female
59
24
1478 P2
Control
Before
264
20.25
203.1
2.48
5.6417
180
139
22317
3.52
27.01
26.36000061
25.55999947
57
0.769999981
3.980000019
1.2999
1.4412
1.1648
0.153
8.56
98
0.06070498
501
40359
10.12759661
0.021629127
S14
Female
59
24
1480 A4
Histamine
Before
412
22.7
224.63
2.74
6.2397
168
129
51798
12.38
205.71
28.45999908
27.29000092
74
0.610000014
3.230000019
1.8341
1.4527
1.1509
0.099
14.77
339
0.06079356
617
55509
10.70272038
0.02974829
S14
Female
59
24
1481 A4
Histamine
Before
470
23.49
240.93
2.94
6.6925
176
134
62365
12.58
216.93
28.72999954
27.87000084
75
0.340000004
2.859999895
1.9508
1.4594
1.176
0.129
6.95
62
0.06145315
600
56715
10.97055003
0.030394607
S14
Female
59
24
1482 A4
Histamine
Before
422
23.26
223.85
2.73
6.2181
166
132
26981
10.62
211.67
28.43000031
27.15999985
71
0.409999996
2.839999914
1.8852
1.4587
1.1532
0.068
7.98
89
0.06138873
656
59811
10.77441431
0.03205381
==PAGE:62==
S14
Female
59
24
1483 A4
Histamine
Before
301
21.7
204.01
2.49
5.6669
171
135
15658
2.11
10.47
27.5
26.12999916
68
0.670000017
3.329999924
1.4754
1.4472
1.1762
0.144
7.4
74
0.06090849
648
57588
10.63735258
0.030862464
S14
Female
59
24
1484 A4
Histamine
Before
277
21.21
201.35
2.46
5.5931
173
135
19729
3.74
31.24
27.31999969
25.59000015
69
0.839999974
3.809999943
1.3757
1.4434
1.1535
0.124
18.03
453
0.06163763
573
49004
10.43502548
0.026262141
S14
Female
59
24
1485 A1
Cowhage
Before
12
9.55
89.01
1.09
2.4725
163
139
7475
2.19
10.41
21.43000031
20.75
36
1.149999976
5.670000076
0.1348
1.3021
1.1073
0.052
9.71
110
0.05719912
412
24229
8.653149285
0.012984765
S14
Female
59
24
1486 A1
Cowhage
Before
19
10.63
106.09
1.29
2.9469
168
137
8964
2.67
14.93
20.86000061
20.37999916
25
0.560000002
3.089999914
0.1791
1.333
1.1015
0.045
12.28
167
0.05845754
336
22194
9.170715305
0.011894171
S14
Female
59
24
1487 A1
Cowhage
Before
364
19.98
187.64
2.29
5.2122
158
129
14114
2.64
16.43
28.22999954
26.93000031
78
0.689999998
3.730000019
1.9399
1.4299
1.1655
0.079
6.44
54
0.05808931
502
45523
10.7453023
0.02439661
S14
Female
59
24
1488 A1
Cowhage
Before
433
20.84
197.46
2.41
5.485
153
123
15405
3.69
36.8
28.82999992
27.42000008
82
0.620000005
3.420000076
2.1928
1.4385
1.1894
0.224
8.58
95
0.05838653
517
47731
10.84201626
0.025579917
S14
Female
59
24
1489 A1
Cowhage
Before
332
19.77
190.83
2.33
5.3008
164
130
25048
8.42
143.32
28.23999977
27.07999992
71
0.589999974
3.359999895
1.7398
1.4307
1.1597
0.093
7.76
80
0.05773939
538
51041
10.99065331
0.027353807
S14
Female
59
24
1490 P1
Control
Before
306
20.08
185.23
2.26
5.1453
163
127
19484
4.02
37.97
27.29999924
26.20000076
69
0.50999999
3.349999905
1.652
1.429
1.1686
0.105
6.61
55
0.05852782
618
52867
10.43645861
0.028332394
S14
Female
59
24
1491 P1
Control
Before
317
20.42
201.63
2.46
5.6008
171
130
39663
11.58
198.61
27.35000038
25.82999992
70
0.670000017
3.519999981
1.5722
1.4355
1.1653
0.088
7.67
82
0.05926281
709
63262
10.65867943
0.033903265
S14
Female
59
24
1492 P1
Control
Before
348
21.28
204.18
2.49
5.6717
167
131
30677
9.08
142.43
27.71999931
26.39999962
65
0.589999974
3.029999971
1.7044
1.4408
1.1924
0.172
6.72
58
0.05941435
691
57369
10.28145728
0.030745098
S14
Female
59
24
1493 P1
Control
Before
451
22.94
222.45
2.71
6.1792
159
126
32302
12.95
277.64
28.75
27.64999962
74
0.5
3.130000114
2.0274
1.4522
1.1915
0.227
9.18
109
0.05932504
796
69953
10.57795457
0.037489094
S14
Female
59
24
1494 P1
Control
Before
443
23.3
214.11
2.61
5.9475
156
126
14918
3.22
24.5
28.46999931
27.43000031
70
0.460000008
3.019999981
2.069
1.4536
1.181
0.155
7.43
72
0.05966325
708
63115
10.65380452
0.033824485
S14
Female
59
24
1495 A2
Heat
Before
194
18.08
175.09
2.14
4.8636
178
133
45440
10.66
167.46
26.11000061
24.45000076
66
0.899999976
3.700000048
1.108
1.4123
1.1593
0.117
9.07
106
0.06098829
420
32539
9.931904045
0.017438246
S14
Female
59
24
1496 A2
Heat
Before
368
21.03
198.79
2.43
5.5219
164
128
29712
8.61
130.43
28.40999985
26.51000023
86
0.639999986
3.160000086
1.8512
1.434
1.173
0.196
10.55
142
0.06113543
537
44757
10.30145099
0.023986096
S14
Female
59
24
1497 A2
Heat
Before
299
20.71
192.48
2.35
5.3467
168
132
23400
6.69
87.21
27.34000015
25.73999977
78
0.689999998
3.299999952
1.5534
1.4334
1.2072
0.534
15.33
312
0.05973646
525
44281
10.36296706
0.023730999
S14
Female
59
24
1498 A2
Heat
Before
280
19.83
185.42
2.26
5.1506
167
131
19517
4.29
36.35
27.07999992
25.5
78
0.790000021
3.480000019
1.5101
1.4264
1.1623
0.123
9.84
127
0.05860908
498
40852
10.21990949
0.021893335
S14
Female
59
24
1499 A2
Heat
Before
208
18.96
173.9
2.12
4.8306
170
130
37283
10.11
153.95
26
24.25
72
0.839999974
3.609999895
1.1961
1.4152
1.167
0.171
9.5
112
0.05706076
618
46848
9.824407077
0.025106701
S14
Female
59
24
1500 A4
Histamine
After
965
30.71
263.14
3.85
10.5256
120
94
17383
12.43
295.75
24.89999962
24.20999908
47
0.529999971
4.110000134
3.6672
1.5146
1.1816
0.119
6.67
60
0.0602306
697
68796
11.21037819
0.036869037
S14
Female
59
24
1501 A4
Histamine
After
946
30.58
256.64
3.76
10.2656
121
99
10066
4.72
67.19
24.69000053
24.21999931
45
0.430000007
3.950000048
3.6861
1.5125
1.1929
0.149
6.56
58
0.05914715
670
68581
11.41614732
0.036753814
S14
Female
59
24
1502 A4
Histamine
After
1109
32.1
297.75
4.36
11.91
124
96
27751
14.79
334.18
24.63999939
24.04000092
46
0.379999995
3.619999886
3.7246
1.5269
1.1749
0.139
10.76
165
0.06030454
709
67482
11.00844342
0.03616484
S14
Female
59
24
1503 A4
Histamine
After
1208
32.4
283.51
4.15
11.3404
112
92
10283
7.45
137.35
24.95000076
24.27000046
48
0.439999998
3.50999999
4.2609
1.5266
1.1749
0.124
8.08
92
0.06085359
716
66663
10.88782107
0.035725923
S14
Female
59
24
1504 A4
Histamine
After
1110
32.18
294.05
4.31
11.762
124
97
26569
13.32
256.38
24.86000061
24.21999931
48
0.5
3.74000001
3.7749
1.5268
1.1798
0.138
8.07
94
0.06083968
738
70460
11.02549757
0.037760805
S14
Female
59
24
1505 A1
Cowhage
After
12
12.05
123.61
1.51
3.4336
159
132
7950
2.99
18.54
20.69000053
20.12000084
24
0.829999983
4.630000114
0.0971
1.3608
1.095
0.038
15.76
274
0.05634627
388
24582
8.98147786
0.013173944
S14
Female
59
24
1507 A1
Cowhage
After
198
17.91
175.95
2.15
4.8875
171
132
33454
12.32
250.08
26.13999939
24.54999924
72
0.870000005
3.869999886
1.1253
1.4151
1.1605
0.135
9.72
135
0.05759664
655
54855
10.32624724
0.029397799
S14
Female
59
24
1508 A1
Cowhage
After
285
19.25
186.44
2.27
5.1789
158
130
14729
3.48
26.74
26.95000076
25.70999908
69
0.550000012
3.049999952
1.5286
1.4283
1.1666
0.228
14.26
292
0.05663324
678
61661
10.76082316
0.033045259
S14
Female
59
24
1509 A1
Cowhage
After
308
19.49
192.85
2.35
5.3569
161
130
14294
2.59
15.7
26.87999916
25.36000061
71
0.699999988
3.349999905
1.5971
1.4346
1.1309
0.036
6.63
68
0.05718888
675
60355
10.66988651
0.03234535
S14
Female
59
24
1510 A1
Cowhage
After
395
21.25
211.41
2.58
5.8725
166
133
33006
14.43
337.07
27.92000008
26.69000053
74
0.589999974
3.369999886
1.8684
1.445
1.1745
0.147
8.41
95
0.05657028
634
60880
11.05726587
0.032626707
S14
Female
59
24
1511 A3
Capsaicin
After
1067
30.8
267.83
3.92
10.7132
117
92
24801
16.51
399.6
25.0900002
24.5
49
0.430000007
3.51999998
3.984
1.513
1.176
0.217
20.53
612
0.05999195
715
71724
11.30145316
0.038438205
S14
Female
59
24
1512 A3
Capsaicin
After
1133
32.8
289.5
4.24
11.58
119
96
17013
12.37
284.93
25.0300007
24.45999908
45
0.400000006
3.49000001
3.914
1.527
1.195
0.214
10.56
151
0.05939166
788
80533
11.40719562
0.04315911
S14
Female
59
24
1513 A3
Capsaicin
After
1293
33.5
306.53
4.49
12.2612
116
91
23942
14.8
335.11
24.9599991
24.45999908
46
0.439999998
3.73000002
4.218
1.534
1.192
0.198
11.75
221
0.05960908
725
70347
11.11498412
0.037700246
S14
Female
59
24
1514 A3
Capsaicin
After
1206
33.3
296.36
4.34
11.8544
118
94
16305
10.08
170.44
25.0499992
24.5
44
0.49000001
3.63000011
4.069
1.531
1.194
0.176
9.48
140
0.05924232
698
70724
11.35823254
0.037902287
S14
Female
59
24
1515 A3
Capsaicin
After
1305
33.6
307.05
4.5
12.282
116
92
16122
11.79
242.9
25
24.37999916
42
0.519999981
3.88000011
4.25
1.535
1.195
0.187
9.31
131
0.06043631
754
76800
11.38806655
0.041158527
S14
Female
59
24
1516 A2
Heat
After
1422
34.8
324.8
4.76
12.992
114
88
21557
11.78
207.29
25.25
24.5
46
0.569999993
3.92000008
4.378
1.541
1.181
0.212
17.59
491
0.05933456
849
92388
11.77088176
0.049512422
S14
Female
59
24
1517 A2
Heat
After
1386
35
314.93
4.61
12.5972
113
90
20828
15.8
381.09
25.0300007
24.51000023
46
0.439999998
3.66000009
4.401
1.541
1.209
0.272
10.44
153
0.05991142
828
84777
11.4177075
0.045433547
S14
Female
59
24
1518 A2
Heat
After
1332
34.3
305.15
4.47
12.206
113
90
13763
10.26
210.62
25.0200005
24.44000053
46
0.5
3.78999996
4.365
1.538
1.198
0.338
21.56
698
0.06013251
776
71958
10.86585088
0.03856361
S14
Female
59
24
1519 A2
Heat
After
1261
33.4
301.38
4.41
12.0552
117
93
21384
12.55
244.99
24.8400002
24.27000046
46
0.419999987
3.6099999
4.184
1.532
1.195
0.42
24.37
815
0.05950952
656
66355
11.34853931
0.03556086
S14
Female
59
24
1520 A2
Heat
After
1248
33.2
304.98
4.47
12.1992
117
91
29902
15.76
338.55
24.8299999
24.26000023
44
0.540000021
3.93000007
4.092
1.53
1.182
0.168
13.39
295
0.05745095
749
73481
11.17639338
0.039379814
S14
Female
59
24
1521 P1
Control
After
128
16.46
159.66
1.95
4.435
167
139
10984
2.05
10.57
24.87000084
23.96999931
46
1.049999952
4.789999962
0.8017
1.4056
1.1601
0.143
8.38
84
0.0596757
568
42817
9.79690753
0.022946415
S14
Female
59
24
1522 P1
Control
After
125
17.65
179.38
2.19
4.9828
180
138
72581
15
266.66
24.28000069
23.61000061
43
0.980000019
4.989999771
0.6968
1.4148
1.1517
0.145
14.05
263
0.06020864
663
51066
9.902941546
0.027367205
S14
Female
59
24
1523 P1
Control
After
232
19.71
203.78
2.49
5.6606
171
135
47162
13.66
253.94
25.60000038
24.54999924
58
0.910000026
3.869999886
1.1385
1.4383
1.1571
0.108
8.34
90
0.06035213
703
58763
10.3164286
0.031492168
S14
Female
59
24
1525 P1
Control
After
161
19.52
189.72
2.31
5.27
172
138
31160
16.08
404.16
24.73999977
23.69000053
52
1.309999943
6.53000021
0.8486
1.4331
1.1848
0.223
7.71
72
0.06127453
680
55280
10.17383337
0.029625565
S14
Female
59
24
1526 P1
Control
After
226
20.52
200.9
2.45
5.5806
163
135
16347
5.88
76.84
25.59000015
24.55999947
54
1.029999971
4.690000057
1.1249
1.4449
1.185
0.161
6.7
61
0.06132577
746
60344
10.14851956
0.032339455
S14
Female
59
24
1527 P2
Control
After
109
15.7
160.45
1.96
4.4569
176
142
25136
10.17
193.85
23.5
22.71999931
38
1.049999952
5.369999886
0.6793
1.4009
1.1472
0.147
8.63
87
0.06041142
383
25838
9.267980669
0.013847057
S14
Female
59
24
1528 P2
Control
After
175
18.46
185.82
2.27
5.1617
183
138
43833
11.23
192.39
25.48999977
24.64999962
53
0.860000014
4.320000172
0.9418
1.4224
1.142
0.118
12.89
207
0.06052636
488
38073
9.96675305
0.020404018
S14
Female
59
24
1529 P2
Control
After
286
20.34
197.7
2.41
5.4917
169
133
17859
4.83
59.47
26.57999992
25.59000015
57
0.660000026
3.569999933
1.4466
1.4391
1.1516
0.086
7.59
72
0.06066911
512
40871
10.08155934
0.021903518
S14
Female
59
24
1530 P2
Control
After
252
20.52
186.16
2.27
5.1711
166
135
14087
2.01
9.34
26.62999916
25.40999985
68
0.75
3.839999914
1.3537
1.4339
1.1901
0.209
7.61
77
0.05914495
570
47474
10.29782588
0.025442186
S14
Female
59
24
1531 P2
Control
After
331
21.61
219.11
2.67
6.0864
168
131
29282
9.81
175.37
26.36000061
25
63
0.810000002
3.809999943
1.5107
1.453
1.1635
0.189
11.72
181
0.0595205
583
46644
10.09296286
0.024997374
S15
Female
50
20.7
1533 A3
Capsaicin
Before
60
12.82
126
1.54
3.5
167
139
11582
4.95
63.22
22.93000031
21.89999962
50
1.480000019
6.510000229
0.4762
1.3619
1.1437
0.204
10.33
120
0.05992387
343
28018
10.19827139
0.015015359
S15
Female
50
20.7
1534 A3
Capsaicin
Before
45
14.28
137.06
1.67
3.8072
170
140
14491
6.95
102.54
22.40999985
21.94000053
34
1.059999943
5.769999981
0.3283
1.3788
1.1532
0.22
10.18
128
0.06024012
419
32163
9.886130141
0.017236741
S15
Female
50
20.7
1535 A3
Capsaicin
Before
149
16.29
164.25
2
4.5625
166
133
29629
10.34
166.39
24.12000084
22.76000023
51
1.070000052
4.559999943
0.9072
1.403
1.1778
0.529
20.28
515
0.0601757
461
36430
10.03076792
0.019523504
S15
Female
50
20.7
1536 A3
Capsaicin
Before
132
16.88
161.59
1.97
4.4886
162
133
11938
2.75
17.6
24.19000053
22.92000008
55
0.99000001
4.179999828
0.8169
1.4086
1.1546
0.128
7.94
77
0.05984847
459
36193
10.01984511
0.019396492
S15
Female
50
20.7
1537 A3
Capsaicin
Before
189
17.9
181.1
2.21
5.0306
170
137
31657
12.08
217.53
24.69000053
23.46999931
55
1.169999957
5.53000021
1.0436
1.4203
1.1683
0.225
14.59
305
0.06013617
571
48021
10.3479091
0.025735334
S15
Female
50
20.7
1538 P2
Control
Before
82
14.57
144.62
1.76
4.0172
170
136
17018
6.87
93.69
23.11000061
22.27000046
37
1.100000024
5.860000134
0.567
1.3832
1.1367
0.092
8.15
81
0.05968082
291
21077
9.603133417
0.01129555
S15
Female
50
20.7
1539 P2
Control
Before
89
16.29
173.34
2.11
4.815
181
138
33816
8.33
105.5
22.70999908
21.98999977
34
1.039999962
5.059999943
0.5134
1.4094
1.1455
0.2
14.73
282
0.060541
474
37623
10.05292864
0.020162855
S15
Female
50
20.7
1540 P2
Control
Before
169
18.8
185.85
2.27
5.1625
166
136
11333
1.78
7.5
24.29999924
23.07999992
49
1.169999957
5.25
0.9093
1.4322
1.1458
0.107
10.37
141
0.06085286
552
44989
10.18682136
0.024110429
S15
Female
50
20.7
1541 P2
Control
Before
216
19.85
199.16
2.43
5.5322
175
136
27066
7.43
99.12
25.38999939
23.73999977
58
1.059999943
4.380000114
1.0846
1.4363
1.1937
0.29
10.52
153
0.06016765
606
52560
10.50863785
0.028167867
S15
Female
50
20.7
1542 P2
Control
Before
216
19.97
200.29
2.44
5.5636
171
134
33379
12.53
256.63
25.45000076
24.11000061
63
1.00999999
4.150000095
1.0784
1.4384
1.1583
0.182
11.16
153
0.06034188
604
51888
10.45851577
0.02780773
S15
Female
50
20.7
1543 A4
Cowhage
Before
91
17.3
162.37
1.98
4.5103
172
141
12094
2.07
8.79
23.32999992
22.73999977
39
1.100000024
6.309999943
0.5604
1.4132
1.1882
0.327
9.82
128
0.0587123
349
23766
9.311515965
0.012736635
S15
Female
50
20.7
1544 A4
Cowhage
Before
238
21.56
216.21
2.64
6.0058
176
141
31264
12.84
285.45
24.87000084
23.72999954
48
0.879999995
4.179999828
1.1008
1.4543
1.1761
0.308
15.78
340
0.05916252
588
46932
10.08093762
0.025151718
S15
Female
50
20.7
1545 A4
Cowhage
Before
311
22.5
228.74
2.79
6.3539
176
136
33480
8.77
126.65
26.20000076
24.86000061
62
0.74000001
3.369999886
1.3596
1.457
1.1818
0.195
9.04
109
0.05956296
633
50361
10.0646894
0.026989382
S15
Female
50
20.7
1546 A4
Cowhage
Before
355
23.15
242.09
2.95
6.7247
171
128
62373
12.66
200.88
26.20999908
24.62000084
69
0.920000017
3.940000057
1.4664
1.4647
1.1766
0.203
9.34
116
0.05849561
537
41232
9.887468595
0.022096984
S15
Female
50
20.7
1547 A4
Cowhage
Before
621
27.18
275.86
3.37
7.6628
154
121
33320
10.57
171.59
27.88999939
26.62999916
67
0.620000005
3.329999924
2.2511
1.4904
1.2034
0.329
16.81
415
0.05724964
652
52018
10.07878281
0.027877399
S15
Female
50
20.7
1554 A1
Histamine
Before
51
14.33
136.56
1.67
3.7933
164
139
9103
2.26
11.48
22.04999924
21.32999992
36
1.409999967
7.260000229
0.3735
1.3796
1.1521
0.365
20.62
507
0.059847
400
27015
9.273155652
0.014477833
S15
Female
50
20.7
1548 A4
Cowhage
After
544
26.26
214.11
3.13
8.5644
132
105
10864
2.61
17.75
23.45000076
22.29999924
49
0.579999983
3.359999895
2.5408
1.4845
1.1864
0.169
8.31
93
0.06066179
630
54262
10.47207353
0.02908
S15
Female
50
20.7
1555 A1
Histamine
Before
83
15.6
147.53
1.8
4.0981
165
140
8727
1.75
7.73
23.12999916
22.26000023
39
1.090000033
5.349999905
0.5626
1.3942
1.1393
0.099
10.52
141
0.06037921
582
46565
10.09307198
0.024955036
S15
Female
50
20.7
1552 A4
Cowhage
After
481
25.38
221.49
3.24
8.8596
140
109
30888
12.84
244.7
22.57999992
21.52000046
49
0.779999971
3.960000038
2.1717
1.4819
1.1871
0.211
11.45
192
0.06011787
706
59779
10.38309988
0.032036661
S15
Female
50
20.7
1556 A1
Histamine
Before
60
15.18
153.85
1.88
4.2736
170
137
26169
13.14
262.27
22.53000069
21.95000076
37
1.25999999
6.099999905
0.39
1.3948
1.1431
0.168
11.9
187
0.0602489
614
45816
9.747190607
0.024553634
S15
Female
50
20.7
1553 A4
Cowhage
After
629
27.23
234.18
3.43
9.3672
131
103
25415
14.6
337.28
23.28000069
22.35000038
45
0.779999971
4.110000134
2.686
1.495
1.1792
0.329
27.91
989
0.06062958
727
64592
10.63597285
0.034616036
S15
Female
50
20.7
1557 A1
Histamine
Before
79
15.34
150.32
1.83
4.1756
171
138
23089
9.41
141.88
22.95999908
22.05999947
41
1.169999957
5.170000076
0.5255
1.3906
1.1558
0.145
7.56
69
0.05834188
685
59494
10.51589783
0.031883924
S15
Female
50
20.7
1558 A1
Histamine
Before
54
14.89
139.49
1.7
3.8747
162
136
9056
1.83
7.89
22.70999908
22.10000038
38
1.110000014
5.059999943
0.3871
1.3852
1.1368
0.114
9.03
93
0.05798975
620
52277
10.36130703
0.028016202
S15
Female
50
20.7
1559 P1
Control
Before
80
14.07
137.79
1.68
3.8275
166
134
16957
6.62
83.44
23.22999954
22.12999916
50
1.370000005
5.630000114
0.5806
1.375
1.1425
0.103
8.38
85
0.05746852
408
33107
10.1644736
0.017742648
S15
Female
50
20.7
1560 P1
Control
Before
107
15.41
147.86
1.8
4.1072
158
133
10810
3.68
33.6
23.70999908
22.09000015
58
1.330000043
5.170000076
0.7237
1.3927
1.1563
0.201
9.25
99
0.05831625
386
29130
9.802382593
0.015611301
S15
Female
50
20.7
1561 P1
Control
Before
98
15.41
156.46
1.91
4.3461
170
135
33233
12.2
206.9
23.45000076
22.23999977
46
1.289999962
5.559999943
0.6264
1.3945
1.1524
0.181
9.25
99
0.05762811
577
42509
9.685177781
0.022781352
S15
Female
50
20.7
1562 P1
Control
Before
379
22.31
216.11
2.64
6.0031
159
128
21610
7.96
140.4
27.01000023
25.63999939
73
0.980000019
4.659999847
1.7537
1.4555
1.1821
0.284
14.31
289
0.0579246
718
62786
10.55174397
0.033648167
S15
Female
50
20.7
1563 P1
Control
Before
310
21.61
208.42
2.54
5.7894
163
133
28831
14.49
357.93
26.62999916
25.17000008
65
0.959999979
4.550000191
1.4874
1.4476
1.181
0.37
20.58
559
0.05805784
758
65651
10.50125318
0.035183573
S15
Female
50
20.7
1564 A2
Heat
Before
75
15.41
140.65
1.72
3.9069
163
135
8784
1.85
7.69
22.88999939
22.22999954
36
1.029999971
5.150000095
0.5332
1.3855
1.1426
0.13
14.43
280
0.0583697
432
30450
9.473420925
0.016318713
S15
Female
50
20.7
1565 A2
Heat
Before
94
15.45
139.66
1.7
3.8794
171
138
13285
2.77
14.62
23.60000038
22.15999985
55
1.139999986
4.110000134
0.6731
1.3826
1.1285
0.05
9.02
107
0.05521962
582
44431
9.859085001
0.023811387
S15
Female
50
20.7
1566 A2
Heat
Before
77
17.17
168.79
2.06
4.6886
168
139
23639
12.05
213.68
23.06999969
22.22999954
39
1.470000029
7.03000021
0.4562
1.4119
1.1331
0.092
10.2
127
0.05889825
404
26776
9.18622813
0.014349749
S15
Female
50
20.7
1567 A2
Heat
Before
108
18.11
182.55
2.23
5.0708
175
138
42069
11.97
188.14
22.95999908
22.32999992
38
1.080000043
5.71999979
0.5916
1.4199
1.1343
0.055
7.53
74
0.05911787
466
31660
9.30074112
0.016967174
S15
Female
50
20.7
1568 A2
Heat
Before
123
17.67
173.38
2.12
4.8161
165
134
11609
2.39
12.16
22.84000015
22.20999908
36
1.139999986
5.599999905
0.7094
1.4213
1.1592
0.137
6.98
59
0.05933822
505
32812
9.095482062
0.017584552
S15
Female
50
20.7
1569 A3
Capsaicin
After
131
15.68
152.89
1.87
4.2469
163
132
15654
6.05
76.97
24.29000092
22.96999931
57
1.059999943
4.570000172
0.8568
1.3941
1.1485
0.13
10.46
139
0.05853441
488
40661
10.29992769
0.021790975
S15
Female
50
20.7
1570 A3
Capsaicin
After
344
21.54
213.09
2.6
5.9192
163
133
14342
3.31
29.68
26.45000076
25.06999969
64
0.810000002
3.880000114
1.6143
1.4534
1.1549
0.1
9.68
124
0.06005564
686
62197
10.74428996
0.033332512
S15
Female
50
20.7
1571 A3
Capsaicin
After
429
23.66
239.63
2.92
6.6564
166
135
30948
13.86
340.45
26.85000038
25.59000015
61
0.620000005
3.25
1.7903
1.4712
1.1771
0.173
8.4
88
0.06018595
731
69381
10.99301064
0.037182549
S15
Female
50
20.7
1572 A3
Capsaicin
After
490
24.68
252.58
3.08
7.0161
167
130
34871
11.52
236.03
27.54000092
26.35000038
66
0.779999971
3.799999952
1.94
1.4762
1.1788
0.139
7.39
74
0.06016252
745
76320
11.42078889
0.040901286
S15
Female
50
20.7
1573 A3
Capsaicin
After
527
25.36
268.06
3.27
7.4461
169
132
34302
10.38
170.95
26.98999977
26.04000092
53
0.610000014
3.460000038
1.966
1.4851
1.1908
0.209
12.23
238
0.06052636
775
77406
11.27694652
0.041483293
S15
Female
50
20.7
1574 A1
Histamine
After
703
27.84
284.91
3.48
7.9142
156
121
26464
8.86
166.34
27.86000061
27.28000069
62
0.519999981
4.090000153
2.4674
1.4991
1.2128
0.518
14.75
297
0.060194
556
58782
11.60218651
0.031502351
S15
Female
50
20.7
1575 A1
Histamine
After
506
24.82
260.16
3.17
7.2267
166
129
48278
12.72
233.34
27.27000046
26.56999969
58
0.529999971
3.470000029
1.945
1.4775
1.2021
0.347
20.52
597
0.05990923
623
57851
10.8734277
0.031003411
S15
Female
50
20.7
1576 A1
Histamine
After
161
18.42
169.9
2.07
4.7194
170
131
35870
11.58
210.64
25.18000031
23.97999954
60
1.039999962
4.489999771
0.9476
1.4136
1.1791
0.22
9.97
135
0.06006369
608
57595
10.98235963
0.030866215
S15
Female
50
20.7
1577 A1
Histamine
After
151
17
156.72
1.91
4.3533
159
132
21282
13.97
324.19
24.40999985
23.12999916
56
1.019999981
4.28000021
0.9635
1.4063
1.1926
0.353
14.27
285
0.06024158
611
53137
10.52284007
0.028477092
S15
Female
50
20.7
1578 A1
Histamine
After
488
23.43
246.87
3.01
6.8575
167
129
40717
9.12
129.76
27.20000076
26.64999962
58
0.730000019
4.53000021
1.9767
1.4701
1.2053
0.24
8.16
85
0.06005491
608
58140
11.03419827
0.031158291
S15
Female
50
20.7
1579 P2
Control
After
56
13.1
132.58
1.62
3.6828
172
135
25412
9.12
125.47
22.29000092
21.73999977
32
1.149999976
5.949999809
0.4224
1.3643
1.1248
0.086
10.55
144
0.0596347
318
20935
9.155413883
0.01121945
S15
Female
50
20.7
1580 P2
Control
After
54
14.94
152.05
1.86
4.2236
175
139
25184
10.33
162.31
22.26000023
21.79999924
29
0.889999986
5.119999886
0.3551
1.3923
1.156
0.221
10.6
146
0.06028917
395
26268
9.201741217
0.014077502
==PAGE:63==
S15
Female
50
20.7
1581 P2
Control
After
71
15.69
163.11
1.99
4.5308
175
141
33203
14.78
320.99
22.93000031
22.28000069
35
1.149999976
5.699999809
0.4353
1.4026
1.1355
0.131
12.57
202
0.0610615
475
34815
9.660318699
0.018657996
S15
Female
50
20.7
1582 P2
Control
After
131
17.16
176.69
2.16
4.9081
170
141
14575
6.39
99.04
23.29000092
22.60000038
38
0.949999988
5.010000229
0.7414
1.421
1.1505
0.149
10.9
151
0.06138946
539
38647
9.554733325
0.020711635
S15
Female
50
20.7
1583 P2
Control
After
161
17.42
175.56
2.14
4.8767
170
137
21625
8.35
120.25
24.37999916
23.09000015
56
1.210000038
5.320000172
0.9171
1.4175
1.1464
0.139
13.18
219
0.06066252
488
36483
9.756418475
0.019551908
S15
Female
50
20.7
1584 A2
Heat
After
611
26.36
274.42
3.35
7.6228
161
130
26310
9.54
170.5
27.86000061
26.98999977
69
0.649999976
3.769999981
2.2265
1.4914
1.178
0.123
7.89
85
0.05920278
707
66654
10.9561624
0.0357211
S15
Female
50
20.7
1585 A2
Heat
After
840
29.52
322.47
3.93
8.9575
160
126
40407
12.53
230.05
28.64999962
27.51000023
65
0.600000024
3.650000095
2.6049
1.5124
1.1776
0.124
7.24
71
0.05950366
799
78143
11.1590368
0.041878265
S15
Female
50
20.7
1586 A2
Heat
After
807
28.94
335.44
4.09
9.3178
167
124
62570
11.28
168.21
28.31999969
27.34000015
65
0.550000012
3.569999933
2.4058
1.5116
1.1795
0.151
8.19
86
0.05981406
772
71147
10.83240042
0.038128981
S15
Female
50
20.7
1587 A2
Heat
After
799
28.58
298.95
3.65
8.3042
149
124
16619
8.26
180.28
28.10000038
27.13999939
66
0.579999983
3.579999924
2.6727
1.506
1.177
0.161
13.28
283
0.05802489
751
72549
11.09049183
0.038880338
S15
Female
50
20.7
1588 A2
Heat
After
645
26.75
296.77
3.62
8.2436
167
131
39579
9.67
136.87
27.56999969
26.47999954
61
0.649999976
3.74000001
2.1734
1.4963
1.2136
0.336
10
134
0.05727013
732
68520
10.91712281
0.036721123
S15
Female
50
20.7
1589 P1
Control
After
221
18.2
180.71
2.2
5.0197
165
135
15167
2.45
13.15
25.30999947
23.96999931
65
0.930000007
4
1.223
1.4251
1.1704
0.201
9.56
118
0.05966838
429
33932
10.03531808
0.01818478
S15
Female
50
20.7
1590 P1
Control
After
194
18.68
190.32
2.32
5.2867
176
134
43844
13.44
285.43
25.01000023
23.29000092
63
1.049999952
4.389999866
1.0193
1.426
1.1714
0.19
10.03
133
0.05920425
480
37140
9.925568486
0.019904006
S15
Female
50
20.7
1592 P1
Control
After
261
20.23
206.91
2.52
5.7475
163
134
12307
2.2
11.78
24.75
23.54999924
55
1.080000043
4.550000191
1.2614
1.4481
1.1642
0.163
8.65
92
0.06057467
649
52807
10.17837526
0.028300239
S15
Female
50
20.7
1593 P1
Control
After
392
21.85
218.42
2.66
6.0672
163
130
32693
11.14
188.45
27.40999985
26.18000031
73
0.689999998
3.710000038
1.7947
1.4504
1.1505
0.075
9.72
140
0.06076062
473
35908
9.8315071
0.019243755
S15
Female
50
20.7
1594 P1
Control
After
176
19.36
193.31
2.36
5.3697
177
143
15702
3.25
29.24
24.59000015
23.54999924
54
0.980000019
4.309999943
0.9105
1.439
1.1631
0.171
10.05
131
0.0584451
630
50376
10.09012682
0.026997421
S16
Male
25
23
1597 A3
Capsaicin
Before
34
11.39
105.48
1.29
2.93
156
130
28862
17.86
400.68
22.23999977
20.97999954
45
1.529999971
6.889999866
0.3223
1.3273
1.1503
0.437
18.69
409
0.05691874
196
12614
9.052185331
0.006760074
S16
Male
25
23
1598 A3
Capsaicin
Before
108
12.84
119.44
1.46
3.3178
151
127
27410
18.67
453.8
24.06999969
22.46999931
66
1.330000043
5.28000021
0.9042
1.3512
1.1289
0.071
8.46
90
0.05618961
159
10490
9.165248429
0.005621783
S16
Male
25
23
1600 A3
Capsaicin
Before
94
13.72
130.63
1.59
3.6286
160
126
22621
9.53
145.49
23.28000069
21.94000053
50
1.25999999
5.269999981
0.7196
1.3649
1.1562
0.204
11.71
182
0.05649195
401
33726
10.34821137
0.018074381
S16
Male
25
23
1601 A3
Capsaicin
Before
126
14.22
132.61
1.62
3.6836
152
127
11193
5.59
72.3
24.43000031
22.60000038
67
1.360000014
5.639999866
0.9502
1.3721
1.1877
1.271
24.06
648
0.05629795
383
32737
10.43218095
0.017544358
S16
Male
25
23
1603 A3
Capsaicin
Before
116
12.81
119.33
1.46
3.3147
150
124
31819
19.64
486.29
24.44000053
22.37000084
67
1.480000019
6.400000095
0.9721
1.35
1.1447
0.212
16.43
341
0.05471816
298
23335
9.985063472
0.012505654
S16
Male
25
23
1604 P2
Control
Before
53
14.89
133.5
1.63
3.7083
155
132
6021
1.49
6.01
22.46999931
21.39999962
42
1.820000052
9.710000038
0.397
1.3789
1.1374
0.125
10.66
135
0.05798902
217
15501
9.536852166
0.00830727
S16
Male
25
23
1606 P2
Control
Before
116
15.94
170.66
2.08
4.7406
178
127
120182
11.46
147.58
24.28000069
22.43000031
67
1.350000024
5.570000172
0.6797
1.3892
1.1652
0.195
8.73
96
0.05809151
310
24399
10.01060271
0.013075871
S16
Male
25
23
1607 P2
Control
Before
111
15.55
149.97
1.83
4.1658
163
130
41598
14.15
252.12
23.81999969
22.43000031
58
1.269999981
5.289999962
0.7401
1.3851
1.1596
0.135
7.22
63
0.05850732
320
24963
9.966173845
0.013378129
S16
Male
25
23
1608 P2
Control
Before
200
17.38
159.04
1.94
4.4178
154
128
23748
15.96
393
26.32999992
23.86000061
86
1.090000033
4.130000114
1.2575
1.4027
1.1622
0.103
6.47
54
0.05814056
426
38309
10.70041613
0.020530495
S16
Male
25
23
1609 P2
Control
Before
141
16.81
141.47
1.73
3.9297
152
129
9492
2.62
18.32
24.98999977
23.32999992
69
1
3.74000001
0.9967
1.3901
1.1476
0.146
16.04
334
0.05849049
364
32363
10.6396846
0.017343925
S16
Male
25
23
1610 A4
Heat
Before
24
11.56
108.41
1.32
3.0114
155
130
7625
2.5
12.39
21.47999954
20.79999924
30
1.080000043
5.159999847
0.2214
1.3386
1.1228
0.079
8.14
77
0.05300952
349
21611
8.879321427
0.011581731
S16
Male
25
23
1611 A4
Heat
Before
29
11.98
111.26
1.36
3.0906
156
128
12009
6.32
81.45
21.47999954
20.73999977
33
1.419999957
6.960000038
0.2607
1.3443
1.1122
0.044
8.95
97
0.05449634
277
17166
8.882796829
0.009199574
S16
Male
25
23
1612 A4
Heat
Before
34
12.9
130.25
1.59
3.6181
167
133
24687
14.68
317.22
21.56999969
20.95999908
29
1.539999962
8.529999733
0.261
1.3639
1.1297
0.155
13.17
203
0.05425696
280
17482
8.916031653
0.009368924
S16
Male
25
23
1613 A4
Heat
Before
48
13.82
131.29
1.6
3.6469
160
136
8901
2.66
16.33
22.14999962
21.39999962
32
1.049999952
5.159999847
0.3656
1.3758
1.1371
0.115
8.79
95
0.05500293
324
21337
9.156916054
0.011434889
S16
Male
25
23
1614 A4
Heat
Before
43
14.92
155.43
1.9
4.3175
173
136
46956
13.29
224.06
21.87000084
21.12999916
34
1.24000001
6.019999981
0.2767
1.3899
1.1394
0.135
9.63
111
0.05640337
308
20838
9.281276648
0.011167466
S16
Male
25
23
1615 A1
Cowhage
Before
164
11.71
97.39
1.19
2.7053
154
122
27786
11.27
204.93
28.10000038
27.15999985
93
0.730000019
3.589999914
1.684
1.3161
1.2172
0.246
8.2
99
0.05571962
415
36527
10.58614927
0.019575488
S16
Male
25
23
1616 A1
Cowhage
Before
153
10.72
87.63
1.07
2.4342
157
116
48474
12.88
226.22
28.69000053
27.77000046
82
0.330000013
2.480000019
1.746
1.2903
1.1772
0.149
10.07
142
0.05568302
355
29316
10.25399826
0.015710981
S16
Male
25
23
1617 A1
Cowhage
Before
132
10.4
84.04
1.03
2.3344
148
120
20682
8.69
127.95
27.64999962
26.29999924
95
0.460000008
2.880000114
1.5707
1.2921
1.1715
0.07
5.25
39
0.05646486
373
31745
10.40970229
0.017012727
S16
Male
25
23
1618 A1
Cowhage
Before
214
12.17
108.01
1.32
3.0003
158
121
50236
10.74
147.64
29.52000046
28.61000061
95
0.270000011
2.670000076
1.9813
1.3214
1.1704
0.048
3.77
21
0.05626501
390
33584
10.47101945
0.017998281
S16
Male
25
23
1619 A1
Cowhage
Before
208
13.13
113.85
1.39
3.1625
165
121
76481
13.17
209.86
29.67000008
29.20999908
94
0.330000013
2.579999924
1.827
1.3322
1.1802
0.091
6.91
69
0.05611347
456
39998
10.56797497
0.021435661
S16
Male
25
23
1620 P1
Control
Before
22
9.07
77.98
0.95
2.1661
149
123
6395
2.56
13.45
20.98999977
19.70999908
40
1.639999986
7.119999886
0.2821
1.283
1.1227
0.113
11.42
155
0.05600879
210
11761
8.444375498
0.006302935
S16
Male
25
23
1621 P1
Control
Before
28
9.12
75.69
0.92
2.1025
150
131
7026
2.41
13.89
22.15999985
20.68000031
57
1.730000019
7.349999905
0.3699
1.2735
1.1484
0.25
13.32
223
0.05631479
220
13829
8.946210387
0.007411214
S16
Male
25
23
1622 P1
Control
Before
244
13.49
113.64
1.39
3.1567
148
116
51500
19.77
484.94
29.69000053
29.06999969
100
0.610000014
3.710000038
2.1471
1.3382
1.1748
0.115
7.1
66
0.05527965
497
41216
10.27566141
0.022088409
S16
Male
25
23
1623 P1
Control
Before
330
16.63
149.15
1.82
4.1431
155
119
35809
12.48
231.82
29.95999908
28.95000076
94
0.600000024
3.569999933
2.2125
1.3848
1.1813
0.155
10.69
176
0.05781625
490
42624
10.52407952
0.022842982
S16
Male
25
23
1624 P1
Control
Before
479
19.6
189.66
2.31
5.2683
149
116
22483
10.18
208.09
29.56999969
28.82999992
78
0.460000008
3.150000095
2.5256
1.4253
1.1825
0.269
14.3
268
0.05837921
510
44845
10.5810066
0.024033257
S16
Male
25
23
1625 A2
Histamine
Before
17
10.58
105.79
1.29
2.9386
150
129
5833
2.07
9.6
19.65999985
18.82999992
23
1.210000038
5.289999962
0.1607
1.3342
1.0829
0.004
11.41
207
0.05676647
220
12202
8.403481131
0.006539275
S16
Male
25
23
1626 A2
Histamine
Before
135
14.57
130.83
1.6
3.6342
166
132
19775
6.96
96.69
25.93000031
24.18000031
76
0.870000005
3.49000001
1.0319
1.367
1.1511
0.086
8.46
96
0.05596486
590
52070
10.60041437
0.027905267
S16
Male
25
23
1627 A2
Histamine
Before
385
19.27
181.72
2.22
5.0478
162
124
33420
8.51
118.47
29.06999969
28.13999939
78
0.469999999
3.299999952
2.1186
1.4159
1.1729
0.102
6.91
67
0.05641801
625
52792
10.37048597
0.0282922
S16
Male
25
23
1628 A2
Histamine
Before
358
19.99
190.79
2.33
5.2997
163
131
25026
9.35
162.95
28.28000069
27.04000092
81
0.589999974
3.200000048
1.8764
1.429
1.1894
0.377
21.86
607
0.05449268
672
62890
10.91594202
0.033703903
S16
Male
25
23
1629 A2
Histamine
Before
335
19.3
175
2.14
4.8611
159
126
17239
4.13
40.26
28.30999947
27.20000076
75
0.560000002
3.119999886
1.9143
1.4174
1.1684
0.109
8.43
96
0.05587116
633
56490
10.65955296
0.030274026
S16
Male
25
23
1630 A1
Cowhage
After
88
9.53
59.13
0.87
2.3652
127
100
11293
4.81
45.86
22.9400005
21.18000031
69
0.810000002
3.28999996
1.488
1.263
1.145
0.07
8.17
86
0.05537482
535
40853
9.86030038
0.021893871
S16
Male
25
23
1631 A1
Cowhage
After
121
10.7
72.59
1.06
2.9036
127
100
40155
17.93
385.4
22.2999992
21.18000031
63
0.720000029
3.4000001
1.667
1.292
1.173
0.149
10.69
162
0.05696926
466
36145
9.937707629
0.019370768
S16
Male
25
23
1632 A1
Cowhage
After
125
11
69.46
1.02
2.7784
126
102
13670
6.25
70.9
23.7199993
22.25
71
0.600000024
2.9000001
1.8
1.292
1.214
0.352
9.59
128
0.05591289
551
42418
9.900436754
0.022732583
S16
Male
25
23
1633 A1
Cowhage
After
154
12.3
83.57
1.22
3.3428
135
104
29325
12.11
212.41
23.6700001
22.31999969
72
0.99000001
4.19000006
1.843
1.316
1.189
0.27
14
255
0.05636896
552
43406
10.00599781
0.02326207
S16
Male
25
23
1635 A1
Cowhage
After
319
18.2
128.63
1.88
5.1452
123
102
22914
19.8
537.04
24.3299999
23.29999924
56
0.550000012
3.16000009
2.48
1.399
1.211
0.222
8.17
102
0.05501464
628
61602
11.17564618
0.03301364
S16
Male
25
23
1636 A4
Heat
After
136
16.3
159.39
1.94
4.4275
165
133
27510
8.31
96.79
24.22999954
22.65999985
60
1.220000029
4.820000172
0.8533
1.397
1.1698
0.219
11.07
155
0.05513397
524
37413
9.534560587
0.020050312
S16
Male
25
23
1637 A4
Heat
After
246
19.89
193.1
2.36
5.3639
161
135
11355
2.76
22.93
25.09000015
23.95999908
58
0.930000007
4.320000172
1.274
1.4384
1.1855
0.221
9.7
131
0.05574305
629
54213
10.47566151
0.02905374
S16
Male
25
23
1638 A4
Heat
After
102
17.67
167.09
2.04
4.6414
166
136
10677
1.86
8.47
23.78000069
22.48999977
49
1.340000033
5.909999847
0.6104
1.4172
1.1698
0.204
8.57
88
0.05720791
468
33265
9.513183998
0.017827323
S16
Male
25
23
1639 A4
Heat
After
344
22.16
220.96
2.7
6.1378
160
132
24892
13.65
325.93
26.14999962
24.94000053
63
0.699999988
3.650000095
1.5568
1.4589
1.1863
0.316
19.66
534
0.0579041
620
55522
10.67804546
0.029755257
S16
Male
25
23
1640 A4
Heat
After
1209
33.45
385.12
4.7
10.6978
151
118
35073
13.18
269.1
28.86000061
28.03000069
64
0.560000002
3.859999895
3.1393
1.5409
1.2092
0.335
14.1
289
0.05838434
667
62420
10.91576116
0.033452021
S16
Male
25
23
1641 A3
Capsaicin
After
219
15.02
107.28
1.57
4.2912
121
101
24899
12.56
203.25
23.01000023
21.95000076
56
0.709999979
3.299999952
2.0414
1.3611
1.1917
0.182
7.6
81
0.0575593
534
52760
11.21596962
0.02827505
S16
Male
25
23
1642 A3
Capsaicin
After
92
12.72
94.28
1.38
3.7712
131
109
23884
18.59
435.72
20.59000015
19
42
1.100000024
4.28000021
0.9758
1.3401
1.1703
0.173
8.33
89
0.05852855
403
33061
10.2202267
0.017717995
S16
Male
25
23
1644 A3
Capsaicin
After
35
11.35
86.18
1.26
3.4472
129
108
12641
10.1
142.08
18.51000023
17.55999947
31
1.519999981
6.940000057
0.4061
1.3238
1.1473
0.191
10.21
127
0.05899415
286
18692
9.122207125
0.010017385
S16
Male
25
23
1645 A3
Capsaicin
After
42
11.96
82.39
1.21
3.2956
125
109
4817
3.55
30.28
18.79999924
17.96999931
27
1.24000001
5.480000019
0.5098
1.3247
1.1383
0.11
8.92
97
0.05787555
337
25565
9.827951563
0.013700752
S16
Male
25
23
1646 P2
Control
After
40
13.79
124.7
1.52
3.4639
155
130
19496
15.18
338.62
21.95000076
21.35000038
37
1.299999952
6.510000229
0.3208
1.3621
1.1349
0.152
12.28
169
0.05703734
215
13969
9.095330568
0.007486243
S16
Male
25
23
1647 P2
Control
After
91
15.47
135.97
1.66
3.7769
154
130
8123
1.88
8.53
23.73999977
22.69000053
53
1.279999971
5.53000021
0.6693
1.3832
1.1545
0.179
10.54
136
0.05556442
349
27075
9.938631275
0.014509988
S16
Male
25
23
1648 P2
Control
After
337
20.37
190.54
2.32
5.2928
156
123
30100
10.74
174.01
27.51000023
25.71999931
82
0.74000001
3.410000086
1.7687
1.4285
1.1935
0.245
9.53
114
0.05562079
511
48041
10.94083904
0.025746052
S16
Male
25
23
1649 P2
Control
After
180
17.82
162.63
1.98
4.5175
164
130
34010
10.97
165.7
25.29000092
23.48999977
70
1.230000019
5.199999809
1.1068
1.4026
1.1835
0.239
8.83
100
0.05642021
423
39213
10.86425399
0.021014965
S16
Male
25
23
1650 P2
Control
After
366
21.3
200.61
2.45
5.5725
159
125
37509
14.01
275.59
28.01000023
26.55999947
82
0.730000019
3.660000086
1.8244
1.4372
1.1771
0.108
6.32
56
0.05579942
560
49553
10.61441398
0.02655636
S16
Male
25
23
1652 A2
Histamine
After
586
26.49
273.02
3.33
7.5839
158
125
27225
11.58
242.28
27.34000015
26.45999908
61
0.579999983
3.789999962
2.1464
1.4922
1.198
0.253
11.75
197
0.05851684
535
50544
10.96763459
0.027087455
S16
Male
25
23
1653 A2
Histamine
After
621
26.73
278.56
3.4
7.7378
164
126
28276
7.73
110.38
27.77000046
26.89999962
54
0.550000012
3.670000076
2.2293
1.4924
1.2263
0.885
28.93
1025
0.05722621
607
58355
11.06368368
0.031273513
S16
Male
25
23
1654 A2
Histamine
After
667
27.04
295.94
3.61
8.2206
167
129
58067
12.5
221.87
28.46999931
27.57999992
65
0.660000026
4.210000038
2.2538
1.4936
1.1908
0.187
9
109
0.05780527
558
52312
10.92543209
0.028034959
S16
Male
25
23
1655 A2
Histamine
After
783
28.61
310.16
3.78
8.6156
158
125
38146
15.89
381.96
28.01000023
27.18000031
62
0.670000017
3.960000038
2.5245
1.5083
1.1919
0.383
22.4
694
0.05798829
569
58190
11.41098422
0.031185087
S16
Male
25
23
1657 A2
Histamine
After
434
23.09
240.57
2.94
6.6825
166
131
45775
14.95
306.2
26.87999916
25.77000046
61
0.899999976
4.460000038
1.804
1.4642
1.1735
0.172
11.03
161
0.05867716
436
45139
11.4812132
0.024190817
S17
Male
25
20
1665 A3
Histamine
Before
19
12.29
116.98
1.43
3.2494
152
129
7647
5.63
72.17
21.25
20.47999954
27
1.169999957
5.929999828
0.1624
1.3528
1.1148
0.071
9.17
96
0.05879649
192
11420
8.70236905
0.006120187
S16
Male
25
23
1658 P1
Control
After
30
10.2
68.25
1
2.73
125
103
7688
4.3
36.27
19.1499996
17.72999954
39
1.340000033
5.25
0.44
1.291
1.191
2.015
21.77
494
0.05748829
245
18067
9.689805047
0.009682436
S17
Male
25
20
1666 A3
Histamine
Before
51
13.94
132.65
1.62
3.6847
152
133
5827
1.33
5.53
21.90999985
21.17000008
35
1.230000019
5.860000134
0.3845
1.3746
1.1357
0.142
10.17
123
0.0584612
525
44450
10.38272354
0.023821569
S16
Male
25
23
1659 P1
Control
After
186
13.6
88.36
1.29
3.5344
114
99
5549
1.65
7.09
23.4899998
21.87000084
68
0.660000026
3.02999997
2.105
1.337
1.16
0.096
7.06
64
0.05720352
489
47175
11.08298088
0.025281947
S17
Male
25
20
1667 A3
Histamine
Before
75
15.13
145.74
1.78
4.0483
158
134
9208
3.61
29.77
22.55999947
21.93000031
37
1.159999967
5.710000038
0.5146
1.3911
1.1366
0.154
11.73
157
0.05850732
679
62473
10.82346589
0.033480425
S16
Male
25
23
1660 P1
Control
After
63
12.8
95.26
1.39
3.8104
133
107
15852
11.81
219.85
19.4899998
18.30999947
39
1.269999981
5.38999987
0.661
1.345
1.206
0.713
11.5
162
0.05815081
276
19817
9.561355654
0.010620293
S17
Male
25
20
1668 A3
Histamine
Before
85
15.58
147.61
1.8
4.1003
159
135
13309
9.41
176.94
23.05999947
22.20000076
41
1.159999967
5.369999886
0.5758
1.3907
1.1566
0.15
8.34
90
0.05803807
791
73208
10.85540644
0.039233508
S16
Male
25
23
1661 P1
Control
After
29
9.29
56.88
0.83
2.2752
124
106
5150
2.33
12.12
18.9699993
17.44000053
41
1.5
6.61000013
0.51
1.265
1.136
0.082
6.75
54
0.05527965
323
24811
9.889536382
0.013296669
S17
Male
25
20
1669 A3
Histamine
Before
119
16.92
161.28
1.97
4.48
168
136
22527
10.83
189.77
24.28000069
23
54
1.230000019
5.340000153
0.7378
1.4037
1.1726
0.166
6.87
60
0.05824305
802
83758
11.53137311
0.044887446
S16
Male
25
23
1663 P1
Control
After
79
13.5
99.41
1.46
3.9764
126
106
7956
5.51
73.76
19.8999996
18.23999977
45
1.350000024
5.05000019
0.795
1.354
1.154
0.151
8.93
101
0.05645535
411
29821
9.611590284
0.01598162
S17
Male
25
20
1670 P2
Control
Before
39
14.99
156.04
1.9
4.3344
166
140
12670
8.85
155.02
21.61000061
21.11000061
26
1.129999995
6.400000095
0.2499
1.4
1.1339
0.158
10.16
119
0.05868155
117
5991
8.074428409
0.003210687
S17
Male
25
20
1671 P2
Control
Before
22
15.21
161.7
1.97
4.4917
166
137
23039
14.66
291.32
21.38999939
20.61000061
30
1.379999995
7.550000191
0.1361
1.4042
1.1052
0.044
11.27
151
0.05764349
158
9878
8.921975509
0.005293801
S17
Male
25
20
1672 P2
Control
Before
30
15.41
158.8
1.94
4.4111
163
138
7006
1.88
8.53
21.55999947
21.09000015
26
1.25999999
6.909999847
0.1889
1.4064
1.1316
0.178
10.51
123
0.05738068
145
8290
8.531950428
0.004442763
S17
Male
25
20
1673 P2
Control
Before
66
17.07
178.89
2.18
4.9692
174
145
13900
5.67
75.53
22.36000061
21.77000046
32
1.429999948
8.220000267
0.3689
1.4221
1.1342
0.114
9.65
108
0.05747584
451
40444
10.68547516
0.02167468
S17
Male
25
20
1674 P2
Control
Before
69
17.7
180.29
2.2
5.0081
171
140
10611
2.27
11.38
22.37000084
21.71999931
34
1.399999976
7.079999924
0.3827
1.4279
1.1239
0.083
13.18
230
0.05711787
542
49059
10.73531425
0.026291617
S17
Male
25
20
1675 A4
Capsaicin
Before
32
15.58
156.15
1.91
4.3375
168
136
10772
3.74
33.87
21.87000084
21.45999908
27
1.139999986
6.579999924
0.2049
1.4018
1.1241
0.104
11.57
158
0.05711347
269
18275
9.300528162
0.009793907
S17
Male
25
20
1676 A4
Capsaicin
Before
65
17.1
187.67
2.29
5.2131
173
138
30463
13.18
243.99
21.89999962
21.37000084
28
1.570000052
8.630000114
0.3464
1.4255
1.1237
0.086
9.93
112
0.05746194
465
38427
10.25762512
0.020593733
S17
Male
25
20
1677 A4
Capsaicin
Before
40
17.22
183.21
2.24
5.0892
182
144
26861
13.24
293.37
22.10000038
21.67000008
26
1.169999957
6.449999809
0.2183
1.4255
1.1314
0.108
9.48
101
0.05733163
505
40285
10.07815548
0.021589469
S17
Male
25
20
1678 A4
Capsaicin
Before
70
17.59
192.04
2.34
5.3344
175
137
27903
9.59
134.63
22.02000046
21.70000076
31
1.070000052
5.670000076
0.3645
1.4303
1.1326
0.109
9.09
97
0.0566164
716
60138
10.34125003
0.032229056
S17
Male
25
20
1679 A4
Capsaicin
Before
65
17.08
182.87
2.23
5.0797
172
142
12755
4.3
41.34
22.20000076
21.64999962
29
1.470000029
8.529999733
0.3554
1.4267
1.1402
0.168
11.26
169
0.05666472
486
38586
10.05429919
0.020678944
S17
Male
25
20
1680 A1
Cowhage
Before
21
10.58
108.33
1.32
3.0092
153
131
5474
2.29
11.07
19.42000008
18.70999908
25
2
11.81000042
0.1939
1.3355
1.0916
0.014
11.36
172
0.05558126
180
11198
8.899980157
0.006001213
S17
Male
25
20
1681 A1
Cowhage
Before
15
10.48
102.01
1.24
2.8336
156
130
6445
2.66
14.24
20.84000015
20.45000076
25
0.930000007
5.309999943
0.147
1.3274
1.094
0.028
14.47
235
0.05683236
194
11969
8.863048541
0.006414406
S17
Male
25
20
1682 A1
Cowhage
Before
21
11.53
119.06
1.45
3.3072
161
135
7611
2.63
14.92
21.20000076
20.81999969
27
1.299999952
7.139999866
0.1764
1.3537
1.1012
0.044
12.03
174
0.05690996
200
11896
8.702430012
0.006375284
S17
Male
25
20
1683 A1
Cowhage
Before
19
13.75
147.19
1.8
4.0886
167
142
7603
2.07
10.1
21.12999916
20.79999924
23
1.059999943
6.599999905
0.1291
1.3906
1.0976
0.063
15.28
254
0.05771157
280
16708
8.716422577
0.008954123
S17
Male
25
20
1684 A1
Cowhage
Before
33
14.29
156.32
1.91
4.3422
169
144
7696
2.34
13.05
21.31999969
20.80999947
23
0.949999988
5.519999981
0.2111
1.3994
1.1272
0.116
8.23
74
0.0578653
310
17674
8.520040079
0.00947182
==PAGE:64==
S17
Male
25
20
1685 P1
Control
Before
30
11.62
122.88
1.5
3.4133
172
139
10672
2.94
18.17
21.05999947
20.95999908
23
0.680000007
4.679999828
0.2441
1.3562
1.12
0.1
10.11
115
0.05710688
120
6743
8.458454474
0.003613697
S17
Male
25
20
1686 P1
Control
Before
48
13.13
140.88
1.72
3.9133
172
143
10750
2.55
14.01
21.43000031
21.17000008
25
1.049999952
6.46999979
0.3407
1.3828
1.1086
0.046
12.49
192
0.05744583
158
9116
8.570944326
0.004885431
S17
Male
25
20
1687 P1
Control
Before
45
13.69
143.86
1.76
3.9961
174
145
10327
2.25
10.68
21.72999954
21.29000092
28
1.190000057
7.070000172
0.3128
1.3879
1.1558
0.623
17.07
320
0.05726281
229
13500
8.663715898
0.007234897
S17
Male
25
20
1688 P1
Control
Before
58
14.22
151.82
1.85
4.2172
173
142
10751
1.81
7.79
22.02000046
21.68000031
29
1.049999952
6.159999847
0.382
1.3952
1.1223
0.154
18.26
407
0.05697145
180
12358
9.349597227
0.006622879
S17
Male
25
20
1689 P1
Control
Before
40
15.09
164.63
2.01
4.5731
183
149
15854
6.31
88.89
21.57999992
21.37000084
23
0.819999993
5.659999847
0.243
1.4093
1.149
0.275
11.63
166
0.05721962
151
8311
8.371306186
0.004454017
S17
Male
25
20
1697 A2
Heat
Before
9
10.13
96.31
1.18
2.6753
146
126
4482
2.11
10.46
19.78000069
19.30999947
21
1.070000052
5.78000021
0.0934
1.318
1.0944
0.037
14.42
242
0.0538675
170
10292
8.779716394
0.005515671
S17
Male
25
20
1698 A2
Heat
Before
25
11.26
108.6
1.33
3.0167
156
133
5932
1.94
9.52
21.32999992
20.89999962
27
1.299999952
7.940000057
0.2302
1.3395
1.1023
0.069
18.53
389
0.05558639
166
9594
8.57829293
0.0051416
S17
Male
25
20
1699 A2
Heat
Before
43
12.6
125.69
1.53
3.4914
163
138
9575
3.74
36.32
21.63999939
21.12000084
31
1.190000057
5.989999771
0.3421
1.3637
1.1277
0.139
11.2
139
0.05564934
342
26410
9.915764573
0.014153603
S17
Male
25
20
1700 A2
Heat
Before
57
14.23
132.01
1.61
3.6669
168
138
10563
2.33
12.83
22.97999954
22.23999977
41
1.210000038
5.670000076
0.4318
1.3758
1.1456
0.093
6.82
55
0.05588068
552
44859
10.17209282
0.02404076
S17
Male
25
20
1701 A2
Heat
Before
54
13.68
133.25
1.63
3.7014
158
135
9092
4.03
39.76
21.97999954
21.53000069
28
1.019999981
5.980000019
0.4053
1.375
1.1226
0.068
10.18
130
0.05728038
258
16985
9.155413883
0.009102573
S17
Male
25
20
1692 A3
Histamine
After
620
25.7
220.18
3.22
8.8072
125
103
25498
17.01
406.12
22.7700005
22.09000015
44
0.709999979
4.05000019
2.816
1.485
1.179
0.159
9.86
137
0.05689166
810
77415
11.0312597
0.041488117
S17
Male
25
20
1693 A3
Histamine
After
644
24.6
208.15
3.05
8.326
122
101
9815
6.56
120.86
23.2999992
22.37999916
47
0.589999974
3.70000005
3.094
1.478
1.203
0.609
24.18
748
0.05927013
464
45486
11.1721033
0.024376781
S17
Male
25
20
1694 A3
Histamine
After
530
25.2
225.49
3.3
9.0196
135
105
30336
13.6
262.64
22.5200005
21.84000015
40
0.949999988
5.26999998
2.35
1.486
1.167
0.16
15.14
352
0.06047804
558
64084
12.09240727
0.034343789
S17
Male
25
20
1695 A3
Histamine
After
745
27.5
245.39
3.59
9.8156
127
100
23063
11.73
227.46
22.6800003
22.27000046
40
0.460000008
3.79999995
3.036
1.504
1.211
0.359
13.08
262
0.0567694
511
47927
10.92785017
0.025684957
S17
Male
25
20
1696 A3
Histamine
After
729
27.1
243.14
3.56
9.7256
127
100
24411
14.81
341.46
22.9300003
22.29000092
42
0.569999993
3.98000002
2.998
1.499
1.159
0.067
6.3
54
0.05895388
569
56999
11.29360371
0.030546808
S17
Male
25
20
1702 A4
Capsaicin
After
402
22.52
242.23
2.96
6.7286
173
136
48332
12.51
220.6
26.25
25.29000092
54
0.970000029
4.880000114
1.6596
1.4647
1.1916
0.273
11.05
168
0.05711787
644
59913
10.88360218
0.032108474
S17
Male
25
20
1703 A4
Capsaicin
After
391
23.1
246.33
3.01
6.8425
162
134
26566
13.85
343.84
25.65999985
24.40999985
55
1.039999962
4.610000134
1.5873
1.474
1.179
0.22
8.88
98
0.05797511
612
54031
10.60231861
0.028956203
S17
Male
25
20
1704 A4
Capsaicin
After
529
24.04
249.68
3.05
6.9356
164
128
35858
10.6
185.89
27.45999908
26.73999977
58
0.529999971
3.650000095
2.1187
1.4697
1.2015
0.378
20.41
582
0.0555571
689
59133
10.45346825
0.031690458
S17
Male
25
20
1705 A4
Capsaicin
After
561
25.52
271.44
3.31
7.54
155
126
20186
6.71
92.9
26.27000046
25.35000038
59
0.75
4.289999962
2.0668
1.4908
1.1801
0.219
11.83
214
0.05820644
523
52359
11.29015454
0.028060147
S17
Male
25
20
1706 A4
Capsaicin
After
637
27.33
296.59
3.62
8.2386
159
133
12933
1.96
10.3
26.60000038
25.70999908
53
0.74000001
4.369999886
2.1477
1.508
1.1736
0.233
13.68
238
0.0581552
706
70012
11.23670426
0.037520713
S17
Male
25
20
1707 P2
Control
After
191
17.11
173.48
2.12
4.8189
167
135
42898
15.33
302.21
24.56999969
22.87999916
58
1.179999948
4.900000095
1.101
1.4107
1.1648
0.231
12.67
212
0.05542606
435
36406
10.32278574
0.019510642
S17
Male
25
20
1708 P2
Control
After
149
17.39
191.34
2.33
5.315
177
140
50232
15.42
300.64
23.56999969
22.55999947
42
1.190000057
5.320000172
0.7787
1.4258
1.1287
0.073
10.27
138
0.05764129
393
32599
10.27687143
0.017470401
S17
Male
25
20
1709 P2
Control
After
100
17.35
178.43
2.18
4.9564
170
137
27004
16.45
409.79
22.80999947
21.79000092
41
1.350000024
6.099999905
0.5604
1.4216
1.1484
0.148
8.03
75
0.05822987
463
36267
9.986662657
0.01943615
S17
Male
25
20
1710 P2
Control
After
295
21.13
223.86
2.73
6.2183
164
133
38671
15.64
332.56
25.05999947
23.67000008
57
1.100000024
5.079999924
1.3178
1.4572
1.1544
0.095
6.84
59
0.05731918
774
72604
10.92860811
0.038909814
S17
Male
25
20
1711 P2
Control
After
323
21.17
217.65
2.66
6.0458
163
133
18883
8.63
148.8
25.81999969
24.37000084
60
0.910000026
3.970000029
1.484
1.4546
1.1573
0.108
8.65
102
0.05825476
641
55417
10.49174074
0.029698985
S17
Male
25
20
1712 A2
Heat
After
222
15.78
160.36
1.96
4.4544
163
130
16334
3.86
33.42
24.85000038
23.85000038
55
0.910000026
4.329999924
1.3844
1.4012
1.1884
0.284
8.6
92
0.05445827
537
49823
10.86883144
0.026701058
S17
Male
25
20
1713 A2
Heat
After
432
21.04
232.41
2.84
6.4558
163
128
36186
10.25
166.57
26.06999969
25.13999939
58
0.589999974
3.380000114
1.8588
1.4544
1.2054
0.477
11.34
154
0.05712153
499
46331
10.87278057
0.024829632
S17
Male
25
20
1714 A2
Heat
After
317
20.43
219.8
2.68
6.1056
166
139
20074
10.14
222.19
25.01000023
24.12999916
51
0.800000012
4.079999924
1.4422
1.4561
1.1904
0.297
10.07
130
0.05678551
614
61320
11.27643827
0.032862511
S17
Male
25
20
1715 A2
Heat
After
694
25.85
270.99
3.31
7.5275
151
124
21980
8.41
126.35
27.80999947
26.80999947
56
0.5
3.420000076
2.561
1.4872
1.2054
0.601
21.35
562
0.05556003
527
52348
11.24604452
0.028054252
S17
Male
25
20
1716 A2
Heat
After
666
25.3
269.72
3.29
7.4922
151
123
16835
4.75
53.3
27.10000038
26.22999954
62
0.74000001
4.360000134
2.4692
1.4891
1.1753
0.119
6.99
63
0.05832577
635
65654
11.47357588
0.035185181
S17
Male
25
20
1717 A1
Cowhage
After
30
12.73
134.37
1.64
3.7325
164
138
8411
3.02
21.12
20.96999931
20.64999962
23
0.850000024
5.440000057
0.2233
1.3726
1.1184
0.125
10.77
128
0.05770278
279
18792
9.260607117
0.010070977
S17
Male
25
20
1718 A1
Cowhage
After
35
13.56
146.07
1.78
4.0575
164
136
12805
6.84
93.6
21.63999939
21.03000069
35
1.960000038
11.86999989
0.2396
1.3869
1.0972
0.046
13.9
218
0.05875696
398
27530
9.384618639
0.014753831
S17
Male
25
20
1719 A1
Cowhage
After
66
13.96
145.71
1.78
4.0475
158
135
7553
3
21.04
21.80999947
21.05999947
38
1.440000057
6.78000021
0.453
1.3872
1.1019
0.03
11.12
148
0.0584268
396
28679
9.602613925
0.015369601
S17
Male
25
20
1720 A1
Cowhage
After
63
14.61
159.74
1.95
4.4372
165
136
14870
8.32
128.09
21.81999969
20.84000015
39
1.559999943
6.989999771
0.3944
1.4011
1.1165
0.161
20.44
506
0.05829795
522
40976
9.997342902
0.021959789
S17
Male
25
20
1721 A1
Cowhage
After
80
14.7
160.5
1.96
4.4583
161
134
19105
14.45
336.39
22.05999947
20.87999916
40
1.450000048
6.440000057
0.4984
1.4012
1.1176
0.082
11.34
160
0.05858199
467
36295
9.94763907
0.019451155
S17
Male
25
20
1722 P1
Control
After
27
12.14
122.18
1.49
3.3939
171
137
12091
3.36
25.97
21.54999924
21.04000092
29
1.299999952
7.190000057
0.221
1.356
1.1399
0.198
11.77
172
0.05713397
151
8525
8.478397605
0.004568704
S17
Male
25
20
1723 P1
Control
After
145
13.63
127.32
1.55
3.5367
154
128
14214
5.92
73.73
25.25
23.60000038
72
1.049999952
4.059999943
1.1389
1.3613
1.1465
0.125
10.07
143
0.05488653
591
47192
10.08313334
0.025291057
S17
Male
25
20
1725 P1
Control
After
35
12.17
116.96
1.43
3.2489
167
136
9464
2.06
8.66
21.86000061
21.44000053
31
1.200000048
6.840000153
0.2992
1.3514
1.1242
0.109
10.62
133
0.05630674
282
17625
8.920620581
0.00944556
S17
Male
25
20
1726 P1
Control
After
56
15.38
159.41
1.94
4.4281
167
141
8933
1.98
9.18
22.59000015
22
36
1.649999976
9.970000267
0.3513
1.4033
1.1253
0.131
16.49
356
0.05761787
383
24545
9.033107747
0.013154115
S17
Male
25
20
1727 P1
Control
After
185
17.47
168
2.05
4.6667
165
131
17634
6.87
105.24
25.18000031
23.04999924
64
1.029999971
3.640000105
1.1012
1.412
1.1363
0.102
8.42
83
0.05640923
666
53129
10.0782184
0.028472804
S18
Male
54
28
1729 A1
Capsaicin
Before
49
12.15
124.36
1.52
3.4544
156
130
11563
5.94
67.31
21.25
20.13999939
41
1.49000001
6.420000076
0.394
1.3558
1.1127
0.095
12.16
167
0.05693412
130
8187
8.954591496
0.004387563
S18
Male
54
28
1730 A1
Capsaicin
Before
46
14.43
147.59
1.8
4.0997
160
138
7152
1.99
9.54
21.43000031
20.96999931
30
1.570000052
9.050000191
0.3117
1.3933
1.133
0.139
11.65
180
0.05953148
137
8240
8.75101406
0.004415967
S18
Male
54
28
1731 A1
Capsaicin
Before
73
13.35
127.46
1.56
3.5406
164
131
13084
3.62
26.8
22.79999924
21.65999985
45
1.24000001
5.489999771
0.5727
1.3641
1.1218
0.053
10.96
165
0.05716399
213
14235
9.224524599
0.007628797
S18
Male
54
28
1732 A1
Capsaicin
Before
94
15.59
154.15
1.88
4.2819
161
132
10750
3
19.33
22.23999977
21.27000046
40
1.399999976
6.5
0.6098
1.3986
1.1192
0.064
11.27
165
0.05881552
251
16403
9.121785195
0.008790668
S18
Male
54
28
1733 A1
Capsaicin
Before
164
16.33
164
2
4.5556
162
131
20109
8.97
146.3
24.13999939
22.62000084
58
1.059999943
4.420000076
1
1.4045
1.1372
0.119
10.76
138
0.0591164
270
18783
9.411430869
0.010066154
S18
Male
54
28
1734 P1
Control
Before
42
14.03
141.4
1.73
3.9278
175
135
17363
3.99
28.04
21.5
20.84000015
32
1.25
6.090000153
0.297
1.3825
1.1405
0.202
10.4
124
0.05857175
235
16759
9.528952864
0.008981455
S18
Male
54
28
1735 P1
Control
Before
56
14.63
148.83
1.82
4.1342
169
136
17022
8.95
152.07
21.42000008
20.76000023
31
1.639999986
9.43999958
0.3763
1.3936
1.107
0.039
12.36
180
0.05860542
274
18447
9.258543082
0.009886085
S18
Male
54
28
1736 P1
Control
Before
73
15.83
166.81
2.04
4.6336
178
143
17688
4.19
33.86
22.10000038
20.79000092
46
1.820000052
8.569999695
0.4376
1.4089
1.134
0.228
19.99
484
0.05896779
261
15779
8.773533602
0.008456255
S18
Male
54
28
1737 P1
Control
Before
52
13.78
139.33
1.7
3.8703
169
134
16049
4.05
30.19
21.87999916
20.72999954
45
1.840000033
8.93999958
0.3732
1.3817
1.1357
0.19
12.35
178
0.05697218
283
19636
9.399145082
0.010523292
S18
Male
54
28
1738 P1
Control
Before
41
14.07
145.22
1.77
4.0339
174
136
14600
4.28
38.76
21.29000092
20.55999947
33
1.919999957
10.35000038
0.2823
1.3889
1.1275
0.169
15.61
308
0.05787921
217
14457
9.21009867
0.007747771
S18
Male
54
28
1739 A2
Cowhage
Before
55
11.87
112.48
1.37
3.1244
155
130
12856
8.25
114.4
21.55999947
20.22999954
44
1.480000019
6.320000172
0.489
1.3441
1.106
0.052
12.04
157
0.05800513
201
13726
9.324574601
0.007356015
S18
Male
54
28
1740 A2
Cowhage
Before
32
13.27
128.59
1.57
3.5719
168
134
13192
4.34
35.85
21.63999939
20.89999962
35
1.360000014
6.570000172
0.2489
1.3678
1.119
0.07
10.3
121
0.05881772
228
16482
9.593842638
0.008833006
S18
Male
54
28
1741 A2
Cowhage
Before
120
14.79
141.96
1.73
3.9433
162
131
13892
3.56
24.51
23.56999969
22.04000092
56
1.24000001
5.150000095
0.8453
1.3839
1.1301
0.058
8.3
91
0.058735
250
19139
9.872898591
0.010256941
S18
Male
54
28
1743 A2
Cowhage
Before
74
13.23
131.4
1.6
3.65
167
137
14578
3.85
31.76
22.26000023
21.20999908
46
1.320000052
5.650000095
0.5632
1.371
1.1371
0.175
14.29
253
0.05854393
280
20431
9.638753094
0.010949347
S18
Male
54
28
1744 A2
Cowhage
Before
64
13.7
131.6
1.61
3.6556
170
136
13823
3.54
23.97
22.02000046
20.96999931
36
1.100000024
4.769999981
0.4863
1.3715
1.1375
0.211
17.27
369
0.05793778
289
21938
9.831157505
0.011756976
S18
Male
54
28
1746 A3
Histamine
Before
24
11.19
103.79
1.27
2.8831
152
131
5735
1.92
8.88
21.03000069
20.13999939
39
1.789999962
8.579999924
0.2312
1.3314
1.1221
0.101
11.12
149
0.05808053
193
13731
9.517600872
0.007358694
S18
Male
54
28
1747 A3
Histamine
Before
77
11.94
104.59
1.28
2.9053
146
128
5929
1.6
8.88
23.05999947
21.68000031
60
1.340000033
5.5
0.7362
1.3353
1.1476
0.133
10.19
135
0.05826135
349
23619
9.282674006
0.012657855
S18
Male
54
28
1748 A3
Histamine
Before
33
11.25
105.45
1.29
2.9292
149
129
5814
2.09
10.12
21.04000092
20.03000069
36
1.629999995
8.140000343
0.3129
1.3342
1.1115
0.053
10.42
131
0.05820937
246
16055
9.115755344
0.008604169
S18
Male
54
28
1749 A3
Histamine
Before
20
11.46
112.35
1.37
3.1208
165
133
34644
17.64
394.28
20.86000061
20.12999916
32
1.429999948
6.559999943
0.178
1.3355
1.1368
0.148
9.49
107
0.05841289
299
19899
9.205239474
0.010664239
S18
Male
54
28
1750 A3
Histamine
Before
60
12.47
116.89
1.43
3.2469
157
134
10583
5.18
57.45
22.26000023
20.70999908
54
1.940000057
9.069999695
0.5133
1.3479
1.1462
0.211
11.68
161
0.05865154
363
26586
9.656689047
0.014247924
S18
Male
54
28
1752 P2
Control
Before
32
13.28
128.61
1.57
3.5725
156
131
6488
1.8
7.64
20.80999947
20.03000069
29
1.350000024
6.710000038
0.2488
1.3706
1.1221
0.089
9.38
103
0.06028917
211
12717
8.760041575
0.006815273
S18
Male
54
28
1753 P2
Control
Before
29
13.28
135.88
1.66
3.7744
163
135
7781
1.67
6.95
21.05999947
20.69000053
29
1.129999995
5.599999905
0.2134
1.3781
1.1191
0.078
8.96
90
0.06080967
259
16960
9.130994922
0.009089175
S18
Male
54
28
1754 P2
Control
Before
42
13.06
128.78
1.57
3.5772
167
139
8528
1.87
7.74
21.37000084
20.63999939
30
1.370000005
6.639999866
0.3261
1.3688
1.1107
0.063
11.37
146
0.05925037
234
14622
8.919705598
0.007836198
S18
Male
54
28
1755 P2
Control
Before
36
12.93
123.72
1.51
3.4367
166
133
16807
8.49
115.17
21.06999969
20.22999954
33
1.460000038
7.699999809
0.291
1.3585
1.1281
0.146
11.89
159
0.05967423
238
15349
9.061636229
0.00822581
S18
Male
54
28
1756 P2
Control
Before
41
12.9
123.38
1.51
3.4272
157
132
8349
3.13
21.22
20.96999931
19.94000053
33
1.419999957
6.260000229
0.3323
1.3611
1.1211
0.103
14.11
254
0.05670059
492
33981
9.377575849
0.01821104
S18
Male
54
28
1758 A4
Heat
Before
36
11.81
104.79
1.28
2.9108
149
126
6282
2.93
20.97
21.39999962
19.84000015
48
1.580000043
6.739999771
0.3435
1.3333
1.1539
0.236
10.47
135
0.05600513
394
31269
10.05226536
0.01675763
S18
Male
54
28
1759 A4
Heat
Before
101
15.24
148.81
1.82
4.1336
157
131
11682
5.52
63.11
23.26000023
21.69000053
59
1.850000024
8.770000458
0.6787
1.3918
1.1682
0.29
12.79
212
0.06048097
282
18827
9.219790791
0.010089734
S18
Male
54
28
1760 A4
Heat
Before
125
14.85
138.51
1.69
3.8475
150
128
7615
2.33
13.66
23.98999977
22.03000069
66
1.529999971
5.929999828
0.9025
1.3832
1.144
0.144
8.7
90
0.05754612
461
32972
9.542831209
0.017670299
S18
Male
54
28
1761 A4
Heat
Before
55
14.63
140.86
1.72
3.9128
160
136
7831
1.82
7.63
21.77000046
20.90999985
36
1.389999986
6.400000095
0.3905
1.3866
1.1161
0.056
13.05
228
0.05774671
421
30655
9.628633841
0.016428576
S18
Male
54
28
1762 A4
Heat
Before
105
14.73
146.16
1.78
4.06
160
129
24236
8.8
115.03
23.82999992
22.07999992
60
1.429999948
5.909999847
0.7184
1.384
1.1575
0.161
7.34
64
0.05793265
563
44863
10.07267955
0.024042903
S18
Male
54
28
1763 A4
Heat
Before
69
13.33
127.32
1.55
3.5367
152
129
18249
14.56
324.7
22.36000061
20.72999954
57
1.940000057
8.510000229
0.5419
1.3661
1.1192
0.074
14
249
0.05562738
576
42995
9.748836667
0.023041808
S18
Male
54
28
1765 A2
Cowhage
After
306
20.99
181.02
2.65
7.2408
141
113
25983
13.63
288
21.13999939
20.64999962
38
0.589999974
3.460000038
1.6904
1.45
1.1934
0.211
7.86
86
0.05705491
770
66651
10.49815623
0.035719492
S18
Male
54
28
1766 A2
Cowhage
After
394
22.39
191.5
2.8
7.66
132
109
16685
10.41
205.4
21.80999947
20.81999969
42
0.870000005
4.210000038
2.0574
1.461
1.1661
0.098
6.84
60
0.0593675
747
67441
10.72152985
0.036142867
S18
Male
54
28
1767 A2
Cowhage
After
454
23.85
210.9
3.09
8.436
137
106
26484
12.28
230.05
21.82999992
20.98999977
42
0.610000014
3.710000038
2.1527
1.477
1.2047
0.375
13.79
269
0.05816765
672
60245
10.68392737
0.032286399
S18
Male
54
28
1768 A2
Cowhage
After
336
21.81
193.21
2.83
7.7284
139
113
23046
11.08
192.07
21.19000053
20.15999985
39
0.910000026
4.599999905
1.739
1.4597
1.1782
0.175
9.17
123
0.05967423
681
61712
10.74153417
0.033072591
S18
Male
54
28
1769 A2
Cowhage
After
350
22.81
196.88
2.88
7.8752
138
112
17898
9.32
162.51
20.97999954
20.19000053
35
0.769999981
4.28000021
1.7777
1.4677
1.1842
0.222
10.28
149
0.05952563
712
63055
10.618785
0.03379233
S18
Male
54
28
1770 A1
Capsaicin
After
39
14.03
140.37
1.71
3.8992
164
140
9491
3.15
21.35
21.29999924
20.87999916
26
1.24000001
6.940000057
0.2778
1.3823
1.1301
0.207
15.74
300
0.05914276
200
12195
8.811116912
0.006535524
S18
Male
54
28
1771 A1
Capsaicin
After
64
14.77
147.99
1.81
4.1108
169
136
18652
10.22
190.41
21.90999985
20.90999985
40
1.519999981
6.409999847
0.4325
1.3906
1.129
0.097
12.61
199
0.05713617
257
18528
9.580821936
0.009929495
S18
Male
54
28
1772 A1
Capsaicin
After
31
15.13
156.34
1.91
4.3428
174
143
11648
4.12
39.37
21.09000015
20.85000038
22
1.350000024
8.260000229
0.1983
1.4005
1.1272
0.117
10.35
128
0.05785139
156
9788
8.937987449
0.005245568
S18
Male
54
28
1773 A1
Capsaicin
After
65
15.16
155.11
1.89
4.3086
165
138
10172
2.45
12.19
21.86000061
21.07999992
36
1.320000052
5.900000095
0.4191
1.4012
1.1444
0.188
10.36
128
0.05681845
208
12485
8.742138148
0.00669094
S18
Male
54
28
1774 A1
Capsaicin
After
198
16.6
172.46
2.1
4.7906
164
131
20748
8.77
142.43
24.42000008
22.73999977
65
1.070000052
4.059999943
1.1481
1.4116
1.1507
0.214
13.26
234
0.05595974
319
22750
9.529067828
0.012192142
S18
Male
54
28
1775 A3
Histamine
After
278
22.29
244.46
2.98
6.7906
180
140
40808
10.65
180.11
24.61000061
23.79000092
44
1.120000005
5.21999979
1.1372
1.469
1.1792
0.237
9.94
124
0.05835579
583
49455
10.39264003
0.02650384
S18
Male
54
28
1776 A3
Histamine
After
414
23.27
247.04
3.01
6.8622
161
132
17343
6.38
102.66
25.28000069
24.34000015
54
0.870000005
4.53000021
1.6758
1.4766
1.1891
0.329
15.4
346
0.06042826
467
46574
11.26855914
0.02495986
S18
Male
54
28
1777 A3
Histamine
After
404
23.74
263.17
3.21
7.3103
172
136
51604
12.36
205.38
25.95000076
24.76000023
57
1.029999971
4.949999809
1.5351
1.4803
1.1967
0.257
8.28
88
0.05845388
503
49228
11.1629033
0.026382187
S18
Male
54
28
1778 A3
Histamine
After
493
24.96
269.83
3.29
7.4953
164
131
25909
8.52
146.7
26.04000092
25.04999924
55
0.720000029
3.970000029
1.8271
1.4877
1.1803
0.213
14.39
310
0.05907394
593
61670
11.50706819
0.033050083
S18
Male
54
28
1779 A3
Histamine
After
503
24.64
253.27
3.09
7.0353
158
126
36979
15.64
369.6
26.84000015
25.87000084
65
0.790000021
4.309999943
1.986
1.4776
1.1823
0.158
8.11
86
0.0594041
351
36035
11.43309374
0.019311817
S18
Male
54
28
1780 A4
Heat
After
741
27.44
299.59
3.66
8.3219
158
123
28898
9.21
153.29
27.87000084
27.04999924
58
0.660000026
3.869999886
2.4734
1.5015
1.1909
0.175
8.94
117
0.05559078
780
73050
10.91988006
0.039148833
S18
Male
54
28
1781 A4
Heat
After
864
29.53
337.99
4.12
9.3886
157
121
38991
11.09
189.44
27.80999947
27.03000069
59
0.629999995
3.900000095
2.5563
1.5188
1.185
0.148
8.27
100
0.05848243
855
82255
11.06759237
0.044081961
S18
Male
54
28
1782 A4
Heat
After
891
29.66
334.65
4.08
9.2958
157
123
42143
11.84
201.79
27.96999931
27.12000084
58
0.689999998
4.090000153
2.6625
1.5179
1.1992
0.313
12.6
221
0.05789312
768
73120
11.01013238
0.039186347
S18
Male
54
28
1783 A4
Heat
After
894
29.83
335.03
4.09
9.3064
154
120
33809
10.93
186.91
27.67000008
26.71999931
57
0.670000017
4.110000134
2.6684
1.5205
1.2035
0.283
8.39
87
0.05909737
749
67718
10.72917211
0.036291317
S18
Male
54
28
1784 A4
Heat
After
864
29.21
330.72
4.04
9.1867
156
122
34628
13.05
265.56
27.51000023
26.69000053
58
0.74000001
4.380000114
2.6125
1.518
1.2181
0.481
13.55
265
0.05828038
658
58673
10.65519151
0.031443935
S18
Male
54
28
1785 P2
Control
After
79
15.41
153.38
1.87
4.2606
162
135
9589
2.48
12.92
22.45999908
21.54999924
41
1.600000024
7.599999905
0.5151
1.3995
1.1249
0.071
8.96
95
0.05961347
244
16388
9.247474103
0.008782629
==PAGE:65==
S18
Male
54
28
1786 P2
Control
After
128
16.5
167.63
2.05
4.6564
161
132
9756
1.76
7.43
22.95999908
21.87000084
43
1.210000038
5.360000134
0.7636
1.4123
1.1416
0.164
11.35
164
0.06026647
301
21842
9.61209408
0.011705528
S18
Male
54
28
1787 P2
Control
After
105
15.6
156.82
1.91
4.3561
158
132
8026
2.1
12.19
22.70999908
21.60000038
45
1.470000029
6.110000134
0.6696
1.4043
1.1471
0.237
14.47
251
0.05967204
254
17683
9.414910036
0.009476644
S18
Male
54
28
1788 P2
Control
After
109
16.08
173.48
2.12
4.8189
172
138
24412
9.17
126.08
22.45999908
21.28000069
47
1.5
6.690000057
0.6283
1.4121
1.1379
0.118
11.27
178
0.0602899
282
19334
9.343107855
0.010361445
S18
Male
54
28
1789 P2
Control
After
98
16.01
167.33
2.04
4.6481
170
140
19902
10.69
207.95
22.57999992
21.5
42
1.279999971
5.610000134
0.5857
1.4103
1.1372
0.117
13.32
226
0.06025183
274
18658
9.311342943
0.009999164
S18
Male
54
28
1790 P1
Control
After
52
14.95
145.64
1.78
4.0456
165
138
8324
2.48
15.61
21.94000053
21.28000069
32
1.179999948
6.329999924
0.357
1.3918
1.1357
0.129
10.44
131
0.06001757
254
19609
9.914388302
0.010508822
S18
Male
54
28
1791 P1
Control
After
66
14.64
135.81
1.66
3.7725
161
136
8141
1.65
7.02
22.64999962
21.37999916
46
1.50999999
6.849999905
0.486
1.3788
1.1354
0.109
11.96
181
0.058235
333
25919
9.955018316
0.013890467
S19
Male
41
29
1796 A1
Capsaicin
Before
94
14.63
136.64
1.67
3.7956
172
135
51048
16.97
374.96
24.43000031
23.38999939
54
0.959999979
4.079999924
0.6879
1.3713
1.148
0.122
8.14
79
0.05802123
477
39748
10.30038625
0.021301681
S19
Male
41
29
1797 A1
Capsaicin
Before
162
17.04
155.56
1.9
4.3211
166
130
13933
1.92
8.14
25.14999962
24.29000092
56
0.860000014
4.690000057
1.0414
1.4022
1.1926
0.233
8.83
106
0.05634188
663
61302
10.85014687
0.032852865
S19
Male
41
29
1798 A1
Capsaicin
Before
134
16.61
148.12
1.81
4.1144
165
137
10637
1.89
9.05
24.95999908
23.94000053
53
1.00999999
4.699999809
0.9047
1.396
1.1715
0.233
9.71
114
0.05744876
719
65036
10.73167533
0.034853984
S19
Male
41
29
1799 A1
Capsaicin
Before
91
14.97
133.21
1.63
3.7003
170
142
12315
2.61
17.44
24.95999908
23.75
51
0.879999995
3.890000105
0.6831
1.3756
1.1461
0.099
9.26
117
0.05753514
818
73997
10.73211861
0.039656348
S19
Male
41
29
1800 A1
Capsaicin
Before
96
14.75
140.61
1.72
3.9058
173
135
23750
11.11
215.26
24.15999985
22.89999962
48
1.24000001
5.269999981
0.6827
1.3792
1.1809
0.201
6.96
61
0.05766765
835
69750
10.31297411
0.037380303
S19
Male
41
29
1801 P1
Control
Before
56
11.61
103.52
1.26
2.8756
155
124
17701
10.66
182.23
23.21999931
21.63999939
61
1.730000019
7.559999943
0.541
1.3259
1.1253
0.139
20
460
0.05712153
470
37343
10.05797919
0.020012798
S19
Male
41
29
1802 P1
Control
Before
62
12.97
116.21
1.42
3.2281
166
140
22810
13.3
268.89
23.42000008
21.85000038
52
1.279999971
5.239999771
0.5335
1.347
1.1347
0.073
8.1
83
0.05705784
554
42811
9.919227777
0.022943199
S19
Male
41
29
1803 P1
Control
Before
72
13.06
113.63
1.39
3.1564
158
131
23880
10.8
163.12
24.06999969
22.03000069
70
1.50999999
6.090000153
0.6336
1.3439
1.1351
0.126
16.83
349
0.05740703
656
54258
10.26207136
0.029077856
S19
Male
41
29
1804 P1
Control
Before
100
14.85
131.76
1.61
3.66
163
130
32744
14.43
304.13
24.77000046
22.70000076
72
1.190000057
4.480000019
0.759
1.3667
1.1488
0.084
9.54
122
0.05691655
790
64580
10.2021225
0.034609605
S19
Male
41
29
1805 P1
Control
Before
92
13.77
120.91
1.48
3.3586
160
136
14974
6.05
73.97
24.59000015
22.85000038
67
1.100000024
4.110000134
0.7609
1.3567
1.157
0.111
9.6
122
0.05614349
744
61072
10.22326605
0.032729603
S19
Male
41
29
1806 A2
Heat
Before
85
12.16
107.38
1.31
2.9828
163
127
19183
7.31
89.18
23.92000008
22.62999916
57
1.149999976
5.099999905
0.7916
1.3346
1.1425
0.086
6.92
58
0.05641801
537
41511
9.920864414
0.022246505
S19
Male
41
29
1807 A2
Heat
Before
80
11.92
105.15
1.28
2.9208
159
128
27018
13.52
268.68
24.23999977
22.62999916
65
1.019999981
4.239999771
0.7608
1.3278
1.1755
0.932
18.71
393
0.05709297
564
44197
9.988767464
0.023685982
S19
Male
41
29
1808 A2
Heat
Before
60
13.01
118.96
1.45
3.3044
159
135
7576
1.65
6.99
22.92000008
22.11000061
42
1.139999986
5.25
0.5044
1.3564
1.1461
0.109
7.43
63
0.05762226
650
51323
10.02661636
0.027504936
S19
Male
41
29
1809 A2
Heat
Before
46
12.78
116.77
1.42
3.2436
161
134
10200
2.88
17.74
22.54999924
21.54000092
40
1.00999999
4.900000095
0.3939
1.3512
1.1232
0.054
10.33
147
0.05843778
555
44715
10.12826802
0.023963588
S19
Male
41
29
1810 A2
Heat
Before
88
13.47
119.83
1.46
3.3286
154
130
9202
2.5
14.74
23.59000015
22.10000038
52
1.080000043
4.360000134
0.7344
1.3577
1.1533
0.185
12.3
199
0.056194
627
50791
10.15581242
0.027219827
S19
Male
41
29
1811 A3
Histamine
Before
34
10.72
87.61
1.07
2.4336
149
124
10202
5.03
47.4
23.18000031
21.95000076
54
1.49000001
6.349999905
0.3881
1.3012
1.1293
0.128
10.23
118
0.05749854
376
29289
9.958946719
0.015696512
S19
Male
41
29
1812 A3
Histamine
Before
30
9.87
86.26
1.05
2.3961
151
129
19746
16.34
340.68
21.84000015
20.39999962
45
1.320000052
5.190000057
0.3478
1.2943
1.1099
0.039
12.17
202
0.05663909
510
39374
9.91458955
0.021101248
S19
Male
41
29
1813 A3
Histamine
Before
51
11.68
108.16
1.32
3.0044
164
129
40921
10.89
144.96
23.18000031
21.70000076
53
1.299999952
4.96999979
0.4715
1.327
1.1276
0.064
8.45
85
0.05711274
584
48528
10.28596003
0.026007044
S19
Male
41
29
1814 A3
Histamine
Before
48
10.65
92.94
1.13
2.5817
148
125
7307
3.03
19.66
22.64999962
21.21999931
51
1.190000057
4.789999962
0.5165
1.3124
1.1185
0.059
9.14
100
0.05590044
617
55365
10.688829
0.029671118
S19
Male
41
29
1815 A3
Histamine
Before
40
10.56
97.66
1.19
2.7128
160
127
45289
14.45
242.45
21.95000076
20.77000046
45
1.779999971
8.890000343
0.4096
1.3078
1.1407
0.127
9.14
104
0.05720425
497
40201
10.14834664
0.021544452
S19
Male
41
29
1816 P2
Control
Before
23
10.19
96.84
1.18
2.69
158
133
13400
10.68
187.71
21.61000061
20.62000084
38
1.899999976
9.140000343
0.2375
1.3138
1.1273
0.107
8.4
80
0.0605798
186
12141
9.116451309
0.006506584
S19
Male
41
29
1817 P2
Control
Before
88
13.81
124.44
1.52
3.4567
158
131
10271
2.41
11.85
23.72999954
22.18000031
57
1.299999952
5.110000134
0.7072
1.3656
1.1354
0.06
7.22
69
0.0607716
480
38096
10.05250111
0.020416344
S19
Male
41
29
1818 P2
Control
Before
142
15.62
152.17
1.86
4.2269
175
132
60515
12.85
203.7
24.78000069
23.20000076
60
1
4.139999866
0.9332
1.386
1.1724
0.921
25.78
719
0.06115666
542
45028
10.28482117
0.02413133
S19
Male
41
29
1819 P2
Control
Before
91
13.84
126.27
1.54
3.5075
163
134
9611
1.99
9.15
24.04000092
22.68000031
53
1.340000033
5.670000076
0.7207
1.3649
1.1712
0.226
11.38
178
0.06028258
503
40509
10.12620763
0.021709515
S19
Male
41
29
1820 P2
Control
Before
91
14.51
133.52
1.63
3.7089
168
134
22725
11.43
224.29
23.79000092
22.60000038
47
0.939999998
4.340000153
0.6815
1.3727
1.1414
0.081
7.51
67
0.06056369
489
40721
10.29697947
0.02182313
S19
Male
41
29
1821 A4
Cowhage
Before
84
12.94
116.24
1.42
3.2289
155
129
10942
4.25
36.84
23.39999962
21.5
64
1.50999999
6.070000172
0.7226
1.3483
1.1438
0.21
16.13
320
0.06157687
473
34064
9.575739237
0.018255522
S19
Male
41
29
1822 A4
Cowhage
Before
32
13.33
123.81
1.51
3.4392
159
132
8012
2.97
20.47
21.60000038
20.90999985
29
1.49000001
8.31000042
0.2585
1.3613
1.1147
0.045
9.29
102
0.06071962
612
49463
10.14424139
0.026508128
S19
Male
41
29
1823 A4
Cowhage
Before
80
13.45
129.27
1.58
3.5908
156
132
7842
1.77
8.03
22.23999977
21.56999969
39
1.360000014
6.559999943
0.6189
1.3706
1.1317
0.09
8.06
76
0.05889751
739
60810
10.23576583
0.032589193
S19
Male
41
29
1824 A4
Cowhage
Before
18
11.92
110.63
1.35
3.0731
159
137
7069
2.01
10.19
21.54999924
21.17000008
28
1.299999952
6.869999886
0.1627
1.3426
1.1137
0.089
12.43
174
0.0612694
578
42646
9.692376845
0.022854773
S19
Male
41
29
1825 A4
Cowhage
Before
58
14.01
130.32
1.59
3.62
161
138
7941
2.31
14.68
22.55999947
21.82999992
37
1.190000057
5.659999847
0.4451
1.3717
1.1263
0.074
8.64
87
0.06120132
655
52778
10.12886712
0.028284697
S19
Male
41
29
1826 A4
Cowhage
After
48
13.52
124.86
1.52
3.4683
157
131
7578
1.69
6.85
22.29999924
21.27000046
42
1.659999967
8.109999657
0.3844
1.3656
1.1163
0.042
8.53
92
0.05961274
544
42225
9.941237253
0.022629151
S19
Male
41
29
1827 A4
Cowhage
After
68
13.15
119.88
1.46
3.33
148
129
6998
2.21
11.15
22.37000084
20.98999977
48
1.559999943
7.550000191
0.5672
1.3565
1.1274
0.079
9.92
119
0.05916691
703
57251
10.18284036
0.03068186
S19
Male
41
29
1828 A4
Cowhage
After
17
11.65
107.85
1.32
2.9958
155
132
7433
2.33
12.01
21.18000031
20.36000061
38
1.960000038
10.65999985
0.1576
1.3397
1.1103
0.042
8.1
79
0.05609151
560
47019
10.3394572
0.025198343
S19
Male
41
29
1829 A4
Cowhage
After
29
12.37
115.19
1.41
3.1997
157
131
15253
8.95
129.74
22
21.26000023
39
1.49000001
7.139999866
0.2518
1.3468
1.1069
0.039
9.81
119
0.05915227
603
49294
10.20219062
0.026417558
S19
Male
41
29
1830 A4
Cowhage
After
36
12.48
115.41
1.41
3.2058
154
132
10268
9.62
173.9
21.31999969
20.43000031
38
1.480000019
7.630000114
0.3119
1.3506
1.1185
0.06
8.55
83
0.05825623
626
51865
10.27081919
0.027795404
S19
Male
41
29
1831 A2
Heat
After
1328
35.07
310.03
4.54
12.4012
116
92
11761
5.77
78.76
25.06999969
24.54999924
42
0.400000006
3.890000105
4.2835
1.5412
1.1899
0.167
7.84
79
0.0564063
519
52795
11.38066861
0.028293808
S19
Male
41
29
1832 A2
Heat
After
1386
34.86
316.3
4.63
12.652
115
92
13996
6.73
89.35
25.12000084
24.70000076
41
0.330000013
3.74000001
4.3819
1.5396
1.1819
0.127
8.16
96
0.05693778
725
84245
12.16348779
0.045148439
S19
Male
41
29
1833 A2
Heat
After
1267
33.6
298.45
4.37
11.938
115
91
13866
8.81
162.22
24.70000076
24.23999977
42
0.409999996
3.839999914
4.2453
1.5335
1.2097
1.159
38.74
1746
0.05945388
810
91962
12.02310815
0.04928412
S19
Male
41
29
1834 A2
Heat
After
1388
35.16
315.1
4.61
12.604
116
91
20129
13.57
307.11
24.87000084
24.40999985
45
0.330000013
3.970000029
4.405
1.5412
1.1808
0.124
8.49
110
0.05657541
622
62890
11.346206
0.033703903
S19
Male
41
29
1835 A2
Heat
After
1081
32.52
300.94
4.41
12.0376
130
97
32996
12.35
229.27
24.59000015
24.14999962
42
0.479999989
4.260000229
3.5921
1.5276
1.178
0.105
7.93
93
0.05706442
685
72301
11.59262869
0.03874743
S19
Male
41
29
1836 A1
Capsaicin
After
27
11.77
96.86
1.18
2.6906
158
129
43433
19.48
442.3
22.71999931
21.47999954
44
1.639999986
7.880000114
0.2788
1.3243
1.1444
0.186
11.8
174
0.05866984
470
40544
10.48019653
0.021728272
S19
Male
41
29
1837 A1
Capsaicin
After
130
17
160.48
1.96
4.4578
166
130
27380
9.15
125.29
24.34000015
23.18000031
53
1.289999962
6.710000038
0.8101
1.4033
1.1397
0.112
13.21
222
0.05898902
548
51891
10.98021389
0.027809337
S19
Male
41
29
1838 A1
Capsaicin
After
192
18.4
170.11
2.08
4.7253
156
128
12109
2.72
18.38
25.10000038
24.32999992
46
0.829999983
4.440000057
1.1287
1.4185
1.206
0.407
9.4
112
0.05966179
689
70553
11.41834579
0.037810645
S19
Male
41
29
1839 A1
Capsaicin
After
530
25.87
254.33
3.1
7.0647
157
129
18454
6.11
89.22
27.69000053
26.98999977
60
0.689999998
3.890000105
2.0839
1.482
1.1949
0.209
9.46
135
0.0579041
819
93926
12.08386938
0.050336664
S19
Male
41
29
1840 A1
Capsaicin
After
625
28.14
286.59
3.5
7.9608
164
127
43211
12.92
254.87
28.45000076
27.81999969
58
0.600000024
4.050000191
2.1808
1.4954
1.2235
0.334
9.24
115
0.05757101
803
93738
12.19144344
0.050235911
S19
Male
41
29
1841 P1
Control
After
75
12.33
108.32
1.32
3.0089
169
128
80162
14.41
237.58
24.55999947
23.06999969
68
1.029999971
4.110000134
0.6924
1.3244
1.1367
0.165
16.12
320
0.05612079
628
51179
10.1864096
0.027427764
S19
Male
41
29
1842 P1
Control
After
34
11.51
100.54
1.23
2.7928
150
128
6741
2.64
15.43
22.01000023
20.80999947
47
1.799999952
8.109999657
0.3382
1.3283
1.1162
0.06
13.38
231
0.05586237
456
34427
9.804427236
0.01845006
S19
Male
41
29
1843 P1
Control
After
35
12.39
113.63
1.39
3.1564
157
134
6866
1.99
9.5
22
20.89999962
39
1.370000005
6
0.308
1.3479
1.1095
0.033
8.49
92
0.05640923
525
39786
9.822918636
0.021322046
S19
Male
41
29
1844 P1
Control
After
66
12.97
116.63
1.42
3.2397
153
132
6551
1.54
6.63
22.70000076
21.26000023
49
1.159999967
4.570000172
0.5659
1.3547
1.1351
0.083
8.67
88
0.05489239
629
48099
9.867286999
0.025777135
S19
Male
41
29
1845 P1
Control
After
35
11.53
98.53
1.2
2.7369
152
129
7296
2.23
11.24
21.86000061
20.80999947
38
1.299999952
5.389999866
0.3552
1.3245
1.1319
0.087
9.56
119
0.05630967
452
34377
9.840560347
0.018423264
S19
Male
41
29
1846 A3
Histamine
After
1036
32.18
287.63
4.21
11.5052
125
98
24325
11.14
190.37
24.34000015
23.95999908
40
0.50999999
4.349999905
3.6018
1.5241
1.192
0.144
6.89
68
0.05918888
551
63044
12.06982963
0.033786434
S19
Male
41
29
1847 A3
Histamine
After
1148
32.75
302.78
4.43
12.1112
123
94
25610
12.83
264.02
24.26000023
23.70999908
40
0.460000008
3.970000029
3.7915
1.531
1.1993
0.237
11.93
222
0.05907175
592
59867
11.34718025
0.032083822
S19
Male
41
29
1848 A3
Histamine
After
1096
32.37
285.43
4.18
11.4172
122
95
19769
12.31
270.19
24.57999992
24.18000031
43
0.449999988
4.090000153
3.8398
1.5254
1.2006
0.229
9.54
121
0.05897145
610
70076
12.09413449
0.037555012
S19
Male
41
29
1849 A3
Histamine
After
1075
32.12
279.34
4.09
11.1736
121
95
13172
5.65
72.02
24.70999908
24.32999992
40
0.430000007
3.859999895
3.8484
1.5232
1.1957
0.196
11.06
203
0.06038946
611
65963
11.72423875
0.03535078
S19
Male
41
29
1850 A3
Histamine
After
1094
32.08
280.3
4.1
11.212
120
95
16579
12.96
341.62
24.51000023
24.23999977
43
0.389999986
4.010000229
3.903
1.524
1.1861
0.144
8
89
0.06023866
524
65135
12.58046299
0.03490704
S19
Male
41
29
1852 P2
Control
After
130
13.23
99.69
1.46
3.9876
135
102
38979
11.23
156.56
21.27000046
20.28000069
45
0.839999974
3.660000086
1.304
1.3439
1.1382
0.057
6.54
53
0.06093192
671
59122
10.59176552
0.031684563
S19
Male
41
29
1853 P2
Control
After
162
14.72
110.17
1.61
4.4068
129
107
10919
7.52
115.34
21.11000061
20.01000023
45
0.879999995
4.070000172
1.4705
1.3709
1.163
0.144
9.77
137
0.05785359
728
64936
10.65693056
0.034800392
S19
Male
41
29
1854 P2
Control
After
61
10.97
70.43
1.03
2.8172
130
108
18240
14.44
282.26
21.07999992
19.61000061
46
1.269999981
5.110000134
0.8661
1.2976
1.1403
0.13
14.05
248
0.06143705
417
33560
10.12273827
0.017985419
S19
Male
41
29
1855 P2
Control
After
95
14.19
99.2
1.45
3.968
135
113
7180
1.96
9.42
21.12999916
19.92000008
43
1.059999943
4.639999866
0.9577
1.3597
1.1527
0.159
15.96
332
0.0602694
611
53301
10.53906621
0.028564982
S19
Male
41
29
1856 P2
Control
After
80
12.48
89.33
1.31
3.5732
138
110
28183
10.04
127.81
21
19.86000061
46
1.080000043
4.639999866
0.8956
1.3291
1.1503
0.092
6.63
54
0.0597533
509
43867
10.47526782
0.023509129
==PAGE:66==
A.6
Additional Figures
The PP graphs include ”DEJ_Tort”, which is not a meaningful parameter and can be dis­
regarded.
Figure A.5: The percent change in all RP metrics for the treatments compared
to the control
Assessing the stimulated dynamic response of cutaneous micro vasculature using OCTA
59
==PAGE:67==
Figure A.6: The percent change in all RP metrics for the treatments by participant
age with a linear regression trend line for each treatment.
60
Assessing the stimulated dynamic response of cutaneous micro vasculature using OCTA
==PAGE:68==
Figure A.7: The significance of the percent change in all RP metrics for the treat­
ments compared to the control where a p­value <0.05 is considered significant.
Figure A.8: The Cohen’s d effect size of the treatments on all metrics where >0.8
is considered a large effect
Assessing the stimulated dynamic response of cutaneous micro vasculature using OCTA
61
==PAGE:69==
Figure A.9: The significance of the percent change in all RP metrics for age and
treatment interaction compared to the control where a p­value <0.05 is consid­
ered significant.
Figure A.10: The partial eta squared effect size of age’s interaction effect on all
RP metrics where >0.14 is considered a large effect.
62
Assessing the stimulated dynamic response of cutaneous micro vasculature using OCTA
==PAGE:70==
Figure A.11: The partial eta squared effect size of age’s interaction effect on all
PP metrics where >0.14 is considered a large effect.
Assessing the stimulated dynamic response of cutaneous micro vasculature using OCTA
63
==PAGE:71==
Figure A.12: The significance of the percent change in all RP metrics for sex and
treatment interaction compared to the control where a p­value <0.05 is consid­
ered significant.
Figure A.13: The significance of the percent change in all PP metrics for sex and
treatment interaction compared to the control where a p­value <0.05 is consid­
ered significant.
64
Assessing the stimulated dynamic response of cutaneous micro vasculature using OCTA
==PAGE:72==
Figure A.14: The partial eta squared effect size of sex’s interaction effect on all
RP metrics where >0.14 is considered a large effect.
Figure A.15: The partial eta squared effect size of sex’s interaction effect on all
PP metrics where >0.14 is considered a large effect.
Assessing the stimulated dynamic response of cutaneous micro vasculature using OCTA
65
==PAGE:73==
Figure A.16: The significance of the percent change in all RP metrics for BMI
and treatment interaction compared to the control where a p­value <0.05 is con­
sidered significant.
Figure A.17: The significance of the percent change in all PP metrics for BMI
and treatment interaction compared to the control where a p­value <0.05 is con­
sidered significant.
66
Assessing the stimulated dynamic response of cutaneous micro vasculature using OCTA
==PAGE:74==
Figure A.18: The partial eta squared effect size of BMI’s interaction effect on all
RP metrics where >0.14 is considered a large effect.
Figure A.19: The partial eta squared effect size of BMI’s interaction effect on all
PP metrics where >0.14 is considered a large effect.
Assessing the stimulated dynamic response of cutaneous micro vasculature using OCTA
67
==PAGE:75==
Figure A.20: The significance of the percent change in all RP metrics for treat­
ment area and treatment interaction compared to the control where a p­value
<0.05 is considered significant.
Figure A.21: The significance of the percent change in all PP metrics for treat­
ment area and treatment interaction compared to the control where a p­value
<0.05 is considered significant.
68
Assessing the stimulated dynamic response of cutaneous micro vasculature using OCTA
==PAGE:76==
Figure A.22: The partial eta squared effect size of areas’s interaction effect on
all RP metrics where >0.14 is considered a large effect.
Assessing the stimulated dynamic response of cutaneous micro vasculature using OCTA
69
==PAGE:77==
Figure A.23: The partial eta squared effect size of areas’s interaction effect on
all PP metrics where >0.14 is considered a large effect.
70
Assessing the stimulated dynamic response of cutaneous micro vasculature using OCTA
==PAGE:78==
Figure A.24: The participants measured epidermis thickness by age. The mean
epidermis thickness of each recording is included.
Figure A.25: The intraclass correlation coefficients (ICC(3,1) for the control
recordings and all metrics. Values less than 0.5 indicate poor reliability, 0.50.75
indicates moderate reliability, 0.750.9 indicates good reliability, and >0.9 indi­
cates excellent reliability.
Assessing the stimulated dynamic response of cutaneous micro vasculature using OCTA
71
==PAGE:79==
Figure A.26: The intraclass correlation coefficients (ICC(3,1)) for the post treat­
ment recordings and all metrics. In this analysis, only the post treatment control
recordings were used for the control dataset.
72
Assessing the stimulated dynamic response of cutaneous micro vasculature using OCTA
==PAGE:80==
Assessing the stimulated dynamic response of cutaneous micro vasculature using OCTA
73
==PAGE:81==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Ørsteds Plads, Building 345C
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.healthtech.dtu.dk
