==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering (Bioinformatics)
Enabling Transfer Learning and Harmonization of
Electronic Health Record Data for Deep Learning
Prediction Models
Master thesis
Katja Naasunnguaq Jagd (s185395)
Main Supervisor: Professor Ole Winther
Section for Computational and RNA Biology, Depart-
ment of Biology, University of Copenhagen
and Section for Cognitive Systems, DTU Compute
Co-Supervisor: Rachael M. DeVries, PhD
University of Copenhagen with Novo Nordisk
Kongens Lyngby 2025
==PAGE:2==
DTU Health Tech
Department of Health Technology
Technical University of Denmark
Ørsteds Plads
Building 345C
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
healthtech-info@dtu.dk
www.healthtech.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Large-scale modeling of in-hospital time-series data, such as vital signs, lab results, and treatments
in critical care, remains underexplored. Most existing models in this field are developed using data
from a single hospital, limiting their ability to generalize across diverse clinical settings and capturing
institution-specific artifacts rather than true clinical patterns. To address these challenges, this study
presents a proof of concept for developing an early-stage foundation model for critical care time-series
data using pre-training through a self-supervised learning approach. To enable reproducible develop-
ment of a foundation model for clinical time-series data, this study builds on Yet Another ICU Bench-
mark (YAIB), a modular and extensible framework designed to support transparent benchmarking in
clinical machine learning. It also incorporates the Bi-Axial Attention Transformer (BAT), a model
architecture tailored to the challenges of irregular, multivariate EHR data. The model is pre-trained
on a large, harmonized, multi-center dataset combining MIMIC-IV and eICU using forecasting as a
self-supervised learning objective, and subsequently fine-tuned on the unseen MIMIC-III dataset for
mortality prediction. The pre-trained model consistently outperforms supervised baselines across mul-
tiple training set sizes up to 10,000 labeled samples. Fine-tuning only the classification head achieves
performance close to full model fine-tuning, suggesting that the learned representations are robust and
clinically meaningful. These results indicate that forecasting as a self-supervised learning task appears
effective for capturing temporal patterns that transfer well to downstream tasks such as mortality pre-
diction. While the model does not yet meet the scale or maturity of foundation models seen in other
domains, it demonstrates the feasibility and potential of this approach in the domain of critical care.
By supporting transparent benchmarking, modular experimentation, and scalable dataset integration,
this work lays the groundwork for future research into generalizable and data-eﬀicient models in critical
care. The results highlight the promise of self-supervised pretraining on large, diverse ICU datasets to
build transferable patient representations across a range of clinical tasks.
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Health Tech in fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring an M.Sc.
in Engineering from the Technical University of Denmark. The project was carried out in the period
7th of February 2025 to 7th of July 2025. The project was supervised by Main Supervisor Professor
Ole Winther and Co-Supervisor PhD student Rachael DeVries.
Katja Naasunnguaq Jagd
Kongens Lyngby, July 7, 2025
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
First off, I’d like to extend a big thank you to Ole Winther for being such a cheerful and positive
presence. Every time I come out of a meeting with him, I leave with a smile on my face after a good
laugh. I especially want to thank him for encouraging me to be more bold and direct in my approach
to this project. Even though he’s incredibly busy, he still managed to find time in his schedule for
multiple meetings, which I truly appreciate.
I also want to thank the lovely PhD students in his group, especially Rachael DeVries and the now-
graduated Felix Teufel.
Rachael has been an amazing support throughout this project as my day-to-day supervisor.
She’s
been both encouraging and very eﬀicient in her supervision. Every time I felt a bit behind or insuﬀi-
cient, she managed to boost my confidence in a very kind way. She’s an incredibly hardworking and
structured person, and it has been truly inspiring to work alongside her. As a woman, having such a
strong role model is especially uplifting, and she gives me a lot of hope for what my own future career
might look like.
A big thank you to Felix as well. He has helped out a few times during this project and many more
times in previous ones. If it weren’t for his excellent work as a teaching assistant in the Deep Learning
course at DTU, I might never have had the courage to pursue a special project with him as a supervisor,
and in doing so, discover Ole Winther’s group. He’s incredibly hardworking and inspiring, and I’m so
grateful for all the help he’s given me over the past two years.
I also want to thank my friends and family for their support during this time.
Special thanks to
my two recently adopted fluffballs, Alma and Arthur, for the much-needed playtime breaks during the
final week of writing. And most importantly, thank you to my fiancé, Matthew, for being so supportive
throughout the whole project.
Lastly, I want to express my gratitude to the Technical University of Denmark and the Danish state.
Not only is education free here, but you’re also supported financially to study, which is an incredible
privilege. I know how rare it is to have access to such opportunities, and I feel extremely lucky to be
able to pursue my education under these circumstances.
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
ii
Acknowledgements
iii
Contents
iv
List of Figures
vi
List of Tables
vii
Abbreviations
viii
1
Introduction
1
2
Theory
3
2.1
Deep learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Electronic Health Records . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Modeling Electronic Health Record data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Modeling sequence data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.5
Foundation models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Related work
10
3.1
Foundation models for critical care time series . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Yet Another ICU Benckmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4
Aim of study
13
5
Methods
14
5.1
Problem formulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
5.2
Datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
5.3
YAIB default settings
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
5.4
YAIB extensions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
5.5
Training and evaluation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.6
Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
6
Results
25
6.1
Data Distributions and Transferability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
==PAGE:7==
Contents
v
6.2
Zero-shot Clustering of Embeddings
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
6.3
Fine-tuning Foundation Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
7
Discussion
31
7.1
Discussion of results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
7.2
Discussion of design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
7.3
Discussion of Foundation Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
7.4
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
8
Conclusion
38
Appendix
38
A Notation
39
B Features
40
C Hyperparameters
42
C.1 Supervised Training
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
C.2 Self-Supervised Pretraining
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
C.3 Fine-Tuning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
Bibliography
44
==PAGE:8==
List of Figures
1
Artificial Intelligence, Machine Learning, and Deep Learning hierarchy . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Simple feedforward neural network and node computations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3
Example of Supervised, Unsupervised and Self-Supervised Learning
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
4
Multivariate clinical time-series . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
5
Bi-Axial Transformer architecture
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
6
Yet Another ICU Benchmark Pipeline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
7
Autoregressive-based Forecasting as Self-Supervised Learning objective . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
8
Cross-validation Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
9
t-SNE of harmonized and preprocessed clinical datasets
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
10
Single-dataset transfer performance heatmap
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
11
UMAP of embeddings from foundation model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
12
Clustering degree of embeddings measured as Adjusted Mutual Information . . . . . . . . .
29
13
Fine-tuning results of foundation model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
14
Future work overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
==PAGE:9==
List of Tables
1
Dataset Statistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2
Summary of notation used in dataset and learning objectives. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
3
Clinical Features and corresponding units . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4
Hyperparameters, training BAT on MIMIC-IV
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5
Hyperparameters, training BAT on eICU
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
6
Hyperparameters, training BAT on MIMIC-III . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
7
Hyperparameters, training Transformer on MIMIC-III . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
8
Hyperparameters, pretraining BAT on pooled MIMIC-IV + eICU . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
9
Hyperparameters, fine-tuning full BAT model on MIMIC-III
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
10
Hyperparameters, fine-tuning BAT classification head on MIMIC-III . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
==PAGE:10==
Abbreviations
Abbreviation
Meaning
AI
Artificial Intelligence
AMI
Adjusted Mutual Information
BAT
Bi-Axial Transformer
CNN
Convolutional Neural Network
CV
Computer Vision
DL
Deep Learning
EHR
Electronic Health Record
FM
Foundation Model
GRU
Gated Recurrent Unit
ICU
Intensive Care Unit
IMTS
Irregularly Sampled Multivariate Time Series
LSTM
Long Short-Term Memory
ML
Machine Learning
MTS
Multivariate Time Series
NLP
Natural Language Processing
RNN
Recurrent Neural Network
SSL
Self-Supervised Learning
SSP
Self-Supervised Pre-training
YAIB
Yet Another ICU Benchmark
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Over the past decade, the rapid digitalization of healthcare has led to a significant expansion in the
volume and detail of electronic health records (EHRs) [1]. This growth has enabled researchers to access
rich clinical data, including patient diagnoses, treatment histories, and laboratory test results, which
can be used to train machine learning (ML) models for diverse clinical applications [2, 3, 4]. Among
these methods, deep learning (DL) has emerged as a central technology for supporting clinical decision-
making [5], one area being the intensive care units (ICUs). In these settings, high-frequency physiological
data are continuously recorded from life-support systems, providing a dense and dynamic stream of
information [6]. As a result, DL models have been developed to predict a range of ICU outcomes,
including in-hospital mortality [7, 8], acute kidney injury [9, 10], and sepsis [11, 12].
Time-series
data plays a central role in these applications because it captures the temporal evolution of a patient’s
clinical state. These data are collected routinely during a patient’s stay and offer the potential to support
predictions of patient outcomes. They can also assist in recommending personalized treatments tailored
to a patient’s condition [13]. However, working with time-series data in the clinical domain presents a
number of challenges. The data are often sparse and incomplete because not all variables are recorded
for every patient. In addition, different measurements may be taken at varying frequencies, leading to
irregular and sporadic data points. Finally, acquiring labeled data for specific prediction tasks can be
diﬀicult and expensive, especially for rare conditions or new diseases [13]. Although modeling techniques
have advanced in recent years, the field still relies heavily on task-specific models with narrow objectives.
These models are typically trained on curated and annotated datasets to perform a single function. For
instance, a model may be built to detect pneumonia from imaging data but would not be capable of
adapting to other diagnostic tasks without retraining [12]. This approach limits scalability and makes
it diﬀicult to generalize across different tasks or settings. Foundation models (FMs) offer an alternative.
These are large models trained on broad and diverse datasets, and they can be adapted to a wide range of
downstream tasks with minimal additional training. This makes them especially valuable in healthcare,
where labeled data are limited and clinical settings vary significantly. FMs have already demonstrated
significant impact in fields such as natural language processing (NLP) [14, 15] and computer vision
(CV) [16]. In the medical domain, early developments show promise [17, 18, 19]. However, they have
not yet been widely adopted in clinical practice.
This is due in part to the diﬀiculty of accessing
large-scale and diverse medical datasets, as well as the complexity of clinical data and decision-making
[12]. One particularly promising direction is the development of FMs for critical care time-series data,
which remains a relatively unexplored research area [20]. Training such models requires datasets that
are both large and representative of different care environments. Most ICU datasets remain relatively
small compared to datasets used to train FMs in other domains. Most existing DL models in healthcare
are therefore developed using data from a single hospital [21]. This limits their ability to generalize,
as they may capture institution-specific practices rather than underlying clinical phenomena [22, 23].
For example, a model might associate specific diagnostic procedures with certain outcomes because of
==PAGE:12==
1 Introduction
2
how a hospital manages suspected cases, rather than learning patterns related to the biology of the
disease itself [11, 21]. As a result, these models often perform poorly when deployed in new hospitals
with different workflows. Creating FMs that generalize well for critical care time-series data will require
efforts to aggregate and harmonize data from many different institutions [20]. These types of multi-
center collaborations are still rare, in part due to technical, regulatory, and logistical challenges [5], as
well as limited understanding of how many hospitals are required to achieve robust model training [24].
In summary, critical care time-series data offers significant potential for building adaptive and scalable
AI models. By pooling data across multiple centers, researchers may be able to develop FMs that
generalize effectively to new clinical tasks and healthcare settings. These models could be fine-tuned
with relatively small amounts of labeled data, enabling more robust and flexible decision support in
critical care.
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 2
Theory
2.1
Deep learning
Artificial Intelligence (AI) is a broad field of computer science dedicated to creating systems capable of
performing tasks that typically require human intelligence, such as reasoning, learning, perception, and
decision-making [25]. A simple example of AI in everyday life is a basic robot vacuum, which uses pre-
programmed rules and sensors to navigate spaces and avoid obstacles, thereby demonstrating intelligent
behavior. Within this broad domain, one of the most prominent and rapidly evolving areas is ML, which
focuses on developing algorithms that enable computers to learn from and make predictions or decisions
based on data [26]. Rather than relying on hard coded rules, ML systems use statistical techniques
to identify patterns and improve their performance over time. A common example of ML in practice
is spam email filtering, where the system learns to classify messages by detecting patterns in labeled
training data. Building on the foundations of ML, DL has emerged as a particularly powerful approach.
DL employs artificial neural networks composed of multiple layers, which is why it is referred to as
”deep”, to model complex patterns and data representations. A key distinction of DL is its ability to
automatically extract and learn hierarchical features directly from raw input data, bypassing the need for
manual feature engineering that is often required in traditional ML methods [27]. A notable application
of DL is facial recognition, which identifies individuals by learning and differentiating complex patterns
in visual data [28]. The hierarchical relationship, where DL is within the domain of ML and ML within
the field of AI, is illustrated in Figure 1. As mentioned above, DL models are built upon artificial neural
Figure 1: Hierarchical relationship between Artificial Intelligence, Machine Learning, and Deep Learn-
ing.
==PAGE:14==
2.1 Deep learning
4
networks composed of multiple layers that enable them to learn increasingly abstract representations of
data. A neural network is a computational model inspired by the structure and functioning of the human
brain. It consists of layers of interconnected units called nodes or neurons, where each connection has
an associated weight that represents the importance of the signal being transmitted. These weighted
connections help determine how much influence one neuron has on another and are adjusted during
training to improve the model’s performance. An example of such a network is shown in Figure 2a,
which illustrates a simple feedforward neural network with an input layer, multiple hidden layers, and
an output layer, each composed of densely connected nodes. Data is processed as it flows from the
input layer, through one or more hidden layers, to the output layer, with each layer transforming the
data through these weighted connections and activation functions. To understand this process at the
level of a single node, Figure 2b shows a zoomed-in view of a neuron receiving three inputs x1, x2, and
x3 with corresponding weights w1, w2, and w3. Inside the node, the weighted sum z = P
i(wixi + b) is
computed, where b is a bias term. This sum is then passed through an activation function f(z), which
determines whether and how strongly a neuron activates, effectively controlling how much information
is passed on to the next layer. The result of this computation is the neuron’s output, which is forwarded
to the next layer in the network. [29].
(a) Feedforward Neural Network
(b) Single node computation
Figure 2: Illustration of a simple feedforward neural network and the internal computation of a single
node. (a) shows a fully connected feedforward neural network with an input layer, three hidden layers,
and an output layer. (b) shows a detailed view of one node, including its inputs, associated weights,
activation function, and output.
The goal of training a neural network is to find the parameters θ (which include all weights, w and
==PAGE:15==
2.1 Deep learning
5
biases, b) that minimize a loss function L. This can be expressed as the following optimization problem:
min
θ
1
n
n
X
i=1
L(fθ(xi), yi)
(2.1)
Here, n is the number of data points, (xi, yi) denotes the input-output pair for the i-th example, and
fθ(xi) is the model’s prediction. During training, the parameters θ are iteratively updated to minimize
the loss function using gradient-based optimization methods. The necessary gradients are computed
eﬀiciently via backpropagation, which propagates the error backward through the network using the
chain rule [30]. While the feedforward neural network illustrated in Figure 2 is one of the most basic and
widely used architectures, it represents only a small part of the broader landscape of neural network
models. Many other types of neural networks have been developed, each tailored to handle specific
kinds of data and learning tasks. For example, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) are particularly
well-suited for image and spatial data due to their ability to detect local patterns through convolutional
filters [31]. Recurrent neural networks (RNNs), along with their variants such as Long Short-Term
Memory (LSTM) networks and Gated Recurrent Units (GRUs), are designed to process sequential data
and capture temporal dependencies, making them useful for time series, speech, and language tasks [32].
More recently, transformer-based architectures have gained prominence for their ability to model long-
range dependencies in sequential data using attention mechanisms, and have become state-of-the-art in
many NLP applications [33]. Each of these architectures is specialized to exploit different structures in
the data, enabling more effective learning and better performance in their respective domains.
2.1.1
Supervised vs. Unsupervised Learning
ML tasks are typically divided into two main categories: supervised and unsupervised learning. In
supervised learning, the training data consist of input-output pairs (xi, yi), where xi is the input and
yi is the corresponding label. The model learns to predict yi from xi by minimizing a loss function
that measures the difference between its predictions and the true labels. For example, a supervised
model trained on images of cats and dogs receives each image along with a label indicating whether
it shows a cat or a dog. The model learns to associate patterns in the images with the correct labels.
This process is illustrated in Figure 3a. The optimization problem described in (2.1) belongs to the
supervised learning setting, as it explicitly depends on labeled data through the use of target values
yi. In contrast, unsupervised learning uses data that consist only of inputs xi, without any labels.
The aim is to discover structure or patterns within the data without explicit supervision. Using the
same image dataset in an unsupervised setting, a model might group similar images together based
on visual features [34]. It could, for instance, form separate clusters for cats and dogs without ever
being told what those categories represent, as shown in Figure 3b. A specific type of unsupervised
learning is known as self-supervised learning (SSL). In this approach, the model learns from unlabeled
data by automatically generating its own labels based on patterns within the data. Rather than relying
on externally provided or human-annotated labels, a pretext task is defined where part of the data is
treated as input and another part as the target to be predicted. These automatically created targets
act as surrogate labels, enabling the model to train in a supervised fashion without manual annotation.
This strategy allows the model to learn meaningful representations that can later be transferred to
downstream tasks [35]. Returning to the cat and dog image example, a SSL task might involve masking
a portion of an image and training the model to predict the missing part based on the visible pixels.
==PAGE:16==
2.2 Electronic Health Records
6
The model is not told whether the image is of a cat or a dog, but it learns to understand structure,
texture, and context within the image, as illustrated in Figure 3c. These patterns the model learns,
such as shapes, textures, or object parts, can be reused later for a supervised task like classifying images
of cats and dogs. Instead of starting the learning process from the beginning, the model only needs a
small amount of labeled data to adjust and improve its performance. This makes SSL especially useful
in situations where labeled data are limited or expensive to collect.
(a) Supervised Learning
(b) Unsupervised Learning
(c) Self-Supervised Learning
Figure 3:
Supervised, unsupervised, and self-supervised learning illustrated in each panel (left to
right), using cat and dog image examples. Example of model input and outputs are shown, and the
tasks are labeling, clustering and reconstruction, respectively.
2.2
Electronic Health Records
EHRs contain a variety of data types that together provide a comprehensive view of a patient’s medical
history. These types, known as modalities, include structured data such as demographics, diagnoses,
medications, vital signs, and laboratory results. They also include unstructured data such as clinical
notes written by healthcare providers.
Each modality differs in how it is represented, the level of
clinical detail it provides, and whether it changes over time. For example, demographics are usually
constant and simple to encode, while clinical notes are more complex. Vital signs and laboratory results
can appear as individual measurements or as sequences over time, depending on the clinical context
[36]. Some modalities in EHRs, such as vital signs and laboratory results, are recorded repeatedly
throughout a patient’s care. These repeated measurements introduce a temporal dimension to the data,
==PAGE:17==
2.3 Modeling Electronic Health Record data
7
which effectively makes them time-series data. In this context, multivariate time-series (MTS) data refer
to sequences of clinical measurements collected over time across multiple physiological variables for each
patient [37]. These data are typically gathered at different and often irregular intervals, reflecting the
dynamic and nonuniform nature of real world medical practice. Each variable may be measured at its
own frequency, resulting in sparse and unevenly spaced records [38]. Figure 4 illustrates an example
of such MTS, showing four clinical variables: heart rate, blood pressure, temperature, and C-reactive
protein. It is clear from the figure that the measurements are irregularly sampled, with each variable
recorded at varying time points. This type of data is reffered to as irregularly sampled multivariate
time-series (IMTS) data.
Figure 4: Multivariate clinical time series with irregularly sampled patient observations illustrating
the high number of missing values. This figure is inspired from Figure 1 in Tipirneni and Reddy [13]
2.3
Modeling Electronic Health Record data
Given the diversity in data types and their temporal characteristics, modeling EHR data requires ap-
proaches tailored to the specific structure and behavior of each modality. Structured, unstructured,
and time series data each come with distinct challenges such as missing values, irregular timing, or
complex clinical context. Because of this heterogeneity, there is no single model that can effectively
handle all types of EHR data. Instead, depending on which modalities are being modeled, either indi-
vidually or in combination, different modeling strategies are needed to capture their unique properties
and relationships [39].
2.4
Modeling sequence data
As mentioned in Section 2.2, measurements of vital signs, laboratory results, and clinical events across
visits have an inherent temporal structure.
These aspects of EHR data reflect the progression of
a patient’s health over time and are well-suited to models that can handle sequential data.
Such
models are capable of learning temporal dependencies and making predictions about future outcomes.
Classical approaches include RNNs and their gated variants, such as LSTMs and GRUs, which process
sequences step by step [40] [41]. More recently, Transformer-based models have been adopted for their
==PAGE:18==
2.4 Modeling sequence data
8
ability to capture long-range dependencies and support eﬀicient parallel computation [42, 43, 44]. The
Transformer is a model architecture originally developed for machine translation, but has since been
successfully applied to many other types of sequence data, such as audio and biological sequences
[45, 46].
It consists of an encoder, which processes the entire input sequence and creates a set of
representations that capture its structure and meaning, and a decoder, which generates the output
sequence step by step using those representations. Unlike earlier models that relied on recurrence or
convolution, the Transformer uses only attention mechanisms. At the heart of this is self-attention,
which allows each element in a sequence to consider all others, capturing relationships regardless of
distance. To strengthen this process, the model uses multi-head attention, which enables it to focus
on different types of relationships simultaneously, making it highly effective and adaptable across a
wide range of sequence-based tasks [33]. However, despite their effectiveness, many existing sequence
models, including both recurrent and Transformer-based architectures, are designed with assumptions
that align more closely with regularly sampled time series. These models often rely on strong temporal
regularity or periodic patterns, which can be beneficial for domains like speech or sensor data but
become problematic when applied to irregular and sparse sequences [47, 48]. In the context of EHRs,
where measurements are taken at irregular intervals and exhibit missingness, such assumptions may
lead to degraded performance. Standard approaches often rely on imputation to fill in missing values,
but this can introduce bias or obscure temporal patterns [49]. As a result, specialized adaptations or
architectures are needed to properly handle the unique challenges posed by IMTS.
2.4.1
Bi-Axial Transformer
One Transformer-based model designed for IMTS data is Bi-Axial Transformer (BAT) introduced in
the work of DeVries et al. [50]. Unlike classical Transformers that use an encoder-decoder structure for
sequence generation, BAT relies solely on encoder-style self-attention to model dependencies across both
the temporal and feature (sensor) dimensions. This axial attention structure allows BAT to capture
rich interactions within and across time steps and modalities. To address common challenges in IMTS
data, such as missing values and heterogeneous input types, BAT incorporates missingness indicators
directly into its input embeddings. Figure 5 illustrates the overall architecture of BAT. The input to
the model is a MTS of shape D × T, where D is the number of features and T is the number of time
steps. Each input is embedded using a combination of the observed value (including missingness), a
learned feature identity embedding, and a continuous time-based positional encoding. This results in
an embedded tensor of shape D × T × E, where E is the embedding dimension. The embedded input
is then processed by bi-axial attention layers, which apply self-attention separately along the time and
feature dimensions. The output from the attention layers is subsequently pooled and concatenated
with the static features, P, which include non-time-varying demographic variables such as age and sex.
Depending on the prediction task, the BAT model can have different prediction heads attached. Two
prediction types are presented: one for a supervised learning setup (binary classification) and another
for a self-supervised setup (forecasting).
==PAGE:19==
2.5 Foundation models
9
Figure 5: Overview of the Bi-Axial Transformer (BAT) architecture. (a) Shows the full model archi-
tecture and data representation, and (b) Shows an attention track indicated by the blue arrows. D is
the number of time-varying features, T the number of time steps, E the embedding size, and P the
static features. The model supports both binary classification and forecasting via separate prediction
heads. This figure is adapted from Figure 2 in DeVries et al. [50]
2.5
Foundation models
FMs represent a paradigm shift in the development of ML systems. Unlike traditional approaches that
require building a bespoke model for each specific task, FMs enable the reuse of a single, pretrained
model across a wide range of downstream applications with minimal adaptation or retraining [51]. They
originated in NLP with models such as GPT [14] and LLaMA [15], and have since gained attention
for their broad capabilities across domains like CV [16].
Despite this momentum, there has been
surprisingly little focus on extending FM approaches to time series data [52]. In the clinical domain,
most existing FMs have been developed for structured EHR such as billing codes [53] and medical
reports [54], rather than the complex, high-frequency time series collected in critical care settings. One
recent effort introduced a FM for medium and long MTS [55], yet FMs specifically tailored to critical
care time series remain largely underexplored [20]. While the term ”foundation model” is widely used in
ML, its exact definition can vary across the field. There is no strict or universally agreed-upon criterion.
In this work, FMs are defined as models that learn generalizable representations through pre-training
on large-scale diverse datasets and can be adapted to a wide range of downstream tasks with minimal
modification. This pretraining is often carried out using SSL objectives, which enable the model to
learn meaningful representations without the need for labeled data, as mentioned in Section 2.1.1.
==PAGE:20==
CHAPTER 3
Related work
As ML becomes increasingly integrated into healthcare, particularly for modeling clinical time series
data, several important trends and persistent challenges have emerged. While the field is advancing
rapidly, progress is often impeded by issues related to reproducibility, generalizability, and limitations
of traditional learning paradigms. The following sections highlight three key areas that exemplify both
current developments and ongoing pitfalls: (1) the challenge of reproducibility and comparability, (2)
the limitations of single-dataset training, and (3) the shift toward Self-Supervised pre-training (SSP)
as a means to improve model adaptability and robustness.
1. The Challenge of Reproducibility and Comparability
Developing ML models for clinical time series data is often hindered by a lack of reproducibility.
Studies frequently report high performance, but these claims are diﬀicult to verify due to missing
or inconsistent details such as cohort definitions, preprocessing steps, and training procedures.
Public code and data are not always available, and when they are, they are often tied to specific
tasks or datasets [56].
Even small differences in how cohorts are defined or how data is processed can lead to large
variations in performance. This makes it hard to compare models fairly and assess true progress.
To overcome this, recent work emphasizes the need for standardized, modular frameworks that
define the full modeling pipeline in a transparent and extensible way. These frameworks enable
reproducible experiments and make it easier to evaluate models across datasets and tasks [56, 57].
2. The Limitations of Single-Dataset Training
ML models for clinical time series are often developed using a single dataset [58, 59], which can
limit their generalization to new hospitals or patient populations [60].
These datasets are typically small and shaped by local treatment practices, leading to performance
drops when models are applied to data from other institutions. Such distribution shifts pose a
major barrier to the real-world deployment of predictive models in healthcare [20].
Pooling multiple datasets can significantly improve model robustness by increasing the size and
diversity of patient populations and clinical scenarios. Recent work enables that harmonizing
variables across datasets allows for effective multi-center training and benchmarking.
Models
trained in this way generalize better across sites and are more likely to reflect the variability seen
in actual clinical environments [60, 20].
3. Moving Beyond Supervised Learning with Self-Supervised Pre-training
Clinical time series models are often developed using supervised learning, targeting specific tasks
such as mortality or sepsis prediction [61, 41, 62]. While these task-specific models can achieve
high performance, they are typically trained on limited labeled data and may learn representations
that do not generalize well beyond the target task or institution. The scarcity of labeled clinical
==PAGE:21==
3.1 Foundation models for critical care time series
11
data and the variability in task definitions across institutions further limit their adaptability to
new clinical settings [13].
Recent work has increasingly adopted SSP approaches [xu2023atransehr, 13, 63, 64, 65]. These
models are first pretrained on unlabeled EHR data to capture general temporal and clinical
patterns, and are then fine-tuned for specific prediction tasks. This training approach enables
models to learn rich and generalizable representations.
3.1
Foundation models for critical care time series
While FM have led to major advances in various areas of healthcare, such as natural language processing
and medical imaging, an area that remains underexplored is their application to critical care time series
[20]. This area holds substantial promise because of the availability of large and richly detailed datasets
that include multiple types of signals, such as vital signs, laboratory values, and treatments, collected
across diverse institutions and geographic locations.
Burger et al. [20] take the first concrete step
toward developing FMs for critical care time series by introducing a harmonized dataset spanning
the United States, Europe, and, for the first time, China. By integrating diverse physiological and
treatment variables from both ICU and emergency settings, their work enables large-scale, multi-center
training directly addressing (2) the limitations of single-dataset training. Regarding (1) the challenge of
reproducibility and comparability, the use of standardized data harmonization and shared benchmarks
marks progress, though full reproducibility is limited by the absence of publicly available code and
an end-to-end modular framework. (3) The shift toward SSP does not apply here, as the models are
developed using only supervised learning without pretraining or unsupervised objectives.
3.2
Yet Another ICU Benckmark
The Yet Another ICU Benchmark (YAIB) framework [56] provides a modular, end-to-end solution for
clinical ML on ICU data, explicitly designed to address key limitations in the field. An illustration
of the end-to-end framework is shown in Figure 6.
It consists of two components: YAIB-cohorts,
which handles dataset harmonization and cohort construction, and the main YAIB repository, which
manages model training and evaluation. The YAIB-cohorts repository builds on the ricu package [66]
to harmonize multiple ICU datasets using a unified, concept-based abstraction of clinical variables. It
supports five publicly available datasets (MIMIC-III, MIMIC-IV, eICU, HiRID, AUMCdb) and maps
their contents into a common structure with consistent semantic definitions and temporal alignment.
This harmonization enables standardized cohort construction, label definition, and data extraction
across datasets, facilitating multi-center analyses and reproducible experimental setups. The main YAIB
repository then provides the downstream ML pipeline for supervised modeling, including preprocessing,
feature extraction, and evaluation. YAIB directly supports (1) the challenge of reproducibility and
comparability, by offering a transparent and extensible end-to-end framework. It also addresses (2)the
limitations of single-dataset training, by enabling pooled model development across harmonized datasets.
However, (3) the shift toward SSP does not apply to this framework, as it is currently designed only for
supervised learning. Extending the architecture would be necessary to support unsupervised objectives
and pretraining workflows.
==PAGE:22==
3.2 Yet Another ICU Benckmark
12
Figure 6: Overview of the Yet Another ICU Benchmark (YAIB) pipeline. The left side illustrates the creation of harmonized ICU cohorts,
implemented in a separate repository, YAIB-cohorts [67]). The right side represents the machine learning component of the pipeline, contained
in the main YAIB repository [68], which covers preprocessing, model training, and evaluation. Dotted-line components indicate extensible modules
that follow a standardized interface. This figure is inspired from Figure 1 in Water et al. [56].
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 4
Aim of study
This work aims to address key limitations in the modeling of critical care time-series data derived from
Electronic Health Records (EHRs), particularly in the context of Intensive Care Unit (ICU) settings.
Despite frequent claims of achieving state-of-the-art performance, many studies in this domain suffer
from poor reproducibility and lack standardized benchmarking practices. To address these challenges,
this study builds upon an existing reproducible machine learning framework that supports transparent
and standardized benchmarking throughout the complete model development pipeline. A central focus
of this work is the use of aggregated and harmonized multi-center datasets, enabling the training of
models on a larger and more diverse collection of ICU data. Leveraging this comprehensive dataset,
the study proposes the pre-training of a transformer-based model using self-supervised learning. This
model is then fine-tuned on clinically relevant downstream tasks using limited labeled data. This model
represents an early-stage foundation model for clinical time-series data that is designed to learn gener-
alizable representations from large-scale and diverse ICU dataset. While it does not yet meet the full
scale or maturity of widely established foundation models, it establishes a proof of concept that can be
further developed and scaled in future work.
The central hypothesis of this study is that a model trained in a self-supervised manner on a large,
diverse, and harmonized critical care time-series dataset can learn generalizable patient representations
that transfer effectively across a wide range of clinical tasks.
The contributions of this work are as follows:
• Extension of an existing end-to-end clinical machine learning framework to support:
1. Compatibility with self-supervised learning paradigms
2. Advanced models capable of handling the challenges of irregular, multivariate time-series
data
• Development of an early-stage foundation model for critical care time-series EHR data with po-
tential for further scaling and clinical application.
• Demonstration of autoregressive forecasting as a self-supervised task for learning robust and gen-
eralizable representations from unlabeled EHR data.
• Proposal and implementation of a transformer-based model as the architecture foundation model.
• Utilization of a large harmonized, multi-center ICU dataset
==PAGE:24==
CHAPTER 5
Methods
This section will cover the methodological framework used in this work. First, the problem formulation
and learning objectives are defined. Next, the implementation strategy is described, which is based on
extending an existing framework, YAIB, as detailed in Section 3.2. These extensions were necessary to
enable the training of a FM using SSL. The section then presents the training and evaluation procedures,
including the key hyperparameters used throughout the experiments.
5.1
Problem formulation
This section introduces the notation and definitions used to describe the dataset, along with two distinct
learning objectives. One is a supervised classification task and the other is a self-supervised forecasting
task.
A base dataset is defined as follows:
D := {(Xi, pi, hi)}N
i=1
(5.1)
where:
• Xi ∈RTi×D is a multivariate time series with Ti timesteps and D features.
• pi ∈RP is a static (time-invariant) feature vector.
• hi ∈RTi
≥0 denotes the time of each observation.
A binary mask Mi ∈{0, 1}Ti×D can be derived from Xi, where each element m(t)
i,d = 1 if the corre-
sponding value x(t)
i,d is observed, and 0 if it is missing.
5.1.1
Supervised Learning - Binary Classification
DSL := {(Xi, Mi, pi, hi, yi)}N
i=1
(5.2)
where:
• yi ∈{0, 1} is a binary class label associated with sample i, which in this work indicates mortality.
Objective: Learn a function fθ that maps input data to a predicted label:
ˆyi = fθ(Xi, Mi, pi, hi)
==PAGE:25==
5.2 Datasets
15
The model is trained to minimize the classification loss: binary cross-entropy:
LSL = −1
N
N
X
i=1
[yi log(ˆyi) + (1 −yi) log(1 −ˆyi)]
5.1.2
Self-Supervised Learning - Forecasting
Each time series is split into an observation window and a forecasting window:
DSSL :=
 Xobs
i
, Mobs
i
, pi, hobs
i
, Xforecast
i
, Mforecast
i
	N
i=1
(5.3)
where:
• Xobs
i
∈RT obs
i
×D is the observation window.
• Xforecast
i
∈RT forecast
i
×D is the forecasting window, serving as the prediction target.
• Mobs
i
∈RT obs
i
×D is the binary mask indicating observed or missing values in the observation
window.
• Mforecast
i
∈RT forecast
i
×D is the binary mask indicating observed or missing values in the forecasting
window.
• hobs
i
∈RT obs
i
≥0
are the timestamps for the observation window.
Objective: Learn a function fθ to forecast future values from past observations:
ˆXforecast
i
= fθ(Xobs
i
, Mobs
i
, pi, hobs
i
)
The model is trained to minimize the reconstruction loss, masked mean squared error (MSE):
LSSL = 1
N
N
X
i=1
Mforecast
i
⊙

ˆXforecast
i
−Xforecast
i

2
F
(5.4)
Here, ⊙denotes element-wise multiplication, and ∥· ∥F is the Frobenius norm, which sums the squared
values across all elements. An illustration of the observation and forecasting window split is provided
in Figure 7, and a summary of notation used in the dataset and learning objectives can be found in
Appendix A.
5.2
Datasets
This work makes use of three publicly available ICU datasets supported by the YAIB framework:
MIMIC-III [69], MIMIC-IV [70], and the eICU [71]. These datasets contain structured clinical data
from ICU stays and are widely used in the development of ML models for critical care. While they share
similar types of information, such as vital signs, laboratory results, and treatment records, they differ in
terms of collection period, hospital systems, and patient populations. Table 1 summarizes key statistics
for the three datasets used in this study. This study uses a filtered subset of MIMIC-III that excludes
all patients also found in MIMIC-IV, specifically those admitted between 2008 and 2012. The overlap
==PAGE:26==
5.3 YAIB default settings
16
Figure 7: Autoregressive-based forecasting as Self-Supervised Learning objective. Time-binned obser-
vations and missing values from example patient on five arbitrary clinical features. The pseudo labeled
data for the forecasting tasks are created by spllitting the data into an observation and forecasting
window. This figure is inspired from Figure 2 of Tipirneni and Reddy [13]
exists because MIMIC-IV was developed to extend MIMIC-III by including more recent and higher-
resolution data, and to maximize sample size, admissions from the 2008–2012 period were included in
both datasets. However, this overlap can lead to duplication and data leakage if the datasets are used
in joint analyses, complicating results and undermining data integrity. To ensure a clean separation,
MIMIC-III is restricted to CareVue records from 2001–2008 [72], with the 2008–2012 period represented
exclusively by MIMIC-IV. The YAIB framework facilitates dataset pooling, making it possible to work
with different combinations of the three datasets, MIMIC-III, MIMIC-IV and eICU, in this work.
Dataset
Admissions
Collection
Origin
Hospital
Mortality
period
(Positive class)
MIMIC-III*
27k* (40k)
2001–2008*
(2001–2012)
U.S.
BIDMC
11.9%
MIMIC-IV
73k
2008–2019
U.S.
BIDMC
7.3%
eICU
200k
2014–2015
U.S.
208
hospitals
across the U.S.
5.5%
Table 1: Dataset statistics for MIMIC-III, MIMIC-IV, and eICU. BIDMC = Beth Israel Deaconess
Medical Center. *The subset of the MIMIC-III data used in this work is the MIMIC-III CareVue subset
[72]; values in parentheses represent statistics from the full MIMIC-III dataset.
5.3
YAIB default settings
This section outlines the components of the YAIB pipeline that were used without modification. The
focus is on highlighting parts of their methodology related to dataset preprocessing, cohort definitions,
==PAGE:27==
5.4 YAIB extensions
17
and feature selection, which were directly applicable and adopted in this work.
5.3.1
Feature selection
Feature selection was performed by [56] based on availability across all benchmarked datasets, with an
emphasis on consistency to support cross-dataset experiments. A total of 52 clinical features were used
as input for model development, consisting of 4 static and 48 time-varying variables. A full list of the
features used and their units are provided in Appendix B.
5.3.2
Patient Cohorts
Patient cohorts were constructed using the YAIB-cohorts repository [67], as part of the broader YAIB
framework described in Section 3.2. All data were temporally aligned and resampled at a fixed resolution
of one hour. The following exclusion criteria were applied uniformly across all datasets and tasks: (1)
invalid ICU stay timing (e.g., negative length of stay), (2) ICU stay duration < 6 hours, (3) fewer than
four valid time points, (4) measurement gaps > 12 hours, and (5) age < 18 years at ICU admission.
These filters preceded any task-specific cohort definitions. For the mortality classification task, the
input window was limited to the first 24 hours following ICU admission. ICU stays shorter than 30
hours were excluded to reduce the risk of causal leakage, as described in [56]. The outcome label was
defined as mortality = 1 if the patient died during the same hospital admission.
5.3.3
Preprocessing
Preprocessing was carried out using YAIB’s main repository YAIB [68], applied after cohort extraction.
This included the addition of missingness indicators, forward-fill imputation within each ICU stay, and
mean imputation for values without prior observations, using statistics computed from the training
set to avoid data leakage. All features were standardized to zero mean and unit variance based on
training split statistics. Data were split into training, validation, and test sets using cross-validation
folds defined during preprocessing, ensuring that preprocessing steps such as scaling and imputation
were fitted only on the training data. All preprocessing decisions followed the default setup specified
by the base_classification_preprocessor class in the main repository, YAIB [68].
5.4
YAIB extensions
While many components of the YAIB pipeline could be used without modification, certain extensions
were necessary to support the training of a FM in a SSL setting. This section describes the key additions
made to the repository, including the implementation of a custom dataset class, a PyTorch Lightning
wrapper, and adjustments to the batch collation logic, all tailored to accommodate the requirements of
pre-training.
5.4.1
Pre-training Patient Cohort
The YAIB framework is designed around supervised learning and requires a task-specific definition that
includes inclusion and exclusion criteria, which leads to label generation for all included patients (see
==PAGE:28==
5.4 YAIB extensions
18
Section 3.2). In a SSL setup, where labels are not used during training, this presents a challenge. To
work around this, a task was chosen that is available for all patients and does not exclude any patients
beyond the five base filtering criteria defined in Section 5.3.2. Specifically, length of stay (LOS) was
used as the prediction task. Although labels were generated to satisfy the framework’s requirements,
they were discarded during training, preserving the unlabeled nature of the SSL setup. This approach
made it possible to remain compatible with YAIB’s supervised infrastructure while still training on an
unlabeled dataset.
5.4.2
Self-supervised learning extension
The SSL objective is implemented as a forecasting task, where future values are predicted based on past
values, as illustrated in Figure 7. SSL requires the generation of labels from unlabelled data, which
can be achieved through various strategies. The approach in this work is inspired by the dynamic
sampling method proposed by Tipirneni et al. [13], in which observation and forecasting windows are
dynamically constructed during batch loading. A set of constraints is introduced to govern the selec-
tion of observation and forecasting windows. These constraints are designed to ensure both suﬀicient
historical context and generating a valid forecasting window, thereby improving the overall quality and
consistency of the training data. The overall goal is to select a valid time index where the observation
and forecasting window are split. For each batch element, a patient is randomly sampled and candidate
time indices are identified. These indices are filtered based on the following constraints:
1. Sparsity check: The selected index must correspond to a time point where there is at least one
observed value in the observation window.
2. Minimum Observation Length: The index must be at least L time steps into the time-series
to ensure suﬀicient historical context. For this work, L = 12 hours.
3. Forecasting Window Availability: The index must allow room for a complete forecasting
window of length H. For this work, H = 2 hours.
If valid time indices are found, one is randomly selected as the split point between the observation
window and the forecasting window.
If no valid index is found, a new patient is sampled and the
process is repeated. Pseudocode for the constraint-aware batch construction procedure is presented in
Listing 5.1.
5.4.3
Integration of new model
When adding a new DL model into the YAIB repository, several components must be implemented
to ensure compatibility with the framework’s modular design.
Specifically, this involves creating a
custom dataset class to define how data is structured and accessed during training, and developing a
PyTorch Lightning wrapper that handles model training, evaluation, and logging in line with YAIB’s
standardized workflow.
PyTorch Lightning is a high-level framework built on top of PyTorch that
simplifies the organization of DL code by decoupling the model definition from the training logic. It
encourages modular, readable code and provides built-in support for features like checkpointing, logging,
distributed training, and hardware acceleration. As mentioned in Chapter 4, it was hypothesized that a
==PAGE:29==
5.4 YAIB extensions
19
1 def __call__(batch):
2
3
# Load batch
4
data, mask = load_batch(batch)
5
B, C, T = data.shape
6
7
t1 = None
8
tries = 0
9
max_tries = B
10
11
while t1 is None and tries < max_tries:
12
13
# Randomly select a patient/sample from the batch
14
i = random_integer(0, B-1)
15
16
# Identify time steps with observed (non-missing) values
17
valid_times = indices where mask[i] is True
18
19
# Ensure there's at least L time steps of history
20
valid_times = valid_times where time >= L
21
if valid_times is empty:
22
tries += 1
23
continue
24
25
# Define max index to ensure forecasting window with length H fits
26
max_index = last(valid_times)
27
valid_times = valid_times where time <= max_index - H
28
if valid_times is empty:
29
tries += 1
30
continue
31
32
# Sample a valid time index where observation and forecasting window is split
33
t1 = random_choice(valid_times)
34
35
if t1 is None:
36
raise Error("No valid index found in batch")
37
38
# Define observation and forecasting window boundaries
39
t0 = max(0, t1 - max_obs) # Maximum length of the observation window is a variable
40
t2 = t1 + forecast_horizon
41
42
# Slice and return observation and forecasting windows including assosiated masks
43
X_obs = data[:, :, t0:t1]
44
M_obs = mask[:, :, t0:t1]
45
46
X_forecast = data[:, :, t1:t2]
47
M_forecast = mask[:, :, t1:t2]
48
49
return X_obs, M_obs, X_forecast, M_forecast
Listing 5.1:
Pseudocode for implementation of forecasting as self-supervised learning task during
batch collation
suitable architecture for the FM would be Transformer-based, provided it also effectively accommodates
the unique characteristics of EHR data. As no such architecture existed in the YAIB repository, a new
model was implemented: the Bi-Axial Transformer (BAT) [50], which is specifically designed to handle
the irregular sampling, high missingness, and complex dependencies found in IMTS. The following
sections presents the dataset class and the wrapper used to integrate BAT into the YAIB environment.
==PAGE:30==
5.4 YAIB extensions
20
5.4.4
BAT Implementation
The BAT model’s prediction head was adapted in this work to support both binary classification,
producing ˜y ∈{0, 1}, and forecasting, outputting ˆXforecast ∈RT forecast×D, as illustrated in Figure 5. A
dataset class was designed to be compatible with the output of the preprocessing pipeline in the YAIB
repository and the input format expected by BAT as implemented by DeVries et al. [50]. The class was
designed in alignment with the existing dataset classes of the YAIB repository. This included support for
gin configuration files and the Polars library, a fast, multi-threaded DataFrame framework that enables
eﬀicient, parallel, and memory-conscious data processing. It also involved designing the __getitem__
method to retrieve data at the hospital stay level. The __init__ method contains definitions that
ensure the correct separation of the data into time-varying features, a corresponding missingness mask,
static features, and time indices. This structure makes the data compatible not only with BAT, but also
with several other advanced and baseline EHR models reimplemented in the work of [50]. This dataset
class effectively functions as glue between the models implemented in the repository from [50] and the
YAIB pipeline. Pseudocode for the class is provided in Listing 5.2. Another step in implementing the
1 @gin.configurable("BATPolarsDataset")
2 class BATPolarsDataset:
3
4
def __init__(self, feature_table, outcome_table, vars):
5
6
# Column names from gin configuration
7
self.dynamic_cols = vars["DYNAMIC"]
8
self.static_cols = vars["STATIC"]
9
self.time_col = vars["SEQUENCE"]
10
self.label_col = vars["LABEL"]
11
self.group_col = vars["GROUP"] # hospital stay, stay_id
12
13
# Missingness indicator columns
14
self.missingness_cols = extract_missingness_cols(feature_table)
15
16
# Group output tables from preprocessing pipeline by hospital stay
17
self.features_by_id = group_by(feature_table, self.group_col)
18
self.labels_by_id = group_by(outcome_table, self.group_col)
19
20
# Define all available hospital stays
21
self.stay_ids = unique(feature_table[self.group_col])
22
23
def __getitem__(self, idx):
24
25
# Get one hospital stay and corresponding data
26
stay_id = self.stay_ids[idx]
27
features = self.features_by_id[stay_id]
28
29
# Get label for that hospital stay
30
label = self.labels_by_id[stay_id]
31
32
# Extract and split features into BAT-compatible components
33
data = features[self.dynamic_cols]
34
mask = features[self.missingness_cols]
35
static = features[self.static_cols]
36
times = features[self.time_col]
37
38
return data, mask, label, times, static
Listing 5.2: Pseudocode for the BATPolarsDataset class, which structures EHR data for compatibility
with BAT and the YAIB pipeline.
==PAGE:31==
5.4 YAIB extensions
21
BAT model into the YAIB repository involved creating a PyTorch Lightning wrapper. Since the YAIB
repository is structured around PyTorch Lightning, wrapping the BAT model in a compatible module
was necessary to ensure full integration with the pipeline. The PyTorch Lightning wrapper class created
for the BAT model inherits from a generic DLWrapper class provided by the YAIB repository. This base
class defines the core components required for integration with PyTorch Lightning, including optimizer
configuration, metric tracking, and training loop hooks. The most important component that required
customization for BAT was the step_fn method, which defines how input batches are unpacked and
passed to the model. Pseudocode for the wrapper is provided in Listing 5.3. The integration of BAT into
1 @gin.configurable("CustomDLPredictionWrapper")
2 class CustomDLPredictionWrapper(DLWrapper):
3
4
def __init__(self, **kwargs):
5
6
# Initialize base DLWrapper with configuration
7
super().__init__(**kwargs)
8
9
def step_fn(self, batch):
10
11
# Unpack inputs from batch
12
data, mask, label, times, static = batch
13
14
# Move tensors to appropriate device and type
15
data = to_device(data)
16
mask = to_device(mask)
17
times = to_device(times)
18
static = to_device(static)
19
label = to_device(label)
20
21
# Forward pass through the model
22
output = self(data, static, times, mask)
23
24
# Compute loss
25
loss = self.loss(output, label)
26
27
# Update performance metrics
28
metric.update(output, label)
29
30
# Log loss
31
log_metric(loss)
32
33
return loss
Listing 5.3: Pseudocode for the PyTorch Lightning wrapper integrating the BAT model into the YAIB
framework.
the YAIB repository demonstrates that integrating new models does not require extensive development
effort. Furthermore, with the custom dataset class and wrapper created in this work. The setup is
compatible not only with the Bi-Axial Transformer (BAT) but also with the baseline and advanced
EHR DL models reimplemented in [Rachael]. This makes the implementation easily extendable and
opens the door for future integration of additional models into the YAIB framework.
==PAGE:32==
5.5 Training and evaluation
22
5.5
Training and evaluation
This work explores different training paradigms, including supervised and SSL, as well as different
dataset strategies, such as training on a single dataset or using pooled datasets. The training and
evaluation setup for these procedures is described in the following section. Optimal hyperparameters
for all setups are summarized in Appendix C.
5.5.1
Supervised training
The first supervised training experiment was designed to assess model generalization across datasets.
It involved training one model per dataset using MIMIC-III, MIMIC-IV, and eICU, respectively, and
evaluating each model on all three datasets. Hyperparameter tuning was performed individually for
each model in two stages: an initial grid search was used to identify a suitable hyperparameter range,
followed by Bayesian hyperparameter optimization (offered by the YAIB framework) conducted within
that range. Models were trained using a 5-fold cross-validation setup. An initial 80/20 split separated
the data into training and test sets, and the training set was further divided into five folds, rotating the
validation fold across training iterations. This setup is illustrated in Figure 8. Final model performance
is reported as the mean and standard deviation across the five cross-validated models. The prediction
task was in-hospital mortality, and the models were trained using binary cross-entropy loss as described
in Section 5.1.1. Model performance was evaluated using two standard metrics for binary classification:
Figure 8: Data splitting strategy, 5-fold cross-validation with held-out test set.
the area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC-ROC) and the area under the precision-
recall curve (AUC-PR). The AUC-ROC measures the ability of the model to distinguish between the
positive and negative classes by plotting the true positive rate (TPR) against the false positive rate
(FPR) at various classification thresholds:
TPR =
TP
TP + FN,
FPR =
FP
FP + TN.
(5.5)
==PAGE:33==
5.5 Training and evaluation
23
While AUC-ROC provides a general measure of separability, it can be overly optimistic in imbalanced
settings where one class dominates. Therefore, AUC-PR is also reported, as it provides a more infor-
mative view of performance on the minority class, in this case the positive class. The precision-recall
curve plots precision versus recall:
Precision =
TP
TP + FP,
Recall =
TP
TP + FN.
(5.6)
AUC-PR is especially relevant in clinical applications such as mortality prediction, where the positive
class (death) is typically much rarer than the negative class (survival).
5.5.2
Self-supervised pretraining
The FM was pretrained in a self-supervised manner using pooled data from the MIMIC-IV and eICU
datasets. This setup enabled MIMIC-III to be reserved for evaluating the model’s ability to generalize to
an entirely unseen dataset. The pretraining objective was to predict future values from past observations,
optimized using the masked mean squared error loss as described in Section 5.1.2. Hyperparameter
tuning was conducted using a grid search. The cross-validation setup described in Figure 8 was used
during this process.
However, only the model with the lowest loss was used for the zero-shot and
fine-tuning experiments. This was the one that achieved the lowest loss within the cross-validation
setup.
5.5.3
Zero-shot
To evaluate the FM before any fine-tuning, a clustering analysis of the embedding space was performed
on all three datasets separately. Two versions of the final model were used to assess how the degree of
clustering evolved during training: one with weights saved after a single epoch, and another after full
convergence. To quantify the quality of the learned representations, Agglomerative Clustering with the
num_clusters = 2 was applied. Clustering analyses were performed separately for the binary labels
mortality, sex, and age to assess how well these attributes were represented in the embedding space. The
resulting cluster assignments were quantified using Adjusted Mutual Information (AMI), as shown in
Equation (5.7), which measures the correspondence between predicted clusters and ground truth labels
while correcting for chance. Lowe et al. [73] demonstrated the effectiveness of various clustering methods
and metrics for evaluating pretrained embeddings. Based on their findings, Agglomerative Clustering
and Adjusted Mutual Information were well-suited choices for this setting, where the number of clusters
was known and class imbalance was highly skewed.
AMI(U, V ) =
MI(U, V ) −E[MI(U, V )]
max {H(U), H(V )} −E[MI(U, V )]
(5.7)
where:
• U and V are the ground truth and predicted cluster assignments.
• MI(U, V ) is the mutual information between U and V .
• E[MI(U, V )] is the expected mutual information between U and V under a random model.
• H(U) and H(V ) are the entropies of U and V , respectively.
==PAGE:34==
5.6 Resources
24
To assess how representation quality evolved during training, ∆AMI is reported and defined as the
difference in AMI scores between the converged model and the model after one epoch:
∆AMI = AMIfinal −AMIepoch1.
(5.8)
This value captures how much structure related to the downstream labels emerges in the embeddings
as training progresses. A larger ∆AMI indicates that the model increasingly organizes the embedding
space in a way that aligns with those labels. To enable a fair comparison of AMI scores across the three
datasets, each dataset was sub-sampled to 3,000 hospital stays with the same class imbalance. This
correction was only necessary for the mortality label, and not sex and age. The class distribution for
the mortality label in all three datasets was aligned with the MIMIC-III dataset (see Table 1).
5.5.4
Fine-tuning
The goal of the fine-tuning experiment was to compare the performance of the fine-tuned FM against
models trained from scratch in a supervised manner, .on progressively larger subsets of training/fine-
tuning data. As described in Section 5.5.2, the FM was pretrained on the pooled MIMIC-IV and eICU
dataset. To evaluate its ability to generalize to unseen data, fine-tuning was performed on the MIMIC-
III dataset. The number of fine-tuning samples ranged from 100 to 9,506. Each subset was constructed
to preserve the same class imbalance, allowing for meaningful evaluation using the AUC-PR metric
across subsets. For robustness, each subset size was sampled five times using five specific seeds, and
model performance was reported as the mean ± standard deviation across these five runs. Evaluation
metrics included both AUC-ROC and AUC-PR. When hyperparameter tuning the fine-tuning process,
a grid search was conducted over learning rate and batch size, while all other hyperparameters were
kept consistent with the optimal ones found during pre-training. The FM was benchmarked against two
models trained from scratch in a supervised manner: one using the same architecture (BAT) and another
based on a simpler Transformer architecture that does not natively handle missing values and instead
relies on imputed data. Hyperparameter tuning for both baselines followed the procedure outlined in
Section 5.5.1. The performance reported in mean ± standard deviation reflects variation across the
randomly sampled data subsets rather than cross-validation, which was not used in this experiment.
5.6
Resources
All experiments were conducted using PyTorch 2.4.0+cu118 with Python 3.10.16 on a system running
AlmaLinux 9.6. Supervised training was performed on an NVIDIA Tesla V100 GPU (32 GB) and took
approximately 2 hours, while self-supervised pretraining was run on an NVIDIA Tesla A100 PCIe GPU
(40 GB) and required around 5 hours. Fine-tuning was carried out on an NVIDIA Tesla V100 GPU
(16 GB), with training times of up to 20 minutes depending on dataset size.
All code related to this project is available at https://github.com/Katja-Jagd/YAIB. This repository
was originally forked from https://github.com/rvandewater/YAIB [68] and has been expanded to
support the experiments and methods presented in this work.
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 6
Results
This chapter presents the results of evaluating the proposed FM across three experiments. First, the
characteristics of the training datasets are examined to highlight distributional differences and the
challenges they pose for model generalization.
Second, a zero-shot clustering analysis investigates
whether the model learns meaningful structure in its representations without supervision.
Finally,
the model’s downstream performance is evaluated after fine-tuning and compared against supervised
baselines.
6.1
Data Distributions and Transferability
This experiment investigates dataset variability and model generalizability. In the first part, the har-
monized and pooled datasets are visualized in a shared, reduced-dimensional space to compare their
distributions. In the second part, cross-dataset transferability is assessed by training models on one
dataset and evaluating on another, aiming to replicate previous findings that performance tends to drop
under distribution shifts [60] [20]. These analyses highlight distributional differences and the challenges
of achieving robust and generalizable models. Figure 9 shows the harmonized and preprocessed datasets
projected down in a 2-dimensional space using t-SNE [74]. Figure 9a is taken from [20] and shows sev-
eral ICU and Emergency Department datasets, whereas Figure 9b shows the three datasets of this work,
MIMIC-III, MIMIC-IV and eICU, having been through preprocessing and harmonization as described
in Section 3.2. The clustering patterns shown in Figure 9a highlight the differences and distributional
shifts across datasets commonly used in this field. When focusing on the three datasets utilized in this
study, they appear to occupy a broadly similar region, spanning approximately TSNE Dimension 1
from -80 to 80 and TSNE Dimension 2 from -120 to 50. One sub-cluster for MIMIC-III is observed.
However, due to the high density of data points in this visualization, it is diﬀicult to determine where
the datasets truly overlap in this space. To address this, a less dense version of the t-SNE plot was
generated using a random sample of 10,000 time steps, as shown in Figure 9b. This approach provides
a clearer view of the distribution and reveals that all three datasets do, in fact, overlap within the
region. Furthermore, distinct sub-clusters become more apparent in this plot, that contains data points
mixed form all three datasets. These sub-clusters may reflect similar clinical states, shared patient
trajectories, or patterns in correlated features and measurement practices. The individual sub-cluster
for MIMIC-III observed in Figure 9a is not present in Figure 9b, which might be due to differences
between harmonization and preprocessing in Burger et al. [20] and this work, or due to a too small
sample size in Figure 9b. To evaluate the performance of models trained on the datasets with slightly
different data distributions, three separate models were trained. Figure 10 presents the performance
of these models, each independently hyperparameter-tuned and trained exclusively on a single dataset,
then evaluated on all three datasets. The results indicate that each model achieves its best performance
==PAGE:36==
6.1 Data Distributions and Transferability
26
(a)
(b)
Figure 9: Two-dimensional t-SNE projections [74] of clinical time-series datasets. (a) Visualization
taken from Burger et al. [20] Figure 1 showing multiple ICU and Emergency Department datasets. (b)
Harmonized and preprocessed datasets used in this study: MIMIC-III, MIMIC-IV, and eICU. Each
point represents a time step of a patient stay. (MIMIC refers to MIMIC-III in both plots).
on the dataset it was trained on (diagonal entries), while performance degrades when evaluated on the
other two datasets. Since AUC-PR is sensitive to class imbalance, it is not directly comparable across
the test datasets. For each test dataset, the expected performance of a random model corresponds to
the proportion of positive instances, which serves as a baseline. These baseline values are provided in
Table 1. Therefore it is possible to compare AUC-PR within the same test dataset as the prevalence of
the positive class is constant in that setting. To evaluate how well the models generalize, the relative
performance drops can analysed. Assuming that the highest performance a model can have is when
it is trained on itself (diagonal) the performance drop can be measured relative to that measure as a
difference. Relative to the best performance, models trained on MIMIC-IV and eICU generalize better
to each other, with AUC-ROC drops of 1.8–2.8 and AUC-PR drops of 3.3–4.1 (MIMIC-IV ↔eICU).
Larger drops are observed when using models trained on MIMIC-III and tested on MIMIC-IV and eICU,
with AUC-ROC drops of 4.1–4.8 and AUC-PR drops of 6.6–7.8. Models tested on MIMIC-III show min-
imal performance drops, with AUC-ROC drops of 0.9–1.0 and AUC-PR drops of 0.5–0.8. The pattern
of performance drops across the datasets is similar for Figure 10b and Figure 10a, indicating that the
trends in generalization across datasets are consistent across both AUC-ROC and AUC-PR metrics.
The model trained on MIMIC-III appeared to generalize the least effectively to other datasets. The
sub-cluster observed for MIMIC-III in Figure 9a may hint that this dataset has a somewhat different
underlying distribution compared to MIMIC-IV and eICU. In contrast, the model trained on MIMIC-IV
showed the strongest generalization performance, suggesting it captures patterns that transfer better
across all datasets. These findings highlight the inherent challenges of developing robust and general-
izable models for medical data. Consequently, performance drops are observed even when models are
applied to datasets that are only moderately different, as demonstrated in Figure 10.
==PAGE:37==
6.2 Zero-shot Clustering of Embeddings
27
(a) AUC-PR, Mortality
(b) AUC-ROC, Mortality
Figure 10: Performance of three independently trained models, each evaluated on all three datasets:
MIMIC-III, MIMIC-IV, and eICU. (a) shows AUC-PR scores; (b) shows AUC-ROC scores. Values
reflect mean performance ± standard deviation on held-out test sets using 5-fold cross-validation.
6.2
Zero-shot Clustering of Embeddings
This experiment evaluates whether the FM, trained in a SSL manner as described in Section X, has
learned meaningful representations that capture clinically relevant structure without the use of labels.
The analysis focuses on whether patient outcomes, specifically mortality, are reflected in the embedding
space produced by the pre-trained model. The evaluation consists of two steps. First, the embeddings
are projected into a lower-dimensional space to visually assess whether samples with different mortality
outcomes form distinguishable clusters. Second, to quantitatively assess how representations evolve
during pretraining, AMI scores from embeddings after one epoch and after full convergence are compared.
The difference in AMI reflects the extent to which the FM structures the embedding space according to
clinical outcomes, despite being trained without access to labels. Figure 11 illustrates the embeddings
of MIMIC-III data points produced by the FM, projected into two dimensions using UMAP [75] for
visualization. Figure 11a shows the embeddings after one epoch of pretraining, while Figure 11b shows
the embeddings after full convergence. In Figure 11a, a main cluster and a smaller secondary cluster are
visible. However, both mortality classes are present in these clusters, indicating that the substructure
is not related to the outcome labels. In contrast, Figure 11b shows only a single dominant cluster. In
both figures some substructure is present where the positive class (Mortality = 1) appears partially
located towards the edges of the dominant cluster. However, a substantial portion of the positive class
remains distributed throughout the embedding space, intermixed with the negative class.
No clear
visual difference in the degree of clustering can be observed when comparing the embeddings after
one epoch and after full convergence with respect to the outcome label. Figures 11c to 11f show the
embeddings labeled by sex and age after one epoch and full convergence. For both age and sex, the
labels are evenly distributed in the embedding space, with no clear clustering observed. Furthermore, no
difference in clustering is seen when comparing embeddings after one epoch and after full convergence.
Similar results for all three labels, mortality, age and sex, were observed for the embeddings produced
on MIMIC-IV and eICU, with no clear clustering (Results not shown).
The AMI score quantifies
==PAGE:38==
6.2 Zero-shot Clustering of Embeddings
28
(a) Epoch 1, Mortality
(b) Converged, Mortality
(c) Epoch 1, Sex
(d) Converged, Sex
(e) Epoch 1, Age
(f) Converged, Age
Figure 11: UMAP projections of embeddings from MIMIC-III data produced by the foundation model
at two stages of pretraining: after one epoch (left column) and after convergence (right column). Each
row labels different features/outcomes: mortality outcome (top row), biological sex (middle row), and
age group (bottom row).
==PAGE:39==
6.3 Fine-tuning Foundation Model
29
the agreement between cluster assignments and the true class labels, where a value of 0 indicates no
relationship between the clusters and the labels, and a value of 1 corresponds to perfect agreement. In
this experiment, the AMI values observed across all settings was < 0.1, indicating that only a weak
clustering signal is generally present in the embedding space. The ∆AMI metric captures how this
signal changes as the model trains, reflecting whether representations evolve to better align with the
class labels. The results for all labels are summarized in Figure 12. For sex, no shift is observed, with
∆AMI values ranging between −0.0013 and 0.0005 across the datasets. For age, a small negative shift
is seen, with ∆AMI values between −0.0153 and −0.0073, suggesting that weak age-related structure
is present before training begins and is gradually diminished as training progresses. In contrast, for
mortality, a positive shift is observed, with ∆AMI values ranging from 0.0326 to 0.0700, indicating
that without being explicitly trained towards mortality classification, the FM embeddings nonetheless
capture some information relevant to this task. Forecasting as a SSL objective may have encouraged
Figure 12:
Adjusted Mutual Information (AMI) score differences (∆AMI) across three datasets
(MIMIC-III, MIMIC-IV, and eICU) and three label types: mortality, sex, and age.
The difference
is computed between AMI scores obtained from the model’s embeddings at epoch 1 and at conver-
gence.
the representation of health-related features, such as mortality, while either diminishing or not affecting
the signal of static features such as sex and age. However, this zero-shot experiment only provides an
initial indication of the model’s potential to generalize to downstream tasks. A fine-tuning analysis is
required to fully assess the performance of the FM.
6.3
Fine-tuning Foundation Model
In this experiment, the FM, pretrained on pooled data from MIMIC-IV and eICU, was evaluated on its
ability to be fine-tuned and generalize to an unseen dataset, MIMIC-III. Fine-tuning was performed on
varying subsets of the MIMIC-III training data, with training set sizes ranging from 100 to 9506 sam-
ples. The fine-tuning performance of the FM was compared to two supervised baselines: a supervised
model trained from scratch on MIMIC-III using the same model architecture as the FM, BAT, and a
==PAGE:40==
6.3 Fine-tuning Foundation Model
30
standard transformer baseline that does not explicitly handle missingness but instead relies on imputa-
tion of missing values. Figure 13 summarizes the fine-tuning results. The fine-tuned FM consistently
outperforms the supervised model trained from scratch on the same architecture across training set
sizes from 500 to 9506 samples. This performance advantage is evident in both AUC-PR, Figure 13a,
and AUC-ROC, Figure 13b. At 500 samples, the fine-tuned model achieves an AUC-ROC of 0.763
and AUC-PR of 0.341, compared to 0.618 and 0.171, respectively, for the supervised model trained
from scratch. At the full training size (9506 samples), the fine-tuned model reaches an AUC-ROC of
0.839 and AUC-PR of 0.446, versus 0.824 and 0.421 for the from-scratch model. This performance gain
is also observed when fine-tuning only the binary classification head of the FM. In the range of 500
to approximately 4000 samples, the head-only fine-tuned model matches or exceeds the from-scratch
model in both metrics. At 2000 samples, the head-only model reaches an AUC-ROC of 0.786 and AUC-
PR of 0.403, compared to 0.772 and 0.332 for the from-scratch baseline, as shown in Figure 13b and
Figure 13a. Across all training set sizes, the BAT architecture consistently outperforms the baseline
transformer model, regardless of whether it is pre-trained and fine-tuned or trained from scratch. In
(a) AUC-PR, Mortality
(b) AUC-ROC, Mortality
Figure 13: Performance comparison of fine-tuned foundation models and supervised models trained
from scratch on MIMIC-III. (a) AUC-PR and (b) AUC-ROC across training set sizes ranging from 100
to 9506 samples. Results are shown for BAT full fine-tuning (yellow), BAT head-only fine-tuning (green),
and supervised models trained from scratch: BAT (blue) and Transformer (purple). Performance values
reflect the mean ± standard deviation over five random subsamples of the training set (with preserved
class imbalance) using a fixed train/validation/test split.
summary, the FM outperforms the supervised model trained from scratch across all dataset sizes up
to close to 10,000 samples, demonstrating its ability to generalize to a previously unseen dataset. Fur-
thermore, fine-tuning only the binary classification head yields performance comparable to full-model
fine-tuning, particularly at smaller dataset sizes, indicating that the learned embeddings are informative
and transferable for downstream classification tasks when limited labeled data is available.
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 7
Discussion
This chapter presents a discussion of the results from Chapter 6, outlines the decision to build on top
of an existing framework, describes the design of the FM, and concludes with a section on future work.
7.1
Discussion of results
In this section, the results of the three experiments conducted in this study are discussed in detail.
Each experiment is examined with a focus on its implications for model generalization, representation
learning, and the potential of FMs in critical care time-series data.
7.1.1
Data distributions and transferability
Prior to any modeling, the harmonized and preprocessed datasets were visualized using dimensionality
reduction. The t-SNE visualizations in Figure 9 suggest that the three datasets used in this work are
largely situated within the same overall data distribution. The only observed difference within this
space is a small sub-cluster associated with MIMIC-III that is visible in Figure 9a, a Figure by Burger
et al. [20], but is not visible in the version generated in this work (Figure 9b). There are several possible
explanations for this discrepancy. First, Burger et al. [20] did not account for patient overlap between
MIMIC-III and MIMIC-IV, a known issue discussed in Section 5.2. This means that the MIMIC-III
dataset from their work is different from the one in this work where a reduced subset that explicitly
removes overlapping patients between MIMIC-III and MIMIC-IV is used. Therefore the data points
that formed the sub-cluster in Figure 9a may simply not be present in this works dataset. Second,
differences in preprocessing and data harmonization pipelines could have contributed to the absence
of the cluster in our visualization. Finally, the version of the t-SNE plot in Figure 9b is based on a
smaller random sample (10,000 time steps), and it is possible that this sample size is insuﬀicient to
reveal finer-grained substructures like the one observed in Figure 9a. Overall, the key takeaway from
Figure 9 is that the datasets used in this work appear to occupy a broadly similar distributional space.
This means that main experiment of this work, which relates to testing if the FM will be able to
generalize to an unseen dataset, will be limited to evaluating in-distribution generalization. This also
means that it is beyond this work to evaluate whether the FM might generalize to out-of-distribution
data. An out-of-distribution analysis might, however, be a natural next step for future work. As part
of the second experiment (see Figure 10), supervised models were trained on one datasets at a time
and evaluated across all three to examine their robustness. As expected, a drop in performance was
observed when models were tested on datasets they were not trained on, confirming the challenge of
transferring predictive performance across models trained on independently collected clinical datasets.
Among the three, the model trained on MIMIC-IV demonstrated the strongest generalization, achieving
==PAGE:42==
7.1 Discussion of results
32
relatively high performance on both eICU and MIMIC-III. In contrast, the model trained on MIMIC-
III generalized the least effectively. As summarized in Table 1, all three datasets are based in on data
collected from hospitals in the US. However, they differ in important ways that may explain these results.
Notably, eICU includes data from multiple hospitals, whereas MIMIC-III and MIMIC-IV originate
from the same institution.
Furthermore, temporal coverage also varies across datasets.
MIMIC-IV
(2008–2019) and eICU (2014–2015) share a more recent and overlapping time period, whereas MIMIC-
III covers an earlier period (2001–2008). These temporal differences likely reflect changes in clinical
practices, documentation standards, and patient populations, which could influence how transferable
learned representations are between datasets. Another factor is the size of the training set. MIMIC-
III had the smallest number of training examples, which may have limited its ability to learn robust,
generalizable patterns. In contrast, eICU contained the largest number of training samples, but the
relatively short data collection window may have introduced overfitting to specific short-term patterns.
MIMIC-IV appears to strike a balance, with a moderate training size and a broad collection period,
which may have contributed to its strong performance across both test sets. While it is drawn from
a single institution, the diversity introduced by a longer time span may have made the training data
more representative of varied clinical scenarios. These results highlight the need for models that are
more robust to distributional shifts, even within datasets from the same domain. They motivate the
development of FMs trained on diverse, pooled and harmonized data to improve generalizability.
7.1.2
Zero-shot Clustering of Embeddings
The experiment presented in Section 6.2 evaluates the representations learned by the FM prior to any
fine-tuning, to assess whether clinically meaningful structure such as patient outcomes is reflected in
the embedding space. In other words, the goal was to determine whether the model captures relevant
information purely from the SSP. The visualizations of the embedding space in Figure 11, labeled by
mortality, sex, and age, show no apparent clustering, suggesting that the FM’s representations do not
clearly separate samples by these outcomes. This observation is supported by the quantitative results
in Figure 12, which report the change in ∆AMI scores between early and late training. AMI values
range from 0 to 1, with 1 indicating perfect alignment between cluster structure and ground truth
labels. In this experiment, all AMI scores were below 0.1, indicating a generally weak clustering signal
in the embedding space. These results make it diﬀicult to assess the meaningfulness of the zero-shot
embeddings for downstream tasks without further fine-tuning. It is also worth noting that this analysis
focused specifically on mortality, sex, and age, leaving open the possibility that the embeddings capture
structure related to other clinical features not examined here. The resulting embedding space may
become structured around clinically meaningful factors that are more relevant to the forecasting task
than to these particular labels. The model may organize patients based on temporal patterns, such
as length of stay or different phases in the clinical course of illness, for instance early, middle, or late
stages of a condition (e.g., sepsis). Future work might look into analysis of these other possible clustering
patterns. A first step, could be to apply the same analysis performed in this experiment but on relevant
temporal labels. Another possibility is that patients with similar physiological signatures, reflected
in trends in vital signs or laboratory values, are grouped together. To investigate this, unsupervised
clustering methods can be applied to the embeddings, followed by statistical comparison of physiological
features across clusters.
The model may also be capturing patterns in treatment history, grouping
patients who received similar interventions or care regimens.
Enrichment analysis of interventions
==PAGE:43==
7.2 Discussion of design
33
within clusters can be used to assess whether this type of structure is present in the embedding space.
To better assess the usefulness of the FM’s learned representations for downstream tasks, it is necessary
to evaluate how they perform when fine-tuned with labeled data.
7.1.3
Fine-tuning
This experiment aimed to evaluate whether the FM, pretrained on a pooled dataset combining MIMIC-
IV and eICU, could generalize to an unseen dataset, specifically MIMIC-III, and how it compares to
training a model from scratch in a supervised setting. The results, shown in Figure 13, benchmark the
performance of the FM against an identical architecture trained from scratch on varying training set
sizes, up to ∼10, 000 samples. Across this range, the FM consistently outperformed the supervised
baseline, suggesting that SSP on large and diverse clinical datasets can lead to representations that
transfer effectively to new tasks and datasets. The decision to cap training sizes at around ∼10, 000
samples was motivated by limitations in available data as well as the goal of simulating real world
scenarios where labeled data is limited, such as in rare diseases or low resource clinical settings where
a FM may offer particular value. However, it remains uncertain whether the FM would continue to
outperform supervised models with access to substantially more training data, making this an interesting
direction for future study. A particularly notable result is that fine-tuning only the classification head
yielded performance close to that of full model fine-tuning, indicating that the learned embeddings are
robust and encode clinically relevant information with minimal task specific adaptation. While the
zero-shot clustering analysis in Section 6.2 did not show clear structure with respect to the mortality
label, the representations still proved informative after fine-tuning. This suggests that forecasting is
a suitable SSL objective for learning features useful in downstream mortality prediction. It would be
valuable to further investigate how well these representations generalize to other clinically relevant tasks
beyond mortality. Finally, this experiment also benchmarked the BAT architecture against a standard
transformer model that relies on imputation for handling missing values. BAT, whether trained in a
supervised or SSL manner, consistently outperformed the transformer trained from scratch. This result
points to the importance of using model architectures that are well suited to the irregular and sparse
nature of clinical time-series data. Still, these findings are constrained to the low data regime examined
here (∼10, 000 data points), and it is possible that the standard transformer model is more sensitive
to limited data and high class imbalance, leaving open the possibility that it may perform better with
access to more extensive training data. Taken together, these results support the hypothesis that SSP
on large, diverse, and harmonized datasets can produce generalizable representations, and they clearly
demonstrate the potential of continuing to explore FM approaches for critical care time-series data.
7.2
Discussion of design
In a field where reproducibility, comparability, and generalizability remain major challenges, developing
new research entirely from scratch risks repeating known pitfalls and duplicating effort. Rather than cre-
ating a separate pipeline, this work is built on top of the YAIB framework [56], which provides a modular
and comprehensive end-to-end pipeline designed to address key structural issues in clinical time-series
modeling. Using an established and extensible foundation accelerates development, ensures alignment
with prior work, and supports transparency and broader community adoption. In addition to YAIB ,
==PAGE:44==
7.3 Discussion of Foundation Model
34
this work also builds upon the repository introduced in DeVries et al. [50], which provides a PyTorch
implementation of BAT (see, ??). The repository includes BAT along with re-implemented baseline
models from prior studies, enabling more straightforward model benchmarking. The re-implementation
of all these models offers a valuable foundation for future extensions or comparisons. Together, these
two prior efforts significantly reduced the overhead typically associated with setting up a DL pipeline.
By relying on YAIB for data preprocessing, training and evaluation, and on the BAT repository for
high quality model implementations, much of the foundational infrastructure was already in place. As
a result, the primary focus of this work became the integration of the BAT model into the YAIB
framework and the subsequent modeling experiments. While building on top of YAIB provides many
advantages, it also means inheriting some of the limitations imposed by the framework. YAIB currently
supports a limited number of ICU datasets: MIMIC-III, MIMIC-IV, eICU, HiRID, and AUMCdb. Of
these, MIMIC-III, MIMIC-IV and eICU were accessible through PhysioNet [76] and used in this project.
While HiRID is also available on PhysioNet, it requires an additional application step that was still
pending at the time of this work. Access to AUMCdb is managed through a dedicated request process
outside of PhysioNet, and approval requires a collaborating practicing intensivist to provide clinical
oversight and domain expertise. As a result, this work was limited to three out of the five datasets
supported by the framework. Nonetheless, YAIB does support the integration of new datasets. Since
it is built on top of the ricu package, new datasets must conform to ricu’s structural requirements.
Specifically, the package must be provided with metadata describing the tables and columns in the data
source, specified via a JSON configuration file. Beyond new datasets, YAIB also supports the addition
of prediction tasks. Its modular structure makes it easy to define custom cohorts and targets, enabling
flexible task development within the same pipeline. Overall, the flexibility of YAIB’s modular design
facilitates the addition of new components without significant restructuring.
7.3
Discussion of Foundation Model
This section reflects on key design choices made in setting up the FM, including the selected architecture,
the SSL objective, and the strategy for pooling datasets during pretraining. With the datasets available
two were selected for pre-training and one for fine-tuning. Between MIMIC-III, MIMIC-IV, and eICU,
the latter two were significantly larger (see Table 1). To make the most of SSP, two datasets were selected
to provide a broader and more diverse data foundation. In contrast, the fine-tuning experiments were
designed to evaluate performance in low supervision settings, using a maximum of
10,000 labeled
training examples. For this reason, MIMIC-III was chosen for fine-tuning, as its smaller size aligns
well with the goal of assessing model performance in data-limited scenarios. Foundation models are
designed to learn generalizable representations during pretraining that can be transferred to downstream
tasks with minimal supervision.
As such, their value is most evident when labeled data is scarce,
making MIMIC-III an ideal test case for evaluating the practical benefits of pretraining in real-world
settings where annotation is costly or limited.
Future work could explore alternative combinations
of pretraining and fine-tuning datasets to assess whether the model’s robustness and transferability
are consistent across the datasets. Alongside dataset selection, choosing the right architecture was a
critical decision in building the FM. Transformer-based architectures have emerged as the dominant
backbone for FMs in NLP and CV, with models such as BERT, GPT, and ViT demonstrating strong
generalization and transfer learning capabilities across diverse tasks [15], [14], [77]. Their ability to
==PAGE:45==
7.4 Future work
35
model long-range dependencies and learn from entire datasets makes them well-suited for time-series
data, where traditional models trained on individual series often fail to capture shared temporal patterns
[78], [79]. Among Transformer variants, BAT is particularly well-suited for modeling IMTS data. By
using axial attention to capture both temporal and sensor-wise dependencies, BAT preserves informative
missingness and remains eﬀicient and robust even under high data sparsity. These properties make BAT
a strong architectural choice for the FM. There exists a rich variety of SSL tasks designed specifically
for time-series data. Depending on the architecture and objectives of a FM, different SSL strategies
can be advantageous. As surveyed in Zhang et al. [35], which presents a comprehensive review of SSL
methods for time-series data, these approaches can be broadly categorized into three groups: generative
based methods such as autoregressive forecasting and autoencoder based reconstruction, contrastive
based methods such as sampling or augmentation contrast, and adversarial based approaches. Each of
these has unique strengths depending on whether the model prioritizes temporal forecasting accuracy,
representation quality, or generative fidelity. This work adopted the autoregressive forecasting objective
as the SSL task, inspired by Tipirneni and Reddy [13]. Tipirneni and Reddy [13] demonstrated that this
SSL task produces generalized representations, achieving strong performance on downstream mortality
prediction across two benchmark EHR datasets. Other SSL methods in the field have explored and
showed promising performance such as contrastive and reconstruction based approaches [80], [81], [82].
It could be valuable in future work to conduct a comparative analysis of SSL methods suited to the BAT
model and different downstream prediction tasks, especially those most relevant in hospital settings.
7.4
Future work
This work has demonstrated that building on top of the YAIB repository makes it feasible to train
a FM for time-series data in a SSL manner. YAIB offers a flexible framework that simplifies experi-
mentation and accelerates development. As such, it provides a strong foundation for future research,
offering opportunities both to examine the core hypotheses of this work in greater depth and to ex-
plore new directions and ideas beyond its current scope. Figure 14 illustrates the potential of this
work by presenting current implementations (green) and possible extensions (grey). As discussed in
Section 7.2, both the HiRID and AUMCdb datasets can be accessed through additional application
procedures. Since these datasets are supported by the YAIB framework, incorporating them into the
current experimental pipeline would be straightforward. As mentioned in Section 6.1 and illustrated
in Figure 9a the datasets used in this study share a similar data distribution. Correspondingly, the
fine-tuning results presented in Figure 13a and Figure 13b demonstrate that the FM is capable of gen-
eralizing well to data within this distribution. Figure 9a further suggests that HiRID and AUMCdb
lie outside this distribution. This divergence is expected given differences in clinical practices, data
collection standards, and patient populations, as the datasets in this work are all from the US, whereas
AUMCdb and HiRID originate from the Netherlands and Switzerland, respectively. A natural next step
would be to fine-tune the FM on these datasets and assess whether its representations are transferable
enough to support robust performance across more diverse clinical environments. Datasets that are
not supported by the YAIB framework can be integrated but require additional efforts in making them
compatible with the ricu package, as outlined in Section 7.2. Currently Burger et al. [20] introduced
the largest collection of harmonized critical care time-series medical datasets (see Figure 9a. From this
collection the following datasets could be extended to this work, SICdb [83], PICdb [84], Zigong EHR
==PAGE:46==
7.4 Future work
36
Figure 14: Overview of the components implemented in this work (green) and potential extensions
for future work (grey), organized across four levels: datasets, self-supervised learning tasks, model
architectures, and fine-tuning prediction tasks.
[85], and MIMIC-IV-ED [86]. They are all available through PhysioNet and the latter three are all
open access. SICdb required an additional application step, similar to that of HiRID as mentioned in
Section 7.2. Incorporating these datasets could expand the current dataset pool from approximately
300,000 to 826,000 stays, which represents an increase of 526,000 stays or more than 175%. This would
significantly enhance the data available for pre-training the FM. It is worth noting that many datasets
in this field have specific labels associated with them that are not shared across datasets, e.g. mortality
or sepsis. This task-specific design often discourages dataset pooling. In contrast, the unsupervised
nature of the pretraining approach used in this work allows for pooling across datasets, as the learning
objective is label-independent. The primary limitation to pooling, in this case, lies not in the labels but
in ensuring that the combined datasets contain suﬀiciently aligned feature sets. Furthermore, there is
strong potential for future work in selecting and evaluating which clinical prediction tasks to fine-tune
the FM toward. While this study focused solely on in-hospital mortality, the YAIB framework already
supports four additional clinically relevant tasks: Sepsis, Acute Kidney Injury (AKI), Kidney Failure,
and Length of Stay.
In addition, new prediction tasks can be added with relative ease, supported
through the ricu infrastructure, which enables the definition of novel outcomes as clinical concepts.
==PAGE:47==
7.4 Future work
37
Another key direction for future work concerns the architecture of the FM. In this study, BAT was
the only architecture tested for the FM. However, both the YAIB and BAT repositories offer a variety
of deep learning architectures that were not explored here. Specifically, YAIB includes implementa-
tions of a RNN, a Temporal Convolutional Network (TCN), and standard Transformer, while BAT
provides additional models such as SeFT, GRU-D, IP-Nets, standard Transformer, and iTransformer.
As discussed in Section 7.3, transformer-based models may be particularly well-suited for modeling in
clinical time-series data. Therefore, exploring alternative transformer variants from these repositories
is a logical next step. In this work, we only experimented with autoregressive-based forecasting as a
SSL task. As discussed in Section 7.3, the suitability of SSL methods can vary depending on the model
architecture. Consequently, future experiments with new architectures should go hand in hand with
a search for the optimal SSL task. This work should be viewed as a proof-of-concept demonstrating
how the YAIB framework can be extended to support the training of FMs. Future work will need to
move beyond this initial demonstration toward establishing a comprehensive benchmark as this work
only benchmarked against a standard Transformer model (see Figure 13). The YAIB framework also
supports several classical ML models, including Logistic Regression, Random Forests, and Gradient
Boosting, in addition to the wide range of DL models already available. Together, these tools offer
a strong basis for benchmarking different modeling approaches under a unified experimental pipeline.
Comparing the FM against both classical ML and DL baselines will be essential for understanding its
strengths, limitations, and practical value across a range of clinical prediction tasks. Notably, deep
learning models in this field have often been outperformed by tree-based methods [20], highlighting the
importance of including such models in future benchmarking efforts.
==PAGE:48==
CHAPTER 8
Conclusion
This thesis investigated the hypothesis that a model trained in a SSL manner on a large, diverse, and
harmonized critical care time-series dataset can learn generalizable patient representations that effec-
tively transfer to a variety of downstream clinical tasks. To address challenges commonly encountered
in the modeling of EHR data, this study built upon the YAIB framework. YAIB is a reproducible
machine learning platform that supports transparent and standardized benchmarking throughout the
entire model development process. To effectively model irregular multivariate time-series data, the BAT
model was used. This architecture is specifically designed to handle missing values and to capture depen-
dencies across both the temporal and feature dimensions. The proposed approach involved pretraining
a transformer-based model on two well-known ICU datasets, eICU and MIMIC-IV, using forecasting as
a SSL task. The pretrained model was then fine-tuned on an unseen dataset MIMIC-III for the task of
mortality prediction. Experimental results showed that the pre-trained and fine-tuned FM model consis-
tently outperformed two supervised baseline models on datasets containing up to approximately 10,000
labeled samples. A key finding was that fine-tuning only the classification head achieved performance
levels close to full model fine-tuning. This indicates that the learned representations are robust and
contain clinically meaningful information that can be applied with minimal task-specific adjustments.
Although the model developed in this work does not yet meet the criteria of a ”true” FM, it can be
considered an early-stage FM. Short-term future work should focus on scaling pretraining to larger and
more diverse datasets in order to improve performance and generalization further. The YAIB frame-
work supports the integration of new datasets, prediction tasks, model architectures, and now also SSL
objectives. This flexibility provides a strong foundation for ongoing development and experimentation.
In summary, the results of this study support the core hypothesis and highlight the value of SSP for
critical care time-series data. They demonstrate that models trained on large and harmonized datasets
can learn general representations that are useful across a range of clinical tasks, offering a promising
direction for future research in FMs for healthcare.
==PAGE:49==
APPENDIX A
Notation
Notation
Definition
N
# hospital stays/samples
D
# time-varying features
P
# static features
Ti
Length of time series for sample i
Xi ∈RTi×D
Full multivariate time series
pi ∈RP
Static feature vector for sample i
hi ∈RTi
≥0
Time vector for sample i
Mi ∈{0, 1}Ti×D
Binary mask indicating observed/missing values
yi ∈{0, 1}
Binary classification label
ˆyi ∈[0, 1]
Binary classification prediction
Xobs
i
∈RT obs
i
×D
Observation window (for SSL)
Xforecast
i
∈RT forecast
i
×D
Ground truth of forecasting window (for SSL)
Mobs
i
∈{0, 1}T obs
i
×D
Mask for the observation window
Mforecast
i
∈{0, 1}T forecast
i
×D
Mask for the forecasting window
ˆXforecast
i
∈RT forecast
i
×D
Predicted values in forecasting window
Table 2: Summary of notation used in dataset and learning objectives.
==PAGE:50==
APPENDIX B
Features
Table 3: List of features and their corresponding units. Features are grouped as static (unchanging
per ICU stay) and time-varying (measured repeatedly over time).
Feature
Unit
Static
Age at hospital admission
years
Female sex
-
Patient height
cm
Patient weight
kg
Time-varying
Albumin
g/dL
Alkaline phosphatase
IU/L
Alanine aminotransferase
IU/L
Aspartate aminotransferase
IU/L
Band form neutrophils
%
Base excess
mmol/L
Bicarbonate
mmol/L
Bilirubin (direct)
mg/dL
Bilirubin (total)
mg/dL
Blood pressure (diastolic)
mmHg
Blood pressure (systolic)
mmHg
Blood urea nitrogen
mg/dL
Calcium
mg/dL
Calcium ionized
mmol/L
Chloride
mmol/L
CO2 partial pressure
mmHg
C-reactive protein
mg/L
Creatinine
mg/dL
Creatinine kinase
IU/L
Creatinine kinase MB
ng/mL
Fibrinogen
mg/dL
Fraction of inspired oxygen
%
Glucose
mg/dL
Haemoglobin
g/dL
==PAGE:51==
B Features
41
Feature
Unit
Heart rate
beats/minute
International normalised ratio (INR)
-
Lactate
mmol/L
Lymphocytes
%
Magnesium
mg/dL
Mean arterial pressure
mmHg
Mean cell haemoglobin
pg
Mean corpuscular haemoglobin concentration
%
Mean corpuscular volume
fL
Methaemoglobin
%
Neutrophils
%
O2 partial pressure
mmHg
Oxygen saturation
%
Partial thromboplastin time
sec
pH of blood
-
Phosphate
mg/dL
Platelets
1,000 / ￿L
Potassium
mmol/L
Respiratory rate
breaths/minute
Sodium
mmol/L
Temperature
°C
Troponin T
ng/mL
Urine output
mL
White blood cells
1,000 / ￿L
==PAGE:52==
APPENDIX C
Hyperparameters
This appendix provides the optimal hyperparameters used across all experiments, grouped by training
paradigm: supervised training, self-supervised pretraining, and fine-tuning.
C.1
Supervised Training
Table 4: Hyperparameters, training BAT on MIMIC-IV
Model
attn_dropout = 0.2, dropout = 0.2, heads = 1, layers = 2, pooling = max, use_mask
= False, value_embed_size = 64
Trainer
batch_size = 256, epochs = 100, patience = 10, min_delta = 1e-4
Optimizer
lr = 1e-4, weight_decay = 1e-6
Table 5: Hyperparameters, training BAT on eICU
Model
attn_dropout = 0.2, dropout = 0.2, heads = 1, layers = 2, pooling = max, use_mask
= False, value_embed_size = 16
Trainer
batch_size = 256, epochs = 100, patience = 10, min_delta = 1e-4
Optimizer
lr = 1e-4, weight_decay = 1e-6
Table 6: Hyperparameters, training BAT on MIMIC-III
Model
attn_dropout = 0.4, dropout = 0.2, heads = 1, layers = 2, pooling = max, use_mask
= False, value_embed_size = 64
Trainer
batch_size = 256, epochs = 100, patience = 10, min_delta = 1e-4
Optimizer
lr = 1e-4, weight_decay = 1e-6
Table 7: Hyperparameters, training Transformer on MIMIC-III
Model
ff_hidden_mult = 1, l1_reg = 0.96325, hidden = 290, heads = 1, depth = 18, dropout
= 0.03312, dropout_att = 0.50651
Trainer
batch_size = 256, epochs = 100, patience = 10, min_delta = 1e-4
Optimizer
lr = 9e-5, weight_decay = 1e-6
==PAGE:53==
C.2 Self-Supervised Pretraining
43
C.2
Self-Supervised Pretraining
Table 8: Hyperparameters, pretraining BAT on pooled MIMIC-IV + eICU
Model
attn_dropout = 0, dropout = 0, heads = 1, layers = 2, pooling = max, use_mask
= False, value_embed_size = 128
Trainer
batch_size = 128, epochs = 200, patience = 15, min_delta = 0.005
Optimizer
lr = 0.0005, weight_decay = 1e-6
Forecasting
forecast_horizon = 2, max_obs = 24
C.3
Fine-Tuning
Table 9: Hyperparameters, fine-tuning full BAT model on MIMIC-III
Adjusted parameters*
batch_size = 64, learning_rate = 5e-3, lr_scheduler = Exponen-
tialLR(gamma = 0.95)
Table 10: Hyperparameters, fine-tuning BAT classification head on MIMIC-III
Adjusted parameters*
batch_size = 64, learning_rate = 3e-4, lr_scheduler = Exponen-
tialLR(gamma = 0.95)
*All other hyperparameters are identical to those used in the pre-trained BAT model.
==PAGE:54==
Bibliography
[1]
Tong Ruan et al. “Representation learning for clinical time series prediction tasks in electronic
health records.” und. In: Bmc Medical Informatics and Decision Making 19.Suppl 8 (2019),
page 259. issn: 14726947. doi: 10.1186/s12911-019-0985-7.
[2]
Edward Choi et al. “Multi-layer representation learning for medical concepts.” eng. In: Proceedings
of the Acm Sigkdd International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining 13-17-
(2016), pages 1495–1504. doi: 10.1145/2939672.2939823.
[3]
Ross Kleiman et al. “High-Throughput Machine Learning from Electronic Health Records [arXiv].”
eng. In: Arxiv (2019), 26 pp.
[4]
Zhenxing Xu et al. “Subphenotyping depression using machine learning and electronic health
records.” eng. In: Learning Health Systems 4.4 (2020), e10241. issn: 23796146. doi: 10.1002/
lrh2.10241.
[5]
Christopher J. Kelly et al. “Key challenges for delivering clinical impact with artificial intelligence.”
eng. In: Bmc Medicine 17.1 (2019), page 195. issn: 17417015. doi: 10.1186/s12916-019-1426-2.
[6]
Duncan Shillan et al. “Use of machine learning to analyse routinely collected intensive care unit
data: A systematic review.” eng. In: Critical Care 23.1 (2019), page 284. issn: 1466609x, 13648535.
doi: 10.1186/s13054-019-2564-9.
[7]
Ikaro Silva et al. “Predicting In-Hospital Mortality of ICU Patients: The PhysioNet/Computing
in Cardiology Challenge 2012.” eng. In: Computing in Cardiology 39 (2012), pages 245–248. issn:
2325887x, 23258861.
[8]
Romain Pirracchio et al. “Mortality prediction in intensive care units with the Super ICU Learner
Algorithm (SICULA): A population-based study.” eng. In: Lancet Respiratory Medicine 3.1 (2015),
pages 42–52. issn: 22132619, 22132600. doi: 10.1016/S2213-2600(14)70239-5.
[9]
Alexander Meyer et al. “Machine learning for real-time prediction of complications in critical
care: a retrospective study.” eng. In: Lancet Respiratory Medicine 6.12 (2018), pages 905–914.
issn: 22132619, 22132600. doi: 10.1016/S2213-2600(18)30300-X.
[10]
Jay L. Koyner et al. “The development of a machine learning inpatient acute kidney injury pre-
diction model.” eng. In: Critical Care Medicine 46.7 (2018), pages 1070–1077. issn: 00903493,
15300293. doi: 10.1097/CCM.0000000000003123.
[11]
Matthew A. Reyna et al. “Early Prediction of Sepsis From Clinical Data: The PhysioNet/Com-
puting in Cardiology Challenge 2019.” eng. In: Critical Care Medicine 48.2 (2020), pages 210–217.
issn: 15300293, 00903493, 10637389. doi: 10.1097/CCM.0000000000004145.
==PAGE:55==
Bibliography
45
[12]
Michael Moor et al. “Predicting sepsis using deep learning across international sites: a retrospec-
tive development and validation study.” eng. In: Eclinicalmedicine 62 (2023), page 102124. issn:
25895370. doi: 10.1016/j.eclinm.2023.102124.
[13]
Sindhu Tipirneni and Chandan K. Reddy. “Self-Supervised Transformer for Sparse and Irregularly
Sampled Multivariate Clinical Time-Series.” eng. In: Acm Transactions on Knowledge Discovery
From Data 16.6 (2022), page 105. issn: 1556472x, 15564681. doi: 10.1145/3516367.
[14]
OpenAI et al. “GPT-4 Technical Report.” und. In: (2024), page 100.
[15]
Hugo Touvron et al. “Llama 2: Open Foundation and Fine-Tuned Chat Models.” und. In: (2023).
[16]
Lu Yuan et al. “Florence: A New Foundation Model for Computer Vision.” und. In: (2021).
[17]
Ethan Steinberg et al. “Language models are an effective representation learning technique for
electronic health record data.” eng. In: Journal of Biomedical Informatics 113 (2021), page 103637.
issn: 15320464, 15320480. doi: 10.1016/j.jbi.2020.103637.
[18]
Ekin Tiu et al. “Expert-level detection of pathologies from unannotated chest X-ray images via
self-supervised learning.” eng. In: Nature Biomedical Engineering 6.12 (2022), pages 1399–1406.
issn: 2157846x. doi: 10.1038/s41551-022-00936-9.
[19]
Karan Singhal et al. “Large language models encode clinical knowledge.” eng. In: Nature 620.7972
(2023), pages 172–180. issn: 14764687, 00280836. doi: 10.1038/s41586-023-06291-2.
[20]
Manuel Burger et al. Towards Foundation Models for Critical Care Time Series. 2024. arXiv:
2411.16346 [cs.LG]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.16346.
[21]
Rockenschaub Patrick et al. “Generalisability of AI-based scoring systems in the ICU: a systematic
review and meta-analysis.” eng. In: Medrxiv (cold Spring Harbor Laboratory) (2023). doi: 10.1101/
2023.10.11.23296733.
[22]
Christopher M. Sauer et al. “Systematic Review and Comparison of Publicly Available ICU Data
Sets - A Decision Guide for Clinicians and Data Scientists.” eng. In: Critical Care Medicine 50.6
(2022), E581–E588. issn: 15300293, 00903493. doi: 10.1097/CCM.0000000000005517.
[23]
Joseph Futoma et al. “Generalization in Clinical Prediction Models: The Blessing and Curse of
Measurement Indicator Variables.” eng. In: Critical Care Explorations 3.7 (2021), E0453. issn:
26398028. doi: 10.1097/CCE.0000000000000453.
[24]
L. Wynants et al. “Untapped potential of multicenter studies: a review of cardiovascular risk
prediction models revealed inappropriate analyses and wide variation in reporting.” und. In: Di-
agnostic and Prognostic Research 3.1 (2019), page 6. issn: 23977523. doi: 10.1186/s41512-019-
0046-9.
[25]
Yongjun Xu et al. “Artificial intelligence: A powerful paradigm for scientific research.” eng. In:
Innovation 2.4 (2021), page 100179. issn: 26666758. doi: 10.1016/j.xinn.2021.100179.
[26]
Batta Mahesh. “Machine Learning Algorithms - A Review.” und. In: International Journal of Sci-
ence and Research (ijsr) 9.1 (2020), pages 381–386. issn: 23197064. doi: 10.21275/ART20203995.
[27]
Yann Lecun, Yoshua Bengio, and Geoffrey Hinton. “Deep learning.” eng. In: Nature 521.7553
(2015), pages 436–444. issn: 14764687, 00280836. doi: 10.1038/nature14539.
==PAGE:56==
Bibliography
46
[28]
C. R. Vishwanatha et al. “Face Recognition and Identification Using Deep Learning.” eng. In:
2023 3rd International Conference on Advances in Electrical, Computing, Communication and
Sustainable Technologies, Icaect 2023 (2023), pages 1–5. doi: 10 . 1109 / ICAECT57570 . 2023 .
10118154.
[29]
Murat Hüsnü SAZLI. “A brief review of feed-forward neural networks.” tur. In: Communications,
Faculty of Science, University of Ankara (2006), pages 11–17. issn: 26186462, 13036009. doi:
10.1501/0003168.
[30]
Omar Elharrouss et al. “Loss Functions in Deep Learning: A Comprehensive Review.” eng. In:
(2025). doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2504.04242.
[31]
Keiron O’Shea and Ryan Nash. An Introduction to Convolutional Neural Networks. 2015. arXiv:
1511.08458 [cs.NE]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/1511.08458.
[32]
Filippo Maria Bianchi et al. “Recurrent neural network architectures.” eng. In: Springerbriefs in
Computer Science 0.9783319703374 (2017), pages 23–29. issn: 21915776, 21915768. doi: 10.1007/
978-3-319-70338-1_3.
[33]
Ashish Vaswani et al. Attention Is All You Need. 2023. arXiv: 1706.03762 [cs.CL]. url: https:
//arxiv.org/abs/1706.03762.
[34]
Mohammed Tuays Almuqati et al. “Challenges in Supervised and Unsupervised Learning: A Com-
prehensive Overview.” eng. In: International Journal on Advanced Science, Engineering and In-
formation Technology 14.4 (2024), pages 1449–1455. issn: 24606952, 20885334. doi: 10.18517/
ijaseit.14.4.20191.
[35]
Kexin Zhang et al. “Self-Supervised Learning for Time Series Analysis: Taxonomy, Progress, and
Prospects.” eng. In: Ieee Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 46.10 (2024),
pages 6775–6794. issn: 19393539, 01628828. doi: 10.1109/TPAMI.2024.3387317.
[36]
Zina Ben-Miled et al. “Multi-Modal Fusion of Routine Care Electronic Health Records (EHR):
A Scoping Review.” eng. In: Information (2078-2489) (2025). issn: 20782489. doi: 10.3390/
info16010054.
[37]
Jeong Min Lee and Milos Hauskrecht. “Modeling multivariate clinical event time-series with recur-
rent temporal mechanisms.” eng. In: Artificial Intelligence in Medicine 112 (2021), page 102021.
issn: 18732860, 09333657. doi: 10.1016/j.artmed.2021.102021.
[38]
Xiongjun Zhao et al. “ Multivariate Time-Series Representation Learning for Continuous Medical
Diagnosis.” In: 2024 IEEE International Conference on Bioinformatics and Biomedicine (BIBM).
Los Alamitos, CA, USA: IEEE Computer Society, December 2024, pages 2936–2941. doi: 10.
1109/BIBM62325.2024.10947608. url: https://doi.ieeecomputersociety.org/10.1109/
BIBM62325.2024.10947608.
[39]
Jiaqi Wang et al. “Recent Advances in Predictive Modeling with Electronic Health Records.” eng.
In: Ijcai 2024 (2024), pages 8272–8280. issn: 10450823. doi: 10.24963/ijcai.2024/914.
[40]
Zachary C. Lipton et al. “Learning to diagnose with LSTM recurrent neural networks.” eng. In: 4th
International Conference on Learning Representations, Iclr 2016 - Conference Track Proceedings
(2016).
==PAGE:57==
Bibliography
47
[41]
Zhengping Che et al. “Recurrent Neural Networks for Multivariate Time Series with Missing
Values.” eng. In: Scientific Reports 8.1 (2018), page 6085. issn: 20452322. doi: 10.1038/s41598-
018-24271-9.
[42]
Junyu Luo et al. “HiTANet: Hierarchical Time-Aware Attention Networks for Risk Prediction on
Electronic Health Records.” eng. In: Proceedings of the Acm Sigkdd International Conference on
Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (2020), pages 647–656. doi: 10.1145/3394486.3403107.
[43]
Laila Rasmy et al. “Med-BERT: pretrained contextualized embeddings on large-scale structured
electronic health records for disease prediction.” eng. In: Npj Digital Medicine 4.1 (2021), page 86.
issn: 23986352. doi: 10.1038/s41746-021-00455-y.
[44]
Zhichao Yang et al. “TransformEHR: transformer-based encoder-decoder generative model to
enhance prediction of disease outcomes using electronic health records.” eng. In: Nature Commu-
nications 14.1 (2023), page 7857. issn: 20411723. doi: 10.1038/s41467-023-43715-z.
[45]
Yuan Gong, Yu An Chung, and James Glass. “Ast: Audio spectrogram transformer.” eng. In:
Proceedings of the Annual Conference of the International Speech Communication Association,
Interspeech 1 (2021), pages 56–60. issn: 19909772, 2308457x. doi: 10.21437/Interspeech.2021-
698.
[46]
Hugo Dalla-Torre et al. “Nucleotide Transformer: building and evaluating robust foundation
models for human genomics.” eng. In: Nature Methods 22.2 (2025), page 23916. issn: 15487105,
15487091. doi: 10.1038/s41592-024-02523-z.
[47]
Yulia Rubanova, Ricky T.Q. Chen, and David Duvenaud. “Latent ODEs for irregularly-sampled
time series.” eng. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 32 (2019). Edited by
H. Wallach et al. issn: 10495258.
[48]
Satya Narayan Shukla and Benjamin M. Marlin. “MULTI-TIME ATTENTION NETWORKS
FOR IRREGULARLY SAMPLED TIME SERIES.” eng. In: Iclr 2021 - 9th International Confer-
ence on Learning Representations (2021).
[49]
Kylie Getz, Rebecca A. Hubbard, and Kristin A. Linn. “Performance of Multiple Imputation Using
Modern Machine Learning Methods in Electronic Health Records Data.” eng. In: Epidemiology
34.2 (2023), pages 206–215. issn: 15315487, 10443983. doi: 10.1097/EDE.0000000000001578.
[50]
Rachael DeVries et al. “Bi-Axial Transformers: Addressing the Increasing Complexity of EHR
Classification.” Unpublished manuscript. 2025.
[51]
Michael Wornow et al. “The shaky foundations of large language models and foundation models
for electronic health records.” und. In: Npj Digital Medicine 6.1 (2023), page 135. issn: 23986352.
doi: 10.1038/s41746-023-00879-8.
[52]
Chin Chia Michael Yeh et al. “Toward a Foundation Model for Time Series Data.” eng. In: Interna-
tional Conference on Information and Knowledge Management, Proceedings (2023), pages 4400–
4404. doi: 10.1145/3583780.3615155.
[53]
Michael Wornow et al. “EHRSHOT: An EHR Benchmark for Few-Shot Evaluation of Foundation
Models.” eng. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36 (2023). issn: 10495258.
[54]
Zeming Chen et al. “MEDITRON-70B: Scaling Medical Pretraining for Large Language Models.”
und. In: (2023).
==PAGE:58==
Bibliography
48
[55]
Adibvafa Fallahpour et al. “EhrMamba: Towards Generalizable and Scalable Foundation Models
for Electronic Health Records.” eng. In: Proceedings of Machine Learning Research 259 (2024),
pages 291–307. issn: 26403498.
[56]
Robin van de Water et al. “Yet Another ICU Benchmark: A Flexible Multi-Center Framework
for Clinical ML.” eng. In: 12th International Conference on Learning Representations, Iclr 2024
(2024).
[57]
Daniel Jarrett et al. “Clairvoyance: A Pipeline Toolkit for Medical Time Series [arXiv].” eng. In:
(2023). doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2310.18688.
[58]
Hrayr Harutyunyan et al. “Multitask learning and benchmarking with clinical time series data.”
eng. In: Scientific Data 6.1 (2019), page 96. issn: 20524463. doi: 10.1038/s41597-019-0103-9.
[59]
Hugo Yèche et al. HiRID-ICU-Benchmark – A Comprehensive Machine Learning Benchmark on
High-resolution ICU Data. 2022. arXiv: 2111.08536 [cs.LG]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/
2111.08536.
[60]
Patrick Rockenschaub et al. “The Impact of Multi-Institution Datasets on the Generalizability of
Machine Learning Prediction Models in the ICU.” eng. In: Critical Care Medicine 52.11 (2024),
pages 1710–1721. issn: 15300293, 00903493. doi: 10.1097/CCM.0000000000006359.
[61]
Max Horn et al. “Set functions for time series.” eng. In: 37th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Icml 2020 168147-6 (2020), pages 4303–4313.
[62]
Yicheng Luo et al. “Hi-Patch: Hierarchical Patch GNN for Irregular Multivariate Time Series.” In:
Forty-second International Conference on Machine Learning. 2025. url: https://openreview.
net/forum?id=nBgQ66iEUu.
[63]
Hrishikesh Patel et al. “EMIT- Event-Based Masked Auto Encoding for Irregular Time Series.”
eng. In: Arxiv (cornell University) (2024). doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2409.16554.
[64]
Zineb Senane et al. “Self-Supervised Learning of Time Series Representation via Diffusion Process
and Imputation-Interpolation-Forecasting Mask.” eng. In: (2024). doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2405.
05959.
[65]
Alex Labach et al. “DuETT: Dual Event Time Transformer for Electronic Health Records.” und.
In: (2023).
[66]
Nicolas Bennett et al. “ricu: R’s interface to intensive care data.” eng. In: Gigascience 12 (2023),
giad041. issn: 2047217x. doi: 10.1093/gigascience/giad041.
[67]
R. van de Water. YAIB-cohorts. GitHub repository. 2024. url: https://github.com/rvandewater/
YAIB-cohorts (visited on 19 June 2025).
[68]
Ruben van de Water. YAIB: Yet Another ICU Benchmark. https://github.com/rvandewater/
YAIB. Accessed: 2025-06-19.
[69]
Alistair E.W. Johnson et al. “MIMIC-III, a freely accessible critical care database.” eng. In: Sci-
entific Data 3.1 (2016), page 160035. issn: 20524463. doi: 10.1038/sdata.2016.35.
[70]
Alistair E.W. Johnson et al. MIMIC-IV, a freely accessible electronic health record dataset. eng.
2023. doi: 10.1038/s41597-022-01899-x.
[71]
Tom J. Pollard et al. “The eICU collaborative research database, a freely available multi-center
database for critical care research.” eng. In: Scientific Data 5.1 (2018), page 180178. issn: 20524463.
doi: 10.1038/sdata.2018.178.
==PAGE:59==
Bibliography
49
[72]
Alistair Johnson, Tom Pollard, and Roger Mark. MIMIC-III Clinical Database CareVue subset
(version 1.4). https://doi.org/10.13026/8a4q-w170. PhysioNet. RRID:SCR_007345. 2022.
[73]
Scott C. Lowe et al. “An Empirical Study into Clustering of Unseen Datasets with Self-Supervised
Encoders.” und. In: (2024).
[74]
Laurens Van Der Maaten and Geoffrey Hinton. “Visualizing data using t-SNE.” eng. In: Journal
of Machine Learning Research 9 (2008), pages 2579–2625. issn: 15337928, 15324435.
[75]
Leland McInnes, John Healy, and James Melville. UMAP: Uniform manifold approximation and
projection for dimension reduction. eng. 2018.
[76]
A. L. Goldberger et al. “PhysioBank, PhysioToolkit, and PhysioNet: Components of a New Re-
search Resource for Complex Physiologic Signals.” In: Circulation 101.23 (2000 (June 13)). Cir-
culation Electronic Pages: http://circ.ahajournals.org/content/101/23/e215.full PMID:1085218;
doi: 10.1161/01.CIR.101.23.e215, e215–e220.
[77]
Salman Khan et al. “Transformers in Vision: A Survey.” eng. In: Acm Computing Surveys 54.10
(2022), page 200. issn: 15577341, 03600300. doi: 10.1145/3505244.
[78]
Ailing Zeng et al. “Are Transformers Effective for Time Series Forecasting?” eng. In: Proceedings
of the 37th Aaai Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Aaai 2023 37.9 (2023), pages 11121–11128.
issn: 23743468, 21595399. doi: 10.1609/aaai.v37i9.26317.
[79]
Guokun Lai et al. “Modeling long- and short-term temporal patterns with deep neural networks.”
eng. In: 41st International Acm Sigir Conference on Research and Development in Information
Retrieval, Sigir 2018 (2018), pages 95–104. doi: 10.1145/3209978.3210006.
[80]
Junghoon Lim, Seunghan Lee, and Taeyoung Park. “Soft Contrastive Learning for Irregular Mul-
tivariate Time Series.” In: 1st ICML Workshop on Foundation Models for Structured Data. 2025.
url: https://openreview.net/forum?id=9Mx8YfLDbu.
[81]
Ranak Roy Chowdhury et al. “PrimeNet: Pre-training for Irregular Multivariate Time Series.”
eng. In: Proceedings of the 37th Aaai Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Aaai 2023 37.6 (2023),
pages 7184–7192. issn: 23743468, 21595399. doi: 10.1609/aaai.v37i6.25876.
[82]
Zhihao Yu et al. “SMART: Towards Pre-trained Missing-Aware Model for Patient Health Status
Prediction.” eng. In: Arxiv (cornell University) (2024). doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2405.09039.
[83]
Niklas Rodemund et al. “The Salzburg Intensive Care database (SICdb): an openly available
critical care dataset.” eng. In: Intensive Care Medicine 49.6 (2023), pages 700–702. issn: 14321238,
03424642. doi: 10.1007/s00134-023-07046-3.
[84]
Xian Zeng et al. “PIC, a paediatric-specific intensive care database.” eng. In: Scientific Data 7.1
(2020), page 14. issn: 20524463. doi: 10.1038/s41597-020-0355-4.
[85]
Ping Xu et al. “Critical Care Database Comprising Patients With Infection.” eng. In: Frontiers
in Public Health 10 (2022), page 852410. issn: 22962565. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2022.852410.
[86]
Alistair Johnson et al. MIMIC-IV-ED (version 2.2). https://doi.org/10.13026/5ntk-km72.
PhysioNet. RRID:SCR_007345. 2023.
==PAGE:60==
