==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Sharing the Gains of Aggregation
Cooperative Redistribution of Imbalance Cost
Savings
Asmus Winther Eriksen
Lyngby campus, Lyngby, August 12,
2025
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
DTU Wind Energy
Department of Wind Energy
DTU RisГё Campus
Frederiksborgvej 399 Building 125
4000 Roskilde, Denmark
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
As renewable penetration increases, Balance Responsible Parties (BRPs) face growing
uncertainty in matching supply and demand. While portfolio aggregation measurably
reduces both imbalance costs and risk, it also obscures each consumer or producers
true contribution, particularly as TSOвҖҷs in the Nordic countries move towards partially
asymmetric pricing in the full-cost balancing imbalance settlement scheme.
This thesis develops a cooperative-game-theoretic framework to allocate ex-post im-
balance costs and risk among prosumers in a 22-client portfolio. Only the day-ahead and
imbalance markets are considered, and an asymmetric two-price imbalance settlement
is used to approximate full-cost balancing. Cost and risk allocation are modeled as
transferable-utility games. Multiple core-selection mechanisms are implemented: The
Shapley Value, VCG, the Gately Point, Nucleolus, and two bespoke mechanisms: Uniform
Price and Reduced Cost. These are compared against a flat rate allocation where the
BRP makes no effort to differentiate between clients.
Each mechanism is assessed for its computational tractability, fairness, budget balance,
and incentive compatibility. The Shapley Value and Nucleolus are found impractical
for these problems, as they are too computationally taxing to scale for large portfolios.
Likewise, VCG is impractical because of its lack of budget balance. A modified VCG
mechanism that ensures budget balance for this problem is proposed, however, it results
in unstable allocations for some games.
Among the classical core selection mechanisms, the Gately Point proves to be the only
practical mechanism, based on computational complexity, stability and budget balanced.
The Reduced Cost and Uniform Price mechanisms prove practical and fair, and can be
considered as simpler alternatives to the Gately Point.
While several tested mechanisms yield stable allocations, each inherently favors certain
types of clients. In some cases, a clientвҖҷs allocated cost may more than double when
transitioning from a mechanism that benefits them to one that does not. As forecast
accuracy improves, these disparities become more pronounced, making it increasingly
important to understand which clients are advantaged or disadvantaged by a given
mechanism.
The application of cooperative game theory to BRP pricing is found to be an important
consideration, as there are significant differences in cost and risk between clients in the
portfolio. Providing similar rates for all clients distributes costs unfairly and does not
reward clients for having low imbalances. Therefore, cooperative game theory can aid
prosumers by assigning costs that reflect their balancing needs, and aid BRPs and the
electrical grid by incentivizing prosumers to work towards predictable consumption.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at the department of Wind Energy at the Technical University
of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring a M.Sc. degree.
The research described in this thesis is the result of a cooperation between Reel Energy
ApS and DTU Wind. The initial idea behind the cooperation was to develop a model
for controlling a battery that was shared between a portfolio of clients as part of ReelвҖҷs
Helios project. After considering this problem, the issue of how to properly allocate
the gains from the battery among shareholders, seemed more interesting and outside of
ReelвҖҷs expertise, and raised questions on how gains of cooperation could be shared in
other parts of ReelвҖҷs business.
Lyngby campus, Lyngby, August 12, 2025
Asmus Winther Eriksen
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
When I first began thinking about my thesis, all I knew was that I wanted it to connect
with the real world. After years immersed in theory, I was burned out on purely academic
pursuits.
Collaborating with Reel on this project has shown me that research can be both in-
teresting and impactful. It has reignited my curiosity and reminded me why I love learning.
I would like to thank
Jalal Kazempour, Professor, DTU
For always asking the right questions and having all the answers, both related to the
thesis and for what lies beyond.
David Ribberholt Ipsen, Machine Learning Engineer, Reel
For his enthusiasm and helpfulness. Thank you for the data and enabling me to ground
my research in the industry. I look forward to meeting you again in the small world of
energy markets.
Farzaneh Pourahmadi, Researcher, DTU
For putting me in contact with Reel and giving initial guidance.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Use of artificial intelligence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
The problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
The Company Case . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.4
Literature Review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Theory
7
2.1
Game Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Optimization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3
Modelling the problem
13
3.1
Stochastic Optimization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
Cost and risk calculation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4
Game Theoretical Details of the Problems
17
4.1
Incentive compatibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.2
The cost allocation problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.3
The risk assigning problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5
Core-selection mechanisms
25
5.1
Shapley Value . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.2
Uniform Price . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.3
Reduced Cost . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.4
VCG . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.5
Gately Point . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.6
Nucleolus
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
6
Data:
45
6.1
Data Sources
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
6.2
Data Availability
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
6.3
Forecasts and scenarios . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
6.4
Accuracy of model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
7
Comparing mechanisms
49
7.1
Mechanism properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
7.2
Numerical comparison
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
7.3
Summary of results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
8
Discussion
65
8.1
Points of Critique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
8.2
Further Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
9
Conclusion
69
A Appendix
71
A.1 Budget imbalance of risk problem caused by changing of indices in Оұ-tail
71
A.2 WMAPE dependent on scenarios
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
A.3 22 Client Cost Timing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
A.4 Risk problem timing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
A.5 Preferred allocations of clients . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
A.6 Nomenclature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
A.7 Code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
Bibliography
79
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
1.1
Use of artificial intelligence
Artificial intelligence has been utilized in the creation of the code for the project and the
readme file.
When creating a complicated function, the function was first written in a way that
was simple and fast to create, and then AI was used to improve it while keeping the
functionality, if needed.
E.g.
the characteristic function calculation and nucleolus
implementation were initially written using many dictionaries and inefficient loops, but
made faster using AI.
Simple functions like plotting and data manipulation have in some cases been created
entirely by AI.
AI has been used to format tables and figures with author created content. E.g. creating
subfigures, switching rows in tables, changing spacing.
AI has also been used to create first drafts of abstract, conclusion, and nomenclature.
AI has not been used in any other way related to creating the content of the thesis.
1.2
The problem
The problem studied in this thesis is balancing the amount of power purchased and con-
sumed, and how the portfolio effect influences that. When any consumer uses electricity,
it must be purchased in a series of markets. It is a balancing responsible partyвҖҷs (BRP)
role to ensure that consumption and purchased energy on these markets match up.
It is important that produced and consumed power always match in a power system and
when there is a discrepancy between these, the imbalance price that reflects the cost to
remediate this must be paid. Imbalances can be either in the "dominating" or "dominant"
direction or in the non-dominant direction. An imbalance in the dominant direction has
the same direction as the overall system imbalance, so it contributes to increasing the
imbalance in the system. An imbalance in the non-dominant direction is opposite, and
so contributes to reducing the imbalance.
In a one-price system the cost is symmetrical. Agents with imbalances in the dominant
direction, called "polluter", will be penalized the same per unit of imbalance as agents
with opposite imbalances are rewarded. In the Nordic countries, the Transmission System
Operators (TSOвҖҷs) are moving towards a full cost balancing system [15]. The reason
for this change is that procurement of reserve balancing capacity that can be activated
when imbalances arenвҖҷt resolved in the preceding markets, is expected to rise by Лң50% in
DK1 and Лң33% in DK2 by 2030 [15]. The current one-price imbalance system only covers
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
the costs of activation of balancing units, but the reserve capacity cost is covered by the
TSO, and in the end by regular consumers.
The purpose of full cost balancing is to make polluters cover the entire cost of their
imbalance. The penalty will only apply to imbalances in the dominant imbalance direc-
tion [15], and therefore this is a move towards a system with two prices. The dominant
imbalance direction will be the direction of the overall system imbalance. In anticipation
of this, the imbalance market in this thesis will be modelled as a two-price scheme, with
polluters paying the imbalance cost in the dominant direction and the spot price in the
non-dominant direction.
In this thesis, a BRP that is remunerated based on spot price plus a flat fee per
unit of energy used is studied. This form of payment means that the BRP isnвҖҷt directly
exposed to the spot price, instead they are exposed to the imbalance spread О». Which is
the difference between imbalance price О»Imbalance and spot price О»DA
О» = О»Imbalance вҲ’О»DA
(1.1)
The imbalance spread is the difference between the imbalance price and the day ahead
price. Suppose the imbalance price is О»imbalance = 100 EUR
MWh and the day ahead price is
О»DA = 50 EUR
MWh. If the BRP buys 1MWh too little, they will have to pay 100вӮ¬ for the
imbalance, but the consumer pays the spot price of 50вӮ¬, so the total cost to the BRP is
50вӮ¬.
In a one-price system, this is symmetrical. So a BRP that bought 1MWh too much
would get paid 50вӮ¬, but for this thesis a two-price system is assumed where polluters pay
and others do not get paid, in line with the preliminary full cost balancing model [15].
This means that the spread would be 50 EUR
MWh for buying missing electricity and 0 EUR
MWh
for selling excess electricity.
When aggregating multiple clients in a portfolio, the portfolio effect will reduce the
variance of the imbalance. This comes as a result of forecasting errors counteracting each
other. A simple example can be seen in figure 1.1. Three clients are in the portfolio,
each have an imbalance caused by buying an inaccurate amount of electricity for them.
By aggregating them, the overall imbalance is reduced. Assuming the imbalance spread
is 50 EUR
MWh with the positive direction being dominant, the unaggregated cost would be:
1MWh В· 50 EUR
MWh + 2MWh В· 50 EUR
MWh вҲ’2MWh В· 0 EUR
MWh = 150EUR
while the aggregated cost in a two-price system would be
1MWh В· 50 EUR
MWh = 50EUR
In figure 1.2, the costs of a portfolio can be seen in a two-price system, assuming that
client imbalances are normally distributed. The two-price system will set all positive
income to 0. Therefore; the expected income will be lower than the mean.
==PAGE:13==
1.2 The problem
3
1
2
-2
1
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
A
B
C
Aggregate
Imbalance [MW]
Client
Imbalance of clients in portfolio
Figure 1.1: Effects of aggregating clients for a single imbalance realization
When summing normal distributions, the mean Вө of the combined distribution will be
the sum of the other distributions Вөsum = Вө1 + Вө2, while the standard deviation Пғ of
the combined distribution will be Пғsum =
q
Пғ2
1 + Пғ2
2, resulting in the combined portfolio
having a lower standard deviation than if the two were separate clients.
In a one-price scheme, since the mean would be the same, the average cost of having the
clients in separate portfolios and having them combined would be the same, but in the
two price scheme, the lower standard deviation causes the expected income to be higher
when aggregating clients.
Figure 1.2: Effects of aggregating clients over time in a two-price system. Distribution
indicates one-price income, area indicates two-price income
==PAGE:14==
4
1 Introduction
In a one-price system, aggregation would not reduce costs as the expected cost would
be the same as the mean of the distribution, and the means are simply added together,
however; aggregation is still beneficial in a one-price system.
In figure 1.3, the effects of aggregation on risk of high costs can be seen. The conditional
value at risk (CVaR) with Оұ = 0.1 is used as the risk metric in this comparison, indicating
the average income in the 10% worst scenarios. CVaR is defined and described more in
depth in section 3.2.2.
From figure 1.3, it is apparent that CVaR is increased as the clients are combined.
Adding client 2 to the portfolio reduces CVaR, rather than increasing it. The results from
aggregating clients on CVaR will be the same for two-price and one-price schemes, as
long as Оұ is chosen so no client has a positive income in any of their worst case scenarios.
This thesis will study how aggregation of clients impact the cost and risk of a portfolio
Figure 1.3: Effects of aggregating clients over time on CVaR
in a two-price system, by modeling it as a cooperative game where the goal is to minimize
costs.
By properly quantifying the cost and risk, it will be possible to make more fair agreements
between BRPвҖҷs who buy the electricity and consumers who consume it, that properly
reflect the cost of the consumers imbalance. The exact usage of this data can vary
depending on the market. The most similar to the current market conditions would be
to receive historical data from the clients, and set fees ex-ante that reflect the expected
imbalance costs incurred by the client.
Another possibility is a model as seen from insurance companies, where a relatively high
fee is agreed upon ex-ante, but the clients are compensated by a rebate when actual
==PAGE:15==
1.3 The Company Case
5
imbalances incurred are calculated ex-post. Similarly, a payment on account system as
sometimes seen with power bills could be implemented where the deviations from the fee,
either positive or negative, are resolved ex-post.
The actual implementation of this system of fair payment can be difficult, as the purpose
of a BRP is to assume the risk of imbalances. In a system where the client is more
directly exposed to the costs of their imbalances, the client assumes risk that they have
limited control over, so this is likely to be a product with lower cost for risk taking clients.
In summary, consumers cause imbalances in produced and consumed electricity in
the electric grid. It is the role of BRPвҖҷs to take responsibility for this imbalance, but
correctly attributing the cost and risk each consumer adds cannot be done by looking at
only the individual consumer, as the whole portfolio will influence the cost. This thesis
will study the best ways to attribute this cost and risk to individual consumers, so it
can be applied to make competitive agreements that reflect true costs. This leads to the
central research question:
How can the true imbalance costs of prosumers in a portfolio be allocated using
cooperative game theory?
1.3
The Company Case
This thesis examines the case of Reel Energy ApS, a Danish broker specializing in Power
Purchase Agreements (PPAs) and Balance Responsible Party services. The focus is
on their 25-signatory PPA centered around in Mesballe, Denmark [4]. As data is only
available for 22 signatories, see section 6.2, only 22 will be studied in this thesis. This
agreement is notable for its high number of signatories, each of whom has acquired a
share in a 14 MW photovoltaic (PV) plant. The signatories represent a diverse mix of
customer types and demand profiles [4], resulting in a heterogeneous portfolio. This
diversity offers a robust foundation for analyzing how risk and cost may vary across
different customer segments.
1.4
Literature Review
Since the introduction of the Shapley Value in 1951[34], research in the basic theory
behind cooperative game theory has continued, with concepts such as the Vickrey-Clarke-
Groves mechanism being developed 1961-1973 [41][10][23], the nucleolus in 1969[33], and
the Gately Point being introduced in 1974[19]. Beyond introducing the Gately Point,
GatelyвҖҷs paper is notable as studying investment planning in electric power generation,
making it one of the earliest works combining cooperative game theory and energy
economics.
Since then, cooperative game theory has become widely noted, as seen by ShapleyвҖҷs
Nobel Prize in Economic Sciences from 2012. It has been especially adopted in energy
==PAGE:16==
6
1 Introduction
economics, and has been applied to many cases within the field. Some examples are:
Sharing the gains from energy communities [25], sharing energy storage capacity [40],
exploring alternatives to marginal pricing in electricity markets [16].
Much of the existing research has focused on the supply side and microgrids, but as
markets become more liberalized, it is pertinent to look at the demand side of the market
as well. Srinivasan et. al. [37] study how price-maker buyers can form coalitions and
bid strategically in order to increase profits. AyГіn et. al. [1] studied how price-taking
aggregators should bid in day-ahead and spot markets, focusing on the optimization and
generation of the bids, but not employing game-theory to redistribute the gains.
As the share of renewables rise, the uncertainty in energy markets rise as well
[8]. An aspect in countering this is aggregation of diverse assets, contributing to the
portfolio effect and reducing uncertainty. Investing in different and geographically spread
generation technologies to reduce uncertainty from the supply side is widely studied
[18] [39]. Baeyans et. al. specifically employs cooperational game theory to reduce
uncertainty and increase profits of wind turbines through aggregation [2]. On the demand
side, diversification in terms of contract types has been studied, showing that it is
preferable to have a mix of bi-lateral contracts and spot market exposure [21] and that
hedging both in terms of power price and generation sources is preferable [5].
Demand side uncertainty can be mitigated partly by bidding curves, anticipating the
demand of price-elastic clients [36], but as ownership of consumer power supply increases,
demand side uncertainty increases further [31]. Russo has found that as consumer
renewables become more common, the risk to retailers rise, driven more by the load risk
from intermittent self sufficiency, than price risk [31].
One approach to countering this is to calculate time-of-use tariffs for all clients, that
clients pay based on the uncertainty in that usage time [29]. This approach is fitting
if individual client uncertainty is not a significant factor, e.g. for large portfolios, but
doesnвҖҷt differentiate between clients.
For a retailer with a low amount of clients that each carry varying amounts of risk, it
might be useful to be able to attribute their risk and cost as part of the portfolio to
them. Cooperative game theory can be applied to this problem, quantifying each clients
contribution based on fair principles, enabling the retailer to make intelligent decisions
regarding their portfolio and pricing.
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 2
Theory
2.1
Game Theory
Game theory is the study of interactions between rational and intelligent agents. In this
context, rational means that agents do what is best for them, they will choose the course
of action that maximizes their own game. Intelligent means that the agents have the
means to understand the problem and find the best strategies[27].
A natural example of a game is chess. The agents each are rational because they want to
win the game, and they are assumed intelligent because they know all the moves and
counter moves. In the real world, the assumption of agents being able to compute every
single move is improbable, but intelligence must be assumed when designing the game of
chess, as fairness of the game is important.
2.1.1
Theory of cooperative games
When studying game theory and decision making, games can be divided into cooperative
and non-cooperative games. The main distinction being that in cooperative games,
obligatory contracts between agents are possible, while they are not in non-cooperative
games [6].
A classic example of a game is the prisoners dilemma. Two agents can choose whether
to turn the other in, or to stay silent. There are three possible outcomes: If no agent
turns the other in, both will get a mild sentence. If one agent turns the other in, the
snitching agent gets freed and the other agent gets a harsh sentence. If both agents turn
each other in, they will both get a medium sentence.
In a non-cooperative game, the agents do not trust each other, and assume that the
other agents will make the choice that maximizes their personal gain. This leads to the
dominant strategy being to turn the other agent in, leading to both agents getting a
harsh sentence.
In a cooperative game, the agents can make an agreement beforehand that they will
work together, leading to the collectively best outcome of not turning each other in.
The prisoners dilemma is a simple game, but introducing complications can make it more
interesting to study. Maybe one agent has committed a harsher crime than the other,
leading to them benefiting more from not being turned in. In this case, the agents may
make a deal that one agent pays the other, in order to maintain fairness.
The problem studied here, will be studied as a set of cooperative games. This allows
agents to collude in order to get the best possible outcome for the group as a whole, as
==PAGE:18==
8
2 Theory
long as the group acts truthfully [3].
A game can be further described as having transferable utilities if money or something
else can be used to transfer the utility between participant in a manner that incentivizes
effective cooperation. The prisoners dilemma can be a transferable utilities game if the
prisoners are able to pay each other to compensate.
Games can be maximization or minimization games.
Many cooperative games are
described as maximization games, and much of the literature defines terms based on
those. The games in this thesis are defined as cost reduction games, with a goal of
minimizing expenditure. Cost reduction games have an equivalent savings game, where
the purpose is to maximize the savings compared to the baseline. An example is the
prisoners dilemma. It can be described as a minimization game, where both agents want
as low a sentence as possible, or it can be described as a maximization game, where both
agents want to maximize their reduction in their sentence. The same theory applies to
minimization games and maximization games with slight changes in terminology or signs.
In this thesis, the games are kept as cost reduction games, so minimization terms are
used instead of maximization terms throughout the report.
In cooperative games, agents i вҲҲN and coalitions S are central terms. With agents
being the individual clients in the set of all agents N and coalition being a subset of N,
S вҠҶN, that could decide to work together. If a coalition is made up of all the agents it is
called the grand coalition N, if it is made up of no agents, it is the empty set вҲ…. Together,
the agents participate in a game v. The game is a set of characteristic functions v(S)
which defines the maximum utility a coalition can produce. The general purpose of a
minimization game is to maximize the utility by minimizing the total cost for all players,
by assigning them to coalitions.
In the context of the prisoners dilemma, the characteristic function would be the sentence
length. Suppose a short sentence is 1 year, a medium is 3 years and a long is 5 years. If a
prisoner acts alone, they can expect the other agent to turn them in, and therefore their
best choice is to turn the other agent in for a medium sentence: v({1}) = v({2}) = 3 for
a collective sentence of 6 years. If they work together, they can collectively achieve a
shorter sentence: v(N) = 2. As this is a total of 4 years shorter than each agent working
alone, the agents will have an incentive to work together.
An important property of some maximization cooperative games is super-additivity,
meaning that the value of two coalitions working together will be at least as much as
their value working apart v(S1) + v(S2) вүӨv(S1 + S2). The minimization equivalent to
this is sub-additivity where v(S1) + v(S2) вүҘv(S1 + S2). This guarantees that it will be
beneficial in regards to total utility to form the grand coalition. The prisoners dilemma
is a sub-additive game, as the total sentence decreases when the agents join a coalition
together. An inessential game is a game where v(S1) + v(S2) = v(S1 + S2), so there is
no additional value being created by cooperation.
A stronger condition than super-additivity is convexity, which requires the marginal
contribution of each individual agent to increase as coalition size increases [6]. The
minimization equivalent is concavity and holds if the following is true:
v(S1 вҲӘS2) + v(S1 вҲ©S2) вүӨv(S1) + v(S2),
вҲҖS1, S2 вҠҶN
(2.1)
==PAGE:19==
2.1 Game Theory
9
The sum of the cost of two coalitions should be greater or equal to the sum of the cost
of the union + the intersection of them. This means that the marginal contribution
of a player to any coalition should be lower than their marginal contribution to any
subcoalition of that coalition. So a player is always worth the most as part of a larger
coalition. Just like sub-additivity, concavity is useful for a minimization game because it
facilitates working together.
Note that that concavity or convexity of the game is not the same as concavity or
convexity of the underlying optimization problem. For the problem in this thesis, the
characteristic functions are found partly by an optimization problem, but the convexity
or concavity of the optimization problem does not influence the concavity of the game.
The characteristic function defines the total utility available to the group, but does not
say anything about how to divide this utility. Sub additivity for minimization games
ensures that the grand coalition will be desirable for the group as a whole, but not
necessarily for each individual agent. How to divide the utility is the central question in
this thesis, and many tradeoffs must be taken into account to decide this. This division
can be described in an allocation vector xS = {xS
i | i вҲҲN}, where xS
i is the payments
attributed to agent i from the total cost of coalition S.
For an alternative prisoners dilemma where the agents are given a fine instead of a jail
sentence, the agents might decide among themselves to pay each other a portion of the
fine. If one prisoner has committed a worse crime than the other, they might pay a
portion of the other agents costs in order to not get turned in.
In order for it to be sensible for an agent to participate in a coalition, individual ratio-
nality must hold. Meaning that the payments of each agent in a coalition, cannot be
higher than when working alone: xS
i вүӨv({i}). If costs were lower when working alone,
the agent is likely to leave the coalition. Suppose a prisoners dilemma with fines has the
following characteristic functions: v({1}) = 500,
v({2}) = 1000,
v(N) = 1200. Agent
1 will not agree to paying more than 500 of the collective fine, as in that case the agent
would be better off working alone and turning the other agent in.
Collective rationality must also hold, the total payments equals the total cost of the
coalition P
iвҲҲS xS
i = v(S). If a payment vector satisfies these conditions, it is an imputa-
tion. The prisoners cannot decide to pay more or less than their collective fine. The set of
imputations can be described by a series of inequalities. For the prisoners dilemma with
fines described above, the imputations can be described with: xN
1 вүӨ500 and xN
2 вүӨ1000
from individual rationality and xN
1 + xN
2 = 1200 from collective rationality. Any division
of costs not in this set will not be feasible.
In order to measure the dissatisfaction of a coalition S1 with the payoff as part of a
different coalition S2 where S1 вҠҶS2, the excess for a minimization game is defined:
Пө(S1, xS2) =
X
iвҲҲS1
xS2
i
вҲ’v(S1)
(2.2)
[25]. Meaning the difference between the utility generated by the coalition working alone,
and the payoffs given to the coalition as part of another coalition. If the excess is positive,
the coalition pays more as part of S2 than they would in S1, and would therefore prefer
to leave S2. If an imputation results in all coalitions having a non-positive excess with
==PAGE:20==
10
2 Theory
respect to the grand coalition, it is part of the core that is a subset of the imputations.
An allocation in the core will be an allocation where no subset of the grand coalition is
better off splitting off and working alone. While an imputation is fair for all agents with
respect to working alone, only imputations in the core ensure long term stability of the
grand coalition.
Expanding the prisoners dilemma to a group of three agents, the characteristic functions
could be: v({1}) = 500, v({2}) = 1000, v({3}) = 2000, v({1, 2}) = 1200, v({1, 3}) =
2100, v({2, 3}) = 2500, v(N) = 3000. Now the agents have the possibility of forming
coalitions that are not the grand coalition or singleton coalitions. A possible impu-
tation is xN
1 = 500,
xN
2 = 1000,
xN
3 = 1500, as it satisfies both individual and
collective rationality, but it is not in the core. The coalition {1, 2} has an excess of
Пө({1, 2}, xN) = (500 + 1000) вҲ’1200 = 300, so they could collectively pay 300 less by
dropping agent 3 from their coalition.
The marginal contribution of an agent is Mi = v(N) вҲ’v(N \ {i}), meaning the change
in the worth of the grand coalition when they join. The marginal contribution is the
utopian allocation for the player, and provides a lower bound for what they can receive
in the core. If they receive a better payoff as part of an imputation, it will not be in the
core, as the rest of the coalition will be better off without them. In the previous example,
M3 = 3000 вҲ’1200 = 1800, so any allocation where agent 3 pays less than 1800 will not
be in the core, as agent 1 and 2 are better off without them.
2.1.2
Properties of core-selecting mechanisms
The purpose of this thesis will be to explore how to find the most fair allocation of costs
and risk-associated cost. It is preferable for that allocation to be in the core, as that will
indicate a stable allocation. A mechanism to select an allocation in the core will be called
a core-selecting mechanism [11]. The choice of the core-selecting mechanism is central
to how utility is distributed, as different mechanisms will yield different allocations. The
mechanisms can be described with a series of properties.
Property 1: Efficiency: The total social welfare of coalition is maximized, assuming
every agent acts truthfully [25].
If a mechanism does not yield the optimal decision, potential utility has been lost. By
default, cooperative games yield an efficient solution, so this will be true for most mech-
anisms. A non-efficient mechanism will be one that leads to a decision that is not the
best for the group, which requires the mechanism to interfere with the decision making
process. Most mechanisms do not interfere with this, and select the decision that lead to
the characteristic functions. In a prisoners dilemma context, it would be a mechanism
that leads to one or more prisoners turning in each other.
Property 2: Incentive compatibility: Every agent maximizes their own utility by acting
truthfully.
In order to ensure an efficient solution and to reduce the complexity of bidding for agents,
it is important that agents are incentivized to reveal their types with the set of types
for a player i being Оҳi. The types contain all the information the agents know about
==PAGE:21==
2.1 Game Theory
11
themselves and other players. This can be the other players costs and utilities, even
when not working together, and also the certainty of the player in this information.
If a core-selecting mechanism doesnвҖҷt have this property, agents may misreport their
preferences in order to obtain a better outcome. This is not only unfair, but can lead to
making an inefficient decision and makes it more complicated for agents to report their
preferences. This could be a prisoner lying about the size of their fines as part of another
coalition, in order to obtain a better allocation or to convince the others that it is better
to turn them in.
Two types of incentive compatibility will be considered: Dominant Strategy Incentive
Compatibility (DSIC) and Bayesian Incentive Compatibility (BIC). DSIC means that
revealing ones types is the optimal strategy, no matter the actions of the other agents,
while BIC means that revealing ones types is optimal if all other agents tell their types
[27].
Property 3: Budget balance: The community manager does not have financial excess
nor deficit.
This property ensures that all generated utility is distributed among the agents. A deficit
is detrimental for the community manager, as it will no longer be viable for them to
maintain the community, and an excess is detrimental to the agents, as they do not
receive all the utility they generate. This is distinct from efficiency, as efficiency regards
the total welfare and budget balance regards the distributed welfare. If the prisoners
have a mediator that handles how to distribute the fines, an efficient mechanism will
yield the lowest possible total fine, while a budget balanced mechanism will make the
prisoners pay exactly the fine. If the mechanism is not budget balanced, the mediator
might take some payment for mediating, or pay part of the fine.
Property 4: Group rationality: No group of agents can benefit from splitting from the
community. This property requires the mechanism to always return an allocation where
every coalition has a non-positive excess. If this property does not hold, the long term
cohesion of the grand coalition is at risk. A mechanism that is not group rational can still
return a group rational allocation, but it is only group rational if it is always the case.
Group rationality is distinct from collective rationality, and does not imply collective
rationality nor stability. It is possibly for a group rational mechanism to return an
allocation that is not in the core, if it is not budget balanced.
Property 5: Additivity: The sum of allocations for a set of sub-games will be the
allocation for the game created by adding together the sub-games
If a mechanism is additive, the choice of how to define the game has less of an impact
on the allocations. In a prisoners dilemma where the agents are sentenced twice, the
overall game can be split into two sub-games, one for each sentencing. If a mechanism
is additive, it will return the same total allocation whether each sentencing is handled
as a separate game or the total sentence is handled at once. In the context of energy
trading, this is relevant as each time period can be seen as an independent sub-game, so
an additive mechanism will return the same allocation whether allocations are calculated
on a hourly, daily, weekly or other basis.
The challenge in choosing a core-selection mechanism comes from it not being possible
==PAGE:22==
12
2 Theory
for any mechanism to satisfy both efficiency, incentive compatibility, budget balance and
group rationality at once [30]. Similarly, Green and Laffonts impossibility states that
incentive compatible and efficient mechanisms cannot be budget balanced in the general
quasi-linear domain [9], quasi-linearity meaning that the utility gained is the utility of
the good they receive, subtracted what they paid for it. Therefore each mechanism has
its own trade-off.
In sections 4 and 5, the problem and mechanisms will be studied from a theoretical point
of view, before they are compared in section 7.
2.2
Optimization
A linear program is a linear objective function and a set of linear constraints that
together form an optimization problem. The objective function is the first line, eq. 2.3
below, and will indicate whether the problem should be minimized or maximized, what
the variables that must be changed are, and the coefficients of those variables.
The following lines, eq. 2.4 and 2.5, will be the constraints that indicate the limitations
on the variables.
min
x cx
(2.3)
s.t.
ax вүҘb
(2.4)
x вүҘ0
(2.5)
This linear program is deterministic, as it assumes 100% certainty in the form of the
constraints. Stochastic programming provides a method to modeling uncertainties in the
constraints or objectives. In this thesis, it will be by introducing a set of scenarios. In the
stochastic example below, eq. 2.6 is the modified objective function. cw can now take a
different value depending on the scenario w вҲҲW, and each scenario is weighted by their
chance of happening ПҖw, causing the objective function to minimize the expected value.
Scenarios can also be used in constraints, as eq. 2.7 is now defined for every scenario, so
ax is constrained by the worst case.
x is not indexed by scenarios, therefore the value of x will be the same for all scenarios.
A variable yw would be able to take a different value for each scenario.
min
x
X
wвҲҲW
ПҖwcwx
(2.6)
s.t.
ax вүӨbwвҲҖw вҲҲW
(2.7)
x вүҘ0
(2.8)
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 3
Modelling the problem
In order to model the power purchasing problem a three-step process is used as seen in
figure 3.1. The primary focus for this thesis is the allocation mechanisms. The processes
before are used to generate the characteristic functions, but can be replaced with other
methods to fit the BRP.
Figure 3.1: Model flowchart
3.1
Stochastic Optimization
For this implementation, a stochastic optimization is used to generate bids. The BRP
can have many strategies in order to reduce their cost, they might not optimize, instead
forecasting and bidding their forecast. In practice, they can be assumed to participate
in more markets than just the day-ahead market, complicating this part of the model
significantly. For this thesis, focus is kept on the day-ahead market.
The exact process the bids are generated doesnвҖҷt make a difference for applying game
theory, however, it is required that the process outputs a separate bid for each client, as
game theory requires the knowledge of the worth of individual clients.
The model in equations 3.1 to 3.5 aims to minimize imbalance costs in a two-price
scheme, is solved for a coalitions S, and the useful output will be the vector of day-ahead
bids for the coalition P DA
t,S
Variables:
P DA
t,S is the day ahead bid variable. It is sub-scripted by the time t, as the BRP gives a
separate bid for each time period. It is also sub-scripted by S, the current coalition.
вҲҶw,t, вҲҶ+
w,t, вҲҶвҲ’
w,t are variables that indicate the imbalances the bids cause. вҲҶw,t is the
imbalance, while вҲҶ+
w,t and вҲҶвҲ’
w,t are the positive and negative parts of the imbalance,
respectively. These are sub-scripted by the time period t and the demand scenario w. As
this is a stochastic model, the day ahead bid P DA
t
must be the one that minimizes the
expected cost across all scenarios.
Objective function:
The model is given a set of scenarios W for the demand realization P D
w,t,i and scenarios
==PAGE:24==
14
3 Modelling the problem
U for the dominant imbalance direction Пғu,t and price О»u,t. The dominant direction Пғu,t
is 1 if the dominant imbalance is positive and 0 if it is negative. Its inclusion in the
objective function enables the two-price scheme, by only counting costs for imbalances
in the dominant direction. ПҖО» and ПҖD indicate the weight of price scenarios u вҲҲU and
demand scenarios w вҲҲW respectively. As all scenarios are assumed equiprobable, they
are calculated ПҖО» =
1
|U| and ПҖD =
1
|W|.
Constraints:
Equation 3.2 measures the deviation between demand P D
w,t,i, production P G
t,i, and day
ahead bid P DA
t,S . Production is given as a deterministic value based on a forecast for
each client in this case. Demand and production are summed across all clients c in the
coalition S.
Equation 3.3 separates the demand into positive and negative deviation, enabling differ-
entiating between imbalance directions in the two price scheme.
min
P DA
t,S ,вҲҶw,t,вҲҶ+
w,t,вҲҶвҲ’
w,t
X
uвҲҲU
X
wвҲҲW
ПҖО»ПҖD
 X
tвҲҲT
(Пғu,tО»u,tвҲҶ+
w,t + (1 вҲ’Пғu,t)О»u,tвҲҶвҲ’
w,t)
!
(3.1)
s.t.
вҲҶw,t =
X
iвҲҲS
P D
w,t,i вҲ’
X
iвҲҲS
P G
t,i вҲ’P DA
t,S ,
вҲҖw вҲҲW, t вҲҲT
(3.2)
вҲҶ+
w,t вҲ’вҲҶвҲ’
w,t = вҲҶw,t,
вҲҖw вҲҲW, t вҲҲT
(3.3)
вҲҶ+
w,t вүҘ0,
вҲҖw вҲҲW, t вҲҲT
(3.4)
вҲҶвҲ’
w,t вүҘ0,
вҲҖw вҲҲW, t вҲҲT
(3.5)
Every constraint in this problem is defined for all t вҲҲT, and therefore the problem is
fully decomposable into smaller problems temporally. Multiple clients are only involved
in the sums in constraint 3.2. As this constraint is a sum of the demands, productions
and bids of individual clients, the optimal bid for a coalition will be the sum of singleton
bids P вҲ—DA
t,S
=
P
iвҲҲS P вҲ—DA
t,i
, therefore it can be decomposed into singleton coalitions.
This singleton decomposed problem will be used instead of the aggregated optimization,
as the imbalances of all combinations of clients can be generated from the bids of the
singular clients. Adding together bids of individual clients is significantly faster than
bespoke optimizations for each coalition.
3.2
Cost and risk calculation
The output of the optimization will be the optimal day ahead bidding decisions for each
singleton coalition P DA
t,i вҲҖi вҲҲN.
These bids are compared with the realization of client demand and production ex-post,
to obtain the real imbalance for each coalition.
вҲҶReal
t,i
= P D,Real
t,i
вҲ’P G,Real
t,i
вҲ’P DA
t,i
(3.6)
==PAGE:25==
3.2 Cost and risk calculation
15
вҲҶReal
t,S
=
X
iвҲҲS
вҲҶReal
t,i
(3.7)
Clients pay the BRP the spot price for power, and therefore the imbalance spread is
what is relevant to the BRPвҖҷs cost. The spread will be the difference between the day
ahead price and the imbalance price, О»t = О»Imbalance
t
вҲ’О»DA
t
.
The imbalance cost to the BRP for a coalition for a given time will then be:
Jt,S = О»tвҲҶReal
t,S
(3.8)
Two types of games will be studied in this thesis, the division of cost and the division
of risk. Up until this point, the method to compute both of them is the same. The
difference lies in what parameter is used to calculate the characteristic function.
3.2.1
Characteristic function for allocating costs
The game of allocating costs is simpler, and is viable in a market with an assymetric
cost structure, like a two-price scheme or the upcoming full cost balancing model. The
characteristic function for a coalition is simply the sum of their costs:
v(S) =
X
iвҲҲS
X
tвҲҲT
Jt,S
(3.9)
In this thesis, imbalance costs Jt,S are computed with a t for every 15 minutes, in line
with the imbalance settlement period.
3.2.2
Characteristic function for assigning risk
The game of assigning the risk level of each client is slightly more complicated, as it
requires defining a risk measure, but it is relevant for any market, not only one with
assymetric pricing.
CVaR, also known as expected shortfall, is chosen as the risk metric. The purpose of
the game is to minimize the CVaR of the costs in a time period. CVaR at confidence
level Оұ is defined as the average cost incurred in the worst Оұ% of imbalance intervals.
Mathematically, this can be expressed as:
CV aRОұ(Jt,S) =
1
|TОұ(Jt,S)|
X
tвҲҲTОұ(Jt,S)
Jt,S
(3.10)
Where:
вҖў Jt,S is the set of imbalance costs in coalition S across all time periods.
вҖў TОұ(Jt,S) denotes the Оұ-tail set of Jt,s, defined as: TОұ(Jt,S) = {t вҲҲT : Jt,S вүӨV aRОұ(Jt,S)}.
i.e. it is the indexes t that have an income at or below VaR.
вҖў VaRОұ(Jt,S) denotes the Value-at-Risk at confidence level Оұ, representing the cost
threshold below which (1вҲ’Оұ)В·100% of the outcomes lie. In other words, it identifies
the minimum cost such that only the worst Оұ% of time steps exceed it.
==PAGE:26==
16
3 Modelling the problem
For this thesis, the empirical VaR is used, computed directly from the discrete set of time
step outcomes Jt,S. Formally, it is defined as: VaRОұ(Jt,S) = inf {О¶ вҲҲR | P(Jt,S вүӨО¶) вүҘ1 вҲ’Оұ}
In simpler terms, CV aRОұ(Jt,S) measures the average imbalance cost during the worst-case
Оұ-percentile periods.
For this thesis Оұ = 0.05, corresponding to the 5% worst case scenarios.
The characteristic function of the game is then:
v(S) = CV aRОұ(Jt,S)
(3.11)
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 4
Game Theoretical Details of the
Problems
In this section, the specific properties of the games that arise from the cost allocation
and risk assigning problems will be studied. These properties help describe the problem
and are useful for describing the properties of the core-selecting mechanisms in section 5.
4.1
Incentive compatibility
The purpose of incentive compatibility is to get the agents to reveal their types Оҳi.
Incentive compatibility will not get the agents to only reveal their demand accurately.
In game theory, the type includes all the information the agent knows that is relevant
to the game, and as such the types for this game will include their future demand,
knowledge about someone elseвҖҷs future demand, information about future prices or
dominant directions, and the agents certainty in all of these.
An incentive compatible mechanism will encourage an agent to reveal what they expect
their own demand will be, and publicly reveal any information they have about other
agents demand or price information.
This will make an agent reveal their types Оҳi as "I expect to have a demand of x, and
everyone else will have an imbalance of y" when joining a coalition, which will reduce
the imbalance of the coalition when the agent joins it. If a mechanism is not incentive
compatible, the agent might strategically reveal their type as "I expect to have a demand
of x-y". The problem with such a mechanism, is if two separate agents have the same
information, they might both say "I expect to have a demand of x-y", causing an imbalance
correction of 2y, which would be an overcorrection.
An example of a Dominant Strategy Incentive Compatible mechanism is VCG[32]. VCG
is DSIC because agents get allocations based on the value they add to all other agents.
More specific information on VCG in section 5.4. This will encourage the agent to say "I
expect to have a demand of x, and everyone else will have an imbalance of y", because
the agent is not paid based on their own imbalance, instead they are paid for the value
they add to the coalition, including the value they add from revealing their types.
4.2
The cost allocation problem
When dividing costs for the imbalance reduction problem, each instance where costs are
divided can be seen as a separate game. The amount of realizations of imbalance in each
game is a choice that must be made when dividing costs. A realization of imbalance will
==PAGE:28==
18
4 Game Theoretical Details of the Problems
be when the difference between the traded electricity and the actual demand is measured.
For this thesis, a realization of imbalance t will be 15 minutes, in line with the imbalance
settlement period in the nordic countries [26].
For this section, the games that result from a single hour will be studied. These games
are relevant if deciding on an internal imbalance settlement period in the portfolio of 15
minutes. They can also be used to analyze how games look for longer periods. As a game
of 24 hours consists of 96 15-minute subgames, the subgames have an effect, especially if
the mechanism is additive.
The games will be cost reduction games, and therefore will be minimization problems.
4.2.1
Possible game structures
For every realization of imbalance, the problem can result in one of 4 structures of games,
based on the imbalances in relation to each other.
вҖў Extreme imbalance: All coalitions have the same imbalance sign.
вҖў High imbalance, dominant direction: All agents with the same sign as the net
imbalance has a smaller imbalance than the net imbalance, and the overall imbalance
of the portfolio is in the dominant direction of the power market. Results in no
agent being able to change the sign of the net imbalance, by leaving the grand
coalition.
вҖў Non-dominant direction imbalance: The overall imbalance is opposite the market
imbalance direction.
вҖў Low imbalance: If none of the other cases are true.
4.2.2
Sub-additivity and convexity
Sub-additivity is the minimization version of superadditivity, and holds if:
v(S1 вҲӘS2) вүӨv(S1) + v(S2),
вҲҖS1, S2 вҲҲN such that S1 вҲ©S2 = вҲ…
(4.1)
Meaning that the costs of a two coalitions together must be lower than or equal to their
costs apart. This is true for the cost problem.
Proof.
Sub-additivity of the cost problem can be proven by considering the
imbalance вҲҶReal
t,S . As v(S1 вҲӘS2) = max

0, О»t(вҲҶReal
t,S1 + вҲҶReal
t,S2 )

, it is clear that the cost
is highest when the imbalances have the same sign, as in that case v(S1 вҲӘS2) =
v(S1) + v(t) if вҲҶReal
t,S1 В· вҲҶReal
t,S2 вүҘ0.
If they have the opposite sign, v(S1 вҲӘS2) <
v(S1) + v(t) if вҲҶS В· вҲҶT < 0, as the imbalance of one will counter the other. Therefore
the problem for every imbalance realization is sub-additive.
As every imbalance realization is an independent sub-game, the game v is the sum
of two games u, w such that v(S) = u(S) + w(S). As the games are independent,
==PAGE:29==
4.2 The cost allocation problem
19
if sub-additivity holds for both sub-games u and w, it will also hold for the sum of
them v.
Recall that concavity is a stronger condition than sub-additivity, and holds if the
following is true:
v(S1 вҲӘS2) + v(S1 вҲ©S2) вүӨv(S1) + v(S2)вҲҖS1, S2 вҠҶN
(4.2)
I.e. the sum of the cost of two coalitions should be greater or equal to the sum of the cost
of the union + the intersection of them. This means that the marginal contribution of a
player to a coalition should be lower than their marginal contribution to any subcoalition.
Concavity does not hold for the cost problem.
Proof.
Concavity can be disproven by counterexample. Given a game with three
agents where вҲҶReal
1
= вҲҶReal
2
= вҲ’вҲҶReal
3
= 1kWh with a positive dominant direction
and an imbalance spread of 1EUR
kWh, the coalitions S1 = {1, 3} and S2 = {2, 3} will
have a cost of v(S1) = v(S2) = 0EUR, but v(N) + v({3}) = 1EUR + 0EUR. Since
v(N) + v({3}) > v(S1) + v(S2) concavity does not hold for this game.
4.2.3
Existence of a core
The core will be the set of imputations where all coalitions have a non-positive excess
with respect to the grand coalition. In the cost game, the core is always nonempty, and
the set of imputations in the core is greatly affected by the imbalance conditions in the
portfolio. In this section, this will be proven and the conditions that form the core will
be studied.
While the existence of the core can be proven with the Bondareva-Shapley theorem [35]
as is done in section 4.3.2 for the risk problem, here, the core will be found separately
for each imbalance case to understand how the core behaves.
Note that these are cases for a single imbalance realization t. This analysis is especially
relevant to the additive mechanisms and to mechanisms where the allocation is calculated
based on individual time steps.
Extreme imbalance
The simplest is the case of extreme imbalance. This will be an inessential game where
the allocation xN
i = v({i}) is the unique imputation in the core.
Proof.
For an allocation to be an imputation, individual rationality and collective
rationality must hold. For individual rationality to hold, each agent must pay no
more than their singleton cost. For collective rationality to hold, the sum of payments
must equal the total costs.
In the case of extreme imbalance, the imbalances will always be in the same direction.
In the cost game, if imbalances are in the same direction, then v(S1) + v(S2) =
v(S1 + S2)вҲҖS1, S2 вҠҶN, meaning that the game is inessential.
Because the game is inessential, the allocation where every agent pays their singleton
==PAGE:30==
20
4 Game Theoretical Details of the Problems
cost xN
i = v({i}) will be the only individually rational allocation. This allocation
will be collectively rational, as
P
iвҲҲN v({i}) = v(N) for an inessential game. It will
also be collectively rational, as P
iвҲҲS v({i}) = v(S), so no coalition can get a better
payoff. Therefore it will be the unique imputation in the core.
High imbalance, dominant direction
For the case of high imbalance, dominant direction, the core will contain a single imputa-
tion that is: xi = P
tвҲҲT О»t В· вҲҶReal
i,t
Proof.
For this game, agents can be divided into imbalance causers and imbalance
reducers. The imbalance causers will be the agents whose marginal contribution
is their imbalance multiplied with the imbalance spread, if the cost is positive
(equivalent to their singleton costs):
Оҙ+ = {i вҲҲN | Mi = v({i})} вҮ”Оҙ+ =
n
i вҲҲN | Mi = О»t В· вҲҶReal
i,t
вҲ§Mi вүҘ0
o
(4.3)
And the imbalance reducers will be those whose marginal contribution is their
imbalance multiplied with the imbalance spread, if the cost is negative:
ОҙвҲ’=
n
i вҲҲN | Mi = О»t В· вҲҶReal
i,t
вҲ§Mi < 0
o
(4.4)
The sets are interesting because their marginal contribution is a linear function of
their imbalance. These exist for the other cases as well, but the high imbalance case
is defined by the following:
N = Оҙ+ вҲӘОҙвҲ’
(4.5)
Additivity of marginal contributions means that the sum of marginal contributions of
clients in a coalition sum up to the characteristic function of the coalition. Additivity
of marginal contributions at the top level, means that this holds for the grand
coalition:
X
iвҲҲN
(Mi) = v(N)
(4.6)
As vt(N) = P
iвҲҲN вҲҶReal
i,t
В· О»t = P
iвҲҲN Mi, additivity of marginal contributions hold at
the top level.
For an imputation to be in the core, every coalition must have a non-positive excess
with respect to the grand coalition[25]. The imbalance causers are characterized with
Mi = v({i})вҲҖi вҲҲОҙ+. For Пө(S, xN) вүӨ0 to hold for all coalitions, they must pay at
least their utopian allocation. Inserting the marginal contribution of Оҙ+ gives:
xN
i вүҘMi вҮ”xN
i вүҘv({i})вҲҖi вҲҲОҙ+
(4.7)
Taking into account that individual rationality requires xS
i вүӨv({i}) results in only
a single stable payoff for imbalance causers, given in equation 4.8. This argument
==PAGE:31==
4.2 The cost allocation problem
21
holds in general across game structures, and shows that all clients in Оҙ+ must pay
their singleton costs to be in the core.
xN
i = v({i}) = MiвҲҖi вҲҲОҙ+
(4.8)
For collective rationality to hold, the sum of payments must equal the total cost. If
N = Оҙ+ вҲӘОҙвҲ’as it is in the high imbalance case, then the following is required for
collective rationality to hold:
X
iвҲҲОҙвҲ’
(xi) +
X
jвҲҲОҙ+
(xj) = v(N)
(4.9)
Using the result from eq. 4.8 gives:
X
iвҲҲОҙвҲ’
(xi) +
X
jвҲҲОҙ+
(Mj) = v(N)
(4.10)
Using equation 4.6 and 4.5 leads to
X
iвҲҲОҙвҲ’
(xi) +
X
jвҲҲОҙ+
(Mj) =
X
iвҲҲОҙвҲ’
(Mi) +
X
jвҲҲОҙ+
(Mj) вҮ”
X
iвҲҲОҙвҲ’
(xi) =
X
iвҲҲОҙвҲ’
(Mi)
(4.11)
As the marginal contribution is an upper bound for the allocation to imbalance
reducers, no one can pay less than their marginal contribution. Therefore the only
collectively rational allocation is:
xN
i = Mi = О»t В· вҲҶReal
i,t вҲҖi вҲҲОҙ+
(4.12)
As such, the core will contain a unique imputation in the high imbalance case. This
imputation will be called the Uniform Price mechanism for this thesis, and is the
allocation where each agent is paid their imbalance multiplied with the imbalance
spread. For all cases except the Non-dominant direction imbalance it can be defined:
xi = P
tвҲҲT О»t В· вҲҶReal
i,t .
Low imbalance
In the case of low imbalance the core will be non-empty and still contain the allocation
xi = P
tвҲҲT О»t В· вҲҶReal
i,t .
Proof.
The difference between high imbalance, dominant direction and low imbalance
is that this case contains a new set Оҙ
вҖІ that encapsulates the clients that are not
strictly marginal causers or reducers, these clients will have an imbalance of the same
sign as the net imbalance, but with a higher magnitude than the net imbalance, they
are defined by their marginal contribution:
0 вүӨMi < v({i})вҲҖi вҲҲОҙ
вҖІ
(4.13)
==PAGE:32==
22
4 Game Theoretical Details of the Problems
The addition of this set changes the makeup of N:
N = Оҙ+ вҲӘОҙвҲ’вҲӘОҙ
вҖІ
(4.14)
Payments for Оҙ+ can still be found by eq. 4.8.
Payments for ОҙвҲ’must still be worse than the utopian allocation, but introducing the
new set Оҙ
вҖІ causes additivity of marginal contributions at the top level to no longer
hold, and means that imbalance reducers no longer share the entire overpayment
of imbalance causers. In this case, it is possible to have an imputation in the core
where P
iвҲҲОҙвҲ’(xi) > P
iвҲҲОҙвҲ’(Mi) and P
iвҲҲОҙвҖІ(xi) < P
iвҲҲОҙвҖІ(v({i})).
The Uniform Price allocation will still be in the core for the low imbalance case. It
remains both individually and collectively rational in this case, so it is an imputation.
Since all imbalance reducers get paid this utopian allocation, there will be no coalition
that is more preferable to them, and since a game without imbalance reducers is
inessential, it is not possible to make a better coalition without them. The Uniform
Price allocation will be in the core. But it will be at the very edge of the core, since
the excess of agents in Оҙ+ and Оҙ
вҖІ with respect to their singleton coalition is 0.
Non-dominant direction imbalance:
In this case, the core will be non-empty but will not contain the allocation xi =
P
tвҲҲT О»t В· вҲҶReal
i,t .
Proof.
When the overall imbalance of the portfolio is opposite of the market, the
characteristic function will be v(N) = 0.
The lowest possible cost is v(S) = 0 both for multi-client and singleton coalitions,
so the allocation xN
i = 0вҲҖi вҲҲN will always be an imputation, as it satisfies both
individual and collective rationality. It will also be in the core, since no coalition can
have a v(S) < 0, so no coalition can have a positive excess. Therefore the core is
guaranteed to exist.
In this case, the payments from clients with imbalances in the market dominant
direction will not be able to cover paying clients with imbalances in the other direction
the imbalance price because: P
iвҲҲN;v({i})>0 О»t В· вҲҶReal
t,i
< P
iвҲҲN;v({i})=0 О»t В· вҲҶReal
t,i
.
This causes the Uniform Price allocation to not be budget balanced in this case. Modifi-
cations that enable budget balance are discussed in the section dedicated to Uniform
Price, section 5.2.
4.2.4
Overall stability of the game
As explained in this section, the core of the game is tightly constrained if many clients
are in Оҙ+. But these studied cases are made on the basis of individual hours. If costs are
divided over 24 hours or longer, the core can become much wider as clients are unlikely
to be in Оҙ+ for every time t.
In general, the core is smaller when there are many agents, the agents are comparable in
==PAGE:33==
4.3 The risk assigning problem
23
size, and there is a high imbalance in a single direction, as this increases the chance of
an extreme- and high imbalance result. The difficulty lies in distributing gains when the
core is large.
4.3
The risk assigning problem
When assigning contribution to risk, the problem is similar to the cost problem but has
some different properties. When using CVaR as a metric, games can no longer easily
be broken into subgames for every imbalance realization, as the CVaR is a statistic
depending on the whole period.
4.3.1
Sub-additivity and convexity
Sub-additivity holds if:
v(S1 вҲӘS2) вүӨv(S1) + v(S2),
вҲҖS1, S2 вҲҲN such that S1 вҲ©S2 = вҲ…
(4.15)
Sub-additivity will hold for the risk problem as well.
Proof.
the set TОұ(Jt,S) is the set of indexes for the Оұ highest values of Jt,S, then
the maximal value of v(S1) + v(S2) will be found when they have the same worst
case scenarios, in which case that will also be the worst case scenarios for S1 вҲӘS2:
TОұ(Jt,S1) = TОұ(Jt,S2) = TОұ(Jt,S1вҲӘS2). In that case, v(S1 вҲӘS2) = v(S1) + v(S2), and in
all other cases v(S1 вҲӘS2) < v(S1) + v(S2), meaning that sub-additivity holds.
Concavity does not hold for the risk problem either.
Proof.
Concavity can be disproven by counterexample for this game.
Given a game with three agents A, B, and C: Оұ = 0.5, imbalances вҲҶReal
t,{A} = вҲҶReal
t,{B} =
вҲ’вҲҶReal
t,{C} = [1, 0], the coalitions {A, C} and {B, C} will have a CVaR of v({A, C}) =
v({B, C}) = 0, but v(N) + V ({C}) = 1 + 0. As v(N) + v({C}) > v({A, C}) +
v({B, C}), concavity does not hold for this game.
4.3.2
Existence of a core
All risk games will be balanced and have a non-empty core.
Proof.
The existence of a core in all cases can be proven by using the Bondareva-
Shapley theorem[35]. The theorem says that a game has a non-empty core if and
only if the game is balanced. A game is balanced if for every balancing function
ОІ : 2N \ {вҲ…} вҶ’[0, 1] where:
X
SвҲҲ2N:iвҲҲS
ОІ(S) = 1
(4.16)
==PAGE:34==
24
4 Game Theoretical Details of the Problems
It holds that (adapted to being a cost reduction game):
X
SвҲҲ2N\{вҲ…}
(ОІ(S)v(S)) вүҘv(N)
(4.17)
In other words, a game is balanced if it is not possible to make a set of subcoalitions
that have a lower cost than the grand coalition, even if agents are allowed to partially
enter coalitions. Intuitively, this is true when using CVaR as a metric, as CVaR will
pick the worst case scenarios. Analytically, it can be shown by applying the theorem.
To apply the theorem, first it is used that the CVaR function is convex, such that
the CVaR of the sum of coalitions will at most be the sum of CVaR of coalitions:
X
SвҲҲ2N
ОІ(S)CV aRОұ (Jt,S) вүҘCV aRОұ
пЈ«
пЈӯX
SвҲҲ2N
ОІ(S)Jt,S
пЈ¶
пЈё
(4.18)
The left hand side is equivalent to the sum of characteristic functions:
X
SвҲҲ2N
ОІ(S)CV aRОұ (Jt,S) =
X
SвҲҲ2N
ОІ(S)v(S)
(4.19)
Using eq. 4.16, the balancing function must sum up to 1 for every agent. Because
Jt,S = P
iвҲҲS Jt,i, then the following is true:
CV aRОұ
пЈ«
пЈӯX
SвҲҲ2N
ОІ(S)Jt,S
пЈ¶
пЈё= CV aRОұ (Jt,N) = v(N)
(4.20)
Inserting into equation 4.18:
X
SвҲҲ2N
ОІ(S)v(S) вүҘv(N)
(4.21)
As such, any risk game will be balanced and the core will always be non-empty.
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 5
Core-selection mechanisms
In this section, the implemented core selection mechanisms will be described in detail.
This includes both a general introduction to the mechanism, and how it works for the
cost and risk problems.
To give some intuition on the mechanisms, a series of figures, like fig. 5.1, will show how
the mechanisms allocate costs. These include both the two-price and one-price costs.
The one-price costs are not used to calculate the allocation, but are there to show the
imbalance of client C and show how the cost problem would look in a one-price scheme.
5.1
Shapley Value
A Shapley Value is a value function ОҰi(v) that assigns payoffs from the game v. Note
that the game v is distinct from the characteristic function of a coalition in the game
v(S).
ShapleyвҖҷs axioms help define the Shapley Value:
вҖў Symmetry: If agents i and j are substitutes, meaning that any coalition without
them gains the same amount of utility when either of them are added, then their
payoff should be the same, ОҰi(v) = ОҰj(v)
вҖў Null agent condition: If i is a null agent, meaning that the utility of all coalitions
without them does not change if they are added, their payoff should be 0, ОҰi(v) = 0
вҖў Efficiency: The sum of payoffs must equal the characteristic function for the
coalition, P
iвҲҲN(ОҰi(v)) = v(N)
вҖў Additivity: For any two games v, w played by the same agents. The payoff for the
two games played together should equal the sum of the payoffs for the games for
all agents ОҰi(v + w) = ОҰi(v) + ОҰi(w).
The unique value satisfying these axioms is called the Shapley Value [6]. The Shapley
Value is a representation of the expected pay-off from participation in a game. Each
agent in a game will have a marginal contribution to each possible coalition, meaning the
value they add to that coalition. The Shapley Value is a mathematical expectation where
it is assumed that the grand coalition will be built up by adding agents in a random
order, and is calculated by equation 5.1. The fraction being the number of permutations
of the specific coalition S, multiplied by the number of permutations agents can join
the coalition after i, divided by the total coalitions. This is multiplied by the marginal
==PAGE:36==
26
5 Core-selection mechanisms
contribution of i to the specific coalition.
ОҰi(v) = xN
i =
X
SвҲҲ2N\{i}
(|S|)! (|N|вҲ’|S|вҲ’1)!
N!
(v(S вҲ©{i}) вҲ’v(S))
(5.1)
Allocating according to the Shapley Value means calculating a weighted sum of the
difference between the value of each coalition containing i and the same coalition without
i. This necessitates having the characteristic function of every possible coalition, meaning
that the optimization must be done 2|N| times, making it difficult to scale to larger
problems.
The efficiency axiom of the Shapley Value ensures both the efficiency and budget balance
properties from section 2.1.2.
Incentive Compatibility
While the Shapley Value is not generally incentive compatible, it is if the agents reveal
their true costs and utilities [40]. In these problems, it is assumed that this is known
ex-post, and the Shapley Value is therefore incentive compatible in this case.
Group Rationality
The Shapley Value is not guaranteed to be part of the core, unless the problem is convex
(or concave for a minimization game like this). As was shown in section 4.2.2, the problem
is not concave, and Shapley is therefore not guaranteed to be in the core. Distributing
with basis in the Shapley Value does therefore not fulfill the group rationality property
from section 2.1.2 in this case. This can lead to instability in the long run, as some
shareholders may be displeased with remaining in the grand coalition.
In figure 5.1, an example of how Shaply allocates costs can be seen. The cross lined
column indicates the singleton cost in a one-price scheme. Allocations are based on the
two-price scheme, but one-price is included to visualize the imbalance of client C. For
simplicity, an imbalance spread of 1EUR
kWh with a positive dominant direction is used for
this plot. Client A has a positive imbalance of 1kWh, client B has a positive imbalance
of 2kWh and client C has a negative imbalance of 2kWh. The singleton imbalance costs
indicate the costs for a non-aggregated client. Client A and B pay their full imbalance,
while C get nothing because of the two-price system.
When applying the Shapley Value to this, A and B get a discount, with B getting a larger
discount than A. C now gets paid for their reduction in imbalance cost. Even though
their imbalance is the opposite of client B, they get paid slightly less. This comes as a
result of client C not being able to capitalize on their non-dominant imbalance direction
when they are in a singleton coalition. The allocation is budget balanced, as costs sum
up to 1вӮ¬.
5.2
Uniform Price
Uniform Price as implemented in this thesis is a way to allocate costs based on the
marginal contribution of each client. The basic concept is that each client that causes a
cost, pays their singleton costs, and each client who reduces costs shares the difference
==PAGE:37==
5.2 Uniform Price
27
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
A
B
C
Aggregate
Cost [вӮ¬] 
Client
Cost division Shapley
Singleton Cost One-price
Singleton Cost Two-price
Shapley
Figure 5.1: Cost allocation for Shapley mechanism
between the payments of the cost causers and the total cost. The implementation is
slightly different for each game, so they are described separately.
5.2.1
Uniform Price applied to cost allocation
In this section, the application of Uniform Price specifically to the cost allocation problem
will be studied. It is formulated as follows:
xi =
X
tвҲҲT
пЈұ
пЈІ
пЈі
вҲ’kuni
t
В· |вҲҶReal
t,i
|,
if v({i}) = 0.
vt({i}),
otherwise.
(5.2)
With kuni
t
being how much dominant direction imbalance each unit of non-dominant
direction imbalance countered, and vt being the subgame that is the imbalance realization
at time t.
kuni
t
is only needed in an assymetric price scheme and is calculated in equation 5.3.
kuni
t
= 1 for all cases from section 4.2.3 except non-dominant direction imbalance. The
denominator gives the difference between the costs of the singleton coalitions and the
cost of the grand coalition. This is the "overpayment" of the cost adding agents for that
t. This is divided by the total imbalance of the clients in the non-dominant direction,
to obtain how much cost each unit of imbalance in the non-dominant direction reduced
the total cost with. kuni will be 1 when the overall imbalance direction in the portfolio
matches the dominant imbalance direction in the imbalance market, and will in the range
0 вүӨkuni < 1 when the imbalance direction of the portfolio and the market are opposite.
kuni
t
=
P
iвҲҲN, vt({i})>0
vt({i}) вҲ’vt(N)
P
iвҲҲN, vt({i})=0
вҲҶReal
t,i
(5.3)
==PAGE:38==
28
5 Core-selection mechanisms
The logic is that if an agent has an imbalance in the dominant imbalance direction, they
pay their singleton cost. If an agent has an imbalance in the opposite direction, they are
compensated by the cost of the imbalance they countered.
Because the Uniform Price allocation is not budget balanced in the non-dominant
direction imbalance case, as shown in section 4.2.3, there are three possibilities for what
to do in this case:
1. Unmodified: Applying the Uniform Price allocation unmodified will not be budget
balanced, as payments to cost reducers will be higher than payments from cost
causers
2. kuni
t : This will reduce the payments to cost reducers in this case, resulting in the
allocation not being in the core.
3. 0 Payments: Returning an allocation where everyone pays 0 if v(N) = 0 will keep
the mechanism budget balanced and group rational, but will make it inconsistent
as cost causers will no longer be punished in this case, and make it no longer
continuous.
kuni
t
is chosen to keep the allocation continuous and consistent across cases, in order to
preserve the central idea of the allocation: that cost causers must pay the full singleton
cost of their imbalance.
Group Rationality:
The Uniform Price mechanism applied to the cost problem will not be group rational
when using the kuni
t
modification.
Proof.
Group rationality of the Uniform Price allocation can be disproven by
counterexample: Suppose вҲҶReal
1,A = 1, вҲҶReal
1,B = вҲ’1, вҲҶReal
1,C = вҲ’1, О»1 = 1 and positive is
the dominant direction. Using kuni
t , the allocation will be xA = 1, xB = вҲ’0.5, xC =
вҲ’0.5. This allocation is not in the core, as v({A, B}) = 0 and xN
A + xN
B = 0.5, so A
and B can gain by splitting from C.
Incentive compatibility:
The Uniform Price allocation applied to cost is not incentive compatible. Because the
allocation rewards agents opposite the dominant direction directly from their own imbal-
ance вҲҶReal
t,i
, the agents are incentivized to keep their knowledge secret if they can predict
the dominant direction and apply it to their own imbalance. So instead of revealing
their type correctly, they are likely to bake it into their personal demand bid, to get an
imbalance that is beneficial to them.
Proof.
Incentive compatibility can be disproven by counterexample: Three clients
each expect a demand of 1. Client A predicts that client B will have a true demand
of 2, and predicts that the dominant direction in the power system will be positive.
==PAGE:39==
5.2 Uniform Price
29
This mechanism incentivizes client A to bid 0 in this case, as then they will get paid
kuni
t
В· 1, instead of revealing their types.
An issue with this allocation is that it is very one-sided. Everyone on one side pays
their full cost, while the other side gets paid. It is always at the edge of the core, with
many coalitions having an excess of 0. The paying agents might ask why they should
pay the helping agents, since the payers get no benefit from being in the coalition. An
agent in the set Оҙ
вҖІ under this allocation has nothing to gain from staying, but can cause
harm to the rest of the coalition by leaving. The severity of this issue is lessened for two
reasons:
From a cooperative game perspective, it is assumed that players can make long term
contracts and only focus on maximizing their own profit. Players are still in the core,
even if they make the same amount of money as they would alone, so they help others
even if it doesnвҖҷt help themselves.
Since imbalance situation happens every 15 minutes, agents are not disadvantaged from
being in Оҙ
вҖІ forever.
In figure 5.2, the Uniform Price cost example is given. Note that when the dominant
direction in the portfolio is the same as in the market, this is equivalent to making
an internal one-price system. Polluters pay their full imbalance, while non-dominant
imbalance direction clients get paid their full imbalance. If the dominant imbalance
direction of the portfolio is not the same as the overall system.
In figure 5.3, the allocation when the dominant direction of the portfolio and system is
not the same is shown. Client C now has a negative imbalance of 4, causing an overall
negative imbalance. In the two price scheme, this causes a cost of 0. Clients A and B
still pay their singleton costs, but now client C only receives the sum of client A and B
payments because kuni
t
= 3
4.
5.2.2
Uniform Price applied to risk
Similar methods can be applied to the risk problem. This is done by looking at the costs
each client adds to the Оұ-tail set, and is computed as follows:
xi =
1
|TОұ(Jt,N)|
X
tвҲҲTОұ(Jt,N))
пЈұ
пЈІ
пЈі
вҲ’kuni
t
В· |вҲҶReal
t,i
|,
if Jt,i = 0.
Jt,i,
otherwise.
(5.4)
With kuni
t
being the same as defined in equation 5.3. For risk, it will almost always be 1,
as it is only less if there is profit in one of the Оұ worst scenarios. The method is very
similar as the implementation for cost, except only the time periods in the worst case
set t вҲҲTОұ(Jt,N)) are considered, and it is divided by the amount of time periods in the
worst case set.
Group rationality
The allocations produced by the Uniform Price mechanism applied to risk will be group
rational and always in the core.
==PAGE:40==
30
5 Core-selection mechanisms
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
A
B
C
Aggregate
Cost [вӮ¬] 
Client
Cost division Uniform Price
Singleton Cost One-price
Singleton Cost Two-price
Uniform-price
Figure 5.2: Cost allocation for Uniform Price mechanism
-5
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
A
B
C
Aggregate
Cost [вӮ¬] 
Client
Cost division Uniform Price
Singleton Cost One-price
Singleton Cost Two-price
Uniform-price
Figure 5.3: Cost allocation for Uniform Price mechanism with dominant direction of
portfolio and system opposite
==PAGE:41==
5.3 Reduced Cost
31
Proof.
For an allocation in the core, it must be individually rational, so v{i} вүҘ
xi(N)вҲҖi вҲҲN. In this game, it is not possible for v{i} < xi(N) as it is equivalent
to P
tвҲҲTОұ(Jt,{i})) Jt,{i} < P
tвҲҲTОұ(Jt,N)) Jt,{i}. As the set TОұ(Jt,{i})) will be the one that
maximizes P
tвҲҲTОұ(Jt,{i})) Jt,{i}, this is never the case.
Another condition is collective rationality, that P
iвҲҲN xi(N) = v(N). This is ensured,
as P
iвҲҲN
P
tвҲҲTОұ(Jt,N)) Jt,{i} = v(N).
Finally, the excess must be non positive with respect to all subcoalitions. The
proof here is similar to individual rationality. For group rationality to not hold, the
following must be true: вҲғS вҠӮN such that v{S} < P
iвҲҲS xS(N). This is equivalent
to P
tвҲҲTОұ(Jt,S)) Jt,S < P
tвҲҲTОұ(Jt,N)) Jt,S, but since the set TОұ(Jt,S)) will be the one that
maximizes P
tвҲҲTОұ(Jt,S)) Jt,S, this is never the case.
Therefore, the allocation will always be in the core.
Incentive-compatibility
The mechanism is not incentive compatible for the same reasons as the Uniform Price
applied to the cost problem. Since agents are rewarded partly from their own imbalance,
they can bid their demand strategically.
5.3
Reduced Cost
Reduced Cost will in this thesis be defined as follows and only implemented for the cost
problem:
xN
i =
X
tвҲҲT
vt({i})
P
jвҲҲN vt({j}) В· vt(N)
(5.5)
Where vt is the subgame resulting from the imbalance realization period t. The logic
from this allocation is that agents with an imbalance in the dominant direction pay their
share of the total cost according to imbalance size, while agents with imbalances in the
other direction pay nothing and do not get paid. In this way, it removes some of the
incentive from strategic bidding, while keeping the allocation budget balanced. This
allocation is presented by the Danish TSO Energinet for netting in the full cost balancing
scheme [15].
This is the opposite extreme of the Uniform Price mechanism. With Uniform Price, the
agents with dominant direction imbalances pay their singleton costs, which is the worst
possible outcome for them that is individually rational, while the non-dominant direction
agents receive all the benefit from the aggregation. In the Reduced Cost mechanism,
the non-dominant direction agents get their singleton payout, while dominant direction
agents get all the gains from aggregation.
Group rationality
The allocation produced by the Reduced Cost mechanism is not always group rational,
as it will be possible for agents to group up for lower costs if a coalition has a lower
imbalance than the grand coalition.
==PAGE:42==
32
5 Core-selection mechanisms
Proof.
Group rationality can be disproven by counterexample: вҲҶReal
1,A = 1, вҲҶReal
1,B =
1, вҲҶReal
1,C = вҲ’1, О»1 = 1 and positive is the dominant direction. The Reduced Cost
allocation will be xA = 0.5, xB = 0.5, xC = вҲ’0.5. Since v({A, C}) = 0 < xN
A + xN
C =
0.5, the allocation is not in the core.
Incentive compatibility:
This mechanism is DSIC if the true costs for the agents are known.
Proof.
As the allocation is based on the singleton cost of an agent. If true costs are
known, an agent cannot lie about their singleton cost v({i}).
If an agent has information they believe could reduce the costs of other agents, they
can choose to reveal it. If revealing their type Оҳi reduces the costs of one or more
agents v({j}) by a vector of nonnegative numbers yt and the grand coalition cost
v(N) by 0 вүӨzt вүӨytвҲҖt вҲҲT, then the cost allocation of agent i will change to:
xN(Оҳi)
i
=
X
tвҲҲT
vt({i})
P
jвҲҲN vt({j}) вҲ’yt
В· (vt(N) вҲ’zt)
Where N(Оҳi) is the grand coalition with the added knowledge Оҳi.
As the games are sub-additive, it holds that:
X
jвҲҲN
vt({j}) вүӨvt(N)
Any information that reduces the costs of a client v(j) вҲ’y will reduce the costs of
the grand coalition to max(0, v(N) вҲ’y), as costs cannot be lower than 0 in a two
price system. The case of v(N(Оҳi)) = 0 and v(N(Оҳi)) Мё= 0 can be studied separately.
In the case v(N(Оҳi)) = 0, xv(N(Оҳi))
i
= 0, and since it is impossible for an allocation
to be lower than 0 in the Reduced Cost allocation, xv(N(Оҳi))
i
вүӨxv(N)
i
In the case v(N(Оҳi)) Мё= 0, then it also holds that xN(Оҳi)
i
вүӨxN
i . Proof:
Given yt > 0, P
jвҲҲN vt({j}) вүҘyt and
vt(N) вҲ’yt
P
jвҲҲN vt({j}) вҲ’yt
<
vt(N)
P
jвҲҲN vt({j})
Setting A = vt(N) and B = P
jвҲҲN vt({j})
A вҲ’yt
B вҲ’yt
< A
B
Eliminate denominators by cross multiplying both sides with B В· (B вҲ’yt). Inequality
direction is kept because B В· (B вҲ’yt) > 0 as B вүҘyt > 0:
(A вҲ’yt)B < A(B вҲ’yt)
==PAGE:43==
5.4 VCG
33
Expanding both sides:
A В· B вҲ’B В· yt < A В· B вҲ’A В· yt
Subtracting A В· B and multiplying by -1 which flips the inequality:
B В· yt > A В· yt
Dividing both sides by yt gives:
X
jвҲҲN
vt({j}) вүӨvt(N)
Which is true because of sub-additivity.
Because xN(Оҳi)
i
вүӨxN
i , then it is always optimal for a player to reveal their true type,
meaning the mechanism is DSIC.
An example of how the Reduced Cost allocation looks is in figure 5.4. Agent A and
B share the discount created by agent C, while agent C gets their singleton outcome.
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
A
B
C
Aggregate
Cost [вӮ¬] 
Client
Cost division Reduced Cost
Imbalance [MWh]
Singleton Imbalance Cost
Reduced cost
Figure 5.4: Cost allocation for Reduced Cost mechanism
5.4
VCG
Vickrey-Clarke-Groves is another mechanism that will be studied as an alternative to
the Shapley Value. VCG is a Grove mechanism, a subset of core-selection mechanisms
that are the only ones that are both incentive compatible and efficient [22], therefore it
is a useful mechanism where incentive compatibility is needed.
In the VCG mechanism using the clarke-pivot tax, each agent i pays a tax that is the
difference between the valuation of every agent except i when part of the grand coalition,
==PAGE:44==
34
5 Core-selection mechanisms
and the total valuation of the coalition without i. This is the externality of i. In the
following equation vi(S) indicates the valuation of i when part of the coalition S. If
everyone bids truthfully, then P
iвҲҲS vi(S) = v(S).
Taxi(N) =
X
jвҲҲN\{i}
vj(N \ {i}) вҲ’
X
jвҲҲN\{i}
vj(N)
(5.6)
The payoff that each agent gets is xN
i = vi(N) вҲ’Taxi(N). If everyone bids truthfully,
then the payoff can be calculated without explicitly calculating the tax, as the marginal
contribution of the player:
xN
i = vi(N) вҲ’
пЈ«
пЈӯ
X
jвҲҲN\{i}
vj(N \ {i}) вҲ’
X
jвҲҲN\{i}
vj(N)
пЈ¶
пЈё
(5.7)
= v(N) вҲ’
X
jвҲҲN\{i}
vj(N \ {i}) = Mi
(5.8)
As this corresponds to the utopian payoff, it is the best payoff that any agent can hope
for in the core. The main drawback with the VCG mechanism is that it is not budget
balanced, it needs an external party who pays or receives the difference [17].
VCG exhibits additivity, meaning that the VCG taxes will be the same if calculated
separately for a set of subgames, or for the main game.
Proof.
A sub-game is defined as a game u in a set of games U where
X
uвҲҲU
u = v вҮ’
X
uвҲҲU
u(S) = v(S)вҲҖS вҠҶN
(5.9)
The marginal contribution is defined
Mi = v(N) вҲ’v(N \ {i})
(5.10)
Inserting eq. 5.9 gives
Mi = v(N) вҲ’v(N \ {i}) =
X
uвҲҲU
u(N) вҲ’
X
uвҲҲU
(N \ {i})
(5.11)
Which is the sum of marginal contributions for each subgame. Therefore, VCG is
additive.
VCG is much simpler to compute than the Shapley Value, because the tax is only
calculated on the basis of the grand coalition N and the coalitions with one agent missing
{N \ {i} | i вҲҲN}, meaning only |N|+1 characteristic functions are needed, compared to
2|N| for the Shapley Value.
The VCG mechanism is often used in auctions and other non-cooperative games,
because there it has a weak budget balance, meaning that the manager never loses money,
==PAGE:45==
5.4 VCG
35
resulting from all agents generally having a negative externality in those games [7].
This is not the case in this problem, as there will always be more positive externalities
than negative externalities. To properly understand this, it is sometimes helpful to split
the VCG payoff into the valuation vi(N) and the tax Taxi(N). How exactly the valuation
is decided doesnвҖҷt matter, as long as it is consistent across agents, as valuation and tax
will sum up to the same xN
i no matter the vi(N), but for the sake of showing budget
balance, it becomes easier to see if the valuation is chosen smartly.
Budget balance of cost allocation:
For every realization of imbalance, the sum of taxes paid will be in the range: 0 вүҘ
P
iвҲҲN Taxi вүҘвҲ’P
iвҲҲN v({i}), meaning that the manager will never make money.
Proof.
Consider the game structure cases:
In the case of extreme imbalance, the game is inessential so all externalities will be 0
if clients pay their own cost, therefore no taxes will be paid and VCG gives a budget
balanced allocation that is the Uniform Price allocation.
In the case of high imbalance, dominant direction, recall from section 4.2.3: N =
Оҙ+ вҲӘОҙвҲ’and P
iвҲҲN(Mi) = v(N). Therefore the allocation where every agent pays
their marginal contribution is budget balance.
In the case of low imbalance, the game is not budget balanced as the set ОҙвҖІ has a
lower marginal contribution than their singleton cost 0 вүӨMi < v({i})вҲҖi вҲҲОҙ
вҖІ. This
removes additivity of marginal contributions at the top level. Subsidies increase
when net imbalance goes towards 0, peaking at P
iвҲҲN Taxi = вҲ’P
iвҲҲN v({i}). Take
the simple example of two agents with equal and opposite imbalances of 1 and
a positive dominant direction. вҲҶReal
t,A
= 1, вҲҶReal
t,B
= вҲ’1, characteristic functions
v({A}) = 1, v({B}) = 0, v(N) = 0. If B joins A, they will have MB = вҲ’1. A joining
B will not change the characteristic function, and A will therefore pay MA = 0.
Together, the agents will have a cost of 0, but they must be paid 1 for working
together. Each agent can be said to have a positive externality equal to the imbalance
cost of the other agent and must therefore be subsidized that amount according to
VCG.
In the case of Non-dominant direction imbalance, the marginal contribution of all
agents are 0, so the allocation will be budget balance.
To summarize, peak subsidies will be found when aggregate imbalance is 0, and
will be P
iвҲҲN Taxi = вҲ’P
iвҲҲN v({i}). Budget balance holds in the high, extreme and
non-dominant direction imbalance cases.
Overall, this means that the payoff calculated by the VCG mechanism becomes more
budget balanced when there are more agents, agents are comparable in size and imbalance
increases, as these factors increase the likelyhood of a high imbalance result. For a high
imbalance result, the VCG mechanism will return the Uniform Price allocation. For a
low imbalance result, the VCG will return a non-budget balanced allocation. For a high
imbalance in the non dominant direction, the VCG will return a 0 allocation.
==PAGE:46==
36
5 Core-selection mechanisms
Budget balance of risk assigning:
As VCG is additive, the risk game can be divided into a series of subgames.
Assuming that the indices in the tail are always constant:
TОұ(Jt,N)) = TОұ(Jt,N\{S})вҲҖS вҠҶN
These subgames can be a game ut for every t вҲҲTОұ(Jt,N)) where the characteristic function
will be ut(S) =
1
|TОұ(Jt,S)|
P
iвҲҲS Jt,S, which is the characteristic function of the cost problem
multiplied with a constant.
So the risk game can be broken down into a series of cost problems, and will only be
budget balanced if all cost problems are budget balanced. Therefore, budget balance
does not hold in the general case for the risk problem.
Budget balance can also be broken if an agent is able to change the indices in the Оұ-tail.
The details on this are in appendix A.1.
Group rationality for cost problem:
VCG will always return a group rational solution for the cost problem. As VCG is not
budget balanced, this allocation is not necessarily in the core.
Proof.
As VCG is additive, it will return the same allocation if calculated for every
time step separately. As the time steps are independent, the sum of a set of group
rational allocations for the sub games will also be group rational for the main game.
Therefore group rationality can be checked per time step.
VCG will in the case of extreme imbalance and high imbalance return the Uniform
Price allocation, as for these cases it is the allocation where all agents get their
marginal contribution. In section 4.2.3, these have been shown to be group rational.
In the low imbalance case, the Uniform Price allocation has also been shown to be
group rational and will be xi = MiвҲҖi вҲҲОҙ+ вҲӘОҙвҲ’and xi > MiвҲҖi вҲҲОҙвҖІ. Since VCG
allocation gives xi = MiвҲҖi вҲҲОҙвҖІ, it will be a cheaper allocation for ОҙвҖІ, even though it
is not budget balanced. Because it is the same cost or cheaper for all clients in a
group rational allocation, the VCG allocation will also be group rational in this case.
For the non-dominant direction imbalance, the marginal contribution of all clients
will be 0, leading the VCG mechanism to return the allocation of 0 for all clients. As
v(S) вүҘ0вҲҖS in this game, no coalition can have a lower cost than this. As a result of
this, the VCG mechanism will always return a group rational allocation for the cost
problem.
Group rationality for risk problem:
VCG will also return a group rational allocation for the risk problem.
Proof.
The Uniform Price mechanism is found to be group rational for the risk
problem in section 5.2. The VCG mechanism will always return a cheaper allocation
than the Uniform Price mechanism. This can be seen on a case by case basis:
If a coalition has the same Оұ-tail set as the grand coalition so TОұ(Jt,S) = TОұ(Jt,N),
==PAGE:47==
5.4 VCG
37
then every index t can be seen as a sub-game, as both VCG and the uniform price
mechanism are additive. For every index in the tail that is a high imbalance or
extreme imbalance case, then the Uniform Price and the VCG mechanism will return
the same allocation. If any indices have a low imbalance case, then VCG will return
the uniform price allocation for all agents in Оҙ+ and ОҙвҲ’and return the marginal
contribution for all clients in ОҙвҖІ, which is cheaper than the uniform price allocation.
In the rare case of a non-dominant direction imbalance for a time t in the Оұ-tail,
VCG will return an allocation of 0 for all Because all sub-games are group rational,
and VCG is additive, it the case of non-dominant direction imbalance will also be
group rational.
If the Оұ-tail sets are not the same, then VCG will provide a discount compared to
the Uniform Price. Consider an index t1 that replaces t2 in the Оұ-tail of a coalition
when client i joins. Client A will have the marginal contribution to that index:
Mi,t1 = Jt1,N вҲ’Jt2,N\{i}, as t2 will be replaced by t1, instead of Jt1,N вҲ’Jt1,N\{i}, the
contribution to costs in t1 if the index hadnвҖҷt changed. This gives a discount of
Jt1,N\{i} вҲ’Jt2,N\{i} to the client that causes a change in Оұ-tail set.
As the allocations produced by VCG will be the same or cheaper than a group
rational allocation for all clients, the VCG mechanism is group rational for the risk
problem.
In figure 5.5, an example of cost allocation by the VCG mechanism is given. Each
client pays according to their marginal contribution. Because client B and C together
have an imbalance of 0, client A adds their singleton cost when joining. Client A and C
together have a negative imbalance of 1, so when B joins, their marginal contribution is
only 1. This results in a Uniform Price allocation with discounts. Since B only pays 1,
the BRP will have to pay for the aggregated imbalance cost of 1вӮ¬, but receive 0вӮ¬ from
the clients, showing how VCG isnвҖҷt budget balanced in this case.
5.4.1
Budget balancing VCG
Because of the VCG mechanisms beneficial properties in being incentive compatible
and computationally cheap to calculate, there has been interest in remedying its lack of
budget balance.
One method proposed by Exizidis[16] is to do an ex-post redistribution of profits based
on if a agent contributes to or detracts from budget balance. This is done by solving the
market clearing without the agent, and comparing the budget balance with the budget
balance when the agent is in the market. If the budget balance of the grand coalition is
negative, as it will always be in this game, and the budget balance without the agent is
positive, which it will never be in this game, the agent is charged for harming budget
balance. Because of this, this fix for budget balance will not work for this problem.
Since there is a limit to how many beneficial properties a mechanism can have, another
method is to sacrifice one of VCGвҖҷs properties in order to gain budget balance. Faltings
[17] proposes such a method, where a random agent is designated as a sink. When solving
the problem, the sink will then have a lower priority, but will be rewarded by being paid
==PAGE:48==
38
5 Core-selection mechanisms
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
A
B
C
Aggregate
Cost [вӮ¬] 
Client
Cost division VCG
Singleton Cost One-price
Singleton Cost Two-price
VCG
Figure 5.5: Cost allocation for VCG mechanism
the tax the other agents pay. The intuition is that by disregarding the sinks preferences,
the other agents can get a better outcome, but they will pay the sink for this. This will
result in a solution that isnвҖҷt efficient, since the sink agent is not accounted for when
solving the problem, but this gap can often be smaller than the loss of the agents from
having to pay the taxes [17]. This method is not preferable for this problem, as here the
agents will always be paid a net subsidy. Bidding according to the sinks preferences can
be done without interfering with the bids of the other agents, and since all taxes are
subsidies, the sink will have to pay the other agents. Implementing this would reduce the
efficiency of the problem, while punishing the sink by making them pay all the subsidies.
A method proposed by Parkes [28], is to minimize the distance to the "vickrey discounts",
i.e. find an allocation that is as close to the VCG allocation as possible. Here, money is
redistributed ex-post to ensure budget balance, while being individually rational and as
close as possible to the VCG payment. This method is not directly applicable to this
problem, as it relies on a surplus generated by differences between sellers asking prices
and buyers bids, but can be adapted slightly to fit this problem:
min
xi
X
iвҲҲN
L(xi, xvick
i
)
(5.12)
s.t.
X
iвҲҲN
xi = v(N)
(5.13)
xi вүҘxvick
i
,
вҲҖi вҲҲN
(5.14)
xi вүӨv({i}),
вҲҖi вҲҲN
(5.15)
==PAGE:49==
5.5 Gately Point
39
The objective is to minimize the distance between the budget balanced allocation xi and
the VCG allocation xvick
i
via a distance function L(xi, xvick
i
). Constraint 5.13 ensures
that the new allocation will be budget balanced. Constraint 5.14 ensures that all clients
will pay at least as much in the new allocation as in the VCG allocation. As the VCG
allocation is the utopian allocation, any allocation where the client pays less will not be
in the core. Constraint 5.15 ensure that the new allocation will be individually rational.
The choice of the distance function impacts the distribution. For this problem, the
squared relative error will be used: L(xi, xvick
i
) =
P
iвҲҲN

xvick
i
вҲ’xi
xvick
i
2
. This is chosen
because of the large difference in size of the clients. Taking the absolute difference is
likely to advantage large clients, as they will get roughly the same absolute price increase
as small clients, it will be a relatively much smaller increase. Note that this is not defined
if a client has a xvick
i
= 0, so it works best for long time periods.
Whether this changes incentive-compatibility or not will not be proven in this thesis,
but in practice, the impact on incentive compatibility is likely to be small, as it would
require strategically bidding to be prioritized by the optimization.
5.5
Gately Point
The Gateley point allocates based on the propensity to disrupt of agents, providing a
compromise that seeks to keep valuable players in the coalition. Propensity to disrupt is
defined as the loss of other players in a coalition caused by agent i leaving divided by
the loss to agent i when leaving the coalition.
di(x) =
P
jМё=i xj вҲ’v(N \ {i})
xi вҲ’v({i})
= v(N) вҲ’v(N \ {i}) вҲ’xi
xi вҲ’v({i})
=
Mi вҲ’xi
xi вҲ’v({i})
(5.16)
xN = arg min
xNвҲҲXN

max
iвҲҲN di(xN
i )

(5.17)
Where XN is the set of all possible allocations in N and di is the propensity to disrupt
of agent i.
Seemingly, there is an issue when xi = v({i}), as there would be a division by 0. But If
the propensity to disrupt for all agents isnвҖҷt d=-1, the the allocation must be xN
i = v({i})
for all agents where v({i}) = Mi.[38]
The propensity to disrupt is a measure of the bargaining power of an agent, since it
measures how dependent the coalition is of them compared to how dependent the agent
is of the coalition. A high di(x) indicates that a player has little to gain by joining a
coalition, but the coalition gains a lot from them joining. A di(x) lower than 1 indicates
that the player has more to loose from leaving the coalition, than the coalition has from
them leaving. While the thesis problem is a minimization problem, formulation 5.16 can
be used for both maximization and minimization problems as the signs will change in
both the denominator and the numerator
The Gately Point is the imputation that minimizes the maximum propensity to disrupt,
therefore it can be found by solving a nonlinear optimization problem. It has been proven
==PAGE:50==
40
5 Core-selection mechanisms
that this optimal point is the point that makes all players propensity to disrupt equal,
and can be found by solving a system of equation or via closed form[38]:
dвҲ—=
P
jвҲҲN Mj вҲ’v(N)
v(N) вҲ’
P
jвҲҲN vj
(5.18)
Once d is found, the allocation can easily be found for each client by inserting the optimal
propensity to disrupt dвҲ—and solving eq. 5.16 for x:
xN
i = dвҲ—v({i}) + Mi
d + 1
(5.19)
The Gately Point is more computationally demanding than VCG, as it requires knowing
the characteristic function for the grand coalition, the coalitions with one agent missing
{N \ {i} | i вҲҲN}, and the singular clients {i}. This is a total of 2 В· |N|+1 compared to
|N|+1 for VCG.
Group Rationality:
A standard cooperative game is top dominant if and only if the Gately value lies in
the core [20]. A minimization game is standard if v({i}) вүҘMiвҲҖi вҲҲN and for at least
one j вҲҲN, vj > Mj. The cost allocation game is standard for all cases except the
case of extreme imbalance, as it doesnвҖҷt fulfill the condition vj > Mj for at least one
j вҲҲN in that case. A minimization game is top dominant if v(s)
|S| вүҘ
v(N)
|N| вҲҖS вҲҲ2N,
meaning that the grand coalition provides the lowest cost per client. This condition
is not true in the general case for this problem, for example if a single client causes a
very high imbalance cost that isnвҖҷt countered by others, the average cost of the coalition
without him will be lower than the average cost of the grand coalition. Therefore, there is
no guarantee that the Gately Point lies in the core of this game or that it is group rational.
A problem with the Gately Point is that it is not well defined for the case where there
is an equal propensity to disrupt of -1. In order for the Gately Point to be well defined,
Staudacher [38] has found that for weakly superadditive games, one of two conditions
must hold. For the equivalent minimization game that is subadditive, the conditions are
as follows:
v({i}) > Mi for at least one i вҲҲ{1, ..., n}
(5.20)
and
v({i}) вүӨMi
вҲҖ
i вҲҲ{1, ..., n} вҲ§v({i}) > Mi for at least one i вҲҲ{1, ..., n}
(5.21)
So either there must be at least one agent whose cost alone is higher than the cost they
add to the grand coalition, or if there are no agents that fulfill that condition, at least
one agent must add more cost to the grand coalition than their cost alone. The condition
v({i}) > Mi is impossible for both the cost and risk problems, so this condition can be
ignored. The condition 5.20 will be true in all cases, except the case of extreme imbalance.
In the case of extreme imbalance, the allocation xN
i = v({i}) will be the only allocation
in the core, as shown in section 4.2.3, so that allocation will be returned instead if the
==PAGE:51==
5.5 Gately Point
41
Gately Point is undefined.
Incentive-Compatibility:
The propensity to disrupt can be calculated as: di(x) = v(N)вҲ’v(N\{i})вҲ’xi
xiвҲ’v({i})
. A strategic
agent will seek to maximize their propensity to disrupt, in order to be awarded a better
allocation in the Gately Point. There are two ways to do this for a strategic agent:
Increasing v({i}), decreasing v(N \ {i}), or increasing v(N). Since the agent isnвҖҷt part
of v(N \ {i}), they have no influence on it and assuming true costs are known, it is not
possible for an agent to increase v({i}) by misreporting.
The only path for a strategic agent to increase their allocation is therefore to maximize
v(N), which is maximized if every agent tells the truth.
In figure 5.6, the Gately Point allocation is shown. Since the Gately Point is about
balancing how much a client can hurt the rest of the coalition by leaving, getting a
discount in the Gately Point is dependent on being able to hurt the rest of the clients.
Since the coalition B,C are perfectly balanced without client A, client A fulfills the
condition vi = Mi, and therefore has to pay their singleton cost because them leaving
would not harm the other clients. This causes the Gately Point to mostly give discounts
to large clients, because they are the ones who can change the sign of the imbalance by
leaving.
In a game where there are many small clients, smaller clients may band together to get
the same bargaining power as larger clients. By extending the definition of the Gately
Point to consider coalitions as well as individual players, the mechanism is called the
Disruptive Nucleolus [27]. This is not considered in this thesis.
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
A
B
C
Aggregate
Cost [вӮ¬] 
Client
Cost division Gately point
Singleton Cost One-price
Singleton Cost Two-price
Gately Point
Figure 5.6: Cost allocation for Gately Point mechanism
==PAGE:52==
42
5 Core-selection mechanisms
5.6
Nucleolus
The Nucleolus is a unique imputation that minimizes the excess among agents. The
allocation is found by first solving an optimization minimizing the maximum excess,
then the excess of the coalition(s) with maximum excess is forced to be constant and the
optimization is done for minimizing the second smallest excess. This continues until no
more changes are possible. Since the core is the set of imputations where every coalition
has a non-positive excess, the Nucleolus will always be in the core if it exists. It will
always be in the center of the core, as it is the allocation that is the farthest away from
being unstable [27]. In addition, it will be incentive compatible if true costs and utilities
are known [40].
To define the Nucleolus, the vector Оё(x) is the excess of every coalition with respect to an
allocation x. Оё(z) вӘ°l Оё(y) means Оё(z) is lexicographically larger than Оё(y). This means
that sorting from large to small, the first value that is different between the two vectors
is larger. E.g. if Оё(z) = [10, 5, вҲ’2] and Оё(y) = [10, 4, 3] then Оё(z) вӘ°l Оё(y). The Nucleolus
is then the allocation that provides the lexicographically smallest vector of excesses.
Оёi(x) = Пө(Si, x), where i = 1, ..., 2|N| вҲ’1
x = {y вҲҲI | Оё(z) вӘ°l Оё(y)вҲҖz вҲҲI}
(5.22)
This low excess is achieved by a series of optimization problems as detailed below. The
objective in eq. 5.23 minimizes the maximum excess Пө by changing the allocation xi.
Eq. 5.24 sets the maximum excess Пө to be the highest excess of coalitions that are not in
the set ОЁ. The set ОЁ is the set of coalitions that already had their excesses fixed.
Eq. 5.25 forces the excesses of all coalitions in ОЁ to be ПҲS, which is the maximum excess
they were assigned in a previous iteration.
Eq. 5.26 ensures budget balance.
After optimizing, the dual value is found for all constraints of the type eq. 5.24. If a dual
value for a coalition is not 0, it means that the constraint is binding for that coalition
and that the coalition has the maximum excess. All coalitions with binding dual values
will be added to ОЁ and have the maximum excess Пө assigned in ПҲS.
min
Пө,xi Пө
(5.23)
s.t.
X
iвҲҲS
(xi) вҲ’v(S) вүӨПө,
вҲҖS вҠӮN, S /вҲҲОЁ
(5.24)
X
iвҲҲS
(xi) вҲ’v(S) = ПҲS,
вҲҖS вҠӮN, S вҲҲОЁ
(5.25)
X
iвҲҲN
xi = v(N)
(5.26)
xi, Пө вҲҲR
(5.27)
In Algorithm 1, the algorithm required to find the Nucleolus is detailed. P(N) is the
power set of N, the set of all possible coalitions. The optimization is performed until the
==PAGE:53==
5.6 Nucleolus
43
all coalitions are contained in ОЁ, requiring 2|N| calls of the optimization, if only a single
coalition is locked each time.
Algorithm 1 Nucleolus Search
1: ОЁ вҶҗвҲ…
2: ПҲ вҶҗ0
в–·Initialize excess vector to zero for all coalitions
3: x вҶҗ0
4: while ОЁ Мё= P(N) do
5:
(Пө, Slocked, x) вҶҗNucOptimize(ОЁ, ПҲ)
в–·Find locked coalitions with excess Пө
6:
ОЁ вҶҗSlocked
7:
ПҲSlocked вҶҗПө
8: end while
9: Return x
в–·Return the allocation x that results in ПҲ
The fact that Nucleolus search is required complicates computing the allocation. Like
the Shapley Value, Nucleolus requires knowledge of all 2|N| characteristic function. On
top of that, the 2|N| optimization calls makes the allocation itself complicated to find.
Methods like clustered Nucleolus can reduce this complexity by grouping clients together
[24], but implementing this is outside the scope of the thesis.
In figure 5.7, an example is given of a Nucleolus allocation. The maximum excess is 0,
and is achieved by coalitions {A, C}, {A}, {B, C}. All of these coalitions have the same
gain from being a part of the grand coalition, as splitting off. The rest of the coalitions
have an excess of -1, indicating that they would rather stay in the grand coalition than
split off.
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
A
B
C
Aggregate
Cost [вӮ¬] 
Client
Cost division Nucleolus
Singleton Cost One-price
Singleton Cost Two-price
Nucleolus
Figure 5.7: Cost allocation for Nucleolus mechanism
==PAGE:54==
44
==PAGE:55==
CHAPTER 6
Data:
6.1
Data Sources
For this thesis, four datasets of time series data were used, as detailed in table 6.1.
Content
Temporal
Resolution
Geographical
Resolution
Source
Consumption data
Hourly resolution
Client-level
Reel, Not public
Imbalance price & spot price
15-minute resolution
Price zone level
[13]
PV production
Hourly resolution
Municipality level
[14]
PV forecasts
Hourly resolution
Price zone level
[12]
Table 6.1: Overview of timeseries data sources
Only the price data is natively in 15-minute resolution, all other data sources are
changed to 15-minute resolution by assuming an evenly spread production/consumption
for the hour. E.g. 4kWh usage for 1:00-2:00 is extended to be 1kWh for 1:00-1:15, and so
on.
6.2
Data Availability
The studied period of time is chosen based on the available data. The earliest imbalance
price data available in a 15-minute resolution from the TSO Energinet is from 2025-03-04
[13], while the most recent available consumption data for prosumers was 2025-07-19.
For the results, a 106 day period from 2025-04-04 to 2025-07-18 is used, to have a month
before that can be used for scenarios.
Consumption data availability: Consumption data contains data for the 25 clients that
take part in the case study. 22/25 have measurements for every hour, while 3/25 have
no measurements in the time period. This missing data is handled by not considering
the 3 clients with no data in following analysis.
Imbalance price & spot price: In figure 6.1, the missing data points for price are plotted.
Only 4 15-minute periods are missing data values for the imbalance price. This is handled
by setting the imbalance price to be the spot price for those periods.
For the two-price scheme, the imbalance direction that is dominating is important, as it
dictates in which direction a client must pay the imbalance price, and in which direction
they must pay the spot price. 97.56% of the time, these align so an imbalance in the
dominant direction means the client loses money, in the remaining 2.44% of cases, the
==PAGE:56==
46
6 Data:
client will be paid for increasing the imbalance in the dominant direction, according to
the dataset. To prevent this dynamic, dominating direction is calculated purely based
on the imbalance spread. It is 1 if the imbalance spread is positive, meaning a positive
imbalance will lose the BRP money, -1 if the imbalance spread is negative and 0 if there
is no need for balancing.
Figure 6.1: Missing data points for price
PV production: production data is on a municipality level, so it is reasonably reflective
of the actual production of the PV plant. In order to use it as production data, it is
scaled by multiplying it with a factor kPVScaling = P max
case
P max
data , where P max
case is the rated output
of the case study PV plant and P max
data is the maximum production measured at any
point in the data. This is under the assumption that the case study PV plant reaches
its maximum production at the same time as the other units and that the maximum
production of the other units is reached in this period. As the measurement is over the
summer period, this is not unlikely.
PV forecast: forecasts are made on an hourly basis on the day before, coinciding with
day-ahead market bidding. Scaling is done in the same way as production data, but the
forecasts are only on a price zone level, reducing their accuracy regarding the case study
plant production.
6.3
Forecasts and scenarios
As forecasting is not a central goal in this thesis, demand scenarios are generated in a
simple way. Each scenario is the data shifted by 1 to W weeks. E.g. if calculating for
Monday 2 PM with 5 demand scenarios, the last 5 Monday 2 PM demands are used as
scenarios.
PV production forecasts are real day ahead solar forecasts from Energinet[12] for the
municipality of the PV plant.
Imbalance spread scenarios are 96 data points from midnight to midnight that give the
price evolution of the imbalance spread for a full day. U random days are picked for
scenarios.
==PAGE:57==
6.3 Forecasts and scenarios
47
Dominating direction scenarios are generated from the same days as imbalance spread
scenarios.
W is set as 5, as it approximates the forecasting model of the BRP in the case study. U
is selected as 30, as the in-sample Weighted Mean Absolute Percentage Error (WMAPE),
calculated as in eq. 6.1, decreases when increasing U. U is not set above 30 to limit the
complexity of the optimization model and reduce the data used for scenarios.
Neither of these methods to set the parameters of the model are ideal. They are used as
the focus of the thesis is the game theory, not the modeling. A more appropriate method
to find the best values could be a k-fold validation on a validation set, in order to prevent
overfitting the models. The in-sample WMAPE depending on choice of W and U can be
found in appendix A.2. The highest in-sample WMAPE for W in the range 1 to 9 is
38.3% while the lowest is 36.4%, so the choice of W matters, but the gains of finding the
optimal W is not considered a priority, given the focus of the thesis. Increasing U makes
a greater difference, but because of limited data availability, will not be set higher than
30. The gains from increasing U are likely to be limited from this point, as the model
always bids the predicted net-consumption, as seen in table 6.2 where the error is 0 with
perfect forecasts of demand and production.
As a more accurate alternative to scenario based forecasting, a noise based forecast is
used for comparison. This forecast is not a true forecast, and is not implementable in
the real world, as it uses the actual demand data. The forecast is created by taking the
actual demand data, and multiplying it with a random normally distributed number with
a standard deviation of 0.28 and mean of 1, thereby creating a forecast that is normally
distributed around the real value with a standard deviation of 28%. 28% results in a
WMAPE of 8.6% of the average demand of the grand coalition, calculated as follows:
WMAPE =
P
tвҲҲT|вҲҶReal
t,N |
P
tвҲҲT P D,Real
t,N
(6.1)
A WMAPE of 8.6% is reported as a realistic aggregated forecast error for the BRP in the
case study. The exact number isnвҖҷt crucial, as the effects of aggregation will be roughly
the same no matter the standard deviation of the normal distributions, as seen in figure
6.2. The y axis is defined y(Пғ) =
vПғ(N)
P
iвҲҲN vПғ({i}), where vПғ is the game resulting from using
the noise based demand forecast. The x axis is the relative standard deviation of the
demand, a standard deviation of 0.25 meaning that the standard deviation per hour is
25% of the demand for the hour.
The result is that if the forecast is perfect, there are no gains of aggregation, but if the
forecast is not perfect, the gains are roughly independent of the standard deviation in
the range.
==PAGE:58==
48
6 Data:
Figure 6.2: Gains of aggregation with noise based demand forecasting and perfect PV
forecast, depending on noise standard deviation
6.4
Accuracy of model
The accuracy of the model is measured with WMAPE. In table 6.2 the WMAPE of
combinations of demand forecasts is displayed.
The measurement is based on the
realization of the bids from the optimization model, with scenarios and forecasts given
as in the table.
The imbalance spread is also an uncertainty, but in a two-price scheme, the optimization
model always bids the expected demand, as evidenced by the perfect demand forecast
with perfect PV forecast box having an error of 0%. This could change if the model
is made risk-averse, but for this simple model the imbalance spread scenarios are not
relevant to the output.
Uncertain PV Forecast
Perfect PV Forecast
Perfect Demand Forecast
18.1%
0%
Scenarios Demand Forecast
35.1%
26.0%
Noise Demand Forecast
22.9%
8.6%
Table 6.2: Weighted mean absolute percentage error for forecast type combinations
==PAGE:59==
CHAPTER 7
Comparing mechanisms
7.1
Mechanism properties
In table 7.1, the mechanisms are compared across a series of categories. These are sorted
roughly in order of importance to this problem. In this section, these mechanisms will
be compared based on these categories.
Mechanism
Formula
Computational
complexity
Budget
balanced
Group
rational
Additive
Incentive
compatible
Shapley Value
xi = P
SвҲҲ2N\{Ai}
(|S|)!(|N|вҲ’|S|вҲ’1)!
N!
(v(S вҲ©{Ai}) вҲ’v(S))
XXXX
Yes
No
Yes
Yes*
VCG
v(N) вҲ’P
jвҲҲN\{i} vj(N \ {i})
X
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
VCG Budget Balanced
Minimize squared distance to VCG allocation
XX
Yes
No
No
No
Uniform Price
xi = P
tвҲҲT
пЈұ
пЈІ
пЈі
вҲ’kuni
t
В· |вҲҶReal
t,i
|,
if v({i}) = 0.
vt({i}),
otherwise.
**
X
Yes
Yes***
Yes
No
Reduced Cost
xN
i = P
tвҲҲT
vt({i})
P
iвҲҲN vt({i}) В· vt(N)
X
Yes
No
Yes
Yes*
Nucleolus
Оёi(x) = Пө(Si, x), where i = 1, ..., 2|N| вҲ’1
x = {y вҲҲI | Оё(z) вӘ°l Оё(y)вҲҖz вҲҲI}
XXXXX
Yes
Yes
No
Yes*
Gately Point
di(x) =
P
jМё=i xjвҲ’v(N\{i})
xiвҲ’v({i})
,
x = arg minx

maxi di(x)

XX
Yes
No**
No
Yes*
Table 7.1: Studied mechanisms and their formulas and properties
* Assuming true costs/utilities for everyone is known
** Slight difference between cost and risk allocation, see section 5.2.2
*** Group rational only for risk allocation
7.1.1
Computational complexity
In order to use a mechanism, it should be tractable. The group of computationally
simplest mechanisms are the basic VCG, Uniform Price and Reduced Cost, as these
only require finding characteristic functions for |N|+1 coalitions and are very simple to
calculate once the characteristic functions are found.
The Gately Point is slightly more complex, as it requires solving 2|N|+1 coalitions. As
is the budget balanced VCG, as it requires solving a simple optimization problem after
calculating VCG.
The Shapley Value is much more computationally intensive, as it requires solving 2|N|
coalitions. This problem has the benefit of being decomposable, so calculating the charac-
teristic function of each coalition can be done quickly by adding together the imbalances
of the singleton coalitions and calculating the CVaR. Therefore the Shapley Value remains
tractable for large coalitions for this problem. Still, the quadratic scaling causes the
Shapley Value to run into memory and computating power issues once coalitions get large,
even though calculating the individual coalitions is quite fast. This would be further
compounded if decomposeability was compromised, for example by adding batteries.
==PAGE:60==
50
7 Comparing mechanisms
The nucleolus is the most computationally intensive. It requires solving the same coali-
tions as the Shapley Value, but finding the nucleolus also requires solving up to 2|N| вҲ’1
optimization problems in order to minimize the excess. While the scaling is similar to
Shapley , the baseline per coalition calculation speed is much lower, leading to hitting
scaling issues faster.
7.1.2
Budget balance
All mechanisms except base VCG are budget balanced. VCG is not, and will always
require the manager to subsidize the agents. The exact amount of subsidies depend on
the game, as detailed in section 5.4.
7.1.3
Group rationality
Group rationality is important for customer satisfaction, and is an indication that the
allocation reflects the worth of the agents.
Only the nucleolus has been proven to always be in the group rational for both the cost
and risk problem. The Uniform Price allocation will always be group rational for the risk
problem, but not necessarily the cost problem. It is possible for a mechanism to return
an allocation in the core, even if it isnвҖҷt group rational, so this doesnвҖҷt immediately rule
out any of the mechanisms.
7.1.4
Additivity
Additivity is relevant in the cost problem, as there will be a subgame for each imbalance
realization. Additive methods are preferred, since the choice of period doesnвҖҷt influence
the allocation. Picking non-additive allocations means that time period is a design
parameter as well, and the mechanism will behave differently dependent on how often it
is recalculated.
7.1.5
Incentive compatible
Only VCG is incentive compatible in the general case, but in this problem the true costs
and utilities of agents is known, so only the budget balanced VCG and Uniform Price
allocation are not incentive compatible.
7.2
Numerical comparison
Initial numerical comparison is done separately for the cost and risk problem. The
numerical comparison is based on the 22 out of 25 clients that have available consumption
data. Where possible, all 22 clients are used for results and figures, but some results are
too computationally expensive to calculate for the full set, so they are calculated for a
subset of clients.
==PAGE:61==
7.2 Numerical comparison
51
The comparison is made for 106 days from 2025-04-04 00:00:00 UTC to 2025-07-18
00:00:00 UTC. The clients have different demands and demand curves.
7.2.1
Cost allocation
Tested mechanisms
All the mechanisms in table 7.1 are tested. Since the Gately Point is not additive, how
many time steps it is calculated over matters. In this section, the "Gately Point" will be
the Gately Point calculated at once for the entire game, while "Gately 15Min" will be
the Gately Point calculated for every 15 minute subgame, and then summed together.
Nucleolus is not broken up in this way, even though it is not additive, as the compu-
tation time would be too long on the available hardware. The budget balanced VCG
implementation is not broken up in this way because of time limitations.
In addition, a mechanism called "Flat Rate" is included as a benchmark. This mechanism
divides the costs so every client pays the same fee per MWh, simulating a case where
Reel makes no effort to differentiate between clients. It is calculated in equation 7.1:
xN
i =
v(N)
P
tвҲҲT P D,Real
t,N
В·
X
tвҲҲT
P D,Real
t,i
(7.1)
The gains of aggregation
The reduction in costs from aggregation is seen in table 7.2. This difference is the utility
gain that must be split among clients when implementing cooperative game theory. This
number is likely to change based on the distribution of imbalances from the forecasting
method.
A way to understand how a client behaves in the portfolio, is by comparing their singleton
costs with grand coalition costs. In figure 7.1, the weighted average ratio of aggregated
costs over singleton costs is plotted for portfolios of different sizes, with the y axis
calculated as:
y(n) =
P
SвҠҶN;|S|=n v(S)
P
SвҠҶN;|S|=n
P
iвҲҲS v({i})
(7.2)
where S вҠҶN; |S|= n means all coalitions of length n that can be created from the grand
coalition N. The smallest clients, N, W, and X, are left out of figure 7.1 because of
hardware limitations, but are included in table 7.2.
The average cost steadily falls as more clients are added. This means that adding more
clients doesnвҖҷt only increase revenue by having a larger customer base, it reduces costs
for all existing customers.
Total Aggregated Cost
Total Singleton Cost
Cost reduction
157617вӮ¬
196756вӮ¬
19.9%
Table 7.2: Reduction in costs from aggregation, 22 clients
==PAGE:62==
52
7 Comparing mechanisms
Figure 7.1: Average cost reduction for portfolio sizes, excluding 3 smallest clients
7.2.1.1
Central numerical results and mechanism sorting
As many allocation mechanisms are implemented in this thesis, the most suitable will
be found by comparing some initial numerical results, before going into the detailed
analysis.
Comparing maximum excess:
In table 7.3, the maximum excess Пө of the allocations are compared. Excess is calculated
based on the full period of 106 days.
Excess is calculated based on two scenarios, one being the 19 largest clients and the other
being the 12 largest clients. The 12 client scenario is included as calculating the nucleolus
is feasible for this coalition size. Increasing clients beyond 12 makes the nucleolus too
slow and memory intensive to calculate on the available hardware. Calculating maximum
excess requires calculating all 2|N| characteristic functions. Beyond 19 clients, this requires
too much memory, so 19 is the maximum number the excess can be checked for in this
thesis. The scenarios with 12 and 19 clients respectively do not include the 10 and 3
clients with the lowest demand out of the complete set of 22 clients.
Recall that excess is the difference in utility between the grand coalition and another
coalition. Maximum excess indicates how much a client could gain from leaving the
grand coalition and joining the best other coalition. All proposed mechanisms provide a
negative or very small positive maximum excess, taking into account the full costs of the
system, indicating that stability is relatively easy to achieve in this case.
The lowest excess is from the VCG; however, it should be noted that the VCG is not
budget balanced, so part of achieving this low excess is subsidizing the clients.
The flat rate allocation is very unstable for this game. Intelligent clients are very likely
to drop out of this allocation, and create a coalition with lower costs if they have the
possibility.
The nucleolus provides a benchmark for the lowest possible maximum excess. It is lower
than any other allocation, but not by a huge amount, considering how computationally
==PAGE:63==
7.2 Numerical comparison
53
complicated it is. The Gately Point provides the third lowest maximum excess, after the
nucleolus and VCG.
Clients
Shapley
VCG
VCG BB
Gately Point
Gately 15 min
Uniform Price
Reduced Cost
Flat Rate
Nucleolus
19
4.7вӮ¬
-132.2вӮ¬
-0.1вӮ¬
-36.2вӮ¬
-16.0вӮ¬
-16.2вӮ¬
2.6вӮ¬
15105вӮ¬
вҖ“
12
-63.0вӮ¬
-789.7вӮ¬
-0.6вӮ¬
-220.9вӮ¬
-188.0вӮ¬
-81.9вӮ¬
98.0вӮ¬
10868вӮ¬
-394.8вӮ¬
Table 7.3: Maximum excess of allocations
Computational complexity
All computations are done on a AMD Ryzen 5 7535HS CPU with 30,8 GB of usable
RAM and a 54 GB paging file on a SSD. The computations are not parallelized.
In figure 7.2 and table 7.4, allocations are compared for up to 12 clients. In figure 7.3,
nucleolus is left out, allowing calculations to be made for the rest of the clients. Timing
results for 22 clients are in the appendix A.3.
Nucleolus is by far the most computationally intensive method. The computation time
for the Shapley Value scales approximately at the same rate as the nucleolus, but the
nucleolus has a much higher base computation speed.
The source of computational complexity are two-fold: Calculating characteristic functions
and calculating allocation.
Calculating the characteristic function is the main source of complexity for most of the
mechanisms. The mechanisms can be divided into two groups, those of low complexity and
those of high complexity. High complexity mechanisms require characteristic functions
for all 2|N| coalitions, while low complexity mechanisms require less.
Even though the Uniform Price, Reduced Cost and VCG mechanisms only needs |N|+1
coalitions, it is computationally faster to optimize N times and add them up, than to
optimize |N|+1 times. The Gately Point requires 2|N|+1 characteristic functions, which
can also be found by optimizing |N| times and adding them up. The time to sum them
is negligible, therefore the characteristic function computation time is the same as for all
the low complexity mechanisms.
Scaling up to 22 clients increases the characteristic function calculation time to 1.1
seconds for the simple mechanism and 71 seconds for the complex, indicating how the
simple mechanisms scale much better. Shapley ends up taking 152 seconds to calculate
for a day with 22 clients, with 71 seconds being characteristic function calculation and
81 seconds being allocation calculation. Both the characteristic function and allocation
calculation could be sped up, as the current implementations are slow and simple for-loops
because the limited available RAM made faster methods impractical. While Shapley is
feasible for 22 clients and could be optimized to be feasible for larger sets, its quadratic
scaling will make it intractable much earlier than the simple mechanism.
The nucleolus differs from the other mechanism by its allocation calculation being much
slower than characteristic function calculation. This is a result of having to optimize
excess up to 2|N| times.
Budget balance:
In table 7.5, the budget balance of VCG is shown for the full 22 client game. The
==PAGE:64==
54
7 Comparing mechanisms
Allocation
Characteristic function time [s]
Allocation time [s]
Total time [s]
Shapley
0.33
8.6 Г— 10вҲ’3
0.34
VCG
0.29
4.4 Г— 10вҲ’6
0.29
VCG Budget Balanced
0.29
1.2 Г— 10вҲ’3
0.29
Gately Point
0.29
6.4 Г— 10вҲ’6
0.29
Gately 15 Min
0.29
2.9 Г— 10вҲ’3
0.29
Full Cost
0.29
4.9 Г— 10вҲ’4
0.29
Reduced Cost
0.29
3.9 Г— 10вҲ’4
0.29
Nucleolus
0.33
85.0
85.3
Table 7.4: Computation Times for Coalitions with 12 Clients (Scientific Notation, 2
Significant Digits)
Figure 7.2: Computation time of alloca-
tions for a day
Figure 7.3: Computation time of alloca-
tions excluding nucleolus for a day
subsidies given are significant, and are likely to increase if forecast accuracy increases, as
found in section 5.4. All other mechanisms are budget balanced, so they are not shown
here.
Total Cost
Total VCG Cost
Unassigned Cost
157617вӮ¬
142919вӮ¬
9.3%
Table 7.5: Budget balance of VCG for cost problem, 22 clients
Picking the best candidates for cost allocation
To improve the legibility of the figures in the in-depth study of how the allocations affect
individual clients, a few will be chosen as the prime candidates.
The Shapley Value is feasible for calculating a day at a time for 22 clients, but because of
hardware limitations it is too time consuming to calculate for the whole 106 day period,
and therefore it is excluded from further analysis.
VCG has a significant budget imbalance for this application, and since so many other
mechanisms are incentive compatible for this game, VCG is not seen as viable.
Nucleolus is excluded from further analysis in this thesis, as it is seen as infeasible to
==PAGE:65==
7.2 Numerical comparison
55
calculate for the full 22 clients.
That leaves the Gately Point calculated for the full period and every 15 minutes, the
Uniform Price, the Reduced Cost, the budget balanced VCG and the flat rate as a
benchmark.
7.2.2
Risk allocation
This numerical comparison uses the same input data and models as section 7.2.1. The
main difference is that instead of having the cost as the characteristic function, how each
client contributes to CVaR is allocated instead. The Оұ parameter is set to 0.05 for this
section.
The allocation of CVaR is different from cost, as the BRP can not directly tell a client
that they must pay this amount. For this metric to be useful, the BRP must have some
equation that incorporates their aversion to risk and the Оұ in order to return the price of
1вӮ¬ of CVaR.
Tested mechanisms:
Fewer allocation methods are implemented for the risk problem compared to the cost
problem. Shapley , VCG, budget balanced VCG, the Gately Point, Uniform Price, and
the nucleolus are applied to the problem. The Gately Point is only computed for the
whole period, with no alternative 15 minute interval computation. This is done because
the CVaR metric by design needs to cover multiple time periods. A risk centric Reduced
Cost allocation is not implemented because of time constraints.
The gains of aggregations:
To show the gains of aggregation for risk, the aggregated CVaR is compared to the sum
of individual CVaRвҖҷs. This is an abstract metric, as CVaR cannot usually be summed in
this way. This metric is used since the alternative to applying cooperative game theory
to risk is to measure the CVaR of each client separately, and assign costs based on that.
In table 7.6, the difference between assigning CVaR based on cooperative game theory
and based on singleton costs is 11.3%.
Aggregated CVaR
Sum of CVaR
Difference
180.3вӮ¬
159.9вӮ¬
11.3%
Table 7.6: Difference between individual and aggregated CVaR, 22 clients
7.2.2.1
Central numerical results and mechanism sorting
Like for the cost problem, not all allocations are suited for the risk problem. Here, all of
them will be compared and the prime candidates will be picked.
Comparing maximum excess:
In table 7.7, the maximum excess for allocations applied to the risk problem is compared.
==PAGE:66==
56
7 Comparing mechanisms
Note that the values are much smaller than for cost, as this is the change in CVaR. These
are also not calculated for the full 22 clients, because of hardware limitations.
All allocations except the flat rate provide a stable or almost stable allocation. The
Gately Point is the most stable among the allocations except the nucleolus and VCG,
but the differences are quite small.
Clients
Shapley
VCG
VCG BB
Gately Point
Uniform Price
Flat Rate
Nucleolus
19
0.02вӮ¬
-0.21вӮ¬
0.001вӮ¬
-0.058вӮ¬
-0.0005вӮ¬
14.9вӮ¬
вҖ“
12
-0.08вӮ¬
-1.04вӮ¬
-0.0005вӮ¬
-0.29вӮ¬
-0.0014вӮ¬
10.72вӮ¬
-0.52вӮ¬
Table 7.7: Maximum excess of allocations
Computational complexity:
The computation speed is very close to the same as for the cost problem, as the allocations
are the same, except characteristic function calculation speed is slightly longer because
of the need for calculating the CVaR of the coalitions. The results for 12 and 22 clients
can be seen in appendix A.4 and are similar to the cost problem, with the Nucleolus
being too computationally expensive for the full client set, and the Shapley Value being
too computationally expensive to calculate for the 106 day dataset.
Budget balance:
In table 7.8, the budget balance of the VCG mechanism when applied to CVaR for the
dataset of all 22 clients is shown. About 20вӮ¬ of CVaR risk is unaccounted for when
applying VCG. That risk must not be taken into account when allocating risk based on
VCG, in order to preserve its properties.
Total CVaR
VCG CVaR Total
Unassigned CVaR
181.1вӮ¬
160.6вӮ¬
11.3%
Table 7.8: Budget balance of VCG
Picking the best candidates:
Because of their long computation times, the Shapley Value and the Nucleolus are seen
as impractical for this problem as well. Likewise, VCG is also seen as impractical because
of its lack of budget balance and that budget balanced incentive compatible alternatives
exist.
That leaves the budget balanced VCG, the Gately Point, Uniform Price and the flat rate
benchmark for further study.
7.2.3
In Depth Analysis
In this section, the best candidates for mechanisms will be compared across the portfolio
for both cost and risk assigning, to understand how they behave with respect to individual
clients.
==PAGE:67==
7.2 Numerical comparison
57
Demand of clients
In figure 7.4, the total demand for each client in the period is shown. In this case, there
is a very large difference between the biggest and smallest clients, with client A having a
demand that is larger than all other clients combined. For subsequent plots, clients are
sorted in this order, according to their total demand.
In figure 7.5, the PV Coverage defined as the total PV production divided by demand
for each client is plotted, PV Cover =
P
tвҲҲT P G,Real
t,i
вҲ’P
tвҲҲT P D,Real
t,i
. A few small clients have very high
PV production compared to their demand in this period. This plot shows how much
uncertainty comes from the demand vs PV production for a client. Client KвҖҷs cost and
risk will mainly come from forecasting demand for purchasing electricity, while client
FвҖҷs cost and risk will mainly come from forecasting PV production to sell electricity. As
the portfolio effect comes from forecasting errors cancelling each other out, and the PV
forecast being the same for each client, clients with a high PV coverage will likely benefit
less from cooperation.
Figure 7.4: Demand of clients in the 106
day period
Figure 7.5: Total PV production as percent
of total demand
Total allocation to Clients
In figure 7.6 and 7.7 the total cost and CVaR allocated to each client is compared. From
comparing figure 7.4 and 7.6, it is clear that the imbalance costs of clients has a strong
relationship with the clients demand. What is interesting from these figures is how
the allocation mechanisms cluster together. Every allocation mechanism except for the
flat rate allocation is clustered close together, indicating that moving from flat rate to
any other allocation, provides a large improvement in fairness, but differences between
allocations are minor in comparison.
Client A and G seemingly overpay quite a bit with the flat rate allocation, while client I
underpays.
In figure 7.7, the total CVaR allocated to each client is plotted. Оұ is set to 0.05, so the
CVaR is the average cost in the worst 5% of 15 minute imbalance settlement periods.
The shape is similar to the plot for cost in figure 7.6, with a CVaR contribution that is
closely tied to demand. Allocations are slightly different, e.g. for client A.
This figures gives an overall view of who the flat rate allocation benefits and who it harms,
==PAGE:68==
58
7 Comparing mechanisms
Figure 7.6: Cost allocations for each client
Figure 7.7:
CVaR allocations for each
client
but to see the differences between allocations and the smaller clients, other visualizations
are needed.
Cost Per MWh
As the differences in allocations among clients are difficult to see except for the largest
clients in figure 7.6 and 7.7, figure 7.8 compares the imbalance costs per MWh demand.
The y axis is defined for both cost and risk as: yi =
xN
i
P
tвҲҲT P D,Real
t,i
.
This makes it more clear who are the clients that cause the highest imbalances. Even
though clients A and G have high total costs, as seen in figure 7.6, their cost per MWh
is lower than most other clients.
Client P is another client with a relatively low cost, but there is a large difference in how
the individual allocations value client P. The Gately Point calculated on a 15 minute basis
and the budget balanced VCG attributes a very low cost to the client, while Reduced
Cost attributes a higher cost.
The clients that have lower demands than P generally have higher imbalance costs. This
could be influenced by them having a PV coverage. The difference between clients is
large, highlighting the need for individualized fees. Client Y has a roughly 4 times higher
contribution to cost and risk than P, depending on chosen allocation.
In figure 7.9, the CVaR contribution is divided by total demand in the period in the
same way as cost. This figure gives an indication on how much each client should be
charged on top of the spot price, to account for the risk they add to the BRP.
Figures 7.8 and 7.9 have similar trends with slight differences. There is a correlation
between a client having a high cost and risk in a two-price system. It makes sense that
more expensive clients are generally more risky, especially considering that both cost and
risk relies on aggregation reducing the variance of the portfolio. The most significant
difference is that a client can have a negative contribution to risk, as seen for client P.
Individual Client Cost Differences
When relative to demand size, the allocations are still clustered quite close together
compared to putting a flat rate across all clients. While going from a flat rate to some
==PAGE:69==
7.2 Numerical comparison
59
Figure 7.8: Imbalance cost per MWh of
demand in 106 day period
Figure 7.9: CVaR contribution per MWh
demand
individualized allocation makes the largest difference, there are also significant differences
between allocations. In figures 7.10 and 7.11, the cost increase for each client going from
their cheapest to most expensive allocation is shown. While the differences in maximum
excess from table 7.3 are small, there is a large difference between who gets a good
deal between allocations. E.g. client P would greatly prefer a Gately Point solution
calculated on a 15 minute basis or the budget balanced VCG, compared to Reduced Cost,
as Reduced Cost is more than three times as expensive. The preferred allocation for each
client can be found in appendix A.5. Budget balanced VCG and Gately 15Min are often
at the extremes of being the most expensive or cheapest for clients. The Gately Point
calculated for the full period is notable for only being the most expensive or cheapest
allocation for client S, making it more of a middle ground compared to other mechanisms.
This plot is only made for the cost problem, but the risk problem has similar results, as
seen in figure 7.9.
Figure 7.10:
Percentage increase from
cheapest to most expensive allocation
Figure 7.11: Absolute increase from cheap-
est to most expensive allocation
Cost ratio of clients
A different way to understand how a client behaves in the portfolio, is by comparing
their singleton cost with grand coalition allocation. This will be called their relative cost
==PAGE:70==
60
7 Comparing mechanisms
or relative CVaR, defined in this thesis as:
zi =
xN
i
v({i})
(7.3)
This is a measurement that indicates how well a client works as part of the portfolio. A
relative cost of 100% means that the client has the same cost as if they were not part of
the portfolio, while a low relative cost means that they synergize well with the rest of
the portfolio. A client with a low relative cost is more likely to be satisfied with being a
part of the portfolio, as their costs are lower than they would be alone.
This is illustrated for cost in figure 7.12. Interestingly, most clients in the portfolio
have a relative cost of around 80%, even though clients have large differences in costs in
figure 7.8. Clients P and V have notably lower relative cost than the others, indicating a
different pattern in demand that works better in the portfolio than the demands of other
clients.
The flat rate relative cost varies greatly. This is not indicative of the portfolio effect on
the clients, as the flat-rate doesnвҖҷt reflect the true worth of the clients, evidenced by its
high excess.
The results are again similar but slightly different for risk. In this case, the budget
balanced VCG and Uniform Price give lower costs to smaller clients. Interestingly, the
budget balanced VCG and Uniform Price return almost the same relative cost for CVaR,
while there is a larger difference between them for the cost problem.
Figure 7.12: Costs as part of coalition vs
alone
Figure 7.13: CVaR as part of coalition vs
alone
Daily variability in results for cost
The previous results have been made with the assumption that an entire 106 day period
is assessed at once. A different model could be that costs are reflected daily. This makes
less sense to do for risk, as determining risk ex-post is sensitive to time period.
In figure 7.14, the allocated daily costs are compared to the daily singleton costs for
client A and P using the relative cost metric. A is chosen as an example of a large client
and P is chosen as an example of a client with a large difference in allocation preference.
The black line is the median cost per day, while the blue line is the mean cost weighted
==PAGE:71==
7.2 Numerical comparison
61
by daily imbalance, which corresponds to the dots on figure 7.12. For this plot, budget
balanced VCG and the Gately Point are caluclated based on a day. Because they are
not additive, the results are slightly different from those in 7.14. All else being equal, a
mechanism that provides a low variability is preferable, as it is less risky for the clients.
Clearly, client P experiences a much wider spread of relative costs, if outliers are not
taken into account. The variances of the allocations are similar, however, Reduced Cost
mechanism stands out among the others as having an especially low variability. This is to
be expected, as by design no client will ever be paid for participating in this mechanism,
so relative costs will be locked between 0% and 100%.
No client ever pays more than their singleton costs for any of the allocations, satisfying
individual rationality.
(a) Client A with outliers
(b) Client P with outliers
(c) Client A without outliers
(d) Client P without outliers
Figure 7.14: Boxplots of daily costs for clients A and P, with and without outliers
==PAGE:72==
62
7 Comparing mechanisms
7.2.4
Effect of forecast accuracy on cost results
In this thesis, the focus has been dividing the costs and risk, not generating the bids.
As such, there are significant errors in the demand and PV forecasts as noted in section
6.4. To give a perspective on how the forecasts affect the allocation, a forecast based on
normally distributed noise as explained in section 6.3 and an assumption of a perfect PV
forecast are presented. This reduces the WMAPE of the grand coalition from 35% to
8.6%, and removes any differences in predictability of clients. Figure 7.15 displays the
effect this has on cost and table 7.9 compares the maximum excess of mechanisms in the
cost problem under this assumption.
By removing PV related uncertainty and making the uncertainty of demand normally
distributed, the only differences between clients is the timing and magnitude of their
demand.
In figure 7.8 there was no direct connection between client size and allocation, but when
removing other sources of uncertainty, there is a clear trend. Client A, who is larger than
the rest of the clients combined, pays a much higher fee than the rest. The intuition
behind this is: an imbalance in the dominant direction is less costly if other clients can
counter it by an opposite imbalance, and an imbalance in the non-dominant direction is
worth more if it can counter an opposite imbalance.
If a large client like A has an imbalance, it is likely larger than the rest of the imbalances
combined, so their imbalances will only partially be countered or partially counter the
imbalances of the rest of the clients.
Although the budget balanced VCG is stable for scenario forecasting, it provides a large
positive excess in table 7.9. This is also apparent from figure 7.15b, where client A will
pay their singleton costs under this allocation, giving them a high chance of getting a
better allocation somewhere else. For this reason, this implementation of budget balanced
VCG is not considered a good mechanism as forecasts get better.
Another interesting result from this, is the spread between the allocations. From table
7.9, the allocations except budget balanced VCG provide a stable or very close to stable
allocation, but figure 7.15a reveals that there is a large difference between who it benefits.
The budget balanced VCG and Gately Point calculated in 15 minute intervals will
prioritize the smaller clients, consistently giving them the lowest costs while giving client
A a high cost. The simple methods, Reduced Cost and Uniform Price are the opposite,
giving higher costs to small clients and lower costs to large clients.
The takeaway from this is that the accuracy of the forecast and how the forecast errors
are distributed have a great effect on the allocations. As overall imbalance falls, the
choice of allocation becomes important. Client A is unlikely to be happy with the 15
minute Gately Point allocation, even though it is fair according to cooperative game
theory.
Forecast type
VCG BB
Gately Point
Gately 15 min
Uniform Price
Reduced Cost
Flat Rate
Scenario forecast
-0.1
-36.1вӮ¬
-16.1вӮ¬
-16.2вӮ¬
2.6вӮ¬
15104вӮ¬
Noise forecast
144.8вӮ¬
-21.8вӮ¬
-11.3вӮ¬
-22.2вӮ¬
-21.2вӮ¬
5626.8вӮ¬
Table 7.9: Maximum excess of allocations comparing forecast types, 19 clients
==PAGE:73==
7.3 Summary of results
63
(a) Cost per MWh
(b) Relative cost
Figure 7.15: Cost metrics for model with perfect PV forecast and normally distributed
error in demand forecast
7.3
Summary of results
Based on their properties, computational complexity and maximum excess, the most
suitable allocations for allocating costs among those studied has been found to be: Re-
duced Cost, Uniform Price and the Gately Point. For assigning risk, the most suitable
allocations have been found to be: Uniform Price and the Gately Point.
The Gately Point provides the lowest maximum excess in many cases, and is therefore
the most fair of the allocations; however, the maximum excess of the other allocations is
also acceptable and not far from the Gately Point, so the choice between them could
come from other factors.
An important factor for a BRP could be transparency. In cooperative game theory,
it is assumed that clients are intelligent, i.e. they understand the allocations and can
calculate everyones utility and excess. In practice, the Reduced Cost and Uniform Price
allocations are much easier to understand for a client, so they may be better tools to
negotiate fees with. This also makes them easier to maintain, as they donвҖҷt require
specialized knowledge.
Another factor is who the allocation prioritizes. As shown in figure 7.11, the difference
between stable allocations can be quite large, so the choice of allocation is also a choice
of which clients to give a pricing advantage. A BRP might seek to prioritize large clients
over small clients, as they require similar work to forecast but have much higher volumes.
Based on figures 7.8 and 7.9, the Gately Point generally gives better allocations to the
large clients than the small clients, so it could be a preferable choice if wanting to give
more competitive deals to them. The noise based demand forecast in figure 7.15a results
in the Gately Point prioritizing smaller clients, so the exact clients allocations favor rely
on more complex dynamics than pure demand size.
==PAGE:74==
64
==PAGE:75==
CHAPTER 8
Discussion
Throughout this thesis, various allocation mechanisms have been studied and compared
in relation to the problem of allocation imbalance costs for a BRP in a two-price market.
In this section, the weak points and potential paths forward for this thesis are discussed.
8.1
Points of Critique
8.1.1
Forecasting and Model Accuracy
This thesis has provided various methods to divide costs, but has not sought to study how
to reduce it. The simple scenario based forecasting coupled with the optimization model
provides a relative MAE of 35.1% throughout the studied time period. The forecast has
a large effect on the allocation, as seen in section 7.2.4. A more accurate forecast leads
to larger differences between the allocations, so the choice becomes more significant as
forecasts get better.
This thesis provides some general tools for how to allocate costs in a portfolio, but this
case study cannot be used directly to allocate costs to the studied portfolio, as the costs
and differences between clients depend greatly on the forecasting methods used by the
BRP.
A related issue is that this thesis only studies the day-ahead market. In practice, a
BRP will trade in multiple markets in order to reduce their costs. Only looking at the
day-ahead market further exacerbates the problem of inaccurate forecasts, as it exposes
the BRP to the full cost of their inaccuracy with no way of remedying it in later markets.
Trading in more markets is likely to complicate the generation of the characteristic
functions, as the trading actions and costs depend on the imbalance of the coalition and
how forecasts evolve, leading to having to calculate characteristic functions for coalitions
independently, instead of summing singleton costs.
8.1.2
Implementation
Another point is on whether these techniques are practical to implement. They require a
fundamental shift in the pricing model and work done by the BRP, so it could be put
into question if the implementation is worth it. There are two primary complications
relevant to this:
==PAGE:76==
66
8 Discussion
Firstly, calculating the allocations requires knowledge of the imbalances caused by
every single coalition. This requires forecasting the demand of every client individually,
which adds complexity to designing the forecasting models compared to having a single
aggregate forecast. If only considering the day ahead market and using a simple model
where the bids equal the forecasts, then the BRP can calculate how the imbalance would
resolve for each coalition, by adding together singleton imbalances, as in this thesis.
This becomes complicated if more markets than the day ahead market are considered.
In that case, the BRP must have some method to simulate what the cost of the coalition
would be if trading in the individual markets. Trading individually for each client,
treating them as if there were no other clients in the coalition and summing up costs
to create coalitions is likely to give a bad approximation. If there is a spread between
the price of buy and sell orders on the intraday market, adding together two clients
with equal but opposite imbalances would have a net cost, where their aggregated costs
would be 0. A better method would be to create a simulation model under price-taker
assumptions, that simulates what the costs would have been for every coalition. This
adds another layer of complexity to the implementation.
Secondly, it requires work to implement in the BRPвҖҷs business model. The simplest
method would be to calculate it ex-ante, working it into the flat fee on top of spot price,
that is offered to the clients upon signing the contract. This requires that prospective
clients give access to historical demand data before signing the agreement. Another
model is to introduce a new product that reflects the cost of the clients imbalance ex-post,
but that requires competitive pricing to entice the client to take on the risk.
8.1.3
Risk Metric
CVaR is used as a risk metric in this thesis. CVaR can be problematic if calculated for
short periods ex-post, as an otherwise very predictable client could be unfortunate and
have a dominant direction imbalance in an expensive period, while unpredictable clients
could be lucky to only have high imbalances in cheap periods. This accurately reflects
the risk the client added in the measured period, but doesnвҖҷt necessarily predict the
risk the client adds in future periods. An alternative could be to base the characteristic
function for risk on imbalance volumes. This can be a better predictor of future risk, but
a worse measurement of the cost of the client ex-post.
8.2
Further Work
8.2.1
Repeated Game Stability
In cooperative game theory, it is assumed that clients will accept an allocation as fair if
they cannot get a better payoff by making another coalition. This can lead to allocations
where some clients have little reason to cooperate, like the uniform price allocation where
a set of clients will pay their singleton costs, the worst possible allocation for them.
This is a very static view of stability, as in the real world clients have more nuanced
==PAGE:77==
8.2 Further Work
67
options than creating a smaller coalition or leaving to work alone.
Both for the cost and risk problem, there is a large range between the best and the
worst allocation for each client. A client might seek to negotiate, stating that they will
leave the cooperation unless a different allocation mechanism is used. This might be an
immediate loss for the client, and therefore it will not happen in classical game theory,
but the client might seek new coalitions elsewhere.
8.2.2
Individual Client Studies
From section 7.2.1, there are some clearly good and bad clients. Client P and V were
found to be especially cheap to have as part of the portfolio. It could be useful to develop
a heuristic for the worth of clients by studying what makes a client "good" and what their
cost and risk will be, to be able to circumvent the complete game theory and provide a
more accurate price ex-ante.
8.2.3
Including Batteries
A connected use case is the sharing of batteries. In this thesis, clients share ownership
of a PV plant. The only complication this causes is that the imbalances caused by the
PV plant will be in the same direction for all clients. A place where cooperational game
theory could be especially important is if clients invest in a battery together. In this
case, there could be gains in reducing imbalance costs or costs in other markets,
==PAGE:78==
68
==PAGE:79==
CHAPTER 9
Conclusion
This thesis set out to answer the question: How can the true imbalance costs of pro-
sumers in a portfolio be allocated using cooperative game theory?
The analysis confirms that aggregation reduces both cost and risk for Balance Responsible
Parties, but introduces the challenge of fair redistribution among diverse clients.
By applying cooperative game theory to a real-world portfolio, this work demonstrates
that, while classical solutions like the Nucleolus and VCG offer theoretical elegance,
their computational and budgetary limitations hinder real-world application. The Gately
Point and simpler mechanisms such as Reduced Cost and Uniform Price emerge as viable
alternatives, balancing tractability and stability.
Stability was found to be possible to achieve for most mechanisms, but stability does not
ensure fairness. Even among stable allocation, there are large differences in costs allocated
to clients, with the most expensive allocation being more than twice as expensive as
the cheapest in some cases. This issue is magnified as forecasts improve, widening the
gap between allocation, making the mechanisms bias towards certain client types an
important consideration when choosing mechanisms.
Importantly, the findings emphasize the role of client diversity in shaping portfolio
performance and the need for differentiated pricing strategies. Costs of clients can vary
greatly, depending on demand pattern and PV coverage. This insight has practical
implications for contract design and stakeholder engagement for BRPвҖҷs, as they enable
contracts that reward predictable clients with low costs.
Ultimately, cooperative game theory provides a tool through which BRPs can foster
trust, transparency, and long-term collaboration. As energy systems evolve toward
decentralization, such approaches will be vital in aligning economic efficiency with social
equity.
==PAGE:80==
70
==PAGE:81==
APPENDIX A
Appendix
A.1
Budget imbalance of risk problem caused by
changing of indices in Оұ-tail
Under the assumption that none of the worst case scenarios has a cost of 0, and that
agents always have a higher imbalance than the aggregated imbalance, such a change
incurs a subsidy of:
Taxi(N) =
X
tвҲҲTОұ(Jt,N))

Jt,N\{i}

вҲ’
X
tвҲҲTОұ(Jt,N\{i})

Jt,N\{i}

(A.1)
Proof.
Suppose t1 and t2 are the time periods that are switched out. Except for t1
and t2, the Оұ-tail sets will be the same: TОұ(Jt,N)) \ t1 = TОұ(Jt,N\{i}) \ t2. t1 is the
time that enters the grand coalition set t1 вҲҲTОұ(Jt,N)) and t2 only exists in the set
without the client t2 вҲҲTОұ(Jt,N\{i}).
Marginal contribution can be broken up into marginal contribution per t вҲҲTОұ(Jt,N)).
Under the assumption that agents always have a higher imbalance than the aggregated
imbalance, all agents j that does not change an index in the tail t1 вҲҲTОұ(Jt,N\{j}))
will have a marginal contribution to the time t1 of Mi,t1 = Jt1,N вҲ’Jt1,N\{i}. If this is
true for all clients, then P
iвҲҲN Mi,t1 = vt1.
If t1 /вҲҲTОұ(Jt,N\{i})) and a client increases the cost at time t1 causing it to enter
TОұ(Jt,N)), their marginal contribution based on the time t1 will be Mi,t1 = Jt1,N вҲ’
Jt2,N\{i}, as t2 will be replaced by t1, instead of Jt1,N вҲ’Jt1,N\{i}, the contribution to
costs in t1 for all other clients. This provides a discount that has to be paid as a
subsidy: Taxi = Jt1,N\{i} вҲ’Jt2,N\{i} which is a reflection of the imbalance that was
"absorbed" by changing the tail set. The same is true if the client decreases the cost
of t2, causing t1 to enter the tail. The marginal contribution will be based on how
much the client decreased costs Jt1,N вҲ’Jt2,N\{i} instead of their costs in the relevant
time Jt1,N вҲ’Jt1,N\{i}.
This generalizes to: Taxi(N) = P
tвҲҲTОұ(Jt,N))

Jt,N\{i}

вҲ’P
tвҲҲTОұ(Jt,N\{i})

Jt,N\{i}

Example: A game with two periods and Оұ = 0.5: T = {1, 2}, has a coalition S with
costs Jt,S = {3, 2}, causing the tail T0.5(Jt,S) = {1} and v(S) = 3. Another agent has the
costs Jt,{i} = {0.5, 2}, and joins S to create the coalition N = S вҲӘ{i}, leading to costs
Jt,N = {3.5, 4}, a new tail T0.5(Jt,N)) = {2}, and v(N) = 4. The marginal contribution
of agent i is Mi = 1, but their valuation is vi(N) = 2, so they must be subsidized
Mi = vi(N) вҲ’Taxi(N) вҮ’Taxi(N) = вҲ’1, which is the cost difference of the new tail
==PAGE:82==
72
A Appendix
and the old tail. The same happens if the tail is changed by decreasing cost instead of
increasing it, e.g. if Jt,S = {3, 2} and Jt,{i} = {вҲ’2, 0}, then Mi = вҲ’1 while vi(N) = 0,
needing a subsidy of Taxi = вҲ’1.
As P
tвҲҲTвҠҳ(Jt,N))

Jt,N\{i}

вүӨP
tвҲҲTвҠҳ(Jt,N\{i})

Jt,N\{i}

, the taxes will always be negative,
indicating a subsidy.
A.2
WMAPE dependent on scenarios
U
WMAPE
1
43.1%
5
41.2%
10
39.9%
15
40.2%
20
40.2%
25
37.9%
30
37.2%
Table A.1: In-sample WMAPE dependent on number of price scenarios, W=5
W
WMAPE
1
36.65%
2
38.00%
3
38.30%
4
37.90%
5
37.20%
6
36.80%
7
36.60%
8
36.40%
9
36.60%
Table A.2: In-sample WMAPE dependent on number of demand scenarios, U=30
==PAGE:83==
A.3 22 Client Cost Timing
73
A.3
22 Client Cost Timing
Allocation
Characteristic function time [s]
Allocation time [s]
Total time [s]
Shapley
71.0787
80.6093
151.6880
VCG
1.12372
0.0000096
1.12373
VCG (budget balanced)
1.12372
0.0014460
1.12516
Gately
1.12372
0.0000136
1.12373
Gately (interval)
1.12372
0.0093322
1.13305
Full cost
1.12372
0.0009508
1.12467
Reduced cost
1.12372
0.0007000
1.12442
Table A.3: Computation Times for Coalitions with 22 Clients, cost problem
A.4
Risk problem timing
Allocation
Characteristic function time [s]
Allocation time [s]
Total time [s]
Shapley
2.19479
0.008586
2.20338
VCG
0.083823
0.0000043
0.0838273
VCG (budget balanced)
0.083823
0.0012108
0.0850338
Gately
0.083823
0.0000067
0.0838297
Nucleolus
2.19479
65.6037
67.7985
Full cost
0.083823
0.0000108
0.0838338
Table A.4: Computation Times for Coalitions with 12 Clients, risk problem
Allocation
Characteristic function time [s]
Allocation time [s]
Total time [s]
Shapley
76.3944
82.7017
159.0960
VCG
0.20012
0.0000157
0.2001357
VCG (budget balanced)
0.20012
0.0032938
0.2034138
Gately
0.20012
0.0000126
0.2001326
Full cost
0.20012
0.0000158
0.2001358
Table A.5: Computation Times for Coalitions with 22 Clients, risk problem
==PAGE:84==
74
A Appendix
A.5
Preferred allocations of clients
Client
Cheapest Allocation
Min вӮ¬/MWh
Most Expensive Allocation
Max вӮ¬/MWh
A
Gately 15Min
18.80
Reduced Cost
20.08
G
Reduced Cost
17.79
VCG BB
19.07
I
Reduced Cost
35.82
Gately 15Min
38.52
Q
VCG BB
22.79
Gately 15Min
24.78
S
VCG BB
20.38
Gately Full Period
21.95
H
Reduced Cost
40.61
Gately 15Min
43.99
L
Uniform Price
34.82
Gately 15Min
37.23
K
VCG BB
16.65
Uniform Price
18.61
U
VCG BB
30.08
Gately 15Min
32.02
D
VCG BB
28.98
Gately 15Min
32.61
P
VCG BB
6.79
Reduced Cost
26.82
M
VCG BB
64.19
Uniform Price
70.99
Y
Reduced Cost
71.79
Gately 15Min
79.05
O
VCG BB
57.60
Gately 15Min
64.50
T
VCG BB
38.38
Uniform Price
44.74
E
Reduced Cost
56.90
Gately 15Min
62.05
J
VCG BB
49.50
Gately 15Min
54.74
V
VCG BB
19.65
Reduced Cost
27.04
F
Reduced Cost
68.42
Gately 15Min
74.20
N
VCG BB
54.94
Uniform Price
59.82
W
VCG BB
38.96
Gately 15Min
42.30
X
VCG BB
42.19
Reduced Cost
50.87
Table A.6: Cheapest and Most Expensive Allocations per Client
A.6
Nomenclature
==PAGE:85==
Nomenclature
Оұ
Risk confidence level for CVaR.
ОІ
Balancing function in bondareva-shapley theorem
ОҙвҖІ
Agents in the cost game that are not in Оҙ+ or ОҙвҲ’
Оҙ+
Imbalance causers in the cost game
вҲҶ+
w,t
Positive Imbalance of clients
ОҙвҲ’
Imbalance reducers in the cost game
вҲҶвҲ’
w,t
Negative Imbalance of clients
вҲҶReal
t,S
Realized imbalance of coalition
вҲҶw,t
Imbalance of clients
Пө(S, x) Excess of coalition S under allocation x: P
iвҲҲS xi вҲ’v(S).
О»DA
t
vector of spot prices
О»t
vector of imbalance spread
О»u,t
Imbalance spread in scenario
TОұ(Jt,S) Indexes t of Оұ worst scenarios
CVaRОұ(J) Conditional Value-at-Risk at level Оұ.
VaRОұ(J) Value-at-Risk at level Оұ.
Вө
Mean of normal distribution
ОҰ
Shapley value
П•i(v) ShapleyвҖ“value allocation for client i in game v.
ПҖt
Day-ahead market price at time t.
ОЁ
Set of coalitions that have assigned a locked excess when calculating nucleolus
ПҲS
Excess of coalition in nucleolus
Пғ
Standard deviation of normal distribution
==PAGE:86==
76
A Appendix
Пғu,t
Dominant direction in scenario (1 if positive 0 if negative)
Оё(x)
Vector of excesses of all coalitions with respect to allocation x
Оҳi
Set of types for player i
dвҲ—
Equalized and minimum possible propensity to disrupt (Gately equilibrium).
di(x) Propensity to disrupt of i under allocation x.
dt
Dominant imbalance direction at t, dt вҲҲ{Вұ1}.
i вҲҲN Clients, members of the grand coalition.
Jt,S
Cost of imbalance for coalition S at time t.
kPVScaling Ratio between max production in data and PV plant capacity
kuni
t
Variable to ensure budget balance for uniform price allocation under non-dominant
direction imbalance
L(xi, xvick
i
Distance function between two allocations
Mi
Marginal contribution of client i: v(N) вҲ’v(N \ {i}).
N
The grand coalition, Set of all clients.
P вҲ—DA
t,i
Optimal bid of client.
P DA
t,i
Day-ahead bid of client i at time t.
P D,Real
t,i
Realized consumption of client i at time t.
P D
w,t,i
Expected consumption of client i at time t in scenario w.
P G,Real
t,i
Realized generation (PV) of client i at time t.
P G
w,t,i
Expected generation of client i at time t in scenario w.
P max
case
Capacity of PV plant, 14 MW
P max
data
Max value of production in data
S вҠҶN A coalition, i.e. any subset of clients.
t вҲҲT Index for time intervals.
T
Set of discretized time intervals (e.g. 15-minute periods).
Taxi(N) VCG tax (externality) of agent i in grand coalition N.
u вҲҲU Index for price-scenario realizations.
==PAGE:87==
A.7 Code
77
U
Set of imbalance-price scenarios.
v
A game, also denoted u or w sometimes
v(S)
Characteristic function (maximum gain/minimum cost) of coalition S in game v.
vcost(S) Characteristic function (total cost) of coalition S, P
tвҲҲT Jt,S.
vrisk(S) Game-value as CVaR of the cost series {Jt,S}, CVaRОұ({Jt,S}).
w вҲҲW Index for demand-forecast scenarios.
W
Set of demand-forecast scenarios.
xS
i
Allocated payoff or payment to client i as part of coalition S. Positive allocations
are payments.
xi
Allocated payoff or payment to client i. Positive allocations are payments.
xvick
i
unmodified VCG allocation
zi
Relative cost or CVaR. Allocated cost as part of grand coalition vs singleton
BIC
Bayesian Incentive Compatible
DSIC Dominant Strategy Incentive Compatible
PVCover Ratio of produced power to consumer power
WMAPE Weighted Mean Average Percentual Error
A.7
Code
Code can be found in the repository: https://github.com/AsmusWE/Sharing-the-
Gains-of-Aggregation-Cooperative-Redistribution-of-Imbalance-Cost-Savings
==PAGE:88==
78
==PAGE:89==
Bibliography
[1]
Xiaolin AyГіn, MarГӯa ГҒngeles Moreno, and Julio Usaola. вҖңAggregatorsвҖҷ Optimal
Bidding Strategy in Sequential Day-Ahead and Intraday Electricity Spot MarketsвҖқ.
In: Energies 2017, Vol. 10, Page 450 10 (4 Apr. 2017), p. 450. issn: 1996-1073.
doi: 10.3390/EN10040450. url: https://www.mdpi.com/1996-1073/10/4/450/
htm%20https://www.mdpi.com/1996-1073/10/4/450.
[2]
Enrique Baeyens et al. вҖңCoalitional aggregation of wind powerвҖқ. In: IEEE Trans-
actions on Power Systems 28 (4 2013), pp. 3774вҖ“3784. issn: 08858950. doi: 10.
1109/TPWRS.2013.2262502.
[3]
Andrew Barkley. The Economics of Food and Agricultural Markets. 2nd. New Prairie
Press, 2016. isbn: 9781944548223. url: https://open.umn.edu/opentextbooks/
textbooks/458.
[4]
Justine BeaulГ©. 25 companies sign historic PPA to build a new solar park in
Denmark. url: https://www.reel.energy/press-releases/25-companies-
sign-historic-ppa-to-build-a-new-solar-park-in-denmark.
[5]
RaphaГ«l Homayoun Boroumand et al. вҖңHedging strategies in energy markets: The
case of electricity retailersвҖқ. In: Energy Economics 51 (Sept. 2015), pp. 503вҖ“509.
issn: 01409883. doi: 10.1016/J.ENECO.2015.06.021. url: https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.eneco.2015.06.021%20https://scite.ai/reports/hedging-
strategies-in-energy-markets-Q0kyr9.
[6]
Satya R Chakravarty, Manipushpak Mitra, and Palash Sarkar. A Course on
Cooperative Game Theory. Cambridge University Press, 2014.
[7]
Michela Chessa. вҖңA Shapley-based Groves mechanism: when the mechanism designer
plays the wise manвҖқ. In: Operations Research Letters 47 (6 Nov. 2019), pp. 560вҖ“564.
issn: 0167-6377. doi: 10.1016/J.ORL.2019.09.010.
[8]
Steven Chu, Yi Cui, and Nian Liu. вҖңThe path towards sustainable energyвҖқ. In:
Nature Materials 2017 16:1 16 (1 Dec. 2016), pp. 16вҖ“22. issn: 1476-4660. doi:
10.1038/nmat4834. url: https://www.nature.com/articles/nmat4834.
[9]
Edward H. Clarke. вҖңIncentives in public decision-makingвҖқ. In: Public Choice 1980
35:3 35 (3 1980), pp. 379вҖ“382. issn: 1573-7101. doi: 10.1007/BF00124449. url:
https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/BF00124449.
[10]
Edward H. Clarke. вҖңMultipart pricing of public goodsвҖқ. In: Public Choice 11 (1
Sept. 1971), pp. 17вҖ“33. issn: 00485829. doi: 10.1007/BF01726210/METRICS. url:
https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/BF01726210.
==PAGE:90==
80
Bibliography
[11]
Robert Day and Paul Milgrom. вҖңCore-selecting package auctionsвҖқ. In: International
Journal of Game Theory 36 (3 2008), pp. 393вҖ“407. issn: 1432-1270. doi: 10.1007/
s00182-007-0100-7. url: https://doi.org/10.1007/s00182-007-0100-7.
[12]
Energinet. Forecast Wind and Solar Power, Hour Resolution. url: https://www.
energidataservice.dk/tso-electricity/Forecasts_Hour.
[13]
Energinet. Imbalance Price Dataset. url: https://www.energidataservice.dk/
tso-electricity/ImbalancePrice.
[14]
Energinet. Production per Municipality per Hour. url: https://www.energidataservice.
dk/tso-electricity/ProductionMunicipalityHour.
[15]
ENERGINET POSITION ON FULL COST BALANCING. Tech. rep. Energinet,
2024. url: https://energinet.dk/media/xbpjtgde/energinet-position-on-
full-cost-balancing.pdf.
[16]
Lazaros Exizidis et al. вҖңIncentive-compatibility in a two-stage stochastic electricity
market with high wind power penetrationвҖқ. In: IEEE Transactions on Power
Systems 34 (4 July 2019), pp. 2846вҖ“2858. issn: 15580679. doi: 10.1109/TPWRS.
2019.2901249.
[17]
Boi Faltings. вҖңA budget-balanced, incentive-compatible scheme for social choiceвҖқ. In:
Lecture Notes in Computer Science (including subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial
Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics) 3435 LNAI (2005), pp. 30вҖ“43.
issn: 03029743. doi: 10.1007/11575726_3. url: https://www.researchgate.
net/publication/37441953_A_Budget- Balanced_Incentive- Compatible_
Scheme_for_Social_Choice.
[18]
Stein Erik Fleten et al. вҖңThe Portfolio Perspective in Electricity Generation and
Market OperationsвҖқ. In: 2018 15th International Conference on the European Energy
Market (EEM) 2018-June (Sept. 2018). issn: 21654093. doi: 10.1109/EEM.2018.
8469857. url: https://doi.org/10.1109/eem.2018.8469857%20https://
scite.ai/reports/the-portfolio-perspective-in-electricity-W8DlK9M.
[19]
Dermot Gately. вҖңSharing the Gains from Regional Cooperation: A Game Theoretic
Application to Planning Investment in Electric PowerвҖқ. In: International Economic
Review 15 (1 Feb. 1974), p. 195. issn: 00206598. doi: 10.2307/2526099.
[20]
Robert P. Gilles and Lina Mallozzi. вҖңGately values of cooperative gamesвҖқ. In:
Economic Theory 79 (3 May 2024), pp. 723вҖ“758. issn: 14320479. doi: 10.1007/
S00199-024-01612-6/METRICS. url: https://link.springer.com/article/
10.1007/s00199-024-01612-6.
[21]
Juan M. GГіmez and Yeny E. RodrГӯguez. вҖңMultiperiod Portfolio of Energy Purchas-
ing Strategies including Climate ScenariosвҖқ. In: Energies 15.9 (Apr. 2022), p. 3012.
doi: 10.3390/en15093012. url: https://www.mdpi.com/1996-1073/15/9/3012.
[22]
Jerry Green and Jean-Jacques Laffont. вҖңCharacterization of Satisfactory Mecha-
nisms for the Revelation of Preferences for Public GoodsвҖқ. In: Econometrica 45
(2 1977), pp. 427вҖ“438. issn: 00129682, 14680262. url: http://www.jstor.org/
stable/1911219.
==PAGE:91==
Bibliography
81
[23]
Theodore Groves. вҖңIncentives in TeamsвҖқ. In: Econometrica 41 (4 July 1973), p. 617.
issn: 00129682. doi: 10.2307/1914085.
[24]
L ; Han, T ; Morstyn, and M D Mcculloch. вҖңScaling Up Cooperative Game Theory
Based Energy Management using Prosumer ClusteringвҖқ. In: IEEE Transactions
on Smart Grid 12 (1 2020), pp. 289вҖ“300. doi: 10.1109/TSG.2020.3015088. url:
https://doi.org/10.1109/TSG.2020.3015088.
[25]
Lesia Mitridati, Jalal Kazempour, and Pierre Pinson. вҖңDesign and game-Theoretic
analysis of community-Based market mechanisms in heat and electricity systemsвҖқ.
In: Omega 99 (Mar. 2021), p. 102177. issn: 0305-0483. doi: 10.1016/J.OMEGA.
2019.102177.
[26]
Nordic Balancing Model. 15 min Imbalance Settlement Period вҖ“ nordicbalancing-
model. url: https://nordicbalancingmodel.net/roadmap-and-projects/15-
min-time-resolution/.
[27]
Y Narahari. Game Theory and Mechanism Design. WORLD SCIENTIFIC / IN-
DIAN INST OF SCIENCE, INDIA, 2014. doi: 10.1142/8902. eprint: https:
//www.worldscientific.com/doi/pdf/10.1142/8902. url: https://www.
worldscientific.com/doi/abs/10.1142/8902.
[28]
David Parkes, Jayant Kalagnanam, and Marta Eso. вҖңAchieving Budget-Balance
with Vickrey-Based Payment Schemes in ExchangesвҖқ. In: IJCAI International Joint
Conference on Artificial Intelligence. May 2001, pp. 1161вҖ“1168.
[29]
RomГЎn PГ©rez-Santalla, Miguel CarriГіn, and Carlos Ruiz. вҖңOptimal pricing for
electricity retailers based on data-driven consumersвҖҷ price-responseвҖқ. In: TOP 30
(3 Oct. 2022), pp. 430вҖ“464. issn: 18638279. doi: 10.1007/S11750-022-00622-8.
[30]
Alvin E. Roth. вҖңThe Economics of Matching: Stability and IncentivesвҖқ. In: https://doi.org/10.128
7 (4 Nov. 1982), pp. 617вҖ“628. issn: 0364-765X. doi: 10.1287/MOOR.7.4.617. url:
https://pubsonline.informs.org/doi/abs/10.1287/moor.7.4.617.
[31]
Marianna Russo and Valentin Bertsch. вҖңA looming revolution: Implications of
self-generation for the risk exposure of retailersвҖқ. In: Energy Economics 92 (Oct.
2020), p. 104970. issn: 0140-9883. doi: 10.1016/J.ENECO.2020.104970.
[32]
Soumendu Sarkar. вҖңConvergence of VCG mechanism to ex-post budget balance
in a model of land acquisitionвҖқ. In: Mathematical Social Sciences 93 (May 2018),
pp. 37вҖ“46. issn: 0165-4896. doi: 10.1016/J.MATHSOCSCI.2018.01.004.
[33]
David Schmeidler. вҖңThe Nucleolus of a Characteristic Function GameвҖқ. In: SIAM
Journal on Applied Mathematics 17.6 (1969), pp. 1163вҖ“1170. issn: 00361399. url:
http://www.jstor.org/stable/2099196 (visited on 07/14/2025).
[34]
Lloyd S. Shapley. Notes on the N-Person Game; II: The Value of an N-Person
Game. Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation, 1951. doi: 10.7249/RM0670.
==PAGE:92==
82
Bibliography
[35]
Lloyd S. Shapley. вҖңOn balanced sets and coresвҖқ. In: Naval Research Logistics
Quarterly 14 (4 Jan. 1967), pp. 453вҖ“460. issn: 1931-9193. doi: 10.1002/NAV.
3800140404. url: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nav.
3800140404.
[36]
Meng Song and Mikael Amelin. вҖңPurchase Bidding Strategy for a Retailer With
Flexible Demands in Day-Ahead Electricity MarketвҖқ. In: IEEE TRANSACTIONS
ON POWER SYSTEMS 32 (3 2017), p. 1839. doi: 10.1109/TPWRS.2016.2608762.
url: http://www.ieee.org/publications.
[37]
Dipti Srinivasan, Ly Trong Trung, and Chanan Singh. вҖңBidding and Cooperation
Strategies for Electricity Buyers in Power MarketsвҖқ. In: IEEE Systems Journal 10
(2 June 2016), pp. 422вҖ“433. issn: 19379234. doi: 10.1109/JSYST.2014.2329314.
[38]
Jochen Staudacher and Johannes Anwander. вҖңConditions for the uniqueness of the
Gately point for cooperative gamesвҖқ. In: (Jan. 2019). url: https://arxiv.org/
abs/1901.01485v1.
[39]
Divya Vikas Tekani, Jim Shi, and Haim Grebel. вҖңManaging renewable energy
resources using equity-market risk tools, the efficient frontiersвҖқ. In: Energy Efficiency
18.6 (July 2025), pp. 1вҖ“10. doi: 10.1007/s12053-025-10350-0. url: https:
//link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s12053-025-10350-0.
[40]
Niklas Vespermann, Thomas Hamacher, and Jalal Kazempour. вҖңAccess Economy
for Storage in Energy CommunitiesвҖқ. In: IEEE Transactions on Power Systems 36
(3 May 2021), pp. 2234вҖ“2250. issn: 15580679. doi: 10.1109/TPWRS.2020.3033999.
[41]
William Vickrey. вҖңCOUNTERSPECULATION, AUCTIONS, AND COMPET-
ITIVE SEALED TENDERSвҖқ. In: The Journal of Finance 16 (1 Mar. 1961),
pp. 8вҖ“37. issn: 1540-6261. doi: 10.1111/J.1540-6261.1961.TB02789.X. url:
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/j.1540-6261.1961.
tb02789.x%20https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/j.1540-
6261.1961.tb02789.x%20https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.
1540-6261.1961.tb02789.x.
