==PAGE:1==
Microfabrication and characterization of a
Hall­sensor chip for low noise “housekeep­
ing” data collection from power supply units
in spacecrafts
Master Thesis
DTU Nanolab/DTU Space
National Centre for Nano Fabrication and Characterization
Department of Space Research and Space Technology
==PAGE:2==
Microfabrication and characterization of a Hall­sensor chip for low noise “house­
keeping” data collection from power supply units in spacecrafts
Master Thesis
August, 2025
By
Thomas Emil Le Cozannet
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Published by:
DTU, , Oersteds Plads ­ Building 347/Elektrovej, building 327 and 328,
2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
https://www.nanolab.dtu.dk/
https://www.space.dtu.dk/
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the National Centre for Nano Fabrication
and Characterization and the Department of Space Research and Space Technology, at
the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of
Science (MSc) in Earth and Space Physics and Engineering.
Thomas Emil Le Cozannet ­ s182485
Signature
Date
ii
Microfabrication and characterization of a Hall­sensor chip for low noise “housekeeping” data collection
from power supply units in spacecrafts
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
In support of the LISA mission—a space­based gravitational wave observatory—engineers
at DTU Space sought to design a compact,galvanically isolated, radiation­hardened cur­
rent sensing solution for a custom power supply. The chosen method for current sensing
was based on measuring the magnetic field generated by the power supply output using
a Hall effect sensor. This project presents the design, microfabrication, and characteri­
sation of a Hall­bar sensor intended to meet strict requirements for sensitivity, noise, and
power consumption at sub­Hz modulation frequencies. A sensitivity of 72.31 ± 0.73 mV/T
was achieved—exceeding the 30 mV/T requirement—while the detection limit of 8.8 μT
approached, but did not meet, the 5 μT target due to elevated noise levels. The discrep­
ancy in material mobility and resistivity measurements is discussed, along with design
and process optimisations for reducing offset and thermal drift. The prototype demon­
strates that the concept is viable, with improvements in thermal management and circuit
symmetry likely to enable full compliance with the specifications in future iterations.
Microfabrication and characterization of a Hall­sensor chip for low noise “housekeeping” data collection
from power supply units in spacecrafts
iii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
Thomas Emil Le Cozannet, Master of Science (MSc) in Earth and Space Physics and
Engineering, DTU
Rafael Taboryski, Professor, DTU Nanolab
Main Supervisor
Jan Raagaard Petersen, Electrical Engineer, DTU Space
Co­Supervisor
Ole Hansen, Professor Emeritus, DTU Nanolab
Co­Supervisor
Thomas Pedersen, Fabrication Engineer, DTU Nanolab
Co­Supervisor
Klavs Rommedahl, Electrical Engineer, DTU Space
Co­Supervisor
A special thanks to Peter Brauer for borrowing the Ørsted magnetometer and Lars William
Pedersen for the coil for the external B­field. And without the help from the Nanolab staff,
this wouldn’t have been possible, including, but not limited to: Pratik Kusumanchi, Pernille
Voss Larsen, Patama Pholprasit and Jonas Michael­Lindhard.
I also owe Pinelopi Konstantinopoulou my thanks for good discussions and input along
the way, and help with comments on the final report. It was truly appreciated.
iv
Microfabrication and characterization of a Hall­sensor chip for low noise “housekeeping” data collection
from power supply units in spacecrafts
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Theory
2
2.1
Electronics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.2
Physics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Fabrication
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
2.4
Characterization methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3
Experimental setup
21
3.1
Circuit design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
3.2
Layout considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
3.3
Final setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
4
Device and structure
27
4.1
Material selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4.2
Hall bar design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4.3
Theoretical estimates
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
5
Process and Mask design
29
5.1
Process flow
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
5.2
Mask designs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
6
Characterisation
33
6.1
Processing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
6.2
4­point probe station . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
6.3
Full test setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
7
Discussion
50
8
Conclusion
53
9
Future Work
54
Bibliography
55
A VdP
57
B Si material parameters
59
C A4 150 mm test
60
D Digital circuit
61
E
Tools
62
F
Process Flow
63
Microfabrication and characterization of a Hall­sensor chip for low noise “housekeeping” data collection
from power supply units in spacecrafts
v
==PAGE:7==
vi
Microfabrication and characterization of a Hall­sensor chip for low noise “housekeeping” data collection
from power supply units in spacecrafts
==PAGE:8==
1
Introduction
In the summer of 2024, a couple of electrical engineers at DTU Space were working
on a power supply for the LISA mission. In short, the LISA mission consists of three
satellites, flying in formation with 2.5 million km between them. Each satellite uses laser
interferometry to measure out the distances between them, and more importantly, the
distance variations. The idea is to measure distance variations which can be attributed
gravitational wave in the space­time fabric itself. Sounds easy. The engineers were facing
the problem of gathering housekeeping data from the output of the power supply, but it
required at least 6 different chips. So they wanted to build their own to minimise the size,
thereby the weight and in turn costs. Now, this was no normal chip as it was required for
the circuit to be galvanically isolated from the rest of the power supply, to minimise noise,
and it should be radiation hardened, as it was going to deep space. They had a rough
idea of the structure, and the IC part of the circuit also seemed manageable to them, but
creating the sensors for this chip, they did not know about. Smart as they are, they asked
a student to make a prototype. Me.
The sensor of interest is the current measuring sensor. It was quickly asserted that the
simplest way of doing this was to measure the B­field generated by the output current
of the power supply. Some quick calculations were done, and the requirements for the
sensor were realised as:
S [mV/T]
Power [mW]
Detection limit [µT]
30
5
5
Table 1.1: Requirements for the Hall bar alone(no amplifier circuit). The requirements
should be fulfilled at 0.1­10 Hz, at room temperature.[1]
A preliminary study was made that showed the performance of a suggested sensor design
and material to be within the required specs:
Expected Performance
B
µH
RHallbar
Vex
VHall
SV
VNtot
677 µT
>1250 cm2 V−1 s
190 kΩ
10 V
101 µV
74.5 mV T−1
55.7 nV Hz−2
Table 1.2: [1] B is the B­field, µH is the mobility of the bought wafer, RHallbar is the ex­
pected Hall­bar resistance, Vex is the expected excitation voltage, VHall is the expected
Hall­potential, SV is the expected sensitivity and VNtot is the expected noise.
This led to the continuation of the project. In this, the sensor has to be fabricated, the
analogue electronics for driving the sensor and signal processing from the sensor have
to be built, and the two put together and characterised. The goal is to have a prototype
of both the sensor and the analogue electronics, which proves whether the requirements
can be achieved or not.
Microfabrication and characterization of a Hall­sensor chip for low noise “housekeeping” data collection
from power supply units in spacecrafts
1
==PAGE:9==
2
Theory
The subject of this project encompasses a range of scientific and engineering areas. It
includes analogue electronics design, solid state physics and microfabrication techniques.
The most essential theory for these subjects will be covered here, but it is not exhaustive,
and further reading can be found in the references.
2.1
Electronics
Some fundamental electronic concepts are needed to design the drivers and signal pro­
cessing unit. This includes theory behind operational amplifiers, noise from a circuit per­
spective, simple filter design and synchronous demodulation.
2.1.1
Operational Amplifiers
Operational amplifiers(OpAmps) are a crucial building block of electronics. They consist of
two input pins +/­ and an output pin. The differential voltage between the pins will, ideally,
be infinitely amplified and have very high input impedance. When determining the gain of
the circuit, it is assumed that the input pins are at the same potential but with no current
running between them, a so­called pseudo short circuit. Then applying Kirchhoff’s circuit
law will yield the output voltage. Depending on the configuration of the gain resistors, the
OpAmp can act as either an inverting or a non­inverting amplifier.
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.1: (a) shows a non­inverting Op­Amp and (b) shows an inverting Op­Amp.
Applying Kirchhoff’s circuit law to both circuits, the amplification emerges.
Non­inverting Gain = Vout
Vin
= 1 + R2
R1
(2.1)
Inverting Gain = Vout
Vin
= −Rf
Rin
(2.2)
2.1.2
Noise
Noise is an inherent quality to all electronics, measurements and just about anything in this
world. When dealing with sensors and electronics, several different noise mechanisms
are at play. They are often spoken of as a spectrum, as it is found that noise has an
inherent connection to the frequency with which it is characterised. As a consequence
of this noise is often depicted as a spectrum. This spectrum will exhibit different features
depending on the dominant noise mechanisms. The first, and most generic, is white noise.
This is characterised by its flat spectrum, e.g. its independence of frequency, hence its
2
Microfabrication and characterization of a Hall­sensor chip for low noise “housekeeping” data collection
from power supply units in spacecrafts
==PAGE:10==
name ”white” as a reference to flat spectrum light. White noise is also called thermal noise
or Johnson­Nyquist noise, as thermal energy is the cause of these random fluctuations
of charge carriers. Dealing with electronics, it is also dependent on the resistance of the
component, and the units come out as V2Hz−1.
SVTN = V 2
TN = 4kBTR
(2.3)
The next feature is the 1/f noise. The mechanism of this noise is not clear, but the be­
haviour is very well known. Experimentally, it can be seen to fall off as 1/f and approxi­
mated by:
SNI ≈I2 α
N
1
f
(2.4)
Where N is the number of charge carriers and α is the Hooge parameter, which for semi­
conductors is around 10−7 −10−9.[2]
The issue with 1/f noise is that it goes towards infinity approaching 0 Hz. Some 1/f noise
can be omitted by a synchronous demodulator, but this will be expanded later on.
Figure 2.2: Sketch of a voltage noise spectral density SNV of a given device, as a function
of frequency f. SV α and SV T are contributions of the 1/f noise and the thermal noise,
respectively. fc is the corner frequency.[2]
The last feature is the corner frequency. It’s the frequency at which the 1/f noise is equal
to the white noise as seen in figure 2.2. [2]
2.1.3
Filters
A way to deal with noise is to use different filters. In general, there are low­pass(LP)
filters, high­pass(HP) filters, and band­pass(BP) filters, but only LP filters are employed
in our circuit. A simple passive LP filter can be seen in 2.3. It consists of a resistor and
a capacitor. Conceptually, think of the capacitor as an open circuit for DC signals and
above a certain frequency, it acts as a short circuit. This allows signals to pass below
this frequency. This cutoff is chosen to be at 3 dB attenuation and is called the cutoff
frequency of the filter.
fcut =
1
2πRC
(2.5)
Microfabrication and characterization of a Hall­sensor chip for low noise “housekeeping” data collection
from power supply units in spacecrafts
3
==PAGE:11==
The transfer function of such a filter is
A(s) =
1
1 + sRC
(2.6)
Where s is the complex frequency s = jω + σ, and the magnitude of the filter response is
|A| =
1
√
1 +
(
f
fcut
)2
(2.7)
For frequencies much higher than the cutoff frequency f >> fcut, the rolloff is 20 dB/decade.
Figure 2.3: Passive low­pass filter.
The definition of the cutoff frequency means that the filter will start rolling off before. This
causes the signal to be slightly attenuated even below the cutoff frequency. To accom­
modate this, an active filter can be built. It is the Frankenstein of a passive filter and an
OpAmp. As can be seen in 2.4, the capacitor is placed over the R2 resistor in an inverting
OpAmp configuration. In the case of a DC signal, the capacitor again acts as an open cir­
cuit, allowing the OpAmp to gain the signal as usual. In the case of AC signals, above the
capacitor goes towards an open circuit, essentially reducing the effective R2 and thereby
the gain goes towards zero. This way, the gain can be used to pump up the signal to
compensate for what is lost in the filter. [3] [4] [5]
Figure 2.4: Inverting active low­pass filter, with cutoff frequency of fcut =
1
2πCR2 , gain
G = −R2
R1
4
Microfabrication and characterization of a Hall­sensor chip for low noise “housekeeping” data collection
from power supply units in spacecrafts
==PAGE:12==
2.1.4
N’th order filters
To get a steeper roll­off, n filters can be connected to create an n’th­order filter with the
transfer function
A(s) =
1
(1 + α1s)(1 + α2s)...(1 + αns)
(2.8)
If the individual filters has the same fcut the α coefficients reduces to
α =
√
21/n −1
(2.9)
and the cutoff frequency og the n’th order filter is:
fcn = fcut α
(2.10)
Further more the roll off should be multiplied by the order of the filter, so a 6th order filter
rolls off with 120 dB attenuation per decade above the cutoff frequency. [5]
2.1.5
Synchronous Demodulation
The synchronous demodulation is a way to generate an AC signal from a sensor at a
certain frequency and fold that response down to a DC voltage. As shown in 2.5, it consists
of a sensor being excited by some AC with the frequency fx, containing some noise the
signal is amplified. Here, an anti­aliasing filter is employed, but it is not detrimental to
the function. Now we come to the actual demodulation. A +/­1 gain circuit controlled by
a switch. When the switch is then controlled by a signal in phase with the excitation AC
signal, you get the demodulation. All you need is an LP filter at the end to ensure a DC
output.
Figure 2.5: Simple synchronous demodulator circuit. Physical parameter is the entity
which is detected/measured by the sensor. fX is the excitation frequency of the sensor.
The noise is added separately and then added to the signal output of the sensor. Next is
an amplifier with some gain, and in this case, an anti­aliasing filter. The box contains gain
+/­1 Op­Amps with a switch controlled by fD. fD is in phase with fX.[6]
A demonstration of this can be seen in the LTspice model in figure 2.6. The positive part of
the input signal is supplied to the inverting configuration, and when switched, the negative
part of the input is supplied to the non­inverting configuration of the OpAmp. This results
in a folding of the two signals. The rest of the circuit is an LP filter.
Microfabrication and characterization of a Hall­sensor chip for low noise “housekeeping” data collection
from power supply units in spacecrafts
5
==PAGE:13==
Figure 2.6: LTspice model of a synchronous demodulator. The yellow box U4 is the switch,
and the OpAmp U2 is the +/­1 switched OpAmp. The green sinusoidal is the input signal
supplied at the left, the red square signal is the switch control supplied at Ref IN, the
non­inverted input in blue shows the signal supplied at INP1 from the switch, and the
convoluted output is from the node opamp1. The green DC is the output after all the
filters.
When the switch is connected to ground, no current runs through R13 and the OpAmp is
in the inverting configuration of gain ­1. When the switch is connected to the input, the
OpAmp is non­inverting with a gain of +1.
Mind you, phase coherence is extremely important. If neglected, the information in the
signal will be lost to distortion. That is why the two filters at the input pins of the OpAmp
need to be equivalent too. If they weren’t, the inputs would be slightly shifted, creating a
false signal. [6] This phase coherence issue is even more important between the excita­
tion signal and the switch control.
2.2
Physics
The physics of this section govern how the sensor works, and the physical arguments
behind the design. This will give a good understanding of both the sensor and why the
fabrication process is developed as it is.
2.2.1
Hall effect
Back in 1879, when Edwin Hall discovered the Hall effect, the electron had not been
discovered and yet he managed to figure out that the current was pressed to the side,
contradicting most theories of the time.[7] We now know that this is a consequence of
the Lorentz force acting on the charge carriers. The Lorentz force acts on the charge
carriers by changing their momentum. In the presence of a material with scattering, the
momentum is allowed to relax if no external force is present. This is characterised by
the momentum relaxation time τ. If we assume iso­momentum(p = mnv) of the charge
carriers, we can treat this problem in a simplified manner. In reality, the charge carriers will
have a velocity distribution, which results in a corresponding momentum distribution.[8]
Starting with Newton’s second law and the Lorentz force, we have:
6
Microfabrication and characterization of a Hall­sensor chip for low noise “housekeeping” data collection
from power supply units in spacecrafts
==PAGE:14==
F = δpd
δt + pd
τ = q(E + vd × B)
(2.11)
pd is the drift momentum, vd is the drift velocity, E is the electric field, B is the B­field, t is
time, and q is the charge. Assuming a steady state solution to this, e.g. no change in the
drift momentum over time, it reduces to:
pd
τ = mvd
τ
= q(E + vd × B)
(2.12)
Now isolating the electric field:
E = mvd
qτ
−vd × B
(2.13)
We can introduce the current density J = qnvd, with n being the number of charged
particles per volume.
E =
m
q2τnJ −1
qnJ × B
(2.14)
Introducing resistivity ρ =
m
q2τn, with m being the particle mass, and the Hall­coefficient
RH =
1
qn we get:
E = ρJ −RHJ × B
(2.15)
In a Hall­bar, it is intended to limit the current density to a parallel longitudinal direction J =
Jxˆx and the B­field perpendicular to the plane B = Bzˆz by design. Under this assumption,
the electric field’s components will then end up as:
E = Exˆx + Eyˆy = ρJxˆx −RHJxBzˆx × ˆz = ρJxˆx + RHJxBzˆy
(2.16)
E = Ex(ˆx + RH
ρ Bzˆy)
(2.17)
If we now introduce the dimensions of such a Hall­bar device, with length l, width w and
thickness t, together with a uniform current density Jx = −I0
wt we get the following expres­
sion:
E = ρ−I0
wt (ˆx + RH
ρ Bzˆy)
(2.18)
Finally let introduce the carrier mobility µ = |q| τ
m in to the RH
ρ factor, it simplifies to:
RH
ρ
= 1
qn
q2τn
m
= q
|q|µ
(2.19)
Now integrating the field over the boundary conditions, the excitation voltage becomes:
Ve =
∫l
0
−E · ˆx dx = ρ l
wtI0
(2.20)
Microfabrication and characterization of a Hall­sensor chip for low noise “housekeeping” data collection
from power supply units in spacecrafts
7
==PAGE:15==
and the transverse voltage (Hall­voltage) becomes:
VHall =
∫w
0
−E · ˆy dy = ρ I0
wt
RH
ρ Bzw = w
l Va
q
|q|µBz
(2.21)
And the mobility of the Hall bar can then be calculated when measuring the VHall by:
µ = l
w
VHall
VaBz
(2.22)
Figure 2.7: Figure from [2]. Shows a Hall plate with two excitation contacts, C1 and C2,
and two sense contacts, S1 and S2. A magnetic field(B) perpendicular to the plate is
applied, and a current is driven from C1 to C2. The field driving the current is labelled Ee.
Charge accumulation is shown as +/ −Qs, the Hall field by EH and the Hall potential by
VH over the contacts S1 and S2.
The above argument is only valid in a steady state solution, where the current deflection
is negligible and the Hall potential is fully realised. To ensure this is the case, the sense
contacts need to be sufficiently far away from the excitation contacts at the ends. The
reason for this is that the excitation contacts force an equipotential in the transverse di­
rection along the metal contact. The electric field will then start bending in the Hall plate,
deflecting the current. At some point, this will be stopped by the edge of the material slab,
and the current density will be parallel along the longitudinal direction, and the electric
field will be at an angle, as it is composed of the Hall field and the excitation field. This
angle is defined as:
tan(ΘH) = EH
Ee
(2.23)
This is why, in the design of a Hall­bar, one needs to ensure the Hall­bar is long enough.
As a rule of thumb, the sense contacts need to be two times the width of the excitation
contacts along the hall bar to have a fully realised Hall­potential. Or in another way, the
length l to width w relation of the Hall­bar needs to fulfil l
w < 4, assuming the contacts are
in the middle.[2][9]
2.2.2
Band Diagram
When dealing with doping and semiconductors in general, one of the fundamental con­
cepts is the band structure of the material. This describes the energy levels that electrons
are permitted at, as a function of the wave vector k of the electron. This dispersion rela­
tion changes dramatically with k. Two of these bands are the valence and the conduction
8
Microfabrication and characterization of a Hall­sensor chip for low noise “housekeeping” data collection
from power supply units in spacecrafts
==PAGE:16==
band in figure 2.8, a typical semiconductor band diagram is shown, with an energy gap
between the valence and conduction band. One of the defining characteristics of a semi­
conductor is that the electrons will need some excitation energy to exist in the conduction
band. For silicon, the band gap is 1.12 eV. The electrons in any material will have some
thermal energy. This energy level defines the Fermi level, which determines the max­
imum energy for which electron states are occupied. If great enough, it will excite the
electrons to the conduction band. This will create readily available electrons to conduct a
current, and such a material is called a conductor. This is another defining characteristic
of a semiconductor, the Fermi level resides between the valence band and the conduction
band.
When an electron is excited to the conduction band, it will necessarily have to leave the
valence band behind. This creates a hole which acts as a positive charge carrier. The
behaviour of the holes is the inverse of the electrons, so holes in the valence band can
conduct a current, whereas in the conduction band they can’t.[2][9]
Figure 2.8: Figure from [2]. The Figure shows an energy band diagram representative of
a semiconductor. E0 is the free electron energy, EC is the lower boundary of the conduc­
tion band energy, and EV is the valence band energy. The band gap Eg is the energy
difference between the valence band and the conduction band.
2.2.3
Contact doping
When making an electrical contact to Si, it is important to have an ohmic contact, and the
resistance of the contact should be relatively small compared to the Hall­bar device. This
Microfabrication and characterization of a Hall­sensor chip for low noise “housekeeping” data collection
from power supply units in spacecrafts
9
==PAGE:17==
is to ensure the contacts don’t degrade the performance of the Hall­bar and that we can
trust that our measurements are actually of the device, and not just the contacts.
When metal, and in our case, silicon, makes contact, a depletion region will occur at the
interface of the two materials. This is created as the Fermi level of the two materials must
be equal at thermal equilibrium. To do this, the energy bands bend at the interface, creat­
ing a potential barrier, the Schottky barrier. The barrier height is the difference between
the metal work function and the semiconductor electron affinity. The electrons have to
pass over this barrier by thermal excitation if nothing else is done.
Figure 2.9: Figure from [10]. Calculated and measured values of Rc against doping.
Different material choices and barrier heights are represented. The bottom middle band
diagram shows a Schottky barrier and an electron passing it by thermal excitation. The
top left band diagram shows the narrow of the barrier and an electron tunnelling through.
10
Microfabrication and characterization of a Hall­sensor chip for low noise “housekeeping” data collection
from power supply units in spacecrafts
==PAGE:18==
Ideally, you can match the metal, by the work function, to the semiconductor and have no
barrier, but that is rarely possible. Instead, the barrier width, called the depletion region,
can be manipulated by introducing electrons, by doping, into the silicon. This way, the
barrier narrows, and as it narrows, the probability of the electrons tunnelling through the
barrier, not over, increases.
Rc ≈exp
(4√mnϵs
√ND
ϕBn
¯h
)
(2.24)
Equation 2.24 describes the contact resistance Rc, with mn being the electron effective
mass, ϵs the semiconductor permittivity, ND the doping concentration, ϕBn the potential
barrier and ¯h the reduced Planck’s constant.
Here, it is clear that Rc is inversely proportional to the doping concentration ND, which
arises directly from the tunnelling of electrons through the potential barrier.
In figure 2.9, different contact resistances are calculated for different barrier heights and
doping concentrations. Additionally, the narrowing of the barrier is shown in two band
diagrams. At high doping levels, the Rc drops off fast when tunnelling becomes sufficiently
probable. Below this doping level, the resistance only depends on the barrier height.
2.2.4
Mobility
It was clear that the most important material parameter for a Hall device is the mobil­
ity. From the perspective of drift velocity, the mobility describes the relation between the
electric field and drift velocity.
vd = µE
(2.25)
This can be defined for both negative and positive charge carriers. The mobility of these in
a
material
depends
on
the
temperature
and
the
doping
concentration.
Figure 2.10: Figure from [11]. Open and closed circles
signify different data sets.
One could also add defects,
as the mobility is dependent
on the relaxation time of the
charge carriers. This is the
time it takes for the parti­
cles to obtain an electrostatic
equilibrium in the material,
after some applied field is re­
moved.
The
relation
between
the
doping concentration and the
mobility of Si can be seen in
2.10. This graph is from 1977
and today’s models are more
accurate, especially at higher
doping concentrations,
but
it shows the behaviour very
well. A table of mobility val­
ues at different doping con­
centrations can be found in
appendix B.
Microfabrication and characterization of a Hall­sensor chip for low noise “housekeeping” data collection
from power supply units in spacecrafts
11
==PAGE:19==
2.2.5
Charge
Trajectories
To truly understand why mobility is the driving material parameter of the Hall effect, one
needs to have a look at charge trajectories in electric and magnetic fields with collisions.
In the case of electrons, they will move in a cyclotron drift movement in between collisions.
This cyclotron movement is responsible for the deflection angle from the excitation field.
Looking at the top figure of figure 2.11, it can be seen how different free transit times affect
the Hall angle. Of course, in a material, the collisions will not be periodic, but somewhat
random. This is reflected in the bottom figure, but the effect remains the same.
Figure 2.11: Figure from [10]. E is the excitation field, B is the B­field, vd is the drift velocity
and ΘH is the Hall angle. The top figure shows the trajectory of an electron, including
collisions. Here, the two different trajectories show the effect of two different free transit
times. In the bottom figure, the free transit time is randomly varying to represent a real
material better.
2.3
Fabrication
To fabricate the devices, several different microprocessing techniques need to be used.
It includes patterning, etching, thermal processes and deposition techniques. To accom­
pany these techniques, continuous characterisation is needed, and thereby some different
characterisation techniques. These will all be introduced briefly in this chapter.
12
Microfabrication and characterization of a Hall­sensor chip for low noise “housekeeping” data collection
from power supply units in spacecrafts
==PAGE:20==
2.3.1
UV­Lithography
The process of patterning a photoresist using UV­lithography is sketched out in figure
2.12. The UV­Lithography process starts by coating the substrate with a photosensitive
polymer called a photoresist. This is done by spincoating, which is a process where
the resist is dispensed in the centre of the wafer while it is spinning. The centrifugal
force and the viscosity determine the thickness of the coating. Sometimes the surface
is treated before the spin­coating to improve the wetting properties of the surface. Note
that usually the resist requires a hydrophobic surface to spread the easiest. This can be
done by baking the wafer with hexamethyldisilazane (HMDS) injected into the furnace.
After the spincoating, a small bake step is often included to evaporate some remains
of the solvent. The next step is the UV exposure of the resist. This is, in this case,
done with a maskless aligner. This uses a laser to write directly on the photoresist. This
pattern is aligned to either the wafer’s major flat or to dedicated alignment marks on the
wafer. When the photoresist is exposed to the UV light, two things can happen depending
on the resist. In one case, the UV light breaks the polymer chains in the resist, thereby
increasing the solubility. This is called a positive photoresist. In another case, the UV light
polymerises the resist, decreasing the solubility. This is called a negative photoresist. By
using the appropriate photoresist, one can obtain control of whether the sidewall of the
photoresist is negative or positive. This is desirable to know, especially in the case of lift­
off, where a negative sidewall ensures that they won’t be covered by metal. More about
that later on. Some photoresist needs an additional post­exposure bake to complete the
polymerisation. In other photoresists, the post­exposure bake can help diffuse chemical
reaction products to smooth some exposure errors, like stitching between writing lines in
a maskless aligner.
Figure 2.12: Simplistic diagram of UV­lithography process with positive photoresist. First,
the substrate is spin­coated with photoresist by dispensing it in the middle while the sub­
strate is spinning. Secondly, a pattern is exposed with UV light. In the case of positive
photoresist. Lastly, the whole substrate is developed.
Finally, the exposed pattern can be developed, meaning the highly soluble parts get
dissolved in some solvent. A typical solvent for this is tetramethylammonium hydrox­
ide(TMAH). This is a very corrosive and toxic chemical, so for safety reasons, some al­
ternatives are also used, like acetone and n­methyl­2­pyrrolidone(NMP).
To optimise these processes, one needs to consider the adhesion of the resist, the thick­
ness of the coating, the focus of the laser, the exposure dose (mJ/cm2), the baking times
and temperature and finally the development time for the chosen solvent. It is advised to
Microfabrication and characterization of a Hall­sensor chip for low noise “housekeeping” data collection
from power supply units in spacecrafts
13
==PAGE:21==
only tinker with one parameter at a time.[12]
2.3.2
Thermal processes
Thermal processes are a rather broad term, encompassing processes based on thermal
diffusion. It can be between materials already on a wafer, or some gas diffusion into a
material, or both. Here, three examples will be covered, but first, a general introduction
to diffusion in solids, as this plays a major role in thermal processes. Diffusion is the
movement of atoms due to a concentration gradient. The diffusion length can be modelled
by
x ≈2
√
Dt
(2.26)
With x being the diffusion length, t the time and D the diffusion coefficient, which is deter­
mined by
D = D0e−Ea/kT
(2.27)
Where D0 is the frequency factor, Ea is the activation energy, k is the Boltzmann constant
and T the temperature.
Oxidation
In oxidation processes, the wafers are placed in a furnace, usually at temperatures ranging
from 900­1200 °C. Then a gas flow of either oxygen or water vapour is injected into the
furnace. If oxygen is used, it is called dry oxidation, and with water vapour, it is called wet
oxidation. For thin oxides, the growth rate is linear, whereas for thicker oxides it becomes
parabolic, related to diffusion. This is captured by the Deal­Groove model, starting with
the diffusion equation for oxygen
dC
dt = 0 = Dd2C
dz2
(2.28)
and the boundary conditions
C = Cs
z = 0
at the silicon oxide surface
−DdC
dz = R
z = Z
at the silicon/silicon oxide interface
(2.29)
In the above, C is the oxygen molecular concentration, D is the diffusion coefficient, and
R is the reaction rate. This will lead to the oxide thickness equation:
t =
Z
KCsv +
Z2
2DCsv
(2.30)
with K being a rate constant, and v is the molar volume of SiO2 A bit curiously, the wet
oxide grows faster than the dry oxide, even if oxygen has a higher diffusion rate than water,
in silicon dioxide. This is due to the solubility of water in silicon dioxide being higher than
oxygen’s solubility, thereby providing more oxidant for the process. The downside of the
wet oxidation is that it produces an oxide of lower quality, seen in the lower density.[13]
Doping
Gas phase doping usually consists of two steps. A pre­deposition and a drive­in, both
usually done at temperatures above 900 °C. In the case of phosphor doping, the pre­
deposition can be done with phosphoryl trichloride (POCL), which will grow a layer of
phosphorous glass on top of the wafer. The phosphor will then diffuse into the substrate
from the glass layer during the drive­in process. In truth, during the pre­deposition a
not unimportant amount of doping will diffuse into the substrate. This effect is quite pro­
nounced for phosphor, as the diffusivity of phosphor in silicon is relatively high compared
14
Microfabrication and characterization of a Hall­sensor chip for low noise “housekeeping” data collection
from power supply units in spacecrafts
==PAGE:22==
to boron. This means for the purpose of electrical contacts, a pre­deposition step and an
anneal step might be enough.[12]
To control the areas which are doped silicon oxide can be used as a doping mask. This
is quite effective, especially for lower temperatures.[14] For more aggressive doping pro­
cesses, one can include a poly­Si layer on top of the oxide. This ensures a diffusion­based
process as the phosphorous glass phase front will move linearly in time through the ox­
ide.[8]
Anneal
Annealing is the process of thermal treatment to diffuse atoms in interfaces, reduce de­
fects, crystallise materials or densificating films. In this project, it is used to densify the
SiO2 and poly­Si films as a last step in the furnace steps. This is done at the depo­
sition/growth temperature in a nitrogen atmosphere. This gives the atoms the required
thermal energy to move around and settle in the film. Annealing is also used to diffuse
phosphor into the substrate after the pre­deposition, which is also done in an inert gas.
The metal contacts are also annealed to ensure that the Si/Ti/Al system has a good inter­
face. This is again a diffusion­based process. We also use an anneal step in forming gas
(5% H2/95% N2) to let hydrogen diffuse into silicon oxide and occupy dangling Si bonds in
the Si/SiO2 interface. This reduces the amount of charge traps and thereby the 1/f noise
of the device.[15] [16]
2.3.3
Deposition
Three different deposition techniques are used in the project. Chemical vapour deposi­
tion(CVD) is used in the doping process, Low Pressure CVD (LPCVD) and e­beam evap­
oration. LPCVD and CVD are very similar. A schematic is provided in figure 2.13. Both
processes are done in a furnace with a reactive gas. The gas molecules find their way to
the surface by diffusion, and when a suitable reaction site is found, the reactant decom­
poses and leaves the solid product on the surface, and a gaseous product will continue
with the gas flow out of the exhaust. LPCVD differs from CVD by using low pressure and
usually higher temperatures. This enables other chemical reactions, as you can tune the
vapour phase of reactants and products.
Figure 2.13: Figure from [12]. Illustrates a CVD process. The arrows in the upper part
represent the gas flow, the squiggly arrows the diffusion process for the gas molecules to
find a reaction site on the wafer and in the bottom, the wafer with the target surface.
E­beam evaporation is a technique where an electron beam is directed into a crucible with
Microfabrication and characterization of a Hall­sensor chip for low noise “housekeeping” data collection
from power supply units in spacecrafts
15
==PAGE:23==
a certain metal, as can be seen in figure 2.14. The beam will heat up the metal locally,
and the beam usually needs to be moved in a pattern to spread the heat in the crucible.
This is done by a magnetic field, which guides the electrons. As this is done in a vacuum
chamber, when the metal evaporates, it will leave the crucible and continue in a straight
line until it hits the substrate or the chamber wall. Tuning the chamber pressure can alter
this directionality, as each metal atom will have more collisions on its way to the substrate.
Figure 2.14: Figure from [12]. Illustrates a e­beam evaporation process. This consists of
an electron beam gun, which is deflected into a crucible containing the desired metal. This
metal is heated by the electron beam until it evaporates. Due to low pressure, the metal
will travel with great directionality in a cone onto the wafer, represented by the straight
arrows.
Their directionality is desirable when doing lift­off. This ensures that the negative sidewall
won’t be covered.[12]
2.3.4
Dry Etch
Gas phase etching is called dry etch, and even if it doesn’t have to be plasma induced,
the one we will treat is. An advanced multistep plasma­induced dry etch process is used,
which consists of three steps: Deposition, Removal, Etch. This process is Multi­stepped
and, in short, it is called DREM. As seen in figure 2.15, the deposition places a passi­
vation layer on all surfaces. Usually, a carbon fluoride is used for this process. This is
preceded by a directional etch where a reactant etch gas is injected into the chamber
and a substrate bias accelerates it towards the surface, removing the passivation layer
on the horizontal surfaces. This is then followed by an isotropic etch step, which etches
whatever material that aren’t masked. Now the process can be repeated, and in theory,
16
Microfabrication and characterization of a Hall­sensor chip for low noise “housekeeping” data collection
from power supply units in spacecrafts
==PAGE:24==
this provides an infinite aspect ratio. Aspect ratio is defined by the relation between the
width of the opening in the mask and the depth of the etch.
Figure 2.15: Figure from [12]. A typical DREM process. a) Shows the SF6 etch. b) the
passivation layer deposition, then c) a directional plasma etches the passivation layer as
seen from above and passes another etch cycle. b) and c) are then repeated.
DREM etching is highly directional, called an anisotropic etch, which can provide excellent
feature control.
2.4
Characterization methods
Different characterisation methods are used during and after the processing. Not all are
covered here, but the included should make the characterisation process reported under­
standable.
2.4.1
Ellipsometry
Ellipsometry is a technique using specular polarised light. The light is analysed after
reflection and the change in the phase and amplitude of the s­ and p­ components. The
incident light is polarised in the p­plane. The reflection usually results in elliptical polarised
light, as can be seen in 2.16.
The Ellipsometry measurement is comprised of two angles, Ψ and ∆, giving the change
in polarisation by the sample expressed as:
ρ = tan(Ψ)ei∆= rp
rs
(2.31)
Where ρ is the polarisation ratio, rp is the reflected light in the p­plane, rs is the reflected
light in the s­plane, Ψ is the amplitude rotation, and ∆is the phase rotation. The mea­
surements are done at a spectrum of photon energies and at different incident angles. To
Microfabrication and characterization of a Hall­sensor chip for low noise “housekeeping” data collection
from power supply units in spacecrafts
17
==PAGE:25==
determine parameters like the film thickness and the refractive index, a model needs to
be fitted to the data. A Mean Squared Error(MSE) between the modelled Ψ and ∆and
the data is then established as a measure of goodness of fit. As the model is prone to
falling into a local minimum, one should bring qualified estimates of the film parameters
as a starting point and critically look at the model after the regression process is finished.
This should ensure that the outcome of the model has relevance in the real world, and is
not only some mathematically plausible solution.
Figure 2.16: Figure from [17]. E is the light polarisation, which is split into components of
the p­ and s­plane.
2.4.2
Van der Pauw and Transfer Length Method
Figure 2.17: Figure from [10]. TLM structure on the left con­
sisting of contacts with varying distance between them. On the
right is an example of the measurements.
When doing electrical char­
acterisation, Van der Pauw(VdP)
structures and Transfer
Length Method(TLM) struc­
tures are used.
The
TLM structures are sim­
ply electrical contacts placed
with varying distance be­
tween them on a slab of
material, see figure 2.17.
A linear regression will
provide the slope and
the y­axis intercept. The
slope is the sheet re­
sistance divided by the
width
of
the
contacts
Rs/Z,
and
the
inter­
cept with the y­axis gives
the
contact
resistance
divided by two Rc/2.
VdP structures are also
used to find the sheet re­
18
Microfabrication and characterization of a Hall­sensor chip for low noise “housekeeping” data collection
from power supply units in spacecrafts
==PAGE:26==
sistance, but it will also give information on the uniformity of the sample. They come in
many different geometries, but the geometry treated here is the square with contacts in
the corners. It is important that s«L so that the contacts approach point contacts. It is de­
sirable to have the ratio s
L > 0.05 so that the correction factor for the resistivity becomes
negligible.[18]
Figure 2.18: Basic square VdP structure, with side length L and contact width s. The
contacts are numbered starting from 1 at the bottom left, going clockwise.
The resistivity of the sample is then calculated by:
ρ =
πt
ln(2)
V43
I12
+ V14
I23
(2.32)
where the subscript indicates the contacts measured between.[19] The difference be­
tween the two measurements will indicate the anisotropy of the sample.
Microfabrication and characterization of a Hall­sensor chip for low noise “housekeeping” data collection
from power supply units in spacecrafts
19
==PAGE:27==
20
Microfabrication and characterization of a Hall­sensor chip for low noise “housekeeping” data collection
from power supply units in spacecrafts
==PAGE:28==
3
Experimental setup
Figure 3.1: Schematic of the lab setup showing how the lab
equipment connects to the board and coil.
The chip itself will only
consist of the sensor and
a through­wire.
This
will require some sup­
port electronics, which
will be built on a PCB to­
gether with external lab
equipment.
In short,
what is needed is driver
circuits for the Hall bar,
supplying up to 20 V
excitation voltage, and
a similar driver circuit
providing 1 amp in the
through­wire, see figure
4.1. On the signal pro­
cessing side, an instru­
mentation amplifier and
synchronous demodula­
tor for the signal detection are needed, together with some filters. The excitation and
demodulation frequency should exceed 1 kHz. These will need power supplies, a func­
tion generator, a voltmeter and an oscilloscope to fully characterise and control the setup.
Furthermore, a well­defined external B­field source with a power supply is needed, as
seen in figure 3.2.
3.1
Circuit design
The PCB will contain voltage regulators, driver circuits and the instrumentation amplifier
with
a
synchronous
demodulator
and
filters.
Figure 3.2: Schematic of the board showing the major func­
tionalities.
3.1.1
Driver
circuits
The Hall bar driver cir­
cuit consists of two Op­
Amps with gain ±1 and
can be seen in figure
3.3.
The inputs are
connected to the same
BNC input, which in turn
will be connected to a
function generator. This
way,
the driver circuit
will output ±of the in­
put.
The green and
blue marker highlights
the output going to the Hall bar. The red marker highlights the input from the function
Microfabrication and characterization of a Hall­sensor chip for low noise “housekeeping” data collection
from power supply units in spacecrafts
21
==PAGE:29==
generator. The non­inverting amplifier(U12) has a gain of +2, so a voltage divider, R7
and R1, of 0.5 is made to counter the extra gain. To get rid of noise, the supply pins of
the op­amps are decoupled with low­pass filters on pins 4 and 7. These are designed
according to the specs of the specific op­amp.
Figure 3.3: Hall bar driver circuit consisting of an inverting and
a non­inverting Op­amp. The red marker is the input, blue and
green are outputs.
A low­pass filter is also
applied on the input and
another over the feed­
back loop. These filters
will reduce spikes and
high­frequency noise. An
important thing to con­
sider is the f3dB, which
should be sufficiently low
and still allow for the
desired excitation frequency.
We aim at a 1­3 kHz Hall
bar excitation frequency,
so we place our fdB at
15.9 kHz for the feed­
back loop and at 48 kHz
for the input. The driver
circuits for the Hall bar
and the through­wire are
very similar.
The only
difference
is
the
cur­
rent needed to be sup­
plied, which has resulted
in some different com­
ponent choices with a
higher power rating.
3.1.2
Sense circuit
The sense circuit con­
sists of three main com­
ponents.
In figure 3.4,
from left to right, an instrumentation amplifier(U15), a switch(U16) and an op­amp(U17).
The violet and orange markers on the left represent the differential output from the sense
pins of the Hall bar. The jumper JP2 enables an analogue programming of the instrumen­
tation amplifier gain of x107 and x979 by connecting different resistors to the gain pins 1
and 8. The output from pin 6 is connected to the switch and the inverting pin of the op­
amp. These two components form the synchronous demodulator. The non­inverting pin
of the op­amp is connected to the output of the switch through a low­pass filter(R15/C12).
This is to ensure the op amp can keep up with the switch and won’t hit the slew rate. It’s
necessary as the switch will switch in the order of a couple of nanoseconds, which is way
too fast for the op­amp. To ensure phase coherence, an equivalent circuit is applied be­
tween the instrumentation amplifier and the Op­amp. Finally, the blue­marked output will
be connected to the filters, whereas the green acts as a probe pin to see what the output,
without filters, looks like. Notice that the switch has both ±12 V and a +5 V supply as the
component is a mix of digital control on pin 6 and the analogue switch circuit. The yellow­
marked input at the bottom is connected to a comparator, which in turn is connected to
22
Microfabrication and characterization of a Hall­sensor chip for low noise “housekeeping” data collection
from power supply units in spacecrafts
==PAGE:30==
the excitation function generator. This ensures the phase coherence of the switch and
the signal.
Figure 3.4: The instrumentation amplifier together with the synchronous demodulator.
On the left, the purple and orange marked wires are the output of the Hall bar. U15 is the
instrumentation amplifier with a jumper on the gain resistance to change between gain
107 and gain 979. Pin 6 of U15 is the output going to the switch (U16) and the inverting
pin of the OpAmp. The second input, pin 8, of the switch is grounded. The yellow input
at the bottom is the output of the comparator, controlling the switch on pin 6. The switch
output is connected to the non­inverting pin. The green and blue marked wires are the
output going to two different filters.
The two filters depicted in figure 3.5 are applied to the two above­mentioned outputs. Blue
and green markers line up with those from figure 3.4. The green probe has an active filter
of gain ­1 and a f3dB to reduce high­frequency noise, but still sees the behaviour of the
demodulator. The blue input is connected to an aggressive 6th­order filter consisting of 3
active and 3 passive filters. Each individual filter has a cut­off frequency of:
fcut =
1
2πRC = 277 Hz
Combining them gives:
fc6 = fcut
√
21/6 −1 = 97 Hz
This will ensure a DC output if the modulation frequency exceeds this cut­off frequency.
As we are using an active filter we can calculate the gain by:
Gain =
(
−R2
R1
)3
= −1.46
This ensures that we won’t dampen the signal in the filtering process.
Microfabrication and characterization of a Hall­sensor chip for low noise “housekeeping” data collection
from power supply units in spacecrafts
23
==PAGE:31==
Figure 3.5: Two filters with input from the left, marked green and blue. The top filter is
a first­order active filter with a f3dB of 3.34 kHz. This allows our demodulation frequency
through to characterise how the demodulator is functioning. The bottom filter is a 6th­
order filter with three active and three passive filters. It has a f3dB of 100 Hz and a small
gain of 1.5. The red marked line goes to an additional amplification circuit and the digital
electronics.
The red marked wire connects to another amplifier and the digital circuit of the design.
This part is documented briefly in the D.1 and D.2.
24
Microfabrication and characterization of a Hall­sensor chip for low noise “housekeeping” data collection
from power supply units in spacecrafts
==PAGE:32==
3.2
Layout considerations
In general, it is desired to have the sense circuit as close to the hall bar as possible, while
keeping the voltage regulators, wire drivers and digital circuit as far away as possible.
This is done to minimise noise interference from the electronics. As can be seen in figure
3.6, this is done by confining these parts to the bottom of the board. Furthermore, cutouts
in the ground plane control where the current is running. The bolt holes in the bottom of
figure 3.6 are grounded, ensuring the possibility of shorting them to control the ground
current if it becomes relevant.
Figure 3.6: Layout of the PCB. The two yellow boxes on the top left are the BNC connec­
tors for the input from the function generator. On the top right, the BNC connectors for the
different output options. The top one is the out of the f3dB =3.34 kHz filter. The middle
is after the 6th order f3dB =100 Hz filter, and the bottom one is after the additional gain.
Blue features indicate backside routing, and red indicates topside routing. The Black is
GND­plane cutouts, and the 6 yellow circles around the edge are the grounded mounting
holes.
At the top of the board, the signal input is placed on the left and the output on the right.
This is done to maintain a general direction of the current flow on the board. This makes
it easier to control where the current flows and how noise is generated.
Microfabrication and characterization of a Hall­sensor chip for low noise “housekeeping” data collection
from power supply units in spacecrafts
25
==PAGE:33==
3.3
Final setup
The Hall bar is fitted on the PCB, which is placed inside the coil. The board is connected
as follows in the figure 3.7. The board PSU supplies ±15 V to the voltage regulators
on the board, which give ±12 V for the analogue circuit and +5 V for the digital circuits.
The function generator is connected to the input of the driver circuit and the comparator
for the switch control. The voltmeter is connected to the output after the filters, and the
oscilloscope is connected to the excitation voltage of the Hall bar. The oscilloscope probes
were used to check the synchronous demodulator function by inspecting the signal at
several points through the system, but ideally, it would not be connected while measuring,
as it might introduce more noise to the system
Figure 3.7: Lab setup consisting of the chip and board inside the coil, voltmeter for the
filtered signal output, oscilloscope to check the demodulation circuit, and coil/board PSUs
to get everything running.
The coil PSU is directly connected to the LW coil. The coil was characterised using an
extremely precise fluxgate magnetometer. This is the magnetometer flown on the Ørsted,
SWARM and most recently Psyche missions[20][21]. The magnetometer was placed in
the centre of the coil, and the field was measured with 0 and 1.5 A running in the coil. The
coil was found to have a response of 56 µT/A, and this will be used to apply a magnetic
field. From calculations, a field strength of around > 600 µT is expected from the current
in the through wire. In tests, the coil will take 10 amps without any dangerous heating
occurring, enabling a field of 560 µT, which is comparable to the expected field strength.
26
Microfabrication and characterization of a Hall­sensor chip for low noise “housekeeping” data collection
from power supply units in spacecrafts
==PAGE:34==
4
Device and structure
In a previous report[1], the sensor structure and material selection were described. This
will be shortly summarised to ensure continuity.
4.1
Material selection
For the material, it was decided to use Si after considering a variety of materials. This
choice was based on the mobility of silicon had the potential to give enough signal to
resolve the current. Furthermore, the use of silicon would ease the process of integrating
the sensor design on an IC chip. The silicon on insulator(SoI) wafer design was chosen
to allow for a z­axis restriction of the sensor, and in terms of the IC chip, it will compel a
radiation­hardened design. Wafers with the following specs were ordered:
Size
Type/dopant
Orientation
Resistivity
Thickness
Mobility
Box
150 mm
N/Ph
<100>
1­10 Ω·cm
8 µm
>1250 cm2/V · s
0.5 µm
Table 4.1
The choice of a wafer with 8 µm device layer was due to limitations of resources.[1]
4.2
Hall bar design
The Hall bar was designed to be bulky, allowing for ease of fabrication and with character­
isation contacts along the side to see the uniformity. The sensor was placed as close as
possible to the gold wire, where the current of interest would run, to maximise the B­field.
Figure 4.1: Red represents the hall­bar, blue is the silicon mesa, yellow is the bottom of
the B­field generating wire, the purple dotted line is the etch pattern, and the purple areas
are the doping areas for the contacts. The etch pattern will continue all the way out to
the wire bond­pads to isolate them from each other. L : 300µm, d : 35µm, w : 20µm, c :
5µm, p : 5µm
To ensure the device is completely in the regime of the Hall potential, the device needed
to be long and narrow. This increases the resistance of the Hall bar, which has two con­
Microfabrication and characterization of a Hall­sensor chip for low noise “housekeeping” data collection
from power supply units in spacecrafts
27
==PAGE:35==
sequences. It increases noise and decreases power consumption if the excitation voltage
is kept constant.
A few changes were made to the fabrication process. The doping mask has been rein­
forced by a polysilicon layer. This is done to make sure no dopant slips through the mask,
as the phosphorus glass phase travels through the silicon oxide linearly with time[8]. The
polysilicon introduces a diffusion­limited doping mask, delaying the linear penetration.
To minimise noise, a 50 nm silicon oxide is introduced, as described in the previous report,
but an anneal step with forming gas is introduced to limit the number of dangling bonds in
the interface between silicon and silicon oxide. This is done after the contact metallisation
at 400 °C to both anneal the contacts and the silicon oxide interface.
4.3
Theoretical estimates
As a consequence of the material choice and design made in[1], the expected perfor­
mance of the chip is, as mentioned before:
Expected Performance
B
µH
RHallbar
Vex
VHall
SV
VNtot
677 µT
>1250 cm2 V−1 s
190 kΩ
10 V
101 µV
74.5 mV T−1
55.7 nV Hz−2
Table 4.2: B is the expected B­field when the sensor is place 35 µm from the gold wire.
The values are estimated based on the dimensions of the sensor design.
The noise floor can be calculated by:
√
4kTR = 55.7 nV/
√
Hz
But some further calculations can be made to have an idea about the offset of the sensor,
due to lithography inaccuracies. Any deviation from the middle of the individual contacts
will produce an offset voltage. Both sides are written in the same mask step, so alignment
will not produce an offset, only a common mode signal. The maskless aligner used boasts
an accuracy of 0.5 µm, and looking at lithography images, some unfortunate stitching can
be observed of about 0.2 µm. If we assume a worst­case scenario, we have an error of
around 0.7 µm. To translate that to an offset for a 300 µm Hall bar we have:
0.7µm
300µm10V = 23mV
(4.1)
This means that we can explain an offset up to 23 mV by lithography issues. There are
other issues which can cause offset. The asymmetry of the design around the longitu­
dinal axis will create an offset, and we already know that we will have one due to the
characterisation contacts we have on one side of the Hall bar and not the other. Material
anisotropy will also possibly cause an offset, which could be caused by doping anisotropy.
Both these effects can be difficult to estimate unless a simulation model is created, and it
is not in the scope of this project.
28
Microfabrication and characterization of a Hall­sensor chip for low noise “housekeeping” data collection
from power supply units in spacecrafts
==PAGE:36==
5
Process and Mask design
5.1
Process flow
The process flow through this project had an organic existence, as changes were made
on the run. This approach was necessary as no developed process flow had been es­
tablished previously, so every step was evaluated continuously in conjunction with the
process. Two full runs were conducted, and several tests were performed. However, the
following outlines the general idea of the process and the final process parameters.
Figure 5.1: The SoI hall bar process.
Some process tests will be included, but several will only be noted briefly. One notable
difference between the two runs is the wafer size increase from 100 mm to 150 mm. This
forced a change of processing tools and parameters for the furnace steps and DREM­etch
step.
5.1.1
Doping Mask
The first step of the process flow is to create the doping mask. The doping mask consists
of a 200 nm silicon oxide and a 30 nm polysilicon layer.
Two furnace steps are required for this, one for growing the dry oxide and one for deposit­
ing the polysilicon. In between these steps, the oxide mask is opened by a lithography
and BHF step.
The dry oxide is grown at 1100°C for 2 hours and 20 minutes, achieving a thickness of
200 nm, followed by an anneal step in nitrogen gas for 20 minutes.
The lithography step consists of a Hexamethyldisilane (HMDS) treatment to make the
substrate hydrophobic, giving the resist better wetting capabilities of the surface. This is
done at 120°C with 30s vacuum bake, injection of HMDS and then 15s reaction time. Then
a 1.5 µm AZ 5214E photoresist layer is spun on the wafer and soft baked for 60s at 90°C.
Microfabrication and characterization of a Hall­sensor chip for low noise “housekeeping” data collection
from power supply units in spacecrafts
29
==PAGE:37==
Then the pattern is written on the wafer with a 405 nm laser with a dose of 75 mJ/cm2
using a maskless aligner. Now the pattern is developed with 2.38% Tetramethylammonium
hydroxide (TMAH) in water for 90s.
Opening the oxide mask is done with buffered hydrofluoric acid (BHF). This has an etch
rate of 75 nm/min, so at 3 minutes, a slight over­etch is done to ensure all the oxide is
gone.
5.1.2
Clean procedure
The polymer mask is stripped with a plasma etch with N2/O2 stoichiometry of 1:1 at 1000
W power and a pressure of 1.3 mbar for 25 min.
To prepare the wafer for the next furnace step, an RCA clean is done. This consists of
three etch steps. RCA1 is a chemical solution of H2O2, NH4OH(25−29%) and H2O2(30%) (5 :
1 : 1) at 70°C which the wafers are dipped in for 10 minutes. RCA2 consists of H2O2, HCl(37%)
and H2O2(30%) (5 : 1 : 1) also at 70°C for 10 minutes. In between and after each RCA
the wafers are dipped in 5% HF for 30 seconds.
5.1.3
Poly­Si
The polysilicon deposition is done in an LPCVD furnace. It is done at a pressure of 200
mTorr with a SiH4 flow of 70 sccm. A temperature gradient from 616­625°Cis maintained
over the furnace to compensate for the silane that reacts and deposits Si when travelling
through the furnace. This process is run for 4 minutes and 20 seconds, as a deposition
rate of 7 nm/min is reported for this process, for the target thickness of 30 nm.
5.1.4
Doping
The doping process itself is a furnace process with phosphoryl trichloride (POCl3) gas
flow. The furnace for this process is made for 100 mm wafers, which means it has a
quartz tube of 160 mm diameter. To accommodate the 150 mm wafers, one wafer has
to be placed on top of the wafer boat in the exact middle of the tube. The was tested
and works with surprising uniformity. The process was run at 950°C for 30 minutes with
a 20­minute anneal after. This deposits and grows a 100 nm phosphorus glass on top of
the wafer.
5.1.5
DREM­etch of mesa structure
First, the structures are defined by a lithography mask. Here, the same process param­
eters are used as they were for the first mask. Next, the phosphorus glass needs to be
removed for the DREM process to reach the Si layer. This is done by a BHF dip.
The DREM process is running with 1 kW coil power, for about 70 cycles or 5 minutes and
30 seconds of processing time. The specifics of the process were not available, as the
software of the tool was malfunctioning gravely at the time of writing this.
5.1.6
Passivation oxide
To passivate the sidewalls, an oxide is grown after the DREM process. The polymer mask
is removed by plasma ash, and then the wafer is cleaned by RCA. Both procedures are
the same as the previous. The dry oxide is grown at 1000°C for 1 hour, which yields a 50
nm oxide.
5.1.7
Metal layer
This includes another lithography step, but with slightly different conditions as the resist
is switched to a negative resist, specifically the AZ nLoF 2020. A 1.5 µm is spun on the
wafer. The soft baking is done at 110°C for 120 s. The exposure is done with a 375 nm
laser, and the dose is increased to 450 mJ/cm2. Remember to invert the design as the
30
Microfabrication and characterization of a Hall­sensor chip for low noise “housekeeping” data collection
from power supply units in spacecrafts
==PAGE:38==
resist is negative. The development starts with a post­exposure bake for 60 s at 110°C,
followed by 60 s development in 2.38% TMAH.
The metal system used for the contacts is the Al/Ti system. Ti is chosen as a middle layer,
it has good adhesion properties and will absorb the oxygen from a potential native oxide
on the silicon interface. Furthermore, it reduces the potential barrier of the contact from
0.72 eV with Si/Al to 0.5 eV for the Si/Ti interface. At last, it acts as a ’sacrificial layer’
and if chosen thick enough, it will prevent the Si from reaching the Al layer. This prevents
several undesired mechanisms, such as contact spiking. The metal layers are deposited
using e­beam evaporation, 100 nm Ti followed by 400 nm of Al.[22]
Next, the wafers were soaked and ultrasonicated in Remover 1165 for 24 hours. Now
the contacts are annealed at 425°C in forming gas (5% H2 95% N2) for 30 minutes. This
ensures the ohmic contacts and reduces dangling bonds in the Si/SiO2 interface.
The metallisation is repeated for the gold wire in the middle of the chip, except for the
anneal step, for a gold thickness of 600 nm
5.2
Mask designs
The total mask design contains many different structures serving different purposes. The
hall bar device structures are contained here, as are utility structures. This includes two
sets of alignment marks for both the doping and the etch step. The etched alignment
marks are very robust, but the first process done is the doping, so alignment marks are
included from this early stage. Some inspection windows are included all around the
wafer to verify colour changes during etch steps easily. Dose and defocus test structures
are included to verify the lithography steps and to characterise how feature sizes survive
the etch steps. A large doping area is included in the middle to be able to measure the
thickness of the oxide in these areas with an ellipsometer. It is important to know the
thickness to calculate the etch times to remove this oxide when doing the metallisation of
the contacts.
Figure 5.2: Overview of the mask layout.
Electrical characterisation structures are also included in the mask design. The simplest
Microfabrication and characterization of a Hall­sensor chip for low noise “housekeeping” data collection
from power supply units in spacecrafts
31
==PAGE:39==
are the TLM structures, providing a way to determine the contact resistance and, to some
degree, the resistivity of the silicon. Van der Pauw structures are also included, see figure
5.3c, to determine the resistivity and uniformity of the material with high precision. These
are placed in both doped and undoped regions at two sizes to check the doping process.
Some symmetric hall bars, see figure 5.3b, are included too to see the geometrical vari­
ance of our design, but also to know the uniformity of the hall bars.
(a) The actual hall bar device mask design.
From the contact areas shown, the metal con­
tinues out to large bondpads at the edge of the
wafer.
(b) A symmetric hall bar for char­
acterisation. From the contact ar­
eas shown, the metal continues
out to large bondpads at the edge
of the wafer.
(c) VdP mask design for the doped area. The
doped area is 1 mm x 1 mm, and the contact
width is 28 um. The square contacts are for the
probe to make contact.
(d) Alignment mark design. Smaller arrows
surround the design to guide the user to the
alignment mark. The inner cross is used for
the alignment and consists of 20 µm wide
strips.
Figure 5.3: Different devices and test structures found in the mask design. The white
areas are crystalline SI. The dark red areas are the contact areas of doped Si with metal
on top. The turquoise areas are the etched areas. The bright green is the gold wire. The
orange refers to doped areas without metallisation on top.
32
Microfabrication and characterization of a Hall­sensor chip for low noise “housekeeping” data collection
from power supply units in spacecrafts
==PAGE:40==
6
Characterisation
6.1
Processing
Throughout the process, the steps are tested by various methods. This is to monitor the
process and fine­tune the steps throughout the process. The available tools for this are
Ellipsometry, Optical microscope, and SEM.
6.1.1
Oxide 1
The first step is to grow a dry oxide, which is measured by ellipsometry. It is expected to
have a thickness of 200 nm and will consist of the first layer of the doping mask.
Figure 6.1: Ellipsometer measurements at five different points of the wafer. A model for
the polarisation of the light is used to estimate the thicknesses of these points. Between
the points, the data is interpolated to give an idea of uniformity.
In figure 6.1, a very uniform film with a thickness of around 200 nm is measured. Now the
wafers are ready for the first lithography step at the BHF dip to open the doping mask.
6.1.2
Lithography 1
The first lithography step is used to open holes in the doping mask by BHF, thus defining
the contact areas for the hall bar. As it is the first lithography step, alignment considera­
tions are limited to the major flat. The two things to inspect are the lithography pattern for
exposure­related issues and the under­etch for resist mask adhesion issues.
Microfabrication and characterization of a Hall­sensor chip for low noise “housekeeping” data collection
from power supply units in spacecrafts
33
==PAGE:41==
(a) First photoresist mask.
The darker areas are the
photoresist, and the lighter
areas are openings. The pic­
tures are taken using a fil­
ter to protect the photore­
sist from unintentional ex­
posure,
hence the orange
colour base.
(b) After BHF dip. Grey areas
are photoresist, and lighter
areas are openings.
Under
etch of 1 −1.5 µm can be ob­
served at every line.
(c) The photoresist mask is
removed and an under etch
of ∼
1 µm is confirmed.
Light greenish areas are ox­
ide, and the light yellow areas
are the exposed silicon.
Figure 6.2: Three images characterising the opening of the doping mask.
As can be seen in figure 6.2, the structure is well defined even with a slightly exaggerated
underetch. It was expected to underetch by approximately the same amount as the thick­
ness of oxide removed, as the BHF etch is isotropic, but minor adhesive issues must have
persisted despite the HMDS treatment. In any case, the issue is not prevalent enough to
create issues through this process.
6.1.3
Poly
The final part of the doping mask consists of a thin polysilicon layer. This is measured in
the middle of the wafer in the dedicated characterisation window. Polysilicon is usually a
bit harder to measure, so the MSE is expected to be higher than for an oxide layer.
In figure 6.3, a polysilicon thickness of 28.45 nm is found with an MSE of 7.971. This
is a bit higher MSE than for the oxide, but still an acceptable result. With the previous
measurement of 200 nm oxide, the total thickness of 221.95 nm from figure 6.3 indicates
that the poly silicon layer might be even thinner. This might have some consequences
later in terms of reduced dopant mask efficiency, but it will make it more probable that we
will have full oxidation of the poly silicon layer, which will give beneficial optical properties
for later lithography steps.
34
Microfabrication and characterization of a Hall­sensor chip for low noise “housekeeping” data collection
from power supply units in spacecrafts
==PAGE:42==
Figure 6.3: Ellipsometry data with the Ψ and ∆angles overlaid as a function of wave­
length. The angles in the lower left legend box are the incident angles. In the top left
corner, some model parameters are displayed. Thickness #3 corresponding to the polysil­
icon layer, and the total thickness is the combination of the polysilicon and silicon oxide
layer.
6.1.4
Doping
The doping process uses POCl as a reactant and grows a phosphor glass on top of the
wafer. This phosphor glass layer will correspond somewhat to the doping in the silicon
below, so measuring the thickness can be used to compare the process to earlier runs.
The oxide will need to be removed before the first metallisation, so it is necessary to know
the thickness to calculate the etch time.
Figure 6.4: Ellipsometry data with the Ψ and ∆angles overlaid as a function of wave­
length. The angles in the top right legend box are the incident angles. In the box below,
some model parameters are displayed. Angle offset is how well aligned the substrate is to
the beam. The total thickness is the oxide layer plus a native oxide of 1 nm. This means
the total phosphor glass layer is 99.8 nm thick.
Microfabrication and characterization of a Hall­sensor chip for low noise “housekeeping” data collection
from power supply units in spacecrafts
35
==PAGE:43==
The expected thickness of the phosphor glass layer is about 100 nm according to previous
tests C.1. The MSE of the model is a little bit high, but can be explained by having the
oxidised polysilicon layer. This might induce some roughness to the film.
Figure 6.5: This is a microscope image using polarised light of the structure after the
doping process. The grey areas have been doped, and the blue areas have been masked.
Polarised light is used to search for features, in our case, leftover polysilicon. In the
transition between doped areas and masked areas, a line can be observed, which has
some slight structure to it. This could be roughness from the oxidised polysilicon layer.
From figure 6.5, it can be seen that the polysilicon film has been fully oxidised, creating a
good optical surface for the lithography. Further more the thickness of the phosphor glass
indicated that the desired doping has been done, but this will show later in the contact
resistance.
6.1.5
Lithography 2
This lithography step is for creating openings where the mesa structure can be etched
through. When the top phosphor glass is removed with BHF, the adhesion will be impor­
tant to keep track of. The adhesion is expected to be reduced due to the hygroscopic
nature of the phosphor glass.
36
Microfabrication and characterization of a Hall­sensor chip for low noise “housekeeping” data collection
from power supply units in spacecrafts
==PAGE:44==
(a) Second lithography step of the process
before the BHF dip. The large light areas
are the contact areas, the darker areas are
the undoped areas, and the narrow struc­
tures separating the contact areas are the
trenches, which require etching.
A slight
overexposure can be observed as the open­
ings expanding 0.5 µm per line compared to
the mask design.
(b) After BHF dip. The light channels are
where the oxide has been removed. Some
underetching has occurred and can be seen
as a light line around the resist mask edges.
Figure 6.6
The adhesion was sufficient to continue the process as the desired structure is intact and
the desired symmetry of the design is thereby intact.
6.1.6
DREM­etch
The DREM etch will etch out the mesa’s and there will be a clear colour change to identify
the completion of the process, as we use the buried oxide(BOX) layer as an etch stop.
(a) The image is taken at partial etch com­
pletion. Purple is the colour indication of the
BOX layer.
(b) This image is at full etch completion with
the purple colour almost completely domi­
nating the trenches.
Figure 6.7: The pink/orange areas are the doped contact areas, the green bar in the
middle is the Hall bar, and the light green/purple narrow structures are trenches.
Microfabrication and characterization of a Hall­sensor chip for low noise “housekeeping” data collection
from power supply units in spacecrafts
37
==PAGE:45==
As can be seen in figure 6.7, the visual clue for etch completion is easily visible in optical
microscope images. At the end of the trench structures, a lighter colour can be seen,
which is leftover silicon. This is left as it etched slowly, to avoid over­etching and thereby
notching. Notching should be avoided to ensure the intended geometry of the contacts
and hall bar.
6.1.7
Oxide 2
An oxide is now grown to passivate the sidewalls of the mesa structures. About 50 nm
is grown on the sidewalls, from previous calibration, but this is not the process­critical
parameter. The important thickness is the oxide on top of the contacts, as in the next
step, we will have to remove this to contact the doped areas with metal. Here, the central
doping test field on the wafer comes in handy, as it will replicate this oxide thickness. It is
measured by ellipsometry.
Figure 6.8: Ellipsometry data with the Ψ and ∆angles overlaid as a function of wave­
length. The angles in the top right legend box are the incident angles. In the box below,
some model parameters are displayed. The total thickness is the oxide layer plus a native
oxide of 1 nm. This means the total phosphor glass layer is 143 nm thick.
As can be seen in figure 6.8, an oxide thickness on top of the contact areas of 143 nm
is achieved. This corresponds to about 2 minutes of BHF etch time as the rate is 75­80
nm/min, but as any residual oxide would be detrimental to the contacts, and the thickness
will vary over the wafer, see Appendix C.1, an over­etch of 50% is chosen, e.g. 3 minutes.
6.1.8
Lithography 3
The third lithography is done with negative photoresist to create negative sidewalls for the
lift­off step. Openings on top of the doped contact areas are made to etch the phosphor
glass and then deposit metal contacts.
After the BHF dip, the oxide is completely removed, as can be seen in figure 6.9. The
coverage issues seem to persist at the edges, and comparing before/after the BHF, the
defect looks to be only more pronounced. Since the trenches and the hall bar structure
itself look covered, the process proceeds.
38
Microfabrication and characterization of a Hall­sensor chip for low noise “housekeeping” data collection
from power supply units in spacecrafts
==PAGE:46==
(a) Third lithography step done with open­
ings at the contacts. The rough edges of
the trenches, in the red ellipses, indicate
some coverage issues. The rainbow stripes,
which are visible in the grey vertical stripe,
indicate varying photoresist thickness.
(b) The blue phosphor glass areas
have turned to bright white/yellow ar­
eas.
The yellow colour is due to the
microscope and not the actual colour
of the silicon. In the red ellipses, the
lithography defects are again visible, as
a colour change has happened where
the mask should have been defined.
Figure 6.9
6.1.9
Liftoff
The lift off took more than 24 hours, but in the end was complete. The combination of
varying photoresist thicknesses and large areas on the wafer with no metal structures
might have caused this.
(a) Overview of the hall bar device. The light
areas are metal contacts, the orange is the
silicon covered in silicon oxide, and the dark
lines are the trenches.
(b) Close up of the contact pads and hall bar.
Unintended metal can be observed as light
lines around the edges. The thick ellipse at
the edge of the Hall bar marks some metal
unintentionally deposited on the Hall bar.
Figure 6.10
While figure 6.10a shows a general successful lift off, figure 6.10b shows some defects.
Microfabrication and characterization of a Hall­sensor chip for low noise “housekeeping” data collection
from power supply units in spacecrafts
39
==PAGE:47==
The metal around the edges creates alternative paths for the current and may short out
parts of the hall bar. This will be seen in the electrical characterisation of the devices.
6.1.10
Final structure
Before the final chips are ready, the big gold wire in the middle of the chip needs to be
deposited. This is done by the lift­off technique. The dimensions of the final structure
show a decrease in feature size, but all desired features are present. Some lift­off issues
remain from the second lift­off.
(a) Final structure.
Shows two hall bars,
one on each side of the gold bar in the mid­
dle, with metal contacts reaching out to the
bonding pads at the edge of the chip. The
rectangle at the top left of the chip is a win­
dow opened to follow the etch processes by
eye.
(b) A closer look at one device shows the
final structure with the gold layer well placed
to the left. The hall bar contacts have a width
of 3.18 µm, the trenches 7.13 µm, and the
hall bar 17.81 µm.
Figure 6.11
Looking at the SEM image from figure 6.12, the structure does look complete. Upon
closer inspection in 6.13a, the incomplete etch shows at the bottom of the trench. This
can explain some geometrical asymmetry affecting the offset of the device. On the side­
walls, some roughness can also be observed. It doesn’t look like there’s any metal on the
sidewalls shorting the device, although it is hard to judge, as the roughness could conceal
metal traces.
40
Microfabrication and characterization of a Hall­sensor chip for low noise “housekeeping” data collection
from power supply units in spacecrafts
==PAGE:48==
Figure 6.12: SEM overview of the Hall bar structure. At the bottom is the area of the gold
wire. Sidewalls at the trenches show up as light areas. Some charging can be seen on
the hall bar as it is covered by an oxide. The bottom middle contact has a line from the
charging of a previous picture taken. Metal contacts are seen on top of the mesas as a
uniform grey colour.
(a) Middle contact of the hall bar.
At the
bottom of the trench, the slightly incomplete
DREM etch can be seen as bright elliptical
areas. The roughness of the sidewalls is vis­
ible, as is the different oxide thickness on top
of the mesas. The metal has slightly rough
edges, but it looks well­aligned.
(b) Corner of contact mesa.
The bottom
of the trench shows again the incomplete
etch by a swept line around the corner. The
roughness of the sidewall is evident, as is
the straight sidewalls.
Figure 6.13: Close­up SEM images of the sidewalls and contacts.
Microfabrication and characterization of a Hall­sensor chip for low noise “housekeeping” data collection
from power supply units in spacecrafts
41
==PAGE:49==
6.2
4­point probe station
Before the wafer is diced, electrical measurements are performed in a probe station. In
this setup, it’s possible to measure the TLM structures, the VdP structures and the Hall
bars as well.
6.2.1
TLM
The simplest measurement is the TLM. If the measurements are plotted as distance
against resistance, the contact resistance is found at d=0, as can be extracted by a linear
regression.
Figure 6.14: TLM measurements at two different placements on the wafer, one in the
middle of the wafer and one at the edge of the wafer.
Two different contact resistances can be found depending on the placement on the wafer,
as can be seen in 6.14. The lowest contact resistance is Rc = 37.4±1.4 Ω
2
≈19 ± 0.7 Ω
and the highest Rc = 89±8.6 Ω
2
≈45 ± 4.3 Ω. For both measurements, ohmic contacts are
achieved as a linear fit. To ensure a reliable assumption for other electrical contacts, the
highest contact resistance is assumed Rc = 45±4.3 Ωfor the TLM contacts. As we know
the area of these well­defined contacts, the contact resistance can be estimated for any
other contact pad. For example, for the Hall bar we have:
RcHb = RcTLM · ATLM
AHb
= 45 ± 4.3 Ω· 9.7 · 10−1 mm2
3.4 mm2
≈13 ± 1.2 Ω
The area of the contacts is calculated using Clewin, which has been used for the mask
designs. These contacts should be of sufficient quality as they are ohmic and relatively
low resistance compared to the expected resistance of the device. The sheet resistance
can also be extracted from the TLM measurements by multiplying the slope by the width
42
Microfabrication and characterization of a Hall­sensor chip for low noise “housekeeping” data collection
from power supply units in spacecrafts
==PAGE:50==
of the TLM strip. Here it is for the middle of the wafer. This is used as the measurements
made on the Hall bars were predominantly near the middle of the wafer
Rs = slope · w = 1.56 ± 0.001 Ω/µm · 995 ± 0.1 µm = 1552.2 ± 1 Ωper square
and from this, the resistivity of the sample can be calculated by multiplying by the thickness
ρ = Rst = 1552.2 ± 1 Ωper square · 8 ± 0.1 µm = 1.24 ± 0.02 Ωcm
These measurements are equivalent to a mobility around 1280 cm2V−1s−1 according to
Appendix B.1
6.2.2
VdP
The VdP structures can be measured with 4 probes, in both the vertical and horizontal
directions.
Figure 6.15: The corresponding VdP structure to the measurements in 6.1. The numbers
are placed on the respective contacts, and the red circle indicates the area of a suggested
short circuit due to a faulty lift­off.
I Contacts
V Contacts
I
V+I
V−I
1­>2
3­>4
± 5 mA
7.57 V
­7.36 V
4­>3
2­>1
± 5 mA
7.58 V
­7.30 V
1­>4
2­>3
± 5 mA
147 mV
­145 mV
2­>3
1­>4
± 5 mA
133 mV
­129 mV
1­>3
4­>2
± 5 mA
7.34 V
­7.20 V
2­>4
3­>1
± 5 mA
7.23 V
­7.46 V
Table 6.1: 4­point probe measurements of VdP structure. First two columns represent the
contacts measured in accordance to 6.15.
Microfabrication and characterization of a Hall­sensor chip for low noise “housekeeping” data collection
from power supply units in spacecrafts
43
==PAGE:51==
The pattern in 6.1 suggests a short in the horizontal direction, as the voltage in the 1­
>4 and 2­>3 directions has around a factor of 50 reduced resistance. As the pattern is
repeatable over many VdP structures, which is well documented in appendix A VdP, it
seems like a systematic error. Comparing it with optical and SEM images of the VdP
structures shown in figure 6.15 and figures 6.16, 6.17, it could be correlated with a metal
residue from an imperfect lift­off process. This pattern of metal residues shorting the VdP
structure in the horizontal direction is very repeatable, see appendix A VdP.
Figure 6.16: SEM picture of the VdP structure. This depicts the distance, 21.8 µm from
the metal contact on the left to the unintended metal strip on the edge.
(a) Shows one of the sides of the VdP struc­
ture with no visible metal, as it should be.
The bottom is the BOX layer, the sidewall is
identified by its roughness, and on top, the
silicon dioxide layer can be seen.
(b) Same spot on a VdP structure, just on an
edge with the unintended metal deposited
on the edge. The metal creates an easily
identifiable slab of a bright, rough material.
Figure 6.17: Close­up SEM images of the sidewalls and contacts.
44
Microfabrication and characterization of a Hall­sensor chip for low noise “housekeeping” data collection
from power supply units in spacecrafts
==PAGE:52==
The broken geometrical symmetry of the VdP structure, caused by the SC, has rendered
the structure useless. To estimate the resistivity of our Si, we are left with the Hall bar
structure.
6.2.3
Hall Bar
The first Hall bar measurements are made at the probe station without a B­field applied.
This enables more flexible measurements that are not possible while the chip is mounted
on our board. The first thing to look for is the resistance of the Hall bars and the offset at
the sense contacts. This will give an idea of the issues and how similar the devices are.
It will also reveal the best candidates for mounting in the electronics, as we can’t mount
all the chips.
Chip ID
Vex
RHb
Voff
12A­left
10 V
4.16 kΩ
4.93 mV
−10 V
−8.03 mV
12A­right
10 V
3.97 kΩ
569 mV
−10 V
−465 mV
11A­left
10 V
4.05 kΩ
128 mV
−10 V
−150 mV
11A­right
10 V
4.14 kΩ
89.1 mV
−10 V
−80 mV
9A­left
10 V
4.13 kΩ
6.30 mV
−10 V
−7.30 mV
Table 6.2
Even if the unintended metal on the VdP structures has not been observed in the SEM
pictures on the Hall bars, it would not be surprising if this were a problem here too. Small
amounts of metal would have detrimental consequences for our device. Looking at table
6.2, the large variance of offset could be explained by this. It would have to be only a
partial short circuit as the total resistance of the Hall bars is respectable and relatively
uniform. Using the figure B.1, in Appendix B, by calculating the resistivity of the Hall bar,
we can estimate the doping concentration and thereby the mobility. The resistivity is found
by:
RHb
A
l = 4 ± 0.04 kΩ144 ± 0.19 µm2
302 ± 0.3 µm2 = 0.19 ± 0.0004 Ωcm
Which, according to B.1, correlates to an electron mobility of roughly 970 cm2V−1s−1.
6.3
Full test setup
One chip was superglued to a small breakout board and wirebonded, then mounted in the
electronics setup. AC and DC measurements were made with the test setup in figure 3.7
at different excitation voltages, waveforms and magnetic fields.
Microfabrication and characterization of a Hall­sensor chip for low noise “housekeeping” data collection
from power supply units in spacecrafts
45
==PAGE:53==
AC(sine)
DC
fex
1.4
kHz
fex
Vp
5
V
Vp
10
V
Gain
15
k
Gain
1.5
k
B
336 ± 5
µT
B
336 ± 5
µT
Voff
−9.7
V
Voff
4.6
V
∆V
130 ± 6.4
mV
∆V
33 ± 0.64
mV
VHall
8.7 ± 0.46
µV
VHall
22 ± 0.46
µV
SV
25.9 ± 0.7
mV/T
SV
65.5 ± 1.8
mV/T
AC(sine)
AC(square)
fex
1.4
kHz
fex
1.4
kHz
Vp
10
V
Vp
10
V
Gain
1.5
k
Gain
1.5
k
B
336 ± 5
µT
B
336 ± 5
µT
Voff
2.5
V
Voff
4.7
V
∆V
25 ± 0.64
mV
∆V
37 ± 0.64
mV
VHall
17 ± 0.46
µV
VHall
25 ± 0.46
µV
SV
50.6 ± 1.4
mV/T
SV
74.4 ± 2.0
mV/T
Table 6.3: Different measurement parameters and results.
Waveform is given in the
parenthesis, fex is the excitation frequency, Vp is the peak voltage, gain is the total gain
of the signal processing circuit, B is the applied B­field, Voff is the offset voltage of the
system with no applied field, ∆V is the measured signal size, VHall is the calculated signal
of Hall bar with the gain deducted and last SV is the sensitivity of the Hall bar.
In table 6.3, the result of the measurements can be seen. The effect of the second am­
plifier circuit can be seen by comparing the two left AC(sine) tables. The top one has
the second amplification stage, and the bottom only has the first. The offset is reduced
when the second amp stage is not included, which enables the excitation voltage to be
increased without saturating our amplifiers. Doubling the excitation voltage also doubles
the sensitivity of the Hall bar, so the world appears to be quite regular. The DC, on the
top right, is expected to have an even higher sensitivity, but with a higher noise level
too, as the demodulator won’t remove the 1/f noise of the instrumentation amplifier. The
sensitivity should increase with factor
√
2 to 50.6 mV/T ·
√
2 = 71.5 mV/T but only an
increase to 65.5 V/T can be observed. This is attributed to the aforementioned noise and
the substantial temperature drift of the device. The bottom left AC(sine) was done as the
sensor was powered up, while the bottom right AC(square) was given +20 minutes to sta­
bilise the temperatures. Comparing these two, we can see that the offset almost doubles.
No temperature measurements were made, so it is hard to quantify this. In the bottom
right table, a square wave is used. This shows the expected factor
√
2 increases from the
sinusoidal excitation voltage in the bottom left.
To obtain a more accurate estimate of the sensitivity and verify the linearity of our device,
a measurement series is conducted at varying B­fields. As can be seen in figure 6.18,
a sensitivity of 72.31 ± 0.73 mV/T is obtained, which correlates well with the sensitivities
derived from single measurements in table 6.3. The fit is forced to go through the origin,
as the offset has been deducted when taking the measurements.
46
Microfabrication and characterization of a Hall­sensor chip for low noise “housekeeping” data collection
from power supply units in spacecrafts
==PAGE:54==
Figure 6.18: Plot of the Hall Voltage against the B­field. The excitation voltage was 10
Vpp as a square wave with a frequency of 1.4 kHz. The Hall voltage has a 1.5k gain
deducted to get the actual response of the sensor. A linear regression line is plotted with
an R2 value of 0.995, a sensitivity of 72.31 ± 0.73 mV/T.
The hall mobility can be calculated from this.
µHall = VHn t
ρ IeBz
= 1213 ± 14 cm2V−1s−1
6.3.1
Noise
The noise of the whole system is characterised using an SR785 dynamic signal analyser
from SRS. In chapter 4, we calculated the noise floor of a 190 kΩHall bar, but we only
achieved a 4 kΩdevice, so the revised noise floor is:
√
4kTR = 8.1 nV/
√
Hz
or in dB
20 · log10(
√
4kTR) = −161 dBVrms/
√
Hz
To compare this with the measured result, we need to factor in the gain of our electronics.
To do this, we multiply the RMS noise voltage spectral density with 1500 and get a noise
floor of
20 · log10(1500
√
4kTR) = −98.3 dBVrms/
√
Hz
Looking at figure 6.19 a noise floor of ­113 dBVrms/
√
Hz is observed.
Microfabrication and characterization of a Hall­sensor chip for low noise “housekeeping” data collection
from power supply units in spacecrafts
47
==PAGE:55==
Figure 6.19: We see the frequency range from 0 Hz to 1.6 kHz. The corner frequency is
marked by a vertical line with a dot at around 344 Hz with ­113 dBVrms/
√
Hz. The peak
around the 1.4 kHz mark is the excitation frequency of the sensor.
Figure 6.20: We see the frequency range from 62.5 mHz to 25 Hz, showing the first part
of the 1/f noise. As the spectrum is reasonably linear, we can use the 1 Hz noise with 154
µVrms/
√
Hz.
Looking at figure 6.20, an estimate of the observed noise, integrated in the bandwidth
0.1­10Hz, and corrected for the gain:
Pink Noise = en,1Hz
1
1500
√
ln
(fu
fl
)
= 154 µVrms/
√
Hz
1
1500 ·
√
ln
( 10 Hz
0.1 Hz
)
= 0.22 µV
Performing 6 10­second measurements on our voltmeter, the average gives a RMS noise
at a bandwidth of 0.1 −10 Hz of 0.64 mV.
To calculate an estimate of the detection limit the above results can be used. The noise
of the measurement is 0.64 mV after the 1500 gain, so the noise at the Hall­bar would be
48
Microfabrication and characterization of a Hall­sensor chip for low noise “housekeeping” data collection
from power supply units in spacecrafts
==PAGE:56==
0.64 mV/1500 = 426 nV. If we define the detection limit at a signal­to­noise ratio of 3 dB,
or a factor of about 1.5, we get:
Detection limit = 426 nV · 1.5
72.3 nV/µT = 8.8 µT
Calculating the detection limit with the noise levels obtained from figure 6.19, we get:
Detection limit = 220 nV · 1.5
72.3 nV/µT = 4.6 µT
Microfabrication and characterization of a Hall­sensor chip for low noise “housekeeping” data collection
from power supply units in spacecrafts
49
==PAGE:57==
7
Discussion
In 6.3, a sensitivity of 72.31±0.73 mV/T was achieved with a square signal at a modulation
frequency of 1.4 kHz. It’s 97% of the theoretically calculated value of 74.5 mV/T. This
difference can be explained by the wafer variation, as the resistivity is given as a range
and not a certain number, or by the doping mask failure.
Two different detection limits were calculated with regard to noise measured by the ana­
logue signal analyser, and the noise measured over 6 10­second measurements on the
voltmeter. They were 8.8 µT and 4.6 µT. The discrepancy could be caused by a mea­
surement mistake, and these measurements will have to be repeated. It should also be
mentioned that the noise spectrum used was not the only one measured, and the noise
level varied from measurement to measurement, even with the signal analyser integrating
over several minutes. This meant that sometimes, noise spikes from the analogue func­
tion generator would fold down into the noise spectrum and drift around. We saw this on
one measurement, where a peak shifted into the noise spectrum and compromised the
measurement.
In Chapter 6 Characterisation, three different mobilities are found by three separate meth­
ods. Two are found by resistivity measurements, and converted to a mobility by the ta­
ble in Appendix B.1. This is done for both the resistivity of the silicon in the TLM struc­
ture and in the Hall bar structure, yielding mobilities of ≈1280 cm2V−1s−1 for the TLM
and ≈970 cm2V−1s−1 for the Hall bar. This is quite a significant discrepancy for two
similar methods. Measuring the Hall mobility directly in the Hall bar structure yields a
mobility of 1213 ± 14 cm2V−1s−1. The mobility of the bought wafer was specified to be
> 1260 cm2V−1s−1, which aligns well with the TLM structure and the direct mobility mea­
surement, but not quite with the Hall bar resistivity. The discrepancy might be explained
by a doping mask failure.
The doping mask failure is regarding a realisation after the processing. It was realised
that the phosphor glass from the doping step was not removed, and when the 50 nm pas­
sivation oxide was grown, some phosphor might have been diffused through the doping
mask and into the substrate. This would give an unknown doping process of doubtful uni­
formity, which could provide an offset. The doping would decrease the resistivity and the
mobility of the silicon. If the top layer has been doped this way, it creates a rather complex
system. One would have to make a 3­dimensional calculation on a slab of material with a
doping gradient to see how the current would flow, and how the Hall effect would cause
transverse currents. The best way to do this would probably be using a FEM simulation
tool, as the calculations get very complicated very quickly in these 3D systems.
Another cause of the discrepancy between the two resistivity­based mobilities could be a
potentially significant difference between the resistance of the wirebonds and the probe
station. These system resistances were not characterised, but it is also unlikely that they
have a detrimental effect on the measurements.
The VdP structures were one big mess. No meaningful measurements could be extracted,
and it was most likely a matter of failure in the lift­off process. Seemingly, the horizontal
contacts were shorted by metal strips deposited at the edges. The cause was probably
the photoresist spun on the wafer being 1.5 µm thick, and the step height of the structure
mesa being 8 µm tall. As the photoresist is spun on the wafer, it might have difficulty
covering the edges towards the centre of the wafer and also create some uncovered
50
Microfabrication and characterization of a Hall­sensor chip for low noise “housekeeping” data collection
from power supply units in spacecrafts
==PAGE:58==
patches at the bottom of the steps pointing away from the wafer. This can be seen in 6.15
and is consistent over the VdP structures in Appendix A.1. The question of the doping
mask failure would also affect the VdP structures. For this specific reason, both doped
and undoped VdP structures were included, thereby the doping mask integrity could be
characterised with these structures.
When the wafer was initially characterised at the probe station, it was undiced. Later, when
the wafer was diced and a chip was installed in our electronics circuit, the performance
was vastly different, and the offset was significantly reduced. The now diced chips were
measured again, and while some chips still showed large offsets, as seen in chapter 6.2.3,
both the resistance and the offset of some chips had dramatically changed. Realising that
the chips on the wafer were not isolated from each other, before dicing, the currents would
have found some undefined path around on the wafer. This reduced the data obtained
because of time pressure, but it was realised that the chips should be isolated on the
wafer too. Another realisation was that this isolation trench should be wide enough for
the dicing blade to pass in. This is to reduce the damage caused to the silicon mesas and
reduce the chance of the brutal dicing process creating any undefined electrical path to
the substrate.
The detrimental part of the performance was the offset. In 6.3, an offset of 4.7 V was
measured, about half of which is attributed to thermal drift, and divided by the gain, an
offset of 31 mV was achieved. As described in Chapter 4.3, the maskless aligner writing
and alignment error might cause a significant offset of up to 23 mV . It should be noted
that half of the observed offset is due to thermal drift. More about what to do about that
later. To eliminate the inherent offset, one could switch to a more accurate tool, like the
DUV Stepper. The alignment accuracy would improve to 50 nm, and the exposure error
should be even less than this. This would reduce the offset caused by lithography error
by a factor of 10­20.
A different cause of offset could be the not insignificant roughness seen in figure 6.13b.
This could be improved by optimising the DREM process to avoid the larger grains. Having
a wafer with a thinner device layer would make this easier, as a smaller scallop size
could be used. After the DREM process, one could grow a sacrificial oxide to smooth the
surface, before the final passivation oxide is grown. The current process doesn’t remove
all the silicon at the bottom of the trenches, especially at the ends of the trenches. This
could also be optimised to decrease offset.
The design of the sensor should be changed to optimise the symmetry. The characterisa­
tion contacts which are placed only on one side should be removed. This would minimise
the offset caused by this asymmetry. The design of the contacts should also be stream­
lined to ensure geometric symmetry, but also consistent contact resistances by having
the same area.
As mentioned before, quite significant thermal drift was observed. This rendered the gold
wire useless as the temperature increase would make the offset skyrocket immediately,
and cause the OpAmps to saturate. No meaningful measurements were possible to be
made, but this effect could be significantly reduced by mounting the chip on a heatsink.
In the current configuration, the chip was superglued to a PCB, which is far from a good
thermal conductor. If the chip could be mounted with thermal paste on a metal strip lead­
ing to a larger heatsink, this could enable less offset and the use of the gold wire. This
would also produce more reliable measurements as the drift of the hall bar itself would be
stabilised, and ultimately lower the noise by lowering the temperature of the chip
Microfabrication and characterization of a Hall­sensor chip for low noise “housekeeping” data collection
from power supply units in spacecrafts
51
==PAGE:59==
The performance of the electronics build was, in general, very satisfying, but in hindsight,
one thing could be improved. Most resistors were in a 5% tolerance spec, and for the
differential drive circuit and for the OpAmp in the demodulator, this might be a bit high and
have contributed to the offset.
52
Microfabrication and characterization of a Hall­sensor chip for low noise “housekeeping” data collection
from power supply units in spacecrafts
==PAGE:60==
8
Conclusion
It was managed to create a Hall bar sensor with a sensitivity of 72.31 ± 0.73 mV/T, which
is far greater than the requirements of 30 mV/T. A detection limit of 8.8 µT was also
achieved. This result could be discussed as another noise measurement was made and
gave a detection limit of Detection limit = 4.6 µT, meeting the requirements. But assuming
the Detection limit = 8.8 µT being correct, just falling short of the detection limit require­
ment of 5 µT. This was due to a higher­than­expected noise. This could be remedied by
having more sensors or a greater integration time. The biggest revelation was the impor­
tance of thermal control, as this made it tricky to make good measurements. Cooling and
calibration to operating temperature are needed.
This prototype of the sensor proves that it would indeed be possible to make a sensor
which would fulfil the requirements.
Microfabrication and characterization of a Hall­sensor chip for low noise “housekeeping” data collection
from power supply units in spacecrafts
53
==PAGE:61==
9
Future Work
The first step is to expand the data pool and create a heatsink for the chip to be mounted
on. At a later point, the chip requires a thermometer to calibrate the sensor to the operating
temperature. Next, a FEM simulation would need to be made to better understand the
mechanism of a doping gradient in the Hall bar. After this, improving the symmetry of the
mask design, together with isolating the individual chips by a wide dicing trench, would
need to be done. Then a batch could be processed, including the removal of the phosphor
glass after the DREM step. If further improvement is needed DUV lithography and etch
optimisation could be done.
From the point of view of the final product, it is absolutely necessary to start thinking about
the whole chip and not just the performance of this prototype. The digital circuit would
need to be developed, together with making an IC version of the analogue electronics
used in this thesis. It is also paramount to get access to a radiation­hardened process
at a fab, and start figuring out if it is possible to make the whole thing as a single chip,
a so­called System on Chip(SoC) solution, or if a two­chip solution should be used. If
that is possible, the integration of the developed sensor into the process needs careful
consideration and dialogue with the fab. Otherwise, some clever packaging would need
to be considered.
This has been a truly exciting and fun project to be a part of, and hopefully it will continue
in the future.
54
Microfabrication and characterization of a Hall­sensor chip for low noise “housekeeping” data collection
from power supply units in spacecrafts
==PAGE:62==
Bibliography
[1]
Thomas Emil Le Cozannet. “Initial study for the development of a Hall censor for
electric current measurement with galvanic separation from the current circuit.” MA
thesis. DTU, 2025.
[2]
R.S. Popovic. Hall Effect Devices. Series in Sensors. Institute of Physics Publishing,
2004.
[3]
Allan R. Hambley. Electrical Engineering: Principles and Applications. Pearson,
2019.
[4]
Ray Stata. Operational Integrators. 1967. URL: https://www.analog.com/media/
en/training- seminars/design- handbooks/ray- stata- op- amp- articles/Operational-
Integrators.pdf.
[5]
Thomas Kugelstadt. Chapter 16 ­ Active Filter Design Techniques. 2001. URL: https:
//www2.seas.gwu.edu/~ece121/Spring-11/filterdesign.pdf.
[6]
Brian Harrington. Low­Power Synchronous Demodulator Design Considerations.
2015. URL: https://www.analog.com/en/resources/analog-dialogue/articles/low-
power-synchronous-demodulator.html.
[7]
E.H.Hall. “On a New Action of the Magnet on Electric Currents”. In: The Johns Hop­
kins University Press (1879).
[8]
Ole Hansen. “Professor Emeritus”. Oral knowledge exchange.
[9]
Steven H. Simon. The Oxford Solid State Basics. Oxford University Press, 2013.
[10]
Ming­Kwei Lee Simon M. Sze. Semiconductor Devices. Physics and Technology.
John Wiley & Sons, 2016.
[11]
C. Jacaboni et al. “A review of some charge transport properties of silicon”. In: Solid­
State Electronics (1977). DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/0038-1101(77)90054-5.
[12]
Sami Franssila. Introduction to Microfabrication. Wiley, 2010.
[13]
Nikos Drakos. 2.3.3 Silicon Dioxide. URL: https://www.iue.tuwien.ac.at/phd/
hoessinger/node28.html.
[14]
R. N. GHOSHTAGORE. “Silicon Dioxide Masking of Phosphorus Diffusion in Sili­
con”. In: Solid­Stale Electronics 18 (1975), pp. 399–406. DOI: https://doi.org/10.
1016/0038-1101(75)90041-6.
[15]
B.K Jones. “Electrical Noise as a Measure of Quality and Reliability in Electronic
Devices”. In: ADVANCES IN FLECTRONICS AND ELECTRON PHYSICS (1994).
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0065-2539(08)60017-7.
[16]
E.G Ioannidis. “Evolution of low frequency noise and noise variability through CMOS
bulk technology nodes from 0.5 lm down to 20 nm”. In: Solid­State Electronics
(2014). DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.sse.2014.03.002.
[17]
Ellipsometry Tutorial. URL: https://www.jawoollam.com/resources/ellipsometry-
tutorial.
[18]
Ronald Chwang. “Contact size effects on the van der Pauw method for resistivity
and Hall coefficient measurement”. In: Solid­State Electronics (1974). DOI: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/0038-1101(74)90001-X.
[19]
7500/9500 Series Hall System User’s Manual: APPENDIX A HALL EFFECT MEA­
SUREMENTS.
[20]
José M.G. Merayo et al. “The Swarm Magnetometry Package”. In: Small Satellites
for Earth Observation (2008).
Microfabrication and characterization of a Hall­sensor chip for low noise “housekeeping” data collection
from power supply units in spacecrafts
55
==PAGE:63==
[21]
Linda T. Elkins­Tanton ”David Y. Oh and Ian Johnson”. “”Development of the Psy­
che Mission for NASA’s Discovery Program””. In: ”Pasadena, CA: Jet Propulsion
Laboratory, National Aeronautics and Space Administration” (2019).
[22]
”L.S. Johansen”. “”Microelectronics for Micromechanics””. PhD thesis. ”MIC Tech­
nical University of Denmark”, 2000.
[23]
”D. B. M. KLAASSEN”. “”A UNIFIED MOBILITY MODEL FOR DEVICE SIMULATION–
II. TEMPERATURE DEPENDENCE OF CARRIER MOBILITY AND LIFETIME ””. In:
”Solid­State Electronics” (1992).
56
Microfabrication and characterization of a Hall­sensor chip for low noise “housekeeping” data collection
from power supply units in spacecrafts
==PAGE:64==
A
VdP
Figure A.1: Overview of the mask layout.
Microfabrication and characterization of a Hall­sensor chip for low noise “housekeeping” data collection
from power supply units in spacecrafts
57
==PAGE:65==
Figure A.2: Overview of the mask layout.
58
Microfabrication and characterization of a Hall­sensor chip for low noise “housekeeping” data collection
from power supply units in spacecrafts
==PAGE:66==
B
Si material parameters
Figure B.1: Klaassens unified mobility model from 1992[23]
Microfabrication and characterization of a Hall­sensor chip for low noise “housekeeping” data collection
from power supply units in spacecrafts
59
==PAGE:67==
C
A4 150 mm test
Figure C.1: Uniformity with the wafers placed on top of the boat.
Figure C.2: Sheet resistance achieved of the doped wafers.
60
Microfabrication and characterization of a Hall­sensor chip for low noise “housekeeping” data collection
from power supply units in spacecrafts
==PAGE:68==
D
Digital circuit
Figure D.1: In the blue box an OpAmp, on the left a ADC, and on the bottom a voltage
regulator for the ADC. The ADC is connected out to the left, to an FPGA.
Figure D.2: FPGA in the bottom left, connected to the ADC, to the Hall­bar drivers and to
the demodulator, to be able to drive the whole circuit and read out the signal.
Microfabrication and characterization of a Hall­sensor chip for low noise “housekeeping” data collection
from power supply units in spacecrafts
61
==PAGE:69==
E
Tools
Spin coater: Gamma 2M cluster from Süss MicroTec with spin coating, HMDS vapour
priming, and baking modules from March 2015.
Lithography tool: MLA150 WMII maskless aligner from Heidelberg Instruments GmbH
(installed 2019 as WMI (0.6µm resolution), rebuilt to WMII 2023).
Developer: Süss MicroTec Gamma 2M developer, s/n GAMMA­000233 from 2014.
Furnaces: Tempress horizontal furnace 4” and 8”
Plasma Etch Chambers: SPTS Advanced Deep Reactive Ion Etching (DRIE) Pegasus.
Serial number CP0170. From 2010.
PVA TePla Resist Ashing System GIGAbatch 380M, sn: 000067, from 2024.
Metal deposition: FerroTec Temescal FC­2000, from 2018.
62
Microfabrication and characterization of a Hall­sensor chip for low noise “housekeeping” data collection
from power supply units in spacecrafts
==PAGE:70==
F
Process Flow
Microfabrication and characterization of a Hall­sensor chip for low noise “housekeeping” data collection
from power supply units in spacecrafts
63
==PAGE:71==
64
Microfabrication and characterization of a Hall­sensor chip for low noise “housekeeping” data collection
from power supply units in spacecrafts
==PAGE:72==
Microfabrication and characterization of a Hall­sensor chip for low noise “housekeeping” data collection
from power supply units in spacecrafts
65
==PAGE:73==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Oersteds Plads ­ Building 347/Elektrovej, building 327 and 328
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
