==PAGE:1==
Video Conferencing Quality
Assessment of Device Induced
Distortions
Author
Rucha A. Jevalikar - s232166
August 3, 2025
==PAGE:2==
Contents
Acknowledgement
iii
Preface
iv
Abstract
v
List of Figures
vi
List of Tables
vii
Nomenclature
viii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Work flow of the study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Related work
7
2.1
Existing datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Objective metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3
Subjective Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3
Methodology
13
3.1
Generation of video sequence
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.1.1
Real Perceptual scenes: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.1.2
AI generated content (AIGC) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.1.3
Reference videos
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.1.4
Synthetic distortions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.1.5
Final dataset composition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.2
Objective metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.2.1
Processing of data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.3
Subjective Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.3.1
Test material
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.3.2
Viewing condition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.3.3
Assessors: Demographic and Screening Process . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.3.4
Training phase
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.3.5
Design of Experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.3.6
Data processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4
Results
36
4.1
SI-TI evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.2
Objective metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.3
Subjective Evaluation & Correlation analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5
Discussion and Limitations
47
5.1
SI-TI Evaluation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
i
==PAGE:3==
Contents
5.2
Objective metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.3
Subjective evaluation and Correlation analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5.3.1
Correlation analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5.4
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
6
Conclusions and future scope of work
53
References
55
7
Appendix
60
ii
==PAGE:4==
Contents
Acknowledgement
I would like to express my sincere gratitude to my academic supervisor Søren Otto Forch-
hammer and industrial supervisors at GN, Randy Frans Fela and Muhammad Umair Mukati
for their continuous support, valuable guidance, and patience throughout this research. This
study wouldn’t have been possible without the sessions of discussion and feedback provided
by them.
Special thanks to my colleagues and peers whose insightful discussions and constructive
feedback significantly enriched this thesis. Additionally, I am grateful to my family for their
unwavering encouragement and understanding during this academic journey. Coming to
Denmark was a very daunting decision, but my friends here made it more enjoyable and
memorable experience. I am thankful to all those people I met throughout my Masters
journey who taught me something on the way, that led to this moment. Lastly, I extend my
appreciation to all participants who contributed their valuable time and perspectives to the
subjective evaluations conducted as part of this research.
iii
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Preface
This thesis was initially registered under the topic "Enhancing QoE by measuring
perceptual video quality for video conferencing applications." The objective was to
explore methods to evaluate and improve the Quality of Experience (QoE) for users engaged
in video conferencing, focusing specifically on perceptual video quality. During the research
process, the scope became more targeted, leading to a refined perspective that emphasizes
a more detailed investigation into device-induced distortions affecting video quality.
Consequently, the thesis title evolved into "Video Conferencing Quality Assess-
ment of Device-Induced Distortions." This revised title reflects a deeper examination
into the specific distortions introduced by video conferencing hardware, such as camera
sensors and image processing pipelines, which significantly impact the perceptual quality
experienced by end-users. The research addresses key technical and perceptual challenges,
developing a structured methodology for measuring, analyzing, and quantifying these distor-
tions. The research question addressed in this thesis is: Which objective video quality
metric most accurately predicts human perceptual judgments in the context of
video conferencing scenarios? I am confident that this comprehensive approach provides
valuable insights for both academia and industry, guiding future improvements in video con-
ferencing technology and ultimately enhancing user experience.
iv
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Abstract
Video conferencing has become an essential tool for hybrid meetings, where some partic-
ipants join physically at a shared location while others collaborate remotely using conferenc-
ing technology. This has driven the development of various video capture devices, including
traditional laptop-mounted webcams and more advanced video conferencing systems. How-
ever, a variety of sources pose challenges to video quality transmitted during such meetings,
with problem sources ranging from "external circumstances" such as compression and trans-
mission artifacts to artifacts stemming from the Image signal processing (ISP) pipeline called
"device induced distortions", which if not properly treated, can introduce visual degradations
such as noise, blur, or color distortions.
While the primary goal of this thesis is to understand the perceptual video quality in
video-conferencing scenarios, the preliminary research suggests the need for attributes that
support evaluation of device-induced distortions such as availability of relevant test mate-
rial and an efficient design of experiment to conduct subjective test. Thus we begin with
sourcing relevant test material which consists of 8 video-conferencing samples with diverse
room sizes, lighting conditions, and participant actions. On top of these samples, we then
apply different levels of synthetic device-induced distortions which are - shot noise, optical
blur, and temporal jitter. These distortions are introduced simultaneously to study their
combined effect on video quality, which led to generation of 192 videos out of 8 samples.
To evaluate the impact of these degradations, we compute a range of full-reference video
quality metrics, namely PSNR, SSIM, MS-SSIM, VMAF, and ColorVideoVDP (CVVDP)
and subsequently correlated with subjective scores. The subjective study was conducted
across 21 assessors at GN multimedia laboratory under controlled and well calibrated envi-
ronment using SenseLabOnline platform. The Mean Opinion scores (MOS) were obtained
across all the assessors. Finally, we analyze the correlation between objective scores and
subjective judgments to identify which metric aligns accurately with perceptual response.
Our findings reveal that CVVDP achieves the highest correlation to the MOS score with
SROCC of 0.784 and PLCC of 0.823.
v
==PAGE:7==
List of Figures
List of Figures
1
Video meeting systems. Left: A personal camera, "webcam". Right : A "Video
Bar" system for meeting rooms. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2
Image acquisition pipeline. [1] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
3
Basic ISP tuning pipeline. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
4
Overview of project flow. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
5
Thumbnail: Personal video-call setup scenario. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
6
Thumbnail of the four Real reference videos. Top left: Single person, Top
right: Small room, Bottom left: Medium room, Bottom right: Big room.
. .
15
7
Thumbnail of the four AI-generated reference videos using SkyReels V2. Top
left: Single person, Top right: Small room, Bottom left: Medium room, Bot-
tom right: Big room. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
8
Diffusion model process, all frames in video are denoised using same noise
schedule θ. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
9
(a) Reference Image (b) Shot noise level = 4. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
10
Figure illustrating creation of jitter artifact.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
11
Flow of introduction of distortions. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
12
The test setup, interface, and illustration of test performing in GN video lab.
31
13
Demographic distribution of the assessors based on (a) Age, and (b) Gender.
31
14
Performance of identifying hidden reference across all assessors.
. . . . . . .
32
15
Preview of the user interface during familiarization session. . . . . . . . . . .
33
16
Test organization format. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
17
Preview of the test user interface. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
18
Comparison of SI-TI values for different scenes.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
19
Overall statistics of AI and Real videos. The red marker point represents the
mean value. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
20
Metric performance under different distortions with each sample type. All
metric scores have been normalized to a scale 0-1 to have better comparability. 39
21
Objective metric performance for each distortion type and level. . . . . . . .
40
22
MOS score obtained for each sample type . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
23
Interaction plot with mean ± 95% CI per distortion pair. . . . . . . . . . . .
43
vi
==PAGE:8==
List of Tables
List of Tables
1
Comparison of selected video quality assessment datasets . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2
Grading scales in ITU-R BT.500 and SAMVIQ. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Overview of room settings and corresponding actions and lighting. . . . . . .
15
4
Comparison of the characteristics of the full reference objective metrics. Columns
indicate whether the metric models spatial vision, temporal vision, color vi-
sion, and whether it accounts for display geometry and photometry.
. . . .
29
5
Test setup and viewing condition. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
6
SROCC and PLCC for different distortion types by group - AI & Real
. . .
45
7
SROCC and LCC of objective metrics, by group . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
8
SROCC and PLCC for different distortion types, by sample. . . . . . . . . .
60
vii
==PAGE:9==
Nomenclature
Nomenclature
AIGC AI Generated Content
CSF
Contrast Sesnsitivity Function
CVVDP Color Video Visual Difference Predictor
HVS
Human Visual System
ISP
Image Signal Processor
ITU
International Telecommunication Union
MOS Mean Opinion Score
MS-SSIM Multi-scale Structural Similarity ndex
PLCC Pearson’s Linear Correlation Coefficient
PSNR Peak Signal to Noise Ratio
SAMVIQ Subjective Assessment of Multimedia VIdeo Quality
SROCC Spearman’s Rank Order Correlation Coefficient
SSIM Structural Similarity Index Measure
VMAF Video Multimethod Assessment Fusion
VQA Video Quality Assessment
viii
==PAGE:10==
1
Introduction
The rapid growth of video-conferencing technology, specially in the post COVID era, has
reshaped modern collaboration which has blurred the boundary between physical and virtual
presence. This at first, started off to enable social distancing measures and led to today’s hy-
brid workplace, where some participants gather in a shared room while others join remotely.
In such scenarios high-fidelity audio and video are essential for building interpersonal rap-
port. The Jabra Hybrid Ways of Working 2023 report notes that 64 % of employees feel that
being able to see and hear their colleagues makes it easier to trust them [2]. This has led to
rapid growth of video meeting systems of two categories - "webcam" and "video bar" Figure 1.
Figure 1: Video meeting systems. Left: A personal camera, "webcam". Right : A "Video
Bar" system for meeting rooms.
To offer a level of satisfaction and confidence in purchase, Microsoft and Zoom and other
video conferencing platform offer certification of video conferencing manufacturer products
to achieve a different tiers of quality levels, (basic, premium, etc). This naturally involved
evaluation of objective quality.
In such devices, the end-to-end video pipeline comprises of multiple stages from capture,
processing, compression, transmission to rendering, each of which can introduce perceptually
significant distortions. At the capture side, sensor read-noise and optical blur contaminate
the raw signal; during encoding, lossy transform quantization may produce blocking, ring-
ing, and color-shift artifacts that are stronger at low bit rates. Once in transit, the video
stream over a noisy channel is further exposed to fluctuating network conditions such as
limited bandwidth, high latency, or packet loss, resulting in frame drops, freezing, or jitter.
As Winkler notes in Digital Video Quality: Vision Models and Metrics, the cumulative im-
pact of these impairments ultimately governs the viewer’s quality-of-experience and must be
considered holistically when designing assessment methods and validating datasets [3].
In our study, we thus, try to understand the "capture-side" distortions. For this, it is
important to first visualize how capturing takes place. In Fig. 2, incident light first traverses
the lens stack, is sampled by the color-filter mosaic on the image sensor, resulting into a
captured raw signal, which is then transformed by the on-chip Image Signal Processor (ISP)
into a viewable RGB frame.
Page 1 of 60
==PAGE:11==
Figure 2: Image acquisition pipeline. [1]
ISP tuning can be defined as process of converting RAW data from sensor to full color
workable video consumed by human visual system [4]. The figure 3 below closely describes
each step that goes into process of converting the RAW image into tuned data.
Figure 3: Basic ISP tuning pipeline.
Each block in Figure 3 represents a critical step in processing and tuning the image.
1. Demosaicing : The sensor’s Bayer pattern only captures one color (red, green, or
blue) at each pixel location. Demosaicing intelligently interpolates the two missing
color values for every pixel by analyzing its neighbors.
2. Auto Exposure : Analyzes the current brightness and adjusts the exposure. The
face stays well lit, even though we move around the room in varied lightning.
3. Auto White Balance: Adjusting the colour balance, so that white colours looks the
same in all lighting conditions.
4. Noise Reduction (NR): To reduce random shot noise and color noise, especially in
low-light conditions. NR works by examining the pixels in a small neighborhood and
gaussian blur is simplest way to tackle noise.
Page 2 of 60
==PAGE:12==
1.1
Work flow of the study
5. Optical distortion correction and Color correction: Corrects geometric distor-
tion such as "barrel effect" and intensifies the corners of the image. Color correction
fine tunes color accuracy and applies gamma correction to match how humans perceive
brightness.
6. Sharpening : Sharpening enhances the definition of edges to make an image appear
crisper and more detailed. It works by increasing the contrast along the detected edges.
Too less sharpening results in a soft, blurry image that lacks detail.
7. Color space Conversion: converts the processed RGB data into a standard output
color space, often YUV. This separates brightness (luma) from color (chroma) and is
highly efficient for video compression.
8. After passing through this final block, the image data is sent to encoder for compression
(e.g., H.264) and streamed out of the device.
Sub-optimal tuning at any of these stages can measurably degrade perceived video qual-
ity, even before compression or network transmission comes into play. [5]. Thus, in this thesis
we focus on evaluating capture-side distortions, namely sensor noise, blur and Jitter -
which we collectively term as "device-induced distortions", that occur due to the red
highlighted blocks in Figure 3 namely, Noise reduction and Sharpening & detail enhance-
ment blocks.
In this work, we first capture 4 and generate 4, resulting in a total of 8 diverse set
of video-conferencing scenarios by varying room layouts, actions, lighting calling them our
"Reference" videos. Further we distort each reference video by sequentially applying three
distortions in different levels of severity.
To measure such distortions, we use objective Video Quality Assessment (VQA) meth-
ods and compute a suite of full-reference metrics, namely : PSNR, SSIM, MS-SSIM, VMAF,
ColorVideoVDP on each distorted version. On the other hand, we also perform subjective
studies using the combined methodology of SAMVIQ and ITU-R BT.500 to validate the
objective scores against real human perceptions. Thus, we correlate objective metric scores
with subjective scores to identify the best predictors for each type of distortion as
well as in the overall category.
To sum up, this thesis aims to evaluate perceptual video quality in video-conferencing
scenarios by building attributes that supports evaluation of device-induced distortions such
as relevant test material (dataset) and designing efficient subjective test methodology. The
result of the thesis would state which predictor performs the closest to the subjective
score.
1.1
Work flow of the study
Figure 4 illustrates the project flow which first consists of the literature review. This
study was conducted by surveying relevant publications describing video conferencing re-
Page 3 of 60
==PAGE:13==
1.1
Work flow of the study
lated video and image datasets. Relevant objective VQA metrics were also studied along
side subjective video quality evaluation methodology. During the literature review, a gap was
discovered that there was limited literature available specific to ’video-conferencing datasets’
and ’device-induced’ distortions.
To bridge the gap sourcing of relevant video-conferencing video data began. This step
could be divided into three sub steps which is to define the capture conditions such as room
size, video perspective (personal meeting or group video call setting) and the lighting con-
ditions. Then capture of four video streams began in real meeting rooms in defined capture
conditions. In addition to this, to make the data more diverse, four AI generated videos
were also made by prompting the model exact same capture conditions as the Real videos.
After the 8 Reference videos were sourced, generation of the ’distorted video’ began by
simulating three types of distortions namely, shot noise (4 levels), blur (3 levels) and jitter
(2 levels) including "Ref" levels. These distortions were combined with each other, which led
to 4 × 3 × 2 × 8 = 192 distorted videos. This was done in order to study their combined
effect of the perceived video quality.
To evaluate our datasets which consists of 192 videos, we computed objective metrics
namely : PSNR, SSIM, MS-SSIM, VMAF and CVVDP. Simultaneously, subjective tests
were performed by defining a design of experiment (DoE) to make the test more efficient in
terms of fatigue of the assessors and quality of data for analysis. We then perform correlation
analysis on this data to determine the predictor closest to the subjective experiment using
Spearman Rank Order Correlation Coefficient (SROCC) and Pearson Linear Correlation
Coefficient (PLCC).
Page 4 of 60
==PAGE:14==
1.1
Work flow of the study
Figure 4: Overview of project flow.
Page 5 of 60
==PAGE:15==
1.1
Work flow of the study
The following report consists of five sections. Chapter 1 is the Introduction of the
thesis and defines the main motivation behind the project. Chapter 2 consists of the Re-
lated study where investigation of relevant publication is done in order understand the
key concepts of human perception and metrics and to identify a gap in existing literature.
Chapter 3 defines the Methodology of sourcing the 8 ’Reference’ samples, to generation
of ’distorted’ dataset and finally, the evaluation of the dataset. Further, Chapters 4 and 5
consists of Results and Discussion respectively, where analysis of the experimental result
is visualized and discussed. Finally, Chapter 6 consists of Conclusion and future scope
of work, where we summarize our results and discuss some future scope.
Page 6 of 60
==PAGE:16==
2
Related work
This section provides the details on the related work done in terms of video dataset
generation and different video quality assessment methods - both objective and subjective
test methodologies and tools used.
2.1
Existing datasets
To evaluate VQA algorithm, the first step is to gather relevant dataset.
There are
some publicly available datasets used extensively for subjective and objective VQA. Promi-
nent ones that we studied include the LIVE Video Quality Dataset [6], comprising of
162 videos distorted by MPEG-2, H.264 compression and simulated transmission over error-
prone IP networks and wireless networks. Therefore, there were four distortion types. These
videos were 10 seconds long and had frame rates of either 25 or 50 fps. A single stimulus
(SS) continuous procedure was adopted and the subjects viewed reference video each time
to compute Difference Mean opinion score (DMOS). To minimize viewers fatigue the test
was conducted in two sessions. A total of 38 subjects participated in the test.
Another dataset is the EPFL-PoliMi Video Quality Dataset, which contains subjec-
tive assessments for 156 video sequences out of 12 reference videos encoded with H.264/AVC
and impaired by simulated packet losses. This offers valuable data for evaluating network-
induced distortions [7]. Here also SS method was introduced with a Hidden reference that
was shown along with other videos to compute the DMOS. Each video was displayed for 10s
and each subject had 3-5 seconds to rate using 5 point continuous ITU scale.
However, despite widespread use, both the databases primarily emphasize coding and
transmission based impairments rather than camera-level artifacts. Additionally, they rarely
include scenarios relevant to video conferencing, such as typical indoor lighting conditions,
seated participants, or stable camera setups.
CVD2014 Camera Video Dataset, is another interesting dataset which contains 234
clips captured with 78 different consumer cameras.[8] Unlike many benchmark sets that rely
on synthetically injected artifacts, CVD2014 features authentic capture-side degradations
like blur, graininess, color imbalance, and temporal jerkiness which makes it highly relevant
to the distortion categories addressed in this thesis. Its limitation, however, lies in content
diversity: the recorded scenes are largely uncontrolled outdoor or broadcast environments
(e.g. traffic junctions, city streets, televised programmes) rather than the indoor, meeting-
room scenarios characteristic of video-conferencing use cases. To evaluate the quality of the
video, the 234 videos were divided into 4 tests and Single stimulus (SS) evaluation method
was used, where one video was displayed at a time and continuous scale type was chosen. A
total of 210 naive observers participated and around 27-33 participated per test.
Page 7 of 60
==PAGE:17==
2.1
Existing datasets
The UGC-VIDEO dataset was developed to support research in perceptual quality
assessment of user-generated content (UGC) videos [9]. Unlike professionally produced con-
tent, UGC typically lacks a pristine source video, as uploads to hosting platforms undergo
unknown and often multiple stages of compression. This closely mirrors the context of our
project, where we do not possess true pristine references; instead, we designate unprocessed
videos as "reference" and aim to evaluate quality relative to them.
In UGC-VIDEO, 50 reference clips were curated from the TikTok platform to span a wide
range of Spatial Information (SI) and Temporal Information (TI) characteristics. To sim-
ulate platform-level (transcoding) compression artifacts, distorted variants were generated
by encoding each video using two different codecs across five quantization parameter (QP)
levels: 22, 27, 32, 37, and 42, resulting in a total of 500 distorted sequences. We consider
the methodology used in this work relevant for evaluating quality in scenarios where pristine
ground truth is unavailable. Absolute Category Rating with Hidden Reference (ACR-HR)
paradigm was used. Subjects rated video quality on an absolute five-grade quality scale. All
videos in the study were viewed by each subject across three sessions, each lasting about
half an hour and containing 16 or 17 source videos along with their compressed versions.
A notable database tailored explicitly to the video conferencing scenario is the recently
introduced Video Conferencing Dataset (VCD) [10]. VCD consists of 160 talking-head
video sequences, covering desktop and mobile conferencing environments, various background
processing types, and explicitly considering spatial and temporal complexities typical of
real-time conferencing scenarios. Video sequences were obtained through a crowdsourcing
platform. The subjective video quality of these captured video clips was initially evaluated
using the ITU-T Rec. P.910 ACR test and its crowdsourcing implementation. However,
despite being highly relevant, VCD predominantly includes only talking-head scenarios, lim-
iting diversity to just four distinct scenario types i.e. talking head, talking head with opaque
background filter, talking head with blurred background filter and handheld mobile record-
ings.
Furthermore, while it provides valuable insights for codec evaluation, it does not
systematically introduce or evaluate device-induced distortions like shot noise or sensor blur
which are the key artifacts in our research.
Evaluation of image-based datasets was also done such as the TID2013 dataset [11]. It
provides 24 different types of distortion including distortion by camera-induced impairments
(e.g., sensor noise, optical aberrations, and blur). There are total 25 reference images out
of which one is artificially generated. The subjective test was conducted using a tristimulus
methodology (three images shown at the same time) and 985 subjects participated across
five countries. While TID2013 offers a detailed information of spatial distortions, it is limited
to still images, lacking any evaluation of temporal dynamics crucial for video conferencing
quality assessment.
Thus, a clear gap remains: existing databases either lack sufficient realism concern-
ing typical conferencing scenarios or fail to systematically evaluate camera-level distortions
across both spatial and temporal dimensions. The following Table 1 summarizes various
datasets studied.
Page 8 of 60
==PAGE:18==
2.1
Existing datasets
Table 1: Comparison of selected video quality assessment datasets
Dataset
Type
#Ref
#Total
Scenario
Distortion Fo-
cus
#Subj
#Rating
Limitations
LIVE
Video
Quality [6]
Video
10
160
General
scenes
Compression,
transmission
errors
38
29
No
camera
or
conferencing sce-
narios
EPFL-PoliMI
[7]
Video
12
156
Lab-based,
synthetic
errors
Packet loss over
networks
40
34
No
real
cam-
era
capture
or
conferencing
context
CVD2014 [8]
Video
5
234
Outdoor en-
vironment
Capture-
distortion
210
30
Not video con-
ferencing scene
UGC-VIDEO
[9]
Video
50
500
TikTok ran-
dom
video,
lacks pristine
reference
Codec artifacts,
varying QP
30
30
Lacks video con-
ferencing set-up
and capture dis-
tortions
VCD
Dataset
[10]
Video
N.A.
160
Talking-
head,
video
conferencing
Codec artifacts,
background blur
N.A.
N.A.
Limited
scenar-
ios; no ISP re-
lated distortion
TID2013 [11]
Image
25
3000
Still natural
images
Blur,
noise,
chromatic aber-
ration
and
21
other distortion
type
35
25
No temporal or
motion artifacts
Our dataset
Video
8
192
Video
con-
ferencing
set-up
Shot noise, Blur
and jitter
21
11
–
Note: #Ref: Number of reference contents. #Total: Number of test video sequences. #Subj: Total number of subjects. #Ratings: Average
number of ratings per video.
Page 9 of 60
==PAGE:19==
2.2
Objective metrics
2.2
Objective metrics
To assess these datasets, various objective metrics exist for measuring video quality. The
objective VQA models can be divided into three types, full-reference (FR) VQA where full
information of the reference is present, reduced reference (RR) VQA where partial reference
information is present, and no-reference (NR) VQA with no information about the reference.
[12] There are different use-cases attributed to each of the type of metrics for example, full
reference is commonly employed for video streaming, video compression and quality control
in video production. RR is used when there is an requirement to save transmission band-
widths and NR is used for realtime quality evaluations. [12].
Study includes classical metrics include Peak Signal-to-Noise Ratio (PSNR) and Struc-
tural Similarity Index (SSIM). Perceptual metrics such as the Netflix-developed Video Multi-
method Assessment Fusion (VMAF) have become popular due to their higher correlation
with subjective judgments because they are video metrics and include movement information
in their quality assessment algorithms. [13].
Nonetheless, the sensitivity and reliability of these metrics in detecting and measuring
camera-induced distortions such as optical blur (MTF), sensor noise, and temporal irregular-
ities in video conferencing scenarios remain insufficiently explored. Identifying metrics that
accurately correlate with human perception for these distortion types is critical, motivating
the central investigation of our work.
2.3
Subjective Evaluation
In subjective evaluation, the quality of video is assessed by a panel of people by con-
ducting a test where people give scores to the videos based on their perceived video quality.
These scores are then averaged to compute the Mean opinion score (MOS). These scores differ
from person to person based on their personal preference, gender, age, skill level, environ-
mental factors etc. There are two major recommendations studied for this thesis, i.e. ITU-R
BT.500-12 [14] and Subjective Assessment Methodology for Video Quality (SAMVIQ) [15]
proposed by EBU(European Broadcast Union) project group.
ITU-R BT.500-12 outlines several protocols for subjective assessment such as:
• DSIS: Double Stimulus Impairment Scale;
• DSCQS: Double Stimulus Continuous Quality Scale;
• SSCQE: Single Stimulus Continuous Quality Evaluation;
• SDSCE: Simultaneous Double Stimulus for Continuous Evaluation.
From the above literature survey of various databases, it can be said that Single Stimulus
Continuous Quality Evaluation (SSCQE) is being most widely used.
Observers are pre-
sented with a single distorted video sequence at a time usually without a hidden reference
Page 10 of 60
==PAGE:20==
2.3
Subjective Evaluation
(HR). However, HR can be used to facilitate the computation of Difference Mean Opinion
Scores (DMOS). Evaluators score each sequence independently using a continuous rating
scale segmented into five categories ranging from "Bad" to "Excellent" which is a 5 point
scale as shown in Table 2. But such technique causes incorrect ratings because, slight lack of
attention while the video sequences are being presented may lead to incorrect rating. This
is also because there is no provision to review and revise the scores. Other reason is that
this technique may lead to fatigue as the subject is expected to pay attention each time the
sequence is played. It is also lengthy as the processed sequences are shown one after the other.
SAMVIQ Methodology was developed specifically for multimedia content, address-
ing limitations of traditional methodologies like ITU-R BT.500 for diverse multimedia sce-
nario. SAMVIQ employs a multi-stimulus approach where observers have interactive control,
allowing random access to multiple sequences, including explicit and hidden references and
impaired versions and they can rate videos at their own pace. Sessions typically involve se-
quences of 10–15 seconds, ensuring consistent viewer engagement and reduced fatigue. The
assessors can also reassess and revise their ratings which improves reliability. The evaluation
scale is continuous (0–100 points), divided into five intervals analogous to ITU-R BT.500 as
shown in Table 2
Table 2: Grading scales in ITU-R BT.500 and SAMVIQ.
Grading Scale
ITU-R BT.500
SAMVIQ
1
Bad
0 to 20 points
2
Poor
20 to 40 points
3
Fair
40 to 60 points
4
Good
60 to 80 points
5
Excellent
80 to 100 points
SAMVIQ incorporates both explicit (known original) and hidden references to anchor
evaluations, alongside low-quality anchors (bad quality processed video) to stabilize observer
ratings. In our procedure we do not employ low quality anchors, simply because it would
increase the complexity of test design by increasing number of clips shown. Moreover, the
participants were also shown what a "Bad score" would look like in the familiarization test
and instructed them to use a full scale range (0-100), which would prevent the saturation of
scores.
In summary, while ITU-R BT.500-12 remains a trusted standard due to its robustness
and widespread acceptance, SAMVIQ offers enhanced flexibility and improved consistency
for multimedia content evaluation, making it particularly relevant for the diverse video con-
ferencing scenarios studied in this thesis. In this thesis we thus incorporate a blend of both
the methodologies.
Page 11 of 60
==PAGE:21==
2.3
Subjective Evaluation
Based on this research, the following goals have been formulated for the project:
• To capture and generate a comprehensive data with device-induced distortions which
includes Real and AI generated scenes.
• To simulate multiple distortion and understand their interaction with each other.
• To design an approach to measure visual quality of these distortions using objective
predictive metrics and subjective data and to have a correlation analysis between them.
Page 12 of 60
==PAGE:22==
3
Methodology
This chapter is divided into three sections - Generation of video sequence which
consists of how the real video sequences were captured and AI video sequences were gen-
erated, Objective metrics which consists of what are the objective metrics used and how
they are computed and finally the Subjective metrics section talks about procedure of
conducting the subjective tests, how the assessors were evaluated and how the trials were
organized to ensure fair arrangement of conditions to avoid bias and memory effects.
3.1
Generation of video sequence
In multimedia service such as video conferencing, the video stream undergoes various
types of distortions [16]. These distortions could occur in the transmission line such as during
compression, transmission and storage. But our main motivation is to address "device-
induced distortions". These distortions have been added on top of "perceptual scenes".
Perceptual scenes can be defined as real-life cases that cannot be reproduced in the lab [17].
Our video dataset was recorded under a variety of capture conditions, including lightning
condition, camera-to-subject distance, room size, and number of participants. Later these
perceptual scenes were replicated by AI platform creating AI generated content(AIGC) using
text-to-video generation AI model Skyreel2.1. [18]
3.1.1
Real Perceptual scenes:
The perceptual scenes can be categorized into two categories:
• Personal: Scenes captured from webcamera embedded on laptops or external personal
webcamera.
• Conference room: Where the camera distance is >40 cm. Such scenes have been further
divided into small, medium and large rooms.
Capture of the Perceptual scenes
For the "Personal" scene the reference video was used from Microsoft videocall MOS
dataset [19]. The Figure 5 shows the thumbnail of the video.
Page 13 of 60
==PAGE:23==
3.1
Generation of video sequence
Figure 5: Thumbnail: Personal video-call setup scenario.
For the "conference room", the scenes were captured using the DUT (device under test),
a videobar from GN(Jabra), in different rooms. Three base videos were captured- one in
each of the rooms with a duration of 10 minutes. These videos were then clipped using
ffmpeg tool to select the regions of 10s duration which are useful for further study. Overall,
4 reference videos of 10s were generated.
The ffmpeg command used was:
1
ffmpeg −ss 00:00:49 −i "C:\Users\rucha\input.mp4" −t 10 −c:v libx264 −b:v
copy "C:\Users\rucha\Downloads\output.mp4"
• -ss 00:00:00.49: Placed before -i. This tells FFmpeg to seek to the keyframe(I-frame)
at or before 49 seconds. The actual video data will start from this keyframe. The
timestamp was changed according to where we desired to clip the video from.
• -i : defines path to input file.
• -t 10 : This will record for 10 seconds from the point FFmpeg actually started reading
(i.e., the keyframe it seeked to).
• -c:v libx264 : Re-encodes the video using the x264 encoder.
• -b:v copy Copies the bitrate of the input video to the output video, maintaining
quality of video.
Capture conditions
The scenes captured vary in terms of room size, number of people in
the room, action being performed and lighting conditions. The following Table 3 describes
the capture conditions of each room type.
Page 14 of 60
==PAGE:24==
3.1
Generation of video sequence
S.no
Room size
No. of people
Action
Lighting
1
Small
7
Personal
entering,
formal
discussion
Ceiling light + natural
front light
2
Medium
9
Drawing on board, others
listening
Side daylight + ceiling
light
3
Big
10
Formal discussion
Strong ceiling light
Table 3: Overview of room settings and corresponding actions and lighting.
The following Figure 6 shows the thumbnail of all four Real videos.
Figure 6: Thumbnail of the four Real reference videos.
Top left: Single person, Top right: Small room, Bottom left: Medium room, Bottom right:
Big room.
3.1.2
AI generated content (AIGC)
To complement our four real-world perceptual scenes, we also synthesized four matching
set of scenes using Generative AI [20]. These AI-Generated Video Stimuli serve these main
purposes:
1. The video dataset that we have collected for "real perceptual scenes" is not entirely
free from distortion as they have some "Jitter" or "Jerkiness" as described in [8] which
occurs due to low temporal sampling. Because of this artifact, the video captured has
discontinuities of movements, and motion appears to slightly jump from one position
to the next. The videos do pass all the post-ISP tuning requirements from Microsoft
Teams [21]. These AI videos would thus serve as "jitter-free" reference videos in addition
to the Real scenes.
2. Training data: Such AI videos are commonly used to train various algorithm such as
gesture recognition, active speaker detection etc. by generating videos that mimics
Page 15 of 60
==PAGE:25==
3.1
Generation of video sequence
statistical properties of real world data and offers powerful solution to data scarcity.
Having these videos in the analysis would be really useful to see how people perceive
these AI generated videos and can they really mimic real perceptual scenes in terms
of spatial and temporal information.
3. Privacy & Security: No real faces or rooms, so there are no GDPR and consent issues.
Figure 7: Thumbnail of the four AI-generated reference videos using SkyReels V2.
Top left: Single person, Top right: Small room, Bottom left: Medium room, Bottom right:
Big room.
SkyReel-V2- Text-to-Video Generation Model
Generative AI has seen rapid advances with two major concepts i.e. diffusion mod-
els for image/video generation and multimodal large language models (LLMs) for
understanding complex inputs.
[22] Diffusion models like OpenAI’s DALL E 2 and the
open-source Stable Diffusion generate high-quality images from text prompts by iteratively
denoising random noise Figure 8(sourced from [23]), guided by text embeddings (converts
text to numerical vectors) called CLIP. [24]. These models produce realistic and diverse im-
ages across styles, benefiting from the stability and detail afforded by the diffusion process.
These models have laid the groundwork for text-to-video generative models, which require
understanding textual prompts (an LLM’s forte) and producing coherent visual frames over
time (a diffusion model’s forte). [22]
Page 16 of 60
==PAGE:26==
3.1
Generation of video sequence
Figure 8: Diffusion model process, all frames in video are denoised using same noise schedule
θ.
SkyReels-V2 is a recently proposed infinite-length film generative model that combines
a multimodal LLM with a diffusion-based video generator to create long, coherent videos
from text prompts.
It was designed to overcome key limitations of earlier text-to-video
systems, which often struggled with prompt fidelity, short output duration (typically 5–10
seconds), and jittery or inconsistent motion over time. They also lacked “cinematic gram-
mar” understanding (e.g. camera angles, shot composition). [18] SkyReel addresses these
issues through several key changes in data representation, training strategy, and generation
method which are stated below.
• Structured Video Descriptions with SkyCaptioner-V1: SkyCaptioner-V1 pro-
vides precise labels for each video clip (covering fields like shot type, camera motion,
environment) in addition to LLM-generated annotations. This refined annotation pro-
cess ensures that the model can interpret and adhere to complex prompts, even those
involving film-style instructions which in our case we do require. [18]
• Multi-Stage Pretraining: Pretraiting is the process where the model learns huge
collection of video clips and captions to learn how text descriptions relate to visuals. It
is pretrained in a progressive multi-stage fashion: first on lower resolution frames then
gradually up to higher resolutions. Thus, SkyReels-V2 pretrains a base diffusion model
at 256p resolution, then 360p, and up to 540p, each stage building on the previous.
This progression helps the model learn coarse motion dynamics first and then add finer
visual details, all while keeping computation feasible. [18]
• Reinforcement Learning for Motion Quality: After pretraining, SkyReel under-
goes a reinforcement learning (RL) finetuning stage targeted at improving temporal
coherence and physical realism in the videos. This is done by a reward model called
DPO (Direct Preference optimization) [18] that scores video clips based on motion
smoothness and adherence to physical laws. To create training data for this reward
model, they adopted a semi-automatic approach: generating pairs of videos where one
has distortions (e.g. added jitter or unrealistic motion) and the other is higher quality,
then used human annotators to validate preferences.
• Diffusion Forcing for longer Video: Diffusion Forcing framework that enables
generation of longer videos. Traditional diffusion models denoised all frames together
with a common noise schedule θ which resulted in a fixed-length video. The MIT
Page 17 of 60
==PAGE:27==
3.1
Generation of video sequence
researcher’s "Diffusion Forcing" method trains neural networks to de-noise a collection
of frames using different noise schedules (θ1, θ2...θn) which removes different amounts
of noise within each frame while simultaneously predicting the next few frames. [25]
Like a language model predicting the next word, Skyreel v2 with Diffusion Forcing
generates a segment of video and then uses the end of that segment as a starting point
to generate the next one.
• Fine-Tuning and Output Refinement:
Finally, SkyReel applies supervised fine-
tuning at high resolution to polish the visual quality. After the RL and diffusion forcing
stages, a second round of high-quality fine-tuning is performed at 720p resolution to
further enhance details and sharpness in the generated frames.
Generation pipeline
• Model: We used the open-source, commercially licensed video-generation engine SkyReels
V2 [26].
• Prompt Design: For each of our four AI generated videos, we wrote structured text
prompts (e.g.“A medium-sized, glass-walled conference room with three participants
seated around a table; warm overhead lighting; camera at 3 m”) matching the descrip-
tion of the four real perceptual scenes.
• Compute: All generation jobs ran on DTU’s HPC cluster, on NVIDIA A100 nodes.
Each 10 s clip (1280×720 @ 24 fps) took ∼2 hrs of GPU time.
3.1.3
Reference videos
To finally conclude with the video data captured and generated, the following 8 refer-
ence samples were acquired :
• AIsingleperson
• AIsmallroom
• AImediumroom
• AIbigroom
• Realsingleperson
• Realsmallroom
• Realmediumroom
• Realbigroom
Each video was of 10s duration and had a resolution of 1280x720 which fits the video-
conferencing video criteria.
Page 18 of 60
==PAGE:28==
3.1
Generation of video sequence
3.1.4
Synthetic distortions
To evaluate how different VQA metrics respond to degradations due to capture, we
took each of our eight reference sequences and introduced three synthetic distortions on
them using MATLAB. These distortions can be organized into two categories - spatial and
temporal categories. [12] Spatial distortions are such as blurring, riniging, mosaic patters
and noise and temporal distortions are motion compensation mismatch, flicker, jitter and
smearing. [27] Together, these distortion types enable a comprehensive study of how both
static image degradation and dynamic motion anomalies affect the objective VQA metrics
and human perception [16]. Each distortion was applied at different levels of severity ranging
from levels: low, medium, and high to simulate gradually worsening camera pipeline-induced
artifacts.
Spatial distortions occur within each individual frame, altering pixel-level character-
istics such as sharpness, contrast, or color fidelity. Some common examples include sensor
noise, optical blur, and compression blocking. [28]
We have introduced two spatial distortions in MATLAB. They are:
1. Shot noise: It is due to random and quantum nature of light. The arrival of photons
is very random. It is scene dependent because it is a function of how bright the scene
is. The number of photons a pixel captures can be modeled by Poisson distribution.
[29]
P(a = k) = e−λλk
k!
• P(a = k): This represents the probability of observing exactly k photon counts
at a given pixel or location.
• k: This is the number of photons counted for which we want to calculate the
probability.
• λ: This is the average rate of occurrence or the expected number of photons at
that location. In Poisson distribution, λ is both the mean and the variance of the
distribution.
The following algorithm 1 explains how three levels of shot noise was introduced.
Page 19 of 60
==PAGE:29==
3.1
Generation of video sequence
Algorithm 1 Simulating Three Levels of Shot Noise
1: Initialize: Define an array of noise intensities I = {0.001, 0.005, 0.007} for low, medium,
and high distortion levels.
2: for each intensity value i in I do
3:
Define Scale Factor: Calculate a scale factor S = 1/i. This factor models the
sensor’s gain. A smaller noise intensity i corresponds to higher S.
4:
Prepare Output: Create a new video file for the current noise level.
5:
for each frame F in the source video do
6:
Normalize Frame: Convert frame F from ‘uint8‘ [0, 255] to a ‘double‘ precision
matrix Fd with values in the range [0, 1].
7:
for each pixel value p in the normalized frame Fd do
8:
Model Photon Count: Calculate the Poisson parameter λ = p × S. This
scales the pixel’s intensity to represent an average expected photon count.
9:
Introduce Noise: Generate a new noisy integer value pnoisy_count by drawing
a random number from a Poisson distribution with mean λ. This is done using the
‘poissrnd‘ function.
10:
Rescale Pixel Value: Convert the noisy count back to the original intensity
range: pnoisy = pnoisy_count/S.
11:
end for
12:
Reconstruct Frame: Assemble all the new noisy pixel values (pnoisy) to form
the distorted frame Fnoisy.
13:
Convert Format: Convert Fnoisy back to the ‘uint8‘ format, clipping any values
outside the [0, 255] range.
14:
Write to File: Write the final noisy frame Fnoisy to the output video.
15:
end for
16: end for
This phenomenon can be observed in Figure 9.
(a)
(b)
Figure 9: (a) Reference Image (b) Shot noise level = 4.
Page 20 of 60
==PAGE:30==
3.1
Generation of video sequence
To summarize ALgorithm 1, shot noise is simulated by taking each pixel value in the
original image and generating a Poisson random variable with equal to that value.
Careful examination reveals that the white areas look noisier than the dark areas.
This result is also seen in the reference. [29]
2. Blur : This artifact orcurs during the image acquisition because of a poor quality or a
out-of-focus lens. This causes the effect of "blurring" (MTF degradation). Modulation
Transfer Function (MTF) is a fundamental measure of imaging system sharpness. [30].
This effect is generated by using gaussian blur which is a low-pass (smoothing)
filter whose point–spread function is the 2-D Gaussian bell curve
G(x, y; σ) =
1
2πσ2 exp

−x2 + y2
2σ2

Convolving an image with G attenuates high spatial frequency content such as fine
edges and texture while preserving low frequencies i.e. content like broad shapes and.
The parameter σ sets the blur radius, the larger σ, the more widely each pixel’s energy
is spread over its neighbourhood and the softer the picture looks.
Algorithm 2 Applying Gaussian Blur
1: Initialize: Define an array of standard deviations σ = {1, 2, 3} for the three blur levels.
2: Initialize: Define corresponding output filenames for each level.
3: for each σi in σ do
4:
Calculate Kernel Size: Determine the filter kernel size ksize based on the standard
deviation to ensure the kernel covers the significant part of the Gaussian curve (almost
˜99.7%), using the formula ksize = 2 × ⌈3σ⌉+ 1.
5:
Create Filter Kernel: Generate a 2D Gaussian filter kernel, H, of size ksize × ksize
with standard deviation σ.
6:
Prepare Video I/O:
7:
Open the source video file for reading.
8:
Create and open a new output video file corresponding to the current σ.
9:
while the source video has unread frames do
10:
Read Frame: Read a frame F from the source video.
11:
Apply Filter: Convolve the frame F with the Gaussian kernel H to produce the
blurred frame Fblurred. Border pixels are handled by replicating the edge values. ▷This
step corresponds to ‘imfilter(F, H, ’replicate’)‘.
12:
Write Frame: Write the blurred frame Fblurred to the current output video file.
13:
end while
14:
Finalize: Close the video writer for the current level.
15: end for
Thus 4 level of blur (including reference distortion-free) were obtained. On careful
evaluation, the 4th level of blur was dropped to make the dataset more compact as
Page 21 of 60
==PAGE:31==
3.1
Generation of video sequence
increasing severity of blur masked other effects and didn’t provide useful information.
So finally only 3 levels of blur were considered.
Temporal distortions: Temporal distortions disrupt the smooth progression of mo-
tion across frames, introducing inconsistencies in timing or frame content such as judder,
flicker, stuttering, or outright frame drops. [31]. This thesis is specifically focused on a sce-
nario for jitter where a series of frames are repeated until a new valid frame becomes available.
Jitter: The type of jitter addressed in this study corresponds to the "jerkiness" arti-
fact described in the CVD2014 paper
[8]. This distortion is perceptual discontinuity in
motion—i.e., visual choppiness or abrupt transitions between frames, making movement ap-
pear unnatural or fragmented. Such artifacts commonly arise due to mismatches between
the frame production rate of the ISP pipeline and the frame consumption rate required for
encoding.
Typically, the ISP operates at a high frame rate (e.g., 60 fps) to ensure smooth capture
and responsiveness. However, to reduce bitrate while maintaining visual quality, the encoder
selects frames at a lower frame rate:
FPSencoding < FPSISP
Under ideal conditions, this downsampling is intentional and stable.
In practice, however, our ISP pipeline includes computationally intensive modules such
as super-resolution and dual-camera stitching, which introduce processing delays. As a result,
we occasionally encounter scenarios where the ISP produces frames at rate lower than what
encoder requires.
FPSISP < FPSencoding
This leads to temporal inconsistencies that amplify the perceived jerkiness in motion.
This degradation is particularly noticeable during fast movement or camera transitions.
To simulate this jitter, a two-stage process was designed to model a scenario where a
high-framerate consumer (the encoder) requests frames from a slow-framerate producer (the
ISP).
Stage 1: Producer Stream Generation. First, the reference video, already processed
with blur and shot noise, is downsampled to a lower frame rate (15 FPS). This is done by
using the Real-Time Intermediate Flow Estimation model (RIFE) [32]. It analyzes motion
flow between frames using optical flow of pixels and selects a subset of frames from the
original video. This 15 FPS video represents our "producer."
Stage 2: Consumer Simulation with Buffer Dynamics. Next, simulation of the "con-
sumer" fetching frames at the original rate (e.g., 24 FPS for AI videos and 30 FPS for Real
videos). This is achieved through a simulated buffer and two independent clocks.
Page 22 of 60
==PAGE:32==
3.1
Generation of video sequence
• Storing (Frame Arrival): A "producer clock" ticks at the slow rate (every 1/15 of a
second). At each tick, a frame from the 15 FPS producer video is considered "available,"
and its frame index is placed into a First-In, First-Out (FIFO) buffer queue.
• Fetching (Frame Consumption): A "consumer clock" ticks at the original, faster rate
(every 1/24 of a second). At each tick, the simulation attempts to fetch a frame index
from the front of the buffer.
Jitter Occurrence: Because the consumer clock ticks faster than the producer clock, the
buffer frequently becomes empty. When a fetch is attempted on an empty buffer there is a
buffer underflow and jitter occurs. To create a visible artifact, the last successfully displayed
frame is repeated. This sequence of successfully fetched and repeated frames is then written
to the final video file, which maintains the original frame rate and we can also now perform
frame by frame VQA on it.
The following figure illustrates how jitter artifact was created. The original video at
30 fps was downsampled to 15 fps using RIFE by measuring motion continuity. From the
downsampled 15 fps video, frame interpolation was done to bring the video back to 30 fps by
repeating previous frames when they were not available creating jitter effect like in citation
[31].
Figure 10: Figure illustrating creation of jitter artifact.
Page 23 of 60
==PAGE:33==
3.1
Generation of video sequence
Algorithm 3 Jitter Simulation via Slow Producer Model
Input: Vproc (Video pre-processed with Algorithm 1 & 2), fpsorig (original FPS), fpsprod
(producer FPS, e.g., 15)
Output: Vjitter (Final video with jitter artifacts, at fpsorig)
1: procedure SimulateJitter(Vproc, fpsorig, fpsprod)
2:
▷Stage 1: Generate the slow producer video source
3:
Vprod ←RIFE_ReduceFPS(Vproc, fpsprod)
▷Use RIFE to downsample
4:
Fprod ←LoadFrames(Vprod)
▷Load all frames of producer video into an array
5:
▷Stage 2: Initialize the consumer simulation
6:
Buffer ←new empty FIFO Queue
7:
∆tarrival ←1/fpsprod
8:
∆tfetch ←1/fpsorig
9:
tarrival ←∆tarrival
10:
tfetch ←∆tfetch
11:
Ntarget ←total number of frames in original video
12:
Flast ←Fprod[1]
▷Initialize last good frame with the first producer frame
13:
Vjitter ←new empty video container
14:
idxarrival ←0
15:
▷Main simulation loop until the output video is full
16:
while |Vjitter| < Ntarget do
17:
if tarrival ≤tfetch and idxarrival < |Fprod| then
18:
▷Producer event: A new frame arrives in the buffer
19:
idxarrival ←idxarrival + 1
20:
Enqueue(Buffer, idxarrival)
21:
tarrival ←tarrival + ∆tarrival
22:
else
23:
▷Consumer event: Attempt to fetch a frame
24:
if Buffer is not Empty then
25:
idxdisplay ←Dequeue(Buffer)
26:
Fdisplay ←Fprod[idxdisplay]
27:
Flast ←Fdisplay
▷Update the last successfully displayed frame
28:
else
29:
▷JITTER: Buffer is empty, repeat the last good frame
30:
Fdisplay ←Flast
31:
end if
32:
AppendFrame(Vjitter, Fdisplay)
33:
tfetch ←tfetch + ∆tfetch
34:
end if
35:
end while
36:
return Vjitter
37: end procedure
Page 24 of 60
==PAGE:34==
3.1
Generation of video sequence
The Figure 11 describes the process of applying the distortions.
Figure 11: Flow of introduction of distortions.
3.1.5
Final dataset composition
Each reference video sequence was sequentially degraded by introducing three types of
distortions: shot noise (Algorithm 1), blur (Algorithm 2) and jitter (Algorithm 3). Each
distortion was introduced at different severity levels, Blur at 3 levels, Shot noise at 4 levels
and Jitter at 2 levels (including the reference level) resulting in a total of 3 × 4 × 2 = 24
combinations per reference, i.e. V n
i,j,k, where 1 ≤i ≤3, 1 ≤j ≤4 and 1 ≤k ≤2 corre-
sponds to the distortion levels of blur, shot noise and jitter respectively. Among these, the
combination corresponding to level 1 for all distortions (i = 1, j = 1, k = 1) is considered
visually equivalent to the original and serves as the undistorted reference. Therefore, we
obtain 23 unique distorted versions for each of the eight reference videos, leading to a total
of 23 × 8 = 184 distorted videos in the dataset. Total including reference there are 192
videos in the dataset.
The distorted videos are denoted as V n
i,j,k, where n indexes the reference video, and i,
j, and k denote the distortion levels of blur, shot noise and jitter respectively, Videos were
saved using the naming convention referencevideo_ijk, where the referencevideo be-
longs to one of the eight categories in 3.1.3.
This systematic organization allows for targeted analysis of how different distortion
types and levels affect both objective video quality metrics and human perception across a
range of realistic video conferencing scenarios.
We use matlab function videoreader to read each frame and VideoWriter to combine all
frames into video. During this process, re-encoding is taking place. To make sure that we
are not introducing any compression artifacts in our videos while generating distortion, we
use profile option "MPEG-4" and set the .Quality parameter to 100. This ensures that the
video is encoded using H.264 as is visually lossless compressed. This has been verified by
measuring the PSNR value of the reference video with the re-encoded video and the PSNR
value was got to be >41 dB.
Page 25 of 60
==PAGE:35==
3.2
Objective metrics
3.2
Objective metrics
The objective metrics are calculated to measure the quality of our "distorted" video files
in comparison to the reference videos. Such metrics are called "Full reference" (FR). The
computation of subjective quality requires a panel of assessors and is sometimes very inten-
sive to perform. That is why there is a trend in developing objective perceptual algorithms
to perform as close as possible to the human scores. [13].
In our evaluation we compute the following metrics: PSNR, SSIM, MS-SSIM, VMAF
and CVVDP. A short overview of each of these metrics is provided below.
1. PSNR: Peak signal to noise ratio is widely used FR video quality assessment method.
It does pixel-by-pixel based comparison and measures image fidelity i.e how closely the
distorted image resembles to the reference. The Peak Signal-to-Noise Ratio (PSNR) is
a widely utilized full-reference (FR) metric for assessing signal distortion and quality.
When the reference and degraded images are identical PSNR value is undefined i.e.
∞. The PSNR is mathematically defined as:
PSNR = 10 log10
 
L2
MSE
!
,
(1)
where L represents the maximum possible pixel value (e.g., for an 8-bit image, L =
28 −1 = 255), and the Mean Squared Error (MSE) is calculated as:
MSE =
1
WH
W
X
j=1
H
X
i=1
[Fref(i, j) −Fdist(i, j)]2 .
(2)
PSNR is frequently used to evaluate the quality of images reconstructed from lossy
compression algorithms. However, it has limitations. It is consistent only for the lu-
minance value of the pixel. It is not aligned well to the HVS [3] as subjectively there
might be cases perceived better by adding noise to the image. For e.g. the background
plays an important role in determining the visibility of distortion a phenomenon known
as "masking". Distortions in smooth areas are easily visible as compared to textured
regions. But it’s straightforward calculation and rapid execution have made it a pop-
ular choice in the signal processing community, despite criticisms regarding its lack of
correlation with human visual perception.
2. SSIM: The Structural Similarity Index (SSIM), introduced by Wang et al. [28], is a
metric designed to assess the similarity between two images/video frame. The SSIM in-
dex is computed on a frame-by-frame basis. It works by separating luminance, contrast,
and structure scores and mirrors the way the human visual system encodes scenes. The
overall SSIM index for a video is calculated by averaging these three scores. Unlike
PSNR, which compares images pixel by pixel, SSIM evaluates small N×N blocks, mak-
ing it more aligned with human visual perception. The SSIM index is computationally
Page 26 of 60
==PAGE:36==
3.2
Objective metrics
efficient, which contributes to its widespread application in video compression research.
3. MS-SSIM: The Multiscale Structural Similarity Index (MS-SSIM) extends the SSIM
by incorporating details of the frame at various resolutions or scales. This method
involves applying a low-pass filter iteratively to the reference and degraded images,
followed by subsampling the filtered image by a factor of 2 in each iteration. At each
scale, the MS-SSIM algorithm assesses the SSIM value while placing less emphasis on
the luminance term compared to the contrast and structure terms. The MS-SSIM is
computed as follows:
MS −SSIM =
1
Mw
Mw
X
i=1
SSIM(F ref
i
, F dist
i
),
(3)
where Mw denotes the total number of scales, and F ref
i
and F dist
i
represent the frame
contents at the i-th local window. It is calculated frame-by-frame on the luminance
component, with the overall index reflecting the average of the frame-level quality
assessments.
4. VMAF: Video multimethod assessment fusion is a quality metric developend by Net-
flix to measure their video streaming quality service. [33] It measures these 3 features
per frame against a pristine reference:
• Visual Information Fidelity (VIF): Estimates how much "visual data" is preserved
(based on human vision models).
• Detail Loss Metric (DLM): Detects blur or loss of fine detail
• Temporal motion: Measures how much movement there is across frames
Netflix takes the three features (VIF, DLM, motion) for each video frame and feeds
them to an Support vector machine (SVM) model trained on MOS scores. The SVM
learns to weight these features so its output aligns closely with subjective quality
judgments. Once trained, it then predicts the quality on new video.
5. CVVDP: ColorVideoVDP [34] is a visual difference predictor that can predict the
distortions in image, videos and also distortions due to different displays. Modelling
human vision is a task, but this metric models human spatiotemporal and chromatic
vision simultaneously and accounts for both luminance and color aspects of vision
across space and time. It is built on novel psychophysical models of chromatic spa-
tiotemporal contrast sensitivity (castleCSF) and cross-channel contrast masking. This
psychophysical foundation allows the metric to adapt more easily to unseen conditions
like varying display related conditions like sizes, resolutions, or peak luminances. It
represents predictions as a single quality value in Just-Objectionable-Difference (JOD)
units. 1 JOD drop in quality means 75% of observers will notice the quality loss in a
pairwise comparison.
Page 27 of 60
==PAGE:37==
3.2
Objective metrics
To compute CVVDP, their github repository was used. [35]
To ensure reproducibility and consistency in the evaluation of perceptual video quality,
all experiments involving ColorVideoVDP used the following standardized configura-
tion:
ColorVideoVDP v0.4.3, 61.02 [pix/deg], Lpeak = 188, Lblack = 0.188,
Lrefl = 0.02865 [cd/m2], (standard_fhd_custom)
A custom display model named standard_fhd_custom was created to match the phys-
ical test setup. The parameters were derived from the viewing conditions detailed in
Section 5. The JSON-style configuration used for this model is as follows:
"standard_fhd_custom": {
"name": "32-inch FullHD monitor, peak luminance 188 cd/m^2, viewed under
dark light (18 lux), seen from 3.2 x display height",
"resolution": [1920, 1080],
"viewing_distance_meters": 1.29,
"diagonal_size_inches": 32,
"max_luminance": 188,
"contrast": 1000,
"E_ambient": 18,
"source": "none"
}
This configuration ensures perceptually accurate predictions under the exact test con-
ditions.
In this study FR because real-time quality evaluation is not our goal. Instead we want
an offline pass after each firmware build to decide whether a ISP tuning improves or degrades
perceived quality. The above five video quality metrics were selected because each represents
different degrees of perceptual accuracy and complexity. PSNR was chosen as it remains
a common baseline metric in image and video quality evaluation due to its simplicity and
wide industry usage, allowing us to assess the improvements achieved by more perceptually-
oriented metrics. However, PSNR lacks spatial vision as it demands strict pixel registration
and even slight spatial misalignments can drastically affect its quality predictions. To ad-
dress this limitation, we included SSIM and MS-SSIM . They also compares co-located
pixels, but it does so inside overlapping blocks which makes them robust against minor mis-
registrations and spatial distortions. MS-SSIM further enhances perceptual accuracy by
performing the comparison across multiple spatial resolutions. VMAF was selected as it
integrates both spatial and temporal features, utilizing a machine-learning approach trained
on perceptual data from human observers, thus making it more predictive of human sub-
jective ratings in video-streaming scenarios. Finally, CVVDP was chosen as it explicitly
Page 28 of 60
==PAGE:38==
3.3
Subjective Evaluation
models all critical dimensions of human visual perception—spatial, temporal, and color sen-
sitivity as well as the specific display characteristics and viewing conditions. The following
Table 4 summarizes the capabilities of these full reference metrics.
Table 4: Comparison of the characteristics of the full reference objective metrics. Columns
indicate whether the metric models spatial vision, temporal vision, color vision, and whether
it accounts for display geometry and photometry.
Metric
Approach
Value range
Spatial
Temporal
Color
Display
PSNR
Mean square error
[0, ∞]
No
No
No
No
SSIM
Structural
distor-
tion
[0, 1]
Yes
No
No
No
MS-SSIM
Multiscale
distor-
tion
[0, 1]
Yes
No
No
No
VMAF
Machine
learning
model
[0, 100]
Yes
Yes
No
No
CVVDP
Psychophysical
model
[0, 10]
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
3.2.1
Processing of data
PSNR, SSIM, MS-SSIM and VMAF was computed using software developed with ffmpeg
[36]. A bash script was written to automatize the process which worked by selecting one
reference video and comparing it against each of it’s 24 distorted versions and computing 4
metrics frame wise and stored result as .csv. After the frame wise results were obtained, a
python script was written which took each "frame-wise" computation and averaged it across
all the frames of the video and finally stored the result as average over all the frame. These
csv results are provided in the zip file.
3.3
Subjective Evaluation
Subjective video evaluation is necessary to measure perceived visual quality. This is con-
sidered the most reliable and accurate method for evaluating the performance of objective
metrics, as well as for comparing different metrics. Perceived visual quality is a subjective
measure and can be described statistically, i.e., by averaging the rating / opinion scores of
a sufficient number of assessors.
There are various methodologies that can be used for conducting subjective evaluations,
as discussed in Chapter 2. In this study, a combined strategy of SAMVIQ [15] along with
ITU-R BT.500 was utilized to conduct the subjective experiment.
Page 29 of 60
==PAGE:39==
3.3
Subjective Evaluation
3.3.1
Test material
The test material consisted of 8 reference samples, hereinafter referred to as Samples.
Each sample was subjected to distortions in the following way:
• Blur — in 3 levels (including the reference level).
• Noise — in 4 levels (including the reference level).
• Jitter — in 2 levels (including the reference level).
This resulted in 3×4×2 = 24 processed sequences (hereinafter referred to as Conditions)
for each sample. Thus, in total there were 24 × 8 = 192 conditions. Each test sequence
had a duration of 10 seconds and a frame resolution of 1280 × 720 pixels.
3.3.2
Viewing condition
The tests followed the conditions specified in Rec. ITU-R BT.500 [14] regarding ambient
light, type of monitor, screen luminance, etc. Maintaining a consistent viewing condition is
essential to ensure the test can be reproduced if necessary. Table 5 summarizes the viewing
conditions and environmental factors.
Table 5: Test setup and viewing condition.
Name of the method
SAMVIQ + ITU-R BT.500
Display Information
Samsung LED TV LT32E310EXXE
Display Type
Full HD, 1080p
Peak luminance level (cd/m2)
188
Black luminance level (cd/m2)
0.1463
Room illumination (lux)
< 20 lux
Illumination (lux) of display light falling on face
4.3
Display size (diagonal in inches)
32
Width/height display ratio
16:9
Distance of observer from screen (cm)
3.2H = 129
The test was conducted in a controlled environment as described in the table. The
SenseLabOnline [37] [38] test interface was used to design the test as it can be seen in Figure
12. The test was conducted in the GN video lab.
Page 30 of 60
==PAGE:40==
3.3
Subjective Evaluation
Figure 12: The test setup, interface, and illustration of test performing in GN video lab.
3.3.3
Assessors: Demographic and Screening Process
A total of 21 assessors participated in the subjective test. All were GN employees work-
ing in various fields of engineering. Only a few had experience in visual quality assessment,
while most were naive participants without specialized knowledge of visual quality. Their
age and gender distributions are shown in Figure 13.
(a)
(b)
Figure 13: Demographic distribution of the assessors based on (a) Age, and (b) Gender.
Before participating in the subjective evaluation, all assessors were screened for nor-
mal visual acuity using the Freiburg Vision Test (FrACT) [39]. This computer-based test
measures the visual resolution threshold of the observer using optotypes (Landolt C) in a
standardized psychophysical procedure, ensuring that all participants had adequate vision
to evaluate video quality.
Page 31 of 60
==PAGE:41==
3.3
Subjective Evaluation
Assessor rejection was also performed by calculating the percentage of correct responses
for identifying the hidden reference. This threshold was set at 80%. Out of the 21 subjects,
it was observed that one subject was unable to identify the hidden reference correctly at least
80% of the time. Therefore, a decision was made to remove this assessor’s scores from the
calculation of the MOS. Figure 14 shows the assessors’ performance in identifying the hidden
reference. It can be seen that assessor GN264 was not able to reach minimum threshold of
80% correct answer for hidden references.
Figure 14: Performance of identifying hidden reference across all assessors.
3.3.4
Training phase
The training phase was conducted for each of the 21 assessors as appropriate training
helps to obtain more reliable and more consistent results [15]. This included a familiarization
session where the subjects were shown videos and the kind of artifacts they would see. They
were also instructed on how to use the test equipment, to understand the user-interface,
and to report their ratings. The SAMVIQ user guide does not mandate that the users score
hidden reference a 100 score, but they encourage it to be >90. In our test, we also instructed
the assessors to give a highest rating possible (100) to the hidden reference.
Figure 15 shows the familiarization template, where Condition refers to artifacts such
as Blur, Noise, Jitter, and the combination of all three effects. The assessor clicked on each
of the levels and was given an explanation of the artifacts. They were specifically instructed
not to consider “hallucination artifacts” in AI-generated videos.
Page 32 of 60
==PAGE:42==
3.3
Subjective Evaluation
Figure 15: Preview of the user interface during familiarization session.
3.3.5
Design of Experiment
To manage the large number of test conditions, a Balanced Incomplete Block Design
of experiment (BIBD) was employed. Since each video sample had 23 distorted conditions
(excluding the reference condition 111), the total number of test conditions exceeded 190,
making it impractical for a single assessor to evaluate all sequences. BIBD allowed us to
distribute the conditions across assessors in a statistically balanced manner while reducing
individual fatigue. In BIBD:
1. Balanced assignment: Each assessor evaluated a subset of samples and test condi-
tions, while each test condition per sample was evaluated an equal number of times
across different assessors.
2. Incomplete blocks: Every assessor did not evaluate every possible condition per
sample, helping to reduce fatigue and complexity.
3. Replication: Some trials were replicated to check the reliability of the assessors.
Two tests were designed, and each participant was assigned one of the tests alternately.
Each test was composed using 4 samples, as follows:
• Test A: AIsingleperson, AImediumroom, Realsingleperson, Realmediumroom.
• Test B: AIsmallroom, AIbigroom, Realsmallroom, Realbigroom.
Each subjective test consisted of 17 trials, where each trial presented a set of 8 video
sequences derived from a common reference sample. As shown in Fig. 16, the 24 distortion
conditions (ranging from 112 to 342, excluding 111) were evaluated in a structured and
balanced manner.
Page 33 of 60
==PAGE:43==
3.3
Subjective Evaluation
Figure 16: Test organization format.
For each test session, we selected 4 reference samples (as described above for Test A
and Test B), and the videos derived from each sample were distributed across 4 consecutive
trials. This ensured that distortions from the same content were evaluated in isolation and
spread evenly across the session. Hence, the total number of trials per test was:
4 (samples) × 4 (trials per sample) = 16 trials
An additional trial 17th was included as a reliability check. It contained repeated
conditions from one of the previous trials to verify assessor consistency (i.e., whether par-
ticipants assigned similar scores to identical stimuli in separate evaluations). Each trial, in
randomized order, includes:
• One explicit reference (i.e., the undistorted signal 111),
• One hidden reference (identical to the explicit reference but anonymized),
• Six distorted sequences (randomly sampled from the remaining 23 conditions).
Each pair of assessors rated all 8 reference samples across all distorted conditions.
Therefore, with a total of 20 valid assessors, we obtained 10 independent scores per
sample–condition combination.
Page 34 of 60
==PAGE:44==
3.3
Subjective Evaluation
This experimental design adhered to BIBD principles and ensured good experimental
control, reducing cognitive fatigue while ensuring sufficient coverage of distortion conditions
and enabling robust statistical analysis.
The interface used in the test is shown in Figure 17. On the right side, 8 sequences are
displayed, with the explicit reference indicated. Ratings were given on a continuous scale
(0–100). On the left, the video under evaluation was played. Assessors could freely navigate
between videos and refine their ratings before clicking the Next button.
Figure 17: Preview of the test user interface.
3.3.6
Data processing
After completion of the subjective tests, the raw data were exported from Senselab in
.json format, containing individual scores from all assessors for each condition and sample.
To analyze the results, we computed the Mean Opinion Score (MOS) and associated 95%
Confidence Interval (CI) for each distortion condition per sample by averaging scores across
all valid assessors. These statistics were calculated after subject screening, allowing us to
evaluate the influence of outlier or inconsistent assessors on the overall score distribution.
Subject rejection followed the criteria defined by the SAMVIQ methodology, and only those
assessors whose responses met the reliability thresholds were retained for the final analysis.
Page 35 of 60
==PAGE:45==
4
Results
4.1
SI-TI evaluation
To compare how the AIGC and real videos in the dataset adequately match each other
in a range of scene complexities, Spatial Information (SI) and Temporal Information (TI)
metrics have been computed. They are standardised measures defined in ITU-T Rec. P.910
for characterising video content [40]. These metrics are crucial in VQA studies to verify that
test sequences cover low to high complexity content, both in texture and motion, thereby
avoiding bias toward overly simple or overly challenging stimuli as required by ITU-T P.910.
In this work, SI and TI values for four perceptual scenes i.e. single person, small room,
medium room, and large room is calculated. Each realized twice (once from real captures
and once via our SkyReels V2 AI pipeline). By comparing the resulting SI/TI distributions,
we would want to see if :
• our real-world recordings span a useful complexity range
• AI-generated videos can mimic those complexity characteristics (like texture and mo-
tion) of the real videos
The Spatial Information (SI) and Temporal Information (TI) metrics are de-
signed to quantify the spatial and temporal complexity of video content. They are defined
based on standard deviation calculations of spatial and temporal gradients in the luminance
component of video frames. [40]
Spatial Information (SI)
The SI value is computed using the following steps:
1. For each video frame Fn at frame index n, extract the luminance channel.
2. Apply a Sobel filter to the luminance channel to highlight edges and spatial variations:
Sn = Sobel(Fn)
3. Compute the spatial standard deviation of each Sobel-filtered frame:
stdspace(Sn)
4. Repeat this operation for all frames in the sequence and get standard deviation value
i.e. SI value of each frame.
5. The mean value of the series is selected as the final SI for the video:
SI = averagetime {stdspace [Sobel(Fn)]}
Page 36 of 60
==PAGE:46==
4.1
SI-TI evaluation
Temporal Information (TI)
TI quantifies motion by measuring the pixel-wise differences between consecutive frames:
1. For each pair of consecutive luminance frames, compute the motion difference map:
Mn(i, j) = Fn(i, j) −Fn−1(i, j)
where Fn(i, j) is the luminance value at pixel (i, j) in frame n.
2. Compute the spatial standard deviation of each difference map Mn(i, j):
stdspace(Mn)
3. The temporal information is taken as the mean value of these standard deviations
across time:
TI = meantime {stdspace [Mn(i, j)]}
A higher TI value indicates more motion or variability between adjacent frames.
The SI and TI values were computed using VQEG tool. [41]
Note: Although, the Spatial Information (SI) and Temporal Information (TI) metrics
are often represented using the maximum value over time, it is recommended to use the mean
as an aggregation measure for a more stable and representative estimate of complexity across
the entire video sequence. [40].
Figure 18: Comparison of SI-TI values for different scenes.
In Figure 18, average values of SI and TI can be seen. The values make the dataset
very diverse by addition of "AIGC" data and also help in accounting for diverse condition.
Page 37 of 60
==PAGE:47==
4.2
Objective metrics
Figure 19: Overall statistics of AI and Real videos. The red marker point represents the
mean value.
Boxplots comparing spatial and temporal values of Real and AI video is presented in
Figure 19. It is plotted frame wise by combining all the four scenes of AI category and 4
scenes of Real category. The red marker point represents the mean value. It can be seen
AI-generated videos have a higher median Spatial Information (SI) value but is also less
varied (small interquartile range) than the real videos. Conversely, the real videos exhibit
greater natural variability in their frame-by-frame complexity.
The temporal information plot for the Real and AI video type is very comparable to each,
with inter-quartile range for AI being slightly larger. The mean value is very similar for AI
and Real cases.
4.2
Objective metrics
To visually compare how different objective metrics respond to specific types of distor-
tion across various video samples, we generated radar plots for each distortion type: blur,
shot noise, and jitter.
For each distortion, a subset of distorted videos was selected
where only the target distortion varied while the others were held constant at level 1 and
averaged. E.g. For blur, the metric scores of videos labeled AIsingleperson_211 and AIs-
ingleperson_311 were averaged where the blur level varied while shot noise and jitter were
fixed. (Refer here for naming convention 3.1.5). The metric values were normalized per
sample, such that for each sample, the maximum score observed across all distortion levels
Page 38 of 60
==PAGE:48==
4.2
Objective metrics
for a given metric was scaled to 1.0.
Figure 20: Metric performance under different distortions with each sample type.
All
metric scores have been normalized to a scale 0-1 to have better comparability.
Objective metric performance on different level of distortion and each distortion type
is presented in Figure 21. M (g)
xyz denotes the metric value for condition ijk and group g ∈
{Real, AI}. For blur, the following average average metric score was computed.
¯
M (g)
Blur=i = 1
8
4
X
j=1
2
X
k=1
M (g)
ijk
Similar methodology follows for shot noise and jitter distortion type.
Page 39 of 60
==PAGE:49==
4.2
Objective metrics
Figure 21: Objective metric performance for each distortion type and level.
Page 40 of 60
==PAGE:50==
4.3
Subjective Evaluation & Correlation analysis
Figure 21 emphasizes that for each distortion type and severity, how the objective
measures track visual quality and how those responses differ between Real and AI-generated
content. It can be observed that there is monotonic decrease in quality with increase in
severity for all metrics, except for jitter where SSIM shows opposite trend.
4.3
Subjective Evaluation & Correlation analysis
Evaluation of the subjective data is essential in order to understand perceptual quality
of video and to and the most crucial step to answer our research question - Which objective
metric can approximately model the human perceptual vision in typical video conferencing
set up?
Figure 22 presents the Mean Opinion Scores (MOS) response along with 95% confidence
intervals for each of the eight sample types. This plot helps to infer the effects of samples
i.e. different video conferencing environments on the video quality response.
It can be seen that the average MOS ranged from approximately 47 to 70 across all
samples. Among AI-generated content, the highest score was recorded for AIsingleperson
(MOS ≈60), while the lowest was for AImediumroom (MOS ≈47).
For real samples,
Realsmallroom achieved the highest MOS (approximately 70), and Realbigroom scored
the lowest (MOS ≈50). Overall, it can be visualized that the Real samples score higher
than the AI generated ones.
Confidence intervals for all samples are narrow, indicating consistent scoring across
assessors. Each bar represents the mean score aggregated from approximately 10 assessors
per sample-condition pair.
Page 41 of 60
==PAGE:51==
4.3
Subjective Evaluation & Correlation analysis
Figure 22: MOS score obtained for each sample type
Figure 23 illustrates how perceptual quality, represented by Mean Opinion Scores (MOS)
and corresponding 95% confidence interval (CI), varies with increasing distortion levels across
different distortion interactions.
In all interactions (Fig. 23(a),(b)(c)), a clear downward trend in MOS is observed with
increasing levels of noise. When moving from the reference (no noise) to high noise condi-
tions, MOS values notably decrease from approximately 80 to below 20. Additionally, the
confidence intervals become narrower at higher distortion levels, especially notable at the
transition from the reference to high-noise condition, highlighting increased assessor agree-
ment under severe distortions.
These plots confirm clear trends: increasing distortion severity systematically reduces
perceived quality, with higher assessor consensus (smaller CI ranges) under severe distortion
conditions.
Page 42 of 60
==PAGE:52==
4.3
Subjective Evaluation & Correlation analysis
(a) Noise x Blur interaction
(b) Noise x Jitter interaction
(c) Blur X Jitter interaction
Figure 23: Interaction plot with mean ± 95% CI per distortion pair.
As it has also been stated earlier in 3.3 response that is recorded by a panel of observers
serves as benchmark for any visual objective metrics. [3]. In this thesis, to measure the
objective metric in terms of it’s prediction performance Spearman’s Rank Order Correlation
Coefficient(SROCC) and Pearson’s Linear Correlation Coefficient (PLCC) have been com-
puted between response-metric pairs.
Page 43 of 60
==PAGE:53==
4.3
Subjective Evaluation & Correlation analysis
• SROCC : Measures monotonicity of the data i.e. if increase (or decrease) in MOS
scores is associated to increase (or decrease) in metric score. It is independent of the
magnitude of the increase (or decrease). In ideal cases, SROCC value would be 1 when
there is no difference between the ranks of conditions (111,112 etc) of metrics and their
MOS scores. It is defined as follows:
rs =
P(xi −¯x)(γi −¯γ)
qP(xi −¯x)2
qP(γi −¯γ)2
where, xi is rank of the i-th metric score, γi is rank of the i-th MOS score, ¯x and ¯γ are
mean ranks of the metric and MOS scores, respectively.
• PLCC : PLCC measures the accuracy of the metric to predict the subjective MOS
with minimum average error. It is defined as:
rp =
P(xi −¯x)(yi −¯y)
qP(xi −¯x)2
qP(yi −¯y)2
where, xi is the objective metric score for the i-th video, yi is MOS score for the i-th
video, ¯x and ¯y are mean values of metric and MOS scores, respectively. It tells how
proportional or linear the relationship is between the two variables. A PLCC of 1
indicates perfect linearity.
SROCC measures whether the order of quality is preserved (monotonicity), while PLCC
evaluates how well the metric linearly predicts the MOS values. A higher SROCC indicates
better ranking agreement, whereas a higher PLCC suggests better numerical accuracy. Re-
porting both gives us an understanding of a metric’s predictive behavior.
To evaluate how well objective quality metrics align with human perception of distortion,
computation of correlation scores between between metric outputs and individual subjec-
tive responses (participant scores before MOS) were computed category (AI & Real) wise.
For each of category and distortion type (blur, noise, jitter), selection of relevant condition
configuration was done such as :
• Blur: Conditions where blur level varied and other distortions were fixed, i.e., 111,
211, 311.
• Shot Noise: Conditions where only shot noise varied, i.e., 111, 121, 131, 141
• Jitter: systems where only Jitter varied , i.e., 111, 112
The Table 6 consists of the correlation scores across 2 categories. Besides, computation
of correlations have also been done across "All" for each distortion type.
Page 44 of 60
==PAGE:54==
4.3
Subjective Evaluation & Correlation analysis
Table 6: SROCC and PLCC for different distortion types by group - AI & Real
AI
Real
All data
Metric
SROCC
PLCC
SROCC
PLCC
SROCC
PLCC
Blur
PSNR
0.686
0.634
0.654
0.602
0.610
0.597
SSIM
0.865
0.827
0.842
0.744
0.850
0.797
MS-SSIM
0.865
0.833
0.839
0.762
0.862
0.807
VMAF
0.843
0.876
0.823
0.805
0.815
0.820
CVVDP
0.832
0.846
0.828
0.819
0.851
0.833
Shot Noise
PSNR
0.614
0.651
0.570
0.616
0.610
0.642
SSIM
0.797
0.789
0.687
0.674
0.757
0.749
MS-SSIM
0.791
0.782
0.679
0.626
0.749
0.727
VMAF
0.720
0.745
0.748
0.737
0.700
0.721
CVVDP
0.759
0.779
0.700
0.679
0.753
0.745
Jitter
PSNR
0.009
0.085
0.047
0.038
0.083
0.099
SSIM
0.494
0.343
0.556
0.461
0.528
0.386
MS-SSIM
0.520
0.357
0.561
0.475
0.542
0.408
VMAF
0.440
0.312
0.574
0.508
0.467
0.390
CVVDP
0.480
0.290
0.561
0.448
0.507
0.356
For the Blur distortion category (all data), the highest monotonic agreement with sub-
jective scores was achieved by MS-SSIM, with a SROCC of 0.862 whereas CVVDP scored
highest PLCC = 0.833 and followed closely with SROCC = 0.851 , while PSNR lagged be-
hind with the lowest scores (SROCC = 0.610, PLCC = 0.597).
In the case of Shot Noise (all data) SSIM yielded the highest SROCC of 0.757, fol-
lowed closely by CVVDP (0.753). For PLCC, SSIM led with 0.749 again followed closely
by CVVDP = 0.745. PSNR had the weakest performance for shot noise as well (SROCC =
0.610, PLCC = 0.642).
For Jitter (all data), all metrics exhibited a notable drop in performance. The best
SROCC was observed for MS-SSIM at 0.542, indicating moderate correlation. In terms of
PLCC, MS-SSIM again reached the highest value at 0.408.
These results highlight that structural similarity derived metrics consistently pro-
vides strong monotonic predictions across all distortion types, while CVVDP and VMAF
follow very closely specially in the real cases. However, all metrics struggle with jitter, sug-
gesting the need for more temporally aware quality models in future work.
Note: The Table 8 in the Appendix section 7 provides further details on each sample
Page 45 of 60
==PAGE:55==
4.3
Subjective Evaluation & Correlation analysis
wise correlation computation.
The Table 7 summarizes the performance of metrics averaging across 4 sample types
for AI and Real respectively. It measures correlation with the MOS scores and consists of
Spearman Rank correlation coefficient (SROCC) and Linear correlation coefficient(LCC) for
each MOS-Metric pair considering all levels and combinations of distortion.
Table 7: SROCC and LCC of objective metrics, by group
(a) AI
Metric
SROCC
LCC
PSNR
0.848
0.791
SSIM
0.697
0.667
MS-SSIM
0.876
0.837
VMAF
0.879
0.857
CVVDP
0.880
0.848
(b) Real
Metric
SROCC
LCC
PSNR
0.654
0.719
SSIM
0.563
0.580
MS-SSIM
0.662
0.677
VMAF
0.771
0.758
CVVDP
0.721
0.758
(c) All data
Metric
SROCC
LCC
PSNR
0.722
0.740
SSIM
0.633
0.635
MS-SSIM
0.778
0.775
VMAF
0.768
0.771
CVVDP
0.784
0.806
It can be observed that CVVDP acheives highest SROCC = 0.784 and PLCC of 0.806
across all data group.
Page 46 of 60
==PAGE:56==
5
Discussion and Limitations
5.1
SI-TI Evaluation
Plot in Figure 18 shows SI vs TI plot of 8 reference scenes. It can be seen that the three
real scenes i.e. Real medium room, Real single person, Real small room achieves around the
same SI value ∼25. Whereas the scene Real bigroom achieves a high average SI value of
∼45. This is due to number of objects highly influence the Spatial complexity of the video
[42]. A higher number of objects means high amount of edges which leads to a complex scene.
Looking at the AI generated data, it can be seen that the AI videos - AI medium room
and AI Small room achieve a higher average SI value as compared to their real ones. This
seems like an anomaly because the real videos are thought to have higher SI value because of
their complexity due to their stochastic and noisy nature and the AI models produce images
with smoother textures and more predictable patterns which results in a less complex spatial
distribution of information. Recent spectral studies on AI generated content [43] explains
the gap that generative models lack high-frequency detail, yielding smoother textures and
thus systematically lower SI. To understand this further and what causes this, boxplots in
Figure 19 have been plotted which shows frame-by-frame complexity.
The interquartile range (IQR) of AI video type is smaller than Real video Figure 19
(Right:Spatial information) which tells that the 50% of the AI video frames are very similar
to each other in terms of spatial complexity. This means that the AI model is generating
frames with a very predictable and uniform level of detail. The points beyond the whisker
represents the frames that are considered outliers and have a SI value unusually higher or
lower. This is because of lack of uniform pixel arrangement across frames causing either
extremely detailed (high SI), or abnormally blurry (low SI) frames in between because pre-
diction is unstable. The presence of outliers signifies that AI video is not very consistent in
reproducing the SI like the Real videos. On the other hand, larger green box for real videos
signifies a large Interquartile Range (IQR). It means the real videos have much greater vari-
ability in its spatial complexity which is more natural. The real video data doesn’t show
outliers because there are no sudden "spikes" or "dips" like in AI video and the scene com-
plexity is more gradual frame-to-frame and thus the data falls within the box and whiskers.
The temporal information boxplot 19 illustrates that the mean TI value for AI videos is
slightly higher than real video which means that AI videos are able to capture small contin-
uous natural movements such as blinking of eyes and movement of people quite realistically
even though there are some outliers.
5.2
Objective metrics
Figure 20 shows interesting information about how scene variations effects metric
performance i.e. which scenes degrade more according to each metric.
Page 47 of 60
==PAGE:57==
5.2
Objective metrics
• Blur plot: It can be seen that PSNR, CVVDP and VMAF can sense this scene dif-
ference with PSNR tends to dip farthest from 1.0 under blur especially in the “Real-
bigroom”, "AIsmallroom” and "AIbigroom" scenes which are more spatially complex
scenes from Figure 18. Thus, it can be said that higher the scene complexity, more
distorted they get even though same amount of blur is applied to all the 8 scenes.
MS-SSIM and SSIM also do degrade per scene time, but this degradation is relatively
lower than other metrics.
• Shot noise : PSNR score is most heavily effected and VMAF and CVVDP scores are
least effected by shot noise degradation. SSIM,MS-SSIM perform almost identically.
Here the less complex scenes (having less number of people like AIsingleperson and
smallroom) gets more effected by shot noise as compared to bigger rooms which means
that shot noise is more prominent in less diverse scenes.
• Jitter : SSIM/MS-SSIM stay close to 1.0, but PSNR, VMAF and CVVDP scores are
effected, where PSNR is more severely effected because it requires pixel registration and
performs poorly. Realsmallroom and AIsingleperson scenes achieve less jitter scores
across CVVDP and VMAF. From the 18 it can be seen that these scenes have higher
TI value and it can be said that scenes with higher temporal information are effected
the most by jitter effect.
Figure 21 presents the averaged objective-metric responses for Real and AI videos under
three distortion types (Shot Noise, Blur, Jitter) at increasing severity levels. Several key
observations emerge:
• Overall monotonic decline. Across nearly all metrics and distortion types, increas-
ing the distortion level leads to lower scores, illustrating that PSNR, SSIM, MS-SSIM,
VMAF and CVDP each successfully track the in crease in distortion successfully.
• Spatial metrics vs. temporal jitter. SSIM and MS-SSIM fall sharply under in-
creasing Shot Noise and Blur, but remain nearly flat (and even rise in SSIM) from
Jitter level 1 to 2. This reflects their fundamentally spatial nature and frame-by-frame
structural similarity is relatively insensitive to small temporal displacements. It sug-
gests that when assessing temporal distortions one should complement SSIM type of
metrics with CVVDP or VMAF type metrics which are spatio-temporal metrics.
• Scale robustness of MS-SSIM. Under "Med" Blur , MS-SSIM remains around
0.96–0.97 for real data, whereas SSIM drops to ∼0.90. This is because MS-SSIM pools
similarity measurements over coarse as well as fine resolutions and it doesn’t penalize
heavy blur as harshly as SSIM, making it more stable when blur strength increases.
Also under shot noise conditions, SSIM scores lower as compared to MS-SSIM.
• Real vs. AI ranking. Real videos are scored higher than AI videos by all metrics
except VMAF under Shot Noise (where AI slightly leads). It can be hypothesized
Page 48 of 60
==PAGE:58==
5.3
Subjective evaluation and Correlation analysis
that Real scenes have unpredictable high frequency detail which yields consistently
higher PSNR, SSIM and MS-SSIM, while AI videos, being spatially smoother achieve
marginally better VMAF because VMAF’s learning-based model may mistake excess
high-frequency content for noise.
5.3
Subjective evaluation and Correlation analysis
The perceptual video quality across different sample types shows an interesting trend
in Figure 22. It can be visualized that most of the AI videos span across the same response
range of ∼50 −60. This results due to lack of dynamic nature in the AI videos and people
perceive same level of distortion across different samples. This range of MOS scores for AI
samples is lower than the response range of real video samples. This can be traced back
to the result in SI box-plot evaluation in 19 where discrepancies in the SI frame wise value
was seen in the AI category and makes the result more concrete that the AI videos lack
frame-wise coherency which results in this drop of MOS scores for AI scenes. The "bigroom"
samples in both the AI and Real cases has the least response range ∼45 −50 and it can
be interpreted that people rate scenes with more number of people and movement more
critically and perception of distortion is stronger in these scenes.
Another important phenomenon that occurs is "Luminance masking" which causes lower
sensitivity of the HVS to the distortion introduced in darker and brighter image areas [44].
Thus real medium room (Figure 6) which has a lot of sidelight coming from the window,
achieves a good response score as the distortions introduced in the brighter part of the image
is less perceived due to luminance masking.
To understand the effect of interaction of distortion on perceived visual quality the plot
can be visualized in Figure 23. In Fig.23 (a) for a fixed noise level, raising blur from “Ref” →
“Low” →“Med” lowers MOS by roughly 30 (in "Ref" and "Low" noise) and 20 (in "Med" and
High noise) points; in contrast, increasing noise while keeping blur constant reduces MOS
by only 5–10 points per step. Thus blur dominates noise in its perceptual impact under the
tested conditions. The human visual system (HVS) is most sensitive to mid–high spatial
frequencies (1-5 cpd peak), as shown by the classical contrast-sensitivity function (CSF) in
the early work in human vision [45] and illustrated in Figure 2 of the NCBI chapter [46].
Blur attenuates these spatial frequencies, directly removing information to which the HVS is
most responsive and thus, subjective studies report steep MOS drops even for modest blur
levels. When blur and noise exist together, blur suppresses the mid-high frequency edge de-
tail that would normally aid in noise detection and this leads to "blur dominant" quality drop.
Considering jitter interaction with noise and blur, it can be visualized that jitter is not a
strong distortion because it’s MOS score in "Ref" and "High" condition is very similar in both
the plots (Fig.23 (b)) and (Fig.23 (c)). There are several key researches that supports this
result. First, fast panning sport clips reveal jitter sooner than static talking-head scenes [47]
and thus in video conferencing scene, when there is not much scene change, jitter is not very
perceptible. Second, continuous-tracking experiments place the mean temporal-integration
Page 49 of 60
==PAGE:59==
5.3
Subjective evaluation and Correlation analysis
window at ∼100 ms, meaning that signals arriving inside that window are effectively pooled
rather than perceived as separate events. [48]. Thus, a single repeated video frame at 25
fps or 30 fps lasts only for 40 ms or 33 ms and fits in this temporal window of 100 ms. This
results in smooth percept of these repeated frames. Thus, the design of our experiment for
jitter cannot produce very perceptible changes because we produce jitter events within this
window of 100 ms.
The sharper penalty for blur and noise is expected, because these artifacts act on every
pixel for the full frame duration and therefore escape the temporal masking (∼100 ms) that
protects viewers from brief jitter events.
5.3.1
Correlation analysis
Table 6 evaluates objective metric performance on AI, real and All data in predicting
the response scores of assessors under different distortions. According to results, PSNR has
least correlation in terms of SROCC and PLCC across all the distortions. This is because
of the fact that PSNR cannot model spatial vision, temporal vision well and strongly re-
quires pixel registration. That is why in case of "Jitter" it performs the worst because the
pixel-to-pixel mapping fails due to temporal misalignment. The results closely follow with
the research [6] where it is stated that PSNR is a not a reliable measure of video (or image)
quality, at least for applications where humans are the video “receivers". Nonetheless, in the
author’s view PSNR is a simple function of the Mean Squared Error (MSE) between the
reference and test videos and provides a baseline for objective VQA algorithm performance.
In the study structural similarity metrics (SSIM and MS-SSIM) slightly outperformed
both CVVDP and VMAF on blur (loss of high-frequency detail) and shot noise (random pixel
fluctuations) distortions in terms of SROCC scores. This can be explained on the basis of
how each metric aligns with the HVS and their algorithmic design. SSIM and its multi-scale
version MS-SSIM were developed under the thought that human vision is highly adapted to
perceive structural information in images [49] rather than focusing on pixel-by-pixel error
because HVS is more closely related to how well structural information is preserved than
how much the pixel values differ.
This design models certain HVS sensitivities i.e.
hu-
mans readily notice changes in edges, patterns, and object structures, which blur and noise
both impact. SSIM was initially found to “overemphasize differences in high spatial fre-
quencies,” whereas MS-SSIM addressed this shortcoming [50] by accounting for larger-scale
structural similarity (making it less blindly sensitive to the loss of only the finest details).
This multi-scale approach better reflects how the HVS tolerates some high-frequency loss
where lower-frequency structure remains and in turn yields higher fidelity rank predictions
for blurred content. Also both MS-SSIM and SSIM operate on luminance values and do not
model any color perception and this quality works in advantage because blur and shot noise
predominantly affect the luminance structural detail.
But it is indeed noteworthy to see that CVVDP achieves highest accuracy in terms of
Page 50 of 60
==PAGE:60==
5.3
Subjective evaluation and Correlation analysis
PLCC score for blur and very close to best accuracy in shot noise condition. This is because
it can model the HVS characteristics. First, contrast is analyzed in multiple frequency bands
for luminance and chromatic channels using a novel “castle” CSF [34]. If an image is blurred,
CVVDP will note the loss of contrast primarily in high spatial frequencies (because it is more
perceptible to human vision). If the loss of contrast is high in high spatial frequency range,
it penalizes the score more as compared to loss of contrast in low spatial frequency, mimick-
ing the HVS. This provides better accuracy of scores. Even though CVVDP provides high
PLCC in Real and "All data" condition, it fails to achieve highest accuracy for AI samples,
creating a challenging condition for the metric.
In the AI category, VMAF achieves highest accuracy (PLCC = 0.876) in blur condition.
It is built by combining Visual Information Fidelity (VIF) metric which computes loss of
information across wavelet subbands. Thus, when blur occur, there is loss of high frequency
which leads to loss of information in higher frequency range subband which is rightly pre-
dicted by VMAF, also accounting for smooth nature of AI videos. Also detail loss metric
(DLM) helps to account for loss of information in such AI videos due to hallucination effect.
MS-SSIM gives highest correlation in comparison to other metrics for Jitter distortion.
In author’s opinion, this can be dotted back to Figure 20 which shows that SSIM and MS-
SSIM score very close to 1 for all samples as well as "Real" and "AI" case and Figure 23 (b)
(c) shows that jitter is the almost imperceptible due to the Mean opinion score for jitter
is very close to it’s reference level and this validates the result provided by MS-SSIM. The
very attribute of MS-SSIM that it cannot model temporal vision well comes to it advantage
to achieve the highest correlation. This leads to conclusion that jitter doesn’t perceptually
effect the quality and the author has identified one limitation that this thesis possesses that
jitter has not been introduced in the best possible way, which will be further explained in
the Limitations section.
The Table 7 provides information about metric performance when all distortion levels
were considered. It can be seen that CVVDP achieves the highest score (SROCC = 0.784,
PLCC = 0.806) in All data category, which demonstrates CVVDP’s high efficiency in mod-
eling MOS score. CVVDP presents a unique methodology, it models low-level human vision
and aims to predict the visibility of distortions in a principled way. CVVDP’s design aligns
closely with HVS psychophysics with it’s two main functionalities. First, it incorporates a
spatiotemporal contrast sensitivity function i.e. how sensitivity varies with spatial/temporal
frequency). Second, it models for contrast masking (how the presence of one pattern makes
it harder to see another) which is helpful in our study due to interaction of distortions. In
addition, it also considers display viewing conditions, spatial resolution, and luminance levels
making it a relatively good metric in measuring "device-induced" distortions.
Page 51 of 60
==PAGE:61==
5.4
Limitations
5.4
Limitations
One limitation of our approach is the weak perceptual impact of the simulated jitter.
In our experimental videos (office meeting scenes), the introduced frame rate mismatch did
not produce a strongly noticeable stutter. We suspect this is due to :
• Relatively slow movement in the content. In practice, severe jitter (e.g., in high-
action footage or unpredictable frame drops) might lead to more pronounced degra-
dation than what we achieved. This discrepancy suggests that our jitter simulation
method could be refined or that additional test scenarios with faster motion might be
necessary to fully stress-test our system’s performance under jitter conditions.
• RIFE preserved motion continuity. The original video after at 30 fps (24 fps for
AI) was downsampled to 15 fps using RIFE. It does so by estimating the optical flow
between the frames using a neural network called IFNet. Optical flow is basically a
map of how each pixmel moves from Frame A to Frame B. After IFNet computes the
motion, RIFE then uses a second network called FusionNet to warp the two input
frames toward the intermediate position and blend them into a new frame Fusion-
Net cleans up artifacts and ensures the generated frame looks natural by fuse details
from both original frames. This methodological downsampling perhaps have slightly
smoothed out the very artifact we wanted to study by selecting “optimal” frames after
downsampling.
As a result, the temporal artifact of jitter was subtle, making it challenging to conclu-
sively evaluate its effect on visual quality.
Page 52 of 60
==PAGE:62==
6
Conclusions and future scope of work
This study introduced a methodology to evaluate video conferencing devices by first
creating a dataset explicitly tailored to investigate perceptual video quality across diverse
scenes typical of personal and conference-room scenarios. To replicate realistic conditions
encountered in video conferencing, the dataset incorporates synthetic distortions associated
with the device-induced degradation during image acquisition processes. Specifically, three
prominent distortions blur, shot noise, and jitter were introduced at varying severity levels,
resulting in a comprehensive dataset of 192 distorted videos derived from eight unique ref-
erence sequences, including both traditionally captured videos and those generated through
advanced AI methods. Subjective quality assessment was employed with a methodology
by combining elements from the SAMVIQ paradigm and ITU-R BT.500 recommendations,
using a continuous rating scale to capture nuanced perceptual differences. This hybrid ap-
proach ensured efficient, robust and reliable subjective evaluations, crucial for accurately
benchmarking objective metrics.
The efficacy of standard objective video quality assessment (VQA) metrics namely,
PSNR, SSIM, MS-SSIM, VMAF, and CVVDP in predicting subjective perceptual judgments
was evaluated. Metric performance was quantified using the Pearson Linear Correlation Co-
efficient (PLCC) and Spearman Rank-Order Correlation Coefficient (SROCC). The results
revealed a clear dependency of metric performance on distortion type: MS-SSIM (SROCC
= 0.862) and CVVDP (PLCC = 0.833) emerged as most effective at predicting perceptual
quality degradation due to blur, whereas SSIM showed superior performance for shot noise
conditions with SROCC = 0.757 and PLCC = 0.749. For jitter, MS-SSIM performed well
with SROCC = 0.542 and PLCC = 0.408. Notably, when aggregating results across all
distortions, CVVDP outperformed other metrics, achieving a PLCC of 0.806
and SROCC of 0.784, which answers our proposed research question. CVVDP’s superior
performance is attributable to its perceptually grounded design, penalizing distortions only
to the extent perceptually noticeable and objectionable by human observers and modeling
display distortions making it highly robust for video conferencing environments.
While this study provides foundational insights into perceptual video quality in con-
ferencing scenarios, several avenues remain open for exploration. One promising direction
is integrating audio quality assessment alongside visual evaluation. Given the multimodal
nature of video conferencing interactions, investigating how the presence or quality of audio
influences overall perceptual video quality ratings could yield valuable insights. Such multi-
modal studies could help develop more comprehensive quality assessment tools, ultimately
improving end-user experiences.
Another critical area for future exploration involves examining and developing tempo-
rally sensitive quality assessment metrics. The current metrics predominantly emphasize
spatial quality aspects, which limits their accuracy in evaluating temporal distortions like
jitter or frame rate fluctuations. Future research should prioritize metrics explicitly account-
Page 53 of 60
==PAGE:63==
ing for human temporal sensitivity, enabling more accurate predictions of subjective quality
in scenarios dominated by temporal artifacts.
Additionally, expanding the dataset to include a broader range of environmental con-
ditions, device types, and conferencing setups could enhance practical applicability. This
extension would also support the development and benchmarking of machine learning-based
quality predictors, potentially offering improved flexibility and accuracy compared to tradi-
tional metrics.
In conclusion, the insights derived from this study underscore the complexity of per-
ceptual video quality assessment and highlight both current strengths and limitations of
existing metrics. By pursuing the suggested future research directions, subsequent studies
can further enhance the fidelity and reliability of video conferencing quality assessments,
directly benefiting user experiences in diverse communication scenarios.
Page 54 of 60
==PAGE:64==
References
References
[1] A. Nazneen, “The fundamentals of image quality tuning.” https://www.embedded.com/
the-fundamentals-of-image-quality-tuning/, 2021. Accessed: 2025-07-06.
[2] Jabra, “Hybrid ways of working 2023: The next generation of hybrid.” https://www.
jabra.com/da-dk/thought-leadership/hybridwork-2023, 2023.
Accessed 5 July
2025.
[3] S. Winkler, Digital Video Quality: Vision Models and Metrics. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley
& Sons, 2005. https://www.researchgate.net/publication/215482740_Digital_
Video_Quality_--_Vision_Models_and_Metrics.
[4] J. Nishimura, T. Gerasimow, R. Sushma, A. Sutic, C.-T. Wu, and G. Michael, “Au-
tomatic isp image quality tuning using nonlinear optimization,” in 2018 25th IEEE
International Conference on Image Processing (ICIP), pp. 2471–2475, IEEE, 2018.
https://arxiv.org/abs/1902.09023.
[5] S. Ratnasingam, “Deep camera: A fully convolutional neural network for image signal
processing.” arXiv preprint, 2019. https://arxiv.org/abs/1901.06788.
[6] K. Seshadrinathan, R. Soundararajan, A. C. Bovik, and L. K. Cormack, “Study of sub-
jective and objective quality assessment of video,” IEEE Transactions on Image Process-
ing, vol. 19, no. 6, pp. 1427–1441, 2010. https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/
5404314.
[7] F. De Simone, M. Tagliasacchi, M. Naccari, S. Tubaro, and T. Ebrahimi, “A H.264/AVC
video database for the evaluation of quality metrics,” in 2010 IEEE International Con-
ference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. 2430–2433, 2010.
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/5496296.
[8] M. Nuutinen, T. Virtanen, M. Vaahteranoksa, T. Vuori, P. Oittinen, and J. Häkki-
nen, “CVD2014: A database for evaluating no-reference video quality assessment algo-
rithms,” IEEE Transactions on Image Processing, vol. 25, no. 7, pp. 3073–3086, 2016.
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/7464299.
[9] Y. Li, S. Meng, X. Zhang, S. Wang, Y. Wang, and S. Ma, “UGC-VIDEO: Perceptual
quality assessment of user-generated videos,” in Proceedings of the IEEE Conference
on Multimedia Information Processing and Retrieval (MIPR), pp. 35–38, 2020. https:
//arxiv.org/abs/1908.11517.
[10] B.
Naderi,
R.
Cutler,
N.
S.
Khongbantabam,
Y.
Hosseinkashi,
H.
Turbell,
A. Sadovnikov, and Q. Zhou, “Vcd: A video conferencing dataset for video compression.”
https://github.com/microsoft/VCD, 2023. Accessed: June 2025.
[11] N. Ponomarenko, L. Jin, O. Ieremeiev, V. Lukin, K. Egiazarian, J. Astola, B. Vozel,
K. Chehdi, M. Carli, F. Battisti, and C.-C. J. Kuo, “Image database tid2013:
Page 55 of 60
==PAGE:65==
References
Peculiarities, results and perspectives,” Signal Processing:
Image Communication,
vol. 30, pp. 57–77, 2015. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0923596514001490.
[12] X. Min, H. Duan, W. Sun, Y. Zhu, and G. Zhai, “Perceptual video quality assessment:
A survey,” 2024. https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.03413.
[13] L. Zhang, I. Saidi, S. Tian, V. Barriac, and O. Déforges, “Overview of full-reference video
quality metrics and their performance evaluations for videoconferencing application,”
Journal of Electronic Imaging, vol. 28, no. 2, p. 023001, 2019. https://doi.org/10.
1117/1.JEI.28.2.023001.
[14] I.-R. R. C. S. of ITU, “Recommendation itu-r bt.500-12,” September 2009. http://
www.itu.int/dms_pubrec/itu-r/rec/bt/R-REC-BT.500-12-200909-I!!PDF-E.pdf.
[15] E. B. Union, “Subjective quality of internet video codecs - phase 2 evaluation using
samviq,” EBU Technical Review, vol. 30, no. 1, pp. 1–10, 2013. http://tech.ebu.ch/
docs/techreview/trev_301-samviq.pdf.
[16] W. Zhou, H. Amirpour, C. Timmerer, G. Zhai, P. Le Callet, and A. Bovik, “Perceptual
visual quality assessment: Principles, methods, and future directions,” 03 2025. https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2503.00625.
[17] F. Rafael, M. Patti, B.-G. Stanislas, P. Gabriel, T. Santiago, B. Thelma, A. Rick,
B. Corentin, M. Hervé, M. Pierre-Yves, L. Chanas, N. Hoang-Phi, P. Benoit, and
G. Frédéric, “Image quality evaluation of video conferencing solutions with realis-
tic laboratory scenes,” Electronic Imaging, vol. 34, pp. 318–1, 01 2022.
https:
//doi.org/10.2352/EI.2022.34.9.IQSP-318.
[18] G. Chen, D. Lin, J. Yang, C. Lin, J. Zhu, M. Fan, H. Zhang, S. Chen, Z. Chen, C. Ma,
W. Xiong, W. Wang, N. Pang, K. Kang, Z. Xu, Y. Jin, Y. Liang, Y. Song, P. Zhao,
B. Xu, D. Qiu, D. Li, Z. Fei, Y. Li, and Y. Zhou, “Skyreels-v2: Infinite-length film
generative model,” 2025. https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.13074.
[19] G. Mittag, B. Naderi, V. Gopal, and R. Cutler, “Lstm-based video quality prediction
accounting for temporal distortions in videoconferencing calls,” in accepted at ICASSP
2023, 2023. https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.12761.
[20] A. Ghildyal, Y. Chen, S. Zadtootaghaj, N. Barman, and A. Bovik, “Quality prediction
of ai generated images and videos: Emerging trends and opportunities,” 10 2024. 10.
48550/arXiv.2410.08534.
[21] Microsoft, “Microsoft teams devices certification specifications,” 2024. https://learn.
microsoft.com/en-us/microsoftteams/devices/certification-specifications.
[22] X. Wang, Y. Zhou, B. Huang, H. Chen, and W. Zhu, “Multi-modal generative ai:
Multi-modal llms, diffusions and the unification,” 2025.
https://arxiv.org/abs/
2409.14993.
Page 56 of 60
==PAGE:66==
References
[23] https://machinelearning.apple.com/research/matryoshka-diffusion-models.
[24] A. Radford, J. W. Kim, C. Hallacy, A. Ramesh, G. Goh, S. Agarwal, G. Sastry,
A. Askell, P. Mishkin, J. Clark, G. Krueger, and I. Sutskever, “Learning transferable vi-
sual models from natural language supervision,” in Proceedings of the International Con-
ference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2021. https://arxiv.org/abs/2103.00020.
[25] MIT
News,
“Combining
next-token
prediction
with
video
diffu-
sion
for
computer
vision
and
robotics.”
https://news.mit.edu/2024/
combining-next-token-prediction-video-diffusion-computer-vision-robotics-1016,
October 2024. Accessed: July 21, 2025.
[26] https://huggingface.co/Skywork/SkyReels-V2-T2V-14B-720P.
[27] L. K. Choi and A. C. Bovik,
“Video quality assessment accounting for tem-
poral visual masking of local flicker,” Signal Processing:
Image Communication,
vol. 67, pp. 182–198, 2018. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0923596518306374.
[28] Z. Wang, A. Bovik, H. Sheikh, and E. Simoncelli, “Image quality assessment: from error
visibility to structural similarity,” IEEE Transactions on Image Processing, vol. 13,
no. 4, pp. 600–612, 2004. https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/1284395.
[29] C. Boncelet, “Image noise models,” The Essential Guide to Image Processing,
pp. 143–167, 01 2009.
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
B978012374457900007X.
[30] https://www.imatest.com/imaging/mtf_appearance/.
[31] Q. Huynh-Thu and M. Ghanbari, “Impact of jitter and jerkiness on perceived video
quality,” in Proceedings of the 2nd International Workshop on Video Processing and
Quality Metrics for Consumer Electronics (VPQM 2006), (Scottsdale, AZ, USA), Jan-
uary 2006.
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/236882981_Impact_of_
jitter_and_jerkiness_on_perceived_video_quality.
[32] Z. Huang, T. Zhang, W. Heng, B. Shi, and S. Zhou, “Real-time intermediate flow
estimation for video frame interpolation,” in Proceedings of the European Conference
on Computer Vision (ECCV), 2022. https://arxiv.org/abs/2011.06294.
[33] Z. Li, A. Aaron, M. Manohara, and Y. Wang, “Toward a practical perceptual
video quality metric.” Netflix Tech Blog, 2020.
https://netflixtechblog.com/
toward-a-practical-perceptual-video-quality-metric-653f208b9652.
[34] R. K. Mantiuk, P. Hanji, M. Ashraf, Y. Asano, and A. Chapiro, “Colorvideovdp: A
visual difference predictor for image, video and display distortions,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2401.11485v2, 2024. https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.11485.
Page 57 of 60
==PAGE:67==
References
[35] R. K. Mantiuk, P. Hanji, M. Ashraf, Y. Asano, and A. Chapiro, “Colorvideovdp: A
visual difference predictor for image, video and display distortions (github repository).”
https://github.com/gfxdisp/ColorVideoVDP, 2024. Accessed: July 21, 2025.
[36] W.
Robitza,
“ffmpeg-quality-metrics(github
repository).”
https://github.com/
slhck/ffmpeg-quality-metrics, 2025. Accessed: July 21, 2025.
[37] FORCE Technology,
“Senselabonline™: Complete online listening test facility.”
https://forcetechnology.com/en/services/acoustics-noise-sound-quality/
senselabonline-, 2025. Accessed: July 29,2025.
[38] G. Le Ray and J. Khalid, “Senselabonline: Combining agile database administration
with strong data analysis,” in The R User Conference, useR, vol. 10, p. 38, 2013.
[39] M. Bach, “Freiburg vision test (fract),” 2025. https://michaelbach.de/fract/index.
html.
[40] International Telecommunication Union, “Recommendation ITU-T P.910: Subjective
video quality assessment methods for multimedia applications,” October 2023. https:
//www.itu.int/rec/T-REC-P.910-202310-I/en.
[41] VQEG, “Vqeg siti tools - spatial and temporal information measurement.” https://
github.com/VQEG/siti-tools, 2020. Accessed: 2025-07-26.
[42] S. Zadtootaghaj, S. Schmidt, N. Barman, S. Möller, and M. G. Martini, “A classification
of video games based on game characteristics linked to video coding complexity,” in
2018 16th Annual Workshop on Network and Systems Support for Games (NetGames),
pp. 1–6, 2018. https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8463434.
[43] K. Chandrasegaran, N. Tran, and N. Cheung, “A closer look at fourier spectrum discrep-
ancies for cnn-generated images detection,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 7200–7209, June 2021.
https://openaccess.thecvf.com/content/CVPR2021/papers/Chandrasegaran_A_
Closer_Look_at_Fourier_Spectrum_Discrepancies_for_CNN-Generated_Images_
CVPR_2021_paper.pdf.
[44] M. Naccari and M. Mrak, “Chapter 5 - perceptually optimized video compression,” in
Academic Press Library in signal Processing (S. Theodoridis and R. Chellappa, eds.),
vol. 5 of Academic Press Library in Signal Processing, pp. 155–196, Elsevier, 2014.
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780124201491000053.
[45] F. W. Campbell and J. G. Robson,
“Application of fourier analysis to the
visibility of gratings,”
The Journal of Physiology,
vol. 197,
no. 3,
pp. 551–
566, 1968. https://www.cns.nyu.edu/~david/courses/perceptionGrad/Readings/
CampbellRobson-JPhysiol1968.pdf?
Page 58 of 60
==PAGE:68==
References
[46] National Center for Biotechnology Information, “Figure: Spatial-frequency channels in
the contrast sensitivity function.” NCBI Bookshelf. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
books/NBK219042/figure/mmm00002/?report=objectonly.
[47] Kalpana Seshadrinathan, Alan C. Bovik, “Movie: Measuring objective video quality
evaluator.” Online PDF, 2025. https://videoclarity.com/PDF/MOVIE.pdf.
[48] M. Deodato and D. Melcher, “Continuous temporal integration in the human visual
system,” Journal of vision, vol. 24, p. 5, 12 2024. https://jov.arvojournals.org/
article.aspx?articleid=2802324.
[49] C. Li and A. C. Bovik, “Three-component weighted structural similarity index,” in
Image Quality and System Performance VI (S. P. Farnand and F. Gaykema, eds.),
vol. 7242, p. 72420Q, International Society for Optics and Photonics, SPIE, 2009.
https://doi.org/10.1117/12.811821.
[50] D. Hammou, Y. Cai, P. Madhusudanarao, C. G. Bampis, and R. K. Mantiuk, “Do image
and video quality metrics model low-level human vision?,” 2025. https://arxiv.org/
abs/2503.16264.
Page 59 of 60
==PAGE:69==
7
Appendix
The following Table shows SROCC and PLCC scores for different distortion type by
sample.
It can be seen that SSIM,MS-SSIM,VMAF and CVVDP provide same ranking
across one sample type. PSNR provides the lowest rank score for all the samples. There is
not much to infer from this data, thus we group in two categories of AI and Real to have
more response-metric scores pairs to compute SROCC and PLCC.
Table 8: SROCC and PLCC for different distortion types, by sample.
AI
Real
Metric
Bigroom Mediumroom Singleperson Smallroom Bigroom Mediumroom Singleperson Smallroom
All
SROCC for Blur
PSNR
0.781
0.815
0.789
0.738
0.566
0.789
0.833
0.760
0.610
SSIM
0.893
0.938
0.851
0.851
0.866
0.765
0.933
0.777
0.850
MS-SSIM
0.893
0.938
0.851
0.851
0.866
0.765
0.933
0.777
0.862
VMAF
0.893
0.938
0.851
0.851
0.866
0.765
0.933
0.777
0.815
CVVDP
0.893
0.938
0.851
0.851
0.866
0.765
0.933
0.777
0.851
SROCC for Noise
PSNR
0.507
0.621
0.808
0.725
0.583
0.751
0.626
0.659
0.610
SSIM
0.565
0.839
0.889
0.822
0.801
0.732
0.836
0.731
0.757
MS-SSIM
0.565
0.839
0.889
0.822
0.801
0.732
0.836
0.731
0.749
VMAF
0.565
0.839
0.889
0.822
0.801
0.732
0.836
0.731
0.700
CVVDP
0.565
0.839
0.889
0.822
0.801
0.732
0.836
0.731
0.753
SROCC for Jitter
PSNR
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
0.083
SSIM
0.410
0.816
0.507
0.490
0.361
0.337
0.825
0.488
0.528
MS-SSIM
0.410
0.816
0.507
0.490
0.361
0.337
0.825
0.488
0.542
VMAF
0.410
0.816
0.507
0.490
0.361
0.337
0.825
0.488
0.467
CVVDP
0.410
0.816
0.507
0.490
0.361
0.337
0.825
0.488
0.507
PLCC for Blur
PSNR
0.742
0.826
0.798
0.755
0.594
0.768
0.843
0.779
0.597
SSIM
0.886
0.932
0.809
0.866
0.896
0.735
0.913
0.784
0.797
MS-SSIM
0.859
0.918
0.851
0.850
0.839
0.761
0.919
0.820
0.807
VMAF
0.870
0.932
0.862
0.865
0.881
0.733
0.915
0.793
0.820
CVVDP
0.850
0.929
0.867
0.865
0.868
0.744
0.920
0.796
0.833
PLCC for Noise
PSNR
0.573
0.627
0.804
0.779
0.523
0.835
0.656
0.663
0.642
SSIM
0.595
0.842
0.889
0.834
0.751
0.779
0.807
0.715
0.749
MS-SSIM
0.596
0.831
0.888
0.830
0.744
0.785
0.803
0.719
0.727
VMAF
0.587
0.851
0.889
0.830
0.761
0.760
0.814
0.705
0.721
CVVDP
0.588
0.841
0.891
0.831
0.752
0.780
0.810
0.717
0.745
PLCC for Jitter
PSNR
0.099
SSIM
0.245
0.677
0.483
0.257
0.259
0.123
0.705
0.443
0.386
MS-SSIM
0.245
0.677
0.483
0.257
0.259
0.123
0.705
0.443
0.408
VMAF
0.245
0.677
0.483
0.257
0.259
0.123
0.705
0.443
0.390
CVVDP
0.245
0.677
0.483
0.257
0.259
0.123
0.705
0.443
0.356
Link to data https://dtudk-my.sharepoint.com/:f:/g/personal/s232166_dtu_
dk/EhFPbxprRC9Kuwc-hSfTPzoBSwQnxmM1Y3-Ea8igBFavMA?email=sofo%40dtu.dk&e=DNVPNV
Page 60 of 60
