==PAGE:1==
 
 
Technical, Economic, and Financial Assessment of a Geothermal Power Plant in Taiwanese Context 
Technical, Economic, and Financial 
Assessment of a Geothermal Power 
Plant in Taiwanese Context 
A 30 ECTS Master Thesis 
Author: Tzu-Hao Lo, MSc. Sustainable Energy 
Supervisor:  
Claire Marie Bergaentzlé, DTU Management 
Co-supervisor:  
Nishith Babubhai Desai, DTU Construct 
María Sigríður Guðjónsdóttir, Reykjavík University 
June, 2025 
 
==PAGE:2==
 
 
Technical, Economic, and Financial Assessment of Geothermal Power Plant in Taiwanese Context  Page  i of 72 
 
Technical, Economic, and Financial Assessment of a Geothermal Power 
Plant in Taiwanese Context 
A 30 ECTS Master Thesis  
June, 2025 
By 
Tzu-Hao Lo 
Copyright: 
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the 
customary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report 
title, etc. 
Published by: DTU Department of Technology, Management and Economics, 
Akademivej, Building 358, 2800 Kongens Lyngby Denmark  
www.man.dtu.dk 
 
==PAGE:3==
 
 
Technical, Economic, and Financial Assessment of Geothermal Power Plant in Taiwanese Context  Page  ii of 72 
 
Abstract 
This study presents financial assessments of a geothermal power plant project in 
Taiwanese context. It integrates technical simulations with a financial model for a 1 
MW organic Rankine cycle (ORC) power plant tapping a geothermal resource at 146°C. 
The plant also adopts anti-scaling measures by using an electrical submersible pump 
(ESP) and limiting reinjection temperature. 
The results show a capital expenditure (CAPEX) per kW as 8669 USD/kW and a 
Levelized Cost of Electricity (LCOE) at 149 USD/MWh, as competitive as other 
renewable energy sources in Taiwan. Implemented with four policy scenarios, the Net 
Present Value (NPV) increases from -3.59 million USD under the market price to +1.95 
million USD with a two-stage Feed-in Tariff (Two-stage FiT) scheme, yielding an Internal 
Rate of Return (IRR) at 7.46% and a breakeven period of 18 years. These findings 
indicate a strong dependence on the policy instruments of project’s feasibility. In 
addition, the electricity price and capacity factor are identified as the most impactful 
factors to project’s viability, while the Operation and Maintenance (O&M) cost and 
drilling cost introduce great uncertainty, showcasing great potential in technological 
advancement. Finally, the threshold wellhead temperature to sustain the project is 
calculated as 135°C, implying great business potential for geothermal projects in 
Taiwan. 
 
 
==PAGE:4==
 
 
Technical, Economic, and Financial Assessment of Geothermal Power Plant in Taiwanese Context  Page iii of 72 
 
Contents 
1 
Introduction ........................................................................................................... 1 
2 
Literature Review ................................................................................................... 4 
2.1. 
Techno-Economic Model for Geothermal Power Plant ............... 4 
2.2. 
Anti-scaling Technology ........................................................ 6 
2.3. 
Financial Model for Geothermal Projects ................................ 8 
3 
Methods ............................................................................................................... 11 
3.1. 
Model Presentation and Key Assumptions ............................. 11 
3.1.1. 
Well System Model ............................................................ 11 
3.1.2. 
Organic Rankine Cycle Power Plant Model ............................. 16 
3.1.3. 
Financial Model ................................................................. 26 
3.2. 
Input data and Parameters .................................................. 27 
3.2.1. 
Site-specific Data ............................................................... 27 
3.2.2. 
Technical Parameters.......................................................... 28 
3.2.3. 
Financial Parameters .......................................................... 29 
3.3. 
Policy Scenarios ................................................................. 30 
3.4. 
Sensitivity Analysis ............................................................. 31 
4 
Results and Discussions ....................................................................................... 32 
4.1. 
Results of Technical Simulations ........................................... 33 
4.1.1. 
Well Pressure Simulation .................................................... 33 
4.1.2. 
Reinjection Limitation ......................................................... 33 
4.1.3. 
Techno-economic model for power plant .............................. 34 
4.2. 
Results of the Financial Analysis ........................................... 38 
4.3. 
Sensitivity Analysis ............................................................. 40 
4.4. 
Threshold Analysis ............................................................. 42 
4.5. 
Comparison with Other Energy Sources ................................ 44 
5 
Conclusion ............................................................................................................ 46 
Acknowledgement ....................................................................................................... 48 
6 
Appendix .............................................................................................................. 49 
7 
Reference ............................................................................................................. 57 
 
 
 
==PAGE:5==
 
 
Technical, Economic, and Financial Assessment of Geothermal Power Plant in Taiwanese Context  Page iv of 72 
 
Abbreviation 
Description 
ANN 
Artificial Neural Network 
BEP 
Best Efficient Point 
CAPEX 
Capital Expenditure 
CEPCI 
Chemical Engineering Plant Cost Index® 
CPI 
Consumer Price Index 
DF 
Double Flash (geothermal plant type) 
DS 
Dry Steam (geothermal plant type) 
EES 
Engineering Equation Solver 
ESP 
Electrical Submersible Pump 
GHG 
Greenhouse Gas 
GWP 
Global Warming Potential 
IEA 
International Energy Agency 
IHX 
Internal Heat Exchanger 
IRENA 
International Renewable Energy Agency 
IRR 
Internal Rate of Return 
ITRI 
Industrial Technology Research Institute (Taiwan) 
LCF 
Loss Carry Forward 
LCOE 
Levelized Cost of Electricity 
LMTD 
Log Mean Temperature Difference 
LSP 
Line-shaft Pump 
NPV 
Net Present Value 
NREL 
National Renewable Energy Laboratory 
OPEX 
Operating Expense 
ORC 
Organic Rankine Cycle 
O&M 
Operation and Maintenance 
PBT 
Payback Time 
PFAS 
Per- and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances 
PPA 
Power Purchase Agreement 
PPI 
Producer Price Index 
PSO 
Particle Swarm Optimization 
R600a 
Isobutane 
R601 
n-Pentane 
R601a 
Isopentane 
REG 
Regenerator 
SF 
Single Flash (geothermal plant type) 
TSE 
Two-stage Evaporation 
==PAGE:6==
 
 
Technical, Economic, and Financial Assessment of Geothermal Power Plant in Taiwanese Context  Page  v of 72 
 
VSD 
Variable Speed Drive 
WACC 
Weighted Average Cost of Capital 
WTP 
Willingness to Pay 
==PAGE:7==
 
 
Technical, Economic, and Financial Assessment of Geothermal Power Plant in Taiwanese Context  Page  1 of 72 
 
1 Introduction 
Geothermal Energy is a clean and secure energy source due to its low emissions and 
independence from weather conditions and global disruptions. It plays a crucial role 
in displacing fossil fuel-based electricity and provides baseload power for carbon-
neutrality vision. 
According to the International Energy Agency (IEA) [1], the global geothermal power 
capacity was 15 GW in 2023, however, with the advancements in technology, the 
global technical potential is up to 600 TW, which is sufficient to meet global electricity 
demand 150 times over. To harness these untapped geothermal resources, nearly 30 
countries have included geothermal energy in their renewable energy goals for 2030 
and implemented a series of incentives and remuneration policies to motivate the 
development of geothermal projects. 
For Taiwan, with the ambition of 2050 Net-zero emissions announced in 2021, the 
government has been launching various renewable energy projects to replace 
decommissioning fossil-based power plants [2]. Thanks to its location at the margin of 
two active tectonic plates, Eurasian plate and Philippine Sea plate, it reports plenty of 
medium-to-high temperature geothermal heat sources (120°C – 250°C) [3].  
Back in the 1970s, the country already performed systematic explorations on several 
geothermal areas [4]. The first demonstration system was built on Chingshui 
geothermal field in 1981. However, due to the lack of anti-scaling technologies and 
reservoir management knowledge, geothermal energy was not widely harnessed in 
the country [5]. 
With the advancement in geothermal technologies over the past decades, the 
government recently reviewed the geothermal potential and incorporated it into the 
2050 net-zero emissions roadmap. In 2025, the Feed-in Tariffs are offered up to 185 
USD/MWh along with the well drilling subsidy, pointing out an advantage for 
developing geothermal energy projects in Taiwan. 
Although it is an emerging opportunity, there are still technical and economic 
challenges to address. On the technical side, the most common issues have been 
related to silica and calcite scaling. Such scaling can lead to clogged wells and pipes, 
equipment damage, reduction of reservoir porosity, and ultimately the degradation of 
power plants [6], [7]. Various studies have presented anti-scaling technologies to 
mitigate this degradation, including chemical inhibitors to remove silica and calcite [8], 
anti-scale coatings [7], and downhole pumps to prevent flashing [9]. However, there is 
==PAGE:8==
 
 
Technical, Economic, and Financial Assessment of Geothermal Power Plant in Taiwanese Context  Page  2 of 72 
 
no universal best practice. The choice of anti-scaling methods may vary depending on 
the location and reinjection regulations. On the economic side, geological surveys 
identify geothermal hot spots, highlighting their business potential. However, it is vital 
to ensure that electricity selling prices are sufficient to cover all the costs over the 
project’s lifespan. Additionally, according to the IEA [1], the initial investment for 
geothermal projects accounts for about 80% of electricity generation costs, which 
implies a high risk during the early stages of a project. Therefore, a discreet feasibility 
study with a financial assessment is essential to ensure the project’s viability.  
In terms of the policy instruments, Feed-in Tariff (FiT) is the main approach used to 
stimulate renewable energy projects in Taiwan, while Power Purchase Agreements 
(PPAs) also play a crucial role in the market due to surging demand from private sectors 
for green electricity. Both mechanisms provide energy projects with a steady and 
predictable cash flow, reducing exposure to risks and uncertainties in the market [10].  
Despite the fact that both technical and economic challenges can be mitigated through 
proper system designs and project management, questions arise about how much 
capital a developer should invest in the project, how these policy instruments can 
affect the project, and what the threshold conditions are to guarantee the project’s 
profitability? 
The existing literature provides a comprehensive foundation for modelling geothermal 
power plants. From technical aspects, diverse plant types including dry steam [11], 
single/double flash [12], and binary Organic Rankine Cycle (ORC) [13] have been well 
studied. Among these, binary ORC presents the advantage of being able to extract 
more energy from the geofluid and is the most widespread type for heat source 
temperatures less than 200°C, which is common practice in Taiwan [14]. For binary 
ORC system, diverse plant configurations such as simple cycle, preheater, internal heat 
exchanger, and regenerator have also been reviewed by Ahmadi et al. [15] and 
Haghighi et al. [16]. However, the existing techno-economic models do not account for 
anti-scaling treatments and only provide results about Payback Time (PBT) and 
Levelized Cost of Electricity (LCOE). The PBT method does not consider the time value 
of money and is less preferred than Net Present Value (NPV) and Internal Rate of 
Return (IRR) methods for assessing profitability for long-term energy projects [17].  
From an economic perspective, pre-feasibility models have been developed under the 
contexts of Ecuador [18], Mexico [19], [20], Indonesia [21], [22], [23], Tanzania [24], 
Europe [25], and Taiwan [26]. However, these financial models assumed constant 
electricity production rates and disregarded the anti-scaling treatments. They also 
neglected the temperature effects of the heat sources, making them incapable of 
==PAGE:9==
 
 
Technical, Economic, and Financial Assessment of Geothermal Power Plant in Taiwanese Context  Page  3 of 72 
 
assessing the profitability of specific geothermal resources. 
Here are the summaries for research gaps: 
1. The existing techno-economic models often neglect the integration of anti-
scaling procedures in plant configurations.  
2. The existing techno-economic models cannot involve time value of money and 
diverse policy scenarios. This limitation results in less accurate profitability 
analyses. 
3. The existing financial models often assume constant power productions, which 
cannot reflect the quality of specific geothermal heat sources and derive the 
thresholds for viability. 
To bridge the existing gaps, this research will develop new models using a test case in 
Taiwan. The research will first develop a techno-economic model of a binary ORC plant 
which mitigates the scaling issues by commissioning a downhole pump. Feeding with 
site-specific data from Taiwan, this techno-economic model will reflect the 
performance of heat sources in terms of capital expenditure (CAPEX) and the 
electricity production rates. After that, the techno-economic model will be integrated 
into a financial model, which accounts for time value of money, taxation, inflation, and 
depreciation to deliver more accurate analyses for specific heat sources. The policy 
scenarios including market price, fixed FiT, two-stage FiT, and PPA, will be engaged to 
derive economic indicators such as NPV and IRR. Sensitivity analyses will be performed 
afterward to identify the impactful financial parameters and possible NPV ranges. 
Finally, threshold analyses will be done to figure out the threshold temperature and 
flow rate to ensure the project’s viability. A brief comparison with other renewable 
energy will be provided to display the competitiveness of this geothermal project. 
The aim of this master’s thesis is to present a framework for the financial assessment 
of geothermal projects, using a test case in Taiwan. The study is the first of its kind to 
utilize the anti-scaling technology with a downhole pump in techno-economic model. 
It is also unprecedented to provide financial assessments for geothermal heat sources 
in Taiwanese context. By means of providing estimation of plant costs and electricity 
generation, the study intends to provide reference for investment decision. Meanwhile, 
by exploring the effects of various pricing structures, the study hopes to offer reference 
for policymakers of incentive programs, aiming to benefit the financing of geothermal 
projects. 
 
 
==PAGE:10==
 
 
Technical, Economic, and Financial Assessment of Geothermal Power Plant in Taiwanese Context  Page  4 of 72 
 
2 Literature Review 
This master thesis will explore the published techno-economic models. Following that, 
anti-scaling technologies, with a particular focus on the downhole pump approach, will 
be studied. Finally, financial models for different countries will be reviewed, along with 
various pricing scenarios such as Feed-in Tariff (FiT) and Power Purchase Agreement 
(PPA). 
2.1. Techno-Economic Model for Geothermal Power Plant 
The existing techno-economic analyses for geothermal power plants have focused on 
optimizing performance by varying system configurations and working fluids. The 
summary outcome of these works indicates that ORC is the most performant 
technology and offers recommendations for working fluid selection. 
DiPippo [27] has extensively discussed the fundamentals of geothermal power plants, 
focusing on the working principles of different plant types and components. Colpan et 
al. [28] further demonstrated thermodynamic models for various plant types including 
dry steam (DS), single flash (SF), double flash (DF), binary ORC, transcritical CO2, 
Double-flash enhanced Kalina, and multi-generation systems (cooling, desalination). 
Among these, flash-steam plants (DS, SF, DF) are reported to offer better technical and 
economic performance. However, the application is preferable in high temperature 
and vapor-dominant geothermal fields. For liquid-dominant fields with geofluid 
temperatures below 150 °C, binary ORC plants are the most widely deployed for their 
low operation temperature and closed loop design against scaling problems [27].  
To enhance system performance by means of tuning working conditions, optimization 
methodologies such as Artificial Neural Network (ANN), Particle Swarm Optimization 
(PSO), Multi-objective Optimization have been presented, whereas the trade-off 
between technical and financial performance is not considered by Colpan et al. [28].  
Another approach to enhance the system performance is by modifying the plant 
configurations, as reviewed by Ahmadi et al. [15] and Haghighi et al. [16]. Apart from 
simple cycles consisted of a pump, an evaporator with preheating function, a turbine, 
and a condenser [29], [30], [31], [32], [33], variants by deploying superheater [30], [32], 
[33], [34], internal heat exchanger (IHX) [30], [31], [32], [34], [35], regenerator (REG) 
[29], [30], [32], two-stage evaporation (TSE) [29], and transcritical cycles [33] have 
been proposed. In addition, the mentioned literature extensively compared the 
performance of diverse working fluids, such as R600a (Isobutane), R601 (n-pentane), 
R601a (Isopentane), R134a, and R245fa. 
==PAGE:11==
 
 
Technical, Economic, and Financial Assessment of Geothermal Power Plant in Taiwanese Context  Page  5 of 72 
 
Karimi et al. [29] performed exergo-economic studies on simple, REG, and TSE cycles 
with heat source temperature at 150°C. They compared the performance of using dry 
(R600a, R601a), wet (R152a, R134a), and isentropic (R11, R123) working fluids. A 
fouling factor was also involved in modeling the heat exchanger for greater accuracy. 
The results showed using R11 in the REG cycle delivered the best exergy efficiency. 
Although the study did not determine the best working fluid, it indicated a better 
profitability to use isentropic working fluids in TSE cycle and to use dry working fluids 
in simple and REG cycles.  
Liu et al. [30] studied the simple, superheating, IHX, and REG cycles for low 
temperature applications at 80-95°C. They compared the performance of using R152a, 
R134a, R123, and R245fa. The study further introduced multi-objective programming 
with thermodynamic and economic indices to determine the optimal operation 
scheme. Their results revealed the overall performance increased with increasing heat 
source temperature. Among all configurations, the simple cycle with working fluid 
R123 is the most suitable for low-temperature ORC system. 
Altun et al. [31] conducted exergy analyses on simple and IHX cycle using 10-year 
operational data from an operating plant in Turkey. The working fluid was R134a, and 
the wellhead temperature was 121°C. They recommended using IHX for better energy 
and exergy efficiency compared to the simple cycle. However, their study did not 
consider the profitability of different layouts. 
Zare [32] conducted exergo-economic analyses on simple, superheating, IHX, and REG 
cycles with different organic working fluids such as R600a (isobutane), R601 (n-
pentane), R245fa, and R152a with the heat source temperature 165°C. Although IHX 
cycle showed the highest thermal efficiency, the superheating cycle was the most 
profitable configuration due to the lowest cost and the shortest payback period. 
Meanwhile, n-pentane yielded the highest efficiency and the lowest cost among the 
selected working fluids. 
Song et al. [33] compared the thermo-economic performance among simple, 
superheating, and transcritical cycle. In their case, the heat source temperature was 
180°C and the working fluids were R1234yf, R134a, R600a, and R245fa. Their study 
concluded that REG cycle is the least preferred among all owing to the high equipment 
cost. R245fa is favored in simple cycle and transcritical cycle. On the other hand, R600a 
is the most suitable for a superheating cycle. For the working fluid whose critical 
temperature was close to the heat-source temperature, using a transcritical cycle can 
deliver better thermodynamic and economic performances because of the better 
thermal match between the heat source and the working fluid. 
==PAGE:12==
 
 
Technical, Economic, and Financial Assessment of Geothermal Power Plant in Taiwanese Context  Page  6 of 72 
 
Bina et al. [34] studied the influence of introducing IHX to a superheating cycle. The 
cycles used heat source temperature 165°C with working fluid R600a (isobutane). The 
results showed the introduction of IHX leading to superior energy and exergy efficiency, 
as well as economic behavior. 
Desai et al. [35] incorporated the degradation of reservoir in their model with an IHX. 
The heat source temperature was 150°C, and the working fluids were R245fa, 
R1233zd(E), and R601. The results showed that R245fa and R1233zd(E) had better 
LCOE outcomes. However, R245fa had a high global warming potential (GWP) and 
R1233zd(E) was problematic due to its per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) issue.  
To date, some studies highlighted thermodynamic performance by means of exergy 
analysis, other studies also took economic performance as a crucial indicator. It can be 
concluded that using dry working fluids such as R600a (Isobutane), R601 (n-pentane) 
for geothermal applications are economically better than isentropic and wet working 
fluids. However, it is not clear which configuration delivers the best economic 
performance. Moreover, the anti-scaling technology has not yet been addressed and 
built into techno-economic model in previous studies. 
Therefore, in this master’s thesis, the model will be built for a simple ORC cycle which 
is the basic and most intensively studied configuration. Dry working fluid R601 (n-
pentane) was studied in our previous work (Desai et al. [35]) and is chosen for its 
excellent economic performance. The anti-scaling technology will also be taken into 
consideration to assess the profitability of a geothermal project. 
 
2.2. Anti-scaling Technology 
Geothermal power generation faces technical challenges affecting equipment 
operation, output, and consequently, the whole business case of plants. Most notably, 
calcite and silica are major concerns and require anti-scaling measures. Yet, anti-
scaling technologies have seldom been considered and integrated in existing feasibility 
studies. 
Silica and calcite, which are originally dissolved in the geofluid and reservoir, are the 
main contributors to the scaling problems, which were extensively explained by 
Gunnlaugsson et al. [6] and Hirtz [36]. 
The silica scaling problem occurs because silica's solubility drops as temperatures 
decrease. This reduction in solubility causes the silica in the geofluid to become 
supersaturated, leading to its precipitation and the formation of scale. 
==PAGE:13==
 
 
Technical, Economic, and Financial Assessment of Geothermal Power Plant in Taiwanese Context  Page  7 of 72 
 
For calcite scaling problems, as the geofluid is extracted from the reservoir to the 
surface, the geofluid pressure drops because of friction and gravitational force. Once 
the pressure falls below the saturation pressure, the geofluid will begin to flash and 
release non-condensable gases such as carbon dioxide (CO2). This phenomenon breaks 
the balance of carbon dioxide-calcite system. It makes pH value of the geofluid 
increase and the geofluid becomes supersaturated of CaCO3 due to the decreased 
solubility at higher pH values. As a result, calcite start to precipitate in the well.  
Several anti-scaling technologies for geothermal well systems are being used currently. 
To ease the silica scaling problems, it is common practice to maintain the reinjection 
temperature above the solubility level, thus silica scaling should not occur. To prevent 
calcite scaling, it is helpful to commission a downhole pump below flashing depth. By 
means of sustaining well pressure above flashing pressure, it hinders the calcite scaling 
[9]. Meanwhile, this application also boosts the flow rate of geofluid and enhances the 
productivity of the well. Apart from those, other approaches were reviewed by Zhao 
et al. [37], including chemical scale inhibitor, pH modification, nanobubble, dilution, 
and anti-scale coatings. These technologies are applicable to mitigate both calcite and 
silica scaling problems. 
Regarding the anti-scaling technology in Taiwanese context, the geothermal fields in 
Taiwan typically overlap with national parks, indigenous traditional territories, hot 
spring attractions, and environmental sensitive area. Hence, strict regulations have 
been implemented on the development of geothermal projects, such as pollution 
treatment plans, reinjection plans, and impact assessments to hot spring operators 
[38]. Because of the potential pollution from chemical inhibitors and the unfeasibility 
of dilution due to scarce land and water, conservative approaches by controlling the 
reinjection temperatures and commissioning downhole pumps are preferred to 
minimize the impact on the surrounding environment and preserve the quality of hot 
springs. 
Today, two types of downhole pumps are utilized, line-shaft pump (LSP) and electrical 
submersible pump (ESP). The main difference between them is, in an LSP system, the 
motor is located at surface with a shaft connecting to the downhole pump. In an ESP 
system, the motor is located downhole beneath the pump [39]. They both have been 
used for oil & gas production since 1970s, and LSPs were more reliable and commonly 
used in industry. However, by overcoming high temperature constraint, ESPs have 
operational advantages such as higher flow rate capacities and greater installation 
depth (>700m) [39], [40]. 
==PAGE:14==
 
 
Technical, Economic, and Financial Assessment of Geothermal Power Plant in Taiwanese Context  Page  8 of 72 
 
Febrianto et al. [41] studied commercial viabilities for harnessing low temperature 
geothermal resources by pump technologies in Indonesia. By using the downhole 
pump, the threshold temperature to ensure viability could be reduced from 210°C to 
160°C and the calcite scaling problems can be mitigated. 
Apart from the mitigation of scaling problems, many studies regarding downhole 
pumps turned the focus on increasing productivity. Aydin et al. [42], [43] reported an 
application of ESPs in Turkey along with its economic benefits. It increased the 
production rate of the studied well by 165 tons/hour with a 2-month pay-off time for 
ESP.  
Mattie et al. [44] also reported a successful case in Turkey. By using the ESP, the 
developer was able to extract the geofluid with static fluid level 300 meters below the 
wellhead, pointing out a 3.5-month pay-off time for the ESP.  
However, these cases primarily rely on chemical inhibitors to address the scaling 
problems, which are often not feasible options in Taiwan due to strict environmental 
regulations. In this study, the ESP is selected because of the less environmental impact 
and several successful cases in Taiwan. The purpose of using ESP is to maintain the well 
pressure above flashing pressure at the minimum necessary flow rate increase, 
achieving sustainable utilization of geothermal reservoirs. 
 
2.3. Financial Model for Geothermal Projects 
While the techno-economic model generally uses simple PBT as a crude investment 
criterion because of its transparency and ease of calculation, it does not consider the 
time value of money and is less favored for accurate project evaluation [45]. As 
elaborated by Raikar et al. [46], for capital intensive renewable energy projects, 
financial models providing Net Present Value (NPV) and Internal Rate of Return (IRR) 
are especially essential for analyzing project risks, sizing debts, and making investment 
decisions.  
For geothermal power plant projects, numerous financial models have been proposed 
for different country-specific scenarios. Typically, the model types can be categorized 
into two, the deterministic models with fixed inputs, and probabilistic Monte Carlo 
method with randomized inputs. 
Moya et al. [18] took advantage of the RETScreen® Clean Energy Management 
Software developed by Government of Canada [47], simulating an imagined 22MW 
binary plant in Ecuadorian context. The study further included Greenhouse Gas (GHG) 
==PAGE:15==
 
 
Technical, Economic, and Financial Assessment of Geothermal Power Plant in Taiwanese Context  Page  9 of 72 
 
reduction cost in its cost structure, aiming to compare the profitability between 
geothermal and fossil-based plants. The results pointed out that the transition from 
fossil fuel to geothermal energy can help to save 24.3 million USD annually. But the 
authors suggested an accurate drilling cost estimation for better accuracy.  
González-García et al. [19] applied Monte Carlo simulation to estimate a potential 
energy output 1MW from a Mexican geothermal field, followed by sensitivity analyses. 
They found the project profitable with payback time of 15 years. They also reported a 
low drilling risk compared to the FiT price but suggested a detailed production test 
from the production well. 
González-García et al. [20] also studied an operating 68 MW Mexican geothermal 
power plant with actual operation cost over the last decade. They aimed to compare 
the profitability of two pricing scenarios, the on-going PPA and the day-ahead market 
prices. The results showed positive accumulative cashflows by PPA and negative values 
by market prices in the first 5 of the 25 years of project’s lifetime. Despite this, they 
believed in the worthiness for both cases after the whole lifetime. 
Lesmana et al. [21] summarized the tendering and tax regulations in Indonesia, 
discussing the profitability in the tendering stage via Excel Monte Carlo simulation. In 
addition to the financial parameters such as electricity price and production wells cost, 
they also included technical parameters such as the well capacity and the steam 
fraction for sensitivity analyses. They concluded the Monte Carlo probabilistic 
approach was very beneficial for the tendering stage when the availability of 
geophysical data was still limited. Among all the parameters, the electricity price and 
the production well capacity had the most significant influence on the project. 
Nasution [22] used deterministic financial models. He settled an imagined 120 MW 
plant in Indonesian context. Because of a higher risk for developing countries, Capital 
Asset Pricing Model (CAPM) was introduced to estimate the Weighted Average Cost of 
Capital (WACC). The results were not very attractive due to the high WACC at 12-15%. 
He further proposed an additional income from carbon trading certificates, which 
would make the projects profitable. 
Setiawan et al. [23] also placed their target plant in Indonesia. They used the Monte 
Carlo method to assess the economic performance of an imagined 110 MW plant and 
performed sensitivity analyses with three pricing scenarios. The results showed that 
the FiT was the most significant parameter in the model and they suggested an 
attractive and stable electricity price from the government. 
==PAGE:16==
 
 
Technical, Economic, and Financial Assessment of Geothermal Power Plant in Taiwanese Context  Page 10 of 72 
 
Kalimbia [24] built a financial model for an imagined 33 MW plant in Tanzanian context 
via Monte Carlo method. Although the project was reported to be highly profitable. 
The aims of the model were to assess the bankability. The writer suggested a public-
private partnership to share the risk during project development. 
Kępińska et al. [25] used the deterministic financial models to study financial 
sustainability of risk insurance fundings for geothermal projects in Hungary, Poland, 
and Greece. They highlighted the significance of the high drilling success rates to 
support and sustain these risk mitigation schemes. 
Hwang et al. [26] featured the two-stage FiT with their Monte Carlo simulation for an 
imagined 1MW plant in Taiwan. The willingness to pay (WTP) concepts were 
introduced for the sensitivity analyses on FiT prices. It concluded that two-stage FiT 
was more beneficial than fixed FiT because of a faster payback time for investors. They 
also recommended the policymakers that, apart from elevating FiT prices, the benefits 
were equally obvious to encourage the plant’s utilization rate and reduce the 
Operation and Maintenance (O&M) expense. 
In general, published financial models often assumed constant plant capacities in 
country-specific frameworks. The pricing scenarios, for instance the FiT, PPA, and 
liberalized market, were reported as the main features to impact the project financing. 
They are often applicable at the early stage of the projects, such as tendering, 
policymaking, and developing insurance schemes. However, these are unable to reflect 
technical aspects such as heat source qualities, well depth, and equipment cost. Nor 
can they involve the scaling problems. 
To account for these technical factors, this study will use data obtained from real 
production tests and integrate the techno-economic model with the financial model. 
The electricity output and CAPEX derived from the thermo-economic models will be 
input into the Excel-based financial models to calculate the profitability of a specific 
geothermal well. The sensitivity analyses will then be performed to identify the most 
impactful parameters. In addition, the threshold temperature and geofluid mass flow 
rate at which the energy projects become economically viable will also be revealed.  
 
 
==PAGE:17==
 
 
Technical, Economic, and Financial Assessment of Geothermal Power Plant in Taiwanese Context  Page 11 of 72 
 
3 Methods 
To assess the profitability of a geothermal project in Taiwanese context, technical and 
financial models are first built and fed with site-specific data to derive the plant’s 
performance and costs. Diverse policy scenarios are then applied to the project, 
showcasing its viability via indicators such as NPV and IRR. Finally, a sensitivity analysis 
is conducted to identify the most impactful parameters in the project. 
3.1. Model Presentation and Key Assumptions 
The model can be divided into three sub-models: the well system model, the power 
plant model, and the financial model. The first two models, developed in Engineering 
Equation Solver (EES) [48], demonstrate thermodynamic performance and component 
costs of a plant. The financial model, developed in Microsoft Excel, reflects the market 
environment in Taiwan. 
3.1.1. Well System Model 
The well system model simulates the well pressure profile along with the ESP, 
determines reinjection limitations, and estimates the drilling cost. 
Flashing Depth 
Deep underground, the geothermal reservoirs contain geofluid at high temperature 
and high pressure. This high pressure prevents the geofluid from boiling despite its 
high temperature. When a geothermal well is drilled and installed with pipes, the 
geofluid flows toward the surface with pressure drops due to hydrostatic and friction 
of the pipe wall. For liquid-only geofluid, the pressure drops along each pipe section 
can be described by Equation (1).  
∆𝑃= 2𝑓𝜌𝑉2𝐿𝑝𝑖𝑝𝑒
𝐷𝑝𝑖𝑝𝑒
+  𝜌𝑔𝐿𝑝𝑖𝑝𝑒 
Equation (1) 
∆𝑃 : Pressure drop along the pipe section 
𝑓 : Friction factor 
𝜌 : Density of geofluid, assumed at saturation pressure, well bottom temperature 
𝑉 : Velocity of geofluid crossing the pipe section 
𝐿𝑝𝑖𝑝𝑒 : Length along the pipe section 
𝐷𝑝𝑖𝑝𝑒 : Diameter of the pipe section 
𝑔 : Gravitational acceleration 
 
==PAGE:18==
 
 
Technical, Economic, and Financial Assessment of Geothermal Power Plant in Taiwanese Context  Page 12 of 72 
 
For the friction factor 𝑓 , Swamee-Jain equation provides an empirical formula to 
calculate the friction factor for turbulent flow in pipes, as shown in Equation (2).  
𝑓= 
0.25
{log10[ 𝜀𝐷𝑝𝑖𝑝𝑒
⁄
3.7
 + 5.74
𝑅𝑒0.9]}2
 
Equation (2) 
𝑓 : friction factor 
𝜀 : Surface roughness of the pipe wall.  
𝐷𝑝𝑖𝑝𝑒 : Diameter of the pipe section 
𝑅𝑒 : Reynolds Number. For 𝑅𝑒>4000, the geofluid flows in the turbulent regime, 
which is the common practice for geothermal wells. 
Where the Reynolds Number 𝑅𝑒 is deduced from Equation (3). 
𝑅𝑒= 𝜌𝑉𝐷𝑝𝑖𝑝𝑒
𝜇
 
Equation (3) 
𝑅𝑒 : Reynolds Number 
𝜌 : Density of geofluid, assumed at saturation pressure, well bottom temperature 
𝑉 : Velocity of geofluid crossing the pipe section 
𝐷𝑝𝑖𝑝𝑒 : Diameter of the pipe section 
𝜇 : Dynamic viscosity of geofluid, assumed at saturation pressure, well bottom 
temperature 
When the geofluid pressure in the well drops below the saturation pressure, the liquid-
only geofluid starts to boil into vapor, causing the phenomenon known as “flashing”. 
The level at which flashing occurs is called the “flash horizon”, which corresponds to 
the “flashing depth”. 
Equation (4) describes the relationship between well bottom pressure, pressure drops 
along the pipes, and saturation pressure. 
𝑃𝑏𝑜𝑡𝑡𝑜𝑚−∆𝑃𝑏𝑜𝑡𝑡𝑜𝑚−𝑓𝑙𝑎𝑠ℎ= 𝑃𝑠𝑎𝑡 
Equation (4) 
𝑃𝑏𝑜𝑡𝑡𝑜𝑚 : Pressure at the bottom of the well 
∆𝑃𝑏𝑜𝑡𝑡𝑜𝑚−𝑓𝑙𝑎𝑠ℎ : Total pressure drops along the pipe sections from the bottom 
of well to the flashing depth. 
𝑃𝑠𝑎𝑡  : Saturation pressure. Assuming the well system being adiabatic, the 
saturation pressure is calculated based on the highest temperature in the well. 
 
==PAGE:19==
 
 
Technical, Economic, and Financial Assessment of Geothermal Power Plant in Taiwanese Context  Page 13 of 72 
 
Pressure at the bottom of the well 𝑃𝑏𝑜𝑡𝑡𝑜𝑚 and reservoir temperature are available 
site data, giving the result of total pressure drop to the flash horizon ∆𝑃𝑏𝑜𝑡𝑡𝑜𝑚−𝑓𝑙𝑎𝑠ℎ, 
which is then used to derive the flashing depth as shown in Equation (5) and Equation 
(6). 
∆𝑃𝑏𝑜𝑡𝑡𝑜𝑚−𝑓𝑙𝑎𝑠ℎ= 2𝑓𝜌𝑉2𝐿𝑏𝑜𝑡𝑡𝑜𝑚−𝑓𝑙𝑎𝑠ℎ
𝐷𝑝𝑖𝑝𝑒
+  𝜌𝑔𝐿𝑏𝑜𝑡𝑡𝑜𝑚−𝑓𝑙𝑎𝑠ℎ 
Equation (5) 
𝐿𝑓𝑙𝑎𝑠ℎ= 𝐿𝑤𝑒𝑙𝑙− 𝐿𝑏𝑜𝑡𝑡𝑜𝑚−𝑓𝑙𝑎𝑠ℎ 
Equation (6) 
𝐿𝑏𝑜𝑡𝑡𝑜𝑚−𝑓𝑙𝑎𝑠ℎ : Length from the bottom of the well to flash horizon 
𝐿𝑓𝑙𝑎𝑠ℎ : Flashing depth 
𝐿𝑤𝑒𝑙𝑙 : Depth of the well 
Above the flash horizon, the geofluid is a two-phase mixture, which is difficult to model 
due to its complexity in flow and friction behavior [49]. For rough estimation of the 
pressure profile in the well, it is treated as single-phase liquid flow referring to 
Equation (1).  
Electrical Submersible Pump 
To prevent the flashing and calcite scaling problem, an ESP is installed below the flash 
horizon. The pressure elevated by the ESP can be calculated from Equation (7). 
∆𝑃𝐸𝑆𝑃= ∆𝑃𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑔𝑒× 𝑛𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑔𝑒 
Equation (7) 
∆𝑃𝐸𝑆𝑃 : Pressure elevated by ESP 
∆𝑃𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑔𝑒 : Head per stage 
𝑛𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑔𝑒 : Number of pump stages 
The power required to operate the ESP can be calculated from Equation (8). 
𝑊̇ 𝐸𝑆𝑃= 𝑊̇ 𝐸𝑆𝑃,𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑔𝑒× 𝑛𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑔𝑒
𝜂𝐸𝑆𝑃
 
Equation (8) 
𝑊̇ 𝐸𝑆𝑃 : Power of ESP   
𝑊̇ 𝐸𝑆𝑃,𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑔𝑒 : Power per stage 
𝑛𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑔𝑒 : Number of pump stages 
𝜂𝐸𝑆𝑃 : ESP efficiency 
After commissioning the ESP, the geofluid is in liquid-only phase. Thus, Equation (1) is 
applicable for calculating the pressure drops in pipes. The wellhead pressure can be 
expressed by Equation (9). 
==PAGE:20==
 
 
Technical, Economic, and Financial Assessment of Geothermal Power Plant in Taiwanese Context  Page 14 of 72 
 
𝑃𝑤𝑒𝑙𝑙ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑑= 𝑃𝑏𝑜𝑡𝑡𝑜𝑚−∆𝑃𝑏𝑜𝑡𝑡𝑜𝑚−𝐸𝑆𝑃+ ∆𝑃𝐸𝑆𝑃
−∆𝑃𝐸𝑆𝑃−𝑤𝑒𝑙𝑙ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑑 
Equation (9) 
𝑃𝑤𝑒𝑙𝑙ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑑 : Wellhead pressure 
∆𝑃𝑏𝑜𝑡𝑡𝑜𝑚−𝐸𝑆𝑃 : Pressure drop from well bottom to ESP 
∆𝑃𝐸𝑆𝑃−𝑤𝑒𝑙𝑙ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑑 : Pressure drop from ESP to wellhead 
While the wellhead pressure is elevated above the saturation pressure, the mass flow 
rate is also boosted, resulting in more energy extracted from geothermal reservoir. The 
mass flow rate after implementing the ESP is expressed in Equation (10). 
𝑚̇ 𝑔𝑒𝑜= 𝑚̇ 𝑠𝑡𝑒𝑎𝑚+ 𝑚̇ 𝑤𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑟+ 𝜌× 𝑉̇𝐸𝑆𝑃 
Equation (10) 
𝑚̇ 𝑔𝑒𝑜 : Mass flow rate of geofluid after implementing the ESP 
𝑚̇ 𝑠𝑡𝑒𝑎𝑚 : Steam mass flow rate 
𝑚̇ 𝑤𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑟 : Water mass flow rate 
𝜌 : Density of geofluid, assumed at saturation pressure, well bottom temperature 
𝑉̇𝐸𝑆𝑃 : Volume flow rate of ESP 
Reinjection Limitation 
To avoid the silica scaling problem, it is necessary to maintain sufficient high 
temperature with high silica solubility. The site data list in Table 5 give the wellhead 
silica concentrations in the water sample, however, it should be diluted because the 
implementation of the ESP prevents the vaporization of geofluid. The revised silica 
concentration can be derived from Equation (11). 
𝐶𝑤𝑒𝑙𝑙ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑑.𝑟𝑒𝑣= 𝐶𝑤𝑒𝑙𝑙ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑑 × (1 −𝑓𝑠𝑡𝑒𝑎𝑚) 
Equation (11) 
𝐶𝑤𝑒𝑙𝑙ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑑.𝑟𝑒𝑣 : Revised wellhead silica concentration after implementing ESP 
𝐶𝑤𝑒𝑙𝑙ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑑 : Measured wellhead silica concentration 
𝑓𝑠𝑡𝑒𝑎𝑚 : Wellhead steam fraction 
Gunnlaugsson et al. [6] reported the slow growth of quartz crystals, indicating that the 
main concern of silica scaling is the precipitation of amorphous silica. The correlation 
about solubility of amorphous silica is given by Fournier et al. [50], as shown in 
Equation (12).  
𝑙𝑜𝑔10 𝐶𝑤𝑒𝑙𝑙ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑑.𝑟𝑒𝑣= −731 𝑇𝑠𝑖𝑙𝑖𝑐𝑎.𝑠𝑎𝑡
⁄
+ 4.52 
Equation (12) 
𝐶𝑤𝑒𝑙𝑙ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑑.𝑟𝑒𝑣 : Revised wellhead silica concentration after implementing ESP 
𝑇𝑠𝑖𝑙𝑖𝑐𝑎.𝑠𝑎𝑡 : Saturation temperature for amorphous silica (K) 
 
 
==PAGE:21==
 
 
Technical, Economic, and Financial Assessment of Geothermal Power Plant in Taiwanese Context  Page 15 of 72 
 
This saturation temperature for amorphous silica will serve as the lower limit of 
reinjection temperature. Below the boundary, the silica start to precipitate, causing 
scaling problems. 
Drilling Cost 
To assess the drilling cost, Shamoushaki et al. [51] proposed a correlation in 2021 with 
respect to the well depth and the number of wells as shown in Equation (13). The cost 
accounts for equipment, construction, project management, insurance, and 
contingency. Country-specific parameters are also used to reflect the costs in different 
regions. 
𝐶𝑑𝑟𝑖𝑙𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑔=  𝑎 ∙𝑛𝑤𝑒𝑙𝑙∙log(𝐷) + 𝑏∙𝑛𝑤𝑒𝑙𝑙∙𝐷2 + 𝑐 
Equation (13) 
𝑎, 𝑏, 𝑐 : Country-specific parameters 
𝑛𝑤𝑒𝑙𝑙 : Number of the well 
𝐷 : Depth of the well 
Table 1 Parameters for drilling cost correlation [51] 
Region 
𝑎 
𝑏 
𝑐 
Indonesia Average (Highest) 
5.449 × 105 
0.2144 
2.123 × 106 
USA Average (Lowest) 
5.050 × 105 
0.1715 
7.616 × 105 
Worldwide Average (Base case) 
5.255 × 105 
0.2181 
9.522 × 105 
 
Drilling Success Rate 
Drilling success rate reflects the risk in exploration stages of geothermal projects and 
varies based on the level of development of the geothermal field [52]. The rate this 
study used is explained in the appendix (Section 6). For this study, the model included 
one production well and one reinjection well, both wells are assumed to have the same 
depth. When taking the success rate into account, the expected number of wells is 
given in Equation (14). 
𝑛𝑤𝑒𝑙𝑙=
2
𝑅𝑑𝑟𝑖𝑙𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑔
 
Equation (14) 
𝑛𝑤𝑒𝑙𝑙 : Number of the well 
𝑅𝑑𝑟𝑖𝑙𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑔 : Drilling success rate 
 
==PAGE:22==
 
 
Technical, Economic, and Financial Assessment of Geothermal Power Plant in Taiwanese Context  Page 16 of 72 
 
Producer Price Index (PPI) 
To index the drilling cost to present value, “Producer Price Index for Drilling oil and gas 
wells, not seasonally adjusted” published by U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics is utilized 
[53]. Calculation is shown in Equation (15). 
𝐶𝑑𝑟𝑖𝑙𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑔,𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑒𝑛𝑡= 𝐶𝑑𝑟𝑖𝑙𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑔,ℎ𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑜𝑟𝑦    × 𝑃𝑃𝐼𝑑𝑟𝑖𝑙𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑔,𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑒𝑛𝑡 
𝑃𝑃𝐼𝑑𝑟𝑖𝑙𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑔,ℎ𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑜𝑟𝑦 
 
Equation (15) 
𝐶𝑑𝑟𝑖𝑙𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑔,𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑒𝑛𝑡 : Present value of drilling cost (Dec. 2024) 
𝐶𝑑𝑟𝑖𝑙𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑔,ℎ𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑜𝑟𝑦   : History value of drilling cost (Mar. 2020) 
𝑃𝑃𝐼𝑑𝑟𝑖𝑙𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑔,𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑒𝑛𝑡 : Present PPI for drilling oil and gas wells (Dec. 2024) 
𝑃𝑃𝐼𝑑𝑟𝑖𝑙𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑔,ℎ𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑜𝑟𝑦 : History PPI for drilling oil and gas wells (Mar. 2020) 
Cost of Electrical Submersible Pump 
An ESP system typically consists of multistage centrifugal pumps, a protector, a motor, 
and a power cable. To power the ESP, auxiliary equipment such as a transformer and a 
variable speed drive (VSD) are also necessary. Since there is no existing literature on 
the cost of ESPs, the author sent inquiries to several ESP vendors in March 2025 and 
received their responses regarding the approximate market price of an ESP system. 
3.1.2. Organic Rankine Cycle Power Plant Model 
This section first introduces the system configuration and then looks into the 
thermodynamics of each component. After that, the empirical equations are used to 
assess the costs for each component. 
System Configuration 
To convert low-to-medium grade heat sources (<250°C) into useful power, ORC system 
is proven to be reliable and efficient technology and widely used in geothermal 
application [54]. Figure 1 illustrates the system configuration of a simple ORC 
geothermal power plant using n-Pentane (R601) as the working fluid. As mentioned in 
literature review (Section 2.1), the simple cycle is the most widely studied 
configuration and the use of n-pentane is because of its excellent thermo-economic 
performance, low GWP value, and the absence of PFAS issues [35]. The power plant 
consists of a pump, a preheater, an evaporator, a turbine set, and an air-cooled 
condenser. The processes between each state are described below.  
==PAGE:23==
 
 
Technical, Economic, and Financial Assessment of Geothermal Power Plant in Taiwanese Context  Page 17 of 72 
 
 
Figure 1 Configuration of Binary ORC System 
State 1→2: 
Geofluid is pumped from the bottom of the production well to the surface using an 
ESP. The pressure maintained by the ESP keeps the geofluid in liquid phase. 
State 2→3: 
Geofluid transfers heat to the organic fluid via an ORC evaporator, which is a counter 
flow shell-and-tube heat exchanger. 
State 3→4: 
Partially cooled geofluid continues to transfer sensible heat to the organic fluid in a 
preheater, which is also a counter flow shell-and-tube heat exchanger. 
State 4→5: 
Cooled geofluid is pumped back into the geothermal reservoir through a reinjection 
pump. 
State 6→7: 
Liquid organic working fluid is preheated by the geofluid and exits as saturated liquid 
in the preheater. 
State 7→8: 
Preheated organic fluid enters the ORC evaporator, where it absorbs additional heat 
from the high temperature geofluid for phase change. It exits as saturated vapor. 
State 8→9: 
High-pressure organic vapor expands through the ORC turbine, producing mechanical 
energy which drives a generator to produce electricity. Organic vapor is exhausted 
from the turbine at lower temperature and pressure. 
State 9→10: 
Low-pressure organic vapor enters an air-cooled condenser, which is a parallel flow 
==PAGE:24==
 
 
Technical, Economic, and Financial Assessment of Geothermal Power Plant in Taiwanese Context  Page 18 of 72 
 
heat exchanger. It is condensed back into saturated liquid at the condenser outlet. 
State 10→6: 
Condensed organic fluid is pressurized by the ORC pump and sent back into the 
preheater to complete the cycle. 
State 11→12: 
Ambient air absorbs residual heat from the system in the air-cooled condenser and 
exits at a higher temperature. 
Key Assumptions 
Here are some assumptions about the system: 
a. The system operates in a steady state. 
b. No heat loss or pressure drop in the heat exchangers. 
c. No heat loss or pressure drop in the pipes. 
d. No superheating or subcooling in the cycle. 
Working Fluids 
The mass flow rate of geofluid, n-pentane, and cooling air is represented by 𝑚̇ 𝐺𝐸𝑂, 
𝑚̇ 𝑂𝑅𝐶, and 𝑚̇ 𝑎𝑖𝑟 respectively. 
Preheater 
The preheater helps to heat up the organic fluid to saturated liquid state. It also helps 
to extract more sensible heat from the geofluid before the geofluid is reinjected into 
reservoir. Assuming no heat loss in the process, the thermodynamic balance of the 
preheater is shown in Equation (16). 
𝑚̇ 𝐺𝐸𝑂× (ℎ3 −ℎ4 ) = 𝑚̇ 𝑂𝑅𝐶× (ℎ7 −ℎ6 ) 
Equation (16) 
Evaporator 
Organic working fluid vaporizes by absorbing heat from high temperature geofluid and 
exits the ORC evaporator as saturated vapor. Assuming no heat loss in the process, the 
thermodynamic balance of the evaporator is shown in Equation (17). 
𝑚̇ 𝐺𝐸𝑂× (ℎ2 −ℎ3 ) = 𝑚̇ 𝑂𝑅𝐶× (ℎ8 −ℎ7 ) 
Equation (17) 
ORC Turbine, generator, gearbox 
Organic working fluid expands and drives the ORC turbine. The ORC turbine is 
connected to the generator and converts shaft work into electricity. However, the 
process is not ideal, that is to say, it is not an adiabatic and reversible process. The 
==PAGE:25==
 
 
Technical, Economic, and Financial Assessment of Geothermal Power Plant in Taiwanese Context  Page 19 of 72 
 
parameter “isentropic efficiency” is used to account for heat loss and entropy increase, 
as shown in Equation (18). 
𝜂𝑖𝑠,𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑏𝑖𝑛𝑒= ℎ8 −ℎ9
ℎ8 −ℎ9𝑠
 
Equation (18) 
𝜂𝑖𝑠,𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑏𝑖𝑛𝑒 : Isentropic efficiency of the ORC turbine 
ℎ9𝑠 : The enthalpy of exhaust gas if considering the process to be isentropic    
By using the isentropic efficiency, the actual enthalpy of the exhaust organic vapor is 
obtained, which helps to calculate the shaft work output of the ORC turbine, as shown 
in Equation (19). 
𝑊̇ 𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑏𝑖𝑛𝑒= 𝑚̇ 𝑂𝑅𝐶× (ℎ8 −ℎ9 ) 
Equation (19) 
 
𝑊̇ 𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑏𝑖𝑛𝑒 : Shaft work output of the ORC turbine 
The mechanical power from the ORC turbine is converted into electricity by the 
generator. Equation (20) expresses the process and generator efficiency.  
𝑊̇ 𝑔𝑒𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑜𝑟= 𝑊̇ 𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑏𝑖𝑛𝑒× 𝜂𝑔𝑒𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑜𝑟 
Equation (20) 
𝑊̇ 𝑔𝑒𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑜𝑟 : Electricity output from the generator 
𝜂𝑔𝑒𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑜𝑟 : Generator efficiency 
Between the turbine and generator, a gearbox is installed to manage the difference of 
rotation speeds for the two components. 
Air-cooled Condenser 
Due to limited access to cooling water and environmental concerns, using an air-
cooled condenser is common practice in Taiwan. After the organic vapor is exhausted 
from the ORC turbine at superheated condition, it is directed to air-cooled condenser 
to release waste heat to ambient air. The organic fluid is completely cooled down to 
saturated liquid state. Assuming no heat loss in the process, the energy balance is 
described in Equation (21). 
𝑚̇ 𝑂𝑅𝐶× (ℎ9 −ℎ10 ) = 𝑚̇ 𝑎𝑖𝑟× (ℎ12 −ℎ11 ) 
Equation (21) 
In terms of the power consumption of the fan, it is calculated by Equation (22). 
𝑊̇𝑓𝑎𝑛= 𝑚̇ 𝑎𝑖𝑟× ∆𝑃𝑓𝑎𝑛
𝜌𝑎𝑖𝑟× 𝜂𝑓𝑎𝑛
 
Equation (22) 
==PAGE:26==
 
 
Technical, Economic, and Financial Assessment of Geothermal Power Plant in Taiwanese Context  Page 20 of 72 
 
𝑊̇𝑓𝑎𝑛 : Power consumption of the fan 
∆𝑃𝑓𝑎𝑛 : Pressure difference between air inlet and outlet 
𝜌𝑎𝑖𝑟 : Density of air 
𝜂𝑓𝑎𝑛 : Fan efficiency 
ORC Pump 
ORC pump elevates the flow pressure and sends back the organic fluid to preheater. 
The same as ORC turbine, since it is not an ideal process, isentropic efficiency is used 
to adjust the calculation, as described in Equation (23).  
𝜂𝑖𝑠,𝑂𝑅𝐶 𝑝𝑢𝑚𝑝= ℎ6𝑠−ℎ10
ℎ6 −ℎ10
 
Equation (23) 
𝜂𝑖𝑠,𝑂𝑅𝐶 𝑝𝑢𝑚𝑝 : Isentropic efficiency of ORC pump 
ℎ6𝑠 : The enthalpy of organic fluid at the outlet of ORC pump considering the 
process to be isentropic 
The power consumption of the ORC pump is then calculated by Equation (24).  
𝑊̇ 𝑂𝑅𝐶 𝑝𝑢𝑚𝑝= 𝑚̇ 𝑂𝑅𝐶× (ℎ6 −ℎ10 ) 
Equation (24) 
𝑊̇ 𝑂𝑅𝐶 𝑝𝑢𝑚𝑝 : Power consumption of ORC pump 
Reinjection pump 
Although it is assumed that no pressure loss in all the cycles, in reality, a reinjection 
pump is necessary before the geofluid is sent back to reservoir. Equation (25) gives the 
relation between the inlet and outlet of a reinjection pump, giving a constant pressure 
increase. 
∆𝑃𝑟𝑒𝑖𝑛𝑗𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝑝𝑢𝑚𝑝= 𝑃5 −𝑃4  
Equation (25) 
∆𝑃𝑟𝑒𝑖𝑛𝑗𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝑝𝑢𝑚𝑝 : Pressure increased by reinjection pump  
Its isentropic efficiency is used to determine the performance, conditions of inlet and 
outlet flow, as shown in Equation (26). 
𝜂𝑖𝑠,𝑟𝑒𝑖𝑛𝑗𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛  𝑝𝑢𝑚𝑝= ℎ5𝑠−ℎ4
ℎ5 −ℎ4
 
Equation (26) 
𝜂𝑖𝑠,𝑟𝑒𝑖𝑛𝑗𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛  𝑝𝑢𝑚𝑝 : Isentropic efficiency of the reinjection pump 
ℎ5𝑠 : The enthalpy of geofluid at the outlet of the reinjection pump if considering 
the process to be isentropic 
==PAGE:27==
 
 
Technical, Economic, and Financial Assessment of Geothermal Power Plant in Taiwanese Context  Page 21 of 72 
 
The power consumption of the ORC pump is then calculated by Equation (27). 
𝑊̇ 𝑟𝑒𝑖𝑛𝑗𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝑝𝑢𝑚𝑝= 𝑚̇ 𝐺𝐸𝑂× (ℎ5 −ℎ4 ) 
Equation (27) 
𝑊̇ 𝑟𝑒𝑖𝑛𝑗𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝑝𝑢𝑚𝑝 : Power consumption of the reinjection pump 
Cost Assessment Principles for ORC Components 
The most accurate cost estimation for equipment is getting the quotation from the 
suitable vendor as done for ESP. An alternative is to use the cost data for previously 
purchased equipment of the same type, which is reported to align with equipment’s 
capacity, size, material, and other key attributes [55], [56], as demonstrated in 
Equation (28). 
𝐶𝑒= 𝑎+ 𝑏× 𝑆𝑛 
Equation (28) 
𝐶𝑒 : Equipment purchased cost 
𝑎, 𝑏 : Cost constant 
𝑆 : Size parameter 
𝑛 : exponent for that type of equipment 
To estimate the cost for each component in the geothermal ORC system, this study 
used the base case published by Astolfi et al. [57]. Correlations for each equipment are 
listed in the following paragraphs respectively. Their costs were originally shown in 
Euro in 2013 values and have been converted to US dollars in 2024 values. 
On the other hand, the equipment purchased cost also increases with the increasing 
operating pressure. To account for this, the equipment purchase cost should be 
multiplied by a pressure factor, calculated by Equation (29), to reach a better 
estimation [55]. 
𝑙𝑜𝑔10𝐹𝑝= 𝐶1 + 𝐶2 𝑙𝑜𝑔10𝑃+ 𝐶3(𝑙𝑜𝑔10𝑃)2 
Equation (29) 
𝐹𝑝 : Pressure factor 
𝐶1, 𝐶2, 𝐶3 : constants for pressure factor 
𝑃 : Working pressure of the equipment 
For shell-and-tube heat exchangers, when the working pressure is above 5 bar, the 
pressure factor mentioned in Equation (29) should be considered, and the constants 
are listed in Table 2. 
==PAGE:28==
 
 
Technical, Economic, and Financial Assessment of Geothermal Power Plant in Taiwanese Context  Page 22 of 72 
 
Table 2 Constants for Pressure Factor of Shell and Tube Heat Exchanger 
Constants for pressure factor 
Value 
𝐶1 
0.03881 
𝐶2 
-0.11272 
𝐶3 
0.08183 
 
Chemical Engineering Plant Cost Index (CEPCI) 
The cost correlations and estimations for ORC components and auxiliary systems were 
proposed before 2024, for instance, the values provided by Astolfi et al. [57] were for 
2013. In order to reflect the market fluctuation and inflation, Chemical Engineering 
Plant Cost Index® (CEPCI) [58] updated and published monthly on Chemical 
Engineering Magazine is utilized to adjust the historical price to present value. 
Equation (30) presents how to convert historical price into present price. 
𝐶𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑒𝑛𝑡= 𝐶ℎ𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑜𝑟𝑦× 𝐶𝐸𝑃𝐶𝐼𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑒𝑛𝑡 
𝐶𝐸𝑃𝐶𝐼ℎ𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑜𝑟𝑦 
 
Equation (30) 
Cost of Preheater and Evaporator 
For heat exchangers, including the preheater, evaporator, and air-cooled condenser, 
the first step to estimate the cost is to calculate the UA value by Log Mean Temperature 
Difference (LMTD) method, as presented in Equation (31).  
𝑄̇ = 𝑈∙𝐴∙∆𝑇𝐿𝑀𝑇𝐷 
Equation (31) 
𝑄̇  : Heat flux of the heat exchanger 
𝑈 : Overall heat transfer coefficient of the heat exchanger 
𝐴 : Heat transfer area 
∆𝑇𝐿𝑀𝑇𝐷 : Log Mean Temperature Difference of the heat exchanger 
This study assumed simplified values for the overall heat transfer coefficient 𝑈 
between different fluids in the heat exchanger, as presented in Table 3 [59]. 
 
 
==PAGE:29==
 
 
Technical, Economic, and Financial Assessment of Geothermal Power Plant in Taiwanese Context  Page 23 of 72 
 
Table 3 Overall Heat Transfer Coefficient 
Overall Heat Transfer Coefficient 
Stage 
Value 
Unit 
Geofluid to organic fluid (boiling) 
Evaporating 
1.2 
𝑘𝑊𝑚2𝐾
⁄
 
Geofluid to organic fluid (liquid) 
Preheating 
0.5 
𝑘𝑊𝑚2𝐾
⁄
 
Cooling air to organic fluid (vapor) 
Desuperheating 
0.5 
𝑘𝑊𝑚2𝐾
⁄
 
Cooling air to organic fluid (dew) 
Condensing 
1.0 
𝑘𝑊𝑚2𝐾
⁄
 
 
The LMTD of a heat exchanger is calculated by Equation (32).  
∆𝑇𝐿𝑀𝑇𝐷= ∆𝑇1 −∆𝑇2
𝑙𝑛∆𝑇1
∆𝑇2
 
Equation (32) 
For the preheater and evaporator, which are counter flow shell-and-tube heat 
exchangers, ∆𝑇1 and ∆𝑇2 are obtained by Equation (33) and Equation (34). 
∆𝑇1 = 𝑇ℎ𝑜𝑡 𝑓𝑙𝑜𝑤,𝑖𝑛−𝑇𝑐𝑜𝑙𝑑 𝑓𝑙𝑜𝑤,𝑜𝑢𝑡 
Equation (33) 
∆𝑇2 = 𝑇ℎ𝑜𝑡 𝑓𝑙𝑜𝑤,𝑜𝑢𝑡−𝑇𝑐𝑜𝑙𝑑 𝑓𝑙𝑜𝑤,𝑖𝑛 
Equation (34) 
The cost correlation is shown in Equation (35), where pressure factor 𝐹𝑝 derived from 
Equation (29) is used to account for high operating pressure.  
𝐶𝑝𝑟𝑒ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑟 𝑜𝑟 𝐶𝑒𝑣𝑎𝑝𝑜𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑜𝑟 = 𝐶0 ( 𝑈𝐴
𝑈𝐴0
)
0.9
 𝐹𝑝 
Equation (35) 
𝐶𝑝𝑟𝑒ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑟, 𝐶𝑒𝑣𝑎𝑝𝑜𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑜𝑟 : Cost of preheater or evaporator 
𝐶0 : 2300 kUSD, reference cost of shell & tube heat exchangers [57] 
𝑈𝐴0 : 4000 kW/K, Reference attribute (UA value) [57] 
Cost of Air-cooled Condenser 
LMTD method is also used for air-cooled condenser, referring to Equation (31), 
Equation (32), and Table 3. A key difference is that, for the air-cooled condenser, which 
is parallel flow shell-and-tube condenser, ∆𝑇1  and ∆𝑇2  for LMTD formula are 
obtained by Equation (36) and Equation (37). 
∆𝑇1 = 𝑇ℎ𝑜𝑡 𝑓𝑙𝑜𝑤,𝑖𝑛−𝑇𝑐𝑜𝑙𝑑 𝑓𝑙𝑜𝑤,𝑖𝑛 
Equation (36) 
==PAGE:30==
 
 
Technical, Economic, and Financial Assessment of Geothermal Power Plant in Taiwanese Context  Page 24 of 72 
 
∆𝑇2 = 𝑇ℎ𝑜𝑡 𝑓𝑙𝑜𝑤,𝑜𝑢𝑡−𝑇𝑐𝑜𝑙𝑑 𝑓𝑙𝑜𝑤,𝑜𝑢𝑡 
Equation (37) 
In addition, to better formulate the process in air-cooled condenser, it is divided into 
two steps, desuperheating and condensing. Their LMTDs and heat transfer areas are 
then obtained respectively. The cost correction dedicated to air-cooled condenser is 
presented in Equation (39). 
𝐶𝑎𝑖𝑟−𝑐𝑜𝑜𝑙𝑒𝑑 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑛𝑠𝑒𝑟= 𝐶𝑑𝑒𝑠𝑢𝑝𝑒𝑟ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑛𝑔+ 𝐶𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑛𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑔 
Equation (38) 
𝐶𝑑𝑒𝑠𝑢𝑝𝑒𝑟ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑜𝑟 𝐶𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑛𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑔= 𝐶0 ( 𝐴
𝐴0
)
0.9
 
Equation (39) 
𝐶𝑑𝑒𝑠𝑢𝑝𝑒𝑟ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑛𝑔, 𝐶𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑛𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑔: Cost for desuperheating or condensing step 
𝐶0 : 810 kUSD, reference cost of air-cooled condensers [57] 
𝐴0 : 3563 𝑚2, reference heat transfer area [57] 
Because the working pressures for both shell and tube sides of the air-cooled 
condenser are below 5 bar, the pressure factor is not required to adjust the estimation. 
Cost of ORC Turbine 
The cost of ORC turbines is a function of the number of turbine stages and the size 
parameter of the last stage, as presented in Equation (40).  
𝐶𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑏𝑖𝑛𝑒= 𝐶0 ( 𝑛
𝑛0
)
0.5
( 𝑆𝑃
𝑆𝑃0
)
1.1
 
Equation (40) 
𝐶𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑏𝑖𝑛𝑒: Cost for ORC turbine 
𝐶0 : 1870 kUSD, reference cost of ORC turbine [57] 
𝑛0 : 2, reference number of turbine stage [57] 
𝑛 : Number of the ORC turbine stage 
𝑆𝑃0 : 0.18 meters, reference size parameter of the ORC turbine [57] 
𝑆𝑃 : Size parameter for the last turbine stage 
Where the size parameter is derived from Equation (41). 
𝑆𝑃= 
√𝑉̇𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑏𝑖𝑛𝑒
(∆ℎ𝑖𝑠,𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑔𝑒)0.25 
Equation (41) 
𝑉̇𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑏𝑖𝑛𝑒 : Volume flow rate of ORC turbine 
∆ℎ𝑖𝑠,𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑔𝑒 : Isentropic enthalpy drop for the last turbine stage 
 
==PAGE:31==
 
 
Technical, Economic, and Financial Assessment of Geothermal Power Plant in Taiwanese Context  Page 25 of 72 
 
Cost of Generator 
In the previous section, an electric generator is mentioned to convert shaft work into 
electricity. Its cost is given by the correlation shown in Equation (42). 
𝐶𝑔𝑒𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑜𝑟= 𝐶0 ( 𝑊𝑒𝑙𝑒
𝑊𝑒𝑙𝑒,0
)
0.67
 
Equation (42) 
𝐶𝑔𝑒𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑜𝑟 : Cost of generator 
𝐶0 : 300 kUSD, reference cost of generators [57] 
𝑊𝑒𝑙𝑒,0 : 5000 kW, reference generator capacity [57] 
𝑊𝑒𝑙𝑒 : Generator capacity 
Cost of Gearbox 
The cost of gearbox is simply assumed as 40% of the cost of generator [57]. 
Cost of ORC Pump 
The cost correlation of the ORC pump is similar to that of generator, but the reference 
point is different, as shown in Equation (43). 
𝐶𝑂𝑅𝐶 𝑝𝑢𝑚𝑝= 𝐶0 ( 𝑊𝑒𝑙𝑒
𝑊𝑒𝑙𝑒,0
)
0.67
 
Equation (43) 
𝐶𝑂𝑅𝐶 𝑝𝑢𝑚𝑝 : Cost of ORC pump 
𝐶0 : 21 kUSD, reference cost of ORC pumps [57] 
𝑊𝑒𝑙𝑒,0 : 200 kW, reference ORC pump capacity [57] 
𝑊𝑒𝑙𝑒 : ORC pump capacity 
Cost of Reinjection Pump 
In the model, geofluid is regarded as pure water. The cost estimation of a reinjection 
pump follows the correlation for single-stage centrifugal pumps proposed by Towler et 
al. [56], the prices are modified from 2010 to 2024, as shown in Equation (44). 
𝐶𝑅𝐽 𝑝𝑢𝑚𝑝= 𝑎+ 𝑏× 𝑉̇𝑅𝐽 𝑝𝑢𝑚𝑝
𝑛 
Equation (44) 
𝐶𝑅𝐽 𝑝𝑢𝑚𝑝 : Cost of the reinjection pump 
𝑎 : 18000 USD, cost constant for single-stage centrifugal pumps [56] 
𝑏 : 360 USD, cost constant for single-stage centrifugal pumps [56] 
𝑆 : Pump flow rate (Liters/s) 
𝑛 : 0.9, exponent for single-stage centrifugal pumps 
==PAGE:32==
 
 
Technical, Economic, and Financial Assessment of Geothermal Power Plant in Taiwanese Context  Page 26 of 72 
 
Cost of Instrumentation and Control System 
According to Towler et al. [56], the cost of instrumentation and control system is 
assumed to be 30% of the cost for ORC system components. 
Cost of Piping 
This model follows the assumption of “GEOPHIRES v2.0” developed by NREL [60], 
assuming the pipe costs 500 USD/m in 2017 and is indexed to 700 USD/m in 2024. 
Cost of Installation 
According to the estimation by Macchi et al. [61], for an ORC system, the installation 
labor cost is 20% of the cost for ORC system components. 
3.1.3. Financial Model 
The financial model is built using Microsoft Excel. Some input parameters such as the 
electricity production and the cost of components are derived from the power plant 
model. Other input parameters reflect the effects of national regulations and the 
market environment, for example, taxation, depreciation, inflation, and discount rate. 
Market price, fixed FiT, two-stage FiT, and PPA are used to assess the profitability under 
different scenarios. The key indicators to pose project’s viability are NPV, IRR, and LCOE. 
Net Present Value (NPV) 
Different from the Payback Time (PBT) method, Net Present Value (NPV) method takes 
the time value of money into consideration, making it more favorable in project 
financing. Equation (45) presents the formula for NPV, revealing the time-adjusted 
value of a project. 
𝑁𝑃𝑉= −𝐼+ ∑
𝐶𝐹𝑡
(1 + 𝑟)𝑡
𝑛
𝑡=1
  
Equation (45) 
𝑁𝑃𝑉 : Net Present Value 
𝐼 : Investment 
𝑡 : Project period 
𝑛 : Lifetime of a project 
𝑟 : Discount rate 
𝐶𝐹𝑡 : Cashflow in the project period 𝑡 
 
 
==PAGE:33==
 
 
Technical, Economic, and Financial Assessment of Geothermal Power Plant in Taiwanese Context  Page 27 of 72 
 
Internal Rate of Return (IRR) 
Internal Rate of Return (IRR) is calculated by setting NPV to zero, as shown in Equation 
(46). It gives the return rate of a project, indicating the relative profitability of the 
project. 
0 = −𝐼+ ∑
𝐶𝐹𝑡
(1 + 𝐼𝑅𝑅)𝑡
𝑛
𝑡=1
 
Equation (46) 
𝐶𝐹𝑡 : Cashflow in the project period 𝑡 
𝐼𝑅𝑅 : Internal Rate of Return 
Levelized Cost of Electricity (LCOE) 
LCOE is another key indicator frequently used to estimate the cost of a unit of 
electricity over the project lifetime, as shown in Equation (47). 
𝐿𝐶𝑂𝐸= 
∑
𝑇𝐶𝑡
(1 + 𝑟)𝑡
𝑛
𝑡=0
∑
𝑞𝑡
(1 + 𝑟)𝑡
𝑛
𝑡=0
 
Equation (47) 
𝑇𝐶𝑡 : Total Cost in the project period 𝑡 (Investment, O&M cost…) 
𝑞𝑡 : Electricity production in project period 𝑡 (e.g., in kWh) 
𝑟 : Discount rate 
 
3.2. Input data and Parameters 
Site-specific data, technical and financial parameters feature the heat source quality, 
ORC system performance, and country’s market and regulations. They serve as the 
inputs to this study. 
3.2.1. Site-specific Data 
The study takes the well “IT-11” in the Tuchang geothermal field in Taiwan as the test 
case. According to ITRI [4], the information about well geometry, including length of 
each section, casing diameters, and borehole diameters which helps to build the well 
pressure profile is listed in Table 4. The key results from production tests, which 
manifest the heat source quality, are summarized in Table 5.  
 
 
==PAGE:34==
 
 
Technical, Economic, and Financial Assessment of Geothermal Power Plant in Taiwanese Context  Page 28 of 72 
 
Table 4 Well Geometry and Practical Information of IT-11 
Depth 
Length 
Casing 
Borehole 
First section 
0-30 m 
30 m 
11 ¾ inch 
13 ¾ inch 
Second section 
30-204 m 
174 m 
8 ½ inch 
10 ⅝ inch 
Third section 
204-525 m 
321 m 
6 ½ inch 
7 ⅞ inch 
Well depth 
525 m 
Pipe roughness 
0.0018 inch 
Drilling success rate 
78% 
Distance between production and reinjection well 
200 m 
 
Table 5 Key Parameters from Production Tests  
Production Test Result 
Value Unit 
Schematic illustration of IT-11 
Steam mass flow rate 
4.33 
ton/h 
 
Water mass flow rate 
62.39 ton/h 
Steam fraction 
6.49% - 
Shut-in pressure at the well bottom 48 
kg/cm2 
Wellhead pressure 
4.4 
kg/cm2 
Highest temperature 
175 
°C 
Wellhead temperature 
146 
°C 
Silica concentration (wellhead) 
301 
ppm 
 
3.2.2. Technical Parameters 
This section lists the technical parameters selected for both the ESP and ORC 
components based on system performance optimization and operational constraints. 
After the author consulted with several ESP vendors, the model SLB REDA HN13500 is 
selected, and the equipment specification is obtained from SLB [62]. The author uses 
the minimal required number of pump stages to ensure the wellhead pressure above 
flashing pressure. Assuming the ESP always operates at the best efficiency point (BEP) 
under 60 Hz, the performance data are shown in Table 6. 
 
 
==PAGE:35==
 
 
Technical, Economic, and Financial Assessment of Geothermal Power Plant in Taiwanese Context  Page 29 of 72 
 
Table 6 Performance Data for SLB REDA Electrical Submersible Pumps [62] 
ESP Specification 
Value 
Unit 
Model 
HN13500 - 
Series number 
562 - 
Minimum case size 
7 inch 
Shaft diameter 
1 inch 
Head per stage at BEP (60 Hz) 
41.5 ft 
Power per stage at BEP (60 Hz) 
6.3 hp 
Efficiency at BEP (60 Hz) 
63% - 
Volume flow rate at BEP (60 Hz) 
13000 bbl/day 
Number of pump stages  
10 - 
 
Table 7 summarizes the ORC system parameters, which were optimized to achieve 
maximum net electricity generation while complying with the reinjection temperature 
requirement. 
Table 7 System Parameters for four ORC systems 
System Parameter 
Value 
Unit 
Source 
Working fluid 
n-Pentane (R601) 
- 
[35] 
Evaporator pinch temperature 
5 
K 
[63] 
Turbine inlet pressure 
540 
kPa 
- 
Turbine exhaust pressure 
140 
kPa 
- 
Turbine isentropic efficiency 
85% 
- 
[63] 
Generator efficiency 
95% 
- 
[63] 
Condenser pinch temperature 
10 
K 
[33] 
Fan efficiency 
70% 
- 
[61] 
Fan pressure difference 
0.13 
kPa 
[64] 
ORC pump isentropic efficiency  
70% 
- 
[63] 
Reinjection pump pressure increase 
50 
kPa 
- 
Reinjection pump isentropic efficiency 
70% 
- 
[57] 
Ambient air pressure 
101.32 
kPa 
[63] 
Ambient air temperature 
20 
°C 
[63] 
 
3.2.3. Financial Parameters 
This section lists the financial parameters which reflect the electricity market 
==PAGE:36==
 
 
Technical, Economic, and Financial Assessment of Geothermal Power Plant in Taiwanese Context  Page 30 of 72 
 
environment and the country’s financial regulations. They are crucial for accurately 
assessing the feasibility of a geothermal project. 
Operating Expense (OPEX) 
In this study under Taiwanese context, the operating expense (OPEX) consists of three 
elements, O&M cost, grid enhancement fee, and hot spring taking fee, as shown in 
Table 8. 
Table 8 Summary of OPEX elements 
OPEX component 
Value 
Unit 
Source 
O&M cost 
161.168 
USD/kW-yr, 2024 [65] 
Grid enhancement fee 
0.0173 
TWD/kWh, fixed [66] 
Hot spring taking fee 
320 
TWD/kW, fixed 
[67] 
 
Key Financial Parameters 
The financial parameters in Table 9 characterize the business environment in Taiwan. 
The selected capacity factor, discount rate, and depreciation time are specifically for 
developing geothermal projects in Taiwanese context. 
Table 9 Summary of key financial parameters 
Financial Parameter 
Value 
Unit 
Source 
Lifetime of the project 
30 
year 
[1] 
Capacity factor 
80% 
- 
[68] 
Discount rate 
5.24% 
- 
[67] 
Inflation rate 
2% 
- 
[69] 
Tax rate 
20% 
- 
[70] 
Depreciation time 
15 
year 
[71] 
USD:TWD exchange rate (2024) 
1:32.1 
- 
[72] 
USD:EUR exchange rate (2024) 
1:0.92 
- 
[73] 
 
3.3. Policy Scenarios 
The FiT mechanism was first introduced to Taiwan in 2009 with the proclamation of 
Renewable Energy Development Act [74]. Today, two FiT methods are conducted for 
geothermal electricity generation, fixed FiT and two-stage FiT [66]. Meanwhile, since 
the liberalization of the electricity market, the PPA has also played a significant role, 
driven by increasing demand for green electricity from the private sector. 
==PAGE:37==
 
 
Technical, Economic, and Financial Assessment of Geothermal Power Plant in Taiwanese Context  Page 31 of 72 
 
Table 10 gives an overview of four pricing scenarios. The market price is assumed to 
be constant as the 2024 average price. Both FiTs only cover the first 20-year period, 
and the same rate as the fixed FiT is assumed for the final decade. 
Table 10 The overview for three pricing scenarios (currency in TWD) 
Scenario 
Year 1-10 
Year 11-20 
Year 21-30 
Source 
2024 market price 
3.4827 
[75] 
Fixed FiT 
5.9459 
5.9459 
[66] 
Two-stage FiT 
7.3213 
3.6516 
5.9459 
[66] 
PPA 
6.0000 
- 
 
3.4. Sensitivity Analysis 
To identify the key factors and show the resilience of the model, sensitivity analyses 
are conducted on five parameters, PPA pricing, capacity factor, discount rate, drilling 
cost, and O&M cost, with conservative, base, and optimistic scenarios, as presented 
in Table 11. 
Table 11 Parameters used for sensitivity analyses 
Parameter 
Conservative 
Scenario 
Base Case 
Optimistic 
Scenario 
Unit 
Reference 
PPA pricing 
5.1956 
6.0000  
6.4709 
TWD/kWh 
[26] 
Capacity factor 
70% 
80% 
90% 
- 
[76] 
Discount rate 
6.00% 
5.24% 
4.50% 
- 
[67] 
Drilling cost 
(Indonesia Case) (Global Average) (Lukawski et al.) 
USD 
[51], [77] 
O&M cost 
259 
161.168 
125.637 
USD/kW-yr 
[65] [78] 
 
 
 
==PAGE:38==
 
 
Technical, Economic, and Financial Assessment of Geothermal Power Plant in Taiwanese Context  Page 32 of 72 
 
4 Results and Discussions 
In this result section, we will first present the results of the well system model, which 
incorporates the anti-scaling technology using an ESP, and determines reinjection 
limitation to prevent scaling. After that, we will focus on the power plant model which 
shows us the cost of each plant component and annual electricity production. 
Based on the outputs of the technical simulations, a financial model involving time 
value of money, market conditions, and regulatory factors, will be applied to present 
more accurate financial assessment. The project’s viability under four different policy 
scenarios is evaluated. This helps us to understand how policy instruments affect the 
projects. 
Finally, the results of sensitivity analysis and threshold analysis will be presented to 
identify the most influential factors and obtain the threshold conditions to guarantee 
the project’s viability. A comparison with other energy sources will also be provided to 
display the competitiveness of the project. 
Figure 2 illustrates the workflow of this thesis project. 
 
Figure 2 Flow diagram of this research 
 
==PAGE:39==
 
 
Technical, Economic, and Financial Assessment of Geothermal Power Plant in Taiwanese Context  Page 33 of 72 
 
4.1. Results of Technical Simulations 
4.1.1. Well Pressure Simulation 
As a first step, we provide the results of the well pressure simulations which are 
essential for determining the flashing depth and the power requirement for the ESP to 
prevent flashing and calcite scaling. 
Figure 3 illustrates the results of measurement and simulation for IT-11, which 
indicates the flashing depth of approximately -90 m. Accordingly, the ESP is placed 
below flash level, at -200 m, to ensure the suction intake remains in a single-phase 
liquid region. Beneath -150 m, the simulation results closely match the measurements. 
However, an obvious deviation is observed above this depth. The author supposes this 
is due to the complex flow regime of two-phase flow above flash level, making 
accurate simulation challenging in this region. Besides, there are still a lot of variables 
for causing the difference, for instance, the roughness of pipes and temperature 
variations in the well. 
With the introduction of ESP, it results in larger pressure drops in each section. This is 
attributed to the increased flow rate, which in turn, leads to higher friction loss 
throughout the pipes. The power consumption to elevate wellhead pressure above 
flash pressure is 75 kW, and the mass flow rate is boosted up from 67 to 144 ton/hr.  
 
Figure 3 Measured and simulated pressure profiles 
4.1.2. Reinjection Limitation 
The next step is to find the minimum reinjection temperature. It serves as the 
constraint for the power plant model to ensure the enough solubility of silica and 
prevent silica precipitation. The results are shown in Table 12. As mentioned by ITRI 
==PAGE:40==
 
 
Technical, Economic, and Financial Assessment of Geothermal Power Plant in Taiwanese Context  Page 34 of 72 
 
[4], a thick layer of quartzitic sandstone was found under IT-11 and silica was prone to 
dissolve in the geofluid with high reservoir temperature. 
Table 12 Reinjection temperature limitation 
Content 
Value Unit 
Silica concentration (wellhead) 
301 ppm 
Reinjection temperature limitation 
79.9 °C 
 
4.1.3. Techno-economic Model for a Power Plant 
Supplied with the boosted geofluid flow rate (Section 4.1.1) and reinjection constraint 
(Section 4.1.2), the techno-economic model calculates the plant performance and the 
required capital to invest in a plant. 
Recalling the plant configuration (Figure 1), the working conditions of each state are 
listed in Table 13. As marked in State 5, this system fulfills the reinjection constraint. 
Table 13 Working conditions of IT-11 geothermal power plant system 
IT-11 
Temperature (°C) Pressure (kPa) Enthalpy(kJ/kg-K) 
Working Fluid 
State 1 
- 
4707 
1136 
Geofluid 
State 2 
146.4 
1013 
616.9 
Geofluid 
State 3 
101.1 
1013 
424.3 
Geofluid 
State 4 
81.59 
1013 
342.4 
Geofluid 
State 5 
81.59 (>79.9) 
1063 
342.5 
Geofluid 
State 6 
46.02 
540 
47.98 
n-Pentane 
State 7 
96.06 
540 
176 
n-Pentane 
State 8 
96.06 
540 
477.1 
n-Pentane 
State 9 
66.15 
140 
434.5 
n-Pentane 
State 10 
45.75 
140 
47.03 
n-Pentane 
State 11 
20.00 
101.3 
293.3 
Air 
State 12 
35.75 
101.3 
309.2 
Air 
𝑚̇ 𝐺𝐸𝑂 
39.9 kg/s (144 ton/hr) 
𝑚̇ 𝑂𝑅𝐶 
25.5 kg/s 
𝑚̇ 𝑎𝑖𝑟 
623.5 kg/s 
==PAGE:41==
 
 
Technical, Economic, and Financial Assessment of Geothermal Power Plant in Taiwanese Context  Page 35 of 72 
 
 
Figure 4 T-s diagram of the ORC system 
Figure 4 is the T-s diagram for the ORC system. Geofluid is supplied at 146.4 °C and 
reinjected at 81.59 °C. The n-Pentane evaporates at 96.06 °C, 540 kPa with a pinch 
temperature of 5K for the preheater and evaporator. After expanding through the 
turbine, the working fluid condenses at 45.75°C, 140kPa with a pinch temperature of 
10K for the air-cooled condenser. 
The capacities of each component are listed in Table 14. The turbine operates at full 
load at 1085 kW. However, the main power consumer is the condenser fan at 96 kW, 
which uses about 9.3% of the generated electricity. The net output is 833 kW, which 
can be sold through FiT or PPA. 
Table 14 Capacity of each component in IT-11 geothermal power plant project  
Well System 
 
Unit 
Power consumption of Electrical Submersible Pump 
75 
kW 
Power consumption of reinjection pump 
3 
kW 
ORC System 
 
 
ORC turbine 
1085 
kW 
Generator 
1031 
kW 
Power consumption of ORC feed pump 
24 
kW 
Power consumption of the fan 
96 
kW 
==PAGE:42==
 
 
Technical, Economic, and Financial Assessment of Geothermal Power Plant in Taiwanese Context  Page 36 of 72 
 
Total 
 
 
Total power consumption 
198 
kW 
Total power generation 
1031 
kW 
Plant net output 
833 
kW 
 
Table 15 lists the CAPEX breakdown of the IT-11 project. The CAPEX per kW is derived 
as 8669 USD/kW, aligning with the reported values 7213-9573 USD/kW in 2024 ATB 
database by NREL [79]. Besides, this derived value of CAPEX per kW is 278,000 
TWD/kW, lower than the reported value of 336,900 TWD/kW used by Taiwan’s Feed-
in Tariffs approval committee [67], showcasing good business potential. 
Table 15 CAPEX of IT-11 geothermal power plant project (indexed to 2024 price) 
Well System 
Value 
Unit 
a.1 
Well Drilling (1x Production, 1x reinjection) 
6,226,000 
USD 
a.2 Electrical Submersible Pump (incl. protector, motor, cable) 
400,000 
USD 
a.3 
Transformer 
50,000 
USD 
a.4 
Variable Speed Drive (VSD) 
75,000 
USD 
a.5 
Reinjection pump 
22,000 
USD 
ORC System 
 
 
b.1 
Preheater 
164,000 
USD 
b.2 
Evaporator 
287,000 
USD 
b.3 
ORC turbine 
601,000 
USD 
b.4 
Generator 
109,000 
USD 
b.5 
Gearbox 
44,000 
USD 
b.6 
Air-cooled condenser (desuperheating)  
19,000 
USD 
b.7 
Air-cooled condenser (condensing) 
151,000 
USD 
b.8 
ORC feed pump 
5,000 
USD 
Auxiliary System 
 
 
c.1 
Instrumentation and Control System 
414,000 
USD 
c.2 
Piping 
400,000 
USD 
Installation 
 
 
d.1 
Installation cost 
276,000 
USD 
Total 
 
 
 
CAPEX 
9,435,000 
USD 
 
CAPEX 
302,857,000 
TWD 
 
CAPEX per kW 
8,669 
USD/kW 
 
CAPEX per kW 
278,000 
TWD/kW 
==PAGE:43==
 
 
Technical, Economic, and Financial Assessment of Geothermal Power Plant in Taiwanese Context  Page 37 of 72 
 
When zooming into the ORC components, as displayed in Figure 5, the turbine 
together with a generator and a gearbox occupies over half of the expenditure on the 
ORC system, followed by 20% on the evaporator, 14% on the air-cooled condenser, and 
12% on the preheater. Whereas a negligible cost is for the ORC pump. These findings 
are consistent with Song et al. [33]. 
 
 
Figure 5 Pie chart of ORC component cost breakdown for IT-11 Project 
While zooming out to the CAPEX scale, as presented in Figure 6, the well system cost, 
including drilling and ESP, accounts for over two-thirds of the initial investment. The 
plant construction cost shares the remaining one-thirds. It is notable that the well 
system occupies a significantly large portion of the CAPEX. However, according to 
statistics from IEA [1], the drilling cost only shares 30-45% of the total expense. The 
author supposes this difference is because a comparatively low geofluid outlet leading 
to low plant capacity and cost share. Another reason is that this study considers the 
drilling success rate, which increases the drilling cost by 35%. Besides, ESP cost is also 
included in the share, accounting for about 6%. Overall, these findings still emphasize 
the importance of geophysical surveys before launching the drilling. 
==PAGE:44==
 
 
Technical, Economic, and Financial Assessment of Geothermal Power Plant in Taiwanese Context  Page 38 of 72 
 
 
 
Figure 6 Pie chart of CAPEX breakdown for IT-11 Project 
 
4.2. Results of the Financial Analysis 
To assess how worthwhile the specific heat source can be and how policy instruments 
affect the project, here we present the financial assessment for four policy scenarios. 
The financial models are built based on the financial parameters (Section 3.2.3), CAPEX, 
and electricity production derived from techno-economic model (Section 4.1.3). For 
the four pricing scenarios, the accumulated discounted cash flows are shown in Figure 
7. 
First of all, it is obvious that the current market price is too low to sustain the project’s 
viability. However, with the support from the government by fixed FiT and two-stage 
FiT, the breakeven points occur near the 19th and 18th year of the project respectively. 
These match the conclusions of Hwang et al. [26], pointing out a good example of de-
risk policy by introducing two-stage FiT. As for the PPA scenario, the breakeven period 
is around 19 years. 
 
==PAGE:45==
 
 
Technical, Economic, and Financial Assessment of Geothermal Power Plant in Taiwanese Context  Page 39 of 72 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7 Accumulated Discounted cashflows for (a) Market price (b) Fixed FiT (c) Two-
stage FiT (d) PPA 
 
-400
-300
-200
-100
0
100
200
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30
Million  TWD
Years
(a)
Accumulated Discount Cashflow of Market Price
-400
-300
-200
-100
0
100
200
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30
Million TWD
Years
(b)
Accumulated Discount Cashflow of Fixed FiT
-400
-300
-200
-100
0
100
200
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30
Million TWD
Years
(c)
Accumulated Discount Cashflow of Two-stage FiT
-400
-300
-200
-100
0
100
200
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30
Million TWD
Years
(d)
Accumulated Discount Cashflow of PPA
==PAGE:46==
 
 
Technical, Economic, and Financial Assessment of Geothermal Power Plant in Taiwanese Context  Page 40 of 72 
 
Regarding financial performance, the results are summarized in Table 16. Except for 
the market price scenario, which results in a remarkable loss, the remaining policy 
scenarios turn the project profitable and demonstrate positive NPVs. Among them, the 
two-stage FiT scenario delivers the highest IRR because of the high cash flow inflows 
during the first 10 years of the project. On the other hand, the PPA outperforms others 
in terms of NPV via high selling prices. In general, the policy instruments are 
indispensable and generate over 5.5 million USD over the plant’s 30-year lifespan. 
Table 16 Financial performance of four policy scenarios 
Policy Scenario 
NPV 
IRR 
Break-even year 
2024 market price -3,590,000 USD 
1.12 % 
- 
Fixed FiT 
1,970,000 USD 
7.18 % 
The 19th year 
Two-stage FiT 
1,950,000 USD 
7.46 % 
The 18th year 
PPA 
2,090,000 USD 
7.29 % 
The 19th year 
 
As presented in Table 17, for the Levelized Cost of Electricity (LCOE) of IT-11 project, it 
is expected to have a cost of 149 USD/MWh, falling within the range reported by IEA 
but much higher than those reported by NREL and IRENA. This is due to the relatively 
small plant capacity (<2 MW), the relatively low heat source temperature (146 °C), and 
the relatively high drilling cost. 
Table 17 Levelized Cost of Electricity (LCOE) for geothermal reported by different 
international organizations 
Organization 
LCOE 
Reference 
National Renewable Energy Lab, USA (NREL) 
70-102 USD/MWh 
[65] 
International Energy Agency (IEA) 
40-240 USD/MWh 
[1] 
International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) 
53-94 USD/MWh 
[68] 
This study for IT-11 
149 USD/MWh 
- 
 
4.3. Sensitivity Analysis 
To realistically define the possible variation of NPV and show the robustness of the 
project, here we present the results of sensitivity analyses performed on O&M cost, 
drilling cost, discount rate, capacity factor, and PPA pricing. The results of optimistic 
and conservative scenarios are exhibited in Figure 8. The values in between imply the 
base case scenario. 
==PAGE:47==
 
 
Technical, Economic, and Financial Assessment of Geothermal Power Plant in Taiwanese Context  Page 41 of 72 
 
 
 
Figure 8 Sensitivity Analysis for IT-11 Project 
For O&M cost, the conservative scenario exhibits a low NPV. One of the reasons is the 
limited number of geothermal projects and the lack of O&M experience in the country. 
Another reason is the relatively small plant capacities in Taiwan compared to those of 
USA, leading to high unit cost. 
For the drilling cost, there is a remarkable variation for NPV, highlighting a difficulty in 
estimating the project’s profitability. According to Energy Administration [67], the 
drilling cost for 1 MW plant is announced as 222 million TWD. However, the result of 
the optimistic scenario reveals a huge gap between itself and the announced cost. This 
suggests great potential to enhance the project’s viability via advancing drilling 
technologies. 
For discount rate, it was reported as the decisive factor by Nasution [22], but it is not 
the most critical factor in this study. This is because low interest rates were maintained 
in Taiwan for the past decades, leading to stable and low WACCs for renewable energy 
projects. 
For the capacity factor, the conservative value 70% and optimistic value 90% are 5th 
and 95th percentiles in IRENA’s database. It is not a frequently fluctuating factor in the 
30-year lifetime of geothermal power plants. However, it is still one of the deciding 
factors influencing the viability of geothermal projects. 
==PAGE:48==
 
 
Technical, Economic, and Financial Assessment of Geothermal Power Plant in Taiwanese Context  Page 42 of 72 
 
The same as capacity factor, PPA pricing is one of the impactful factors on profitability, 
consistent with the findings of the literature about financial models for geothermal 
projects [19], [21], [23], [26]. Hence, proposing attractive PPA contracts or FiT rates is 
still an efficient tool to encourage investment in geothermal projects. 
All in all, the capacity factor and PPA price are undoubtedly the impactful parameters 
on the project’s viability. However, we also found great uncertainty about the O&M 
cost and drilling cost. This implies potential to improve profitability by means of 
advancing O&M and drilling technologies. 
 
4.4. Threshold Analysis 
The final question to address is, what are the threshold heat source conditions to make 
the project profitable. As a result, threshold analyses are conducted on the geofluid 
mass flow rate and wellhead temperature. These parameters are highly related to 
equipment capacity and the plant scale. 
Table 18 Results of threshold analysis for IT-11 project – geofluid mass flow rate 
Flow rate 
(kg/s) 
Flow rate with ESP 
(kg/s) 
#Pump stage 
(-) 
Net output 
(kW) 
LCOE 
(USD/MWh) 
NPV 
(Million TWD) 
18.5 (base case) 
39.9 
10 
833 
149 
63.5 
15 
36.4 
10 
752 
160 
35.5 
12 
33.4 
9 
692 
168 
15.6 
9 
30.4 
8 
631 
179 
5.4 
8 
29.4 
8 
608 
183 
0.9 
7 
28.4 
8 
585 
188 
-3.2 
6 
27.4 
8 
563 
194 
-7.3 
 
==PAGE:49==
 
 
Technical, Economic, and Financial Assessment of Geothermal Power Plant in Taiwanese Context  Page 43 of 72 
 
 
Figure 9 Threshold analysis – geofluid mass flow rate 
The geofluid mass flow rate, which was measured in the production test, was boosted 
by ESP at the minimal number of stages to prevent flashing. The results are shown in 
Table 18 and visualized in Figure 9.  
The threshold for geofluid mass flow rate is around 8 kg/s (29 ton/hr), which will be 
boosted to 29 kg/s (104 ton/hr) by the ESP. At this point, the LCOE is 183 USD/MWh. 
From the graph, it is also notable that the NPV slope increases with increasing 
temperature, indicating the benefits of economies of scale. 
Table 19 Results of threshold analysis for IT-11 project – wellhead temperature 
Wellhead temp. 
(°C) 
Highest temp. 
(°C)  
#Pump stage 
(-) 
Turbine inlet 
Pressure (kPa) 
Net output 
(kW) 
LCOE 
(USD/MWh) 
NPV 
(Million TWD) 
146.4 (base case) 
175 
10 
540 
833 
149 
63.5 
141.4 
170 
9 
520 
742 
161 
33.5 
136.4 
165 
8 
500 
657 
175 
7.7 
135.4 
164 
8 
480 
639 
179 
1.6 
134.4 
163 
8 
480 
621 
183 
-1.9 
133.4 
162 
8 
480 
604 
187 
-5.0 
131.4 
160 
8 
480 
569 
195 
-11.5 
 
-10
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
5
7
9
11
13
15
17
19
21
Net Present Value (Million TWD)
Geofluid Mass Flow Rate (kg/s)
==PAGE:50==
 
 
Technical, Economic, and Financial Assessment of Geothermal Power Plant in Taiwanese Context  Page 44 of 72 
 
 
Figure 10 Threshold analysis – wellhead temperature 
Regarding the wellhead temperature, it is assumed to be constantly 28.6 K lower than 
the highest temperature in the reservoir. When the wellhead temperature decreases, 
the flashing pressure will also decrease. Consequently, we can reduce the ESP stages 
without causing geofluid flashing. Meanwhile, the turbine inlet pressure should be 
adjusted to reach a lower evaporation temperature and achieve a better thermal 
match between the organic working fluid and the geofluid.  
The results are shown in Table 19 and visualized in Figure 10. To sustain the project’s 
viability, the wellhead temperature should be above 135 °C, implying a reservoir 
temperature above 164 °C.  
 
4.5. Comparison with Other Energy Sources 
In 2024, Fossil-based electricity still shares over 80% in Taiwan’s electricity structure, 
and renewable electricity shares about 14%, revealing the urgency of green transition. 
As presented in Table 20, compared to other renewable energy sources, geothermal 
energy only accounts for a tiny fraction. The reported capacity factor was relatively low, 
leading to the high generation cost. If it is normalized to 80%, which is the worldwide 
average reported by IRENA [68], the generation cost will be as competitive as that of 
solar and wind energy. Furthermore, the nature of high capacity factors for geothermal 
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
130
132
134
136
138
140
142
144
146
148
Net Present Value (Million TWD)
Wellhead Temperature (°C)
==PAGE:51==
 
 
Technical, Economic, and Financial Assessment of Geothermal Power Plant in Taiwanese Context  Page 45 of 72 
 
power plants will highlight their strength, as an alternative option for fossil-based and 
nuclear energy. 
Table 20 Electricity structure in Taiwan (2024) [80], [81] 
Source type 
Installed capacity 
(MW) 
Electricity production 
(TWh) 
Capacity 
factor 
Generation cost 
 by Taipower 
(USD/MWh) 
Fossil-based 
42,097 
240001 
65.1% 
89 
Nuclear 
1,902 
12,180 
73.1% 
44 
Pumped Storage 
2,602 
3,075 
13.5 
145 
Hydropower 
2,123 
4,206 
22.6% 
55 
Geothermal 
7 
27 
43.6% 
221 
Solar 
14,281 
14,903 
11.9% 
123 
Wind 
3,890 
10,330 
30.3% 
137 
Biomass 
84 
224 
30.4% 
- 
Waste-to-Energy 
666 
3,644 
62.5% 
- 
Total 
Total 
21,052 
33,333 
18.1% 
98 
This study 
1 
5,838 
80.0% 
149 (LCOE) 
 
 
 
==PAGE:52==
 
 
Technical, Economic, and Financial Assessment of Geothermal Power Plant in Taiwanese Context  Page 46 of 72 
 
5 Conclusion 
This study assesses the financial viability of a geothermal power plant project in 
Taiwanese context. It incorporates the anti-scaling procedures by commissioning an 
ESP and setting reinjection temperature limitation for a specific heat resource. It also 
quantifies the effects of diverse policy scenarios (market price, fixed FiT, two-stage FiT, 
PPA), identifies the most impactful factors, and derives the threshold conditions to 
sustain the project’s viability. 
Key findings 
(1) The CAPEX per kW of a 1 MW plant under the Taiwanese context is 8669 
USD/kW, which falls in the 7213-9573 USD/kW range reported by NREL. 
(2) The LCOE of this project is 149 USD/MWh, consistent with the 40-240 
USD/MWh range reported by IEA. 
(3) The derived NPVs under market price, fixed FiT, two-stage FiT, and PPA 
scenarios are -3.59, +1.97, +1.95, and +2.09 million USD, respectively. This 
highlights the strong dependence on remuneration policies for Taiwan’s 
geothermal projects. 
(4) The two-stage FiT scheme delivers the best IRR at 7.46% with a breakeven 
period of 18 years, which is beneficial for mitigating investment risk and 
financial pressure in the project’s early stages. 
(5) Capacity factors and PPA pricing are the most impactful parameters; however, 
the O&M cost and drilling cost introduce significant uncertainty, revealing high 
potential to improve profitability by advancing technologies. 
(6) The threshold wellhead temperature is 135 °C, implying that the reservoir 
temperature should exceed 164 °C to make the project viable in the Taiwanese 
context. 
Limitations 
Although this research is the first of its kind to incorporate anti-scaling technology into 
the financial assessment of a specific geothermal heat source in the Taiwanese context, 
there are still some limitations to the model. 
(1) The model does not account for reservoir behavior and dynamics, which 
introduces uncertainty to the long-term financial assessment. 
(2) The well pressure profile is estimated using simplified assumptions, providing 
only a rough approximation that can lead to deviations on ESP operation. 
==PAGE:53==
 
 
Technical, Economic, and Financial Assessment of Geothermal Power Plant in Taiwanese Context  Page 47 of 72 
 
(3) The PPA prices are rough assumptions due to the confidentiality of actual PPA 
contracts, which could introduce bias into the results. 
Future Work 
(1) The author suggests that future work can incorporate reservoir behavior for a 
better estimation in a long-term project. 
(2) It would be applicable to engage the renewable energy certificate trading as a 
premium on the electricity price. Taiwan’s certificate trading system was 
launched in 2024, and there will be more information about the pricing in the 
future. 
(3) The author suggests looking into drilling subsidies and insurance programs 
since the drilling cost shares the biggest portion in CAPEX. However, at this 
moment, the drilling subsidy is reported to be ineffective, and no project 
developer received the subsidy yet. 
 
 
==PAGE:54==
 
 
Technical, Economic, and Financial Assessment of Geothermal Power Plant in Taiwanese Context  Page 48 of 72 
 
Acknowledgement 
I want to express my sincerest gratitude to Dr. Claire Marie Bergaentzlé, who leads me 
into the field of energy economics at the very beginning of my study and always 
provides me with clear guidance and practical advice on my favorite thesis project. 
Also, I would like to thank Dr. Nishith Babubhai Desai for patiently equipping me with 
the knowledge and skills of thermodynamic modelling since taking the special course 
last summer. My appreciation also goes to Dr. María Sigríður Guðjónsdóttir who 
generously shares invaluable insights into geothermal energy. 
 
Lastly, I would like to thank my family, my friends, and my girlfriend Ann for supporting 
me from the other side of the earth. Without their support, I am not able to explore 
the world of energy technologies. 
 
This study would not have been possible without these people. 
 
 
==PAGE:55==
 
 
Technical, Economic, and Financial Assessment of Geothermal Power Plant in Taiwanese Context  Page 49 of 72 
 
6 Appendix 
The appendix elaborates how the author accesses and uses the input data, including 
site-specific data, technical parameters, and financial parameters. 
Heat Source Data 
 
Figure 11 Geologic Assessed Priority Map of Taiwan [82] 
As summarized by Wang et al. [82], Figure 11 considered the geologic attributes, 
combining heat source and fractural pathway components, indicating the best 
geothermal potential areas in Taiwan. Among these areas, this study used production 
test data from the well “IT-11” in the Tuchang geothermal field. The production test 
data were originally published by the Industrial Technology Research Institute (ITRI) [4] 
and obtained from the Geological Survey and Mining Management Agency, MOEA 
Taiwan [83]. 
 
 
==PAGE:56==
 
 
Technical, Economic, and Financial Assessment of Geothermal Power Plant in Taiwanese Context  Page 50 of 72 
 
Drilling Cost 
To assess the drilling cost, Shamoushaki et al. [51] proposed a correlation in 2021 with 
respect to the well depth and the number of wells as shown in Equation (13). Earlier 
in 2014, Lukawski et al. [77] also provided a correlation for geothermal well drilling 
and completion, as presented in Equation (48). This result serves as the optimistic 
scenario for sensitivity analysis. 
𝐶𝑑𝑟𝑖𝑙𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑔= (1.72 × 10−7 × 𝐷2 + 2.3 × 10−3 × 𝐷−0.62) × 𝑛 
Equation (48) 
𝐷 : Depth of the well 
 
𝑛 : Number of wells 
Drilling Success Rate 
A focus on drilling success rate is vital. Sanyal et al. [84] from GeothermEx Inc. (now 
became part of SLB) published a statistical study and the learning curve effect for well 
drilling. In their study, a database covering 2528 wells from 52 fields in 14 countries 
were analyzed. With the same database, Allen et al. [52] from International Finance 
Corporation concluded the drilling success rates at different project stages as listed in 
Table 21. They also pointed out the growing success rate over the last 50 years. 
Table 21 Drilling Success Rate for Different Project Stage [52] 
Stage 
Well numbers 
Success rate 
Average capacity 
Exploration 
≤5 
59 % 
6.0 MW 
Development 
> 5, ≤30 
74 % 
7.3 MW 
Operation 
> 30 
83 % 
7.5 MW 
OVERALL 
ALL 
78 % 
7.3 MW 
 
In their studies, a success well was defined as the one with capacity higher than 3 MW, 
which has not yet been achieved by any well in Taiwan. However, because the thesis 
aims to provide an overall framework to assess geothermal projects in Taiwan, a 
success rate of 74% at the development stage is used, which is the current situation in 
the country. For instance, around IT-11 in the Tuchang geothermal field, there were 
about 40 wells drilled and investigated over past decades. 
 
 
==PAGE:57==
 
 
Technical, Economic, and Financial Assessment of Geothermal Power Plant in Taiwanese Context  Page 51 of 72 
 
Operation and Maintenance Cost (O&M cost) 
The model uses statistical results from 2024 Annual Technology Baseline database 
developed by National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL) [65]. It costs 161.168 USD 
per kW-year to run a binary geothermal power plant throughout its 30-year lifespan. 
The expense covers the routine maintenance and the replacement fee of plant 
components, for instance, the replacement of ESP, the administrative fee, and the 
operating labor salaries.  
For the sensitivity analysis, this study uses the cost 125.637 USD per kW-year as the 
optimistic scenario, reflecting the advancement in geothermal technologies. In 
contrast, for the conservative scenario, this study uses the cost reported by Industrial 
Technology Research Institute (ITRI) in 2017 Renewable Energy Electricity Feed-in Tariff 
Rate Approval Committee [72]. The value was assumed constant 8,323 TWD per kW-
year (259 USD per kW-year).  
Grid Enhancement Fee 
According to the Feed-in Tariff (FiT) rules in Taiwan [66], a grid enhancement fee is 
collected by the state-owned grid operator, Taiwan Power Company (Taipower). The 
fee is 0.0173 TWD per kWh for connections to the transmission grid at voltages above 
66kV. 
Hot Spring Taking Fee 
According to Regulations for Levy and Usage of Hot Spring Taking Fee published by 
Water Resource Agency [85], the hot spring taking fee is 0.5 TWD per cubic meter if 
fulfilling the 90% brine reinjection rules. Based on this, the study will use the reference 
cost provided by 2025 Renewable Energy Electricity Feed-in Tariff Rate Approval 
Committee, a cost of 320 TWD per kW for taking hot spring for a geothermal power 
plant [67]. 
Lifetime 
Several international organizations have reported the expected lifetime of geothermal 
power plants. According to IEA [1], the geothermal wells can operate at a consistent 
high rate in their 20- to 30- year lifetime. IRENA [68] assumes a 25-year lifespan for 
operation and maintenance. For NREL [65], the lifetime of plant and reservoir is 
assumed as 30 years. In this study, a 30-year lifetime assumption is made. 
 
==PAGE:58==
 
 
Technical, Economic, and Financial Assessment of Geothermal Power Plant in Taiwanese Context  Page 52 of 72 
 
Table 22 Lifetimes assumption of geothermal power plants 
Organization 
Expected Lifetime 
Reference 
Internation Energy Agency (IEA) 
20-30 years 
[1] 
International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) 
25 years 
[68] 
National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL) 
30 years 
[65] 
This study 
30 years 
- 
 
Capacity Factor 
According to statistics from IRENA Renewable Cost Database, as presented in Figure 
12, the average capacity factor for binary geothermal power plants in 2007-2023 is 
reported at 80%, slightly lower than the 82% of flash technologies [76]. Although 
Taghizadeh-Hesary et al. [86] reported the 80% capacity factor might lead to rapid 
depletion of resources and suggested a rate of 60%. After consulting with supervisors, 
a capacity factor of 80% is more reasonable and commonly used in literature.  
For the sensitivity analysis, the value for conservative scenario is set at 70%, close to 
the average of the 5th percentile 69.9%; In contrast, the value for optimistic scenario is 
set at 90%, close to the average of 95th percentile 89.7% 
 
Figure 12 Capacity Factor of Geothermal Power Plants (2007-2023) [76] 
 
 
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
5th percentile
80.00% 82.10% 69.60% 80.00%
-
76.30% 73.10% 49.60% 77.20% 58.70% 58.80% 62.10% 74.00% 75.90% 58.40% 69.00% 73.40%
Average
80.00% 88.30% 73.10% 87.00%
-
83.30% 82.40% 84.10% 89.00% 84.90% 81.00% 84.30% 79.40% 80.80% 77.00% 85.30% 82.10%
95th percentile
80.00% 90.00% 82.10% 92.20%
-
94.10% 91.20% 91.10% 92.70% 90.10% 90.00% 96.30% 86.30% 91.20% 91.30% 89.60% 86.80%
==PAGE:59==
 
 
Technical, Economic, and Financial Assessment of Geothermal Power Plant in Taiwanese Context  Page 53 of 72 
 
Discount Rate 
Weighted Average Cost of Capital (WACC) represents the cost for a company to finance 
a project. In a geothermal power plant project, WACC would typically be used as the 
discount rate to calculate the present value of future cash flows for the project 
developers. For the WACC of renewable energy projects in Taiwan, Ministry of 
Economic Affairs poses reference values annually. Figure 13 presents the WACC values 
used in Feed-in Tariff Rate Approval Committee since 2010. The discount rate for this 
study is set at 5.24%, the value for renewable energy projects in 2025 [67].  
The historical WACC for renewable energy projects in Taiwan fluctuated between 
4.66% and 5.25%. Meanwhile, the WACC for offshore wind farm projects remains 
higher and peaked at 6.06% in 2017. Therefore, for the sensitivity analysis, the 
conservative scenario uses 6.00% discount rate, assuming it is almost as risky as 
offshore wind farm projects. For the optimistic scenario, the discount rate is set at 
4.50%, close to the historical low value. 
 
 
Figure 13 Weighted Average Cost of Capital (WACC) of renewable energy projects in 
Taiwan 
 
 
Year
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
Real WACC, Renewable Energy
5.212% 5.253%
5.19%
5.16%
5.25%
5.17%
4.66%
5.17%
5.15%
5.12%
5.05%
5.03%
4.98%
5.11%
5.24%
Real WACC, Offshore Wind
5.50%
5.49%
5.65%
6.06%
6.05%
6.00%
5.97%
5.73%
5.69%
5.62%
5.64%
5.51%
Announced WACC, Renewable Energy
5.25%
5.25%
5.25%
5.25%
5.25%
5.25%
5.25%
5.25%
5.25%
5.25%
5.25%
5.25%
5.25%
5.25%
5.25%
5.25%
Announced WACC, Offshore Wind
5.25%
5.25%
5.65%
6.06%
6.05%
6.05%
6.05%
5.75%
5.70%
5.70%
5.70%
5.70%
==PAGE:60==
 
 
Technical, Economic, and Financial Assessment of Geothermal Power Plant in Taiwanese Context  Page 54 of 72 
 
Inflation rate 
In this study, the 2% inflation rate is used, which are the long-term targets of central 
banking authorities such as Federal Reserve Board (Fed) [87], and European Central 
Bank (ECB) [88]. In Figure 14, the annual change of consumer price indices (CPI), also 
known as inflation rate, is published by Taiwan’s National Statistics, aligning with the 
2% inflation targets in the country [69]. 
 
Figure 14 Annual Change of Consumer Price Indices in Taiwan 
Tax and Depreciation 
The corporate income tax rate in Taiwan is 20% [70]. With the depreciation of 
enterprises’ fixed assets, tax shields can be built for tax reduction. For geothermal 
power plants, the service lifetime for depreciation of geothermal equipment is 
announced as 15 years according to the Ministry of Finance, Taiwan [71]. The choice 
of depreciation methods such as the straight-line method and the declining balance 
method are decided by the corporates [89]. For this study, the author uses the straight-
line method for simplification. Because of the considerable initial investment of 
geothermal projects, the asset depreciation can lead to loss in the early stages of the 
project. With the application of Loss Carry Forward (LCF), the tax shields can be 
prolonged. In Taiwan, the loss can be carried forward by 100% with a 10-year time limit 
[89]. 
 
 
==PAGE:61==
 
 
Technical, Economic, and Financial Assessment of Geothermal Power Plant in Taiwanese Context  Page 55 of 72 
 
Fixed Feed-in Tariff (Fixed FiT) 
The fixed FiT price is guaranteed by the government for 20 years. However, this price 
is only applied to the plant’s net output, which means the plant operators must cover 
their facility’s own energy consumption. Figure 15 illustrates the historical trend of 
geothermal FiT rate. In order to promote the development of small-scale systems, a 
higher rate was proposed for plants with capacity below 2 MW since 2022. In 2025, 
the price is 5.9459 TWD per kWh. 
 
 
Figure 15 Feed-in Tariff rates for geothermal electricity in Taiwan 
Two-stage Feed-in Tariff (Two-stage FiT) 
The two-stage FiT consists of a higher price for the initial 10 years and a lower price 
for the second decade. It aims to provide the investors with higher revenue at the early 
stage of the project, mitigating their financial pressures. The concept has been 
implemented on geothermal projects since 2017, and the values for 2025 are 7.3123 
TWD/kWh for first 10 years and 3.6516 TWD/kWh for the remaining 10 years. 
 
 
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
FiT Geothermal
5.1838
4.8039
4.8039
4.8039
4.9315
4.9315
4.9428
4.9428
5.1956
5.1956
5.1956
5.1956
5.1956
5.1956
5.1956
5.1956
FiT Geothermal < 2MW
5.7736
5.9406
5.9459
5.9459
==PAGE:62==
 
 
Technical, Economic, and Financial Assessment of Geothermal Power Plant in Taiwanese Context  Page 56 of 72 
 
Power Purchase Agreement (PPA) 
The prices of PPA are generally higher than the FiT rates. However, the agreements 
between corporates are usually confidential and inaccessible to the public. In this study, 
the PPA prices are assumed to be 6.0000 TWD per kWh and valid for 30 years. 
In terms of sensitivity analysis, for the conservative scenario, we use the FiT price for 
over-2 MW system, 5.1956 TWD per kWh. For the optimistic scenario, Hwang et al. [26] 
reviewed the literature and indicated that citizens would have a willingness to pay an 
extra 0.4709 TWD per kWh as a premium to support renewable energy, raising the PPA 
price to 6.4709 TWD per kWh. 
 
 
==PAGE:63==
 
 
Technical, Economic, and Financial Assessment of Geothermal Power Plant in Taiwanese Context  Page 57 of 72 
 
7 Reference 
[1] 
International Energy Agency, “The Future of Geothermal Energy,” Dec. 
2024. Accessed: May 22, 2025. [Online]. Available: 
https://www.iea.org/reports/the-future-of-geothermal-energy 
[2] 
R. O. C. (Taiwan) Executive Yuan, “Reaching net-zero emissions by 2050 
(Major Policies Detail).” Accessed: Jan. 09, 2025. [Online]. Available: 
https://english.ey.gov.tw/News3/9E5540D592A5FECD/5cf73389-61f9-
43dd-80b3-62926546d710 
[3] 
T. Industrial Technology Research Institute, “Geothermal Data Platform.” 
Accessed: May 27, 2025. [Online]. Available: https://www.geothermal-
taiwan.org.tw/GIS/ 
[4] 
C.-R. Lee, D.-Y. Jang, and J.-H. Chen, “Compilation Report of Geothermal 
Exploration Data in Taiwan,” Jul. 1994. 
[5] 
Y. C. Lu et al., “Thermal Fluid Changes after Operating a Geothermal 
System: A Case Study of the Chingshui Geothermal Field, Taiwan,” 
Geothermics, vol. 87, Sep. 2020, doi: 10.1016/j.geothermics.2020.101878. 
[6] 
E. Gunnlaugsson, H. Ármannsson, S. Thorhallsson, and B. Steingrímsson, 
“Problems in Geothermal Operation - Scaling and Corrosion,” Santa Tecla, 
El Salvador, Mar. 2014. 
[7] 
C. Penot, D. Martelo, and S. Paul, “Corrosion and Scaling in Geothermal 
Heat Exchangers,” Oct. 01, 2023, Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing 
Institute (MDPI). doi: 10.3390/app132011549. 
[8] 
S. J. Zarrouk, B. C. Woodhurst, and C. Morris, “Silica scaling in geothermal 
heat exchangers and its impact on pressure drop and performance: 
Wairakei binary plant, New Zealand,” Geothermics, vol. 51, pp. 445–459, 
2014, doi: 10.1016/j.geothermics.2014.03.005. 
[9] 
R. DiPippo, “Binary Cycle Power Plants,” in Geothermal Power Plants, 
Elsevier, 2016, pp. 193–239. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-08-100879-9.00008-2. 
==PAGE:64==
 
 
Technical, Economic, and Financial Assessment of Geothermal Power Plant in Taiwanese Context  Page 58 of 72 
 
[10] 
S. Raikar and S. Adamson, “Public policy mechanisms to support 
renewable energy,” in Renewable Energy Finance, Elsevier, 2020, pp. 9–19. 
doi: 10.1016/b978-0-12-816441-9.00002-7. 
[11] 
M. Aziz and F. B. Juangsa, “Dry steam power plant: Thermodynamic 
analysis and system improvement,” in Thermodynamic Analysis and 
Optimization of Geothermal Power Plants, Elsevier, 2021, pp. 97–111. doi: 
10.1016/B978-0-12-821037-6.00015-9. 
[12] 
S. Mohammadzadeh Bina, H. Fujii, and S. Tsuya, “Single- and double-flash 
cycles for geothermal power plants,” in Thermodynamic Analysis and 
Optimization of Geothermal Power Plants, Elsevier, 2021, pp. 83–95. doi: 
10.1016/B978-0-12-821037-6.00002-0. 
[13] 
Y. Başoğul, O. V. Güler, and A. Keçebaş, “Binary geothermal power plant,” 
in Thermodynamic Analysis and Optimization of Geothermal Power Plants, 
Elsevier, 2021, pp. 113–129. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-821037-6.00013-5. 
[14] 
R. DiPippo, “Binary Cycle Power Plants,” in Geothermal Power Plants, 
Elsevier, 2016, pp. 193–239. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-08-100879-9.00008-2. 
[15] 
A. Ahmadi et al., “Applications of geothermal organic Rankine Cycle for 
electricity production,” Nov. 20, 2020, Elsevier Ltd. doi: 
10.1016/j.jclepro.2020.122950. 
[16] 
A. Haghighi, M. R. Pakatchian, M. E. H. Assad, V. N. Duy, and M. Alhuyi 
Nazari, “A review on geothermal Organic Rankine cycles: modeling and 
optimization,” Jun. 01, 2021, Springer Science and Business Media B.V. doi: 
10.1007/s10973-020-10357-y. 
[17] 
H. Levy and M. Sarnat, Capital investment and financial decisions. 
Pearson Education, 1994. 
[18] 
D. Moya, J. Paredes, and P. Kaparaju, “Technical, financial, economic and 
environmental pre-feasibility study of geothermal power plants by 
RETScreen - Ecuador’s case study,” Sep. 01, 2018, Elsevier Ltd. doi: 
10.1016/j.rser.2018.04.027. 
==PAGE:65==
 
 
Technical, Economic, and Financial Assessment of Geothermal Power Plant in Taiwanese Context  Page 59 of 72 
 
[19] 
H. González-García, Prol-Ledesma R M, Amaro-Rodiles F, and Arango-
Galván C, “Financial and technical feasibility study of the low enthalpy 
geothermal system ‘La Jolla’, Baja California Mexico,” 2018. 
[20] 
H. González-García, H. Francke, E. Huenges, and I. Sass, “Financial 
performance analysis of the geothermal power station of Los Humeros, 
Mexico,” Geothermics, vol. 112, Jul. 2023, doi: 
10.1016/j.geothermics.2023.102745. 
[21] 
A. Lesmana, N. C. Winofa, H. B. Pratama, A. Ashat, and N. M. Saptadji, 
“Preliminary Financial Modelling with Probabilistic Approach for 
Geothermal Development Project in Indonesia,” in IOP Conference Series: 
Earth and Environmental Science, Institute of Physics Publishing, Feb. 
2020. doi: 10.1088/1755-1315/417/1/012024. 
[22] 
Fuadi Arif Nasution, “Geothermal power plant investment evaluation study 
case: Indonesia,” 2012. [Online]. Available: www.bi.go.id 
[23] 
A. D. Setiawan, D. Nurachman, M. P. Dewi, and I. Rahman, “Feasibility 
Investment Analysis of Geothermal Project: A Case of Lumut Balai 
Geothermal Power Plant,” in ACM International Conference Proceeding 
Series, Association for Computing Machinery, Sep. 2020, pp. 180–184. doi: 
10.1145/3429551.3429559. 
[24] 
C. Kalimbia and B. Pálsson, “Financial modelling and analysis of power 
project finance. A case study of Ngozi geothermal power project, 
southwest Tanzania,” 2019. 
[25] 
B. Kępińska et al., “Risk insurance fund for geothermal energy projects in 
selected european countries – operational and financial simulation,” 
Gospodarka Surowcami Mineralnymi / Mineral Resources Management, 
vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 139–158, 2021, doi: 10.24425/gsm.2021.138654. 
[26] 
T. L. Hwang and W. W. C. Tseng, “Cost-Benefit Analysis and Feed-In Pricing 
Policy Recommendations for Geothermal Power Generation: A Monte 
Carlo Simulation Study in Taiwan,” in 2023 10th International Conference 
on Power and Energy Systems Engineering, CPESE 2023, Institute of 
==PAGE:66==
 
 
Technical, Economic, and Financial Assessment of Geothermal Power Plant in Taiwanese Context  Page 60 of 72 
 
Electrical and Electronics Engineers Inc., 2023, pp. 366–371. doi: 
10.1109/CPESE59653.2023.10303147. 
[27] 
R. DiPippo, Geothermal power plants: principles, applications, case 
studies and environmental impact. Butterworth-Heinemann, 2012. 
[28] 
C. O. Colpan, M. A. Ezan, and O. Kizilkan, Thermodynamic Analysis and 
Optimization of Geothermal Power Plants. Elsevier, 2021. 
[29] 
S. Karimi and S. Mansouri, “A comparative profitability study of geothermal 
electricity production in developed and developing countries: 
Exergoeconomic analysis and optimization of different ORC 
configurations,” Renew Energy, vol. 115, pp. 600–619, 2018, doi: 
10.1016/j.renene.2017.08.098. 
[30] 
X. Liu, M. Wei, L. Yang, and X. Wang, “Thermo-economic analysis and 
optimization selection of ORC system configurations for low temperature 
binary-cycle geothermal plant,” Appl Therm Eng, vol. 125, pp. 153–164, 
2017, doi: 10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2017.07.016. 
[31] 
A. F. Altun and M. Kilic, “Thermodynamic performance evaluation of a 
geothermal ORC power plant,” Renew Energy, vol. 148, pp. 261–274, Apr. 
2020, doi: 10.1016/j.renene.2019.12.034. 
[32] 
V. Zare, “A comparative exergoeconomic analysis of different ORC 
configurations for binary geothermal power plants,” Energy Convers 
Manag, vol. 105, pp. 127–138, Aug. 2015, doi: 
10.1016/j.enconman.2015.07.073. 
[33] 
J. Song, P. Loo, J. Teo, and C. N. Markides, “Thermo-Economic 
Optimization of Organic Rankine Cycle (ORC) Systems for Geothermal 
Power Generation: A Comparative Study of System Configurations,” Front 
Energy Res, vol. 8, Feb. 2020, doi: 10.3389/fenrg.2020.00006. 
[34] 
S. Mohammadzadeh Bina, S. Jalilinasrabady, and H. Fujii, “Energy, 
economic and environmental (3E) aspects of internal heat exchanger for 
ORC geothermal power plants,” Energy, vol. 140, pp. 1096–1106, 2017, doi: 
10.1016/j.energy.2017.09.045. 
==PAGE:67==
 
 
Technical, Economic, and Financial Assessment of Geothermal Power Plant in Taiwanese Context  Page 61 of 72 
 
[35] 
N. B. Desai, I. M. Orozova-Bekkevold, F. L. Christensen, and F. Haglind, 
“Integrated Analysis of Geothermal Reservoir and Binary Power Cycle 
System,” in 37th International Conference on Efficiency, Cost, 
Optimization, Simulation and Environmental Impact of Energy Systems, 
ECOS 2024, ECOS 2024, 2024, pp. 1422–1432. doi: 10.52202/077185-
0122. 
[36] 
P. Von Hirtz, “Silica scale control in geothermal plants-historical 
perspective and current technology,” in Geothermal Power Generation: 
Developments and Innovation, Elsevier Inc., 2016, pp. 443–476. doi: 
10.1016/B978-0-08-100337-4.00016-4. 
[37] 
H. Zhao et al., “Research progress on scaling mechanism and anti-scaling 
technology of geothermal well system,” J Dispers Sci Technol, vol. 44, no. 
9, pp. 1657–1670, 2023, doi: 10.1080/01932691.2022.2033625. 
[38] 
“Regulations on Permits and Management for Geothermal Exploration and 
Development.” 
[39] 
B. Curkan, W. Klaczek, and C. Reede, “High Temperature ESPs for 
Geothermal Production: The Ideal Pump,” 2018. 
[40] 
Joe Vandevier and Ben Gould, “Application of Electrical Submersible 
Pumping Systems in High Temperature Geothermal Environments,” 2009. 
[41] 
R. Febrianto, J. Bydder, A. Hochwimmer, G. Ussher, and R. Libbey, 
“Developing low temperature Geothermal projects in Indonesia using 
pumped well technology,” in IOP Conference Series: Earth and 
Environmental Science, Institute of Physics Publishing, 2019. doi: 
10.1088/1755-1315/254/1/012021. 
[42] 
H. Aydin and S. Merey, “Design of Electrical Submersible Pump system in 
geothermal wells: A case study from West Anatolia, Turkey,” Energy, vol. 
230, Sep. 2021, doi: 10.1016/j.energy.2021.120891. 
[43] 
H. Aydin, S. I. Tezel, and S. Erol, “Optimizing inhibitor injection in 
geothermal wells with electrical submersible pump,” Geothermics, vol. 
127, Mar. 2025, doi: 10.1016/j.geothermics.2024.103238. 
==PAGE:68==
 
 
Technical, Economic, and Financial Assessment of Geothermal Power Plant in Taiwanese Context  Page 62 of 72 
 
[44] 
T. Mattie, Y. Ovunc, and E. Elmas, “ESPs in Geothermal Applications: an 
Operational and Commercial Success Case Study in Turkey,” 2019. 
[45] 
E. R. Yescombe, Principles of Project Finance. Academic Press, 2002. 
[46] 
S. Raikar and S. Adamson, Renewable energy finance: Theory and 
practice. Elsevier, 2024. 
[47] 
“RETScreen.” Accessed: Jan. 17, 2025. [Online]. Available: https://natural-
resources.canada.ca/maps-tools-and-publications/tools/modelling-
tools/retscreen/7465 
[48] 
“EES: Engineering Equation Solver | F-Chart Software : Engineering 
Software.” Accessed: Jan. 17, 2025. [Online]. Available: 
https://fchartsoftware.com/ees/ 
[49] 
R. DiPippo, “Reservoir Engineering,” in Geothermal Power Plants, Elsevier, 
2016, pp. 61–103. doi: 10.1016/b978-0-08-100879-9.00004-5. 
[50] 
R. O. Fournier and J. J. Rowe, “The solubility of amorphous silica in water at 
high temperatures and high pressures,” 1977. 
[51] 
M. Shamoushaki, D. Fiaschi, G. Manfrida, P. H. Niknam, and L. Talluri, 
“Feasibility study and economic analysis of geothermal well drilling,” 
International Journal of Environmental Studies, vol. 78, no. 6, pp. 1022–
1036, 2021, doi: 10.1080/00207233.2021.1905309. 
[52] 
M. Allen et al., “Success of geothermal wells: A global study,” 2013. 
[53] 
“BLS Data Viewer.” Accessed: Apr. 16, 2025. [Online]. Available: 
https://data.bls.gov/dataViewer/view/timeseries/PCU213111213111 
[54] 
K. Rahbar, S. Mahmoud, R. K. Al-Dadah, N. Moazami, and S. A. 
Mirhadizadeh, “Review of organic Rankine cycle for small-scale 
applications,” 2017, Elsevier Ltd. doi: 10.1016/j.enconman.2016.12.023. 
[55] 
“Analysis, Synthesis, and Design of Chemical Processes, Fifth Edition.” 
[56] 
G. Towler and R. Sinnott, Chemical engineering design: principles, practice 
and economics of plant and process design. Butterworth-Heinemann, 
==PAGE:69==
 
 
Technical, Economic, and Financial Assessment of Geothermal Power Plant in Taiwanese Context  Page 63 of 72 
 
2021. 
[57] 
M. Astolfi, M. C. Romano, P. Bombarda, and E. Macchi, “Binary ORC 
(Organic Rankine Cycles) power plants for the exploitation of medium-low 
temperature geothermal sources - Part B: Techno-economic optimization,” 
Energy, vol. 66, pp. 435–446, Mar. 2014, doi: 
10.1016/j.energy.2013.11.057. 
[58] 
“The Chemical Engineering Plant Cost Index ® - Chemical Engineering.” 
Accessed: May 14, 2025. [Online]. Available: 
https://www.chemengonline.com/pci-home 
[59] 
J. M. Andal, “POWER PLANT AND THERMOECONOMICS MODELLING OF 
LOW-TO INTERMEDIATE-TEMPERATURE GEOTHERMAL RESOURCE IN 
MONTELAGO, PHILIPPINES.” 
[60] 
K. F. Beckers and K. McCabe, “GEOPHIRES v2. 0: updated geothermal 
techno-economic simulation tool,” Geothermal Energy, vol. 7, pp. 1–28, 
2019. 
[61] 
E. Macchi and M. Astolfi, Organic rankine cycle (ORC) power systems: 
technologies and applications. Woodhead Publishing, 2016. 
[62] 
SLB (Schlumberger), “Reda ESP pumps | SLB.” Accessed: Jun. 22, 2025. 
[Online]. Available: https://www.slb.com/products-and-
services/innovating-in-oil-and-gas/completions/artificial-lift/electrical-
submersible-pumps/reda-esp-pump-system/reda-esp-pumps 
[63] 
P. J. Chen, T. C. Yeh, J. C. Hsieh, and B. H. Lee, “Performance and 
economic analysis of various geothermal power plant systems: Case 
study for the Chingshui geothermal field in Taiwan,” Energy Reports, vol. 
12, pp. 4539–4554, Dec. 2024, doi: 10.1016/j.egyr.2024.10.027. 
[64] 
A. Keshvarparast, S. S. M. Ajarostaghi, and M. A. Delavar, “Thermodynamic 
analysis the performance of hybrid solar-geothermal power plant 
equipped with air-cooled condenser,” Appl Therm Eng, vol. 172, May 2020, 
doi: 10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2020.115160. 
==PAGE:70==
 
 
Technical, Economic, and Financial Assessment of Geothermal Power Plant in Taiwanese Context  Page 64 of 72 
 
[65] 
National Renewable Energy Lab (NREL), “Geothermal | Electricity | 2024 | 
ATB | NREL.” Accessed: May 17, 2025. [Online]. Available: 
https://atb.nrel.gov/electricity/2024/geothermal 
[66] 
Ministry of Economic Affairs Taiwan, “2025 Feed-in Tariffs and Calculation 
Method for Renewable Energy Electricity in the Republic of China 
(Taiwan).” Accessed: May 18, 2025. [Online]. Available: 
https://law.moea.gov.tw/LawContent.aspx?id=GL001791 
[67] 
Energy Administration Taiwan, “Second Meeting Attachment of 2025 
Renewable Energy Electricity Feed-in Tariff Rate Approval Committee.” 
Accessed: May 18, 2025. [Online]. Available: 
https://www.moeaea.gov.tw/ECW/renewable/content/ContentLink.aspx?
menu_id=778 
[68] 
International Renewable Energy Agency, Renewable Power Generation 
Costs in 2023. 2024. [Online]. Available: www.irena.org 
[69] 
National Statistics Taiwan, “National Statistics, Republic of China 
(Taiwan)-CPI Change Rate.” Accessed: May 21, 2025. [Online]. Available: 
https://eng.stat.gov.tw/Point.aspx?sid=t.2&n=4201&sms=11713 
[70] 
Ministry of Finance Taiwan, “Guide to ROC Taxes 2024.” Accessed: May 21, 
2025. [Online]. Available: 
https://www.mof.gov.tw/Eng/singlehtml/254?cntId=7f6fffaa87074dfbaa61
ee27d5e8e71b 
[71] 
Ministry of Finance Taiwan, “Table of the Service Life of Fixed Assets.” 
Accessed: May 21, 2025. [Online]. Available: https://law-
out.mof.gov.tw/LawContentSource.aspx?id=GL010207 
[72] 
Central Bank of the Republic of China, “2024 New Taiwan Dollar Exchange 
Rates (NTD/USD).” Accessed: Jun. 15, 2025. [Online]. Available: 
https://www.cbc.gov.tw/en/cp-4237-165072-15ec2-2.html 
[73] 
European Central Bank, “EUR-USD Exchange Rate Charts.” Accessed: Jun. 
22, 2025. [Online]. Available: 
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/stats/policy_and_exchange_rates/euro_refere
==PAGE:71==
 
 
Technical, Economic, and Financial Assessment of Geothermal Power Plant in Taiwanese Context  Page 65 of 72 
 
nce_exchange_rates/html/eurofxref-graph-usd.en.html 
[74] 
Legislative Yuan Taiwan, Renewable Energy Development Act - Laws & 
Regulations Database of The Republic of China (Taiwan). Taiwan, 2023. 
Accessed: May 19, 2025. [Online]. Available: 
https://law.moj.gov.tw/ENG/LawClass/LawAll.aspx?pcode=J0130032 
[75] 
Taiwan Power Company, “2024 Electricity Generation Cost and Average 
Market Price.” Accessed: Jun. 15, 2025. [Online]. Available: 
https://www.taipower.com.tw/2289/2363/2373/2375/10358/normalPost 
[76] 
International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA), “Chart Data - Renewable 
Power Generation Costs in 2023.” Accessed: May 22, 2025. [Online]. 
Available: https://www.irena.org/Data/View-data-by-topic/Costs/Global-
Trends 
[77] 
M. Z. Lukawski et al., “Cost analysis of oil, gas, and geothermal well 
drilling,” 2014, Elsevier. doi: 10.1016/j.petrol.2014.03.012. 
[78] 
Energy Administration Taiwan, “Second Meeting Attachment of 2017 
Renewable Energy Electricity Feed-in Tariff Rate Approval.” Accessed: May 
23, 2025. [Online]. Available: 
https://www.moeaea.gov.tw/ECW/renewable/content/ContentLink.aspx?
menu_id=778 
[79] 
National Renewable Energy Lab (NREL), “2024 Electricity ATB 
Technologies and Data Overview.” Accessed: Jun. 04, 2025. [Online]. 
Available: https://atb.nrel.gov/electricity/2024/index 
[80] 
Ministry of Economic Affairs, “Monthly Energy Statistics.” Accessed: Jun. 
22, 2025. [Online]. Available: 
https://www.esist.org.tw/en/newest/monthly?tab=Energy+Indicators 
[81] 
Taiwan Power Company (Taipower), “Electricity Generation Cost.” 
Accessed: Jun. 22, 2025. [Online]. Available: 
https://www.taipower.com.tw/2289/2363/2373/2375/10359/normalPost 
[82] 
C. Wang, W. Lo, S. R. Song, and M. Y. Wu, “Geothermal energy 
==PAGE:72==
 
 
Technical, Economic, and Financial Assessment of Geothermal Power Plant in Taiwanese Context  Page 66 of 72 
 
development roadmap of Taiwan by play fairway analysis,” Geothermics, 
vol. 97, Dec. 2021, doi: 10.1016/j.geothermics.2021.102242. 
[83] 
“Geothermal Exploration System.” Accessed: Jan. 10, 2025. [Online]. 
Available: https://geotex.geologycloud.tw/english 
[84] 
S. K. Sanyal and J. W. Morrow, “SUCCESS AND THE LEARNING CURVE 
EFFECT IN GEOTHERMAL WELL DRILLING-A WORLDWIDE SURVEY.” 
[85] 
Water Resources Agency Taiwan, “Regulations for Levy and Usage of Hot 
Spring Taking Fee.” Accessed: May 18, 2025. [Online]. Available: 
https://law.moj.gov.tw/LawClass/LawAll.aspx?PCode=J0110047 
[86] 
F. Taghizadeh-Hesary et al., “Role of energy finance in geothermal power 
development in Japan,” International Review of Economics and Finance, 
vol. 70, pp. 398–412, Nov. 2020, doi: 10.1016/j.iref.2020.06.011. 
[87] 
“The Federal Reserved (Fed) - Inflation (PCE).” Accessed: May 21, 2025. 
[Online]. Available: https://www.federalreserve.gov/economy-at-a-glance-
inflation-pce.htm 
[88] 
“European Central Bank - Two per cent inflation target.” Accessed: May 21, 
2025. [Online]. Available: 
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/mopo/strategy/pricestab/html/index.en.html 
[89] 
Ministry of Finance Taiwan, “Enforcement Rules of the Income Tax Act.” 
Accessed: May 21, 2025. [Online]. Available: 
https://law.moj.gov.tw/ENG/LawClass/LawAll.aspx?pcode=G0340004 
  
 
