==PAGE:1==
MSc Eng in Quantitative Biology and Disease Modelling
g
Developing Physiologically Based Pharmacokinetic Models
For Lipid-Based Formulations
July 6, 2025
Author
Amy Lisa Surry
s201902
Supervisers
Anette M¨ullertz
Jonathan Currie
Line Hagner Nielsen
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
Pretomanid is a lipophilic anti-tuberculosis drug with poor aqueous solubility, a well known
challenge in oral drug delivery that often limits bioavailability. This project aimed to develop
and evaluate physiologically based pharmacokinetic (PBPK) models for pretomanid adminis-
tered as an aqueous suspension and a self nanoemulsifying drug delivery system (SNEDDS),
using GastroPlus. The primary objective was to assess whether SNEDDS could enhance
systemic exposure.
Models were constructed using a middle out approach, combining predicted physicochem-
ical properties, literature data, and in vivo pharmacokinetic data from rats. The aqueous
suspension model served as a reference and was refined through sensitivity analysis and op-
timisation of solubility, permeability, clearance, and gastrointestinal physiology. The refined
model aligned well with observed plasma concentration–time profiles.
The SNEDDS model incorporated increased solubility and adjusted physiological parameters
to reflect improved absorption and possible lymphatic uptake. It predicted higher Cmax and
AUC compared to the aqueous suspension, indicating enhanced systemic exposure.
Despite limitations, including the absence of intravenous data and reliance on predicted in-
puts, the results demonstrate the value of PBPK modelling in formulation development. The
findings support the potential of lipid-based systems to improve the oral delivery of poorly
soluble drugs.
1
==PAGE:3==
Contents
1
Introduction
5
1.1
Pretomanid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.2
Lipid-Based Formulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.3
Project Aim and Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2
Physiologically Based Pharmacokinetic Models
7
2.1
PBPK Model Development Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
The GastroPlus Software
10
3.1
The ACAT model in GPX . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.2
GastroPlus PBPK tissue models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.3
ADMET Predictor Module
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.4
Physiology Module . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.5
Metabolism & Transport Module . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4
Data Sources
14
4.1
In Vivo Pharmacokinetic Data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.2
Molecular Properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.3
Solubility and Permeability Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.4
Distribution and Elimination Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.5
SNEDDS Formulation Properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.6
Physiological Parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5
PBPK modelling Framework and development
21
5.1
Pretomanid in Aqueous Suspension . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.2
Pretomanid in SNEDDS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
6
Results and discussion
39
7
Conclusion
41
A Plasma concentration-time data
47
A.1 Aqueous Suspension
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
A.2 SNEDDS
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
==PAGE:4==
Abbreviations
ACAT Advanced Compartmental Absorption and Tansit
ADME Absorption, Distribution, Metabolism, Elimination
BCS
Biopharmaceutical Classification System
BW
Body weight
Caco-2 Caucasian colon adenocarcinoma-2
CAT
Compartmental Absorption and Transit
DDS
Drug Delivery System
fup
Fraction unbound in plasma
fut
Fraction unbound in tissue
FaSSIF Fasted state simulated intestinal fluid
FDA
Food and Drug Administration
FeSSIF Fed state simulated intestinal fluid
GI
Gastrointestinal
Kp
Partition coefficient
LBF
Lipid-based formulation
LogP Octanol–water partition coefficient (logarithmic scale)
LSA
Local sensitivity analysis
MCT Medium chain triglycerides
MDR-TB Multidrug Resistant-Tuberculosis
Mtb
Mycobacterium tuberculosis
NAP
nitroimidazopyrans
PAMPA Parallel Artificial Membrane Permeability Assay
PBPK Physiologically Based Pharmacokinetic
3
==PAGE:5==
PEAR Population Estimates for Age-Related Physiology
PK
Pharmacokinetics
PSA
Parameter sensitivity analysis
PStc
Permeability surface area product
Rbp
Blood-to-plasma concentration ratio
SNEDD Self nano-emulsifying drug delivery system
STT
Stomach Transit Time
TB
Tuberculosis
TDR-TB Totally Drug-Resistant Tuberculosis
WHO World Health Organisation
XDR-TB Extensively Drug Resistant Tuberculosis
4
==PAGE:6==
1
Introduction
Tuberculosis (TB) is a deadly airborne infection with the highest mortality rate among infectious
diseases worldwide. TB is caused by Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb) bacteria and was declared
a global emergency in 1993 by the World Health Organisation (WHO) [1].
Mtb has the ability to evolve and develop drug-resistant variants making treatment challenging.
TB can be classified according to the degree of drug resistance. Multidrug resistant tuberculosis
(MDR-TB) is defined by resistance to at least isoniazid and rifampicin, the two most effective
first-line anti-TB drugs [1, 2, 3]. Until the results of the Nix-TB trial were published in 2020, the
treatment of MDR-TB required the use of less effective and often more toxic second-line drugs,
which could result in the development of extensive drug resistant tuberculosis (XDR-TB) [2, 3].
In addition to being resistant to isoniazid and rifampicin, XDR-TB strains are also resistant to
any fluoroquinolone and at least one of the second-line injectable drugs capreomycin, kanamycin,
and amikacin [1, 3]. If resistance mechanisms continue to advance, they can ultimately result in
totally drug resistant TB (TDR-TB) , for which there is currently no effective treatment [1].
The Nix-TB trial tested the combination of bedaquiline, pretomanid, and linezolid for 26 weeks
with results showing that the three-drug regimen had a success rate of 90% against MDR- and
XDR-TB [2, 4]. However, many of the patients in the trial for the three drug regimen developed
severe adverse events, which were associated with long-term administration of linezolid, a protein
synthesis inhibitor [4].
Pretomanid is a new anti-tuberculosis drugs and is used exclusively in combination therapies for
drug-resistant TB. However, due to its poor aqueous solubility and high lipophilicity, pretomanid
exhibits complex pharmacokinetics (PK) that may limit its bioavailability [5, 6]. Therefore, opti-
mising its formulation is of interest to improve it’s therapeutic performance.
In this project, pretomanid is investigated in isolation by developing physiologically based pharma-
cokinetic (PBPK) models of two formulations, an aqueous suspension and a self-nanoemulsifying
drug delivery system (SNEDDS). These models aim to better understand the absorption and
systemic exposure of pretomanid and evaluate the potential impact of lipid-based formulations
on its PK.
1.1
Pretomanid
Pretomanid is a nitroimidazooxazine drug approved by the United States Food and Drug Ad-
ministration (FDA) in 2019, for the treatment of XDR-TB and MDR-TB as part of a multi-drug
regimen with bedaquiline and linezolid [7, 2]. Pretomanid was specifically developed as a TB drug
5
==PAGE:7==
to target Mtb, and represents one of the newest classes of nitroimidazooxazines, nitroimidazopy-
rans (NAP) , which are derivatives of nitroimidazoles [2, 7]. Pretomanid is effective against both
replicating and non-replicating Mtb [2, 1]. It is a prodrug activated by the enzyme nitroreductase,
resulting in the release of nitric oxide, which disrupts Mtb cell wall synthesis and interferes with
protein synthesis, leading to cell death [2, 1].
Pretomanid is a moderately lipophilic compound with a logP value of approximately 2.42 and a
molecular weight of 359.26 g/mol [8, 9]. Co-administration of pretomanid with food significantly
improves bioavailability, increasing exposure by nearly twofold (1.9-fold) at the clinically ap-
proved dose of 200 mg compared to fasted conditions [8]. Pretomanid is widely distributed with
a volume of distribution of approximately 164 L, and is highly protein-bound (∼86%) [8]. The
terminal half-life is around 15-20 h and because the drug is excreted mainly as metabolites, less
than 1% of the drug is excreted unchanged in the urine. However, for metabolites the main route
of elimination of absorbed drug is within the urine (55-65%), and metabolism and excretion into
faeces plays a smaller role in elimination (25-40%) [8].
1.2
Lipid-Based Formulations
Pretomanid offers a powerful therapeutic effect against drug-resistant TB. However, pretomanid
is classified as a Class II compound in the Biopharmaceutical Classification System (BCS), char-
acterised by poor aqueous solubility and high permeability [5]. The oral route of administration
is the preferred method of drug delivery due to its safety, ease of use, and convenience for pa-
tients [6]. Pretomanid has low bioavailability when administered orally due to the low solubility
of the drug [6]. To improve the solubility and oral absorption of lipophilic drugs, lipid-based
formulations (LBFs) are considered a promising approach [6].
LBFs have emerged as an effective strategy to overcome the solubility-limited absorption of
lipophilic drugs, like pretomanid. These systems utilise oils, surfactants, and co-solvents to en-
hance drug solubilisation and promote absorption by maintaining the drug in a dissolved state
throughout the gastrointestinal (GI) tract. By mimicking physiological lipid digestion and en-
hancing drug partitioning into intestinal membranes, LBFs can bypass some of the solubility and
dissolution constraints that limit oral bioavailability [10]. Over the past five decades, lipid-based
delivery systems have evolved from simple oil solutions to more complex and self-emulsifying
systems, offering greater control over drug release and absorption kinetics [10].
6
==PAGE:8==
1.2.1
Self Nano-Emulsifying Drug Delivery Systems
SNEDDS are lipid-based formulations that spontaneously form oil-in-water nanoemulsions upon
dilution in gastrointestinal fluids, significantly increasing the surface area for drug dissolution
and promoting absorption of poorly water-soluble drugs. In oral drug delivery, SNEDDS are
among the most investigated lipid-based drug delivery systems (DDS) [6].
SNEDDS consist of a mixture of oil, surfactant, and co-surfactant or co-solvent, resulting in the
spontaneous formation of oil-in-water nano-emulsions upon dilution with water under mild agita-
tion [6, 11]. SNEDDS are anhydrous isotropic mixtures in which the drug is dissolved in the oil
phase [11]. SNEDDSs have a droplet size of 200 nm or less and have been shown to increase solubil-
ity and absorption in the GI tract, improve dissolution, and reduce enzymatic degradation [6, 11].
The performance of SNEDDSs depends not only on the formulation of the drug delivery system
(DDS) but also on the environment they react with. Physiological factors such as gastric emptying,
bile secretion, enzyme activity, and intestinal transit time can all influence the rate and extent of
drug absorption. To systematically explore and predict how these variables affect drug exposure,
PBPK modelling can be a powerful tool.
1.3
Project Aim and Objectives
In this project PBPK models will be developed for the oral administration of pretomanid in an
aqueous suspension and SNEDDS, respectively. The primary aim is to develop and evaluate the
PBPK model for pretomanid in SNEDDS.
The objectives include gathering relevant physicochemical, biopharmaceutical, and PK data,
constructing and validating the PBPK models within the GastroPlus software, and simulating
plasma concentration–time profiles. The models are evaluated by comparison with available in
vivo PK data and are improved through parameter sensitivity analyses (PSAs) and optimisations.
The key parameters influencing absorption and exposure are identified through PSAs.
2
Physiologically Based Pharmacokinetic Models
Physiologically Based Pharmacokinetic (PBPK) models are mechanistic mathematical models
that simulate the absorption, distribution, metabolism, and excretion (ADME) of drugs in the
body using anatomically significant compartments [12, 13]. These compartments correspond to
different tissues or organs within the body, connected by the circulating blood system [12, 13].
7
==PAGE:9==
PBPK models are highly complex models constructed using a series of differential equations
that require a large number of inputs, including physiological variables such as tissue volumes
and blood flow rates specific to the species of interest and drug-specific parameters such as
solubility, permeability, and metabolism rates [12, 13]. Typically, PBPK models include com-
partments for the main tissues of the body (adipose, bone, brain, gut, heart, kidney, liver, lung,
muscle, skin, and spleen), although in some cases tissues with similar blood flow rates have been
combined to reduce the number of compartments within the model and the model complexity [12].
The concept of PBPK models with the incorporation of biological and physiological components
in multicompartmental models has existed for several decades, where the foundations of phar-
macokinetic modelling were introduced by the Swedish Professor Torsten Teorell, who proposed
a mathematical framework for drug kinetics in 1937 [12, 14].
Figure 1: Schematic of a PBPK model illustrating drug absorption, distribution, and circulation.
From Shin et al. [15].
PBPK models are widely used in drug development to support interspecies translation, guide
clinical study design, and predict pharmacokinetics (PK) from preclinical data [12]. PBPK models
can be modified to simulate specific populations, including patients with liver or kidney disease, by
adjusting physiological parameters [12]. Additionally, these models are used to support regulatory
decisions, optimise dosing by integrating pharmacodynamic (PD) models, and predict drug-drug
8
==PAGE:10==
interactions (DDIs) [12]. PBPK models also simulate drug exposure and risk variability across
virtual populations using Monte Carlo simulations, accounting for age, body weight, and organ
function variations [12].
2.1
PBPK Model Development Methods
For the development of PBPK models, there are three different methods that can be utilised:
bottom-up, top-down, and middle-out, a combination of bottom-up and top-down [16]. These
methods vary in their reliance on data sources and in the stage of drug development at which
they are applied. The top-down method is data-driven and is primarily based on experimental
PK data. This approach develops PBPK models by empirically fitting the model to the data
[16]. PBPK models developed using this method have a limited scope due to the reliance on
empirical data, which typically only supports accurate predictions under the circumstances in
which the data were collected [16].
The bottom-up approach is based on a broader understanding of the physiology and its mech-
anisms, by incorporating chemical-specific data, physiological or anatomical parameters, and
pharmacokinetic processes [16]. It explicitly represents the current understanding of the un-
derlying physical, chemical, and biological processes [16]. The bottom-up approach provides a
mechanistic and mathematical description of the relationship between variables, based on the
underlying principles [16].
Often, the semi-mechanistic middle-out approach, combining the top-down and bottom-up ap-
proaches, is preferred [16]. The middle-out method allows the utilisation of available in vivo
parameters to mechanistically develop the PBPK model and PK data to empirically determine
unknown or uncertain parameters by optimising and fitting the parameters to the experimental
data [16].
The PBPK models of pretomanid were developed using the middle-out approach, combining
elements of both bottom-up and top-down modelling strategies. The initial model structure was
informed by physicochemical and biopharmaceutical data, including solubility, permeability, and
metabolic parameters obtained from in silico predictions and supplemented with experimental
values where available, reflecting a bottom-up foundation. To enhance model accuracy and ensure
alignment with observed pharmacokinetics, in vivo plasma concentration-time data from a rat
study were used to calibrate and optimise key parameters.
9
==PAGE:11==
3
The GastroPlus Software
The PBPK models and simulations were performed using GastroPlus® version 10.1 (Simulations
Plus, Inc., Lancaster, CA, USA). GastroPlus is a widely used software in drug development to
simulate oral absorption, pharmacokinetics, and drug-drug interactions between species. The
platform integrates a variety of modules that allow mechanistic and compartmental modelling
of drug behaviour under different physiological and formulation conditions.
GastroPlus takes compound-specific, formulation-specific, and physiology-specific data as input
to create the physiologically based pharmacokinetic (PBPK) model.
The advanced compartmental absorption and transit (ACAT) model, a submodel of the PBPK
model, was included in the development of the PBPK models of pretomanid, as it is used for
simulating the oral absorption of drugs in the gastrointestinal (GI) tract. The ACAT model
accounts for the regional differences in pH, transit time, enzyme activity, and fluid composition
along the intestinal segments. When the drug has entered the systemic circulation, the PBPK
model is used to model the systemic drug distribution and elimination based on organ-specific
blood flows, tissue volumes, and partition coefficients.
3.1
The ACAT model in GPX
The ACAT model is based on the compartmental absorption and transit (CAT) model, which
has been expanded to include absorption from the colon and first-pass metabolism in the liver
[17]. In the PBPK model, the ACAT model serves as a submodel describing the oral absorption
of a drug, where the drug that bypasses first-pass metabolism enters the systemic circulation,
allowing for its distribution to various tissues described by the PBPK model [17].
10
==PAGE:12==
Figure 2: Schematic of the ACAT (Advanced Compartmental Absorption and Transit) model
illustrating drug dissolution, degradation, absorption, and metabolism along the gastrointestinal
tract. From Simulations Plus, Inc. [17].
The ACAT model consists of multiple compartments, where the GI tract is divided into nine
compartments: stomach, duodenum, jejunum in two segments, ileum in three segments, caecum,
and colon. Each of these nine compartments consists of four subcompartments: unreleased drug,
undissolved drug, dissolved drug, and enterocytes (absorbed drug) [17]. The unabsorbed drug
remains within the GI tract until it reaches the colon, where it is excreted [17].
The top row of subcompartments for the unreleased drug in the ACAT model is only used for
controlled-release dosage forms, which can be released either into solution, into the dissolved
subcompartments, or as solid particles, into the undissolved subcompartments.
The undissolved drug must undergo dissolution before it, like the dissolved drug, becomes avail-
able for absorption, lumenal degradation, and carrier-mediated transport [17]. Both dissolved
and undissolved drugs undergo first-order transit through the GI tract, where the drug that has
not been absorbed during this process is excreted from the colon [17].
The drug is considered to be absorbed when it enters the enterocytes, either by passive trans-
port, driven by the concentration gradient, or by active transport, mediated by influx and efflux
transporters [17]. In GastroPlus, enterocytes act as well-mixed tanks in which efflux, basolateral
transport, and intestinal metabolism compete for the drug [17].
After crossing the basolateral intestinal membrane, the drug enters the portal vein, transporting
it to the liver, where first-pass metabolism occurs. Drugs that escape first-pass metabolism reach
the systemic circulation, from where they can be distributed to various tissues within a PBPK
11
==PAGE:13==
model [17].
3.2
GastroPlus PBPK tissue models
In GastroPlus, each tissue compartment within the PBPK model can be defined as perfusion-
limited or permeability-limited, depending on the drug’s permeability.
3.2.1
The perfusion-limited tissue model
The permeability-limited model is used for drugs with high permeability where tissue partitioning
is limited by the perfusion rate [17]. The amount of drug within a tissue is calculated based on
a partition coefficient (Kp), which is estimated based on lipophilicity, pKa, the blood-to-plasma
concentration ratio (Rbp), the fraction unbound in plasma (fup), and the fraction unbound in
tissue (fut) [17].
Tissues in the perfusion-limited model can be categorised as eliminating with intrinsic clearance
or non-eliminating [17]. In non-eliminating tissues, the amount of drug is determined by the
difference in drug concentration between the incoming and outgoing blood, taking red blood
cell binding and tissue-to-plasma partitioning into account [17]. When elimination occurs in
eliminating tissues with intrinsic clearance, the clearance is based on the concentration of unbound
drug within the tissue. In GastroPlus, tissue clearance can be entered directly or calculated from
enzyme kinetics or systemic clearance [17].
3.2.2
The permeability-limited tissue model
The permeability-limited tissue model is applied for drugs with low tissue permeability, where
the permeability and the surface area available for permeation limit the amount of drug that
partitions into the tissue. This is described by the permeability surface area product (PStc),
which is used to estimate the rate of drug transfer into or out of the tissue [17]. Initially, the drug
concentration in the tissue is lower than in the blood but increases with time. In the perfusion-
limited tissue model, the tissue compartment is divided into the extracellular and intracellular
spaces, where Kp determines the concentration of the drug in the extracellular space and PStc
determines the drug concentration in the intracellular space [17]. The unbound fractions of drug
in the blood and extracellular space are in equilibrium. The movement of drugs into and out of the
intracellular space is influenced by passive diffusion and active saturable transport mechanisms,
including influx and efflux pathways, while the overall change in intracellular concentration over
time depends on passive and carrier-mediated transport, saturable metabolism, and intrinsic
12
==PAGE:14==
clearance [17].
The PBPK model in GastroPlus also includes drug partitioning into lysosomal compartments.
It assumes that exchange between the intracellular space and lysosomes occurs solely through
passive diffusion, with the same permeability as across the cellular membrane [17].
The tissue compartments in the PBPK models developed for pretomanid are perfusion limited
due to its high permeability.
3.3
ADMET Predictor Module
The ADMET Predictor Module imports a compound into GastroPlus based on the compound’s
molecular structure. The module takes molecular structure files, such as .smi, .mol, and .sdf, as
input to predict the physicochemical and pharmacokinetic characteristics of the compound [18].
The predictions are specific to the species and depend on the selected physiology. The ADMET
Predictor module predicts properties such as lipophilicity (logP), solubility, fraction unbound
in plasma (fup), blood-to-plasma concentration ratio (Rbp), clearance values, and permeability,
enhancing the creation of compound properties for simulations based on data provided by the
user or in silico predictions [18]. ADMET Predictor can be used to import a compound for
a compartmental or a PBPK model, where the PBPK model option includes more prediction
options, including tissue partition coefficients (Kp values), renal clearance mechanisms and
enzyme kinetics, compared to the simpler compartmental option [18].
3.4
Physiology Module
In GastroPlus, the Population Estimates for Age-Related Physiology (PEAR) function is used to
calculate species-specific physiological parameters. PEAR estimates key physiological attributes
such as cardiac output, body fat percentage, and organ-specific characteristics, including organ
volumes and perfusion rates, for American (Western), Japanese (Asian), and Chinese human
models across ages ranging from premature newborns to 85-year-olds [17, 18]. Additionally, PEAR
provides adult physiology estimates for several commonly used preclinical species, including rats
[17, 18].
3.5
Metabolism & Transport Module
The Metabolism and Transport module allows the integration of saturable metabolism and
carrier-mediated transport within the absorption and pharmacokinetic model. These processes
are often parameterised according to in vitro experiments, producing results in various units [18].
The Metabolism and Transport module includes a unit converter that enables quick conversion of
13
==PAGE:15==
in vitro metabolic or transport data to in vivo values applicable in the model [18]. Experimental
enzyme and transporter kinetics, metabolic clearance, and diffusional clearance measures can be
converted to in vivo parameters. This conversion represents an in vitro to in vivo extrapolation
(IVIVE) conducted through dimensional analysis, using specific scaling factors of the assay and
physiology [18].
4
Data Sources
The physiologically based pharmacokinetic (PBPK) models of pretomanid were developed us-
ing a combination of data from the literature, experimental measurements, and computational
predictions.
4.1
In Vivo Pharmacokinetic Data
Previous to this project, an in vivo pharmacokinetic (PK) study in rats was performed investi-
gating whether drug absorption is superior when dosed as SNEDDS compared to an aqueous
suspension, and whether the drugs are absorbed equally when dosed as a combination in SNEDDS
versus individually in SNEDDS [19]. The study included six groups: BPaC SNEDDS (high-dose
Pa), BPaC SNEDDS (low-dose Pa), BPaC aqueous suspension, bedaquiline SNEDDS, pretomanid
SNEDDS, and clofazimine SNEDDS, where each group consisted of six male Sprague–Dawley
rats. The BPaC SNEDDS groups received combination doses of bedaquiline, pretomanid, and
clofazimine (BPaC) in SNEDDS. The high-dose group included 40 mg/kg of pretomanid, while
the low-dose group received 14 mg/kg. In both SNEDDS combinations, bedaquiline and clofaz-
imine were administered at 25 mg/kg and 20 mg/kg, respectively. Rats in the BPaC aqueous
suspension group received a combination dose equivalent to the BPaC high dose, but in an aque-
ous formulation instead of SNEDDS. The remaining three groups received single drug SNEDDS
formulations of bedaquiline, pretomanid, and clofazimine, respectively [19].
Blood samples were collected from the rats in all 6 study groups over a 23-hour period after
oral administration to assess systemic drug exposure. Blood samples were taken from the tail
vein and collected at the following time points: 0, 0.5, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, and 23 hours. The
plasma concentration time data for pretomanid dosed individually in SNEDDS and in aqueous
suspension can be found in Appendix A.
14
==PAGE:16==
4.1.1
Calculation of Pharmacokinetic Parameters
All PK parameters were calculated using standard non-compartmental analysis methods.
The mean plasma concentration and the coefficient of variation (CV%) were calculated at each
time point and used to validate the PBPK models. These calculations are shown in eqs. (1)
and (2).
¯x =
Pn
i=1 xi
n
(1)
Equation (1) defines the mean plasma concentration (¯x) at a specific time point, where xi is the
concentration observed in the i’th rat and n is the number of rats (n = 6).
CV % = σ
µ · 100%
(2)
Equation (2) gives the coefficient of variation in percent, where σ is the standard deviation and
µ = ¯x is the mean plasma concentration at that time point.
The resulting mean plasma concentrations and CV% values, together with their corresponding
time points, were entered into GastroPlus and used to validate each PBPK model. Key PK
parameters were also derived from the concentration–time profiles. The maximum plasma con-
centration (Cmax) and the time it occurred (tmax) were obtained directly from the observed
data. The area under the plasma concentration–time curve from t = 0 to the last sampling time
(AUC0−n) was calculated using the trapezoidal rule shown in eq. (3):
AUC0−n =
X
0.5 · (tn −tn−1) · (Cpn + Cpn−1)
(3)
In eq. (3), tn and tn−1 are the current and previous time points, and Cpn and Cpn−1 are the
corresponding plasma concentrations.
The elimination rate constant (k) was determined from the terminal log-linear portion of the
curve. The area under the curve extrapolated to infinity (AUCinf) was calculated using:
AUCinf = AUC0−n + Clast
k
(4)
Apparent clearance (CL/F) was then calculated as:
CL/F =
Dose
AUCinf
(5)
These calculations were performed in Excel, and the resulting PK values and standard deviations
15
==PAGE:17==
are summarised in Table 16 and Table 18 in Appendix A. The mean PK values (Table 1) were
used to support and validate the GastroPlus model simulations.
Cmax
tmax
AUC0−t
AUCinf
CL/F
(ng/mL)
(h)
((ng/mL)·h)
((ng/mL)·h)
(L/h)
PTMaq
3144.2 ± 1107.3
3.0 ± 1.1
29680.1 ± 10342.9
31116.0 ± 11927.3
0.4 ± 0.3
PTM
7630.7 ± 1658.6
4.3 ± 2.1
95900.2 ± 13375.39
117049.3 ± 29404.4
0.09 ± 0.02
Table 1: PK summary parameters as mean ± SD for PTMaq (pretomanid in aqueous suspension)
and PTM (pretomanid in SNEDDS).
Table 1 presents the pharmacokinetic (PK) summary parameters for pretomanid administered as
an aqueous suspension (PTMaq) and as a SNEDDS formulation (PTM). These values represent
the mean ± standard deviation from six rats in each group. The data clearly demonstrate
that the SNEDDS formulation significantly enhances systemic exposure of pretomanid. The
maximum concentration (Cmax) of pretomanid was more than twice as high following SNEDDS
administration (7630.7 ± 1658.6 ng/mL) compared to the aqueous suspension (3144.2 ± 1107.3
ng/mL), and the time to reach Cmax (tmax) was delayed by over an hour (4.3 ± 2.1 h vs. 3.0
± 1.1 h). Table 1 also showed a markedly increase in the area under the curve (AUC), where
AUC0–t increased from 29680.1 to 95900.2 ((ng/mL)·h) and AUCinf from 31116.0 to 117049.3
((ng/mL)·h). These results reflect improved bioavailability of pretomanid when delivered in
SNEDDS. Consistent with this, the apparent clearance (CL/F) was substantially lower for
SNEDDS (0.09 ± 0.02 L/h) than for the aqueous suspension (0.4 ± 0.3 L/h), indicating slower
elimination due to enhanced absorption.
4.2
Molecular Properties
Pretomanid has a molecular weight of 359.26 g/mol [9]. The melting point of pretomanid used in
the PBPK model was 145◦C, which has been found experimentally [19]. The diffusion coefficient
was predicted by ADMET Predictor (7.87 × 10−6 cm2/s).
4.3
Solubility and Permeability Data
Most of the solubility data for pretomanid were obtained from the literature. Nguyen et al.
reports a water solubility range of 10–20 µg/mL, based on the findings of Li et al., Sutherland
et al.. Specifically, Li et al. measured a solubility of 10.2±1.6 µg/mL, while Sutherland et al.
reported 19 µg/mL at pH 7 and 20◦C. Additionally, Lakshminarayana et al. reported a solubility
of 13 µg/mL at pH 6.8. The solubility of 19 µg/mL reported by Sutherland et al. was selected
16
==PAGE:18==
for the PBPK model for the aqueous suspension of pretomanid.
Medium
Crystalline solubillity (µg/mL)
Reference
Water (pH 7, 20◦C)
19
[22]
HCl solution (pH 1.6)
15.2 ± 1.4
[9]
FaSSIF V1 (pH 6.5)
53.8 ± 4.0
[9]
FeSSIF V2 (pH 5.8)
108.1 ± 0.1
[9]
Table 2: Crystalline solubility of pretomanid in different biorelevant media. Values are presented
as mean ± SD where available.
Biorelevant in vitro solubilites have also been reported by Nguyen et al. and are summarised
in Table 2. These were the only biorelevant in vitro solubility values available in the literature.
However, the fasted state simulated intestinal fluid (FaSSIF) solubility at pH 6.5 in human media
was also experimentally measured in conjunction with the in vivo rat study and was found to
be 53.3 µg/mL. This value falls within the standard deviation of the data reported by Nguyen
et al..
Permeability data for pretomanid are limited. However, Lakshminarayana et al. reported both
the Caucasian colon adenocarcinoma-2 (Caco-2) and the parallel artificial membrane permeabil-
ity assay (PAMPA) values. In addition, the effective human permeability (Peff) was predicted
using ADMET Predictor and subsequently converted to rat permeability within the GastroPlus
software.
Permeability
Value (cm/s)
Reference
Peff
5.3 × 10−5
Predicted
Caco-2
27.6 × 10−6
[22]
PAMPA
6.31 × 10−5
[22]
Table 3: Pretomanid permeability data included in the PBPK model of pretomanid in aqueous
suspension.
The predicted Peff, along with the reported Caco-2 and PAMPA values, were incorporated into
the PBPK model and are summarised in Table 3.
4.4
Distribution and Elimination Data
The tissue-to-plasma partition coefficients (Kp values) were generated within GastroPlus using
the Rodgers and Rowland method, which accounts for drug ionisation, lipophilicity, and plasma
protein binding [17]. These coefficients were not available in literature and therefore predicted
within GastroPlus. The plasma protein binding and blood-to-plasma ratio in rats are known to
17
==PAGE:19==
be 80.1% (fup = 19. 9%) and 1.47, respectively [8].
The absolute bioavailability of pretomanid in rats has been reported to be 52% when dosed
in HPβCD [8, 9]. The total systemic clearance can be estimated using eq. (6) based on this
bioavailability along with the calculated apparent clearance (CLapp) of 0.4 L/h (Table 16 in
Appendix A.1).
CLapp = CL
F
(6)
The systemic clearance of pretomanid was estimated by rearranging eq. (6):
CLapp = CL
F
⇔CL = CLapp · F = 0.21 L/h
This gives a systemic clearance estimate of 0.21 L/h.
Lakshminarayana et al. reported an intravenous clearance of pretomanid in mice of 12.1 mL/min/kg.
When scaled using the average rat body weight from the in vivo study (0.257 kg), this corresponds
to:
CL = 12.1 mL/min/kg = 0.726 L/h/kg
CL = 0.726 L/h/kg · 0.257 kg = 0.19 L/h
Although derived from a different species, this value closely agrees with the rat-specific calculated
clearance and supports the estimate of approximately 0.2 L/h.
For comparison, allometric scaling was also applied to extrapolate mouse clearance to rats using
Equation (7) [23]:
CLrat = CLmouse ·
 BWrat
BWmouse
0.75
(7)
Assuming a typical mouse body weight of 0.025 kg:
CLrat = 12.1 ·
0.257
0.025
0.75
= 68.0 mL/min/kg
CLrat = 68.0 · 0.257 ·
60
1000 = 1.05 L/h
This estimate is substantially higher than the calculated rat clearance. Such overpredictions
are common when applying allometric scaling between closely related species. Therefore, the
calculated systemic clearance of 0.2 L/h is considered more appropriate for use in the PBPK
model than the allometric prediction. In GastroPlus, systemic clearance cannot be input directly
18
==PAGE:20==
but is calculated as the sum of the tissue-specific clearances.
4.4.1
Metabolism Parameters
The CYP P450 isoenzyme CYP3A4 is known to contribute 20% to pretomanid metabolism
[24, 25]. Therefore, to incorporate the enzyme kinetics of cyp3a1, which is the primary rat
isoform corresponding to the human CYP3A4 enzyme, into the rat PBPK model of pretomanid,
the Michaelis-Menten kinetic parameters Vmax and Km must be determined.
Vmax and Km for the human CYP3A4 enzyme was predicted by ADMET Predictor (version
12.0). The Michaelis constant (Km), which represents the substrate concentration at which the
reaction rate is half of Vmax, indicates the enzyme’s affinity for the drug [26]. Km is often assumed
to be preserved across species for orthologous enzymes, which is commonly applied in PBPK
modelling. For instance, Tardif et al. scaled Vmax between rats and humans but treated Km as
species-invariant, and Nong et al. directly applied a Km value determined in rats to their mouse
PBPK model without adjustment [27, 28]. This reasons the application of the predicted human
Km value for the rat PBPK model of pretomanid.
Vmax is the maximum velocity and is directly proportional to the enzyme concentration [26].
Because liver size and microsomal protein content differ between species, Vmax must be scaled to
account for these physiological differences. Therefore, to estimate the rat-specific Vmax for cyp3a1,
the predicted Vmax for human CYP3A4 was scaled using the ratio of liver weights (human:rat),
enabling implementation of species-appropriate enzyme kinetics in the rat PBPK model.
Species
Liver weight
Reference
Rat
7.0675 g
[29]
Human
1500 g
[30, 31]
Ratio
212.239
Table 4: Human and rat liver weights used for interspecies scaling of Vmax from human to rat.
The ratio is based on total liver weight in grams.
The Vmax valas scaled to the rat based on the the human liver weight (1500 g) and the mean
liver weight of the rats included in the in vivo study. The liver weight of a rat is assumed to be
2-3% of the body weight [32]. Xue et al. reports the absolute and relative organ weights in male
Sprague-Dawley rats, including the relative weight of the liver (0.0275 ± 0.0019 (SD)) [29]. The
mean relative organ weight of the liver, 0.0275 (2.75%), is within the 2-3% range and was used
to calculate the mean liver weight of the rats in the in vivo study based on their mean body
19
==PAGE:21==
weight (0.257 kg).
0.0275 · 257 = 7.0675 g
The human and rat liver weights are presented in table 4.
Km (µM)
Vmax (nmol/min/(mg enzyme))
CYP3A4 (Human)
185.28
0.996
cyp3a1 (Rat)
185.28
4.693 × 10−3
Table 5: Michaelis-Menten kinetic parameters (Km and Vmax) for the human CYP P450 isoenzyme
CYP3A4 and the rat orthologue cyp3a1.
The human-to-rat liver weight ratio presented in table 4 was used to scale Vmax.
Vmax,rat = Vmax,human
Rhuman,rat
(8)
The rat Vmax value (Vmax,rat) was estimated based on eq. (8), where Vmax,human represent the
human Vmax value and Rhuman,rat is the human-to-rat liver ratio. The Michaelis-Menten kinetic
parameters, Km and Vmax, for CYP3A4 (human) and the rat orthologue cyp3a1 are shown in
table 5.
4.5
SNEDDS Formulation Properties
The PBPK models were developed to reflect the oral administration of self-nanoemulsifying drug
delivery systems (SNEDDS) specifically designed to enhance the solubility and bioavailability of
bedaquiline, pretomanid, and clofazimine.
The blank SNEDDS formulation used in the in vivo study was a lipid vehicle composed of 20%
w/w Medium Chain Triglycerides (MCT), serving as the oil phase, 50% w/w kolliphor RH40, a
non-ionic surfactant, 20% w/w capryrol 90, acting as a co-surfactant, and 10% w/w transcutal
HP, used as a co-solvent.
For modelling purposes, the physicochemical characteristics of the SNEDDS components were
estimated using molecular weights and densities available in the literature. A weighted-average
molecular weight and density of the blank SNEDDS were calculated based on the w/w composition
and the molecular weights (MW) and densities (ρ), shown in Table 6.
20
==PAGE:22==
Component
Molecular Weight (g/mol)
Density (g/mL)
References
MCT oil
387.5
0.95
[33, 34]
Kolliphor RH40
2500
1.03
[35]
Capryol 90
202.29
0.94
[36, 37]
Transcutol HP
134.17
0.99
[38]
SNEDDS
1381.38
0.992
Table 6: Molecular weights and densities of SNEDDS components used for weighted-average
calculations.
These weighted-average properties were used as representative values for the SNEDDS formula-
tion in GastroPlus along with the droplet size of the blank SNEDDS (∼26 nm) and the size of
the precipitate (65 ± 55 µm), which will likely increase in size over the dispersion time period.
4.6
Physiological Parameters
All rat-specific anatomical and physiological values (organ volumes, blood flow rates, GI transit
times, etc.) were predicted in GastroPlus using the Population Estimates for Age-Related Physi-
ology (PEAR) function. The PEAR physiology was predicted based on the average body weight
(BW) of the rats (0.257 kg) in the in vivo PK rat study.
Regional bile salt concentrations in the rat intestinal mucus were quantified by Klitgaard et al.
[39]. They measured the bile salt concentration in the duodenum to be 16.0 ± 2.2 mM, which
gradually increased to the proximal jejunum (20.7 ± 3.5 mM) and peaked in the mid jejunum
(55.1 ± 9.5 mM) [39]. From the mid jejunum the bile salt concentration decreased resulting in
the concentration in the ileum to be 22.0 ± 8.1 mM [39].
5
PBPK modelling Framework and development
The physiologically based pharmacokinetic (PBPK) models for pretomanid were developed using
a middle-out approach, integrating both in silico predictions and in vitro data with in vivo
pharmacokinetic (PK) data from the rat study.
To establish a robust foundation, the aqueous suspension of pretomanid was first modelled,
serving as a reference for developing the PBPK model of pretomanid in a self nano-emulsifying
drug delivery system (SNEDDS).
21
==PAGE:23==
5.1
Pretomanid in Aqueous Suspension
Pretomanid was imported into GastroPlus using the ADMET Predictor module, which predicts
the physicochemical and compound-specific parameters of pretomanid based on the SDF file for
its 2D structure, downloaded from PubChem, the species of interest, and the dosing schedule.
Before importing the compound, the species was changed from human to rat, and the mean rat
body weight (0.257 kg) was used to define the physiology. The formulation was modelled as an
orally administered immediate-release tablet to represent the aqueous suspension. It included
the measured particle size (36 ± 33 µm), which was incorporated as a mean radius of 18 µm
with a standard deviation of 16.5 µm. The dosing schedule was defined as a single oral dose of
40 mg/kg administered at time zero.
The initial PBPK model was based primarily on the predicted values of ADMET Predictor
and GastroPlus and a small number of compound-specific parameters measured experimentally,
including the melting point (145◦C), FaSSIF solubility (53.3 µg/mL), and logP (2.9). The pre-
dicted blood-to-plasma concentration ratio (Rbp) and the fraction unbound in plasma (fup) were
replaced with the reported values in the literature, Rbp = 1.47 and fup = 19.9% [8].
Figure 3: Simulated plasma concentration-time curve of the initial PBPK model of pretomanid
in aqueous suspension against observed in vivo concentrations (mean ± CV%).
Figure 3 shows the simulated plasma concentration-time profile of pretomanid in aqueous sus-
pension of the PBPK model. The corresponding pharmacokinetic parameters are presented in
Table 7.
22
==PAGE:24==
F
Cmax
tmax
AUC0-t
AUC∞
CL/F
(%)
(ng/mL)
(h)
((ng/mL)·h)
((ng/mL)·h)
(L/h)
Predicted
29.63
1853
3.15
22380
28670
0.46
Observed
52
3144.19
3
29680.11
31115.98
0.41
Table 7: Pharmacokinetic (PK) parameters of the predicted (simulated) plasma concentration-
time data and the mean PK parameters of the experimentally observed data
The simulated plasma concentration–time profile captures the overall shape of the observed data,
but underpredicts the systemic exposure (AUC) and the maximum plasma concentration (Cmax).
The concentrations in the elimination phase are however overestimated. The underestimation of
Cmax and AUC is indicated by the lower predicted values for Cmax, AUCt, and AUC∞relative to
the observed means (Table 7). The predicted time to maximum concentration (tmax) corresponds
well to the experimental observations. The underprediction of bioavailability (F), Cmax, and
AUC indicates that the input parameters for solubility and/or permeability may not represent
in vivo conditions.
A second simulation was performed in which the predicted solubility values were replaced with the
solubility data reported in the literature (Section 4.3). All other parameters were left unchanged
to isolate the effect of solubility alone.
Figure 4: Simulated plasma concentration–time profiles of pretomanid in aqueous suspension
using predicted solubilities (blue curve) and literature-reported solubilities (red curve).
23
==PAGE:25==
F
Cmax
tmax
AUC0-t
AUC∞
CL/F
(%)
(ng/mL)
(h)
((ng/mL)·h)
((ng/mL)·h)
(L/h)
Predicted
21.71
1187
3.61
16150
21800
0.64
Observed
52
3144.19
3
29680.11
31115.98
0.41
Table 8: Pharmacokinetic (PK) parameters of the predicted (simulated) plasma concentration-
time data of the PBPK model, including literature-based solubilities and the mean PK parameters
of the experimentally observed data
Table 9 presents the solubilities predicted by ADMET Predictor in GastroPlus and reported in
the literature. The literature solubility values are lower than the predicted, where the incorpora-
tion of the literature-based solubilities, as shown in Figure 4, led to a reduced peak in plasma
concentration (Cmax) and a lower systemic exposure compared to the model using predicted
solubility. Specifically, Cmax dropped from 1853 ng/mL to 1187 ng/mL, and the overall profile
fell further below the observed in vivo data.
Solubility
Predicted value (mg/mL)
Literature value (mg/mL)
Water (pH 7)
0.02548 (25◦C)
0.019 (20◦C) [21]
SGF (pH 1.2)
0.146
0.0152 [9]
FaSSIF (pH 6.5)
0.099
0.0538 [9]
FeSSIF V2 (pH 5.8)
0.2434
0.1081 [9]
Table 9: Solubility values predicted by ADMET Predictor and reported in literature
Although the observed solubilities, measured in human biorelevant media, are more physiolog-
ically representative, they consistently underpredicted the observed plasma concentrations of
pretomanid in rats. In contrast, the predicted solubilities resulted in a better fit to the in vivo
data, particularly in terms of Cmax and AUC. Given the lack of rat-specific solubility data, the
predicted values were retained and the model was further refined through sensitivity analysis
and targeted optimisation of key parameters.
To account for hepatic metabolism, the Michaelis-Menten kinetic parameters Km and Vmax for
the rat cyp3a1 enzyme were incorporated into the PBPK model via the Metabolism & Transport
module. The Vmax value was scaled in GastroPlus using a scaling factor of 0.2, based on the
approximate 20% contribution of CYP3A4 to pretomanid metabolism. However, the inclusion of
cyp3a1-mediated metabolism, whether Vmax was scaled or unscaled, did not result in any notice-
able change in the simulated plasma concentration–time profile. Similarly, the experimentally
reported PAMPA and Caco-2 permeabilities by Lakshminarayana et al. were incorporated into
the model to enhance its physiological relevance, but these adjustments also had no observable
24
==PAGE:26==
impact on the predicted plasma concentration–time profile.
Based on the observed oral bioavailability (52%) and the apparent clearance estimated based
on the in vivo PK data (CL/F = 0.41 L/h), the systemic clearance (CL) of pretomanid was
estimated to be approximately 0.21 L/h. To incorporate the observed systemic clearance into the
PBPK model, hepatic clearance (CLliver) was adjusted accordingly. Based on the total systemic
clearance of 0.21 L/h and a predicted renal clearance (CLkidney) of 0.01549 L/h, hepatic clearance
was set to 0.19451 L/h (CLliver = 0.21 −0.01549 L/h) in GastroPlus.
Figure 5: PBPK model simulations before and after increasing the systemic clearance are shown
against the observed data (mean ± CV%).
Figure 5 compares the simulations of the PBPK model of pretomanid in aqueous suspension with
different CL values. It compares the initial model with CL = 0.12 L/h with the updated model
with CL = 0.21 L/h, calculated from observed bioavailability (52%) and the in vivo CL/F (0.41
L/h). Increasing clearance from 0.12 to 0.21 L/h reduces the predicted plasma concentrations
throughout the profile. Although this adjustment improves prediction in the elimination phase
and the shape of the peak, which more closely resembles the curvature of the observed data, it
substantially underpredicts Cmax and early exposure.
Klitgaard et al. quantified regional bile salt concentrations in the mucus of the rat small intes-
tine, revealing levels ranging from 16.0 ± 2.2 mM in the duodenum to a peak of 55.1 ± 9.5
mM in the mid-jejunum before decreasing again in the ileum [39]. Based on these findings, the
bile salt concentration in the GastroPlus rat physiology model was adjusted to better reflect in
25
==PAGE:27==
vivo conditions, providing a more accurate simulation of the intestinal solubilisation environment.
Predicted
Observed
Duodenum
20
16
Jejunum 1
17.29
20.7
Jejunum 2
6.98
55.1
Ileum 1
2.82
22
Ileum 2
1.3
22
Ileum 3
1.24
22
Table 10: Comparison of predicted and observed bile salt concentrations (mM) in different
segments of the rat small intestine. Predicted values are taken from the default GastroPlus
rat physiology model. Observed values are based on experimental measurements reported by
Klitgaard et al. [39].
Table 10 compares the bile salt concentrations predicted by GastroPlus with the experimentally
observed values reported by Klitgaard et al. in different segments of the rat small intestine.
Although the predicted values follow a general decreasing trend from the proximal to distal
segments, they underestimate the maximum concentration in the jejunum and the ileum.
The effect of changing the bile salt concentrations from the predicted to the observed values is
illustrated in Figure 6.
Figure 6: Plasma concentration-time simulations based on predicted bile salt concentrations (red
curve) and experimentally observed concentrations by Klitgaard et al. (green curve) against in
vivo observed concentrations (mean ± CV%).
Including the bile salt concentration reported by Klitgaard et al. in the PBPK model, resulted
in an increased peak concentration (Cmax) and a better fit to the observed in vivo data.
26
==PAGE:28==
To further explore factors affecting absorption, a local sensitivity analysis of the stomach transit
time (STT) was conducted.
Figure 7: Local sensitivity analysis exploring the effect of varying the stomach transit time
parameter while keeping all other parameters constant.
As shown in Figure 7, increasing the STT from 0.125 to 1.46 h (pink to dark green curve) led to an
increase in Cmax, where further increases in the STT up to 5 h reduced Cmax. The prolongation
of the STT shifted tmax later. This suggests that a longer gastric emptying time allows more
drug to dissolve in the stomach before entering the intestine, where solubility may be lower due
to pH changes or bile salt interactions.
From Figure 7, a stomach transit time (STT) of approximately 0.97 h (light green curve) provides
the best alignment with the observed tmax while also preserving the overall shape of the plasma
concentration–time profile.
27
==PAGE:29==
Figure 8: Simulated plasma concentration–time curves for pretomanid in aqueous suspension
comparing baseline stomach transit time (STT = 0.25 h) with extended STT (1.21 h)
As illustrated in Figure 8, increasing the STT from 0.25 h to 0.97 h results in a delayed absorption
phase, shifting tmax from 2.66 h to 3.48 h. This adjustment improves the peak concentration and
suggests that the default gastric emptying time of 0.25 h was underestimated in the initial model.
By increasing the STT the model more accurately captures the observed tmax. To further improve
the model and its alignment with the observed in vivo data a parameter sensitivity analysis
(PSA) was performed exploring the effect of varying solubility and permeability, respectively,
against Cmax and AUC.
28
==PAGE:30==
(a)
(b)
Figure 9: Parameter sensitivity analyses of solubility and permeability against (a) Cmax and (b)
AUC0−t
Figure 9 shows that both solubility and permeability have a strong positive influence on Cmax. In
particular, Cmax is more sensitive to changes in permeability at lower values, with the maximum
concentration plateauing at higher permeability values, where solubility, on the contrary, continues
to increase Cmax. This suggests that increasing solubility may be a more effective strategy than
permeability enhancement alone for elevating Cmax.
For AUC, both solubility and permeability have a positive impact on drug exposure. Permeability
has a similar effect on AUC as on Cmax, with a strong influence on AUC for lower values and
plateauing as permeability increases. Solubility also has a more substantial influence on AUC at
lower values, where the influence decreases along with increasing solubility levels.
To evaluate the effect of solubility and permeability on the concentration-time curve, local
sensitivity analyses (LSA) varying each of the parameters individually while preserving all other
parameters were performed.
Figures 10 and 11 represent the LSA of solubility and permeability, respectively.
29
==PAGE:31==
Figure 10: Local sensitivity analysis on solubility (water) at pH 7 and 25◦C
In Figure 10 increasing the solubility leads to an increase in Cmax. Increasing solubility also
changes the shape of the plasma concentration-time curve, where lower solubility values result
in a broader, flatter peak with a slower and more prolonged absorption. As solubility increases,
absorption becomes more rapid, and the peak sharpens, reaching a higher Cmax earlier in time.
This leads to a faster systemic uptake but also causes a steeper decline in the elimination phase,
slightly overestimating the initial distribution while underestimating later-phase concentrations.
Figure 11: Local sensitivity analysis on permeability
Figure 11 shows the effect of increasing permeability on the plasma concentration-time curve.
30
==PAGE:32==
Increasing permeability values increase the peak concentration (Cmax) and shift the timing of
the peak (tmax) earlier. As permeability increases, the shape of the peak becomes narrower,
suggesting a more rapid and efficient uptake.
Since the PSAs showed that solubility continues to affect Cmax even at higher values, while
permeability has a greater impact at lower values, an optimisation of both parameters simulta-
neously is performed. This approach aims to better capture the rate and extent of pretomanid
absorption.
The PBPK model of pretomanid in aqueous suspension with the optimised permeability and
solubility values compared to the model based on the predicted values is presented in Figure 12.
Figure 12: Simulated plasma concentration-time curved based on predicted (blue curve) and
optimised (black curve) permeability and solubility values. The simulations are compared to
observed in vivo concentration (mean ± CV%).
As seen in Figure 12 the optimisation of the permeability and solubility parameters has resulted
in a PBPK model simulation that closely aligns with the observed data. The predicted and
optimised permeability and solubility parameters are presented in Table 11.
Predicted
Optimised
Solubility (mg/mL)
0.0255
0.0499
Permeability (cm/s)
2.364 × 10−4
4.337 × 10−4
Table 11: Permeability and solubility parameter values predicted by ADMET Predictor in Gas-
troPlus compared to the values optimised on the in vivo rat data.
Optimising permeability and solubility led to a markedly improved plasma concentration-time
31
==PAGE:33==
curve compared to the simulation using the predicted parameter values. This refinement increases
the predicted peak concentration (Cmax) and enhances systemic exposure, while maintaining a
realistic curve shape throughout the absorption and elimination phases.
Predicted
Observed
F (%)
61.38
52
Cmax (ng/mL)
3048
3144.19 ± 1107.25
tmax (h)
3.41
3.0 ± 1.1
AUCt ((ng/mL)·h)
29620
29680.11 ± 10342.87
AUC∞((ng/mL)·h)
30020
31115.98 ± 11927.34
CL/F (L/h)
0.34
0.41 ± 0.26
Table 12: Pharmacokinetic (PK) parameters of the predicted (simulated) plasma concentration-
time data and the mean PK parameters of the experimentally observed data
As summarised in Table 12, the optimised model now predicts a Cmax of 3048 ng/mL, which is
considerably closer to the observed mean value of 3144 ± 1107 ng/mL. Similarly, the predicted
tmax (3.41 h) and the area uncer the curve (AUCt and AUV∞) are also well-aligned with
the experimental data. Although bioavailability (F) is still overpredicted, the improvement in
peak exposure and overall profile indicates that the parameter adjustments, particularly the
optimisation of permeability and solubility, improved the model performance.
Figure 13: Simulated plasma concentration-time curve of pretomanid in aqueous suspension after
model refinement.
Figure 13 presents the final PBPK model of pretomanid in aqueous suspension, incorporating all
refined parameters, including the optimised effective permeability. The model closely reproduces
the observed pharmacokinetic profile, capturing the peak concentration (Cmax), time to maximum
32
==PAGE:34==
concentration (tmax), and systemic exposure (AUC).
Figure 14: Enter Caption
Figure 14 illustrates the predicted regional absorption of pretomanid along the gastrointestinal
tract. The majority of absorption occurs in the colon (38.2%), distributed between the caecum
(17.3%) and ascending colon (20.9%), followed by the jejunum (31%). Minor contributions are
observed from the duodenum (5.2%) and ileum (less than 1%), while no absorption is predicted
in the stomach.
This regional absorption profile indicates a relatively slow and extended absorption process,
consistent with pretomanid’s physicochemical properties and the experimentally observed delayed
tmax. The substantial colonic absorption suggests that pretomanid retains sufficient solubility
and permeability to be absorbed effectively in the distal intestine, contributing to the sustained
plasma concentrations observed during the terminal elimination phase.
5.2
Pretomanid in SNEDDS
The final physiologically based pharmacokinetic (PBPK) model for the aqueous suspension of
pretomanid was used as a reference for developing the PBPK model of pretomanid in a self-
nanoemulsifying drug delivery system (SNEDDS). The formulation of the drug in the model was
changed to resemble the SNEDDS formulation by changing the dose form from tablet to solution
and included the SNEDDS as an additional solvent and solubiliser.
In GastroPlus the composition and physical properties of the SNEDDS formulation must be
specified. The entire SNEDDS mixture is treated as a single solubiliser characterised by its
molecular weight (MW), density, and pretomanid solubility. The SNEDDS dose was estimated
33
==PAGE:35==
to be 302 mg, and the binding constant was changed from the default (0 1/mol/L) to 1 1/mol/L.
The SNEDDS droplet size and the particle size of the precipitate were included in the PBPK
model by setting the mean radius of the SNEDDS droplet to 0.013 µm (13 nm), correspond-
ing to the measured 26 nm droplet diameter, and the mean radius of the precipitate to 32.5
µm with a standard deviation of 27.5 µm, corresponding to the measured size of 65 ± 55 µm.
The fraction of SNEDDS and precipitate at time zero were set to 1 and 0, respectively, ensur-
ing that the pretomanid is completely dissolved within the SNEDDS droplets when administered.
Figure 15: Predicted plasma concentration-time curve of the initial PBPK model of pretomanid
in SNEDDS compared to in vivo concentrations (mean ± CV%
The first simulation of the PBPK model of pretomanid in SNEDDS, based on the aqueous
suspension model with the updated formulation parameters, is shown in Figure 15. The pre-
dicted plasma concentrations underestimate both the peak concentration and systemic exposure
compared to the in vivo observations. This indicates that the model may overestimate hepatic
clearance, leading to an underprediction of the drug’s bioavailability and plasma retention time.
Predicted
Observed
Cmax (ng/mL)
2996
7630.74 ± 1658.59
tmax (h)
4.02
4.33 ± 2.07
AUCt ((ng/mL)·h)
30390
95900.21 ± 13375.39
AUC∞((ng/mL)·h)
30750
117049.33 ± 29404.40
CL/F (L/h)
0.33
0.093 ± 0.02
Table 13: Pharmacokinetic (PK) parameters of the predicted (simulated) plasma concentration-
time data and the mean PK parameters of the experimentally observed data
34
==PAGE:36==
To improve the predictive performance of the SNEDDS model, the hepatic intrinsic clearance
was reduced based on the observed difference in apparent clearance (CL/F) between the aqueous
suspension and SNEDDS formulations. The mean CL/F values were 0.41 L/h and 0.093 L/h,
respectively, resulting in a scaling factor of approximately 0.23. The systemic clearance is scaled
based SNEDDS ability to reduce hepatic metabolism by inhibing or escaping first-pass metabolism
through lymphatic transport [40, 41]. As shown in the updated plasma concentration–time profile
in Figure 16, implementing the reduced clearance leads to a better fit of the model to the observed
in vivo data, particularly in terms of overall exposure and elimination phase concentrations.
Figure 16: Comaprison of the initial PBPK model simulation of pretomanid in SNEDDS (blue
curve) with the PBPK model simulation with decreased systemic clearance (orange curve).
Reducing the hepatic intrinsic clearance (CL) in the PBPK model of pretomanid in SNEDDS
resulted in a markedly improved fit to the observed plasma concentration–time profile. As shown
in Figure 16, the updated model better captures systemic exposure, both in the absorption
and elimination phase, where concentrations especially in the elimination phase previously were
underpredicted. The shape of the curve is more aligned with the in vivo data, and both the
peak concentration and time to peak are well represented, though still being slightly under- and
overpredicted, respectively. This suggests that the SNEDDS formulations may reduce apparent
hepatic clearance by bypassing or inhibiting first-pass metabolism. However, the model still
underpredicts the extent of absorption in the early phase, indicating that further refinement
is needed. Given that SNEDDS formulations are known to significantly enhance solubility, a
local sensitivity analysis (LSA) of solubility was conducted to evaluate whether increasing the
solubility input could improve the model’s prediction of the absorption phase.
35
==PAGE:37==
Figure 17: Local sensitivity analysis of solubility evaluating the effect of varying the solubility
parameter on the plasma concentration-time curve.
A local sensitivity analysis (LSA) of solubility was conducted to evaluate its impact on the
absorption phase of the PBPK model of pretomanid in SNEDDS. As shown in Figure 17, in-
creasing solubility led to higher Cmax and improved alignment with observed data. However,
very high solubility values resulted in profiles that overshot the observed data, particularly in
the ascending phase, indicating overprediction of absorption rate and extent. The best visual
fit was achieved at a solubility of approximately 0.069 mg/mL (light green curve), which closely
followed the trend of the experimental data. To increase the value of the solubility parameter
that improves the model to best represent the in vivo data, an optimisation of solubility in the
observed concentrations and Cmax was performed.
36
==PAGE:38==
Figure 18: PBPK model simulations of the initial (orange curve) and optimised (black curve)
solubility values against in vivo concentration data (mean ± CV%).
The updated PBPK model with the optimised solubility value of 0.067 mg/mL resulted in an
improved fit to the observed plasma concentration–time data compared to the model using the
predicted solubility of 0.045 mg/mL. The higher solubility enhanced both the absorption rate
tmax and peak concentration Cmax, aligning well with the observed values.
This final adjustment demonstrates that a moderate increase in solubility, consistent with what
can be expected from SNEDDS formulations, improves the model’s ability to reproduce the in
vivo pharmacokinetics of pretomanid.
Predicted
Observed
Cmax (ng/mL)
7117
7630.74 ± 1658.59
tmax (h)
4.40
4.33 ± 2.07
AUCt ((ng/mL)·h)
107000
95900.21 ± 13375.39
AUC∞((ng/mL)·h)
123000
117049.33 ± 29404.40
CL/F (L/h)
0.084
0.093 ± 0.02
Table 14: Pharmacokinetic (PK) parameters of the predicted (simulated) plasma concentration-
time data and the mean PK parameters of the experimentally observed data
Figure 19 illustrates the final PBPK model simulation of pretomanid in SNEDDS after opti-
misation of hepatic clearance and solubility. The model now accurately captures the plasma
concentration–time profile across all phases, with Cmax, AUC, and CL/F values closely aligned
with the observed in vivo data.
37
==PAGE:39==
Figure 19: Predicted plasma concentration-time curve of the final PBPK model of pretomanid
in SNEDDS against the observed in vivo concentrations (mean ± CV%).
Figure 20 presents the predicted regional absorption of pretomanid along the gastrointestinal
tract in the final SNEDDS model. The majority of absorption occurs in the jejunum (34.1%),
with significant contributions from the colon as well (37%). Only minor absorption occurs in the
duodenum (12.6%) and distal small intestine, while no absorption is predicted in the stomach.
This distribution supports a sustained and extended absorption phase, which aligns well with
the delayed tmax observed in vivo. The colonic absorption indicates that pretomanid maintains
favourable permeability and solubility characteristics throughout the entire intestinal tract, a
performance likely enhanced by the solubilising properties of the SNEDDS formulation.
38
==PAGE:40==
Figure 20: Amount of pretomanid absorbed from different gut sections in percent.
6
Results and discussion
Physiologically based pharmacokinetic (PBPK) models were successfully developed for pre-
tomanid administered as an aqueous suspension and as a self-nanoemulsifying drug delivery
system (SNEDDS). The model for the aqueous suspension was developed first using physico-
chemical and in vitro data alongside default rat physiological settings in GastroPlus. Initial
simulations underpredicted drug exposure, particularly the peak concentration (Cmax) and the
area under the curve (AUC), while slightly overestimating concentrations during the elimination
phase. To improve model performance, parameter sensitivity analyses were performed to identify
key variables affecting absorption and systemic exposure. Clearance and solubility were found
to be highly influential. Adjusting systemic clearance to match the observed bioavailability and
incorporating experimentally reported bile salt concentrations helped better reflect physiological
conditions. Modifying the stomach transit time improved the prediction of time to peak concen-
tration (Tmax), which was initially overpredicted. Additional refinements included optimisation
of solubility and effective permeability, resulting in a final model that aligned closely with the in
vivo data. The predicted Cmax (3048 ng/mL) and AUC∞(30,020 ng·h/mL) were within range
of the observed means (3144 and 31,116 ng·h/mL, respectively). The absorption was predicted
to occur primarily in the jejunum and colon, supporting the experimentally observed delayed
absorption phase.
39
==PAGE:41==
Using the refined aqueous suspension model as a foundation, the SNEDDS model was devel-
oped by modifying the formulation input to represent a solubilised lipid-based system. Solubility
was increased to reflect the enhanced dissolution associated with SNEDDS, and the drug was
modelled as fully dissolved within the formulation at the time of dosing. Early simulations un-
derestimated systemic exposure, suggesting an overprediction of hepatic clearance. Given the
potential for lipid-based systems to bypass first-pass metabolism through lymphatic transport,
hepatic clearance was reduced proportionally to the observed decrease in apparent clearance.
This modification led to a much closer match between simulated and observed concentration–time
profiles. To further improve early-phase prediction, a local sensitivity analysis of solubility was
performed, and the parameter was optimised. The final SNEDDS model successfully captured
the observed Cmax, AUC, and Tmax, with predicted values of 7117 ng/mL, 123,000 ng·h/mL, and
4.4 h, respectively, closely matching the observed data. The model predicted most absorption in
the jejunum and colon, consistent with the known behaviour of SNEDDS formulations and the
sustained plasma concentrations observed in vivo.
Both models, however, have limitations. A key constraint is the absence of intravenous data,
which would have enabled a clearer distinction between absorption and distribution processes.
The models also depend heavily on in silico predictions, and the lack of measured permeability
and tissue distribution data introduces additional uncertainty. In the SNEDDS model, lymphatic
transport, a potentially significant route for lipid-based drugs, was not explicitly incorporated.
Furthermore, model assumptions such as homogeneous distribution in each compartment and
constant physiological parameters simplify the complexity of drug behaviour in vivo and may
limit predictive power under different conditions.
Alternative modelling strategies could have been explored to improve robustness. For example,
a more iterative middle-out approach, incorporating additional in vivo data or parameter fitting,
could increase reliability. Experimental determination of rat-specific solubility and permeability,
as well as tissue-specific metabolism, would further strengthen model accuracy.
Despite these limitations, the models provide valuable insights into how formulation impacts the
pharmacokinetics of pretomanid. The contrast between the aqueous suspension and SNEDDS
models highlights the potential of lipid-based drug delivery systems to enhance oral bioavailability,
particularly for poorly soluble compounds. These findings support the broader application of
PBPK modelling to inform formulation development and guide preclinical decision-making.
40
==PAGE:42==
7
Conclusion
This project focused on developing physiologically based pharmacokinetic (PBPK) models for the
oral administration of pretomanid as an aqueous suspension and as a self-nanoemulsifying drug
delivery system (SNEDDS), with the primary aim of developing and evaluating the SNEDDS
model. Both models were successfully constructed using a middle-out approach, combining in
silico predictions with experimental data and in vivo pharmacokinetic profiles from rats. The
aqueous suspension model served as a baseline and required refinement through sensitivity analy-
ses and optimisation of key parameters, including solubility, permeability, systemic clearance, and
gastric transit time. These adjustments improved alignment with the observed data and provided
information on regional absorption, which was predicted to occur primarily in the jejunum and
colon.
The SNEDDS model was then developed by modifying the formulation and reducing hepatic
clearance to reflect the enhanced solubility and possible lymphatic absorption associated with
lipid-based systems. Parameter optimisation, particularly of solubility, led to a strong agreement
between the simulated and observed profiles, supporting the conclusion that SNEDDS can sig-
nificantly improve systemic exposure of pretomanid.
Despite some limitations, including the lack of intravenous reference data, reliance on predicted
inputs, and simplifications in the model structure, the models illustrate how PBPK modelling
can be effectively applied to investigate formulation strategies during early drug development. If
time had allowed, future work could have extended this modelling framework by using the final
SNEDDS model as a baseline for developing PBPK models of bedaquiline and clofazimine in the
SNEDDS formulation and of all three drugs in combination. This would have enabled the explo-
ration of potential drug–drug interactions and formulation effects. The SNEDDS model could
also be adapted to human physiology, supporting the development of first-in-human predictions
for formulation selection and dose guidance.
This project demonstrates that formulation has a clear impact on drug absorption and phar-
macokinetic behaviour, and that PBPK modelling is a valuable tool for understanding and
optimising this process.
41
==PAGE:43==
References
[1] J. L. Khawbung, D. Nath, and S. Chakraborty, “Drug resistant tuberculosis: A review,”
Comparative Immunology, Microbiology and Infectious Diseases, vol. 74, p. 101574, 2021.
[Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0147957120301636
[2] S. Kim, A. Louie, G. L.
Drusano, M. Almoslem, S. Kim, J. Myrick, J. Nole,
B.
Duncanson,
C.
A.
Peloquin,
C.
A.
Scanga,
W.
Yamada,
M.
Neely,
and
S. Schmidt, “Evaluating the effect of clofazimine against mycobacterium tuberculosis
given alone or in combination with pretomanid, bedaquiline or linezolid,” International
Journal of Antimicrobial Agents, vol. 59, no. 2, p. 106509, 2022. [Online]. Available:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0924857921013509
[3] R. P. G. van Heeswijk, B. Dannemann, and R. M. W. Hoetelmans, “Bedaquiline:
a
review
of
human
pharmacokinetics
and
drug–drug
interactions,”
Journal
of
Antimicrobial Chemotherapy, vol. 69, no. 9, pp. 2310–2318, 05 2014. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1093/jac/dku171
[4] M. Zohaib Ali, T. S. Dutt, A. MacNeill, A. Walz, C. Pearce, H. Lam, J. S. Philp,
J. Patterson, M. Henao-Tamayo, R. Lee, J. Liu, G. T. Robertson, A. J. Hickey, B. Meibohm,
and M. Gonzalez Juarrero, “A modified bpal regimen for tuberculosis treatment replaces
linezolid with inhaled spectinamides,” eLife, vol. 13, p. RP96190, oct 2024. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.96190
[5] N. Aekwattanaphol, M. Ali Khumaini Mudhar Bintang, H. Paliwal, and T. Srichana,
“Biomolecular interaction of pretomanid and its pro-liposomal formulation with human
serum albumin by multi-spectroscopic, surface plasmon resonance and molecular docking
approaches,” Journal of Photochemistry and Photobiology A: Chemistry, vol. 453,
p. 115636, 2024. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S1010603024001801
[6] A. B. Buya, A. Beloqui, P. B. Memvanga, and V. Pr´eat, “Self-nano-emulsifying
drug-delivery systems: From the development to the current applications and challenges
in oral drug delivery,” Pharmaceutics, vol. 12, no. 12, 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://www.mdpi.com/1999-4923/12/12/1194
[7] S. L. Stancil, F. Mirzayev, and S. M. Abdel-Rahman, “Profiling pretomanid as a therapeutic
option for tb infection: evidence to date,” Drug Design, Development and Therapy, pp.
2815–2830, 2021.
42
==PAGE:44==
[8] European
Medicines
Agency,
“Assessment
report:
Pretomanid
FGK,”
https://www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/assessment-report/
pretomanid-fgk-epar-public-assessment-report en.pdf,
June
2020,
eMA/200048/2020.
Available
from:
https://www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/assessment-report/
pretomanid-fgk-epar-public-assessment-report en.pdf.
[9] H. T. Nguyen, T. Van Duong, S. Jaw-Tsai, R. Bruning-Barry, P. Pande, R. Taneja, and
L. S. Taylor, “Fed-and fasted-state performance of pretomanid amorphous solid dispersions
formulated with an enteric polymer,” Molecular Pharmaceutics, vol. 20, no. 6, pp. 3170–3186,
2023.
[10] O. M. Feeney, M. F. Crum, C. L. McEvoy, N. L. Trevaskis, H. D. Williams, C. W. Pouton,
W. N. Charman, C. A. Bergstr¨om, and C. J. Porter, “50years of oral lipid-based formulations:
Provenance, progress and future perspectives,” Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews, vol. 101,
pp. 167–194, 2016, understanding the challenges of beyond-rule-of-5 compounds. [Online].
Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0169409X16301065
[11] G. U. Sailor, Self-Nanoemulsifying Drug Delivery Systems (SNEDDS): An Innovative
Approach to Improve Oral Bioavailability.
Singapore: Springer Singapore, 2021, pp.
255–280. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-33-4497-6 10
[12] H. Jones and K. Rowland-Yeo, “Basic concepts in physiologically based pharmacokinetic
modeling in drug discovery and development,” CPT: pharmacometrics & systems pharma-
cology, vol. 2, p. e63, 08 2013.
[13] L. E. Gerlowski and R. K. Jain, “Physiologically based pharmacokinetic modeling: principles
and applications,” Journal of pharmaceutical sciences, vol. 72, no. 10, pp. 1103–1127, 1983.
[14] L. Paalzow, “Torsten teorell, the father of pharmacokinetics,” Upsala journal of medical
sciences, vol. 100, pp. 41–6, 02 1995.
[15] H. K. Shin, Y.-M. Kang, and K. T. No, “Predicting adme properties of chemicals,” in
Handbook of computational chemistry.
Springer, 2016, pp. 1–37.
[16] W.
Utembe, H.
Clewell, N.
Sanabria, P.
Doganis, and M.
Gulumian, “Current
approaches and techniques in physiologically based pharmacokinetic (pbpk) modelling
of nanomaterials,” Nanomaterials, vol. 10, no. 7, 2020. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.mdpi.com/2079-4991/10/7/1267
43
==PAGE:45==
[17] Simulations Plus, Inc., “Gpx scientific principles guide,” https://simulations-plus.learnupon.
com/, 2024, training document available through Simulations Plus LearnUpon portal (re-
stricted access).
[18] ——, “Gpx user guide,” https://simulations-plus.learnupon.com/, 2024, training document
available through Simulations Plus LearnUpon portal (restricted access).
[19] J. Currie, “Pharmacokinetic study of snedds-formulated bedaquiline, pretomanid, and clo-
fazimine in rats,” 2025, unpublished data, University of Copenhagen, 2025.
[20] X. Li, U. H. Manjunatha, M. B. Goodwin, J. E. Knox, C. A. Lipinski, T. H. Keller, C. E.
Barry III, and C. S. Dowd, “Synthesis and antitubercular activity of 7-(r)-and 7-(s)-methyl-
2-nitro-6-(s)-(4-(trifluoromethoxy) benzyloxy)-6, 7-dihydro-5h-imidazo [2, 1-b][1, 3] oxazines,
analogues of pa-824,” Bioorganic & medicinal chemistry letters, vol. 18, no. 7, pp. 2256–2262,
2008.
[21] H. S. Sutherland, A. Blaser, I. Kmentova, S. G. Franzblau, B. Wan, Y. Wang, Z. Ma, B. D.
Palmer, W. A. Denny, and A. M. Thompson, “Synthesis and structure- activity relation-
ships of antitubercular 2-nitroimidazooxazines bearing heterocyclic side chains,” Journal of
medicinal chemistry, vol. 53, no. 2, pp. 855–866, 2010.
[22] S. B. Lakshminarayana, H. I. Boshoff, J. Cherian, S. Ravindran, A. Goh, J. Jiricek, M. Nanjun-
dappa, A. Nayyar, M. Gurumurthy, R. Singh et al., “Pharmacokinetics-pharmacodynamics
analysis of bicyclic 4-nitroimidazole analogs in a murine model of tuberculosis,” PloS one,
vol. 9, no. 8, p. e105222, 2014.
[23] D. W. van Valkengoed, E. H. Krekels, and C. A. Knibbe, “All you need to know about
allometric scaling: an integrative review on the theoretical basis, empirical evidence, and
application in human pharmacology,” Clinical Pharmacokinetics, pp. 1–20, 2024.
[24] T. Gils, L. Lynen, B. C. de Jong, A. Van Deun, and T. Decroo, “Pretomanid for tuberculosis:
a systematic review,” Clinical Microbiology and Infection, vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 31–42, 2022.
[25] U.S. Food and Drug Administration, “Pretomanid tablets - prescribing information,” https://
www.fda.gov/drugs/drug-approvals-and-databases/drug-trials-snapshots-pretomanid, 2019,
accessed: 2025-07-01.
[26] J. W. Pelley, “4 - enzymes and energetics,” in Elsevier’s Integrated Review Biochemistry
(Second Edition), second edition ed., J. W. Pelley, Ed.
Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders,
44
==PAGE:46==
2012, pp. 29–37. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
B9780323074469000040
[27] R. Tardif, G. Charest-Tardif, J. Brodeur, and K. Krishnan, “Physiologically based pharma-
cokinetic modeling of a ternary mixture of alkyl benzenes in rats and humans,” Toxicology
and applied pharmacology, vol. 144, no. 1, pp. 120–134, 1997.
[28] A. Nong, G. Charest-Tardif, R. Tardif, D. Lewis, L. Sweeney, M. Gargas, and K. Krishnan,
“Physiologically based modeling of the inhalation pharmacokinetics of ethylbenzene in b6c3f1
mice,” Journal of Toxicology and Environmental Health, Part A, vol. 70, no. 21, pp. 1838–
1848, 2007.
[29] Y. Xue, N. Chen, and T. Jiang, “Repeated intravenous dose toxicity of di-isononyl phthalate
in male sprague-dawley rats,” J Toxicol Risk Assess, vol. 5, p. 020, 2019.
[30] J.
Flatt,
“Use
and
storage
of
carbohydrate
and
fat,”
The
American
Journal
of
Clinical
Nutrition,
vol.
61,
no.
4,
pp.
952S–959S,
1995.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0002916523187569
[31] D. K. Molina and V. J. DiMaio, “Normal organ weights in men: part ii—the brain, lungs,
liver, spleen, and kidneys,” The American journal of forensic medicine and pathology, vol. 33,
no. 4, pp. 368–372, 2012.
[32] A. B. Rogers and R. Z. Dintzis, “Hepatobiliary system,” in Comparative anatomy and
histology.
Elsevier, 2018, pp. 229–239.
[33] National Center for Biotechnology Information, “PubChem Compound Summary for
CID 91757308, Glyceryl caprylate-caprate,” https://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/compound/
Glyceryl-caprylate-caprate, 2025, accessed: 2025-06-28.
[34] ChemicalBook,
“Caprylic/capric
triglyceride,”
https://www.chemicalbook.com/
ProductChemicalPropertiesCB12130353 EN.htm, 2025, accessed: 2025-06-28.
[35] BASF, “Cremophor RH 40 Technical Data Sheet,” https://media.knowde.com/image/
upload/v1714650658/production/Collateral/573315/Cremophor RH 40 Technical Data
Sheet.pdf, 2024, accessed: 2025-06-28.
[36] National Center for Biotechnology Information, “PubChem Compound Summary for
CID 109307, Propylene glycol 1-caprylate,” https://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/compound/
Propylene-glycol-1-caprylate, 2025, accessed: 2025-06-28.
45
==PAGE:47==
[37] American Chemical Society, “Common chemistry - substance detail: Cas rn 31565-12-5,”
https://commonchemistry.cas.org/detail?cas rn=31565-12-5, 2025, accessed: 2025-06-28.
[38] National Center for Biotechnology Information, “Pubchem compound summary for cid
8146, diethylene glycol monoethyl ether,” https://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/compound/
Diethylene-Glycol-Monoethyl-Ether, 2025, accessed: 2025-06-28.
[39] M. Klitgaard, J. Jacobsen, M. N. Kristensen, R. Berthelsen, and A. M¨ullertz, “Characterizing
interregional differences in the rheological properties and composition of rat small intestinal
mucus,” Drug Delivery and Translational Research, vol. 14, no. 11, pp. 3309–3320, 2024.
[40] V. Patel, R. Lalani, D. Bardoliwala, S. Ghosh, and A. Misra, “Lipid-based oral formulation
strategies for lipophilic drugs,” Aaps Pharmscitech, vol. 19, no. 8, pp. 3609–3630, 2018.
[41] K. M. Wasan, “Formulation and physiological and biopharmaceutical issues in the develop-
ment of oral lipid-based drug delivery systems,” Drug development and industrial pharmacy,
vol. 27, no. 4, pp. 267–276, 2001.
46
==PAGE:48==
A
Plasma concentration-time data
A.1
Aqueous Suspension
Time (h)
Rat 1
Rat 2
Rat 3
Rat 4
Rat 5
Rat 6
Mean
CV%
0
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.5
1360.08
1277.90
758.01
1065.78
2656.28
373.37
1248.57
62.40
1
2093.43
2384.24
1727.95
1551.21
3289.49
627.22
1945.59
45.75
2
2946.89
3572.76
3152.02
1973.07
2327.17
948.27
2486.70
38.11
3
2972.18
3718.17
3118.69
3699.04
2718.77
1073.24
2883.35
33.73
4
2959.53
3718.17
3518.62
4293.47
2085.55
1035.75
2935.18
40.68
5
2314.69
2870.82
3252.00
3022.88
2093.88
848.28
2400.43
36.53
6
2295.73
3096.39
2463.50
1793.94
1510.66
852.45
2002.11
39.35
8
1682.50
1524.72
2089.72
1885.59
1169.06
631.66
1497.21
35.26
23
0.00
378.30
498.35
52.60
0.00
0.00
154.88
144.47
Table 15: Concentration–time data for pretomanid in BPaC aqueous suspension (individual).
Plasma concentrations (ng/mL) were measured from 6 rats at each time point. Mean and
coefficient of variation (CV%) were calculated for each time point.
Figure 21: Mean plasma concentration–time profile of pretomanid dosed as an aqueous suspension
in rats (n=6). Error bars represent CV% at each time point.
47
==PAGE:49==
Rat
Cmax
tmax
AUC0−t
k
AUCinf
CL/F
CL/F
CL
(ng/mL)
(h)
((ng/mL)·h)
(h−1)
((ng/mL)·h)
(mL/h)
(L/h)
(L/h)
Rat 1
2972.18
3.00
31188.24
-0.45
31188.24
329.61
0.33
0.17
Rat 2
3718.17
3.00
36748.97
-0.11
40093.61
256.40
0.26
0.13
Rat 3
3518.62
4.00
39911.75
-0.10
44944.55
228.73
0.23
0.12
Rat 4
4293.47
4.00
33797.67
-0.22
34035.48
302.04
0.30
0.16
Rat 5
3289.49
1.00
25223.60
-0.44
25223.60
407.55
0.41
0.21
Rat 6
1073.24
3.00
11210.41
-0.39
11210.41
917.00
0.92
0.48
Mean
3144.19
3.00
29680.11
-0.2852
31115.98
406.89
0.41
0.21
±SD
1107.25
1.10
10342.87
0.16
11927.34
257.52
0.26
0.13
Table 16: Pharmacokinetic parameters for pretomanid administered in BPaC aqueous suspension,
shown per rat. Mean and standard deviation (±SD) are also reported. The clearance (CL) is
based on the bioavailability (F) of 52% [8, 9].
A.2
SNEDDS
Time (h)
Rat 1
Rat 2
Rat 3
Rat 4
Rat 5
Rat 6
Mean
CV%
0
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.5
2908.96
2460.10
2325.70
885.78
2852.07
3910.21
2557.14
38.71
1
4660.14
4413.58
2900.90
1564.82
3935.20
4203.53
3613.03
32.50
2
5690.61
6095.22
4868.39
4580.92
4760.05
5739.03
5289.04
11.87
3
6449.25
8434.34
8788.46
5039.16
5897.33
5684.87
6715.57
22.94
4
6449.25
8415.37
9967.40
5118.31
7197.09
5264.12
7068.59
26.60
5
5581.39
9322.05
6693.02
5855.68
5938.99
3868.55
6209.94
28.80
6
5848.31
9224.30
5951.49
5234.96
6472.23
4214.32
6157.60
27.44
8
4915.96
5923.93
4559.51
7109.61
5401.59
5076.66
5497.88
16.64
23
1419.67
1314.41
1756.45
2627.12
1410.68
0.00
1421.39
59.68
Table 17: Concentration-time data for pretomanid in SNEDDS (individual) where plasma concen-
trations (ng/mL) from 6 rats were obtained at various time points (0–23 h). Mean and coefficient
of variation (CV%) were calculated for each time point.
48
==PAGE:50==
Figure 22: Mean plasma concentration–time profile of pretomanid dosed as SNEDDS in rats
(n=6). Error bars represent CV% at each time point.
Rat
Cmax
tmax
AUC0−t
k
AUCinf
CL/F
CL/F
(ng/mL)
(h)
((ng/mL)·h)
(h−1)
((ng/mL)·h)
(mL/h)
(L/h)
Rat 1
6449.25
3.00
90325.74
-0.08
108107.61
95.09
0.10
Rat 2
9322.05
5.00
110855.06
-0.11
122867.48
83.67
0.08
Rat 3
9967.40
4.00
94512.20
-0.07
119070.42
86.34
0.09
Rat 4
7109.61
8.00
110198.03
-0.05
166156.09
61.87
0.06
Rat 5
7197.09
4.00
94372.88
-0.09
110957.03
92.65
0.09
Rat 6
5739.03
2.00
75137.37
-0.49
75137.37
136.82
0.14
Mean
7630.74
4.33
95900.21
-0.1471
117049.33
92.74
0.09
±SD
1658.59
2.07
13375.39
0.17
29404.40
24.59
0.02
Table 18: Pharmacokinetic parameters for pretomanid administered in SNEDDS formulation,
shown per rat. Mean and standard deviation (±SD) are reported for each parameter.
49
