==PAGE:1==
Sleep Analysis from Wrist Accelerometer
Using Contrastive Deep Learning
Master Thesis
DTU Health Tech
Department of Health Technology
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the
customary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title,
etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Health Technology, , 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
==PAGE:4==
Sleep Analysis from Wrist Accelerometer Using Contrastive Deep Learning
Type: Master thesis
Date: August 3, 2025
Author: Karol Paweł Jędrzejewski
Supervisor: Sadasivan Puthusserypady Kumaran
Co­supervisors: Andreas Brink­Kjær, Emmanuel Mignot and Poul Jennum
Project period: February 2, 2025 ­ August 3, 2025
Karol Paweł Jędrzejewski ­ s230208
Signature
August 1, 2025
Date
ii
Sleep Analysis from Wrist Accelerometer Using Contrastive Deep Learning
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
A special thanks to my co­supervisor Andreas Brink­Kjær and Niels Rasmus Lorenzen
for constant support throughout the project. Your insights during our discussions on both
engineering and science were key, and I’ve learned much from working with you.
I would also like to specifically thank Niels Rasmus Lorenzen for preparing the Amazfit
Health and Traumatic Brain Injury (TBI) datasets for the preprocessing pipeline and for
providing code to perform frequency synchronization check.
Many thanks to co­supervisors Poul J. Jennum , and Emmanuel Mignot, for many
insightful meetings and for making my visit to Stanford possible. I had a great time at the
Mignot lab.
I would also like to thank you to the William Demant Fonden for helping fund my trip to
Stanford.
The generative AI tool Gemini 2.5 Pro was utilized to assist with code development and
thesis formatting.
Sleep Analysis from Wrist Accelerometer Using Contrastive Deep Learning
iii
==PAGE:6==
Abstract
The clinical gold standard for diagnosing sleep disorders, polysomnography (PSG),
is expensive, inaccessible, and burdensome, leading to widespread underdiagnosis
[1][2].Consumer wearable devices offer a scalable alternative for sleep monitoring,
but extracting clinically meaningful information from their limited sensor data remains
a challenge.
This thesis investigates the efficacy of cross­modal contrastive learning
to enhance sleep stage classification from wrist­worn accelerometry (actigraphy) by
leveraging richer, concurrent PSG signals.
This work has three main contributions. The first is the development of a robust and
reusable data processing pipeline that was used to prepare four datasets (DreamT [3]
[4], Amazfit Health [5], TBI [6], Newcastle [7]) for efficient model training. The second
is the implementation of a deep learning framework with a two­branch (actigraphy and
PSG) contrastive encoder, followed by a downstream LSTM­based classifier, fine­tuned
for sleep staging. The third is a series of experiments designed to evaluate the proposed
model’s behavior and benchmark its performance against a supervised CNN­LSTM
baseline trained for this comparison, as well as existing methods for actigraphy­based
sleep analysis in the literature.
For the Wake/Sleep classification task on the external test set, the contrastive model
achieved an accuracy of 73.5%±13.2%, while the supervised baseline achieved
73.1%±12.9%.
These results are comparable to methods reported in the literature,
such as DACNN (80.1%) [8] and Relcon (70.5%±14.9%)[9].
While the contrastive
learning encoder did not show significant improvement compared to the baseline when
both models were trained with all available data, it performed and generalized much
better in the scenario where only a part of the dataset was labeled.
In this setting,
the contrastive model outperformed the baseline on the external test set, achieving
a Wake/Sleep accuracy of 68.0%±14.9% versus the baseline’s 52.7%±17.3%.
This
highlights the method’s potential for tasks where not all of the datasets have labels, such
as sleep apnea classification. Further experiments showed that the respiratory channels
(THORAX, ABDOMEN) were the most critical PSG signals, having the biggest impact on
the model’s final performance.
This study validates cross­modal contrastive learning as a promising approach for
improving the diagnostic utility of consumer wearables, especially in limited labels
scenarios, and provides a foundation for future research aimed at further enhancing the
method.
iv
Sleep Analysis from Wrist Accelerometer Using Contrastive Deep Learning
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background and motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Summarized scope of this report . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Delimitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Clinical Background
5
2.1
Polysomnography (PSG)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Clinical Assessment of Sleep and Sleep Stages . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Actigraphy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Technical Background
9
3.1
Machine Learning and Deep Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Self­Supervised Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.3
Sequence Modeling Architectures
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.3.1
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.3.2
Long Short­Term Memory (LSTM)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3.3.3
Transformers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3.4
Contrastive Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4
Literature review
13
5
Materials and methods
17
5.1
Datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
5.1.1
DreamT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
5.1.2
Amazfit
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
5.1.3
TBI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
5.1.4
Newcastle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
5.2
Data Preprocessing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
5.2.1
Synchronization Check
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
5.2.2
Actigraphy Preprocessing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
5.2.3
PSG Preprocessing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
5.2.4
Data Combination and Storage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
5.2.5
Train, Validation, and Test Split . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
5.3
Downstream Task and Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
5.4
Model Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
5.4.1
Contrastive Learning Encoder
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
5.4.2
Contrastive Learning Objective . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
5.4.3
Downstream Task Fine­Tuning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
5.4.4
Tracked Metrics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
5.4.5
Hyperparameter Tuning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
5.5
Experimental Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
5.5.1
Contrastive vs. Baseline Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
5.5.2
Simulating Limited Labels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
Sleep Analysis from Wrist Accelerometer Using Contrastive Deep Learning
v
==PAGE:8==
5.5.3
Impact of PSG Channel Selection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
5.5.4
Different pairing strategies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
6
Results
39
6.1
Embedding Model Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
6.2
Downstream Task Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
6.3
Limited Label Scenario Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
6.4
Impact of PSG Channel Selection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
6.5
Different pairing streategies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
7
Discussion
49
7.1
Data Collection and Preprocessing Pipeline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
7.2
Challenges in Benchmarking and Reproducibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
7.3
Model Performance and Baseline Comparison
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
7.4
Future Work and Directions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
7.4.1
Adding initial single modality pre­training
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
7.4.2
Preprocessing the raw signal with band­pass filters . . . . . . . . . . 50
7.5
Broader trends in Sleep Technology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
8
Conclusion
53
Bibliography
55
A Best hyperparameters configurations
59
B Confusion matrices of models tested on internal test set
60
C Confusion matrices of models tested on external test set (Newcastle)
65
vi
Sleep Analysis from Wrist Accelerometer Using Contrastive Deep Learning
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
Background and motivation
Sleep disorders like sleep apnea (SA) and obesity hypoventilation syndrome (OHS)
have a significant negative impact on individual patients, their partners, and society.
Individuals suffering from these disorders are associated with higher healthcare service
and medication use, lower mental well­being, and higher unemployment rates and
lower income levels. Based on data from Danish National Patient Registry, each year,
the total extra costs for patients—combining their direct medical expenses and lost
earnings—were €3,860 for SA, €11,320 for OHS. Additionally, patients with SA and
OHS received an annual mean excess social transfer income of €879 and €3,263,
respectively.
These socioeconomic impacts were evident as early as eight years
before the initial diagnosis, and they intensified as the disease progressed.
While
effective treatments like Continuous Positive Airway Pressure (CPAP) exist for these
conditions, a major challenge remains ­ the large number of undiagnosed cases[1]
[2].
The clinical gold standard for diagnosing sleep disorders is polysomnography
(PSG), a multi­parameter study that measures various physiological signals to provide a
detailed evaluation of sleep. These include signals such as brain activity (EEG), eye
movements (EOG), muscle activity (EMG), heart activity (ECG), and breathing channels,
such as movement of the abdomen and chest. Despite its diagnostic accuracy, PSG
has limitations. The procedure requires specialized and expensive equipment, must be
administered by trained technicians, and is typically conducted in an unnatural sleep
laboratory setting. These factors contribute to high costs, limited accessibility, and long
waiting lists for patients, resulting in widespread underdiagnosis. The growing popularity
of consumer wearables such as Apple Watch, Fitbit, Whoop, equipped with sensors like
wrist­worn accelerometers (actigraphy), offers the potential to improve sleep disorder
diagnosis by providing a convenient and accessible method for sleep data collection.
However, extracting meaningful features from this data for accurate sleep diagnosis
remains a significant challenge. This is primarily because actigraphy data provides less
detailed physiological information and is more noisy compared to the comprehensive,
multi­channel signals captured by PSG. To make these data useful for an accurate
diagnosis, improvements are needed in the current algorithmic methods.
Sleep Analysis from Wrist Accelerometer Using Contrastive Deep Learning
1
==PAGE:10==
1.2
Summarized scope of this report
The primary aim of this thesis is to investigate the efficacy of cross­modal
contrastive learning as a method to enhance the analysis of sleep using data from
wrist­worn consumer devices.
The first major task is to collect, clean, and preprocess a concurrent PSG and
actigraphy dataset to establish a dataset for experiments on methods that integrate
PSG signals with data from wearables.
The second is the development of a comprehensive deep learning pipeline that will
enable efficient training, experimentation, and result analysis.
This thesis will address this through the following key aims:
• Aim 1: Benchmark the proposed contrastive model’s performance against a
supervised baseline and relevant methods from existing literature.
• Aim 2: Evaluate the model’s effectiveness in a scenario where only a subset
of the data is annotated.
• Aim 3: Analyze the impact of selection of PSG modalities used for training
and architectural decisions like contrastive pairing strategies, on model
performance.
1.3
Delimitations
This study will deliberately limit the input from the wearable device to only raw
accelerometry data,
excluding other modalities like photoplethysmography (PPG)
or oxygen saturation.
This focus allows for the use of more publicly available sleep
datasets, as not all of them include other sensor modalities from wearables. Secondly,
it simplifies the modeling and training pipeline by reducing architectural choices and
hyperparameter tuning complexities, allowing a more direct and isolated evaluation of
the proposed encoding method’s effectiveness. Another reason is that one of the aims
of this study is to contribute to the development of a model capable of processing and
labeling data from the UK Biobank, which provides only raw accelerometry recordings.
1.4
Structure
The structure and a short description of each chapter in this thesis are presented below.
Chapter 2 Clinical Background
Describes key clinical concepts and technologies relevant to this thesis. It covers essential
methods for sleep assessment, such as Polysomnography (PSG), the principles of sleep
staging, and the use of wearable devices equipped with accelerometry sensors.
Chapter 3 Technical Background
Explains the core technical concepts utilized in this work.
This chapter begins by
explaining supervised and self­supervised machine learning paradigms, then covers
different architectures for sequence modeling, such as CNNs, LSTMs, and Transformers,
and concludes with an overview of contrastive learning.
Chapter 4 State of the Art / Literature Review
Presents a comprehensive review of existing literature, focusing on methods that
use accelerometry and PSG for sleep analysis, with a particular emphasis on recent
advancements in self­supervised and contrastive learning techniques.
2
Sleep Analysis from Wrist Accelerometer Using Contrastive Deep Learning
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 5 Materials and Methods
Describes the implementation details. It covers the data preprocessing methods, the
architecture of the contrastive learning pipeline, and the design of the experiments used
for evaluation.
Chapter 6 Results
Presents the empirical findings from the experiments. This chapter analyzes the learned
data embeddings, evaluates the model’s performance on the sleep stage classification
task, and details the outcomes of both the limited label and the ablation studies
Chapter 7 Discussion
Interprets the results in a broader context.
It discusses the implications of the key
findings, analyzes the challenges encountered during the research, and proposes
several directions for future work.
Chapter 8 Conclusion
Summarizes the thesis by reiterating the key contributions and the outcomes of the
research aims.
Sleep Analysis from Wrist Accelerometer Using Contrastive Deep Learning
3
==PAGE:12==
4
Sleep Analysis from Wrist Accelerometer Using Contrastive Deep Learning
==PAGE:13==
2
Clinical Background
Sleep is a fundamental component of a healthy life. To assess whether an individual’s
sleep is healthy, researchers and clinicians use a variety of specialized tools and sensors.
This chapter describes the key clinical concepts and technologies for sleep assessment,
detailing methods such as the Polysomnography (PSG), the process of sleep staging, and
the use of wearable sensors like actigraphy.
2.1
Polysomnography (PSG)
The clinical gold standard for sleep analysis is Polysomnography (PSG). This is a
comprehensive study that involves the overnight recording of multiple physiological
signals to provide a detailed picture of a patient’s sleep architecture. A standard PSG
montage measures a set of different signals using various sensors. These include:
• Electroencephalography (EEG): Records brain activity from scalp electrodes,
essential for identifying the characteristic waveforms of different sleep stages.
• Electrooculography (EOG): Monitors eye movements. It operates by measuring
the electrical potential difference between the cornea (positive charge) and the retina
(negative charge), which creates a dipole that shifts with eyeball movement.
• Electromyography (EMG): Measures muscle activity, typically from the chin
(submental) and legs, to assess muscle tone.
• Electrocardiogram (ECG): Tracks heart rate and rhythm.
• Respiratory Sensors (PTAF, THORAX, ABDOMEN): These sensors measure
airflow and respiratory effort and are crucial for diagnosing sleep breathing
disorders, such as sleep apnea. Airflow is often measured using a nasal pressure
transducer (PTAF). Respiratory effort is monitored with bands placed around the
chest (THORAX) and abdomen (ABDOMEN) .
• Pulse Oximetry (SpO2): Monitors blood oxygen saturation.
Additional sensors may be used to record body position and other physiological
parameters as needed for a specific sleep study.
2.2
Clinical Assessment of Sleep and Sleep Stages
Sleep is broadly categorized into two main types: Non­Rapid Eye Movement (NREM)
sleep and Rapid Eye Movement (REM) sleep. NREM sleep is further divided into three
stages (N1, N2, N3) representing progressively deeper sleep. During a night, a healthy
individual typically cycles through these stages, with each cycle lasting approximately 90
minutes.
The gold standard for determining sleep stages involves the manual scoring of PSG
data by trained technicians. According to the standard from the American Academy of
Sleep Medicine (AASM)[10], these technicians analyze the recording in consecutive 30­
second intervals, known as epochs. To assign a sleep stage to each epoch, scorers
primarily evaluate three key signals: the EEG, which reveals characteristic waveforms
and frequency bands; the EOG, which captures specific eye movements; and the chin
EMG, which indicates the level of muscle tone. The defining characteristics of each sleep
stage are summarized in Table 2.1.
Sleep Analysis from Wrist Accelerometer Using Contrastive Deep Learning
5
==PAGE:14==
Stage
Typical
%
of TST
Key Characteristics
Wake (W)
<5%
EEG: Alpha rhythm (8­13 Hz) over the occipital
region with eyes closed.
EOG:
Rapid
eye
movements,
blinks
with
a
frequency of 0.5­2 Hz.
EMG: High, stable muscle tone.
N1
5­10%
EEG: Low­amplitude,
mixed­frequency activity,
primarily theta waves (4­7 Hz).
Alpha activity
accounts for <50% of the epoch.
EOG: Slow, rolling eye movements.
EMG: Muscle tone is slightly lower than in
wakefulness. This is a light sleep stage with a low
arousal threshold.
N2
45­55%
EEG:
Characterized
by
the
presence
of
K­
complexes (sharp biphasic waves) and sleep
spindles (bursts of 11­16 Hz activity lasting ≥0.5
seconds).
EOG: Generally no eye movements, or slow
movements.
EMG: Muscle tone is lower than in N1.
N3
15­20%
EEG: Deep sleep,
defined by high­amplitude
(>
75µV ), slow­wave activity in the delta range
(0.5­2 Hz) for at least 20% of the epoch.
EOG: No eye movements.
EMG: Muscle tone is lower than in N2, but some
tone is maintained.
REM
20­25%
EEG: Low­amplitude,
mixed­frequency activity,
similar to N1. May contain characteristic sawtooth
waves (2­6 Hz bursts).
EOG: Bursts of rapid, conjugate eye movements.
EMG: Atonia (muscle paralysis), resulting in the
lowest muscle tone of all stages. Associated with
vivid dreaming.
Table 2.1: Summary of Sleep Stage Definitions based on AASM guidelines.
Despite detailed guidelines, manual scoring is subject to inter­rater variability.
A
systematic review and meta­analysis by Lee et al. [11] quantified the reliability of manual
sleep scoring among human experts.
While the overall reliability was found to be
”substantial” with a pooled Cohen’s kappa (κ) of 0.76, it varied significantly by stage, as
shown in Table 2.2.
Cohen’s kappa is a statistical measure that quantifies the level of agreement between two
raters while correcting for agreement that could occur by chance. [12] A kappa value of +1
indicates perfect agreement, 0 indicates that agreement is equivalent to random chance,
and a negative value indicates disagreement.
The transitional N1 stage is the most
ambiguous and difficult to score reliably, showing only ”fair” agreement. This inherent
variability poses a challenge for both clinical diagnosis and the development of automated
scoring algorithms, which are trained on this human­scored data.
6
Sleep Analysis from Wrist Accelerometer Using Contrastive Deep Learning
==PAGE:15==
Sleep Stage
Pooled Cohen’s Kappa (κ)
Wake (W)
0.70
N1
0.24
N2
0.57
N3
0.57
REM (R)
0.69
Overall
0.76
Table 2.2: Inter­Rater Reliability of Manual Sleep Scoring by Stage. Data from the meta­
analysis by Lee et al. (2022).
2.3
Actigraphy
Actigraphy is a method for quantifying physical movement using an actigraph, a device
that uses accelerometer to record and measure acceleration in 3 axes. Actigraph can
be integrated into a wearable device, such as a smartwatch, or be a standalone unit
worn on the wrist, ankle, or other parts of the body. The raw acceleration data can be
processed to quantify the intensity, duration, and frequency of movement. Compared
to PSG, it is a non­invasive, inexpensive, and easy­to­use method that is well­suited for
long­term monitoring in a subject’s natural environment. However, it provides less precise
information than PSG.
Sleep Analysis from Wrist Accelerometer Using Contrastive Deep Learning
7
==PAGE:16==
8
Sleep Analysis from Wrist Accelerometer Using Contrastive Deep Learning
==PAGE:17==
3
Technical Background
This chapter provides a concise overview of the key machine learning concepts and
architectures that form the foundation of this thesis. It begins with a general introduction
to machine learning and deep learning, followed by a discussion of self­supervised
learning.
Finally, it details the specific neural network architectures and learning
techniques employed, namely LSTMs, Transformers, and contrastive learning.
3.1
Machine Learning and Deep Learning
Machine Learning (ML) is a field of study focused on methods and algorithms that
enable computer systems to learn useful representations directly from data, instead of
relying on explicit programming or hand­crafted features. In simple terms, this works by
having the algorithm make a prediction, comparing it to the correct outcome (the label),
and calculate an error value (a ’loss’). This error then guides the algorithm to adjust its
internal parameters, so its next prediction is slightly more accurate. By repeating this
process over and over with many examples, the model learns the underlying patterns
and representations in the data without being explicitly programmed for the task.
A
subfield, Deep Learning (DL) [13], utilizes multi­layered neural networks that are
effective at this, as their structure allows them to represent more complex patterns and
learn from vast amounts of raw data. This capability is especially useful when working
with large and complex datasets, like time­series signals from Polysomnography (PSG)
and accelerometry from multiple subjects, where it is difficult to manually create effective
features.
3.2
Self­Supervised Learning
A primary consideration for supervised deep learning is its dependency on large datasets
that have been manually labeled by domain experts, as these labels are necessary to
generate the ’loss’ signal that directs the model’s learning. Self­Supervised Learning
(SSL) addresses this limitation by enabling models to learn meaningful representations
from vast quantities of unlabeled data. This self­supervised pre­training creates models
that develop a foundational understanding of the data, which then can be fine­tuned for
specific tasks using a much smaller labeled dataset [14]. There are various strategies
for this, such as training a model to predict a masked portion of a sequence, learning to
associate different augmented views of the same data point, or using contrastive methods,
which are detailed further in this chapter.
3.3
Sequence Modeling Architectures
When analyzing time­series data like PSG and actigraphy, models benefit from
architectures specifically designed to capture temporal dependencies.
This section
reviews two well­established architectures for this purpose.
3.3.1
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN)
While best known for image processing,
one­dimensional Convolutional Neural
Networks (1D CNNs) are also well­suited for sequence analysis. The core idea is to
slide a small, learnable filter across the sequence to detect specific local patterns, like a
particular shape in a signal. A key advantage is that this filter is applied across the entire
sequence, allowing the model to efficiently find a pattern no matter where it appears.
By stacking these convolutional layers, the network can then combine simple, low­level
Sleep Analysis from Wrist Accelerometer Using Contrastive Deep Learning
9
==PAGE:18==
patterns into more complex features. This makes the architecture an efficient encoder,
suitable for transforming raw sequence data into a compact, feature­rich representation.
This architecture is illustrated in Figure 3.1. (Reprinted from [15])
Figure 3.1: Illustration Convolutional Neural Network Architecture
3.3.2
Long Short­Term Memory (LSTM)
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) are a class of neural networks designed for sequential
data, processing inputs one step at a time while maintaining an internal state, or memory,
of past information. Long Short­Term Memory (LSTM) [16] networks are a specialized
type of RNN designed to overcome the challenges of learning long­range dependencies.
Unlike standard RNNs, which can struggle with vanishing gradients, LSTMs use a more
complex internal structure called a memory cell. This cell contains a set of gates—an input
gate, an output gate, and a forget gate—that regulate the flow of information. These gates
allow the network to selectively add, remove, and output information from a persistent
cell state, enabling it to remember relevant context over extended sequences and learn
meaningful temporal representations.
A typical LSTM unit is illustrated in Figure 3.2
(Reprinted from [17]).
3.3.3
Transformers
The Transformer architecture [18]offers a different approach to sequence modeling.
Unlike LSTMs, which process data sequentially, Transformers handle entire sequences
at once using a self­attention mechanism. This allows the model to weigh the importance
of any data point relative to all others in the sequence, enabling it to capture complex,
long­range dependencies directly.
The sharpness of this importance distribution can
be modulated by a temperature parameter within the attention calculation;
lower
temperatures create a sparse, focused distribution by concentrating importance on a few
key data points, while higher temperatures produce a softer, more uniform weighting
across the sequence.
A key advantage over LSTMs is their ability to model global
10
Sleep Analysis from Wrist Accelerometer Using Contrastive Deep Learning
==PAGE:19==
Figure 3.2: Diagram of a Long Short­Term Memory (LSTM) unit
context more effectively, along with a highly parallelizable structure that can significantly
speed up training.
A potential disadvantage is the computational cost, which scales
quadratically with sequence length, making it intensive for very long sequences.
3.4
Contrastive Learning
Contrastive learning [19] popularized by [20] is an SSL technique that learns
representations by pulling ”positive” (similar) pairs of samples together in an embedding
space while pushing ”negative” (dissimilar) pairs apart.
Since there are no explicit labels in self­supervised learning, the construction of positive
(similar) and negative (dissimilar) pairs is a design choice. There are multiple strategies
for how those pairs can be created.
For data from a single modality, one common strategy is data augmentation. For instance,
a slight rotation could be applied to a physiological signal, and the original signal and
its augmented version would then form a positive pair [21].
Another method uses a
learnable distance metric [9]. First, a model is trained on augmented data to understand
the essential characteristics of a motion pattern while ignoring minor variations. This
trained metric can then identify other samples in the dataset that represent similar motion
to create positive pairs for the main contrastive learning task.
When dealing with multi­modal data, a different strategy can be employed: signals that
are naturally aligned, such as by a timestamp, can be paired together. For example,
signals from different PSG channels, such as an EEG and an EOG signal aligned by the
same timestamp, can be treated as a positive pair, teaching the model to associate these
co­occurring signals [22].
A common loss function used to train Contrastive Learning models is the InfoNCE
(Noise­Contrastive Estimation) loss [23]. This function frames the learning problem as a
classification task. For a given ”positive” pair, it samples a set of ”negative” pairs and
asks the model to identify the correct positive one from the entire set. By minimizing this
loss, the model learns to produce representations where the positive pair is more similar
than any of the negative pairs. The InfoNCE loss is formally defined as:
LN = −E
X
[
log
fk(xt+k, ct)
∑
xj∈X fk(xj, ct)
]
(3.1)
Sleep Analysis from Wrist Accelerometer Using Contrastive Deep Learning
11
==PAGE:20==
where:
• ct is the anchor, for example 30s of signal.
• xt+k is the sample that create positive pair with anchor, for example 30s of signal
that is similar to anchor signal
• X is the set containing one positive sample xt+k and N −1 negative (dissimilar) xj
samples.
• fk is a scoring function that measures the similarity between two samples.
The intuition is that by minimizing this loss, we force the model to adjust its encoder so
that the scoring function fk gives a much higher value to the positive pair than to any of the
negative pairs. This pulls the representations of positive pairs together in the embedding
space and pushes them far away from the negative ones.
In practice, the scoring function fk is defined using cosine similarity and is scaled by
a temperature parameter τ, effectively turning the loss into a softmax function over the
similarity scores. This adjustment is crucial for controlling the learning dynamics. The
formula becomes:
LN = −E
X
[
log
exp(sim(ct, xt+k)/τ)
∑
xj∈X exp(sim(ct, xj)/τ)
]
(3.2)
where sim() is the cosine similarity between vector representations and τ is a positive
temperature parameter that scales the scores. This temperature controls the penalty on
”hard negatives”—dissimilar samples the model finds confusingly similar to the anchor. A
low temperature increases this penalty to force a wider separation between positive and
negative pairs, while a high temperature lessens it, which in turn dictates the discriminative
power of the learned embedding space. The choice of temperature often depends on the
nature of the task. A low temperature is better when one is confident that positive pairs are
very similar and negative pairs are very dissimilar. For example, in an image task where
positive pairs are created via data augmentation, a low temperature forces the model to
be very strict and learn a tight, well­separated embedding space.
High temperature is a better choice when there might be ambiguity. For instance, with
signal data, segments from different timestamps could still be semantically similar. A
higher temperature makes the model more relaxed, preventing it from being overly
penalized for these cases and allowing for a more flexible embedding structure.
12
Sleep Analysis from Wrist Accelerometer Using Contrastive Deep Learning
==PAGE:21==
4
Literature review
In this section, a review of relevant articles is presented to establish the context for this
thesis. The literature search was conducted primarily on the PubMed and IEEE databases.
Given the focus of the thesis, the search included phrases such as:
• ”sleep stage classification” AND ”accelerometry” AND ”Polysomnography”
• ”wearable sensors” AND ”sleep analysis”
• ”contrastive learning” AND ”time series” AND ”sleep”
• ”self­supervised learning” AND ”actigraphy”
In addition to direct searches, the literature review was expanded by examining citations
within key articles to identify foundational and related works.
The analysis of sleep using data from consumer wearable devices is a well­established
field. Initial approaches, such as the work by Cole et al. (1992) [24], relied on defining an
activity parameter from movement data and using a linear regression model to establish
a threshold for distinguishing sleep from wakefulness.
While the algorithm correctly
identified sleep versus wake 88% of the time, this result is misleading because it did not
account for the class imbalance in the data (approximately 90% sleep and 10% wake).
This biased the algorithm, causing it to overestimate the amount of sleep [25].
The next major advance in automatic sleep analysis came from using deep learning
methods to learn features directly from raw sensor signals. For example, Supratak et
al. [26] used a model that combined Convolutional (CNN) and Long Short­Term Memory
(LSTM) neural networks. The model was trained on single­night EEG recordings from
82 patients, using data from the MASS and Sleep­EDF datasets. For 5­class sleep stage
classification (Wake, N1, N2, N3, REM), the model achieved high accuracy and macro F1­
scores of 86.2% and 81.7% on MASS, and 82.0% and 76.9% on Sleep­EDF, respectively,
on an internal validation set.
These promising results motivated researchers to apply similar methods to data from
consumer devices.
Korkalainen et al. [27] trained a CNN+RNN model on photoplethysmogram (PPG) signals
obtained from a finger pulse oximeter. Using a dataset of 933 single­night recordings from
patients with suspected sleep apnea, they achieved an accuracy of 64.1% for 5­class
sleep stage classification on an internal test set.
Similarly, Olsen et al.
[5] developed a pipeline that first preprocessed wrist­worn
accelerometer (ACC) and photoplethysmography (PPG) signals into spectrograms, and
then fed them into a U­Net­inspired deep neural network. Their model was trained on a
dataset of 301 recordings and validated on a separate external test set of 35 recordings.
On this external test set, the combined ACC and PPG model achieved an accuracy of
69% for 4­class classification (Wake, Light(N1+N2), Deep(N3), REM).
While Olsen et al. [5] demonstrated that using multiple modalities from wearables, such
as PPG and ACC, gives better results, focusing only on accelerometry can help to
simplify the problem to test new algorithmic approaches, address specific use cases and
access more training data as many public datasets lack concurrent multi­channel sensor
Sleep Analysis from Wrist Accelerometer Using Contrastive Deep Learning
13
==PAGE:22==
recordings. Taking such an approach, Nunes et al.
[8] tested a Domain Adversarial
Convolutional Neural Network architecture (DACNN) with the goal of improving the
generalizability of sleep­wake classification from accelerometer data. The architecture
is composed of two competing networks: a main Wake/Sleep classifier and a domain
classifier. The domain classifier tries to identify the origin of the data (i.e., which dataset
it comes from), and the main network is penalized if it succeeds. This process forces the
initial layers of the model to learn representations that are indistinguishable between
the different data domains. The model was trained on the large Multi­Ethnic Study of
Atherosclerosis (MESA)[28] dataset, which includes 1817 participants, and validated on
the external Newcastle [29] dataset of 28 recordings. The model was designed only for
the binary Wake/Sleep classification task, for which it achieved an accuracy of 80.1% on
the external validation set. This work will serve as first key benchmark for this thesis, as
it provides a strong, recent result for accelerometer­only Wake/Sleep classification and
uses public dataset as external test set.
While the supervised deep learning methods described above show good results, they
are dependent on labeled datasets for training. The increasing popularity of consumer
wearable devices generates large quantities of unlabeled data, creating a need for new
methods that can leverage that. To train a model on 1 billion unlabeled accelerometry
segments from over 87,376 participants, Xu et al. [9] used a self­supervised learning
approach. They trained a large foundation model on the unlabeled data, which was then
fine­tuned on smaller, labeled datasets for specific downstream tasks. During pretraining,
they used Relative Contrastive Learning (RelCon).
This approach uses a learnable
distance measure to determine semantic similarity between samples.
Based on this
distance, the model is trained to pull similar samples closer while pushing dissimilar ones
away, which teaches the model to understand the underlying relationships between
different motion patterns. Then the model was fine­tuned on small, labeled datasets for
downstream tasks, including Gait Metric Regression and Human Activity Recognition
(HAR) of 16 activities, achieving state­of­the­art results, outperforming fully supervised
methods.
Similarly, another study by Yuan et al. [21] also utilized a self­supervised approach for
sleep analysis from wearables.
Their method, SleepNet, first involved pre­training a
feature extractor on a massive unlabeled dataset of over 100,000 participants from the UK
Biobank. The pre­training used multi­task self­supervision, where the model learned to
discriminate between spatiotemporal transformations (e.g., reversing, permuting) applied
to the raw accelerometer data. The model was then fine­tuned with a recurrent neural
network (RNN) on a smaller dataset of 1,113 nights of PSG­labeled recordings from the
Newcastle [29] and Raine [30] cohorts for 5­class sleep stage classification (Wake, N1,
N2, N3, REM).
During validation, the models were grouped to assess performance on the binary
Wake/Sleep and the 3­class (Wake, NREM, REM) tasks.
Internal validation was
performed using the Newcastle dataset,
where model achieved an accuracy of
0.713±0.109 and an F1­score of 0.676±0.124 for the Wake/Sleep classification
task, and an accuracy of 0.513±0.103 and an F1­score of 0.471±0.115 for the
3­class(Wake/REM/NREM) classification.
External validation was performed on
the Leicester [31] and Pennsylvania [32] cohorts and model achieved accuracy of
0.728±0.124 and an F1­score of 0.658±0.115 for the Wake/Sleep task, and an accuracy
of 0.539±0.104 and an F1­score of 0.491±0.103 for the 3­class(Wake/REM/NREM)
classification.
14
Sleep Analysis from Wrist Accelerometer Using Contrastive Deep Learning
==PAGE:23==
Results on the Newcastle dataset from this study (Wake/Sleep accuracy of 0.713±0.109
and 3­class classification accuracy of 0.513±0.103), together with the Wake/Sleep
accuracy of 80.1% from Nunes et al. [8], were selected as the primary benchmarks for
this thesis. These benchmarks were chosen because both studies report results on the
publicly available dataset (Newcastle [29]) and are based on actigraphy, which provides
a direct and fair comparison for the models developed in this work.
A different approach to self­supervised learning is cross­modal contrastive learning. This
method differs from the previously mentioned studies in how it creates positive and
negative pairs for training. Instead of augmenting a single signal or learning distance
features, it leverages multiple, synchronized signals.
Positive pairs are created by
matching samples from different signal channels that occur in the same timeframe,
using their temporal alignment as the basis for similarity. This is the core idea behind the
SleepFM framework by Thapa et al. [22], which serves as the main inspiration for this
thesis. They developed a multimodal foundation model using a massive dataset of over
585,000 hours of PSG recordings from approximately 65,000 patients. The architecture
first uses a 1D CNN to create embeddings for 5­second windows of each physiological
signal (e.g., BAS, ECG, respiratory).
These embeddings are then aggregated using
channel­agnostic attention pooling and a temporal transformer to create representation
for a 5­minute segment.
The contrastive loss then encourages the representations
from different modalities within the same 5­minute segment to be similar while being
dissimilar to all other segments in the batch.
This pre­training created encoder that,
when fine­tuned, achieved competitive results on traditional tasks like sleep staging
(mean F1 scores: 0.70­0.78) and sleep apnea diagnosis. More significantly, the learned
embeddings were highly predictive of over 130 future diseases, demonstrating strong
performance for outcomes such as death, heart failure , and dementia.
While the cross­modal approach has proven effective for clinical­grade signals, it has not
yet been systematically tested on data from consumer wearables. The basis for this thesis
is formed by combining the successful methodology of SleepFM with findings from prior
research showing the potential to extract physiological information, such as respiration
[33] [34] and heart rate [35] [36] from high­resolution wrist accelerometer data. This leads
to the central research question: can the same cross­modal contrastive learning technique
be successfully applied to enhance data from consumer wearables? Specifically, this
work will test whether contrasting actigraphy signals with concurrent PSG signals can
improve the learned actigraphy representations and, consequently, improve performance
on downstream sleep analysis tasks that use only the actigraphy signal as input.
Sleep Analysis from Wrist Accelerometer Using Contrastive Deep Learning
15
==PAGE:24==
16
Sleep Analysis from Wrist Accelerometer Using Contrastive Deep Learning
==PAGE:25==
5
Materials and methods
5.1
Datasets
The primary requirement for the datasets used in the thesis was the availability of
temporally aligned raw polysomnography (PSG) signals, actigraphy data from wrist­worn
accelerometers, and sleep stage annotations. Each dataset contained a common set of
core PSG channels:
• Thoracic and abdominal respiratory effort (THORAX, ABDOMEN)
• Electrooculography (EOG E1, EOG E2)
• Submental electromyography (EMG Chin)
• Electrocardiography (ECG)
For model training, a combined dataset from the Traumatic Brain Injury (TBI), Amazfit
(Health), and DreamT cohorts was utilized. For the final, independent evaluation, the
Newcastle cohort was used exclusively as a hold­out test set. This dataset contained
only actigraphy data and PSG­derived sleep labels, but lacked the raw PSG signals.
5.1.1
DreamT
The DREAMT (Dataset for Real­time sleep stage Estimation using Multisensor wearable
Technology) is a publicly accessible collection of multimodal sleep data from 100
participants [3] [4]. It includes individuals with a high prevalence of sleep disorders. The
data was collected between May and September 2022 at the Duke University Health
System (DUHS) Sleep Disorder Lab from patients undergoing clinical overnight PSG.
Each participant was fitted with an Empatica E4 wristband on their left wrist, which
recorded concurrently with a Nihon Kohden Polysmith 1004 PSG system. The Empatica
E4 captured triaxial accelerometry (ACC) at 32 Hz.
The original dataset authors
upsampled the accelerometry signal to 100 Hz and downsampled the PSG signals from
200 Hz to 100 Hz to create a unified sampling rate. Sleep stages were scored by clinical
experts in 30­second epochs according to AASM standards (Wake, N1, N2, N3, REM).
The demographic and clinical distribution details are summarized in Table Table 5.1.
5.1.2
Amazfit
The Amazfit Health study dataset was collected as part of the broader Stanford
Technological Analytics and Genomics in Sleep (STAGES) study.
All study protocols
received approval from the Stanford University Institutional Review Board (IRB #55476).
Consenting patients undergoing clinical lab nocturnal PSG recording were equipped with
an Amazfit Arc (Huami, Inc.) wrist device that recorded 25 Hz tri­axial accelerometry
(ACC) which was synchronized with the PSG data.
Raw sensor data, along with a
timestamp every second, was transferred in real­time via Bluetooth to a smartphone and
subsequently uploaded to cloud storage. Sleep stages were scored by clinical experts
following AASM guidelines. From an initial 54 participants, subjects were excluded due
to Bluetooth instability or recordings shorter than four hours, leaving a final cohort of 35.
[5] The demographic and clinical distribution details are summarized in Table Table 5.1.
5.1.3
TBI
The Traumatic Brain Injury (TBI) dataset contains nocturnal PSG and concurrent
actigraphy recordings from patients undergoing rehabilitation for a TBI Utilizing a GT3X
Sleep Analysis from Wrist Accelerometer Using Contrastive Deep Learning
17
==PAGE:26==
actigraph, tri­axial acceleration data was recorded at 100 Hz with a 12­bit resolution
and a dynamic range of ±6g. For synchronization with polysomnography (PSG) data,
timestamps were extracted from the actigraph following the recording period.
The
scoring of sleep stages and associated events was performed in accordance with the
2007 AASM criteria. [6]
The demographic and clinical distribution details are summarized in Table 5.1.
5.1.4
Newcastle
The Newcastle dataset comprises nocturnal accelerometry recordings and corresponding
sleep­wake labels. The raw PSG data is not available, only the derived sleep labels.
Actigraphy data was recorded using tri­axial GENEActiv accelerometer worn on each wrist
at a sampling frequency of 85.7 Hz. The ground­truth sleep stages were scored in 30­
second epochs from the clinical PSG. [7] The demographic and clinical distribution details
are summarized in Table Table 5.1.
Characteristic
DreamT
Amazfit
TBI
Newcastle
Number of Participants (N)
100
35
231
28
Age (years)
56.2 ± 16.6
36.2 ± 13.6
38.4 ± 20.6
45 ± 15
BMI (kg/m2)
33.7 ± 8.6
28.6 ± 7.8
26.2 ± 5.2
N/A
Male (%)
N/A
40.0
81.4
60.7
AHI (events/hour)
22.1 ± 28.7
16.0
17.6 ± 20.2
N/A
Actigraphy Details
Device
Empatica E4
Amazfit Arc
GT3X
GENEActiv
Sampling Rate (Hz)
32
25
100
85.7
Table 5.1:
Summary of Dataset Characteristics.
Values are presented as mean ±
standard deviation where applicable. N/A indicates data was not available.
5.2
Data Preprocessing
A key challenge was the heterogeneity of the data collected from the different cohorts,
with raw actigraphy and PSG signals provided in various formats (e.g., CSV, EDF, BIN). To
address this, a two­stage preprocessing strategy was implemented. In the first stage data­
specific scripts were used to load the raw files and convert them into a common data frame
structure, synchronizing the actigraphy and PSG signals. This produced a consistent
dataframe format across all datasets. Having this common structure was important, as it
allowed the same standardized preprocessing pipeline to be applied to every dataset.
5.2.1
Synchronization Check
While the dataset authors stated that the actigraphy and PSG recordings were
synchronized, an additional verification step was performed to confirm this.
Any
misalignment in time between the two data streams could harm the model’s performance,
as it is trying to learn how patterns in the actigraphy signal correspond to patterns in the
PSG signal at the exact same moment.
The verification method, with code provided by Niels­Rasmus Lorenzen [37], was based
on the principle that motion artifacts from respiration should be detectable in the wrist­worn
accelerometer data. The core steps of this analysis were as follows:
1. Signal Preparation:
The PSG thorax (breathing) signal was downsampled
to match the accelerometer’s sampling rate.
Both the thorax and the tri­axial
18
Sleep Analysis from Wrist Accelerometer Using Contrastive Deep Learning
==PAGE:27==
accelerometer signals were then bandpass­filtered to isolate the typical frequency
band of respiration (0.1­0.6 Hz).
2. Windowing and Quiet Period Detection: The continuous signals were segmented
into short, overlapping windows. To focus on periods where the respiratory artifact
would be most apparent, windows with significant voluntary movement (identified by
a standard deviation > 0.015g in the raw accelerometer signal) were excluded from
the analysis.
3. Lagged
Cross­Correlation:
Within
each
”quiet”
window,
the
lagged
cross­correlation was computed between the filtered thorax signal and each of the
three filtered accelerometer axes. This produced a measure of similarity between
the two signals at various time offsets (lags).
4. Lag
Analysis:
For
each
window,
the
lag
corresponding
to
the
peak
cross­correlation was identified. If the signals are perfectly synchronized, this peak
lag should consistently be at or near zero.
This analysis confirmed that most datasets were well­synchronized. However, it revealed
a consistent sampling rate drift in the DreamT dataset. Figure Figure 5.1 illustrates this
issue by plotting the peak correlation lag over the course of a night’s recording. The
pre­correction plot reveals a distinct linear trend, where the calculated lag systematically
drifts over the course of the night. This tilted alignment shows a clear synchronization
problem, indicating that the PSG and actigraphy signals were being recorded at slightly
different effective rates. To correct this, a specific sampling frequency correction factor
was introduced for the DreamT dataset during the initial data loading stage. As shown
in the post­correction plot in Figure Figure 5.2, the previously tilted line is now flat, with
consistent lag values centered around zero throughout the recordings. The Mean Cross­
Axial Max Correlation vs. Lag plot in Figure Figure 5.3 further confirms this. For a well­
synchronized recording, this plot should show a single, sharp peak at or very close to
a lag of 0, indicating that the strongest relationship occurs with no time shift. While the
pre­correction plot shows this peak shifted away from zero, the post­correction plot shows
the peak correctly centered at a lag of zero.
Figure 5.1: Pre­correction plot for a DreamT subject showing the peak cross­correlation
lag (y­axis) over the course of the night’s recording (x­axis). The lag systematically drifts
over time, forming a tilted line that indicates a synchronization issue.
Sleep Analysis from Wrist Accelerometer Using Contrastive Deep Learning
19
==PAGE:28==
Figure 5.2:
Post­correction plot for same DreamT subject showing the peak cross­
correlation lag (y­axis) over the course of the night’s recording (x­axis). After applying
the correction factor, the peak cross­correlation lag forms a vertical line, confirming the
synchronization has been fixed.
Figure 5.3: Mean cross­axial maximum correlation vs. lag for a DreamT subject. The
pre­correction data shows the correlation peak shifted away from a lag of zero, while
the post­correction data shows the peak correctly centered at zero, indicating successful
synchronization.
5.2.2
Actigraphy Preprocessing
The raw tri­axial accelerometer data from each cohort was processed using a
standardized pipeline designed to calibrate, filter, and resample the signal consistently.
This pipeline transforms the raw, device­specific accelerometer data into a clean,
standardized format suitable for model training. A flowchart illustrating this process is
presented in Figure Figure 5.4. The sequence of operations is as follows:
1. Dropout Handling: If any input data point had a vector magnitude of zero across the
three accelerometer axes (x, y, z) it was considered a signal dropout and replaced
with NaN (Not a Number) to exclude it from subsequent calculations.
2. Unit Scaling: The raw accelerometer signal, originally in various device­specific
units, was first scaled to units of gravitational acceleration (1g).
3. Low­pass Filtering: A low­pass filter was applied to serve as an anti­aliasing
filter prior to downsampling the signal. The filter’s cutoff frequency was set to the
Nyquist frequency of the target sample rate to remove high­frequency components
that would otherwise introduce aliasing artifacts and corrupt the signal during the
20
Sleep Analysis from Wrist Accelerometer Using Contrastive Deep Learning
==PAGE:29==
resampling process.
4. Resampling: The filtered signal was then resampled to a uniform frequency of 30
Hz across all datasets. This was achieved through linear interpolation.
5. Gravity Calibration:
An essential step for wrist­worn accelerometers is to
correct for orientation errors and calibrate the signal to the gravitational constant
(1g).
The pipeline employs an autocalibration procedure that identifies periods
of non­movement (standard deviation < 0.013g within 10­second windows) to
estimate and correct for sensor bias and scaling errors.
This ensures that the
gravitational component can be accurately isolated from voluntary movement.
5.2.3
PSG Preprocessing
The raw PSG signals were also subjected to a standardized preprocessing pipeline to
ensure consistency in sampling rate and signal characteristics across all datasets. The
process was applied to each selected PSG channel independently and is illustrated in
Figure Figure 5.4.
1. Anti­aliasing Filter: For signals requiring downsampling, a 4th­order zero­phase
Butterworth low­pass filter was applied.
The filter’s cutoff frequency was set to
the Nyquist frequency of the target signal to prevent aliasing artifacts during
resampling. This step was skipped if the signal was upsampled or the sampling
rate was unchanged.
2. Resampling: All channels were subsequently resampled to a uniform frequency of
100 Hz. This was achieved using linear interpolation.
3. Standardization: Following resampling, each channel was normalized using Z­
score standardization. It calculated the mean and standard deviation, centered the
signal at zero and scales it to unit variance. It ensures that channels with different
native amplitudes and dynamic ranges contribute equitably to the model’s learning
process.
The pipeline was designed to be robust to missing data points (‘NaN‘s).
During
filtering, missing segments were temporarily filled using linear interpolation to allow the
filter to operate, after which the ‘NaN‘s were reinstated.
In subsequent resampling
and standardization steps, ‘NaN‘ values were either propagated or ignored during
calculations, ensuring their positions were preserved in the final processed signal.
Sleep Analysis from Wrist Accelerometer Using Contrastive Deep Learning
21
==PAGE:30==
Figure 5.4: Flowchart of data preprocessing pipeline
5.2.4
Data Combination and Storage
After the separate preprocessing of actigraphy and PSG signals, the resulting data
streams, along with the expert­annotated sleep stages, were combined and stored in a
standardized HDF5 file for each participant. Final step was to trim the recordings to the
22
Sleep Analysis from Wrist Accelerometer Using Contrastive Deep Learning
==PAGE:31==
overlapping time period where valid data was present from both the actigraphy and PSG
devices. This process removed any segments where only one modality was recording,
ensuring that every time point in the final dataset had corresponding signals from all
sources. This unified HDF5 format serves as the direct input for the model, ensuring that
data from any of the source cohorts can be loaded and processed by the same training
and evaluation pipeline. Label distributions in preprocessed datasets are presented in
Table 5.2.
Amazfit
DreamT
TBI
Training Datasets Combined
Newcastle
N1
2.47
9.25
9.58
8.79
4.98
N2
42.22
41.47
32.24
35.58
34.25
N3
18.09
2.91
19.34
15.05
18.19
REM
12.24
8.50
14.37
12.67
11.93
WK
24.98
37.88
24.47
27.92
30.64
Table 5.2: Label Distribution by Sleep Stage (%)
An example of a preprocessed whole­night recording,
including the hypnogram,
corresponding actigraphy channels, and select PSG channels (ABDOMEN, THORAX,
ECG), is presented infig. 5.5. A detailed view of a 30­second window of these signals is
presented in fig. 5.6.
Sleep Analysis from Wrist Accelerometer Using Contrastive Deep Learning
23
==PAGE:32==
Figure 5.5: An example of a whole­night recording from a single participant. The figure
displays the clinical hypnogram (top panel) which shows sleep stages over time. Below
are the corresponding time­aligned physiological signals used in this study: wrist­worn
actigraphy, THORAX and ABDOMEN, and ECG.
24
Sleep Analysis from Wrist Accelerometer Using Contrastive Deep Learning
==PAGE:33==
Figure 5.6: A detailed 30­second epoch of the actigraphy, THORAX, ABDOMEN, and
ECG signalsn
5.2.5
Train, Validation, and Test Split
The final step in data preparation was to split the combined dataset into training, validation,
and test sets. This was done on a per­subject basis to prevent data leakage, where data
from the same individual appears in multiple splits. The training, validation, and internal
test sets were composed of data from the Amazfit, DreamT, and TBI cohorts, which were
split on a per­subject basis into an 80% training set, a 10% validation set, and a 10%
internal test set. The entire Newcastle dataset was held out to serve as the external test
set.
The purpose of each set is as follows:
• Training Set: Used for the primary training of the model to learn its parameters.
• Validation Set:
Used during training to tune hyperparameters and for model
selection (e.g., identifying the best­performing checkpoint via early stopping). It
also provides quick information on whether the model is capable of learning and
helps to identify overfitting (indicated by good performance on the training set but
poor performance on the validation set).
• Internal Test Set: Used to evaluate the performance of the final, tuned model on
unseen data from the same cohorts as the training data. This helps to check if
the model’s hyperparameters have been overfitted to the data in the training and
validation sets.
Sleep Analysis from Wrist Accelerometer Using Contrastive Deep Learning
25
==PAGE:34==
• External Test Set:
Used as final evaluation that check how well model can
generalize.
The use of a completely separate, external dataset is important for assessing the
model’s true generalization capabilities. It provides a robust evaluation of how the model
is expected to perform on new, unseen data from different populations that can have
different underlying distributions.
This simulates a real­world deployment scenario
where the model will encounter data with different underlying distributions than what it
was trained on.
Figure 5.7: Visualization of the subject­wise data split. Each source dataset (Amazfit,
DreamT, TBI) was partitioned by subject to create training (80%), validation (10%), and
internal test (10%) sets. The Newcastle dataset was reserved as a separate external test
set.
5.3
Downstream Task and Evaluation
To evaluate the quality of the learned actigraphy representations, a downstream task of
sleep stage classification was performed.
The primary evaluation involved a 5­class classification problem, distinguishing between
Wake, N1, N2, N3, and REM. In addition to the 5­class problem, the model was also
evaluated on two simplified classification tasks to facilitate comparison with prior work, as
many studies focus on these coarser­grained problems.
• Binary Sleep/Wake Detection: A 2­class problem where all sleep stages (N1, N2,
N3, REM) are grouped into a single ’Sleep’ category.
26
Sleep Analysis from Wrist Accelerometer Using Contrastive Deep Learning
==PAGE:35==
• 3­Class Sleep Staging: A problem distinguishing between Wake, REM, and a
combined Non­REM (NREM) stage, where N1, N2, and N3 are grouped together.
Evaluating on these simplified tasks provides a valuable benchmark against existing
literature that may not report on the full 5­class staging problem.
The performance of the downstream model was assessed using overall accuracy and the
macro­averaged F1­score. The macro F1­score was chosen as a key metric because it
treats each class equally, providing a robust measure of performance even in the presence
of class imbalance, which is common in sleep data.
5.4
Model Architecture
The model was in a two­stage process. The first stage involved pre­training a contrastive
learning encoder using paired actigraphy and polysomnography (PSG) data. The goal
of this stage is to teach the encoder to generate robust and meaningful representations
of raw actigraphy signal. In the second stage, the pre­trained Actigraphy branch from
contrastive encoder is frozen, and its output embeddings are fed into a LSTM­based
model, which is fine­tuned on the downstream task using only actigraphy data.
5.4.1
Contrastive Learning Encoder
The architecture of the contrastive learning encoder is primarily inspired by the SleepFM
paper [22]. It features two separate branches. One dedicated to processing actigraphy
data and another for PSG data. Each branch first encodes single, 30­second windows of
the signal using a 1D Convolutional Neural Network (CNN). The resulting window­level
representations are then processed by a Transformer, which aggregates a sequence of 12
windows (representing 5 minutes of signal) into a single, final embedding. This process
results in two final embedding vectors, zact and zpsg, which represent the full 5­minute
input sequences in a shared latent space. The resulting embeddings are used to construct
positive and negative pairs. These pairs then serve as input to a contrastive loss function,
which provides the training signal for the model. High level architecture of contrastive
encoder is illustrated in Figure Figure 5.8.
Figure 5.8: Diagram presenting high level architecture of Contrastive Encoder
Sleep Analysis from Wrist Accelerometer Using Contrastive Deep Learning
27
==PAGE:36==
5.4.1.1
Actigraphy Branch
The Actigraphy Branch processes the signal in a hierarchical manner.
A flowchart
illustrating this process is presented in Figure 5.9.
1. Window Encoder: Each 30­second window of actigraphy data is first passed
through a standard CNN encoder. This encoder consists of two 1D convolutional
layers. The first layer has 32 filters with a kernel size of 15, and the second has
64 filters with a kernel size of 9. Each convolutional layer is followed by a Batch
Normalization layer, a ReLU activation function, and a Max Pooling layer.
An
adaptive average pooling layer ensures a fixed­size output.
It is then passed
through a fully connected layer to produce an embedding of one 30­second
window with a dimension specified in the training configuration (e.g., 64).
2. Temporal Processor: The embeddings from 12 consecutive 30­second windows
are concatenated to form a single sequence of signals, representing a 6­minute
segment. This sequence is then processed by a multi­layer Transformer encoder,
which is preceded by positional encoding to incorporate temporal information. This
models the contextual relationships between the windows within the segment.
3. Sequence Pooling and Projection: The output sequence from the Transformer is
summarized into a single vector using an attention pooling layer. This vector is then
normalized using LayerNorm and projected through a final linear layer to produce
the ultimate actigraphy embedding, zact.
28
Sleep Analysis from Wrist Accelerometer Using Contrastive Deep Learning
==PAGE:37==
Figure 5.9: Diagram presenting architecture of the Actigraphy Branch.
5.4.1.2
PSG Branch
The PSG Branch shares a similar architecture but includes an additional channel­fusion
step to handle the multiple PSG input channels. PSG branch architecture is shown in
Figure 5.10.
1. Window Encoder: The same CNN encoder architecture used in the actigraphy
branch is applied to each PSG channel independently for every 30­second window.
2. Channel Pooling: For each window, the resulting set of embeddings (one per PSG
channel) is fed into a Transformer­based channel­pooling module. This module
fuses the information across all channels, producing a single, unified feature vector
for that 30­second window.
3. Temporal Processing and Projection:
The sequence of 12 fused window
embeddings is then processed by a temporal Transformer and an attention pooling
layer, identical to the architecture of the Actigraphy Branch. This produces the final
PSG embedding, zpsg.
Sleep Analysis from Wrist Accelerometer Using Contrastive Deep Learning
29
==PAGE:38==
Figure 5.10: Diagram presenting architecture of the PSG Branch.
5.4.2
Contrastive Learning Objective
The training objective is achieved using a symmetric InfoNCE loss function [38]. For each
training batch, the embeddings from the same timestamp, z(i)
act and z(i)
psg, form a positive
pair. Conversely, an actigraphy embedding z(i)
act paired with a PSG embedding from a
different timestamp, z(j)
psg (where i ̸= j), forms a negative pair. The loss function aims to
maximize the similarity for positive pairs while minimizing it for negative pairs.
30
Sleep Analysis from Wrist Accelerometer Using Contrastive Deep Learning
==PAGE:39==
The calculation is performed from two perspectives to ensure both branches of the
encoder are trained jointly:
1. Similarity Calculation: First, the similarity for all positive (i = j) and negative
(i ̸= j) pairs between the two signals is measured using cosine similarity. For an
embedding from the first signal, z(i)
1 , and an embedding from the second signal, z(j)
2 ,
the similarity is:
sim(z(i)
1 , z(j)
2 ) =
z(i)
1 · z(j)
2
∥z(i)
1 ∥∥z(j)
2 ∥
(5.1)
2. Probability Calculation: The softmax function is used to convert the raw similarity
scores into a probability distribution. For a vector of scores s, the probability of the
k­th score is calculated by taking the exponential of the score for the pair of interest,
sk, and dividing it by the sum of the exponentials of the scores for all possible pairs
in the batch, ∑B
j=1 esj.
softmax(s)k =
esk
∑B
j=1 esj
(5.2)
When this is applied to the similarity scores for a given embedding from one signal,
z(i)
1 , and all embeddings from the second signal in the batch, the formula for the
probability of a correct pairing becomes:
P(positive pair) =
exp(sim(z(i)
1 , z(i)
2 ))
∑B
j=1 exp(sim(z(i)
1 , z(j)
2 ))
(5.3)
3. InfoNCE Loss with Temperature: The loss is the negative log­likelihood of this
probability. To control the sharpness of the probability distribution, a temperature
hyperparameter τ is introduced to scale the similarity scores before the softmax
operation.
Intuitively, a higher temperature softens the probability distribution,
making the distinction between positive and negative pairs less sharp. The choice
of this value depends on the data; for instance, when negative pairs are very
distinct from positive pairs (e.g., images of different classes), a lower temperature
is better, but when negative pairs can be very similar to the positive one (e.g., two
different but similar­looking windows of a sleep signal), a higher temperature may
be more appropriate. This gives the final InfoNCE loss.
From the actigraphy perspective, the loss for a single embedding z(i)
act is:
L(i)
act→psg = −log
exp(sim(z(i)
act, z(i)
psg)/τ)
∑B
j=1 exp(sim(z(i)
act, z(j)
psg)/τ)
(5.4)
Symmetrically, the loss from the PSG perspective for a single embedding z(i)
psg is:
L(i)
psg→act = −log
exp(sim(z(i)
psg, z(i)
act)/τ)
∑B
j=1 exp(sim(z(i)
psg, z(j)
act)/τ)
(5.5)
where:
• z(i)
act and z(i)
psg are the embeddings for the i­th positive pair.
Sleep Analysis from Wrist Accelerometer Using Contrastive Deep Learning
31
==PAGE:40==
• B is the batch size.
• j is the index iterating over all samples in the batch.
• τ is a temperature hyperparameter that scales the similarity scores before the
softmax operation.
The final, total loss for the batch is the average of these two directional losses:
Ltotal = 1
2B
B
∑
i=1
(L(i)
act→psg + L(i)
psg→act)
(5.6)
5.4.3
Downstream Task Fine­Tuning
Once the contrastive encoder is pre­trained, it is used to fine­tune a model for a specific
downstream task, such as sleep stage classification.
For this stage, the Actigraphy
Branch of the encoder is frozen and used to generate feature embeddings. Each training
sample consists of an embedding representing 30 seconds of actigraphy signal and its
corresponding ground­truth sleep label. A Long Short­Term Memory (LSTM) model, a
standard architecture for time­series analysis, is used as the classifier. The model takes
an input sequence of 12 windows, representing 6 minutes of signal. This sequence is
structured to provide context for the prediction, containing the target window to be
classified, the 10 preceding windows (5 minutes of past context), and one subsequent
window (30 seconds of future context).
The LSTM processes this sequence, and its
output corresponding to the target window is fed into a classification head. This training
process is presented in Figure Figure 5.11.
32
Sleep Analysis from Wrist Accelerometer Using Contrastive Deep Learning
==PAGE:41==
Figure 5.11: Diagram presenting architecture of downstream model. Embeddings from
Actigraphy Branch are extracted after first CNN layer and are used as training input for
downstream task model.
The model is then trained using a standard Cross­Entropy Loss function to predict the
correct sleep stage. The loss for a single observation is defined as:
L = −
M
∑
j=1
yj log(pj)
(5.7)
Where:
L is the cross­entropy loss for the single sample.
M is the total number of classes.
yj is the true probability of class j, typically represented as 1 for the correct class and 0
for all other classes.
pj is the model’s predicted probability that the sample belongs to class j.
5.4.4
Tracked Metrics
To ensure the model learns effectively and to diagnose common training pitfalls such
as overfitting or representation collapse, a comprehensive set of metrics was monitored
during both the contrastive pre­training and downstream fine­tuning stages.
Sleep Analysis from Wrist Accelerometer Using Contrastive Deep Learning
33
==PAGE:42==
Train/Validation Loss, Accuracy, and F1­Score: These metrics were tracked to check
that the training was implemented correctly and that the model was capable of learning. A
decreasing loss on both training and validation sets indicated that the model was learning
as expected. If the training loss continued to decrease while the validation loss began to
increase, it shows that the model is overfitting to the training data. For the downstream
classification task, accuracy and F1­score were used to quickly assess how well the model
was performing.
Positive and Negative Pair Similarity: The InfoNCE loss, while central to contrastive
learning, is not an absolute measure of performance.
Its value is highly dependent
on hyperparameters like temperature and the batch size, which controls the number
of negative pairs.
Furthermore, the loss function itself is composed of two distinct
objectives:
making positive pairs more similar and negative pairs less similar.
Consequently, to better evaluate the model training a set of diagnostic metrics was
introduced. These included the positive pair similarity and negative pair similarity,
representing the average cosine similarity computed for all positive and all negative
pairs within a training batch. The similarity difference between these two similarities
was also tracked.
For monitoring purposes, these batch­level metrics were then
averaged over each training epoch. While strong performance on these metrics does
not guarantee improved results on downstream tasks, they serve as valuable diagnostic
signals, helping to identify whether the model struggled to attract positive examples or
repel negative ones and allowing for more targeted training adjustments.
Embedding Similarity Statistics (Mean and Standard Deviation): To prevent the
model from learning a degenerate solution during contrastive training, the distribution of
similarities was monitored. This helps detect two common failure modes:
• Representation Collapse: The model maps all inputs to nearly the same point
in the embedding space. This would result in high similarity for both positive and
negative pairs and a very low standard deviation of similarities across the batch.
• Uniform Scattering: The model pushes all embeddings far apart from each other,
leading to low similarity for both positive and negative pairs.
Tracking these statistics helped to ensure that the model was learning a well­structured
and meaningful representation space.
Prediction Label Distribution: During the fine­tuning of the downstream classifier, the
distribution of predicted labels on the validation set was monitored. Since sleep stage
datasets are highly imbalanced, a model can achieve deceptively high performance on
some metrics by taking a shortcut, such as predicting only the most frequent sleep stage.
Tracking the predicted label distribution ensured that the model was not collapsing to this
trivial solution and was actively attempting to classify instances from all classes, including
the underrepresented ones.
5.4.5
Hyperparameter Tuning
The process of finding the optimal model configuration involved tuning several key
hyperparameters. Initial values were selected based on common practices in related
literature and standard defaults. The training metrics described in Table 5.3 were then
used to guide adjustments for a stable training process.
Finally, a grid search was
performed over a narrow range of promising values to finalize the configuration. The
tuned parameters are summarized in the table below.
34
Sleep Analysis from Wrist Accelerometer Using Contrastive Deep Learning
==PAGE:43==
Parameter
Description
Number
and
size of model
layers
Determines the model’s capacity. A bigger model can handle more
complex patterns and achieve better results, but if it is too big, it can
easily overfit to the training data.
Learning Rate
One of the most important parameters to tune. It tells the model how
large the update steps should be. If too small, the model learns very
slowly or gets stuck in local minimum; if too large, the training can
become unstable.
Weight Decay
A regularization technique that penalizes large weights in the model.
It is a tool to prevent the model from overfitting by discouraging it
from learning overly complex patterns.
Dropout Rate
A regularization method that randomly sets a fraction of neuron
activations to zero during training. This is mainly used to prevent
overfitting. A larger rate provides more regularization, but if it’s too
high, it can prevent the model from learning effectively.
Contrastive
Temperature
Controls the sharpness of the probability distribution in the
contrastive loss. It was tuned to find the right balance for this specific
dataset.
Table 5.3: Summary of Hyperparameters used during model training
5.5
Experimental Design
To validate the effectiveness of the proposed contrastive learning framework and to gain
a deeper understanding of the model’s behavior, a series of experiments was designed.
These experiments aim to benchmark the pre­trained model against a standard
supervised baseline, investigate the impact of different PSG signal modalities on the
learned representations, and explore various model design choices.
5.5.1
Contrastive vs. Baseline Model
The primary experiment is designed to compare the performance of the fine­tuned
contrastive model against a supervised baseline model. The purpose is to determine
whether the two­stage pre­training and fine­tuning approach offers an advantage over a
standard end­to­end supervised model trained on the same data.
The baseline is a hierarchical CNN­LSTM model trained directly on raw actigraphy data
to predict sleep stages. This architecture illustrated on Figure 5.12 was chosen as it
represents a strong, standard approach for time­series classification and has been
successfully utilized as a solid baseline in related literature for sleep analysis. The model
processes a sequence of 12 consecutive 30­second actigraphy windows to classify the
target window.
Initially, each window is passed through a 1D CNN feature extractor,
which consists of two convolutional blocks.
Each block applies a 1D convolution
followed by batch normalization, a ReLU activation function, and max pooling to learn
spatial features within the raw signal.
The output from the convolutional blocks is
then passed through an adaptive average pooling layer and a fully connected layer to
produce a fixed­dimension feature vector for each window. This sequence of feature
vectors is then fed into a bidirectional LSTM, which is designed to capture the temporal
dependencies and contextual information across the windows.
Finally, the LSTM’s
output corresponding to the target window is passed through a dropout layer and a final
fully connected layer with a softmax activation to produce the sleep stage probabilities.
Sleep Analysis from Wrist Accelerometer Using Contrastive Deep Learning
35
==PAGE:44==
Figure 5.12: Diagram presenting the architecture of Baseline Supervised model
Both the fine­tuned contrastive model and the CNN­LSTM baseline were trained and
evaluated on the exact same training, validation, and test sets to ensure a fair and direct
comparison. To better understand our model’s performance, results were also compared
to benchmarks reported in related studies namely DACNN [8] and Relcon [9].
5.5.2
Simulating Limited Labels
In a second experiment, a realistic scenario with limited labeled data availability was
simulated.
This simulation is motivated by the practical challenges in sleep analysis.
While the presence of PSG data allows for the relatively straightforward generation of
sleep stage labels using for automated sleep staging systems like UNET [39], this is not
the case for other important sleep­related tasks. Diagnosing conditions like sleep apnea or
other sleep disorders requires expert annotation, which is time­consuming and expensive,
often resulting in a limited number of available labels for training supervised models.
While the first experiment utilized three datasets for training both models, this experiment
re­frames the setup to mimic this scenario when raw actigraphy and PSG data are
available from all three datasets, but only one of them has the necessary labels.
In this scenario end­to­end baseline model, being fully supervised, can only be trained
using the one dataset that has labels. In contrast, the contrastive model can use all
36
Sleep Analysis from Wrist Accelerometer Using Contrastive Deep Learning
==PAGE:45==
the data for encoder pretraining since this step did not need labels.
Then, this pre­
trained model is fine­tuned for the specific task using only the single labeled dataset. This
experiment is designed to check how well this approach performs in a common scenario
where only a part of the available data is labeled.
5.5.3
Impact of PSG Channel Selection
The contrastive learning framework relies on PSG signals to provide the supervisory signal
for learning actigraphy representations. This experiment investigated how the choice of
PSG channels used during pre­training affects the quality of the learned embeddings
and, consequently, the downstream task performance. The hypothesis is that different
physiological signals may provide complementary or redundant information, influencing
what features the actigraphy encoder learns to extract.
To test this, the contrastive encoder was pre­trained using three different subsets of PSG
channels:
• Respiratory­based
Pre­training:
Using
only
the
thoracic
and
abdominal
respiratory effort channels (THORAX, ABDOMEN).
• Cardiac­based Pre­training: Using only the electrocardiography (ECG) channel.
• Full­Modal Pre­training: Using all available core PSG channels (EOG, EMG, ECG,
THORAX, ABDOMEN).
For each configuration, a separate contrastive encoder was pre­trained. The resulting
actigraphy branches were then fine­tuned and evaluated on the downstream sleep staging
task. The performance of these models is compared to assess the impact of each PSG
modality on the final classification accuracy and F1­score.
5.5.4
Different pairing strategies
As part of the architecture choices exploration, several alternative contrastive pairing
strategies were tested. These experiments explored variations on the primary approach
of contrasting embeddings derived from 12 windows that represented 6­minutes of signal.
The following strategies were tested:
• Window­Level Pairing: The contrastive loss was applied to individual 30­second
window embeddings rather than those from 6­minute sequences.
• Temporal Proximity Pairing: Positive pairs included the anchor window and the
three windows immediately preceding and following it.
• Supervised Label­Based Pairing: Ground­truth sleep stage labels dictated pairing,
with windows from the same stage forming positive pairs and those from different
stages forming negative pairs.
Sleep Analysis from Wrist Accelerometer Using Contrastive Deep Learning
37
==PAGE:46==
38
Sleep Analysis from Wrist Accelerometer Using Contrastive Deep Learning
==PAGE:47==
6
Results
6.1
Embedding Model Analysis
Before fine­tuning, the contrastive model’s ability to distinguish between positive and
negative pairs was evaluated. On average, the model demonstrated a cosine similarity
difference of approximately 10%.
The best hyperparameter configuration achieved a
17.5% similarity difference, indicating the model’s capability to learn. The evolution of
this similarity difference during one of training runs is shown in Figure 6.1.
Figure 6.1:
The similarity difference metric plotted over training steps for a single
experimental run.
Cosine similarity of 0 suggests the embeddings are entirely unrelated, while a similarity
of 1 indicates they are perfectly similar. The average cosine similarity for positive pairs
was approximately 0.4, while for negative pairs, it was around 0.2.
The evolution of
those metrics during one of the training runs is shown in Figure 6.2. The relatively high
average similarity for negative pairs is understandable given the nature of sleep data,
where different time epochs can still represent the same physiological state (e.g., the
same sleep stage), thus making them inherently similar. The standard deviation of the
similarities was observed to be in the stable range of 0.5­0.7, indicating that the training
successfully avoided both representation collapse and uniform scattering.
Sleep Analysis from Wrist Accelerometer Using Contrastive Deep Learning
39
==PAGE:48==
Figure 6.2: Positive and Negative Pair Similarity metrics plotted over training steps for a
single experimental run.
To visualize the learned representation space, output embeddings from the actigraphy
encoder were projected into two dimensions using both t­Distributed Stochastic Neighbor
Embedding (t­SNE) [40] and Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection (UMAP)
[41]. The resulting plots were colored according to their corresponding ground­truth sleep
labels and are presented on Figure 6.3 and Figure 6.4. The visualizations show no clear
separation between sleep stages, besides one cluster dominated by the wake stage. This
does not necessarily mean the model will fail at the downstream classification task, as it
evaluates a sequence of 12 consecutive embedding windows rather than a single one, but
suggests that future work should focus on improving this part of the pipeline. Given this
embedding structure, the outcome confirms the necessity of an LSTM­based classifier,
since a simple linear layer would be incapable of performing the task.
40
Sleep Analysis from Wrist Accelerometer Using Contrastive Deep Learning
==PAGE:49==
Figure 6.3: Visualization of Embeddings projected into two dimensions using t­SNE
Figure 6.4: Visualization of Embeddings projected into two dimensions using UMAP
6.2
Downstream Task Evaluation
The evaluation of the downstream sleep stage classification task revealed challenges
related to the dataset’s class imbalance. Both the fine­tuned contrastive model and the
Sleep Analysis from Wrist Accelerometer Using Contrastive Deep Learning
41
==PAGE:50==
end­to­end supervised baseline model initially adopted a strategy of predicting only the
most frequent classes (e.g., N2 and Wake), resulting in poor performance on minority
classes (N1, N3, REM). An example of this skewed prediction distribution, where the
model heavily favors majority classes, is presented in Figure 6.5
Figure 6.5: Predictions distribution plotted over training epochs for a single experimental
run.
To address this, the standard cross­entropy loss function was replaced with a weighted
cross­entropy loss.
This modification penalizes misclassifications of minority classes
more heavily, encouraging the model to learn to predict all five stages. The weighted
cross­entropy loss for a single observation is defined as:
L = −
M
∑
j=1
wjyj log(pj)
(6.1)
Where M is the number of classes, yj is the binary indicator for the true class, pj is the
model’s predicted probability for class j, and wj is the weight assigned to class j, which
is typically the inverse of the class frequency.
Following the incorporation of the weighted loss function, both the contrastive and
baseline models were trained and evaluated. During training, different behaviors were
observed.
Figure 6.6 shows an example of rapid overfitting, indicative of an overly
complex model relative to data size, whereas Figure 6.7 presents a more stable learning
curve.
42
Sleep Analysis from Wrist Accelerometer Using Contrastive Deep Learning
==PAGE:51==
Figure 6.6: Train and Validation loss metrics plotted over training epochs for a single
experimental run. Plot present training run with rapid overfitting.
Figure 6.7: Training and validation loss plotted over epochs for a single experimental run.
The model exhibits stable training until approximately epoch 30, after which overfitting
begins. This is indicated by the divergence of the curves, where the validation loss starts
to increase while the training loss continues to decrease.
Sleep Analysis from Wrist Accelerometer Using Contrastive Deep Learning
43
==PAGE:52==
The fine­tuned model was then evaluated on an external test set from the Newcastle
cohort [29]. Its performance was compared against a supervised CNN­LSTM baseline
and results from related works, namely Relcon [9] and DACNN [8] on external test
set(Newcastle) and internal test set. As summarized in Table 6.1 and Table 6.2, both
the fine­tuned contrastive model and the end­to­end baseline achieved performance
comparable to models reported in the literature, despite being trained with less data.
However, a direct comparison of the two approaches indicates that the contrastive
pre­training stage did not offer a significant improvement over the baseline when an
equal amount of labeled data was used for training.
Relcon
DACNN
Supervised
baseline
Contrastive
Encoder
Labeled train
set size
(n_nights)
1113
1817
337
337
Unlabeled train
set size
(n_nights)
over 100,000
N/A
N/A
N/A
Wake/Sleep
accuracy (%)
70.5±14.9
80.1
73.1±12.9
73.5±13.2
Wake/Sleep F1
(%)
67.6±12.4
81.7
77.7±16.5
77.4±17.6
Wake/REM/NREM
accuracy (%)
51.3±10.3
N/A
54.3±12.2
53.3±12.9
Wake/REM/NREM
F1 (%)
47.1±11.5
N/A
54.3±11.6
54.1±12.7
5­stages
accuracy (%)
N/A
N/A
30.4±14.2
30.7±16.9
5­stages F1 (%)
N/A
N/A
21.7±6.8
22.8±9.9
Table 6.1: Performance comparison on the Newcastle dataset. Results are shown for two
methods from related literature (Relcon and DACNN), supervised baseline and proposed
Contrastive Encoder
Further analysis using the confusion matrix (Figure 6.8) reveals specific patterns of
misclassification. The model most frequently confused Wake with REM and, separately,
REM with NREM sleep.
This outcome is logical, as certain NREM stages function
as transitional states between wakefulness and REM sleep, making the boundaries
between them difficult for the model to distinguish accurately.
44
Sleep Analysis from Wrist Accelerometer Using Contrastive Deep Learning
==PAGE:53==
Supervised baseline
Contrastive Encoder
Labeled train set size
(n_nights)
337
337
Wake/Sleep accuracy
(%)
74.3 ± 17.05
73.3 ± 16.24
Wake/Sleep F1 (%)
79.3 ± 16.91
77.9 ± 17.73
Wake/REM/NREM
accuracy (%)
57.6 ± 14.48
56.1 ± 15.76
Wake/REM/NREM F1
(%)
57.0 ± 14.28
56.2 ± 15.78
5­stages accuracy (%)
32.9 ± 13.56
35.0 ± 14.88
5­stages F1 (%)
24.5 ± 9.29
25.2 ± 11.69
Table 6.2:
Performance comparison of the supervised baseline and the proposed
contrastive encoder on the internal test set.
Figure 6.8:
Confusion matrix for Contrastive Encoder model predictions during
Wake/NREM/REM classification on Newcastle test set.
Sleep Analysis from Wrist Accelerometer Using Contrastive Deep Learning
45
==PAGE:54==
Additionally, there was a high degree of variability in the performance scores between
individual patients, as presented in Figure 6.9 and Figure 6.10. This is to be expected, as
the dataset included a mix of healthy sleepers and individuals with sleep disorders such
as parasomnia. Conditions like parasomnia can significantly disrupt sleep patterns and
introduce movement artifacts, affecting the accuracy of a model that relies on movement­
based sensors.
Figure 6.9: Per­patient accuracy of the Contrastive Encoder model on the Newcastle test
set.
Figure 6.10: Per­patient F1 of the contrastive encoder model on the Newcastle test set.
6.3
Limited Label Scenario Evaluation
In a simulated limited labeled data scenario, the utility of the contrastive pre­training
approach became evident. As shown in Table6.3, the model pre­trained on unlabeled data
significantly outperformed the baseline that was trained only on the small labeled subset.
Moreover, its performance approached that of the model fine­tuned on the complete
dataset. This demonstrates that pre­training on a large volume of unlabeled data is a
highly effective strategy, enabling strong downstream performance with only a fraction of
labeled data.
46
Sleep Analysis from Wrist Accelerometer Using Contrastive Deep Learning
==PAGE:55==
Supervised
baseline
Supervised
baseline
limited labels
Contrastive
Contrastive
limited labels
Labeled training
size (n_nights)
337
27
337
27
Unlabeled
training size
(n_nights)
N/A
N/A
N/A
310
Wake/Sleep
accuracy (%)
73.1±12.9
52.7±17.3
73.5±13.2
68.0±14.9
Wake/Sleep F1
(%)
77.7±16.5
52.8±22.8
77.4±17.6
71.8±18.5
Wake/REM/NREM
accuracy (%)
54.3±12.2
43.4±15.0
53.3±12.9
52.0±13.8
Wake/REM/NREM
F1 (%)
54.3±11.6
41.7±15.7
54.1±12.7
53.1±12.0
5­stages
accuracy (%)
30.4±14.2
25.2±15.3
30.7±16.9
30.2±15.6
5­stages F1 (%)
21.7±6.8
14.8±6.4
22.8±9.9
20.0±8.1
Table 6.3: Performance comparison on the Newcastle dataset for models trained with
limited access to labeled data. Results are shown for the proposed Contrastive Encoder
and a supervised baseline.
6.4
Impact of PSG Channel Selection
To evaluate the contribution of different physiological signals, three distinct encoders were
trained and compared using different subsets of PSG channels. The first encoder used all
available channels (THORAX, ABDOMEN, ECG, EMG chin, EOG); the second used only
breathing­related channels (THORAX, ABDOMEN); and the third was trained exclusively
on cardiac activity (ECG). We compared these models using both the encoder­specific
metric, similarity pair difference, and their performance on downstream classification tasks.
The complete results are presented in Table 6.4.
The findings revealed a small trade­off between the models. The encoder using only
breathing channels was most effective for the binary sleep/wake detection task.
In
contrast, the encoder trained on all available channels demonstrated higher accuracy on
the grouped 3­stage Wake/REM/NREM classification but performed worse on the more
granular 5­stage classification. This suggests that the combination of all channels helps
to distinguish between REM and non­REM sleep but fails to effectively differentiate
between the individual non­REM sub­stages.
The encoder model trained only on the ECG signal struggled to properly differentiate
between positive and negative pairs.
However, its performance was still better than
random, indicating that the embeddings did capture some basic movement patterns. One
hypothesis for the model’s limited performance is that the amplitude of movement caused
Sleep Analysis from Wrist Accelerometer Using Contrastive Deep Learning
47
==PAGE:56==
by the heartbeat is relatively small compared to the larger motions from hand movement
or breathing. This makes it difficult for the model to take advantage of the cardiac signal
without specific preprocessing designed to isolate and amplify the heart rate information.
All
Breathing
Heart Activity
Positive/Negative
similarity difference
0.14
0.18
0.05
Wake/Sleep accuracy (%)
70.5±14.9
73.5±13.2
67.1±14.5
Wake/Sleep F1 (%)
73.0±20.0
77.4±17.6
66.8±16.0
Wake/REM/NREM
accuracy (%)
58.9±13.8
53.3±12.9
45.6±12.3
Wake/REM/NREM F1 (%)
56.9±13.0
54.1±12.7
42.4±11.7
5­stages accuracy (%)
26.9±18.7
30.7±16.9
25.4±14.2
5­stages F1 (%)
20.8±7.8
22.8±9.9
14.5±9.3
Table 6.4: Performance comparison of Contrastive Encoders trained on different subsets
of physiological signals. Three models are compared: one using All channels (THORAX,
ABDOMEN, ECG, EMG chin, EOG), one with only Breathing signals (THORAX,
ABDOMEN), and one with only Heart Activity (ECG). Performance is evaluated using
both the encoder training metric, ”similarity pair difference,” and downstream classification
metrics from Newcastle test set.
6.5
Different pairing streategies
Initial results for different pairing strategies did not indicate any improvement over the
main approach. Early indicators, including encoder­specific metrics, downstream task
loss curves, and preliminary accuracy, showed that none of the variations performed better
than the main experimental setup.
48
Sleep Analysis from Wrist Accelerometer Using Contrastive Deep Learning
==PAGE:57==
7
Discussion
This chapter presents an analysis of the experimental results, discusses their implications
in the context of existing research, and outlines potential directions for future work. The
discussion is framed around the contributions of this thesis, the challenges encountered,
and the broader landscape of sleep analysis using wearable devices.
7.1
Data Collection and Preprocessing Pipeline
During this thesis, four distinct datasets were collected and processed: three containing
concurrent Polysomnography (PSG) and actigraphy data, and one containing actigraphy
data with corresponding sleep labels.
One of the contributions of this work is the
development of a flexible and reusable data preprocessing pipeline. This pipeline can be
readily adapted for future datasets, which only need to be converted to a standardized
input format, making research in this area easier.
7.2
Challenges in Benchmarking and Reproducibility
A challenge encountered during this thesis was the lack of standardized benchmarks in
the field for comparing different methods. Direct comparisons are difficult because studies
often use different datasets and evaluation metrics. Furthermore, the classification task
itself varies, with some studies providing only sleep/wake metrics.
From a methodological standpoint, some studies report results only on a validation set
drawn from the same cohort as the training data. This practice is problematic because
the model’s hyperparameters and architectural decisions are often tuned on this validation
set, which can lead to overfitting in model selection [42] [43] . The lack of evaluation on
a separate, external test set makes it difficult to assess how well a method generalizes to
unseen data from a different cohort, which may have a different data distribution. There
is a clear need for standardization in evaluation protocols. Fortunately, the situation is
improving as more datasets become publicly available, such as DREAMT and Newcastle,
with more like Wearanize+ [44] planned for release. This trend may soon enable the
creation of robust benchmarks for the field.
7.3
Model Performance and Baseline Comparison
Strong supervised baseline model was developed and trained end­to­end on actigraphy.
The model’s performance on the external Newcastle test dataset was comparable to that
reported in other studies in the field. This result validates that the data preparation and
training procedures were implemented correctly.
The proposed cross­modal contrastive learning method was found to be challenging to
optimize, as its performance was highly sensitive to multiple hyperparameters, such as
the contrastive temperature. Although it achieved similar results to the baseline when
trained on the same amount of labeled data, it offered superior performance in scenarios
where only a portion of the data was labeled. While this may not be critical for sleep stage
classification, where labels can be automatically generated from PSG, it demonstrates
the method’s potential for other downstream tasks where labeling data is more difficult,
such as sleep apnea or other sleep disorder detection. This makes it a valid approach for
such scenarios.
Sleep Analysis from Wrist Accelerometer Using Contrastive Deep Learning
49
==PAGE:58==
7.4
Future Work and Directions
While this thesis conducted a systematic evaluation of a specific cross­modal architecture,
the results open up numerous avenues for future investigation. The architecture itself has
many elements that could be tuned and adjusted. Based on the conducted experiments,
the most promising next steps involve making the initial encoders within the contrastive
learning framework stronger. The following sections outline two key strategies to achieve
this.
7.4.1
Adding initial single modality pre­training
A key limitation of this method is its requirement for concurrent PSG and actigraphy
data. This prevents the use of large datasets that have either only actigraphy data or
only PSG data. To overcome this, an additional step could be added to the contrastive
learning pipeline. The first step in this new pipeline would be to train strong, single­channel
encoders, using self­supervised methods like signal reconstruction. This step would allow
the model to learn fundamental sleep characteristics and representations. Outputs from
these single­channel modality encoders would then be used as input for the contrastive
learning part, which would focus on providing relevant cross­modal context, enabling the
relationships between the signals to be learned.
7.4.2
Preprocessing the raw signal with band­pass filters
A complementary direction focuses on better data preparation. Although it is possible to
extract signals related to heart rate and breathing from wrist actigraphy, it is challenging
without specific preprocessing, since the amplitudes of these signals are relatively small
compared to the amplitude of movement. The current encoder had to spot these tiny,
low­amplitude patterns for heart rate and breathing and compress them along with the
dominant movement signals into a single encoding. This is a challenging task that would
likely require a much larger dataset for the model to learn those patterns effectively.
To solve this, an additional preprocessing step could be implemented. This step would
involve applying specific band­pass filters to the raw actigraphy data to separate it into
distinct frequency bands that are correlated with heart rate, breathing, and movement.
This process would effectively turn the single actigraphy channel into three ’virtual’
channels, with each containing information primarily about one of these physiological
signals.
These preprocessed signals could then be used as input to a multi­channel
contrastive learning pipeline, allowing the model to learn the complex relationships both
among these virtual channels and between them and the PSG channels.
7.5
Broader trends in Sleep Technology
The general trajectory of the field suggests several developments that will influence future
research.
First,
wearable
devices
are
increasingly
incorporating
new
sensors,
such
as
photoplethysmography (PPG) for rich heart rate data and pulse oximetry (SpO2) for
blood oxygen saturation [45]. Future work should aim to integrate these modalities, as
they provide physiological data that is more directly related to sleep processes than
actigraphy alone.
The emergence of experimental consumer wearable EEG devices
also presents an exciting possibility [46].
Second, the limited amount of available data remains a major problem. The practice of
technology companies keeping user data private makes academic research more difficult.
However, this project demonstrated the possibility of combining existing public datasets,
and there are encouraging signs of increased data sharing. Projects like Wearanize+ [44]
50
Sleep Analysis from Wrist Accelerometer Using Contrastive Deep Learning
==PAGE:59==
are planning to release more data for public use, and various initiatives are exploring
crowdsourcing as a means to build large­scale sleep datasets [47].
Finally, the popularization of wearable devices offers not only a quantitative improvement
in data by including more people, but also a qualitative one. It allows for the analysis of
multiple nights for the same person, which helps to reduce the impact of night­to­night
variability. This ultimately leads to more reliable and personalized sleep analysis.
Sleep Analysis from Wrist Accelerometer Using Contrastive Deep Learning
51
==PAGE:60==
52
Sleep Analysis from Wrist Accelerometer Using Contrastive Deep Learning
==PAGE:61==
8
Conclusion
In this thesis, the efficacy of cross­modal contrastive learning was investigated to
improve sleep
stage
classification
from
wrist­worn
accelerometry
by
leveraging
concurrent Polysomnography (PSG) signals.
The project accomplished this through
three key contributions:
• The development of a robust and reusable data processing pipeline for four distinct
datasets.
• The implementation of a deep learning framework featuring a two­branch
(actigraphy and PSG) contrastive encoder and a downstream classifier.
• A series of experiments to benchmark the model against a supervised baseline and
existing literature.
Several findings emerged from the experimental evaluation on external test set
(Newcastle).
When all available labeled data was used for training, the proposed
contrastive model achieved performance comparable to the supervised baseline and
other methods reported in the literature.
For the Wake/Sleep classification task, the
contrastive model reached an accuracy of 73.5% ± 13.2%, while the supervised baseline
achieved 73.1% ± 12.9%. These results are in line with established methods such as
DACNN (80.1%) and Relcon (70.5%±14.9%).
Then models were trained and evaluated in a setting where only a fraction of the dataset
was labeled. For Wake/Sleep accuracy, the contrastive model achieved 68.0%±14.9%
versus the baseline’s 52.7%±17.3%.
For grouped (Wake/NREM/REM) accuracy, the
scores were 52.0%±13.8% for the contrastive model and 43.4%±15.0% for the baseline.
For 5­stage classification, the results were 30.2%±15.6% for the contrastive model and
25.2%±15.3% for the baseline. This highlights the method’s potential for tasks where
expert labels are limited, such as sleep apnea classification. An ablation study designed
to assess the importance of different PSG channels on the final results reported that
the model benefited most from the respiratory channels (ABDOMEN, THORAX), and
it revealed a limited ability to use the heart rate (ECG) signal.
Further experiments
exploring different pairing strategies for the contrastive learning framework did not show
any performance improvements.
A significant challenge encountered was the lack of standardized benchmarks and
evaluation protocols in the field, making direct comparison across studies difficult.
The development of a flexible and reusable data processing pipeline in this work is a
contribution toward mitigating these challenges by enabling easier adaptation for future
datasets.
Future work should focus on strengthening the initial encoders within the contrastive
learning framework. One promising direction is to add a preliminary single­modality pre­
training step, allowing the use of larger, non­concurrent actigraphy and PSG datasets.
A complementary approach involves enhancing data preparation by applying band­pass
filters to the raw actigraphy signal to isolate distinct frequency bands correlated with heart
rate, breathing, and movement.
In conclusion, this thesis investigated cross­modal contrastive learning as a method for
improving sleep analysis from wrist wearable devices. The findings established this as
Sleep Analysis from Wrist Accelerometer Using Contrastive Deep Learning
53
==PAGE:62==
a promising approach and identified the specific conditions where it performs best.
Notably, the method demonstrated a clear performance advantage over a standard
supervised model in scenarios where labeled data was limited. This work provides a
validated methodology and a foundation for future research in leveraging wearable
sensor data for more robust sleep assessment.
54
Sleep Analysis from Wrist Accelerometer Using Contrastive Deep Learning
==PAGE:63==
Bibliography
[1]
Poul Jennum and Jakob Kjellberg. “Health, social and economical consequences
of sleep­disordered breathing: a controlled national study”. In: Thorax 66.7 (2011),
pp. 560–566. DOI: 10.1136/thx.2010.143958. URL: https://doi.org/10.1136/thx.2010.
143958.
[2]
Poul Jennum, Rikke Ibsen, and Jakob Kjellberg. “Social consequences of sleep
disordered breathing on patients and their partners: a controlled national study”. In:
The European respiratory journal 43.1 (2014), pp. 134–144. DOI: 10.1183/09031936.
00169212. URL: https://doi.org/10.1183/09031936.00169212.
[3]
Will Ke Wang et al. “DREAMT: A Public Dataset for Real­time Sleep Stage
Estimation with a Wearable Device”. In: Proceedings of the fifth Conference on
Health, Inference, and Learning. Vol. 248. Proceedings of Machine Learning
Research. PMLR, 2024, pp. 380–396.
[4]
Ary L. Goldberger et al. “PhysioBank, PhysioToolkit, and PhysioNet: Components
of a new research resource for complex physiologic signals”. In: Circulation 101.23
(2000), e215–e220. DOI: 10.1161/01.cir.101.23.e215. URL: https://www.ahajournals.
org/doi/full/10.1161/01.CIR.101.23.e215.
[5]
M. Olsen et al. “A Flexible Deep Learning Architecture for Temporal Sleep
Stage Classification Using Accelerometry and Photoplethysmography”. In: IEEE
Transactions on Biomedical Engineering 70.1 (Jan. 2023), pp. 228–237. DOI:
10.1109/TBME.2022.3187945.
[6]
Risa Nakase­Richardson et al. “Comparison of Diagnostic Sleep Studies in
Hospitalized Neurorehabilitation Patients With Moderate to Severe Traumatic
Brain Injury”. In: Chest 158.4 (2020), pp. 1689–1700. ISSN: 0012­3692. DOI:
10.1016/j.chest.2020.03.083. URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chest.2020.03.083.
[7]
Vincent T. van Hees et al. “A Novel, Open Access Method to Assess Sleep Duration
Using a Wrist­Worn Accelerometer”. In: PLOS ONE 10.11 (2015), e0142533. DOI:
10.1371/journal.pone.0142533. URL: https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0142533.
[8]
Andre S. Nunes et al. “Domain Adversarial Convolutional Neural Network Improves
the Accuracy and Generalizability of Wearable Sleep Assessment Technology”. In:
Sensors 24.24 (2024), p. 7982. DOI: 10.3390/s24247982. URL: https://doi.org/10.
3390/s24247982.
[9]
Maxwell Xu et al. “RelCon: Relative Contrastive Learning for a Motion Foundation
Model for Wearable Data”. In: (Nov. 2024). DOI: 10.48550/arXiv.2411.18822.
[10]
American Academy of Sleep Medicine. The AASM Manual for the Scoring of Sleep
and Associated Events: Rules, Terminology and Technical Specifications. Version
3. [Online; accessed 22­July­2025]. American Academy of Sleep Medicine. Darien,
IL, Feb. 2023. URL: https://aasm.org/clinical-resources/scoring-manual/.
[11]
Yun Ji Lee et al. “Interrater reliability of sleep stage scoring: a meta­analysis”. In:
Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine 18.1 (2022), pp. 107–117. DOI: 10.5664/jcsm.
9538. URL: https://doi.org/10.5664/jcsm.9538.
[12]
Wikipedia
contributors.
Cohen’s
kappa
—
Wikipedia,
The
Free
Encyclopedia.
[Online;
accessed
22­July­2025].
2025.
URL:
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cohen%27s_kappa.
[13]
Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville. Deep Learning. http://www.
deeplearningbook.org. MIT Press, 2016.
Sleep Analysis from Wrist Accelerometer Using Contrastive Deep Learning
55
==PAGE:64==
[14]
Rishi Bommasani et al. “On the Opportunities and Risks of Foundation Models”. In:
ArXiv (2021). URL: https://crfm.stanford.edu/assets/report.pdf.
[15]
Alex Shenfield and Martin Howarth. “A Novel Deep Learning Model for the Detection
and Identification of Rolling Element­Bearing Faults”. In: Sensors 20 (Sept. 2020).
DOI: 10.3390/s20185112.
[16]
Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. “Long short­term memory”. In: Neural
computation 9.8 (1997), pp. 1735–1780.
[17]
Ian Jenkins et al. “Accident Scenario Generation with Recurrent Neural Networks”.
In: Nov. 2018, pp. 3340–3345. DOI: 10.1109/ITSC.2018.8569661.
[18]
Ashish Vaswani et al. “Attention is All you Need”. In: Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems. Ed. by I. Guyon et al. Vol. 30. Curran Associates,
Inc., 2017. URL: https : / / proceedings . neurips . cc / paper _ files / paper / 2017 / file /
3f5ee243547dee91fbd053c1c4a845aa-Paper.pdf.
[19]
R. Hadsell, S. Chopra, and Y. LeCun. “Dimensionality Reduction by Learning an
Invariant Mapping”. In: 2006 IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR’06). Vol. 2. 2006, pp. 1735–1742. DOI:
10.1109/CVPR.2006.100.
[20]
Ting Chen et al. “A Simple Framework for Contrastive Learning of Visual
Representations”. In: CoRR abs/2002.05709 (2020). arXiv: 2002 . 05709. URL:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2002.05709.
[21]
Hang Yuan et al. “Self­supervised learning of accelerometer data provides new
insights for sleep and its association with mortality”. In: npj Digital Medicine 7 (2024),
p. 86. DOI: 10.1038/s41746-024-01072-5. URL: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41746-024-
01072-5.
[22]
Rahul Thapa et al. SleepFM: Multi­modal Representation Learning for Sleep Across
Brain Activity, ECG and Respiratory Signals. 2024. arXiv: 2405.17766 [cs.LG]. URL:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.17766.
[23]
Aäron van den Oord, Yazhe Li, and Oriol Vinyals. “Representation Learning
with Contrastive Predictive Coding”. In: CoRR abs/1807.03748 (2018). arXiv:
1807.03748. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1807.03748.
[24]
Roger J Cole et al. “Automatic sleep/wake identification from wrist activity”. In: Sleep
15.5 (1992), pp. 461–469. DOI: 10.1093/sleep/15.5.461.
[25]
A Sadeh. “The role and validity of actigraphy in sleep medicine: an update”. In: Sleep
Medicine Reviews 15.4 (2011), pp. 259–267. DOI: 10.1016/j.smrv.2010.10.001.
[26]
Akara Supratak et al. “DeepSleepNet: A Model for Automatic Sleep Stage Scoring
Based on Raw Single­Channel EEG”. In: IEEE Transactions on Neural Systems
and Rehabilitation Engineering 25.11 (2017), pp. 1998–2008. DOI: 10.1109/TNSRE.
2017.2721116.
[27]
H
Korkalainen
et
al.
“Deep
learning
enables
sleep
staging
from
photoplethysmogram for patients with suspected sleep apnea”. In: Sleep 43.11
(2020), zsaa098. DOI: 10.1093/sleep/zsaa098.
[28]
Xiaoli Chen et al. “Racial/Ethnic Differences in Sleep Disturbances: The Multi­Ethnic
Study of Atherosclerosis (MESA)”. In: Sleep 38.6 (June 2015), pp. 877–888. ISSN:
0161­8105. DOI: 10.5665/sleep.4732. eprint: https://academic.oup.com/sleep/article-
pdf/38/6/877/26671856/aasm.38.6.877.pdf. URL: https://doi.org/10.5665/sleep.
4732.
[29]
Vincent
van
Hees,
Sarah
Charman,
and
Kirstie
Anderson.
Newcastle
polysomnography and accelerometer data. Version 1.0. [Data set]. 2018. DOI:
10.5281/zenodo.1160410. URL: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.1160410.
56
Sleep Analysis from Wrist Accelerometer Using Contrastive Deep Learning
==PAGE:65==
[30]
Leon M. Straker et al. “Cohort Profile: The Western Australian Pregnancy
Cohort
(Raine)
Study—Generation
2”.
In:
International
Journal
of
Epidemiology 46.5 (2017), 1384–1385j. DOI: 10 . 1093 / ije / dyw329. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1093/ije/dyw329.
[31]
Tatiana Plekhanova et al. “Validation of an automated sleep detection algorithm
using data from multiple accelerometer brands”. In: Journal of Sleep Research 32.3
(2022), e13760. DOI: 10.1111/jsr.13760. URL: https://doi.org/10.1111/jsr.13760.
[32]
Enda M. Byrne et al. “Genetic correlation analysis suggests association between
increased self­reported sleep duration in adults and schizophrenia and type 2
diabetes”. In: Sleep 39.9 (2016), pp. 1853–1857. DOI: 10.5665/sleep.6103. URL:
https://doi.org/10.5665/sleep.6103.
[33]
J. Leube, J. Zschocke, M. Kluge, et al. “Reconstruction of the respiratory
signal
through
ECG
and
wrist
accelerometer
data”.
In:
Scientific
Reports 10 (2020), p. 14530. DOI: 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 020 - 71539 - 0. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-71539-0.
[34]
J. Zschocke et al. “Reconstruction of Pulse Wave and Respiration From Wrist
Accelerometer During Sleep”. In: IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering
69.2 (Feb. 2022), pp. 830–839. DOI: 10.1109/TBME.2021.3107978.
[35]
Johannes Zschocke et al. “Detection and analysis of pulse waves during sleep
via wrist­worn actigraphy”. In: PLoS ONE 14.12 (2019), e0226843. DOI: 10.1371/
journal.pone.0226843. URL: https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0226843.
[36]
Max Moebus et al. Nightbeat: Heart Rate Estimation From a Wrist­Worn
Accelerometer During Sleep. 2024. arXiv: 2411 . 00731 [q-bio.QM]. URL:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.00731.
[37]
Niels Rasmus Lorenzen. PhD Student Profile, Department of Health Technology.
https://orbit.dtu.dk/en/persons/niels-rasmus-lorenzen. Accessed: 2024­07­26. 2024.
[38]
Aaron van den Oord, Yazhe Li, and Oriol Vinyals. Representation Learning with
Contrastive Predictive Coding. 2019. arXiv: 1807.03748 [cs.LG]. URL: https://arxiv.
org/abs/1807.03748.
[39]
Mathias Perslev et al. “U­Sleep: resilient high­frequency sleep staging”. In: npj
Digital Medicine 4.1 (Apr. 2021), p. 72. DOI: 10.1038/s41746-021-00440-5. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41746-021-00440-5.
[40]
Laurens van der Maaten and Geoffrey Hinton. “Visualizing Data using t­SNE”. In:
Journal of Machine Learning Research 9.86 (2008), pp. 2579–2605. URL: http :
//jmlr.org/papers/v9/vandermaaten08a.html.
[41]
Leland McInnes, John Healy, and James Melville. UMAP: Uniform Manifold
Approximation and Projection for Dimension Reduction. 2020. arXiv: 1802.03426
[stat.ML]. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1802.03426.
[42]
Andrew Y. Ng. “Preventing ”Overfitting” of Cross­Validation Data”. In: Proceedings
of the Fourteenth International Conference on Machine Learning. ICML ’97. San
Francisco, CA, USA: Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., 1997, pp. 245–253. ISBN:
1558604863.
[43]
Gavin C. Cawley and Nicola L.C. Talbot. “On Over­fitting in Model Selection and
Subsequent Selection Bias in Performance Evaluation”. In: J. Mach. Learn. Res. 11
(Aug. 2010), pp. 2079–2107. ISSN: 1532­4435.
[44]
Niloy Sikder et al. Wearanize+: A Multimodal Dataset for Evaluating Wearable
Technologies in Sleep Research. Jan. 2025. DOI: 10.31219/osf.io/dth8y_v1. URL:
osf.io/dth8y_v1.
Sleep Analysis from Wrist Accelerometer Using Contrastive Deep Learning
57
==PAGE:66==
[45]
Wikipedia. Samsung Galaxy Watch 4 — Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia. [Online;
accessed 31­July­2025]. 2025. URL: https : / / en . wikipedia . org / wiki / Samsung _
Galaxy_Watch_4.
[46]
BrainBit Inc. BrainBit. https://brainbit.com/. Accessed: 2025­07­28. 2025.
[47]
CrowdWise Inc. CrowdWise. https://crowdwise.bio/. 2025.
58
Sleep Analysis from Wrist Accelerometer Using Contrastive Deep Learning
==PAGE:67==
A
Best hyperparameters configurations
Hyperparameter
Supervised baseline (all data)
Supervised baseline (limited data)
Size of LSTM layers
128
64
Number of LSTM layers
2
2
Learning rate
0.001
0.00001
Dropout rate
0.5
0.5
Weight decay
0.0001
0.00002
Table A.1: Best hyperparameter configuration for the Supervised baseline models trained
on all data and limited data.
Hyperparameter
All PSG channels
Breathing channels
Heart rate (ECG)
Actigraphy temporal layer size
64
256
128
Actigraphy CNN layer size
64
128
64
PSG CNN layer size
64
128
64
PSG temporal layer size
64
256
128
Dropout rate
0.6
0.5
0.5
Contrastive temperature
0.3
0.3
0.3
Learning rate
0.00002
0.0003
0.0004
Final embedding dim
128
128
128
Weight Decay
0.05
0.001
0.001
Table A.2: Best hyperparameter configuration for the Contrastive Encoders trained on All
PSG channels, Breathing channels (THORAX ABDOMEN), and Heart rate (ECG).
Hyperparameter
Full labeled data
Limited labels
Dropout rate
0.6
0.5
Learning rate
0.0001
0.00001
Size of LSTM hidden layers
64
32
Number of LSTM layers
1
1
Weight decay
0.01
0.01
Table A.3: Best hyperparameter configuration for fine­tuned downstream task models on
limited labels and full labeled data.
Sleep Analysis from Wrist Accelerometer Using Contrastive Deep Learning
59
==PAGE:68==
B
Confusion matrices of models tested
on internal test set
Figure B.1: Confusion matrix for Supervised baseline model trained on all labels and
tested on Sleep/NREM/REM classification task on internal test set.
60
Sleep Analysis from Wrist Accelerometer Using Contrastive Deep Learning
==PAGE:69==
Figure B.2: Confusion matrix for Supervised baseline model trained on all labels and
tested on 5­stage classification task on internal test set.
Figure B.3: Confusion matrix for Supervised baseline model trained on limited labels and
tested on Sleep/NREM/REM classification task on internal test set.
Sleep Analysis from Wrist Accelerometer Using Contrastive Deep Learning
61
==PAGE:70==
Figure B.4: Confusion matrix for Supervised baseline model trained on limited labels and
tested on 5­stage classification task on internal test set.
Figure B.5: Confusion matrix for Contrastive model trained on all labels and tested on
Sleep/NREM/REM classification task on internal test set.
62
Sleep Analysis from Wrist Accelerometer Using Contrastive Deep Learning
==PAGE:71==
Figure B.6: Confusion matrix for Contrastive model trained on all labels and tested on
5­stage classification task on internal test set.
Figure B.7: Confusion matrix for Contrastive model trained on limited labels and tested
on Sleep/NREM/REM classification task on internal test set.
Sleep Analysis from Wrist Accelerometer Using Contrastive Deep Learning
63
==PAGE:72==
Figure B.8: Confusion matrix for Contrastive model trained on limited labels and tested
on 5­stage classification task on internal test set.
64
Sleep Analysis from Wrist Accelerometer Using Contrastive Deep Learning
==PAGE:73==
C
Confusion matrices of models tested
on external test set (Newcastle)
Figure C.1: Confusion matrix for Supervised baseline model trained on all labels and
tested on Sleep/NREM/REM classification task on external test set (Newcastle).
Sleep Analysis from Wrist Accelerometer Using Contrastive Deep Learning
65
==PAGE:74==
Figure C.2: Confusion matrix for Supervised baseline model trained on all labels and
tested on 5­stage classification task on external test set (Newcastle).
Figure C.3: Confusion matrix for Supervised baseline model trained on limited labels and
tested on Sleep/NREM/REM classification task on external test set (Newcastle).
66
Sleep Analysis from Wrist Accelerometer Using Contrastive Deep Learning
==PAGE:75==
Figure C.4: Confusion matrix for Supervised baseline model trained on limited labels and
tested on 5­stage classification task on external test set (Newcastle).
Figure C.5: Confusion matrix for Contrastive model trained on all labels and tested on
Sleep/NREM/REM classification task on external test set (Newcastle).
Sleep Analysis from Wrist Accelerometer Using Contrastive Deep Learning
67
==PAGE:76==
Figure C.6: Confusion matrix for Contrastive model trained on all labels and tested on
5­stage classification task on external test set (Newcastle).
Figure C.7: Confusion matrix for Contrastive model trained on limited labels and tested
on Sleep/NREM/REM classification task on external test set (Newcastle).
68
Sleep Analysis from Wrist Accelerometer Using Contrastive Deep Learning
==PAGE:77==
Figure C.8: Confusion matrix for Contrastive model trained on limited labels and tested
on 5­stage classification task on external test set (Newcastle).
Sleep Analysis from Wrist Accelerometer Using Contrastive Deep Learning
69
==PAGE:78==
Technical
University of
Denmark
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
