==PAGE:1==
Game-Theoretic
and
Logical
Modeling
of
Multi-agent Coordination in Search and Res-
cue Scenarios
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Game-Theoretic and Logical Modeling of Multi-agent Coordination in Search and
Rescue Scenarios
Master Thesis
July, 2025
By
Mario Rojo Vicente
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Department of Applied Mathematics
and Computer Science, Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfillment for the
degree Master of Autonomous Systems, MSc. Under the supervision of Nina Gierasim-
czuk.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of set theory.
Mario Rojo Vicente - s230243
Signature
Date
ii
Game-Theoretic and Logical Modeling of Multi-agent Coordination in Search and Rescue Scenarios
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This thesis will focus on a particular subset of tasks from the many involved in search
and rescue scenarios, the location and retrieval of targets. More precisely this thesis
will aim to make an intelligent system capable of finding the location of both moving and
stationary targets in search and rescue scenarios through a fleet of drones. The task
includes locating the target, identifying a traversable path from its position to the safe
house and accompanying the target to the safe place adapting the root taken to there if
necessary. For complexity reasons both time and space will be considered discrete in
this implementation. This thesis will only consider situations were the agents do not have
an initial idea of the layout for the search area, and the environment will be considered
dynamic as it often happens in search and rescue missions, such as looking for lost hikers.
Alternating-Time Epistemic Logic will be utilized to model the context, actions, and com-
munication between agents. In order to achieve optimal solutions, the scenarios will be
modeled as multi agent cooperative games in which the agents strive for the cooperative
equilibrium.
The drones will be equipped with signals transmitters and receivers for communicating,
but these will be of limited range, meaning that they will only be able to communicate with
the other drones that are up to a certain distance from them.
This communication between the agents opens the door to the possibility of collective
learning. In this thesis an approach based on social networks will be implemented, as
suggested in the paper Collective Learning in Games through Social Networks[KG15].
Game-Theoretic and Logical Modeling of Multi-agent Coordination in Search and Rescue Scenarios
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Mario Rojo Vicente, MSc Autonomous Systems, DTU
To the creator of this thesis template.
Dr. Nina Gierasimczuk, Supervisor of this thesis
I would like to express my deepest gratitude to my supervisor, Dr. Nina Gierasimczuk, for
her invaluable guidance, support, and patience throughout the development of this thesis.
Her mentorship has been a constant source of inspiration, not only during this project but
throughout my entire MSc program, and she has been the one to open the door to the
fascinating world of logic for me.
And finally to my family, for their unconditional support and understanding, particularly
during long nights and tight deadlines. This work would not have been possible without
their love and encouragement.
iv
Game-Theoretic and Logical Modeling of Multi-agent Coordination in Search and Rescue Scenarios
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
State Of The Art Search and Rescue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
State Of The Art Logic for Multi-agent Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
The Model and Its Propositional Representation
4
2.1
Simplified World Representation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Atomic Propositions (Π) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
The State Space and It´s Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3
Background on Logic, Pathfinding and Epistemic Planning
8
3.1
Propositional Logic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.2
Linear Temporal Logic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.3
Alternating Time Temporal Logic
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3.4
Epistemic Logic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.5
Alternating-time Temporal Epistemic Logic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.6
Dynamic Epistemic Logic
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.7
Multi-Agent Pathfinding in Cooperative Environments
. . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.8
Epistemic Planning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.9
The Agents and Their Action Sets
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
3.10 Agent Types and Roles
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3.11 Actions Schema
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4
The SAR Process
25
4.1
Exploration protocol
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
4.2
Rescue Protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4.3
Guiding Protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
4.4
Scouting Protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
4.5
Finding Scape Routes Protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
4.6
Request Extraction Protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
4.7
Time Window and Communication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
4.8
System Properties as ATEL+EAL formulas
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
5
Communication and Consensus
35
5.1
Communication via the Alternating Bit Protocol (ABP)
. . . . . . . . . . . . 35
5.2
Achieving Consensus: The UAV Consensus Protocol (UCP) and Social
Network Dynamics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
5.3
Social Network Communication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
5.4
Weighted PSCF as Consensus Function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
6
The System After the Inclusion of EAL
43
6.1
The System´s Transition Function
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
6.2
The system´s Epistemic Accessibility Relations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
Game-Theoretic and Logical Modeling of Multi-agent Coordination in Search and Rescue Scenarios
v
==PAGE:8==
7
Conclusion
51
7.1
Future Lines of Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
Bibliography
53
A Guiding Protocol Flowchart
55
vi
Game-Theoretic and Logical Modeling of Multi-agent Coordination in Search and Rescue Scenarios
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
In recent years, there has been a significant increase in the use of drones, and more
specifically, aerial vehicles (AVs), in a variety of applications such as military operations
and search and rescue (SAR) missions. These vehicles serve as valuable tools to protect
human lives and assist operational teams in handling challenging situations more rapidly
and safely [Sal25] [Ent21].
In this thesis, I present a game-theoretic model, based on Alternating-time Temporal Epis-
temic Logic (ATEL) [Wie03], of a search and rescue mission carried out by a fleet of au-
tonomous aerial vehicles (UAVs). The use of ATEL allows us to capture not only the tem-
poral evolution of the system but also the strategic abilities and knowledge of agents over
time, making it particularly suitable for modeling multi-agent decision-making under un-
certainty. In this thesis I will include some concepts and operators from Epistemic Action
Logic, a branch of Dynamic epistemic logic, to the ATEL grammar, in order to model the
effect of complex epistemic actions in the Alternating-time Epistemic Transition System
proposed. The resulting grammar, ATEL+EAL, is one of the main variations included in
this thesis to the methodologies implemented in the current relevant literature. The closest
implementation to the idea presented in this thesis comes from the paper Alternating-time
temporal dynamic epistemic logic by Tiago de Lima, but this paper focuses on implement-
ing something more closely related to a different branch of Dynamic epistemic logic called
coalition announcement logic instead of EAL as we do in this thesis.
To ensure the feasibility of the model within the scope of this thesis, several simplifications
have been made. These include discrete representation of time and space, as well as the
simulation, rather than full implementation, of key protocols involved in agent interaction.
For example, we simulate the effects of communication mechanisms using the Alternating
Bit Protocol and error detection/correction methods such as the Extended Hamming Code.
The modeling process follows a structured sequence:
• Definition of the propositional variables that describe the relevant facts of the envi-
ronment (section 2);
• Establishing the base knowledge of ATEL and it´s predecessor logics and their
significance to the system (section 3.1 to 3.6) and the background knowledge on
pathfinding and epistemic planning (section 3.7 and 3.8);
• Identification and formalization of agents involved in the mission, along with their
corresponding action sets (sections 3.9 to 3.11);
• Establishing the SAR process and its protocols, that the different agents in the drone
fleet will carry and the propertiesof the system that can be modeled through the use
of ATEL+EAL (section 4);
• Establishing the communication protocols and protocols for archiving consensus in
the fleet of drones as well as explaining how social network dynamics can be utilized
as part of the consensus protocol (section 5);
• Establishment of the transition function, governing how the system evolves based
on agent actions (section 6.1);
Game-Theoretic and Logical Modeling of Multi-agent Coordination in Search and Rescue Scenarios
1
==PAGE:10==
• Incorporation of epistemic relations, capturing the knowledge and uncertainty of
each agent, which is essential for reasoning about partial observability and coor-
dination under imperfect information (section 6.2).
In the section on communication and consensus making, we introduce and analyze a
particular protocol that enables coordination among agents. The Byzantine fault-tolerant
consensus protocol proposed in the paper A consensus protocol for unmanned aerial ve-
hicle networks in the presence of Byzantine faults [Che+22]. However, instead of the pro-
posed majority vote mechanisms, we will implement a novel consensus function inspired
by social network dynamics [KG15] [Phi13], which better reflects complex inter-agent in-
fluences and local agreement patterns in distributed systems.
In the final section of this thesis I will present my conclusions on the model and it´s rel-
evance for the future application of fully autonmous UAVs in SAR missions as well ad
proposing some possible future lines of work to extend this project.
1.1
State Of The Art Search and Rescue
In the last years, Search and Rescue (SAR) operations are undergoing significant trans-
formation through the integration of advanced technologies. Recent developments in-
clude the adoption of autonomous underwater vehicles (AUVs), drones, and AI-driven
systems together with other technologies such as satellite tracking to enhance the ef-
ficiency and accuracy of rescue missions at sea. These innovations are enabling faster
identification of individuals in distress and improving communication between rescue units,
dramatically reducing response times and increasing survival rates [25].
Parallel to maritime innovations, robotics research is contributing to major breakthroughs
in disaster response scenarios on land. In particular, soft robotics is proving to be a game-
changer in navigating dangerous and unstable environments such as collapsed buildings
or confined underground spaces. These biologically inspired, flexible robots can deform
and squeeze into areas inaccessible to humans or traditional rigid machines. Soft robotics
not only reduces the risk to human rescuers but also expands the reach and adaptability
of SAR efforts, making them more effective in complex post-disaster settings [Seb25].
In the field of aerial search and rescue, coordinated drone swarms are emerging as a vital
asset. Leveraging advanced path-planning algorithms, these swarms can autonomously
divide and conquer expansive or rugged terrains. This technology allows for rapid aerial
surveying of disaster zones while optimizing energy use and minimizing redundant cover-
age. A recent May 2025 paper by Pedro Antonio Alarcon Granadeno and Jane Cleland-
Huang [GC25] presents a terrain-aware approach that enables UAVs to interpret topo-
graphical data in real time, allowing for highly efficient deployment during time-critical
missions such as locating lost hikers or victims in earthquake-affected areas.
In this thesis, I propose a novel framework for modeling search and rescue (SAR) mis-
sions that integrates epistemic knowledge representation into traditional path-planning
methodologies. By incorporating epistemic planning, the framework enables agents to
reason not only about actions and outcomes but also about their own knowledge and
that of other agents. This enhancement facilitates more sophisticated coordination and
interaction among agents, ultimately advancing the long-term goal of deploying fully au-
tonomous drone fleets capable of managing critical and sensitive tasks within SAR oper-
ations.
2
Game-Theoretic and Logical Modeling of Multi-agent Coordination in Search and Rescue Scenarios
==PAGE:11==
1.2
State Of The Art Logic for Multi-agent Systems
The development of reliable, verifiable intelligent agents, particularly in multi-agent sys-
tems (MAS), requires formal frameworks capable of representing and reasoning about the
beliefs, intentions, and knowledge of different agents. Epistemic logic, often combined
with temporal or dynamic extensions (e.g., DEL, ATEL), has emerged as a cornerstone
in modeling such epistemic states and their evolution through communication and action.
In the context of multi-agent systems, logic-based frameworks serve multiple roles: they
provide semantic foundations for reasoning, enable the design of protocols and strategies,
and crucially, offer formal guarantees of correctness. As underlined in Epistemic planning:
Perspectives on the special issue by Belle et al. [Bel+23], epistemic planning builds upon
these logics to allow agents not only to plan actions but to plan with respect to what they
or others know or believe which is a necessity in cooperative, adversarial, or partially
observable environments.
Modern approaches implmenting Alternating-time Temporal Epistemic Logic (ATEL) or
Dynamic Epistemic Logic (DEL) have shown particular promise. These logics enable
reasoning about knowledge over time and under strategic interaction, making them highly
suitable for settings such as human-robot interaction, cooperative robotics, and epistemic
game playing. For instance, DEL allows the modeling of communicative actions such
as public announcements or private messages that alter not the world, but the agents’
knowledge of it. Extensions to first-order and probabilistic settings have further increased
their expressivity, enabling richer modeling of real-world scenarios [Bel+23].
Moreover, logic-based representations support verification, a critical feature in safety-
critical domains. Through model checking and logical inference, one can rigorously en-
sure that a given agent behavior or multi-agent protocol adheres to specified knowledge
or safety constraints. Even in situations when undecidability arises within epistemic plan-
ning, the identification of decidable fragments (e.g., via restricted modal depth) allows the
practical application of verification tools.
In sum, the logic of knowledge and belief in MAS is not only a theoretical pursuit but a
foundational enabler of explainability, coordination, and dependability in modern AI sys-
tems. The tight integration between planning and logic advocated in epistemic planning
contributes directly to the advancement of socially intelligent agents, while maintaining
the formal rigor required for trustworthy AI.
The integration of the ATEL+EAL logic proposed in this paper, that combines Alternating-
time Temporal Epistemic Logic (ATEL) with Epistemic Action Logic (EAL), offers signifi-
cant improvements to current protocols in search and rescue (SAR) operations. By uniting
strategic reasoning with dynamic epistemic updates, this logic enables agents not only to
plan actions based on their capabilities and temporal constraints, but also to reason about
their own knowledge and how it evolves through interaction and observation. This is par-
ticularly valuable in SAR contexts, where agents must frequently act under uncertainty
and make decisions based on incomplete or changing information. The ATEL compo-
nent allows for the modeling of coalitional strategies and temporal dynamics, while EAL
introduces the ability to formalize how more complex epistemic actions (such as sensing,
communication, or exploration) affect agents’ epistemic states. As a result, SAR agents
can coordinate more effectively, avoid redundant behaviors, and adapt their strategies in
real time as new information becomes available. Ultimately, this framework paves the
way toward deploying fully autonomous, knowledge-aware agent teams capable of exe-
cuting complex and time-sensitive rescue missions with a higher degree of reliability and
efficiency.
Game-Theoretic and Logical Modeling of Multi-agent Coordination in Search and Rescue Scenarios
3
==PAGE:12==
2
The Model and Its Propositional
Representation
Before introducing the atomic propositions used to describe our model, I will begin by
defining the formal structure on which our representation is based: an Alternating-time
Epistemic Transition System (AETS). This structure provides the logical foundation for
modeling knowledge, actions, and strategic capabilities of agents over time in a dynamic,
multi-agent environment. More information about ATL, ATL* and ATEL is included in sec-
tion 3
An Alternating-time Epistemic Transition System is formally defined as the following tuple
[vW03]:
⟨Π, ΣD, ΣT , Q, {∼a}a∈ΣD, π, δ⟩
An AETS is therefore made up of the following elements:
• A finite set of atomic propositions, denoted Π, which represent the basic facts of the
environment. These will be introduced in detail later in this section.
• A finite set of agents, denoted ΣD = {1, . . . , n}, representing all drone-type entities
in the system. These are discussed in more detail in Section 3.9.
• A finite set of agents, denoted ΣT = {a, . . . , z}, representing all target-type entities
in the system. These are discussed in more detail in Section 3.9.
• A finite, non-empty set of states, denoted Q, which represents all possible configu-
rations of the system at any given point in time.
• An epistemic accessibility relation per agent, ∼a ⊆Q × Q, for a ∈ΣD, that defines
which states are indistinguishable from each other with respect to the knowledge
available to each agent.
• A valuation function, denoted π : Q →P(Π), which maps each state in Q to the
subset of atomic propositions that are true in that state.
• A transition function, denoted δ, which describes how the system evolves in re-
sponse to the joint actions of agents. This function is detailed in section 6.1.
2.1
Simplified World Representation
In order to construct a feasible and analyzable model, I will employ a simplified represen-
tation of the real world. The environment is modeled as a 2D grid of variable size, where
each cell is assigned a symbol that determines its role in the simulation.
• The digit 0 represents empty space, which is traversable by agents on foot.
• The digit 1 represents walls or insurmountable obstacles that all agents regardless
of type cannot pass through.
• The digits 2 through 9 represent members of the set of drones involved in the mis-
sion.
4
Game-Theoretic and Logical Modeling of Multi-agent Coordination in Search and Rescue Scenarios
==PAGE:13==


1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
1
0
a
1
1
2
1
1
0
0
1
1
0
1
1
1
0
1
1
0
0
1
3
0
1
1
b
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1




1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
c
0
0
1
4
1
1
0
1
1
1
0
1
1
0
1
5
1
0
1
1
0
1
0
1
0
1
1
d
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1


Figure 2.1: Here we can see two examples of the simplifies world representations for this
problem
• The lowercase letters a through z represent individuals in need of rescue, also re-
ferred to as targets.
As stated in the Introduction, section 1, both space and time are considered discrete in our
model. Every action takes exactly one time step to complete, unless otherwise specified
(See section 4).
This grid-based spatial abstraction allows us to reason formally and computationally about
spatial dynamics, agent positioning, movement, and interaction within a defined environ-
ment.
2.2
Atomic Propositions (Π)
I will now present the set of atomic propositions (Π) that define the significant facts within
our world model. These propositions capture spatial configurations, agent characteristics,
knowledge states, and action-related properties:
• safeAt(x, y): Indicates that the cell at position (x, y) is safe to traverse.
• wallAt(x, y): Indicates that there is a wall or insurmountable obstacle in the cell in
position (x, y).
• AgentaAt(x, y): Indicates that agent a, where a ∈(ΣD ∪ΣT ), is located in position
(x, y).
• IsFlyingHigh(a): Indicates that the agent a is currently flying at a high altitude,
typically for exploration purposes, allowing broader sensor coverage. Where, a ∈
ΣD.
• IsFlyingLow(a): Indicates that the agent θ is flying at low altitude, usually to interact
with targets, such as guiding them or assessing their condition. Again, a ∈ΣD.
• IsInCommsRange(ai, ax): Indicates that the agents ai and ax are within the commu-
nication range and have an unobstructed line of sight to each other, meaning that
they can communicate. Here both, ai, ax ∈ΣD where ai ̸= ax.
• isExploring(a): Indicates that agent a such that a ∈ΣD is currently executing the
exploration protocol (see section 4.1).
• isGuiding(ad, at): Indicates that agent ad such that ad ∈ΣD is currently executing
the guiding protocol (see section 4.3) for agent at such that at ∈ΣT .
• isScouting(ad, at): Indicates that agent ad such that ad ∈ΣD is currently executing
the scouting protocol (see section 4.4) for agent at such that at ∈ΣT .
Game-Theoretic and Logical Modeling of Multi-agent Coordination in Search and Rescue Scenarios
5
==PAGE:14==
• isFindingRoutes(a1, a2): Indicates that agent a1 such that a1 ∈ΣD is currently
executing the finding scape routes protocol (see section 4.5) for agent a2 such that
a2 ∈ΣD.
• hasBeenExtracted(t): Indicated that the extraction protocol for agent t such that
t ∈ΣT has successfully finished (see section 4.6).
• isBeingExtarcted(t): Indicated that the extraction protocol for agent t such that
t ∈ΣT has been invoked but not yet finished (see section 4.6).
• rescueTimeOut(t): Indicated that the timeout for rescue as included in the guiding
protocol for agent t such that t ∈ΣT has happened (see section 4.3).
• isBeingGuided(t): Indicates that agent t such that t ∈ΣT is currently taking part in
a guiding protocol (see section 4.3).
• isBeingScouted(t): Indicates that agent t such that t ∈ΣT is currently taking part
in a scouting protocol (see section 4.4).
• safeHouseAt(x, y): Indicates that the safehouse in in the position (x, y). There is
only one safehouse per SAR mission and it is the position where the rescue team
has established their central camp. (see section 4.3 for more information on the
safehouse)
These propositions allow the model to encode key properties about the environment, the
state of each agent, and inter-agent knowledge, which are fundamental for applying ATEL-
based reasoning.
2.3
The State Space and It´s Limitations
The state space in this system corresponds to all possible evaluations of the world model.
Mathematically, this space can be estimated based on the dimensions of the map and
the number and types of agents. Given a grid of area N(length x width), and a toal of NA
agents, with TA targets and DA drones such that NA = TA+DA, we obtain a total number
of states of:
23·N+3·DA+2·!DA+5·TA+N·NA+2·(DA·TA)
This accounts for:
• The evaluation of each of the N cells with respect to walls ,safety status and safe-
house position.
• The possible positions of each agent.
• Pairwise synchronization relations among drones (consensus).
• Altitude information (whether a drone is flying high or low).
• State of the every target (e.g., is it being guided, extracted, scouted, etc.)
• State of every drone (e.g is it guiding, scouting, exploring, ect.) and the possible
combinations for this actions.
For the porpoise of this paper, this theoretical state space is significantly reduced due to
several constraints included in the simulation:
• Only one drone may occupy a specific position at a time.
6
Game-Theoretic and Logical Modeling of Multi-agent Coordination in Search and Rescue Scenarios
==PAGE:15==
• Drones execute their actions in the numerical order of their IDs, before any targets
act.
• Targets act in alphabetical order of their IDs.
• Any number of targets may share the same cell.
• Neither drones nor targets can occupy or move through cells designated as walls.
• All maps include an outer border composed entirely of walls, restricting movement
to internal cells.
Moreover, since I have full knowledge of the initial configuration (even if individual agents
do not possess this information) I can prune the theoretical state space to include only
those states that are reachable from the initial state, which greatly improves tractability in
most situations.
To explore the reachable portion of the state space, I recommend implementing a Breadth-
First Search (BFS) algorithm. This BFS implementation would run without an explicit
termination condition, it would only halt once the frontier is empty, meaning the full reach-
able state space has been discovered and stored in the visited array. Since the goal
is to exhaustively explore all states, there would be no benefit to employing an informed
search method. Likewise, i suggest implementing BFS over DFS for its simplicity in mem-
ory handling, and because both strategies would ultimately cover the same state space
under these conditions.
Game-Theoretic and Logical Modeling of Multi-agent Coordination in Search and Rescue Scenarios
7
==PAGE:16==
3
Background on Logic, Pathfinding and
Epistemic Planning
Now that we have established the objective of this thesis, from this section onward, I will be
delving into the different areas required to understands what an AETL system, as the one
proposed in section 2, is and how it models the different components of our SAR mission
from the agents involved to the evolution of the system through time. To formally model
and reason about the capabilities and knowledge of agents in multi-agent systems, I will
be relying on a family of logical systems that build upon each other in expressive power.
This section introduces each of these systems in sequence, beginning with propositional
logic, and culminates presenting the framework of Alternating-time Temporal Epistemic
Logic (ATEL). A brief overview of Dynamic Epistemic Logic (DEL) is also included, as it
influences the design of epistemic and ontic action schema presented in section 3.9.
M = ⟨Π, ΣD, ΣT , Q, {∼a}∀a∈ΣD, π, δ⟩
This model M is the same as the one presented in section 2 and in this section I will be
referring to them interchangeably.
3.1
Propositional Logic
Propositional logic is the foundation upon which more complex logics are constructed
[HR04]. It deals with atomic propositions (q, r, s, t, . . .), which are declarative atomic sen-
tences that can be evaluated as either true or false, and combines them into propositional
formulas using the following logical connectives ( in the system proposed in section 2 of
this thesis, a proposition q holds in a particular state s if and only if q ∈π(s), this can also
be expressed as s |= q ) :
• Negation: ¬ψ - evaluates to true in state s if and only if s ̸|= ψ
• Conjunction: ψ1 ∧ψ2 - evaluates to true in state s if s |= ψ1 or s |= ψ2 or s |= ψ1, ψ2
• Disjunction: ψ1 ∨ψ2 - evaluates to true in state s if and only if s |= ψ1, ψ2
• Implication: ψ1 →ψ2 - evaluates to true in state s if s |= ψ1, ψ2 or s ̸|= ψ1
This leaves us with the following grammar:
ψ ::= p | ¬ψ | ψ ∧ψ | ψ ∨ψ | ψ →ψ
p ::= any of {q, r, s, t, . . .}
Through the use of formulas of propositional logic, we can express ideas of the state in a
particular pointed version of our model (M, w), such as, drone agent a is flying at a high
altitude but b is not (a, b ∈ΣD). Which would be represented as:
M, w |= IsFlyingHigh(a) ∧¬IsFlyingHigh(b)
8
Game-Theoretic and Logical Modeling of Multi-agent Coordination in Search and Rescue Scenarios
==PAGE:17==
3.2
Linear Temporal Logic
Linear Temporal Logic (LTL) extends propositional logic by introducing temporal opera-
tors that allow reasoning over time [HR04]. In LTL, formulas are interpreted over linear
sequences of states, corresponding to computations or timelines. The main temporal
operators include:
• Next: Xψ - evaluates as true if ψ holds in the next state.
• Eventually: Fψ - evaluates as true if ψ holds at at least one future state.
• Always: Gψ - evaluates as true if ψ holds in all future states.
• Until: ψUϕ - evaluates as true if ψ holds until ϕ becomes true with the requisite that
ϕ becomes true at some future state.
These operators are essential for expressing properties of time variant systems such as
safety (“nothing bad ever happens”) and liveness (“something good eventually happens”).
In order to asses how these operators relate to our system, I will introduce the idea of a
computation. A computation, c, is a sequence of states s0, s1, s2, ..., defined by the actions
taken by the agents in the system, such that each si+1 ∈δ(si) (here the transition function
only takes the state as input and it outputs the set of reachable states. For a single agent
situation this system is deterministic and so this set has 1 state per action, but in a multi
agents sceario there will be 1 state per possible combination of 1 action per agent). Also
let’s define C as the set of all possible computations of a pointed version of our system
(in the pointed ATEL system (M, w) ∀c ∈C s0 will be w, meaning that every computation
c in the set of all possible computations C will start in world w). Now we can define how
the different operators evaluate in the system:
• Next: Xψ - evaluates as true in state so if for every state s1 such that s1 ∈δ(so) we
have M, s1 |= ψ.
• Eventually: Fψ - evaluates as true in state so if ∀c ∈C such that s0, sx in c where
x > 0 we have that M, sx |= ψ.
• Always: Gψ - evaluates as true in state so if ∀c ∈C such that s0 in c, M, sx |= ψ
holds ∀sx in c such that x > 0.
• Until: ψUϕ - evaluates as true in state so if ∀c ∈C such that s0 in c and there ∃sx in
c such that x > 0 where sx |= ϕ and ∀si in c such that x > i > 0 we have that si |= ψ
with the additional condition that ∃c ∈C such that s0 in c and there ∃sx in c such that
x > 0 where sx |= ϕ.
In LTL there is only one possible computation and therefore all sets are of size one, making
the use of sets unnecessary, but as we expand to Alternating Time Temporal Logic, where
the size of the sets will be grater that one, the definitions provided in this chapter will still
hold.
Through the use of formulas of linear temporal logic, we can express ideas of the evolution
of a particular pointed version of our model (M, w) over time, such as, target agent a
(a ∈ΣT ) will eventually get to position (x, y). Which would be represented as:
M, w |= FAgentaAt(x, y)
Game-Theoretic and Logical Modeling of Multi-agent Coordination in Search and Rescue Scenarios
9
==PAGE:18==
3.3
Alternating Time Temporal Logic
ATL generalizes LTL to the multi-agent setting by incorporating cooperation mechanics.
It enables reasoning about what groups of agents (coalitions) can achieve through coor-
dinated strategies, regardless of the actions of other agents [vW03].
Formulas in ATL take the form:
ψ ::= p | ¬ψ | ψ ∧ψ | ψ →ψ | ⟨⟨A⟩⟩Xψ | ⟨⟨A⟩⟩Gψ | ⟨⟨A⟩⟩(ψ U ψ)
Where ⟨⟨A⟩⟩followed by a formula ψ implies that the coalition A has a strategy to ensure
that the ψ formula is satisfied.
ATL is interpreted over tree-like structures, where agents simultaneously choose actions
that determine transitions between states. In these tree-like structures every path down
the tree is a possible computation that depends on the choices of the actions of all agents,
therefore by limiting the actions we consider we can also limit the computations to a sub-
set. A strategy is a set of actions that defines, for every agent in a coalition in every
timestep, the action said agent will take. This strategies are interesting because they let
us talk about what the agents in our system can achieve and what properties they can
ensure as they decrease the set of possible computations for the system. Let’s go over
an example for clarification:
Let’s say that we have a coalition A ⊆(ΣD ∪ΣT ). This coalition has N agents and
each agent has Na possible actions at any given point in time (for simplification we will
suppose that this number is constant throughout the state space, although in most cases
the number of applicable actions will vary depending on the state we are in). C will be the
set of all possible computations in the system and SA the set of all possible strategies of
length t for coalition A. The total number of strategies in SA (|SA|) will be:
|SA| =
( N
∑
a=0
Na
)t
Now we also have that strategies enforce certain conditions on the possible computations
of the system (the actions the members of the coalition perform), and therefore every
strategy (σ) limits the possible computations of the system to a subset Cσ of the original
computations set C:
∀σ ∈SA, Cσ ⊆C
Cσ = {c ∈C | c is consistent with σ}
Cσ = {c ∈C | ∀i ∈[1, t] ∩N, c(i) ∈δ(c(i −1), σ(i))}
where c(i) is the i’th state in the c computation, σ(i) is the i’th set of actions, one per
agent in the coalition, for the strategy σ and δ(s, σ(i)) returns the subset of δ(s) limited by
applying the actions specified by σ(i).
With this in mind, we can now formally define how the coalition operator (⟨⟨A⟩⟩) together
with the different time operators in our grammar is evaluated on our system M:
10
Game-Theoretic and Logical Modeling of Multi-agent Coordination in Search and Rescue Scenarios
==PAGE:19==
M, s0 |= ⟨⟨A⟩⟩X ↔∃σ for A | ∀c ∈Cσ where s0 ∈c,
(M, s0) |= X
M, s0 |= ⟨⟨A⟩⟩G ↔∃σ for A | ∀c ∈Cσ where s0 ∈c,
(M, s0) |= G
M, s0 |= ⟨⟨A⟩⟩(ψ U ψ) ↔∃σ for A | ∀c ∈Cσ where s0 ∈c,
(M, s0) |= (ψ U ψ)
ATL logic has an extension called ATL* that, by differencing between state and path for-
mulas, allows for arbitrary nesting of path and temporal operators. This variant increases
expresivity by allowing some formulas that would not work in ATL such as ⟨⟨A⟩⟩(Fp∧Gq).
This increased expressivity of the language comes at a much higher computational cost.
With this is mind for the system M we will stick with ATL as I do not consider the increase
in expressivity of ATL* to be relevant for the situation we are modeling.
Through the use of formulas of alternating time temporal logic, we can express ideas of
the abilities of a given coalition A (such that A ⊆(ΣD ∪ΣT )) to ensure some temporal
properties oin a given pointed version of our system (M,w), such as, the coalition A =
{a1, a2, a3} can ensure that at every point in time at least one member of the coalition will
be flying at a high altitude. Which would be represented as:
M, w |= G(IsFlyingHigh(a1) ∨IsFlyingHigh(a2)
∨IsFlyingHigh(a3))
3.4
Epistemic Logic
Epistemic logic introduces the ability to reason about agents’ knowledge. It uses modal
operators to express what agents know (or do not know) about the system: Kaψ, which
reads as ‘agent a knows ψ’.
The semantics of epistemic logic is based on Kripke models, in which each agent has an
accessibility relation over possible worlds (states), capturing the idea of indistinguishabil-
ity. The formula Kaψ holds in a state if ψ holds in all states that agent a considers possible.
This logic is crucial for modeling incomplete information, uncertainty, and knowledge evo-
lution in multi-agent systems [RSW23].
In the pointed version of our system (M, w) (for the deffinitions of the parameters of the
model M, included ∼a, refer to section 2), the formula Kaψ holds if and only if:
M, w |= Kaψ ↔∀s ∈∼a (w), (M, s) |= ψ
As we will be working with coalitions in this thesis, we will enrich epistemic knowledge by
including the following group operator:
Game-Theoretic and Logical Modeling of Multi-agent Coordination in Search and Rescue Scenarios
11
==PAGE:20==
E⟨⟨A⟩⟩ψ ↔∀a ∈A, Kaψ
(M, w) |= E⟨⟨A⟩⟩ψ ↔∀a ∈A, (M, w) |= Kaψ
Where:
• ⟨⟨A⟩⟩is a coalition of agents such that A ⊆ΣD;
• ψ is a formula of our language, ultimately ATEL;
• and E⟨⟨A⟩⟩ψ reads as every agent in coalition A beliefs ψ.
Through the use of formulas of epistemic logic, we can express ideas of the believes of
agents (only drone agents have beliefs in our system) in a particular pointed version of our
model (M, w), such as, target agent a (a ∈ΣD) beliefs a certain target agent b (b ∈ΣT )
is at position (x, y). Which would be represented as:
M, w |= KaAgentbAt(x, y)
3.5
Alternating-time Temporal Epistemic Logic
ATEL merges the strategic reasoning of ATL with the knowledge-based reasoning of epis-
temic logic. It allows statements about what coalitions of agents can achieve while taking
into account what they know [vW03].
Formulas in ATEL follow this structure:
ψ ::= p | ¬ψ | ψ∧ψ | ψ →ψ | Kaψ | E⟨⟨A⟩⟩ψ | ⟨⟨A⟩⟩Xψ
| ⟨⟨A⟩⟩Gψ | ⟨⟨A⟩⟩(ψ U ψ)
The expressive power of ATEL makes it well-suited for modeling autonomous agents that
must make decisions based not only on the state of the environment, but also on what
they and others know.
Through the use of formulas of ATEL, we can express more complex ideas by merging
the previously presented logics, in a particular pointed version of our model (M, w), such
as, the set of drones defined by coalition A (A ⊂ΣD) has a strategy that ensures that the
bigger set of drones defined by coalition B (B ⊇A, B ⊆ΣD) eventually beliefs that target
agent c (c ∈ΣT ) is at position (x, y), (meaning that they can ensure their beliefs spread
to other agents, which is meaningful when aiming for common knowledge in cooperative
scenarios). Which would be represented as:
M, w |= ⟨⟨A⟩⟩F(E⟨⟨B⟩⟩AgentcAt(x, y))
3.6
Dynamic Epistemic Logic
Dynamic Epistemic Logic (DEL) models how agents’ knowledge changes as a result of
epistemic events, such as announcements, observations, or communication. Unlike stan-
dard epistemic logic, which describes static knowledge, DEL captures dynamic updates
to epistemic states and it has the following variants:
12
Game-Theoretic and Logical Modeling of Multi-agent Coordination in Search and Rescue Scenarios
==PAGE:21==
• Public Announcement Logic (PAL): That models the effect of a truthful public
announcement on agents’ knowledge. The model is restricted to simple events and
assumes common knowledge of the announcement.
• Epistemic Action Logic (EAL): Generalizes PAL using action models and prod-
uct update, allowing for private announcements, misinformation, and agent-relative
event perception [BR16].
DEL is particularly useful for modeling epistemic actions, which update what agents know,
rather than changing the physical world. These are expressed using action schemas,
while ontic actions affect the world state directly [BR16].
An action model is a Kripke-style structure:
⟨E, {∼a}∀a∈ΣD, pre⟩
where:
• E: a finite set of events ( these events will be derived from the epistemic actions in
section 3.9 ).
• ∼a⊆E × E: an epistemic accessibility relations between events for each agent a.
• pre : E →LATEL: set of precondition formulas of ATEL for each event.
Now let us work on the formal definition for product update, given our original ATEL system
(M) and an action model (hereafter referred to as A). The product update M →M[A]
applied on the pointed ATEL system (M,w) and the pointed action model (A,e) returns the
new pointed ATEL system (M[A], (w,e)) where M[A]:
⟨Π, ΣD, ΣT , Q[A], {∼a [A]}∀a∈ΣD, π[A], δ[A]⟩
Where:
• Q[A] := {(v, f) ∈Q × E | M, v |= preA(f)} ∪{(v, ) | v ∈Q, ∀f ∈E, v ̸|= preA(f)}
1 — is the set obtained by pairing all worlds in Q with all the events in E whose
preconditions they satisfy and adding the pair (v, ø) for every world v in Q that does
not satisfy the preconditions of any event in E. The is a new event that will allow our
system to migrate all significant world models for the transition function to the new
model while still coding the new epistemic information coming from the execution of
the event.
• (v2, f2) ∈∼a [A]((v1, f1)) ⇐⇒(v2 ∈∼M
a
(v1) ∧(f2 ∈∼A
a (f1) ∨f2 = f1 = ))23
— insert an epistemic relationship arrow for agent a in M[A] between the two pairs
(v1,f1) and (v2,f2), just if there is an epistemic relationship arrow for agent a in M
between the two worlds (v2 ∈∼M
a
(v1)) and, an epistemic relationship arrow for
agent a in A between the two events (f2 ∈∼A
a (f1)) or both events are ø.
• π[A]((v, f)) := πM(v) 4 - make the evaluation of v at the pair (v,f) just as it was on
M.
1preA(f) means the set of preconditions on the action model A for event f.
2∼M
a means the epistemic relation of agent a in model M.
3∼A
a means the epistemic relation of agent a in action model A.
4πM(v) means the evaluation function of state v in model M.
Game-Theoretic and Logical Modeling of Multi-agent Coordination in Search and Rescue Scenarios
13
==PAGE:22==
• δ[A]((v, f)) - the new transition function will have to be reformulated according to
the list of possible actions, both ontic and epistemic, as explained later in section
6.1.
This process yields a new pointed model (M[A], (w,e)), where the epistemic state reflects
the effect of the epistemic action.
Let’s now define the recursive grammar for Epistemic Action Logic (EAL) along with AM
(the set of pointed action models with preconditions in EAL) as:
ψ ::= p | ¬ψ |ψ ∧ψ | ψ →ψ | Kaψ | E⟨⟨A⟩⟩ψ | ⟨⟨A⟩⟩Xψ
| ⟨⟨A⟩⟩Gψ | ⟨⟨A⟩⟩(ψ U ψ) | [A, e]ψ
So that we are adding the modal operator [A,e] to the ATEL grammar.
Now that the grammar is defined I will go over the idea of executable events and action
models. So to say that the pointed action model (A,e) is executable in a pointed version
of our system (M,w) we require that (M,w) meets the preconditions for the pointed event
e as listed in the action model A, or formally expressed:
(A, e) is executable in (M, w) ↔M, w |= preA(e)
This definition extends to an event g being executable in (M, w) if and only if there exists
action model A with g ∈EA such that (A, g) is executable in (M, w), or more formally
written:
g is executable in (M, w) ↔
(∃A | g ∈EA, (A, e) is executable in (M, v))
Finally we have that an action model A is executable in system M if:
A is executable in M ↔
∃e ∈EA, ∃v ∈QM | (A, e) is executable in (M, v)
The new operator [A, e]ψ evaluates to true in a pointed system (M,w) whenever the event
e is not executable in said system or the resulting pointed model (M[A],(w,e)) (after the
product update) entails ψ, or more formally written:
M, w |= [A, e]ψ ⇐⇒(M, w ̸|= preA(e) ∨M[A], (w, e) |= ψ)
The idea of incorporating EAL to the ATEL grammar in order to model dynamic systems
is unique to this thesis, nonetheless there is a previous article titled Alternating-time tem-
poral dynamic epistemic logic [Lim14] where they propose a variant logic of ATEL with
elements similar to those of coalition announcement logic (CAL), which on time is a vari-
ant of Public Anouncement Logic that deals with coalition’s announcements. This thesis
14
Game-Theoretic and Logical Modeling of Multi-agent Coordination in Search and Rescue Scenarios
==PAGE:23==
instead proposes a framework for tackling the modeling of dynamic epistemic transitive
systems by incorporating EAl in ATEL instead of a variant of PAL as suggested in [Lim14].
Through the use inclusion of the EAL operator in the previously discussed ATEL grammar,
we can now express the effect of any given complex epistemic action, as a pointed action
model (A, e), in a particular pointed version of our ATEL system (M, w), such as, while
drone agent a (a ∈ΣD) does not belief target agent c (c ∈ΣT ) to be at position (x, y), in
pointed world model (M, w), in this same pointed model it can perform an action (defined
by the pointed action model (A, e)) that will make him belief agent c to be in that position
(such as scanning the environment). Which would be represented as:
M, w |= ¬KaAgentcAt(x, y)) ∧[A, e]KaAgentcAt(x, y)
3.7
Multi-Agent Pathfinding in Cooperative Environments
In this paper the problem of multi agent Search and Rescue will be addressed as a coop-
erative path finding problem in a simplified framework, for this I will now present the basic
ideas behind path finding and epistemic planning in cooperative multi-agent systems.
Multi-agent pathfinding (MAPF) addresses the problem of computing collision-free tra-
jectories for multiple agents operating simultaneously within a shared environment. This
problem emerges in various practical domains, such as autonomous robotics, video
games, and air traffic management, where agents must reach specified goals while
avoiding collisions with both static obstacles and other agents. The inherent complexity
of the problem arises from the combinatorial explosion of the joint state space relative to
the number of agents.
A core distinction within MAPF approaches lies in the nature of inter-agent interaction,
typically classified into cooperative, non-cooperative, and antagonistic settings:
• In cooperative scenarios, agents share information and coordinate their plans to
optimize joint objectives or ensure global feasibility.
• In non-cooperative settings, by contrast, we assume independent behavior among
agents, with limited or no coordination, often resulting in suboptimal or unsafe tra-
jectories.
• Finally, antagonistic pathfinding involves adversarial agents, where one or more
agents actively seek to interfere with the plans of others, introducing elements akin
to game-theoretic analysis.
Two high-level architectural paradigms dominate MAPF approaches:
• Centralized approaches compute a global plan for all agents within a unified planner.
Although these can guarantee optimality and completeness, centralized methods
are computationally intractable for large numbers of agents due to the nature of the
problem.
• Distributed approaches, in contrast, assign planning responsibilities to individual
agents or subsets thereof, which significantly improves scalability. However, they
suffer from incomplete coordination, leading to increased risk of bottlenecks 5, live-
5Bottlenecks occur when multiple agents contend for access to the same critical resource, causing delays
or stalling.
Game-Theoretic and Logical Modeling of Multi-agent Coordination in Search and Rescue Scenarios
15
==PAGE:24==
locks 6, deadlocks 7, or cyclic repetition of behaviors 8.
These undesired behaviors (bottlenecks, deadlocks, and cyclic repetition of behaviors)
arise especially in heavily constrained environments with narrow passages or high agent
density. Avoiding such behaviors requires sophisticated coordination strategies and has
motivated the development of many cooperative algorithms.
Among cooperative decentralized strategies, several algorithms have been proposed in
the paper Cooperative Pathfinding by David Silver [Sil21]:
• Local Repair A* (LRA*) is a reactive algorithm where each agent executes an A*
search toward its goal while resolving conflicts locally when collisions are detected.
While LRA* is computationally efficient and adaptable to dynamic environments, it
often fails to resolve complex interactions among agents, especially in dense set-
tings.
• Cooperative A* (CA*) extends LRA* by explicitly reserving space-time positions for
agents during planning. Each agent plans sequentially in a shared reservation table,
ensuring that its trajectory avoids conflicts with previously planned agents. Although
CA* guarantees completeness in discrete environments, its performance deterio-
rates as the number of agents increases due to its fully sequential planning model.
The efficiency of the solutions found is dependent on the priority order for planning
given to the different agents.
• Hierarchical Cooperative A* (HCA*) improves upon CA* by decomposing planning
into hierarchical levels. Agents plan paths in an abstract representation of the space
first, followed by a refinement step to achieve the final trajectories over the fully
defined space. This hierarchical abstraction reduces planning complexity and miti-
gates some of the scalability limitations of CA*, but it may still produce suboptimal
solutions and remains sensitive to ordering effects among agents.
• Windowed Hierarchical Cooperative A* (WHCA*) further enhances scalability and
responsiveness by introducing a temporal planning horizon or “window.” In WHCA*,
agents reserve their paths only for a fixed number of timesteps ahead, rather than
over the entire trajectory to the goal. This windowed approach allows for periodic
replanning, enabling the system to adapt to dynamic changes and reducing the
computational burden of long-horizon planning.
WHCA* combines the hierarchical structure of HCA* with temporal decomposition, strik-
ing a balance between global coordination and local responsiveness. By limiting the depth
of each planning iteration, WHCA* substantially reduces the impact of agent ordering, as
new reservations are made iteratively and updated at regular intervals. Despite its effi-
ciency, WHCA* does not guarantee completeness, particularly in environments requiring
long-term commitments to bypass conflicts. Nevertheless, empirical evaluations demon-
strate that WHCA* achieves high success rates and significantly reduced computation
times in benchmark environments, making it a practical solution for many real-world ap-
plications [Sil21].
6A livelock happens when a process contains loops (sections that can be infinitely repeated) within which
no task is completed [Sme90]
7A deadlock happens when no event can occur in a given process and this prevents any tasks from
completing. [Sme90]
8Cyclic repetition manifests when agents repeatedly execute similar sequences of movements without
making global progress toward their goals. Similarly to livelocks but do not imply the section to be executed
infinitely many times.
16
Game-Theoretic and Logical Modeling of Multi-agent Coordination in Search and Rescue Scenarios
==PAGE:25==
3.8
Epistemic Planning
Epistemic planning is a research area that extends traditional planning with reasoning
about agents’ knowledge and beliefs. Unlike classical planning, which focuses solely on
achieving goal states through deterministic actions in a known environment, epistemic
planning enables agents to reason about what they or others know or believe, including
also higher order knowledge.
Epistemic planning refers to the extension of classical automated planning by incorpo-
rating epistemic constructs such as knowledge, belief, and higher-order knowledge (i.e.,
knowledge about the knowledge of others, having a, b ∈ΣD and ψ ∈Π we could say that
KaKb(ψ)). This paradigm enables agents not only to reason about the physical effects
of their ontic actions but also about how epistemic actions change what agents know or
believe.
Unlike classical planning, where agents are assumed to have complete information and
the world evolves deterministically, epistemic planning is inherently suited for scenarios
with uncertainty, partial observability, and communicative actions. In multi-agent settings,
this is particularly crucial for achieving coordination and collaboration based on shared or
distributed knowledge states.
The field brings together insights from several sub-disciplines in artificial intelligence, in-
cluding epistemic logic, knowledge representation and reasoning, and dynamic logic.
Modal logics such as Dynamic Epistemic Logic (DEL), that in this paper we extend to
ATEL with action schemes, provide the formal backbone for describing how knowledge
evolves as a result of epistemic actions.
A key distinction in epistemic planning lies in how knowledge is represented. Two ap-
proaches are commonly adopted: the sentential (syntactic) approach and the model-
theoretic (semantic) approach. The former encodes knowledge as logical formulas, whereas
the latter uses Kripke structures to represent in-distinguishability among possible worlds,
which is the chosen method in this paper.
Another fundamental concern is the specification of epistemic actions. While domain de-
scription languages like PDDL are well-established in classical planning, the epistemic
planning community lacks a standard formalism for representing epistemic actions. Re-
search efforts continue toward defining expressive yet tractable languages.
In this paper I will be implementing action schemas based on the PDDL model [SB01]:
ActionName(parameters)
• Preconditions:
• Output:
where:
• parameters ⊆(ΣD ∪ΣT ) or one of the possible moves; North (N), South (S), West
(W), East (E) and No Action (NM). These are mathematically represented as the a
tuple with the vector value of the move in both the x and y axes giving the following
dictionary:
Game-Theoretic and Logical Modeling of Multi-agent Coordination in Search and Rescue Scenarios
17
==PAGE:26==
1
DIRECTIONS = {"N": [-1,0], "W": [0, -1], "E": [0,1], "S": [1,0],
"NM": [0,0]}
,→
• preconditions and output, which are sets of formulas based on the grammar pre-
sented in section 3.6 Dynamic Epistemic Logic of this paper.
– Where the preconditions of an action A,pre(A), define the set of requirements
that must be met (they must hold true) for such action to be applicable in state
s ∈Q. Action A is applicable in state S if and only if:
M, s |= pre(A)
– and the outputs of an action A, out(A) define the changes on the current world
state after said action is applied and are represented in the model provided on
this paper by it’s transition function (δ). Meaning that the output of action A
applied in state w ∈Q would be:
out(A, w) = {s ∈Q | s ∈δ(A, w)}
Due to the richness of the epistemic domain, unrestricted epistemic planning is undecid-
able in general. To address this, researchers have identified decidable fragments through
syntactic restrictions, such as limiting modal depth or disallowing nested belief constructs.
Despite these constraints, such fragments maintain the expressiveness necessary for
modeling many practical scenarios.
For the purpose of this paper the following limitations will be considered for the problem
of epistemic planning in the system provided. This limitations are based on the ones
provided in the paper A lightweight epistemic logic and its application to planning by Martin
C. Cooper et al. [Coo+21].
• For the parameters we will implement typing, meaning that the type of each param-
eter will be defined as part of the action schema.
• For preconditions of the actions in this paper we will use the complete ATEL+EAL
grammar with bounded quantifiers, which means they only work over finite sets.
• Lastly the output of the actions will adhere to STRIPS9, by implementing the ad-
d/delete list adding all positive literals and deleting the ones that appear negated,
but will include the epistemic operators to represent changes on the beliefs of one
or more agents and bounded quantifiers.
• Nesting will be allowed in both preconditions and outputs for actions, but it will
be limited to a recursion depth of three.
That is, while KaKbKb(ψ) is allowed,
KbKaKbKb(ψ) would not be accepted.
3.9
The Agents and Their Action Sets
In the system under consideration, there is are two finite set of agents ΣD and ΣT , each
representing a particular type of agent; ΣD includes all drones (UAVs), which constitute
the active search and rescue units, and ΣT all targets, representing individuals in need of
9STRIPS promotes the use of add/delete lists for the outputs of an action, adding the positive elements
and deleting the ones that are negated, and the exclusive use of positive literals as preconditions for actions.
18
Game-Theoretic and Logical Modeling of Multi-agent Coordination in Search and Rescue Scenarios
==PAGE:27==
rescue. Agents act autonomously and synchronously in discrete time steps. All agents of
the same type are assumed to possess equivalent capabilities.
There are two types of actions:
• Ontic actions: Alter the actual state of the world (e.g., agent positions).
• Epistemic actions: Affect the epistemic accessibility relation by updating what agents
know about the world.
All actions are assumed to take one time step unless otherwise stated.
3.10
Agent Types and Roles
Drones, which are mobile, sensor-equipped UAVs capable of:
• Exploring the environment via epistemic actions like scanning and updating their
beliefs.
• Navigating through the space via ontic actions such as flying.
• Sharing and synchronizing knowledge within communication constraints.
Their perception is based on line of sight, and the area covered increases with altitude.
Drones operate as a distributed multi-agent system, communicating via the Alternating
Bit Protocol. Communication is subject to range and line-of-sight restrictions. They are
unaware of the full map initially and must explore to build local knowledge.
And Targets, which are agents representing people who move randomly until they per-
ceive a low-flying drone, at which point they cooperate by following the drone. Their
interaction is passive-reactive and not communicative. The success condition of a sim-
ulation is defined by the delivery of all targets to a predefined safe house, after which
targets become static.
3.11
Actions Schema
Scan(α):
where α ∈ΣD
• Prerequisites:
• Output:
∀cell(x, y) ∈the range of α′s sensors:
if safeAt(x, y) then Kα(safeAt(x, y))
else Kα(wallAt(x, y))
and ∀αi ∈(ΣD ∪ΣT ):
if AgentαiAt(x, y) then Kα(AgentαiAt(x, y))
else Kα(¬AgentαiAt(x, y))
and ∀αi ∈ΣD:
if IsFlyingHigh(αi) then Kα(IsFlyingHigh(αi)), Kα(¬IsFlyingLow(αi))
else Kα(¬IsFlyingHigh(αi)), Kα(IsFlyingLow(αi))
Game-Theoretic and Logical Modeling of Multi-agent Coordination in Search and Rescue Scenarios
19
==PAGE:28==
Update(coalition):
where coalition ⊆ΣD
• Prerequisites:
∀(α1, α2) ∈coalition such that α1 ̸= α2
IsInCommsRange(α1, α2)
• Output:
∀p ∈Π:
if consensus(p, coalition) = K(p) then E⟨⟨coalition⟩⟩(p)
else if consensus(p, coalition) = K(¬p) then E⟨⟨coalition⟩⟩(¬p)
else, ∀α ∈coalition:
¬Kα(p)
In the previous schema consensus(p, coalition), where p ∈Π and coalition ⊆ΣD,
is a function that returns the agreed upon belief value for all agents in coalition) in re-
gards to proposition p. consensus(p, coalition) can either return K(p), K(¬p) or ¬K(p)
according to the results of the UCP protocol (see section 5).
Fly(α, D)
where α ∈ΣD and D ∈{[0, 0], [0, 1], [1, 0], [−1, 0], [0, −1]}
• Prerequisites:
AgentαAt(x, y),
¬wallAt(x + D[0], y + D[1])
and ∀α1 ∈ΣD so that α ̸= α1:
¬Agentα2At(x + D[0], y + D[1])
• Output:
¬AgentαAt(x, y)
AgentαAt(x + D[0], y + D[1])
and ∀α2 ∈ΣD such that α ̸= α2:
if manhattanDistance(positionOfα, positionOfα2) ≤communicationRange
then IsInCommsRange(α1, α2)
else ¬IsInCommsRange(α1, α2)
Walk(α, D)
where α ∈ΣT and D ∈{[0, 0], [0, 1], [1, 0], [−1, 0], [0, −1]}
• Prerequisites:
AgentαAt(x, y),
¬wallAt(x + D[0], y + D[1])
• Output:
¬AgentαAt(x, y),
AgentαAt(x + D[0], y + D[1])
20
Game-Theoretic and Logical Modeling of Multi-agent Coordination in Search and Rescue Scenarios
==PAGE:29==
Guide(αd, αt)
where αd ∈ΣD and αt ∈ΣT
• Prerequisites:
∀t ∈ΣT , ¬isGuiding(αd, t),
∀t ∈ΣT , Kαd(¬isGuiding(αd, t)),
isExploring(αd),
Kαd(isExploring(αd)),
¬isBeingGuided(αt),
Kαd(¬isBeingGuided(αt)),
and ∃(x, y) such that:
AgentαdAt(x, y),
AgentαtAt(x, y),
Kαd(AgentαdAt(x, y)),
Kαd(AgentαtAt(x, y)),
• Output:
¬isExploring(αd),
Kαd(¬isExploring(αd)),
isBeingGuided(αt),
isGuiding(αd, αt),
Kαd(isBeingGuided(αt)),
Kαd(isGuiding(αd, αt))
Scout(αs, αg, αt)
where αs, αg ∈ΣD and αt ∈ΣT
• Prerequisites:
∀t ∈ΣT , ¬isScouting(αs, t),
∀t ∈ΣT , Kαs(¬isScouting(αs.t)),
isExploring(αs),
Kαs(isExploring(αs)),
Kαg(isExploring(αs)),
isGuiding(αg, αt),
¬isBeingScouted(αg),
Kαs(isGuiding(αg, αt)),
Kαs(¬isBeingScouted(αg)),
• Output:
¬isExploring(αs),
Kαs(¬isExploring(αs)),
Kαg(¬isExploring(αs)),
isBeingScouted(αg),
isScouting(αs, αt),
Kαs(isScouting(αs, αt)),
Kαs(isBeingScouted(αg)),
Kαg(isBeingScouted(αg)),
Kαg(isScouting(αs, αt))
Game-Theoretic and Logical Modeling of Multi-agent Coordination in Search and Rescue Scenarios
21
==PAGE:30==
HelpFindingRoutes(αf, αg, αs, αt)
where αf, αg, αs ∈ΣD and αt ∈ΣT
• Prerequisites:
isSouting(αs, αt),
isGuiding(αg, αt),
Kαs(isGuiding(αg, αt)),
isExploring(αf),
IsInCommsRange(αs.αf)
we define coalition R = {αg, αs, αt} then:
E⟨⟨R⟩⟩¬⟨⟨R⟩⟩F(AgentαtAt(x, y) ∧safeHouseAt(x, y)) ∧¬rescueTimeout(αt)
we define coalition F = {αf, αs} then:
E⟨⟨F⟩⟩(isSouting(αs, αt)),
E⟨⟨F⟩⟩(isExploring(αf)),
E⟨⟨F⟩⟩(IsInCommsRange(αs.αf))
• Output:
¬isExploring(αf),
isFindingRoutes(αf, αs),
we define coalition F = {αf, αs} then:
E⟨⟨F⟩⟩(¬isExploring(αf)),
E⟨⟨F⟩⟩(isFindingRoutes(αf, αs))
Descend(α)
where α ∈ΣD
• Prerequisites:
IsFlyingHigh(α),
Kα(IsFlyingHigh(α))
• Output:
¬IsFlyingHigh(α),
IsFlyingLow(α),
Kα(¬IsFlyingHigh(α)),
Kα(IsFlyighLow(α))
Rise(α)
where α ∈ΣD
• Prerequisites:
IsFlyingLow(α),
∀t ∈ΣT , ¬isGuiding(α, t),
∀t ∈ΣT , Kα(¬isGuiding(α, t)),
Kα(IsFlyingLow(α))
• Output:
¬IsFlyingLow(α),
IsFlyingHigh(α),
Kα(¬IsFlyingLow(α)),
Kα(IsFlyighHigh(α))
22
Game-Theoretic and Logical Modeling of Multi-agent Coordination in Search and Rescue Scenarios
==PAGE:31==
Explore(αe)
where αe ∈ΣD
• Prerequisites:
• Output:
RequestExtraction(αs, αt)
where αs, αt ∈ΣD
• Prerequisites:
rescueTimeOut(αt),
Kαs(rescueTimeOut(αt)),
¬isBeingExtracted(αt),
Kαs(¬isBeingExtracted(αt)),
isSouting(αs, αt),
Kαs(isSouting(αs, αt))
• Output:
isBeingExtracted(αt),
Kαs(isBeingExtracted(αt))
RelayTimeout(αg, αs)
where αg, αs ∈ΣD
• Prerequisites:
we define coalition R = {αg, αs}
∃t ∈ΣT such that:
isGuiding(αg, t) ∧isScouting(αs, t) ∧rescueTimeOut(t),
E⟨⟨R⟩⟩(isGuiding(αg, t) ∧isScouting(αs, t)),
Kαg(rescueTimeOut(t))
• Output:
By reusing the variable t from the preconditions, we have that:
Kαs(rescueTimeOut(t))
StopGuiding(αg)
where αg ∈ΣD
• Prerequisites:
¬isExploring(αg)
∃t ∈ΣT such that:
isGuiding(αg, t),
hasBeenExtracted(t),
Kαg(hasBeenExtracted(t))
• Output:
isExploring(αg),
Kαg(isExploring(αg)),
By reusing the variable t from the preconditions, we have that:
¬isGuiding(αg, t),
Kαg(¬isGuiding(αg, t))
Game-Theoretic and Logical Modeling of Multi-agent Coordination in Search and Rescue Scenarios
23
==PAGE:32==
StopScouting(αs)
where αs ∈ΣD
• Prerequisites:
¬isExploring(αs)
∃t ∈ΣT such that:
isScouting(αs, t),
hasBeenExtracted(t),
Kαs(hasBeenExtracted(t))
• Output:
isExploring(αs),
Kαs(isExploring(αs)),
By reusing the variable t from the preconditions, we have that:
¬isScouting(αs, t),
Kαs(¬isScouting(αs, t))
24
Game-Theoretic and Logical Modeling of Multi-agent Coordination in Search and Rescue Scenarios
==PAGE:33==
4
The SAR Process
In this section, I propose a novel and comprehensive Search and Rescue (SAR) process
designed for the identification and extraction of targets in dynamic environments. This
process, developed exclusively for this thesis, aims to approximate real-life scenarios as
closely as possible within the defined scope of this work. While it does not capture every
detail of real-world operations, it provides a solid foundation for modeling relevant systems
and testing critical constraints such as safety, fairness, and operational feasibility.
In order to make the process more comprehensible, I have divided it in six modules that
interact together (see figure 4.1):
• Exploration protocol (see section 4.1)
• Rescue protocol (see section 4.2)
• Guiding protocol (see section 4.3)
• Scouting protocol (see section 4.4)
• Finding Scape Routes Protocol (see section 4.5)
• Request Extraction Protocol (see section 4.6)
Figure 4.1: Model for the SAR process.
Game-Theoretic and Logical Modeling of Multi-agent Coordination in Search and Rescue Scenarios
25
==PAGE:34==
In the following sections a number of flowcharts will be presented for clarification of the
different modules of the SAR process, for all of them the following applies:
• Dashed lines imply a connection with a different of module of the process, wether
it be some sort of information or signal coming in form the other module (inwards
connections) or going out (outwards connections).
• Yellow elements within any of the flowcharts represent some significant part of the
process that will be particularly addressed within the corresponding section of this
thesis.
• Blue elements represent subprotocols that have been abstracted from their corre-
sponding parent protocols for clarification purposes. Each of this subprotocols have
their corresponding flowchart that is displayed next to their parent protocol’s one
and the pink elements within the subprotocol are connection points between the
subprotocol and it’s parent protocol.
4.1
Exploration protocol
Figure 4.2: Flowchart for the exploration protocol of the SAR process.
The flowchart in figure 4.2 models the decision-making process for the first module of
the Search and Rescue (SAR) protocol, the exploration protocol. The process initiates
with the agents exploring the map ( reference to the yellow ”exploring” box in figure 4.2,
see subsection 4.1.1). During the exploration protocol, the system continuously assesses
whether a target has been identified. Upon a positive detection, the protocol transitions
into the Rescue Protocol (see section 4.2) by issuing a dedicated call for intervention.
Conversely, if no target is found, the system evaluates whether the ”rescue team”, mean-
ing the human rescuers in charge of the operation, has called for a manual halt of the
operation. If not, the exploration phase is resumed, forming a feedback loop that main-
tains situational awareness and system responsiveness. On the other hand, if no new
targets are detected and the ”rescue team” calls for a manual halt of the process, the ex-
ploration protocol is formally terminated. This cyclical logic ensures that both exploration
and rescue components interact seamlessly, facilitating real-time adaptability in dynamic
and uncertain environments.
4.1.1
Uncertainty-Driven Exploration Heuristic
Map exploration (represented by the yellow box ”exploration” in figure 4.2) is framed as a
process of minimizing epistemic uncertainty. Agents evaluate nodes based on the cardi-
nality of their epistemic accessibility relations. Each agent seeks to take the action with
26
Game-Theoretic and Logical Modeling of Multi-agent Coordination in Search and Rescue Scenarios
==PAGE:35==
the highest potential of minimizes the size of its epistemic accessibility relation set. When
operating as part of a coalition, the agents collaboratively minimize the uncertainty of the
coalition.
Planning is conducted either individually or in coalitions of agents within communication
range. These coalitions may include targets with assigned guides. While this increases
computational complexity in dense environments, it significantly improves collision avoid-
ance in both the physical and epistemic domains.
Formally, the uncertainty for a coalition A | ai ∈A, in state w, given a set of actions
ac | ∀ai ∈A, ∃aci ∈ac so that agents ai takes action aci , is defined as:
uncertainty(A, w) =
∑
ai∈A
| ∼ai(w, aci) |
This uncertainty function serves as the heuristic for Windowed Hierarchical Cooperative
A* (WHCA*), which we discussed in section 3.7, during the map exploration process.
4.2
Rescue Protocol
Figure 4.3: Flowchart for the rescue protocol of the SAR process.
Game-Theoretic and Logical Modeling of Multi-agent Coordination in Search and Rescue Scenarios
27
==PAGE:36==
The rescue protocol as described in figure 4.3 is invoked from the exploration protocol
whenever a target is found (see section 4.1). This protocol next forms a coalition of all
drones within communication range of the one that discovered the target, so that we can
stablish consensus on this coalition (see section 5.2). Now that we are working on a
common grounds we assign the two roles, the guide, the drone that discovered the target,
and one scout, the closest drone within communication range of the guide. Every other
drone within the coalition with no assigned role will go back to exploring the map as per
the exploration protocol.
Now we have to possibilities; if there were enough agents on the coalition to assign both
roles (2 or more agents), they will proceed by executing the guiding and scouting protocols
(see sections 4.3 and 4.4) according to their role. In the complementary scenario where
the initial coalition was of size 1 the guide will take on the role of the scout but will skip
the scouting protocol and go straight to the request rescue protocol (see section 4.6).
Depending on the situation some protocols or others will be executed from the rescue
protocol presented on this section but it is important to clarify that the rescue protocol will
not finish until the complete execution of all other pending protocols that derive from this
one. This directive holds true for all other protocols part of our SAR process .
4.3
Guiding Protocol
Figure 4.4: Flowchart for the guiding protocol of the SAR process. For a bigger version
of this flowchart see appendix A.
The guiding protocol described in figure A.1 is invoked from the rescue protocol (see
section 4.2) in the case where there are both a guide and a scout in the initial coalition
for the process. It is the guide who is in charge of executing the guiding protocol while
the scout will be in charge of executing the scouting protocol parallel to the execution
of the guiding protocol by the guide. It is important to clarify that by this point in the
execution there is consensus between both the guide and the scout about the world
model (remember consensus was established during the rescue protocol in ”establish
consensus in coalition”, see section 4.2)
28
Game-Theoretic and Logical Modeling of Multi-agent Coordination in Search and Rescue Scenarios
==PAGE:37==
During the guiding protocol, the guide will iteratively select the best paths to the safe-
house, by minimizing path length from the target’s current location. In order to do this, the
guide abstracts the map to a set of paths, a path being an ordered set of coordinates such
that each coordinate is adjacent to the previous and next one. Due to system constraints,
the guide only consider paths that allow them to remain adjacent to the target and ensure
the target’s safety. As long as there is at least one path that satisfies this constraints the
guide will move to executing the ”Traverse Best Path Subprotocol”, else it will go into
waiting for the extraction of the target (see section 4.6).
The ”Traverse Best Path Subprotocol” consists of an iterative process of advancing to the
next coordinates of the path, checking if there is a need reselect the path been followed
due to the scout’s updates on the environment, check if the target been guided has made
it to the safehouse, and finally check if the maximum time limit for the rescue has been
exceeded, in which case the guide would request the scout to start the request extraction
protocol (see section 4.6). This last condition, the time limit, is to prevent the rescue
process from getting stuck in live locks (ensuring the liveness property, as we also handle
deadlocks but through the request extraction protocol) and also from lasting unreasonably
long, it is not acceptable to have a person trying to get to safety for hours when a helicopter
can be dispatched to aid on the process.
On the other hand when the guide starts ”waiting for the extraction team” it will follow an
iterative process of ensuring the safety of the target (as its’ top priority), checking if the
rescue team has arrived, which would put an end to the guiding protocol so that the guide
could go back to exploring the map, and checking for new incoming information from the
scout, which might discover one or more new traversable paths and end running the
”Traverse Best Path Subprotocol” as presented in the previous paragraph.
4.4
Scouting Protocol
The scouting protocol described in figure 4.5 starts with the scout evaluating the highest-
priority route, from the list of routes available, according to the guide’s standards (see
section 4.3). It´s important to recall that consensus between the guide and the scout
was archived right before the beginning of the execution of both the guiding and scouting
protocols. The traversability of this route is assessed and communicated to the guide.
If during this interaction the guide explicitly requests extraction, the scout will begin the
request extraction protocol (see section 4.6) and sequentially after that the scouting Pro-
tocol will finish, allowing the scout to return to exploring the map. In the absence of such
a request, the system verifies whether the guiding protocol has concluded, if that is the
case, the scouting protocol concludes. Otherwise, the system continues by inspecting
the next highest-priority route, repeating the evaluation cycle.
Should no extraction be requested and no traversable route be confirmed after exhausting
all candidate routes, the scout will call the finding scape routes protocol, which attempts
to identify alternative escape paths (see section 4.5). If new candidate routes emerge
from this process, the system re-enters the scouting cycle, presented in the previous
paragraph. If no new traversable paths are discovered, the scout will begin the request
extraction protocol and sequentially end the scouting protocol.
This protocol’s flow structure ensures both robustness and adaptability, allowing the scout-
ing agents to dynamically re-prioritize their search based on environmental conditions and
guide responses. Furthermore, the integration of the request extraction protocol guaran-
tees liveness by ensuring that the system will eventually reach a resolution, wether it be
by identifying a valid route that allows the target to get to the safehouse, or escalating to
Game-Theoretic and Logical Modeling of Multi-agent Coordination in Search and Rescue Scenarios
29
==PAGE:38==
alternative extraction mechanisms.
Figure 4.5: Flowchart for the scouting protocol of the SAR process.
4.5
Finding Scape Routes Protocol
The Finding Scape Routes Protocol, as shown in figure 4.6, is a collaborative endeavor
initiated by the scout as part of the scouting protocol, when within the initial set of valid
traversal paths, none are identified as still valid (see section 4.4). Its objective is to locate
alternative escape routes by engaging additional agents in a coordinated exploratory effort
of a limited part of the map considered relevant to that particular target’s rescue efforts.
The protocol begins by engaging nearby explorers, who are instructed to execute the
30
Game-Theoretic and Logical Modeling of Multi-agent Coordination in Search and Rescue Scenarios
==PAGE:39==
Figure 4.6: Flowchart for the finding routes protocol of the SAR process.
Explore Relevant Area subprotocol as well as sharing the information with the appointed
guide for the particular rescue mission.
When engaging nearby explorers (first yellow box in the flowchart), the scout will com-
municate with any agent on it’s communication area and make a coalition with those that
are currently exploring the map. Then this coalition will stablish consensus on their knowl-
edge of the current world model and they will stablish the relevant search area to cover
for the mission. The relevant map section for the particular rescue protocol of agent t,
is defined as the rectangular section of land confined by two opposing corners, the first
been the target’s current location and the second one where the safehouse is located.
As part of the explore relevant areas subprotocol, the relevant map section for the par-
ticular rescue protocol is divided into manageable coverage areas, one for each of the
agents of the newly formed coalition. Then each member of the coalition sequentially ex-
plores every cell of its assigned zone. After covering the whole area, the agent stores the
collected information and verifies whether its’ entire assigned area has been explored. If
Game-Theoretic and Logical Modeling of Multi-agent Coordination in Search and Rescue Scenarios
31
==PAGE:40==
not, the agent will go back to covering the next cell of its’ assigned area and saving that
information until full coverage is confirmed. Once the exploration of an area is complete,
the findings are shared among agents to ensure distributed situational awareness.
This shared knowledge is then propagated back to the Scouting and Guiding Protocols
(see sections 4.3 and 4.4 respectively), enabling them to re-evaluate route viability with
updated environmental data. Upon completion of the information exchange, the finding
scape routes protocol is formally terminated.
4.6
Request Extraction Protocol
Figure 4.7: Flowchart for the request extraction protocol of the SAR process.
The request extraction protocol, as described in figure 4.7, can be invoked from either
the rescue protocol (see section 4.2) or the scouting protocol (see section 4.4). Upon
initiating this protocol, the scout that invoked it begins by traversing the environment to
reach a designated safehouse, where the extraction team is on standby. Once there the
scout notifies the target’s last known position to the extraction team, right after that the
scout returns to check on the status of the target.
32
Game-Theoretic and Logical Modeling of Multi-agent Coordination in Search and Rescue Scenarios
==PAGE:41==
At this stage of the protocol, the scout performs two checks: whether the extraction team
has arrived to the target´s position and whether the target has moved. If the team is
present and the target remains in place, the protocol is safely terminated. However, if the
target has relocated, the scout enters a target reacquisition loop where it will implement
a spiral coverage technique to find the target.
There are two checks that the scout must iteratively check when it enters the target
reacquisition loop; first, whether the target has been successfully located, and second,
whether the time limit for this operation has been exceeded. If the time constraint is vi-
olated before reacquisition, the request extraction protocol finishes and the scout goes
back to exploring the map. At this point it is up to the rescue team to locate the target
and its’ assigned guide who will remain in standby, only avoiding any danger to the target
(see guiding protocol in section 4.3).
4.7
Time Window and Communication
In our proposed approach, we employ a variant of the Windowed Hierarchical Coopera-
tive A* (WHCA*) algorithm to coordinate a fleet of drones with the objective of exploration
and target extraction in a dynamic environment. The abstraction of the state space inte-
grates both temporal and spatial dimensions. A key design element in our approach is the
definition of the planning window, which is crucial for collision avoidance and coordination.
During the exploration phase (the exploring yellow box in figure 4.2), the planning window
is set to half the minimum time it takes a drone to traverse a distance equal to its com-
munication range. This constraint is derived from the requirement to prevent collisions
between agents that could not communicate when the plan was initially computed. This
time window ensures that each agent has a sufficient buffer to react to the presence of
other agents once they become aware of each other.
During the rescue protocol (see section 4.2), the planning window remains the same.
However, planning is recomputed whenever new agents enter the interaction range of the
fleet, which we defined as the space in which a fleet of one or more drones acknowledges
the presence of another agent. For drones, this is equivalent to the full communication
range of the fleet, but for targets the interaction range is limited to the scanning range of
the fleet.
4.8
System Properties as ATEL+EAL formulas
Now we will discuss some relevant properties to the system and how they can be modeled
through the use of ATEL+EAL so that they can be checked trough our AETS system:
• Safety – The system avoids undesirable states or behaviors. To represent this
property we need to define what an undesirable state or behavior is, as an example
we can model that no target should ever be at a position were it is not safe, this can
be represented in ATEL+EAL as:
⟨⟨ΣD ∪ΣT ⟩⟩G(∀t ∈ΣT , ¬(AgenttAt(x, y) ∧¬safeAt(x, y)))
This formula reads as the coalition off all drones and targets has an strategy to
ensure that no target in the system is ever at a position were it is not safe. This
modeling process could be extended to other safety constraints for the system and
identifying those would be an interesting future work line to extend on the framework
presented in this thesis.
Game-Theoretic and Logical Modeling of Multi-agent Coordination in Search and Rescue Scenarios
33
==PAGE:42==
• Liveness - The system eventually makes progress or completes its tasks. For the
system presented in this thesis the progress is for every agent to be either guided to
the safehouse or extracted by the extraction team. In both cases we represent this
as ∀t ∈ΣT , hasBeenExtracted(t) and so liveness in the system can be modeled
as:
⟨⟨ΣD ∪ΣT ⟩⟩F(∀t ∈ΣT , hasBeenExtracted(t))
This formula reads as the coalition off all drones and targets has an strategy to
ensure that every target agent, meaning ∀t ∈ΣT is either guided to the safehouse
or extracted by the extraction team.
• Correctness - The system behaves according to its formal specification under all
expected conditions. In the case of our system this behavioral formal specifications
are collected within the flowcharts for the different modules of the SAR process
presented in this section. One example of such constraints would be: whenever a
drone is not taking part on a rescue protocol, wether it be as a guide, scout or helper
in the finding scape routes protocol (see section 4.5), that drone will be exploring
(see section 4.1). This is modeled in ATEL+EAL as:
⟨⟨ΣD ∪ΣT ⟩⟩G(∀d ∈ΣD, (isExploring(d) ∨isGuiding(d, t)∨
isScouting(d, t) ∨isFindingRoutes(d, s)))
Where t ∈ΣT and s ∈ΣD, s ̸= d
In summary, the properties of safety, liveness, and correctness constitute essential guar-
antees for the execution of autonomous multi-agent search and rescue missions. By
expressing these properties within the formal framework of ATEL+EAL, we enable not
only precise specification but also automated verification through our proposed AETS
system. These examples demonstrate how complex system behaviors can be encoded
using epistemic and temporal constructs. Future extensions to this work could incorporate
additional properties such as robustness or resilience, further strengthening the system’s
guarantees under partial observability and uncertainty.
34
Game-Theoretic and Logical Modeling of Multi-agent Coordination in Search and Rescue Scenarios
==PAGE:43==
5
Communication and Consensus
In scenarios characterized by uncertainty and partial observability, effective cooperation
among drones requires common knowledge. Shared epistemic states enable agents to
coordinate actions, interpret data consistently, and make strategic decisions, even when
individual knowledge is incomplete. In our system, achieving common knowledge is par-
ticularly crucial for aligning beliefs about explored areas, the state of targets, and plans
for task allocation.
5.1
Communication via the Alternating Bit Protocol (ABP)
To facilitate reliable communication under constraints such as message loss, the system
uses the Alternating Bit Protocol (ABP) [SDN]. ABP is a robust, low-level protocol that
ensures reliable communication over unreliable channels.
For this protocol to work we require the following assumptions:
• Message correctness: While messages may be lost, any received message is as-
sumed to be correct.
• Fairness assumption: If a message is sent infinitely often, it will eventually be re-
ceived.
And through this protocol we ensure:
• Safety: Messages are received in the correct order and no incorrect bits are sent;
• Liveness: All bits of the message sequence will eventually be sent and received.
ABP supports the transmission of infinitely long sequences of bits and can be modeled
within an Alternating-time Temporal Epistemic Logic (ATEL) system as a three-agent in-
teraction: the sender, the receiver, and the environment. This abstraction makes it well
suited for modeling reliable communication in multi-agent systems operating under partial
observability.
5.2
Achieving Consensus: The UAV Consensus Protocol
(UCP) and Social Network Dynamics
To coordinate decisions among multiple drones, particularly in the presence of potentially
faulty agents, we implement the UAV Consensus Protocol (UCP, see [Che+22]), which
builds on reliable communication to achieve distributed agreement. In this thesis I will
be implementing this protocol as part of the framework provided and I will extend it by
including concepts from social network dynamics in order to create a new consensus
function for the protocol that better fits dynamic environments such as the one presented
in this thesis (see section 5.4).
This process has three phases:
1. Message Exchange Phase:
• Each drone exchanges signed messages with all others for t+1 rounds, where
t ≤n−1
3 , with n being the total number of drones in the fleet. These values,
when received, are stored in a construct referred to as as the UCP Matrix,
unique to each agent.
Game-Theoretic and Logical Modeling of Multi-agent Coordination in Search and Rescue Scenarios
35
==PAGE:44==
• Missing or unresponsive agents are represented by a placeholder value ζX ,
where the superscript X tracks how many rounds that particular piece of in-
formation has been missing (which can be significant later when reducing the
dimensionality of the data).
2. Consensus Computation Phase:
• Each agent constructs their UCP matrix by storing the received values at UCP_matrix[t]
where t is the current round.
• A consensus function (e.g., majority function 1) is applied iteratively to reduce
the matrix to the desired consensus value.
Figure 5.1: Example of a reduction by the consensus function of an UCP matrix for a 3
agent UAV consensus protocol. For the meaning of the function BEL refer to section 5.3.
3. Reintegration of Returning Agents:
• Drones returning to the network request consensus values from other drones
that have not lest the network during the protocol.
• When a drone receives n−a−1
3
+ 1 (a being the number of agents that were
away during the UCP) identical values from it´s peers, it settles on that value
as the one there is consensus on.
In section 7.1 I will be suggesting how one could alter some of the properties of the system
to make it closer to real life applications. This changes will affect the assumptions taken for
this protocols as such is purpose of that section, to asses the performance of the system,
including it‘s communication and consensus protocols, in not ideal situations.
A social network is a structured set of agents interconnected by directed or undirected
edges representing social relationships, influence, or communication links. Formally, it
can be modeled as [KG+15]:
G = (ΣD, Ew)
where:
• ΣD is a finite set of agents, representing the drones in our system M, that take the
place of nodes on the network´s graph.
• Ew ⊆ΣD × ΣD is a set of edges encoding relationships such as trust (the one we
go by in our scenario), visibility, or communicative access.
In our weighted directed network, each edge (ai, aj) ∈Ew carries a weight wij ∈[0, 1],
indicating the degree of confidence that agent ai assigns to agent aj. Our social network
1A majority function is a type of function that returns the most frequent value among it’s inputs
36
Game-Theoretic and Logical Modeling of Multi-agent Coordination in Search and Rescue Scenarios
==PAGE:45==
Figure 5.2: Example of a social network.
will also accept reflexive edges that will represent the trust that an agent has on their own
information.
5.3
Social Network Communication
Social network communication refers to the local exchange of beliefs, information, or
intentions among agents through the links defined by a social network. Given a network
G = (ΣD, Ew) and a belief function bx(sp) : S →[0, 1] representing agent x’s probabilistic
assessment over a set of strategies for proposition p, sp, the process of communication
consists of iterative updates of beliefs according to the beliefs of neighboring agents.
For the purpose of this paper the strategies will be possible values for each individual
proposition in Π. For a given proposition p ∈Π there are three possible values, encoded
in binary way as V = {00, 01, 10} each respectively imply Ki(p), ¬Ki(p) and Ki(¬p).
Therefore S = Π × |V | and sp represents the three possible values that can be assigned
to the proposition p. With this in mind we now define the belief function bx(sp).
bx(sp) = {
∪
∀s∈sp
bpx(s)}
bpx(s) =





1
if s = BELx(p) before consensus is archived and s ̸= 01
0.01
if s = BELx(p) before consensus is archived and s = 01
0
else
Game-Theoretic and Logical Modeling of Multi-agent Coordination in Search and Rescue Scenarios
37
==PAGE:46==
where BELx(p) is a function that returns the valuation that was last assigned by agent x,
with x ∈ΣD, to proposition p. For example, if agent x scanned position (x, y) some time
steps ago, and perceived that target a was on said position, then:
BELx(agentaAt(x, y)) = KxagentaAt(x, y) = 00
After consensus is archived BELx(p) will return the agreed upon value until a new valuation
for said proposition is assigned. In the previous function a minimal value is assigned to
s = 01 so that the agreed upon value will only be ¬Kxp if no agent in ΣD suggested a
different value.
In the weighted setting, the updated belief of agent x ∈ΣD regarding the strategies for
proposition p at time t + 1 is given by:
b(t+1)
x
(p) = {
∪
∀s∈V
(
∑
j∈ΣD
wxj · b(t)
pj (s))}
where wxj is the trust weight that agent x assigns to j, and b(t)
j (spi) is the belief of agent
j at time t about strategy spi. This process allows for distributed belief updating, where
agents converge toward shared strategies or knowledge under the influence of their social
connections.
The weight function in our paper will be proportional to the height of flight and inversely
proportional to the uncertainty of the agent. Our weight function will therefore be defined
as follows:
wi(j) =







0.8
|{∀p∈Π|¬Kjp}|
if KjIsFlyingHigh(j)
0.5
|{∀p∈Π|¬Kjp}|
if ¬KjIsFlyingHigh(j)
0.2
|{∀p∈Π|¬Kjp}|
if Kj¬IsFlyingHigh(j)
In the previous equation, we want to assign higher values to the agents that are flying at
a higher altitude and therefore if KjIsFlyingHigh(j) for j, a ∈ΣD, meaning that agent
j communicates that it is flying at a high altitude, then it assigns a higher value than
if Kj¬IsFlyingHigh(j), where agent j would have anounced that it is flying at a lower
altitude ( 0.8
x for a high altitude agent, versus 0.2
x , for a low altitude agent). These values
are a conjecture and I would recommend to adapt them experimentally if this framework
is implemented. In case of ¬KiIsFlyingHigh(j) we assign to it an intermediate value as
we entertain the possibility of it been at high altitude but we are unsure about it (in this
case we assign 0.5
x which is smaller than the value for a high altitude agent, 0.8
x , and larger
than the value for a low altitude agent, 0.2
x ). In short we consider agents at high altitude to
be the experts and assign a medium degree of expertise to those whose altitude we are
unsure of. The denominator of our functions counts the number of propositions for which
agent j is not sure of their valuation (|{∀p ∈Π | ¬Kjp}|) meaning that the trust agent i
deposits on agent j will be inversely proportional to the uncertainty of agent j.
5.4
Weighted PSCF as Consensus Function
A probabilistic social choice function (PSCF) is a mechanism for aggregating the proba-
bilistic beliefs held by individual agents into a single group-level probability distribution for
38
Game-Theoretic and Logical Modeling of Multi-agent Coordination in Search and Rescue Scenarios
==PAGE:47==
the hole society or coalition over some strategies. Each agent contributes to the final de-
cision in proportion to their influence weight, as presented in the previous sections. To be
more precise the weighted PSCF or wPSCF is a mapping from the individual probability
values of each agent to a weighted arithmetic mean of these values that represents the
society´s probability values.
b(p) = {
∪
∀s∈V
(
∑
j∈ΣD
wj ∗bpj(s))}
The consensus function as identified in subsection 6.2 of this paper and in the context
of decentralized learning is a mathematical rule that determines how local models, be-
liefs, or parameters are aggregated across agents (nodes) in a network to move toward
agreement (consensus). In the paper A consensus protocol for unmanned aerial vehicle
networks in the presence of Byzantine faults [Che+22], the authors selected a majority
function for this purpose, but here,due to the dynamicity of the environment, I considered
a more complex approach based on social dynamics that will allow me to account for
several of the dynamic parameters of the context. With this in mind I propose to use a
wPSCF as a consensus function for the system presented on this paper.
The idea of the consensus function in the UAV Consensus Protocol is to recursively con-
vert M[t + 1]2 to M[t]. This conversion process continues until t = 0, which will be the
consensus value. In each round we will select the strategy with the highest degree of
society’s belief. At his point, in order for our wPSCF to be a valid consensus function we
just need to define the way it handles missing information and given the epistemic nature
of our representation all missing information can be treated as 10 inputs, meaning that
¬Ki(p) for p ∈Π and a ∈ΣD. In the setup provided in this paper the UCP matrix stores
the strategies and by reducing its dimensionality we are changing the strategies set for
the next rounds of reduction.
Due to the nature of UCP the belief update formula is substituted by the recursive reduction
in dimensionality of the UCP matrix and the beliefs are recomputed after every reduction
process to account for the new distribution in values over the strategies. We could also
say that belief update is implemented based on the dynamic change of the strategies, by
adjusting spi ∀i ∈ΣD through changing the UCP matrix in every round and recomputing
b(s), instead of the believes of the previous rounds.
Let´s now go over a simplified example of how the majority function proposed in this
section would apply to our SAR scenario. Let´s say we have three drones and one target.
π(w) is shared but not common knowledge among the drones. After communicating they
will all agree on their vielievs about the the current world model, w, and therefore we will
have one unique BELx for ∀x ∈ΣD.
For the purpose of this example we have that:
• ΣD = {a1, a2.a3}
• ΣT = {t}
• Π =
{ IsFlyingHigh(a1), IsFlyingHigh(a2),
IsFlyingHigh(a3), agenttAt(0, 0)
}
2M[t] being the UCP matrix at round t of the communication between drones as part of UCP.
Game-Theoretic and Logical Modeling of Multi-agent Coordination in Search and Rescue Scenarios
39
==PAGE:48==
• BELa1(p) =











Ka1p
if p = IsFlyingHigh(a1)
¬Ka1p
if p = IsFlyingHigh(a2)
Ka1¬p
if p = IsFlyingHigh(a3)
Ka1p
if p = agenttAt(0, 0)
• BELa2(p) =











Ka2p
if p = IsFlyingHigh(a1)
Ka2¬p
if p = IsFlyingHigh(a2)
¬Ka2p
if p = IsFlyingHigh(a3)
¬Ka2p
if p = agenttAt(0, 0)
• BELa3(p) =











Ka3p
if p = IsFlyingHigh(a1)
Ka3¬p
if p = IsFlyingHigh(a2)
Ka3¬p
if p = IsFlyingHigh(a3)
¬Ka3p
if p = AgenttAt(0, 0)
• π(w) =
{
IsFlyingHigh(a1), agenttAt(0, 0)
}
With this definitions down we can now start applying the formulas to get the weights for
every agent as shown is table 5.1:
a1
a2
a3
wa1
0.8
1
0.2
2
0.2
1
wa2
0.8
1
0.2
2
0.2
1
wa3
0.8
1
0.2
2
0.2
1
Table 5.1: Table capturing all weights (wi(j))
40
Game-Theoretic and Logical Modeling of Multi-agent Coordination in Search and Rescue Scenarios
==PAGE:49==
as well as their beliefs, recollected in tables 5.2 to 5.5:
00
01
10
ba1
1
0
0
ba2
1
0
0
ba3
1
0
0
Table 5.2: Table with the probabilistic assessment of every agent over SIsFlyingHigh(a1) in
our example.
00
01
10
ba1
0
1
0
ba2
0
0
1
ba3
0
0
1
Table 5.3: Table with the probabilistic assessment of every agent over SIsFlyingHigh(a2) in
our example.
00
01
10
ba1
0
0
1
ba2
0
1
0
ba3
0
0
1
Table 5.4: Table with the probabilistic assessment of every agent over SIsFlyingHigh(a3) in
our example.
Now we just need to apply our majority function and we get:
• For p = IsFlyingHigh(a1) we have that b(p) = {1.1, 0, 0}
• For p = IsFlyingHigh(a2) we have that b(p) = {0, 0.008, 0.3}
• For p = IsFlyingHigh(a3) we have that b(p) = {0, 0.002, 0.9}
• For p = AgenttAt(0, 0) we have that b(p) = {0.8, 0.003, 0}
and therefore the agreed upon BELx function, ∀x ∈ΣD, is:
BELx(p) =











Kaxp
if p = IsFlyingHigh(a1)
Kax¬p
if p = IsFlyingHigh(a2)
Kax¬p
if p = IsFlyingHigh(a3)
Kaxp
if p = agenttAt(0, 0)
Which in this case perfectly reflects the evaluation of the current world, π(w).
Game-Theoretic and Logical Modeling of Multi-agent Coordination in Search and Rescue Scenarios
41
==PAGE:50==
00
01
10
ba1
1
0
0
ba2
0
1
0
ba3
0
1
0
Table 5.5: Table with the probabilistic assessment of every agent over SAgenttAt(0,0) in our
example.
42
Game-Theoretic and Logical Modeling of Multi-agent Coordination in Search and Rescue Scenarios
==PAGE:51==
6
The System After the Inclusion of EAL
In this section, we analyze how the integration of Epistemic Action Logic (EAL) transforms
the structure and behavior of our Alternating-time Epistemic Transition System (AETS).
Specifically, we examine the effects of EAL on two key components of the system: the
transition function, which governs the evolution of states under agent actions, and the
epistemic relations, which capture the knowledge agents hold about the system and each
other. These modifications reflect the dynamic nature of knowledge and action introduced
by EAL, and lay the groundwork for a richer, more expressive semantic framework unique
to this paper
6.1
The System´s Transition Function
The AETS as presented in this paper is a merge between two different kripke models. A
kripke model for alternating temporal logic, that implements the transition function (defined
by δ) as it´s accessibility relation between all possible world models (defined by Q), and a
second kripke model for the epistemic section of ATEL that I will further explain in section
6.2.
For now let´s focus on the kripke model for alternating temporal logic defined based on
the elements of the AETS as follows:
M = ⟨Π, Σ = ΣD ∪ΣT , Q, δ, π⟩
All elements of M are as presented in section 2 but including the addition of EAL to the
original AETS we require some modification over the original idea of the transition function
for a model such as M.
In AET systems without dynamic logic inclusions, as defined by model M, the transition
function specifies the evolution of the system based on joint action profiles1 for the agents
in the system. For systems limited to temporal logics this transition happens between two
points of the same model and implies a temporal succession between states.
In the example provided in figure 6.1 the different elements of M are:
• Π = {p1, p2}
• Σ = {a1, a2}
• Q = {w1, w2, w3}
• δ(w, j) =











{w2}
if w = w1 and j = {a,c}
{w3}
if w = w1 and j = {a,d}
{w1}
if w = w2 and j = {a,c}
{w3}
if w = w2 and j = {b,d}
• π(w) =





{p1}
if w = w1
{p1, p2}
if w = w2
{}
if w = w3
1a joint action profile been a set that specifies what action each agent in Σ will make at a given timestep.
If any of the actions for any agent are missing we will refer to this as a partial joint action profile.
Game-Theoretic and Logical Modeling of Multi-agent Coordination in Search and Rescue Scenarios
43
==PAGE:52==
Figure 6.1: Example of a kripke model for an ATL system.
The lambda function just presented can be extended to allow for partial joint action schema
as parameters but instead of returning a singleton it will instead return a set of possible
worlds that satisfy the constrains given in that particular partial joint action schema for the
specified world.
δ(w, j) =



































...
{w2, w3}
if w = w1 and j = {a,ø}
{w3}
if w = w1 and j = {ø,d}
{w2}
if w = w1 and j = {ø,c}
{w1}
if w = w2 and j = {a,ø}
{w1}
if w = w2 and j = {ø, c}
{w3}
if w = w2 and j = {ø,d}
{w3}
if w = w2 and j = {b,ø}
{}
else
From this extended definition of the transition function we can see that given a world
w | w ∈Q and a joint action profile j = {ac1, ac2, ...} | ∃aci∀ai ∈Σ, aci ̸= we can also
calculate δ(w, j) as the exclusive union of the sets returned by the partial joint action
schema (ji) that make up j:
44
Game-Theoretic and Logical Modeling of Multi-agent Coordination in Search and Rescue Scenarios
==PAGE:53==
δ(w, j) = {
∩
∀ji
δ(w, ji) | ji ⊆j,
∪
∀ji
ji = j}
The else case within the transition function handles the presence of invalid actions in the
joint action schema, which are defined as actions that cannot be executed in a given world
w due to the preconditions of said actions not holding on w. The presence of one or more
invalid actions in the input action schema for the transition function will always return an
empty set.
As an example:
δ(w, {a, d}) = δ(w, {a, }) ∩δ(w, {, d}) = {w2, w3} ∩{w3} = {w3}
Now, with the inclusion of EAL to our original AETS we find ourselves in need of a transition
function that works with pointed kripke models instead of worlds, sue to the fact that some
actions will alter the epistemic relationships of our AETS therefore returning a point in a
different model/AETS. The effects of product update to the ATEL system were already
discussed in depth in section 3.6 so here I will focus in providing an example of the altered
transition function to showcase the changes in the inner workings of the system. Our new
δ function with the modifications for EAL we will henceforth call δd(w, j), having that w =
(M, w) where M is a kripke model and w ∈Q of M, and we will define a new kripke model
that utilizes this function called Md:
Md = ⟨Π, Σ, Q, δd, πd⟩
Now in order to express the difference between δ and δd we need to refer to the action
types as presented in section 3.9.1. Here it is important to clarify that for ontic actions there
is no difference between both transition function, except for the fact that we now work with
pointed kripke models and not worlds within one single kripke model, and therefore this
new transition function, δd, can somehow be thought of as an extension of δ to include
epistemic actions in the system. We also need to come back to the idea of action models
as presented in section 3.6, and define our action model A. The idea of product update
has a big impact in the epistemic accessibility relation of the different ATEL systems we
will be transitioning to, but this effect will be explored in section 6.2 and in this section
those models will be simplified to their temporal logic versions as represented by models
M and Md. From this point onward ontic actions will be represented as oi and epistemic
actions as ei | ei ∈E of A. Also we will be working with pointed world models which are
touples (M,w) such that w ∈Q of M.
A = ⟨E, {∼a}∀a∈ΣD, pre⟩
In the example on figure 6.2 the different elements of Md are:
• Π = {p1, p2}
• Σ = {a1, a2}
• Q = {w1, w2, w3}
Game-Theoretic and Logical Modeling of Multi-agent Coordination in Search and Rescue Scenarios
45
==PAGE:54==
Figure 6.2: Example of δd over model Md. In this example the epistemic accessibility
relation od the models is represented by doted lines to help perceive the effect of epistemic
actions in the system but this relations will not be included as part of the models in this
section. All epistemic lines refer to the epistemic relation for both agents.
• δd(w, j) =











{(Md, w2)}
if w = (Md, w1) and j = {o1, o3}
{(Md[A], w2)}
if w = (Md, w1) and j = {o1, e1}
{(Md, w1)}
if w = (Md, w2) and j = {o1, o3}
{(Md, w3)}
if w = (Md, w2) and j = {o2, o4}
• πd(w) =





{p1}
if w = (Md, w1)
{p1, p2}
if w = (Md, w2)
{}
if w = (Md, w3)
, the elements of the action model A are:
• E = {e1}
• ∼a1 (e) =
{
{e1}
if e = e1
• ∼a2 (e) =
{
{e1}
if e = e1
• pre(e) =
{
{¬p2}
if e = e1
and the elements for model Md[A] are:
• Π = {p1, p2}
• Σ = {a1, a2}
• Q[A] = {w′
1, w′
2, w3} | w′
i = (wi, e1), wi = (wi, )
• δd[A](w, j) =











{(Md[A], w′
2)}
if w = (Md[A], w′
1) and j = {o1, o3}
{(Md[A], w3)}
if w = (Md[A], w′
1) and j = {o1, o5}
{(Md[A], w′
1)}
if w = (Md[A], w′
2) and j = {o1, o3}
{(Md[A], w3)}
if w = (Md[A], w′
2) and j = {o2, o4}
46
Game-Theoretic and Logical Modeling of Multi-agent Coordination in Search and Rescue Scenarios
==PAGE:55==
• πd[A](w) =





{p1}
if w = (Md[A], w′
1)
{p1, p2}
if w = (Md[A], w′
2)
{}
if w = (Md[A], w3)
The differences between δd and δd[A] are due to the fact that we presume both ontic
and epistemic actions to be able to have epistemic preconditions and therefore the set of
actions available for a given agent in a particular world is model dependent.
6.2
The system´s Epistemic Accessibility Relations
As commented in the previous section we will now focus on the second of the two simpler
kripke models that together make our AETS. This system, Me, focuses on modeling the
uncertainty of every agent in each world w | w ∈Q based on their beliefs about the
evaluation of the current world.
Me = ⟨Π, Σ = ΣD, Q, {∼a}∀a∈Σ, π⟩
The elements that make up Me follow the same nomenclature as the ones explained in
section 2 as part of our AETS, from this we can see that Me ⊂AETS.
In the example provided in figure 6.3 the elements of Me are:
• Π = {p1, p2}
• Σ = {a1, a2}
• Q = {w1, w2, w3}
• ∼a1 (w) =





{w1, w2}
if w = w1
{w1, w2}
if w = w2
{}
if w = w3
• ∼a2 (w) =





{w1, w3}
if w = w1
{}
if w = w2
{w1, w3}
if w = w3
• π(w) =





{p1}
if w = w1
{p1, p2}
if w = w2
{}
if w = w3
This example is interesting because it represents an scenario where, while none of the two
agents individually know in which world they are, it is shared knowledge among them. In
this situation it is enough for one of them to publicly anounce what they know for the other
to be certain about what the current world model is as we will see in the following example
where we will adress the effect of epistemic actions and product update in the epistemic
relations of the agents in model Me. As it happened in the previous section, several of
the functions from Me will be adapted to work with pointed kripke models instead of world
models now that we are including EAL into out initial epistemic model.
In the example provided in figure 6.4 the elements of Med are:
• Π = {p1, p2}
• Σ = {a1, a2}
Game-Theoretic and Logical Modeling of Multi-agent Coordination in Search and Rescue Scenarios
47
==PAGE:56==
Figure 6.3: Example of {∼a}∀a∈Σ in model Me. In this example ∼a1 is represented by
the dashed green lines and ∼a2 but the red ones. This relations respectively encode the
epistemic formulas Ka1(p1) and Ka2(¬p2).
• Q = {w1, w2, w3}
• ∼a1 (w) =





{(Med, w1), (Med, w2)}
if w = (Med, w1)
{(Med, w1), (Med, w2)}
if w = (Med, w2)
{}
if w = (Med, w3)
• ∼a2 (w) =





{(Med, w1), (Med, w3)}
if w = (Med, w1)
{}
if w = (Med, w2)
{(Med, w1), (Med, w3)}
if w = (Med, w3)
• π(w) =





{p1}
if w = (Med, w1)
{p1, p2}
if w = (Med, w2)
{}
if w = (Med, w3)
, the elements of A are:
• E = {e1(a), e2(a), e3(a), e4(a)} | a ∈Σ
• ∼a1 (e) =











{e1(a)}
if e = e1(a)
{e2(a)}
if e = e2(a)
{e3(a)}
if e = e3(a)
{e4(a)}
if e = e4(a)
48
Game-Theoretic and Logical Modeling of Multi-agent Coordination in Search and Rescue Scenarios
==PAGE:57==
Figure 6.4: Example of {∼a}∀a∈Σ in models Med and Med[A]. Here we can observe the
effect several different public announcements in the system, one per event.
• ∼a2 (e) =











{e1(a)}
if e = e1(a)
{e2(a)}
if e = e2(a)
{e3(a)}
if e = e3(a)
{e4(a)}
if e = e4(a)
• pre(e) =











{Ka(p1)}
if e = e1(a)
{Ka(¬p1)}
if e = e2(a)
{Ka(p2)}
if e = e3(a)
{Ka(¬p2)}
if e = e4(a)
and the elements of Med[A] are:
• Π = {p1, p2}
• Σ = {a1, a2}
• Q[A] = {(w1, e1), (w1, e4), (w2, e1), (w2, e3), (w3, e2), (w3, e4)}
• ∼a1 [A](w) =



















{(Med[A], (w1, e1)), (Med[A], (w2, e1))}
if w = (Med[A], (w1, e1))
{(Med[A], (w1, e4))}
if w = (Med[A], (w1, e4))
{(Med[A], (w2, e1)), (Med[A], (w1, e1))}
if w = (Med[A], (w2, e1))
{(Med[A], (w2, e3))}
if w = (Med[A], (w2, e3))
{(Med[A], (w3, e2))}
if w = (Med[A], (w3, e2))
{(Med[A], (w3, e4))}
if w = (Med[A], (w3, e4))
• ∼a2 [A](w) =



















{(Med[A], (w1, e1))}
if w = (Med[A], (w1, e1))
{(Med[A], (w1, e4)), (Med[A], (w3, e4))}
if w = (Med[A], (w1, e4))
{(Med[A], (w2, e1))}
if w = (Med[A], (w2, e1))
{(Med[A], (w2, e3))}
if w = (Med[A], (w2, e3))
{(Med[A], (w3, e2))}
if w = (Med[A], (w3, e2))
{(Med[A], (w3, e4)), (Med[A], (w1, e4))}
if w = (Med[A], (w3, e4))
Game-Theoretic and Logical Modeling of Multi-agent Coordination in Search and Rescue Scenarios
49
==PAGE:58==
• π[A](w) =





















{p1}
if w = (Med[A], (w1, e1))
{p1}
if w = (Med[A], (w1, e4))
{p1, p2}
if w = (Med[A], (w2, e1))
{p1, p2}
if w = (Med[A], (w2, e3))
{}
if w = (Med[A], (w3, e2))
{}
if w = (Med[A], (w3, e4))
As we can see in the example provided the public announcement of certain information
changes the uncertainty of the agents who did not know that information, and in this par-
ticular scenario, allows said agents to be certain about the current world state. This is but
one of the many possible interactions that EAL allows us to model (e.g private announce-
ments) and one of the most simple ones. Nonetheless this example will help the reader
to understand how the inclusion of EAL alters the original caracteristics of the epistemic
relations of our AETS.
50
Game-Theoretic and Logical Modeling of Multi-agent Coordination in Search and Rescue Scenarios
==PAGE:59==
7
Conclusion
This thesis has presented a novel framework for modeling Search and Rescue (SAR) mis-
sions executed by autonomous fleets of drones. These missions are centered around the
detection and extraction of multiple lost targets within a dynamic and partially observable
rescue area. The proposed model builds upon the Alternating-Time Epistemic Transition
System (AETS), enriched with modal operators from Epistemic Action Logic (EAL), en-
abling the representation of sophisticated epistemic interactions among agents and their
environments. This abstract representation offers a tractable yet expressive means of
capturing complex real-world scenarios, laying the groundwork for the development of
more realistic and intricate models in future research.
The background section has outlined the theoretical foundations necessary for under-
standing the construction of the proposed framework. It has emphasized the relevance of
ATEL and justified the integration of EAL as a critical extension—particularly for modeling
multi-agent, temporally dynamic environments with limited observability. Furthermore, the
inclusion of discussions on multi-agent pathfinding and epistemic planning introduces the
algorithmic landscape relevant to the proposed model and explains the rationale behind
specific algorithmic choices.
To address computational tractability, constraints such as limiting recursion depth in gram-
mar rules and restricting the definition of action schemas have been introduced. These
serve as implementation guidelines aimed at maintaining the system’s feasibility for fu-
ture deployment. While these constraints may require adjustment depending on the spe-
cific conditions of implementation, they provide a pragmatic foundation for translating the
model into a functional system.
Section 4 introduces a comprehensive and original model of the SAR process, grounded in
theoretical and domain-specific research. While this model would benefit from validation
and refinement through collaboration with SAR professionals, it constitutes a meaningful
contribution within the scope of this thesis.
A central and particularly challenging aspect of the framework is agent interaction. This
thesis proposes an integrated model combining the Alternating Bit Protocol (ABP) for
transmitting information and the Uniform Consensus Protocol (UCP) for achieving agree-
ment among agents. Notably, the UCP is adapted to dynamic, partially observable con-
texts through the introduction of a novel consensus function based on social dynamics
(Section 5.4). This represents a unique contribution of this work and addresses a critical
gap in the modeling of partially observable decentralized cooperative behavior.
Finally, section 6 illustrates how the integration of EAL modifies the behavior and expres-
sivity of the AETS model. These examples aim to demonstrate the utility and necessity
of this extension, and to support future efforts toward implementation and further devel-
opment.
In summary, this thesis proposes a robust and extensible framework for modeling SAR
missions using autonomous drones. The contributions herein are intended as a founda-
tion for future, more sophisticated models that can ultimately support the realization of
fully autonomous SAR operations. Such developments have the potential to minimize the
exposure of human rescue teams to hazardous environments and to maximize the effi-
ciency and success rate of rescue missions—ultimately contributing to the preservation
Game-Theoretic and Logical Modeling of Multi-agent Coordination in Search and Rescue Scenarios
51
==PAGE:60==
of human life.
7.1
Future Lines of Work
The following directions are proposed as potential extensions to the research presented
in this thesis:
Expansion of Action Schemas: The action schemas introduced in Section 3.11 repre-
sent only a subset of those that could be integrated into the framework. Expanding this
set to include more diverse and intricate action types would significantly enhance the ex-
pressive power of the model. Moreover, while the current examples suffice to illustrate
the utility of the ATEL+EAL grammar, the full potential of this grammar would be better
demonstrated through the modeling of more complex scenarios, which fall outside the
scope of this thesis.
Framework Implementation: The complexity of the proposed framework has, thus far,
confined it to the theoretical domain. A natural extension of this work would involve de-
veloping a practical implementation, guided by the architectural and computational con-
siderations discussed throughout the thesis. Such an implementation would serve as a
proof of concept and facilitate further empirical evaluation.
Identification of Additional System Constraints: In Section 4.8, several properties rel-
evant to the SAR process were identified and discussed. However, the proposed protocol
in Section 4 would benefit from verification and further refinement through collaboration
with domain experts. Such engagement could help uncover additional operational con-
straints and validate the assumptions underlying the model, thereby improving its fidelity
and applicability in real-world scenarios.
Integration of an Expertise Function within the Weighted PSCF Consensus Mech-
anism: Section 5.4 introduces a novel consensus function inspired by social dynamics,
incorporating the notion of agent expertise. While a preliminary conceptualization of this
idea is presented, future work could focus on formalizing and implementing an expertise
function that varies according to the agent and the specific proposition under considera-
tion. For instance, it is reasonable to assume that agents may possess varying degrees of
expertise depending on the nature of the information, particularly when it pertains to their
internal state. Refining this aspect of the consensus model could improve the robustness
and realism of decision-making in collaborative, partially observable environments.
These proposed extensions aim to deepen and broaden the applicability of the framework,
facilitating its evolution from a theoretical construct to a practical tool capable of supporting
real-world autonomous SAR missions.
52
Game-Theoretic and Logical Modeling of Multi-agent Coordination in Search and Rescue Scenarios
==PAGE:61==
Bibliography
[Sme90]
R. Smedinga. “Discrete Event Systems: Deadlock, Livelock, and Livedead-
lock”. In: IFAC Proceedings Volumes 23.8, Part 3 (1990). 11th IFAC World
Congress on Automatic Control, Tallinn, 1990 - Volume 3, Tallinn, Finland,
pp. 523–528. ISSN: 1474-6670. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/S1474-6670(17)
51969-2. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1474667017519692.
[SB01]
Tran Cao Son and Chitta Baral. “Formalizing sensing actions— A transition
function based approach”. In: Artificial Intelligence 125.1 (2001), pp. 19–91.
ISSN: 0004-3702. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0004-3702(00)00080-1. URL:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0004370200000801.
[vW03]
Wiebe van der Hoek and Michael Wooldridge. “Model checking cooperation,
knowledge, and time—a case study”. In: Research in Economics 57.3 (2003).
Logic and the Foundations of the Theory of Games and Decisions, pp. 235–
265. ISSN: 1090-9443. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/S1090-9443(03)00031-0.
URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1090944303000310.
[Wie03]
Michael Wooldridge Wiebe van der Hoek. Cooperation, Knowledge, and Time:
Alternating-time Temporal Epistemic Logic and its Applications. https://static.
aminer . org / pdf / PDF / 001 / 053 / 701 / cooperation _ knowledge _ and _ time _
alternating_time_temporal_epistemic_logic_and.pdf. [Accessed 19-05-2025].
2003.
[HR04]
Michael Huth and Mark Ryan. Logic in computer science: Modelling and rea-
soning about systems. Cambridge University Press, 2004.
[Phi13]
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Social Choice Theory (Stanford Ency-
clopedia of Philosophy) — plato.stanford.edu. https://plato.stanford.edu/
entries/social-choice/. [Accessed 19-05-2025]. 2013.
[Lim14]
Tiago de Lima. “Alternating-time temporal dynamic epistemic logic”. In: Jour-
nal of Logic and Computation 24.6 (2014), pp. 1145–1178. DOI: 10 . 1093 /
logcom/exs061.
[KG15]
Sanne Kosterman and Nina Gierasimczuk. “Collective Learning in Games
through Social Networks”. In: (2015).
[KG+15]
Sanne Kosterman, Nina Gierasimczuk, et al. “Collective Learning in Games
through Social Networks.” In: SocInf@ IJCAI. 2015, pp. 35–41.
[BR16]
Alexandru Baltag and Bryan Renne. Dynamic epistemic logic. June 2016.
URL: https://plato.stanford.edu/ENTRIES/dynamic-epistemic/.
[Coo+21]
Martin C. Cooper et al. “A lightweight epistemic logic and its application to
planning”. In: Artificial Intelligence 298 (2021), p. 103437. ISSN: 0004-3702.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.artint.2020.103437. URL: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0004370220301843.
[Ent21]
DJI Enterprise. Public Safety Webinar——Drones in Search Rescue - Insights
from Veteran SAR Pilots. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9Oiud34DYYU&
t=34s&ab_channel=DJIEnterprise. [Accessed 18-05-2025]. 2021.
Game-Theoretic and Logical Modeling of Multi-agent Coordination in Search and Rescue Scenarios
53
==PAGE:62==
[Sil21]
David Silver. “Cooperative Pathfinding”. In: Proceedings of the AAAI Confer-
ence on Artificial Intelligence and Interactive Digital Entertainment 1.1 (Sept.
2021), pp. 117–122. DOI: 10.1609/aiide.v1i1.18726. URL: https://ojs.aaai.org/
index.php/AIIDE/article/view/18726.
[Che+22]
Chien-Fu Cheng et al. “A consensus protocol for unmanned aerial vehicle
networks in the presence of Byzantine faults”. In: Computers and Electrical
Engineering 99 (2022), p. 107774. ISSN: 0045-7906. DOI: https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.compeleceng.2022.107774. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0045790622000763.
[Bel+23]
Vaishak Belle et al. Epistemic planning: Perspectives on the special issue.
2023.
[RSW23]
Rasmus Rendsvig, John Symons, and Yanjing Wang. Epistemic logic. Dec.
2023. URL: https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/logic-epistemic/?utm_source=
chatgpt.com.
[25]
Apr. 2025. URL: https://sailorspeaks.com/2025/03/27/technological-advancements-
maritime-search-rescue-2025/?utm_source=chatgpt.com.
[GC25]
Pedro Antonio Alarcon Granadeno and Jane Cleland-Huang. Land-Coverage
Aware Path-Planning for Multi-UAV Swarms in Search and Rescue Scenarios.
2025. arXiv: 2505.08060 [cs.RO]. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.08060.
[Sal25]
Tarek Salame. Ukraine’s Survival on the Frontline — euroweeklynews.com.
https://euroweeklynews.com/2025/05/08/how- ukraines- firefighting- robot-
became-a-lifeline/. [Accessed 18-05-2025]. 2025.
[Seb25]
Abhishek Sebastian. Soft Robotics for Search and Rescue: Advancements,
Challenges, and Future Directions. 2025. arXiv: 2502.12373 [cs.RO]. URL:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.12373.
54
Game-Theoretic and Logical Modeling of Multi-agent Coordination in Search and Rescue Scenarios
==PAGE:63==
A
Guiding Protocol Flowchart
Figure A.1: Flowchart for the guiding protocol of the SAR process. For a bigger version
of this flowchart see apendix
Game-Theoretic and Logical Modeling of Multi-agent Coordination in Search and Rescue Scenarios
55
==PAGE:64==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
