==PAGE:1==
Design and Optimization of a Multiple Chan­
nel Low­Power High­Speed ADC in 180nm
CMOS Process
Master Thesis
DTU ELECTRO
Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Design and Optimization of a Multiple Channel Low­Power High­Speed ADC in 180nm
CMOS Process
Master Thesis
July, 2025
By
Yaogang Wang
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering, Elektrovej,
Building 325„ 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
https://electro.dtu.dk/
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Section for Department of Elec­
trical and Photonics Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial
fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of statistics.
Yaogang Wang ­ s232232
Signature
Date
ii
Design and Optimization of a Multiple Channel Low­Power High­Speed ADC in 180nm CMOS Process
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Analysis the signal from medical device such as electroencephalograms(EEG) or Brain
interface is a challenge for front­end circuit since these kind of signal is high noise sensi­
tivity. Designing the Analog­to­Digital Converter for medical device is also a trade off in
speed, resolution, power and silicon area.
In this thesis, a Chopper Amplifier with two stage fully differential amplifier designed. This
amplifier achieve 101.83 dB Common Rejection Ratio for high linearity and low noise.
A 5MHz 12 bits Successive Approximation Register (SAR) ADC uses Vcm based bridge
CDAC to reduce the switching energy and area of the DAC. The sampling switches are
bootstrapped to reduce the non­linearity introduced when the input signal is sampled. The
comparator of ADC is dynamic for low power consumption, which asynchronous controlled
to make high speed converting.
Design and Optimization of a Multiple Channel Low­Power High­Speed ADC in 180nm CMOS Process
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Yaogang Wang, MSc Electrical Engineering, DTU
Creator of this thesis template.
Per Lynggaard, Professor, supervisor
iv
Design and Optimization of a Multiple Channel Low­Power High­Speed ADC in 180nm CMOS Process
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Background
1
2
Related Work
3
2.1
Low­Noise Amplifiers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Low­Power ADC Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
3
Analysis and Proposed Solution
7
3.1
Low Noise Amplifier
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
Analog to Digital Converter
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.3
Successive Approximation Register ADC
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
4
Circuit Design and Simulation
23
4.1
Chopper Amplifier Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.2
SAR ADC Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
4.3
Multiple Channel Non­overlap Clock . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
5
OTA Layout
43
5.1
Floorplan
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
5.2
Common­Centroid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
6
Conclusions
45
Bibliography
47
A Appendix 1
51
A.1 SAR Logic in Verilog­A . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
B Appendix 2
54
B.1 Non­overlap clock generator Verilog­a code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
C Appendix 3
56
C.1 12 bits SAR ADC Simulation Result
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
D Appendix 4
59
D.1 Fully Differential Amplifier with Dummy Transistor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
E
Appendix 5
61
E.1 Fully Differential Amplifier Layout . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
E.2 Common­Centroid Calculation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
F
Appendix 6
65
F.1
OTA Sizing Calculation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
Design and Optimization of a Multiple Channel Low­Power High­Speed ADC in 180nm CMOS Process
v
==PAGE:8==
Abbreviations
•
•
•
•
• ADC : Analog to Digital Converter
ASAR : Asynchronous Successive Approximation Register
DAC : Digital to Analog Converter
DNL : Differential Non-Linearity
ENOB : Effective Number Of Bits
• FFT : Fast Fourier Transform
• INL : Integral Non-Linearity
• LSB : Least Significant Bit
• MOS : Metal Oxide Semiconductor
• MSB : Most Significant Bit
• NC : Noise Cancellation
• SSAR : Synchronous Successive Approximation Register
• SNR : Signal to Noise Ratio
• SNDR : Signal to Noise and Distortion Ratio
• SQNR : Signal to Quantization Noise Ratio
• SAR: Successive approximation register
• EEG: 
• LFP: L ocal Field Potential
E lectroencephalogram
vi
Design and Optimization of a Multiple Channel Low­Power High­Speed ADC in 180nm CMOS Process
==PAGE:9==
1
Background
The acquisition and analysis of neural signals, such as electroencephalograms (EEGs),
local field potentials (LFPs), and action potentials, are important for diagnosing neuro­
logical disorders (e.g., epilepsy, Parkinson’s disease), and developing brain­computer
interfaces (BCIs)[1]. Advancements in neuroscience necessitate high­density neural sig­
nal processing, enabling simultaneous recording from a large number of neurons to un­
ravel complex brain network dynamics. In these high­density systems, analog­to­digital
converters (ADCs) play a necessary role, converting continuous analog neural signals
into digital data. Low­power design is paramount for long­term, implantable, and wireless
neural recording, minimizing battery consumption, device size, and tissue heating. Neural
signals are characterized by their low amplitude (microvolts to millivolts), wide frequency
range (from sub­hertz for LFPs to kilohertz for spikes)[2], and low signal­to­noise ratio
(SNR)[3]. High­density recording systems, requiring multiple channels, exacerbate the
challenges of power consumption and data transmission bandwidth. ADCs, with key per­
formance metrics including resolution, sampling rate, power consumption, linearity, and
noise, must be meticulously designed to meet these demands. Successive approxima­
tion register (SAR) ADCs is particularly well­suited for low­power neural signal processing,
offering trade­offs between resolution, speed, and power[4].
Before the analog­to­digital conversion process, neural signals, due to their inherent char­
acteristics, require significant amplification. This crucial pre­processing step is accom­
plished by Low­Noise Amplifiers (LNAs)[5].
As previously mentioned, neural signals,
particularly local field potentials (LFPs) and extracellular action potentials, are extremely
weak, often residing in the microvolt (µV) to low millivolt (mV) range. Furthermore, they
are susceptible to various sources of noise, including thermal noise from the recording
electrodes and surrounding tissue, interference from other physiological signals, and ex­
ternal electromagnetic interference. This low signal amplitude and inherent noise present
a major challenge for accurate signal acquisition. The LNA’s primary function is to boost
the signal strength to a level suitable for ADC input, while simultaneously minimizing the
introduction of additional noise[6]. Key performance parameters for LNAs in this applica­
tion include: 1) High Gain: Sufficient gain is needed to bring the weak neural signals into
the optimal input range of the ADC. 2) Low Noise: The LNA’s noise figure, which quanti­
fies the amount of noise added by the amplifier, must be as low as possible to preserve
the already low signal­to­noise ratio (SNR) of the neural signal. 3) High Input Impedance:
A high input impedance is crucial to minimize loading effects on the recording electrodes,
which minimize signal attenuation. 4) Low Power Consumption: Consistent with the over­
all low­power requirements of high­density neural recording systems, the LNA must con­
sume minimal power to maximize battery life and minimize heat generation, especially in
implantable applications. 5) Sufficient Bandwidth: The LNA’s bandwidth must cover the
frequency range of interest for the specific neural signals being recorded (e.g., 0.1 Hz ­
500 Hz for LFPs, 100 Hz ­ 2 kHz for spikes)[7]. 6) Good Linearity: The LNA must am­
plify the signal linearly to avoid introducing distortion. Common LNA topologies employed
in neural recording include capacitively­coupled amplifiers, operational transconductance
amplifiers (OTAs), and instrumentation amplifiers. Trade­offs exist between these topolo­
gies in terms of gain, noise, power consumption, and area, necessitating careful design
choices based on the specific application requirements. The design of a suitable LNA is
thus a critical front­end component that directly impacts the overall performance of the
Design and Optimization of a Multiple Channel Low­Power High­Speed ADC in 180nm CMOS Process
1
==PAGE:10==
high­density neural recording system and the quality of the data acquired before it even
reaches the ADC.
2
Design and Optimization of a Multiple Channel Low­Power High­Speed ADC in 180nm CMOS Process
==PAGE:11==
2
Related Work
2.1
Low­Noise Amplifiers
The design of low­noise amplifiers (LNAs) for medical signal has been a subject of ex­
tensive research, driven by the demanding requirements of high­density, low­power, and
implantable neural interfaces. Prior work can be broadly categorized based on the LNA
circuit topology and the specific design techniques employed to achieve low noise and
low power consumption.
Several researchers have explored capacitively­coupled instrumentation amplifiers (CCIAs)
for neural recording [8], [9], [10]. These designs typically employ a capacitive feedback
network to achieve high input impedance and good common­mode rejection. [8] pre­
sented a CCIA with DC gain of 40dB, a noise efficiency factor (NEF) of 7.69 and a power
consumption of 0.36 µW, targeting EEG recording. [9] focused on improving noise effi­
ciency factor using DC­servo loop, achieving 3.9 NEF. [10]utilized a Complementary Tran­
simpedance Boosting (CTB) technique to obtain high gain of 49.2dB maintaining a low
NEF. However, CCIAs often suffer from limited gain accuracy due to capacitor mismatch.
While CCIAs offer good noise performance and input impedance, their gain accuracy can
be a limitation, especially in applications requiring precise amplitude information. The
power consumption of these designs also varies significantly depending on the specific
implementation.”
Operational Transconductance Amplifier (OTA)­based LNAs have also been widely in­
vestigated [11], [12], [13]. [11] presented an OTA­based LNA with a folded­cascode ar­
chitecture, achieving a low noise figure. [12] explored the use of subthreshold operation
to minimize power consumption. [13] focused on improving the noise­power efficiency,
the OTA using Current­Reused, achieving NEF of 2.26 with high input impedance of 20
MΩ. However, OTAs can be susceptible to process variations and may require careful
compensation techniques to ensure stability. OTA­based designs offer flexibility in gain
setting and can achieve low noise, but their power consumption can be higher than CCIAs
in some cases. The stability and process sensitivity of OTAs are also important consider­
ations.
Beyond CCIAs and OTAs, some researchers have explored alternative LNA topologies.
[14] proposed a chopper­stabilized amplifiers achieving 1.6 µW with NEF of 1.62.
2.2
Low­Power ADC Design
Successive Approximation Register (SAR) Analog­to­Digital Converters (ADCs) have emerged
as a prominent architecture for low­power neural signal acquisition systems. Their inher­
ent power efficiency, coupled with moderate resolution and speed capabilities, makes
them particularly well­suited for applications where power budget is a critical constraint,
such as implantable neural interfaces. Key advantages of SAR ADCs include their low
dynamic power consumption, small silicon footprint, and ability to operate at low supply
voltages. These characteristics align well with the requirements of high­density neural
recording, where minimizing power dissipation is critical to extend battery life and restrict
heat[15]. While SAR ADCs excel in low­power scenarios, they typically exhibit moderate
sampling rates and resolutions compared to other ADC architectures like Sigma­Delta
converters. This limitation necessitates careful design considerations and trade­offs to
achieve the desired performance for specific neural recording applications. The core of a
Design and Optimization of a Multiple Channel Low­Power High­Speed ADC in 180nm CMOS Process
3
==PAGE:12==
SAR ADC comprises a comparator, a Digital­to­Analog Converter (DAC), and a Succes­
sive Approximation Register (SAR) logic. The conversion process operates in a binary
search manner, iteratively refining the digital output code to represent the analog input
voltage. The conversion cycle begins with the DAC generating a voltage corresponding
to the mid­scale of the input range. The comparator compares this voltage with the input
signal. Based on the comparison result, the SAR logic adjusts the DAC output, succes­
sively halving the voltage step in each iteration until the desired resolution is achieved.
Capacitive DACs are commonly employed in SAR ADCs due to their inherent linearity
and low power consumption, especially in switched­capacitor implementations[16].
While the fundamental principles of SAR ADCs remain consistent, numerous architec­
tural variations have been developed to optimize performance for specific application
requirements. In the context of high­density neural signal acquisition, these variations
often focus on improving energy efficiency, speed, resolution, and linearity. The conven­
tional binary­weighted SAR ADC employs a DAC with binary­weighted capacitors. During
each conversion step, the comparator determines whether the input voltage is above or
below the DAC output, and the corresponding bit in the SAR is set or resets[16].This
architecture is conceptually simple and easy to implement, however, the large capac­
itor spread in the binary­weighted DAC leads to significant area requirements and in­
creased sensitivity to capacitor mismatch, limiting achievable resolution and linearity, es­
pecially in high­resolution designs. The split­capacitor SAR ADC, which addresses the
capacitor spread issue by dividing the most significant bit (MSB) capacitor into smaller
sub­capacitors, significantly reduces the DAC area and improves energy efficiency com­
pared to the conventional binary­weighted architecture[17]. Merged­Capacitor Switching
(MCS) SAR ADCs employ a switching scheme that minimizes the switching energy by
reducing the number of switching transitions and the voltage swing on the capacitors.
This is achieved by merging certain switching operations, which can significantly reduce
switching energy compared to conventional and split­capacitor approaches, making them
attractive for ultra­low­power applications[18]. The other SAR ADC architecture is asyn­
chronous SAR ADCs, which eliminate the need for a high­frequency global clock, relying
instead on internal timing signals generated by the comparator and logic. This reduces
dynamic power consumption, especially at lower sampling rates, and can improve ro­
bustness to clock jitter[19]. To overcome the limitations of individual ADC architectures
and achieve an optimal balance between power efficiency, speed, and resolution, hybrid
ADC architectures have emerged. These architectures combine the strengths of different
ADC topologies and their complementary characteristics to meet the demanding require­
ments of neural signal processing. One of architectures is time­interleaved SAR ADC,
which achieve higher aggregate sampling rates by operating multiple ADC channels in
parallel, with each channel sampling the input signal at a staggered phase of the clock.
While each individual channel operates at a moderate speed, the interleaved operation
effectively multiplies the overall sampling rate[20].
To minimize power consumption, various techniques have been explored. Luo and Liu[21]
proposed a time comparator (T­CMP) comparator operating in the subthreshold region to
achieve power of 3.4 µW. Other technology like Pang [22] propose a splitting compara­
tor and energy saving capacitor array to achieve low power consumption. It achieved
reduction by 69% compared to a conventional switching method, with the SNDR of this
ADC is 58.4 dB and ENOB of 9.4 bits at 500 KS/s sampling rate with an ultra­low power
consumption of 42­µW from a 1­V supply voltage in a 0.18 µm CMOS technology
Capacitor mismatch in the DAC is a major source of nonlinearity in SAR ADCs. To mitigate
this, some calibration techniques should be employed to improve linearity. [23] propose
4
Design and Optimization of a Multiple Channel Low­Power High­Speed ADC in 180nm CMOS Process
==PAGE:13==
a complex one­side switch method (COSS) for high energy­efficiency and high linearity,
achieving 66.9 dB of SNDR . A mismatch error shaping (MES) technique proposed by
Yang[24], which improved SNDR to 90.2 dB in a 20­kHz bandwidth
The other novel self­mismatch calibration technology, like [25], [26], which will not be
explored and applied in my work.
These techniques typically involve measuring the DAC errors and applying correction
factors in the digital domain.
Other approaches include asynchronous SAR logic, which eliminates the need for a high­
frequency clock, and charge­recycling techniques to reduce switching energy in the DAC.
Design and Optimization of a Multiple Channel Low­Power High­Speed ADC in 180nm CMOS Process
5
==PAGE:14==
6
Design and Optimization of a Multiple Channel Low­Power High­Speed ADC in 180nm CMOS Process
==PAGE:15==
3
Analysis and Proposed Solution
3.1
Low Noise Amplifier
3.1.1
Front­End Amplifier in Biomedical Device
Biomedical signal, including Electroencephalogram (EEG) , electrocardiogram (ECG) are
increasingly integral to contemporary clinical diagnostics or treatment across a diverse
range of illnesses. The common challenges for these signals are in their inherent low am­
plitude and low frequency characteristics, which complicate accurate acquisition and anal­
ysis. Concurrently, Brain­Machine Interface (BMI) applications represent another frontier
in biomedical signal processing involving the utilization of brain electrical signals which
include the local field potentials(LFPs) and action potentials(APs). Whether it’s traditional
EEG/ECG monitoring or cutting­edge BMI applications, efficient and accurate process­
ing of these subtle biosignals is the key element for realizing their clinical or functional
potential. EEG signals are typically characterized by a frequency spectrum range from
approximately 0.3 Hz to 100 Hz, with amplitudes generally below 100 µV. ECG waveforms
and LFPs are typically observed within the 0.1 to 150 Hz band, with peak­to­peak ampli­
tudes generally under 5 mV[27][28]. On the other hand, typically APs’s peak amplitude is
around a few microvolts (µV) within the 0.25 kHz to 5kHz frequency bandwidth[29].
Thus, directly transmit these kinds of biomedical signal into an ADC presents significant
challenges since quantization levels of the ADCs is generally limited which affects the
completeness of information and resolution. At the same time, long­term, uninterrupted
data acquisition is often essential to capture intermittent medical events or to assess
trends. Hence, the objective of amplifier is to introduce minimal additional noise while
providing significant voltage gain with ultra low power.
By amplifying the signal significantly above the noise floor of the subsequent ADC, the
LNA improves the overall system SNR. This is crucial because any noise introduced by the
LNA at its input will be amplified along with the desired signal, whereas noise generated
by the ADC itself will be a smaller fraction of the LNA’s amplified output, thus having a
less detrimental impact on the final digitized signal. A well­designed LNA has a very low
noise figure (NF), indicating its ability to preserve the inherent SNR of the input signal.
3.1.2
Operational Transconductance Amplifier Noise
Thermal Noise
The thermal noise of semiconductor originates from the continuous and random thermal
motion of its charge carriers. Under thermal equilibrium conditions, the motion of these
carriers is isotropic, i.e., the probability of motion in any direction is equal at any given
period. As a result, there is no net flow of charge and no macroscopic DC current can be
observed from an external perspective. This ceaseless random motion produces instanta­
neous localized fluctuations in the charge distribution. These fluctuations manifest them­
selves as tiny instantaneous voltage differences at the terminals of electronic devices.
This spontaneously generated time­varying potential is defined as thermal noise[30].
As noise is a random process, its precise value at any given instant is indeterminate.
The definable quantity, therefore, is the average power of the noise.(can presents as
noise voltage source v2n). Another parameter for quantifying noise is the Power Spectral
Density (PSD)￿which describes the distribution of a signal’s power over frequency. For
thermal noise, the power is uniformly distributed across all frequencies. Therefore, the
Design and Optimization of a Multiple Channel Low­Power High­Speed ADC in 180nm CMOS Process
7
==PAGE:16==
Power Spectral Density (PSD) of thermal noise from a resistor is constant and is given in
figure The total power thermal noise is
Figure 3.1: Thermal Noise PSD
Pn =
∫f1
f2
PSD(f) · df = n0(f1 −f2) = 4kT∆f
(3.1)
where k is the Boltzmann constant and T is the absolute temperature in Kelvin. Thus, for
∆f = 1, the noise voltage of thermal noise is
v2n = 4kTR
(3.2)
For long channel Mosfets, the thermal noise is
v2n = 4kTγ 1
gm
(3.3)
and γ is a parameter in the modeling of thermal noise in the saturation region of MOS
transistors.
Flicker Noise
Flicker noise (or 1/f noise) is another major noise, riginating from charge trapping and de­
trapping at the substrate­oxide interface. The bonds between atoms are “hanging”, which
creates additional energy states, and carriers arriving at these boundaries are randomly
trapped or released from these energy states, creating a random current, or noise. It is
directly related to the carrier mobility and the number of free electrons, which the 1/f noise
is process dependent. The noise voltage is
v2
n,1/f =
K
CoxWL
1
f
(3.4)
At low frequencies, 1/f noise is the dominant noise source. As the frequency increases, its
contribution deceases, eventually falling below the level of frequency­independent ther­
mal noise[31].
3.1.3
Front­End Amplifier
Instrumentation Amplifier
The Instrumentation Amplifier is a specialized type of differential amplifier provide high­
precision, closed­loop gain. It is distinguished by a collection of superior performance
characteristics that make it ideal for applications requiring the accurate amplification of
small differential signals in the presence of large common­mode voltages. Its architecture
8
Design and Optimization of a Multiple Channel Low­Power High­Speed ADC in 180nm CMOS Process
==PAGE:17==
Figure 3.2: Instrumentation Amplifier
is optimized to offer very high input impedance, an exceptionally high common­mode
rejection ratio (CMRR), low intrinsic noise, and excellent linearity.
The typical topology of Instrumentation Amplifier is shown in figure 3.2. Operational ampli­
fiers A1 and A2 realize signal buffering and amplification to ensure high input impedance
of the instrumentation amplifier and reduce the loading effect of the instrumentation am­
plifier on weak signals; operational amplifier A3 amplifies the difference between the
buffered signals while suppressing the common­mode signals of the two inputs to provide
a common­mode rejection ratio. With R1=R2 and R3=R4, the gain of instrumentation
amplifier is
Gain = (1 + 2R1
RG
)RF
R3
(3.5)
Thus, the gain can be adjusted by changing RG[32].
However, the standard Instrumentation Amplifier architecture possesses an intrinsic lim­
itation, which it does not mitigate the 1/f noise and offset voltage to its own internal op­
erational amplifiers. These low­frequency are processed by the amplifier and directly
affect the system’s output accuracy. This limitation is especially critical when operating in
low­frequency signals. This internal noise bottleneck is therefore a challenge for medical
signal and other technology can be considered to employ.
Chopper Amplifier
The chopper technology is to reduce the DC offset and 1/f input noise by modulating
the low­frequency or DC input signal into an AC signal using switches, and the principle
is shown in figure 3.3. Assuing the input signal is DC signal. The DC input signal(Vin)
is modulated into a square wave by the initial chopper stage. The op­amp’s input offset
voltage, (VOS), acts as a DC error source added to the square wave signal at the input. In
Design and Optimization of a Multiple Channel Low­Power High­Speed ADC in 180nm CMOS Process
9
==PAGE:18==
Figure 3.3: Principle of Chopper Amplifier
the frequency domain, this square wave can be decomposed into a fundamental compo­
nent and a series of odd harmonics, which sum with the offset and noise voltages. Then,
the OTA then amplifies the composite signal, which consists of the square wave and the
offset voltage. The amplified composite signal is then transmit into the second chopper
modulator. The square wave component is synchronously demodulated to DC, and the
offset voltage component is chopped, converting it from DC to a square wave. Through
the demodulation process, the original input signal(Vin), is restored to a low­frequency,
whereas the offset voltage and the noise are up­modulated and distributed among the
odd harmonics of the chopping frequency. In the final stage, a low­pass filter (LPF) is
employed to process the signal. The DC component, which corresponds to the original
input, is preserved, and the majority of the up­modulated offset voltage is rejected by the
filter.
3.1.4
Switches
A
B
B
A
(S/D)
(S/D)
(G)
Figure 3.4: Switch Model
The modulator and demodulator of the chopper amplifier is achieved using switches,
which chop the input signal and create square waves with an amplitude proportional to the
input signal. MOS (Metal­Oxide­Semiconductor) transistors are widely used in switches
due to their high switching speed, low power consumption in the off­state, and suitability
for integration in integrated circuits. When the VGS < VT of transistor, transistor opera­
tions in Cut­off Region, which is in OFF STATE. When MOS switch is in ON STATE, MOS
transistor operation in active region, the resistance between drain and source of MOS
transistor is
Ron ≈vDS
iD
=
1
µCoxW
L
(vGS −VT )
(3.6)
10
Design and Optimization of a Multiple Channel Low­Power High­Speed ADC in 180nm CMOS Process
==PAGE:19==
3.1.5
Operational Transconductance Amplifier
Since the biomedical signal’s amplitude is in the microvolt (μV) to millivolt (mV) range,
amplifier require low power consumption with high gain. Moreover, In order to prevent
biological signals from being interfered by common mode noise such as input electrodes
or human activities during the acquisition process, a large input impedance and low noise
amplifier is considered as front end with High Common­Mode Rejection Ratio(CMRR).
Driven by the comprehensive analysis of the above, a two­stage amplifier topology was
determined to be the suitable main amplifier for the chopper amplifier. A two­stage ampli­
fier architecture facilitates the achievement of high open­loop voltage gain (Av = Av1×Av2)
by serially connecting two amplification. Typically, the initial stage is designed as a differ­
ential input amplifier, offering moderate gain and strong common­mode rejection. Sub­
sequently, the second stage, as common­source amplifier, provides the voltage gain and
necessary output swing. In addition, according to Friis formulas for noise
Ftotal = F1 + F2 −1
A2
1
+ F3 −1
A2
1A2
2
+ . . .
(3.7)
where F is the noise figure and A is the voltage gain, the input­referred noise from later
stages is suppressed due to the high gain of this initial stage, resulting in a superior overall
noise performance for the amplifier.
To achieve additional noise reduction, the input differential pair was implemented using
PMOS transistors. The main reason is that PMOS transistors typically exhibit a 1/f noise
that is one to two orders of magnitude lower than NMOS. Since unlike NMOS transistors,
which feature a surface channel, PMOS transistors feature a buried channel when both
NMOS and PMOS transistors utilize an n+ polysilicon gate layer[33].
3.2
Analog to Digital Converter
Modern electronics benefit from a wide spectrum of Analog­to­Digital Converters (ADCs),
each presenting a unique set of performance characteristics. The selection of an appro­
priate ADC for a specific application is fundamentally based by the specific application’s
performance. This decision­making process involves a multi­dimensional trade­off among
several key performance, including power consumption, resolution, conversion speed or
bandwidth and silicon area.
Pipelined ADC
The Pipelined ADC architecture decomposes the high­resolution conversion process into
a cascade of lower­resolution, sequential stages. Each stage in the pipeline is designed
to resolve a small number of bits, typically from 1 to 4 bits. The operation starts in the first
stage, which performs a rough quantization of the analog input signal to determine MSBs
of the final digital word. This partial digital result is simultaneously transmitted into a local
DAC. The analog output of this DAC is then subtracted from the stage’s original input to
compute a quantization error, formally known as the ’residue’. This residue subsequently
amplified by a inter­stage gain amplifier and propagated to the input of the succeeding
stage. This pipelined operation, where each stage works on a different sample simulta­
neously, means that the ADC’s overall sample rate is determined by the time it takes for
a single stage to complete its operation, rather than the time it takes for a sample to travel
through the entire converter. The digital results from each stage are collected over time
and digitally combined to form the final output[34]. The negative side is the high com­
plexity and demanding of the circuit design, since the errors of each stages will gain by
pipeline.
Design and Optimization of a Multiple Channel Low­Power High­Speed ADC in 180nm CMOS Process
11
==PAGE:20==
Flash ADC
The Flash ADC architecture achieves the highest conversion rates of any ADC topology
by employing a massively parallel comparison scheme. For an N­bit Flash ADC, the core
of the Flash ADC consists of 2N −1 comparators a string of (2N) identical resistors. The
collective outputs of the comparator group form a “thermometer code”. In Flash ADC, all
comparators with reference voltages below the input signal level will output a logic high,
and all comparators above the input signal level will output a logic low, which converts the
temperature measurement data into a final N­bit binary output word, which achieve very
high speed[35].
However, as the architecture requires 2N −1 comparators, power consumption and area
scale exponentially with the number of bits (N). And the collective capacitance of all com­
parator inputs constitutes a heavy load, imposing demanding requirements on the driver
[36]
Integrating ADC
Integrating ADC is a high accuracy ADC(typical Dual­Slope Integrating ADC), which is
fundamentally a voltage­to­time (V­T) transformation. The analog voltage is converted
into a time interval proportional to its size, and then the time interval is converted into
a digital output using a reference clock source and a counter. In the first stage (rising
ramp), the input voltage is integrated for a fixed amount of time and the output voltage of
the integrator is proportional to the input voltage. In the second stage (falling ramp), the
input is switched to a known reference voltage of opposite polarity, which back­integrates
the integrator until its output returns to zero. The time required for this downward ramp is
measured, which is proportional to the input voltage. Thus, integrating ADC’s conversion
results are only dependent on the reference voltage and time measurement accuracy
and are not sensitive to the value of the integrating capacitor and resistor, achieving high
accuracy and stability. Still, two integrating steps of a conversion process limit the speed
of conversion[37].
Σ −∆ADC
Sigma­Delta ADC is a class of converter architecture, which able to achieve very high
resolution. Its operational principle is fundamentally based on oversampling and noise
shaping. First, the input signal is sampled at a frequency significantly higher than the
Nyquist rate, which is as oversampling. Oversampling transfer the inherent quantization
noise into a much high frequency spectrum. Subsequently, a digital low­pass filter can
remove this out­of­band noise, and a decimator reduces the sample rate back to the
Nyquist rate, resulting in a high­resolution digital representation of the original signal. The
∆−Σ ADC is shown in figure 3.5. The output of the Σ­Δ modulator is a quantized data
stream generated at a high sampling rate, which the output is most commonly a single­bit
stream. As with other modulator, ∆−Σ modulator produces a digital signal representing
the analog input voltage. However, the ∆−Σ modulator implement an integrator within its
feedback loop. Specifically, the integrator functions as a low­pass filter for the input signal
while simultaneously acting as a high­pass filter for the quantization noise introduced
within the loop, which is noise shaping. Thus, the noise spectral density at the output of
the Σ­Δ modulator is exhibited a non­uniform characteristic.
The core of this process involves differencing the input signal with the 1­bit DAC’s feed­
back output to produce an error voltage (X2). This error signal is then fed into an integra­
tor, the output of which, X3, continuously accumulates this error. The voltage at X3 ramps
in a positive or negative direction, with its slope and polarity being directly proportional to
the magnitude and sign of the voltage at X2. The integrated voltage X3 is supplied to
a comparator. This digital output X4 is generate at each cycle of the system clock and
12
Design and Optimization of a Multiple Channel Low­Power High­Speed ADC in 180nm CMOS Process
==PAGE:21==
Figure 3.5: Σ −∆ADC
serves two purposes: it is the raw output of the modulator (Yi) sent to the digital filter, and
it is simultaneously fed back to the input of the DAC. When the output of the comparator
is switched from high to low or opposite, the 1­bit DAC responds by changing the analog
output voltage of the differential amplifier, which will produce a different output voltage at
X2, leading to the integrator to change in the opposite direction. The time­domain output
pulse wave signal represents the input signal at the sampling rate and is equal to the value
of the input signal if the output pulses are averaged[38][39].
SAR ADC
The Successive Approximation Register (SAR) ADC represents a well­balanced trade­
off between speed, power consumption, and resolution. Typically SAR ADC’s converting
speed is slower than flash (Flash) ADCs but faster than integrating ADCs, and because
of their principle of operation, the power consumption of SAR ADCs is in between that of
Flash ADCs and integrating ADCs. Therefore, it is the best choice for medical application
and will be employed in this design. The details of SAR ADC will shown on chapter 3.3
In conclusion, the performance of different ADC architecture is shown in table
Table 3.1: Performance of different ADC architecture[]
ADC Architectures
Speed
Accuracy (bits)
Power
Successive Approximation (SAR)
Medium (µs)
Medium (10–16 bits)
Low
Sigma­Delta (Σ −∆)
Low (kHz)
High (16–24 bits)
Low
Pipeline
High (GHz)
Medium (12–16 bits)
Medium
Flash
Very high (GHz)
Low
High
Integrating
Very low (ms)
High (>16 bits)
Low
3.3
Successive Approximation Register ADC
The conversion process of a Successive Approximation Register (SAR) Analog­to­Digital
Converter (ADC) is, in essence, a feedback­based implementation of a binary search
algorithm. The fundamental objective is to identify the discrete quantization level that
best represents the analog input voltageVin, within a predefined full­scale range, which
typically extends from 0 to a reference voltage(Vref). The search is performed over 2N
discrete levels within a defined range ( 0 to Vref). Through N successive approximation
steps, the algorithm tests one bit at a time, from MSB to LSB, and converges upon the
digital code that most closely corresponds to the analog input [31].
Design and Optimization of a Multiple Channel Low­Power High­Speed ADC in 180nm CMOS Process
13
==PAGE:22==
Figure 3.6: SAR ADC Architecture
Figure 3.7: The Example Conversion Process of SAR ADC
The typical SAR architecture is shown on figure 3.6. The architecture of a Successive Ap­
proximation Register (SAR) ADC is fundamentally a negative feedback loop comprising
three core elements: a comparator, a Digital­to­Analog Converter (DAC), and the SAR
digital control logic, which is the core of binary search conversion process. The SAR
logic generates a digital test code, which the DAC converts into an analog voltage. The
comparator acts as the error detector of the loop, determining the sign of the difference be­
tween the sampled input voltage and the DAC’s test voltage. The comparator’s single­bit
output provides feedback for the SAR logic to refine its next step, systematically reducing
the error until the best N­bit digital approximation is found. The loop’s primary function is
to iteratively minimize the quantization error through this feedback mechanism[40].
The main complete conversion cycle of SAR ADC consists of two sequential phases.
First is Sampling Phase. In this phase, the analog input signal(Vin) is tracked and then
sampled by a Sample­and­Hold (S/H) circuit. The fundamental purpose of this stage is to
capture an instantaneous value of the input and hold this voltage stable for the duration of
the subsequent conversion process. The control switches of Digital­to­Analog Converter
14
Design and Optimization of a Multiple Channel Low­Power High­Speed ADC in 180nm CMOS Process
==PAGE:23==
(DAC) connect the array to the input signal, allowing it to charge to the voltage Vin. The
next is Conversion Phase. It executes a binary search algorithm controlled by the N­bit
SAR logic. The algorithm resolves one bit per clock cycle, from the MSB to the LSB.
The process is initiated by the SAR logic, which sets the MSB to ’1’ and all other bits to
’0’, which forms an initial trial digital code. This code will also transmit to DAC, which in
turn generates an analog trial voltage, corresponding to half the reference voltage. The
comparator then performs a decision by comparing with the sampled input voltage. Based
on the comparator’s output, the SAR logic decides the final value for bit i. If Vin is higher,
bit i is kept at ’1’; otherwise, it is reset to ’0’. This process is iterated for all remaining bits,
from higher to lower significance, thereby progressively refining the digital approximation
of the input voltage. After N clock cycles, a decision has been made for all N bits. The
final N­bit binary code will store in the Successive Approximation Register[31][41]. The
whole process shown on figure 3.7. The Voltage of the result Vxis
Vx = Vref ·
N
∑
i=1
bN−i · 2−i
(3.8)
, where bN−i is digital result of bit N­i and N is the number of whole bits.
3.3.1
Sample and Hold Circuit
Sample and Hold (S/H) circuit is essential component in Analog­to­Digital Converters. The
main function is to capture and maintain a stable analog voltage level during the analog­to­
digital conversion process, which convert a continuous­time, continuous­amplitude ana­
log signal into a discrete­time, continuous­amplitude signal. The operation of traditional
S/H circuit, is conceptually modeled by a MOS switch and a hold capacitor. In the sam­
pling phase, the MOS switch connect to capacitor, which allow the capacitor voltage to
instantaneously and track the continuous­time input voltage. Upon transitioning to the
hold phase, the switch opens to isolate the capacitor. The charge on the capacitor is then
maintained, resulting in an output voltage that is a stable and represent the input voltage
at the moment of sampling[31].
However, the MOS transistor’s On­Resistance (Ron) is non­linear, which depends on the
gate voltage(VGS).
Ron =
1
µCox W
L (VGS −Vth)
(3.9)
, where VGS = VDD −Vin for MOS switch. Since the sampling time constant is
τ = RonC
(3.10)
, which is non­linearity, it limits the dynamic performance(such as Effective Number of
Bits(ENOB) and Spurious­Free Dynamic Range(SFDR)) by increasing Total Harmonic
Distortion (THD). Thus, the bootstrap S/H circuit will be designed to improve the perfor­
mance. The bootstrap S/H circuit maintain the constant gate­to­source voltage to keep
the Ron in low value and constant. Thus, the sampling time τ is independent of the signal
level, which improves sampling linearity.
3.3.2
Comparator
Within a SAR ADC, the comparator functions as the decision­making unit. The bit­by­bit
binary search, progressing from MSB to LSB, fundamentally depends on the compara­
tor’s ability to provide an accurate and swift ’1’ or ’0’ decision at every stage. Hence,
the comparator’s characteristics fundamentally constrain the overall ADC’s performance
capabilities. Precision of the comparator directly determines the ADC’s ENOB and linear­
ity. Moreover, the comparator’s speed directly dictates the ADC’s conversion rate. The
Design and Optimization of a Multiple Channel Low­Power High­Speed ADC in 180nm CMOS Process
15
==PAGE:24==
comparator’s delay(including both its reset time and regeneration/latch time) constitutes a
bottleneck in each conversion cycle. Thus, a high­speed comparator can directly reduce
the duration of each decision interval, and significantly enhancing the overall sampling
rate of the ADC. Furthermore, the comparator accounts for a major share of an ADC’s
analog power consumption, making minimizing power dissipation a key design objective
for low power ADC.
For the high­speed comparator, the main objective is to optimize the conflict between
operational speed and conversion precision, which performed by a combination of a pre­
amplifier and a latch. The latch comparator function as a positive feedback­based circuit
for high­speed decision implementation, and it rapidly amplifies even a minute input differ­
ential, driving its internal node voltages to exponentially transit towards either the supply
VDD and GND. However, if the input differential voltage is too small, this signal is insuf­
ficient to drive the positive feedback loop. This can lead latch to exhibit a slow response,
potentially falling into a metastable state, or its output decision could be influenced by its
own inherent noise which restricts the achievable resolution. According to the response of
Figure 3.8: Pre­amplifier and latch step response[41]
the combination of a pre­amplifier and a latch in figure 3.8, these combination effectively
integrates the advantages of a negative exponential response circuit (the pre­amplifier)
with those of a positive exponential response circuit (the latch), which is
Since the dynamic comparators eliminate quiescent (static) current, it achieve lower power
consumption. However, a problem of dynamic comparators is the dramatic voltage swing
observed at the internal nodes of latch during operation. The drastic voltage variations
experienced by the internal nodes of the dynamic comparator are reflected back to its
input through the parasitic gate capacitance (Cgs and Cgd) of of the transistors, which
identified as ”Kickback Noise”[42].The pre­amplifier provides isolation between the input
and the latch, acting as a buffer to minimize the impact of noise feedback. The other
problem for the dynamic comparator is the offset, which is largely attributable to device
mismatches. Assuming the gain of pre­amplifier is Apre, pre­amplifier input offset is Vos,pre
and latch offset is Vos,latch. Thus the total offset(Vos,total) can be given as
Vos,total = Vos,latch
Apre
+ Vos,pre
(3.11)
In the other words, the offset of latch is decrease by gain of pre­amplifier.
16
Design and Optimization of a Multiple Channel Low­Power High­Speed ADC in 180nm CMOS Process
==PAGE:25==
3.3.3
Digital­to­Analog Converter
The other critical design consideration for SAR ADCs is the design choice of digital­to­
analog converter (CDAC), which enable the achievement energy efficiency and conver­
sion accuracy. In the N(the N is ADC’s resolution) successive comparisons, the precise
of digital quantized value is determined by the accuracy of input analog voltage. The
main function of CDAC is based on the charge redistribution. The basic structure is the
capacitors array which combined with N (the N is ADC’s resolution) binary­weighted ca­
pacitors Ci = 2i−1C, i = 1, 2, · · · N and a unit capacitor C, which the total capacitance is
Ctotal = 2NC.
Figure 3.9: Charge­Redistribution CDAC
The top plates of all capacitors are connected, as the CDAC’s output node, which is then
connected to the input of the comparator. All bottom plates of the capacitor array are
connected via switches to the analog input Vin. Concurrently, the shared top plate node
Vx (as the comparator input) of all capacitors is also connected to a fixed reference po­
tential, typically ground (GND) or a common­mode voltage (Vcm), through a switch. In the
sampling phase, it is the charge establishment phase. the bottom plates of the capacitor
array connect to Vin, the total charge in capacitor array is
Qtotal = Ctotal · (−Vin)
(3.12)
After, it is charge redistribution and decision­making phase. An N­bit binary search algo­
rithm is executed. Assuming after k time iteration, the initial total charge (Q total) is redis­
tributed through binary­weighted switching operations on the capacitor bottom plates.
Vx(k) =
N
∑
i=k
bi
Ci
Ctotal
Vref −Vin
(3.13)
where bi is decision of the identified higher digit. Thus, capacitors do not consume static
DC power excepting the transient switching processes. The power consumption is pri­
marily
P ∝C · V 2
ref · fs
(3.14)
3.3.4
Structures of CDAC
The designing of an appropriate CDAC structures is crucial in SAR ADC design, as it di­
rectly affects key performance metrics such as resolution, linearity, power consumption,
conversion speed, and silicon area. C.C.Liu in 2010 proposed the Monotonic Switching
[43], it, which the common­mode voltage at the comparator’s input is maintained at an ap­
proximately constant level achieving excellent Differential Non­Linearity (DNL). However,
it causes the unnecessary capacitor charging and discharging, and increase the power
Design and Optimization of a Multiple Channel Low­Power High­Speed ADC in 180nm CMOS Process
17
==PAGE:26==
consumption. Y.Chen in 2010 implement Split capacitor DAC in a SAR ADC, which divid­
ing the CDAC array into multiple smaller sub­arrays substantially decreases the overall
silicon area. While, the total unit capacitors is increased to 2N and also causing higher
power consumption. The other structure is Voltage Common Mode (VCM)­based CDAC
switching technique[44]. By introducing a third reference voltage, Vcm(normally is 1
2Vref),
and modifying the switching logic, most switching operations can occur within a smaller
voltage swing (e.g., from Vcm to GND or Vref), achieving lower power consumption. An­
other DAC is shown on Zhu.[45] in 2015 is Bridge DAC Capacitor Array. The N­bit CDAC
is commonly split into an M bit Most Significant Bit (MSB) sub­array and an L bit Least
Significant Bit (LSB) sub­array (where N=M+L), which connected via a bridge capacitor.
This configuration not only minimizes the overall capacitance but also effectively reduces
the silicon area. The summary performance comparison of various CDAC architecture is
shown on table 3.2
Table 3.2: Performance Comparison of Various CDAC Architectures
CDAC Architectures
Total Number Unit Capacitors
Power Consumption
Area
DNL
Monotonic
2N−1
High
Very High
Very Low
Vcm­Base
2N−1
Low
Low
Medium
Split capacitor
2N
High
Low
Low
Bridge capacitor
2
N
2 +1
Very Low
Very Low
High
3.3.5
Vcm Based Bridge Capacitor Array
Vcm Based Switching scheme
According to table 3.2, A CDAC (Capacitive Digital­to­Analog Converter) employing a
Vcm­based and bridge capacitor structure was designed to achieve both low power con­
sumption and area.
By connecting the differential array to Vcm, the Vcm based switching scheme determines
the most significant bit(MSB). The subsequent n−1 bits are estimated by an (n−1) bit array,
as opposed to an n­bit array, which reduces the required capacitance by half compared
to conventional methods[46].The details of the Vcm­based switching is shown on figure
In sampling phase, the total capacitors(Ctotal = (2N −1)Cu)’s bottom plates connected
to the input voltage Vin and The top plate is connected to the common­mode voltage
(Vcm). Then, in charging redistribution phase for bit N­1, initially hypothesizes the MSB
to be ’1’ for V inp( opposite for V inn). To test this, it connects the bottom plate of CN−1
to Vref(typically is VDD) . The voltage of the top plates connected to the input of the
comparator is
Vx(N −1) = −V in + CN−1
Ctotal
(3.15)
Since CN−1
Ctotal = 1
2, it can be written as
Vx(N −1) = −Vin + Vref
2
(3.16)
The comparator compare the potential between positive and negative array. If the value
is 1, keep the connection for N­1 bits. Otherwise, bottom plate of MSB is switch to GND.
Then, continue to next bits. This process is repeated until all bits is determined.
18
Design and Optimization of a Multiple Channel Low­Power High­Speed ADC in 180nm CMOS Process
==PAGE:27==
Vcm
Vip
Vin
Vcm
Vcm
Vcm Vcm
Vcm
C
C
2C
C
C
2C
Vcm
Vcm
V
Vcm
Vcm
C
C
2C
C
C
2C
Vcm
Vcm
Vcm
Vcm
C
C
2C
C
C
2C
Vop> V
?
on
ref
Vref
1_
2 CVref
2
Yes
No
1_
2 CVref
2
1_
8 CVref
2
5_
8 CVref
2
1_
8 CVref
2
5_
8 CVref
2
Figure 3.10: A 3­bit Example of Vcm­based switching procedures.
Typically, Vcm = 1
2vref.The voltage of bottom plates is
vp(i) = vip −vcm +
1
2i−1 vcm + ∑i−1
k=1 2−k · (1 −bk) vref
vn(i) = vin −vcm +
1
2i−1 vcm + ∑i−1
k=1 2−k · bkvref
(3.17)
During the transition from the i­th to the (i+1)­th comparison, if Vop > Von, the potentials
difference of bottom plates in positive and negative array is
vp(i) −vp(i −1) =
1
2i−1 · (1 −bi−1) vref −
1
2i−1 vcm
vn(i) −vn(i −1) =
1
2i−1 · bi−1vref −
1
2i−1 vcm
(3.18)
The energy consumed from the (i−1)­th to the i­th comparison is calculated as
Ei−1→i ={2n−i · (1 −bi−1) C × [(vref −vp(i)) −(vcm −vp(i −1))]
+
i−2
∑
k=1
2n−k−1 · (1 −bk) C × [(vref −vp(i)) −(vref −vp(i −1))]
+ 2n−i−1C × [(vcm −vp(i)) −(vcm −vp(i −1))]
+ 2n−i · bi−1C × [(vref −vn(i)) −(vcm −vn(i −1))]
+
i−2
∑
k=1
2n−k−1 · bkC × [(vref −vn(i)) −(vref −vn(i −1))]
+ 2n−i−1C × [(vcm −vn(i)) −(vcm −vn(i −1))]
} × vref
=
{
2n−i−1 +
1
2i−1 ·
[i−1
∑
k=1
2n−k−1 ·
(
bk −1
2
)
+ bi−1
i−1
∑
k=1
2n−k−1 · (1 −2bk)
]}
CV 2
ref
(3.19)
, where n is the total number of bits, Thus, the total power consumption is
E(x) =
n
∑
i=2
{
2n−i−1 +
1
2i−1 ·
[i−1
∑
k=1
2n−k−1 ·
(
bk −1
2
)
+ bi−1
i−1
∑
k=1
2n−k−1 · (1 −2bk)
]}
CV 2
ref
(3.20)
Design and Optimization of a Multiple Channel Low­Power High­Speed ADC in 180nm CMOS Process
19
==PAGE:28==
From equation 3.20, the switching energy of 12bits Vcm­based CDAC shown in figure 3.20
Figure 3.11: 12Bits Switching Energy in output code
Bridge Capacitor Array
As N scales up, the quantity of unit capacitors exhibits an exponential increase, which
not only necessitates a large area but also introduces substantial interconnect parasitics.
The implementation of bridge capacitor arrays in DACs architectures are highly effective
at minimizing the count of unit capacitors, leading to benefits in both and power efficiency,
silicon area and conversion speed. Nevertheless, these bridge capacitors introduce par­
asitic capacitance into the DAC. This parasitic capacitance consequently degrades the
harmonic distortion and Signal­to­Noise Ratio (SNR) of the converter[45]. Therefore, the
selection of unit capacitors must be careful to prevent capacitance mismatch. Within the
bridge­type DAC capacitor array, the capacitors within both the MSB and LSB arrays are
split, alongside the implementation of redundancy[47].
3.3.6
SAR Logic
The role of the SAR Logic in SAR ADC is not only central control unit of the ADC, but
also precisely managing the entire conversion sequence. The operational principle of a
SAR ADC is an efficient binary search algorithm. Its objective is to determine an N­bit
digital output code that most closely approximates the input analog voltage (Vin) through
successive comparisons within N clock cycles. The SAR logic block is responsible for
executing and controlling this iterative approximation. In phase of Sample and Hold, SAR
Logic provides the bits signal to control logic blocks of CDAC to keep the CDAC in S/H
mode. Then, it moves in Successive Approximation Conversion phase. Over N clock
cycles, the digital output code is sequentially determined bit by bit, initiating with MSB. In
the first clock cycle, the SAR logic sets the MSB of the SAR to ’1’, while the remaining bits
are set to ’0’. This digital code is then converted into an analog voltage, VDAC. Based
on the previously established Vcm method, the result from the CDAC is then compared.
The MSB is assigned ’0’ if the comparator outputs ’1’, and ’1’ if the comparator outputs
’0’. This established MSB value is then transmitted to the CDAC in preparation for the
determination of the next most significant bit. This process repeats bit by bit, from the
MSB until the lowest significant bit is determined. Thus, SAR Logic required to precisely
control timing and transmit the temporarily digital code to CDAC. After N clock cycles, the
SAR logic completes the determination of all bits and get the final conversion result.
20
Design and Optimization of a Multiple Channel Low­Power High­Speed ADC in 180nm CMOS Process
==PAGE:29==
Synchronous SAR ADC
In a conventional Synchronous SAR ADC, the entire conversion sequence is controlled
by a fixed­frequency, global clock signal. Each phase of the bit­by­bit approximation,
including the comparison, decision, and latching of the result, is synchronized to this clock
and must be completed within a predefined number of full clock cycles.
The timing allocation of the synchronous digital logic architecture is determined by two
primary factors. First, the propagation delay of the comparator, which depends on the
magnitude of the input signal — the larger the input amplitude, the shorter the comparator
delay, and vice versa. Second, the settling time of the DAC array, which is governed by the
RC time constant. Specifically, the most significant bit (MSB) capacitor in the CDAC has
the largest capacitance, resulting in the longest voltage settling time. The synchronous
digital logic timing is designed to accommodate the worst­case scenarios of both factors.
Consequently, the maximum operating frequency is limited by the worst­case conditions.
As a result, a significant portion of the timing budget in the synchronous digital logic is
effectively underutilized[48].
Asynchronous SAR ADC
Another more efficient control logic in SAR ADC is Asynchronous control, which is an
adaptive, internally­generated timing . Rather than being triggered by an external clock,
this event­driven logic generates its own high­speed control signals based on the actual
completion of internal operations. It can be achieved using combinational logic and delay
paths or completion detectors. This allows it to create control pulses that are just long
enough for the DAC array to settle and the comparator to make a valid decision for each
specific bit. The system therefore dynamically adapts, running faster for less­demanding
LSB decisions and slower for the more critical MSB decision.
3.3.7
Multiple Channel
A most critical challenge in the design of multi­channel SAR ADCs is the management of
inter­channel crosstalk. The reason for causing crosstalk is often incomplete settling of
the ADC’s internal sampling capacitor during the sampling phase. When the input multi­
plexer switches from a previously selected channel to the current channel, the sampling
capacitor, which may hold a residual voltage from the prior signal, must fully settle to the
new input voltage. If time is insufficient for the capacitor to charge or discharge to the
required precision , a portion of the previous channel’s signal will effectively contaminate
the current measurement. This results in a measurement error where the reading for one
channel becomes dependent on the voltage level of the channel(s) sampled immediately
before it, thereby degrading the overall system accuracy and channel isolation[49].
A solution for precise switch control in analog and mixed­signal circuits is the implementa­
tion of a non­overlapping clock. This clock generator provides clock phases. The charac­
teristic of this clocking scheme is the guaranteed non­overlap period, between the active
states of the different phases[50]. This complete disconnection during the transition elim­
inates any transient short between the two signal paths, thus ensuring their integrity and
isolation.
Design and Optimization of a Multiple Channel Low­Power High­Speed ADC in 180nm CMOS Process
21
==PAGE:30==
22
Design and Optimization of a Multiple Channel Low­Power High­Speed ADC in 180nm CMOS Process
==PAGE:31==
4
Circuit Design and Simulation
4.1
Chopper Amplifier Design
Block
LPF
+
-
+
-
·
·
·
·
Block
Vout
+
-
+
-
+
-
·
·
·
Vin
Vclk
Modulator
Modulator
OTA
Figure 4.1: Chopper Amplifier Circuit
The designed chopper amplifier is as figure 4.1
4.1.1
Chopper Modulator
Figure 4.2: Chopper Modulator Circuit
The chopper modulator is designed by NMOS switch, which gate controlled by clock sig­
nal. To validate the function, put a DC signal in the modulator and get the result in figure
4.3, which demonstrate the chopper modulator’s function.
4.1.2
Operational transconductance amplifier (OTA) Design
XT018 technology MOSFET parameter shown in table 4.1
To achievement the requiement, the specifications of two­stage operational amplifier is in
table 4.2
Design and Optimization of a Multiple Channel Low­Power High­Speed ADC in 180nm CMOS Process
23
==PAGE:32==
Figure 4.3: Chopper Modulator Simulation Result
Table 4.1: XT018 technology Mosfet parameter
Parameters
NMOS
PMOS
Threshold voltage
VTn = 0.33 V
VTp = 0.33 V
Transconductance parameter
KPn = 240 µA/V2
KPp = 57 µA/V2
Sub­threshold slope factor
nn = 1.2
np = 1.3
Thermal voltage
UT = 26 mV
UT = 26 mV
Mobility degradation factor
Ua,n = 27 V
Ua,p = 18 V
Table 4.2: XT018 technology Mosfet parameter
Specifications
Value
Supply Voltage
V DD = 1.8 V
GBW
fGBW = 10 MHz
Bias Circuit
I0 = 1 µA
Open Loop Gain
A = 100 dB
Bandwidth
fw = 20 kHz
Slew Rate(SR)
SR = 10 V/µS
Phase Margin(PM)
PM > 60 o
All the calculation equation used for OTA design are mainly from [51],[52] and [31], which
based on the gm/Id methodology. Miller capacitance can be calculated from SR as
Cc = I0
SR fF
(4.1)
Using the EKV model [53], M1 and M2, as PMOS differential pair, operates in weak in­
version for minimizing the 1/f noise and reducing mismatch. And g1,2 is approximated
as
gm1 ∼= fGBW 2πCc
(4.2)
The inversion coefficient (IC1) for M1, M2 can be found from
ICI :=
((
np · uT ·
gm1
0.5 · I0
)−1
−1
2
)2
−1
4
(4.3)
24
Design and Optimization of a Multiple Channel Low­Power High­Speed ADC in 180nm CMOS Process
==PAGE:33==
Ibias
Ibias
M1
M2
M3
M4
M5
Ibias
Ibias
M6
M7
M8
M9
M12
M11
M13
M14
M17
M18
M16
M15
VDD
Vout-
Vin-
Vin+
Vout+
CMFB
GND
Figure 4.4: OTA Circuit Topology
, which is 1 and M1 and M2 is in in weak inversion. The size of M1 and M2 can also be
calculated from
(W
L )1,2 =
0.5I0
2npKPpIC1u2
T
(4.4)
M3 and M4 operation in strong inversion for higher,transconductance (gm), which inver­
sion coefficient(IC3) is 10.
(W
L )3,4 =
0.5I0
2nnKPnIC3u2
T
(4.5)
The active load M5 operation in strong inversion which inversion coefficient(IC3) is also
10.
(W
L )5 =
I0
2npKPpIC5u2
T
(4.6)
Since the second stage generates the second pole, it is critical for stability. For optimal
phase margin, the RHP
ωp2 ≈3ωGBW ⇒gm7 ≈3gm1
(4.7)
The miller capacitor creates a positive zero, From to the pole­zero cancellation technique,
ωZ =
1
Cc(Rc −
1
gm7 ) ≤ωp2
(4.8)
To cancel the effect of the positive zero, Rc can assume as
Rc ≥
2
gm7
(4.9)
Since the
1
nUT is the minimum gm/ID that can achieve, the current on second stage is 2
times current of first stage, which is I2 = 2 µA The inversion coefficient (IC7) for M7 is
IC7 :=
((
np · uT · gm7
·I2
)−1
−1
2
)2
−1
4
(4.10)
Design and Optimization of a Multiple Channel Low­Power High­Speed ADC in 180nm CMOS Process
25
==PAGE:34==
, which is 1 and also in weak inversion. And size of the M7 is
(W
L )7 =
I0
2npKPpIC7u2
T
(4.11)
M8 also operates in strong inversion(IC8 = 10) and size for M8 is
(W
L )8 =
0.5I0
2nnKPnIC8u2
T
(4.12)
For length of transistor, it is in general given by the required value of Rout to achieve the
gain specification. For calculation, assume the gain of the two stage are the same, which
the gain is
A1 = A2 =
√
A
(4.13)
As fully differential amplifier topology, the gain of the first stage is
A1 = gm1Rout1 =
gm1
go3 + go1
=
gm1
2( 0.5I0
UapL)
(4.14)
The length of M1 and M2 is
L1,2 =
A1I0
Uapgm1
(4.15)
The length of M3 and M4 is
L3,4 = L1,2Ua,p
Ua,n
(4.16)
The calculation of the remaining transistor parameters follows the approach described
previously. M10 is designed for bias circuits. M11­M18 is design for compensation resistor
and M20­M25 is deigned for CMFB circuit. The parameter of transistors for OTA designed
is shown on
Table 4.3: The parameter of transistors for OTA designed
Transistor
W/L
Length(µm)
Width (µm)
gm/Id (V−1)
M1,M2
5
2.2
11
21.28
M3, M4
2
1.65
3.3
20.6
M5
10
1
10
21.52
M7, M9
20
2.3
46
20.97
M6 , M8
5
1
5
20.17
M10
10
1
10
21.36
M11, M15
2
0.22
0.5
15.75
M12, M16
10
1
10
21.5
M13, M14, M17, M18
6
0.5
10
23.77
M20, M21, M22, M23
45
0.22
6
20.74
M24, M25
5
1
5
21.14
26
Design and Optimization of a Multiple Channel Low­Power High­Speed ADC in 180nm CMOS Process
==PAGE:35==
Noise Analysis
Assuming the first stage is perfect matching, the noise contribution of the first stage is M1,
M2, M3, M4. The contribution of the second stahe is M6, M7, M8, M9.
As the differential amplifier, the input­referred thermal noise of the first stage is
v2
Tn,i1 = 2 × [4kTγ 1
gm1(1 + gm3
gm1
)]
(4.17)
As the common source amplifier, the input­referred thermal noise of the first stage is
v2
Tn,i2 = 4kTγ 1
gm6(1 + gm7
gm6
)
(4.18)
The flicker(1/f) noise of the first stage is
v2
fn,i2 = 2 × [
K
Cox(LW)1
· 1
f + (gm3
gm1
)2
K
Cox(LW)3
· 1
f ]
(4.19)
The flicker(1/f) noise of the second stage is
v2
fn,i2 =
K
Cox(LW)6
· 1
f + (gm7
gm6
)2
K
Cox(LW)7
· 1
f
(4.20)
4.1.3
Low Pass Filter
Figure 4.5: Fully Differential First­order Gm −C Low­Pass Filter
The topology of low pass filter(LPF) for chopper amplifier is in figure 4.5, which is based
on the Gm −C technology[54]. The Gm for proposed amplifier is
Gm = 1
R + gm
(4.21)
The transfer function of this is
H(s) =
Gm1
Gm2 + sCL
(4.22)
Design and Optimization of a Multiple Channel Low­Power High­Speed ADC in 180nm CMOS Process
27
==PAGE:36==
Figure 4.6: Open Loop Simulation Result
4.1.4
OTA Simulation Result
The designed OTA is simulated in Cadence Virtuoso using XT018 CMOS technology,
with the supply voltage(VDD) is 1.8 V. The frequency response result for AC open loop
simulation is shown in figure 4.6 In figure 4.6, the DC gain of the amplifier is 109 dB
and phase margin is 86.1◦. The result validate the stability of proposed amplifier and the
efficacy of the proposed frequency compensation.
The measurement result of the Common Mode Rejection Ratio(CMRR) and Power Supply
Rejection Ratio(PSRR) is shown on figure 4.7 the CMRR is 101.823 dB and PSRR is
97.357 dB.
The amplifier’s front­end was implemented using a capacitive­feedback topology and it is
designed and result is shown in figure 4.8 This architecture was chosen for its ability to
provide high­pass filtering and stable, well­defined gain.
The input capacitor Cin, serves as the AC­coupling component, to block the large DC
offset voltage originating from the electrode interface. In this configuration, the ampli­
fier’s mid­band gain is determined by the relationship between the input capacitor and a
feedback capacitor, Cf, according to the equation Gain≈Cin
Cf . The Rf and Cf are imple­
mented as low­pass feedback to detect LFPs signal.The bandwidth is 21.24kHz with the
gain 57.5dB. The power of the amplifier can be calculated as
Power = V DD × I0
(4.23)
And the power of amplifier is 22.2µW.
Table 4.4 shows the performance of front­end amplifier in some prior work, which compare
with this design.
28
Design and Optimization of a Multiple Channel Low­Power High­Speed ADC in 180nm CMOS Process
==PAGE:37==
Figure 4.7: CMRR and PSRR measurement result
Figure 4.8: Close Loop Simulation Result
Table 4.4: The parameter of transistors for OTA designed
OTA
Process (µm)
VDD(V)
Gain(dB)
Power(µW)
BW(Hz)
CMRR(dB)
PSRR(dB)
Lee[55]
0.035
1.8
40
19.3
10k
56.4
65.5
Samiei, A[56]
0.18
1.2
59
2.6
5k
70
nr
Nikas, A[57]
0.18
1.8
37.5
23
5k
90
92
Tasneem[58]
0.5
3.3
60
4.12
12.9k
97.1
84.4
This work
0.18
1.8
57.5
22.2
21.24k
101.82
97.36
Design and Optimization of a Multiple Channel Low­Power High­Speed ADC in 180nm CMOS Process
29
==PAGE:38==
4.1.5
Noise Simulation
The main target of using chopper technology is to diminish the 1/f noise. Thus, the out­
put noise of the amplifier is be tested in Cadence Virtuoso and shown in figure 4.9 The
Figure 4.9: Chopper Amplifier Output Noise Simulation Result
simulation result demonstrate that the 1/f noise have been significantly reduced, which is
from roughly 15µV 2/Hz to 0.055µV 2/Hz in DC.
4.2
SAR ADC Design
4.2.1
Bootstrap S/H circuit
The low power bootstrapped S/H circuit is proposed in figure 4.10[59]
When clk signal is in low, the M6 and M5 conduct to ground. C3 charged to VDD since
M2 and M3 is on. In this phase, the gate of M1 and Ms is low and the gate of M4 is high,
which M1 and M4 is off to isolate the sample switching Ms and S/H circuit is in holding
phase. M5 is to improve the reliability by reducing the drain­sourse voltage(VDS) of M6.
When clk signal is high, S/H circuit is in sampling phase. The gate of M4 is in low and the
gate of Ms is charged from capacitor C3. In this phase, M1 and Ms turns on and VGS of Ms
is clamped around VDD by M1, which constant VGS of Ms at VDD. M9 is acts to prevent
VGS4 from exceeding VDD. To design the ADC’s S/H Circuit, Signal­to­Noise Ratio(SNR)
serves as a crucial design reference, which can be defined as:
SNR = 10 log10(Pinput
Pnoise
) dB
(4.24)
For 12 bits ADC, the ideal Signal­to­Noise Ratio(SNR) can be calculated as
SNRideal = 6.02 · N + 1.76 = 74 dB
(4.25)
30
Design and Optimization of a Multiple Channel Low­Power High­Speed ADC in 180nm CMOS Process
==PAGE:39==
M1
Ms
Ms
M5
M6
M2
M3
M7
M8
M9
M4
C3
Cs
VDD
VDD
CLK_b
CLK_b
CLK
CLK
Vin
M2
Vout
G
Bootstrapped
Switch
Figure 4.10: Proposed Bootstrap S/H Circuit
for N = 12. For the worst case, some redundancy added and the overall target SNR for
proposed Bootstrap S/H Circuit to achieved is 80 dB. Assume the analog input signal is
a full amplitude sine wave,
Vin = Asin(ωt)
(4.26)
, which A is the amplitude of input signal. And the input signal power as sine wave is
Pinput = A2
2
(4.27)
The SNR of sample­and­hold circuits is fundamentally determined by the kT/C noise, its
mean­squared noise voltage can be represent as
V 2
n,rms = kT
Cs
(4.28)
Thus,
SNR = 10 log10(A2Cs
2kT ) = 80 dB
(4.29)
When A = 0.9 V and T = 300 K, Cs ≈1 pF . To ensure that the signal is in negligible
attenuation by the sample­and­hold circuit across the entire input frequency range of the
ADC, the attenuation Nyquist rate of ON­Resistance of Ms (RonMs) is should as small as
possible[60]. The transfer function for sample­and­hold circuit is that
|H| =
1
√
1 + (2πfNyquistRonC2
S)
(4.30)
where |H| designed as 0.999 for negligible attenuation. It can calculate the Ron is 1424.3Ω.
Then, the size of the Ms can be calculated from:
Ron =
1
µCox W
L (V DD −Vin −Vth)
(4.31)
Design and Optimization of a Multiple Channel Low­Power High­Speed ADC in 180nm CMOS Process
31
==PAGE:40==
When µCox = 57 µA/V2, fNyquist = 5 MHz, V DD = 1.8 V, Vin = 0.9 V, Vth = 0.33 V and
L = 0.22 µm, the width of the Ms is W ≈4 µm.
Assuming the total parasitic capacitance connected to C3 is Cp, the gate voltage during
the sampling period is
VG = VS +
C3
C3 + Cp
· V DD
(4.32)
Thus, to maintain a stable high gate voltage during the sampling period, the capacitance
of C3 require large according to the equation 4.32, and the value of C3 of this proposed
design is 300f. The transistor M1 and M4 should be low on­resistance for making C3
clamp between the gate and source of the switch Ms in a very short period of time[61].
Bootstrap S/H Simulation
In this simulation, the sampling frequency is set to 5 MHz. Firstly, the gate voltage of the
Bootstrapped Switch is measured in figure , and it shows the simulated transient wave­
Figure 4.11: Gate Voltage of Bootstrapped Switch
forms of the key nodes in the proposed bootstrap switch during sample and hold. During
the sample phase (when the clock is high), it is observed that the gate voltage VG , ef­
fectively tracks the input with a DC offset approximately equal to VDD, demonstrating
the successful bootstrapping action. Then, set the input signal into fin =
509
1024, which
fin < 1
2fs following the Nyquist Sampling Theorem for S/H circuit simulation. ”The tran­
sient response of the S/H circuit, showing the differential sin input signal and the corre­
sponding sampled­and­held differential output in figure 4.12. It illustrates the transient
simulation results for the complete differential Sample­and­Hold circuit under a dynamic
input condition. A differential sinusoidal input signal with a time­varying amplitude was
32
Design and Optimization of a Multiple Channel Low­Power High­Speed ADC in 180nm CMOS Process
==PAGE:41==
Figure 4.12: Bootstrap Sample and Hold Circuit Simulation
applied to characterize the circuit’s tracking and holding capabilities. The resulting differ­
ential output waveform exhibits the characteristic staircase shape that is expected from
a functioning S/H circuit. The tracking capability is evident as the envelope of the output
signal accurately follows the envelope of the input signal. Following each sampling event,
the output is held at a constant DC level, providing the stable voltage required by the ADC
conversion.
After verifying that the designed S/H circuit has the correct sample­and­hold functionality
through transient simulation, the output signals are analyzed by Fast Fourier Transform
(FFT) analysis in order to accurately and quantitatively evaluate its performance. FFT
analysis able to clearly separates noise and errors in the frequency domain and allows
us to calculate key dynamic performance metrics such as SNDR, SFDR, and ENOB,
thus giving us a comprehensive evaluation of the circuit’s true performance. The FFT
simulation result is shown in figure 4.13, which shows the proposed bootstrap S/H circuit
exhibits high dynamic performance with 13.64 bits ENOB.
4.2.2
Comparator
The circuit of the pre­amplifier designed in figure 4.14[62].
The gain of the this pre­amplifier is
Av = gm1
gm3
= gm2
gm4
(4.33)
During clock edge transitions, the sudden activation of the tail current in dynamic amplifier
generates a substantial di/dt. The capacitor C0 is capacitor connected between the tail
Design and Optimization of a Multiple Channel Low­Power High­Speed ADC in 180nm CMOS Process
33
==PAGE:42==
Figure 4.13: S/H circuit FFT Simulation Result
VDD
M1
M2
M3
M4
M5
M6
C0
Vout-
CLK
Vout+
Vin+
Vin-
CLK
CLK_b
Figure 4.14: Pre­amplifier Topology
current source M5 and ground, which is designed to reduce the glitch of the output.
4.2.3
Latch Comparator
The latch comparator is shown on figure 4.15. Transistor M6 and M7 are the latch tran­
sistors and M1 and M2 are configured to form the positive feedback loop within the latch.
M5 and M8 is for resetting the latch by making the Vds of the M6 and M7 to 0.
34
Design and Optimization of a Multiple Channel Low­Power High­Speed ADC in 180nm CMOS Process
==PAGE:43==
M1
M2
M3
M4
M5 M6
M7 M8
Vin+
Vin-
Vout-
Vout+
Clk_B
Clk_B
VDD
Figure 4.15: Latch Comparator Topology
Figure 4.16: Transient Simulation Result of Dynamic
4.2.4
Comparator Simulation
In figure 4.16, the simulation demonstrates the dynamic comparator’s response to a slow­
ramping differential input controlled. The output shows the correct decision­making and
latching behavior. The other concern for dynamic comparator is the noise.
Figure 4.17 presents the simulated output­referred noise spectral density of the proposed
dynamic comparator. The plot clearly demonstrates the 1/f noise behavior . At low fre­
quencies, the noise density at 1 Hz is approximately 8.5 mV/
√
Hz.
As the frequency
increases, the spectrum begins to flatten, indicating the transition to the thermal noise
dominated region. The 1/f corner frequency can be estimated from the graph to be in the
range of several kilohertz. demonstrate a good high­frequency noise performance.
4.2.5
Vcm Based Bridge CDAC
To meet the dual optimization requirements of energy efficiency and chip area under 12­bit
resolution, a hybrid capacitor DAC (CDAC) architecture is proposed in this project, which
is Vcm Based Bridge CDAC on figure 4.18. The 12­bit CDAC consists of a 7­bit Most
Significant Bit (MSB) subarray and a 5­bit Least Significant Bit (LSB) subarray. The two
Design and Optimization of a Multiple Channel Low­Power High­Speed ADC in 180nm CMOS Process
35
==PAGE:44==
Figure 4.17: Output Noise of Dynamic Comparator
Figure 4.18: Proposed Vcm Based Bridge CDAC
subarrays are connected by a bridging capacitor Ca (Attenuation Capacitor), which.work
together to implement 12­bit binary network. The overall switching logic is based on a
Vcm­based scheme with three reference levels (Vref, GND, Vcm), which optimizes the
switching energy consumption at the physical level. MSB Sub­array comprise six binary­
weighted capacitors (C6 toC11), ranging from Cu to 32Cu, this sub­array is responsible for
quantizing the six MSB (B11 toB6). LSB Sub­array consist five binary­weighted capacitors
(C5 toC1), ranging from Cu to 16Cu, this sub­array handles the quantization of the next
five bits. Ca functions as an attenuator precisely scaling the equivalent capacitance of
the LSB sub­array, ensuring proper binary weighting at the comparator input. Thus, the
36
Design and Optimization of a Multiple Channel Low­Power High­Speed ADC in 180nm CMOS Process
==PAGE:45==
precision of Ca is critical to achieving low INL in the ADC.
Therefore, a primary consideration in the design of a Capacitive Digital­to­Analog Con­
verter (CDAC) is the issue of capacitor mismatch, which is to ensure the accuracy and
linearity of the converter. The test circuit for detecting mismatch error is shown on figure
4.19 For small­signal AC,
Figure 4.19: Cu Test Circuit
I = V · 2πfC
(4.34)
Assuming V=1, the value of I is the capacitance when the value of f is f =
1
2π(0.159).
And if this value is equal to Cu, there is no mismatch for this capacitor. The capacitor
technology in XT018 I used is cmm4 and value of Cu proposed in this design is 10fF.
After the AC simulation, the result is shown on figure 4.20. And there is no mismatch
Figure 4.20: Cu Capacitor Mismatch Test
when the capacitance value of cmm4 is 10fF. Then, Monte Carlo simulation is also used
to verify and the result is shown on figure 4.21 The other part of CDAC is the switches
which connected to Vref, GND, Vcm. The truth table of control switch is
According to table 4.5, the designed circuit of Switches in CDAC is in figure 4.22 The
circuit of the
Some simulation to verify the CDAC is demonstrated in figure4.23 and figure 4.24
Design and Optimization of a Multiple Channel Low­Power High­Speed ADC in 180nm CMOS Process
37
==PAGE:46==
Figure 4.21: Monte Carlo simulation result of Cu
Table 4.5: Performance Comparison of Various CDAC Architectures
P
N
Vref
GND
Vcm
0
0
√
0
1
√
1
0
√
1
1
√
P
N
i
i
Vref
VDD
GND
C
Figure 4.22: CDAC Switch Logic Circuit
4.2.6
SAR Logic
The first part of SAR Logic is Asynchronous Controlling Logic block. The main circuit to
generate the asynchronous control signal is in This block is designed in verilog­a and the
38
Design and Optimization of a Multiple Channel Low­Power High­Speed ADC in 180nm CMOS Process
==PAGE:47==
Figure 4.23: CDAC Function verification simulation
Design and Optimization of a Multiple Channel Low­Power High­Speed ADC in 180nm CMOS Process
39
==PAGE:48==
Figure 4.24: CDAC FFT Simulation Result
Figure 4.25: Asynchronous Control Signal Generator Loop Circuit
simulation result is in figure 4.26 The signal ”latch” and ”valid” is generated independently
with clock signal, and these two signals will supply internal clock to dynamic comparator
and SAR Logic block.
The other part of the whole SAR Logic is successive approximation registers. and it also
will be design in verilog­a. The simulation result demonstrate in
4.3
Multiple Channel Non­overlap Clock
The non­overlap clock generator is proposed by verilog­a, which can achieve the 4 chan­
nels non­overlap clock generation. The simulation result is shown on figure
Above all, the total Architecture of the designed ADC is like figure 4.29. The simulation
result of the 12 bits SAR ADC is in Appendix
40
Design and Optimization of a Multiple Channel Low­Power High­Speed ADC in 180nm CMOS Process
==PAGE:49==
Figure 4.26: Asynchronous Control Signal Generator Loop Circuit Simulation Result
Figure 4.27: Successive Approximation Registers Logic simulation result
Figure 4.28: Non­overlap clock generation result
Design and Optimization of a Multiple Channel Low­Power High­Speed ADC in 180nm CMOS Process
41
==PAGE:50==
Figure 4.29: Multiple Channel ADC
42
Design and Optimization of a Multiple Channel Low­Power High­Speed ADC in 180nm CMOS Process
==PAGE:51==
5
OTA Layout
After the IC circuit design and the designed circuit is simulated using simulation tools to
ensure that the specifications are theoretically met, IC layout is a critical step in the IC
design process. It places electronic components (such as transistors, resistors, capaci­
tors, etc.) and the wires connecting them in precise physical locations on a silicon wafer,
in order to convert the design into an entity that can be fabricated on the wafer. How­
ever, The process of converting a circuit diagram into a physical layout introduces two
main types of problems. One is the parasitic capacitance and resistance generated by
metal wiring, device proximity effects, etc. These parasitic parameters directly affect the
frequency response of the amplifier, which may lead to a decrease in the gain bandwidth
product (GBW) and a deterioration of the phase margin, or even cause stability problems.
The second is device mismatch due to process variation and layout asymmetry. For a
fully differential amplifier, any small mismatch between the differential input pair and the
load will severely degrade the Common Mode Rejection Ratio (CMRR) and Power Supply
Rejection Ratio (PSRR), and increase the Input Offset Voltage, which is fatal for a high
performance amplifier.
Therefore, the core goal of layout design in this chapter is to suppress the above para­
sitic effects and mismatch problems through systematic Floorplanning. Specifically, we
will adopt a symmetry layout (Symmetry) to ensure the balance of differential paths; uti­
lize matching techniques such as Common­Centroid and Dummy Device to improve the
matching accuracy of key devices to ensure a high CMRR; and at the same time, isolate
the mismatches by means of reasonable power ground planning and Guard Ring design.
At the same time, through the rational power supply ground planning and Guard Ring
design to isolate the substrate noise to ensure signal integrity.
5.1
Floorplan
Firstly, the layout should be symmetry.The largest transistor for the designed OTA is the
current mirror part in both first stage and second stage, put it on the top of is a good plan
which benefits the whole symmetry. The details of the floor plan is in figure
5.2
Common­Centroid
The core objective of Common­Centroid Layout is to suppress systematic mismatches
introduced by process gradients. During semiconductor fabrication, key physical param­
eters such as gate oxide thickness, doping concentration, film resistivity, and mechanical
stress often exhibit slow but continuous, near­linear spatial variations on the wafer sur­
face. With a simple side­by­side layout, devices at different locations in the gradient field
will experience different average process parameters, leading to inevitable deviations in
their electrical characteristics. Co­centering technology works by splitting the matched
devices into multiple cells and laying them out in a crossed, symmetrical form around a
common geometric center point. This layout ensures that the geometric centers of all
cells are physically precisely coincident, making the average process parameter values
perceived by the two groups of devices in the gradient field theoretically identical, and
thus effectively counteracting the mismatch effect brought about by first­order gradients.
As a result, the technique is able to significantly reduce the Input Offset Voltage of the dif­
ferential amplifier. All the current mirror transistors layout designed as common­centroid,
which is in figure
Design and Optimization of a Multiple Channel Low­Power High­Speed ADC in 180nm CMOS Process
43
==PAGE:52==
Figure 5.1: Enter Caption
Figure 5.2: Current Mirror Layout
5.2.1
DRC and LVS check
Design Rule Check (DRC) and Layout­Versus­Schematic (LVS) are two complementary
and critical components of the IC physical verification process.
LVS (Layout Versus
Schematic) focuses on the electrical functional equivalence of the design, and its core
task is to extract transistors, resistors, and other devices and their connections from the
layout, and accurately compare them to the original schematic netlist to verify that the
layout accurately reproduces the designer’s circuit topology and ensures that no func­
tional defects such as short circuits, open circuits, or device parameter errors have been
introduced.
For the designed layout, DRC and LVS has be checked and both of them are passed,
which verify the layout.
44
Design and Optimization of a Multiple Channel Low­Power High­Speed ADC in 180nm CMOS Process
==PAGE:53==
6
Conclusions
In this thesis, A chopper amplifier and 12bits SAR ADC is designed in 0.18 µm technol­
ogy. The Low noise amplifier using chopper to provide a high linearity and low noise
signal. 12 bits SAR ADC using Vcm­based bridge CDAC, results in a reduction of power
consumption and area in SAR ADC.
The chopper amplifier designed using chopper modulator to remove the noise and achiev­
ing low noise output. The chopper modulator designed based on the MOS switch. The
main element in chopper amplifier is OTA. The topology of OTA is fully two stage ampli­
fier for low noise and low power consumption. The DC gain of OTA achieve to 109 dB
with also high CMRR(101.82) and PSRR(97.36). After output noise simulation, the result
shows a significant reduction of the output noise.
In SAR ADC, the bootstrap circuit is as S/H circuit for reduce the distortion by keeping
the gate­source voltage of the transistor switch constant. Bootstrap circuit can achieve
13.64 bits ENOB. The Comparator using the dynamic technology to reduce the static
power consumption. The CDAC combine the V­cm based switching scheme and bridge
capacitor array for improving the power efficiency. The unit capacitor set as 10fF and pass
the mismatch test. The switch based on the Vcm switching algorism and implement to
control and achieving successive approximation. The logic part of SAR ADC is designed
by verilog­a. SAR Logic part generate the asynchronous clock to comparator, which can
achieve very high speed converting process. The SAR logic implements a 12­step binary
search algorithm to resolve the digital output code. Finally, a four channels overlap clock
generator is also designed by verilog­a to support multiple channel ADC design.
While the current design utilizes a non­overlapping clock to manage multiple channels,
residual mismatches in gain, offset, and timing skew between channels are inevitable
due to process variations. A significant area for future work would be the development
and implementation of a comprehensive background digital calibration. It could employ
techniques like code­based statistics or injection of a pseudo­random signal to simulta­
neously estimate and correct for these mismatches. Furthermore, a sophisticated digital
model could be developed to characterize and actively cancel inter­channel crosstalk,
potentially by analyzing the digital output of adjacent channels and subtracting a pre­
dicted crosstalk component, thereby improving the overall system’s Spurious­Free Dy­
namic Range (SFDR) and Signal­to­Noise and Distortion Ratio (SNDR).
Design and Optimization of a Multiple Channel Low­Power High­Speed ADC in 180nm CMOS Process
45
==PAGE:54==
46
Design and Optimization of a Multiple Channel Low­Power High­Speed ADC in 180nm CMOS Process
==PAGE:55==
Bibliography
[1]
John P. Donoghue. Bridging the Brain to the World: A Perspective on Neural Inter­
face Systems. Nov. 2008. DOI: 10.1016/j.neuron.2008.10.037.
[2]
Hariprasad Chandrakumar and Dejan Markovic. “A High Dynamic­Range Neural
Recording Chopper Amplifier for Simultaneous Neural Recording and Stimulation”.
In: IEEE Journal of Solid­State Circuits 52 (3 Mar. 2017), pp. 645–656. ISSN: 00189200.
DOI: 10.1109/JSSC.2016.2645611.
[3]
Seung Bae Lee et al. “An Inductively­Powered Wireless Neural Recording System
With a Charge Sampling Analog Front­End”. In: IEEE Sensors Journal 16 (2 Jan.
2016), pp. 475–484. ISSN: 1530437X. DOI: 10.1109/JSEN.2015.2483747.
[4]
Jingyu Wang, Yufeng Hua, and Zhangming Zhu. “A 10­bit reconfigurable ADC with
SAR/SS mode for neural recording”. In: Analog Integrated Circuits and Signal Pro­
cessing 101 (2 Nov. 2019), pp. 297–305. ISSN: 15731979. DOI: 10.1007/s10470-
019-01534-7.
[5]
Jeremy Holleman, Fan Zhang, and Brian Otis. Ultra Low­Power Integrated Circuit
Design for Wireless Neural Interfaces. Springer New York, 2011. ISBN: 978­1­4419­
6726­8. DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4419-6727-5. URL: https://link.springer.com/10.1007/
978-1-4419-6727-5.
[6]
Jose Luis Valtierra et al. “A Sub­μW Reconfigurable Front­End for Invasive Neural
Recording That Exploits the Spectral Characteristics of the Wideband Neural Sig­
nal”. In: IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems I: Regular Papers 67 (5 May
2020), pp. 1426–1437. ISSN: 15580806. DOI: 10.1109/TCSI.2020.2968087.
[7]
Hariprasad Chandrakumar and Dejan Markovic. “A High Dynamic­Range Neural
Recording Chopper Amplifier for Simultaneous Neural Recording and Stimulation”.
In: IEEE Journal of Solid­State Circuits 52 (3 Mar. 2017), pp. 645–656. ISSN: 00189200.
DOI: 10.1109/JSSC.2016.2645611.
[8]
Kenji Mii, Daisuke Kanemoto, and Tetsuya Hirose. “0.36 μW/channel capacitively­
coupled chopper instrumentation amplifier in EEG recording wearable devices for
compressed sensing framework”. In: Japanese Journal of Applied Physics 63 (3
Mar. 2024). ISSN: 13474065. DOI: 10.35848/1347-4065/ad264f.
[9]
Jiawei Zheng et al. “Chopper Capacitively Coupled Instrumentation Amplifier Capa­
ble of Handling Large Electrode Offset for Biopotential Recordings”. In: IEEE Trans­
actions on Circuits and Systems II: Express Briefs 64 (12 Dec. 2017), pp. 1392–
1396. ISSN: 15583791. DOI: 10.1109/TCSII.2017.2741348.
[10]
Kian Ann Ng et al. “A Single­Stage, Capacitively­Coupled Instrumentation Amplifier
with Complementary Transimpedance Boosting”. In: IEEE Transactions on Circuits
and Systems I: Regular Papers 71 (7 July 2024), pp. 2989–3001. ISSN: 15580806.
DOI: 10.1109/TCSI.2024.3391169.
[11]
P.K Chan et al. “Designing CMOS folded­cascode operational amplifier with flicker
noise minimisation”. In: Microelectronics Journal 32 (1 Jan. 2001), pp. 69–73. ISSN:
18792391. DOI: 10.1016/S0026-2692(00)00105-1. URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.
com/retrieve/pii/S0026269200001051.
[12]
Atifa Aqueel, Mohd. Samar Ansari, and Sudhanshu Maheshwari. “Subthreshold
CMOS low­transconductance OTA based low­pass notch for EEG applications”. In:
2017 International Conference on Multimedia, Signal Processing and Communica­
tion Technologies (IMPACT). IEEE, Nov. 2017, pp. 247–251. ISBN: 978­1­5090­
Design and Optimization of a Multiple Channel Low­Power High­Speed ADC in 180nm CMOS Process
47
==PAGE:56==
6674­2. DOI: 10.1109/MSPCT.2017.8364014. URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/
document/8364014/.
[13]
Jie Zhang et al. “A Low­Noise, Low­Power Amplifier with Current­Reused OTA for
ECG Recordings”. In: IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Circuits and Systems 12 (3
June 2018), pp. 700–708. ISSN: 19324545. DOI: 10.1109/TBCAS.2018.2819207.
[14]
Alessandro Fava et al. “A Compact Low­Power Chopper Low Noise Amplifier for
High Density Neural Front­Ends”. In: Sensors 25 (4 Feb. 2025), p. 1157. ISSN:
1424­8220. DOI: 10.3390/s25041157. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/1424-8220/25/
4/1157.
[15]
You­Kuang Chang, Chao­Shiun Wang, and Chorng­Kuang Wang. “A 8­bit 500­KS/s
low power SAR ADC for bio­medical applications”. In: 2007 IEEE Asian Solid­State
Circuits Conference. 2007, pp. 228–231. DOI: 10.1109/ASSCC.2007.4425772.
[16]
Frank Ohnhäuser. “ADCs Based on Successive Approximation”. In: Analog­Digital
Converters for Industrial Applications Including an Introduction to Digital­Analog
Converters. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2015, pp. 51–118. DOI: 10.1007/978- 3-
662-47020-6_2.
[17]
Siyu Tan et al. “A 10­Bit Split­Capacitor SAR ADC with DAC Imbalance Estima­
tion and Calibration”. In: 2020 IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and Sys­
tems (ISCAS). IEEE, Oct. 2020, pp. 1–5. ISBN: 978­1­7281­3320­1. DOI: 10.1109/
ISCAS45731.2020.9180539. URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9180539/.
[18]
V. Hariprasath et al. “Merged capacitor switching based SAR ADC with highest
switching energy­efficiency”. In: Electronics Letters 46 (9 Apr. 2010), pp. 620–621.
ISSN: 00135194. DOI: 10.1049/el.2010.0706.
[19]
Zhangming Zhu et al. “An 8/10 bit 200/100MS/s configurable asynchronous SAR
ADC”. In: Analog Integrated Circuits and Signal Processing. Vol. 77. Nov. 2013,
pp. 249–255. DOI: 10.1007/s10470-013-0133-8.
[20]
Young­Hwa Kim, Jaewon Lee, and SeongHwan Cho. “A 10­bit 300MSample/s pipelined
ADC using time­interleaved SAR ADC for front­end stages”. In: Proceedings of
2010 IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and Systems. IEEE, May 2010,
pp. 4041–4044. ISBN: 978­1­4244­5308­5. DOI: 10 . 1109 / ISCAS . 2010 . 5537646.
URL: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/5537646/.
[21]
Jian Luo et al. “A Low Voltage and Low Power 10­bit Non­Binary 2b/Cycle Time
and Voltage Based SAR ADC”. In: IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems I:
Regular Papers 67 (4 Apr. 2020), pp. 1136–1148. ISSN: 15580806. DOI: 10.1109/
TCSI.2019.2949072.
[22]
Wen­Yi Pang et al. “A 10­bit 500­KS/s low power SAR ADC with splitting comparator
for bio­medical applications”. In: 2009 IEEE Asian Solid­State Circuits Conference.
IEEE, Nov. 2009, pp. 149–152. ISBN: 978­1­4244­4433­5. DOI: 10.1109/ASSCC.
2009.5357200. URL: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/5357200/.
[23]
“A 12­Bit 10 MS/s SAR ADC with High Linearity and Energy­Efficient Switching”. In:
IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems I: Regular Papers 63 (10 Oct. 2016),
pp. 1616–1627. ISSN: 15580806. DOI: 10.1109/TCSI.2016.2581177.
[24]
Chuanshi Yang et al. “An Area­Efficient SAR ADC with Mismatch Error Shaping
Technique Achieving 102­dB SFDR 90.2­dB SNDR over 20­kHz Bandwidth”. In:
IEEE Transactions on Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) Systems 29 (8 Aug.
2021), pp. 1575–1585. ISSN: 15579999. DOI: 10.1109/TVLSI.2021.3087660.
[25]
Mojtaba Bagheri et al. “A Mismatch Calibration Technique for SAR ADCs Based on
Deterministic Self­Calibration and Stochastic Quantization”. In: IEEE Transactions
on Circuits and Systems I: Regular Papers 67 (9 Sept. 2020), pp. 2883–2896. ISSN:
15580806. DOI: 10.1109/TCSI.2020.2985816.
48
Design and Optimization of a Multiple Channel Low­Power High­Speed ADC in 180nm CMOS Process
==PAGE:57==
[26]
In­Seok Jung and Yong­Bin Kim. “A 12­bit 32MS/s SAR ADC using built­in self
calibration technique to minimize capacitor mismatch”. In: 2014 IEEE International
Symposium on Defect and Fault Tolerance in VLSI and Nanotechnology Systems
(DFT). IEEE, Oct. 2014, pp. 276–280. ISBN: 978­1­4799­6155­9. DOI: 10.1109/
DFT.2014.6962078. URL: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/6962078/.
[27]
John G Webster. Medical instrumentation: application and design. John Wiley &
Sons, 2009.
[28]
Luat Tran and Hyouk­Kyu Cha. “An ultra­low­power neural signal acquisition analog
front­end IC”. In: Microelectronics Journal 107 (2021), p. 104950. ISSN: 1879­2391.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mejo.2020.104950. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S0026269220305498.
[29]
Hariprasad Chandrakumar and Dejan Marković. “A High Dynamic­Range Neural
Recording Chopper Amplifier for Simultaneous Neural Recording and Stimulation”.
In: IEEE Journal of Solid­State Circuits 52.3 (2017), pp. 645–656. DOI: 10.1109/
JSSC.2016.2645611.
[30]
Behzad Razavi. Design of analog CMOS integrated circuits. 2005.
[31]
Tony Chan Carusone, David A Johns, and Kenneth W Martin. Analog integrated
circuit design. John Wiley & Sons, 2011.
[32]
Chinmayee Nanda et al. “A CMOS instrumentation amplifier with low voltage and
low noise for portable ECG monitoring systems”. In: 2008 IEEE International Con­
ference on Semiconductor Electronics. IEEE. 2008, pp. 54–58.
[33]
O KK, Namkyu Park, and Dong­Jun Yang. “1/f noise of NMOS and PMOS transis­
tors and their implications to design of voltage controlled oscillators”. In: 2002 IEEE
Radio Frequency Integrated Circuits (RFIC) Symposium. Digest of Papers (Cat. No.
02CH37280). IEEE. 2002, pp. 59–62.
[34]
Junkai Zhang et al. “The Design of a Low­Power Pipelined ADC for IoT Applica­
tions”. In: Sensors 25.5 (2025), p. 1343.
[35]
Alex Stojcevski et al. “Flash ADC architecture”. In: Electronics letters 39.6 (2003),
pp. 501–502.
[36]
Franco Maloberti. Data converters. Springer, 2007.
[37]
Darshan Shetty and Pratap Tumkur Renukaswamy. “A 11­Bit Integrating Analog to
Digital Converter”. In: 2016 Austrochip Workshop on Microelectronics (Austrochip).
IEEE. 2016, pp. 19–23.
[38]
Walt Kester. “ADC Architectures IV: Sigma­Delta ADC Advanced Concepts and Ap­
plications”. In: Analog Devices, MT­023 Tutorial (2008).
[39]
Richard Schreier, Gabor C Temes, et al. Understanding delta­sigma data convert­
ers. Vol. 74. IEEE press Piscataway, NJ, 2005.
[40]
Tomohiko Ogawa et al. “SAR ADC algorithm with redundancy”. In: APCCAS 2008­
2008 IEEE Asia Pacific Conference on Circuits and Systems. IEEE. 2008, pp. 268–
271.
[41]
Phillip E Allen and Douglas R Holberg. CMOS analog circuit design. Elsevier, 2011.
[42]
Shih­Hsing Wang and Chung­Chih Hung. “A 0.3 V 10b 3MS/s SAR ADC with com­
parator calibration and kickback noise reduction for biomedical applications”. In:
IEEE transactions on biomedical circuits and systems 14.3 (2020), pp. 558–569.
[43]
Chun­Cheng Liu et al. “A 10­bit 50­MS/s SAR ADC with a monotonic capacitor
switching procedure”. In: IEEE Journal of Solid­State Circuits 45.4 (2010), pp. 731–
740.
[44]
Marcel JM Pelgrom. Analog­to­digital conversion. Springer International Publishing,
2012.
Design and Optimization of a Multiple Channel Low­Power High­Speed ADC in 180nm CMOS Process
49
==PAGE:58==
[45]
Yan Zhu et al. “Histogram­based ratio mismatch calibration for bridge­DAC in 12­bit
120 MS/s SAR ADC”. In: IEEE Transactions on Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI)
Systems 24.3 (2015), pp. 1203–1207.
[46]
Yan Zhu et al. “A 10­bit 100­MS/s reference­free SAR ADC in 90 nm CMOS”. In:
IEEE Journal of Solid­state circuits 45.6 (2010), pp. 1111–1121.
[47]
Yan Zheng, Fan Ye, and Junyan Ren. “A 13 Bit 100 MS/s SAR ADC with 74.57 dB
SNDR in 14­nm CMOS FinFET”. In: 2020 IEEE International Symposium on Circuits
and Systems (ISCAS). IEEE. 2020, pp. 1–4.
[48]
Daniel Bankman et al. “Understanding metastability in SAR ADCs: part I: synchronous”.
In: IEEE Solid­State Circuits Magazine 11.2 (2019), pp. 86–97.
[49]
Yimin Wu et al. “Analysis and cancellation of crosstalk in multi­channel pipelined­
SAR ADCs”. In: 2022 11th International Conference on Communications, Circuits
and Systems (ICCCAS). IEEE. 2022, pp. 136–139.
[50]
Jeonggoo Song et al. “A 10­b 800­MS/s time­interleaved SAR ADC with fast variance­
based timing­skew calibration”. In: IEEE Journal of Solid­State Circuits 52.10 (2017),
pp. 2563–2575.
[51]
Paul Jespers. The gm/ID Methodology, a sizing tool for low­voltage analog CMOS
Circuits: The semi­empirical and compact model approaches. Springer Science &
Business Media, 2009.
[52]
Christian C Enz and Eric A Vittoz. Charge­based MOS transistor modeling: the EKV
model for low­power and RF IC design. John Wiley & Sons, 2006.
[53]
Christian C Enz, François Krummenacher, and Eric A Vittoz. “An analytical MOS
transistor model valid in all regions of operation and dedicated to low­voltage and
low­current applications”. In: Analog integrated circuits and signal processing 8
(1995), pp. 83–114.
[54]
Oscar J Cinco­Izquierdo et al. “Tunable Low Frequency Gm­C Low­Pass Filter using
an OTA with Bootstrapping”. In: Circuits, Systems, and Signal Processing (2024),
pp. 1–13.
[55]
Seung Bae Lee et al. “An inductively­powered wireless neural recording system
with a charge sampling analog front­end”. In: IEEE sensors journal 16.2 (2015),
pp. 475–484.
[56]
Aria Samiei and Hossein Hashemi. “A chopper stabilized, current feedback, neural
recording amplifier”. In: IEEE solid­state circuits letters 2.3 (2019), pp. 17–20.
[57]
Antonios Nikas et al. “A continuous­time delta­sigma modulator using a modified in­
strumentation amplifier and current reuse DAC for neural recording”. In: IEEE Jour­
nal of Solid­State Circuits 54.10 (2019), pp. 2879–2891.
[58]
NT Tasneem and IA Mahbub. 2.53 NEF 8­bit 10 kS/s 0.5 µm CMOS Neural Record­
ing Read­Out Circuit with High Linearity for Neuromodulation Implants. Electronics
2021, 10, 590. 2021.
[59]
Tasnim B Nazzal and Soliman A Mahmoud. “Low­power bootstrapped sample and
hold circuit for analog­to­digital converters”. In: 2016 IEEE 59th International Mid­
west Symposium on Circuits and Systems (MWSCAS). IEEE. 2016, pp. 1–4.
[60]
Chakradhar Adupa and Sreenivasarao Ijjada. “Design and Implementation of a
Bootstrap­based Sample and Hold Circuit for SAR ADC Applications”. In: Interna­
tional Journal of Electrical and Electronics Research 11.3 (2023), pp. 689–695.
[61]
Andrew M Abo and Paul R Gray. “A 1.5­V, 10­bit, 14.3­MS/s CMOS pipeline analog­
to­digital converter”. In: IEEE journal of solid­state circuits 34.5 (2002), pp. 599–606.
[62]
Daniel Schinkel et al. “A double­tail latch­type voltage sense amplifier with 18ps
setup+ hold time”. In: 2007 IEEE international solid­state circuits conference. Digest
of technical papers. IEEE. 2007, pp. 314–605.
50
Design and Optimization of a Multiple Channel Low­Power High­Speed ADC in 180nm CMOS Process
==PAGE:59==
A
Appendix 1
A.1
SAR Logic in Verilog­A
Asynchronous Control Block
1
`include "constants.vams"
2
`include "disciplines.vams"
3
4
module nand_not_gate(A, B, VDD, GND, Ready, CLK, Valid, Latch);
5
input A, B, CLK, Ready;
6
output Valid, Latch;
7
inout
VDD;
8
inout
GND;
9
10
electrical A, B, VDD, GND, Ready, CLK,Valid, Latch;
11
real a_logic , b_logic;
12
real nand_out , nor_out , nand_out_2;
13
real CLK_Logic ,
nor_out_logic , ready_logic , delayed_nand_out , and_out;
14
analog begin
15
16
17
18
a_logic = (V(A) > 0.9) ? 1.0 : 0.0;
19
b_logic = (V(B) > 0.9) ? 1.0 : 0.0;
20
ready_logic = (V(Ready) > 0.9) ? 0.0 : 1.0;
21
CLK_Logic = (V(CLK) > 0.9) ? 1.0 : 0.0;
22
23
24
nand_out = (a_logic * b_logic == 1.0) ? 0.0 : 1.0;
25
and_out = (nand_out == 1.0) ? 0.0 : 1.0;
26
27
delayed_nand_out = transition(nand_out , 1n, 0.5n);
28
29
nor_out_logic = (delayed_nand_out >= 0.9 || CLK_Logic) ? 0.0 : 1.0;
30
nor_out =
transition(nor_out_logic , 1n, 0.5n);
31
32
33
nand_out_2 = (nor_out >= 0.9 * ready_logic) ? 1.0 : 0.0;
34
35
V(Latch) <+ transition(nand_out_2 * 1.8, 1n, 1n);
36
V(Valid) <+ transition(and_out * 1.8, 1n, 1n);
37
end
38
endmodule
Listing A.1: Asynchronous SAR Control
12 bits SAR Logic
1
`include "constants.vams"
2
`include "disciplines.vams"
3
4
module SAR_Logic_va(
5
input
electrical In_p,
6
input
electrical In_n,
7
input
electrical clk,
8
input
electrical valid,
9
10
inout
electrical VDD,
11
inout
electrical GND,
12
output electrical done,
Design and Optimization of a Multiple Channel Low­Power High­Speed ADC in 180nm CMOS Process
51
==PAGE:60==
13
output electrical [11:0] Out_p,
14
output electrical [11:0] Out_n,
15
output electrical Num,
16
output electrical Comp_Done
17
);
18
19
parameter real td = 10p;
20
parameter real tt = 10p;
21
parameter integer N = 11;
22
genvar i ;
23
24
integer start, done_reg , bit_index , valid_reg , P_reg, N_reg, rst_reg , comp_clk
, end_reg , done_logic;
25
integer
P_out[N-1:0],
N_out[N-1:0], result [N-1:0],
result_reg[N-1:0];
26
analog begin
27
28
@(initial_step)begin
29
for (i=N-1; i>=0; i=i-1)begin
30
result_reg [i] = 0;
31
result [i] = 0;
32
P_out [i] = 0;
33
N_out [i] = 0;
34
end
35
done_reg = 0;
36
comp_clk = 1;
37
bit_index = N-1;
38
end
39
40
P_reg = V(In_p) > 0.9;
41
N_reg = V(In_n) > 0.9;
42
43
44
45
@( cross(V(clk) - 0.9, -1) or cross(V(clk) - 0.9, +1)or cross(V(valid) - 0.9,
+1) or cross(V(valid) - 0.9, -1) )begin
46
47
if( (V(clk) < 0.9) && (V(valid) < 0.9)) begin
48
done_reg = 1;
49
end
50
51
else if (V(clk) > 0.9) begin
52
done_reg = 0;
53
end
54
55
else begin
56
end
57
58
end
59
60
@(cross(done_reg - 0.5, +1) or cross(done_reg - 0.5, -1) or cross(V(valid) -
0.9, -1))begin
61
62
if ((done_reg == 1) && (bit_index >=0)) begin
63
if (V(In_p) < V(In_n)) begin
64
P_out [bit_index] = 1;
65
N_out [bit_index] = 0;
66
result_reg [bit_index] = 0;
67
end
68
69
else if (V(In_p) > V(In_n)) begin
70
P_out [bit_index] = 0;
71
N_out [bit_index] = 1;
52
Design and Optimization of a Multiple Channel Low­Power High­Speed ADC in 180nm CMOS Process
==PAGE:61==
72
result_reg [bit_index] = 1;
73
end
74
75
else begin
76
P_out [bit_index] = 0;
77
N_out [bit_index] = 0;
78
result_reg [bit_index] = 0;
79
end
80
81
bit_index = bit_index - 1;
82
end
83
84
else if ((done_reg == 0) && (bit_index < 0)) begin
85
86
bit_index = N -1;
87
for (i = N-1; i>= 0; i = i - 1)begin
88
P_out [i] = 0;
89
N_out [i] = 0;
90
result [i] = result_reg [i];
91
end
92
end
93
94
95
96
end
97
98
99
comp_clk =((P_out [0]) + (N_out [0]) >= 1.0) ? 1.0 : 0.0;
100
101
for (i = 0; i<= N-1; i = i+1)begin
102
V(Out_p[i]) <+ transition(V(VDD)*P_out[i], td, tt);
103
V(Out_n[i]) <+ transition(V(VDD)*N_out[i], td, tt);
104
end
105
V(done) <+ transition (V(VDD)*done_reg , 20p, 2p) ;
106
V(Comp_Done) <+ transition (V(VDD)*comp_clk , 20p, 2p) ;
107
108
V(Num) <+ transition(V(VDD)*bit_index , td, tt);
109
110
end
111
endmodule
Listing A.2: 12 bits SAR Logic
Design and Optimization of a Multiple Channel Low­Power High­Speed ADC in 180nm CMOS Process
53
==PAGE:62==
B
Appendix 2
B.1
Non­overlap clock generator Verilog­a code
1
2
`include "constants.vams"
3
`include "disciplines.vams"
4
5
module nonoverlap_clk_4ph (clk, ph1, ph2, ph3, ph4);
6
input clk;
7
output ph1, ph2, ph3, ph4;
8
electrical clk, ph1, ph2, ph3, ph4;
9
10
parameter real vdd = 1.0;
11
parameter real vss = 0.0;
12
parameter real t_edge = 1e-9;
13
parameter real t_delay = 1e-9;
14
parameter real t_dead = 20e-9;
15
16
real delay_ph1;
17
real delay_ph2;
18
real delay_ph3;
19
real delay_ph4;
20
real bit_ph1;
21
real bit_ph2;
22
real bit_ph3;
23
real bit_ph4;
24
integer clk_edge_count=0;
25
26
analog begin
27
@(initial_step) begin
28
bit_ph1 = 0;
29
bit_ph2 = 0;
30
bit_ph3 = 0;
31
bit_ph4 = 0;
32
end
33
34
35
@(cross(V(clk)-vdd/2, +1)) begin
36
clk_edge_count = clk_edge_count + 1;
37
38
case(clk_edge_count)
39
1: begin
40
bit_ph1 = 1;
41
bit_ph2 = 0;
42
bit_ph3 = 0;
43
bit_ph4 = 0;
44
delay_ph4 = t_delay;
45
delay_ph1 = t_delay + t_dead;
46
end
47
2: begin
48
bit_ph1 = 0;
49
bit_ph2 = 1;
50
bit_ph3 = 0;
51
bit_ph4 = 0;
52
delay_ph1 = t_delay;
53
delay_ph2 = t_delay + t_dead;
54
55
end
54
Design and Optimization of a Multiple Channel Low­Power High­Speed ADC in 180nm CMOS Process
==PAGE:63==
56
3: begin
57
bit_ph1 = 0;
58
bit_ph2 = 0;
59
bit_ph3 = 1;
60
bit_ph4 = 0;
61
delay_ph2 = t_delay;
62
delay_ph3 = t_delay + t_dead;
63
64
end
65
4: begin
66
bit_ph1 = 0;
67
bit_ph2 = 0;
68
bit_ph3 = 0;
69
bit_ph4 = 1;
70
delay_ph3 = t_delay;
71
delay_ph4 = t_delay + t_dead;
72
clk_edge_count = 0;
73
end
74
endcase
75
end
76
77
V(ph1) <+ vdd*transition(bit_ph1 ,delay_ph1 ,t_edge) + vss*transition(bit_ph2 ,
delay_ph1 ,t_edge);
78
V(ph2) <+ vdd*transition(bit_ph2 ,delay_ph2 ,t_edge) + vss*transition(bit_ph1 ,
delay_ph2 ,t_edge);
79
V(ph3) <+ vdd*transition(bit_ph3 ,delay_ph3 ,t_edge) + vss*transition(bit_ph3 ,
delay_ph3 ,t_edge);
80
V(ph4) <+ vdd*transition(bit_ph4 ,delay_ph4 ,t_edge) + vss*transition(bit_ph4 ,
delay_ph4 ,t_edge);
81
82
end
83
endmodule
Listing B.1: Non­overlap clock generator Verilog code
Design and Optimization of a Multiple Channel Low­Power High­Speed ADC in 180nm CMOS Process
55
==PAGE:64==
C
Appendix 3
C.1
12 bits SAR ADC Simulation Result
56
Design and Optimization of a Multiple Channel Low­Power High­Speed ADC in 180nm CMOS Process
==PAGE:65==
Design and Optimization of a Multiple Channel Low­Power High­Speed ADC in 180nm CMOS Process
57
==PAGE:66==
58
Design and Optimization of a Multiple Channel Low­Power High­Speed ADC in 180nm CMOS Process
==PAGE:67==
D
Appendix 4
D.1
Fully Differential Amplifier with Dummy Transistor
Design and Optimization of a Multiple Channel Low­Power High­Speed ADC in 180nm CMOS Process
59
==PAGE:68==
60
Design and Optimization of a Multiple Channel Low­Power High­Speed ADC in 180nm CMOS Process
==PAGE:69==
E
Appendix 5
E.1
Fully Differential Amplifier Layout
E.2
Common­Centroid Calculation
Design and Optimization of a Multiple Channel Low­Power High­Speed ADC in 180nm CMOS Process
61
==PAGE:70==
Figure E.1: OTA Layout
62
Design and Optimization of a Multiple Channel Low­Power High­Speed ADC in 180nm CMOS Process
==PAGE:71==
Figure E.2: Layout DRC and LVS check Result
Design and Optimization of a Multiple Channel Low­Power High­Speed ADC in 180nm CMOS Process
63
==PAGE:72==
64
Design and Optimization of a Multiple Channel Low­Power High­Speed ADC in 180nm CMOS Process
==PAGE:73==
F
Appendix 6
F.1
OTA Sizing Calculation
Design and Optimization of a Multiple Channel Low­Power High­Speed ADC in 180nm CMOS Process
65
==PAGE:74==
(1)
(1)
(4)
(4)
(6)
(6)
(3)
(3)
(2)
(2)
(5)
(5)
K
K K
K
K
K
K
K
K
K13
K6
K
K
K
K
==PAGE:75==
(15)
(15)
(16)
(16)
(10)
(10)
(13)
(13)
(7)
(7)
(12)
(12)
(8)
(8)
(14)
(14)
(9)
(9)
(11)
(11)
K
K
K
K
K
K
2.196026153
1.464017435
K
==PAGE:76==
(17)
(17)
==PAGE:77==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Elektrovej, Building 325,
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://electro.dtu.dk/
