==PAGE:1==
New Assays to Shed Light onto the Oxidation of
Carbohydrates in One-Pot Reactions
Master Thesis
DTU Chemistry
Department of Chemistry
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
New Assays to Shed Light onto the Oxidation of Carbohydrates in One-Pot Reactions
Master Thesis
27th of July, 2025
By
Mette-Maya Siewertsen
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the
customary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title,
etc.
Published by:
DTU, Department of Chemistry, Kemitorvet, Building 206, 2800 Kgs.
Lyngby Denmark
www.kemi.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This thesis has been prepared at the Section for Organic Chemistry, Department of Chem-
istry, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree
Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng. in Applied Chemistry. Experimental work
was conducted in the Sebastian Meier group in the NMR Spectroscopy section at DTU
Chemistry from January to July 2025.
Mette-Maya Siewertsen - s194549
Signature
Date
ii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgments
I want to express my sincerest gratitude to my supervisors Professor Sebastian Meier, As-
sociate Professor Pernille Rose Jensen and PhD student Stefan Warthegau for their guid-
ance and sparring and for the opportunity to undertake this project. I’m grateful for the
continual discussions about the findings this project has produced, and for their willing-
ness to answer any questions I have had. The guidance and feedback they have provided,
has been invaluable to me and to the process of executing this project. Their engagement,
help and positive attitudes throughout has made the experience of writing on this thesis
thoroughly enjoyable and insightful. I would also like to express my many thanks to the
Sebastian Meier group and the rest of the NMR Spectroscopy section at DTU Chemistry
for the joy and camaraderie they brought me in our shared office space over the last seven
months, keeping my spirits high throughout the duration of this thesis.
Finally, a heartfelt thanks to my loved ones, my parents, my sisters, my in-laws and my
niece for their unwavering support and belief in me.
Dedicated to my grandparents Benny, Ruth, Jørgen and Lizzie.
iii
==PAGE:6==
Abstract
Production of formic acid is currently dependent on fossil fuels, and while green alterna-
tives for production has been suggested, none have been commercialised yet. Previous
studies have also been conducted studying the mechanisms and products in oxidations of
carbohydrates. In this project, the oxidation of various saccharides was studied and for-
mate emerged as the predominant product in these reactions with high yields. All of the
reactions produced the lower aldonates as secondary products. Mechanistic suggestions
for the oxidation of monosaccharides have been proposed based on pseudo-2D reaction
tracking experiments, and product yield quantification. The mechanism has been proposed
to be the cause of the attack of a hydroperoxyl anion on a carbonyl group, which under-
goes either a Baeyer-Villiger transformation or an oxidative C-C bond cleavage. This
reaction has been screened in other solvents and with other bases, of which some base and
solvent combinations have shown promising results. Experiments are needed to investi-
gate this further. Experiments on disaccharides have shown similar reaction pathways to
monosaccharides although further research is needed to fully elucidate these and provide
mechanistic suggestions for these reactions. Finally cellulose has also shown promising
glycolate-to-formate yields under similar reaction conditions to the mono- and disaccha-
ride experiments. Experiments are needed for further optimisation and understanding of
the cellulose experiments. Formate yields in saccharide oxidation have been observed to
be dependent on the H2O2 concentration relative to saccharide length, base and solvent
selection and saccharide affinity for aldose-to-ketose isomerisation in the reducing end of
the saccharide. Aldose-to-ketose isomerisation via. the Lobry de Bruyn-Van Enkenstein
transformation has been observed to be in competition with formate production, with ke-
toses consistently producing more glycolate than their aldose counterparts.
iv
==PAGE:7==
Dansk Resumé
Produktionen af myresyre er i øjeblikket afhængig af fossile brændstoffer, og selvom
der er blevet foreslået grønne alternativer til produktionen, er ingen endnu blevet kom-
mercialiseret. Tidligere studier har også undersøgt mekanismerne og produkterne i ox-
idationer af kulhydrater. I dette projekt blev oxidation af forskellige sakkarider under-
søgt, og formiat viste sig at være det dominerende produkt i disse reaktioner med høje
udbytter. Alle reaktionerne producerede de lavere aldonater som sekundære produkter.
Mekanistiske forslag til oxidation af monosakkarider er blevet fremsat på baggrund af
pseudo-2D reaktionssporingsforsøg og kvantificering af produktudbytter. Mekanismen
er foreslået at skyldes et angreb af en hydroperoxylanion på en carbonylgruppe, hvilket
enten fører til en Baeyer-Villiger-transformation eller en oxidativ C-C-bindingskløvning.
Reaktionen er blevet screenet i andre solventer og med andre baser, hvoraf nogle base
og solvent kombinationer har vist lovende resultater. Der er behov for yderligere eksper-
imenter for at undersøge dette nærmere. Eksperimenter med disakkarider har vist lig-
nende reaktionsforløb som monosakkarider, selvom yderligere forskning er nødvendig
for fuldt ud at klarlægge disse og fremsætte mekanistiske forslag for reaktionerne. Cel-
lulose har også vist lovende udbytter af glycolat til formiat under lignende reaktions-
betingelser som i mono- og disakkarid-eksperimenterne. Der er behov for eksperimenter
til yderligere optimering og forståelse af celluloseforsøgene. Formiatudbytter ved oxida-
tion af sakkarider er blevet observeret at afhænge af H2O2-koncentrationen i forhold til
sakkaridets længde, valg af base og opløsningsmiddel samt sakkaridets tilbøjelighed til
aldose-til-ketose-isomerisering i den reducerende ende af sakkaridet. Aldose-til-ketose-
isomerisering via Lobry de Bruyn-Van Ekenstein transformationen er blevet observeret at
konkurrere med formiatproduktionen, idet ketoser konsekvent producerer mere glycolat
end deres aldose-modparter.
v
==PAGE:8==
List of Abbreviations
EDTA, Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid
DBU, 1,8-Diazabicyclo[5.4.0]undec-7-ene
DEPT, Distortionless Enhancement by Polarization Transfer
DMSO, Dimethyl sulfoxide
DQF-COSY, Double Quantum Filtered Correlation Spectroscopy
EtOH, Ethanol
HMBC, Heteronuclear Multiple-Bond Correlation Spectroscopy
HOHAHA, Homonuclear Hartman-Hahn Spectroscopy
HSQC, Heteronuclear Single Quantum Coherence
J, Spin-Spin Coupling Constant
MeOH, Methanol
MOE, Margin of Error
NEt3, Triethylamine
NMR, Nuclear Magnetic Resonance
NOESY, Nuclear Overhauser Effect Spectroscopy
POM, Polyoxometalate
pp, Percentage Points
TEAOH, Tetraethylamonnium Hydroxide
TOCSY, Total Correlation Spectroscopy
Syngas, Synthetic Gas
w/v%, Weight over Volume Concentration
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
Dansk Resumé
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
List of Abbreviations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
vi
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Aldoses in Alkaline Solutions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.1.1
Identification of Compounds Using NMR . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Formic Acid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.3
Commercial Production of Formic Acid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.3.1
Methyl Formate Hydrolysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.4
Experimental Production of Formic Acid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.4.1
Formic Acid From Biomass
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.4.2
Uncatalysed Hydrogen Peroxide Oxidation . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2
Aim and Scope
11
3
Experimental
12
3.1
Chemicals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.2
Stock Preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.2.1
Saccharide Stock . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.2.2
Base Stock . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.2.3
H2O2 concentration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.3
Experimental Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.3.1
Standard Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.3.2
Monosaccharide Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.3.3
Disaccharide Procedure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.3.4
Cellulose Procedure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.3.5
Periodate Procedure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.3.6
Ethanol Reference Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.4
Data Processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4
Results and Discussion
16
vii
==PAGE:10==
4.1
Monosaccharides in Aqueous Alkaline Solutions in the Presence of a Per-
oxide
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.1.1
Products and Distribution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.1.2
Isotope Tracking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.1.3
Mechanism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.2
Concentration Experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.2.1
The Effect of Hydrogen Peroxide Concentration
. . . . . . . . .
34
4.2.2
The Effect of the Base Concentration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.3
Effect of Different Bases and Solvents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.3.1
Effect of Different Bases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.3.2
Effects of Different Solvents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.4
Disaccharides and Cellulose
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.4.1
Disaccharide Experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.4.2
Cellulose Experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5
Conclusion
44
Bibliography
45
A HSQC - Glucose in Water, 6 Equivalents H2O2, 0.6M LiOH
53
B
Oxidation of Erythrose and Glyceraldehyde
55
C HSQC - Arabinose in Water, 6 Equivalents H2O2, 0.6M LiOH
56
D HSQC - Erythrose in Water, 6 Equivalents H2O2, 0.6M LiOH
58
E
HSQC - Glyceraldehyde in Water, 6 Equivalents H2O2, 0.6M LiOH
60
F
Chemical Shifts in Water: Monosaccharides
62
G pH Measurements of the Glucose Oxidation Experiment
65
H Oxidation of 2-Deoxy-Glucose
66
I
Mechanism of Lactate and Acetate Formation From Glucose
67
J
Chemical Shifts in Methanol
68
K Chemical Shifts in Ethanol
71
L
Chemical Shifts in DMSO
74
viii
==PAGE:11==
M HSQC - LiOH in DMSO
77
N HSQC - Glucose in Water, 6 Equivalents H2O2, 0.6M DBU
79
O HSQC - Glucose in MeOH, 6 Equivalents H2O2, 0.6M DBU
81
P
HSQC - Glucose in EtOH, 6 Equivalents H2O2, 0.6M DBU
83
Q Chemical Shifts in Water: Disaccharides
85
R HSQC - Maltose in Water, 12 Equivalents H2O2, 0.6M LiOH
88
S
HSQC - Cellobiose in Water, 12 Equivalents H2O2, 0.6M LiOH
90
T
HSQC - Lactulose in Water, 12 Equivalents H2O2, 0.6M LiOH
92
ix
==PAGE:12==
x
==PAGE:13==
1
Introduction
The depletion of the world’s fossil fuels and the current climate crisis we are facing have
led to an urgent need for us to adopt greener alternatives to current commodities.
While biochemicals, and other materials derived from biomass, are generally considered to
be more environmentally friendly than their non-renewable fossil resource counter-parts,
it is important to take into account the methods from which these materials have been
derived, and the environmental impact of these.[1]
When discussing biomass, it is also important to distinguish between where the biomass
is sourced from. Different sources have therefore been classified into generations. First
generation biomass is sourced from food crops like sugar canes and palm oils. Using first
generation biomass therefore competes with food production. Second generation biomass
is non-edible biomass like starch and straw. A third and fourth generation also exists,
of biomass made from algae, but these generations are not relevant for the scope of this
assignment.[2, 3]
Within green chemistry, the focus has shifted towards carbohydrates as one of the main
alternatives to fossil fuels, as carbohydrates are both abundant and are able to theoretically
work as a precursor to many types of chemicals.[4]
The most used carbohydrates are derived from lignocellulosic biomass, which can be
found as both first-generation and second-generation carbohydrates, where an advantage
of second-generation carbohydrates is that they do not compete with food production.[2]
Lignocellulosic biomass is a mixture of cellulose, hemicellulose and lignin - three different
types of biopolymers, of which cellulose and hemicellulose are polysaccharides. While
lignin is not a polysaccharide, the constituents obtained from its degradation, which in-
clude polyols, phenols and aromatic hydrocarbons, could also be used for biofuel.[5]
Lignocellulosic biomass has the drawback that it requires pretreatment for hydrolysis to oc-
cur, which influences the economic and environmental impact of it’s usage.[6] The process
of utilising lignocellulosic biomass is not currently economically feasible, and therefore
the process has not been commercialised yet. If it were to be commercialised, it could
potentially compete with fossil fuels.[7]
1
==PAGE:14==
1.1
Aldoses in Alkaline Solutions
It is known that glucose exists in an equilibrium between its open-chain form and it’s four
ring forms - which is shifted towards the ring forms in aqueous solutions.[8, 9]
Furthermore high concentrations of base will result in side reactions including aldose-to-
ketose isomerisation and formation of trioses by retro-aldol reaction. These side reactions
are also known to produce lactic acid, acetic acid, and other deoxy-acids among the many
other side products formed.[10] Monosaccharides especially are unstable under highly al-
kaline conditions and degrade by many different pathways.[11]
Under alkaline conditions, the fructose yield is generally known to be below 10% of the
total isomerisation of glucose, when Brønsted bases are used.[11] The aldose-to-ketose iso-
merisation under alkaline conditions is also known as the Lobry de Bruyn-van Ekenstein
transformation,[8] as discovered in 1895.
The base catalysed Lobry de Bruyn-van Enkenstein transformation can be seen in Scheme
1.1
Scheme 1.1: Lobry de Bruyn-van Ekenstein transformation as described in Bruyn and
Ekenstein, showing the aldose-to-ketose isomerisation mechanism of saccharides in alka-
line conditions.[12]
While it is known that carbohydrates undergo this transformation in alkaline solutions, it
is also known that the rates of transformation differ between epimers and between aldoses
of different lengths,[13, 14] and also on both the solution in which the sugar in reacting in
and the base used.[15]
Isomerisation of glucose and fructose in water has been studied extensively, including
their mutarotation to mannose. While mutarotation between the epimers is possible and
has been reported in alkaline conditions, in general the transformation from fructose to
mannose is the least favoured compared to the the isomerisation between glucose and fruc-
tose, in alkaline aqueous solutions.[15, 16] The chemical shift for the most common isomers
for glucose, α- and β-D-glucopyranose, and the most common isomers for fructose, β-D-
fructopyranose and α- and β-D-fructofuranose, are known in both water and D2O.[17–19]
2
==PAGE:15==
In water, it is also known that the epimerisation into mannose is relatively small, both in
neutral and high pH values, but that the yield is both base and catalyst dependent.[15, 16, 20]
1.1.1
Identification of Compounds Using NMR
Monosaccharides come in the D and L enantiomers, the α and β epimers, in ring form
and open-chain form, and lastly in aldose or ketose form. While direct interchangeability
has not been observed between the D and L enantiomers, the α and β epimers undergo
mutarotation when the saccharide enters and exits a ring form. Ketoses can also form rings
with different anomeric configurations. Ketoses in open chain forms can isomerise into
the aldose form and vice versa. This isomerisation can further epimerise the C2 carbon.[20]
Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is a useful tool for identifying saccha-
rides and the different isomers, due to the versatility of the experiments available.
While NMR spectroscopy is unable to directly differentiate between D and L enantiomers,
as NMR parameters tend to be scalars that cannot distinguish between mirror forms of
molecules, it can be determined from spectra of derivatives of the sugars. This could be
done with the use of chiral agents that can only react with one of the isomers.[21] Further-
more, the majority of monosaccharides occur naturally in the D form.
For solutions in which monosaccharides are stable, the most common isomers can be iden-
tified completely. While the chemical shifts of the compounds also depend on the solvent
and pH of the solution, it is in general possible to differentiate between the epimers, tau-
tomers and ring forms in slow chemical exchange due to the differences in chemical shifts
and coupling patterns of the different isomers.
The usage of isotope-labelled molecules has also been shown to be effective for elucida-
tion. Isotope labels can give insight in distributions between tautomers, identify a given
carbon within the given structure, and give insight into the products a given carbon trans-
forms into and the distribution between these given products.[9, 10] Usually, the molecules
are labelled with 13C or deuterium, denoted as 2H or D.
1D Experiments
1D 1H spectra can elucidate the chemical shifts of all non-labile protons, their integrals and
their spin-spin splitting patters, which gives insight to their chemical environment. Labile
protons are also able to be seen if they cannot exchange with the solvent.[22]
1D 13C spectra can also elucidate the chemical shifts of the 13C atoms in a molecule, but the
natural abundance of 13C is significantly lower than 1H, which makes the signals weaker.
Therefore, it can be useful to use 13C-isotope labelled substances to enhance the signal.
1D 13C spectra can also have spin-spin patterns due to hydrogen coupling, but the majority
of 1D 13C spectra are proton-decoupled. Using Distortionless Enhancement by Polariza-
3
==PAGE:16==
tion Transfer (DEPT), it is also possible to differentiate between CH and CH3, CH2 and
quartenary carbons, due to the different phases of the respective carbons in different DEPT
pulse sequences.[22]
Double Quantum Filtered Correlation Spectroscopy (DQF-COSY)
COSY spectra show the through-bond spin-spin coupling between vicinal protons (3JH,H).
The resultant spectrum show the individual peaks on the diagonal, and cross-peaks at the
off-diagonal intersections between neighbouring hydrogens. From this spectrum you can
determine the spin systems in a molecule.[22] DQF-COSY furthermore suppress the singlet
peaks, making peaks close to the diagonal more visible.[23]
DQF-COSY can be useful for determining the spin-systems, but since monosaccharides
all lie within the same spectral range, it can be difficult to differentiate between close lying
peaks, especially in di- and polysaccharides.
Total Correlation Spectroscopy (TOCSY)
TOCSY also shows through-bond JH,H-couplings. Much like COSY the spectrum show
singlet peaks on the diagonal and cross-peaks. TOCSY, unlike COSY, show cross-peaks
between all signals within a spin-system.[9]. TOCSY is also known as Homonuclear
Hartmann–Hahn spectroscopy (HOHAHA).
Heteronuclear Single Quantum Coherence (HSQC)
HSQC spectra show the 1JC,H -couplings, of directly connected protons and carbons. The
spectra can also identify diastereotopic protons, if this has not already been elucidated by
other NMR methods. Since the method requires proton-carbon couplings, this means that
all quaternary carbons cannot be determined from this spectrum.[22]
Heteronuclear Multiple-Bond Correlation (HMBC)
HMBC spectra also show through-bond JC,H -couplings. The couplings are usually 3 bond
couplings, but 2 and 4 bond couplings can also show up on a spectrum.[24]
HMBC can therefore also determine quaternary carbons, and when combined with HSQC,
their relative position to protonated carbons, can also be determined.
Nuclear Overhauser Effect Spectroscopy (NOESY)
NOESY spectra show the through-space JC,H -couplings, when a proton and carbon is
around 5Å apart. It is used often for large molecules as it can differentiate between
conformers.[22] For sugars this could also be used to differentiate between saccharide
epimers.
Pseudo-2D Reaction Tracking
Reaction tracking can be visualised by pseudo-2D spectra, in which for instance the carbon
dimension is the one being the one measured. Multiple 1D 13C spectra are acquired over
a period of time, and the second dimension therefore functions as a real-time dimension.
In these spectra, it is possible to see the formation of products from their carbon shifts.
4
==PAGE:17==
1.2
Formic Acid
Formic acid is the simplest of the carboxylic acids. It was discovered in nature, as vapours
from ant hills; formic acid therefore has it name from the Latin word for ant.
Its usage is vast and varied across different industries. Unlike mineral acids, it does not
leave residue when used. Due to its antibacterial properties formic acid is often used as
a preservative of food, silage, of both crops and animal biomass, and as an ingredient
in cleaning agents. It also finds usage as a pH-regulator within the tanning and textile
industries.[25] Furthermore, it is also used as a solvent as it can dissolve polyamides, and
can also be used as precursor in certain syntheses. Formate salts also have usages in many
further industries.[26]
Currently, formic acid is being investigated as a hydrogen carrier for hydrogen fuel cells.
Current hydrogen fuel cells commonly use methanol or H2 depending on the type of fuel
cell, but this application also has drawbacks. Methanol and H2 both require high operating
temperatures, methanol is toxic, and H2 requires extreme storage conditions.[27] Formic
acid could theoretically function both indirectly as a hydrogen carrier and directly as a
fuel in fuel cells due to its solubility in water, low cost, and low operating temperatures,
making it favourable compared to current fuel cells.[26, 27] While formic acid is also toxic,
it is less toxic than other fuel types used in fuel cells.[27, 28]
1.3
Commercial Production of Formic Acid
There are currently many ways to produce formic acid, but few are used commercially. In
2015 the global production of formic acid was around 675000 metric tons.[28] In 2012, 90%
of the world’s formic acid production was produced through hydrolysis of methyl formate,
as this so far has proved to be the most economically advantageous way of producing
formic acid.[26]
1.3.1
Methyl Formate Hydrolysis
Methyl formate hydrolysis functions by carbonylating methanol in accordance with these
general chemical equations:
CH3OH + CO
HCOOCH3
(1.1)
HCOOCH3 + H2O
HCOOH + CH3OH
(1.2)
In this process, the resultant methanol produced is then returned to the original start feed.
Although multiple processes for commercial methyl formate hydrolysis exist,[29, 30] they
all only differ significantly in the hydrolysis stage. Both stages of the reaction need to be
catalysed, leading to the formation of by-products that need to be managed. Furthermore,
5
==PAGE:18==
the reaction is only favourable at high temperatures and high pressures, and the carbon
monoxide gas, a toxic and volatile gas,[31] used should be extremely pure to ensure the
formation of the right compounds. The process can produce almost quantitative levels of
methyl formate to methanol.[26]
In 2019, methanol had an estimated annual consumption of 97 million metric tons, and the
primary commercial production is based on fossil fuels and synthetic gas (syngas), which
is a mixture of CO2 and H2.[32]
1.4
Experimental Production of Formic Acid
There have also been studies into other ways to produce formic acid optimally.
While multiple processes have been proposed for formic acid synthesis, all of these have
drawbacks that prevent them from being used to produce formic acid commercially. These
drawbacks differ between syntheses but they are in general more complex than syntheses
using fossil fuels and in general the technologies are not optimised enough for commercial
use. Furthermore, these technologies would either have to be integrated into the current
production lines, or new biorefineries would have to be made.[33]
1.4.1
Formic Acid From Biomass
Carbohydrates from biomass have been proposed as a means to producing formic acid, as
an alternative to carbohydrates from fossil fuels.[34]
Biomass theoretically should yield quantitative yields of formic acid upon oxidation as
described in Equation 1.3.
nCxOxH2x
[O]
xnHCOOH
(1.3)
Good results have been reported using vanadium substituted Keggin-type polyoxometa-
late (POM) catalysts for oxidation of monosaccharides, with formic acid yields of around
≈50% in aqueous solution,[35] although more recent research has shown that methanolic
solvents may produce higher yields.[36]
Vanadium-substituted Keggin-type POM catalysts have shown promising yields of formic
acid in regard to oxidising biomass. This process is called the OxFA process, in which
the POM catalysts can complete 100% conversion of larger biomaterials using gaseous
oxygen as a reactant, with formic acid and CO2 being the only products. The yields of the
CO2 and formic acid depend on the biomaterial that is being degraded.[37]
Other methods have also been proven to work, including palladium catalysts,[38] alkali- and
transition metal oxide catalysts,[39, 40] using periodate as an oxidant,[41] and other oxidants
6
==PAGE:19==
like O3.[42]
It is known that oxidation of carbohydrates using H2O2 can be catalysed by ferrous ions
and react radically by the Fenton reaction.[43] This reaction works optimally at acidic pH,
as H2O2 is known to self-decompose ionically in alkaline mixtures at pH 9 or higher.[44]
1.4.2
Uncatalysed Hydrogen Peroxide Oxidation
The oxidation of saccharides in aqueous alkaline medium, was first studied by John Ulric
Nef around the turn of the 20th century,[45] and was expanded extensively on by the sys-
tematic work of Horace Isbell and colleagues in the 70’s, where the main oxidant used
was H2O2.[8, 46–49]
Hydrogen peroxide has been eyed as a green alternative as an oxidant as it is cheap to pro-
duce and is already being produced as a byproduct of the redox reaction of anthraquinone.
Currently, the world capacity is at at least 1.1 million tons of 100% H2O2.[42] Furthermore,
upon oxidation of H2O2 the only waste products produced is water.[50]
Uncatalysed hydrogen peroxide oxidations of sugars have been proven to work with and
without chelating agents such as ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA), to prevent the
formation of HO radical formation.[42, 51]
Monosaccharides and Mechanisms
In the earliest studies Isbell et al. reported quantitative conversion of aldohexoses and
aldopentoses to formic acid at 0◦C. Here, it was argued that under alkaline conditions the
hydroperoxide ion attacks the aldehyde in the acyclic form of the sugars, forming a sugar-
hydroperoxide adduct which then cleaves in either an ionic or free-radical mechanism
as seen in Scheme 1.2.[46] It was also reported that upon addition of FeSO4 as a radical
initiator, there was no significant difference in the resultant yield.[46]
Scheme 1.2: Hydroperoxide adduct cleavage mechanism as proposed by Isbell et al.,
showing the cleavage of formic acid from the hydroperoxide adduct, and formation of
the next lower aldose. An ionic and radical mechanism is shown, forming the same
products.[46]
Further studies into the oxidation of monosaccharides using H2O2 as the oxidant and un-
der ambient conditions have reported further by-products of the reactions, with fructose,
glycolic acid and glyceric acid being the most commonly reported.[38, 39, 52, 53]
Multiple mechanisms for the specific method of oxidation have been suggested, including,
but not limited to, peroxide adduct cleavage as seen in Scheme 1.2, free-radical oxidation
7
==PAGE:20==
by the superoxide radical O –
2 , as seen in Scheme 1.3, and Baeyer-Villiger oxidation as
seen in Scheme 1.4.[49]
Scheme 1.3: Superoxide radical ion mechanism from an aldehyde hydroperoxide adduct
as proposed by El Khadem et al., showing the different two reaction pathways and their
possible products. Pathway one produces the corresponding aldonic acid, while pathway
two produces formic acid and the hydrated form of the lower aldose.[14]
The mechanism involving the superoxide radical ion has been suggested by El Khadem et
al., as seen in Scheme 1.3.[14]
The mechanism builds on previous work by Isbell et al., with Path 2 being the addition
to the work. The final step, which produces either the corresponding acid or the formate
intermediate, are the same products as proposed in the Baeyer-Villiger oxidation as seen
in Scheme 1.4.[48]
Scheme 1.4: The Baeyer-Villiger oxidation from an aldehyde hydroperoxide adduct, show-
ing the the two possible reaction pathways, depending on which side migrates. Pathway
one produces the corresponding acid and the second pathway produces an O-formyl inter-
mediate, which is then hydrolysed to formic acid.
8
==PAGE:21==
Di-, Oligo- and Polysaccharides
The products from the oxidation of di- and oligosaccharides have shown to be dependent
on the placement of the glycosidic bond between the monosaccharides. It has been pro-
posed that when the glycosidic bond sits on at least one anomeric carbon, the oxidation
cannot progress beyond the glycosidic bond, as the glycosidic bond inhibits the reducing
properties of the given monosaccharide. [54]
It has been reported that the (1→4)-glycosidic bonds produce the corresponding lower
aldonate, second lower aldonate, and formate when oxidised by hydrogen peroxide [49] and
that other O-glucosides behave in similar manners, although the products and distribution
of products of these reactions depend on the placement of the glycosidic bond on the
reducing saccharide, except for (1→1) bonds, as the resulting sugars are non-reducing.
(1→1)-sugars have shown to undergo other reactions in alkaline medium.[54]
Mechanistic suggestions for the oxidations of di- and oligosaccharides have varied par-
tially because of the complexity of the systems, but are thought to generally follow the
same mechanisms as for monosaccharides. Furthermore, some disaccharides have also
been shown to break the glycosidic bond, with a deoxy-saccharide and a reducing sugar as
the resultant products of this reaction. Mechanisms have been proposed for this reaction[54]
which further increases the complexity of a total reaction pathway for oxidations of di- and
oligosaccharides.
There has been conflicting data as to whether or not the corresponding aldonate is formed
when oxidising a sugar using H2O2 in alkaline solutions. The majority of the literature
agrees that this reaction does not occur, although it has been suggested that this transfor-
mation can occur under certain conditions.[8, 55]
Oligo- and polysaccharides are known to be able to hydrolysed to their monosaccharide
constituents, but have also shown to be able to be oxidised under similar reaction condi-
tions as the mono- and disaccharide degradation previously described, but generally with
a lower conversion rate.[49, 54, 56, 57]
Deoxy-Saccharides
There have also been studies into the oxidation of deoxy-saccharides. It intuitively makes
sense that the outcome and product yields of alkaline oxidation of a given deoxy-aldose
exclusively depend on the position that has been deoxidised, and how many positions that
have been deoxidised.
Nonetheless, oxidation experiments have been performed, particularly on 2-deoxy-aldoses
and on a few other biologically relevant deoxy-aldoses.[48] There has been evidence to
suggest that 2-deoxy-aldoses are able to be oxidised to their corresponding aldonate,[51]
while 6-deoxy-aldoses reacts more like regular saccharides in terms of product yields,
9
==PAGE:22==
producing formic acid, but also higher concentrations of acetic acid than their saccharide
counterparts.[47]
More commonly though deoxy-aldoses/deoxy-aldonates usually appear as products of ox-
idation of disaccharides or other O-substituted saccharides, with the deoxidation occuring
at the site of the previous glycosidic bond,[54] and as products of side reactions in alkaline
medium without oxidant present.[8]
10
==PAGE:23==
2
Aim and Scope
The aim of this thesis has been to expand upon the findings made by Wang et al. in which
they report a near quantitative conversion of glucose into formic acid under mild reaction
conditions.[53] The implications of such a conversion method could prove beneficial for
a green alternative to the current ways of formic acid production. Furthermore, the reac-
tants used in Wang et al. are also cheap to produce, which is advantageous, as the cost
of production is a concern with green alternatives to formic acid production, as outlined
earlier.
Wang et al. performed all of their studies on monosaccharides under the same reaction
conditions,[53] which have been the starting point for the experiments and research detailed
going forward.
A reaction mechanism has also been proposed by the authors, which can be seen in Scheme
2.1.
Figure 2.1: Mechanism for glucose oxidation proposed by Wang et al.[53]
The degradation of saccharides proceeds via. a complex mechanism. Therefore, the re-
search in this thesis has been confined mainly to the degradation of monosaccharides under
the conditions underlined in Wang et al., although the degradation of disaccharides and
cellulose will also be discussed briefly. The focus will mainly be on product identifica-
tion and distribution, and how the choice of base and solvent influence these. The reaction
mechanism of the degradation will also be touched upon to an extent.
11
==PAGE:24==
3
Experimental
3.1
Chemicals
H2O2 (30 %w/v) was purchased from Fischer Scientific. D-(+)-Maltose Monohydrate
(≥99%) was purchased from Fluka Biochemika. DMSO-d6 (99.8%) was purchased from
Deutero GmbH. Methanol and Absolute Ethanol was purchased from VWR Chemicals.D2O
(99.9 atom % D), α-D-Glucose (96%), D-(+)-Galactose (≥99%), D-Lyxose (99%), L-(+)-
Arabinose (≥98%), D-Ribose (≥99%), D-(+)- Xylose (≥99%), D-Sorbitol (≥98%), L-
(-)-Arabitol (≥98%), L-(-)- Fucose (99%), 2-Deoxy-D-Glucose (≥98%), Gluconic Acid
(98%), D-Arabino-1,4-lactone, Potassium D-Erythronate, Glycolic Acid (99%), L-(-)-Glyceric
Acid Hemicalcium Salt, Glycolaldehyde dimer, D-(+)-Cellobiose, Cellulose (Powder, 20µm),
Sodium silicate solution (water glass), Sodium Periodate (≥99.8%), Iron(II) Sulfate Hep-
tahydrate, MgO, KOH (90%), LiOH (98%), NaOH (≥98%), and Na3PO4 (96%) were all
purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. D-Mannose and D-(-)-Erythrose (75%, syrup) were pur-
chased from Merck. [1-13C]-Glucose, [6-13C]-Glucose, [1-13C]-Fructose, [2-13C]-Fructose
and [5-13C]-Arabinose were all purchased from Omicron Biochemicals. Deionised water
was used in all reactions.
3.2
Stock Preparation
3.2.1
Saccharide Stock
For glucose, a 1000µL, 1M stock solution was made of 180.2mg glucose and 1000 µL
D2O.Unless otherwise indicated, this solution was used for all experiments.
For other saccharides, sugar alcohols, and sugar acids 1M solutions in D2O were also made
when needed. The saccharides were mostly weighed out so that the resultant solution was
20µL. If more saccharide than needed was weighed out, the D2O was scaled up so that
the resultant mixture was still 1M.
As erythrose was a ≥75% purity syrup, 2µL was added, assuming a density of the syrup
of 1.7g cm−3, to 18µL D2O.
Cellulose
Cellulose was measured in %w/v, in a 20µL volume. The solutions were also in D2O. The
concentrations are also indicated in g mL−1, which is g cellulose per mL total solution.
3.2.2
Base Stock
As LiOH was the most common base used, a 1000µL, 1M stock solution was made, of
23.95mg LiOH and 1000µL deionised H2O. Unless otherwise indicated, this is the stock
12
==PAGE:25==
solution used in the experiments.
For experiments with a desired concentration of 1M LiOH, a 2M 100µL LiOH stock so-
lution was used.
Other bases used were mixed into 120µL 1M solutions when needed. If more base than
needed was measured, the deionised H2O was scaled up so that the resultant mixture was
still 1M.
EDTA and FeSO4 solutions
For the experiments where the effects of EDTA and FeSO4 were studied, 10mL of standard
LiOH stock was transferred to a separate flask, where 0.05g L−1 FeSO4∙7H2O was added.
240µL of this solution was transferred into an Eppendorf tube.
Approximately 42mg EDTA was weighed out in a secondary Eppendorf tube, and was
transferred to the flask by transferring mixture into the tube, and transferring it back into
the flask. The resultant flask mixture had a concentration of 4.3g L−1, which corresponds
to 15wt% EDTA relative to glucose.
3.2.3
H2O2 concentration
H2O2 concentration is denoted in percentages or equivalents, depending on the experiment.
100% is one equivalent H2O2 per carbon substrate. For C6 sugars this equals 13µL H2O2.
3.3
Experimental Procedure
All samples were incubated in a VWR Thermal Shake Lite shaker for 24 h at 3535 ◦C and
500 rpm and all in-situ NMR spectra were recorded on an 800 MHz Bruker Avance III
spectrometer (Fällanden, Switzerland) equipped with an 18.7 T magnet and a 5 mm TCI
cryoprobe, unless otherwise stated. All experiments were carried out in 3 mm NMR tubes,
unless otherwise stated.
3.3.1
Standard Procedure
20µL 1M carbohydrate solution was added to an Eppendorf tube. 47µL deionised wa-
ter was added, followed by 120µL 1M LiOH stock solution, and lastly 13µL H2O2 was
added. Unless otherwise stated, this general procedure was followed, with the appropriate
measures of stock.
3.3.2
Monosaccharide Procedure
Monosaccharides usually followed the standard procedure. In one series of experiments,
testing the oxidation of other C6 monosaccharides, all reactants except for the carbohy-
drate stock was mixed before being added to the carbohydrate stock.
13
==PAGE:26==
3.3.3
Disaccharide Procedure
Disaccharides followed standard procedure, but with 12 equivalents H2O2 (25µL), used
instead, unless otherwise indicated.
3.3.4
Cellulose Procedure
For cellulose, standard procedure was followed.
For an appropriate H2O2 concentration of 240%, H2O2 was added to the mixture at a ratio
of 8.6µL mg−1, which was calculated using the weight of cellobiose and a 240% H2O2
concentration, which amounts to 28.8 equivalents or 60µL.
3.3.5
Periodate Procedure
Two periodate experiments were made. Both used a 2M NaIO4 solution.
In the first experiment, the NaIO4 solution was added after the base, in the second the
NaIO4 solution was added after the H2O2.
3.3.6
Ethanol Reference Procedure
In some of the experiments 0.1M EtOH was added as a reference after incubation.
3.4
Data Processing
Intensities were calculated from integrals, gathered on Topspin. For integrals gathered
from 1D-1H spectra or HSQC spectra, the intensities were normalised by the number of
hydrogens the peak gave rise to, when applicable.
The peaks most commonly used for measuring intensities in products are: α-Glucose
(1H, 5.08ppm; 13C, 92ppm), β-Glucose (1H, 4.49ppm; 13C, 95.91ppm), Arabinonate (1H,
4.17ppm; 13C, 71.76ppm), Erythronate (1H, 3.49ppm; 13C, 62.08ppm), Glycerate (1H,
3.76ppm; 13C, 64.58ppm), Glycolate (1H, 2.87ppm; 13C, 61.42ppm), Formate (1H, 8.4ppm;
13C, 171.07ppm), Acetate (1H, 1.778ppm; 13C, 23.19ppm).
Product distribution is the normalised sum of the relative intensities, where the intensities
have been reduced to one hydrogen equivalent. Unless otherwise specified, the product
distributions were calculated from HSQC spectra.
Carbon distributions were calculated as the normalised sum of the product distributions
with the individual product distributions multiplied by the amount of carbons in the prod-
uct. Carbon distributions were only calculated from product distributions calculated from
1D-1H spectra.
Ethanol Quantification
Ethanol was added to some samples to function as an internal standard. Quantification
using this standard was attempted, but the ethanol peaks overlapped with the methylene
14
==PAGE:27==
peaks of the products. Therefore this was not continued further.
Satellite Quantification
Satellite quantification was calculated by from relative intensities of each spectrum, cali-
brated to the given spectrum’s formate peak.
The intensity and satellites for a given peak was then normalised to calculate the 12C/13C
ratio.
For glycolate, where only one satellite was visible on the glucose spectra, the normalisa-
tion was conducted with the main glycolate peak and double the intensity of satellite peak,
to simulate the missing satellite.
pH Measurement
A 4mL solution was made with standard measurements, and measured on a Mettler-Toledo
pH meter over 6 days.
15
==PAGE:28==
4
Results and Discussion
4.1
Monosaccharides in Aqueous Alkaline Solutions in
the Presence of a Peroxide
4.1.1
Products and Distribution
Glucose and Fructose
The initial reproduction of the experiments found in Wang et al. found significant differ-
ences, most notably form the absence of fructose isomers present in any of the conducted
experiments. For all the experiments with glucose, the only products present were arabi-
nonate, erythronate, glycerate, glycolate and formate. There were trace amounts of acetate
present in some of the spectra as well.
The presence of the products was supported by chemical shifts, of which glycerate, glyco-
late and acetate were already known[58] and the aldonates were validated by experiments
with glyceric acid hemicalcium salt and glycolic acid under standard conditions (6 equiv-
alents H2O2 and 0.6M LiOH). Erythronate and arabinonate was validated by experiments
with potassium erythronate and arabino-1,4-lactone respectively, under standard condi-
tions (6 equivalents H2O2 and 0.6M LiOH). The presence of arabinonate also differs from
the findings of Wang et al. who reported observing xylose as the C5 species generated
from an α-scission.[53] Spectra of the glucose experiments can be found in Appendix A.
Looking at the product distribution for the glucose experiments as determined by the
HSQC intensities, a relatively consistent distribution of products was observed.
In Figure 4.1 the average product distribution of seven glucose experiments under standard
conditions (6 equivalents H2O2, 0.6M LiOH), with a margin of error (MOE) with a 95%
confidence level can be seen.
Here it is observed that while formate is clearly the most abundant product, the other
lower aldonates are also present at a relatively consistent distribution. The pure glucose
originated from the few experiments where full conversion was not achieved. Furthermore,
there are trace amounts of acetate is observed in the samples. It is assumed that to originate
from a secondary process that occurs independently of this reaction pathway.
As can be seen in Figure 4.1, the second most abundant product is arabinonate. Formate
and arabinonate also have the largest MOE’s of the products indicating that these two
have the most differences in their final distributions. The differences in the final distribu-
16
==PAGE:29==
tions could in part be because these two products are the most abundant, although these
experiments do not determine this conclusively.
Figure 4.1: Mean product distribution of 7 reactions with glucose with a MOE with a 95%
confidence level (6 equivalents H2O2, 0.6M LiOH, H2O/D2O (90%/10%), 0.1M glucose,
35◦C, 500rpm). The product yield ranges can be observed with their corresponding errors.
It can be observed that while acetate and unreacted glucose is present, they are within their
margin of error.
Previous findings reported fructose as a product of this reaction.[39, 53] Reference 1D-1H,
1D-13C, 1H-13C-HSQC and 1H-13C-HMBC spectra of fructose in water with no base or
H2O2 present were acquired to confirm the absence of ketose tautomers in the glucose sam-
ples. These reference spectra yielded the most naturally abundant tautomers of fructose,[17–19]
β-fructopyranose, β-fructofuranose and α-fructofuranose. None of these tautomers were
present in the experiments conducted under these conditions.
Therefore an experiment using fructose as the initial monosaccharide was conducted, yield-
ing the same products as glucose. The product distribution of fructose compared to the
average glucose product distribution can be seen in Figure 4.2.
While glucose and fructose produce the same products, the experiments have different
product yields. Notably, the glycolate share of the total distribution increased by approx-
imately 20 percentage points (pp) in the fructose reaction product distribution, compared
to the product distribution from the product distribution. Likewise, the formate share has
decreased by 20 pp compared to the glucose reaction product distribution.
The arabinonate yield in the two experiments is similar in the two reactions. Since aldose-
to-ketose isomerisation is known to take place in alkaline solutions, and the same products
17
==PAGE:30==
Figure 4.2: The average glucose reaction product distribution compared to the fructose re-
action product distribution (6 equivalents H2O2, 0.6M LiOH, H2O/D2O (90%/10%), 0.1M
glucose, 35◦C, 500rpm). An increase in glycolate yield can be observed in the fructose
product distribution lying outside the MOE for the average glycolate yield in the glucose
reaction. The decrease in the formate yield in the fructose reaction similarly lies outside
the formate MOE in the glucose reaction.
are produced from oxidation of glucose and fructose, the overall mechanisms of oxidation
are also assumed to be similar. Due to this, it is also reasonable to deduce that arabinonate
and glycolate are formed from two different glucose transformations, which is also evident
since that would require an additional carbon from somewhere else. This indicates that
a second side-reaction occurs that forms glycolate. Since the remainder of the aldonate
products have similar distributions, this gives a strong indication that the isomerisation
directly influences the favourability of each of the three possible pathways of degradation.
Since the yield of arabinonate is similar in both it poses three initial possibilities the prod-
uct distribution: either the side reaction that produces glycolate is more favoured than
the one that produces arabinonate, but the pathway that produces glycolate is slower than
the aldose-to-ketose isomerisation, that the formation of arabinonate is independent of the
aldose-to-ketose isomerisation or that arabinonate can be formed directly from glucose.
Based on this, the possible products from a given aldose must be the products seen in
Scheme 4.1.
18
==PAGE:31==
Scheme 4.1: Products from the oxidation of a given aldose as identified in the oxidation
experiments.
Other monosaccharides
Experiments were conducted on the other C6 aldoses, using the same conditions as the
glucose experiments (0.6M LiOH, 6 molar equivalents H2O2) to see if a similar product
distribution to the glucose reaction could be observed.
The average glucose product yield was compared to mannose, the C2 epimer, and galac-
tose, the C3 epimer. The results can be seen on Figure 4.3.
Figure 4.3: Product distributions of other C6 aldoses, compared to glucose (6 equivalents
H2O2, 0.6M LiOH, H2O/D2O (90%/10%), 0.1M saccharide, 35◦C, 500rpm). Mannose
can be observed to produce less of the C5 aldonate compared to glucose. Galactose yields
more glycolate. The differences in these product yields indicates that stereochemistry
plays a role in product distribution and secondary aldonate yields.
As can be seen, mannose produces notably more formate than glucose, and therefore also
19
==PAGE:32==
less of the other aldonates. As fructose prefers to isomerise to glucose under alkaline con-
ditions, this implies that if isomerisation was prevalent, the product distribution would
be similar to that of glucose. Since this is not the case, it can also be surmised that the
formation of the majority of arabinonate is likely not completely independent of the iso-
merisation.
Furthermore, comparing the glucose to the galactose product distribution, it can be seen
that galactose displays a similar formate yield to glucose and a similar C5 aldonate yield
to mannose. This further indicates the differences in reactivity between epimers, but here
the difference occurs due to the epimerisation of the C3 carbon.
To possibly illuminate these differences, experiments were conducted on all C5 aldoses
under standard conditions (0.6M LiOH, 6 molar equivalents H2O2). The product distribu-
tions of all the C5 aldoses can be seen in Figure 4.4.
Figure 4.4: Product distribution of experiments with all C5 aldoses (6 equivalents H2O2,
0.6M LiOH, H2O/D2O (90%/10%), 0.1M saccharide, 35◦C, 500rpm). Differences be-
tween the C2 epimers can be observed especially between xylose and lyxose, where xylose
has a significantly higher C4 aldonate yield. Differences between the other C5 aldoses are
less pronounced.
While the differences in product yields between the epimers are less pronounced here,
differences are still visible. For instance, xylose has a much higher threose yield than
lyxose. The differences between arabinose and ribose are however less pronounced.
Experiments were also conducted on erythrose and glyceraldehyde, the results of which
can be found in Appendix B. Pure threose was not available, therefore it was only possible
to compare erythrose with glyceraldehyde. The differences in the glycolate yields between
the two are noteworthy, but without threose to compare to, it is difficult to unravel why
this difference occurs.
A reference HSQC spectrum of erythrulose was also acquired, to confirm the absence of
20
==PAGE:33==
the ketose in the erythrose reaction. This spectrum did not indicate any ketose products in
the erythrose sample.
Spectra of all the aldose reactions can be found in Appendices C to E.
The chemical shifts assignments of the products produced by monosaccharides in aqueous
alkaline solutions can be found in Appendix F.
Furthermore, it was evident from these spectra that under these conditions the reaction did
not produce the corresponding aldonate of a given monosaccharide. Therefore, this indi-
cates that the formation of the next lowest aldonate must happen as a secondary reaction,
instead of the cleavage between the C1 and C2 carbon in an aldose by H2O2 in an alkaline
solution. The overall findings from these replications have been surmised in Figure 4.5.
Figure 4.5: HSQC spectra showing the products from experiments of monosaccharides (6
equivalents H2O2, 0.6M LiOH, H2O/D2O (90%/10%), 0.1M saccharide, 35◦C, 500rpm)
of decreasing size from Warthegau et al. where it can be observed that the aldoses do not
form their corresponding acid.[59]
Periodate experiments
Experiments were conducted using periodate as an additive to glucose, with the ambition
that it would break down the secondary aldonate products. Three experiments were con-
ducted. One where the test was spiked after a 24 hour incubation with approximately 20
21
==PAGE:34==
mol% NaIO4 to glucose and two sets of experiments with different molar concentrations
of NaIO4 added before and after H2O2, respectively.
The addition of periodate showed no significant difference in product distribution, and has
not been explored further.
4.1.2
Isotope Tracking
Satellite Quantification
To gain insight to how much a given carbon position contributes to a given product yield,
experiments were conducted on some isotope labelled compounds.
The experiments were conducted on unlabelled fructose, [1-13C]-fructose, [2-13C]-fructose
and [5-13C]-arabinose, with the unlabelled fructose functioning as a reference spectrum for
the other experiments. [5-13C]-arabinose oxidised was in 5 molar equivalents H2O2 and
0.6M LiOH, as [6-13C]-glucose or [6-13C]-fructose were not available for quantification.
As the [5-13C]-arabinose and the fructose experiments are equimolar, the results are com-
parable. Labelling of the terminal carbon in arabinose also gives further insight into the
possible mechanisms of the oxidation. All of the major aldonates identified, with the
exception of formate, have a methylene group as the terminal carbon, which could give
valuable insight to what products the methylene group in the initial aldose yields.
13C can be observed on 1H spectra as satellites around a peak and has a natural abundance
of about 1%. Because of this, the 12C/13C ratio in a peak can be quantified. The spectrum
of the reaction with unlabelled fructose has therefore been used as a reference for the other
experiments, as the experiments are equimolar.
Layered spectra of the experiments can be found in Figures 4.6a and 4.6b.
The ratios of 12C and 13C for formate and glycolate in the different experiments can be
found in Table 4.1.
Experiment
Formate
12C
ratio
Formate
13C
ratio
Glycloate
12C
ratio
Glycolate
13C
ratio
Unlabelled fruc-
trose
98.81%
1.19%
99.07%
0.94%
[1-13C]-
fructose
88.94%
11.06%
7.51%
92.49%
[2-13C]-
fructose
98.61%
1.39%
98.53%
1.47%
[5-13C]-
arabinose
79.66%
20.34%
53.93%
46.07%
Table 4.1: Ratio of 12C and 13C in fructose and arabinose isotope labelled experiments
calculated from the satellites, showing the approximate contribution from each carbon
position in fructose to the formate and glycolate yields.
22
==PAGE:35==
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.6: Layered 1H spectra for experiments with unlabelled fructose, [1-13C]-fructose,
[2-13C]-fructose (6 equivalents H2O2) and [5-13C]-arabinose (5 equivalents H2O2, 0.6M
LiOH, H2O/D2O (90%/10%), 0.1M saccharide, 35◦C, 500rpm). (a) The formate peak
for the experiments. The satellites sizes differ between them, due to the 13C labelling,
making quantification possible. (b) The C2 glycolate peak for the experiments. In the
[1-13C]-fructose spectrum, the 13C satellites have increased significantly, indicating that
the majority of the glycolate is formed from the C1 position of glucose.
Here, it is observed that the 13C ratio in the experiment with unlabelled fructose experi-
ments correspond to the natural abundance, as expected. The ratios show the favoured
product formation of the given carbon position in each of the reactions. In the [1-13C]
labelled experiment, it becomes clear that the majority of the C1 positions end up as ei-
ther formate or the C2 position in glycolate, with the glycolate formation being heavily
favoured. In the [2-13C]-fructose experiment, it can further be seen that the C2 position
23
==PAGE:36==
of fructose does not primarily end up as neither formate nor the C2 position in glycolate.
Since there is no significant change in the 13C ratio for the [2-13C]-fructose experiment,
it indicates that the C2 position in fructose is transformed into a quarternary carbon in
the aldonate products. Finally, in the [5-13C]-arabinose experiment, an increase in both
the formate and glycolate 13C ratios is observed. This finding indicates that a significant
amount of formate and glycolate originate from unlabelled carbon positions in fructose.
The 1D 13C spectra for these three experiments, are also of importance. In 1D 13C spectra,
the increase in labelled quaternary carbons can be observed, which is impossible in 1D
1H spectra. A 13C spectrum was not acquired for the experiment with [5-13C]-arabinose,
but an isotope labelled time study was conducted, from which the final 13C spectrum, was
used to compare to the remaining experiments. Layered 13C spectra can be seen in Figures
4.7a and 4.7b.
Two additional peaks at 172.78 ppm and 168.17 ppm are observed on the [2-13C]-fructose
spectrum on Figure 4.7a. Neither peak couple to anything on the HMBC spectrum. The
peak at 172.78 ppm is assumed to be d1-formate and and the peak at 168.17 ppm is sus-
pected to be carbonate.
It is not possible to quantify the 13C change in 1D 13C spectra, with the same accuracy as
can be done in 1H spectra. Since quaternary carbons have longer relaxation times than
primary, secondary and tertiary carbons, the intensities in 1D 13C only reflect the accurate
13C yields in experiments with a sufficient delay between scans.
It is observed that the 13C peak for the C2 position of glycolate in the [1-13C]-fructose
spectrum, as seen in Figure 4.7b is has increased significantly, corroborating the findings
from the 1H spectra. In Figure 4.7a an increase in the C1 carbons for arabinonate and
glycolate is also observed in the [2-13C]-fructose spectrum.
The 13C spectrum for the [5-13C]-arabinose experiment spectrum provides valuable insight
into the mechanism. Firstly, the small fraction of the carbonate that is labelled indicates
that the oxidation and over-oxidation does not occur at the terminal carbon. Secondly, the
most abundant peaks on the 13C spectrum for [5-13C]-arabinose are by far the methylene
groups in the aldonate products. Aside from the small carbonate peak, and the formate
peak, there were no peaks in the 160-200 ppm region, meaning that the C5 position in ara-
binonate does not naturally end up as the C1 carbon in glycolate, glycerate, or erythronate.
24
==PAGE:37==
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.7: Layered 13C spectra for the experiments with unlabelled fructose [1-13C]-
fructose, [2-13C]-fructose (6 equivalents H2O2) and [5-13C]-arabinose (5 equivalents H2O2,
0.6M LiOH, H2O/D2O (90%/10%), 0.1M saccharide, 35◦C, 500rpm).
(a) The 160-
190ppm region, showing the quaternary carbons. An increase in intensity for the C1 car-
bons for glycolate and arabinonate can be observed in the [2-13C]-fructose experiment.
(b) The 40-80ppm region, showing the methylene groups for the experiments. It can be
observed that glycolate is the most abundant product in this region. In the arabinose ex-
periment, other peaks are visible, stemming from other aldonate products.
Reaction Tracking Time Studies
Time studies tracking [1-13C] and [6-13C] labelled glucose and [2-13C] labelled fructose
were conducted to track the formation of products in the reactions.
While a spectrum of unlabelled glucose spectrum was acquired, the quality was not opti-
mal. Therefore a spectrum of [u-13C]-glucose has been included here, to show the approx-
25
==PAGE:38==
imate differences in peaks as seen on Figure 4.8
Figure 4.8: Reaction tracking of [u-13C]-glucose (6 equivalents H2O2, 0.6M LiOH,
H2O/D2O (90%/10%), 0.1M saccharide). The difference in product yields can be visu-
alised here, with formate being the most abundant product.
From this time spectrum the relative intensities of the products show the formation of the
products. Graphs showing the evolution of the different compounds can be seen in Figures
4.9a and 4.9b. From these, it is obvious that formate is the predominant product in this
reaction. Furthermore, the over-oxidation of other aldonates can also be seen in the slow
decline of arabinonates intensity over time in Figure 4.9b.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.9: (a) Evolution of products in the [u-13C]-glucose experiment over time (6 equiv-
alents H2O2, 0.6M LiOH, H2O/D2O (90%/10%), 0.1M saccharide). (b) Evolution of prod-
ucts over time in the [u-13C]-glucose experiment, with formate omitted, here a decrease in
arabinonate yield can be observed over time, indicating over-oxidation.
From the time spectrum for the [6-13C]-glucose experiment as seen on Figure 4.10, it is
26
==PAGE:39==
evident that a lot of the 13C labelled carbon ends up as the methylene group in arabinonate,
a trend previously observed in the [5-13C]-arabinonate spectrum.
Figure 4.10: Time spectrum for [6-13C]-glucose experiment (6 equivalents H2O2, 0.6M
LiOH, H2O/D2O (90%/10%), 0.1M saccharide). It can be observed that the arabinonate
peak has increased significantly compared to the other peaks.
Although not as obvious as the arabinonate peak, there is also an intensity increase in
the methylene groups in the other compounds in this spectrum, as seen on Figure 4.11,
further suggesting that the C6 position of glucose remains as the terminal carbon when
not converted into formate.
Figure 4.11: Time spectrum for the [6-13C]-glucose experiment in the 60-66ppm region.
A slight intensity increase can also be seen in the other aldonate products.
Looking at the time spectrum from the [1-13C]-glucose experiment, as seen on Figure
27
==PAGE:40==
4.12, it can be seen that the C1 position of glucose, like with fructose, primarily ends up
as formate or the C2 carbon in glycolate.
Figure 4.12: Time spectrum for the [1-13C]-glucose experiment (6 equivalents H2O2, 0.6M
LiOH, H2O/D2O (90%/10%), 0.1M saccharide). Intensity increases can be seen in both the
formate and glycolate peaks indicating that the C1 position primarily ends up as formate
and glycolate.
Finally, the time spectrum for the [2-13C]-fructose experiment as seen in Figure 4.13 cor-
roborates the findings in the [1-13C]-glucose time spectrum.
Figure 4.13: Time spectrum for [2-13C]-fructose 160-185 ppm region (6 equivalents H2O2,
0.6M LiOH, H2O/D2O (90%/10%), 0.1M saccharide). The sharp increase in the peaks for
the quaternary carbons in glycolate and arabinonate corroborates the findings from the
satellite quantification experiments that the C2 position primarily ends up as glycolate.
Here, it observed that the C2 carbons primarily end up as the C1 carbons in both glyco-
late and arabinonate. Keeping in mind the difference in glucose and fructose formate-
to-glycolate yields, these time series, along with the satellite data and the product yields
28
==PAGE:41==
measurements post reactions, give a comprehensive insight to the fate of the different car-
bon positions of a C6 monosaccharide which can be summed up by the following Scheme
4.2.
Scheme 4.2: The fates of carbon positions as confirmed by the reaction tracking experi-
ments and corroborated from the satellite quantification from Warthegau et al.
4.1.3
Mechanism
Radical versus Ionic Pathway
Since H2O2 can react both radically and ionically, there is still debate as to whether or not
this is a radical or ionic reaction. A mechanism and reaction pathway has already been
proposed by Isbell et al., which neglects the formation of the shorter aldonates,[46] while
Wang et al. postulates that the reaction is primarily a free-radical reaction driven by HO
and O –
2 radicals formed from H2O2.[53]
Under the standard conditions (0.1M monosaccharide in 200µL in H2O/D2O (90%/10%),
100% H2O2, 0.6M LiOH), the conversion of glucose into other products with a consistent
distribution, with a relatively small MOE.
It is known that above pH 10, H2O2 predominantly dissociates to the hydroperoxyl ion,
29
==PAGE:42==
HOO–. [60] The pH of the oxidation experiment with glucose (0.1M monosaccharide, 0.6M
LiOH, H2O/D2O (90%/10%)) was measured over almost 6 days. The results can be found
in Appendix G. This experiment showed that the reaction consistently has a pH above 10,
and can be approximated as an exponential decay.
To promote radical reactions to see if it gave different product yields than the standard
glucose experiments, two experiments were conducted to promote a Fenton-like oxidation
of glucose. The experiments compared the effects of FeSO4 in addition to H2O2 in glucose
degradation and the effects of EDTA as a chelating agent in this reaction.
There were significant differences in these two experiments compared to the average prod-
uct distribution of the glucose experiments under standard conditions. The average prod-
uct distribution from the glucose experiments compared to the Fenton-like experiments
with glucose can be found on Figure 4.14.
Figure 4.14: The average product distribution of the glucose experiments compared to
the product distribution of the Fenton-like reactions (6 equivalents H2O2, 0.6M LiOH,
H2O/D2O (90%/10%), 0.1M saccharide, 35◦C, 500rpm). Notably, the arabinonate yield
is significantly lower in the Fenton-like experiments, while the glycolate yield is signifi-
cantly higher.
These findings contradict the findings made by Isbell et al. where no difference was re-
ported when adding FeSO4.[46] As is observed with the Fenton-like reactions, arabinonate
is no longer the second most predominant product from this reaction. This has instead
shifted to glycolate being the second most predominant product, and glycerate being the
second most predominant aldonate product.
While this is not conclusive proof as to whether this reaction is a radical mechanism, the
difference in aldonate product distribution lies significantly outside of their corresponding
MOE when no FeSO4 is added to the solution. These findings point to H2O2 still primarily
dissociating to HOO– and that the standard oxidation reaction is an ionic mechanism.
30
==PAGE:43==
Reaction Pathway
Mechanistic proposals for the methods of degradations have already been studied exten-
sively, and many mechanisms have been suggested. The findings from our experiments
narrow down the suggestions into plausible pathways.
Wang et al. postulated three different cleavage patterns, α- and β-scissions and a C3-C4
cleavage.[53] Both α and β scissions of carbohydrates have been reported in other studies in
saccharide oxidation under similar conditions.[38, 39, 52] The α-scission corresponds to the
mechanism proposed by El Khadem et al., but this mechanism was proposed as a radical
mechanism.[14] The hydroperoxide adduct cleavage reaction proposed by Isbell et al. can
happen ionically,[46] as can the Baeyer-Villiger oxidation.
The findings from the time tracking studies did not indicate that we observed any direct
β -scissions of the aldoses, as such a scission would mean that the C1 carbon of a C6
monosaccharide would become the C1 carbon in glycolate. This was not observed; instead
the C1 carbon of C6 aldoses became the C2 carbon in glycolate. Since aldose-to-ketose
isomerisation takes place in the form of the Lobry de Bruyn-Van Ekenstein transformation,
a cleavage between the C2 and C3 carbons could take place by a hydroperoxyl anion attack
and cleavage of a ketose. This cleavage mechanism could happen either as a Baeyer-
Villiger mechanism in which a side migrates, or as an C-C cleavage mechanism like Isbell
et al.’s hydroperoxide adduct cleavage mechanism, where the cleavage occurs from the
C3 carbon.
The aldose-to-ketose isomerisation would also explain the formation of the lower aldonate,
assuming that the mechanism occurs from the opposite side than the reaction that forms
glycolate.
Since the arabinonate yields in the glucose and fructose experiments do not correspond to
the yields that would be obtainable only trough a hydroperoxyl attack on the ketone, there
is a possibility of a arabinonate formation directly from glucose. This reaction would in
such a case also be a secondary reaction. The specific mechanism for such a reaction
could be an epoxide formation reaction, as proposed in Warthegau et al., but the exact
mechanism cannot be determined solely from these experiments.
The C3-C4 cleavage reported in Wang et al. has not generally been observed in any experi-
ments, using either 6 equivalents H2O2 or H2O2 corresponding to aldose length for aldoses
shorter than 6 carbons. Under standard conditions, lactate has not been observed as a prod-
uct, and while trace amounts of acetate has been observed, it is assumed to be a secondary
reaction mechanistic suggestions to the formation of acetate would not be relevant for an
overview of mechanistic pathway of these degradation reactions. Any formate produced
in such an reaction would be negligible.
31
==PAGE:44==
The different mechanistic suggestions in the standard oxidation reaction can be seen in
Scheme 4.3.
Scheme 4.3: Proposals for the hydroperoxide adduct cleavage mechanism with resultant
products as seen in Warthegau et al. Multiple mechanisms have been proposed to account
for the different product yields observed in the reactions.
As such, an overall reaction pathway can be proposed for the oxidation of monosaccharides
in alkaline solutions as shown in Scheme 4.4.
Here the complex reaction pathway highlights the formation of the products observed in
the experiments with different monosaccharides, under similar reaction conditions. The
hydroperoxyl anion attack on the aldehyde form of a monosaccharide is the primary re-
32
==PAGE:45==
action pathway, with the side reactions accounting for the remainder of the products ob-
served. The results from the isotope tracking experiments are consistent with the side
reactions.
Scheme 4.4: Proposed overall reaction scheme for the oxidation of monosaccharides by
H2O2 in alkaline solutions from Warthegau et al., based on on the proposed mechanisms
and showing all products observed in the reactions.
A control reaction with 2-deoxy-glucose was conducted in standard conditions to validate
the pathway. Unlike the reactions with glucose, oxidation of 2-deoxy-glucose formed
significant amounts of the corresponding aldonate, indicating that the hydroxy group on
the C2 carbon plays a crucial role for the degradation and lower aldonate formation to
occur. This reaction also produced arabitol and formate, validating that the insertion of
an oxygen atom next to a carbonyl group, which is then hydrolysed, is the method of
breaking C-C bonds in the oxidative reaction. The findings from this oxidation reaction
can be found in Appendix H.
4.2
Concentration Experiments
To study the effect of the reaction conditions on formate yields, experiments were con-
ducted varying the parameters of the oxidation reaction.
For the concentration experiments, comparisons are made on carbon product distributions
33
==PAGE:46==
from 1H spectra, as they are more accurate than HSQC product distributions and 1H spectra
were available for all the experiments.
4.2.1
The Effect of Hydrogen Peroxide Concentration
Experiments with H2O2 concentrations from 0%-250% (0 to 15 equivalents in regards to
glucose) were conducted and can be seen in Figure 4.15. This was done to investigate the
effects of both insufficient and excess oxidant concentrations upon the product yields and
constitutions.
Figure 4.15: Carbon distribution of oxidation reactions with glucose, with varying H2O2
concentration (0.6M LiOH, H2O/D2O (90%/10%), 35◦C, 500rpm) as shown in Warthe-
gau et al. It can be observed that higher peroxide concentrations increases the formate
yield and decreases the yields of the secondary aldonate products. It can also be observed
that below 100% H2O2 concentration (6 equivalents for glucose), the aldonate and lactate
yields increase.
Here, it can be observed that the formate yield is directly dependent of the H2O2 concen-
tration, increasing with a higher concentration.
When no oxidant is present in the solution, the predominant product is lactate, followed
by the aldonates. It can also be observed that the acetate yield has significantly increased
when no oxidant is present, indicating that the formation of acetate observed in the previ-
ous experiments originates from a secondary reaction when the oxidant has been depleted,
which has also been described in the literature.[10, 11, 61] A mechanism has also proposed
which can be found in Appendix I. The lactate and acetate yields decrease with increasing
H2O2 concentration, where lactate and acetate is almost not produced at 50% H2O2 con-
34
==PAGE:47==
centration. From 30% H2O2 concentration the two predominant secondary products are
arabinonate and glycolate, which are also the two most predominant secondary products
under standard conditions (6 equivalents H2O2).
Furthermore, it is observed that from 50% H2O2 concentration, the yields of the other aldo-
nates also decrease with a higher H2O2 concentration. This indicates that over-oxidation
of products occurs with higher oxidant concentration, and also that the H2O2 concentration
naturally pushes the reaction towards formate production rather than aldonate production.
This results in almost complete conversion into formate at 200% H2O2 concentration.
An experiment was also conducted studying the effects of a slow addition of 100% H2O2
to the reaction over approximately 9 hours. The experiment showed both lactate and ac-
etate peaks, prominent known aldose peaks and unidentified peaks that could possibly be
ketoses. The presence of lactate, acetate and the unidentified peaks further validates the
dependence of adequate oxidant in the solution on overall aldonate yield.
Using 6 equivalents H2O2 for aldoses with fewer than 6 carbons
It can be observed that an excess of H2O2 over-oxidises the aldonates into formate in the
experiments and promotes formate production. This indicates that in experiments with
aldoses shorter than 6 carbons that have been oxidised with 6 equivalents H2O2, over-
oxidation can have occurred. The initial experiments with these reaction conditions were
to limit the different reaction conditions between experiments.
Using oxidant relative to the aldose length across all aldoses would give the most accurate
product yields for quantification, which is also why experiments with shorter aldonates
differ in H2O2 concentration. For C5 aldoses, 6 equivalents H2O2 corresponds to 120%
H2O2. For C6 aldoses 120% corresponds to 7.2 equivalents. Looking at Figure 4.15, the
formate yield has increased but not excessively so, compared to higher H2O2 yields. So
while over-oxidation of shorter aldoses should be considered, it should not be significant
for these concentrations.
4.2.2
The Effect of the Base Concentration
Experiments with varying LiOH concentrations were likewise conducted showing the in-
fluence of base concentration on the product yield. The carbon product distribution can
be seen in Figure 4.16.
Here, it is observed that for the oxidation of glucose to occur, the solution must be basic.
Glucose can only be fully converted at a minimum of 0.6M LiOH, which is why this
concentration has been chosen for the standard experiments.
While an alkaline solution is crucial for the oxidation to occur, it can also be observed
that the basicity does not promote formate formation in the way that H2O2 does. The
35
==PAGE:48==
formate yields plateaus at 0.4M LiOH, while the formation of arabinonate and glycolate
increase slightly beyond 0.6M LiOH. This indicates that the primary role of the base is to
deprotonate H2O2 to HOO–.
Figure 4.16: Carbon distribution of oxidation reactions with glucose, with varying LiOH
concentration (6 equivalents H2O2, H2O/H2O2 (90%/10%), 0.1M glucose, 35◦C, 500rpm)
as shown in Warthegau et al. It is observed that the LiOH concentration promotes conver-
sion of glucose, but not formation of formate. Rather, the secondary aldonate products
increase with higher solution basicity, while the formate yield stalls beyond 0.4M LiOH.
No acetate or lactate is observed in these experiments, which would indicate secondary re-
actions after oxidant depletion. Since the glycolate and arabinonate yields increase slightly
with higher solution basicity, it indicates that formation of secondary aldonate product is
somewhat dependent on the basicity of the solution, because of more aldose-to-ketose
isomerisation.
During the experiments, arabinonate and glycolate have been the most abundant secondary
products over both varying H2O2 concentration, and varying LiOH concentration. The
remaining aldonate products have been negligible. Therefore, the carbon fraction of ara-
binonate and glycolate can approximate the total secondary aldonates in the solution.
The effects of varying LiOH and H2O2 concentration on the secondary aldonate products
have been visualised on Figure 4.17, showing the effect of varying basicity and oxidant
concentration have on the product distribution.
36
==PAGE:49==
Figure 4.17: The effects of varying LiOH and H2O2 concentration on the secondary al-
donate yield compared to the formate yield in glucose oxidations (6 equivalents H2O2,
H2O/D2O (90%/10%), 0.1M glucose, 35◦C, 500rpm), as seen in Warthegau et al. It can
be observed that the two parameters have the opposite effects on each other, with a higher
solution basicity promoting secondary aldonate formation, while higher oxidant concen-
tration promotes formate formation.
4.3
Effect of Different Bases and Solvents
4.3.1
Effect of Different Bases
The use of other bases as reaction catalysts could make the oxidation of carbohydrates
more versatile. Therefore, other bases were screened as potential alternatives to LiOH to
investigate their effects on product yields and glucose conversion.
Other alkali metal hydroxides, such as potassium hydroxide (KOH) and sodium hydroxide
(NaOH) were able to oxidise glucose with similar yields as LiOH, while both potassium
carbonate (K2CO3) and magnesium oxide (MgO) suspended in H2O were not able to suc-
cessfully catalyse the reaction, likely because they were unable to deprotonate H2O2.
Sodium phosphate (Na3PO4) and sodium silicate were also used and was shown to catalyse
the reaction under similar conditions, as seen on Figure 4.18.
Both sodium phosphate and phosphate silicate showed a higher glycolate yield than the
metal alkali hydroxides. Otherwise, the product distributions were similar to that of LiOH,
posing other alkali metal hydroxides, phosphates, and silicates as possible base alterna-
tives.
37
==PAGE:50==
Figure 4.18: Comparison of 1H spectra for oxidation reactions with glucose (6 equivalents
H2O2, 0.6M Base, H2O/D2O (90%/10%), 0.1M glucose, 35◦C, 500rpm), with different
bases as seen in Warthegau et al. It can be observed that Na3PO4 and Na-Silicate produce
notably more glycolate than NaOH.
Tertiary Amine Bases
Tertiary amine bases were also screened for their potential usage in oxidising the reaction.
Triethylamine (NEt3) was tested, since the the chemical shifts of the base would not over-
lap with the known chemical shifts of the products of the reaction. 1,8-Diazabicyclo[5.4.0]-
undec-7-ene (DBU) was screened due to it being a non-nucleophilic base.
Both bases were screened with a 0.6M base concentration as well as using concentrated
base instead of a base stock solution.
NEt3 could only oxidise glucose when it was used concentrated, and even so the oxida-
tion was only partial. DBU was able to oxidise glucose both in a 0.6M solution and in a
concentrated solution, but not to completion.
The conjugate acids of NEt3 and DBU have pKa’s of 10.75 and 13.5 in water, respectively.
Since H2O2 has a pKa of 11.75 it can be assumed that NEt3 is too weak a base to deprotonate
H2O2. Since DBU is not able to fully oxidise glucose into aldonates, it indicates that the
nucleophilicity and/or size of the base plays a role in the conversion of saccharides.
Concentration experiments with NEt3 were conducted to determine the effects of NEt3
concentrations on the reaction. As the three predominant aldonate productions have been
formate, arabinonate and glycolate, their yield share has been used as representative of all
aldonates formed.
38
==PAGE:51==
Figure 4.19: The effect NEt3 concentration on aldonate yield, with a total base concen-
tration of 0.6M, and the remainder of the base being LiOH (6 equivalents H2O2, 0.6M
Base, H2O/D2O (90%/10%), 0.1M glucose, 35◦C, 500rpm). It can be observed that NEt3
severely impacts the aldonate formation even in low concentrations.
As can be seen in Figure 4.19, the addition of NEt3 severely impacts the aldonate formation,
even in low concentrations, indicating that NEt3 is not an optimal base alternative.
Quaternary Ammonium Salts as Bases
To investigate the effect of stronger bases, with better nucleophilicity than DBU, tetraethy-
lammonium hydroxide (TEAOH) and choline hydroxide were screened as possible base
alternatives.
Neither were able to fully oxidise glucose, but there was a significant increase in aldonate
yields compared to the experiments with NEt3.
Lactate and acetate was identified in both experiments indicating that secondary reactions
have taken place due to oxidant depletion. Furthermore, in both reactions, peaks that
could correspond to gluconic acid could be observed. Though a definite identification
could not be made, this could indicate that quaternary ammonium salts were more suscep-
tible to form corresponding aldonates of sugars. Unidentified peaks were present in both
experiments, that are assumed to be ketose tautomers, but these have not been identified
conclusively either.
The partial oxidation of glucose could also indicate that steric hindrance in the base could
influence the product yield, but the usage of quaternary ammonium salts as base alterna-
tives for saccharide oxidation remains an area for future exploration.
39
==PAGE:52==
4.3.2
Effects of Different Solvents
Different solvents were studied to determine the effect on product yields in the reaction.
Furthermore, when conducting these experiments, different bases were also used to inves-
tigate if other solvent and base combinations could oxidise the reaction with similar yields
compared to the standard reaction conditions.
Dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO), methanol (MeOH) and ethanol (EtOH), were screened as
potential solvent alternatives.
A list of chemical shifts for the products identified in the different solvents can be found
in Appendices J to L.
LiOH as Base
In all of the three solvents, fructose tautomers were present in the final HSQC spectrum.
Due to the amount of signals present in the final spectra, it was difficult to accurately quan-
tify how much conversion had occurred in the experiments, as full product identification
is essential for an accurate estimation of product distribution. In the experiment in which
DMSO was used as a solvent, lactate and acetate were identified, indicating that secondary
reactions have taken place, due to oxidant depletion.
In the experiment in which DMSO was used as a solvent there seemed to be little conver-
sion of glucose into aldonates, although possible chemical shifts have been identified. In
this sample, the corresponding acid (gluconic acid) was also possibly identified, based on
a reference spectra of gluconic acid in 0.6M LiOH in H2O. If this identification is correct,
it would indicate that the choice of solvent also has an effect on whether the corresponding
aldonates are formed. The spectrum of the experiment can be found in Appendix M.
Other Bases
TEAOH, choline hydroxide, and DBU were screened in MeOH, and DBU was also screened
in EtOH.
Although none of the solvent/base combinations were able to fully oxidise glucose, DBU
showed significantly more oxidation in MeOH and EtOH than in the H2O experiment. In
the experiment with H2O. The spectra for these experiments can be found in Appendices N
to P.
The experiment with TEAOH as base and MeOH as the solvent, fructose tautomers, lac-
tate and acetate were again present, indicating that TEAOH is not the optimal base for
saccharide oxidation under these conditions.
The experiment with choline hydroxide in MeOH similarly also had acetate and lactate
peaks present. MeOH shifted the chemical shifts significantly compared to the experiment
with choline hydroxide in H2O, so it was not possible to rule out the presence of fructose
40
==PAGE:53==
tautomers in this sample. It does not seem likely that fructose tauomers is present though,
due to fewer peaks being present on the HSQC spectrum in the regions where peaks from
fructose tautomers would be expected. The spectrum was compared to the spectra of
fructose in water and with TEAOH in MeOH, to identify possible tautomers, but these
references did not produce conclusive evidence.
4.4
Disaccharides and Cellulose
Based on the success in oxidising monosaccharides to formic acid, experiments testing the
oxidation of disaccharides and cellulose were also conducted. Oxidation of oligosaccha-
rides under mild conditions could have great impact on greener alternatives to the current
production of formic acid and other aldonic acids. Chemical shifts of the products found
in these experiments can be found in Appendix Q.
4.4.1
Disaccharide Experiments
Experiments were conducted using maltose, cellobiose, and lactulose, as experiments had
been conducted on all the monosaccharide constituents in the three saccharides.
Isbell and Frush previously reported the presence of the corresponding aldonate, the lower
aldonate, and 2-O-D-glucopyranosyl-D-erythronate.[49]
Conducting the experiments on the dissaccharides (12 equivalents H2O2, 0.6M LiOH,
0.1M Disaccharide), confirmed the presence of the lower aldonates and 2-O-D-glucopyranosyl-
D-erythronate, but the corresponding aldonate was not observed in any of the experiments.
All of the experiments with disaccharides with a 100% H2O2 concentration showed the
presence of anomeric carbons and 2-deoxy-erythronate, indicating that the glycosidic bond
is partially hydrolysed in the reaction. Aldonates that have been identified in glucose
and galactose experiments were therefore also identifiable in the solutions, with glycerate
being the most abundant secondary product. Acetate and lactate were not present, which
would be the case if oxidant had been depleted, since monomeric sugar was present. This
could imply both that the hydrolysis of the glycosidic bond is independent of the peroxide,
and also that the experiments had not been completed at the time of spectrum acquisition.
Spectra of these experiments can be found in Appendices R to T.
200% Peroxide Concentration
Experiments using the same disaccharides, with 24 equivalents H2O2, corresponding to
200% H2O2 concentration with regard to disaccharides, were also conducted.
Cellobiose showed significant degradation under 200% H2O2, unlike the two other disac-
charides. The product yields for cellobiose under these conditions were primarily formate.
Comparisons of the experiments can be found in Figure 4.20
41
==PAGE:54==
Figure 4.20: Product distributions of disaccharide experiments with 100% and 200% H2O2
concentrations(0.6M LiOH, H2O/D2O (90%/10%), 0.1M glucose, 35◦C, 500rpm). Here,
Other refers to C6 sugar, C5 aldonate, C4 aldonate, glycerate, 2-deoxy-erythronate and
lactate yields. It can be observed that cellobiose degrades almost exclusively to formate
in 200% H2O2 concentration, while the difference is not as notable with the other disac-
charides.
Here it can be seen that the majority of the longer aldonates experience a yield decrease
in solutions with a 200% H2O2 concentration, as is expected due to the excess oxidant.
The formate yield from the 200% H2O2 cellobiose experiment is unlike anything found in
literature. These findings open up for further investigation into why this is, and whether
other disaccharides could have similar properties.
4.4.2
Cellulose Experiment
Since the cellobiose experiments showed higher oxidation at higher H2O2 concentrations,
experiments on cellulose were also conducted, to investigate if similar product yields could
be obtained. Since both cellulose and cellobiose consist of β-(1→4) linked glucose units,
it was hypothesised that the two saccharides would have similar reaction pathways.
As it was assumed that cellulose had similar reaction patterns as cellobiose, this would
mean that cellulose would have glycosyl products of different lengths. This would make
product quantification impossible due to the size of cellulose, and the many sizes of the
possible glycosyl products. Therefore, the ratio of the glycolate peak to the formate peak
was calculated instead for product quantification, the results of which can be found in
Figure 4.21.
As can be seen, there is a clear trend in which the glycolate to formate ratio decreases
with higher w/v% with 240% H2O2 concentration. Since these are the most abundant
products it can directly be inferred that the formate yield increases with higher cellulose
concentration. The glycolate to formate ratio is not the same as cellobiose under the same
conditions, where quantification is possible. It can be observed that it approaches the
glycolate to formate ratio of cellobiose, despite being a much bigger molecule.
42
==PAGE:55==
Figure 4.21: Glycolate to formate ratio in oxidations with varying cellulose concentra-
tions (8.6 µL mg−1 H2O2, 0.6M LiOH, H2O/D2O (90%/10%), 35◦C, 500rpm). It can be
observed that at higher cellulose concentrations, more formate molecules per glycolate
molecules are produced. The reference line is the glycolate to formate ratio for the oxida-
tion reaction with cellobiose in similar conditions.
The formate yields gathered from the experiments with disaccharides and cellulose show
promising results, and can be expanded further upon. These findings have great possibil-
ities for further investigation into product yield distribution and parameter optimisation.
The possibility of oxidation of cellulose under ambient conditions could prove to be an
enormous step forward in finding green alternatives to formate production.
43
==PAGE:56==
5
Conclusion
The findings presented in this thesis provide a comprehensive mechanistic insight into the
oxidation of various saccharides under ambient conditions.
The formate product yield from saccharides has been observed to be dependent on the
H2O2 concentration, with high yields being achieved in the 100%-240% H2O2 concentra-
tion range.
It has been demonstrated that various monosaccharides follow the same degradation pat-
terns in alkaline solutions, producing high formate yields with secondary products being
the shorter aldonates. This oxidation reaction is likely an ionic reaction in these condi-
tions, and mechanistic suggestions found elsewhere in literature have been proposed as
possible pathways for this reaction to occur. The proposed mechanism for the oxidation
of monosaccharides is a cascade of oxidative cleavages with hydroperoxyl anions and Lo-
bry de Bruyn-Van Ekenstein transformations of aldose intermediates. These mechanistic
suggestions and proposed reaction pathway correlate with the pseudo-2D isotope tracking
studies. Further research into validation of this proposed reaction pathway is possible.
Disaccharides have shown similar degradation patterns to monosaccharides, and have
shown to be able to partially hydrolyse the glycosidic bond in alkaline solutions also pro-
ducing high formate yields, with lower aldonates as secondary products. Furthermore,
cellobiose has shown to be able to convert into formate almost quantitatively in solutions
with a 200% H2O2 concentration.
Lastly, degradation of cellulose has also shown promising glycolate-to-formate ratios dur-
ing oxidation in similar conditions. Further research is needed to elucidate the impact of
the reaction parameters on formate yield in reactions with disaccharides and polysaccha-
rides.
The oxidation reaction has shown to be versatile in both base and solvent selection, making
the reaction applicable in different environments.
The results of this thesis open up for the possibility for further research into the degrada-
tion patterns and mechanisms of di-, oligo- and polysaccharides under oxidative alkaline
conditions. Larger scale degradations could function as a viable alternative to green pro-
duction of formic acid, with a low cost of productions. With the need for green chemical
production alternatives rising, the results of this thesis remain promising for the green
transition and the possibility of deploying the full potential of natural resources.
44
==PAGE:57==
Bibliography
[1]
L. M. Tufvesson, P. Tufvesson, J. Woodley, and P. Börjesson, “Life cycle assess-
ment in green chemistry: Overview of key parameters and methodological con-
cerns,” eng, International Journal of Life Cycle Assessment, vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 431–
444, 2013, ISSN: 16147502. DOI: 10.1007/s11367-012-0500-1.
[2]
H. Jahangiri, J. Santos, A. Hornung, and M. Ouadi, “Thermochemical conversion
of biomass and upgrading of bio-products to produce fuels and chemicals,” eng,
Catalysis for Clean Energy and Environmental Sustainability: Biomass Conversion
and Green Chemistry - Volume 1, pp. 1–47, 2021. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-030-65017-
9_1.
[3]
P. Cavelius, S. Engelhart-Straub, N. Mehlmer, J. Lercher, D. Awad, and T. Brück,
“The potential of biofuels from first to fourth generation,” eng, Plos Biology, vol. 21,
no. 3, e3002063, 2023, ISSN: 15457885, 15449173. DOI: 10.1371/JOURNAL.
PBIO.3002063.
[4]
X. Yixiang, H. Milford A., and I. Loren, ““green” chemicals from renewable agri-
cultural biomass - a mini review,” eng, Open Agriculture Journal, vol. 2, no. 1,
pp. 54–61, 2008, ISSN: 18743315. DOI: 10.2174/1874331500802010054.
[5]
C. Xia, L. Cai, H. Zhang, L. Zuo, S. Q. Shi, and S. S. Lam, “A review on the
modeling and validation of biomass pyrolysis with a focus on product yield and
composition,” eng, Biofuel Research Journal, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 1296–1315, 2021,
ISSN: 22928782. DOI: 10.18331/BRJ2021.8.1.2.
[6]
R. A. Sheldon, “Enzymatic conversion of first- and second-generation sugars,” eng,
Biomass and Green Chemistry: Building a Renewable Pathway, S. Vaz Jr., Ed.,
pp. 169–189, 2017. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-66736-2_7.
[7]
A. Ammanagi, P. Satapute, S. A. Adhoni, S. S. Adhikari, S. K. Gupta, and S. I.
Mulla, “Biomass conversion and green chemistry,” eng, Catalysis for Clean En-
ergy and Environmental Sustainability: Biomass Conversion and Green Chemistry
- Volume 1, pp. 807–822, 2021. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-030-65017-9_25.
[8]
H. Isbell, H. L. Frush, C. W. R. Wade, and C. E. Hunter, “Transformations of sug-
ars in alkaline solutions,” eng, Carbohydrate Research, vol. 9, no. 2, p. 163, 1969,
ISSN: 1873426x, 00086215. DOI: 10.1016/S0008-6215(00)82132-1.
[9]
W. A. Bubb, “Nmr spectroscopy in the study of carbohydrates: Characterizing the
structural complexity,” eng, Concepts in Magnetic Resonance Part A: Bridging Ed-
ucation and Research, vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 1–19, 2003, ISSN: 15525023, 15466086,
10990534, 10437347. DOI: 10.1002/cmr.a.10080.
45
==PAGE:58==
[10]
J. M. De Bruijn, A. P. G. Kieboom, and H. Van Bekkum, “Alkaline degradation
of monosaccharides part vii. a mechanistic picture,” eng, Staerke, vol. 39, no. 1,
pp. 23–28, 1987.
[11]
C. Liu, J. M. Carraher, J. L. Swedberg, C. R. Herndon, C. N. Fleitman, and J. P.
Tessonnier, “Selective base-catalyzed isomerization of glucose to fructose,” eng,
Acs Catalysis, vol. 4, no. 12, pp. 4295–4298, 2014, ISSN: 21555435. DOI: 10.1021/
cs501197w.
[12]
C. A. L. de Bruyn and W. A. van Ekenstein, “Action des alcalis sur les sucres,
ii. transformation réciproque des uns dans les autres des sucres glucose, fructose
et mannose,” eng, Recueil Des Travaux Chimiques Des Pays-bas, vol. 14, no. 7,
pp. 203–216, 1895, ISSN: 18787096, 01650513. DOI: 10.1002/recl.18950140703.
[13]
J. C. Speck, “The lobry de bruyn-alberda van ekenstein transformation,” eng, Ad-
vances in Carbohydrate Chemistry, vol. 13, pp. 63–103, 1958, ISSN: 18756425,
00965332. DOI: 10.1016/s0096-5332(08)60352-5.
[14]
H. S. El Khadem, S. Ennifar, and H. S. Isbell, “Contribution of the reaction path-
ways involved in the isomerization of monosaccharides by alkali,” eng, Carbohy-
drate Research, vol. 169, no. 169, pp. 13–21, 1987, ISSN: 1873426x, 00086215.
DOI: 10.1016/0008-6215(87)80238-0.
[15]
A. A. Marianou, C. M. Michailof, A. Pineda, E. F. Iliopoulou, K. S. Triantafyllidis,
and A. A. Lappas, “Glucose to fructose isomerization in aqueous media over homo-
geneous and heterogeneous catalysts,” eng, Chemcatchem, vol. 8, no. 6, pp. 1100–
1110, 2016, ISSN: 18673899, 18673880. DOI: 10.1002/cctc.201501203.
[16]
M. El Tawil-Lucas, M. Montaña, M. Macias-Villasevil, J. Moreno, and J. Iglesias,
“Isomerization of hemicellulose aldoses to ketoses catalyzed by basic anion resins:
Catalyst screening and stability studies,” eng, Catalysts, vol. 13, no. 9, p. 1301,
2023, ISSN: 20734344. DOI: 10.3390/catal13091301.
[17]
P. M. Richardson, W. Iali, S. S. Roy, P. J. Rayner, M. E. Halse, and S. B. Duck-
ett, “Rapid 13c nmr hyperpolarization delivered from: Para -hydrogen enables the
low concentration detection and quantification of sugars,” eng, Chemical Science,
vol. 10, no. 45, pp. 10 607–10 619, 2019, ISSN: 20416520, 20416539. DOI: 10.
1039/c9sc03450a.
[18]
P. E. Pfeffer, K. M. Valentine, and F. W. Parrish, “Deuterium induced differential
isotope shift carbon-13 nmr part 1 resonance reassignments of mono saccharides
and di saccharides,” eng, Journal of the American Chemical Society, vol. 101, no. 5,
pp. 1265–1274, 1979, ISSN: 00027863.
[19]
A. E. Flood, M. R. Johns, and E. T. White, “Mutarotation of d-fructose in aqueous-
ethanolic solutions and its influence on crystallisation,” eng, Carbohydrate Research,
46
==PAGE:59==
vol. 288, no. 0, pp. 45–56, 1996, ISSN: 1873426x, 00086215. DOI: 10.1016/0008-
6215(96)00099-7.
[20]
J. M. de Bruijn, A. P. G. Kieboom, and H. van Bekkum, “Alkaline degradation
of monosaccharides v: Kinetics of the alkaline isomerization and degradation of
monosaccharides,” eng, Recueil Des Travaux Chimiques Des Pays-bas, vol. 106,
no. 2, pp. 35–43, 1987, ISSN: 18787096, 01650513. DOI: 10.1002/recl.19871060201.
[21]
T. J. Wenzel and C. D. Chisholm, “Assignment of absolute configuration using
chiral reagents and nmr spectroscopy,” eng, Chirality, vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 190–214,
2011, ISSN: 1520636x, 08990042. DOI: 10.1002/chir.20889.
[22]
D. L. Pavia, G. M. Lampman, G. S. Kriz, and J. R. Vyvyan, Introduction to spec-
troscopy, eng. Cengage Learning, 2015, ISBN: 128546012x.
[23]
J. M. Newman and A. Jerschow, “Improvements in complex mixture analysis by
nmr: Dqf-cosy idosy,” eng, Analytical Chemistry, vol. 79, no. 7, pp. 2957–2960,
2007, ISSN: 15206882, 00032700. DOI: 10.1021/ac061760g.
[24]
J. Duus, C. H. Gotfredsen, and K. Bock, “Carbohydrate structural determination
by nmr spectroscopy: Modern methods and limitations,” eng, Chemical Reviews,
vol. 100, no. 12, pp. 4589–4614, 2000, ISSN: 15206890, 00092665. DOI: 10.1021/
cr990302n.
[25]
A. B. Pant, “Formic acid,” eng, in Dictionary of Toxicology. Springer Nature Sin-
gapore, 2024, pp. 394–395, ISBN: 9819992826. DOI: 10.1007/978-981-99-9283-
6_1007.
[26]
J. Hietala, A. Vuori, P. Johnsson, I. Pollari, W. Reutemann, and H. Kieczka, “Formic
acid,” in Ullmann’s Encyclopedia of Industrial Chemistry. John Wiley and Sons,
Ltd, 2016, pp. 1–22, ISBN: 9783527306732. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/
14356007.a12_013.pub3. eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.
1002/14356007.a12_013.pub3. [Online]. Available: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.
com/doi/abs/10.1002/14356007.a12_013.pub3.
[27]
Z. Ma, U. Legrand, E. Pahija, J. R. Tavares, and D. C. Boffito, “From co2 to formic
acid fuel cells,” eng, Industrial and Engineering Chemistry Research, vol. 60, no. 2,
pp. 803–815, 2021, ISSN: 15205045, 08885885. DOI: 10.1021/acs.iecr.0c04711.
[28]
J. Su and F. Farris, “Formic acid,” eng, Encyclopedia of Toxicology, Fourth Edition:
Volume 1-9, vol. 4, pp. V4-V4–845, 2023. DOI: 10.1016/B978- 0- 12- 824315-
2.00757-0.
[29]
F.-J. Mueller, W. Steiner, K.-H. Ross, and O. Kratzer, “Process for the preparation
of methyl formiate,” EP0048891A1, Apr. 7, 1982.
[30]
J. D. Leonard, “Preparation of formic acid by hydrolysis of methyl formate,” EP0005998B1,
Dec. 12, 1982.
47
==PAGE:60==
[31]
H. Kinoshita et al., “Carbon monoxide poisoning,” eng, Toxicology Reports, vol. 7,
pp. 169–173, 2020, ISSN: 22147500. DOI: 10.1016/j.toxrep.2020.01.005.
[32]
R. Vinayagamoorthi, B. Viswanathan, and K. R. Krishnamurthy, “Catalytic conver-
sion of alcohols into value-added products,” eng, Catalysis for Clean Energy and
Environmental Sustainability: Biomass Conversion and Green Chemistry - Volume
1, pp. 505–590, 2021. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-030-65017-9_16.
[33]
S. Marques, A. D. Moreno, M. Ballesteros, and F. Gírio, “Starch biomass for bio-
fuels, biomaterials, and chemicals,” eng, Biomass and Green Chemistry: Building
a Renewable Pathway, S. Vaz Jr., Ed., pp. 69–94, 2017. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-
66736-2_4.
[34]
W. Wang et al., “Catalytic conversion of biomass-derived carbohydrates to formic
acid using molecular oxygen,” eng, Green Chemistry, vol. 16, no. 5, pp. 2614–2618,
2014, ISSN: 14639270, 14639262. DOI: 10.1039/c4gc00145a.
[35]
R. Wölfel, N. Taccardi, A. Bösmann, and P. Wasserscheid, “Selective catalytic
conversion of biobased carbohydrates to formic acid using molecular oxygen,”
eng, Green Chemistry, vol. 13, no. 10, pp. 2759–2763, 2011, ISSN: 14639270,
14639262. DOI: 10.1039/c1gc15434f.
[36]
S. Maerten, C. Kumpidet, D. Voß, A. Bukowski, P. Wasserscheid, and J. Albert,
“Glucose oxidation to formic acid and methyl formate in perfect selectivity,” eng,
Green Chemistry, vol. 22, no. 13, pp. 4311–4320, 2020, ISSN: 14639270, 14639262.
DOI: 10.1039/d0gc01169j.
[37]
S. Ponce, S. Wesinger, D. Ona, D. A. Streitwieser, and J. Albert, “Valorization
of secondary feedstocks from the agroindustry by selective catalytic oxidation to
formic and acetic acid using the oxfa process,” eng, Biomass Conversion and Biore-
finery, vol. 13, no. 8, pp. 7199–7206, 2023, ISSN: 21906823, 21906815. DOI: 10.
1007/s13399-021-01854-7.
[38]
N. Zargari, Y. Kim, and K. W. Jung, “Conversion of saccharides into formic acid
using hydrogen peroxide and a recyclable palladium(ii) catalyst in aqueous alkaline
media at ambient temperatures,” eng, Green Chemistry, vol. 17, no. 5, pp. 2736–
2740, 2015, ISSN: 14639270, 14639262. DOI: 10.1039/c4gc02362e.
[39]
A. Takagaki, W. Obata, and T. Ishihara, “Oxidative conversion of glucose to formic
acid as a renewable hydrogen source using an abundant solid base catalyst,” eng,
Chemistryopen, vol. 10, no. 10, pp. 954–959, 2021, ISSN: 21911363. DOI: 10 .
1002/open.202100074.
[40]
L. Wu, Y. Yang, J. Cheng, X. Shi, H. Zhong, and F. Jin, “Highly efficient conver-
sion of carbohydrates into formic acid with a heterogeneous mgo catalyst at near-
ambient temperatures,” eng, Acs Sustainable Chemistry and Engineering, vol. 10,
48
==PAGE:61==
no. 47, pp. 15 423–15 436, 2022, ISSN: 21680485. DOI: 10.1021/acssuschemeng.
2c04502.
[41]
G. Hughes and T. P. Nevell, “The mechanism of the oxidation of glucose by perio-
date,” eng, Transactions of the Faraday Society, vol. 44, pp. 941–948, 1948, ISSN:
20505647, 00147672. DOI: 10.1039/TF9484400941.
[42]
S. J. H. F. Arts, E. J. M. Mombarg, H. Van Bekkum, and R. A. Sheldon, “Hydro-
gen peroxide and oxygen in catalytic oxidation of carbohydrates and related com-
pounds,” eng, Synthesis, vol. 1997, no. 6, pp. 597–613, 1997, ISSN: 1437210x,
00397881. DOI: 10.1055/s-1997-1406.
[43]
H. J. H. Fenton, “Oxidation of tartaric acid in presence of iron,” eng, Journal of the
Chemical Society, Transactions, vol. 65, no. 0, pp. 899–910, 1894, ISSN: 20505450,
03681645. DOI: 10.1039/CT8946500899.
[44]
Y. S. Jung, W. T. Lim, J. Y. Park, and Y. H. Kim, “Effect of ph on fenton and fenton-
like oxidation,” eng, Environmental Technology, vol. 30, no. 2, pp. 183–190, 2009,
ISSN: 1479487x, 09593330. DOI: 10.1080/09593330802468848.
[45]
J. U. Nef., “Dissoziationsvorgänge in der zuckergruppe. über das verhalten der
zuckerarten gegen ätzalkalien,” ger, Justus Liebig’s Annalen Der Chemie, vol. 376,
no. 1, pp. 1–119, 1910, ISSN: 10990690, 1434193x, 00754617. DOI: 10.1002/jlac.
19103760102.
[46]
H. S. Isbell, H. L. Frush, and E. T. Martin, “Reactions of carbohydrates with hy-
droperoxides .1. oxidation of aldoses with sodium peroxide,” eng, Carbohydrate
Research, vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 287–295, 1973, ISSN: 1873426x, 00086215. DOI:
10.1016/S0008-6215(00)84515-2.
[47]
H. S. Isbell, “Enolization and oxidation reactions of reducing sugars,” eng, Ad-
vances in Chemistry Series, no. 117, pp. 70–87, 1973, ISSN: 00652393.
[48]
H. S. Isbell, H. L. Frush, R. Naves, and P. Soontracharoen, “Reactions of car-
bohydrates with hydroperoxides .14. degradation of 2-deoxyaldoses by alkaline
hydrogen-peroxide,” eng, Carbohydrate Research, vol. 90, no. 1, pp. 111–122, 1981,
ISSN: 1873426x, 00086215. DOI: 10.1016/S0008-6215(00)85617-7.
[49]
H. S. Isbell and H. Frush, “Reactions of carbohydrates with hydroperoxides .17.
mechanisms for hydroperoxide degradation of disaccharides and related-compounds,”
eng, Carbohydrate Research, vol. 161, no. 2, pp. 181–193, 1987, ISSN: 1873426x,
00086215. DOI: 10.1016/S0008-6215(00)90076-4.
[50]
A. Goti and F. Cardona, “Hydrogen peroxide in green oxidation reactions: Recent
catalytic processes,” eng, Green Chemical Reactions, P. Tundo and V. Esposito,
Eds., pp. 191–212, 2008, ISSN: 18714668. DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4020-8457-7_9.
[51]
O. Varela, “Oxidative reactions and degradations of sugars and polysaccharides,”
eng, Advances in Carbohydrate Chemistry and Biochemistry, vol. 58, D. Horton,
49
==PAGE:62==
Ed., pp. 307–369, 2003, ISSN: 21625530, 00652318. DOI: 10.1016/S0065-2318(03)
58006-4.
[52]
P. Pullanikat, S. J. Jung, K. S. Yoo, and K. W. Jung, “Oxidative degradation of
reducing carbohydrates to ammonium formate with h2o2 and nh4oh,” eng, Tetra-
hedron Letters, vol. 51, no. 47, pp. 6192–6194, 2010, ISSN: 18733581, 00404039.
DOI: 10.1016/j.tetlet.2010.09.092.
[53]
C. Wang et al., “Room temperature, near-quantitative conversion of glucose into
formic acid,” eng, Green Chemistry, vol. 21, no. 22, pp. 6089–6096, 2019, ISSN:
14639270, 14639262. DOI: 10.1039/c9gc02201e.
[54]
R. L. Whistler and J. BeMiller, “Alkaline degradation of polysaccharides,” eng,
Advances in Carbohydrate Chemistry, vol. 13, pp. 289–329, 1958, ISSN: 18756425,
00965332. DOI: 10.1016/S0096-5332(08)60359-8.
[55]
F. Jin and H. Enomoto, “Rapid and highly selective conversion of biomass into
value-added products in hydrothermal conditions: Chemistry of acid/base-catalysed
and oxidation reactions,” eng, Energy and Environmental Science, vol. 4, no. 2,
pp. 382–397, 2011, ISSN: 17545706, 17545692. DOI: 10.1039/c004268d.
[56]
J. Reichert and J. Albert, “Detailed kinetic investigations on the selective oxidation
of biomass to formic acid (oxfa process) using model substrates and real biomass,”
eng, Acs Sustainable Chemistry and Engineering, vol. 5, no. 8, pp. 7383–7392,
2017, ISSN: 21680485. DOI: 10.1021/acssuschemeng.7b01723.
[57]
R. L. Whistler and R. Schweiger, “Oxidation of amylopectin with hydrogen perox-
ide at different hydrogen ion concentrations,” eng, Journal of the American Chemi-
cal Society, vol. 81, no. 12, pp. 3136–3139, 1959, ISSN: 15205126, 00027863. DOI:
10.1021/ja01521a055.
[58]
T. Chatterjee, E. Boutin, and M. Robert, “Manifesto for the routine use of nmr for
the liquid product analysis of aqueous co2 reduction: From comprehensive chem-
ical shift data to formaldehyde quantification in water,” eng, Dalton Transactions,
vol. 49, no. 14, pp. 4257–4265, 2020, ISSN: 14779234, 14779226. DOI: 10.1039/
c9dt04749b.
[59]
S. S. Warthegau, M.-M. Siewertsen, R. Madsen, and S. Meier, “Base-catalyzed cas-
cades of monosaccharide conversion to formic acid: Isotope tracking reveals path-
ways and their optimal usage under mild conditions in water,” Green Chem., 2025.
DOI: 10.1039/D5GC01907A. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1039/
D5GC01907A.
[60]
S. H. Zeronian and M. K. Inglesby, “Bleaching of cellulose by hydrogen peroxide,”
eng, Cellulose, vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 265–272, 1995, ISSN: 1572882x, 09690239. DOI:
10.1007/BF00811817.
50
==PAGE:63==
[61]
P. Modugno and M. M. Titirici, “Influence of reaction conditions on hydrother-
mal carbonization of fructose,” eng, Chemsuschem, vol. 14, no. 23, pp. 5271–5282,
2021, ISSN: 1864564x, 18645631. DOI: 10.1002/cssc.202101348.
51
==PAGE:64==
52
==PAGE:65==
A
HSQC - Glucose in Water, 6
Equivalents H2O2, 0.6M LiOH
53
==PAGE:66==
F2 [ppm]
 4.2 
 4.0 
 3.8 
 3.6 
F1 [ppm]
 75 
 70 
 65 
54
==PAGE:67==
B
Oxidation of Erythrose and
Glyceraldehyde
Figure B.1: Product distribution of the oxidations of erythrose and glyceraldehyde (6
equivalents H2O2, 0.6M LiOH, H2O/D2O (90%/10%), 0.1M saccharide, 35◦C, 500rpm).
The most abundant product in both experiments is formate. It can be observed that ery-
throse also produces glycerate but that glyceraldehyde does not, corresponding with the
findings from longer aldose experiments.
55
==PAGE:68==
C
HSQC - Arabinose in Water, 6
Equivalents H2O2, 0.6M LiOH
56
==PAGE:69==
F2 [ppm]
 4.2 
 4.0 
 3.8 
 3.6 
F1 [ppm]
 75 
 70 
 65 
57
==PAGE:70==
D
HSQC - Erythrose in Water, 6
Equivalents H2O2, 0.6M LiOH
58
==PAGE:71==
F2 [ppm]
 4.0 
 3.9 
 3.8 
 3.7 
F1 [ppm]
 74 
 72 
 70 
 68 
 66 
 64 
59
==PAGE:72==
E
HSQC - Glyceraldehyde in Water, 6
Equivalents H2O2, 0.6M LiOH
60
==PAGE:73==
F2 [ppm]
 4.2 
 4.0 
 3.8 
 3.6 
F1 [ppm]
 78 
 76 
 74 
 72 
 70 
 68 
 66 
 64 
61
==PAGE:74==
F
Chemical Shifts in Water:
Monosaccharides
62
==PAGE:75==
Chemical Shifts in H2O
δ 1H chemical shift δ 13C chemical shift
O
O-
O
O-
HO
O
O-
OH
HO
O
O-
O
O-
O
O-
OH
OH
HO
HO
OH
OH
OH
HO
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
HO
O
HO
171.07
8.4
179.99
61.42
3.87
179.74
64.58
3.66/3.76
73.87
4.05
Formate
Glycolate
Glycerate
D-Erythronate
D-Arabinonate
D-Gluconate
D-α-Glucose
D-β-Glucose
178.75
74.03
3.95
73.54
3.78
62.08
3.49
179.41
72.36
3.78
71.76
4.17
71.43
3.66
63.28
3.6/3.782
92
5.08
71.4
3.68
74.21
3.96
69.63
3.25
71.52
3.39
60.62
3.62/3.69
72.88
3.57
178.7
62.7
3.47/3.63
70.97
3.84
71.33
3.58
72.72
3.58
OH
OH
OH
HO
O
HO
95.91
4.49
75.82
3.31
69.63
3.25
74.22
3.1
60.8
3.58/3.75
75.78
3.34
Can vary slightly depending on base
63
==PAGE:76==
HO
OH
O
O-
OH
O
O-
O
O-
OH
O
O-
OH
OH
OH
HO
O
OH
OH
OH
OH
HO
178.68
71.88
3.67
62.92
3.5/3.541
73.85
3.99
71.3
3.76
178.8
73
3.96
72.61
3.99
63.23
3.6/3.67
D-Lyxonate
D-Threonate
Lactate
68.6
3.98
20.34
1.19
182.54
181.45
23.19
1.78
Acetate
69.81
3.74
67.7
3.753
69.32
3.95
63.39
3.51/3.67
63.35
3.69/3.97
?
β-Fructopyranose
O
O-
OH
HO
(3S)-3,4-dihydroxybutanoate
179.93
69.77
3.92
41.17
2.19/2.25
65.25
3.67/3.48
Chemical Shifts in H2O
δ 1H chemical shift δ 13C chemical shift
Can vary slightly depending on base
64
==PAGE:77==
G
pH Measurements of the Glucose
Oxidation Experiment
Figure G.1: The change in pH of the glucose oxidation reaction over almost 6 days (6
equivalents H2O2, 0.6M LiOH, H2O/D2O (90%/10%), 0.1M glucose, 35◦C, 500rpm). A
plateau can be observed to form, which can be approximated by an exponential decay.
65
==PAGE:78==
H
Oxidation of 2-Deoxy-Glucose
Figure H.1: The results from oxidation of 2-Deoxy-glucose (6 equivalents H2O2, 0.6M
LiOH, H2O/D2O (90%/10%), 0.1M carbohydrate, 35◦C, 500rpm) from Warthegau et al.
It can be observed that the reaction produced the corresponding aldonate, and that arabitol
did not react further, indicating that the C2 alcohol group on a monosaccharide is crucial
for oxidation to occur, as seen in Warthegau et al.
66
==PAGE:79==
I
Mechanism of Lactate and Acetate
Formation From Glucose
Figure I.1: Proposed formation of lactate and acetate from fructose in alkaline solutions,
when no oxidant is present, as proposed in Modugno and Titirici.
67
==PAGE:80==
J
Chemical Shifts in Methanol
68
==PAGE:81==
Chemical Shifts in MeOH
δ 1H chemical shift δ 13C chemical shift
Can vary slightly depending on base
O
O-
O
O-
O
O-
O
O-
HO
HO
OH
HO
OH
OH
OH
O
HO
HO
OH
OH
OH
O
HO
OH
OH
OH
HO
169.29
8.25
Formate
?
?
61.34
3.68
Glycolate
D-Glycerate
71.36
1.31
62.28
1.187/1.3
?
71.45
4
72.24
3.62
71.61
3.46
63.25
3.43/3.59
O
O-
OH
OH
HO
?
72.87
3.77
73.32
3.79
62.2
3.44
D-Erythronate
D-Arabinonate
D-α-Glucose
D-β-Glucose
61
3.48/3.57
61.06
3.45/3.63
92.26
4.92
72.08
3.19
71.36
3.56
73.16
3.47
?
?
96.38
4.3
?
?
?
?
74.59
2.94
76.29
3.17
69
==PAGE:82==
O
O-
HO
OH
OH
OH
OH
O
O-
O
O-
OH
O
OH
OH
OH
OH
HO
?
Chemical Shifts in MeOH
δ 1H chemical shift δ 13C chemical shift
Can vary slightly depending on base
β-Fructofuranose
O
OH
OH
HO
HO
OH
?
81.24
3.61
75.75
3.9
74.82
3.9
62.57
3.48/3.58
62.83
3.35/3.48
O
OH
OH
HO
HO
OH
?
82.07
3.8
76.97
3.8
83.31
3.89
61.44
3.48/3.58
62.72
3.48/3.57
α-Fructofuranose
β-Fructopyranose
?
62.32
3.49/3.82
62.37
3.42/3.49
71.17
4.15
71.17
4.15
71.17
4.15
?
?
23.22
1.72
Acetate
Lactate
Gluconic Acid
67.54
3.87
16.88
1
74.14
3.89
70.74
3.9
72.26
3.52
71.5
3.55
64.11
3.33/3.52
70
==PAGE:83==
K
Chemical Shifts in Ethanol
71
==PAGE:84==
Chemical Shifts in EtOH
δ 1H chemical shift δ 13C chemical shift
Can vary slightly depending on base
O
O-
O
O-
O
O-
O
O-
HO
HO
OH
HO
OH
OH
OH
O
HO
HO
OH
OH
OH
O
HO
OH
OH
OH
HO
169.3
8.11
Formate
?
?
61.33
3.55
Glycolate
D-Glycerate
73.85
3.724
65.41
3.56/?
?
72.39
3.97
73.19
3.63
72.52
3.48
64.39
3.44/3.61
O
O-
OH
OH
HO
?
74.41
3.63
74.36
3.75
?
?
D-Erythronate
D-Arabinonate
D-α-Glucose
D-β-Glucose
60.82
3.36/3.45
60.85
3.33/3.5
92
4.82
71.23
3.45
71.79
3.1
72.92
3.38
69.84
3
96.22
4.2
76
3
74.31
3.78
76.06
3.1
69.84
3
72
==PAGE:85==
O
O-
HO
OH
OH
OH
OH
O
OH
OH
OH
OH
HO
?
Chemical Shifts in EtOH
δ 1H chemical shift δ 13C chemical shift
Can vary slightly depending on base
β-Fructopyranose
?
62.08
3.62/?
?
?
68.05
3.52
68.89
3.51
68.42
3.58
Gluconic Acid
73.78
3.78
70.42
3.76
71.12?
3.4?
?
?
62.92
3.65/?
73
==PAGE:86==
L
Chemical Shifts in DMSO
74
==PAGE:87==
Chemical Shifts in DMSO
δ 1H chemical shift δ 13C chemical shift
O
O-
O
O-
O
O-
O
O-
HO
HO
OH
HO
OH
OH
OH
O
HO
HO
OH
OH
OH
O
HO
OH
OH
OH
HO
169.11
8.3
Formate
?
?
61.7
3.63
Glycolate
D-Glycerate
71.36
1.31
64.55
3.45/3.57
?
71.41
3.92
72.33
3.6
71.75
3.46
63.59
3.42/3.62
O
O-
OH
OH
HO
?
73.72
3.61
73.32
3.73
?
?
D-Erythronate
D-Arabinonate
D-α-Glucose
D-β-Glucose
61.07
3.5/3.6
61.17
3.46/3.66
92.2
4.96
71.71
3.57
72.08
3.22
73.08
3.47
70.18
3.13
96.4
4.35
76.31
3.16
70.15
3.1
74.72
2.96
76.34
3.21
75
==PAGE:88==
O
O-
HO
OH
OH
OH
OH
O
O-
O
O-
OH
O
OH
OH
OH
OH
HO
?
Chemical Shifts in DMSO
δ 1H chemical shift δ 13C chemical shift
β-Fructofuranose
O
OH
OH
HO
HO
OH
?
81.28
3.58
75.66
3.85
75
3.86
62.88
3.31/3.55
63
3.36/3.53
O
OH
OH
HO
HO
OH
?
82.47
3.76
76
3.75
82.91
3.83
61.54
3.44/3.55
63.54
3.35/3.44
α-Fructofuranose
β-Fructopyranose
?
64.19
3.29/3.48
63.36
3.47/3.79
67.61
3.59
70
3.63
68.42
3.67
?
?
24.4
1.7
Acetate
Lactate
Gluconic Acid
69.4
3.72
21.1
1.15
70.46?
3.86?
68.51?
3.74?
72.82
3.38
71.77
3.5
62.62
3.4/3.75
76
==PAGE:89==
M
HSQC - LiOH in DMSO
77
==PAGE:90==
F2 [ppm]
 4.5 
 4.0 
 3.5 
 3.0 
F1 [ppm]
 100 
 90 
 80 
 70 
Group SEMEI
LiOH i dmso
DTU800_250516_Sebastian_MMS  60  1  D:\Speciale\Mette-Maya\SSW141
==PAGE:91==
N
HSQC - Glucose in Water, 6
Equivalents H2O2, 0.6M DBU
79
==PAGE:92==
F2 [ppm]
 5.0 
 4.5 
 4.0 
 3.5 
F1 [ppm]
 90 
 80 
 70 
80
==PAGE:93==
O
HSQC - Glucose in MeOH, 6
Equivalents H2O2, 0.6M DBU
81
==PAGE:94==
F2 [ppm]
 4.5 
 4.0 
 3.5 
 3.0 
F1 [ppm]
 90 
 80 
 70 
82
==PAGE:95==
P
HSQC - Glucose in EtOH, 6
Equivalents H2O2, 0.6M DBU
83
==PAGE:96==
F2 [ppm]
 5.0 
 4.5 
 4.0 
 3.5 
 3.0 
F1 [ppm]
 100 
 90 
 80 
 70 
84
==PAGE:97==
Q
Chemical Shifts in Water:
Disaccharides
85
==PAGE:98==
O
HO
HO
OH
OH
O
HO
OH
O-
O
OH
O
HO
HO
OH
OH
O
HO
OH
O-
O
OH
O
HO
HO
OH
OH
O
HO
OH
O-
O
O
HO
HO
OH
OH
O
HO
OH
O-
O
179.1
78.49
4
3-O-β-D-Glucosyl-D-Arabinonate
2-O-β-D-Glucosyl-D-Erythronate
3-O-β-D-Galactosyl-D-Arabinonate
2-O-β-D-Galactosyl-D-Erythronate
176.8
78.96
4.05
72.69
3.92
62.32
3.56/3.61
97.49
4.824
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
70.98
4.14
70.93
3.71
72.19
3.79
68.87
3.77
75.09
3.5
71.03
3.46
72.94
3.51
72.74
3.85
103.6
4.33
75.19
3.45
81.55
3.99
73.03
3.47
68.92
3.73
80.96
3.81
71.17
4.15
71.08
3.36
103.3
4.19
177.79
179.67
62.67
3.62/3.79
62.81
3.54/3.75
60.13
3.57/3.64
62.18
3.56/3.6
61.43
3.48/3.68
98.3
4.91
Chemical Shifts in H2O
δ 1H chemical shift δ 13C chemical shift
Can vary slightly depending on base
86
==PAGE:99==
O
OH
OH
OH
OH
HO
OH
O-
O
OH
HO
O
OH
OH
OH
OH
HO
OH
HO
OH
HO
O
O-
3-O-α-D-Glucosyl-D-Arabinonate
78.52
4
176.71
60.51
3.65/3.73
62.81
3.55/3.75
60.5
3.65/3.73
62.263
3.55/3.61
72.25
3.79
70.88
4.13
69.43
3.31
72.45
3.64
69.5
3.29
72.4
3.67
97.41
4.82
78.96
4.05
72.69
3.92
98.24
4.91
71.52
3.41
73.38
3.66
71.57
3.44
69.56
3.28
179.08
2-O-α-D-Glucosyl-D-Erythronate
Chemical Shifts in H2O
δ 1H chemical shift δ 13C chemical shift
Can vary slightly depending on base
87
==PAGE:100==
R
HSQC - Maltose in Water, 12
Equivalents H2O2, 0.6M LiOH
88
==PAGE:101==
F2 [ppm]
 5.0 
 4.5 
 4.0 
 3.5 
 3.0 
 2.5 
F1 [ppm]
 100 
 90 
 80 
 70 
 60 
 50 
89
==PAGE:102==
S
HSQC - Cellobiose in Water, 12
Equivalents H2O2, 0.6M LiOH
90
==PAGE:103==
F2 [ppm]
 5.0 
 4.5 
 4.0 
 3.5 
 3.0 
 2.5 
F1 [ppm]
 100 
 90 
 80 
 70 
 60 
 50 
91
==PAGE:104==
T
HSQC - Lactulose in Water, 12
Equivalents H2O2, 0.6M LiOH
92
==PAGE:105==
F2 [ppm]
 4.0 
 3.5 
 3.0 
 2.5 
F1 [ppm]
 100 
 90 
 80 
 70 
 60 
 50 
93
==PAGE:106==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Kemitorvet, Building 206
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.kemi.dtu.dk
