==PAGE:1==
Systematic review of meta-analysis
methods for RNA-seq
Master’s Thesis
Kledi Salla - s230702
July 3, 2025
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
Meta-analysis of RNA-seq data is a powerful strategy to integrate findings across studies
by combining transcript-level differential expression results from multiple datasets, address-
ing challenges such as small sample sizes and limited statistical sensitivity.
Despite its
potential, no consensus exists on the most effective meta-analysis approach for RNA-seq
studies. This thesis presents a systematic review and benchmarking of five meta-analysis
methods: Fisher’s method, Aggregated Cauchy Association Test (ACAT), Weighted Stouf-
fer’s method, Random Effects Model (REM), and Robust Rank Aggregation (RRA). Each
method was evaluated in terms of statistical power, computational performance, stability,
and relevance across four disease case studies: Alzheimer’s disease, cardiovascular diseases,
obesity, and type II diabetes.
All methods were applied to RNA-seq datasets using a pipeline that implemented transcript-
level meta-analysis, followed by gene-level aggregation and enrichment analysis. The results
demonstrate that Fisher’s method more consistently identified the highest number of dif-
ferentially expressed transcripts and performed well in terms of runtime and robustness.
ACAT showed comparable sensitivity with better handling of sparse signals. The Weighted
Stouffer’s method provided a balance between sensitivity and biological directionality but
exhibited lower stability and results variability. REM was conservative and computationally
demanding, while RRA demonstrated high stability with limited detection power.
To ensure accessibility, the most appropriate method, Weighted Stouffer’s, was integrated
into a user-friendly Shiny application, allowing interactive meta-analysis and result explo-
ration. This study displays the strengths and weaknesses of the aforementioned meta-analysis
methods and provides a base framework for RNA-seq integration across particular disease
studies.
i
==PAGE:3==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisors, Kristoffer Vitting-Seerup and Dimitrios S. Kanakoglou,
for giving me the opportunity work under their guidance. I am especially grateful for their
understanding, helpful feedback and for always making time to answer my questions. Their
support throughout the thesis kept me motivated and helped me recognize my own strengths.
ii
==PAGE:4==
Abbreviations
DNA
Deoxyribonucleic acid
RNA
Ribonucleic acid
RNAP II
RNA polymerase II
pre-mRNA
Precursor messenger RNA
RNA-seq
RNA sequencing
cDNA
Complementary DNA
RPKM
Reads Per Kilobase per Million
FPKM
Fragments Per Kilobase per Million
DGE
Differential Gene Expression
Aβ
Beta peptide
APP
Amyloid precursor protein
tau
Tubule Associated Unit
CVD
Cardiovascular diseases
T2D
Type 2 diabetes
ACAT
Aggregated Cauchy Association Test
REM
Random Effects Model
RRA
Robust Rank Aggregation
iii
==PAGE:5==
Table of Contents
Contents
Introduction
1
1.1
DNA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Transcription
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
RNA Splicing and Alternative Splicing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
RNA-seq Data analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.4.1
RNA-sequencing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.4.2
Read Alignment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.4.3
Estimation of Gene expression levels
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.4.4
Differential Gene expression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.5
Meta-analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.6
Rationale
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.7
Aim of the thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.8
Case Studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.8.1
Alzheimer’s Disease . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.8.2
Cardiovascular Diseases
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.8.3
Obesity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.8.4
Type II Diabetes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
Materials and Methods
9
1.1
Data Acquisition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.2
Meta-analysis methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
1.2.1
Fisher’s method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
1.2.2
Weighted Stouffer’s method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
1.2.3
Tippet’s method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
1.2.4
Aggregated Cauchy Association Test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
1.2.5
Random Effects model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
1.2.6
Robust rank aggregation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
1.3
Algorithm Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
iv
==PAGE:6==
1.3.1
Package Dependencies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
1.3.2
Project Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
1.3.3
Setup and User Input . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
1.3.4
Data preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
1.3.5
Meta-analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
1.3.6
Benchmarking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
1.4
Interactive Shiny Application design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
Results
21
1.1
Alzheimer’s Disease . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
1.1.1
Transcript-level analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
1.1.2
Stability analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
1.1.3
Gene Set Enrichment Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
1.2
Other Diseases
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
1.2.1
Cardiovascular Diseases
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
1.2.2
Obesity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
1.2.3
Type II Diabetes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
1.3
Runtime analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
Discussion
45
Conclusion
49
List of Figures
I
List of Tables
V
References
VI
Appendix
XIII
v
==PAGE:7==
Introduction
1.1
DNA
The basis of modern molecular biology can be traced back to the discovery of the
deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) structure by James Watson and Francis Crick in 1953, fun-
damentally changing our understanding of genetic information and setting the stage for its
central dogma, the idea that information flows from DNA to RNA to protein, which was
later articulated by Crick. With this discovery, a new era of molecular research began, one
that continues to push boundaries to this day [1, 2].
DNA is a long, two-stranded polymer arranged in a double-helical structure. Each strand
is a poly-deoxyribonucleotide chain of repeating monomers made up of a five-carbon sugar
(deoxyribose) with a phosphate group and one of four nitrogenous bases, adenine (A), gua-
nine (G), cytosine (C), or thymine (T) linked to it’s 5’ and 1’ carbons respectively. The
deoxyribonucleotides are bound together by phosphodiester bonds, which form when the
3’ hydroxyl group of one sugar binds with the 5’ phosphate group of another, giving each
strand a directional phosphodiester backbone. This creates a hydrophilic exterior and a
hydrophobic interior, where the strands are antiparallel to each other and are held together
by complementary base pairing, through hydrogen bonds: adenine pairs exclusively with
thymine, while guanine pairs with cytosine, stabilizing the overall structure [3].
In eukaryotes, DNA is typically found in the cells’ nuclei, where it is organized into structures
known as chromosomes. Inside each chromosome, a very long linear DNA strand is wrapped
around a core of eight histone proteins, forming its basic unit, the nucleosome, which re-
sembles knots on a rope. These basic units are then further squeezed by coiling into a more
elaborate fiber-like structure, called chromatin. Non-histone chromosomal proteins assist in
folding and looping chromatin, which is then coiled and stacked to form the chromosome’s
highly condensed and familiar shape. This high degree of order makes DNA manageable
and selectively accessible to enzymes involved in processes such as transcription, while also
protecting the genetic material [4].
1.2
Transcription
The central dogma of molecular biology is, at its core, a description of gene expression.
Gene expression is essential for the execution of the instructions encoded in DNA to produce
1
==PAGE:8==
the functional products that cells require. This process is carried out in two distinct steps,
transcription and translation [5].
The instructions for making functional products are stored in genes, sections of the DNA
sequence that contain the necessary information. Gene expression starts with transcription,
in which a gene’s sequence is used to generate an ribose nucleic acid (RNA) molecule, often
referred to as transcript. RNA is a single-stranded molecule that differs from DNA by con-
taining the sugar ribose instead of deoxyribose, and having uracil (U) instead of thymine (T)
in its stricture [3]. For protein-coding genes, transcription is performed by RNA polymerase
II and can be divided into three phases: initiation, elongation, and termination [5, 6].
For transcription (Figure 1) to begin, RNAP II must first bind to the promoter region located
near the start of the gene. Promoters are specific DNA sequences that serve as signals for
RNA polymerase binding,2 and transcription initiation. With the assistance of transcription
factors, RNAP II binds to the promoter to form a preinitiation complex. This is followed by
local changes in the DNA structure that ultimately expose the template strand, the strand
that RNAP II reads to synthesize the RNA molecule, marking the point at which the enzyme
is ready to begin RNA synthesis [5, 6, 7].
Once synthesis begins, RNAP II may produce a short RNA fragment before escaping the
promoter region and transitioning to the elongation phase. During this phase, RNAP II
moves along the template strand in the 3’ to 5’ direction, adding ribonucleotides to the RNA
chain in the 5’ to 3’ direction. As the polymerase progresses, the DNA behind it reassembles,
restoring the initial structure [5].
Termination occurs when the polymerase encounters specific DNA sequences downstream of
the gene, known as terminators. These sequences signal the end of transcription, leading to
the release of the RNA molecule. This RNA molecule is referred to as precursor messenger
RNA (pre-mRNA) [5, 6].
2
==PAGE:9==
Figure 1: Overview of transcription: RNA polymerase II synthesizes a pre-mRNA transcript
from a DNA template strand.
1.3
RNA Splicing and Alternative Splicing
The second step of gene expression is translation. Before this, pre-mRNA must first
be processed to mature mRNA through several modifications, one of which is splicing. Pre-
mRNA is made up of two types of sequences: coding sequences called exons and noncoding
sequences called introns. During splicing the spliceosome, a collection of proteins and small
RNA molecules, recognizes exon-intron boundaries, removes introns and combines exons.
This ensures that only coding regions are present in the final mRNA molecule, preventing
the production of dysfunctional proteins during translation [5, 6].
Pre-mRNa can also be subjected to alternative splicing. By incorporating certain exons
or omitting others, a single gene can generate a large number of distinct mRNA variants
(isoforms), resulting in the production of different sets of proteins in different types of cells,
as illustrated in Figure 2. This process depends on various factors and serves as a major
source of genetic and functional diversity [5, 6].
3
==PAGE:10==
Figure 2: The process of alternative splicing.
However, alternative splicing is a complex process that can be vulnerable to gene mu-
tations that can interfere with its machinery. These errors result in the production of dys-
functional proteins that could potentially initiate or promote the development of diseases.
Therefore, analyzing gene expression is essential for uncovering the underlying biology of
diseases, and RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) serves as an important tool for this purpose [8, 9].
1.4
RNA-seq Data analysis
Gene expression can be studied by analyzing the complete set of mRNA molecules
produced in a biological sample. In recent years, advances in next-generation sequencing
have made RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) the preferred method for this analysis [10].
1.4.1
RNA-sequencing
It starts with the extraction of RNA from a cell or tissue. Once isolated, RNA is reverse
transcribed to complementary DNA (cDNA), which is cut into smaller pieces to build se-
quencing libraries, a prepared collection of fragments ready to be processed by the sequencing
platform. The library is then typically amplified and loaded onto a high-throughput sequenc-
ing machine. There, it is read using a method specific to the applied technology, to determine
the fragment sequence, called reads, of the library [10, 11].
4
==PAGE:11==
1.4.2
Read Alignment
Once sequencing is complete, the resulting reads are aligned with known gene or tran-
script sequences. Bioinformatic tools are used to compare the read with these sequences to
determine where they most likely originated. These tools must account for changes in nu-
cleotide composition that include mismatches, missing, or additional nucleotides by allowing
imperfect alignments within a threshold. Especially for gene expression analysis, it is also
important to take into consideration spliced reads. Due to the nature of splicing, reads can
be aligned to more than one sequence when they share common exons, which affects align-
ment accuracy [12]. Based on the objectives of the analysis, aligned reads can be used to
reconstruct transcripts. This can be done by tools that either analyze how reads are aligned
to the reference, or build the transcripts directly from the reads themselves when a reference
is not available through de novo assembly [10].
1.4.3
Estimation of Gene expression levels
Once the transcripts or genes have been defined, gene expression levels can be mea-
sured. This is usually done by measuring the number of reads that align with a gene or its
transcripts. Some methods use only uniquely matching reads, while others use probabilities
to estimate the most likely origin of each read [11]. However, counts suffer from multiple
sources of variability and require normalization for more precise estimation of gene expres-
sion levels. One such source is the total number of aligned reads, which is used to adjust the
counts. Other, more effective methods may compare individual gene counts that average the
count for that gene across samples, and then use that to adjust the data. Gene length can
also affect the number of reads. Longer genes produce more reads, which in turn leads to
overestimation of expression levels. To correct for this, methods such as Reads Per Kilobase
per Million (RPKM) and Fragments Per Kilobase per Million (FPKM), normalize the data
dividing the number of reads aligned to a gene, by the total number of aligned reads and
the length of the gene. Finally, batch effects can also influence gene expression and should
be accounted for [12].
1.4.4
Differential Gene expression
After normalization, a bioinformatics tool is selected for Differential Gene Expression
(DGE) analysis. DGE analysis aims to investigate how gene expression changes in diseases
and other two-condition comparisons. The analysis utilizes commonly used statistical models
based on the Poisson or Negative Binomial distributions and can account for technical and
biological variations. Evidence of a real difference between groups is represented by a small
5
==PAGE:12==
p-value.
At this stage, the pieces of data obtained are suitable for more comprehensive
analysis [11, 12, 13].
1.5
Meta-analysis
Despite the advantages RNA-seq provides in an experimental setting, it can often be
expensive, allowing mostly for a small sample size to be used. This leads to reduced de-
tection power and makes the identification of differentially expressed genes less reliable and
harder to reproduce [13]. Meta-analysis offers an effective solution to these challenges by
enabling the integration of RNA-seq data between independent studies that explore similar
biological questions.
By combining different statistics from multiple experiments, meta-
analysis increases the statistical power, improves reliability, and robustness of DGE analysis
[13, 14, 15]. There are several methods to perform meta-analysis. Some focus on combining
differences in gene expression levels to determine whether a gene is consistently differentially
expressed. Some combine p-values for each gene to assess its overall significance of the ex-
pression. Other methods convert gene-level metrics to ranks, and then combine them into a
single consensus rank [16].
1.6
Rationale
While meta-analysis can be beneficial in combining evidence from multiple studies, there
is no universally accepted standard to conducting an analysis on RNA-seq studies. The best
approach depends on the nature of the studies and the research questions. Each method
has its own strengths and provides different types of evidence [17, 18, 19, 20]. Although
it may not be possible to establish a superior method, a systematic review of the existing
meta-analysis landscape could provide useful in identifying a method that could offer the
most flexibility, and consistently reliable results.
1.7
Aim of the thesis
With these considerations in mind, the aim of this thesis is to conduct a systematic
review of the current methods used in meta-analysis and to benchmark them in terms of
speed, robustness, and stability in different disease studies. Based on this, the best method
will be implemented in an easy-to-use Shiny app.
6
==PAGE:13==
1.8
Case Studies
To evaluate and benchmark existing meta-analysis methods, this thesis focuses on four
distinct diseases: Alzheimer’s disease, cardiovascular disease, obesity and type II diabetes.
1.8.1
Alzheimer’s Disease
Alzheimer’s disease is the most prevalent type of dementia that gradually disrupts essen-
tial cognitive and physical functions, severely reducing quality of life. With cases projected
to surpass 150 million by the middle of the century, it has established itself as a rapidly
growing global health and economic crisis [21].
Alzheimer’s disease is primarily driven by two important changes in the brain, amyloid
plaques, and neurofibrillary tangles. Amyloid plaques are assemblies formed by elevated lev-
els of extracellular amyloid beta peptides (Aβ) which derive from the cleavage of the amyloid
precursor protein (APP), an integral membrane protein for neuronal regulatory functions.
The soluble oligomers of these peptides are some of the most well-known signs of the disease.
They bind to a variety of receptors, triggering harmful effects such as calcium imbalance,
inflammatory responses, and ultimately neuronal damage and death in brain regions respon-
sible for memory, learning, and emotional regulation [21, 22, 23].
Neurofibrillary tangles are caused by the hyperphosphorylation of the Tubule Associated
Unit (tau) protein which reside in the cell body of neurons. In Alzheimer’s disease, tau
undergoes a series of changes that cause it to accumulate abnormally inside the cell’s body.
The accumulation disrupts the normal function of neurons, ultimately causing cell death. In
addition, tau can spread to other neurons through synaptic transmissions, which progresses
the disease [21, 24].
Studies have shown that applying meta-analysis to RNA-seq data can detect differentially
expressed genes that may support biomarker discovery and disease understanding [25, 26].
1.8.2
Cardiovascular Diseases
Cardiovascular diseases (CVD), as the term implies, involve conditions that compromise
normal blood circulation or lead to changes in the morphology of the heart or blood vessels
[27]. Their significant impact on global health is driven by a variety of factors, ranging from
environmental conditions, to living habits , and as of 2021, accounted for a large proportion
of deaths worldwide [28].
Circulation is disrupted when fatty deposits slowly accumulate inside the arteries, narrowing
them, reducing or completely blocking blood flow to the heart or limbs. In other cases, clots
that form in the veins can also block flow which, if dislodged, can travel to vital organs,
7
==PAGE:14==
leading to fatal complications. On the other hand, morphology changes include cases in
which the heart becomes larger, making it less effective in circulating blood.
In others,
the heart muscle thickens, blocking blood flow, or may lose flexibility, preventing the heart
from filling with blood. In addition, infections may cause damage to the heart valves. Some
problems may also be congenital and involve holes in the chambers of the heart and improper
valve formation [27].
Given the complexity of these diseases, meta-analysis has been proven to be beneficial in
revealing genes that may be overlooked in individual studies, allowing the potential discovery
of biomarkers and therapeutic targets [29].
1.8.3
Obesity
Over the past few decades, obesity has increased significantly across all age groups,
particularly in the Americas and Europe. This increasing trend shows no signs of slowing
down and is estimated that even more people will be affected in the near future [30].
There are several factors that contribute to obesity, from behavioral patterns to underlying
biological changes. One of the most common behavioral factors is high calorie intake. Many
individuals are regularly exposed and encouraged to choose sugary and fat-rich foods as
quick and convenient alternatives to healthier options, that can significantly increase body
fat. This behavior, combined with a sedentary life and psychological factors, greatly con-
tribute to the rise of obesity. Furthermore, changes in the populations of some gut bacteria
can affect insulin and glucose levels, further promoting obesity. In addition, some individ-
uals may be more vulnerable due to mutations in one or more genes that disrupt normal
metabolic functions [31].
Meta-analysis has been shown to be useful in discovering genes linked to obesity. For exam-
ple, a study using microarray data compared adipose tissue between obese and non-obese
and found genes related to metabolism that may play a role in obesity [32]. Although the
study used microarray data, the same approach could be applied to RNA-seq.
1.8.4
Type II Diabetes
Type 2 diabetes (T2D) is the most prevalent form of diabetes worldwide, affecting over
800 million adults as of 2022 and is caused by impaired insulin production due to pancreatic
β-cell dysfunction and insulin resistance [33].
Insulin plays a vital role in maintaining balanced blood glucose levels by helping cells absorb
and use glucose, while also reducing the amount of glucose released into the blood [34].
Insulin is produced by β-cells when blood glucose exceeds normal levels, causing the cells to
absorb the excess glucose and break it down, which leads to the release of insulin into the
8
==PAGE:15==
bloodstream [34]. However, long-term exposure to high glucose levels can wear out β-cells,
leading to loss of their normal functions, reduced ability to produce insulin, and cell death
[35].
Insulin resistance refers to a reduced response to the effects of insulin. This can be caused
by β-cell dysfunction, interfering molecules in the blood, and impaired insulin response in
crucial body tissues such as skeletal muscles, the liver and adipose tissue. Skeletal muscle
supports glucose storage by absorbing glucose from the blood. Adipose tissue not only helps
regulate glucose levels but also produces various molecules involved in processes like appetite
control and body weight regulation. In the liver, insulin manages both the production and
usage of glucose, and also plays a key role in fat metabolism. When these tissues do not
respond properly to insulin, glucose builds up in the blood, leading to chronically high blood
sugar levels [33, 35].
A T2D meta-analysis of microarray data using three different methods has revealed a broad
pattern of gene down-regulation [36], raising the possibility that similar approaches could be
applied to RNA-seq data to explore differential gene expression associated with the disease.
Materials and Methods
1.1
Data Acquisition
For each disease, multiple datasets were provided by the Isoform Analysis Group led
by Associate Professor Kristoffer Vitting-Seerup, in the Department of Health Technology,
Bioinformatics, at the Technical University of Denmark. The differential expression anal-
ysis for these datasets was performed using the DESeq2 R package [37].
Each dataset
corresponded to a case-versus-control study containing transcript-level differential expres-
sion statistics, represented as a table in comma-separated values (CSV) format. The ta-
bles contain transcript entries represented as a combination of two identifiers, a gene ID
and a transcript ID. Furthermore, the statistics are organized in six columns: baseMean,
log2FoldChange, lfcSE, stat, pvalue and padj. For the purpose of the analysis, log2FoldChange
(base-2 logarithm of the ratio of expression levels between two conditions), lfcSE (standard
error of the log2foldchange), pvalue, and padj (adjusted p-value) are used.
Information on the sample size of each dataset was obtained from the internal server of the
9
==PAGE:16==
group and manually counted. The number of datasets carried across diseases are summa-
rized in Table 1. Detailed information on the sample sizes of each dataset can be found in
the metadata directory within the project folder.
Disease
Number of Studies
Alzheimer’s Disease
54
Cardiovascular Diseases
30
Obesity
28
Type II Diabetes
36
Table 1: Summary of studies per disease.
For the analysis, biologically relevant gene sets were selected from the Molecular Signa-
tures Database (MSigDB) for each disease. Specifically, the C2 curated gene sets and C5 on-
tology gene sets were accessed using the MSigDB website (https://www.gsea-msigdb.org/),
with gene sets from CGP and HPO subcollections being excluded. The names of the selected
gene sets were compiled into a CSV file, namely selected_gene_sets.csv, and stored in the
gsea_inputs directory of the project folder.
Moreover, disease-relevant keywords were manually identified from three TSV files obtained
from DISEASES web resource of Jensenlab (https://diseases.jensenlab.org/). The files can
be found in the online_sources directory of the project folder and contain gene identifiers
and disease terms, among other information. For each disease, a custom list of keywords
was manually compiled based on biological relevance. All keywords can be found in Jensen-
lab_keywords.csv in the gsea_inputs directory within the project folder. Finally, gene lists
associated with the diseases studied in this thesis were derived from genome-wide association
studies (GWAS) and obtained from the internal server of the Isoform Analysis Group. The
GWAS can also be found in gwas_genes.RDS of the online_sources directory within the
project folder.
1.2
Meta-analysis methods
Six methods were considered for the meta-analysis. Those were Fisher’s method, weighted
Stouffer’s method, Tippet’s method, the Aggregated Cauchy Association Test (ACAT), the
Random Effects Model (REM), Robust Rank Aggregation (RRA).
10
==PAGE:17==
1.2.1
Fisher’s method
Fisher’s method [38] computes a single combined p-value by aggregating the logarithms
of individual p-values for each gene across studies. If there is no real effect in any study, the
resulting combined statistic follows a chi-squared distribution [17].
F = −2
n
X
i=1
ln(pi)
(1)
where pi represents the p-value of each gene from the ith study, and n is the total number
of studies [17]. The p-value of the F statistic is then calculated by comparing it to the
chi-squared distribution to estimate the likelihood of observing such a value [20].
1.2.2
Weighted Stouffer’s method
Weighted Stouffer’s method [39] combines p-values by converting them into Z-scores
using the inverse standard normal cumulative distribution function. To preserve the direction
of effect, this method requires one-sided p-values, from which signed Z-scores are derived
[19]. Each individual Z-score of each study can also be weighted to reflect the contribution
of the study to the combined statistic. Common choices include using the square root of
the sample size or the inverse of the standard error [17]. In this analysis, square root of the
sample sizes were used as weights.
The combined Z-score, Z, is calculated as:
Z =
Pn
i=1 wizi
pPn
i=1 w2
i
,
zi = Φ−1(1 −pi)
(2)
where pi represents the p-value for each gene from the ith study, wi is the corresponding
weight for that study, zi is the Z-score calculated from pi and Φ−1, the inverse standard
normal cumulative distribution function. [17]. The p-value is then calculated by [40]:
p = 1 −Φ(Z)
(3)
1.2.3
Tippet’s method
Tippett’s method combines p-values by taking the smallest observed p-value across
multiple studies as the test statistic.
T = min(p1, p2, . . . , pn)
(4)
11
==PAGE:18==
When there is no real effect, the combined statistic follows a beta distribution Beta(1, n)
and the combined p-value is calculated as [17, 41]:
P = 1 −(1 −T)n
(5)
1.2.4
Aggregated Cauchy Association Test
ACAT, like Fisher’s method, combines multiple p-values into a single test statistic. But
instead of using a logarithmic transformation, it applies a transformation that results in
a statistic following a standard Cauchy distribution when there is no real effect. Similar
to Stouffer’s method, ACAT allows the use of weights [42]. The combined statistic can be
calculated as :
ACAT =
K
X
i=1
wi tan [(0.5 −pi) π]
(6)
where pi is the p-value from the ith study, and wi is the weight for that study, and tan [(0.5 −pi)π]
is the Cauchy transformation. Based on cumulative density function of the Cauchy distri-
bution, the combined p-value is then [42]:
pACAT = 0.5 −1
π arctan (ACAT)
(7)
In this analysis weights were not applied, and each p-value contributed equally to the com-
bined statistic.
1.2.5
Random Effects model
The Random Effects Model (REM), is an effect size-based method that combines the
magnitude and direction of gene expression differences across studies to assess whether a gene
is consistently differentially expressed. It assumes that true changes in gene expression may
vary between studies due to biological or technical differences. Under this model, the final
combined expression difference for each gene is a weighted average, where the weights account
for both within-study variability and between-study variability. A widely used estimator is
Hedge’s g [17, 43]:
g =

1 −
3
4(ncase + ncontrol) −9

·


¯ycase −¯ycontrol
q
(ncase−1)s2case+(ncontrol−1)s2
control
ncase+ncontrol−2


(8)
Where:
12
==PAGE:19==
• ¯ycase and ¯ycontrol are the mean gene expression levels in the case and control groups,
respectively;
• scase and scontrol are the standard deviations of gene expression in each group;
• ncase and ncontrol are the sample sizes in each group.
In the REM, the combined difference in gene expression between groups across studies (effect)
is given by:
ˆY =
Pn
i=1 wigi
Pn
i=1 wi
(9)
where wi is the weight of study i given by:
wi =
1
vi + τ 2
(10)
vi is the within-study variance given by:
ui = ncase + ncontrol
ncasencontrol
+
g2
i
2(ncase + ncontrol)
(11)
and τ 2 is the between-study variance given by:
τ 2 = Q −(n −1)
C
,
if Q > (n −1)
(12)
where:
C =
n
X
i=1
1
ui
−
Pn
i=1

1
ui
2
Pn
i=1
1
ui
(13)
and Q is the total variance :
Q =
n
X
i=1
1
ui
 
gi −
Pn
j=1
gj
uj
Pn
j=1
1
uj
!2
(14)
with the fraction representing the total weighted average g from all studies. Once everything
has been calculated, the combined expression difference can be calculated with a variance
of:
V =
1
Pn
i=1 wi
(15)
Finally, the two-sided p-value for the combined expression difference can be calculated by:
P = 2[1 −Φ(
ˆY
V )]
(16)
13
==PAGE:20==
Where Φ is the standard normal cumulative distribution function [17].
1.2.6
Robust rank aggregation
Let n be the total items in a ranked list and let m be the number of ranked lists. Each
item is ranked based on a specific criteria with its rank indicating its position within each
list. Each rank is then divided by n to produce a normalized value between 0 and 1. For
any given item, its ranks across the m lists can be represented as a vector:
r = (r1, . . . , rm)
where rj is the normalized rank of the item in the j-th list [44].
The goal is to find items, in this case genes, that often appear near the top of many ranked
lists by identifying those that consistently receive low ranks across studies. For each gene,
its normalized ranks across studies are sorted in increasing order. Then, the likelihood of
observing such ranks purely by chance is calculated, assuming that all rankings are random,
using a binomial probability model :
βk,m(ˆrk) =
m
X
i=k
m
i

ˆri
k(1 −ˆrk)m−i
(17)
where ˆrk is the observed value of the k-th smallest normalized rank in a vector r. The score
for each rank in a vector r can then be defined as:
ρ = min
1,.m βk,m(ˆrk)
(18)
However, this score is not a valid p-value and must be adjusted for multiple tests using a
Bonferroni correction, where each score is multiplied by the number of lists, followed by
standard multiple testing correction methods to identify significant genes [44].
1.3
Algorithm Design
The analysis workflow is presented in Figure 3. This diagram offers a high-level overview
of the structure of the algorithm, showing the processing and flow of data.
14
==PAGE:21==
Figure 3: High-level analysis workflow diagram highlighting the structure of the designed
algorithm.
1.3.1
Package Dependencies
The analysis was carried out in R (V4.5.0) utilizing several packages. These packages
included devtools (V2.4.5), [45] which was used to install the ACAT (V0.91) package from
its Github repository in order to be used for the ACAT-based meta-analysis. The tidyverse
(V2.0.0) [46] was also employed for data wrangling and visualization, alongside patchwork
(V1.3.0) [47], ggVennDiagram (V1.5.2) [48, 49] and ggrepel (V0.9.6) [50] to improve the
presentation of the results. Besides ACAT, metap (V1.12) [51] was used to perform meta-
analysis with Fisher’s method and Weighted Stouffer’s method, metafor (V4.8-0) [52] was
used for REM meta-analysis and RobustRankAggreg (V1.2.1) [44] for rank aggregation meta-
analysis. Finally, biomaRt (V2.64.0) [53], msigdbr (V24.1.0) [54] and fgsea (V1.34.0) [55]
were used for gene set enrichment analysis.
15
==PAGE:22==
1.3.2
Project Structure
The project, as seen in Figure 4 is organized into subdirectories to store different types
of data. The data subdirectory contains a folder per disease, consisting of DESeq2 result files
representing individual studies. In addition, it includes the gsea_inputs subfolder containing
the selected_gene_sets.csv and Jensenlab_keywords.csv files mentioned in Section 1.1. The
metadata subdirectory stores study-specific sample size information, mapping each study to
its corresponding sample size. The online_sources subdirectory includes the GWAS gene
lists associated with each disease and the JenseLab files. Finally, the renv subdirectory and
renv.lock file created by the renv(V1.1.4) [56] package track the dependencies being used
and their exact versions, ensuring reproducibility across systems.
For the Shiny application, the www subdirectory contains frontend components while the
src subdirectory contains R scripts that define backend functionality. The main analysis is
executed by the main.R script, and the Shiny application is launched by app.R. A README
file is also included which provides instructions for setup and execution.
Root/
data/
metadata/
online_sources/
renv/
src/
www/
app.R
main.R
README
renv.lock
Alzheimer/
CVD/
OBS/
T2D/
gsea_inputs
alzheimer_sample_sizes.csv
CVD_sample_sizes.csv
OBS_sample_sizes.csv
T2D_sample_sizes.csv
GWAS
JensenLab file
JensenLab file
JensenLab file
Figure 4: Folder structure of the project.
16
==PAGE:23==
1.3.3
Setup and User Input
The algorithm starts by identifying the directory (root) it is running in, whether exe-
cuted in RStudio or from the command line, and stores its absolute path. Once the root has
been identified, it sets the paths for the data, metadata, and online sources subdirectories.
If the algorithm is executed within Rstudio, it prompts the user to select a disease and a
threshold for the fraction of studies a transcript must appear in, through the console. By
default, the threshold is set to 0.8 (80%), with a minimum allowed value of 0.5 (50%).
When run from the command line, the disease and threshold must be passed as arguments.
If the threshold argument is not provided, it will be set to 0.8. Error handling ensures that
valid inputs are provided for both the disease selection and the threshold.
Next, a results directory is created based on the selected disease, and the corresponding
studies are loaded from the data directory. The minimum number of studies required for a
transcript is calculated by multiplying the threshold by the total number of studies for the
selected disease. Finally, the corresponding sample sizes are retrieved from the metadata
directory.
1.3.4
Data preparation
Once all data for the disease are loaded, the study files undergo cleaning and preprocess-
ing. For each study, transcripts are labeled with the study name, discarding those without
adjusted p-values (padj). The cleaned data from all studies are then merged and joined
with the corresponding sample sizes. For each transcript, a nested data structure is created
to organize its expression metrics across studies. This structure, named transcript_data,
contains the p-value, log2foldchange, standard error of the log2foldchange (lfcSE), study
name, and sample size from each study. The number of studies in which each transcript is
absent is also calculated as files_absent and is used to filter out transcripts that do not meet
the minimum study presence threshold.
1.3.5
Meta-analysis
The resulting dataframe is then used to perform the meta-analysis for each method as
described in Section 1.2. Specifically, for Fisher’s method, the custom fisher_comb function
was used to compute the combined p-value for each transcript. This function first constrains
input p-values between (0,1) using machine epsilon to avoid undefined logarithmic opera-
tions, and then applies the sumlog function from the metap package. The run-time of this
computation was recorded. Next, the weighted average log2foldchange is calculated using
17
==PAGE:24==
the inverse-variance weighting (Equation (19)) for each transcript.
Weighted log2 FC =
Pn
i=1 wi · log2 FCi
Pn
i=1 wi
,
wi = 1
σ2
i
(19)
Transcripts were then ranked by the combined p-value. Ties were broken by prioritizing those
present in more studies and an inverse-rank score
1
rank was computed. Finally, the p-values
were corrected for multiple hypothesis testing using the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure to
control the false discovery rate (FDR).
For Weighted Stouffer’s method, the analysis follows a similar structure but used the custom
weighted_stouffer_comb function. This function first converts the sample size of each study
into weights by taking the square root. Next, the input two-sided p-values are converted into
one-sided according to the following rule, using the helper function two2one of the metap
package [51, 40]:
pone_sided =



ptwo_sided/2,
log2 FoldChange > 0
1 −ptwo_sided/2,
log2 FoldChange < 0
(20)
The resulting one-sided p-values are constrained within (0,1) to avoid computational errors
and are then combined using Equation 2. Once the combined Z-score has been calculated,
its p-value is calculated from Equation 3 and converted to a two-sided p-value using [40]:
ptwo_sided_combined = 2(1 −Φ(Z_combined))
(21)
The function returns both the combined two-sided p-value and the corresponding combined
Z-score. As with Fisher’s method, a weighted average log2foldchange is also calculated for
each transcript, and the run-time is recorded.
ACAT follows the same principles but instead uses the custom acat_comb. This function
first constrains the input p-values between (0, 1) using machine epsilon then applies the
ACAT function from the ACAT R package. Once again, a weighted average log2foldchange is
computed and the run-time is recorded
REM was applied using the log2foldchange of each transcript and its standard error from
each study. These values were passed to the custom random_effects function, which fits a
random effects model using the rma function from the metafor R package with Hedges’ esti-
mator (method = "HE"). The function returns the combined effect size (pooled log2foldchange),
its standard error, confidence interval bounds, the p-value and heterogeneity statistics. As
before, the inverse-rank score is computed for each transcript and the p-values corrected
using the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure. Run-time was again recorded.
18
==PAGE:25==
Finally, RRA was applied in three steps. First, the weighted average log2foldchange for each
transcript was calculated separately. Then, ranked lists of transcripts based on p-values are
prepared. Again, if ties are present, they are broken by prioritizing transcripts present in
more studies. Next, the ranked lists were used as input for the aggregateRanks function of
the RobustRankAggreg package, and the runtime was recorded. After aggregation, p-values
are adjusted using the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure, and an inverse rank score is com-
puted. The RRA results were then merged with the weighted average log2foldchanges) for
each transcript.
1.3.6
Benchmarking
Benchmarking was conducted through gene set enrichment analysis and stability eval-
uation of each meta-analysis method.
To evaluate the stability of each method, the available studies for each selected disease were
randomly split into two equal halves. For each split, every meta-analysis method was applied
to transcripts observed in at least two studies within each half. The resulting p-values of
each method from each half were then used to calculate the Spearman rank correlations.
For gene set enrichment analysis, gene annotation data were imported using the archived
Ensembl dataset version 107 (July 2022) through the biomaRt R package. The manually
curated, disease-specific gene sets mentioned in Section 1.1 were used to filter relevant path-
ways. From MSigDB, the C2 curated gene sets and the C5 ontology gene sets were down-
loaded.
The CGP and HPO were excluded and only pathways matching the manually
curated gene set names were retained. Additionally, disease-specific GWAS gene sets were
loaded from the gwas_genes.rds obtained from the internal server of the Isoform Analy-
sis Group and mapped to gene symbols using Ensembl annotations. JensenLab disease-
associated gene files were filtered using curated keywords from Jensenlab_keywords.csv as
described in Section 1.1, resulting in three gene sets named after their source files. Finally,
all gene sets were combined into a single collection.
For each meta-analysis method, transcript-level results were first filtered to remove entries
with missing gene annotations. Transcript IDs were split to extract the corresponding gene
ID. Next, all transcripts were grouped under their associated gene along with their statistical
measures. A custom function, tippett_comb, was then applied to combine transcript-level
p-values into a single gene-level p-value. For genes with multiple transcripts, the function
identifies the minimum raw p-value using the minimump function from the metap R package.
In cases where multiple transcripts share the same minimum p-value, the transcript with
the largest absolute log2foldchange is preferred. The function returns the combined p-value
using Tippet’s method (Equation 5) and the corresponding log2foldchange of the transcript
19
==PAGE:26==
with the lowest p-value or the one that resolved the tie. For genes with only one transcript,
the original p-value and log2foldchange are returned.
After obtaining gene-level measures, gene IDs are mapped to their HGNC symbols using
Ensembl annotations and a gene-level ranking statistic is computed as −log10(p −value). If
genes share the same HGNC symbol, ties are broken by selecting the gene with the highest
ranking statistic. Then, this ranked gene list was used as input to fgseaMultilevel from
the fgsea R package, using the gene sets from MSigDB, GWAS, and JensenLab.
1.4
Interactive Shiny Application design
A fully custom interactive web application (Figure 5) was developed using the Shiny
package (V1.10.0) [57].
The application interface was constructed entirely using custom
HTML, CSS, and JavaScript, combined with ui functions of the package, which allows for
complete control over the layout, styling, and interactivity.
Figure 5: Layout of the interactive Shiny app for performing meta-analysis. The interface al-
lows users to select from preloaded collection datasets, adjust transcript presence thresholds,
and view both gene-level and transcript-level meta-analysis results, including corresponding
volcano plots.
The application is designed to provide an easy way to run meta-analysis at both the transcript
20
==PAGE:27==
and gene level using data provided by the Isoform Analysis Group. It allows users to select
one of the four available diseases, studies they want to include in the meta-analysis (minimum
10), and the fraction of studies a transcript must appear in, denoted as Transcript Presence.
After selection, the user must click the Run analysis button to initiate meta-analysis. The
meta-analysis is then performed using one of the methods described in Subsection 1.2, which
was deemed as the most appropriate.
The rationale for this choice is discussed in the
conclusion section.
Upon completion of the analysis, the application presents two results tables created using
the package DT (V0.33) [58], one for the transcript-level meta-analysis and another for the
gene-level aggregation. A volcano plot is also generated for both results. All the outputs
can be downloaded directly.
Results
1.1
Alzheimer’s Disease
1.1.1
Transcript-level analysis
To compare the meta-analysis methods, each approach was first applied to the Alzheimer’s
disease datasets. The aim was to compare methods based on the number of differentially
expressed transcripts identified, the overlap and exclusivity of the results, the stability, the
outcomes of gene-level pathway enrichment and the computational efficiency.
All meta-analyses were conducted on the same 10.2932 transcripts under the same signifi-
cance criteria to ensure comparability of results. A transcript was considered significant if
it met both an adjusted p-value threshold of < 0.05 and |log2foldchange| > 1.5. Fisher’s
method, the Weighted Stouffer’s method, ACAT and RRA do not directly incorporate effect
size and as such, a weighted average log2foldchange was computed for each transcript, as
described in the Methods (Section 1.3.5) to account for differences in sample sizes. For REM,
the second filter was applied to the pooled log2foldchange (Equation 9), while for all other
methods it was applied to the computed weighted log2foldchange (Equation 19).
The results were visualized using volcano plots, which show the relationship between the
effect size and statistical significance. Up-regulated transcripts were colored red, while down-
21
==PAGE:28==
regulated transcripts were colored blue, and non-significant transcripts gray. Figure 6 shows
the volcano plots for all five meta-analysis methods.
Figure 6: Volcano plots created with the ggplot2 [59] and patchwork[47] R packages show-
ing significantly expressed transcripts in Alzheimer’s disease identified by five meta-analysis
methods using an adjusted p-value < 0.05 and an absolute log2foldchange > 1.5 threshold.
Red and blue dots represent significantly upregulated and downregulated transcripts respec-
tively, while grey dots represent non-significant transcripts.
As shown in Figure 6 the number of differentially expressed transcripts varied noticeably
between the different meta-analysis methods. Fisher’s method identified a total of 992 sig-
nificant transcripts, evenly divided between 496 up-regulated and 496 down-regulated. The
Weighted Stouffer’s method identified 871 significant transcripts, including 423 up-regulated
and 448 down-regulated. The ACAT method found 745 significant transcripts, while the
22
==PAGE:29==
REM method identified 331 transcripts, and RRA only 32.
The differences found in the volcano plots reflect how each method handles the evidence
integrated from different studies. Fisher’s method identified the highest number of differen-
tially expressed transcripts among all methods considered. This approach is more sensitive
to small p-values and less sensitive to large ones when calculating the combined statistic
[19]. As shown in Equation 1 the logarithm of small p-values contributes more to the sum
than the logarithm of the larger p-values. As a result, the combined statistic can become
significant due to the presence of a few moderate or small p-values, even if most studies
suggest that the transcript is not significantly differentially expressed [17, 19]. Similarly,
ACAT is very effective when only a few studies provide very strong evidence [42]. Equa-
tion 6 suggests that even the presence of very few small p-values can have a strong impact
on the combined ACAT statistic, while moderate p-values have a minimal impact. This is
reflected in the volcano plot by the vertical lines at the top of the graph, which correspond
to transcripts with very low p-values. On the other hand, consistently large p-values across
studies will result in a large combined p-value [60]. Figure A1 of the Appendix shows the
comparison of the distribution of combined p-values from both methods. Both distributions
show a large number of significant transcripts. However, ACAT shows a large number of
transcripts with a padj close to one. This might indicate that the bar represents transcripts
that showed consistent moderate to large p-values which led to a very small Caunchy com-
bined statistic and as a result, a large p-value. The Weighted Stouffer’s method identified
slightly less differentially expressed transcripts than Fisher’s method but more than ACAT.
This method takes advantage of two important components, the z = Φ−1(1 −p) transforma-
tion and the weights. Two-sided p-values are converted to one-sided values based on the sign
of the log2foldchange enabling the calculation of z-scores that preserve the direction of the
effect[40]. This transformation allows studies that show effects in opposite directions to par-
tially or completely cancel each other out when their evidence is combined. This also means
that even moderate p-values, as long as they show consistency can provide a significant test
statistic. On the other hand, if only a small number of studies report low p-values while the
majority show moderate to large p-values, the combined statistic may be reduced or even
cancel out entirely, potentially resulting in an overall statistic that might not be deemed
significant. [61, 62]. Weights, which are typically proportional to the square root of the sam-
ple size, allow larger studies to contribute more to the combined statistic than smaller ones
[40]. In theory, the method works well when all or most studies show evidence in the same
direction and when their results are fairly consistent [61, 62]. To further explore these prop-
erties, a plot was included in the Appendix Figure A2. Significant differentially expressed
23
==PAGE:30==
transcripts were grouped based on the direction of small p-values across studies: those where
most small p-values indicated down-regulation, those where most indicated up-regulation,
those with an equal number in each direction, and those without any small p-values. Each
transcript was colored according to the directional consistency, ranging from -1 (complete
agreement on down-regulation) to +1 (complete agreement on up-regulation).
The plot
suggests that transcripts are more significant when there is at least modest agreement in
direction, especially when most of the small p-values supported that direction. However,
even transcripts with high directional consistency sometimes showed only moderate signifi-
cance, which could indicate that their small p-values may have been partially canceled out
by the presence of larger ones from other studies. In some cases, transcripts showed an equal
number of small p-values in both directions but still appeared significant. This could sug-
gest that the disagreement wasn’t strong enough to cancel out the combined Z statistic. In
other cases, transcripts showed directional agreement in one direction but had more smaller
p-values in the opposite direction and still reached significance, which might mean that the
p-values were small enough to outweigh the evidence from the dominant direction. It also
appears that even without very small p-values, a moderate level of consistency across studies
might still be enough for a transcript to be significant. Finally, even when equal number of
small p-values are present in both directions, weights and individual p-values might still be
enough to push a transcript just below the significance threshold, even if the direction is not
consistent.
REM produced less differentially expressed transcripts than the previously mentioned meth-
ods, revealing that the method is conservative. This conservative behavior stems from the
incorporation of two sources of variability, the within-study variance (ui), and a shared
between-study variance (τ 2). Each study is assigned a different weight, which the sum of ui
and τ 2 (Equation 10), and its contribution depends on their magnitude of these two vari-
ables. The sample size influences the within-study variance (Equation 11), larger sample
sizes decrease ui, while increasing the number of studies improves the accuracy of τ 2. As (ui
increases, the weight decreases. Similarly, as τ 2 increases the weight also decreases. If the
within-study variance is large and the between-study variance is small, the weights are driven
primarily (ui but when within-study variance is low and between-study variance dominates,
the weights become more uniform across studies. Overall, when the total variance (ui plus
τ 2 ) is large, the weights decrease, resulting in higher combined variance for the pooled effect
(Equation 15), a reduced chance of detecting a significant effect [63]. A plot is included in
Appendix (Figure A3) which depicted the possible relationships between the total variance,
pooled log2foldchange and significance. The plot shows the relationship between the pooled
log2foldchange and the significance adjusted for multiple hypothesis testing.
The color
24
==PAGE:31==
shows the overall standard error of the combined statistic. The plot shows that the most
statistically significant transcripts are found more commonly at low pooled log2foldchange
and low standard errors, but also shows that some transcripts with high standard error can
still be significant. This may be explained by Equation 16, where the ratio of the pooled
log2foldchange to its standard error influences the resulting p-value. It may be possible that
when the pooled log2foldchange is larger than its already large standard error, the resulting
p-value can still be small enough to be deemed significant.
RRA identified the least differentially expressed transcripts. It works by comparing the rank
of each transcript across studies to what one would expect by random chance. It then assigns
a score based on the consistency of its ranking [44]. In this analysis, each transcript was
ranked according to its p-value within each study. Given that RRA emphasizes transcripts
that show consistent high rank across studies, only a limited number of transcripts would
be detected [44].
To evaluate the level of agreement between methods, a Venn diagram (Figure 15) was used to
show the overlap in significant differentially expressed transcripts identified by each method.
25
==PAGE:32==
Figure 7: Venn diagram created with the ggVenDiagram [48, 49] R package showing the over-
lap of significant transcripts in Alzheimer’s Disease identified by five meta-analysis methods
using a significance threshold of adjusted p-value < 0.05 and |log2foldchange| > 1.5.
Fisher’s method identified 72 transcripts that were not detected by any other method and
shared 149 transcripts exclusively with the Weighted Stouffer’s method and 72 with ACAT.
The Weighted Stouffer’s method identified 19 transcripts exclusively and showed a very small
overlap with REM (13). ACAT was able to identify seven exclusive transcripts that were
not detected by other methods and did not show any additional overlaps. REM identified
the highest number of unique transcripts not detected by other methods, with a total of 156,
and shared only two with Fisher’s method. In contrast, RRA did not identify any unique
transcripts and did not show exclusive overlap with any other method.
The biggest overlap in the results was observed among Fisher’s method, the Weighted Stouf-
fer’s method, and ACAT, which shared 509 transcripts. Fisher’s method, Weighted Stouffer’s
method, ACAT, and REM shared 124 transcripts, while Fisher’s method, Weighted Stouf-
fer’s method, ACAT, and RRA shared 22 transcripts. Only three transcripts were identified
26
==PAGE:33==
by all five methods.
As noted earlier, Fisher’s method and ACAT are more sensitive to small p-values. However,
ACAT is more sensitive and can detect sparse signals which Fisher’s method may not pick
up [42, 60]. In addition, the small number of transcripts identified by Weighted Stouffer’s
method, suggests that these may be transcripts with overall consistent moderate p-values
and direction across studies.
REM, even though identified fewer differentially expressed transcripts compared to these
three methods, it was able to capture more unique transcripts exclusive to it. Because REM
incorporates effect sizes, transcripts with consistent effects across studies (low within-study
variance) and low between-study variance may lead to high significance, even if the corre-
sponding p-values are not small, something that other methods may miss [63]. RRA shared
28 transcripts with Weighted Stouffer’s method, Fisher’s method and ACAT, suggesting that
these may represent transcripts with very small p-values that were consistently ranked high
across studies. The agreement across all methods suggests that these transcripts fulfill the
criteria of each individual method.
The methods were also subjected to less strict criteria to quantify how many transcripts
were unique to each method solely based on adjusted p-values < 0.05, as seen in Figure 8.
27
==PAGE:34==
Figure 8: Unique significant transcripts in Alzheimer’s Disease identified by each method
under padj < 0.05 criteria. The plot was created with the ggplot2 [59] R package.
Under this criterion, Fisher’s method identified a large number of exclusive transcripts
(7542), while ACAT identified 5681.The Weighted Stouffer’s method identified 1080 tran-
scripts , followed by RRA with 166 and REM with 54.
The variation in transcript counts across methods reflects their sensitivities. Fisher’s method,
being highly sensitive to small p-values even if significance is not consistent across studies,
identified the most transcripts. ACAT, while still sensitive to small p-values, favors a lot
more extreme p-values, especially when they are sparse. However, if studies show consis-
tent moderate to high p-values for a transcript, the ACAT statistic will be small and will
result in a large p-value (Equation 6). The Weighted Stouffer’s method relies on consistent
direction of evidence, which suggests that these transcripts may be deemed significant due
to moderate but consistently aligned p-values across studies. Furthermore, RRA relies on
28
==PAGE:35==
rank consistency, allowing it to detect transcripts that are consistently ranked moderately
high based on their p-value even if their individual p-values are not significant. REM utilizes
effect sizes and favors transcripts with low within and between study variance, suggesting
that the transcripts it identified likely meet these criteria. For an overview of the number
of differentially expressed transcripts identified by each method across all diseases, see Ap-
pendix Figure A6.
To explore the similarity between the methods, transcripts were ranked by p-value. Ties
were broken by favoring those present in more studies and a score of 1/rank was assigned.
Spearman correlation was then calculated between the ranking scores of each method. The
resulting correlations are shown as a heatmap in Figure 9.
Figure 9: Spearman correlation heatmap created with the ggcorrplot [64] R package showing
the pairwise p-value correlations (ρ) between meta-analysis methods in Alzheimer’s disease.
The plot showed that the strongest correlation was between Fisher’s method and ACAT (ρ
29
==PAGE:36==
= 0.77). Both showed a moderate correlation with RRA, with (ρ = 0.6) for Fisher’s method
and ρ = 0.47 for ACAT. The weighted Stouffer’s method had a moderate correlation with
REM (ρ = 0.65) and showed low correlation with the rest. In addition, ACAT showed a low
correlation with REM but slightly more with RRA (ρ = 0.47).
The correlation between Fisher’s method and ACAT further supports the idea that both
methods emphasize small p-values, even when significance is driven by only a small subset
of studies. This likely also explains the observed correlation between RRA and these two
methods, as transcripts were ranked based on their p-value making it more sensitive to
consistent low values across studies. On the other hand, the fact that REM and the Weighted
Stouffer’s method showed higher correlation with each other, rather than with the other
methods suggests that they had greater agreement when transcripts showed consistent effect
sizes and directions. Figure A4 of the Appendix aims to explore this possibility further by
showing how the agreement between REM and the Weighted Stouffer’s method may depend
on the consistency of effect directions across studies.
1.1.2
Stability analysis
The stability of each method was then evaluated by comparing how consistently they
would rank transcripts when they were applied to subsets of the original data. To do this,
the studies were randomly divided in half and each method was applied to each one. The
process was repeated ten times and the Spearman correlation between the resulting ranks
was calculated for each split. The results are shown in Figure 10, which summarizes the
Spearman correlation values for each method.
30
==PAGE:37==
Figure 10: Stability of the five meta-analysis methods across ten random data splits for
Alzheimer’s Disease created with the ggplot2 [59] R package. The plot shows the Spearman
correlations between transcript-level p-value rankings from the two halves, calculated across
ten iterations.
RRA consistently showed the highest stability, with a Spearman correlation between
0.74 and 0.79. This was followed by Fisher’s method, with a relatively consistent stability
between 0.53 and 0.66, while ACAT showed lower but moderate stability between 0.38 and
0.49. In contrast, the Weighted Stouffer’s method exhibited lower correlation scores than
the other three between 0.12 and 0.21, and REM showed the least stability between 0.02
and 0.1.
RRA focuses primarily on transcripts that are consistently ranked near the top across studies.
When the dataset is split, the same high-ranking transcripts are likely to remain at the top in
31
==PAGE:38==
each subset, even if the number of significant transcripts changes slightly. Since RRA relies
on rank positions, small changes in the composition may have less impact on overall ranking.
Fisher’s method and ACAT are more sensitive to small p-values, with ACAT appearing to
be more strongly influenced. This suggests that ACAT may be more affected by the specific
composition of studies in each subset. If one half contains more small p-values, or even a
single very small p-value, it could affect the ranking of the transcript and thus reducing
stability. Fisher is less sensitive than ACAT, but it may still be affected by variations in
the distribution of small p-values between splits. Moreover, the Weighted Stouffer’s method,
as described in Equation 2, depends on a combination of weights (typically based on the
square root of the sample size), individual p-values, and the direction of the effect. When
the data is randomly split, these factors can vary quite a bit between subsets. A transcript
may be represented by different subsets of studies in each split, each contributing different
effect directions, sample sizes, or p-values, which can lead to fluctuations in the combined
statistic. This sensitivity to multiple interacting factors likely contributes to the low stability
of the method. REM exhibited the lowest stability of all the methods, likely due to its
sensitivity to between-study and within-study variance. When the dataset is randomly split,
transcripts within each half may end up with fewer contributing studies which can influence
the estimated between-study variance and directly affect the total variance. As a result,
even small differences in study composition between splits can lead to big differences in the
pooled effect size and significance, reducing the overall stability of REM.
1.1.3
Gene Set Enrichment Analysis
As the final step of the analysis, gene set enrichment analysis was performed to eval-
uate the biological relevance of each meta-analysis method. First, transcript-level results
from each meta-analysis method were aggregated at the gene level using Tippet’s method
which combines p-values by taking the minimum value among transcripts belonging to the
same gene [17]. If two transcripts had the same p-value, ties were broken by prioritizing
the one with the highest absolute log2foldchange. After aggregation, genes were mapped to
their corresponding HGNC symbol and ranked according to −log10(p −value). If two genes
shared the same HGNC symbol, the one with the lowest combined p-value was selected.
Next, FGSEA [55] was applied to identify positively enriched pathways. This analysis aimed
to identify genes and pathways that are consistently disregulated in different meta-analysis
approaches.
FGSEA works by utilizing two inputs, a ranked list of genes and a list of pathways. For
each pathway, it calculates an Enrichment Score (ES). This score is calculated by moving
down the ranked gene list, increasing a sum statistic when a gene in the pathway is found
32
==PAGE:39==
in the ranked list, and decreasing it when it is not. The Enrichment Score is the maximum
value reached by the running sum, reflecting how concentrated the gene set is at the top or
bottom of the ranked list. Next, based on the size of each pathway, it generates random gene
sets of the same size and computes the ES for each one of them based on the same ranked
list, creating a distribution of ES scores specific to the ranked list. Finally, it compares the
observed ES of the real pathway to this distribution to calculate a p-value, which shows how
likely it is to observe such an enrichment score by chance. These p-values are then adjusted
for multiple testing [55, 65].
Figure A5 of the Appendix shows the distribution of the ranking metric used (stat =
−log10(p −value) ) for each method.
Each distribution is different due to the proper-
ties of each method. Tippett’s method takes the smallest p-value across studies, making it
very sensitive to a single extreme value. Fisher’s method tends to rely on multiple modest
or small p-values, which may have allowed Tippet’s method to select more extreme p-values
for some genes. Its distribution shows that the ranking score reaches up to 300, giving a
broad range of highly ranked genes. Since in this analysis, FGSEA was set to focus on genes
that are more concentrated at the top of the ranked list, this wide range of highly ranked
genes may have a strong impact on the results. Moreover, the Weighted Stouffer’s method
may produce less extreme p-values due to the incorporation of effect direction, which allows
contradicting studies to weaken the overall evidence, while still producing a significant re-
sult when the evidence is consistently aligned. When Tippett’s method is applied to these
results, it may end up selecting moderate p-values as the minimum, apart from cases where
a transcript shows small p-values. Figure A5 shows that its ranking metric is distributed
in a smaller range with few highly ranked genes. With fewer highly ranked genes, FGSEA
may not be able to detect significant enrichment, unless the top genes align very well with
the input gene sets. ACAT is extremely sensitive to even a small number of low p-values,
so when Tippett’s method is applied, it will likely select one of these extreme values. As a
result, it can produce genes with extremely low p-values. This is also apparent in Figure A5.
The distribution of the ranking metric for ACAT shows a high number of highly ranked genes
on the very right of the distribution, which further supports the idea that Tippet’s method
gave rise to even more significant genes. When the focus is at the top of the ranked list, as
is in this case, FGSEA may benefit from these highly ranked genes, potentially supporting
the detection of significant enrichment. However, if the number of highly ranked genes is
limited, fewer pathways may be detected. In either case, if the top genes align well with the
input gene sets, enrichment may be stronger.
RRA emphasizes transcripts that show a consistent high rank across studies. When Tippet’s
method is applied, it will likely pick up on those transcripts that showed the smallest p-value
33
==PAGE:40==
because they were consistently ranked high, but may miss on transcripts that showed consis-
tently moderate ranking. Consequently, only a limited number of genes will be ranked high,
as evident by Figure A5 where there is a small number of highly ranked genes. As a result, a
small number of genes will be at the top of the list, which may affect FGSEA if those genes
are not well aligned with the input gene set. Finally, when Tippet’s method was applied
on REM results, transcripts that showed consistent effects across studies and had low total
variance were most likely pushed at the top of the ranked list. These genes appear in a very
small range, and as a result, they may not contribute to the identification of enriched path-
ways unless they correlate with the input gene sets. For simplicity, the gene-level data will
be referred to by the meta-analysis method they originated from before applying Tippett’s
aggregation. Figure 11 shows the UpSet plot of the significantly enriched pathways detected
by each method.
34
==PAGE:41==
Figure 11: UpSet plot showing the overlap of significantly enriched pathways detected by
Tippet’s method after aggregating transcript-level data to the gene level for each meta-
analysis method in Alzheimer’s disease.
Left bars represent the number of significantly
enriched pathways by each method. Each row corresponds to an intersection between two
methods. Each row shows where two methods overlap. If two or more methods identify the
same pathway, their intersection is marked with filled circles connected by a line. The plot
was created with ggVennDiagram[48, 49]
Fisher’ method identified the largest number of significantly enriched pathways, with 14
in total, closely followed by the Weighted Stouffer’s method with 12. RRA and Weighted
Stouffer’s method followed with 11 each and REM showed the least number of significantly
enriched pathways, with a total of 7. The greatest overlap was observed between all meth-
ods, sharing a total of 4 pathways. All methods except RRA shared 3 pathways. Fisher,
Weighted Stouffer, and ACAT shared 2 pathways, as did REM, RRA, Weighted Stouffer,
and Fisher. RRA, ACAT, and Fisher shared one pathway, and Fisher, Weighted Stouffer,
and REM shared also one. Only ACAT, Fisher, and RRA revealed each one pathway that
was not found by any other method.
Lastly, the pathways within each enrichment analysis were based on their normalized enrich-
ment scores (NES) and compared using Spearman’s correlation to evaluate how much they
35
==PAGE:42==
agree on which pathways are most enriched, as seen in Figure 12.
Figure 12: Spearman correlation heatmap created with the ggcorrplot [64] R package showing
the pairwise rank correlations (ρ) between significantly enriched pathways identified by each
method methods in Alzheimer’s disease. For simplicity, the gene-level data are referred to
by the meta-analysis method they originated from before applying Tippett’s aggregation.
Pathways were ranked based on their normalized enrichment score (NES)
The Spearman correlation heatmap revealed strong correlation in pathway rankings between
Fisher and ACAT. The Weighted Stouffer’ss method and REM had also strong correlation.
RRA showed moderate correlation with all other methods, with the weakest being with
REM. Finally, REM showed low correlation with RRA and Weighted Stouffer’s method and
negative correlation with the remaining. The reasons for these differences are unclear and
may reflect the unique properties of the methods or the data.
All the pathways are included in the supplementary material of the project.
1.2
Other Diseases
This section presents the transcript-level meta-analysis and gene-level aggregation re-
sults for the rest of the diseases. The same significance thresholds described above were
36
==PAGE:43==
applied and notable results are shown.
1.2.1
Cardiovascular Diseases
Compared to Alzheimer’s disease, where the Weighted Stouffer’s method identified more
differentially expressed transcripts than ACAT, the most notable observation in cardiovas-
cular diseases (Figure 13) was that the Weighted Stouffer’s was able to identify fewer tran-
scripts than both Fisher’s method and ACAT. This may be attributed to the higher number
of moderate and large p-values (Figure 14).
Figure 13: Volcano plots created with the ggplot2 [59] and patchwork [47] R packages show-
ing significantly expressed transcripts in cardiovascular diseases identified by the five meta-
analysis methods using an adjusted p-value (padj) < 0.05 and an absolute log2foldchange
> 1.5 threshold. Red and blue dots represent significantly upregulated and downregulated
transcripts respectively, while grey dots represent non-significant transcripts.
37
==PAGE:44==
Figure 14:
Distribution of individual p-values of all transcripts across studies between
Alzheimer’s disease and cardiovascular diseases. Created with the ggplot2 [59] and patch-
work[47] R packages
The Venn diagram shows that Fisher’s method identified the largest number of unique sig-
nificant transcripts not identified by any other method.
It also had the biggest overlap
with ACAT, sharing 154 transcripts, the largest overlap overall in the diagram. Weighted
Stouffer’s method shared only 5 transcripts with REM and shared 73 when combined with
Fisher’s method and ACAT. All methods except RRA shared 16 transcripts, while the five
methods did not share any transcripts.
38
==PAGE:45==
Figure 15: Venn diagram created with the ggVenDiagram [48, 49] R package showing the
overlap of significant transcripts in cardiovascular disease identified by the five meta-analysis
methods using a significance threshold of adjusted p-value < 0.05 and |log2foldchange| >
1.5.
Interestingly, Figure 16 shows that RRA identified more unique differentially expressed tran-
scripts than the Weighted Stouffer’s method under the less strict criteria of adjusted p-value
< 0.05. This difference may reflect the focus of RRA on rank consistency between studies
even for transcripts with moderately significant p-values. In contrast, Weighted Stouffer’s
likely found transcripts with consistent directions but moderate to high p-values. For an
overview of the number of differentially expressed transcripts identified by each method
across all diseases, see Appendix Figure A6.
39
==PAGE:46==
Figure 16: Unique significant transcripts in cardiovascular disease identified by each method
under adjusted p-value < 0.05 criteria. The plot was created with the ggplot2 [59] R package.
The correlation between the methods in cardiovascular disease was very similar to what
was observed in Alzheimer’s disease. Fisher’s method and ACAT again showed the strongest
correlation, with both moderately aligned with RRA. REM and the Weighted Stouffer’s
method were more in agreement with each other but showed lower correlation with the
other methods. Furthemore, the stability of each method followed the same order as in
Alzheimer’s disease, with RRA again performing the best and REM showing the lowest
stability. However, the overall stability scores were slightly lower across all methods.
On the gene-level (Figure 17), the results from Fisher’s method produced the highest number
of significantly enriched pathways, with a total of 9, followed closely by ACAT with 8 and
RRA with 6. In contrast, the Weighted Stouffer’s method produced the same number of
significant pathways as REM, with a total of 5 each, and both showing less enriched pathways
40
==PAGE:47==
than all other methods.
Figure 17: UpSet plot showing the overlap of significantly enriched pathways detected by
Tippet’s method after aggregating transcript-level data to the gene level for each meta-
analysis method in cardiovascular diseases. Left bars represent the number of significantly
enriched pathways by each method. Each row corresponds to an intersection between two
methods. Each row shows where two methods overlap. If two or more methods identify the
same pathway, their intersection is marked with filled circles connected by a line. The plot
was created with ggVennDiagram[48, 49]
Remarkably, the Spearman correlation heatmap (Figure 18) revealed strong correlation in
pathway rankings between REM, ACAT and the Weighted Stouffer’s method, while all of
them showed a very low correlation with Fisher’s method.
RRA and Fisher’s method,
however, displayed a strong correlation.
41
==PAGE:48==
Figure 18: Spearman correlation heatmap created with the ggcorrplot [64] R package showing
the pairwise rank correlations (ρ) between significantly enriched pathways identified by each
method methods in cardiovascular disease. For simplicity, the gene-level data are referred
to by the meta-analysis method they originated from before applying Tippett’s aggregation.
Pathways were ranked based on their normalized enrichment score (NES)
All the pathways are included in the supplementary material of the project.
1.2.2
Obesity
In obesity, all methods showed the same behavior as in cardiovascular diseases. The
most notable difference was observed gene set enrichment analysis. Figure 19 showed that
REM and Fisher’s method identified the highest number of significantly enriched pathways,
with a total of 14 each, followed by Weighted Stouffer’s method with 13 , ACAT with 10
and RRA with 1. Furthermore, all methods expect RRA shared 6 pathways, while Fisher’s
method, REM and Weighted Stouffer’s method shared 4. REM shared one pathway with
ACAT, and also shared one each with Fisher’s method and Weighted Stouffer’s method.
All methods shared one pathway, and only ACAT and Fisher each uniquely revealed one
pathway.
42
==PAGE:49==
Figure 19: UpSet plot showing the overlap of significantly enriched pathways detected by
Tippet’s method after aggregating transcript-level data to the gene level for each meta-
analysis method in obesity. Left bars represent the number of significantly enriched pathways
by each method. Each row corresponds to an intersection between two methods. Each row
shows where two methods overlap. If two or more methods identify the same pathway, their
intersection is marked with filled circles connected by a line. The plot was created with
ggVennDiagram[48, 49]
Surprisingly, there was no correlation between the pathway rankings.
For an overview of the number of differentially expressed transcripts identified by each
method across all diseases, see Appendix Figure A6.
All the pathways are included in
the supplementary material of the project.
1.2.3
Type II Diabetes
Similar patterns were observed between all methods in type II diabetes and Alzheimer’s
disease. As in obesity, the most notable differences were observed in gene set enrichment
analysis. Figure 20 shows ACAT revealed highest number of significantly enriched path-
ways(13) and the the most uniquely enriched pathways among all methods (8). RRA folled
with 6 pathways, and Fisher’s method with 5. RRA alone revealed one unique pathway.
43
==PAGE:50==
Moreover, the Weighted Stouffer’s method and REM each revealed 1 significantly enriched
pathways. Finally, ACAT, RRA and Fisher’s method shared 4 pathways, while all pathways
shared one.
Figure 20: UpSet plot showing the overlap of significantly enriched pathways detected by
Tippet’s method after aggregating transcript-level data to the gene level for each meta-
analysis method in type II diabetes. Left bars represent the number of significantly enriched
pathways by each method. Each row corresponds to an intersection between two methods.
Each row shows where two methods overlap. If two or more methods identify the same
pathway, their intersection is marked with filled circles connected by a line. The plot was
created with ggVennDiagram[48, 49]
As in obesity, there was no correlation between the pathway rankings.
For an overview of the number of differentially expressed transcripts identified by each
method across all diseases, see Appendix Figure A6.
1.3
Runtime analysis
Finally, the runtime for each meta-analysis method across the four diseases was evalu-
ated. Figure 21 shows that across all diseases REM was the slowest, with runtimes ranging
44
==PAGE:51==
from 370 to 500 seconds. The Weighted Stouffer’s method was the second slowest, taking 22
to 27 seconds. Next was ACAT with runtimes between 6.9 and 9 seconds. Fisher’s method
was the fastest in Alzheimer’s disease and type II diabetes, taking 5 and 5.5 seconds respec-
tively, with an overall range of 5 to 6.1 seconds. RRA was the fastest for cardiovascular
diseases and obesity at 5.7 and 5.5 seconds respectively and an overall range of 5.5 to 6.2
seconds.
Figure 21: Runtime comparison of the five meta-analysis methods across the four disease
datasets. Each bar represents the runtime of each method under a disease. Created with
the ggplot2 [59] and patchwork [47] R packages.
Discussion
This systematic review evaluated five meta-analysis methods with the aim to determine
the most effective approach for combining data from multiple studies in the context of RNA-
seq. These methods were evaluated based on their computational speed, robustness, and
stability in four diseases: Alzheimer’s disease, cardiovascular diseases, obesity and type II
45
==PAGE:52==
diabetes. The goal was to identify the most suitable method and integrate it into a Shiny
application for easy use.
The results showed differences in method performance depending on both the disease and
datasets. Among the five evaluated approaches, Fisher’s method consistently outperformed
the others in the identification of differentially expressed transcripts under the thresholds
of adjusted p-value threshold of < 0.05 and |log2foldchange| > 1.5. It also outperformed
the other methods in runtime speed and being only slightly slower in cardiovascular diseases
and obesity. The method was also effective in identifying unique significant differentially
expressed transcripts that were not detected by any other method under p-value threshold
of < 0.05 threshold. Overall it handled heterogeneous data with minimal performance issues
but showed moderate but better stability that most methods. This may be due to its sen-
sitivity to small p-values which can affect it depending on how these values are distributed
across splits.
However it is important to note that Fisher’s method has some limitations. First, it does not
account for the direction of effect nor its size, since it only focusing on combining p-values
[66]. To address this, a weighted log2foldchange was calculated for each gene across the
studies in which it appeared which might provide a misleading picture of the true expression
profile of both the genes and their transcripts. In addition, some transcripts may appear in
only a few studies, resulting in a smaller number of p-values compared to other transcripts.
This could affect the combined statistical results. In particular, transcripts with only a few
available p-values, especially if those p-values are small, may lead to an inflation of the type
I error [19].
ACAT also performed very well in identifying significant differentially expressed transcripts.
In cardiovascular diseases and obesity, it detected the second highest number of significant
transcripts under the adjusted p-value of < 0.05 and |log2foldchange| > 1.5 thresholds,
while in other diseases it closely followed the Weighted Stouffer’s method. Like Fisher’s
method, ACAT does not take effect size or direction into account, so a weighted average fold
change was calculated per transcript, which might have influenced the results and poten-
tially given a misleading information about the actual expression of each transcript. Under
p-value threshold of < 0.05 the method again identified the second highest number of unique
significant transcripts due to its sensitivity to small and extreme p-values, and its ability to
pick up sparse signals [42]. This behavior was also reflected by its moderate to high cor-
relation wth Fisher’s methdod. However, the method’s author notes that for very small or
moderate ACAT p-values type I error is generally controlled but it may be inflated for values
larger than 10−3, so results should be interpreted carefully. Overall ACAT is fast, making
it appealing for large-scale studies. Although it is available in the metaAnalysisDE function
46
==PAGE:53==
of the DexMA [67] R package, no studies were found during this project where ACAT was
directly applied for transcript-level meta-analysis. However, the authors suggest it may be
applicable beyond its original purpose.
The Weighted Stouffer’s showed good performance in Alzheimer’s disease and type II dia-
betes, but was less effective in others. Its incorporation of effect direction through the use
of Z-scores, the use of weights, which were proportional to the square root of the sample
size, may have made it dependent on the data. Significant effort was put to identify the
factors driving these inconsistent results. Figure A2 in the Appendix represents an attempt
to show and explain the method’s behavior. However, no conclusive evidence was found
to explain why the method performed well in some diseases and and poorly in others. A
possible explanation is that individual p-values played a significant role in influencing the
results. Even though some correlation was observed, it was not strong enough to provide
an explanation. Directional agreement between studies was also explored, but it did not
provide any new information. Other exploratory analyses included examining the ratio of
small to large p-values per transcript combined with the directional agreement, the mean
p-value per transcript and the combined p-value, and the combinations of mean sample size,
mean p-value, and directional agreement. These results were not included in the report, as
they do not show any clear relationships.
Understanding the results was not straightforward, likely due to the complex relationship
between directional agreement, individual p-values and sample sizes or from the limited
statistical experience. Despite these personal challenges, the Weighted Stouffer’s method is
praised in the literature for its power and performance [19, 20, 17]. Nevertheless, the method
was very unstable in random splits, likely due to the aforementioned relationships, and shares
the same limitation of not accounting for effect size. It is, however, fast to implement.
REM was conservative compared to the other methods due to its integration of both within
and between study variance. It consistently identified fewer significantly differentially ex-
pressed transcripts than the aforementioned methods, though more than RRA. Under the
less stringent criterion of p-value threshold < 0.05 it consistently identified the fewest unique
significant transcripts, except in the obesity dataset, where it slightly outperformed the
Weighted Stouffer’s method. Moreover, REM showed the slowest computational time. How-
ever, REM has the advantage of incorporating effect sizes from each study. This allows it to
estimate a combined effect based on the distribution of individual study effects, making it
less influenced by any single study [63]. In other words, REM provides a measure of effect
magnitude rather than just significance. In this analysis, the performance of REM could
have been influenced by the data. An exploratory analysis on the data revealed that both
the within and between study variance were low. However, as also seen by the volcano plots
47
==PAGE:54==
most of the significant transcripts are concentrated in around zero. This could be a result
of individual standard errors influencing the weight of each study but no clear pattern was
seen. The choice of the estimator was also investigated. In this analysis Hedge’s estimator
was used, as it is generally recommended due to its bias reduction in studies with small
sample sizes [17, 68]. However, this property does not carry over to the meta-analysis [68].
In the future, taking the time to explore how different estimators behave could really help in
understanding and improving the performance of REM. However, due to time constraints,
this was not possible in this analysis.
RRA consistently identified the fewest number of significantly differentially expressed tran-
scripts across diseases. It also detected the lowest number of unique significant transcripts not
identified by other methods, outperforming only REM and the Weighted Stouffer’s method
in obesity. In terms of computational time, RRA was notably fast and demonstrated the
most consistent stability across random data splits. The conservative behavior of the method
is likely due to the focus of RRA on rank consistency. The method also does not account
for effect size and its direction due to its non-parametric nature. However, the same pro-
cedures were applied to assign an effect size to each transcript. Transcripts were ranked
based on their p-values, with ties broken by prioritizing those found in more studies. An-
other approach could have been to rank transcripts based on the absolute value of their
log2foldchange, using p-values to break any ties. This would have placed more emphasis on
the strength of the biological effect rather than just statistical significance. However, this
could push transcripts that aren’t actually statistically significant higher up in the ranking,
which could be misleading. During this project, no clear standard was found in literature
for how to rank transcripts when applying RRA to RNA-seq data. Due to time constrains,
no other ranking metrics were explored. However, future work could explore the use of a
composite ranking metric that incorporates both the log2foldchange and the p-value, which
may produce a more biologically meaningful metric.
Gene set enrichment analysis was not able to provide much information about which method
is more appropriate for RNA-seq meta-analysis. When Tippet’s method was applied on each
meta-analysis result it revealed a varying number of pathways for each method. This might
suggest that there is a dependence on both the data and the properties of each individual
method. These results raised doubts about the effectiveness of using Tippett’s method in
aggregating data to the gene level. It may have been more effective to perform a second meta-
analysis at the transcript level. For instance, using REM at the transcript level followed by
Fisher’s method could potentially identify a broader number of differentially expressed genes.
However, exploring this kind of approach is left for future work. A potentially more strategy
could involve a two-step meta-analysis: starting with REM and either Fisher’s method or
48
==PAGE:55==
ACAT at the transcript level, and then combining those results before moving to gene-level
aggregation. Due to time constraints, this was not feasible but may be a promising direction.
Conclusion
This systematic review explored five meta-analysis methods, Fisher’s, ACAT, Weighted
Stouffer’s, REM, and RRA for combining RNA-seq transcript-level data across studies in four
diseases, Alzheimer’s, cardiovascular diseases, obesity, and type II diabetes. Each method
was evaluated for computational efficiency, robustness, and stability.
Fisher’s method consistently performed well, identifying the highest number of differentially
expressed transcripts both in strict and relatively more relaxed significance and log2foldchange
thresholds. It also had one of the fastest runtimes. However, its sensitivity to small p-values
may lead to inflated type I errors, and since it does not account for effect size or its direction,
the results might not always reflect meaningful biological changes. ACAT performed well in
some diseases and was second only to Fisher’s method in identifying significant and unique to
itself transcripts. Despite its performance, it shares the same limitations as Fisher’s method,
only being more sensitive to small p-values.
The Weighted Stouffer’s method showed good performance in Alzheimer’s disease and type
II diabetes. The clear advantage of the method is that it incorporates effect direction, which
makes results more biologically meaningful. However, it was unstable across random data
splits and its results may have depended on the data composition.
REM was the most conservative method that required the most processing time. It iden-
tified the fewest significant transcripts, but offered the benefit of incorporating effect size
along with the within and between study variance. Its performance was likely influenced
by the low variability in the data and the choice of estimator. RRA was the most stable
and computationally efficient method, but it was also the most conservative, consistently
detecting the fewest differentially expressed transcripts. Its focus on rank consistency, while
useful it may be limited to the data used and the defined ranking metric.
In conclusion, this systematic review shows that RNA-seq meta-analysis is a very compli-
cated, and challenging topic. The performance of each method varied depending on the
disease, the composition of the datasets, and their statistical assumptions. In the end, the
Weighted Stouffer’s method was chosen due to its incorporation of effect size direction, which
provides a balance between sensitivity and specificity without a cost in computational speed.
49
==PAGE:56==
However, it is important to acknowledge that this method has clear limitations, and no single
approach can be considered universally appropriate. That being said, one should interpret
the results with caution. Future work could involve running independent Deseq2 analyses
on raw RNA-seq data provided by the Isoform Analysis Group, rather than relying on pre-
processed results, to ensure better control over data processing and deeper understanding of
the limitations associated with differential gene expression. In addition, combining multiple
meta-analysis methods could help take advantage of their respective strengths. Although,
more statistical experience is required to effectively implement such strategies.
50
==PAGE:57==
List of Figures
1
Overview of transcription: RNA polymerase II synthesizes a pre-mRNA tran-
script from a DNA template strand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
The process of alternative splicing.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3
High-level analysis workflow diagram highlighting the structure of the de-
signed algorithm. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4
Folder structure of the project.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
5
Layout of the interactive Shiny app for performing meta-analysis. The in-
terface allows users to select from preloaded collection datasets, adjust tran-
script presence thresholds, and view both gene-level and transcript-level meta-
analysis results, including corresponding volcano plots.
. . . . . . . . . . . .
20
6
Volcano plots created with the ggplot2 [59] and patchwork[47] R packages
showing significantly expressed transcripts in Alzheimer’s disease identified
by five meta-analysis methods using an adjusted p-value < 0.05 and an abso-
lute log2foldchange > 1.5 threshold. Red and blue dots represent significantly
upregulated and downregulated transcripts respectively, while grey dots rep-
resent non-significant transcripts. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
7
Venn diagram created with the ggVenDiagram [48, 49] R package showing
the overlap of significant transcripts in Alzheimer’s Disease identified by five
meta-analysis methods using a significance threshold of adjusted p-value <
0.05 and |log2foldchange| > 1.5. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
8
Unique significant transcripts in Alzheimer’s Disease identified by each method
under padj < 0.05 criteria. The plot was created with the ggplot2 [59] R package. 28
9
Spearman correlation heatmap created with the ggcorrplot [64] R package
showing the pairwise p-value correlations (ρ) between meta-analysis methods
in Alzheimer’s disease. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
10
Stability of the five meta-analysis methods across ten random data splits for
Alzheimer’s Disease created with the ggplot2 [59] R package. The plot shows
the Spearman correlations between transcript-level p-value rankings from the
two halves, calculated across ten iterations. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
I
==PAGE:58==
11
UpSet plot showing the overlap of significantly enriched pathways detected
by Tippet’s method after aggregating transcript-level data to the gene level
for each meta-analysis method in Alzheimer’s disease.
Left bars represent
the number of significantly enriched pathways by each method. Each row
corresponds to an intersection between two methods. Each row shows where
two methods overlap. If two or more methods identify the same pathway,
their intersection is marked with filled circles connected by a line. The plot
was created with ggVennDiagram[48, 49] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
12
Spearman correlation heatmap created with the ggcorrplot [64] R package
showing the pairwise rank correlations (ρ) between significantly enriched path-
ways identified by each method methods in Alzheimer’s disease. For simplicity,
the gene-level data are referred to by the meta-analysis method they originated
from before applying Tippett’s aggregation. Pathways were ranked based on
their normalized enrichment score (NES) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
13
Volcano plots created with the ggplot2 [59] and patchwork [47] R packages
showing significantly expressed transcripts in cardiovascular diseases identified
by the five meta-analysis methods using an adjusted p-value (padj) < 0.05
and an absolute log2foldchange > 1.5 threshold. Red and blue dots represent
significantly upregulated and downregulated transcripts respectively, while
grey dots represent non-significant transcripts. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
14
Distribution of individual p-values of all transcripts across studies between
Alzheimer’s disease and cardiovascular diseases.
Created with the ggplot2
[59] and patchwork[47] R packages . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
15
Venn diagram created with the ggVenDiagram [48, 49] R package showing the
overlap of significant transcripts in cardiovascular disease identified by the
five meta-analysis methods using a significance threshold of adjusted p-value
< 0.05 and |log2foldchange| > 1.5. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
16
Unique significant transcripts in cardiovascular disease identified by each method
under adjusted p-value < 0.05 criteria. The plot was created with the ggplot2
[59] R package.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
II
==PAGE:59==
17
UpSet plot showing the overlap of significantly enriched pathways detected
by Tippet’s method after aggregating transcript-level data to the gene level
for each meta-analysis method in cardiovascular diseases. Left bars represent
the number of significantly enriched pathways by each method. Each row
corresponds to an intersection between two methods. Each row shows where
two methods overlap. If two or more methods identify the same pathway,
their intersection is marked with filled circles connected by a line. The plot
was created with ggVennDiagram[48, 49] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
18
Spearman correlation heatmap created with the ggcorrplot [64] R package
showing the pairwise rank correlations (ρ) between significantly enriched path-
ways identified by each method methods in cardiovascular disease. For sim-
plicity, the gene-level data are referred to by the meta-analysis method they
originated from before applying Tippett’s aggregation. Pathways were ranked
based on their normalized enrichment score (NES) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
19
UpSet plot showing the overlap of significantly enriched pathways detected
by Tippet’s method after aggregating transcript-level data to the gene level
for each meta-analysis method in obesity. Left bars represent the number of
significantly enriched pathways by each method. Each row corresponds to
an intersection between two methods. Each row shows where two methods
overlap. If two or more methods identify the same pathway, their intersection
is marked with filled circles connected by a line. The plot was created with
ggVennDiagram[48, 49] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
20
UpSet plot showing the overlap of significantly enriched pathways detected by
Tippet’s method after aggregating transcript-level data to the gene level for
each meta-analysis method in type II diabetes. Left bars represent the number
of significantly enriched pathways by each method. Each row corresponds to
an intersection between two methods. Each row shows where two methods
overlap. If two or more methods identify the same pathway, their intersection
is marked with filled circles connected by a line. The plot was created with
ggVennDiagram[48, 49] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
21
Runtime comparison of the five meta-analysis methods across the four disease
datasets. Each bar represents the runtime of each method under a disease.
Created with the ggplot2 [59] and patchwork [47] R packages.
. . . . . . . .
45
A1
Distribution of combined adjusted p-values (padj) from Fisher’s method and
ACAT created with the ggplot2 [59] and patchwork [47] R packages. . . . . . XIII
III
==PAGE:60==
A2
Volcano plot created with the ggplot2 [59] R package showing significantly ex-
pressed transcripts in Alzheimerâs disease using Weighted Stouffer’s method
under p-adjusted p-value < 0.05 threshold. Points are colored by directional
consistency ranging from -1 (Perfect agreement on down-regulation) to 1 (Per-
fect agreement on up-regulation). The plot is divided in four panels based on
the transcripts that were supported by more small p-values.
. . . . . . . . . XIV
A3
Volcano plot created with the ggplot2 [59] R package showing significantly
expressed transcripts in Alzheimerâs disease using REM with p-adjusted p-
value < 0.05. Points are colored by the standard error of the pooled effect
size, with yellow and purple indicating larger and smaller standard errors
respectively. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
XV
A4
Scatter plots created with the ggplot2 [59] R package comparing the adjusted
p-values (padj) from the Weighted Stouffer’s method and REM in Alzheimer’s
disease. The left plot shows significantly differentially expressed transcripts
(padj < 0.05) with directional consistency that exceeded 0.7 in either direction,
divided into positive and negative direction. Points are colored by the degree
of directional consistency. The right plot shows the overall comparison of padj
values between the two methods.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . XVI
A5
Distribution of adjusted p-values (padj) from Tippett’s method when applied
to the five meta-analysis methods. Created with the ggplot2 [59] and and
patchwork [47] R packages.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .XVII
A6
Differentially expressed transcripts identifed by the five meta-analysis meth-
ods in each disease. Created with the ggplot2 [59] and and patchwork [47] . .XVIII
IV
==PAGE:61==
List of Tables
1
Summary of studies per disease. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
V
==PAGE:62==
References
[1] J. D. Watson and F. H. C. Crick, “Molecular Structure of Nucleic Acids: A Structure
for Deoxyribose Nucleic Acid,” Nature, vol. 171, pp. 737–738, Apr. 1953.
[2] F. Crick, “Central Dogma of Molecular Biology,” Nature, vol. 227, pp. 561–563, Aug.
1970.
[3] R. R. Sinden, “Introduction to the Structure, Properties, and Reactions of DNA,” in
DNA Structure and Function, pp. 1–57, Elsevier, 1994.
[4] A. Wolffe, “Chromatin Structure,” in Chromatin, pp. 7–172, Elsevier, 2000.
[5] C.-H. Shen, “Gene expression,” in Diagnostic Molecular Biology, pp. 57–89, Elsevier,
2023.
[6] N. Bhagavan and C.-E. Ha, “RNA and Protein Synthesis,” in Essentials of Medical
Biochemistry, pp. 301–320, Elsevier, 2011.
[7] P. Cramer, “Organization and regulation of gene transcription,” Nature, vol. 573, pp. 45–
54, Sept. 2019.
[8] M. M. Scotti and M. S. Swanson, “RNA mis-splicing in disease,” Nature Reviews Ge-
netics, vol. 17, pp. 19–32, Jan. 2016.
[9] R. Wang, I. Helbig, A. C. Edmondson, L. Lin, and Y. Xing, “Splicing defects in rare
diseases: transcriptomics and machine learning strategies towards genetic diagnosis,”
Briefings in Bioinformatics, vol. 24, p. bbad284, Sept. 2023.
[10] K. R. Kukurba and S. B. Montgomery, “RNA Sequencing and Analysis,” Cold Spring
Harbor Protocols, vol. 2015, p. pdb.top084970, Nov. 2015.
[11] D. Deshpande, K. Chhugani, Y. Chang, A. Karlsberg, C. Loeffler, J. Zhang,
A. MuszyĹska, V. Munteanu, H. Yang, J. Rotman, L. Tao, B. Balliu, E. Tseng, E. Eskin,
F. Zhao, P. Mohammadi, P. P. Ĺabaj, and S. Mangul, “RNA-seq data science: From
VI
==PAGE:63==
raw data to effective interpretation,” Frontiers in Genetics, vol. 14, p. 997383, Mar.
2023.
[12] F. Finotello and B. Di Camillo, “Measuring differential gene expression with RNA-seq:
challenges and strategies for data analysis,” Briefings in Functional Genomics, vol. 14,
pp. 130–142, Mar. 2015.
[13] D. Rosati, M. Palmieri, G. Brunelli, A. Morrione, F. Iannelli, E. Frullanti, and A. Gior-
dano, “Differential gene expression analysis pipelines and bioinformatic tools for the
identification of specific biomarkers: A review,” Computational and Structural Biotech-
nology Journal, vol. 23, pp. 1154–1168, Dec. 2024.
[14] Z. Hu, Y. Wu, and Y. Zhou, “Meta-analysis of RNA-seq studies with an adaptive weight
and truncation p-value combination test,” Applied Mathematical Modelling, vol. 136,
p. 115611, Dec. 2024.
[15] B. Prasad and X. Li, “Fused inverse-normal method for integrated differential expression
analysis of RNA-seq data,” BMC Bioinformatics, vol. 23, p. 320, Aug. 2022.
[16] S. Yoon, B. Baik, T. Park, and D. Nam, “Powerful p-value combination methods to
detect incomplete association,” Scientific Reports, vol. 11, p. 6980, Mar. 2021.
[17] D. Toro-Dominguez, J. A. Villatoro-Garcia, J. Martorell-Marugan, Y. Roman-Montoya,
M. E. Alarcon-Riquelme, and P. Carmona-Saez, “A survey of gene expression meta-
analysis: methods and applications,” Briefings in Bioinformatics, vol. 22, pp. 1694–
1705, Mar. 2021.
[18] T. M. Loughin, “A systematic comparison of methods for combining p-values from
independent tests,” Computational Statistics & Data Analysis, vol. 47, pp. 467–485,
Oct. 2004.
[19] M. C. Whitlock, “Combining probability from independent tests:
the weighted Z
âmethod is superior to Fisher’s approach,” Journal of Evolutionary Biology, vol. 18,
pp. 1368–1373, Sept. 2005.
[20] Z. Chen, “Is the weighted z-test the best method for combining probabilities from in-
dependent tests?: Combining probabilities from independent tests,” Journal of Evolu-
tionary Biology, vol. 24, pp. 926–930, Apr. 2011.
[21] Z. Breijyeh and R. Karaman, “Comprehensive Review on Alzheimerâs Disease: Causes
and Treatment,” Molecules, vol. 25, p. 5789, Dec. 2020.
VII
==PAGE:64==
[22] E. Passeri, K. Elkhoury, M. Morsink, K. Broersen, M. Linder, A. Tamayol, C. Malaplate,
F. T. Yen, and E. Arab-Tehrany, “Alzheimerâs Disease: Treatment Strategies and Their
Limitations,” International Journal of Molecular Sciences, vol. 23, p. 13954, Nov. 2022.
[23] G.-f. Chen, T.-h. Xu, Y. Yan, Y.-r. Zhou, Y. Jiang, K. Melcher, and H. E. Xu, “Amyloid
beta: structure, biology and structure-based therapeutic development,” Acta Pharma-
cologica Sinica, vol. 38, pp. 1205–1235, Sept. 2017.
[24] J. Zhang, Y. Zhang, J. Wang, Y. Xia, J. Zhang, and L. Chen, “Recent advances in
Alzheimer’s disease: mechanisms, clinical trials and new drug development strategies,”
Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy, vol. 9, p. 211, Aug. 2024.
[25] B. Aguzzoli Heberle, K. L. Fox, L. Lobraico Libermann, S. Ronchetti Martins Xavier,
G. Tarnowski Dallarosa, R. Carolina Santos, D. W. Fardo, T. Wendt Viola, and
M. T. W. Ebbert, “Systematic review and metaâanalysis of bulk RNAseq studies in
human Alzheimer’s disease brain tissue,” Alzheimer’s & Dementia, vol. 21, p. e70025,
Mar. 2025.
[26] A. B. Lamisa, I. Ahammad, A. Bhattacharjee, M. U. Hossain, A. Ishtiaque, Z. M.
Chowdhury, K. C. Das, M. Salimullah, and C. A. Keya, “A meta-analysis of bulk
RNA-seq datasets identifies potential biomarkers and repurposable therapeutics against
Alzheimerâs disease,” Scientific Reports, vol. 14, p. 24717, Oct. 2024.
[27] V. R. Netala, S. K. Teertam, H. Li, and Z. Zhang, “A Comprehensive Review of Car-
diovascular Disease Management: Cardiac Biomarkers, Imaging Modalities, Pharma-
cotherapy, Surgical Interventions, and Herbal Remedies,” Cells, vol. 13, p. 1471, Sept.
2024.
[28] M. Vaduganathan, G. A. Mensah, J. V. Turco, V. Fuster, and G. A. Roth, “The Global
Burden of Cardiovascular Diseases and Risk,” Journal of the American College of Car-
diology, vol. 80, pp. 2361–2371, Dec. 2022.
[29] A. Alimadadi, P. B. Munroe, B. Joe, and X. Cheng, “Meta-Analysis of Dilated Car-
diomyopathy Using Cardiac RNA-Seq Transcriptomic Datasets,” Genes, vol. 11, p. 60,
Jan. 2020.
[30] C. Boutari and C. S. Mantzoros, “A 2022 update on the epidemiology of obesity and a
call to action: as its twin COVID-19 pandemic appears to be receding, the obesity and
dysmetabolism pandemic continues to rage on,” Metabolism, vol. 133, p. 155217, Aug.
2022.
VIII
==PAGE:65==
[31] X. Lin and H. Li, “Obesity: Epidemiology, Pathophysiology, and Therapeutics,” Fron-
tiers in Endocrinology, vol. 12, p. 706978, Sept. 2021.
[32] Y. Goutzelas, P. Kontou, Z. Mamuris, P. Bagos, and T. Sarafidou, “Meta-analysis of
gene expression data in adipose tissue reveals new obesity associated genes,” Gene,
vol. 818, p. 146223, Apr. 2022.
[33] E. MĹynarska, W. Czarnik, N. DzieĹźa, W. JÄdraszak, G. Majchrowicz, F. Prusinowski,
M. Stabrawa, J. Rysz, and B. Franczyk, “Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus: New Pathogenetic
Mechanisms, Treatment and the Most Important Complications,” International Journal
of Molecular Sciences, vol. 26, p. 1094, Jan. 2025.
[34] C. Pierre-Jerome, “Pathophysiology of type II diabetes mellitus,” in Myopathies and
Tendinopathies of the Diabetic Foot, pp. 137–152, Elsevier, 2025.
[35] U. Galicia-Garcia, A. Benito-Vicente, S. Jebari, A. Larrea-Sebal, H. Siddiqi, K. B.
Uribe, H. Ostolaza, and C. MartĂn, “Pathophysiology of Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus,”
International Journal of Molecular Sciences, vol. 21, p. 6275, Aug. 2020.
[36] K. D. Silva, R. T. Demmer, D. JĂśnsson, A. Mousa, A. Forbes, and J. Enticott, “Highly
perturbed genes and hub genes associated with type 2 diabetes in different tissues of
adult humans: A bioinformatics analytic workflow,” Feb. 2022.
[37] M. I. Love, W. Huber, and S. Anders, “Moderated estimation of fold change and dis-
persion for RNA-seq data with DESeq2,” Genome Biology, vol. 15, p. 550, Dec. 2014.
[38] “Statistical Methods for Research Workers,” Nature, vol. 131, pp. 383–383, Mar. 1933.
[39] “The American Soldier. Vol. I, Adjustment During Army Life; The American soldier.
Vol. II, Combat and Its Aftermath.,” Journal of Consulting Psychology, vol. 13, pp. 310–
310, Aug. 1949.
[40] D. V. Zaykin, “Optimally weighted Z-test is a powerful method for combining proba-
bilities in meta-analysis: Optimally weighted Z-test is a powerful method,” Journal of
Evolutionary Biology, vol. 24, pp. 1836–1841, Aug. 2011.
[41] Z. Chen, “Optimal Tests for Combining p-Values,” Applied Sciences, vol. 12, p. 322,
Dec. 2021.
[42] Y. Liu, S. Chen, Z. Li, A. C. Morrison, E. Boerwinkle, and X. Lin, “ACAT: A Fast
and Powerful p Value Combination Method for Rare-Variant Analysis in Sequencing
Studies,” The American Journal of Human Genetics, vol. 104, pp. 410–421, Mar. 2019.
IX
==PAGE:66==
[43] L. V. Hedges and I. Olkin, “Random Effects Models for Effect Sizes,” in Statistical
Methods for Meta-Analysis, pp. 189–203, Elsevier, 1985.
[44] R. Kolde, S. Laur, P. Adler, and J. Vilo, “Robust rank aggregation for gene list integra-
tion and meta-analysis,” Bioinformatics, vol. 28, pp. 573–580, Feb. 2012.
[45] H. Wickham, J. Hester, W. Chang, and J. Bryan, devtools: Tools to Make Developing R
Packages Easier, 2022. https://devtools.r-lib.org/, https://github.com/r-lib/devtools.
[46] H. Wickham, M. Averick, J. Bryan, W. Chang, L. D. McGowan, R. FranĂ§ois, G. Grole-
mund, A. Hayes, L. Henry, J. Hester, M. Kuhn, T. L. Pedersen, E. Miller, S. M. Bache,
K. MĂźller, J. Ooms, D. Robinson, D. P. Seidel, V. Spinu, K. Takahashi, D. Vaughan,
C. Wilke, K. Woo, and H. Yutani, “Welcome to the tidyverse,” Journal of Open Source
Software, vol. 4, no. 43, p. 1686, 2019.
[47] T. L. Pedersen, patchwork: The Composer of Plots, 2025. R package version 1.3.0.9000,
https://github.com/thomasp85/patchwork.
[48] C.-H. Gao, G. Yu, and P. Cai, “ggVennDiagram: An Intuitive, Easy-to-Use, and Highly
Customizable R Package to Generate Venn Diagram,” Frontiers in Genetics, vol. 12,
p. 706907, Sept. 2021.
[49] C. Gao, C. Chen, T. Akyol, A. Dusa, G. Yu, B. Cao, and P. Cai, “ggVennDiagram:
Intuitive Venn diagram software extended,” iMeta, vol. 3, p. e177, Feb. 2024.
[50] K. Slowikowski, ggrepel: Automatically Position Non-Overlapping Text Labels with ’gg-
plot2’, 2024. https://ggrepel.slowkow.com/, https://github.com/slowkow/ggrepel.
[51] M. Dewey, metap: Meta-Analysis of Significance Values, 2025. R package version 1.12.
[52] W. Viechtbauer, “Conducting meta-analyses in R with the metafor package,” Journal
of Statistical Software, vol. 36, no. 3, pp. 1–48, 2010.
[53] S. Durinck, Y. Moreau, A. Kasprzyk, S. Davis, B. De Moor, A. Brazma, and W. Hu-
ber, “BioMart and Bioconductor: a powerful link between biological databases and
microarray data analysis,” Bioinformatics, vol. 21, pp. 3439–3440, Aug. 2005.
[54] I. Dolgalev, msigdbr: MSigDB Gene Sets for Multiple Organisms in a Tidy Data Format,
2025. R package version 24.1.0.
[55] G. Korotkevich, V. Sukhov, N. Budin, B. Shpak, M. N. Artyomov, and A. Sergushichev,
“Fast gene set enrichment analysis,” June 2016.
X
==PAGE:67==
[56] K. Ushey and H. Wickham, renv: Project Environments, 2025. R package version 1.1.4,
https://github.com/rstudio/renv.
[57] W. Chang, J. Cheng, J. Allaire, C. Sievert, B. Schloerke, Y. Xie, J. Allen, J. McPherson,
A. Dipert, and B. Borges, shiny: Web Application Framework for R, 2025. R package
version 1.11.0.
[58] Y. Xie, J. Cheng, and X. Tan, DT: A Wrapper of the JavaScript Library ’DataTables’,
2025. R package version 0.33.3.
[59] H. Wickham, ggplot2: Elegant Graphics for Data Analysis. Springer-Verlag New York,
2016.
[60] Y. Liu and J. Xie, “Cauchy Combination Test: A Powerful Test With Analytic p -
Value Calculation Under Arbitrary Dependency Structures,” Journal of the American
Statistical Association, vol. 115, pp. 393–402, Jan. 2020.
[61] A. B. Owen, “Karl Pearson’s meta-analysis revisited,” The Annals of Statistics, vol. 37,
Dec. 2009.
[62] T. M. Loughin, “A systematic comparison of methods for combining p-values from
independent tests,” Computational Statistics
Data Analysis, vol. 47, no. 3, pp. 467–
485, 2004.
[63] M. Borenstein, L. V. Hedges, J. P. Higgins, and H. R. Rothstein, “A basic introduction to
fixed-effect and random-effects models for meta-analysis,” Research Synthesis Methods,
vol. 1, pp. 97–111, Apr. 2010.
[64] A. Kassambara, ggcorrplot: Visualization of a Correlation Matrix using ’ggplot2’, 2029.
R package version 0.1.4.999.
[65] A. Subramanian, P. Tamayo, V. K. Mootha, S. Mukherjee, B. L. Ebert, M. A. Gillette,
A. Paulovich, S. L. Pomeroy, T. R. Golub, E. S. Lander, and J. P. Mesirov, “Gene
set enrichment analysis: A knowledge-based approach for interpreting genome-wide ex-
pression profiles,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, vol. 102, pp. 15545–
15550, Oct. 2005.
[66] L.-C. Chang, H.-M. Lin, E. Sibille, and G. C. Tseng, “Meta-analysis methods for com-
bining multiple expression profiles: comparisons, statistical characterization and an
application guideline,” BMC Bioinformatics, vol. 14, p. 368, Dec. 2013.
XI
==PAGE:68==
[67] J. A. Villatoro-GarcĂa, J. Martorell-MarugĂĄn, D. Toro-DomĂnguez, Y. RomĂĄn-
Montoya, P. Femia, and P. Carmona-SĂĄez, “DExMA: An R Package for Performing
Gene Expression Meta-Analysis with Missing Genes,” Mathematics, vol. 10, p. 3376,
Sept. 2022.
[68] L. Lin and A. M. Aloe, “Evaluation of various estimators for standardized mean differ-
ence in metaâanalysis,” Statistics in Medicine, vol. 40, pp. 403–426, Jan. 2021.
XII
==PAGE:69==
Appendix
Figure A1: Distribution of combined adjusted p-values (padj) from Fisher’s method and
ACAT created with the ggplot2 [59] and patchwork [47] R packages.
XIII
==PAGE:70==
Figure A2: Volcano plot created with the ggplot2 [59] R package showing significantly
expressed transcripts in Alzheimerâs disease using Weighted Stouffer’s method under p-
adjusted p-value < 0.05 threshold. Points are colored by directional consistency ranging
from -1 (Perfect agreement on down-regulation) to 1 (Perfect agreement on up-regulation).
The plot is divided in four panels based on the transcripts that were supported by more
small p-values.
XIV
==PAGE:71==
Figure A3: Volcano plot created with the ggplot2 [59] R package showing significantly ex-
pressed transcripts in Alzheimerâs disease using REM with p-adjusted p-value < 0.05. Points
are colored by the standard error of the pooled effect size, with yellow and purple indicating
larger and smaller standard errors respectively.
XV
==PAGE:72==
Figure A4: Scatter plots created with the ggplot2 [59] R package comparing the adjusted
p-values (padj) from the Weighted Stouffer’s method and REM in Alzheimer’s disease. The
left plot shows significantly differentially expressed transcripts (padj < 0.05) with directional
consistency that exceeded 0.7 in either direction, divided into positive and negative direction.
Points are colored by the degree of directional consistency. The right plot shows the overall
comparison of padj values between the two methods.
XVI
==PAGE:73==
Figure A5: Distribution of adjusted p-values (padj) from Tippett’s method when applied
to the five meta-analysis methods. Created with the ggplot2 [59] and and patchwork [47] R
packages.
XVII
==PAGE:74==
Figure A6: Differentially expressed transcripts identifed by the five meta-analysis methods
in each disease. Created with the ggplot2 [59] and and patchwork [47]
XVIII
