==PAGE:1==
Forecasting and Scenario Generation for
Optimized Manufacturing
Leonardo Debarba Bassani
Master Thesis
MSc Eng in Business Analytics
Department of Technology, Management and Economics
Supervisor: Dario Pacino
==PAGE:2==
Forecasting and Scenario Generation for Optimized Manufacturing
Master Thesis
June, 2025
By
Leonardo Debarba Bassani
s232829
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the
customary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title,
etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Technology, Management and Economics, Brovej,
Building 358, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.dtu.dk
Considerations:
Artificial intelligence tools were used to assist with text proofreading,
orthographic corrections, and debugging of coding errors throughout
the development of this work.
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
This study investigates the application of two-stage stochastic optimization to medium-
term production planning under demand uncertainty in manufacturing environments. Mo-
tivated by challenges faced by industrial companies, such as demand volatility, stockouts,
and finite resource capacities, the research develops and compares deterministic and
stochastic lot-sizing models across multi-product and multi-period environments to deter-
mine when stochastic approaches have significant planning advantages. Three distinct
industrial environments, each characterized by different production volumes and demand
distributions were analysed using real-world data. The model incorporated first-stage pro-
duction decisions made before demand is realized, and second-stage recourse decisions,
such as overtime, backorders and inventory adjustments, after demand is revealed, en-
abling a flexible and adaptative planning strategy. Scenario generation was performed
using Monte Carlo and Bootstrap methods, with Bootstrap proving more effective, while
scenario reduction was conducted using Fast Forward Selection (FFS) and K-Means,
with FFS delivering superior results. The models were compared using the Value of the
Stochastic Solution (VSS), highlighting that stochastic optimization is not universally op-
timal across all cases but offers clear benefits in environments with high demand vari-
ability, skewed distributions and high service-level penalties. This research provides a
robust methodological framework for integrating uncertainty into production planning, of-
fering valuable insights for practitioners aiming to improve decision-making in complex
manufacturing settings.
ii
Forecasting and Scenario Generation for Optimized Manufacturing
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
First, I would like to thank my supervisor, Dario Pacino, for providing valuable input and
information throughout the research. He continuously challenged me to explore beyond
the solutions we discussed and showed great patience in listening to all my questions. His
expertise, knowledge, and guidance were fundamental to the development of this study.
I would also like to express my deepest gratitude to my colleagues and friends at 4Cast,
who are among the most intelligent, supportive, and inspiring individuals I have had the
privilege to work with. I am truly grateful for their help and encouragement during this re-
search, and I am proud to be part of this inspired vision of not only supports organizations
in Brazil but spread Brazilian technology around the world.
Last but not least, I would like to thank all my loved ones. A very special thanks to my
parents, who have been the foundation of everything I have achieved. The values they
taught me continue to give me the courage and dedication to dream big. My deepest love
and gratitude go to those who stood by my side, no matter the distance, encouraging and
believing in me even in the most uncertain moments. Your support meant more than I can
put into words. A special thank you to all my friends in Brazil and Denmark, who have
also been a part of this chapter in my life. And to my beloved grandmother, whose love,
wisdom, and strength accompanied me throughout this journey, your memory continues
to inspire every step I take.
Forecasting and Scenario Generation for Optimized Manufacturing
iii
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
2
2
Literature Review
4
3
Background
7
3.1
Case Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
Stochastic Optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.3
Two-Stage Optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.4
Scenario Generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.5
Scenario Reduction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
4
Methodology
16
4.1
Problem Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
4.2
Scenario Generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
4.3
Scenario Reduction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.4
Deterministic Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4.5
Two-Stage Stochastic Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
4.6
Validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
5
Results and Discussion
31
5.1
Data Source
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
5.2
Industrial Environment One . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
5.3
Industrial Environment Two . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
5.4
Industrial Environment Three . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
5.5
Trade-off Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
5.6
Limitations and Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
6
Conclusion
59
Bibliography
60
A Additional Tables
63
Forecasting and Scenario Generation for Optimized Manufacturing
1
==PAGE:6==
1
Introduction
Production planning under uncertainty is a persistent and critical challenge for manufactur-
ing organizations operating in dynamic markets. Companies must often make production
and capacity decisions well before actual demand becomes known. Seasonal trends,
volatile customer preference, new products in the market and unforeseen events, such
as disruption in the supply chain, increase the complexity of planning, potentially leading
to excessive inventory or missed deliveries [1]. To address this, decision-makers require
advanced tools that allow both proactive planning and adaptive adjustments when uncer-
tainty is resolved [2].
This research is motivated by the practical need of real-world organizations which face
recurring difficulties in aligning production goals over a planning horizon with highly vari-
able demand. To meet planning objectives, companies typically divide planning activities
into three categories: long-term, medium-term, and short-term. Long-term production
planning generally deals with facility location and design decisions, as well as focusing
on equipment and processes. Medium-term production planning focuses on material re-
quirements planning (MRP), forecasting production quantities and lot-sizing over a finite
defined planning horizon. While short-term production planning focus more on daily ac-
tivities, such as job scheduling [3]. This study will focus on the medium-term production
planning, more specifically on lot-sizing problems.
In recent years, there has been growing interest in developing stochastic optimization
models to better manage demand uncertainty in manufacturing and supply chains. Al-
though deterministic models remain widely used due to their simplicity and computational
tractability, by typically using expected values as estimates for uncertain parameters, they
often fail to capture the variability and risk inherent in real-world operations, as practical
planning problems frequently involve various forms of uncertain or incomplete data [1].
In contrast to this, stochastic optimization models, particularly two-stage stochastic pro-
gramming approach, offer a promising alternative by explicitly incorporating demand un-
certainty into the decision-making process [4]. However, practical implementation of such
models depends on several factors, including data availability, computational tractability,
and effective scenario generation and reduction techniques.
The objective of this study is to analyse and improve the lot-sizing by explicitly incorporat-
ing demand uncertainty into the decision-making framework considering a multi-product
environment. By doing it, lot-sizing decisions of how many products should be produced to
balance inventory levels and minimize cost can be made, helping organizations to reduce
cost and improve efficiency [5]. This is achieved through the development of a two-stage
stochastic programming model, where first-stage decisions, such as production quanti-
ties and resource allocations, are made before demand is known, while second-stage
decisions, such as inventory adjustments and backordered units, are executed after de-
mand is revealed. By comparing stochastic model approach to a traditional deterministic
lot-sizing model, the project aims to evaluate when and to what extent stochastic opti-
mization provides added value in terms of cost savings, service level improvements and
robustness to demand fluctuations, as many companies are willing to invest for more
accurate information, since their production planning heavily depends on forecasts and
dynamic response to maintain a customer satisfaction [2].
The problem is motivated by real-world cases where companies often face recurring dif-
2
Forecasting and Scenario Generation for Optimized Manufacturing
==PAGE:7==
ficulties in aligning their production objectives over a planning horizon, resulting in lost
sales, excess inventory or inefficient use of productive resources. As a case study of
a services and consulting company, this study was proposed based on several chal-
lenges faced by customers, who experience a lack of communication and integrity be-
tween production, sales and supply chain processes. As a result, these companies often
had demand forecasts misaligned with their production capacity, leading to inventory im-
balances, stock shortages, higher operational costs, and internal conflicts. The present
study arises from the practical need to support these companies’ strategic production
planning decisions through a more robust approach to demand uncertainty. The proposal
consists of using stochastic programming model to simulate future scenarios, providing
companies with an analytical tool capable of anticipating possible variations in demand
and, thus, planning a more resilient and effective actions. By incorporating different fu-
ture scenarios demands into the decision-making process, the companies can reduce
customers disruptions, minimise costs associated with excess inventory and idle capac-
ity, adjust productive proactively instead of reactively, and improve integration between
production, sales and supply chain departments.
The study aims to combine theory and practice, using real-world industrial data and prob-
lems. The key contributions are to conduct a comprehensive review of existing literature
on stochastic optimization, scenario generation, scenario reduction and production plan-
ning to identify gaps and best practices, collecting and preprocessing historical production
order data, including quantities, timings and resource usage, to enable the development
and validation of the model through a stochastic optimization framework adapted to cap-
ture demand variability in manufacturing systems. The study also proposed to construct a
mathematical model that incorporates uncertainty to optimize lot-sizing decisions and ca-
pacity allocation, through a computational two-stage stochastic optimization problem, ap-
plying scenario generation methods, including Monte Carlo simulation and Bootstrapping,
and utilize scenario reduction techniques such as Fast Forward Selection and k-means
clustering. The study is guided by the central research question: ”When stochastic op-
timization can be effectively applied in manufacturing environments to improve capacity
planning under demand uncertainty?”. To explore this question, a comparative analysis
is conducted between a traditional deterministic model and a two-stage stochastic pro-
gramming model, using real-world data adapted from industrials customers partners. This
comparison will highlight the potential advantages and limitations of employing stochastic
optimization in medium-term production planning based on different industrials environ-
ments according to each decision goals.
Forecasting and Scenario Generation for Optimized Manufacturing
3
==PAGE:8==
2
Literature Review
Production planning is an essential activity in manufacturing organizations that decisively
influences the efficiency and responsiveness of production systems. A central issue in
production planning is lot-sizing, which involves determining the optimal production quan-
tities to minimize overall operating costs, including inventory holding, backordering, and
setup costs [6]. Lot-sizing problems can significantly aid manufacturing decision-making
by offering structured approaches to manage production under uncertainty. By optimizing
the balance between inventory levels and production costs, these models reduce oper-
ating and holding costs while improving service levels and responsiveness to demand
fluctuations [7]. Effective lot-sizing decisions also help minimize unnecessary expenses
and production downtime, increasing resource utilization and aligning internal capabilities
with flexible external supply.
Moreover, lot-sizing supports better decisions in capac-
ity planning, inventory control, and scheduling, increasing the competitive advantage of
manufacturing companies [4]. Lot-sizing classifications follow different criteria, with foun-
dational contributions by [8, 9]. For a more comprehensive review, see [10, 11].
In real-world production environments, uncertainty in customer demand, due to seasonal
patterns, market fluctuations, or unforeseen events, significantly complicates planning.
These challenges can result in high holding costs, stockouts or inefficient resource uti-
lization [12]. In multi-product lot-sizing settings, the complexity increases further, as man-
ufacturers must coordinate the production of multiple items, each with its own demand
variability, resource constraints, and scheduling needs.
The application of two-stage stochastic optimization models has become a relevant method
for dealing with uncertainty in lot-sizing problems. Two-stage stochastic optimization has
emerged as a valuable method for addressing uncertainty in lot-sizing. This approach
divides decision-making into two phases: strategic first-stage decisions made before un-
certainty is realized, and tactical second-stage decisions made in response to actual out-
comes [13]. While still limited in industrial applications, this technique has demonstrated
robust performance in diverse production contexts [14], effectively balancing costs and
service levels. In multi-product environments, two-stage models are especially useful
due to their ability to capture uncertainty and product interdependencies [15].
Several studies illustrate the practical relevance of two-stage stochastic models. For in-
stance, [16] proposed a model for lot-sizing and scheduling with sequence-dependent
setups, addressing demand uncertainty across multiple products, capturing demand un-
certainty and optimizing both production sequences and quantities, minimizing produc-
tion, setup, inventory, and backorder costs. Their case study on hydraulic brake pro-
duction showed consistent performance gains over deterministic models, particularly un-
der scenarios with sufficient production flexibility. Similarly, [1] developed a model for a
multi-product shop floor, incorporating uncertainties in demand and workforce productiv-
ity. Their findings highlight the effectiveness of stochastic models in capturing variability
and supporting tactical decisions such as inventory build-up and overtime allocation in
peak seasons. Another relevant contribution by [14] focused on a kitting system fac-
ing demand and yield uncertainty, showing that their two-stage model enabled effective
scheduling and workforce planning, permitting a proactive planning through decisions in
the first stage and flexible adjustments through resource actions in the second stage.
These studies underscore the model’s robustness and practical value in dynamic manu-
facturing contexts.
4
Forecasting and Scenario Generation for Optimized Manufacturing
==PAGE:9==
Recent contributions have improved the efficiency and integration of two-stage models.
For example, [17] introduced data-driven scenario reduction techniques that improve com-
putational tractability by selecting scenarios based on performance criteria. Likewise, [12]
proposed a closed-loop framework integrating forecasting and optimization stages for dy-
namic reserve and demand management. Their approach has demonstrated substantial
cost savings and improved reliability, particularly in the energy sector.
It is important to consider how scenarios representing uncertainty are generated and in-
corporated into such models. Because of this, scenario generation plays a critical role in
stochastic programming, as it captures the variability of key parameters. For example,
[18] used demand scenarios from statistical distributions to evaluate trade-offs in midterm
supply chain planning. [19] conducted a detailed evaluation of generation methods, em-
phasizing that while many models rely on discrete scenario trees, inputs often come from
continuous or empirical data. They introduced two evaluation metrics: in-sample stability
(similar solutions across scenario trees) and out-of-sample stability (solution performance
on unseen data). They conclude that scenario generation must be problem-specific, with
no universally optimal method.
Monte Carlo has been also explored as a powerful tool for scenario generation in two-
stage stochastic programming. For example, [20] combined Monte Carlo sampling with
scenario reduction to solve large-scale stochastic problems. Though powerful, pure Monte
Carlo sampling may lead to computationally intractable models due to large scenario sets,
this is particularly relevant for two-stage models involving multiple products and uncertain
demand, where the decision space becomes intractable with increasing scenario sizes.
By integrating Monte Carlo generation with scenario reduction, the authors demonstrated
that it is possible to maintain decision quality while significantly reducing computation
time. Bootstrap methods offer an alternative when underlying distributions are unknown or
complex. Pioneering work by [21] introduced bootstrap as a general resampling method.
Later, [22] formalized the bootstrap as a general approach for estimating the distribution of
a statistic by resampling from observed data. Their work laid the theoretical and practical
of using bootstrap sampling in a variety of applications, including cases where classi-
cal statistical assumptions, such as normality or independence, are violated. Recently,
[23] extended it to hierarchical data via a two-stage method that maintains structural de-
pendencies, highly relevant for manufacturing datasets. Originally developed for health
economics applications, the method involves resampling clusters in the first stage and
individuals inside the clusters in the second stage, thus preserving the dependency struc-
ture inherent in hierarchical data.
Scenario reduction techniques have proven to be a strategic tool for improving the flexi-
bility of models without significantly compromising the quality of decisions. A contribution
in this area is made by [24], who evaluate various scenario reduction methods within
a two-stage stochastic transmission planning model. Their analysis demonstrates that
scenario selection methods that are stratified and based on distance with probabilities
corresponding to the moment can significantly reduce computational loads while main-
taining the quality of the solution. A foundational contribution to scenario reduction in
stochastic programming is the work of [25] introducing a rigorous mathematical frame-
work for reducing large scenario sets, ensuring the statistical integrity of the stochastic
problem, based on backward and forward scenario reduction techniques, Both, backward
and forward techniques were later formulated by [26] where they introduced algorithms
for reducing discrete scenario sets while controlling the error introduced by the reduction
process, focusing in on Kantorovich functional distance to quantify the closeness between
the original and reduced probability distributions.
Forecasting and Scenario Generation for Optimized Manufacturing
5
==PAGE:10==
This study contributes by applying a two-stage stochastic optimization framework to lot-
sizing in a multi-product setting, across three industrial environments: plastic injection
moulding, automotive axle and suspension systems, and glass manufacturing, further
described in subsection 5.1. A key innovation is the comparison of scenario generation
methods, applying Monte Carlo and Bootstrap Sampling, offering a deeper analysis of
how different methods capture demand uncertainty. Furthermore, the study stands out
by comparing two scenario reduction strategies, Fast Forward Selection and K-means
clustering, highlighting the trade-offs between computational efficiency and representa-
tiveness of uncertainty. Unlike most existing studies, which often focus solely on demand
or cost uncertainties, the model integrates a detailed cost structure, considering regular
production, overtime, holding and backorder cost, while also adapt production decisions
once uncertainty is revealed. This allows the model not only to plan production quan-
tities but also to adjust through additional in-house production, inventory or backorders
based on the realized scenarios. The study concludes with a decision analysis compar-
ing stochastic and deterministic results across industrial contexts, offering insights into
how different factors, such as number of products, resource constraints, and demand
variability, impact the suitability of stochastic modelling.
6
Forecasting and Scenario Generation for Optimized Manufacturing
==PAGE:11==
3
Background
Optimization plays a critical role in modern manufacturing, where companies must bal-
ance production efficiency, cost control, and customer satisfaction in the face of uncer-
tainty. Traditionally, optimization models have assumed deterministic conditions, where
all parameters, such as demand and production costs, are known with certainty. However,
real-world manufacturing environments often involve unpredictable variations, especially
in customer demand, necessitating the adoption of stochastic modelling approaches [27].
Stochastic programming extends traditional optimization by explicitly incorporating un-
certainty into the decision-making process, enabling the development of more robust and
adaptive production plans. In the context of manufacturing, this results in improved lot-
sizing strategies that not only plan production ahead of time but also allow for dynamic
adjustments as new information becomes available [28].
This study applies a two-stage stochastic programming model to a lot-sizing problem,
where first-stage decisions define a production quantity plan and second-stage decisions
allow adjustments to production, inventory, or backorders once actual demand is real-
ized. To address the complexity of representing uncertainty, the study explores advanced
scenario generation methods, Monte Carlo and Bootstrap Sampling, and compares two
scenario reduction techniques: Fast Forward Selection and k-means clustering. This
framework is applied to a real-world case study involving a technology services company.
3.1
Case Study
The case study is based on a real application within the startup company 4Cast, a Brazil-
ian technology firm founded in 2021 that focuses on services and consultancy. Drawing
on the founders’ experience in industrial markets, the company was created to address
the limitations of existing production planning and scheduling software. Its main product
is an Advanced Planning and Scheduling (APS) tool, developed to transform short-term
production sequencing by analysing and simulating millions of production scenarios within
seconds. The system optimizes schedules using genetic algorithms and machine learn-
ing, providing efficiency gains and reduced operational costs in job-shop environments.
Today, 4Cast serves clients in diverse industries, including metalworking, injection mold-
ing, and machining.
The motivation for this study came from challenges faced by 4Cast’s clients in medium-
term production planning. These clients operate in increasingly volatile markets, where
unpredictable consumption patterns and demand variability threaten operational efficiency,
customer satisfaction, and profitability. For this reason, a new proposal has arisen inside
the company with the aim of helping customers deal with medium-term challenges, of-
fering a new time horizon for services beyond its existing short-term APS solutions. The
concept of adopting different future scenarios arose because many companies are re-
porting problems when considering demand forecasts that are not aligned with current
production capacity or supply chains, resulting in missed delivery targets, customer dis-
satisfaction, and financial penalties. Without a integrated planning between production
capacity and the supply chain, production ends up producing unnecessary products, gen-
erating obsolete inventory or high storage costs, or even failing to produce items in high
demand, leading to stock shortages and lost sales. The absence of integrated planning
leads to inefficient use of resources, such as unforeseen overtime, for example, and the
Forecasting and Scenario Generation for Optimized Manufacturing
7
==PAGE:12==
inappropriate purchase of raw materials at higher prices due to lack of negotiation or ur-
gency, leading to higher operating costs. All of this causes the company to react late to
market changes, resulting in a delay in responding to variations in demand, competitor
promotions, seasonality, or supply problems.
The proposed solution aims to help companies achieve better strategic alignment and min-
imize internal conflicts, as different departments often pursue competing objectives, sales
aiming for higher volume, production seeking stability, and procurement minimizing costs.
A conflict of priorities such as this tends to harm the company’s overall performance. The
solution also aims to assist the company in making decisions based on real data, facili-
tating a consolidated view of the operation and increasing the assertiveness of planning
based on reliable analysis, avoiding decisions based on assumptions and supposition.
With all this, the solution expects to have a better impact on the customer experience,
avoiding delays, partial deliveries or cancelled sales orders. Contributing to brand rep-
utation, customer satisfaction and loyalty, especially in highly competitive markets. But
above all, the solution is committed to developing the ability to simulate scenarios and
prepare for uncertainties, simulating various demand scenarios in order to plan different
coordinated actions for each desired situation, thus increasing the company’s resilience
to unexpected events and promoting more aligned and proactive management based on
the criteria desired by each company.
By choosing to act in lot-sizing problems, the objective of the solution is to determine the
periods in which production should take place and the quantities to be produced in order
to meet demand while minimizing the costs of production, set-up, and inventory mainte-
nance [10], also considering costs of backorder and changeover. Lot-sizing consider the
number of machines, number of periods, production stages, and fixed or variable capac-
ity constraints [10]. In process industries, production systems often consist of a limited
number of stages, each containing parallel resources with finite capacity. Demands for
individual products are associated with a time period and vary over time. The counting of
holding cost is considered if an inventory in stock at the end of each period occurs. While
the setup costs are consider when a changeover from one product to another happens,
also considering setups times which are sequence-dependent [11]. Through these inves-
tigations, the solution aims to analyse and improve lot-sizing decisions by incorporating a
demand uncertainty model into the decision-making framework, supporting decisions in
uncertain environments with the support of real data from industry partners and validated
through computational experiments.
3.2
Stochastic Optimization
Optimization models in production planning have traditionally been deterministic, which
means that all parameters, such as demand, production costs and processing times, are
considered known and fixed when the decision is made. Deterministic programming of-
fers simplicity and computational efficiency, which is why it has been favoured in industrial
applications [29]. However, in dynamic and uncertain environments, the assumption of
total certainty often leads to fragile or even infeasible solutions when deviations occur
in the real world. Stochastic programming addresses this limitation by incorporating un-
certainty in the optimization model. Instead of working with a single scenario, stochastic
optimization considers multiple future outcomes. This results in solutions that are not only
cost-effective under expected conditions but also more resilient to variations in inputs such
as customer demand or capacity constraints [27].
An important aspect of stochastic optimization is the ability to model two-stage decision-
making, where initial decisions are made before uncertainty is realised and corrective
8
Forecasting and Scenario Generation for Optimized Manufacturing
==PAGE:13==
or operational adjustments are taken afterwards. This reflects real industry scenarios,
where production plans are made in advance, but adjustments, such as overtime produc-
tion, backorders and stock build-ups, are then required when actual demand becomes
known [30]. Applying stochastic optimization provides a practical advantage, as it allows
manufacturers to not only minimize expected costs but also to balance risks across dif-
ferent uncertain scenarios. For instance, a decision-maker might accept a slightly higher
upfront production cost if it leads to a lower expected penalties for stock-outs or backo-
rders. This trade-off is critical in industries with high volatility in customer demand, long
production lead times or costly capacity adjustments [27].
Moreover, stochastic optimization involves evaluating several potential future scenarios,
each representing a possible realization of uncertainty. As the number of scenarios in-
creases, the size and complexity of the resulting mathematical models can become lim-
iting, leading to long solution times and significant demands on computational resources
[27]. To mitigate this, advanced scenario generation sampling techniques are employed
to generate a representative but manageable set of scenarios, rather than modelling all
possible outcomes [28]. Also, scenario reduction techniques are employed in the study as
a way to reduce the number of scenarios to keep computations tractable while preserving
the essential characteristics of the uncertain scenarios [31, 32]. All scenario generation
and scenario reduction techniques applied on this study are explained in detail in section
3.4 and 3.5, respectively.
By moving beyond deterministic assumptions and adopting stochastic methods, industries
can obtain production plans that are cost-optimal and operationally robust, taking into
account the challenges of real-world applications with complex production environments.
This balance between advanced scenario techniques and stochastic optimization, ensure
that the solution remains computationally feasible in the context of production planning,
providing faster decision-making and computational efficiency for practical applications.
3.3
Two-Stage Optimization
Two-Stage stochastic optimization is a powerful modelling approach for decision-making
under uncertainty, particularly effective for industrial operations, such as lot-sizing, pro-
duction planning and supply chain management [27]. A Two-Stage stochastic program-
ming is distinguishes between strategic and tactical decisions [16], where strategic de-
cisions are taken during first-stage when decisions have to be taken before before the
realization of uncertainty, and tactical decisions are solve during the second-stage when
other decisions can be taken after we know what has happened. During the first-stage, the
decisions that are made prior to the realization of uncertain parameters are revealed are
called here-and-now decisions. A recourse decision can then be taken after the uncer-
tainty is revealed, compensating for any negative outcomes resulting from the first-stage
decisions [1]. These decisions are also called wait-and-see or recourse decisions [33].
The objective of two-stage modelling is to develop robust optimization strategies that per-
form well across a set of uncertain scenarios [16]. The model includes variables and con-
straints for both stages. First-stage variables are consistent across all scenarios, while
second-stage variables are scenario-dependent, adapting to the realization of uncertainty
[33]. Similarly, first-stage constraints remain fixed, whereas second-stage constraints are
defined for each scenario[16]. Figure 3.1 illustrates a scenario tree used in a two-stage
stochastic model, where each path represents a possible future scenario with associated
probabilities.
Forecasting and Scenario Generation for Optimized Manufacturing
9
==PAGE:14==
Figure 3.1: Scenario Tree
Where x represents the first-stage variable and yw1, yw2, yw3 represent the second-stage
decision variables. The scenario probabilities πw1, πw2, πw3 are associated with each sce-
nario w1, w2, w3 [33]. Mathematically a two-stage model can be represented as follows:
Min(x)
{cT x + Eξ[Q(x, ξ(ω))]},
(3.1)
s.t.
Ax = b,
(3.2)
x ≥0
(3.3)
Where Eξ[Q(x, ξ(ω))] is the mathematical representation for the called recourse function
and Q(x, ξ(ω)) the value of the optimal expected second-stage cost, defined as:
Min(y)
q(ω)T y(ω),
(3.4)
s.t.
T(ω)x + W(ω)y(ω) = h(ω),
(3.5)
y(ω) ≥0
(3.6)
Equations (3.1), (3.2), (3.3) represent the first-stage model where c denotes the coefficient
cost vector for the first-stage, A for the first-stage coefficient matrix and b for the right hand
side vector. Equations (3.4), (3.5), (3.6) denote the second-stage model where T(ω),
q(ω), W(ω) and h(ω) are the technology matrix, coefficient cost vector for the second-
stage, second-stage coefficient vector and right hand side vector, respectively. At this
stage, T(ω), q(ω), W(ω) and h(ω) depend on the scenario vector ω.
The sequence of events in the model can be illustrated by the first-stage variable x where
decisions are taken in the presence of uncertainty and the variable y, where second-stage
decisions are taken with respect to the revealed uncertainty [1]. However, first-stage de-
cisions are made taking into account the future effect and these effects are measured
by the expected value of the resource function Eξ[Q(x, ξ(ω))] and, to represent these
uncertainties, it is common to apply scenarios to sample them [34]. Adapting the men-
tioned approach, let ω ∈Ωbe the finite set of scenarios of uncertainty and π(ω) the prob-
ability of scenario ω [33], then Eξ[Q(x, ξ(ω))] = ∑
ω∈Ωπ(ω)q(ω)T y(ω) and Q(x, ξ(ω)) =
min{q(ω)T y(ω) : T(ω)x + W(ω)y(ω) = h(ω) : y(ω) ≥0}. The above two-stage can be
reformulated as:
10
Forecasting and Scenario Generation for Optimized Manufacturing
==PAGE:15==
Min
cT x +
∑
ω∈Ω
π(ω)q(ω)T y(ω),
(3.7)
s.t.
Ax = b,
(3.8)
T(ω)x + W(ω)y(ω) = h(ω)
∀ω ∈Ω,
(3.9)
x ≥0,
(3.10)
y(ω) ≥0
∀ω ∈Ω
(3.11)
3.4
Scenario Generation
In two-stage modelling the accuracy and reliability of the solution depend on how well
the uncertainty is modelled. Since the true probability distribution of future parameters
are often unknown or analytically intractable [27], scenario generation becomes a critical
step. It involves constructing a discrete set of future outcomes, each with an associated
probability, that collectively approximate the uncertainty space [14], as generally to solve
a mathematical program with uncertain parameters described by continuous distributions
can be intractable [35].
The scenario generation consists of forming an approximation of the original continuous
stochastic process or the underlying distributions through discretization [35]. To discretize
the process, it is necessary to consider that a stochastic process X(t, ω) is defined as a
set of random variables over the index time t ∈T and a realisation of the sample space
ω ∈Ω. Considering that X(t, ·) is a continuous random variable, this means that there is a
continuous stochastic process. And for a continuous stochastic process, it is not feasible
to create all possible combinations because there are numerous combinations. Therefore,
the continuous process must be approximated by a discrete one, considering only a finite
set N of possible samples. And once X(t, ·) is a discrete random variable, then it can be
presented as a finite set of scenarios resulting from all possible combinations of discrete
realisations. After assigning probabilities, these scenarios can be used in a stochastic
program.
3.4.1
Monte Carlo
Monte Carlo simulation is one of the most widely used techniques for generating scenarios
in stochastic optimization. It relies on the random sampling input parameters from known
or assumed probability distributions. In the context of stochastic optimization, it is used
to generate a discrete set of scenarios representation a possible realization of uncertain
variables [20]. The algorithm steps of a Monte Carlo scenario generation starts with a def-
inition of the probability distribution for the uncertain parameters. Then, it draws a large
number of independent random samples u from [0.0, 1.0] evaluating the cumulative distri-
bution at u, where it represents the realization of the uncertain variable in the generated
scenario. This leads to a discrete representation of the stochastic process. If samples
are drawn with uniform likelihood, each scenario can be equiprobable as p1 =
1
#samples
having the same probability. After that, the sets of scenarios can be integrated into the
stochastic model [13].
3.4.2
Bootstrap
Another scenario generation method is called Bootstrap. Originally introduced by [21],
Bootstrap is an effective non-parametric resampling technique commonly used to estimate
statistics, improve forecast performance and generate confidence intervals [36, 21, 37].
Instead of relying on theoretical distributions, as in Monte Carlo method, Bootstrap creates
artificial scenarios by resampling from historical data.
Forecasting and Scenario Generation for Optimized Manufacturing
11
==PAGE:16==
In this approach, the observed dataset is considered as a sample s of size N drawing
from a population with distribution F. Then a statistic of interest R is estimated from the
observed sample, given a
∧
R. From that, bootstraps samples are generated by resampling
with replacement from the observed sample, resulting in B Bootstraps samples, where
each sample B is resampled across the planning horizon. For each resample, the statistic
of interest is calculated and denoted by
∧
R. The algorithm repeats the process to gener-
ate N scenarios while estimates
∧
R providing an empirical distribution of the statistic of
interest that can be used to approximate the sampling distribution. Finally, assigns equal
probability to each scenario constructed from the empirical distribution by measuring the
uncertainty around the point estimate, such as standard error and confidence intervals
[22, 23].
3.5
Scenario Reduction
As scenario generation methods can produce a large number of scenarios, directly us-
ing all of them in a two-stage stochastic optimization model often results in intractable
computational complexity [14]. For a stochastic parameter situation, there are different
possible realisations at each stage, in other words, multiple different branches at each
stage, which can be represented by b(t−1) scenarios, where b is the number of branches
at each stage and t is the number of stages. In general, for n stochastic parameter and
m possible realizations for each parameter gives b = mn branches at each stage. So, t
decision stages lead to b(t−1) = mn(t−1) scenarios, which results in a large number of sce-
narios mn(t−1) especially when multiple uncertainties are present [38]. Scenario reduction
is therefore essential to maintain a balance between solution quality and model tractability
[25], aiming to retain a smaller subset of scenarios that still preserve the statistical struc-
ture and variability of the original full set [26]. Among various methods, this study focuses
on two complementary and well-established approaches, Fast Forward Selection (FFS)
and K-means Clustering.
3.5.1
Fast Forward Selection
Proposed by [26] the Fast Forward Selection method aims to reduce the number of sce-
narios and reassigns probabilities to preserve the stochastic characteristics of the origi-
nal distribution [25] selecting the most representative scenarios and adding weights from
unselected scenarios to the closest selected scenario [16]. This reduces computational
complexity while maintaining essential information about the underlying uncertainty.
The FFS algorithm follows the Kantorovich distance method, which calculate the distance
between two distributions Q and Q′ considering that Q contains scenarios Ωwith prob-
abilities πω from the original set Ωand Q′ contains scenarios ΩS with probabilities π′
ω′.
Then the Kantorovich distance Dk can be defined as:
DK(Q, Q′) =
min
η(ω,ω′)
∑
ω∈Ω,ω′∈ΩS
υ(ω, ω′)η(ω, ω′),
(3.12)
η(ω, ω′) ≥0
∀ω ∈Ω, ω′ ∈Ωs,
(3.13)
∑
ω′∈ΩS
η(ω, ω′) = πω
∀ω ∈Ω,
(3.14)
∑
ω∈Ω
η(ω, ω′) = π′
ω′
∀ω′ ∈Ωs
(3.15)
12
Forecasting and Scenario Generation for Optimized Manufacturing
==PAGE:17==
Where υ(ω, ω′) is a distance measure between the scenarios and η(ω, ω′) variables that
describe the redistribution of the probabilities from distribution Q to Q′. For the case where
is select one scenario at a time, the Kantorovic distance can be calculated by (3.16):
DK(Q, Q′) =
∑
ω∈Ω,ω′∈ΩS
πω min
ω′∈ΩS υ(ω, ω′)
(3.16)
This gives the basis for the FFS algorithm, which follows the following steps:
Step 1: Calculate the pair-wise distance matrix υ(ω, ω′) for all scenarios pairs. The matrix
can be calculated based on different measures, such as euclidean norm, manhattan norm
and absolute value norm. For solving the expected value approach in each scenario it
is needed to evaluate the first-stage variable in each scenario ω individually to obtain an
objective value zω, resulting the distance between objective values υ(ω, ω′) = |zω −zω′|.
Notice that the distance between two identical scenarios is 0.
Step 2: Select scenario ω ∈Ωthat minimizes Kantorovich distance between the reduced
ΩS and the original set Ωby calculating the distance for each scenario using their proba-
bilities, as showed in equation (3.17):
dω =
∑
ω′∈ΩD
πω′υ(ω′, ω)
(3.17)
Step 3: Add the selected lowest Kantorovich distance ω in the set of reduced scenarios ΩS
and removed from the original set Ω. The non-selected scenarios are in ΩD. Then update
the distance matrix as show in equation (3.18) with w∗being the selected scenario.
υnew(ω′, ω) = min{υold(ω′, ω), υold(ω′, ω∗)}
∀ω, ω′ ∈ΩD
(3.18)
Step 4: Update the distance matrix υ for all remaining scenarios ω ∈Ωconsidering the
new υnew. Calculate the Kantorovich distance for ω ∈ΩD and select again the minimum
distance value, as it represent equation (3.19).
dω =
∑
ω′∈ΩD
πω′υnew(ω′, ω)
(3.19)
Step 5: If the total number of scenarios selected so far is less than the desired total
scenario target, return to step 3 until the total number of scenarios is achieved.
Step 6: Redistribute the probabilities from the non-selected scenarios ΩD to the closest
selected scenarios ΩS based on the original distance matrix υ(ω, ω′), following equation
(3.20) to identified the closest scenarios between ΩS and ΩD.
map(ω) = arg min
ω′∈ΩS υ(ω, ω′)
(3.20)
Forecasting and Scenario Generation for Optimized Manufacturing
13
==PAGE:18==
Then calculate the probability of the selected scenarios ω′ ∈ΩS with the probabilities of
all non-selected scenarios by the map(ω), following equation (3.21), considering π∗
ω′ the
new aggregated probability.
π∗
ω′ =
∑
ω∈map(w)
πω + πω′
(3.21)
Initially, all scenarios are treated as unselected. The algorithm begins by computing the
full distance matrix in Step 1 and selecting the scenario with the smallest weighted dis-
tance in Step 2. In Step 3, this scenario is added to the reduced set, ΩS, and the re-
mained distances are updated, as Step 4. The process continues until the target number
of scenarios is reached. Finally, in Step 6, the probabilities of discarded scenarios are
reassigned to the nearest selected scenarios based on the original distances. This en-
sures that the reduced set retains the statistical integrity of the original while significantly
reducing computational complexity [26, 25, 16].
3.5.2
K-means Clustering
K-Means Clustering is an algorithm used for partitioning a set of data points into k non-
overlapping clusters based on similarity. In stochastic programming, especially in prob-
lems solving a large number of uncertain scenarios, K-means can be adapted to compress
the scenario set by summarizing similar scenarios into representative centroids [39]. In
other words, it partitions a set of objects into clusters, so that the objects in each clus-
ter show a high degree of similarity, while objects belonging to different clusters are as
dissimilar as possible [40].
The algorithm is a centroid-based technique, which means that each cluster is repre-
sented by a so-called centroid. These centroids then serve as reduced scenarios, and
each data point is assigned to its nearest centroid, therefore belonging to the respective
cluster k represented by the mean of all data objects in the cluster. Each centroid is then
associated with a probability derived from the number of original scenarios it represents
[40]. A detailed step is represent in Algorithm 1 describing the K-Means algorithm.
Algorithm 1: K-Means Algorithm
1 Initialize k centroids: m(1)
1 , ..., m(1)
k ;
2 i ←1
3 while assignments change do
4
Assign each data point d ∈D to nearest centroid;
5
a(d) = arg minm′∈{m(1)
1 ,...,m(1)
k }{dist(d, m′)};
6
Build clusters based on assignment:
7
S(i)
k
= {d ∈D|(a)d = m(i)
k }
8
for each centroid m ∈{m(1)
1 , ..., m(1)
k } do
9
Re-calculate the means of the centroids:
10
m(i+1)
k
=
1
|S(i)
k |
∑
d∈S(i)
k xd
11
end
12
i ←i + 1
13 end
The algorithm initialize selecting k initial centroids m(1)
1 , m(1)
2 , ..., m(1)
k
from the dataset D.
To track the the evolution of the centroids through iterations a iteration index i = 1 is
14
Forecasting and Scenario Generation for Optimized Manufacturing
==PAGE:19==
setted. For each data point d ∈D, assign it to the nearest centroid based on a distance
metric, usually euclidean distance or manhattan distance, by the a(d) equation. For each
centroid m(i)
k
form a cluster S(i)
k
containing all data points assigned to it. This partitions
the data set D into k clusters based on the proximity to centroids. For each cluster S(i)
k ,
re-calculate the new centroid as the mean of the points in that specific cluster by the
equation m(i+1)
k
. Increment the iteration counter i ←i + 1 and repeat it until assignments
no longer change, in other words, if the cluster assignments stabilize, no more changes
in the set S(i)
k , the algorithm terminates [40, 41, 42]. After the K-Means method applied
one scenario will be equal to one data point, resulting in one scenario per cluster. The
new scenario probability is then redistribute by the sum of probabilities of each scenario
in respective cluster.
Forecasting and Scenario Generation for Optimized Manufacturing
15
==PAGE:20==
4
Methodology
4.1
Problem Statement
Production planning in modern manufacturing environments is increasingly challenged by
volatile and uncertain market conditions. This is particularly evident in process-oriented
industries where aligning medium-term production decisions with fluctuating customer de-
mand is a persistent difficulty. As a result, many of these companies rely on demand
forecasts to inform production planning decisions [2]. However, these forecasts not only
influence the production system itself but also affect the broader manufacturing ecosys-
tem [14]. Inaccurate forecasts can lead to significant operational inefficiencies, such as
stockouts, excess inventory, excessive overtime and delayed deliveries, ultimately reduc-
ing customer satisfaction and increasing operational costs.
Existing planning solutions in these industries are often focused on short-term schedul-
ing, which involves assigning individual tasks to specific resources to execute operations
efficiently. In contrast, medium-term planning, typically responsible for aggregate produc-
tion planning and material requirements, is frequently based on deterministic demand as-
sumptions. These assumptions overlook real-world uncertainties, leading to reactive and
misaligned decisions that compromise performance across departments such as produc-
tion, sales and supply chain, each of which requires consistent and coordinated medium-
term planning.
To address these challenges, the present study propose a solution to the lot-sizing prob-
lem under uncertainty. Lot-sizing is a critical task in production medium-term planning,
where the objective is to determine the period and quantity of production for each product
in order to meet the demand at a minimal total cost [6]. These costs typically include pro-
duction, setups, inventory holding and backordering [10]. In process industries, lot-sizing
becomes particularly complex due to multi-product environments with finite resources,
where products demand and production requirements vary across time. Thus, a stochas-
tic programming approach is adopted to consider demand uncertainty as a way to improve
decision-making quality and enhance the resilience of manufacturing system.
In this context, the study applies a stochastic programming framework to model and
analyse the lot-sizing problem under demand uncertainty, using real industrial data from
clients of 4Cast. The goal is to support more robust and informed production decisions
by enabling manufacturing environments to simulate various demand scenarios. This
is achieved by integrating scenario generation techniques, Monte Carlo and Bootstrap
sampling, with scenario reduction methods such as Fast Forward Selection and K-Means
clustering. The study aims to assess when and how stochastic optimization provides tan-
gible advantages over traditional deterministic models by comparing their performance
using real-world industrial data. In doing so, it delivers practical insights and decision-
support tools to enhance the accuracy, flexibility, and resilience of manufacturing systems
operating under demand uncertainty.
4.2
Scenario Generation
In order to incorporate demand uncertainty into the two-stage stochastic model, it is nec-
essary to generate a representative set of future demand scenarios. These scenarios are
used to simulate different possible futures that the production system may face, allowing
16
Forecasting and Scenario Generation for Optimized Manufacturing
==PAGE:21==
the optimization model to make more robust and informed decisions [18]. Scenario gener-
ation is a crucial step in stochastic programming, as the quality and diversity of scenarios
directly influence the reliability of the resulting decisions [35].
This study adopts two widely used techniques for generating demand scenarios based on
the historical production orders, Monte Carlo simulation and Bootstrap resampling. Both
methods aim to capture the stochastic nature of demand by creating multiple possibili-
ties realization of future demand, but they differ in their underlying assumptions and data
handling approaches.
4.2.1
Monte Carlo Simulation
To incorporate demand uncertainty into the stochastic production planning model, a Monte
Carlo simulation technique was used to generate synthetic demand scenarios based
on empirical historical data. This approach was implemented using the Julia program-
ming language (version 1.9.3), supported by specialized statistical and data manipulation
libraries, including Dataframes.jl (version 1.6.1) for data handling, Distributions.jl (ver-
sion 0.25.107) for probability distributions and StatsBase.jl (version 0.34.4) for supporting
statistical operations. The program was executed on a CPU model 11th Gen Intel(R)
Core(TM) i5-1135G7, 2.40GHz, with 4 physical cores, 8 logical processors, using up to 8
threads.
The scenario generation process began with the extraction and pre-processing of histor-
ical order records obtained from a manufacturing company dataset. The data contained
detailed information on customer production orders, including requested delivery dates,
production identification and planned order quantities, Initially, all entries with missing or
invalid delivery dates were excluded to ensure temporal consistency. The cleaned dataset
was then enriched with temporal indicators, such as the corresponding month and year of
each production order, allowing the aggregation of demand over specific time intervals,
as this study focuses on a monthly planning horizon. Monthly demand was calculated for
each product across the historical time frame, and the analysis was restricted to the firsts
four months of the year, January through April, reflecting the planning time horizon under
consideration on this study.
To model the statistical properties of historical demands, the empirical distribution of ag-
gregated monthly demand value was analysed. A non-parametric estimation of the prob-
ability distribution was first conducted through histogram fitting, which served as a visual
reference for selecting an appropriate theoretical distribution. To enable probabilistic sim-
ulation, it was necessary to approximate the underlying distribution of historical demand,
so the aggregated demand histogram was normalized such that the total area under the
histogram summed to one. This normalization, achieved by calculating density histogram,
transformed the histogram from raw frequency counts to an empirical estimate of the prob-
ability density function (PDF). The bin heights thus represent the estimated probability
density of demand falling within each interval. As a way to evaluate the theoretical dis-
tribution against the empirical histogram, the midpoint of each bin was computed. These
midpoints, derived as the average of the lower and upper edges of each bin, serve as rep-
resentative x-values for comparison with theoretical PDFs. The statistical analysis was
implemented using the Python language (version 3.11.5), supported by specialized sta-
tistical and data manipulation libraries, including pandas (version 2.2.2) for data handling,
NumPy (version 2.0.2) for numerical computing, Matplotlib (version 3.8.4) for data visual-
ization, and SciPy (version 1.14.1) for probability distributions and statistical operations.
The program was executed on a CPU model 11th Gen Intel(R) Core(TM) i5-1135G7,
2.40GHz, with 4 physical cores and 8 logical processors, utilizing up to 8 threads.
Forecasting and Scenario Generation for Optimized Manufacturing
17
==PAGE:22==
Subsequently, a set of candidate continuous probability distributions was fitted to eval-
uate the empirical data using maximum likelihood estimation. The chosen distribution
candidates were normal distribution, Log-Normal distribution, Gamma distribution and
Exponential distribution. The normal distribution was included as a reference due to its
widespread use in modelling symmetrical demand patterns with moderate variability. It
assumes that deviations from the mean are equally likely in both directions and is ap-
propriate when demand is the result of the aggregation of many small and independent
influences, according to the central limit point. The Log-Normal distribution was consid-
ered to captured skewness and strictly positive demand distributions, which are common
in applications where demand variability might be driven by fluctuating customer require-
ments, market conditions and lead times, causing large spikes in order volumes. As a
result, the LogNormal distribution often exhibits a heavier right tail, capturing extreme
demand peaks more effectively. In contrast, the Gamma distribution was also selected
based on the non-negative and right-skewed shape, while considering a more stable and
aggregative demand distribution, compared to the Log-normal distribution. Finally, the Ex-
ponential distribution was included as a model suitable for representing time-dependent
with high volatility context, where demand events can occur randomly and independently.
By comparing these four distinct distributions, the analysis ensured that a diverse range
of statistical behaviour and skewness were considered, increasing the likelihood of iden-
tifying a model that accurately reflected the empirical characteristics of historical demand.
To identify the best-fitting distribution, an iterative comparison was performed by the Sum
of Squared Errors (SSE), calculated between the empirical histogram values and the val-
ues of the fitted theoretical PDF evaluated at the histogram bin centers. The distribution
with the minimum SSE was selected. This approach was selected to ensure consistent
empirical distribution fitting over a discretized empirical PDF, providing a direct quantita-
tive measure of how close a theoretical distribution approximates observed data.
Based on the selected probability distribution, a selected number of synthetic demand
scenarios were generated using Monte Carlo sampling. As a form of validation and com-
parison, different numbers of scenarios were generated during the study, as a way to
capture a good balance between representing a wide range of possible outcomes and
maintaining computational tractability in the optimization model. The model was adapted
following the algorithm steps presented in section 3.4.1. First, the simulation accommo-
date temporal and product structure of the production environment, generating demand
representing individual scenarios across the same time periods previously fitted, January
through April, and products types. Second, the underlying distribution for the simula-
tion was selected based on the fitting distribution described in the earlier stages of the
methodology. Thirdly, the model incorporated a non-negativity constraint, recognising
the practical reality that demand cannot fall below zero. Finally, the simulated data was
transformed into a structure where each row corresponds to a specific combination of sce-
nario, month and product, and recorded the associated demand value. This format not
only facilitated detailed statistical analysis of the simulation output, but also ensured inte-
gration into the stochastic programming model, which requires scenario-based demand
inputs indexed by product and time period.
To validate the quality of the simulated scenarios, different statistical diagnostics were
conducted. First, the moment matching error was calculated as a way to measure the
degree of correspondence between the mean and standard deviation of the simulated
demand and the original historical demand for each product. This ensured that both the
central tendency and dispersion characteristics were adequately captured. Secondly, the
coverage rate was calculated to determine the proportion of historical demand values that
18
Forecasting and Scenario Generation for Optimized Manufacturing
==PAGE:23==
fall into the range covered by the simulated scenarios, evaluating whether the scenarios
sufficiently covered the variability observed in the historical data. Thirdly, the outlier rate
was evaluated to identify the percentage of simulated values that exceeded the historical
bounds, providing a measure of the realism and reliability of the generated scenarios.
4.2.2
Bootstrap Resampling
In addition to the Monte Carlo simulation, a Bootstrap resampling approach was also
adapted for scenario generation, offering a non-parametric alternative to modelling de-
mand uncertainty. Whereas the Monte Carlo method relies on random sampling from a
fitted probability distribution, the Bootstrap technique draws directly from the observed
historical data, without making assumptions about the underlying probability distribution.
This makes it particularly advantageous when the historical dataset is sufficiently rich and
when the empirical distribution does not conform well to standard theoretical forms.
The Bootstrap model was developed using the Julia programming language (version
1.9.3), in combination with a set of open-source packages, such as DataFrames.jl (ver-
sion 1.6.1) for data handling, Random.jl for resampling and StatsBase.jl (version 0.34.4)
for supporting statistical operations. The model was implemented to reflect the temporal
and product granularity of the production environment following the approach presented
in section 3.4.2. Again, the program was executed on a CPU model 11th Gen Intel(R)
Core(TM) i5-1135G7, 2.40GHz, with 4 physical cores and 8 logical processors, utilizing
up to 8 threads. The historical demand data, previously described in the distribution fit-
ting process, served as empirical basis for the resampling procedure. However, different
from Monte Carlo sampling which rely on the fitting probability distribution, the Bootstrap
method resamples demand values randomly based on the corresponding historical ob-
servations. A key adaptation of the Bootstrap model involved handling heterogeneous
data availability. In cases where certain product-month combinations had limited histori-
cal observations, the resampling mechanism ensured that each sample remained within
the empirical bounds of the original data, thus preventing the introduction of unrealistic
extreme values.
As with the Monte Carlo approach, different numbers of scenarios were tested in order
to achieve a trade-off between representative range of outcomes and a good computa-
tional feasibility, generating data structure with the same dimensions scenarios, months
and products. Such structure allowed for direct comparison with the Monte Carlo simula-
tions and enabled uniform integration into the stochastic optimization model. Unlike the
Monte Carlo simulation, there was no need for post-processing to enforce non-negativity
constraints, since all sampled values were originally drawn from the positive empirical
dataset. To validate the approach, the method was statistically validated based on the
adoption of the moment matching error, the coverage rate and the outlier rate, as de-
scribed in the subsection 4.2.1.
4.3
Scenario Reduction
Given the computational complexity and scalability challenges associated with large-scale
stochastic programming, especially when thousands of scenarios are generated, scenario
reduction becomes a critical preprocessing step. The goal of scenario reduction is to ap-
proximate the original probability space with a smaller subset of representative scenarios
of the full scenario set [24]. This enables tractable optimization while retaining fidelity to
the uncertainty captured in the original data [38].
In this work, two distinct scenario reduction techniques were implemented and evaluated,
Fast Forward Selection (FFS), a probabilistic method based on distance metrics, and K-
Forecasting and Scenario Generation for Optimized Manufacturing
19
==PAGE:24==
Means Clustering, a data-driven technique that minimizes within-cluster variance. Both
methods were applied to the Monte Carlo and Bootstrap generated demand scenarios
described previously.
4.3.1
Fast Forward Selection (FFS)
Fast Forward Selection (FFS) is a model used in stochastic programming which aims
to retain the statistical structure of the full scenario set while significantly lowering the
dimensionality of the optimization problem. The implementation was carried out using the
Julia programming language (version 1.9.3), with key libraries including DataFrames.jl
(version 1.6.1) for tabular data manipulation, Distances.jl (version 0.10.12) for computing
Euclidean distances and XLSX.jl (version 0.10.0) for exporting the reduced scenario set.
The computations were applied based on the scenarios generated from the Monte Carlo
and Bootstrap samples. The program was executed on a CPU model 11th Gen Intel(R)
Core(TM) i5-1135G7, 2.40GHz, with 4 physical cores and 8 logical processors, utilizing
up to 8 threads.
The FFS algorithm was applied to the demand scenario set, where each scenario was
represented as a multi-dimensional vector combining monthly and product demand val-
ues. These vectors were first constructed by transforming the scenario data into a matrix,
where each column corresponds to a unique month and product combination. This was
achieved by concatenating month and product identifiers resulting in a scenario matrix
suitable for a distance-based comparison.
The core idea of FFS is to incrementally select a subset of scenarios that best approxi-
mate the full set in terms of distributional proximity. The functions applied in the present
algorithm follow the proposed study presented in subsection 3.5.1. First, the algorithm
computes a pairwise distance matrix between all scenarios using the Euclidean metric.
This matrix quantifies how similar or dissimilar each scenario is from every other scenario
in the demand space.
The selection procedure begins with an empty set and iteratively adds scenarios one
at a time. At each iteration, the algorithm selects the scenario that minimizes the total
distance to the rest of the unselected scenarios, weighted by their associated probabilities.
This greedy heuristic ensures that each newly added scenario contributes maximally to
covering the diversity of the original scenario set.
After the desired number of scenarios has been selected, the algorithm redistributes the
probabilities of the original set. Each unselected scenario is assigned to its closest se-
lected scenario, and its probabilities transferred accordingly. This ensures that the re-
duced scenario set maintains a valid probability distribution that approximates the original.
The output of this process is a reduced set of scenarios along with their new probabilities.
These scenarios were structured into a final data frame and exported as an Excel file for
integration into the stochastic model.
To evaluate the quality of the scenario reduction, a histogram plot was compared to the
original histogram dataset as a comparative visualisation, and statistical measures such
as Moment Matching Error (MME), scenario coverage, and outlier rate were calculated
as described in subsection 4.2.1.
4.3.2
K-Means
K-Means is an unsupervised learning algorithm based on centroids that divides the com-
plete set of scenarios into a predefined number of clusters, each represented by its cen-
troid. These centroids serve as synthetic but representative scenarios that capture the
central trends of the original scenario distribution [41]. The applied algorithm is presented
20
Forecasting and Scenario Generation for Optimized Manufacturing
==PAGE:25==
in subsection 3.5.2. All computations were performed using the Julia programming lan-
guage (version 1.9.3) with support from Clustering.jl (version 0.15.7) for the K-Means
algorithm, DataFrames.jl (version 1.6.1) for data manipulation and StatsBase.jl (version
0.34.4) for auxiliary statistical operations. The program was executed on a CPU model
11th Gen Intel(R) Core(TM) i5-1135G7, 2.40GHz, with 4 physical cores and 8 logical pro-
cessors, utilizing up to 8 threads.
The starting point for K-Means scenario reduction was the three-dimensional array of
demand simulations generated by the scenario generation techniques, see section 4.2,
with dimensions corresponding to scenarios, months and products. This data structure
was reshaped into a two-dimensional matrix, where each row represented a complete
scenario and each column corresponded to a unique month and product demand feature.
This transformation enabled the application of K-Means.
The algorithm was initialized after selecting the desired number of reduced scenarios.
Each cluster centroid, computed as the mean vector of all scenarios assigned to the
cluster, served as a representative scenario in the reduced set. The K-Means process
involved allocating each scenario to the nearest centroid and updating centroids based
on current assignments. This iteration was run for a maximum of 100 iterations or until
convergence. This process differs from the FFS method, when FFS prioritizes the cover-
age of extremes and approximates the original distribution using selected real scenarios,
K-Means generates synthetic scenarios (centroids) that represent the mean behaviour
within each cluster, tending to preserve central tendencies better than extreme variations.
After clustering, the proportion of original scenarios assigned to each cluster was used to
determine the probability of each reduced scenario, ensuring that the reduced set retained
a valid probability distribution that reflected the relative frequency of occurrence in the
original data. The output of this process was a data frame of the synthetic scenarios,
each indexed by the product and period combinations, associated with a probability.
To assess the performance of the K-Means reduced set, the same diagnostics used in
the FFS evaluation were applied. A visual histogram comparison was made between the
original period dataset distribution and the new scenarios distribution. Statistical metrics
were calculated based on the Moment Matching Error (MME), scenario coverage, and
outlier rate referenced in the subsection 4.2.1.
4.4
Deterministic Model
The deterministic production planning model developed in this study aims to support tacti-
cal decision-making over a multi-period horizon in a multi-product and multi-resource en-
vironment. The core objective is to determine optimal production, inventory and backorder
quantities for each product and period, while accounting for limited resource capacities,
setup requirements and overtime costs. All decisions are based on known deterministic
values. The formulation is implemented using Julia (version 1.9.3) and solved via Gurobi
Optimizer (version 1.0.3), using JuMP.jl (version 1.14.0) as the modelling interface. The
model was executed on the HPC cluster at DTU Computing Center using a CPU model
Intel(R) Xeon(R) Gold 6126 CPU, 2.60GHz, with 24 physical cores, 24 logical processors,
and using up to 24 threads. The deterministic model was setup to a time limit of 3,600
seconds.
To support the deterministic production planning model, product demand values were gen-
erated using a data-driven statistical fitting procedure based on the historical production
orders. The original dataset, which contained production orders including planned quan-
tities and delivery dates, was processed using Python (version 3.11.5) along with Pandas
Forecasting and Scenario Generation for Optimized Manufacturing
21
==PAGE:26==
(version 2.2.2), NumPy (version 2.0.2) and SciPy (version 1.14.1) libraries for data han-
dling, distribution fitting and random sampling, respectively. The monthly demand per
product was first aggregated by year and month using cleaned historical records. At least
three historical observations for each period were considered as sufficient to fit the sta-
tistical calculations. To find the best fitting distributions, the same procedure described in
subsection 4.2.1 was adopted, considering candidates as Log-Normal, normal, Gamma
and exponential distribution. The chosen distribution was then fitted by estimating the
scale parameter via maximum likelihood, with the location parameter fixed at zero to re-
flect the non-negativity of demand. After the distribution was fitted, the selected number of
periods, in this study the months from January to April, generated four synthetic demand
values representing the planning horizon for the respective four time periods. These val-
ues were used to compute descriptive statistics, including the mean, variance, skewness
and kurtosis, allowing further validation of the distributional properties. The determinis-
tic demand was then defined as the rounded mean of these synthetic samples for each
product, assuming this average value as the expected monthly demand in the absence
of uncertainty. These demand values were compiled into a product and period demand
dictionary, later used as fixed inputs in the deterministic optimization model.
4.4.1
Mathematical Notations
The associated mathematical notations for the deterministic model are described in table
A.1. The production decisions are represented by two non-negative integer variables, xp,t
which indicate the number of units of product p produced during regular capacity in period
t, and yp,t which represents the additional quantity produced using overtime. To manage
temporal material flow, two continuous variables were introduced, ip,t tracks the inventory
level of product p at the end of period t and it is positive if production exceeds demand,
and bp,t represents the amount of backlogged demand of product p not satisfied within
the same period t, being positive if demand exceeds production. In addition, the model
includes binary decision variables that govern setup and sequencing decisions. The vari-
able αp,t takes a value of 1 if product p is set up for production in period t, otherwise, it is
set to 0. Moreover, the variable zi,j,t equals 1 if a setup change from product i to product
j occurs in period t, activating the associated setup time and cost.
The deterministic production planning model is built upon a set of structural and opera-
tional assumptions that reflect practical manufacturing constraints. First, demand fulfil-
ment is flexible over time, as backorders are permitted to satisfy necessary demand. The
demand for each period is treated as independent of their previous, meaning that demand
in one period does not depend on or influence the results of previous periods. The model
assumes zero initial inventory, with inventory accumulation beginning only from the first
production period, and recorded at the end of each period. Both regular and overtime pro-
duction are subject to capacity limits and share the same setup requirements. Importantly,
the model prohibits setup between identical products, so a changeover between products
only occurs if the product scheduled in the current period differs from the one previously
set up. Additionally, the model assumes discrete time periods, and fixed processing and
setup times.
4.4.2
Objective Function
The objective of the deterministic production planning model is to minimize the total cost
of operations over the planning horizon. The total cost consists of the production cost
during regular time, production cost during overtime, inventory holding cost, backorder
penalty cost, and setup changeover cost. Specifically, the model penalizes each unit
produced in regular time according to its respective unit production cost, while overtime
production incurs a typically higher unit cost to reflect its less efficient or more expensive
22
Forecasting and Scenario Generation for Optimized Manufacturing
==PAGE:27==
nature. Inventory costs are associated with each unit carried from one period to another,
incentivising the model to minimise excess inventory. On the other hand, backorders
are penalised to discourage postponement of customer demand. Although their inclusion
offers flexibility under capacity constraints, they have a higher cost compared to on-site
production. The final cost component is responsible for sequence-dependent configura-
tion changes between different products, each changeover from product i to product j
incurs a fixed setup cost. The full modelling is represented in equation 4.1.
min
∑
p∈P
∑
t∈T
(
cp
prodxp,t + Cp
extrayp,t + Cp
stockip,t + Cp
backbp,t
)
+
∑
t∈T
∑
i∈P
∑
j∈P,j̸=P
Csetup
i,j
zi,j,t
(4.1)
4.4.3
Constraints
The demand balance constraints, ensure that in each period t the production quantities,
both from regular time xp,t and additional yp,t, are correctly allocated to meet product de-
mand dp,t, while accounting for inventory ip,t and backorders bp,t. For the first period,
the model assumes no initial inventory, and thus production must directly fulfil demand
or be backlogged, while any overproduction is stored as inventory, as shown in equa-
tion 4.2. From the second period onward, the model includes inventory carried over from
the previous period in the balance by ip,t−1, allowing it to fulfil current demand alongside
new production, constraint 4.3. These constraints ensure that every unit of demand is ac-
counted for by either timely production, carried inventory or delivery through backorders.
xp,t + yp,t = dp,t + ip,t −bp,t
∀p ∈P, t = 1
(4.2)
xp,t + yp,t + ip,t−1 = dp,t + ip,t −bp,t
∀p ∈P, t ∈{2, ..., T}
(4.3)
The model includes capacity constraints to ensure that production activities do not exceed
the available capacity of each resource in any period. The constraint 4.4 accounts for both
the time required to produce each unit, tp,r of every product and the time consumed by
setup changes tsetup
i,j
. The total processing time of all planned production, combined with
the total setup time required for product transitions, must remain within the predefined
capacity limit of each machine or workstation during regular working hours Capr,t. In
addition to regular capacity, the model allows for the use of additional capacity, which
provides extra flexibility but incurs higher costs. A separate capacity constraint, equation
4.5, is defined for additional production, reflecting the structure of the regular capacity
constraint. Total additional production yp,t, combined with the necessary setup changes,
must remain within the additional capacity limits defined for each resource and period
Capextra
r,t
.
∑
p∈P
xp,t · tp,r +
∑
i∈P
∑
j∈P,j̸=i
zi,j,t · tsetup
i,j
≤Capr,t
∀t ∈T
(4.4)
Forecasting and Scenario Generation for Optimized Manufacturing
23
==PAGE:28==
∑
p∈P
yp,t · tp,r
∑
i∈P
∑
j∈P,j̸=i
zi,j,t · tsetup
i,j
≤Capextra
r,t
∀t ∈T
(4.5)
To ensure production logic, the model imposes a constraint 4.6 that ties the ability to
produce a product whether it has been set up in that period or not. Specifically, production
quantities, both regular xp,t and additional yp,t, are only allowed if the corresponding binary
setup variable for the product is activated, αp,t. A large constant M is used to model this
logical dependency in a linear form, commonly referred to as a big-M formulation. This
constraint prevents the model from scheduling production for any product that has not
been explicitly prepared.
xp,t + yp,t ≤M · αp,t
∀p ∈P, t ∈T
(4.6)
The changeover constraint 4.7 tracks setup transitions between different products across
consecutive periods. This constraint enforce that a setup change is recognized only when
the product scheduled in the current period differs from the one set up in the previous
period, by comparing zi,j,t and αi,t−1. This is done using binary variables that activate
when a new product is introduced, capturing both the cost and the time of the changeover.
zi,j,t ≥αi,t−1 + αj,t −1
∀i ̸= j, ∀t ∈T \ {1}
(4.7)
To avoid idle schedules and ensure active use of production capacity, the model includes
a constraint that requires at least one unit of some product to be produced in every period,
shown in equation 4.8. This encourages the use of available time and resources and can
be interpreted as a minimal utilization condition. Finally, the model enforces non-negativity
on all continuous production, inventory, and backorder variables, equation 4.9.
∑
p∈P
(xp,t + yp,t) ≥1
∀t ∈T
(4.8)
xp,t, yp,t, ip,t, bp,t ≥0
∀p ∈P, t ∈T
(4.9)
4.5
Two-Stage Stochastic Model
The two-stage stochastic programming model extends the deterministic by explicitly in-
corporating demand uncertainty through a finite set of discrete demand scenarios. In
this formulation, first-stage decisions, which include production scripts and setups, are
made before the realization of demand. Once the uncertainty is resolved and a specific
scenario materializes, second-stage decisions are made adaptively, including overtime
production, inventory adjustments and backorder fulfilment. This separation allows the
model to develop robust production plans that balance cost efficiency with flexibility under
uncertain conditions. The stochastic model was developed and solved using the the Julia
programming language (version 1.9.3), solved using Gurobi Optimizer (version 1.0.3) with
24
Forecasting and Scenario Generation for Optimized Manufacturing
==PAGE:29==
a modelling interface with JuMP.jl (version 1.14.0). Scenario management and data trans-
formations were handled using DataFrames.jl (version 1.6.1), while probabilistic model-
ing and scenario generation were integrated via Distributions.jl (version 0.25.107). The
model was executed on the HPC cluster at DTU Computing Center using a CPU model
Intel(R) Xeon(R) Gold 6126 CPU, 2.60GHz, with 24 physical cores, 24 logical processors,
and using up to 24 threads. The deterministic model was setup to a time limit of 3,600
seconds.
The stochastic demand dataset was provided by scenario generation and reduction tech-
niques. After statistical qualification, the dataset that represented the best distribution
compared to the original demand dataset was chosen.
4.5.1
Mathematical Notations
The two-stage stochastic model incorporates a structured set of decision variables sep-
arated into first-stage and second-stage categories, to reflect the timing and availability
of information relative to demand uncertainty. The associated notations to the stochastic
model is presented in table A.2. First-stage variables include, the planned regular time
production quantity xp,t of product p in period t. A binary variable αp,t that activates the
setup for product p in period t when is assigned to 1. And another binary variable zi,j,t
which indicates whether a changeover from product i to product j is scheduled in period
t, assigned as 1 if the changeover occurs.
In contrast, the second-stage variables include the uncertainty s in the modelling. These
include yp,t,s, the additional production quantity for product p in period t under scenario s.
The inventory level of product p at the end of period t under scenario s is carried by the
variable ip,t,s, being grater than 0 if production exceeds demand in period t. The backorder
variable bp,t,s track the quantity of product p at time t in scenario s, being greater than 0
if demand exceeds production in time t. Additionally, zextra
i,j,t,s is introduced to represent
scenario changeovers due to unforeseen production adjustments in response to realized
demand, assigned to 1 if a changeover from product i to product j occurs in time t in
scenario s.
The two-stage stochastic model relies on a set of parameters to represent the economic
and operational production environment. These include unit cost for regular production
Cp
prod, overtime production Cp
extra, inventory holding Cp
stock, and backorders Cp
back. Also,
a setup cost Csetup
i,j
is defined after a changeover from product i to j. Setup time tsetup
i,j
,
and process time tp,r are defined for each product p, while resource capacities Capr,t and
Capextra
r,t
limit the total production and setup activity in resource r in regular and overtime
time, respectively. Demand uncertainty is represented by scenario-dependent demand
parameter dp,t,s associated with their probabilities πs.
4.5.2
Objective Function
The objective function minimizes the expected total cost across all demand scenarios,
capturing both the deterministic and scenario-dependent components. In the first-stage,
the model minimizes the total cost associated with regular production and planned setup
changeovers, which occurs independently of changes in demand. In the second stage,
the model minimizes the expected cost across scenarios, weighted by their respective
probabilities. These costs include overtime production, inventory holding, backorder penal-
ties, and any additional setup costs arising from scenario-specific changeovers. By inte-
grating both stages, the objective function ensures that decisions made before uncertainty
are robust enough to limit expensive corrective actions in the second stage. The two-stage
stochastic objective function modelling is presented in equation 4.10.
Forecasting and Scenario Generation for Optimized Manufacturing
25
==PAGE:30==
min
∑
t∈T
( ∑
p∈P
cp
prodxp,t +
∑
i∈P
∑
j∈P
j̸=i
Csetup
i,j
zi,j,t
)
+
∑
s∈S
πs
( ∑
t∈T
∑
p∈P
(
Cp
extrayp,t,s + Cp
stockip,t,s + Cp
backbp,t,s
)
+
∑
i∈P
∑
j∈P
j̸=i
Csetup
i,j
zextra
i,j,t,s
)
(4.10)
4.5.3
Constraints
For the first time period, t = 1, the constraint 4.11 ensures that total production, including
first-stage xp,t and second-stage yp,t,s, is properly allocated to fulfil the scenario demand
dp,t,s. The equation balances available supply with actual demand and incorporating in-
ventory ip,t,s and backorders bp,t,s, if necessary. Since there is no initial inventory, all
demand must be satisfied through current period production or backorders.
xp,t + yp,t,s = dp,t,s + ip,t,s −bp,t,s
∀p ∈P, s ∈S, t = 1
(4.11)
In period t ≥2 the demand balance is extended to include inventory carried over from
the previous period ip,t−1,s. This constraint 4.12 ensures that the supply chain remains
dynamically balanced across time, where cumulative production and inventory must meet
current demand. It also allows backorders as a mechanism to fulfilling demand, providing
flexibility during periods of capacity limitations or peak demand.
xp,t + yp,t,s + ip,t−1,s = dp,t,s + ip,t,s −bp,t,s
∀p ∈P, t ∈{2, ..., T}, s ∈S
(4.12)
The first-stage capacity constraint 4.13 limits the total production xp,t and setup activity
zi,j,t within the available regular capacity of each resource r in each time period t. Specif-
ically, it ensures that the total workload generated by regular production tp,r, combined
with the time required for planned setups changes tsetup
i,j
, does not exceed the predefined
resource capacity Capr,t. Since these decisions are made before demand is known, this
constraint guarantees feasibility for all future scenarios based solely on known resource
limitations.
∑
p∈P
xp,ttp,r +
∑
i∈P
∑
j∈P,j̸=P
zi,j,ttsetup
i,j
≤Capr,t
∀r ∈R, t ∈T
(4.13)
In contrast to the first stage, the second-stage capacity constraint 4.14 applies to ad-
ditional capacity, which is only activated after a scenario demand becomes known. It
ensures that the total workload from additional production yp,t,s and any additional sce-
nario setup activities zi,j,t,s remains within the available extra capacity Capextra
r,t
of each
resource r in each period t and scenario s.
26
Forecasting and Scenario Generation for Optimized Manufacturing
==PAGE:31==
∑
p∈P
yp,t,s · tp,r +
∑
i∈P
∑
j∈P,j̸=P
zextra
i,j,t,s · tsetup
i,j
≤Capextra
r,t
∀r ∈R, s ∈S, t ∈T
(4.14)
The activation setup constraint 4.15 ensures that production is allowed only if the product
has been set up. It enforces that both regular and additional production of a product p,
xp,t and yp,t,s respectively, in a period t can occur only if the corresponding binary setup
variable was activated in the first stage αp,t. A large constant M is used to scale this
logical relationship into a linear form. This constraint prevent the model from producing a
product without prior setup.
xp,t + yp,t,s ≤Mαp,t
∀p ∈P, t ∈T, s ∈S
(4.15)
The changeover constraint 4.16 governs the sequencing of setups across periods t and
scenarios s. It activates a setup change variable whenever the product scheduled in the
current period, αi,t differs from the one set up in the previous period αj,t−1. This rule
ensures that setup time and costs are incurred only when transitioning between different
products. In this stochastic model, the constraint is extended to include both first-stage
planned changeovers zi,j,t and second-stage scenario ones zi,j,t,s.
zi,j,t + zextra
i,j,t,s ≥αi,t + αj,t−1 −1, ∀i ̸= j, ∀t ∈T \ {1}
∀s ∈S
(4.16)
The minimum required production constraint 4.17 controls that at least one unit of some
product p need to be produced in every period t under every scenario s. It prevents idle
production schedules that may otherwise arise in models where backorders or high setup
costs make temporary non-production optimal.
∑
p∈P
(xp,t + yp,t,s) ≥1
∀t ∈T, s ∈S
(4.17)
The non negative constraint 4.18 ensures that all production quantities, inventories and
backorders remain non-negative for all products, periods and scenarios.
xp,t, yp,t,s, ip,t,s, bp,t,s ≥0
∀p ∈P, t ∈T, s ∈S
(4.18)
4.6
Validation
The validation of the production planning models was carried out across three different
manufacturing environments, each representing a distinct company case with its own his-
torical demand behaviour. For each environment, the validation followed a structured
and systematic procedure aimed at comparing deterministic and stochastic planning ap-
proaches under realistic operational and data-driven conditions. As this is a sensitive
matter, the company name and confidential information, such as costs and production
times, have been changed to maintain confidentiality. The first step involved identify-
ing the most appropriate probability distribution to model historical demand. Historical
Forecasting and Scenario Generation for Optimized Manufacturing
27
==PAGE:32==
monthly demand data was collected and grouped by product, month and year and four
candidate distributions, Normal, LogNormal, Gamma, and Exponential, were fitted us-
ing maximum likelihood estimation. To determine the best-fitting distribution, the sum of
squared errors (SSE) was computed between the empirical histogram of demand and
the theoretical probability density function of each fitted distribution. This statistical fitting
process ensured that the structure of demand uncertainty was appropriately represented
in each company environment before being incorporated into the optimization models.
Once the best distribution was selected, it was used to generate the deterministic demand
forecast by extracting the mean value of the fitted distribution for each product over the
defined time horizon, as described in subsection 4.4. These average values were as-
sumed to be the expected demand in the absence of uncertainty and were used as fixed
inputs to solve the deterministic production planning model. The resulting deterministic
solution served as a baseline against which the value of incorporating uncertainty could be
measured. Following this, demand uncertainty was reintroduced through scenario gener-
ation, using two alternative methods, Monte Carlo simulation and Bootstrap resampling,
see section 4.2. For both methods, scenario sets of size 1,000, 10,000 and 50,000 were
generated in order to evaluate how scenario quantity affects quality and convergence.
The choice to evaluate scenario generation using these three different sets scenarios is
grounded in both computational efficiency and modelling accuracy, reflecting a balance
between practical constraints and the need for statistically representative outcomes. Us-
ing 1,000 scenarios allows for a lightweight, fast evaluation that is computationally in-
expensive, often sufficient for capturing broad trends in the data. However, due to the
smaller sample size, it may fail to fully capture the tail behaviour or complex interactions
in high-dimensional demand distributions. Increasing to 10,000 scenarios significantly
improves the representativeness of the scenario set. At this size, the scenario distribu-
tion more closely approximates the underlying fitted probability distribution or empirical
resampling behaviour. Finally, the generation of 50,000 scenarios aims to test the be-
haviour and stability of the scenario generation method. At this scale, the set of scenarios
becomes large enough to approximate the real underlying uncertainty with high fidelity,
reducing statistical noise and offering better convergence to theoretical expectations.
Each scenario generation method was evaluated using three metrics. The Moment Match-
ing Error (MME) measured the difference between the simulated and historical means
and standard deviations, reflecting the statistical fidelity of the scenario set. The Sce-
nario Range Coverage assessed the percentage of historical demand values that were
captured within the simulated range, indicating how well the scenario set reflects the ob-
served variability. The Outlier Rate quantified the proportion of simulated demand values
falling outside the historical demand range, revealing whether a method generates unre-
alistic or extreme scenarios. These three metrics were selected to balance the trade-offs
between accuracy, realism, and robustness of the simulated data. The best-performing
method, based on the combination of lowest MME, high coverage, and minimal outliers,
was then selected for scenario reduction.
Scenario reduction was conducted using two complementary techniques, Fast Forward
Selection (FFS) and K-Means clustering, described in section 4.3. These methods were
applied to the best full scenario set and used to reduce it to smaller subsets containing
10, 30 and 50 scenarios.This choice is motivated by the need to balance model accu-
racy, computational tractability, and solution interpretability in the context of two-stage
stochastic programming. Using 10 scenarios allows for a high level of tractability and fast
model resolution, which is especially important in large-scale production planning prob-
lems involving multiple products, resources, and time periods. It also facilitates clearer
28
Forecasting and Scenario Generation for Optimized Manufacturing
==PAGE:33==
managerial interpretation, as fewer scenarios lead to simpler solutions and easier what-if
analysis. However, reducing too aggressively may lead to a loss of statistical richness,
increasing the risk of omitting important patterns in the original uncertainty distribution.
Increasing the reduction level to 30 scenarios provides a compromise between repre-
sentational quality and computational effort. With this number, the reduced scenario set
is large enough to capture more nuanced demand behaviours, such as multimodality or
product interactions, while still maintaining manageable model size. Choosing 50 scenar-
ios targets environments where preserving uncertainty characteristics is critical, such as
when demand has high skewness, long tails, or strong intertemporal correlations. This
size improves moment matching fidelity, range coverage, and helps reduce outlier effects
in the optimization results. Each reduced scenario set was evaluated using the same
three metrics, MME, range coverage, and outlier rate, to determine which method and
reduction level best preserved the statistical characteristics of the full set. The scenario
environment that demonstrated the best balance of accuracy and tractability was then
selected to be applied in the two-stage stochastic production planning model.
After solving the two-stage stochastic model using reduced scenario set, the model perfor-
mance was evaluated through four indicators in stochastic programming. The Recourse
Problem (RP) represents the optimal expected cost of the two-stage stochastic solution,
accounting for flexibility in the second-stage decisions, see equation 4.19, where x is the
first-stage decisions, ω represents the scenario and Φ(x, ω) is the total cost function, in-
cluding first and second stages. The Expected Value (EV) corresponds to the cost of the
deterministic solution assuming all future scenarios realize as expected, replacing uncer-
tainty with the forecast deterministic demand. The mathematical formulation can be seen
in equation 4.20 where ¯ω is the expected scenario. The Expected Result of using the
Expected Value (EEV) is obtained by applying the deterministic solution to each scenario
and calculating the expected cost, showing how well a fixed solution performs under un-
certainty. The formulation can be seen in equation 4.21 and xEV is the optimal solution
obtained from solving the EV problem. Finally, the Value of the Stochastic Solution (VSS)
is computed as EEV −RP and measures the added value of explicitly considering uncer-
tainty in the optimization model. Informing the decision maker how much the stochastic
model outperforms the deterministic model.
RP = min
x Eω[Φ(x, ω)]
(4.19)
EV = min
x Φ(x, ¯ω)
(4.20)
EEV = Eω[Φ(xEV , ω)]
(4.21)
To further assess the sensitivity and robustness of the model, a final set of experiments
was conducted by varying the level of demand variance. Using the originally fitted de-
mand distributions, new demand samples were generated by keeping the mean constant
and scaling the deviations from the mean using variance levels of 100, 300, and 500.
The adjusted demand was calculated using the formula 4.22 where µ is the average de-
mand for a specific product in a specific period across different scenarios generated. D
Forecasting and Scenario Generation for Optimized Manufacturing
29
==PAGE:34==
is the original demand observation, Vartarget is the desired target variance to apply and
σ is the historical standard deviation of demand for a product in a specific period. This
formulation of generate new demand values is motivated by the need to systematically
control the variability of the demand distribution while preserving its original structure, by
centering each historical demand value D around the mean µ and scaling its deviation by
the ratio of the target standard deviation
√
Vartarget to the observed historical standard
deviation σhistorical. This method has value in stochastic modeling and scenario analysis,
where controlling the level of uncertainty is crucial for sensitivity analysis, as increasing
the variance allows the decision-maker to explore how the solution behaves under higher
uncertainty.
Adjusted Demand = µ + (D −µ) ·
√
Vartarget
σhistorical
(4.22)
For each variance level, the full validation cycle was repeated, and the EV, EEV, RP and
VSS were recalculated to analyse how the value of stochastic optimization changes under
different uncertainty environments. The use of variance levels 100, 300 and 500 offers
a progressive scale that simulates moderate to high uncertainty, reflecting the range of
volatility typically encountered in manufacturing environments, with variance 100 repre-
senting a low-uncertainty environment, typically associated with stable or well-forecasted
demand, variance as 300 captures a medium level of uncertainty, which is commonly
encountered in realistic industrial settings where demand forecasts carry moderate error
margins and variance equal to 500 reflects a high-uncertainty environment, suitable for
stress-testing the robustness of the production plan.
30
Forecasting and Scenario Generation for Optimized Manufacturing
==PAGE:35==
5
Results and Discussion
5.1
Data Source
The validation process of the proposed production planning model was applied across
three distinct industrial environments, each representing different manufacturing realities
in terms of product characteristics, resource constraints and operational cost structures.
These environments were selected to ensure the robustness and generalizability of the
methodology under various industry challenges and dynamics. The three environment
sets were adopted using the parameters shown in tables A.1 and A.2, with their respec-
tive values represented in table 5.1. Each cost parameter represents a cost for one unit
of a product p and resources allocation are represented by the time in hours for each
resource r. All scenarios were simulated in a four-period planning horizon where each
period corresponds to a month.
The first industrial environment consists of a plastic injection moulding company special-
ising in the production of household utensils. This scenario covers 45 different products
and 59 production resources. Each product has its own production script, consisting of a
specific resource within a specific time to produce one unit. Resources can produce dif-
ferent products, but only one product at a time. This environment reflects a high-volume
production context that requires tight inventory control and cost-efficient scheduling to
remain competitive. The second environment simulates the production system of a man-
ufacturer of axles and suspension systems for the automotive industry. It comprises 39
products and 42 resources, following the same production scripts and resource charac-
teristics applied in environment one. This case reflects a moderate-volume system where
the cost of stockouts is particularly high, emphasizing the need for careful alignment be-
tween production and demand. Finally, the third environment corresponds to a glass
manufacturing company serving the household appliance sector. This scenario includes
50 different products and 44 production resources, adopting the same structural attributes
described in the previous two environments. Due to the nature of the products, demand
values were normalized by dividing by 100, since historical data was originally recorded
in square meters. This configuration models a highly sensitive system where resource
allocation efficiency and demand satisfaction are critical to mitigate financial risks due to
costly disruptions.
Environment 1
Environment 2
Environment 3
Cp
prod
0.25
1.75
37.5
Cp
extra
1.15
3.25
60
Cp
stock
0.75
0.85
12.5
Cp
back
3.25
8
82
Csetup
i,j
0.15
0.75
12.5
Capr,t
645
600
665
Capextra
r,t
48
23
175
tsetup
i,j
0.3
0.8
0.15
Table 5.1: Cost and capacity parameters for each industrial environment
Forecasting and Scenario Generation for Optimized Manufacturing
31
==PAGE:36==
5.2
Industrial Environment One
5.2.1
Distribution Fit
To establish a reliable basis for scenario generation and subsequent optimization, his-
torical demand data were analysed and fitted to four candidate probability distributions:
Normal, Log-Normal, Gamma, and Exponential. The results of the Sum of Squared Er-
rors (SSE) are shown in table 5.2. The Log-Normal distribution achieved the lowest SSE
value indicating the best fit to the historical data. The Normal and Gamma distributions
followed closely with SSE results. In contrast, the Exponential distribution produced a
significantly higher SSE confirming its inadequacy for capturing the shape and spread of
the empirical demand.
SSE
Normal
2.25 x 10−8
Log-Normal
2.17 x 10−8
Gamma
2.26 x 10−8
Exponential
2.46 x 10−7
Table 5.2: SSE results of demand distribution - environment one
The superiority of the Log-Normal fit can be visually corroborated in the two following
plots. The first histogram 5.1 illustrates the empirical raw frequency distribution of de-
mand. The vertical axis (y-axis) displays the absolute number of observations, that is,
how many times demand values fell within each bin across the dataset. This represen-
tation is useful for gaining an intuitive understanding of the data volume and identifying
areas of concentration or patterns, which clearly represents a right-skewed pattern, a
common pattern in industrial settings where most products exhibit moderate demand lev-
els, punctuated by occasional surges in order volumes. In contrast, the second figure 5.2
shows the best-fitting Log-Normal distribution superimposed on the histogram. Instead of
showing counts, it displays probability density values, which reflect the proportion of to-
tal observations falling into each bin, normalized such that the area under the histogram
sums to 1. The curve captures the central mass of the distribution as well as the heavier
right tail, aligning closely with the actual demand frequencies and accurately reflecting the
asymmetric nature of the data.
Figure 5.1: Frequency distribution - environment one
32
Forecasting and Scenario Generation for Optimized Manufacturing
==PAGE:37==
Figure 5.2: Density distribution - environment one
The adoption of the Log-Normal distribution is thus well justified, both statistically and
operationally. From a modelling standpoint, the Log-Normal distribution is known for its
flexibility in representing skewed data, particularly when the variable of interest, in this
case the demand, is strictly non-negative and exhibits long right tails. Given the evi-
dence, this distribution was selected to represent the stochastic demand behaviour in all
subsequent modelling stages for this industrial environment.
5.2.2
Scenario Generation
The comparison between Monte Carlo and Bootstrap methods for scenario generation
reveals distinct differences in their ability to accurately reproduce the characteristics of
historical demand. As illustrated in the results table 5.3 and 5.4, the evaluation is based
on three key criteria: Moment Matching Error (MME), scenario range coverage and outlier
rate, and these are assessed over three distinct scenario sample sizes.
Monte Carlo
1000
10000
50000
MME
28.07%
27.94%
27.92%
Scenario Range
100%
100%
100%
Outlier
0.97%
0.93%
0.93%
Table 5.3: Monte Carlo performance metrics - environment one
Bootstrap
1000
10000
50000
MME
4.42%
4.00%
3.84%
Scenario Range
100%
100.00%
100.00%
Outlier
0.00%
0.00%
0.00%
Table 5.4: Bootstrap performance metrics - environment one
Starting with Monte Carlo simulation, while it consistently achieves full scenario range
coverage (100%) across all sample sizes, its MME remains relatively high, starting at
28.07% for 1,000 scenarios and only slightly decreasing to 27.92% at 50,000 scenarios.
This indicates that even though the range of generated demands aligns with the historical
data, the mean and standard deviation across product and month combinations are not
closely replicated. Moreover, Monte Carlo introduces a small but persistent percentage of
outliers, values that fall outside the realistic range observed in the historical dataset, with
approximately 0.93% to 0.97% of the generated values being unrealistic. These results
Forecasting and Scenario Generation for Optimized Manufacturing
33
==PAGE:38==
highlight an important limitation of the Monte Carlo approach in this context, although it
captures the range of potential demand values, it does so with less precision in repro-
ducing the actual statistical moments of the observed distribution and tends to generate
extreme and unrealistic values at the tail.
In contrast, the Bootstrap resampling method demonstrates superior performance in both
accuracy and realism. Its MME is significantly lower, dropping from 4.42% at 1,000 sce-
narios to just 3.84% at 50,000 scenarios. This improvement suggests that bootstrap sce-
narios more effectively preserve the original distribution’s shape, particularly the mean
and standard deviation, owing to the fact that they are resampled directly from historical
observations rather than being synthetically generated from a fitted distribution. Addi-
tionally, Bootstrap exhibits no outliers across any scenario size, reinforcing its strength
in producing plausible demand scenarios strictly within the historical domain. Like Monte
Carlo, it also maintains 100% scenario range coverage, ensuring comprehensive repre-
sentation of observed demand variability.
From a performance standpoint, Bootstrap clearly outperforms Monte Carlo in terms of
Moment Matching Error (MME). With values ranging from 4.42% down to 3.84% as the
number of scenarios increases, the Bootstrap method shows a much closer replication
of the empirical means and standard deviations of historical demand. This reflects its
resampling nature, where demand values are directly drawn from the actual historical
dataset, preserving the statistical moments and shape of the original distribution more
faithfully. Monte Carlo, despite being based on a fitted theoretical distribution, suffers from
a consistently higher MME, around 28% across all tested scenario sizes, which implies
that synthetic sampling from the estimated distribution introduces systematic deviations
from the actual data patterns.
In terms of scenario range, both methods perform equally well, consistently achieving
100% coverage. This indicates that each method is able to replicate the minimum-to-
maximum span of demand values observed historically, ensuring that all possible demand
levels are accounted for in the generated scenarios. However, the two methods diverge
sharply when we examine the outlier rate. The Monte Carlo method introduces a measur-
able number of unrealistic demand values that fall outside the historically observed range,
approximately 0.93% to 0.97% depending on the scenario sample size. These outliers,
while small in proportion, can have disproportionate effects on the optimization results by
skewing capacity allocation or inflating cost penalties in extreme conditions. Bootstrap,
on the other hand, has zero outliers across all sample sizes, as it is inherently bounded
by the values present in the historical data. This makes it not only more statistically stable
but also more operationally reliable, as it avoids planning based on potentially implausible
scenarios.
The sample size dimension further strengthens the case for Bootstrap. While both meth-
ods show marginal improvement as the number of scenarios increases, the gain is sig-
nificantly more substantial for Bootstrap. With just 1,000 scenarios, Bootstrap achieves
a low MME of 4.42%, whereas Monte Carlo remains high at 28.07%. Even at 50,000
scenarios, Monte Carlo only improves by 0.15%. This declining return highlights a critical
computational inefficiency in the Monte Carlo approach, as it requires much more data to
approximate the statistical precision that Bootstrap achieves with far fewer scenarios.
The results suggest that Bootstrap offers a superior balance between accuracy, range
representation, and robustness, making it a more effective method for demand scenario
generation in stochastic production planning for environment one. Its lower sensitivity to
sample size and immunity to outliers align well with the requirements of stochastic mod-
34
Forecasting and Scenario Generation for Optimized Manufacturing
==PAGE:39==
elling, where accurate reflection of uncertainty must coexist with computational feasibility
and operational realism. Monte Carlo, while still useful in contexts where theoretical dis-
tributions are well justified, appears less suited for demand simulate environments char-
acterized by characteristics of industrial environment one.
Based on the performance metrics and computational considerations observed, the cho-
sen scenario generation method for the subsequent stages of the analysis for environ-
ment one was the Bootstrap approach with 10,000 scenarios. This decision was driven
by the observation that, while increasing the number of Bootstrap scenarios from 10,000 to
50,000 resulted in a small improvement in Moment Matching Error, from 4.00% to 3.84%,
the relative gain was minimal and did not justify the substantially higher computational cost
associated with simulating and processing a five times increase in scenario volume. Addi-
tionally, both the 10,000 and 50,000 scenario sets achieved full coverage of the observed
demand range and maintained a zero outlier rate, indicating that statistical representa-
tiveness and reliability had already been effectively attained at scenario set with 10,000
samples.
5.2.3
Scenario Reduction
The scenario reduction results presented in tables 5.5 and 5.6 highlight the comparative
performance of Fast Forward Selection (FFS) and K-Means clustering in preserving statis-
tical and structural features of the original demand scenarios while reducing their number
to a more computationally manageable size. Each method was tested under varying sce-
nario set sizes and reduction levels, with evaluation based on Moment Matching Error
(MME), Scenario Range Coverage, and Outlier Rate.
FFS
10
30
50
MME
17.76%
13.02%
11.88%
Scenario Range
100%
100%
100%
Outlier
0.00%
0.00%
0.00%
Table 5.5: FFS performance metrics - environment one
K-Means
10
30
50
MME
33.27%
32.20%
31.59%
Scenario Range
93.44%
93.56%
93.56%
Outlier
0.00%
0.00%
0.00%
Table 5.6: K-Means performance metrics - environment one
In the case of Fast Forward Selection (FFS), applied to 10,000 Bootstrap generated sce-
narios, the results showed clear improvements as the number of retained scenarios in-
creased. With 10 reduced scenarios, the MME was 17.76%, which dropped to 13.02%
with 30 scenarios and further to 11.88% with 50 scenarios. Scenario Range Coverage re-
mained 100% across all reduction levels, ensuring that the reduced set preserved the full
spread of original demand. Importantly, no outliers were introduced in any configuration.
For the K-Means approach, an initial attempt using 10,000 scenarios led to a high MME
value of 32.82%, changing to an expansion of 50,000 input scenarios to improve perfor-
mance. Even so, the MME remained substantially higher, with 33.27% in 10 scenarios,
32.20% with 30 scenarios and 31.59% with 50 scenarios. Additionally, Scenario Range
Coverage stabilised at 93.56%, indicating that the method failed to fully capture the tails of
Forecasting and Scenario Generation for Optimized Manufacturing
35
==PAGE:40==
the demand distribution. K-Means did not introduce any outliers in the reduced scenario
sets.
When comparing both reduction methods, FFS clearly demonstrates superior performance
across all key metrics. Its ability to accurately match statistical moments, preserve the
complete demand range and avoiding outlier generation makes it a more reliable and ro-
bust option for scenario reduction in this context. In contrast, even with a larger input
scenario base, K-Means struggles to replicate the variability and distributional character-
istics of the original demand data, as evidenced by its consistently high MME and limited
coverage of extreme values. Based on these results, FFS with 50 reduced scenarios was
selected for subsequent use in the two-stage stochastic programming model. This con-
figuration offers the best compromise between computational efficiency and fidelity to the
original demand variability.
5.2.4
Deterministic Analysis
In the deterministic model, the optimization was conducted using the forecast demand
estimates, as described in subsection 5.2.1, and did not account for demand uncertainty.
The histogram in figure 5.3 displays the simulated demand used for the baseline case.
The data generated based on a Log-Normal distribution reflects the right-skewed shape
of the histogram. The y-axis, which represents frequency, indicates how often particular
demand levels occur in the simulation dataset, with a high concentration of observations
clustered around lower demand values, most commonly between 1,000 and 3,000 units,
followed by a gradual decline as demand increases. This long right tail reveals that while
high demand values are rare, they are possible and potentially impactful.
Figure 5.3: Deterministic distribution - environment one
The total cost was decomposed into five key components, regular time production cost,
overtime production cost, setup cost, inventory cost, and backorder cost. And the re-
sults are demonstrated according to four different demand variance levels, the baseline
deterministic demand, and the three different changes in demand variance. The results
are shown in table 5.7. In the baseline deterministic case the total cost amounted to
621,385.10.
The largest contributor to this cost was the backorder penalty, totalling
525,479.50, which represented over 84% of the total cost. This dominance reflects a
system that struggles to meet demand with available capacity, thus frequently resorting
to costly backlog situations. Inventory costs also played a relevant role, as 28,297.50,
while production costs in regular and overtime shifts remained comparatively moderate,
60,775.00 and 6,768.90, respectively. The optimization terminated with a gap of 1.78%
within the predefined time limit of 3600 seconds, suggesting a near-optimal but not fully
converged solution due to the computational complexity of the model.
With variance set to 100, the total cost rose to 674,396.95, driven primarily by increases
36
Forecasting and Scenario Generation for Optimized Manufacturing
==PAGE:41==
Cost Component
Baseline
V 100
V 300
V 500
Regular time production cost
60,775.00
58,541.25
58,527.25
58,539.00
Overtime production cost
6,768.90
5,520.00
5,520.00
5,589.00
Setup cost
64.20
58.95
58.95
58.95
Inventory cost
28,297.50
52,242.00
53,008.50
53,742.75
Backorder cost
525,479.50
558,034.75
558,220.00
557,882.00
Total cost
621,385.10
674,396.95
675,334.70
675,811.70
Table 5.7: Deterministic cost breakdown - environment one
in inventory cost, 52,242.00, and backorder cost, 558,034.75. The regular production
cost decreased slightly, reflecting more frequent underproduction or shifts in resource al-
location to accommodate a wider demand range. Notably, the solver gap increased to
9.02%, indicating more difficulty in converging to optimality under greater demand vari-
ability, reaching the time limit of 3,600 seconds.
As the variance increased to 300, the cost components followed a similar trend. The to-
tal cost reached 675,334.70, with further growth in inventory, 53,008.50, and backorders,
558,220.00. Interestingly, regular time production remained nearly constant at 58,527.25,
implying that the production strategy appears to stabilize around the mean, despite in-
creased demand. The solver gap decreased to 8.77% with a time limit of 3,600 seconds.
At variance level 500, the deterministic model generated a total cost of 675,811.70, slightly
higher than the previous scenario. The pattern of rising inventory cost, 53,742.75, and
high backorder cost, 557,882.00, persisted. The increase in overtime production, 5,589.00
also suggests a moderate operational effort to buffer against the extended demand. The
solver reached a 9.04% gap in the time limit of 3,600 seconds.
These results highlight a crucial limitation of deterministic modelling in the face of de-
mand uncertainty. While the baseline model provides a cost-efficient plan under nominal
conditions, it fails to account for tail risks, particularly evident in high backorder penalties
under all demand variance settings. As variance increases, total costs presents a nearly
identical regular and overtime production levels. This trend suggests that deterministic
models lack the flexibility needed to respond effectively to extreme fluctuations, making
them highly sensitive to variability. Furthermore, the steady solver gap around 9% under
high variance scenarios indicates increased solution complexity and difficulty in reach-
ing convergence within a reasonable time. This reinforces the necessity of considering
stochastic approaches that explicitly integrate demand uncertainty and scenario diversity
into the planning process.
5.2.5
Two-Stage Analysis
In the two-stage stochastic programming approach the model incorporates demand un-
certainty through scenario-based modelling, according to subsections 5.2.3 and 5.2.2.
The model was solved across four simulations, the baseline and three simulations using
demand adjusted by increasing levels of variance. For each, the cost components were
evaluated, the optimality gap recorded, and the computational performance tracked. The
costs results are presented in table 5.8.
Forecasting and Scenario Generation for Optimized Manufacturing
37
==PAGE:42==
Figure 5.4: Stochastic distribution - environment one
Cost Component
Baseline
V 100
V 300
V 500
Regular time production cost
64,500.00
64,500.00
64,500.00
64,500.00
Overtime production cost
2,042.61
2,113.40
2,099.91
2,096.54
Setup cost
4.98
1.91
2.49
2.64
Inventory cost
2.70
0.00
0.00
0.00
Backorder cost
1,132,866.96
1,132,327.39
1,132,387.68
1,132,391.48
Total cost
1,199,417.25
1,198,942.70
1,198,990.08
1,198,990.66
Table 5.8: Two-Stage cost breakdown - environment one
The stochastic demand distribution across all generated scenarios is shown in figure 5.4.
This plot shows the superposition of density curves from multiple bootstrap-generated de-
mand scenarios, with the y-axis representing density. As evident, the distribution remains
positively skewed, consistent with the Log-Normal characteristics of the environment. A
high concentration of probability mass is observed around 1,500 to 2,500 units, but with
a tail extending well beyond 6,000 units. This reflects the presence of rare but impactful
high-demand events, whose influence justifies the stochastic approach. The density rep-
resentation, unlike frequency plots, provides a smoother and continuous view of demand
probability, reinforcing the scenario generation’s ability to reflect realistic, risk-weighted
variability.
In the baseline case, the total expected cost was approximately, 1,199,417.25. The vast
majority of this cost,approximately 1,132,866.96, was attributed to backorders, reflect-
ing unmet demand across scenarios. The remainder of the cost was distributed across
regular production, 64,500.00, overtime, 2,042.61, setup in the second stage, 4.98, and
minimal inventory cost, 2.70. The solver achieved an optimality gap of only 0.0181%
within 3602.48 seconds, signifying a high-quality solution within the time budget.
When the variance was increased to 100, the total expected cost slightly decreased to
1,198,942.70, with a similarly large portion consumed by backorders, 1,132,327.39. The
model again allocated 64,500.00 to regular production, with a modest increase in overtime
cost, 2,113.40, and a small setup cost, 1.91. Notably, inventory was not used, likely due
to the structure of demand shifts. The solver reached the optimal solution with a gap
of 0.0068% in 1257.98 seconds, demonstrating both high solution quality and efficient
computation under moderate variance.
At variance 300, the total cost rose marginally to 1,198,990.08, with minor variations
38
Forecasting and Scenario Generation for Optimized Manufacturing
==PAGE:43==
across cost components, as backorders remained stable at 1,132,387.68, and overtime
decreased slightly to 2,099.91, and setup costs increased modestly to 2.49. As in the
previous case, inventory levels were negligible. The solver successfully converged in
1850.23 seconds, with a gap of 0.0089%, maintaining computational efficiency despite
greater variance.
Finally, in the variance 500 scenario, the model showed a similar total expected cost
of 1,198,990.66, with backorders holding steady at 1,132,391.48. Overtime production
was 2,096.54 and setups 2.64, remained consistent with prior levels. The solver reached
an optimal solution in 644.21 seconds, with a gap of 0.0095%, representing the fastest
runtime among all simulations, likely due to scenario smoothing effects caused by wider
demand spread.
These results reveal the robustness and adaptability of the stochastic model under vary-
ing demand variances. Across all simulations, the model consistently produced low gaps,
all below 0.02%, indicating strong convergence and reliability. Moreover, the cost com-
ponents remained remarkably stable, especially under variances of 300 and 500, with
minimal increases in overtime and setup costs. The constancy in regular production,
always 64,500.00, reflects a strategic first-stage decision unaffected by demand fluctu-
ations, while scenario-specific corrections were efficiently managed in the second stage
through controlled overtime and minor setup transitions.
An important insight from the analysis is the stochastic model’s ability to buffer risk as
even with increased variance, the system avoids drastic cost swings, thanks to the flex-
ibility provided by recourse variables like overtime. This contrasts with the deterministic
model, where increased variance led to significantly higher total costs and more severe
penalty costs. In summary, the stochastic formulation successfully handles uncertainty
through probabilistic planning, resulting in cost stability, efficient scenario adaptation, and
computational tractability. These findings support its adoption in environments with high
variability.
5.2.6
Stochastic Results
This section analyses the stochastic optimization results based on four key metrics: Ex-
pected Value (EV), Recourse Problem (RP), Expected result of using the Expected Value
solution (EEV), and the Value of the Stochastic Solution (VSS). These results are sum-
marized in Table 5.9.
Metrics
Baseline
V 100
V 300
V 500
EV
621,385.09
674,396.94
675,334.69
675,811.69
RP
1,199,417.25
1,198,942.70
1,198,990.08
1,198,990.65
EEV
1,260,532.69
1,306,281.93
1,348,878.46
1,372,283.37
VSS
61,115.44
107,339.23
149,888.38
173,292.72
Table 5.9: Stochastic results - environment one
In the baseline case, the EV, representing the total cost of the deterministic solution was
621,385.09, while the RP, representing the expected cost under the optimal stochastic
solution, was significantly higher at 1,199,417.25. The EEV, which evaluates the ex-
pected performance of the deterministic solution under uncertainty, was 1,260,532.69.
This resulted in a VSS of 61,115.44, highlighting a substantial benefit from solving the full
stochastic model over relying on the deterministic approach.
Forecasting and Scenario Generation for Optimized Manufacturing
39
==PAGE:44==
When the variance of the demand was increased to 100, the EV naturally increased to
674,396.94 due to the elevated variability in demand inputs. The RP slightly decreased to
1,198,942.70, while the EEV dropped to 1,306,281.93. Interestingly, the VSS increased
to 107,339.23, indicating that under slightly increased uncertainty, the advantage of using
a stochastic solution becomes even more valuable.
With variance elevated further to 300, the EV had a value of 675,334.69, EEV approached
1,348,878.46 and the RP remained stable. This generated a slightly reduced VSS of
149,888.38, suggesting that while the benefits of stochastic optimization remain signifi-
cant, the relative advantage may fluctuate depending on how variance affects the perfor-
mance of the deterministic and recourse models differently.
For the highest variance level analysed, the EV rose slightly to 675,811.69, and EEV
increased to 1,372,283.37. Despite the higher demand variability, the RP remained con-
sistent at 1,198,990.65, while the VSS increased to 173,292.72. This result indicates that,
although a stochastic model continues to offer a large performance gain over determin-
istic approaches, the marginal improvement begins to taper off as uncertainty increases,
likely due to growing conservatism and the impact of the costs of covering against wider
variations in demand.
Overall, the stochastic optimization consistently delivers improved cost performance, with
VSS values confirming the value of explicitly incorporating demand uncertainty. As the
variance in demand increases, the gap between what is planned deterministically and
what is actually optimal under uncertainty widens.
5.3
Industrial Environment Two
5.3.1
Distribution Fit
In the context of the second industrial environment, a manufacturing facility dedicated to
the production of axles and suspension systems for the automotive industry, historical
monthly demand data was collected and analysed to capture the underlying structure of
demand behaviour over time. To statistically evaluate which probability distribution best
fits the empirical demand data, the four defined distributions were assessed through the
Sum of Squared Errors (SSE) between the empirical density and the fitted theoretical
probability density function. As shown in table 5.10, the Gamma distribution had the
lowest SSE value at 1.873 x 10−7 indicating superior statistical accuracy in representing
the data compared to the Normal, Log-Normal and Exponential distributions.
SSE
Normal
1.987 x 10−7
Log-Normal
2.307 x 10−6
Gamma
1.873 x 10−7
Exponential
4.138 x 10−7
Table 5.10: SSE results of demand distribution - environment two
From a statistical perspective, the Gamma distribution offers a flexible two-parameter
structure, shape and scale, capable of capturing positively skewed data with heavier tails.
The histogram of raw demand frequencies clearly displays this skewed pattern, see fig-
ure 5.5, with a concentration of lower demand values and a gradual tail extending toward
higher volumes. The superiority of the Gamma distribution is further corroborated by the
visual inspection of the fitted density curve. In the overlay plot comparing the observed
40
Forecasting and Scenario Generation for Optimized Manufacturing
==PAGE:45==
histogram with the fitted Gamma probability density function (PDF), figure 5.6, it is evi-
dent that the Gamma curve closely traces the empirical distribution. It aligns well across
the modal region, captures the peak accurately, and smoothly follows the declining tail,
offering both a visually and statistically compelling fit.
Figure 5.5: Frequency distribution - environment two
Figure 5.6: Density distribution - environment two
Therefore, based on both quantitative SSE metrics and qualitative graphical analysis,
the Gamma distribution was selected as the most appropriate representation of demand
uncertainty in this environment. Its adoption ensures that subsequent stochastic scenario
generation and optimization processes are grounded in a distribution that best reflects the
real-world behaviour of demand.
5.3.2
Scenario Generation
In the scenario generation analysis for the second industrial environment, a comprehen-
sive comparison between the Monte Carlo and Bootstrap methods was conducted across
three scenario volumes, 1,000, 10,000, and 50,000. The performance of each scenario
generation approach was evaluated based on three quantitative metrics, the Moment
Matching Error (MME), scenario range Coverage, and the outlier rate. The results are
shown in tables 5.11 and 5.12
From the results presented, it is evident that the Bootstrap method consistently outper-
forms Monte Carlo in terms of MME across all three scenario counts. Specifically, Boot-
strap achieved an MME of 4.74%, 4.32% and 4.16% for 1,000, 10,000, and 50,000 sce-
narios respectively. This indicates a high degree of accuracy in replicating the empirical
demand distribution, with minimal deviation between simulated and historical statistics.
By contrast, the Monte Carlo method had substantially higher MME values of 28.49%,
Forecasting and Scenario Generation for Optimized Manufacturing
41
==PAGE:46==
Monte Carlo
1000
10000
50000
MME
28.49%
28.66%
28.67%
Scenario Range
100%
100%
100%
Outlier
0.18%
0.18%
0.16%
Table 5.11: Monte Carlo performance metrics - environment two
Bootstrap
1000
10000
50000
MME
4.74%
4.32%
4.16%
Scenario Range
100%
100.00%
100.00%
Outlier
0.00%
0.00%
0.00%
Table 5.12: Bootstrap performance metrics - environment two
28.66% and 28.67% for the same scenario sizes. The stagnation of MME across increas-
ing scenario volumes suggests that, in this context, random sampling from the Gamma
distribution, even though it is the best fitting theoretical model, introduces a degree of
dispersion that fails to fully reflect the structure and nuance of the empirical data.
The scenario range metric remained constant at 100% for both methods across all sce-
nario volumes. This result confirms that both methods are effective at covering the full
range of historical demand values, ensuring that extreme but plausible scenarios are in-
cluded in the modelling framework. However, this alone is insufficient for assessing dis-
tributional fidelity, especially when combined with high error rates as seen in the Monte
Carlo method. Regarding the outlier rate, Bootstrap demonstrated a clear advantage with
a 0.00% rate across all scenario volumes. This outcome is expected due to the resam-
pling nature of the Bootstrap method, which draws directly from the historical data without
extrapolation. In contrast, Monte Carlo showed a small but non-negligible outlier rate,
declining slightly from 0.18% to 0.16% as the number of scenarios increased. Although
this rate is relatively low, the presence of outliers in production planning models can lead
to distorted estimates of resource requirements.
Given these results, the Bootstrap method with 50,000 scenarios was selected for sub-
sequent scenario-based stochastic modelling. This choice reflects a strategic balance
between statistical fidelity and computational tractability. While the marginal gain in MME
from 10,000 to 50,000 scenarios is small, the improved representativeness and the com-
plete absence of outliers justify the additional computational cost in a critical production
setting. Ultimately, this ensures a more realistic and risk-sensitive decision-making pro-
cess in the face of demand uncertainty in the automotive manufacturing environment.
5.3.3
Scenario Reduction
In order to make the stochastic optimization problem computationally tractable, scenario
reduction techniques were applied to the initial scenario sets generated via the Bootstrap
method. As previously discussed, the Bootstrap method with 50,000 scenarios provided
the best performance in terms of Moment Matching Error (MME), scenario range cover-
age, and absence of outliers. However, due to the high computational burden, where
reducing the 50,000 scenario set to 50 using Fast Forward Selection (FFS) took over
3,610 seconds, it was necessary to adopt a more manageable base scenario set. Conse-
quently, the reduction procedure was primarily performed using 10,000 initial scenarios,
which represented a pragmatic compromise between statistical fidelity and computational
42
Forecasting and Scenario Generation for Optimized Manufacturing
==PAGE:47==
efficiency.
Tables 5.13 and 5.14 present clear performance differences between the two methods.
FFS consistently outperformed K-Means across all reduction levels, 10, 30, and 50 sce-
narios. For example, using 10,000 original scenarios, FFS achieved an MME of 17.49%
with 50 reduced scenarios. In contrast, K-Means, even when applied to a larger 50,000
scenario base, recorded a significantly higher MME of 33.95% under the same reduc-
tion level. Furthermore, FFS preserved 100% of the scenario range and produced zero
outliers in all configurations, demonstrating strong robustness in maintaining the diversity
and extremities of the demand distribution.
FFS
10
30
50
MME
26.82%
19.83%
17.49%
Scenario Range
100%
100%
100%
Outlier
0.00%
0.00%
0.00%
Table 5.13: FFS performance metrics - environment two
K-Means
10
30
50
MME
35.57%
34.95%
33.95%
Scenario Range
100%
100%
100%
Outlier
0.00%
0.00%
0.00%
Table 5.14: K-Means performance metrics - environment two
From a computational standpoint, while FFS with 10,000 scenarios proved far more ef-
ficient than its 50,000 scenario counterpart, it still delivered high-quality approximations
with MME improvements from 26.82% to 17.49%. These improvements further validate
the use of 50 reduced scenarios, as this setting offered the best trade-off between accu-
racy and tractability. Meanwhile, the performance of K-Means remained relatively weak
in this environment, suggesting that it struggles to capture the variability of the demand
distribution adequately when demand presents moderate skewness or heavy tails, as was
observed with the Gamma distribution fit in the previous subsection.
Considering the combination of reduced computational burden, high representativeness
of the demand range, and low error rates, the final scenario set selected for the stochastic
model was derived using Fast Forward Selection with 50 reduced scenarios based on the
original 10,000 Bootstrap generated scenarios. This configuration provided the most bal-
anced and computationally feasible scenario set for the two-stage stochastic optimization
model that followed.
5.3.4
Deterministic Analysis
The deterministic analysis for the second industrial environment, characterized by Gamma-
distributed demand, was performed under four demand configurations, a baseline forecast
and three variance-adjusted scenarios, see Table 5.15. The histogram of the simulated
deterministic demand, derived from the fitted Gamma distribution, is shown in figure 5.7.
This distribution exhibits a positively skewed pattern consistent with the statistical as-
sessment in subsection 5.3.1, with a high concentration of lower demand values and a
gradually declining tail toward higher volumes. This behaviour closely reflects real-world
industrial demand patterns in this setting.
Forecasting and Scenario Generation for Optimized Manufacturing
43
==PAGE:48==
Figure 5.7: Deterministic distribution - environment two
Cost Component
Baseline
V 100
V 300
V 500
Regular time production cost
216,949.25
216,420.75
216,405.00
216,392.75
Overtime production cost
5,560.75
5,222.75
5,222.75
5,216.25
Setup cost
63.00
62.25
62.25
62.25
Inventory cost
53,839.00
52,826.65
52,829.20
52,824.10
Backorder cost
313,488.00
316,696.00
316,808.00
316,872.00
Total cost
589,900.00
591,228.40
591,327.20
591,367.35
Table 5.15: Deterministic cost breakdown - environment two
In the baseline scenario, the deterministic model achieved an optimal solution with a
very tight optimality gap of 0.0012% within 1496.92 seconds. The total cost amounted
to 589,900, with the majority of the cost coming from backorders, 313,488, and regular
time production, 216,949.25. Inventory costs of 53,839 also made up a significant portion,
indicating a trade-off between holding extra stock and avoiding unmet demand. The rela-
tively modest overtime of 5,560.75 and setup costs of 63 suggest efficient use of capacity
and stable production scheduling.
As the demand include a variance of 100 the model remained stable, again reaching an
optimal solution, with a gap of 0.0019% in 3022.44 seconds. The total cost slightly in-
creased to 591,228.40, primarily driven by a rise in backorder costs to 316,696.00, while
regular production cost and inventory saw slight decreases and adjustments, respectively.
These variations reflect the model’s responsiveness to moderate uncertainty, where in-
creased demand fluctuations begin to pressure inventory policies and service levels.
For the variance 300 scenario, the model approached the solution imposed limit with a final
gap of 3.5898% after 3600.29 seconds. The total cost increased slightly to 591,327.20,
and cost distributions remained similar, with backorders climbing marginally again to
316,808.00. Although the gap is higher, the cost structure indicates the model was still
managing demand variation with minimal disruption, emphasizing the robustness of the
deterministic plan under medium uncertainty. However, the computational effort required
underscores the increasing challenge of solving deterministic models as variance grows.
Finally, the variance 500 instance once again reached an optimal solution with a gap of
0.0018% in 3026.40 seconds, having a total cost of 591,367.35. Once again, the results
followed the same trend, a slight increase in backorder cost and marginal adjustments
across the other cost categories. These figures confirm that while the deterministic model
can handle increasing variability in demand, the marginal cost differences are relatively
small. However, it is important to note that this stability comes at the cost of potential un-
44
Forecasting and Scenario Generation for Optimized Manufacturing
==PAGE:49==
derestimation of uncertainty, a factor that motivates the subsequent stochastic modelling
approach.
Overall, this analysis highlights the deterministic model’s capacity to maintain feasible
and near-optimal solutions even under increasing levels of demand variability. However,
the presence of growing backorder costs and the observed computational burden with
rising variance reinforce the need to consider more flexible optimization frameworks that
explicitly incorporate uncertainty
5.3.5
Two-Stage Analysis
The demand distribution used in the two-stage stochastic optimization for the second in-
dustrial environment is illustrated in Figure 5.8. The histogram presents demand values
across all generated scenarios, with superimposed density curves revealing substantial
variation between them. The overall distribution remains positively skewed, reflecting
realistic demand heterogeneity. Compared to the deterministic Gamma distribution in
Figure 5.7, the stochastic representation incorporates greater variability and richer com-
plexity, offering a more accurate representation of demand uncertainty over time. The
corresponding cost breakdown for each variance level is provided in Table 5.16.
Figure 5.8: Stochastic distribution - environment two
Cost Component
Baseline
V 100
V 300
V 500
Regular time production cost
417,200.00
415,100.00
417,060.00
420,000.00
Overtime production cost
1,664.00
2,101.89
2,002.00
1,164.90
Setup cost
53.25
49.62
54.25
50.40
Inventory cost
2,865.58
311.47
2,506.77
6.72
Backorder cost
654,788.30
632,769.97
657,310.24
628,374.72
Total cost
1,076,571.13
1,050,332.95
1,078,933.26
1,049,596.74
Table 5.16: Two-Stage cost breakdown - environment two
The baseline solution the model was solved within the time limit of 3,601.02 seconds with
a gap of 0.5507% and a total expected cost of 1,076,571.13. The majority of this cost
was attributed to backorders with 654,788.30, and regular production with 417,200.00,
while other components like overtime and inventory played a smaller role. These results
suggest the model relies heavily on meeting demand through planned production while
tolerating a degree of backordering due to uncertainty. Inventory levels remained modest.
For the demand variance of 100, the model again terminated at the time limit with a smaller
Forecasting and Scenario Generation for Optimized Manufacturing
45
==PAGE:50==
optimality gap of 0.3082%. The total cost dropped to 1,050,332.95, driven by reduced
backorder costs, 632,769.97, and a slight decrease in regular production. The use of
overtime increased to 2,101.89, indicating a strategic shift toward short-term flexibility to
accommodate uncertain fluctuations. Inventory levels fell sharply to 311.47.
When the variance increased to 300, the model once again completed within the time
limit of 3,601.24 seconds, with an optimality gap of 0.4676% and a total expected cost of
1,078,933.26. Backorder costs increased to 657,310.24, nearing baseline levels, while
regular production remained stable at 417,060.00. Minor adjustments were made to over-
time and inventory, but the rise in backorders signals growing difficulty in absorbing de-
mand variability through the existing production plan. This reflects the model’s limitations
as uncertainty intensifies.
Finally, the variance of 500 produced the lowest total expected cost result of 1,049,596.74
and the smallest optimality gap of 0.2488% in 3606.93 seconds. Regular production was
increased to 420,000.00, with significant cuts to overtime and inventory. Backorders also
decreased to 628,374.72, suggesting that the model adapted by internal production to
mitigate the high volatility in demand.
In summary, the two-stage stochastic model demonstrates its effectiveness in responding
to varying levels of demand uncertainty. As variability increases, the model dynamically
reallocates resources balancing overtime, inventory, and backorders, while maintaining
solution feasibility and improving cost performance. This confirms the value of stochastic
programming for complex, high-volatility environments.
In summary, the two-stage stochastic model demonstrates its effectiveness in responding
to varying levels of demand uncertainty. As variability increases, the model dynamically
reallocates resources, balancing overtime, inventory, and backorders, while maintaining
solution feasibility and improving cost performance. Notably, the lowest total expected
cost was obtained at the highest demand variance, which may seem counterintuitive at
first. However, this outcome can be attributed to the broader scenario diversity introduced
by the higher variance, which allowed the model to identify more cost-efficient production
and backorder strategies across the entire distribution of possible demands, related also
with the Gamma distribution’s shape, particularly moderate skewness and tail behaviour.
As a result, the model was better able to anticipate against extremes, enabling a smoother
allocation of regular production and reduced reactive measures like overtime or excess
inventory. This behaviour highlights one of the strengths of two-stage stochastic program-
ming, its capacity to explore broader uncertainty representations to find lower-cost solu-
tions through first-stage planning and targeted second-stage corrections. This confirms
the value of stochastic programming for complex, high-volatility environments, particularly
when the distribution’s structure allows for meaningful scenario differentiation.
5.3.6
Stochastic Results
The stochastic evaluation for the second industrial environment is based on four core
metrics, Expected Value (EV), Recourse Problem (RP), the Expected result of using the
Expected Value solution (EEV), and the Value of the Stochastic Solution (VSS). These
results are summarized in Table 5.17.
In the baseline configuration, the stochastic model had an EV of 589,900.00, which repre-
sents the deterministic model’s cost under expected demand without variability. The RP
cost, the expected cost of solving the stochastic problem with full demand information is
considerably higher at 1,076,571.13. The EEV reaches 1,121,960.08, signifying the cost
incurred when using the EV solution across all scenarios. The VSS, which measures the
46
Forecasting and Scenario Generation for Optimized Manufacturing
==PAGE:51==
Metrics
Baseline
V 100
V 300
V 500
EV
589,900.00
591,228.40
591,327.20
591,367.35
RP
1,076,571.13
1,050,332.95
1,078,933.26
1,049,596.74
EEV
1,121,960.08
1,129,616.59
1,158,150.12
1,130,258.19
VSS
45,388.95
79,283.64
79,216.86
80,661.45
Table 5.17: Stochastic results - environment two
advantage of adopting a stochastic approach over relying on deterministic decisions, is
at 45,388.95, reinforcing the value of explicitly modelling uncertainty in this setting.
When demand variance increased to 100, although the EV increases modestly to 591,228.40
due to the slightly more dispersed demand profile, both the RP and EEV show a reduction
compared to the baseline. This results in a slightly lower VSS of 79,283.64. These find-
ings suggest that under mild uncertainty, the stochastic model still adapts to variability,
reducing cost exposure and improving planning robustness.
For variance 300, the EV continues its incremental rise to 591,327.20, while RP climbs to
1,078,933.26 and EEV slightly reached 1,158,150.12. The VSS reduces more to 79,216.86,
suggesting that the benefits of using a stochastic solution decrease under this level of vari-
ance.
Under variance of 500, the model registers the EEV at 1,130,258.19 and a moderate RP
at 1,049,596.74, with a final EV of 591,367.35. Interestingly, the VSS goes to 80,661.45,
indicating that under higher variance in uncertainty, the benefits of using a stochastic
model again become more preferable. This increase in VSS can be attributed to the
growing gap between the EEV and RP values, highlighting the limitations of deterministic
compare to an adaptive second-stage decisions.
A critical point in this analysis is the substantial and consistent gap between the EV and
both RP and EEV values, often approaching or exceeding a difference of 500,000 mone-
tary units. It is natural to question whether this difference may signal flaws or misconfig-
uration in the modelling approach. However, such a conclusion is not supported by the
structure of the experiment. This results are not supported from errors or poor modelling
in either the deterministic or stochastic formulations, but from their inherent conceptual
differences and demands generations.
The deterministic EV model assumes that demand equals its expected value and opti-
mizes production accordingly, without accounting for variability or extreme realizations.
On the other hand, the RP and EEV computations integrate the full stochastic nature of
demand, including the costs of backordering and inventory across a range of possible
outcomes. In real-world settings, uncertainty translates to real costs, particularly in envi-
ronments sensitive to full capacity resource penalties. As this case, resources capacities
were fulfilled with actual capacity, which are already in their maximum level, and as the
demand increase considerable the model adjust to costly backorders sets.
Additionally, the demand Gamma distribution used in this case is positively skewed, as
shown in earlier sections. This asymmetry leads to a concentration of low to moderate de-
mand values with a long right tail of potentially high demand spikes. Deterministic models
cantered on the mean are inherently unable to prepare for these rare but costly scenarios,
whereas the stochastic model explicitly integrates them into the planning process. As a
result, the EV cost remains low, but unrealistic, while the RP and EEV reflect the actual
Forecasting and Scenario Generation for Optimized Manufacturing
47
==PAGE:52==
cost exposure under uncertainty.
In summary, the observed gap between EV and RP/EEV is not a sign of poor modelling,
but rather an important indicator of the limitations of deterministic planning in uncertain en-
vironments. The consistent magnitude of the VSS across all variance levels underscores
the tangible benefits of using stochastic optimization. While the deterministic model may
serve as a useful benchmark or initial approximation, only the stochastic model captures
the true operational risks and cost implications of demand variability in this industrial set-
ting.
5.4
Industrial Environment Three
5.4.1
Distribution Fit
The distribution fitting analysis for the third industrial environment revealed that the de-
mand data was best modelled by an Exponential distribution, as shown in table 5.18, by
the lowest sum of squared errors (SSE) compared to Normal, Gamma and Log-Normal
alternatives. Statistically, the Exponential distribution’s superior performance indicates a
highly skewed pattern, which is typically characterized by a high concentration of low-
demand observations and a long tail of sporadic high-demand events. This aligns with
environments subject to infrequent but extreme demand fluctuations, such as those ob-
served in high-priority or emergency service supply chains.
The visual support for the Exponential fit is provided in the two plots shown in figures
5.9 and 5.10. The histogram in figure 5.9 illustrates the empirical distribution of demand
across observed periods. The shape is sharply right-skewed, with the vast majority of de-
mand values clustered below 10,000 units and a long tail extending beyond 80,000 units.
This heavy skew and the presence of extreme outliers confirm the need for a distribution
capable of capturing this asymmetry and irregularity.
In figure 5.10, the Exponential distribution is visually overlaid on the histogram. The fitted
curve closely follows the observed demand density, especially in the lower range where
most values lie. The rapid decline of the density curve is particularly well aligned with
the observed decay in frequency, reinforcing the statistical evidence of the Exponential
model’s. Additionally, the curve maintains a smooth and realistic representation of the
long tail, capturing the few but substantial demand spikes without over fitting.
Together, the statistical and visual analyses strongly justify the selection of the Exponen-
tial distribution for modelling demand in the third industrial environment. The Exponen-
tial model’s capacity to accommodate heavy-tailed distributions makes it an appropriate
choice for environments where rare but significant demand surges are a critical business
factor, ensuring that further scenario generation and optimization modelling reflect the
true risk and variability inherent in the system.
SSE
Normal
1.240 x 10−7
Log-Normal
1.772 x 10−7
Gamma
1.699 x 10−7
Exponential
4.11 x 10−8
Table 5.18: SSE results of demand distribution - environment three
48
Forecasting and Scenario Generation for Optimized Manufacturing
==PAGE:53==
Figure 5.9: Frequency distribution - environment three
Figure 5.10: Density distribution - environment three
5.4.2
Scenario Generation
The scenario generation analysis for the third industrial environment was once again eval-
uated using three indicators, Mean Matching Error (MME), Scenario Range Coverage and
Outlier Rate. The results are summarized in tables 5.19 and 5.20.
Monte Carlo
1000
10000
50000
MME
72.98%
72.91%
72.95%
Scenario Range
70.20%
70.40%
70.40%
Outlier
0.00%
0.00%
0.00%
Table 5.19: Monte Carlo performance metrics - environment three
Bootstrap
1000
10000
50000
MME
6.56%
5.73%
5.53%
Scenario Range
100%
100.00%
100.00%
Outlier
0.00%
0.00%
0.00%
Table 5.20: Bootstrap performance metrics - environment three
The Monte Carlo method, while computationally straightforward and commonly used for
scenario generation, demonstrated consistently weak performance in this environment.
Across all sample sizes, the MME remained exceptionally high, approximately 72.9%,
indicating a significant mismatch between the empirical demand distribution and the sim-
ulated scenarios. Additionally, the scenario range coverage was limited to just over 70%,
Forecasting and Scenario Generation for Optimized Manufacturing
49
==PAGE:54==
meaning that nearly 30% of the actual demand range was not adequately represented
in the generated data. Although Monte Carlo produced no statistical outliers, its failure
to capture the full variability of the Exponential demand undermining its reliability in this
context. This is especially problematic in environments with heavy-tailed distributions like
the one at hand, where rare but extreme demand values must be adequately reflected in
the scenario set.
In contrast, the Bootstrap method demonstrated strong and consistent performance across
all sample sizes. At the highest level of 50,000 scenarios, the MME was reduced to
just 5.53%, a dramatic improvement over Monte Carlo. More importantly, the Bootstrap
method achieved complete 100% scenario range coverage without introducing any out-
liers. This indicates a robust capacity to reproduce the underlying demand distribution,
particularly the long tail that characterizes the exponential fit.
Based on these results, Bootstrap with 50,000 scenarios was selected for subsequent
stochastic modelling. Its superior alignment with the empirical data and ability to reflect
extreme demands ensure that the optimization models are grouped in a more realistic
representation of uncertainty.
5.4.3
Scenario Reduction
The scenario reduction phase for the third industrial environment involved evaluating Fast
Forward Selection (FFS) and K-Means clustering. The results are shown in tables 5.21
and 5.22, respectively. The FFS method showed progressively better performance as
the number of selected scenarios increased. For the subset of 10 scenarios, the MME
was relatively high at 28.06%, but this decreased notably to 20.46% and 18.01% for 30
and 50 scenarios, respectively. In all configurations, FFS achieved complete coverage of
the scenario range and introduced no outliers. These results demonstrate the method’s
ability to maintain a distributional close to the original dataset while improving accuracy
with larger subsets. This performance is particularly significant given the exponential
nature of the underlying demand distribution, which requires careful attention to capture
long-tail behaviour.
K-Means, on the other hand, performed substantially worse across all configurations.
Even with 50 scenarios, the MME remained high at 39.71%, suggesting that the clusters
formed by the algorithm failed to represent the full spectrum of demand values accurately.
While scenario range coverage and outlier metrics were equivalent to FFS, 100% and
0.00%, respectively. The consistently poor MME indicates that K-Means struggles with
non-symmetric, heavy-tailed distributions like the exponential, often centering clusters
around more frequent lower values and neglecting the extremes.
Based on this comparative analysis, FFS with 50 scenarios was selected for the final
stochastic model implementation. This configuration offered the best balance between
representativeness and computational efficiency, effectively preserving the essential fea-
tures of the original demand distribution while significantly reducing the scenario space.
FFS
10
30
50
MME
28.06%
20.46%
18.01%
Scenario Range
100%
100%
100%
Outlier
0.00%
0.00%
0.00%
Table 5.21: FFS performance metrics - environment three
50
Forecasting and Scenario Generation for Optimized Manufacturing
==PAGE:55==
K-Means
10
30
50
MME
44.96%
41.11%
39.71%
Scenario Range
100%
100%
100%
Outlier
0.00%
0.00%
0.00%
Table 5.22: K-Means performance metrics - environment three
5.4.4
Deterministic Analysis
The deterministic analysis for the third industrial environment follows a simulated deter-
ministic demand generated from the fitted exponential distribution, as shown in figure 5.11.
The distribution displays a heavy right skew with a high frequency of low-demand values
and a long tail extending towards extremely high values. This pattern is consistent with
the exponential distribution identified during the distribution fitting analysis in subsection
5.4.1 supporting the statistical and visual evidence that demand in this environment is
characterized by extreme demand spikes.
Figure 5.11: Deterministic distribution - environment three
The cost breakdown for the deterministic model under the four sets is shown in Table
5.23. In the baseline case, the model achieved an optimal solution in 5.70 seconds with
a total cost of 423,862.50. All the demand was satisfied using regular production with
no overtime or backorders. The inventory holding cost and setup cost reflect a proactive
inventory strategy in the nature of an exponential demand.
Cost Component
Baseline
V 100
V 300
V 500
Regular time production cost
387,412.50
388,125.00
391,687.50
395,550.00
Overtime production cost
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Setup cost
11,025.00
16,887.50
19,487.50
19,700.00
Inventory cost
25,425.00
26,137.50
22,825.00
22,050.00
Backorder cost
0.00
0.00
0.00
246.00
Total cost
423,862.50
431,150.00
434,000.00
437,546.00
Table 5.23: Deterministic cost breakdown - environment three
As demand variance increases to 100, the model again achieves an optimal solution in
6.78 seconds. The total cost rises to 431,150.00, mainly driven by increased setup and
inventory costs, which indicates a shift in strategy to accommodate larger variability. Reg-
ular production remains the primary fulfilment method and no backorders are observed,
Forecasting and Scenario Generation for Optimized Manufacturing
51
==PAGE:56==
confirming the model’s efficiency in absorbing modest fluctuations through inventory man-
agement.
Under variance 300, the total cost increases further to 434,000.00, with a similar struc-
ture, regular production equals to 391,687.50, setup as 19,487.50, and inventory equals
with value of 22,825.00 dominate the cost components. No backorders or overtime are
incurred, and the model completes in 7.08 seconds with a zero gap, suggesting that even
with moderate variance, the deterministic model maintains robust planning strategies.
At the highest demand variance, the solution is found in just 6.47 seconds with a mini-
mal optimality gap of 0.0097%. The total cost rises to 437,546.00. Regular production
increases slightly to 395,550.00, while setup and inventory costs stabilize. A very small
amount of backorder cost appears, marking the first instance of unmet demand. This
signals the model’s upper operational limit under deterministic planning, where additional
variability begins to surpass its ability to pre-allocate resources effectively.
In summary, the deterministic model in the third industrial environment performs efficiently
and consistently under escalating demand variability. The cost increases steadily but
predictably, driven primarily by setup and production decisions, with minimal disruption
observed even at the highest tested variance. This confirms the model’s adaptability
in face of exponential demand behaviour, although its lack of responsiveness to rare,
extreme outliers may limit its suitability in higher uncertainty.
5.4.5
Two-Stage Analysis
The two-stage analysis for the third industrial environment structure is represented across
four configurations, baseline and variances V100, V300 and V500. The results are sum-
marized in table 5.24. Additionally, figure 5.12 illustrates the demand density distribution
across all stochastic scenarios generated in the modelling, which closely align with char-
acteristics of the exponential distribution previously analysed in subsection 5.4.1. The
figure lustrates a sharply right-skewed shape, with a dense cluster of low-demand sce-
narios and a long tail of high values. This structure confirms the appropriateness of the
exponential model and justifies the observed variation in production and cost responses.
Figure 5.12: Stochastic distribution - environment three
The baseline scenario resulted in a total cost of 491,899.71, which was associated with a
considerable optimality gap of 4.7861%, indicating convergence difficulties within the time
limit of 3,600 seconds. The cost structure reveals a strong dependence on overtime pro-
duction, cost of 137,006.32, and backorders costing 129,749.74, with regular production
contributing to 180,412.50 and inventory and setup costs remaining relatively moderate.
52
Forecasting and Scenario Generation for Optimized Manufacturing
==PAGE:57==
Cost Component
Baseline
V 100
V 300
V 500
Regular time production cost
180,412.50
279,487.50
238,500.00
206,175.00
Overtime production cost
137,006.32
58,763.55
110,371.97
86,210.58
Setup cost
8,487.50
13,862.50
68,366.24
9,691.87
Inventory cost
36,243.64
32,114.60
25,575.24
19,531.12
Backorder cost
129,749.74
48,894.09
23,242.65
132,385.96
Total cost
491,899.71
433,122.24
466,056.13
453,994.54
Table 5.24: Two-Stage cost breakdown - environment three
This profile is typical in environments with high demand volatility, where the model com-
pensates for uncertainty through reactive cost components.
In the V100 scenario, which introduced demand variability into the stochastic simulation,
achieved near-optimal convergence with a gap of 0.0354% within the time limit. Interest-
ingly, the total cost for V100 is reported as 433,122.24, lower than the baseline total cost,
driven by a significant reduction in backorder cost to 48,894.09, down from over 129,000
monetary units in the baseline scenario. Regular production increased to 279,487.50
while overtime dropped drastically to 58,763.55.
The V300 scenario followed this trend with a total cost of 466,056.13 and a higher gap of
14.0027%, suggesting more difficulty in convergence as demand uncertainty increased.
While regular and overtime production levels adjusted to 238,500.00 and 110,371.97 re-
spectively, setup cost increased sharply to 68,366.24. Although backorders remained
relatively low to 23,242.65, the sharp rise in setup and production costs points to a more
volatile scheduling behaviour needed to handle the wider demand spread.
In the V500 scenario, the total cost settled at 453,994.54 with a still high gap of 8.3212%.
The configuration was marked by a decrease in regular production to 206,175.00 and
a continued reliance on overtime. Backorders spiked to 132,385.96, indicating that the
stochastic model was reaching its operational limits under extreme demand variability.
The adjustments across all cost components suggest that while the model could identify
a feasible production strategy, it struggled to find near-optimal combinations within the
available time limit.
The cost differences observed between the deterministic and two-stage stochastic analy-
ses in the third industrial environment are both significant and revealing, particularly when
examined from the perspective of the underlying demand exponential distribution, which
is known for its high variance and heavy right tail. While the deterministic model assumes
a single average demand forecast, the two-stage stochastic model accounts for a wide
range of potential demand realizations, which greatly influences the cost structure and
production decisions.
One of the most noticeable differences lies in the use of regular time production. In the
deterministic model, regular production levels were consistently higher across all variance
scenarios. This can be attributed to the two-stage stochastic model distribution attempt to
defer some of the production to the second stage, where it can better respond to realized
demand, leading to overtime and backorders.This leads to the second critical observa-
tion, the stochastic model makes substantial use of backorders, whereas the deterministic
counterpart effectively eliminates them in most cases. For example, backorder costs in
the baseline stochastic scenario reached 129,749.74, while in the deterministic baseline
Forecasting and Scenario Generation for Optimized Manufacturing
53
==PAGE:58==
it remained at zero. This divergence is rooted in the very structure of the exponential
distribution, where a large number of low-demand realizations are combined with a long
tail of extremely high demands. The two-stage model anticipates these rare but severe
spikes and, to balance expected cost, allows some demand to be met later via backorder.
The deterministic model, lacking visibility into this long-tail risk, opts instead for capacity
planning and inventory to satisfy its single demand estimate. Moreover, the presence
of overtime in the two-stage model, while absent in the deterministic one, further under-
scores the adaptive nature of stochastic planning. Overtime is a flexible but costly option
that becomes valuable when the model must react to unforeseen demand fluctuations in
the second stage. In the deterministic model, the lack of variance awareness leads to
planning production so precisely that no overtime is needed.
These differences can be largely attributed to the challenges posed by modelling future
demand under an exponential distribution. Exponential distributions do not have a typical
standard demand level, once the demand might present constantly ups and downs due to
the extreme pikes and heavy right tail, making it extremely difficult for scenario generation
to fully capture future uncertainties with a manageable number of representative scenar-
ios. This uncertainty forces the two-stage model to adopt costly strategies for prioritise
flexibility, such as backorders and overtime. On the other hand, the deterministic model,
despite solving faster and more efficiently, ignores this long-tail risk entirely, which may
result in underperformance when actual demand deviates from its mean-based assump-
tions.
5.4.6
Stochastic Results
The stochastic results for the third industrial environment are summarized in table 5.25,
which reports the Expected Value (EV), Recourse Problem (RP), Expected result of the
Expected Value solution (EEV) and the resulting Value of the Stochastic Solution (VSS)
for the baseline and three increasing levels of demand variance.
Metrics
Baseline
V 100
V 300
V 500
EV
423,862.50
431,150.00
434,000.00
437,546.00
RP
491,899.71
433,122.24
466,056.13
453,994.54
EEV
617,076.40
436,675.62
542,098.71
631,318.70
VSS
125,176.69
3,553.38
76,042.58
177,324.16
Table 5.25: Stochastic results - environment three
In the baseline configuration, the EV solution, which represents the deterministic problem,
has a total cost of 423,862.50, while the RP solution, which represents the true optimal
two-stage stochastic plan, results in a higher cost of 491,899.71. The EEV, however,
shows an even more inflated cost of 617,076.40. This discrepancy suggests that when
first-stage variables are fixed across all stochastic scenarios, it performs quite poorly due
to its inability to adapt to the extreme demand realizations.
Interestingly, the V100 configuration stands out due to its unusually low VSS of just 3,553.38,
which is significantly lower than in other sets. This result may appear counterintuitive at
first, considering that V100 introduces variance in the demand. However, it indicates
that, in this specific instance, the stochastic model and the deterministic EV solution carry
very similar outcomes in terms of performance under realized demand. One possible ex-
planation is that the generated scenarios in V100 did not capture the full extent of the
exponential tail. As a result, the demand profile may have resembled a more bounded
distribution, allowing the deterministic plan to perform nearly as well as the fully adaptive
54
Forecasting and Scenario Generation for Optimized Manufacturing
==PAGE:59==
stochastic one. This highlights one of the main challenges of modelling with exponential
distributions, as their long tails can have disproportionate impacts, these rare events are
often not properly represented in finite scenario samples, which can distort the results.
For V300, the gap between EEV and RP remains substantial and VSS rises again to
76,042.58. Here, the stochastic model benefits more clearly from adaptability, likely due
to the inclusion of more extreme demands in the scenario set. The same trend is observed
in V500, where the VSS peaks at 177,324.16. This value demonstrates the growing payoff
of employing a two-stage model as the difficulty of demand forecasting increases. The
higher EEV of 631,318.70, far exceeding both RP and EV, again indicates that the first-
stage fixed decision variables suffer greatly when subjected to stochastic realizations that
include large tail events.
In summary, this analysis reaffirms the importance of modelling approaches that account
for the structural properties of demand distributions. The exponential distribution, with
its high skewness and long tails, poses significant forecasting challenges, especially for
scenario generation. The large EEV values across all variance levels show that determin-
istic approximations are insufficient in this context. The exception in V100 illustrates how
delicate the balance is, small changes in how scenarios are generated can either mask or
expose the volatility of the underlying distribution. As a result, this environment highlights
the critical role of scenario quality in two-stage modelling and the need for careful design
and validation of stochastic inputs when dealing with heavy-tailed distributions.
5.5
Trade-off Analysis
The trade-off analysis aims to assess whether implementing a two-stage stochastic model
provides a significant advantage over the deterministic alternative for each industrial en-
vironment. This decision is guided by the Value of the Stochastic Solution (VSS) across
different levels of demand variance and interpreted in the context of each company’s oper-
ational priorities and risk exposure. High VSS values signal potential cost reductions and
performance improvements by adopting a stochastic approach, whereas low VSS values
suggest that a deterministic model may already be sufficient. However, only this state-
ment by itself does not define whether stochastic should be adopted or not, as a deeper
analysis must be implemented across the three different environments to understand and
validate each individual circumstances. The values of each VSS are shown in figure 5.13,
where lighter colours represent lower values and darker colours denote higher values.
In Environment one, a high-volume plastic injection moulding company operating under
a Log-Normal demand distribution, shows in the results a consistently increasing VSS,
from 61,115 at the baseline to 173,293 at the highest variance level, clearly demonstrate
that stochastic optimization is particularly effective under rising demand variability. This
pattern suggests that in environments where production is continuous, costs are tightly
linked to inventory levels, and product variety is high, stochastic models can significantly
contribute to scheduling and reduce costs under uncertainty. Also, as is typical for Log-
Normal distributions, stochastic modelling captures demand dispersion more accurately
and prevents overstocking or backorders under the environment. With 45 distinct prod-
ucts and 59 production resources, this environment exhibits high operational complexity,
reinforcing the need for probabilistic planning tools capable of scaling the different pro-
duction scenarios across multi-product environment. The combination of high volume and
skewed demand makes this environment an ideal candidate for stochastic optimization,
especially at moderate and high variance levels.
Forecasting and Scenario Generation for Optimized Manufacturing
55
==PAGE:60==
Figure 5.13: VSS Heat-map
Environment two involves the production of axles and suspension systems for the au-
tomotive industry, representing a medium volume manufacturing where stockouts have
high penalties due to potential disruptions in supply chains. The demand follows a gamma
distribution, with VSS remaining relatively stable across all variance levels, ranging from
45,389 to 80,661. The gamma distribution, known for its positive skewness and moderate
tail behaviour, introduces uncertainty without being excessively erratic. This explains the
uniform benefit of stochastic modelling, as it consistently adds value by better aligning pro-
duction with demand, although it does not show drastic gains under higher variances be-
cause the distribution does not heavily amplify extreme events. The environment features
39 products and 42 resources, suggesting moderate complexity but with enough variability
and interdependence to justify flexible planning mechanisms across multiple productions
scripts. Because this environment is highly sensitive to demand misalignment, especially
due to Just-in-Time requirements and supply chain integration, stochastic optimization is
most effective when stockout costs are structurally high, even if demand variance is not
extreme. Therefore, a stochastic model is advisable across all scenarios, particularly to
minimize stockouts and improve reliability performance in supply commitments.
Environment three, representing a glass manufacturing company facing Exponential de-
mand, reveals a more complex trade-off. The environment shows the most variable VSS
pattern, starting high at 125,177 for the baseline, dropping sharply to 3,553 at V100, and
then rising to 177,324 at V500. The low VSS at V100 is likely an error of scenario gener-
ation under an exponential demand distribution, where the long tail makes reliable fore-
casting extremely difficult. At higher variances, the stochastic model proves increasingly
beneficial, possibly due to better alignment with extreme demand realizations. This fluc-
tuation reflects the complexity of modelling exponential demand distributions, where long
tails and rare events can distort scenario-based planning. With 50 products and 44 re-
sources, this environment reflects a sensitive production network where high product di-
versity and non-linear demand risk exposure require adaptive and risk-aware planning.
Given the sensitivity of this environment adopting a stochastic model is recommended for
baseline and high-variance scenarios. However, the difficulty in capturing the full spec-
trum of possible demand scenarios at low variance levels leads to an underestimation of
the stochastic model’s value, so in this case, a better scenario generation method should
be adopted to increase the reliability of the future generated scenarios.
56
Forecasting and Scenario Generation for Optimized Manufacturing
==PAGE:61==
In conclusion, the trade-off analysis suggests that stochastic optimization is beneficial and
often necessary, but its utility varies by industry context and level of demand uncertainty.
The environments studied demonstrate that stochastic optimization is most effective when
demand distributions are skewed, when the cost of planning errors is amplified by produc-
tion scale, as in Environment One, or when service levels and stockout penalties dominate
the cost structure, as in Environment Two. Additionally, the number of products and re-
sources in each environment directly contributes to the decision, higher product variety
and complex resource allocation amplify the uncertainty impact, making stochastic models
not only preferable but often essential. Thus, the decision to apply stochastic optimiza-
tion should not only consider statistical properties like variance but also the nature of the
demand distribution and the operational context.
5.6
Limitations and Future Work
While this research demonstrated the effectiveness of two-stage stochastic optimization
supported by the scenario generation technique Bootstrap and the scenario reduction
Fast Forward Selection (FFS), it is important to acknowledge the limitations encountered
during implementation, as well as directions for future research. A key limitation lies in
the interaction between scenario generation and scenario reduction. Although Bootstrap
outperformed Monte Carlo in terms of initial generation quality, especially regarding MME,
scenario range, and the absence of outliers, the integration of FFS as a reduction method
diminished some of this accuracy, particularly in environments with high variability. The
MME values after reduction, even with FFS, indicated a drop in fidelity when the reduced
scenario set was used in the optimization model. This suggests that while Bootstrap
is a powerful method to replicate demand behaviour, its full advantage is only realized
when a sufficiently large number of scenarios is retained. Reducing them, especially
in environments with long-tailed distributions, can result in a loss of representativeness,
which ultimately impacts solution quality. Therefore, future studies should explore either
increasing the number of generated scenarios used for reduction or refining the distribu-
tional assumptions before sampling to mitigate such losses.
Another notable challenge emerged in the exponential demand environment, where de-
mand volatility and heavy skewness led to difficulties in generating balanced scenario
sets. This distribution’s extreme right tail often produced scenarios with exceptionally
high demands, distorting the solution space and increasing the complexity of capacity
planning, as it was particularly evident in the stochastic analysis. Also, the Expected Re-
sult of the Expected Value (EEV) was significantly higher than both Expected Value (EV)
and Recourse Problem (RP), in cases at higher variance levels. This mismatch reflects
the limitations of EEV. Future work could address this by exploring alternative stochas-
tic solution methods, such as robust optimization, or improving tail management during
scenario generation.
Although FFS was found to be superior to K-Means in preserving scenario diversity and
range coverage, it still required considerable computational time when applied to large
scenario sets. As problem sizes scale, this computational workload may compromise the
practicality of the approach in real-time planning configurations. Additionally, managing
a large number of products and resources, such as those modelled in this study, with up
to 50 products and nearly 60 resources, introduces practical challenges. The complexity
increases combinatorially with the number of decision variables and constraints, poten-
tially affecting solver performance and interpretability. Future models could investigate
decomposition techniques, neural networks or metaheuristic approaches to manage this
scalability issue.
Forecasting and Scenario Generation for Optimized Manufacturing
57
==PAGE:62==
Another limitation is the modelling scope in the stochastic formulation. The current model
focuses on production, inventory, setup and backorder costs but omits several real-world
constraints that could impact feasibility and accuracy. For instance, constraints involving
workforce availability and shifts, varying setup times between product transitions, machine
maintenance schedules or alternative production routes for certain products are common
in manufacturing environments. Incorporating such constraints would make the model
more realistic and its decisions more actionable for practical deployment in industrial en-
vironments.
Another important limitation is the lack of real-world validation. Although this study is
based on realistic industrial scenarios, the results have not yet been tested against actual
company data or operations. A critical future step would be to collaborate with companies
representing each simulated environment and validate whether the predictions and model
outputs align with real-world behaviour. This validation can be conducted through several
practical approaches, such as comparing model outputs with historical data, assessing
how well the model predicts production variables, alternatively a shadow simulation can
be run in parallel with the company’s real planning process for a specific period, allowing
for direct comparison of results without disrupting operations. This would ensure external
validity and increase the practical adoption of the proposed stochastic planning frame-
work.
Finally, a full sensitivity analysis remains to be conducted. Exploring how the model reacts
to changes in key parameters, such as adding or removing overtime capacity, varying
time-based capacity limits, or adjusting penalty costs for inventory and backorders, would
provide more comprehensive insights into the robustness and flexibility of the stochastic
optimization results. This would be especially important in dynamic environments where
business constraints evolve over time.
In summary, while this research confirms the strategic benefit of combining Bootstrap
and FFS in stochastic capacity planning, it also highlights the need for further refinement
in aligning generation and reduction techniques, especially under heavy-tailed demand
distributions. Future developments should also address model validation with real oper-
ations, scalability under high product-resource combinations, and the inclusion of more
detailed manufacturing constraints. These advancements will strengthen the applicability
and impact of stochastic optimization in real-world production planning.
58
Forecasting and Scenario Generation for Optimized Manufacturing
==PAGE:63==
6
Conclusion
The findings of this research provide a comprehensive answer to the central question:
”When can stochastic optimization be effectively applied in manufacturing environments to
improve capacity planning under demand uncertainty?” Through the integration of a two-
stage stochastic programming technique, supported by scenario generation and reduc-
tion strategies, this study has demonstrated the conditions when stochastic approaches
offer substantial advantages over traditional deterministic planning methods, particularly
in real-world, multi-product production environments.
Stochastic optimization was implemented and evaluated across three distinct industrial
environments, each characterized by unique production configurations and demand dis-
tributions, Log-Normal, Gamma and Exponential. Scenario generation was performed
using both Monte Carlo and Bootstrap methods, with Bootstrap emerging as the superior
approach, underscoring the advantage of resampling-based techniques for better pre-
serving empirical data characteristics, especially under complex or skewed demand be-
haviours. To address the computational capacity of working with large scenario sets,
scenario reduction techniques, Fast Forward Selection (FFS) and K-Means, were eval-
uated. FFS was consistently superior, offering lower approximation errors and greater
preservation of demand distribution features.
The comparative analysis between deterministic and stochastic models was grounded in
the Value of the Stochastic Solution (VSS), a metric that quantifies the benefit of using
a stochastic model over a deterministic one. The results revealed that the application of
stochastic optimization is most effective under certain conditions, such as when the de-
mand distribution is skewed, when production volumes are high and sensitive to demand
misalignment, and when stockout costs or service level penalties are significant. In such
contexts, deterministic models tend to underestimate the risks associated with variability,
leading to unsatisfactory planning outcomes.
In conclusion, stochastic optimization is not universally superior in all study environments
presented in this study, but it becomes essential in environments where uncertainty is
impactful and costly to ignore. This research shows that when supported by appropriate
scenario generation and effective reduction, two-stage stochastic models can significantly
contribute to capacity planning decisions. However, the limitation and future potential
studies presented in the research, the methodological framework and insights provided by
this study offer practical guidance for companies seeking to align medium-term production
planning with real-world demand uncertainties.
Forecasting and Scenario Generation for Optimized Manufacturing
59
==PAGE:64==
Bibliography
[1]
Eugene Peden Xinhui Zhang Meenakshi Prajapati. “A stochastic production plan-
ning model under uncertain seasonal demand and market growth”. In: International
Journal of Production Research Vol. 49, No. 7, 1957–1975 (2011).
[2]
T.S. Lee Jinxing Xie Xiande Zhao. “Freezing the master production schedule un-
der single resource constraint and demand uncertainty”. In: Int. J. Production Eco-
nomics 83 65–84 (2003).
[3]
J.M. Wilson B. Karimi S.M.T. Fatemi Ghomi. “The capacitated lot sizing problem: a
review of models and algorithms”. In: Omega 31, 365–378 (2003).
[4]
Schlenkrich et al. “Enhancing Rolling Horizon Production Planning Through Stochas-
tic Optimization Evaluated by Means of Simulation”. In: (2025).
[5]
B. Wang B. Esmaeilian S. Behdad. “The evolution and future of manufacturing: A
review”. In: Journal of Manufacturing Systems, Volume 39, Pages 79-100 (2016).
[6]
Simon Thevenin Dan Luo and Alexandre Dolgui. “Stochastic Optimization Method-
ology for Production Planning with Uncertain Demand and Lead Time Based on the
Digital Twin”. In: Science, Engineering Management and Information Technology
(2024).
[7]
Görkem Yılmaz Seyed Amin Seyfi Ihsan Yanıkoglu. “Multi-stage scenario-based
stochastic programming for managinglotsizing andworkforce scheduling at Vestel”.
In: Annals of Operations Research, Volume 344, pages 911–936 (2023).
[8]
L.A. Wolsey G. Belvaux. “A specialized branch-and-cut system for lot-sizing prob-
lems”. In: Management Science 46, 724–738 (2000).
[9]
L.A. Wolsey G. Belvaux. “Modelling practical lot-sizing problems as mixed-integer
programs”. In: Management Science 47 (7), 993–1007 (2001).
[10]
N. Brahimi et al. “Single item lot sizing problems”. In: European Journal of Opera-
tional Research 168, 1–16 (2006).
[11]
K. Copil et al. “Simultaneous lotsizing and scheduling problems: a classification and
review of models”. In: ORSpectrum, 39(1), 1–64 (2017).
[12]
Garcia et al. “Application-Driven Learning: A Closed-Loop Prediction and Optimiza-
tion Approach Applied to Dynamic Reserves and Demand Forecasting”. In: (2024).
[13]
Louveaux François Birge John R. Introduction to Stochastic Programming. Springer,
2011.
[14]
Guiping Hu Zhengyang Hu Goutham Ramaraj. “Production planning with a two-
stage stochastic programming model in a kitting facility under demand and yield
uncertainties”. In: International Journal of Management Science and Engineering
Management (2020).
[15]
Guiping Hu Yihua Li. “Shop floor lot-sizing and scheduling with a two-stage stochas-
tic programming model considering uncertain demand and workforce efficiency”. In:
Computers Industrial Engineering, Volume 111, Pages 263-271 (2017).
[16]
Guiping Hu Zhengyang Hu. “A two-stage stochastic programming model for lot-
sizing and scheduling under uncertainty”. In: Int. J. Production Economics 180, 198–
207 (2016).
[17]
Nishanth Mundru Dimitris Bertsimas. “Optimization-Based Scenario Reduction for
Data Driven Two-Stage Stochastic Optimization”. In: Operations Research (2023).
[18]
Costas D. Maranas Anshuman Gupta. “Managing demand uncertainty in supply
chain planning”. In: Computers and Chemical Engineering 27 1219 / 1227 (2003).
60
Forecasting and Scenario Generation for Optimized Manufacturing
==PAGE:65==
[19]
Stein W. Wallace Michal Kaut. “Evaluation of Scenario-Generation Methods for
Stochastic Programming”. In: Pacific Journal of Optimization (2007).
[20]
Alexander Shapiro Andrzej Ruszczyński. Chapter 6 - Monte Carlo Sampling Meth-
ods, Handbooks in Operations Research and Management Science. School of In-
dustrial and Systems Engineering, 2003.
[21]
B. Efron. “Bootstrap Methods: Another Look at the Jackknife”. In: The Annals of
Statistics, Vol. 7, No. 1, pp. 1-26 (1979).
[22]
B. Efron and R. J. Tibshirani. An Introduction to the Bootstrap. NewYork: Chapman
Hall/CRC, 1993.
[23]
James R. Carpenter Edmond S. W. Ng Richard Grieve. “Two-stage nonparamet-
ric bootstrap sampling with shrinkage correction for clustered data”. In: The Stata
Journal 13, Number 1, pp. 141–164 (2013).
[24]
B. F. Hobbs S. Park Q. Xu. “Comparing scenario reduction methods for stochastic
transmission planning”. In: IET Gener. Transm. Distrib., Vol. 13 Iss. 7, pp. 1005 1013
(2019).
[25]
Römisch W. Dupačová J. Gröwe-Kuska N. “Scenario reduction in stochastic pro-
gramming: An approach using probability metrics”. In: Math. Program., Ser. A 95,
493–511 (2003).
[26]
Römisch W. Heitsch H. “Scenario Reduction Algorithms in Stochastic Program-
ming”. In: Computational Optimization and Applications 24, 187–206 (2003).
[27]
R. Louveaux J. Birge. Introduction to Stochastic Programming. School of Industrial
and Systems Engineering, 2003.
[28]
Ruszczyński A Shapiro A. Dentcheva D. Lectures on Stochastic Programming:
Modeling and Theory. SIAM, 2009.
[29]
Jeffrey B. Goldberg Wayne L. Winston. Operations Research: Applications and Al-
gorithms. Brooks/Cole, 2004.
[30]
Thomas Zeugmann Osamu Watanabe. StochasticAlgorithms: Foundations and Ap-
plications. Springer, 2009.
[31]
W. Römisch J. Dupačová N. Gröwe-Kuska. Scenario reduction in Stochastic Pro-
gramming. Mathematical Programming, 2003.
[32]
W. Römisch N. Gröwe-Kuska H. Heitsch. “Scenario reduction and scenario tree
construction for power management problems”. In: 2003 IEEE Bologna PowerTech
- Conference Proceedings (2003).
[33]
Alexander Shapiro Andrzej Ruszczyński. Chapter 1- Stochastic Programming Mod-
els, Handbooks in Operations Research and Management Science. School of In-
dustrial and Systems Engineering, 2011.
[34]
P.V. Kamesam L.F. Escudero. On solving stochastic production planning problems
via scenario modelling. Springer-Verlag, 1995.
[35]
Sarah M. Ryan Yonghan Feng. “Scenario construction and reduction applied to
stochastic power generation expansion planning”. In: Computers Operations Re-
search, Volume 40, Pages 9-23 (2013).
[36]
Zhang et al. “Two-Stage Bootstrap Sampling for Probabilistic Load Forecasting”. In:
IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management, VOL.69,NO.3 (2022).
[37]
AlHakeem et al. “A new strategy to quantify uncertainties of wavelet-GRNN-PSO
based solar PV power forecasts using bootstrap confidence intervals”. In: Ieee
Power and Energy Society General Meeting, pp. 7286233 (2015).
[38]
Juan M. Morales Antonio J. Conejo Miguel Héctor Fernández Carrión. Decision
Making Under Uncertainty in Electricity Markets. NewYork: Springer, Vol 1, Chapter
3.3, 2010.
Forecasting and Scenario Generation for Optimized Manufacturing
61
==PAGE:66==
[39]
Salman et al. “Two-Stage Clustering with k-Means Algorithm”. In: Communications
in Computer and Information Science, vol 162. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg (2011).
[40]
Li Yang Daobao Xu Zhiping Chen. “Scenario tree generation approaches using K-
means and LP moment matching methods”. In: Journal of Computational and Ap-
plied Mathematics, Volume 236, Pages 4561-4579 (2012).
[41]
Wong M. A Hartigan J. A. “A K-means clustering algorithm”. In: Applied Statistics,
Volume 28, Issue 1, pp. 100-108 (1979).
[42]
Sergei Vassilvitskii David Arthur. “K-means++: The advantages of careful seeding”.
In: Proceedings of the Annual Acm-siam Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, Vol-
ume 07-09, pp. 1027-1035 (2007).
62
Forecasting and Scenario Generation for Optimized Manufacturing
==PAGE:67==
A
Additional Tables
Table A.1: Notations for deterministic model
Sets
P
Set of products p
R
set of production resources r
T
set of time periods t
Subscripts
i 1, 2, . . . , P
Products
j 1, 2, . . . , P
Products
Parameters
Cp
prod
Cost per unit for product p
Cp
extra
Cost per unit of overtime production for product p
Cp
stock
Holding cost per unit inventory for product p
Cp
back
Backorder penalty per unit of product p
Csetup
i,j
¨
Setup cost for changing from product i to product j
tp,r
Processing time required to produce one unit of product p in resource r
tsetup
i,j
Setup time from changing from product i to product j
Capr,t
Available regular capacity for resource r at time t
Capextra
r,t
Extra overtime capacity for resource r at time t
dp,t
Demand for product p in time t
M
Big-M constant for setups constraints
Decision variables
xp,t ∈Z+
planned production quantity for product p in period t
yp,t ∈Z+
additional production quantity for product p in period t
ip,t ≥0
inventory of product p in time t
bp,t ≥0
backorders of product p in period t
αp,t ∈{0, 1}
1 if product p is setup in time t
zi,j,t ∈{0, 1}
1 if a changeover from product i to product j occurs in time t
Forecasting and Scenario Generation for Optimized Manufacturing
63
==PAGE:68==
Table A.2: Notations for stochastic model
Sets
P
set of products p
R
set of production resources r
T
set of time periods t
S
set of demand scenarios s
Subscripts
i 1, 2, . . . , P
products
j 1, 2, . . . , P
products
Parameters
Cp
prod
cost per unit for product p
Cp
extra
cost per unit of overtime production for product p
Cp
stock
holding cost per unit inventory for product p
Cp
back
backorder penalty per unit of product p
Csetup
i,j
¨
setup cost for changing from product i to product j
tp,r
processing time required to produce one unit of product p in resource r
tsetup
i,j
setup time from changing from product i to product j
Capr,t
available regular capacity for resource r at time t
Capextra
r,t
extra overtime capacity for resource r at time t
dp,t,s
demand for product p in time t in scenario s
πs
probability of scenario s
M
Big-M constant for setups constraints
Decision variables
First-Stage
xp,t ≥0
planned production quantity for product p
αp,t ∈{0, 1}
1 if product p is setup in time t
zi,j,t ∈{0, 1}
1 if a changeover from product i to product j occurs in time t
Second-Stage
yp,t,s ≥0
additional production quantity for product p at time t in scenario s
ip,t,s ≥0
inventory carried of product p at time t in scenario s
bp,t,s ≥0
backorders of product p at time t in scenario s
zextra
i,j,t,s ∈{0, 1}
1 if a changeover from product i to product j occurs in time t in scenario s
64
Forecasting and Scenario Generation for Optimized Manufacturing
==PAGE:69==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 358
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.dtu.dk
