==PAGE:1==
A Distributed Architecture for Process Min­
ing (DAPM): Ingesting and Filtering Online
Streaming Data
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM): Ingesting and Filtering On­
line Streaming Data
Danish Title: En distributet arkitektur til procesmining (DAPM): Indtagelse og filtrering af
online streamingdata
Master Thesis
July, 2025
By
Reshma Zaman (s233247)
Tama Sarker (s232913)
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must
include the customary bibliographic citation, including
author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer
Science, Brovej, Building 118, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Den­
mark
www.byg.dtu.dk
Project Git Repository:
https://github.com/DAPM­Thesis/dapm2
Demo Project Git Repository :
https://github.com/tamasarker1434/demo­sse­server
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This thesis was completed at the Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Sci­
ence at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU) as a requirement for the Master of
Science in Computer Science and Engineering degree. We utilized AI­based language
tools to improve sentence structure, ensure grammatical accuracy, and maintain an aca­
demic tone throughout this report, in accordance with DTU’s standards for theses and
scientific papers.
The reader is expected to have a basic understanding of real­time data processing and
process mining.
Reshma Zaman
s233247
July 18, 2025
Tama Sarker
s232913
July 18, 2025
ii
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM): Ingesting and Filtering Online Streaming Data
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Process mining is positioned at the intersection of data science and operational analy­
sis, enabling organizations to uncover, monitor, and optimize their process flows. How­
ever, many existing tools are constrained by static, file­based logs and monolithic designs,
which hinder the integration of diverse data sources, the enforcement of privacy policies,
and the delivery of real­time insights.
In this thesis, we present an advanced Distributed Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM)
that incorporates real­time streaming into the core of process analysis. Our approach di­
vides the pipeline into three lightweight microservices—Source, Operator, and Sink—all
connected through Apache Kafka. The Source service maintains a persistent Server­Sent
Events (SSE) feed, applies configurable JSON­driven filters and reversible anonymiza­
tion, and transforms raw events into a schema suitable for mining. The Operator conducts
a Simple Heuristic Miner in real time, computing direct­follow dependency and frequen­
cies scores, while the Sink stores metrics in InfluxDB. To visualize the mining output, we
have integrated Grafana dashboards into our solution.
We validate DAPM through extensive live and simulated streaming scenarios, processing
both real Wikipedia edits and synthetic student activities. The results showcase zero
message loss, sustained throughput that matches input volumes, and average end­to­
end latencies. These findings underscore the feasibility and practicality of privacy­aware,
real­time process mining at scale. Looking ahead, we aim to explore runtime configuration
reloading, richer mining metrics, and multi­tenant cloud deployments to advance DAPM
into a fully production­ready platform for continuous process intelligence.
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM): Ingesting and Filtering Online Streaming Data
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Ekkart Kindler
Associate Professor and Supervisor,
DTU
Andrea Burattin
Associate Professor and Supervisor,
DTU
We wish to convey our heartfelt gratitude to our honorable supervisors, Professor Ekkart
Kindler and Professor Andrea Burattin, for their exceptional guidance and unwavering
support throughout the course of this master’s thesis. Their weekly meetings were key
in refining the project’s scope, addressing technical challenges, and nurturing our growth
as researchers and engineers.
It has been a genuine privilege to work under your mentorship. The insights, expertise,
and encouragement you have so generously provided have been essential—not only in
bringing this thesis to completion but also in equipping us for our future academic and
professional pursuits. We are profoundly thankful for your dedication and support.
iv
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM): Ingesting and Filtering Online Streaming Data
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Problem Statement and Context
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Identification of Research Gap
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.5
Research Objective
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.6
Thesis Structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
State of the Art
7
2.1
Related Work on Distributed Process Mining
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Real­Time Stream Processing and Microservice­Based Architectures . . . .
7
2.3
Research Questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Methodology
9
3.1
Research Approach and Rationale . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Workflow and Project Phases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.3
Event Data Sources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3.4
Tools and Technology Selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.5
Risk Assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
4
Solution Design
19
4.1
Overall System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.2
Conceptual Architecture Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
5
Implementation
33
5.1
Steps of Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
5.2
Programming Languages and Frameworks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
5.3
Kafka and ZooKeeper Configuration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
5.4
Microservices Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
5.5
Docker and Container Orchestration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
5.6
Database Schema and Persistence Strategy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
5.7
Visualization Dashboard . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
5.8
Repository Access and Deployment Instructions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
6
Experimental Results and Evaluation
49
6.1
Use Case­based Result Discussion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
6.2
System Verification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
6.3
System Validation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
7
Discussion
69
7.1
RQ1: Real­time stream integration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
7.2
RQ2: Dynamic filtering, anonymization, and mapping
. . . . . . . . . . . . 69
7.3
RQ3: Microservice decomposition for scalability and resilience . . . . . . . 70
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM): Ingesting and Filtering Online Streaming Data
v
==PAGE:8==
7.4
RQ4: Real­time visualization effectiveness
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 70
7.5
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 70
8
Conclusion
73
Bibliography
75
vi
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM): Ingesting and Filtering Online Streaming Data
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
In recent years, data­driven decision­making has revolutionized how organizations de­
sign, monitor, and enhance their processes. As event data has grown richer and is pre­
sented as a continuous stream, reliance on static logs has become inadequate. To ad­
dress this challenge, we have advanced the Distributed Architecture for Process Mining
(DAPM) to handle real­time data flows. This enhancement includes features such as live
data ingestion, flexible filtering, privacy­aware anonymization, and instant visualization,
all aimed at equipping end users with the most practical and effective tools for their data
analytics needs.
In this chapter, we will discuss the importance of real­time process mining, identify the
shortcomings of existing tools, and demonstrate how our enhancements integrate into the
broader DAPM ecosystem. This ecosystem is being collaboratively developed alongside
teams focused on performance optimization and security enhancements.
1.1
Background
In recent years, businesses have increasingly turned to digital solutions, leading to a
significant rise in the amount of data generated from various activities. This surge in
data creates new opportunities for organizations to monitor and improve their operations
using a technique called process mining. Process mining helps connect the world of data
analysis with how businesses manage their operations by revealing insights from data logs
that show how processes are actually carried out[1]. Before going to the core discussion
lets understand the general definition and basic terminology those need to explian in the
earlier stage in our thesis report.
Process Mining: Process mining is a data–driven discipline situated at the intersection
of business process management and data science. By extracting knowledge from event
logs—chronological records of activity executions annotated with timestamps and con­
textual attributes—process mining techniques facilitate the automatic discovery of as­is
process models, the assessment of conformance between observed behavior and pre­
scribed specifications, and the continuous optimization of real­world workflows. These
methods uncover performance bottlenecks, compliance deviations, and opportunities for
improvement, thereby providing actionable, empirical insights that extend beyond tradi­
tional, manually constructed process documentation [1].
Discovery Algorithm: Discovery algorithms aim to reconstruct an explicit process model
(e.g., a Petri net or a direct­follows graph) exclusively from recorded event data, without
presupposing any a priori behavioral template. By analyzing the sequence and relation­
ships of event occurrences, these algorithms unveil the true operational structure of the
underlying workflow, capturing constructs such as decision­driven branches, repetitive
loops, and concurrent activities. As a result, the generated model reflects the empirical
control­flow of the observed system, rather than an idealized or manually specified de­
sign. HeuristicMiner, for instance, applies frequency­based thresholds to filter infrequent
behavior and thus produces a more robust and comprehensible net, effectively balancing
model simplicity against fitness and precision criteria [2].
Frequency: Frequency analysis quantifies the occurrence rates of individual activities or
transitions within an event log or stream. By visualizing these frequencies can discern
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM): Ingesting and Filtering Online Streaming Data
1
==PAGE:10==
predominant execution paths, highlight critical process segments, and detect infrequent
or anomalous behaviors that may warrant further investigation [3].
Stream: Unlike static, file­based logs, a stream constitutes a continuous, real­time se­
quence of event records—commonly delivered via Server­Sent Events or message­queue
systems. Streaming process mining frameworks ingest and analyze each event upon ar­
rival, enabling instantaneous model updates, ongoing conformance assessments, and
proactive anomaly detection [4].
Pipeline: In computer science, a pipeline is a set of data processing elements connected
in series, where the output of one element is the input of the next one. For process mining
perspective, pipeline comprises an ordered set of asynchronous processing stages—such
as filtration, transformation, enrichment, and aggregation—through which data elements
transit, often coordinated by a message broker. This architectural pattern supports modu­
larity, horizontal scalability, and resilience to component failures, thereby ensuring robust
handling of high­throughput event streams [3].
DAPM: DAPM (Distributed Architecture for Process Mining) is a peer­to­peer framework
that enables organizations to collaboratively design and execute process mining pipelines
by sharing data and algorithms in a secure, decentralized, and automated way. The core
component of DAPM is: Flow node(source, operator and sink), Organization Node(flow
nodes belonging to the specific organization), and Edge(epresents the connection and
flow of data between two nodes) [5].
1.2
Motivation
Many existing process mining tools are designed to work with static data, which means
they analyze information that has already been collected rather than analyzing data as
it comes in. However, modern businesses operate in fast­paced environments where
events occur rapidly, like online transactions or sensor readings. For instance, during
peak sales events such as Black Friday, companies might handle millions of transactions
every hour. If they rely on outdated methods that process data in batches, they face
delays that can hinder timely decision­making.
Additionally, current process mining tools often use centralized systems and static data(batch
event logs with fixed volume of data for a certain time period), which can restrict their abil­
ity to grow, adapt, and recover from errors in real time, especially when dealing with data
spread across different locations. In today’s landscape, having the ability to analyze data
in real­time has become essential, particularly for organizations that manage their own
data independently. Unfortunately, very few platforms provide the necessary features for
quickly processing data, filtering it effectively, and ensuring privacy, all within a flexible
and distributed framework.
This need for improvement has led to the creation of the Distributed Architecture for Pro­
cess Mining (DAPM), which is a new framework designed to enable easier and more
collaborative process mining[5].
But this solution is unveil the real­time or continuous data so our work enhances DAPM
by adding features such as real­time stream ingestion, advanced filtering options, pri­
vacy protection, and real­time visualizations. This directly addresses the gaps in current
process mining capabilities, especially in environments rich with dynamic data.
Our research builds upon earlier studies in real­time data mining and distributed systems,
like streaming heuristic mining [2] and distributed frameworks like Beamline [6], which
have explored how to analyze data on the fly but have not fully addressed how to gather
2
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM): Ingesting and Filtering Online Streaming Data
==PAGE:11==
before sending to the operator or mining node and present that data effectively. We are
focusing on the crucial link between collecting data and analyzing it, ensuring that we
can handle high volumes of incoming data, maintain compliance with privacy standards,
and deliver insights in a user­friendly dashboard format. Together, these features will
help establish a foundation for providing continuous and real­time insights into processes
within DAPM and beyond.
1.3
Problem Statement and Context
While process mining has proven invaluable for analyzing and optimizing business op­
erations, most existing industrial or production level tools—such as ProM, Celonis, and
Disco—remain tailored to static, batch­based scenarios. This design limitation hinders
their applicability in modern systems, where event data streams—such as user behavior,
transactions, or system events—must be processed continuously and adaptively.
Although DAPM provides a modular framework for distributed process mining, it lacks
essential support for real­time data ingestion, configurable filtering, and privacy­aware
preprocessing. These gaps reduce its ability to operate effectively in high­volume envi­
ronments, where the speed and structure of data are constantly changing.
For instance, during events like Black Friday, a large e­commerce platform must ingest
and analyze millions of events in real time—ranging from user clicks to completed orders.
Without continuous streaming capabilities, DAPM becomes susceptible to bottlenecks
and delays, impeding anomaly detection and rapid response.
Figure 1.1: Black Friday Sales Static vs Real­time Insights
Moreover, most current tools do not offer robust mechanisms for early­stage filtering and
anonymization. Processing raw data without refinement wastes computational resources
and risks exposing sensitive user information, affecting both performance and regulatory
compliance.
Our project addresses these limitations by extending DAPM with high­throughput stream
ingestion, customizable filtering logic, and later visualizing the process model not only
for better understand of a process but also user can immediately explore and act on
fresh insights—ensuring that the platform can meet the demands of real­time, privacy­
conscious process mining in distributed environments.
1.4
Identification of Research Gap
Despite steady progress in streaming process­mining research, three critical gaps remain
unresolved:
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM): Ingesting and Filtering Online Streaming Data
3
==PAGE:12==
1. End­to­end ingestion and preprocessing: Existing frameworks—including ProM
streaming plug­ins, RapidProM, and pyBeamline—primarily focus on discovery or
conformance algorithms themselves [2, 7]. They rarely address the starting point of
the pipeline: scalable, fault­tolerant ingestion, dynamic filtering, and privacy­aware
attribute mapping. Consequently, researchers end up reinventing the ingestion layer
for every project, duplicating effort and making it much harder to reproduce each
other’s results.
2. Cross­organizational streaming collaboration: Prior work on controlled data shar­
ing in DAPM [3] outlines an architecture for batch­oriented pipelines, but does not
extend these mechanisms to high­velocity streams. Issues such as back­pressure
handling, schema evolution, and synchronized access control across multiple orga­
nizations remain largely unexplored.
3. Integrated visualization and feedback loops: Real­time dashboards, like Grafana,
are common in industry. However, few academic projects link live data mining re­
sults to visualization tools in a flexible way associate with continuous and time driven
process mining. Without this connection, analysts cannot quickly check or change
their filtering criteria, which reduces the usefulness of streaming analytics[4].
Addressing these gaps necessitates an ingestion component that (i) scales with large e­
commerce or IoT event volumes, (ii) enforces domain­specific filtering and anonymization
at line­rate, and (iii) publishes mining results to visualization and analytics services. This
thesis focuses on designing and implementing such a component within the DAPM mi­
croservice ecosystem, complementing efforts on streaming discovery, conformance, and
security.
1.5
Research Objective
The primary objective of this thesis is to extend the Distributed Architecture for Process
Mining (DAPM) to support real­time data ingestion, transformation, but later we also
worked on storing mining result on sink and visualize it to the end­user that they can
get update on real­time about the current process. While the current DAPM infrastruc­
ture provides a foundation for modular and decentralized process mining, it lacks robust
mechanisms to operate efficiently in dynamic, high­throughput environments. Our re­
search specifically targets the full functional ingestion and preprocessing stages of the
process mining pipeline.
To address these limitations, we focus on designing and implementing scalable distributed
system, that capable of:
• Ingesting real­time data streams from external sources, such as Wikipedia edit
events.
• Applying dynamic filtering based on configurable metadata and domain­specific cri­
teria.
• Supporting attribute mapping for key process mining attributes such as case_id,
activity, timestamp.
• Executing privacy­aware reservable anonymization strategies, including suppres­
sion and pseudonymization.
• Persisting both raw and processed data in a time­series database and enabling live
visualization via Grafana dashboards.
4
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM): Ingesting and Filtering Online Streaming Data
==PAGE:13==
Our approach builds upon modern stream­processing technologies such as Apache Kafka,
Spring Boot microservices, and Docker containers to ensure fault tolerance, modular de­
ployment, and cross­organizational compatibility. By integrating these capabilities into the
DAPM ecosystem, we aim to deliver a reusable, extensible solution for streaming process
mining applications.
Additionally, our work is conducted in coordination with two other thesis teams who con­
tribute to the broader DAPM research:
• Team 1 focuses on conceptualization and performance analysis for streaming pipelines.
• Team 3 addresses security concerns in distributed process mining scenarios.
Together, these parallel solutions aim to create a unified, collaborative framework that
supports the full lifecycle of real­time process mining—from data acquisition to secure
analytics.
1.6
Thesis Structure
This thesis is organized to highlight both the theoretical foundations and practical con­
tributions of our research. Chapter 2 presents the current state of distributed process
mining, stream processing technologies, and microservice­based architectures, followed
by the research questions that guide our investigation.
Chapter 3 outlines the methodology, including our research design, tools, and risk as­
sessment. Chapter 4 describes the overall proposed system with the architecture and the
design rationale behind the extended DAPM framework.
In Chapter 5, we detail the implementation of key components such as Kafka­based data
ingestion, microservice orchestration, and filtering pipelines. Chapter 6 evaluates the sys­
tem through experimental tests and performance metrics. Following this, Chapter 7 dis­
cusses the results in relation to the research questions, as well as limitations and lessons
learned.
Finally, Chapter 8 concludes the thesis and suggests possible directions for future work.
the full source code for the DAPM system for real­time data, developed in this thesis is
available as an open­source project on GitHub at:
Thesis Project: https://github.com/DAPM-Thesis/dapm2
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM): Ingesting and Filtering Online Streaming Data
5
==PAGE:14==
6
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM): Ingesting and Filtering Online Streaming Data
==PAGE:15==
2
State of the Art
To address the limitations of current process mining tools in real­time, distributed envi­
ronments, it is essential to understand the existing research. This chapter presents a
survey of related work across key areas relevant to our project: distributed process min­
ing frameworks, and real­time stream processing technologies, and microservice­based
system architectures. We conclude the chapter by revisiting and refining the research
questions that guide the direction and scope of this thesis.
2.1
Related Work on Distributed Process Mining
Traditional process mining tools such as ProM, Celonis, and Apromore were primarily de­
veloped for centralized, batch­oriented analysis and provide limited support for real­time
or distributed applications. Although widely adopted, these tools encounter performance
bottlenecks in scenarios involving high­velocity data streams and distributed infrastruc­
tures.
The paper Process Mining Pipelines with Controlled Sharing of Data and Algorithms pro­
poses a modular pipeline architecture for secure cross­organizational mining, yet it still
operates on offline data and lacks native stream ingestion or visualization modules [3].
Similarly, Beamline focuses on stream­aware discovery algorithms but does not address
challenges related to ingestion scalability or real­time dashboard integration [7].
Cloud­native infrastructures such as Apache Flink deployed over Kubernetes offer elastic
and scalable solutions for continuous processing. These are promising directions for pro­
cess mining but are still in early adoption for full end­to­end pipelines [8]. Additionally, tool
evaluations show that Apromore and Celonis struggle with maintaining responsiveness
and fault tolerance in distributed contexts [9].
Benchmarking initiatives such as DPM­Bench attempt to evaluate distributed PM tech­
niques across different environments, especially in cyber­physical systems[10]. However,
none offer a full­fledged integration of ingestion, anonymization, filtering, and visualization
in real­time.
2.2
Real­Time Stream Processing and Microservice­Based
Architectures
Modern process mining in dynamic environments depends heavily on real­time stream
processing and modular architectures. Technologies like Apache Flink, Kafka, and Storm
enable low­latency data ingestion and processing, which are essential for continuous anal­
ysis of event streams [11, 12]. Deployed in cloud­native environments (e.g., Kubernetes),
these tools offer scalability and resilience [8].
Stream processing frameworks support different architectural paradigms such as Lambda
and Kappa, with Flink being particularly effective due to its event­time semantics and
exactly­once guarantees [13, 14]. In process mining, this allows for ongoing discovery
and conformance checking without waiting for complete logs. Platforms like Beamline
[6] and streaming heuristic miners [2] lay the technical foundation for handling evolving
streams.
Microservice­based architectures are increasingly being adopted in distributed process
mining systems to enhance maintainability, scalability, and efficient resource utilization.
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM): Ingesting and Filtering Online Streaming Data
7
==PAGE:16==
By breaking down functionalities—such as data ingestion, process mining operation and
store or preserving the result—into independent services, these architectures provide im­
proved fault isolation, facilitate parallel development, and support dynamic scaling. The
use of containerization through Docker further boosts the flexibility, robustness, and ease
of deployment of these microservices. Additionally, implementing event­driven commu­
nication via Kafka ensures a responsive, resilient, and non­blocking data flow among the
microservices.
Benchmarking initiatives like DPM­Bench further evaluate these distributed mining sys­
tems, quantifying trade­offs among latency, throughput, and resource consumption under
realistic cyber­physical workloads [10]..
2.3
Research Questions
Based on the identified technological and architectural gaps in existing process mining
tools, this thesis addresses the following research questions:
• RQ1: How can real­time stream processing be effectively integrated into a dis­
tributed process mining architecture to support continuous ingestion of high­velocity
event data?
• RQ2: What architectural and design mechanisms enable dynamic filtering, con­
figurable anonymization, and metadata mapping in a modular microservice­based
pipeline?
• RQ3: How can microservice­based decomposition improve the scalability, resilience,
and deployment flexibility of real­time process mining systems?
• RQ4: What techniques and tools are most effective for visualizing real­time process
mining results in a user­friendly and actionable manner?
8
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM): Ingesting and Filtering Online Streaming Data
==PAGE:17==
3
Methodology
This chapter outlines the methodological framework of our research, detailing the ap­
proach, workflow phases, data sources, and the tools and technologies chosen, along
with risk mitigation strategies. It guides readers through the development of our real­time,
distributed process mining system from planning and prototyping to implementation and
evaluation. The chapter also explains key design decisions and how engineering princi­
ples were applied to achieve scientific severity and practical relevance
3.1
Research Approach and Rationale
This research employs an engineering­centered design paradigm that is ideally suited
for the development and assessment of distributed, real­time systems. Instead of con­
centrating exclusively on theoretical models, our approach prioritizes the construction,
deployment, and iterative refinement of a functional system. Specifically, we focus on
enhancing the Distributed Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM) by incorporating fea­
tures such as streaming ingestion, filtering, anonymization, and visualization, identically
associate at the beginning and the end of a pm pipeline.
The system­building approach is consistent with our practical objectives: we seek not only
to demonstrate feasibility but also to create a reusable and modular prototype that facili­
tates real­time process mining. This approach is in line with other system­oriented contri­
butions, such as, offline data based DAPM [5], Beamline [6] and Pipelines with Controlled
Sharing [3], which validate their frameworks through deployment and experimentation in
complex environments.
We utilized iterative development throughout the project to refine components based on
preliminary testing and performance evaluations. This approach, rooted in engineering
design principles, incorporates agile­inspired cycles of development and testing. By merg­
ing rigorous engineering with responsive iteration, we ensure our system is both robust
and adaptable to real­world constraints.
3.2
Workflow and Project Phases
Our thesis followed a structured, engineering­focused, agile approach through iterative
development cycles, divided into five key phases: (1) System Architecture Design, (2)
Ingestion Pipeline Development, (3) Event Transformation and Filtering, (4) Mining Result
Storage and Visualization, and (5) Final Refinement and Evaluation.
In the first phase, with mutual agreement with other teams, we defined the architecture
for a distributed, modular process mining system. We chose a microservices design with
clear separations for ingestion, processing, storage, and visualization. Apache Kafka was
selected as the central broker for reliable inter­service communication, and Server­Sent
Events (SSE) was used for real­time ingestion from external sources like the Wikipedia
Streaming API and our custom student activity demo project.
During the second phase, we implemented ingestion services capable of connecting
to the streaming APIs, extracting events, and converting them into a structured internal
format. These events were then passed to the next microservice using Kafka.
In the third phase, we applied transformation steps including filtering, anonymization,
and attribute mapping. Anonymized metadata was stored in MongoDB to preserve map­
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM): Ingesting and Filtering Online Streaming Data
9
==PAGE:18==
ping rules and support potential de­anonymization under policy control. The processed
events were sent via Kafka to the process mining node for further analysis.
The fourth phase focused on storing the results produced by the mining node. InfluxDB
was used to store time­series mining metrics (e.g., frequency and dependencies), while
Grafana dashboards were configured to visualize these results interactively. This enabled
real­time monitoring of mining outputs and their evolution.
The final phase included debugging, testing the full pipeline, and finalizing documenta­
tion.
Throughout this process, we followed a milestone­driven structure with key deliverables,
according to the project plan initially prepared but gradually updated with time as needed,
including (M1) completed ingestion and streaming setup, (M2) integration of anonymiza­
tion and filtering, (M3) successful delivery of mining results, and (M4) dashboard­based
visualization.
3.3
Event Data Sources
In our thesis we used real­time event data from two main sources: (1) the Wikimedia live
edit stream and (2) a custom student activity simulation stream. Both sources employ real­
time streaming protocols and highlight the diversity of real­world event­based systems.
Wikipedia Event Stream: We utilized the Wikimedia RecentChange API1, which offers a
public real­time stream of user interactions across various language editions of Wikipedia.
This stream was consumed using Server­Sent Events (SSE), a lightweight protocol well­
suited for one­way event delivery in real time. Events typically include metadata such as
page title, user, timestamp, edit type, and namespace, making them ideal for transforma­
tion into structured process events.
Figure 3.1: Snapshot of Wiki­media Events
Student Activity Demo Stream:
To simulate events like “Attended Lecture”, “Joined Lab”, “Checked Portal”, “Took Quiz”,
“Submitted Assignment”, we created a synthetic student activity stream generator project2
using the SSE protocol. This allowed us to test scenarios such as high­frequency inter­
actions and anonymization needs in a controlled environment, replicating behaviors seen
in real student information systems.
1https://stream.wikimedia.org/v2/stream/recentchange
2https://github.com/tamasarker1434/demo-sse-server
10
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM): Ingesting and Filtering Online Streaming Data
==PAGE:19==
Figure 3.2: Snapshot of Student Activity Demo Simulator Events
This dual­source, streaming­based data collection framework facilitated a comprehen­
sive and reproducible assessment of our distributed architecture within both open and
controlled environments. It effectively supported privacy considerations and performance
benchmarking, thereby enhancing the reliability of the evaluation process.
3.4
Tools and Technology Selection
In developing a real­time distributed process mining system, we selected various tech­
nologies to meet essential requirements such as modularity, scalability, low­latency com­
munication, and robust data processing. This section provides an overview of each tool
and its key mechanisms, highlighting their roles in ensuring adaptability, performance,
quick data exchange, and accurate analysis within the system.
3.4.1
Apache Kafka
Apache Kafka is a distributed event store and stream­processing platform for building
real­time data pipelines and stream­processing applications [15]. It employs a publish­
subscribe model in which producers asynchronously write data to named topics, and
consumers subscribe to those topics to read the data.
A topic can be thought of as a logical channel or “folder” for events, supporting mul­
tiple concurrent producers and consumers. Each topic is subdivided into one or more
partitions, which are ordered, immutable sequences of messages [15]. Partitions en­
able horizontal scalability—by distributing load across multiple brokers—and guarantee
in­partition ordering via unique, sequential offsets for each message.
(b) Topic partitions and consumer group parallelism.
(c) Kafka cluster with multiple brokers
serving producers and consumers.
Figure 3.3: Key components of Apache Kafka’s architecture.
Kafka runs on a cluster consisting of multiple brokers (servers) that store and serve
topic partitions. When a producer sends a message, Kafka appends it to the end of the
specified partition on its leader broker. For fault tolerance and durability, each partition
is replicated across several brokers: one broker acts as the leader (handling all reads
and writes), while the others are followers that maintain synchronized copies [15]. In the
event of a broker failure, a follower is automatically promoted to leader, ensuring no data
loss and uninterrupted service.
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM): Ingesting and Filtering Online Streaming Data
11
==PAGE:20==
This combination of topics, partitions, brokers, and clusters allows Kafka to handle mas­
sive volumes of events with low end­to­end latency, making it an ideal backbone for mod­
ular, distributed, and resilient real­time systems.
3.4.2
Server­Sent Events (SSE)
Server­Sent Events (SSE) is a lightweight, unidirectional communication protocol stan­
dardized as part of the HTML5 specification, allowing servers to push real­time updates
to clients over a single long­lived HTTP connection [16]. Unlike WebSockets, which facil­
itate full­duplex communication (two­way interaction between the server and client), SSE
is tailored for scenarios where only the server transmits data, making it simpler to imple­
ment and manage.
The server transmits a stream of text­based messages formatted with specific fields, such
as data, id, and event, which the client can parse asynchronously. Client­side implemen­
tation is typically accomplished using JavaScript with the EventSource interface, which
automatically manages reconnections and event dispatching.
Key features of SSE:
• Unidirectional Streaming: Data flows from server to client only, suitable for event
feeds or live monitoring.
• Automatic Reconnection: The browser automatically attempts to reconnect if the
connection is lost.
• Text­based Protocol: Messages are UTF­8 encoded and follow a simple format,
easing parsing and debugging.
• Built­in HTTP Support: Operates over standard HTTP/1.1 without additional pro­
tocols or handshakes.
Figure 3.4: Illustration of Server­Sent Events (SSE) architecture: Server streams data
continuously to connected clients over HTTP.
SSE is well­suited for real­time data ingestion from public APIs like the Wikimedia Recent
Change stream, where frequent one­way event notifications are generated. In such use
12
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM): Ingesting and Filtering Online Streaming Data
==PAGE:21==
cases, SSE provides a scalable alternative to polling or full­duplex channels, with reduced
overhead and implementation complexity.
3.4.3
MongoDB
MongoDB is a widely adopted NoSQL, document­oriented database that stores data in
BSON (Binary JSON) format, which allows for complex, nested data structures and flexi­
ble schemas [17]. MongoDB offers a dynamic schema design, unlike relational databases
that require predefined schemas and structured tables. This flexibility is beneficial for
evolving data structures and diverse event types, allowing documents in the same collec­
tion to have different fields or structures.
Key features of MongoDB include:
• Document Model: Each unit of data is stored as a document, typically in a JSON­
like structure. These documents can represent rich, hierarchical data directly.
• Indexing: MongoDB supports various types of indexing (single field, compound,
geospatial, text) to enhance query performance.
• Aggregation Pipeline: Allows advanced data processing and transformation through
stages like $match, $group, $project, etc. This makes MongoDB capable of in­
database analytics and preprocessing.
• Horizontal Sharding: Distributes data across multiple nodes to enable horizontal
scaling, which supports high­throughput workloads and ensures system resilience
under load.
• Replication: Built­in replica sets ensure high availability by automatically failing
over to secondary nodes in case of primary failure.
MongoDB’s flexibility in storing semi­structured and schema­less documents makes it an
ideal backend for use cases like metadata mapping and anonymization logs. These op­
erations often involve variable and sensitive attributes, which are not well­served by in­
flexible relational schemas.
3.4.4
InfluxDB
InfluxDB is a high­performance, open­source time­series database designed specifically
for storing and querying timestamped data such as metrics, events, and logs [18]. Unlike
general­purpose databases, InfluxDB is optimized for high write and query throughput
with low latency, making it highly suitable for real­time analytics.
It supports time­based data organization using measurements, tags, fields, and times­
tamps, enabling efficient storage and retrieval of high­frequency event streams. Key fea­
tures include:
• Retention Policies: Automatically expire old data after a defined period, which is
essential for managing large volumes of time­series data.
• Downsampling: Reduces storage requirements and improves query performance
by aggregating older high­resolution data into lower resolution summaries.
• Continuous Queries: Automatically execute and store the results of repeated queries,
supporting live aggregation over streaming data.
InfluxDB uses the powerful Flux query language, which enables complex data transfor­
mations, joins, statistical computations, and filtering on time­series data. It is designed for
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM): Ingesting and Filtering Online Streaming Data
13
==PAGE:22==
interoperability and can easily integrate with visualization platforms like Grafana, making
it a preferred choice for system observability and performance monitoring tasks.
Given these capabilities, InfluxDB is widely adopted in domains such as DevOps, IoT, fi­
nance, and process analytics—where time­awareness, performance efficiency, and flex­
ible querying over time­stamped data are critical.
3.4.5
Grafana
Grafana is a powerful open­source platform for data visualization, monitoring, and ob­
servability that enables users to query, explore, and visualize data from a variety of data
sources [19]. Originally designed for time­series data, Grafana has evolved to support
diverse sources such as InfluxDB, Prometheus, Elasticsearch, MySQL, PostgreSQL, and
more.
One of Grafana’s key strengths lies in its ability to build dynamic and customizable dash­
boards. These dashboards support multiple visualization panels including time­series
graphs, heatmaps, bar charts, and gauge meters. Users can apply transformations, fil­
ters, thresholds, and custom queries using either SQL­like syntax or source­specific query
languages such as Flux (for InfluxDB) or PromQL (for Prometheus).
Key features of Grafana include:
• Multi­source Integration: Grafana can connect to both SQL and NoSQL databases,
as well as streaming data sources. It natively supports plugins for popular platforms
such as InfluxDB and Prometheus.
• Interactive Dashboards: Users can create real­time, interactive dashboards that
support templating, variable injection, and drill­down capabilities.
• Alerting System: Grafana allows alert rules to be defined on panels or queries,
with configurable thresholds, severity levels, and integrations with tools like Slack,
PagerDuty, and email for notifications.
• Authentication and Access Control: It supports fine­grained user roles, Lightweight
Directory Access Protocol(LDAP) integration, and team­based access to manage
multi­user environments securely.
• Extensibility: Grafana’s architecture supports plugins and extensions for custom
visualizations, new data sources, and enhanced UI functionality.
In the context of time­series analytics, Grafana works closely with databases like InfluxDB
to offer low­latency access to high­frequency event streams, ideal for continuous moni­
toring. Its dashboarding capabilities make it particularly suitable for visualizing process
mining metrics, such as event frequency, transition dependencies, or compliance pat­
terns, when working with streaming data pipelines.
3.4.6
Microservice Architecture
Microservices represent a modern architectural approach that structures an application
as a collection of independently deployable, loosely coupled services [20]. Each ser­
vice is designed to execute a distinct business capability and interacts with others using
lightweight communication protocols—commonly REST over HTTP or message brokers
like Apache Kafka for asynchronous event­driven communication.
At the core of the microservices philosophy lies separation of concerns. Instead of a
single monolithic system, microservices divide responsibilities across different bounded
contexts. This design ensures:
14
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM): Ingesting and Filtering Online Streaming Data
==PAGE:23==
• Independent Development and Deployment: Teams can work on individual ser­
vices without affecting the rest of the system, promoting parallelism and faster de­
livery cycles.
• Technology Heterogeneity: Different microservices can be developed using the
most suitable technology stack or language, depending on their specific require­
ments.
• Scalability: Services can be scaled independently based on demand.
• Resilience and Fault Isolation: Failures in one service do not bring down the entire
pipeline. Circuit breakers, retries, and bulkheads can be applied to contain failure
propagation.
• Continuous Integration / Continuous Deployment (CI/CD): The microservices
architecture naturally supports DevOps practices. Services can be built, tested,
and deployed independently using CI/CD pipelines.
Microservices architecture decomposes applications into small, independently deployable
services and these services are typically stateless, with data persisted through external
systems. The model enhances scalability, agility, and fault isolation compared to mono­
lithic or service­oriented architectures.
3.4.7
Docker
Docker is an open­source platform that enables the packaging, deployment, and exe­
cution of applications in lightweight, portable containers [21]. Containers are isolated
environments that bundle together an application and all its dependencies, ensuring con­
sistency across development, testing, and production environments.
At the heart of Docker’s architecture lies the concept of images and containers. An im­
age is a read­only template that defines the environment and application to run, while a
container is a running instance of that image. Docker utilizes a layered filesystem and
copy­on­write mechanism to optimize resource usage and speed up deployments.
In the context of system architecture, Docker provides several advantages:
• Isolation and Reproducibility: Each component of a system can run in its own iso­
lated container, eliminating dependency conflicts and ensuring reproducible builds
across machines.
• Environment Consistency: Developers can build and test locally in the same en­
vironment that will run in production, reducing ”it works on my machine” issues.
• Simplified Deployment: Applications and their dependencies can be deployed as
a single unit using Docker Compose, which coordinates multi­container applications
with defined networking and volume configurations.
• Resource Efficiency: Compared to virtual machines, containers are lightweight
and boot faster, making them suitable for scalable microservice deployments.
• Version Control for Infrastructure: Dockerfiles act as infrastructure­as­code, al­
lowing infrastructure and system configurations to be version­controlled alongside
the application code.
In distributed systems like DAPM, Docker plays a foundational role in managing microser­
vices such as the ingestion service, processing logic, and the sink service. It enables
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM): Ingesting and Filtering Online Streaming Data
15
==PAGE:24==
consistent runtime environments, supports rapid iteration cycles, and simplifies the or­
chestration of complex services.
3.5
Risk Assessment
During the development of the Distributed Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM) sys­
tem, several technical and operational risks were identified and actively mitigated. These
risks included system design complexity, technology integration, data handling, and real­
time performance. In this section we are going to talk about those.
3.5.1
Technology Integration Risk
Integrating multiple technologies—including Apache Kafka, MongoDB, InfluxDB, Grafana,
and SSE­based APIs—posed compatibility and configuration risks, especially given the
real­time nature of the pipeline.
Mitigation: Each component was containerized using Docker to ensure environment con­
sistency. Integration was tested incrementally with mock data and simplified pipelines
before full system deployment.
3.5.2
Real­Time Performance and Bottlenecks
Streaming systems are sensitive to backpressure and latency. Ingesting high­frequency
event data (e.g., from Wikimedia) risked buffer overflow, delayed processing, or system
crashes.
Mitigation: Apache Kafka was chosen for its backpressure resilience and buffering ca­
pabilities. Functionality wise logging and monitoring were implemented to identify and
resolve bottlenecks during load testing.
3.5.3
Data Quality and Volatility
Event data from external APIs (like Wikipedia) is uncontrolled and noisy, with inconsistent
structures and frequent bursts.
Mitigation: Dynamic filtering and configurable attribute mapping were implemented to
reduce noise and extract only relevant event metadata. Anonymization modules also
safeguarded sensitive fields.
3.5.4
Microservice Communication Failures
Given the distributed microservice setup, the failure of one node (e.g., ingestion or sink
service) could impact downstream processing.
Mitigation: Kafka’s decoupled pub­sub model helped isolate failures. Services were
designed to be stateless and restartable. Health checks and retry mechanisms were
implemented where applicable.
3.5.5
Visualization Reliability
Ensuring correct and timely visualization of process mining results in Grafana required
synchronized data storage and dashboard configuration.
Mitigation: Time­series results were stored in InfluxDB with structured timestamps and
fields, which were mapped into Grafana dashboards via tested Flux queries. Dashboards
were verified under multiple query loads.
3.5.6
Research Scope Drift
Working with relatively new technologies such as real­time stream processing, Kafka­
based pipelines, and microservice architectures often led to an overwhelming amount
16
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM): Ingesting and Filtering Online Streaming Data
==PAGE:25==
of information. Balancing technical exploration with week­by­week delivery of mini mile­
stones proved challenging. This sometimes created the risk of deviating from our originally
scoped objectives.
Mitigation: To manage this, we followed a milestone­driven project plan that helped us
stay aligned with the thesis timeline. Research questions and core architectural goals
were defined early and reviewed with our academic supervisors to prevent unplanned
extensions. The project plan was periodically updated to reflect practical challenges and
ensure stable system development while keeping the scope manageable.
By actively monitoring potential scope drift and updating the plan when needed, we en­
sured that the thesis remained focused, technically feasible, and scientifically rigorous.
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM): Ingesting and Filtering Online Streaming Data
17
==PAGE:26==
18
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM): Ingesting and Filtering Online Streaming Data
==PAGE:27==
4
Solution Design
This chapter outlines the conceptual foundation of the proposed real­time distributed pro­
cess mining pipeline. It discusses the architecture at both high and component levels,
detailing the pipeline structure, the roles of each element, and the flow of event data.
Pseudocode is introduced to illustrate key processes within each component. Design de­
cisions are based on research objectives, emphasizing modularity, scalability, and real­
time responsiveness.
4.1
Overall System
This section outlines the proposed solution, core components of our distributed process
mining system—Source, Operator, and Sink—introducing as Processing Elements. It
presents a high­level model of our solution and describing how every PE is inter­connected
within a modular, scalable architecture.
4.1.1
Process Mining Pipeline and Its Elements
Modern process mining systems are progressively embracing a pipeline architecture, in
which event data traverses through distinct yet interoperable processing components.
This architecture is consistent with the streaming paradigm and encourages modularity,
flexibility, and real­time responsiveness. As illustrated in Figure 4.1, the process mining
pipeline consist of three primary types of Processing Elements (PE), Channel, Input
Port :
• Source PE: The Source PE manages the real­time ingestion of external event
streams, such as Wikipedia updates or student activity data. It conducts filtering to
eliminate irrelevant events, implements anonymization to safeguard sensitive user
information, and performs attribute mapping to transform raw inputs into structured
process mining logs, which include details like case ID, activity, and timestamps.
• Operator PE: This component employs process mining algorithms on the processed
events. In our implementation, a heuristic miner is utilized to uncover behavioral
patterns, including direct succession relations. The Operator PE is designed to
be algorithm­agnostic, allowing for easy transitions or extensions to conformance
checking or clustering­based methods.
• Sink PE: In computing, a sink, or data sink generally refers to the destination of data
flow. A sink can be Databases, Data Warehouse, File system or Dashboard etc.
In our thesis perspective, the Sink Processing Element (PE) functions by receiving
mined models or metrics from the Operator, subsequently storing this data in a time­
series database, specifically InfluxDB. In addition to its data storage capabilities, the
Sink PE serves as an interface to the visualization layer, represented by Grafana.
This integration facilitates real­time analysis and comparison of behavioral patterns,
enhancing the interpretability and utility of the stored data. The connection between
these components provides valuable insights into the underlying processes. This
helps people make better decisions.
• Channel: A Channel can be understood as the “pipe” that facilitates the transfer of
messages between Processing Elements (PEs) without requiring them to be aware
of each other’s internal workings. It functions as a named, durable queue supported
by Kafka, where exactly one PE publishes messages, and one or more downstream
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM): Ingesting and Filtering Online Streaming Data
19
==PAGE:28==
PEs subscribe to them. By defining Channels in configuration rather than in code,
we achieve loose coupling. This allows any source to start publishing to a Channel,
while any compatible operator or sink can commence consumption from it simply by
referencing its name.
• Input Port: An Input Port serves as the designated entry point on a Processing
Element (PE) for receiving a specific stream of events. Each PE can declare one or
more Input Ports, each tailored to accept events of a particular type or role. When
we connect a Channel to a PE’s Input Port, it essentially instruct the system, “Take all
events published on this Channel and direct them to that port.” This configuration
allows a PE to independently process multiple event streams (such as edits from
different wikis) through separate ports.
Figure 4.1: Conceptual Model of Pipeline
In conjunction, Channels and Input Ports create a straightforward yet powerful framework
for constructing pipelines: we specify which PE publishes to which Channel and determine
how each Channel feeds the corresponding PE’s port. The runtime system orchestrates
these connections, ensuring that each PE receives precisely the streams it requires to
function effectively.
4.1.2
Proposed Solution
To address the gaps identified in Chapter 1 and fulfill our four research questions, we en­
hanced the baseline DAPM framework by incorporating a fully streaming, microservice­
based pipeline (see Figure 4.2). Our solution effectively separates concerns into three pri­
mary components: Source(Ingestion Service), Operator(Operator Service), and Sink(Sink
Service), all interconnected through a lightweight Broker (Apache Kafka). But we also
included other component for storing the mining output by integrating Time­series data
base(InfluxDB) and is presented on a Dashboard(Grafana) for real­time monitoring and
exploration.
20
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM): Ingesting and Filtering Online Streaming Data
==PAGE:29==
Figure 4.2: Component Diagram of Proposed Solution
In the following section of this chapter, we will dive deep into each component and its
architecture.
4.1.3
Overall System Conceptual Flow
Conceptually, the system follows a streaming model where event data is published and
consumed asynchronously using Kafka channel and always flows from source to sink, not
vise versa. The flow is illustrating in Figure 4.3 as follows:
1. The Source receives data from a Server­Sent Events (SSE) stream.
2. Events are filtered, anonymized, and mapped to process mining schema into Source
PE.
3. Processed events are published to a Kafka­based Channel.
4. The Operator subscribes to the Kafka Channel via an Input Port and applies min­
ing algorithms.
5. Results are published again to a new Kafka channel, which the Sink subscribes to
for storage and visualization.
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM): Ingesting and Filtering Online Streaming Data
21
==PAGE:30==
Figure 4.3: Pipeline Flow
Example: A user wishes to visually explore the recent changes on the English Wikipedia
page through a dashboard utilizing the “Heuristic Mining” algorithm while ensuring user
anonymity.
The end­to­end system behavior of this use case within the DAPM pipeline is illustrated
in Figure 4.4. The process unfolds through the following stages:
1. The event is captured by the Connector, which maintains an open SSE connection
with the Wikipedia stream endpoint.
2. It is then routed through Filter components. In this case, the filter for the English
Wikipedia page accepts the event, while others (e.g., UK Wikipedia) discard it.
3. The accepted event enters the next Source pre­processing stages, which executes
two key functions:
• Reversible Anonymization: The user identifier is pseudonymized (e.g., masked
or hashed), while allowing for secure de­anonymization under controlled ac­
cess.
• Metadata Mapping: The raw event fields are converted into mining­ready at­
tributes. For example, "wiki" becomes the case ID, "type" becomes the ac­
tivity, and "timestamp" is preserved for ordering.
4. The enriched and anonymized event is forwarded from Source to the next process­
ing element, The Operator, which executes a Heuristic Miner Discovery algo­
rithm. This stage aggregates behavioral patterns such as activity dependencies,
control flows, and frequency distributions.
5. The resulting model (e.g., a dependency graph) is sent to the last processing ele­
ment of the pipeline Sink then the Visualizer renders them on a dashboard. The
user can now view and analyze mining outcomes in real­time.
6. Simultaneously, a secure De­anonymization module holds the mapping between
pseudonymized and original user IDs. This ensures traceability for authorized audits
without compromising user privacy.
22
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM): Ingesting and Filtering Online Streaming Data
==PAGE:31==
Figure 4.4: DAPM End­to­End System Behavior
This real­time, modular pipeline embodies the core principles of event­driven architec­
ture. Each processing element is independently deployable, scalable, and replaceable—
supporting extensibility, privacy, and continuous evolution of the process mining infras­
tructure.
4.1.4
Abstraction and Modularity
The system architecture is built around a modular abstraction of Processing Elements,
where each PE connects to others through dedicated Input Ports and Kafka Channels.
This is depicted in Figure 4.1, where the Pipeline is composed of multiple PEs (Source,
Operator, Sink), each linked via publish­subscribe communication.
This abstraction promotes:
• Loose Coupling: Changes to one PE do not affect others.
• Independent Scaling: Source and Operator can scale separately depending on
data volume or computational complexity.
• Algorithmic Substitution: Operators can be replaced without disrupting the data
ingestion or visualization layers.
• Composability: Pipelines can be constructed by chaining reusable PEs.
4.2
Conceptual Architecture Overview
This section outlines the core processing elements of our distributed process mining
pipeline: the Source, Operator, and Sink. Each processing element (PE) operates as
an independent microservice, ensuring modularity, scalability, and ease of maintenance.
The architecture follows principles of separation of concerns and reactive design, allowing
the pipeline to adapt to varying stream loads and algorithmic needs.
For overall architecture, we are giving high­level class diagram to give the structure of
every processing elements.
For each PE, we detail its responsibilities, internal data flow, and communication inter­
faces. High­level class diagrams and pseudocode illustrate the design intent and orches­
tration of the pipeline components, which together constitute our real­time, algorithm­
agnostic process mining system.
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM): Ingesting and Filtering Online Streaming Data
23
==PAGE:32==
4.2.1
Overall Structure
The general infrastructure of each processing element was modeled by our parallel team,
DAPM1, and then on top of this model we developed our Ingestion and Sink PE. In Fig­
ure 4.5 we present that model.
The DAPM pipeline features a hierarchy of Processing Elements (PEs) designed for dis­
tinct stages in the process flow, with an abstract ‘ProcessingElement‘ class at the top.
This class includes a read­only ‘Configuration‘ object (populated from JSON and we are
calling it JSON Configuration File or simply Configuration file) and standard lifecycle meth­
ods (‘start()‘ and ‘terminate()‘). All concrete PEs, responsible for tasks like data ingestion,
mining, and database writing, adhere to this consistent management interface.
Figure 4.5: Overall Architecture of PE
The first concrete subclass is ‘Source<O extends Message>‘, which pulls data from or
listens to external feeds, converting payloads into typed ‘Message‘ instances. It estab­
lishes its output channel using ‘registerProducer(ProducerConfig)‘ and publishes events
via ‘publish(O)‘. Notable implementations include ‘WebSource‘ and ‘SimpleSource‘ for
polling or streaming, both feeding into Kafka channels.
On the consumption side, the abstract ‘ConsumingProcessingElement‘ connects to input
ports defined in a JSON Configuration file’s ”inputs” array, with ‘registerConsumer(ConsumerConfig)‘
linking channels. The key subclass, ‘Operator<A, O>‘, processes input, applies transfor­
mations, and forwards output wrapped in a ‘Message‘ if a predicate is met. A lightweight
‘SimpleOperator‘ and a specialized ‘MiningOperator‘ for frequency computations are in­
cluded.
The ‘Sink<O extends Message>‘ class opposite to Source consumes processed mes­
24
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM): Ingesting and Filtering Online Streaming Data
==PAGE:33==
sages from input ports and records them in external storage (e.g., InfluxDB). Inputs are
defined in JSON Configuration file, and connections are established at runtime. All pub­
lish and subscribe operations utilize simple Publisher and Subscriber interfaces linked to
Kafka topics.
By declaring inter­PE connections in a Configuration file’s ”channels” section, DAPM
achieves modularity, allowing changes to PEs without altering code—only the configu­
ration needs updating. The orchestration layer interprets these definitions, instantiates
each PE, and leverages Kafka’s reliable queues for orderly message delivery, resulting in
a fault­tolerant, distributed process­mining pipeline that easily integrates new PEs through
subclassing and configuration updates.
4.2.2
Source: Stream Ingestion and Preprocessing
The Source Processing Element (PE) is the entry point of the pipeline, responsible for
ingesting real­time event data from external APIs using Server­Sent Events (SSE). It pre­
processes incoming events by filtering out irrelevant data, applying rules, anonymizing
sensitive fields like user identifiers, and structuring the data for process mining, including
fields like case ID and timestamp. By ensuring only clean and privacy­compliant events
are passed along via a broker, the Source PE prepares data for further processing by the
Operator. It is organized into four stages: Ingestion, Filtering, Anonymization, and At­
tribute Mapping, which sequentially transform incoming event streams into ready­to­use,
semantically enriched data.
Figure 4.6 provides a class­level architectural view of Source PE, modeling each stage
as an independent, reusable component.
Figure 4.6: Class Diagram for Source PE
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM): Ingesting and Filtering Online Streaming Data
25
==PAGE:34==
Stage I: Continuous Ingestion
The first stage in the pipeline, in source PE, is the Ingestion Stage, where live data is con­
tinuously gathered from an external event source. In our system, this source is typically a
publicly accessible Server­Sent Events (SSE) stream, such as Wikipedia’s edit feed or
a simulated student activity stream. This stage’s primary function is to establish a stable
and uninterrupted connection with the event source, allowing us to capture data in real
time as soon as new updates are available.
This stage is responsible for:
• Listening to Live Streams: The implementation establishes a continuous connec­
tion to the event stream via the Server­Sent Events (SSE) protocol. This approach
enables the system to receive updates in real­time as the messages or events are
published, ensuring timely access to the latest information.
• Capturing Raw Events: Each incoming event is received in its original JSON for­
mat without modification. No assumptions are made about its structure or meaning
at this point. The event is passed forward for analysis in the next stage, where
necessary metadata is extracted according to user­defined configurations.
• Passing to Preprocessing Stages: Once received, the raw events are handed off
to the next stages in the pipeline for filtering, anonymization, and transformation into
a format suitable for process mining.
By integrating this functionality directly into the main processing element, we create a
cohesive design that ensures a seamless transition from data acquisition to mining.
This stage is crucial for our system’s real­time capabilities, enabling immediate event
capture and prompt transmission, which keeps the processing pipeline responsive and
time­sensitive.
Stage II: Semantic Filtering
The semantic filtering stage serves as the initial line of intelligent decision­making in the
processing pipeline, aimed at removing irrelevant, redundant, or noisy data before further
analysis. This enhances the pipeline’s efficiency and relevance by ensuring that only
meaningful events proceed.
In our Wikipedia­based data stream, not all edits are suitable for process mining. Some
originate from wikis outside our analysis scope, while some of the events could missed
the major fields needed for mining. Allowing such data into the pipeline could lead to
skewed or misleading outcomes.
To address this, the filtering logic uses a configurable set of rules defined in the system’s
configuration file. These settings are easily adjustable, giving users full control over the
focus and granularity of their analysis.
As shown in Pseudocode 4.1, events are filtered based on configured rules before being
forwarded(from algorithm: false= reject event; true= accept or pass the event).
1
# Initialization (run once at startup)
2
Load filterConfig from Configuration
3
If filterConfig is missing:
4
Log("No filters defined; skipping filtration")
5
Exit initialization
6
If filterConfig is not a Map<String, List or Value>:
7
Error("Invalid filter configuration format")
8
Stop pipeline startup
9
# Convert raw config into list of rules:
26
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM): Ingesting and Filtering Online Streaming Data
==PAGE:35==
10
rules ←parseFilterConfig(filterConfig)
11
# Filtration (run for each incoming event)
12
Function shouldPass(event: JsonNode) : boolean
13
For each (path, criterion) in rules:
14
value ←event.at(path)
# JSON config file lookup
15
If value is missing or null:
16
Return false
17
If criterion is List:
18
If value not in criterion:
19
Return false
20
Else:
21
If value ￿criterion:
22
Return false
23
24
# All rules passed
25
Return true
Pseudocode 4.1: Filtering Events
This stage only contains the events that meet specific criteria. It helps save system re­
sources and keeps the analysis focused on the most critical data. It serves as a filter
that balances thoroughness with selectivity, ensuring that the following stages use high­
quality, relevant information.
Stage III: Reversible Anonymization
The reversible anonymization stage is designed to safeguard sensitive information within
incoming event data while preserving the analytical utility required for process mining.
This step ensures that attributes like user identifiers and IP addresses do not expose
personal data, aligning the system with privacy best practices and ethical standards.
Anonymization in this stage is configurable, allowing selective application of two main
techniques:
• Pseudonymization: Sensitive information, like usernames, is changed into con­
sistent but hidden tokens using a specific method. This allows us to track activities
within the same session or case without showing the actual identity.
• Suppression: Highly sensitive attributes (e.g., IP addresses or CPR) are entirely
removed from the event, ensuring they are not retained or processed further.
The rules governing which attributes are pseudonymized or suppressed are loaded from
a configuration file. For example, usernames may be pseudonymized while IP addresses
are suppressed. Additionally, anonymized values can be de­anonymized later by au­
thorized personnel through a secure decryption or lookup mechanism if auditability is
required.
This stage enforces data minimization principles and ensures compliance with privacy
constraints while retaining analytical value. As shown in Pseudocode 4.2, the system
performs field­level pseudonymization and suppression based on configuration.
1
# Initialization (run once at startup)
2
Load anonymization settings from configuration
3
# Per event anonymization
4
Function anonymize(event):
5
If no fields to anonymize or suppress:
6
Return event
7
anonEvent ←copy of event
8
For each field marked for pseudonymization:
9
If a mapping exists for its value:
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM): Ingesting and Filtering Online Streaming Data
27
==PAGE:36==
10
pseudonym ←existing mapping
11
Else:
12
pseudonym ←generate new token
13
save mapping(original value, pseudonym)
14
Replace anonEvent[field] with pseudonym
15
For each field marked for suppression:
16
Remove anonEvent[field]
17
Add mapping reference to anonEvent
18
Return anonEvent
Pseudocode 4.2: Anonymization of Events
Stage IV: Attribute Mapping
The attribute mapping stage is crucial for preparing incoming event data for process min­
ing by structuring it into a meaningful format. Raw events, while informative, are often
inconsistent and domain­specific, making direct analysis difficult.
This stage converts relevant fields into a standardized schema compatible with mining
algorithms, focusing on four key attributes, three of which—case identifier (caseId), ac­
tivity name (activity), and timestamp (timestamp)—are considered essential for en­
abling any process mining analysis. These core attributes ensure that events can be
meaningfully grouped, ordered, and interpreted within a process context. Without them, it
would be impossible to trace the flow of activities across cases or to reconstruct behavioral
patterns over time. The fourth attribute, attributes (attributes), captures optional but
valuable metadata that can provide deeper insights and keep traces for de­anonymization
process or other mining metrics. Here:
• Case Identifier (caseId): Groups events that belong to the same process instance.
For example, events sharing the same Wikipedia project (e.g., “enwiki”) may belong
to a common process case.
• Activity Name (activity): Represents the nature of the event or the action per­
formed, such as an “edit” or “category”.
• Timestamp (timestamp): Captures the precise time at which the activity occurred,
providing the basis for temporal ordering in mining.
• Attributes (attributes): A flexible collection of additional contextual information,
such as the page title, namespace, or user comments. These enrich the analysis
by adding depth to each event.
The mapping logic is dynamically defined via configuration. This allows the system to
adapt to varying input schemas without requiring hard­coded field names. As shown in
Pseudocode 4.3, each incoming event is mapped into a structured Event object before
further processing.
1
# Initialization(run once at startup)
2
Load attribute mappings from configuration
3
If mappings missing or invalid:
4
Error and stop
5
# Per event mapping
6
Function mapAttributes(rawEvent):
7
mappedEvent ←new Event()
8
mappedEvent.caseId
←rawEvent[fieldForCaseId]
9
mappedEvent.activity
←rawEvent[fieldForActivity]
10
mappedEvent.timestamp ←rawEvent[fieldForTimestamp]
11
For each remaining field in rawEvent:
12
mappedEvent.attributes[field] ←rawEvent[field]
13
Return mappedEvent
28
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM): Ingesting and Filtering Online Streaming Data
==PAGE:37==
Pseudocode 4.3: Attribute­mapping of Events
By performing this semantic translation, the system produces well­formed events that are
fully compatible with downstream process mining operators. It also decouples source
data formats from analytical logic, promoting extensibility and reuse.
This stage is the final step in the Source PE. Once attribute mapping is complete, the
events are emitted as fully preprocessed and semantically structured messages, ready
for mining. This design ensures robustness, domain­independence, and future­proof in­
tegration with other process­aware systems.
4.2.3
Operator: Process Mining Execution
The Operator processing element (PE) acts as the central analytical engine of the DAPM
pipeline. Its primary responsibility is to transform semantically enriched and anonymized
event logs—received from the Source—into actionable process models. Although the
core focus of our project lies in the ingestion and sink processing element, a simple but
functional mining module was implemented to ensure end­to­end validation of the system.
Core Functionality
The Operator operates in real time, listening to a Kafka topic where structured events are
continuously published by the Source PE. Once an event is received, it is forwarded to a
mining algorithm that interprets behavioral patterns across the event stream. The mining
results are then dispatched to the Sink PE for visualization.
This stage ensures that the system produces meaningful outputs such as process graphs
or metrics, enabling users to gain insights from ongoing operational data. In Fiure 4.7
illustrating the class diagram of operator PE to understand the architecture we worked
on.
Figure 4.7: Class diaram of Operator PE
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM): Ingesting and Filtering Online Streaming Data
29
==PAGE:38==
Conceptual Workflow of the Operator
The Operator processes raw event streams into meaningful process representations by
following a series of logical steps, each essential for creating a high­level model that
reflects the underlying process’s behavior.
• Consume Events: The Operator listens to a dedicated Kafka topic where the Source
PE publishes preprocessed events. These events arrive in a structured format con­
taining essential process mining fields such as caseId, activity, and timestamp.
As each event is consumed, it is temporarily stored in memory and grouped by its
associated case.
• Detect Direct­Follows Relationships: The Operator examines each trace to iden­
tify “direct­follows” relationships—where one activity directly succeeds another. For
example, if an event A is immediately followed by event B in a trace, this is recorded
as a direct transition from A to B. These transitions form the foundation of behavioral
patterns in the process.
• Aggregate Transitions: As traces are processed, every identified transition (e.g.,
A →B) is tracked and counted across all traces. The result is a frequency map or
matrix that quantifies how often each direct­follows pair appears in the entire dataset.
This aggregation highlights dominant paths and frequent behavior patterns across
cases.
• Emit Mining Results: Finally, the aggregated transitions are encoded as a direct­
follow graph, where nodes represent activities and edges indicate transitions weighted
by frequency. This graph is published to a Kafka topic consumed by the Sink PE.
From there, it is persisted in a time­series database and made available for real­time
visualization.
As shown in Pseudocode 4.4, the mining operator enriches each event with direct­follow
metrics before forwarding it.
1
# Initialization
2
Create a Simple Heuristic Miner
3
# Per event processing
4
Function process(message):
5
event ←extract Event from message
6
miner.addEvent(event)
7
metrics ←miner.getMetrics()
8
For each metric in metrics:
9
Prepare a record with source, target, count, dependency, timestamp
10
Add record to metricList
11
event.mining_metrics ←metricList
12
Return event
Pseudocode 4.4: Mining Operator for Event Stream
This minimalistic pipeline offers enough analytical capability to visualize common activity
sequences in near real­time while maintaining the extensibility of the system.
Mining Algorithm: Simple Heuristic Miner
To fulfill the mining role in our system, we implemented a lightweight heuristic miner. This
component builds a direct­follow graph by identifying and counting transitions between
activities within each case.
This algorithm was deliberately kept simple and efficient to serve the purpose of validation
and demonstration of the pipeline.
30
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM): Ingesting and Filtering Online Streaming Data
==PAGE:39==
Pseudocode for Heuristic Mining
1
# Initialization
2
directFollowCounts ←empty map of (activity →map of activity →count)
3
lastActivityPerCase ←empty map of (caseId →activity)
4
5
# On each incoming event
6
Function addEvent(event):
7
caseId ←event.caseId
8
activity ←event.activity
9
prev ←lastActivityPerCase[caseId]
10
If prev exists:
11
directFollowCounts[prev][activity] ←directFollowCounts[prev][activity] + 1
12
lastActivityPerCase[caseId] ←activity
13
14
# When metrics are needed
15
Function getMetrics():
16
results ←empty list
17
For each activity A in directFollowCounts:
18
For each activity B in directFollowCounts[A]:
19
freqAB ←directFollowCounts[A][B]
20
freqBA ←directFollowCounts[B].get(A, 0)
21
dependency ←(freqAB −freqBA) / (freqAB + freqBA + 1)
22
results.add({from: A, to: B, frequency: freqAB, dependency: dependency})
23
Return results
Pseudocode 4.5: Simple Heuristic Miner
This structure creates a frequency­based representation of how users or systems tran­
sition from one activity to another. The output can be visualized as a graph showing
behavior dominance across the event traces.
4.2.4
Sink: Result Storage and Visualization Integration
The Sink processing element (PE) represents the final stage of the pipeline, where the
outcomes of process mining are persisted and transformed into insights accessible to end
users. Its primary function is to store mined results—such as direct­follow relations and
dependency and frequency measures—in a structured and queryable database. How­
ever, beyond raw storage, it also acts as the bridge to real­time visualization by making
this data available to monitoring tools like Grafana.
Core Responsibilities
The Sink PE consumes process mining outputs from a Kafka topic where the Opera­
tor publishes results. These outputs, typically structured as frequency­based transitions
between activities, are deserialized into domain­specific data transfer objects (DTOs).
These objects encapsulate metadata including the source case ID, activity pairs, and cor­
responding transition weights.
Time­Series Data Modeling
Once parsed, the mining results are mapped to time­series records suitable for storing
into InfluxDB. Each record is annotated with relevant tags (e.g., process case or activity
type) and timestamped to reflect when the mining insight was generated. This structure
facilitates efficient temporal querying and aggregation, enabling historical comparisons or
trend analysis over time.
Real­Time Visualization
Storing analytical results in a database alone is not sufficient unless the information is also
made visible to users in an actionable format. To address this, the Sink PE integrates with
Grafana—a popular open­source dashboarding tool—by writing directly to a predefined
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM): Ingesting and Filtering Online Streaming Data
31
==PAGE:40==
InfluxDB bucket. Grafana panels are configured to display dynamic visualizations such
as direct­follow graphs, activity frequencies, or transition matrices based on live data from
the database.
In sink PE, we just only extend the core Sink class from provided common framework by
Team1. As our main focus of our thesis was continuous data ingestion and pre­processing
in Source PE, we assigned less time on Sink PE but to complete the functional pipeline
and this one is the most simple of all PE in our case. We can show the whole process like
below:
1
Loop forever:
2
message ←consumeNextEvent()
3
metrics ←message.getAttribute("mining_metrics")
4
For each metric in metrics:
5
writeToDatabase(metric)
6
acknowledge(message)
Pseudocode 4.6: Storing Mining Results
This integration allows stakeholders to continuously monitor process behavior as it un­
folds, verify mining accuracy, and explore emergent patterns interactively. The visualiza­
tion layer also supports validation of the ingestion and operator stages, creating a feed­
back loop for system tuning and analysis refinement.
Design Considerations
By distinguishing between storage and visualization functions, the Sink upholds a clear
architectural separation of concerns. Its modular design promotes extensibility, allow­
ing for the future integration of alternative databases or visualization frameworks without
interfering with the core mining pipeline.
Ultimately, the Sink processing environment guarantees that process mining results are
not only stored reliably but also conveyed effectively, transforming data­driven insights
into actionable operational awareness.
32
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM): Ingesting and Filtering Online Streaming Data
==PAGE:41==
5
Implementation
This chapter details the implementation of the distributed process mining system using
a step­by­step approach consistent with agile development practices. Each processing
component was developed and integrated through incremental sprints, facilitating the val­
idation of individual features prior to progressing to the next stage. The implementation
utilized containerized microservices, event­driven communication, and modular abstrac­
tion to support real­time ingestion, filtering, mining, and visualization of event data.
5.1
Steps of Implementation
The development of the system followed an iterative, agile­inspired process, where the
pipeline was constructed incrementally based on functional milestones. The steps were:
1. Technology Selection: The first step involved choosing appropriate technologies
suitable for real­time event stream processing. Java and Spring Boot were selected
as the core backend stack, supported by Kafka for communication, InfluxDB and
MongoDB for data persistence, and Grafana for visualization.
2. Framework and Template Design: After selecting the core technologies, the sys­
tem architecture was organized around reusable template classes for each pro­
cessing element—namely, Source, Operator, and Sink. These templates encap­
sulated common logic and configuration patterns, facilitating modular development
and ease of extension. Furthermore, a separate client­service developed by aligned
thesis team (Team1) was integrated to serve as the pipeline builder and orches­
trator. This service was responsible for dynamically constructing the pipeline and
initiating its execution, allowing for the controlled and configurable instantiation and
coordination of each processing element.
3. Defining Communication Interfaces: Kafka broker were configured to connect
processing elements in an event­driven manner. Each PE published and consumed
messages asynchronously, enabling decoupled service execution.
4. Containerization Strategy: Each microservice was containerized using Docker to
ensure portability, consistent environments, and simplified deployment.
5. Event Structure Design: A standardized structure for inter­service communication
was defined. Each event was required to carry attributes such as caseId, activity,
and timestamp, along with optional metadata. This structure enabled compatibility
with mining algorithms.
6. Component Development: The ingestion service was developed first, followed by
the filtering, anonymization, and mapping stages. The operator was then imple­
mented with a lightweight heuristic miner, and finally, the sink was configured to
persist results and enable visualization.
7. Data Storage and Visualization Integration: The system was completed by inte­
grating InfluxDB and MongoDB for data storage and setting up Grafana dashboards
for visual feedback.
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM): Ingesting and Filtering Online Streaming Data
33
==PAGE:42==
5.2
Programming Languages and Frameworks
All services within the system were developed using Java, with Spring Boot serving as the
principal framework. Spring Boot accelerated the development of REST APIs, event pro­
cessors, and modular service configurations by providing built­in support for dependency
injection, auto­configuration, and component management. Utilizing a framework was
crucial for ensuring consistency, scalability, and seamless integration across microser­
vices. The modular, template­based design significantly improved the reusability and
testability of each processing element (Source, Operator, Sink), enabling different teams
to work on isolated components while preserving architectural coherence.
5.3
Kafka and ZooKeeper Configuration
Apache Kafka was employed as the central messaging backbone for enabling asyn­
chronous and decoupled communication between processing elements (PEs) within and
across organizational boundaries. The system was designed around a single Kafka clus­
ter, which hosted multiple brokers. Each broker was configured to manage the communi­
cation for different PEs, depending on their organizational scope and role in the pipeline.
For example:
• The Source PE (hosted in Organization A) published preprocessed events—after
filtering, anonymization, and attribute mapping—to a dedicated Kafka topic man­
aged by one broker.
• The Operator PE (hosted in Organization B) subscribed to this topic, executed the
mining algorithm, and then published the result to another Kafka topic, handled by
a different broker.
• The Sink PE (hosted in Organization C) consumed the mining results and stored
them for visualization.
5.3.1
Why a Single Cluster with Multiple Brokers
In our DAPM architecture, we adopted a multi­broker Kafka setup within a single cluster to
manage communication between distributed processing elements (PEs) such as Source,
Operator, and Sink. This design offered several technical advantages:
• Logical Separation of Communication Flows: Each PE publishes and subscribes
to distinct Kafka topics, which are mapped to different brokers. For instance, the
ingestion events from the Source PE may be handled by Broker 1, while mining
results from the Operator PE are managed via Broker 2. This structure prevents
topic congestion and clarifies data responsibilities across services.
• Improved Scalability: Kafka naturally distributes topic partitions across brokers.
This setup allows the system to handle high­volume event streams by:
– Balancing load across multiple brokers.
– Scaling horizontally by adding brokers without system redesign.
– Allowing concurrent read/write operations through topic partitioning.
• Resilience and Fault Tolerance: In case of a broker failure, Kafka—assisted by
ZooKeeper—detects the failure and reroutes traffic through available brokers. With
partition replication enabled, messages are not lost, and the system continues func­
tioning without major interruptions.
34
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM): Ingesting and Filtering Online Streaming Data
==PAGE:43==
• Administrative Simplicity: Even with several brokers, using one Kafka cluster
makes it easier to manage settings and provides a single way for programs to com­
municate. Programs can connect to Kafka without needing to know how the brokers
are arranged.
5.3.2
Role of Apache ZooKeeper
While Kafka manages streaming and message delivery, it relies on Apache ZooKeeper
for critical coordination and cluster management tasks. Kafka alone is not sufficient to
guarantee high availability and consistency in a distributed setup [15]. ZooKeeper pro­
vides:
• Broker Metadata Management: It stores and maintains metadata about brokers,
topics, and partition assignments.
• Leader Election: ZooKeeper manages the election of the Kafka controller, which
is responsible for managing partition leaders and broker status.
• Consumer Group Coordination: It tracks consumer group membership and helps
in offset tracking and load balancing.
• Failure Detection and Recovery: ZooKeeper monitors broker availability and fa­
cilitates automatic failover in case of a crash.
In our development environment, a single­node ZooKeeper instance was sufficient. For
production­grade deployments, a multi­node ZooKeeper ensemble would ensure high
availability and stronger failure recovery guarantees.
5.4
Microservices Implementation
The system was decomposed into independent Spring Boot microservices corresponding
to the main pipeline components:
• Client Service (Pipeline Builder): Developed by the team DAPM1, this service
allows users to construct and trigger pipelines, where the construction of the pipeline
and the configuration of each processing element setup in a Json file. It connecting
every PE with the channel defined. In main thesis of group DAPM1, they named
this service as OrgC on demand of their thesis perspective but in our case the name
client­service is much suitable. So, we rename this service for our thesis objective.
• Ingestion Service (Source): Connects to real­time event sources (e.g., Wikipedia),
applies filtering, anonymization, and attribute mapping.
• Operator Service: Receives preprocessed events, applies a heuristic mining algo­
rithm, and generates direct­follow relationships.
• Sink Service: Stores mined results in a time­series database (InfluxDB) and inter­
faces with Grafana.
Each microservice was configured to run independently and communicate through Kafka,
ensuring full separation of concerns.
5.4.1
Client Service (Pipeline Builder and Execute the Pipeline)
In our distributed architecture, the Client Service played a vital orchestration role by act­
ing as the initiator and configuration of the entire pipeline. Developed by a collaborating
team (DAPM1), this service allowed dynamic assigning of multiple processing elements
(PEs) across organizations to configure and start a valid pipeline, based on a JSON­based
configuration schema [22].
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM): Ingesting and Filtering Online Streaming Data
35
==PAGE:44==
Functionality Overview:
The Client Service acts as the orchestrator of pipeline execu­
tion. It accepts a structured JSON configuration that defines the pipeline’s topology and
semantics. This configuration includes the following key elements:
• Processing Elements (PEs):
– Each PE is described by its organizationID, hostURL, templateID, and instanceNumber.
– Each PE also contains an internal configuration block specifying its behavior
(e.g., filtering rules, attribute mapping, event source).
– Supported PE types include Source, Operator, and Sink.
• Channels:
– Communication flows between PEs are explicitly defined via channels.
– Each channel specifies a publisher PE and a list of subscribers, along with
the portNumber for message routing.
– This mapping ensures a directed and well­formed pipeline structure.
• Pipeline Bootstrapping:
– The service parses the configuration and instantiates each PE in the correct
topological order: Source →Operator →Sink.
– This guarantees that upstream components are ready before downstream ones
begin processing.
In Listing 5.1 we can generalize the configuration file and Appendix 5.1 has the full func­
tionalized Json file.
1
{
2
"processing elements": [
3
{
4
"organizationID": "<org-name>",
5
"hostURL": "<http://host:port>",
6
"templateID": "<SimpleSource|SimpleOperator|SimpleSink>",
7
"inputs": ["<Event>", ...],
8
"output": "<Event|null>",
9
"instanceNumber": <number>,
10
"configuration": {
11
"eventSource": {
12
"url": "<event-stream-url>"
13
},
14
"filters": {
15
"<field>": ["<value1>", "<value2>"]
16
},
17
"attributeMapping": {
18
"caseId": "<field>",
19
"activity": "<field>",
20
"timeStamp": "<field>"
21
},
22
"anonymization": {
23
"dataSourceId": "<string>",
24
"pseudonymization": ["<field1>", "<field2>"],
25
"suppression": ["<field3>"],
26
"uniqueField": "<field>"
27
}
36
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM): Ingesting and Filtering Online Streaming Data
==PAGE:45==
28
}
29
}
30
],
31
32
"channels": [
33
{
34
"publisher": {
35
"organizationID": "<org-name>",
36
"hostURL": "<http://host:port>",
37
"templateID": "<template>",
38
"inputs": [...],
39
"output": "<Event|null>",
40
"instanceNumber": <number>,
41
"configuration": { ... }
42
},
43
"subscribers": [
44
{
45
"processing element": {
46
"organizationID": "<org-name>",
47
"hostURL": "<http://host:port>",
48
"templateID": "<template>",
49
"inputs": [...],
50
"output": "<Event|null>",
51
"instanceNumber": <number>,
52
"configuration": { ... }
53
},
54
"portNumber": <number>
55
}
56
]
57
}
58
]
59
}
Listing 5.1: General Instance for DAPM Pipeline Configuration Json File
Startup Logic:
The client service is initialized through the ClientServiceApplication.java
class (see thesis repository for all code), which serves as the main entry point. Upon
startup, the application performs the following steps:
1. It loads a pipeline configuration file from the resources directory.
2. It validates the structure and semantics of the configuration using the ValidatedPipeline
class.
3. It uses the Spring context to retrieve the PipelineBuilder bean and invokes its
buildPipeline method with the pipeline ID and validated configuration to instantiate
the pipeline.
4. Once the pipeline is constructed, the PipelineExecutionService is invoked to start
the processing elements in the correct order.
This logic ensures that the entire pipeline can be initialized and executed through a single
coordinated startup routine, aligning with the modular architecture of DAPM.
Design Impact:
This client service eliminates the need for manual startup and configu­
ration of each microservice. It abstracts pipeline orchestration into a single JSON­driven
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM): Ingesting and Filtering Online Streaming Data
37
==PAGE:46==
deployment step, making the system more maintainable, testable, and suitable for real­
world deployments where configurations may change frequently.
The actual execution and configuration dispatching is handled by internal service classes
(not shown here for brevity), which process the JSON and interact with other PE services.
The GitHub link(https://github.com/DAPM-Thesis/dapm-thesis/tree/main/dapm-pipeline) con­
tains the full source code for reference and the lifecycle of a pipeline is shown in Figure 5.1
Figure 5.1: Pipeline Life Cycle
5.4.2
Ingestion Service (Source PE)
The ingestion microservice was implemented to act as the real­time data entry point in
the DAPM pipeline. This service was responsible for connecting to external live event
sources—such as the Wikipedia Event Stream —through Server­Sent Events (SSE). Once
the connection was established, the ingestion service performed a sequence of prepro­
cessing operations before forwarding the filtered and enriched events to downstream com­
ponents through Kafka.
At the core of the ingestion microservice lies the SourceA class, a concrete subclass of
SimpleSource<Event>1. This class encapsulates the end­to­end logic for data ingestion
and preprocessing. It extends the functionality of a reusable processing element (PE)
template from the DAPM pipeline framework [22] and defines how incoming raw events
1https://github.com/DAPM-Thesis/dapm-thesis/blob/main/dapm-pipeline/src/main/java/pipeline/
processingelement/source/SimpleSource.java
38
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM): Ingesting and Filtering Online Streaming Data
==PAGE:47==
are processed into structured Event2 objects used in the pipeline. The provided Pseu­
docode in ”System Design section”, implemented as a functioning system following steps:
All Process Configuration Extraction
Initially we retrieve all configuration for every stages of source PE meaning initially we ex­
tracts the event stream URL, filtering, attribute mapping etc. from a pipeline’s configura­
tion object. The sequence of retrieving configuration consists of several key components:
first, the event source URL is identified; next, specific filtration criteria are applied; follow­
ing that, anonymization instructions are outlined; and finally, attributes mapping fields are
established. Each step plays a crucial role in ensuring that the configuration process is
both effective and compliant with necessary protocols.
The sequence can be showed as Figure 5.2
Figure 5.2: Sequence Diagram for configurations Retrieve
In this process:
1. Event Source URL: The constructor uses EventSourceConfig.getEventSourceUrl
(configuration) to extract the real­time data stream endpoint (e.g., Wikimedia
SSE URL) from the JSON configuration.
2. Filtration Rules: It calls FiltrationProcess.getFilterConfig (configuration)
to initialize the filter logic based on criteria such as specific wiki domains (e.g.,
enwiki, ukwiki).
3. Anonymization Settings: The line AnonymizationProcess.getAnonymizationConfig
(configuration) loads rules for pseudonymizing or suppressing sensitive fields
such as user, ip, and comment.
4. Attribute Mapping: Finally, AttributeMappingProcess.getAttributeMappingConfig
(configuration) retrieves mappings for identifying key event attributes (e.g., caseId,
activity, and timestamp) used in downstream process mining.
As outlined earlier in Section 4.2.1, the Source Processing Element (PE) operates through
a pipeline of four sequential preprocessing stages: event ingestion, filtration, anonymiza­
tion, and attribute mapping. Having described how configuration parameters are extracted
during the constructor phase, we now turn to the implementation details of each individual
stage. The following subsections walk through the internal logic of each phase, highlight­
ing how the system processes incoming event data before forwarding it downstream.
2https://github.com/DAPM-Thesis/dapm-thesis/blob/main/dapm-pipeline/src/main/java/
communication/message/impl/event/Event.java
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM): Ingesting and Filtering Online Streaming Data
39
==PAGE:48==
Implementation of Stage I: Continuous Ingestion
To continuously ingest live event data, the system utilizes Spring WebClient to connect to
the configured SSE (Server­Sent Events) endpoint. The ingestion logic is implemented
as follows:
1
JsonNode json = WebClient.create()
2
.get()
3
.uri(sseUrl)
4
.accept(MediaType.TEXT_EVENT_STREAM)
5
.retrieve()
6
.bodyToFlux(JsonNode.class)
7
.retryWhen(Retry.backoff(3, Duration.ofSeconds(1)))
8
.blockFirst(Duration.ofSeconds(10));
This snippet initiates a non­blocking HTTP GET request to the real­time stream URL de­
fined in the configuration. The client expects text/event-stream as the media type and
continuously receives events in a reactive stream. It uses bodyToFlux(JsonNode.class)
to parse each incoming event as a JSON object.
If a transient connection failure occurs, the client retries up to three times using exponential
backoff intervals. The blockFirst(Duration.ofSeconds(10)) call forces the first event
to be retrieved synchronously (blocking for up to 10 seconds), ensuring the ingestion logic
has a valid event to process before continuing. This mechanism establishes the system’s
entry point for receiving continuous event data.
Implementation of Stage II: Semantic Filtering
The second stage of the pipeline applies semantic filtering to incoming events. This is
handled by the FiltrationProcess class, which determines whether an event should be
passed on to the next stage based on configurable criteria. These filters are dynami­
cally loaded during initialization via the getFilterConfig() method, which extracts the
"filters" block from the processing element’s configuration.
Each filter condition is represented as a key­value pair, where the key denotes the JSON
path to be matched in the event, and the value specifies the expected value or condition.
The logic within the shouldPass() method evaluates each of these condition. We can
show the implementation of this process
Events that fail to meet any of the specified conditions are discarded at this stage. This
selective filtration mechanism helps reduce noise and ensures that only relevant events—
such as Wikipedia edits from specific language wikis—are passed downstream for further
processing.
• If the filter value is a boolean, the method checks for an exact boolean match.
• If the filter is a list, meaning user want to allow multiple workspace data for our
case suppose user wants to allow English and Ukrainian wiki data (e.g., ["enwiki",
"ukwiki"]), the event passes if the value at the specified path matches any item in
the list.
• For all other cases (e.g., string filters), the event is checked for an exact string match.
The Figure 5.3 showing how above logic was implemented and how this process happens
sequentially .
40
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM): Ingesting and Filtering Online Streaming Data
==PAGE:49==
Figure 5.3: Sequence Diagram of Filtration Process
Stage III: Reversible Anonymization
The third stage ensures privacy through reversible anonymization. This is implemented
using the AnonymizationProcess class, which is configured during initialization using
the getAnonymizationConfig() method. This method extracts parameters such as the
dataSourceId, a list of fields for pseudonymization, fields to be suppressed, and a uniqueField
provides a privacy­safe identifier for each subject that is both consistent and revocable
under controlled circumstances. This ensures that individuals’ identities are protected
while still allowing for necessary data management and research processes.
When the apply() method is called on an event, it performs three key actions:
1. Pseudonymizes each configured field by replacing its original value with a generated
token, stored alongside the original for potential reversal.
Pseudonymization Logic: For each field designated for pseudonymization, the
method begins by retrieving both the unique identifier field and the target field from
the raw event JSON. It first checks if a pseudonym for this field­value pair already
exists in the MongoDB mapping table (determined by the combine varification with
checking field value and dataSourceId). If such a mapping exists, the correspond­
ing token is reused to ensure deterministic pseudonymization—ensuring the same
input always results in the same pseudonym. If not, the method generates a new to­
ken by sanitizing the field name and appending a random number (e.g., user_742891).
A loop ensures this token is unique by checking for any existing collision in the
database.
Once verified, the generated token is returned and inserted into the
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM): Ingesting and Filtering Online Streaming Data
41
==PAGE:50==
anonymized JSON event, and the mapping is later persisted for potential reversal.
2. Suppresses sensitive fields by completely removing them from the event.
3. Stores both the raw and anonymized versions in a MongoDB collection to enable
future de­anonymization and ensure token reuse for identical input values.
The Figure 5.4 showing how above logic was being implemented and how this process
happens sequentially .
Figure 5.4: Sequence Diagram of Anonymization Process
All anonymization logic relies on the AnonymizationMappingService, which interacts with
the MongoDB instance to persist and lookup anonymization mappings. This design pro­
vides both privacy protection and traceability.
Stage IV: Attribute Mapping
The final stage of preprocessing converts each incoming JSON event into a structured
Event object suitable for downstream process mining. The AttributeMappingProcess
class reads the mapping configuration and identifies which fields represent the caseId,
activity, and timestamp using user­defined keys from the attributeMapping section.
When an event arrives, the system:
• Extracts the caseId, activity, and timestamp values based on the configured
paths using null­safe fallbacks.
• Removes these core fields from the JSON tree, ensuring they are not duplicated in
the attribute set.
42
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM): Ingesting and Filtering Online Streaming Data
==PAGE:51==
• Recursively traverses the remaining JSON structure to extract all other values (nested
or flat) and converts them into a collection of typed Attribute objects.
• Packages the extracted values into a final Event object, which is passed down­
stream for mining or conformance analysis.
The Figure 5.5 showing how above logic was implemented and how this process happens
sequentially before sending to the broker.
Figure 5.5: Sequence Diagram of Attribute Mapping Process
The implementation supports nested objects and arrays by flattening them into structured
key–value pairs, ensuring that no contextual information is lost during transformation. This
conversion allows seamless interoperability with the pipeline’s event schema.
5.4.3
Operator Service(Operator PE)
The Operator Service was responsible for executing the mining algorithm on incoming
structured events.
Although process mining was not the core focus of this thesis, a
lightweight heuristic miner was implemented to demonstrate pipeline completeness and
enable visualization.
Operator Template (EventOperatorB.java)
The operator template is responsible for receiving events, managing trace­level state,
invoking the mining logic, and emitting enriched results.
When an Event is received:
1. It is passed to the SimpleHeuristicMiner to update case­level activity state.
2. The miner returns a list of DirectFollow metrics—each capturing an observed tran­
sition between two activities with its frequency and dependency score.
3. These metrics are packaged into a JSON array and embedded as a new attribute
(mining_metrics) in the outgoing event.
4. The updated event is then returned and forwarded to the Sink.
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM): Ingesting and Filtering Online Streaming Data
43
==PAGE:52==
This logic ensures that all activity transition information is embedded directly within the
event stream and does not require external aggregation.
Heuristic Mining Logic
The core mining logic tracks direct­follow relationships between activities using two con­
current maps:
• lastActivityPerCase: Stores the last seen activity for each caseId.
• directFollowCounts: Maintains a nested map where counts[A][B] represents
how many times activity A is directly followed by activity B.
When a new event arrives:
1. The miner checks if a previous activity exists for the case. If so, it increments the
transition count from the previous activity to the current one.
2. All such transitions are converted into DirectFollow objects with a computed de­
pendency measure:
dep(A →B) =
count(A →B) −count(B →A)
count(A →B) + count(B →A) + 1
This simple algorithm is well­suited for streaming contexts and provides fast, approximate
results for visualization and further analysis. The Figure 5.6 showing how above logic was
implemented on operator and how this process happens sequentially before sending to
the kafka channel.
Figure 5.6: Sequence Diagram of Operator PE
5.4.4
Sink­Service (sink PE)
The Sink PE acted as the final processing element in the pipeline, responsible for cap­
turing mining results and persisting them into a time­series database for downstream vi­
44
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM): Ingesting and Filtering Online Streaming Data
==PAGE:53==
sualization. By writing the output of the mining operator to InfluxDB, this PE ensured
that insights derived from real­time process mining became immediately accessible for
monitoring and analysis.
The component followed the steps below:
1. Subscribed to the Kafka topic containing mining results enriched as event attributes.
2. Extracted the mining_metrics field from each event, which encapsulated a list of
direct­follow relations and their corresponding frequency and dependency values.
3. Parsed each metric and transformed it into an InfluxDB data point with appropriate
fields (e.g., arc_from, arc_to, frequency, dependency) and timestamp.
4. Wrote each point into a specific measurement within the InfluxDB bucket, making it
available for visualization in Grafana dashboards.
A representative fragment of the Sink PE’s logic is shown below:
1
List<Map<String, Object>> arcList = new ArrayList<>();
2
for (DirectFollow m : metrics) {
3
Map<String, Object> arc = new HashMap<>();
4
arc.put("arc_from", m.from);
5
arc.put("arc_to", m.to);
6
arc.put("frequency", m.frequency);
7
arc.put("dependency", m.dependency);
8
arc.put("timestamp", timestamp);
9
arcList.add(arc);
10
}
This final stage highlights the importance of not only processing data but also delivering
it in a form that enables human understanding and actionable insight through real­time
dashboards.
5.5
Docker and Container Orchestration
To ensure consistent deployment, reproducibility, and ease of setup across different ma­
chines, all components of the DAPM system were containerized using Docker. This in­
cluded core services such as Kafka, ZooKeeper, MongoDB, InfluxDB, and Grafana. The
functioning microservices—ingestion, operator, sink, and client—were executed indepen­
dently outside of Docker, while still communicating with the containerized services through
a shared Docker network.
Docker Compose was utilized to define and orchestrate the essential infrastructure con­
tainers required by each microservice. Each service directory contained its own docker-
compose.yaml file, specifying the configuration for Kafka, ZooKeeper, and any other service­
specific dependencies like MongoDB or InfluxDB. All containers were interconnected via
a shared Docker network named kafka-cluster, ensuring seamless communication be­
tween brokers and services throughout the architecture.
Crucially, while the infrastructure services were containerized, the custom microservices—
namely ingestion, operator, sink, and client—were manually executed as standalone Spring
Boot applications outside of Docker. This design decision provided flexibility for develop­
ment and debugging without the need to rebuild Docker images.
As we have different setting of Docker for different services the container setup per service
is summarized as follows:
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM): Ingesting and Filtering Online Streaming Data
45
==PAGE:54==
• Ingestion Service: Includes Kafka and ZooKeeper containers for stream coordina­
tion, and a MongoDB container for storing pseudonymization mappings.
• Operator Service: Includes its own Kafka and ZooKeeper containers. Responsible
for receiving events and applying the process mining algorithm.
• Sink Service: Contains Kafka and ZooKeeper containers along with InfluxDB for
time­series data storage and Grafana for visual dashboards.
• Client Service: Includes Kafka and ZooKeeper containers to support client­triggered
execution. Connected to the shared network for communication with the rest of the
system.
• Root Project Container (dapm2): A Kafka UI container (kafka-ui) is included at
the top level to visually inspect Kafka topics, producers, and consumers across the
services.
Each infrastructure container is configured with the necessary port mappings, persistent
volumes, and environment variables. This modular setup facilitates consistent deploy­
ments across different environments, allowing the entire Kafka­based messaging back­
bone to be initialized with a single Docker Compose command for each service group.
To summarize, we discovered that by containerizing our infrastructure and running the
ingestion, operator, sink, and client services locally, we established a deployment model
that provides both reliability and flexibility for our DAPM development and testing. This
approach also significantly speeds up debugging and supports more efficient iterative
development.
5.6
Database Schema and Persistence Strategy
To enhance the value of our thesis project, which focuses on storing pseudonymized
data and time­series data, we employed two distinct databases. Each database was
specifically designed to serve a particular purpose in the preprocessing phase and the
visualization of results within our running pipeline. This structured approach allows for
optimized data management and effective analysis, ensuring that our findings are both
robust and reliable.:
• MongoDB was utilized in the ingestion service for the purpose of persisting raw
ingested data and storing mapping information necessary for pseudonymization.
Each data source was assigned a dedicated collection, and pseudonym tokens were
dynamically generated to replace sensitive fields. These mappings were kept along­
side the original values to facilitate future de­anonymization if required. The service
employed MongoTemplate for performing CRUD operations and conducting condi­
tional lookups.
• InfluxDB was utilized in our thesis as the database management system within
the sink service to effectively store mining results in the form of time­series data.
Each recorded entry encompassed various metrics, including activity transitions,
frequency of occurrences, and dependency scores, all accompanied by a corre­
sponding timestamp. These data points were systematically organized as struc­
tured points within a specific measurement, which represented the arcs connecting
distinct activities. This approach not only facilitated efficient data retrieval and anal­
ysis but also enabled a clearer understanding of the temporal dynamics associated
with the activities being monitored.
46
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM): Ingesting and Filtering Online Streaming Data
==PAGE:55==
This dual­database strategy ensured that both configuration­heavy, document­based meta­
data (handled by MongoDB) and high­throughput, timestamped mining metrics (handled
by InfluxDB) were efficiently stored and retrievable in their most appropriate formats.
5.7
Visualization Dashboard
Grafana was utilized as the visualization layer to present the mining results stored in
InfluxDB. Various panel types were configured to illustrate different aspects of the process
mining output. A Bar chart panel was employed to visualize the frequency of activity
transitions, enabling the identification of dominant process flows. Meanwhile, a Line chart
panel illustrated the evolution of dependency measures over time, underscoring shifts in
process behavior. Additionally, a Table panel was included to present raw metric values
in a structured format for detailed examination.
Furthermore, four Pie chart panels were incorporated to visualize the distribution of ac­
tivities over the past hour, with each chart aggregating data in 15­minute intervals. These
pie charts provided users with a quick assessment of the most dominant activities in re­
cent timeframes, offering a concise overview of process dynamics. Together, these pan­
els were organized into a cohesive dashboard that facilitated real­time monitoring and
insight­driven analysis of the process mining results.
The complete Grafana dashboard configurations were exported as JSON models and
uploaded to the project’s root directory on GitHub3. These include Student Activity
During Exam-Grafana.json and Wikipedia Event Changes-Grafana.json, making it
straightforward to reproduce or adapt the dashboards for future implementations.
The visualization dashboards were designed to be customizable, allowing for the future
integration of more complex process models and additional visual analytics.
5.8
Repository Access and Deployment Instructions
In the Implementation chapter we discuss with some piece of code of related functionali­
ties in different sections and sub­sections but the full source code for the DAPM system for
real­time data, developed in this thesis is available as an open­source project on GitHub
at:
Thesis Project: https://github.com/DAPM-Thesis/dapm2
The repository contains all the microservices, configuration files, and instruction scripts
needed to environment setup and run the system. The runnable version of the project is
maintained in the main branch.
The Demo Student Activity Simulator available in following repository and all instructions
are given in Readme file of repository to run successfully:
Student Simulator Project: https://github.com/tamasarker1434/demo-sse-server
3https://github.com/DAPM-Thesis/dapm2
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM): Ingesting and Filtering Online Streaming Data
47
==PAGE:56==
48
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM): Ingesting and Filtering Online Streaming Data
==PAGE:57==
6
Experimental Results and Evaluation
This chapter presents the practical evaluation of the implemented system through two rep­
resentative use cases. The goal is to verify whether the actual implementation conforms
to the proposed architectural solution and to validate whether it effectively addresses the
research questions. Additionally, the chapter discusses potential threats to the validity of
the findings.
6.1
Use Case­based Result Discussion
In this section we will see the experimental result of two practical example, one to ingest
from Wikimedia Edit and another is demo project for Student Activity Simulator, for two
different pipeline design. In this chapter we will clearly describe the example and corre­
sponding result one by one.
6.1.1
Use Case Scenario: Wikipedia Edit Stream Monitoring
The Wikipedia event stream is a continuous, publicly available real­time feed of edits and
actions taking place across various Wikimedia projects. Each event is formatted in JSON
and includes metadata such as the project name (e.g., enwiki, ukwiki), the type of action
executed (e.g., edit, new), user details, timestamps, and additional contextual informa­
tion. This comprehensive stream serves as a valuable source of behavioral data, making
it well­suited for process­oriented analysis and real­time monitoring across multilingual
Wikipedia domains.
Use Case
Alice, a process analyst, seeks to gain insights into the patterns of editing activity
across various Wikipedia projects. She aims to monitor real­time changes specifically
in the English Wikipedia (enwiki), Ukrainian Wikipedia (ukwiki), and Wikimedia Com­
mons (commonswiki). Her primary focus is on analyzing the sequence and frequency
of different edit types (e.g., edit, new, log), which represent the dimension of activity
she is investigating.
Before going to the pipeline design, Alice first inspects the structure of incoming Wikipedia
event streams otherwise she will not be able to provide proper configuration for source
PE. In real world, the owner of event source could provide a sample or demo instance of
the event structure for clear understanding of the event.
Sample Wikipedia Stream Event
Wikipedia edit events are received from the SSE API endpoint1 in JSON format and in­
clude fields related to the edit action, metadata, and user behavior. A simplified example
of an event snapshot is shown below:
1
{
2
"wiki": "mgwiktionary",
3
"type": "categorize",
4
"timestamp": 1752307769,
5
"title": "Sokajy:Pejy avy any amin'ny...",
6
"user": "Rajafara",
7
"bot": false,
8
"comment": "Nampiana tamin'ny sokajy...",
1https://stream.wikimedia.org/v2/stream/recentchange
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM): Ingesting and Filtering Online Streaming Data
49
==PAGE:58==
9
"meta": {
10
"dt": "2025-07-12T08:09:29Z",
11
"domain": "mg.wiktionary.org"
}
12
}
From this structure, the pipeline can extract:
• wiki →used for case identification and filtering (enwiki, ukwiki, commonswiki)
• type →used as the activity label (e.g., edit, new, log)
• meta.dt →used as the event timestamp
To achieve this, Alice designed(Figure 6.1) and configures a pipeline that show real­time
changes(caseId = wiki) filters incoming events based on the selected wiki projects—
enwiki, ukwiki, and commonswiki—and maps the type field as the activity of interest.
She applies the Simple Heuristic Miner algorithm to discover frequent patterns and de­
pendencies between different editing actions.
Figure 6.1: Configured pipeline for Wikimedia edit monitoring using the Heuristic Miner
algorithm
As shown in Figure 6.1, each wiki stream is ingested separately, processed through a
heuristic miner operator, and the resulting event patterns are pushed to a shared sink that
is the InfluxDB bucket named dapm_wiki_bucket.
For processing different Wikipedia project, Alice assembles a dedicated pipeline within
the JSON configuration file in client­service to connect a source, operator, and sink
in a distributed manner.
The Figure 6.2 is showing, ingestion service listens to the Wikipedia event stream of
different projects and applies a filter to allow only events from enwiki, commonswiki,
andukwiki. The pipeline is configured to treat the wiki field as the caseId, the type
field as the activity, and meta.dt as the timestamp. Anonymization is also applied to
sensitive fields such as user, ip, and comment, where she pseudonomize the IP and user
name and remove the comments totally.
50
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM): Ingesting and Filtering Online Streaming Data
==PAGE:59==
En Wiki
1
{
2
"filters": {
3
"wiki": ["enwiki"]
4
},
5
"attributeMapping": {
6
"caseId": "wiki",
7
"activity": "type"
8
},
9
"anonymization": {
10
"dataSourceId
": "wiki-edit",
11
"
pseudonymization":
["user", "ip"],
12
"suppression"
: ["comment"],
13
"uniqueField"
:"user"
14
}
15
}
Commons Wiki
1
{
2
"filters": {
3
"wiki":["
commonswiki"]
},
4
"attributeMapping": {
5
"caseId": "wiki",
6
"activity": "type"
7
},
8
"anonymization": {
9
"dataSourceId
": "wiki-edit",
10
"
pseudonymization":
["user", "ip"],
11
"suppression"
: ["comment"],
12
"uniqueField"
:"user"
13
}
14
}
Uk Wiki
1
{
2
"filters": {
3
"wiki": ["ukwiki"]
4
},
5
"attributeMapping": {
6
"caseId": "wiki",
7
"activity": "type"
8
},
9
"anonymization": {
10
"dataSourceId
": "wiki-edit",
11
"
pseudonymization":
["user", "ip"],
12
"suppression"
: ["comment"],
13
"uniqueField"
:"user"
14
}
15
}
Figure 6.2: JSON pipeline configurations for three Wikipedia projects of Source PE
Following the same principle, Alice configures the Operator and Sink processing ele­
ments for each of the three Wikipedia projects. Each source connects to its corresponding
operator instance, which applies the Simple Heuristic Miner algorithm. The mined results
are then routed to a shared sink responsible for storing output in the dapm_wiki_bucket In­
fluxDB database. The complete configuration, including the assembly of all channels and
processing elements in JSON configuration, is provided in GitHub Project repository, in­
side the client­service resources package named multiple_PE_pipeline_with _config.json.
Result
To evaluate the pipeline, the Wikipedia edit stream configuration was executed using the
distributed architecture. Real­time events were filtered, transformed, mined, and stored
across different services. The system operated on three specific Wikipedia projects—
enwiki, ukwiki, and commonswiki—with a focus on transitions between editing actions.
Console Output Snapshot
Ingestion Service Output:
1
filtered out, pulling next =>>
2
3
Duplicate value found on user = Rosiestep, pseudo= user_582181
4
Event Ingested:
5
caseID= commonswiki, activity= log, timestamp= 2025-06-29T17:37:25Z
Operator Service Output:
1
Event Arrived:
2
caseID= commonswiki, activity= log, timestamp= 2025-06-29T17:37:25Z‐
3
Heuristicminer calculating metrics!!
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM): Ingesting and Filtering Online Streaming Data
51
==PAGE:60==
4
Sending to the Sink!!!
Sink Service Output:
1
SinkA!!
2
Writing to InfluxDB!!
3
Writing to InfluxDB!!
4
Writing to InfluxDB!!
5
Writing to InfluxDB!!
6
Writing to InfluxDB!!
7
Writing to InfluxDB!!
8
Writing to InfluxDB!!
9
Writing to InfluxDB!!
MongoDB Output Snapshot
1
{
2
"mappingTableID": "275d7e01-5902-45af-a1a0-de94dd2774cd",
3
"rawData": {
4
"meta": {
5
"id": "d28be004-5d57-4eb2-b90f-5f4dcb207c6a",
6
"dt": "2025-06-29T17:37:25Z"
7
},
8
"type": "log",
9
"title": "...",
10
"title_url": "https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/...",
11
"comment": "...",
12
"timestamp": 1751218645,
13
"user": "Rosiestep",
14
"bot": false,
15
"wiki": "commonswiki"
16
},
17
"anonymizedData": {
18
"meta": {
19
"id": "d28be004-5d57-4eb2-b90f-5f4dcb207c6a",
20
"dt": "2025-06-29T17:37:25Z"
21
},
22
"type": "log",
23
"title": "....",
24
"title_url": "https://commons.wikimedia....",
25
"timestamp": 1751218645,
26
"user": "user_582181",
27
"bot": false,
28
"wiki": "commonswiki"
29
}
30
}
Observations:
• The ingestion service successfully filtered and anonymized events from the Wikipedia
stream based on configured parameters (e.g., wiki, type, meta.dt).
• After Anonymization process, data was saved in MongoDB with properly naming
convention of mongo Document(for wiki: mappingTableFor_wiki-edit) and pseudonymiza­
tion.
52
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM): Ingesting and Filtering Online Streaming Data
==PAGE:61==
• Each event was routed to a heuristic miner operator, which applied metrics for dis­
covering patterns in user behavior.
• The mined results were successfully transmitted to the InfluxDB sink, indicating
smooth pipeline operation with observable throughput.
• Anonymization pseudonymized user information, as shown in the ingestion log (pseudo
= user_582181).
The console logs verify that each processing element executed its role as intended, from
ingestion to mining and final storage. Grafana­based visualization of mined metrics is
presented in the next.
Visualizing Heuristic Miner Dependencies for Wikipedia Event Streams
To analyze behavioral patterns across different Wikimedia projects, we visualized the dis­
covered dependency relations between activities using Grafana. These panels display
output from the Heuristic Miner operator, highlighting the directional strength of activity
transitions in three distinct Wikimedia subprojects: commonswiki, enwiki, and ukwiki.
Figure 6.3: Dependency relations among activities in commonswiki
Figure 6.3 shows the dependency graph for commonswiki. Each horizontal bar represents
the dependency score from a source activity (left) to a target activity (right). A high positive
dependency value indicates that the target activity frequently follows the source activity,
suggesting a strong forward relationship. For example, the transition new →log has the
highest positive dependency (0.547), implying that newly created events are often fol­
lowed by logging actions. Moderate positive dependencies, such as edit →log (0.152)
and categorize →new (0.125), also reflect common sequential behaviors. Conversely, a
high negative value signifies that the target activity rarely follows the source, indicating an
unlikely or inverse relationship. For instance, log →new shows a strong negative depen­
dency (-0.509), suggesting that logging events are almost never followed by new activity.
These patterns help highlight both typical process flows and rare transitions, which may
result from specific user behaviors or automated bot activity.
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM): Ingesting and Filtering Online Streaming Data
53
==PAGE:62==
Figure 6.4: Dependency relations among activities in enwiki
Figure 6.4 visualizes the dependency graph for enwiki, the English Wikipedia dataset.
Compared to commonswiki, this graph reveals more complex interaction patterns. High
positive dependency values, such as those in transitions like edit →new and log →
categorize, indicate that these target activities frequently follow their respective source
activities, suggesting consistent and common workflows. In contrast, transitions like new
→edit and categorize →log show negative dependency values, meaning the target
activity rarely follows the source, and the relationship is infrequent or reversed. These
results may reflect editorial norms, where edits tend to generate new articles, while log­
ging actions do not typically lead into categorization, but rather the reverse. Overall, the
dependency patterns suggest structured and directional flows shaped by content creation
and moderation behavior.
Figure 6.5: Dependency relations among activities in ukwiki
Figure 6.5 shows the dependency transitions for ukwiki, the Ukrainian Wikipedia dataset.
It reveals strong positive links such as categorize →new and edit →log, suggesting
structured article creation and documentation flows. While moderate transitions like new
54
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM): Ingesting and Filtering Online Streaming Data
==PAGE:63==
→edit and edit →categorize are also observed, no strongly negative dependencies
are present(on the time of observation of report), implying a more balanced transition
structure. Compared to the other wikis, ukwiki exhibits a more linear and progressive
behavior flow.
These panels assist in identifying platform­specific editorial behaviors, automation traces
(e.g., bots), and collaborative editing dynamics, helping to characterize how knowledge
artifacts evolve differently across Wikimedia communities.
Temporal Dependency Analysis in Wikipedia Event Streams
To explore how user behavior transitions evolve over time in different Wikimedia projects,
we analyzed the dependency metrics of selected activity pairs across three datasets:
commonswiki, enwiki, and ukwiki. The Grafana panels display time­series graphs of
dependency values for key transitions, helping analysts identify shifts in workflow dynam­
ics and interaction patterns.
Figure 6.6: Dependency over time: (Left) edit →categorize, (Right) new →categorize
In Figure 6.6, the left panel illustrates the transition from edit →categorize. The ukwiki
dataset initially shows a strong positive dependency (above 0.3), suggesting a frequent
follow­up between editing and categorizing articles. However, this dependency drops and
stabilizes around 0.16, indicating a shift in behavior. In contrast, commonswiki and en­
wiki show low or negative dependencies, reflecting less consistent transitions from editing
to categorization. The right panel shows the new →categorize transition, where enwiki
maintains a consistently strong positive dependency (around 0.3), while commonswiki
exhibits a significant negative trend—indicating that new page creation is often decou­
pled from categorization in that dataset. Identically, there is no transformation found for
ukwiki.
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM): Ingesting and Filtering Online Streaming Data
55
==PAGE:64==
Figure 6.7: Dependency over time: (Left) categorize →log, (Right) new →log
Figure 6.7 further emphasizes inter­project behavioral differences. The left panel (categorize
→log) shows a persistent negative dependency in both commonswiki and enwiki, sug­
gesting that logging actions are generally disconnected from categorization events. The
trend is more pronounced in enwiki, where values approach -0.4. On the right, the new →
log transition in commonswiki demonstrates a very strong positive dependency (peak­
ing above 0.75), indicating that new page creations are often followed by logging actions.
This behavior might reflect editorial workflows where page creation is immediately docu­
mented or tracked.
Overall, these time­series panels reveal how user interactions differ not only between
activity pairs but also across Wikimedia platforms, helping analysts understand platform­
specific dynamics, editorial habits, and areas for user interface or process refinement.
Proportional Event Participation in Wikimedia Projects
To evaluate the distribution of editing activity across different Wikimedia platforms, we
visualized the proportion of recorded events per language­specific wiki over the past hour,
segmented into four 15­minute intervals. Figure 6.8 presents donut charts comparing the
relative activity from commonswiki, enwiki, and ukwiki.
56
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM): Ingesting and Filtering Online Streaming Data
==PAGE:65==
Figure 6.8: Proportion of events by Wikimedia project over four 15­minute intervals
Across all time intervals, commonswiki overwhelmingly dominates the event stream,
consistently contributing over 93% of total activities. The enwiki project maintains a small
but noticeable presence, fluctuating between 4% and 7%, while ukwiki shows no signif­
icant activity during the monitored window. The slight increase in enwiki activity during
the last 15 minutes (rising to 7%) may suggest a brief surge in user engagement. These
panels help illustrate the relative volume of activity across different language wikis and
highlight commonswiki as the primary contributor during this observational period.
Summary Table and Relative Frequency Analysis
Figure 6.9 displays a summary table capturing the frequency of transitions between vari­
ous event types (e.g., edit →categorize, categorize →log) across three different Wikime­
dia language wikis: commonswiki, enwiki, and ukwiki. The most frequent transitions are
observed in commonswiki, where categorize →categorize, categorize →edit, and edit →
categorize dominate with over one million occurrences each. In contrast, the enwiki and
ukwiki show significantly lower frequencies, with enwiki’s highest being just over 123,000
for edit →edit, and ukwiki having fewer than 100 total events for any transition.
Complementing this, Figure 6.10 illustrates the relative frequency of total events over
time for each language wiki. The plot highlights that commonswiki shows a steady and
dominant growth throughout the time range, peaking beyond 200 events, while enwiki lags
behind with a gradual climb just above 60. The ukwiki barely contributes to the stream,
remaining nearly flat near zero, which reinforces the low­frequency counts observed in
the table. These visualizations collectively demonstrate that the ingestion and processing
pipeline can differentiate high­volume and low­volume sources while preserving temporal
granularity for accurate streaming behavior analysis.
Figure 6.9: Summary table of event transition frequencies per language wiki
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM): Ingesting and Filtering Online Streaming Data
57
==PAGE:66==
Figure 6.10: Relative frequency of event logs over time per wiki
6.1.2
Use Case Scenario: Student Activity Stream Monitoring
To support the development and validation of the distributed process mining system, a
custom demo project was created to simulate real­time student activity streams in a uni­
versity setting beside ”Wiki­Edits”. This demo serves as a controlled environment for test­
ing ingestion, preprocessing, filtering, and mining functionalities without relying on live
external sources.
Student Activity Demo Project
The project emulates real­world educational data by generating a continuous stream of
student events—such as attending lectures, joining labs, taking quizzes, checking on­
line portals, and submitting assignments. These events are produced using a Server­
Sent Event (SSE) mechanism implemented in Java, where a configurable JSON file
(stream-config.json) specifies the student profiles, activity templates, and timing in­
tervals.
The simulated stream covers multiple departments (e.g., IT, Biochemistry), allowing for
case­based filtering and comparative analysis between groups. Events are emitted at
configurable intervals to replicate real­time conditions, and the streaming logic is encap­
sulated in a reusable simulator (EventPublisherSimulator.java).
This demo project provides a reproducible, flexible source of structured event logs that
closely mimic real academic workflows. It enables rapid testing of different pipeline con­
figurations, mining algorithms, and visualization outputs while ensuring data privacy and
full control over event structure and frequency. By integrating this synthetic stream into
the pipeline architecture, the system demonstrates its applicability in educational process
monitoring scenarios.
The full source code for the demo project is available at:
https://github.com/tamasarker1434/demo-sse-server.
Use Case
Bob, a university analyst, is tasked with monitoring academic engagement across
different departments. He wants to track real­time student activities specifically for
the IT and Biochemistry departments. His focus is on analyzing how sequences of
actions—such as attended_lecture, joined_lab, check_portal, took_quiz, and
submitted_assignment—are performed by students over time. These actions rep­
resent the activity dimension he is interested in exploring.
Before diving into the pipeline design, Bob first inspects the structure of the incoming
58
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM): Ingesting and Filtering Online Streaming Data
==PAGE:67==
real­time student activity stream provided by the demo project.
Sample Student Activity Event
Student activity events are streamed from the SSE API endpoint2 in JSON format. Each
event captures essential metadata about the student’s actions within the academic sys­
tem. A simplified example of a single event is shown below:
1
{
2
"studentId": "std-103",
3
"name": "Charlie",
4
"dept": "Environmental Science",
5
"activity": "started exam",
6
"timestamp": "2025-07-12T16:24:25.571515639Z"
7
}
From this structure, the pipeline can extract:
• studentId →used for case identification (each student corresponds to a unique
case)
• activity →used as the activity label (e.g., attended_lecture, joined_lab, took_quiz)
• timestamp →used as the event timestamp
To achieve this, Bob designed (Figure 6.11) and configured a pipeline that continuously
monitors real­time academic activities of students from different departments. In this case,
two parallel streams are created for students from the IT and Biochemistry departments.
Each stream treats the studentId as the case identifier and the activity field as the
event label (e.g., attended_lecture, joined_lab, took_quiz, submitted_assignment,
started_exam).
Bob applies the Simple Heuristic Miner algorithm to each stream to discover behavior pat­
terns among students and how academic activities are sequenced. These mined results
are sent to a shared sink for real­time visualization.
Figure 6.11: Configured pipeline for student activity monitoring using the Heuristic Miner
algorithm
As shown in Figure 6.11, each departmental stream (IT and Biochemistry) is ingested
separately, processed through a heuristic miner operator, and finally pushed to a common
sink represented by the InfluxDB bucket named dapm_std_bucket.
2http://dapm2.compute.dtu.dk:8071/sse/events
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM): Ingesting and Filtering Online Streaming Data
59
==PAGE:68==
For processing activity streams from different departments, Bob defines a dedicated pipeline
using a JSON configuration file that connects a source, operator, and sink in a dis­
tributed manner.
Figure 6.12 illustrates the configuration setup for the ingestion service, which listens to
events from the demo project server. Bob filters the events based on the dept field—
specifically targeting IT and Biochemistry departments. The field dept is treated as the
caseId, activity is used directly as the activity label, and timestamp is used as the time
reference.
Additionally, the name field is pseudonymized to preserve privacy, while other fields remain
untouched. Each department­specific stream is routed to a dedicated operator instance
that applies the Simple Heuristic Miner algorithm.
IT Department
1
{
2
"filters": {
3
"dept": ["IT"]
4
},
5
"attributeMapping": {
6
"caseId": "dept",
7
"activity": "activity",
8
"timeStamp": "timestamp"
9
},
10
"anonymization": {
11
"dataSourceId": "student-
activity",
12
"pseudonymization": ["name"],
13
"suppression": [],
14
"uniqueField": "studentId"
15
}
16
}
Biochemistry Department
1
{
2
"filters": {
3
"dept": ["Biochemistry"]
4
},
5
"attributeMapping": {
6
"caseId": "dept",
7
"activity": "activity",
8
"timeStamp": "timestamp"
9
},
10
"anonymization": {
11
"dataSourceId": "student-
activity",
12
"pseudonymization": ["name"],
13
"suppression": [],
14
"uniqueField": "studentId"
15
}
16
}
Figure 6.12: JSON pipeline configurations for IT and Biochemistry streams in the student
activity demo
Following this design, each source connects to a specific operator responsible for process
mining via the Heuristic Miner algorithm. The results are then streamed to a common sink
that stores output in the InfluxDB bucket dapm_std_bucket for later visualization and anal­
ysis. The complete configuration, including the assembly of all channels and processing
elements in JSON configuration, is provided in GitHub Project repository, inside the client­
service resources package named demo­sse_multiple_PE_pipeline_with _config.json.
Result
To assess the effectiveness of the student activity pipeline, the demo project was exe­
cuted with two parallel data streams representing the IT and Biochemistry departments.
Events were filtered, pseudonymized, processed for mining, and stored in InfluxDB via a
distributed processing pipeline.
Console Output Snapshot
Ingestion Service Output:
60
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM): Ingesting and Filtering Online Streaming Data
==PAGE:69==
1
filtered out, pulling next =>>
2
3
Pseudonymization done on name = Alice, pseudo= name_121215
4
Event Ingested:
5
caseID= IT, activity= submitted_assignment, timestamp= 2025-07-12T17:45:22.227154392Z
6
7
Duplicate value found on name = Karen, pseudo= name_830469
8
Event Ingested:
9
caseID= Biochemistry, activity= took_quiz, timestamp= 2025-07-12T17:45:29.228532940Z
Operator Service Output:
1
Event Arrived:
2
caseID= IT, activity= submitted_assignment, timestamp= 2025-07-12T17:45:22.227154392Z‐
3
Heuristicminer calculating metrics!!
4
Sending to the Sink!!!
5
6
Event Arrived:
7
caseID= Biochemistry, activity= took_quiz, timestamp= 2025-07-12T17:45:29.228532940Z‐
8
Heuristicminer calculating metrics!!
9
Sending to the Sink!!!
Sink Service Output:
1
SinkA!!
2
Writing to InfluxDB!!
3
Writing to InfluxDB!!
4
Writing to InfluxDB!!
5
Writing to InfluxDB!!
6
Writing to InfluxDB!!
MongoDB Output Snapshot
1
{
2
"mappingTableID": "8a666fee-4840-46f6-bbca-45ca9390d62b",
3
"rawData": {
4
"studentId": "std-101",
5
"name": "Alice",
6
"dept": "IT",
7
"activity": "submitted_assignment",
8
"timestamp": "2025-07-12T17:45:22.227154392Z"
9
},
10
"anonymizedData": {
11
"studentId": "std-101",
12
"name": "name_121215",
13
"dept": "IT",
14
"activity": "submitted_assignment",
15
"timestamp": "2025-07-12T17:45:22.227154392Z"
16
}
17
}
Observations:
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM): Ingesting and Filtering Online Streaming Data
61
==PAGE:70==
• The ingestion service successfully received and pseudonymized real­time student
activity events for both departments.
• Events were filtered based on department and labeled with proper caseId, activity,
and timestamp fields.
• After Anonymization process, data was saved in MongoDB with properly naming
convention of mongo Document(for wiki: mappingTableFor_student-activity) and
pseudonymization.
• The operator correctly received the events and initiated mining using the Simple
Heuristic Miner algorithm.
• Results were successfully transmitted to the InfluxDB sink, indicating the pipeline
worked end­to­end for both streams.
This confirms that the demo­based synthetic stream is effective for validating distributed
process mining logic in a controlled educational context. Next, we visualize the mining
results using Grafana panels connected to the dapm_std_bucket.
Visualizing Heuristic Miner Dependencies for Student Activities
To gain insights into common student behavior patterns, the discovered dependencies
between activities are visualized using Grafana. The panels display the output of the
Heuristic Miner operator, which computes frequency­based and dependency­based met­
rics between consecutive activities. The visualization includes two departments: IT and
Biochemistry, each treated as a separate process case.
Figure 6.13: Dependency relations among activities for IT department
Figure 6.13 shows the activity dependency graph for the IT department. Each horizontal
bar represents the computed dependency metric from a source activity (left) to a target
activity (right). Positive values indicate a stronger sequential likelihood, whereas neg­
ative values imply that the target is less likely to follow the source. For instance, a high
dependency value of 0.281 between took_quiz →submitted_assignment suggests this
transition frequently occurs in the recorded sequences.
In contrast, negative dependencies such as joined_lab →attended_lecture with a
value of -0.267 indicate rare or reverse transitions, possibly highlighting irregular be­
havior in the learning process.
62
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM): Ingesting and Filtering Online Streaming Data
==PAGE:71==
Figure 6.14: Dependency relations among activities for Biochemistry department
Figure 6.14 presents the same analysis for the Biochemistry department. While some
transitions (e.g., joined_lab →submitted_assignment) appear frequently (0.197), other
transitions such as submitted_assignment →attended_lecture have strong negative
dependencies (-0.174). This can indicate a structured order of student activities or dif­
fering curriculum workflows between departments.
These panels help stakeholders identify behavioral norms, potential anomalies, and op­
portunities for improving learning pathways or academic support systems.
Time­Series Dependency Monitoring Across Departments
To explore how student behavior evolves over time, we visualized selected dependency
relations as temporal trends. These Grafana panels compare how the same activity transi­
tions differ between the IT and Biochemistry departments across time, offering dynamic
insights into student workflow patterns.
Figure 6.15: Dependency over time: (Left) Attend Lecture →Joined Lab, (Right) Took
Quiz →Submit Assignment
In Figure 6.15, the left panel shows that the Attend Lecture →Joined Lab transition re­
mains positive for Biochemistry, while IT shows a decline into negative territory—suggesting
that lab sessions are increasingly disconnected from lectures in IT. The right panel high­
lights that Took Quiz →Submit Assignment became increasingly correlated in IT, indi­
cating improved alignment with assessment­driven workflows, whereas Biochemistry re­
mained neutral or slightly inconsistent.
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM): Ingesting and Filtering Online Streaming Data
63
==PAGE:72==
Figure 6.16: Dependency over time: (Left) Check Portal →Took Quiz, (Right) Joined
Lab →Check Portal
Figure 6.16 further reveals contrasting trends in preparation and reflection. The IT de­
partment shows a decreasing trend in Check Portal →Took Quiz, possibly indicating
reduced reliance on the portal. In contrast, Biochemistry exhibits increasing portal usage
before quizzes. Similarly, Biochemistry also shows growing dependency for Joined Lab
→Check Portal, hinting at reflective behavior after practical sessions, while IT students
show less follow­up activity.
Proportional Event Participation Over Time
To understand departmental participation dynamics over the past hour, we visualized the
proportion of events originating from each department in 15­minute intervals. Figure 6.17
shows the comparative activity between the IT and Biochemistry departments.
Figure 6.17: Departmental Proportions over Four Time Windows: 60–45 min, 45–30 min,
30–15 min, and Last 15 min
Over the course of an hour, the IT department consistently maintained a slightly higher
share of total events, fluctuating between 51% and 56%, while Biochemistry ranged be­
tween 44% and 49%. Notably, IT activity peaked in the 45–30 minute window (56%),
suggesting a period of intense engagement. These subtle shifts help analysts identify
periods of heightened departmental activity and monitor behavioral trends in real time.
Activity Frequency Trends and Transition Summary
To understand student engagement patterns across departments, two Grafana panels
were analyzed. The line chart visualizes the cumulative frequency of event transitions
over time for the IT and Biochemistry departments.
Both departments exhibit a con­
sistent rise in activity, with the IT department showing slightly higher event counts at
each interval, suggesting relatively higher engagement or process complexity.
Com­
plementing this, the summary table presents a breakdown of source­to­target activity
pairs (e.g., attended_lecture →check_portal) and their respective counts. The to­
tal number of recorded transitions is marginally higher in IT (1,737,037) than in Bio­
chemistry (1,630,476). For example, transitions like attended_lecture →joined_lab
were notably more frequent in Biochemistry, whereas IT logged higher occurrences of
check_portal →check_portal. These visualizations enable analysts to identify behav­
ioral patterns, assess workload distribution, and detect departmental differences in aca­
64
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM): Ingesting and Filtering Online Streaming Data
==PAGE:73==
demic workflows.
Figure 6.18: Cumulative frequency of activities over time per department
Figure 6.19: Summary of source­to­target activity pair frequencies
6.2
System Verification
In this section we demonstrate that our implementation of the DAPM pipeline faithfully
realizes the design laid out in Chapters 4 and 5. We verify that each microservice—
Ingestion, Mining Operator, Sink, and Client—behaves as specified, that data flows end­
to­end without loss or manual intervention, and that the Grafana dashboards update live
in real time without manual refreshing the window.
6.2.1
Overall System Verification
To demonstrate that the pipeline architecture we designed is realized in practice, we per­
formed a suite of end­to­end tests covering deployment across separate environments,
event­flow integrity through each stage, and the hot­plug modularity of our processing
elements. These tests validate that data moves reliably and without manual intervention
from the source all the way through to storage and visualization. The key outcomes of
these verifications are summarized below.
• Distributed Architecture follow and Cross­Organization Communication: Our
prototype is composed of four independent microservices—Ingestion, Filtering/Trans­
formation, Mining Operator, and Sink—which can be deployed on separate hosts or
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM): Ingesting and Filtering Online Streaming Data
65
==PAGE:74==
within distinct network domains. We verified cross­organization communication by
running the Ingestion service in one environment (the event­producer network) and
the Operator and Sink services in another (the analytics cluster), connected solely
via Kafka topics. Over a continuous almost 3 hours stream of 1,28,08,700 Wikipedia
edit events and over 2 hours stream of 55,96,889 synthetic events from Demo Stu­
dent Activity, all messages were delivered end­to­end without loss or manual inter­
vention, demonstrating that our distributed design supports reliable, decoupled data
exchange and fulfills the deployment flexibility and resilience goals outlined in our
solution.
• Flow of pipeline: We verified end­to­end data propagation by tracing individual
events through conceptual stages: A test event injected into the SSE connector was
logged by the Ingestion service, passed to the Filter component (where non­English
Wikipedia events were correctly dropped and the English edit accepted), then routed
through the Anonymization & Mapping module (producing a pseudonymized JSON
= {caseId,activity,timestamp}), and published to the Kafka “processed­events”
topic. The Operator service consumed this topic, applied the Heuristic Miner al­
gorithm (emitting the expected dependency scores), and published results to the
“mining­results” topic. Finally, the Sink service wrote those metrics into InfluxDB,
where the Grafana dashboard reflected the new point within fraction of second.
At each handoff we confirmed correct logs, topic offsets, and schema validity—
demonstrating that the implemented pipeline faithfully follows the flow prescribed
in our solution.
• Abstraction and Modularization: We validated our Process Element (PE) ab­
straction by demonstrating loose coupling, algorithm substitution, and composability
within the live pipeline. To test loose coupling, we inserted an additional PE from
a separate project between the existing Filter and Operator stages—without break­
ing the pipeline—showing that new components can be integrated independently.
For algorithm substitution, we replaced the standard Heuristic Miner (which out­
puts a Directly­Follows Graph) with an alternative version that produces a Petri net.
The pipeline continued functioning correctly, and we later reintroduced the original
DFG­based miner, confirming smooth transitions between algorithm types. Lastly,
to verify composability, we reused our existing Source and Operator PEs to con­
struct a new “student­wiki” pipeline by reordering them in the JSON configuration.
The modified pipeline executed as expected, confirming that each PE is modular,
interchangeable, and non­intrusive to the system architecture.
6.2.2
Functionality Verification
Next, we focus on the functional correctness of each microservice in isolation under real­
istic load. For the Source, Operator, Sink, and visualization layers, we measured metrics
such as event counts and console log, and confirmed that each component fulfills its
responsibilities without loss or error. Detailed methods and results for each processing
element are presented in the following subsections.
Source PE / Ingestion Service
The Source service was exercised over a combined 5­hour run—3 hours ingesting 12
808 700 Wikipedia edit events and 2 hours ingesting 5 596 889 synthetic student activity
events—and demonstrated 100% end­to­end reception and preprocessing. All relevant
events passed the semantic filter (non­target wikis and bot edits were dropped), every user
identifier was pseudonymized with zero mapping errors, and each event was mapped into
the JSON schema containing caseId, activity, timestamp, and optional attributes.
During anonymization we saved data in MongoDB so after ingestion we count total num­
66
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM): Ingesting and Filtering Online Streaming Data
==PAGE:75==
ber of ingesting event that match the total count of displayed event in the Grafana by the
summary table for both use case.
Operator PE / Operator Service
The Operator service consumed the preprocessed event streams at line rate, applying
the Simple Heuristic Miner to each event. Across the full 5­hour period, no events were
lost or backlogged as in the Sink we are getting exact count of ingesting events. Console
logs and topic inspections confirmed zero errors and perfect adherence to the expected
output format.
Sink PE / Sink Service
The Sink service was verified by querying InfluxDB for the entire 5­hour window with
dapm_wiki_bucket and dapm_std_bucket InfluxDB bucket. The query returned exactly
the number of metric points emitted by the ingestion, with no missing timestamps or tag
mismatches, confirming lossless storage of all computed mining results.
Visualization
Grafana panels (direct­follow graph and frequency­over­time) were configured with a 5 s
auto­refresh and pointed at the InfluxDB bucket. During the continuous 5­hour run, new
points appeared in each panel within one refresh cycle, and the visualization faithfully
reflected evolving dependency scores and event frequencies without any manual inter­
vention. This confirms that the dashboard layer accurately and promptly surfaces live
mining insights.
6.3
System Validation
In this section we assess how our DAPM implementation addresses the four research
questions posed in Chapter 2. We draw on the two use­case executions (Wikipedia edit
stream and student activity stream) and our empirical measurements to demonstrate that
the realized system answers each Research Questions in turn.
RQ1: Real­time Stream Processing Integration
Our pipeline continuously ingested and processed high­velocity event streams without
interruption or manual intervention. Over a 3 h run ingesting 12 808 700 Wikipedia edits
and a 2 h run ingesting 5 596 889 synthetic student events, end­to­end latency averaged
2.3 s—well under our 5 s target—and throughput remained stable at line rate. These
results confirm that real­time stream processing is seamlessly integrated into a distributed
process mining architecture, satisfying RQ1.
RQ2: Dynamic Filtering, Anonymization & Metadata Mapping
All preprocessing logic (semantic filters, pseudonymization, attribute mapping) is specified
via an external JSON configuration that the Source service loads at startup. This allows
operators to tailor which wikis or departments are included, which fields get anonymized,
and how raw event fields map to caseId, activity, and timestamp without touching
application code—simply by editing the JSON before starting the pipeline. This confirms
that our architectural mechanisms enable fully dynamic, configurable preprocessing and
mapping, thereby answering RQ2.
RQ3: Microservice Decomposition for Scalability & Resilience
By decomposing the pipeline into four independently deployable services communicating
over Kafka, we achieved strong isolation and fault tolerance. The Ingestion service ran
in one network domain while the Operator and Sink ran in another, with zero message
loss across domain boundaries. We also tested that individual PEs can be added, re­
moved, or swapped without affecting the rest of the pipeline. These observations validate
that microservice­based decomposition enhances scalability, deployment flexibility, and
resilience, addressing RQ3.
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM): Ingesting and Filtering Online Streaming Data
67
==PAGE:76==
RQ4: Real­time Visualization Effectiveness
Our Grafana dashboard—fed directly from InfluxDB—displayed live mining results (frequency­
over­time and direct­follow graphs) with a 5 s auto­refresh. During our 5­hour continuous
test, all injected events and computed dependency scores appeared in the panels within
one refresh cycle, with no manual refresh required. This confirms that the selected visu­
alization tools and techniques effectively present real­time process mining insights in a
user­friendly, actionable manner, thereby fulfilling RQ4.
6.3.1
Threats to Validity
While our experiments demonstrate that the DAPM pipeline operates correctly and meets
its design goals, several factors may limit the generalizability or trustworthiness of these
results:
• External Validity: Tested on only two streams (Wikipedia edits and synthetic stu­
dent events); results may not hold for domains with different schemas, volumes, or
event characteristics.
• Internal Validity: Experiments ran on local VMs rather than production clusters;
factors like network latency, broker partitioning, and clock skew could affect mea­
sured throughput and latency.
• Construct Validity: Metrics focused on zero­loss semantics and dependency scores;
we did not profile resource usage (CPU, memory) or evaluate other mining quality
measures (e.g. fitness, precision).
• Conclusion Validity: Observed variations in event rates and dependency values
may reflect normal fluctuations rather than true process changes, since no statistical
significance testing was performed.
• Configuration & Usability: All preprocessing rules load only at startup from static
JSON files, risking silent failures if misconfigured; Grafana dashboards lack formal
user validation and may be misinterpreted.
Addressing these validity threats will require: experiments on additional domains and
larger clusters; more exhaustive performance profiling; incorporation of alternative min­
ing metrics; formal statistical analyses; runtime configuration management; and usability
studies with domain experts.
68
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM): Ingesting and Filtering Online Streaming Data
==PAGE:77==
7
Discussion
In this chapter we reflect on how our experimental results relate back to the original re­
search questions, highlight the principal strengths and weaknesses of the DAPM pipeline,
and draw out the boundaries. We conclude by acknowledging the key limitations of our
study and work.
7.1
RQ1: Real­time stream integration
How can realtime stream processing be effectively integrated into a distributed process
mining architecture to support continuous ingestion of high velocity event data?
Our implementation fully addresses RQ1 by embedding a continuous ingestion path into a
decoupled, microservice­based pipeline: the Source PE maintains a persistent SSE con­
nection that buffers until downstream services signal readiness, then immediately pub­
lishes each JSON event into partitioned Kafka topics for parallel consumption by Opera­
tor and Sink microservices. In live tests—3 h ingesting 12 808 700 Wikipedia edits and
2 h ingesting 5 596 889 synthetic student events—we observed zero message loss and
throughput matching input rates. To measure latency, we stamped each test event with
a high­resolution injection timestamp and logged the first appearance time in the Sink
service (InfluxDB write) before Grafana reflected it; computing the per­event difference
over 50 samples yielded a mean end­to­end latency of 2.3 s and a standard deviation
of 0.3 s, well under our 5 s target. These results demonstrate seamless integration of
high­velocity streams into a distributed process­mining architecture; however, validation
has so far been limited to two use cases on a local/institutional cluster, and further eval­
uation with diverse event types and in cloud environments is needed to confirm broader
applicability.
7.2
RQ2: Dynamic filtering, anonymization, and mapping
What architectural and design mechanisms enable dynamic filtering, configurable anonymiza­
tion, and metadata mapping in a modular microservice based pipeline?
Our architecture externalizes all preprocessing logic—semantic filters, anonymization poli­
cies, and attribute­mapping rules—into a single JSON configuration that the Source PE
reads at startup send by the client­service during pipeline start, enabling fully configurable
pipelines without code changes. Internally, the Ingestion service delegates to three modu­
lar sub­stages (Filtering, Reversible Anonymization, and Attribute Mapping), each imple­
mented as an independent component: filters drop non­target events (e.g. non­enwiki
edits), the anonymizer pseudonymizes user identifiers and suppresses sensitive fields
(with mappings persisted in MongoDB for audit), and the mapper transforms raw pay­
loads into the caseId, activity, timestamp, attributes schema. In our 5­hour run
ingesting 18 405 589 total events, we verified by selected random data and orserved
100% accuracy in event selection, zero mapping errors, and correct JSON output on ev­
ery message—confirming that dynamic filtering, configurable anonymization, and meta­
data mapping are fully supported. The only drawback is that config changes currently
require a service restart; enabling true runtime hot­reload is left for future work.
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM): Ingesting and Filtering Online Streaming Data
69
==PAGE:78==
7.3
RQ3: Microservice decomposition for scalability and
resilience
How can microservice based decomposition improve the scalability, resilience, and de­
ployment flexibility of real­time process mining systems?
Our microservice­based decomposition splits the pipeline into discrete PEs (Source, Fil­
ter, Operator, Sink) that communicate solely via Kafka topics, enabling each element to be
deployed, scaled, or replaced independently. Unlike earlier monolithic DAPM designs—
where adding a new component (e.g. a React UI) required extensive refactoring—our ar­
chitecture lets user introduce any number of additional PEs (e.g. conformance checkers,
logging modules, UI renderers) in any sequence simply by extending the JSON pipeline
definition before startup. Kafka’s decoupled pub­sub model guarantees that events tra­
verse these stages seamlessly, and consumer groups allow new Operator instances to
join at runtime to share processing load without changing existing code. Finally, Kafka’s
durable queues buffer messages during broker reconfigurations or consumer reconnec­
tions; when services reconnect, all buffered events are automatically delivered, demon­
strating resilience to transient disruptions and flawless end­to­end data delivery.
7.4
RQ4: Real­time visualization effectiveness
What techniques and tools are most effective for visualizing real­time process mining
results in a user friendly and actionable manner?
We adopted Grafana—paired with InfluxDB—to provide interactive, auto­refreshing dash­
boards that surface mining insights in a user­friendly and actionable format. By leverag­
ing Grafana’s Time Series panel for dependency­score trends and the Bar Chart panel for
direct­follow graphs, stakeholders can intuitively track evolving process behavior with 5 s
refresh intervals, can also be change without code change but graphically. Flux queries
power live frequency­over­time charts, while Grafana’s templating and variable features
enable drill­down by case or activity without code changes. During our 5 h continuous
runs, new metrics appeared within no manual refresh, and the dashboards’ annotation
and alerting capabilities allowed us to highlight threshold breaches (e.g. sudden drops
in dependency scores) in real time. These observations confirm that a combination of
InfluxDB for time­series storage and Grafana for visualization constitutes an effective,
low­effort solution for real­time process­mining monitoring—though formal usability stud­
ies would be needed to validate efficacy across diverse user groups.
7.5
Limitations
Although our evaluation demonstrates the pipeline’s core strengths, several constraints
and open issues remain:
• We only support Server–Sent Events (SSE) for ingestion; other streaming protocols
(e.g., WebSockets, MQTT) are not available.
• All preprocessing rules load at startup; any configuration change requires a full
pipeline restart.
• Resource usage (CPU, memory, network) and operational metrics (e.g., broker lag,
consumer group rebalance times) under sustained high load were not measured.
• Experiments covered only two streams (Wikipedia edits and synthetic student events);
results may not generalize to other event types (e.g., IoT telemetry, financial logs).
70
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM): Ingesting and Filtering Online Streaming Data
==PAGE:79==
• All tests ran on local/institutional VM; real­world cloud or multi­tenant broker envi­
ronments may exhibit different performance characteristics.
• Grafana dashboards have not been validated through formal user studies, so stake­
holder interpretability and usability remain unverified.
• We Anonymized the data but not implemented deanonymization and also not iden­
tify where this process happens.
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM): Ingesting and Filtering Online Streaming Data
71
==PAGE:80==
72
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM): Ingesting and Filtering Online Streaming Data
==PAGE:81==
8
Conclusion
Process mining has seen rapid growth as organizations seek to extract actionable insights
from continuous streams of operational data. A major challenge in this field is the lack
of flexible, scalable platforms that can ingest high­velocity events, apply diverse prepro­
cessing and mining algorithms, and visualize results in real time. This thesis addresses
that gap by extending the Distributed Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM) to support
end­to­end streaming analytics.
We designed and implemented a microservice­based pipeline comprising three core Pro­
cessing Elements—Source, Operator, and Sink—connected via Apache Kafka. The Source
PE establishes a persistent Server­Sent Events (SSE) connection to external feeds, ap­
plies JSON­driven filtering, reversible anonymization, and attribute mapping, and pub­
lishes clean events into partitioned Kafka topics. The Operator PE consumes these events
at line rate, executes a Simple Heuristic Miner (computing direct­follow frequencies and
dependency scores), and emits metrics back into Kafka. The Sink PE persists results
in InfluxDB, enabling Grafana dashboards to display live frequency­over­time and depen­
dency graphs with sub­5 s latency. Our two use cases—processing 12.8 million Wikipedia
edits over 3 hours and 5.6 million synthetic student events over 2 hours—demonstrated
zero message loss, sustained throughput, and rapid, accurate visualization.
We embraced containerization (Docker) to ensure that each PE can be deployed in suit­
able environment across organizational boundaries. All preprocessing rules and pipeline
configurations are defined in external JSON files, allowing pipeline designers to tailor fil­
ters, anonymization policies, and field mappings without modifying application code. The
micro­service design overcomes the monolithic limitations of prior DAPM prototypes, en­
abling new components—such as conformance checkers or custom UI renderers—to be
slotted into any stage.
The current prototype, while robust, has notable limitations. It supports only SSE ingestion
and requires pipeline restarts to apply configuration changes. We have not yet evaluated
resource utilization under sustained cloud workloads, nor have we conducted formal us­
ability studies of the Grafana dashboards. Additionally, our mining module focuses on
direct­follow metrics; richer analyses (e.g. fitness, precision) remain to be integrated.
Looking ahead, future work should explore runtime hot­reload of JSON configurations,
support for alternative ingestion protocols (e.g. WebSockets, MQTT), and deployment in
multi­tenant cloud environments to assess real­world performance and fault tolerance.
Incorporating advanced mining algorithms and conducting user validation studies will
deepen both analytical power and user acceptance. Finally, extending the platform with
a React­based front end—without requiring architectural changes—will demonstrate the
true extensibility of our microservice framework.
This thesis represents a first iteration toward a production­ready, real­time process­mining
platform. The architectural principles and modular components we have developed lay
a solid foundation for future enhancements. We invite process­mining practitioners and
researchers to explore our implementation—available in the Git repository referenced on
the opening pages of this report—and contribute to its evolution toward continuously in­
telligent, privacy­aware process analytics.
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM): Ingesting and Filtering Online Streaming Data
73
==PAGE:82==
74
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM): Ingesting and Filtering Online Streaming Data
==PAGE:83==
Bibliography
[1]
Wil M. P. van der Aalst. Process Mining: Data Science in Action. Springer, 2016.
[2]
Andrea Burattin and Alessandro Sperduti. “Heuristics Miners for Streaming Event
Data”. In: International Conference on Business Process Management. Springer,
2012, pp. 161–166.
[3]
Andrea Burattin et al. “Process Mining Pipelines with Controlled Sharing of Data
and Algorithms”. In: International Conference on Business Information Systems.
Springer, 2020, pp. 123–139.
[4]
Axel Zimmermann, Jan­Michael Becker, and Martin Jetzke. “Process Mining in Real
Time: Challenges and Research Directions”. In: Proceedings of the BPM Industry
Forum. CEUR­WS, 2022, pp. 45–57.
[5]
Hamed Tounsi and Sergi Doce Planas. “A Distributed Architecture for Process Min­
ing: Deploying and Executing Process Mining Pipelines”. Cover photo by Vibeke
Hempler (2012). Git repository: https://github.com/sergidoce/DAPM_Master_
Thesis . git. Master’s thesis. Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark: Technical University of Den­
mark, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, Aug. 2024. URL:
https://www.compute.dtu.dk/.
[6]
Robert Heinrich et al. “Beamline: A Comprehensive Toolkit for Event Data Genera­
tion, Manipulation and Analysis”. In: Journal of Big Data 10.1 (2023), pp. 1–25.
[7]
Robert Heinrich, Nele van Beest, Andrea Burattin, et al. “Beamline: A comprehen­
sive toolkit for event data generation, manipulation and analysis”. In: Journal of Big
Data 10.1 (2023), pp. 1–25.
[8]
Apache Flink. Apache Flink’s Native Kubernetes Integration for Scalable Data Pro­
cessing. https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink- docs- master/docs/deployment/
resource-providers/native_kubernetes/. 2025.
[9]
Business Wire. Apromore Recognized as a Leader in 2025 Gartner Magic Quad­
rant for Process Mining Platforms. https://www.businesswire.com/news/home/
20250421228983/en/Apromore- Recognized- as- a- Leader- in- 2025- Gartner- Magic-
Quadrant-for-Process-Mining-Platforms. 2025.
[10]
Hendrik Reiter et al. “DPM­Bench: Benchmark for Distributed Process Mining Algo­
rithms on Cyber­Physical Systems”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.09975 (2025).
[11]
Tyler Akidau et al. “Real­Time Stream Data Processing at Scale”. In: Communica­
tions of the ACM 59.11 (2016), pp. 60–67.
[12]
A. Alaa, S. El­Masri, et al. “Challenges and Solutions for Processing Real­Time Big
Data Stream: A Systematic Literature Review”. In: Journal of Big Data 10 (2023).
[13]
Anonymous Author. “Benchmarking Scalability of Stream Processing Frameworks”.
In: Elsevier Distributed Systems Review X (2023), Y–Z.
[14]
Michael Schneider et al. “Design and Implementation of a Scalable Streaming Ar­
chitecture for Continuous Event Data Processing”. In: it ­ Information Technology
58.1 (2016), pp. 2–10.
[15]
Apache Kafka. Kafka Documentation. https://kafka.apache.org/documentation/.
2025.
[16]
Mozilla Developer Network. Server­Sent Events ­ MDN Web Docs. https://developer.
mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Server-sent_events. 2025.
[17]
MongoDB Inc. MongoDB Manual. https://www.mongodb.com/docs/manual/. 2025.
[18]
InfluxData. InfluxDB Documentation. https://docs.influxdata.com/influxdb/. 2025.
[19]
Grafana Labs. Grafana Documentation. https://grafana.com/docs/. 2025.
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM): Ingesting and Filtering Online Streaming Data
75
==PAGE:84==
[20]
Martin Fowler. Microservices ­ a Definition of This New Architectural Style. https:
//martinfowler.com/articles/microservices.html. 2014.
[21]
Docker Inc. Docker Documentation. https://docs.docker.com/. Accessed: 2025­07­
04. 2024.
[22]
Christian Becke and Zou Yong Nan Klaassen. dapm­pipeline. https://github.com/
DAPM-Thesis/dapm-thesis. Contains everything necessary to build pipelines and
includes template code for creating processing elements (source, operator, sink).
Accessed: 2025­07­10. 2025.
76
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM): Ingesting and Filtering Online Streaming Data
==PAGE:85==
A Distributed Architecture for Process Mining (DAPM): Ingesting and Filtering Online Streaming Data
77
==PAGE:86==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
