==PAGE:1==
Democratizing Financial Advice with AI: LLM
Agents and RAG for Personalized Wealth
Strategies
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Democratizing Financial Advice with AI: LLM Agents and RAG for Personalized
Wealth Strategies
Master Thesis
September, 2025
By
Ivan Antonino Arena
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Brovej, Building 118, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.byg.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at Dreamplan in partial fulfillment for the
degree Master of Science in Computer Science and Engineering Engineering at Technical
University of Denmark, DTU.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of software engineering.
Ivan Antonino Arena ­ s233352
Signature
Date
ii
Democratizing Financial Advice with AI: LLM Agents and RAG for Personalized Wealth Strategies
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Access to high­quality financial advice remains limited for many individuals due to high
costs and exclusivity, despite its critical role in promoting long­term financial well­being.
This thesis investigates the design and implementation of an AI­powered financial advi­
sory system that aligns with Dreamplan’s mission of democratizing financial planning. By
integrating Large Language Models (LLMs) with Retrieval­Augmented Generation (RAG)
and deterministic financial optimization models, the proposed system aims to provide ex­
plainable, scalable and personalized wealth strategies via natural language dialogue.
Unlike end­to­end generative advisors, the architecture adopts a hybrid approach: LLMs
serve as interpreters and orchestrators of user intent, while a robust financial engine en­
sures accuracy and rigor in recommendations. The system is developed using real­world
anonymized data provided by Dreamplan and leverages cloud­based APIs for LLM infer­
ence and vector­based retrieval.
Through both qualitative and quantitative evaluation – including response accuracy, rout­
ing performance and explainability – the thesis demonstrates the feasibility of deploying
conversational financial agents in real­world settings. The results suggest that combining
neural and symbolic systems offers a promising path forward for accessible, trustworthy
and intelligent financial advisory tools.
Democratizing Financial Advice with AI: LLM Agents and RAG for Personalized Wealth Strategies
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Ivan Antonino Arena, MSc Computer Science and Engineering, DTU
Author.
Finn Årup Nielsen, Associate Professor, DTU Compute
Internal supervisor at DTU.
Philip Rasmussen, Lead Data Scientist, Dreamplan
External supervisor at Dreamplan.
iv
Democratizing Financial Advice with AI: LLM Agents and RAG for Personalized Wealth Strategies
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Prior Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Problem Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Empirical Considerations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.5
Impact . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
System Design
8
2.1
Goal­Oriented Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2
System Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Calculation API . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
2.4
Database . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
2.5
Design principles and considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3
Retrieval­Augmented Generation
17
3.1
Retrieval­Augmented Generation architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.2
Documents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4
Reasoning pipeline
22
4.1
Decision Layer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
4.2
Specialization Layer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.3
Guardrail Layer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.4
User Interaction Flow
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
5
Development
28
5.1
Costs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
5.2
Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
5.3
CI/CD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
5.4
Deployment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
6
Experiments
34
6.1
Decision Layer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
6.2
Retrieval­Augmented Generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
6.3
System Quality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
6.4
Experimental Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
6.5
System Metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
6.6
Costs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
7
Results
41
7.1
Decision Layer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
7.2
Retrieval­Augmented Generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
7.3
System Quality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
Democratizing Financial Advice with AI: LLM Agents and RAG for Personalized Wealth Strategies
v
==PAGE:8==
8
Conclusion
47
8.1
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
Bibliography
51
A Appendix A
55
A.1 LLM prompts and instructions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
B Appendix B
60
B.1 Cyclomatic complexity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
vi
Democratizing Financial Advice with AI: LLM Agents and RAG for Personalized Wealth Strategies
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
Background
Financial literacy is one of the key differentiators between economic success and stag­
nation. As Robert Kiyosaki famously argues [1], the core distinction between the rich
and the poor often lies not in income but in financial behavior – how individuals budget,
track expenses, save and invest. For those lacking access to quality financial education
or guidance, wealth management becomes a challenge and opportunities for long­term
financial growth are frequently missed.
Financial advisory services exist precisely to bridge this gap, offering individuals the tools
and strategies needed to make informed financial decisions. However, in many countries
– including Denmark – financial advice remains a largely exclusive service. Human ad­
visors are expensive and scarce, often reserved for the high­net­worth clients of banks.
This creates a structural inequality: those who could benefit most from financial advice
are often the least likely to receive it.
Dreamplan [2] was born to challenge this status quo. Founded in 2019 by Stine Kalmer
Jørgensen and Simon Bentholm, Dreamplan envisions a world where financial planning
is not a luxury, but a widely accessible resource. The core part of Dreamplan is a B2C
solution that delivers automated financial advice tailored to individual users. By analyz­
ing data such as age, income, assets, marital status and savings, Dreamplan generates
personalized wealth strategies and product recommendations. This approach, commonly
referred to as robo­advisory, has already proven to be transformative – lowering the barrier
to entry for financial advice while maintaining efficiency and scalability.
While traditional robo­advisors are built on complex rule­based systems and optimization
algorithms, the advent of Artificial Intelligence —­ particularly the rapid advancement of
Large Language Models (LLMs) —­ presents an exciting new frontier for the field. LLMs,
with their ability to process and generate human­like text, introduce the possibility of de­
signing more intuitive, dynamic and conversational financial advisory systems. When
combined with Retrieval­Augmented Generation (RAG) techniques, LLMs can access,
retrieve and reason over domain­specific knowledge in real­time, significantly enhancing
the depth and personalization of advice provided.
This evolution opens the door to a new generation of intelligent financial agents: AI sys­
tems that can simulate the behavior of a human financial advisor, engage users in natural
dialogue and offer tailored recommendations grounded in up­to­date information and best
practices. Unlike traditional robo­advisors, these agents require minimal pre­defined rules
or hard­coded financial models – they instead leverage the reasoning and generative ca­
pabilities of LLMs to adapt to a wide variety of user contexts and goals.
The aim of this thesis is to explore how such AI agents can be designed and implemented
in alignment with Dreamplan’s mission. Specifically, I focus on building a prototype con­
versational agent that provides personalized wealth strategies using LLMs and RAG. This
system seeks not only to match the capabilities of current robo­advisory tools, but to sur­
pass them in flexibility, interactivity and user accessibility, ultimately contributing to the
democratization of financial advice for all.
Democratizing Financial Advice with AI: LLM Agents and RAG for Personalized Wealth Strategies
1
==PAGE:10==
Figure 1.1: Screenshot from https://www.dreamplan.io/om-os.
1.2
Prior Work
Recent advancements in financial AI have largely centered around the development of
LLM­powered robo­advisors, which generate investment recommendations directly through
language generation. Notable examples include the pioneering BloombergGPT[3], as
well as its open­source successors [4, 5]. These works highlight the remarkable capabil­
ities of large language models (LLMs) in finance, particularly in tasks such as sentiment
analysis, entity recognition and financial question answering. Early exploratory works [6]
further reinforce the promise of LLM­based financial assistants.
However, despite their sophistication, LLM­only approaches often fall short in three key
areas: explainability, financial rigor and control. These limitations pose serious challenges
for real­world deployment, where user trust and regulatory compliance are essential. This
thesis builds upon these prior efforts by addressing these limitations through a more robust
and explainable system architecture.
In contrast to end­to­end generative advisors, this project adopts a hybrid architecture
that integrates LLM­based interfaces with deterministic financial models. Specifically, I
leverage Dreamplan’s existing optimization­based recommendation engine to produce fi­
nancial advice that is both explainable and grounded. The LLM acts, then, as a natural
language interface — responsible for interpreting user input, guiding the dialogue and
routing queries to the appropriate computational modules — rather than generating rec­
2
Democratizing Financial Advice with AI: LLM Agents and RAG for Personalized Wealth Strategies
==PAGE:11==
ommendations itself. This division of responsibilities ensures greater transparency and
traceability.
My design philosophy aligns with approaches such as FinRobot [5], which employs a hier­
archical, agent­based system to orchestrate multiple components. However, my system
differs in terms of its underlying tools, data access and architectural choices. Moreover,
I draw inspiration from research on conversational AI in other high­stakes domains [7],
where explainability and user alignment are paramount.
LLMs operating alone are prone to hallucinations and vague, ungrounded answers, es­
pecially in high­stakes contexts like personal finance. To mitigate this, recent research
has focused on retrieval­augmented generation (RAG) systems, which combine LLMs
with external knowledge retrieval. Studies such as [8, 9] show that LLM+RAG pipelines
significantly outperform standalone LLMs on financial QA tasks.
System performance, however, depends heavily on design. Works like LightRAG [10] and
FastRAG [11] explore architectural optimizations for latency and relevance, while [12] im­
proves answer quality through query rewriting before retrieval. Additionally, [13] empha­
size domain­specific retrieval tuning — an insight directly applied in this thesis to personal
finance.
Evaluating AI systems in finance requires methods that go beyond traditional metrics.
Recently, LLM­as­a­judge paradigms [14] have emerged as effective tools for assessing
response quality and are employed in this thesis to benchmark user­facing interactions. At
the same time, the user’s perception of LLM­generated content plays a key role in adop­
tion. Prior work [15, 16] explores how trust can be fostered through improved interface
design, explainability and consistent system behavior.
My methodology also draws from earlier work on explainable financial modeling [17],
where system outputs are grounded in transparent assumptions and user­defined goals.
The core idea remains the same: AI should enhance rather than obscure the decision­
making process.
In summary, while recent research demonstrates the promise of LLMs and RAG in fi­
nance [5], existing solutions often:
• lack integration with rigorous, deterministic financial models;
• miss fine­grained orchestration and control across modules;
• or are constrained to narrow use cases like document­level question answering.
This thesis project proposes a novel integration of explainable financial modeling with
LLM­based orchestration. The result is a trustworthy, interactive and scalable advisory
platform that combines the strengths of both symbolic and neural systems.
1.3
Problem Statement
The central challenge addressed in this thesis is determining the feasibility of developing
an LLM­powered financial advisory chatbot that integrates with a financial optimization
model to generate personalized wealth strategies. The goal is to evaluate whether such
a system can deliver accurate, context­aware and explainable financial recommendations
at scale. Specifically, the thesis aims to address the following questions:
• How effectively can an LLM function as a decision layer in a multi­agent system, in­
telligently routing user queries to the appropriate resources and tools (e.g. financial
optimization models, RAG systems)?
Democratizing Financial Advice with AI: LLM Agents and RAG for Personalized Wealth Strategies
3
==PAGE:12==
• How accurate and reliable is the LLM­based RAG system in answering financial
queries?
To address these questions, the research will build on recent literature to identify the best
strategies for prompting and orchestrating LLM agents, constructing the RAG system and
evaluating the effectiveness of information retrieval as well as the accuracy of the decision­
layer routing.
The system will be evaluated through both qualitative and quantitative metrics, including
performance measures such as response time, accuracy of query routing and the quality
and explainability of the AI­generated financial recommendations. User feedback will
be used to further refine the system and validate the recommendations. These goals
are designed to be operational and measurable, allowing for a clear assessment of the
proposed system’s effectiveness.
1.4
Empirical Considerations
Since this project is carried out in close collaboration with Dreamplan, the empirical setting
is grounded in a real­world application, with direct access to both technical infrastructure
and domain expertise.
Dreamplan provides access to anonymized financial and demographic data from its user­
base, which serves as the foundation for experimentation and prototyping. This data
includes variables such as age, income, savings, household status, assets, housing and
more. All data analysis and system development will be conducted independently by the
author, using tools and environments made available by the company.
The development of the LLM­based financial advisory system will involve building a con­
versational agent that integrates with Dreamplan’s existing optimization models. Vector
embeddings of financial documents and user input will be stored and queried using a
Retrieval­Augmented Generation (RAG) approach.
To support this, Dreamplan provides monetary credit on the OpenAI API platform, allowing
extensive use of LLMs without requiring dedicated hardware. All heavy computational
tasks (such as inference and embedding generation) are handled via cloud infrastructure,
minimizing local resource constraints.
In addition, the company provides access to their MySQL­based backend database, which
could be used to manage and persist vectorized content and user data.
Given the nature of the data and the involvement of third­party AI services (e.g., OpenAI),
all experiments involving sensitive information will rely strictly on test or anonymized data.
This is in full compliance with GDPR regulations and internal company policies regarding
data handling. No personally identifiable or production user data will be processed through
external APIs.
The project is expected to be conducted with guidance and regular feedback from Dream­
plan’s technical and business teams. The author is responsible for the research, design,
implementation and documentation of the AI­powered advisory system. Although there is
no formal obligation to deliver a commercial product, the work is expected to inform future
product development and internal prototyping at the company.
All required software and infrastructure are provided by the company or available through
academic licenses. No additional funding is needed for the completion of this project.
Regarding intellectual property, Dreamplan retains ownership over their existing codebase
4
Democratizing Financial Advice with AI: LLM Agents and RAG for Personalized Wealth Strategies
==PAGE:13==
and data, while any new software or models developed specifically during this thesis will
follow DTU’s and Dreamplan’s mutual understanding regarding student IP contributions,
which has been agreed upon prior to the start of the project.
1.5
Impact
The ultimate aim of this project is to explore the feasibility and efficacy of deploying a trust­
worthy, AI­powered financial advisor capable of interacting with users in a personalized,
intuitive and scalable manner. By leveraging recent advances in Large Language Models
and Retrieval­Augmented Generation (RAG), this work seeks to demonstrate that high­
quality financial guidance can be delivered without relying on human advisors or complex
rule­based interfaces.
The envisioned chat­bot system is not only able to guide users through Dreamplan’s
services—such as portfolio construction and automated product recommendations—but
also capable of answering open­ended financial questions, helping users better under­
stand their economic situation and educating them on fundamental financial concepts.
This aligns directly with the core challenge introduced in the background: financial advi­
sory today is often expensive, limited in accessibility and tailored only to high­net­worth
individuals. The proposed system aims to address this inequality by offering a low­barrier,
interactive entry point to financial advice. Through natural language interaction, users with
little financial literacy or prior knowledge can benefit from guidance that is both compre­
hensible and context­aware.
From an innovation standpoint, this project experiments with the role of LLMs as a “de­
cision layer” that orchestrates financial logic (e.g., optimization algorithms) and knowl­
edge (e.g., internal documentation or regulatory material). This architectural pattern—
merging symbolic reasoning with statistical learning—may inform broader applications in
AI­powered decision support systems beyond finance.
In practical terms, the results of this thesis will serve as a foundational prototype for
Dreamplan’s continued efforts to enhance their product with conversational AI features.
If successful, the system can be further developed and potentially deployed in produc­
tion, thereby contributing to the company’s broader mission of democratizing access to
financial advice.
Currently, Dreamplan users are required to complete a multi­step sign­up form (see fig. 1.2),
sequentially entering all the financial data necessary for generating a personalized rec­
ommendation. Once the form is submitted, the system presents a detailed financial plan
along with an option to schedule a meeting with a human advisor for further clarification
(fig. 1.3).
The solution proposed in this thesis – illustrated in the chat example in fig. 1.4 – stream­
lines this process by delegating all computations and interactions to a large language
model (LLM). This approach not only simplifies the user experience but also enables the
system to handle follow­up questions about the recommendation autonomously, signifi­
cantly reducing the need for manual intervention and lowering operational costs.
User: I’m 56 and my spouse is 50. I earn 80,000 DKK per month while my
spouse earns 20,000 DKK. We both have pension policies: I contribute 7,200
monthly and have 2,500,000 DKK already saved, while my spouse contributes
3,600 DKK and has 500,000 DKK. We own a house worth 5,000,000 DKK with
a mortgage of 4,000,000 DKK left and 20 years remaining. We also invest
Democratizing Financial Advice with AI: LLM Agents and RAG for Personalized Wealth Strategies
5
==PAGE:14==
Figure 1.2: Dreamplan’s signup flow.
5,000 DKK every month in stocks and currently have 1,000,000 DKK saved
there.
Dreamplan AI: To enhance your financial future, consider reducing the propor­
tion of wealth concentrated in your house by reallocating part of your housing
savings. Maintain your partner’s pension contribution at 43’200 DKK annually,
as in the baseline. Increase your own pension contributions to 223’892 DKK
annually between 2025 and 2036 to secure a projected payout of 453’842
DKK from 2037. Redirecting more of your current savings – beyond the ex­
isting 5’000 DKK monthly investment in stocks – could yield higher long­term
returns. Finally, growing your emergency savings by at least 125’000 DKK
will strengthen your household’s financial resilience and increase overall re­
tirement wealth by approximately 188’363 DKK.
Figure 1.4: An example of a chat with the proposed solution.
6
Democratizing Financial Advice with AI: LLM Agents and RAG for Personalized Wealth Strategies
==PAGE:15==
Figure 1.3: Dreamplan’s results page after completing the signup.
Democratizing Financial Advice with AI: LLM Agents and RAG for Personalized Wealth Strategies
7
==PAGE:16==
2
System Design
This chapter provides a comprehensive overview of the system’s architecture and the
principles that guided its development.
2.1
Goal­Oriented Design
The project consists of an AI­powered Financial Advisor that leverages large language
model (LLM) agents to handle different user tasks. A Retrieval­Augmented Generation
(RAG) system enhances the advisor’s performance by improving both the factual accu­
racy and explainability of the responses. It also makes use of Dreamplan’s proprietary
API, which enables financial forecasting and asset allocation recommendations based on
user­provided household financial data.
The primary interaction modality is a chat interface, similar to modern AI assistants such
as OpenAI’s ChatGPT [18], Anthropic’s Claude [19], or Google DeepMind’s Gemini [20].
Upon launching the application, the user is prompted with an introduction explaining the
functionality of the system. Users can, then, input their financial data, ask questions about
the computed recommendations, or inquire about general financial topics and services.
The design of the system is rooted in the principles of Goal­Oriented Requirements En­
gineering (GORE) [21]. GORE is a methodology in software engineering that focuses on
capturing, modeling and analyzing the goals of stakeholders. Rather than simply doc­
umenting system functionalities, GORE allows developers to structure system design
around the high­level intentions and desired outcomes of users. This goal­driven ap­
proach is particularly suited to systems involving LLM agents, where intent recognition
and outcome mapping are critical to user satisfaction and successful task execution.
In this context, each user input is interpreted as a goal expression and the system decom­
poses this high­level goal into sub­goals, which are then handled by specialized agents
or tools within a modular architecture. This aligns with how GORE structures require­
ments into a goal hierarchy: strategic­level goals are refined into operational objectives
and assigned to specific actors or components in the system.
The system centers on three primary user goals:
1. Recommendation: the user seeks a personalized financial recommendation. The
system parses anagraphical data and household financial information – such as
incomes, savings, assets and properties – and queries the forecasting engine via the
proprietary API, responding with an accurate and tailored wealth allocation strategy.
I'm 56 and my spouse is 50. I earn 80,000 per month while my spouse
earns 20,000. We both have pension policies: I contribute 7,200
monthly and have 2,500,000 already saved, while my spouse contributes
3,600 and has 500,000. We own a house worth 5,000,000 with a mortgage
of 4,000,000 left and 20 years remaining. We also invest 5,000 every
month in stocks and currently have 1,000,000 saved there. What can you
recommend us?
Listing 2.1: An example user query for the recommendation goal.
2. Explanation: the user requests clarification of the recommendation received in a
previous step, asking to further elaborate the reason why certain allocations were
made or if any change is possible.
8
Democratizing Financial Advice with AI: LLM Agents and RAG for Personalized Wealth Strategies
==PAGE:17==
Why should I pay more into my pension, according to your recommendation?
Listing 2.2: An example user query for the explanation goal.
3. Generic: the user asks about general financial concepts or national policies, such
as taxes or investment products. For this project, the scope is limited to the Danish
market and policies, as Dreamplan is based in Denmark and currently focusing on
this user segment.
What are tax cards in Denmark?
Listing 2.3: An example user query for the generic goal.
These goals are mapped to a modular architecture built on a centralized LLM­based
agent, which orchestrates the interaction by dispatching sub­goals to specialized tools
or secondary agents. This architecture supports a goal decomposition and dispatching
layer, in which the main agent analyzes the intent behind each query and routes it to
appropriate components for resolution – in accordance with the GORE model’s empha­
sis on goal satisfaction through actor responsibility – i.e. other specialized LLM­agents,
each equipped with their own set of tools in order to interact with the RAG system (dis­
cussed in chapter 3) and the external Calculation API (see section 2.3). This architecture
is discussed in further detail in chapter 4.
2.2
System Architecture
The system is built around a modular and hierarchical agent­oriented architecture, de­
signed to promote separation of concerns, ease of maintenance and horizontal scala­
bility. Each module is responsible for a specific functionality, allowing for independent
development, testing and deployment. This architectural choice facilitates rapid iteration
and integration of new components, especially valuable in experimental AI workflows.
This structure draws inspiration from recent work in multi­agent LLM systems. In particu­
lar, the HALO framework proposed by Hou et al. (2025) [22] introduces a decentralized
orchestration mechanism that assigns distinct roles to specialized sub­agents. These
agents interact via a hierarchical control flow and employ local prompt optimization strate­
gies to enhance individual and collective performance. Similarly, Rasal et al. (2024) [23]
advocate for a more canonical vertical and centralized orchestration pipeline, emphasiz­
ing modularity and role alignment in complex reasoning tasks. Both these approaches
build on consolidated agent­based paradigms to offer a reliable and reproducible frame­
work for orchestrated problem­solving with LLMs.
The system is implemented in Python (version 3.12), chosen for its rich ecosystem of
machine learning libraries, native support for concurrent execution and robust community
support. Dependency management and environment reproducibility are handled using
uv [24], a high­performance Python package manager that integrates linting and format­
ting tools out­of­the­box, helping maintain code quality across the project lifecycle.
The backend is exposed as a RESTful API using FastAPI [25], selected for its asyn­
chronous capabilities and overall suitability for high­performance microservices.
This
makes it well­suited for serving AI models and orchestrating agent communications in
production environments.
A visual overview of the system is presented in fig. 2.1. The architecture is logically divided
into four major layers:
Democratizing Financial Advice with AI: LLM Agents and RAG for Personalized Wealth Strategies
9
==PAGE:18==
• The API layer (FastAPI), which acts as the system’s external interface, accepting
client requests and routing them to the orchestration core.
• The multi­agent infrastructure (or reasoning pipeline) – detailed in chapter 4 – which
manages agent lifecycle, communication, role assignment and coordination strate­
gies. Agents operate under a hierarchical controller that delegates sub­tasks and
aggregates outputs to solve complex queries collaboratively.
• The Retrieval­Augmented Generation (RAG) subsystem – discussed in detail in
chapter 3 – responsible for grounding the generative agents in relevant external
knowledge. It represents a core component of this system, improving the overall
factual consistency and contextual awareness.
• The integrations layer – currently only including Dreamplan’s Calculation API inte­
gration (see section 2.3) – which interfaces with external systems or tools e.g. web
search, external APIs, file system interaction. Can be accessed directly by agents
or through tool­wrapping agents.
This architectural decomposition ensures that all the subsystems can evolve or expand
independently while maintaining tight integration.
10
Democratizing Financial Advice with AI: LLM Agents and RAG for Personalized Wealth Strategies
==PAGE:19==
Figure 2.1: System Architecture overview.
Democratizing Financial Advice with AI: LLM Agents and RAG for Personalized Wealth Strategies
11
==PAGE:20==
2.3
Calculation API
The foundational component of Dreamplan’s financial advisory platform is the Calcula­
tion API – a deterministic, RESTful service responsible for generating tailored long­term
wealth allocation strategies. Developed in C# and conforming to the OpenAPI 3.0 spec­
ification [26], the API acts as the decision engine for household­level financial planning,
translating structured user data into actionable recommendations.
The API is deployed on a private Azure cloud instance managed by Dreamplan, ensur­
ing security and compliance. Access is restricted to authenticated internal systems and
authorized personnel, following industry­standard security policies for sensitive financial
data handling.
From the user’s standpoint, the API operates as a black box: it returns calculated out­
comes without exposing internal mechanisms or decision­making algorithms. Internally,
however, the architecture is designed to be modular and extensible.
This allows for
seamless integration of new components – such as regulatory rulesets, additional asset
classes, or alternative allocation strategies – without impacting core functionality.
The API returns a structured JSON response comprising three core components:
• Baseline: a snapshot of the household’s current financial state based on submitted
data.
• Recommendation: an optimal long­term wealth allocation plan generated by pro­
prietary algorithms.
• Projections: future financial outcomes (e.g., net worth at retirement) simulated un­
der both the baseline and recommended plans.
Figure 2.2: A screenshot of the CalculateTargetPrices endpoint of the Calculation API
in Swagger UI.
As the API’s response is pretty substantial in size, before feeding it to the LLM­agent I
programmatically remove the forecasting object.
Within the larger Dreamplan system, this API is triggered during the user onboarding or
data submission phase. In the context of this project, it is seamlessly integrated into the
LLM agent pipeline.
When a user submits a natural language query related to financial planning, the system’s
triage agent – a general­purpose LLM – first classifies the user’s intent according to the
predefined goal categories (e.g., recommendation, explanation, or generic). If the input
12
Democratizing Financial Advice with AI: LLM Agents and RAG for Personalized Wealth Strategies
==PAGE:21==
requires a financial recommendation, the request is forwarded to a specialized calcula­
tion agent. This agent, equipped with domain­specific prompt engineering and tool­use
capabilities, is responsible for:
1. Parsing and validating user data from natural language.
2. Constructing a compliant JSON payload according to the API specification.
3. Executing the API call via a secure HTTP tool wrapper.
4. Parsing the response and passing the structured results back into the reasoning
pipeline for contextual explanation.
This setup allows for a clean separation of concerns: the LLM agents handle interpre­
tation, dialogue management and explanation, while the Calculation API performs high­
stakes financial computation. Such a decoupled architecture adheres to software engi­
neering best practices—supporting maintainability, auditability and system evolution.
In future extensions, the pipeline could also incorporate multi­scenario simulation tools,
fine­grained tax models, or rule­based validation engines. The modular nature of the
Calculation API makes it well­positioned for these upgrades.
2.4
Database
In order to have a clear history of the user sessions with queries and responses, I inte­
grated Supabase [27], a hosted backend service that provides a PostgreSQL database
with RESTful and real­time APIs. To interact with the database asynchronously in Python,
the implementation uses asyncpg for connection pooling and SQLAlchemy for schema
definition and management.
Connection parameters (e.g., username, password, host, port and database name) are
securely loaded from environment variables using python-dotenv. This approach decou­
ples configuration from code and ensures portability across environments.
2.4.1
Schema Design
The database schema consists of two primary tables: replies and feedbacks, each serv­
ing a distinct purpose in logging user interactions.
The replies table stores records of individual chat interactions, including both the user’s
input and the system’s response. Its fields are:
• id: a unique primary key for each entry.
• session_id: a string identifier linking replies to a specific chat session.
• query: the text of the user’s input.
• response: the generated response from the system.
• timestamp: the time at which the reply was stored, automatically set to the current
time.
• response_time: an optional integer measuring response latency in milliseconds.
The feedbacks table collects user evaluations of system replies across several dimen­
sions. Each entry is associated with a session and includes:
• id: a unique primary key for each feedback record.
• session_id: links feedback to a particular session.
Democratizing Financial Advice with AI: LLM Agents and RAG for Personalized Wealth Strategies
13
==PAGE:22==
• correctness, relevance, clarity, satisfaction: optional integer ratings provided by
the user.
• comments: optional textual feedback.
• timestamp: automatically recorded submission time.
To manage concurrent access efficiently, the application employs asyncpg’s connection
pooling mechanism. The connection pool is initialized lazily on the first database interac­
tion via the connect_db coroutine and persists globally for reuse. When the application
shuts down, a clean disconnection is ensured via disconnect_db.
Integration with the FastAPI web framework is handled through a lifespan event [28],
ensuring that the database pool is created on application startup and properly closed
during shutdown.
Two main operations are supported for data insertion:
• insert_reply: Logs a single user query and system response, along with response
latency.
• insert_feedback: Stores user ratings and optional comments related to a specific
session.
A separate utility function, create_tables, uses SQLAlchemy to initialize the database
schema by executing the necessary DDL statements.
An example entry from the replies table is shown in table 2.1, capturing the interaction
between user and system, along with the timestamp and response latency. An example
entry from the feedbacks table is shown in table 2.2.
Table 2.1: Example entry from the replies table
Field
Value
id
42
session_id
7b92c1f0b3e249d885d3a2d9e2a2a1c6
query
What is the capital of Denmark?
response
The capital of Denmark is Copenhagen.
timestamp
2025­07­30 14:12:08
response_time
124
Table 2.2: Example entry from the feedbacks table
Field
Value
id
17
session_id
7b92c1f0b3e249d885d3a2d9e2a2a1c6
correctness
5
relevance
5
clarity
4
satisfaction
5
comments
Clear and concise answers, thanks!
timestamp
2025­07­30 14:13:02
14
Democratizing Financial Advice with AI: LLM Agents and RAG for Personalized Wealth Strategies
==PAGE:23==
2.5
Design principles and considerations
This project has been developed as a functional prototype to explore the integration of
Large Language Models (LLMs) within a multi­agent system architecture. As such, certain
constraints – particularly around security and user data protection – have been relaxed
to prioritize experimentation, modularity and performance. The following section outlines
the key design principles that guided development, as well as considerations for adapting
the system to real­world, production­grade settings.
Given the exploratory nature of this prototype, user privacy and data protection mech­
anisms have not been fully implemented. Users are explicitly advised not to input any
personally identifiable information (PII), such as names, email addresses, national identi­
fication numbers (e.g., CPR), phone numbers, or physical addresses.
However, if the system were to be deployed in a production environment, incorporating
a robust privacy­preservation strategy would be critical. In such a scenario, a dedicated
sanitization layer would be introduced as a pre­processing stage between the user input
and any downstream LLM interactions. This layer would be responsible for detecting and
anonymizing sensitive data to ensure compliance with privacy regulations such as the
GDPR.
The sanitization module would likely adopt a hybrid approach, including:
• Rule­based heuristics: using regular expressions and syntactic patterns to detect
well­known PII formats (e.g., email addresses, phone numbers).
• Keyword and entity detection: employing named entity recognition (NER) models to
identify personal or sensitive entities in free text.
• Placeholder substitution: replacing identified PII with structured placeholders (e.g.,
{NAME}, {EMAIL}) to preserve semantic coherence while ensuring anonymity.
Such a privacy­aware preprocessing pipeline would not only enhance user safety but also
allow interactions with third­party or externally hosted LLMs without risking the exposure
of confidential information.
A foundational goal of the system is to support modularity and ease of extensibility. To
this end, the architecture is designed around the Single Responsibility Principle [29], en­
suring that each component in the system is tasked with a distinct, well­defined function.
This promotes a clean separation of concerns and enables independent testing and de­
bugging of modules, safe substitution or upgrade of components (e.g., replacing or adding
an agent or changing the underlying retrieval technique in the RAG module) and greater
maintainability and scalability over time.
Each subsystem – from the retrieval layer to the orchestration logic – can be developed
and refined independently, enabling iterative improvements without jeopardizing the in­
tegrity of the overall system.
Another central design consideration is transparency, both in the internal logic and in the
evaluation of outputs. All system components are accompanied by clear documentation,
including:
• Descriptive annotations of each agent’s role and responsibilities.
• Prompt templates and hyper­parameters for LLM invocations.
• Evaluation metrics and intermediate outputs for inspection and debugging.
Democratizing Financial Advice with AI: LLM Agents and RAG for Personalized Wealth Strategies
15
==PAGE:24==
This design choice aligns with recent best practices in human­AI interaction and fosters
trust by making the system’s reasoning process observable and interpretable.
Although the system currently runs as a unified deployment in order to minimize latency
as much as possible, ensuring a smooth and seamless user experience, its modular ar­
chitecture is amenable to future decomposition into distributed services. For instance,
if the company decided to employ open­source models running on local servers, the or­
chestration infrastructure could be moved to its own REST API. This kind of architecture
makes it possible to:
• Migrate bottleneck components to dedicated services (e.g. retrieval, summariza­
tion).
• Introduce asynchronous task queues for long­running agent operations.
• Apply container orchestration strategies (e.g. Docker + Kubernetes) for deployment
at scale.
By anticipating such adaptations, the design remains flexible and production­aware, de­
spite the current prototype status.
16
Democratizing Financial Advice with AI: LLM Agents and RAG for Personalized Wealth Strategies
==PAGE:25==
3
Retrieval­Augmented Generation
Retrieval­Augmented Generation (RAG) [30] is an information retrieval and question an­
swering technique that integrates external knowledge sources into the generation process
of Large Language Models (LLMs). Unlike traditional LLMs that rely solely on their inter­
nal parameters, RAG systems dynamically retrieve relevant documents from a knowledge
base to ground responses in factual, up­to­date information.
Recent research, including the work of Wang et al. (2025) [8] and Qin et al. (2025)
[9], claims that RAG­enhanced pipelines mitigate hallucination, enhance factual accuracy
and reduce the dependency on model size or pretraining corpus coverage, consistently
outperforming standalone LLMs on domain­specific tasks such as financial question an­
swering, where precision and context­awareness are critical. In this thesis, I compare four
different setups with an LLM­only baseline.
3.1
Retrieval­Augmented Generation architecture
The Retrieval­Augmented Generation (RAG) system is implemented using the open­source
NLP framework Haystack [31], a widely adopted Python library for building production­
ready search pipelines.
Given that this application is customer­facing and users interact with the chat­bot in real
time, the system must provide fast and seamless responses.
To meet these latency and cost­efficiency requirements, I preferred lightweight architec­
tures, balancing cost, performance and implementation complexity. As the bulk of the
documents used for the retrieval is not considerable, I opted for storing the them locally
on start­up, so to minimize the latency of the retrieval and avoid additional expenses,
even though open­source and free decentralized vector databases alternatives were con­
sidered, such as Qdrant. Haystack provides helper classes and functions to handle the
chunking process, ensuring that each stored document is not too large and information is
not lost in the splitting.
The baseline consists in a specifically instructed LLM agent that answers the user queries
by only using its internal training knowledge. As per the RAG methods I use the following:
• BM25: this is the actual RAG baseline, employing BM25 for retrieval inspired by
Intel Lab’s FastRAG implementation [32].
Compared to dense or hybrid retrievers, BM25 offers significantly lower inference
time and resource consumption, while still delivering strong performance in many
practical settings.
Although dense retrievers have gained popularity, classical sparse methods such as
BM25 remain competitive baselines, especially in scenarios demanding low latency
and cost efficiency. For instance, Thakur et al. (2021) [33] and Li et al. (2025) [34]
demonstrate that BM25 can match or even outperform dense retrieval in specific
domains, making it a practical choice for real­time, customer­facing applications.
Zhu et al. (2025) [35] findings show that BM25 has the highest recall, completeness
and Effective Information Rate [35], while maintaining the lowest hallucination rate.
Democratizing Financial Advice with AI: LLM Agents and RAG for Personalized Wealth Strategies
17
==PAGE:26==
• BM25 + Reranker: A reranker is a model used in RAG to re­score and re­rank
retrieved documents or chunks, which usually improves the performance of the sys­
tem, as seen for example in Dong et al. (2024) [36].
However, other studies show that the reranker is not always improving the accuracy
and performance of the baseline — such as in Kim et al. (2024) [37] — and this
can be due to various factors, including the choice of reranker model, task­specific
requirements and domain mismatch. For this reason, I considered it important to
experiment with reranking and compare the performance with and without it.
The reranking component is implemented using HuggingFace’s open­source sentence­
transformers/all­MiniLM­L6­v2 model, using cosine similarity as the scoring function.
• Dense: Dense retrieval methods encode both queries and documents into high­
dimensional dense vectors using deep learning models (typically transformers) and
retrieve documents based on vector similarity, usually cosine or dot product. This
paradigm enables semantic matching rather than exact term overlap.
In this thesis, I use the OpenAI’s text-embedding-ada-002 model.
Dense retrieval has shown strong performance, especially in zero­shot and domain­
transfer settings. For example, Karpukhin et al. (2020) [38], Luan et al. (2021)
[39] and more recently, Maillard et al. (2023) [40] demonstrate how dense retriev­
ers outperform sparse methods on tasks requiring deeper semantic understanding.
However, they often require substantial GPU resources for indexing and inference
and their performance can degrade on small or domain­specific corpora without
fine­tuning [33].
• Dense + Reranker: Combining dense retrieval with reranking is a standard strat­
egy in modern RAG pipelines. The dense retriever retrieves semantically relevant
candidates, while the reranker (often a cross­encoder or late­interaction model) re­
evaluates the top­k candidates with greater precision.
In my implementation, the reranker remains the same as for BM25 (i.e., all-MiniLM-L6-v2),
allowing for a direct comparison between sparse and dense pipelines under identical
reranking conditions. This helps isolate the contribution of retrieval quality versus
reranking effectiveness.
The RAG pipeline includes a dedicated prompt builder module (listing 3.1), which dy­
namically constructs prompts for the generator. This component integrates the retrieved
documents as context – including the sources’ URLs – and provides tailored instructions
on how to formulate a response.
The final stage of the pipeline is the generator, which uses OpenAI’s GPT­4.1­nano model
[41]. This model was selected due to its favorable trade­off between speed and quality,
making it well­suited for real­time applications. The generation is constrained by setting
the max_tokens parameter to 256, so that the resulting answers are concise and only
containing the essential information – the user can then ask more specific questions or
refer to the information source.
The generator component was favored over simply returning the retrieved context be­
cause the information can be scattered across different chunks and the LLM helps extract­
ing only the relevant parts, presenting them to the user in a readable and clear fashion.
You are an AI assistant tasked with answering questions using
the provided context.
18
Democratizing Financial Advice with AI: LLM Agents and RAG for Personalized Wealth Strategies
==PAGE:27==
Your response must be:
- **Concise** and in your own words.
- Based **only on the documents** below — **cite them** where
relevant by providing the URL in parentheses (e.g., (Source:
https://example.com)).
- If the question is unclear or too broad, ask for clarification
.
--- CONTEXT ---
{% for doc in documents %}
Document {{ loop.index }} (Source: https://{{ doc.meta.source }}
):
{{ doc.content }}
{% endfor %}
----------------
Question: {{ question }}
Answer:
Listing 3.1: The prompt used in the prompt builder.
3.2
Documents
While Dreamplan has provided access to user financial and demographic (anagraphical)
data from their internal database, this data is not currently utilized in the project. This
decision aligns with the idea of building a proof­of­concept system without processing
personal or sensitive information.
To populate the document store for the Retrieval­Augmented Generation (RAG) sys­
tem, a dedicated web scraping tool was developed using Python, combining the Play­
wright browser automation framework, because of its compatibility with JavaScript client­
rendered content and BeautifulSoup for HTML parsing due to the ease of use and high
number of features.
The scraper was designed to be robust, modular and efficient in crawling relevant con­
tent from two main official Danish portals, selected due to their authoritative nature and
comprehensive coverage of topics central to personal finance and life in Denmark: lifein­
denmark.dk and skat.dk (screenshots are shown in fig. 3.1 and fig. 3.2 for reference). The
scraped content pertains to key topics relevant to personal finance and financial regula­
tions, such as taxation and tax returns, employment contracts and rights, social benefits
and pensions, housing and relocation, personal identification and banking.
In total, the scraper retrieves and processes over 327 unique pages, forming the core
knowledge base used by the chat­bot’s RAG system. A comprehensive list of the re­
sulting documents and their categorization can be found in in the source code in the
documents/index.md file.
The recursion depth and crawl coverage are designed to strike a balance between breadth
and content quality. Rate­limiting between requests is implemented using randomized
sleep intervals to reduce server load and avoid IP bans.
To prevent crawling of undesired pages, the script includes a manually annotated blacklist
Democratizing Financial Advice with AI: LLM Agents and RAG for Personalized Wealth Strategies
19
==PAGE:28==
Figure 3.1: A screenshot of lifeindenmark.dk website.
containing ULRs of known irrelevant pages, domain­based restrictions enforced via URL
parsing and deduplication through a set of visited URLs, making the script extremely ef­
ficient for its task and ensuring that only unique and contextually relevant documents are
collected for downstream processing.
The scraper performs the following key tasks in a recursive and systematic fashion and
can easily be extended to scrape even more websites:
1. The script defines a set of root URLs and allowed domains, ensuring the crawl is
restricted to predefined, trusted sources. A persistent set of visited URLs is main­
tained to prevent redundant downloads.
2. Using Playwright’s Chromium driver in headless mode, the tool loads each URL and
waits for client­side content to render. This is crucial for JavaScript­heavy pages,
ensuring full content extraction. An automatic interaction with common cookie con­
sent banners is also implemented. The script attempts to click an “Accept all” button
if present, enhancing navigation and access to the full site content.
3. The rendered HTML is saved to disk and simultaneously processed into plain text.
The conversion excludes non­informative elements (such as script, style, nav,
footer, etc.) via BeautifulSoup’s tree manipulation. This cleaning procedure signif­
icantly improves the quality and relevance of the resulting text corpus. Haystack’s
own converter from HTML to Document (the class used in the library to represent
documents for the RAG) was also considered as a tool to extract the text in order to
speed­up the process but it was soon discarded after a few experiments because
the removal of the HTML elements was too aggressive, often leading to missing
text information that was supposed to be in the document and was left intact other­
wise. Additionally, specific text sequences containing irrelevant information – such
as privacy policies statements – are statically removed to lighten and declutter the
20
Democratizing Financial Advice with AI: LLM Agents and RAG for Personalized Wealth Strategies
==PAGE:29==
Figure 3.2: A screenshot of skat.dk website.
documents.
4. From each downloaded page, all hyperlinks are extracted and normalized. The
scraper filters out external domains and URLs matching a blacklist of known irrele­
vant or duplicate paths. This prevents inclusion of privacy policies, navigation­only
pages, or redundant entries.
5. For each unique URL, both the original HTML and the corresponding cleaned text
are stored, the original file for auditing and potential reprocessing and the cleaned
one to be fed to the RAG pipeline. File names are derived from the URL paths,
making the dataset traceable and easy to navigate.
Democratizing Financial Advice with AI: LLM Agents and RAG for Personalized Wealth Strategies
21
==PAGE:30==
4
Reasoning pipeline
The pipeline consists of multiple components: Large Language Model (LLM) agents, a
Retrieval­Augmented Generation (RAG) system and a suite of specialized tools acces­
sible to the LLMs. Since Dreamplan provided monetary credit for OpenAI’s API usage,
the LLMs employed throughout this project are exclusively OpenAI’s GPT models [42].
This choice was also motivated by the lack of local hardware capable of efficiently run­
ning such models – standard CPUs are neither sufficiently powerful nor optimized for the
computational demands of large­scale language models.
The LLM agents are developed using the OpenAI Agents SDK, which offers a stream­
lined and effective framework for building and deploying LLM­based agents. Notably, the
Agents SDK designates the triage agent as both the initial processor and the final respon­
der to user queries. To achieve greater modularity and finer control over the overall rea­
soning process and output quality, I designed a custom reasoning pipeline inspired by the
single responsibility principle from object­oriented programming. This principle ensures
that each pipeline stage is dedicated to a specific task, promoting clarity, maintainability
and extensibility.
In this architecture, each agent is equipped with a distinct set of instructions and tools tai­
lored to its role. The triage agent, however, deviates from this pattern: instead of having its
own tools, it maintains a ”hand­off” list – essentially references to the specialized agents.
This enables the triage agent to delegate subtasks effectively, orchestrating the collabo­
ration between experts while preserving control over the final user­facing response.
4.1
Decision Layer
The first stage of the reasoning pipeline is the decision layer, also referred to interchange­
ably as the dispatching layer throughout this document. Its primary responsibility is to
interpret the user’s query, determine the intended end­goal and route the query to the
specialized agent best suited to handle that specific type of request.
This decision­making process is fully delegated to an LLM­powered agent, referred to
as the triage agent. The triage agent operates exclusively through prompt engineering,
relying entirely on the model’s contextual understanding — including the initial instructions
that establish the agent’s behavior for the session — without any hard­coded rules or
heuristic logic. This design choice is motivated by the clearly defined and distinct nature
of user goals, which contemporary LLMs are well­equipped to reason about and resolve
effectively.
Once the triage agent identifies the user’s goal, it delegates the request by invoking the
corresponding specialized agent. Each specialized agent executes its own reasoning
workflow, which may involve leveraging external tools and ultimately returns its findings
to the triage agent.
This modular and structured communication protocol enhances control over the reasoning
chain and overall pipeline. It facilitates detailed testing, monitoring and debugging at each
individual stage, thereby improving transparency and maintainability of the system.
All the LLM prompts that I used are available in the components/prompts.py file in the
source code and in appendix A.1.
22
Democratizing Financial Advice with AI: LLM Agents and RAG for Personalized Wealth Strategies
==PAGE:31==
4.2
Specialization Layer
The specialization layer is responsible for executing the agents and tools that directly
contribute to achieving the user’s goal. It comprises two distinct LLM­powered agents,
each designed to handle a specific type of user intent:
• Calculation Agent: this agent is tasked with fulfilling the recommendation goal.
It constructs the appropriate request for the Calculation API and processes its re­
sponse. To do this, it utilizes a dedicated tool that maps the user’s household finan­
cial and demographic (anagraphical) data into the structured JSON format required
by the API.
• Dreamplan Agent: this agent is tasked with fulfilling the explanation goal. It can
only work when a calculation has already been executed as it uses the recommenda­
tion results to provide actionable steps to the user for them to increase their wealth.
It doesn’t use any tool because all the relevant information to explain the results is
present in its instructions set. The instructions set is based on Dreamplan’s inter­
nal guidelines for wealth allocation and it aims to explain to the user how to better
allocate their wealth and why.
• Finance Agent: this agent addresses the generic goal by handling broad, finance­
related user queries. It does so by interacting with a Retrieval­Augmented Gener­
ation (RAG) component. The agent employs a specialized tool to issue the user’s
query to the RAG pipeline and return the retrieved, contextually enriched response.
4.3
Guardrail Layer
The guardrail layer acts as a critical safety net within the reasoning pipeline, ensuring the
quality and reliability of the data flowing through the system. Positioned around the deci­
sion and specialization layers, this layer systematically validates both the inputs received
from users and the outputs generated by agents before and after processing.
At its core, this layer employs two specialized LLM­powered agents: the input guardrail
agent and the output guardrail agent. These agents serve to enforce constraints and
checks that prevent invalid, ambiguous, or unsafe data from propagating through the
pipeline.
• Input Guardrail Agent: Before any reasoning or delegation occurs, the input guardrail
agent reviews incoming user queries to verify their validity and appropriateness. It
uses a dedicated prompt­driven LLM model to assess the input against predefined
criteria, ensuring that only well­formed and contextually suitable requests proceed
to the triage agent. Invalid or problematic inputs can trigger tripwires that prompt
corrective handling or user feedback.
• Output Guardrail Agent: After a specialized agent has processed a request and
generated a response, the output guardrail agent scrutinizes the output for correct­
ness, completeness and alignment with expected formats and constraints. This
agent filters or flags outputs that might be erroneous, inconsistent, or out­of­scope,
thereby maintaining the integrity of the system’s responses.
Both guardrail agents operate through prompt engineering without relying on hard­coded
rules, leveraging the flexible contextual reasoning abilities of modern LLMs. They are inte­
grated transparently in the pipeline through decorator­like constructs (@input_guardrail
and @output_guardrail), enabling seamless invocation during request handling.
Democratizing Financial Advice with AI: LLM Agents and RAG for Personalized Wealth Strategies
23
==PAGE:32==
By embedding this validation layer around the triage agent in the decision layer and the
specialized agents in the specialization layer, the architecture achieves a robust modular
design. This design enhances fault tolerance, facilitates easier debugging and monitoring
and ensures consistent, high­quality interaction outcomes.
In the underlying implementation, the guardrail layer is instantiated using agents config­
ured with specific instruction sets (input_guardrail_instructions and output_guardrail_instructions)
and lightweight LLM models optimized for validation tasks. These agents are invoked
asynchronously during runtime to maintain efficiency and responsiveness.
4.4
User Interaction Flow
The user interaction flow is illustrated in the UML sequence diagram in fig. 4.2 and pro­
ceeds as follows:
1. Query submission: the user is prompted to provide their anagraphic (personal
identification) and financial data via the text input field within the chat user inter­
face (UI). The user types their query and submits it by clicking the Send button or
pressing enter. This action triggers the transmission of the message to the backend
system. Upon receiving the user’s message, the triage agent acts as the primary
orchestrator. It immediately forwards the message to the input guardrail agent for
inspection to ensure the input’s validity and security.
2. Input validation: the input guardrail agent performs a thorough inspection of the
message to verify:
• Relevance: the query should pertain to the system’s domain (financial recom­
mendations, explanations, or general finance).
• Safety: the query must be free from malicious or harmful content.
If the query is deemed invalid or malicious, the guardrail agent rejects it and gener­
ates a prompt requesting the user to reformulate their question. This prompt is sent
back and displayed in the chat UI. If the query passes validation, the guardrail agent
returns a confirmation to the triage agent with a boolean flag set to True, signaling
approval to proceed.
3. Goal identification and dispatching: the triage agent analyzes the validated user
query to determine the appropriate system goal. It classifies the intent into one of
three categories:
• Recommendation: requests related to personalized financial advice. The triage
agent calls the calculation agent, passing the user’s financial and anagraphic
data along with the query. The calculation agent formats the data into the re­
quired JSON schema and communicates with the Calculation API to generate
personalized financial recommendations.
• Explanation: requests seeking detailed explanations about a personalized rec­
ommendation. The triage agent invokes the dreamplan agent, providing the
user query and relevant financial data. The dreamplan agent leverages Dream­
plan’s parameters for wealth allocation and financial strategies to generate an
insightful explanation tailored to the user’s context.
• Generic: general finance­related questions that require information retrieval.
The triage agent contacts the finance agent, which executes a query against
24
Democratizing Financial Advice with AI: LLM Agents and RAG for Personalized Wealth Strategies
==PAGE:33==
the Retrieval­Augmented Generation (RAG) system to fetch and synthesize
relevant financial information.
Based on this classification, the triage agent initiates a tool call to the relevant spe­
cialized agent. Thanks to the OpenAI Agents SDK’s hand-off agents abstraction,
this interaction is seamless without explicit tool creation.
4. Response aggregation: the results returned by the specialized agents are col­
lected by the triage agent. It integrates these outputs, guided by agent­specific
instructions and contextual awareness, to compose a coherent and contextually ap­
propriate response for the user.
5. Final output validation: before delivering the response back to the user, the triage
agent routes the generated reply to the output guardrail agent for a final validation
step. This agent checks for:
• Accuracy: ensuring the response does not contain errors or inconsistencies.
• Relevance: confirming the reply aligns with the user’s query and system’s
scope.
• Compliance: verifying adherence to any regulatory or ethical guidelines.
If the output guardrail agent detects any issues, it rejects the response and gener­
ates a generic error message asking the user to try again. If validated, it returns
a boolean True signal to the triage agent, which then proceeds to send the final
response to the chat UI for display.
6. User feedback loop (Optional): optionally, after receiving the response, the user
may end the chat and be prompted to provide feedback or rate the usefulness of
the replies. This feedback can be used to further improve the agents’ performance
and ensure user satisfaction.
This multi­agent interaction framework ensures robustness, security and relevance in user
communication, while abstracting the complexity of specialized financial processing and
natural language understanding.
A short example interaction is shown in fig. 4.1.
Democratizing Financial Advice with AI: LLM Agents and RAG for Personalized Wealth Strategies
25
==PAGE:34==
Figure 4.1: A short example interaction with the platform.
26
Democratizing Financial Advice with AI: LLM Agents and RAG for Personalized Wealth Strategies
==PAGE:35==
Figure 4.2: UML sequence diagram of the system.
Democratizing Financial Advice with AI: LLM Agents and RAG for Personalized Wealth Strategies
27
==PAGE:36==
5
Development
This chapter describes all the processes concerning the development of the software
under a software engineering point­of­view, delving into expenses, Quality Assurance and
deployment. The code is available on GitHub at https://github.com/ivanarena/dreamplan-
ai-financial-advisor.
5.1
Costs
The development of the system involved extensive use of OpenAI’s GPT­4.1 models,
specifically the gpt-4.1-nano and gpt-4.1-mini variants. These models were selected
for their balance between cost, latency and reasoning capabilities, making them suitable
for both the decision­routing and Retrieval­Augmented Generation components of the
application.
Between 1 April and 12 August (from the start date of the project to when the code was
completed and the all the experiments executed), the system processed a total of 6.276
chat completion requests, corresponding to approximately 62.977 million input tokens
for chat completion tasks. The total expenditure over this period was $79.55, with a peak
daily cost of $62.91 during a period of intensive testing and benchmarking.
The choice of gpt-4.1-nano and gpt-4.1-mini allowed the system to remain cost­efficient
without sacrificing essential quality in query interpretation and response generation. This
cost profile indicates that the solution is financially sustainable for research and proto­
typing purposes, with the possibility of further optimization in production by fine­tuning
routing efficiency and caching frequent responses to reduce token consumption.
5.2
Testing
Effective testing is essential to ensure the reliability and maintainability of the software
system. In this project, multiple testing practices were adopted to measure code qual­
ity and robustness. These include unit and integration testing, code coverage analysis,
code complexity evaluation, static analysis and formatting. To conduct the tests I use the
Python testing library pytest [43] because of its wide range of functionalities, comprehen­
sive documentation and populated and active community.
Pytest also allows for the creation and management of test fixtures: reusable test com­
ponents and environment rules that are globally available and automatically detected in
every test file, ensuring cleaner test files with minimal to none code duplication, improv­
ing modularity and maintainability. The fixtures are defined inside the tests folder in a
conftest.py file.
The following tests were implemented and successfully passed:
5.2.1
Unit tests
The unit tests aim to test the correctness of the internal logic of the app. All the unit tests
are in the tests/test_client.py file:
• test_session checks that the session cookie is correctly set, ensuring that a user
can access the app in a new session.
• test_existing_session sets a mock session id and then checks if it’s being rec­
ognized and used in the app, ensuring that a user is able to return to their existing
session.
28
Democratizing Financial Advice with AI: LLM Agents and RAG for Personalized Wealth Strategies
==PAGE:37==
• test_chat_session checks that the /chat POST endpoint is working and the ses­
sion is being maintained.
• test_chat_unset_session checks that an error is returned if the session cookie is
not set.
5.2.2
Integration tests
The integration tests aim to ensure that all the components of the app can correctly com­
municate with each other and that exceptions and errors are properly handled.
• test_calculate_target_prices_success (in tests/test_calculation.py verifies
the correct construction of the input JSON payload and the successful response from
the external Calculation API.
• test_baseline_rag, test_reranker_rag, test_dense_rag, test_dense_reranker_rag
(in tests/test_rag.py test the RAG components by running a mock query and ver­
ifying that all the items in the output are correctly returned and an answer is gen­
erated. This also involves an OpenAI API call for the generation part of the RAG
pipeline.
• test_chat (in tests/test_chat.py tests if the OpenAI integration is working cor­
rectly by mocking a chat message and checking if the output is a non­empty string.
• test_db (in tests/test_db.py) tests the connection and disconnection to the database,
making sure that the pool is correctly created and acquired by running a test selec­
tion query and evaluating the output.
• test_reply_log (in tests/test_db.py) tests that chat questions and answers are
correctly inserted in the replies table by executing and example insertion query,
then executing a selection query to fetch the inserted chat log and finally a deletion
query to clean up the table from the test log.
• test_feedback_log (in tests/test_db.py) tests that the final feedback at the end
of the chat is correctly inserted in the feedbacks table by executing and example
insertion query, then executing a selection query to fetch the inserted feedback log
and finally a deletion query to clean up the table from the test log.
5.2.3
Code Coverage
Code coverage analysis was performed using the pytest­cov [44] plugin for pytest. A
total of 13 test cases were executed successfully, covering various components of the
application, including calculation routines, chat logic, session management and retrieval­
augmented generation (RAG) pipelines.
The overall code coverage achieved was 93%. The full report is shown in table 5.1.
Note that the experiment folder was excluded from the computation as it doesn’t contain
features that are supposed to be used in the app.
5.2.4
Static analysis
Static code analysis and linting were performed using Ruff [45], a fast Python linter that
enforces PEP8 compliance and detects common coding issues. Ruff reports unused
imports and variables, style violations, potential bugs and anti­patterns, ensuring that the
codebase adheres to modern Python standards and remains both clean and readable.
In addition, Ruff’s built­in formatter was used to provide fast and consistent code styling
across the project. By relying on a single tool for both linting and formatting, the develop­
ment toolchain is simplified compared to using separate tools such as black. Formatting
Democratizing Financial Advice with AI: LLM Agents and RAG for Personalized Wealth Strategies
29
==PAGE:38==
Table 5.1: Code Coverage Report
Module
Statements
Misses
Coverage (%)
calculation/__init__.py
0
0
100
calculation/client.py
24
6
75
calculation/factories.py
29
21
28
calculation/templates.py
441
0
100
components/__init__.py
0
0
100
components/chat.py
19
13
32
components/dispatching.py
26
2
92
components/prompts.py
13
0
100
components/rag.py
194
0
100
components/tools.py
59
20
66
db.py
39
3
92
main.py
59
13
78
tests/conftest.py
43
0
100
tests/test_calculation.py
10
0
100
tests/test_chat.py
9
0
100
tests/test_client.py
31
0
100
tests/test_db.py
32
0
100
tests/test_rag.py
48
0
100
TOTAL
1076
78
93
checks are integrated into the pre­commit workflow, so that code is automatically vali­
dated before it is committed. Together, linting and formatting establish a foundation of
style consistency and reliability that supports long­term maintainability.
Code complexity was analyzed using radon [44], which computes cyclomatic complexity
(CC) and assigns a maintainability grade to each function, method, or class. Cyclomatic
complexity quantifies the number of linearly independent execution paths, serving as a
proxy for the difficulty of understanding, testing and maintaining software. According to
established guidelines, values of CC ≤10 are generally considered acceptable, while
higher values may indicate code in need of refactoring. The overall results show that the
vast majority of modules in the system achieve an “A” grade (CC ≤5), meaning they are
straightforward and maintainable. The full report is provided in appendix B.1.
In addition to CC, the Maintainability Index (MI) was computed using radon. The MI is a
composite metric derived from Halstead volume, cyclomatic complexity and lines of code,
providing an indication of how easily a system can be maintained. Scores are mapped
to letter grades, with “A” denoting highly maintainable code. As shown in table 5.2, all
modules of the project received an “A” grade, with several achieving a perfect score of
100. These results confirm that the system is overall highly maintainable, consistent with
the cyclomatic complexity analysis.
5.3
CI/CD
To maintain consistent code quality and style, a pre­commit configuration was employed.
It integrates static analysis and automatic formatting into the development workflow. The
following configuration was used (listing 5.1):
30
Democratizing Financial Advice with AI: LLM Agents and RAG for Personalized Wealth Strategies
==PAGE:39==
Table 5.2: Maintainability index (MI) scores across all modules.
Module
MI
Grade
db.py
49.94
A
main.py
57.50
A
calculation/client.py
63.36
A
calculation/templates.py
100.00
A
calculation/__init__.py
100.00
A
calculation/factories.py
56.04
A
scraping/scraper.py
41.83
A
scraping/blacklist.py
100.00
A
tests/test_db.py
68.50
A
tests/test_client.py
68.27
A
tests/test_calculation.py
80.45
A
tests/test_chat.py
74.04
A
tests/test_rag.py
39.46
A
tests/conftest.py
100.00
A
components/chat.py
100.00
A
components/rag.py
41.18
A
components/tools.py
46.33
A
components/dispatching.py
71.72
A
components/prompts.py
100.00
A
components/__init__.py
100.00
A
repos:
- repo: https://github.com/astral-sh/ruff-pre-commit
rev: v0.11.2
hooks:
- id: ruff
args: [--fix]
types_or: [python, pyi]
- id: ruff-format
types_or: [python, pyi]
Listing 5.1: Pre­commit configuration from .pre-commit-config.yaml
The configuration ensures that both linting and formatting are applied automatically be­
fore each commit, reducing manual effort and catching issues early. The ruff hook is
configured to fix common issues, while the ruff-format hook guarantees a consistent
style. This automation enforces coding standards continuously and seamlessly across
the codebase.
As the code is stored in a private repository on GitHub, I could leverage GitHub Actions
to automate testing on the main branch to ensure code reliability and maintain continuous
integration. The workflow is defined in a YAML file placed in the .github/workflows
directory. This setup provides immediate feedback on code correctness and compatibility
whenever changes are pushed.
The workflow, named Run tests, is triggered on every push to the main branch. It per­
forms a full environment setup, dependency synchronization and test execution. Sensi­
Democratizing Financial Advice with AI: LLM Agents and RAG for Personalized Wealth Strategies
31
==PAGE:40==
tive information such as API keys and service URLs is injected into the environment using
GitHub Secrets to maintain security and modularity.
The workflow consists of the following key steps:
1. Repository checkout: the first step ensures that the workflow has access to the lat­
est version of the codebase by checking out the repository using actions/checkout.
2. Python environment setup: it configures a Python 3.12 environment using
actions/setup-python, which guarantees compatibility with the version used in
development.
3. Dependency management: dependencies are installed via uv, installs the project’s
dependencies based on a lock file via the uv sync command, ensuring consistency
across runs.
4. Test execution: tests are executed using pytest with verbosity enabled to provide
detailed output. The environment variable PYTHONPATH is explicitly set to include
relevant directories, ensuring that all project modules are importable. Tests involving
external retrieval­augmented generation (RAG) logic are excluded via the --ignore
flag to prevent reliance on network access or third­party APIs during automated
runs.
By integrating this workflow, each change to the main branch is automatically validated
through rigorous testing. This enhances development velocity while ensuring stability
and it complements the pre-commit configuration by extending quality assurance beyond
individual commits into the deployment pipeline.
5.4
Deployment
To ensure a reproducible, portable and efficient development environment, the application
was containerized using Docker. Containerization addresses common challenges such
as dependency conflicts, system­specific configurations and mismatches in Python ver­
sions across development and production environments. By encapsulating all required
dependencies and runtime configurations, Docker guarantees consistency between local
development, testing and deployment.
The service is defined in a docker-compose.yaml file, which streamlines the orchestration
of containers. This configuration builds the container from a custom Dockerfile, sets
environment variables from a local .env file and maps port 8000 on the host machine to
the same port in the container, making the application accessible for local testing.
The Dockerfile specifies a minimal Python 3.12 environment based on the slim image to
reduce overhead and improve build efficiency. Relevant environment variables are con­
figured to optimize runtime execution. Dependency management is also handled through
uv, synchronizing the environment with the specifications defined in the pyproject.toml
file. This guarantees deterministic builds and a clean, dependency­resolved environment.
While uvicorn provides a lightweight and high­performance ASGI server with fast startup
and non­blocking capabilities, the final deployment leverages gunicorn’s workers orches­
tration to better handle concurrent requests and ensure robustness.
For cloud deployment, the containerized application is hosted on Microsoft Azure [46]
on Dreamplan’s account, which provides a scalable and reliable platform­as­a­service
(PaaS) environment. Azure’s container services support the direct deployment of Dock­
erized applications, simplifying the transition from local development to production. By
32
Democratizing Financial Advice with AI: LLM Agents and RAG for Personalized Wealth Strategies
==PAGE:41==
pushing the container image to an Azure Container Registry (ACR) and deploying it via
Azure App Service (or Azure Kubernetes Service for larger­scale scenarios), the applica­
tion benefits from automatic scaling, load balancing and managed updates. Additionally,
Azure Monitoring and Application Insights provide runtime observability, offering metrics
such as request throughput, error rates and response latencies. This allows for proactive
performance tuning and rapid debugging in production environments.
Democratizing Financial Advice with AI: LLM Agents and RAG for Personalized Wealth Strategies
33
==PAGE:42==
6
Experiments
This chapter describes the conducted experiments and the metrics and strategies for
the evaluation of the different components of the system.
The results of the experi­
ments are available in chapter 7. The datasets are available in the source code in the
experiment/data folder.
6.1
Decision Layer
I evaluate the decision layer by calling only the triage agent and retrieving the hand­off
agent call to check if it matches the expected agent relative to the goal. For this purpose,
I manually built a dataset with a wide set of different queries for each of the goals, then
perform the LLM calls and compare the expected agent with the one which was called by
the triage agent.
The primary evaluation metric is accuracy, computed as follows:
Accuracy = Number of correct predictions
Total number of predictions
In addition, to better capture the performance per agent (class), I also compute the stan­
dard classification metrics: precision, recall and F1­score for each agent. These metrics
are defined as:
Precision =
True Positives
True Positives + False Positives
Recall =
True Positives
True Positives + False Negatives
F1­score = 2 × Precision × Recall
Precision + Recall
where:
• True Positives (TP) represent the number of queries correctly routed to a given
agent.
• False Positives (FP) represent the number of queries incorrectly routed to that agent.
• False Negatives (FN) represent the number of queries that should have been routed
to that agent but were assigned elsewhere.
These metrics provide a more detailed insight into the decision layer’s ability to correctly
identify each agent’s relevant queries while minimizing misclassifications.
In table 6.1 an excerpt of the CSV dataset used to evaluate the accuracy of the decision
layer is shown. The prompt column contains the user’s input; the expected column con­
tains the name of the specialized agent that should be called to answer the user’s query
in order to satisfy the relative system goal; the result column contains the name of the
last agent that was called by the triage agent after receiving the user’s query and it should
34
Democratizing Financial Advice with AI: LLM Agents and RAG for Personalized Wealth Strategies
==PAGE:43==
Prompt
Expected
Result
Time
”I’m 56 and my spouse is 50.
I earn
80,000 per month while my spouse
earns 20,000.
We both have pension
policies: I contribute 7,200 monthly and
have 2,500,000 already saved, while
my spouse contributes 3,600 and has
500,000.
We own a house worth
5,000,000 with a mortgage of 4,000,000
left and 20 years remaining.
We also
invest 5,000 every month in stocks and
currently have 1,000,000 saved there.”
Calculation
Agent
Calculation
Agent
1.2332234
”How do I pay taxes as a foreign
worker?”
Finance
Agent
Finance
Agent
2.005504
”Why should I put more money into my
emergency savings?”
Dreamplan
Agent
Dreamplan
Agent
1.025445
Table 6.1: An excerpt from the Decision Layer evaluation dataset.
match the expected field; The time column measures the response time, from when the
triage agent is called to when it returns the response.
The accuracy of the specialized agents’ tool calls is not evaluated to avoid redundancy:
since each of these agents is equipped with a single tool and the only tasks that they
are instructed to perform all require their specific tool to be called, when the triage agent
correctly dispatches the task we can be certain that the relevant tool will be, in fact, called.
If an issue arise, it would result from an exception in the tool, not from an incorrect or
missed tool call from the agent.
6.2
Retrieval­Augmented Generation
To assess the performance of the Retrieval­Augmented Generation component, I used
the popular open­source evaluation framework Ragas [47], installed in the project as a
Python package.
Ragas is designed to automate the evaluation of RAG systems while ensuring inter­
pretability.
The library comes with a series of well­defined and documented granular
metrics to evaluate the different components of the RAG [48].
Ragas needs to be run on a dataset composed of three features, user_input, represent­
ing the user’s query, retrieved_contexts, where the contents of the documents retrieved
by the RAG in order to answer the query are stored as a list of strings and response, rep­
resenting the final answer of the LLM. Optionally, you could have a reference feature,
where the ground truth (i.e. the real expected answer to the query) is stored, which would
allow you to evaluate using more and more accurate metrics, but since the dataset has
been built manually with over 200 samples, it would have been too time­consuming to
also research the answer to every question; furthermore, it offers a good chance to inves­
tigate on the power of LLM­as­a­judge in evaluating RAG systems, opportunity that I was
curious to explore.
Democratizing Financial Advice with AI: LLM Agents and RAG for Personalized Wealth Strategies
35
==PAGE:44==
The evaluation dataset has been built, as said before, manually, formulating over 200
questions related to the different information from all the documents collected in the pre­
vious phase of the project and storing them in JSONL for better compatibility with Ragas.
The questions are then fed to the RAG pipeline and the retrieved contexts and final re­
sponses are stored in their relative columns in the dataset. Finally, using the functions
provided by the Ragas library, the dataset is evaluated and the result stored for reference.
An excerpt of the dataset is shown in listing 6.1.
...
{
"user_input": "What is the difference between tax
assessment and preliminary income assessment?",
"retrieved_contexts": [
"Source: skat.dk_en-us_individuals ... Your tax
assessment notice for 2024 will be ready on 24
March 2025. It tells you if you'll get a tax
refund or if you have paid too little tax in 2024
.\nThe deadline for voluntary payment of
outstanding tax is 1 July 2025. You an pay by
means of dankort until 23:59 or via online
banking within the opening hours of your online
banking ...",
"Source: lifeindenmark.borger.dk ...",
"Source: lifeindenmark.borger.dk ...",
"Source: skat.dk_en-us_individuals ...",
"Source: skat.dk_en-us_individuals ...",
"Source: lifeindenmark.borger.dk ...",
"Source: skat.dk_en-us_individuals ...",
"Source: lifeindenmark.borger.dk ..."
],
"response": "The tax assessment (årsopgørelse) is the
final calculation of your taxable income and taxes
owed, based on your actual income and deductions for
the year. The preliminary income assessment (
forskudsopgørelse) is an estimate of your expected
income and deductions for the upcoming year, used to
determine your monthly tax payments.",
"time": 3.06943678855896
}
...
Listing 6.1: An excerpt of the JSONL dataset for the RAG evaluation.
The goals of this part of the evaluation are:
1. Compare the performance of the different Retrieval­Augmented Generation tech­
niques with an LLM­only approach, relying solely on the model’s internal training
knowledge to answer the questions.
Since the LLM is not retrieving any context via external tools, the only possible metric
to compare other than response time is answer relevancy (see section 6.2.2).
The LLM baseline uses the same model used in the generator components of all
36
Democratizing Financial Advice with AI: LLM Agents and RAG for Personalized Wealth Strategies
==PAGE:45==
the RAG pipelines.
2. Compare the performance of the different Retrieval­Augmented Generation tech­
niques with each other according to the metrics described in section 6.2.1 and sec­
tion 6.2.2 in order to establish the overall best strategy for this domain.
6.2.1
Evaluating Retrieval
In order to thoroughly evaluate the retrieval part of the RAG, I use the following metrics:
• Context Precision [49]: measures the proportion of relevant chunks in the retrieved
contexts, indicating how accurately the retrieval system ranks relevant information.
Ragas offers the possibility of employing this metric with or without reference; I am
using the one without reference, which leverages an LLM. The metric is defined as
follows:
Context Precision@K =
∑K
k=1(Precision@k × vk)
Total number of relevant items in the top K results
Precision@k =
true positives@k
true positives@k + false positives@k
where K is the total number of chunks in retrieved contexts and vk ∈{0, 1} is the
relevance indicator at rank k.
• Context Relevance [50]: measures the relevance of the retrieved context to the
user’s query. It divides the contexts in two different templates, handled by two sep­
arate LLM­as­a­judge calls (contrary to the Context Precision metric, which only
uses one), thus limitating bias. Each judge assigns as score ranging from 0, if the
retrieved contexts are not relevant at all, to 2, if the contexts are fully relevant. The
scores are subsequently normalized to a [0,1] scale.
6.2.2
Evaluating Generation
I also evaluate the Generation part of the RAG, using two of the metrics available for this
task which don’t require the reference feature:
• Faithfulness [51]: identifies all the claims in the response checking if they can be
inferred from the retrieved context, thus measuring factual consistency. The score
is computed as follows:
Faithfullness score = Number of claims in the response supported by the retrieved context
Total number of claims in the response
• Response Relevancy (or Answer Relevancy) [52]: measures the relevancy of the
final response to the user’s query, only using these two features. It uses a ”reverse­
engineering” approach, generating a set of artificial questions from the generated
answer, then computing the similarity of each of these synthesized questions to
the original user’s query and taking the average of these scores, which is usually
ranging from 0 to 1:
Answer Relevancy = 1
N
N
∑
i=1
cosine similarity(Egi, Eo)
Democratizing Financial Advice with AI: LLM Agents and RAG for Personalized Wealth Strategies
37
==PAGE:46==
or explicitly:
Answer Relevancy = 1
N
N
∑
i=1
Egi · Eo
∥Egi∥∥Eo∥
where Egi is the embedding of the generated question, Eo is the embedding of the
user input and N is the number of generated questions (default is 3).
6.3
System Quality
To assess and predict the general user experience when interacting with the system in a
production environment, I conducted a system quality evaluation.
For this purpose, I implemented a feature that allows the user to terminate a chat session
at any point. Upon termination, a feedback form is automatically displayed. The form
consists of four questions, each to be answered on a numerical scale from 0 to 9, as
well as an optional text field for additional comments (see fig. 6.1). Once submitted, the
responses are stored as entries in the feedbacks table of the database, as described in
section 2.4.1.
The four questions are designed to capture different qualitative aspects of the system:
• Correctness: the extent to which the user perceives the chatbot’s responses as
factually accurate and truthful.
• Relevance: the extent to which the chatbot demonstrates an ability to correctly
interpret the user’s query and provide contextually appropriate answers.
• Clarity: the extent to which the chatbot communicates in a clear, precise, and com­
prehensible manner.
• Satisfaction: the user’s overall satisfaction with the chat session and the system
as a whole.
The evaluation was carried out during a collective feedback session involving multiple
employees at Dreamplan. Participants included both domain experts from the financial
sector and software engineers, thereby ensuring a diverse and comprehensive perspec­
tive on the system’s overall quality.
6.4
Experimental Setup
Experiments were carried out using Jupyter Notebook on a laptop with the following hard­
ware and software configuration. The system runs Ubuntu 24.04.2 LTS with Linux kernel
version 6.8.0­60­generic on a 64­bit x86_64 architecture.
The machine is an Acer Swift SFG14­71, featuring a 13th Gen Intel® Core™i5­1335U
processor. The CPU specifications include:
• Architecture: x86_64, supporting both 32­bit and 64­bit operation modes,
• 1 socket with 10 cores and 12 threads (hyper­threading enabled),
• Base clock frequency ranging from 400 MHz up to a maximum of 4.6 GHz,
• CPU flags include advanced vector extensions (AVX, AVX2, AVX­VNNI), AES, SHA­
NI, FMA, virtualization support (VT­x) and various security mitigations.
The CPU cache hierarchy is as follows:
• L1 Data cache: 352 KiB distributed across 10 instances,
38
Democratizing Financial Advice with AI: LLM Agents and RAG for Personalized Wealth Strategies
==PAGE:47==
• L1 Instruction cache: 576 KiB distributed across 10 instances,
• L2 cache: 6.5 MiB distributed over 4 instances,
• L3 cache: 12 MiB shared among all cores.
The system uses a single NUMA node containing all 12 logical CPUs.
6.5
System Metrics
Since most of the computational workload is delegated to external servers, such as those
provided by OpenAI, system­level performance metrics such as computation time or la­
tency are not central to the objectives of this project. Nevertheless, for completeness, I
report a selection of these metrics as a point of reference.
6.6
Costs
Because the evaluation of the multi­agent system relies on an external paid API, it is
important to consider the associated costs. Although Dreamplan did not impose a strict
budget ceiling for API usage within the scope of this thesis, it was agreed that expenses
should remain reasonably low, ideally below a few hundred dollars.
While the inference cost per user session in the application is minimal, large­scale testing
on datasets containing hundreds of entries requires multiple API calls. As a result, the
cumulative cost of experimentation can increase significantly, even if individual queries
are inexpensive (see section 5.1).
Democratizing Financial Advice with AI: LLM Agents and RAG for Personalized Wealth Strategies
39
==PAGE:48==
Figure 6.1: Feedback form user interface.
40
Democratizing Financial Advice with AI: LLM Agents and RAG for Personalized Wealth Strategies
==PAGE:49==
7
Results
This chapter shows and discusses the results of the experiments. The values in bold
represent the best scores for the feature, while the ones in underlined italic represent the
second­best scores for the same feature. The file containing the results are available in
the source code in the experiment/data folder.
7.1
Decision Layer
Table 7.1: Overall system performance metrics
Metric
Value
Dispatching accuracy (excluding InputError)
0.8532
Dispatching accuracy
0.8087
Average response time [s]
7.4747
Table 7.2: Agent­wise dispatching performance (excluding InputError)
Agent
Total
Correct
Errors
Accuracy
Calculation Agent
59
59
0
1.0000
Dreamplan Agent
80
32
48
0.4000
Finance Agent (excluding InputError)
188
188
0
1.0000
Total
327
279
48
0.8532
Table 7.3: Agent­wise dispatching performance
Agent
Total
Correct
Errors
Accuracy
Calculation Agent
59
59
0
1.0000
Dreamplan Agent
80
32
48
0.4000
Finance Agent
206
188
18
0.9126
Total
345
279
66
0.8087
As seen in Table 7.1, the decision layer achieved an overall dispatching accuracy of
80.87%. By excluding from the computation the data points that caused an InputError
(i.e., the Input Guardrail agent was triggered because it didn’t recognize the question as
relevant in the context of the platform) – only caused by 18 prompts expected to be routed
to the Finance Agent – the accuracy increases to 85.32%.
It is safe to exclude these rows from the computation as the problem does not lie in the
routing but rather either in the efficiency of the guardrail layer in properly recognizing
pertinent queries or in the prompts, which could actually be too general or vague for the
input guardrail agent to approve them.
The average decision latency is 7.47 seconds and measures the time from when the
triage agent begins reasoning until it formulates an answer, thus including hand­offs and
any possible tool calls.
Democratizing Financial Advice with AI: LLM Agents and RAG for Personalized Wealth Strategies
41
==PAGE:50==
Agent­level performance analysis (Table 7.3) reveals distinct patterns. The Calculation
Agent exhibited perfect classification accuracy (59/59), indicating that the dispatcher is
highly effective at detecting user queries containing explicit financial and demographic
data for computational processing.
The Finance Agent achieved a strong accuracy of 91.26%, reaching perfect accuracy
when InputError cases were removed. This confirms that misclassifications within the
Finance Agent’s domain were solely attributable to invalid or incomplete input data rather
than to decision­making errors in the routing mechanism.
In contrast, the Dreamplan Agent displayed substantially lower accuracy (40%), with
all 48 misclassified queries being incorrectly routed to the Finance Agent. A qualitative
examination of these instances indicates a consistent failure mode: the dispatcher misin­
terpreted user queries about personal financial data or calculation results (intended for the
Dreamplan Agent) as general financial inquiries (assigned to the Finance Agent). Given
the routing specification, this distinction is critical:
• Queries referencing the user’s specific financial data or previously generated results
must be directed to the Dreamplan Agent.
• Queries on general financial topics unrelated to user data must be directed to the
Finance Agent.
The observed errors suggest that the current routing model has difficulty reliably discrim­
inating between context­specific and general financial questions, despite explicit instruc­
tion. This limitation is likely due to semantic overlap in the financial vocabulary across
both categories, which can cause ambiguity in classification when user input lacks ex­
plicit cues.
While the misclassified queries were still handled by an agent with relevant domain ex­
pertise, this routing mismatch risks degrading user experience, as the Finance Agent is
not designed to interpret or contextualize personalized financial data.
Table 7.4: Confusion matrix of agent predictions (excluding InputError). Rows represent
true labels, columns represent predicted labels.
Pred. Calculation
Pred. Dreamplan
Pred. Finance
Total
True Calculation
59
0
0
59
True Dreamplan
0
32
48
80
True Finance
0
0
188
188
Total
59
32
236
327
Table 7.4 clearly shows that all misclassifications originate from the Dreamplan Agent
queries being routed incorrectly to the Finance Agent. This confusion highlights the need
for improved discrimination between these two categories.
The precision, recall and F1­score metrics in Table 7.5 provide further insight into the
routing performance. The Calculation Agent achieved perfect scores across all metrics,
confirming flawless dispatching for its domain. The Finance Agent maintains perfect recall
but has reduced precision due to misrouted Dreamplan queries, indicating it sometimes
receives queries outside its intended scope. The Dreamplan Agent, while having perfect
precision, suffers from low recall (0.40), reflecting the high number of queries it failed to
receive.
42
Democratizing Financial Advice with AI: LLM Agents and RAG for Personalized Wealth Strategies
==PAGE:51==
Table 7.5: Agent­wise precision, recall and F1­score (excluding InputError).
Agent
Precision
Recall
F1­score
Calculation Agent
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
Dreamplan Agent
1.0000
0.4000
0.5714
Finance Agent
0.7966
1.0000
0.8869
Macro Average
0.9322
0.8000
0.8194
Overall, the results demonstrate that employing an LLM agent as a dynamic decision layer
is an effective strategy for query routing. However, performance in certain domains could
possibly be further enhanced by adopting a hybrid approach combining rule­based and
learned components or by fine­tuning the LLM on domain­specific data. Such improve­
ments are likely to increase classification accuracy and robustness, ultimately leading to
a more reliable and user­friendly system.
7.2
Retrieval­Augmented Generation
Table 7.6: Comparison of RAG variants and LLM­only approach
Method
Answer Relevancy (Mean) ↑
Avg. Response Time (s) ↓
LLM­only
0.770
3.192
BM25
0.862
2.143
BM25 + Reranker
0.842
3.042
Dense
0.853
2.456
Dense + Reranker
0.814
2.700
Table 7.7: Retrieval Metrics across RAG variants
Method
Context Precision ↑
Context Relevance ↑
BM25
0.7603
0.5170
BM25 + Reranker
0.7410
0.5121
Dense
0.7673
0.6262
Dense + Reranker
0.7686
0.6238
This section evaluates the performance of different Retrieval­Augmented Generation (RAG)
variants compared to a standalone LLM approach. The models are assessed along sev­
eral dimensions: answer relevancy, response latency, LLM context precision, retrieval
relevance and faithfulness. Tables 7.6–7.8 summarize the results across all metrics.
Table 7.6 shows that integrating retrieval significantly improves answer relevancy over the
LLM­only baseline (0.770), with the highest score achieved by the BM25 variant (0.862),
closely followed by Dense retrievers (0.853). Interestingly, BM25 also achieves the lowest
average response time (2.143 s), making it the most efficient retrieval strategy overall.
Reranking improves performance in some cases (e.g., BM25 + Reranker shows higher
answer relevancy than LLM­only), but often at the cost of increased latency. Dense +
Reranker, for example, shows a moderate drop in answer relevancy (0.814) and a higher
response time (2.700 s) compared to Dense alone.
Democratizing Financial Advice with AI: LLM Agents and RAG for Personalized Wealth Strategies
43
==PAGE:52==
Table 7.8: Generation metrics and response time across RAG variants
Method
Faithfulness ↑
Answer Relevancy ↑
Avg. Time (s) ↓
BM25
0.9379
0.8619
2.1431
BM25 + Reranker
0.9142
0.8422
3.0423
Dense
0.9308
0.8526
2.4557
Dense + Reranker
0.9198
0.8142
2.6997
Table 7.7 presents the retrieval metrics described in the previous chapter. Dense­based
approaches outperform BM25­based ones in retrieval quality. Specifically, Dense + Reranker
achieves the highest LLM context precision (0.769) and Dense alone attains the highest
context relevance (0.626). These results indicate that neural retrievers are more effective
at retrieving semantically rich content, which better aligns with the query intent. How­
ever, improvements in retrieval quality do not always translate directly to higher answer
relevancy, as discussed below.
Table 7.8 consolidates the three most critical dimensions. BM25 stands out with the best
faithfulness score (0.938), highest answer relevancy (0.862) and fastest response time
(2.143 s), suggesting that traditional sparse retrieval is surprisingly competitive.
Dense retrievers, while offering slightly improved retrieval precision, do not surpass BM25
in faithfulness or answer relevancy. Reranking slightly improves context precision but
tends to increase latency and does not consistently enhance answer quality.
To quantify the significance of performance differences, I applied the Wilcoxon signed­
rank test to the key comparisons. Table 7.9 summarizes the results.
Table 7.9: Wilcoxon signed­rank test for key metric comparisons. Significant differences
(p < 0.05) are in bold.
1st method (best)
2nd method
Metric
p­value
BM25
LLM Only
Answer Relevancy
1.09e­07
BM25
Dense (2nd best)
Answer Relevancy
0.163
BM25
Dense (2nd best)
Faithfulness
0.838
BM25
BM25 + Reranker
Faithfulness
0.245
Dense + Reranker
Dense (2nd best)
Context Precision
0.012
Dense
Dense + Reranker (2nd best)
Context Relevance
0.625
Dense
BM25 + Reranker
Context Relevance
0.00061
Summing up: RAG with BM25 significantly improves answer relevancy over LLM­only
(p ≪0.05), nevertheless differences between top­performing RAG and their reranker
variants are usually not significant.
These results highlight a key trade­off in RAG design: while dense retrievers and rerankers
can improve certain retrieval metrics, they do not always lead to better answer quality or
efficiency. In contrast, BM25 offers a balanced trade­off between speed, faithfulness and
relevancy. This raises important questions about the marginal gains offered by complex
retrievers in real­world applications where latency and interpretability are crucial.
Moreover, the disconnect between retrieval relevance and answer quality suggests that
downstream generation models may not fully utilize improved retrieval quality unless fur­
44
Democratizing Financial Advice with AI: LLM Agents and RAG for Personalized Wealth Strategies
==PAGE:53==
ther fine­tuned for that purpose. Future work could explore joint optimization of retriever
and generator, as well as domain­specific tuning.
7.3
System Quality
To evaluate the quality of the developed system, 13 participants provided a total of 41
feedback sessions. Each session was rated along four dimensions: correctness, rele­
vance, clarity and overall satisfaction. In addition to the quantitative scores, participants
provided open­ended comments that shed light on specific strengths and weaknesses of
the system. This mixed­methods evaluation enables a comprehensive understanding of
the system’s current performance and areas for improvement.
The average scores across all feedback sessions are summarized in Table 7.10.
Dimension
Mean
Median
Correctness
5.05
5.00
Relevance
5.37
5.00
Clarity
5.61
6.00
Satisfaction
4.88
5.00
Table 7.10: Mean and median scores across all feedback sessions (N = 41, with values
ranging from 0 to 9).
Overall, the system achieved moderate performance across all dimensions. Clarity re­
ceived the highest mean score (5.61), indicating that most responses were understand­
able and well­structured. Correctness and relevance followed closely, though with some
inconsistency across sessions. Satisfaction was slightly lower (4.88), reflecting that de­
spite adequate clarity, users were sometimes dissatisfied due to missing features, lack of
continuity in dialogue or unrealistic recommendations.
The open­ended feedback provided nuanced insights into the system’s behavior. These
comments are grouped into recurring themes.
• Promptness and clarity of responses: users generally found the system’s an­
swers to be quick and easy to follow. Explanations of calculations were described
as “very thorough” and “helpful in guiding input data requirements”.
• Domain knowledge: the assistant demonstrated competency in handling tax­ and
salary­related queries, with some users explicitly noting satisfaction when it retrieved
supporting knowledge from external resources.
• Usability: the chat interface was perceived as simple and user­friendly, with rela­
tively low friction in initiating interactions.
• Context handling: a recurring concern was the system’s difficulty in maintaining
conversational continuity. Users reported that the model would disregard previously
provided inputs (e.g. age and salary), ask redundant questions, or fail to recognize
affirmative replies such as “yes.”
• Calculation transparency: multiple participants noted that while the assistant indi­
cated it had performed a calculation, it often did not display the actual output unless
explicitly prompted with specific phrasing.
• Sensitivity to prompt phrasing: Users frequently needed to “massage” their queries
or repeat information before the assistant could produce the desired output. This
Democratizing Financial Advice with AI: LLM Agents and RAG for Personalized Wealth Strategies
45
==PAGE:54==
limited the system’s accessibility for non­technical users.
Several comments highlighted concrete avenues for system enhancement such as proac­
tively requesting missing user data (e.g., liquid savings, rental status) before attempting
calculations, to avoid basing recommendations on incomplete information and improving
dialogue management, so that the system better understands context, carries over prior
inputs and responds appropriately to simple confirmations.
The evaluation demonstrates that the system achieves a moderate level of quality, with
particular strengths in clarity and knowledge delivery, but with notable limitations in reli­
ability and contextual understanding. The variation in user experience suggests that the
system is capable of excellent performance under optimal conditions, yet struggles when
faced with ambiguous inputs or incomplete data.
Addressing the weaknesses identified through user comments would likely yield signifi­
cant improvements in overall satisfaction. In particular, enhancements to context man­
agement and proactive data elicitation could reduce friction and align the system’s outputs
more closely with user expectations.
In summary, the current system provides a functional and usable foundation, but requires
further refinement to ensure robustness, transparency and realistic recommendations in
financial planning scenarios.
46
Democratizing Financial Advice with AI: LLM Agents and RAG for Personalized Wealth Strategies
==PAGE:55==
8
Conclusion
Let us recall the research questions guiding this study:
• How effectively can an LLM function as a decision layer in a multi­agent system, in­
telligently routing user queries to the appropriate resources and tools (e.g. financial
optimization models, RAG systems)?
• How accurate and reliable is the LLM­based RAG system in answering financial
queries?
The experimental evaluation revealed that the LLM­based decision layer achieves a ro­
bust overall dispatching accuracy of approximately 81%, which improves to 85% when
excluding queries that triggered the Input Guardrail due to vague or irrelevant inputs.
This demonstrates the model’s strong capacity for correctly interpreting and routing the
majority of user queries in a complex multi­domain environment.
Performance analysis at the agent level showed that the dispatcher perfectly routed all
queries to the Calculation Agent, highlighting the effectiveness of the model in recogniz­
ing explicit computational requests. The Finance Agent also achieved very high accuracy,
particularly when disregarding the small subset of inputs resulting in guardrail errors, in­
dicating reliable identification of general financial queries.
However, the Dreamplan Agent presented a notable challenge, with a substantially lower
accuracy of 40%, primarily due to misclassification of its context­specific queries as gen­
eral financial inquiries routed instead to the Finance Agent. This error pattern underscores
the difficulty the LLM encounters in discriminating between semantically overlapping but
contextually distinct user intents, especially when cues distinguishing personalized data
queries from broader financial topics are subtle or ambiguous.
Despite this limitation, all misrouted queries were still directed to agents with domain rel­
evance, minimizing the risk of completely irrelevant responses but potentially impacting
the precision and quality of user interactions, especially in sensitive financial advisory
contexts.
These results confirm that an LLM can serve effectively as a decision layer, demon­
strating substantial capability in understanding and routing diverse user queries with high
accuracy across multiple specialized agents. The model’s dynamic reasoning enables
flexible, context­aware dispatching, reducing reliance on rigid rule­based systems. Nev­
ertheless, challenges remain in domains with overlapping semantics, where the LLM’s
generalist nature may lead to classification ambiguities.
The experimental evaluation of various Retrieval­Augmented Generation (RAG) configu­
rations provides several important insights into the accuracy, reliability and efficiency of
LLM­based RAG systems in the financial domain:
• Significant improvement over LLM­only baseline: uncorporating retrieval mech­
anisms, such as BM25 or dense neural retrievers, substantially enhances answer
relevancy compared to relying solely on the LLM’s internal knowledge. The best­
performing RAG variant achieved an average answer relevancy of 0.862, compared
to 0.770 for the LLM­only approach.
Democratizing Financial Advice with AI: LLM Agents and RAG for Personalized Wealth Strategies
47
==PAGE:56==
• Trade­off between retrieval quality and answer faithfulness: dense retrievers
offer higher retrieval precision, but this does not consistently translate to improved
answer faithfulness or overall relevancy. Furthermore faithfulness is consistent in
all the evaluated RAG variants.
• Mixed effects of reranking: the addition of a reranker only improved context preci­
sion, having no significant effect on the other metrics. This suggests that increased
system complexity does not necessarily yield better performance in practical appli­
cations.
• Practical implications: these results demonstrate that an LLM­based RAG sys­
tem, particularly when combined with well­established sparse retrieval methods,
can deliver accurate, faithful and timely answers. Such systems are suitable for
real­time decision support and other applications where both speed and reliability
are critical.
In summary, the LLM­based RAG system exhibits promising accuracy and reliability in
the financial domain. Traditional sparse retrieval approaches like BM25 continue to offer
a balanced trade­off between precision, faithfulness and latency. Future work should
explore tighter integration between retrievers and generators, as well as domain­specific
fine­tuning, to further enhance system performance.
This work demonstrated that large language models can effectively operate as deci­
sion layers in multi­agent systems and as generators in Retrieval­Augmented Generation
pipelines for the financial domain. The LLM­based dispatcher achieved high routing ac­
curacy, particularly for unambiguous queries, while retrieval­augmented systems – espe­
cially those using BM25 – delivered accurate, faithful and low­latency financial answers
that outperformed LLM­only baselines.
The findings show that LLM­driven orchestration offers flexibility and strong perfor­
mance, but challenges remain in intent disambiguation between semantically overlap­
ping domains. Future advances should focus on adaptive decision­routing enriched with
explicit context signals and hybrid retrieval methods that combine the strengths of sparse
and dense approaches to further boost accuracy without sacrificing efficiency.
8.1
Future work
While the current prototype is functional and meets the project’s initial requirements, sev­
eral avenues remain for further research and development to transition the system toward
a production­grade product. Given the increasing relevance of AI­driven advisory systems
in finance, continued work in this area is not only promising but necessary to ensure eth­
ical, robust and user­centric deployment.
As noted in section 2.5, privacy and data security are paramount in financial applications.
Future work should include rigorous implementation of end­to­end encryption, session
authentication and fine­grained access control mechanisms. These features are critical
to guarantee that sensitive user data – such as financial goals, investment history and
risk profiles – remains protected throughout interaction and storage.
Moreover, to comply with regulatory frameworks such as the General Data Protection
Regulation (GDPR), the system must include mechanisms for user data control, such
as the ability to opt out of data collection or request data deletion. Integrating privacy­
preserving machine learning techniques could further enhance user trust and legal com­
pliance.
48
Democratizing Financial Advice with AI: LLM Agents and RAG for Personalized Wealth Strategies
==PAGE:57==
According to the user feedback from section 7.3, the prompt could be further refined and
more strict static rules could be introduced in order to increase the accuracy of the system
in detecting missing parameters and producing output in the requested format.
A distinguishing feature of Dreamplan’s proprietary platform is its emphasis on data visu­
alization to support financial recommendations (fig. 8.1, fig. 1.3). Future iterations of the
system should incorporate similar capabilities, allowing the LLM­agents to generate and
present visual summaries in response to user queries. Embedding real­time charts or
scenario comparisons within the conversational flow could help users better understand
the rationale behind recommendations and ultimately foster more informed financial de­
cisions.
Figure 8.1: An example of one of Dreamplan’s data visualizations.
To enhance accessibility and simulate a more natural advisory interaction, integrating a
speech­to­text interface is a logical next step. This functionality would allow users to com­
municate with the system through spoken language, mimicking the dynamics of human
financial consultations.
State­of­the­art speech recognition models, such as OpenAI’s Whisper [53] or Google’s
Speech­to­Text API, offer highly accurate transcription and multi­lingual support, making
their integration both feasible and effective. Though initially omitted from this research
Democratizing Financial Advice with AI: LLM Agents and RAG for Personalized Wealth Strategies
49
==PAGE:58==
to maintain focus on the main research objectives, multi­modal interaction presents a
promising direction for improving the user experience and broadening the system’s ap­
peal.
50
Democratizing Financial Advice with AI: LLM Agents and RAG for Personalized Wealth Strategies
==PAGE:59==
Bibliography
[1]
Robert T. Kiyosaki and Sharon L. Lechter. Rich Dad Poor Dad: What the Rich Teach
Their Kids About Money That the Poor and Middle Class Do Not! New York: Warner
Books, 1997. ISBN: 9780446677455.
[2]
Dreamplan. Dreamplan’s website. Accessed: 2025­05­19. 2025. URL: https://www.
dreamplan.io/.
[3]
Shijie Wu et al. “BloombergGPT: A Large Language Model for Finance”. In: arXiv
preprint arXiv:2303.17564 (2023). DOI: 10.48550/arXiv.2303.17564. URL: https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2303.17564.
[4]
Xiao­Yang Liu et al. “FinGPT: Democratizing Internet­scale Data for Financial Large
Language Models”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.10485 (2023). DOI: 10 . 48550 /
arXiv.2307.10485. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.10485.
[5]
Hongyang Yang et al. “FinRobot: An Open­Source AI Agent Platform for Financial
Applications using Large Language Models”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.14767
(2024). URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.14767.
[6]
Kausik Lakkaraju et al. “Can LLMs be Good Financial Advisors?: An Initial Study in
Personal Decision Making for Optimized Outcomes”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.07422
(2023). URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.07422.
[7]
Anil Palepu et al. “Towards Conversational AI for Disease Management”. In: arXiv
preprint arXiv:2503.06074 (2025). DOI: 10.48550/arXiv.2503.06074. URL: https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2503.06074.
[8]
Jingru Wang, Wen Ding, and Xiaotong Zhu. “Financial Analysis: Intelligent Financial
Data Analysis System Based on LLM­RAG”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.06279
(2025). DOI: 10.48550/arXiv.2504.06279. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.06279.
[9]
Yuehan Qin et al. “Don’t Let It Hallucinate: Premise Verification via Retrieval­Augmented
Logical Reasoning”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.06438 (2025). DOI: 10.48550/
arXiv.2504.06438. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.06438.
[10]
Zirui Guo et al. “LightRAG: Simple and Fast Retrieval­Augmented Generation”. In:
arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.05779 (2024). DOI: 10.48550/arXiv.2410.05779. URL:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.05779.
[11]
Amar Abane, Anis Bekri, and Abdella Battou. “FastRAG: Retrieval Augmented Gen­
eration for Semi­structured Data”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.13773 (2024). URL:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.13773.
[12]
Kepu Zhang et al. “QE­RAG: A Robust Retrieval­Augmented Generation Bench­
mark for Query Entry Errors”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.04062 (2025). DOI: 10.
48550/arXiv:2504.04062. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.04062.
[13]
Xiaohua Wang et al. “Searching for Best Practices in Retrieval­Augmented Gener­
ation”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.01219 (2024). DOI: 10.48550/arXiv.2407.01219.
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.01219.
[14]
Jiawei Gu et al. “A Survey on LLM­as­a­Judge”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.15594
(2024). URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.15594.
[15]
Takehiro Takayanagi et al. “Are Generative AI Agents Effective Personalized Finan­
cial Advisors?” In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.05862 (2025). DOI: 10.48550/arXiv.
2504.05862. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.05862.
[16]
Alex Zarifis and Xusen Cheng. How to build trust in answers given by Generative
AI for specific and vague financial questions. 2024. DOI: 10.1108/JEBDE-11-2023-
Democratizing Financial Advice with AI: LLM Agents and RAG for Personalized Wealth Strategies
51
==PAGE:60==
0028. URL: https://www.emerald.com/insight/content/doi/10.1108/jebde-11-2023-
0028/full/html.
[17]
Daniel Ben David, Yehezkel S. Resheff, and Talia Tron. “Explainable Recommen­
dation via Interpretable Feature Propagation”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.02555
(2021). URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2101.02555.
[18]
OpenAI. ChatGPT. Accessed: 2025­06­05. URL: https://chat.openai.com.
[19]
Anthropic. Claude AI. Accessed: 2025­06­05. URL: https://www.anthropic.com/
claude.
[20]
Google DeepMind. Gemini. Accessed: 2025­06­05. URL: https://deepmind.google/
gemini.
[21]
Axel Van Lamsweerde. “Goal­oriented requirements engineering: A guided tour”.
In: Proceedings Fifth IEEE International Symposium on Requirements Engineering
(2001), pp. 249–262.
[22]
Zhipeng Hou, Junyi Tang, and Yipeng Wang. HALO: Hierarchical Autonomous Logic­
Oriented Orchestration for Multi­Agent LLM Systems. 2025. arXiv: 2505.13516 [cs.MA].
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.13516.
[23]
Sumedh Rasal and E. J. Hauer. Navigating Complexity: Orchestrated Problem Solv­
ing with Multi­Agent LLMs. 2024. arXiv: 2402.16713 [cs.MA]. URL: https://arxiv.
org/abs/2402.16713.
[24]
Astral Software. UV Documentation. Accessed: 2025­05­22. 2024. URL: https://
docs.astral.sh/uv/.
[25]
Sebastián Ramírez. FastAPI. Accessed: 2025­06­05. 2018. URL: https://fastapi.
tiangolo.com.
[26]
OpenAPI Initiative. OpenAPI Specification Version 3.0. Accessed: 2025­06­05. 2017.
URL: https://swagger.io/specification/v3/.
[27]
Supabase. Supabase: Open Source Firebase Alternative. Accessed: 2025­07­02.
2023. URL: https://supabase.com/.
[28]
Sebastián Ramírez. FastAPI — Advanced User Guide: Events. Accessed: 2025­
07­02. n.d. URL: https://fastapi.tiangolo.com/advanced/events/.
[29]
Robert C. Martin. Agile Software Development: Principles, Patterns, and Practices.
Prentice Hall, 2003. ISBN: 978­0135974445.
[30]
Patrick Lewis et al. “Retrieval­Augmented Generation for Knowledge­Intensive NLP
Tasks”. In: (2021). arXiv: 2005.11401 [cs.CL]. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2005.
11401.
[31]
deepset GmbH. Haystack — Open source NLP framework for building search sys­
tems. Accessed: 2025­05­22. 2023. URL: https://docs.haystack.deepset.ai.
[32]
IntelLabs. fastRAG. Accessed: 2025­07­02. n.d. URL: https://github.com/IntelLabs/
fastRAG/tree/main.
[33]
Nandan Thakur et al. BEIR: A Heterogenous Benchmark for Zero­shot Evaluation
of Information Retrieval Models. 2021. arXiv: 2104.08663 [cs.IR]. URL: https://
arxiv.org/abs/2104.08663.
[34]
Yuyang Li et al. “Evaluating the Performance of RAG Methods for Conversational
AI in the Airport Domain”. In: (2025). arXiv: 2505.13006 [cs.CL]. URL: https://arxiv.
org/abs/2505.13006.
[35]
Kunlun Zhu et al. “RAGEval: Scenario Specific RAG Evaluation Dataset Generation
Framework”. In: (2025). arXiv: 2408.01262 [cs.CL]. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/
2408.01262.
[36]
Jialin Dong et al. Don’t Forget to Connect! Improving RAG with Graph­based Rerank­
ing. 2024. arXiv: 2405.18414 [cs.CL]. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.18414.
52
Democratizing Financial Advice with AI: LLM Agents and RAG for Personalized Wealth Strategies
==PAGE:61==
[37]
Dongkyu Kim et al. AutoRAG: Automated Framework for optimization of Retrieval
Augmented Generation Pipeline. 2024. arXiv: 2410.20878 [cs.CL]. URL: https://
arxiv.org/abs/2410.20878.
[38]
Vladimir Karpukhin et al. “Dense Passage Retrieval for Open­Domain Question An­
swering”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.04906 (2020). URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/
2004.04906.
[39]
Yi Luan et al. “Sparse, Dense, and Memory­Efficient Representations for Text Re­
trieval”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.00783 (2021). URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/
2107.00783.
[40]
Jean Maillard et al. “Evaluating Dense and Hybrid Retrieval in Multi­Stage and Re­
Ranking Pipelines”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.19045 (2023). URL: https://arxiv.
org/abs/2305.19045.
[41]
OpenAI. GPT­4.1­nano Model Documentation. Accessed: 2025­05­22. 2025. URL:
https://platform.openai.com/docs/models/gpt-4.1-nano.
[42]
OpenAI. Models — OpenAI API documentation. Accessed: 2025­05­22. 2025. URL:
https://platform.openai.com/docs/models/.
[43]
pytest development team. pytest: simple powerful testing with Python. Accessed:
2025­05­29. 2024. URL: https://docs.pytest.org/.
[44]
Michele Lacchia. Radon: Python code metrics. 2024. URL: https://github.com/
rubik/radon.
[45]
Charlie Marsh and Astral Software Inc. Ruff: An extremely fast Python linter, written
in Rust. Accessed: 2025­05­29. 2024. URL: https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/.
[46]
Microsoft Corporation. Microsoft Azure: Cloud Computing Services. Accessed: 2025­
08­19. 2025. URL: https://azure.microsoft.com/.
[47]
Shahul Es et al. “Ragas: Automated Evaluation of Retrieval Augmented Genera­
tion”. In: (2025). arXiv: 2309.15217 [cs.CL]. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.15217.
[48]
Shahul Es et al. Available Metrics — RAGAS Documentation. Accessed: 2025­05­
20. 2024. URL: https://docs.ragas.io/en/latest/concepts/metrics/available_metrics/.
[49]
Shahul Es et al. Context Precision — RAGAS Documentation. Accessed: 2025­05­
20. 2024. URL: https://docs.ragas.io/en/latest/concepts/metrics/available_metrics/
context_precision/.
[50]
Shahul Es et al. Context Relevance — RAGAS Documentation. Accessed: 2025­
05­20. 2024. URL: https://docs.ragas.io/en/latest/concepts/metrics/available_
metrics/nvidia_metrics/#context-relevance.
[51]
Shahul Es et al. Faithfulness — RAGAS Documentation. Accessed: 2025­05­20.
2024. URL: https://docs.ragas.io/en/latest/concepts/metrics/available_metrics/
faithfulness/.
[52]
Shahul Es et al. Answer Relevance — RAGAS Documentation. Accessed: 2025­
05­20. 2024. URL: https://docs.ragas.io/en/latest/concepts/metrics/available_
metrics/answer_relevance/.
[53]
Alec Radford et al. “Robust speech recognition via large­scale weak supervision”.
In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.04356 (2023). URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.04356.
Democratizing Financial Advice with AI: LLM Agents and RAG for Personalized Wealth Strategies
53
==PAGE:62==
54
Democratizing Financial Advice with AI: LLM Agents and RAG for Personalized Wealth Strategies
==PAGE:63==
A
Appendix A
A.1
LLM prompts and instructions
A.1.1
Dreamplan Agent Instructions
You are a specialist agent for answering questions about Dreamplan's
recommendations. Always refer directly to the user ("you") and
present information using bullet points and clear markdown sections.
,→
,→
# Retirement Overview
- **Current Retirement Contribution**
- Your current retirement contribution results in a monthly payout of
{{baselineDisposableIncome, currency}} after tax at retirement.
,→
- This gives you a coverage ratio of {{baselineCoverageRatio}}% of
your current disposable income.
,→
- **Recommended Contribution**
- If you make the recommended additional retirement contribution,
your new expected monthly payout will be
{{recommendedDisposableIncome, currency}} after tax.
,→
,→
- This results in a coverage ratio of {{recommendedCoverageRatio}}%
of your current disposable income.
,→
# Emergency Savings
- We recommend creating a rainy-day savings fund of **{{value}}** kr.
that you can access at any time if something goes wrong.
,→
# Housing
- **Recommendation**
- Adjust your plan so you only get **{{value}}** kr. in free value.
- This follows our recommendation that debt should constitute 50% of
your home's value at retirement.
,→
- **Home Equity**
- If you continue as planned, you will have **{{value}}** kr. in home
equity when you retire.
,→
# Negative Impact
- By following Dreamplan's recommendations:
- Your expenses may increase.
- You will gain a better asset distribution and greater financial
well-being.
,→
# Pension
Democratizing Financial Advice with AI: LLM Agents and RAG for Personalized Wealth Strategies
55
==PAGE:64==
- **Coverage Ratio**
- You currently have a coverage ratio of {{coverageRatio}}% of your
salary.
,→
- The additional payment will provide approximately **{{value}}** kr.
in retirement funds, enough for a payout of 75% of your current
salary when you retire.
,→
,→
- **Savings Comparison**
- Your current retirement contribution results in retirement savings
of **{{baselineSavings}}** kr. after tax.
,→
- This gives you a disposable income of {{baselineCoverageRatio}}%
during retirement, compared to your current disposable income.
,→
- With the recommended additional contribution, your expected
retirement savings will be **{{recommendedSavings}}** kr. after
tax, resulting in a disposable income of
{{recommendedCoverageRatio}}% during retirement.
,→
,→
,→
# Equity Recommendations
- **Lower Savings**
- By saving less in your home, you avoid tying up too much money in
property.
,→
- Change your mortgage so you save **{{amount}}** in your home until
retirement.
,→
- Save the difference elsewhere, such as a high-interest savings
account, long-term investments, or pension savings for higher
yield and possible tax benefits.
,→
,→
- **Identical Savings**
- Saving the optimal amount in property.
- Change your mortgage so you save **{{amount}}** in your home until
retirement.
,→
- Save the difference elsewhere for better returns and tax advantages.
- **Higher Savings**
- Saving enough in property.
- Change your mortgage so you save **{{amount}}** in your home until
retirement.
,→
- Save the difference elsewhere for higher yield and tax benefits.
# Debt Advice
- Pay off all debt with an APR over 8% immediately.
- Debt with an APR between 4% and 8%: pay off as soon as possible after
setting aside money in a buffer account.
,→
- Debt with an APR less than 4% and a buffer account: pay off in lower
instalments and invest the rest in pension savings or other
investments.
,→
,→
56
Democratizing Financial Advice with AI: LLM Agents and RAG for Personalized Wealth Strategies
==PAGE:65==
# Pension Recommendations
- **Primary**
- When you retire, you won't need as much money as you do today.
- We recommend a total pension payment of 75% of your salary for
retirement, so you can maintain your standard of living.
,→
- Many expenses decrease after retirement, such as transport,
insurance, union fees, and labor market contributions.
,→
- **Spouse**
- You will end up with a pension of approximately **{{amount}}**,
allowing you to receive 75% of your current salary when you
retire.
,→
,→
# Profit Ultimo Recommendation
- Keep what you need for the next 3 years in cash.
- Invest the rest in medium risk and long-term options.
- Our recommendation is based on medium risk and a long time horizon,
resulting in **{{amount}}** when you retire.
,→
- You can later adjust our calculation and recommendation to fit your own
risk profile.
,→
# Savings
- As a first step, create an emergency savings account with
**{{amount}}** that you can access if things go completely wrong.
,→
- Since you have enough money to cover your expected needs for the next 3
years, we recommend investing these funds in medium risk and
long-term options. This will accumulate to **{{value}}** kr. when you
retire.
,→
,→
,→
# Dreamplan Comparison
- **With Dreamplan**
- **Without Dreamplan**
A.1.2
Finance Agent Instructions
You are a specialist agent for answering finance-related questions using
a Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) system.
,→
You must call the RAG tool at all times.
The response should be in English but referring to Denmark and Danish
financial context.
,→
Your role is to:
1. Receive general financial questions from the user (e.g., about
savings, investment strategies, retirement planning, etc.).
,→
2. Use the integrated RAG tool to fetch relevant and trustworthy context
from the financial knowledge base.
,→
Democratizing Financial Advice with AI: LLM Agents and RAG for Personalized Wealth Strategies
57
==PAGE:66==
If the information cannot be confidently answered using the available
context, respond with: This information is not in my knowledge, sorry.
,→
You MUST ALWAYS INCLUDE any sources or URLs provided in your final
response.
,→
A.1.3
Calculation Agent Instructions
You are a specialized financial agent responsible for formatting and
submitting accurate financial data
,→
to the Calculation API.
**Your only job is to**:
1. Parse and structure the user's financial data from natural language
into the expected API format.
,→
2. Validate all required fields:
- Age of the primary user
- Salary of the primary user
3. Call the Calculation API with the structured data.
4. Return the API's response EXACTLY as received — without modifying,
summarizing, or interpreting it.
,→
**Rules**:
- If any required information (age or salary) is missing, ask the user
for clarification.
,→
- You may assume all other fields are optional and can be left empty if
not provided.
,→
- Do not explain the results or give financial advice — your role is
strictly data preparation and API calling.
,→
A.1.4
Triage Agent Instructions
You are a financial advisor AI for Dreamplan, responsible for routing
user queries to the appropriate specialist agent.
,→
- If the user provides financial and demographic data (e.g., age, income,
pensions, mortgage) you MUST hand-off to the Calculation Agent
,→
and **SHOW THE RESULTS** immediately when you receive them (e.g., "I'm 32
and I earn 43000 kr. per month.").
,→
- If the user asks about his financial data or calculation results, you
MUST hand-off to the Dreamplan Agent (e.g., "Why is my savings
negative in 2035?").
,→
,→
- If the user asks about general financial topics (e.g., savings,
investments, retirement planning) that have NOTHING to do with
,→
the user's data or calculation you MUST hand-off to the Finance Agent
(e.g., What kind of taxes do I have to pay in Denmark?).
,→
**Important**:
- DO NOT modify the output of the selected agent.
- If the agent output includes URLs or sources, ALWAYS include them in
your final message.
,→
- NEVER attempt to explain or interpret results yourself — that is the
Dreamplan Agent's role.
,→
58
Democratizing Financial Advice with AI: LLM Agents and RAG for Personalized Wealth Strategies
==PAGE:67==
A.1.5
Input Guardrail Instructions
You are an Input Guardrail AI for Dreamplan, responsible for ensuring the
user's input is valid and safe for processing.
,→
To be valid, the user's query should be aiming for one of the following
actions:
,→
1. Providing their financial and demographic data (e.g., age, salary,
savings) to request a recommendation.
,→
2. Asking for explanations about a previous financial forecast (e.g.,
"Why is my savings negative in 2035?").
,→
3. Asking general questions about financial or administration topics
(e.g., taxes, investments, working conditions, etc.).
,→
4. Following up with a request regarding a previous question or answer.
If NONE of these actions is detected, return an error message indicating
that the input is invalid or unsafe.
,→
A.1.6
Output Guardrail Instructions
You are an Output Guardrail AI for Dreamplan, responsible for ensuring
the output is valid and safe for the user.
,→
If the output from the agent does not provide a clear, actionable, and
trustworthy financial recommendation or explanation, return an error
message indicating that the output is invalid or unsafe.
,→
,→
Democratizing Financial Advice with AI: LLM Agents and RAG for Personalized Wealth Strategies
59
==PAGE:68==
B
Appendix B
B.1
Cyclomatic complexity
db.py
F 57:0 connect_db - A
F 78:0 disconnect_db - A
F 90:0 insert_reply - A
F 104:0 insert_feedback - A
F 127:0 create_tables - A
main.py
F 41:0 chat_endpoint - A
F 72:0 feedback_endpoint - A
F 13:0 lifespan - A
F 31:0 index - A
calculation/client.py
C 9:0 CalculationApiClient - A
M 15:4 CalculationApiClient.calculate_target_prices - A
M 10:4 CalculationApiClient.__init__ - A
calculation/templates.py
C 6:0 EntityBase - A
C 10:0 DateConvention - A
C 15:0 AccountType - A
C 62:0 AssetType - A
C 68:0 CalculationCountry - A
C 74:0 Owner - A
C 79:0 PaymentFrequency - A
C 84:0 PersonType - A
C 90:0 Scenario - A
C 95:0 HealthStatus - A
C 101:0 MessageCode - A
C 117:0 AbsoluteMonth - A
C 123:0 EntryBase - A
C 127:0 PercentageEntry - A
C 131:0 AmountEntry - A
C 135:0 Key - A
C 141:0 Account - A
C 147:0 Statement - A
C 151:0 StatementResponse - A
C 157:0 PersonInput - A
C 163:0 PaymentBase - A
C 170:0 Payment - A
C 174:0 Contribution - A
C 179:0 RiskCoverageContribution - A
C 183:0 PensionContribution - A
C 188:0 PayOutType - A
C 193:0 Annuity - A
C 197:0 LifeAnnuity - A
C 201:0 LumpSum - A
60
Democratizing Financial Advice with AI: LLM Agents and RAG for Personalized Wealth Strategies
==PAGE:69==
C 205:0 RiskCoverageInformation - A
C 209:0 DkRiskCoverageType - A
C 221:0 DkRiskCoverageInformation - A
C 225:0 UkRiskCoverageType - A
C 234:0 UkRiskCoverageInformation - A
C 238:0 DkTaxCode - A
C 248:0 PayoutReceiver - A
C 255:0 RiskCoveragePayOut - A
C 260:0 Coverage - A
C 265:0 RiskCoverage - A
C 273:0 PensionCoverage - A
C 283:0 Policy - A
C 288:0 Income - A
C 294:0 RedemptionDetails - A
C 299:0 LoanBase - A
C 304:0 AmortizedLoan - A
C 312:0 HouseBase - A
C 317:0 HouseWithLoans - A
C 322:0 LiquidAsset - A
C 330:0 CompanyBase - A
C 337:0 IncorporatedCompany - A
C 341:0 PersonalCompany - A
C 345:0 Dream - A
C 350:0 OutputConfiguration - A
C 357:0 BaseRecommendation - A
C 361:0 PensionRecommendationProduct - A
C 368:0 SinglePensionRecommendationProduct - A
C 375:0 PriceRule - A
C 381:0 PriceStep - A
C 389:0 PriceRange - A
C 398:0 PriceStepRule - A
C 406:0 RiskCoverageWithProductInformation - A
C 413:0 SpecifiedPolicyRecommendationProduct - A
C 429:0 PensionCoverageRatioGoalSeek - A
C 436:0 AverageDisposableIncomeGoalSeek - A
C 443:0 SimpleSpecifiedPension - A
C 450:0 SpecifiedNetVoluntaryPayment - A
C 457:0 EstablishmentDetails - A
C 469:0 LoanToValueRatioGoalSeek - A
C 476:0 RestrictedLoanToValueRatioGoalSeek - A
C 483:0 SpecifiedAmortizationLoan - A
C 493:0 CashSavingsWithSpecifiedContribution - A
C 499:0 CashToSalaryRatio - A
C 503:0 DefinedCashSavings - A
C 508:0 NoCompanyRecommendation - A
C 512:0 SpecifiedDividends - A
C 516:0 TopTaxOptimizedDividends - A
C 523:0 RecommendationSettings - A
C 557:0 Message - A
C 564:0 PensionPayOutOverview - A
Democratizing Financial Advice with AI: LLM Agents and RAG for Personalized Wealth Strategies
61
==PAGE:70==
C 572:0 PensionPerson - A
C 581:0 PensionPersonDelta - A
C 588:0 PensionHouseholdOutput - A
C 598:0 PensionHouseholdDelta - A
C 607:0 PensionBaselineAndRecommendedOutput - A
C 613:0 CompanyOutput - A
C 617:0 CompanyBaselineAndRecommendedOutput - A
C 623:0 SavingsOutput - A
C 628:0 SavingsBaselineAndRecommendedOutput - A
C 633:0 EmergencySavingsOutput - A
C 641:0 EmergencySavingsBaselineAndRecommendedOutput - A
C 647:0 HousingHeating - A
C 655:0 RefinancingDetails - A
C 665:0 HousingOutput - A
C 672:0 HousingOutputAggregate - A
C 682:0 HousingOutputAggregateRecommendation - A
C 689:0 HousingBaselineAndRecommendedOutput - A
C 699:0 OverallResultOutput - A
C 705:0 OverallResultBaselineAndRecommendedOutput - A
C 714:0 CalculateRequest - A
C 730:0 CalculateResponse - A
calculation/factories.py
F 89:0 build_houses - A
F 111:0 build_liquid_assets - A
F 16:0 build_incomes - A
F 41:0 build_policies - A
F 12:0 build_person - A
experiment/evaluations.py
F 171:0 run_dense_rag_on_dataset - A
F 205:0 run_dense_reranker_rag_on_dataset - A
F 240:0 run_reranker_rag_on_dataset - A
F 275:0 run_baseline_rag_on_dataset - A
F 32:0 evaluate_dispatching - A
F 309:0 run_llm_only_on_dataset - A
F 73:0 evaluate_reranker_rag - A
F 97:0 evaluate_baseline_rag - A
F 121:0 evaluate_dense_rag - A
F 145:0 evaluate_dense_reranker_rag - A
F 349:0 evaluate_llm_only - A
scraping/scraper.py
F 46:0 html_to_text - D
F 94:0 crawl - B
F 28:0 extract_links - B
F 15:0 save_html - A
F 131:0 main - A
tests/test_db.py
F 15:0 test_reply_log - A
F 44:0 test_feedback_log - A
F 6:0 test_db - A
tests/test_client.py
62
Democratizing Financial Advice with AI: LLM Agents and RAG for Personalized Wealth Strategies
==PAGE:71==
F 5:0 test_session - B
F 16:0 test_existing_session - A
F 35:0 test_chat_session - A
F 28:0 test_chat_unset_session - A
tests/test_calculation.py
F 1:0 test_calculate_target_prices_success - B
tests/test_chat.py
F 6:0 test_chat - A
tests/test_rag.py
F 1:0 test_baseline_rag - B
F 29:0 test_reranker_rag - B
F 58:0 test_dense_rag - B
F 86:0 test_dense_reranker_rag - B
tests/conftest.py
F 19:0 client - A
F 28:0 triage - A
F 34:0 baseline_rag_pipeline - A
F 41:0 reranker_rag_pipeline - A
F 48:0 dense_rag_pipeline - A
F 55:0 dense_reranker_rag_pipeline - A
F 62:0 api - A
F 68:0 payload - A
components/chat.py
F 13:0 chat - A
F 7:0 format_messages - A
components/rag.py
M 23:4 RAG._load_documents - A
C 17:0 RAG - A
M 40:4 RAG._create_documents - A
M 46:4 RAG._split_documents - A
C 104:0 BaselineRAG - A
C 117:0 RerankerRAG - A
C 149:0 DenseRAG - A
M 175:4 DenseRAG._split_documents - A
C 208:0 DenseRerankerRAG - A
M 235:4 DenseRerankerRAG._split_documents - A
M 18:4 RAG.__init__ - A
M 33:4 RAG._init_splitter - A
M 52:4 RAG._init_document_store - A
M 57:4 RAG._init_retriever - A
M 60:4 RAG._init_generator - A
M 67:4 RAG._init_prompt_builder - A
M 91:4 RAG._build_pipeline - A
M 100:4 RAG.get_pipeline - A
M 105:4 BaselineRAG.__init__ - A
M 118:4 RerankerRAG.__init__ - A
M 130:4 RerankerRAG._init_ranker - A
M 137:4 RerankerRAG._build_pipeline - A
M 150:4 DenseRAG.__init__ - A
M 163:4 DenseRAG._init_text_embedder - A
Democratizing Financial Advice with AI: LLM Agents and RAG for Personalized Wealth Strategies
63
==PAGE:72==
M 168:4 DenseRAG._init_splitter - A
M 181:4 DenseRAG._embed_documents - A
M 188:4 DenseRAG._init_document_store - A
M 193:4 DenseRAG._init_retriever - A
M 196:4 DenseRAG._build_pipeline - A
M 209:4 DenseRerankerRAG.__init__ - A
M 223:4 DenseRerankerRAG._init_text_embedder - A
M 228:4 DenseRerankerRAG._init_splitter - A
M 241:4 DenseRerankerRAG._embed_documents - A
M 248:4 DenseRerankerRAG._init_document_store - A
M 253:4 DenseRerankerRAG._init_retriever - A
M 256:4 DenseRerankerRAG._init_ranker - A
M 263:4 DenseRerankerRAG._build_pipeline - A
components/tools.py
F 51:0 _build_policies - A
F 73:0 call_calculation_api - A
F 40:0 _build_spouse - A
F 46:0 _build_incomes - A
F 64:0 _build_houses - A
F 68:0 _build_liquid_assets - A
F 93:0 call_rag - A
C 15:0 SavingsData - A
C 21:0 HouseData - A
C 27:0 HouseholdData - A
components/dispatching.py
F 54:0 call_input_guardrail - A
F 65:0 call_output_guardrail - A
C 30:0 ValidInput - A
C 34:0 ValidOutput - A
> uvr radon cc . -s
db.py
F 57:0 connect_db - A (5)
F 78:0 disconnect_db - A (3)
F 90:0 insert_reply - A (1)
F 104:0 insert_feedback - A (1)
F 127:0 create_tables - A (1)
main.py
F 41:0 chat_endpoint - A (3)
F 72:0 feedback_endpoint - A (3)
F 13:0 lifespan - A (2)
F 31:0 index - A (2)
calculation/client.py
C 9:0 CalculationApiClient - A (3)
M 15:4 CalculationApiClient.calculate_target_prices - A (3)
M 10:4 CalculationApiClient.__init__ - A (1)
calculation/templates.py
C 6:0 EntityBase - A (1)
C 10:0 DateConvention - A (1)
C 15:0 AccountType - A (1)
C 62:0 AssetType - A (1)
64
Democratizing Financial Advice with AI: LLM Agents and RAG for Personalized Wealth Strategies
==PAGE:73==
C 68:0 CalculationCountry - A (1)
C 74:0 Owner - A (1)
C 79:0 PaymentFrequency - A (1)
C 84:0 PersonType - A (1)
C 90:0 Scenario - A (1)
C 95:0 HealthStatus - A (1)
C 101:0 MessageCode - A (1)
C 117:0 AbsoluteMonth - A (1)
C 123:0 EntryBase - A (1)
C 127:0 PercentageEntry - A (1)
C 131:0 AmountEntry - A (1)
C 135:0 Key - A (1)
C 141:0 Account - A (1)
C 147:0 Statement - A (1)
C 151:0 StatementResponse - A (1)
C 157:0 PersonInput - A (1)
C 163:0 PaymentBase - A (1)
C 170:0 Payment - A (1)
C 174:0 Contribution - A (1)
C 179:0 RiskCoverageContribution - A (1)
C 183:0 PensionContribution - A (1)
C 188:0 PayOutType - A (1)
C 193:0 Annuity - A (1)
C 197:0 LifeAnnuity - A (1)
C 201:0 LumpSum - A (1)
C 205:0 RiskCoverageInformation - A (1)
C 209:0 DkRiskCoverageType - A (1)
C 221:0 DkRiskCoverageInformation - A (1)
C 225:0 UkRiskCoverageType - A (1)
C 234:0 UkRiskCoverageInformation - A (1)
C 238:0 DkTaxCode - A (1)
C 248:0 PayoutReceiver - A (1)
C 255:0 RiskCoveragePayOut - A (1)
C 260:0 Coverage - A (1)
C 265:0 RiskCoverage - A (1)
C 273:0 PensionCoverage - A (1)
C 283:0 Policy - A (1)
C 288:0 Income - A (1)
C 294:0 RedemptionDetails - A (1)
C 299:0 LoanBase - A (1)
C 304:0 AmortizedLoan - A (1)
C 312:0 HouseBase - A (1)
C 317:0 HouseWithLoans - A (1)
C 322:0 LiquidAsset - A (1)
C 330:0 CompanyBase - A (1)
C 337:0 IncorporatedCompany - A (1)
C 341:0 PersonalCompany - A (1)
C 345:0 Dream - A (1)
C 350:0 OutputConfiguration - A (1)
C 357:0 BaseRecommendation - A (1)
Democratizing Financial Advice with AI: LLM Agents and RAG for Personalized Wealth Strategies
65
==PAGE:74==
C 361:0 PensionRecommendationProduct - A (1)
C 368:0 SinglePensionRecommendationProduct - A (1)
C 375:0 PriceRule - A (1)
C 381:0 PriceStep - A (1)
C 389:0 PriceRange - A (1)
C 398:0 PriceStepRule - A (1)
C 406:0 RiskCoverageWithProductInformation - A (1)
C 413:0 SpecifiedPolicyRecommendationProduct - A (1)
C 429:0 PensionCoverageRatioGoalSeek - A (1)
C 436:0 AverageDisposableIncomeGoalSeek - A (1)
C 443:0 SimpleSpecifiedPension - A (1)
C 450:0 SpecifiedNetVoluntaryPayment - A (1)
C 457:0 EstablishmentDetails - A (1)
C 469:0 LoanToValueRatioGoalSeek - A (1)
C 476:0 RestrictedLoanToValueRatioGoalSeek - A (1)
C 483:0 SpecifiedAmortizationLoan - A (1)
C 493:0 CashSavingsWithSpecifiedContribution - A (1)
C 499:0 CashToSalaryRatio - A (1)
C 503:0 DefinedCashSavings - A (1)
C 508:0 NoCompanyRecommendation - A (1)
C 512:0 SpecifiedDividends - A (1)
C 516:0 TopTaxOptimizedDividends - A (1)
C 523:0 RecommendationSettings - A (1)
C 557:0 Message - A (1)
C 564:0 PensionPayOutOverview - A (1)
C 572:0 PensionPerson - A (1)
C 581:0 PensionPersonDelta - A (1)
C 588:0 PensionHouseholdOutput - A (1)
C 598:0 PensionHouseholdDelta - A (1)
C 607:0 PensionBaselineAndRecommendedOutput - A (1)
C 613:0 CompanyOutput - A (1)
C 617:0 CompanyBaselineAndRecommendedOutput - A (1)
C 623:0 SavingsOutput - A (1)
C 628:0 SavingsBaselineAndRecommendedOutput - A (1)
C 633:0 EmergencySavingsOutput - A (1)
C 641:0 EmergencySavingsBaselineAndRecommendedOutput - A (1)
C 647:0 HousingHeating - A (1)
C 655:0 RefinancingDetails - A (1)
C 665:0 HousingOutput - A (1)
C 672:0 HousingOutputAggregate - A (1)
C 682:0 HousingOutputAggregateRecommendation - A (1)
C 689:0 HousingBaselineAndRecommendedOutput - A (1)
C 699:0 OverallResultOutput - A (1)
C 705:0 OverallResultBaselineAndRecommendedOutput - A (1)
C 714:0 CalculateRequest - A (1)
C 730:0 CalculateResponse - A (1)
calculation/factories.py
F 89:0 build_houses - A (3)
F 111:0 build_liquid_assets - A (3)
F 16:0 build_incomes - A (2)
66
Democratizing Financial Advice with AI: LLM Agents and RAG for Personalized Wealth Strategies
==PAGE:75==
F 41:0 build_policies - A (2)
F 12:0 build_person - A (1)
experiment/evaluations.py
F 171:0 run_dense_rag_on_dataset - A (5)
F 205:0 run_dense_reranker_rag_on_dataset - A (5)
F 240:0 run_reranker_rag_on_dataset - A (5)
F 275:0 run_baseline_rag_on_dataset - A (5)
F 32:0 evaluate_dispatching - A (4)
F 309:0 run_llm_only_on_dataset - A (4)
F 73:0 evaluate_reranker_rag - A (1)
F 97:0 evaluate_baseline_rag - A (1)
F 121:0 evaluate_dense_rag - A (1)
F 145:0 evaluate_dense_reranker_rag - A (1)
F 349:0 evaluate_llm_only - A (1)
scraping/scraper.py
F 46:0 html_to_text - D (22)
F 94:0 crawl - B (8)
F 28:0 extract_links - B (6)
F 15:0 save_html - A (2)
F 131:0 main - A (2)
tests/test_db.py
F 15:0 test_reply_log - A (4)
F 44:0 test_feedback_log - A (4)
F 6:0 test_db - A (2)
tests/test_client.py
F 5:0 test_session - B (6)
F 16:0 test_existing_session - A (4)
F 35:0 test_chat_session - A (4)
F 28:0 test_chat_unset_session - A (3)
tests/test_calculation.py
F 1:0 test_calculate_target_prices_success - B (9)
tests/test_chat.py
F 6:0 test_chat - A (3)
tests/test_rag.py
F 1:0 test_baseline_rag - B (10)
F 29:0 test_reranker_rag - B (10)
F 58:0 test_dense_rag - B (10)
F 86:0 test_dense_reranker_rag - B (10)
tests/conftest.py
F 19:0 client - A (1)
F 28:0 triage - A (1)
F 34:0 baseline_rag_pipeline - A (1)
F 41:0 reranker_rag_pipeline - A (1)
F 48:0 dense_rag_pipeline - A (1)
F 55:0 dense_reranker_rag_pipeline - A (1)
F 62:0 api - A (1)
F 68:0 payload - A (1)
components/chat.py
F 13:0 chat - A (5)
F 7:0 format_messages - A (2)
Democratizing Financial Advice with AI: LLM Agents and RAG for Personalized Wealth Strategies
67
==PAGE:76==
components/rag.py
M 23:4 RAG._load_documents - A (3)
C 17:0 RAG - A (2)
M 40:4 RAG._create_documents - A (2)
M 46:4 RAG._split_documents - A (2)
C 104:0 BaselineRAG - A (2)
C 117:0 RerankerRAG - A (2)
C 149:0 DenseRAG - A (2)
M 175:4 DenseRAG._split_documents - A (2)
C 208:0 DenseRerankerRAG - A (2)
M 235:4 DenseRerankerRAG._split_documents - A (2)
M 18:4 RAG.__init__ - A (1)
M 33:4 RAG._init_splitter - A (1)
M 52:4 RAG._init_document_store - A (1)
M 57:4 RAG._init_retriever - A (1)
M 60:4 RAG._init_generator - A (1)
M 67:4 RAG._init_prompt_builder - A (1)
M 91:4 RAG._build_pipeline - A (1)
M 100:4 RAG.get_pipeline - A (1)
M 105:4 BaselineRAG.__init__ - A (1)
M 118:4 RerankerRAG.__init__ - A (1)
M 130:4 RerankerRAG._init_ranker - A (1)
M 137:4 RerankerRAG._build_pipeline - A (1)
M 150:4 DenseRAG.__init__ - A (1)
M 163:4 DenseRAG._init_text_embedder - A (1)
M 168:4 DenseRAG._init_splitter - A (1)
M 181:4 DenseRAG._embed_documents - A (1)
M 188:4 DenseRAG._init_document_store - A (1)
M 193:4 DenseRAG._init_retriever - A (1)
M 196:4 DenseRAG._build_pipeline - A (1)
M 209:4 DenseRerankerRAG.__init__ - A (1)
M 223:4 DenseRerankerRAG._init_text_embedder - A (1)
M 228:4 DenseRerankerRAG._init_splitter - A (1)
M 241:4 DenseRerankerRAG._embed_documents - A (1)
M 248:4 DenseRerankerRAG._init_document_store - A (1)
M 253:4 DenseRerankerRAG._init_retriever - A (1)
M 256:4 DenseRerankerRAG._init_ranker - A (1)
M 263:4 DenseRerankerRAG._build_pipeline - A (1)
components/tools.py
F 51:0 _build_policies - A (4)
F 73:0 call_calculation_api - A (4)
F 40:0 _build_spouse - A (2)
F 46:0 _build_incomes - A (2)
F 64:0 _build_houses - A (2)
F 68:0 _build_liquid_assets - A (2)
F 93:0 call_rag - A (1)
C 15:0 SavingsData - A (1)
C 21:0 HouseData - A (1)
C 27:0 HouseholdData - A (1)
components/dispatching.py
68
Democratizing Financial Advice with AI: LLM Agents and RAG for Personalized Wealth Strategies
==PAGE:77==
F 54:0 call_input_guardrail - A (1)
F 65:0 call_output_guardrail - A (1)
C 30:0 ValidInput - A (1)
C 34:0 ValidOutput - A (1)
Listing B.1: Radon’s cyclomatic complexity analysis output.
Democratizing Financial Advice with AI: LLM Agents and RAG for Personalized Wealth Strategies
69
==PAGE:78==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
