==PAGE:1==
Exploring the development of Focal Plane
Arrays for the Atacama Large Millimeter
Array
Ulrika Woulhøj Jakobsen
Master Thesis
DTU Space
Department of Space Research and Space Technology
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Exploring the development of Focal Plane Arrays for the Atacama Large Mil-
limeter Array
Master Thesis
3rd September, 2025
By
Ulrika Woulhøj Jakobsen
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title,
etc.
Cover photo:
Alex Pérez
Published by:
DTU, Department of Space Research and Space Technology, Elektrovej,
Building 327, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.space.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Division for Astrophysics and Atmo-
spheric Physic, Department of Space Research and Technology, at the Technical University
of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfillment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering,
MSc Eng.
Ulrika Woulhøj Jakobsen - s194124
Signature
Date
ii
Exploring the development of Focal Plane Arrays for the Atacama Large Millimeter Array
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The Atacama Large Millimeter Array, or ALMA, is the most powerful interferometer
working in the far-infrared to millimeter wavelengths. However, a major factor hindering
the full potential of ALMA is the limited field of view (FoV). This thesis explores the
development of a focal plane array (FPA) for ALMA in terms of the expected gains in
extragalactic surveys. Firstly, a sky image is created with a realistic number of sources
with realistic flux densities, based on previously observed surveys.
This sky image is
then used to simulate an ALMA observation, to properly estimate the noise level of a
real observation.
The simulated sensitivity is combined with simulated and observed
differential number counts, to estimate the number of sources which would be detected in
each ALMA band for varying sizes of FPA and varying observation times. For both an
integration time of 10 hours and 30 minutes, and both a 5 by 5 and 10 by 10 FPA, band
6 shows the highest number of sources. Then, to investigate at which redshift the highest
number of sources would be found, observed infrared luminosity functions from 0 < z < 7.7
are used to create realistic catalogues of galaxies with corresponding luminosities and
redshifts for ALMA bands 4 to 9. Using these catalogues, differential number counts, and
total number of expected galaxies, are created for each band. Again, there is the highest
number of sources in band 6, for both an integration time of 30 minutes and 10 hours. From
the simulation, there is expected to be the highest number of galaxies between redshifts
1.8 to 3.5. Finally, the number counts derived from luminosity functions are compared
with number counts from the literature, showing a good agreement in general. This thesis
shows the unparalleled possibilities the development of an FPA would unlock for ALMA,
making it the perfect instrument for pushing scientific frontiers over the next decades.
Exploring the development of Focal Plane Arrays for the Atacama Large Millimeter Array
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I would like to extend my thanks to my supervisor, Georgios Magdis, for giving me the
opportunity to work on a meaningful project and his guidance throughout.
A special
thanks also goes out to my unoﬀicial co-supervisor, Minju Lee, whose insight has been
invaluable.
Without the unwavering support and encouragement from my partner, Nikolaj, this project
would not have been possible. I appreciate every day that you and Teddy are by my side.
Lastly, I would like to thank my family who have always believed in me and my capabilities.
iv
Exploring the development of Focal Plane Arrays for the Atacama Large Millimeter Array
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
ALMA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Interferometry
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Focal plane arrays
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.4
Number count surveys . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.5
Luminosity function
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.6
Spectral energy distribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.7
CASA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
1.8
ALMA observing tool
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
1.9
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2
Focal Plane Array for ALMA
11
3
ALMA FPA as a survey instrument
14
4
Differential number counts from mock observations
17
4.1
Extraction of galaxies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5
Number counts prediction
21
6
Differential number counts from luminosity functions
24
6.1
Number counts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
6.2
Distribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
7
Discussion
32
8
Summary
35
Bibliography
36
A Appendix
39
A.1 Number counts as a function of area and RMS
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
A.2 Luminosity function derived differential number counts . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
A.3 Luminosity function derived differential number count fits and histograms
per redshift bin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
Exploring the development of Focal Plane Arrays for the Atacama Large Millimeter Array
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Exploring the development of Focal Plane Arrays for the Atacama Large Millimeter Array
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
With the ever evolving telescope technology one would think that we are close to solving
many of the questions that the Universe poses, however, with every question answered it
seems that two more are being raised. These are questions related to topics such as the
formation and evolution of galaxies and the rising chemical complexity of the Universe,
which we do not currently have the right instruments to answer as current telescopes are
either lacking in angular resolution or are unsuitable for large scale surveying of the sky.
Especially for radio astronomy, this is a challenge as finer details are more diﬀicult to
resolve compared to shorter wavelengths. For this, larger mirrors than what is physically
practical or possible is required, and as a result interferometry has been used to create
some of the most powerful telescopes [1]. One drawback of these interferometers is the
limited field of view making them unsuitable as survey instruments. If the field of view
could be extended however, the interferometers angular resolution and spectral resolution
capabilities could be combined with the mapping speed of single dish telescopes.
1.1
ALMA
The Chajnantor Plateau in the Atacama Desert of Chile is where you will find the most
powerful radio telescope currently on Earth. This is the Atacama Large Milimeter/sub-
milimeter Array (ALMA), which was constructed as a collaboration between the European
Southern Observatory (ESO), the National Radio Astronomy Observatory (NRAO), the
National Astronomical Observatory of Japan (NAOJ) and the Republic of Chile. Unlike
most telescopes ALMA is an interferometer, consisting of several antenna dishes which
work together to provide ALMA with a much higher resolution than a single dish telescope
could achieve. ALMA is designed to look at the millimeter and submillimeter wavelengths
that is being emitted by the most distant and earliest galaxies in the Universe.
ALMA consists of 66 antennas in total with 50 antennas with a diameter of 12 meters in
the main array. Apart from the main array ALMA has an additional compact array, four
of these antennas have a diameter of 12 meters and twelve of them a diameter of 7 meters.
This extra compact array is able to compensate for the large scale emission lost by the
main array. The telescope combines the signals from all of these antennas acting as one
giant telescope with a size equal to that of the total array. Each of these antennas are
designed to be moved around in order to satisfy the needs of a given observation without
risking any damage to the antennas themselves.
They can be positioned at distances
ranging from 150 meters to 16 kilometers from each other, with these distances directly
affecting the resolution of the resulting observations. This distance between an antenna
pair is called a baseline.
Since ALMA is designed for millimeter and submillimeter wavelengths its reflectors do not
need to be mirrors, as is required for the visible spectrum. Instead the ALMA reflectors
are metallic panels where any imperfections in the surface must not be greater than the
received wavelengths, as this can decrease the accuracy of the data.
A total of ten receiver bands are planned for ALMA, with nine of these currently in
operation. This will make it possible to cover a wide range of wavelengths, from 0.32
mm all the way up to 8.6 mm. Each receiver band covers a smaller interval in this range
which are detailed in Figure 1.1. From this figure the large variance in the atmospheric
transmission can be seen as well, with a high transmission fraction meaning that less
Exploring the development of Focal Plane Arrays for the Atacama Large Millimeter Array
1
==PAGE:10==
light is absorbed by the water in the atmosphere. As can be seen the fraction is much
lower for the higher frequencies, making observations in these bands more diﬀicult and
very dependent on the weather conditions. Each of these receiver bands were created with
different purposes in mind, from studying global wind patterns on Mars to dust in different
interstellar environments [2].
Figure 1.1: Graph shows the bandwidth of all nine current ALMA bands, and the yet to
be implemented band 2. The x-axis shows which frequency these bands are found at, while
the y-axis shows their atmospheric transmission. Reproduced from ALMA OST Help [2].
1.1.1
ALMA pointings
For a single interferometric pointing the field of view (FoV) of that pointing is decided by
the primary beam of the antenna and generally approximated as the wavelength divided
by the diameter of the antenna. Depending on the exact configuration of the antenna
a constant is added to this equation to better estimate the FoV. The FoV of an ALMA
pointing is denoted by the full width half maximum (FWHM) of the primary beam. For
a circular and uniformly illuminated aperture the FWHM will be 1.02λ/D. Because of
the abrupt decrease of the antenna illumination pattern high side lobes will be present.
In the case of radio and millimeter receivers they usually illuminate their antennas with a
nearly Gaussian illumination pattern. As such, ALMA’s feedhorns were also designed to
deliver a Gaussian beam with low side lobes. Decreasing the side lobes however, can affect
the resolution and sensitivity and therefore there is always a trade-off between these. For
ALMA, the end result of these considerations is a FWHM of 1.13λ/D for the 12-meter
ALMA antennas, corresponding to a FWHM of 58” at 100 GHz with this value inversely
varying with frequency.
In the case that a map size which exceeds the FWHM is required, additional adjacent
pointings are necessary to recover the sky emission. Applying these additional pointings
is referred to as mosaicing. As with a single pointing, the mosaic has a ”mosaic primary
beam response pattern” which consists of a combination of all the individual primary
beams of the different pointings. Near the center the sensitivity will be greater than that
for a single pointing, and decrease away from the center. For ALMA the default mosaicing
2
Exploring the development of Focal Plane Arrays for the Atacama Large Millimeter Array
==PAGE:11==
pointing pattern is a fully sampled hexagonal grid with equilateral triangles with verticies
distanced by θhex = λ/(D ·
√
3) = 0.511 · FWHM. This spacing enables the mosaicing to
sample the emission at the Nyquist spatial frequency. Along a row the hexagonal mosaic
will have a spacing of θhex, while between the rows it will be
√
3
2 θhex. The number of
pointings required for the mosaic of an area LX x LY can be estimated by:
NX =
LX
0.511 · FWHM + 1
(1.1)
NY =
2 · LY
0.511 · FWHM ·
√
3 + 1
(1.2)
Np = (2 · NX −1)NY
2
(1.3)
NX refers to the amount of horizontal pointings, while NY is the vertical amount of
pointings. Np is the total amount needed to cover the entire area. In the case of an odd
number of rows the amount of pointings calculated with the above might diviate from the
OT [3].
1.2
Interferometry
When observing with a telescope one of the most important factors to keep in mind is
the diffraction.
Diffraction is the spreading of waves as they pass by an object or go
through an aperture. This diffraction theory is applicable to radio telescopes as well, as
they coherently sum electric fields over an aperture, giving an angular resolution following
Equation 1.4 [4].
θarcsec ≈2λcm/Dkm
(1.4)
As can be seen in Equation 1.4, the angular resolution of a given telescope is dependent
on two main parameters: the diameter of the aperture and the observed wavelength [5].
As such, if one was to observe light with a wavelength of 8 mm and required an angular
resolution of 1 arcsec, an aperture with a diameter of 1.6 km would be needed. This is
much larger than what is currently possible to build and for this reason, traditional sub-
millimeter/millimeter single dish telescopes are very limited in terms of angular resolution.
Instead it is possible to ”synthesize” an aperture of that size by combining several smaller
apertures, with a method known as ”aperture synthesis” [4].
In the case of radio astronomy, each individual antenna acts as an aperture. By linking
these antennas together they function as one single large dish, with the angular resolution
being determined by the largest separation between individual antennas instead of the
diameter of the individual dishes. This separation is known as the baseline [5].
Depending on their placement in the array, the signals arrive at each of these antennas
at slightly different times, creating interference patterns. The signals are then combined
with correlators and the time difference is both measured and corrected for.
For this
process to work each antenna needs to be equipped with a very accurate clock, otherwise
the combined signal cannot be produced.
With the interference pattern measured the Fourier transform makes it possible to trans-
late the pattern into radio brightness on the sky:
Exploring the development of Focal Plane Arrays for the Atacama Large Millimeter Array
3
==PAGE:12==
V (u, v)
FT
⇀
↽T(x, y)
(1.5)
Here, the V (u, v) space is in the Fourier space and is measured at the telescope.
By
using the Fourier transform it is translated to the image space where it becomes the
sky brightness distribution, T(x, y), which is exactly what we wish to know. The true
sky brightness is convolved with the point spread function, PSF, of the interferometer
resulting in a ”dirty” image, TD(x, y). This ”dirty” image can then be cleaned.
Figure 1.2: Different steps in the process of turning the (u,v) plane into source brightness.
Reproduced from Introduction to Radio Interferometry [6].
When sampling the (u,v) plane, one antenna pair, with a baseline between them, create
two points on the (u,v) plane. These antenna pairs can then be moved in a myriad of
configurations, both compact and extended variations. A compact configuration is only
sensitive to low spacial frequencies (i.e., large scales, see middle image in Figure 1.3),
effectively applying a low-pass filter to the image, making it ”blurry” with no details
on small scales. The extended configurations on the other hand is only sensitive to high
spacial frequencies (i.e., small scales, see left image in Figure 1.3), resulting in sharp details
but missing the big picture, effectively applying a high-pass filter to the image. To acquire
the best possible coverage of the (u,v) plane, compact and extended configurations are
combined. This sampling of the (u,v) plane is how ”aperture synthesis” is performed [6],
as shown in the right image of Figure 1.3.
1.2.1
FoV, Angular resolution and maximum recoverable scale
By combining both the compact and extended configurations, the true sky brightness
distribution is recovered more accurately. The recovered sky brightness distribution can
be used to create an image.
4
Exploring the development of Focal Plane Arrays for the Atacama Large Millimeter Array
==PAGE:13==
Figure 1.3: Figure shows the data obtained from an extended antenna configuration and
a compact antenna configuration. It is also illustrated how a combination of extended and
compact configurations can give a more ”whole” image. Reproduced from Introduction to
Radio Interferometry [6].
There are several parameters, all determined by the design of the telescope, that affects
this image. The field of view is what determines the size of the image and the general
formula is defined as:
FoV =
λ
Dantenna
(1.6)
Here, λ is the observed wavelength and Dantenna is the diameter of the individual antenna
dish. The angular resolution is the smallest size on the sky, which the telescope can resolve.
For an interferometric array it is given by:
θres = k · λ
Lmax
≈0.574 λ
L80
(1.7)
The resolution here is then the FWHM of the synthesized beam, λ is again the observed
wavelength in meters and Lmax is the longest baseline given in meters.
The factor k
is a factor which depends on the weighting function of the (u,v) plane and is normally
between 0.7 and 1.2. One caveat is that the longest baseline is rarely representative of
the largest distance due to the non-uniform (u,v) coverage. Instead, ALMA uses the 80th
percentile projected baseline (u,v) distance. The final equation was approximated through
simulations.
On the other hand, the smallest baseline in the array determines the maximum recoverable
scale, which is the largest spatial scale that the telescope is sensitive to.
θMRS =
λ
Lmin
≈0.983 λ
L5
(1.8)
Again, in this case Lmin is not representative of the shortest baseline and instead the 5th
percentile shortest baseline is used. Once again, the final equation for this was approxi-
mated trough simulations [3].
Due to the physical size of the antenna dishes there is a limit to how close they can be
placed together. This means that the shortest baseline can never be zero, creating the
”missing flux” problem. This means that the total flux of an object cannot be measured
Exploring the development of Focal Plane Arrays for the Atacama Large Millimeter Array
5
==PAGE:14==
with an interferometer and instead a single dish telescope would be needed to measure
that value [7].
1.3
Focal plane arrays
The desire for a wider field of view for radio telescopes is not a novel one and has pre-
viously been implemented for telescopes operating in other wavelength regimes. Indeed,
the Westerbork Synthesis Radio Telescope (WSRT) wanted to be able to perform deep
wide-field surveys in order to investigate topics such as the role of gas in galaxy evolution
and the properties of the transient sky. The WSRT has an operating frequency range from
0.12 to 8.6 GHz. Based on previous successes for single-dish telescopes the implementation
of a focal plane array was proposed. A focal plane array is an array of receivers in the
focal plane of a telescope, which can sample several beams on the sky simultaneously. For
the WSRT, the idea was to use phased-array technology in the focal plane of the telescope
to form several beams on the sky and with that Apertif, APERture Tile In Focus, was
introduced. Apertif effectively increased the collecting area, and thereby mapping speed,
of WSRT by a factor of ∼8.5, by observing 40 overlapping beams on the sky. Typically,
the increase in eﬀiciency will be exectly the same as the number of feeds, however, in the
case of Apertif, it was designed to make a uniform coverage for each pointing, limiting the
effective gain [8]. For higher frequency applications, a feed horn array is likely needed,
such as the SCUBA-2 bolometer camera on the James Clerk Maxwell Telescope [9]. A feed
horn array uses a grid of feed horns to sample several beams on the sky simultaneously.
1.3.1
Feedhorns
Each ALMA antenna is implemented with their own receiver, and one part of this is the
feedhorn. The horn antenna design is specifically made for higher frequency ranges and,
as the name implies, has a horn shaped opening and ends in a waveguide. They can be
used both to feed from a reflector antenna or as a separate antenna. When used to feed
from a reflector antenna they are referred to as a feedhorn. Feedhorns are commonly used
for millimeter and microwave purposes due to several factors such as their relatively high
gain and being fairly easy to manufacture.
Figure 1.4: Illustration showing how the radiated emission travels trough the different
parts of a feedhorn. Reproduced from Radartutorial [10].
.
The waveguide is combined with a flared horn shape that allows the impedance of the
waveguide to be matched with the impedance of free space, ensuring that as much as
6
Exploring the development of Focal Plane Arrays for the Atacama Large Millimeter Array
==PAGE:15==
possible of the wave is collected [10].
The feedhorns don’t only collect light directly from the front, but from the sides too.
As such, not only is a main lobe obtained but side lobes and back lobes as well. It is
generally wished to keep the side lobes to a minimum, as these can negativly impact the
data collected. The design of the feedhorn directly impacts the shape of the lobes, where
a gradual and smooth horn profile can help reduce the side lobe level. The size and overall
shape of the feedhorn aperture is important too, with a large aperture generally creating
a narrow main lobe and lower side lobes.
Figure 1.5: Example of a feedhorn antenna pattern, highlighting the main lobe, side lobes,
and null lobes. Reproduced from 5G Store [11].
1.4
Number count surveys
A number count survey is essentially the process of extracting number counts from a sky
survey. These counts are presented in the relative differential form dN/dS, representing
the number of sources, N, per unit area with a flux density of S within dS. The most
common method of converting a sky survey into number counts is by directly counting
the sources, correcting for their purity and completeness and then obtaining the number
density per survey area.
Usually, the number counts are characterized by a Schechter function:
ϕ(Sν) = ϕ0
(Sν
S0
)α
exp
(
−Sν
S0
)
(1.9)
Here, ϕ0 is the normalization, S0 is the characteristic flux density and α is the faint-end
slope power-law index.
Going from a sky survey to source count is not an easy task and there are several factors
to keep in mind. Radio and millimeter surveys measure the differential surface brightness
above a background and here, sources stand out due to an apparent high differential
surface brightness, ∆Tb. Since the surveys are only done down to a certain ∆Tb limit,
some selection effects are introduced as a consequence. Overlapping sources also pose a
Exploring the development of Focal Plane Arrays for the Atacama Large Millimeter Array
7
==PAGE:16==
problem, as one source can obscure others or sources can be too close together resulting
in them being counted as one.
1.4.1
Eddington Bias
The Eddington bias is a selection bias often occurring in astrophysical surveys. It arises
from uncertainties such as measurement errors and population characteristics. Essentially,
the Eddington bias is the case where common sources are mistaken for rarer sources, which
artificially raises the count of the rarer sources significantly leading to an overestimation
[12]. It affects sources at all fluxes but given the large number of sources in the faint end,
the effect will not be as large as in the bright end where sources are scarce [13, 14].
1.5
Luminosity function
The luminosity function describes the frequency with which galaxies of different intrinsic
luminosities are found in space, usually expressed in terms of ϕ(L)dL. The luminosity
function is defined to be the space density of galaxies with intrinsic luminosities in the
range from L to L + dL. The analytical form of the luminosity function proposed by
Schechter (1976), is shown in Equation 1.5:
ϕ(L)dL = ϕ∗
( L
L∗
)α
exp
(
−L
L∗
) dL
L∗
The shape of the luminosity function is usually described by such a Schechter function,
which is a power law with a high luminosity exponential cut-off, and is characterised by the
slope, α, and the ”break”, L∗. ϕ∗is a normalization factor that determines the absolute
spacial density of galaxies with L = L∗.
Figure 1.6: Example of an infrared luminosity function characterised by a Schechter func-
tion. The luminosity function is from Gruppioni et al. (2020).
The shape of the luminosity function is heavily dependent on the galactic environment.
8
Exploring the development of Focal Plane Arrays for the Atacama Large Millimeter Array
==PAGE:17==
While a common one can be created it will vary between different types of galaxies, their
distance or the specific environment they are found in. As a consequence of this luminosity
functions are generally a rough approximation [17].
1.6
Spectral energy distribution
Galaxies emit light throughout the entire electromagnetic spectrum, the flux from the
galaxy at specific wavelengths is called the spectral energy distribution (SED). A lot of
information about the galaxy is found in this SED, with different parts of the spectrum
characterizing different properties.
In the X-ray range it is generally highly energetic
processes which emits the light, such as gas accreting onto an object. In the ultra violet
(UV) to the near infra-red (NIR) range it is the bound-free transitions in the photosphere
of stars within the galaxy that dominate.
A high flux in this range indicates a large
population of young OB stars, although the light from these can easily be obscured by
dust, leading to a lower detected flux. The mid-infrared (MIR) and far-infrared (FIR) part
of the spectrum are mostly affected by thermal emissions from dust. Lastly, radio emission
arises when charged particles are moving through strong magnetic or electric fields, either
as free-free emission or synchrotron emission [18].
Figure 1.7: Example of an SED for a star-forming galaxy with the different parts of the
spectrum coloured to show the different regions of the electromagnetic spectrum. Some of
the brightest emission lines are included on the plot.
The SED also contains both absorption and emission lines produced by the bound-bound
transitions within ions, molecules, and atoms. These transitions are found both in the
photosphere of the stars within the galaxy and the interstellar gas in the galaxy. Absorp-
tion lines mostly arise from the atmosphere of the stars and give insight into the age of the
stellar population as well as the metallically. The emission lines on the other hand can be
used to measure properties such as density, temperature, and the chemical composition of
the interstellar dust and gas [18].
Exploring the development of Focal Plane Arrays for the Atacama Large Millimeter Array
9
==PAGE:18==
1.7
CASA
Common Astronomy Software Applications, or CASA [19], is a software package for the
purpose of calibrating, imaging, and analysing radio astronomical data from both inter-
ferometers and single dish telescopes. A core functionality of CASA is supporting imaging
pipelines and data reduction for interferometers such as ALMA and VLA.
The simalma()[20] task simulates ALMA observations and images, while simultaneously
analysing the simulated data. It takes several parameters as input, such as skymodel
which requires a CASA or FITS image. inbright is the peak brightness which the image
is wished to be scaled to, given in Jy/pixel. incell is given to define the spatial pixel size
which the skymodel should be scaled to. The frequency used for the central channel is
defined in incenter and inwidth is used to define the width of the channel. The angular
size of the mosaic map is defined by mapsize, while antennalist is used to define the
antenna configuration and totaltime is the total time of the observations.
It is also
possible to choose the precipitable water vapor with pwv.
1.8
ALMA observing tool
The ALMA observing tool, ALMA OT [21], is an application used to prepare and submit
ALMA proposals.
Specifically the ScienceGoal module is used to plan and give time
estimates based on specific desires for an observation. These include things such as source
coordinates, properties of the source and configuration information. For the purposes of
this thesis it is primarily used to calculate appropriate integration times and sensitivity
estimations.
1.9
Motivation
Millimeter wave astronomy is an important tool to learn how the Universe works. Indeed,
answers to a plethora of questions regarding the formation and evolution of galaxies,
molecular clouds and proto-planetary disks are hidden within the sub millimeter and
millimeter regimes of the electromagnetic spectrum. In extension of this, the assembly of
unbiased statistical samples, which can be obtained through deep wide-field surveys, are
crucial. The homogeneous mapping of the sky is vital to see both the ecosystem of galaxies
and large scale structures. To do this eﬀiciently, a combination of large sky coverage, high
spatial and spectral resolution, as well as a high sensitivity is required.
With ALMA, as it is right now, there is a trade-off between high angular resolution,
sensitivity, sky coverage, and mapping speed, mainly due to its limited field of view. If
ALMA were to implement a focal plane array, effectively widening its field of view, this
trade-off would no longer be necessary and ALMA would be the perfect instrument to
push cosmic frontiers for decades to come.
This thesis will explore the expected gain in the number of sources when performing deep
sky surveys by simulating parts of the sky as seen by ALMA, both with and without an
FPA.
10
Exploring the development of Focal Plane Arrays for the Atacama Large Millimeter Array
==PAGE:19==
2
Focal Plane Array for ALMA
In practice, the implementation of a FPA for ALMA will mean that a single antenna
receiver will have several feedhorns, instead of the single one they currently have. With
more feedhorns, it will be possible for a single antenna to have more than one beam per
pointing, with the amount of beams per pointing being equal to the number of feedhorns
implemented.
Figure 2.1: Image of the ALMA receiver cartridge for band 5, in the GARD/ALMA
receiver lab at Chalmers University.
The spacing between the feedhorns is important, as this determines several parameters
which affects the quality of the resulting image. With a 2 f-lambda spacing there will
be no eﬀiciency penalty per feed, whereas higher sampling will blend signals from several
beams, and lower sampling will be less eﬀicient. With this 2 f-lambda spacing and a 10
by 10 FPA, it is possible to Nyquist sample a map with uniform coverage by using a total
of 16 pointings. With Equations (1.1), (1.2), and (1.3) it is possible to determine the
amount of pointings needed to cover this 10 by 10 FPA area with the current cababilities
of ALMA. As an example, the sizes for band 6 from Table 2.2 are used, together with the
FWHM.
The horizontal number of beams are found by:
7.8′
0.511 · 0.39′ + 1 = 40.1
The vertical number of beams by:
2 · 6.8′
0.511 · 0.39′ ·
√
3 + 1 = 40.4
Exploring the development of Focal Plane Arrays for the Atacama Large Millimeter Array
11
==PAGE:20==
And finally, the total amount by:
(2 · 40.1 −1)40.4
2
≈1600
As can be seen from above, With the current capabilities of ALMA it would instead require
1600 pointings in a mosaic to cover a map of identical size. As a 10 by 10 FPA would have
a hundred feedhorns, the FPA would indeed only need 16 pointings.
The decrease in the required number of pointings results in less integration time to achieve
the same sensitivity, since a pointing both with or without FPA takes the same amount of
time, regardless of the number of beams. As shown in Table 2.1 a FPA reaches the same
sensitivity as expected with mosaicing in just 6 minutes as opposed to 10 hours. Thus,
by using the same integration time for the FPA as used with mosaicing the achieved
sensitivity is ten times deeper for the same covered area.
Integration time
Sensitivity
Mosaicing
10 hours
0.15 mJy
FPA
6 minutes
0.15 mJy
10 hours
15 µJy
Single pointing*
10 hours
5 µJy
Table 2.1: Table shows the expected sensitivity reached for a given integration time by
using mosaicing, FPA and a single pointing. *To uniformly cover this singular pointing,
six additional pointings are required, resulting in a total integration time of around 70 for
the specified rms.
To sample the field most eﬀiciently a hexogonal grid is used for the FPA. As a result of
this, the obtained images for a single pointing will be rectangular instead of square. If a
square area is desired additional pointings will be necessary. The horizontal span of the
beams of a map for a given ALMA band can be found by:
horizontal span = λf · FWHM · Nx
(2.1)
Here, λf refers to the f-lambda spacing of the feeds, while FWHM is the full width
half maximum in arcminutes for the given band. Nx is the amount of horizontal feeds.
Similarly, the vertical span can be found as:
vertical span =
√
3 · λf · FWHM · Ny
2
(2.2)
λf and FWHM has the same definition as above while Ny is the amount of vertical feeds.
The
√
3
2 constant arises from the hexagonal grid structure.
12
Exploring the development of Focal Plane Arrays for the Atacama Large Millimeter Array
==PAGE:21==
Figure 2.2: Image shows the distribution of beams for a single pointing produced by a 10
by 10 FPA for a map in band 6. The area covered for the image is 7.8x6.8 arcmin2, while
the beams (green circles) have a FWHM of 0.39’.
As the full width half maximum of the primary beam changes from band to band, equation
2.1 and equation 2.2 can be used to find the total span of the beams for a single pointing
with FPA per band.
In the table below, the FWHM of each band which is used for
calculating the map sizes are shown as well. These FWHM have been calculated with the
equation given in Section 1.1.1.
FWHM [arcmin]
Vertical size [arcmin]
Horizontal size [arcmin]
Band 4
2.1 mm
0.68
11.8
13.6
Band 5
1.6 mm
0.52
9.2
10.4
Band 6
1.2 mm
0.39
6.8
7.8
Band 7
850 µm
0.28
4.9
5.6
Band 8
700 µm
0.23
4
4.6
Band 9
450 µm
0.15
2.6
3
Table 2.2: Table showcasing the horizontal and vertical sizes of the area covered by a
single FPA pointing for the different ALMA bands. The areas are calculated with the
central wavelength of the bands given in the left column.
Exploring the development of Focal Plane Arrays for the Atacama Large Millimeter Array
13
==PAGE:22==
3
ALMA FPA as a survey instrument
To find the number of sources one would expect ALMA to detect it is necessary to simulate
a section of the sky, such that the proper amount of sources with their respective fluxes
can be recovered. This is known as the number density, usually expressed in the form
of differential number counts.
The shape of this distribution can be described with a
Schechter function. The parameters of the Schechter function will vary depending on the
observed wavelength, thus, to accurately simulate the true differential number counts, it
is necessary model each receiver band separately. For ALMA band 6, band 7, and band 9
observational data, characterized by a Schechter function, is available from Fujimoto et al.
(2024), Geach et al. (2017) and Wang et al. (2017) respectively. The 1.2 mm study from
Fujimoto et al. (2024) uses 180 sources identified in 33 massive cluster fields over an area
of 133 square arcminutes. The data presented in Geach et al. (2017) contains close to 3000
submillimeter sources detected at 850 µm, covering an area of five square degrees. Lastly,
the study from Wang et al. (2017), performed at 450 µm, covers a total area of 151 square
arcminutes, resulting in 141 sources. For band 4, band 5, and band 8, the literature is
missing observationally derived differential number counts with accompanying Schechter
function parameters.
Instead, for band 4, band 5, and band 8 simulated differential number counts from Lagos
et al. (2020) are used to derive an appropriate Schechter model. The simulated catalogue
from Lagos et al. (2020) consists of both cumulative and differential number counts with
accompanying flux bins. The differential number counts are given in units of deg−2dex−1
which for this purpose is converted to deg−2mJy−1 by multiplying the differential number
count with the size of the flux bins in log space (0.25) and dividing this by (10binhigh -
10binlow). Here, binhigh is the upper boundary of the flux bin and binlow is the lower bound
of each flux bin.
Equation 1.9 is then implemented as a function and the curve_fit
function, from the scipy.optimize Python package, is used to fit the Schechter function
to the Lagos et al. (2020) data. The fit takes the uncertainties of each point into account.
The resulting Schechter fit and the differential number counts are then plotted together.
The best fit parameters are also included in the plot. This process is then repeated for
the last two bands.
The final Schechter function fits and differential number counts for all bands are shown in
Figure 3.1. Included in Figure 3.1 are the fits from Fujimoto et al. (2024), Geach et al.
(2017) and Wang et al. (2017). Both Geach et al. (2017) and Wang et al. (2017) only
have data points for the brighter end, being sensitive down to a limit of 3 mJy and 3.5 mJy
respectively. Differential number count values below these limits will therefore have to be
extrapolated from the fit. As can be seen in Figure 3.1 there is some variation in the slopes
of the Schechter functions, α, in general either having a value of approximately -1.5 or -2,
with the exception of band 8. The data points in band 8 are not very well characterized
by the Schechter function, leading to a larger scatter from the fitted Schechter function
than any of the other bands. The slope in band 8 is significantly shallower than the slope
of any of the other bands, at just −1.1.
14
Exploring the development of Focal Plane Arrays for the Atacama Large Millimeter Array
==PAGE:23==
Figure 3.1: Differential number counts for six ALMA receiver bands with their respective
Schechter function to characterize their shape.
Included in each plot is the Schechter
parameters corresponding to the best fit with uncertainties included.
Additionally, all the fitted Schechter functions have been plotted together in Figure 3.2
to clearly show the difference in slope, shape and scaling. From Figure 3.2 it can be seen
that the Schechter functions from Fujimoto et al. (2024) and Wang et al. (2017) are
similar, with similar slopes and both having the knee further to the bright end. Similarly,
for Lagos et al. (2020) and Geach et al. (2017), all functions cross the same value at
approximately 10−2 mJy, and with shallower slopes with increasing frequency, i.e. band
number.
In general, both the normalization and the characteristic flux increases with
increasing frequency, with band 4 having the lowest normalization and characteristic flux,
and band 9 having the highest.
Exploring the development of Focal Plane Arrays for the Atacama Large Millimeter Array
15
==PAGE:24==
Figure 3.2: All Schechter fits plotted together. Fits from Lagos et al. (2020) are using
simulated data, and fits from Fujimoto et al. (2024), Geach et al. (2017), and Wang et
al. (2017) use observed data.
16
Exploring the development of Focal Plane Arrays for the Atacama Large Millimeter Array
==PAGE:25==
4
Differential number counts from mock
observations
The Schechter functions found in Section 3 can now be used to properly simulate the
sources one would find in a random section of the sky. As the Schechter parameters have
been defined for each band it is possible to simulate observations corresponding to each of
these. By simulating mock images of the sky as seen by ALMA it should be possible not
only to derive the number counts, but also obtain a realistic estimate of the rms associated
with a given observation.
The images are constructed by splitting the Schechter function into several flux bins. The
number of galaxies within each flux bin specified by the integral of the Schechter function
is calculated, and each galaxy is assigned a random flux within the bin, using a uniform
distribution. When the total number of galaxies and their respective fluxes are found
they are then placed randomly into the image as a point source, again using a uniform
distribution. It is worth noting here that galaxies tend to cluster together due to gravity,
however, this effect has not been taken into account.
In the case that the amount of
galaxies in a flux bin does not equate to or exceed one, the number of galaxies from the
next bin is added. This continues until there is at least one galaxy for each bin. Similarly
to a real observation, the size of the image affects how many galaxies in each bin you
would expect, also limiting the rarer and brighter galaxies to the larger images.
This procedure was used to create a skymodel for band 6, with the total image size of
7.8x6.8 arcminutes, as determined in Table 2.2. To asses the performance of the code
used to produce the skymodel image, the simulated differential number counts are plotted
alongside the fitted Schechter function from Fujimoto et al. (2024).
Figure 4.1: Differential number counts as determined by the code, with the Schechter fit
provided by Fujimoto et al. (2024) overplotted.
Exploring the development of Focal Plane Arrays for the Atacama Large Millimeter Array
17
==PAGE:26==
As can be seen in Figure 4.1 there are several data points with high uncertainties at the
higher flux values (0.2 < S < 2). These large uncertainties are most likely an effect of the
summation done to obtain at least one galaxy in each bin. However, even with the larger
uncertainties they still agree well with the fit and in general all the simulated differential
number counts follow the fit nicely.
The next step in the process is then to run the created skymodel through CASA in order
to simulate how a real observation would look with this skymodel acting as the ”true” sky
brightness distribution. For this, the CASA command simalma() is used, together with
the various parameters described in Section 1.7. These parameters include the incell,
which is set to be 0.1 arcseconds, inbright to 0.0063 Jy, incenter and inwidth is set
to 250 GHz and 7.5 GHz respectively. The ALMA configuration is set as configuration
five from cycle ten, corresponding to a spatial resolution of 0.33 arcseconds. The mapsize
parameter is set to fit the given size of a single FPA pointing for band 6 and the total time
to 10 hours. The total time here corresponds to what would be 0.1 hours with an FPA,
since a 10 by 10 FPA is a hundred times more eﬀicient than mosaicing. CASA will then
treat the skymodel as a sky brightness distribution which is being observed, and process
it as described in Section 1.7.
The resulting map, as seen in Figure 4.2, will then be an appropriate estimation for one
produced by the ALMA telescope of the given map size and bandwidth coverage. This
process can be done for each band and for any map size, depending on what is necessary
for a given analysis. When using CASA, the resulting map is still produced with a single
beam, i.e. mosaicing, the only difference in the simulated map for the FPA will be the
integration time given to CASA, as mosaicing is much less eﬀicient than an FPA. CASA
creates both (u,v) plane data in the form of a measurement set, and several sets of images.
The created images are able to be analyzed in the same way as a standard observed image
would be.
Figure 4.2: Image showing the resulting 7.8x6.8 arcmin2 map produced by running the
skymodel through simalma. Since the image is very big it is impossible to see any sources
with the naked eye. A zoom in on the map it provided, to clearly show two bright sources.
18
Exploring the development of Focal Plane Arrays for the Atacama Large Millimeter Array
==PAGE:27==
4.1
Extraction of galaxies
To assess the quality of the final produced map, the differential number counts can be
extracted in a similar manner as they would be from a normal ALMA observation.
The sources on the map are extracted by finding the largest flux value in the image,
noting down the value and coordinates, and then removing an area of 12 by 12 pixels
around the source. By removing the area around the detected source none of the extended
flux will be counted in the next iteration. Ideally, the source should be removed as a
point source convolved with the beam, however, since these maps are very large, this is a
very computationally expensive process. The above mentioned procedure is then repeated,
until the value of the detected source reaches a certain threshold. For this analysis the
threshold is chosen to be 3σ of the rms in the image, ensuring that most of the background
noise in the image will not be counted as a source. The rms extracted from the image is
around 0.15 mJy. All of the recorded flux values for the sources and their coordinates are
compiled in a separate text file.
While this method avoids counting most of the noise as detections there will still be several
noise peaks with fluxes large enough to be counted as a source, resulting in the data being
slightly skewed. To combat this a negative peak analysis can be performed to evaluate
the expected number of real sources. The negative analysis is done by multiplying the
natural map with -1 and performing the galaxy extraction on the inverse map in the same
manner as previously. The sources detected in the inverse map will all be noise peaks,
which then can be compared with the sources found in the natural map. The left plot
in Figure 4.3 shows a histogram of the sources from the natural map and the negative
sources from the inverse map as a function of the signal to noise ratio. In this histogram,
the expected number of real sources will be the excess of the detections in the natural map
to the sources detected in the inverse map, also referred to as the purity.
p = Npos −Nneg
Npos
(4.1)
Here, Npos and Nneg are the number of positive and negative sources found at a given
SNR. The purity is shown on the right hand side in Figure 4.3.
Figure 4.3: Plot on the left shows the amount of sources found in both the natural and
the inverse map as a function of the SNR. Plot on the right hand side shows the purity,
as calculated with Equation 4.1, as a function of the SNR.
Exploring the development of Focal Plane Arrays for the Atacama Large Millimeter Array
19
==PAGE:28==
On the plot to the left hand side in Figure 4.3 it can be seen that for lower signal to
noise ratios, it is hard to distinguish between the sources found in the natural map and
the inverse map. At a signal to noise ratio of about six however, there are only sources
detected in the natural map. By using Equation 4.1 in each bin, the purity on the right
hand side of Figure 4.3 is produced. Here it can be seen that when the SNR is a little
above six 100% of the detected sources are real and not caused by noise. At around five
SNR approximately half of the detected sources will be real.
After all sources are extracted they can be expressed as differential number counts by
taking the gradient between the bins and dividing this by the area for the observation, as
shown on the left hand side in Figure 4.4. As can be seen the counts closer to 3σ are quite
underestimated compared to the observations from Fujimoto et al. (2024), in contrast to
the sources in the brighter end. One cause for this could be the Eddington bias and can
be corrected by artificially ”boosting” the sources in the affected flux bins. Usually, this
is done by injecting the map with artificial sources but in this instance there are already
known artificial sources in the map which are not detected. With these acting as the
injected sources the extracted number counts can be compared to the number counts from
the sky model and the sources can be boosted to match, by increasing the flux density
measurements of the sources below SNR 6.
Figure 4.4: Plot on the left shows the extracted number counts of the 7.8x6.8 arcmin2
image (green), and the differential number counts in the skymodel image (blue). The plot
on the right shows the number counts after being corrected for the Eddington bias.
The plot on the right hand side in Figure 4.4 shows the resulting differential number counts
after applying the Eddington correction. As can be seen, the extracted number counts
agree well with the fit from Fujimoto et al. (2024) that was used to create the sky model
map. As such, the simulated ALMA images can indeed be treated as a true observation,
in regards to applying the same methods as one would a true observation.
20
Exploring the development of Focal Plane Arrays for the Atacama Large Millimeter Array
==PAGE:29==
5
Number counts prediction
With the differential number count models established for each band, it is possible to
determine the amount of sources one would expect at a given wavelength, both with and
without the FPA. This is done by integrating the area under the fitted Schechter curve,
down to a given flux value corresponding to the sensitivity of the mock observations. Also,
included in this integration is the covered area corresponding to a single ALMA pointing
with a 10 by 10 FPA.
To achieve a realistic estimation for the sensitivity the Cycle 10 ALMA Observing Tool
is used, which includes the effects of the weather, atmospheric transmission, and receiver
noise. For the OT setup the following parameters are used; the central frequency of each
band, default pwv, angular resolution of the ALMA C43-5 configuration, and a bandwidth
of 7.5 GHz. These have all been obtained from the ALMA Technical Handbook [3]. The
sensitivities from ALMA OT are calculated as single pointings without any mosaicing.
Realistically however, to uniformly cover the FPA field of view, several pointings are
required, decreasing the achieved sensitivity. To convert the ALMA OT sensitivities into
appropriate estimates for a uniform coverage of a 10 by 10 FPA, the ratio between an
ALMA OT calculation for 10 hours and the mock ALMA image can be used. The rms
extracted from the mock image was 0.15 mJy, which would be ten times deeper with a 10
by 10 FPA, 0.015mJy, while a corresponding ALMA OT calculation yielded 0.005 mJy.
The sensitivities from the OT calculations for the other bands are then corrected by a
factor of 3. These sensitivities and the factor is derived for band 6, and it is assumed that
the same corrective factor can be used for the other receiver bands.
Band 4
2.1 mm
Band 5
1.6 mm
Band 6
1.2 mm
Band 7
850 µm
Band 8
700 µm
Band 9
450 µm
C43-5 θres
[arcsec]
0.36
0.30
0.24
0.16
0.12
0.084
10 hour rms
[µJy]
10.7
17.4
15.0
25.6
88.9
217
30 minutes rms
[µJy]
48.0
77.8
67.0
115
395
973
Table 5.1: Estimated sensitivity for each ALMA band, for both 10 hours and 30 minutes.
Included is the angular resolution for configuration 5, which has been used to calculate
the sensitivities in ALMA OT.
Depending on the area and sensitivity of each band the number of sources detected will
vary. As shown in Figure 5.1, the expected increase in number of sources is proportional
to the increased area observed with the FPA, e.g., a single source with the area 0.36 square
arcminutes and 159 with an area of 160 square arcminutes for band 4 with a total of 30
minutes integration time. As can be seen, the biggest difference between an integration
time of 30 minutes and 10 hours is the total number of sources detected in each band.
Proportionally, band 4, band 5, and band 6 are similar between the two integration times.
For the 30 minute integration time however, band 7, band 8, and band 9 are much closer
to the number of sources in band 4, band 5, and band 6 than they are for the 10 hour
Exploring the development of Focal Plane Arrays for the Atacama Large Millimeter Array
21
==PAGE:30==
integration. For both integration times there is most sources found in band 6 and least
found in band 9.
Figure 5.1: Distribution of expected sources across the different ALMA receiver bands.
For each band the amount of sources have been calculated without the FPA, with a 5 by
5 FPA and with a 10 by 10 FPA. This is done for an integration time of both 30 minutes
and 10 hours for all areas.
By taking the ratio of the sources between 30 minutes and 10 hours, it is possible to find
the relative gain for all six bands. This is only done for the 10 by 10 FPA area and can
be seen in Figure 5.2.
Figure 5.2: Relative gain of sources in each ALMA receiver band between 30 minutes
integration time and 10 hours of integration time.
22
Exploring the development of Focal Plane Arrays for the Atacama Large Millimeter Array
==PAGE:31==
The relative gain in sources is around the same for band 4, band 5, and band 6, all being
approximately 5.5. Band 7 and band 8 are similar to each other too, with a relative gain
around a factor of 3. Band 9 is clearly the band most affected by the deeper integration
with a gain in sources of a little above 7.
The Schechter models can additionally be used to calculate the number counts as both
a function of the area and the sensitivity. For this the same method as above is used,
where instead of having both the area and the sensitivity fixed these will vary. To find the
number counts as a function of the covered sky area, the sensitivity is kept constant, while
the number of feeds is increased. This has been calculated for the rms corresponding to
10 hours and 30 minutes of integration time, as determined in Table 5.1, resulting in the
two different slopes on the left plot in Figure 5.3. In contrast, the right plot in Figure 5.3
shows the effects of keeping the number of feeds constant while increasing the sensitivity.
This has been done for three cases: one without the FPA, one with a 5 by 5 FPA, and
one with a 10 by 10 FPA.
Figure 5.3: The plot on the left hand side shows the number counts as a function of area,
where the sensitivity is constant. On the right the number counts are plotted as a function
of the sensitivty, where the area is kept constant.
As seen in the left plot of Figure 5.3 there is a large gain in numbers between using
an integration time of 10 hours versus 30 minutes, with this gain being constant across
all number of feeds at approximately a factor of 12.
Apart from this, the number of
sources detected is linearly correlated to the area covered for both integration times. On
the right hand side it can be seen that the increase in sources rises exponentially with
decreasing rms, with the gain in sources being directly linked to the number of feedhorns
within the FPA. This means that deeper observations will benefit much more from the
implementation of the FPA than shallower ones, in terms of raw number of galaxies.
The above plots have been created for all bands, with similar results. They can be found
in the Appendix from Figure A.1 to Figure A.5.
Exploring the development of Focal Plane Arrays for the Atacama Large Millimeter Array
23
==PAGE:32==
6
Differential number counts from
luminosity functions
Producing mock observations from number count surveys only yields the total number
and distribution of galaxies, however, this does not include any physical properties for the
individual sources. This limits the information which can be extracted from these surveys,
since properties such as redshift is crucial. Therefore, this section explores the possibility
of converting observed redshift-dependent luminosity functions into differential number
counts.
The infrared luminosity functions are borrowed from several different papers in order
to cover redshifts from the local universe up to z = 7.7.
For redshifts 0 < z < 2.3
the adopted luminosity functions are from Magnelli et al. (2013), for 2.5 < z < 6 the
luminosity functions from Gruppioni et al. (2020) are used, and for 6.4 < z < 7.7 the
luminosity function from Barrufet et al. (2023) is used. While there are some small gaps
in this redshift range, it should not impact the end results significantly. All luminosity
functions can be seen in Figure 6.1.
Figure 6.1: Infrared luminosity functions spanning from a redshift of around 0 to 7.7.
Luminosity functions are from Magnelli et al. (2013), Gruppioni et al. (2020), and Barrufet
et al. (2023).
24
Exploring the development of Focal Plane Arrays for the Atacama Large Millimeter Array
==PAGE:33==
It is worth noting here that the luminosity functions produced by Magnelli et al. (2013)
follow a double power law, in contrast to the ones from Gruppioni et al.
(2020) and
Barrufet et al. (2023) which both use a Schechter function.
With the infrared luminosity functions defined for each redshift interval, these are used
to find the number of sources in each interval.
Each luminosity function is split into
50 luminosity bins and the luminosity functions are then integrated over these bins and
multiplied by the co-moving volume covered by the FPA FoV and redshift, resulting in
a certain number of sources for each bin. Each source in a given bin is then assigned a
random luminosity within that bin, using a uniform distribution. Additionally, a random
redshift within the current redshift bin is assigned to the source, again using a uniform
distribution. This process is then repeated for all luminosity functions, giving a catalogue
of sources, where each has a unique luminosity and redshift value for each ALMA band.
The redshift of each source is then used to assign an appropriate dust template adopted
from Magdis et al. (2012). The SED’s from Magdis et al. (2012) are given in νrest · Lνrest.
For the purpose of this study, a conversion from the rest frame to observed frame is needed.
The SEDs are divided by the frequency to obtain Lνrest, which is then scaled by the current
source’s luminosity value. To get from the rest frame to observed frame, Lνrest is then
multiplied by (1 + z), where the redshift value of the source is used. Lastly, the flux is
found by applying the inverse square law. The flux in all six bands can then be measured
for each source, at the appropriate redshifted wavelengths for the bands.
Figure 6.2: Example of how the template (dotted spectrum) is scaled and shifted with
redshift. The six ALMA receiver bands placements are included to show where on the
SED the flux is measured.
A catalogue is then compiled with the luminosity, redshift, and fluxes for ALMA bands
4, 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9. In total, 60 catalogues are created, 10 for each band, to properly
characterize the distribution of galaxies.
Exploring the development of Focal Plane Arrays for the Atacama Large Millimeter Array
25
==PAGE:34==
6.1
Number counts
With these catalogues compiled it is then possible to extract the number counts. For the
following, the median value of all ten catalogues per band is used. Within each redshift bin
the total number of sources in each receiver band is counted, as well as the distribution
of galaxies in flux bins.
The flux bins span from 1 µJy to 6.3 mJy, sources above or
below this flux range are not included. Each flux bin is then assigned a certain number
of sources and the gradient with respect to the flux can be found and divided by the area
for a single FPA pointing. A Schechter function is then fitted to the differential number
count data points, taking into account the uncertainties derived from the distribution of
the 10 catalogues. The resulting number counts for each redshift interval can be seen in
Figure 6.3.
Figure 6.3: Differential number counts for each redshift interval in band 6.
Number
counts in all intervals are characterized by a Schechter function, with the corresponding
slope included for each range.
In general, the Schechter fits produced from the Magnelli et al. (2013) luminosity functions
result in steeper slopes compared to the ones produced from the Gruppioni et al. (2020)
and Barrufet et al. (2023) luminosity functions. For the redshift intervals with higher
26
Exploring the development of Focal Plane Arrays for the Atacama Large Millimeter Array
==PAGE:35==
differential number counts, the Schechter parameters are better constrained.
As a supplement to the differential number counts for the redshift intervals above, his-
tograms containing the raw number of sources for each flux bin have been created as well.
From Figure 6.4 it can be seen that very few sources are found in the local Universe,
z ∼0, and at the highest redshifts, z > 6.4. The largest amount of sources are found in
the redshift interval 1.3 to 2.3. Reflecting the slopes from the differential number counts
produced with luminosity functions from Magnelli et al. (2013), the histograms from these
also have a narrower distribution than the others, with there being almost no sources at
the higher flux values. There is a decrease in the number of sources around 10−4 Jy across
all redshift intervals, most likely caused by the data binning.
Figure 6.4: Histograms of the flux distribution of sources in the different redshift ranges
for band 6. The total number of sources, rounded to the nearest whole number, in each
redshift range is stated.
The combined differential number counts for all redshift intervals should be an approxi-
mation to what would be observed in a true survey. Thus, they can be compared to the
Exploring the development of Focal Plane Arrays for the Atacama Large Millimeter Array
27
==PAGE:36==
observed differential number counts produced by Fujimoto et al. (2024), which can be
seen in Figure 6.5.
Figure 6.5: Differential number counts as produced from the luminosity functions, with an
accompanying Schechter function to characterize the counts. For comparison, the best-fit
Schechter function produced by Fujimoto et al. (2024) is overplotted.
As seen in Figure 6.5, the simulated differential number counts produced from the infrared
luminosity functions generally agrees with the observed differential number counts from
Fujimoto et al. (2024). The slope for the simulated differential number counts is slightly
shallower, with a slope of -1.67, compared to −2.05 ± 0.11 from Fujimoto et al. (2024),
resulting in fewer sources in the faint end. In the bright end the simulated and observed
differential number counts agree well, falling within the uncertainty.
The simulated differential number counts for the other ALMA bands are shown in the
Appendix. The differential number counts for band 4 can be seen in Figure A.6. Here,
the simulated counts are quite overestimated compared to the fit produced from the Lagos
et al. (2020) simulated data, especially disagreeing in the bright end. Figure A.7 shows
the simulated counts for band 5, where the simulated counts largely agree with the fit
produced from Lagos et al. (2020) data. Because of the sharp knee however, there is an
overabundance of sources in the bright end. The simulated counts for band 7 is shown in
Figure A.8, where there is a great agreement between the simulated differential number
counts and the Geach et al. (2017) fit using observed data. Figure A.9 shows the simulated
counts for band 8. It can be seen here that the counts are significantly underestimated
compared to the ones from Lagos et al. (2020). Lastly, Figure A.10 illustrates the simu-
lated counts for band 9. The slope here is slightly shallower than the observed differential
number counts from Wang et al. (2017), making the faint end of the simulated counts
lower.
28
Exploring the development of Focal Plane Arrays for the Atacama Large Millimeter Array
==PAGE:37==
6.2
Distribution
Since the above analysis is done for each ALMA receiver band, it is possible to determine
the amount of sources detected in each band. To get a realistic number of detections, the
sensitivities from Table 5.1 are used as a lower limit flux cut-off.
Figure 6.6: Distribution of sources in the different ALMA receiver bands for a 10 by 10
FPA. The left graph shows the distribution for an integration of 30 minutes. Right graph
shows the distribution for 10 hour integration time.
For both the 30 minute and the 10 hour integration it can be seen in Figure 6.6 that
there are most sources found in band 6. For the 10 hour integration in general, with the
exception of band 6, the number of sources decreases with increasing frequency. Since the
lower frequency bands have much larger areas covered there will be a greater number of
faint sources detected with the 10 hour integration, than in the higher frequency bands.
In the case of the 30 minute integration time, only bright sources will be detected which
are rarer in band 4 and band 5, than the other bands. The comparison between these
luminosity derived numbers and the ones derived with the Schechter functions in Figure
5.1 are discussed in Section 7.
As for the Schechter derived number counts, the relative gain between the 30 minute
integration and the 10 hour integration can be found in Figure 6.7. Here, band 5, band
6, and band 8 have similar relative gains all with a factor of about four. The lowest gain
is found in band 7, being a little below three. Band 4 has the second to largest gain of
almost five, and band 9 with the largest of almost six.
Exploring the development of Focal Plane Arrays for the Atacama Large Millimeter Array
29
==PAGE:38==
Figure 6.7: Relative gain of sources in each ALMA receiver band between 30 minutes
integration time and 10 hours of integration time.
To further assess the distribution of the sources, they can be plotted for each redshift
interval. This is done by using the assigned redshift from the catalogue for each of the
sources.
Figure 6.8: Distribution of number of detected galaxies above the 10 hours sensitivity
limit across redshift interval, and split into each receiver band.
30
Exploring the development of Focal Plane Arrays for the Atacama Large Millimeter Array
==PAGE:39==
As seen in Figure 6.8 the distribution follows what we would expect, with most galaxies
around a redshift of 2, coinciding with the peak of the cosmic star formation rate density
[29]. The plot also shows that there is not a lot of sources in the local Universe z ∼0, and
likewise at higher redshifts z > 6. For the higher redshifts the luminosity functions are
not very well constrained, and the current facilities do not have the capabilities to detect
these higher redshift galaxies. In a real observation the number of galaxies in this range
would probably be higher than predicted here.
Exploring the development of Focal Plane Arrays for the Atacama Large Millimeter Array
31
==PAGE:40==
7
Discussion
As became clear in the previous section, the differential number counts vary from the
observed and simulated ones in Section 3 to the ones derived from the infrared luminosity
functions in Section 5. Some bands agree, or partially agree, while others are quite different
from one method to the other. As a result, the bar plots showcased in Figure 5.1 and Figure
6.6 differ as well.
When comparing Figure 5.1 and Figure 6.6, both for an integration time of 30 minutes,
the overall shape of the bars are very similar. The biggest difference lies in the amount of
sources, with the numbers derived from the Schechter fits being slightly larger across all
the bands. Another clear difference between the Schechter and luminosity derived numbers
is that band 7 is larger than band 4 and band 5 in the luminosity ones, and the opposite
for the Schechter ones. For the 10 hour integration there is not a great difference, the only
being that for the luminosity derived numbers band 4 is larger than band 5, while they
are around the same size in the Schechter derived ones.
Because of these slight inconsistencies, both between the differential number counts and the
derived number of sources, it is necessary to evaluate if the counts derived from the infrared
luminosity functions make sense. In order to get a gauge on the number counts extracted
from the luminosity functions, cumulative number counts can be produced and compared
with observed cumulative number counts in the literature. To find the cumulative number
counts, instead of calculating the gradient with respect to flux, the number of sources are
counted in flux bins from high to lower flux, where all previous counts from higher flux
bins are added to the current count.
Figure 7.1: Cumulative number counts as derived from the infrared luminosity functions
for each ALMA receiver band.
32
Exploring the development of Focal Plane Arrays for the Atacama Large Millimeter Array
==PAGE:41==
As seen in fig. 7.1 the cumulative number counts increase with frequency. Theoretically,
this is what we would expect, as across nearly the entire simulated redshift range band 9 is
closest to the peak of the dust emission. Realistically, however, it would not be possible to
observe the fainter end of the high frequency bands due to several observational constraints.
The cumulative number counts in band 4, band 6, and band 7 can then be compared with
observed cumulative number counts from Adscheid et al. (2024). For further comparison
cumulative number counts for band 6 and band 7 have been estimated from the observed
differential number counts found by Fujimoto et al.
(2024) and Geach et al.
(2017),
respectively. This was done by integrating the dN/dS values with respect to flux to get
the number of sources in each bin and counting the sources as done previously.
Figure 7.2: Cumulative number counts for band 4, band 6, and band 7 derived from the
luminosity functions. Overplotted are the cumulative number counts for these bands found
by Adscheid et al. (2024) and the derived cumulative number counts from Lagos et al.
(2020), Fujimoto et al. (2024) and Geach et al. (2017).
In general from Figure 7.2 it can be seen that the luminosity derived cumulative number
counts are slightly overestimated compared to the observed ones from Adscheid et al.
(2024). The best agreement is observed specifically around 10−1 mJy for both band 4
and band 6. For band 4 both the simulated counts from Lagos et al. (2020) and the
luminosity derived counts agree in the fainter end but diverge towards the brighter end.
The cumulative counts derived from the Schechter fit for band 4 fit almost perfectly with
the cumulative number counts from Adscheid et al. (2024). Looking at the cumulative
number counts for band 6 it can be seen that the ones derived from Fujimoto et al. (2024)
are higher in the faint end than the luminosity derived ones. This could be one reason why
Exploring the development of Focal Plane Arrays for the Atacama Large Millimeter Array
33
==PAGE:42==
the number of sources in band 6 in Figure 5.1 are larger than the ones in Figure 6.6. Above
0.2 mJy there is a good agreement between the simulated and observed cumulative number
counts derived from Fujimoto et al. (2024). Interestingly, the derived cumulative number
counts from Fujimoto et al. (2024) are higher than the observations from Adscheid et al.
(2024), similarly to the simulated data. In band 7 there are only data points from Geach et
al. (2017) in the bright end > 3 mJy, making it impossible to compare the faint end of the
number counts. The luminosity derived number counts are higher than the ones derived
from Geach et al. (2017), and show a shallower slope, although this could be caused by
the large uncertainties in the bright end of the simulated data. The cumulative number
counts derived from Geach et al. (2017) are in excellent agreement with the observations
from Adscheid et al. (2024). In Figure 5.1 and Figure 6.6 however, the derived number
of sources is quite similar and the differential number counts shown in Figure A.8 are in
excellent agreement as well.
Apart from the cumulative number counts which corresponds to the counts from Adscheid
et al. (2024), the counts derived from the Schechter fits for band 5, band 8 and band 9
can be compared to each other as well.
Figure 7.3: Cumulative number counts for band 5, band 8, and band 9 derived from the
luminosity functions. Overplotted are the derived cumulative number counts from Lagos
et al. (2020) and Wang et al. (2017).
As Figure 7.3 shows there is an excellent agreement between the two cumulative counts
in both band 5 and band 9. However, similarly to the differential number counts, the
Schechter fit derived cumulative number counts for band 8 are higher than the luminosity
derived ones.
34
Exploring the development of Focal Plane Arrays for the Atacama Large Millimeter Array
==PAGE:43==
8
Summary
Through this thesis the development of focal plane arrays for the Atacama Large Millimeter
Array has been explored by simulating sections of the sky in six different ALMA receiver
bands. With a 10 by 10 FPA, the integration time for ALMA will be a hundred times
shorter than the current integration time required with mosaicing for the same area. If
using the same integration time for the FPA, the sensitivity would instead be ten times
deeper. The area that a single pointing with a 10 by 10 FPA would span was found for
each of the six bands in Table 2.2, yielding a total area approximately 450 times larger
than a single beam.
To model the differential number counts in all six receiver bands, Schechter functions from
Fujimoto et al. (2024), Geach et al. (2017) and Wang et al. (2017) were used. For the
remaining bands simulated differential number counts by Lagos et al. (2020) were fitted
with Schechter functions. The Schechter function presented in Fujimoto et al. (2024) was
used to create a skymodel for ALMA band 6, which was then run through CASA to create
a mock image of the sky. Both the differential number counts and the rms was extracted
from this mock observation, where the rms was used as a guide to create the flux limits
in Table 5.1 for all six bands, for two different integration times.
With the flux limits for all ALMA bands in hand, it was possible to find the total number
of sources expected to be observed in each band, with a uniformly covered 10 by 10 FPA
ALMA observation. It was found that there would be most sources detected in band 6,
both for an integration time of 30 minutes and for 10 hours. The largest relative gain,
however, was found to be in band 9 (Figures 5.1 and 5.2).
In order to obtain redshifts for all sources, infrared luminosity functions from Magnelli
et al. (2013), Gruppioni et al. (2020), and Barrufet et al. (2023) were used to create a
catalogue of galaxies with corresponding redshifts and IR-luminosities, which were then
used to derive differential number counts. For this process SED templates from Magdis
et al. (2012) were used. Once again, the largest number of sources would be expected in
band 6. By estimating the number of sources in each redshift interval used, it was possible
to determine at which redshift the most galaxies would be detected. There was found to
be the highest number of galaxies between redshift 1.8 to 3.5, imitating the peak of the
cosmic star formation density (Figure 6.8).
To determine the validity of the luminosity derived differential number counts, the cu-
mulative number counts for these were compared to the Schechter derived ones as well
as observed counts from Adscheid et al. (2024). It was found that for all bands, with
the exception of band 8, there was a good agreement between the luminosity derived
cumulative counts and the Schechter derived cumulative counts. The Schechter derived
cumulative counts were found to follow the ones from Adscheid et al. (2024) nicely, while
the luminosity derived ones were slightly overestimated in the bright end.
Exploring the development of Focal Plane Arrays for the Atacama Large Millimeter Array
35
==PAGE:44==
Bibliography
[1]
ESO. url: https://www.eso.org/public/teles-instr/technology/interferometry/.
[2]
ALMA European ARC UK. url: https://almaost.jb.man.ac.uk/help/.
[3]
Paulo Cortes et al. ALMA Cycle 12 Technical Handbook. Mar. 2025. isbn: 978-3-
923524-66-2. doi: 10.5281/zenodo.14933753. url: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.
14933753.
[4]
Rick Perley. Fundamentals of Radio Interferometry. Oct. 2018. url: https://www.
icrar.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/11/Perley_Fundamentals_of_radio_interferometry.
pdf.
[5]
ESA. Observations: Very Long Baseline Interferometry (VLBI). url: https://www.
esa.int/Science_Exploration/Space_Science/Observations_Very_Long_Baseline_
Interferometry_VLBI.
[6]
Megan Ansdell. url: https://science.nrao.edu/facilities/alma/naasc-workshops/nrao-
cd-berkeley19/03_interferometry_basics.pdf.
[7]
J. Pety and N. Rodrı́guez-Fernández. “Revisiting the theory of interferometric wide-
field synthesis”. In: Astronomy and Astrophysics 517, A12 (July 2010), A12. doi:
10.1051/0004-6361/200912873. arXiv: 1004.4415 [astro-ph.IM].
[8]
W. A. van Cappellen et al. “Apertif: Phased array feeds for the Westerbork Synthesis
Radio Telescope. System overview and performance characteristics”. In: Astronomy
and Astrophysics 658, A146 (Feb. 2022), A146. doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202141739.
arXiv: 2109.14234 [astro-ph.IM].
[9]
W. S. Holland et al. “SCUBA-2: the 10 000 pixel bolometer camera on the James
Clerk Maxwell Telescope”. In: Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society
430.4 (Apr. 2013), pp. 2513–2533. doi: 10.1093/mnras/sts612. arXiv: 1301.3650
[astro-ph.IM].
[10]
Christian Wolff. url: https://www.radartutorial.eu/03.linetheory/Horn.en.html.
[11]
5G Store. url: https://5gstore.com/blog/2024/06/26/how-to-interpret-antenna-
radiation-patterns/?srsltid=AfmBOoqHzEBIIrPV-IxDK4WIdC84h3N9AtZnXs6WLS4CGWCW--
lDYCt7.
[12]
astro.vaporia.com. url: http://astro.vaporia.com/start/eddingtonbias.html.
[13]
P. Teerikorpi. “Influence of a generalized Eddington bias on galaxy counts”. In: As-
tronomy and Astrophysics 424 (Sept. 2004), pp. 73–78. doi: 10.1051/0004-6361:
20040567.
[14]
P. Teerikorpi. “Eddington-Malmquist bias in a cosmological context”. In: Astronomy
and Astrophysics 576, A75 (Apr. 2015), A75. doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201425489.
arXiv: 1503.02812 [astro-ph.CO].
[15]
P. Schechter. “An analytic expression for the luminosity function for galaxies.” In:
The Astrophysical Journal 203 (Jan. 1976), pp. 297–306. doi: 10.1086/154079.
[16]
C. Gruppioni et al. “The ALPINE-ALMA [CII] survey. The nature, luminosity func-
tion, and star formation history of dusty galaxies up to z ￿6”. In: Astronomy and
Astrophysics 643, A8 (Nov. 2020), A8. doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202038487. arXiv:
2006.04974 [astro-ph.GA].
[17]
Malcolm S. Longair. Galaxy Formation. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2008. isbn:
3540734775, 3540734783, 9783540734772, 9783540734789.
[18]
Houjun Mo, Frank van den Bosch, and Simon White. Galaxy formation and evolu-
tion. Cambridge University Press, 2010.
[19]
NRAO. url: https://casa.nrao.edu/.
36
Exploring the development of Focal Plane Arrays for the Atacama Large Millimeter Array
==PAGE:45==
[20]
casadocs. url: https://casadocs.readthedocs.io/en/stable/api/tt/casatasks.simulation.
simalma.html.
[21]
A. Miotello. ALMA Observing Tool Quickstart Guide. url: https://almascience.eso.
org/documents-and-tools/cycle12/alma-ot-quickstart.
[22]
Seiji Fujimoto et al. “ALMA Lensing Cluster Survey: Deep 1.2 mm Number Counts
and Infrared Luminosity Functions at z ￿1–8”. In: The Astrophysical Journal Sup-
plement Series 275.2, 36 (Dec. 2024), p. 36. doi: 10.3847/1538-4365/ad5ae2. arXiv:
2303.01658 [astro-ph.GA].
[23]
J. E. Geach et al. “The SCUBA-2 Cosmology Legacy Survey: 850 µm maps, cata-
logues and number counts”. In: Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society
465.2 (Feb. 2017), pp. 1789–1806. doi: 10.1093/mnras/stw2721. arXiv: 1607.03904
[astro-ph.GA].
[24]
Wei-Hao Wang et al. “SCUBA-2 Ultra Deep Imaging EAO Survey (STUDIES):
Faint-end Counts at 450 µm”. In: The Astrophysical Journal 850.1, 37 (Nov. 2017),
p. 37. doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aa911b. arXiv: 1707.00990 [astro-ph.GA].
[25]
Claudia del P. Lagos et al. “Physical properties and evolution of (sub-)millimetre-
selected galaxies in the galaxy formation simulation SHARK”. In: Monthly Notices
of the Royal Astronomical Society 499.2 (Dec. 2020), pp. 1948–1971. doi: 10.1093/
mnras/staa2861. arXiv: 2007.09853 [astro-ph.GA].
[26]
B. Magnelli et al. “The deepest Herschel-PACS far-infrared survey: number counts
and infrared luminosity functions from combined PEP/GOODS-H observations”.
In: Astronomy and Astrophysics 553, A132 (May 2013), A132. doi: 10.1051/0004-
6361/201321371. arXiv: 1303.4436 [astro-ph.CO].
[27]
L. Barrufet et al. “The ALMA REBELS Survey: the first infrared luminosity function
measurement at z ∼7”. In: Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society
522.3 (July 2023), pp. 3926–3934. doi: 10.1093/mnras/stad1259. arXiv: 2303.11321
[astro-ph.GA].
[28]
Georgios E. Magdis et al. “The Evolving Interstellar Medium of Star-forming Galax-
ies since z = 2 as Probed by Their Infrared Spectral Energy Distributions”. In: The
Astrophysical Journal 760.1, 6 (Nov. 2012), p. 6. doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/760/1/6.
arXiv: 1210.1035 [astro-ph.CO].
[29]
Piero Madau and Mark Dickinson. “Cosmic Star-Formation History”. In: Annual
Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics 52 (Aug. 2014), pp. 415–486. doi: 10.1146/
annurev-astro-081811-125615. arXiv: 1403.0007 [astro-ph.CO].
[30]
Sylvia Adscheid et al. “A3COSMOS and A3GOODSS: Continuum source catalogues
and multi-band number counts”. In: Astronomy and Astrophysics 685, A1 (May
2024), A1. doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202348407. arXiv: 2403.03125 [astro-ph.GA].
Exploring the development of Focal Plane Arrays for the Atacama Large Millimeter Array
37
==PAGE:46==
38
Exploring the development of Focal Plane Arrays for the Atacama Large Millimeter Array
==PAGE:47==
A
Appendix
A.1
Number counts as a function of area and RMS
Figure A.1: The plot on the left hand side shows the number counts as a function of area,
where the sensitivity is constant. On the right the number counts are plotted as a function
of the sensitivty, where the area is kept constant.
Figure A.2: The plot on the left hand side shows the number counts as a function of area,
where the sensitivity is constant. On the right the number counts are plotted as a function
of the sensitivty, where the area is kept constant.
Exploring the development of Focal Plane Arrays for the Atacama Large Millimeter Array
39
==PAGE:48==
Figure A.3: The plot on the left hand side shows the number counts as a function of area,
where the sensitivity is constant. On the right the number counts are plotted as a function
of the sensitivty, where the area is kept constant.
Figure A.4: The plot on the left hand side shows the number counts as a function of area,
where the sensitivity is constant. On the right the number counts are plotted as a function
of the sensitivty, where the area is kept constant.
40
Exploring the development of Focal Plane Arrays for the Atacama Large Millimeter Array
==PAGE:49==
Figure A.5: The plot on the left hand side shows the number counts as a function of area,
where the sensitivity is constant. On the right the number counts are plotted as a function
of the sensitivty, where the area is kept constant.
A.2
Luminosity function derived differential number
counts
Figure A.6: Differential number counts derived from luminosity functions for band 4,
across the entire redshift range. Overplotted is the Schechter fit to simulated data from
Lagos et al. (2020)
Exploring the development of Focal Plane Arrays for the Atacama Large Millimeter Array
41
==PAGE:50==
Figure A.7: Differential number counts derived from luminosity functions for band 5,
across the entire redshift range. Overplotted is the Schechter fit to simulated data from
Lagos et al. (2020).
Figure A.8: Differential number counts derived from luminosity functions for band 7,
across the entire redshift range. Overplotted is the Schechter fit to observed data from
Geach et al. (2017).
42
Exploring the development of Focal Plane Arrays for the Atacama Large Millimeter Array
==PAGE:51==
Figure A.9: Differential number counts derived from luminosity functions for band 8,
across the entire redshift range. Overplotted is the Schechter fit to simulated data from
Lagos et al. (2020).
Figure A.10: Differential number counts derived from luminosity functions for band 7,
across the entire redshift range. Overplotted is the Schechter fit to observed data from
Wang et al. (2017).
A.3
Luminosity function derived differential number count
fits and histograms per redshift bin
Exploring the development of Focal Plane Arrays for the Atacama Large Millimeter Array
43
==PAGE:52==
Figure A.11: Luminosity function derived differential number counts per redshift for band
4. The slope of the fitted Schechter is shown in text.
44
Exploring the development of Focal Plane Arrays for the Atacama Large Millimeter Array
==PAGE:53==
Figure A.12: Flux distribution of luminosity derived number counts per redshift for band
4.
Exploring the development of Focal Plane Arrays for the Atacama Large Millimeter Array
45
==PAGE:54==
Figure A.13: Luminosity function derived differential number counts per redshift for band
5. The slope of the fitted Schechter is shown in text.
46
Exploring the development of Focal Plane Arrays for the Atacama Large Millimeter Array
==PAGE:55==
Figure A.14: Flux distribution of luminosity derived number counts per redshift for band
5.
Exploring the development of Focal Plane Arrays for the Atacama Large Millimeter Array
47
==PAGE:56==
Figure A.15: Luminosity function derived differential number counts per redshift for band
7. The slope of the fitted Schechter is shown in text.
48
Exploring the development of Focal Plane Arrays for the Atacama Large Millimeter Array
==PAGE:57==
Figure A.16: Flux distribution of luminosity derived number counts per redshift for band
7.
Exploring the development of Focal Plane Arrays for the Atacama Large Millimeter Array
49
==PAGE:58==
Figure A.17: Luminosity function derived differential number counts per redshift for band
8. The slope of the fitted Schechter is shown in text.
50
Exploring the development of Focal Plane Arrays for the Atacama Large Millimeter Array
==PAGE:59==
Figure A.18: Flux distribution of luminosity derived number counts per redshift for band
8.
Exploring the development of Focal Plane Arrays for the Atacama Large Millimeter Array
51
==PAGE:60==
Figure A.19: Luminosity function derived differential number counts per redshift for band
9. The slope of the fitted Schechter is shown in text.
52
Exploring the development of Focal Plane Arrays for the Atacama Large Millimeter Array
==PAGE:61==
Figure A.20: Flux distribution of luminosity derived number counts per redshift for band
9.
Exploring the development of Focal Plane Arrays for the Atacama Large Millimeter Array
53
==PAGE:62==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Elektrovej, Building 327
www.space.dtu.dk
