==PAGE:1==
Modelling the 4D Resolution function for
the Neutron Spectrometer BIFROST
Enabling Realistic Comparison Between Theory and Experiment
Nicolai Lindaa Amin - s194113
Master Thesis
DTU Physics
Department of Physics
==PAGE:2==
Super-Resolution Methods for the BIFROST Spectrometer
Enabling Realistic Comparison Between Theory and Experiment
Master Thesis
July, 2025
By: Nicolai Lindaa Amin - s194113
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the customary bibli-
ographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Nicolai Amin, 2025
Published by:
DTU, Department of Physics, Fysikvej, Building 307, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.physics.dtu.dk
Tel.: +45 2381 4736
Mail: info@fysik.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
i
Abstract
This thesis develops a theoretical resolution model for the BIFROST spectrometer at the European
Spallation Source (ESS). The model, based on linear error propagation and covariance matrices, is
validated against detailed Monte Carlo ray-tracing simulations performed with McStas. It predicts the
resolution across all components of ( ⃗Q, ∆E) space with residuals below 5%, and captures the under-
lying correlations with good accuracy, though some higher-order correlations are not fully reproduced.
The model is further tested through single-mode approximation (SMA) convolutions of a lead phonon
dispersion, showing excellent agreement with McStas simulations, with full width at half maximum
(FWHM) residuals of line cuts being within 10%. In addition to its accuracy, the convolution approach
demonstrates significant computational advantages, including faster runtime and reduced memory and
storage demands. These results confirm both the validity and practical utility of the theoretical resolu-
tion model for predictive calculations and experimental interpretation.
==PAGE:4==
Preface
ii
Preface
This Masters Thesis was prepared at the department of Physics at the Technical University of Denmark
in fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring a Masters Degree (M.Sc.) in Engineering Physics.
Kongens Lyngby, July 25, 2025
Nicolai Lindaa Amin - s194113
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgments
iii
Acknowledgments
Firstly, I would like to thank Gregory Tucker and Rasmus Toft-Petersen for their first-class supervision.
Without their guidance and support, this thesis would not have been finished, much less have the results
that are presented in it. Thank you for many trips to the ESS for impromptu lunch meetings, long
Whatsapp text chains, and for always being available to talk things through. Sorry if the thesis was a
bit longer than expected!
I would incredibly grateful to Niels Bech Christenen for his guidance as my Honors Program supervisor.
Thank you for guiding me, and for getting me hooked on neutron scattering in the first place. Your
support, from helping shape my study plan to arranging my internship at PSI, has made a huge impact
on my life. I know that I would not be where I am right now, nor have the experiences I have had the
last two years, without you.
A special thanks to Peter Willendrup for his invaluable help with the McStas-related challenges in this
project, as well as all the other technical McStas problem I’ve encountered over the years.
Thank you to my girlfriend, Isabella, for being endlessly patient, helping with wording, listening to me
ramble about uncertainties on uncertainties, and keeping me from being malnourished during the final
stretch of writing.
Lastly, but not least, thank you to my family and friends for your support, help and occasionally
(much-needed) distractions.
==PAGE:6==
Contents
iv
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
ii
Acknowledgments
iii
Contents
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Neutron Scattering
2
2.1
Interactions and Instrumentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.2
Elastic Coherent Scattering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.3
Inelastic Coherent scattering
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3
The ESS and BIFROST
6
3.1
The European Spallation Source - ESS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.2
BIFROST - The Extreme Environment Spectrometer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.3
Instrumental Calculations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.4
Instrument Resolution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4
BIFROST Simulations
18
4.1
McStas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.2
BIFROST model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.3
Data Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.4
Resolution Simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5
Resolution Results and Validation
24
5.1
Determination of Neutron Path Variances . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.2
Validation of Theoretical Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.3
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6
Resolution Effects on Phonon Dispersion
47
6.1
Theoretical Phonon Dispersion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
6.2
Resolution Orientation and Sample Frame . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
6.3
Monte Carlo Convolution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
6.4
Methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
6.5
Results and Visualization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
6.6
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
7
Conclusion
60
A Angular deviation of Ef
62
B Phonon Slices
64
C Bhattacharyya Distance Results
74
C.1 Varying Detector Element . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
C.2 Varying Jaws . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
C.3 Results for all analyzers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
Bibliography
146
==PAGE:7==
1 Introduction
1
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
The discovery and design of modern materials increasingly depends on understanding structure and
collective dynamics of large systems. These include atomic arrangements, phonon dispersions, spin
correlations, and electron-lattice interactions. Understanding these characteristics is essential for fun-
damental discoveries, such as unraveling the origins of high-temperature superconductivity. Along with
this, they also enable advancements in quantum materials, energy storage, and spintronic devices. As
such, accurately understanding them is important for materials research, and it is essential for both
fundamental physics and the development of next-generation technologies.
One powerful technique to explores these systems is neutron scattering. Developed in the mid 20th
century, and winning the Nobel Prize in 1994 [1], this technique stands out as not only being able to
probe bulk materials, but also able to provide a large insight into lattice vibrations and magnetic exci-
tations. However, the raw experimental data do not directly reveal the true physical spectra. Instead,
they are inherently influenced by the instrument’s resolution, effectively a filter that blurs and reshapes
the measured signal. Without rigorous modeling of this resolution, critical features such as subtle mode
splittings or fine magnetic structures risk being misinterpreted or lost altogether.
As condensed matter research delves into ever more complex and exotic materials, the demand for pre-
cise resolution characterization becomes increasingly vital. The state-of-the-art spectrometer BIFROST
at the European Spallation Source (ESS) [2], [3] will push the boundaries of what is experimentally
achievable using it’s intrinsically good resolution. Nonetheless, even with its excellent intrinsic reso-
lution, a detailed understanding of the resolution function remains crucial for correctly interpreting
experimental data and distinguishing subtle physical features.
This project will focus on developing a theoretical resolution model for BIFROST, using linear error
propagation and covariance matrices, allowing the resolution function to be represented as a multivari-
ate Gaussian. This formalism lends itself to representing the resolution as ellipsoids, which visualize the
shape and orientation. Along with this, a full resolution model can be used to perform eﬀicient convo-
lution of theoretical dispersion relations. These convolutions are essential for interpreting experimental
spectra, as they allow for quantitative comparisons that include the instrument’s resolution.
This
helps in refining theoretical models, guiding experimental designs, and understanding subtle features in
scattering data.
To complement the analytical framework, detailed Monte Carlo ray-tracing simulations are performed
with the McStas software package. These simulations provide realistic representations of the BIFROST
instrument, including its source, guide, choppers, analyzers, and detectors. The results from McStas
serve both as a benchmark for validating the theoretical resolution model and convolutions.
==PAGE:8==
2 Neutron Scattering
2
CHAPTER 2
Neutron Scattering
Neutron scattering is a powerful tool for understanding materials at the atomic scale due to a com-
bination of properties. Firstly, cold and thermal neutrons, 0.05-200 meV, have energies which lie in a
range that makes them well-suited for studying dynamics of atomic structures. Similarly, the wave-
length of the neutrons is on the order of Angstrom, the same scale as interatomic distance, allowing
for investigating atomic-scale structures. Because neutrons interact with materials quite weakly, they
have a large penetration depth, and are quite useful for studying bulk materials. Lastly, since neutrons
carry a magnetic moment, the magnetic structure and dynamics of materials is also possible to probe.
These characteristics make neutron scattering an invaluable tool for exploring a wide range of material
properties [4].
To describe neutron scatter, one would assume that quantum mechanics would be used, as they are
subatomic particles. The quantum limit for precisely knowing quantities of a given particle is given by
Heisenberg uncertainty principle:
δEδt ≥ℏ
2
δxδpx ≥ℏ
2
(2.1)
(and similarly in y and z). However, for thermal or cold neutron instruments, δxδpx will be many
times ℏ. As an example, the smallest neutron samples are typically 1 mm broad, and the divergence of
the momentum can be down to 0.06◦. Thus the uncertainty on the momentum of a 10 meV neutron is
0.001mnv ≈1.7 · 10−26 kg ∗m/s. As such the product of the two uncertainties is 1600ℏ[5]. This means
that, as a approximation, neutrons can be treated semi-classically, as particles with definite positions
and momenta during their interactions. This largely simplifies the calculations of scattering processes.
There are some important relations between different neutron characteristics that need to be defined:
E = mn
2 |v|2
(2.2)
The wavelength of a neutron from it’s de-Broglie wavelength:
λ = 2πℏ
m|v|
(2.3)
Lastly the wave number k:
⃗k = mn
ℏ⃗v
|k| = 2π
λ
(2.4)
where mn is the mass of the neutron.
2.1
Interactions and Instrumentation
Neutrons interact with materials due to two different types of interactions: Firstly, neutrons are able to
interact with atomic nuclei due to the strong force, and secondly, they are able to interact with materials
through the electromagnetic force due to their magnetic moment. For this project the interaction due
to the magnetic moment will not be considered.
There are many different situations that can take place when a neutrons and matter interact. The first
and most simple is that a nuclei absorbs the neutron. The second possibility is that no interaction
will take place, transmission. The last possibility is that the neutrons will scatter, either coherently or
incoherently. The later is used to describe randomly scattered neutrons, which do not have a directional
preference, due to interactions with the individual atoms in the material not being correlated. As such
coherent scattering is the type of scattering that is important for neutron scattering experiments, as it
arises from the interaction with individual atoms being correlated and constructively or destructively
interfering with each other.
==PAGE:9==
2.2 Elastic Coherent Scattering
3
Figure 2.1: Bragg’s law in neutron diffraction for a crystal with distance d between planes, and the
blue circles representing atoms in the crystal lattice [6].
2.2
Elastic Coherent Scattering
Most materials of interest in neutron scattering are crystalline, meaning that their atoms are arranged
in a periodic lattice. This periodicity can be described in terms of a real-space lattice with basis vectors
⃗a,⃗b,⃗c and a corresponding reciprocal basis vectors are given as:
⃗a∗= 2π
⃗b × ⃗c
⃗a ·

⃗b × ⃗c

(2.5)
where the denominator is the volume of the unit cell in real space, and similarly for ⃗b∗and ⃗c∗. For a
cubic lattice, this simplifies to be |⃗a∗| =
2π
|⃗a|2 .
When a neutron scatters off of a crystal and it’s momentum is changed, it imparts some momentum
change onto the crystal. Considering it’s incident, ⃗ki, and final wavevector, ⃗kf:
⃗ki −⃗kf = ⃗Q
(2.6)
where ⃗Q is the momentum transfer vector. For constructive interference to occur, ⃗Q must match a
reciprocal lattice vector ⃗G, leading to the Laue condition:
⃗Q = ⃗G = H⃗a∗+ K⃗b∗+ L⃗c∗,
(2.7)
where (H, K, L) are integers known as the Miller indices. These indices label a family of lattice planes.
For example, the (1, 0, 0) planes are normal to ⃗a. A plane in this family passes through all lattice
points where x = n ∗|⃗a| for a given n ∈Z, where x is the position along the ⃗a direction. Similarly, the
(1, 1, 0) plane cuts through intersects both the ⃗a and ⃗b axes.
The distance between these planes is given as
dHKL =
2π
|⃗GHKL|
(2.8)
If one considers only the scattering angle between a given plane and the plane, the Laue condition can
be written instead as Braggs Law:
nλ = 2dHKL sin(θ)
(2.9)
where n ∈N, λ is the wavelength of the neutron and θ is the scattering angle, as seen in Figure 2.1.
==PAGE:10==
2.3 Inelastic Coherent scattering
4
2.2.1
Diffractometers and Monochromators
When utilizing elastic scattering, the structure of a material is probed. By measuring the intensity
of scattered neutrons as a function of ⃗Q, it can be found which (HKL) values are allowed and thus
reconstruct the crystal structure.
Neutron diffractometers are designed for this, by recording the intensity for a set of in and out of plane
scattering angles for a given wavelength. From this, different diffraction peaks can used to map out the
structure, lattice constants and symmetry of the crystal. Along with this, it can be used to figure out
incommensurate crystal structures, which can show long-range order interactions.
An important instrumental use of elastic scattering is wavelength selection.
This can be done by
orienting a crystal at the Bragg angle, θ from (2.9). The crystal will then only reflecting whole number
multiples of the fundamental wavelength that satisfies (2.9). This is called a monochromator, and is
commonly used for energy differentiation in neutron instruments.
2.3
Inelastic Coherent scattering
When moving to the inelastic case, the neutron also imparts some energy into the sample. This energy
deposited in the sample can cause coherent excitations, which reveals the dynamics of a sample, how
the atoms and their magnetic moments change and interact over time. The momentum difference is
described the same as for the elastic method, but the energy difference is given as:
∆E = Ei −Ef
(2.10)
where Ei is the incident energy and Ef is the final energy.
2.3.1
Spectrometers
Spectrometers are instruments designed to measure ( ⃗Q, ∆E) space, thereby mapping out the dynamic
structure factor S( ⃗Q, ω) of a specific material. The structure factor encodes the probability of a neutron
exchanging both momentum ⃗Q and energy ω with the sample and provides direct information about
its dynamic excitations.
Neutron spectrometers measure different angles around the sample and fix either Ei or Ef (or both),
to measure a given ( ⃗Q, ∆E) point. For a classical triple-axis spectrometer, both Ei and Ef are fixed
using monochromators.
Figure 2.2: Top figure shows the 1D chain model one can derive the phonon energy from. The lower
figure shows the shape of the 1D phonon dispersion.
==PAGE:11==
2.3 Inelastic Coherent scattering
5
2.3.2
Phonons
An example of a collective excitation is the phonon, which is a quantized vibrational excitation. A
phonon can more simply be though of as a sound traveling through a crystal. When sound travels
through air, it compresses and expands in a synchronized, repeating fashion. Similarly, when there is a
vibration is in a crystal, the particles will coherently be displaced back and forward.
The energy of a 1D phonon can be found by considering a chain of particles of mass m, each connected
by springs with elastic constant κ, as seen in Figure 2.2 [7]. In this case, the displacement from the
equilibrium position of a particle i, can be defined as:
δxi(t) = xi(t) −xi,0
(2.11)
The equation of motion for the nth particle is then:
−2κδxn(t) + κ(δxn+1(t) + δxn−1(t)) = m∂2δxn
∂t2
(2.12)
Since the motion of the particles is expected to be periodic, it is important to impose periodic boundary
conditions, and with this, the solution will be of the form:
δxn(t) = A · exp(−iωt −ikna)
(2.13)
which leads to the dispersion relation:
ω = 2
s
κ
m sin2
ka
2

(2.14)
Where k is the wavevector of the particle, a is the unit cell size. By replacing particles with atoms,
and the spring with an attractive force between the atoms, this shows a simplified 1D acoustic phonon
dispersion relation, as shown in Figure 2.2. In real materials, this case does not work, as the unit cell
can contain more than one atom, with several interactions between several different atoms. This leads
to multiple phonon branches and anisotropies depending on the stricture of the crystal.
==PAGE:12==
3 The ESS and BIFROST
6
CHAPTER 3
The ESS and BIFROST
To fully exploit the unique properties of neutrons in probing materials, large-scale research facilities
have been developed to produce and utilize neutron beams. These facilities produce neutrons through
two different methods, either nuclear reactors, which produce neutrons as a bi-product of fission, or
spallation sources, which use large proton accelerators to collide protons with neutron rich nuclei, which
fragment into neutrons [4].
While reactor sources have enabled decades of research for many different communities, they have
reached the apex of their capabilities [8], [9]. To meet the growing demands of modern science, particu-
larly the need to study increasingly complex, dynamic, and nanoscale systems, more powerful neutron
sources are required. This need has led to the construction of the European Spallation Source (ESS) in
Lund, Sweden, designed to be the world’s most powerful neutron source.
3.1
The European Spallation Source - ESS
Currently under construction and expected to begin user operations by 2027, the ESS will utilize a
long-pulse spallation design to deliver high flux neutron beams to a suite of cutting-edge instruments.
The layout of the facility can be seen in Figure 3.1.
Neutron production at ESS starts with a powerful linear accelerator (seen in Figure 3.1, G02), using
sections of conducting and super conducting cavities to accelerate protons to 2 GeV, and an average
beam power of 5 MW. These protons strike a rotating tungsten target, which upon impact, releases
bursts of high energy neutrons. The emitted fast neutron then strike the ESS “butterfly” moderator,
which is made of two different parts: an outer cold moderator, which uses liquid hydrogen (H2) as a
moderator, and is in the shape of butterfly wings; a central X shaped moderator, connecting the cold
Figure 3.1: Layout of the ESS facility, from [10].
==PAGE:13==
3.1 The European Spallation Source - ESS
7
Figure 3.2: Simulated time structure of neutron pulses at ESS compared to existing spallation sources.
The long-pulse design provides a broader pulse width, which can be flexibly shaped by
choppers at the instrument level. From [10].
moderator wings, which uses water as a moderator. The design of the moderator produces near uniform
brightness (n/cm2/s/sr/Å) on all 44 beam lines for both thermal and cold neutrons. Thanks to this
design, ESS is expected to achieve a cold neutron brilliance three times higher per-proton than that of
other spallation sources [10].
The pulsed nature of the linac naturally leads to a pulsed neutron pulse, as seen in Figure 3.2. The linac
operates with a rate of 14 Hz, and the moderating pulse time is 2.86 ms. This combination provides a
good baseline for versatile neutron instruments, that have different requirements for the neutron beam
properties. This allows for a tailoring a ratio between the neutron flux at the sample position and
specific resolution requirements for instruments and even different experiments.
The ESS is not only designed for high performance, but also for flexibility and long-term sustainability,
supporting a broad scientific community across fields such as magnetism, soft matter, biology, and
energy materials. To meet the needs of these communities, ESS will host a comprehensive suite of
instruments dedicated to both structural and dynamical studies of materials.
The ESS’ suite includes both diffractometer such as powder diffractometer or small-angle neutron
scattering (SANS), which study atomic and magnetic structure in materials under different conditions,
Figure 3.3: BIFROST instrument layout, from [3].
==PAGE:14==
3.2 BIFROST - The Extreme Environment Spectrometer
8
Figure 3.4: TOF Diagram of the BIFROST instrument. Left shows the entire length of the instrument,
with the 3 chopper types, PSC, FOC and BW. The right figure is a close up of how the
PSC choppers shape the nominal pulse, allowing for improved energy resolution..
such as strain, temperature or magnetic field. Along with this, there is a wide array of spectrometers
for dynamics studies. One of the instruments under development at ESS is BIFROST, a state-of-the-
art spectrometer tailored for high-resolution studies of magnetic and lattice excitations in quantum
materials in extreme environments.
3.2
BIFROST - The Extreme Environment Spectrometer
As illustrated in Figure 3.3, BIFROST features a long primary flight path with flexible beam-shaping
components and a secondary spectrometer based on the prismatic analyzer concept. It is an in-direct
geometry time-of-flight spectrometer, which means that it measures the neutrons energy transfer at the
sample by having a fixed final energy, and recording the time-of-flight of each neutron when it arrives
at the detector element. By combining the high brilliance of ESS with innovative instrument design,
BIFROST is optimized for studying excitations in materials, especially superconductivity and magnetic
excitations. Specifically BIFROST has an emphasis on tailoring energy and momentum resolution for
different experiments [2].
3.2.1
Primary Spectrometer - Guide, Choppers and Jaws
The primary spectrometer transports neutrons from the moderator to the sample position, while shaping
the beam in time and divergence. It consists of a long guide system, three chopper pairs, and adjustable
collimating jaws. A simplified time-of-flight (TOF) diagram for BIFROST can be seen in Figure 3.4,
which shows the chopper system, which consists of three sets: the pulse shaping choppers (PSC), located
about 6.5 m away from the moderator; two frame overlap choppers (FOC), located at 8.5 m and 15 m
from the moderator; and the bandwidth choppers (BW), located at 78 m from the moderator.
Each of these chopper pairs serves a different purpose, which can be inferred by their names. The
PSCs shape the pulse by having a set of two choppers which have the same opening angles and speeds,
but slightly different delays. This allows one to shape the pulse in time, having a very high degree of
certainty of when the neutrons should be the center point of the two PSCs (highlighted in Figure 3.4
Right). The FOCs make sure that neutrons from different pulses do not cross into the frame of another
pulse, as seen in Figure 3.4 on the right. A frame is defined as the time interval during which neutrons
from one moderator pulse arrive at the sample position.
This interval is important, as it ensures
==PAGE:15==
3.2 BIFROST - The Extreme Environment Spectrometer
9
that the measured TOF can be associated with a specific pulse. As illustrated in Figure 3.4, a new
moderator pulse starts before the previous frame is done, which needs to be taken into consideration
when calculating the ToF. The last chopper pair, the BWCs, also serve to make sure the frames of two
pulses do not overlap, and also serve to specify the wavelength bandwidth that arrives at the sample
position, which for BIFROST is ∼1.7 Å. The choppers speeds and delays are all calculated from the
wavelength range that is requested at the sample position and the PSC opening.
Along with the choppers, the guide system helps transport neutrons from moderator to sample. The
guide consists of a focusing section before the PSC, and a curved section thereafter, to remove direct
line of sight of the moderator. This reduces the impact of fast neutrons and gamma rays that may
be created at the moderator, which would ruin measurements. After the FOCs, the guide transitions
to a de-focusing elliptical section, which gently expands the beam into a straight section before finally
refocusing it near the sample with a final elliptical part. The entire guide system is coated with varying
degrees of supermirror coating.
The coating improves neutron transport by allowing reflections at
higher incident angles than the pure substrate, utilizing alternating layers of materials to improve the
reflectivity. This also has a wavelength dependent impact on the divergence of neutrons.
Lastly, three meters before the sample position, a set of four jaws are in place which can be varied in
width. Together, the jaws act as collimators to limit the divergence of the neutrons able to arrive at
the sample.
3.2.2
Secondary Spectrometer - Analyzers and Detectors
After the sample, BIFROST employs an indirect geometry multiplexing secondary spectrometer, where
the final neutron energy, Ef, is fixed using a set of monochromators (analyzers). Five analyzer sets,
all using the (002) Bragg plane reflection of highly oriented pyrolytic graphite (HOPG) crystals have
been installed in series, selecting final energies 2.7, 3.2, 3.8, 4.4, and 5 meV. Each multiplexing analyzer
channel spans 5.2° in-plane. BIFROST’s eﬀiciency is further enhanced by employing nine such analyzer
channels in the secondary spectrometer tank, spaced 10° apart, as seen in Figure 3.5. Consequently, by
rotating the detector tank to two different angular settings, separated by 5◦, BIFROST is capable of
Figure 3.5: Left) Shows the secondary spectrometer from an aerial view. The orange circle is the
sample position. A4 shows the angle of rotation of the tank. θs shows the scattering
angle of a given neutron, into channel 1, which has central angle of ϕ0. The asymmetrical
steps in each channel is also clearly shown. Channel indices go from 1 to 9, from lowest to
highest central scattering angle. Analyzer angles go from 1 to 5, from inner most (2.7 meV)
to outer most analyzer (5 meV). Right) Shows the detector set up, with the places where
the charge is deposited to the left and right of the triplet. The top tube (Tube index
1) shows the 100 bins that each detector is split into. The arrows on the wire running
through the triplet shows the direction of Lx. As can be seen, the direction in the middle
tube (Tube index 2) is reversed compared to the others. Tubes indices go from top to
bottom, 1 to 3. Detector element indices go from left to right, 1 to 100.
==PAGE:16==
3.2 BIFROST - The Extreme Environment Spectrometer
10
Figure 3.6: A figure illustrating the multiplexing concept.
The left show the final energies of all
neutrons which land on the detector triplet, if one does not separate the tubes. The right
shows the energies if one splits the result up by tube. Here the central 4 pixels are binned
together to give this result.
covering a continuous 90° scattering angle range.
The channels follow a near-symmetric Rowland geometry, where the distance from the sample to the
analyzer is approximately equal to the distance from the analyzer to the detector. Instead of having
continuous detector coverage like CAMEA at SINQ PSI [11], [12], BIFROST employs a targeted layout
using detector triplets, each composed of three serially connected Helium-3 tubes.
Due to the mosaicity of the analyzer crystals, 60 arcmin, the accepted energies, and thus the energies
that arrive at the detector, is broadened. This has a positive effect in increasing the intensity at the
detector, but increasing the number of different energies that arrive at the detectors. However, this
allows BIFROST to utilize the prismatic analyzer concept. Since the analyzer reflects a range of energies
due to its finite mosaic spread, and these energies are reflected at slightly different angles according to
Bragg’s law, the neutrons are focused onto different angles. Thus, each detector tube in the triplet will
resolve a different final energy, as seen in Figure 3.6. This spatial-energy correlation effectively increases
the energy resolution without sacrificing intensity.
Since the analyzers are flat, only neutrons striking the center of an analyzer reflect at the exact Bragg
angle. Neutrons hitting different in-plane positions on the analyzer effectively encounter slightly different
incidence angles, which results in a variation of the probed Ef, as seen in Figure 3.7. This effect is a
function of the deviation ϕ′ from the channels central scattering angle ϕ0, and will be discussed further
in Section 3.3.
Figure 3.7: Final energy as a function of the position along the tube in degrees. 0 is at the center of
the analyzer. The red line is a function showing the cosine dependence of the distribution.
==PAGE:17==
3.3 Instrumental Calculations
11
The vertical acceptance of each analyzer is determined by the sample–analyzer distance and the mo-
saicity of the HOPG crystals. With the 7 to 9 HOPG wedges that are used in each analyzer, the total
vertical coverage of the analyzers is at most ±2° , for 2.7 meV, and lowest ±1.47° , for 5 meV.
As mentioned, the detectors are set up in triplets, which are connected in series, as seen in Figure 3.5.
Thus, signals from each tube in a triplet share a common readout system and are distinguished based
on their individual channel responses. When a neutron is detected by a 3He tube, an ionization cascade
is caused. This produces an electrical signal which propagates to both ends of the triplets. This signal
is read out as the integrated charge deposited at the left and right side of the triplet, from which both
the interaction position along the tube’s central axis can be reconstructed via the relation of the two
charges:
Lx = CR −CL
CR + CL
(3.1)
This normalized position Lx is mapped to the interval [−1,1], where −1 is the left most part of the
triplet, and 1 is the rightmost part. The physical location of the hit within the triplet, is inferred from
this value. Ignoring the resistance between the wires connecting the tubes for now, the triplet is divided
into three equal segments, with tube boundaries set at Lx = −1
3 and Lx = 1
3 for tubes 1 and 2, and 2
and 3 respectively. From this, each section can be split into 100 different bins, which are the detector
elements.
An important detail arises due to the readout wiring configuration: the tubes are connected in series
such that the right end of tubes 1 and 2 are connected, as are the left ends of tubes 2 and 3. This
means that tube 2 is electrically read out in the opposite direction compared to tubes 1 and 3, as seen
in Figure 3.5. As a result, for neutrons detected in tube 2, the position Lx must be inverted to correctly
reflect the spatial geometry of the detector.
3.3
Instrumental Calculations
To reconstruct the neutron’s energy and momentum transfer, BIFROST relies on both event-level data
and experimental metadata. Each detected neutron event provides:
• Detection time (event_time): Used to calculate time-of-flight and incident energy. referenced to
the most recent moderator pulse, meaning the zero point is defined at the start of the most recent
pulse.
• Integrated charge in the left and right ends of the Helium-3 detector triplet (event_charge_left
and event_charge_right): Allows for position reconstruction along the detector length and thus
determination of which detector element the event occurred at.
• Channel and Analyzer information (FIBER, GROUP): This information encodes which channel and
analyzer an event occurred at.
• Weighting (p): The weighting of a neutron based on detector eﬀiciency and attenuation (how
many neutrons have been absorbed by previous analyzers).
In addition to the event data, the analysis makes use of metadata recorded at the time of measurement:
• A4 Angle: Rotation of the detector tank, defined at the center of the central channel
• A3 Angle: Rotation of the sample
• PSC Velocity and Angular Phase: Determines the incident neutron time-of-flight window and
energy band
• Sample information: Describes the physical properties and environment of the sample at the
time of measurement, including temperature, magnetic field, orientation of the sample and lattice
parameters.
Together, this all allows for a complete determination of the neutron’s energy and scattering vector in
each event. The following subsections outline how the energy and momentum transfer (∆E, ⃗Q) are
calculated based on this data.
==PAGE:18==
3.3 Instrumental Calculations
12
3.3.1
Laboratory Reference Frame
Before starting any calculations it is important to define a reference frame for the instrument. As such,
for this project, the z-direction will be along the nominal incident neutron beam at the sample position,
and the y-direction will be vertically upwards. This implies that the x-direction is defined to be in the
horizontal plane, perpendicular to the beam, pointing to the left when viewed from the source toward
the sample. This reference frame is based on McStas conventions.
3.3.2
Detector Element
For the secondary spectrometer, there are a few things that are detector element specific. For BIFROST,
each tube in a triplet is split into 100 detector elements, such that in total there are
100 Detector elements × 3 Tubes × 5 Analyzers × 9 Channels = 13500
(3.2)
possible detector elements. Each of these detector elements has a nominal final energy, Ef, path length
L2, and scattering angle for a given A4. Thus it is important to know which detector element recorded
the event.
The FIBER and GROUP variables are used at the actual BIFROST instrument to know which electrical
port a signal comes from, which in turn encodes which analyzer and channel an event is coming from.
Channels and analyzer indices range from 1-9 and 1-5 respectively, as seen in Figure 3.5. They are
encoded in FIBER and GROUP as such:
A = floor(GROUP/3) + 1
C = 3 floor(FIBER/2) + (GROUP
mod 3) + 1
(3.3)
where A is the analyzer index and C is the channel index. As mentioned in Section 3.2.2, the detector
element, indices ranging from 1-100, and triplet tube, indices ranging from 1-3, can be found from the
integrated charges. By digitizing Lx to 300 bins, an event will have the bin id bi, and then the tube
and detector element can be calculated as:
T = floor(bi/100) + 1
di =
 (bi
mod 100) + 1,
for bi < 100 or bi > 199
100 −(bi
mod 100),
else
(3.4)
where T is the tube index, and di is the detector element index on each tube. This calculation is
specifically for when there is no resistance between the tubes in a triplet, which is the case this project
will be working with.
3.3.3
Energy Calculation
The final energy is determined by the detection position on the secondary spectrometer. Each tube has
a nominal energy EA,T
f0
at the middle of the tube. This energy is defined from Bragg scattering:
EA,T
f0
=
h2
2mn
1

2d sin(θA,T
B
)
2
(3.5)
Where θA,T
B
is the nominal Bragg angle for the middle of a specific analyzer and tube, d is the inter-planar
spacing for the (002) HOPG reflection, h is Planck’s constant, and mn is the mass of the neutron.
Since the analyzers are flat, and are aligned such that the center of each analyzer is perpendicular to the
incident beam, neutrons arriving at detectors offset by an angle ϕ′ from the central channel effectively
scatter at a slightly different Bragg angle. The energy shift due to this angular deviation is given by:
Ef =
EA,T
f0
cos(ϕ′ A,T,di)
(3.6)
This is derived by looking at the angle between the Bragg scattering vector τ and an incident neutron
at the angle ϕ′. The full derivation of this is found in Appendix A. Once the final energy is determined,
the neutron velocity and time-of-flight from sample to detector can be calculated:
vf =
r
2Ef
mn
t2 = L2
vf
(3.7)
==PAGE:19==
3.3 Instrumental Calculations
13
where L2 is the distance from sample to detector for the given detector element. The incident energy
is found as such:
Ei = mn
2 v2
i = mn
2

L1
T −t2
2
(3.8)
with L1 being the PSC-to-sample distance and T the total time-of-flight from the PSC to the detector.
T is the measured event time subtracted by midpoint of when the PSC is open. This is done to specify
a well-known time that all neutrons should be at the distance L1 from the sample. The energy transfer
is finally computed as:
∆E = Ei −Ef
(3.9)
3.3.4
Momentum Calculation
The magnitude of the wave vector is found from the energy to wave vector conversion :
|k| =
√2mnE
ℏ
(3.10)
The nominal incident wave vector is directed along the beamline thus:
ki =


0
0
|ki|


(3.11)
The scattered vector depends on the detector’s physical angle relative to the beam. Each detector
element is assigned a scattering angle ϕ, which, together with the A4 angle, gives the total scattering
angle, θs = ϕ + A4, and:
kf = |kf|


sin(θs)
0
cos(θs)


(3.12)
Subtracting kf from ki gives the components of the momentum transfer, which is also illustrated in
Figure 3.8:
Qx = −|kf| sin(θs)
Qy = 0
Qz = |ki| −|kf| cos(θs)
(3.13)
3.3.5
Sample Reference Frame
When a sample is measured, it is necessary to define a sample reference frame in order to describe the
momentum transfer ⃗Q in crystallographic coordinates. This is typically done by defining ⃗Qc in terms
of the unit cell of the measured sample, defined by the Miller indices (HKL). In an experiment this can
be done by measuring the orientation of the sample, using known scattering angles that fulfill the Laue
Figure 3.8: Left: Representation of the scattering triangle in wavevector space. Right: Representation
of rotation from laboratory reference frame Ql to sample reference frame Qc, because of
the angle A3.
==PAGE:20==
3.4 Instrument Resolution
14
condition, and then following the UB matrix procedure set out by Busing and Levy [13] to transform
from the instrument frame to the sample frame. For the data analysis in this chapter, it will be assumed
that the sample is cubic, and that the crystallographic ⃗a axis is aligned with the laboratory z axis when
the sample rotation, A3, is 0.
When measuring a given scattering vector ⃗Ql in the laboratory frame, it is important to know which
scattering vector ⃗Qc it relates to in the reference frame of the sample. The transformation between the
two vectors will depend on the orientation of the lattice compared to the orientation of the laboratory.
Therefore, by multiplying the laboratory frame scattering vector with a rotation matrix, for instance,
if the sample is rotated around the vertical axis by an angle A3, then:
⃗Qc =


cos(A3)
0
−sin(A3)
0
1
0
sin(A3)
0
cos(A3)

·


−|kf| sin(θs)
0
|ki| −|kf| cos(θs)


(3.14)
To convert these to Miller indices for a cubic lattice, each component is divided by the magnitude of
the corresponding reciprocal lattice vector, for instance, H = QH/|⃗a∗|, where QH is the components of
the scattering vector ⃗Q along the direction of the reciprocal lattice vector ⃗a∗.
3.4
Instrument Resolution
Resolution plays a fundamental role in determining the performance of a neutron spectrometer. For
BIFROST, achieving a good resolution for inelastic scattering is essential for precise measurements of
dispersion surfaces. Equally crucial is understanding the shape of the resolution function, how it varies in
( ⃗Q, ∆E)-space and how it varies with instrument settings and geometry. A well-characterized resolution
function is important for properly interpreting experimental data and comparing it to theoretical models.
This section will outline a theoretical framework for the resolution function R( ⃗Q, ∆E).
3.4.1
Definition of the Resolution Function
In previous sections, resolution has been loosely described as a “blurring” effect on measured data, but
it is essential to define it more precisely. In experimental physics, resolution quantifies an instrument’s
ability to distinguish between two nearby signals or features as separate entities, rather than as a single,
merged response. It reflects the intrinsic precision and limitations of the measurement system. A high
resolution instrument can resolve fine details and separate closely spaced peaks, while low resolution
leads to significant overlap and loss of information.
A good analogy for resolution is to imagine two cameras taking pictures of the night sky. One camera
has a very few large pixels. It is unable to precisely differentiate between two nearby stars, but each
pixel receives a large amount of light.
The other camera has a lot of small pixels, resolving every
star, but each pixel receives significantly less light. This illustrates the trade-off between resolution
and intensity. While a high resolution instrument will be able to resolve features better than a low
resolution instrument, the high resolution instrument will typically have a lower detected intensity, as
the number of neutrons that are within the small resolving volume in ( ⃗Q, ∆E) space is fewer. This
factor is important to remember, and is the reason why if instruments had resolution functions that
were delta function in ( ⃗Q, ∆E) space, they would never measure anything.
Mathematically, the intensity measured by a neutron instrument is the convolution of the intrinsic
scattering signal, represented by the dynamic structure factor S( ⃗Q, ω), and the instrument’s resolution
I( ⃗Q0, ω0) =
ZZ
S( ⃗Q, ∆E)R( ⃗Q −⃗Q0, ∆E −∆E0) d ⃗Qd∆E
(3.15)
This convolution reflects how the resolution function spreads the signal, and why both resolution and
intensity must be considered when interpreting experimental data. The resolution function of neutron
spectrometers has been extensively studied in the past, with early efforts focusing on triple-axis spec-
trometers [14], [15]. These methods involve deriving an analytical expression for the resolution at any
point in ( ⃗Q, ∆E) space, by considering the resolution and correlation of incoming and outgoing wave-
vectors ki and kf. These classical methods laid the foundation for modern approaches. The resolution
calculations for direct-geometry ToF spectrometers by N. Violini et al. [16] form the basis of the present
work, which employs error propagation of ⃗Q and ∆E across the different components of the instrument.
==PAGE:21==
3.4 Instrument Resolution
15
The resolution function is well approximated by a multivariate Gaussian distribution in ( ⃗Q, ∆E) space.
This assumption is justified by the central limit theorem, as the total resolution arises from a combi-
nation of multiple independent sources of uncertainty, including pulse shape, chopper timing, detector
resolution, and geometrical factors. By assuming that each of these sources contributes a roughly Gaus-
sian broadening, their convolution results in an approximately Gaussian overall distribution [17], [18].
Representing the resolution as a Gaussian allows for a compact description using a covariance matrix,
which defines both the shape and orientation of the resolution function in four-dimensional space. An-
other positive aspect of the Gaussian approach is that the resolution function can be visualized as an
ellipsoid of equal probability in lower dimensions. This ellipsoidal representation provides an intuitive
understanding of the anisotropy of the resolution, showing how uncertainties are distributed differently
along various directions in ( ⃗Q, ∆E) space. This gives a direct comparison between the resolution’s ex-
tent in energy transfer versus momentum transfer and the ability to evaluate how well specific features
in the dispersion can be resolved.
3.4.2
Analytical Resolution Model
Neutron measurements probe a nominal point in ( ⃗Q, ∆E) space.
However, due to instrument and
beamline uncertainties, neutrons contributing to a given measurement actually span a finite volume
around this point. To characterize the resolution, it is necessary to evaluate how small variations in
the underlying neutron parameters (e.g., path length, scattering angle, time-of-flight) and instrumental
parameters (e.g., mosaicity, geometry) propagate into variations in ⃗Q and ∆E.
This propagation is treated using linear error propagation, which assumes that the total uncertainty in
( ⃗Q, ∆E) can be approximated by the first-order derivatives of these quantities with respect to the un-
derlying parameters. This approach enables a straightforward construction of the resolution covariance
matrix, from which the Gaussian resolution function is derived. The uncertainty of a single component,
yi, in ( ⃗Q, ∆E) space (either Qx, Qy, Qz or ∆E) can be written out as:
σ2
yi =
X
j
 
∂yi
∂xj

xj= ˆ
xj
σxj
!2
(3.16)
where xj is an independent parameter and σxj is the standard deviation from the nominal value ˆxj.
To extend this to multiple, potentially correlated, ( ⃗Q, ∆E) components, the Jacobian matrix J will be
defined with elements:
Jij = ∂yi
∂xj

⃗
xj= ˆ⃗
xj
(3.17)
Thus, J is a 4 by N matrix, where there are N parameters xj. The full covariance matrix is:
Σ ⃗Q∆E = J · Σx · J⊤
(3.18)
where Σx is the covariance matrix of the neutron path parameters. Σx is approximated to be diagonal,
and no correlations between variables are considered, which is discussed further in Section 5.3.1. The
resulting covariance matrix Σ ⃗Q, ∆E can be written as:
Σ ⃗Q, ∆E =




σQxQx
σQxQy
σQxQz
σQx∆E
σQxQy
σQyQy
σQyQz
σQy∆E
σQxQz
σQyQz
σQzQz
σQz∆E
σQx∆E
σQy∆E
σQz∆E
σ∆E∆E




(3.19)
where σij = ρijσiσj.
Here, σj is the standard deviation of component j, and ρij is the Pearson
correlation coeﬀicient between components i and j, ranging from −1 to 1, with ρii = 1 and ρij = ρji.
The diagonal terms are the variance of individual components, and the off-diagonal elements are the
covariance between different components. These covariances quantify how strongly two components of
the ( ⃗Q, ∆E) space vary together.
To compute the resolution for a specific spectrometer setting or measurement condition, it is necessary to
identify all neutron path parameters which influence the neutron’s trajectory and energy determination,
assign appropriate uncertainties to them, and calculate their partial derivatives with respect to the
output space ( ⃗Q, ∆E).
This process forms the core of the analytical resolution model, where the
sensitivity of the measurement to each parameter determines its contribution to the resolution ellipsoid.
==PAGE:22==
3.4 Instrument Resolution
16
3.4.3
Error Propagation
The analytical resolution method relies on precise knowledge of how uncertainties in the neutron path
parameters propagate to the quantities of interest. In neutron time-of-flight spectrometry, key contribu-
tors include flight path lengths, time resolution (from source pulse width or chopper opening time), and
angular resolution determined by beam divergence and detector element size. Each of these parameters
affects the measured wavevector ⃗k or energy transfer ∆E, which in turn defines the location in ( ⃗Q, ∆E)
space.
3.4.3.1
Parameter Considerations
This section will discuss which parameters will be considered for the model.
A parameter impacts
a neutron when there is possible variance in it that can cause confusion on the interpretation of the
neutrons characteristic (fx. ToF, scattering angle or final energy). In the primary spectrometer, there
are a number of physical effects which impact the neutron:
1. Path length: While nominally 162 m from moderator to sample position, or the 155.66 m from
PSC to sample, this length can be affected by the neutrons flight path. Fx. a neutron that reflects
off the guide 100 times, will have a longer flight path than one that reflects no times, as the path
will be across the guide width more. This will impact the ToF
2. PSC opening time: Depending on the PSC opening time, neutrons which do not cross the mid-
point of the PSC opening, see Figure 3.4 Left, will have a slightly different ToF. Along with this,
the time for the detector to measure the neutron will have an effect on the ToF.
3. Divergence: The nominal beam is completely parallel to the z-axis, but neutrons may have in-
plane divergence γi and out of plane divergence δi. This will affect the scattering angle.
The secondary spectrometer has 4 factors that could influence the interpretation of a neutrons charac-
teristic:
1. Path length: The nominal neutron will take the smallest path from the sample to the detector
element, but due to the mosaicity and size of the analyzers, the path length can vary, which will
vary the time of flight of the neutron.
2. Accepted scattering angle: Several different scattering angles, both in-plane, θs, and out of plane,
δf, will be accepted by the analyzers and will land on the detector element. This causes uncertainty
in the measured scattering angle.
3. Inter-planar distance: Due to the crystals not being perfect, the inter-planar distances in HOPG
are not exactly 3.355 Å. This causes uncertainty in the final energy.
4. Take-off angle: Due to physical effects of the size of the sample and detectors, and the mosaicity
of the analyzers, different energies will be able to fulfill the Bragg condition on the analyzer and
reflect onto the detector elements, which can be simplified as variation in the Bragg angle θB.
This causes there to be variations in the final energy.
For now, only the uncertainties in the individual parameters will be considered, or rather the diagonal
of Σx. Correlations, off-diagonal terms, between the parameters will be ignored for now. This will
be discussed in Section 5.3.1. In both the calculations and simulations, the sample is set to be small
(2.5 mm in width and height). Having identified the relevant parameters, the next step is to evaluate how
small variations in these values propagate through the instrument and affect the energy and momentum
transfer resolution.
3.4.3.2
Jacobian: Energy Derivatives
Since the energy transfer is given as the difference between the incident and final energy, the derivative
of the energy transfer with respect to a parameter is given as the difference of the derivatives of the
incident and final energy.
ℏω = Ei −Ef −→∂∆E
∂xi
= ∂Ei
∂xi
−∂Ef
∂xi
(3.20)
==PAGE:23==
3.4 Instrument Resolution
17
Given the equations for the initial energy in (3.8), the derivatives with respect to the relevant parameters
are given as:
∂Ei
∂L1

L1= ˆ
L1
= 2Ei
L1
∂Ei
∂T

T = ˆT
= −2Ei
t1
∂Ei
∂L2

L2= ˆ
L2
= 2Ei
L2
· t2
t1
∂Ei
∂d

d= ˆd
= 2Ei
d
· t2
t1
∂Ei
∂θB

θB= ˆ
θB
=
2Ei
tan(θB) · t2
t1
(3.21)
Where t1 = T −t2. As a first approximation, the energy shift due to angular deviation will be ignored,
and use (3.5) as Ef, which yields the following derivatives:
∂Ef
∂d

d= ˆd
= −2Ef
d
∂Ef
∂θB

θB= ˆ
θB
= −
2Ef
tan(θB)
(3.22)
3.4.3.3
Jacobian: Momentum Derivatives
Similarly to the energy derivatives, the momentum derivatives are the difference between the derivatives
of the incident and final wavevector.
Q = ki −kf −→∂Q
∂xi
= ∂ki
∂xi
−∂kf
∂xi
(3.23)
Here, the effects of the initial beam divergence and the accepted scattering angles, are accounted for
through the directional projections of the wavevectors:
ki = |ki|


sin(γi) cos(δi)
sin(δi)
cos(γi) cos(δi)


|ki| = mn
√
2ℏ
L1
ToF −2 C2 L2 d sin(θB)
(3.24)
kf = |kf|


sin(θs) cos(δf)
sin(δf)
cos(θs) cos(δf)


|kf| =
π
d sin(θB)
(3.25)
Here, C2 =
mn
√
8πℏ. The derivatives of the incident wavevector are then:
∂ki
∂L1

L1= ˆ
L1
=|ki|
L1


0
0
1


∂ki
∂ToF

T oF =
ˆ
T oF
= −|ki|
t1


0
0
1


∂ki
∂γi

γi= ˆ
γi
= |ki|


1
0
0


∂ki
∂δi

δi= ˆδi
= |ki|


0
1
0


∂ki
∂L2

L2= ˆ
L2
=L2t2|ki|
t1


0
0
1


∂ki
∂d

d= ˆd
= t2|ki|
t1d


0
0
1


∂ki
∂θB

θB= ˆ
θB
=
t2|ki|
t1 tan(θ)


0
0
1


(3.26)
The derivatives of the final wavevector are:
∂kf
∂θs

θs= ˆ
θs
= |kf|


cos(θs)
0
−sin(θs)


∂kf
∂δf

δf = ˆ
δf
= |kf|


0
1
0


∂kf
∂d

d= ˆd
= −|kf|
d


sin(θs)
0
cos(θs)


∂kf
∂θB

θB= ˆ
θB
=
−|kf|
tan(θB)


sin(θs)
0
cos(θs)


(3.27)
With the full Jacobian matrix for both energy and momentum transfer defined, the mathematical
framework for propagating uncertainties through the spectrometer is complete. The specific values of
the parameter covariance matrix Σx, which quantifies the uncertainties in the neutron path parameters,
will be presented and discussed in Section 5.1, where the resolution model also will be validated against
simulations.
==PAGE:24==
4 BIFROST Simulations
18
CHAPTER 4
BIFROST Simulations
To validate the resolution model, this chapter introduces the McStas simulation package, its principles,
and its strengths in modeling complex neutron instruments. It details the BIFROST implementation,
event data structure, HPC workflow integration, and the applied data analysis and resolution measure-
ment methods.
4.1
McStas
McStas (Monte-Carlo Simulations of Triple Axis Spectrometers) [19], is a Monte Carlo ray-tracing
simulation software designed for modeling physical neutron transport. It provides a flexible, modular
framework for building detailed models of neutron instruments, enabling realistic simulations of neutron
experiments.
McStas works by propagating individual rays, which represent neutrons, through a series of virtual
components. Each component models a specific physical element, such as a neutron source, optics,
samples, or monitors, which govern how neutrons are transported, scattered, or absorbed. Through
its probabilistic approach, McStas captures the statistical nature of neutron interactions and produces
realistic simulations of instrument performance.
4.1.1
Monte Carlo Statistics
Monte Carlo methods are a class of algorithms which use stochastic sampling to estimate the behavior of
complex systems. Rather than attempting to solve a problem analytically, which may be impossible or
intractable due to high dimensionality or system complexity, Monte Carlo simulations rely on repeated
random sampling to obtain statistical approximations of the system’s behavior.
In essence, Monte
Carlo methods trade exactness for flexibility: They provide an approximate solution by generating large
numbers of random inputs and observing the resulting output distributions. This makes them especially
Figure 4.1: Monte Carlo estimation of π by randomly sampling points in a unit square. Left: Shows
the random points points falling inside the quarter-circle (blue), and outside (red). This
an be used to approximate π. Right: Shows the variation in the estimation of π, with
increasing sampling size N.
==PAGE:25==
4.1 McStas
19
powerful in physics, where systems often involve many degrees of freedom, and where interactions can
occur in highly nonlinear or stochastic ways.
To illustrate the principle, consider a classic Monte Carlo approach to estimating π. Suppose N points
are sampled in a unit square and the fraction of those points fall inside an inscribed quarter-circle is
calculated. The area of the square is 1, and the area of the quarter-circle is π/4. By counting the fraction
f of points that fall within the quarter-circle (i.e., those for which x2 + y2 ≤1), we can approximate
π = 4f. With enough random samples, this estimate converges toward the true value of π, despite the
randomness of the individual points. This can be seen in Figure 4.1
4.1.2
Ray Tracing
In McStas, a similar principle applies: Individual neutrons (represented as rays) are randomly generated
from a source distribution, and their paths through the virtual instrument are simulated one by one.
These rays are propagated through the simulated instrument until they reach a component, which
applies physical rules, such as scattering probabilities, absorption cross sections, or reflection conditions
to the neutron. The final set of detected events builds up a statistical representation of the instrument’s
behavior. The more rays are simulated, the better the simulation becomes.
It is important to note that the McStas rays do not represent individual neutrons, but rather rates of
neutrons. The ESS moderator will produce at peak ∼5·1013 n/cm2/s/sr/Å, as seen in Figure 3.2. This
is far too many neutrons to simulate individually, while also varying the neutron’s direction, energy and
starting position. Thus, each ray represents a neutron rate s−1.
The weight factor p, is added to the neutron descriptors. This factor is updated at each component to
represent the number of neutrons which would continue after this component in the instrument. For
example, when reflecting off a monochromator due to Bragg Scattering, some neutrons will be absorbed,
some will reflect and some will transmit through. If the probability that a neutron will be scattered is
wj, the weight factor of the neutron after the analyzer will be pj = wjpj−1, where j is the analyzers
component index. This approach makes McStas a linear simulation framework, where components are
processed sequentially, each modifying the neutron parameters in turn.
The weight multiplier wj is calculated using importance sampling. This is a method for Monte-Carlo
sampling, where instead of uniformly sampling a space, the sampling is proportional to a proposal dis-
tribution q(x). This distribution focuses the sampled points on the most “important” regions, typically
where the function being integrated has the largest contributions. An example of this would be inte-
grating the points around the mean of a Gaussian distribution more than the points outside 2σ. Each
sample in the importance sampling is assigned a weight which corrects for the biased sampling, usually
1/q(x), allowing an accurate estimate of the true distribution or integral despite the non-uniform sam-
pling. The more the proposed sampling distribution matches the integrated function, the more accurate
the importance sampling will be.
In McStas, the weight multiplier is given as fMC,bwj = Pb, where fMC,b is the importance MC sampling
probability and Pb is the physical probability of event b. This ensures that the simulation remains
physically accurate, even though it samples preferentially in more important regions of phase space [5].
4.1.3
Variance
While intensity of a neutron rate is important for experiments, equally important is the statistical
uncertainty in ones measurement. If M rays are simulated, with weights p, and probability P that
they reach a detector, the number of rays observed will be binomially distributed, such that the mean
number of observed rays will be N = MP and variance σ2(N) = MP · (1 −P). When enough rays are
simulated M ≫1, and P ≪1, which is the case for most McStas simulations, the binomial distribution
can be approximated by a Gaussian with variance σ2(N) ≈MP = N, due to the central limit theorem
[5].
When converting from observation count to intensity, I = Np, where N is number of observations, and
the variance becomes σ2(I) = σ2(N)p2 = Np2, For rays with different weight factors, pi, the intensity
and variance becomes:
I =
X
i
pi
σ2(I) =
X
i
p2
i
(4.1)
==PAGE:26==
4.2 BIFROST model
20
4.1.4
Simulations
As mentioned in the introduction, McStas simulations are made of different components, which affect
the neutrons weight factor based on physical interactions, in a linear fashion. Beyond components,
McStas also offers several powerful simulation features:
• Variables: Variables can be declared and assigned within the instrument file using DECLARE and
INITIALIZE blocks. These are useful for defining parameters, counters, or storing intermediate
results across components.
• Saving: Data from simulations can be saved using SAVE blocks, which are executed at the end of
a component’s processing. This is commonly used to record quantities like neutron flux, energy
spectra, or position distributions for analysis.
• Splitting: SPLIT allows a single neutron ray to spawn multiple copies with reduced weights,
increasing simulation statistics in regions of interest and is particularly useful for rare events.
• Conditionals: McStas also supports conditionals (WHEN) to apply to neutrons, which allows for
several branching paths to available for the neutron.
• MCPL: Integration with external particle lists via the MCPL format is also available, which allows
one to save particle positions and section off instrument parts for reuse.
4.1.5
Parallelization and HPC
The linearity of ray tracing simulations leans very much up against parallelization. Utilizing Message
Passing Interface, MPI, to split computations between multiple CPU cores, allows several simulations
to progress simultaneously. McStas supports MPI natively, enabling simulations to run eﬀiciently on
high-performance computing (HPC) clusters. This is particularly beneficial for large-scale simulations
requiring high statistical precision, where billions of neutron rays may need to be traced. The output
from all processes is automatically combined into a single set of result files.
Another beneficial aspect of utilizing HPC clusters is the ability to submit large parameter space sweeps
using small for loops to submit jobs. This approach allows users to eﬀiciently explore wide ranges of
instrument settings or sample properties by running many independent simulations in parallel. Each
job then varies a parameter systematically. Such automated batch processing significantly speeds up
design iterations and data analysis in neutron instrument development.
For this project, a general system was set up for HPC simulations, utilizing an administrator/worker
system to manage and distribute computational tasks eﬀiciently. An administrator node handles job
scheduling, monitoring, and result aggregation, while worker nodes execute the assigned simulations
in parallel. Since DTU’s HPC has a max-runtime of 72 hours, this administrator also had the role of
submitting a new administrator before it’s runtime was over, in case it did not finish it’s tasks. This
separation of roles enables scalable management of large simulation campaigns, and was crucial to
produce the large amounts of data this project utilized.
4.2
BIFROST model
To simulate BIFROST, a detailed virtual instrument was implemented in McStas, incorporating all
major components from source to detector. This model was originally built by Gregory Tucker, in a
larger project to create a digital twin of BIFROST for use when the instrument is up and running [20],
but has been adapted for this project. Below a short summary of the instrument is given.
The simulation is divided into two distinct stages, each handled by a separate McStas instrument
file. The primary spectrometer, implemented in BIFROST_1.instr, simulates neutron generation, pulse
shaping by the chopper system, and beam transport up to the sample position. The chopper system
parameters (such as delay and speed of each chopper) is calculated using Gregory Tuckers’s chopcal
library [21] to ensure the choppers allow the correct energies through, with the correct PSC open-
ing width. Neutron states are recorded in a Monte Carlo Particle List (MCPL) file at a distance of
58 cm downstream of the sample, enabling their reuse in the secondary spectrometer simulation. This
==PAGE:27==
4.3 Data Analysis
21
approach decouples the computationally expensive source simulation from the analysis of scattering
events, allowing for flexible iteration on spectrometer configurations.
The secondary spectrometer, modeled in BIFROST_2.instr, incorporates the sample, all nine analyzer
channels, and the detector array. All simulations will use a cylindrical sample with height and diameter
2.5 mm. A critical optimization involves the use of McStas’ WHEN directive to dynamically activate only
the analyzer channel intersected by a given neutron’s trajectory. This selective simulation preserves the
linearity of the simulations while maintaining the statistical correctness of the results and not simulating
any neutrons which would otherwise not be detected.
The detector dynamics is handled by Gregory Tuckers’ Detector_tubes component [22], which simu-
lates how real detector tubes produce integrated charge, and introduces a small time variance in when
the neutrons are detected (due to the finite depth of the tubes). This all helps make the simulations
as realistic as possible. Data acquisition is managed through McStas’ Monitor_nD components, which
output comprehensive event records including ToF, FIBER/GROUP variables, detector charges and
full wavevectors at the sample position (initial and final wavevector components ki,x, ki,y, ki,z, kf,x,
kf,y, kf,z). These outputs enable data analysis, as well as allowing for resolution measurements.
4.3
Data Analysis
The data analysis for this project utilized Python 3.9.21, with the matplotlib, numpy, pandas and
scipy packages. Along with this, three different classes were made to streamline the data analysis, this
section will shortly go through the classes and the implemented functionality of each. The entire code
repository can be found on GitHub [23].
4.3.1 BIFROST_nD
BIFROST_nD is the main data analysis function, utilizing the data reduction from Section 3.3. The
individual neutron event data is given and the metadata is read from the McStas files as well. Along
with this, a few pre-calculated values are read from a table at the start of the data analysis: Nominal
Ef, L2 and ϕ for each detector element. This simplifies the calculations quite a bit. From here the
following data analysis takes place:
1. self.RT_2_CA: Convert the GROUP and FIBER variables into analyzer and channel index
2. self.pixel_split: Convert the integrated charges into tube and detector element index
3. self.E_f_k_f: Load the Ef and ϕ for the given detector element. Calculate the scattering angle
from ϕ and A4. Convert Ef to |kf| and use the scattering angle to find ⃗kf. Calculate t2 from Ef.
4. self.E_i_k_i: Calculate t1 from the measured ToF, PSC opening time and t2. Find Ei and ⃗ki
from t1.
5. self.Q_hw: Calculate ∆E and ⃗Q from the above information.
6. self.a3_rotation: If A3 is in the McStas metadata, ⃗Q is rotated to the sample reference frame.
This code completes all the data analysis that is necessary for a BIFROST experiment, with the ex-
ception of converting ⃗Q to crystallographic coordinates, which should be implemented as well. All the
data is available in a pandas dataframe called from BIFROST_nD.data. All of the analysis is done for
all events at the same time, using vectorized code, making it run quite fast.
4.3.2
BIFROST_Res
BIFROST_Res is a subclass of BIFROST_nD, with a couple of extra steps:
1. self.Res_Q_hw: Read the McStas wavevectors at the sample, which will now on be refereed
to as the actual wavevector, ⃗k0
i and ⃗k0
f. From this calculate the actual momentum and energy
transfer ⃗Q0 and ∆E0. Also calculate the difference between the actual and calculated values:
==PAGE:28==
4.4 Resolution Simulation
22
δ ⃗Q = ⃗Q −⃗Q0 and δE = ∆E −∆E0, where ∆E and ⃗Q are the values calculated from the data
analysis in BIFROST_nD.
2. self.pixel_resolution: Calculate the weighted covariance of ( ⃗Q, ∆E) for all detector elements
(specific channel, analyzer, tube, detector element), where the weight of each event is p. If plot
is set to true, a plot like Figure 4.2 will be produced and saved in the folder the data is located
in. The elements of the covariance matrix, σij, are calculated as:
σij =
1
P
n pn
N
X
n
pn(in −i0)(jn −j0)
(4.2)
where i, j are components of ( ⃗Q, ∆E) for all N neutron events, and i0, j0 are the corresponding com-
ponents of ( ⃗Q0, ∆E0). Thus (i −i0) simplifies to a component of (δ ⃗Q, δE). This covariance matrix of
( ⃗Q, ∆E) is the simulated resolution covariance matrix Σsim
⃗Q,∆E, which will be compared to the theoretical
covariance matrix from Section 3.4.2, Σ ⃗Q,∆E. The last function of this subclass is not vectorized, and if
one wanted to simplify the calculation, the covariance matrix should only be calculated for a specified
detector element. All of the resolution calculations are only in the laboratory reference frame.
4.4
Resolution Simulation
Simulating a resolution function using McStas requires careful consideration of how to set up the simu-
lation so that it captures the inherent instrument resolution, without introducing artificial constraints
or correlations. To do this, one must first understand what “measuring the resolution” actually entails.
In essence, resolution characterizes the spread of neutron events in ( ⃗Q, ∆E) space, detected at a specific
detector element and at a specific time. That is, we are interested in the statistical variation of neutrons
arriving at a given detector element, di, at a given time ToF. This detection point corresponds to a
nominal point in ( ⃗Q, ∆E) space, ( ⃗Q0, ∆E0). The resolution function describes the spread of neutron
events around this nominal point. Therefore, to estimate the resolution, we must simulate all possible
( ⃗Q, ∆E) combinations that can contribute to detections at a specific (di, ToF). The spread of these
values relative to the nominal point gives the resolution: (δ ⃗Q, δE).
To achieve this, we need to ensure that the simulated neutrons have the possibility of arriving at the
chosen detector element at the chosen time. Spatially, this means sampling all neutron trajectories
realistically reaching the detector element di. For example, each analyzer reflects neutrons over a finite
angular range. For in-plane scattering, this corresponds to a range of angles ∆θs, around the nominal
scattering angle θs. The same applies for the out-of-plane angular distribution. Thus for each incoming
⃗ki onto the sample, and random direction for ⃗kf is picked from a uniform distribution, with in-plane
angular range θs ± ∆θs and out-of-plane angular range 0 ± ∆δ.
Picking ∆θs and ∆δ can naively be done by illuminating the entire analyzer surface.
However, to
improve statistics and sample the space more eﬀiciently, there are two better strategies: Restrict the
angular range to only those parts of the analyzer which significantly contribute to the selected detector
position, and sample uniformly within this reduced angular region. Utilize importance sampling, where
angles are drawn from a Gaussian distribution resembling the analyzer’s mosaic spread. By adjusting
the neutron weight by the inverse of this Gaussian probability, the sampling becomes more eﬀicient
while still statistically valid. While the simulations described here use the first approach, the second is
a more eﬀicient way to explore the angular space and would be preferred in future simulations.
For ToF, ideally, one would only sample neutrons which arrive at the detector element at time ToF0.
However, simulating this is more diﬀicult than it initially sounds. Since the path length of each neutron
is variable, specifying a time for a neutron to land on a detector, especially after an energy transfer, is
diﬀicult. The ESS_butterfly moderator component has the ability to focus in ToF by specifying the
distance traveled and the time when the neutrons should be at this distance. Thus it should be possible
to calculate the time of arrival at a detector element, as well as what length the initial energy neutrons
would have to travel to arrive at this ToF:
T0 =
√mnL1
√2Ei
+
√mnL2
p
2Ef
Lmod = T0
r
2Ei
mn
(4.3)
==PAGE:29==
4.4 Resolution Simulation
23
Figure 4.2: Resolution function, as obtained from McStas simulations for ∆E0 = 5 meV, ⃗Q0 =
(−1.098, 0, 1.098) Å−1, Ef = 5 meV for central pixel, 0.1 ms PSC opening time.
The
diagonal shows 1D histograms of each variable. The top off-diagonal show 2D correla-
tions. The bottom off-diagonal shows the Pearson correlation coeﬀicient ρ between the
corresponding variables.
However, this approach undermines the modularity of reusable primary instrument simulations and
adds complexity to the calculations. In addition, neutrons do not arrive exactly at T0, but within an
interval T0 ± δT.
By instead ToF-focusing the neutrons on to the sample position, they have a specific range of Ei ±∆Ei.
Thereafter the neutrons can be uniformly spread in the energy range Ef ±∆Ef. As such the modularity
is preserved. If one focuses the time of arrival at the sample position to be within ∆T = 1µs, this will
cause there to be a certain time range within which the neutrons will arrive at the detector element. For
5 meV analyzer, this time is ∼37 µs. This is much smaller than the ToF uncertainty due to the PSC
opening time, and is of a similar order of magnitude to the detection time uncertainty. Thus, integrating
over this entire time width is a fine first approximation for verifying the theoretical resolution model.
In the future, the previous method of time focusing on the detector would be preferred, but could be
more computationally expensive.
By sampling broadly across these angle and energy distributions (θs, δ, Ef), McStas can simulate the
full spread of ( ⃗Q, ∆E) values contributing to a given detection event, from which the resolution function
can be constructed. Figure 4.2 shows an example of the resulting resolution distribution.
==PAGE:30==
5 Resolution Results and Validation
24
CHAPTER 5
Resolution Results and
Validation
To assess the validity of the resolution model developed in Section 3.4.2, it is essential to compare its
predictions with detailed Monte Carlo simulations of the BIFROST instrument. This chapter presents
the determination of neutron path variances used in the theoretical model, Σx, explores how different
instrumental parameters influence the resolution, and evaluates the model’s accuracy by comparing it
to McStas simulation results. The comparison provides insight into the reliability of the model and
identifies the dominant contributions to the overall resolution.
Note: Due to storage issues on the HPC system shortly before the project deadline, resolution data
for the 2.7 meV analyzers was lost for PSC opening times other than 0.2 ms.
5.1
Determination of Neutron Path Variances
To determine the variances of the neutron path parameters, as discussed in Section 3.4.2, it is easiest
to treat them independently, and simulate the variance in each of them. The nine parameters which
will be studied at are the ones from the theoretical resolution model in Section 3.4.3.1. The variances
of any secondary spectrometer parameters will be done for the central detector element of the central
tube and channel of a given analyzer. All variances are obtained by calculating the second moment, or
variance, of the simulated distributions:
σ2
x =
1
P
i pi
N
X
i
pi(xi −µ)2
(5.1)
where x is the parameter, N is the number of samples, xi is a given sample, and µ is the mean, or
first moment. This is a weighted variance calculation, where each neutron event contributes it’s weight
factor from MCStas. In cases where the distributions appear Gaussian, this has been validated by
fitting Gaussian functions to confirm consistency.
Figure 5.1: Left) Path Lengths in the Primary Spectrometer instrument, from the mid point of the
PSCs to 58 cm before the sample position for PSC opening time 0.1 ms and for 2.15 meV.
Right) Path Lengths in the Secondary Spectrometer instrument, for Ef =5 meV, for the
central detector element in Tube 2, Channel 5.
==PAGE:31==
5.1 Determination of Neutron Path Variances
25
5.1.1
Primary Spectrometer Flight Path Length - L1
Variations in the primary spectrometer flight path length L1 arise primarily from neutron beam di-
vergence and the number of reflections off the neutron guide walls, which increase the effective travel
distance. This effect can be simulated by recording the time at which a neutron passes the midpoint
between the two PSCs and the time it reaches the end of the primary spectrometer component in the
McStas model, then multiplying the time with the velocity of the individual neutron to get the length.
This result is illustrated in Figure 5.1 Left. The resulting distribution of L1 shows some spread and
approximately follows an exponentially decaying form.
This behavior contradicts a the assumption in the theoretical resolution model that all parameters can
be approximated as Gaussians. This will be discussed further in Figure 5.20, but since the uncertainty
in L1 is so small, it won’t have much of an effect for now. For L1, the standard deviation, or square
root of the variance, used in Σx is σL1 =4 mm, which is a very small variance on a distance of 155.66 m.
There is a slight energy dependence of L1 and it’s variance, but this variation is so small that it will be
ignored for now.
It is also worth noting the nominal distance from the PSC to the sample is 155.66 m [2], which differs
by about 8 cm from the average simulated value.
This problem was experienced during the entire
simulation, but is likely a small mistake in the simulations.
5.1.2
Secondary Spectrometer Flight Path Length - L2
Simulating the flight path length in the secondary spectrometer is more complex than for L1. It is
done by replacing the sample component in the secondary spectrometer instrument file with a highly
divergent, point-like source (a circular source with a radius of 2.5 mm), which illuminates the entire
analyzer. By measuring the time from this artificial source to each detector element, the corresponding
flight paths can be inferred in the same manner as for L1.
The resulting distribution is shown in
Figure 5.1 Right.
This distribution is not Gaussian either, rather a flat topped or super-Gaussian distribution. Never-
theless, the standard deviation used σL2 ≈5 mm was used in the resolution covariance matrix. This
corresponds to about 0.2% of the nominal L2 value.
5.1.3
Interplanar Distances - d
The variations in interplanar distances in the analyzers is not something that can be directly simulated,
but will still be approximated from knowing the quality of the HOPG analyzer slabs. For this, a rough
estimate of 0.1% variation of the interplanar distance of 3.355 Å was used, simply due to the fact that
this variation is so small, it should not play a part in the simulation. This effect is expected to be
negligible in practice, but it is included for completeness in the covariance matrix.
5.1.4
Time of Flight and Take of Angle - T & θB
Variance in the time of flight can be attributed to 3 factors: When the neutron travels through the
midpoint of the PSC opening; when during the flightpath through the detector the neutron is detected;
and when during the flightpath through sample the neutron scattered. If one ignores the sample effects
on resolution, the prior two can be split up into two independent effects of the ToF variance.
The timing variance introduced by the PSC is governed by the chopper opening width, which in turn
depends on the rotation speed and relative delay of the PSC. As the chopper spins faster, the opening
time becomes narrower, reducing the timing variance. However, this relationship is nonlinear and also
depends on the delay, and the time distribution deviates significantly from a Gaussian shape. Along
with this, when the chopper spins more slowly, the opening becomes wider, leading to increased variance
and a more trapezoidal distribution.
The time at which a neutron is detected depends on the point at which the neutron interaction within
the detector tube. Since neutron capture can occur at any point along the neutron’s trajectory through
the gas volume, this introduces an inherent timing variance. For a fixed neutron energy, this effect is
==PAGE:32==
5.1 Determination of Neutron Path Variances
26
Figure 5.2: Energy Resolution σ∆E when changing ∆E, for different PSC opening times. The top
plots show the resolution curves, as well as the contribute (Cont.) of different neutron
path parameters. The error-bars on the simulation values comes from it being the average
over many simulations at different angles. The lower curve shows the residuals of the
curves R = (σsim −σtheory)/σsim for different PSC opening times.
approximately constant and independent of other parameters, and is ∼10 µs. Compared to even the
smallest PSC opening time, this variance is minimal, and can be ignored.
In the secondary spectrometer, the variance in the neutron’s take-off angle, θs after scattering from
the analyzer arises from two effects: geometric spread (finite sample, analyzer and detector sizes) and
energy dispersion due to analyzer mosaicity. Because different energies can satisfy the Bragg condition
at slightly different angles, there is a spread in the reflection angle for a given detector position. While
this is diﬀicult to compute analytically, it is constant for each detector element within a fixed analyzer
set.
Since all other contributions to the energy resolution have been estimated, the remaining timing variance
attributed to the PSC can be extracted directly by comparing the simulated energy resolution to the
theoretical prediction. By fitting both σθB and σT across different energy transfer for different PSC
opening times (dt), one expects σθB to remain constant across all datasets, while σT oF is constant for
each opening time.
As seen in Figure 5.2, this approach yields excellent agreement across a wide range of PSC opening
times and energy transfers, with only minor residuals between simulation and theory. The figure also
breaks down the contributions from the individual parameters to the overall resolution. The simulation
points in Figure 5.2 represent averages over 24 simulations at different in-plane scattering angles θs,
which were primarily used for evaluating ⃗Q resolution effects. The observed large increase in residuals
for a PSC opening time of 0.1 ms may be attributed to statistical noise, as the reduced opening time
allows fewer neutrons to pass through the choppers and reach the relevant detector element. While
these effects are important, there may also be a dependence on “when” in the wavelength band the
energy ∆E0 is, but this should be considered in a further analysis of the resolution function.
The parameter variances can be found in Table 5.1 and Table 5.2.
==PAGE:33==
5.1 Determination of Neutron Path Variances
27
Table 5.1: σT oF as a function of dt.
dt [ms]
σT oF /dt [-]
1.0
0.327
0.5
0.34
0.2
0.369
0.1
0.425
Table 5.2: σθB for different final energies.
EF [meV]
σθB [mrad]
2.7
1.253
3.2
1.146
3.8
1.062
4.4
0.989
5.0
0.926
5.1.5
Incident Divergence - γi & δi
The angular spread of neutrons arriving at the sample, characterized by the incident horizontal diver-
gence γi and vertical divergence δi, is a key contributor to the ⃗Q resolution. These divergences are
primarily defined by the geometry and collimation of the incoming beam, as well as the moderator and
guide characteristics upstream of the sample.
Quantifying the incident divergence is, in principle, straightforward: One can place a McStas moni-
tor 1 mm at the sample position, and histogram the horizontal and vertical divergences of the beam.
However, a number of subtleties must be considered.
The critical angle for total internal reflection from neutron guides is energy dependent, introducing
a cutoff on the divergence spectrum. Lower-energy neutrons can be reflected at larger angles than
higher-energy neutrons, resulting in a coupling between energy and angular distribution. This means
the maximum attainable divergence decreases with increasing neutron energy. This energy dependence
is clearly seen in Figure 5.3, where the divergence in both horizontal and vertical directions is plotted
as a function of incident energy.
The horizontal divergence shows an inverse trend, which is quite easy to characterize. However, the fit
of σγi is not perfect for energies between 10 and 45 meV, which might hint towards there being more
complex effects that are at play here, which would need to be more closely looked at. The vertical
divergence appears to plateau at approximately 0.6◦up to 10 meV, after which it decreases.
This
Figure 5.3: Top) Shows how the horizontal and vertical divergence standard deviation changes with en-
ergy, for the x ∈[−2.5, 2.5]mm on the sample position. Bottom) Shows the distribution of
horizontal divergence γi and vertical divergence δi for Ei =10 meV, for x ∈[−2.5, 2.5]mm.
==PAGE:34==
5.1 Determination of Neutron Path Variances
28
Figure 5.4: Heatmap of divergence in degrees vs. x-position for different jaw positions. Left) Jaws
completely open; Middle) Jaws set such that FWHM of divergence at x = 0 is ±0.4◦;
Right) Jaws set such that FWHM of divergence at x = 0 is ±0.2◦. The colorbars are
shown without ticks, as the intensity scale is arbitrary; each plot represents a small sample
of neutron rays, 10 million, that would reach the sample position under the given jaw
configuration.
behavior may be due to geometric constraints in the vertical plane of the guide system, which limits
the divergence for low energies. As such, the characterization of σδi was split up, where the variance
on divergences for energies lower than 10 meV was set to 0.6◦, while for higher energies it was set to be
inversely proportional to increasing energies, like the horizontal divergence. From Figure 5.3 Bottom
Left, it is also clear that the vertical divergence does not follow a Gaussian distribution either. Further
work on characterizing this parameter would be important for the resolution model.
The jaws, acting as adjustable collimators upstream of the sample, play a significant role in defining
both the horizontal spatial and angular profile of the beam. Slimmer jaws restrict the beam divergence,
leading to a more collimated beam at the sample position but also reduces the intensity. Moreover, the
divergence is not spatially uniform across the sample surface; positions near the edges may experience
different divergence characteristics due to how the guide focuses in on the sample position. Figure
Figure 5.19 illustrates how varying jaw openings influences the divergence distribution as a function of
position, highlighting the trade-off between beam intensity and angular resolution.
Importantly, the jaws impose a hard upper limit on the divergence of neutrons reaching the sample. This
means that neutrons with natural divergence exceeding ±0.4◦or ±0.2◦will be physically blocked when
the jaws are set to those respective FWHM limits. As a result, the divergence distribution becomes
truncated, particularly affecting lower-energy neutrons whose divergence would otherwise exceed the
allowed range.
5.1.6
Accepted Scattering Angle - θs & δf
The scattering angle of a neutron detected after interaction with the sample is another key factor in
determining the resolution of a neutron spectrometer. These angles, θs, in-plane, and δf, out-of-plane,
represent the final trajectory of the neutron relative to the nominal beam axis, z, and are shaped by
both the sample-to-detector geometry and the analyzer-to-detector geometry.
As was shown in the BIFROST article [2], an approximation of the in-plane resolution can be found,
by adding the in-plane angular contributions in quadrature:
∆θs ≈
p
s2 + (2ξLad sin(θB))2 + d2
Lsa + Lad
(5.2)
where s is the FWHM sample size, ξ is the mosaicity, d is the detector resolution and Lsa and Lad are the
nominal distances from the sample to analyzer, and analyzer to detector, respectively. This expression
==PAGE:35==
5.1 Determination of Neutron Path Variances
29
Figure 5.5: Left) Histogram of which scattering angles neutrons have at the sample position, which are
able to land on the 5 meV detector. Right) Shows the variance in in-plane scattering angle
for the different analyzer energies. The blue crosses are the values from the BIFROST
article for a 5 mm sample, while the simulations were for a 2.5 mm sample. The black dots
in the back show the values for each of the 27 simulations sampled for this plot.
provides a useful first-order estimate of the angular resolution in the scattering plane, capturing the
key geometric and optical contributions of the secondary spectrometer. McStas simulations confirm the
validity of this, with a small deviation from the results of the BIFROST article, see Figure 5.5. This
small change is due to the fact that the BIFROST article calculates the angular deviation with a 5 mm
tall sample, while these simulations are with a 2.5 mm tall sample.
The accepted out-of-plane scattering angle initially seems more complex to characterize. Each analyzer
blade contributes differently to the vertical angular acceptance depending on its position, number
of slabs, and tilt.
Instead, McStas simulations were used to evaluate the vertical scattering angle
distribution δf, providing a more accurate characterization of the out-of-plane resolution, as seen in
Figure 5.6. In the simulations, similarly to how the variance on L2 was found, the entire analyzer was
illuminated by a source at the sample position, and then the initial angles of which neutrons hit the
detector element was calculated. The resulting variance shows a similar dependence on final energy as
in Figure 5.5, suggesting that an expression similar to (5.2) might also describe the out-of-plane case
well.
Figure 5.6: Left: Histogram of which scattering angles neutrons have at the sample position, which are
able to land on the 5 meV detector. Right: Shows the variance in out-of-plane scattering
angle for the different analyzer energies. The black dots in the back show the values for
each of the 27 simulations sampled for this plot.
==PAGE:36==
5.2 Validation of Theoretical Model
30
5.2
Validation of Theoretical Model
Having quantified the variances on the neutron path parameters, the next step is to validate the theo-
retical resolution model against McStas simulations across a range of instrumental configurations. To
ensure comprehensive validation, a representative parameter space spanning key experimental degrees
of freedom is set:
• Scattering Angle: The model must be valid across the full angular range accessible on BIFROST,
[5◦, 135◦] with 5◦steps. For high PSC opening time or high energy transfer, only [5◦, 45◦, 95◦, 135◦]
was used.
• Energy Transfer: The resolution model is tested across a broad range, [0, 50] meV. To maximize
data coverage, all incident energies corresponding to integer energy transfers for a single analyzer
are used for all analyzers.
This approach effectively quintuples the measurement points - for
instance, using the ∆E =10 meV setting from the 2.7 meV analyzer, allows the 5 meV to measure
at ∆E =7.7 meV.
• PSC Opening Time: As discussed in Section 5.1.4, the Pulse Shaping Chopper significantly im-
pacts energy resolution. The model is validated for different opening durations: [0.1, 0.2, 0.5, 1, 1.5]
ms.
• Jaws: As shown in Figure 5.19, the jaws shape the divergence profile and therefore the resolution.
This is tested for open, ±0.4◦and ±0.2◦jaws.
• Detector Element: Path variances were previously calculated only for central detector pixels.
The performance of the model for off-center detector elements, across tubes and analyzer channels,
is also tested.
5.2.1
Projections and Cross Sections
To extract the resolution of an individual parameter from the full resolution model, one must extract
the covariance matrix Σ ⃗Q,∆E. The covariance between two components of ( ⃗Q, ∆E), is calculated using
(4.2) with i ̸= j.
The following sections will focus on 1D resolution components, which is obtained by projecting the full
4D resolution function onto individual axes. This approach is justified by a key property of multivariate
Gaussian distributions: although the full distribution may include correlations between variables (cap-
tured by off-diagonal terms in the covariance matrix), the marginal distribution of any single variable
depends only on its variance. A marginal distribution describes the behavior of one variable regardless
of the others. As a result, projecting the resolution function onto a single axis yields a well-defined and
interpretable measure of resolution along that direction.
In a similar way, 2D projections involve selecting a 2×2 submatrix of the full covariance matrix. These
submatrices describe the shape and orientation of resolution ellipses in chosen planes, such as (Qx, Qz)
or (∆E, Qy), and are used to visualize correlations and anisotropies in the resolution function. An
example of such 2D projections is shown in Figure 4.2, where the structure of the resolution function
in the different planes can be directly interpreted.
Cross sections, the conditional distribution over a subset of components given fixed values of the others,
are just as important for resolution. Cross sections allow for the examination of the effective resolution in
the vicinity of a feature, taking into account how the uncertainty is reduced by fixing some components.
For a multivariate Gaussian distribution, the conditional (cross-sectional) covariance is computed using
the Schur complement[24]. Given a covariance matrix:
Σ =
Σaa
Σab
Σ⊤
ab
Σbb

(5.3)
where Σaa is size N × N and is the covariance for variables a, Σbb is size M × M and is the covariance
for variables b, and Σab is size N ×M and is the covariance between a and b. The conditional covariance
of a given b is:
Σa|b = Σaa −ΣabΣ−1
bb Σab.
(5.4)
==PAGE:37==
5.2 Validation of Theoretical Model
31
This expression reflects the reduction in uncertainty due to conditioning: when some variables are fixed
(those in b), the variance in the remaining ones (those in a) generally becomes smaller, because part of
their variability was correlated with b.
All together, this forms the foundation for evaluating and validating resolution performance across the
various components of ( ⃗Q, ∆E) space. With these tools in place, the specific results for each resolution
component is shown.
5.2.2
∆E Resolution
The 5 meV analyzer energy resolution results are presented in Figure 5.2. At low PSC opening times
and for low energy transfers (<10 meV), the resolution is dominated by the secondary spectrometer.
In contrast, as either the energy transfer or PSC opening time increases, the primary spectrometer
becomes the dominant contributor to the overall energy resolution.
Additionally, the effects of path length variance (L1 and L2) and interplanar spacing (d) variation were
found to be negligible across the studied parameter space. This supports their omission in simplified or
computationally eﬀicient versions of the theoretical resolution model.
The simulated data comes from averaging over several simulations that are done at different scattering
angles θs.
The error bars, from the standard deviation, on the simulation data are notably small
suggesting the energy resolution is largely independent of the scattering angle as one would expect.
The strong agreement between the theoretical prediction and simulation across the full energy transfer
range demonstrates the robustness of the model, even as the relative contributions of the primary and
secondary spectrometers shift. This holds true for the other analyzers. The residuals consistently show
a slight negative bias, where the model over estimates the resolution by ∼1-2%. This is a tradeoff that
will be talked about later, in relation to the in-plane ⃗Q resolution. The residuals are used to compare
the model to the simulated data, where it is defined as:
R = (σsim −σtheory)/σsim
(5.5)
Figure 5.7: Out-of-plane Momentum Transfer Resolution σQy, when changing ∆E for different PSC
opening times. The top plots show the resolution curves, as well as the different com-
ponents that contribute to it. The error-bars on the simulation values come from the
standard deviation of the average over many simulations at different angles. The lower
curve shows the residuals of the curves for different PSC opening times.
==PAGE:38==
5.2 Validation of Theoretical Model
32
5.2.3
Qy Resolution
The 4.4 meV analyzer Qy resolution results are shown in Figure 5.7. As with the energy resolution
results, the Qy resolution is found to be largely independent of both scattering angle and PSC opening
time. Instead, the dominant factor influencing the resolution is the incident energy, which, as discussed
in Section 5.1.5, significantly affects the incident beam divergence.
A distinct “knee” in the resolution curve is observed here as well, though it appears at slightly higher
energy values than would be expected based on the divergence trends in Figure 5.3. Applying a corrected
model for the incident divergence, similar to the correction used for the energy resolution and time-of-
flight variance, yields a much closer match between the theoretical prediction and the simulated results.
The remaining discrepancy may stem from correlations not fully captured in the model. For example,
the nontrivial shape of the incident angle distribution δi (Figure 5.3, bottom right), which becomes
convolved with the similarly non-uniform δf distribution (Figure 5.6). Nonetheless, the model captures
the overall behavior of the out-of-plane resolution very well.
Figure 5.8: In-plane Momentum Transfer Resolution σQz, when changing ∆E for different PSC open-
ing times and scattering angles for 5 meV analyzer. The contributions of each neutron
path variance is shown with dashed lines. The lower curve shows the residuals of the
curves for different PSC opening times and angles.
==PAGE:39==
5.2 Validation of Theoretical Model
33
Figure 5.9: In-plane Momentum Transfer Resolution σQx, when changing ∆E for different PSC open-
ing times and scattering angles for 5 meV analyzer. The contributions of each neutron
path variance is shown with dashed lines. The lower curve shows the residuals of the
curves for different PSC opening times and angles.
5.2.4
In-plane ⃗Q Resolution
The in-plane resolution is split into two parts, Qx and Qz, which can be seen in Figures 5.8 and 5.9.
The resolution in Qz is by far the most complex among all ( ⃗Q, ∆E) components. As seen in Figure 5.8,
the ToF variance plays a significant role at low (< 15◦) scattering angles, as well as at high scattering
angles.
Additionally, near θs = 90◦, the variance in the scattering angle becomes dominant.
This
is expected, since the resolution is proportional to ∂Qz
∂θs ∝−sin(θs). At low scattering angles, small
energy transfers, and narrow pulse-shaping chopper (PSC) openings, the take-off angle variance σθB
becomes the primary limiting factor. The overall resolution model performs remarkably well in this case.
The slight underestimation of the energy resolution discussed in Section 5.2.2 is balanced by improved
agreement in most of the Qz resolutions. There may be a minor overestimation of the time-of-flight
(ToF) variance, which could contribute to residual discrepancies. However, given the large number of
varying parameters in the model, achieving a perfect match remains challenging.
While Qz exhibits the most individual contributions, the Qx resolution is more diﬀicult to characterize,
==PAGE:40==
5.2 Validation of Theoretical Model
34
primarily due to the influence of incident beam divergence. The characterization of σγi does result in a
good match between the theoretical resolution model and the simulations, as seen in Figure 5.9 Bottom.
There seems to be a power-relation (linear in log-space) between ℏω and the Qx resolution, which was
not the characterization of σγi. This could hint that the characterization of σγi needs to be corrected
for the model. Outside of the γi contribution, the θs contribution sinks from θs = 5◦to θs = 95◦, since
∂Qx
∂θs ∝cos(θs), while the θB rises since ∂Qx
∂θB ∝sin(θs). These trends describe the general fall and rise of
the Qx resolution. This shows that there simply needs to be a better description for the γi contribution
to the resolution.
The model exhibits consistent strengths and weaknesses across all analyzers.
5.2.5
Covariance Matrix
Beyond 1D resolution components, the full 4D resolution matrix characterizes correlations between
∆E and ⃗Q.
This section compares the covariance matrices derived from simulation and from the
analytical model to assess how well joint uncertainties are captured. While direct inspection of these
matrices can highlight discrepancies in shape and orientation, it remains challenging to reduce such
a high-dimensional comparison to a single, interpretable quantity. To gain insight into how well the
off-diagonal structure (i.e., correlations) is captured, the Pearson correlation coeﬀicient of the flattened
upper triangular elements for the theoretical and simulated covariance matrices is calculated:
ρij = σij
σiσj
(5.6)
Figure 5.10: Pearson correlation coeﬀicient between Qy and the other 3 components for the 4.4 meV
analyzer in different rows: Top - Qx, Middle - Qz, Bottom - ∆E. For different PSC
opening times in the columns: Left - 0.1 ms, Middle - 0.2 ms, Right - 0.5 ms.
The
black dots indicate individual simulations, and the error bar points are the average and
standard deviation of simulations at the same energy transfer.
==PAGE:41==
5.2 Validation of Theoretical Model
35
Figure 5.11: Pearson correlation coeﬀicient between Qy and the other 3 components for the 4.4 meV
analyzer: Left - Qx, Middle - Qz, Right - ∆E. The different colors indicates different
energy transfers, and the plot spans various scattering angles.
5.2.5.1 Qy Correlations
In the theoretical model, the only two neutron path parameters which impacted the Qy resolution were
the out-of-plane incoming and outgoing angles, δi and δf. These two parameters uniquely contribute
to Qy, and Qy has no other contributions. As such the theoretical model predicts that there is no cor-
relation between any other component and Qy. However, the simulation does reveal slight correlations
between Qy and the remaining components, as shown in Figure 5.10.
Unlike the 1D resolution components, the error bars on the average correlations are considerably larger,
making it more diﬀicult to define a general trend. Nonetheless, som general trends can be found. Most
notably, there is a clear positive trend in ρQy∆E, starting at values below 0, and tends towards 0 with
higher energy transfers. This could be due to the fact that higher incident energies have lower vertical
divergence, and therefore there will be a lower correlation between these two values at higher energy
transfers.
There is a very slight linear trend for ρQxQy, although the large error bars limit confidence
in this conclusion. Lastly, ρQyQz does not seem to have any specific trend, rather being very close to,
or slightly lower than, 0 for most energy averaged values. Across all PSC opening times, there does not
seem to be any change, only an improvement in statistical precision, as reflected in the reduced error
bars.
Figure 5.11 shows the trend of the correlations with respect to the scattering angle. While there is no
discernible trend for ρQxQy or ρQy∆E, there is a slight positive trend for ρQyQz. Therefore it is not
impossible to suggest that there might be some correlation between the horizontal beam divergence and
vertical beam divergence. The correlation might have a proportionality to a −cos curve, as it is negative
for small angles, and positive for angles > 90◦, which might suggest that it has a correlation with the
take off angle derivative, which is proportional to the same value. Why the correlation ρQx Qy does not
have a similar correlation is odd, but it might suggest that the correlation is caused by something else,
or that Qx is much smaller than Qy.
How important these correlations are is a bit uncertain, as BIFROST integrates the entire Qy component
in it’s measurements anyways. Along with this, these correlations are very small, and correspond to a
very small tilt in the relevant axes. Nonetheless it is important to have in mind when modeling any
BIFROST experiments.
5.2.5.2 Qx Correlations
The correlations between Qx and the two other components, Qz and ∆E, have 3 and 2 neutron path
parameters in common, respectively. As such, the theoretical model does produce a predicted correlation
between the components, which varies greatly for different angles, PSC Opening time and energy
transfer.
As can be seen in Figure 5.12 Top, the model is consistent at predicting ρQxQz for low energy transfers,
but seems to fail as it gets higher. This is more clear for lower PSC opening times, as it slightly under
estimates the correlation. This could be an effect of the high residuals on σQx at low energy transfers.
==PAGE:42==
5.2 Validation of Theoretical Model
36
Figure 5.12: Top) Correlation between Qx and Qz for different PSC opening times, and angles for
the 5 meV analyzer. The crosses × represent the simulated data at these angles and the
dashed lines represent the theoretical models predictions. Bottom) Correlation between
Qx and ∆E for different PSC opening times, and angles for the 5 meV analyzer. The
crosses × represent the simulated data at these angles and the dashed lines represent
the theoretical models predictions, and color indicates angle.
However, this does not explain the large discrepancies between simulations and theory for lower PSC
opening times. This may be some missing correlation that has not been considered for the model. As
can be seen for 0.2 ms opening time, there is a large discrepancy at high energy transfers, where the
correlation seems to be more positive than expected.
In Figure 5.12 Bottom, the correlation ρQx∆E can be seen for different PSC opening times. This is
Figure 5.13: Correlations between Qx and Qz and ∆E for different energies, for the 5 meV analyzer
and PSC opening time 0.2. The crosses × represent the simulated data at these angles
and the dashed lines represent the theoretical models predictions, where color indicates
energy.
==PAGE:43==
5.2 Validation of Theoretical Model
37
Figure 5.14: Correlations between Qz and ∆E for different energy transfers, for the 3.8 meV analyzer
and varying PSC opening. The crosses × represent the simulated data at these angles
and the dashed lines represent the theoretical models predictions, where color indicates
scattering angle.
clearly a point where the theoretical model under-performs, as it is unable to capture the correlations
between these two components. Similarly to the previous correlation, the discrepancy grows larger with
smaller PSC opening times, however, and the model fails for larger energy transfer, and is quite good
at small energy transfer. There seems to be some kind of “knee” where the correlation stops decreasing
and instead increases, very clearly seen in the 0.5 ms PSC opening time for θs = 95◦, where ρQx∆E levels
off at around 0.05. This is backed up by the results in Figure 5.13 for different angular dependencies,
Where the values for small energy transfer is perfect, but there seems to be some missing shift at higher
energy transfer.
5.2.5.3 Qz-∆E Correlations
The last correlation to look at is the correlation between Qz and ∆E. Despite these two components
sharing a strong dependence on common neutron path parameters, the theoretical model reproduces
the observed correlations remarkably well, as shown in Figures 5.14 and 5.15. Interesting aspects of
the figures to note is that the correlation for small scattering angles or high energy transfers is close
to 1. This indicates strong correlations under those conditions. Second, increasing the PSC opening
time consistently drives the correlation closer to 1 at lower energy transfers. This is expected, as longer
opening times make the time-of-flight (ToF) variance the dominant contributor to both the energy and
Qz resolutions, thereby tightly linking them. This fits with the angular results, where higher PSC
openings causes there to be a lower angular dependence.
Figure 5.15: Correlations between Qz and ∆E for scattering angles, for the 3.8 meV analyzer and
varying PSC opening. The crosses × represent the simulated data at these angles and
the dashed lines represent the theoretical models predictions, where color indicates energy
transfer.
==PAGE:44==
5.2 Validation of Theoretical Model
38
There is also an interesting aspect in the fact, that there is a “phase transition” when the PSC opening
time is between 0.5 ms and 1 ms, where the correlation no longer becomes negative. This transition
suggests a shift in the balance of dominant resolution contributions across this range of PSC timings.
5.2.6
Visualization of Resolution Ellipsoids
As discussed in Section 5.2.1, it is possible to create two-dimensional (2D) projections of the resolution
function in selected variable planes. This approach provides an intuitive way to visualize and compare
the theoretical and simulated resolution.
The method involves projecting both covariance matrices
onto the chosen 2D subspace and representing the 2σ contour as an ellipse derived from each covariance
matrix. These contours effectively illustrate the shape and orientation of the resolution ellipsoid in the
selected plane, highlighting correlations between the chosen variables. By plotting the contours for both
the simulated and theoretical cases on the same graph, one obtains a direct visual comparison of their
agreement. Along with this, the 2D cross section, calculated using the Schur complement, will also be
shown to compare the covariance matrices.
While such visualizations are highly useful for gaining qualitative insight, they can sometimes be mis-
leading. Therefore, a complementary metric is essential to objectively evaluate the degree of agreement
between the theoretical and simulated covariance matrices.
5.2.6.1
Bhattacharyya Distance
The Bhattacharyya distance provides a scalar metric to quantify similarity between two multivariate
distributions [25]. Here, it is used to compare the simulated and theoretical resolution functions, ac-
counting for both spread and correlation.
For two n-dimensional Gaussian distributions N0(⃗µ0, Σ0) and N1(⃗µ1, Σ1), the Bhattacharyya distance
is defined as:
DB = 1
8(⃗µ1 −⃗µ0)T Σ−1(⃗µ1 −⃗µ0) + 1
2 ln

det Σ
√det Σ0 · det Σ1

(5.7)
where Σ = 1
2(Σ0+Σ1). This metric offers a compact summary of how well the theoretical and simulated
resolution functions agree. A smaller DB indicates closer agreement, DB = 0 indicates an identical
distribution, while larger values signify differences in either shape (covariance) or alignment (mean
offset). In this context, the Bhattacharyya distance is used as a quantitative benchmark for model
validation across different instrument settings, utilizing only the later term, as the covariance is the
values of interest, and the prior term will be 0, as µ is the same for the two distributions, ( ⃗Q0, ∆E0).
The Bhattacharyya distance is not without limitations. It conflates discrepancies in spread and orienta-
tion into a single value, which can obscure the nature of the mismatch. This is particularly important
when the covariance matrices differ only slightly in shape but not in determinant. Along with this,
there is no predefined “good” value for the distance, rather it depends on the application. In Machine
Learning applications, a distance of < 0.5 is good enough for classification. However, for this project,
the simulated and theoretical covariance matrix should be as close as possible to each other, so a limit
for a good distance is set to be < 0.01.
5.2.7
Resolution Ellipses
A full overview of all DB values can be found in Appendix C, but notable trends and results will be
presented here, alongside the resolution ellipse plotted for these values.
Out of a total of 6,369 total points looked at only 122, or 1.9%, of these values were above the set DB
boundary, as seen in Figure 5.16. These outliers fall into two distinct categories: (1) Anomalous points
likely due to simulation artifacts (2) Points corresponding to very high energy transfers.
The first category consists of two points with the highest DB values (0.85 and 0.30). Both exhibit
McStas integrated intensities approximately 50 times higher than neighboring points differing by only
±5◦in scattering angle, an implausible result suggesting numerical or simulation errors. These points
are therefore excluded from further interpretation.
==PAGE:45==
5.2 Validation of Theoretical Model
39
Figure 5.16: Left: Histogram of DB values for all points looked at. The green line at 10−2 shows the
DB boundary set, while the red line shows the boundary used for Machine Learning.
The second category comprises points with ∆E > 20 meV, particularly at low scattering angles (e.g.,
5◦). The highest remaining DB value is illustrated in Figure 5.17. Here the high DB value can be
attributed to the slight tilt difference of the ellipsoids in the Qz-∆E projection. This corresponds to
a small residual in the energy variance: Simulations yield σ2
∆E = 1.22 meV2 compared to the model’s
σ2
∆E = 1.16 meV2—a difference of about 5%. While the resulting angular difference between the two
distributions, 0.1◦, may seem negligible, since the distribution in Qz-∆E is quite elongated and narrow,
this difference is amplified, further impacting the distributions’ overlap.
The reasoning for the off tilt, and more generally, the larger DB values for higher energy transfer,
values at higher energy transfers could be explained by statistical sampling. Since the same number of
neutron events is simulated for both low and high energy transfers, the broader resolution functions at
high ∆E are relatively under sampled. Consequently, a large Gaussian requires more events to achieve
the same statistical fidelity as a smaller Gaussian. With insuﬀicient sampling, the covariance estimation
becomes noisy, which can manifest as slight covariance deviations. This hypothesis is explored further
in Section 5.3.2.1.
While the edge cases are important, the general result of the model shows large agreement with simula-
tions. In most configuration, like the one seen in Figure 5.18, the model captures not only the size, but
also the shape of the resolution function. Minor residuals in Qx resolution, as discussed in Section 5.2.4,
account for most of the remaining differences. Overall, these results confirm that the theoretical reso-
lution model provides an accurate and reliable description of the instrument response across a broad
Figure 5.17: Resolution Ellipses, 2σ contour of the Gaussian, for the non-anomalous point with the
highest DB value. Left to right: Projection onto Qx and Qz; Projection onto Qx and ∆E;
Projection onto Qz and ∆E. ∆represents the difference from the nominal measurement
point.
==PAGE:46==
5.2 Validation of Theoretical Model
40
Figure 5.18: Resolution Ellipses for the point with the lowest DB value. Left to right: Projection
onto Qx and Qz; Projection onto Qx and ∆E; Projection onto Qz and ∆E.
range of operating conditions.
5.2.8
Varying Detector Elements and Jaws
Finally, the robustness of the resolution model is tested, by applying it to different detector elements,
including those far from the central channel axis, as well as different jaw openings. This ensures the
model’s applicability across the full detector bank and validates spatial inhomogeneities in resolution.
5.2.8.1
Detector Element Varying
The results of this analysis can be seen in Appendix C.1, where the Bhattacharyya distance is tabu-
lated for different channels central detector element and different tubes for different detector elements
respectively. All the calculations and simulations were done for the relevant detector element being
placed at 50◦, with scattering angle 50◦, and a PSC opening time of 0.2 ms.
The agreement between the model and simulation is generally very good. Most discrepancies arise from
a slight tilt misalignment in the Qx–∆E projection, and, at low energy transfers, an underestimation
of the Qx resolution. These deviations are consistent with the earlier findings on resolution widths and
correlation structure. Importantly, all Bhattacharyya distances remain below 2 ×10−3, with agreement
improving at higher energy transfers. No significant systematic variation is observed when switching
away from the central pixel. This holds true across different tubes or detector elements, despite potential
differences in their take-off angle variances. This suggests that the resolution model remains robust
across the detector, which simplifies calculations significantly.
5.2.8.2
Jaws
The last instrument parameter that is changed for the validation part of this project, is the jaws. So far,
the jaws have consistently been fully open, but will now be changed to only let neutrons through with
a divergence of ±0.4◦and ±0.2◦. This was done for three different PSC opening times (0.1 ms, 0.5 ms
and 1 ms), for four different scattering angles (5◦, 45◦, 95◦, 135◦), and three different energy transfers
(0 meV, 1 meV, 10 meV). The full results can be found in Appendix C.2, but highlights of the results
are shown here. A figure showing a projection of the covariance matrix across different setting is shown
in Figure 5.19.
It is very clear that there is a much better Qx resolution as one closes the jaws, as one would expect,
and other resolution components do not significantly change, also as expected. From the figure, as well
as the DB values, the models agree with each other, with the earlier issue of slightly underestimating
the γi resolution still playing a factor for the open jaws. However, the divergence for the jaws allowing
±0.4◦divergence, seems to slightly overestimate the covariance matrix. Nonetheless, with these small
adjustments, and a lot more testing for edge cases, jaws will be as well-verified as the res of the resolution
model.
==PAGE:47==
5.3 Discussion
41
Figure 5.19: Projection of the covariance matrix onto the axes Qx and Qz, for scattering angle θs =
45◦, PSC opening time of 0.5 ms for the 5 meV analyzer. The three different jaws settings
are shown (Left - Open, Middle - ±0.4◦, Right - ±0.2◦), for 2 different energy transfers
Top Row 1 meV and Bottom Row 10 meV.
5.3
Discussion
The results presented in this work span a wide range of configurations and metrics, revealing general
agreement between theory and simulations , with subtle discrepancies. This section explores the key
factors influencing these outcomes, with emphasis on the statistical stability of covariance estimates, the
assumptions underlying the analytical model, and the physical correlations that shape the resolution
function. Furthermore, the inherent limitations to high-dimensional simulations, such as computational
cost, sampling density, and systematic effects, are addressed and their implications for model validation
and experimental design are discussed.
5.3.1
Assumptions and Correlations
Throughout this work, several simplifying assumptions were made to construct the resolution model.
The most fundamental assumption was that the resolution function is a multivariate Gaussian. However,
as shown in Figure 5.20, this assumption does not always hold. This figure shows the simulated reso-
lution distributions, and a Gaussian function which is centered at ( ⃗Q0, ∆E0) with covariance matching
the theoretical model
Examining individual components of the resolution function, the Qx resolution initially appears unaf-
fected by increasing PSC opening time, apart from a rise in intensity. At low energy transfer, Figure 5.20
a), the distributions look quite Gaussian, however, it is hard to be sure, since they have quite high statis-
tical noise. At high PSC opening times, a flat top appears between Qx = −1.56 and −1.54, resembling
the shape observed in the ∆E distribution under similar conditions. This might hint that even though
the PSC opening time does not included in the calculation of the Qx resolution, it may still have an
impact. Although PSC opening time is not explicitly included in the Qx resolution calculation, its im-
pact may still be present. Overall, the Gaussian approximation slightly underestimates the distribution
width.
The Qz resolution distribution for low energy transfer fits the Gaussian perfectly, with maybe a slight
overestimation of the amplitude. Nonetheless, in this regime for Qz the Gaussian approximation is valid.
However, when increasing the energy transfer, and for high PSC opening times, the approximation falls
apart again. For 0.1 ms the approximation still holds quite well, but at 0.5 ms a flat top starts to develop
on the distribution, which is increased even further for 1 ms. Here the Gaussian quite under estimates
==PAGE:48==
5.3 Discussion
42
Figure 5.20: (a,c) Qx and Qz resolution at 95◦for different PSC opening times with 5 meV analyzer
and 0 meV energy transfer. (b,d) Same for 3.8 meV analyzer and 25 meV energy transfer.
(e,f) ∆E resolution for these cases, averaged over all scattering angles (25 data sets for
0.1 and 0.5 ms in e; 4 data sets for 1 ms in e and all of f) All distributions have a Gaussian
fit in dashed lines in the same color to show the difference between the actual distribution
and the proposed Gaussian..
the shape of the distribution.
A quite analogous thing can be said for the ∆E distributions.
The one caveat is that the 0.1 ms
low energy transfer curve also has quite a flat top, and the Gaussian distribution underestimates this
distribution as well. This might have to do with the energy distribution accepted at the sample position
not being exactly Gaussian. On the other hand, the high energy transfer energy resolution distributions
at high PCS opening times are very clearly square functions, and the Gaussian approximation falls short
of approximating the distribution correctly.
While the resolution of components in ( ⃗Q, ∆E) space are defined by the standard deviations of the
distributions, which fit correctly, assuming that they are Gaussian when fitting or modeling will lead
to large discrepancies.
This issue is even more pronounced for the 2D projections as shown in Figure 5.21. While the low
energy transfer and low PSC opening time can be approximated as a Gaussian distributions, at higher
energy transfer and high PSC opening time, the resolution function cannot be approximated to this.
Here the distributions look much more like parallelograms or squares This is quite clearly seen in
the energy distribution, which like seen in Figure 5.20 is quite flat.
The 2σ projected covariance
ellipses do fit the majority of the distributions quite well, ever so slightly over estimating the ∆E
resolution. However, these 2σ contours do not say much about the actual shape of the distributions..
One thing that is interesting to compare is that for a square and a Gaussian distribution with the same
==PAGE:49==
5.3 Discussion
43
Figure 5.21: 2D projections of simulated resolution function for two settings both with scattering
angle 90◦.
The top row shows the 5 meV analyzer, 0 meV energy transfer for 0.1 ms
PSC opening time (case 1). The bottom row shows the 3.8 meV analyzer, 25 meV energy
transfer for 1 ms PSC opening time (case 2). The red ellipses show the covariance ellipses
for a Gaussian approximation of the resolution function.
variance, the FWHM of the square will be 1.47 times larger than that of the Gaussian. So, even if the
standard deviation is the same, the resolution appears broader. This highlights that Gaussian fits can
misrepresent the true shape and width of the resolution, especially at high energy transfers or large
PSC openings.
Looking closely at the Qz-∆E projection for the bottom row in Figure 5.21, the cross-section of Qz with
constant ∆E looks to be Gaussian in nature, as can slightly be seen in Figure 5.22. While not exactly
Gaussian, and only being a cross-section of ∆E, this could hint towards the fact that resolution function
is much more complicated than a simple multivariate Gaussian. A possibility is that the cross-sectional
Figure 5.22: Qz cross section for ∆E = 25 meV, 1 ms PSC opening time and scattering angle 90◦for
the 3.8 meV analyzer.
==PAGE:50==
5.3 Discussion
44
distribution for a single variable is Gaussian, but much more work needs to be done here to consider
all of this.
5.3.1.1
Beyond Gaussian Approximations
One possible correction to this Gaussian approximation is to incorporate higher moment into the res-
olution model to enable distribution reconstruction [26]. The second moment, or variance, is defined
as the expectation value of the squared deviation from the mean. Higher moments are defined as the
expectation value of the n’th power of the deviation from the mean. However, this approach faces two
major challenges: Many distributions can share similar moment sets; and higher-order moments derived
from Monte Carlo simulations are themselves noisy, limiting reliability.
Another possibility would be to combine parametric Gaussian modeling with corrections based on
simulated higher moments. However, calculating the higher moments from theoretical values and not
just fitting would require deriving analytic expressions for the instrument response, which is non-trivial
given the complexity of the system.
A more pragmatic strategy is to tabulate resolution shapes at a grid of points in ( ⃗Q, ∆E) space, and
apply interpolation for intermediate points while retaining theoretical control over standard deviations.
This approach balances accuracy, computational cost and complexity.
5.3.1.2
Neglected Correlations
Another strong simplifying assumption was that neutron path parameters are independent. This is
demonstrably false. For example, correlations between Qx, and Qx and ∆E, as shown in Section 5.2.5.2,
depend strongly on incident energy which are not captured in the current model. These correlations
possibly arise from couplings to incident divergence, γi, with another parameter such as time-of-flight or
scattering angle. Resolving this requires a detailed multivariate analysis, as neglecting these correlations
can bias covariance predictions.
Additional correlations are expected between sample size and divergence. For instance, as shown in
Figure 5.3, sample width correlates with horizontal incident divergence. Along with this, from (5.2) it
is known that the accepted in-plane scattering angle is sample size dependent. A realistic resolution
model must therefore include sample geometry explicitly. Similarly, correlations between horizontal
and vertical divergence and minor couplings between instrument lengths, L1 and L2, and the angular
components, (γi,δi) and (θs,δf), should be looked into, even though some of them may be very small
and in the end negligible.
Finally, all primary simulations were performed for a single incident energy, with the choppers timed
such that the target energy corresponded to the center of the wavelength band. However, it remains to
be examined whether the edges of the wavelength band exhibit different resolution properties.
5.3.2
Variance and Simulation Limitations
While McStas provides realistic simulations, several limitations arise related to statistical accuracy and
computational cost.
5.3.2.1
Variance of Variances
As discussed in Section 5.2.7, the larger space a distribution contains, the more points are necessary to
sample the entire space properly. This naturally raises the question: How reliable are the covariance
estimates obtained from the sampled data?
This is an important statistical sampling problem and has to do with the central moments of distri-
butions. The variance has been used throughout this project, as the second moment of the resolution
function, which is being considering as a normalized probability function. To evaluate the reliability of
this variance estimate, the variance of the sample variance is introduced. This quantity describes the ex-
pected fluctuation in the estimated variance due to finite sampling. For a one-dimensional distribution,
==PAGE:51==
5.3 Discussion
45
the variance of the sample variance, V(σ2
N), can be expressed as [27]:
V(σ2
N) =

κ −N −3
N −1
 σ4
N
N
(5.8)
where σ2
N is the variance of the sample population, σ4 is the square of the expected value of σ2
N and κ
is the kurtosis of the distribution, which is given as:
E((Xi −µ)4) = κσ4
(5.9)
where σ2 is the variance of the true distribution, and the entire expectation value is the fourth moment
of the distribution.
Kurtosis is a measure of the “tailedness” of a distribution, or the tendency to
produce outliers. For a Gaussian distribution, this value is by definition 3. As such, the variance of the
resolution sample variance is:
V(σii,N) =
2σ2
ii
N −1
(5.10)
For the off-diagonal terms, it can be shown to be:
V(σij,N) = (1 + ρ2
ij)σiiσjj
N −1
(5.11)
where the N1 term in the denominator is the Bessel correction.
For weighted sampling the only
modification is replacing N with the effective sample size [28]:
Neff = (P
i wi)2
P
i w2
i
(5.12)
This adjustment highlights an important point: the effective samples size strongly influences the relia-
bility of the covariance estimates. Consequently, resolution functions that broaden significantly (e.g.,
at higher energy transfers or with tighter collimation settings) require many more effective samples to
achieve comparable statistical certainty.
5.3.2.2
Computational Constraints and Practical Challenges
Moving from 0 meV to 50 meV energy transfer increases the energy resolution, σ∆E, by roughly a factor
of 7. Because the variance of the sample variance scales as σ4, this implies that the effective number of
samples must increase by a factor of approximately 2,400 to maintain the same statistical certainty.
While this is theoretically possible, such an increase runs into the problem of necessary compute. For
reference, a simulation to measure the resolution function at a single point (not including run-time for
the primary spectrometer), was ∼1 CPU hours, for 109 neutrons simulated. This yields an effective
sample size of ∼2 · 103 for 0 meV and ∼1 · 103 for 25 meV on a single detector element for the lowest
PSC opening time and open jaws. This highlights a double challenge: high-energy neutrons not only
traverse the primary spectrometer with lower probability, but also require populating a much broader
distribution in ( ⃗Q, ∆E) space.
A similar trend occurs for PSC opening time. Increasing PSC time broadens resolution in Qz and ∆E,
but the extra neutron flux does not scale enough to offset the statistical loss. For example, doubling
PSC time from 0.1 ms to 0.2 ms increases resolution width by about 1.5× (requiring 5× more samples)
while flux only grows by ∼1.5×. This imbalance makes it increasingly ineﬀicient to obtain suﬀicient
statistics at higher PSC settings.
The opposite trend happens for the jaws.
Narrowing the jaws improves Qx resolution but reduces
flux, lowering effective sample size.
These changes affect all covariance components simultaneously,
complicating uniform sampling strategies further.
To illustrate the problem, one could consider two cases: Case 1: PSC opening time = 0.1 ms, ∆E =0 meV
for the 5 meV analyzer; Case 2: PSC opening time = 1.0 ms, ∆E =25 meV , for the 3.8 meV analyzer,
as seen in Figure 5.20. In case 2 the effective sample size is 3.6 times that of case 1, but the energy
resolution for case 2, 0.275 meV, is a factor 22 times than that of case 1, 0.0125 meV. The variance of
the energy resolution, using the Gaussian approximation, in case 1 is 2.5 · 10−11meV4, while in case 2
it is 1.5 · 10−6meV4.
==PAGE:52==
5.3 Discussion
46
While the variance on the energy resolution is 5 orders of magnitude larger, the question becomes:
When is variance “small enough” for validation purposes? The resolution function shown in Figure 5.21
appears visually to indicate the opposite of the above conclusion. However, visual completeness can be
misleading. Because the variance of covariance estimates scales as σ4, case 2 requires orders of magnitude
more effective samples to achieve comparable precision. In contrast, case 1, despite appearing sparse, is
concentrated in a small ellipsoid where each event carries far greater statistical weight. This underscores
that color plots should be interpreted with caution: Apparent density does not guarantee statistical
robustness. This example emphasizes the need to evaluate statistical precision quantitatively rather
than relying on visual impressions. Without accounting for how variance scales with resolution width,
misleading conclusions about convergence and reliability can easily arise.
Examining Figure 5.20, specifically the Qz resolution, reinforces the argument of distribution uncer-
tainty. For 25 meV the shape is slightly ambiguous, as it is unclear if the distributions is uniform, super
Gaussian or something in between. Resolving such ambiguities would require substantially higher statis-
tics, illustrating the impact of variance in the covariance matrix. Ultimately, acceptable variance of
sample variances should not be judged by absolute thresholds alone, but rather in the context of the dis-
tribution’s shape, and the level of precision required for meaningful validation. Statistical uncertainty
must therefore be assessed relative to the goals of the analysis, not merely the apparent completeness
of visualizations.
5.3.2.3
Memory and Runtime constraints
Detailed simulations with fine sampling over multi-dimensional parameter spaces (e.g., energy transfer,
scattering angle, PSC opening time) are constrained by memory, storage, and runtime, particularly on
shared HPC resources. Key limitations include:
• Storage requirements: Each simulation produces large output files, from ∼100 MB at 0.1 ms open-
ing time to over 1 GB at 1 ms. Consequently, the parameter space is sampled more densely at
shorter PSC times due to storage constraints. The resolution ellipse validation in total consumed
∼5 TB.
• Compute considerations: With a total of 240 cores available at a given time for one user and each
resolution ellipse costs ∼1 CPU-hour, there is a limit to how finely the parameter space can be
swept.
• Parameter space size: Comprehensive validation across energy transfer, scattering angle, and PSC
opening time is prioritized, while tube/channel and jaw variations receive sparser coverage.
From this several methodological question arises: Which areas of parameter space should a model
validation prioritize? Are the chosen parameter-space boundaries physically meaningful and useful for
scientific purposes? Clear criteria for these choices are essential to balance computational feasibility
with the need for robust model validation, and should be considered carefully for future validation.
While this validation focused on validating a wide range in parameter space, future validations should
focus on the edge cases for high scattering angles and high energy transfer for high and low PSC setting,
as these are the areas where more work needs to be done.
Ultimately, all of these challenges illustrate a fundamental trade-off in Monte Carlo methods: achieving
statistically reliable Monte Carlo resolution functions for all parameter sets is computationally expen-
sive. Practical modeling will therefore require a combination of variance-reduction techniques, adaptive
sampling strategies, and selective high-fidelity simulations rather than brute-force sampling.
==PAGE:53==
6 Resolution Effects on Phonon Dispersion
47
CHAPTER 6
Resolution Effects on
Phonon Dispersion
Accurate interpretation of inelastic neutron scattering data requires accounting for the instrument
resolution, which is convolved with the sample’s dynamic structure factor. Neglecting this effect can
lead to systematic errors in the position and width of features. This is particularly important when
the intrinsic features of the sample are comparable in width to the instrument resolution, making it
diﬀicult to distinguish between sample properties and instrumental broadening
In this chapter, we combine the theoretical phonon dispersion model with Monte Carlo convolution to
evaluate its impact on measurable spectra, and compare the convolution against full McStas simulations
to assess consistency and highlight the strengths and limitations of both approaches.
6.1
Theoretical Phonon Dispersion
The phonon model employed in this work follows the approach utilized in McStas’ Phonon_sample
component, based on G.L. Squires’ Introduction to the Theory of Thermal Neutron Scattering [29]. This
model describes a single 3D acoustic phonon branch for a face-centered cubic (fcc) lattice, accounting
for only first-nearest neighbor interactions.
While this representation captures essential features of acoustic phonons, it lacks the complexity of
real system models, and neglects higher order interactions. However, this model was chosen for this
simplicity and the direct comparison to McStas, factors that make it well-suited for validating the
convolution approach.
The material chosen for this study is lead (Pb), which provides a suitable test case due to its relatively
low maximum phonon energy of approximately 8 meV. This makes it simple to tailor a primary spec-
trometer simulations which includes the elastic line for the 5 meV analyzer and can capture the peak of
the dispersion. The acoustic phonon dispersion is modeled as:
ω( ⃗Q) = c
a
q
12 −J( ⃗Q) , where J( ⃗Q) =
X
⃗d
cos( ⃗Q · ⃗d)
(6.1)
where c is the speed of sound in the crystal, a is the lattice constant and ⃗Q is the momentum transfer
vector in the sample reference frame. ⃗d is the position of the 12 first-nearest-neighbors:
⃗d±i,±j = a
2(±ˆi ± ˆj) ,
ˆi, ˆj ∈{ˆx, ˆy, ˆz} ,ˆi ̸= ˆj
(6.2)
For lead, the constants are set to be c = 10meV · Å and a = 4.95 Å. Along with this, we will set the
sample temperature to T = 290 K and a cylindrical sample with height and diameter 2.5 mm.
6.1.1
Weighting Factors in the Phonon Cross Section
In the Phonon_sample implementation, the scattering weight is expressed as a product of several phys-
ically motivated factors:
• Absorption factor: Accounts for attenuation of the neutron beam inside the sample due to ab-
sorption and scattering along the incident and exit paths.
==PAGE:54==
6.2 Resolution Orientation and Sample Frame
48
• Geometric focusing factor: Reflects the probability of selecting a specific scattering channel among
nf possible final states and includes the illuminated sample volume and solid angle coverage.
• Kinematic cross-section factor: Incorporates the main dynamical dependencies, including the ratio
of final to initial neutron velocities (vf/vi), the Debye–Waller factor (DW), the 1/|ω| scaling from
the phonon density of states, and the Bose population factor.
• Jacobian factor: Arises from integrating over the delta function, correcting for the fact that energy
and momentum are not independent variables in inelastic scattering.
• Structural factor: Depends on the square of the scattering length b and the atomic mass M of
the target material.
In this study, only the dominant cross-section term, which will be called p3, is included, as it captures
the key kinematic dependencies of phonon scattering. Other factors, such as absorption and focusing,
were omitted for eﬀiciency, as the goal is to validate the convolution method rather than absolute
intensities. The Jacobian term would improve accuracy by correcting the intensity for steep dispersion
regions, but was excluded for simplicity.
6.2
Resolution Orientation and Sample Frame
Earlier discussions focused on projecting the resolution function into different planes, which is useful for
characterization as a normalized Gaussian. However, when assessing its effect on a dispersion, both the
effective amplitude (i.e., the weight during convolution) and the orientation of the resolution function
are critical. This section addresses these aspects and explains how the resolution function is rotated
from the laboratory to the sample reference frame. The notation is changed from ∆E to ω, as the focus
is now on a dispersion relation.
6.2.1
Amplitude
In general, the measured intensity I on a neutron spectrometer, represents the scattering function
S( ⃗Q, ω) convoluted with the resolution function R:
I( ⃗Q0, ω0) =
ZZ
S( ⃗Q, ω)R( ⃗Q −⃗Q0, ω −ω0) d ⃗Qdω
(6.3)
When approximating the resolution function as a multivariate gaussian distribution, the resolution
function can be written as:
R( ⃗Q −⃗Q0, ω −ω0) = R0( ⃗Q0, ω0) exp

−1
2
⃗XT · Σ−1 ⃗X

(6.4)
where Σ is the resolution covariance matrix, ⃗X is a 4 dimensional vector including ⃗Q −⃗Q0 as the first
three components and ω −ω0 as the last one, and R0 is the amplitude. This amplitude is given as:
R0( ⃗Q0, ω0) = ViVf
Ve
(6.5)
where Vi and Vf are the phase-space volumes for incident and final wavevectors:
Vx = p(kx) 1
t4x
∆Ωx∆tx
(6.6)
Channel Idx.
Analyzer Ef
1
2
3
2.7 meV
0.9980
0.9980
0.9981
3.2 meV
0.9985
0.9984
0.9985
3.8 meV
0.9987
0.9987
0.9987
4.4 meV
0.9988
0.9989
0.9989
5 meV
0.9990
0.9990
0.9990
Table 6.1: Relative transmission for different final energies and analyzer configurations..
==PAGE:55==
6.2 Resolution Orientation and Sample Frame
49
Figure 6.1: Left) Time-of-flight monitor showing intensity per time bin across moderator pulses.
Right) Time-of-flight monitor converted to intensity per energy bin, emphasizing the need
for re-normalization.
where x can be i or f [30] and p(kx) is a transition function, describing the primary or secondary
spectrometer intensity as a function of wavevector kx. Ve is the normalization factor for a multivariate
gaussian:
Ve =
q
(2π)k det Σ
(6.7)
where det is the determinant and k is the dimensionality of Σ [31].
While Ve is a function of the
covariance matrix itself, the other factors would normally be found using a monitor on an instrument.
We will use McStas to similarly monitor the relative intensity before the sample position and before the
detector.
6.2.1.1
Incident Intensity Spectrum
The monitors on BIFROST are normalized with respect to the start of each moderator pulse at a
repetition rate of 14 Hz. As seen in Figure 6.1 Left, slow neutrons from the previous pulse overlap
with fast neutrons from the current pulse within a given moderator frame at the sample position. It
is therefore crucial to re-normalize the bins to obtain the correct intensity spectrum, as shown in
Figure 6.1 Right. This spectrum can be expressed as p(ki) or, equivalently, as p(Ei) for convenience.
In the current analysis, the correction factor ∆Ωi∆ti/t4
i was not included in the calculation of Vi due
to time constraints in the implementation of the convolution framework.
6.2.1.2
Outgoing Intensity Spectrum
By replacing the sample with a simple flat source covering all analyzers uniformly and normalizing
the recorded neutron weight by the weight at the source, a comparative intensity distribution can be
obtained for the five analyzers, as well as the different channel types (index 1, 2 and 3). Table 6.1 shows
the relative increase in neutron ray weight from the sample position to the central detector element for
different analyzers and channels.
6.2.2
Orientation
The principal axes of the resolution ellipsoid are generally rotated relative to (Qx, Qz, ω) due to cor-
relations. This orientation determines whether the resolution broadens or sharpens a given feature
along the dispersion. Aligning ellipsoids with the dispersion minimizes effective broadening, whereas
misalignment leads to significant smearing. This loss of information can be critical when interpreting
resolution effects on dispersions. Thus, understanding ellipsoid orientation relative to the measured
feature is essential for accurate data interpretation.
To preserve some sense of this three-dimensional nature in 2D plots, we introduce a notation: a “+” or
“–” symbol is used to indicate whether the distribution is primarily above or below the mean value in
the projected-out axis on a given half of the projection. This is illustrated in Figure 6.2, which shows
the full 3D resolution ellipsoid, its 2D projections onto coordinate planes, and the use of these markers.
Small dashed lines are also included as orientation aids which splits the projection in two. This dashed
line also represents the line on which the distribution is exactly at the mean of the projected-out axis.
As an example of the “+”/“-” markers and dashed line, looking at the projection in Qz and Qx in
==PAGE:56==
6.3 Monte Carlo Convolution
50
Figure 6.2: Three-dimensional representation of the resolution ellipsoid for 0.1 ms PSC opening time,
5 meV analyzer, 5 meV energy transfer, 25◦scattering angle. Projections onto coordinate
planes are shown, with “+” and “–” markers indicating whether the ellipsoid extends
primarily above or below the mean of the projected-out variable. Dashed lines denote
equal extension of the projected-out variable above and below the mean.
Figure 6.2, the dashed line represents the line in the distribution where ω = 5 meV. The + side of the
distribution is on average above 5 meV and the minus side is below.
6.2.3
Sample Reference Frame
Converting the covariance matrix from the laboratory reference frame to the crystal reference frame is
as simple as doing a rotation, much like for ⃗Q Σsample = R · Σlab · RT . Here R is the same rotation
matrix from (3.14), with an extra dimension, for ω, that is 1 in the diagonal, similar to Qy.
6.3
Monte Carlo Convolution
With the instrument resolution fully defined in terms of its covariance matrix Σ and normalization
amplitude R0, the next step is to perform the convolution of the phonon dispersion with this resolution
function. Direct analytical convolution is generally intractable for realistic dispersions due to the high
dimensionality of the problem. Therefore, a Monte Carlo (MC) integration approach is employed.
As discussed in Section 4.1.1, MC integration is well suited for high-dimensional integrals such as the
convolution of a phonon dispersion with a 4D resolution function. The convolution integral at a point
( ⃗Q0, ω0) can be approximated as:
I( ⃗Q0, ω0) =
ZZ
S( ⃗Q, ω) R( ⃗Q −⃗Q0, ω −ω0) d ⃗Q dω ≈1
N
N
X
i
S( ⃗Qi, ωi) R( ⃗Qi −⃗Q0, ωi −ω0)
(6.8)
==PAGE:57==
6.3 Monte Carlo Convolution
51
where ⃗Qi and ωi are sampled points in ( ⃗Q, ω) space. For the phonon approximation considered here,
S( ⃗Q, ω) is modeled as a delta distribution:
S( ⃗Q, ω) = p3( ⃗Q, ω) δ
 ω −ω( ⃗Q)

,
(6.9)
meaning that scattering occurs only along the dispersion surface ω( ⃗Q).
6.3.1
Naive 4D Monte Carlo Sampling
The simplest approach is to approximate the delta function by a very narrow Gaussian of width σω =
1 neV, ensuring that the added broadening does not influence the resolution-convolved result. This
yields
I( ⃗Q0, ω0) ≈1
N
N
X
i=1
p3( ⃗Qi, ωi) δ
 ωi −ω( ⃗Qi)

Vi( ⃗
ki,i)Vf( ⃗
kf,i)
(6.10)
where ( ⃗Qi, ωi) are sampled from the full 4D Gaussian resolution function, R( ⃗Q −⃗Q0, ω −ω0), using
importance sampling. This effectively eliminates R from the integrand, since the proposal distribution
is equal to the normalized resolution function. Vi and Vf are still incorporated since the importance
sampling proposal distribution does not include those two terms.
A practical challenge arises in evaluating the Dirac delta function, δ
 ωi −ω( ⃗Qi)

, which cannot be
directly sampled, as all points except for exactly ω( ⃗Qi) will be 0. To address this, the delta function is
replaced with a narrow Gaussian:
δ
 ωi −ω( ⃗Qi)

−→
1
√
2πϵ exp
 
−(ωi −ω( ⃗Qi)2
2ϵ2
!
(6.11)
Figure 6.3: Averaged convolution value for the two different MC integration approaches for a different
amount of sampled points, at a point very close to the dispersion: Top) Naive 4D MC
sampling approach, Bottom) Single Mode Approximation. Black dots represent individual
convolutions, crosses indicate the mean of 100 convolutions for a given sample size, and
error bars show the standard deviation.
==PAGE:58==
6.3 Monte Carlo Convolution
52
Figure 6.4: Left) Time required to convolve a single point as a function of the number of MC samples
for the two approaches. Right) Relative error (standard deviation divided by mean) of
100 independent convolutions for each method as a function of sample size..
where ϵ is chosen to be very small as not to affect the width of the convolution. This substitution allows
for a numerically stable approximation of the delta distribution within the convolution framework.
However, as shown in Figure 6.3 Top, this naive method suffers from large statistical fluctuations and
poor convergence. Even with N = 106 samples, the integration error remains significant. Furthermore,
the computational cost scales poorly: as shown in Figure 6.4, achieving a statistical uncertainty of 10%
for a single point requires approximately 1 s of computation time.
6.3.2
Single Mode Approximation
A more eﬀicient approach exploits the delta distribution in S( ⃗Q, ω) by integrating over ω analytically.
This reduces the integral to a three-dimensional form:
I( ⃗Q0, ω0) =
Z
p3( ⃗Q) R( ⃗Q −⃗Q0, ω( ⃗Q) −ω0) d ⃗Q,
(6.12)
Then in practice, the integration utilizes importance sampling again, however, since we are now unable
to sample in the ω axis, the convolution becomes:
I( ⃗Q0, ω0) ≈1
N
N
X
i=1
p3( ⃗Qi) R( ⃗Qi −⃗Q0, ω( ⃗Qi) −ω0)
D( ⃗Qi −⃗Q0)
(6.13)
Where D is our proposed gaussian, which uses the same covariance matrix as the resolution function,
but with the ω axis projected out. This reduces the dimensionality by one and concentrates sampling
to be on the distribution. This methodology is called the single mode approximation (SMA), as it only
approximates a single mode [32].
As seen in Figure 6.3 Bottom, the SMA method converges significantly faster and with much smaller
variance than the naive 4D approach. In addition, the computational time per convolution is reduced
by roughly 2.5 orders of magnitude for the same accuracy, as shown in Figure 6.4. For the phonon
convolution we will utilize this method with a sample count of N = 104, such each of our convolutions
has an statistical uncertainty of ∼1%.
==PAGE:59==
6.4 Methodology
53
6.4
Methodology
The methodology consists of two parts: 1) McStas Simulations and data reduction using the BIFROST_nD
class and (2) Resolution convolution using SMA integration. Both of the approaches were implemented
on DTU’s HPC, utilizing the administrator-worker approach discussed in Section 4.1.5.
6.4.1
Simulations
The methodology for the McStas simulations is quite simple. Firstly, a single primary spectrometer
simulation was run, choosing the chopper delays such that the energy range of Ei ∈[4.95, 14.5] meV
would arrive at the sample position. The PSC opening time and jaw settings were varied to give a good
taste for how different settings impact measured dispersion. For the secondary spectrometer, to ensure
continuous angular coverage, a combination of two fixed A4 angles and a continuous scan of the sample
rotation angle, A4. Due to the fourfold symmetry of the face-centered cubic (fcc) lattice around the
(001) axis, a 90◦rotation in A3 provides complete sampling of the phonon structure in reciprocal space.
Choosing the correct A4 and A3 values is determined by the sample structure.
Since the phonon
dispersion repeats every 2 brillouin zones in (HKL), an ideal place to look for the dispersion would be
at the (020) reflection. For the 5 meV analyzer, this point is at 2θ ≈110◦. As such setting two A4
angles of 110◦and 115◦will be used. This is not exactly realistic, as the maximum scattering angle for
BIFROST is 135◦, and the maximum scattering angle of these simulations is 160◦, but for the sake of
this project, this will be ignored. The A3 angles set will be centered around A3m = 2θ
2 = 55, and with
the four fold symmetry, the A3 range will be 10◦to 100◦degrees. To make the simulations as fine as
possible, an A3 step of 0.5◦was used, so there are 181 simulations per A4 angle.
All simulations were performed for the complete set of analyzers in the instrument, corresponding to
five distinct final energies.
Each analyzer dataset spans the full energy range and is treated as an
independent measurement. For the analysis presented in this work, the 5 meV analyzer was selected as
the reference case, but it is important to remember that five data sets are available.
6.4.2
Convolution
The convolution was carried out for every detector element, tube and channel combination for the 5 meV
analyzer, which totals 2,700 detector elements per analyzer. The integration is done for each detector
element for each A3 and A4 angle, which further increases the convolution calculation count to ∼106.
When incorporating energy transfer into the calculation, the situation becomes significantly more com-
plex. Simulated data are converted into visualizations by binning events into voxels (3D pixels) in
(H, K, ω) space. As a result, each pixel in a 2D histogram inherently includes integration effects from
the dimension that has been projected out, meaning the displayed intensity represents an average over
a finite range in the third dimension. While the angular contributions cannot increase further than the
natural binning of the detector elements, when specifying the energy transfers to convolve the model
with, this has to be considered. If one simply chose the mid points of each voxel, these integration
effects would not play a part. Taking this into consideration, five convolution calculations per detector
element per width of the (H, K, ω) voxel in energy will be done to ensure several energy contributions
per voxel. To simplify it, if we are using 0.1 meV energy bin width with midpoint on 0 meV, our con-
volution will calculate convolutions for all detector elements with energy transfers, -0.05, -0.25, 0, 0.25
and 0.5 meV. For the incident energy range discussed in the McStas methodology, and an energy bin
width of 0.05 meV, the number of energy transfer points that need to be considered is ∼1,000.
As such in total, ∼109 convolution calculations have to be done for a fulfilling model. This is a massive
computational burden, and even for convolutions that take <1 ms, this would take over 11 days for
a single CPU core to calculate, or 11 CPU days. To avoid this, a stochastic sampling approach was
adopted. For each point, a random number p was drawn from a uniform distribution from 0 to 1, and the
convolution was computed only if p exceeded a predefined threshold. This probabilistic down-sampling
reduces the number of computed points while preserving statistical representativeness of the integrated
signal. We chose the threshold to be 0.9, thus only computing 10% of all convolutions.
==PAGE:60==
6.4 Methodology
54
Figure 6.5: Slices of phonon dispersion comparing convolution, first and third columns, and McStas simulations, second and fourth columns. Top) ω slices at 2 meV
and 5 meV (integration widths 0.10 meV and 0.16 meV). Middle and Bottom) H and K slices at selected values (integration widths 0.05 meV in ω). All
slices are for PSC opening time of 1 ms and open jaws to ensure enough McStas statistics and integration width of 0.016 r.l.u. in H, K.
==PAGE:61==
6.5 Results and Visualization
55
6.5
Results and Visualization
This section compares the convolution method with McStas simulations in several ways. Firstly, 2D
slices of the phonon dispersion are shown in Figure 6.5; secondly, 1D line cuts are presented in Figure 6.6.
Overall, as shown in Figure 6.5, the two methods demonstrate excellent agreement. The widths of
the various features in each curve match remarkably well, and the influence of the resolution on the
intensity at different points along the dispersion is also well captured. This is illustrated best by the
slice at ω =2 meV, where the top right corner is more intense than the bottom right. The McStas data
is comparatively sparse, which makes it more challenging to compare slices at high energy transfers.
This is illustrated in the top-right panel of Figure 6.5. There the number of events in the dispersion
centered at (020) is very small. A potential solution would be to integrate over larger bins, although
this might also smear out some of the resolution effects.
The phonon dispersion was also simulated for PSC opening times of 0.1 ms and 0.5 ms, as well as with
open jaws and jaws set to ±4◦and ±2◦. However, the number of simulated neutrons for these settings
was significantly lower than in the data presented here. Results for these settings and the convolutions
are shown in Appendix B, with the same integration slices.
Considering the individual line cuts in Figure 6.6 and the corresponding FWHM values in Table 6.2, the
model performs well very well, though some refinements are still needed. Most peaks differ by less than
10%, indicating very good agreement overall. There are, however, a few outliers—most notably the
high-H peak for ω = 5, K= −2.2, which deviates significantly. As seen in Figure 6.6, this discrepancy
may stem from low sampling in that region, as evidenced by the large McStas error bars.
Figure 6.6:
Line cuts of the phonon dispersion comparing convolution (red) and McStas simulations
(blue) for six different lines. Integration widths are as in Figure 6.5, with details specified
for each panel. All intensities are scaled to unity for comparison.
==PAGE:62==
6.5 Results and Visualization
56
ω = 5 meV
K= −2.2 r.l.u.
Low H
ω = 5 meV
K= −2.2 r.l.u.
High H
ω = 2 meV
H= 0.1 r.l.u.
Low K
ω = 2 meV
H= 0.1 r.l.u.
High K
K= −2.5 r.l.u.
H= −0.25 r.l.u.
µH
FWHM
µH
FWHM
µK
FWHM
µK
FWHM
µω
FWHM
-0.3791
0.0453
0.0106
0.0249
-2.1215
0.0260
0.0195
0.0459
6.1187
0.2597
-0.3664
0.0422
0.0137
0.0323
-2.1233
0.0242
0.0196
0.0463
6.1922
0.2434
ω = 3 meV
K= −2.1 r.l.u.
Low H
ω = 3 meV
K= −2.1 r.l.u.
High H
ω = 3 meV
H= −0.1 r.l.u.
Low K
ω = 3 meV
H= −0.1 r.l.u.
High K
K= −2.5 r.l.u.
H= 0.25 r.l.u.
µH
FWHM
µH
FWHM
µK
FWHM
µK
FWHM
µω
FWHM
-0.2207
0.0395
0.0102
0.0241
-2.2198
0.0325
0.0138
0.0325
6.1098
0.1820
-0.2137
0.0436
0.0113
0.0267
-2.2182
0.0333
0.0145
0.0342
6.1506
0.1721
Table 6.2: Comparison of peak positions (µx) and widths (FWHM) for convolution (first data line in
each block) and McStas simulations (second data line) across different line cuts. For line
cuts with two peaks, low and high indicate the smaller and larger values of the variable not
fixed in the cut. The line cuts correspond to the cuts in Figure 6.6.
.
The convolution data also exhibits large error bars. These represent the standard deviation of points
within each bin, meaning that larger bin sizes naturally lead to larger error bars, clearly seen in the
rightmost column. This might hint that 5 energy calculations per energy bin was too many, or that
even less than 10% of the convolutions are necessary for a good convolution result. Furthermore, the
intensities for each cut were scaled to unity. This normalization is necessary because additional weighting
factors from the phonon cross-section calculation were not included in the convolution. These missing
weighting factors appear to affect certain cases, particularly the cut at (ω = 5meV, K= −2.2 r.l.u),
where the low-H peak is convolved to a much lower intensity than shown in the simulations. However,
this discrepancy could also be influenced by integration effects, as the McStas error bars are notably
large for this peak.
The main deviation is seen in the peak centers, µ, which shift toward more positive values, particularly
at higher energy transfers.
This arises from an overestimation of Ei in the BIFROST_nD code, as
illustrated in Figure 6.7. Although the simulated primary spectrometer flight path is slightly shorter
than the nominal value, the measured difference in average path length between 2.5 meV and 50 meV
is only 5 mm, far too small to account for the observed error. Since the final energy and t2 show no
discrepancies, and identical conversion constants are used in both BIFROST_nD and McStas, the issue
likely stems from a small offset in the McStas time-of-flight calculation relative to the PSC opening
midpoint.
This is puzzling, as t1 is defined as ToF −t2−tP SC, where tP SC is determined directly from the chopper
settings and t2 matches the expected nominal value. This suggests that the discrepancy originates from
how McStas records ToF. Further investigation is required, as this error is important for accurate data
Figure 6.7: Relative error of Ei depending on incident energy. The relative error is the calculated
value minus the actual value.
==PAGE:63==
6.6 Discussion
57
analysis. However, it should not affect the resolution calculation beyond introducing a slight shift in
the peak positions.
Another observation is the presence of gaps in the dispersion at locations where measurements were
taken. This is most evident in the bottom-right panel of Figure 6.8, which shows the projection of
all data points with H∈[0, 1] onto a single plane.
A distinct arc of missing data originates from
the dispersion point at K= −2.05 and ω = 3.5meV. This appears to be a numerical artifact of the
Phonon_simple model and is treated as such.
6.6
Discussion
Returning to the main focus of this project, the projected resolution function is overlaid on three slices
of the dispersion, as shown in Figure 6.8.
These resolution functions were calculated by selecting
all neutrons contributing to a small volume around a point and averaging their resolution functions.
This step is necessary because multiple points, with different A3 angles, scattering angles, and energy
transfers, can contribute to a single pixel bin. Each of these variables affects the shape and orientation
of the resolution function, and this variation must be accounted for.
For the ω = 2 meV slice, the dispersion mostly lies within the 2σ contour and is noticeably broader in
regions where the dispersion is perpendicular to the resolution ellipsoid. Due to the tilt of the resolution
in and out of the ω plane (as indicated by the “+/-” markers), the top-right corner is expected to be
better resolved than the bottom-left corner, which agrees with the simulations.
Shifting focus onto the H= −0.15 r.l.u slice, the resolution functions again fit very well with the
dispersion widths. The one place it does not is at the bottom of the dispersion, which is due to the
H integration impacting this area the most, as that is where the gradient of the dispersion out of
the plane is greatest. The orientation of the resolution ellipsoids is consistent with previous results
Figure 6.8: Top row and Bottom Left) Three slices of the phonon dispersion with overlaid resolution
functions. The ellipses align with the local curvature of the dispersion, broadening mainly
perpendicular to it. Bottom Right) Projection of all neutron events with H∈[0, 1] to show
the Phonon_simple artifact.
==PAGE:64==
6.6 Discussion
58
(positive towards negative K and positive H), except near the bottom of the dispersion, where the
orientation switches abruptly.
This abrupt switch is quite interesting, and shows how the effect of
different scattering angles and sample rotations causes the resolution function to vary quite a bit in
HKL space quickly. These two points are not significantly different in scattering angle from neighboring
points, 2◦from K= −2.2 and 9◦from K= 1.9, but because of the rotation of the covariance matrix by
A3, this switch occurs here.
Lastly, looking at the constant K= −2.2 r.l.u slice, the resolution functions appear to slightly overesti-
mate the dispersion width. This is likely due to the low neutron statistics, particularly for positive H
values as the 2σ contours should contain 95% of the data points. Nevertheless, the observed tilt of the
dispersion is physically reasonable: the resolution function is aligned with the dispersion for positive H
values and perpendicular for negative H values. Overall, the resolution model shows good agreement
with the data but requires minor refinements to fully capture the observed features.
6.6.1
Systematic Correlations and Data Combination
All secondary spectrometer simulations at a given A3/A4 angle combination were generated from the
same initial primary spectrometer simulation MCPL file containing 109 particles.
As a result, the
individual datasets are not entirely independent, and small correlations between the resulting spectra
may arise. While this effect is expected to be minor compared to statistical uncertainties, it could lead
to subtle biases when combining the data. A straightforward way to mitigate this issue would be to
run larger, independent primary spectrometer simulations for each analyzer setting, thereby reducing
potential correlations.
Furthermore, the data analysis in this work relied exclusively on the 5 meV analyzer dataset, with
the other analyzer datasets being ignored.
While this was acceptable for the present simulations,
future studies would benefit from combining all analyzer datasets in a consistent and meaningful way.
One possible approach would be to weight each data point by the inverse of the determinant of the
local covariance matrix in ( ⃗Q, ω) space. This is crucial because the different analyzers have distinct
resolution functions, and a simple unweighted average could cause the broader 5 meV analyzer resolution
to dominate, or even produce non-Gaussian artifacts in line cuts. Addressing these aspects will be
important for ensuring that future data is utilized as effectively and accurately as possible.
6.6.2
Computational Eﬀiciency
One of the uses of a resolution convoluting calculations is as a fast and simple way to: A) Visualize
what the data should look like for a sample before the beam time, or B) To fit model parameters by
comparing resolution-convolved predictions to experimental line cuts or slices. For this to be useful, the
convolution method has to be more eﬀicient than McStas simulations, fast enough to enable iterative
fitting or rapid exploration of model parameters during analysis or even in preparation for beam time.
This section will talk about the runtime, memory usage (RAM usage) and storage usage (disk usage)
of the two different methods: Convolution and McStas simulations
6.6.2.1
Convolution
As described in the methodology, a total of 108 points, representing 10% of the 109 simulated events,
needed to be convolved for the resolution-convolved phonon data presented in this work.
The cur-
rent implementation of the convolution procedure is highly brute-force, relying on nested for-loops
and non-vectorized matrix operations. Despite this ineﬀiciency, a single energy-transfer slice required
approximately 250 CPU s to compute, with each individual data point taking roughly 7.5 CPU ms. Con-
sequently, the entire 108-point volume was processed in about 70 CPU hours. Memory consumption per
slice peaked at 120 MB, resulting in a total of 120 GB of RAM used. Each slice is saved as a 3.8 MB
file, and the total memory usage for the entire (H, K, ω) space is 3.8 GB.
The present implementation is single-threaded, which limits scalability for more complex dispersions or
larger sampling amounts. Future improvements will focus on parallelization and, critically, vectorization
of integration routine for different points, which is expected to reduce runtime by at least one order of
magnitude. Along with this, for parameter fitting, the full (H, K, ω) space is not necessary. As such, it
is often more fitting to convolve individual slices of (H, K, ω) space instead. The current implementation
only allows for ω slices, but a next step would be to be able to select H or K slices instead to convolve.
==PAGE:65==
6.6 Discussion
59
6.6.2.2
McStas Simulations
For one of the 362 simulations for a full phonon dispersion, the average compute time was 7000 CPU s,
which means that for all 362 combinations of A3 and A4, the total simulation time is 703 CPU hours.
This is about a factor 10 more than the convolution. However, McStas benefits from built-in MPI
support; by distributing each simulation across 10 CPU cores, the effective wall-clock time was reduced
to a similar range as the convolution calculations.
It is worth noting that a significant fraction of the McStas runtime is spent writing Monitor_nD files,
a process that can occasionally cause simulations to crash due to a known error where the master MPI
rank fails to open a file before the worker ranks attempt to write. These crashes can increase the overall
runtime and reduce reliability. The memory usage per A3/A4 simulation was approximately 600 MB,
which totals 271 GB of RAM used. The total storage space used for the raw data for the entire secondary
spectrometer simulation is 600 MB, which when analyzed turns into 2 GB. The storage usage of the
individual A3/A4 paired simulations depends on the values of those two angles, as some simulations
have only a couple points, while others have thousands. However, the real storage usage for the McStas
simulations comes from the primary spectrometer, where the MCPL file is a total of 40 GB large.
6.6.2.3
Comparison
Even with its unoptimized implementation, the convolution approach achieves comparable performance
times to McStas, while avoiding some of the reliability issues associated with Monitor_nD output.
McStas remains highly robust for complex simulations, but the convolution method offers a simpler,
more direct path for testing models and fitting data. However, the McStas simulations also produces
data for all 5 analyzer energies, and as such, effectively, the compute time is cut in 5. To directly
compare the two simulation methods, both were set to queue on the HPC simultaneously. With 240
available cores per user, the 1000 convolutions, each using a single core, completed in slightly over 16
hours, whereas the McStas simulations, each utilizing 8 cores, took slightly under 24 hours to finish.
While this comparison is useful, it is also only relevant for people with HPC access, which not all users
may have.
Comparing memory usage is somewhat more nuanced, as the reported RAM reflects only the peak
usage on the HPC system and not the full memory footprint over time. Ideally, a comparative study of
the memory usage profile throughout the simulation would provide a more accurate picture. However,
given that the maximum RAM usage for the McStas simulations is approximately twice as large, it still
indicates a significantly higher memory demand and highlights the relative eﬀiciency of the convolution-
based approach.
The storage use for the two methods is quite interesting to compare. While the McStas secondary
spectrometer simulations utilizes significantly less memory than the convolutions, it is because the
data is in event format. The McStas monitors will not record the intensity at the points which were
measured but no intensity was recorded. Furthermore, the 2 GB of data is for all 5 analyzer energies,
which means it is 400 MB per analyzer. Meanwhile, the convolutions record a total intensity on 108
points using 64-bit floats. This means that even for points where there is no or negligible intensity, a
64-bit float is still allocated for it, which utilized quite a bit of space, totaling 3.8 GB for one analyzer
energy.
Despite this, the total storage still remains well below the 40 GB required for the McStas
primary spectrometer simulations. Although this large dataset can be reused for different secondary
spectrometer configurations, it still represents a substantial storage burden, particularly when the goal
is to rapidly fit models or explore experimental scenarios in advance.
Lastly, as mentioned, the same phonon dispersion was also measured for lower PSC opening setting
and jaws, however the number of events for these was much lower than the simulation showed. Here
a true positive of the convolution model appears, as it is not limited by the number of neutrons, and
thus produces just as clear slices as in Figure 6.5 for low PSC opening times and smaller jaw settings.
Future developments, such as implementing vectorized and parallelized routines and exploring multi-
mode approximations, could make the convolution method significantly faster than McStas. While a
multi-mode approximation would require denser Monte Carlo sampling (increasing computational cost),
it would eliminate the need for dedicated McStas components and instead rely on a lightweight sampling
function. With these optimizations, the convolution approach could reach run-times that are usable on
a laptop, similar to other established resolution-convolution frameworks in neutron scattering [32], [33].
==PAGE:66==
7 Conclusion
60
CHAPTER 7
Conclusion
This thesis has developed and validated a comprehensive resolution model for the BIFROST neutron
spectrometer, providing a framework capable of accurately characterizing the energy and momentum
resolution in ( ⃗Q, ℏω) space. By utilizing linear error propagation and constructing a full covariance ma-
trix, the resolution was represented as a multivariate Gaussian, enabling both a compact mathematical
description and straightforward visualization. The approach was systematically benchmarked against
Monte Carlo ray-tracing simulations with McStas, demonstrating that the analytical model captures
the essential features of the instrument’s resolution while offering computational eﬀiciency.
The resolution model agreed with simulations for a large range of different instrumental parameters,
scattering angles and energy transfers. The largest discrepancy was the correlations between Qx and
the other parameters, which is likely due to missing correlations, and the general Qx resolution, where
the resolution for small energy transfers was slightly underestimated (+5% residuals). Along with this,
it was shown that the gaussian covariance approximation works well for low energy transfers, but falls
short for high energy transfers and large PSC opening times.
The work also introduced a convolution-based method for single-mode scattering cross sections, using
a SMA convolution approach, which provides a fast and flexible alternative to McStas for resolution-
corrected data analysis. Although this method is not as comprehensive as McStas for modeling full
instrument behavior, it proved capable of delivering comparable results for well-defined test cases.
Notably, the analytical and convolution methods can be applied to large parameter scans or fitting
procedures, where the cost of full Monte Carlo simulations would be prohibitive, as well as calculate
dispersions for low neutron count settings much faster than McStas could for the same statistical cer-
tainty.
This thesis demonstrates that an analytical Gaussian resolution model, when paired with a carefully
parameterized covariance matrix, can serve as a reliable and computationally eﬀicient alternative to
full-scale Monte Carlo simulations for BIFROST. By quantifying the contributions of key instrument
parameters and validating them against McStas, the model provides a deeper understanding of how
different components shape the overall resolution.
Future Work
While significant progress has been made in this project, as well as in previous studies, there remain
many avenues for further development.
One important aspect concerns the resolution model itself.
The Qx resolution and its correlations with other parameters require a more detailed investigation,
particularly as current assumptions of independence between neutron path parameters may not hold
under all conditions. Sample size effects and their induced correlations are another area where more
work needs to be done to produce a more accurate modeling. Furthermore, looking into non-Gaussian
functions for the resolution could provide a more accurate description, especially in regimes where the
Gaussian assumption breaks down.
Looking at the data analysis, the most vital thing is that the incident energy Ei is correctly calculated,
as systematic errors in Ei could severely impact the analysis. This is largely the biggest error in this
project and something that should have had more time invested into it. Further work vectorizing and
parallelizing the convolution method would have made the comparison between McStas simulations and
the convolution much more stark.
Looking even further forwards with the convolution method, extending the current single-mode approach
to a multi-mode approximation would make the convolution framework applicable to more complex
scattering systems. Along with this, decreasing the storage size of the dataset, by using a different data
==PAGE:67==
7 Conclusion
61
structure, as well as allowing for H and K slices to be done would be a large step forward. Furthermore,
using more complex dispersions would show the complexities of the resolution function, and would be
something that could be used for the first science cases on BIFROST. A moon-shot idea to make the
convolution more eﬀicient, would be to implement non-linear convolution schemes, where important
regions of parameter space are sampled more densely, or where different detector element - energy
transfer combinations are sampled for importance sampling. This would speed up the convolutions and
use less memory.
Beyond these improvements, if the BIFROST model in McStas is to be used as a full digital twin
of the instrument, incorporating counting time analysis, as outlined in [5], is a must for comparing
experimental and simulated data sets. Along with this, combining data from the different analyzer
energies and performing detailed comparisons between the convolution method and McStas for various
dispersions would be a much needed step forward for this project, as treating each data set individually
is ineffective.
In the longer term, a robust fitting algorithm, like the ones used in Tobyfit [34], for dispersion param-
eters is also important to include. This project has only utilized the convolution method for a known
dispersion, but for unknown dispersions, fitting a model to the neutron data is important. One step
further in this direction would be to be able to de-convolve resolution effects from neutron data, either
using large neural networks, or utilizing methods from image analysis. This is a long and complex
idea, with no certainty of a useful result, but it could end up being incredibly rewarding for neutron
data-analysis methods in general.
==PAGE:68==
A Angular deviation of Ef
62
APPENDIX A
Angular deviation of Ef
Given an neutron with wavelength λ and a wavevector:
⃗ki = 2π
λ


0
0
1


(A.1)
reflecting off of an analyzer that is rotated θ degrees around the x axis. The Bragg scattering vector
for the analyzer is:
⃗q = 2π
d

0
−cos(θ) sin(θ)

(A.2)
From this the elastic scattering equation is:
⃗ki −⃗kf = 2π
λ


0
0
1

−2π
λ


ex
ey
ez

= 2π
d


0
−cos(θ)
sin(θ)


(A.3)
If the Bragg criteria fits, nλ = 2d sin(θ), replacing d with this equation, the solution to the direction of
⃗kf is:
ex = 0
ey = sin(2θ)
ez = cos(2θ)
(A.4)
Adding a slight deviation in the initial wavevector, such that it has angle ϕ with respect to the z-axis:
⃗ki = 2π
λ′


sin(ϕ)
0
cos(ϕ)


(A.5)
The equation then becomes:
⃗ki −⃗kf = 2π
λ′


sin(ϕ)
0
cos(ϕ)

−2π
λ′


e′
x
e′
y
e′
z

= 2π
d


0
−cos(θ)
sin(θ)


(A.6)
Since the new Bragg crtiera is nλ′ = 2d sin(θ′), the equation becomes:
⃗ki −⃗kf =


sin(ϕ) −e′
x
−e′
y
cos(ϕ) −e′
z

=


0
−2 sin(θ′) cos(θ)
2 sin(θ′) sin(θ)


(A.7)
Which solves to be:
e′
x = sin(ϕ)
e′
y = 2 sin(θ′) cos(θ)
ez = cos(ϕ) −2 sin(θ′) sin(θ)
(A.8)
Since this vector has to be unit vector, otherwise (A.6) doesn’t work:
e′2
x + e′2
y + e′2
z = 1
(A.9)
1 = sin2(ϕ) + 4 sin2(θ′) cos2(θ) + cos2(ϕ) + 4 sin2(θ′) sin2(θ) −4 sin(θ′) sin(θ) cos(ϕ)
(A.10)
Simplifying this, the solution becomes:
1 −sin2(ϕ) −cos2(ϕ) = 0 = 4 sin2(θ′)(cos2(θ) + sin2(θ)) −4 sin(θ′) sin(θ) cos(ϕ)
(A.11)
0 = 4 sin2(θ′) −4 sin(θ′) sin(θ) cos(ϕ)
(A.12)
==PAGE:69==
A Angular deviation of Ef
63
0 = 4 sin(θ′) (sin(θ′) −sin(θ) cos(ϕ))
(A.13)
The right term will give trivial solutions, which are that the wavelength λ′ = 2d sin(θ′) is equal to 0,
but the other solution can be simplified:
sin(θ′) −sin(θ) cos(ϕ) = 0 →λ′
2d −λ
2d cos(ϕ) = 0
(A.14)
Which means that new wavelength will be λ′ = λ cos(ϕ), and for energy this equates to E′
f = Ef/ cos(ϕ).
==PAGE:70==
B Phonon Slices
64
APPENDIX B
Phonon Slices
This appendix shows the phonon slice comparison between convolution and simulation. All figures have
an additional text of ”Top) ω slices at 2 meV and 5 meV (integration widths 0.10 meV and 0.16 meV).
Middle and Bottom) H and K slices at selected values (integration widths 0.05 meV in ω). All slices
are for PSC opening time of 1 ms and open jaws to ensure enough McStas statistics and integration
width of 0.016 r.l.u. in H, K”, exactly as Figure 6.5 has.
As expected, the smaller the jaws opening and the smaller the PSC opening time, the fewer neutrons
come through. With the smallest jaw opening and smallest PSC opening time, see Figure B.3, there
are nearly no neutrons which arrive at the sample position. There is a clear improvement in the energy
resolution at higher energy transfers for lower PSC opening times as expected. The effect of smaller
jaws may not be seen due to large integration widths in K and H. This effect should be looked further
into.
==PAGE:71==
B Phonon Slices
65
Figure B.1: Slices of phonon dispersion comparing convolution, first and third columns, and McStas simulations, second and fourth columns. For PSC opening
time 0.1 ms and open jaws..
==PAGE:72==
B Phonon Slices
66
Figure B.2: Slices of phonon dispersion comparing convolution, first and third columns, and McStas simulations, second and fourth columns. For PSC opening
time 0.1 ms and ±0.4◦divergence jaws..
==PAGE:73==
B Phonon Slices
67
Figure B.3: Slices of phonon dispersion comparing convolution, first and third columns, and McStas simulations, second and fourth columns. For PSC opening
time 0.1 ms and ±0.2◦divergence jaws..
==PAGE:74==
B Phonon Slices
68
Figure B.4: Slices of phonon dispersion comparing convolution, first and third columns, and McStas simulations, second and fourth columns. For PSC opening
time 0.5 ms and open jaws..
==PAGE:75==
B Phonon Slices
69
Figure B.5: Slices of phonon dispersion comparing convolution, first and third columns, and McStas simulations, second and fourth columns. For PSC opening
time 0.5 ms and ±0.4◦divergence jaws..
==PAGE:76==
B Phonon Slices
70
Figure B.6: Slices of phonon dispersion comparing convolution, first and third columns, and McStas simulations, second and fourth columns. For PSC opening
time 0.5 ms and ±0.2◦divergence jaws..
==PAGE:77==
B Phonon Slices
71
Figure B.7: Slices of phonon dispersion comparing convolution, first and third columns, and McStas simulations, second and fourth columns. For PSC opening
time 1 ms and open jaws. Same as figure Figure 6.5.
==PAGE:78==
B Phonon Slices
72
Figure B.8: Slices of phonon dispersion comparing convolution, first and third columns, and McStas simulations, second and fourth columns. For PSC opening
time 1 ms and ±0.4◦divergence jaws..
==PAGE:79==
B Phonon Slices
73
Figure B.9: Slices of phonon dispersion comparing convolution, first and third columns, and McStas simulations, second and fourth columns. For PSC opening
time 1 ms and ±0.2◦divergence jaws..
==PAGE:80==
C Bhattacharyya Distance Results
74
APPENDIX C
Bhattacharyya Distance
Results
C.1
Varying Detector Element
ℏω [meV]
Channel Index
0
1
10
1
1.108 × 10−3
8.828 × 10−4
3.092 × 10−4
2
1.082 × 10−3
9.343 × 10−4
8.514 × 10−4
3
1.177 × 10−3
8.229 × 10−4
8.019 × 10−4
4
8.927 × 10−4
1.475 × 10−3
1.068 × 10−3
5
1.641 × 10−3
1.470 × 10−3
7.924 × 10−4
6
5.486 × 10−3
1.084 × 10−3
8.739 × 10−4
7
2.899 × 10−3
1.797 × 10−3
8.122 × 10−4
8
3.358 × 10−3
1.284 × 10−3
6.696 × 10−4
9
2.967 × 10−3
1.617 × 10−3
7.037 × 10−4
Table C.1: DB as a function of channel index vs. energy transfer.
ℏω [meV]
Tube
Index
Detector
Element
Index
0
1
10
10
9.918 × 10−4
9.507 × 10−4
7.764 × 10−4
30
1.266 × 10−3
1.377 × 10−3
3.360 × 10−4
1
50
1.008 × 10−3
1.164 × 10−3
7.012 × 10−4
70
1.280 × 10−3
1.170 × 10−3
4.395 × 10−4
90
7.362 × 10−4
6.907 × 10−4
3.017 × 10−4
10
8.250 × 10−4
1.034 × 10−3
7.380 × 10−4
30
1.503 × 10−3
1.268 × 10−3
7.792 × 10−4
2
50
1.007 × 10−3
1.132 × 10−3
7.492 × 10−4
70
6.074 × 10−4
1.156 × 10−3
9.800 × 10−4
90
1.470 × 10−3
1.051 × 10−3
3.459 × 10−4
10
1.271 × 10−3
1.491 × 10−3
1.015 × 10−3
30
8.234 × 10−4
1.756 × 10−3
7.471 × 10−4
3
50
1.804 × 10−3
1.795 × 10−3
3.782 × 10−4
70
1.304 × 10−3
1.455 × 10−3
5.539 × 10−4
90
1.786 × 10−3
1.785 × 10−3
1.070 × 10−3
Table C.2: DB, as a function of Tube and Detector Element Index, vs. energy transfer.
==PAGE:81==
C.2 Varying Jaws
75
C.2
Varying Jaws
Table C.3: DB as a function of channel index and energy transfer..
hw
0
1
10
2theta
5
2.069 × 10−3
7.720 × 10−4
1.297 × 10−3
45
1.326 × 10−3
1.690 × 10−3
7.065 × 10−4
95
1.200 × 10−3
1.591 × 10−3
8.047 × 10−4
135
5.128 × 10−3
3.141 × 10−3
9.792 × 10−4
Table C.4: DB as a function of channel index and energy transfer..
hw
0
1
10
2theta
5
1.695 × 10−3
1.502 × 10−3
6.579 × 10−4
45
7.348 × 10−4
1.023 × 10−3
2.701 × 10−4
95
8.874 × 10−4
8.710 × 10−4
1.663 × 10−4
135
2.770 × 10−3
2.295 × 10−3
2.403 × 10−4
Table C.5: DB as a function of channel index and energy transfer..
hw
0
1
10
2theta
5
1.469 × 10−3
1.659 × 10−3
2.933 × 10−3
45
8.496 × 10−4
6.447 × 10−4
2.290 × 10−4
95
9.475 × 10−4
1.024 × 10−3
2.226 × 10−4
135
8.367 × 10−4
5.531 × 10−4
3.172 × 10−4
Table C.6: DB as a function of channel index and energy transfer..
hw
0
1
10
2theta
5
4.228 × 10−3
1.922 × 10−3
5.700 × 10−3
45
6.026 × 10−3
2.673 × 10−3
3.680 × 10−3
95
4.780 × 10−3
5.279 × 10−3
4.237 × 10−3
135
5.448 × 10−3
8.195 × 10−3
5.894 × 10−3
Table C.7: DB as a function of channel index and energy transfer..
hw
0
1
10
2theta
5
1.970 × 10−3
1.954 × 10−3
3.264 × 10−3
45
2.197 × 10−3
2.332 × 10−3
2.176 × 10−3
95
2.512 × 10−3
1.915 × 10−3
2.378 × 10−3
135
1.803 × 10−3
2.166 × 10−3
2.144 × 10−3
==PAGE:82==
C.2 Varying Jaws
76
Table C.8: DB as a function of channel index and energy transfer..
hw
0
1
10
2theta
5
1.641 × 10−3
1.610 × 10−3
4.896 × 10−3
45
1.849 × 10−3
1.963 × 10−3
1.694 × 10−3
95
2.230 × 10−3
1.850 × 10−3
1.493 × 10−3
135
1.847 × 10−3
1.638 × 10−3
1.810 × 10−3
Table C.9: DB as a function of channel index and energy transfer..
hw
0
1
10
2theta
5
6.460 × 10−3
3.608 × 10−3
2.923 × 10−3
45
2.652 × 10−3
1.385 × 10−3
1.832 × 10−3
95
3.090 × 10−3
4.750 × 10−3
2.980 × 10−3
135
4.809 × 10−3
4.425 × 10−3
2.272 × 10−3
Table C.10: DB as a function of channel index and energy transfer..
hw
0
1
10
2theta
5
4.679 × 10−3
4.334 × 10−3
2.004 × 10−3
45
1.114 × 10−3
1.927 × 10−3
6.852 × 10−4
95
1.160 × 10−3
3.890 × 10−4
8.813 × 10−4
135
5.628 × 10−4
8.218 × 10−4
6.785 × 10−4
Table C.11: DB as a function of channel index and energy transfer..
hw
0
1
10
2theta
5
5.235 × 10−3
4.150 × 10−3
3.355 × 10−3
45
1.695 × 10−3
8.393 × 10−4
5.552 × 10−4
95
6.566 × 10−4
3.345 × 10−4
1.057 × 10−3
135
2.294 × 10−3
4.355 × 10−4
6.285 × 10−4
==PAGE:83==
C.3 Results for all analyzers
77
C.3
Results for all analyzers
==PAGE:84==
C.3 Results for all analyzers
78
C.3.1
5meV Analyzer
Table C.12: DB as a function of scattering angle and energy transfer for Ef = 5 meV and dt = 0.1 ms, part 1.
∆E [meV]
2θ [°]
-2.300000
-1.800000
-1.300000
-1.200000
-0.800000
-0.600000
-0.300000
-0.200000
0.000000
0.200000
5
1.638 × 10−3
4.723 × 10−3
1.702 × 10−3
8.960 × 10−4
1.574 × 10−3
2.206 × 10−3
2.043 × 10−3
1.860 × 10−3
2.069 × 10−3
1.941 × 10−3
10
N/A
2.482 × 10−3
3.108 × 10−3
2.062 × 10−3
1.476 × 10−3
2.163 × 10−3
6.235 × 10−4
2.765 × 10−3
2.935 × 10−3
1.251 × 10−3
15
4.160 × 10−3
1.683 × 10−3
8.779 × 10−4
1.506 × 10−3
6.333 × 10−4
2.844 × 10−3
1.264 × 10−3
1.910 × 10−3
1.236 × 10−3
9.496 × 10−4
20
3.652 × 10−3
5.596 × 10−3
1.705 × 10−3
1.673 × 10−3
1.223 × 10−3
2.216 × 10−3
1.285 × 10−3
2.566 × 10−3
1.465 × 10−3
25
4.355 × 10−3
1.728 × 10−3
1.780 × 10−3
1.085 × 10−3
1.448 × 10−3
1.785 × 10−3
9.074 × 10−4
1.347 × 10−3
1.240 × 10−3
1.586 × 10−3
30
2.945 × 10−3
8.878 × 10−3
4.225 × 10−3
1.578 × 10−3
3.693 × 10−3
1.507 × 10−3
2.480 × 10−3
1.570 × 10−3
2.043 × 10−3
35
2.046 × 10−3
1.668 × 10−3
8.167 × 10−4
1.464 × 10−3
6.663 × 10−4
8.751 × 10−4
1.506 × 10−3
1.317 × 10−3
1.687 × 10−3
1.990 × 10−3
40
2.928 × 10−1
5.145 × 10−3
4.495 × 10−3
2.858 × 10−3
1.321 × 10−3
2.978 × 10−3
1.075 × 10−3
1.556 × 10−3
1.635 × 10−3
1.497 × 10−3
45
4.880 × 10−3
1.472 × 10−3
1.690 × 10−3
1.749 × 10−3
7.136 × 10−4
1.576 × 10−3
1.747 × 10−3
1.796 × 10−3
1.326 × 10−3
1.050 × 10−3
50
3.606 × 10−3
1.530 × 10−3
1.476 × 10−3
1.279 × 10−3
1.462 × 10−3
9.174 × 10−4
9.905 × 10−4
2.589 × 10−3
7.632 × 10−4
1.275 × 10−3
55
2.816 × 10−3
2.671 × 10−3
1.334 × 10−3
1.439 × 10−3
3.169 × 10−3
1.479 × 10−3
9.006 × 10−4
1.298 × 10−3
1.047 × 10−3
1.482 × 10−3
60
4.655 × 10−3
7.131 × 10−4
6.035 × 10−4
1.246 × 10−3
1.516 × 10−3
1.333 × 10−3
1.629 × 10−3
9.428 × 10−4
1.169 × 10−3
1.409 × 10−3
65
6.312 × 10−3
5.627 × 10−4
1.483 × 10−3
1.010 × 10−3
1.476 × 10−3
1.364 × 10−3
1.210 × 10−3
1.267 × 10−3
1.775 × 10−3
1.543 × 10−3
70
4.903 × 10−3
1.534 × 10−3
1.016 × 10−3
1.446 × 10−3
9.203 × 10−4
1.349 × 10−3
4.937 × 10−4
1.485 × 10−3
5.971 × 10−4
1.092 × 10−3
75
2.873 × 10−3
1.202 × 10−3
6.260 × 10−4
1.348 × 10−3
1.159 × 10−3
1.396 × 10−3
9.707 × 10−4
1.511 × 10−3
1.541 × 10−3
1.257 × 10−3
80
5.208 × 10−3
1.465 × 10−3
1.850 × 10−3
1.619 × 10−3
7.821 × 10−4
1.606 × 10−3
1.904 × 10−3
1.311 × 10−3
2.592 × 10−3
1.594 × 10−3
85
3.030 × 10−3
5.897 × 10−4
1.582 × 10−3
1.097 × 10−3
6.153 × 10−4
1.576 × 10−3
1.115 × 10−3
9.957 × 10−4
8.405 × 10−4
1.622 × 10−3
90
6.328 × 10−3
6.190 × 10−4
1.565 × 10−3
1.013 × 10−3
1.547 × 10−3
1.154 × 10−3
1.239 × 10−3
1.031 × 10−3
1.349 × 10−3
1.651 × 10−3
95
3.537 × 10−3
6.946 × 10−4
9.904 × 10−4
1.383 × 10−3
1.260 × 10−3
1.216 × 10−3
1.371 × 10−3
1.590 × 10−3
1.200 × 10−3
1.086 × 10−3
100
1.050 × 10−2
1.171 × 10−3
7.794 × 10−4
6.947 × 10−4
9.729 × 10−4
1.791 × 10−3
1.510 × 10−3
1.669 × 10−3
9.012 × 10−4
1.446 × 10−3
105
5.529 × 10−3
8.791 × 10−4
5.054 × 10−4
1.113 × 10−3
1.932 × 10−3
9.044 × 10−4
1.572 × 10−3
1.390 × 10−3
1.592 × 10−3
9.325 × 10−4
110
2.042 × 10−3
1.545 × 10−3
1.190 × 10−3
1.372 × 10−3
1.556 × 10−3
1.548 × 10−3
6.350 × 10−4
1.038 × 10−3
1.058 × 10−3
1.005 × 10−3
115
5.633 × 10−3
1.234 × 10−3
3.545 × 10−4
6.780 × 10−4
9.314 × 10−4
1.270 × 10−3
1.256 × 10−3
1.215 × 10−3
1.436 × 10−3
1.663 × 10−3
120
3.142 × 10−3
2.079 × 10−3
1.075 × 10−3
9.954 × 10−4
1.209 × 10−3
1.916 × 10−3
1.557 × 10−3
6.302 × 10−4
6.647 × 10−4
9.869 × 10−4
125
7.883 × 10−3
1.219 × 10−3
1.489 × 10−3
1.202 × 10−3
8.399 × 10−4
7.124 × 10−4
8.371 × 10−4
1.921 × 10−3
1.723 × 10−3
1.496 × 10−3
130
4.692 × 10−3
1.725 × 10−3
8.806 × 10−4
2.072 × 10−3
1.137 × 10−3
7.977 × 10−4
7.744 × 10−4
1.112 × 10−3
1.617 × 10−3
8.812 × 10−4
==PAGE:85==
C.3 Results for all analyzers
79
Table C.13: DB as a function of scattering angle and energy transfer for Ef = 5 meV and dt = 0.1 ms, part 2.
∆E [meV]
2θ [°]
0.400000
0.800000
1.000000
1.400000
2.000000
2.700000
3.200000
3.800000
4.400000
5.000000
5
2.366 × 10−3
1.527 × 10−3
7.720 × 10−4
2.432 × 10−3
1.253 × 10−3
2.118 × 10−3
9.094 × 10−4
2.084 × 10−3
6.140 × 10−3
1.735 × 10−3
10
1.111 × 10−3
1.474 × 10−3
1.883 × 10−3
1.739 × 10−3
1.186 × 10−3
5.930 × 10−3
15
1.307 × 10−3
2.177 × 10−3
1.569 × 10−3
1.591 × 10−3
9.885 × 10−4
3.942 × 10−3
20
1.610 × 10−3
1.172 × 10−3
1.360 × 10−3
9.590 × 10−4
1.748 × 10−3
6.037 × 10−3
25
1.259 × 10−3
1.193 × 10−3
1.481 × 10−3
1.173 × 10−3
5.974 × 10−4
3.037 × 10−3
30
9.933 × 10−4
1.284 × 10−3
1.209 × 10−3
9.721 × 10−4
6.478 × 10−4
1.018 × 10−2
35
1.933 × 10−3
1.036 × 10−3
1.153 × 10−3
8.940 × 10−4
1.380 × 10−3
6.279 × 10−3
40
1.369 × 10−3
1.741 × 10−3
7.898 × 10−4
1.449 × 10−3
1.031 × 10−3
6.551 × 10−3
45
1.953 × 10−3
1.867 × 10−3
1.690 × 10−3
1.207 × 10−3
9.713 × 10−4
6.476 × 10−3
1.128 × 10−3
9.650 × 10−4
4.464 × 10−3
1.802 × 10−4
50
9.831 × 10−4
2.277 × 10−3
2.073 × 10−3
1.216 × 10−3
8.834 × 10−4
3.389 × 10−3
55
1.937 × 10−3
1.939 × 10−3
1.372 × 10−3
1.096 × 10−3
6.561 × 10−4
3.160 × 10−3
60
5.765 × 10−4
1.088 × 10−3
1.723 × 10−3
6.565 × 10−4
6.205 × 10−4
5.133 × 10−3
65
1.530 × 10−3
1.367 × 10−3
1.389 × 10−3
9.194 × 10−4
8.485 × 10−4
1.243 × 10−2
70
1.712 × 10−3
1.017 × 10−3
2.142 × 10−3
1.773 × 10−3
4.705 × 10−4
2.389 × 10−3
75
7.753 × 10−4
1.263 × 10−3
9.937 × 10−4
8.033 × 10−4
7.279 × 10−4
5.013 × 10−3
80
1.533 × 10−3
1.513 × 10−3
8.656 × 10−4
9.768 × 10−4
7.903 × 10−4
7.860 × 10−3
85
8.090 × 10−4
1.924 × 10−3
8.907 × 10−4
1.321 × 10−3
4.418 × 10−4
7.988 × 10−3
90
1.189 × 10−3
1.466 × 10−3
1.987 × 10−3
5.020 × 10−4
1.360 × 10−3
3.980 × 10−3
95
1.249 × 10−3
1.137 × 10−3
1.591 × 10−3
9.920 × 10−4
4.589 × 10−4
9.108 × 10−3
6.773 × 10−4
7.265 × 10−4
1.397 × 10−2
2.653 × 10−4
100
1.608 × 10−3
1.772 × 10−3
1.742 × 10−3
7.115 × 10−4
1.041 × 10−3
1.714 × 10−3
105
1.264 × 10−3
6.590 × 10−4
7.940 × 10−4
4.101 × 10−4
1.738 × 10−3
4.514 × 10−3
110
1.028 × 10−3
2.264 × 10−3
7.461 × 10−4
1.278 × 10−3
7.207 × 10−4
3.930 × 10−3
115
2.183 × 10−3
1.542 × 10−3
1.910 × 10−3
1.996 × 10−3
1.640 × 10−3
3.521 × 10−3
120
9.355 × 10−4
2.869 × 10−3
1.876 × 10−3
1.761 × 10−3
7.415 × 10−4
3.455 × 10−3
125
1.703 × 10−3
1.453 × 10−3
1.579 × 10−3
8.630 × 10−4
7.335 × 10−4
3.227 × 10−3
130
1.474 × 10−3
1.770 × 10−3
1.058 × 10−3
1.367 × 10−3
9.120 × 10−4
6.742 × 10−3
135
6.991 × 10−4
2.066 × 10−4
3.501 × 10−3
9.416 × 10−4
==PAGE:86==
C.3 Results for all analyzers
80
Table C.14: DB as a function of scattering angle and energy transfer for Ef = 5 meV and dt = 0.1 ms, part 3.
∆E [meV]
2θ [°]
7.700000
8.200000
8.800000
9.400000
10.000000
22.700000
23.200000
23.800000
24.400000
25.000000
5
2.450 × 10−3
4.239 × 10−3
5.208 × 10−3
6.310 × 10−3
1.297 × 10−3
2.000 × 10−2
1.075 × 10−2
1.092 × 10−2
6.600 × 10−3
3.473 × 10−3
45
8.611 × 10−4
2.348 × 10−3
5.919 × 10−3
6.323 × 10−3
7.065 × 10−4
5.821 × 10−3
8.172 × 10−3
8.493 × 10−3
1.015 × 10−2
1.561 × 10−3
95
1.517 × 10−3
6.103 × 10−3
4.912 × 10−3
4.245 × 10−3
8.047 × 10−4
1.471 × 10−2
1.625 × 10−2
1.566 × 10−2
6.507 × 10−3
3.189 × 10−3
135
5.953 × 10−4
6.278 × 10−3
6.556 × 10−3
7.526 × 10−3
9.792 × 10−4
7.073 × 10−3
1.708 × 10−2
1.341 × 10−2
1.200 × 10−2
3.981 × 10−3
==PAGE:87==
C.3 Results for all analyzers
81
Table C.15: DB as a function of scattering angle and energy transfer for Ef = 5 meV and dt = 0.1 ms, part 4.
∆E [meV]
2θ [°]
47.700000
48.200000
48.800000
49.400000
50.000000
5
1.932 × 10−2
1.053 × 10−2
9.073 × 10−3
1.597 × 10−2
5.782 × 10−3
45
3.922 × 10−2
2.350 × 10−2
1.401 × 10−2
1.859 × 10−2
2.866 × 10−3
95
1.672 × 10−2
9.990 × 10−3
2.209 × 10−2
2.865 × 10−2
3.540 × 10−3
135
1.309 × 10−2
1.820 × 10−2
1.051 × 10−2
1.808 × 10−2
2.961 × 10−3
==PAGE:88==
C.3 Results for all analyzers
82
Table C.16: DB as a function of scattering angle and energy transfer for Ef = 5 meV and dt = 0.2 ms, part 1.
∆E [meV]
2θ [°]
-2.300000
-1.800000
-1.300000
-1.200000
-0.800000
-0.600000
-0.300000
-0.200000
0.000000
0.200000
5
1.543 × 10−3
1.165 × 10−3
1.898 × 10−3
1.478 × 10−3
1.491 × 10−3
1.097 × 10−3
1.272 × 10−3
1.504 × 10−3
1.692 × 10−3
1.610 × 10−3
10
1.979 × 10−3
3.382 × 10−3
4.952 × 10−3
1.906 × 10−3
1.354 × 10−3
2.868 × 10−3
1.972 × 10−3
1.054 × 10−3
1.327 × 10−3
9.908 × 10−4
15
1.805 × 10−3
1.048 × 10−3
7.928 × 10−4
1.053 × 10−3
9.702 × 10−4
1.224 × 10−3
1.907 × 10−3
3.759 × 10−4
9.776 × 10−4
1.571 × 10−3
20
2.413 × 10−3
1.398 × 10−3
4.995 × 10−4
1.173 × 10−3
2.564 × 10−3
1.286 × 10−3
9.493 × 10−4
9.928 × 10−4
8.297 × 10−4
25
1.981 × 10−3
1.946 × 10−3
5.506 × 10−4
1.077 × 10−3
1.080 × 10−3
1.569 × 10−3
1.615 × 10−3
1.375 × 10−3
1.452 × 10−3
1.044 × 10−3
30
3.260 × 10−3
8.364 × 10−3
3.559 × 10−3
1.401 × 10−3
2.574 × 10−3
1.220 × 10−3
1.493 × 10−3
2.555 × 10−3
1.325 × 10−3
35
1.341 × 10−3
1.030 × 10−3
8.312 × 10−4
7.553 × 10−4
1.530 × 10−3
1.084 × 10−3
1.226 × 10−3
1.291 × 10−3
1.593 × 10−3
1.287 × 10−3
40
2.605 × 10−3
3.448 × 10−3
2.677 × 10−3
3.221 × 10−3
7.660 × 10−4
2.587 × 10−3
7.984 × 10−4
1.984 × 10−3
4.060 × 10−3
1.192 × 10−3
45
1.656 × 10−3
1.064 × 10−3
1.387 × 10−3
6.237 × 10−4
7.464 × 10−4
9.211 × 10−4
1.122 × 10−3
1.207 × 10−3
8.310 × 10−4
1.130 × 10−3
50
1.153 × 10−3
1.191 × 10−3
5.147 × 10−4
3.837 × 10−4
1.218 × 10−3
1.058 × 10−3
1.158 × 10−3
1.003 × 10−3
1.274 × 10−3
1.271 × 10−3
55
2.332 × 10−3
1.220 × 10−3
9.805 × 10−4
9.671 × 10−4
9.246 × 10−4
1.342 × 10−3
1.297 × 10−3
1.536 × 10−3
1.192 × 10−3
1.113 × 10−3
60
1.784 × 10−3
7.625 × 10−4
6.771 × 10−4
8.873 × 10−4
1.349 × 10−3
7.435 × 10−4
1.077 × 10−3
1.103 × 10−3
1.203 × 10−3
1.315 × 10−3
65
1.858 × 10−3
1.289 × 10−3
1.161 × 10−3
6.868 × 10−4
6.390 × 10−4
1.488 × 10−3
6.789 × 10−4
9.950 × 10−4
1.545 × 10−3
1.325 × 10−3
70
1.647 × 10−3
1.393 × 10−3
1.287 × 10−3
1.077 × 10−3
1.204 × 10−3
1.162 × 10−3
1.113 × 10−3
1.356 × 10−3
1.265 × 10−3
1.754 × 10−3
75
1.105 × 10−3
8.388 × 10−4
9.922 × 10−4
9.551 × 10−4
8.549 × 10−4
8.169 × 10−4
1.529 × 10−3
1.238 × 10−3
1.404 × 10−3
1.255 × 10−3
80
1.166 × 10−3
7.280 × 10−4
9.876 × 10−4
8.255 × 10−4
7.253 × 10−4
5.504 × 10−4
8.765 × 10−4
1.729 × 10−3
9.616 × 10−4
1.239 × 10−3
85
1.818 × 10−3
1.761 × 10−3
9.274 × 10−4
8.379 × 10−4
1.144 × 10−3
1.134 × 10−3
9.130 × 10−4
7.053 × 10−4
1.196 × 10−3
1.043 × 10−3
90
1.019 × 10−3
1.352 × 10−3
6.627 × 10−4
7.936 × 10−4
9.685 × 10−4
4.951 × 10−4
1.103 × 10−3
1.125 × 10−3
1.365 × 10−3
9.907 × 10−4
95
1.645 × 10−3
1.007 × 10−3
4.357 × 10−4
6.387 × 10−4
9.119 × 10−4
9.889 × 10−4
1.887 × 10−3
1.257 × 10−3
1.212 × 10−3
1.002 × 10−3
100
1.037 × 10−3
1.049 × 10−3
8.157 × 10−4
1.576 × 10−3
1.118 × 10−3
1.469 × 10−3
9.863 × 10−4
1.055 × 10−3
9.162 × 10−4
8.541 × 10−4
105
1.777 × 10−3
1.524 × 10−3
1.106 × 10−3
1.745 × 10−3
7.994 × 10−4
1.165 × 10−3
1.478 × 10−3
9.917 × 10−4
1.051 × 10−3
1.046 × 10−3
110
1.437 × 10−3
4.277 × 10−4
8.819 × 10−4
9.297 × 10−4
8.262 × 10−4
1.679 × 10−3
1.269 × 10−3
8.120 × 10−4
8.502 × 10−4
8.499 × 10−4
115
9.476 × 10−4
1.489 × 10−3
1.177 × 10−3
1.508 × 10−3
1.452 × 10−3
1.109 × 10−3
1.470 × 10−3
1.405 × 10−3
1.068 × 10−3
1.427 × 10−3
120
1.416 × 10−3
1.067 × 10−3
9.306 × 10−4
8.441 × 10−4
1.409 × 10−3
8.422 × 10−4
1.080 × 10−3
7.919 × 10−4
1.593 × 10−3
9.731 × 10−4
125
2.232 × 10−3
1.172 × 10−3
1.228 × 10−3
4.094 × 10−4
4.895 × 10−4
5.344 × 10−4
7.154 × 10−4
1.272 × 10−3
8.681 × 10−4
1.089 × 10−3
130
1.220 × 10−3
1.332 × 10−3
9.434 × 10−4
7.631 × 10−4
1.077 × 10−3
1.386 × 10−3
6.232 × 10−4
1.033 × 10−3
1.208 × 10−3
1.217 × 10−3
==PAGE:89==
C.3 Results for all analyzers
83
Table C.17: DB as a function of scattering angle and energy transfer for Ef = 5 meV and dt = 0.2 ms, part 2.
∆E [meV]
2θ [°]
0.400000
0.800000
1.000000
1.400000
2.000000
2.700000
3.200000
3.800000
4.400000
5.000000
5
1.706 × 10−3
1.572 × 10−3
1.842 × 10−3
1.200 × 10−3
1.322 × 10−3
8.204 × 10−4
6.154 × 10−4
9.496 × 10−4
9.895 × 10−4
7.990 × 10−4
10
1.222 × 10−3
1.712 × 10−3
1.226 × 10−3
1.131 × 10−3
7.530 × 10−4
1.131 × 10−3
15
1.129 × 10−3
1.250 × 10−3
1.287 × 10−3
5.784 × 10−4
6.701 × 10−4
3.601 × 10−4
20
1.500 × 10−3
1.614 × 10−3
1.368 × 10−3
8.624 × 10−4
6.546 × 10−4
5.586 × 10−4
25
1.680 × 10−3
1.000 × 10−3
1.043 × 10−3
1.422 × 10−3
6.568 × 10−4
1.103 × 10−3
30
1.602 × 10−3
6.689 × 10−4
1.306 × 10−3
8.553 × 10−4
1.043 × 10−3
5.838 × 10−4
35
1.321 × 10−3
1.279 × 10−3
1.309 × 10−3
1.481 × 10−3
7.223 × 10−4
5.500 × 10−4
40
1.665 × 10−3
1.225 × 10−3
1.626 × 10−3
1.046 × 10−3
6.769 × 10−4
4.901 × 10−4
45
8.491 × 10−4
1.188 × 10−3
1.362 × 10−3
9.188 × 10−4
6.037 × 10−4
5.578 × 10−4
4.434 × 10−4
6.263 × 10−4
6.538 × 10−4
6.615 × 10−4
50
1.003 × 10−3
1.243 × 10−3
1.032 × 10−3
9.324 × 10−4
6.633 × 10−4
7.006 × 10−4
55
1.301 × 10−3
6.345 × 10−4
8.057 × 10−4
1.204 × 10−3
8.860 × 10−4
8.166 × 10−4
60
1.208 × 10−3
8.604 × 10−4
1.194 × 10−3
1.117 × 10−3
3.746 × 10−4
4.510 × 10−4
65
1.379 × 10−3
1.527 × 10−3
1.082 × 10−3
1.352 × 10−3
1.115 × 10−3
7.519 × 10−4
70
1.465 × 10−3
9.446 × 10−4
6.775 × 10−4
9.984 × 10−4
4.196 × 10−4
8.831 × 10−4
75
1.023 × 10−3
1.154 × 10−3
1.670 × 10−3
9.377 × 10−4
5.993 × 10−4
4.840 × 10−4
80
1.389 × 10−3
1.047 × 10−3
7.174 × 10−4
1.071 × 10−3
7.653 × 10−4
1.355 × 10−3
85
1.499 × 10−3
1.899 × 10−3
1.311 × 10−3
7.144 × 10−4
6.467 × 10−4
8.370 × 10−4
90
8.212 × 10−4
1.105 × 10−3
1.117 × 10−3
7.749 × 10−4
8.508 × 10−4
5.560 × 10−4
95
9.119 × 10−4
9.571 × 10−4
1.637 × 10−3
7.250 × 10−4
9.180 × 10−4
8.354 × 10−4
8.695 × 10−4
5.171 × 10−4
7.640 × 10−4
4.141 × 10−4
100
1.161 × 10−3
1.074 × 10−3
1.366 × 10−3
6.722 × 10−4
8.939 × 10−4
1.504 × 10−3
105
1.753 × 10−3
1.284 × 10−3
1.383 × 10−3
8.452 × 10−4
1.374 × 10−3
7.070 × 10−4
110
7.631 × 10−4
1.065 × 10−3
1.059 × 10−3
5.490 × 10−4
7.071 × 10−4
4.704 × 10−4
115
1.346 × 10−3
1.188 × 10−3
9.724 × 10−4
1.328 × 10−3
8.482 × 10−4
5.385 × 10−4
120
1.396 × 10−3
1.466 × 10−3
8.164 × 10−4
1.316 × 10−3
1.213 × 10−3
8.065 × 10−4
125
1.036 × 10−3
1.289 × 10−3
1.026 × 10−3
9.872 × 10−4
7.573 × 10−4
8.498 × 10−4
130
6.273 × 10−4
1.381 × 10−3
1.945 × 10−3
9.645 × 10−4
7.718 × 10−4
8.776 × 10−4
135
5.307 × 10−4
3.221 × 10−4
6.161 × 10−4
7.645 × 10−4
==PAGE:90==
C.3 Results for all analyzers
84
Table C.18: DB as a function of scattering angle and energy transfer for Ef = 5 meV and dt = 0.2 ms, part 3.
∆E [meV]
2θ [°]
7.700000
8.200000
8.800000
9.400000
10.000000
22.700000
23.200000
23.800000
24.400000
25.000000
5
1.516 × 10−3
1.294 × 10−3
1.200 × 10−3
8.017 × 10−4
1.051 × 10−3
1.555 × 10−3
1.685 × 10−3
1.155 × 10−3
1.651 × 10−3
2.383 × 10−3
45
3.610 × 10−4
4.753 × 10−4
1.105 × 10−3
3.976 × 10−4
1.732 × 10−4
1.135 × 10−3
1.577 × 10−3
2.026 × 10−3
1.288 × 10−3
2.152 × 10−3
95
5.080 × 10−4
4.382 × 10−4
3.505 × 10−4
4.116 × 10−4
3.937 × 10−4
1.227 × 10−3
5.547 × 10−4
1.720 × 10−3
1.442 × 10−3
1.380 × 10−3
135
7.813 × 10−4
1.264 × 10−3
1.086 × 10−3
6.149 × 10−4
4.748 × 10−4
1.585 × 10−3
1.462 × 10−3
1.040 × 10−3
7.289 × 10−4
1.293 × 10−3
==PAGE:91==
C.3 Results for all analyzers
85
Table C.19: DB as a function of scattering angle and energy transfer for Ef = 5 meV and dt = 0.2 ms, part 4.
∆E [meV]
2θ [°]
47.700000
48.200000
48.800000
49.400000
50.000000
5
6.597 × 10−3
5.324 × 10−3
5.757 × 10−3
5.478 × 10−3
3.043 × 10−3
45
1.284 × 10−3
1.806 × 10−3
2.645 × 10−3
1.580 × 10−3
1.811 × 10−3
95
1.428 × 10−3
1.860 × 10−3
2.951 × 10−3
1.603 × 10−3
2.168 × 10−3
135
3.243 × 10−3
1.413 × 10−3
3.239 × 10−3
1.611 × 10−3
2.027 × 10−3
==PAGE:92==
C.3 Results for all analyzers
86
Table C.20: DB as a function of scattering angle and energy transfer for Ef = 5 meV and dt = 0.5 ms, part 1.
∆E [meV]
2θ [°]
-2.300000
-1.800000
-1.300000
-1.200000
-0.800000
-0.600000
-0.300000
-0.200000
0.000000
0.200000
5
1.484 × 10−3
1.268 × 10−3
1.133 × 10−3
9.750 × 10−4
9.105 × 10−4
1.275 × 10−3
1.231 × 10−3
1.259 × 10−3
1.695 × 10−3
1.426 × 10−3
10
1.668 × 10−3
4.891 × 10−3
1.505 × 10−3
1.407 × 10−3
1.052 × 10−3
4.129 × 10−3
1.025 × 10−3
1.579 × 10−3
3.736 × 10−3
1.037 × 10−3
15
1.321 × 10−3
8.598 × 10−4
5.986 × 10−4
8.482 × 10−4
5.741 × 10−4
1.108 × 10−3
8.228 × 10−4
8.007 × 10−4
7.546 × 10−4
1.353 × 10−3
20
5.638 × 10−3
3.804 × 10−3
3.088 × 10−3
8.144 × 10−4
2.107 × 10−3
9.239 × 10−4
1.493 × 10−3
2.795 × 10−3
1.121 × 10−3
25
1.178 × 10−3
1.121 × 10−3
7.799 × 10−4
7.707 × 10−4
8.824 × 10−4
5.885 × 10−4
7.634 × 10−4
9.165 × 10−4
9.360 × 10−4
1.055 × 10−3
30
2.721 × 10−3
7.288 × 10−3
2.302 × 10−3
8.427 × 10−4
6.869 × 10−4
6.248 × 10−4
5.268 × 10−4
5.851 × 10−4
35
1.072 × 10−3
7.900 × 10−4
3.058 × 10−4
7.817 × 10−4
6.838 × 10−4
1.171 × 10−3
9.426 × 10−4
5.679 × 10−4
8.418 × 10−4
8.060 × 10−4
40
2.514 × 10−3
1.049 × 10−3
3.650 × 10−3
3.331 × 10−3
1.083 × 10−3
4.238 × 10−3
8.735 × 10−4
1.145 × 10−3
4.497 × 10−3
5.940 × 10−4
45
1.282 × 10−3
1.174 × 10−3
6.594 × 10−4
1.107 × 10−3
7.811 × 10−4
8.527 × 10−4
9.901 × 10−4
9.899 × 10−4
7.348 × 10−4
8.514 × 10−4
50
1.539 × 10−3
7.095 × 10−4
4.977 × 10−4
6.572 × 10−4
7.859 × 10−4
6.205 × 10−4
8.431 × 10−4
8.285 × 10−4
9.211 × 10−4
9.632 × 10−4
55
1.408 × 10−3
1.042 × 10−3
9.088 × 10−4
7.650 × 10−4
3.374 × 10−4
1.010 × 10−3
6.260 × 10−4
8.593 × 10−4
9.079 × 10−4
8.717 × 10−4
60
1.977 × 10−3
7.869 × 10−4
4.779 × 10−4
9.224 × 10−4
1.274 × 10−3
7.081 × 10−4
1.001 × 10−3
7.909 × 10−4
1.018 × 10−3
1.045 × 10−3
65
1.965 × 10−3
6.251 × 10−4
4.601 × 10−4
1.248 × 10−3
8.102 × 10−4
9.492 × 10−4
9.983 × 10−4
7.946 × 10−4
1.060 × 10−3
8.957 × 10−4
70
1.824 × 10−3
8.682 × 10−4
6.977 × 10−4
6.539 × 10−4
6.568 × 10−4
1.099 × 10−3
9.428 × 10−4
5.118 × 10−4
1.215 × 10−3
8.844 × 10−4
75
1.468 × 10−3
8.492 × 10−4
6.180 × 10−4
6.252 × 10−4
1.020 × 10−3
6.901 × 10−4
1.293 × 10−3
9.184 × 10−4
9.699 × 10−4
6.850 × 10−4
80
1.147 × 10−3
6.801 × 10−4
1.026 × 10−3
8.382 × 10−4
6.738 × 10−4
1.046 × 10−3
7.121 × 10−4
1.306 × 10−3
8.861 × 10−4
1.061 × 10−3
85
1.331 × 10−3
7.681 × 10−4
8.121 × 10−4
6.919 × 10−4
1.062 × 10−3
7.492 × 10−4
6.162 × 10−4
6.177 × 10−4
8.491 × 10−4
8.677 × 10−4
90
1.767 × 10−3
5.482 × 10−4
5.570 × 10−4
6.164 × 10−4
1.004 × 10−3
1.054 × 10−3
8.165 × 10−4
1.385 × 10−3
9.501 × 10−4
1.044 × 10−3
95
1.844 × 10−3
1.071 × 10−3
6.251 × 10−4
5.729 × 10−4
6.496 × 10−4
8.404 × 10−4
9.497 × 10−4
6.967 × 10−4
8.874 × 10−4
8.611 × 10−4
100
1.630 × 10−3
1.070 × 10−3
4.854 × 10−4
6.050 × 10−4
1.078 × 10−3
1.091 × 10−3
1.122 × 10−3
1.024 × 10−3
7.304 × 10−4
1.064 × 10−3
105
1.709 × 10−3
4.184 × 10−4
7.375 × 10−4
8.406 × 10−4
6.517 × 10−4
8.094 × 10−4
6.119 × 10−4
9.928 × 10−4
9.148 × 10−4
9.966 × 10−4
110
1.555 × 10−3
5.509 × 10−4
6.599 × 10−4
9.920 × 10−4
1.063 × 10−3
4.170 × 10−4
7.388 × 10−4
9.958 × 10−4
1.057 × 10−3
1.219 × 10−3
115
1.183 × 10−3
8.139 × 10−4
6.628 × 10−4
8.863 × 10−4
7.673 × 10−4
8.333 × 10−4
7.345 × 10−4
8.063 × 10−4
9.486 × 10−4
9.472 × 10−4
120
2.009 × 10−3
6.746 × 10−4
9.130 × 10−4
9.595 × 10−4
8.319 × 10−4
9.037 × 10−4
1.130 × 10−3
7.610 × 10−4
9.926 × 10−4
1.160 × 10−3
125
1.641 × 10−3
5.604 × 10−4
7.903 × 10−4
3.632 × 10−4
9.626 × 10−4
9.703 × 10−4
9.798 × 10−4
8.212 × 10−4
8.460 × 10−4
9.062 × 10−4
130
1.408 × 10−3
7.390 × 10−4
9.075 × 10−4
7.135 × 10−4
8.911 × 10−4
8.519 × 10−4
8.977 × 10−4
8.771 × 10−4
1.215 × 10−3
8.845 × 10−4
==PAGE:93==
C.3 Results for all analyzers
87
Table C.21: DB as a function of scattering angle and energy transfer for Ef = 5 meV and dt = 0.5 ms, part 2.
∆E [meV]
2θ [°]
0.400000
0.800000
1.000000
1.400000
2.000000
2.700000
3.200000
3.800000
4.400000
5.000000
5
1.760 × 10−3
1.959 × 10−3
1.502 × 10−3
1.166 × 10−3
8.423 × 10−4
7.329 × 10−4
5.227 × 10−4
7.306 × 10−4
6.097 × 10−4
8.957 × 10−4
10
9.430 × 10−4
9.470 × 10−4
9.094 × 10−4
8.758 × 10−4
6.785 × 10−4
3.632 × 10−4
15
7.931 × 10−4
9.960 × 10−4
6.586 × 10−4
7.707 × 10−4
9.125 × 10−4
3.541 × 10−4
20
7.063 × 10−4
1.053 × 10−3
7.607 × 10−4
1.048 × 10−3
7.922 × 10−4
3.332 × 10−4
25
7.288 × 10−4
1.129 × 10−3
8.112 × 10−4
7.835 × 10−4
4.942 × 10−4
5.850 × 10−4
30
8.615 × 10−4
9.773 × 10−4
9.245 × 10−4
7.726 × 10−4
5.347 × 10−4
4.318 × 10−4
35
9.069 × 10−4
9.555 × 10−4
8.225 × 10−4
9.593 × 10−4
7.359 × 10−4
1.797 × 10−4
40
1.103 × 10−3
9.405 × 10−4
1.003 × 10−3
7.586 × 10−4
6.742 × 10−4
4.145 × 10−4
45
1.081 × 10−3
7.865 × 10−4
1.023 × 10−3
7.226 × 10−4
8.684 × 10−4
4.589 × 10−4
3.253 × 10−4
3.363 × 10−4
2.438 × 10−4
4.087 × 10−4
50
9.408 × 10−4
1.025 × 10−3
7.548 × 10−4
5.402 × 10−4
4.929 × 10−4
4.746 × 10−4
55
1.175 × 10−3
1.006 × 10−3
6.736 × 10−4
5.973 × 10−4
6.942 × 10−4
4.358 × 10−4
60
9.551 × 10−4
1.145 × 10−3
6.124 × 10−4
9.568 × 10−4
4.990 × 10−4
4.576 × 10−4
65
9.797 × 10−4
8.054 × 10−4
7.568 × 10−4
5.915 × 10−4
8.201 × 10−4
2.730 × 10−4
70
1.270 × 10−3
9.818 × 10−4
7.409 × 10−4
7.115 × 10−4
4.585 × 10−4
3.116 × 10−4
75
1.094 × 10−3
5.353 × 10−4
1.035 × 10−3
9.722 × 10−4
5.757 × 10−4
4.247 × 10−4
80
1.186 × 10−3
1.203 × 10−3
6.996 × 10−4
5.146 × 10−4
4.709 × 10−4
4.510 × 10−4
85
1.014 × 10−3
1.052 × 10−3
7.383 × 10−4
7.259 × 10−4
5.444 × 10−4
3.555 × 10−4
90
1.022 × 10−3
7.820 × 10−4
9.414 × 10−4
8.016 × 10−4
5.106 × 10−4
5.354 × 10−4
95
1.145 × 10−3
1.041 × 10−3
8.710 × 10−4
6.522 × 10−4
4.091 × 10−4
3.291 × 10−4
2.094 × 10−4
3.551 × 10−4
2.673 × 10−4
2.519 × 10−4
100
6.837 × 10−4
1.052 × 10−3
7.804 × 10−4
6.032 × 10−4
6.476 × 10−4
5.769 × 10−4
105
9.731 × 10−4
9.405 × 10−4
7.503 × 10−4
5.744 × 10−4
5.509 × 10−4
5.270 × 10−4
110
1.098 × 10−3
1.015 × 10−3
9.740 × 10−4
4.895 × 10−4
5.304 × 10−4
4.313 × 10−4
115
1.308 × 10−3
8.843 × 10−4
9.506 × 10−4
7.604 × 10−4
5.667 × 10−4
4.651 × 10−4
120
9.144 × 10−4
7.995 × 10−4
1.006 × 10−3
7.443 × 10−4
6.548 × 10−4
4.482 × 10−4
125
6.009 × 10−4
9.647 × 10−4
1.009 × 10−3
7.435 × 10−4
5.949 × 10−4
5.042 × 10−4
130
7.910 × 10−4
7.572 × 10−4
7.997 × 10−4
7.403 × 10−4
4.241 × 10−4
3.989 × 10−4
135
4.216 × 10−4
4.016 × 10−4
3.005 × 10−4
3.397 × 10−4
==PAGE:94==
C.3 Results for all analyzers
88
Table C.22: DB as a function of scattering angle and energy transfer for Ef = 5 meV and dt = 0.5 ms, part 3.
∆E [meV]
2θ [°]
7.700000
8.200000
8.800000
9.400000
10.000000
22.700000
23.200000
23.800000
24.400000
25.000000
5
9.013 × 10−4
1.734 × 10−3
9.310 × 10−4
5.591 × 10−4
6.579 × 10−4
3.226 × 10−3
3.147 × 10−3
3.326 × 10−3
3.239 × 10−3
4.504 × 10−3
45
1.976 × 10−4
1.377 × 10−4
2.738 × 10−4
4.912 × 10−4
2.701 × 10−4
5.557 × 10−4
6.362 × 10−4
6.053 × 10−4
6.157 × 10−4
8.076 × 10−4
95
3.034 × 10−4
1.984 × 10−4
3.139 × 10−4
3.568 × 10−4
1.663 × 10−4
4.125 × 10−4
4.276 × 10−4
1.747 × 10−4
2.949 × 10−4
7.637 × 10−4
135
4.218 × 10−4
3.758 × 10−4
3.907 × 10−4
2.404 × 10−4
2.403 × 10−4
1.122 × 10−3
4.038 × 10−4
3.420 × 10−4
9.466 × 10−4
7.803 × 10−4
==PAGE:95==
C.3 Results for all analyzers
89
Table C.23: DB as a function of scattering angle and energy transfer for Ef = 5 meV and dt = 0.5 ms, part 4.
∆E [meV]
2θ [°]
47.700000
48.200000
48.800000
49.400000
50.000000
5
1.905 × 10−2
2.109 × 10−2
1.935 × 10−2
1.678 × 10−2
1.913 × 10−2
45
8.360 × 10−4
2.103 × 10−3
1.894 × 10−3
2.527 × 10−3
1.809 × 10−3
95
1.881 × 10−3
1.521 × 10−3
1.474 × 10−3
1.489 × 10−3
1.387 × 10−3
135
2.120 × 10−3
2.338 × 10−3
2.910 × 10−3
2.161 × 10−3
2.085 × 10−3
==PAGE:96==
C.3 Results for all analyzers
90
Table C.24: DB as a function of scattering angle and energy transfer for Ef = 5 meV and dt = 1.0 ms, part 1.
∆E [meV]
2θ [°]
-2.300000
-1.800000
-1.300000
-1.200000
-0.800000
-0.600000
-0.300000
-0.200000
0.000000
0.200000
5
1.565 × 10−3
6.007 × 10−4
8.866 × 10−4
8.075 × 10−4
8.652 × 10−4
1.022 × 10−3
1.131 × 10−3
1.260 × 10−3
1.469 × 10−3
1.265 × 10−3
45
8.501 × 10−4
7.027 × 10−4
4.329 × 10−4
3.215 × 10−4
9.064 × 10−4
4.594 × 10−4
5.819 × 10−4
5.454 × 10−4
8.496 × 10−4
6.695 × 10−4
95
9.929 × 10−4
8.852 × 10−4
4.950 × 10−4
4.023 × 10−4
6.445 × 10−4
6.426 × 10−4
3.784 × 10−4
7.286 × 10−4
9.475 × 10−4
7.527 × 10−4
135
9.783 × 10−4
5.896 × 10−4
7.821 × 10−4
4.015 × 10−4
6.886 × 10−4
7.178 × 10−4
7.716 × 10−4
8.093 × 10−4
8.367 × 10−4
7.701 × 10−4
==PAGE:97==
C.3 Results for all analyzers
91
Table C.25: DB as a function of scattering angle and energy transfer for Ef = 5 meV and dt = 1.0 ms, part 2.
∆E [meV]
2θ [°]
0.400000
0.800000
1.000000
1.400000
2.000000
2.700000
3.200000
3.800000
4.400000
5.000000
5
1.527 × 10−3
1.714 × 10−3
1.659 × 10−3
1.810 × 10−3
1.698 × 10−3
1.160 × 10−3
1.675 × 10−3
1.279 × 10−3
1.985 × 10−3
2.017 × 10−3
45
7.836 × 10−4
9.786 × 10−4
6.447 × 10−4
7.420 × 10−4
4.052 × 10−4
3.831 × 10−4
2.467 × 10−4
3.608 × 10−4
1.997 × 10−4
2.255 × 10−4
95
9.462 × 10−4
8.855 × 10−4
1.024 × 10−3
7.484 × 10−4
4.503 × 10−4
3.039 × 10−4
3.046 × 10−4
2.007 × 10−4
1.600 × 10−4
1.715 × 10−4
135
8.626 × 10−4
7.302 × 10−4
5.531 × 10−4
6.219 × 10−4
3.966 × 10−4
2.897 × 10−4
2.100 × 10−4
2.455 × 10−4
2.742 × 10−4
2.321 × 10−4
==PAGE:98==
C.3 Results for all analyzers
92
Table C.26: DB as a function of scattering angle and energy transfer for Ef = 5 meV and dt = 1.0 ms, part 3.
∆E [meV]
2θ [°]
7.700000
8.200000
8.800000
9.400000
10.000000
22.700000
23.200000
23.800000
24.400000
25.000000
5
2.620 × 10−3
2.707 × 10−3
2.842 × 10−3
2.774 × 10−3
2.933 × 10−3
1.222 × 10−2
1.341 × 10−2
1.407 × 10−2
1.539 × 10−2
1.678 × 10−2
45
2.003 × 10−4
3.825 × 10−4
1.951 × 10−4
3.129 × 10−4
2.290 × 10−4
7.765 × 10−4
9.480 × 10−4
6.555 × 10−4
1.255 × 10−3
1.050 × 10−3
95
3.373 × 10−4
1.850 × 10−4
3.264 × 10−4
8.222 × 10−5
2.226 × 10−4
5.272 × 10−4
6.069 × 10−4
5.506 × 10−4
9.413 × 10−4
5.187 × 10−4
135
3.112 × 10−4
4.517 × 10−4
2.660 × 10−4
2.705 × 10−4
3.172 × 10−4
6.046 × 10−4
1.177 × 10−3
1.365 × 10−3
7.196 × 10−4
1.374 × 10−3
==PAGE:99==
C.3 Results for all analyzers
93
Table C.27: DB as a function of scattering angle and energy transfer for Ef = 5 meV and dt = 1.0 ms, part 4.
∆E [meV]
2θ [°]
47.700000
48.200000
48.800000
49.400000
50.000000
5
6.354 × 10−2
6.467 × 10−2
6.664 × 10−2
7.170 × 10−2
7.132 × 10−2
45
6.930 × 10−3
5.698 × 10−3
7.649 × 10−3
6.950 × 10−3
8.287 × 10−3
95
3.638 × 10−3
3.678 × 10−3
2.426 × 10−3
3.237 × 10−3
3.585 × 10−3
135
6.287 × 10−3
6.366 × 10−3
7.546 × 10−3
5.458 × 10−3
6.099 × 10−3
==PAGE:100==
C.3 Results for all analyzers
94
Table C.28: DB as a function of scattering angle and energy transfer for Ef = 5 meV and dt = 1.5 ms, part 1.
∆E [meV]
2θ [°]
-2.300000
-1.800000
-1.300000
-1.200000
-0.800000
-0.600000
-0.300000
-0.200000
0.000000
0.200000
5
1.600 × 10−3
1.122 × 10−3
1.076 × 10−3
1.078 × 10−3
1.330 × 10−3
1.387 × 10−3
8.520 × 10−1
1.747 × 10−3
1.581 × 10−3
2.183 × 10−3
45
1.205 × 10−3
3.518 × 10−4
5.547 × 10−4
5.521 × 10−4
5.472 × 10−4
6.717 × 10−4
5.416 × 10−2
8.521 × 10−4
8.257 × 10−4
1.007 × 10−3
95
1.386 × 10−3
8.289 × 10−4
4.439 × 10−4
4.023 × 10−4
5.196 × 10−4
5.151 × 10−4
2.598 × 10−2
8.598 × 10−4
9.120 × 10−4
1.201 × 10−3
135
1.301 × 10−3
7.687 × 10−4
6.623 × 10−4
6.677 × 10−4
4.327 × 10−4
6.408 × 10−4
3.930 × 10−3
8.644 × 10−4
9.009 × 10−4
8.192 × 10−4
==PAGE:101==
C.3 Results for all analyzers
95
Table C.29: DB as a function of scattering angle and energy transfer for Ef = 5 meV and dt = 1.5 ms, part 2.
∆E [meV]
2θ [°]
0.400000
0.800000
1.000000
1.400000
2.000000
2.700000
3.200000
3.800000
4.400000
5.000000
5
2.485 × 10−3
2.630 × 10−3
2.396 × 10−3
2.845 × 10−3
3.002 × 10−3
2.308 × 10−3
2.565 × 10−3
3.310 × 10−3
3.270 × 10−3
3.621 × 10−3
45
9.848 × 10−4
7.700 × 10−4
8.699 × 10−4
6.652 × 10−4
7.240 × 10−4
5.154 × 10−4
4.512 × 10−4
2.930 × 10−4
3.270 × 10−4
4.229 × 10−4
95
7.538 × 10−4
9.420 × 10−4
6.926 × 10−4
9.500 × 10−4
4.070 × 10−4
5.041 × 10−4
3.230 × 10−4
2.276 × 10−4
2.950 × 10−4
3.043 × 10−4
135
1.189 × 10−3
9.111 × 10−4
1.003 × 10−3
1.142 × 10−3
6.037 × 10−4
5.115 × 10−4
3.845 × 10−4
6.024 × 10−4
4.560 × 10−4
3.563 × 10−4
==PAGE:102==
C.3 Results for all analyzers
96
Table C.30: DB as a function of scattering angle and energy transfer for Ef = 5 meV and dt = 1.5 ms, part 3.
∆E [meV]
2θ [°]
7.700000
8.200000
8.800000
9.400000
10.000000
22.700000
23.200000
23.800000
24.400000
25.000000
5
5.187 × 10−3
6.100 × 10−3
6.191 × 10−3
6.595 × 10−3
7.525 × 10−3
2.720 × 10−2
2.992 × 10−2
3.157 × 10−2
3.206 × 10−2
3.424 × 10−2
45
4.485 × 10−4
4.458 × 10−4
5.785 × 10−4
2.497 × 10−4
6.868 × 10−4
2.005 × 10−3
1.632 × 10−3
2.442 × 10−3
1.928 × 10−3
3.110 × 10−3
95
3.584 × 10−4
3.949 × 10−4
2.070 × 10−4
3.185 × 10−4
2.617 × 10−4
1.246 × 10−3
1.200 × 10−3
8.007 × 10−4
1.144 × 10−3
1.060 × 10−3
135
2.958 × 10−4
3.176 × 10−4
3.785 × 10−4
3.522 × 10−4
3.790 × 10−4
1.991 × 10−3
1.815 × 10−3
2.476 × 10−3
1.736 × 10−3
2.292 × 10−3
==PAGE:103==
C.3 Results for all analyzers
97
Table C.31: DB as a function of scattering angle and energy transfer for Ef = 5 meV and dt = 1.5 ms, part 4.
∆E [meV]
2θ [°]
47.700000
48.200000
48.800000
49.400000
50.000000
5
1.356 × 10−1
1.337 × 10−1
1.375 × 10−1
1.467 × 10−1
1.455 × 10−1
45
1.344 × 10−2
1.541 × 10−2
1.480 × 10−2
1.417 × 10−2
1.547 × 10−2
95
5.991 × 10−3
6.637 × 10−3
8.344 × 10−3
6.817 × 10−3
8.630 × 10−3
135
1.315 × 10−2
1.245 × 10−2
1.404 × 10−2
1.325 × 10−2
1.456 × 10−2
==PAGE:104==
C.3 Results for all analyzers
98
C.3.2 4.4meV Analyzer
Table C.32: DB as a function of scattering angle and energy transfer for Ef = 4.4 meV and dt = 0.1 ms, part 1.
∆E [meV]
2θ [°]
-1.700000
-1.200000
-0.700000
-0.600000
-0.200000
0.000000
0.300000
0.400000
0.600000
0.800000
5
2.128 × 10−3
2.613 × 10−3
1.263 × 10−3
2.167 × 10−3
1.959 × 10−3
1.756 × 10−3
1.798 × 10−3
9.280 × 10−4
1.589 × 10−3
2.313 × 10−3
10
5.012 × 10−3
2.175 × 10−3
6.410 × 10−3
1.899 × 10−3
1.113 × 10−3
3.854 × 10−3
1.833 × 10−3
2.559 × 10−3
1.741 × 10−3
2.344 × 10−3
15
2.617 × 10−3
1.217 × 10−3
2.518 × 10−3
1.647 × 10−3
1.110 × 10−3
1.880 × 10−3
9.708 × 10−4
2.998 × 10−3
2.844 × 10−3
1.178 × 10−3
20
3.483 × 10−3
4.053 × 10−3
2.929 × 10−3
1.691 × 10−3
3.903 × 10−3
1.753 × 10−3
1.943 × 10−3
2.077 × 10−3
2.472 × 10−3
25
3.516 × 10−3
1.642 × 10−3
1.650 × 10−3
1.024 × 10−3
1.111 × 10−3
1.704 × 10−3
1.239 × 10−3
2.289 × 10−3
1.696 × 10−3
2.253 × 10−3
30
4.317 × 10−3
3.134 × 10−3
4.991 × 10−3
7.300 × 10−4
2.402 × 10−3
1.450 × 10−3
1.016 × 10−3
1.723 × 10−3
9.825 × 10−4
35
2.370 × 10−3
1.332 × 10−3
1.784 × 10−3
2.316 × 10−3
2.129 × 10−3
1.504 × 10−3
1.246 × 10−3
2.117 × 10−3
1.744 × 10−3
1.055 × 10−3
40
2.965 × 10−3
2.969 × 10−3
2.381 × 10−3
3.052 × 10−3
1.713 × 10−3
2.645 × 10−3
1.875 × 10−3
1.981 × 10−3
4.673 × 10−3
2.089 × 10−3
45
2.056 × 10−3
1.281 × 10−3
1.313 × 10−3
1.403 × 10−3
1.794 × 10−3
1.652 × 10−3
1.423 × 10−3
1.446 × 10−3
7.194 × 10−4
2.093 × 10−3
50
1.855 × 10−3
2.123 × 10−3
1.018 × 10−3
1.049 × 10−3
1.204 × 10−3
2.285 × 10−3
1.254 × 10−3
1.896 × 10−3
1.688 × 10−3
7.689 × 10−4
55
3.694 × 10−3
1.859 × 10−3
1.579 × 10−3
6.934 × 10−4
1.119 × 10−3
1.047 × 10−3
1.349 × 10−3
1.399 × 10−3
1.224 × 10−3
2.478 × 10−3
60
1.958 × 10−3
1.416 × 10−3
1.806 × 10−3
1.417 × 10−3
1.660 × 10−3
1.015 × 10−3
2.679 × 10−3
1.259 × 10−3
1.029 × 10−3
1.980 × 10−3
65
2.280 × 10−3
1.229 × 10−3
1.265 × 10−3
8.452 × 10−4
1.738 × 10−3
1.165 × 10−3
2.309 × 10−3
2.494 × 10−3
1.045 × 10−3
1.462 × 10−3
70
1.992 × 10−3
1.665 × 10−3
1.789 × 10−3
1.414 × 10−3
1.397 × 10−3
1.293 × 10−3
2.455 × 10−3
1.091 × 10−3
1.541 × 10−3
2.375 × 10−3
75
2.297 × 10−3
1.232 × 10−3
1.212 × 10−3
1.786 × 10−3
8.531 × 10−4
9.796 × 10−4
1.918 × 10−3
1.899 × 10−3
1.401 × 10−3
2.320 × 10−3
80
1.405 × 10−3
1.067 × 10−3
8.442 × 10−4
1.326 × 10−3
6.603 × 10−4
1.100 × 10−3
1.498 × 10−3
1.747 × 10−3
9.325 × 10−4
2.245 × 10−3
85
1.300 × 10−3
8.756 × 10−4
1.699 × 10−3
1.851 × 10−3
6.517 × 10−4
1.744 × 10−3
1.605 × 10−3
1.154 × 10−3
1.647 × 10−3
1.744 × 10−3
90
3.737 × 10−3
1.892 × 10−3
7.657 × 10−4
1.239 × 10−3
3.171 × 10−3
1.133 × 10−3
1.685 × 10−3
1.110 × 10−3
1.404 × 10−3
1.759 × 10−3
95
1.748 × 10−3
2.685 × 10−3
1.459 × 10−3
2.270 × 10−3
1.594 × 10−3
1.045 × 10−3
1.614 × 10−3
1.691 × 10−3
1.470 × 10−3
1.656 × 10−3
100
2.321 × 10−3
1.975 × 10−3
9.264 × 10−4
8.740 × 10−4
2.763 × 10−3
1.133 × 10−3
1.896 × 10−3
1.972 × 10−3
9.286 × 10−4
2.966 × 10−3
105
2.173 × 10−3
1.863 × 10−3
1.974 × 10−3
9.710 × 10−4
1.361 × 10−3
2.047 × 10−3
1.439 × 10−3
1.753 × 10−3
2.406 × 10−3
1.329 × 10−3
110
1.178 × 10−3
1.770 × 10−3
1.526 × 10−3
9.740 × 10−4
1.604 × 10−3
2.083 × 10−3
1.759 × 10−3
7.012 × 10−4
2.352 × 10−3
1.631 × 10−3
115
3.663 × 10−3
1.408 × 10−3
1.647 × 10−3
7.059 × 10−4
1.589 × 10−3
1.432 × 10−3
1.712 × 10−3
2.315 × 10−3
1.735 × 10−3
1.573 × 10−3
120
2.141 × 10−3
2.490 × 10−3
9.045 × 10−4
1.004 × 10−3
1.747 × 10−3
1.348 × 10−3
1.748 × 10−3
1.963 × 10−3
1.657 × 10−3
1.838 × 10−3
125
2.120 × 10−3
1.390 × 10−3
1.387 × 10−3
1.218 × 10−3
1.358 × 10−3
2.188 × 10−3
6.216 × 10−4
1.302 × 10−3
1.839 × 10−3
1.910 × 10−3
130
2.861 × 10−3
1.506 × 10−3
1.628 × 10−3
1.171 × 10−3
1.229 × 10−3
1.355 × 10−3
2.172 × 10−3
1.214 × 10−3
1.364 × 10−3
2.129 × 10−3
==PAGE:105==
C.3 Results for all analyzers
99
Table C.33: DB as a function of scattering angle and energy transfer for Ef = 4.4 meV and dt = 0.1 ms, part 2.
∆E [meV]
2θ [°]
1.000000
1.400000
1.600000
2.000000
2.600000
3.300000
3.800000
4.400000
5.000000
5.600000
5
1.552 × 10−3
2.019 × 10−3
1.544 × 10−3
1.760 × 10−3
2.231 × 10−3
1.851 × 10−3
2.370 × 10−3
2.252 × 10−3
1.359 × 10−3
2.547 × 10−3
10
1.574 × 10−3
3.495 × 10−3
1.212 × 10−3
1.463 × 10−3
2.608 × 10−3
15
2.389 × 10−3
1.599 × 10−3
2.335 × 10−3
1.938 × 10−3
1.659 × 10−3
20
1.422 × 10−3
2.901 × 10−3
1.551 × 10−3
2.602 × 10−3
1.145 × 10−3
25
1.497 × 10−3
1.498 × 10−3
2.018 × 10−3
1.527 × 10−3
1.606 × 10−3
30
2.546 × 10−3
2.780 × 10−3
2.314 × 10−3
1.953 × 10−3
2.164 × 10−3
35
1.627 × 10−3
1.247 × 10−3
1.775 × 10−3
1.417 × 10−3
7.464 × 10−4
40
2.674 × 10−3
2.106 × 10−3
1.172 × 10−3
1.601 × 10−3
1.771 × 10−3
45
2.882 × 10−3
1.641 × 10−3
2.361 × 10−3
2.004 × 10−3
1.413 × 10−3
1.477 × 10−3
2.094 × 10−3
9.147 × 10−4
1.214 × 10−3
1.900 × 10−3
50
1.145 × 10−3
1.826 × 10−3
3.405 × 10−3
1.328 × 10−3
8.303 × 10−4
55
2.439 × 10−3
2.045 × 10−3
1.437 × 10−3
2.358 × 10−3
2.401 × 10−3
60
1.682 × 10−3
1.342 × 10−3
2.123 × 10−3
1.923 × 10−3
9.265 × 10−4
65
1.201 × 10−3
2.000 × 10−3
2.134 × 10−3
2.813 × 10−3
1.095 × 10−3
70
1.663 × 10−3
1.924 × 10−3
2.405 × 10−3
1.488 × 10−3
2.208 × 10−3
75
3.689 × 10−3
2.135 × 10−3
2.104 × 10−3
2.099 × 10−3
7.038 × 10−4
80
2.567 × 10−3
3.036 × 10−3
1.844 × 10−3
1.867 × 10−3
1.012 × 10−3
85
2.558 × 10−3
1.501 × 10−3
2.071 × 10−3
1.874 × 10−3
1.352 × 10−3
90
1.604 × 10−3
2.144 × 10−3
1.550 × 10−3
1.662 × 10−3
1.127 × 10−3
95
1.522 × 10−3
1.405 × 10−3
1.677 × 10−3
2.019 × 10−3
2.157 × 10−3
1.419 × 10−3
5.678 × 10−4
1.453 × 10−3
1.467 × 10−3
1.542 × 10−3
100
1.479 × 10−3
2.796 × 10−3
2.339 × 10−3
1.525 × 10−3
1.682 × 10−3
105
1.124 × 10−3
1.941 × 10−3
1.598 × 10−3
1.364 × 10−3
2.278 × 10−3
110
1.455 × 10−3
1.593 × 10−3
1.854 × 10−3
1.233 × 10−3
2.253 × 10−3
115
2.442 × 10−3
2.697 × 10−3
1.944 × 10−3
2.175 × 10−3
1.313 × 10−3
120
2.203 × 10−3
1.923 × 10−3
1.853 × 10−3
2.116 × 10−3
1.115 × 10−3
125
1.513 × 10−3
2.751 × 10−3
1.459 × 10−3
1.526 × 10−3
1.356 × 10−3
130
1.983 × 10−3
8.840 × 10−4
2.075 × 10−3
1.244 × 10−3
1.482 × 10−3
135
1.433 × 10−3
1.721 × 10−3
6.919 × 10−4
1.087 × 10−3
1.549 × 10−3
==PAGE:106==
C.3 Results for all analyzers
100
Table C.34: DB as a function of scattering angle and energy transfer for Ef = 4.4 meV and dt = 0.1 ms, part 3.
∆E [meV]
2θ [°]
8.300000
8.800000
9.400000
10.000000
10.600000
23.300000
23.800000
24.400000
25.000000
25.600000
5
1.867 × 10−3
2.048 × 10−3
2.298 × 10−3
1.783 × 10−3
2.236 × 10−3
2.090 × 10−3
3.110 × 10−3
2.391 × 10−3
2.307 × 10−3
4.979 × 10−3
45
2.083 × 10−3
6.808 × 10−4
9.694 × 10−4
1.876 × 10−3
1.875 × 10−3
1.995 × 10−3
2.967 × 10−3
3.928 × 10−3
1.026 × 10−3
2.727 × 10−3
95
2.196 × 10−3
8.696 × 10−4
1.491 × 10−3
1.670 × 10−3
2.289 × 10−3
3.270 × 10−3
2.133 × 10−3
4.731 × 10−3
2.997 × 10−3
2.330 × 10−3
135
1.173 × 10−3
2.044 × 10−3
2.163 × 10−3
2.339 × 10−3
1.241 × 10−3
2.043 × 10−3
2.605 × 10−3
3.678 × 10−3
4.567 × 10−3
2.683 × 10−3
==PAGE:107==
C.3 Results for all analyzers
101
Table C.35: DB as a function of scattering angle and energy transfer for Ef = 4.4 meV and dt = 0.1 ms, part 4.
∆E [meV]
2θ [°]
48.300000
48.800000
49.400000
50.000000
50.600000
5
6.356 × 10−3
9.266 × 10−3
7.235 × 10−3
3.075 × 10−3
1.053 × 10−2
45
2.339 × 10−3
5.430 × 10−3
5.033 × 10−3
5.798 × 10−3
8.336 × 10−3
95
5.403 × 10−3
3.531 × 10−3
3.388 × 10−3
5.702 × 10−3
7.099 × 10−3
135
4.850 × 10−3
6.809 × 10−3
4.568 × 10−3
3.921 × 10−3
3.822 × 10−3
==PAGE:108==
C.3 Results for all analyzers
102
Table C.36: DB as a function of scattering angle and energy transfer for Ef = 4.4 meV and dt = 0.2 ms, part 1.
∆E [meV]
2θ [°]
-1.700000
-1.200000
-0.700000
-0.600000
-0.200000
0.000000
0.300000
0.400000
0.600000
0.800000
5
8.595 × 10−4
1.772 × 10−3
1.258 × 10−3
1.508 × 10−3
1.521 × 10−3
2.924 × 10−3
2.790 × 10−3
1.985 × 10−3
2.585 × 10−3
1.971 × 10−3
10
3.467 × 10−3
3.458 × 10−3
2.835 × 10−3
5.492 × 10−3
1.134 × 10−3
5.034 × 10−3
1.299 × 10−3
2.015 × 10−3
2.821 × 10−3
2.623 × 10−3
15
1.101 × 10−3
1.159 × 10−3
1.330 × 10−3
4.299 × 10−4
1.279 × 10−3
1.019 × 10−3
1.050 × 10−3
1.446 × 10−3
1.919 × 10−3
1.515 × 10−3
20
3.746 × 10−3
5.069 × 10−3
1.102 × 10−3
1.317 × 10−3
2.150 × 10−3
2.022 × 10−3
2.251 × 10−3
2.057 × 10−3
1.197 × 10−3
25
1.587 × 10−3
1.519 × 10−3
1.322 × 10−3
7.814 × 10−4
1.243 × 10−3
8.720 × 10−4
1.990 × 10−3
1.224 × 10−3
1.304 × 10−3
1.512 × 10−3
30
1.286 × 10−3
3.426 × 10−3
2.090 × 10−3
1.229 × 10−3
1.891 × 10−3
9.362 × 10−4
1.662 × 10−3
2.579 × 10−3
1.981 × 10−3
35
1.695 × 10−3
1.678 × 10−3
1.127 × 10−3
7.666 × 10−4
7.739 × 10−4
2.228 × 10−3
1.714 × 10−3
1.256 × 10−3
1.249 × 10−3
1.654 × 10−3
40
2.220 × 10−3
2.275 × 10−3
5.940 × 10−3
2.318 × 10−3
1.165 × 10−3
1.062 × 10−3
1.821 × 10−3
1.052 × 10−3
1.723 × 10−3
1.185 × 10−3
45
2.272 × 10−3
1.576 × 10−3
6.389 × 10−4
7.098 × 10−4
1.480 × 10−3
1.116 × 10−3
1.029 × 10−3
1.520 × 10−3
1.218 × 10−3
1.548 × 10−3
50
1.721 × 10−3
9.891 × 10−4
7.696 × 10−4
8.885 × 10−4
1.501 × 10−3
1.509 × 10−3
1.818 × 10−3
6.587 × 10−4
1.155 × 10−3
1.544 × 10−3
55
1.196 × 10−3
7.538 × 10−4
1.016 × 10−3
9.708 × 10−4
1.143 × 10−3
1.426 × 10−3
1.227 × 10−3
1.425 × 10−3
1.431 × 10−3
1.783 × 10−3
60
1.936 × 10−3
1.422 × 10−3
1.155 × 10−3
1.168 × 10−3
1.363 × 10−3
1.497 × 10−3
1.800 × 10−3
1.187 × 10−3
1.122 × 10−3
1.926 × 10−3
65
2.578 × 10−3
1.438 × 10−3
1.129 × 10−3
8.010 × 10−4
1.996 × 10−3
1.250 × 10−3
2.011 × 10−3
1.599 × 10−3
1.446 × 10−3
1.515 × 10−3
70
1.863 × 10−3
1.632 × 10−3
1.081 × 10−3
9.416 × 10−4
1.946 × 10−3
1.683 × 10−3
2.279 × 10−3
1.835 × 10−3
1.315 × 10−3
1.157 × 10−3
75
1.966 × 10−3
1.389 × 10−3
1.010 × 10−3
1.210 × 10−3
9.039 × 10−4
1.535 × 10−3
1.276 × 10−3
1.948 × 10−3
1.802 × 10−3
2.019 × 10−3
80
2.598 × 10−3
1.705 × 10−3
1.468 × 10−3
9.931 × 10−4
1.543 × 10−3
9.964 × 10−4
7.338 × 10−4
1.640 × 10−3
9.082 × 10−4
1.923 × 10−3
85
2.215 × 10−3
1.361 × 10−3
1.074 × 10−3
1.081 × 10−3
1.314 × 10−3
1.407 × 10−3
3.516 × 10−4
1.789 × 10−3
1.356 × 10−3
1.248 × 10−3
90
1.564 × 10−3
1.624 × 10−3
1.068 × 10−3
1.587 × 10−3
1.481 × 10−3
1.465 × 10−3
1.404 × 10−3
9.673 × 10−4
1.225 × 10−3
1.276 × 10−3
95
1.620 × 10−3
1.031 × 10−3
4.760 × 10−4
1.141 × 10−3
1.412 × 10−3
1.001 × 10−3
1.014 × 10−3
1.030 × 10−3
1.789 × 10−3
1.511 × 10−3
100
2.286 × 10−3
1.309 × 10−3
9.447 × 10−4
1.003 × 10−3
1.165 × 10−3
1.054 × 10−3
2.440 × 10−3
1.090 × 10−3
1.436 × 10−3
1.102 × 10−3
105
2.208 × 10−3
6.501 × 10−4
1.087 × 10−3
1.813 × 10−3
9.787 × 10−4
1.059 × 10−3
1.591 × 10−3
8.793 × 10−4
1.390 × 10−3
1.139 × 10−3
110
1.596 × 10−3
1.046 × 10−3
1.070 × 10−3
3.592 × 10−4
1.258 × 10−3
8.954 × 10−4
1.121 × 10−3
1.093 × 10−3
7.998 × 10−4
1.484 × 10−3
115
2.779 × 10−3
1.200 × 10−3
1.083 × 10−3
4.681 × 10−4
1.152 × 10−3
1.676 × 10−3
1.162 × 10−3
1.502 × 10−3
1.383 × 10−3
1.796 × 10−3
120
2.403 × 10−3
1.381 × 10−3
8.953 × 10−4
7.679 × 10−4
1.105 × 10−3
7.570 × 10−4
1.405 × 10−3
1.257 × 10−3
1.895 × 10−3
1.478 × 10−3
125
1.501 × 10−3
6.402 × 10−4
1.180 × 10−3
1.292 × 10−3
1.136 × 10−3
1.509 × 10−3
1.652 × 10−3
1.205 × 10−3
1.842 × 10−3
2.280 × 10−3
130
1.564 × 10−3
1.769 × 10−3
8.238 × 10−4
1.366 × 10−3
1.121 × 10−3
1.417 × 10−3
1.276 × 10−3
1.355 × 10−3
9.188 × 10−4
1.479 × 10−3
==PAGE:109==
C.3 Results for all analyzers
103
Table C.37: DB as a function of scattering angle and energy transfer for Ef = 4.4 meV and dt = 0.2 ms, part 2.
∆E [meV]
2θ [°]
1.000000
1.400000
1.600000
2.000000
2.600000
3.300000
3.800000
4.400000
5.000000
5.600000
5
2.097 × 10−3
1.447 × 10−3
2.301 × 10−3
2.666 × 10−3
1.305 × 10−3
1.601 × 10−3
1.375 × 10−3
1.668 × 10−3
1.919 × 10−3
1.304 × 10−3
10
1.579 × 10−3
8.109 × 10−4
1.767 × 10−3
1.172 × 10−3
1.807 × 10−3
15
1.628 × 10−3
1.870 × 10−3
1.831 × 10−3
7.326 × 10−4
1.364 × 10−3
20
1.638 × 10−3
1.918 × 10−3
1.965 × 10−3
1.471 × 10−3
5.585 × 10−4
25
1.598 × 10−3
1.529 × 10−3
1.792 × 10−3
1.388 × 10−3
8.843 × 10−4
30
1.412 × 10−3
1.959 × 10−3
1.395 × 10−3
1.219 × 10−3
9.570 × 10−4
35
1.308 × 10−3
1.153 × 10−3
2.346 × 10−3
8.311 × 10−4
1.116 × 10−3
40
1.761 × 10−3
1.385 × 10−3
1.368 × 10−3
1.254 × 10−3
1.212 × 10−3
45
2.256 × 10−3
2.716 × 10−3
1.373 × 10−3
1.713 × 10−3
1.745 × 10−3
6.504 × 10−4
9.986 × 10−4
1.044 × 10−3
1.070 × 10−3
1.300 × 10−3
50
1.382 × 10−3
1.339 × 10−3
1.838 × 10−3
1.722 × 10−3
9.183 × 10−4
55
1.294 × 10−3
1.619 × 10−3
1.393 × 10−3
1.413 × 10−3
1.418 × 10−3
60
2.026 × 10−3
1.814 × 10−3
1.253 × 10−3
1.813 × 10−3
9.625 × 10−4
65
1.614 × 10−3
1.468 × 10−3
1.782 × 10−3
8.071 × 10−4
1.783 × 10−3
70
1.824 × 10−3
1.513 × 10−3
1.136 × 10−3
1.334 × 10−3
8.545 × 10−4
75
1.180 × 10−3
1.607 × 10−3
1.687 × 10−3
1.414 × 10−3
1.138 × 10−3
80
3.074 × 10−3
1.466 × 10−3
1.431 × 10−3
1.374 × 10−3
1.097 × 10−3
85
1.796 × 10−3
1.501 × 10−3
1.362 × 10−3
1.297 × 10−3
1.419 × 10−3
90
1.150 × 10−3
1.724 × 10−3
1.631 × 10−3
6.966 × 10−4
8.230 × 10−4
95
1.586 × 10−3
1.382 × 10−3
2.640 × 10−3
1.078 × 10−3
9.791 × 10−4
1.200 × 10−3
3.475 × 10−4
3.764 × 10−4
9.074 × 10−4
9.598 × 10−4
100
2.258 × 10−3
1.423 × 10−3
1.465 × 10−3
1.063 × 10−3
9.943 × 10−4
105
1.303 × 10−3
1.600 × 10−3
1.951 × 10−3
1.262 × 10−3
9.024 × 10−4
110
1.955 × 10−3
2.156 × 10−3
1.558 × 10−3
1.535 × 10−3
1.338 × 10−3
115
1.853 × 10−3
1.871 × 10−3
1.873 × 10−3
1.652 × 10−3
1.766 × 10−3
120
1.708 × 10−3
1.151 × 10−3
1.829 × 10−3
1.032 × 10−3
6.917 × 10−4
125
1.170 × 10−3
9.487 × 10−4
1.041 × 10−3
1.409 × 10−3
6.942 × 10−4
130
1.829 × 10−3
1.649 × 10−3
1.453 × 10−3
1.987 × 10−3
1.605 × 10−3
135
3.929 × 10−4
1.186 × 10−3
1.015 × 10−3
7.244 × 10−4
1.519 × 10−3
==PAGE:110==
C.3 Results for all analyzers
104
Table C.38: DB as a function of scattering angle and energy transfer for Ef = 4.4 meV and dt = 0.2 ms, part 3.
∆E [meV]
2θ [°]
8.300000
8.800000
9.400000
10.000000
10.600000
23.300000
23.800000
24.400000
25.000000
25.600000
5
1.094 × 10−3
1.311 × 10−3
2.801 × 10−3
1.592 × 10−3
7.855 × 10−4
1.772 × 10−3
1.748 × 10−3
1.542 × 10−3
1.302 × 10−3
2.257 × 10−3
45
3.587 × 10−4
5.148 × 10−4
1.194 × 10−3
4.971 × 10−4
5.587 × 10−4
6.699 × 10−4
7.435 × 10−4
2.177 × 10−3
1.638 × 10−3
1.984 × 10−3
95
4.097 × 10−4
6.969 × 10−4
1.210 × 10−3
1.143 × 10−3
1.090 × 10−3
9.647 × 10−4
1.326 × 10−3
7.105 × 10−4
8.613 × 10−4
8.716 × 10−4
135
8.516 × 10−4
1.460 × 10−3
1.320 × 10−3
6.101 × 10−4
6.921 × 10−4
1.204 × 10−3
1.907 × 10−3
1.182 × 10−3
8.736 × 10−4
2.543 × 10−3
==PAGE:111==
C.3 Results for all analyzers
105
Table C.39: DB as a function of scattering angle and energy transfer for Ef = 4.4 meV and dt = 0.2 ms, part 4.
∆E [meV]
2θ [°]
48.300000
48.800000
49.400000
50.000000
50.600000
5
3.775 × 10−3
6.053 × 10−3
4.604 × 10−3
5.962 × 10−3
5.489 × 10−3
45
2.115 × 10−3
3.231 × 10−3
1.805 × 10−3
9.644 × 10−4
2.423 × 10−3
95
1.412 × 10−3
1.741 × 10−3
3.369 × 10−3
2.233 × 10−3
2.050 × 10−3
135
2.240 × 10−3
1.689 × 10−3
4.678 × 10−3
4.422 × 10−3
2.583 × 10−3
==PAGE:112==
C.3 Results for all analyzers
106
Table C.40: DB as a function of scattering angle and energy transfer for Ef = 4.4 meV and dt = 0.5 ms, part 1.
∆E [meV]
2θ [°]
-1.700000
-1.200000
-0.700000
-0.600000
-0.200000
0.000000
0.300000
0.400000
0.600000
0.800000
5
1.689 × 10−3
1.111 × 10−3
7.812 × 10−4
9.761 × 10−4
1.065 × 10−3
1.438 × 10−3
1.356 × 10−3
1.646 × 10−3
1.067 × 10−3
1.660 × 10−3
10
2.980 × 10−3
2.112 × 10−3
1.699 × 10−3
2.657 × 10−3
6.998 × 10−4
3.291 × 10−3
1.163 × 10−3
1.188 × 10−3
9.061 × 10−4
9.027 × 10−4
15
1.989 × 10−3
6.582 × 10−4
7.456 × 10−4
7.810 × 10−4
6.829 × 10−4
1.362 × 10−3
9.103 × 10−4
1.249 × 10−3
8.831 × 10−4
1.006 × 10−3
20
1.934 × 10−3
6.629 × 10−3
2.026 × 10−3
8.820 × 10−4
5.588 × 10−4
7.901 × 10−4
1.334 × 10−3
1.850 × 10−3
1.000 × 10−3
25
9.502 × 10−4
8.109 × 10−4
3.953 × 10−4
4.367 × 10−4
7.332 × 10−4
8.012 × 10−4
9.210 × 10−4
9.164 × 10−4
1.365 × 10−3
1.257 × 10−3
30
2.837 × 10−3
3.881 × 10−3
2.873 × 10−3
6.580 × 10−4
1.323 × 10−3
8.925 × 10−4
2.615 × 10−3
2.723 × 10−3
8.521 × 10−4
35
1.628 × 10−3
7.052 × 10−4
6.980 × 10−4
4.925 × 10−4
7.210 × 10−4
1.085 × 10−3
1.564 × 10−3
1.021 × 10−3
8.505 × 10−4
9.495 × 10−4
40
3.070 × 10−3
3.938 × 10−3
1.985 × 10−3
2.869 × 10−3
9.139 × 10−4
1.293 × 10−3
7.095 × 10−4
2.504 × 10−3
2.479 × 10−3
7.870 × 10−4
45
9.445 × 10−4
1.205 × 10−3
4.098 × 10−4
6.288 × 10−4
7.813 × 10−4
6.397 × 10−4
6.637 × 10−4
1.355 × 10−3
8.316 × 10−4
1.160 × 10−3
50
1.291 × 10−3
7.625 × 10−4
1.041 × 10−3
3.836 × 10−4
6.605 × 10−4
8.964 × 10−4
6.056 × 10−4
1.240 × 10−3
8.585 × 10−4
8.618 × 10−4
55
1.464 × 10−3
6.002 × 10−4
5.994 × 10−4
5.248 × 10−4
6.380 × 10−4
9.448 × 10−4
1.252 × 10−3
1.148 × 10−3
8.834 × 10−4
8.516 × 10−4
60
1.458 × 10−3
1.638 × 10−3
1.024 × 10−3
8.083 × 10−4
7.250 × 10−4
9.086 × 10−4
6.415 × 10−4
1.020 × 10−3
1.340 × 10−3
7.397 × 10−4
65
1.536 × 10−3
9.761 × 10−4
7.108 × 10−4
7.265 × 10−4
8.726 × 10−4
4.885 × 10−4
1.043 × 10−3
4.927 × 10−4
8.773 × 10−4
9.913 × 10−4
70
1.228 × 10−3
6.988 × 10−4
4.516 × 10−4
4.825 × 10−4
4.224 × 10−4
8.726 × 10−4
9.471 × 10−4
8.509 × 10−4
7.738 × 10−4
8.373 × 10−4
75
1.269 × 10−3
9.479 × 10−4
5.136 × 10−4
5.624 × 10−4
5.283 × 10−4
7.154 × 10−4
6.493 × 10−4
1.190 × 10−3
9.482 × 10−4
7.851 × 10−4
80
1.965 × 10−3
9.129 × 10−4
6.887 × 10−4
8.371 × 10−4
5.410 × 10−4
3.731 × 10−4
5.075 × 10−4
7.043 × 10−4
1.187 × 10−3
1.270 × 10−3
85
1.679 × 10−3
9.920 × 10−4
7.900 × 10−4
1.003 × 10−3
7.645 × 10−4
9.873 × 10−4
6.245 × 10−4
1.143 × 10−3
1.169 × 10−3
1.172 × 10−3
90
1.167 × 10−3
1.294 × 10−3
6.557 × 10−4
6.554 × 10−4
5.298 × 10−4
9.366 × 10−4
8.035 × 10−4
9.331 × 10−4
9.363 × 10−4
6.090 × 10−4
95
1.685 × 10−3
1.071 × 10−3
5.599 × 10−4
6.030 × 10−4
8.608 × 10−4
6.503 × 10−4
4.861 × 10−4
1.450 × 10−3
8.905 × 10−4
6.344 × 10−4
100
2.125 × 10−3
7.865 × 10−4
7.127 × 10−4
5.594 × 10−4
6.919 × 10−4
8.039 × 10−4
1.563 × 10−3
1.262 × 10−3
7.486 × 10−4
1.081 × 10−3
105
1.464 × 10−3
1.220 × 10−3
9.223 × 10−4
8.290 × 10−4
9.797 × 10−4
3.792 × 10−4
4.756 × 10−4
9.786 × 10−4
7.226 × 10−4
8.959 × 10−4
110
1.778 × 10−3
9.700 × 10−4
6.052 × 10−4
7.433 × 10−4
5.702 × 10−4
9.196 × 10−4
7.871 × 10−4
1.022 × 10−3
1.431 × 10−3
1.216 × 10−3
115
1.676 × 10−3
9.717 × 10−4
5.637 × 10−4
5.453 × 10−4
8.431 × 10−4
9.790 × 10−4
1.153 × 10−3
1.278 × 10−3
1.168 × 10−3
9.007 × 10−4
120
1.321 × 10−3
6.414 × 10−4
5.327 × 10−4
1.052 × 10−3
1.048 × 10−3
1.311 × 10−3
6.189 × 10−4
1.050 × 10−3
7.576 × 10−4
9.815 × 10−4
125
1.171 × 10−3
8.881 × 10−4
7.663 × 10−4
8.895 × 10−4
5.931 × 10−4
1.075 × 10−3
1.188 × 10−3
1.135 × 10−3
1.265 × 10−3
9.668 × 10−4
130
1.844 × 10−3
1.329 × 10−3
5.004 × 10−4
5.656 × 10−4
7.958 × 10−4
6.207 × 10−4
1.208 × 10−3
1.153 × 10−3
8.103 × 10−4
7.264 × 10−4
==PAGE:113==
C.3 Results for all analyzers
107
Table C.41: DB as a function of scattering angle and energy transfer for Ef = 4.4 meV and dt = 0.5 ms, part 2.
∆E [meV]
2θ [°]
1.000000
1.400000
1.600000
2.000000
2.600000
3.300000
3.800000
4.400000
5.000000
5.600000
5
1.305 × 10−3
1.713 × 10−3
1.217 × 10−3
1.360 × 10−3
1.112 × 10−3
9.082 × 10−4
1.220 × 10−3
1.078 × 10−3
7.425 × 10−4
1.022 × 10−3
10
9.185 × 10−4
9.032 × 10−4
1.054 × 10−3
8.111 × 10−4
5.982 × 10−4
15
1.040 × 10−3
9.106 × 10−4
1.193 × 10−3
8.653 × 10−4
8.217 × 10−4
20
9.877 × 10−4
9.865 × 10−4
8.517 × 10−4
6.131 × 10−4
4.358 × 10−4
25
1.011 × 10−3
1.052 × 10−3
6.873 × 10−4
5.898 × 10−4
5.249 × 10−4
30
1.271 × 10−3
8.293 × 10−4
6.516 × 10−4
1.086 × 10−3
3.533 × 10−4
35
5.281 × 10−4
9.904 × 10−4
7.732 × 10−4
6.760 × 10−4
7.028 × 10−4
40
1.041 × 10−3
7.510 × 10−4
5.968 × 10−4
9.022 × 10−4
5.484 × 10−4
45
1.016 × 10−3
1.080 × 10−3
8.262 × 10−4
1.243 × 10−3
5.348 × 10−4
3.198 × 10−4
4.767 × 10−4
4.583 × 10−4
3.737 × 10−4
4.755 × 10−4
50
1.016 × 10−3
9.723 × 10−4
8.072 × 10−4
8.104 × 10−4
1.091 × 10−3
55
8.067 × 10−4
8.350 × 10−4
8.495 × 10−4
6.952 × 10−4
5.149 × 10−4
60
8.333 × 10−4
1.171 × 10−3
6.121 × 10−4
7.466 × 10−4
5.562 × 10−4
65
8.223 × 10−4
9.767 × 10−4
1.064 × 10−3
5.003 × 10−4
7.546 × 10−4
70
1.020 × 10−3
6.516 × 10−4
7.856 × 10−4
6.117 × 10−4
4.037 × 10−4
75
7.898 × 10−4
7.604 × 10−4
1.385 × 10−3
7.530 × 10−4
6.792 × 10−4
80
1.055 × 10−3
8.231 × 10−4
9.038 × 10−4
7.174 × 10−4
7.084 × 10−4
85
7.967 × 10−4
1.003 × 10−3
9.599 × 10−4
9.837 × 10−4
4.029 × 10−4
90
6.271 × 10−4
1.257 × 10−3
5.138 × 10−4
7.452 × 10−4
5.723 × 10−4
95
9.193 × 10−4
1.093 × 10−3
8.374 × 10−4
7.457 × 10−4
4.410 × 10−4
4.177 × 10−4
5.991 × 10−4
5.081 × 10−4
4.394 × 10−4
2.095 × 10−4
100
8.794 × 10−4
6.114 × 10−4
7.427 × 10−4
9.826 × 10−4
6.392 × 10−4
105
8.635 × 10−4
7.478 × 10−4
8.814 × 10−4
7.284 × 10−4
6.841 × 10−4
110
9.652 × 10−4
1.202 × 10−3
7.072 × 10−4
8.219 × 10−4
6.239 × 10−4
115
9.559 × 10−4
7.051 × 10−4
8.978 × 10−4
4.983 × 10−4
7.499 × 10−4
120
1.281 × 10−3
7.856 × 10−4
7.619 × 10−4
7.459 × 10−4
5.056 × 10−4
125
1.115 × 10−3
7.738 × 10−4
8.707 × 10−4
1.001 × 10−3
5.210 × 10−4
130
8.972 × 10−4
9.467 × 10−4
8.362 × 10−4
8.231 × 10−4
1.041 × 10−3
135
7.472 × 10−4
6.909 × 10−4
4.514 × 10−4
3.998 × 10−4
3.362 × 10−4
==PAGE:114==
C.3 Results for all analyzers
108
Table C.42: DB as a function of scattering angle and energy transfer for Ef = 4.4 meV and dt = 0.5 ms, part 3.
∆E [meV]
2θ [°]
8.300000
8.800000
9.400000
10.000000
10.600000
23.300000
23.800000
24.400000
25.000000
25.600000
5
8.425 × 10−4
1.306 × 10−3
1.742 × 10−3
1.110 × 10−3
1.326 × 10−3
3.921 × 10−3
2.935 × 10−3
3.390 × 10−3
3.472 × 10−3
4.869 × 10−3
45
2.567 × 10−4
5.174 × 10−4
3.075 × 10−4
2.235 × 10−4
1.473 × 10−4
1.839 × 10−4
4.555 × 10−4
3.265 × 10−4
4.064 × 10−4
9.479 × 10−4
95
1.830 × 10−4
3.203 × 10−4
3.889 × 10−4
1.918 × 10−4
1.955 × 10−4
2.658 × 10−4
7.228 × 10−4
6.061 × 10−4
4.973 × 10−4
5.452 × 10−4
135
3.657 × 10−4
5.225 × 10−4
5.409 × 10−4
2.272 × 10−4
1.605 × 10−4
7.730 × 10−4
8.289 × 10−4
9.390 × 10−4
5.747 × 10−4
1.334 × 10−3
==PAGE:115==
C.3 Results for all analyzers
109
Table C.43: DB as a function of scattering angle and energy transfer for Ef = 4.4 meV and dt = 0.5 ms, part 4.
∆E [meV]
2θ [°]
48.300000
48.800000
49.400000
50.000000
50.600000
5
2.039 × 10−2
2.081 × 10−2
2.071 × 10−2
2.422 × 10−2
2.381 × 10−2
45
2.334 × 10−3
2.980 × 10−3
2.949 × 10−3
1.471 × 10−3
2.555 × 10−3
95
9.656 × 10−4
1.692 × 10−3
1.048 × 10−3
1.392 × 10−3
2.679 × 10−3
135
2.283 × 10−3
2.005 × 10−3
2.159 × 10−3
3.253 × 10−3
3.367 × 10−3
==PAGE:116==
C.3 Results for all analyzers
110
C.3.3 3.8meV Analyzer
Table C.44: DB as a function of scattering angle and energy transfer for Ef = 3.8 meV and dt = 0.1 ms, part 1.
∆E [meV]
2θ [°]
-1.100000
-0.600000
-0.100000
0.000000
0.400000
0.600000
0.900000
1.000000
1.200000
1.400000
5
1.337 × 10−3
1.497 × 10−3
2.335 × 10−3
2.969 × 10−3
2.963 × 10−3
2.636 × 10−3
1.635 × 10−3
7.802 × 10−4
1.481 × 10−3
3.330 × 10−3
10
2.934 × 10−3
1.731 × 10−3
4.903 × 10−3
3.436 × 10−3
1.285 × 10−3
1.275 × 10−3
1.782 × 10−3
2.341 × 10−3
3.168 × 10−3
1.342 × 10−3
15
3.187 × 10−3
2.058 × 10−3
2.187 × 10−3
1.606 × 10−3
2.993 × 10−3
9.230 × 10−4
1.507 × 10−3
1.419 × 10−3
1.847 × 10−3
2.937 × 10−3
20
6.381 × 10−3
6.200 × 10−3
2.317 × 10−3
1.249 × 10−3
4.493 × 10−3
8.754 × 10−4
1.542 × 10−3
3.167 × 10−3
1.887 × 10−3
25
3.553 × 10−3
1.948 × 10−3
2.057 × 10−3
2.939 × 10−3
1.446 × 10−3
1.446 × 10−3
2.637 × 10−3
2.648 × 10−3
1.294 × 10−3
1.353 × 10−3
30
2.753 × 10−3
5.621 × 10−3
2.242 × 10−3
2.533 × 10−3
4.342 × 10−3
1.696 × 10−3
8.658 × 10−4
9.469 × 10−4
35
1.356 × 10−3
2.153 × 10−3
1.531 × 10−3
1.500 × 10−3
1.766 × 10−3
1.061 × 10−3
1.882 × 10−3
8.618 × 10−4
3.322 × 10−3
1.182 × 10−3
40
3.452 × 10−3
4.662 × 10−3
8.930 × 10−3
3.409 × 10−3
1.668 × 10−3
5.308 × 10−4
2.298 × 10−3
7.650 × 10−4
3.584 × 10−3
1.828 × 10−3
45
1.191 × 10−3
1.112 × 10−3
7.534 × 10−4
7.537 × 10−4
2.138 × 10−3
2.481 × 10−3
1.563 × 10−3
2.177 × 10−3
1.267 × 10−3
2.220 × 10−3
50
2.940 × 10−3
1.530 × 10−3
1.067 × 10−3
1.710 × 10−3
1.895 × 10−3
5.225 × 10−4
2.453 × 10−3
1.235 × 10−3
2.153 × 10−3
1.890 × 10−3
55
2.000 × 10−3
1.773 × 10−3
1.535 × 10−3
3.025 × 10−3
1.398 × 10−3
1.352 × 10−3
1.357 × 10−3
1.479 × 10−3
2.420 × 10−3
2.410 × 10−3
60
2.217 × 10−3
9.658 × 10−4
1.875 × 10−3
9.560 × 10−4
7.551 × 10−4
2.695 × 10−3
1.540 × 10−3
8.613 × 10−4
1.965 × 10−3
9.983 × 10−4
65
1.987 × 10−3
1.302 × 10−3
1.428 × 10−3
1.131 × 10−3
1.702 × 10−3
2.838 × 10−3
1.198 × 10−3
1.105 × 10−3
1.044 × 10−3
9.614 × 10−4
70
1.868 × 10−3
2.117 × 10−3
8.622 × 10−4
7.663 × 10−4
7.001 × 10−4
2.781 × 10−3
1.440 × 10−3
2.019 × 10−3
9.251 × 10−4
1.910 × 10−3
75
3.826 × 10−3
1.923 × 10−3
1.478 × 10−3
1.147 × 10−3
1.793 × 10−3
1.531 × 10−3
1.690 × 10−3
1.174 × 10−3
1.441 × 10−3
2.059 × 10−3
80
4.763 × 10−3
2.893 × 10−3
8.216 × 10−4
1.455 × 10−3
1.994 × 10−3
1.493 × 10−3
1.005 × 10−3
2.226 × 10−3
1.170 × 10−3
2.178 × 10−3
85
2.936 × 10−3
2.338 × 10−3
2.821 × 10−3
1.668 × 10−3
1.412 × 10−3
1.242 × 10−3
1.324 × 10−3
1.446 × 10−3
1.991 × 10−3
2.727 × 10−3
90
1.929 × 10−3
1.191 × 10−3
1.316 × 10−3
1.502 × 10−3
1.514 × 10−3
1.494 × 10−3
9.489 × 10−4
1.058 × 10−3
1.168 × 10−3
1.830 × 10−3
95
2.237 × 10−3
1.997 × 10−3
1.062 × 10−3
1.477 × 10−3
8.076 × 10−4
1.552 × 10−3
1.194 × 10−3
1.700 × 10−3
2.990 × 10−3
1.822 × 10−3
100
4.205 × 10−3
2.376 × 10−3
1.470 × 10−3
2.460 × 10−3
1.248 × 10−3
1.743 × 10−3
1.408 × 10−3
1.500 × 10−3
2.670 × 10−3
1.322 × 10−3
105
2.368 × 10−3
1.284 × 10−3
1.026 × 10−3
1.436 × 10−3
3.182 × 10−3
1.340 × 10−3
1.859 × 10−3
1.437 × 10−3
1.694 × 10−3
1.811 × 10−3
110
2.750 × 10−3
9.094 × 10−4
1.569 × 10−3
2.244 × 10−3
2.083 × 10−3
2.023 × 10−3
2.042 × 10−3
1.261 × 10−3
1.168 × 10−3
1.282 × 10−3
115
1.642 × 10−3
1.953 × 10−3
2.280 × 10−3
8.866 × 10−4
1.462 × 10−3
1.494 × 10−3
2.157 × 10−3
2.221 × 10−3
1.331 × 10−3
1.574 × 10−3
120
2.321 × 10−3
1.603 × 10−3
1.802 × 10−3
2.064 × 10−3
1.530 × 10−3
2.343 × 10−3
8.860 × 10−4
1.581 × 10−3
1.501 × 10−3
2.145 × 10−3
125
1.984 × 10−3
2.148 × 10−3
2.516 × 10−3
1.952 × 10−3
8.826 × 10−4
2.121 × 10−3
1.582 × 10−3
1.061 × 10−3
1.751 × 10−3
9.802 × 10−4
130
2.823 × 10−3
2.357 × 10−3
1.418 × 10−3
1.363 × 10−3
1.569 × 10−3
8.972 × 10−4
1.788 × 10−3
3.106 × 10−3
2.876 × 10−3
2.662 × 10−3
==PAGE:117==
C.3 Results for all analyzers
111
Table C.45: DB as a function of scattering angle and energy transfer for Ef = 3.8 meV and dt = 0.1 ms, part 2.
∆E [meV]
2θ [°]
1.600000
2.000000
2.200000
2.600000
3.200000
3.900000
4.400000
5.000000
5.600000
6.200000
5
1.912 × 10−3
1.857 × 10−3
1.862 × 10−3
2.032 × 10−3
1.645 × 10−3
2.686 × 10−3
2.003 × 10−3
2.305 × 10−3
2.550 × 10−3
1.193 × 10−3
10
1.483 × 10−3
1.539 × 10−3
1.909 × 10−3
1.140 × 10−3
15
1.960 × 10−3
2.295 × 10−3
1.658 × 10−3
1.835 × 10−3
20
2.755 × 10−3
2.238 × 10−3
1.646 × 10−3
1.570 × 10−3
25
1.895 × 10−3
1.694 × 10−3
1.305 × 10−3
1.381 × 10−3
30
7.007 × 10−4
1.553 × 10−3
2.170 × 10−3
1.445 × 10−3
35
1.620 × 10−3
2.296 × 10−3
2.095 × 10−3
2.083 × 10−3
40
2.213 × 10−3
1.968 × 10−3
2.097 × 10−3
6.024 × 10−4
45
3.044 × 10−3
2.178 × 10−3
1.771 × 10−3
1.093 × 10−3
1.207 × 10−3
1.325 × 10−3
1.202 × 10−3
6.023 × 10−4
4.726 × 10−4
1.994 × 10−3
50
2.128 × 10−3
9.424 × 10−4
2.718 × 10−3
2.337 × 10−3
55
1.230 × 10−3
1.371 × 10−3
3.095 × 10−3
2.590 × 10−3
60
2.761 × 10−3
1.194 × 10−3
1.053 × 10−3
1.408 × 10−3
65
2.575 × 10−3
2.030 × 10−3
1.642 × 10−3
1.688 × 10−3
70
2.254 × 10−3
2.010 × 10−3
2.200 × 10−3
4.269 × 10−4
75
2.067 × 10−3
1.040 × 10−3
1.207 × 10−3
1.720 × 10−3
80
1.865 × 10−3
2.414 × 10−3
1.962 × 10−3
1.735 × 10−3
85
1.293 × 10−3
1.499 × 10−3
2.397 × 10−3
2.368 × 10−3
90
2.175 × 10−3
1.606 × 10−3
1.204 × 10−3
1.054 × 10−3
95
8.536 × 10−4
1.324 × 10−3
2.929 × 10−3
1.978 × 10−3
8.429 × 10−4
1.627 × 10−3
1.312 × 10−3
1.369 × 10−3
1.007 × 10−3
2.078 × 10−3
100
1.728 × 10−3
1.128 × 10−3
1.867 × 10−3
3.296 × 10−3
105
1.157 × 10−3
1.728 × 10−3
2.127 × 10−3
2.085 × 10−3
110
3.850 × 10−3
1.429 × 10−3
7.550 × 10−4
7.112 × 10−4
115
1.946 × 10−3
1.843 × 10−3
1.906 × 10−3
1.063 × 10−3
120
1.246 × 10−3
1.722 × 10−3
1.272 × 10−3
7.524 × 10−4
125
1.327 × 10−3
2.946 × 10−3
1.528 × 10−3
1.866 × 10−3
130
1.933 × 10−3
2.127 × 10−3
1.498 × 10−3
1.754 × 10−3
135
8.848 × 10−4
1.305 × 10−3
2.073 × 10−3
1.111 × 10−3
6.441 × 10−4
1.473 × 10−3
==PAGE:118==
C.3 Results for all analyzers
112
Table C.46: DB as a function of scattering angle and energy transfer for Ef = 3.8 meV and dt = 0.1 ms, part 3.
∆E [meV]
2θ [°]
8.900000
9.400000
10.000000
10.600000
11.200000
23.900000
24.400000
25.000000
25.600000
26.200000
5
2.424 × 10−3
4.071 × 10−3
1.652 × 10−3
3.043 × 10−3
3.194 × 10−3
4.190 × 10−3
3.491 × 10−3
3.989 × 10−3
3.515 × 10−3
2.822 × 10−3
45
1.245 × 10−3
3.827 × 10−3
1.250 × 10−3
2.396 × 10−3
2.107 × 10−3
3.518 × 10−3
2.267 × 10−3
2.400 × 10−3
2.479 × 10−3
3.884 × 10−3
95
1.589 × 10−3
1.213 × 10−3
1.646 × 10−3
1.998 × 10−3
1.307 × 10−3
1.978 × 10−3
6.602 × 10−3
1.309 × 10−3
1.939 × 10−3
5.243 × 10−3
135
2.182 × 10−3
1.949 × 10−3
1.442 × 10−3
1.983 × 10−3
1.917 × 10−3
4.337 × 10−3
2.712 × 10−3
4.568 × 10−3
3.349 × 10−3
2.716 × 10−3
==PAGE:119==
C.3 Results for all analyzers
113
Table C.47: DB as a function of scattering angle and energy transfer for Ef = 3.8 meV and dt = 0.1 ms, part 4.
∆E [meV]
2θ [°]
48.900000
49.400000
50.000000
50.600000
51.200000
5
6.664 × 10−3
5.253 × 10−3
5.895 × 10−3
7.549 × 10−3
3.928 × 10−3
45
4.509 × 10−3
4.316 × 10−3
1.000 × 10−2
6.168 × 10−3
1.072 × 10−2
95
7.450 × 10−3
4.586 × 10−3
4.006 × 10−3
4.194 × 10−3
4.174 × 10−3
135
9.293 × 10−3
3.304 × 10−3
6.324 × 10−3
7.876 × 10−3
6.253 × 10−3
==PAGE:120==
C.3 Results for all analyzers
114
Table C.48: DB as a function of scattering angle and energy transfer for Ef = 3.8 meV and dt = 0.2 ms, part 1.
∆E [meV]
2θ [°]
-1.100000
-0.600000
-0.100000
0.000000
0.400000
0.600000
0.900000
1.000000
1.200000
1.400000
5
1.616 × 10−3
1.069 × 10−3
7.343 × 10−4
1.034 × 10−3
8.439 × 10−4
1.953 × 10−3
1.919 × 10−3
1.936 × 10−3
1.842 × 10−3
1.102 × 10−3
10
2.776 × 10−3
1.361 × 10−3
4.736 × 10−3
2.820 × 10−3
1.466 × 10−3
3.832 × 10−3
2.028 × 10−3
1.657 × 10−3
2.558 × 10−3
1.541 × 10−3
15
2.368 × 10−3
1.766 × 10−3
6.685 × 10−4
7.134 × 10−4
4.191 × 10−4
1.381 × 10−3
1.823 × 10−3
9.151 × 10−4
2.186 × 10−3
1.235 × 10−3
20
5.793 × 10−3
3.521 × 10−3
4.270 × 10−3
8.860 × 10−4
4.729 × 10−3
1.733 × 10−3
1.074 × 10−3
4.464 × 10−3
1.395 × 10−3
25
2.480 × 10−3
1.655 × 10−3
1.678 × 10−3
1.959 × 10−3
2.163 × 10−3
8.659 × 10−4
8.940 × 10−4
1.547 × 10−3
1.095 × 10−3
1.291 × 10−3
30
3.555 × 10−3
7.525 × 10−3
2.666 × 10−3
2.130 × 10−3
6.699 × 10−3
1.106 × 10−3
2.382 × 10−3
3.433 × 10−3
35
2.963 × 10−3
1.201 × 10−3
1.129 × 10−3
8.264 × 10−4
1.937 × 10−3
1.429 × 10−3
9.210 × 10−4
1.174 × 10−3
7.698 × 10−4
1.018 × 10−3
40
5.282 × 10−3
6.272 × 10−3
6.114 × 10−3
1.066 × 10−3
1.836 × 10−3
5.209 × 10−3
1.229 × 10−3
2.900 × 10−3
5.574 × 10−3
9.767 × 10−4
45
1.412 × 10−3
1.295 × 10−3
1.784 × 10−3
1.347 × 10−3
3.912 × 10−4
9.800 × 10−4
2.030 × 10−3
1.226 × 10−3
1.278 × 10−3
1.667 × 10−3
50
1.384 × 10−3
1.108 × 10−3
1.102 × 10−3
3.388 × 10−4
1.720 × 10−3
1.680 × 10−3
1.779 × 10−3
1.842 × 10−3
1.191 × 10−3
2.069 × 10−3
55
2.529 × 10−3
9.829 × 10−4
6.304 × 10−4
1.246 × 10−3
8.926 × 10−4
2.011 × 10−3
9.785 × 10−4
1.658 × 10−3
1.056 × 10−3
1.338 × 10−3
60
1.688 × 10−3
7.565 × 10−4
1.585 × 10−3
9.656 × 10−4
1.032 × 10−3
1.414 × 10−3
7.251 × 10−4
1.933 × 10−3
1.607 × 10−3
2.017 × 10−3
65
1.568 × 10−3
1.351 × 10−3
1.277 × 10−3
9.221 × 10−4
7.820 × 10−4
1.644 × 10−3
1.721 × 10−3
1.142 × 10−3
1.184 × 10−3
2.226 × 10−3
70
1.921 × 10−3
1.379 × 10−3
9.333 × 10−4
1.112 × 10−3
4.155 × 10−4
1.541 × 10−3
1.037 × 10−3
1.260 × 10−3
1.741 × 10−3
2.866 × 10−3
75
1.754 × 10−3
1.840 × 10−3
1.028 × 10−3
4.408 × 10−4
1.260 × 10−3
9.831 × 10−4
1.287 × 10−3
1.760 × 10−3
1.747 × 10−3
8.600 × 10−4
80
6.775 × 10−4
1.751 × 10−3
1.463 × 10−3
1.415 × 10−3
8.289 × 10−4
8.460 × 10−4
1.301 × 10−3
1.072 × 10−3
1.206 × 10−3
1.123 × 10−3
85
1.360 × 10−3
1.692 × 10−3
1.753 × 10−3
1.464 × 10−3
7.261 × 10−4
1.350 × 10−3
1.495 × 10−3
1.678 × 10−3
2.027 × 10−3
7.869 × 10−4
90
1.955 × 10−3
1.251 × 10−3
6.056 × 10−4
5.893 × 10−4
1.550 × 10−3
9.725 × 10−4
1.281 × 10−3
8.727 × 10−4
8.761 × 10−4
1.018 × 10−3
95
1.848 × 10−3
9.107 × 10−4
1.334 × 10−3
1.708 × 10−3
1.398 × 10−3
1.117 × 10−3
1.105 × 10−3
1.256 × 10−3
1.517 × 10−3
1.028 × 10−3
100
1.865 × 10−3
1.501 × 10−3
1.247 × 10−3
9.147 × 10−4
1.397 × 10−3
1.062 × 10−3
1.760 × 10−3
1.085 × 10−3
2.040 × 10−3
1.631 × 10−3
105
1.822 × 10−3
1.539 × 10−3
7.801 × 10−4
1.408 × 10−3
1.477 × 10−3
9.434 × 10−4
9.711 × 10−4
1.133 × 10−3
1.992 × 10−3
1.866 × 10−3
110
1.775 × 10−3
1.038 × 10−3
8.715 × 10−4
8.211 × 10−4
1.432 × 10−3
9.022 × 10−4
1.483 × 10−3
1.796 × 10−3
1.475 × 10−3
1.800 × 10−3
115
1.369 × 10−3
8.170 × 10−4
1.465 × 10−3
1.616 × 10−3
1.528 × 10−3
1.693 × 10−3
1.058 × 10−3
1.729 × 10−3
1.138 × 10−3
1.532 × 10−3
120
1.270 × 10−3
1.381 × 10−3
1.047 × 10−3
1.897 × 10−3
1.255 × 10−3
6.419 × 10−4
1.516 × 10−3
1.267 × 10−3
1.445 × 10−3
1.614 × 10−3
125
3.216 × 10−3
7.059 × 10−4
7.637 × 10−4
9.815 × 10−4
1.059 × 10−3
9.297 × 10−4
1.327 × 10−3
1.001 × 10−3
1.550 × 10−3
6.039 × 10−4
130
2.395 × 10−3
2.239 × 10−3
1.798 × 10−3
8.683 × 10−4
9.762 × 10−4
8.294 × 10−4
1.817 × 10−3
1.789 × 10−3
1.400 × 10−3
1.331 × 10−3
==PAGE:121==
C.3 Results for all analyzers
115
Table C.49: DB as a function of scattering angle and energy transfer for Ef = 3.8 meV and dt = 0.2 ms, part 2.
∆E [meV]
2θ [°]
1.600000
2.000000
2.200000
2.600000
3.200000
3.900000
4.400000
5.000000
5.600000
6.200000
5
1.720 × 10−3
2.295 × 10−3
2.685 × 10−3
1.172 × 10−3
1.917 × 10−3
1.535 × 10−3
1.713 × 10−3
8.530 × 10−4
1.716 × 10−3
3.153 × 10−3
10
1.647 × 10−3
1.343 × 10−3
1.334 × 10−3
1.432 × 10−3
15
1.283 × 10−3
1.653 × 10−3
1.667 × 10−3
1.622 × 10−3
20
2.009 × 10−3
2.861 × 10−3
1.944 × 10−3
1.191 × 10−3
25
1.399 × 10−3
2.390 × 10−3
1.516 × 10−3
1.464 × 10−3
30
2.334 × 10−3
1.050 × 10−3
1.059 × 10−3
1.508 × 10−3
35
1.919 × 10−3
1.188 × 10−3
1.542 × 10−3
1.558 × 10−3
40
9.541 × 10−4
1.250 × 10−3
1.259 × 10−3
1.269 × 10−3
45
1.401 × 10−3
1.622 × 10−3
1.146 × 10−3
1.017 × 10−3
1.270 × 10−3
8.102 × 10−4
1.159 × 10−3
9.139 × 10−4
6.931 × 10−4
9.560 × 10−4
50
1.723 × 10−3
1.819 × 10−3
1.892 × 10−3
1.456 × 10−3
55
1.284 × 10−3
1.174 × 10−3
1.069 × 10−3
1.567 × 10−3
60
1.725 × 10−3
1.599 × 10−3
1.460 × 10−3
1.039 × 10−3
65
2.201 × 10−3
1.262 × 10−3
1.514 × 10−3
1.136 × 10−3
70
1.239 × 10−3
1.682 × 10−3
1.672 × 10−3
1.369 × 10−3
75
1.448 × 10−3
2.204 × 10−3
1.428 × 10−3
1.693 × 10−3
80
1.179 × 10−3
1.757 × 10−3
1.473 × 10−3
1.663 × 10−3
85
1.795 × 10−3
1.667 × 10−3
1.123 × 10−3
2.107 × 10−3
90
2.731 × 10−3
9.993 × 10−4
1.684 × 10−3
1.641 × 10−3
95
2.111 × 10−3
1.115 × 10−3
9.936 × 10−4
6.676 × 10−4
1.155 × 10−3
1.288 × 10−3
8.724 × 10−4
4.435 × 10−4
1.727 × 10−3
9.594 × 10−4
100
9.061 × 10−4
1.463 × 10−3
6.046 × 10−4
1.313 × 10−3
105
1.556 × 10−3
1.370 × 10−3
2.042 × 10−3
2.152 × 10−3
110
1.771 × 10−3
1.291 × 10−3
1.229 × 10−3
1.491 × 10−3
115
1.153 × 10−3
9.269 × 10−4
2.346 × 10−3
1.372 × 10−3
120
1.415 × 10−3
1.960 × 10−3
1.475 × 10−3
2.029 × 10−3
125
1.644 × 10−3
2.057 × 10−3
2.054 × 10−3
9.217 × 10−4
130
1.123 × 10−3
1.720 × 10−3
3.060 × 10−3
1.319 × 10−3
135
7.525 × 10−4
1.485 × 10−3
8.169 × 10−4
4.694 × 10−4
8.615 × 10−4
5.280 × 10−4
==PAGE:122==
C.3 Results for all analyzers
116
Table C.50: DB as a function of scattering angle and energy transfer for Ef = 3.8 meV and dt = 0.2 ms, part 3.
∆E [meV]
2θ [°]
8.900000
9.400000
10.000000
10.600000
11.200000
23.900000
24.400000
25.000000
25.600000
26.200000
5
7.323 × 10−4
1.614 × 10−3
9.057 × 10−4
6.700 × 10−4
1.190 × 10−3
2.816 × 10−3
2.930 × 10−3
1.842 × 10−3
2.244 × 10−3
4.379 × 10−3
45
6.709 × 10−4
8.437 × 10−4
1.830 × 10−3
4.568 × 10−4
4.265 × 10−4
1.354 × 10−3
1.786 × 10−3
2.398 × 10−3
1.193 × 10−3
1.355 × 10−3
95
7.715 × 10−4
1.238 × 10−3
1.069 × 10−3
1.091 × 10−3
4.536 × 10−4
2.339 × 10−3
9.039 × 10−4
1.701 × 10−3
1.539 × 10−3
1.980 × 10−3
135
5.745 × 10−4
1.242 × 10−3
1.474 × 10−3
9.075 × 10−4
5.934 × 10−4
1.964 × 10−3
1.197 × 10−3
1.485 × 10−3
1.987 × 10−3
2.076 × 10−3
==PAGE:123==
C.3 Results for all analyzers
117
Table C.51: DB as a function of scattering angle and energy transfer for Ef = 3.8 meV and dt = 0.2 ms, part 4.
∆E [meV]
2θ [°]
48.900000
49.400000
50.000000
50.600000
51.200000
5
4.463 × 10−3
9.029 × 10−3
8.140 × 10−3
9.051 × 10−3
7.612 × 10−3
45
2.714 × 10−3
2.857 × 10−3
3.856 × 10−3
1.730 × 10−3
3.831 × 10−3
95
1.659 × 10−3
3.773 × 10−3
2.533 × 10−3
2.606 × 10−3
2.803 × 10−3
135
2.117 × 10−3
3.300 × 10−3
3.044 × 10−3
3.759 × 10−3
3.007 × 10−3
==PAGE:124==
C.3 Results for all analyzers
118
Table C.52: DB as a function of scattering angle and energy transfer for Ef = 3.8 meV and dt = 0.5 ms, part 1.
∆E [meV]
2θ [°]
-1.100000
-0.600000
-0.100000
0.000000
0.400000
0.600000
0.900000
1.000000
1.200000
1.400000
5
1.223 × 10−3
8.169 × 10−4
7.246 × 10−4
1.001 × 10−3
1.286 × 10−3
1.085 × 10−3
7.854 × 10−4
1.399 × 10−3
1.850 × 10−3
1.559 × 10−3
10
3.812 × 10−3
2.337 × 10−3
8.030 × 10−3
1.965 × 10−3
7.680 × 10−4
3.773 × 10−3
1.069 × 10−3
2.693 × 10−3
3.871 × 10−3
8.149 × 10−4
15
1.587 × 10−3
7.942 × 10−4
6.256 × 10−4
7.524 × 10−4
4.860 × 10−4
5.774 × 10−4
8.860 × 10−4
6.628 × 10−4
5.908 × 10−4
6.067 × 10−4
20
2.875 × 10−3
9.724 × 10−3
2.012 × 10−3
6.853 × 10−4
2.069 × 10−3
1.222 × 10−3
1.483 × 10−3
2.165 × 10−3
7.579 × 10−4
25
1.650 × 10−3
8.244 × 10−4
8.313 × 10−4
5.228 × 10−4
4.421 × 10−4
1.075 × 10−3
1.260 × 10−3
9.145 × 10−4
8.791 × 10−4
7.852 × 10−4
30
4.412 × 10−3
6.812 × 10−3
1.800 × 10−3
4.003 × 10−4
3.620 × 10−3
1.122 × 10−3
1.928 × 10−3
2.037 × 10−3
35
1.669 × 10−3
1.523 × 10−3
1.008 × 10−3
4.590 × 10−4
9.219 × 10−4
7.164 × 10−4
1.098 × 10−3
6.449 × 10−4
8.444 × 10−4
8.235 × 10−4
40
6.124 × 10−3
5.359 × 10−3
2.831 × 10−3
6.023 × 10−3
8.244 × 10−4
1.886 × 10−3
9.646 × 10−4
2.357 × 10−3
3.894 × 10−3
8.284 × 10−4
45
2.558 × 10−3
6.858 × 10−4
3.039 × 10−4
1.436 × 10−3
7.359 × 10−4
1.003 × 10−3
7.558 × 10−4
8.554 × 10−4
4.670 × 10−4
8.502 × 10−4
50
1.109 × 10−3
9.469 × 10−4
1.190 × 10−3
7.630 × 10−4
4.238 × 10−4
5.260 × 10−4
6.692 × 10−4
1.367 × 10−3
1.019 × 10−3
6.843 × 10−4
55
1.752 × 10−3
7.828 × 10−4
5.637 × 10−4
9.097 × 10−4
5.315 × 10−4
3.641 × 10−4
1.211 × 10−3
8.626 × 10−4
7.709 × 10−4
1.053 × 10−3
60
1.590 × 10−3
1.272 × 10−3
8.041 × 10−4
9.046 × 10−4
4.637 × 10−4
6.510 × 10−4
1.074 × 10−3
1.200 × 10−3
7.344 × 10−4
7.376 × 10−4
65
2.578 × 10−3
1.328 × 10−3
7.491 × 10−4
6.566 × 10−4
7.809 × 10−4
8.572 × 10−4
7.352 × 10−4
9.616 × 10−4
6.813 × 10−4
1.099 × 10−3
70
2.724 × 10−3
8.723 × 10−4
1.004 × 10−3
9.063 × 10−4
8.764 × 10−4
7.996 × 10−4
7.368 × 10−4
9.510 × 10−4
1.057 × 10−3
1.083 × 10−3
75
1.773 × 10−3
9.037 × 10−4
6.379 × 10−4
7.769 × 10−4
7.444 × 10−4
6.545 × 10−4
1.048 × 10−3
1.257 × 10−3
8.398 × 10−4
6.680 × 10−4
80
1.845 × 10−3
9.448 × 10−4
3.097 × 10−4
7.197 × 10−4
4.110 × 10−4
7.644 × 10−4
9.072 × 10−4
8.917 × 10−4
7.111 × 10−4
8.600 × 10−4
85
1.800 × 10−3
6.413 × 10−4
1.130 × 10−3
5.764 × 10−4
8.291 × 10−4
8.459 × 10−4
5.834 × 10−4
4.539 × 10−4
8.214 × 10−4
8.934 × 10−4
90
1.829 × 10−3
7.884 × 10−4
7.026 × 10−4
6.306 × 10−4
3.704 × 10−4
6.147 × 10−4
8.102 × 10−4
9.948 × 10−4
8.435 × 10−4
1.081 × 10−3
95
1.541 × 10−3
7.151 × 10−4
4.395 × 10−4
7.505 × 10−4
9.484 × 10−4
7.467 × 10−4
9.773 × 10−4
8.043 × 10−4
6.875 × 10−4
9.273 × 10−4
100
2.146 × 10−3
7.101 × 10−4
5.824 × 10−4
4.995 × 10−4
6.341 × 10−4
9.700 × 10−4
1.144 × 10−3
1.225 × 10−3
6.166 × 10−4
5.783 × 10−4
105
1.604 × 10−3
6.093 × 10−4
1.439 × 10−3
6.637 × 10−4
5.541 × 10−4
7.712 × 10−4
9.142 × 10−4
1.241 × 10−3
7.640 × 10−4
8.633 × 10−4
110
1.356 × 10−3
1.082 × 10−3
7.935 × 10−4
6.328 × 10−4
9.508 × 10−4
6.443 × 10−4
1.064 × 10−3
1.135 × 10−3
9.102 × 10−4
1.043 × 10−3
115
1.839 × 10−3
1.303 × 10−3
8.880 × 10−4
5.076 × 10−4
7.902 × 10−4
7.688 × 10−4
8.745 × 10−4
8.617 × 10−4
7.795 × 10−4
1.005 × 10−3
120
1.822 × 10−3
7.149 × 10−4
7.248 × 10−4
6.607 × 10−4
1.004 × 10−3
5.817 × 10−4
6.904 × 10−4
8.208 × 10−4
1.199 × 10−3
8.667 × 10−4
125
1.719 × 10−3
1.302 × 10−3
7.146 × 10−4
6.027 × 10−4
6.434 × 10−4
5.630 × 10−4
9.137 × 10−4
1.086 × 10−3
8.740 × 10−4
9.553 × 10−4
130
1.492 × 10−3
8.699 × 10−4
9.140 × 10−4
9.041 × 10−4
1.091 × 10−3
7.565 × 10−4
9.775 × 10−4
1.059 × 10−3
8.529 × 10−4
8.186 × 10−4
==PAGE:125==
C.3 Results for all analyzers
119
Table C.53: DB as a function of scattering angle and energy transfer for Ef = 3.8 meV and dt = 0.5 ms, part 2.
∆E [meV]
2θ [°]
1.600000
2.000000
2.200000
2.600000
3.200000
3.900000
4.400000
5.000000
5.600000
6.200000
5
1.283 × 10−3
1.197 × 10−3
1.438 × 10−3
1.141 × 10−3
5.535 × 10−4
8.358 × 10−4
1.232 × 10−3
1.245 × 10−3
6.610 × 10−4
6.356 × 10−4
10
1.024 × 10−3
7.517 × 10−4
7.051 × 10−4
6.456 × 10−4
15
1.145 × 10−3
9.863 × 10−4
1.229 × 10−3
8.545 × 10−4
20
6.557 × 10−4
7.405 × 10−4
8.085 × 10−4
7.478 × 10−4
25
1.235 × 10−3
7.303 × 10−4
6.155 × 10−4
1.102 × 10−3
30
1.374 × 10−3
9.192 × 10−4
1.015 × 10−3
8.420 × 10−4
35
9.834 × 10−4
1.095 × 10−3
5.231 × 10−4
1.172 × 10−3
40
8.332 × 10−4
9.367 × 10−4
6.152 × 10−4
7.813 × 10−4
45
8.321 × 10−4
8.876 × 10−4
7.414 × 10−4
7.413 × 10−4
7.856 × 10−4
4.945 × 10−4
4.467 × 10−4
3.096 × 10−4
3.284 × 10−4
4.908 × 10−4
50
1.027 × 10−3
9.744 × 10−4
5.747 × 10−4
8.450 × 10−4
55
5.567 × 10−4
7.931 × 10−4
7.829 × 10−4
1.431 × 10−3
60
7.535 × 10−4
1.048 × 10−3
1.099 × 10−3
7.221 × 10−4
65
1.242 × 10−3
9.202 × 10−4
6.859 × 10−4
5.845 × 10−4
70
1.093 × 10−3
1.136 × 10−3
7.785 × 10−4
5.708 × 10−4
75
1.029 × 10−3
6.905 × 10−4
1.013 × 10−3
9.247 × 10−4
80
9.130 × 10−4
8.825 × 10−4
1.313 × 10−3
1.195 × 10−3
85
1.157 × 10−3
1.134 × 10−3
7.110 × 10−4
1.095 × 10−3
90
9.033 × 10−4
9.328 × 10−4
8.466 × 10−4
7.470 × 10−4
95
8.030 × 10−4
9.304 × 10−4
9.596 × 10−4
6.484 × 10−4
6.656 × 10−4
6.935 × 10−4
4.848 × 10−4
4.494 × 10−4
3.063 × 10−4
4.349 × 10−4
100
6.798 × 10−4
1.135 × 10−3
8.443 × 10−4
9.371 × 10−4
105
6.278 × 10−4
8.744 × 10−4
8.997 × 10−4
7.907 × 10−4
110
7.893 × 10−4
6.931 × 10−4
7.175 × 10−4
8.979 × 10−4
115
1.057 × 10−3
1.026 × 10−3
1.057 × 10−3
9.864 × 10−4
120
8.671 × 10−4
9.612 × 10−4
1.068 × 10−3
9.483 × 10−4
125
8.308 × 10−4
1.050 × 10−3
1.025 × 10−3
7.157 × 10−4
130
1.273 × 10−3
7.583 × 10−4
8.555 × 10−4
5.499 × 10−4
135
7.402 × 10−4
7.144 × 10−4
5.045 × 10−4
6.256 × 10−4
5.772 × 10−4
4.521 × 10−4
==PAGE:126==
C.3 Results for all analyzers
120
Table C.54: DB as a function of scattering angle and energy transfer for Ef = 3.8 meV and dt = 0.5 ms, part 3.
∆E [meV]
2θ [°]
8.900000
9.400000
10.000000
10.600000
11.200000
23.900000
24.400000
25.000000
25.600000
26.200000
5
1.317 × 10−3
9.351 × 10−4
1.722 × 10−3
1.569 × 10−3
1.031 × 10−3
6.168 × 10−3
3.713 × 10−3
3.956 × 10−3
5.780 × 10−3
5.314 × 10−3
45
2.562 × 10−4
4.104 × 10−4
4.877 × 10−4
3.249 × 10−4
2.962 × 10−4
8.372 × 10−4
7.571 × 10−4
7.601 × 10−4
5.790 × 10−4
7.997 × 10−4
95
4.042 × 10−4
2.535 × 10−4
3.199 × 10−4
3.155 × 10−4
1.915 × 10−4
7.632 × 10−4
4.041 × 10−4
3.179 × 10−4
3.887 × 10−4
6.475 × 10−4
135
3.733 × 10−4
3.975 × 10−4
4.523 × 10−4
3.974 × 10−4
4.642 × 10−4
8.451 × 10−4
3.243 × 10−4
8.254 × 10−4
1.100 × 10−3
7.970 × 10−4
==PAGE:127==
C.3 Results for all analyzers
121
Table C.55: DB as a function of scattering angle and energy transfer for Ef = 3.8 meV and dt = 0.5 ms, part 4.
∆E [meV]
2θ [°]
48.900000
49.400000
50.000000
50.600000
51.200000
5
2.962 × 10−2
2.428 × 10−2
2.253 × 10−2
2.413 × 10−2
3.053 × 10−2
45
1.619 × 10−3
1.619 × 10−3
2.353 × 10−3
3.344 × 10−3
2.604 × 10−3
95
5.179 × 10−4
2.785 × 10−3
1.858 × 10−3
1.056 × 10−3
2.309 × 10−3
135
1.274 × 10−3
3.188 × 10−3
1.246 × 10−3
3.158 × 10−3
2.485 × 10−3
==PAGE:128==
C.3 Results for all analyzers
122
Table C.56: DB as a function of scattering angle and energy transfer for Ef = 3.8 meV and dt = 1.0 ms, part 1.
∆E [meV]
2θ [°]
-1.100000
-0.600000
-0.100000
0.000000
0.400000
0.600000
0.900000
1.000000
1.200000
1.400000
5
1.498 × 10−3
4.066 × 10−4
5.203 × 10−4
8.139 × 10−4
7.072 × 10−4
1.052 × 10−3
1.014 × 10−3
1.329 × 10−3
1.182 × 10−3
1.279 × 10−3
45
1.077 × 10−3
6.493 × 10−4
5.883 × 10−4
4.019 × 10−4
4.194 × 10−4
6.595 × 10−4
6.004 × 10−4
6.916 × 10−4
7.443 × 10−4
7.503 × 10−4
95
1.270 × 10−3
4.918 × 10−4
2.323 × 10−4
2.663 × 10−4
6.880 × 10−4
5.773 × 10−4
7.470 × 10−4
8.571 × 10−4
8.057 × 10−4
6.422 × 10−4
135
1.061 × 10−3
5.620 × 10−4
7.220 × 10−4
3.657 × 10−4
4.618 × 10−4
5.239 × 10−4
9.002 × 10−4
6.641 × 10−4
7.382 × 10−4
1.008 × 10−3
==PAGE:129==
C.3 Results for all analyzers
123
Table C.57: DB as a function of scattering angle and energy transfer for Ef = 3.8 meV and dt = 1.0 ms, part 2.
∆E [meV]
2θ [°]
1.600000
2.000000
2.200000
2.600000
3.200000
3.900000
4.400000
5.000000
5.600000
6.200000
5
8.730 × 10−4
1.521 × 10−3
1.268 × 10−3
1.620 × 10−3
1.218 × 10−3
1.148 × 10−3
1.702 × 10−3
1.667 × 10−3
1.343 × 10−3
1.633 × 10−3
45
9.013 × 10−4
5.903 × 10−4
9.931 × 10−4
5.656 × 10−4
6.333 × 10−4
3.505 × 10−4
2.563 × 10−4
2.189 × 10−4
1.920 × 10−4
1.531 × 10−4
95
1.106 × 10−3
8.031 × 10−4
6.901 × 10−4
8.974 × 10−4
4.058 × 10−4
2.709 × 10−4
4.997 × 10−4
2.939 × 10−4
1.977 × 10−4
2.327 × 10−4
135
7.925 × 10−4
7.718 × 10−4
7.210 × 10−4
6.104 × 10−4
4.998 × 10−4
4.246 × 10−4
2.964 × 10−4
1.871 × 10−4
1.732 × 10−4
2.607 × 10−4
==PAGE:130==
C.3 Results for all analyzers
124
Table C.58: DB as a function of scattering angle and energy transfer for Ef = 3.8 meV and dt = 1.0 ms, part 3.
∆E [meV]
2θ [°]
8.900000
9.400000
10.000000
10.600000
11.200000
23.900000
24.400000
25.000000
25.600000
26.200000
5
2.914 × 10−3
2.631 × 10−3
3.038 × 10−3
3.464 × 10−3
3.994 × 10−3
1.580 × 10−2
1.717 × 10−2
2.007 × 10−2
1.895 × 10−2
1.984 × 10−2
45
4.600 × 10−4
1.530 × 10−4
4.378 × 10−4
3.558 × 10−4
2.168 × 10−4
1.133 × 10−3
1.530 × 10−3
9.215 × 10−4
9.887 × 10−4
1.064 × 10−3
95
2.621 × 10−4
3.338 × 10−4
2.662 × 10−4
2.025 × 10−4
2.626 × 10−4
8.235 × 10−4
5.624 × 10−4
5.981 × 10−4
6.287 × 10−4
9.842 × 10−4
135
3.986 × 10−4
3.973 × 10−4
2.643 × 10−4
4.146 × 10−4
2.822 × 10−4
7.851 × 10−4
1.531 × 10−3
1.147 × 10−3
1.265 × 10−3
2.000 × 10−3
==PAGE:131==
C.3 Results for all analyzers
125
Table C.59: DB as a function of scattering angle and energy transfer for Ef = 3.8 meV and dt = 1.0 ms, part 4.
∆E [meV]
2θ [°]
48.900000
49.400000
50.000000
50.600000
51.200000
5
8.633 × 10−2
8.482 × 10−2
8.377 × 10−2
8.782 × 10−2
1.013 × 10−1
45
5.260 × 10−3
5.575 × 10−3
4.639 × 10−3
8.254 × 10−3
8.054 × 10−3
95
2.296 × 10−3
4.227 × 10−3
5.319 × 10−3
3.354 × 10−3
2.378 × 10−3
135
8.150 × 10−3
6.877 × 10−3
7.943 × 10−3
5.022 × 10−3
8.269 × 10−3
==PAGE:132==
C.3 Results for all analyzers
126
Table C.60: DB as a function of scattering angle and energy transfer for Ef = 3.8 meV and dt = 1.5 ms, part 1.
∆E [meV]
2θ [°]
-1.100000
-0.600000
-0.100000
0.000000
0.400000
0.600000
0.900000
1.000000
1.200000
1.400000
5
1.377 × 10−3
1.091 × 10−3
7.709 × 10−4
9.749 × 10−4
1.525 × 10−3
1.093 × 10−3
1.404 × 10−3
1.588 × 10−3
1.761 × 10−3
1.835 × 10−3
45
1.260 × 10−3
4.327 × 10−4
5.937 × 10−4
3.869 × 10−4
4.724 × 10−4
6.659 × 10−4
7.443 × 10−4
9.291 × 10−4
7.802 × 10−4
9.298 × 10−4
95
1.080 × 10−3
6.527 × 10−4
3.694 × 10−4
4.220 × 10−4
4.884 × 10−4
4.886 × 10−4
6.815 × 10−4
7.893 × 10−4
1.011 × 10−3
8.286 × 10−4
135
1.054 × 10−3
8.165 × 10−4
6.949 × 10−4
8.002 × 10−4
4.606 × 10−4
7.612 × 10−4
6.224 × 10−4
8.486 × 10−4
9.982 × 10−4
1.022 × 10−3
==PAGE:133==
C.3 Results for all analyzers
127
Table C.61: DB as a function of scattering angle and energy transfer for Ef = 3.8 meV and dt = 1.5 ms, part 2.
∆E [meV]
2θ [°]
1.600000
2.000000
2.200000
2.600000
3.200000
3.900000
4.400000
5.000000
5.600000
6.200000
5
1.878 × 10−3
2.220 × 10−3
1.802 × 10−3
2.158 × 10−3
2.366 × 10−3
2.319 × 10−3
3.153 × 10−3
2.868 × 10−3
2.966 × 10−3
3.566 × 10−3
45
8.914 × 10−4
1.156 × 10−3
7.589 × 10−4
8.636 × 10−4
4.115 × 10−4
4.945 × 10−4
3.792 × 10−4
3.782 × 10−4
2.613 × 10−4
2.636 × 10−4
95
9.940 × 10−4
7.713 × 10−4
7.779 × 10−4
6.625 × 10−4
6.115 × 10−4
5.305 × 10−4
3.864 × 10−4
3.719 × 10−4
3.243 × 10−4
2.421 × 10−4
135
1.066 × 10−3
7.303 × 10−4
8.245 × 10−4
9.773 × 10−4
8.348 × 10−4
4.766 × 10−4
3.877 × 10−4
3.875 × 10−4
3.651 × 10−4
3.493 × 10−4
==PAGE:134==
C.3 Results for all analyzers
128
Table C.62: DB as a function of scattering angle and energy transfer for Ef = 3.8 meV and dt = 1.5 ms, part 3.
∆E [meV]
2θ [°]
8.900000
9.400000
10.000000
10.600000
11.200000
23.900000
24.400000
25.000000
25.600000
26.200000
5
5.951 × 10−3
5.954 × 10−3
6.698 × 10−3
8.072 × 10−3
8.335 × 10−3
3.408 × 10−2
3.526 × 10−2
4.211 × 10−2
4.296 × 10−2
4.402 × 10−2
45
3.073 × 10−4
4.108 × 10−4
6.696 × 10−4
4.480 × 10−4
2.995 × 10−4
2.302 × 10−3
1.868 × 10−3
2.390 × 10−3
2.601 × 10−3
2.184 × 10−3
95
3.677 × 10−4
4.606 × 10−4
3.696 × 10−4
3.031 × 10−4
2.598 × 10−4
1.331 × 10−3
7.675 × 10−4
1.200 × 10−3
1.486 × 10−3
1.606 × 10−3
135
4.870 × 10−4
6.034 × 10−4
5.992 × 10−4
4.240 × 10−4
6.069 × 10−4
2.064 × 10−3
2.480 × 10−3
2.432 × 10−3
2.439 × 10−3
2.059 × 10−3
==PAGE:135==
C.3 Results for all analyzers
129
Table C.63: DB as a function of scattering angle and energy transfer for Ef = 3.8 meV and dt = 1.5 ms, part 4.
∆E [meV]
2θ [°]
48.900000
49.400000
50.000000
50.600000
51.200000
5
1.722 × 10−1
1.819 × 10−1
1.825 × 10−1
1.879 × 10−1
1.981 × 10−1
45
1.370 × 10−2
1.439 × 10−2
1.423 × 10−2
1.493 × 10−2
1.517 × 10−2
95
5.560 × 10−3
8.841 × 10−3
7.986 × 10−3
6.287 × 10−3
6.923 × 10−3
135
1.278 × 10−2
1.657 × 10−2
1.562 × 10−2
1.431 × 10−2
1.588 × 10−2
==PAGE:136==
C.3 Results for all analyzers
130
C.3.4 3.2meV Analyzer
Table C.64: DB as a function of scattering angle and energy transfer for Ef = 3.2 meV and dt = 0.1 ms, part 1.
∆E [meV]
2θ [°]
-0.500000
0.000000
0.500000
0.600000
1.000000
1.200000
1.500000
1.600000
1.800000
2.000000
5
2.764 × 10−3
1.663 × 10−3
1.605 × 10−3
1.751 × 10−3
6.167 × 10−4
1.029 × 10−3
2.087 × 10−3
2.190 × 10−3
1.591 × 10−3
1.456 × 10−3
10
4.650 × 10−3
7.908 × 10−3
4.642 × 10−3
8.762 × 10−3
1.129 × 10−3
2.917 × 10−3
1.431 × 10−3
2.136 × 10−3
3.437 × 10−3
1.589 × 10−3
15
1.517 × 10−3
1.184 × 10−3
1.039 × 10−3
8.348 × 10−4
1.028 × 10−3
8.727 × 10−4
1.471 × 10−3
1.454 × 10−3
1.949 × 10−3
1.949 × 10−3
20
8.760 × 10−4
9.563 × 10−3
1.868 × 10−3
1.842 × 10−3
2.913 × 10−3
2.279 × 10−3
2.615 × 10−3
1.674 × 10−3
2.549 × 10−3
25
2.609 × 10−3
9.276 × 10−4
2.588 × 10−3
2.669 × 10−3
1.866 × 10−3
2.141 × 10−3
1.008 × 10−3
1.607 × 10−3
2.539 × 10−3
2.298 × 10−3
30
2.947 × 10−3
2.560 × 10−3
1.628 × 10−3
1.006 × 10−3
6.688 × 10−3
1.909 × 10−3
2.211 × 10−3
6.193 × 10−3
2.973 × 10−3
35
1.276 × 10−3
6.438 × 10−4
1.649 × 10−3
2.275 × 10−3
1.293 × 10−3
1.323 × 10−3
8.693 × 10−4
1.944 × 10−3
3.020 × 10−3
1.037 × 10−3
40
2.780 × 10−3
5.084 × 10−3
6.429 × 10−3
3.279 × 10−3
2.639 × 10−3
2.704 × 10−3
1.449 × 10−3
4.474 × 10−3
5.051 × 10−3
1.826 × 10−3
45
1.642 × 10−3
2.930 × 10−3
9.043 × 10−4
1.815 × 10−3
2.136 × 10−3
9.140 × 10−4
2.410 × 10−3
1.341 × 10−3
2.633 × 10−3
2.466 × 10−3
50
2.132 × 10−3
1.241 × 10−3
1.040 × 10−3
1.766 × 10−3
1.754 × 10−3
2.918 × 10−3
1.149 × 10−3
1.864 × 10−3
1.517 × 10−3
2.415 × 10−3
55
1.614 × 10−3
8.224 × 10−4
2.621 × 10−3
1.360 × 10−3
1.879 × 10−3
1.442 × 10−3
1.994 × 10−3
1.545 × 10−3
1.008 × 10−3
2.915 × 10−3
60
2.615 × 10−3
2.565 × 10−3
1.768 × 10−3
1.821 × 10−3
2.882 × 10−3
1.062 × 10−3
2.032 × 10−3
1.583 × 10−3
1.682 × 10−3
2.937 × 10−3
65
2.066 × 10−3
1.751 × 10−3
2.159 × 10−3
1.962 × 10−3
1.536 × 10−3
1.719 × 10−3
9.965 × 10−4
1.829 × 10−3
3.295 × 10−3
1.981 × 10−3
70
2.412 × 10−3
2.096 × 10−3
8.355 × 10−4
1.142 × 10−3
7.770 × 10−4
1.100 × 10−3
2.500 × 10−3
2.036 × 10−3
1.374 × 10−3
1.609 × 10−3
75
2.435 × 10−3
1.955 × 10−3
9.626 × 10−4
1.241 × 10−3
8.072 × 10−4
9.955 × 10−4
1.576 × 10−3
1.380 × 10−3
2.411 × 10−3
3.081 × 10−3
80
3.000 × 10−3
2.078 × 10−3
5.751 × 10−4
1.462 × 10−3
6.777 × 10−4
1.723 × 10−3
1.472 × 10−3
1.059 × 10−3
1.753 × 10−3
2.379 × 10−3
85
3.882 × 10−3
2.167 × 10−3
1.642 × 10−3
1.968 × 10−3
1.421 × 10−3
1.104 × 10−3
1.889 × 10−3
1.509 × 10−3
1.649 × 10−3
3.808 × 10−3
90
3.198 × 10−3
1.235 × 10−3
1.230 × 10−3
3.280 × 10−3
1.918 × 10−3
1.236 × 10−3
1.435 × 10−3
1.997 × 10−3
1.781 × 10−3
1.611 × 10−3
95
2.066 × 10−3
1.432 × 10−3
1.681 × 10−3
1.018 × 10−3
1.458 × 10−3
1.152 × 10−3
2.497 × 10−3
1.401 × 10−3
9.215 × 10−4
2.266 × 10−3
100
2.084 × 10−3
1.727 × 10−3
2.660 × 10−3
1.010 × 10−3
1.295 × 10−3
1.786 × 10−3
1.268 × 10−3
2.549 × 10−3
2.211 × 10−3
2.388 × 10−3
105
4.366 × 10−3
3.585 × 10−3
1.990 × 10−3
1.672 × 10−3
1.891 × 10−3
1.391 × 10−3
2.687 × 10−3
1.888 × 10−3
2.095 × 10−3
1.747 × 10−3
110
2.658 × 10−3
2.289 × 10−3
6.097 × 10−4
1.465 × 10−3
7.034 × 10−4
1.174 × 10−3
1.847 × 10−3
1.313 × 10−3
2.153 × 10−3
2.123 × 10−3
115
2.559 × 10−3
1.095 × 10−3
1.563 × 10−3
1.396 × 10−3
1.015 × 10−3
1.761 × 10−3
1.763 × 10−3
2.600 × 10−3
6.319 × 10−4
2.219 × 10−3
120
3.091 × 10−3
8.920 × 10−4
1.714 × 10−3
2.552 × 10−3
1.046 × 10−3
1.323 × 10−3
1.613 × 10−3
1.649 × 10−3
1.095 × 10−3
1.420 × 10−3
125
4.141 × 10−3
9.756 × 10−4
2.292 × 10−3
1.578 × 10−3
1.291 × 10−3
1.883 × 10−3
2.197 × 10−3
2.216 × 10−3
2.410 × 10−3
6.858 × 10−4
130
1.838 × 10−3
1.957 × 10−3
1.774 × 10−3
2.732 × 10−3
1.407 × 10−3
2.310 × 10−3
2.093 × 10−3
2.104 × 10−3
2.416 × 10−3
1.802 × 10−3
==PAGE:137==
C.3 Results for all analyzers
131
Table C.65: DB as a function of scattering angle and energy transfer for Ef = 3.2 meV and dt = 0.1 ms, part 2.
∆E [meV]
2θ [°]
2.200000
2.600000
2.800000
3.200000
3.800000
4.500000
5.000000
5.600000
6.200000
6.800000
5
2.468 × 10−3
1.735 × 10−3
2.205 × 10−3
4.014 × 10−3
2.137 × 10−3
1.888 × 10−3
2.865 × 10−3
3.132 × 10−3
1.715 × 10−3
2.976 × 10−3
10
1.574 × 10−3
2.449 × 10−3
3.747 × 10−3
15
1.412 × 10−3
1.930 × 10−3
2.527 × 10−3
20
1.364 × 10−3
3.813 × 10−3
2.116 × 10−3
25
1.888 × 10−3
1.065 × 10−3
1.881 × 10−3
30
1.860 × 10−3
1.310 × 10−3
2.113 × 10−3
35
1.351 × 10−3
1.494 × 10−3
1.028 × 10−3
40
2.782 × 10−3
1.532 × 10−3
1.711 × 10−3
45
2.266 × 10−3
1.470 × 10−3
1.777 × 10−3
1.702 × 10−3
2.727 × 10−3
1.235 × 10−3
2.668 × 10−3
2.186 × 10−3
8.083 × 10−4
1.275 × 10−3
50
1.534 × 10−3
1.597 × 10−3
1.549 × 10−3
55
1.604 × 10−3
2.625 × 10−3
6.270 × 10−4
60
1.381 × 10−3
1.726 × 10−3
1.537 × 10−3
65
1.302 × 10−3
1.110 × 10−3
2.129 × 10−3
70
1.082 × 10−3
2.756 × 10−3
2.382 × 10−3
75
1.435 × 10−3
9.579 × 10−4
2.491 × 10−3
80
2.206 × 10−3
9.543 × 10−4
1.642 × 10−3
85
2.045 × 10−3
1.088 × 10−3
2.115 × 10−3
90
1.534 × 10−3
1.378 × 10−3
1.694 × 10−3
95
2.856 × 10−3
2.157 × 10−3
1.180 × 10−3
1.177 × 10−3
1.732 × 10−3
1.212 × 10−3
1.630 × 10−3
9.256 × 10−4
8.119 × 10−4
1.515 × 10−3
100
2.005 × 10−3
1.573 × 10−3
2.045 × 10−3
105
1.474 × 10−3
1.058 × 10−3
2.081 × 10−3
110
2.647 × 10−3
1.458 × 10−3
1.376 × 10−3
115
2.471 × 10−3
1.652 × 10−3
6.213 × 10−4
120
3.427 × 10−3
1.274 × 10−3
1.851 × 10−3
125
1.005 × 10−3
2.297 × 10−3
1.428 × 10−3
130
1.724 × 10−3
1.653 × 10−3
2.018 × 10−3
135
2.147 × 10−3
2.162 × 10−3
1.309 × 10−3
1.750 × 10−3
8.111 × 10−4
1.817 × 10−3
2.879 × 10−3
==PAGE:138==
C.3 Results for all analyzers
132
Table C.66: DB as a function of scattering angle and energy transfer for Ef = 3.2 meV and dt = 0.1 ms, part 3.
∆E [meV]
2θ [°]
9.500000
10.000000
10.600000
11.200000
11.800000
24.500000
25.000000
25.600000
26.200000
26.800000
5
3.685 × 10−3
2.496 × 10−3
1.549 × 10−3
1.886 × 10−3
2.397 × 10−3
2.030 × 10−3
4.905 × 10−3
2.460 × 10−3
3.391 × 10−3
3.972 × 10−3
45
2.550 × 10−3
1.543 × 10−3
2.061 × 10−3
2.524 × 10−3
7.085 × 10−4
5.032 × 10−3
2.211 × 10−3
3.027 × 10−3
3.669 × 10−3
3.017 × 10−3
95
1.069 × 10−3
2.833 × 10−3
2.066 × 10−3
1.766 × 10−3
8.096 × 10−4
1.690 × 10−3
3.191 × 10−3
2.420 × 10−3
2.624 × 10−3
3.945 × 10−3
135
1.954 × 10−3
1.931 × 10−3
1.721 × 10−3
1.369 × 10−3
2.405 × 10−3
3.684 × 10−3
5.111 × 10−3
3.489 × 10−3
3.679 × 10−3
4.816 × 10−3
==PAGE:139==
C.3 Results for all analyzers
133
Table C.67: DB as a function of scattering angle and energy transfer for Ef = 3.2 meV and dt = 0.1 ms, part 4.
∆E [meV]
2θ [°]
49.500000
50.000000
50.600000
51.200000
51.800000
5
7.685 × 10−3
6.077 × 10−3
7.688 × 10−3
8.548 × 10−3
7.864 × 10−3
45
7.076 × 10−3
6.467 × 10−3
5.287 × 10−3
1.271 × 10−2
3.399 × 10−3
95
6.554 × 10−3
8.546 × 10−3
4.881 × 10−3
6.375 × 10−3
5.138 × 10−3
135
7.819 × 10−3
5.816 × 10−3
2.510 × 10−3
2.310 × 10−3
6.355 × 10−3
==PAGE:140==
C.3 Results for all analyzers
134
Table C.68: DB as a function of scattering angle and energy transfer for Ef = 3.2 meV and dt = 0.2 ms, part 1.
∆E [meV]
2θ [°]
-0.500000
0.000000
0.500000
0.600000
1.000000
1.200000
1.500000
1.600000
1.800000
2.000000
5
1.905 × 10−3
1.693 × 10−3
1.075 × 10−3
1.521 × 10−3
6.710 × 10−4
1.111 × 10−3
1.399 × 10−3
1.071 × 10−3
2.290 × 10−3
1.013 × 10−3
10
3.785 × 10−3
2.652 × 10−3
9.277 × 10−3
3.007 × 10−3
1.728 × 10−3
3.639 × 10−3
1.297 × 10−3
2.443 × 10−3
3.079 × 10−3
2.096 × 10−3
15
2.396 × 10−3
5.897 × 10−4
8.154 × 10−4
1.256 × 10−3
5.316 × 10−4
1.975 × 10−3
1.572 × 10−3
9.672 × 10−4
1.525 × 10−3
9.806 × 10−4
20
5.468 × 10−3
1.254 × 10−2
3.314 × 10−3
1.043 × 10−3
3.444 × 10−3
1.789 × 10−3
3.454 × 10−3
3.224 × 10−3
8.928 × 10−4
25
1.276 × 10−3
2.091 × 10−3
7.864 × 10−4
1.477 × 10−3
1.262 × 10−3
2.529 × 10−3
1.643 × 10−3
1.756 × 10−3
1.551 × 10−3
2.052 × 10−3
30
2.260 × 10−3
5.220 × 10−3
2.440 × 10−3
1.082 × 10−3
5.109 × 10−3
2.055 × 10−3
1.436 × 10−3
4.464 × 10−3
2.159 × 10−3
35
1.635 × 10−3
9.580 × 10−4
6.388 × 10−4
8.264 × 10−4
1.191 × 10−3
1.461 × 10−3
9.975 × 10−4
1.012 × 10−3
1.632 × 10−3
1.880 × 10−3
40
4.800 × 10−3
1.066 × 10−3
5.851 × 10−3
3.782 × 10−3
1.138 × 10−3
3.325 × 10−3
1.773 × 10−3
1.999 × 10−3
2.364 × 10−3
1.937 × 10−3
45
2.625 × 10−3
1.835 × 10−3
1.506 × 10−3
9.502 × 10−4
8.558 × 10−4
1.367 × 10−3
1.012 × 10−3
9.370 × 10−4
1.185 × 10−3
1.755 × 10−3
50
1.771 × 10−3
1.394 × 10−3
7.353 × 10−4
1.424 × 10−3
1.576 × 10−3
1.160 × 10−3
1.359 × 10−3
1.254 × 10−3
1.610 × 10−3
9.255 × 10−4
55
2.182 × 10−3
1.587 × 10−3
6.211 × 10−4
1.070 × 10−3
9.834 × 10−4
1.397 × 10−3
1.110 × 10−3
1.646 × 10−3
1.333 × 10−3
1.056 × 10−3
60
2.102 × 10−3
9.093 × 10−4
5.238 × 10−4
8.776 × 10−4
1.975 × 10−3
1.220 × 10−3
7.144 × 10−4
1.531 × 10−3
1.280 × 10−3
1.845 × 10−3
65
1.613 × 10−3
1.615 × 10−3
1.904 × 10−3
7.689 × 10−4
1.769 × 10−3
1.933 × 10−3
1.864 × 10−3
1.469 × 10−3
1.366 × 10−3
2.744 × 10−3
70
1.566 × 10−3
1.748 × 10−3
1.137 × 10−3
1.141 × 10−3
9.645 × 10−4
1.658 × 10−3
1.100 × 10−3
1.450 × 10−3
1.168 × 10−3
1.388 × 10−3
75
1.736 × 10−3
1.014 × 10−3
8.378 × 10−4
1.248 × 10−3
1.178 × 10−3
1.733 × 10−3
1.692 × 10−3
1.264 × 10−3
1.295 × 10−3
1.047 × 10−3
80
1.054 × 10−3
7.908 × 10−4
1.887 × 10−3
1.145 × 10−3
1.122 × 10−3
1.402 × 10−3
5.981 × 10−4
1.012 × 10−3
1.219 × 10−3
1.782 × 10−3
85
2.202 × 10−3
1.321 × 10−3
1.605 × 10−3
1.074 × 10−3
1.155 × 10−3
2.498 × 10−3
1.216 × 10−3
1.002 × 10−3
2.594 × 10−3
1.842 × 10−3
90
9.882 × 10−4
9.614 × 10−4
1.186 × 10−3
1.089 × 10−3
1.597 × 10−3
1.486 × 10−3
2.105 × 10−3
1.079 × 10−3
2.015 × 10−3
1.083 × 10−3
95
1.509 × 10−3
1.836 × 10−3
1.101 × 10−3
1.179 × 10−3
1.914 × 10−3
1.094 × 10−3
1.282 × 10−3
1.726 × 10−3
2.295 × 10−3
1.685 × 10−3
100
1.926 × 10−3
1.469 × 10−3
1.214 × 10−3
4.803 × 10−4
7.419 × 10−4
2.630 × 10−3
1.112 × 10−3
1.342 × 10−3
1.904 × 10−3
2.150 × 10−3
105
2.110 × 10−3
9.153 × 10−4
9.140 × 10−4
4.326 × 10−4
7.366 × 10−4
1.072 × 10−3
2.292 × 10−3
1.386 × 10−3
1.041 × 10−3
1.291 × 10−3
110
1.319 × 10−3
1.518 × 10−3
8.361 × 10−4
1.024 × 10−3
1.318 × 10−3
1.563 × 10−3
2.545 × 10−3
1.645 × 10−3
1.268 × 10−3
1.696 × 10−3
115
1.665 × 10−3
1.061 × 10−3
1.514 × 10−3
1.213 × 10−3
7.995 × 10−4
1.310 × 10−3
1.738 × 10−3
1.425 × 10−3
9.753 × 10−4
1.785 × 10−3
120
1.151 × 10−3
1.127 × 10−3
1.438 × 10−3
5.084 × 10−4
1.325 × 10−3
1.326 × 10−3
1.482 × 10−3
9.409 × 10−4
1.169 × 10−3
2.362 × 10−3
125
1.394 × 10−3
1.483 × 10−3
1.416 × 10−3
1.577 × 10−3
9.156 × 10−4
1.750 × 10−3
1.277 × 10−3
1.850 × 10−3
1.847 × 10−3
1.657 × 10−3
130
2.112 × 10−3
1.824 × 10−3
9.622 × 10−4
1.471 × 10−3
6.411 × 10−4
1.310 × 10−3
9.881 × 10−4
1.398 × 10−3
9.990 × 10−4
1.374 × 10−3
==PAGE:141==
C.3 Results for all analyzers
135
Table C.69: DB as a function of scattering angle and energy transfer for Ef = 3.2 meV and dt = 0.2 ms, part 2.
∆E [meV]
2θ [°]
2.200000
2.600000
2.800000
3.200000
3.800000
4.500000
5.000000
5.600000
6.200000
6.800000
5
2.353 × 10−3
1.989 × 10−3
2.385 × 10−3
2.051 × 10−3
1.114 × 10−3
2.958 × 10−3
1.493 × 10−3
4.271 × 10−4
2.097 × 10−3
1.226 × 10−3
10
1.758 × 10−3
2.732 × 10−3
2.259 × 10−3
15
1.812 × 10−3
1.862 × 10−3
1.589 × 10−3
20
2.182 × 10−3
3.150 × 10−3
1.230 × 10−3
25
2.140 × 10−3
1.382 × 10−3
1.906 × 10−3
30
1.400 × 10−3
2.556 × 10−3
1.552 × 10−3
35
1.600 × 10−3
2.143 × 10−3
1.637 × 10−3
40
1.848 × 10−3
2.660 × 10−3
1.289 × 10−3
45
2.239 × 10−3
1.000 × 10−3
1.075 × 10−3
1.121 × 10−3
8.910 × 10−4
1.207 × 10−3
7.162 × 10−4
4.537 × 10−4
7.535 × 10−4
1.384 × 10−3
50
1.400 × 10−3
1.861 × 10−3
1.216 × 10−3
55
1.030 × 10−3
1.523 × 10−3
5.331 × 10−4
60
2.014 × 10−3
1.747 × 10−3
1.531 × 10−3
65
1.220 × 10−3
1.823 × 10−3
1.463 × 10−3
70
1.299 × 10−3
1.947 × 10−3
1.518 × 10−3
75
1.843 × 10−3
1.853 × 10−3
9.153 × 10−4
80
2.145 × 10−3
2.565 × 10−3
1.673 × 10−3
85
1.863 × 10−3
1.925 × 10−3
1.252 × 10−3
90
2.180 × 10−3
1.702 × 10−3
1.729 × 10−3
95
1.363 × 10−3
2.206 × 10−3
1.512 × 10−3
1.741 × 10−3
1.845 × 10−3
9.293 × 10−4
6.057 × 10−4
7.824 × 10−4
2.040 × 10−3
1.103 × 10−3
100
2.240 × 10−3
2.077 × 10−3
1.896 × 10−3
105
7.684 × 10−4
2.077 × 10−3
1.546 × 10−3
110
1.373 × 10−3
1.717 × 10−3
1.098 × 10−3
115
6.956 × 10−4
1.925 × 10−3
2.033 × 10−3
120
1.507 × 10−3
1.144 × 10−3
1.504 × 10−3
125
1.849 × 10−3
2.001 × 10−3
2.343 × 10−3
130
1.139 × 10−3
1.567 × 10−3
1.350 × 10−3
135
1.182 × 10−3
8.384 × 10−4
1.668 × 10−3
3.390 × 10−4
6.433 × 10−4
1.094 × 10−3
1.139 × 10−3
==PAGE:142==
C.3 Results for all analyzers
136
Table C.70: DB as a function of scattering angle and energy transfer for Ef = 3.2 meV and dt = 0.2 ms, part 3.
∆E [meV]
2θ [°]
9.500000
10.000000
10.600000
11.200000
11.800000
24.500000
25.000000
25.600000
26.200000
26.800000
5
7.632 × 10−4
1.426 × 10−3
1.532 × 10−3
6.025 × 10−4
9.605 × 10−4
1.191 × 10−3
2.605 × 10−3
1.723 × 10−3
1.310 × 10−3
2.633 × 10−3
45
6.284 × 10−4
1.024 × 10−3
1.211 × 10−3
6.813 × 10−4
1.317 × 10−3
1.308 × 10−3
2.204 × 10−3
1.832 × 10−3
6.867 × 10−4
2.374 × 10−3
95
5.396 × 10−4
1.061 × 10−3
8.172 × 10−4
6.640 × 10−4
7.423 × 10−4
7.383 × 10−4
9.224 × 10−4
7.347 × 10−4
2.135 × 10−3
1.464 × 10−3
135
2.883 × 10−4
1.172 × 10−3
1.559 × 10−3
9.760 × 10−4
4.539 × 10−4
1.322 × 10−3
1.643 × 10−3
1.423 × 10−3
2.137 × 10−3
1.192 × 10−3
==PAGE:143==
C.3 Results for all analyzers
137
Table C.71: DB as a function of scattering angle and energy transfer for Ef = 3.2 meV and dt = 0.2 ms, part 4.
∆E [meV]
2θ [°]
49.500000
50.000000
50.600000
51.200000
51.800000
5
8.503 × 10−3
1.184 × 10−2
1.215 × 10−2
6.702 × 10−3
8.121 × 10−3
45
1.787 × 10−3
3.895 × 10−3
3.391 × 10−3
3.721 × 10−3
6.964 × 10−3
95
2.786 × 10−3
3.178 × 10−3
2.547 × 10−3
3.068 × 10−3
8.421 × 10−4
135
1.897 × 10−3
4.212 × 10−3
2.069 × 10−3
2.469 × 10−3
1.792 × 10−3
==PAGE:144==
C.3 Results for all analyzers
138
Table C.72: DB as a function of scattering angle and energy transfer for Ef = 3.2 meV and dt = 0.5 ms, part 1.
∆E [meV]
2θ [°]
-0.500000
0.000000
0.500000
0.600000
1.000000
1.200000
1.500000
1.600000
1.800000
2.000000
5
1.418 × 10−3
8.342 × 10−4
8.390 × 10−4
5.159 × 10−4
6.736 × 10−4
1.313 × 10−3
1.025 × 10−3
1.138 × 10−3
1.734 × 10−3
1.125 × 10−3
10
3.388 × 10−3
3.556 × 10−3
8.746 × 10−3
4.704 × 10−3
6.998 × 10−4
3.226 × 10−3
1.006 × 10−3
1.421 × 10−3
2.239 × 10−3
9.183 × 10−4
15
1.471 × 10−3
9.980 × 10−4
3.751 × 10−4
1.038 × 10−3
8.368 × 10−4
7.063 × 10−4
8.227 × 10−4
8.683 × 10−4
9.498 × 10−4
7.984 × 10−4
20
2.386 × 10−3
2.784 × 10−3
2.657 × 10−3
4.742 × 10−4
4.617 × 10−3
5.815 × 10−4
1.288 × 10−3
3.651 × 10−3
1.001 × 10−3
25
1.334 × 10−3
1.082 × 10−3
5.688 × 10−4
8.414 × 10−4
4.269 × 10−4
8.463 × 10−4
8.293 × 10−4
7.522 × 10−4
7.079 × 10−4
7.145 × 10−4
30
3.084 × 10−3
7.268 × 10−3
1.924 × 10−3
2.422 × 10−4
2.561 × 10−3
6.486 × 10−4
1.742 × 10−3
3.408 × 10−3
1.090 × 10−3
35
1.594 × 10−3
6.296 × 10−4
8.550 × 10−4
6.709 × 10−4
2.506 × 10−4
5.809 × 10−4
5.842 × 10−4
1.461 × 10−3
1.097 × 10−3
4.784 × 10−4
40
2.102 × 10−3
5.027 × 10−3
7.304 × 10−3
4.473 × 10−3
6.284 × 10−4
2.417 × 10−3
7.488 × 10−4
2.230 × 10−3
4.332 × 10−3
1.038 × 10−3
45
1.350 × 10−3
1.152 × 10−3
5.617 × 10−4
3.971 × 10−4
6.789 × 10−4
1.049 × 10−3
6.753 × 10−4
6.952 × 10−4
6.447 × 10−4
1.145 × 10−3
50
1.556 × 10−3
6.913 × 10−4
1.064 × 10−3
6.915 × 10−4
5.726 × 10−4
7.137 × 10−4
4.304 × 10−4
1.004 × 10−3
7.985 × 10−4
1.007 × 10−3
55
1.813 × 10−3
6.152 × 10−4
7.758 × 10−4
5.505 × 10−4
6.815 × 10−4
1.133 × 10−3
4.993 × 10−4
7.046 × 10−4
1.068 × 10−3
1.208 × 10−3
60
2.365 × 10−3
9.129 × 10−4
3.058 × 10−4
5.304 × 10−4
7.579 × 10−4
6.464 × 10−4
6.462 × 10−4
1.022 × 10−3
1.170 × 10−3
8.853 × 10−4
65
1.555 × 10−3
7.161 × 10−4
6.749 × 10−4
9.318 × 10−4
6.742 × 10−4
6.839 × 10−4
5.974 × 10−4
9.282 × 10−4
1.026 × 10−3
7.333 × 10−4
70
9.465 × 10−4
8.412 × 10−4
8.249 × 10−4
5.961 × 10−4
6.677 × 10−4
4.864 × 10−4
7.163 × 10−4
7.495 × 10−4
5.538 × 10−4
7.971 × 10−4
75
2.288 × 10−3
4.816 × 10−4
6.443 × 10−4
7.056 × 10−4
6.668 × 10−4
5.698 × 10−4
7.404 × 10−4
8.002 × 10−4
7.890 × 10−4
9.504 × 10−4
80
1.454 × 10−3
7.959 × 10−4
1.660 × 10−4
6.731 × 10−4
4.081 × 10−4
4.640 × 10−4
6.468 × 10−4
9.282 × 10−4
9.858 × 10−4
8.253 × 10−4
85
1.182 × 10−3
8.370 × 10−4
5.848 × 10−4
5.111 × 10−4
7.150 × 10−4
4.640 × 10−4
7.005 × 10−4
1.230 × 10−3
7.413 × 10−4
9.682 × 10−4
90
1.332 × 10−3
4.565 × 10−4
6.779 × 10−4
5.067 × 10−4
5.381 × 10−4
9.086 × 10−4
7.173 × 10−4
9.299 × 10−4
5.206 × 10−4
9.855 × 10−4
95
1.840 × 10−3
9.613 × 10−4
7.462 × 10−4
7.208 × 10−4
9.246 × 10−4
5.597 × 10−4
1.057 × 10−3
9.946 × 10−4
1.167 × 10−3
7.316 × 10−4
100
1.461 × 10−3
9.214 × 10−4
8.271 × 10−4
3.688 × 10−4
9.659 × 10−4
8.585 × 10−4
8.177 × 10−4
8.143 × 10−4
8.138 × 10−4
8.796 × 10−4
105
1.370 × 10−3
9.603 × 10−4
6.286 × 10−4
6.508 × 10−4
6.834 × 10−4
5.404 × 10−4
5.594 × 10−4
8.593 × 10−4
1.306 × 10−3
1.007 × 10−3
110
1.492 × 10−3
1.098 × 10−3
1.014 × 10−3
3.924 × 10−4
1.007 × 10−3
7.425 × 10−4
5.495 × 10−4
8.986 × 10−4
8.049 × 10−4
1.239 × 10−3
115
1.771 × 10−3
7.409 × 10−4
5.623 × 10−4
3.139 × 10−4
8.132 × 10−4
6.643 × 10−4
5.826 × 10−4
6.559 × 10−4
6.288 × 10−4
8.440 × 10−4
120
2.037 × 10−3
8.668 × 10−4
7.182 × 10−4
5.754 × 10−4
7.780 × 10−4
4.043 × 10−4
8.824 × 10−4
9.425 × 10−4
6.437 × 10−4
1.073 × 10−3
125
1.543 × 10−3
6.648 × 10−4
1.548 × 10−4
8.812 × 10−4
2.178 × 10−4
7.621 × 10−4
1.002 × 10−3
1.110 × 10−3
1.102 × 10−3
7.025 × 10−4
130
1.649 × 10−3
7.704 × 10−4
2.500 × 10−4
4.013 × 10−4
2.362 × 10−4
4.771 × 10−4
7.753 × 10−4
5.778 × 10−4
8.410 × 10−4
9.492 × 10−4
==PAGE:145==
C.3 Results for all analyzers
139
Table C.73: DB as a function of scattering angle and energy transfer for Ef = 3.2 meV and dt = 0.5 ms, part 2.
∆E [meV]
2θ [°]
2.200000
2.600000
2.800000
3.200000
3.800000
4.500000
5.000000
5.600000
6.200000
6.800000
5
1.199 × 10−3
8.747 × 10−4
1.399 × 10−3
1.171 × 10−3
6.964 × 10−4
1.063 × 10−3
1.496 × 10−3
9.651 × 10−4
8.763 × 10−4
3.400 × 10−4
10
1.052 × 10−3
8.386 × 10−4
7.201 × 10−4
15
1.057 × 10−3
9.450 × 10−4
9.941 × 10−4
20
8.443 × 10−4
5.656 × 10−4
1.120 × 10−3
25
1.236 × 10−3
1.039 × 10−3
1.176 × 10−3
30
9.312 × 10−4
6.215 × 10−4
9.436 × 10−4
35
6.985 × 10−4
7.061 × 10−4
1.043 × 10−3
40
1.075 × 10−3
1.068 × 10−3
1.165 × 10−3
45
7.088 × 10−4
1.181 × 10−3
5.406 × 10−4
7.494 × 10−4
7.241 × 10−4
5.563 × 10−4
6.689 × 10−4
6.289 × 10−4
3.625 × 10−4
3.122 × 10−4
50
7.789 × 10−4
3.393 × 10−4
7.470 × 10−4
55
1.234 × 10−3
1.112 × 10−3
7.387 × 10−4
60
9.068 × 10−4
8.418 × 10−4
8.935 × 10−4
65
5.471 × 10−4
1.244 × 10−3
6.210 × 10−4
70
1.080 × 10−3
1.070 × 10−3
8.836 × 10−4
75
6.699 × 10−4
9.455 × 10−4
8.483 × 10−4
80
7.936 × 10−4
8.754 × 10−4
8.475 × 10−4
85
1.344 × 10−3
7.510 × 10−4
1.123 × 10−3
90
6.080 × 10−4
9.202 × 10−4
1.002 × 10−3
95
8.795 × 10−4
1.042 × 10−3
1.026 × 10−3
5.355 × 10−4
4.927 × 10−4
4.026 × 10−4
1.812 × 10−4
5.047 × 10−4
5.137 × 10−4
3.011 × 10−4
100
1.294 × 10−3
1.131 × 10−3
9.814 × 10−4
105
1.072 × 10−3
9.325 × 10−4
4.835 × 10−4
110
8.826 × 10−4
1.078 × 10−3
6.651 × 10−4
115
1.044 × 10−3
7.441 × 10−4
6.439 × 10−4
120
1.236 × 10−3
7.099 × 10−4
1.144 × 10−3
125
6.637 × 10−4
1.079 × 10−3
7.030 × 10−4
130
9.681 × 10−4
7.579 × 10−4
7.293 × 10−4
135
5.085 × 10−4
1.007 × 10−3
3.173 × 10−4
4.787 × 10−4
2.123 × 10−4
3.337 × 10−4
3.341 × 10−4
==PAGE:146==
C.3 Results for all analyzers
140
Table C.74: DB as a function of scattering angle and energy transfer for Ef = 3.2 meV and dt = 0.5 ms, part 3.
∆E [meV]
2θ [°]
9.500000
10.000000
10.600000
11.200000
11.800000
24.500000
25.000000
25.600000
26.200000
26.800000
5
9.980 × 10−4
1.358 × 10−3
1.118 × 10−3
1.303 × 10−3
1.171 × 10−3
4.339 × 10−3
5.301 × 10−3
5.141 × 10−3
5.938 × 10−3
6.263 × 10−3
45
5.289 × 10−4
5.242 × 10−4
5.162 × 10−4
4.543 × 10−4
2.951 × 10−4
6.608 × 10−4
4.226 × 10−4
5.959 × 10−4
7.004 × 10−4
1.009 × 10−3
95
2.246 × 10−4
3.603 × 10−4
3.840 × 10−4
2.231 × 10−4
3.102 × 10−4
5.626 × 10−4
7.854 × 10−4
5.789 × 10−4
6.578 × 10−4
8.439 × 10−4
135
4.491 × 10−4
8.394 × 10−4
4.726 × 10−4
4.580 × 10−4
3.928 × 10−4
1.086 × 10−3
7.803 × 10−4
5.464 × 10−4
5.503 × 10−4
6.643 × 10−4
==PAGE:147==
C.3 Results for all analyzers
141
Table C.75: DB as a function of scattering angle and energy transfer for Ef = 3.2 meV and dt = 0.5 ms, part 4.
∆E [meV]
2θ [°]
49.500000
50.000000
50.600000
51.200000
51.800000
5
3.455 × 10−2
2.895 × 10−2
2.868 × 10−2
3.452 × 10−2
3.747 × 10−2
45
2.944 × 10−3
1.734 × 10−3
1.843 × 10−3
3.955 × 10−3
1.307 × 10−3
95
5.895 × 10−4
2.031 × 10−3
4.773 × 10−4
2.011 × 10−3
2.074 × 10−3
135
2.307 × 10−3
3.598 × 10−3
2.252 × 10−3
4.406 × 10−3
2.513 × 10−3
==PAGE:148==
C.3 Results for all analyzers
142
C.3.5 2.7meV Analyzer
Table C.76: DB as a function of scattering angle and energy transfer for Ef = 2.7 meV and dt = 0.2 ms, part 1.
∆E [meV]
2θ [°]
0.000000
0.500000
1.000000
1.100000
1.500000
1.700000
2.000000
2.100000
2.300000
2.500000
5
2.108 × 10−3
1.918 × 10−3
9.729 × 10−4
1.789 × 10−3
2.898 × 10−3
1.505 × 10−3
2.217 × 10−3
1.432 × 10−3
1.677 × 10−3
2.837 × 10−3
10
5.687 × 10−3
3.667 × 10−3
3.938 × 10−3
2.270 × 10−3
1.575 × 10−3
3.233 × 10−3
2.392 × 10−3
3.063 × 10−3
9.994 × 10−4
2.067 × 10−3
15
1.513 × 10−3
1.430 × 10−3
1.214 × 10−3
1.453 × 10−3
2.544 × 10−3
6.869 × 10−4
3.618 × 10−3
2.266 × 10−3
1.738 × 10−3
1.287 × 10−3
20
3.944 × 10−3
1.073 × 10−2
2.184 × 10−3
1.827 × 10−3
3.174 × 10−3
1.181 × 10−3
7.215 × 10−4
4.154 × 10−3
1.571 × 10−3
25
2.587 × 10−3
1.575 × 10−3
9.345 × 10−4
1.631 × 10−3
2.249 × 10−3
1.645 × 10−3
1.481 × 10−3
1.595 × 10−3
1.598 × 10−3
2.964 × 10−3
30
9.836 × 10−3
1.340 × 10−2
3.963 × 10−3
2.188 × 10−3
4.849 × 10−3
1.089 × 10−3
3.221 × 10−3
2.748 × 10−3
1.993 × 10−3
35
2.876 × 10−3
1.534 × 10−3
9.045 × 10−4
1.679 × 10−3
7.140 × 10−4
1.608 × 10−3
1.699 × 10−3
2.592 × 10−3
2.011 × 10−3
2.300 × 10−3
40
8.491 × 10−3
3.265 × 10−3
6.644 × 10−3
8.895 × 10−3
1.643 × 10−3
5.466 × 10−3
2.085 × 10−3
2.490 × 10−3
6.288 × 10−3
2.285 × 10−3
45
2.208 × 10−3
1.404 × 10−3
1.742 × 10−3
1.741 × 10−3
3.290 × 10−4
1.632 × 10−3
2.451 × 10−3
7.497 × 10−4
2.103 × 10−3
1.563 × 10−3
50
4.064 × 10−3
1.687 × 10−3
1.558 × 10−3
2.458 × 10−3
1.663 × 10−3
1.061 × 10−3
1.849 × 10−3
1.425 × 10−3
1.727 × 10−3
1.542 × 10−3
55
2.420 × 10−3
1.068 × 10−3
1.498 × 10−3
1.373 × 10−3
1.584 × 10−3
1.384 × 10−3
1.016 × 10−3
1.553 × 10−3
1.589 × 10−3
2.926 × 10−3
60
2.382 × 10−3
1.430 × 10−3
2.407 × 10−3
1.710 × 10−3
2.049 × 10−3
1.260 × 10−3
2.577 × 10−3
2.284 × 10−3
1.414 × 10−3
1.828 × 10−3
65
2.763 × 10−3
1.603 × 10−3
1.467 × 10−3
1.936 × 10−3
3.794 × 10−4
2.176 × 10−3
2.639 × 10−3
1.294 × 10−3
2.086 × 10−3
2.561 × 10−3
70
1.538 × 10−3
7.614 × 10−4
1.016 × 10−3
1.273 × 10−3
1.516 × 10−3
2.254 × 10−3
1.629 × 10−3
1.882 × 10−3
1.520 × 10−3
1.628 × 10−3
75
1.963 × 10−3
2.636 × 10−3
1.843 × 10−3
5.439 × 10−4
1.512 × 10−3
1.159 × 10−3
1.066 × 10−3
9.931 × 10−4
2.630 × 10−3
2.175 × 10−3
80
2.304 × 10−3
1.354 × 10−3
1.963 × 10−3
8.729 × 10−4
2.761 × 10−3
3.053 × 10−3
9.266 × 10−4
1.091 × 10−3
1.635 × 10−3
1.127 × 10−3
85
3.266 × 10−3
1.771 × 10−3
1.835 × 10−3
6.449 × 10−4
1.795 × 10−3
2.830 × 10−3
1.359 × 10−3
1.234 × 10−3
1.785 × 10−3
2.164 × 10−3
90
1.983 × 10−3
2.221 × 10−3
1.562 × 10−3
1.127 × 10−3
1.345 × 10−3
1.431 × 10−3
1.583 × 10−3
1.565 × 10−3
1.721 × 10−3
1.242 × 10−3
95
1.721 × 10−3
1.531 × 10−3
1.563 × 10−3
1.721 × 10−3
1.459 × 10−3
2.804 × 10−3
1.807 × 10−3
1.747 × 10−3
1.924 × 10−3
2.381 × 10−3
100
1.211 × 10−3
1.334 × 10−3
1.126 × 10−3
8.485 × 10−4
8.948 × 10−4
1.612 × 10−3
1.926 × 10−3
1.495 × 10−3
2.078 × 10−3
1.427 × 10−3
105
4.055 × 10−3
1.527 × 10−3
2.346 × 10−3
2.251 × 10−3
1.812 × 10−3
1.185 × 10−3
6.888 × 10−4
1.424 × 10−3
2.028 × 10−3
3.165 × 10−3
110
2.351 × 10−3
9.549 × 10−4
1.188 × 10−3
1.144 × 10−3
1.147 × 10−3
2.205 × 10−3
2.193 × 10−3
1.069 × 10−3
9.010 × 10−4
2.410 × 10−3
115
2.224 × 10−3
2.150 × 10−3
1.200 × 10−3
1.100 × 10−3
1.451 × 10−3
1.138 × 10−3
1.134 × 10−3
1.446 × 10−3
2.164 × 10−3
1.828 × 10−3
120
1.287 × 10−3
2.919 × 10−3
2.103 × 10−3
1.927 × 10−3
1.915 × 10−3
1.024 × 10−3
1.433 × 10−3
1.517 × 10−3
1.629 × 10−3
1.906 × 10−3
125
3.626 × 10−3
2.516 × 10−3
1.703 × 10−3
1.598 × 10−3
1.309 × 10−3
1.270 × 10−3
1.989 × 10−3
1.905 × 10−3
1.542 × 10−3
1.235 × 10−3
130
3.136 × 10−3
1.656 × 10−3
2.963 × 10−3
8.908 × 10−4
1.013 × 10−3
1.125 × 10−3
1.370 × 10−3
1.851 × 10−3
1.731 × 10−3
1.656 × 10−3
==PAGE:149==
C.3 Results for all analyzers
143
Table C.77: DB as a function of scattering angle and energy transfer for Ef = 2.7 meV and dt = 0.2 ms, part 2.
∆E [meV]
2θ [°]
2.700000
3.100000
3.300000
3.700000
4.300000
5.000000
5.500000
6.100000
6.700000
7.300000
5
2.802 × 10−3
2.775 × 10−3
3.773 × 10−3
2.055 × 10−3
1.252 × 10−3
1.844 × 10−3
1.166 × 10−3
1.046 × 10−3
1.697 × 10−3
2.509 × 10−3
10
1.997 × 10−3
15
2.168 × 10−3
20
2.344 × 10−3
25
3.159 × 10−3
30
1.654 × 10−3
35
7.907 × 10−4
40
1.654 × 10−3
45
3.164 × 10−3
2.212 × 10−3
2.439 × 10−3
1.923 × 10−3
2.061 × 10−3
1.602 × 10−3
9.762 × 10−4
7.330 × 10−4
3.125 × 10−3
1.045 × 10−3
50
1.311 × 10−3
55
2.335 × 10−3
60
1.778 × 10−3
65
2.231 × 10−3
70
1.767 × 10−3
75
1.613 × 10−3
80
1.916 × 10−3
85
1.938 × 10−3
90
2.009 × 10−3
95
1.499 × 10−3
2.526 × 10−3
1.600 × 10−3
1.813 × 10−3
1.102 × 10−3
1.104 × 10−3
7.714 × 10−4
6.869 × 10−4
9.888 × 10−4
2.030 × 10−3
100
2.232 × 10−3
105
2.283 × 10−3
110
2.331 × 10−3
115
1.282 × 10−3
120
2.321 × 10−3
125
1.737 × 10−3
130
1.718 × 10−3
135
2.269 × 10−3
1.911 × 10−3
2.645 × 10−3
2.288 × 10−3
1.445 × 10−3
1.186 × 10−3
1.184 × 10−3
9.149 × 10−4
1.657 × 10−3
==PAGE:150==
C.3 Results for all analyzers
144
Table C.78: DB as a function of scattering angle and energy transfer for Ef = 2.7 meV and dt = 0.2 ms, part 3.
∆E [meV]
2θ [°]
10.000000
10.500000
11.100000
11.700000
12.300000
25.000000
25.500000
26.100000
26.700000
27.300000
5
1.599 × 10−3
6.951 × 10−4
1.358 × 10−3
1.766 × 10−3
7.399 × 10−4
1.489 × 10−3
3.076 × 10−3
2.880 × 10−3
2.964 × 10−3
2.982 × 10−3
45
7.954 × 10−4
1.395 × 10−3
1.313 × 10−3
8.854 × 10−4
5.495 × 10−4
2.781 × 10−3
7.829 × 10−4
1.205 × 10−3
1.385 × 10−3
3.907 × 10−3
95
8.194 × 10−4
1.147 × 10−3
1.029 × 10−3
6.398 × 10−4
7.494 × 10−4
2.277 × 10−3
1.720 × 10−3
3.406 × 10−3
1.449 × 10−3
1.907 × 10−3
135
1.414 × 10−3
7.164 × 10−4
8.418 × 10−4
8.184 × 10−4
9.374 × 10−4
1.388 × 10−3
2.298 × 10−3
2.367 × 10−3
1.253 × 10−3
2.392 × 10−3
==PAGE:151==
C.3 Results for all analyzers
145
Table C.79: DB as a function of scattering angle and energy transfer for Ef = 2.7 meV and dt = 0.2 ms, part 4.
∆E [meV]
2θ [°]
50.000000
50.500000
51.100000
51.700000
52.300000
5
7.214 × 10−3
8.531 × 10−3
1.283 × 10−2
9.401 × 10−3
1.218 × 10−2
45
1.489 × 10−3
5.320 × 10−3
2.605 × 10−3
4.477 × 10−3
5.071 × 10−3
95
2.399 × 10−3
5.471 × 10−3
4.790 × 10−3
2.870 × 10−3
1.824 × 10−3
135
3.987 × 10−3
3.752 × 10−3
1.862 × 10−3
4.370 × 10−3
3.534 × 10−3
==PAGE:152==
Bibliography
146
Bibliography
[1]
The Nobel Prize in Physics 1994 - Elastic and Inelastic neutron scattering. [Online]. Available:
https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/uncategorized/the- nobel- prize- in- physics-
1994/.
[2]
R. Toft-Petersen, G. S. Tucker, L. Whitelegg, et al., “BIFROST—An indirect geometry cold neu-
tron spectrometer at the European Spallation Source,” Review of Scientific Instruments, vol. 96,
no. 4, Apr. 2025, issn: 10897623. doi: 10.1063/5.0258847/3345422. [Online]. Available: /aip/
rsi/article/96/4/043904/3345422/BIFROST-An-indirect-geometry-cold-neutron.
[3]
K. H. Andersen, D. N. Argyriou, A. J. Jackson, et al., “The instrument suite of the European
Spallation Source,” Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research Section A: Accelerators,
Spectrometers, Detectors and Associated Equipment, vol. 957, p. 163 402, Mar. 2020, issn: 0168-
9002. doi: 10.1016/J.NIMA.2020.163402.
[4]
K. Lefmann, “Neutron Scattering: Theory, Instrumentation, and Simulation,” KU, Copenhagen
University, Tech. Rep., 2012.
[5]
P. K. Willendrup and K. Lefmann, “McStas (i): Introduction, use, and basic principles for ray-
tracing simulations,” Journal of Neutron Research, vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 1–16, 2020, issn: 14772655.
doi: 10.3233/JNR-190108. [Online]. Available: https://scholar.google.com/scholar_url?
url=https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/pdf/10.3233/JNR-190108&hl=en&sa=T&oi=ucasa&
ct=ufr&ei=Z5VyaNqkIYOuieoPy5rs-A8&scisig=AAZF9b9C0W4_OrlCq12BqbQqP5yA.
[6]
N. L. Amin, J. Hoff-Møller, and I. S. Støvring, “Ray-tracing simulation of phonon scattering at
the BIFROST spectrometer at the European Spallation Source,” Ph.D. dissertation, DTU, 2022.
[Online]. Available: https://findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/62ab0f848231c41d0e3d7b13.
[7]
S. H. Simon, “The Oxford Solid State Basics,” p. 290, 2013. [Online]. Available: https://books.
google.com/books/about/The_Oxford_Solid_State_Basics.html?id=QI8jLeTOBAsC.
[8]
F. Mezei, “The Raison d’Etre of Long Pulse Spallation Sources,” Tech. Rep., 1997.
[9]
F. Mezei, “New perspectives from new generations of neutron sources,” Comptes Rendus Physique,
vol. 8, no. 7-8, pp. 909–920, Sep. 2007, issn: 1631-0705. doi: 10.1016/J.CRHY.2007.10.003. [On-
line]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1631070507002496.
[10]
R. Garoby, H. Danared, I. Alonso, et al., The European Spallation Source Design, Jan. 2018. doi:
10.1088/1402-4896/aa9bff.
[11]
P. G. Freeman, J. O. Birk, M. Markó, et al., “CAMEA ESS - The Continuous Angle Multi-
Energy Analysis Indirect Geometry Spectrometer for the European Spallation Source,” EPJ Web
of Conferences, vol. 83, Jun. 2014. doi: 10.1051/epjconf/20158303005. [Online]. Available:
http://arxiv.org/abs/1406.5945%20http://dx.doi.org/10.1051/epjconf/20158303005.
[12]
J. Lass, H. Jacobsen, K. M. Krighaar, et al., “Commissioning of the novel Continuous Angle
Multi-energy Analysis spectrometer at the Paul Scherrer Institut,” Review of Scientific Instru-
ments, vol. 94, no. 2, p. 23 302, Feb. 2023, issn: 10897623. doi: 10.1063/5.0128226/2869204.
[Online]. Available: /aip/rsi/article/94/2/023302/2869204/Commissioning-of-the-novel-
Continuous-Angle-Multi.
[13]
W. R. Busing and H. A. Levy, “Angle calculations for 3- and 4-circle X-ray and neutron diffrac-
tometers,” urn:issn:0365-110X, vol. 22, no. 4, pp. 457–464, Apr. 1967, issn: 0365-110X. doi:
10 . 1107 / S0365110X67000970. [Online]. Available: https : / / journals . iucr . org / paper ?
a05492%20https://journals.iucr.org/q/issues/1967/04/00/a05492/.
[14]
M. J. Cooper and R. Nathans, “The resolution function in neutron diffractometry. I. The resolution
function of a neutron diffractometer and its application to phonon measurements,” Acta Cryst.,
p. 357, 1967.
==PAGE:153==
Bibliography
147
[15]
G. Eckold and O. Sobolev, “Analytical approach to the 4D-resolution function of three axes
neutron spectrometers with focussing monochromators and analysers,” Nuclear Instruments and
Methods in Physics Research Section A: Accelerators, Spectrometers, Detectors and Associated
Equipment, vol. 752, pp. 54–64, Jul. 2014, issn: 0168-9002. doi: 10.1016/J.NIMA.2014.03.019.
[16]
N. Violini, J. Voigt, S. Pasini, and T. Brückel, “A method to compute the covariance matrix
of wavevector-energy transfer for neutron time-of-flight spectrometers,” Nuclear Instruments and
Methods in Physics Research Section A: Accelerators, Spectrometers, Detectors and Associated
Equipment, vol. 736, pp. 31–39, Feb. 2014, issn: 0168-9002. doi: 10 . 1016 / J . NIMA . 2013 .
10 . 042. [Online]. Available: https : / / www . sciencedirect . com / science / article / pii /
S016890021301423X#bbib1.
[17]
A. D. Stoica, “On the resolution of slow-neutron spectrometers. I. A general method to calculate
resolution functions,” urn:issn:0567-7394, vol. 31, no. 2, pp. 189–192, Mar. 1975, issn: 0567-7394.
doi: 10.1107/S056773947500037. [Online]. Available: https://journals.iucr.org/paper?
a11676%20https://journals.iucr.org/a/issues/1975/02/00/a11676/.
[18]
M. Popovici, “On the resolution of slow-neutron spectrometers. IV. The triple-axis spectrom-
eter resolution function, spatial effects included,” urn:issn:0567-7394, vol. 31, no. 4, pp. 507–
513, Jul. 1975, issn: 0567-7394. doi: 10.1107/S0567739475001088. [Online]. Available: https:
//journals.iucr.org/paper?a11747%20https://journals.iucr.org/a/issues/1975/04/
00/a11747/.
[19]
P. Willendrup, E. Farhi, and K. Lefmann, “McStas 1.7 - A new version of the flexible Monte
Carlo neutron scattering package,” in Physica B: Condensed Matter, vol. 350, Elsevier, 2004. doi:
10.1016/j.physb.2004.03.193.
[20]
G. Tucker, Niess, https://github.com/g5t/niess, 2025.
[21]
G. Tucker, Chopcal, https://github.com/g5t/chopper-calculations/, 2023.
[22]
G. Tucker, Multiple tube detector for mcstas 3, https://github.com/mcdotstar/mcstas-
detector-tubes, 2023.
[23]
N. Amin, Bifrost_analysis, https://github.com/nicolai3008/BIFROST_Analysis, 2025.
[24]
C. Chatfield and A. J. Collins, “Introduction to multivariate analysis,” Introduction to Multivariate
Analysis, pp. 1–248, Jan. 2018. doi: 10.1201/9780203749999/INTRODUCTION-MULTIVARIATE-
ANALYSIS-CHRIS-CHATFIELD.
[25]
A. Bhattacharyya, “On a Measure of Divergence between Two Multinomial Populations on JS-
TOR,” The Indian Journal of Statistics, vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 401–406, Jul. 1946. [Online]. Available:
https://www.jstor.org/stable/25047882.
[26]
N. Lebaz, A. Cockx, M. Spérandio, and J. Morchain, “Reconstruction of a distribution from a
finite number of its moments: A comparative study in the case of depolymerization process,”
Computers & Chemical Engineering, vol. 84, pp. 326–337, Jan. 2016, issn: 0098-1354. doi: 10.
1016/J.COMPCHEMENG.2015.09.008. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/abs/pii/S0098135415003038.
[27]
B. O’Neill, “Some Useful Moment Results in Sampling Problems,” American Statistician, vol. 68,
no. 4, pp. 282–296, Oct. 2014, issn: 15372731. doi: 10.1080/00031305.2014.966589. [Online].
Available: /doi/pdf/10.1080/00031305.2014.966589?download=true.
[28]
L. Kish, “Survey sampling,” p. 643, 1965. [Online]. Available: https://www.wiley.com/en-
us/Survey+Sampling-p-9780471109495.
[29]
G. L. Squires, “Nuclear scattering by crystals,” Introduction to the Theory of Thermal Neutron
Scattering, pp. 25–60, Jan. 2012. doi: 10.1017/CBO9781139107808.004. [Online]. Available:
https://www.cambridge.org/core/books/introduction- to- the- theory- of- thermal-
neutron-scattering/nuclear-scattering-by-crystals/6AE08D4BE279F560FFE4217C308EDD42.
[30]
B. Dorner, “Integrated intensities in inverse time-of-flight technique,” Nuclear Instruments and
Methods in Physics Research Section B: Beam Interactions with Materials and Atoms, vol. 247,
no. 2, pp. 390–396, Jun. 2006, issn: 0168-583X. doi: 10.1016/J.NIMB.2006.01.071. [Online].
Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0168583X06002072.
[31]
G. L. Tindle, “Resolution function normalisation and secondary extinction in neutron triple-axis
spectrometry,” Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research Section A: Accelerators,
Spectrometers, Detectors and Associated Equipment, vol. 256, no. 1, pp. 121–134, Apr. 1987,
issn: 0168-9002. doi: 10.1016/0168- 9002(87)91047- 3. [Online]. Available: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/0168900287910473.
==PAGE:154==
Bibliography
148
[32]
A. Zheludev, ResLib: A library for neutron scattering resolution calculations, Oak Ridge, TN, Oct.
2007.
[33]
T. Weber, Takin. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/ILLGrenoble/takin/wiki.
[34]
Tobyfit — Horace documentation. [Online]. Available: https://pace- neutrons.github.io/
Horace/v3.6.2/manual/Tobyfit.html.
