==PAGE:1==
DTU Wind and Energy Systems
Long Term Evaluation of EIA-assessment 
Reports for Onshore Wind Farms
Investigation, Evaluation and Comparison of the 
Planning Process, Visual Impact and Noise Conditions 
for Wind Farms in Denmark and Italy
Jens Rafn Andersen and Sergio Modugno
DTU Wind-Energy-WEM-0018
July 2022
==PAGE:2==
DTU Wind and Energy Systems
Author: Jens Rafn Andersen and Sergio Modugno
Title:
Long Term Evalutation of EIA-assessment Reports 
for Onshore Wind Farms - Investigation, Evaluation 
and Comparison of the Planning Process, Visual 
Impact and Noise Conditions for Wind Farms in 
Denmark and Italy
DTU Wind and Energy Systems is a department of the 
Technical University of Denmark with a unique 
integration of research, education, innovation and 
public/private sector consulting in the field of wind and 
energy. Our activities develop new opportunities and 
technology for the global and Danish exploitation of 
wind and energy. Research focuses on key technical-
scientific fields, which are central for the development, 
innovation and use of wind energy and provides the 
basis for advanced education.
Picture on cover page by Erik Vogeley, DTU
Project period: 
February - July 2022
ECTS: 15
Education: Master of Wind Energy
Main supervisor:
Niels-Erik Clausen 
DTU Wind and Energy Systems
Co-supervisor:
Jonas Klinck
COWI
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for 
graduation in the above education at the 
Technical University of Denmark.
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Wind and Energy Systems 
Frederiksborgvej 399
DK-4000 Roskilde
www.vindenergi.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Long Term Evaluation of EIA-assessment Reports for Onshore Wind
Farms
Investigation, Evaluation and Comparison of the Planning Process, Visual Impact
and Noise Conditions for Wind Farms in Denmark and Italy
Master Thesis
July, 2022
By
Jens Rafn Andersen, Sergio Modugno
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the
customary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report
title, etc.
www.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at Department of Wind Energy,
at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the Online
Master of Wind Energy.
Jens Rafn Andersen, Sergio Modugno - s205711, s205895
July, 2022
ii
Long Term Evaluation of EIA-assessment Reports for Onshore Wind Farms
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
Jens Rafn Andersen, Sergio Modugno, Wind Energy Master, DTU
Niels-Erik Clausen, Associate Professor, Ph.D., DTU
For the supervision through the whole project and the constant support.
Jonas Klinck, Head of Section, COWI A/S
For the supervision and the interest shown to the project.
Louise Østergaard and Brian Thomsen, MARTEC
For helping to prepare the survey and colleagues for reviewing it.
Lars Sommer Søndergaard, Senior Specialist, M.Sc.Eng, FORCE Technology
For easy access and clarifying questions on noise.
All others who participated in surveys or answered our questions on the way, it is
all very much appreciated.
JENS: I would like to thank my wife, Camilla, for helping a photographic amateur,
and my whole family for never ending support and motivation.
SERGIO: I owe this thesis and this Master to my family (Luisa, Gianni and Emma)
and my girlfriend, Gabi. Without them and their constant care and assistance all
this would not have been possible. Finally, I would like to dedicate this work to
Sônia, a special person and a second mother who gave me motivation to go through
all of it, teaching me to never back down to diﬀiculties.
Long Term Evaluation of EIA-assessment Reports for Onshore Wind Farms
iii
==PAGE:6==
Abstract
Planning for wind turbines and wind farms have been relevant ever since the first
wind turbines were built. But since wind energy has expanded and turbines get big-
ger, this is even more important. With the Environment Impact Assessment (EIA)
being introduced to wind energy planning in The European Community (EC) in
1985, a powerful tool was incorporated in the planning and decision process. The
aim of this project is to examine the planning processes in Denmark, Italy, and
France and investigate how well visual impact and noise emission, described in the
EIA resemble the real conditions after the wind farm has been built. As an exam-
ple we have chosen to look at visual impact and noise to represent how the local
community feels about the planning process. We have studied wind farm projects in
Denmark and Italy. Information has been gathered by interviewing people working
with wind farm planning for authorities, talking to experts, reading EIA reports,
visiting wind farms and distributing surveys to local communities.
The main findings of this work are:
Planning processes for wind farm projects are carried out on a similar basis in
Denmark, Italy and France, based on European Union (EU) directives, with a few
national differences. The same can be said for the EIA, which is structured in the
same way and addressing the same topics. However, communication about wind
farm projects is done quite differently in the 3 countries: much information is given
to the public in Denmark, but not as much in Italy nor France.
In general, the visualizations found in EIAs are very precise, and resemble the real
outline of the wind farm very well. Noise modelling in EIAs is precise and indicate
very well that the noise level people will experience, is below noise level limits. We
also found that people can have concerns about wind turbine noise even if they
cannot hear it.
Using visual impact and noise to represent the entire EIA process we found that in
general the EIA report represent quite well the reality i.e. the wind farm as built.
Furthermore, we found that a structured evaluation of EIAs, the planning process
and finalized projects will be very helpful in order to make the planning process for
wind farm projects more eﬀicient, faster and transparent to all stakeholders.
iv
Long Term Evaluation of EIA-assessment Reports for Onshore Wind Farms
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
List of Figures
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . vii
List of Tables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ix
List of Abbreviations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
xi
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Main objective and research questions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Literature review
5
2.1
General EU directives on EIA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Description of the EIA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Procedures for wind farms’ installation in Denmark . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.4
Procedures for wind farms’ installation in Italy
. . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.5
Procedures for wind farms’ installation in France
. . . . . . . . . . .
15
3
Methodology
19
3.1
Generic description of the study process
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.2
Choice of the Danish wind farm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.3
Creation of the assessment survey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.4
Study of the visualisation impact . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.5
Study of the noise impact
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.6
Study of the planning process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4
Results and discussion
27
4.1
Comparison between the planning processes from different countries .
27
4.2
Resuming the differences between the EIAs of the different countries
28
4.3
Analysis of the visual impact
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.4
Analysis of the noise impact . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.5
Analysis of the survey results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5
Conclusion
63
6
Our own learnings
65
7
Recommendations for future work
67
Bibliography
69
Long Term Evaluation of EIA-assessment Reports for Onshore Wind Farms
v
==PAGE:8==
A List of appendixes
73
A.1
Appendix: Survey master template in English . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
A.2
Appendix: Facebook post for distribution of the survey in Italy
. . .
73
A.3
Appendix: Facebook post for distribution of the survey in Denmark .
73
A.4
Appendix: Survey results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
A.5
Appendix: Interview guide for interviews with people working with
wind farm planning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
A.6
Appendix: Visual comparisons for Nørhede-Hjortmose wind farm
. .
73
A.7
Appendix: Noise measurement report Nørhede-Hjortmose . . . . . . .
74
vi
Long Term Evaluation of EIA-assessment Reports for Onshore Wind Farms
==PAGE:9==
List of Figures
2.1
Important steps in the EIA process [2] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2
Illustration of a good planning process [13] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3
Procedures summary table . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.4
Work-flow for permitting the construction of a wind farm . . . . . . .
15
2.5
Summary scheme for French unique authorization [17]
. . . . . . . .
18
3.1
Map of the area showing turbines and their sizes [20] . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2
Map of area, including municipal planning documents [21]
. . . . . .
21
3.3
Example of question included in the survey – Danish edition . . . . .
23
3.4
Rendering (on the left) and photo (on the right) from visualization
point 6 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.5
Map of noise modelling with noise limit lines indicated . . . . . . . .
26
4.1
Map of the local area showing the elevation of the area around the
Nørhede Hjortmose Wind Farm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.2
Map indicating the 31 points of visualization chosen for the Nørhede-
Hjortmose Wind Farm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.3
Point 1 - near zone . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.4
Point 12 – near zone . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.5
Point 20 – middle zone . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.6
Point 20 – middle zone at a different weather condition . . . . . . . .
37
4.7
Example of how rendering looks like or Italian EIA; note the 120°
angle of the pic [31] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.8
Still photo of Klim Fjordholme wind farm. 24.05.22 . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.9
Noise changes as perceived by the human ear [40] . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.10 Noise levels at 6 m/s . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.11 Noise levels at 8 m/s . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.12 Low frequency noise levels at 6 m/s . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.13 Low frequency noise levels at 8 m/s . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.14 Questions 4 and 5 from Danish survey
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
4.15 Distribution of sources of information . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
4.16 Questions 9 and 10 from Danish survey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
4.17 Ideas for improvement of process
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
4.18 Visual perception of wind turbines for both Denmark and Italy
. . .
56
4.19 Visual perception of wind turbines according to the perception of the
rendering
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
4.20 Distribution of people living inside/outside noise modelled area
. . .
58
4.21 Distribution of people living inside/outside noise modelled area
. . .
58
Long Term Evaluation of EIA-assessment Reports for Onshore Wind Farms
vii
==PAGE:10==
4.22 Worries about wind turbine noise according to the fact that people
hear or not wind turbines
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
4.23 Worries about wind turbine noise - Italian case
. . . . . . . . . . . .
59
4.24 Other concerns about health issues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
viii
Long Term Evaluation of EIA-assessment Reports for Onshore Wind Farms
==PAGE:11==
List of Tables
4.1
Italian noise limits in dB(A) for different territory classes . . . . . . .
42
4.2
Italian noise limits in dB(A) for more generic cases . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.3
Maximum noise level on the measurement perimeter for France
. . .
42
4.4
Marked tone limit for France
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
Long Term Evaluation of EIA-assessment Reports for Onshore Wind Farms
ix
==PAGE:12==
This page has been left blank intentionally.
x
Long Term Evaluation of EIA-assessment Reports for Onshore Wind Farms
==PAGE:13==
List of Abbreviations
ASAP
Law on acceleration and simplification of public action
dB
decibel (measured with an A-filter)
DTU
The Technical University of Denmark
EC
The European Community
EIA
Environmental Impact Assessment
EIS
Environment Impact Statement
EU
The European Union
GMO
Genetically Modified Organisms
GW
Gigawatt
ICPE
Classification for the Protection of the Environment
IOTA
The Water Act (protection of water)
km
kilometer
kW
kilowatt
m/s
meters pr. second
MW
megawatt
NW
North East
SA
Single Authorization
SE
South East
SEP
Simplified Enabling Procedure
SW
South West
VR
Virtual Reality
WT
Wind Turbine
Long Term Evaluation of EIA-assessment Reports for Onshore Wind Farms
xi
==PAGE:14==
This page has been left blank intentionally.
xii
Long Term Evaluation of EIA-assessment Reports for Onshore Wind Farms
==PAGE:15==
1
Introduction
1.1
Background
Global warming, climate and biodiversity crisis have been an increasing part of
concerns and discussions all over the world. The need of developing and using alter-
native and renewable alternatives to fossil fuels is getting more and more important.
There are different kinds of renewable energies, but one of the main drivers for the
green transition is wind energy
The wind energy sector has increased significantly over the last decades, above all
in Europe where the total capacity grew from 2.5 GW in 1995 to over 142 GW in
2015, most of which is in form of onshore wind farms [1].
This growth and more generally the development of all sustainable energies, is in-
creasingly being supported, also because during the past years it has been possible
to balance the environmental protection necessary for a long-term survival with an
economical development.
In order to balance this, the process of Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA)
was introduced in the USA around the 70’s and then adopted by the European
Community (EC) in 1985 [2]. The EIA is a systematic way to examine and assess
the impact that different development actions has on the environment, before the
development project is decided and executed. In the EIA process different steps are
included; screening of projects to define possible impact and the need for an EIA,
impact prediction, mitigation and presentation of findings from the EIA.
During all these steps, the participation of the public is crucial. For this reason, the
EIA should be considered an iterative process in which there has to be an important
interaction among all steps.
But inviting the public into the EIA process is also where conflicts regarding lo-
cation, nature protection and respect of landscape, between authorities, developers
and other stakeholders, e.g. neighbors often start. These conflicts lead to many
planning appeals and complaints, which delays the planning process. To avoid these
delays, it is important that the EIA process is fine-tuned and addresses possible
areas of conflicts to eliminate doubts and concerns.
The EIA is a very important planning and decision tool, and working with this and
improving EIAs to make planning effective, smooth and perhaps faster, is a conti-
nous process. One important thing in improving things is to evaluate the present
state. This is apparantly not done in a structured way for wind energy projects.
Long Term Evaluation of EIA-assessment Reports for Onshore Wind Farms
1
==PAGE:16==
1.2
Main objective and research questions
The objective of this research project is to investigate and evaluate the planning
process for Denmark, Italy and France and to make a comparison between all of
them. This is to have an idea of the way each country is able to apply and interpret
the EU directives on this process. In addition, the EIA process in each of those
country will be analysed through the study of the EIA reports for wind farms from
each of the considered nations.
After that, an operating wind farm in Denmark will be selected as specimen of next
part the investigation. Both the assessed visual and noise impact will be analysed
and compared to the actual conditions after the wind farm construction. To achieve
that, a physical tour of the surrounding zone of the wind farm is done to try to
retrieve some pictures from the same points of view considered during the environ-
mental impact assessment. Also the noise impact will be examined and compared
to a noise measurement campaign performed after the wind farm went active.
Areas chosen for wind energy will most likely be used for the same scope for a very
long time. A wind turbine has a lifetime of around 25 years, but most areas laid
out for wind energy, will probably be repowered with new wind turbines when this
period expires. This calls for high-quality long-term planning [3]. To make sure
that the quality of the EIA is the best possible, it is important to carry out quality
control and reassessment of the EIA-reports to make sure that the results after is
as described in the reports. Furthermore it is important to re-evaluate the public
involvement along the process to implement the learning and improve the reports
and the process around them.
In order to accomplish the main purpose of this project and to trace a guideline
of the main topics to approach, different research questions have been set:
1. How much do planning processes vary from country to country?
2. How to choose the points of the EIA to focus on?
3. How do visualizations and noise modelling correspond with the real conditions?
4. How stakeholders feel about the process and their involvement in it?
This report has the following structure:
• Chapter 2 gives a theoretical background of all the concepts needed along this
project.
• Chapter 3 gives an overview on the method used to approach the research
project and a detailed description of what has been practically done.
• Chapter 4 presents the results and discussion of EIA, differences in planning
processes, visual impact and noise impact.
• Chapter 5 presents the conclusion
2
Long Term Evaluation of EIA-assessment Reports for Onshore Wind Farms
==PAGE:17==
• Chapter 6 presents the learnings and surprises the authors have had while
working with this project
• Chapter 7 gives recommendations on further research and tools to optimize
planning for wind farms and enrich the work of this project.
Long Term Evaluation of EIA-assessment Reports for Onshore Wind Farms
3
==PAGE:18==
This page has been left blank intentionally.
4
Long Term Evaluation of EIA-assessment Reports for Onshore Wind Farms
==PAGE:19==
2
Literature review
This chapter gives a theoretical background of the legislation for EIAs, the EIA itself
and the planning process for Denmark, Italy and France.
2.1
General EU directives on EIA
One of the most relevant parts of EU environmental legislation is the Environmental
Impact Assessment (EIA) Directive which makes sure that environmental consider-
ations are properly taken into account when project decisions are made.
Since its incorporation in 1985, it has helped to the inclusion of environmental con-
siderations into the preparation of projects and regularly provided a high level of
safeguard of the environment. All this with the purpose to reduce the environmental
impact caused by the projects, promoting a more sustainable development of them.
After its adoption in 1985, the EIA Directive has been amended three times (in
1997, 2003 and 2009) and then again in 2012, when the EU commission proposed
certain changes in order to correct few shortcomings in implementation, lighten un-
necessary administrative burden, increase the level of environmental protection and
simplify the assessment procedure. In this way, it has been possible to consider
new arising challenges like climate change, biodiversity and resource eﬀiciency. The
amending Directive 2014/52/EU was adopted in 2014 and entered into force in 2017
[4].
Lately, environmental policy integration has made notable improvements, ensur-
ing that all EU actions and policies cooperate together to help the European Union
accomplish a successful and fair transition towards a sustainable future. The most
powerful instrument for guaranteeing the right integration of environmental con-
cerns in a project, and to ensure that its impacts are carefully analysed before its
approval is the environmental impact assessment procedure.
The EU Directive has a broad field of interest and applies to both private and public
projects, which can be considered more or less likely to have relevant environmental
impacts. Before being authorised, projects likely to have important effects on the
environment because of their nature, size and location have to undergo a require-
ment for development consent and an assessment of their effects, according to the
EU Directive.
The EIA must recognise, define and assess the direct and indirect effects of a project
on different environmental factors together with the interaction between them. A
report including the minimum level of information prescribed by the Directive must
Long Term Evaluation of EIA-assessment Reports for Onshore Wind Farms
5
==PAGE:20==
be provided by the project developer to the authority responsible for its approval.
This includes the project description of location, design and size as well as character-
istics of the project and/or measures to prevent, limit or balance significant adverse
effects. Also alternatives to the project should be considered and presented by the
developer, together with the rationale for that choice and a non-technical summary
of this information.
It is very important that all the details about the decision-making process are avail-
able to all the relevant stakeholders at an early stage. Relevant parties could be:
• all the environmental authorities suited for the project approval, both local
and regional ones;
• the public, which should be informed by all the relevant means, including elec-
tronically, about all the approval details and that should have the possibility
to participate to public consultation for the approval procedure;
• other municipalities, Regions or Member States, if the project is likely to have
transversal effects.
When the procedure is done and the results of the public consultation are examined,
a decision is taken by the competent authority leading to the acceptance, the denial
or the modification of the project. In the end, the final verdict has to be communi-
cated to both the public and all the concerned stakeholders [4].
2.2
Description of the EIA
The Art.3 of the EU Directive states that: ”the environmental impact assessment
screening, description and evaluation, in a proper way, for each particular case [...]
both direct and indirect effects of a project on the following factors:
• mankind, fauna and flora;
• soil, water, air, climate and landscape;
• cultural heritage;
• the interaction among all the aforementioned factors.” [5]
The list of environmental factors provided by the Directive highlights how the con-
cept of Environment does not only include natural factors, but also anthropic ones,
such as some aspects of the landscape, material assets (works, constructions, infras-
tructures, plants) or heritage. In EIA procedures, therefore, the environment must
first be studied analytically, using the most appropriate specialist disciplines. After
having analyzed with an analytical procedure the possible alterations of each of the
factors that make up the environment and their iterations, it will be necessary to
carry out an overall evaluation of its effects with a synthetic and integrated ap-
proach.
6
Long Term Evaluation of EIA-assessment Reports for Onshore Wind Farms
==PAGE:21==
To reference the book by J. Glasson, ”Introduction to Environmental Impact As-
sessment”, the EIA is «a systematic process that examines the environmental con-
sequences of development actions, in advance» [2].
The EIA is mainly composed by four phases:
• the objective of the screening phase is to detect and pay attention to all the
possible impacts on the environment of the proposed project, both direct and
indirect, positive or negative.
• the description (or scooping) phase is aimed at forecasting and quantitative
measurement of the impacts, the probability of their occurrence and their
spatial and temporal scope.
• identification and presentation of mitigation measures suggested to avoid ex-
cessive environmental impact.
• finally, in the assessment phase, the relevance analysis of the various impacts
is carried out, i.e. the study of their different weight and importance for the
purposes of the final balance necessary for the verification of environmental
compatibility.
All international standards highlight the need for the EIA to examine not only the
primary or direct impacts of the project, but also the secondary or indirect ones,
with an adequate reconstruction of the possible cause-effect chains of impact prop-
agation. This requires the ability to consider the environment as a unitary system,
within which the various factors of a physical, biological, cultural, socio-economic
nature interact in often unexpected and complex ways.
The final result of the fourth stage of an EIA, is the EIA report, in which all the
information regarding the project’s effects on the environment is gathered. [6].
In the next subsections, both the EIA procedure and its report will be described in
more detail.
2.2.1
The EIA process and its stages
The EIA is basically a process that analyses and tries to predict the environmental
consequences linked to a project; for this reason a big emphasis is put on prevention.
Long Term Evaluation of EIA-assessment Reports for Onshore Wind Farms
7
==PAGE:22==
Figure 2.1: Important steps in the EIA process [2]
In fig. 2.1 a quick overview of all the steps of this process is shown. It is important
to underline that even if it is indicated as a linear process, the EIA is more a cyclical
one with a lot of interaction between the various steps. Also attention should be
paid to the fact that the real process can vary significantly from what represented
in fig. 2.1. A brief description of those steps is given as follows:
• The first step is the project screening, which restricts the application of the
EIA only to those activities that may cause important environmental impacts.
• The scooping tries to identify at an early stage, all those project’s impacts
that could be significant and all the alternatives that could be considered.
• The consideration of alternatives seeks to ensure that the party proposing
the project has thought about other feasible approaches, including backup in
terms of project locations, layouts, operating conditions, scales, processes and
also the ‘no action/zero-alternative’ option.
• The description of the project/development action includes an elucidation of
the objective and rationale of the project, and a perception of its various
8
Long Term Evaluation of EIA-assessment Reports for Onshore Wind Farms
==PAGE:23==
characteristics – including stages of development, location and processes.
• The description of the environmental baseline includes the description of both
the present state without the project,and future state of the environment,
considering changes resulting from other human activities or natural events
instead.
• The identification of the main impacts makes sure that all the environmental
impacts that could be significantly important are recognized and considered
in the process, by bringing together all the previous steps.
• The prediction of impacts phase consists in carrying out a comparison between
the situations with and without the considered project, in order to determine
the importance of the identified change in the environment.
• The evaluation and assessment of significance estimates the relative signifi-
cance of the predicted impacts to guarantee a focus on the most conflicting
ones.
• Mitigation phase is about introducing some expedients which could avoid, re-
duce, remedy or compensate for any significant adverse impacts. Furthermore,
an enhancement step could be performed in order to conceive some beneficial
impacts if possible.
• Public consultation and participation step as the scope not only to guaran-
tee the quality, exhaustiveness and effectiveness of the EIA, but also ensure
that the public opinion is decently taken into account in the decision-making
process.
• EIS (Environmental Impact Statement) presentation is a crucial step in the
process since if it not properly done, much good work in the EIA may be
negated.
• The Review phase involves a systematic evaluation of EIS quality, as a con-
tribution to the decision-making process.
• The Decision-making step involves different considerations by the pertinent
authority of the EIS and also some other material considerations.
• Post-decision monitoring is important because can contribute to eﬀicient project
management and consists in keeping track of effects associated with develop-
ment impacts, after a decision to continue with the project.
• Auditing follows from monitoring. This phase can be useful for putting along-
side the actual outcomes with predicted ones, and also for assessing the quality
of predictions and the effectiveness of mitigation. Hence it considered as a vital
step in the EIA learning process.
Long Term Evaluation of EIA-assessment Reports for Onshore Wind Farms
9
==PAGE:24==
2.2.2
The EIA report
In the following paragraph, an overview on the EIA structure based on EU Directive
will be given.
The EIA Report is a collection of different important project components, including
its description, the assessment of its environmental and social impacts, mitigation
measures, and related management and monitoring plans. During this step of the
process, all the knowledge gathered during the previous phases is compiled into a
comprehensive report that analyzes and synthesizes the data. A quality EIA Report
has the following characteristics:
• It is well-structured and uses non-technical language supported by data and
well-executed analyses.
• It includes helpful information which are relevant to decision making.
• Thanks to conventional or customized techniques, it guarantees a good predic-
tion of the negative effects of the proposed actions and a solution to mitigate
them.
The importance of a good EIA report must not be underestimated since it presents
all the results of the assessment and proposed mitigation actions, providing infor-
mation for decision making. For this reason, an EIA report should be complete,
easily understood, objective, factual and internally consistent. Naturally, to achieve
such a result is not easy since during this process many different elements, types of
impacts and mitigation measures are involved.
Once the EIA report is submitted, designated authorities will review it to determine
how the planned project will address major environmental and social impacts and
decide whether or not it should be granted a license.
The general approach to preparing an EIA report consists in structuring the infor-
mation and interpreting knowledge gathered in such a way that it furnish reasoning
for the proposed mitigation measures and changes in project implementation. The
document structure and interpretation is guided by the Terms of Reference that the
project is subjected to [7]. A classic EIA report is made by the following sections:
• Description of the project =⇒this is one of the most important chapters
of the EIA report since includes a detailed description of all the characteristics
of the proposed project, such as size and location on the map. Moreover, par-
ticular attention should be paid when describing the wind farm main features
like its layout and wind turbine type.
• Description of alternatives + recommendations =⇒a discussion of
alternatives is important and useful for all the stakeholders involved in the
project. For the developer to show that different approaches have been con-
sidered in order to prevent environmental damages; for the analysts, who are
encouraged to focus on different choices; for the people who are not directly
10
Long Term Evaluation of EIA-assessment Reports for Onshore Wind Farms
==PAGE:25==
involved into the process, to better understand the rationale at the base of it.
• Description of the environment =⇒here a description of the landscape
encircling the designed site is given, mentioning with attention all those aspects
that could be affected by the project, in particular flora and fauna. Sometimes,
a specific chapter on birds is also included.
• Description of the impact =⇒both positive and negative impacts are
described in this section, and at which extent they are going to influence the
environment (locally, regionally or globally).
• Mitigation of impact =⇒following the description of the various impacts,
also a detailed analysis of different ways to mitigate their magnitude is in-
cluded.
• Monitoring during operation =⇒in this section all the requirements to
guarantee the follow-up during the wind farm operation phase, are presented.
• Non-technical summary =⇒last but not the least, the non-technical chap-
ter of the report is very important since it targets the general public and it is
written in such a simplified way to be understood by all the people not directly
involved into the whole process. It could be a many pages chapter or even a
simple leaflet with an attractive layout [6].
2.3
Procedures for wind farms’ installation in
Denmark
The principal authorities involved in planning and regulating the construction of
wind farms are:
▶Ministry of Trade (‘Erhvervsministeriet’)
▶Ministry of Environment (‘Miljøministeriet’)
▶The Danish municipalities
The Ministry of Trade defines the legislation for planning for wind farms in the
Planning Act (‘Planloven’). The object of this law is to ensure a consistent planning
uniting societal interests in spatial planning and ensure protection of environment
and nature in all parts of Denmark while planning for different purposes and defin-
ing the tasks and responsibilities of the municipalities. This does not only concern
planning for wind farms but is a more overall planning law [8]. The specific reg-
ulations for wind farm planning are stated in two executive orders, the Executive
Order on planning for and permission to erect wind turbines (”Bekendtgørelse om
planlægning for og tilladelse til opstilling af vindmøller” [9]) from the Ministry of
Trade, and the Executive Order on noise from wind turbines (”Bekendtgørelse om
støj fra vindmøller” [10]) from the Ministry of Environment.
Long Term Evaluation of EIA-assessment Reports for Onshore Wind Farms
11
==PAGE:26==
The Executive Order on planning and permission to erect wind turbines defines
how the planning for wind turbines has to be performed and gives some national
guidelines on specific topics. The order applies to all onshore wind turbines apart
from small private wind turbines up to 25 m I height. It gives guidelines on mini-
mum distances to neighbors (4 times the wind turbine tip height), that the layout
of a wind farm must be an easily perceived pattern, that planning for wind turbines
within 28 times tip height from other turbines needs to account for the total impact
on the landscape. Furthermore, it describes some guidelines regarding the municipal
planning for wind turbines/wind farms [9, 11].
The Executive order on noise from wind turbines defines the noise level limits for
wind turbines in Denmark and at which wind speeds these are defined, including
low frequency noise. It also defines when, after the wind farm starts operating, a
noise measurement report is to be carried out. In appendix A.7, it is described how
a measurement campaign is carried out [10].
Specific planning for wind farms is a responsibility of the Danish municipalities,
and planning for wind farms as well as other technical facilities, is part of the cen-
tral planning in the municipality. Each municipality must make a comprehensive
plan for all areas of the municipality and define areas where the possibility of con-
structing wind farms is present. This plan is made for a 12-year period but must be
reviewed every 4 years [11]. Development of the plan is made according to national
legislation [8] which includes some preliminary work, an idea-phase and a public
hearing before the plan is approved by the municipal board.
In the municipal plan for wind farms, not only areas are specified, but also that a
local plan is to be made for the specific area, defining number of turbines, size, wind
farm layout and impact on nature and environment. These things are specified and
described in the wind farm project made by the wind farm developer and in the
EIA. A proposal of the local plan and the EIA are subject to public hearings where
neighbors and other stakeholders can give inputs to the project and possible impact
on nature, environment, and the local community.
After the hearing period the plan is either approved as it is, approved with some
changes, or rejected. If the plan is approved – with or without changes – the nec-
essary permits are issued, and the construction of the wind farm may begin. In
the approval a noise emission report made after operation starts is sometimes re-
quired [11]. There are requirements in the legislation about the process regarding
e.g. involving the local citizens in the process. These are minimum requirements
and municipalities are free to do more to involve neighbors and other stakeholders in
the planning process. However, municipalities for the most part follow regulations
and don’t do more than that, even though examples where the developer or the
municipality have done more, have given projects with greater public engagements
[12].
12
Long Term Evaluation of EIA-assessment Reports for Onshore Wind Farms
==PAGE:27==
Figure 2.2: Illustration of a good planning process [13]
2.4
Procedures for wind farms’ installation in
Italy
The principle authorities involved in planning and regulating the construction of
wind farms are:
▶Ministry of Economic Development (‘Ministero dello Sviluppo Economico’)
▶Ministry for Cultural Heritage and Activities (‘Ministero per i Beni e le At-
tività Culturali’)
▶Ministry of the Environment and the Protection of the Territory and the Sea
(‘Ministero dell’ambiente e della Tutela del Territorio e del Mare’)
Their duty is to establish the national guidelines for the authorization of plants
powered by renewable sources, which provide certain rules that should encourage
investments and allow for the combination of growth needs and respect for the en-
vironment and the landscape [14].
The legislative decree n.
28 of the 03/03/2011 introduced measures to simplify
and rationalize the administrative procedures for the construction of renewable en-
ergy plants, both for the production of electricity and thermal energy.
There are three possible procedures envisaged by current legislation for the con-
struction of plants powered by renewable sources:
Communication to the municipality −→Communication to the Municipality
is the authorization title required by current legislation for the installation
of plants similar to ”free building activity” and it was Introduced by legisla-
tive decree 115/2008 to simplify the process authorization of some types of
small plants with renewable sources. Currently the presentation of the simple
communication is suﬀicient to start the work for single wind turbines with an
Long Term Evaluation of EIA-assessment Reports for Onshore Wind Farms
13
==PAGE:28==
overall height not exceeding 1.5 meters and a diameter not exceeding 1 meter
[15].
Simplified Enabling Procedure (SEP) −→is applied for wind farms whose
power is up to 60 kW for which the simple communication to the munici-
pality is not applicable. The SEP must be submitted by the interested party,
even electronically, to the Municipality at least 30 days before the actual start
of work. The SEP must be accompanied by a report signed by a qualified
designer and from the planning documents able to assert the conformity of
the project to the planning tools and to the building regulations. To the SEP,
it should also be attached the estimate for the connection drawn up by the
network manager and accepted by the proposer, as well as the indication of
the company to which you want to entrust the work. At the end of the in-
tervention, the designer or the qualified technician presents a final inspection
certificate to the Municipality [15].
Single Authorization (SA) −→is the measure introduced by the legislative de-
cree n. 287/2003 for the authorization of electricity production plants powered
by renewable energy sources, above the pre-established power thresholds of 60
kW. The SA, issued at the end of a single procedure carried out within the
‘Conference of Services’ (in which participates all the administrations con-
cerned participate), represents the right to build and operate the plant [15].
The competence for issuing the SA lies with the Regions for on-shore wind
farms with a power of up to 30 MW. Wind farmswith a power higher than 30
MW is state juristiction [16].
Figure 2.3 shows the aforementioned procedures in a summary table:
Figure 2.3: Procedures summary table
14
Long Term Evaluation of EIA-assessment Reports for Onshore Wind Farms
==PAGE:29==
Finally, a simplified scheme of a work-flow for permitting the realization of the wind
farm is shown in the following figure, taking into account a plant with a power higher
than 30 MW:
Figure 2.4: Work-flow for permitting the construction of a wind farm
2.5
Procedures for wind farms’ installation in
France
Starting from March 1st 2017, the various environmental procedures and decisions
required for projects subject to the regulations for installations classified for the pro-
tection of the environment (ICPE) and projects subject to authorization under the
Water Act (IOTA), are merged within the environmental authorization. The reform
also aims to strengthen the upstream phase of the authorization request, to offer the
petitioner better visibility of the rules to which his project is subject. This reform,
is part of the process of modernization of environmental law and simplification the
governmental administration [17].
Before the reform, the same project could simultaneously fall under several environ-
mental authorizations. Conducting different proceedings in parallel did not favor
an overall analysis of the projects and led to charges and additional deadlines for
petitioners and services instructors. It could be a source of misunderstandings and
litigation.
The creation of the unique environmental authorization has three main objectives:
• Simplify procedures and reduce deadlines for petitioners, without reducing the
level of environmental protection
• Provide a better overall vision of all the environmental issues of a project for
the instructing services, as well as for the public
• Reinforce the project in the initial phase, through increased anticipation, read-
ability and legal stability for the proponent of the project [18].
Long Term Evaluation of EIA-assessment Reports for Onshore Wind Farms
15
==PAGE:30==
In the heading n° 2980 of the regulation of risks prevention and environment pro-
tection, are indicated the only two typologies of wind farm susceptible to the unique
environmental authorization:
1. Wind farms including at least one turbine whose height is included between
12-50 meters and whose power capacity is lower than 20 MW.
2. Wind farms including at least one turbine which is higher than 50 meters
and/or whose power capacity is bigger than or equal to 20 MW [19].
The environmental authorization includes all the requirements of the various appli-
cable legislation and falling under the various codes:
• Environmental Code: authorization for installations classified for the protec-
tion of the environment (ICPE) or installations, works and activities (IOTA),
derogation from compliance with the objectives of good status of bodies of
water, authorization under the legislation of national nature reserves or na-
ture reserves of Corsica, special authorization under the legislation of classified
sites, derogations from the ban on damage to protected species and habitats,
approval for the use of organisms genetically modified (GMO), approval of
waste treatment facilities; IOTA statement; ICPE registration and declara-
tion.
• Forest Code: clearing authorization.
• Energy Code: authorization to operate electricity production facilities.
• Transport code, defense code and heritage code: authorization for the estab-
lishment of wind farms or for road or rail infrastructure [18].
The authorization is requested in one go by the project owner. It has a single point
of contact who is:
• The State service in charge of the water policy, for projects that mainly fall
under the regime IOTA.
• The State service responsible for inspecting classified installations, for projects
that mainly fall under the regime ICPE (like wind farms).
• The State service designated by the competent administrative authority, in
other cases [18].
The main advantages of this unique environmental authorization are the following:
◦State services well organized to support project owners from the
beginning of the project.
◦Reduced instruction times; procedure times are reduced compared to pre-
16
Long Term Evaluation of EIA-assessment Reports for Onshore Wind Farms
==PAGE:31==
vious law, with an objective of 9 months of investigation in general cases,
without lowering the level of protection.
◦Stabilization of standards.
◦Better targeted environmental issues and more effective public par-
ticipation: the law of December 7, 2020 on the acceleration and simplification
of public action (known as the “ASAP” law) introduces the possibility, when
the project is not subject to environmental assessment, of replacing the public
inquiry with a one-month electronic participation, depending on the environ-
mental and socio-economic issues of the project [17].
The following image represents a scheme of the summarized process of the unique
authorization.
Long Term Evaluation of EIA-assessment Reports for Onshore Wind Farms
17
==PAGE:32==
Figure 2.5: Summary scheme for French unique authorization [17]
18
Long Term Evaluation of EIA-assessment Reports for Onshore Wind Farms
==PAGE:33==
3
Methodology
In this chapter an overview on the method used to approach the research project and
a detailed description of what has been practically done will be given.
3.1
Generic description of the study process
Since the first objective of this research project is to analyse the differences among
the planning processes of the chosen countries (Denmark, Italy and France), the first
that has been done is to dig into the legislation of each nation. By studying each of
the planning processes, it has been possible to make a solid comparison, highlighting
both the differences and the similarities between the various processes.
After this first step, it has been possible to dig even deeper and to focus on the
EIA process for each country. In order to do that, for every chosen nation, one
complete EIA report has been recovered and examined, to have a complete and
clear view on the work that has been done before the building of those wind farms.
Due to the vastness of impacts identified during the environmental assessment, an
important judgmental work has been done in order to identify the most significant
ones and put particular attention on them.
The main driver that led to the recognising these impacts, has been the global per-
ception that the public has when interacting with wind energy and in particular
with a wind farm. This emphasises how the parameters which are perceived as the
most influencing ones during an EIA are the visual and the acoustic impacts. For
this reason, the rest of this research has been based on this assumption.
Hence, after a preliminary study phase of the different EIA reports, an ulterior
comparison between the designated countries has been done, finding similarities
and differences of the EIA process and, in particular, the way the assessment of the
impacts is done.
Finally, a more specific analysis has been carried out.
An operating wind farm
from Denmark has been selected and taken as example and its EIA report has been
studied in order to compare it with actual data available after the construction phase
and during the activity period of the wind farm.
This part of the research is important to evaluate how well the predictions done
during the EIA process, and the actual situation while wind turbines are operating,
corresponds. Above all in terms of visual and noise impact.
Long Term Evaluation of EIA-assessment Reports for Onshore Wind Farms
19
==PAGE:34==
3.2
Choice of the Danish wind farm
This section describes the criteria and choices made in deciding on which wind farm
to use as primary source of information for the Danish case.
For the thesis and the comparison between Italian, French and Danish ways of
wind farm planning, a Danish wind farm was chosen. When selecting this wind
farm, certain criteria had to be met:
• Only onshore wind farms were considered for this project.
• The wind farm needed to be in operation, and not too old, since the turbines
in older wind farms are smaller than the wind turbine types mostly used
nowadays.
• The wind farm needed to be of a certain size, meaning that single turbine
installations were not relevant as they have small visual and acoustic impact.
Bigger wind farms will also affect more people.
• The wind farm EIA needed to be accessible, this is not a problem in Denmark,
since EIAs are public documents that can be found directly online or retrieved
through the website of the municipality doing the planning.
• A case for which a noise measurement report for the wind farm was made after
the construction of the wind farm, is preferred. This is not always the case,
and noise reports are not directly available, but need to be retrieved either
through the planning municipality or the wind farm owner.
• If possible, the chosen wind farm should be in Jutland, since a field trip was
planned, to take comparison pictures of the visual impact of the wind farm.
20
Long Term Evaluation of EIA-assessment Reports for Onshore Wind Farms
==PAGE:35==
Using these criteria, areas with suitable wind farms were found using an interactive
map found on the website of The Danish Energy Agency:
Figure 3.1: Map of the area showing turbines and their sizes [20]
To make the final selection of the wind farm to be used as primary source of infor-
mation, these pre-selected wind farms, were then located in a map from Plandata
[21] showing the municipal plans of different technical constructions, including wind
turbines.
Here it is possible to download the planning documents, however not the EIA. This
is retrieved by a simple Internet search using the wind farm name. It was then veri-
fied that the wind farm layout, and the proposed layout in the EIA, were matching.
For some wind farms, the wind farm that is finally approved, has a different layout
than what was originally planned, and to be able to make the most valid compar-
isons on visual and noise impact it is preferred that planned and final layout are the
same.
Figure 3.2: Map of area, including municipal planning documents [21]
Long Term Evaluation of EIA-assessment Reports for Onshore Wind Farms
21
==PAGE:36==
Because of this, the wind farm Nørhede-Hjortmose in the municipality of Ringkøbing-
Skjern was chosen. A field trip to the area was conducted to take photographs, a
meeting with a planner from the municipality was held, and it was later confirmed
that a noise measurement report was required by the municipality and later made
for this particular wind farm, and this was retrieved through the municipality [22,
23].
3.3
Creation of the assessment survey
This section describes how the assessment survey was made, what considerations
were done when designing it, and thoughts on the distribution of the survey.
To find out how one group of stakeholders in a wind farm project (i.e.
the lo-
cal citizens) feels about the planning process, the visual impact and noise condi-
tions of a wind farm, an assessment survey was made. This survey was distributed
locally around the Danish wind farm Nørhede-Hjortmose, in the municipality of
Ringkøbing-Skjern and in Italy around the area of the city of S. Agata di Puglia,
where numerous wind farms are operating.
When designing the survey, three things need to be decided [24, 25]:
What are the themes that we want to cover in our survey? The object of
the survey is to present the themes of the thesis, which are long term evaluation
of the planning process, the visual impact and noise conditions, to the local
citizens and get their opinion on it.
What is the knowledge we want to gain from the survey? Questions will be
asked to the responders on how they feel about the process and their engage-
ment in it, as well getting information on how well they feel that the informa-
tion in the EIA fits the result.
What will we use our knowledge for, and how? The results of the survey will
be used to compare with interviews made with municipal planners on the plan-
ning process and compare the answers on visual impact and noise with what
is found when looking at EIA´s compared with own observations and noise
measurement reports.
Furthermore, the idea is to make a comparison between Danish and Italian trends
in responses.
Since the survey is distributed in both Italy and Denmark, it is of great importance
that the meaning and understanding of the questions is the same for both countries,
since the distribution is in Italian and Danish respectively. First the survey ques-
tions were defined and done in English and was thoroughly discussed to settle the
structure of the questions and use the correct wording to make them as precise as
possible.
22
Long Term Evaluation of EIA-assessment Reports for Onshore Wind Farms
==PAGE:37==
Then the survey was translated and sent into peer review with several selected
people in Italy and Denmark [24]. A diverse group of reviewers were used, differ-
ent ages, gender and occupation to match the expected diversity of the responders.
They went through the survey, and they were interviewed on their understanding
of the questions. Incorporating all inputs, the survey was finalized and made ready
for distribution. The survey was set up in a digital tool, Defgo fig. 3.3, supplied
by MARTEC, and set up in exactly the same way for the Italian and the Danish
survey.
Figure 3.3: Example of question included in the survey – Danish edition
Different ways of distribution were considered; physical hand-outs, “targeted” e-
mails to respondents and ways to reach many people digitally [25]. Since the projects
have large geographical impact and are placed far apart, a survey distribution on
Facebook was decided. Local Facebook groups were identified and the surveys were
posted there. For the Danish wind farm Nørhede-Hjortmose several groups with a
total number of approximately 10,000 members were targeted. For the Italian area,
groups with approximately 5000 were targeted.
The results of the survey will be used to compare the local citizens view of the
planning process and impacts of a wind farm project with what is found when
comparing EIA´s with “real results” and the view of the process and impact, seen
from a municipal point of view. The results from Italy and Denmark will also be
compared.
3.4
Study of the visualisation impact
This section describes how the visual impact of a wind farm is compared, using the
EIA´s, own observations and inputs coming from local citizens and the municipali-
ties planning for wind farms.
Visual images are made for wind farm planning to try to represent reality, most
Long Term Evaluation of EIA-assessment Reports for Onshore Wind Farms
23
==PAGE:38==
of all how the outline of the landscape will look after the wind farm is constructed
and operational. There are different ways of doing visual renderings and the choices
made will affect what it is seen and how, what is visible and what is not [26, 27].
The basis of the comparisons made in this project, are the choices made for the
visualizations in the EIA of Nørhede-Hjortmose [22] and the choices made in the
EIA of the wind farm in Sant’Agata di Puglia [28]. To compare the renderings in
the Danish EIA with what reality looks like, a field trip is made to the area of the
wind farm. This is conducted during the same time of year as the photos used in
the EIA were taken, and pictures were taken at many of the points of interests used
in the EIA. These are then inspected visually and compared regarding weather con-
ditions, color of turbines, rotor orientation and the outline of the landscape, since
this might have changed during the 10 years that have passed between renderings
and photos. An example of how this comparison will look like can be seen in fig. 3.4.
Figure 3.4: Rendering (on the left) and photo (on the right) from visualization point
6
Furthermore, in the survey were included questions regarding the visual impact of
the wind farms. These questions addressed the feeling that people have about the
impact of the wind farm. For example, it was asked if wind turbines are perceived as
beautiful or ugly or if the EIA visualizations were observed before the construction
and if so, how well do they resemble reality [28].
During interviews with municipal planners, the topic of visualizations and the quality
of these was also addressed.
Based on interviews and replies from the survey, different views on the quality of
the visualizations were gathered, discussed and compared with the photographic
comparisons made for the Danish case, and later were also discussed in comparison
with the Italian case.
24
Long Term Evaluation of EIA-assessment Reports for Onshore Wind Farms
==PAGE:39==
3.5
Study of the noise impact
This section describes how the noise impact is handled in the report.
The noise, or sound, from a wind turbine or a wind farm is something that can
easily create discussions and conflicts. While the visual impact is something that
cannot be objectively measured, it is different with the sound level. And legislative
noise limits are set, setting maximum limits of the noise level allowed [10]. So it
has to be carefully modelled during the planning process, and the calculated noise
values are included in the EIA. Sometimes after the wind farm starts operating,
a noise measurement campaign is carried out. This can be done either because of
some complaints that have been made by neighbours or others, or it could have been
decided to be made, as part of the general approval of the wind farm.
The modelling made in the EIA is strictly theoretical, calculated from noise levels
from the source, i.e. the wind turbine, and then the noise level at a certain posi-
tion is a factor of the source level as a function of the distance to the source [10].
The noise level at all neighbours living close by (1 km for the Nørhede-Hjortmose
wind farm), and some other points of interest e.g. cities, are modelled and lines are
drawn on maps in the EIA, showing the area where noise level limits are exceeded
[22]. The Noise measurement report is made by measuring the noise of wind turbines
at specific locations (from 3 turbines for the Nørhede-Hjortmose wind farm). These
measurements are then subject to calculations and modelling to find noise levels at
other positions, typically the same as in the EIA [23].
The values in the EIA are compared with the results from the measurement report
to see how much they are different, and questions in the survey regarding people’s
perception of noise and their concerns about it are also assessed.
Long Term Evaluation of EIA-assessment Reports for Onshore Wind Farms
25
==PAGE:40==
Figure 3.5: Map of noise modelling with noise limit lines indicated
3.6
Study of the planning process
In this section it is described how information on the planning process was gathered
and from whom.
The planning process for a wind farm project in Italy, France or Denmark has
to follow laws and regulations.
Some of these are EU-regulative, and some are
country-specific. In these, it is outlined how the planning process should be, and
what elements it has to contain. These are things as public involvement, EIA and
planning documents required, and what permits are needed before a wind farm is
built. Comparisons between the planning process in Italy and Denmark are made,
and the differences are discussed.
During interviews with the municipal planners, the topic of how the planning is
done in each municipality was discussed, as regulations only state a minimum but
obviously more can be done. Also, some examples of projects that went either very
well or not and the reasons of this were discussed.
In the survey, some questions on the planning process were asked, to find out how
the respondents felt about the planning process and to which extent they had par-
ticipated in the process and in what activities.
26
Long Term Evaluation of EIA-assessment Reports for Onshore Wind Farms
==PAGE:41==
4
Results and discussion
4.1
Comparison between the planning processes
from different countries
In this section, a comparison between the planning process from Denmark, Italy and
France will be carried out, based on what has been described in the previous para-
graphs (see section 2.3, section 2.4 and section 2.5).
Throughout this study, the analysis of how these different countries exercise their
legislation and how they deal with the planning process for a wind farm project has
been carried out. Therefore, it is possible at this point to also perform a comparison
between those and see how they differ or how similar they are in respect to one
another.
The main outcome of this analysis is that, from a global point of view, planning
processes in Denmark and France are smoother and faster compared to how is in
Italy. A demonstration of this is that to start building something in Italy, normally
much more time is needed due to errors when filling documents in, ambiguity of the
process itself and vagueness of the information given by both sides of the process.
This could be mainly due to the fact that the type of authorization needed differs
among these countries. As a matter of fact, in Italy there is much more distinction
in terms of kind of authorizations, which depends on different things (see fig. 2.3 as
a reminder). While in France it is only a binary option and in Denmark it is even
simpler because there is no distinction at all.
This difference is also influencing which authorities that are involved during the
process. Indeed, this depends on the complexity of the authorization needed. In
fact, for Denmark are always the same authorities (Ministries and municipalities)
that take part in the process. Also in France, even though there are two possibilities
of planning authorisation, it is always and only the Government which is taking
care of it. While in Italy it is a bit more intricate according to the size of the wind
farm, hence the permit needed. It could vary from being a simple matter of the
municipality to be object of regional institutions or national Ministries.
Another important aspect of the planning process which should be considered since
it is varying a lot from country to country is the public engagement.
Of course, it is extremely important to imform people of any incoming project which
could modify their everyday life, such as the building of a wind farm in their commu-
Long Term Evaluation of EIA-assessment Reports for Onshore Wind Farms
27
==PAGE:42==
nity. That is why public debate should represent an important phase of the planning
process and should be considered when scheduling its timetable. The problem is that
sometimes this is not realised. As a matter of fact, while public debate is indeed
mandatory in countries like Denmark and France [29], in other cases it is not like in
Italy [30].
It comes natural that this is influencing the perception that the people has of the
project itself. In fact, as it is also demonstrated by the survey results that is shown
in section 4.5, people that did not participate at all at the planning process and
could not express their opinion on that, tend to be more sceptical and against the
project, resulting in a big dissatisfaction after its construction.
It is also curious to notice how, depending on the country, there can be imple-
mented helpful means to improve and simplify the planning process. One example
is the way how Danish municipalities manage their own land and surrounding area,
establishing the zones in which it is possible or not to build a wind farm. In this
way, the selection process by the project proponent it is smoothed.
Unfortunately, this procedure is not implemented in Italy or France yet.
4.2
Resuming the differences between the EIAs
of the different countries
In this section, a comparison between the EIA reports from Denmark, Italy and
France will be carried out. To do so, different reports from these countries have been
studied to gain enough knowledge and build a base for the analysis.
The first thing that should be pointed out is that globally all the EIAs present
the same approach, meaning that the assessment is done always on the same as-
pects, and the reports are structured more or less in the same way. This is due
to the fact that EIA process is based on EU directives as seen in section 2.1 and
section 2.2.
Who is actually performing the environmental impact assessment is the first as-
pect to consider. In all the cases that have been taken into account for Denmark,
Italy and France, it found a similarity in the way EIA is performed and, more pre-
cisely, by who.
In general for all those countries, the company that proposes or owns the project, is
the one commissioning the EIA. To do so, it avails itself of third companies which
have more expertise in one specific field. For example, to conduct the noise impact
study, the proposer of the wind farm project delegates the job to another company,
which is expert in that sector.
Now, a little focus on the content itself of the EIA report should be put.
One
28
Long Term Evaluation of EIA-assessment Reports for Onshore Wind Farms
==PAGE:43==
first difference between Denmark, Italy and France stands in the first part of the
final report, when the legislation in effect in the specific country at the moment of
the writing is mentioned. Usually, for the Danish EIAs, this part occupies a very
small section of the overall memo and everything is communicated in a concise way.
On the other hand, for Italian and French cases, an extremely long and detailed
reminder on the ongoing legislation, both European and national, is given. This
results into a final document that is much longer and heavier from a reader point of
view.
Hence, this rises a doubt on who is exactly the targeted public of the resulting re-
port. If it is meant to be read by a general public that could be interested in the
project but not being en expert, or only a more experienced public which should
evaluate the integrity of the process in the end to approve it or not.
The same consideration arises when taking into account the non-technical summary,
which is a essential section of the final EIA report. In fact, this is much shorter (only
few pages maximum, but can also be presented as a simple pamphlet) and easier to
read for a Danish project. In case of an Italian of French report instead, it is much
longer (can reach up to about a hundred pages) and not very fluid when reading it
because of different technical detail which still are presented in it.
Also, the non-technical resume can also be directly included inside the main EIA
report for a Danish case. Differently, for Italy and France it is attached with the
EIA, but not included inside the EIA report.
A consideration on the technical aspect of the EIA could also be made. In this
project, particular attention has been paid on those impacts which are assessed be-
fore beginning a project and could represent a major source of discomfort for people
living close to the designed site. For the sake of this analysis, the focus was put on
both the visual and the acoustic impact. Precisely, the technical approach through
which those studies were performed in the selected countries have been observed
and compared.
Generally speaking, regardless of the country, the scientific method used to conduct
these analysis is more or less the same between Denmark, Italy and France, both
for visualisations and for noise study. Only few minor differences were noticed.
As a matter of fact, during the visual impact assessment in Italy, companies tend to
use pictures and reproduce rendering with an azimuth sight angle of 120° in order
to better replicate the visual field of the human eye. Differently, for the Danish and
French EIAs, a normal horizontal angle of 43.2° is used.
Another aspect that should be considered is the way through which EIAs are dis-
tributed or made public in general. In Denmark, municipalities are the main driver
for promoting a project. Generally, everything is posted on their national and mu-
nicipal websites but sometimes and they make sure to inform people about that.
Sometimes even few hard copies of the EIA report are printed and can be handed
Long Term Evaluation of EIA-assessment Reports for Onshore Wind Farms
29
==PAGE:44==
out to those stakeholders which should mandatory be heard about the process.
In France, also thanks to the practice of the ”débat publique”, people is quite in-
volved in decision-making processes. Hence, the environmental impact assessment
is promoted so that everyone can express themselves and they could also get infor-
mation about the project.
On the other hand, in Italy this is not always kept possible. As also confirmed by the
regional oﬀice worker that has been interviewed, the EIA process is not very much
promoted. As a matter of fact, the final report is kept on the municipality website
only until the project is confirmed and built and the public is not even informed
about it, so it is rare that someone consults the document.
Finally, one could reflect on the fact that after the process is done and the wind
farm is built, EIA reports are kept public in Denmark but in Italy and France they
are not anymore and no one can access them anymore, unless an oﬀicial request is
made to the project owner, which not always accept to grant this favor.
What is equal for all these countries is that, independently from the fact that these
documents are kept or not public, no one has ever done a systematic evaluation of
the EIA process.
The whole analysis conducted during this Master project and hence all the com-
parisons just discussed, have been based on the EIA of the following real cases:
• ”Nørhede-Hjortmose” in Denmark [22];
• ”Sant’Agata di Puglia” wind farm in Italy [31];
• ”Projet éolien de la Vallée Berlure” in France [32];
4.3
Analysis of the visual impact
This section describes how the visualizations are made in the EIA for Nørhede-
Hjortmose, and some of the general choices made, when doing the visualizations.
The visualizations in the EIA for Nørhede-Hjortmose wind farm consist of 31 points
of “public interest” and also in points in some of the neighbors’ gardens/property. It
was chosen to focus on the points in public areas, as these are affecting most people.
These are also easier to locate in order to try to take pictures for the comparison of
visualization and reality.
The points of visualization are chosen on the basis of an analysis of the surrounding
landscape, including terrain, growth, buildings, technical installations and points
of recreational and historical interest. This analysis is made from maps, studies of
literature and visits in the area. All these elements are analysed, and it is assessed
whether the area is sensitive and vulnerable to the planned wind turbines. Existing
wind turbines in the area are described and evaluated as indicators for the impact
the new wind turbines will have on the area [22].
30
Long Term Evaluation of EIA-assessment Reports for Onshore Wind Farms
==PAGE:45==
All these descriptions, analysis and assessments are used together with the actual
visualizations made at each point. For the visualizations, a picture is taken at each
point to show the existing conditions. Then the planned turbines are inserted in
this photo, to show how the landscape will look like in the future. This approach
is used by most companies that have been reviewed [33], but EIAs are found where
pictures of existing conditions are absent, thus giving less possibility to compare by
reading the EIA [34].
Points of visualizations are chosen in the near-zone (0-4.5 km from nearest WT
– similar to approx. <30 * WT-height), middle-zone (4.5-10 km from nearest WT –
similar to approx. 30-67 times WT-height) and the far zone (>10 km from nearest
WT – similar to > 67 times WT-height). Different companies and developers have
different approach to number of visualization points chosen, and what distances to
include. But the same relation between WT-height and the extent of the zones
is also found in other EIAs made by some other companies [33], and some a bit
different is also found (near-zone similar to approx. <24 times WT-height, middle-
zone 24-80 times WT-height, and far-zone >80 times WT-height) [34]. But these
zones are chosen by the companies and the visibility of the WT is more defined by
the landscape and the weather conditions than by the actual distance. A map of
visibility is seen below in fig. 4.1 and this is based on the above mentioned analysis.
Long Term Evaluation of EIA-assessment Reports for Onshore Wind Farms
31
==PAGE:46==
Figure 4.1: Map of the local area showing the elevation of the area around the
Nørhede Hjortmose Wind Farm
Based on the analysis, and the map generated from this, the 31 points of visualization
are chosen.
Figure 4.2: Map indicating the 31 points of visualization chosen for the Nørhede-
Hjortmose Wind Farm
32
Long Term Evaluation of EIA-assessment Reports for Onshore Wind Farms
==PAGE:47==
All pictures are taken with a standard 24 *36 mm digital camera with a 50 mm focal
length, taken between December 2011 and March 2012. Then the planned turbines
are inserted. In the EIA of Nørhede-Hjortmose the rotors of the turbines are always
oriented towards the spectator giving the maximum visual impact [22]. In other
EIAs the rotor orientation in the visualizations is set to be facing the dominant
wind direction in Denmark (SW) [34].
Furthermore, the WT are in some of the visualizations highlighted in a different
color than the actual color of the WT. Real color is white/light grey, but in some
pictures, they are drawn in dark grey or even red to make sure that the spectator
does not miss the WT in the pictures. For each point of visualization, comments
are written about the existing landscape, and about the impact of the planned WT.
Finally, the impact is evaluated, and conclusions are drawn on how the influence
will be on cities, landscape in near-, middle- and far-zone, recreational and historical
interests. All is summed up in a conclusion of the total visual impact.
4.3.1
Specific comments on visualizations in Nørhede
Hjortmose EIA, compared with photos taken
24+25/3 2022
All pictures are taken with the same photo settings and taken at exactly the same
positions (where this was possible) as the photos that the visualizations are based
upon. Both pictures taken for the visualizations in the EIA, and photos taken on
the field trip were taken at a time of year, when the trees carry no leaves, so the
trees in the pictures should give the same impression.
Some points were not located as the landscape has changed during the last 10 years
and also building are in some places erected, blocking the earlier view. Furthermore,
is was also found that trees and vegetation has changed a lot in 10 years and this
also affects the visual impression of different elements.
During the field trip the weather changed a lot, and a period of very dense fog made
visibility very limited. This, and weather conditions in general, means of course a
lot for the way that WT and WF are perceived.
Comparisons for all points of visualization are found in appendix A.6.
Long Term Evaluation of EIA-assessment Reports for Onshore Wind Farms
33
==PAGE:48==
Comparison, Point 1 – near zone:
Figure 4.3: Point 1 - near zone
The size of the WTs is precisely modelled, and also the orientation of the rotors also
seems to be the same. The layout of the wind farm is seen clearly, and even though
the turbines are dominating the view, they seem all together as one element in the
field of view. In the visualizations the turbines look like they are “lying in shadow”.
In the photo they are enlightened directly by the sun, which makes the WTs seem
34
Long Term Evaluation of EIA-assessment Reports for Onshore Wind Farms
==PAGE:49==
less visible and the landscape looks more harmonic in the photo than it does in the
visualization. The visibility at the time of photographing was very good, and all
turbines of the wind farm are visible. The view is what is seen when leaving the
city of No going SE.
Comparison, Point 12 – near zone:
Figure 4.4: Point 12 – near zone
Long Term Evaluation of EIA-assessment Reports for Onshore Wind Farms
35
==PAGE:50==
This view is only seen at a very particular spot of the churchyard, from where the
wind turbines are visible and they are not easily seen as logical pattern of turbines in
a wind farm. The turbines seem a little bigger in the real picture, but even though,
they seem to bet less visible. Different weather conditions will be able to alter the
visual impression. It is also seen in the picture that some trees have grown, and
others have been cut down. This also very much affects the view of the wind farm.
Comparison, Point 20 – middle zone:
Figure 4.5: Point 20 – middle zone
36
Long Term Evaluation of EIA-assessment Reports for Onshore Wind Farms
==PAGE:51==
Sizing and placing of the wind farm are precise, and the turbines cover a lot of the
horizon from exactly this point, but not in a very dominating way. The main road
takes a curve right here and the landscape is quite hilly in this area, so visualizations
could have been made just a short distance from this point, giving different impres-
sions. But at this point many people pass by and at the same time the turbines are
visible, making it a relevant choice of visualization point.
In fig. 4.6 Point 20 is photographed under different meteorological conditions. On
the day of photographing, the weather changed back and forth between haze and
bright sunshine.
The difference in visual impact is clearly seen in the two pho-
tographs taken at point 20.
Figure 4.6: Point 20 – middle zone at a different weather condition
4.3.2
Discussion
When looking at the visualizations in the EIA of Nørhede-Hjortmose wind farm,
and the renderings done of the wind turbines and the wind farm and comparing
them to the pictures taken on the field trip in March ’22, there are some things that
be discussed and concluded. It is very important that turbines in renderings are
made in the right size and that they are placed in the right way according to the
designed pattern of the wind farm. This is important as an incorrect sizing will give
the impression that the turbines are either smaller or bigger than they will be in
reality. The investigation of the EIA of Nørhede-Hjortmose, and other EIAs show
that the size of the planned wind turbines is modelled very precisely.
Long Term Evaluation of EIA-assessment Reports for Onshore Wind Farms
37
==PAGE:52==
The layout of a wind farm is important and must be made in a way that is does not
confuse the eye of the spectator and the municipalities demands this. This normally
gives wind farms with turbines placed in one or more straight lines. The layout is
specified by the developer and then modelled in the EIA. In the case of Nørhede-
Hjortmose, the 22 turbines are placed in two lines, and is it found that modelled
outline and the final one is identical. The final layout of a wind farm is sometimes
changed during the planning and approval process, and that means that the wind
farm ends up with a different layout than in the EIA. Even though this changes the
visual impression it is found that if the pattern is maintained with turbines in line,
the total impact of the wind farm does not change much if the number of turbines
is changed e.g from 6 to 5.
If the number of turbines change significantly, new
visualizations can be needed.
The coloring of wind turbines in EIAs is done differently, depending on the company
making the EIA. In the Nørhede-Hjortmose case, different colors are used. The real
color of the turbines is light grey, and this color is used in some of the visualizations,
where in others, the turbines are drawn in darker grey, or even red. This makes the
turbines easier to see and can be argued to be a “worst case scenario”, when looking
at the visual impact. It does indeed make turbines more visible, but at the same
time gives an unrealistic sense of the visibility.At some points there is also drawn a
line, pointing at the turbines – mostly in the middle and far zone. From the inves-
tigation of Nørhede-Hjortmose visualizations, it is found that renderings with the
correct coloring gives the most precise reproduction of the real conditions. This, in
addition with lines pointing at the turbines will give the spectator the most realistic
view of how thing will look after construction and make sure that the turbines are
not “missed” when looking at the rendering.
The rotor orientation means a lot for the impression of the wind turbines. The
largest impact is when the rotor is oriented towards the spectator. So when mod-
elling the turbines, it can be chosen to model the turbine facing the most frequent
wind direction, which for Nørhede-Hjortmose is 210-300 degrees [35], or to model
it with the rotor facing the spectator.
Choosing the latter, as it is done in the
Nørhede-Hjortmose case is a fair way to do it. The wind does not always come from
the same direction, and by choosing this method, no under-estimation in impact is
made because of this.
The human eyes cover a vision angle of approximately 180 degrees. To make the
most realistic visualizations panoramic photographs can be used, as they are done
in the Italian EIA [31]. This gives a more accurate modelling, but has the disad-
vantage, that it can be hard to fit in a normal A4-sheet of paper without details
in the picture being too small to distinguish. In the Nørhede-Hjortmose EIA some
panoramic views are used, but as two separate pictures, a right side and a left side
of the panorama. This gives better perception of details but means that they are
38
Long Term Evaluation of EIA-assessment Reports for Onshore Wind Farms
==PAGE:53==
placed on two different pages in the EIA. This means that it is necessary to have
the pictures printed on paper to put them besides each other. Realism then also
depends on printer quality. The optimal way would be to combine the two pictures
in an A3-sheet to make the picture big enough while keeping the detail level up.
Figure 4.7: Example of how rendering looks like or Italian EIA; note the 120° angle
of the pic [31]
It is seen very clearly, when looking at wind turbines, that they look differently
depending on the weather conditions. With a bright blue sky as background, a
turbine looks very visible and can easily dominate the view, whereas at a longer
distance on a cloudy day, the turbines will almost not be noticeable. Visualizations
are made based on a photograph taken under one specific weather condition, and to
make a very precise comparison it is necessary to look at the turbines under very
similar conditions. But when conditions are the same, it is possible to make a good
comparison on visual impact in renderings and photos focusing on other things than
the influence of changing weather conditions.
When comparing visualizations and pictures an important factor is also the out-
line of the landscape. This meaning both that the time of year is important as well
as the change of the landscape over time. The photographs which are the basis of
the visualizations are taken during the winter period 2012-13, and the field trip was
conducted in March 2022, meaning that the vegetation is very much in the same
condition at these two times.
As the seasons change, so does the effect the vegetation has on the view of the
turbines. It is clearly seen at some visualizations that as trees grow bigger, they
obstruct the view of the turbines more and more, and at the time of year when the
trees are wearing leaves, this obstruction is even larger.
Changing the landscape by building houses, or other buildings influence the outline
of the area, and this also affects the view from some of the visualization points and
make the wind turbines less dominating. This indicates that to get the full value of
the long-term evaluation of the EIA and the visualizations in it, it is a good idea
to make it as soon as possible after construction and operation start of the wind farm.
All visualizations as well as pictures taken shows are still-pictures, meaning that
the image is showing wind turbines that seem to be at a stand-still. This is in real-
ity of course not the situation for most of the time, since turbines are supposed to
be rotating, and are so for most of the time.
Long Term Evaluation of EIA-assessment Reports for Onshore Wind Farms
39
==PAGE:54==
Rotating turbines are more visible than turbines at a stand-still, so the visual impact
will actually be larger than it is found to be – both in visualization and photograph.
To increase realism in visualizations an idea could be to make a moving visualization
that people can access and view as part of the EIA. An example of this is seen when
comparing a photo taken at Klim Fjordholme wind farm, Jammerbugt Kommune,
DK on 24.05.22 with a live footage recorded at the same time and place [36].
Figure 4.8: Still photo of Klim Fjordholme wind farm. 24.05.22
To enhance the experience of the wind farm, an idea could also be to use Virtual
Reality (VR) to make as realistic a scenario as possible – using the recommendations
given above, regarding sizes, coloring of rendered turbines, rotor orientation and
format of pictures.
40
Long Term Evaluation of EIA-assessment Reports for Onshore Wind Farms
==PAGE:55==
4.4
Analysis of the noise impact
This section describes the noise level modelled in the Nørhede-Hjortmose wind farm
and compares with noise levels measured and calculated in the noise measurement
report made after the wind farm started operating.
4.4.1
Noise level limits and modelling
Noise level limits for wind are specified in executive orders made by the national
authorities 16). In Denmark the noise limits in open land are set at 42 dB(A) at a
wind speed of 6 m/s and 44 dB(A) at 8 m/s. In noise sensitive areas, the limits are
lower, 37 dB(A) at 6 m/s and 39 dB(A) at 8 m/s. A noise sensitive area is an area
that has been specified in a local plan or city plan statute as an area for housing,
institutions, summer houses, camping or allotment purposes. It can also be areas
specified for noise sensitive recreational purposes.
The municipality is responsible for identifying noise sensitive areas when a wind
farm is planned, and even though the Nørhede-Hjortmose wind farm is placed in
open farmland, 3 small cities/dwellings were identified as noise sensitive areas. An
institution, Hatkærhus, is also one of the neighbors, but as the people using it were
not sleeping there, and the activity there was not noise sensitive, it was categorised
as a “normal neighbor”, so the noise limits are set at 42/44 dB(A) at this point [22].
So, when identifying noise sensitive areas, it is based on a specific assessment of the
house/area and the way it is used.
In addition to these noise level limits, there is also in Denmark a limit for low
frequency noise between 10 and 160 Hz, set at 20 dB(A). While the regular noise
levels are modelled at a point 15 m from the point of the building closest to the
wind farm, low frequency noise is modelled inside the houses [22].
Noise limits are national matters, so each country sets their own limits. The pre-
viously mentioned noise level limits apply for Denmark, while noise limits in Italy
and France are different.
In Italy there are two reference criteria for the assessment and / or prediction of
environmental noise:
1. The absolute criterion: is based on the description of the territory based
on its characteristics urban planning and housing. For each identified area,
maximum admissible limits are defined for the day and night period not to be
exceeded. The application of this criterion concerns the open environment.
2. The differential criterion: involves the definition of two different noise
conditions: the environmental noise, i.e. that dependent on a specific noise
source and noise background or residual, which describes the overall noise,
with the exclusion of the specific source.
For the first criterion, In case that the site has been classified according to the
Long Term Evaluation of EIA-assessment Reports for Onshore Wind Farms
41
==PAGE:56==
intended use of it, table 4.1 can be used; otherwise table 4.2 has to be referred.
Classes of intended
use of the territory
Daytime (6-22h)
Night-time (22-6h)
I. Particularly protected
areas
50 dBA
40 dBA
II. Areas intended for
mainly residential use
55 dBA
45 dBA
III. Mixed type areas
60 dBA
50 dBA
IV. Areas of intense
human activity
65 dBA
55 dBA
V. Mainly industrial
areas
70 dBA
60 dBA
VI. Exclusively
industrial areas
70 dBA
70 dBA
Table 4.1: Italian noise limits in dB(A) for different territory classes
Zoning
Daytime (6-22h)
Night-time (22-6h)
All the national territory
70 dBA
60 dBA
Exclusively industrial
area
70 dBA
70 dBA
Table 4.2: Italian noise limits in dB(A) for more generic cases
For the second criterion, the differential emission limits coincide with those already
established by the DPCM 01/03/91 and, precisely, within the living environment,
the increase in residual noise brought about by a specific source cannot exceed the
limit of 5dB during the day and 3 dB during the night.
In France, the regulation is done in a third way, working with maximum noise
levels quite close to the turbine, and not at neighboring houses. Limits are shown
in table 4.3.
Daytime (6-22h)
Night-time (22-6h)
70 dBA
60 dBA
Table 4.3: Maximum noise level on the measurement perimeter for France
The measurement perimeter is defined as: ”Perimeter corresponding to the smallest
polygon in which the discs with the centre of each wind turbine and radius R defined
as follows:”
R = 1.2 ∗(Hub height + Length of half a rotor)
42
Long Term Evaluation of EIA-assessment Reports for Onshore Wind Farms
==PAGE:57==
The marked tone consists in highlighting the preponderance of a frequency compo-
nent. In the present case, the marked tone is detected from the spectral levels in
the third octave band and is established when the difference:
50-315 Hz
400-8000 Hz
10 dBA
5 dBA
Table 4.4: Marked tone limit for France
Neither Italy or France have any regulation on low frequency noise.
Regulations might change, but a wind farm is always subject to the legislation
active at the time of approval. In Denmark, the order on wind turbine noise “Bek-
endtgørelse om støj fra vindmøller” has been changed twice since the approval of
Nørhede-Hjortmose wind farm was approved. However, the noise limits remain the
same [10, 37, 38].
When noise modelling is done for a wind farm, certain things need to be known.
First, a wind turbine model needs to be chosen, and the noise emission from this
specific wind turbine type needs to be known. This is supplied by the wind turbine
manufacturer, and the noise emission measured directly at the turbine is in this
report called the source value. The wind turbine type chosen for final construction
does not have to be this type, since this is not always decided upon when the EIA
is written. Different types of wind turbines might be possible, and noise modelling
is normally only done for one of them, as in the EIA of Nørhede-Hjortmose where
the modelled turbine is a Siemens 3.0 MW with a hub-height of 92.5 m and a rotor
diameter of 113 m. The different options of wind turbines are normally quite similar
regarding size and output but can be from different suppliers. If another type than
the one modelled in the EIA is chosen a noise modelling for the chosen type must
be made documenting that noise level limits are not exceeded.
The turbine chosen for Nørhede-Hjortmose is not the Siemens turbine, but a Vestas
3.3 MW turbine with a hub-height of 94 m and a rotor diameter of 112 m. The
source value of the noise is 106.0 dB(A) for the Siemens turbine and 104 dB(A) for
the Vestas model [22].
Knowing the source value and the position of all turbines in the wind farm, it
is possible to calculate the noise level at each point of interest. The total noise level
is, however, not only the noise from the wind farm, but a sum of noise from all
wind farms in the area. The existing wind farms in the area are evaluated to see if
their noise emission adds to the total noise around the new wind farm, and if so,
they are included in the noise modelling. For Nørhede-Hjortmose, one existing wind
farm is included in modelling future noise values [22]. When modelling noise levels
Long Term Evaluation of EIA-assessment Reports for Onshore Wind Farms
43
==PAGE:58==
a software tool, typically ’Windpro’, is used. The result of the modelling is then
assessed and compared to the noise level limits set by legislation.
The noise modelling for Nørhede-Hjortmose indicated that the noise level from the
wind farm was 2 dB(A) or less below the noise limits, so the authorities demanded
a noise measurement campaign for the wind farm to ensure that noise limits are not
exceeded [22]. This was performed in by DELTA in August 2014 [23].
4.4.2
The noise measurement report
The noise measurement report is carried out by measuring the noise from a number
of turbines, in this case 3. These turbines are chosen more or less randomly from
practical criteria like accessibility, crops in the field that might disturb the measur-
ing devices and also away from other significant sources of noise – if possible. The
measurement is carried out according to the procedure found in the legislation [10].
The background noise is measured while the turbine is at a standstill. Over some
time intervals, the noise from each of the chosen turbines is measured while the
neighboring turbines are stopped so they don´t interfere with the measurements.
As well as the noise level, the temperature, humidity, and air pressure are recorded.
Noise level limits are set at 6 and 8 m/s and the measured values must be at the
same wind speeds. Depending on the situation, the wind speed is determined in
different ways. During measurement of the background noise, the wind speed is
measured by an anemometer placed on a 10 m measuring mast. In periods where
the wind turbine power output is over 95% of nominal power, the wind speed is
measured by the anemometer placed on the nacelle. At power output lower than
95% of nominal power, the wind speed is calculated from the power curve of the
turbine [23]. The correlation between power curve and wind speed is very precise in
the wind speed range that is interesting for the noise measurement, 6 +/-0.5 m/s
and 8 +/-0.5 m/s. All wind speeds outside these bins are discarded. Discarded are
also measurements where noise disturbances are identified, like a passing airplane
or other sudden noises.
All measurements are reviewed and analyzed regarding tonality to see if a certain
frequency has a significantly higher level than the others. From these measurements,
all noise levels are calculated at the points of interest (same points as in the EIA,
but numbered in another order) and plots are made to show the noise levels and
tonality of the 3 measured wind turbines.
4.4.3
Perception of noise
Sound and noise are two sides of the same coin, depending on how it is perceived.
Noise is when the sound gets annoying or damaging physically or mentally. Sound
from wind turbines is defined as noise, hence the noise level limits. When measuring
sound, the energy intensity I [W/m2] of the sound is measured. The lowest intensity
that the human ear can detect is 10−12W/m2 at 1000 Hz and this is called the
44
Long Term Evaluation of EIA-assessment Reports for Onshore Wind Farms
==PAGE:59==
reference value (Iref)and corresponds to 0 dB. The sound level is then calculated
using the formula:
L = 10 ∗log10 ∗(I/Iref) [dB]
From this formula it is seen that a doubling of the sound energy intensity I gives an
increase of 3 dB [39].
This is however not the way it is perceived by the human ear. To have the feeling
of a doubling in sound level, the sound needs to go up by 8 – 10 dB, depending
on the frequency of the sound [22, 39]. The perception of sound/noise is not only
dependent on the level, but also on the composition of the sound and the level of
background noise. If a turbine emits a pure tone of one single frequency, it will be
felt like more annoying than if the noise is more “broad-spectered”, and that is why
a new type-approved wind turbine must not emit audible pure tones.
Figure 4.9: Noise changes as perceived by the human ear [40]
Noise is perceived more annoying if there are different sources of noise, so the total
level of noise perceived is a sum of noise from Nørhede-Hjortmose wind turbines,
other turbines in the area, traﬀic, farm work and other activities in the area.
Wind turbine noise varies in time in a special way, which means that it is audible
even at very low noise levels, and that is why it is not certain that the background
noise will drown the noise of the turbine. The background noise is what you hear
when the turbine is not running, and comes from vegetation etc., and is dependent
on weather conditions, time of day and year and other activities in the area and
therefore not at a constant level [22, 39].
Long Term Evaluation of EIA-assessment Reports for Onshore Wind Farms
45
==PAGE:60==
4.4.4
Comparisons
When comparing wind turbine noise it is possible to do it in different ways. The
noise level can be compared with the noise level limits. And the noise level of the
EIA can be compared with the noise level values in the noise measuring report made
after the wind farm starts operating. Comparison of noise levels in the EIA are made
to get an overview of how far the modelled noise level is from the limits, whether it
is under or over the limit.If limit and modelled values are within +/- 2dB from each
other (which is the uncertainty of the noise modelling [38]), a control measurement
report can be demanded. This is the case for the Nørhede-Hjortmose wind farm.
Comparisons of noise levels modelled in the EIA with noise levels in the measure-
ment report gives an indication of the accuracy of the noise modelling.
Both comparisons are plotted below. In plots comparing with noise level, the noise
level is on the y-axis in dB, and in plots comparing EIA noise values with measure-
ment report values, the difference in noise level is on the y-axis (positive values when
EIA values are higher than Measurement report values). In all plots, the physical
positions of modelling (neighbors) are on the x-axis, numbered as in the EIA, see
fig. 4.2 (chapter 3.4 pp. 27). Separate plots are made for low frequency noise.
Since the wind turbine chosen for modelling in the EIA is a Siemens S113 and
the turbine chosen for the wind farm is a Vestas V112, with different levels of noise
emission, it makes comparison of noise more uncertain, but some trends can be seen.
At no point at any wind speed is the difference between the values modelled in the
EIA and the values in the measurement report more than 4 dB, which is the largest
uncertainty (2 * 2 dB), and for 70% of the compared values, the difference is below
2 dB.
At some conditions the EIA values are higher than in the measurement report,
and for others they are lower. It is seen that for the neighbors on Ølstrupvej, the
EIA values are the highest at all conditions. These houses are positioned between
two wind farms, both taken into account when calculating the total noise impact.
Compared to noise limit values, both the noise values in the EIA, and in the mea-
surement report are all below the limit values, apart from one neighbor (Ølstrupvej
31B) where the noise levels in the EIA is modelled to exceed the noise limit at 6
m/s and 8 m/s. To mitigate this problem, the EIA proposes two different solutions,
either that the Nørhede-Hjortmose developer buys the house so no one can live there
or to downscale the operation of one or more turbines to reduce noise emission. The
measurement report shows lower values that the limit at all conditions, so this mit-
igation is no longer needed.
At some neighbors in the open land, the emitted noise level is very close to the
46
Long Term Evaluation of EIA-assessment Reports for Onshore Wind Farms
==PAGE:61==
noise limit, and for others there is some margin. For the noise sensitive areas No
and Nørhede (the two closest noise sensitive areas) the noise level is just below the
limit, while in Ølstrup the noise levels are approximately 7 dB below the noise limit
[22, 23].
Figure 4.10: Noise levels at 6 m/s
Long Term Evaluation of EIA-assessment Reports for Onshore Wind Farms
47
==PAGE:62==
Figure 4.11: Noise levels at 8 m/s
48
Long Term Evaluation of EIA-assessment Reports for Onshore Wind Farms
==PAGE:63==
Figure 4.12: Low frequency noise levels at 6 m/s
Long Term Evaluation of EIA-assessment Reports for Onshore Wind Farms
49
==PAGE:64==
Figure 4.13: Low frequency noise levels at 8 m/s
4.4.5
Discussion
As the turbine types are two different models from two different manufacturers it is
diﬀicult to make a valid comparison between noise levels. Even though the size and
power output from the two turbines are similar, it is not necessarily so for the noise
emission, where the difference in noice level at the source is 106 dB for the Siemens
wind turbine, and 104 dB for the Vestas turbine. This makes direct comparison
diﬀicult.
The noise modelling in the EIA has found the noise emission to be below the noise
50
Long Term Evaluation of EIA-assessment Reports for Onshore Wind Farms
==PAGE:65==
level limit at all but one neighbor position, and this is confirmed in the measuring
report. Noise levels in the report are generally a little bit lower, than modelled in
the EIA. This indicates that noise modelling is accurate, if not conservative.
Low frequency noise values are well below the limit at all conditions at all neighbor
positions, and the modelling and measuring report are corresponding well. Since
low frequency noise is of great concern of some people and may have some influence
on health if it is at a high level, this is important to document as it is not always
heard and noticed.
4.5
Analysis of the survey results
4.5.1
Comparison and correlation of survey results
This section presents and discusses some interesting observations and correlations
found when investigating the responses of the surveys distributed in Italy and Den-
mark.
To be able to analyze the Danish and Italian survey, different correlations have
been investigated. Since responses from the Italian survey are very few (75 started
the survey), most details have been extracted from the Danish survey (145 have
started the survey) and compared to the overall picture from the Italian survey.
Due to an inconvenient setup of navigating through the survey and skipping irrel-
evant questions, many respondents failed to complete all questions. First it was
designed in way where it was not possible to skip e.g. irrelevant questions. Because
of feedback on this, it was changed, so there was no need to respond to all ques-
tions. But because of this only 77 completed the Danish survey and 46 the Italian
survey. Graphs for all questions in the surveys are shown in appendix A, without
any filtering.
First, the difference between respondents living in the area before the wind farms
were planned and constructed, are filtered out and compared to those having moved
there since, or younger than the wind farms. The wind farms are built in 2012, and
no respondents younger than 10 years have participated. All respondents answering
that they have lived in the area 0-10 years also responded that they did not know
of or participated in the activities during the planning period.
Of the rest of the respondents, the overall picture is that they feel that the area
is a little less attractive than it was 10 years ago (fig. 4.14a). However, for most
people, this did not affect their attachment to the area (fig. 4.14b).
Long Term Evaluation of EIA-assessment Reports for Onshore Wind Farms
51
==PAGE:66==
(a) Changes in attractiveness of different
parameters of local area (1-5, where 1 is
much worse, 5 is much better and 3 is neu-
tral)
(b) How has attachment to local area
changed due to these changes of attractive-
ness
Figure 4.14: Questions 4 and 5 from Danish survey
Of these people, only 5% have never heard of the planning process, but only 5%
knew about it from the authorities, while hearing it from media or other people
goes for 77.5%. This indicates that authorities have a big task in communicating
about project planning and that there is still room for improvement (fig. 4.15).
It is however not shown whether information from authorities brought in newspapers
or other media is part of the 50% indicating media as their source of information.
One person indicated that the first information came from the developer, and this
is quite normal for landowners owning land where a potential wind farm is sup-
posed to be. Developers often negotiate with landowners in advance, to scout if the
landowners are interested in supplying/selling land for the project.
Of the respondents knowing about the process and having lived in the area at the
time of the planning process, only 1/3 did not participate in any kind of activity
connected to the project, meaning that about 2/3 participated in one or more activ-
ities. 20% participated in the public debate in some way (fig. 4.16a) and 22.9% were
active in the public hearings being held, while 43% were just attending. (fig. 4.16b).
52
Long Term Evaluation of EIA-assessment Reports for Onshore Wind Farms
==PAGE:67==
Figure 4.15: Distribution of sources of information
(a) Distribution of participation in process
(b) Distribution of participation in public
hearings
Figure 4.16: Questions 9 and 10 from Danish survey
Long Term Evaluation of EIA-assessment Reports for Onshore Wind Farms
53
==PAGE:68==
For the respondents of the Italian survey, only 7% participated in activities during
the planning process, while 57% didn’t know about it. This could be because plan-
ning documents in Italy are publicized on authority websites, but no information is
given that it is actually there. Furthermore, the Italian people think that they have
no influence anyway, and also because documents are removed from publicity after
wind farm approval.
Regarding addressing the concerns of the local population, residents having lived
in the area are having different opinions on how well this was done. 23% think it
was done well or very well, 41% think it was not done suﬀiciently, and 36% have do
not know or have no opinion on this. Some ideas for improving the process were pre-
sented in the survey (More information in media, more public involvement, guided
tours of the area and creation of an interactive platform for participation) (fig. 4.17),
but other suggestions were made by the respondents and are quoted hereafter:
• Objections not handled properly, should improve
• Legislation too old regarding neighbors for wind farms
• More public involvement
• More information for summer house owners
• Better information in media
• More dialogue between developer and neighbors
• Larger distance requirements to neighbors
• More ambitious local politicians and better opportunities for compensation
and selling houses to developer
• More emphasis on sustainability and the future for our descendants
54
Long Term Evaluation of EIA-assessment Reports for Onshore Wind Farms
==PAGE:69==
Figure 4.17: Ideas for improvement of process
Some of these quotes and ideas are related to the communication from developer and
authorities to the public, and are to some extent already implemented in procedures
regarding planning (see from section 2.3 to section 2.5), but it can always be argued
whether communication is suﬀicient. Other comment are more targeting legislation
and are not as such topics that the municipality controls. But they are important
statements and should be addressed when current rules and guidelines are reviewed
when revising legislation. The same points of view are found in comments in the
Italian survey.
Most of the respondents of both the Italian and the Danish survey have a view
of wind turbines from their property (86%), and many also from inside their houses.
What could be expected is that this would give a negative response when asking
about the perception of the view of the wind turbines. But this is not the general
picture. Both the Danish and the Italian survey results show that about 1/4 think
they are just ugly.
The rest think either that the turbines are beautiful (≈10%), ugly but necessary
(≈25%) and around 33% either do not see them, or do not notice them. This
distribution is the same for the Italian and Danish survey. Besides the fact that the
feeling of visual impact is an individual thing, some other reasons are also relevant.
Wind farms have spread widely across the countryside during the last decades, and
somehow the eye gets used to what it sees, so wind turbines are now a natural part
Long Term Evaluation of EIA-assessment Reports for Onshore Wind Farms
55
==PAGE:70==
of the landscape for many people. The need for green transition can also have an
impact on how people feel about the view and make them accept more for ”a greater
cause”.
(a) Danish case
(b) Italian case
Figure 4.18: Visual perception of wind turbines for both Denmark and Italy
Of people answering the Italian survey, only 8% saw the visualizations in the EIA.
In the Danish survey, about half saw them, and of these about 1/3 thought resemble
reality well, while 2/3 think they do not.
Of the people thinking that the EIA rendering were accurate 57% think that wind
turbines are beautiful (Figure 9), while 69% of people thinking that the visualizations
do not resemble reality think they are ugly (Figure 10).
Comments from these respondents on how to minimize the visual impact are mostly
like ‘I think wind turbines are beautiful and necessary’ and ‘There is no need to
change anything’, while those who are negative posts comments like ‘Put fewer
turbines in one park’, ‘Larger distances to houses required’, ‘They are there, so they
should not be taken down’ and ‘From our house the wind farm layout looks messy’.
It is a general trend that people indicate changing the wind turbine color and layout
of the wind farm to minimize the visual impact. As described in section 4.3, the
perception of wind turbine color is very dependant on surroundings and weather
conditions, and the layout is specified to be easy-perceptible – but that depends on
the point from where you see the wind farm.
Generally the people positive towards the visualizations are also much more positive
towards the other aspects of the survey, the planning process, the noise level and its
possible affect on health.
56
Long Term Evaluation of EIA-assessment Reports for Onshore Wind Farms
==PAGE:71==
(a) Rendering considered not precise
(b) Rendering considered precise
Figure 4.19: Visual perception of wind turbines according to the perception of the
rendering
Noise is modelled in the EIA, but the distribution of answers to the question whether
people live in the area modelled, is different from Italy to Denmark. In Italy 17% live
inside the zone, 42% outside and 33% do not know. The Danish responses are more
evenly distributed, with 30% living within the zone, 28% outside, and 40% unaware.
When looking at how many indicate that they can hear the wind turbines, that is
the case for 40% of the Danish responses, and 67% of the Italian responses. Since
more people in Italy than Denmark, in percentages, live outside the noise modelled
area it was expected that fewer would indicate that they can hear the wind turbines.
However, this is not what the surveys shows. The reason for this is that the area
of modelling is in Italy chosen by looking at sensitive points in the area, and then
model up to this distance from the turbines, in this case 1200 m. Below are shown
the graphs of distribution of people living inside/outside the noise modelled area
(see fig. 4.20a and fig. 4.20b) and graphs showing how many can hear the turbines
from their house (see fig. 4.21a and fig. 4.21b).
Long Term Evaluation of EIA-assessment Reports for Onshore Wind Farms
57
==PAGE:72==
(a) Danish case
(b) Italian case
Figure 4.20: Distribution of people living inside/outside noise modelled area
(a) Danish case
(b) Italian case
Figure 4.21: Distribution of people living inside/outside noise modelled area
Of those being able to hear the Danish wind farm, 74% live inside the zone where
noise is modelled, and 21% are unsure whether they live inside or outside. 68% of
these are either worried or very worried that noise can influence their health (Figure
15), while the same number for those not being able to hear the turbines is 41%
(Figure 16). So even if people are not directly disturbed by the noise, there is some
concern about the possibility of noise influencing their health. More than half of
the people not disturbed, do not notice the noise or are not concerned about it. Of
those who can hear the noise, that number is only 16%.
58
Long Term Evaluation of EIA-assessment Reports for Onshore Wind Farms
==PAGE:73==
(a) People hearing wind turbines
(b) People not hearing wind turbines
Figure 4.22: Worries about wind turbine noise according to the fact that people
hear or not wind turbines
For Italy (fig. 4.23), 50% are found to be worried or very worried about noise influ-
encing their health, while 42% either do not hear the noise, or are not worried by
it
Figure 4.23: Worries about wind turbine noise - Italian case
Long Term Evaluation of EIA-assessment Reports for Onshore Wind Farms
59
==PAGE:74==
It is not only noise that some of the respondents are concerned about.
30% of
those who can not hear the turbines have other concerns, while 42% of those who
can, have other concerns. These are stated as concerns about stress-factors, blood
pressure disorder, disturbance by blade flickering and general drop in quality of life.
Some indicate that they can not use their gardens as before, especially at some
wind directions. For the total number of Danish responses 51% are worried or very
worried about noise, and 34% have other concerns (Figure 18).
For the Italian case, 50% are worried or very worried about noise affecting health,
and 42% have other concerns (Figure 19).
(a) Danish case
(b) Italian case
Figure 4.24: Other concerns about health issues
Finally, but not least, another factor also relevant for acceptance of nuisances such
as visual impact and noise, is whether there is also something to gain from these
nuisances. In Denmark there are different ways to gain financially from renewable
energy plants, such as wind farms, both as an individual and as a local community
[41]. There are two of these financial reasons that are the main ones for the local
inhabitants around Nørhede-Hjortmose wind farm. The first one is the possibility
to buy shares in the project, thus giving an income for every produced kWh from
the wind farm, which many did. The second is the fact that a sum of money is dis-
tributed from the wind farm owners to the local community, to be managed locally.
No significant differences were found when filtering out answers from people with
direct financial interest in the wind farm, although they seem a bit more positive
regarding the visual impact, and also a slightly larger acceptance of noise is found.
60
Long Term Evaluation of EIA-assessment Reports for Onshore Wind Farms
==PAGE:75==
4.5.2
Discussion
Since the number of responses are limited, what is found from the surveys cannot
be categorized as statistical facts, but indicates some trends and gives some ideas
of how the public feel about aspects of wind farm planning and projects.
The overall picture on how attractive the neighborhood is and how it has changed
for the last 10 years indicate that people think that the area is a little less attractive
now. For most people this change does not affect their attachment to the area, and
the reason for the area being less attractive is not certain to be because of the wind
farm. However, this might have an effect on the ability to attract new inhabitants
to the area, even if it considered rather attractive. Other areas, without wind farms
are perhaps more attractive.
The Danish survey showed that people mostly got their information via other peo-
ple or from the media. There is a potential for authorities to get their information
out to people, to do it more precise and in that way have more control over which
information is distributed and that it is correct. Municipal planners state that they
inform according to legislation and some send out personal information to neighbors
in a radius from the wind farm – not only to those defined by legislation. As only
5% indicate that they did not know that there was a planning process going on, 95%
of all people had the possibility to look for more information about the project, and
participate in the public part of the process. That is a high rate and shows that
most people get information about projects in the municipality directly or indirectly.
This is also corresponding with what was found in a survey by Megafon in Denmark
on green transition and wind turbines at Bornholm, where 7% indicated that they
never heard of the specific project[42].
When only 1/3 of the people knowing about the process chooses not to participate in
the process, it shows that most people feel strongly about their local neighborhood
and are ready to participate in activities that can influence the local community.
When looking at the statements about how to improve the process, many of thse
are wishes for more information, more public involvement, better handling of com-
plaints and more ambitious politicians. This could indicate that people feel, that
even though they take active part in the process and participate in meetings and
hearings, they are very much in doubt whether they can affect the process and
the decisions being taken by the authorities. ‘The authorities hear, but they don’t
listen’. Clausen, L.T and Nyborg, S. find in their article ‘Borgeres og kommuners
erfaringer med borgerinddragelse I dansk vindmølleplanlægning’ [43] that people
find the planning process of wind farms undemocratic, and not very transparent.
They also find that there are many doubts whether the input given by people is ac-
tually used. This could also be the reason why some people choose not to participate.
Long Term Evaluation of EIA-assessment Reports for Onshore Wind Farms
61
==PAGE:76==
When it comes to the visual impact, there is a clear correlation between people
thinking that the visualizations do not resemble reality, and people that think tur-
bines are ugly. The same goes for people thinking that the visualizations are pre-
cise, and people that think turbines are pretty. It is not possible to extract whether
people think turbines are ugly/pretty, so they do not think the visualizations are
precise/not precise, or vice versa. But from the rest of the answers from these two
groups, it seems to be a case of being in favor of wind turbines or being against
them – being a general fan or an opponent.
There are many people not knowing if they live within the area that has been
noise modelled in the EIA. In the EIA, lines showing the noise limits are drawn on
a map, and neighbors or positions where noise is modelled are indicated by points
[22]. Limits of the noise modelled area is not shown, and it is not very clear if
neighbors of noise modelled positions are also in the modelled area, or not. There
are many people who are concerned about the impact wind turbines might have on
their health. People that live close to the turbines, and can hear them, are more
worried than those who cannot hear the turbines. But for both groups, a significant
group is worried, even though the noise limits are not exceeded in any position,
confirmed in the noise measurement report [23]. People being worried even at low
noise levels, or not audible noise at all, indicates that authorities and wind farm
developers still have a large communication task in informing people about actual
noise levels, results from research in noise and health. Being below noise limits does
not necessarily mean that you cannot hear the turbines.
62
Long Term Evaluation of EIA-assessment Reports for Onshore Wind Farms
==PAGE:77==
5
Conclusion
In this section, the overall conclusions for this project will be presented, answering
those research questions that were established in the beginning (see section 1.2).
In this study, both the planning and the EIA processes in Denmark, Italy and
France have been assessed and compared, through literature review, surveys and
interviews to authorities and planners.
In general, planning processes in Denmark, Italy and France seem to be quite sim-
ilar and respect the minimum conditions set by the EU directives. Nevertheless,
there are few differences. In Italy in fact, it is always a bit longer and harder than
in the other two countries to get the authorisations for a wind farm project; also
because of the awkwardness of the legislation. This brings about not only a larger
process time, but also the fact that a big percentage of projects get stuck in the
authorisation process and is refused after years of iterations.
All this ambiguity in the process, also causes a much smaller engagement of the
Italian people compared to the Danish and French one. In Italy only 1 out of 10
participated in the process while 2/3 participated in the Danish process, As a matter
of fact, a proper public hearing phase is not defined in Italy and people don’t have
many chances to express themselves during the decision-making process.
EIA reports are structured more or less in the same ways and is really dependent on
the proposer of the project itself. What has been observed by the cases taken as ex-
amples, is that there are small differences like the length of the non-technical resume
(for Italy it is much longer and still quite technical, it seems not to be made for being
distributed to everyone). Also the techniques on how visual impact is studied differs
a bit for the Italian case since visualisations are made with a broader visual angle
to imitate human vision. Noise simulations are all done more or less in the same way.
From the analysis of the visual impact, it can be noticed that the assessment made
during the EIA process of Nørhede-Hjortmose is very accurate, with a very precise
rendering. There is still space for improvement, giving more attention to few details
like the colour of the turbines, the view angle for the pictures etc, in order to give
a more realistic impression to people.To get precise visualizations under different
conditions, further research and work with visualization tools are needed.
Also the analysis of the noise impact seems to be valid although sometimes peo-
ple tend to misunderstand the fact that noise levels are not exceeded with the idea
that wind turbines are not emitting any sound at all.
Long Term Evaluation of EIA-assessment Reports for Onshore Wind Farms
63
==PAGE:78==
Moreover, even if noise reports are public and showing real noise conditions, it is
not easy to find them publicly but they must be retrieved through municipalities
or wind farm owners. In addition, they are written in a diﬀicult way which makes
them hard to understand for people who are not experts in this field.
A great part of this study has been played by the survey that has been handed
out to people in Denmark and Italy, to have an idea on how the public senses the
topic and how feels about wind energy in general. From the answers, it can be
seen that communication to the public is very different from Denmark (much more
involvement) to Italy (public not involved at all).However, this does not necessarily
mean that the Danish public feel that they have actual influence on the final wind
farm project.
A trend found in the surveys, is that people being critical to the visualizations also
tend to give negative responses to other questions, indicating that that the answers
people give, are affected by their general feeling about wind energy and wind energy
developers.
To conclude, another general consideration could be made on the fact that the
policy on the documents’ diffusion varies a lot from one country to another. As a
matter of fact, while in Denmark most documents are publicly available and easily
retrievable, for Italy and France it is not. To find public documents on operating
wind farms is extremely hard, not to say impossible. Even companies are not prone
to help in this sense since they always feel suspicious and do not want to be bothered
by people rising questions that could put them in a diﬀicult position.
This has been a big blocking point for this project but not only; it also represents
a giant limitation for the sake of scientific research and for transparency towards
people who just want to be informed and participate to the process.
64
Long Term Evaluation of EIA-assessment Reports for Onshore Wind Farms
==PAGE:79==
6
Our own learnings
This section highlights some of the learning acquired along the way, reflections on it
and some things that have been surprising while working with this project.
Everybody seems to think that it is a great and valuable idea to do evaluation
of wind farm projects for future use and benefit, both municipal planners, people
responding to surveys and people working in research and with EIAs and wind farm
projects. It has been surprisingly diﬀicult to get in contact with people working
for the authorities to get their view and experiences from working in this field. It
seems that there is a skepticism towards people wanting to ask questions on wind
energy projects, because a lot of conflicts have been seen in some of these projects.
However, when talking to Danish municipal planners, they are quite eager to share
their view and how they execute the planning process.
In Denmark there is a high “level of trust” between people and authorities, and most
documents regarding wind farms can be found directly online, or easily requested.
This is not the case in Italy and France, where documents are “hidden” after project
execution to avoid being bothered by questions.
Visualizations from the Danish EIA were found to be diﬀicult to reproduce.
In
10 years, the landscape changes more than we expected and only a little change in
weather conditions or point of photographing changes the total outline of the wind
farm. So visualizations are indeed realistic but only at specific conditions.
The surveys distributed in Denmark and Italy have also given some room for reflec-
tion. Structuring a survey and targeting the right people to respond to the surveys
is very time demanding and addressing people via Facebook-groups is not the most
precise way. In Denmark it is possible to send out surveys through a public plat-
form, e-books, where respondents can be sorted in different ways, e.g. randomly or
by address, but it was not possible to get an authority to help with that. What
was surprising from the answers, was that most people are actually in favor of wind
energy, even in their neighborhood, but seem to think that the process can be im-
proved.
In the end, the question is why the focus is not on the quality of the process, and
possible ways to keep high quality even if the process is speeded up. Focus should
be on getting solid data foundation for wind farm projects by using former successes
and failures to optimize planning processes. This could save a lot of time and reduce
time spent on local resistance and complaints. For this, structured reviews could
be an excellent tool and since everybody thinks it is a great idea – it should be a
priority to get it done.
Long Term Evaluation of EIA-assessment Reports for Onshore Wind Farms
65
==PAGE:80==
This page has been left blank intentionally.
66
Long Term Evaluation of EIA-assessment Reports for Onshore Wind Farms
==PAGE:81==
7
Recommendations for future
work
This section gives ideas and recommendations for possible activities that can be per-
formed following this project to make further investigations into the tendencies and
trends found during our work with this project.
This project being a part of the DTU Online Wind Master, it has been conducted in
5 months. This gives some limitations regarding possibilities to gather large amounts
of data from different wind farms to make a complete evaluation. Some trends are
found and can be investigated further and validated.
Wind farm projects take long time to plan and execute but no structured evaluation
is done. A standard evaluation form for wind farm projects should be made, per-
haps by national authorities and all evaluations then gathered in a national database
containing everything, for planners to use in future projects. The evaluation should
include topics like time span and time plan, communication and communication
channels, interaction with the public/neighbors, tasks performed by the developer
and by the authorities etc. And if something extra than the mandatory activities is
performed and the effect of that.
Comparisons of visualizations from EIAs and pictures taken after construction, as
well as noise and flicker comparisons should also be gathered to show similarity and
validate the quality of the EIA modelling. It is recommended to use visual images
with an interactive tool, making it possible to change parameters to imitate the vi-
sual impact of wind turbines under different conditions. Noise measurement reports
should be easily accessible; a good idea is to make a ‘non-technical summary’ of the
report, as is known from EIA reports.
How the public feel about wind farm projects, planning and impact, and if it changes
over time, can be assessed through repeating surveys. To validate the trends found
in this project, larger surveys targeted more precisely towards the people in wind
farm areas should be conducted.
Gathering all these things in a database of wind farm projects, on a national level
at first, and later perhaps also including more countries will increase the ability for
authorities to optimize the planning process and for people to have easy access to
more information. Information that is somehow an upscaling of this project. This
way, successes can be repeated, and problems and conflicts minimized.
Long Term Evaluation of EIA-assessment Reports for Onshore Wind Farms
67
==PAGE:82==
This page has been left blank intentionally.
68
Long Term Evaluation of EIA-assessment Reports for Onshore Wind Farms
==PAGE:83==
Bibliography
[1]
Geraint Ellis and Gianluca Ferraro. The social acceptance of wind energy. 2016.
[2]
John Glasson, Riki Therivel, and Andrew Cadwick. Introduction to Environ-
mental Impact Assessment. Routledge, 2012.
[3]
Rebecca Windemer. “Considering time in land use planning: An assessment of
end-of-life decision making for commercially managed onshore wind schemes”.
In: Land Use Policy 87 (2019), p. 104024. issn: 0264-8377. doi: https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.landusepol.2019.104024. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S026483771831915X.
[4]
European Commission. 35 years of EU Environmental Impact Assessment.
2021.
[5]
Vincenzo Belgiorno, Vincenzo Naddeo, and Tiziano Zarra. Tecniche per la
valutazione di impatto ambientale. ASTER onlus, 2011.
[6]
Niels-Erik Clausen. The principles of Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA).
University Lecture. 2021.
[7]
International Institute for Sustainable Development. The 7 steps of an EIA.
2022. url: https://www.iisd.org/learning/eia/eia-7-steps/step-5-the-eia-
report/.
[8]
Erhvervsstyrelsen. Planloven. 2020. url: https://www.retsinformation.dk/eli/
lta/2020/1157.
[9]
Erhvervsministeriet. Bekendtgørelse om planlægning for og tilladelse til opstill-
ing af vindmøller. 2019. url: https://www.retsinformation.dk/eli/lta/2019/923.
[10]
Miljøministeriet. Bekendtgørelse om støj fra vindmøller. 2019. url: https://
www.retsinformation.dk/eli/lta/2019/135.
[11]
Indenrigs- og Boligministeriet. Vejledning om planlægning for og tilladelse
til opstilling af vindmøller. 2022. url: https://www.retsinformation.dk/eli/
retsinfo/2022/9317.
[12]
Holstebro Kommune; Ringkøbing-Skjern Kommune; Jammerbugt Kommune;
Regione Puglia. Interviews with authorities.
[13]
Kommunernes Landsforening et al. ’Den gode proces’. 2009. url: https://
naturstyrelsen.dk/media/nst/Attachments/VindDengodeproces110609.pdf.
[14]
Paola Andreolini. VALUTAZIONE DI IMPATTO AMBIENTALE IMPIANTI
EOLICI - REGIONE PUGLIA. 2012.
[15]
Comune di Genzano. url: http://www.comune.genzano.pz.it/genzano/files/
docs/10/12/91/DOCUMENT_FILE_101291.pdf.
[16]
Gazzetta Uﬀiciale. Decreto legislativo 16 giugno 2017. 2017. url: https://
www.ambientesicurezzaweb.it/wp-content/uploads/sites/5/2017/07/VIA.pdf.
[17]
L’autorisation environnementale : des démarches simplifiées, des projets sécurisés.
2017.
Long Term Evaluation of EIA-assessment Reports for Onshore Wind Farms
69
==PAGE:84==
[18]
Ministère de la Transition écologique et de la Cohésion des territoires. L’autorisation
environnementale. url: https://www.ecologie.gouv.fr/lautorisation-environnementale.
[19]
AIDA. Installation terrestre de production d’électricité à partir de l’énergie
mécanique du vent et regroupant un ou plusieurs aérogénérateurs. url: https://
aida.ineris.fr/reglementation/2980-installation-terrestre-production-delectricite-
a-partir-lenergie-mecanique-vent.
[20]
Danish Energy Agency. url: http://www.ens.dk/.
[21]
Danish housing and planning authority. Map displaying wind turbine plants.
url: https://visplaner.plandata.dk/lokalplan?CQL_FILTER=anvgen%20%
3D%2081%20AND%20anvspec%20LIKE%20%278111%27&loc=458626%
2C6217125%2C3.
[22]
Ringkøbing-Skjern Kommune. Vindmøller ved Nørhede til Hjortmose, VVM-
redegørelse. 2012.
[23]
DELTA. ”Miljømåling – ekstern støj” Dokumentation af støj fra Nørhede-
Hjortmose Vindmøllepark (Appendix A.7). 2014.
[24]
Henning Olsen. Gudie til gode spørgeskemaer. 2006.
[25]
Danmarks Evalueringsinstitut. Det gode spørgeskema. EVA. 2017.
[26]
M. Crang. Visual methods and methodologies. London: Sage, 2009.
[27]
Aitken S.C.; J. Craine. Methods in Human Geography. A guide for students
doing a research project. Pearson education, 2005.
[28]
Marc Antrop Marjanne Sevenant. “Landscape Representation Validity: A com-
parison between On-site Observations and Photographs with Different Angles
of View”. In: Landscape Research 36.3 (2011), pp. 363–385.
[29]
Legifrance. Code de l’environnement. 2022. url: https://www.legifrance.gouv.
fr/codes/section_lc/LEGITEXT000006074220/LEGISCTA000006176636/2022-
06-09/#LEGISCTA000033038422.
[30]
QualEnergia.it. Dcpm dibattito pubblico grandi opere: niente débat public per
eolico e idroelettrico. 2017. url: https://www.qualenergia.it/articoli/20171215-
dcpm-dibattito-pubblico-grandi-opere-niente-debat-public-eolico-e-idroelettrico/.
[31]
Comune di Sant’Agata di Puglia. Impianto eolico composto da n.11 aerogener-
atori da 3MW per una potenza complessiva di 33MW nel comune di Sant’Agata
di Puglia (FG) in località ”Serra Palino”. 2012.
[32]
Communes de Ribemont et Surfontaine et Renansart. ETUDE D’IMPACT
SUR L’ENVIRONNEMENT - Projet éolien de la Vallée Berlure. 2020.
[33]
Sønderborg Kommune. Vindmøller ved Mintebjerg, Miljørapport med VVM og
Miljøvurdering. 2011.
[34]
Mariagerfjord Kommune. Vindmøller ved Heiring, VVM-redegørelse. 2010.
[35]
url: https://globalwindatlas.info/.
[36]
Andersen J. Live footage of an operating wind turbine. url: https://youtu.be/
g5R7YEBkjUE.
[37]
Denmark Miljøministeriet. Bekendtgørelse om støj fra vindmøller (historisk).
2015. url: https://www.retsinformation.dk/eli/lta/2015/1736.
70
Long Term Evaluation of EIA-assessment Reports for Onshore Wind Farms
==PAGE:85==
[38]
Denmark Miljøministeriet. Bekendtgørelse om støj fra vindmøller (historisk).
2011. url: https://www.retsinformation.dk/eli/lta/2011/1284.
[39]
Nielsen J. Miljøteknik, GAD´s forlag. 2013.
[40]
ROLIG BOLIG. Oplevede ændringer i støjniveau. url: https://roligbolig.dk/
sadan-maler-man-stoj/.
[41]
Energistyrelsen. Fremme af udbygning ned vindmøller og solceller. url: https:
//ens.dk/ansvarsomraader/stoette-til-vedvarende-energi/fremme-af-udbygning-
med-vindmoeller.
[42]
Bornholms Regionskommune. Grøn omstilling og vindmøller. 2019. url: https:
//www.brk.dk/Nyheder/Documents/Megafon%20unders%C3%B8gelse%20om%
20bornholmeres%20holdning%20til%20vindm%C3%B8ller%20og%20gr%C3%
B8n%20omstilling%20overordnet%20final.pdf.
[43]
Nyborg S. Clausen L. T. Borgeres og kommuners erfaringer med borgerdelt-
agelse i dansk vindmølleplanlægning. 2016. url: https://curis.ku.dk/ws/files/
178695608/IFRO_Udredning_2016_29.pdf.
Long Term Evaluation of EIA-assessment Reports for Onshore Wind Farms
71
==PAGE:86==
This page has been left blank intentionally.
72
Long Term Evaluation of EIA-assessment Reports for Onshore Wind Farms
==PAGE:87==
A
List of appendixes
A.1
Appendix: Survey master template in
English
This is the survey as it was made in English, before translating it into Italian and
Danish.
A.2
Appendix: Facebook post for distribution of
the survey in Italy
This is what was posted in different Facebook-groups in the local area around the
Italian wind farm ‘Sant’Agata di Puglia’, to invite people to do the questionnaire.
A.3
Appendix: Facebook post for distribution of
the survey in Denmark
This is what was posted in different Facebook-groups in the local area around the
Italian wind farm ‘Nørhede-Hjortmose’, to invite people to do the questionnaire.
A.4
Appendix: Survey results
This appendix contains graphical illustrations of all answers in the Danish and
Italian surveys along with a few explaining remarks for each set of graphs.
A.5
Appendix: Interview guide for interviews
with people working with wind farm
planning
This is the guide used as base for the interviews/discussions made with people from
different municipalities in Denmark and municipal/regional planners in Italy.
A.6
Appendix: Visual comparisons for
Nørhede-Hjortmose wind farm
This appendix shows a map of the visualization points, visualizations from all points,
own photographs from the same points where possible, and some comments on
comparison are made for all points of visualization.
Long Term Evaluation of EIA-assessment Reports for Onshore Wind Farms
73
==PAGE:88==
A.7
Appendix: Noise measurement report
Nørhede-Hjortmose
This is the noise measurement made by Delta in 2014 (DANAK 100/1847, sagsnr.:
T208164), which is used for noise comparisons.
74
Long Term Evaluation of EIA-assessment Reports for Onshore Wind Farms
==PAGE:89==
This page has been left blank intentionally.
Long Term Evaluation of EIA-assessment Reports for Onshore Wind Farms
75
==PAGE:90==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Fredensborgvej 399
DK-4000 Roskilde
Tlf. 4525 2525
www.dtu.dk
