==PAGE:1==
An axiomatic framework for neuro-symbolic
reasoning in multi-agent systems
A theoretical exploration of symbol grounding and
belief aggregation
Master Thesis
DTU Civil Engineering
Department of Civil Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
An axiomatic framework for neuro-symbolic reasoning in multi-agent systems
A theoretical exploration of symbol grounding and belief aggregation
Master Thesis
September, 2025
By
Nick Jørgensen
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Civil Engineering, Brovej, Building 118, 2800 Kgs.
Lyngby Denmark
www.byg.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over seven months at the Department of Applied Math-
ematics and Computer Science (DTU Compute) at the Technical University of Denmark
(DTU). The work was carried out in partial fulfilment of the requirements for the degree of
Master of Science (MSc) in Computer Science and Engineering.
Nick Jørgensen - s194600
Signature
Date
ii
An axiomatic framework for neuro-symbolic reasoning in multi-agent systems
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Cooperation in multi-agent systems is one that poses great challenge, especially with
more complex environments. This essentially boils down to each agent not only having to
learn to navigate a more or less static environment, but also having to learn to interact with
other agents whose internal parameters are unknown to all other agents; this is known as
the problem of non-stationarity. In purely data-driven reinforcement learning approaches,
this problem can quickly become practically insurmountable. Neuro-symbolic reinforce-
ment learning seeks to alleviate this problem by combining the strengths of neural net-
works with that of symbolic artificial intelligence, which covers the collection of all methods
in artificial intelligence which represent problems in a more human-readable manner with
“hard-coded” logic, thus addressing and combining, respectively, the shortcomings and
strengths of each paradigm.
In this report I will set out to answer the question: how can one integrate symbolic knowl-
edge into a multi-agent deep reinforcement learning algorithm to improve performance
and environmental understanding?
I have developed a general theoretical framework for integrating symbolic learning and
reasoning modules into MARL algorithms, both in a centralized manner in which all agents
share the symbolic reasoning module, and in a decentralized manner, where each agent
has their own symbolic reasoning module. This theoretical framework is heavily inspired
by social choice theory and the domain of belief merging and judgment aggregation. Fur-
thermore, a simple experiment, implementing a simplified version of a centralized sym-
bolic reasoning module, was conducted to see if the problem of symbol grounding could
be solved in LLE. This experiment relied on logical axioms to guide predicates to yield
high probabilities for correct entity labels, essentially creating an entity-label map. The
results of this experiment impacted the direction of this thesis which subsequently took
a more theoretical turn, as the issue of symbol grounding was much more difficult than
anticipated.
An axiomatic framework for neuro-symbolic reasoning in multi-agent systems
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
First and foremost, I would like to express my sincere gratitude to my supervisor, Nina
Gierasimczuk, associate professor at the Department of Applied Mathematics and Com-
puter Science, for her invaluable guidance, patience, and support throughout this thesis
project. Her insightful feedback and encouragement were instrumental in shaping this
work.
I would also like to extend my sincere gratitude to the student guidance office for their
invaluable assistance during the application process. I am particularly grateful to asso-
ciate professor Poul G. Hjorth, chair of the Study Board at DTU Compute, and the entire
board for their understanding and for granting the dispensation that was crucial for the
completion of this thesis.
iv
An axiomatic framework for neuro-symbolic reasoning in multi-agent systems
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background and motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Problem statement and research questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Report structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Background
3
2.1
Reinforcement learning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Multi-agent reinforcement learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
2.3
Neuro-symbolic artificial intelligence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
2.4
The laser-learning environment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
2.5
Related work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
3
Evaluation of environments
31
3.1
Robotic warehouse (RWARE) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
3.2
Overcooked-AI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
3.3
Level-based foraging (LBF) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
3.4
Reasoning behind the choice of the laser-learning environment . . . . . . . 33
4
A theoretical framework for neuro-symbolic integration in multi-agent rein-
forcement learning
35
4.1
Rationale for a neuro-symbolic approach
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
4.2
Choice of MARL algorithm backbone . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
4.3
Centralized vs decentralized approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
4.4
Empirical investigation of the centralized symbolic reasoning module . . . . 37
4.5
A framework for decentralized symbolic reasoning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
4.6
Examples use cases of the theoretical framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
4.7
Design of logical axioms for symbol grounding
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
4.8
The centralized symbolic reasoning module . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
5
Discussion
47
5.1
Key findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
5.2
The symbol grounding challenge . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
5.3
Implications for the theoretical framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
5.4
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
6
Conclusion
49
Bibliography
51
A Social choice theory
55
A.1 Condorcet’s jury theorem
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
A.2 Condorcet’s paradox . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
A.3 Condorcet winner . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
An axiomatic framework for neuro-symbolic reasoning in multi-agent systems
v
==PAGE:8==
A.4 Profiles
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
A.5 Aggregation rules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
A.6 Constraints on the choice of standard aggregation rules . . . . . . . . . . . 57
A.7 Preference aggregation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
A.8 Arrow’s suggested conditions on preference aggregation rules
. . . . . . . 58
A.9 Arrow’s theorem
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
A.10 Avoiding the consequences of Arrow’s theorem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
B Belief merging and judgment aggregation
62
B.1 Judgment aggregation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
B.2 Belief merging
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
C Fuzzy logic semantics
73
C.1 Triangular norm operators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73
C.2 Triangular conorm operators
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73
C.3 Fuzzy logic semantics for logical conjunction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 74
C.4 Fuzzy logic semantics for logical disjunction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 76
C.5 Fuzzy logic semantics for logical disjunction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79
D Implementation details
83
D.1 Experiments with vanilla MADDPG . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83
D.2 Teacher-student architecture
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85
D.3 Learning from static cells
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85
D.4 Symbolic reasoning module pre-processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85
D.5 The centralized symbolic reasoning module . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85
vi
An axiomatic framework for neuro-symbolic reasoning in multi-agent systems
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
Background and motivation
The field of deep learning multi-agent reinforcement learning has seen explosive growth
since the 2010s (Albrecht, Christianos, and Schäfer 2024) and has seen increased adop-
tion in a wide range of fields. The usecases of multi-agent reinforcement learning are
enormous in scope and encompass everything from optimizing the movements of ware-
house robots in warehouses to customizing a user’s online experience when shopping for
clothes. Reinforcement learning is also favorable to other forms of deep learning when
there is not yet any sufficiently large dataset available, owing to the ability of reinforcement
learning algorithms to generate their own data.
In deep learning, there is the “black box” problem; it is practically infeasible to know how
the potentially enormous number of neural net parameters should be interpreted. This
poses an issue in that we do not understand exactly what some trained model has learned
and what its underlying mechanics actually are. One may state that some output is pro-
duced for some input, but we may not know if that output is radically changed with some
small tweak of the inputs in general, without testing for each and every possible input, of
which there are often an astronomical amount.
Neuro-symbolic artificial intelligence provides a promising solution to the issues with tra-
ditional deep learning, seeking to provide more interpretable and data-efficient methods,
while still leveraging the power of deep neural networks.
1.2
Problem statement and research questions
The central problem this thesis addresses is the lack of a formal framework that bridges the
gap between low-level perceptual data and high-level symbolic reasoning in multi-agent
reinforcement learning (MARL). While current MARL agents can learn effective policies,
their knowledge remains subsymbolic, uninterpretable, and difficult to coordinate, espe-
cially in complex tasks. This work, therefore, seeks to establish a theoretical foundation
for how agents can ground symbols from raw experience and use the principles of formal
logic to reason about their environment and each other.
To guide this theoretical exploration, the key research questions are as follows:
• What constitutes a formal axiomatic framework for guiding symbol grounding in a
multi-agent environment using neuro-symbolic methods?
• How can challenges from social choice theory and belief merging inform the design
of architectures for decentralized symbolic reasoning in MARL?
• What are the theoretical trade-offs when designing logical axioms for such a frame-
work, particularly concerning the choice between exhaustive, high-precision rules
and more general, scalable heuristics?
• What are the fundamental limitations of applying this theoretical framework in prac-
tice, as highlighted by a case study of its implementation, and what do they reveal
about the symbol grounding problem itself?
An axiomatic framework for neuro-symbolic reasoning in multi-agent systems
1
==PAGE:10==
1.3
Contributions
This thesis makes the following primary contributions to the field of neuro-symbolic multi-
agent reinforcement learning:
• A formal axiomatic framework: A theoretical framework for integrating symbolic
reasoning into MARL agents is proposed. This framework provides a structured
methodology for tackling the symbol grounding problem through unsupervised learn-
ing, guided by a set of formal, human-readable logical axioms defined with fuzzy
logic semantics.
• A theoretical analysis of multi-agent reasoning: A formal connection between
the challenges of decentralized symbolic reasoning in MARL and established con-
cepts in social choice theory and belief merging is established. This analysis pro-
vides a new lens through which to understand the fundamental difficulties of achiev-
ing rational, collective belief aggregation in multi-agent systems.
• A motivating case study on symbol grounding: The results of an empirical in-
vestigation into the practical application of our axiomatic framework are presented.
This case study, while not achieving convergence, serves as a critical contribution
by highlighting the profound difficulty of the symbol grounding problem in practice
and validating the need for the robust theoretical work presented in this thesis.
1.4
Report structure
The structure of this report is such that the reader is first introduced to the foundational
theory in reinforcement learning (section 2.1), along with its inherent challenges, shortly
followed by the extension of reinforcement learning to the multi-agent domain (section 2.2)
along with the new challenges that are inherent to such multi-agent environments. After
covering the theory behind reinforcement learning, the branch of artificial intelligence,
neuro-symbolic artificial intelligence, will be introduced (section 2.3), along with the moti-
vation for its inclusion in this thesis. Logic tensor networks (LTNs) will also be introduced
as the practical means with which neuro-symbolic AI is implemented (section 2.3.3). The
Laser-Learning Environment (LLE) – the environment of choice for the purposes of this
thesis – will be described (section 2.4), and the section on background theory will conclude
with a summary of related works (section 2.5). The report continues with a description
of some other environments that have been considered and why LLE is most suitable
for this project. A theoretical section ensues (section 4), detailing the theoretical frame-
work developed for this thesis, as well as the experiment that was implemented to test
out how symbols are grounded – the basis for symbolic knowledge and reasoning. The
report ends with a discussion (chapter 5) and a conclusion (chapter 6), with the appendix
(6) holding much of the theory used in the mentioned theoretical framework, along with
practical implementation details of said experiment.
2
An axiomatic framework for neuro-symbolic reasoning in multi-agent systems
==PAGE:11==
2
Background
This chapter provides the theoretical groundwork for the neuro-symbolic algorithm pro-
posed in this project. First, I will introduce the theory of single-agent reinforcement learn-
ing, and subsequently expand these concepts to the more complex multi-agent domain,
focusing on the MADDPG algorithm.
Finally, I will introduce the principles of neuro-
symbolic artificial intelligence, with a thorough introduction to logic tensor networks, the
core technology used to inject logical reasoning into our system.
2.1
Reinforcement learning
Reinforcement learning is a field of artificial intelligence in which an agent gathers expe-
rience by choosing and performing actions and learning from the outcome of these in the
attempt at maximizing a reward function (Sutton and Barto 1998). The diagram in figure
2.1 illustrates such an environment:
Figure 2.1: Diagram of reinforcement learning
This section will cover the theory underpinning the field of RL as well as the most promi-
nent branches of model-free reinforcement learning algorithms, finishing with some of the
challenges of RL.
2.1.1
Markov decision processes
Formally, reinforcement learning consists of the following (Busk 2025):
• There is an agent navigating an environment.
• The environment is in a state s ∈S.
• Given some state, an agent can perform one of the actions a ∈A(s).
• Actions transform the environment through a transition distribution P(s′ | s, a). That
is, a function outputting the likelihood of ending in state s′ given the current state s
and action a.
• The result of an action is:
– A new state s′.
– A reward r, or R(s, a, s′).
The operation of an agent in an RL environment constitutes a Markov decision process
(MDP) and obeys the Markov property, i.e., the probability of the next state s′ depends
only on the current state and action (s, a), not on any combination of all the preceding
states and actions (Sutton and Barto 1998).
An axiomatic framework for neuro-symbolic reasoning in multi-agent systems
3
==PAGE:12==
States and observations
As can be observed in figure 2.1, the agent is informed by two things: the reward it has
received and the state of the environment in which it finds itself. A state is a complete
description of the state of the environment and constitutes one configuration in the state
space S, with the state space being the set of all possible states in an environment (Sutton
and Barto 1998; OpenAI 2018a).
Before an agent can learn from the state, it must first observe it. An observation is a
description of a state which may omit information; when such observations do not reveal
the entire state, they are said to be partial observations (Sutton and Barto 1998; OpenAI
2018a). Although many RL algorithms require that the states be fully observable, this is
not always the case and depends on the environment at hand.
Environments are characterized by them being fully observed environments or partially
observed environments (Sutton and Barto 1998; OpenAI 2018a). A fully observed envi-
ronment is one in which agents are able to observe the complete state of the environment,
and a partially observed environment is one in which agents are unable to observe the
complete state of the environment, only being able to see partial observations.
Action space
After an agent perceives the state of the environment (and the reward), it outputs an action
from the action space A; an action space is the set of all valid actions in a particular
environment (OpenAI 2018a). There exist two kinds of action spaces: discrete action
spaces and continuous action spaces. A discrete action space is an action space in
which there is only a finite number of valid actions, whereas a continuous action space is
an action space in which actions are real-valued vectors. Such an action space is thus
infinite in size.
Some algorithms can only be directly applied with one type of action space, and would
require substantial change to work with the other. An example of an algorithm initially de-
veloped for continuous action spaces, but which can be made to work with discrete action
spaces, is the MADDPG algorithm. In the context of this project, MADDPG was made to
work with discrete environments with the Gumbel-softmax function (section D.1.2).
Rewards
Besides state observations, rewards make up the input that an agent learns from. Reward
represents the utility of the current state and is computed with a reward function (OpenAI
2018a). In many cases, the reward is not a result of the most recent action, but is instead
caused by earlier decisions, meaning the reward is delayed in time. Therefore, an agent
must learn to maximize its cumulative reward over the long run, a concept known as the
expected return.
2.1.2
Policies
It is clear that states and rewards are the input that impacts an agent and its behavior;
this behavior is called a policy, which is the set of rules an agent uses to select its actions
(Busk 2025), i.e., strategy with which it maximizes its expected return. The ultimate goal
of reinforcement learning is to find the optimal policy. A policy can be either deterministic
or stochastic.
Informally, one can consider the policy of an agent to be the brain of that agent, since it
dictates all of the agent’s behavior. In the following, we describe the two types of policies,
along with the concept of an optimal policy.
Deterministic policies
In a deterministic action policy π, a state s ∈S always maps to the same action a ∈A
(Sutton and Barto 1998):
4
An axiomatic framework for neuro-symbolic reasoning in multi-agent systems
==PAGE:13==
π : S →A
(2.1)
Stochastic policies
In a stochastic action policy, however, a state maps to a probability distribution over avail-
able actions from which an action can be sampled (Sutton and Barto 1998):
π : S →p(A = a | S = s)
(2.2)
Optimal policies
As stated, the ultimate goal of RL is to find the optimal policy, i.e., a policy π∗that maxi-
mizes the expected reward R from all states (Sutton and Barto 1998):
π∗= argmax
π
E[R | π]
(2.3)
Expected return
Expected return J(π) of a policy π is given by the following (OpenAI 2018a):
J(π) =
∑
τ
P(τ | π)R(τ) = Eτ∼π[R(τ)]
(2.4)
Since this thesis is focused on the Laser-Learning Environment (section 2.4), a discrete
environment, equation 2.4 gives the expected reward for discrete environments by sum-
ming over the possible trajectories in the environment, multiplied by the probability of a
trajectory by its probability conditioned on the policy.
Where π is the policy, τ the trajectory, P(τ|π) the probability of the trajectory conditioned
on π, and R(τ) the reward of the trajectory, e.g., the sum of all immediate rewards obtained
on the trajectory, depending on the measure, and Eτ∼π[R(τ)] an alternative definition,
stating the expected return in terms of the expectation taken over all possible trajectories
that can be generated by following the policy π.
Trajectories
A trajectory is a sequence of states and actions in the environment (OpenAI 2018a).
The probability P(τ | π) of a trajectory τ conditioned on π containing T timesteps is given
by:
P(τ | π) = ρ0(s0)
T−1
∏
t=0
P(st+1 | st, at)π(at | st)
(2.5)
Where τ is the trajectory, π the policy, ρ0(s0) the distribution of the start state, P(st+1 |
st, at) the probability of state st+1 conditioned on st and at, and π(at | st) the probability
of taking action at conditioned on state st.
Undiscounted future reward
Future reward is either discounted or undiscounted. If reward is undiscounted, immediate
rewards have the same effect on the total reward R, no matter how far into the future.
However, if reward is discounted, immediate rewards are factored less into the total reward
the farther into the future they are.
The undiscounted total future reward RT after T timesteps is given by (OpenAI 2018a;
Karpathy 2016):
An axiomatic framework for neuro-symbolic reasoning in multi-agent systems
5
==PAGE:14==
RT =
T
∑
t=0
rt
(2.6)
Where T is the number of timesteps, and rt the immediate reward at time t.
Discounted future reward
The discounted future reward RT is given by (OpenAI 2018a; Karpathy 2016):
RT =
T
∑
t=0
γtrt
(2.7)
Where T is the number of timesteps, γ ∈[0, 1] is the discount rate, and rt the reward at
time t.
The following provide the intuition behind the discount factor:
• Growing uncertainty in future timesteps: In stochastic environments, the same
series of actions can lead to different results, and the uncertainty grows the farther
into the future one looks.
• Prioritization of present timestep: The discount factor (with a value < 1) prioritizes
rewards closer to the present timestep.
• Use of discount factor: The use of the discount factor can thus be interpreted as
prioritizing more certain rewards.
The effect of the discount rate value at either extreme is outlined below:
• γ = 1: There is no discount, which would reflect a completely deterministic environ-
ment.
• γ = 0: Only immediate rewards are considered, effectively doing away with planning
into the future.
The discounted future reward is also known as the discounted return.
2.1.3
Value functions
In the previous section, it was established that the goal of an agent is to maximize its
expected future reward. However, an agent cannot know the true return of a state until
the episode has terminated. To solve this issue, value functions will be introduced. A
value function provides a practical estimate of the expected return from any given state
or state-action pair (Busk 2025), allowing the agent to make informed decisions by simply
comparing values.
A value function is defined with respect to a policy. Several value functions can be utilized,
depending on choice and availability. Value functions are thus the primary tools with which
to estimate expected return. In the following, the three types of value functions that exist
will be covered.
State-value functions
A state-value function V π(s) is a value function which returns the expected return of being
in a state s when following a policy π (OpenAI 2018a; Karpathy 2016):
V π(s) = Eπ[R | s],
(2.8)
6
An axiomatic framework for neuro-symbolic reasoning in multi-agent systems
==PAGE:15==
where R is the reward.
The optimal policy π′ can be greedily found by choosing the action a which maximizes the
expected return of the next state s′:
π′(s | V π) = argmax
a
Es′∼P(s′|s,a)[V π(s′)]
(2.9)
To do this, the transition distribution P(s′ | s, a) is required. π′ is guaranteed to be at least
as good as π.
State-value functions that follow a particular policy are also called on-policy value func-
tions.
Action-value functions
An action-value function Qπ(s, a) is a value function which returns the expected return
of being in a state s when selecting action a and following a policy π (OpenAI 2018a;
Karpathy 2016):
Qπ(s, a) = Eπ[R | s, a],
(2.10)
where R is the reward.
The optimal policy π′ can be greedily found by choosing the action a which maximizes
Qπ(s, a):
π′(s | Qπ) = argmax
a
[Q(s, a)]
(2.11)
This new policy does not depend on the transition distribution T and can therefore be
found without knowing the dynamics of the environment. π′ is guaranteed to be at least
as good as π.
Action-value functions that follow a particular policy are also called on-policy action-value
functions.
Advantage functions
An advantage function Aπ(s, a) is a value function which, instead of returning the absolute
action-value like Qπ, returns the relative action-value representing the relative value of
choosing one action over another (OpenAI 2018a):
Aπ(s, a) = Qπ(s, a) −V π(s)
(2.12)
The best policy π′ can be greedily found by choosing the action a which maximizes
Aπ(s, a):
π′(s | Aπ) = argmax
a
[A(s, a)]
(2.13)
This is completely analogous to finding the best policy with Qπ. π′ is guaranteed to be at
least as good as π.
An axiomatic framework for neuro-symbolic reasoning in multi-agent systems
7
==PAGE:16==
2.1.4
The Bellman equations
The Bellman equations serve as the theoretical foundation for almost all reinforcement
learning algorithms. These recursive formulae connect the value of a state (represented
by a value function) to the value of subsequent states. The Bellman equations decompose
the value of a state into two parts: the immediate reward and the discounted value of the
next state. The recursive nature of the Bellman equations is critical, as it allows for iterative
updates to the value estimate, forming the basis for learning methods such as temporal
difference learning.
Bellman equations on state-value functions
The Bellman equation for on-policy state-value functions is a recursive formula which
shows – for a particular policy π – that the value of being in a certain state depends on
the immediate reward as well as that of future states (OpenAI 2018a; Pykes 2024):
V π(s) = r(s, π(s)) + γ
∑
s′
P(s′ | s, π(s))V π(s′)
(2.14)
Where V π(s) is the value of state s under the policy π, representing the long-term reward of
being in that state, r(s, π(s)) is the immediate reward for taking the action π(s) prescribed
by the policy π in state s, γ ∈[0, 1] is the discount factor determining the importance of
future rewards, and P(s′ | s, π(s)) is the probability of transitioning to state s′ from state s
by taking the action π(s) prescribed by the policy π.
This equation represents expected future rewards because the right term of the sum in the
equation multiplies the value of each possible next state with the probability of reaching
that state.
The Bellman equation for on-policy state-value functions is also simply called the standard
Bellman equation. When this alternative name is used, it should be clear from context
whether it applies – as is the case here – to state-value functions or action-value functions.
The Bellman equation for optimal value functions is a recursive formula which shows that
the (maximum) value of being in a certain state depends on the immediate reward as well
as that of future states:
V ∗(s) = max
a
[
r(s, a) + γ
∑
s′
P(s′ | s, a)V ∗(s′)
]
,
(2.15)
where V (s) is the value of state s, representing the long-term reward of being in that state,
r(s, a) is the immediate reward for taking action a in state s, γ ∈[0, 1] is the discount
factor determining the importance of future rewards, and P(s′ | s, a) is the probability of
transitioning to state s′ from state s by taking action a, maxa is the optimal action that
maximizes the expected value of future rewards.
This equation represents expected future rewards because the right term of the sum in
the square brackets multiplies the value of each possible next state with the probability of
reaching that state.
The Bellman equation for optimal value functions is also simply called the Bellman optimal-
ity equation. When this alternative name is used, it should be clear from context whether
it applies – as is the case here – to state-value functions or action-value functions.
The Bellman optimality equation is used to find the optimal policy. In contrast to the stan-
dard Bellman equation which operates with a single particular policy, the Bellman optimal-
8
An axiomatic framework for neuro-symbolic reasoning in multi-agent systems
==PAGE:17==
ity operates over all policies. Thus, the difference between the two is their focus as the
standard Bellman equation is used for policy evaluation whereas the Bellman optimality
equation is used for policy improvement and control.
Bellman equations on action-value functions
The Bellman equation for on-policy action-value functions is a recursive formula which
shows – for a particular policy π – that the value of being in a certain state and taking
some action depends on the immediate reward as well as that of future states (OpenAI
2018a; Pykes 2024):
Qπ(s, a) = r(s, a) + γ
∑
s′
P(s′ | s, a)
∑
a′
π(a′ | s′)Qπ(s′, a′),
(2.16)
where Qπ(s, a) is the value of taking action a in state s under the policy π, representing
the long-term reward of taking that action in that state, r(s, a) is the immediate reward for
taking the action a in state s, γ ∈[0, 1] is the discount factor determining the importance
of future rewards, P(s′ | s, a) is the probability of transitioning to state s′ from state s by
taking the action a, π(a′ | s′) is the probablity of taking action a′ in state s′ under the policy
π.
This equation represents expected future rewards, because the right term of the sum
in the equation multiplies the value of each possible next state and each possible next
action with the probability of reaching that state and the probablity of taking that action,
respectively.
The Bellman equation for optimal action-value functions is a recursive formula which
shows that the (maximum) value of being in a certain state and taking some action de-
pends on the immediate reward as well as that of future states:
Q∗(s, a) = r(s, a) + γ
∑
s′
P(s′ | s, a) max
a′
Q∗(s′, a′)
(2.17)
Where Q∗(s, a) is the maximum value of taking action a in state s, representing the long-
term reward of taking that action in that state, r(s, a) is the immediate reward for taking
the action a in state s, γ ∈[0, 1] is the discount factor determining the importance of future
rewards, P(s′ | s, a) is the probability of transitioning to state s′ from state s by taking the
action a.
This equation represents expected future rewards, because the right term of the sum
in the equation multiplies the value of each possible next state and each possible next
action with the probability of reaching that state and the probability of taking that action,
respectively.
2.1.5
Temporal difference learning
In section 2.1.4 on the Bellman equations, it was mentioned that the recursive nature
of the equations allow for iterative updates to the value estimate; this is where temporal
difference (TD) learning comes into play.
TD learning updates estimates of expected reward based on other learned estimates,
without waiting for the final outcome (Karagiannakos 2018). Updates to the parameters
in networks making use of TD learning to have their parameters updated at each step, as
opposed to at the end of an episode.
An axiomatic framework for neuro-symbolic reasoning in multi-agent systems
9
==PAGE:18==
The following equation shows how a simple version of TD learning updates the value
function V at timestep t based on the result of V at the next timestep t + 1:
V (st) ←V (st) + α [rt+1 + γ(V (st+1) −V (st))] ,
(2.18)
where st is the state at timestep t, α a constant stepsize parameter, rt+1 the immediate
reward at timestep t + 1, and γ the discount rate.
Because TD learning does not wait for the final outcome, and instead bases its update in
part on an existing estimate of the value function, it is referred to as bootstrapping.
2.1.6
Model-free reinforcement learning
Model-free reinforcement learning is reinforcement learning in which the following are not
estimated:
• The transition probability distribution.
• The reward function.
Model-free reinforcement learning algorithms thus learn through direct interaction with
the environment, discovering optimal behaviors through systematic exploration and ex-
perimentation, rather than relying on a predefined model of the environment’s dynamics,
(Sutton and Barto 1998; S. E. Li 2023; Duan, Guan, and S. Li 2021).
This thesis was scoped to the domain of model-free RL algorithms, a choice made to
demonstrate the power of the neuro-symbolic approach, as the integration of neuro-
symbolic modules provide what can be considered a pseudo-model of the world, and
also because the main inspiration for the thesis, the SymDQN algorithm (2.5.1), is based
on a model-free RL algorithm, the Dueling DQN algorithm.
Model-free algorithms are typically divided into two main families: methods that directly
learn a parameterized policy, known as policy-based methods, and methods that learn the
value of actions to indirectly find the policy, known as value-based methods. The following
sections will cover both.
The following are examples of model-free reinforcement learning algorithms: Monte Carlo
reinforcement learning and Q-learning.
The two main families of model-free reinforcement learning are policy gradient (see sec-
tion 2.1.7) algorithms and Q-learning algorithms (see section 2.1.7). In the following, these
two branches of model-free RL will be covered.
2.1.7
Policy gradient algorithms
A policy gradient algorithm is a model-free reinforcement learning algorithm in which a
policy πθ(a | s) is learned for the optimal policy, i.e., a mapping from states to actions
(OpenAI 2018b; OpenAI 2018c). The parameters of the policy πθ(a | s) are learned either
by performing gradient ascent on the performance objective, or by indirectly maximizing
local approximations of the performance objective. Each update to the parameters can
only use data collected while following the latest policy during training; this is because
a policy is being followed. This is called on-policy optimization. If no policy were being
followed, then data used to update the parameters could come from any point in time,
regardless of how the agent was choosing to explore the environment when the data was
obtained.
Policy optimization also usually involves learning an approximator Vϕ(s) for the on-policy
function V π(s), which is used in figuring out how to update the policy.
10
An axiomatic framework for neuro-symbolic reasoning in multi-agent systems
==PAGE:19==
Actor-critic policy gradient algorithms
An actor-critic policy gradient algorithm is an instance of the policy gradient method in
which there is an actor network and a critic network (Karunakaran 2020; Karagiannakos
2018). The actor is a neural network representing the policy, and the critic a neural network
representing a Q-function for computing the values of the actions produced by the policy.
The actor represents the agent’s policy and thus decides which actions to take. The critic
informs the actor of the quality of its actions and how to adjust. This network employs TD
learning to iterate on itself.
The separation of the policy (the actor) and the value function (the critic) is a key advan-
tage of the actor-critic framework. This architectural separation provides a natural point of
intervention for injecting external knowledge. While the critic learns how good an action
is from environmental rewards, the actor, which determines what to do, can be guided by
other sources of information – a property that is central to the neuro-symbolic approach
proposed in this thesis.
Some view actor-critic learning methods to be an instance of the policy optimization paradigm,
whereas others view it as merging that of policy optimization and Q-learning.
Deterministic policy gradient algorithms
A deterministic policy gradient (DPG) algorithm is an actor-critic policy-gradient reinforce-
ment learning algorithm in which the policy is deterministic, i.e., the policy outputs a spe-
cific action for each state.
The critic network’s loss function Lc(θQ) is the mean squared TD learning error:
Lc(θQ) = 1
N
N
∑
i=1
(yi −Q(si, ai | θQ))2
(2.19)
With the target value yi being given by:
yi = ri + γQ(si+1, µ(si+1 | θµ) | θQ)
(2.20)
Where N is the number of samples, γ the discount factor, ri is the immediate reward, ai is
the action being taken, si is the state, θQ is the critic network’s parameters, Q(si, ai | θQ)
is the predicted Q-value, representing what the critic thinks the value of the current state-
action pair (si, ai) is, θµ is the actor network’s parameters, and µ(si+1 | θµ) is the action
output of the actor network.
The reason for the critic’s loss function having this form is that we want to minimize the
difference between what is predicted by the critic network’s predictions Q(si, ai | θQ) and
the expected return yi, which is an implementation of the Bellman equation. By minimiz-
ing this error, the critic’s estimates are made consistent with the rewards that are later
observed plus its own predictions of future value.
The parameters of the critic network are updated by:
1. Sample collection: Collecting a batch of transitions from the replay buffer, with
each transition being a tuple (st, at, rt, st+1), where st, at, and rt is the state, action,
and immediate reward at time t, and st+1 is the state at time t + 1.
2. Target calculation: For each transition, the target yi = ri + γQ(si+1, µ(si+1 | θµ) |
θQ) is calculated.
An axiomatic framework for neuro-symbolic reasoning in multi-agent systems
11
==PAGE:20==
3. Loss calculation: For each corresponding pair of transition and target value, the
loss is calculated.
4. Gradient descent: Based on the loss, gradient descent updates the parameters of
the critic network.
The actor network’s loss function La(θµ) is given by the negative mean:
La(θµ) = −1
N
N
∑
i=1
Q(si, µ(si | θµ) | θQ)
(2.21)
Where N is the number of samples, ai is the action being taken, si is the state, θQ is
the critic network’s parameters, Q(si, ai | θQ) is the predicted Q-value, θµ is the actor
network’s parameters, and µ(si | θµ) is the action output of the actor network.
The reason for the actor’s loss function having this form is that we want the actor to find
actions that maximize expected returns, and maximizing the critic’s estimates achieves
this goal since the critic – representing the Q-function – outputs expected returns. The
minus sign is used because optimization libraries typically minimize loss functions, but we
want to maximize it.
The parameters of the actor are updated by:
1. Waiting for critic network: Since the actor depends on the critic being up to date,
we wait for the critic network to update first. This becomes even clearer if one
observes the gradient for the actor network, in which the gradient wrt. the critic
shows up as a term.
2. Loss calculation: Using the same transitions that were sampled and used to up-
date the critic, the loss is calculated.
3. Gradient ascent: Based on the loss, gradient ascent updates the parameters of
the actor network.
Because the policy is deterministic, and not stochastic, only one action can be taken given
some state configuration, which leads to the need for explicit exploration strategies.
Deep deterministic policy gradient algorithms
DDPG is an extension of DPG with the following augmentations (Lowe et al. 2020):
• Experience replay: It is an off-policy algorithm, sampling trajectories from the re-
play buffer during training.
• Target networks: It makes use of a target network for both the actor and critic.
These target networks are updated more slowly than the main networks and help
stabilize training.
• Exploration strategy: Noise is added directly to the actions to have improved ex-
ploration.
By combining a deterministic policy with an off-policy approach, DDPG aims for high sam-
ple efficiency, but this architectural choice necessitates a specific strategy for tackling
the exploration-exploitation dilemma (section 2.1.9), as the agent can no longer rely on
stochasticity for discovering new actions.
DDPG can be thought of as DPG plus the key stabilizing techniques that were proven
effective in DQNs (section 2.1.7).
12
An axiomatic framework for neuro-symbolic reasoning in multi-agent systems
==PAGE:21==
Q-learning
Q-learning is a model-free reinforcement learning approach in which an approximator
Qθ(s, a) is learned for the optimal action-value function Q∗(s, a) (OpenAI 2018b). The
learning objective is typically based on the Bellman optimality equation. Each update to
the parameters can use data collected at any point during training, regardless of how
the agent was choosing to explore the environment when the data was obtained; this is
because no policy is being followed. This is called off-policy optimization. If a policy were
being followed, then data used to update the parameters would have to come from after
the latest policy update. Actions are chosen based on the following:
a(s) = argmax
a
Qθ(s, a)
(2.22)
Deep Q-learning is an example of Q-learning.
Deep Q-learning
Deep Q-Learning, or Deep Q Network (DQN) is an extension of the Q-Learning algorithm.
Instead of storing Q-values for each state-action pair in a table, DQN uses a neural net-
work to approximate the Q values (Amin 2024; Hugging Face 2024). DQN consists of two
primary components: the main neural network and the target neural network. The main
neural network is also called the online/policy network. A DQN uses a memory/replay
buffer to store experiences, i.e, sequences of tuples of state, action, reward, and next
state. The network is trained on random mini-batches of experiences from the buffer,
thus breaking the correlation between consecutive experiences and improving sample
efficiency. The main neural network is used for selecting actions during interaction with
the environment. This network takes the current state as input and produces a set of
Q-values for all possible actions as output. The target network is a periodic copy of the
main network, with the same architecture, which is used for more stable learning. This
network is used to compute the target Q-values when calculating the loss function.
The use of a replay buffer and a distinct exploration strategy (like epsilon-greedy) are
DQN’s primary mechanisms for addressing the fundamental challenges of credit assign-
ment and the exploration-exploitation dilemma, respectively, which are discussed further
in section 2.1.9.
The reason for having both the main and target neural network is to reduce the moving
target problem. This is because:
1. We are trying to predict future rewards.
2. Those rewards are predicted with a neural network.
3. The neural network is updated based on the loss which incorporates the rewards.
4. To prevent this problem, a separate neural network (the target network) is used
which acts as a more stable reference point.
DQN can be extended with prioritized experience replay (PER). By default, samples are
drawn uniformly at random from the experience replay memory and all samples are thus
treated the same. Instead of treating all samples the same, the probability is augmented
for samples for which the temporal difference (TD) error – the difference between the
target and estimation values – is greater. This extension to DQN leverages the intuition
that there is more potential to learn from experiences for which the outcomes differ more
from the expectations.
An axiomatic framework for neuro-symbolic reasoning in multi-agent systems
13
==PAGE:22==
Dueling DQN
DDQN is a reinforcement learning architecture which extends that of deep Q-networks
(Saini 2024).
DDQN innovates on DQN by decomposing the value function into two
streams. The main inspiration for this thesis, the SymDQN algorithm (section 2.5.1), is
based on DQN.
The value function is decomposed into two steams: the value stream V and the advantage
stream A. The value stream estimates the value of being in some state s, regardless of
the action taken, and the advantage stream estimates the additional value of taking a
specific action in state s, relative to other actions.
DDQNs benefit from the value function being decomposed into two streams due to the
value function in DQNs (potentially) being dominated by the state, with the state thus
determining the expected reward with very little influence by the choice of action.
The two streams must be aggregated to provide the final Q-values, i.e., expected rewards,
and this must be done in a way such that the result does not collapse into being simply
the result of the advantage stream – as the network could otherwise learn to represent
everything by this stream, as it captures both information about state and actions. In order
for the result to not collapse into being the result of the advantage stream, and also take
into consideration the value stream, the average or the maximum of the advantage stream
over all possible actions for the given state can be subtracted from the usual result of the
advantage stream:
• Average advantage aggregation:
Q(s, a | θ) = V (s | θ) +

A(s, a | θ) −1
|A|
∑
a′∈|A|
A(s, a′ | θ)


(2.23)
• Maximum advantage aggregation:
Q(s, a | θ) = V (s | θ) +
(
A(s, a | θ) −max
a′∈A A(s, a′ | θ)
)
(2.24)
Where the Q-values are calculated by the following in DQNs (where only a single value
stream exists):
Q(s, a | θ) = V (s | θ) + A(s, a | θ)
(2.25)
Where s represents a state, a an action, Q(s, a | θ) the predicted Q-value for taking an
action a while in a state s, and θ the parameters of the neural networks.
2.1.8
Comparison between policy optimization and Q-learning
The primary strength of the policy optimization branch of RL is that it is principled in the
sense that it optimizes a policy (OpenAI 2018b). This tends to make instances of this
approach stable and reliable.
The primary weakness of Q-learning is that instances of this approach only indirectly opti-
mize for agent performance. There are many failure modes for this kind of learning, which
tends to make it less stable.
The primary advantage of Q-learning is that it is substantially more sample efficient be-
cause data can be reused more effectively than polizy optimization techniques.
14
An axiomatic framework for neuro-symbolic reasoning in multi-agent systems
==PAGE:23==
2.1.9
Challenges in reinforcement learning
In the following, some of the biggest challenges in reinforcement learning are covered.
The credit assignment problem
The credit assignment problem is the problem of knowing exactly which actions helped
achieve a particular reward (Karpathy 2016; Sutton and Barto 1998). For example, in the
game of Pong, in the point of view of the agent, when the ball makes it past the opponent,
it would be hard to know exactly which past actions made this happen.
The exploration-exploitation dilemma
The exploration-exploitation dilemma refers to when an agent in an RL environment should
stop exploring and start exploiting what it has learned (Sutton and Barto 1998). An agent
cannot know if there is a more optimal policy to learn without further exploration. Most
strategies for solving the exploration-exploitation dilemma depend on heuristics.
2.2
Multi-agent reinforcement learning
2.2.1
Introduction
Multi-agent reinforcement learning is the implementation of several agents in a single en-
vironment, which learn to interact with one another. Such a setting is markedly different
compared to an otherwise identical environment in which there is only one agent. This
marked difference is caused by the much greater complexity of the environment intro-
duced by having several agents learning to reason about an environment in which there
are now other complicated agents it needs to learn to interact with. The main challenges
are as follows.
Non-stationarity
Non-stationarity referes to each agent in a multi-agent environment facing a non-stationary
learning problem due to the dynamics of the environment effectively changing as other
agents modify their behaviors while learning (Guillaume J. Laurent, Laëtitia Matignon,
and N. Le Fort-Piat 2011). This poses an issue as it is much harder to adjust to an ever-
changing environment than it is to adjust to a static environment in which, e.g., all entities
but the single learning agent remain static.
The moving target problem
The moving target problem is the problem of an agent trying to learn an optimal policy in
a non-stationary environment (Tuyls and Weiss 2012). However, in such an environment,
the optimal policy is itself constantly changing due to the environment dynamics; the agent
is trying to hit a target that is constantly moving. The following effects are caused directly
by the moving target problem:
• A change in one agent’s policy influences that of other agents; this creates complex
feedback loops.
• A small change in one agent’s policy could by chance result in a high reward, en-
couraging the agent to adopt this new policy. This can drastically alter the dynamics
of the environment, forcing other agents to make large and sudden adjustments to
their own policies. This results in a situation in which initially small changes lead to
chaotic or highly divergent outcomes for the group.
The lazy agent problem
In centralized approaches, inefficient policies can emerge where only one agent becomes
active while others remain lazy in the sense that, when one agent learns a useful policy,
a second agent is discouraged from exploring because its actions might hinder the first
agent and lead to worse team reward (Pina, De Silva, and Artaud 2023).
An axiomatic framework for neuro-symbolic reasoning in multi-agent systems
15
==PAGE:24==
Spurious rewards
Independent learners face difficulties because, from the perspective of a single agent, the
environment is only partially observed, and agents may receive spurious reward signals
originating from teammates’ unobserved behavior. In the context of this project, this is not
of concern as the laser-learning environment is fully observable and all agents thus have
complete knowledge of the environment state at all times.
2.2.2
Centralized and decentralized training and execution
Centralized training
Some multi-agent algorithms train in a centralized fashion by providing each agent with the
observations and/or actions of every other agent during training. This serves to combat
the issue of the problem of non-stationarity as every agent now has more information
about the dynamics and behavior of every other agent.
Decentralized training
In decentralized training, in contrast to centralized training, agents only have access to
their own observations and actions during training.
Centralized execution
Some multi-agent algorithms broadcast the observations and/or actions of every other
agent during execution. This can help agents coordinate with one another to more effec-
tively achieve their goals, as agents will, e.g., not get in the way of each other.
Decentralized execution
In decentralized execution, in contrast to centralized execution, agents only have access
to their own observations and actions during execution.
2.2.3
Taxonomy of reinforcement learning
In this section, an overview of the taxonomy of reinforcement learning will be given.
Many multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) algorithms exist, and all of them can
roughly be split into a taxonomy which at its highest level splits into two branches: model-
free and model-based reinforcement learning (OpenAI 2018a). We will disregard the latter
branch of reinforcement learning algorithms as our focus is the extension of SymDQN to
the multi-agent domain, with SymDQN being based on Dueling DQN (see section 2.1.7),
a model-free reinforcement learning algorithm. The branch of model-free reinforcement
learning algorithms can further be split into two: Q-learning algorithms and policy gradient
algorithms. There are advantages and disadvantages to each of these approaches to re-
inforcement learning, and a MARL algorithm being an instance of one approach naturally
imposes constraints that would possibly not be present if it were an instance of the other
approach.
In the following, an overview will be given of certain MARL algorithms which are relevant
in the context of MARL algorithms and the SymDQN algorithm.
2.2.4
Multi-agent deep deterministic policy gradient
The multi-agent deep deterministic policy gradient (MADDPG) algorithm is a multi-agent
actor-critic policy-gradient reinforcement learning algorithm which effectively extends the
deep deterministic policy gradient (DDPG) algorithm to the multi-agent domain (Lowe et
al. 2020). This algorithm is characterized by:
• Decentralized execution: The actor only using local information, i.e., their own
observations, at execution time.
• Centralized training: Addressing non-stationarity by augmenting the critic with in-
formation about the other agents’ policies.
16
An axiomatic framework for neuro-symbolic reasoning in multi-agent systems
==PAGE:25==
• Applicability: Is applicable to both cooperative, competetive, and mixed cooperative-
competetive environments.
• Policy ensembles: Introducing a method of improving the stability of multi-agent
policies by training agents with an ensemble of policies.
The central innovation of MADDPG is its centralized training with decentralized execution
paradigm, which is specifically designed to combat the non-stationarity and moving target
problems that destabilize learning in multi-agent environments.
Actor networks
The actor network in an agent only uses local information, i.e., the agent’s own obser-
vations, at execution time. For alleviating the moving target problem, this network has a
target network equivalent, updated every so often.
The reason for occasionally updating the target network, and not updating it immediately
with the main actor network, is to ensure the actions used to calculate the Q-value do not
change erratically, which further stabilizes the entire learning process for all agents.
Critic networks
The critic network in an agent consists of a Q-function augmented with information about
the other agents’ policies. For alleviating the moving target problem, this network has a
target network equivalent, updated every so often.
Training
Training takes place in a centralized fashion by providing each agent’s critic with every
agent’s observations and actions, which are fetched from the replay buffer.
Critic loss function
The loss function L(θi) for each critic network i with the parameters θi is given by:
L(θi) = Ex,a,r,x′
[
(Qµ
i (x, a1, . . . , aN) −y)2]
,
(2.26)
y = ri + γQµ′
i (x′, a′
1, . . . , a′
N)|a′
j=µ′
j(oj)
(2.27)
Where Qµ
i and Qµ′
i represents the main critic network under the current policy µ and the
target critic network under the target policy µ′, respectively, which evaluates state-action
values for agent i, ri the immediate reward for agent i, γ the discount factor, x the complete
global state of the environment, x′ the next complete global state of the environment,
a1, . . . , aN the actions of agent of all N agents, and the expression a′
j = µ′
j(oj) represents
the next-state action a′
j for agent j, obtained by applying the target policy network µ′
j to
agent j’s next-state observation oj. The switch in subscript notation from i to j in the latter
expression indicates the switch from considering the specific agent whose critic we are
currently updating to using j as an index variable that ranges over all agents, including
agent i.
Actor loss function
The loss function for each actor network is given by:
∇θµiJ(µi) = Ex,a∼D
[
∇θµiµi(ai|oi)∇aiQµ
i (x, a1, . . . , aN)|ai=µi(oi)
]
(2.28)
Where ∇θµiJ(µi) is the gradient of the performance objective J wrt. the policy parameters
θµi for agent i, Ex,a∼D[. . . ] is the expected value over state-action pairs sampled from the
replay buffer D, ∇θµiµi(ai|oi) is the gradient of the policy output (actions) wrt. the policy
An axiomatic framework for neuro-symbolic reasoning in multi-agent systems
17
==PAGE:26==
parameters, evaluated at observation oi. This represents the sensitivity of the action with
respect to the policy parameters. It tells us how much each parameter in the policy network
influences the output action, ∇aiQµ
i (x, a1, . . . , aN)|ai=µi(oi) is the gradient of the critic’s
Q-value wrt. agent i’s action, evaluated at the action produced by the current policy.
This represents the sensitivity of the Q-value with respect to the action. It tells us which
directions in action space would increase the expected return, and ai = µi(oi) indicates
that we evaluate this gradient at the action currently output by the policy.
The loss function used in the actor network can be understood as adjusting agent i’s
behavior to take actions that its critic thinks will lead to higher rewards.
Updating actor parameters
The following algorithmically walks through the process of updating the actor parameters:
1. The actor network of agent i outputs an action based on agent i’s observation.
2. The action of agent i, along with the actions of all other agents and the global state
information, is input to the critic network.
3. The output of the critic network is a Q-value (expected return).
4. We compute the gradient of the Q-value with respect to agent i’s action. This tells
us how changing the action would affect the expected return. In continuous envi-
ronments, the action space itself is typically multi-dimensional. For example, if an
agent controls a robot with five joints, all its actions would be five-dimensional vec-
tors with each element, e.g., representing the torque or position for a different joint.
Actions are thus different instantiations of such five-dimensional vectors.
5. This gradient represents how sensitive the Q-value is to changes in agent i’s action.
6. This action gradient is propagated backward through the actor network to calculate
how each parameter in the actor network affects the Q-value through its effect on
the action.
7. The parameters of the actor network are updated with gradient ascent (not descent),
because we want to maximize the Q-value, not minimize it. So we add the gradient
(multiplied by learning rate) to the parameters.
In figure 2.2, a diagram of MADDPG can be seen, illustrating the above process. This
diagram illustrates MADDPG through an example with two agents, a blue agent (a1) and
a green agent (a2). In this example, the blue agent chooses to stay in place (the ac-
tion ‘STAY’), whereas the green agent chooses to move north (the action ‘NORTH’). See
section (2.4) for more specifics on LLE.
Policy ensembles
A policy ensemble is a collection of K different policies. In each episode, for each agent,
one policy is chosen from the agent’s ensemble at random for the agent to execute. The
objective is maximized with respect to the policy in use.
Because different policies will be executed in different episodes, the replay buffer is main-
tained for each policy in the ensemble for each agent.
The aim of policy ensembles is to obtain policies that are more robust to changes in the
policy of competing agents, since an agent could otherwise derive a policy overfitted to
the behavior of its competitors.
18
An axiomatic framework for neuro-symbolic reasoning in multi-agent systems
==PAGE:27==
Figure 2.2: Diagrammatic overview of the MADDPG algorithm
2.3
Neuro-symbolic artificial intelligence
Neuro-symbolic artificial intelligence is a domain in the field of artificial intelligence which
combines the architectures of neural artificial intelligence, e.g., deep neural nets, and
symbolic artificial intelligence. Symbolic artificial intelligence is centered on the manipula-
tion of symbols, i.e., the representation of concepts in a symbolic, human-readable format
upon which logical rules can be applied to reason about them.
The point of neuro-symbolic artificial intelligence is to address the weaknesses of each of
the two mentioned architectures, providing a more performant artificial intelligence in the
process.
Neural artificial intelligence is good at pattern recognition, but is practically impossible to
be interpreted by humans, and cannot be symbolically manipulated. The opposite holds
true for symbolic artificial intelligence, highlighting both their strengths and weakness.
This section will cover a couple of examples of neuro-symbolic AI algorithms, followed by
a description of LTNs.
2.3.1
SOFAI
One kind of neuro-symbolic artificial intelligence is proposed by an IBM research team.
This team proposes a system called “SOFAI” (for Slow and Fast Artificial Intelligence)
(IBM Research and Academic Partners 2025) – a multi-agent cognitive architecture char-
acterized by being split into two systems, with the first being a fast, reactionary neural
system, and the second being a slower, more deliberate symbolic reasoning system:
• System 1:
– This system is responsible for handling familiar or cognitively easy tasks.
– The tasks tasks handled by this system only require brief thinking.
– The system is fast, reflexive, intuitive, and unconscious.
– Such thinking is best suited for deep learning.
An axiomatic framework for neuro-symbolic reasoning in multi-agent systems
19
==PAGE:28==
• System 2:
– This system handles deliberative thinking such as planning and deduction.
– Such thinking is best suited for symbolic reasoning.
These two systems are kept separate and are combined through an architecture layer.
SOFAI is inspired by Daniel Kahneman’s book “Thinking, Fast and Slow” from 2011. The
main thesis is that there are two modes of thought. The first mode of thought is fast,
instinctive and emotional, whereas the second mode is slower, more deliberate, and more
logical. SOFAI is but one example among many on how neuro-symbolic systems can be
fashioned.
2.3.2
Automaton/logic multi-agent natural actor-critic
The Automaton/logic multi-agent natural actor-critic (Almanac) algorithm addresses the
challenge of having multiple agents learn to collectively satisfy objectives using linear
temporal logic (LTL) to formally define these objectives (Hammond et al. 2021). Existing
methods for learning with LTL specifications were limited to a single agent trying to satisfy
a single task.
The proposed solution is a model-free, multi-agent actor-critic algorithm. It works by con-
verting each LTL specification into a special type of automaton, which helps the agents
track their progress towards satisfying the goals. The algorithm is notable for being the
first multi-agent reinforcement learning technique for temporal logic specifications that
can handle multiple objectives and provides convergence guarantees, even with function
approximation.
The paper provides formal proofs that the Almanac algorithm converges to an optimal
policy.
2.3.3
Logic tensor networks
A logic tensor network (LTN) is an extension of a neural network which interprets first-
order logic formulas on tensors, which may then be integrated into the loss function of the
network, thus guiding its learning process.
In the following, the various logical components and semantics of LTNs will be covered.
It should be kept in mind that the logical connectives can be grounded according to many
different semantics, however, with each having their particular advantages and disadvan-
tages. In this section, only the so-called “stable product configuration” of fuzzy logical
connective operators will be described, with a more thorough walkthrough of them, and
those of the Gödel and Łukasiewicz logics being covered in the appendix C. In general,
the stable product logical connectives are recommended.
Logic tensor network learning workflow
The learning workflow with LTNs is as follows:
1. Grounding: Data is used to ground the logical axioms in the knowledge base.
2. Forwarding: The truth values of the logical axioms are computed based on the
groundings. This phase is referred to as forwarding as these groundings are for-
warded through the logic tensor networks.
3. Aggregation: The truth values of the logical axioms are aggregated to compute the
overall satisfaction level of the knowledge base.
4. Loss computation: The loss function is used to compute the extent to which all the
logical axioms are satisfied, with the loss being a real number in [0, 1].
20
An axiomatic framework for neuro-symbolic reasoning in multi-agent systems
==PAGE:29==
5. Backpropagation: The parameters of all the LTNs are changed with backpropaga-
tion to maximize the overall satisfaction level of the logical axioms.
Real logic
Real logic is a fuzzy first-order logic designed to serve as a foundation for LTNs. Real
logic is a first-order language L which contains the following sets:
• C: Constant symbols.
• F: Function symbols.
• P: Predicate symbols.
• X: Variable symbols.
• D: Domain symbols. Types for every set of constants, functions, predicates, and
variables.
Every atomic formula is a value in [0, 1].
Domain functions
A domain function is one of the following three functions:
• D : X ∪C →D: Returns the domain of a variable or a constant.
• Din : F ∪P →D∗: Returns the domains of the arguments of a function or a predi-
cate. If a function takes more than one argument, e.g., f(x, y), then Din returns a
domain for each of the arguments.
• Dout : F →D: Returns the range of a function.
Where D∗is the Kleene star of D, i.e., the set of all finite sequences of symbols in D.
Grounding
Grounding is the process by which the components of the logical language is translated
into tensors and the operations that can be performed on them. This is the key to allowing
logical statements to be evaluated on real data and enabling networks to learn from that
data.
Domain grounding
The grounding of a domain symbol does not produce an actual tensor, but instead as-
sociates with the domain a set of possible tensors. For example, let ‘images’ denote a
domain of RGB images of dimensions 256 by 256 pixels. The result of a grounding of this
domain becomes G(images) ⊆R256×256×3.
Constant grounding
The grounding of a constant symbol c results in a single tensor in the domain G(D(c)).
For example, if dogs are represented as a tensor [height, weight, gender], then a constant
“Max” (the name of a dog) could have the grounding [50, 20, 1].
Variable grounding
The grounding of a variable symbol x results in a finite sequence of tensors, each in the
domain G(D(x)). These tensors represent the instances of x. This differs from first-order
logic where a variable is assigned to a single value of the domain at a time. Variables
ground to a sequence of tensors to allow for the quantification over variables. When more
than one variable is involved, then the grounding takes on the number of dimensions of
free variables.
Figure 2.3 illustrates the grounding – and the tensors along with the dimensions involved
– when finding the grounding G(p(x, f(x, y))), where p is a predicate and f is a function
taking two arguments.
An axiomatic framework for neuro-symbolic reasoning in multi-agent systems
21
==PAGE:30==
Figure 2.3: Grounding of multiple variables in LTNs
It is clear to see that the tensor of both G(f(x, y)) and G(p(x, f(x, y))) take on two dimen-
sions since each free variable constitutes one extra dimension of value instances.
Function grounding
The grounding of a function symbol f results in a function taking tensors from G(Din(f))
as input and producing a tensor in G(Dout(f)) as output.
Predicate grounding
The grounding of a predicate symbol p results in a function taking tensors from G(Din(f))
as input and producing a truth value in the interval [0, 1] as output.
Fuzzy logic quantification semantics
Fuzzy logic quantifiers cannot use the same semantics as in first-order logic as the first-
order logic quantifiers either check that at least one value is a true value (1), or that all
values are true values (1). As there is likely no perfectly true value (1) in fuzzy logic, and
all values in fuzzy logic are in the interval [0, 1], we cannot process the values in the same
manner as in first-order logic.
The solution to this dilemma wrt. existential quantification in fuzzy logic is to – instead of
iterating through all elements and finding one true value as in first-order logic – find the
maximum value. If the resulting value is large, then it is very likely that there exists such
an element in the set of fuzzy values, and vice versa if the resulting value is small. The
intuition is that a statement made with the existential quantifier likely holds if there is at
least one likely element; the maximum operator captures this by selecting the largest truth
value.
The solution with respect to universal quantification is to – instead of iterating through all
elements to find if all elements are true as in first-order logic – find the minimum value. If
the resulting value is large, then it is very likely that all elements in the set are true, and
vice versa if the resulting value is small. The intuition is that a statement made with the
universal quantifier is only as true as its weakest link; the minimum operator captures this
by selecting the lowest truth value.
In a gradient-based algorithm, the choice of semantics for fuzzy logic quantification must
be picked such that the gradient flows back to all the values provided as input to the
quantification operation. For this reason, the standard maximum and minimum operators,
also referred to as the Gödel t-norm and Gödel t-conorm, respectively, are not suited
for gradient-based algorithms as its gradient only flows back to the single input with the
maximal or minimal value, respectively. The standard solution consists of the p-mean and
the p-mean error fuzzy logic operators from the so-called “stable product configuration”.
22
An axiomatic framework for neuro-symbolic reasoning in multi-agent systems
==PAGE:31==
Figure 2.4: Effect of quantification
Effect of quantification on tensors
Quantification over a free variable x will iterate over all the instances that represent x. The
quantification over a free variable results in the tensor representation losing one dimension
corresponding to that free variable. This is because the operation of quantification is
intended to evaluate the combination of that free variable with all other free values, and
the result of evaluation has to be a tensor as well.
Figure 2.4 illustrates the effect of quantification.
As can be seen in figure 2.4, each time quantification over a free variable takes place,
which happens two times – one for each variable – one dimension is lost. In this case the
result is a single number in the interval [0, 1].
The p-mean fuzzy logic operator
The p-mean operator pM(u1, . . . , un) in fuzzy logic is defined as follows:
pM(u1, . . . , un) =
(
1
n
n
∑
i=1
up
i
) 1
p
,
(2.29)
where p ≥1.
The p-mean operator is used as the fuzzy logic equivalent of the existential quantifier.
The p-mean operator has exploding gradients on the edge cases where u1 = · · · = un =
0. To fix this issue, each ui can be modified so that:
u′
i = (1 −ϵ)ui + ϵ,
(2.30)
where ϵ is a small positive value, e.g., 1 × 10−5. This trick provides a stable version of the
operator in the sense that the gradient no longer vanishes.
The higher the value of the hyperparameter p, the less the p-mean operator takes outliers
into account, and the more the operator behaves like the maximum aggregator operator.
With a value of p = 1, the operator behaves like the averaging operator.
The p-mean error fuzzy logic operator
The p-mean error operator pME(u1, . . . , un) in fuzzy logic is defined as follows:
pME(u1, . . . , un) = 1 −
(
1
n
n
∑
i=1
(1 −ui)p
) 1
p
(2.31)
An axiomatic framework for neuro-symbolic reasoning in multi-agent systems
23
==PAGE:32==
Where p ≥1.
The p-mean error operator is used as the fuzzy logic equivalent of the universal quantifier.
The p-mean error operator has exploding gradients on the edge cases where u1 = · · · =
un = 1. To fix this issue, each ui can be modified so that:
u′
i = (1 −ϵ)ui
(2.32)
Where ϵ is a small positive value, e.g., 1 × 10−5. This trick provides a stable version of
the operator in the sense that the gradient no longer vanishes.
The higher the value of the hyperparameter p, the less the p-mean error operator takes
outliers into account, and the more the operator behaves like the minimum aggregator
operator. With a value of p = 1, the operator behaves like the averaging operator.
The standard negation fuzzy logic operator
The standard negation operator ¬ in fuzzy logic is defined as follows:
¬u = 1 −u
(2.33)
The standard negation operator is recommended as the standard grounding of negation
and belongs to the “stable product configuration”.
The product t-norm fuzzy logic operator
The product t-norm operator TP is also covered in the appendix (see section C.3) along
with its behavior in gradient-based algorithms. The TP operator is defined as follows:
TP (u, v) = uv
(2.34)
The product t-norm operator is recommended as the standard grounding of conjunction
and belongs to the “stable product configuration”.
The product t-norm operator has vanishing gradients on the edge case where u = v = 0.
To fix this issue, both u and v can be modified so that u′ = (1−ε)u+ε and v′ = (1−ε)v+ε,
where ε is a small positive value, e.g., 1 × 10−5. This trick provides a stable version of the
operator in the sense that the gradient no longer vanishes.
The product t-conorm fuzzy logic operator
The product t-conorm operator SP is also covered in the appendix (see section C.4) along
with its behavior in gradient-based algorithms. The SP operator is defined as follows:
SP (u, v) = u + v −uv
(2.35)
The product t-conorm operator is recommended as the standard grounding of disjunction
and belongs to the “stable product configuration”.
The product t-conorm operator has vanishing gradients on the edge case where u = v =
1. To fix this issue, both u and v can be modified so that u′ = (1 −ϵ)u and v′ = (1 −ϵ)v,
where ε is a small positive value, e.g., 1 × 10−5. This trick provides a stable version of the
operator in the sense that the gradient no longer vanishes.
24
An axiomatic framework for neuro-symbolic reasoning in multi-agent systems
==PAGE:33==
The Reichenbach implication fuzzy logic operator
The Reichenbach implication operator IR is also covered in the appendix (see section
C.5) along with its behavior in gradient-based algorithms. The IR operator is defined as
follows:
IR(u, v) = 1 −u + uv
(2.36)
The Reichenbach implication operator is recommended as the standard grounding of im-
plication and belongs to the “stable product configuration”.
The Reichenbach implication operator has vanishing gradients on the following edge
cases where u = 0 and v = 1. To fix this issue, both u and v can be modified so that
u′ = (1 −ϵ)u + ϵ and v′ = (1 −ϵ)v, where ε is a small positive value, e.g., 1 × 10−5. This
trick provides a stable version of the operator in the sense that the gradient no longer
vanishes.
2.4
The laser-learning environment
The Laser-Learning Environment (LLE) is a discrete cooperative MARL environment.
2.4.1
Action space
The action space is discrete and consists of five possible actions: ‘North’, ‘South’, ‘East’,
‘West’, and ‘Stay’. The first four actions move the respective agent in the direction of the
associated cardinal direction whereas the last action has the respective agent stay put for
one timestep.
2.4.2
Environment structure
The environment consists of cells, with each cell containing one of several possible enti-
ties.
2.4.3
Environment entities
There are multiple entities in the environment, with each distinct entity interacting with
agents in differing ways. In the following, all of these entities are briefly described. For
more elaborate descriptions of the interactivity of the environment, go to section 2.4.4.
• Spaces: Spaces do not directly interact with agents. They do, however, allow for
agents as well as laser beams to pass through them undisturbed.
• Agents: Agents are the sole entities – not considering laser beams – to be able
to move around the environment. Agents are also the sole entities that can be
controlled with the LLE API during environment simulations.
• Laser origin blocks and beams: Laser origin blocks emanate laser beams in one
of the four cardinal directions.
• Walls: Walls prevent agents and laser beams from passing through them.
• Exit tiles: An exit tile can be entered by an agent.
• Voids: Voids kill agents that try to pass through them.
• Gems: Gems provide a reward of 1 point to the team when any agent collects them.
An axiomatic framework for neuro-symbolic reasoning in multi-agent systems
25
==PAGE:34==
2.4.4
Environment interactivity
In the following, the full scope of how every entity in the environment can interact with
every other entity is thoroughly detailed. However, not all entities are included, as some
(e.g., spaces) are essentially self-explanatory. All the dynamics of the environment are
caused by interaction with agents, and each entity is thus naturally described in terms of
how it interacts with agents.
Voids
If an agent tries to enter a void, the agent immediately disappears, i.e., dies. In order for
a level to be completed, all agents must enter an exit tile, and the death of at least one
agent thus precludes the possibility of a level being completed.
Laser beams
Laser beams are blocked by all other entities but spaces and agents of the same color
as the laser beam. If a laser beam is blocked at some point in some timestep t, then the
part of the laser beam emanating past the point of blocking at timestep t −1 immediately
ceases to exist at timestep t.
Gems
If an agent tries to enter a cell containing a gem, the team of agents receive a reward
of 1. Gems are thus the only entity that provide rewards, with no other means of getting
rewards but by completing the level.
2.4.5
Sparse rewards and environment difficulty
Because there are such few rewards, with the only reward before level completion being
gems, LLE has proven to be a very difficult exploration benchmark. As will be covered
in the rest of the report, this is attested to by the vanilla implementation of the MADDPG
algorithm not being able to complete the levels designed for this project with more than
one agent and at least two laser beams standing between the agents and the goals.
2.5
Related work
2.5.1
The SymDQN algorithm
SymDQN is based on the Dueling DQN (section 2.1.7) with which it integrates an LTN
module, referred to as the ShapeRecognizer module, which is responsible for learning
a symbolic representation of its environment, guided by three logical axioms. Besides
the ShapeRecognizer module, three other LTN modules are integrated with SymDQN,
allowing for reward prediciton (the RewardPredictor module), action reasoning (the Ac-
tionReasoner module), and action filtering (the ActionFilter module).
The initial approach was heavily inspired by the SymDQN algorithm, specifically the ShapeRe-
cognizer module, to learn a symbolic representation of its environment.
The ShapeRecognizer module in the SymDQN algorithm
The ShapeRecognizer module is responsible for learning a symbolic representation of
the environment, achieving this through knowledge injection coming in two variants: soft
knowledge injection and logical axioms that guide the learning. Soft knowledge is injected
by the architecture being pre-configured to deal with a 5-by-5 grid of 25 patches containing
a total of five distinct shapes. There are three logical axioms that guide the module during
learning to assign a label to every shape, assign no more than one label to every shape,
and make sure to not assign the same label to several distinct shapes.
This symbolic representation of the environment allows for much faster training, as the
SymDQN algorithm will not have to learn which pixels in which pixel clusters belong to-
gether, etc., but immediately knows how the environment is segmented into patches and
the total number of possible shapes.
26
An axiomatic framework for neuro-symbolic reasoning in multi-agent systems
==PAGE:35==
2.5.2
Meta-agent Q-learning
The “meta-agent” approach to multi-agent Q-learning entails modeling a multi-agent en-
vironment to that of a single-agent environment by having this meta-agent choose a joint
action consisting of the set of actions of all individual agents (Asghari 2024). The Q-
function is conditioned on the state and the joint action of all agents. Because all agents
are modeled as this single meta-agent, all single-agent reinforcement learning problems
can be applied to this problem. However, due to the exponential growth in the joint action
space in the number of agents, this approach is not scalable and thus impractical for a
large number of agents.
2.5.3
Independent Q-learning and independent DQN
In independent Q-learning (IQL), each agent ignores the presence of other agents in the
environment and learns its own Q-function conditioned on the state and its own actions.
IQL avoids the scalability issue of meta-agent Q-learning and can easily be extended
independent DQN.
Albeit simple, IQL suffers from the issue of non-stationarity in the environment as each
agent is independently updating its own policy. This also rules out any convergence guar-
antees that exist for single-agent Q-learning. In spite of this, however, IQL shows strong
empricial results (Laetitia Matignon, Guillaume J Laurent, and Nadine Le Fort-Piat 2012)
(independent DQN notwithstanding). Another downside with IQL is the confusion in the
neural network that may arise when re-learning form past experiences when sampling
from the experience replay memory, as former experiences may no longer reflect the cur-
rent dynamics due to the non-stationarity introduced by each agent according to their own
policy.
2.5.4
Value decomposition networks
Value decomposition networks (VDN) is a cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning
algorithm which addresses the challenges of learning with only a single joint reward signal
(Sunehag et al. 2017). By decomposing the team’s value function into a sum of individual
agent values, VDN provides a direct solution to the credit assignment problem in a multi-
agent context and helps mitigate issues like the lazy agent problem. The algorithm is
characterized by:
• Representing the agents’ overall success with a centralized total value function.
• Each agent also having an individual value function.
• Learning to decompose the centralized team value function into individual agent-
wise value functions.
• Enabling decentralized execution while utilizing centralized training.
• Addressing the ”lazy agent” problem and spurious rewards that arise in cooperative
multi-agent settings.
The core idea of VDN is to additively decompose the joint action-value function for the
system into value functions across agents:
Q((h1, h2, ..., hd), (a1, a2, ..., ad)) ≈
d
∑
i=1
˜Qi(hi, ai)
(2.37)
Where ˜Qi is the Q-function of agent i, depending only on each agent’s local observation-
s/history hi and actions ai.
An axiomatic framework for neuro-symbolic reasoning in multi-agent systems
27
==PAGE:36==
The individual agent value functions ˜Qi are learned implicitly by backpropagating gradi-
ents from the Q-learning rule using the joint reward through the summation layer, rather
than from any specific reward assigned to individual agents.
The VDN architecture consists of:
• Individual agent networks that process local observations.
• A value decomposition layer that combines individual agent value estimates into a
joint Q-value.
• Backpropagation through the summation operation to train individual agent net-
works.
Although training requires some centralization to compute the joint Q-function, the learned
agents can be deployed independently during execution, since each agent acting greedily
with respect to its local value ˜Qi is equivalent to a central coordinator choosing joint actions
by maximizing the sum ∑
i ˜Qi.
In summary, VDN addresses the following issues:
• The lazy agent problem:
In centralized approaches, inefficient policies can emerge where only one agent
becomes active while others remain ”lazy.” This happens when one agent learns a
useful policy, but a second agent is discouraged from exploring because its actions
might hinder the first agent and lead to worse team reward.
• Spurious rewards:
Independent learners face difficulties because from a single agent’s perspective,
the environment is only partially observed, and agents may receive spurious reward
signals originating from teammates’ unobserved behavior.
• Non-stationarity:
Independent agents face a non-stationary learning problem because the dynamics
of the environment effectively change as teammates modify their behaviors through
learning.
2.5.5
QMIX
QMIX is a multi-agent reinforcement learning algorithm which extends that of VDN by
combining individual agents’ Q-values in a more sophisticated manner that does not re-
quire full factorization when computing the total team value (Rashid et al. 2018). Like
VDN, QMIX is designed to address the multi-agent credit assignment challenge, but it
employs a more expressive mixing network to allow for a richer, non-linear combination
of agent utilities while still ensuring a stable learning process. QMIX is characterized by:
• Training is centralized.
• Execution is decentralized.
• Each agent has its own Q-network which produces values for its own actions based
on its local observations.
• Using a ”mixing” network to combine all agents’ predicted Q-values into a total team
Q-value.
The architecture of an agent is composed of a deep recurrent Q-network (DRQN) with the
recurrent unit being the gated recurrent unit (GRU). Before the state and observation are
passed on, they are combined and fed to a recurrent network (a GRU) which allows for
28
An axiomatic framework for neuro-symbolic reasoning in multi-agent systems
==PAGE:37==
the agent to reason based on its history of observations, since the environment is one of
partial observability.
The mixing network is responsible for combining all individual agents’ predicted Q-values
into the total team value. The mixing network is characterized by the monotonicity con-
straint and being generated by hypernetworks. The monotonicity constraint prevents the
team Q-value from decreasing if an agent’s Q-value increases, and vice versa. This is
enforced by putting the weights of the mixing network, after being generated by the hyper-
networks, through a function that ensures they are positive. The monotonicity constraint
is formalized by:
∂Qtot
∂Qa
≥0, ∀a
(2.38)
Where Qtot is the total team Q-value, and Qa the Q-value of agent a’s Q-network.
Each layer of the mixing network is dynamically generated by hypernetworks, with each of
the hypernetworks taking the global state. This allows for the mixing network to adapt to
the global state and for the contribution of each agent to vary depending on the situation.
Due to the nature of the mixing network, the following holds:
argmax
u
Qtot(τ, u) =





argmax
u1
Q1(τ 1, u1)
...
argmax
un
Qn(τ n, un)





(2.39)
That is, finding the joint action vector maximizing the total team reward results in the
agents taking the same actions as if they were to decide which action to greedily take on
their own in order to maximize their own rewards.
Agents cannot have their actions depend on those of other agents as the monotonicity
constraint would prevent an agent from picking any other action than the one that brings
the greatest Q-value for an individual agent at execution time, although it could be more
advantageous for the team to have such a particular individual agent pick an action locally
that results in a smaller Q-value.
In figure 2.5, the mixing network in QMIX is illustrated. From left to right, the figure illus-
trates:
1. This illustrates the mixing network alone and how it is generated by the hypernet-
works (the red blocks) which take the state st.
2. This illustrates the overall QMIX architecture and how the mixing network takes as
input the output of each agent.
3. This illustrates the structure of each agent network.
2.5.6
Limitations of value-decomposition for complex reasoning
While effective, the primary contribution of VDN and QMIX lies in ensuring efficient, de-
centralized execution by enforcing a strict additive or monotonic relationship between in-
dividual and team values. However, this very constraint makes it difficult to model more
complex inter-agent dependencies or to integrate external, non-reward-based knowledge.
For instance, an agent might need to take a locally suboptimal action (decreasing its own
An axiomatic framework for neuro-symbolic reasoning in multi-agent systems
29
==PAGE:38==
Figure 2.5: QMIX mixing network structure
Q-value) to satisfy a logical constraint that benefits the team, a scenario that is challeng-
ing to represent under the QMIX monotonicity constraint. This highlights a gap for MARL
frameworks that can handle more expressive forms of agent coordination and reasoning.
30
An axiomatic framework for neuro-symbolic reasoning in multi-agent systems
==PAGE:39==
3
Evaluation of environments
Before the experiment of implementing a symbolic reasoning module for grounding sym-
bols, a lot of research went into finding an environment that satisfied the criteria of cus-
tomizability, ease of use, and suitability for demonstrating the utility of logic tensor net-
works (LTNs) in a neuro-symbolic context. In the end, the Laser-Learning Environment
(LLE) was chosen as it best met these criteria, but many others were considered. Only
discrete environments were taken into consideration, as this was deemed most fitting for
the project’s goals. The other environments that were considered are introduced and
described below, followed by a detailed justification for selecting LLE.
3.1
Robotic warehouse (RWARE)
RWARE is a MARL environment that simulates a warehouse where multiple robots must
retrieve and deliver requested shelves to specific goal locations (Christianos and Schäfer
2024a). It is a partially observable grid world where agents must navigate corridors, avoid
collisions, and manage a queue of requested items.
• Advantages:
– High customizability: The environment is highly configurable, allowing for dif-
ferent warehouse sizes, numbers of agents, and numbers of requested shelves,
which directly impacts the difficulty and sparsity of rewards.
– Complex Dynamics: The collision dynamics, where agents can move under
shelves but not when carrying one, present interesting coordination challenges
that could potentially be expressed with logical rules.
• Disadvantages:
– Focus on collision avoidance: The primary challenge in RWARE is spatial-
temporal coordination and collision avoidance. While logical rules could be
written for this, the environment’s core complexity does not revolve around
recognizing abstract patterns or entity properties, which is a key strength of
the proposed LTN-based approach. The logic would be more about pathing
and less about semantic understanding.
– Partial observability: The environment is partially observable by default (a
3x3 grid around each agent). While this is a realistic feature, it adds a layer of
complexity (belief state representation) that could obscure the direct impact of
the symbolic reasoning module this project aims to demonstrate.
– Outdated dependencies: As noted in its own documentation, the environment
has had to be updated to keep up with modern RL frameworks like Gymnasium,
suggesting potential maintenance overhead.
3.2
Overcooked-AI
Overcooked-AI is a well-known, fully cooperative MARL benchmark based on the popular
video game Overcooked (Carroll et al. 2019). Two agents must work together in a kitchen
to prepare, cook, and deliver soups as quickly as possible. This requires dynamic task
allocation, coordination, and movement in a constrained space.
• Advantages:
An axiomatic framework for neuro-symbolic reasoning in multi-agent systems
31
==PAGE:40==
– Clear cooperative goal: The environment has a very clear and intuitive goal
that necessitates tight cooperation, making it an excellent benchmark for MARL.
– Rich task hierarchy: The process of making soup (get ingredients →place
in pot →cook →deliver) has a natural hierarchical structure that could be
represented with symbolic logic.
– Strong community and support: As a popular benchmark, it has a large user
base and has been used in numerous research papers.
• Disadvantages:
– Complexity in human-AI interaction: A significant portion of the Overcooked-
AI framework is dedicated to human-in-the-loop experiments and modeling hu-
man behavior. While powerful, this focus is not central to the goals of this
thesis, which is about agent-agent learning guided by logic.
– Logic is primarily procedural: The logic required to succeed in Overcooked
is largely procedural (a sequence of tasks). While this can be modeled, it is less
about identifying static properties of the environment (like a trap or a specific
type of wall) and more about following a recipe. This makes it a less ideal
showcase for a ShapeRecognizer-inspired network trained by LTNs.
– Deprecated codebase: The official repository explicitly states that the rein-
forcement learning and behavioral cloning implementations are deprecated
and no longer supported, posing a significant risk for a new project relying
on them.
3.3
Level-based foraging (LBF)
Level-Based Foraging is a mixed cooperative-competitive MARL environment where agents
with different ”levels” must navigate a grid to collect ”food” items, which also have levels
(Christianos and Schäfer 2024b). A food item can only be collected if the sum of the levels
of the agents attempting to load it is equal to or greater than the food’s level.
• Advantages:
– Explicit cooperation mechanism: The core mechanic—summing agent lev-
els to overcome a challenge—is a clear and quantifiable form of cooperation.
– Simple, clear rules: The environment’s rules are straightforward and easy to
understand, making it easier to formulate crisp logical axioms.
– Good balance of cooperation and competition: Agents must decide whether
to collect low-level food alone or cooperate to acquire higher-level food, creat-
ing interesting strategic dynamics.
• Disadvantages:
– Limited scope for abstract reasoning: The primary challenge is numerical
and tactical. It does not require agents to identify abstract shapes or environ-
mental properties. The logic is based on simple arithmetic and proximity, not
on recognizing complex spatial patterns that would justify dedicated symbolic
reasoning modules proposed in this thesis.
– Focus on reward distribution: Much of the environment’s complexity, as de-
scribed in its documentation, relates to credit assignment and how rewards are
32
An axiomatic framework for neuro-symbolic reasoning in multi-agent systems
==PAGE:41==
shared among cooperating agents. This is a classic MARL problem, but it is
tangential to the primary goal of this thesis, which is injecting symbolic knowl-
edge.
3.4
Reasoning behind the choice of the laser-learning
environment
After careful consideration, the Laser-Learning Environment (LLE) was selected as the
most suitable testbed for this project. While the other environments are excellent MARL
benchmarks, LLE’s characteristics align uniquely with the goal of demonstrating the utility
of LTNs for neuro-symbolic reasoning for the following reasons:
• Ideal for spatial, symbolic reasoning: Unlike the other environments, LLE con-
tains entities and dynamics (e.g., voids, laser beams that are blocked by walls)
whose properties are defined by their spatial configuration and interaction with agents
over time. A void, for instance, is not just a tile; its identity as a ”trap” is revealed by
a logical rule: if an agent is here at time t, and gone at time t + 1, this space might
be a void. This is a perfect use case for the proposed symbolic reasoning module,
as it requires agents to learn abstract, symbolic concepts from raw observations,
guided by logical axioms.
• High and meaningful customizability: LLE allows for the creation of complex
puzzle-like scenarios that cannot be solved by reactive policies alone. One can
design levels where understanding the concept of a laser beam being blocked or the
danger of a void is a prerequisite for success. This allows for the creation of a clear
and demonstrable gap between a purely data-driven agent and a neuro-symbolic
agent.
• Avoids confounding factors: LLE is fully observable and has a simpler reward
structure than environments like RWARE or LBF. This is an advantage, as it removes
confounding variables like partial observability or complex credit assignment. Any
performance improvement can be more directly attributed to the success of the LTN-
based symbolic reasoning module, which is the core contribution of this work.
In summary, while RWARE focuses on collision, Overcooked on procedural tasks, and
LBF on numerical cooperation, LLE provides the ideal sandbox for exploring symbolic
and spatial pattern recognition within a MARL context, making it the superior choice for
this thesis.
An axiomatic framework for neuro-symbolic reasoning in multi-agent systems
33
==PAGE:42==
34
An axiomatic framework for neuro-symbolic reasoning in multi-agent systems
==PAGE:43==
4
A theoretical framework for
neuro-symbolic integration in
multi-agent reinforcement learning
In the following, the theoretical framework for enabling symbolic representation in a multi-
agent reinforcement learning environment will be covered. It will be explained how the
MADDPG MARL algorithm was deemed the most suited for the integration of symbolic
reasoning in the form of LTNs, and the code responsible for testing such a symbolic rea-
soning module in practice will be covered.
This chapter sets out to answer the question of how one can integrate symbolic knowl-
edge into a multi-agent deep reinforcement learning algorithm to improve performance
and environmental understanding. To answer this, a theoretical framework for enabling
symbolic representation and reasoning in a multi-agent environment is proposed. First,
the profound theoretical challenges of aggregating beliefs in a decentralized system are
explored by drawing parallels to social choice theory. Then, the contribution is presented:
an axiomatic framework designed to tackle the foundational problem of symbol grounding
using unsupervised methods. Finally, a concrete motivating case study will be discussed
– an empirical implementation of a centralized reasoning module. The results of this ex-
periment underscore the profound difficulty of the symbol grounding problem and validate
the need for the robust theoretical work presented here.
To overcome the limitations of standard MARL algorithms in complex coordination tasks, a
neuro-symbolic approach is proposed. This framework provides agents with the capacity
to reason symbolically about their environment and each other, enabling more sophisti-
cated and explicit cooperation. In the following, the theoretical basis for this framework is
detailed, beginning with the rationale and culminating in a discussion of a robust, decen-
tralized architecture.
4.1
Rationale for a neuro-symbolic approach
As briefly mentioned in section 2.3, neuro-symbolic artificial intelligence combines the
advantages of neural AI with that of symbolic AI, effectively mitigating the disadvantages
of each. That is, instead of designing an algorithm in which agents’ actions are more or
less wholly controlled by their corresponding neural nets and their learned parameters,
logic can be attached to the agents’ behavior using symbols representative of, e.g., the
environment.
Through initial testing, it was found that the vanilla MADDPG algorithm struggles to solve
levels in LLE (section 2.4) that demand intricate cooperation, such as agents needing to
block lasers for one another; figure 4.1 shows the start configuration of one such level
where agents did not learn to coordinate in blocking their respective laser beams so the
other agent could pass. This is characteristic of the challenges MARL algorithms face in
environments with sparse rewards and complex sequential decision-making, potentially
exacerbated by issues like the lazy agent problem (section 2.2.1).
A neuro-symbolic architecture can address these shortcomings. One could imagine that,
if agents could reason about symbolic concepts such as ‘laser beam’, ‘laser beam color’,
An axiomatic framework for neuro-symbolic reasoning in multi-agent systems
35
==PAGE:44==
Figure 4.1: Simple level vanilla MADDPG cannot solve on its own
and ‘void’, they could follow explicit logical rules to improve performance by avoiding dan-
gers and achieve complex coordination; an accomplishment that is difficult to achieve by
learning from reward signals alone.
4.2
Choice of MARL algorithm backbone
With respect to the other considered algorithms such as QMIX (section 2.5.5) and VDN
(section 2.5.4), MADDPG facilitates the implementation of symbolic reasoning. This is due
to the fact that QMIX and VDN combine individual agent Q-values into a single, collective
Q-value on which the monotonic structural constraint applies. This means that these two
algorithms are by nature more rigid than MADDPG.
The MADDPG algorithm could be modified such that the symbolic reasoning module pro-
vides a set of symbolic facts that are then provided as input to the critic, thus enriching the
critic’s understanding of the situation, allowing it to provide much more informed learning
signals to the actor networks.
The actor networks themselves could also be directly bypassed with encoded rules that
specify agent behavior when some symbolic facts are present, as provided by the sym-
bolic reasoning module. However, it is more in line with the MADDPG algorithm to simply
have the actor learn which actions to take based on the Q-values output by the critic,
which is in turn, as stated earlier, provided with symbolic facts from the symbolic reason-
ing module.
4.3
Centralized vs decentralized approach
The centralized approach to the implementation of a symbolic reasoning module is to
share it among all agents, ensuring that all agents learn the same symbolic representation.
On the other extreme, each agent could implement their own symbolic reasoning module,
or at least train their own version of it. This could possibly entail that not all agents perceive
the environment identically, as one agent’s module might have learned to wrongly classify,
e.g., a void in LLE as a wall, with the other agents having learned the correct labeling.
Some interesting parallels with social choice theory and the theory of belief merging and
judgment aggregation arise when considering the case in which each agent possesses
36
An axiomatic framework for neuro-symbolic reasoning in multi-agent systems
==PAGE:45==
their own symbolic reasoning module – some of these parallels also exist for the central-
ized approach, but not nearly to the same extent.
A symbolic reasoning layer may be integrated into a MARL algorithm like MADDPG in a
centralized or decentralized fashion:
4.3.1
Centralized reasoning module
This approach utilizes a single symbolic reasoning module that is shared among all agents.
It processes global or aggregated information to produce a single, unified symbolic rep-
resentation of the environment. The main advantage is simplicity, as it eliminates the
possibility of conflicting beliefs between agents. However, it acts as a single point of fail-
ure and is less generalizable to scenarios where agents may have fundamentally different
perspectives or inputs. In the case of LLE, however, all agents have full observability of
the environment.
4.3.2
Decentralized reasoning module
With this approach, each agent is equipped with its own independent symbolic reasoning
module. This is a more robust and generalizable architecture, mirroring real-world sce-
narios where individuals must act based on their own perception of the world. However,
it introduces the critical challenge of coordinating actions when agents’ symbolic beliefs
may differ and/or conflict.
4.4
Empirical investigation of the centralized symbolic
reasoning module
To ground the theoretical exploration, an initial empirical study was conducted focusing
on the simpler centralized paradigm within LLE. The primary goal was to first solve the
foundational symbol grounding problem: the challenge of training a neural module to map
raw perceptual pixel data to meaningful symbolic labels.
Because there are a small number of entities in LLE, and one particular entity always looks
the same, with its pixels arranged in exactly the same manner and color, it makes little
sense to perform supervised image classification on the cells in LLE, as one could just as
well find each distinct and unique entity in the environment and subsequently choose to
encode a mapping of the proper label associations directly with each corresponding cell
image representing that entity. This would allow one to directly write rules and formulas
for how agents should act around each entity.
The advantages of this is the practical lack of training, as one directly encodes the label-
entity mappings, and one can directly begin to work on encoding rules that improve the
performance of the algorithm in question. The disadvantages, however, is that this ap-
proach does not generalize nor scale to other environments, as other environments could
potentially hold many more entities, and entities that are not deterministic in appearance
but could hold noise. For this reason, the purely supervised approach was dismissed. The
investigation therefore focused on training a centralized symbolic reasoning module in an
unsupervised manner, guided by a set of logical axioms that describe the environment’s
dynamics.
The initial goal of the empirical study was to train the module on the full complexity of
LLE, including lasers and walls, supported by a comprehensive set of logical axioms.
However, this initial complex experiment failed to show signs of convergence. To iso-
late the core learning challenge, the experiment was simplified to a minimal environment
containing only agents, spaces, and goals. The axioms were correspondingly reduced
An axiomatic framework for neuro-symbolic reasoning in multi-agent systems
37
==PAGE:46==
to focus purely on entity movement and existence. It was the failure of even this sim-
plified version that revealed the foundational nature of the symbol grounding problem.
The module struggled to reliably converge on a consistent and correct mapping. This
finding was critical: it demonstrated that even in the simplest architectural case, learning
the symbols themselves is a formidable challenge. This insight motivated a pivot away
from a purely implementation-focused effort towards the development of a more robust
theoretical framework capable of addressing the problem in its most general form.
4.5
A framework for decentralized symbolic reasoning
The challenges revealed in the centralized investigation motivate the development of a
framework that addresses the ultimate goal of multi-agent systems: enabling coordination
among agents that perceive and reason about the world independently. This leads us to
the decentralized paradigm.
When each agent forms its own beliefs, the potential for conflict is inevitable. This ag-
gregation problem is analogous to well-studied issues in social choice theory and more
directly addressed by the field of belief merging and judgment aggregation.
For example, in the following scenario – analogous to Condorcet’s paradox (section A.2) –
three agents observe a cell, labeling it with each of their own symbolic reasoning modules.
The first agent could give the following triple of probabilities for the entity in that cell,
with the first element representing a space s, the second representing an agent a, and
the third representing a goal g: (0.8, 0.6, 0.4), translating to a an individual preference
a > s > g. The second agent could give the following probabilities: (0.1, 0.5, 0.3),
translating to an individual preference s > g > a. Finally, the third agent could give the
following probabilities: (0.5, 0.1, 0.9), translating to an individual preference g > a > s.
This perfectly exemplifies Condorcet’s paradox (section A.2 for more). Collectively, the
agents would believe s is preferred to a, that a is preferred to g, and that g is preferred to
s – an irrational loop violating the transitive relation.
Arrow’s theorem (section A.9) also states that there exists no preference aggregation rule
satisfying all of the following conditions if there are more than two social alternatives:
universal domain, ordering, the weak Pareto principle, independence of irrelevant alter-
natives, and non-dictatorship. These conditions were suggested by Arrow on aggregation
rules as desirable and fair; see section A.8 in the Appendix for a list and description of
these conditions. In other words, any way of merging the differing symbolic representa-
tions of the agents will have to disobey at least one of these desirable conditions. For
example, dictatorship is one way of merging differing agent views – of course, this is
generally not desired.
While converting classifier outputs to preference rankings provides a direct analogy to
concepts like Condorcet’s paradox, it is important to note that this involves a loss of in-
formation by discarding the cardinal confidence scores. Therefore, methods from belief
merging, such as distance-based merging, provide a more suitable and precise frame-
work for aggregating these probabilistic beliefs, as they operate directly on the agents’
confidence levels.
The Doctrinal paradox (section B.1) shows how the collective judgment may be irrational
even when every individual’s judgment is logical and consistent. This is showcased in Ko-
rnhauser and Sager’s court example (section B.1). To provide a more concrete example,
more pertinent to a cooperative MARL environment, one could imagine that each agent
shared a logical axiom ¬isStatic(c) ∧isRed(c) →isLaser(c) that each agent would apply
this rule with its own observations in the environment. As with Kornhauser and Sager’s
38
An axiomatic framework for neuro-symbolic reasoning in multi-agent systems
==PAGE:47==
example, one can imagine that, applying the majority rule to the output of these individ-
ual agent predicates, that the individual and shared agent axioms hold, but that the one
resulting from inserting the values of the predicates – after aggregating each individual
agent predicate with the majority rule – does not.
Integrity constraints (section B.2) provide rules that must be satisfied when merging dif-
ferent belief bases into one, with each belief base corresponding to the logical axioms of
each agent in their symbolic reasoning module. An example of such an integrity constraint
could, e.g., be that a wall cannot simultaneously be a wall and a void: ¬((isWall)(c) ∧
isVoid(c)). Meging the various belief bases under a set of integrity constraints results in
a single, collective belief base that does not violate such basic truths.
Two classes of integrity constraint operators exist for merging different belief bases while
satisfying the integrity constraints: majority fusion operators (section B.2) and arbitration
operators (section B.2). The former minimizes total disagreement between the agents
whereas the latter distributes dissatisfaction equally.
Distance-based merging (section B.2) is a method of merging various belief bases in
which the resulting, single belief base preserves as much information as possible by being
the closest possible to all individual beliefs. The distance function measures the amount of
dissatisfaction an interpretation of the world causes for some agent. The distance-based
method could, e.g., be used in the example of Condorcet’s paradox. After each agent’s
symbolic reasoning module outputs probabilities for the cell in question being a space s,
an agent a, or a goal g, the distance-based method could calculate the label that results in
the distance function being the lowest possible value, thus ensuring that this label causes
the least disagreement among the agents, while respecting a set of predefined integrity
constraints, e.g., that a wall cannot simultaneously be a wall.
Choosing the correct method is critical, as different operators are optimized for different
collective goals. The foundation for this entire reasoning system is a set of logical ax-
ioms that both guide individual learning and provide the shared basis for rational belief
aggregation. The specific formulation of these axioms for LLE is detailed later.
4.5.1
Goal-oriented aggregation strategies
The choice of an aggregation operator depends on the overarching goal of the collective.
Whether the agents aim to uncover the most accurate representation of reality, ensure
a fair compromise among differing viewpoints, or strictly adhere to a set of operational
rules, different operators from social choice theory and belief merging are required. The
framework must be flexible enough to deploy the right tool for the right job.
Majority and minisum operators
When the primary objective is to determine the most likely correct or true state of the
environment, the aggregation method should prioritize accuracy over individual satisfac-
tion. This is particularly relevant when agents’ individual perceptions are noisy or partially
obscured, but each agent is more likely to be correct than not
In this context, methods analogous to majority rule are highly effective. The logic mirrors
Condorcet’s Jury Theorem (section A.1), which posits that the majority opinion of a group
of competent individuals is more likely to be correct than any single individual’s opinion.
In the realm of belief merging, the equivalent is a distance-based fusion operator that
uses a minisum function (section B.2). This operator works by selecting the outcome
that minimizes the sum of the distances to all individual belief sets, effectively finding the
outcome with the least total disagreement. By doing so, it identifies the belief state that
is, on average, most pleasing to the group, which often corresponds to the most probable
An axiomatic framework for neuro-symbolic reasoning in multi-agent systems
39
==PAGE:48==
truth.
The minisum operator is best suited for object identification, state estimation, and situa-
tions where there is a single ground truth that agents are trying to determine collectively.
For example, if multiple agents observe a cell, a minisum operator can aggregate their
probabilistic classifications to determine the most likely entity in that cell.
Arbitration operators
In many coordination problems, there is no single correct answer, but rather a set of
valid but conflicting preferences or plans. The goal then shifts from finding the truth to
achieving a fair and stable compromise that maximizes collective satisfaction or, more
precisely, minimizes the dissatisfaction of the worst-off agent.
For these scenarios, arbitration operators are the most suitable choice. Unlike majority
operators that can leave a minority completely ignored, arbitration operators aim to dis-
tribute dissatisfaction as equally as possible. A prime example is the Leximax operator
(section B.2), which uses a minimax-like approach. It compares potential outcomes by
first looking at the highest level of disagreement an outcome causes for any single agent.
The outcome that minimizes this maximum disagreement is chosen. This ensures that no
single agent is made excessively displeased by the collective decision. This approach is
ideal for tasks like resource allocation or joint planning where balancing individual agent
preferences is key to successful long-term cooperation.
The Leximax operator is most suited for task allocation, resource distribution, and nego-
tiation scenarios where agents have competing but equally valid preferences, and main-
taining group cohesion is paramount.
Fusion under integrity constraints
When agents’ actions are governed by a strict set of rules, protocols, or physical laws, the
primary goal is to ensure that the collective belief set is logically consistent and adheres
to these constraints. A simple majority vote on individual beliefs can easily lead to a
collectively irrational outcome, as demonstrated by the Doctrinal Paradox.
Here, IC (Integrity Constraint) fusion operators are essential (section B.2). These opera-
tors merge belief bases while guaranteeing that the resulting collective belief set satisfies
a predefined set of logical formulas, known as integrity constraints. For example, a con-
straint might be that a cell cannot simultaneously be a wall and a void (¬(isWall(c) ∧
isVoid(c))). The IC fusion operator will produce a merged belief base that, regardless of
individual agent inputs, never violates such fundamental truths. This mechanism plays
a role analogous to the collective rationality condition in judgment aggregation, blocking
unacceptable or inconsistent outcomes.
IC fusion operators are most suited for building a shared world model, safety-critical ap-
plications, and any scenario where agents must abide by shared protocols or “laws of
physics” to prevent catastrophic failures.
4.6
Examples use cases of the theoretical framework
The point of the theoretical framework is to aggregate different agents’ potentially differing
beliefs so that the aggregated beliefs improve collective understanding through increased
accuracy and robustness. Individual agents may be wrong, their perceptions noisy and
viewpoints obscured, or their reasoning flawed. Through aggregation, these individual
errors can be filtered out, similarly to Condorcet’s jury theorem (section A.1), which states
that a large group of individually competent voters is almost certain to arrive at a correct
decision, even if some of them are wrong. Furthermore, agents often only have a partial
40
An axiomatic framework for neuro-symbolic reasoning in multi-agent systems
==PAGE:49==
view of the world, with each agent’s beliefs only representing a fraction of the world model.
Merging these different beliefs is analogous to assembling a puzzle with each agent’s
beliefs representing a subset of the puzzle pieces, providing increased completeness in
the aggregated belief base in the process.
In this section, some example use cases of the theoretical framework described in the
preceding section will be covered, illustrating its utility. By nature, this framework is ag-
nostic to the specific implementation of each agent’s symbolic reasoning module, as well
as the specific MARL algorithm in question; it only requires that there is a mechanism
present for the agents to broadcast their symbolic beliefs to each other and that this is
somehow taken into account in the algorithm to improve its performance. For these rea-
sons, and to illustrate the general nature of the framework, the following cases deal with
slightly different symbolic reasoning modules and environments.
4.6.1
Example case: the doctrinal paradox and safety coordination
This scenario demonstrates how a simple majority vote can lead to an irrational collective
outcome, and how the theoretical framework provides the tools to handle it.
In this example, a team of three autonomous agents must decide whether a collapsed
building is a danger zone. Their shared protocol, an integrity constraint in their symbolic
modules, is: (hasStructuralInstability ∨hasGasLeak) →isDangerZone.
Each agent has its own sensors and a symbolic module that forms a logical belief base
from its partial observations:
• Agent 1: Detects tremors. Its belief base is {hasStructuralInstability, ¬ hasGasLeak}.
The individual conclusion for agent 1 is that isDangerZone is true.
• Agent 2: Detects gasses. Its belief base is {¬ hasStructuralInstability, hasGasLeak}.
The individual conclusion for agent 2 is that isDangerZone is true.
• Agent 3: Visually inspects the collapsed building. Its belief base is {¬ hasStruc-
turalInstability, ¬ hasGasLeak}. The individual conclusion for agent 3 is that isDan-
gerZone is false.
Using premise-based majority fusion, agent 1 votes that there is structural instability,
whereas agent 2 and agent 3 vote that there is not. Agent 2 votes that there is a gas
leak, whereas agent 1 and agent 3 vote that there is not. By majority, it is therefore be-
lieved that there is neither structural instability nor any gas leak, meaning that the shared
rule becomes (⊥∨⊥) →isDangerZone, which is false.
This is a classic case of the doctrinal paradox (section B.1) in which the group concludes
that the area is safe, even though a clear majority of individual agents (two out of three)
privately concluded it was dangerous. A naive merging process leads to a potentially
catastrophic failure.
The theoretical framework covered in the preceding section allows for more sophisticated
operators. Instead of a premise-based vote, the agents could use a conclusion-based
vote. In this case, the majority vote on the final conclusion isDangerZone would be true,
correctly identifying the danger and ensuring safety. The appropriate aggregation strategy
should be picked according to the context.
4.6.2
Example case: social choice and fair task allocation
This scenario shows how concepts from social choice theory can resolve a complex co-
ordination problem where there is no single “best” answer.
An axiomatic framework for neuro-symbolic reasoning in multi-agent systems
41
==PAGE:50==
In this example, there are three specialized agents that must simultaneously manage
three tasks to shut down a factory: hack the network (H), disable the power core (P), and
create a diversion (D.
Each agent’s symbolic reasoning module is a preference ranker, analyzing the global state
and its own capabilities to output a ranked preference list for the tasks:
• Agent 1 (stealth specialist): Has the following preference ranking: H > D > P.
• Agent 2 (combat specialist): Has the following preference ranking: D > P > H.
• Agent 3 (technical specialist): Has the following preference ranking: P > H > D.
A simpler pairwise vote on the tasks leads to an irrational cycle (Condorcet’s paradox,
section A.2):
• H is preferred to D (agent 1 and agent 3 prefers it to D).
• D is preferred to P (agent 1 and agent 2 prefers it to P).
• P is preferred to H (agent 2 and agent 3 prefers it to H).
This reflects Arrow’s theorem (section A.9), which states that no voting system can be
perfectly fair, and showcases how a simple majority rule fails.
This problem can be solved by using an arbitration operator designed not to find a majority
winner, but to maximize collective fairness by distributing dissatisfaction equally. This
operator evaluates each possible total assignment of tasks:
• Assignment A: In the following configuration, all agents get their first choice, and
the maximum dissatisfaction is therefer 0: (agent 1: H, agent 2: D, agent 3: P).
• Assignment B: In the following configuration, all agents get their second choice,
and the maximum dissatisfaction is therefore 1: (agent 1: D, agent 2: P, agent 3:
H).
The arbitration operator selects assignment A as it minimzes the maximum dissatisfaction
among all agents, leading to a globally optimal and “fair” coordinated plan that simple vote
could not find.
4.6.3
Example case: integrity constraints for a shared world model
This example shows how agents can build a single, logically consistent map of their world
from conflicting, partial pieces of information.
In this example, agents are exploring different sections of a facility and reporting their
findings to build a shared knowledge base.
Each agent’s module is a knowledge base builder. It observes the world and adds logical
propositions (facts) to its internal belief set:
• Agent 1: Explores a lab and finds a glowing vial. Its belief base: {isLab(Room101),
contains(Room101, Vial), isChemical(Vial)}.
• Agent 2: Monitors security feeds and sees a scientist carrying a similar vial. Its be-
lief base is: {isMedicalBay(Room101), contains(Room101, Vial), isAntidote(Vial)}.
The agents’ individual belief bases are contradictory (isLab vs. isMedicalBay; isChemical
vs. isAntidote). For this reason, an IC (integrity constraint) fusion operator is used to
merge these differing knowledge bases while respecting a set of pre-defined common-
sense rules such as:
42
An axiomatic framework for neuro-symbolic reasoning in multi-agent systems
==PAGE:51==
• IC 1: isAntidote(x) →isChemical(x). That is, all antidotes are a type of chemical.
• IC 2: ¬(isLab(r) ∧isMedicalBay(r)). That is, a room cannot both be a lab and a
medical bay.
Using the majority fusion operator, a final, merged knowledge base is created which sat-
isfies the greatest number of propositions from the individual agents without violating any
integrity constraints.
1. Merging propositions:
• isChemical(Room101) conflicts with isMedicalBay(Room101). This violates IC
2 and the operator must therefore make a choice. In this case, it is assumed
that agent 2 is trusted more, as security feeds are more reliable, and isMedi-
calBay(Room101) is chosen.
• isChemical(Vial) and isAntidote(Vial) do not directly conflict, and the opreator
can thus include both.
2. Consistency check:
• The merged base {isMedicalBay(Room101), contains(Room101, Vial), isChem-
ical(Vial), isAntidote(Vial)} is checked against the integrity constraints.
• isAntidote(Vial) implies isChemical(Vial) according to IC 1.
Since isChemi-
cal(Vial) is present from agent 1’s beliefs, this is consistent.
3. Final collective belief set: The merged knowledge base becomes {isMedical-
Bay(Room101), contains(Room101, Vial), isChemical(Vial), isAntidote(Vial)}.
This final belief set is more complete and accurate than that of either agent’s individual be-
liefs, demonstrating how this theoretical framework can be used to construct a consistent
and more complete shared understanding of the world.
4.7
Design of logical axioms for symbol grounding
The axiomatic approach is the engine of the entire neuro-symbolic framework proposed
in this thesis. These formal rules, defined with fuzzy logic semantics (see section C in the
Appendix), serve a critical dual purpose. First, they provide the supervisory signal needed
to tackle the symbol grounding problem, guiding an agent’s neural perception to converge
on meaningful labels. Second, they form the basis for rational collective reasoning, acting
as the shared language and integrity constraints for belief aggregation in a decentralized
system.
The following discussion details the design and formulation of the logical axioms that
were implemented in the simplified empirical investigation described in section D.5 in
the appendix. As mentioned, that experiment was reduced to a minimal environment
containing only two distinctly-colored agents, a space, and a goal for each agent, and the
axioms were designed accordingly. This serves as a concrete case study for the more
general design strategies discussed.
4.7.1
Designing logical axioms
When designing axioms, one of several approaches can be utilized. One might choose to
create axioms that cover all possible configurations that would allow for the identification
of a specific entity. For example, one could check whether either of the four adjacent cells
to some cell had movement, and that the middle cell subsequently changed, and that no
An axiomatic framework for neuro-symbolic reasoning in multi-agent systems
43
==PAGE:52==
other cells contained movement in the considered patch for the remaining timesteps. This
would heavily suggest that the middle cell is a goal, for instance.
Another strategy when designing the logical axioms is to create less clear cut rules which
can be interpreted more as heuristics that sometimes overlap. Ideally, the network would
learn to handle said edge cases where the heuristic rules do not provide a clear way to
separate distinct entities from each other.
The advantages of the first strategy is that the likelihood of the network wrongly labeling
entities is theoretically much lower, if not non-existent, if done perfectly. The disadvan-
tages, however, are that it can very quickly become practically impossible to cover all
possible cases, which is realistically only possible in very simple environments. The com-
putational demands of training an LTN also increases with a growing number of logical
axioms.
The advantages of the second strategy is that the number of logical axioms is much re-
duced, which in turn allows for more computationally efficient training. It is also much
easier for a human to keep track of the logical axioms, the number and size of which may
rapidly become impractical in the case of the first strategy.
4.7.2
Example axioms and considerations when forming axioms
In the following, an overview of the considerations that go into forming logical axioms
will be given, as well as some of the most relevant axioms, each briefly discussed along
with the choice of fuzzy logic semantics. For existential and universal quantification, only
the p-mean and the p-mean error fuzzy logic operators are used, and for negation the
standard negation operator is used.
The following gives a simple and abstract example of what shape a logical axiom might
take. One axiom might be that no two distinct entities can have the same label:
∀l, c1, c2 (c1 ̸= c2 →¬ (label(c1, l) ∧label(c2, l)))
(4.1)
This axiom states that, for every possible pair of unique cells, they may not have the
same label, e.g., both be goals, the same agent, etc. This is a simple axiom that does
not take temporality into consideration. As stated, this axiom is abstract in that the logical
semantics for the fuzzy logical operators is not given, and the predicate label is also not
defined; this could be a programmed predicate or a trained neural network.
It makes sense to consider the Łukasiewicz t-norm operator (see section C.3) for this con-
junction, as it is only satisfied if the sum of the probabilities for each of the label predictions
is below 1.0, meaning it more strongly enforces that only one of the predicates is true at
the same time. For example, if we only consider two cells, with the first cell c1 having a 0.6
probability of being an agent, and the second cell c2 having a 0.7 probability of being an
agent, the overall satisfaction of this logical axiom becomes 1−max(0, 0.6+0.7−1) = 0.3.
However, if the sum of both is below one, e.g., by setting the probabilities to 0.8 and 0.1,
respectively, we get 1 −max(0, 0.8 + 0.1 −1) = 1. This showcases how the Łukasiewicz
operator helps by having the axiom heavily penalize several cells outputting values close
to 1. Normally, this operator makes sure that the satisfaction value is very low unless both
inputs are very close to 1, but since the logical axiom in question is negated, the effect
is reversed. As the product t-norm operator is more lenient by nature, and we want to
strictly enforce that no two distinct cells are labeled the same, this operator is prioritized.
An example of a logical axiom that does take the temporality of the LLE environment into
consideration could be the detection of spaces. In the following axioms – which directly
44
An axiomatic framework for neuro-symbolic reasoning in multi-agent systems
==PAGE:53==
correspond to those used in the latest experiment – unless obvious or otherwise stated,
the second strategy of forming logical axioms is applied, meaning that logical axioms are
defined more as heuristic rules that do not cover all combinatorial cases that define the
dynamics of any one entity.
A space is an empty cell in which agents may move about. Intuitively, it thus makes
sense to simply define spaces as cells containing agents, which are not any of the other
entities in the environment. However, pretending we have a black box function that labels
agents with 100% reliability, we would still not be able to identify empty spaces, as our
naive approach so far was to simply identify spaces as cells with agents moving through
them. For this axiom, more temporal consideration is needed in order to properly identify
spaces.
A heuristic axiom for learning to properly label spaces could be to detect if an agent moved
into the cell in question and subsequently moved out of it again. This requires three
timesteps, and involves calculating the difference of the cell in question across these
timesteps. This rule is a great example of a heuristic rule which encapsulates both its
advantages and disadvantages. For example, we may not be sure that the original cell
in question was a space, as it may in fact have been an agent that simply moved out of
the cell and then returned to it. This behavior satisfies the logical axiom as it simply fires
whenever change happens in the cell in question from the first timestep to the second
timestep, and also from the second timestep to the third timestep. In abstract logical
notation, this axiom could take the following form:
∀c (static(c, t0, t1) ∧static(c, t1, t2) →label(c, “space”))
(4.2)
In the code, the static(c, t0, t1) predicate has been implemented as a simple check by
comparing the one-hot vector representations of a cell at timestep t0 with that same cell
at t1; if the cell changes, the predicate is true, and otherwise false. If we abstract away the
implementation, treating this predicate as yet another learnable predicate, it makes sense
to use the Gödel t-norm (see section C.3) here. The Gödel t-norm outputs the minimum
value of its inputs
One could imagine that this axiom could be somewhat unstable in the sense that it is a
very heuristic rule with many fuzzy cases. One may thus argue that the remaining axioms
should be somewhat more stable in order to counteract this effect. One such axiom could
be that for identifying agents.
One has to be resourceful and mindful of the environment at hand when defining logical
axioms, as all the dynamics could potentially need to be taken into consideration. For
the purposes of identifying agents, the reader is reminded that, whenever agents reach
and enter a goal cell, they stay there until the end of the current episode, after which the
environment resets or ends. Therefore, the logical axiom for learning to label agents could
involve measuring if there are non-static cells in the beginning – indicating the presence
of at least one agent – followed by no movement at all. Such a logical axiom could take
the following form:
∀c ((¬static(c, t0, t1) ∧static(c, t1, t2)) →label(c, “goal”))
(4.3)
Finally, the last missing logical axiom concerns the detection of agents. By this point, it
has been described how agents are the only entity out of the three considered (spaces,
An axiomatic framework for neuro-symbolic reasoning in multi-agent systems
45
==PAGE:54==
goals, agents), that are able to move about; therefore, it stands to reason that the logical
axiom for detecting agents also makes use of the static predicate. Such a logical axiom
could take the following form:
∀c (¬static(c, t0, t1) →label(ct0, “agent”) ∨label(ct1, “agent”))
(4.4)
This logical axiom is very heuristic in the sense that it states there is an agent either in the
cell at timestep t0 or at timestep t1, but does not specify anything further. The notation ct0
and ct1 denotes the same cell at timestep t0 and timestep t1, respectively.
For this axiom, it intuitively makes sense to keep the smooth product fuzzy logic oper-
ators (Reichenbach implication and product t-conorm) as the axiom represents a soft,
correlational relationship rather than a clear-cut definition. For more on the Reichenbach
implication and the product t-conorm, see section , respectively. In cases such as this,
with more heuristic axioms, it makes sense that smoother operators are used, as op-
posed to more “sharp” ones such as those in the Gödel semantic, as to avoid the gradient
becoming zero for parts of the formula, preventing the network from further learning.
In summary, the design of logical axioms represents a critical trade-off between the preci-
sion of exhaustive, combinatorial rules and the practical feasibility of heuristic ones. The
choice of fuzzy logic semantics further allows for fine-tuning the behavior of these rules
within a gradient-based learning context. This axiomatic approach, capable of guiding
both individual perception and collective reasoning, forms the cornerstone of the pro-
posed neuro-symbolic framework, offering a promising path toward solving the symbol
grounding and coordination challenges that plague traditional MARL.
4.8
The centralized symbolic reasoning module
The empirical experiment to solve the symbol grounding problem relied on the implemen-
tation of a centralized symbolic reasoning module. Conceptually, the module needed to
identify not just that entities were distinct, but what they represented, e.g., that voids and
distinctly colored lasers are dangers. This excluded a design that simply analyzed static
images as in the SymDQN algorithm (see section 2.5.1).
It was determined that the module had to analyze spatio-temporal data, specifically 5-by-
5 cell patches observed over three timesteps to accomodate all the entities in LLE. This
larger context was necessary to disambiguate entities based on their dynamic behavior,
such as distinguishing an agent’s death from it simply moving out of view. However,
despite a design that considered these environmental dynamics, the module consistently
struggled to converge on a correct mapping. This outcome underscored the profound
difficulty of the symbol grounding problem and served as the primary catalyst for pivoting
to the more robust, general theoretical framework discussed previously.
Further implementation details of this module can be found in section D.
46
An axiomatic framework for neuro-symbolic reasoning in multi-agent systems
==PAGE:55==
5
Discussion
5.1
Key findings
The central empirical finding of this thesis is that symbol grounding – the process by which
agents learn to associate raw perceptual data with meaningful labels – constitutes a pro-
found and foundational bottleneck for neuro-symbolic multi-agent reinforcement learning.
The initial goal was to improve agent coordination by integrating a symbolic reasoning
module; however, the experiment revealed that a prior, more fundamental challenge must
be solved first. The failure of even a simplified, centralized module to reliably converge
on a correct entity-label mapping underscores the depth of this problem.
5.2
The symbol grounding challenge
The difficulty encountered in the case study likely stems from several interconnected fac-
tors. While the axiomatic framework provides a supervisory signal, the learning process
remains challenging due to:
• The ambiguity of dynamic behavior: Unlike static image classification, identify-
ing entities in LLE requires interpreting spatio-temporal patterns. Distinguishing an
agent’s death from it temporarily moving out of view, or a space from a temporar-
ily unoccupied goal, requires a level of contextual understanding that is difficult to
encode and learn from purely heuristic rules.
• The heuristic nature of the axioms: The choice to use general, heuristic axioms
over exhaustive, combinatorial rules introduces a trade-off. While more scalable,
these heuristics can create ambiguity in edge cases, providing a noisy or conflicting
learning signal that may have hindered the convergence of the LTNs.
Other factors could be related to errors in the pre-processing pipeline or the data gener-
ating process; perhaps levels are not simulated for long enough, or not enough training
data is generated for the symbolic reasoning module to effectively learn from.
5.3
Implications for the theoretical framework
The empirical challenge of symbol grounding in a centralized system provides a stark
warning for the even greater theoretical challenges of decentralized reasoning. The dif-
ficulty in achieving a consistent, shared understanding among agents is not unique to
MARL; it mirrors fundamental problems formalized in social choice theory and belief merg-
ing.
Social choice theory reveals the difficulty of aggregating individual preferences into a ra-
tional collective decision. Foundational results like Condorcet’s paradox and Arrow’s im-
possibility theorem prove that there is no perfectly fair way to combine preferences without
risking irrational or dictatorial outcomes. Similarly, belief merging highlights the doctrinal
paradox, where aggregating logically consistent individual beliefs can lead to a collectively
inconsistent conclusion.
The axiomatic framework proposed in this thesis can be viewed through this lens. Rather
than attempting to aggregate conflicting beliefs after they have formed, the framework
takes a different approach: it seeks to prevent deep conflicts from emerging in the first
place. By providing all agents with a single, globally consistent set of logical axioms, the
An axiomatic framework for neuro-symbolic reasoning in multi-agent systems
47
==PAGE:56==
framework acts as a common, rational foundation that constrains and guides the learning
process of every agent. The goal is to ensure all agents build their symbolic understanding
from a shared set of first principles, thereby circumventing the paradoxes of aggregation.
5.4
Limitations
This work’s conclusions should be considered in the context of its limitations.
• Centralized architecture: The empirical investigation was limited to a centralized
symbolic module. While this simplified the problem by removing the need for be-
lief aggregation, it is a single point of failure and does not address the challenges
of decentralized systems where agents may have differing perspectives or partial
observability.
• Environment and axiom design: The study was confined to a single, discrete en-
vironment (LLE) with a set of hand-designed, heuristic axioms. The framework’s
performance in more complex, noisy environments or with different axiom sets re-
mains an open question.
48
An axiomatic framework for neuro-symbolic reasoning in multi-agent systems
==PAGE:57==
6
Conclusion
This thesis set out to explore the integration of symbolic reasoning into multi-agent re-
inforcement learning (MARL) to improve agent coordination. The central investigation
focused on developing a theoretical framework to bridge the gap between low-level per-
ceptual data and high-level symbolic understanding. To this end, a novel neuro-symbolic
framework guided by fuzzy logical axioms was proposed and its theoretical challenges
contextualized through the lens of social choice theory. A motivating case study was
conducted by implementing a centralized symbolic reasoning module for the MADDPG
algorithm in the Laser-Learning Environment (LLE), which served to highlight the funda-
mental difficulties inherent in the symbol grounding problem.
The primary contributions of this thesis are twofold: the development of a general theo-
retical framework and the critical empirical finding that resulted from its application.
• A formal axiomatic framework: A theoretical framework for integrating symbolic
reasoning modules into MARL algorithms was developed. This framework uses un-
supervised learning, guided by logical axioms, to tackle the symbol grounding prob-
lem, offering a structured method for injecting human-readable domain knowledge
into learning agents.
• A motivating case study on symbol grounding: Through the implementation of a
centralized reasoning module, it was demonstrated that symbol grounding is a pro-
found and foundational bottleneck in neuro-symbolic MARL. This critical empirical
finding validates the need for robust theoretical work and reveals that sophisticated
coordination cannot be achieved without first solving the problem of establishing a
shared, meaningful understanding of the environment.
The scope of this work was subject to several limitations which provide important context
for the contributions. The empirical investigation was confined to a single, discrete, and
fully observable environment (LLE). Furthermore, the implemented architecture was cen-
tralized, deferring the complex challenges of decentralized belief aggregation that were
explored theoretically. Finally, the logical axioms used to guide the system were hand-
designed and heuristic, which may have contributed to the learning difficulties encoun-
tered.
The findings and limitations of this thesis open up several promising avenues for future
research.
• Implementing a decentralized framework: A major next step is to design and
implement a decentralized architecture where each agent possesses its own sym-
bolic module. This would involve applying principles from belief merging and social
choice theory to enable agents to rationally aggregate their potentially conflicting
symbolic beliefs (e.g., distance-based merging).
• Overcoming the symbol grounding challenge: Future work should focus on solv-
ing the convergence issues identified in the case study. This could involve exploring
more advanced neuro-symbolic architectures, different fuzzy logic semantics, or de-
veloping more robust axioms.
• Automated axiom discovery: To move beyond the limitations of hand-designed
rules, research could investigate methods for automatically discovering or learning
An axiomatic framework for neuro-symbolic reasoning in multi-agent systems
49
==PAGE:58==
logical axioms directly from environmental interaction, leading to more adaptable
and scalable systems.
This thesis demonstrates that the challenges of multi-agent coordination are deeply tied
to fundamental problems of collective reasoning. The primary difficulty lies not just in
learning what to do, but in agreeing on the beliefs upon which those actions are based.
By revealing the symbol grounding problem as a critical prerequisite, this work argues
that establishing a common, rational understanding of the environment is the cornerstone
of effective cooperation. The proposed neuro-symbolic framework, guided by logical ax-
ioms, offers a promising path toward building this shared foundation, thereby bridging the
gap between low-level perception and high-level collective intelligence.
50
An axiomatic framework for neuro-symbolic reasoning in multi-agent systems
==PAGE:59==
Bibliography
Albrecht, Stefano V., Filippos Christianos, and Lukas Schäfer (2024). Multi-Agent Rein-
forcement Learning: Foundations and Modern Approaches. 1st ed. Forthcoming. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press.
Sutton, Richard S and Andrew G Barto (1998). Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction.
MIT press.
Busk, Jonas (2025). An Introduction to Deep Reinforcement Learning. Google Colab note-
book for the course ”Deep Learning”. Accessed: 2025-08-28. URL accessible to course
participants only. URL: https://colab.research.google.com/drive/1tPbIJmS84uzHBm7qs-
HBO7E-_7gaMjPn?authuser=1.
OpenAI (2018a). Spinning Up in Deep RL: Part 1: Key Concepts in RL. OpenAI. URL:
https://spinningup.openai.com/en/latest/spinningup/rl_intro.html (visited on 08/13/2025).
Karpathy, Andrej (May 2016). Deep Reinforcement Learning: Pong from Pixels. Andrej
Karpathy blog. URL: http://karpathy.github.io/2016/05/31/rl/.
Pykes, Kurtis (Nov. 2024). Understanding the Bellman Equation in Reinforcement Learn-
ing. DataCamp. URL: https://www.datacamp.com/tutorial/bellman-equation-reinforcement-
learning.
Karagiannakos, Sergios (Nov. 2018). The idea behind Actor-Critics and how A2C and
A3C improve them. AI Summer. URL: https://theaisummer.com/Actor-critics/.
Li, Shengbo Eben (2023). Reinforcement Learning for Sequential Decision and Optimal
Control. First. Singapore: Springer Verlag. ISBN: 978-9-811-97783-1. DOI: 10.1007/
978-981-19-7784-8.
Duan, J., Y. Guan, and S. Li (2021). “Distributional Soft Actor-Critc: Off-Policy Reinforce-
ment Learning for Addressing Value Estimation Errors”. In: IEEE Transactions on Neu-
ral Networks and Learning Systems 33.11, pp. 6584–6598. DOI: 10.1109/TNNLS.2021.
3082568.
OpenAI (2018b). Spinning Up in Deep RL: Part 2: Kinds of RL Algorithms. OpenAI. URL:
https://spinningup.openai.com/en/latest/spinningup/rl_intro2.html (visited on 08/13/2025).
– (2018c). Spinning Up in Deep RL: Part 3: Intro to Policy Optimization Algorithms. Ope-
nAI. URL: https://spinningup.openai.com/en/latest/spinningup/rl_intro3.html (visited on
08/13/2025).
Karunakaran, Dhanoop (Sept. 2020). The Actor-Critic Reinforcement Learning algorithm.
Medium. URL: https://medium.com/intro- to- artificial- intelligence/the- actor- critic-
reinforcement-learning-algorithm-c8095a655c14.
Lowe, Ryan et al. (2020). “Multi-Agent Actor-Critic for Mixed Cooperative-Competitive
Environments”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.02275.
Amin, Samina (Sept. 2024). Deep Q-Learning (DQN). URL: https://medium.com/@samina.
amin/deep-q-learning-dqn-e6a0e8763c7a (visited on 08/13/2025).
Hugging Face (2024). The Deep Q-Learning Algorithm. Hugging Face Deep RL Course
documentation. URL: https : / / huggingface . co / learn / deep - rl - course / unit3 / deep - q -
algorithm (visited on 08/13/2025).
Saini, Jagjit (Mar. 28, 2024). “Understanding Dueling DQN: A Deep Dive into Reinforce-
ment Learning”. In: Medium. URL: https://medium.com/@sainijagjit/understanding-
dueling-dqn-a-deep-dive-into-reinforcement-learning-575f6fe4328c (visited on 09/01/2025).
Laurent, Guillaume J., Laëtitia Matignon, and N. Le Fort-Piat (2011). “The world of inde-
pendent learners is not markovian”. In: International Journal of Knowledge-based and
Intelligent Engineering Systems 15.1, pp. 55–64. DOI: 10.5555/1971886.1971889.
An axiomatic framework for neuro-symbolic reasoning in multi-agent systems
51
==PAGE:60==
Tuyls, Karl and Gerhard Weiss (2012). “Multiagent Learning: Basics, Challenges, and
Prospects”. In: AI Magazine 33.3, p. 41. DOI: 10.1609/aimag.v33i3.2426.
Pina, Rafael, Varuna De Silva, and Corentin Artaud (2023). “Learning Independently from
Causality in Multi-Agent Environments”. In: Proceedings of the 12th International Con-
ference on Pattern Recognition Applications and Methods (ICPRAM). DOI: 10.48550/
arXiv.2311.02741. arXiv: 2311.02741.
IBM Research and Academic Partners (2025). Thinking Fast and Slow in AI: Leveraging
cognitive theories of human decision making to advance AI. Description of a research
project led by IBM Research. URL: https://sites.google.com/view/sofai/home (visited on
08/10/2025).
Hammond, Lewis et al. (2021). “Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning with Temporal Logic
Specifications”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.00582. arXiv: 2102.00582 [cs.AI].
Asghari, Seyed Mohammad (2024). “Deep Q-learning (DQN) for Multi-agent Reinforce-
ment Learning”. In: arXiv preprint.
Matignon, Laetitia, Guillaume J Laurent, and Nadine Le Fort-Piat (2012). “Independent
reinforcement learners in cooperative markov games: a survey regarding coordination
problems”. In: The Knowledge Engineering Review 27.1, pp. 1–31.
Sunehag, Peter et al. (2017). “Value-Decomposition Networks For Cooperative Multi-
Agent Learning”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.05296. arXiv: 1706.05296 [cs.AI]. URL:
https://arxiv.org/abs/1706.05296.
Rashid, Tabish et al. (2018). “QMIX: Monotonic Value Function Factorisation for Deep
Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning”. In: Proceedings of the 35th International Confer-
ence on Machine Learning. Ed. by Jennifer Dy and Andreas Krause. Vol. 80. Proceed-
ings of Machine Learning Research. Stockholm, Sweden: PMLR.
Christianos, Filippos and Lukas Schäfer (2024a). Multi-Robot Warehouse (RWARE). Ver-
sion 2.0.0. URL: https://github.com/semitable/robotic-warehouse.
Carroll, Micah et al. (2019). Overcooked-AI. Version 1.1.0. URL: https://github.com/
HumanCompatibleAI/overcooked_ai.
Christianos, Filippos and Lukas Schäfer (2024b). Level-based Foraging (LBF). Version 2.0.0.
URL: https://github.com/semitable/lb-foraging.
List, Christian (2022). Social Choice Theory. URL: https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/
social-choice/ (visited on 08/31/2025).
Pigozzi, Gabriella (June 9, 2025). Belief Merging and Judgment Aggregation. URL: https:
//plato.stanford.edu/entries/belief-merging/ (visited on 08/31/2025).
Klement, Erich Peter, Radko Mesiar, and Endre Pap (2005). “Triangular norms: Basic
notions and properties”. In: Logical, Algebraic, Analytic and Probabilistic Aspects of
Triangular Norms. Elsevier, pp. 17–60. DOI: 10.1016/B978-044451814-9/50002-1.
Complementary Notebook: Appropriate Operators to Approximate Connectives and Quan-
tifiers (2025). LTNtorch Tutorials. Commit hash: 8601317. The LTNtorch Team. URL:
https : / / nbviewer . org / github / tommasocarraro / LTNtorch / blob / main / tutorials / 2b -
operators-and-gradients.ipynb (visited on 08/31/2025).
Bobillo, Fernando et al. (2009). “Fuzzy description logics under Gödel semantics”. In:
International Journal of Approximate Reasoning 50, pp. 494–514.
Tabor, Phil (2021). Multi-Agent-Deep-Deterministic-Policy-Gradients. A PyTorch imple-
mentation of the MADDPG algorithm. URL: https://github.com/philtabor/Multi-Agent-
Deep-Deterministic-Policy-Gradients.
Wong, Wanshun (May 17, 2020). “What is Gumbel-Softmax? A differentiable approxima-
tion to sampling discrete data”. In: TDS Archive (Medium). URL: https://medium.com/
data-science/what-is-gumbel-softmax-7f6d9cdcb90e (visited on 09/01/2025).
52
An axiomatic framework for neuro-symbolic reasoning in multi-agent systems
==PAGE:61==
Benjaminson, Emma (Aug. 13, 2020). The Gumbel-Softmax Distribution. URL: https://
sassafras13.github.io/GumbelSoftmax/ (visited on 09/01/2025).
Fuchs, Fabian (2024). Gumbel Softmax. URL: https://fabianfuchsml.github.io/gumbel/
(visited on 09/03/2025).
An axiomatic framework for neuro-symbolic reasoning in multi-agent systems
53
==PAGE:62==
54
An axiomatic framework for neuro-symbolic reasoning in multi-agent systems
==PAGE:63==
A
Social choice theory
In the following, important and relevant concepts in social choice theory will be covered
in depth and mathematically formalized, all of which is sourced from List 2022.
A.1
Condorcet’s jury theorem
Condorcet’s jury theorems states that:
• The majority of a set of more than one jurors is more likely to be correct than each
individual juror.
• The probability of a correct majority judgment approaches 1 as the number of jurors
in the jury increases.
This is conditioned on each juror having a chance better than random, but worse than
perfect, of making correct judgments.
A.2
Condorcet’s paradox
Condocet’s paradox is the insight that the result of majority voting with preferences can
result in majority preferences that are intransitive, and thus irrational, even when individual
preferences are transitive, and thus rational.
In this example, we have three groups, with the following preferences:
• One group prefers x to y and y to z, resulting in this individual preference:
x > y > z
• One group prefers y to z and z to x, resulting in this individual preference:
y > z > x
• One group prefers z to x and x to y, resulting in this individual preference:
z > x > y
This results in the following majority preferences:
• A majority of the groups (two out of three) prefer x to y.
• A majority of the groups (two out of three) prefer y to z.
• A majority of the groups (two out of three) prefer z to x.
We see that this creates an endless and intransitive cycle, illustrating the paradox that
majority voting can have irrational results, although each individual voter is rational.
A.3
Condorcet winner
A Condorcet winner is an alternative in pairwise majority voting which beats or at least ties
with every other alternative, i.e., if one were to compare this alternative directly against
every alternative individually, the Condorcet winner would be preferred by a majority of
voters in every single comparison.
An axiomatic framework for neuro-symbolic reasoning in multi-agent systems
55
==PAGE:64==
A.4
Profiles
A profile ⟨v1, . . . , vn⟩is the combination of votes across the individuals N = {1, . . . , n},
where n ≥2, with each individual having to choose between two alternatives. Each
individual i ∈N casts a vote vi such that:
• vi = 1 represents a vote for the first alternative.
• vi = −1 represents a vote for the second alternative.
• vi = 0 represents an abstention.
A.5
Aggregation rules
An aggregation rule is a function f that assigns to a profile ⟨v1, . . . , vn⟩a social decision
v = f(v1, . . . , vn). Analogously to individual voting, we have that:
• vi = 1 represents a decision for the first alternative.
• vi = −1 represents a decision for the second alternative.
• vi = 0 represents a tie.
Examples of aggregation rules involve majority rule, dictatorship, weighted majority rule,
etc.
Majority rule
The majority rule is an aggregation rule given by:
f(v1, . . . , vn) =





















1
if v1 + · · · + vn > 0
(there are more 1s than -1s)
0
if v1 + · · · + vn = 0
(there are as many 1s as -1s)
−1
if v1 + · · · + vn < 0
(there are more -1s than 1s)
(A.1)
This rule is defined for every profile ⟨v1, . . . , vn⟩.
Dictatorship
Dictatorship is an aggregation rule that simply returns the vote of an antecedently fixed
individual; the dictator. This rule is defined for every profile ⟨v1, . . . , vn⟩.
Weighted majority rule
The weighted majority rule is an aggregation rule given by:
f(v1, . . . , vn) =





1
if w1v1 + · · · + wnvn > 0
0
if w1v1 + · · · + wnvn = 0
−1
if w1v1 + · · · + wnvn < 0
(A.2)
Where w1, . . . , wn are real numbers representing voting weights of the n individuals. This
rule is defined for every profile ⟨v1, . . . , vn⟩.
56
An axiomatic framework for neuro-symbolic reasoning in multi-agent systems
==PAGE:65==
Standard definition of aggregation rules
A standard aggregation rule is:
• Extensional:
An aggregation rule is defined as a mapping between all of the inputs in its domain,
and all of the outputs in its codomain. It is not intensional. That is, it is not a rule in
the traditional sense.
• Situation-bound:
By the extensional nature of an aggregation rule’s definition, it is defined in terms of
the individuals and the decision problem at hand.
These two points put together mean that the majority rule becomes a different mathemat-
ical object as the number of individuals and the decision problem changes.
In the following example, two aggregation rules are defined:
• Example definition of an extensional aggregation rule:
– Input: Alice(X), Bob(X), Carol(Y) →Output: X wins
– Input: Alice(X), Bob(Y), Carol(Y) →Output: Y wins
– Input: Alice(Y), Bob(X), Carol(X) →Output: X wins
– Input: Alice(Y), Bob(Y), Carol(X) →Output: Y wins
• Example definition of an intensional aggregation rule:
Count the voters for each alternative. The alternative with the most votes wins.
This effectively illustrates how the extensional definition simply lists all possible input-
output pairs, whereas the intensional definition provides a procedure that produces these
outcomes.
A.6
Constraints on the choice of standard aggregation rules
In the following, the constraints that were introduced to choose one of the aggregation
rules from the large class of possible standard aggregation rules will be covered. These
constraints were created so that the aggregation rules obeying them satisfy certain desired
qualities.
Universal domain constraint
The universal domain constraint states that there may be as many individuals as possible,
as long as each vote vi ∈{−1, 1}. That is, the votes are restricted to be in favor of one of
two alternatives, foregoing the possibility of abstention.
Anonymity
The anonymity constraint states that all voters be treated equally. More specifically, any
permutation of votes is treated the same:
f(v1, . . . , vn) = f(w1, . . . , wn)
(A.3)
Neutrality
The neutrality constraint states that, if the votes for the two alternatives are reversed, then
so is the social decision:
f(−v1, . . . , vn) = −f(v1, . . . , vn)
(A.4)
An axiomatic framework for neuro-symbolic reasoning in multi-agent systems
57
==PAGE:66==
Positive responsiveness
The constraint of positive responsiveness states that the social decision is a positive func-
tion of the way people vote.
Aggregation rules satisfying all constraints
Majority rule is the only aggregation rule that satisfies both universal domain, anonymity,
neutrality, and positive responsiveness.
A.7
Preference aggregation
The following constitutes the formalization of the analysis of preference aggregation in
social choice theory:
• A set of individuals N where:
– N = {1, . . . , n}.
– n ≥2.
• A set of social alternatives X.
• Preference orderings where:
– Each individual i ∈N has a preference ordering Ri over the set of alternatives
X.
– Each preference ordering is a complete and transitive binary relation on X.
– xRiy means that the individual i weakly prefers x to y.
– xPiy means that the individual i strictly prefers x to y. That is, if xRiy and not
yRix.
– xIiy means that the individual is indifferent between x and y. That is, if both
xRiy and yRix.
– x, y ∈X.
• Profiles, a combination of preference orderings across the individuals.
• Preference aggregation rules F, functions where:
– F assigns to each profile ⟨R1, . . . , Rn⟩a social preference relation R = F(R1, . . . , Rn)
on X.
– If F is clear from the context, one simply writes R for the social preference
relation corresponding to ⟨R1, . . . , Rn⟩.
Frequency of intransitive majority preferences
The proportion of preference profiles that lead to cyclical majority preferences increases
with the number of individuals and the number of alternatives.
A.8
Arrow’s suggested conditions on preference
aggregation rules
Universal domain
Any combination of voter preferences are allowed, with an arbitrary number of voters.
Ordering
The collective outcome must be rational in the sense that society’s preferences must be
transitive.
58
An axiomatic framework for neuro-symbolic reasoning in multi-agent systems
==PAGE:67==
Weak pareto principle
If each individual voter prefers one alternative over another, then this is reflected in the
collective outcome.
Independence of irrelevant alternatives
The societal preference between two alternatives sohuld only depend on how individuals
rank the two, not on how they rank other alternatives.
Non-dictatorship
The preferences of one single voter cannot automatically become those of society.
A.9
Arrow’s theorem
If there are more than two social alternatives, then there exists no preference aggregation
rule satisfying all of the following: universal domain, ordering, the weak Pareto principle,
independence of irrelevant alternatives, and non-dictatorship.
A.10
Avoiding the consequences of Arrow’s theorem
To avoid the consequences of Arrow’s theorem, one of the five conditions must be relaxed,
or the restriction of the aggregation rule’s inputs to orderings given up, defending the user
of richer inputs. Such richer inputs could, e.g., involve:
• Cardinal utilities, i.e., how strongly people prefer alternatives.
• Probability judgments.
• Approval thresholds.
In the following, ways of relaxing the conditions on preference aggregation rules sug-
gested by Arrow will be covered.
Relaxing the condition of universal domain with single-peakedness
A profile ⟨R1, . . . Rn⟩is single-peaked if the alternatives can be ordered from left to right
along some dimension, e.g., cognitive or ideological deimsnion, such that each individual
has a most preferred position on this alignment with decreasing prefernce as alternatives
get farther away from this peak in either direction. The constraint/introduction of such
a single-peaked profile relaxes the condition of universal domain and avoids the conse-
quences of Arrow’s theorem. In this case, the median voter’s most preferred alternative
is the Condorcet winner.
Other ways of relaxing the condition of universal domain
The following approachs all serve to relax the condition of universal domain and avoiding
the consequences of Arrow’s theorem:
• Single-cavedness.
• Separability into two groups.
• Latin-squarelessness.
• Triple-wise value-restriction.
Relaxing the condition of ordering with aggregation rules
The following rules can be used to relax the condition of ordering to avoid the conse-
quences of Arrow’s theorem:
• The Pareto rule.
An axiomatic framework for neuro-symbolic reasoning in multi-agent systems
59
==PAGE:68==
• The Pareto extension rule.
Both of these rules are unanimitarian in the sense that they give each individual veto
power, respectively, if a single individual does not have the same strict preference, and if
a single individual has a strict preference.
The Pareto dominance rule
The Pareto dominance rule is an aggregation rule that relaxes the condition of ordering by
producing transitive, but often incomplete, social preferences. This rule states that, given
a profile ⟨R1, . . . , Rn⟩and any pair of alternatives x, y ∈X, we have that xRy iff xPiy for
all i ∈N.
The Pareto extension rule
The Pareto extension rule is an aggregation rule that relaxes the condition of ordering by
producing complete, but often intransitive, social preferences. This rule states that, given
a profile ⟨R1, . . . , Rn⟩and any pair of alternatives x, y ∈X, we have that xRy iff yPix is not
the case for all i ∈N. This rule is an oligarchic rule where every individual is an oligarch.
Quasi-transitivity of preference orderings
Quasi-transitivity is the quality that only the strict preference orderings must be transi-
tive, whereas this requirement of indifference orderings and weak preference orderings
is removed.
Oligarchic aggregation rules
An oligarchic aggregation rule is a rule in which, given a subset M ⊆N of oligarchs:
• If all oligarchs prefer an alternative x to y, then society also prefers x to y.
• If any oligarch prefers y to x, then society does not prefer x to y.
Gibbard’s theorem
Gibbard’s theorem states that, if there are more than two alternatives, then there exists no
preference aggregation rule satisfying the following: universal domain, quasi-transitivity
and completeness of social preferences, the weak Pareto principle, independence of ir-
relevant alternatives, and non-oligarchy.
Case for abandoning the weak Pareto principle
The weak Pareto principle may reasonably be abandoned in cases of spurious unanimity,
when everyone prefers one alternative to another, but for reasons that are mutually in-
consistent or based on different probability estimates. For eaxample, two individuals both
prefer to fight over not fighting:
• Each person prefers fighting due to overestimating their own chances of winning.
• There is no probability distribution over outcomes that both would agree on.
• The unanimous preference is based on contradictory beliefs.
Imposed rule without the weak Pareto principle
The imposed rule is an aggregation rule that becomes possible when foregoing the weak
Pareto principle. The imposed rule:
• Fixes the preference orderings of society in advance, regardless of individual pref-
erences.
• Is completely unresponsive to what individuals want.
• Technically satisfies Arrow’s other conditions.
60
An axiomatic framework for neuro-symbolic reasoning in multi-agent systems
==PAGE:69==
Inverse dictator
The inverse dictator rule is an aggregation rule that becomes possible when foregoing the
weak Pareto principle. With the inverse dictator rule:
• Society’s preference oderings are always the exact opposite of some particular in-
dividual’s preference orderings.
• Technically satisfies Arrow’s other conditions.
Familar voting methods and the condition of independence of irrelevant
alternatives
Most familiar voting methods involving preferential voting violate the condition of indepen-
dence of irrelevant alternatives to avoid the consequences of Arrow’s theorem.
Examples of aggregation rules that violates the condition of independence
of irrelevant alternatives
The following is a non-exhaustive list of aggregation rules that violates the condition of
independence of irrelevant alternatives to avoid the consequences of Arrow’s theorem:
• Plurality rule.
• Borda count.
Plurality rule
The plurality rule is an aggregation rule which violates the condition of independence of
irrelevant alternatives to avoid the consequences of Arrow’s theorem. This rule works by:
• Each person votes for their most preferred alternative.
• Alternatives are ranked in the order of how many individuals most prefer each of
them.
• The alternative with the most votes wins, and the others are discarded.
Issue with plurality rule
Besides violating the condition of independence of irrelevant alternatives, plurality rule
may result in a Condorcet winner losing. For example: if 34% of the voters rank x above
y above z, 33% rank y above z above x, and 33% rank z above y above x, plurality rule
ranks x above each of y and z, while pairwise majority voting would rank y above z above
x (y is the Condorcet winner).
Borda count
The Borda count rule is an aggregation rule which violates the condition of independence
of irrelevant alternatives to avoid the consequences of Arrow’s theorem. This rule works
by:
• Each voter assigns points based on rankings.
• Alternatives are ranked by the number of points received.
• This is a ranking based on full preference, not just parwise comparisons.
An axiomatic framework for neuro-symbolic reasoning in multi-agent systems
61
==PAGE:70==
B
Belief merging and judgment
aggregation
All of the following material and theory on belief merging and judgment aggregation is
sourced from Pigozzi 2025.
B.1
Judgment aggregation
Judgment aggegation concerns the aggregation of
Kornhauser and Sager’s court example
In this example, a three-member court has to reach a verdict in a case of breach of contract
between a plaintiff and a defendant. According to the contract law:
1. The defendant is liable for breach of contract (proposition r) iff
2. the contract forbids the defendant from doing some action (proposition p) and
3. the defendant did that action (proposition q).
The logical relationship between the conclusion r and the premises p and q can be ex-
pressed by (p ∧q) ↔r and is exemplified in table B.1.
Obligation (p)
Action (q)
Defendant liable (r)
Judge 1
True
True
True
Judge 2
True
False
False
Judge 3
False
True
False
Majority
True
True
False
Table B.1: Kornhauser and Sager’s court example: the logical relationship
Table B.1 shows that each judge respects the legal doctrine by strictly adhering to the
logical expression, but that the aggregation of each of their individual opinions using ma-
jority rule will result in a violation of the legal doctrine; this is an instance of the doctrinal
paradox.
Doctrinal paradox
The doctrinal paradox is a paradox stating that a group’s judgment is not necessarily
logically consistent, although it is itself the aggregation of individually logically consistent
judgments.
Formalization of judgment aggregation
The following components constitute the framework of judgment aggregation in the lan-
guage L of propositional logic:
• Agendas (A ⊆L):
– An agenda is a set of formulas on individuals express their judgments.
– An agenda does not contain double negations. That is, ¬¬φ is equivalent to φ.
– An agenda is closed with respect to negation. That is, if φ ∈A, then ¬φ ∈A.
– An agenda is generally assumed to not contain tautologies or contradictions.
62
An axiomatic framework for neuro-symbolic reasoning in multi-agent systems
==PAGE:71==
• Judgment sets (J ⊆A):
– A judgment set is a consistent and complete set of formulae.
– A judgment is complete if ∀φ ∈A : φ ∈J ∨¬φ ∈J. That is, for any item in the
agenda, the judgment set must either accept it or reject it.
• Profiles:
A profile is an n-tuple of individual judgment sets.
• Judgment aggregation rules:
A judgment aggregation rule F is a function that assigns to each profile ⟨J1, . . . , Jn⟩
a collective judgment set F(J1, . . . , Jn) ⊆A.
Conditions imposed on judgment aggregation rules
The following conditions are imposed on judgment aggregation rules:
• Universal domain:
Any set of logically valid individual judgments must be accepted as valid input. The
system can’t discard certain combinations of opinions just because they’re inconve-
nient. In the doctrinal paradox example, all judges gave logically consistent opinions
that followed the rule relating obligation, action, and liability.
• Collective rationality:
The group’s final decision must be both complete (taking a position on every issue)
and consistent (following logical rules). In the paradox example, the majority out-
come failed this condition because it accepted both premises (obligation and action)
but rejected the conclusion (liability), violating the logical rule.
• Independence:
The group’s decision on any single issue should depend only on individual opinions
about that specific issue. Like judging each contest in a competition separately
without letting one contest influence another. Majority voting satisfies this because
the group’s position on each issue is determined solely by counting votes on that
issue.
• Unanimity preservation:
If everyone agrees on something, the group decision must reflect that agreement.
This is a basic fairness principle; if there’s complete consensus on an issue, the
collective judgment should honor it.
It has been shown that there exists no judgment aggregation rule, besides dictatorship,
which jointly satisfies all of the above conditions.
Judgment aggregation can be seen as a more general problem than preference aggre-
gation.
B.2
Belief merging
Belief merging and fusion
Belief merging is the study of how multiple belief bases, consisting of symbolic information
expressed in propositional logic, are combined into single, consistent knowledge bases.
The process of merging several knowledge bases has tight links with belief change/revi-
sion.
An axiomatic framework for neuro-symbolic reasoning in multi-agent systems
63
==PAGE:72==
Belief revision
Belief revision is the study of how single belief bases change when new information is
encountered, and particularly when that new information conflicts with existing beliefs.
Meaning of term “knowledge” in belief merging
In belief merging, “knowlededge” refers to formulas accepted by an agent, i.e., formulas
in that agent’s knowledge base, which are not necessarily true.
Principle of irrelevance of syntax
The principle of irrelevance of syntax is a property that syntactically different, but logi-
cally equivalent, belief bases should yield equivalent results when merged. For example,
two belief bases K1 = {a, b} and K2 = {a ∧b} are syntactically different, but logically
equivalent.
Combination operators
A combination operator is in belief merging an operator for combining belief bases where:
• The operator takes the union of all the belief bases.
• If this creates inconsistencies, the maximally consistent subsets are picked.
• All sources are treated equally. Thus, the source of information is ignored, and by
extension, the credibility of the source.
• The principle of irrelevance of syntax is not upheld.
Merging operators
A merging operator is in belief merging an operator for combining belief bases. In contrast
to combination operators:
• The principle of irrelevance of syntax is satisfied.
• Equivalent belief bases should yield equivalent results.
• Sources of credibility can be considered.
Example of combination operators and their limitations in practice
The following example revolves around vaccines and experts’ opinions on these:
• Propositions:
The following four propositions exist about vaccines:
– a: Vaccine A is effective in people over the age of 65.
– b: Vaccine B is effective in people over the age of 65.
– c: Vaccine C is effective in people over the age of 65.
– d: Vaccine D is effective in people over the age of 65.
• Belief bases:
Four expert opinions (belief bases) exist:
– K1 = K2 = {a, b}: Two experts agree that vaccines A and B are effective.
– K3 = {¬a, d}: One expert believes vaccine D works but that vaccine A does
not.
– K4 = {a, b →c}: One expert believes that vaccine A works and that vaccine c
works if vaccine b does.
64
An axiomatic framework for neuro-symbolic reasoning in multi-agent systems
==PAGE:73==
• Inconsistency of union:
The union is inconsistent: {a, ¬a, b, b →c, d}.
• Maximally consistent subsets:
Two maximally consistent subsets exist:
– {a, b, b →c, d}: All vaccines are accepted.
– {¬a, b, b →c, d}: Vaccine A is rejected and all others accepted.
• Indecision:
This creates indecision about proposition a (vaccine A).
• Proposition choice dilemma:
Most belief bases contain a, with only one containing ¬a, meaning that a should
intuitively be accepted if all sources are equally trustworthy. However, if K3 is more
trustworthy, the second subset listed in #4 might be preferred.
The above example provides insight into the nature of combination operators and how
they are unable to incorporate credibility information, whereas merging operators poten-
tially can.
Arbitration operators
An arbitration operator is in belief merging an operator for combining belief bases where:
• Two belief bases provide contradictory information.
• The two bases are equally credible.
• The two bases are fused with the goal of containing as much as possible of both
sources.
In belief merging literature, sources of information are generally assumed to be equally
reliable.
Notation and fundamentals for merging under integrity cosntraints
Propositional language framework
The language L is composed of a finite set At of atomic propositions and the standard
logical connectives.
Interpretations
An intepretation is a total function At →{0, 1} which assigns 0 (false) or 1 (true) to each
atomic proposition. For example, if At = {p, q, r}, then (1, 0, 1) is the interpretation
assigning true to p, true to r, and false to q.
Notation for all interpretations
All interpretations are denoted W = {0, 1}At.
Set of models of a formula
The set of models of a formula φ ∈L, i.e., the set of truth assignments (interpretations)
that makes φ true, is given by:
mod(φ) := {ω ∈W | ω |= φ}
(B.1)
For example, given Kornhauser and Sager’s court example (section B.1), then mod((p ∧
q) ↔r) = {(1, 1, 1), (1, 0, 0), (0, 1, 0), (0, 0, 0)}.
An axiomatic framework for neuro-symbolic reasoning in multi-agent systems
65
==PAGE:74==
Consistent formulae
A formula is consistent if it has at least one model.
A formula φ follows from a set of formulae Φ if every interpretation that makes all formulae
in Φ true also makes φ true.
Belief bases
A belief base Ki is a finite set of propositional formulae representing the beliefs held by
an individual i. All belief bases are assumed to be consistent.
Notation for set of all consistent belief bases
K denotes the set of all consistent belief bases.
Multi-sets of belief bases
A multi-set (or belief profile, belief set) of belief bases E = {K1, . . . , Kn} is the set arising
from the union of multiple belief bases.
Notation for multi-set unions
A multi-set union is denoted with ⊔. For example, the union of two belief bases K1 and
K2 is K1 ⊔K2.
Equivalence of belief profiles
Two belief profiles E1 and E2 are equivalent (E1 ≡E2) iff there exists a bijection f from
E1 to E2 such that:
∀B ∈E1 : |= ∧f(B) ↔∧B
(B.2)
That is, the two belief profiles should be considered equivalent if they represent the same
distribution of beliefs, even if those beliefs might be expressed differently. For exam-
ple, if agent 1 believes ”It will rain tomorrow” and agent 2 believes ”Tomorrow there will
be rainfall,” these statements are logically equivalent even though they’re phrased differ-
ently. The bijection would map one belief to the other, recognizing they express the same
underlying belief.
Integrity constraints
An integrity constraint is an extra condition that holds for a belief base resulting from the
merger of others. The intent of such a constraint is to ensure that the resulting belief base
satisfies some problem-specific requirement.
Example of integrity constraints
In this example, members of a city council decide on what to build in a certain area. There
may be constraints on:
• The available budget:
The budget suffices only to pay some of the projects.
• The coexistence of different projects:
There may not be a parking lot and a playground, but there may be a playground
and a public library.
Merging multi-sets with integrity constraints
∆IC(E) denotes the result of merging the multi-set E of belief bases provided the in-
tegrity constraints IC. The result will be a consistent belief base which logically entails
the integrity constraints.
Conjunction of all belief bases in the belief profile
The notation ∧E represents the conjunction of all belief bases in the belief profile E, i.e.:
∧E = K1 ∧· · · ∧Kn
(B.3)
66
An axiomatic framework for neuro-symbolic reasoning in multi-agent systems
==PAGE:75==
Rationality postulates
An operator ∆is only an IC fusion operator iff it satisfies the following rationality postulates
(IC0 through IC8). All of these rationality postulates are covered in the following by giving
their logical formalization, informal meaning, the intuition behind them, together with an
example.
IC0: Integrity constraint satisfaction
Logical formalization
∆IC(E) |= IC
Meaning
The merged result must satisfy the integrity constraints.
Intuition
The whole point of merging with constraints is to ensure the
final result respects those constraints.
Example
If the constraint is “we cannot afford more than two facilities,”
the merged result must respect this budget limitation.
IC1: Consistency preservation
Logical formalization
If IC is consistent, then ∆IC(E) is consistent.
Meaning
If the integrity constraints are consistent, then the merged result
will also be consistent.
Intuition
If the constraints themselves do not contradict each other, the
merging process will not create contradictions.
Example
If it is possible to satisfy the constraint “annual expenses must
remain reasonable,” then the merged result won’t contain con-
tradictions.
IC2: Maximality
Logical formalization
If ∧E is consistent with IC, then ∆IC(E) ≡∧E ∧IC.
Meaning
If all belief bases are compatible with the integrity constraints,
the merged result is simply their conjunction with the con-
straints.
Intuition
When everyone’s beliefs can be satisfied together within the
constraints, we should keep all beliefs.
Example
If everyone agrees to build both a swimming pool and a tennis
court, and this respects the budget constraint, then the merged
result will include building both.
IC3: Syntax independence
Logical formalization
If E1 ≡E2, and IC1 ≡IC2, then ∆IC1(E1) ≡∆IC2(E2).
Meaning
Logically equivalent belief profiles under equivalent constraints
yield equivalent results. This is an example of the principle of
irrelevance of syntax.
Intuition
The merging depends only on what people believe, not how
those beliefs are expressed.
Example
Whether someone says “build a pool” or “construct a swimming
facility” does not affect the outcome.
IC4: Fairness
Logical formalization
If K1 |= IC and K2 |= IC, then ∆IC({K1, K2}) ∧K1 is consis-
tent iff ∆IC({K1, K2}) ∧K2 is consistent.
Meaning
When merging two belief bases, the result is consistent with
one base if and only if it is also consistent with the other.
Intuition
No belief base gets special priority; they are treated equally.
Example
If building the tennis court (preferred by group 1) or swimming
pool (preferred by group 2) are both feasible options, neither
group gets automatic priority.
An axiomatic framework for neuro-symbolic reasoning in multi-agent systems
67
==PAGE:76==
IC5: Preservation of common beliefs (combination property #1)
Logical formalization
∆IC(E1) ∧∆IC(E2) |= ∆IC(E1 ⊔E2).
Meaning
When two groups are merged, any belief that was indepen-
dently accepted by both separate group merges must be pre-
served in the combined group merge.
Intuition
This postulate ensures that genuine areas of agreement be-
tween subgroups are not lost when combining groups. This
postulate, together with IC6, ensures consistent treatment of
subgroup agreements.
Example
If one subgroup of condo owners independently decides to build
a swimming pool, and another subgroup independently decides
to build both a swimming pool and parking, then the swimming
pool (their common agreement) must be included in the deci-
sion when all owners are considered together.
IC6: Maximum preservation when compatible (combination property #2)
Logical formalization
If ∆IC(E1) ∧∆IC(E2) is consistent, then ∆IC(E1 ⊔E2) |=
∆IC(E1) ∧∆IC(E2).
Meaning
When the independent decisions of two subgroups are mutually
compatible, the merged decision of the combined group should
include exactly these compatible decisions.
Intuition
If subgroups’ decisions do not conflict, we should preserve all
their decisions in the whole group decision.
This postulate,
together with IC5, ensures consistent treatment of subgroup
agreements.
Example
If one subgroup decides to build a swimming pool, and another
subgroup decides to build a parking lot, and there’s no con-
straint preventing both, then the final decision for all owners
should include both the swimming pool and the parking lot.
IC7: Constraint conjunction consistency (minimal change under constraints #1)
Logical formalization
∆IC(E) ∧IC2 is consistent, then ∆IC1∧IC2(E) |= ∆IC1(E).
Meaning
When adding a new constraint (IC2) to an existing constraint
(IC1), if the original merged result is already compatible with the
new constraint, then the merged result under both constraints
should entail the original result.
Intuition
This ensures that adding constraints that are already satisfied
doesn’t unnecessarily alter the original decisions.
This pos-
tulate, together with IC8, implements the principle of minimal
change under constraints.
Example
If the group decided to build a swimming pool under a budget
constraint, and we add a new constraint stating ”if we build a
swimming pool, it must include a children’s area” (which is com-
patible with the original decision), the new decision should still
include the swimming pool with the added specification about
the children’s area.
68
An axiomatic framework for neuro-symbolic reasoning in multi-agent systems
==PAGE:77==
IC8: Minimal change under additional constraints (minimal change under
constraints #2)
Logical formalization
If ∆IC1(E) ∧IC2 is consistent, then ∆IC1∧IC2(E) |= ∆IC1(E).
Meaning
When a new constraint is compatible with the original merged
result, adding this constraint should only restrict the result as
necessary, preserving the original decisions where possible.
Intuition
This is a principle of minimal change; we want to adjust exist-
ing decisions as little as possible when adding new constraints.
This postulate, together with IC8, implements the principle of
minimal change under constraints.
Example
If the swimming pool was selected among three alternatives
(pool, tennis court, parking), and we add a new constraint that
eliminates the parking option, the swimming pool should still
be selected if we now choose between just the pool and tennis
court (assuming both are consistent with all constraints).
Sub-classes of IC fusion operators
Two sub-classes of IC fusion operators exist:
• An IC majority fusion operator.
• An IC arbitration operator.
IC majority fusion operators
An IC majority fusion operator minimizes the total dissatisfaction. On top of the rationality
postulates, an IC majority fusion operator also satisfies the following postulate:
∃n∆IC(E1 ⊔En
2 ) |= ∆IC(E2)
(B.4)
Where En denotes the multi-set containing E n times. This postulate thus states that
enough repetitions of E2 will make E2 the opinion of the group, with the number of needed
repetitions depending on the specific instance.
IC arbitration fusion operators
An IC arbitration fusion operator equally distributes individual satisfaction among agents.
On top of the rationality postulates, an IC arbitration operator also satisfies the following
postulate:
∆IC1(K1) ≡∆IC2(K2),
and
∆IC1↔¬IC2({K1, K2}) ≡(IC1 ↔¬IC2),
then
∆IC1∨IC2({K1, K2}) ≡∆IC1(K1)
This postulate thus states that the arbitration operator selects the median outcomes that
are IC-consistent.
Example of the difference between majority and arbitration operators
Suppose three friends need to decide whether to buy a birthday present for a common
acquaintance. Suppose now that two of them want to buy her a book and invite her out
for dinner, while the third friend does not want to contribute to either of those presents. If
the group takes its decision by majority, the three friends would resolve to buy a book and
to invite her out for dinner, making the third friend very unhappy. If, on the other hand,
they use an arbitration operator, they would either buy her a book or invite her out to a
An axiomatic framework for neuro-symbolic reasoning in multi-agent systems
69
==PAGE:78==
restaurant, making the three members equally dissatisfied. Everyone has exactly one
formula in their belief base that is not being satisfied, so the “amount” of dissatisfaction
for each friend is the same.
Classes of fusion operators in literature
In literature, fusion operators can be divided into two classes:
• Syntax-based fusion:
This class does not take the principle of irrelevance of syntax into consideration.
• Model-based fusion:
This class does take the principle of irrelevance of syntax into consideration.
Resulting collective belief set when using IC model-based fusion operators
The collective belief set which results when using an IC model-based fusion operator is
guaranteed to be a set of formulas which hold in all of the selected models while also
satisfying the IC and some preference relations.
Preference information
Preference information usually takes the form of a total pre-order, i.e., a reflexive and
transitive relation ≤on the interpretations induced by a notion of distance d(ω, E) between
an interpretation ω and a profile E.
Preference information is used to select collective outcomes closest to all individual belief
bases while satisfying the ICs.
A distance-based fusion operator does not always guarantee a unique result.
Economy principle
The economy principle states that, when merging beliefs:
• As much information should be preserved from each individual belief base Ki as
possible.
• As little as possible should be deleted from each individual belief base Ki as possi-
ble.
• All sources should be treated as equally reliable.
Interpretation and use of distance
Distance can be viewed as a way of capturing the notion of dissatisfaction by obeying the
economy principle. Formally, this can be expressed by:
mod(∆IC(E)) = min(mod(IC), ≤d)
(B.5)
That is, the models selected by the fusion operator (those of the merged belief set) are
those that minimize the distance (however it be defined) between the models of IC.
Formal definition of distance
Distance d between interpretations is a total function d : W ×W →R+ where, ∀ω, ω′ ∈W:
• d(ω, ω′) = d(ω′, ω).
• d(ω, ω′) = 0 iff ω = ω′.
70
An axiomatic framework for neuro-symbolic reasoning in multi-agent systems
==PAGE:79==
Finding the models of IC which minimize the distances to the belief profile
The following steps are needed to find the models of IC which minimize the distances to
the belief profile:
1. Calculate the distance between each interpretation which satisfies IC to each in-
dividual belief base Ki ∈E. This is done by defining the distance between an
interpretation ω and a belief base K with the distance being the minimal distance
between ω and the models of K. Formally, d(ω, K) = minω′∈mod(K)d(ω, ω′). For
example, if K has more than one model (e.g., K = {a ∨b} has three models:
{(0, 1), (1, 0), (1, 1)}), ω′ will be the closest to ω.
2. Aggregate the individual distances into a collective distance for each candidate out-
come (model) with some aggregation method. This is done by defining the dis-
tance between an interpretation ω and a belief profile E. An aggregation function
D : R+n →R+ takes the distances between the models of IC and the belief bases
Ki calculated in the first step and aggregates them into a collective distance with
the following calculation: D(ω, E) = D(d(ω, K1), . . . , d(ω, Kn)).
3. The outcomes (models) with the smallest collective distance are selected as the
merged result.
Choice of distance functions
The outcome of the merging operator depends on the two chosen distance functions d
and D.
Effect of choice of collective distance functions
The minisum operator DΣ obtains the global distance as the sum of the individual ones.
The effect is the selection of those interpretations which are most pleasing to the average,
much like majority rule.
The minimax operator DMax obtains the global distance as the maximum distance to any
individual base. The effect is the selection of those interprerations which minimize the
disagreement with the most dissatisfied individual.
Well known distances
The Hamming distance was a commonly used distance in belief revision, and the drastic
distance is also well known. The drastic distance assigns a distance of 0 if two interpre-
tations are the same and 1 otherwise.
Distinction between arbitration operators and majority operators explained
with the distance-based approach
In the following, the arbitration operator Leximax will be used as an example. The Leximax
operator:
1. Hamming distance: Uses the Hamming distance as d.
2. Lists of individual distances: For each interpretation, the distance between that
interpretation and every belief base Ki is found and put in a list.
3. Sorting each list of distances: For each list of individual distances, the list is sorted
in decreasing order from largest to smallest, putting the worst disagreements at the
top of the list.
4. Lexicographic comparison: For each position, for each list, beginning with the first
element: If the elements being compared differ, the interpretation with the smaller
element is preferred. If the elements are equal, move to the next element. Continue
until a position is found where the lists differ.
An axiomatic framework for neuro-symbolic reasoning in multi-agent systems
71
==PAGE:80==
For example, if we have the following two distance lists: DLeximax(ω, E) = (2, 2, 2) and
DLeximax(ω′, E) = (5, 1, 0). Then, after sorting in decreasing order, since 2 < 5, we
get that the interpretation ω is preferred. Leximax focuses on minimizing the worst-case
disagreement. By sorting in decreasing order and comparing lexicographically, it first
minimizes the maximum disagreement with any individual base, then the second-worst
disagreement, and so on.
Similarity between belief merging and judgment aggregation
Belief merging, a field from computer science, and judgment aggregation, a field from
social choice theory, both try to combine individual inputs into consistent collective out-
comes.
Difference between belief merging and judgment aggregation
Judgment aggregation cannot satisfy all the conditions imposed on judgment aggrega-
tion rules simultaneously, whereas belief merging operators can guarantee consistent
outcomes; this is because belief merging operators violate the independence condition
imposed on judgment aggregation rules.
Merit and weakness of the condition of independence
The condition of independence has been attractive as it protects aggregation functions
form strategic manipulation, which entials thant no individual has any interest in submit-
ting insincere judgments in order to get better personal outcomes. However, it has been
criticized for not being suitable for aggregating loigcally connected propositions.
Analogy of roles between the collective rationality condition and integrity
constraints
The collective rationality condition in judgment aggregation plays a role analogous to that
of integrity constraints in belief merging. That is, both of these concepts block unaccept-
able outcomes like inconsistent majority judgments.
Majority voting and least total disagreement with individuals
Majority voting minimizes the sum of Hamming distances between the collective judg-
ment and individual judgments. This means it creates the outcome with the least total
disagreement with all voters.
Majority voting and the minisum function
When majority voting produces consistent outcomes, then the outcomes selected are the
same as those that result from the minisum function from belief merging.
Truth over voter dissatisfaction
In contrast to other methods which are centered around minimizing dissatisfaction, or
maximizing fairness, majority voting / minisum prioritizes finding the truth instead.
Rationality assumption in judgment aggregation and belief merging
In judgment aggregation, it is assumed that all members are rational and thus submit
consistent judgment sets. This is not a required assumption in belief merging.
72
An axiomatic framework for neuro-symbolic reasoning in multi-agent systems
==PAGE:81==
C
Fuzzy logic semantics
In the following, the various logic families and their semantics will be covered with respect
to triangular norms (conjunction), triangular conorms (disjunction) and logical implication.
All of the following information and analysis is based on the following sources: Klement,
Mesiar, and Pap 2005; Complementary Notebook: Appropriate Operators to Approximate
Connectives and Quantifiers 2025; Bobillo et al. 2009.
C.1
Triangular norm operators
Since all fuzzy logic implementations of the logical conjunction are based on triangular
norms, also referred to as t-norms, they will be briefly covered in the following.
A triangular norm operation T is a set operation which computes the intersection of two
fuzzy sets, i.e., two sets represented by numbers in the interval [0, 1]. More formally, it is
a mapping T : [0, 1] × [0, 1] →[0, 1] satisfying these algebraic properties:
• Boundary condition (identity element property):
T(1, x) = x for all x ∈[0, 1]
(C.1)
This is the identity element property with the identity element being 1.
• Commutativity.
• Associativity.
• Monotonicity.
It is important to disambiguate between triangular conorm operations and triangular norm
operations as they are distinct, albeit related, operations. Be careful to pay attention to
the presence of the ”co-” prefix.
C.2
Triangular conorm operators
Since all fuzzy logic implementations of the logical disjunction are based on triangular
conorms, also referred to as t-conorms, they will be briefly covered in the following. They
share many of the qualities of t-norms.
A triangular conorm operation S is a set operation which computes the intersection of two
fuzzy sets, i.e., two sets represented by numbers in the interval [0, 1]. More formally, it is
a mapping S : [0, 1] × [0, 1] →[0, 1] satisfying these algebraic properties:
• Boundary condition (identity element property):
S(0, x) = x for all x ∈[0, 1]
(C.2)
This is the identity element property with the identity element being 0.
• Commutativity.
• Associativity.
• Monotonicity.
An axiomatic framework for neuro-symbolic reasoning in multi-agent systems
73
==PAGE:82==
C.3
Fuzzy logic semantics for logical conjunction
The product t-norm operator
The product t-norm operator TP in fuzzy logic is defined as follows:
TP (u, v) = uv
(C.3)
The product t-norm operator TP obeys the strictness property:
TP (u, v) < min(u, v) for u, v ∈[0, 1]
(C.4)
That is, the operator returns outputs that are smaller than the input values, making this
operator suitable for applications requiring more gradual aggregation of membership val-
ues.
The product t-norm operator can be interpreted as treating the truth values like probabili-
ties of independent events.
Gradient flow in gradient-based algorithms
The gradient will flow through both vari-
ables by adjusting each value, scaled by the value of the other. If one of the variables is
greater than the other, the gradient signal will be stronger for the latter, and vice versa.
This incentivizes the model to make both inputs true while learning that increasing one
input is most effective when the other input is already strongly contributing.
This gradient flow is evidenced by the partial derivatives of the operator. The partial
derivatives of the product t-norm operator TP with respect to the two input variables are
given in the following:
• Partial derivative of TP with respect to u:
∂TP
∂u = v
(C.5)
• Partial derivative of TP with respect to v:
∂TP
∂v = u
(C.6)
The minimum t-norm operator
The minimum t-norm operator T is defined as follows:
T(u, v) = min(u, v)
(C.7)
That is, it is defined as the minimum operator.
The minimum t-norm operator is also known as the Gödel t-norm operator.
The minimum t-norm operator is idempotent and thus preserves the minimum value of
the two inputs exactly, which does not hold for, e.g., the product t-norm operator and the
Łukasiewicz t-norm operator.
74
An axiomatic framework for neuro-symbolic reasoning in multi-agent systems
==PAGE:83==
Gradient flow in gradient-based algorithms
The gradient will only flow through the
term with the minimum value, and backpropagation will thus only adjust the gradients to
increase the value with the minimum value. This can be useful when one condition is
a hard bottleneck or a prerequisite for another. The gradient signal is always constant,
irrespective of the magnitude of either variable.
This gradient flow is evidenced by the partial derivatives of the operator. The partial
derivatives of the minimum t-norm operator TG with respect to the two input variables
are given in the following:
• Partial derivative of TG with respect to u:
∂TG
∂u =
{
1
if u < v
0
if u > v
(C.8)
• Partial derivative of TG with respect to v:
∂TG
∂v =
{
1
if v < u
0
if v > u
(C.9)
The Łukasiewicz t-norm operator
The Łukasiewicz t-norm operator T is defined as follows:
TL(u, v) = max(0, u + v −1)
(C.10)
The Łukasiewicz t-norm operator is nilpotent, i.e., it can output a value of 0 even when
both of its inputs are greater than 0. This can be desirable in applications where complete
lack of membership is desirable.
The Łukasiewicz t-norm operator can be interpreted as measuring the excess truth beyond
1. It only yields a non-zero truth value if the sum of the inputs is greater than 1.
Gradient flow in gradient-based algorithms
During backpropagation, the gradient
signal is either 1 or 0. In the following, this is explained with the two relevant cases:
• u + v > 1:
The gradient signal is 1 and flows back through both u and v. The gradient-based
algorithm receives a strong signal to adjust its parameters.
• u + v ≤1:
The gradient signal is 0 and no gradient signal flows back through the variables.
This gradient flow is evidenced by the partial derivatives of the operator. The partial
derivative of the Łukasiewicz t-norm operator TL with respect to either of the two input
variables is:
∂TL
∂x =
{
1
if u + v > 1
0
otherwise
(C.11)
Where x represents u and v, as both partial derivatives practically take on the same ex-
pression.
An axiomatic framework for neuro-symbolic reasoning in multi-agent systems
75
==PAGE:84==
Feature
Product t-norm
Gödel t-norm
Łukasiewicz
t-
norm
Formula
uv
min(u, v)
max(0, u + v −1)
Gradient behavior
The
gradient
sig-
nal for each value
is
smooth
and
is
scaled by the value
of the other vari-
able,
creating
a
gradual penalty.
The gradient flows
only through the in-
put with the mini-
mum value, ignor-
ing the other.
A constant gradient
signal flows through
both values if their
sum exceeds 1.
If
the sum of the vari-
ables’ values is not
1, no gradient signal
is active.
Defining features
Treats
inputs
like
probabilities of in-
dependent
events.
A
strict
operator
where the output is
always smaller than
the minimum of the
inputs.
The
gradient
pre-
serves the minimum
value exactly.
Measures
excess
truth beyond 1. Can
output 0 even if both
inputs are non-zero.
Table C.1: Comparison of fuzzy logic conjunction operators in gradient-based algorithms
Comparison of fuzzy logic conjunction operators in gradient-based
algorithms
Example use case of the product t-norm
We want to train an AI to determine the
likelihood of purchase based on product visibility u and positive review score v. These
factors are mutually reinforcing. The operator provides a smooth aggregation of these two
scores: a high score in one and a moderate score in the other still results in a reasonable
likelihood, reflect a real-world probabilistic outcome.
Example use case of the Gödel t-norm
We want a system to model whether an in-
dustrial machine is ready for operation. This requires assessing that the machine has
sufficient power u and has not criticial errors v. The machine’s readiness is only as good
as the weakest of these two conditions. If the power supply is only at 50% (u = 0.5), and
there are no errors (v = 1.0), the machine is still only 50
Example use case of the Łukasiewicz t-norm
In this example, a safety system for an
autonomous vehicle msut decide whether to engage “autonomous mode”. This requires
that all sensors are operational u, and that a high-definition map of the world is loaded
v. This operator is used because it heavily penalizes the system unless both inputs are
extremely close to 1, reflecting the high stakes where both conditions must be strongly
met.
C.4
Fuzzy logic semantics for logical disjunction
The product t-conorm operator
The product t-conorm operator SP in fuzzy logic is defined as follows:
SP (u, v) = u + v −uv
(C.12)
76
An axiomatic framework for neuro-symbolic reasoning in multi-agent systems
==PAGE:85==
The product t-conorm operator obeys the strictness property:
S(u, v) > max(u, v) for u, v ∈[0, 1]
(C.13)
That is, the operator returns outputs that are larger than the input values, making this op-
erator suitable for applications requiring more gradual aggregation of membership values.
The product t-conorm operator can be interpreted as the probability of the union of two
independent events.
Gradient flow in gradient-based algorithms
The gradient will flow through both vari-
ables by adjusting each value, scaled by the value of the other. If one of the variables is
greater than the other, the gradient signal will be stronger for the former, and vice versa.
This incentivizes the model to make the input that is already the strongest even stronger.
This gradient flow is evidenced by the partial derivatives of the operator. The partial
derivatives of the product t-conorm operator SP with respect to the two input variables
are given in the following:
• Partial derivative of SP with respect to u:
∂SP
∂u = 1 −v
(C.14)
• Partial derivative of SP with respect to v:
∂SP
∂v = 1 −u
(C.15)
The maximum t-conorm operator
The maximum t-conorm operator SG is defined as follows:
SG(u, v) = max(u, v)
(C.16)
That is, it is defined as the maximum operator.
The maximum t-conorm operator is also known as the Gödel t-conorm operator.
The maximum t-conorm operator is idempotent and thus preserves the maximum value
of the two inputs exactly, which does not hold for, e.g., the product t-norm operator and
the Łukasiewicz t-norm operator.
Gradient flow in gradient-based algorithms
The gradient will only flow through the
term with the maximum value, and backpropagation will thus only adjust the gradients to
increase the value with the maximum value. This incentivizes the model to satisfy the
disjunction by making just one of the terms true, focusing on whichever value is already
the greatest. The gradient signal is always constant, irrespective of the magnitude of
either variable.
This gradient flow is evidenced by the partial derivatives of the operator. The partial
derivatives of the maximum t-conorm operator SG with respect to the two input variables
are given in the following:
An axiomatic framework for neuro-symbolic reasoning in multi-agent systems
77
==PAGE:86==
• Partial derivative of SG with respect to u:
∂SG
∂u =
{
1
if u > v
0
if u < v
(C.17)
• Partial derivative of SG with respect to v:
{
1
if v > u
0
if v < u
(C.18)
The Łukasiewicz t-conorm operator
The Łukasiewicz t-conorm operator SL is defined as follows:
SL(u, v) = min(1, u + v)
(C.19)
The Łukasiewicz t-conorm operator can output values of 1 for certain inputs. This can be
useful in applications where full membership is desirable.
The Łukasiewicz t-conorm operator can be interpreted as capping the value at 1.
Gradient flow in gradient-based algorithms
In the following, the two relevant cases
of the operator with respect to backpropagation are explained:
• u + v < 1:
The gradient signal is 1, pushing the gradient-based algorithm to increase both u
and v to satisfy the disjunction.
• u + v ≥1:
The gradient signal is 0; no gradient signal flows back through the variables.
Comparison of fuzzy logic disjunction operators in gradient-based
algorithms
Example use case of the product t-conorm
In this example, a model measures over-
all customer satisfaction. This is achieved through high product quality u, or excellent
customer service v.
If product quality is decent (u = 0.6), and customer service is
also decent (v = 0.5), then the overall satisfaction is higher than each individual score,
reflecting how satisfaction can be boosted by positive experiences in multiple areas:
0.6 + 0.5 −(0.6 · 0.5) = 0.8.
Example use case of the Gödel t-conorm
In this example, a system determines dis-
count eligibility. A customer is eligible if they are a student u or a senior citizen v. If a
customer is a student (u = 1.0), but not a senior (v = 0.0), their eligibility is 100
Example use case of the Łukasiewicz t-conorm
In this example, a power plant’s mon-
itoring system triggers a high alert. The alert is triggered by high temperature u or high
pressur v. Even if neither condition is critical on its own, their combination can be. If the
temperature is moderately high (u = 0.7) and the pressurs is also moderately high (v =
0.5), the system triggers a full alert because their sum exceeds 1: min(1, 0.7 + 0.5) = 1.0.
78
An axiomatic framework for neuro-symbolic reasoning in multi-agent systems
==PAGE:87==
Feature
Product t-norm
Gödel t-norm
Łukasiewicz
t-
norm
Formula
u + v −uv
max(u, v)
min(1, u + v)
Gradient behavior
The
gradient
sig-
nal for each value
is
smooth
and
is
inversely
scaled
by the value of the
other variable.
The gradient flows
only through the in-
put with the maxi-
mum value, ignor-
ing the other.
A constant gradient
signal flows through
both values if their
sum is less than 1. If
the sum of the vari-
ables’ values is 1 or
greater, no gradient
signal is active.
Defining features
Treats
inputs
like
the
probability
of
the union of inde-
pendent
events.
A
strict
operator
where the output is
always larger than
the maximum of the
inputs.
The
gradient
pre-
serves
the
maxi-
mum value exactly.
Caps the summed
truth at 1. Can out-
put 1 even if both in-
puts are not 1.
Table C.2: Comparison of fuzzy logic disjunction operators in gradient-based algorithms
C.5
Fuzzy logic semantics for logical disjunction
The Reichenbach implication operator
The Reichenbach implication operator IR in fuzzy logic is defined as follows:
IR(u, v) = 1 −u + uv
(C.20)
Gradient flow in gradient-based algorithms
In the following, the gradient signals for
both variables are explained:
• The premise u:
The partial derivative for u is always negative or 0, becoming 0 only when the con-
lusion v = 1. This means the gradient signal is always trying to decrease the truth
of the premise u. The strength of this signal, however, depends on the conclusion;
if the conclusion v is very weak, the gradient signal is very close to −1. On the other
hand, if the conclusion v is very strong, the gradient signal is very close to 0.
• The conclusion v:
When the premise u is strong, then so is the conclusion, which is the gradient signal
for the variable v.
This gradient flow is evidenced by the partial derivatives of the operator. The partial
derivatives of the Reichenbach implication operator IR with respect to the two input vari-
ables are given in the following:
• Partial derivative of IR with respect to u:
∂IR
∂u = v −1
(C.21)
An axiomatic framework for neuro-symbolic reasoning in multi-agent systems
79
==PAGE:88==
• Partial derivative of IR with respect to v:
∂IR
∂v = u
(C.22)
The Gödel implication operator
The Gödel implication operator IG is defined as follows:
IG(u, v) = max(1 −u, v)
(C.23)
The Gödel implication is defined based on the maximum/Gödel t-conorm operator, as it
is known logically that u →v ≡¬u ∨v.
The behavior of the Gödel implication operator is considered in the following based on
the two relevant cases:
• 1 −u > v:
The implication outputs 1−u; the truth value of the implication is determined by how
false the premise is. This case occurs when the evidence for the premise u being
false is stronger than the evidence for the conclusion v being true.
• v ≥1 −u:
The implication outputs v; the truth value of the implication is determined by how
true the conclusion is. This case occurs when the evidence for the conclusion v
being true is stronger than or equal to the evidence for the premise u being false.
Examples of using the Gödel implication operator
The following examples illustrate
the use of the Gödel implication operator:
1. In this example, u represents that it is raining, and v that the streets are wet. If
the premise u = 0.1 and the conclusion v = 0.3, then the implication is considered
strongly true because it is not raining. Plugging in the values, we verify this: max(1−
0.1, 0.3) = 0.9.
2. In this example, u represents that it is raining, and v that the streets are wet. If the
premise u = 0.9 and the conclusion v = 0.95, then the implication is considered
strongly true because the streets are wet. Plugging in the values, we verify this:
max(1 −0.9, 0.95) = 0.95.
Gradient flow in gradient-based algorithms
At most one of the partial derivatives can
be non-zero. Therefore, during backpropagation, the gradient only flows through one of
these variables.
This gradient flow is evidenced by the partial derivatives of the operator. The partial
derivatives of the Gödel implication operator IG with respect to the two input variables
are given in the following:
• Partial derivative of IG with respect to u:
∂IG
∂u =
{
−1
if 1 −u > v
0
otherwise
(C.24)
80
An axiomatic framework for neuro-symbolic reasoning in multi-agent systems
==PAGE:89==
• Partial derivative of IG with respect to v:
∂IG
∂v =
{
1
if v > 1 −u
0
otherwise
(C.25)
The Łukasiewicz implication operator
The Łukasiewicz implication operator IL is defined as follows:
IL = min(1, 1 −u + v)
(C.26)
The behavior of the Łukasiewicz implication is considered in the following based on the
two relevant cases:
• u ≤v:
The implication outputs 1.
• u > v:
The implication outputs 1 −u + v.
This measures the extent to which v is truer than u.
The Łukasiewicz implication creates a strong, linear pressure to ensure that the truth
value of the conclusion is at least as high as the truth value of the premise. The reason
for the pressure being characterized as linear is that, in the case of u > v, the implication
is violated or not fully satisfied, and the formula simplifies to 1 −u + v, which is a linear
function with respect to its inputs. This linear pressure operates to both decrease u as
well as increase v at the same time.
Gradient flow in gradient-based algorithms
The partial derivatives are constant when
u > v, irrespective of the magnitude of u and v. Therefore, the gradient signal is always
the same, with switched signs for the respective variables.
This gradient flow is evidenced by the partial derivatives of the operator. The partial
derivatives of the Łukasiewicz implication operator with respect to the two variables are
given in the following:
• Partial derivative of I with respect to u:
∂I
∂u =
{
−1
if u > v
0
otherwise
(C.27)
• Partial derivative of I with respect to v:
∂I
∂v =
{
1
if u > v
0
otherwise
(C.28)
Comparison of fuzzy logic implication operators in gradient-based
algorithms
Example use case for the Reichenbach implication operator
We want to train an AI
to correlate high consumer spending u with rise in inflation v; this is not a rule of law or
nature, but a probabilistic tendency. The operator will create gradient signals that result
in higher values of inflation v if spending is high u, and if inflation v is already great, it will
not be pressured as much to elevate the value of consumer spending u. The relationship
is smoothly handled, reflecting the soft and correlational nature of the economic principle.
An axiomatic framework for neuro-symbolic reasoning in multi-agent systems
81
==PAGE:90==
Feature
Reichenbach
im-
plication
Gödel implication
Łukasiewicz impli-
cation
Formula
1 −u + uv
max(1 −u, v)
min(1, 1 −u + v)
Gradient behavior
Smooth and always
on, unless u = 0
or v
=
1.
Gra-
dient
signal
flows
through both vari-
ables.
Modulated
by variable values.
The gradient signal
only flows through
one variable at a
time, u if 1 −u is
greater than v, and
v otherwise.
Gradient
signals
flow
through
both
variables if u > v. u
has a constant gra-
dient signal of −1.
v
has a constant
gradient signal of 1.
Defining features
Smooth
optimiza-
tion based on the
value of the premise
u and the conclu-
sion v.
No abrupt
activation/deacti-
vation
of
gradient
signals as with the
other
implication
operators.
Tries to make the
implication true ei-
ther by making the
premise u false or
by making the con-
clusion v true.
It
subsequently bases
its truth value on
whichever of these
two paths is already
more true.
This is
reflected during gra-
dient descent where
that path is chosen,
completely ignoring
the other path/vari-
able.
Strict
enforcement
that v must be at
least as great as
u.
If this rule is
violated,
it
simul-
taneously
pushes
to
decrease
the
premise
u
and
increase
the
con-
clusion v in equal
amounts.
The
gradient
signals
are
constant,
ir-
respective
of
the
magnitude
of
the
violation.
Table C.3: Comparison of fuzzy logic disjunction operators in gradient-based algorithms
Example use case for the Gödel implication operator
We want to train an AI to en-
force the prerequisite that a student only wants to enroll in some class u (e.g., ”Calculus
II”) if they have passed another class v (e.g., ”Calculus 1”). For a new student with no
record, their score for having passed ”Calculus 1” (v) might be very low (e.g., 0.1). Now,
the system can easily satisfy the rule by making the premise of wanting to enroll in ”Cal-
culus II” (u) very false (e.g., 0.05). The Gödel operator recognizes that falsification of the
premise is the dominant path as 0.95 > 0.1 (with 1 −u = 1 −0.05 = 0.95) and the entire
formula will be satisfied. There is no need to simultaneously prove that the student passed
the prerequisite; it simply blocks enrollment. The rule is efficiently enforce by picking the
easiest of the two options.
Example use case for the Łukasiewicz implication operator
We want to train an
AI to classify animals. We want to enforce the rule that, if an image depicts a poodle,
then it must be a dog. If the model outputs u = 0.9 (very sure of the image depicting a
poodle) and v = 0.7 (less sure that the image depicts a dog), then the rule is violated.
The Łukasiewicz implication operator will apply strong, constant pressure to both lower
the score of u and raising the score of v until v ≥u, thus strictly enforcing the logical
taxonomy, ensuring that a subtype can never be more certain than its parent type.
82
An axiomatic framework for neuro-symbolic reasoning in multi-agent systems
==PAGE:91==
D
Implementation details
This appendix details the implementation journey undertaken to integrate symbolic rea-
soning into a multi-agent system. First, the MADDPG algorithm was implemented – based
on the implementation by Phil Tabor (Tabor 2021) – and adapted to the LLE environment.
The first approach to symbolic integration was inspired by the SymDQN architecture (sec-
tion 2.5.1), which led to the development of a teacher-student model (section D.2). How-
ever, initial experiments revealed a fundamental challenge with visually ambiguous static
entities (section D.3), necessitating a more complex centralized, spatio-temporal reason-
ing module. The profound difficulty of the symbol grounding problem encountered with this
final module was the primary catalyst for the pivot to the theoretical framework discussed
in the main body of this thesis.
D.1
Experiments with vanilla MADDPG
The MADDPG algorithm is a multi-agent, actor-critic, policy-gradient reinforcement learn-
ing algorithm. Execution is decentralized whereas training is centralized. Each agent’s
critic is provided with every agent’s observations and actions, fetched from the replay
buffer. Both the actor and critic networks have a duplicate, updated every so often, allevi-
ating the moving target problem. The actor networks in each MADDPG agent make use
of convolutional networks to extract visual features from the state it is presented with.
As opposed to the training procedure for the symbolic reasoning module, training the
MADDPG algorithm involves working directly with the image observations of the envi-
ronment. As is described in section D.4, the pre-processing involved with training the
symbolic reasoning module changes observations to integer labels before training com-
mences.
D.1.1
MADDPG training and hyperparameters
Training was conducted on DTU’s high performance computing (HPC) clusters. Specif-
ically, training was run on Nvidia’s A100 tensor core GPU. Training was submitted with
LSF (Load Sharing Facility) batch scripts designed to queue until exclusive access to the
GPU was granted, ensuring sole ownership of the GPU for the duration of the training.
Furthermore, the job requested 8 CPU cores and 20 gigabytes of system memory with a
maximum walltime of 24 hours. All the details of this batch job can be found in the file
submit_main.sh in the code.
The MADDPG agents were trained using the Adam optimizer with a learning rate α of
5 × 10−5 for the actor network and a learning rate β of 5 × 10−4 for the critic network. A
discount factor γ of 0.99 and a soft-update parameter τ of 0.001 were used. To stabilize
training, gradient clipping is employed with a maximum norm of 1.0 for both the actor and
the critic networks. For a full overview of all training and environment parameters, refer
to the config.toml file in the code.
An epsilon-greedy strategy was utilized for exploration during training. The value of ϵ was
experimented with, but settled on a starting value of 0.3, ending in 0.1 over the course of
30,000 episodes.
The replay buffer has a capacity of 512 transitions. During training, mini-batches of 256
transitions are sampled from this buffer.
An axiomatic framework for neuro-symbolic reasoning in multi-agent systems
83
==PAGE:92==
D.1.2
Discrete action space and Gumbel-Softmax
As the standard MADDPG implementation is originally designed for continuous action
spaces, it had to be adapted to the discrete environment of LLE in which there are five
discrete actions: ‘STAY’, ‘NORTH’, ‘EAST’, ‘SOUTH’, and ‘WEST’; each action corre-
sponds to either staying in place or moving one cell in one of the cardinal directions. A
naive approach would be to take the logits of the actor networks, apply softmax to them,
and subsequently argmax these outputs to get the index corresponding to the action rep-
resenting, and interpreted as, the action with the highest probability. This naive approach
fails as it prevents backpropagation through the actor network as the argmax function is
not differentiable – the gradient is lost. This is why the Gumbel-Softmax function is used.
The Gumbel-Softmax operation is given by (Wong 2020; Benjaminson 2020; Fuchs 2024):
yi =
exp ((log(πi) + gi)/τ)
∑k
j=1 exp ((log(πj) + gj)/τ)
(D.1)
Where gi is an i.i.d. sample drawn from a Gumbel distribution, πi the ith logit, and τ a
temperature parameter. The greater the value of τ, the more more uniform the distribution,
ans the closer its gets to zero, the more it approaches a one-hot vector encoding, similar
to argmax.
D.1.3
Core MADDPG agent architecture
The agent architecture consists of a deep convolutional actor network for policy generation
and a simpler multi-layer perceptron (MLP) critic network for value estimation.
Actor network
The network begins with three sequential convolutional blocks to extract visual features
from the input image:
• Block 1: 64 output channels, 5x5 kernel, stride of 1, padding of 2.
• Block 2: 128 output channels, 3x3 kernel, stride of 1, padding of 1.
• Block 3: 256 output channels, 3x3 kernel, stride of 1, padding of 1.
Each block consists of a Conv2d layer, a BatchNorm2d layer for training stability, a ReLU
activation function, and a MaxPool2d layer for down-sampling.
After the convolutional blocks, the flattened feature map is passed through a linear pro-
jection layer, reducing the feature map to a fixed-size feature vector of 256 dimensions.
This vector is what the critic network receives from each agent. This also dramatically
alleviates potential memory issues, as the size of the concatenated raw feature maps
from each agent could possibly be larger than the memory of the GPU on which training
occurs.
Finally, the projected feature vector is passed through two fully connected layers of 256
dimensions each, with ReLU activations. The final layer outputs logits for the available
actions.
Critic network
The critic network is a centralized MLP that evaluates state-action values. It takes as input
the concatenation of the projected feature vectors from all agents as well as the one-hot
encoded actions taken by all agents.
The critic network consists of two fully connected hidden layers of 256 dimensions each,
followed by ReLU activations. The final layer is a single linear unit that outputs the esti-
mated Q-value.
84
An axiomatic framework for neuro-symbolic reasoning in multi-agent systems
==PAGE:93==
D.2
Teacher-student architecture
The symbolic reasoning module is set up to accept 5-by-5 patches of cells, but the reason
for its inception was to identify single-cell entities. This is handled by defining an extra
“student” network which only takes single cells and outputs the corresponding entity. This
extra network learned from the labels output by the “teacher” module based on its 5-by-5
patches. The entire architecture is therefore one of a teacher and a model network; the
teacher model learns the correct labels with unsupervised learning and the student model
subsequently learns the same with completely supervised learning. In the end, it is the
student model that is used in practice to, e.g., detect if a cell contains a laser and either
guide agents to avoid it or block it for other agents.
D.3
Learning from static cells
The initial idea was to have the module learn from the static cells as is the case with
the SymDQN algorithm (see ), but this idea was quickly dropped as it was not possible
to distinguish between entities in their cells in the Laser-Learning environment simply
based on their single-cell visual appearance. For example, there is no way to distinguish
between any static entity, be it a void, wall, or laser origin block. This realization was the
catalyst for the prolonged development and design of the new symbolic reasoning module
and the teacher-student architecture.
D.4
Symbolic reasoning module pre-processing
Before the symbolic reasoning module learns how to symbolically represent the envi-
ronment, pre-processing is performed on the levels with which it is trained. This pre-
processing:
1. First, the environment is run with random agent actions for thousands of timesteps
to generate a diverse dataset of world states, saved as PNG images.
2. The directory of level images is scanned. The pixel data of every 32x32 cell is
hashed using SHA256 to discover all unique entity appearances.
3. A JSON file (entity_map.json) is created, mapping each unique hash to a distinct
integer label.
4. Using this map, the entire PNG image dataset is converted into a dataset of NumPy
arrays (.npy files) containing the corresponding integer labels.
5. During the teacher model’s training, this NumPy dataset is queried to extract batches
of 5-by-5 integer-labeled patches over three consecutive timesteps.
The resulting 5-by-5 integer labels are batched and run through the module, letting the
module learn how to symbolically represent the environment, guided by the logical ax-
ioms.
D.5
The centralized symbolic reasoning module
The empirical experiment to solve the symbol grounding problem relied on the implemen-
tation of a centralized symbolic reasoning module. Conceptually, the module needed to
identify not just that entities were distinct, but what they represented, e.g., that voids and
distinctly colored lasers are dangers. This excluded a design that simply analyzed static
images as in the SymDQN algorithm (see section 2.5.1).
It was determined that the module had to analyze spatio-temporal data, specifically 5-by-
5 cell patches observed over three timesteps to accomodate all the entities in LLE. This
An axiomatic framework for neuro-symbolic reasoning in multi-agent systems
85
==PAGE:94==
larger context was necessary to disambiguate entities based on their dynamic behavior,
such as distinguishing an agent’s death from it simply moving out of view. However,
despite a design that considered these environmental dynamics, the module consistently
struggled to converge on a correct mapping. This outcome underscored the profound
difficulty of the symbol grounding problem and served as the primary catalyst for pivoting
to the more robust, general theoretical framework discussed previously.
Further implementation details of this module can be found in section D.
86
An axiomatic framework for neuro-symbolic reasoning in multi-agent systems
==PAGE:95==
An axiomatic framework for neuro-symbolic reasoning in multi-agent systems
87
==PAGE:96==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
