==PAGE:1==
DTU Wind Energy
Master of Wind Energy
 
 
 
 
Public Regulation of Offshore Wind: Barriers and Opportunities ‐ 
Focus on TSOs’ Role 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Peter Fausbøll 
DTU Wind-Energy-WEM-0014 
July 2021 
 
 
==PAGE:2==
 
 
Author: Peter Fausbøll 
Title: Public Regulation of Offshore Wind: Barriers and Opportunities - 
Focus on TSOs’ Role 
 
 
July 2021  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DTU Wind Energy is a department of the Technical University of Denmark 
with a unique integration of research, education, innovation and public/private 
sector consulting in the field of wind energy. Our activities develop new 
opportunities and technology for the global and Danish exploitation of wind 
energy. Research focuses on key technical-scientific fields, which are central 
for the development, innovation and use of wind energy and provides the 
basis for advanced education at the education. 
Project period:  
February 2021 – July 2021 
 
ECTS: 15 
 
Education: Master 
 
 
Supervisor: 
Lena Kitzing 
 
DTU Wind Energy 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Remarks: 
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for 
graduation in the above education at the 
Technical University of Denmark. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Wind Energy 
Frederiksborgvej 399 
4000 Roskilde 
Denmark 
www.vindenergi.dtu.dk 
 
==PAGE:3==
Executive summary
In 2020, the European Commission issued an offshore strategy aiming at 300 GW wind towards
2050. This entails a sector spending of up to 800 bn EUR. 2/3s of this, i.e., circa 533 bn EUR is
expected to be spent by transmission system operators (TSOs) on offshore infrastructure, such
as cables, substations, and converters. Given the vast amount of money to be spent by monopoly
TSOs, this thesis challenges the conventional assumption that infrastructure development should
be ownership unbundled and lie with the the TSOs.
The main scientific question is whether offshore development is a natural monopoly, i.e., whether
the industry is best served by one company, rather than several. A natural monopoly is related to
a company’s cost function, but also to barriers of entry in the form of limited access to resources
or large up-front investments.
The thesis focuses on European conditions, and specifically the North Sea, where much of the
development is expected. The thesis presents and discusses EU regulation of TSOs and the scope
of their monopolies. The UK offshore transmission owner (OFTO) regime is presented and it is
documented how this regime works and differs from the approach of Denmark, Germany and
the Netherlands.
Costs and basic data for 26 UK transmission projects for offshore wind farms (OWFs) have been
collected and are analysed for economies of scale. Costs are also calculated for Danish, German,
and Dutch offshore transmission projects, but it becomes apparent that these TSOs are restrictive
in publishing cost data.
The thesis finds that there are constant economies of scale in offshore transmission develop-
ments, and not limited access to resources nor prohibitive up-front costs for entrants. This leads
to the conclusion that offshore transmission is most likely not a natural monopoly. Not least in
comparison with onshore transmission, which has clear economies of scale, and where a com-
peting network is infeasible. External studies are presented showing the UK competitive model
leading to lower costs. This reduces the amount of arguments in favour of offshore transmis-
sion always being assigned to TSOs. On the other hand, TSO-build do have advantages that the
developer-build model lack: Such as providing sufficient capacity to reach socio-economic opti-
mally levels, coherent control of the infrastructure, concern for security of supply, and control
of market dominance.
In conclusion, European energy agencies are advised to revisit arguments for offshore trans-
mission unbundling and split of responsibility between commercial developers and TSOs. The
view on merchant interconnectors should also be revisited. It is recommended that public TSOs
should be required to publish cost information per offshore transmission project. This would
enable better European benchmarking.
Public regulation of offshore wind: TSOs’ role
iii
==PAGE:4==
iv
Public regulation of offshore wind: TSOs’ role
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
This thesis has been prepared in the spring-summer of 2021 as a part of fulfilling the requirements
of DTU’s Wind Energy Master programme.
I would like to express my sincere gratitude to my master thesis supervisor: Associate professor
Lena Kitzing from DTU Wind for guidance and support throughout this final project.
The rest of the staff at DTU WEM also deserves my thumbs up. Many could be mentioned, since
I have always felt the enthusiasm and dedication all along the 9 courses. Senior scientist and
Head of Master Studies, Merete Badger, deserves thanks for establishing this master programme
and managing it in a fine way. Secretary and Master Programme Coordinator Nina Juhl Madsen
also deserves thanks for her always helpful assistance.
The management at my former employer, the Danish Utility Regulator, also deserves my grati-
tude for letting me pursue the master programme during the past 3 years. Thanks to heads of
departments, Mads Lyndrup and Pia Rønager.
Thanks to my master programme fellow students: Laín Nieto Gómez and Emilio Barrrachina
Gascó, it has been a pleasure studying with you!
Thanks to my former colleague at DUR, economist Thomas Folkerman, for constructive review
of my text.
Finally, I can recommend leaving the computer screen and going for a walk. Many ideas came
from this!
Peter Fausbøll
Public regulation of offshore wind: TSOs’ role
v
==PAGE:6==
Abbriviations
AC
Alternating Current
ACM
Dutch regulator
AEP
Annual Energy Production
bn
109
BNetzA
German regulator
DC
Direct Current
DK1
Bidding zone in Jylland/Fyn
DK2
Bidding zone in Sjælland/Lolland/Falster/Bornholm
DUR
Danish Utility Regulator
CAPEX
Capital expenditures
CGS
Combined Grid Solution
CO2
Carbon dioxide
EC
European Commission
EEZ
Exclusive Economic Zone
EMC
European Market Coupling
ESO
Electricity System Operator (UK)
FTV
Final Transfer Value
GHG
Green House Gasses
HV
High Voltage
H2
Hydrogen
HVDC
High Voltage Direct Current
NH3
Ammonia
NRA
National Regulatory Authority
LCOE
Levelised Cost of Energy
OBZ
Offshore Bidding Zone
OFTO
Offshore Transmission Owner
OFGEM
UK regulator
OPEX
Operating Expenses
OWF
Offshore Wind Farm
PCC
Point of Common Coupling
PoC
Point of Connection
PtX
Power to X
RES
Renewable Energy Sources
TSO
Transmission System Operator
WACC
Weighted Average Cost of Capital
vi
Public regulation of offshore wind: TSOs’ role
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Executive summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
Abbreviations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
vi
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Purpose and method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Plans involving offshore wind and grids in the EU
4
2.1
EC offshore strategy plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
North Sea Wind Power Hub (NSWPH)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
WindEurope developer vision
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.4
Danish government plans for energy islands . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.5
OffshoreGrid project
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Network topologies and market models
9
3.1
Classification of offshore grid topologies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Offshore gas pipelines in the North Sea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4
Regulatory analysis
17
4.1
Literature review
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.2
EU regulation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.3
UK regulation: Offshore transmission model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.4
Danish examples of regulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.5
German example of regulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5
Economic analysis
27
5.1
Literature review
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.2
Theoretical considerations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.3
Data collection of transmission costs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.4
Assessment of economies of scale - UK OFTO assets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.5
Assessment of economies of scale - Danish island and German costs . . . . . . .
37
5.6
Assessment of access to limited resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.7
Cost comparison of offshore transmission developments: UK, DK, DE, NL . . . .
40
5.8
EU support schemes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
Public regulation of offshore wind: TSOs’ role
vii
==PAGE:8==
6
Discussion and conclusion
44
6.1
Analysis of natural monopoly
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
6.2
Conclusion and policy recommendations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
Bibliography
51
A Data for UK, Danish, and German offshore transmission projects
55
viii
Public regulation of offshore wind: TSOs’ role
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
Background
The world’s first offshore wind farm (OWF), Vindeby, was established in Denmark in 1991. The
production capacity was a modest 5 MW for the park consisting of 11 turbines of 0.45 MW each.
Much has happened since then. The turbine developer Vestas is now marketing a 15 MW turbine
and OWFs in the range of 1 GW are being planned, e.g. the Danish Thor OWF that has been
initially tendered for in March 2021.
The cost of offshore wind production has decreased steadily. The global levelised cost of elec-
tricity (LCOE1) for offshore wind has decreased by 44% in 10 years, reaching 45-79 EUR/MWh
in 2019 according to EU’s Joint Research Center[1]. This means that offshore wind is more cost
effective than traditional means of electricity production, like coal-, biomass-, or gas-fired power
plants, which are in the 80-140 EUR/MWh range [2]. In 2017, Germany saw the first zero bids in
wind auctions for OWFs: He Dreiht (900MW) and Borkum Riffgrund III2 (900MW)[3].
At the same time, the need for significant change in the global production mix is overwhelming.
To keep global warming at a minimum, many parts of the world are planning actions across sec-
tors to reduce green house gas emissions (GHG). In the energy sector, offshore wind is expected
to play a large role due the technology being the least expensive. The EC plans to have 300 GW
offshore wind production by 2050[4]. This is up from circa 22 GW being spread out in 12 EU
countries by end 2019.
The European Commission (EC) expects the offshore strategy plan up until 2050 will cost around
800 bn EUR, of which TSOs will invest circa two thirds, i.e., 533 bn EUR in offshore infrastruc-
ture[4]. This is a lot of money to be spent by monopolies. The text will later discuss the precise
nature of these monopolies. The EC expects that private capital will provide the bulk of the 800
bn EUR investment.
When the electricity market was liberalized in the late 1990s by EU legislation, production and
transmission were unbundled into separate ”pillars”. Transmission system operators (TSOs) were
formed with typically public ownership. Electricity production was left to free market players
that could maximize profits. The idea was that free competition and transparency in electricity
prices would be beneficial to societies in terms of security of supply and socio-economic welfare.
Development of the transmission system in the late 1990s would have expected transmission sys-
tem development to happen onshore, which is cheaper than offshore transmission development.
1LCOE measures the NPV of cash flows over an assumed lifetime divided by energy production. This makes it
possible to compare different technologies. See also p. 40.
2Formerly known as Borkum Riffgrund West 1/2 and OWP West.
Public regulation of offshore wind: TSOs’ role
1
==PAGE:10==
The first EU liberalization package, Directive 96/92/EC of 19 December 1996[5], says in article 7
that TSOs can develop if necessary their transmission system. In the late 1990s it was probably
expected that the ”operator” role was predominant. Today, TSOs are just as much transmission
system developers.
Since TSOs are not subject to competitive pressures, governments have to take a critical look
at the TSOs and their development plans to ensure that they are cost-effective. Cf. Borkum
Riffgrund III and He Dreiht auctions mentioned above, although the auction ended in zero bids,
both OWFs were indirectly subsidized by having points of connection offshore, where the TSO,
TenneT, developed and paid for HVDC connections, called Dolwin 5 and Borwin 5, which are
ultimately to be paid by German consumers. In Figure 1.1, TenneT builds transmission from the
land station to the offshore substation inclusive. The Borwin 5 project costs 1.5 bn EUR3 and the
Dolwin 5 project is very similar.
Figure 1.1 – A typical connection for an offshore wind farm. The Point of Connection is where the responsi-
bility for development shift from OWF developer to TSO. This varies from country to country and project to
project, but could be either land station or offshore substation.
National regulatory agencies (NRAs) regulate TSOs and their tariffs and expenses. An example is
the Danish Utility Regulator (”Forsyningstilsynet”). NRAs are independent authorities that were
established along with the TSOs to regulate these. It seems fair to note that regulating a 533 bn
EUR development plan is a fairly large task, and likely more comprehensive than regulating a
pure operator that does not conduct development.
This is the background for the subject of this thesis.
1.2
Purpose and method
This thesis is based on the motivation that it is worth investigating TSO-build vs developer-build
for the development of the 533 bn EUR infrastructure investments that the EC expects is needed
to connect 300 GW offshore wind towards 2050. The thesis will therefore investigate:
3https://tyndp.entsoe.eu/tyndp2018/projects/projects/192
2
Public regulation of offshore wind: TSOs’ role
==PAGE:11==
• Whether there are economies of scale in offshore transmission work.
• Whether offshore transmission development is a natural monopoly activity.
• EU regulation of TSO monopolies.
• Classification of offshore assets after use/purpose.
• The reasons for unbundling requirements for offshore assets.
• Whether monopoly TSOs or commercial OWF developers can deliver the most cost effec-
tive infrastructure developments.
The thesis will analyse EU regulation and cost data for offshore transmission projects. It will
become clear later in the text that unfortunately there is not much cost data from Continental
TSOs. Therefore, many parts of this thesis will build on existing literature and research and try to
combine and review this input and assemble it into the context of who does offshore transmission
work most cost effective. Please remark that this thesis does not cover whether OWF developers
should pay for offshore transmission via tariffs to the TSO, via own development costs or whether
the TSO should pass costs to general users of the transmission system. This is big subject of its
own.
Where possible, I will compare the expected offshore electricity setup with the already existing
setup in the oil/gas sector. There are many things in common between the sectors, most notably
that offshore energy resources are brought to onshore markets.
I will try to balance the analyses of TSOs by also relaying their view on the matter. Focus is on
European conditions and the North Sea.
Public regulation of offshore wind: TSOs’ role
3
==PAGE:12==
2
Plans involving offshore wind and grids
in the EU
This chapter seeks to give an overview of important plans for future wind energy initiatives,
offshore grids, and OWF developer views.
2.1
EC offshore strategy plan
In December 2015 the European Commission and EU Member States committed to decarbonisa-
tion in Europe by signing the Paris Agreement. This plan, a product of the 21st Conference of the
Parties of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, aims to limit the rise
in global temperatures to no more than 2° Celsius above pre-industrial levels, while efforts should
be made towards a limit of 1.5° Celsius. EU members also agreed to produce 32% of consumed
energy from renewables by 2030. A rulebook produced at the 24th Conference of the Parties in
Katowice in December 2018 supports the implementation of the Paris Agreement. It will help
governments measure greenhouse gas emissions, report progress towards curbing carbon use
and mobilise USD 100 billion a year to fund climate policy.
After the Paris agreement, one of the important documents is the European Green Deal - a paper
from the European Commission [6] that sets EU’s strategy within fields as climate, energy supply,
circular economy, buildings, renewables, environment, ecology, food and mobility to name the
most important. In the context of this thesis, the most relevant parts are climate neutrality in
2050, and reduction of GHG emission of 50% in 2030 compared with 1990. The Commission
will by June 2021 propose new climate policy instruments, including a possible extension of the
European emissions trading system to new sectors. In the Green Deal, the power sector must be
developed so that it is largely based on renewable resources. This means rapid phasing out of
coal, and gas should be decarbonised.
The Green Deal has led to other, more specific strategies. The EC Offshore Strategy plan [4] ”An
EU Strategy to harness the potential of offshore renewable energy for a climate neutral future” is the
most relevant here. This plan states that EU should aim to have 300 GW in total of offshore wind
capacity by 2050. The plan states that this is expected to cost EUR 800 bn in CAPEX of which
2/3’rds are expected to be TSO development costs. The UK, as former EU member, has a 75 GW
offshore wind strategy by 2050[7].
One also has to keep in mind that EUR 800 bn is ”only” offshore wind. On top of this comes
electrification of transport, industry, and agriculture. So, the sectoral change in the energy sector
is truly immense.
4
Public regulation of offshore wind: TSOs’ role
==PAGE:13==
2.2
North Sea Wind Power Hub (NSWPH)
The North Sea Wind Power Hub is a consortium of TenneT (TSO Netherlands), Energinet (TSO
Denmark), TenneT (TSO Germany) and Gasunie (gas TSO Netherlands). The TSO consortium
are investigating several alternatives for a North Sea based hub for wind power.
A large scale European electricity system for offshore wind is proposed to be developed in the
North Sea. It includes a construction of one or more hubs at a suitable location in the North Sea
with interconnectors to bordering North Sea countries. The system may function as a hub for
transport of wind energy, an interconnection hub to the connected countries, a working hub for
offshore wind developers and a location for possible power-to-gas solutions. This project is a
first building block in a hub-and-spoke concept connecting up to 12 GW future offshore wind
parks to the systems of Denmark, the Netherlands and Germany after 2035. An integral part of
the NSWPH is to assess the perspectives of coupling large-scale wind power production with the
gas system through power-to-gas (PtG) technology. The commissioning date is forecasted to be
year 2035.
2.3
WindEurope developer vision
WindEurope is a lobby organization of over 400 members, active in over 35 countries. The orga-
nization covers wind turbine manufacturers, component suppliers, research institutes, national
wind and renewables associations, developers, contractors, electricity providers, finance and
insurance companies, and consultants. WindEurope actively coordinates international policy,
communications, research and analysis.
WindEurope expects the electricity grid infrastructure in Europe would see major growth in both
offshore and onshore wind energy. This expansion should be accelerated by governments and
includes offshore grids and the reinforcements of onshore grids. Governments should promote
hybrid offshore wind projects with connections to more than one country in order to pool assets
and optimise space. They should support the development of meshed offshore grids. This will
require enhanced cooperation between countries[8].
WindEurope estimates that six offshore wind connection hubs will be built over the next three
decades: four in the North Sea and two in the Baltic. All of these will connect to different ju-
risdictions. The longer links and large farm sizes mean that high voltage direct current (HVDC)
grid infrastructure will play an increasingly important role. The grid will transmit power from
many geographically dispersed generators, rather than from a few large generators.
WindEurope recommends that the EU should elaborate a high-level strategy to achieve the grid
infrastructure needed for more than 400 GW of offshore wind included in its long term decarbon-
isation strategy, with support from Member States, industry and grid operators. Such strategy
should include the optimisation of existing grid infrastructure and the support of new technolo-
gies and approaches. The EU should further elaborate the regulatory framework to allow project
Public regulation of offshore wind: TSOs’ role
5
==PAGE:14==
developers to build grid connections for cross-border hybrid projects with a smooth and stream-
lined process[9].
WindEurope finds that Member States should include clear plans for a coordinated offshore grid
development in their National Energy and Climate Plans for 2030 including an assessment of
investment needs and sources of finance to deliver them. Member States should amend the reg-
ulatory framework to include the option of opening investments in offshore grid assets to new
players. National regulatory authorities should consider opening for competition the rights to
build and operate offshore grid transmission assets and auctions for offshore wind energy should
open the development of transmission assets (to shore) to offshore wind developers. In the short
term, the EU should increase the funding and coordinate with Member States to accelerate the
execution of Projects of Common Interests on- and offshore.
2.4
Danish government plans for energy islands
Denmark plans to build two energy hubs by 2030 with a combined minimum capacity of 5 GW. In
the long term, Denmark plans to establish energy hubs with a total capacity of 12 GW of offshore
wind energy in the North Sea and Baltic Sea. See [10]. The energy hubs are located respectively
in the North Sea about 100 km west of Jutland and around Bornholm as hub in the Baltic Sea.
The 5 GW is expected initially to be 3 GW in the North Sea and 2 GW around Bornholm. Several
concepts have been evaluated. In the North Sea the hub could consist either of several platforms
in proximity or a more distributed cluster of platforms. An alternative is a caisson based island
with more layout space and a harbour. The platforms / island would primarily host the electri-
cal infrastructure needed to collect the power produced from the surrounding wind parks. The
caisson island could potentially also have space for PtX and/or energy storage. Behind this plan
is a cost benefit analysis made by the consulting planners, COWI [11]. The caisson island was
chosen 4 February 2021 in a political agreement[12].
The cost of the energy island / hub of platforms in the North Sea in the 10 GW scenario is, cf.
Figure 2.1 EUR 28 bn. With Bornholm as another energy island, the costs reach EUR 33 bn. The
North Sea island itself is actually not a big share of the total costs. Most costs are electrical
infrastructure, and this does not even count onshore grid enforcements, which would be needed
to receive 10(+2) GW of electricity. Again, it must be emphasized that the concept is at a very
early stage, and much more planning work is expected.
The Danish energy island in the North Sea is expected to be owned 50.1% by the Danish state[13],
and the rest by private investors. This includes the artificial island itself, the electricity trans-
mission network, the OWFs and other potential activities. The Danish Energy Agency expects
electrical work to be arranged by Energinet. DEA also considers the artificial island a monopoly,
and is considering how to arrange the commercial setup around this. The political agreement
states that the project must be economically profitable. Please remark that the project is at an
early stage, currently.
6
Public regulation of offshore wind: TSOs’ role
==PAGE:15==
Figure 2.1 – COWI’s estimate of CAPEX of Danish Energy Islands
It is worth setting the costs of the Danish energy islands and the EU strategy in perspective.
Figure 2.2 sets the amount of money in perspective. The Danish Energy Islands are expected
in their full development scenario (12GW) to cost EUR 33 bn including turbines. This would
be the single largest development the Danish State has ever undertaken. The full EU budget of
reaching 300 GW offshore wind is expected by the EC to cost EUR 800 bn. Remarkably, the United
States sent astronauts to the Moon in the Apollo program 1960-1972 for what today would be
the equivalent of EUR 330 bn[14]. However, the EUR 800 bn is topped by the Corona stimulus
package agreed by EU member states in 2020.
Danish budget for 10+2 GW 
energy islands - 33 bn. EUR
US Apollo programme to go 
the moon 1960-70'ies - 330 
bn. EUR
300 GW offshore wind by 
2050 - 800 bn EUR
EU-27 Corona stimulus 
package - 1800 bn. EUR
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
2000
bn  EUR
Figure 2.2 – The European Commission’s 300 GW offshore wind strategy in historic cost comparison.
2.5
OffshoreGrid project
The North Sea Offshore Grid, officially the North Seas Countries Offshore Grid Initiative, was a
collaboration between EU member-states and Norway to create an integrated offshore energy
grid which links wind farms and other renewable energy sources across the northern seas of
Public regulation of offshore wind: TSOs’ role
7
==PAGE:16==
Europe. It is one of several proposed European super grid schemes. Since 2016, the cooperation
has been integrated into the new Political Declaration on energy cooperation between the North
Seas countries.
The OffshoreGrid project and its report[15] was an analysis of how to build a cost-efficient grid in
the North and Baltic Seas. The coordinator for the project was the renewable energy consultancy
firm 3E and several commercial and academic partners were behind the report. In essence, the
OffshoreGrid project was a commercial undertaking. With this in mind, the report still provides
insights and concepts worth considering. The OffshoreGrid project does not cover PtX, which
may show the document’s age.
The OffshoreGrid report [15] provides recommendations on topology, dimensioning, and public
policies of an offshore grid in northern Europe. The report recommends clustering of OWF
projects, like the typical TenneT hub concept shown in Figure 3.6. The magnitude of the benefits
depends on the hub distance from shore, and the distance between the individual wind farms.
The report finds that a shared hub connection is most advantageous when a high amount of
OWF capacity is concentrated in a small area and when the cluster capacity is about the size
of the standard available HVDC VSC systems. Integrating a wind farm into a nearby hub is
economically advantageous for wind farm to hub connection distances of less than 20 km. In
addition, a hub solution may be beneficial for reasons other than cost. Offshore hubs can help to
mitigate the environmental and social impact of laying multiple cables through sensitive coastal
areas and allow for more efficient logistics during installation.
The report further notes that national borders should not be a barrier for hub solutions. If for
instance an OWF is built close to the border and close to a wind farm cluster in a neighbouring
country, it is recommended to construct cross border hub solutions. Regulatory frameworks,
support scheme issues should allow these solutions.
8
Public regulation of offshore wind: TSOs’ role
==PAGE:17==
3
Network topologies and market models
This chapter presents 4 types of network topologies and 2 market models. Normally, economists
are not so interested in electrical topologies. But I am of the conviction that economists ought
to dig deeper into transmission topologies and concepts in order to understand where the EUR
533 bn is about to be invested. The electrical details are not necessary to understand, but the
overall topology is about the transmission assets’ purposes and is needed to understand where
monopolies, if any, could exist.
3.1
Classification of offshore grid topologies
There are two main topologies for defining the layout of a (transmission) grid: the radial grid
and the meshed grid. The radial grid is a tree shape topology with no closed loops, and unidirec-
tional power flow. Roland Berger [16] furthermore introduces hybrid projects: This means dual
functionality of the infrastructure both as offshore wind grid connection and cross-border inter-
connection capacity. Hybrid projects are further subdivided into amongst other ”combined grid
solutions” and ”modular grids/hubs”1. Tractebel et al [17] define 4 levels of coordination. The
Roland Berger and Tractebel et al terminologies are combined and illustrated with a progression
towards a meshed grid, see Figures 3.1 - 3.4.
1. Radial or Point-to-point is the classic topology for connecting OWFs. Most OWFs to date
are of this type. See Figure 3.1 and also Figure 1.1 on p. 2. Flow is unidirectional, and there
is a single user on the cables.
2. Local coordination introduces hubs, where multiple OWFs are connected to, still radially,
and with unidirectional flow. The users are the local OWFs. See Figure 3.2. This concept
is often seen in Belgium and in the German EEZ of the North Sea, see Figure 3.6.
3. International coordination or Combined grid solutions or radial multi-terminal combine ex-
port cables to have a dual functionality as interconnectors between countries. See Figure
3.3. Flow can be bidirectional, subject to technical possibility. See also a concrete exam-
ple in Kriegers Flak CGS, shown in Figure 3.5 on p. 12. There is now a common use of
the cables, which serve both OWFs and the market in general. The proposed North Sea
Wind Power Hub and the Danish energy island are more advanced examples of the radial
multi-terminal concept, also with a hub. See Figure 3.7.
4. Meshed grids introduces loops in the network, and now the system is much more integrated,
like onshore transmission. See Figure 3.4. The power flow can be bi-directional, and there
is a common use of most of the network. No examples of actual implementation exist yet
of this type.
1Roland Berger also defines ”tie-ins” and ”neighbour OWF”, that are not relevant here.
Public regulation of offshore wind: TSOs’ role
9
==PAGE:18==
Onshore 
substation 
transformer
Offshore 
substation 
transformer
Export
cable
Country-to-
country cable / 
interconnector
Array 
cables
Figure 3.1 – Topology example Type 1: Each turbine in an OWF is connected via an array cable to an offshore
substation transformer. The substation is connected via the export cable in a point-to-point connection. The
connections are radial, single user, and the flow is unidirectional. Each OWF is connected to a transformer
substation that transforms 33/66 kV to export cable voltage. The purple cables are interconnectors.
Hub
Onshore 
HVAC/DC 
converter
Offshore 
HVAC/DC 
converter
Spoke
Figure 3.2 – Topology example Type 2: Local coordination: OWFs are connected to local hubs in the form of
HVDC converters. The hubs could alternatively also be a transformer substation, depending on export cable
type. The setup is radial with unidirectional flow. The export cables now have multiple users. This type is
sometimes called modular grid.
Even more complicated situations arise if Power-to-X (PtX) or storage are introduced. Then,
the energy need not be transmitted in the form of electricity, but could be converted into e.g.
hydrogen, methane for pipelines, ships etc. PtX will be discussed later in the text.
The NSWPH consortium has issued an assessment of market setup options: Two alternatives
are presented: 1. The so-called Home Market (HM) model: The offshore wind farm bids and dis-
patches into its home market and receives the HM electricity price. The cable between the hub
10
Public regulation of offshore wind: TSOs’ role
==PAGE:19==
Figure 3.3 – Topology example Type 3: Many names: International coordination / radial multi-terminal /
hybrid / combined grid solution. Interconnectors and export cables are now combined into one cable. The
interconnector/export cables are bidirectional, with multiple users.
Hub-to-hub cables
Hub-to-shore cables
Offshore Bidding Zone 
OBZ B
Home Market Model
OBZ A
Bidding Zone C
Figure 3.4 – Topology example Type 4: International coordination and use of a meshed grid with closed
loops. The grid is hybrid, bidirectional, with multiple users, and meshed. Offshore Bidding Zones (OBZ) are
also shown. These could also exist in Types 1 to 3, but are shown here. OBZs are like normal EU bidding zones.
and HM is a hybrid asset, whereas the cables between the hub and the other bidding zones are
cross-border interconnections. 2. The so-called Offshore Bidding Zone (OBZ): The hub forms a
separate offshore bidding zone, in which the offshore wind farm submits bids and are dispatched.
The European market coupling matches the offshore generation with onshore demand. The elec-
tricity price within the offshore bidding zone is the result of market coupling and is equal to the
electricity price of the bidding zone connected by uncongested cross-border interconnections.
Kriegers Flak would be a HM solution, since KF is in the Danish DK2 bidding zone. So far, most
Public regulation of offshore wind: TSOs’ role
11
==PAGE:20==
Figure 3.5 – Kriegers Flak Combined Grid solution (could also be called a radial multi-terminal type). En-
erginet and 50Hertz took advantage of Baltic 1 and 2 OWFs being in the vicinity of Kriegers Flak. With AC
connections from KFA/B connecting to Baltic 1/2 substations, an interconnector was made. DK2 and Germany
are not synchronous areas, therefore ”back-to-back” HVDC converters had to be installed in Bentwisch.
if not all OWFs have been done via the so-called Home Market (HM) model. HM and OBZs are
possible in all 4 topology types, but are shown in Figure 3.4 for reference.
Figure 3.6 – Typical hub topology used by TenneT in the North Sea. Sometimes also called modular grid.
When states tender for OWF, the concept of Point-of-Connection (PoC) is used. PoC defini-
tions vary, but here it is the point at which responsibility for ownership and operation of the
electrical system passes from the wind farm to the TSO. Sometimes called Point of Common
12
Public regulation of offshore wind: TSOs’ role
==PAGE:21==
Figure 3.7 – Possible setup for largest scenario (10 GW) for Danish Energy Island in the North Sea[11].
The island is internally connected in a 275/380 kV AC network in order to enable using the island as an
interconnector and to be able to send electricity in different directions. The closest OWFs can connect directly,
but more distant OWFs have to connect via a substation that transforms the voltage to 275 kV AC. The island
is connected via HVDC connections to shore.
Public regulation of offshore wind: TSOs’ role
13
==PAGE:22==
Coupling (PCC). For the wind park developer it is important where the responsibility for devel-
opment changes from developer to TSO. As an example, for Horns Rev 3, the PoC is the offshore
transformer platform, Horns Rev 3. This platform is also established, owned and operated by
Energinet. Please be aware that PoC is not always consistently defined. From an engineering
perspective, a relevant definition may be that PoC is where the total project connects to the on-
shore TSO/DSO network. This thesis has a economic-legal viewpoint and therefore responsibility
for development is relevant.
As a practical example, Figure 3.5 shows the Kriegers Flak Combined Solution, where a new wind
park, Kriegers Flak, was located close to two already existing German wind parks. Energinet and
50Hertz established a solution where Kriegers Flak was electrically connected to Baltic2. This
solution enabled the possibility to use the infrastructure as an import / export solution when
capacity was not used by the wind park. This meant prioritized access for the wind parks. The
PoCs were KFA and KFB, two offshore transformer platforms. Energinet was responsible for the
220 kV land based cable from Bjæverskov continuing into sea cables to KFA/KFB. Energinet was
also responsible for KFA/KFB sea cables to OWF Baltic 2.
The topology of the Danish energy island in the North Sea is a combined topology type. Figure
3.7 shows a schematic example of the largest configuration at 10 GW[11]. The setup consists of
an island with AC transformers that transform electricity from the closest OWFs from 33/66 kV
to 380 kV AC. The 33/66 kV cables are called array cables. The OWFs farthest away from the
island have their own substations transforming electricity from 33/66 kV AC to 275 kV AC. From
these substations to the island are 275 kV AC cables. The island therefore also has 275 kV AC to
380 kV AC transformers. In order to export electricity off the island, converters from 380 kV AC
to 320 kV DC are also on the island. In addition to this general facilities such as housing, helipad,
harbour etc. could also be imagined, but all facilities require layout area. Facilities such as PtX
conversion, energy storage or energy export in pipelines are also potential candidates.
3.2
Offshore gas pipelines in the North Sea
In order to set the expected offshore electrical grid in perspective, it is worth considering the
offshore gas pipeline network in the North Sea. This will be done with examples of a few major
pipelines. See Figure 3.8. All data are from gassco.no.
Zeepipe I runs from the Sleipner field offshore to Zeebrügge in Belgium, and was commissioned
in 1993. Later extensions Zeepipe IIA and IIB run from Kollnes in Norway to Sleipner/Draupner.
These were commissioned in 1996/97. Zeepipe is today (2020) owned by the Gassled partners.
The pipeline capacity is 41 mn scm/d, which corresponds to 19 GW.
Franpipe is a 840 kilometres long natural gas pipeline from the Draupner platform in the North
Sea to the receiving terminal at Port Ouest in Dunkirk, France. The gas transported to France
originates mainly from Sleipner East and Troll Vest gas fields. The pipeline is owned by Gassled
14
Public regulation of offshore wind: TSOs’ role
==PAGE:23==
partners and operated by Gassco. The pipeline was commissioned in 1998. The capacity is 19.6
bn m3/year, which corresponds to 25 GW.
Norpipe is an offshore natural gas pipelines system in the North Sea. It supplies gas from the
Norwegian Ekofisk and associated fields to Germany. The length of the pipeline is 354 kilometres.
The pipeline is owned by Norpipe Oil AS, a consortium which includes ConocoPhillips, Total
Norge, Equinor, Eni Norge, and SDFI. The capacity is 32 mn. scm/day, corresponding to 15 GW.
Europipe I runs from the Sleipner field offshore to Dornum in Germany, and was commissioned
in 1995. Europipe is owned by Gassled partners. The pipeline capacity is 18 bn m3/year, which
corresponds to 23 GW.
Europipe II runs from Kårstø, Norway to Dornum in Germany, and was commissioned in 1999.
Europipe II is owned by Gassled partners. The pipeline capacity is 24 bn m3/year, which corre-
sponds to 30 GW.
The Gassled owners today (2021) are Petoro AS (SDFI) 46.7 %, Sval Energi AS 15.6 %, CapeOmega
26.3 %, Silex Gas Norway AS 6.4 %, Equinor Energy AS 5.0 %.
There are some takeaways from the above examples:
The natural gas pipeline network in the North Sea represents large capacities that are comparable
in capacity to the expected development of offshore electric capacities, and likely even exceed it.
The total network is comprehensive, interconnected, and crosses many national borders.
Much of the infrastructure was built by oil/gas producers/field owners in a bundled way, i.e. co-
ownership of pipelines and production fields. In 2003 Gassled was established, when virtually all
the Norwegian gas transport systems in place at that time were combined into a large new joint
venture. This illustrates that commercial actors in this sector have built offshore infrastructure,
without TSO bodies.
The oil/gas industry has a tradition for risk mitigation using joint ventures, which is why there
are many co-owners in the examples given. These joint ventures spread risks across several firms,
and firms can spread their risk by participating in several joint ventures. There is typically an
operator, which leads the JV and does technical and administrative operation/development. The
involved firms are a mixture of state-owned companies and pure commercial companies.
Public regulation of offshore wind: TSOs’ role
15
==PAGE:24==
MURCHINSON
STATFJORD
VISUND
KVITEBJØRN
GULLFAKS
OSEBERG
BERYL
ALVHEIM
GOLDENEYE
BREAGH
ATLANTIC
HEIMDAL
GRANE
SLEIPNER
EDVARD GRIEG
JOHAN SVERDRUP
GUDRUN
BRAE
VESLEFRIKK
HULDRA
VALEMON
MARTIN LINGE
BRAGE
TROLL
GJOA
Tampen Link
DRAUPNER
BRITANNIA
FORTIES
ELGIN FRANKLIN
EVEREST
REV
AUDREY
W. SOLE
ULA
GYDA
EKOFISK
VALHALL
HOD
LULITA
HARALD
SYD
ARNE
MURDOCH
AMETHYST
TYRA
GALLEON
LANCELOT
LEMAN
MARKHAM
HEWETT
B/13
Bacton
NEL
NEL
NOWAL
N
DEUDAN
RHG
NETRA
Risavika
Skangass
Hamburg
Brunsbüttel LNG
Teesside
Ahlten
h
Leeds
m
ck
Manchester
Oldenburg
Steinbrink
Wardenburg
Bygnes
Karmøy
Haugesund
Stavanger
Bergen
Kollsnes
Egtved
Nybro
S k a g e r r
N o r t h
 S e a
D E
T H E  N E T H E R L A N D S
AMSTERDAM
LONDON
 Kårstø 
Easington
IsleofGrain
St. Fergus
Emden
Krummhörn
Enschede
Oude Statenzijl
Vlieghuis
Balgzand
l k
Julianadorp
Dornum
S
Quarnstedt
Hetlingen
Emsbüren
Bunde
Jemgum
Bunder-Tief
Rehden
Nordlohne
Ellund
Theddlethorpe
Groningen
SIRGE
UTSIRA
VALEMON
TOGI
OGT
SLEIPNER CONDENSATE
STATPIPE
TROLL
ZEEPIPE IIA
ZEEPIPE IIB
FLAGS NLGP
FUKA
VESTERLED
FULMAR
STATPIPE
SAGE
MILLER
BRITANNIA
CATS
SEAL
ZEEPIPE
FRANPIPE
NOGAT
NORPIPE
EUROPIPE
LANGELED SOUTH
SOUTH
LANGELED
LANGELED NORTH
INTERCONNECTOR
BBL
NOGAT
NGT
NGT
EUROPIPE II
EUROPIPE II
BALTIC PIPE
ETF
GTF
NBP
18
14
36
100
109
16
74
201
228
202
301
302
206
406
402
400
401
Figure 3.8 – Offshore gas pipeline network in the North Sea 2021. Map is shown to illustrate an already
existing grid infrastructure in the area - from another sector than electricity. Map source: [18].
16
Public regulation of offshore wind: TSOs’ role
==PAGE:25==
4
Regulatory analysis
The purpose of this chapter is to describe the EU regulatory setup with regards to offshore elec-
tricity transmission and TSOs, especially in relation to their monopoly activities. The primary
regulation is the Clean Energy Package that sets the roles and objectives of TSOs in the EU. The
typical continental TSO role in offshore transmission will be compared with the UK OFTO reg-
ulation and the all-EU upstream gas pipeline regulation. The chapter also touches on PtX, since
it turns out that these aspects should be considered in context with the assessment of a natural
monopoly in offshore transmission activity.
4.1
Literature review
The purpose of the regulatory literature review is to find papers that discuss regulation of offshore
transmission, monopolies, TSOs and their roles, meshed grids, and the North Sea. Most of the
literature within this context are about the potential conflicts in legal jurisdictions being national,
whereas an offshore grid is transnational. Therefore, the most relevant literature is actually the
current legislation as it is. However, I found one relevant paper:
Sunila, Bergaentzlé, Martin and Ekroos (2018) [19] discuss a supra-national TSO to enhance off-
shore wind power development (in the Baltic Sea). Meshed offshore grids are investigated from
a legal perspective. It is assumed that meshed offshore grids provide synergy effects. The legal
jurisdiction in the Economic Exclusive Zone (EEZ) is discussed. In the EEZ, coastal states do
not have full sovereignty, but the national jurisdiction can be declared to partly apply. Other
states have a right to lay cables in a third country’s EEZ under the United Nations Convention
on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) if the cables do not relate to economic activity in the EEZ. This
means that an interconnector can be laid down without consent of the coastal state, with some
limited exceptions, whereas OWF-to-shore cables may need such consent. The paper finds that
in practice, national and EU law are currently applied to offshore interconnectors inside the EU
internal market. When considering OWFs in the EEZ, the coastal state’s and EU jurisdiction is
even clearer. The national TSOs are the key actors in the meshed offshore grid development, as
they have the responsibility to develop the transmissions systems and interconnectors to other
systems under Directive (EU) 2019/944 of 5 June 2019 on common rules for the internal market
for electricity, article 40. The rest of the paper deals with the idea that a supra-national TSO has
legal and regulatory benefits in the form of operation, financing and clear legal basis. The point
about a supra-national TSO follows the general perception that offshore transmission develop-
ment will be conducted by the TSOs, and from this perspective, a supra-national TSO seems a
fair proposal to overcome cross-border issues. But the idea is in contrast to the thinking of this
thesis.
Public regulation of offshore wind: TSOs’ role
17
==PAGE:26==
The take-away from the paper is that it is most relevant to look at EU regulation and national
regulation.
4.2
EU regulation
4.2.1
Clean Energy Package
The main EU electricity sector regulation lies in the Clean Energy Package. The Clean Energy
Package was a package of updated legislation that the European Commission introduced in 2016.
The directives were adopted into legislation in 2018-2019, and some of the content are relevant
in the context of regulation of offshore wind.
The total CEP consisted of:
• Energy Performance of Buildings Directive 2018/844
• The recast Renewable Energy Directive (EU) 2018/2001
• The revised Energy Efficiency Directive (EU) 2018/2002
• Governance of the Energy Union and Climate Action (EU) Regulation 2018/1999
• Regulation on risk-preparedness in the electricity sector (EU) 2019/941
• Regulation establishing a European Union Agency for the Cooperation of Energy Regula-
tors (EU) 2019/942
• Regulation on the Internal Market for Electricity (EU) 2019/943
• Directive on Common Rules for the Internal Market for Electricity (EU) 2019/944
The relevant parts will be reviewed below.
4.2.2
TSOs and interconnectors
The Electricity Directive (EU) 2019/944[20] chapter VI mandates a structural separation between
transmission system operators (TSOs) and activities related to generation, trade and supply. This
applies to the high voltage (HV) and extra high voltage (EHV) networks1, and is commonly
known as unbundling. TSO activities include onshore and offshore electricity transmission and
electricity interconnections. The aim of these rules is to increase competition in the EU energy
market and to prevent possible abuse of market power, by insuring the independence of elec-
tricity and gas transmission services from generation, production, and supply. There are three
options for implementing the unbundling rules into national laws: (1) Either full ownership
unbundling, (2) appointment of an independent system operator (ISO), or (3) an independent
transmission operator (ITO). The first option prevents TSOs from forming part of a vertically in-
tegrated group. The second and third option each allow some degree of vertical integration, but
are only relevant for companies that were vertically integrated on 3 September 2009. It is also
worth noting that directives are not direct applicable law, but has to be translated into national
legislation in each member states in EU.
1In Denmark, Energinet operates cables above 132 kV AC and all DC lines
18
Public regulation of offshore wind: TSOs’ role
==PAGE:27==
The definition of a ’interconnector’ means a transmission line which crosses or spans a border
between Member States and which connects the national transmission systems of the Member
States; cf. article 2 from Regulation (EC) 2019/943.
It is worth considering what the EU does not regulate:
• No regulation on the number of TSOs.
• No regulation on TSOs’ responsibility for certain geographical areas. As example: Ger-
many has 4 electricity TSOs: TenneT, 50Hertz, Amprion, and TransnetBW.
• No direct mentioning of a TSO monopoly, however it is recognized that TSOs should be
unbundled from generation interests and that access to the network happens at regulated
prices.
• No specific regulation of offshore transmission in particular, except interconnectors.
• No specific regulation of energy islands and more complicated offshore topologies than
interconnectors. Cables from an energy island to shore could cross national borders, but
they do not necessarily connect two TSOs, as required in the definition, at least this is not
the main intention of such cable, which is to bring power ashore. This means that such
connections have an unclear regulation.
Many aspects of TSOs and their investments are up to the member states and their national
policies and regulation. This is also the reason why the UK - as a former EU member - could
form their own offshore transmission policy within the framework of EU regulation.
4.2.3
Merchant interconnectors
Interconnectors are multi-user, bidirectional cables connecting bidding zones. Normal intercon-
nectors are owned by TSOs, but there is a special subset of interconnectors, popularly called
merchant interconnectors. These are not owned by TSOs.
These HVDC lines are granted exempt under Regulation (EU) 2019/943, article 64. The exemp-
tion covers articles 19(2+3) of Regulation (EU) 2019/943 and articles 6, 43, 59(7), and 60(1) of
Directive (EU) 2019/944. These provisions exempt such lines from third party access, ownership
unbundling, and regulator governance including tariff approval. This allows for an interconnec-
tor to cover investments through congestion rents from the transmission of electricity between
different markets with different electricity prices. It is the European Commission that grants
such exemptions. As of 2020, eight exemptions have been given, see Table 4.1. Most merchant
interconnectors are member of the European Market Coupling2.
BalticCable AB was in 2019 certified as an independent Transmission Operator (ITO) under the
German Energy Industry Act. Baltic Cable joined the market coupling in 2010, according to Nord
2https://www.arera.it/allegati/docs/16/228-16all.pdf
https://ec.europa.eu/transparency/documents-register/detail?ref=C(2014)9904&lang=en
https://ec.europa.eu/energy/sites/ener/files/documents/2015_106_at_en.pdf
https://www.nordpoolgroup.com/message-center-container/newsroom/exchange-message-list/2019/q4/nord-pool-
welcomes-eleclink-interconnector/
Public regulation of offshore wind: TSOs’ role
19
==PAGE:28==
Interconnector name
Operation from
Member of market coupling
Estlink
2005
yes
BritNed
2011
yes until 2020
Imera East-West
2008
No
Tarvisio-Arnoldstein
2010
yes
ElecLink
2014
yes in 2020
Piemonte-Savoia
2016
yes
Slovenia - Italy (SI-IT)
2016
yes
Baltic Cable
1994
yes, from 2019
Table 4.1 – List of merchant interconnectors as of 1. June 2021. [21]
Pool message no. 28/2010. The UK interconnectors have left the European market coupling due
to Brexit 1 Jan 2021.
4.2.4
Power-to-X
Power-to-X (PtX) represents technologies where power is transformed into other energy carriers
than electricity. The context including the possibility of PtX should be known when evaluating
natural monopolies. PtX is also important to investigate, because if already existing offshore
infrastructures, like natural gas pipelines could be retrofitted and utilized, this should be analysed
in order to possibly save money.
In the ENTSOs’ joint report [22] Power-to-gas is used as an example as shown in Figure 4.1. Here
synthetic methane can be produced via hydrogen created from Power-to-hydrogen technologies
and combined with CO2. Synthetic methane can be injected directly in the gas networks[22].
This could potentially open up for existing natural gas pipelines networks to be used as means
of transport. If this is possible, cost savings are possible, because the pipelines substitute instal-
lation of electric cables. As mentioned before, Dutch gas TSO, Gas Unie, is part of the NSWPH
consortium, see section 2.2 on p. 5.
Power conversion to hydrogen and hydrogen transmission do not yet have a dedicated legislative
framework at European level. It was not part of the latest energy package, see section 4.2.1 on
p. 18. Legislation and regulation for (natural / industrial / chemical) gas infrastructure may be
applicable to power conversion to hydrogen and hydrogen transmission to some extent. But this
does not account for the potential importance of hydrogen in the future energy market as shares
of RES in the energy mix increase[16].
Please remark that the ENTSOs only cover PtG, not more the general PtX. This means that
Power-to-ammonia is not covered. The reason is that ammonia cannot be transported in the
gas infrastructure. This is an example of how the ENTSO organizations have certain limitations
in their role and obligations. European decision makers cannot rely solely on view points from
the ENTSOs.
20
Public regulation of offshore wind: TSOs’ role
==PAGE:29==
Power infrastructure
Gas infrastructure
Electrolysis
Methanation
Industry & 
Mobility
Heating
Power 
generation
H2
H2
CO2
CH4
CH4
Solar
Wind
H2
H2
Figure 4.1 – Joint ENTSOs’ example of how power-to-gas could introduce substitution effects between gas
and power infrastructure [22, p. 126]
A more general look at PtX is given in Figure 5.2 on p. 32.
4.2.5
Upstream gas pipeline regulation
Upstream gas pipeline networks in the EU are regulated by Directive 2009/73/EC of 13 July
2009[23], article 34. Upstream gas pipelines are pipelines running from fields offshore to markets
onshore, like shown in Figure 3.8 on p. 16. In many respects these pipelines can be compared to
offshore electrical infrastructure from OWFs: There is an energy source offshore (wind/oil/gas)
that needs to be transported in a network to market. But the regulation of pipelines and electrical
infrastructure is different.
According to article 34(1), ”Member States shall take the necessary measures to ensure that natural
gas undertakings and eligible customers, wherever they are located, are able to obtain access to up-
stream pipeline networks, including facilities supplying technical services incidental to such access,
in accordance with this Article, except for the parts of such networks and facilities which are used
for local production operations at the site of a field where the gas is produced.” Furthermore article
34(2): ”The access referred to in paragraph 1 shall be provided in a manner determined by the Mem-
ber State in accordance with the relevant legal instruments. Member States shall apply the objectives
of fair and open access, achieving a competitive market in natural gas and avoiding any abuse of a
dominant position, taking into account security and regularity of supplies, capacity which is or can
reasonably be made available, and environmental protection. […]”
This means that it is not required by EU law to separate ownership of gas production and pipelines.
It is rather up to Member States’ national laws.
Public regulation of offshore wind: TSOs’ role
21
==PAGE:30==
The regulation of upstream gas pipelines resembles the regulation of merchant interconnectors
from the electricity sector with respect to no unbundling requirements.
4.3
UK regulation: Offshore transmission model
The UK relies on a competitive and partially integrated approach where the developer of an OWF
bids on developing the wind farm and the transmission asset together. After commissioning, the
offshore transmission asset is re-tendered for operation to third party[24].
The Office of Gas and Electricity Markets (OFGEM) is the UK regulator. OFGEM has since 2009,
when the OFTO regime was invented, been responsible for managing the competitive tender
process through which offshore transmission licences are granted. In most EU countries there is
an OWF developer and a TSO, but the UK also has a third role: ”Offshore Transmission Owner”.
An OFTO licence guarantees revenues to the OFTO over a 20-year period subject to uphold-
ing performance conditions. The period depends on the technical lifetime of the asset, and can
potentially be prolonged.
The purpose of the OFTO regime is to deliver transmission infrastructure to connect offshore
generation, attract new entrants to the sector, and provide best value for money to consumers.
OFGEM expects that granting licences to operate new offshore transmission assets mean that
generators are partnered with the most efficient and competitive players in the market. OFGEM
hopes this results in lower costs and higher standards of service for generators and, ultimately,
consumers.
Figure 4.2 shows the overall planning process for OWFs in the UK, and where the offshore trans-
mission comes into play. ”Pre-tender engagement” is the first step. In this step potential devel-
opers are pre-qualified, and if successful, they are allowed to bid for leasing of offshore areas
for 50 or 60 years. The leasing round winners are chosen by The Crown Estate (TCE) based
on certain merits and the highest bidders are chosen first until the desired capacity is reached.
The third step is consenting, where all permits and licenses are obtained. This is also the step,
where the developer must choose between developing the transmission asset themselves or let a
third party (OFTO) be responsible. So far, all developers have chosen to develop the transmission
assets themselves.
There are 2 main incentives on the developer to minimize the costs of the transmission asset: The
first is that OFGEM undertakes a cost assessment and may disallow costs which it deems have
not been efficiently incurred. The second incentive is that the transmission tariffs are determined
by the cost of the investment, amongst other factors. The developer also has incentives to do his
work properly. If the transmission asset is not reliable, the developer will miss income from sales
of electricity[24].
Before commencing operation of the OWF, the offshore transmission asset will need to be trans-
ferred to an offshore transmission owner (OFTO), as per unbundling requirement in EU legisla-
22
Public regulation of offshore wind: TSOs’ role
==PAGE:31==
START: Pre-tender 
engagement 2Y
Seabed leasing 1Y
Consenting 5Y
Procurement & CfD tender 
2Y
Construction 3Y
Assign transmission asset 
to OFTO
Operation 25Y
Lifetime extension or 
repowering 1Y
Continued operation (if 
viable) 20Y
Decommissioning 1Y
Figure 4.2 – Overall offshore wind farm planning process for UK[25]. The numbers show the typical duration
in years for each step.
tion that the UK has been governed by up until at least 2020. OFGEM therefore tenders for sale
of the asset. OFGEM selects the successful bidder based on its revenue request = Tender Revenue
Stream (TRS). This entitles the OFTO to earn a regulated rate of return on the costs of building
and operating these networks. The revenue stream will be paid to the OFTO by the National Grid
Electricity System Operator (NGESO) in its role as National Electricity Transmission System Op-
erator (NETSO). The terms and conditions for the OFTO include bonuses and fines related to the
availability of the asset during its life span.
The process for deciding on the final transfer value has 4 steps, see Figure 4.3. First, the developer
sends a first template to OFGEM before final investment decision. With this, he is able to take
OFGEM’s comments to the template into consideration before commencing. When the project
is nearly finished, the developer can gather his costs and argue towards OFGEM on the reasons
for costs. Finally, OFGEM benchmarks the development project with other projects, e.g. by the
use of statistical methods like shown in [26].
In the ”OFTO build” model, the OFTO will begin constructing the asset directly, and no transfer
takes place.
Figure 4.4 shows conceivable asset types. The low voltage (typically 33/66kV) network is owned
and developed by the wind farm developer, whereas the OFTO owns the offshore HV (>132 kV)
transmission cables and substation platforms. Even some onshore cables and substations can be
Public regulation of offshore wind: TSOs’ role
23
==PAGE:32==
Figure 4.3 – Process for deciding on final transfer value for OFTO asset[25].
owned by the OFTO. The KPMG report from 2014 [24] reported that at that point in time, most
OFTO assets were point-to-point, but there are no restrictions on the topology of the OFTO
assets.
As long as the OFTO has licence to do so, he is responsible for the maintenance and operation
of the transmission asset. The OFTO also gets a lease, which for the tender round 6 (TR6) is 50
years.
Figure 4.4 – The typical OFTO Assets in the UK[24]
There are in early 2021 more than 20 OFTOs representing a value of 4.6 bn GBP, according to
OFGEM’s home page. OFGEM has recently acknowledged [27] that projects are becoming larger
and more complex with developers using newer technology. The fairly simple, radial point-to-
point connections seen so far are likely in the future to be challenged by more complex topologies.
This means that OFGEM in its assessment of transfer value has to consider innovative technolo-
gies, co-location of e.g. storage, and anticipatory investments. OFGEM’s approach so far is that
developers should argue for their choice of transmission setup, and OFGEM will take appropriate
concerns in setting the transfer value.
24
Public regulation of offshore wind: TSOs’ role
==PAGE:33==
4.4
Danish examples of regulation
Since the EU regulation in the case of directives need to be translated into national legislation,
it is of interest to see how this is done. I have summarised the essential, relevant parts from 3
Danish laws. It turns out that there is some flexibility in transforming EU directives to national
legislation:
4.4.1
Danish law for the TSO
Energinet is specifically regulated in ”Bekendtgørelse af lov om Energinet”[28], where it is stated in
article 4a that Energinet must obtain approval from the Danish Minister for Climate, Energy and
Utilities if Energinet wishes to change or construct new facilities in the territorial sea or the EEZ
of Denmark. The Minister also decides on the articles of association (vedtægter) for Energinet.
Energinet is not strictly limited by law to activities in Denmark, but activities in other countries’
EEZ would require permit from such other country.
In essence, Energinet does not have a legal monopoly on electricity transmission, but rather a
favourable position as a State owned company. The Minister may possibly also prefer Energinet
to other would-be transmission companies, but this is unknown. The favourable position for
Energinet is especially true onshore, since it will be more difficult for would-be competitors to
document the need for alternative transmission networks onshore.
4.4.2
Danish law on electricity supply
”Bekendtgørelse af lov om elforsyning”[29] regulates establishment of offshore transmission net-
works in Denmark’s territorial sea and exclusive economic zone. Here it is stated that a permit
is required from the Danish Minister for climate, energy and utilities. The requester must doc-
ument sufficient need, that the purpose is security of supply, competition or for the benefit of
renewables. The requester must also let Energinet have access to the net on reasonable terms, if
the offshore assets are connected to the main transmission network in Denmark - however not
to internal cables to wind parks.
Transmissions networks between 100 kV og 200 kV and interconnectors to other countries below
100 kV that are available to Energinet can only be sold to the Danish State and Energinet must
be notified.
Transmission and network activities require a permit. This can only be given to sufficiently able
companies, cf. article 19. A permit is granted for 20 years. Energinet does not need a permit.
Article 19 regulates that there must be ownership unbundling from production and trading ac-
tivities[29].
According to article 5, section 29, ”Transmissionsnet” are defined as: ”Kollektivt elforsyningsnet,
som har til formål at transportere elektricitet fra produktionssteder til et overordnet center i distri-
butionsnettet eller at forbinde det med andre sammenhængende elforsyningsnet”. Here, it is worth
Public regulation of offshore wind: TSOs’ role
25
==PAGE:34==
noticing that non-collective networks are not transmission systems in the sense of the Danish
law. The concept of ”collective” net does not come from EU legislation.
4.4.3
Danish law on net connection
”Bekendtgørelse af lov om nettilslutning”[30]3 is a newly updated Danish regulation. It states in
article 5 that for OWFs established after 1 July 2021, the costs for internal collection net until PoC
onshore are to be held by the developer. There is no requirement for unbundling the internal net.
4.5
German example of regulation
In Germany, several TSOs can develop offshore infrastructure in the same offshore area. As an
example, TenneT and Amprion are both developing infrastructure in the North Sea. The BorWin
4 project is run by Amprion, where the BorWin 6 project is run by TenneT. Both projects are
connecting OWFs in the North Sea. Due to the TenneT control area not being able to absorb
all forthcoming production, Amprion’s project will take the electricity via a long onshore cable
through TenneT’s area to Amprion’s area. The regulatory basis for this is §17d section 1 of the
”Energiewirtschaftsgesetz” that says that it is the TSO, whose grid the offshore connection is
connected to, that is responsible for offshore development.
3Published 14 June 2021.
26
Public regulation of offshore wind: TSOs’ role
==PAGE:35==
5
Economic analysis
The previous chapter gave an overview of how EU regulation regulates TSOs with respect to
offshore transmission and unbundling. This chapter will investigate the same subject from an
economic perspective. There are sections on theories of economies of scale, natural monopolies,
and congestion rent. Merchant interconnectors and PtX are also discussed. Data are analysed to
look for economies of scale for UK OFTO cases, the Danish Energy island, and German average
costs. Finally, results from a recent paper comparing UK and German costs are relayed.
5.1
Literature review
I have searched for literature within the areas of natural monopolies, merchant vs TSO intercon-
nectors, meshed grids, and costs of developing offshore transmission assets.
Baumol (1977) [31] provides the current formal definition of a natural monopoly. He defines a
natural monopoly as ”[a]n industry in which multi-firm production is more costly than production
by a monopoly”. Baumol linked the definition to the mathematical concept of sub additivity;
specifically, the cost function. Baumol also noted that for a firm producing a single product, scale
economies were a sufficient condition but not a necessary condition to prove sub additivity.
Greer (2012) [32]states that the theory of natural monopolies implies that certain markets are
“naturally monopolistic,” which means that due to the presence of high fixed costs, the average
cost per produced unit declines with increases in output. This means that efficiency is obtained
when there is only one supplier. Examples exist in public utilities such as electricity, gas, tele-
phone and water services. The initial investment in onshore meshed electricity grids is significant
and the cost of connecting the marginal user is lower for the incumbent TSO. Any would-be com-
petitor starting from scratch would have to build his own network in parallel to the incumbent’s
network. Apart from the costs, land use may also be restricted. The conventional conclusion
is then that onshore TSO services are best supplied by a single operator in an geographic area.
Some monopolies also arise from barriers to entry. This can be patents, large start-up costs or
limited access to resources. Clearly, access to land is a restricted resource onshore.
Koivisto, Gea-Bermúdez and Sørensen (2020) [33] run an economic model for Europe in Balmorel
that takes technologies, prices, transmission network, electricity production etc. into considera-
tion. The transmission network is both exogenous in the form of already decided infrastructure,
but the model also endogenously find the optimal network structure. There is a radial and a
meshed scenario. The scenarios are differentiated by the allowed network structure in the net-
work optimization. The North Sea region is modelled in detail. The study finds that Germany
will be the country with most hub connected OWFs and with most difference between the radial
Public regulation of offshore wind: TSOs’ role
27
==PAGE:36==
and the meshed scenario. The study also finds that radial transmission lines provide a large share
of country-to-country transmission capacity, also in the meshed case.
Girard, Kemfert, and Stoll (2020) [34] has collected transmission cost data for 10 German and 21
UK OWFs projects. German data is based on estimations. Baltic Sea projects are excluded in an
attempt to have similar geological conditions for projects. The paper also corrects for stricter
environmental rules in the Wadden Sea, German use of HVDC, and longer German cable routes,
and lower WACC for German TSOs. The article calculates transmission LCOE and finds that Ger-
man costs are on average 10.47 EUR/MWh more expensive than UK OWF transmission projects.
The article discusses the role of the regulatory setup in two dimensions: degree of competition
and degree of integration. The article suggests that the UK competitive model (OFTO, see 4.3 on
p. 22) puts more cost pressure on developers than the German setup where the monopoly TSO
is responsible.
Gómez (2013) [35] argues that there are huge economies of scale in onshore electricity transmis-
sion. The main argument is that going up in transmission voltage reduces the number of needed
lines and at the same time costs go down per km. The use of several lines is therefore uneco-
nomical (p. 261-64). In addition to this, the duplication, or multiplication, of transmission grids
would be unthinkable in terms of cost, land use and environmental impact. However, the book
does not cover offshore transmission.
Dismukes and Upton (2015) [36] investigates economies of scale in OWFs. Data for costs, year of
completion, capacity, water depth, and distance to shore are evaluated in an econometric model.
41 OWFs from 1991 to 2012 in a variety of Danish1, Swedish, Belgic, Irish, and German OWFs
are evaluated. The article finds consistent evidence of approximately constant returns to scale
for the OWFs in the study.
Xiang, Merlin, and Green (2016) [37] establishes cost functions for HVDC and HVAC (and HV
low frequency) for offshore wind power. Functions are established based on distance. The paper
compares 0.6 GW and 1.4 GW scenarios. In both cases, optimal number of cables and types are
chosen based on distance, voltage and capacity.
The PROgress on Meshed HVDC Offshore Transmission Networks (PROMOTioN) project is an
EU funded project with the aim of making offshore HVDC grids more sustainable, reliable and
economical. Several DTU authors have in 2016 written a synthesis of all available technical
knowledge regarding HVDC meshed grids[38]. It is mentioned that a meshed grid is more robust
against single lines breaking down, so that the certainty of getting electricity ashore is greater.
Furthermore, it is concluded: ”Firstly, it is unlikely that the final solution consists of a single large
interconnected offshore grid: roadmaps usually come up with several offshore grids not connected
together by DC branches. Secondly, complex offshore topologies (i.e. radial multi-terminal and
meshed grids) appear to be cost-efficient only for scenarios considering both a high offshore wind
1Even Vindeby is included
28
Public regulation of offshore wind: TSOs’ role
==PAGE:37==
generating capacity and numerous offshore hubs to collect this energy (geographical spreading).
Otherwise, purely radial configurations stay the most economical way to collect wind energy. It
must also be noted that offshore mixed AC/DC grids can be relevant from an economic point of view
in some cases. Finally, the economical advantage of complex offshore topologies such as radial multi-
terminal and meshed grids can only be demonstrated when the overall grid structure is optimized.”
A report [17] made for the EC finds that most offshore transmission infrastructure is going to
be radial, even when allowing for meshed networks in optimisation studies. The ratios between
radial and meshed networks are not quantified.
Knops and de Jong (2005) [39] compares TSO and merchant interconnectors in the European
electricity system. The authors conclude that merchant interconnectors should only be allowed
if they are overall beneficial to competition and market integration. M.I. should be restricted to
HVDC, and parts of the capacity should be available to the market. M.I. should not constitute
or contribute to a dominant position in the connected supply markets. There is also a warning
against having ”Trojan horses” that are working for price differences between bidding zones.
5.2
Theoretical considerations
5.2.1
Economies of scale and marginally produced unit
An industry is said to have economies of scale when average costs are reduced with increased
production. It is generally accepted that onshore transmission is an industry with economies
of scale [35]. Table 5.1 shows how average costs of transmitting 2400 MW are best served by
a single line and choosing a voltage level of 765kV (US data). Choosing lower levels of voltage
would require more lines, which would be more expensive and also require more land. There is
a factor 3.5 reduction in costs by going up in transmission voltage.
765kV
500kV
345kV
Capacity per single-circuit line (MW)
2400
901
390
Required number of lines
1
3
6
Average investment cost (mn EUR/km)
1.6
4.3
5.6
Table 5.1 – Onshore AC transmission - example of economies of scale[35, p. 262]
The assessment of whether offshore transmission activity is a natural monopoly or not, requires
that the marginal unit produced is defined, together with the time scale and location of produc-
tion. There is only one ”product” in electricity transmission: electricity. The end consumer would
care about the marginal kWh used at his residence. Such a definition would be in line with the
classic theory of natural monopolies of local telephone companies. However, such definition is
not appropriate for the subject of this thesis. The subject is the development of production ca-
pacity offshore. This means that the time scale is the investment horizon, and therefore several
years. The location is best defined as the point of connection in the main onshore grid, where
Public regulation of offshore wind: TSOs’ role
29
==PAGE:38==
also the wholesale market takes place. The unit could be either MWh produced or MW capacity.
MW or MWh may not matter much, since in the investment horizon, one would expect that the
cost of producing the marginal MWh is 8760 times the cost of increasing the marginal production
capacity in MW.
Some texts mention that there are economies of scale ”in relation to sea cable length”[26, p. 51]
or ”We have used a squared term for weight to test whether the data indicates an existence of
economies of scale in the construction of platforms.” [26, p. 34] or ”economies of scale in trans-
former capacity” [26, p. 30]. These parameters are a means to reach the end goal of producing
energy by the use of OWFs and transport this in a meaningful way to point of connection. Longer
cables, heavier platforms or stronger transformers are beneficial, if they enable higher produc-
tion of energy. Longer cables could e.g. enable OWFs harvesting a better wind resource farther
offshore, but may also be needed simply because of the location of the OWF.
5.2.2
Monopolies in the electricity market
In addition to the analysis of natural monopolies, it is relevant to mention conventional monop-
olies. A monopoly is defined to exist when a specific company is the only supplier to a market.
See e.g. [40]. As examples, onshore transmission is a monopoly, one for each TSO area. Other
than this, monopolies in offshore wind are less easy to pin-point, because time horizon, areas,
definition of markets, ownership structure and so forth come into consideration.
In the bigger picture, all generators that are part of the EMC are in competition with one another.
Exactly how many generators there are in the EMC is a confidential number2. But, there are 27
EU countries in 2021, and 21 countries are in the market coupling as of 20213. Each country has
”many” generators, so it is fair to conclude that there are ”many” generators in competition with
one another via the market coupling, and this is part of the objective of the EMC.
The choice of time horizon also comes into play. There could be a monopoly or an area dominated
by one supplier in the short run, but in the long run, new transmission lines or new generators
could remove such monopolies / market dominance. In relation to the EC plan of 300 GW offshore
wind, this could be achieved by e.g. 300 OWFs at 1 GW each, and radially connected to onshore.
Onshore, replication of the network is infeasible, but offshore replication of several export cables
or interconnectors lines into the onshore network is not only feasible, it is actually planned to
happen.
Some of these 300 OWFs may cluster into energy hubs / islands. These could lead to market
dominance in areas, especially if the hub is operated as one entity. There are at least 3 energy is-
lands on the table right now: NSWPH, the Danish energy island in the North Sea, and Bornholm.
These hubs would also be in competition with each other.
2Due to DA electricity exchanges being in competition with each other
3https://www.entsoe.eu/network_codes/cacm/implementation/sdac/
30
Public regulation of offshore wind: TSOs’ role
==PAGE:39==
5.2.3
Theoretical cost estimations
To analyse natural monopolies in offshore transmission, it is relevant to look at cost functions.
Figure 5.1 show how AC and DC connection costs compare in two setups: 0.6 GW and 1.4 GW.
This is a theoretical calculation, where, for each distance, the optimal choice of cable types and
number of cables is chosen[37]. The curves cross at about 80-100 km, below which AC is least
costly, and above where HVDC is least costly. Since there are two curves for each technology 0.6
GW and 1.4 GW can also be compared. Here it can be seen that HVAC costs are practically the
same per km per MW no matter the scale. HVDC on the other hand is circa 1.0 GBP per km per
MW less costly when going to 1.4 GW. This can around 33% when going to the farthest distances.
This corresponds to a reduction factor of 1.33. Figure 5.1 therefore indicates that there seems to
be little, if none, economies of scale for HVAC, but HVDC do show slight economies of scale.
Figure 5.1 – Estimated offshore transmission CAPEX costs. For HVAC the included elements are: Offshore
step-up transformer plant and platform, cables and compensation, onshore step-down transformer plant,
transformer and cable losses. Costs included for for HVDC: Offshore converter station and platform, cables,
onshore converter station, offshore AC/DC converter losses, cable losses, and onshore DC/AC converter losses.
Data are from paper[37] from 2016 and in £. The 80-100 km point is seen, above which HVDC is preferable.
5.2.4
The role of PtX
The classic monopoly theory assumes a technologically stable environment, which is not always
the case. The telephone network is a good example: Technological development has provided
mobile phones, Internet communications, shift of focus to software, etc. This means that even
though economies of scale in local telephony at one point in time have made the optimal industry
structure to be that of a monopoly, that situation has been overrun by technological development.
Similar considerations could be made regarding offshore wind. It is fairly certain that for the time
being, the cheapest, green energy production is offshore wind and solar PV. This has been shown
in many studies, e.g. [1]. Offshore wind is also a mature technology that has given gigawatt scale
energy production for around 10 years. Offshore wind will of course replace or out-compete
Public regulation of offshore wind: TSOs’ role
31
==PAGE:40==
Ammonia 
process
O2
Power
Water
H2
Various fuel 
processes
Bio 
crude 
oil
Ammonia
NH4
fertilizers
Methanol, 
DME, petrol 
etc
N2
CO2
Heat
H2
O2
Organic 
waste
Heat
Power
Methane
CH4
Combustion
Heat
CO2
Kinetic 
energy
Bio refinery
Combustion
Direct H2
use
H2
Heat
Kinetic 
energy
Electrolysis
Methanation
Figure 5.2 – Examples of Power-to-X: Wind power is converted to electricity that is converted to hydrogen
that is then further converted. [11]
conventional electricity production. Other than this, it is less clear, exactly how and where the
”new” energy should be spent. It is not a given that the energy should be transported to shore
and consumed as electricity.
Figure 5.2 shows examples of how wind power via electrolysis can produce hydrogen that can
then be used in various processes to produce e.g. oil, methane, ammonia to name a few. Hydrogen
can also be used directly in e.g. hydrogen-powered cars or other combustion based engines.
For the discussion of a natural monopoly in offshore electricity transmission, these alternative
energy carriers mean that even though there may or may not be a natural monopoly in electricity
transmission, the overall analysis of optimal energy carrier should always be conducted.
5.2.5
Tender neutrality level towards energy carrier
With reference to the PtX section above, I argued that a fundamental choice of energy carrier
should be conducted on an equal basis between feasible alternatives. Therefore, public authori-
ties’ tenders’ neutrality towards choice of energy carrier is of interest.
First of all, since it is not offshore wind as such that is a goal, but rather GHG reductions. Offshore
wind happens to be the preferred choice presently due to costs. Secondly, the energy sector
32
Public regulation of offshore wind: TSOs’ role
==PAGE:41==
is seeing innovation with PtX, storage, etc. which means that setting too strict technological
terms in a tender could potentially be counterproductive. Thirdly, whether offshore transmission
activity is a natural monopoly or not, clearly depends on what is being transported and by whom.
State support for offshore wind energy is often tied together with electricity being bound to be
delivered to the supporting state’s onshore grid. In this way there is a non-neutrality with regards
to delivery point and energy carrier for offshore tenders. There is no EU regulation stating that
it should be so, rather this is a national choice, and/or based on national legislation.
Authorities have to strike a balance between being able to control the tender and freeing up
options for choice of technology. Too many degrees of freedom could introduce problems in
other areas of regulation, such as municipality planning, environmental considerations, offshore
spatial planning. As an example, offshore wind tenders often include a pre-investigation and
reservation of certain areas in advance.
Depending on the level of tender neutrality, TSOs may also be influenced. It may be easier for a
TSO to conduct planning, if there is certainty on the PoC and technology of a given tender.
5.2.6
Merchant interconnectors
The regulation of merchant interconnectors were presented in the regulatory chapter, see section
4.2.3 on p. 19. It is relevant that merchant interconnectors represent private investors that seek
to profit from price differences between bidding zones. To the investor, an interconnector is
an option on price differences. Users of the cable can be multiple (the ”market”) and flow is
bidirectional.
Figure 5.3 shows the economics of the decision on capacity for an interconnector. The demand
in the high-price bidding zone, B, and the supply curve in the exporting low-price bidding zone,
A. In the case of limited capacity (푐퐴→퐵) for export from A to B, the congestion rent to the owner
of the interconnector is shown in the orange square area. In this case, the capacity also brings
consumer and producer surplus represented by the white triangles on top and below the orange
square area. There could be even more surplus to society if the capacity was 푐′
퐴→퐵. However,
that level of capacity is not optimal for the merchant interconnector that in this case would have
zero congestion rent, i.e., zero profit.
The interpretation of this is that merchant interconnectors are likely to invest less than socio-
economically optimal in capacity[41]. This is the reason why most EU member states let TSOs
develop interconnectors, and why merchant interconnectors are the exception. When the invest-
ment in an interconnector has been done, whether by TSO or merchant, the operation is often the
same, since most merchant interconnectors are part of the European market coupling, thereby
maximising socio-economic welfare. See Figure 4.1 on p. 20. However, some merchant intercon-
nectors offer explicit capacity instead of being part of the market coupling. This is normally not
as efficient as the optimization of the market coupling.
Public regulation of offshore wind: TSOs’ role
33
==PAGE:42==
Capacity from
BZ A to B [kWh]
p [EUR/kWh]
Demand curve
BZ B
Supply curve
BZ A
No 
congestion
Limited 
capacity
Congestion
rent
pB
pA
cA→B
Congestion
cost
c’A→B
Figure 5.3 – Illustration of how interconnector capacity - in the non-hybrid form - influences profits and the
capacity’s value to society. Congestion costs are the socio-economic loss from not having full capacity. Graph
from [41, p.8]
But what about hybrid offshore assets? These are offshore assets where the cables serve both as
export cables for an OWF and as an interconnector. See Types 3 and 4 in Figure 3.3 and Figure
3.4 on p. 11/11. The owner of the OWF has an interest in capacity being sufficient to allow him
to export the full production capacity to market. As an example, all OFTO capacities are set at
the OWF capacities. The question is whether a merchant hybrid interconnector would invest in
more or less capacity, if the investor owns an OWF connected to the asset than if it were a pure
merchant interconnector with no OWF?
It is not straightforward to answer this question, it would require economic modelling. Such
analysis would depend on a range of factors: market setup (offshore bidding zone or home mar-
ket), whether the hybrid interconnector is owned by the OWF owner, and possibly more. It could
be interesting to run Balmorel-type models with private profit optimization and compare with
socio-economic optimization, in both cases with hybrid assets included. I will not pursue this
route, due to the size of such analysis.
However, I do find it probable, that since a hybrid merchant interconnector co-optimizes OWF
production and interconnector capacities, the problem of under-investment in capacity would
be less in the hybrid case than in the pure interconnector case, especially if the OWF is also the
owner of the transmission assets.
Finally, merchant interconnectors do raise some other concerns: A) TSOs may develop an in-
terconnector that is not relying on price differences, but instead improve security of supply. B)
Merchant investors are economic agents that do not work for price convergence between zones
in the electricity market. Such investors may work against other interconnectors or other ac-
34
Public regulation of offshore wind: TSOs’ role
==PAGE:43==
tions that seek to reduce price differences. C) Care must taken regarding the creation of dominant
positions in the market.
5.3
Data collection of transmission costs
In evaluating whether offshore transmission activities are a natural monopoly, it would be ideal
to have a large dataset of costs that would enable estimation of a cost function. This has proven
difficult for several reasons. Marine cables and offshore structures are bespoke assets that are
custom built to the project at hand and often take several years to build. So data has to come
from the developer / TSO. But annual financial reports from TSOs are not disclosing project costs
across multiple years.
I have contacted Energinet, Svenska Kraftnät, Bundesnetzagentur, ACM, and TenneT DE, but
have only been able to get a little above and over what was already public. It cannot be ruled out
that a closer dialogue with these TSOs could have gotten more information. Language also comes
into play. There are reports in French, Dutch, German or Danish with some relevant information,
e.g. [42], [43], [44], [45], [46], [47]. There could likely be more information in national languages
than this, but it requires knowledge of the language to find it.
Energinet publishes ex ante business cases, where the expected costs are deleted from public
view (crossed out). This was the case for Anholt, Kriegers Flak, Horns Rev 3, and also for in-
terconnectors. This is likely done not to set a target price for potential bidders in advance of
Energinet tendering for construction. This is understandable, but Energinet could publish full
business cases or actual realized costs post tender / post construction, perhaps with a lag of e.g.
1 year. If this is not enough, there could be a case of severe competition problems in the cable
sector, that need to be tackled much more profoundly. Luckily, on 8 May 2018 a member of the
Danish Parliament in the standing committee on Energy, Utility and Climate asked the Minister
for Energy, Utility and Climate what the actual costs have been on Anholt, Kriegers Flak, and
Horns Rev 3, which was then answered by Energinet [47].
Since TSOs are mostly publicly owned enterprises it would be fair to call for greater transparency
and publication of projects and costs. A practice of publishing actual project costs could enhance
the public’s insight into transmission activity, and would enable the public to evaluate TSOs’
conduct. An ideal situation would be an EU database of project costs.
However, there are good and firm data from the UK. This is due to the OFTO regime, where the
developer sells the OFTO asset in a process, regulated by OFGEM. See section 4.3 on p. 22. This
means that UK offshore development data from circa 2009 can be found at OFGEM’s homepage.
The Transfer Prices (initial, indicative and final) are published, and can be used for comparison.
Public regulation of offshore wind: TSOs’ role
35
==PAGE:44==
5.4
Assessment of economies of scale - UK OFTO assets
5.4.1
UK Data collection
Data for 26 of the newest and largest OWFs in the UK has been collected from OFGEM [48]. Every
time OFGEM decides on a final transfer value (FTV), a formal decision is made and published.
These documents contain a description of the assets being transferred, no. of cables, no. of
substations, cable distances and the cost in GBP of the year. The full data set is shown in A.1.
OFGEM does not split the costs in onshore and offshore costs. Therefore, the table includes
calculations, where the onshore part has been estimated from key figures given in [45].
A distinction is made between cable route length and cable length. The cable length is the number
of cables times cable route length. Not all sources are clear on this point, e.g. in reporting costs
per km. In a few instances, OFGEM documents do not have the full data, e.g. on cable lengths.
In this case, other sources like press announcements from Nexam, NKT, ABB etc. have filled the
gaps. In OFGEM reports, costs are provided in running GBP. All costs are therefore corrected via
UK CPI data to 2020-GBP.
Transmission connection of OWFs entail both offshore work and onshore work. The OWF de-
veloper has in all instances built both the offshore and onshore part. The search for economies
of scale might therefore as well include the complete infrastructure part of a OWF project.
The regression model is:
푦= 훽0 + 훽1 · 푥1 + 훽2 · 푥2 + 훽3 · 푥3 + 훽4 · 푥4 + 휖
(5.1)
where the dependent variable is 푦= FTV per capacity [2020-GBP/kW], consisting of subsea
cables, substations, onshore cables, onshore work, and project management. The independent
variables are: 푥1 = Nominal OWF capacity [GW], 푥2 = HVAC Voltage, 푥3 = No. of platforms and
substations, 푥4 = Total cable length [km].
The regression analysis has been done in Python and is shown in Figure 5.4. Nominal OWF
capacity, Voltage, and Cable total length are all not significant (P>|t|)>0.05. The No. of platforms
and substations is the only significant independent variable together with the constant. So, a little
surprisingly, Cable total distance does not influence the FTV per capacity significantly. HVAC
(substation-to-shore) Voltage level does not influence FTV per capacity, either.
Removing the insignificant independent variables leaves the final regression to be as shown
in Figure 5.5. It then turns out that No. of platforms and substations is not significant either
(P>|t|)>0.05. The conclusion is therefore that the FTV per capacity is constant with statistical
significance.
36
Public regulation of offshore wind: TSOs’ role
==PAGE:45==
OLS Regression Results
==============================================================================
Dep. Variable:
FTV per capacity
R-squared:
0.412
Model:
OLS
Adj. R-squared:
0.300
Method:
Least Squares
F-statistic:
3.677
Date:
Tue, 06 Jul 2021
Prob (F-statistic):
0.0202
Time:
08:51:51
Log-Likelihood:
-166.18
No. Observations:
26
AIC:
342.4
Df Residuals:
21
BIC:
348.7
Df Model:
4
Covariance Type:
nonrobust
====================================================================================================
coef
std err
t
P>|t|
[0.025
0.975]
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
const
730.3116
174.907
4.175
0.000
366.573
1094.050
Nominal OWF capacity
309.2865
383.458
0.807
0.429
-488.158
1106.731
Voltage
0.5657
1.297
0.436
0.667
-2.132
3.264
No. of platforms and substations
-213.0462
78.513
-2.714
0.013
-376.323
-49.769
Cable total length
0.8242
0.746
1.105
0.282
-0.728
2.376
==============================================================================
Omnibus:
9.117
Durbin-Watson:
2.328
Prob(Omnibus):
0.010
Jarque-Bera (JB):
9.732
Skew:
0.719
Prob(JB):
0.00770
Kurtosis:
5.629
Cond. No.
2.82e+03
==============================================================================
Figure 5.4 – Results from the first run of the multiple regression analysis
OLS Regression Results
==============================================================================
Dep. Variable:
Cost per capacity
R-squared:
0.001
Model:
OLS
Adj. R-squared:
-0.041
Method:
Least Squares
F-statistic:
0.01299
Date:
Tue, 06 Jul 2021
Prob (F-statistic):
0.910
Time:
08:54:41
Log-Likelihood:
-173.08
No. Observations:
26
AIC:
350.2
Df Residuals:
24
BIC:
352.7
Df Model:
1
Covariance Type:
nonrobust
====================================================================================================
coef
std err
t
P>|t|
[0.025
0.975]
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
const
738.9397
96.529
7.655
0.000
539.715
938.165
No. of platforms and substations
6.9044
60.586
0.114
0.910
-118.138
131.947
==============================================================================
Omnibus:
3.371
Durbin-Watson:
1.403
Prob(Omnibus):
0.185
Jarque-Bera (JB):
1.927
Skew:
0.275
Prob(JB):
0.381
Kurtosis:
4.215
Cond. No.
5.39
==============================================================================
Figure 5.5 – Results from second run of the multiple regression analysis
The graph shown in Figure 5.6 illustrates the linear relationship between capacity and cost. The
graph shows increasing FTV per capacity, i.e., decreasing economies of scale. However, this is
not statistically significant.
5.5
Assessment of economies of scale - Danish island and
German costs
5.5.1
Danish energy island in the North Sea
The main idea behind the Danish energy islands is that collecting several OWF to a hub reduces
the amount of cables compared with the alternative of connecting all OWFs radially. So, the
whole purpose of an island is to create economies of scale.
However, the islands do more than this, they are also planned to be hybrid, i.e., including in-
terconnectors to other countries than Denmark. They are also farther away from shore than
Public regulation of offshore wind: TSOs’ role
37
==PAGE:46==
0
200
400
600
800
1.000
1.200
1.400
0,0
0,2
0,4
0,6
0,8
1,0
1,2
1,4
OFTO FTV per OWF capacity  [2020-GBP/kW]
OWF capacity [GW]
Figure 5.6 – UK OFTO average costs per output: Final Transfer Values (FTV) per OWF capacity as a function
of OWF capacity.
previous Danish OWFs, which is needed due to the size of the spatial area needed, and to collect
the best possible wind resource at the lowest possible water depth.
All these parameters complicate the analysis of economies of scale, especially the inclusion of
interconnectors, since this implies that a welfare economic analysis be made, possibly compar-
ing with the alternative of making separate interconnectors and radially connected OWFs. As
presented in the literature review, several generic analyses have been made with such purpose,
but to my knowledge, there is no specific report on the Danish energy islands comparing with
Danish alternatives. So, I cannot answer whether the Danish energy islands in practice (in their
anticipated form) are going to create economies of scale.
5.5.2
German costs in the North Sea
The German TSOs have published very little about their costs for offshore transmission develop-
ment. I have succeeded to find two TYNDP projects4 where German TSOs have published costs,
and one document[44], where the 4 German TSOs publish average costs for the North Sea and
the Baltic Sea. Even then, only the 320 kV DC and the 155 kV AC cable systems are based on
historic costs, whereas the 525 kV systems are forecasts.
The 320 kV DC cable systems can transport around 1 GW[49]. This means that DC 320 kV are
2.0 mn EUR/km/GW, using Table 5.2. 525 kV cable systems can transport around 2.6 GW, this
4https://tyndp.entsoe.eu/tyndp2018/projects/projects/192
38
Public regulation of offshore wind: TSOs’ role
==PAGE:47==
Part
Cost
Unit
AC Cable system 155 kV
1.5
mn EUR/km
DC Station 320 kV
1.0
mn EUR/MW
DC station 525 kV
0.75
mn EUR/MW
DC Cable system 320 kV
2.0
mn EUR/km
DC cable systems (offshore) 525 kV
4.0
mn EUR/km
DC cable systems (onshore) 525 kV
6.5
mn EUR/km
Table 5.2 – Average German costs (primarily TenneT) in the North Sea 2021. All DC cable costs per km are incl.
metallic return conductor. Cable costs are total cost for delivery, purchase, route planning and installation.
DC station costs are for onshore and offshore stations in total.
gives 1.5 mn EUR/km/GW offshore and 2.5 mn EUR/km/GW onshore, again using Table 5.2. DC
stations at 525 kV are cheaper per MW than 320 kV systems.
Combining the cable and station costs means that economies of scale can to some degree be
realised, but it is not for certain, and especially if 525 kV DC cables have long routes onshore,
there is likely not economies of scale in total.
5.6
Assessment of access to limited resources
Another check needed to evaluate whether offshore activity is a natural monopoly is to look at
access to limited resources, which is done below.
The TSO NSWPH consortium consisting of TenneT (NL/DE), Gasunie (NL), Energinet (DK) has
had the company Witteveen+Bos Raadgevende ingenieurs B.V. write a report on planning and
costs[50]. The report mentions that the North Sea is used for many different purposes, such as
shipping, military exercises, fisheries and sand mining. Only approximately 3% of the suitable
space remains available for OWFs (14,000 km2), if all used areas are excluded. The remaining
space can host 47-84 GW, depending on the used power density. The report assumes in the base
scenario 3.6 MW/km2. The report concludes that a co-utilization approach will be necessary in
the future. E.g. OWFs around oil and gas platforms. It is also possible to increase the power
density, in fact the report finds that values between 6-14 MW/km2 are optimal, when looking at
cable lengths and wake losses together.
In search for whether offshore grid development is a natural monopoly or not, with regards to
access to a limited resource, it seems fair to conclude - for the North Sea - that this is not the case.
Although 3% of the North Sea area is perhaps a surprisingly low number, it still allows two-digit
GW capacities, a scale that is much bigger than current installed OWFs. It also seems that there
is a great flexibility with regards to co-utilization of areas and choice of power density.
Public regulation of offshore wind: TSOs’ role
39
==PAGE:48==
5.7
Cost comparison of offshore transmission developments:
UK, DK, DE, NL
The next question is then, if differences can be found in costs between the UK approach and
the other countries’ approach. In the following I make use of: A) DNV-GL report on behalf of
TenneT NL[51], B) Girard, Kemfert, and Stoll (2020) [34], C) Dismukes and Upton (2015) [36], A)
own calculations for Kriegers Flak and the Danish energy island in the North Sea. I have also
tried to contribute by assembling and publishing available data for Danish, German, Dutch and
UK offshore installations. See Appendix A on p. 55. There is data on voltages, no. of cables, cable
route distances, capacities, no. of substations and converters etc.
DNV-GL has calculated the LCOE for transmission for offshore wind. The purpose of this study
was for TenneT to benchmark the cost of their standard HVAC platform and grid connection
system to comparable offshore transmission systems. The DNV-GL study also gives the reader
an indication of how efficiently TSOs handle their projects in real life. None of the two studies
were intended to evaluate economies of scale. The analysis in [34] recognises that technical,
geological, cable lengths, and environmental conditions can influence costs.
The levelised cost of energy - LCOE - is calculated as:
LCOE =
푛Í
푡=1
퐼푡+푂푡
(1+푟)푡
푛Í
푡=1
퐸푡
(1+푟)푡
(5.2)
which is the (net present value of CAPEX/Investment + OPEX) divided by the expected en-
ergy production from the connected OWF. DNV-GL uses the following assumptions: CAPEX
include offshore substation, offshore HV AC, onshore cable HV AC, and land station. The nomi-
nal CAPEX of the year is used. OPEX is set to 1% of CAPEX per annum. The CF is set to .44 for
all OWFs. 푟=WACC is 4.4%. The results together with results from own calculations are shown
in Figure 5.8. The calculations show that Germany stands out with high costs, an average of 35
EUR / MWh.
The authors of [34] recognize that comparing average German (35.2 EUR/MWh) and UK costs
(15.2 EUR/MWh) in the form of LCOEs should take externals factors into consideration. The
authors find that German environmental regulation is more strict in the Wadden Sea than com-
parable UK waters. TenneT also uses HVDC, whereas all UK OWFs so far are HVAC. This also
reflects that UK farms are closer to shore than German North Sea OWFs are. On the contrary,
TenneT has access to capital at a lower WACC than commercial UK developers. The authors es-
timate all these effects, and Figure 5.7, shows this breakdown. In the end, there is a residual, 10.5
EUR/MWh, that cannot be explained by other means that there is a difference in the regulatory
regime and who does the development, according to the authors.
40
Public regulation of offshore wind: TSOs’ role
==PAGE:49==
15.4
-1.7
1.7
0.5
3.0
5.9
10.5
35.2
UK average costs
Capital costs higher in UK
Over capacity in Germany
Environmental standards 
higher in Germany
German use of HVDC 
system
Distances longer in 
Germany
Residual
LCoE EUR / MWh
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Figure 5.7 – Adjusting German transmission LCOEs for external conditions to compare with UK costs on an
equal footing. Calculations from [34]
I have tried to calculate Danish transmission LCOE for Kriegers Flak and the Danish Energy
island in the North Sea. The LCOEs for Anholt and Horns Rev 3 are calculated by DNV in [51].
Both results are shown in Figure 5.8 and on p. 57 Figure A.2 shows the data basis. Anholt
and Horns Rev 3 turn out to have rather low LCOEs in comparison with most other projects.
Kriegers Flak is a complicated case. It is a hybrid type, where parts of the connection, namely
Baltic 1 and 2, with associated export cable already was in place before the decision to make KF an
interconnector. The costs published in [52] only include Danish costs, but TenneT has installed
back-to-back HVDC converters in Bentwisch in Germany. TenneT has not directly published the
costs, but ENTSO-E has in their 2018-TYNDP published costs for ”Project 36”5, which states a
cost of EUR 349 mn., but it is unclear what this number covers. However, using the key figures
in Table 5.2 would give a cost of EUR 400 mn. for an offshore and an onshore HVDC converter.
Combining two onshore converters and reaching EUR 349 mn. therefore seems reasonable. This
gives a LCOE for KF of 32.3 EUR/MWh. This is based on expected production from KF. But KF
CGS also works as an interconnector, therefore the LCOE is not directly comparable to LCOEs
of non-hybrid types that do not work as import-export interconnectors.
5.8
EU support schemes
The push towards hybrid topologies for offshore transmission comes for many reasons. Offshore
wind production comes from wind resource rich areas and must be harvested and transported
5https://tyndp.entsoe.eu/tyndp2018/projects/projects/36
Public regulation of offshore wind: TSOs’ role
41
==PAGE:50==
to various consumption centres onshore. Influential reports like [17] recommend hybrid topolo-
gies. EU support schemes promote cross-border projects, and combined with many new OWF
installations, hybrid topologies come naturally. It is therefore worth looking at some primary
EU support schemes:
The Trans-European Networks for Energy (TEN-E) is a EU policy that is focused on linking the
energy infrastructure of EU countries. As part of the policy, nine priority corridors and three
priority thematic areas have been identified. The main electricity corridor of relevance is the
North Seas offshore grid (NSOG). TEN-E is about to be updated to better support modernisation
of Europe’s cross-border energy infrastructure and achieve the objectives of the European Green
Deal[53]. The TEN-E policy works through projects of common interest (PCIs), which must con-
tribute to the achievement of the EU’s emission reduction targets for 2030 and climate neutrality
by 2050.
Projects of Common Interest (PCI) is an EU status granted to infrastructure projects aimed at
strengthening the European internal energy market and implementing the EU’s energy policy
objectives. Energy infrastructure projects located on one of the nine priority corridors and three
thematic areas can apply for PCI status and benefit from an accelerated permit granting process
and improved regulatory treatment.
The EU Horizon programme also entails energy financing, where EUR 6 bn has been set a side
under this programme, for applicants[54].
The Connecting Europe Facility (CEF) is an EU funding instrument to promote growth, jobs and
competitiveness through targeted infrastructure investment at European level. CEF Energy is
targeted at updating ageing energy infrastructure, to ensure security of supply or to support
large-scale deployment of energy from renewable sources. CEF grants contribute to construction
costs and are applied to fill in the gaps in commercial viability of projects. A total budget of EUR
5.35 bn is made available for energy infrastructure projects for the 2014-2020 period, of which
EUR 4.6 bn in the form of grants managed by INEA[55].
The European Energy Programme for Recovery (EEPR) promoted gas and infrastructure projects.
Priorities are: security and diversification of sources of energy, the optimisation of the capacity
of the energy network and the integration of the internal energy market, in particular concern-
ing cross-border sections; the development of the network to strengthen economic and social
cohesion; the connection and integration of renewable energy resources[56].
The COBRACable was granted EUR 7 mn under the CEF, and EUR 86 mn under EEPR[57]. KF
CGS was supported by up to EUR 150 mn under EEPR.
42
Public regulation of offshore wind: TSOs’ role
==PAGE:51==
32,3
26,2
35,2
15,6
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
BorWin2 (2015)
BorWin3 (2019)
DoIWin2 (2016)
DoIWin3 (2018)
DolWin1
HelWin1
HelWin2 (2015)
Nordergründe (2017)
Riffgat (2014)
SylWin1 (2015)
Anholt (2012)
Krigers Flak (2016)
Danish Energy Island North Sea
Horns Rev 3 (2018)
France Grid (2022-2023)
TenneT Grid 2019-2023
Beatrice (2018)
Burbo Bank Extension (2016)
Dudgeon Offshore Wind Farm (2016)
East Anglia 1 (2020)
Galloper Wind Farm (2017)
Greater Gabbard (2013)
Gunfleet Sands (2011)
Gwynty Mor (2015)
Hornsea 1 (2018)
Humber Gateway (2015)
Lincs (2014)
London Array (2013)
Ormonde (2012)
Race Bank Offshore Wind Farm (2016)
Rampion Offshore Wind Farm (2016)
Robin Rigg East and West (2011)
Sheringham Shoal (2013)
Thanet (2014)
Walney 1 (2011)
Walney 2 (2012)
Walney Extension (2017)
West of Duddon Sands (2015)
Westermost Rough (2014)
EUR / MWh
Figure 5.8 – LCOE for OWF transmission development projects in Germany[34], Denmark[51] (+ own calc.),
the Netherlands[51], France[51] and the UK[51]+[34]. The UK bars are double, because two sources have
calculated for the same transmission asset. It seems there is fair agreement between the numbers.
Public regulation of offshore wind: TSOs’ role
43
==PAGE:52==
6
Discussion and conclusion
This chapter consolidates all prior analyses and discusses which learnings can be drawn from the
text.
6.1
Analysis of natural monopoly
The EC expects that European TSOs are going to spend around EUR 533 bn towards 2050 on
providing the offshore infrastructure for the EC strategy of 300 GW OWFs. This is more than
twice the equivalent in today’s euro of the US Apollo programme to go to the moon 1960-1973.
It is a major shift in outlook compared to the situation in the late 1990s where major offshore
TSO network developments were not expected. The EC expects the main part of the needed total
investment in transmission and OWFs to come from private capital.
This thesis has investigated whether offshore transmission is a natural monopoly activity. An
industry is said to have a natural monopoly, if one firm can service an industry more efficiently
than two or more companies. Natural monopolies are linked to declining average costs with
increased output, high barriers of entry, and access to limited resources. Declining average costs
are linked to economies of scale. It is generally accepted that onshore transmission is a natural
monopoly. This is based on economies of scale; that there are limited access to resources in the
form of land, and it is unthinkable to have parallel transmission systems. Furthermore, the initial
investment would be a high barrier of entry for any would-be TSO competitor.
In order to investigate offshore transmission for economies of scale, cost data is needed both ex
ante and ex post projects. However, Danish, Dutch, and German TSOs are reluctant to publish
expenditures on offshore projects. Very little is published, and examples are seen where ex-ante
budgets are published - without numbers. Often, data is unstructured, leaving the reader in doubt
of the precise scope of costs. Transparency suffers due to this policy.
EU regulation requires that all transmission and generation companies are ”unbundled”. This
means that a generator or an OWF cannot own a transmission system. Whether unbundling ap-
plies or not is defined by the voltage level, where ”HV” and ”EHV” systems demand unbundling.
However, EU member states have a certain degree of freedom to translate EU directives to na-
tional legislation.
Unbundling has been the tool that has provided ”the electricity market” where producers compete
against each other and electricity prices are visible. The European electricity market is a large
market with many consumers and producers
The UK has the so-called Offshore Transmission Owner (OFTO) regulation, where developers
are allowed to build transmission assets linked to their offshore wind farm. The purpose of the
44
Public regulation of offshore wind: TSOs’ role
==PAGE:53==
OFTO regime is to deliver transmission infrastructure to connect offshore generation, attract
new entrants to the sector, and provide best value for money to consumers, according to the
UK regulator, OFGEM. Latest at time of first operation, the developers must transfer the OFTO
asset at a regulated price, and externals can bid to become the owner of the OFTO asset. OFGEM
selects the OFTO on the basis of lowest bids for future cash flows. This publicly regulated process
creates transparency in the costs, although not all details are revealed.
The UK model gives developers incentives to build offshore assets at lowest cost, because the
developer is benchmarked by OFGEM at the point of sale, where excess costs cannot go into the
transfer price. Furthermore, the developer will pay a tariff proportional to the transfer price of
his transmission asset to the NETSO. In addition, the developer must build the asset at a proper
quality, because the asset will transmit the energy of the developer’s own OWF.
Data for UK transmission projects form the basis for the evaluation of natural monopolies. This
thesis has shown that there are constant economies of scale for offshore transmission develop-
ments. This is in contrast to onshore, where there are clear economies of scale. There are also
more free space offshore. OWFs can be considered marginal additions to the already existing
onshore network. Therefore there are also not high entry barriers. All these factors lead to the
conclusion that there is most likely not a natural monopoly in offshore transmission.
6.1.1
Topologies
Offshore transmission assets can be divided in groups after topology types. The classic topology
is the radial point-to-point connection, where the offshore wind farm (OWF) transmits its own
energy (Type 1). All UK types are of this type so far. TenneT Germany has developed many radial
hubs where several OWFs are connected to the same hub, in this case, the hub being a HVDC
converter. Energy flow is unidirectional in these hubs, and the users are the connected OWFs
(Type 2). Energinet has developed the first hybrid type (also called radial multi-terminal), where
the future Kriegers Flak OWF is to be connected to a bi-directional interconnector. This type
is expected to occur more frequently in the future because of the benefits of combining export
cables and interconnectors (Type 3). The final type is the offshore meshed grid. This has not been
seen so far, due to technological challenges (Type 4).
For types 1 and 2 networks, the users are the OWF itself or the OWFs themselves. Such assets are
for all practical purposes a natural part of the production apparatus of the OWF or OWFs. These
types have prevailed for 10+ years. For type 2, unbundling could have the benefit that a TSO can
act as a facilitator that connects several OWFs into the hub. But, alternatively, commercial OWFs
could also cooperate and initiate the hub themselves as a joint venture. The case for requiring
unbundling of companies owning types 1 and 2 networks appears weak, and the natural owner
of such transmission asset(s) is the OWF(s) themselves. This is actually what the Danish Energy
Agency has chosen for the upcoming Thor OWF. See Figure 6.1.
Public regulation of offshore wind: TSOs’ role
45
==PAGE:54==
Figure 6.1 – Danish Energy Agency’s new practice in 2021 for Point of Connection (PoC) for upcoming Thor
OWF. The export cable is not going to be unbundled. From [58].
For type 3 networks, the cables work as both export cables and interconnectors. The concern
here is that merchant interconnectors are not going for the socio-economically optimal capacity,
but rather the lower, profit maximising capacity. Exactly how much capacity would be developed
under a commercial regime would need to be calculated in future studies. From an operations
viewpoint, whether the network is TSO operated, bundled or pure merchant, as long as the net-
work is part of the European market coupling, the socio-economic welfare is maximised within
the given capacity.
Meshed grids are more complicated grids that are more obvious cases for unbundling, so that
a neutral TSO can manage and develop the network on a non-discriminatory basis. However,
many OWF connections are still expected to be radial.
There are indications that the UK developer-led OFTO model leads to lower LCOE of transmission
assets than the German TSO model. This furthermore questions the need for unbundling and TSO
monopolies offshore.
6.1.2
TSO view on offshore development
The TSOs come to a different conclusion, e.g. in the Navigant analysis [59] which is a report
made for the Dutch and French TSOs. The report compares West of Duddon Sands, Gwynt
y Môr, Westermost Rough, Humber Gateway, Burbo Bank Extension, and Dudgeon Offshore
Wind Farm with: 1) TenneT’s standardized grid connection for the roll-out of offshore wind in
the Netherlands between 2019-2023, 2) Elia’s Modular Offshore Grid connection, 3) Horns Rev 3
grid connection, 4) RTE’s Round 1 connections (4 in total), which include onshore substations,
onshore and offshore export cables. RTE does not build the offshore substation of these connec-
tions. Navigant concludes on this basis p. 17 ”..that the UK developer build model has resulted in
generally higher CAPEX per installed MW HVAC grid connections than in the TSO build offshore
grid development model in Denmark, France and the Netherlands”. I must say that I cannot come
to the same conclusion. Navigant has chosen a small subset of UK OWFs and compared with
46
Public regulation of offshore wind: TSOs’ role
==PAGE:55==
sparse cost data for Dutch, Belgian, and French developments. This is not a sufficient data set to
conclude from.
Figure 6.2 shows how French and Dutch TSOs and their consultant, Navigant, have evaluated
TSO-build vs developer-build. The figure shows that the TSOs considers many other factors
than pure development costs. These factors should therefore also be addressed in practical situ-
ations, but they are not straightforward to include in an economic analysis. I notice that TSOs
acknowledge that competition could lead to cost reductions.
TSO-build
Developer-build
Planning and 
Design
Holistic approach, early initiation of 
development, opportunity to standardise design 
for economies of scale. Shared assets (single 
connection for multiple wind farms) can limit 
environmental footprint.
A single party is responsible for wind farm and 
offshore grid scope in planning and design 
stage.
Platform specific developer needs (e.g. with 
respect to innovations) may not be fully 
reflected in the design and procurement process 
of the potentially larger and more complex 
standardised transmission systems.
Incremental development with a short horizon. 
Developers use different design concepts, 
which prevents standardisation and asset 
sharing.
Commercial and 
Finance
TSOs benefit from more favourable financing 
conditions and a stable pipeline of projects can 
reduce costs.
Commercial parties could have more flexible 
financing options (e.g. higher debt shares 
which could result in lower Weighted Average 
Cost of Capital) and competition could lead to 
cost reductions.
Larger amounts of (pre-) investment capital is 
required. TSOs do not face the same market 
(cost) pressures as developers in competitive 
tenders.
Higher cost of capital (e.g. including 
transaction costs from developer to OFTO) and 
a lower potential to reduce societal costs 
through a coordinated approach.
Construction and 
Interface Risk
Offshore wind deployment and onshore capacity 
reinforcements are coordinated.
Single party coordination limits the interfaces 
and reduces the risk of construction delays.
A complex technical and procedural offshore 
interface between parties with different drivers. 
Could result in stranded asset costs if not 
properly coordinated.
Lack of system perspective: onshore 
reinforcement not included in developer scope.
Operations and 
Reliability
Larger standardised asset base (OPEX reduction 
potential), higher redundancy and greater 
control by transmission responsible party.
Risk of export cable and platform failure is 
with party most effected. O&M of the wind 
farm and grid connection can be aligned.
Unavailability penalties might be less effective 
as ultimately costs could be (partially) socialised.
Transmission asset typically have a longer 
design lifetime than a wind farm, which leaves 
full asset utilisation in the long term uncertain.
Figure 6.2 – TSOs’ view on offshore transmission development (TSO-build vs Developer-build). Source: Nav-
igant report on behalf of Dutch and French TSOs (TenneT / RTE) [59]
My view on TSOs’ opinions / Navigant’s view is that I agree to all of them, except that TSOs
claim they can create economies of scale and reduce costs. This is undocumented in my opinion.
The UK data set shows that commercial developers can create constant economies of scale, and
more generally, the data set for TSO costs is so sparse, that very little can be concluded.
Public regulation of offshore wind: TSOs’ role
47
==PAGE:56==
6.1.3
TSOs’ role
TSOs were invented and defined with the first liberalization package from the EU in 1997. TSOs
are de facto monopolies that are regulated in terms of what they can engage in, access to their
networks, and tariffs. Ideally, TSOs work for maximising the socio-economic welfare in the EU
and implementing networks for green strategies so that GHG emissions can come down. TSOs
are experts within their fields, and their advice carry great weight. But letting massive players
like electricity TSOs be part of the development landscape also implicitly means that other voices
are less heard and trusted, and maybe alternatives like PtX, e.g. ammonia production are not
evaluated on the same objective level as electrical transmission is. Policy makers and regulators
could remind themselves that TSOs are not completely neutral institutions, with regards to the
solutions they recommend. Furthermore TSOs are likely also institutions that have a momentum
towards growth, like many other organizations have. In a situation with competitors this would
not be a problem, but TSOs are regulated monopolies and do not have competitors or competitive
cost pressures.
According to WindEurope, OWF developers would like to take over the offshore infrastructure
development projects currently in the hands of (Continental) TSOs. There could be many reasons
for this: Most likely is better control of ”their” export cable, and in the end, more profits to devel-
opers. European energy agencies could consider this wish from private developers, and evaluate
TSO-build vs developer-build for offshore transmission on a more equal basis with inspiration
from the UK.
Furthermore, there are many similarities between offshore wind and offshore oil/gas: The re-
sources are offshore and need to be transported in networks to markets onshore. European
energy agencies could therefore consider if/why/when the two industries need to be regulated
differently offshore.
6.1.4
The role of EU financing
EU financing is primarily available for cross-border projects, as documented in the regulatory
analysis. The economic analysis showed that the Kriegers Flak project in LCOE terms was a
very expensive project. I would argue that the European Commission should be aware that
establishing such public funding opportunities, especially focusing on promoting cross-border
infrastructure, has an inherent risk: It gives incentives for TSOs to pursue hybrid or cross-border
projects that are more expensive than simpler, non cross-border projects. Funding may help the
TSOs’ business cases, but is it in the European interest to support the most expensive projects?
I would argue that the EC should take care in ensuring that the projects supported are truly the
most cost effective alternatives, given a broad range of alternatives. These alternatives could
either be established by more competition between more applicants, or by cost-benefit analyses.
The EC could also open up for not primarily supporting TSOs, but also private developers.
48
Public regulation of offshore wind: TSOs’ role
==PAGE:57==
6.2
Conclusion and policy recommendations
This thesis is based on the motivation that it is worth investigating TSO-build vs developer-build
for the circa EUR 533 bn infrastructure investments that the EC expects is needed to connect 300
GW offshore wind towards 2050. In the context of this, this thesis has also assessed whether a
natural monopoly exists in offshore transmission. The thesis has found:
• There are constant economies of scale in offshore transmission development projects. This
is based on 26 UK HVAC projects and a sparse set of German key figures. This means that
developing two 500 MW offshore transmission connections is expected to cost the same as
one 1 GW connection.
• Offshore transmission development is most probably not a natural monopoly activity. This
is based on the assessed economies of scale, and access to offshore spatial resources, and
lack of prohibitive up-front costs.
• European energy agencies should investigate why TSOs publish very little cost data on a
project level. The objective should be to increase the public’s insight into investment costs,
as a minimum for publicly owned monopoly TSOs.
• EU regulation defines transmission systems after the voltage level (HV or EHV), and de-
mands unbundling on this basis. This is potentially too restrictive, since the topology of
the network is also of relevance. However, national implementations of the EU directive
can turn out in various ways. Denmark has 1 July 2021 allowed OWFs with associated
cables to stay unbundled until the ”collective” net.
• Four different topology types are defined in this thesis: Radial, Hub, Radial multi-terminal,
and Meshed.
• Two market models are presented: Home Market (HM) and offshore bidding zone (OBZ).
An OBZ is a normal EU bidding zone.
• The reasons for demanding unbundling are weak for the radial and hub cases. These topolo-
gies have uni-directional flow and one or a few users, i.e., no collective purposes. These
assets are essentially a part of the production apparatus of the connected OWFs.
• Radial multi-terminal and meshed network have more general purposes that are in line
with TSOs’ obligations. However, European energy agencies are advised to take a renewed
look at merchant interconnectors that have the benefit that private capital is brought into
the sector. As long as merchant interconnectors are part of the European market cou-
pling, operation is similar to TSO operation. Potential dominant market positions should,
however, be considered case by case.
• European energy agencies are advised to analyse why there are different approaches to
offshore oil/gas regulation than to offshore wind. Both sectors bring offshore resources to
a strong onshore market, where the price formation takes place.
• EU member states play a large role, since the EU regulation only formulate the overall
setup.
Public regulation of offshore wind: TSOs’ role
49
==PAGE:58==
• There are indications that commercial OWF developers can deliver more cost effective
infrastructure developments than TSOs can. This is in the order of 10 EUR/MWh LCOE.
• TSOs are of the opinion that they are in a better position to standardize designs, use asset
sharing, take care of security of supply, and take onshore reinforcements in consideration.
• European energy agencies should consider that keeping the TSO-build model is a push
towards choice of energy carrier, since electricity TSOs may not objectively consider PtX
on the same level as electricity transmission.
• In relation to several EU infrastructure support mechanisms, the EC is advised to take
care in ensuring that the projects supported are truly the most cost effective alternatives,
given a broad range of alternatives. These alternatives could either be established by more
competition between more applicants, or by cost-benefit analyses. The EC could also open
up for not primarily supporting TSOs, but also private developers.
• TSO investments in radial multi-terminal and meshed grid topologies are more difficult to
do ex-post efficiency analyses of. This is because hybrid projects provide welfare economic
benefits, that have to be taken into account together with costs. This reduces the economic
transparency of TSO investments.
In the end, a fundamental economic question is whether A) topologically simpler, developer-
built offshore assets subject to competition forces are more cost effective than B) more complex
electrical topologies developed by the TSOs. I can only encourage to a larger public debate around
this topic. Very little research exists from this viewpoint, and most reports assume that offshore
infrastructure development is going to be TSO-build.
50
Public regulation of offshore wind: TSOs’ role
==PAGE:59==
Bibliography
[1]
European Commission. Facts and figures on Offshore Renewable Energy Sources in Europe.
2020.
[2]
Danish Energy Agency. Finding Your Cheapest Way to a Low Carbon Future. The Danish
Levelized Cost of Energy Calculator. 2018.
[3]
Bundesnetzagentur. BK6-17-001. WindSeeG - 1. Ausschreibung für bestehende Projekte nach
§ 26 WindSeeG.n Ergebnisse der 1. Ausschreibung vom 01.04.2017. Bekanntgabe der Zuschläge.
2017. url: https://www.bundesnetzagentur.de.
[4]
European Commission. An EU Strategy to harness the potential of offshore renewable energy
for a climate neutral future. 2020. url: https://eur-lex.europa.eu.
[5]
European Commissions. Directive 96/92/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council
of 19 December 1996 concerning common rules for the internal market in electricity. 1996.
url: https://eur-lex.europa.eu.
[6]
European Commission. The European Green Deal. 2019.
[7]
NationalgridESO. Offshore Co-ordination project: scope for phase 1. 2020. url: https://www.
nationalgrideso.com/.
[8]
WindEurope. Industry position on how offshore grids should develop. 2019. url: https://
windeurope.org.
[9]
WindEurope. Our energy, our future. How offshore wind will help Europe go carbon-neutral.
2019. url: https://windeurope.org.
[10]
Energy Danish Minestry of Climate and Utilities. Denmark unveils plan to build the world’s
first offshore wind “energy islands”, ushering in a new era for offshore wind energy in Europe.
2020. url: https://en.kefm.dk.
[11]
COWI. Cost benefit analyse og klimaaftryk af energiøer i Nordsøen og Østersøen. 2021. url:
https://ens.dk.
[12]
KEFM. Tillæg til klimaaftale om energi og industri af 22. juni 2020 vedr. Ejerskab og kon-
struktion af energiøer mv. 2021. url: https://kefm.dk.
[13]
Danish Energy Agency. Invitation to market dialogue. 2021. url: https://www.ens.dk.
[14]
NASA. Apollo Program Budget Appropriations. 2021. url: https://history.nasa.gov.
[15]
3E. Offshore Electricity Grid Infrastructure in Europe. 2011.
[16]
Roland Berger. Hybrid projects: How to reduce costs and space of offshore developments. A
North Seas Offshore Energy Clusters study. 2018.
[17]
Stijn Cole et al. Study of the benefits of a meshed offshore grid in northern seas region. 2014.
url: https://ec.europa.eu/.
[18]
ENTSO-G. The European natural gas network. 2019.
Public regulation of offshore wind: TSOs’ role
51
==PAGE:60==
[19]
Kanerva Sunila et al. “A supra-national TSO to enhance offshore wind power development
in the Baltic Sea? A legal and regulatory analysis”. In: Energy Policy 128 (2019), pp. 775–
782. issn: 0301-4215. doi: https:/ /doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2019.01.047. url: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0301421519300485.
[20]
European Commissions. Directive (EU) 2019/944 of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 5 June 2019 on common rules for the internal market for electricity and amending
Directive 2012/27/EU (recast). 2019. url: https://eur-lex.europa.eu.
[21]
Axel Gautier. Merchant Interconnectors in Europe: Merits and Value Drivers. 2020. url: https:
//www.fsr.eui.eu.
[22]
ENTSO-E and ENTSO-G. Future of Wind: Deployment, investment, technology, grid integra-
tion and socio-economic aspects. 2020. url: https://www.entsoe.org.
[23]
Directorate-General for Energy (European Commission). Directive 2009/73/EC of the Eu-
ropean Parliament and of the Council of 13 July 2009 concerning common rules for the in-
ternal market in natural gas and repealing Directive 2003/55/EC. 2009. url: https://eur-
lex.europa.eu.
[24]
KPMG. Offshore Transmission: An Investor Perspective - Update Report. 2014. url: https:
//www.ofgem.gov.uk.
[25]
Deloitte. UK Offshore Wind Power Market Update. Overview of the UK offshore wind power
market and points to note for new entrants. 2019. url: https://www.deloitte.com.
[26]
Cambridge Economic Policy Associates (CEPA) Ltd. OFTO Benchmarking. 2014.
[27]
Ofgem. Offshore Transmission Owner (OFTO) Regime Tender Process - Consultation concern-
ing developments to the tender process within the current OFTO regime. 2020. url: https:
//www.ofgem.gov.uk.
[28]
Energistyrelsen j.nr. 2020-783 Klima Energi-og Forsyningsministeriet. Bekendtgørelse af
lov om Energinet. LBK nr 118 af 06/02/2020. 2020. url: https://retsinformation.dk.
[29]
Energistyrelsen j.nr. 2020-783 Klima Energi-og Forsyningsministeriet. Bekendtgørelse af
Lov om elforsyning. LBK nr 984 af 12/05/2021. 2021. url: https://retsinformation.dk.
[30]
Energi-og Forsyningsministeriet. Klima. Bekendtgørelse om nettilslutning af vindmøller af
14. juni 2021. 2021.
[31]
William J. Baumol. “On the Proper Cost Tests for Natural Monopoly in a Multiproduct
Industry”. In: The American Economic Review 67.5 (1977). doi: 10.1080/02646811.2019.
1569873. url: https://www.jstor.org/stable/1828065.
[32]
Monica Greer. “Chapter 2 - The Theory of Natural Monopoly and Literature Review”. In:
Electricity Marginal Cost Pricing. Ed. by Monica Greer. Boston: Butterworth-Heinemann,
2012, pp. 15–38. isbn: 978-0-12-385134-5. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-385134-
5.00002-8. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780123851345000028.
[33]
Matti Koivisto, Juan Gea-Bermúdez, and Poul Sørensen. “North Sea offshore grid develop-
ment: combined optimisation of grid and generation investments towards 2050”. In: IET
52
Public regulation of offshore wind: TSOs’ role
==PAGE:61==
Renewable Power Generation 14.8 (2020), pp. 1259–1267. doi: https://doi.org/10.1049/iet-
rpg.2019.0693.
[34]
Y. Girard, C. Kemfert, and J. Stoll. “Comparing regulatory designs for the transmission
of offshore wind energy”. English. In: Economics of Energy and Environmental Policy 10.1
(2020). url: www.scopus.com.
[35]
Ignacio J. Pérez-Arriaga (editor). Regulation of the Power Sector. Springer, London, 2013.
[36]
David E. Dismukes and Gregory B. Upton. “Economies of scale, learning effects and off-
shore wind development costs”. In: Renewable Energy 83 (2015), pp. 61–66. issn: 0960-1481.
doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2015.04.002. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0960148115002827.
[37]
X. Xiang, M. M. C. Merlin, and T. C. Green. “Cost analysis and comparison of HVAC, LFAC
and HVDC for offshore wind power connection”. In: 12th IET International Conference on
AC and DC Power Transmission (ACDC 2016). 2016, pp. 1–6. doi: 10.1049/cp.2016.0386.
[38]
J-B. et al Curis. Deliverable 1.3: Synthesis of available studies on offshore meshed HVDC
grids. PROMOTion - Progress on Meshed HVDC Offshore Transmission Networks. 2016. url:
https://orbit.dtu.dk/en/publications/deliverable-13-synthesis-of-available-studies-on-
offshore-meshed-.
[39]
“Merchant Interconnectors in the European Electricity System”. In: Journal of Network
Industries 6 ().
[40]
Milton Friedman. Capitalism And Freedom. University of Chicago Press, 1962. isbn: 19631962.
[41]
Rudi Hakvoort and H.M. Jong. “Pushing European power transmission: private investment
in priority interconnections?” In: European Review of Energy Markets 2 (Jan. 2007), pp. 109–
139.
[42]
Bundesnetzagentur. Anhang Zum Netzentwicklungsplan Strom 2030. 2017. url: https://
www.netzentwicklungsplan.de.
[43]
Bundesnetzagentur. Anhang Zum Netzentwicklungsplan Strom 2030. 2019. url: https://
www.netzentwicklungsplan.de.
[44]
TenneT et al. Netzentwicklungsplan - Strom 2035. Zweiter Entwurf der Übertragungsnetzbe-
treiber. 2021. url: https://www.netzentwicklungsplan.de.
[45]
Yann Girard et al. Marktdesign für eine effiziente Netzanbindung von Offshore-Windenergie.
2019. url: https://diw-econ.de.
[46]
Royal HaskoningDHV. Technische, ruimtelijke en organisatorische aspecten van het elek-
triciteitsnet voor de verbinding van windparken op zee op het landelijke hoogspanningsnet.
2014. url: https://www.eerstekamer.nl/.
[47]
Energinet. Energi- Forsynings- og Klimaudvalget 2017-18 EFK Alm. del endeligt svar på
spørgsmål 253. 2018. url: https://ft.dk.
[48]
Ofgem. Offshore Transmission: Cost Assessment for XX transmission assets. 2009-2021. url:
https://www.ofgem.gov.uk.
[49]
Uwe Riechert et al. Compact High Voltage Direct Current (HVDC) Transmission. 2016.
Public regulation of offshore wind: TSOs’ role
53
==PAGE:62==
[50]
E.C.M. Ruijgrok, E.J. van Druten, and B.H. Bulder. Cost Evaluation of North Sea Offshore
Wind Post 2030. 2019.
[51]
DNV-GL. Cost of Offshore Transmission. 2019. url: https://tennet.eu.
[52]
Energinet. Redegørelse fra Energinet om omkostninger til nettilslutning af Anholt, Horns Rev
3 og Kriegers Flak havvindmølleparker. 2018. url: https://ft.dk.
[53]
European Commission. Questions and Answers: The revision of the TEN-E Regulation. 2020.
url: https://ec.europe.eu.
[54]
Europa-kommissionen. Horizon 2020. Kort fortalt. 2020.
[55]
The European Commission. The Connecting Europe Facility. 2019. url: https://ec.europe.eu.
[56]
The European Commission. Regulation (EC) No 663/2009 of 13 July 2009 establishing a pro-
gramme to aid economic recovery by granting Community financial assistance to projects in
the field of energy. 2009.
[57]
The European Commssion. Project of Common Interest: COBRAcable. 2017. url: https://ec.
europa.eu/energy/sites/default/files/documents/pci_factsheet_cobracable_2017_0.pdf.
[58]
Danish Energy Agency. New Danish calls for offshore wind farm tenders. 2019.
[59]
Navigant. Connecting Offshore Wind Farms - A Comparison of Offshore Electricity Grid De-
velopment Models in Northwest Europe. 2019. url: https://guidehouse.com.
54
Public regulation of offshore wind: TSOs’ role
==PAGE:63==
A
Data for UK, Danish, and German
offshore transmission projects
Public regulation of offshore wind: TSOs’ role
55
==PAGE:64==
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
17
Year
OWF Name
Type
Nominal 
OWF 
capacity Voltage
No. of 
HVAC 
export 
cables
No. of 
platforms 
and 
substations
HVAC 
substation 
to shore 
cable route 
distance
Estimated 
offshore 
costs
No. of 
onshore 
cables
Onshore 
cable 
route 
length
No. of 
onshore 
substations 
(being 
transferred)
Estimated 
onshore 
costs excl. 
cable
Estimated 
onshore 
cable costs
Cable total 
length
OFTO 
transfer 
value 2020
OFTO 
transfer 
value 
Costs per 
capacity 
GW
kV
#
#
km
mn 2020-
GBP
#
km
#
mn 2020-
GBP
mn 2020-
GBP
km
mn 2020-
GBP
mn GBP
2020-GBP/kW
1
2011 Gun Fleet Sands 1 and 2
HVAC
0,173
   
132
1
1
7
35
             
3
4
          
1
14
          
8
                 
18
             
57,6
         
49,5
      
333,0
              
2
2011 Robbin Rig East and West
HVAC
0,180
   
132
2
2
13
59
             
2
2
          
0
15
          
3
                 
29
             
76,2
         
65,5
      
423,5
              
3
2011 Walney 1
HVAC
0,184
   
132
1
1
45
106
           
1
3
          
1
15
          
2
                 
48
             
122,7
       
105,4
    
666,7
              
4
2012 Barrow
HVAC
0,090
   
132
1
1
28
24
             
1
4
          
1
11
          
3
                 
32
             
38,0
         
33,6
      
422,3
              
5
2012 Ormonde
HVAC
0,150
   
132
1
1
40
104
           
1
1
          
1
13
          
0
                 
41
             
117,5
       
103,9
    
783,5
              
6
2012 Walney 2
HVAC
0,184
   
132
1
1
49
109
           
1
1
          
1
15
          
1
                 
50
             
124,2
       
109,8
    
675,0
              
7
2013 Sheringham Shoal
HVAC
0,315
   
132
2
2
22
150
           
2
22
        
1
30
          
33
               
87
             
213,1
       
193,1
    
676,5
              
8
2013 Greater Gabbard
HVAC
0,500
   
132
3
2
62
276
           
3
1
          
1
72
          
1
                 
186
           
349,8
       
317,0
    
699,7
              
9
2013 London Array
HVAC
0,630
   
150
4
2
54
372
           
4
6
          
1
116
        
18
               
240
           
506,5
       
459,0
    
804,0
              
10
2014 Westermost Rough
HVAC
0,245
   
155
2
1
12
138
           
1
15
        
1
21
          
12
               
39
             
170,3
       
156,7
    
695,2
              
11
2014 Lincs
HVAC
0,270
   
132
2
1
48
292
           
2
12
        
1
24
          
18
               
120
           
334,5
       
307,7
    
1.238,8
           
12
2014 Thanet
HVAC
0,300
   
132
2
1
26
147
           
2
2
          
1
28
          
4
                 
57
             
178,3
       
164,0
    
594,2
              
13
2014 Gwynt i Mor
HVAC
0,574
   
132
4
2
21
253
           
4
11
        
1
96
          
34
               
126
           
382,6
       
352,0
    
666,6
              
14
2015 Humber Gateway
HVAC
0,220
   
132
2
1
9
110
           
2
30
        
1
18
          
46
               
78
             
174,2
       
160,3
    
792,0
              
15
2015 West of Duddon Sands
HVAC
0,388
   
155
2
1
41
244
           
2
3
          
1
44
          
5
                 
88
             
292,3
       
268,9
    
753,3
              
16
2017 Galloper
HVAC
0,340
   
132
2
1
45
260
           
2
1
          
1
34
          
1
                 
92
             
295,4
       
281,0
    
868,8
              
17
2017 Walney extension
HVAC
0,600
   
220
2
2
70
358
           
2
4
          
1
105
        
6
                 
148
           
469,5
       
446,6
    
782,5
              
18
2018 Burbo Bank Extension
HVAC
0,258
   
220
1
1
24
169
           
1
10
        
1
22
          
8
                 
35
             
199,0
       
193,9
    
771,4
              
19
2018 Rampion
HVAC
0,400
   
150
2
1
17
232
           
2
27
        
1
47
          
43
               
88
             
321,4
       
313,1
    
803,0
              
20
2018 Dudgeon
HVAC
0,402
   
132
2
1
42
185
           
2
47
        
1
47
          
74
               
178
           
305,8
       
297,9
    
760,6
              
21
2018 Race Bank
HVAC
0,573
   
220
2
2
78
371
           
2
12
        
1
96
          
18
               
178
           
485,0
       
472,5
    
846,4
              
22
2019 Beatrice
HVAC
0,588
   
220
2
1
65
361
           
2
20
        
1
101
        
32
               
170
           
493,6
       
489,5
    
839,4
              
23
2020 Hornsea 1
HVAC
1,218
   
220
3
3
145
621
           
3
38
        
1
463
        
91
               
549
           
1.174,9
    
1.174,9
 
964,6
              
24
2021 East Anglia 1
HVAC
0,714
   
220
2
1
45
648
           
2
9
          
1
151
        
14
               
108
           
813,6
       
813,6
    
1.139,5
           
25
2021 Triton Knoll
HVAC
0,855
   
220
2
2
50
301
           
2
57
        
1
220
        
91
               
214
           
612,5
       
612,5
    
716,4
              
26
2022 Moray East
HVAC
0,950
   
220
3
3
58
362
           
3
35
        
1
275
        
83
               
278
           
720,0
       
720,0
    
757,9
              
Figure A.1 – Actual OFTO transfer prices together with estimated onshore and offshore CAPEX and other
data. From OFTO asset transfer decisions 2009-2021 published by OFGEM [48].
56
Public regulation of offshore wind: TSOs’ role
==PAGE:65==
First year of 
operation
OWF Name
Type
Transmission 
capacity
HVAC 
voltage
No. of 
HVAC 
export 
cables
No. of 
transformer 
substations
Export 
cable(s) 
route 
distance
Substation 
costs
Export 
cable(s) costs
No. of 
HVDC 
cables
HVDC 
Voltage
No. of 
HVDC 
converter 
stations
HVDC Cable 
subsea route 
distance
MW
kV
#
#
km
mn EUR
mn EUR
#
kV
#
km
2010
Anholt
HVAC
400
              
220
         
1
       
1
               
24,5
      
58
            
28
              
-
-
-
-
2015
Horns Rev 3
HVAC
407
              
220
         
1
       
1
               
35,0
      
66
            
34
              
-
-
-
-
2016
Kriegers Flak
HVAC/DC
600
              
220
         
2
       
2
               
94,6
      
111
          
104
            
-
-
2
-
2025-35
Danish Energy Island
HVAC/DC
10.000
         
220-380
-
4
               
-
-
-
10
± 320
10
100
First year of 
operation
OWF Name
No. of 
cables
Land cable 
route length
No. of land 
stations
Substat
ion 
costs
Land cable 
costs
Cost of 
expansion 
of 
onshore 
grid 
capacity
General 
project costs
Point of 
Connection
Total Infra. 
CAPEX 
OWF 
Developer 
CAPEX cost
Estimate of 
State aid 
over 
lifetime
EU Grant
Wind 
park 
capacity 
factor
AEP
LCOE (for 
infrastruct
ure)
Energy 
Production 
lifetime
#
km
#
mn EUR
mn EUR
mn EUR
mn EUR
mn 2020-EUR
TWh/year
EUR/MWh
TWh
2010
Anholt
1
            
59,8
             
1
             
16
      
27
             
-
        
13
            
TF
157
          
1.480
       
2.170
       
-
0,44
1,5
           
7,0
        
31 
           
2015
Horns Rev 3
1
            
44,8
             
1
             
13
      
19
             
15
         
18
            
HR C TF
172
          
1.034
       
1.014
       
-
0,44
1,6
           
7,5
        
31 
           
2016
Kriegers Flak
104,2
           
1
             
131
    
45
             
35
         
33
            
KFA / KFB
833
          
1.223
       
484
          
150
             
0,44
2,3
           
32,3
      
46 
           
2025-35
Danish Energy Island
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
14.062
     
14.115
     
-
-
0,55
48,2
         
26,2
      
964 
         
Offshore - HVAC
Onshore
Offshore - HVDC
Figure A.2 – Actual costs and basic data for Danish OWFs. Kriegers Flak costs include an estimate of 349
mn. EUR for the back-to-back HVDC converters in Bentwisch. Data from [52]
Public regulation of offshore wind: TSOs’ role
57
==PAGE:66==
First year of 
operation
Transmission 
Project Name
Type
TSO
OWF1
OWF2
OWF3
transmission 
capacity
HVAC 
voltage
No. of 
HVAC 
cables 
(OWF1)
No. of 
HVAC 
cables 
(OWF2)
No. of 
HVAC 
cables 
(OWF3)
GW
kV
#
#
#
2009 Alpha ventus
HVAC
TenneT
Alpha ventus (62MW)
-
-
0,062
           
110
1
0
0
2010 BorWin 1
HVDC
TenneT
Bard Offshore 1 (400MW)
-
-
0,400
           
170
0
0
0
2014 Riffgat
HVAC
TenneT
Riffgat (113MW)
-
-
0,113
           
1
0
0
2015 BorWin 2
HVDC
TenneT
Veja Mate (402MW)
Deutsche Bucht (269MW)
Albatros (117MW)
0,916
           
155
2
2
1
2015 DolWin 1
HVDC
TenneT
Borkum Riffgrund 1 (277MW)
Trianel Windpark Borkum II (200MW)
Trianel Windpark Borkum (200 MW)
0,800
           
155
2
2
2
2015 Sylwin 1
HVDC
TenneT
Sandbank (288MW)
DanTysk (288MW)
Butendiek (288MW)
0,864
           
155
2
2
2
2015 Helwin 1
HVDC
TenneT
Nordsee Ost (288 MW)
Meerwind Süd|Ost (288 MW)
0,575
           
155
2
2
0
2015 HelWin 2
HVDC
TenneT
Amrumbank West (303MW)
Kaskasi II (325MW)
0,690
           
155
2
2
0
2016 DolWin 2
HVDC
TenneT
Nordsee One (332MW)
Gode Wind 1 (332MW)
Gode Wind 2 (252MW)
0,916
           
155
2
2
2
2017 Nordergründe
HVAC
TenneT
Nordergründe (111MW)
-
-
0,111
           
155
1
0
0
2019 BorWin 3
HVDC
TenneT
Global Tech 1 (400MW)
EnBW Hohe See (500MW)
-
0,900
           
155
2
3
0
2018 DolWin 3
HVDC
TenneT
Borkum Riffgrund 2 (450MW)
Merkur Offshore (400 MW)
0,900
           
155
2
2
0
2023 DolWin 6
HVDC
TenneT
Gode Wind 3 (242 MW)
Gode Wind 4 ( MW)
0,900
           
155
1
1
0
2025 DolWin 5
HVDC
TenneT
Borkum Riffgrund 3 (formerly 
known as Borkum Riffgrund West 
1/2, OWP West) (900MW)
-
-
0,900
           
0
0
0
2025 BorWin 5
HVDC
TenneT
EnBW He Dreiht (900 MW)
0,900
           
155
0
0
0
Offshore - HVAC - From substation
Figure A.3 – Basic data and estimated costs for infrastructure for German OWFs.
58
Public regulation of offshore wind: TSOs’ role
==PAGE:67==
Transmission 
Project Name
HVAC 
substation 
(OWF1) to 
either shore or 
HVDC 
converter 
cable route 
distance
HVAC 
substation 
(OWF2) to 
either shore or 
HVDC 
converter 
cable route 
distance
HVAC 
substation 
(OWF3) to 
either shore or 
HVDC 
converter cable 
route distance
No. of 
HVDC 
cables 
(both + 
and -)
HVDC 
Voltage
No. of 
HVDC 
converter 
stations
HVDC 
Cable 
subsea 
route 
distanc
e
Estimated 
offshore costs
No. of 
HVDC 
cables
No. of 
HVAC 
cables
 Cable 
route 
length
Estimated 
onshore 
costs
TSO info on 
costs
LCoE own 
calc
km
km
km
#
kV
km
mn EUR
#
#
km
mn EUR
mn. EUR
Alpha ventus
60
0
0
0
-
0
0
94
              
0
1
6
         
9
              
-
34,9
         
BorWin 1
125
0
0
2
± 150
1
125
900
             
1
0
75
       
300
          
-
63,2
         
Riffgat
50
0
0
0
-
0
0
82
              
0
1
30
       
45
            
-
23,6
         
BorWin 2
27
27
24
2
± 300
1
125
1.669
          
1
0
75
       
300
          
-
45,3
         
DolWin 1
8
8
8
2
± 320
1
75
1.220
          
1
0
90
       
360
          
-
41,6
         
Sylwin 1
35
9
30
2
± 320
1
160
1.778
          
1
0
45
       
180
          
-
47,7
         
Helwin 1
5
5
0
2
± 250
1
67
908
             
2
0
45
       
360
          
-
46,4
         
HelWin 2
5
5
0
2
± 320
1
85
1.101
          
2
0
45
       
360
          
-
44,6
         
DolWin 2
7
12
12
2
± 320
1
45
1.244
          
2
0
90
       
720
          
-
45,2
         
Nordergründe
28
0
0
0
-
0
0
49
              
0
1
4
         
6
              
-
10,4
         
BorWin 3
18
8
0
2
± 320
2
130
1.564
          
2
0
30
       
240
          
1.318
          
42,2
         
DolWin 3
9
13
0
2
± 320
1
80
1.340
          
2
0
80
       
640
          
1.290
          
46,3
         
DolWin 6
16,5
16,5
0
2
± 320
1
45
1.184
          
1
0
45
       
180
          
-
31,9
         
DolWin 5
0
0
0
2
± 320
1
100
1.300
          
1
0
30
       
120
          
-
33,2
         
BorWin 5
0
0
0
± 320
1
120
900
             
1
110
     
440
          
1.518
          
31,4
         
Offshore - HVDC
Offshore - HVAC - From substation
Onshore
Figure A.4 – Basic data and estimated costs for infrastructure for German OWFs - cont. Please remark that
since TenneT publishes very little, the cost estimates are based on key figures in EUR per km multiplied with
cable route lengths. For converters, costs per MW are multiplied with OWF capacity.
Public regulation of offshore wind: TSOs’ role
59
