==PAGE:1==
Airport Baggage Handling
Authors
Aysenaz Ipek - s232852
Izgi Tulunay - s232853
Supervisor
David Pisinger
August 26, 2025
==PAGE:2==
Preface
This 35 ECTS master’s thesis was prepared at the Technical University of Denmark in
fulfilment of the requirements for acquiring a master’s degree in Mathematical Modelling
and Computation and Transport and Logistics.
We would like to express our deepest gratitude to our supervisor, Prof. David Pisinger, for
his continuous support, guidance, and encouragement throughout this thesis. His availabil-
ity, patience, and motivation have been invaluable in helping us overcome challenges along
the way.
We also sincerely thank Copenhagen Airport for sharing their data and providing us with
the opportunity to visit and explore the Baggage Handling System (BHS) infrastructure on
site, especially to Malene Fangel Høgsvig.
Finally, we would like to thank each other, Ayşenaz İpek and İzgi Tulunay. From the very
first day of our Master’s, we have taken every class together, shared every step of this
journey, and supported one another through the hardships and challenges of graduate life.
Writing this thesis together has been both a rewarding and memorable experience that we
will always cherish.
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Baggage handling is a critical component of airport operations, directly affecting both pas-
senger satisfaction and airline costs. At Copenhagen Airport (CPH), the growing passenger
demand places increasing pressure on existing infrastructure, particularly the allocation of
baggage chutes and the operation of the Early Baggage Storage (EBS) system. This thesis
proposes an integrated optimization and simulation framework to improve departure bag-
gage operations. First, the chute allocation problem is formulated as a mathematical model
and solved using a Greedy Construction Heuristic combined with Adaptive Large Neigh-
borhood Search (ALNS), enabling efficient assignment of flights to chutes under complex
operational constraints. Second, the study introduces a novel Free Flow Algorithm for the
EBS, which allows partial emptying of storage lines and reduces unnecessary circulation
compared to the current timestamp-based.
Using real operational data from CPH and
stress-test scenarios, a discrete-event simulation demonstrates that the proposed methods
reduce overflow baggage, in other words, manually handled baggage. Finally, we develop an
integrated mechanism that establishes feedback between the chute allocation and EBS sys-
tems. This mechanism enables the two previously separate planning stages to adapt to each
other, creating harmony and improving overall system resilience. Together, these contribu-
tions provide a scalable and practical framework for enhancing the efficiency, robustness,
and harmony of baggage handling at Copenhagen Airport.
ii
==PAGE:4==
Contents
Preface
i
Abstract
ii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Literature Review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.2
Contribution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.3
Thesis Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2
Mathematical Model for Chute Allocation
10
3
Data Description and Preprocessing
12
3.1
Data Presentation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
Data Cleaning and Transformation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.3
Exploratory Data Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4
Chute Allocation
19
4.1
Initial Greedy Construction Heuristic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.2
Adaptive Large Neighborhood Search (ALNS) Framework . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.3
Sorting Method Selection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.4
Parameter Tuning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.5
Experimental Results for Chute Allocation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.6
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5
Early Baggage Storage Operations
44
5.1
Timestamp Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.2
Free Flow Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.3
Simulation Model Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5.4
Simulation Algorithm
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5.5
Experimental Results for Simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5.6
Discussions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
iii
==PAGE:5==
6
Integrated Chute Allocation–EBS Feedback Model
57
6.1
Communication Mechanism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
6.2
Experimental Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
6.3
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
7
Conclusion
63
8
Future Work
64
A Baggage System Diagram
70
B MIP Model
71
B.1
Sets
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
B.2
Parameters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
B.3
Decision Variables
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
B.4
Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
C Data
72
C.1 Overflow Baggage Percentages for Dummy Load Scenarios . . . . . . . . . .
72
D Greedy Modes and Summary Results
74
D.1 Per-dataset results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
D.2 Averaged comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
E Parameter Tuning
76
F ALNS Results
80
F.1
Objective Progression Graphs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
F.2
Destroy Operator Probabilities
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
F.3
Repair Operator Probabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
F.4
Full Gantt Charts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
84
F.5
ALNS Stress Test Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
G EBS Simulation Results
89
iv
==PAGE:6==
G.1 EBS Utilization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
90
v
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
Baggage handling (BH) is one of the core services provided at airports. Any mismanagement
within the BH process can have a direct and significant impact on passenger satisfaction,
while rectifying such issues often results in considerable financial costs for the operating
companies [27]. Consequently, every stakeholder involved in the process aims to perform
their tasks in an optimized manner to minimize these negative impacts.
Figure 1: Baggage Handling System
Figure 1 shows the overview of the whole baggage handling process at the Copenhagen
Airport. As also shown in the representation, baggage handling starts when passengers
check in their luggage at the check-in counter. There, the baggage is tagged with a barcode
that contains the passenger, flight, and destination information. Then, by using conveyor
belts, the baggage gets carried to the automated baggage handling system. In the system,
the baggage goes through multiple checkpoints to get the barcode scanned. With the help
of those checkpoints, the control center can tell where each piece of baggage is at a given
time. Before the baggage goes to the sorter, it goes through the security screening and is
checked by X-ray machines. If nothing is suspicious in the screening, the baggage heads to
the sorter. Otherwise, first it goes to the manual inspection, and if it gets cleared from the
manual inspection, the baggage goes to the sorter.
1
==PAGE:8==
(a) Conveyor belt connecting to chutes. Source:
[10]
(b) Collection area for baggage exiting from
chutes. Source: [17]
Figure 2: Sorter-Chute Connections: (a) Conveyor Belt Connection, (b) Baggage Collection
Area.
Airport baggage sorters are advanced, automated conveyor systems designed to efficiently
and accurately transfer baggage in the system from check-in points to the appropriate
area for loading from the system to the aircraft.
The sorter circulates the baggage on
the conveyor belt until the baggage exits the sorter through chutes, which are slide-like
mechanisms that help the bags move easily to the next stage of the handling process. Every
chute has a schedule that serves as a transfer area during a certain time of the day for some
assigned flights. When the baggage is in the correct position in the sorter, it is pushed to
the chute. Once pushed to the chute, the baggage is collected and later transferred to the
corresponding aircraft of the flight. Figure 2a shows the sorter and its connection to the
chutes, while Figure 2b shows the handling area where the baggage is collected after exiting
the chute. In Figure 3, the red and green lines indicate the sorter, with the black dots
representing the chutes. The full infrastructure including the check-in counters, security
check points etc. can be examined in Figure A.1.
2
==PAGE:9==
Figure 3: Sorter System of CPH, Source: Copenhagen Airport
Each airline has a designated ground handling company with which it operates. Ground
handlers are responsible for ensuring that baggage reaches the aircraft. Once baggage leaves
the sorter, it is transported to the aircraft by handlers using trolleys. Each ground handlers
has a group of chutes which they operate through. However, not every chute is available for
use by all flights. There are four handler companies managing commercial flights at CPH.
The chutes are distributed among these handler companies proportionally, handlers with
more airline clients are allocated more chutes.
Within the sorter system at Copenhagen Airport, there are 107 active chutes. In addition
to reserved chutes for each ground handling company, there are also FLEX chutes. These
chutes are not permanently assigned to any specific ground handler; instead, they are
shared and allocated dynamically based on real-time operational demand. In other words,
whichever ground handler cannot provide chutes to a flight from their original assigned
chutes can use the FLEX chutes. In Figure 4, the chute positioning of the CPH Airport
is shown with different ground handling companies represented with different colors and
yellow chutes as FLEX chutes.
3
==PAGE:10==
Figure 4: Chute Positions at CPH
The EBS (Early Baggage Storage) system is a storage mechanism integrated within the
baggage sorter. Infrastructure can be seen in Figure 3, the blue lines in the middle of the
image refer to the Early Baggage Storage (EBS) system infrastructure. The current system
consists of 14 conveyor belt lines. Each belt has its own storage capacity and a designated
release timestamp. Any baggage that arrives before its chute is open is routed to the EBS
for temporary storage. These baggage are labeled as early baggage. Each early baggage
entering EBS is assigned to an EBS belt that has available capacity with a release time
that falls between the chute opening and closing times for the baggage. The entire belt is
emptied at the moment specified by this timestamp. The released baggage re-enters the
sorter to be directed to its assigned chute. EBS system follows a First-In First-Out (FIFO)
pattern, which means that the earliest arrived bag to the EBS system gets emptied first [38].
Since the EBS system has limited capacity, some baggage may not be processed through
it. These bags, classified as overflow baggage, are collected in designated overflow areas.
Since they cannot be handled by the automated system, they must be processed manually,
which increases the risk of mishandling.
Each year, interest in Copenhagen continues to grow, and as a result, the number of passen-
gers is projected to increase by 24% between 2023 and 2030 [34]. This anticipated growth
places additional pressure on existing airport infrastructure. Since building new facilities is
costly and time-consuming, we propose a new approach to better manage the baggage load
4
==PAGE:11==
at Copenhagen Airport, aiming to handle the current and projected increase in demand.
The purpose of this thesis is to use the existing infrastructure more efficiently and help it
reach maximum utilization. This is planned in two steps. Firstly, we aim to optimize chute
allocation to find the best chute–flight pairings. Secondly, we aim to implement a new
strategy in the EBS system to make better use of its existing capacity. These combined
implementations will enable better management of the baggage load, ensuring that the
current infrastructure can efficiently accommodate both current and projected increases in
demand.
1.1
Literature Review
Baggage handling is widely recognized as one of the most critical and complex operations
in the airport environment, functioning as a logistics network that connects passengers,
airlines, and ground operations. Rijsenbrij and Ottjes describe the limitations of traditional
baggage cart systems, such as labor intensity, congestion, and baggage loss, while proposing
truck-based conveyor systems to streamline operations [26]. Similarly, Barth et al. analyze
the transfer baggage process at Frankfurt Airport, showing how dispatch decisions for infeed
areas affect apron driving times, baggage handling travel times, and ultimately the risk of
missed connections [8].
Their modeling of the Transfer Baggage Problem as a mixed-
integer linear program highlights the growing focus on structured optimization for baggage
planning.
Recent work has increasingly adopted data-driven methods. Ruf et al. develop a hybrid
approach that combines process mining, machine learning, and discrete-event simulation
to build highly realistic models of baggage operations [28]. Their framework allows testing
of alternative strategies and layouts under real demand variability, offering both flexibil-
ity and robustness.
Likewise, Sørensen, Nielsen and Karstoft apply deep reinforcement
learning to routing in baggage handling systems, demonstrating how intelligent algorithms
can outperform static routing by dynamically adapting to congestion [30].
Zhou et al.
contribute a multi-airport perspective from China, mapping recurrent system bottlenecks
such as jams at check-in conveyors, diverters, and chutes, and proposing operational im-
provements including design adjustments and control system enhancements [36]. Finally,
Tor Fog Justesen’s PhD thesis centers directly on Copenhagen Airport, where optimization
models for check-in desks, baggage make-up chutes, and reclaim belts are developed and
solved with heuristic and metaheuristic techniques [18]. His work underscores the impor-
tance of integrating interdependent resource allocation problems and testing solutions with
real-world CPH data, making it a cornerstone reference for current and future research on
baggage handling at Copenhagen Airport.
5
==PAGE:12==
Together, these studies present baggage handling as a domain where operations research,
optimization, and data-driven methods converge to address complexity, interdependency,
and uncertainty. They provide the conceptual and methodological basis for modern im-
provements to airport baggage systems.
Within this broader research landscape, efficient chute allocation emerges as a critical com-
ponent of airport baggage handling systems, directly impacting baggage delivery perfor-
mance and overall passenger satisfaction. A variety of methodologies have been proposed
in the literature to address this resource planning challenge. Early work considered greedy
strategies for scheduling baggage handling facilities, which offered fast but often subopti-
mal solutions [1]. Building on this, Ascó, Atkin, and Burke developed constructive and
evolutionary algorithms that targeted objectives such as minimizing the distance between
baggage chutes and aircraft stands, balancing workloads across sorting stations, and maxi-
mizing buffer time between consecutive flights assigned to the same chute [4], [5].
Alternative approaches have also been explored. Frey et al. proposed a decomposition
heuristic to better manage bounded baggage workloads [12], while Barth and Pisinger ap-
plied the Greedy Randomized Adaptive Search Procedure (GRASP) to generate effective
allocation schedules [7]. These studies demonstrate the relevance of heuristic and meta-
heuristic methods in overcoming the scale and combinatorial nature of the chute allocation
problem. More broadly, the literature on metaheuristics provides a rich toolbox for solv-
ing large-scale, NP-hard allocation and scheduling problems, including genetic algorithms,
tabu search, variable neighborhood search, and simulated annealing [14]. A particularly
promising method is the Adaptive Large Neighborhood Search (ALNS), which has been
successfully applied to a variety of complex scheduling and routing problems [22], [11].
Complementing optimization methods, simulation plays a central role in the study of bag-
gage handling systems, as it provides a safe and flexible environment to test alternative
designs and operational policies. Unlike static models, simulation captures the dynamic,
stochastic nature of baggage flows, passenger arrivals, and equipment availability. Lin et al.
demonstrate this by using SysML to create formalized models of Taiwan Taoyuan Airport’s
baggage handling system [21]. Their simulations focused on buffer zones and explored how
control rules affect congestion and manual handling. The study highlighted the trade-off
between minimizing baggage recirculation and reducing manual interventions, illustrating
how simulation can uncover operational tensions that static analysis might overlook.
Le, Creighton and Nahavandi, further emphasize the value of simulation by tackling the
problem of input loading conditions at check-in. Overloading the system can cause cascad-
ing blockages, so they developed a hybrid simulation–binary search approach to optimize
safe loading rates [20]. Their model provided check-in schedulers with guidelines to prevent
6
==PAGE:13==
bottlenecks while maintaining high throughput. More recently, Tymofiiv et al. explores the
use of simulation modeling, specifically Discrete Event Simulation (DES) and Agent-Based
Modeling (ABM), to optimize airport baggage handling logistics [33]. The study focuses on
identifying bottlenecks, improving efficiency, safety, and reliability, and ensuring effective
resource allocation to reduce costs and enhance customer satisfaction. Another research
presents a data-driven simulation of passenger check-in at Buffalo Niagara International
Airport. Using real-world data and Arena-based modeling, it analyzed how factors like
baggage and party size affect service times. Scenario tests showed that removing traditional
counter check-in in favor of kiosks greatly reduces waiting times, suggesting simulation can
guide more efficient airport operations [3].
Simulation research consistently demonstrates its ability to bridge theoretical models and
operational practice, offering a testbed where airports can validate optimization strategies
and control rules under realistic and uncertain conditions. This is directly relevant to the
Copenhagen Airport context, where simulation forms a core part of testing integrated chute
allocation and early baggage storage solutions.
1.2
Contribution
In this thesis, in addition to the previously studied aspects of Baggage Handling Systems,
namely chute allocation strategies and Early Baggage Storage (EBS) operations, we have
introduced several new contributions. For chute allocation, we implemented an Adaptive
Large Neighborhood Search (ALNS) optimization approach, enabling more efficient and
dynamic assignment of chutes under varying operational conditions. While metaheuristics
have been widely applied to resource allocation and transport-related problems, we found
that no prior studies have addressed chute allocation in airport baggage handling systems
using ALNS. We consider this gap noteworthy, as ALNS offers both the flexibility to in-
tegrate operational constraints and the adaptability to cope with highly dynamic airport
environments. Addressing this limitation forms a key contribution of the present thesis,
where we combine ALNS with a greedy construction heuristic to optimize chute allocation
at Copenhagen Airport.
For the EBS system, we developed a new operational strategy, the Free Flow Algorithm,
which allows partial emptying of storage lines rather than the conventional full-line re-
lease. This strategy is designed to reduce unnecessary recirculation of baggage and improve
the effective use of available capacity. To assess its robustness, we subjected the EBS to
stress tests that mimic real-world operational challenges, including peak-load conditions
and simulated disruptions such as line breakdowns.
7
==PAGE:14==
Finally, we implemented an integrated feedback model in which chute allocation and the
EBS system interact with each other. In this closed-loop design, an initial chute assignment
generated by ALNS is tested in simulation, and the resulting information, such as flights
that are prone to overflow or that create storage pressure, is fed back into the allocation
phase to refine subsequent schedules. In this way, chute allocation and EBS operations
adapt to each other, allowing surplus capacity in one subsystem to relieve overload in the
other and creating a more balanced and responsive baggage handling environment.
1.3
Thesis Overview
This thesis addresses the operational challenge of efficiently managing departure baggage
in large-scale airport baggage handling systems, with a particular focus on chute allocation,
the utilization of Early Baggage Storage (EBS), and their integrated model. The study is
motivated by the need to ensure timely baggage delivery to flights while making optimal use
of limited handling resources and storage capacity, especially under peak-load conditions.
We begin by examining the operational context and constraints of baggage handling at
Copenhagen Airport, supported by a detailed description and statistical analysis of real
operational datasets (section 3).
This establishes the basis for understanding baggage
arrival patterns, flight group requirements, chute availability rules, and the role of the EBS
in managing early arrivals.
8
==PAGE:15==
Figure 5: Thesis Overview
We formulate a mathematical model (section 2) to represent the chute allocation prob-
lem. The model integrates flight schedules, operational constraints, and resource capaci-
ties into a formal optimization framework. To solve this problem at a practical scale, we
employ a Preliminary Chute Assignment algorithm which is implemented through using
an Initial Greedy Construction Heuristic. Then a Chute Allocation algorithm completes
the chute allocation, by using Adaptive Large Neighborhood Search (ALNS) metaheuristic
(subsection 4.2). This metaheuristic iteratively improves chute assignments to minimize
operational disruptions and maximize system efficiency.
To assess the real-world feasibility of the optimized schedules, we develop a deterministic,
dynamic, discrete-event simulation (section 5) of the sorter and EBS system. This sim-
ulation reproduces baggage flows under both normal and stress test scenarios, comparing
the current EBS management strategy with a newly proposed strategy, which has a more
dynamic approach than the one currently used. Performance is measured in terms of suc-
cessful baggage delivery, EBS capacity utilization, and overflow baggage occurrences. The
simulation is represented in the Figure 5 as EBS.
Finally, we introduce an integrated feedback framework (section 6) that connects optimiza-
tion and simulation. Here, results from the EBS simulation, particularly the identification
9
==PAGE:16==
of flights that historically produced overflow baggage, are fed back into the allocation model,
which adjusts chute opening times to alleviate EBS pressure in subsequent iterations. This
creates a closed-loop system that adaptively refines both chute allocation and EBS utiliza-
tion over multiple cycles. This framework is displayed in the diagram provided in Figure 5.
Together, these components form a comprehensive framework for improving departure bag-
gage operations in complex airport environments, with results demonstrating significant
potential for operational gains in both chute allocation efficiency and EBS performance.
2
Mathematical Model for Chute Allocation
The first step of improving the baggage handling in the airport is to define a good chute
allocation. To improve the allocation of baggage chutes at Copenhagen Airport, we for-
malize the problem using a mathematical optimization model. The formulation captures
the operational rules and preferences of both flights and ground handlers and serves as the
foundation for the solution approach developed in subsequent sections.
The chute allocation problem is defined over two main sets. We consider a set of flights F,
where each element f ∈F represents a departing flight requiring baggage handling, and a
set of chutes C, where each element c ∈C denotes an individual baggage chute that can
potentially be assigned to flights.
To describe the system, we introduce several parameters. Each flight f ∈F is characterized
by a desired start time Sdes,f and fixed end time Ef. The minimum chute opening time for
a flight f is defined by Tmin,f. The required number of chutes for each flight f is denoted by
Vf. Feasibility of chute assignment is captured by the binary parameter Afc, which equals 1
if chute c can be used by flight f, if the flight is handled by the correct handler company, and
0 otherwise. Since chutes must be allocated in consecutive blocks, adjacency is encoded by
the binary parameter Adjcc′, which takes value 1 if chutes c and c′ are physically adjacent.
Finally, penalty weights guide the optimization: Ps penalizes deviations from the desired
start time, Pn penalizes not placed flights, and a Big-M constant M is used when necessary
for linearization in the MIP formulation.
The decision variables define the actual allocation. For each flight f ∈F, the variable Sf
represents its actual start time of chute usage. The binary variable xfc indicates whether
flight f is assigned to chute c, and the binary variable Nf specifies whether flight f is
considered not placed.
The model tries to minimize the shifting from the Sdes,f by penalizing each unit shift by
penalty parameter Ps and number of Not Placed Flights P
f∈F Nf by penalizing each Not
10
==PAGE:17==
Placed Flight with parameter Pn. Hence, the objective function is:
min
X
f∈F
Ps(Sf −Sdes,f) + PnNf
(1)
To accomplish this, we have some constraints.
• A flight may only be assigned to a chute if that chute is operated by the flight’s
designated handler company. This is captured by the parameter Afc, where Afc = 1
if chute c can be used by flight f (it belongs to the correct handler), and Afc = 0
otherwise (2).
• The number of chutes used by a flight f must be equal to the target number of chutes
Vf (3).
• If chutes c and c′ are used for the same flight f, then they must be adjacent. Adjcc′
is 1 if chute c is adjacent to chute c′ (4).
• The ending time Ef for flight f must be later then starting time Sf (5).
• A flight f’s actual start time Sf may deviate later from its desired start time Sdes,f
(6).
• A flight f should be considered as not placed if the assigned chute time is less than
the minimum opening time Tmin,f (7).
• None of the flights may be assigned to the same chute c at overlapping times; their
usage periods must be non-conflicting (8).
Hence nonlinear version of the model is:
xfc ≤Afc
∀f ∈F, c ∈C
(2)
Vf =
X
c∈C
xfc
∀f ∈F
(3)
xfc + xfc′ ≤1 + Adjcc′
∀f ∈F, c, c′ ∈C
(4)
Edes,f −Sf ≥0
∀f ∈F
(5)
Sf −Sdes,f ≥0
∀f ∈F
(6)
Edes,f −Sf ≤Tmin,f ⇒Nf = 1
∀f ∈F
(7)
(xfc ∧xf′c) ⇒(Sf ≥Edes,f′ ∨Sf′ ≥Edes,f)
∀f, f′ ∈F, c ∈C
(8)
11
==PAGE:18==
A MIP reformulation can be found in Appendix B. While the optimization model captures
the problem structure and constraints effectively, solving it exactly is computationally infea-
sible due to its combinatorial nature and the scale of real-world operations at Copenhagen
Airport.
The chute allocation problem is NP-hard by reduction from the classical Bin Packing prob-
lem. In Bin Packing, we are given a set of items with sizes wi, a bin capacity W, and a
maximum number of bins K. The decision problem asks whether all items can be packed
into at most K bins without exceeding the capacity W of any bin.
We obtain a special case of the chute allocation problem equivalent to Bin Packing by the
following mapping. Each item i corresponds to a flight fi with chute requirement Vfi = wi.
Each bin has a capacity of W chutes, which corresponds to the total number of chutes C.
The number of bins K translates directly to the number of chute groups available, which
in our case is 1.
In this restricted version, we consider only a single time unit, so time-related constraints
and overlaps are irrelevant. Furthermore, we ignore adjacency constraints, and we require
that all flights must be placed.
This reduction allows us to model the chute allocation problem as a bin packing problem,
which is proven to be NP-Hard [19]. Since this reduced version is a relaxation of the original
chute allocation problem, it follows that the original problem is also NP-hard.
Therefore, in the following sections, we shift our focus toward heuristic and metaheuristic
approaches, first by constructing an initial feasible solution, and then by iteratively im-
proving it using a metaheuristic framework. Before presenting the algorithmic methods, we
first describe the dataset that forms the basis for this work.
3
Data Description and Preprocessing
The purpose of this section is to present the datasets used in this thesis, explain the prepro-
cessing steps undertaken to prepare them for analysis, and provide an initial exploration
of their characteristics. We first describe the raw data structure and its key attributes,
then outline the cleaning and transformation procedures applied to ensure consistency with
the operational context. Finally, we examine descriptive statistics and visual patterns to
highlight the differences between the selected operational days and to set the stage for the
modeling and simulation work that follows.
12
==PAGE:19==
3.1
Data Presentation
This thesis utilizes historical operational baggage handling data provided by Copenhagen
Airport, recording actual baggage movement and flight information across three specific
dates in 2024: June 13th, June 24th, and July 8th. The data captures individual baggage
activities and is instrumental for analyzing and optimizing baggage system performance. In
addition to the provided data, we have visited the Baggage Handling site in the Copenhagen
Airport and incorporated some of our observations.
For each baggage, the dataset includes the following attributes:
• First Induction DateTime: The timestamp indicating when the baggage entered the
baggage handling system.
• STD (Scheduled Time of Departure):
The scheduled departure time of the flight
associated with the baggage.
• Flight Information: Including the name and ID of the flight.
• Ground handler Information: The ground handler company that manages the bag-
gage.
Additionally, the data includes a Flight Group mapping sheet that assigns each flight to a
specific group category (Groups B, C, D, or E). This attribute indicates how many active
chutes should be assigned based on the flight size. Group B requires only one chute, Groups
C and D require two, and the largest load, Group E, requires four chutes.
Furthermore, the ground handler assignment directly influences the set of baggage chutes
available for a given baggage. Each handler is limited to a predefined subset of chutes,
including the flex chutes, which are also presented in the data and can be seen in Figure 4.
This introduces an additional operational constraint in the routing and handling of baggage.
This dataset forms the foundation for the analysis and modeling conducted throughout
the thesis, with a particular focus on timing, resource allocation, and compliance with
operational constraints based on flight groups and ground handler assignments. The map
for the sorters, EBS lines, and the relative capacities are also disclosed in the presented
data.
3.2
Data Cleaning and Transformation
Copenhagen Airport has reported that, for operational success, all chutes assigned to flights
must close 20 minutes before the scheduled departure time (STD). This is a mandatory
13
==PAGE:20==
condition that must be met. But regarding opening times, the desired duration of chute
activity depends on the flight group and can be more flexible:
Groups B, C, and D require a duration of 2 hours
Group E requires a duration of 3 hours
Therefore, the desired opening and fixed closing times for chutes can be calculated as follows:
• Desired Opening Time:
STD −20 minutes −Desired Duration (in minutes)
• Fixed Closing Time:
STD −20 minutes
Although the data are defined for specific dates, it also includes baggage arrivals from the
day before or after and requires some data cleaning. Some bags are associated with flights
whose STD falls outside the defined date range.
These flights are excluded during the
chute-to-flight scheduling process, as they are not relevant in that context. However, for
the simulation, we included all bags that entered the system on the given day, even if their
corresponding flight was scheduled for another day, since these bags still contribute to the
baggage load on the day under consideration.
As our project aims to find methods to handle the current baggage load at Copenhagen
Airport, as well as to prepare for the expected increase in the coming year and for unforeseen
system breakdowns, we decided to introduce additional data. Since different scenarios may
involve different types of extra stress on the system, we generated dummy flights with
corresponding dummy baggage to simulate these conditions.
To create a stress test, we gradually increased the number of flights in the system, starting
at 17% above the baseline and going up to 30%. The intervals used were [17%, 20%, 22%,
25%, 27%, 30%]. Values below 17% were excluded, as the lower loads did not produce a
meaningful level of stress on the system.
To generate dummy flights, we mimic the real flight and baggage patterns observed at
Copenhagen Airport. Each flight is randomly assigned a ground handler and a flight group
(B, C, D, or E), both based on historical proportions. The flight group determines how
many chutes the flight requires. Start times are randomly selected within the operational
hours of the day, and durations are assigned according to group-specific rules, either two
or three hours. Chute requirements are added accordingly. This process is repeated to
create as many flights as needed, resulting in a realistic dataset that reflects actual airport
operations and is suitable for simulation or stress testing. Once generated, the flights are
fed into the ALNS algorithm. However, due to the randomness of the process, some flights
may turn out to be infeasible to schedule, typically because too many flights compete for a
14
==PAGE:21==
limited number of chutes in overlapping time windows. As a result, a data-cleaning step is
performed to remove these infeasible flights before proceeding to the baggage simulation.
To generate dummy bags for these dummy flights, we assigned each flight a random number
of bags within a range informed by historical baggage data, with an added buffer, resulting
in values between 80 and 120 bags per flight. We have 30% of the bags marked as early,
meaning they arrive before the chute opens, while the rest arrive within the valid window
leading up to departure. The historical proportion for the early bags is around 25%, this
number is rounded up to put more stress on the EBS system. Each baggage is assigned
an entry time and linked to its corresponding flight. This approach helps simulate realistic
baggage flow and timing behavior, particularly for testing how the system handles early
arrivals and the Early Baggage Storage (EBS) mechanism. Finally, the bags are sorted by
their entry time to reflect the actual order of processing within the system.
After generating the dummy data and conducting the tests, we observed that the chute
allocation model was unable to assign all flights in cases where the additional load exceeded
system capacity. Since flights that were not placed had no valid chute assigned, their bags
would remain undeliverable regardless of how many tours they completed in the sorter.
Including them would therefore produce a misleadingly high count of overflow baggage. To
avoid this distortion, we excluded such flights from the baggage generation step. In other
words, baggage was only created for flights that were successfully scheduled. Consequently,
the actual percentage of processed baggage may differ slightly from the initial percentage
of created flight load. The detailed, valid extra flight percentages for each dummy load
scenario are provided in Appendix C.1.
Another approach to generating stress in the system is to imitate breakdowns, which often
occur in real-life operations as well. Within the 14 lines of the EBS, we prepared test cases
where one, two, or three of the highest-capacity lines break down, and combined these
scenarios with the increases in flights and baggage.
3.3
Exploratory Data Analysis
We have been provided with three datasets from the following dates: 8th of July 2024, 24th
of June 2024, and 13th of June 2024. For the remainder of this thesis, these datasets will
be referred to as Peak Data, Medium Data, and Average Data, respectively.
15
==PAGE:22==
Date
Total Flights
Total Bags
Avg Bags per Flight
Peak Data
324
30235
93.32
Medium Data
326
23722
72.77
Average Data
321
18247
56.84
Table 1: Comparison of total flights, bags, and average bags per flight across three dates.
In the Table 1, we display total flights, bags, and the average number of bags per flight across
three operational dates. Peak Data had the highest traffic volume, with 324 flights and over
30,000 bags processed, resulting in an average of 93.32 bags per flight. In contrast, Average
Data handled the fewest total bags and flights, leading to a lower average of 56.84 bags per
flight. The different date instances represent varying levels of operational difficulty, with
Peak Data being the most challenging due to its high number of bags and flights. By testing
our algorithms across these diverse scenarios, we ensured that our methods are robust and
adaptable, capable of handling both typical days and high-load situations. According to
airport feedback, Average Data reflects a more standard operational day.
Date
Outlier Bags (% of
Total)
Late Bags (% of Total)
Average Data
1008 (5.52%)
132 (0.72%)
Medium Data
1701 (7.17%)
476 (2.01%)
Peak Data
1977 (6.54%)
509 (1.68%)
Table 2: Outlier and late baggage analysis per day: number and share of bags inducted as
outliers and after STD.
Table 2 presents a summary of baggage anomalies observed in the historical data provided,
on three operational days, reporting both outlier and late baggage statistics. Outlier bags
were identified based on deviations in induction time relative to the Scheduled Time of
Departure (STD). Specifically, a baggage was classified as an outlier if its induction time
lay outside the range: [ Q1 −1.5 × IQR, Q3 + 1.5 × IQR ], where Q1 and Q3 represent
the first and third quartiles, respectively, and IQR = Q3 −Q1 denotes the interquartile
range of all induction time differences (measured in minutes before STD). This statistical
criterion, rooted in exploratory data analysis, is widely used to identify extreme or irregular
observations within a distribution [32]. The implementation of this outlier detection was
carried out as part of our analysis using standard statistical techniques.
16
==PAGE:23==
In addition to outliers, the table shows the number and percentage of late bags, referring to
those inducted after the STD, representing operational delays. Notably, although Peak Data
had the highest absolute number of outliers and late bags, Medium Data had the highest
percentage of late bags, suggesting varying types of operational stress across different dates.
Figure 6: Distribution of STD Times by Hour (All Dates Combined)
Figure 6 presents the distribution of bags’ scheduled departure (STD) times by hour, ag-
gregated across all three dates. The histogram clearly indicates that flight activity is not
uniformly distributed throughout the day. Instead, there are distinct peak periods, with the
most prominent one occurring around 12:00, followed by secondary peaks between 6:00–9:00
and 14:00–18:00. Among the three dates, the Peak Data shows the highest concentration
of departures across nearly all active hours, highlighting its overall business. This further
supports the classification of Peak Data as the most challenging day in terms of opera-
tional load. In contrast, the Average Data appears to have fewer bags, particularly during
the early morning and late evening hours, aligning with its designation as a more typical,
baseline day.
17
==PAGE:24==
Figure 7: Distribution of baggage Induction Times Before STD (All Dates Combined)
Figure 7 illustrates the distribution of baggage induction times, measured as the number
of minutes before the scheduled departure time (STD), across three different operational
dates. The graph shows that most bags are induced approximately 50–150 minutes prior
to STD, with earlier or later induction occurring less frequently. Notably, Peak Data shows
consistently higher baggage counts in every bin, further highlighting its status as the busiest
day. The distribution also exhibits a long tail, with a non-negligible number of bags being
inducted more than 200 minutes before departure. This insight emphasizes the importance
of early system readiness and robust buffer management to accommodate varying baggage
flow patterns throughout the day.
18
==PAGE:25==
Figure 8: Distribution of Bags per Flight (All Dates Combined)
Figure 8 presents the distribution of the number of bags per flight across the three dates.
The plot shows that the Average Data exhibits the lowest average number of bags per
flight, with a sharp peak around 30–50 bags, reflecting a relatively light operational day. In
contrast, the Peak Data displays a wider and flatter distribution, with a noticeable number
of flights handling over 100 bags, indicating a significantly heavier workload. The Medium
Data lies in between, both in terms of peak density and tail length.
These differences
confirm that each day represents a distinct operational regime, which was helped in the
development of the built strategies.
As seen from the results of the analysis, the data names reflect the attributes of the data.
4
Chute Allocation
Chute allocation is a core step in the baggage handling process, where flights must be
assigned to available chute resources within strict timing and capacity constraints. Because
the problem combines limited resources with a large number of flights and overlapping time
windows, it quickly becomes computationally difficult to solve optimally, as also explained
in section 2. This makes it a natural candidate for heuristic and metaheuristic approaches,
which can generate high-quality solutions within acceptable computation times [25]. In the
following, we describe our initial greedy construction method and the subsequent ALNS
framework used to improve these solutions.
19
==PAGE:26==
4.1
Initial Greedy Construction Heuristic
Most applications in engineering and industry involve some form of optimization, whether it
is minimizing resource consumption or maximizing profit [35]. However, due to limitations
in time, budget, and available resources, many combinatorial optimization problems en-
countered in real-world applications pose significant challenges for finding exact solutions.
Oftentimes in practice, we handle models that are rough simplifications of reality, making
finding the exact solution more meaningless
[23], hence using metaheuristics for Chute
Allocation remains logical.
The first definition of metaheuristics was proposed by Glover, who described it as “a meta-
heuristic refers to a master strategy that guides and modifies other heuristics to produce
solutions beyond those that are normally generated in a quest for local optimality”
[9].
This approach aims to orchestrate a structured process of local improvements to escape lo-
cal optima and to explore the solution space effectively. Within this framework, the search
progresses by transitioning between solutions using various mechanisms.
Historically, a
number of methods and mechanisms developed through the metaheuristic methods have
demonstrated remarkable effectiveness [14]. These methods are typically regarded as the
fastest approximate methods providing solutions from the ground up [31].
As the first step of our metaheuristic design, we implemented a construction algorithm.
Construction algorithms build feasible solutions from the ground up. In our case, they
serve as initialization methods for metaheuristics, providing a foundation upon which a
complete solution can be iteratively assembled. These algorithms begin from an empty
or partially constructed solution and incrementally build toward feasibility.
The initial
solution generated by the construction phase plays a critical role in determining the ef-
fectiveness of subsequent improvement procedures. As such, the design and selection of
the construction method significantly influence convergence behavior, solution quality, and
overall metaheuristic performance [29, 16].
Several strategies can be employed for the initial construction phase. A commonly used but
simplistic method is fully random initialization. Although easy to implement, this approach
often yields solutions that are slow to converge and require more iterations to achieve high
quality [37]. In contrast, heuristic or semi-random approaches can substantially improve
both convergence speed and final solution quality [13].
In this project, we implemented a semi-random greedy initial construction algorithm. The
greedy approach is characterized by making locally optimal choices at each step, selecting
what appears to be the best option in the moment, with the goal of guiding the search
toward a global optimum. To enhance diversity and avoid overly deterministic behavior,
20
==PAGE:27==
we incorporate controlled randomness into the greedy logic. This combination aims to strike
a balance between intensification and diversification, providing a robust starting point for
the subsequent improvement phase.
Algorithm 1 Construction Algorithm
Input: List of flights, set of chute blocks, scheduling criteria
Output: Scheduled flights and Not Placed flights
Step 1: Sort Flights
Sort flights based on the selected criterion
Step 2: Assign Flights to Chutes
for each flight in the sorted list do
Select a random adjacent chute block
if flight can be scheduled within desired start and fixed end time then
Assign flight to chute block
end
else if there is a flight-chute overlap then
if fixed end time is not violated and valid duration ≥allowed duration then
Assign flight to chute block
else
Retry scheduling (restart Step 2) until out of attempts
end
end
end
Step 3: Handle Not Placed Flights Record flights that could not be scheduled sepa-
rately for later handling
Our initial greedy construction algorithm firstly sorts all the flights based on the selected
criteria out of 7 options: prioritizing the earlier and later desired start time, higher and
lower number of required chutes, earlier and later fixed chute closing times, or random. For
each flight, a random block of adjacent chutes is selected from the corresponding handler,
ensuring the selected chutes are always adjacent. It is directly assigned if the flight can
be scheduled in that random chute block without any overlap during its required time
window. However, if there is an overlap with existing flights, the algorithm checks whether
the overlap ends before the required end time and whether the remaining available time
is long enough. If these conditions are satisfied, it means the flight can still be scheduled
even if it does not fully cover the requirement; it can cover sufficiently. The first successful
chute assignment the algorithm finds is assigned directly, whether it covers the requirement
partially or not. If the candidate chute block cannot cover the requirements sufficiently,
21
==PAGE:28==
then the algorithm retries with a different chute block, repeating this process up to a fixed
number of attempts. Flights that still cannot be assigned after all attempts are recorded
separately as not placed and handled later in the process. Flights that are not assigned
to any chute during initial construction are recorded and passed to the later stages of the
metaheuristics algorithm, where some methods prioritize handling them. This approach
combines randomness and a greedy approach at the same time, as it makes chute selections
randomly but schedules the flights based on a predefined ordering.
Throughout the project, the quality of a given strategy is evaluated based on the objective
value. The objective value reflects the number of Not Placed Flights, and the total amount
of chute duration we failed to cover. Therefore, all qualities of a satisfying solution are
reflected in the objective value. In all cases, lower values for these indicators are preferred.
The objective calculations are done in the following manner:
Algorithm 2 Objective Calculation
Input: Minutes of flights categorized as: Mduration, Mpartially, Mnot placed
Output: Objective value
Step 1: Initialize Metrics
Mduration ←Duration of the flight
Mpartially ←Minutes of partially covered flights
Mnot placed ←Minutes of not placed flights
Step 2: Compute Objective Value
Objective ←Mduration + (Mpartially × Ppartially) + (Mnot placed × Pnot placed)
The objective values are calculated in a weighted manner that prioritizes certain criteria.
The aim is to minimize the calculated objective as best as possible and allocate chutes to
all the flights as long as it is required. Not placing a flight to any chute, partially or not,
is unacceptable. Therefore, the weight, in other words, the penalty point, is much higher.
These penalty parameters are referred as Ppartially and Pnot placed. They are set by using
parameter tuning, and the final selection of these parameters can be found in subsection 4.4.
When selecting the most effective sorting criterion for the initial construction heuristic,
we conducted experiments to evaluate how each option influenced the overall performance
of the metaheuristic.
Since the starting solution determines the initial position in the
neighborhood search space, it can significantly impact the quality and trajectory of the
subsequent ALNS optimization [31]. Therefore, the choice of sorting strategy was not only
evaluated based on its standalone performance but also on how well it interacted with the
improvement phase. The experimental results related to this sorting selection are presented
and discussed in subsection 4.2.
22
==PAGE:29==
4.2
Adaptive Large Neighborhood Search (ALNS) Framework
After obtaining an initial solution, the typical metaheuristic structure calls for implementing
some search methods to try and improve the initial solution in the end. Metaheuristic
frameworks commonly incorporate diversification and intensification protocols during this
search. Diversification is a method that directs the search to explore the broader solution
space and avoid premature convergence to local optima, while intensification is a method
that exploits accumulated search experience by focusing on promising regions where high-
quality solutions have been identified [2]. For this purpose we employed Adaptive Large
Neighborhood Search (ALNS), which is a metaheuristic that is well-suited for large-scale,
constraint-rich scheduling problems. ALNS allows for flexible integration of domain-specific
rules, adapts dynamically to the problem landscape, and provides high-quality solutions
within reasonable computation times. Its success in similar logistics and scheduling domains
further justifies its selection for this work [11].
The region around a current solution is typically referred to as its neighbourhood, and the
process of exploring this region is known as neighbourhood search.
According to Pisinger and Ropke [22], a neighborhood in the context of metaheuristic search
is defined as follows:
A neighborhood is a mapping N : S →2S that assigns to each solution s ∈S a
set N(s) ⊆S of solutions, called its neighbors.
Here, S denotes the solution space, and the set N(s) represents the feasible solutions
that are reachable from s by applying a specific move or transformation. The design of
the neighborhood structure directly influences the search trajectory and performance of
local search-based metaheuristics. The neighborhood N(s) may vary in size and structure
depending on the problem and the chosen operators.
23
==PAGE:30==
Figure 9: Illustration of local and global optima in the search space. Adapted from Talbi
(2009) [31].
Figure 9 shows the objective function value across the search space. A solution can move to
its neighboring solutions through a neighborhood search, potentially escaping local optima.
If the search process is well-designed, it may traverse from one local optimum to another
and eventually reach the global optimum, as shown by the lowest point in the graph. During
this neighbourhood search, one iteratively generates solutions, and whether to traverse onto
the proposed solution or not depends on the acceptance criteria. The acceptance criteria
can be based on improvement, or different methods, such as random or simulated annealing,
can also be chosen as the acceptance criteria based on the algorithm [31].
In the Large Neighborhood Search (LNS) metaheuristic, the neighborhood N(x) of a so-
lution x is implicitly defined through the combination of a destroy operator and a repair
operator.
The destroy process typically incorporates stochastic elements to ensure that
different segments of the solution are altered in each iteration. The repair operator then
reconstructs the solution, transforming the destroyed partial assignment into a feasible one.
The repaired assignment corresponds to a different point in the neighborhood N(x). Conse-
quently, the neighborhood N(x) consists of all solutions that can be generated by applying
a destroy operator followed by a repair operator to x. This approach allows traversal of the
solution space without enumerating all solutions, enabling the exploration of a large range
of neighboring solutions in an efficient and targeted manner [22].
Adaptive Large Neighborhood Search (ALNS) is a metaheuristic framework designed to
solve complex combinatorial optimization problems by systematically exploring large neigh-
borhoods. It extends the basic idea of Large Neighborhood Search (LNS) by introducing
an adaptive layer that dynamically selects among multiple neighborhood operators based
on their past performance.
24
==PAGE:31==
Similarly to LNS, ALNS is an iterative algorithm based on partial destruction and recon-
struction of solutions. At each iteration, a new solution is generated by applying a destroy
operator followed by a repair operator. The key difference is that ALNS has multiple de-
stroy and repair operators, unlike the LNS algorithm. Destroy operators remove a part of
a solution, such as removing a subset of flights scheduled to some chutes. Then the repair
operator completes the partial solution and outputs a feasible solution. They are generally
designed to obtain a better solution. For each of the different operators, there is a scoring
systems that records the weight of the historical performance. Operators are selected in a
probabilistic manner, where the probability of choosing a specific operator is proportional
to its weight, thus favoring those with better historical performance. After obtaining a so-
lution, to decide whether to traverse, ALNS employs an acceptance rule such as simulated
annealing or threshold acceptance.
The way that weights of the operators are updated dynamically based on their contribu-
tion to the search process. After each iteration, the selected destroy and repair operators
receive a score depending on the quality of the solution produced. For example, if the new
solution becomes the global best, the operators receive a large reward; if it is better than
the current solution, they get a moderate reward; and if it is accepted but not better, they
still receive a small reward. If the solution is rejected, no reward is given. These rewards
are incorporated into the existing weights using a smoothing parameter, which ensures that
recent performance has more influence while still retaining some memory of past effective-
ness. As a result, operators that consistently lead to improvements gain higher selection
probabilities, while less effective ones gradually lose influence unless they show renewed
performance.
The balance between diversification and intensification in Adaptive Large Neighborhood
Search is achieved dynamically through this adaptive scoring system. This adaptive scor-
ing system creates a self-tuning process. When the algorithm gets stuck in a local opti-
mum, it favors operators that promote diversification by exploring new areas of the solution
space. On the other hand, when promising regions are discovered, it prioritizes operators
that focus on intensification by refining and exploiting those areas. As a result, the algo-
rithm continuously adjusts its behavior to maintain a robust balance between intensification
and diversification. ALNS thus combines the strengths of large neighborhood search with
adaptive operator selection, making it highly effective for large-scale and computationally
challenging optimization problems [22].
25
==PAGE:32==
Figure 10: ALNS Framework. Adapted from Lei [15].
The algorithm employs seven distinct destroy operators to selectively remove flights from
the current schedule, constrained by a fixed upper bound on the number of removals per
iteration. If a destroy operator fails to identify enough eligible flights up to the upper bound,
fewer are removed accordingly. The first destroy operator (Random) selects and removes a
26
==PAGE:33==
random subset of flights, offering a baseline of stochasticity. The second destroy operator
(Partial Flights) targets a randomly selected ground handler and removes a subset of its
partially scheduled flights. The third destroy operator (Most Partial Interval) divides the
planning horizon into some time intervals with a predefined duration, identifies the interval
containing the highest number of partially assigned flights, and removes flights overlapping
with that chunk. The fourth destroy operator (Random Handler) randomly selects a ground
handler and removes a set of its flights. The fifth destroy operator (Specific Chute Flights)
focuses on chute requirements. A chute number, which can be either 1, 2, or 4, is selected
randomly, and flights requiring that number of chutes are partially destroyed. The sixth
destroy operator (Random Time Interval) involves choosing a random time window and
removing flights that overlap with it. Finally, the seventh destroy operator (Around Not
Placed Flights) specifically targets flights scheduled before and after the time of not placed
flights, aiming to free space and increase the chance of successful reinsertion, especially for
previously not placed flights. This multi-operator destruction strategy helps diversify the
search space while enabling focused disruption in critical regions. Table 3 gives an overview
of the implemented destroy operators.
Mode
Name
Description
1
Random
Removes a random set of scheduled flights, ex-
cluding those not yet placed.
2
Partial Flights
Picks a random handler and deletes some of its
partially scheduled flights.
3
Most Partial Interval
Splits the timeline into intervals and removes
flights in the busiest partially scheduled one.
4
Random Handler
Chooses a random handler and removes all
flights assigned to it.
5
Specific Chute Flights
Selects a chute requirement (1, 2, or 4) and re-
moves flights needing it.
6
Random Time Interval
Chooses a random window and removes flights
within it, limited to one handler.
7
Around Not Placed Flights
Deletes flights scheduled around the same time
as not placed flights
Table 3: Overview of destroy operators used in the ALNS algorithm.
The repair operator aims to reschedule previously not placed flights and those recently re-
moved from the solution by the destroy operator. It begins by merging these two sets into
27
==PAGE:34==
a unified list of flights pending rescheduling. While building the solutions, the flights are
scheduled one by one according to their order in the list of flights to schedule. Thus, the
algorithm then reorders the list of flights to reschedule based on a selected sorting strategy,
prioritizing different attributes, which makes our repair operator. Available prioritization
strategies include favoring flights that require the largest number of chutes, randomizing the
scheduling order, prioritizing those with the longest duration requirements, giving prece-
dence to previously partially scheduled flights, targeting flights that have repeatedly failed
to be scheduled, or sorting based on earliest starting times. Once the flights are sorted
according to the chosen strategy, the algorithm attempts to schedule them using a best
insertion approach, in which each flight is placed in the position that results in the smallest
possible increase in the objective value. This ensures consistency while enabling flexible
reallocation based on problem-specific heuristics. Table 4 gives an overview of the repair
operators.
Mode
Name
Description
1
Largest Chute Requirement
Flights requiring the largest number of chutes
are scheduled first.
2
Random
Random shuffle of flights before scheduling.
3
Longest Durations First
Longer-duration flights are given higher schedul-
ing priority.
4
Prioritize Partial Flights
Partially scheduled flights are inserted first.
5
Previously Not Placed First
Flights that repeatedly failed to be scheduled are
prioritized.
6
Earliest Start Times First
Flights are sorted by ascending desired start
time.
Table 4: Overview of repair operators used in the ALNS algorithm.
Destroy and repair operations define one iteration of the local search phase. After each
iteration, the ALNS adaptive layer updates the scoring system for all destroy and repair
operators based on their performance. These scores influence the probability distribution
used to select operators in subsequent iterations. To support the learning curve of the algo-
rithm, the selection of operator pairs is refreshed every 10 iterations, allowing the algorithm
to gradually favor more effective strategies. As the acceptance criterion, a simulated anneal-
ing approach is employed. Improving solutions are always accepted, while non-improving
solutions may also be accepted with a probability that decreases over time. This mecha-
nism enables controlled exploration, supporting the chance of the algorithm escaping local
28
==PAGE:35==
optima during the search process. With this approach, we build upon an initial solution
and iteratively improve it through local search, continuing for a fixed number of iterations
in pursuit of the best possible outcome.
We should also mention that, in constructing the initial greedy solution, differing from
ALNS, we relied on a Max Attempt strategy, where each flight is assigned by repeatedly
selecting random candidate chute blocks and attempting placement until either success or
a predefined attempt limit is reached based on our observations during development. This
approach sacrifices some solution quality compared to a systematic Best Insertion strategy,
which evaluates all candidate chute blocks and selects the placement that minimizes cut-out
time. However, our design choice was deliberate: while best-insertion generally produces
stronger greedy solutions, the outcome leaves little structural flexibility for the ALNS phase,
often trapping the search in a local optimum. By contrast, the max-attempt method in-
troduces controlled randomness, yielding more diverse initial solutions that give the ALNS
framework greater room to explore and improve upon. Thus, although the greedy initial-
ization alone may perform worse under max-attempt, its variability ultimately benefits the
overall optimization process.
A key difficulty in the search process is that partial flights may remain misaligned after
destroy-and-repair operations, since adjustments to surrounding flights do not automati-
cally propagate to them. This can lead to situations where a chute assignment is made
with too much cut out, even though earlier coverage has become feasible throughout the
iterations. This may reduce the overall quality of the solution. To address this, a Partial
Fixer protocol is periodically applied, every 1000 iterations, and as the last operation be-
fore ALNS is finalized, as a corrective step: it inspects each partial flight, checks the latest
possible feasible start time given its dependencies, and shifts the flight earlier whenever
conditions allow. By updating the flight timing, this procedure ensures that partial flights
are kept consistent with the evolving solution structure, thereby recovering lost coverage
opportunities and improving the logical soundness of the schedule.
The potentially most computationally expensive operation performed throughout the iter-
ations in the local search algorithms, such as ALNS, can be the calculation of the objective
function [31]. To maintain computational efficiency, the objective value is not recalculated
from scratch at each iteration.
Instead, only the changes introduced by the destroyed
and subsequently repaired flights are considered, allowing for an incremental update of the
objective function.
As a sanity check, we implemented a solution verification procedure to ensure the feasibility
of our results. This step, applied after the ALNS procedure, allowed us to double-check
and confirm that all solutions were valid.
29
==PAGE:36==
4.3
Sorting Method Selection
As mentioned in subsection 4.1, the sorting strategy defines the initial greedy algorithm,
which is later used as the starting point for the ALNS algorithm. Therefore, the evaluation
of each sorting method was carried out not only based on the performance of the greedy
construction phase alone but also on its interaction with the ALNS algorithm. With this
joint evaluation, we ensured that the selected sorting method is aligned with the overall
optimization trajectory, leading to better final solutions.
For the sorting methods, we defined the following options and conducted experiments using
all seven criteria and selected the one that yielded the best performance.
Mode
Sorting Criteria
Description
1
Number of Chutes (Descending)
Prioritize flights with higher chute numbers
2
Start Time (Descending)
Prioritize flights with later start times
3
End Time (Descending)
Prioritize flights with later end times
4
Number of Chutes (Ascending)
Prioritize flights with lower chute numbers
5
Start Time (Ascending)
Prioritize flights with earlier start times
6
End Time (Ascending)
Prioritize flights with earlier end times
7
Random Order
No prioritization; random ordering of flights
Table 5: Greedy Construction Sorting Strategies
The results presented below represent averages computed across three datasets. Detailed
results for each dataset, including full numerical values, are provided in the Appendix
Table D.1. Also, the plotted values overall the datasets can be found in the Appendix
Table D.2 to examine the full numbers.
30
==PAGE:37==
Figure 11: Number of not placed flights under each greedy sorting method
The primary objective of our scheduling strategy is to ensure that all flights are successfully
placed, a priority that is also heavily weighted in the objective function. It can be easily
seen that the options we can consider after this point are only the first and fifth sorting
methods.
Figure 12: Total cut-out minutes from the desired chute duration under different greedy
sorting method
31
==PAGE:38==
Among the configurations that achieve full placement, our secondary criterion is to maxi-
mize the extent to which flights receive their desired chute durations. Since only methods
1 and 5 meet the requirement for the number of not placed flights, these are the only
candidates we consider.
Although method 3 achieves the best performance in terms of
total cut-out minutes, it is excluded because it fails to meet the placement requirement.
Its strong performance in partially covered flights is unsurprising, as the high number of
not placed flights it produces results in a less congested schedule for the remaining flights.
The difference in total cut-out minutes between the lowest-performing acceptable method,
method 1, and method 3 is only 10 minutes, indicating that method 1 still performs suf-
ficiently well for partially assigned flights. Therefore, in this metric, the greedy sorting
method of method 1 is selected as the best-performing acceptable method.
Figure 13: Objective values across different greedy sorting strategies
These priorities are reflected in the calculated objective values. Based on this evaluation,
we selected the first sorting strategy, Sort Descending based on Desired Chute Number,
as it produces the lowest overall objective score while successfully placing all flights and
minimizing the cutoff durations. Although Method 5 achieves a comparable objective value,
the total cut-off minutes indicate that Method 1 results in a more favorable plan.
4.4
Parameter Tuning
Before switching to the results, as the algorithm relies on several user-defined parameters,
to improve performance, we conducted a parameter tuning study to identify more effective
32
==PAGE:39==
configurations. We focused on four key parameters:
• Penalty for Not Placed Flights (NP Penalty) — this penalty discourages not
placed flights.
• Penalty for Partially Placed Flights (P Penalty) — this penalty discourages
higher cut out times.
• Destruction Set Size — maximum number of flights destroyed in each ALNS iter-
ation.
• Partial Flight Check Interval — length of time interval to flag partially covered
flights to be used in destroy op.
Each parameter was evaluated in isolation by varying one parameter at a time while keeping
the others fixed to the base configuration that can be seen in Table 6, which is a configura-
tion that we have observed to perform sufficiently well during our algorithm development
experiments. The objective function value was used as the performance metric since the
information related to not placed flights and partially placed flights is embedded in the
objective value.
Parameter
Value
Not Placed Flight Penalty
100
Partial Flight Penalty
3
Destruction Set Size
50
Partial Flight Check Interval Length
90
Table 6: Base Parameter Settings Used for Comparison
The following parameter ranges were explored during tuning:
33
==PAGE:40==
Figure 14: Explored Parameter Values During ALNS Parameter Tuning
Depending on the parameter, for each we tried 4–5 different values.
The comparisons
are made with a scoring system while deciding on which parameter performs better. We
evaluate the allocations for each day based on the objective value since this value contains
information about both Partially Placed Flights and Not Placed Flights.
34
==PAGE:41==
Figure 15: Objective value trends across different parameter configurations. Each subplot
shows the isolated effect of a single parameter on overall solution quality.
Figure 15 illustrates how each parameter changes the performance of the solution. In each
subplot, only one parameter is varied while the others are held fixed at their base-case
values. This controlled setup allows us to isolate and observe the individual impact of each
parameter on solution quality. The plots provide insight into the algorithm’s sensitivity to
different configurations and help identify parameter values that lead to improved objective
outcomes.
Not Placed Penalty and Partial Flight Penalty both contribute to the objective func-
tion. Hence, directly comparing experiment results using objective values is not meaningful.
Instead, we evaluated the metrics contributing to the objective function, namely the num-
ber of not placed flights and partial flights. For both penalties, the number of not placed
flights was zero across all tested parameters. Therefore, we did not include this metric in
our graphs.
For the Not Placed Penalty parameter, increasing the penalty from 50 to 100 reduced the
number of total partial flights, which was the intended effect. However, further adjustments
showed no difference in the results. Thus, we decided to keep the base parameter value at
100. For the Partial Flight Penalty, varying the value between 2 and 10 had no effect on
the total number of partial flights. This suggests that the algorithm consistently handles
35
==PAGE:42==
partial placements regardless of the penalty. Therefore, we retain the base value.
For the remaining parameters, we base our comparisons on objective values, since these
do not directly influence the objective function. For the
destruction size, a value of
100 produces the best result, while smaller and larger sizes lead to poorer performance,
indicating that 100 offers the best balance between diversification and stability of the so-
lution. Lastly, for the Partial Flight Check Interval Length, an interval of 75 minutes
performs significantly worse than the others. The best result occurs at 90 minutes, and the
surrounding values also yield stable results.
To avoid clutter, the detailed experiment results for each baggage load level (Average,
Medium, Peak) are moved to the Appendix E. Instead, a consolidated view is provided
below for comparison purposes:
NP Pen.
P Pen.
Destr. Size
Interval (min)
# Partial Flights
Obj.
100
3
50
90
61
118050
50
3
50
90
69
118860
150
3
50
90
61
118050
200
3
50
90
61
118050
100
2
50
90
61
118050
100
5
50
90
61
118050
100
7
50
90
61
118050
100
10
50
90
61
118050
100
3
25
90
59
118575
100
3
75
90
61
118305
100
3
100
90
59
117810
100
3
125
90
53
118710
100
3
50
60
62
118935
100
3
50
75
66
130860
100
3
50
120
73
119520
100
3
50
150
75
119370
Table 7: Consolidated Parameter Tuning Results Across Load Scenarios
Among the tested configurations, the row highlighted in bold in Table 7 is selected as the
final parameter choice. This configuration yields the lowest objective function value while
ensuring there are no not placed flights and maintaining a low number of partial flights.
It represents a balanced solution with respect to feasibility and scheduling quality without
introducing adverse side effects.
36
==PAGE:43==
Parameter
Value
Not Placed Flight Penalty
100
Partial Flight Penalty
3
Destruction Set Size
100
Partial Flight Check Interval Length
90
Table 8: Decided Base Parameter Settings
4.5
Experimental Results for Chute Allocation
Once the construction algorithm settings and parameter settings are finalized, experiments
can be conducted on different datasets.
The experiments were conducted on a system equipped with a 12th Gen Intel Core i7-
1250U processor and 16 GB of RAM. Based on empirical observations during the devel-
opment phase, we found that a local search limit of 75000 iterations consistently led to
satisfactory convergence behavior. Consequently, all experimental runs in this study were
performed using a fixed iteration count of 75000, alongside the previously defined parameter
configurations.
Figure 16: Objective Progression Graph for Medium Data
37
==PAGE:44==
Figure 16 shows the progression of the objective values throughout iterations. The grey line
represents the raw objective value at each iteration, while the orange line indicates the best-
so-far objective value found up to that point. In the early phase, the high variability in the
raw objective values indicates that the search is largely exploratory, randomly navigating the
solution space without consistent improvement. However, as iterations progress, the best-
so-far curve begins to stabilize, showing that the algorithm gradually learns and identifies
more effective solution strategies. The sustained drop and eventual flattening of the best-so-
far line suggest that the search converges toward a specific, high-performing combination
of destroy and repair operators.
This behavior confirms that the adaptive mechanism
within the algorithm successfully guides it from diversification to intensification, resulting
in efficient convergence to a strong solution. The objective progression results for the two
other data can be found in the Appendix in Figure F.1 and Figure F.2. Figure 17 and
Figure 18 show the final adaptive probability distributions assigned to each destroy and
repair operator across the three datasets. The labels Operator 1, Operator 2, etc., refer to
the specific heuristic strategies described earlier in Table 3.
Figure 17: Final destroy operator probability distributions across three datasets.
38
==PAGE:45==
Figure 18: Final repair operator probability distributions across three datasets.
The ALNS algorithm exhibits strong convergence toward the most effective operator for each
instance type. For example, in the Peak Data, Destroy Operator 5 and Repair Operator 6
were dominant. For the Average Data, the algorithm favored Destroy Operators 2 and 5
almost equally, and Repair Operator 1 exclusively. In the Medium Data, Destroy Operator 6
and Repair Operator 5 were the most frequently selected options. We should underline that
these destroy and repair operator results are the final values of the whole ALNS iterations.
Thus, we see the converged and favored operators. The iterations up until this point have
used different operators before converging to the favored ones. These results highlight the
adaptiveness of ALNS in selecting context-specific strategies for each problem instance.
The full results of the probability distributions can be found in Appendix Table F.1 and
Table F.2.
39
==PAGE:46==
Figure 19: Gant Chart of Time vs Chute For Medium Data
Figure 19 shows a section of the full Gantt chart generated from the Medium Data. Each
horizontal line represents a chute, and the different colored boxes correspond to flights. The
x-axis indicates time. Fully placed flights are shown as solid blocks, while striped blocks
represent partially placed flights. When a flight cannot be fully placed, it is still covered
as much as possible, starting immediately after the previous flight ends. No flights are
separated across non-adjacent chutes. This figure clearly demonstrates how the algorithm
ensures tight, continuous placement of flights, effectively handling both fully and partially
placable ones while prioritizing compactness and feasibility in the overall scheduling logic.
The full Gantt charts for all the datasets can be found in the Appendix at Figure F.3,
Figure F.4 , and Figure F.5.
(a) Objective Improvement After Initial Greedy
Construction vs After ALNS
(b) Total Cut-Out Time Improvement After Ini-
tial Greedy Construction vs After ALNS
Figure 20: Comparison of Greedy Construction vs ALNS for Objective and Cut-Out Time.
40
==PAGE:47==
Figures 20a and 20b illustrate the improvements achieved by ALNS compared to the initial
Greedy Construction in terms of both objective values and total cut-off minutes. ALNS
consistently reduces significantly both measures across all datasets, highlighting its ability
to generate more efficient solutions.
A more detailed breakdown is given in Table 9, which compares Greedy and ALNS across
objective values, the number of not placed flights, the number of partially placed flights,
and the total cut-off minutes. In particular, ALNS eliminates not placed flights entirely
and substantially reduces the number of partially placed flights. For the Average Data
(326 flights), partially placed flights decrease from 65 in Greedy (≈19.9%) to 20 in ALNS
(≈6.1%). For the Medium Data (323 flights), the number drops from 67 (≈20.7%) to 17
(≈5.3%). In the Peak Data (339 flights), the reduction is from 68 (≈20.1%) to 17 (≈5.0%).
This corresponds to a relative reduction of roughly 70–75% in partially placed flights across
all scenarios.
These results demonstrate that ALNS provides more efficient schedules than the initial
Greedy solution.
Average Data
Medium Data
Peak Data
Greedy
Objectives After Greedy
162120
185640
150900
Not Placed Flights
10
12
9
Partially Placed Flights
65
67
68
Total Cut-Off Minutes
1680
1700
1740
Average Cut-Off Minutes
25.85
25.37
25.59
ALNS
Objectives After ALNS
39030
39045
39540
Not Placed Flights
0
0
0
Partially Placed Flights
20
17
17
Total Cut-Off Minutes
250
355
260
Average Cut-Off Minutes
12.5
20.88
15.29
Table 9: Summary of ALNS results across baggage load scenarios
We have also conducted stress tests with the additional data in section 3. In this stress
test, we evaluate the performance of our solution under extreme conditions by artificially in-
creasing the flight load through generated flights according to given percentage increments.
This setup reflects expected trends in future air traffic growth and allows us to examine
how the algorithm behaves when the system is pushed beyond normal operating levels. The
ALNS objective values, in Figure 21, generally increase with higher percentages, but the
progression is not perfectly linear. This is because each percentage addition is made inde-
41
==PAGE:48==
pendently, and for each dataset, the added flight load produces a unique problem instance
with a different set of flights. As a result, the objectives reflect different solution spaces
rather than incremental adjustments to the same base case. However, an overall increase
in the objective is expected as the load grows, as higher traffic levels naturally introduce
more conflicts and constraints for the heuristic to resolve. As the flight load increases, the
problem becomes more constrained and, in some cases, this leads to flights not being placed,
which makes the corresponding solution infeasible.
Figure 21: Stress Test Objective Values over Different Datasets for given extra percentage
flight load
Figure 22: Stress Test Not Placed Flights over Different Datasets for given extra percentage
flight load
The trends in the number of not placed flights closely mirror the behavior of the objec-
tive values, which is expected. For small increases in flight load, the algorithm is able to
accommodate the additional flights without leaving any unassigned. However, after a cer-
tain threshold, the solution space becomes too constrained, and we begin to see not placed
flights appearing. The full stress test results can be found in subsection F.5.
We should also note that the final results are observed under the assumption that flights
operate exactly as scheduled, with no delays or cancellations, ensuring that chute opening
42
==PAGE:49==
and closing times consistently match the planned timetable. Furthermore, the chute opening
times are flexible but not independent from each other, meaning that all chute opening and
closing times for a given aircraft are the same.
4.6
Discussion
The Adaptive Large Neighborhood Search (ALNS) framework demonstrated strong perfor-
mance across all tested demand levels, Average, Medium, and Peak, successfully placing
all flights in every case. The algorithm’s ability to adaptively select the most effective de-
stroy and repair operators allowed it to converge to high-quality solutions within a fixed
number of iterations. The progression of objective values during the iterations showed a
clear learning pattern: an initial exploratory phase followed by stable convergence toward
better solutions. This confirms the effectiveness of the adaptive scoring and operator se-
lection mechanism. Moreover, the algorithm displayed adaptability in operator selection.
The dominant operators varied across datasets, suggesting that ALNS is responsive to the
characteristics of each scenario, favoring different strategies depending on workload inten-
sity and scheduling density. Such dynamic responsiveness provides a significant advantage
in real-world airport operations, where workload intensity and flight distribution patterns
fluctuate daily, distinguishing ALNS from static heuristic approaches.
Quantitatively, ALNS significantly outperformed the initial Greedy Construction heuristic.
It eliminated all cases of unassigned flights and reduced the number of partially assigned
flights by approximately 70–75% across all scenarios, while also significantly minimizing
cut-off times.
The resulting schedules were compact and feasible, as confirmed by the
Gantt charts, which showed efficient packing of flights with minimal fragmentation and
strong adherence to adjacency requirements.
The final results reflect the strength of the ALNS approach. Objective values remained con-
sistently low, and all flights were placed across all datasets. The number of partially placed
flights and the associated cut-off durations were also minimized, supporting the algorithm’s
ability to generate compact, feasible, and operationally sound schedules. Visualizations
such as the Gantt charts further confirm that flight assignments are tightly packed, with
minimal fragmentation and efficient utilization of adjacent chutes.
Stress testing further demonstrated the robustness of ALNS. While increasing flight loads
naturally led to higher objective values and, at extreme levels, infeasible allocations, the
algorithm consistently absorbed moderate traffic growth without compromising feasibility.
This suggests that ALNS is well-suited not only for current operational demands but also
for anticipated increases in air traffic.
43
==PAGE:50==
Overall, the results validate ALNS as a powerful and reliable metaheuristic for the chute
allocation problem.
It combines feasibility, efficiency, and adaptability, offering a clear
improvement over static heuristic methods. Moreover, its ability to produce high-quality
solutions under varying levels of demand makes it an excellent foundation for integration
with broader baggage handling system components, such as Early Baggage Storage (EBS),
within the feedback framework introduced later in this work.
5
Early Baggage Storage Operations
In real-life applications, plans often encounter unexpected complications. Therefore, simu-
lating them using real-world data provides valuable insights into their actual performance.
In this section, we present how we simulated the baggage operations at Copenhagen Air-
port using our scheduled plans and evaluated the resulting performance. Additionally, we
propose a new strategy to be implemented within the simulation framework to enhance
the accuracy and efficiency of baggage handling operations. Our simulation environment is
built to model the baggage flow beginning at the point where a bag enters the sorter sys-
tem. As the upstream process, from check-in to sorter entry, consists of fixed operations,
we omitted it from our simulation model.
One of the key challenges in airport baggage handling systems is managing early baggage,
meaning that baggage that arrives before the assigned chute has opened for their flight.
These early arrivals must be held temporarily without blocking the main flow or overloading
the system. Efficient management of early baggage is crucial for avoiding manually handled
bags and ensuring best operational efficiency while ensuring timely loading, optimizing chute
and conveyor usage.
Copenhagen Airport addresses the early baggage issue using an Early Baggage Storage
(EBS) system. This system comprises 14 conveyor belts, each with different capacity con-
straints. When baggage arrives early, it is first allowed to circulate on the main conveyor
belt for a limited number of laps. If, after completing the allowed laps, the chute remains
closed, the baggage is transferred to the EBS system for storage in one of the lines with
sufficient capacity. These EBS lines store early baggage and record all baggage information
in the lines. According to a defined strategy by the Copenhagen Airport, these lines gets
emptied periodically and the early bags rejoin the sorter.
44
==PAGE:51==
5.1
Timestamp Algorithm
The current strategy implemented by Copenhagen Airport for EBS is referred to as Times-
tamp Algorithm. Within this algorithm, each EBS line in the current setup has an associated
fixed timestamp. Timestamp refers to the time when the line is scheduled to be emptied.
The baggage is placed on a line whose timestamp is between the opening and closing times
of the chute. If no such line is available, the baggage is placed on the line with available
capacity and the closest timestamp to the opening time of the chute. The timestamp of the
selected line needs to be updated to accommodate the baggage’s required delivery window.
If a baggage arrives too early, when all EBS timestamps are earlier than the chute opening
time, it is assigned to the line with the latest timestamp.
When the scheduled time for the line’s emptying time, namely the timestamp, arrives,
the entire line is emptied, and its baggage load is reintroduced into the main system. The
emptied line’s timestamp is then set to be 30 minutes later than the latest timestamp among
all EBS lines. All EBS lines have one direction of flow; therefore, all the lines work in a
First-In First-Out manner, which means that the first baggage to arrive leaves the system
first. Once back on the conveyor, bags begin circulating again. If their assigned chute is
still closed after completing the maximum allowed number of tours, they are retransferred
to the EBS system once more, following the same rules as before.
When the EBS reaches its full capacity, and there is no alternative left to store the baggage
within the belt system, excess baggage must be removed from the system and handled
manually. This category of baggage is referred to as overflow baggage. Because overflow
baggage has to be handled manually, it is more susceptible to errors and has a higher risk of
being mishandled or lost. In baggage handling systems, ensuring accurate baggage delivery
is considered the most critical criterion to maintain passenger satisfaction [24]. Therefore,
the overflow baggage number is aimed to be strictly zero as a result of the baggage handling
strategies combined with the chute allocation schedules.
5.2
Free Flow Algorithm
While the current method is functional, it has its limitations. When the EBS lines are
emptied periodically, entire lines are cleared even when only a subset of bags are ready for
release, resulting in unnecessary churn. Additionally, frequent modifications to line-level
timestamps can introduce delays and reduce system responsiveness to individual baggage
timing requirements.
To address these inefficiencies, we propose an improved strategy,
which is called Free Flow Algorithm, that offers finer control over timing, storage allocation,
and release behavior.
45
==PAGE:52==
In our proposed system, when an early baggage exceeds its maximum allowed laps on the
conveyor belt and still cannot be delivered to its chute, it is still transferred to the EBS
system. Instead of relying on per-line timestamps, each tray now tracks its own release
time. A tray refers to a position on an EBS line for early baggage, and its release time is
defined as the moment the chute opens.
Unlike the original method, our model implements partial emptying of EBS lines. When
the system time matches the release time of any tray, that tray is removed along with
all trays positioned ahead of it in the same line, since the FIFO layout requires clearing
these trays to access the target one. Any trays released earlier than their scheduled release
time are reintroduced to the belt and will continue circulating. The reintroduced baggage
circulates until it reaches the tour limit and is redirected to EBS unless the corresponding
chute becomes available during circulation.
When assigning baggage to the EBS, the system follows a priority-based search. First, it
looks for a line where the latest arrived bag to that said line has a release time that matches
the newly arrived bag’s chute’s opening time. If such a line exists, the baggage is placed
there without altering the other baggage’s release schedule in that line. If no such line
is available, the system checks for an entirely empty EBS line and sets that tray as the
triggering tray for that line. A triggering tray is the designated tray in an EBS line that
serves as the reference point for scheduling releases, meaning its release time dictates when
the line will be partially emptied, and it may be updated whenever a newly assigned bag
requires an earlier release. The trays stored ahead of the triggering tray are emptied along
with it. If neither condition is met, the baggage is placed onto the line whose most recently
stored bag has a release time closest to the new baggage’s required release time. If that
line’s current trigger tray has a release time later than the baggage’s required release time,
the line’s trigger tray is updated accordingly. In each case where a trigger tray is modified,
the system explicitly records the tray that triggered the update to ensure traceability.
This approach reduces unnecessary circulation of baggage compared to the full-line emp-
tying of the Timestamp Algorithm, while still improving timing precision. After partial
emptying, the line’s trigger tray is updated to the next soonest scheduled tray release time.
46
==PAGE:53==
Figure 23: Early Baggage System Representation
Figure 23 illustrates the structure and behavior of the Early Baggage Storage (EBS) sys-
tem. The following section demonstrates how a sample scenario would play out under both
the Timestamp Algorithm and the Free Flow Algorithm. It depicts three EBS lines, each
containing multiple bags placed in trays. The labels above the bags represent their individ-
ual release times, the times they should re-enter the sorter. On the right side, the earliest
release times are indicated. In the Timestamp Algorithm, these times determine when an
entire line will be emptied, whereas in the Free Flow Algorithm, they specify when partial
emptying takes place. The arrows indicate the direction of baggage flow within each line,
which resembles the First-In-First-Out flow.
In this example, we observe how the Timestamp Algorithm leads to avoidable operations
due to its line release mechanism. The first EBS line in the Figure 23 is already full, so
when additional early bags with release times of 8:40, 9:00 and 8:45 arrive, they are assigned
to the second line, which, at that moment, has the closest timestamp match, even though
it already contains a baggage scheduled for 7:00. According to the current system logic, the
entire line is released when the system clock reaches the earliest tray’s release time, in this
case, 7:00. As a result, the 8:40, 9:00 and 8:45 bags are also released early alongside the
47
==PAGE:54==
7:00 baggage, even though their respective chutes are still closed. This triggers unnecessary
circulation and possible repeated EBS storage, leading to avoidable churn in the system,
which could have been prevented with partial line emptying.
In the Free Flow Algorithm, under the same scenario, the second line does not release
all trays at 7:00 but instead allows partial emptying at appropriate times. At 7:00, the
other bags remain stored in the line, and the next trigger tray is set to 8:40. At 8:40,
that bag will be released, while the rest will remain stored in the line. This time, the next
trigger tray becomes the 8:45 baggage. At 8:45, this bag will be released alongside the 9:00
baggage. Although, as in the last case, the 9:00 bag is still released earlier than its intended
release time, compared to the Timestamp Algorithm, it remains stored in the EBS line for
a longer period of time, preventing unnecessary operations. This scenario demonstrates
how specific bags can remain stored in the EBS for longer without requiring recirculation
or repositioning.
5.3
Simulation Model Design
When designing a simulation model, it is important to understand the nature of the system
being modeled. In general, simulations can be grouped into several categories based on how
they behave over time and how they handle input data. First, there is a distinction between
static and dynamic simulations. A static simulation looks at a system at a single point in
time, such as running a snapshot of performance or doing a one-time risk assessment. On
the other hand, a dynamic simulation focuses on how things change over time [6]. Since
the baggage handling process evolves second by second, baggage entering, chutes opening,
and EBS being updated, it clearly falls under the dynamic category.
Simulations are also classified on the basis of whether they contain randomness. If there is
no uncertainty in the inputs, such as baggage check-in times, chute assignments, or system
timing, the simulation is called deterministic [6]. In our case, because all the inputs are
fully known and no elements are randomly generated, the model is deterministic.
Lastly, there is the distinction between discrete and continuous simulations. A discrete-
event simulation tracks changes that occur at specific points in time [6].
For example,
a baggage entering the system, a chute opening, or a conveyor line being emptied is a
discrete event. There is no smooth flow, but rather distinct events that trigger changes.
Since baggage operations happen in steps or events, our simulation is best described as
discrete.
So overall, the simulation we built is a deterministic, dynamic, discrete-event model, as it
follows the time evolution of a system where events happen at specific times and all inputs
48
==PAGE:55==
are fully known ahead of time.
In our simulations, we operated under a set of idealized conditions designed to represent an
optimized operational environment. Flights were assumed to depart as scheduled, without
delays or cancellations, ensuring that chute opening and closing times were always aligned
with the planned timetable. Chutes were modeled without capacity limits, allowing any
number of bags to be processed without congestion. The chute allocation model was as-
sumed to operate at peak efficiency, maximizing the probability that arriving baggage could
be sent directly to its assigned chute and minimizing the need for EBS. Ground handling
staff were assumed to perform all tasks without error or delay, and the EBS lines were
considered fully functional at all times, with no mechanical failures or downtime.
49
==PAGE:56==
5.4
Simulation Algorithm
Algorithm 3 Baggage Handling Algorithm
Input: Flight Chute Assignment, baggage arrival data
Output: All bags delivered, stored, or flagged as failed
Step 1: Initialize System Step 2: Begin Baggage Handling Loop
while there are still active bags do
Rotate the belt by one step
for each position on the belt do
if a baggage is ready and at a chute then
Deliver the baggage
Clear the belt position
else
if baggage has exceeded tour limits then
if EBS has space then
Move baggage into EBS
else
Mark baggage as overflow
end
else
if position is empty and a baggage is ready then
Load a new baggage and set its system time
end
end
end
end
Check if any EBS lines are ready to release bags
Advance the system clock by 0.3 seconds
end
The baggage handling simulation models how bags move through an automated sorter
system from sorter to chute delivery. At initialization, the system loads all relevant flight
schedules, chute assignments, and baggage arrival data. Each bag is represented as an object
with attributes such as arrival time, flight assignment, and current status. The conveyor belt
is modeled as a circular array of discrete positions, some of which are linked to chutes that
only open during their respective flight’s ground handling window. In the real Copenhagen
Airport system, two belts move in opposite directions, effectively doubling capacity and
50
==PAGE:57==
speed; the simulation captures this by doubling the number of belt slots and advancing the
system clock in 0.3-second steps instead of 0.6, so a full tour still represents 240 seconds
in real time. Once running, the simulation repeatedly rotates the belt and by checking
every position, delivering bags that arrive at their chute, and moving overstayed bags into
the Early Bag Store (EBS) if space allows. Empty positions are filled with newly arrived
bags whenever possible. Bags released from the EBS rejoin the belt under the same tour
limits, and this cycle can repeat multiple times. When EBS is full but baggage is sent to be
stored, they are flagged as overflow baggage. The simulation supports both the Timestamp
Algorithm and the Free Flow Algorithm, applied under the same flight–chute assignments
and input datasets, enabling direct comparison. Key performance metrics include successful
delivery rates, EBS efficiency, and overflow occurrences, providing practical insight into
whether the proposed Free Flow Algorithm yields measurable operational improvements.
5.5
Experimental Results for Simulation
The experiments were conducted on a system equipped with an Intel Core i7-10750H pro-
cessor and 16 GB of RAM. The simulation is run until all the bags within the specified
timeline are processed. As mentioned earlier, this includes all the bags of the day and the
bags until the next flight period starts at around 4 AM.
Objectives
After
ALNS
Not
Placed
Flights
Partially
Placed
Flights
Total
Cut-Off
Minutes
Overflow
Bags
with
Timestamp
Algorithm
Overflow
Bags
with
Free Flow
Algorithm
Average
Data
39030
0
20
250
0
0
Medium
Data
39045
0
17
355
0
0
Peak
Data
39540
0
17
260
0
0
Table 10: Simulation results for Average, Medium, and Peak Data scenarios.
As it can easily be seen in Table 10, due to the efficient Chute Allocation Algorithm, we
were able to handle all the baggage load without needing to use the overflow chute, even for
the peak day. This was applicable for both the Timestamp Algorithm and the Free Flow
Algorithm.
Hence to have a more meaningful comparison between the two algorithms we conducted
51
==PAGE:58==
stress tests, using the data introduced in section 3. Within the stress test schemes, we
compare the Timestamp Algorithm and the Free Flow Algorithm under incrementally higher
flight loads. At each tested point, the Free Flow Algorithm consistently directs fewer bags
to the overflow chute than the Timestamp Algorithm across all three traffic profiles. For
the Average Data, both algorithms managed all the baggage with no overflow.
Figure 24: Number of Baggage in Overflow Chute (%) vs Extra Percentage on Medium
Data
In the Medium Data setting Figure 24, the Timestamp Algorithm shows an oscillating trend
in overflow as load increases in some scenarios, ultimately resulting in overflow baggage,
while the Free Flow Algorithm remains stable at zero overflow baggage across all tested
points.
52
==PAGE:59==
Figure 25: Number of Baggage in Overflow Chute (%) vs Extra Percentage on Peak Data
The Peak Data setting, Figure 25, is the most demanding case.
Here, the Timestamp
Algorithm shows high overflow at all tested points with a pronounced increasing trend.
The Free Flow Algorithm keeps overflow low throughout, with only a modest rise at the
highest tested point.
It is important to emphasize that the curves are not expected to be perfectly linear. For each
load level, a new dummy data set is generated following the procedure described earlier;
therefore, each point reflects a different realization of flight schedules and baggage timing.
The figures should be interpreted as discrete observations of system behavior at the tested
points, rather than as a continuous, interpolable relationship.
53
==PAGE:60==
Figure 26: EBS Utilization for Medium Data
Figure 26 presents the EBS utilization over time for both EBS strategies under the Medium
Data with a 20% increase in load. The x-axis represents the system time throughout the
day, while the y-axis shows the number of bags stored in the Early Baggage Storage (EBS).
The blue line corresponds to the Timestamp Algorithm, while the orange line represents the
Free Flow Algorithm. The dark blue markers indicate overflow events, where bags could no
longer be accommodated within the automated system. Together, these curves illustrate
how the utilization of the storage system evolves dynamically and allow a direct comparison
between the two strategies.
In the figure, the differences between the algorithms become evident. The Timestamp Al-
gorithm exhibits higher fluctuations in utilization levels, frequently pushing the EBS lines
toward capacity limits. This oscillating behavior increases the likelihood of unnecessary
recirculation and, in overload cases, results in overflow baggage. In contrast, the Free Flow
Algorithm demonstrates a smoother and more stable utilization trajectory. By allowing
partial emptying of lines and aligning individual trays with their precise chute opening
times, it avoids the steep spikes characteristic of the Timestamp Algorithm and maintains
the EBS load well within safe margins. Whereas the Timestamp Algorithm shows pro-
nounced accumulation of baggage between 07:00 and 11:00, leading to overflow, the Free
Flow Algorithm consistently operates at lower capacity levels. These results highlight how
the Free Flow Algorithm dominates over the Timestamp Algorithm under stressed condi-
tions, confirming its superior ability to delay or entirely avoid overflow, even as system load
54
==PAGE:61==
rises.
Figure 27: EBS utilization for Peak Data, zoomed into a selected time horizon
Figure 27 presents a zoomed-in view of the utilization dynamics for the Peak Data under a
30% increase in load. In this highly stressed setting, both strategies operate at consistently
high levels of EBS utilization, with frequent periods where the system reaches full capacity.
As highlighted by the overflow markers, all overflow events coincide with these maximum-
capacity intervals, confirming that once the EBS is full the system cannot accommodate
additional early baggage. While both strategies experience overflow under these conditions,
the Free Flow Algorithm maintains a smoother utilization trajectory and delays overflow
relative to the Timestamp Algorithm with fewer overflow baggage. This again demonstrates
the advantage of partial emptying and finer release control, which help preserve EBS ca-
pacity and mitigate the negative impact of extreme load peaks. The full EBS Utilization
experiment result can be found in subsection G.1.
55
==PAGE:62==
Figure 28: EBS Entry Frequencies Per Bag
Figure 28 presents the distribution of the number of times baggage re-enters the Early
Baggage Storage (EBS) system per bag.
The x-axis represents how many times a bag
enters the EBS, while the y-axis shows the frequency of occurrence. Two algorithms are
compared: the Timestamp Algorithm and the Free Flow Algorithm.
As illustrated, the Timestamp Algorithm produces a longer tail, with a noticeable number
of bags re-entering the EBS multiple times. In contrast, the Free Flow Algorithm exhibits
a sharper decline, with significantly fewer bags requiring repeated storage. This pattern
demonstrates that the Free Flow Algorithm results in more consistent handling behavior,
reducing unnecessary churn in the system.
The reason for this difference lies in the handling mechanisms of each strategy.
With
the Timestamp Algorithm, entire EBS lines are periodically reintroduced to the conveyor,
which causes some bags to circulate and re-enter storage multiple times if their chute is
still unavailable. The Free Flow Algorithm, by enabling partial line emptying and aligning
release times more closely with chute openings, minimizes such premature reintroductions.
Consequently, fewer bags undergo repeated cycles of storage and circulation, leading to
improved operational efficiency and reduced system strain.
56
==PAGE:63==
5.6
Discussions
The results presented in Section 5.5 show that, under the optimized conditions of our sim-
ulation, both the Timestamp Algorithm and the Free Flow Algorithm can operate without
producing overflow baggage during normal operational scenarios, even at peak load levels.
This outcome is closely tied to the assumptions built into the model, which makes our
framework idealized. Within this idealized framework, chute availability remains consis-
tently high, and the use of the EBS system for early baggage is minimal. As a result, both
algorithms achieve zero overflow in normal load conditions. However, the stress test results
highlight the differences between the two approaches when the system is pushed beyond
normal capacity. Across all tested overload scenarios, the Free Flow Algorithm consistently
outperforms the Timestamp Algorithm by maintaining a lower overflow rate. This advan-
tage stems from the Free Flow Algorithm’s ability to release only the trays necessary to
access a target bag, rather than clearing an entire EBS line at once. By reducing unnec-
essary recirculation, this approach preserves EBS capacity for genuinely early baggage and
delays the point at which overflow becomes unavoidable.
It is important to note that while the simulation is based on optimized assumptions, real-
world operations are far more dynamic, influenced by factors such as flight delays, last-
minute schedule changes, varying ground handling performance, and fluctuations in chute
availability. In such a setting, the Free Flow Algorithm more closely reflects real-life con-
ditions, as its dynamic nature allows it to adapt to uncertainty and shifting constraints.
This flexibility positions it to deliver even greater benefits in practice than those observed
under controlled simulation, making it a strong candidate for robust, real-world baggage
handling.
Future work should therefore evaluate both algorithms under more realistic, stochastic
conditions that incorporate variability in flight schedules, chute capacity, and operational
reliability. Such an approach would provide a clearer picture of how these strategies per-
form in practice and offer more robust guidance for operational decision-making in airport
baggage handling systems.
6
Integrated Chute Allocation–EBS Feedback Model
In the following section, we propose an architecture where the Chute Allocation Model and
the EBS Simulation operate as interconnected modules. The chute allocation model enables
smart assignments to optimize the transport of baggage to the correct aircraft. To assess the
real-life feasibility of these assignments, we implement a simulation algorithm that mimics
57
==PAGE:64==
the dynamic flow of baggage through the airport’s handling system. The simulation results
reveal the effectiveness of our schedule and highlight areas for improvement through the
number of overflow bags. By analyzing the simulation results and adjusting the assignment
accordingly, we can enhance the performance even more.
With this motivation, we’ve
implemented an integrated feedback mechanism, where we first generate a chute assignment
plan, simulate it, and then feed the results back into the scheduling algorithm. This creates
a continuous loop of learning and refinement.
6.1
Communication Mechanism
The communication mechanism begins with the Chute Allocation Model, which generates
a flight-to-chute assignment. This assignment is passed to the EBS Simulation, which uses
it to simulate baggage flow under real-world operating conditions. As it performs better,
in this section, we carried out our simulation tests using Free Flow Algorithm. During
this simulation, the system identifies problematic bags, specifically, those that could not be
delivered to their assigned chutes and instead ended up in the overflow chute due to EBS
limitations. The simulation logs the flight IDs associated with these overflow bags. This
information is then read by the Chute Allocation Model, which uses the feedback to adjust
the next scheduling iteration. To incorporate this feedback, the Chute Allocation Model
modifies the scheduling of the affected flights in the next iteration. Specifically, for each
flight identified as having overflow bags, the model moves its desired chute opening time by
15 minutes earlier. This intervention effectively extends the chute’s availability window for
each flight, allowing more early-arriving bags to bypass the EBS and be sent directly to the
chute, thereby reducing the risk of manual handling. This simple yet effective adjustment
aims to relieve pressure on the EBS system, leading to fewer mishandled bags and improved
overall system performance in subsequent iterations. Through this mechanism, we aim to
teach the model dynamically from past simulation outcomes and adjust the assignment
accordingly. Figure 29 represents the workflow of the system. The first step is retrieving
the initial schedule, and after this step, the loop starts. The loop is repeated as many times
as the user defines or up until we retrieve a solution with zero overflow baggage.
58
==PAGE:65==
Figure 29: Communication Model
As demonstrated by our initial simulation results, the occurrence of overflow baggage is
minimal, even when incorporating stress scenarios with additional generated flights and
corresponding baggage, when our proposed simulation strategy is applied. However, real-
world operations rarely proceed exactly as planned. To account for this, we introduced an
59
==PAGE:66==
additional layer of realism by simulating breakdowns in selected EBS lines during operation.
For this scenario, we considered that one to three of the highest-capacitated EBS lines were
out of service. This allowed us to evaluate the robustness of our strategy under extreme
conditions and to assess whether the integration of a communication mechanism between
the chute allocation model and the EBS simulation would provide measurable benefits.
To create the most challenging test cases, we combined the EBS line breakdown scenario
with the increased flight demand scenario. This approach enabled us to observe system
performance in the face of simultaneous capacity constraints and heightened operational
load, providing a more comprehensive evaluation of the proposed strategy’s resilience.
An important note is that the improvement process is not expected to follow a strictly
monotonic path. Since each iteration modifies the timing of selected flights to alleviate
pressure on the EBS, the objective values reported by ALNS cannot be directly compara-
ble across iterations. Instead, the focus shifts from optimizing the numerical objective to
minimizing the number of overflow bags, which is the more meaningful indicator of oper-
ational success. In practice, this trade-off is justified: reducing overflow baggage directly
reduces the reliance on manual intervention and minimizes the risk of mishandling.
6.2
Experimental Results
In our tests, we have implemented the previously defined parameters. The experiments were
conducted on a system equipped with a 12th Gen Intel Core i7-1250U processor and 16 GB
of RAM. Based on empirical observations during the development phase, we found that a
local search limit of 75000 iterations consistently led to satisfactory convergence behavior.
Consequently, all experimental runs in this study were performed using a fixed iteration
count of 75000, along with the parameter configurations defined previously.
Every run
of ALNS followed by simulation is considered as one integrated iteration. The integrated
iterations continue for 5 iterations unless all flights are placed without any overflow bags,
in which case the process stops earlier.
60
==PAGE:67==
Data
Integrated
Iteration
# of Off
EBS Lines
Percentage
Overflow Bags
Average
1
3
30%
55
Average
5
3
30%
0
Medium
1
3
25%
20
Medium
2
3
25%
0
Medium
1
2
30%
77
Medium
2
2
30%
29
Medium
1
3
30%
269
Medium
4
3
30%
57
Peak
1
2
30%
422
Peak
3
2
30%
125
Table 11: Experimental results across different load scenarios
The results presented in Table 11 summarize the experimental outcomes across different
baggage load scenarios. Each pair of rows represents a single test run: the first row cor-
responds to the initial ALNS solution and its directly simulated overflow result, while the
second row reports the best outcome achieved through the integrated feedback mechanism.
The Integrated Iteration column indicates either the first iteration or the iteration at which
this best solution was obtained. All the test cases involves three different EBS line break-
down scenarios, combined with 25% or 30% increase in the number of flights. But the
table only includes cases where improvements were observed; other datasets either showed
no improvement within the considered runs or started with zero overflow bags. For those
non-improving cases, additional integrated iterations could be performed until an improve-
ment is reached. There were eight test cases where, from the initial integrated iteration,
the number of overflow bags started with zero. The column # of Off EBS Lines reflects the
number of EBS lines intentionally taken out of service to simulate breakdowns or mainte-
nance conditions. The Percentage column denotes the share of additional flights included
in the experiment. The Overflow Bags column provides the number of bags that could
not be accommodated within the BHS and were diverted to overflow storage. Taken to-
gether, these results form the experimental setup and serve to evaluate how effectively the
communication mechanism between the Chute Allocation Model and the EBS Simulation
mitigates overflow under varying system stress conditions.
The experimental results reveal distinct behaviors across the datasets. For the medium-
load case with 25% additional flights and three EBS lines offline, the system reached the
termination criterion of zero overflow bags already at the second integrated iteration, which
61
==PAGE:68==
makes the process stop early. In contrast, for the Average Data, the zero-overflow condition
was only achieved at the final and fifth integrated iteration. The remaining scenarios show
improvement but do not completely eliminate overflow bags within the tested runs.
It is also important to highlight that while the absolute number of overflow bags in some
scenarios may appear relatively high, for example, several hundred bags in the peak-load
tests, each dataset contains more than 30,000 bags in total. When expressed as a percentage,
the loss rate remains extremely low, demonstrating that the proposed strategy performs
very well in relative terms even under severe stress conditions.
6.3
Discussion
The experimental findings confirm that the proposed communication mechanism between
the Chute Allocation Model and the EBS Simulation provides measurable benefits in re-
ducing overflow baggage. Although the initial ALNS solutions already performed well in
most scenarios, the integration of simulation-based feedback allowed the system to further
adapt and improve, particularly under stressed conditions such as increased flight demand
combined with EBS line breakdowns.
The results show that the number of iterations required to reach satisfactory performance
varies by scenario. In some instances, the system achieved zero overflow after only two
iterations, while other cases required more cycles without always fully eliminating overflow.
This demonstrates that the mechanism adapts to different operating environments but may
require additional iterations in high-stress situations.
From an operational perspective,
this suggests the usefulness of flexible stopping rules, such as terminating the process once
zero overflow has been observed for consecutive iterations, since further runs at that point
primarily explore equivalent allocations. By analyzing the improving instances, one can
reach valuable insights about the system bottlenecks.
The robustness of the approach is also noteworthy. Even when multiple high-capacity EBS
lines were simulated as unavailable, the integrated mechanism reduced overflow compared
to the baseline allocation in some instances. While full elimination was not always achieved
in the most demanding cases, the observed reductions highlight the resilience of the strategy
and its value for real-world airport operations where disruptions are inevitable. At the same
time, the results indicate opportunities for future refinement, for example by introducing
adaptive feedback rules that account for the severity of breakdowns or by incorporating
probabilistic failure scenarios into the initial allocation stage.
Overall, the study demonstrates that the feedback-based integration strengthens the link
between scheduling and simulation, enabling a continuous learning process that enhances
62
==PAGE:69==
robustness against uncertainty.
Although not guaranteed to resolve all overflow cases,
the mechanism represents a practical and effective step toward improving the reliability of
automated baggage handling systems under both normal and stressed operating conditions.
7
Conclusion
This thesis presented an integrated optimization and simulation framework for departure
baggage operations at Copenhagen Airport, with particular focus on chute allocation, Early
Baggage Storage (EBS), and their communication-based integrated feedback mechanism.
The evaluation of the chute allocation problem demonstrated that Adaptive Large Neigh-
borhood Search (ALNS) is a highly effective method. The results show that ALNS con-
sistently produces feasible and high-quality solutions within acceptable computation times.
Its strength lies in its adaptability to operational constraints and robustness under vary-
ing demand. To decide whether to implement ALNS or remain with the current chute
allocation algorithm one can use simulation as it provides some indicators of the solution
effectiveness.
For the EBS component, the proposed Free Flow Algorithm executes promising results
when compared with the existing Timestamp Algorithm, especially under higher demand
scenarios. This is due to the fact that the Free Flow Algorithm provides greater flexibil-
ity and resilience in avoiding overflow. Given the cost of expanding infrastructure, such
algorithmic improvements offer a practical and timely alternative to physical investments.
Especially considering the expected increase in passenger rates, this change in the struc-
ture becomes crucial to enhance the utility of the baggage handling system and increase its
effective capacity, whether this is achieved through strategic or infrastructural changes.
Simulation comparisons revealed that, while our method performs superior under the con-
trolled test scenarios, its true strength becomes apparent in real-world operations where
both demand variability and unexpected disruptions are common. In practice, baggage
flows do not follow perfectly predictable patterns: peaks may occur outside of planned
windows, flights may be delayed, and arrival streams may cluster in ways that stress the
system unevenly. Under such conditions, the Timestamp Algorithm often forces repeated
recirculation of bags, leading to congestion within the sorter, longer waiting times before
chutes open, and increased pressure at the entry points of the system.
The Free Flow Algorithm, by contrast, is better equipped to handle these irregularities. Its
flexible release mechanism continuously feeds baggage into the sorter as capacity becomes
available, preventing unnecessary all-at-once releases that overload the system. This re-
63
==PAGE:70==
duces the likelihood of bottlenecks at entry points, limits the buildup of bags queued to
enter the sorter, and mitigates cascading delays further down the process. In effect, Free
Flow smooths the flow of baggage through the network, maintaining a steadier circulation
even under stress.
These benefits can be seen even in simplified experimental settings,
where demand is modeled in aggregate and disruptions are limited. However, in real oper-
ations, where variability is the norm rather than the exception, the Free Flow Algorithm
offers even more functional and resilient alternative to the Timestamp Algorithm.
The integrated communication model adds another dimension by linking chute allocation
and EBS performance. Its greatest contribution lies in exposing system weak points: by
comparing alternative but parallel allocation outcomes, the framework highlights where
bottlenecks are likely to occur.
However, this comes at the expense of computational
efficiency. The communication mechanism requires significant processing, and the number
of integrated iterations necessary to achieve stable improvements remains uncertain. As
such, while its everyday use may be limited, it holds clear potential for application in
high-demand or stress-test scenarios where identifying vulnerabilities is critical.
In summary, the methods developed in this thesis balance practicality and innovation.
ALNS provides a strong optimization backbone, the Free Flow Algorithm enhances re-
silience without costly and timely infrastructure investments, and the communication model
offers valuable diagnostic insights. Together, they represent a step toward more flexible, ro-
bust, and data-driven baggage handling operations that can adapt to the growing demands
placed on modern airports.
8
Future Work
While the developed optimization and simulation framework provides strong results for both
chute allocation and Early Baggage Storage (EBS) operations, several promising extensions
remain for future research.
First, the current model applies a uniform penalty for partially placed flights. In practice,
not all flights are equally critical: some can operate with partial coverage without major
disruptions, while others require full allocation. Introducing a differentiated penalty scheme,
where critical flights are penalized more heavily and less critical ones are allowed partial
allocation at lower cost, would increase realism and improve scheduling flexibility.
Second, the EBS strategy can be further refined. At present, the system relies on the Free
Flow Algorithm, but additional release rules could be introduced. One promising exten-
sion is to release the earliest releasable bag when the EBS reaches full capacity, ensuring
64
==PAGE:71==
continuous circulation and reducing the likelihood of overflow.
Third, the current work assumes that flights depart exactly as scheduled, with no cancel-
lations or delays. In reality, disruptions are frequent and have direct effects on baggage
handling. Incorporating stochastic elements, for example through variance-based analysis
of historical data, could allow the evaluation of chute allocations and EBS strategies under
uncertainty, thereby testing the robustness of solutions.
Fourth, the assumption that all chutes assigned to a flight must share the same start
times can be relaxed. In practice, while closing times must be synchronized, opening times
may vary across chutes.
Allowing this flexibility would potentially yield more efficient
allocations.
Finally, although Adaptive Large Neighborhood Search (ALNS) proved effective for the
chute allocation problem, other metaheuristics and heuristic approaches could be explored.
Methods such as hybridized strategies may provide alternative trade-offs between solution
quality and computational effort. Their evaluation can again be performed using the EBS
simulation framework to ensure consistent benchmarking.
In addition, the integrated communication model opens new avenues for methodological
refinement. Future research could experiment with alternative feedback designs, such as
weighted adjustments based on the number of overflow bags, dynamic step sizes in opening
time extensions, or multi-criteria signals that combine both overflow volume and EBS uti-
lization rates. Testing such variants would provide deeper insights into the responsiveness
of the system and its adaptability across operational scenarios.
Within these trials, parameter tuning also plays a central role. While the current configu-
ration employs fixed thresholds and step values, adaptive tuning techniques could be intro-
duced. For example, metaheuristic-based parameter adjustment or reinforcement learning
strategies may enable the communication loop to self-calibrate during operation, improving
convergence speed and stability. Exploring these avenues would extend the practical ro-
bustness of the integrated model and allow for more fine-grained control over the trade-off
between allocation efficiency and EBS resilience.
Together, these extensions would enhance the practical applicability of the model by cap-
turing more operational nuances, incorporating uncertainty, and broadening the method-
ological landscape.
65
==PAGE:72==
References
[1] Ahmed Abdelghany, Khaled Abdelghany, and Rajesh Narasimhan.
Scheduling
baggage-handling facilities in congested airports. Journal of Air Transport Manage-
ment, 12(2):76–81, 2006.
[2] Sami F. Adra and Peter J. Fleming.
Intensification, diversification, and learning
in metaheuristic optimization.
IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation,
23(2):243–255, 2019.
[3] Simone Appelt, Rajan Batta, Li Lin, and Colin G. Drury. Simulation of passenger
check-in at a medium-sized us airport. In Proceedings of the Winter Simulation Con-
ference, pages 1252–1260, 2007.
[4] Adrià Ascó, Jason A. D. Atkin, and Edmund K. Burke. An evolutionary algorithm for
the over-constrained airport baggage sorting station assignment problem. In Lam Thu
Bui, Yew-Soon Ong, Nguyen Xuan Hoai, Hisao Ishibuchi, and Ponnuthurai Nagarat-
nam Suganthan, editors, Simulated Evolution and Learning, volume 7673 of Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, pages 32–41. Springer, Berlin, 2012.
[5] Adrià Ascó, Jason A. D. Atkin, and Edmund K. Burke. An analysis of constructive
algorithms for the airport baggage sorting station assignment problem.
Journal of
Scheduling, 17(6):601–619, 2014.
[6] Jerry Banks, John S. Carson II, Barry L. Nelson, and David M. Nicol. Discrete-Event
System Simulation. Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ, 4th edition, 2005.
[7] Torben Barth and David Pisinger. Scheduling of outbound luggage handling at air-
ports. In Diethard Klatte, Karl Schmedders, and Hans-Jakob Lüthi, editors, Operations
Research Proceedings 2011: Selected Papers, volume Part 8, pages 251–256. Springer,
2012.
[8] Torben C. Barth, Janus Timler Holm, Jakob Lindorff Larsen, and David Pisinger.
Optimization of transfer baggage handling in a major transit airport. SN Operations
Research Forum, 2(16), 2021.
[9] Edmund K. Burke and Graham Kendall, editors.
Search Methodologies: Introduc-
tory Tutorials in Optimization and Decision Support Techniques.
Operations Re-
search/Computer Science Interfaces Series. Springer, New York, NY, 2nd edition, 2014.
66
==PAGE:73==
[10] Vanderlande Industries B.V. Chutes (loading systems). https://www.vanderlande.
com/us/systems/loading/chutes/, Accessed 2025. Page describing chute design and
implementation.
[11] Leandro do Carmo Martins and Gustavo Peixoto Silva. An adaptive large neighborhood
search heuristic to solve the crew scheduling problem. In V. N. Coelho et al., editor,
Smart and Digital Cities: Urban Computing, pages 45–63. Springer Nature Switzerland
AG, 2019.
[12] Marco Frey, Christian Artigues, Rainer Kolisch, and Pierre Lopez. Scheduling and
planning the outbound baggage process at international airports. In Proceedings of
the IEEE International Conference on Industrial Engineering and Engineering Man-
agement (IEEM), pages 2129–2133. IEEE, 2010.
[13] Aida Gholipour, Mohammad Mahdavi, and Morteza Bazyar. Metaheuristic algorithms
for the quadratic assignment problem: A review and computational study. Concurrency
and Computation: Practice and Experience, 36(11), 2024.
[14] Fred W. Glover and Gary A. Kochenberger, editors.
Handbook of Metaheuristics,
volume 57 of International Series in Operations Research & Management Science.
Kluwer / Springer, New York, NY, 2003.
[15] Lei He, Xiaolu Liu, Gilbert Laporte, Yingwu Chen, and Yingguo Chen. An improved
adaptive large neighborhood search algorithm for multiple agile satellites scheduling.
Computers Operations Research, 100:12–25, 2018.
[16] Le Van Hien and Van Tuan Nguyen. A comparative study of metaheuristic algorithms
for solving the vehicle routing problem with time windows. Mathematics, 11(12):2695,
2023.
[17] iStockphoto.
Baggage
handling
and
sorting
area
at
the
airport.
https://www.istockphoto.com/photo/
baggage-handling-and-sorting-area-at-the-airport-gm1269570282-372863903,
2020. Accessed: 2025-08-25.
[18] Tor Fog Justesen. Robust and Free Flight in Air Traffic Management. PhD thesis,
Technical University of Denmark (DTU), Lyngby, Denmark, 2014.
[19] Bernhard Korte and Jens Vygen. Combinatorial Optimization: Theory and Algorithms;
3rd ed., volume 21 of Algorithms and Combinatorics. Springer, Berlin, 2006.
67
==PAGE:74==
[20] Vu T. Le, Doug Creighton, and Saeid Nahavandi.
Simulation-based input loading
condition optimisation of airport baggage handling systems. In Proceedings of the 2007
IEEE Intelligent Transportation Systems Conference (ITSC), pages 574–579, Seattle,
WA, USA, September 30–October 3 2007. IEEE.
[21] James T. Lin, Ping-Hsi Shih, Edward Huang, and Chun-Chih Chiu. Airport baggage
handling system simulation modeling using sysml. In Proceedings of the 2015 Inter-
national Conference on Industrial Engineering and Operations Management (IEOM),
pages 1–10, Dubai, United Arab Emirates, March 2015. IEEE.
[22] David Pisinger and Stefan Ropke. Large neighborhood search. In Michel Gendreau and
Jean-Yves Potvin, editors, Handbook of Metaheuristics, volume 272 of International
Series in Operations Research & Management Science, pages 99–127. Springer, 2018.
[23] Mauricio G. C. Resende and Jorge Pinho de Sousa, editors. Metaheuristics: Computer
Decision-Making, volume 86 of Applied Optimization. Springer US, Boston, MA, 2003.
[24] Jafar Rezaei, Aida Arab, Amir Ali Daryaei, Jafar Hatami-Marbini Dahooie, and
Amir Hadi Daryaei. Service quality assessment of airline baggage handling systems
using servqual and bwm. Transport Policy, 63:125–133, 2018.
[25] Celso C. Ribeiro and Pierre Hansen, editors. Essays and Surveys in Metaheuristics.
Kluwer Academic Publishers, Norwell, MA, 2002. Part of the series: Operations Re-
search/Computer Science Interfaces.
[26] Joan C. Rijsenbrij and Jaap A. Ottjes. New developments in airport baggage handling
systems. Transportation Planning and Technology, 30(4):417–430, 2007.
[27] Christian Ruf, Sebastian Schiffels, Rainer Kolisch, and Markus Matthäus Frey. A data-
driven approach for baggage handling operations at airports. Transportation Science,
56(5):1179–1195, 2022.
[28] Christian Ruf, Sebastian Schiffels, Rainer Kolisch, and Markus Matthäus Frey. A data-
driven approach for baggage handling operations at airports. Transportation Science,
56(5):1179–1195, 2022.
[29] Zeinab Shafiei Nikabadi and Mohammad Taghi Farahani.
A hybrid metaheuristic
algorithm for solving an integrated lot-sizing and scheduling problem. International
Transactions in Operational Research, 2023.
[30] René Arendt Sørensen, M. Nielsen, and H. Karstoft. Deep reinforcement learning for
route optimization in baggage handling systems. In Proceedings of the 1st International
68
==PAGE:75==
Conference on Advances in Signal Processing and Artificial Intelligence (ASPAI 2019),
pages 29–33, Barcelona, Spain, March 2019. ASPAI.
[31] El-Ghazali Talbi. Metaheuristics in combinatorial optimization: Overview and con-
ceptual comparison. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Part B
(Cybernetics), 39(1):1–15, 2009.
[32] John W. Tukey. Exploratory Data Analysis. Addison-Wesley, 1977.
[33] Volodymyr Tymofiiv, Michal Hovanec, Peter Korba, Samer Al-Rabeei, and Martin
Vencel. Simulation model of logistics processes for baggage handling at airports. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2024 New Trends in Aviation Development (NTAD), page 194. IEEE,
November 2024.
[34] Urban Innovative Actions. Copenhagen — about the projects, 2023. Accessed: 2025-
06-21.
[35] Xin-She Yang, Amir Hossein Gandomi, Siamak Talatahari, and Amir Hossein Alavi,
editors. Metaheuristics in Water, Geotechnical and Transport Engineering. Newnes /
Elsevier, Oxford, UK, 2012. Computers / Programming.
[36] Peng Zhou, Guodong Zhang, Gao Xiang, Xiangke Zhang, and Tianyu Huang. Analysis
of the smoothness of baggage handling based on the current status of baggage handling
system operations. In Kun Zhang and Pascal Lorenz, editors, Proceedings of SPIE
– International Conference on Mechatronics and Intelligent Control (ICMIC 2024),
volume 13447, page 1344719. SPIE, 2025.
[37] Reza Ziarati, Shahriar Lotfi, Morteza Bazyar, and Mahdi Fathi. A review on applica-
tions of metaheuristic algorithms in industrial engineering, 2020.
[38] Moshe Zukerman. Introduction to Queueing Theory and Stochastic Teletraffic Models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1307.2968, 2013. Available at: https://arxiv.org/abs/1307.
2968.
69
==PAGE:76==
A
Baggage System Diagram
Diverter Table
Diverter Table
Diverter Table
Diverter Table
MES
MES
MES
MES
MES
MES
MES
LV3
LV3
CLR
L3
L3
CLR
LV3
LV3
3600
3600
3600
3600
3600
3600
3600
3600
3600
3600
3600
3600
3600
3600
3600
VSU
VSU
VSU
VSU
VSU
VSU
VSU
VSU
VSU
VSU
VSU
VSU
VSU
VSU
VSU
VSU
VSU
VSU
VSU
VSU
VSU
VSU
VSU
VSU
VSU
VSU
VSU
VSU
VSU
VSU
VSU
2-way VSU
2-way VSU
Merge
Merge
Merge
Merge
Merge
Merge
Merge
Merge
Merge
Merge
VSU
VSU
VSU
VSU
VSU
Merge
Merge
Merge
Merge
Merge
VSU
Merge
Merge
Merge
Merge
900
2700
XXX0
2700
2700
900
900
900
900
900
900
900
900
900
3600
3600
3600
3600
3600
3600
3600
3600
3600
H
P
LV3
L
P
P
P
P
H
L
H
L
900
900
91
92
93
94
89
90
87
88
83
84
85
86
81
82
79
80
77
78
75
76
141
142
143
144
145
146
147
148
149
150
151
152
153
154
130
131
132
133
134
135
136
137
138
139
140
127
128
129
119
120
122
123
124
125
126
111
112
113
114
115
116
117
118
108
109
110
101
102
103
104
105
106
107
95
96
97
98
99
100
U213
U212
U211
U210
U209
U201
U202
U203
U204
U205
U206
U208
U207
U214
U215
U216
U217
U218
U219
U220
U221
U222
MWAB
69
68
67
66
151
150
149
148
65
64
63
62
147
146
145
144
61
60
59
58
143
142
141
140
57
56
55
54
139
138
137
136
53
52
51
50
135
134
133
132
49
131
128
127
125
124
123
122
70
72
71
78
79
80
81
5
6
7
8
82
83
84
85
9
10
11
12
86
87
88
89
13
14
15
16
90
91
92
93
17
18
19
20
95
96
98
99
21
22
23
24
27
100
101
25
26
114
115
120
119
118
117
74
73
75
3
4
1
2
L
D
C
D
F
F
C
D
F
E
B
B
A
A
A
C
C
C
C
C
D
D
B
B
B
A
A
D
I
A
B
H
C
D
G
A
B
C
D
D
G
G
G
G
G
B
A
T2 TUNNEL
38
37
35
33
31
36
34
32
27
25
23
21
26
24
22
28
7
5
6
9
8
16
14
11
15
12
10
18
17
D
D
D
C
D
C
B
B
B
A
A
B
A
BF3
HALL 38
BF3
48
47
46
45
44
43
42
41
40
39
D
C
B
A
Level 3
THE HORSESHOE
152
153
D
C
A
B
D
C
A
B
Inserted floor
“THE SWAMP”
BASEMENT 
UNDER T3
ARRIVING ODD-SIZE T3
BASEMENT
UNDER T3
FIREWALL
FIREWALL
A
B
B
A
B
A
Drop from 
arrival
D
C
C
3
C
104
105
106
108
109
111
112
28
29
103
32
33
37
30
31
76
77
94
97
102
107
110
113
5
3
4
6
8
7
3
5
4
5
3
4
8
7
6
1
1
2
2
2
1
7
8
6
5
4
3
2
1
BF2
RECONCILIATION ROOM BF2
T2 TUNNEL
BFW WEST TUNNEL
BF2
AWEB
AWEB
AWFB
AWFB
TAAB
TABB
FIREWALL
FIREWALL
Odd Size BF2
AAEB
AAFB
130
126
121
Arrival
Arrival
Arrival
Arrival
Arrival
Arrival
LEVEL 2
LEVEL 2
LEVEL 3
LEVEL 2
Transfer D
Transfer B
Transfer A
RT38
Sorter 1
Sorter 2
Sorter 1
Transfer D
Level 3
Sorter 1  
Sorter 2  
Transfer C  
Level 3  
EBS8  
EBS7  
Sorter 2  
Sorter 1  
Odd-size T3 
Sorter 1
Sorter 2
Sorterbånd 2
EBS9 
EBS1 
Sorter 2
LEVEL 3
EBS9
EBS
EBS
EBS1
EBS10
EBS2
EBS3
EBS12
EBS4
EBS13
EBS5
EBS14
EBS6
EBS13
EBS5
Sorter 1
Sorter 2
38
EBS14
EBS6
EBS11
EBS10
EBS2
EBS3
EBS12
EBS4
EBS11
Level 3
EBS8
EBS7
Sorter 3
Sorter 3
BF3
T3
T2
BFW
N
N
N
N
ARKADEN
Grafik: Gottlieb Paludan Architects   www.gottliebpaludan.com    Orientkaj 4, 2150 Nordhavn, København, Denmark    +45 4171 8200
Dato: 19-10-2020 
Version: C07.0 -001 
Fil: X:\1727_Københavns Lufthavn\003_CPH Bagage. Anlægsdiagram\C07_Geometri\C07.0_Gældende
LEGEND
ELEVATOR
OVER HEIGHT CHECK
OVER LENGHT CHECK
X-RAY PORTAL CHECK 
LEVEL 3 
ATR
VSU
DIVERTER TABLE
MES
2-WAY VSU
X-RAY
PLOUGH
TELESCOPE
MERGE
MES
RECONCILIATION ROOM BF3
Figure A.1: Baggage Handling System Diagram
70
==PAGE:77==
B
MIP Model
B.1
Sets
C = Set of chutes
F = Set of flights
B.2
Parameters
Afc =
(
1
if flight f can be assigned to chute c
0
otherwise
Adjcc′ =
(
1
if chute c is adjacent to chute c′
0
otherwise
Vf = Preferred number of chutes for flight f
Sdes,f = Preferred start time for flight f
Edes,f = Preferred end time for flight f
Ps = Penalty for shifting from desired start time
Pn = Penalty for not placing a flight
M = 105
(Big-M constant for logical constraints)
B.3
Decision Variables
xfc =
(
1
if flight f is assigned to chute c
0
otherwise
Sf ≥0,
Actual start time of flight f
zf1f2c =
(
1
if flight f1 finishes in chute c before flight f2 starts
0
otherwise
Nf =
(
1
if flight f has not been placed to any chute
0
otherwise
71
==PAGE:78==
B.4
Model
minimize
X
f∈F
Ps(Sf −Sdes,f) + PnNf
(B.1)
subject to
xfc ≤Afc,
∀f ∈F, c ∈C
(B.2)
Vf =
X
c∈C
xfc,
∀f ∈F
(B.3)
xfc + xfc′ ≤1 + Adjcc′,
∀f ∈F, c ∈C
(B.4)
Edes,f −Sf ≥0,
∀f ∈F
(B.5)
Sf −Sdes,f ≥0,
∀f ∈F
(B.6)
Edes,f −Sf ≤2
3(Edes,f −Sdes,f) + M(1 −Nf),
∀f ∈F
(B.7)
zf1f2c ≥xf1c + xf2c −1,
∀f1, f2 ∈F, c ∈C, f1 < f2
(B.8)
Sf2 ≥Edes,f1 −M(1 −zf1f2c),
∀f1, f2 ∈F, c ∈C, f1 < f2
(B.9)
Sf1 ≥Edes,f2 −Mzf1f2c,
∀f1, f2 ∈F, c ∈C, f1 < f2
(B.10)
C
Data
C.1
Overflow Baggage Percentages for Dummy Load Scenarios
Extra Load (%)
Overflow (%)
17
15.84
20
18.69
22
20.37
25
23.29
27
24.69
30
26.71
Table C.1: Actual percentages on Peak Dataset using dummy flight loads after clean up
72
==PAGE:79==
Extra Load (%)
Overflow (%)
17
16.20
20
19.00
22
20.87
25
23.90
27
24.68
30
28.43
Table C.2: Actual percentages on Average Dataset using dummy flight loads after clean up
Extra Load (%)
Overflow (%)
17
15.84
20
19.02
22
20.69
25
24.20
27
25.24
30
27.13
Table C.3: Actual percentages on Medium Dataset using dummy flight loads after clean up
73
==PAGE:80==
D
Greedy Modes and Summary Results
D.1
Per-dataset results
Dataset
Greedy
Mode
Objective
Value
Not Placed
Flights
Partially Covered
Flights
Total Cut Out
Minutes
Average
1
39195
0
21
305
Average
2
140265
7
14
335
Average
3
240240
16
0
0
Average
5
39525
0
22
415
Average
6
39225
0
22
315
Average
7
41625
0
48
1115
Average
9
99720
5
25
680
Medium
1
39585
0
26
535
Medium
2
39615
0
30
545
Medium
3
39420
0
21
480
Medium
5
39210
0
23
410
Medium
6
38955
0
18
325
Medium
7
39255
0
23
425
Medium
9
88320
3
46
940
Peak
1
39750
0
20
330
Peak
2
40455
0
31
565
Peak
3
58560
1
35
660
Peak
5
60135
1
52
1185
Peak
6
41355
0
46
865
Peak
7
78180
2
55
1260
Peak
9
70725
2
39
755
Table D.1: Performance metrics for different greedy modes across Average, Medium, and
Peak datasets.
74
==PAGE:81==
D.2
Averaged comparison
Greedy
Mode
Objective
Value
Not Placed
Flights
Total Cut Out
Minutes
Partially Covered
Flights
1
39510
0
390
22.3
2
73445
2.33
482
25.0
3
112740
5.67
380
18.7
4
46290
0.33
670
32.3
5
39845
0
502
28.7
6
53020
0.67
933
42.0
7
86255
3.33
792
36.7
Table D.2: Performance of greedy modes.
Values represent averages across evaluation
instances.
75
==PAGE:82==
E
Parameter Tuning
Average Baggage Load
NP Pen.
P Pen.
Destr. Size
Interval (min)
Not Placed
Partial
Objective
100
3
50
90
0
30
40260
50
3
50
90
0
30
40260
150
3
50
90
0
30
40260
200
3
50
90
0
30
40260
100
2
50
90
0
30
40260
100
5
50
90
0
30
40260
100
7
50
90
0
30
40260
100
10
50
90
0
30
40260
100
3
25
90
0
14
39015
100
3
75
90
0
21
39195
100
3
100
90
0
20
39030
100
3
125
90
0
21
38955
100
3
50
60
0
22
39915
100
3
50
75
0
17
39465
100
3
50
120
0
15
39060
100
3
50
150
0
23
39645
Table E.1: Average Load Scenario
76
==PAGE:83==
Figure E.1: Objective Function Scores for Average Baggage Load
Medium Baggage Load
NP Pen.
P Pen.
Destr. Size
Interval (min)
Not Placed
Partial
Objective
100
3
50
90
0
25
39420
50
3
50
90
0
25
39525
150
3
50
90
0
25
39420
200
3
50
90
0
25
39420
100
2
50
90
0
25
39420
100
5
50
90
0
25
39420
100
7
50
90
0
25
39420
100
10
50
90
0
25
39420
100
3
25
90
0
19
39120
100
3
75
90
0
26
39585
100
3
100
90
0
17
39045
100
3
125
90
0
20
39030
100
3
50
60
0
26
39525
100
3
50
75
0
20
39405
100
3
50
120
0
26
39255
100
3
50
150
0
26
39630
Table E.2: Medium Load Scenario
77
==PAGE:84==
Figure E.2: Objective Function Scores for Medium Baggage Load
Peak Baggage Load
NP Pen.
P Pen.
Destr. Size
Interval (min)
Not Placed
Partial
Objective
100
3
50
90
0
19
39765
50
3
50
90
0
27
40785
150
3
50
90
0
19
39765
200
3
50
90
0
19
39765
100
2
50
90
0
19
39765
100
5
50
90
0
19
39765
100
7
50
90
0
19
39765
100
10
50
90
0
19
39765
100
3
25
90
0
18
39750
100
3
75
90
0
20
39750
100
3
100
90
0
17
39540
100
3
125
90
0
21
39930
100
3
50
60
0
18
39630
100
3
50
75
0
21
39930
100
3
50
120
0
20
40065
100
3
50
150
0
22
40215
Table E.3: Peak Load Scenario
78
==PAGE:85==
Figure E.3: Objective Function Scores for Peak Baggage Load
79
==PAGE:86==
F
ALNS Results
F.1
Objective Progression Graphs
Figure F.1: Objective Progression Graph for Peak Data
80
==PAGE:87==
Figure F.2: Objective Progression Graph for Average Data
F.2
Destroy Operator Probabilities
Dataset
Operator
1
Operator
2
Operator
3
Operator
4
Operator
5
Operator
6
Operator
7
Peak
1.60e−7
1.47e−7
1.41e−7
5.24e−7
0.999 998
2.21e−7
1.02e−6
Average
7.04e−24
0.5008
2.19e−24
6.09e−24
0.4992
3.21e−15
1.17e−23
Medium
5e−324
5e−324
5e−324
5e−324
5e−324
1.0
5e−324
Table F.1: Final destroy operator probability distributions after all iterations are completed
across three datasets. Dominant modes per day are highlighted.
81
==PAGE:88==
F.3
Repair Operator Probabilities
Dataset
Operator 1
Operator 2
Operator 3
Operator 4
Operator 5
Operator 6
Peak
4.83e-7
9.37e-7
8.84e-8
5.96e-7
2.46e-7
0.999998
Average
1.0
5.60e-10
5.69e-26
3.07e-26
2.65e-26
2.65e-26
Medium
5.0e-324
5.0e-324
5.0e-324
5.0e-324
1.0
5.0e-324
Table F.2: Final repair operator probability distributions after all iterations are completed
across three datasets. Dominant modes per day are highlighted.
82
==PAGE:89==
83
==PAGE:90==
F.4
Full Gantt Charts
84
==PAGE:91==
85
==PAGE:92==
86
==PAGE:93==
F.5
ALNS Stress Test Results
87
==PAGE:94==
Greedy Results
ALNS Results
Data
Percentage
Objective
# Not Placed
Flights
# Partial
Flights
# Cut Off
Minutes
Objective
# Not Placed
Flights
# Partial
Flights
# Cut Off
Minutes
Average
0.17
611670
47
91
2310
51780
0
105
1800
Average
0.20
618570
47
86
2250
55035
0
111
2505
Average
0.22
714495
54
91
2305
174345
7
96
2435
Average
0.25
804660
63
87
2240
118170
4
134
3090
Average
0.27
823920
63
91
2420
165435
7
116
2705
Average
0.30
914115
71
96
2405
168510
7
149
3350
Medium
0.17
749625
58
103
2555
115335
5
112
2985
Medium
0.20
767925
60
92
2335
145230
5
111
2670
Medium
0.22
810225
63
95
2335
171810
8
126
3370
Medium
0.25
930240
73
82
2300
213045
10
114
2815
Medium
0.27
1043730
82
87
2230
291525
16
115
2955
Medium
0.30
1045410
82
91
2390
363690
21
117
2850
Peak
0.17
652995
50
78
2045
95850
3
103
2450
Peak
0.20
601605
46
92
2355
73065
1
119
2395
Peak
0.22
727290
56
91
2430
114990
4
98
2270
Peak
0.25
899565
71
81
2055
141780
6
125
2900
Peak
0.27
859530
67
90
2290
125640
4
139
3180
Peak
0.30
919770
71
80
2170
239085
11
126
2975
Table F.3: Stress Test Result of Greedy and ALNS results across datasets.
88
==PAGE:95==
G
EBS Simulation Results
Percentage
Overflow Baggage Number
with TimeStamp Algorithm
Overflow Baggage Number
with Free Flow Algorithm
0.17
0
0
0.20
0
0
0.22
0
0
0.25
0
0
0.27
0
0
0.30
0
0
Table G.1: Average Data
Percentage
Overflow Baggage Number
with TimeStamp Algorithm
Overflow Baggage Number
with Free Flow Algorithm
17
0
0
20
111
0
22
0
0
25
66
0
27
0
0
30
0
0
Table G.2: Medium Data
Percentage
Overflow Baggage Number
with TimeStamp Algorithm
Overflow Baggage Number
with Free Flow Algorithm
17
99
0
20
187
0
22
605
0
25
390
0
27
477
27
30
632
108
Table G.3: Peak Data
89
==PAGE:96==
G.1
EBS Utilization
(a) Average Dataset — 0.17
(b) Average Dataset — 0.20
(c) Average Dataset — 0.22
(d) Average Dataset — 0.25
(e) Average Dataset — 0.27
(f) Average Dataset — 0.30
Figure G.1: EBS Utilization with Overflow Events for Average Dataset with added relevant
stress percentage
90
==PAGE:97==
(a) Medium Dataset — 0.17
(b) Medium Dataset — 0.20
(c) Medium Dataset — 0.22
(d) Medium Dataset — 0.25
(e) Medium Dataset — 0.27
(f) Medium Dataset — 0.30
Figure G.2: EBS Utilization with Overflow Events for Medium Dataset with added relevant
stress percentage
91
==PAGE:98==
(a) Peak Dataset — 0.17
(b) Peak Dataset — 0.20
(c) Peak Dataset — 0.22
(d) Peak Dataset — 0.25
(e) Peak Dataset — 0.27
(f) Peak Dataset — 0.30
Figure G.3: EBS Utilization with Overflow Events for Peak Dataset with added relevant
stress percentage
92
