==PAGE:1==
Generating documentation with verified quotes
using fine-tuned large language models
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
Generating documentation with verified quotes using fine-tuned large language models
Master Thesis
September, 2025
By
Andro Kranjcevic
Supervised by
Tue Herlau, Associate Professor, Technical University of Denmark
Luka Grbcic, Postdoctoral Researcher, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory
Morten Hastrup Bjerregaard, Engineer, Novo Nordisk Engineering
Güler Nur Dönmez, IT Engineer, Novo Nordisk Engineering
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the customary
bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Section for Cognitive Systems, Department
of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, Technical University of Denmark (DTU), and
the Novo Nordisk Engineering, Manufacturing IT, NNE Kalundborg. It is submitted in partial
fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of Master of Science in Engineering (MSc Eng.).
Andro Kranjcevic - s204704
Signature
Date
Generating documentation with veriﬁed quotes using ﬁne-tuned large language models
ii
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Large Language Models (LLMs) are increasingly being considered for integration into industrial
workflows, as companies such as Novo Nordisk Engineering (NNE) seek to reduce repetitive man-
ual work in the preparation of industrial design documentation. However, the content produced
by LLMs is often not fully trustworthy, since models tend to generate fluent but unverifiable
text that is not directly linked to any reliable source.
This thesis addresses the problem by exploring how LLMs can be trained to generate outputs
that quote verbatim from trusted sources, reducing hallucinations and ensuring that generated
information is accurate and verifiable.
To achieve this, quote-tuning is implemented, which
is a fine-tuning strategy where the model is trained to prefer outputs that contain verbatim
quotations from a trusted source corpus. The quote-tuning pipeline works by first generating
responses with a pre-trained LLM, which are then evaluated with the QUIP (Quoted Informa-
tion Precision) score, which measures how much of the generated text is quoted verbatim from a
known corpus. The model is then fine-tuned through preference learning with Direct Preference
Optimization (DPO). Two baseline models, Phi-3-mini-4k-instruct and Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct,
are fine-tuned and evaluated, making the approach feasible within realistic computational lim-
its. In this thesis, Wikipedia (English version) is used as the benchmark trusted source, and the
approach is then extended to include synthetically generated NNE industrial design documen-
tation that the model should preferentially quote.
Phi-3-mini-4k-instruct and Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct were fine-tuned and evaluated on Wikipedia
and NNE data.
Baseline generations showed modest quoting alignment of responses, which
was significantly improved with quote-tuning. For Wikipedia, Phi-3-mini-4k-instruct improved
from a baseline QUIP score of 0.2827 to 0.3737 after quote-tuning, while Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct
improved from 0.3382 to 0.3671. On NNE data, Phi-3-mini-4k-instruct improved from 0.2222
to 0.2691, and Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct from 0.2448 to 0.2714. These results demonstrate that
even relatively small models, when quote-tuned using DPO, improve verbatim quoting and
verifiability. Although the NNE dataset was synthetically generated, the results confirm that
quote-tuning is not limited to Wikipedia and can be applied to domain-specific corpora.
Generating documentation with veriﬁed quotes using ﬁne-tuned large language models
iii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
Supervisors
Tue Herlau, Associate Professor, Technical University of Denmark
I am very thankful for your steady support and confidence in the project. Your clear guidance
and insights have been a great help throughout this thesis.
Luka Grbcic, Postdoctoral Researcher, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory
I truly appreciate your valuable input and the time you dedicated to discussing this work. Your
constructive feedback and thoughtful perspectives have contributed greatly to the progress of
the thesis.
Morten Hastrup Bjerregaard, Engineer, Novo Nordisk Engineering
I am grateful for the opportunity to carry out the thesis within Manufacturing IT at NNE. Your
support has been invaluable in shaping the direction of this thesis.
Güler Nur Dönmez, IT Engineer, Novo Nordisk Engineering
I would like to extend my sincere thanks for stepping in on behalf of Morten and for the generous
support throughout the thesis.
Center for Advanced Computing and Modelling, University of Rijeka
Ante Sikirica, Researcher, Center for Advanced Computing and Modelling, University of Rijeka
I am very grateful for your support with the HPC setup and for granting me access to the
supercomputer during this thesis. Your assistance made it possible to carry out the large-scale
experiments required for this thesis.
Generating documentation with veriﬁed quotes using ﬁne-tuned large language models
iv
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Current Approaches
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Project Scope/Research Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Related Work
4
3
Data
5
3.1
Reference Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.2
Synthetic data generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
4
Methodology
9
4.1
Quote-Tuning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4.2
Language Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.3
QUIP (Quoted Information Precision) Score . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4.4
Preference Data Formation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.5
Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.6
Parameter-Eﬀicient Fine-Tuning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
5
Experimental Setup
20
5.1
Environment and Library Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
5.2
Training parameteres setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.3
High-Performance Computing Infrastructure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.4
Challenges and Troubleshooting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
6
Results
26
6.1
Statistical Significance Testing: Paired Two-Tailed t-Test
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
7
Discussion
37
8
Conclusion
38
References
39
A Appendix
42
A.1 Prompt Templates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
Generating documentation with veriﬁed quotes using ﬁne-tuned large language models
v
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
Recent development and growing use of Artificial Intelligence, in particular Large Language
Models (LLMs), have opened new avenues for enhancing eﬀiciency by reducing manual tasks
within project workflows. LLMs are increasingly being considered for integration into industrial
workflows, as companies such as Novo Nordisk Engineering (NNE) seek to reduce repetitive man-
ual work in the preparation of industrial design documentation. However, the content produced
by LLMs is often not fully trustworthy, since models tend to generate fluent but unverifiable
text that is not directly linked to any reliable source. With Novo Nordisk Engineering (NNE)
collaboration, existing industrial design documentation was obtained, including functional spec-
ifications, master recipes, and operation descriptions. These are utilized as the foundation for
the generation of a synthetic dataset consisting of a combination of different industrial design
documents. One of the primary challenges was that the majority of documents consisted of for-
matted content, such as tables, diagrams, and nested flows of logic that are diﬀicult to parse and
model using plain-text inputs. This makes pre-processing more time-consuming and adds to the
diﬀiculty of keeping the content accurate and easy to understand. Therefore, it was necessary
to conduct synthetic data generation, where the provided NNE industrial design documenta-
tion served as seed material for an LLM (OpenAI’s GPT-4o [20]) to produce new prompts and
references of the same domain.
This thesis explores how LLMs can be fine-tuned to generate outputs that quote verbatim from
trusted sources, reducing hallucinations and ensuring that generated information is accurate
and verifiable. To achieve this, quote-tuning is implemented, which is a fine-tuning strategy
where the model is trained to prefer outputs that contain verbatim quotations from a trusted
source corpus. In this thesis, Wikipedia (English version) is used as a benchmark trusted source,
and the approach is then applied to synthetically generated NNE industrial design documen-
tation that the model should preferentially quote. The LLMs implemented in this project are
Phi-3-mini-4k-instruct and Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct. The Phi-3 was implemented because it is
suﬀiciently small to be effectively fine-tuned and offers a good trade-off between size and capa-
bility. To evaluate how model size and architecture affect the quality of response generation,
the project also incorporates LLaMA-3, a significantly larger model.
1.1
Current Approaches
LLMs produce outputs that might be erroneous, and users must either assume them or else
verify them independently. The erroneous outputs, with no grounding, are often referred to as
hallucinations. This poses significant risks to users, since it is hard to fact-check the convincing
text produced by LLMs[1][2]. Besides, generative models will generate citations that are either
contextually irrelevant or misrepresent the source, undermining the credibility of the produced
content[3][4]. In [5], reinforcement learning is implemented from human preferences (RLHP)
to train ”open-book” models that generate answers whilst also citing specific evidence for their
claims, which aids in the appraisal of correctness. Because of the human factor, this approach
Generating documentation with veriﬁed quotes using ﬁne-tuned large language models
1
==PAGE:8==
can quickly become computationally expensive, making it less feasible for the scope and con-
straints of this project. Avoiding human annotation makes the process faster, more scalable,
and ensures that preference signals are consistent.
To overcome such limitations and reduce the vagueness inherent in earlier approaches, [6]
presents a verifiable-by-design system. The implemented quote-tuning system aligns the model
to quote from trusted sources by applying the Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) algorithm
for optimizing human preferences without reinforcement learning described in [7]. Rather than
adopting loosely supported paraphrasing or impermeable justification chains, the approach pro-
posed in [8] is built around generating literal quotes of high-quality sources, i.e., Wikipedia. This
strategy is driven by the potential of LLMs, which, having been pre-trained on internet-scale
corpora with trustworthy content of high quality, have memorized a broad range of content from
the pre-training stage.
1.2
Project Scope/Research Objectives
With quote-tuning, one can adapt LLMs to use their parametric knowledge to generate contex-
tual quotations across a wide range of input prompts on tasks that require long-form generation
to quote through preference optimization. The overall pipeline of this procedure is summarized
in Figure 1.1.
Figure 1.1: Quote-tuning pipeline. The algorithm starts with 1. Pre-trained LLM response gen-
eration, then proceeds with 2. Preference data creation, and ﬁnishes with 3. Direct Preference
Optimization (DPO).
The algorithm begins with a known trusted corpus (i.e., a Wikipedia subset of the Pile dataset[9]),
which is applied to generating prompts and checking model responses. For each prompted gener-
ation (e.g., ”Who won the most French Open titles?”), a pre-trained LLM produces several (e.g.,
Generating documentation with veriﬁed quotes using ﬁne-tuned large language models
2
==PAGE:9==
20) candidate responses, which are then scored under the QUIP score[10] metric, an estimate of
the proportion of character-level 25-gram substrings in the generated text that appear verbatim
in a trusted corpus. In Figure 1.1, the overlapping text segments matching the ground truth
from the trusted corpus are highlighted in blue. Next, quotation-aligned preference pairs are
formed: the preferred response is the highest QUIP score response, and the dispreferred response
is another one with a lower QUIP score but similar length. Based on this setup, newly created
tuples constitute the preference dataset, which is then used to fine-tune the model via DPO [7].
Unlike traditional reinforcement learning techniques, DPO learns to assign higher probability
to preferred responses without the requirement of using external reward models. In the process,
the model learns naturally to bias quoting from the source corpus[7]. Therefore, by the end
of training, the model’s parameters are updated to prefer response patterns with higher QUIP
scores.
The project will focus on the implementation of quote-tuning, as depicted in Figure 1.1, first on
Wikipedia as the benchmark dataset, and then extending the approach to synthetically generated
NNE data. Finally, the performance of Phi-3-Mini-4K-Instruct and LLaMA-3.1-8B-Instruct is
evaluated on both datasets, showing the trade-offs between the two models.
Therefore, the following research aims are formulated to guide the process of this thesis:
• Aim 1: To implement quote-tuning, inspired by the methodology of the quote-tuning
paper[6], on a subset of the Wikipedia of the PILE dataset (used as a benchmark data).
– This includes model training and evaluation using the QUIP score
– The quote-tuning is applied on LLaMA-3.1-8B-Instruct and Phi-3-Mini-4K-Instruct
• Aim 2: To generate a synthetic dataset of NNE industrial design documentation.
– The synthetic dataset is constructed to resemble the Wikipedia dataset prompt-
response format, so that it is suitable for quote-tuning tasks
– OpenAI’s GPT-4o was used to generate the synthetic dataset, with the original NNE
Microsoft Word documents serving as seed material
• Aim 3: To apply quote-tuning on the synthetic NNE dataset and evaluate the effectiveness
of the quote-tuned models.
– Quote-tuned versions of Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct and Phi-3-Mini-4k-Instruct are eval-
uated on the synthetic NNE dataset using the QUIP score
– Performance of the models was compared when quote-tuned on the synthetic NNE
data versus the Wikipedia subset
Generating documentation with veriﬁed quotes using ﬁne-tuned large language models
3
==PAGE:10==
2
Related Work
Large Language models (LLMs) have made remarkable progress in generating fluent and in-
formative text. However, the content produced by LLMs is often not fully trustworthy, since
models tend to generate fluent but unverifiable text that is not directly linked to any reliable
source. Multiple research approaches tackle this challenge by suggesting methods for aligning
model outputs with content from trusted sources.
One major line of work focuses on quote-based generation, where the model is trained to generate
responses that quote directly from trusted sources. Zhang et al. [6] introduce a ”verifiable-by-
design” framework where models are trained to maximize a QUIP score, which is an automated
metric for measuring the proportion of generated content that is quoted verbatim from a known
corpus. This approach contrasts with earlier methods like context-aware decoding [11], which
reduce hallucination through dynamic attention to retrieved documents but still fall short on
strict verifiability. Building on the foundation introduced by prompt-response structured quot-
ing strategies [10], the QUIP metric is implemented in [12], a Bloom filter-based membership
testing method for large corpora. QUIP has also been used in [5] on RLHP (Reinforcement
Learning from Human Preferences) to train models to cite evidence when answering questions.
More recent works have explored optimization techniques for fine-tuning models using quoting-
based supervision. Rafailov et al. [7] propose DPO, which allows models to be aligned with
human or synthetic preferences without requiring reinforcement learning or reward modeling.
DPO’s implementation is straightforward and works well when combined with metrics like QUIP.
Several related efforts, such as those by Liu et al. [13], extend these principles into areas of legal
document generation and retrieval-augmented generation. While exact quote-alignment is not
always their focus, they share the same goal: increasing the factual reliability of LLMs. Together,
these contributions provide the foundation for this thesis’s study of generating documentation
with verified quotes using fine-tuned LLMs.
In the broader context of parameter-eﬀicient fine-tuning (PEFT), techniques such as LoRA [14]
and QLoRA [15] have enabled fine-tuning of LLMs (i.e., GPT-4 or LLaMA-3) on modest hard-
ware setups. Recent surveys [16, 17] provide overviews of PEFT methods and their applications,
where experiments using several representative PEFT methods are conducted to evaluate their
effectiveness in terms of computational cost. Accordingly, LoRA is particularly relevant for this
thesis to enable the computationally eﬀicient application of DPO.
The Phi series of models [18, 19] serves as a suﬀiciently small baseline model to be effectively
fine-tuned, with a good trade-off between size and capability. To investigate how model size
and architecture affect the quality of response generation, the project also uses LLaMA-3 [20]
for fine-tuning, which is a significantly larger model than Phi-3.
Generating documentation with veriﬁed quotes using ﬁne-tuned large language models
4
==PAGE:11==
3
Data
In this thesis, two different trusted source datasets were used: a Wikipedia subset of the Pile
dataset (used as benchmark data) and synthetically generated NNE industrial design documen-
tation data. The following sections describe how the data were obtained, split between training
and testing sets, and processed to facilitate the quote-tuning method. Firstly, Section 3.1 briefly
outlines the formats of both Wikipedia and NNE industrial design documentation. Section 3.2
presents how the synthetic data is generated to mimic the structure of the Wikipedia subset.
3.1
Reference Data
Reference data within this project are trusted textual sources in the form of Wikipedia subsets
written in English and internal NNE industrial design documentation. The core role of the
reference data is that it is used as a ground truth corpus to assess the alignment of LLM-
generated responses.
3.1.1
Wikipedia
The Pile is a 886.03 GB diverse, open-source dataset of English text created as a training dataset
for LLMs. It was constructed by EleutherAI in 2020 and publicly released on December 31 of
that year [9]. It consists of 22 smaller datasets of different sizes. Figure 3.1 illustrates the share
of the Pile dataset that is made up of Wikipedia, which is the part used in this thesis.
Figure 3.1: Treemap of Pile components by eﬀective size[9].
Wikipedia is a standard source text of high quality for language modeling. In addition to being
a source of high-quality, clean English text, it is also valuable as it is written in expository prose
and spans many domains [9]. In contrast to the Pile dataset as a whole, the Wikipedia subset
size is 20.54 GB. It was selected to be a benchmark reference dataset for this project due to
Generating documentation with veriﬁed quotes using ﬁne-tuned large language models
5
==PAGE:12==
the diversity of its content, while some other subsets may have been lacking diversity. Also, the
Wikipedia subset of the Pile dataset includes exclusively the English-language portion of the
full Wikipedia corpus.
The raw dataset for Wikipedia was provided in the following format:
1 {
2
"prompt ": "Who is Tracy
McConnell ?",
3
"response ": "Tracy
McConnell , better
known as "The Mother", is the title
character
from the CBS
television
sitcom How I Met ... ",
4
"id": "0001"
5 },
6 {
7
"prompt ": "What is Black
Sails ?",
8
"response ": "Black
Sails is an American
television
drama
series
created by
Jon
Steinberg
and Robert
Levine for Starz
that
debuted on January 25,
2014..." ,
9
"id": "0002"
10 },
11 ...
Listing 3.1: Structure and content of the raw Wikipedia dataset
The ”id” ensures that each record is unique, as the questions and responses are not repetitive.
The file consists of 24898 predefined questions (prompts) and adequate responses extracted from
Wikipedia, consisting of 2-5 sentences, which are then split into the train and test set as:
Table 3.1: Wikipedia dataset split
Metric
Train
Test
Train/Test Split (%)
90%
10%
Number of Questions
22 173
2725
Total Characters
14 083 538
1 726 157
Total Tokens
2 349 644
287 901
All questions (prompts) from the train set are different than the ones in the test set, so that the
evaluation measures model generalization to unseen questions without data leakage.
3.1.2
NNE Data
In addition to the Wikipedia dataset, the NNE data was incorporated to evaluate model per-
formance on a substantially smaller corpus containing highly domain-specific content. The data
provided by the NNE was in the form of Microsoft Word documents and included structured
technical documentation of industrial designs for factory processes. The document is modularly
structured, beginning with the rationale section explaining the purpose of different units (freeze
dryer, dry mixer,...) within the operation with the code name SEMA K7, including the opera-
tion process.
This is followed by a tabular operations structure, with columns consisting of different units
Generating documentation with veriﬁed quotes using ﬁne-tuned large language models
6
==PAGE:13==
(identified by source tags), references, and instance tags with short text descriptions, with both
English and Danish text.
Figure 3.2: NNE industrial design documentation format
However, while the table includes references (i.e., ”Section 3”, ”[5]”, ”TBD”), the content behind
those references was not provided or verifiable, as the document was fictional and used primarily
as a template.
Consequently, the main part utilized for further analysis or documentation
purposes was the textual rationale section, which provided information about the operational
logic and was suﬀiciently described to inform a conceptual understanding of process structure.
The tabular part was discarded for further analysis, since it was generally missing references,
some of which were non-existent, and due to potential diﬀiculties when mixing English and
Danish text.
3.2
Synthetic data generation
As the data in the provided format was incomplete, primarily due to the absence of references
and their lack of verifiability, and the presence of mixed-language entries, any chance of using
it directly for reliable model training or testing was not possible. Therefore, it was necessary to
conduct synthetic data generation, where the original NNE Microsoft Word documents served
as seed material for an LLM (OpenAI’s GPT-4o [21]) to produce new prompts and references of
the same domain. The synthetic dataset was designed to mimic the structure of the Wikipedia
subset in terms of prompt–reference structure for easy integration into the quote-tuning pipeline.
Similar prompt-response synthetic generation methods have been reported in recent literature,
including [22][23][24], demonstrating their validity for augmenting datasets in specialized do-
mains.
Generating documentation with veriﬁed quotes using ﬁne-tuned large language models
7
==PAGE:14==
Once the synthetic data generation is conducted using the prompt template defined in A.5, the
resulting output is a JSON-formatted dataset with the following structure:
1 {
2
"prompt ": "How does
Solvent
Exchange
differ
from
traditional
methods ?",
3
"response ": "Solvent
Exchange at Novo
Nordisk is a critical
operation
used
to enhance
product
quality , ensure
consistency , and
maintain
GMP
compliance.
It involves
tailored
control
parameters to support
the
production of
injectable
therapies
like
semaglutide .",
4
"id": "0001"
5 },
6 {
7
"prompt ": "Which
equipment is used for
Holding
Tank?",
8
"response ": "Holding
Tank at Novo
Nordisk is a critical
operation
used to
enhance
product
quality , ensure
consistency , and
maintain
GMP
compliance. It
involves
tailored
control
parameters to support
the
production of
injectable
therapies
like
semaglutide .",
9
"id": "0002"
10 },
11 ...
Listing 3.2: Structure and content of the raw NNE dataset
The file consists of 2000 predefined questions (prompts) and adequate responses generated using
NNE industrial design documentation format from Figure 3.2 as seed for synthetic generation,
consisting of 1-3 sentences on average.
Table 3.2: NNE dataset split
Metric
Train
Test
Train/Test Split (%)
90%
10%
Number of Questions
1800
200
Total Characters
598534
67092
Total Tokens
80801
8149
The train and test sets follow the 90% - 10% split. Additionally, as for Wikipedia datasets, all
questions (prompts) from the train set are different than the ones in the test set, so that the
evaluation measures model generalization to unseen questions without data leakage.
Generating documentation with veriﬁed quotes using ﬁne-tuned large language models
8
==PAGE:15==
4
Methodology
In this section, the quote-tuning pipeline and core methodology used to train and evaluate LLMs
are presented.
The section begins with an overview of the quote-tuning pipeline, including
its algorithm structure, followed by the introduction of the selected language models, Phi-3-
mini-4k-instruct (3.8B), and Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct (8B). Following the model overview, the
key evaluation metric, the QUIP Score, which quantifies how much of a generated response
quotes verbatim from a trusted corpus, is described. Then, the procedure of creating preference
pairs is described, which are later used to form a preference dataset used for DPO training.
Finally, we introduce the parameter-eﬀicient fine-tuning techniques employed, namely Low-Rank
Adaptation (LoRA), which allow fine-tuning LLMs on limited hardware.
4.1
Quote-Tuning
The quote-tuning aligns LLMs to quote through preference optimization and automatic feedback,
without the need for human annotation. It first generates responses from a pre-trained LLM and
then synthesizes a preference dataset for quoting by ranking responses by how much they quote
from a referenced corpus, i.e., NNE data. Finally, quote-tuning aligns the model to quote from
trusted sources by applying preference optimization algorithms (i.e., DPO [7]) on the synthesized
reference dataset. The overall flow of the quote-tuning algorithm is summarized as follows:
Generating documentation with veriﬁed quotes using ﬁne-tuned large language models
9
==PAGE:16==
Algorithm 1 Quote-Tuning
Input: Pre-trained LLM πref, prompt x(i), raw prompt dataset Dprompt = {x(i)}N
i=1, candidate
answer yn, QUIP on corpus C, QUIPC(·), QUIP hyperparameter ∆quip, tokenized length len(·),
length hyperparameter ∆length
Output: Best candidate answer ˜yw, second best candidate answer ˜yl, quote-tuned LLM πθ
1: D ←∅
2: // 1) Response Generation
3: for i = 1, . . . , N do
4:
y1, . . . , yn ∼πref(·|x(i))
5:
˜y1, . . . , ˜yn ←sort(y1, . . . , yn)
▷sorted by decreasing QUIP order
6:
// 2) Synthesizing Data
7:
for w ∈{1, . . . , n −1}, l ∈{w + 1, . . . , n} do
8:
if QUIPC(˜yw) −QUIPC(˜yl) > ∆quip and
|len(˜yw)−len(˜yl)|
min{len(˜yw),len(˜yl)} < ∆length then
9:
D ←D ∪{(x(i), ˜yw, ˜yl)}
▷formed preference pair
10:
break
11:
end if
12:
end for
13: end for
14: // 3) Direct Preference Optimization
15: Initialize πθ = πref, and ﬁne-tune πθ on D using DPO
16: return πθ
Overall, the quote-tuning algorithm can be divided into three main stages: generation, syn-
thesizing data, and tuning via DPO. During the generation stage, the model samples multiple
candidate responses yn to the prompts x(i) given the pre-trained LLM πref. In this project,
either 5 or 20 candidate responses are generated, which are then scored using the QUIP score
described in Section 4.3 and sorted from highest to lowest based on their score.
The algorithm then attempts to find a valid preference pair (yw, yl) using the QUIP score and
length as constraints. So that the best candidate answer yw must quote significantly more than
the second best candidate answer yl by at least ∆quip. Suppose the ∆quip between the best and
second-best candidate answer is smaller than the selected threshold (i.e., ∆quip = 0.10). In that
case, the algorithm keeps searching further for the candidate answer that will form a preference
pair. Similarly, the token lengths len(·) of the candidate responses must be similar, with no
more than ∆length ratio difference. If both constraints described above are met, the preference
pair (yw, yl) is formed and added to the dataset D. Once all such quote preference pairs are
collected, the preference dataset creation D is finalized.
The model πref is then fine-tuned using DPO, which uses the newly formed preference dataset
D to shift the model distribution to favor quoted completions. The outcome is the quote-tuned
model πθ.
Generating documentation with veriﬁed quotes using ﬁne-tuned large language models
10
==PAGE:17==
4.2
Language Models
The language models implemented in this project are Phi-3-mini-4k-instruct and Llama-3.1-
8B-Instruct.
Although Phi-3-Mini-4K-Instruct is considered a small language model (SLM)
and LLaMA-3.1-8B-Instruct is an LLM, for simplicity, both are referred to as LLMs in this
thesis. The Phi-3 model was implemented because it offers a good trade-off between size and
capability. Larger alternatives perform well but need substantial computational resources to
fine-tune. In contrast, Phi-3-mini-4k-instruct is suﬀiciently small to be effectively fine-tuned,
even on relatively modest hardware setups (i.e., single-GPU or CPU-assisted cloud notebooks),
which nicely fits this thesis project’s initial resource constraints. To evaluate the impact of scale
and architecture on preference optimization and quoting behavior, the project also incorporates
LLaMA-3.1-8B-Instruct, a significantly larger model. LLaMA-3.1-8B-Instruct is implemented
to investigate how model size and architecture affect the quality of response generation.
4.2.1
Phi-3-mini-4k-instruct
The Phi-3 family consists of three decoder-only transformer models of increasing size: Phi-3
Mini (3.8B), Phi-3 Small (7B), and Phi-3 Medium (14B). All models are trained with a con-
text length of 4k tokens, with long context variants available that support up to 128k tokens
using a sliding window attention approach [25].
These models were trained on high-quality
filtered datasets with both synthetic and web data, where the content was education-oriented
and reasoning-based.
This thesis employs precisely Phi-3-Mini-4K-Instruct (3.8B), a quantized and instruction-tuned
variant of the 3.8B Phi-3 Mini model, which shares the same base model and training strat-
egy but has been optimized for resource-constrained environments and is usable in experiments
on resource-constrained hardware.
As a smaller, instruction-tuned model with only 3.8 bil-
lion parameters, it enables experimentation with fine-tuning techniques (i.e., LoRA) on modest
hardware, and despite its size, Phi-3 Mini achieves competitive performance on benchmarks
involving reasoning, math, and factual question answering, which are involved in the generation
of technical, quote-based documentation. Such traits make it a good choice for quote-tuning on
synthetic data specific to domains, which will be implemented in this thesis. Additionally, Phi-3
Mini (3.8B) achieves performance that surpasses or matches models of similar or even larger
size, such as Mistral-7B, Gemma-7B, and GPT-3.5 (base)[25].
4.2.2
Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct
The LLaMA (Large Language Model Meta AI) family comprises open-weight transformer models
developed by Meta, designed to offer high performance across a range of language tasks while
remaining accessible to the research community.
LLaMA 3.1 models follow a decoder-only
transformer architecture and include several parameter sizes, with the 8B variant having a
strong balance between performance and resource requirements. LLaMA 3.1–8B Instruct has
been trained on trillions of tokens, showing it is possible to train state-of-the-art models using
publicly available datasets exclusively, without resorting to proprietary and inaccessible datasets,
enabling improved zero-shot and few-shot generalization on tasks including question answering,
summarization, and dialog generation[26].
In this thesis, LLaMA 3.1–8B Instruct was implemented alongside Phi-3 Mini-4k-instruct to
Generating documentation with veriﬁed quotes using ﬁne-tuned large language models
11
==PAGE:18==
evaluate how model size and architecture affect the quality of the quote-tuning. With 8 billion
parameters, LLaMA 3.1–8B Instruct provides greater representational capacity and stronger
reasoning abilities compared to smaller models, optimal for DPO [7] training. Despite its larger
size, the model remains feasible to run on modern GPU hardware for inference and fine-tuning
tasks, particularly using parameter-eﬀicient methods (i.e., LoRA[14]).
4.3
QUIP (Quoted Information Precision) Score
The QUIP score is defined as the character n-gram overlap between generated output and the
pre-training corpus. In other words, the QUIP score is higher when more character sequences
in the generated output match those from the pre-training corpus. Specifically, the QUIP score
is implemented, as proposed in [10]:
QUIPC(x) =
P
gramn∈x ⊮C(gramn)
|gramn ∈x|
,
where x is a text string, and C is a trusted corpus, gramn ∈x indicates all n-grams in x,
and ⊮C(·) is an indicator function that returns 1 if gramn ∈C else 0. Intuitively, QUIPC(x)
measures the percentage of n-grams in x that appeared in C.
For this thesis, 25-grams are used as the n-gram size, which means that the QUIP score is
calculated by evaluating the frequency of 25-character sequences (25-grams) within the provided
text x and comparing these sequences against the trusted corpus C. The use of 25-grams allows
for a stronger evaluation of the similarity between the generated text and the reference corpus,
as larger n-grams capture more contextual information, so that a higher accuracy in reflecting
textual similarity is achieved.
For example, a high QUIP score indicates that a large number of n-grams (25-grams) of the
generated text exist in the reference corpus, which suggests a high similarity between them. On
the other hand, a low QUIP score indicates fewer common n-grams, which represents a more
distinctive text from the reference corpus.
Generating documentation with veriﬁed quotes using ﬁne-tuned large language models
12
==PAGE:19==
Table 4.1: Example outputs generated by the model before and after quote-tuning on Wikipedia
data from the Pile [9] dataset. The highlighting in blue indicates overlapping of quoted 25-gram
text segments.
Prompt
Reference
QUIP
Who won the most French
Open titles?
Rafael Nadal holds the record for the most French
Open titles in history, winning the tournament 14
times between 2005 and 2022. Known as the "King
of Clay," Nadal’s remarkable consistency and dom-
inance on clay courts have made him one of the
sport’s most celebrated champions.
1.00
Who won the most French
Open titles?
Roger
Federer
has
won
the most French Open titles ,
with
6
champi-
onships over his career. He has also won 7 US Open
titles, which is the highest for any player.
0.04
Who won the most French
Open titles?
Rafael Nadal
has
won
14 French Open titles ,
which
is
a
record
for
the tournament.
His
success
on clay courts
has
earned
him the title of "King of Clay".
0.56
The idea is that a ”superior” response with the high QUIP score not only needs to be fluent
or coherent but verifiably true with regard to the reference corpus. However, a perfect QUIP
score of 1 means that the model copied too much reference text, instead of understanding and
answering in its own words, while still staying true to the source. Such a model wouldn’t perform
well if the questions are twisted or asked in a slightly different way. Therefore, an ideal QUIP
score lies in the range of around (0.4-0.6), meaning that the response is both accurate and
naturally written.
4.3.1
Bloom filter
Checking each 25-gram against a large reference corpus (e.g., Wikipedia) by string search would
be very slow and computationally ineﬀicient. Therefore, the QUIP scoring system uses a proba-
bilistic data structure known as a Bloom filter to check if an element (in this case, a character)
is present in a reference corpus using a very small memory space of a fixed size. Insertion and
membership testing in Bloom filters implies an amount of randomization, since elements are
transformed using one-way hash functions [27]. Testing for the presence of elements that have
actually been inserted in the filter will always give a positive result; there are no false negatives.
On the contrary, there is always some probability of false positives: elements that have not been
inserted into the filter can, without an error, pass the membership test.
Generating documentation with veriﬁed quotes using ﬁne-tuned large language models
13
==PAGE:20==
Figure 4.1: QUIP System Architecture with Bloom Filter Integration
The process begins with tokenizing a large reference corpus (Wikipedia or NNE data) and seg-
menting it into overlapping 25-grams, which are then inserted into a Bloom filter. Although it
does not allow the retrieval of the actual data, it can determine with high certainty whether a
particular n-gram is present in the corpus. Once the Bloom filter is constructed and stored as
a serialized object, it is queried by the QUIP scoring system. When an input is passed as an
LLM-generated response, the system tokenizes the input in the same manner and generates its
own set of overlapping 25-grams. Each of these n-grams is then queried against the Bloom filter,
and if a 25-gram is found in the filter, it is considered likely present in the reference corpus;
otherwise, it is considered novel or unseen. The system then generates an annotated version of
the original input, where the matched quoted spans in the Bloom Filter are counted.
Once the Bloom filter is in place, the QUIP system can be applied to evaluate model outputs.
The following is an example of a single evaluated JSON output from the Wikipedia dataset
using the QUIP for 25-gram size, showing the raw structure of the quoted segments list along
with relevant metadata:
1 {
2
"quip_report ": {
3
"denominator ": 2016,
4
"numerator ": 851,
5
"quip_25_beta ": 0.42212301587301587 ,
6
"too_short ": false ,
7
" quoted_segments ": [
8
", also
known as the Critic",
9
" the
Critical
Infrastructure
Protection
Program , ",
10
"es various
sensors
and
monitoring
systems to ensure the s",
11
"ms to ensure the
security
and
resilience of ",
12
"ence of critical
infrastructure . These
systems ",
13
". These
systems
include :\n",
14
" These are used to monitor ",
15
" access to critical
infrastructure
facilities , such as ",
16
"ilities , such as power plants , water ",
Generating documentation with veriﬁed quotes using ﬁne-tuned large language models
14
==PAGE:21==
17
" power plants , water
treatment
plants ."
18
],
19
" longest_segment_string_length ": 81
20
},
21 }
The denominator represents the total number of n-grams (tokens, sub-spans) in the generated
response, while the numerator stands for the number of those n-grams that are found verbatim
in the reference corpus. Additionally, the algorithm checks whether the generated response was
long enough to compute the QUIP score based on 25-grams (windows of 25 tokens). QUIP slides
a window of 25 characters over the model’s response and checks if each such substring (25-gram)
is present in the trusted reference corpus. For instance, if out of 2016 candidate substrings, 851
are found in the Bloom filter, the resulting QUIP score is approximately 0.42. The QUIP score
is then simply calculated as:
QUIP 25_β =
numerator
denominator = 851
2016 ≈0.4221
(4.1)
The speed and eﬀiciency of QUIP come directly from its use of Bloom filters, and without storing
and searching through massive raw text datasets, the system can operate quickly even on very
large corpora.
4.4
Preference Data Formation
Once the N candidate answers are generated for each prompt and scored with QUIP, these
answers are converted into ”preferred vs. dispreferred” pairs suitable for DPO training.
In
practice, this is achieved by sorting the responses by decreasing QUIP order before pair selection.
For each prompt with index i, it is loaded
prompti,
{predi,j}N
j=1,
{quipi,j}N
j=1
where i denotes the index of the prompt in the dataset, N represents the number of sampled
candidate responses per prompt i (i.e., N = 5 or N = 20). Furthermore, predi,j denotes the
j-th response generated by the pre-trained LLM for prompti. Finally, quipi,j is the QUIP score
assigned to predi,j, where QUIP is computed via character-level substring matches (i.e., 25-
grams) against the trusted corpus.
Then, any candidates with undefined QUIP are discarded. Also, if no response pair can be
selected, the prompt xi is discarded. Otherwise, the surviving tuples are sorted in descending
order of quipi,j, producing a list
(ˆyi,1, ˆyi,2, . . . ),
ˆqi,1 ≥ˆqi,2 ≥· · · ,
Generating documentation with veriﬁed quotes using ﬁne-tuned large language models
15
==PAGE:22==
where ˆyi,k denotes the candidate with the k‐th highest QUIP score ˆqi,k. The following constraints
are tested:
ˆqi,k −ˆqi,ℓ≥∆quip,
ℓi,k −ℓi,ℓ

min(ℓi,k, ℓi,ℓ) ≤∆len
Given the situation where there are N = 5 candidate answers generated for the prompt xi, and
then sorted in decreasing order based on their QUIP scores. Also, considering the ∆quip = 0.30,
which is a minimum acceptable QUIP difference between two candidate responses that can form
a preference pair, the pair formation proceeds as:

0.68


0.48
0.35
0.21
0.17

Since the second-best response is lower than the best response for < ∆quip, it cannot be consid-
ered as a candidate answer that will form a preference pair. Therefore, the third-best response
is the one forming a preference pair, as its QUIP score is > ∆quip, or for more than 0.30 lower
than the best response. The selected responses also need to satisfy the length requirement of
not surpassing a maximum acceptable relative length difference ∆len between them. Whenever
all criteria are satisfied, one preference pair is emitted:
  ˆyi,k = 0.68, ˆyi,ℓ= 0.35

Once the preference pair is formed for the given prompt xi, the algorithm stops searching for
more candidates for that prompt. In case where out of 5 candidate answers a pair cannot be
formed, the prompt xi is omitted. Each accepted pair is then recorded as a JSON object with
fields:
{ prompt, ˆyi,k, ˆyi,ℓ, QUIPˆyi,k, QUIPˆyi,ℓ, lengthˆyi,k, lengthˆyi,ℓ}
where prompt denotes the input query, ˆyi,k is the preferred response (chosen), and ˆyi,ℓis the
dispreferred response (rejected). QUIPˆyi,k and QUIPˆyi,ℓrepresent the QUIP scores of the preferred
and dispreferred responses, respectively, while lengthˆyi,k and lengthˆyi,ℓdenote the token lengths
of the corresponding responses.
All such objects are aggregated into a single file, which then serves as the training data for
the DPO quote‐tuning stage. The constraints ensure that the selected responses differ in their
QUIP scores, as ”good” and ”bad” examples, and are also reasonably balanced in length. Finally,
having obtained the preference dataset D, the DPO training can now be conducted using D on
the pre-trained LLM πref, to obtain the quote-tuned model πθ.
4.5
Direct Preference Optimization (DPO)
Although large-scale unsupervised LLMs learn broad world knowledge and reasoning skills,
achieving precise control of their behavior is diﬀicult because of the completely unsupervised
nature of their training. Therefore, DPO, as described in [7], is investigated, which is an algo-
rithm for optimizing human preferences without reinforcement learning. The algorithm works
Generating documentation with veriﬁed quotes using ﬁne-tuned large language models
16
==PAGE:23==
by turning the rather unstable reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) pipeline
into a single training step, without a reward model, on-policy sampling, and far fewer hyperpa-
rameters to tune. Given a pre-trained LLM πref and a prompt x, a pair of responses y1, y2 is
sampled as:
(y1, y2) ∼πref( · | x)
where the selected metric selects the best response (highest QUIP score), labeling it yw and
the less‐preferred one yℓ. DPO assumes a static pairwise preference dataset constructed from
generated responses of the pre-trained LLM instance πref :
D =
(x(i), y(i)
w , y(i)
ℓ)
	N
i=1.
The DPO objective for training a parameterized model πθ (initialized from πref) is:
LDPO(πθ; πref) = −E(x,yw,yℓ)∼D
"
log σ

β log πθ(yw | x)
πref(yw | x) −β log πθ(yℓ| x)
πref(yℓ| x)
#
,
(4.2)
where E(x,yw,yℓ)∼D[·] denotes the expectation over the dataset D, variable σ(z) = 1/(1 + e−z) is
the sigmoid function and β > 0 is a tuning hyperparameter.
Figure 4.2: Direct Preference Optimization vs.
Reinforcement Learning from Human Feed-
back[7]
.
As depicted in Figure 4.2, DPO optimizes for human preferences while avoiding reinforcement
learning. Existing methods for fine-tuning LLMs with human feedback first fit a reward model to
a dataset of prompts and human preferences over pairs of responses, and then use reinforcement
learning to find a policy that maximizes the learned reward. In contrast, DPO directly optimizes
for the policy best satisfying the preferences with a simple classification objective, without an
explicit reward function or reinforcement learning.
4.6
Parameter-Eﬀicient Fine-Tuning
In this thesis, the Parameter-Eﬀicient Fine-Tuning (PEFT) is adopted to enable the computa-
tionally eﬀicient application of DPO. Without PEFT, DPO training would require significantly
more GPU memory and time. As modern pre-trained LLMs grow into the tens or hundreds of
billions of parameters, the traditional approach of fine‐tuning every weight for each downstream
Generating documentation with veriﬁed quotes using ﬁne-tuned large language models
17
==PAGE:24==
task becomes prohibitively expensive in terms of both storage and computation [28]. PEFT
addresses this challenge by updating only a small, task‐specific subset of parameters—often no
more than 1–5% of the total—while keeping the vast majority of the original model weights
frozen [29]. To achieve this, PEFT methods introduce compact adaptation modules or reparam-
eterizations into the pre-trained network, allowing most of the heavy computation to remain
in the shared backbone and isolating task‐dependent learning in lightweight components [30].
Empirical studies have shown that these small adaptations can match or even exceed the perfor-
mance of full model fine‐tuning on a variety of language benchmarks, despite requiring orders of
magnitude fewer trainable parameters [31]. Beyond reducing GPU memory footprint and train-
ing time, PEFT facilitates rapid switching between multiple tasks simply by loading different
adapter weights or prompt vectors, which greatly simplifies model versioning and deployment
pipelines [28].
4.6.1
Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA)
The exponential growth of the Transformer‐based LLMs with billions or even trillions of param-
eters has made fine-tuning very expensive in terms of compute, memory, and storage, meaning
that these powerful models are accessible to the budgets of only the largest organizations. With-
out a solution for adaptation eﬀiciency, each new task would require duplicating and training
the full set of weights, which then leads to higher costs and slows down deployment and research.
To solve that problem, [14] proposed Low-Rank Adaptation, or LoRA, which freezes the pre-
trained model weights and injects trainable rank decomposition matrices into each layer of the
Transformer architecture, reducing the number of trainable parameters for downstream tasks by
approximately 10,000 times and the computation hardware requirement by 3 times compared
to full fine-tuning.
Figure 4.3: LORA reparameterization during training [14]
As shown in Figure 4.3, LoRA allows for training every dense layer in a neural network indirectly
by injecting and optimizing rank decomposition matrices of the dense layer’s update instead,
while keeping the original matrices frozen. A typical neural network consists of numerous dense
layers that perform matrix multiplication, and the weight matrices within the layers can be of
full rank. During training on a particular task, [32] shows that pre-trained LLMs have a low
Generating documentation with veriﬁed quotes using ﬁne-tuned large language models
18
==PAGE:25==
”intrinsic dimension” and can still learn effectively under a low-dimensional reparametrization.
Then, the updates of the weights are constrained to be of low ”intrinsic rank” when learning to
fit into downstream tasks.
Let
W0 ∈Rd×k
where W0 is a pre-trained weight matrix, k is the input dimension, and d is the output dimension.
The next step is to add a small, low-rank tweak ∆W to the pre-trained weight matrix W0, which
is a product of two much smaller matrices:
∆W = BA
where
• B ∈Rd×r
• A ∈Rr×k
• r ≪min(d, k) is the ”rank” (e.g. r = 4 or 16, not hundreds)
Because rank(BA) ≤r, this forces ∆W to live in a low-dimensional subspace, using only r(d+k)
parameters instead of dk.
During training, W0 is frozen (no gradient updates), while A and B contain all trainable pa-
rameters. Both W0 and ∆W = BA are multiplied by the same input, and their outputs are
summed coordinate-wise. If h = W0x is the original output, the modified forward pass yields
h = W0x + ∆W x = W0x + BAx.
(4.3)
Weight decay behaves differently under LoRA than with full fine-tuning. Specifically, applying
standard weight decay to A and B is equivalent to decaying back toward the pre-trained weights,
a form of regularization against ”catastrophic forgetting”, which is a tendency of an LLM to
lose previously learned knowledge when fine-tuned on new data, that has been studied in prior
work [33]. While a detailed study of this effect is beyond the scope of this project, it likely
provides additional regularization benefits. For example, according to the authors, LoRA with
r = dmodel = 1024 outperforms full fine-tuning on GPT-2 Medium.
Generating documentation with veriﬁed quotes using ﬁne-tuned large language models
19
==PAGE:26==
5
Experimental Setup
This section describes the experimental setup of the project, including the technical environ-
ment, parameter configuration, and methods used to set up and run the experiments related to
quoting behavior evaluation using the QUIP score. The installation process, environment con-
figuration, a detailed description of the quote-tuning pipeline, and the challenges encountered
during deployment on high-performance computing (HPC) infrastructure are presented.
5.1
Environment and Library Setup
To manage dependencies and ensure reproducibility, all experiments are conducted within a
dedicated Conda vllm environment, which includes Python libraries listed in the repository
of this thesis, integrated as part of the existing pipeline. The full overview of the quote-tuning
pipeline is shown in Figure 5.1.
Figure 5.1: Quote-Tuning pipeline
Start:
At the outset, the following repositories are cloned: verifiable-by-design, data-portraits,
and controlable-safety-alignment.
Accordingly, the vllm Conda environment is set up
together with its dependencies. The vllm server is then launched on the available GPU with:
Generating documentation with veriﬁed quotes using ﬁne-tuned large language models
20
==PAGE:27==
CUDA_VISIBLE_DEVICES=0 \
./start_vllm.sh
which loads the Hugging-Face–compatible phi-3-mini-4k-instruct/llama3.1-8b-instruct models
into GPU memory. Once running, the server exposes the chat and completion endpoints at
http://localhost:8000/v1, accepting requests as if it were the oﬀicial OpenAI API.
LLM generates responses on train and test data: In the next step, the selected LLM (i.e., phi-
3-mini-4k-instruct) generates responses on a set of predetermined questions, using its trusted
text corpus (Wikipedia or NNE data). That is done through the following steps:
• Loading model weights and tokenizer files.
• Constructing the prompt from the HF dataset according to the template and sending it
to the local vLLM server in batches.
• Loading a small JSON blob of extra generation parameters, as described in table 5.1, which
instructs vLLM to sample n-amount of candidate answers per prompt and keep only the
best according to log-probability.
Start QUIP server: In this step, a separate Flask service is started that assigns QUIP scores
to each candidate’s answer to every prompt.
Additionally, the bloom filter is loaded as an
integrated part of the QUIP scoring system. This server runs locally on localhost:8001.
DS_SERVER_PORT=8001 DS_NAME="quip_20200301.25-1.bf" DS_WIDTH=25 python server.py
Use QUIP scoring on LLM-generated responses: After response generation, each (prompt, response)
is posted to the QUIP server, the returned scores are retrieved, and attached to each candidate
answer of every prompt for downstream processing.
Produce paired data for DPO:
Once N candidate answers for each prompt are generated and scored with QUIP, they are put
together to form a preference pair, as described in Section 4.4. All such pairs are aggregated
into two JSON files (train and test), which then serve as the data for the DPO training stage.
Convert paired data to HF format: The two JSON files, containing pairs of responses generated
and scored using the QUIP score, one representing the test set and the other representing the
training set, are converted into Hugging Face dataset format.
Perform DPO:
The next step is to conduct DPO training, which includes loading pre-trained weights, initializing
the pre-trained LLM, and setting up the loss function described in equation 4.2. Once the DPO
training is completed, the fine-tuned model is saved as a ”.pt” file, which contains the trained
weights of the model. The trained weights represent the final parameter values after the DPO.
Generating documentation with veriﬁed quotes using ﬁne-tuned large language models
21
==PAGE:28==
Convert trained model to HF format: The trained model ”.pt” file is converted back into the
Hugging Face format, so that the model file structure is compatible with transformers library.
Evaluation:
In this final step of the process, the quote-tuned model is assessed by generating outputs on
the evaluation dataset. That is done by taking the quote-tuned model and the specified prompt
template to generate predictions on the evaluation data, and once the model’s outputs are
generated, the QUIP scores are computed for the generated outputs.
The evaluation results are then saved in a JSON file, which contains the computed QUIP scores
for each generated response. QUIP scores from the JSON file are then extracted into a text file
containing only the float QUIP values. The final QUIP score for the model with N candidate
answers on the selected dataset is the mean value of all the QUIP scores in the extracted text
file. Additionally, standard deviations of each QUIP-score response are extracted into a text
file, where the final standard deviation for a model is the mean value of all computed standard
deviations.
5.2
Training parameteres setup
The experiments in this thesis relied on three different groups of parameter configurations, each
for a different stage of the experiment. The first group consists of the pre-trained LLM response
generation parameters (Table 5.1), which control the inference behaviour of the models, and
determine how outputs are sampled and ranked during the response generation. The second
group contains the LoRA hyperparameters (Table 5.2), which regulate the low-rank adaptation
fine-tuning method. Finally, the third group corresponds to the DPO training hyperparameters
(Table 5.3), which define the optimization setup during fine-tuning, all of which govern how the
model parameters are updated.
5.2.1
Pre-trained LLM Response Generation Parameters
Before applying quote-tuning, it is important to define how the pre-trained LLM generates
responses during inference. These parameters are not learned during training but instead control
the decoding process, which is to determine how many responses are sampled, how randomness
is injected, and how strongly the generation is biased toward more or less probable tokens.
Table 5.1 summarizes the set of response generation parameters.
Table 5.1: Pre-trained LLM Response Generation Parameters
Hyperparameter
Value
N candidates
5
Temperature
1
Max Tokens
512
Top p
0.9
where N is the number of generated responses per one prompt. For the experiments, either N = 5
Generating documentation with veriﬁed quotes using ﬁne-tuned large language models
22
==PAGE:29==
or N = 20 was applied as a parameter value. The temperature, which controls randomness in
sampling, was set to 1 for all experiments. Lower temperature values would make the model
more deterministic, while higher values would increase the model’s creativity, so 1 seemed like
a perfect balance. The maximum number of tokens the model may generate in its response was
set to 512 for all experiments. The value of ”Top p” was set to restrict the sampling to the top
90% of the tokens sorted by probability of occurrence.
5.2.2
LoRA Hyperparameters
In addition to the base training setup, low-rank adaptation (LoRA) was implemented for the
model fine-tuning to reduce the number of parameters that need to be updated during training.
Table 5.2 summarizes the hyperparameters used for the LoRA configuration.
Table 5.2: LoRA Hyperparameters
Hyperparameter
Value
r
32
α
16
Dropout
0.05
Target modules
q, k, v, o, gate,
up- and down-proj
The r is the rank of the low-rank decomposition, while α stands for the scaling factor applied to
the LoRA updates, which controls the contribution of the low-rank adaptation relative to the
frozen base model. A small dropout of 0.05 was applied to prevent overfitting during fine-tuning.
In this setup, LoRA was applied to the query (q), key (k), value (v), and output (o) projections
of the attention mechanism, and to the projection layers of the feed-forward network.
5.2.3
Training Hyperparameters
The main part of the quote-tuning pipeline is model training using DPO, for which a set of
training hyperparameters was defined as shown in Table 5.3.
Table 5.3: Training Hyperparameters
Hyperparameter
Value
Num epochs
3
Batch size
4
Learning rate
5e-7
Max length
256
Max prompt length
128
Trainer
FSDPTrainer
Reference dtype
BFloat16
Gradient accumulation steps
2
Optimiser
RMSprop
Generating documentation with veriﬁed quotes using ﬁne-tuned large language models
23
==PAGE:30==
As defined in Table 5.3, the training was conducted for three full passes (epochs) over the train
set, and each gradient update was computed on a mini batch of 4 examples, with two gradient
accumulation steps. The learning rate was employed with a value of 5 × 10−7 to secure stable
convergence when optimizing with the RMSprop optimiser. The maximum sequence length of
256 and maximum prompt length of 128 control how many tokens are fed into the model, with
longer prompts truncated to focus on the most relevant context. The Fully Sharded Data Parallel
(FSDP) trainer was implemented to shard and distribute model weights across 4 available GPUs,
and stored all model parameters and activations in the bfloat16 format to reduce memory usage
without making numerical precision worse.
5.3
High-Performance Computing Infrastructure
All the experiments were conducted on the Bura supercomputer[34], which is a high-performance
hybrid computing facility at the University of Rijeka, Croatia. Bura’s design is a multicomputer
and multiprocessor system hybrid, with a computational environment that can be utilized for
QUIP-related simulations consisting of a cluster partition with 288 compute nodes. Each node
hosts two Intel Xeon E5 processors with a total of 24 physical cores and 64 GB of RAM. The
cluster provides 6912 cores (13824 threads), 18 TB RAM, and 95 TB of disk storage space, with
compilation and installation of software taken care of by secure Xeon E5-based login nodes.
The system runs on Red Hat Enterprise Linux 7 and uses the Slurm Workload Manager for job
scheduling. Python and related environments were built directly on the login nodes, with all
QUIP server processes executed within user-managed virtual environments. Figure 5.2 shows
an example of multi-GPU usage when running an experiment, in particular DPO training.
(a) GPU Usage for DPO Training of Phi-3-Mini-
4K-Instruct
(b) GPU Usage for DPO Training of LLaMA-3.1-
8B-Instruct
Figure 5.2: GPU usage during DPO training of LLMs
Because of the FSDP parameter described in Table 5.3, it is visible in Figure 5.2 above, how the
model is equally distributed across 4 available GPUs. It can be observed from Figure 5.2b that
DPO training of LLaMA-3.1-8B-Instruct (8 billion parameters), given the parameters configura-
tion described in Table 5.3, almost uses the full memory of the available GPUs. From Figure 5.2a
it is visible that Phi-3-Mini-4K-Instruct (3.8 billion parameters) still leaves some space across all
Generating documentation with veriﬁed quotes using ﬁne-tuned large language models
24
==PAGE:31==
GPUs with the same parameter configuration. This shows that Phi-3-Mini-4K-Instruct works
better on limited hardware because it leaves extra memory available, so that it is possible to
run more processes or use larger batches. On the other hand, LLaMA-3.1-8B-Instruct almost
fills the GPU’s memory, which limits flexibility and requires reductions in training parameters.
5.4
Challenges and Troubleshooting
Several challenges were encountered during the project, of which the main ones were the quote-
tuning system configuration and long processing time. One of the most challenging parts of
the quote-tuning pipeline was starting the QUIP server.
Although it initially functioned as
expected, it later failed to accept the provided Bloom filter. To resolve this, a new Bloom filter
was downloaded directly from Hugging Face and loaded with:
sketch = dataportraits.RedisBFSketch.from_file(
host="localhost",
port=8899,
key="quip_20200301.25-1.bf",
width=25,
path="/scratch/akranjcevic/data-portraits/models--quip_20200301.25-1.bf"
)
The output of the DPO training is a ”policy.pt” file, which is then converted to Hugging Face
format. However, the final evaluation script couldn’t recognize the HF-formatted model. More
precisely, it couldn’t recognize the configuration file of the quote-tuned model. To overcome
that, the configuration file of the quote-tuned model was replaced with the configuration file of
the pre-trained model, while the rest of the model structure was kept the same. This way, the
quote-tuned model could be evaluated while keeping the rest of the tuned internal structure.
The results for both models (Phi-3-Mini-4K-Instruct and LLaMA-3.1-8B-Instruct) were hard to
extract because of the very long waiting time for scoring the responses of the pre-trained models
via the QUIP server, and even longer waiting time for DPO training of the models. The waiting
time for scoring pre-trained model responses for the Wikipedia dataset was approximately 6
hours, while for the NNE dataset, it took approximately 2 hours, for both the train and test sets
combined. The waiting time for DPO training was approximately 8 hours for models trained on
the Wikipedia dataset, and 3 hours for models trained on the NNE dataset.
Generating documentation with veriﬁed quotes using ﬁne-tuned large language models
25
==PAGE:32==
6
Results
The following section covers all of this study’s experimental results related to the quote-tuning of
the LLMs. The experiments are run with hyperparameters detailed in Table 5.3. Phi-3-mini-4k-
instruct and Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct are mutually compared when trained on both Wikipedia and
NNE data (synthetically generated), and when different parameter setting (∆quip) is applied.
Also, statistical significance tests are conducted to check whether quote-tuning significantly
improved the model performance.
In Table 6.1, the 25-gram QUIP scores of the Phi-3-Mini-4K-Instruct and LLaMA-3.1-8B-
Instruct models are compared before and after applying the best-of-5 quote-tuning. Best-of-5
means that the preference data used for DPO training is constructed by pre-trained LLM gen-
eration of five candidate answers. The models are compared mutually on both Wikipedia and
NNE data.
Table 6.1: 25-gram QUIP scores on NNE and Wikipedia data for Phi-3-mini-4k-instruct and
LLaMA-3.1-8B-Instruct (Best-of-5).
Data
Method
QUIP (mean ± std)
Wikipedia
Phi-3-mini-4k-instruct
0.2827 ± 0.00063
+ Best-of-5 Quote-Tuning
0.3737 ± 0.00239
LLaMA-3.1-8B-Instruct
0.3382 ± 0.00364
+ Best-of-5 Quote-Tuning
0.3671 ± 0.00498
NNE Data
Phi-3-mini-4k-instruct
0.2222 ± 0.00197
+ Best-of-5 Quote-Tuning
0.2691 ± 0.00495
LLaMA-3.1-8B-Instruct
0.2448 ± 0.00205
+ Best-of-5 Quote-Tuning
0.2714 ± 0.00460
Table 6.1 reveals that both models show improvement in QUIP scores after applying the best-
of-5 quote-tuning on Wikipedia data. However, Phi-3-Mini-4K-Instruct’s QUIP score was more
significant, with an improvement of 0.09 with quote-tuning, compared to a 0.03 improvement of
quote-tuned LLaMA-3.1-8B-Instruct. The improvement in the QUIP score suggests that Phi-3
might be easier to fine-tune compared to LLaMA-3; however, the improvement is only significant
for the Phi-3 trained on Wikipedia. Whereas for NNE data, the improvement with quote-tuning
was less significant for both models, compared to Wikipedia.
Table 6.2 provides the success rate of the Phi-3-Mini-4K-Instruct and LLaMA-3.1-8B-Instruct
models when forming preference pairs, as described in Section 4.4. The default value of a min-
imum acceptable QUIP difference between two candidate responses that can form a preference
pair (∆quip) for these experiments is initially set to 0.10.
Generating documentation with veriﬁed quotes using ﬁne-tuned large language models
26
==PAGE:33==
Table 6.2: Success rate for (Best-of-5) preference data formation.
Data
Method
Success rate
Wikipedia
Phi-3-mini-4k-instruct + Quote-Tuning (Best-of-5 )
49.7%
Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct + Quote-Tuning (Best-of-5 )
51.1%
NNE Data
Phi-3-mini-4k-instruct + Quote-Tuning (Best-of-5 )
29.9%
Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct + Quote-Tuning (Best-of-5 )
33.5%
From Table 6.2, it can be observed that both Phi-3-Mini-4K-Instruct and LLaMA-3.1-8B-
Instruct lost approximately 50 % of Wikipedia data, and 30 % of the NNE data, respectively,
due to unsuccessful preference pair formation. The unsuccessful preference pair formation means
that from all 5 LLM-generated candidate answers, the acceptable QUIP difference between re-
sponses was smaller than the set minimum. That occurred in approximately half of all examples
for both Wikipedia and NNE data.
To visualize the performance difference, the bar plot is displayed in Figure 6.1, comparing
the performance of pre-trained and quote-tuned models (using the best-of-5 preference data
formation) on both NNE and Wiki data.
(a) Pre-trained vs quote-tuned model (Best-of-5)
model comparison - Wikipedia
(b) Pre-trained vs quote-tuned model (Best-of-5)
model comparison - NNE Data
Figure 6.1: In Figure (a), the results for the two models (vertical bars) trained on Wikipedia are
shown, while Figure (b) displays models trained on NNE data. The quote-tuned Phi-3 models
(grey bars) perform signiﬁcantly better than their pre-trained versions (blue bars). This shows
that quote-tuning improves performance as measured by QUIP.
Figure 6.1 illustrates a clear improvement in QUIP scores for Phi-3-Mini-4K-Instruct trained
on Wikipedia after applying best-of-5 quote-tuning. The greater improvement of Phi-3 over
LLama-3-1 is also visible in Figure 6.1b, although not as significant compared to 6.1a.
To further analyze the results, data distribution and outliers are investigated from the bar plot.
Therefore, a box plot showing the spread of the QUIP scores for every response for pre-trained
and quote-tuned models (best-of-5) is displayed in Figure 6.2.
Generating documentation with veriﬁed quotes using ﬁne-tuned large language models
27
==PAGE:34==
(a) QUIP Scores for Pre-trained vs Quote-Tuned Models - Wikipedia
(b) QUIP Scores for Pre-trained vs Quote-Tuned Models - NNE Data
Figure 6.2: In Figure (a), data distribution of the two models (vertical boxes) trained on
Wikipedia is shown, while Figure (b) displays data distribution of the models trained on NNE
data. The quote-tuned Phi-3 model (orange boxes) performs signiﬁcantly better than the pre-
trained model (blue boxes), while quote-tuned LLaMA (red boxes) does not improve a lot
compared to its pre-trained version (green boxes). This shows that quote-tuning has a stronger
inﬂuence on Phi-3 than the LLaMA model.
From Figure 6.2a, it is visible that the distribution of QUIP scores for the models trained on
Wikipedia results in a relatively wide spread (higher variance).
The distributions of QUIP
scores in Figure 6.2a, while mostly being in the central range, are skewed to the right, with the
tail extending towards the higher scores. This skewness shows that both models occasionally
produce extreme values that are not representative of the general trend. In contrast, the Figure
6.2b shows a tighter distribution, with QUIP scores for models trained on NNE data clustered
closer to the median (less variance). However, it is also visible from Figure 6.2b that the NNE
data quote-tuned models have a lower acceptance rate, which results in fewer datapoints.
Generating documentation with veriﬁed quotes using ﬁne-tuned large language models
28
==PAGE:35==
The next step is to investigate the performance of the quote-tuned models when there are 20 can-
didate answers instead of 5. In Table 6.3, the 25-gram QUIP scores for Phi-3-Mini-4K-Instruct
and LLaMA-3.1-8B-Instruct models after applying best-of-20 quote-tuning are examined. By in-
creasing the number of candidates (best-of-20) generated by the pre-trained LLM, it is expected
that the models’ ability to generate factually accurate responses will be improved further. That
is because generating a larger number of candidate answers might improve the QUIP scores
of the highest-ranked answers, which will subsequently make the formation of preference pairs
easier.
Table 6.3: 25-gram QUIP scores on NNE and Wikipedia data for Phi-3-mini-4k-instruct and
LLaMA-3.1-8B-Instruct (Best-of-20).
Data
Method
QUIP (mean ± std)
Wikipedia
Phi-3-mini-4k-instruct
0.2958 ± 0.00151
+ Best-of-20 Quote-Tuning
0.3721 ± 0.00239
LLaMA-3.1-8B-Instruct
0.3325 ± 0.00073
+ Best-of-20 Quote-Tuning
0.3583 ± 0.00245
NNE Data
Phi-3-mini-4k-instruct
0.2249 ± 0.00098
+ Best-of-20 Quote-Tuning
0.2744 ± 0.00513
LLaMA-3.1-8B-Instruct
0.2438 ± 0.00098
+ Best-of-20 Quote-Tuning
0.2781 ± 0.00151
Table 6.3 shows that both models perform similarly to when 5 candidate answers are generated
by the pre-trained LLM (best-of-5), on both NNE and Wiki data, as shown in Table 6.1. The
improvement in the QUIP score shows that quote-tuning has a higher effect on Phi-3, compared
to LLaMA-3, when applying the quote-tuning with best-of-20 preference data formation.
Table 6.4 shows the success rates for Phi-3-Mini-4K-Instruct and LLaMA-3.1-8B-Instruct models
forming preference pairs after applying the best-of-20.
Table 6.4: Success rate for (Best-of-20) preference data formation.
Data
Method
Success rate
Wikipedia
Phi-3-mini-4k-instruct + Quote-Tuning (Best-of-20)
98.7%
Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct + Quote-Tuning (Best-of-20)
99.2%
NNE Data
Phi-3-mini-4k-instruct + Quote-Tuning (Best-of-20)
39.7 %
Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct + Quote-Tuning (Best-of-20)
78.8 %
It can be observed that the success rate is nearly perfect with the best-of-20 setup for Wiki
data, and it is significantly improved compared to the success rate shown in Table 6.2 (best-of-
5). That is important for the experiment, as the inability to form a preference pair would result
in less training data for DPO. However, the success rate for NNE data remains lower, especially
for the Phi-3-mini-4k-instruct.
Generating documentation with veriﬁed quotes using ﬁne-tuned large language models
29
==PAGE:36==
To visually assess what sets the models apart, the bar plot is displayed in Figure 6.3, comparing
the performance of pre-trained and quote-tuned models (using the best-of-20 preference data
formation) on both NNE and Wiki data.
(a) Pre-trained vs Quote-Tuned model (Best-of-20)
model comparison - Wikipedia
(b) Pre-trained vs Quote-Tuned model (Best-of-20)
model comparison - NNE Data
Figure 6.3: In Figure (a), the results for the two models (vertical bars) trained on Wikipedia are
shown, while Figure (b) displays models trained on NNE data. The quote-tuned Phi-3 models
(grey bars) perform signiﬁcantly better than their pre-trained versions (blue bars). This shows
that quote-tuning improves performance as measured by QUIP.
Figure 6.3a illustrates a clear improvement in QUIP scores for Phi-3-Mini-4K-Instruct trained
on Wikipedia after applying best-of-5 quote-tuning. The greater improvement of Phi-3 over
LLaMA-3 is also visible in Figure 6.3b, although not as significant compared to 6.3a. Quote-
tuning, having 20 instead of 5 LLM-generated candidate answers for preference pair formation,
improves the QUIP score significantly. However, the improvement is not much different com-
pared to using 5 LLM-generated answers to form preference pairs.
Additionally, data distribution and outliers should also be investigated through the box plot.
Therefore, a box plot showing the spread of the QUIP scores for every response for pre-trained
and quote-tuned models (best-of-20) is displayed in Figure 6.4.
Generating documentation with veriﬁed quotes using ﬁne-tuned large language models
30
==PAGE:37==
(a) QUIP Scores for Pre-trained vs Quote-Tuned Models - Wikipedia
(b) QUIP Scores for Pre-trained vs Quote-Tuned Models - NNE Data
Figure 6.4: In Figure (a), data distribution of the two models (vertical boxes) trained on
Wikipedia is shown, while Figure (b) displays data distribution of the models trained on NNE
data. The quote-tuned Phi-3 and LLaMA models (orange and red boxes) perform better than
the pre-trained models (blue and green boxes).
This shows that quote-tuning improves the
performance of both models as measured by the QUIP score.
From Figure 6.4a, it is visible that the distribution of QUIP scores for the models trained on
Wikipedia results in a relatively high variance. The distributions of QUIP scores in Figure 6.4b
display lower variance. The exception is the quote-tuned LLaMa-3 model, exhibiting a large tail
in both directions, with a higher concentration of extreme values (> 0.7) skewed towards the
upper end of the QUIP score spectrum. Figure 6.4b shows a tighter distribution, with QUIP
scores for models pre-trained on NNE data clustered closer to the median. However, it is also
visible from Figure 6.4b that the NNE data quote-tuned models (especially Phi-3) have a lower
acceptance rate, which results in fewer datapoints.
Generating documentation with veriﬁed quotes using ﬁne-tuned large language models
31
==PAGE:38==
For the next experiment, the minimum acceptable QUIP difference between two candidate re-
sponses that can form a preference pair ∆quip was increased to enable the model to better
distinguish between good and bad responses.
However, the experiment was conducted only
using the best-of-20 quote-tuning, as employing the best-of-5 quote-tuning would result in a
stronger absence of preference pairs, leading to data loss.
Table 6.5: 25-gram QUIP scores on NNE and Wikipedia data for Phi-3-mini-4k-instruct and
LLaMA-3.1-8B-Instruct (Best-of-20), with diﬀerent ∆quip values.
Data
Method
QUIP (mean ± std)
Wikipedia
Phi-3-mini-4k-instruct + Best-of-20 Quote-Tuning (∆quip = 0.10)
0.3721 ± 0.00151
Phi-3-mini-4k-instruct + Best-of-20 Quote-Tuning (∆quip = 0.25)
0.3734 ± 0.00239
Phi-3-mini-4k-instruct + Best-of-20 Quote-Tuning (∆quip = 0.35)
0.3729 ± 0.00241
LLaMA-3.1-8B-Instruct + Best-of-20 Quote-Tuning (∆quip = 0.10)
0.3583 ± 0.00245
LLaMA-3.1-8B-Instruct + Best-of-20 Quote-Tuning (∆quip = 0.25)
0.3567 ± 0.00244
LLaMA-3.1-8B-Instruct + Best-of-20 Quote-Tuning (∆quip = 0.35)
0.3579 ± 0.00244
NNE Data
Phi-3-mini-4k-instruct + Best-of-20 Quote-Tuning (∆quip = 0.10)
0.2744 ± 0.00513
Phi-3-mini-4k-instruct + Best-of-20 Quote-Tuning (∆quip = 0.25)
0.2646 ± 0.00482
Phi-3-mini-4k-instruct + Best-of-20 Quote-Tuning (∆quip = 0.35)
/ ± /
LLaMA-3.1-8B-Instruct + Best-of-20 Quote-Tuning (∆quip = 0.10)
0.2781 ± 0.00151
LLaMA-3.1-8B-Instruct + Best-of-20 Quote-Tuning (∆quip = 0.25)
0.2795 ± 0.00213
LLaMA-3.1-8B-Instruct + Best-of-20 Quote-Tuning (∆quip = 0.35)
/ ± /
The results from Table 6.5 suggest that the performance of the quote-tuned models on Wikipedia
is quite consistent, with similar QUIP scores and standard deviations across different values of
∆quip. On the other hand, the models quote-tuned on NNE data show less consistency, with a
higher standard deviation and worsened QUIP score, particularly for the Phi-3-mini-4k-instruct.
Furthermore, the models quote-tuned on NNE data with ∆quip = 0.35 could not produce any
results due to having a success rate of 0% for preference data formation.
Table 6.6 shows the success rates for Phi-3-Mini-4K-Instruct and LLaMA-3.1-8B-Instruct models
forming preference pairs after applying the best-of-20 preference data formation for different
values of ∆quip.
Generating documentation with veriﬁed quotes using ﬁne-tuned large language models
32
==PAGE:39==
Table 6.6: Success rate for (Best-of-20) Quote-Tuned models with diﬀerent ∆quip values.
Data
Method
Success rate
Wiki
Phi-3-mini-4k-instruct + Quote-Tuning (∆quip = 0.10)
98.7 %
Phi-3-mini-4k-instruct + Quote-Tuning (∆quip = 0.25)
24.3 %
Phi-3-mini-4k-instruct + Quote-Tuning (∆quip = 0.35)
5.98 %
Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct + Quote-Tuning (∆quip = 0.10)
99.2 %
Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct + Quote-Tuning (∆quip = 0.25)
20.9 %
Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct + Quote-Tuning (∆quip = 0.35)
4.27 %
NNE
Phi-3-mini-4k-instruct + Quote-Tuning (∆quip = 0.10)
39.7 %
Phi-3-mini-4k-instruct + Quote-Tuning (∆quip = 0.25)
9.2 %
Phi-3-mini-4k-instruct + Quote-Tuning (∆quip = 0.35)
0 %
Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct + Quote-Tuning (∆quip = 0.10)
78.8 %
Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct + Quote-Tuning (∆quip = 0.25)
13.8 %
Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct + Quote-Tuning (∆quip = 0.35)
0 %
From Table 6.6, it can be observed how the success rate subsequently decreases when the value
of ∆quip increases for all model variations. The success rate for NNE data remains significantly
lower, especially for the Phi-3-mini-4k-instruct. Therefore, it can be concluded that while con-
trollably increasing ∆quip for Wikipedia can be applied without major issues, applying the same
increase to NNE data leads to too few preference pairs being formed, limiting the usefulness of
the results. Moreover, increasing ∆quip is only meaningful when working with suﬀiciently large
datasets, as smaller datasets risk losing too many preference pairs to be effective.
To visually assess the impact of increasing the ∆quip on the model performance, the scatter
plot is displayed in Figure 6.5, comparing the performance of quote-tuned models (using the
best-of-20 preference data formation) on both Wikipedia and NNE data, with different ∆quip
values.
Generating documentation with veriﬁed quotes using ﬁne-tuned large language models
33
==PAGE:40==
(a) QUIP Scores for Phi-3-mini-4k-Instruct and
LLaMA-3.1-8B-Instruct with Diﬀerent ∆quip Val-
ues - Wikipedia (best-of-20)
(b) QUIP Scores for Phi-3-mini-4k-Instruct and
LLaMA-3.1-8B-Instruct with Diﬀerent ∆quip Val-
ues - NNE Data (best-of-20)
Figure 6.5: In Figure (a), a slight improvement in QUIP is visible when ∆quip is increased to
0.25 for Phi-3, while LLaMA-3 QUIP score increases with ∆quip increasing further to 0.35, when
models are trained on Wikipedia. Figure (b) displays a sharp decline of Phi-3 with a larger
standard deviation compared to the LLaMA-3 model, trained on NNE Data.
Figure 6.5 illustrates how QUIP scores change as the ∆quip threshold is increased for both
Wikipedia and NNE data. For the Wikipedia (Figure 6.5a), the scores remain relatively stable
across thresholds, with Phi-3 slightly outperforming LLaMA-3 for ∆quip = 0.25. In contrast,
on NNE data (Figure 6.5b), Phi-3’s performance decreases as ∆quip increases, while LLaMA-3
shows a minimum improvement with higher ∆quip.
To ensure the reproducibility of the results, the best-of-20 quote-tuning (Wikipedia) experiments
were repeated using the same parameter setup. The goal was to confirm that the obtained QUIP
scores stay consistent across two independent runs, instead of showing fluctuations. For example,
if an initial run achieves a QUIP score of 0.30, it is expected that a subsequent run under the
same conditions should return a nearly identical result, without increased standard deviation.
Generating documentation with veriﬁed quotes using ﬁne-tuned large language models
34
==PAGE:41==
Table 6.7: 25-gram QUIP scores on Wikipedia for Phi-3-mini-4k-instruct and LLaMA-3.1-8B-
Instruct (Best-of-20) with diﬀerent ∆quip. Results from the second run are shown, with the
diﬀerences in mean QUIP (∆mean) and standard deviation (∆std) compared to the ﬁrst run
shown in Table 6.5.
Method
Run 2 (mean ± std)
∆mean
∆std
Phi-3-mini-4k-instruct + Best-of-20 Quote-Tuning (∆quip = 0.10)
0.3721 ± 0.00153
0.0000
0.00002
Phi-3-mini-4k-instruct + Best-of-20 Quote-Tuning (∆quip = 0.25)
0.3737 ± 0.00233
0.0003
−0.00006
Phi-3-mini-4k-instruct + Best-of-20 Quote-Tuning (∆quip = 0.35)
0.3733 ± 0.00249
0.0004
0.00008
LLaMA-3.1-8B-Instruct + Best-of-20 Quote-Tuning (∆quip = 0.10)
0.3584 ± 0.00246
0.0000
0.00001
LLaMA-3.1-8B-Instruct + Best-of-20 Quote-Tuning (∆quip = 0.25)
0.3565 ± 0.00250
−0.0002
0.00006
LLaMA-3.1-8B-Instruct + Best-of-20 Quote-Tuning (∆quip = 0.35)
0.3578 ± 0.00251
−0.0001
0.00007
The results presented in Table 6.7 confirm that DPO training produces consistent outcomes
across independent runs. The observed differences in mean QUIP scores and standard deviation
(∆mean and ∆stdev) are minimal, remaining close to zero for both models and all tested values
of ∆quip. By performing a second run, it can be confirmed that the DPO training process is
stable with better evidence that improvements in QUIP scores are not due to randomness, but
a product of the quote-tuning.
6.1
Statistical Significance Testing: Paired Two-Tailed t-Test
To assess whether quote-tuning significantly impacted model performance, a paired two-tailed
t-test was conducted. The test compares the QUIP scores of the pre-trained model and its
corresponding scores after quote-tuning. The test statistic was computed using the following
formula:
t =
¯D −µ0
sD/√n
(6.1)
where ¯D is the mean of the differences, sD is the standard deviation of the differences, n is the
number of paired observations, and µ0 is the expected mean difference under the null hypothesis.
The hypotheses tested were:
H0 : µD = 0
(no difference in means)
H1 : µD ̸= 0
(a difference exists in either direction)
The resulting two-tailed p-value is given by:
p = 2 · P(T ≥|t|),
T ∼t(n −1)
(6.2)
where a p-value below 0.05 was considered statistically significant.
The paired two-tailed t-test results are displayed in Tables 6.8, 6.9, and 6.10.
Generating documentation with veriﬁed quotes using ﬁne-tuned large language models
35
==PAGE:42==
Table 6.8: Paired t-test results (Best-of-5) comparing pre-trained vs.
25-gram quote-tuned
models on Wikipedia and NNE datasets.
Data
Model
t-statistic
p-value
Wikipedia
Phi-3-mini-4k-instruct (Bo5)
22.8663
5.22e-106
Wikipedia
Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct (Bo5)
5.1682
2.53e-07
NNE Data
Phi-3-mini-4k-instruct (Bo5)
5.4687
1.35e-06
NNE Data
Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct (Bo5)
1.9441
0.0533
Table 6.9: Paired t-test results (Best-of-20) comparing pre-trained vs. 25-gram quote-tuned
models on Wikipedia and NNE datasets.
Data
Model
t-statistic
p-value
Wikipedia
Phi-3-mini-4k-instruct (Bo20)
25.4693
1.55e-128
Wikipedia
Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct (Bo20)
5.7824
2.59e-07
NNE Data
Phi-3-mini-4k-instruct (Bo20)
8.3051
1.52e-14
NNE Data
Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct (Bo20)
25.8652
1.57e-136
Table 6.10: Paired t-test results (Best-of-20) comparing base vs. 25-gram quote-tuned models
on Wikipedia and NNE datasets with diﬀerent ∆quip values.
Data
Model
t-statistic
p-value
Wikipedia
Phi-3-mini-4k-instruct + Quote-Tuning (∆quip = 0.25)
22.7935
2.11e-105
Wikipedia
Phi-3-mini-4k-instruct + Quote-Tuning (∆quip = 0.35)
17.4069
2.09e-75
Wikipedia
Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct + Quote-Tuning (∆quip = 0.25)
5.8235
2.28e-08
Wikipedia
Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct + Quote-Tuning (∆quip = 0.35)
4.4532
2.43e-06
NNE Data
Phi-3-mini-4k-instruct + Quote-Tuning (∆quip = 0.25)
5.8235
2.28e-08
NNE Data
Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct + Quote-Tuning (∆quip = 0.25)
14.4532
2.41e-42
The paired t-test results for best-of-5 quote-tuning (Table 6.8) show statistically significant
improvements for Phi-3-mini-4k-instruct on both Wikipedia and NNE data, while the LLaMA-
3.1-8B-Instruct model benefits significantly only on Wikipedia. The results for the best-of-20
quote tuning (Table 6.9) display significant improvements for both models across Wikipedia and
NNE datasets, having higher t-statistics and lower p-values. The paired t-test results from Table
6.10 show that improvements remain statistically significant with different ∆quip values.
Overall, the t-test results confirm that quote-tuning consistently improves the quoting behavior
of both Phi-3-mini-4k-instruct and LLaMA-3.1-8B-Instruct, with significance levels strongly
supporting the effectiveness of the approach. While from Table 6.10 it is visible that the effect
is stronger for Phi-3, both models benefit from increasing the number of candidate responses to
best-of-20.
Generating documentation with veriﬁed quotes using ﬁne-tuned large language models
36
==PAGE:43==
7
Discussion
The results presented in Section 6 highlight how quote-tuning shapes model behavior, with Phi-
3-Mini-4K-Instruct benefiting the most, particularly when trained on Wikipedia. By contrast,
LLaMA-3.1-8B-Instruct showed only modest gains, showing how scale alone does not guarantee
better quoting performance, especially when the baseline model already incorporates the training
corpus. That model behavior is understandable given the sizes of the two presented: 3.8 billion
parameters for Phi-3-Mini-4K-Instruct, and 8 billion parameters for LLaMA-3.1-8B-Instruct.
That is because smaller models are known to be easier to fine-tune for domain-specific tasks,
compared to larger models [14][17]. Therefore, it is expected that a smaller model will have a
more significant improvement after quote-tuning. Having more limited model quoting behavior
improvements on the synthetic NNE dataset showed how corpus size and quality of the content
influence quote-tuning effectiveness.
However, the study also has limitations regarding the synthetically generated data, which lacks
the scale and diversity of Wikipedia. Performance improvements depend a lot on corpus quality
and size, as seen in the stronger results on Wikipedia compared to the smaller and less diverse
NNE dataset. Moreover, relying on synthetic data solely creates risks of bias or reduced diversity,
meaning that outputs could become overly constrained to synthetic patterns and therefore less
representative of real-world industrial design documentation.
Also, if a company decides to
incorporate the proposed methodology into its existing pipelines, privacy and confidentiality
should be ensured. Unlike in Wikipedia, industrial design documentation can contain sensitive
or proprietary information that cannot be made freely available when training models, and
therefore, compliance with data protection regulations should be required before subjecting
such data to quote-tuning.
Future work should focus on extending the experiments to other settings, for example, instruction
tuning [35][36], which fine-tunes the model to follow new tasks. In this study, quoting was used
as a simple interface to what the model has already learned, which leaves room for investigating
the synergy between quote-tuned models and retrieval-augmented generation [37][38], or other
non-parametric techniques [39].
Another useful direction would be to extend QUIP scoring
with accuracy, so that model outputs are not only verifiable but also factually correct. Also,
given the available computational resources of about 192 GiB, and the current sizes of the
evaluated models, it would be valuable to investigate whether even smaller models of around
1 billion (or fewer) parameters could achieve similar or even better performance. Finally, it
would be interesting to compare how models perform without quote-tuning when using more
detailed instructions as prompt templates against quote-tuned models with the current prompt
templates used in this study.
Generating documentation with veriﬁed quotes using ﬁne-tuned large language models
37
==PAGE:44==
8
Conclusion
This thesis demonstrated that quote-tuning, implemented through DPO, significantly improves
the LLMs to generate outputs with verbatim quotes from trusted sources. In experiments on
both Wikipedia and synthetic NNE data, Phi-3-Mini-4K-Instruct showed a substantial improve-
ment over their pre-trained baselines, while LLaMA-3.1-8B-Instruct achieved more modest gains,
although still consistent across datasets.
The models performed better when trained on Wikipedia, where LLMs, especially Phi-3-Mini-4k-
Instruct, benefited from the diversity and size of the corpus. That might not be a coincidence,
as both pre-trained LLaMA-3.1-8B-Instruct and Phi-3-Mini-4k-Instruct models are probably
trained on a larger amount of data from Wikipedia. However, improvements were also observed
on the smaller, domain-specific NNE dataset. Although the NNE dataset was synthetically gen-
erated, the results indicate that quote-tuning works well, while leaving room for improvement
and adaptation.
Overall, the results show that even relatively small models, when quote-tuned with DPO, im-
prove verbatim quoting and verifiability, enabling LLMs to generate outputs that are more
reliable for downstream use. Although the NNE dataset was synthetically generated, the results
confirm that quote-tuning is not limited to Wikipedia and can be applied to domain-specific
corpora. Furthermore, the findings suggest that quote-tuned LLMs have great potential for in-
tegration into industrial workflows of companies such as Novo Nordisk Engineering (NNE), which
aim to reduce repetitive manual work in the preparation of industrial design documentation.
Generating documentation with veriﬁed quotes using ﬁne-tuned large language models
38
==PAGE:45==
References
[1]
Xiang Yue et al. “Automatic evaluation of attribution by large language models”. In: arXiv
preprint arXiv:2305.06311 (2023).
[2]
Raymond Fok and Daniel S Weld. “In search of veriﬁability: Explanations rarely enable
complementary performance in AI-advised decision making”. In: AI Magazine 45.3 (2024),
pp. 317–332.
[3]
Nelson F. Liu, Tianyi Zhang, and Percy Liang. Evaluating Veriﬁability in Generative
Search Engines. 2023. arXiv: 2304.09848 [cs.CL]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.09848.
[4]
Weijia Shi et al. Trusting Your Evidence: Hallucinate Less with Context-aware Decoding.
2023. arXiv: 2305.14739 [cs.CL]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.14739.
[5]
Jacob Menick et al. “Teaching language models to support answers with veriﬁed quotes”.
In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.11147 (2022).
[6]
Jingyu Zhang et al. “Veriﬁable by design: Aligning language models to quote from pre-
training data”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.03862 (2024).
[7]
Rafael Rafailov et al. “Direct Preference Optimization: Your Language Model is Secretly a
Reward Model”. In: Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems.
2023. url: https://openreview.net/forum?id=HPuSIXJaa9.
[8]
Nicholas Carlini et al. “Extracting training data from large language models”. In: 30th
USENIX security symposium (USENIX Security 21). 2021, pp. 2633–2650.
[9]
Leo Gao et al. “The pile: An 800gb dataset of diverse text for language modeling”. In:
arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.00027 (2020).
[10]
Orion Weller et al. “" According to...": Prompting Language Models Improves Quoting
from Pre-Training Data”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.13252 (2023).
[11]
Weijia Shi et al. “Trusting your evidence: Hallucinate less with context-aware decoding”.
In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.13252 (2023).
[12]
Marc Marone and Benjamin Van Durme. “Data Portraits: Recording Foundation Model
Training Data”. In: Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems
Datasets and Benchmarks Track. 2023. url: https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_ﬁles/
paper/2023/ﬁle/3112ee706d21d734c15532c1239773e1-Paper-Datasets_and_Benchmarks.
pdf.
[13]
Nelson F Liu, Tianyi Zhang, and Percy Liang. “Evaluating veriﬁability in generative search
engines”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.03614 (2023).
[14]
Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, et al. “LoRA: Low-rank adaptation of large lan-
guage models”. In: International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) (2022).
[15]
Tim Dettmers et al. “Qlora: Eﬃcient ﬁnetuning of quantized llms”. In: Advances in neural
information processing systems 36 (2023), pp. 10088–10115.
[16]
Zeyu Han et al. “Parameter-eﬃcient ﬁne-tuning for large models: A comprehensive survey”.
In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.14608 (2024).
Generating documentation with veriﬁed quotes using ﬁne-tuned large language models
39
==PAGE:46==
[17]
Lingling Xu et al. “Parameter-eﬃcient ﬁne-tuning methods for pretrained language models:
A critical review and assessment”. In: CoRR abs/2312.12148 (2023).
[18]
Marah Abdin, Jyoti Aneja, Hany Awadalla, et al. “Phi-3 technical report: A highly capable
language model locally on your phone”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.14219 (2024).
[19]
Marah Abdin, Jyoti Aneja, Harkirat Behl, et al. “Phi-4 technical report”. In: arXiv preprint
arXiv:2412.08905 (2024).
[20]
Hugo Touvron et al. “Llama: Open and eﬃcient foundation language models”. In: arXiv
preprint arXiv:2302.13971 (2023).
[21]
OpenAI. GPT-4o: Multimodal Large Language Model. https://openai.com/index/hello-gpt-
4o. Available at https://openai.com/index/hello-gpt-4o. May 2024.
[22]
Chris Alberti et al. “Synthetic QA Corpora Generation with Roundtrip Consistency”. In:
Proceedings of ACL. 2019. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/1906.05416.
[23]
Seyed Mehran Shakeri et al. “End-to-End Synthetic Data Generation for Domain Adap-
tation of Question Answering Systems”. In: Proceedings of EMNLP. 2020. url: https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2010.06028.
[24]
Yu Wang et al. “Augmenting Textual Generation via Topology Aware Retrieval”. In: arXiv
preprint arXiv:2405.17602 (2024).
[25]
Marah Abdin et al. “Phi-3 technical report: A highly capable language model locally on
your phone”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.14219 (2024).
[26]
Hugo Touvron et al. Llama 2: Open Foundation and Fine-Tuned Chat Models. 2023. arXiv:
2307.09288 [cs.CL]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.09288.
[27]
Paulo Sérgio Almeida et al. “Scalable bloom ﬁlters”. In: Information Processing Letters
101.6 (2007), pp. 255–261.
[28]
Zihao Fu et al. “On the Eﬀectiveness of Parameter-Eﬃcient Fine-Tuning”. In: Proceedings
of the AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence. Vol. 37. 11. 2023, pp. 12799–12807. doi:
10.1609/aaai.v37i11.26505. url: https://doi.org/10.1609/aaai.v37i11.26505.
[29]
Zeyu Han et al. “Parameter-Eﬃcient Fine-Tuning for Large Models: A Comprehensive
Survey”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.14608 (2024). doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2403.14608.
url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.14608.
[30]
Lingling Xu et al. “Parameter-Eﬃcient Fine-Tuning Methods for Pretrained Language
Models: A Critical Review and Assessment”. In: CoRR abs/2312.12148 (2023). doi: 10.
48550/ARXIV.2312.12148. arXiv: 2312.12148. url: https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2312.
12148.
[31]
Ning Ding et al. “Parameter-Eﬃcient Fine-Tuning of Large-Scale Pre-Trained Language
Models”. In: Nature Machine Intelligence 5 (2023), pp. 220–235. doi: 10.1038/s42256-
023-00626-4. url: https://doi.org/10.1038/s42256-023-00626-4.
[32]
Armen Aghajanyan, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Sonal Gupta. “Intrinsic dimensionality ex-
plains the eﬀectiveness of language model ﬁne-tuning”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.13255
(2020).
[33]
James Kirkpatrick et al. “Overcoming catastrophic forgetting in neural networks”. In:
Proceedings of the national academy of sciences 114.13 (2017), pp. 3521–3526.
Generating documentation with veriﬁed quotes using ﬁne-tuned large language models
40
==PAGE:47==
[34]
Bura (superraunalo). https://hr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bura_(superraunalo). Accessed: 2025-
08-31. 2025.
[35]
Swaroop Mishra et al. “Cross-task generalization via natural language crowdsourcing in-
structions”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.08773 (2021).
[36]
Shilong Zhang et al. “Gpt4roi: Instruction tuning large language model on region-of-
interest”. In: European conference on computer vision. Springer. 2024, pp. 52–70.
[37]
Kelvin Guu et al. “Retrieval augmented language model pre-training”. In: International
conference on machine learning. PMLR. 2020, pp. 3929–3938.
[38]
Gautier Izacard et al. “Atlas: Few-shot learning with retrieval augmented language mod-
els”. In: Journal of Machine Learning Research 24.251 (2023), pp. 1–43.
[39]
Sewon Min et al. “Nonparametric masked language modeling”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.01349
(2022).
Generating documentation with veriﬁed quotes using ﬁne-tuned large language models
41
==PAGE:48==
A
Appendix
GitHub repository:
Generating-documentation-with-verified-quotes
A.1
Prompt Templates
The following section describes the content of the main prompt templates used in this project.
1 {
2
"name ": "complete_gr",
3
"messages ":[
4
{" role ": "system", "content ": "Please
complete
the
following
paragraph
based on the
context ."},
5
{" role ": "user", "content ": "{ question }"}
6
],
7
"aggregate ": " generate_response "
8 }
Listing A.1: Structure and content of system prompt.
1 {
2
"name ": "concise_gr",
3
"messages ":[
4
{" role ": "system", "content ": "You will be given a question. Write a
short
paragraph
that
answers
the
question. Remember to be concise , accurate ,
and on -topic ."},
5
{" role ": "user", "content ": "{ question }"}
6
],
7
"aggregate ": " generate_response "
8 }
Listing A.2: Structure and content of system’s response generation prompt.
1 {
2
"name ": "given_sys_gr",
3
"messages ":[
4
{" role ": "system", "content ": "{ system_prompt }"},
5
{" role ": "user", "content ": "{ question }"}
6
],
7
" dataset_template_mapping ": {
8
"system_prompt ": "system_prompt ",
9
"prompt ": "question"
10
},
11
"aggregate ": " generate_response "
12 }
Listing A.3: Structure and content of system prompt.
Generating documentation with veriﬁed quotes using ﬁne-tuned large language models
42
==PAGE:49==
1 {
2
"name ": "only_wiki_gr",
3
"messages ":[
4
{" role ": "system", "content ": "You are a knowledgeable
assistant
who
provides
accurate
answers. Respond to the
following
question
using
only
information
that can be attributed to Wikipedia ."},
5
{" role ": "user", "content ": "{ question }"}
6
],
7
"aggregate ": " generate_response "
8 }
Listing A.4: Structure and content of prompt for pre-trained LLM response generation.
1 {
2
"name ": "only_nne_gr",
3
"messages ":[
4
{" role ": "system", "content ": "You are a knowledgeable
assistant
who
provides
accurate
answers. Respond to the
following
question
using
only
information
that can be attributed to the
provided
NNE
industrial
design
documentation ."},
5
{" role ": "user", "content ": "Generate
200
promptresponse
pairs for the
test set and 1800 for the
training
set. Ensure
that no prompts
from the
training
set are
repeated in the test set ."}
6
],
7
"aggregate ": " generate_response "
8 }
Listing A.5: Structure and content of NNE data generation prompt.
Generating documentation with veriﬁed quotes using ﬁne-tuned large language models
43
==PAGE:50==
This thesis was written by Andro Kranjcevic, and it concludes his MSc in Human Centered Artificial
Intelligence at the Technical University of Denmark. It was made in collaboration with Novo Nordisk
Enineering (NNE), who provided technical expertise and resources for the project, and was supervised
by an Associate Professor Tue Herlau and Postdoctoral Researcher Luka Grbcic, whose project
guidance was invaluable.
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 321
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 3031
https://orbit.dtu.dk/en/organisations/department-of-applied-mathematics-and-computer-science
