==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
 
Master’s Thesis 
 
 
Women in leadership with decision-
making power within STEM 
 
 
 
By: Mirela Lavranciuc (s233411) 
Supervised by: Robin van Oorschot 
 
 
 
 
 
DTU Technology Entrepreneurship 
Centre for Technology Entrepreneurship 
 
August, 2025 
==PAGE:2==
DTU Entrepreneurship 
| 
Women in leadership with decision-making power in STEM 
i 
 
Acknowledgements 
 
I would like to express my graƟtude to Robin van Oorschot for his invaluable supervision, 
construcƟve feedback, and for meeƟng me halfway throughout this journey, which was not 
always linear. I am also deeply thankful to Andreea Balasiu for the inspiring brainstorming 
sessions, and to my mentor Lene for her encouragement. I am equally grateful to all 
parƟcipants who generously shared their Ɵme, experiences and insights for this research. 
Finally, I extend special thanks to my family and friends for their paƟence and constant 
support. 
 
==PAGE:3==
DTU Entrepreneurship 
| 
Women in leadership with decision-making power in STEM 
ii 
 
Abstract: 
The overall purpose of this research is to understand how we can have more women in 
decision-making roles within STEM, in Denmark, in the private sector. Currently, Denmark has 
the lowest share of women in leadership roles within the Nordics, which means that despite 
the exisƟng iniƟaƟves, there is sƟll work to be done. In this thesis, there will be an analysis of 
leadership styles, how these impact women, and the role of senior leadership. There will also 
be a correlaƟon with the entrepreneurial mindset (EM) and how it contributes to leadership 
success. UlƟmately, the research seeks to idenƟfy opportuniƟes to increase the number of 
women in leadership roles with decision-making power. 
 
 
Learning objecƟves:  
 
Analysis of relevant literature on the topic 
 
Analysis of qualitaƟve and quanƟtaƟve data from primary and secondary data 
 
Communicate the work in a clear and understandable way 
 
Deﬁne and explore leadership styles in Denmark  
 
Deﬁne EM and analyse how it impacts leadership style 
 
IdenƟfy the role of senior leadership for supporƟng women  
 
Reﬂect on limitaƟons of the research 
 
 
==PAGE:4==
DTU Entrepreneurship 
| 
Women in leadership with decision-making power in STEM 
iii 
 
Table of Contents 
List of tables ..................................................................................................................................iv 
List of abbreviaƟons ...................................................................................................................... v 
1. 
IntroducƟon .......................................................................................................................... 1 
2. 
TheoreƟcal FoundaƟons ....................................................................................................... 2 
2.1. 
Women in Denmark’s workforce and STEM educaƟon ............................................... 2 
2.2. 
The Nordic gender equality paradox and women in leadership .................................. 3 
2.3. 
Entrepreneurial mindset in STEM leadership .............................................................. 7 
3. 
Methodology ........................................................................................................................ 8 
3.1. 
Data collecƟon ............................................................................................................. 8 
3.2. 
Sampling ...................................................................................................................... 9 
3.3. 
Interview setup .......................................................................................................... 10 
3.4. 
Interview guide .......................................................................................................... 10 
3.5. 
Data analysis .............................................................................................................. 11 
3.6. 
Ethical consideraƟons  ............................................................................................... 11 
3.7. 
Digital tools ................................................................................................................ 12 
4. 
Findings ............................................................................................................................... 12 
4.1. 
Leadership pracƟces in STEM in Denmark ................................................................. 12 
4.2. 
Gender and leadership in STEM – barriers and biases .............................................. 17 
4.3. 
Enablers – opportuniƟes and future direcƟons for women in STEM in Denmark ..... 22 
5. 
Discussion ........................................................................................................................... 25 
5.1. 
LimitaƟons and direcƟons for future research .......................................................... 29 
6. 
Conclusion .......................................................................................................................... 29 
7. 
Bibliography ........................................................................................................................ 31 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:5==
DTU Entrepreneurship 
| 
Women in leadership with decision-making power in STEM 
iv 
 
List of tables 
Table 1: Number of male and female graduates in STEM higher educaƟon in Denmark between 
2020 and 2024, from short cycle higher educaƟon to PhD level .................................................. 3 
Table 2: Gender gap index in the Nordic countries in 2025 including world and European 
rankings ......................................................................................................................................... 3 
Table 3: DescripƟon of parƟcipants in the interviews ................................................................... 9 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:6==
DTU Entrepreneurship 
| 
Women in leadership with decision-making power in STEM 
v 
 
List of abbreviaƟons 
 
AI – ArƟﬁcial Intelligence 
CEO – Chief ExecuƟve Oﬃcer 
CPO – Chief People Oﬃcer 
DEI – Diversity, Equality, and Inclusion 
EU – European Union 
EM – Entrepreneurial Mindset 
HR – Human Resources 
KPI – Key Performance Indicator 
SDG – Sustainable Development Goals 
STEM – Science, Technology, Engineering, MathemaƟcs 
UN – United NaƟons 
UK – United Kingdom 
USA – United States of America 
 
 
 
==PAGE:7==
DTU Entrepreneurship 
| 
Women in leadership with decision-making power in STEM 
1 
 
1. IntroducƟon  
In recent decades, Denmark has consistently been recognised as a global champion in gender 
equality (Hovden et al., 2011). As part of its commitment to the Sustainable Development 
Goals (SDGs), Denmark has set clear goals under SDG 5 – Gender Equality, which includes 
ensuring women’s full participation and equal opportunities in leadership roles at all levels 
(Denmark StaƟsƟcs, 2023c). Despite its reputation, women in leadership in Denmark continue 
to be disproportionately under-represented, especially in male-dominated industries such as 
STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering, Mathematics) (Denmark StaƟsƟcs, 2023d; The 
Diversity Council, 2022).  
This thesis was motivated by earlier exploratory conversations with women working in STEM 
across Denmark and the Nordics. A female developer from Sweden noted that women are 
under-promoted and concentrated in middle-management, with representation declining 
sharply at higher levels of leadership. A female Supply Chain Engineer in a robotics 
organisation in Denmark raised concerns around family expectations, workplace dynamics, 
leadership perceptions that limit work-balance and her own leadership aspirations. Similarly, 
the Head of Diversity at a Danish university confirmed that these challenges persist in 
academic settings as well, introducing the concepts of lack of identity-fit, unclear career paths 
for women, and microaggressions women experience in the workplace. Together, these 
conversations revealed a gap between Denmark’s international reputation for gender equality 
and women’s lived experiences of leadership opportunities in STEM industries.  
Given the fast-paced world that we live in, STEM organisations must find a way to stay 
competitive and constantly improve their solutions. With that in mind, the thesis will explore 
women’s access to leadership in STEM through the lens of entrepreneurial mindset (EM) and 
the Nordic gender equality paradox. 
Building on these insights, the initial research question for this thesis was framed in a solution-
oriented way: How can we have more women in leadership roles with decision-making power 
within STEM in Denmark? However, as the literature review and exploratory interviews 
revealed, this question required broader lens. Women’s under-representation cannot be 
explained solely by numbers, but must also be understood through cultural norms, 
organisational practices, and alternative approaches to leadership. This led to a reformulated 
research question: How do cultural norms, organisational practices, and EM shape women’s 
access to leadership roles in Denmark’s STEM organisations? 
The thesis will cover the following: status quo of women in Denmark’s labour market, 
theoretical foundations of women in STEM leadership, the Nordic gender equality paradox, 
and EM. The methodological approach will be presented followed by the findings based on 
interviews with STEM leaders in Denmark. Finally, the findings will be discussed in light of the 
literature, concluding with implications for STEM organisations, leaders, and women who 
aspire to leadership roles.  
==PAGE:8==
DTU Entrepreneurship 
| 
Women in leadership with decision-making power in STEM 
2 
 
2. TheoreƟcal FoundaƟons 
To gain a better overview of women in STEM leadership in Denmark and how EM influences 
leadership style, the sections below provide a literature review about women in STEM in 
Denmark and women in leadership. The concept of Nordic gender equality paradox will be 
presented, as well as a definition of EM. 
2.1. Women in Denmark’s workforce and STEM educaƟon 
The percentage of women in the Nordics who participate in the labour market is one of the 
highest in the world and they are also amongst the most highly educated, often surpassing 
men (Denmark StaƟsƟcs, 2024; Nordic StaƟsƟcs, 2024a; Sørensen, 2019). While the 
employment rate for women in Denmark was 75,8% in 2023 and for men was 79,2%, both 
genders showed similar high participation in the workforce (Hovden et al., 2011; World 
Economic Forum, 2025). Despite this high gender representation, women held only 25,9% of 
the overall leadership roles in Denmark in 2023 which is part of the Nordic gender equality 
paradox in the next sub-chapter (Denmark StaƟsƟcs, 2023d). At the executive level, the 
representation was lower with 19% in the private sector, and only 9% at the level of Chief 
Executive Officer (CEO) or board presidency (Nordic StaƟsƟcs, 2024b). 
According to Eurostat (2025), women accounted for 48,8% of all scientists and engineers in 
Denmark in 2024, slightly lower compared to previous years: 50,8% in 2023, 52,7% in 2022, 
50,1% in 2021, and 51,6%, in 2020 (Eurostat, 2025). However, Denmark experiences a high 
degree of horizontal gender segregation in the labour market (Sørensen, 2019; The Diversity 
Council, 2022; Villesèche et al., 2021). Men dominate the private sector and STEM industries, 
whereas women are disproportionately employed in the public sector and female-dominated 
industries such as education, healthcare, and social work activities (Sanandaji, 2018; 
Spangsdorf & Forsythe, 2021; The Diversity Council, 2022). Between 2014 and 2024, men’s 
participation in male-dominated industries consistently ranged between 76% and 78,1%, 
whereas women’s representation in female-dominated industries remained between 71,7% 
and 73,3% (Nordic StaƟsƟcs, 2024b). This pattern suggests that individuals tend to work in 
sectors where their own gender represents at least 70% of the workforce. 
Given the high gender market segregation in Denmark, even when women hold similar 
qualifications to men, they are still more likely to be employed in lower-paid, female-
dominated sectors which enhances ongoing gender inequality in leadership from the beginning 
of their careers (Sørensen, 2019; The Diversity Council, 2022).  
EducaƟon pipeline 
Over the last decade, there were consistently more women than men attaining higher 
education degrees in Denmark (Denmark StaƟsƟcs, 2024). In 2024, over 370 000 men and 
nearly 482 000 women graduated at higher education levels (Denmark StaƟsƟcs, 2024). 
However, this overall gender advantage for women is not reflected in STEM education fields 
==PAGE:9==
DTU Entrepreneurship 
| 
Women in leadership with decision-making power in STEM 
3 
 
where the representation of male graduates is significantly higher (see table 1). Within STEM, 
women remain more concentrated in programmes including the terms “bio”, “life science”, 
“environment” and “design” (McKinsey & Company & InnovaƟon Fund Denmark, 2018), 
although specific numbers by technical fields remain limited.  
Between 2020 and 2024, 65% of the STEM graduates in Denmark were men and 35% were 
women. At the same time, the number of male graduates has been decreasing since 2021 
whereas the number of female graduates has been fairly constant in the last 5 years, with the 
exception of 2023 with a slight increase (table 1). The Danish Society of Engineers (IDA) 
expects a shortage of engineers in Denmark until 2040 which means the number of graduates 
might continue to decrease in the following years (Frandsen, 2025). 
GRADUATE STUDENTS IN STEM INDUSTRIES
YEAR
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
MEN
46 901
47 044
45 788
45 183
43 701
WOMEN
24 114
24 694
24 724
25 025
24 409
Table 1: Number of male and female graduates in STEM higher educaƟon in Denmark between 2020 and 2024, from 
short cycle higher educaƟon to PhD level. 
Source: (Denmark StaƟsƟcs, 2025) 
High participation in education and the workforce, combined with persistent horizontal gender 
segregation and under-representation in leadership reflect the structural dynamics at the 
heart of the Nordic gender equality paradox. The next sub-chapter explores how these 
dynamics manifest in women’s access to leadership roles in Denmark. 
2.2. The Nordic gender equality paradox and women in 
leadership 
The Nordic countries (Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway, Sweden) are often seen as role 
models for gender equality (Hovden et al., 2011). They consistently rank among the highest in 
healthcare, empowerment, education, political participation, and labour market, according to 
the United Nations (UN) Development Program’s Gender Inequality and the Global Gender 
Gap Report (United NaƟons, 2023; World Economic Forum, 2025) – see table 2. However, 
despite these achievements, a persistent gender imbalance remains in leadership roles, 
particularly in Denmark, which is referred to as the Nordic gender equality paradox.  
GENDER GAP INDEX IN THE NORDICS
World ranking
European ranking
Nordic country
Gender gap index (%)
1
1
Iceland
7,4%
2
2
Finland
12,1%
3
3
Norway
13,7%
6
5
Sweden
18,3%
14
11
Denmark
20,9%
Table 2: Gender gap index in the Nordic countries in 2025 including world and European rankings. 
Source: (World Economic Forum, 2025) 
==PAGE:10==
DTU Entrepreneurship 
| 
Women in leadership with decision-making power in STEM 
4 
 
PercepƟon versus reality 
The paradox manifests in the Danes’ perception of gender equality in leadership (The Diversity 
Council, 2022). A survey conducted in 2017 by the European Union (EU) found that 58% of the 
population in Denmark believed gender equality in leadership had been achieved (The 
Diversity Council, 2022). The Diversity Council refers to this misalignment as a “negative gap” 
where optimistic societal expectations mask the reality of inequality (The Diversity Council, 
2022; Wedel, 2020). This gap may contribute to the limited focus on improving gender equality 
in leadership (Wedel, 2020). As a result, many women continue to face the “glass ceiling” 
effect which is a metaphor for the invisible structural and cultural barriers that prevent women 
from advancing to top leadership positions, particularly in male-dominated industries such as 
STEM (Chisholm-Burns et al., 2017; Gipson et al., 2017; Sanandaji, 2018).  
Work, care, and the child penalty 
Cultural norms around gender and labour continue to influence women’s career progression 
(Villesèche et al., 2021). Despite Denmark’s reputation for progressiveness, it still reflects a 
relatively traditional and conservative mindset regarding gender roles at home and in the 
workplace (Villesèche et al., 2021). Women are still more likely to assume primary 
responsibility for household and caregiving duties and, as a result, are twice as likely as men to 
work part-time following childbirth (Denmark StaƟsƟcs, 2023b; Villesèche et al., 2021).  
The Nordic countries promote what is known as “dual-breadwinner” or “weak breadwinner” 
model where both men and women are equally encouraged to invest in their careers while 
caretaking policies become responsibility of the state (Muhammad et al., 2023; Neergaard & 
Thrane, 2011; Sanandaji, 2018; Villesèche et al., 2021). In Denmark, due to assumptions 
related to the traditional breadwinner model and gender role segregation, women’s careers 
are still more affected than men’s (Neergaard & Thrane, 2011; Villesèche et al., 2021). 
This dynamic contributes to a gender pay gap of currently 12,7%, as organisations in Denmark 
reward continuous full-time employment with career progression and higher incomes 
(Denmark StaƟsƟcs, 2023b; Neergaard & Thrane, 2011). Even though Denmark offers family-
friendly policies such as parental leave with benefits and a strong emphasis on work-life 
balance, long career breaks and reduced working hours continue to penalise women’s income 
and career advancement (Adams et al., 2025; Kleven et al., 2019).  
This phenomenon is known as the “child penalty”, which can reduce women’s earnings by up 
to 20% across industries in the long term (Kleven et al., 2019). In contrast, men often benefit 
from a “fatherhood advantage” as they are perceived as more stable and committed after 
childbirth and more deserving of advancement, reinforcing the traditional breadwinner model 
(Kleven et al., 2019; Villesèche et al., 2021). 
Leadership stereotypes and idenƟty-ﬁt 
Given the Danish traditional mindset towards family roles, women continue to carry an 
unequal burden towards family and household responsibilities, as per section above. In this 
==PAGE:11==
DTU Entrepreneurship 
| 
Women in leadership with decision-making power in STEM 
5 
 
context, top positions in the private sector which are often associated with long working 
hours, constant availability and limited flexibility, are widely perceived as being incompatible 
with women’s lives (Villesèche et al., 2021). These structural expectations shape career 
preferences early on, discouraging women from pursuing a career in leadership and limiting 
their access to high-paid jobs, which are concentrated in the private sector (Sørensen, 2019; 
Villesèche et al., 2021). In addition, the strong horizontal gender segregation of the labour 
market in Denmark, where women are over-represented in the public sector and lower-paid 
female-dominated industries, reduces their proximity and eligibility for leadership roles in the 
private sector. 
These patterns are reinforced by the persistence of a masculine leadership ideal (Koenig et al., 
2011). Cultural stereotypes of leadership remain closely associated with masculine traits such 
as assertiveness, power, and competitiveness, qualities that are more associated with men 
(Koenig et al., 2011; Spangsdorf & Forsythe, 2021; Villesèche et al., 2021). By contrast, women 
are in general described as nice, compassionate, and kind, traits that are typically undervalued 
in leadership contexts (Koenig et al., 2011). Although the authors argue that effective 
leadership benefits from integrating more feminine qualities over time, masculine leadership 
cultures are likely to remain predominant in male-dominated industries, such as STEM (Koenig 
et al., 2011).   
One might expect that Denmark’s low masculine culture with flat organisational hierarchy 
would favour more feminine leadership traits; however, literature shows that male-
stereotypes prevail in leadership (Spangsdorf & Forsythe, 2021). Denmark is also affected by 
the “think manager-think male” mindset reinforcing gender and organisational bias in 
leadership (Spangsdorf & Forsythe, 2021). As a result, many Danish women do not see 
themselves as fitting the Danish leadership model, believing that leadership is more suited for 
men than for women (Spangsdorf & Forsythe, 2021). This perceived lack of identity-fit tends to 
lower women’s leadership aspirations by default (Spangsdorf & Forsythe, 2021). By contrast, 
men, whose traits and careers patterns are more closely aligned with these norms, are more 
likely to view themselves as natural leaders (Spangsdorf & Forsythe, 2021; Villesèche et al., 
2021). Notably, women who self-identify as more masculine or work in male-dominated 
industries express higher leadership aspirations than those who do not (Spangsdorf & 
Forsythe, 2021).  
Women in leadership roles often face a “double-bind” or “double-standard” (Gipson et al., 
2017; Villesèche et al., 2021). They are expected to show traditionally feminine traits such as 
warmth and empathy in their leadership style, while at the same time, they must show 
assertiveness and power which are associated with masculine leadership traits (Gipson et al., 
2017; Koenig et al., 2011). This creates a dilemma: if they stay true to their feminine side, they 
may be perceived as being weak leaders or lacking authority; if they show too many masculine 
traits in their leadership, they risk being judged as inappropriate or unlikeable since this does 
not conform with gender norms (Chisholm-Burns et al., 2017; Gipson et al., 2017). These 
contradictory expectations can lead to adverse reactions when aspiring to grow into leadership 
roles and increase pressure to constantly adjust behaviour to fit organisational norms 
(Chisholm-Burns et al., 2017; Koenig et al., 2011; Villesèche et al., 2021). 
==PAGE:12==
DTU Entrepreneurship 
| 
Women in leadership with decision-making power in STEM 
6 
 
Gender and leadership in Denmark 
The Danish leadership culture is described as highly democratic with emphasis on equality, 
collaboration, and trust (Andreasson & Lundqvist, 2018; Lauring & Klitmøller, 2015). It is also 
characterised by a flat hierarchy with high levels of informality and empowerment where 
employees are encouraged to take ownership and make decisions to a certain extent 
(Andreasson & Lundqvist, 2018; Campoy, 2024; Lauring & Klitmøller, 2015). This promotes not 
only innovation and sustainable growth but also fosters well-being and psychological safety 
among the employees (Andreasson & Lundqvist, 2018; Lundqvist et al., 2023; Newman et al., 
2017). A psychological safe workplace enables the employees to speak freely without fear of 
being judged or having a negative impact on their jobs (Newman et al., 2017).   
Even though women tend to display more leadership traits than men that align with the 
Danish leadership culture, this is not reflected in equal representation in leadership in 
Denmark (Gipson et al., 2017; Spangsdorf & Forsythe, 2021; The Diversity Council, 2022). 
Female leaders tend to be more democratic, focus on empowering and developing others, and 
prioritise teamwork and collaboration (Chisholm-Burns et al., 2017; Gipson et al., 2017; Koenig 
et al., 2011). These traits align with transformational leadership style which women are more 
likely to adopt (An & Meier, 2021; Gipson et al., 2017; Koenig et al., 2011). Transformational 
leadership style describes feminine traits which increase women’s likelihood of achieving their 
leadership goals while meeting social gender expectations (An & Meier, 2021; Gipson et al., 
2017; Koenig et al., 2011). Men tend to adopt a transactional leadership style since they prefer 
an autocratic, systemic, and task-oriented approach while creating competitive environments 
(An & Meier, 2021; Andreasson & Lundqvist, 2018; Gipson et al., 2017). Transactional 
leadership style is also characterised by rewarding or punishing the employees based on goals 
achieved (An & Meier, 2021; Gipson et al., 2017). 
OrganisaƟonal bias and informal networks  
Women face organisational biases that are reflected on different fronts. In Denmark’s private 
sector, men are twice as likely to become managers and three times as likely to reach 
executive positions compared to women (The Diversity Council, 2022). Despite this disparity, a 
high percentage of men in these roles, 55% at managerial level and 71% top executives, 
believe the promotion system is fair, highlighting a significant perception gap (The Diversity 
Council, 2022).  
Once in leadership roles, women are more likely to encounter microaggressions, such as 
having their expertise questioned, being interrupted or spoken over, or having comments 
made about their emotional state (The Diversity Council, 2022). These microaggressions are 
brief and subtle, often unintentional, forms of discrimination and insult towards marginalised 
groups which include women (Kim & Meister, 2023) They are also more frequently excluded 
from social gatherings such as informal networking events, particularly in male-dominated “old 
boys’ networks” (Chisholm-Burns et al., 2017; Hersby et al., 2009). “Old boys’ networks” are 
informal yet powerful social spaces that provide men with excellent opportunities to build 
relationships with male senior leaders, gaining the visibility, credibility and sponsorship that 
prove to be essential for promotions (Chisholm-Burns et al., 2017; Gipson et al., 2017).  
==PAGE:13==
DTU Entrepreneurship 
| 
Women in leadership with decision-making power in STEM 
7 
 
By contrast, women tend to have fewer informal interactions with senior leaders and often fall 
behind due to limited access, lack of flexibility, family responsibilities, or the absence of 
sponsors willing to actively advocate for them (Chisholm-Burns et al., 2017). Sponsors are 
senior leaders who use their influence to recommend, promote, and connect sponsees to 
other powerful figures, and the lack of sponsors for women reinforces existing inequalities 
(Chisholm-Burns et al., 2017; Gipson et al., 2017).  
Top leadership plays a key role in decreasing organisational biases (Payne & Keeﬀe, 2023). 
They have the power to influence the organisational culture and distribute resources to 
support inclusion and create equal opportunities (Payne & Keeﬀe, 2023).  
In summary, persistent gendered expectations, structural barriers and deep-rooted 
stereotypes continue to restrict women’s access to leadership roles, particularly in traditionally 
male-dominated STEM industries. Overcoming these challenges requires different strategies 
towards career progression and one of them is cultivating an EM which is a dynamic approach 
to leadership that emphasises innovation, adaptability, and opportunity creation (Daspit et al., 
2023; Kuratko et al., 2021). 
2.3. Entrepreneurial mindset in STEM leadership 
There is no consensus in the literature about the definition of EM (Daspit et al., 2023; Kuratko 
et al., 2021). There are fragmented interpretations according to the approach of each 
researcher; however, Daspit et al., (2023) reviewed 61 publications on the topic to create an 
integrated definition that combines the most used terms. Therefore: 
“Entrepreneurial mindset is defined as a cognitive perspective that enables an individual to 
create value by recognizing and acting on opportunities, making decisions with limited 
information, and remaining adaptable and resilient in conditions that are often uncertain and 
complex.”  (Daspit et al., 2023) 
Having an EM extends beyond problem-solving functions. It is a thinking process that allows 
individuals to find opportunities and add value where others see obstacles (Kuratko et al., 
2021; Naumann, 2017). A leader with EM sees the bigger picture and focuses on finding 
solutions to achieve the organisational goals, and not simply focus on the day-to-day activities 
which is more associated with managerial mindset (Daspit et al., 2023; Rajagopal, 2014). The 
managerial mindset is described as a more mechanical and strategic approach with focus on 
the operational side and efficient utilisation of existing resources (Daspit et al., 2023; 
Rajagopal, 2014). Shifting from a managerial to an EM can create a competitive advantage for 
the organisation and improve its overall performance (Daspit et al., 2023; Rajagopal, 2014; 
Wenjun & Panikarova, 2023). 
Within an established organisation, employees with EM are known as intrapreneurs, who are 
considered fundamental to drive innovation (Wenjun & Panikarova, 2023). Creating 
psychological safety in the organisation will nurture the employees’ EM and their behaviour 
(Wenjun & Panikarova, 2023).  
==PAGE:14==
DTU Entrepreneurship 
| 
Women in leadership with decision-making power in STEM 
8 
 
Leaders who are intrapreneurs can influence the organisational culture and drive growth 
(Daspit et al., 2023; Naumann, 2017). Their leadership style fosters a participative approach 
where employees at all levels are empowered to contribute to the decision-making process 
(Menzel et al., 2007). They prefer to decentralise the power and give ownership to the 
employees to accelerate decision-making (Rajagopal, 2014). They inspire others, are open to 
new ideas and feedback, and hold a positive culture towards failure which is essential for the 
employees to feel supported (Menzel et al., 2007; Rajagopal, 2014).  
EM is considered a must-have skill for leaders in STEM who operate in industries that require 
continuous innovation and opportunity creation (Daspit et al., 2023; Mitchell, 2007; Rajagopal, 
2014; Sitaridis & Kitsios, 2021). EM equips them with essential skills to apply their technical 
knowledge and develop new solutions to real problems that fit the market needs (Zappe et al., 
2023).  
EM can be developed over time through awareness, practice, and formal training (Bosman & 
Fernhaber, 2018; Mitchell, 2007; Naumann, 2017). It also requires overcoming psychological 
barriers including low self-confidence, fear of losing money, and procrastination (Rajagopal, 
2014). It is not an innate skill, but if a leader is discouraged by the organisation to practice EM 
or they supress their entrepreneurial drive, this can hinder the passion and the entrepreneurial 
thinking (Bosman & Fernhaber, 2018; Kuratko et al., 2021; Naumann, 2017).  
Certain traits associated with masculine (dominance, assertiveness) and feminine (creativity, 
imagination) leadership styles can contribute to an effective EM in STEM leadership (Sitaridis & 
Kitsios, 2021). However, research suggests that men are more likely to report higher 
motivation or intent to adopt an EM, influenced by factors such as greater access to networks, 
more frequent exposure to male role models, and culturally reinforced confidence in risk 
taking (Sitaridis & Kitsios, 2021; Wenjun & Panikarova, 2023). Zappe et al. (2023) argue that 
STEM leadership is lacking focus on diversity and inclusion.  
While literature discusses the EM in leadership and in STEM fields, there is a noticeable lack of 
empirical research focusing on the Danish context. This gap highlights the need to explore how 
EM manifests in STEM organisations in Denmark, particularly in relation to gender and 
leadership styles.   
3. Methodology  
3.1. Data collecƟon 
Semi-structured interviews were chosen as primary data collection for this thesis. Semi-
structured interviews are a qualitative research method that evolve around pre-defined topics 
and questions while at the same time allow for flexibility about the order in which the 
questions are asked and introduction of new topics depending on the direction of each 
interview (Easterby-Smith et al., 2021).   
==PAGE:15==
DTU Entrepreneurship 
| 
Women in leadership with decision-making power in STEM 
9 
 
There were 22 people approached in total who were asked to participate in the interviews for 
this thesis. The people were contacted via the following channels:  
 
Phone: one person was contacted and accepted to be interviewed  
 
Email: two people contacted; one accepted to be interviewed and the second one 
suggested to reach out to a different organisation 
 
Microsoft Teams: one person was contacted and accepted to be interviewed 
 
LinkedIn: 16 people were contacted and three accepted to be interviewed; 12 did not 
reply, and one stopped replying to the messages before booking an interview. 
 
In person: two people were contacted and accepted to be interviewed 
The interviews occurred between the 31st of March and 2nd of June of 2025 and had a duration 
between 23 minutes and one hour and 45 minutes. Table 3 below shows the profile of each 
person interviewed who were assigned a code according to the order in which the interviews 
took place e.g.: R1 – respondent 1, R2 – respondent 2, etc.  
 
GENDER 
NATIONALITY 
BACKGROUND 
JOB TITLE 
TEAM 
LEADERSHIP 
EXPERIENCE 
COMPANY 
INDUSTRY 
EMPLOYEES 
NOTES 
R1 
F 
Danish 
Cand.IT, Executive 
MBA 
SVP of 
Innovation, 
Sustainability, 
and Digital 
8 
14 years 
Civil Engineering 
8000 
 
R2 
F 
Danish 
Civil Engineering, 
Sustainable Design 
Innovation 
Manager 
2 
2+ years 
Ground Passenger 
Transportation 
350 
Entrepreneur/ 
ex-Founder 
R3 
F 
Danish 
Telecommunications 
business 
Head of 
Operations 
220 
30+ years 
Building 
Technologies and 
Smart Infrastructure 
327 000 
 
R4 
M 
Portuguese 
Software Engineering 
IT Manager & 
Product 
Owner 
8 
3 years 
Telecommunications 
2000 
 
R5 
M 
Danish 
Software Engineering 
Technical 
Lead and 
Senior 
Software 
Engineer 
8 
4+ years 
Software Technology 
600 
Entrepreneur/ 
Founder, 
Contractor 
R6 
F 
Ukrainian 
Architectural 
Engineering 
Founder & 
CEO 
7 
3 years 
Smart Infrastructure 
7 
 
R7 
M 
Danish 
Electrical Engineering 
Sales Director 
6 
3+ years 
Smart Infrastructure 
327 000 
 
R8 
F 
Danish 
HR, Organisational 
Communication, 
Labour and Business 
Studies 
Chief People 
Officer 
10 
6+ years 
Energy 
700 
 
Table 3: DescripƟon of parƟcipants in the interviews. 
3.2. Sampling 
The sample for this thesis consists of eight respondents, ﬁve women and three men, who were 
selected through a combinaƟon of purposive and snowball sampling. Purposive sampling is a 
sampling design where the researcher screens potenƟal interviewers to see if they meet a pre-
deﬁned criteria that aligns with the topic of the research (Easterby-Smith et al., 2021). A 
snowball sampling is when one of the respondents recommends other people who also meet 
the pre-defined criteria for the research (Easterby-Smith et al., 2021). All respondents are in 
leadership roles with direct reports within STEM-related industries in Denmark. They were also 
required to either hold a leadership posiƟon in a technical department such as innovaƟon, 
operaƟons, or engineering, or to be a Founder or Co-founder of a start-up within STEM 
industries.  
==PAGE:16==
DTU Entrepreneurship 
| 
Women in leadership with decision-making power in STEM 
10 
 
Preference was given to respondents who had a background in STEM ﬁelds, although 
respondents in strategic funcƟons within STEM organisaƟons were also considered, for 
example, the Chief People Oﬃcer (CPO) of an energy company whose role integrates strategic 
development, leadership training, and recruitment and promoƟon. AddiƟonally, while Sales is 
tradiƟonally outside STEM, the Sales Director (R6) was included due to leading a team of 
salespeople composed primarily of engineers. This department requires substanƟal technical 
knowledge and therefore the preference is to hire engineers.  
The majority of the parƟcipants are Danish, reﬂecƟng the aim of the thesis in understanding 
the Danish leadership style and the iniƟaƟves towards increasing the representaƟon of women 
in leadership roles in STEM ﬁelds in Denmark. Two expats were selected who are integrated in 
the Danish workforce and comply with the criteria above. On the other hand, Respondent 5 is 
Danish and the teams they managed in the past were primarily in the United Kingdom (UK) and 
the United States of America (USA). The roles were remote, and the respondent was always 
based in Denmark. At the moment they work at a Danish company, based in Copenhagen, and 
due to the cultural background and physical locaƟon being always Denmark, the interview was 
accepted for this thesis.  
The company sizes varied between 7 employees (start-up) and mulƟnaƟonal corporaƟons (over 
300 000 employees), oﬀering diverse perspecƟves on leadership pracƟces in Denmark and 
gender balance in STEM leadership. 
3.3. Interview setup 
Six of the interviews were held online via Microsoft Teams, while two were conducted in 
person. The online interviews were recorded and transcribed automatically through the 
Microsoft Teams platform. For the in-person interviews, audio was recorded using a mobile 
phone and later transcribed via www.web.descript.com (Descript, n.d.), a transcription service 
compliant with SOC 2 Type II. All audio recordings and related user accounts were permanently 
deleted from Descript after download to ensure data security and confidentiality. 
All respondents were informed about the anonymous nature of the thesis and gave their 
consent prior to the interview. To protect the identity of the respondents, all personal 
identifiable information including names, company names, and other potentially identifying 
details was removed from the final transcripts. Transcripts can be found in the appendix (C-J). 
3.4. Interview guide 
The semi-structured interview guide was organized into ﬁve main secƟons. First, respondents 
were asked to introduce themselves, their roles, and their teams (IntroducƟon). In the second 
secƟon (Leadership style), they described their leadership approach and shared reﬂecƟons on 
how leadership is pracƟced in Denmark, including whether it is shaped by gender or other 
factors. 
The third secƟon (OrganisaƟonal support and gender balance) focused on how their 
organisaƟons support aspiring leaders, parƟcularly women, and what structural or cultural 
==PAGE:17==
DTU Entrepreneurship 
| 
Women in leadership with decision-making power in STEM 
11 
 
challenges exist. QuesƟons addressed policies, iniƟaƟves, and perceived barriers to advancing 
into leadership roles within STEM, along with the inﬂuence of senior leadership on gender 
equality. 
The fourth secƟon (Entrepreneurial mindset) explored how leaders understand and apply 
entrepreneurial thinking. While the last four respondents were asked to deﬁne EM, the ﬁrst 
four respondents were given the following deﬁniƟon: 
“Entrepreneurial mindset is deﬁned as a cogniƟve perspecƟve that enables an individual to 
create value by recognizing and acƟng on opportuniƟes, making decisions with limited 
informaƟon, and remaining adaptable and resilient in condiƟons that are oŌen uncertain and 
complex.” (Daspit et al., 2023) 
Respondents reﬂected on the relevance of EM to leadership, how they apply it in their own 
roles, and whether they observe any gender diﬀerences in its expression. 
Finally, the interviews concluded with a short set of closing quesƟons (Future consideraƟons), 
inviƟng respondents to share thoughts on the future of women in STEM leadership and to add 
any ﬁnal reﬂecƟons (see Appendix A – Interview guide). 
3.5. Data analysis 
A themaƟc analysis was conducted to analyse the transcripts from the interviews and originate 
the ﬁndings in the next chapter. ThemaƟc analysis is a ﬂexible analyƟcal method used to 
idenƟfy, analyse, and report paƩerns or themes for qualitaƟve data (Braun & Clarke, 2006).  
The transcripts generated by ArƟﬁcial Intelligence (AI) were ﬁrst read and amended based on 
the recordings. AŌer a second reading, all respondents’ idenƟﬁable ﬁelds were removed from 
the transcripts, followed by highlighƟng all relevant data.  
Once the screening and highlighƟng was ﬁnalised, the selected citaƟons were transferred to an 
Excel sheet (Appendix B) and a brief code summarising the general idea was wriƩen next to 
each of them. The codes combined abducƟve and inducƟve reasoning considering the data 
collected from the interviews and the explanaƟons added from empirical data to support 
paƩerns or emphasise discrepancies.  
The codes were then grouped in themes that shared similar ideas. Some of the themes 
reﬂected the topics in the interview guide, others originated from the interviews. Finally, the 
themes were grouped into three main ﬁndings that focus on leadership pracƟces in STEM in 
Denmark, correlaƟon between gender and leadership (barriers and biases) in STEM ﬁelds in 
Denmark, and ending on a more posiƟve note, iniƟaƟves that support career progression for 
women and how women can navigate male-dominated ﬁelds, such as STEM.   
3.6. Ethical consideraƟons  
The author of this thesis is a woman in her early 30s, studying at a male-dominated university 
and with work experience in male-dominated organisations. It must be acknowledged that 
personal experience, gender, and cultural contexts might have influenced the formulation of 
==PAGE:18==
DTU Entrepreneurship 
| 
Women in leadership with decision-making power in STEM 
12 
 
questions at times and the interpretation of data, potentially introducing unconscious biases. 
Previous knowledge of Diversity Management could have led to prioritising certain topics and 
perspectives, while potentially overlooking others, and there may have been a tendency to 
identify pattern that confirm previous beliefs. 
3.7. Digital tools 
Several tools were used to support the analysis and development of this thesis, besides 
MicrosoŌ Teams and Descript used for the interviews (see 3.3. Interview setup).  
 
ChatGPT: used for brainstorming, connecƟng ideas, and enhancing the wriƟng.  
 
NotebookLM: helped analyse and summarise academic sources used in the thesis. 
 
Zotero: used for managing references and creaƟng the bibliography 
4. Findings 
The ﬁndings presented in this secƟon are based on the themes idenƟﬁed in the themaƟc 
analysis and compiled into three sub-secƟons for beƩer understanding: 
 
Leadership pracƟces in STEM in Denmark: This sub-secƟon examines the leadership 
approaches of current leaders in STEM ﬁelds in Denmark. In addiƟon, it presents their 
percepƟons of a good leader, leadership pracƟces in a Danish context, and the 
inﬂuence of gender diversity within their teams. It also explores the relevance of an EM 
in their leadership style, roles, and teams, as well as percepƟons of how EM manifests 
in both male and female leaders. 
 
Gender and leadership in STEM – barriers and bias: The second sub-secƟon explores 
leaders’ perspecƟves on how gender expectaƟons, masculinity traits in leadership, and 
societal norms shape gender representaƟon in STEM leadership. It also highlights 
barriers and biases that the respondents have encountered in the industry which 
contribute to the glass ceiling eﬀect in Danish STEM industries.  
 
Enablers – opportuniƟes and future direcƟons for women in STEM in Denmark: 
Finally, the last sub-secƟon focuses on how women who aspire to leadership roles can 
be supported. The respondents oﬀer recommendaƟons and idenƟfy diﬀerent 
organisaƟonal iniƟaƟves that can encourage equitable advancement in STEM 
leadership.  
4.1. Leadership pracƟces in STEM in Denmark 
Personal leadership pracƟces in STEM industries 
Across the interviews, the respondents described leadership styles based on empowerment, 
trust, collaboraƟon and inclusivity moving away from the tradiƟonal top-down leadership 
approaches. R1 described their leadership approach as “servant leadership”, focusing on 
removing barriers for the team and helping them succeed, while rejecƟng the idea of simply 
being “the boss”. Servant leadership style has an ethical approach, where the leader focuses on 
==PAGE:19==
DTU Entrepreneurship 
| 
Women in leadership with decision-making power in STEM 
13 
 
the followers’ needs ﬁrst, then the organisaƟon’s, and lastly, their own (Eva et al., 2019). R2 
introduces the concept of “regeneraƟve leadership” which is primarily based on ecological 
principles, but also focuses on creaƟng psychological safe workplaces where employees can 
thrive and innovate (Bobek & Carter, 2025): 
“we have diﬀerent cycles throughout our lives. Some people are in their fall, maybe looking into 
going on pension soon, you will lead them another way. They would maybe not want as much 
educaƟon or being pushed forward to do these things. But whereas if you have a newly 
graduate, then (...) Let's put more on you because you're used to studying, you’re new in your 
career, we need to liŌ you up. And my other colleague, she's in the beginning of the 50s, so she 
has another way of looking at... She needs also balance her life to go and pick up her kid” 
R2 highlights the importance of adapƟng their leadership style to the needs of each individual 
in the team. By understanding what people need to thrive, you adjust the resources 
accordingly and increase engagement and moƟvaƟon.  
Some respondents explained that they use their soŌ skills to bring people together, build trust 
and create a psychologically safe environment for the teams (R2, R4, R7). R5 described 
themselves as an extrovert and said prioriƟse creaƟng “an environment where people actually 
can come in and have some fun and actually enjoy themselves while also producing valuable 
output”. R2 and R8 emphasised the importance of equity, arguing that when you “lead whole 
people” (R2) you must remain open to “diﬀerent perspecƟves and diﬀerent styles” (R8).  
A strong focus on human-centred approaches came through consistently in the interviews. This 
includes giving employees decision-making power, working “in the trenches” (R7) alongside the 
team, while also being able to “look at the bigger picture” (R8). 
Traits of a good leader 
When describing what makes an eﬀecƟve leader, the respondents consistently emphasised 
human-centred qualiƟes, such as “integrity” (R1), an understanding of “team dynamics” (R5), 
being “structured” (R6), and ensuring that “your employees shine and they will in turn shine 
back on you” (R7). A leader should “like people” and be “team oriented (…) because if the team 
doesn’t funcƟon, you don’t funcƟon as an individual” (R8). A good leader was also described as 
a “facilitator” whose role is to empower others to succeed, “you’re not there to solve problems. 
You’re there to hire and guide people that can solve problems” and to “listen for those who 
don't speak because some of them might actually have a lot to say but just don't” (R5). This 
underlines that a good leader should be a good listener, have great people skills, and be 
percepƟve. 
R5 and R7 agreed that good leadership can be learned. They added that it requires experience, 
trial and error, and a willingness to try diﬀerent approaches to see what works best for the 
team. R5 noted that an extroverted leader oŌen might help create stronger team-dynamics as 
than an introverted leader but added “I've seen also good leaders being introverted. I'm not 
saying being extroverted is a key to success”. There is no perfect formula, and as R5 concluded, 
”I don’t think that a perfect leader exists”.   
==PAGE:20==
DTU Entrepreneurship 
| 
Women in leadership with decision-making power in STEM 
14 
 
Leadership culture in Denmark 
Another aspect discussed was the leadership style in Denmark, which the respondents 
described as characterised by a ﬂat hierarchy, trust and empowerment, traits that they also 
used when describing their own personal leadership approach. R3 said: 
“I think the leadership culture in Denmark in general is very inﬂuenced by empowerment. That 
is that we allow our employees to think for themselves. We expect them to do that, and we also 
expect them to make decisions, and not to push up every decision to the management level.”   
This percepƟon agrees with the organisaƟonal culture in Denmark described in literature 
(Andreasson & Lundqvist, 2018; Campoy, 2024; Lauring & Klitmøller, 2015). R7 also added that 
“it's not frowned upon if an employee on the boƩom actually speaks up and says, I believe we 
could do things diﬀerent, this way of working, we can change it to this and opƟmise things”.  
However, there was also some criƟcism of the Danish leadership style which also shows rooted 
masculine traits (Spangsdorf & Forsythe, 2021). R1 reﬂected on past experiences where male 
managers encouraged them to adopt a more tradiƟonally masculine leadership style: “the male 
managers I’ve had (…) have said, you need to have more edge to your leadership style (…) more 
power in your leadership” which shows that some tradiƟonal masculine traits were preferred. 
R2 argued that the new generaƟons, especially Gen Z, expect something diﬀerent and reject 
the more “masculine leadership style where it’s very much focused on performance, numbers”. 
According to R2, Gen Z employees have diﬀerent prioriƟes, they do not want to spend more 
Ɵme at work than necessary and prioriƟse free Ɵme for personal life. Literature supports this 
reinforcing that work-life balance is indeed a priority, as well as understanding the “Why” to 
not lose interest in the job, and have leadership that focuses on well-being and values the 
employees (Zahra et al., 2025). However, these preferences change based on the cultural 
background, therefore more research is needed to understand the correlaƟon of Gen Z and 
STEM leadership in Denmark. The respondent added that although leadership styles in 
Denmark have evolved over Ɵme, change is progressing at a slow pace to keep up with current 
needs. 
Another challenge raised was the use of Danish as the main working language. R2 noted, “even 
though we are an internaƟonal company, we talk very much in Danish, and I think that is also a 
barrier in terms of leadership, actually, aspiraƟons”. This can mean that non-naƟve speakers 
feel excluded or struggle to see themselves stepping into leadership roles.   
R7 also pointed out that the leadership style in Denmark varies according to the industry. If it is 
a male-dominated or a female-dominated industry, this will inﬂuence the leadership style and 
impact women’s moƟvaƟon to pursue these roles (Spangsdorf & Forsythe, 2021). R4 
emphasised that leadership styles can diﬀer signiﬁcantly from one organisaƟon to another. 
AddiƟonally, if a leader is an expat, their own cultural background and previous leadership 
experiences may shape their approach, which can diﬀer from the Danish norm and be hard to 
adapt (R4). R4 also highlighted generaƟonal diﬀerences in leadership styles: younger managers 
oŌen communicate more eﬀecƟvely and help bridge the gap between technical and non-
technical employees, whereas older managers can be more diﬃcult to communicate and 
connect with. 
==PAGE:21==
DTU Entrepreneurship 
| 
Women in leadership with decision-making power in STEM 
15 
 
The role of entrepreneurial mindset  
Another topic the respondents were asked about was the importance of having an EM in 
leadership. The last four respondents were asked to deﬁne EM, and they demonstrated an 
understanding of the concept similar to the ﬁrst four respondents who were given a deﬁniƟon 
by Daspit et al. (2023) (see Methodology). R1 and R2 described EM as a core value for anyone 
working in innovaƟon, which is the case for both of them. R1 explained: 
“it's super important especially in today's world where everything is going so fast. You need to 
be super adapƟve to changes and to move fast and to have this really interest in learning, be 
curious, be open minded, but also that you navigate uncertainty all the Ɵme.“ 
R8 described EM as the ability to start a project without knowing where it will lead you or who 
will be responsible to close it, something which requires risk-taking, adaptability and comfort 
with uncertainty. R7 and R4 both pointed out that an EM can help leaders manage change 
more eﬀecƟvely and reduce resistance within teams. 
R5 oﬀered a diﬀerent perspecƟve, arguing that leaders are not always the ones who beneﬁt 
the most from having an EM:  
“I believe that some of the stronger entrepreneurial minds that I’ve seen are not necessarily 
good leaders and vice versa. (…) it’s not necessary because if you can ﬁnd the right people to 
solve the right problems with the entrepreneurial mindset in mind, then you’ll succeed.” 
This view shiŌs the focus away from the leader towards team members, whom R5 described as 
“problem solvers”. They stressed that it is more important to have team members with EM 
than to rely solely on the leader having this skill. To support this argument, literature shows 
that lower income employees which in this case we can assume are the team members have a 
higher EM than high-income employees which tend to be the leaders (Wenjun & Panikarova, 
2023). This may be due to their ﬁrsthand experience with the problems, having more drive for 
economic improvement, such as bonuses or promoƟons, or higher moƟvaƟon to overcome 
limited resources (Wenjun & Panikarova, 2023).  
For R4, it is equally vital that team members can handle stress, manage change, and cope with 
a volaƟle work environment. As they put it: “if the person doesn't have these kinds of skills, it 
doesn't maƩer if you are very good technically. You will not be a good ﬁt for the team”. 
R7 also noted that an EM is valuable for driving cross-departmental communicaƟon and 
collaboraƟon, especially in large organisaƟons where the status quo needs to be challenged 
more oŌen. At the same Ɵme, the respondent argued that the relevance of EM can vary 
depending on the nature of the business and the market. If it is a stable market that is not 
evolving much, R7 argued that it may not be as crucial as for fast-changing markets, where 
organisaƟons must innovate and stay compeƟƟve, otherwise “your compeƟtors will do it or 
companies of a smaller size than you that are more agile and more willing to take risks and 
developing faster”. R1 agreed, adding that in industries where “risk is not super welcomed”, a 
perfecƟonist mindset might be preferred, which means that the organisaƟonal culture sets 
how much of an EM is needed. To challenge these arguments, literature shows that EM can be 
used to create, test and iterate new products in controlled environments as well as to improve 
services and strategies which are not as tangible (Naumann, 2017; Rajagopal, 2014). Therefore, 
==PAGE:22==
DTU Entrepreneurship 
| 
Women in leadership with decision-making power in STEM 
16 
 
having an EM can help dealing with uncertainty and complexity both in stable markets and in 
industries that are more risk averse which will have a posiƟve impact on the survival of the 
organisaƟon (Naumann, 2017). 
A common view across the interviews which is also supported by literature was that EM is not 
innate and can be developed. R2 summed it up well: “it's a skillset, just like the innovaƟon 
muscle. You can train it so it's actually possible to strengthen that muscle if you want to”.  
Gender diﬀerences in entrepreneurial mindset 
While most respondents agreed that having an EM is important in STEM leadership, a 
consistent observaƟon was that EM tends to come more naturally to men than to women, 
reﬂecƟng the literature review. There was broad consensus that men are generally more willing 
to take risks, act with limited informaƟon, and feel comfortable with uncertainty, whereas 
women oŌen “need to feel more on a safe route for making decisions” (R1). R2 supported this, 
saying “tradiƟonally, men have more ease to lean into it (…) you can see within startups, there’s 
way more males than females”. R4 added that women are typically brought up to “think twice 
before you make a decision (…) always consider all the opƟons” which inevitably “reﬂects on 
the work life as well” (R4).  
R2 also pointed out that the ﬁnancial insecurity and lack of job stability associated with the 
entrepreneurial approach are oŌen less appealing to women. In addiƟon, STEM remains “a 
male dominated space” (R5) where women tend to be more concentrated within support roles 
which can limit their opportuniƟes to think “outside the box” (R8) and develop an EM. R8 
noted that women are oŌen “very focused on what we are delivering is perfect” (R8) and tend 
to pay great aƩenƟon to details which is not compaƟble with EM, as described in literature.  
However, several respondents highlighted that they have received training in decision-making, 
showing that there is scope to develop and strengthen an EM in both genders.   
Gender diversity in STEM teams 
Several respondents emphasised that diversity within teams is a crucial aspect of eﬀecƟve 
leadership in STEM organisaƟons. Diversity was described not only in terms of gender, ethnicity 
or cultural background, but also in terms of personality, skills, and mindset (R2, R5). R2 
explained that this had certainly been a focus: “I tried very much to put a team together where 
we can complement each other”. R3 added that having diverse teams means “we get a beƩer 
dynamic amongst us, we get new ideas, new ways of looking and things. New ways of leading 
our employees”. This reinforces the idea that complementarity helps teams cover blind spots, 
balance strengths and weaknesses, and ensuring that gender diversity directly contributes to 
the quality of the leadership and decision-making.  
Some respondents also pointed to structural barriers that limit how much diversity is reﬂected 
in technical teams. R5 stressed that technical teams, parƟcularly in engineering, remain 
“predominantly male” which means that women are sƟll more likely to be found in roles such 
as “project management, product ownership” and “some (…) execuƟve” or more people-
focused areas, but “not the technical parts” (R5). Literature supports that when women 
==PAGE:23==
DTU Entrepreneurship 
| 
Women in leadership with decision-making power in STEM 
17 
 
achieve leadership posiƟons many tend to be in support areas with less visibility and 
responsibility rather than in the core business of the organisaƟon (Gipson et al., 2017). 
R8 argued that diversity in teams alone is not enough; there must be also genuine inclusion. 
They explained:  
“we could have two women in our (top) management team, but if they're not included, then 
they would just sit in the corner and, it would sƟll be, now I'm saying white men, but the more 
(...) Homogenic group of people discussing things” 
It is important to foster inclusion and have a clear Diversity, Equality, and Inclusion (DEI) 
strategy to ensure unity within the team, that everyone’s voice is heard and have trust in what 
they have to say (R8). Having leadership teams that are too homogeneous might fail to 
acknowledge minority groups’ needs, the umbrella that women sit under, promote conƟnuous 
power imbalance, and keep feeding the stereotype “think manager-think male” (Gipson et al., 
2017; Payne & Keeﬀe, 2023).  
At the same Ɵme, R8 acknowledged that working in diverse teams can be complex and that 
leaders need to be well equipped to navigate these dynamics. It is likely that such teams “will 
never agree a hundred percent”, but it is the leader’s responsibility to set a clear direcƟon and 
ensure that diverse perspecƟves translate into meaningful contribuƟons. Psychological safety 
plays a key role in dealing with diverse teams by fostering a safe environment in the workplace 
where individuals feel safe to engage in risk-taking, share new ideas, provide honest feedback, 
and try new things (Newman et al., 2017).  
Sub-conclusion ﬁnding one 
Overall, these insights demonstrate that leadership pracƟces in Denmark’s STEM ﬁelds are 
moving towards more human-centred and adapƟve pracƟces rooted in trust, empowerment, 
and adaptability, yet they sƟll face masculine leadership ideals. The respondents agreed that 
eﬀecƟve leadership is about creaƟng condiƟons for teams to thrive, fostering psychological 
safety, and adapƟng approaches to individual and team needs. They emphasised that there is 
no one perfect leadership model, suggesƟng that leadership skills can be learned and reﬁned 
over Ɵme. Having an EM is viewed as essenƟal for navigaƟng uncertainty and driving 
innovaƟon. However, views diﬀered on whether EM should be centred in leaders or distributed 
across teams, and gender diﬀerences were noted, with men being more comfortable with risk-
taking than women who are in general more cauƟous. Finally, while gender diversity was highly 
valued for improving creaƟvity and problem-solving, its real impact depends on genuine 
inclusion and leaders’ ability to create environments where all voices are heard. 
4.2. Gender and leadership in STEM – barriers and biases 
Gender diﬀerences in leadership styles 
As described in Finding one, the respondents highlighted the value of soŌ leadership traits 
such as empathy, trust, empowerment, and collaboraƟon. This secƟon shows how these traits 
are oŌen viewed through a gendered lens, inﬂuencing how men and women lead, and how 
they are judged.  
==PAGE:24==
DTU Entrepreneurship 
| 
Women in leadership with decision-making power in STEM 
18 
 
R1 argued that the servant leadership described as their own leadership approach comes more 
naturally to women because of their strong focus on people and emoƟons. However, more 
men are beginning to adopt this leadership style too, oŌen as they gain age and experience 
(R1).  
Despite this shiŌ, tradiƟonal masculine models of leadership remain dominant, parƟcularly in 
STEM ﬁelds. As R2 explained, “We started to dress like the men, we took on the style, the 
rhetoric of males, and that's how we found our way to become leaders and sƟll are leaders with 
that leadership style” and that is “not beneﬁcial at all” for the younger generaƟons. Male 
leadership is frequently described as dominant and decisive, marked by quick decision-making 
and visible authority (R1, R3, R8). 
R8 also noted that when women lead with a team-focus, consensus-seeking approach, they 
can encounter resistance for being too indecisive or too soŌ. They cauƟoned that ”aiming for 
consensus” can result in women being “run over” in male-dominated environments.   
Finally, R4 and R8 emphasised that trust and respect are vital for female leaders to gain 
authority and avoid resistance; trust that they know what they are doing, can deliver, and 
deserve respect for their experƟse.  
Societal norms and gendered expectaƟons 
R1 explained that women are oŌen raised to be caring and aƩenƟve to other’s needs, which 
shapes their prioriƟes later in both their personal and professional lives: “I think it's kind of 
grounded more in the way also that you're brought up as a woman. And also, being a mother”.  
R2 pointed out that tradiƟonal expectaƟons around women’s roles at home and at work can 
create a stressful and unsustainable situaƟon that makes it harder for women to succeed in 
leadership. R2 added that some women eventually choose to step away from these roles 
because it becomes unmanageable to “have a job, be a mum, be a friend, (…) be a leader that’s 
present, (…) be all those things”.  
These expectaƟons create a “double-standard” for women as described in chapter 2.2 The 
Nordic gender equality paradox and Women in Leadership. R6 pointed out: “If you are very 
soŌ, then they might not take you seriously (…) If you are very strict then they might think oh, 
she's afraid of losing her power”. R8 added that this constant balancing act can be challenging, 
saying that women oŌen feel they must “ﬁght a liƩle bit more for it than I actually think that 
we need to”. Women are becoming more androgynous in their leadership style, adopƟng both 
masculine and feminine traits, which can help reduce implicit biases challenging the stereotype 
that only men are a natural ﬁt for leadership (Koenig et al., 2011). On the other hand, this also 
contributes to the “double-standard” where women are expected to not violate the communal 
gender stereotypes, being kind and caring, which can result in a negaƟve reacƟon (Gipson et 
al., 2017; Koenig et al., 2011).  
AddiƟonally, R7 noted that young leaders someƟmes have unrealisƟc expectaƟons when 
stepping up the leadership ladder. “Their own personal ambiƟons” and a desire to “shine” can 
oŌen lead to disappointment and ulƟmately to leaving the role (R7).  
==PAGE:25==
DTU Entrepreneurship 
| 
Women in leadership with decision-making power in STEM 
19 
 
Gender representaƟon and biases in STEM leadership 
Several respondents agreed that gender representaƟon in STEM leadership in Denmark 
remains uneven. As previously menƟoned, technical ﬁelds tend to be predominantly male-
dominated, and this is oŌen reﬂected on the leadership teams (R1, R3). R1 noted that their 
company has an internal Key Performance Indicator (KPI) for increasing the share of women in 
senior leadership: “So yes, we are geƫng there. We are not there yet”. This highlights that 
even with internal iniƟaƟves, signiﬁcant eﬀorts are sƟll needed to reach a 50/50 gender 
balance.  
One of the most common explanaƟons for the gender gap in STEM is that the pool of talent 
available is sƟll larger for men than for women, due to fewer women graduaƟng from STEM 
ﬁelds (R4, R5). Even though this is supported by literature, the number of scienƟsts and 
engineers in Denmark who are women was nearly 50% in 2024 and over 50% in previous years 
(Eurostat, 2025). R4 observed that while more women are now visible in technical 
environments, the gap remains clear. To close this gap, more women must be recruited and 
retained early on so they can progress into leadership roles (R3). However, even when women 
do reach leadership, they oŌen ﬁnd themselves clustered in middle management (R2) or in 
departments such as Finance or Human Resources, rather than in core technical or strategic 
posiƟons (Gipson et al., 2017).  
Bias also plays a subtle but powerful role in shaping who is hired or promoted. While some 
respondents believe that explicit bias is declining and that “even the male managers, they look 
for women”, others note that similarity biases persist. R1 and R5 both stressed that there is 
always a focus on ﬁnding the “best ﬁt” for the role, but as R8 pointed out, when most leaders 
are men, “there is a natural bias, you look at yourself and then you reﬂect that”, which R4 
echoed: “when you have more men as leaders, they tend to hire men as well”. Literature shows 
that similarity bias persists in STEM ﬁelds in Denmark and this manifests in the recruitment 
process, favouring individuals who share similar characterisƟcs to the recruiters (Payne & 
Keeﬀe, 2023; The Diversity Council, 2022).  
Ageism was another bias idenƟﬁed by some of the respondents. R8 highlighted that young 
women face diﬀerent standards than young men when aspiring to leadership and top 
leadership roles. With leadership teams oŌen being dominated by people aged 45-50 or older 
(R5, R8), younger women can face greater scruƟny and a higher bar to prove themselves. 
According to Denmark StaƟsƟcs, most managers in 2023 were aged between 50-59 years old, 
and the second highest group was aged 40-49 (Denmark StaƟsƟcs, 2023a). As R5 explained, 
“the (career) ladder is just a bit taller for women”, adding that once women establish seniority 
and credibility in the industry, they “get equal respect as any men”, but geƫng to that point is 
more challenging for young women and recent graduates. Literature agrees that women take 
more Ɵme to reach leadership posiƟons compared to men; however, once they are established 
in leadership, they gain visibility and due to mobility between organisaƟons their career 
progression to higher ranks becomes faster compared to men’s (Griﬀeth et al., 2021; Hovden et 
al., 2011). Women are seen as more trustworthy, ethical, and beƩer at building a fair 
environment for career progression (Griﬀeth et al., 2021). 
==PAGE:26==
DTU Entrepreneurship 
| 
Women in leadership with decision-making power in STEM 
20 
 
R7 pointed out how maternity leave can sƟll be an obstacle and how some leaders “cannot 
handle” it, meaning women of childbearing age may be quietly excluded from the leadership 
pipelines. R8 added that male-dominated organisaƟons might oŌen lack adequate internal 
policies for maternity leave, being beƩer prepared for paternity leave instead, as most 
employees are men.  
Finally, respondents emphasised the importance of trust and clear communicaƟon to 
overcome hidden bias. R8 reﬂected:  
“a lot of it comes down to trust in each other and communicaƟon (...) when you go higher up in 
the organizaƟon, you really need to build teams where there is a lot of trust to be able to open 
up to diﬀerent perspecƟves”. 
This reinforces the idea that creaƟng inclusion in leadership is not only about formal policies, 
but also about culƟvaƟng everyday pracƟces of psychological safety, open communicaƟon, and 
respect. 
Barriers to women’s career progression into leadership  
The respondents highlighted a range of interconnected barriers that conƟnue to limit women’s 
advancement into leadership roles in STEM. Given the fact that women hold most of the 
household responsibiliƟes in Denmark (Villesèche et al., 2021), there is a perceived 
incompaƟbility between leadership responsibiliƟes and work-life balance, which may lead to 
some women opƟng out of pursuing leadership posiƟons (R1). As described in previous 
chapters, the traits of good leadership are sƟll closely associated with tradiƟonally masculine 
norms; therefore, when women see exhausted male leaders seƫng the example, some 
perceive that combining leadership with family life is neither aƩracƟve nor sustainable (R3). R3 
also noted that women in senior roles someƟmes unintenƟonally reinforce this percepƟon by 
sharing how impossible work-life balance felt without “having an au-pair at home”.  
There is also an implicit assumpƟon that men are more knowledgeable and therefore beƩer 
suited for senior roles (R4). The respondents’ percepƟon about informal “boys’ club” networks 
or “old boys’ networks” (Chisholm-Burns et al., 2017; Gipson et al., 2017) conﬁrms what 
literature says about men beneﬁƟng more from these informal social groups, leading to more 
sponsorship and promoƟon opportuniƟes for them (R4, R5).  
R4 added that STEM job posƟngs are oŌen overly technical and rigidly framed, which makes 
them less appealing to women. Literature shows that job posƟngs for leadership roles in male-
dominated ﬁelds sƟll include words such as “compeƟƟve”, “dominant”, “success” associated 
with masculine traits, reinforcing the lack-of-ﬁt for women and an implicit preference for men 
(Seong & Parker, 2024). R8 suggested that job descripƟons must be “gender neutral” and 
argued that this should apply to technical educaƟon as well, which is also oŌen communicated 
in ways that resonate more with men. Regardless, R7 and R8 stressed that simply changing the 
wording in how educaƟon is presented might not be enough, and that the curricula and career 
paths must change as well or women are less likely to apply. 
R5 described how “toxic” and hyper-compeƟƟve male-dominated industries can make women 
hold back and become more introverted. R5 explained that there are women with great 
==PAGE:27==
DTU Entrepreneurship 
| 
Women in leadership with decision-making power in STEM 
21 
 
technical skills, but because of the industry’s culture, they might limit their own progression. 
They may doubt their readiness for leadership or adapt their style to ﬁt masculine norms, 
which can lead to confusion about how their abiliƟes are perceived (R5, R8), reinforcing the 
gendered expectaƟons and the “double-standard”. As R5 put it: “I think the industry has just 
not been very encouraging”.  
Some respondents also noted that women’s communicaƟon style can be indirect and overly 
detailed (R6, R8). They added that this may lead to women’s work and authority being 
quesƟoned more oŌen, and their contribuƟons overlooked in decision-making, forcing them to 
conƟnually have to prove themselves (R8). Literature shows that these microaggressions occur 
in fact due to rooted cultural stereotypes, unconscious biases, and systemic barriers as a way to 
protect male dominance in the workplace and tend to become more frequent as women 
transiƟon into more senior leadership roles (Kim & Meister, 2023; The Diversity Council, 2022). 
Other forms of microaggressions are sex-based harassment at work (Kim & Meister, 2023) 
which also discourages women from aspiring to leadership roles (R4). 
R3 also expressed concerns about internaƟonal trends that could slow down progress on 
gender equality. Current poliƟcal pressures from the USA to drop gender targets and DEI 
agendas might reduce Danish organisaƟons’ focus on improving gender representaƟon in 
leadership (R3). Despite the eﬀorts in advancing women in leadership and women in STEM in 
recent years, the EU is facing current pressures from Trump’s administraƟon to cancel DEI 
programmes (Petersen, 2025). Trump has revoked DEI programmes in the USA, and Danish 
organisaƟons such as Lego and Novo Nordisk have already made changes to their DEI policies 
(First Word Pharma, 2025; Wood, 2025). Novo Nordisk has removed their gender targets for 
their senior leadership in the USA, and Lego has removed key words such as “diversity”, 
“woman”, “LGBTQ” and “people of colour” from their latest sustainability report in 2024 
(Turner-Wharfe, 2025; Wood, 2025). Given this current poliƟcal situaƟon, there is a risk that 
Novo Nordisk and Lego might be seƫng the example for other Danish companies especially 
those with businesses in the USA (Petersen, 2025). 
Finally, there is a sense of resistance that can grow if men perceive gender equality policies as a 
threat to male-dominated spaces (R8). R8 highlighted that an excessive focus on gender targets 
can create more tension between men and women, increase compeƟƟon rather than promote 
genuine equity, and give men the wrong impression that their opportuniƟes are being reduced. 
Literature agrees that forcing gender quotas might create more discriminaƟon rather than 
achieve gender balance in leadership (Payne & Keeﬀe, 2023). Norway, for instance, which was 
the ﬁrst country in the world to implement gender quotas for corporate boards, despite its 
success in improving gender balance at board level, this did not automaƟcally reproduce at 
remaining leadership levels (KiƩerød & Teigen, 2018). A focus on acƟve recruitment policies, 
training, and clear career paths for women are preferred by both genders instead of regulatory 
measures such as gender quotas (KiƩerød & Teigen, 2018). 
Sub-conclusion ﬁnding two 
Finding two shows that although soŌ, human-centred leadership traits are increasingly such as 
empathy, trust, and collaboraƟon are increasingly valued in STEM, female leaders sƟll face 
==PAGE:28==
DTU Entrepreneurship 
| 
Women in leadership with decision-making power in STEM 
22 
 
conﬂicƟng expectaƟons shaped by tradiƟonal masculine norms and societal gender roles. The 
respondents highlighted that female leaders are oŌen judged against a “double-standard”, 
expected to be both authoritaƟve and approachable, while organisaƟonal culture, “old boys’ 
networks”, and structural barriers such as maternity-related career breaks restrict women’s 
progression to leadership. Even when organisaƟons introduce gender diversity quotas, women 
oŌen remain clustered in support funcƟons or in middle management, reﬂecƟng persistent 
biases in recruitment and promoƟon. Moreover, recent poliƟcal developments reversing DEI 
iniƟaƟves pose a risk to ongoing eﬀorts to achieve gender balance in leadership in Denmark. 
Overall, these ﬁndings suggest that meaningful progress in gender equality in STEM leadership 
requires more than valuing soŌ leadership skills; it demands structural and cultural change 
through recruitment, training, policy frameworks, and everyday pracƟces of trust and 
psychological safety. 
4.3. Enablers – opportuniƟes and future direcƟons for women 
in STEM in Denmark 
CreaƟng opportuniƟes for women 
Several respondents emphasised that creaƟng opportuniƟes for women in STEM should start 
before they enter the labour market. R2 and R3 stressed that building awareness and interest 
in these subjects as early as primary school, to ensure that girls see technology, science and 
engineering as engaging and diverse ﬁelds where they can succeed. As R2 put it: “even though 
it doesn't come easy for you, you can sƟll (…) become a great engineer, and you can sƟll 
become a really great leader at some point”. Respondents highlighted that young girls need 
encouragement, and that the messaging around STEM must be appealing and relatable for 
them to remain interested throughout their educaƟon (R2, R3, R8). 
Another factor raised was the structural support at home that can help women sustain a career 
in STEM aŌer entering the industry. R1 explained: “At least you need to make sure that you 
have a husband that is ready to also take their part at home. Otherwise, it will not work.”. R3 
agreed, adding that there should be open conversaƟons at home about how to share 
responsibiliƟes: “If you have a wish to or just are curious about leadership, have that discussion 
with your partner at home. That's very important, to have a support from your family.”. R7 
reinforced this and noted that to maintain a healthy work-life balance, women may need to 
prioriƟse and avoid seƫng “too much ambiƟon on a lot of diﬀerent fronts” at the same Ɵme. 
There’s only so many hours in a day and “we have a set amount of energy and mental capacity 
(…) and that needs balance” (R7). From a leadership perspecƟve, for this to change, the Danish 
mindset around household and caregiving responsibiliƟes must shiŌ, where both partners 
contribute more equally, allowing more availability and ﬂexibility for women to focus on career 
progression. AddiƟonally, as menƟoned in Finding two, the STEM industry has not been very 
encouraging for women to grown into leadership roles, and when they become leaders, their 
experƟse and authority are oŌen challenged, leading to constantly trying to overcompensate 
and trying to outperform male colleagues to prove their competence (Kim & Meister, 2023).  
OrganisaƟonal structures and policies also play a key role in making leadership more accessible 
to women. R8 argued that creaƟng and strengthening policies for parental leave will encourage 
==PAGE:29==
DTU Entrepreneurship 
| 
Women in leadership with decision-making power in STEM 
23 
 
more men to take paternity leave, helping to normalise shared family responsibiliƟes. 
Normalising this type of career break, for both men and women, may help reduce the career 
penalty that women oŌen face aŌer maternity-related career breaks (R6, R8). R6 added that 
safeguarding women’s posiƟons during maternity leave is key to prevenƟng them from falling 
behind or losing out to male colleagues.  
OrganisaƟonal commitment: iniƟaƟves, senior leadership, and role models 
The respondents described a range of organisaƟonal and individual iniƟaƟves that can help 
create more opportuniƟes for women in STEM leadership. Several respondents highlighted 
structured training pathways: internal accelerator programmes to develop and retain talent 
(R1, R2), internal leadership courses for aspiring leaders (R1, R4, R8), and company-funded 
ExecuƟve MBAs for high-potenƟal talent (R1). R8 shared how their organisaƟon has developed 
a clear leadership model or framework to help aspiring leaders understand what stepping into 
leadership means and requires, so they can decide if this is the right path for them. As also 
noted in Finding two, R8 believes that designing gender-neutral iniƟaƟves within the 
organisaƟon may help reduce resistance from men and lead to posiƟve changes in the 
organisaƟonal culture. 
Tools such as personality tests and skills assessments (R2, R7) were menƟoned as useful for 
helping teams work beƩer together, highlighƟng their strengths, and supporƟng clear career 
pathways, all of which can help retain talented employees (R7). Some respondents said that 
they deliberately pay closer aƩenƟon to female candidates during recruitment or promoƟon to 
ensure that competent women are not overlooked (R1, R3). Others prefer to rely on neutral AI 
tools and gender-neutral wording to avoid bias (R5).   
Respondents also spoke about the value of communiƟes and networks within the industry (R2, 
R6) where women can connect, share good pracƟces, and ﬁnd potenƟal mentors (R6). Three 
respondents, all women in leadership, said that they currently have a mentor or have 
themselves mentored other women (R2, R3, R6). Mentors were described in literature and by 
the respondents as “good leadership role models” (R2) who provided encouragement (R3) and 
“support” (R6) (Griﬀeth et al., 2021). While some literature defends that women need more 
eﬀecƟve mentorship programmes, other argues that women are over-mentored and under-
sponsored, thus less promoted compared to men (Griﬀeth et al., 2021; Ibarra, 2023). A 
mentorship programme is enriching from a psychological, emoƟonal, and personal 
development point of view, where the mentor provides guidance, feedback, and career 
direcƟons to the mentee (Griﬀeth et al., 2021). However, it is argued that to increase women’s 
representaƟon in leadership, they may beneﬁt more from sponsorship programmes where 
senior leaders have an acƟve role in opening doors for career advancement opportuniƟes 
(Griﬀeth et al., 2021; Ibarra, 2023).   
The need for visible role models for young women in STEM came up repeatedly. Seeing 
successful women in leadership that they can relate to helps women picture themselves in 
similar posiƟons (R2) and gives them ﬁrst-hand learning and inspiraƟon (R2, R6). R3 pointed 
out that women in leadership must be “aware that we are role models. And also act 
accordingly” which means encouraging “other women to look into leadership” roles. For R5, 
role models should inspire pride and help break gender paƩerns in male-dominated sectors 
==PAGE:30==
DTU Entrepreneurship 
| 
Women in leadership with decision-making power in STEM 
24 
 
“because history has not been very benevolent on women in this industry” (R5). Literature 
supports that having more women as roles models may help reduce stereotypical beliefs 
regarding leadership models, increase self-conﬁdence in women to pursue leadership roles, 
and improve self-idenƟty-ﬁt (Koenig et al., 2011; The Diversity Council, 2022).  
Finally, respondents made it clear that these eﬀorts must be backed up by genuine 
commitment from senior leadership (C-level, heads of departments). It is not enough for 
diversity to be a slogan menƟoned at town halls; senior leaders must demonstrate day-to-day 
commitments and lead by example (R1, R4). R8 emphasises that leaders at all levels take their 
cue from those above them; therefore, top leaders must acƟvely encourage women to raise 
their hand, ensure they have access to training, and show through recruitment and promoƟon 
that gender balance is both valued and rewarded (R1, R4, R8). Literature adds that senior 
leaders should move beyond awareness phase and take a proacƟve and accountable role in 
transforming the organisaƟonal culture, pracƟces and individual relaƟonships to foster gender 
balance in leadership (KiƩerød & Teigen, 2018; The Diversity Council, 2022). 
Growing into a leadership role 
Most of the respondents emphasised that stepping into a leadership role requires individual 
proacƟvity as well as supporƟve condiƟons within the organisaƟon. Echoing points from 
Finding one, they agreed that men are oŌen more comfortable at raising their hand and 
puƫng themselves forward for promoƟons, training and new responsibiliƟes, while women 
may hold back or wait to be recognised (R1, R4). As R1 explains, women who want to move 
into leadership must communicate their ambiƟons clearly and ensure they develop the 
necessary skillset. The respondents agree that women should speak up more, be conﬁdent, 
and stay acƟvely engaged (R3, R5, R6, R7, R8). R6 noted that women oŌen underesƟmate 
themselves in the workplace while men typically do not quesƟon whether they are “enough”.  
The transiƟon into leadership also requires a pracƟcal shiŌ in mindset and behaviour. R8 
encourages women to push back more oŌen and to “say No more than you say Yes”, to avoid 
taking on other people’s problems that fall outside their own responsibiliƟes. R8 also describes 
how leadership requires learning to delegate, leƫng go of some control, and trusƟng the team 
to deliver. If things do not go according to plan, it is important to reﬂect on how the work was 
communicated and whether the delegaƟon was clear (R8). R7 noted that moving from being 
part of the team to managing it inevitably changes the team dynamics, creates new 
boundaries, and shiŌs social interacƟons.  
The respondents shared that from their experience career progression typically happens in two 
ways: either they idenƟfy an employee’s potenƟal and encourage them to step up, or the 
employee proacƟvely expresses their ambiƟon to move up the career ladder (R3, R5, R7). R5 
admiƩed that they would prefer if the employee iniƟated the conversaƟon, as it shows genuine 
“good engagement” and avoids creaƟng unwanted pressure or assumpƟons.   
Echoing a theme from Finding one, the respondents stressed that stepping out of the comfort 
zone is essenƟal for growth. R5 and R8 emphasised that women should take on new challenges 
even if they do not feel fully prepared. As R5 puts it: “Get out of your comfort zone, because 
you won't evolve into a leader if you're uncomfortable being outside your comfort zone.”. R5, 
==PAGE:31==
DTU Entrepreneurship 
| 
Women in leadership with decision-making power in STEM 
25 
 
R7 and R8 encouraged women to not fear male-dominated spaces but to enter them with 
pride and conﬁdence: “the worst thing that can happen is you are wrong, right? You won't get 
ﬁred from speaking your mind. You'll be ﬁred actually from not contribuƟng more” (R5).  
Finally, R8 urged women to apply for roles even if they don’t Ɵck every single criterion on the 
job descripƟon: “Just apply if you think this is interesƟng”. Taking this step, learning by doing 
and gaining training on the job is how many new leaders build the pracƟcal tools and 
conﬁdence they need (R3, R7).  
Sub-conclusion ﬁnding three 
In conclusion, the respondents agreed that creaƟng more opportuniƟes for women in STEM 
leadership must happen on several fronts. Early exposure to STEM subjects can help build 
young girls’ conﬁdence and interest in these ﬁelds. In the household, equitable support 
parƟcularly shared caregiving responsibiliƟes may help women sustain their careers. In the 
workplace, organisaƟons must provide clear career paths, ﬂexible and inclusive policies, and 
visible commitment from senior leadership, supported by mentorship, sponsorship, and 
relatable role models. At the same Ɵme, women must play an acƟve role by voicing their 
ambiƟons, stepping out of their comfort zones, and leadership opportuniƟes even if they do 
not fulﬁl all criteria. Sustainable progress relies on pracƟcal organisaƟonal acƟons, systemic 
change, and self-determinaƟon and iniƟaƟve, dismantling tradiƟonal barriers and creaƟng a 
more inclusive leadership landscape in STEM. 
5. Discussion 
Alignment on equitable access  
In line with literature, the thesis shows that women in general show leadership traits such as 
collaboraƟon, empowerment and trust that resonate with Denmark’s work culture and ﬂat 
hierarchy. Nevertheless, this alignment does not necessarily translate into equitable access to 
leadership roles. The stereotype “think manager-think male” is also persistent in Denmark, 
parƟcularly in male-dominated industries such as STEM.  
The respondents highlighted the “double-bind” that women in leadership face which 
represents a set of challenges. On one hand, if too collaboraƟve or empathic they are 
perceived as “too soŌ”; on the other, asserƟve behaviour might be judged as unfeminine or 
unlikeable due to rooted stereotypical gender norms. These percepƟons show a high inﬂuence 
of masculine norms in STEM leadership, regardless of the Danish work culture towards 
collaboraƟon and equality.  
Structural segregaƟon of the labour market reinforces these barriers. Women are 
predominantly employed in the public sector and in support roles in STEM, being under-
represented in core technical funcƟons that may be a stepping stone to execuƟve leadership 
posiƟons. Career breaks associated with maternity leave and implicit expectaƟons concerning 
women’s role as primary caregivers conƟnue to hinder career progression to leadership.  
==PAGE:32==
DTU Entrepreneurship 
| 
Women in leadership with decision-making power in STEM 
26 
 
Other aspects such as Danish as a workplace language especially in internaƟonal organisaƟons 
as well as generaƟonal expectaƟons from Gen-Z are also reshaping leadership with more focus 
on inclusion.  
In conclusion, the overall picture of cultural compaƟbility on paper is undermined by 
embedded cultural and structural barriers in Denmark.  
The entrepreneurial mindset – an enabler and a constraint 
Literature and respondents highlighted EM as a highly valuable skill, both in risk-averse and 
stable markets in STEM ﬁelds, where it can help idenƟfy and create opportuniƟes, embrace 
change, and show resilience in uncertain environments. EM plays a key role in innovaƟon and 
agility which are essenƟal to stay compeƟƟve. However, the ﬁndings also demonstrate how EM 
is understood and applied.  
While some respondents viewed EM as a collecƟve skill best embedded across the team, 
others viewed it as a fundamental trait for leaders. Therefore, EM has a dual importance: 
leaders should use it to set the direcƟon in uncertain and fast changing environments, inspire 
conﬁdence in the team and encourage risk-taking, whereas the team should culƟvate it in day-
to-day pracƟces.  
The ﬁndings also revealed that EM is gendered. Men were described as more willing to take 
risks with limited informaƟon, while women were described as more cauƟous and risk averse. 
This reﬂects gendered paƩerns and stereotypes around conﬁdence. Nevertheless, both 
literature and respondents defended that EM is not innate and can be developed through 
training, pracƟce, and role models. However, this is placing a burden on women to adapt to 
risk-taking without changing the organisaƟonal policies, which means that organisaƟons should 
communicate how risk-taking is evaluated, rewarded, and penalised to avoid women facing 
higher penalƟes for failure. Without addressing organisaƟonal policies towards EM, there is a 
risk of reinforcing gender inequaliƟes in leadership rather than closing the gap.  
InterconnecƟng barriers 
The ﬁndings show how individual, organisaƟonal, and societal barriers hinder women’s career 
progression to leadership.  
At an individual level, the respondents agreed that women tend to under-esƟmate themselves, 
abstaining from self-nominaƟng for leadership roles, and oŌen feeling compelled to over-
prepare. While building conﬁdence, learning to delegate eﬀecƟvely, and stepping out of the 
comfort zone are essenƟal strategies, these measures alone are insuﬃcient in the absence of 
systemic change.  
From an organisaƟonal level, informal “old boys’ networks”, similarity bias in recruitment, and 
the over-representaƟon of women in support roles conƟnue to hinder access to leadership 
roles. Furthermore, respondents noted that subtle forms of exclusion such as microaggressions 
and age bias, alongside inconsistencies in the implementaƟon of family-friendly policies 
==PAGE:33==
DTU Entrepreneurship 
| 
Women in leadership with decision-making power in STEM 
27 
 
conƟnue to impact gender inequaliƟes. Leadership models and job posƟngs frequently reﬂect 
masculine norms, reinforcing percepƟons of “lack of ﬁt”.  
At societal level, the Nordic countries promote a dual-breadwinner model. However, Denmark’s 
societal gender norms sƟll place expectaƟons on women as primary caregivers, creaƟng a 
“child penalty” eﬀect that has a negaƟve impact on women’s career progression. Furthermore, 
current poliƟcal pressures from USA to withdraw from DEI iniƟaƟves could potenƟally reduce 
organisaƟons’ focus on promoƟng gender balance in leadership in Denmark.   
Pathways for change in Danish STEM organisaƟons 
To create equitable opportuniƟes, foster systemic change, and achieve gender balance in STEM 
leadership, there were several pracƟcal iniƟaƟves idenƟﬁed in the interviews.   
 
Leadership accountability: senior leaders should support inclusion and equitable 
opportunity creaƟon through inclusive behaviour and psychological safety. Building on 
this, organisaƟons should recognise and reward these behaviours, so they become 
embedded in everyday leadership pracƟces.  
1. Senior leaders must lead by example and acƟvely support and act on the DEI 
iniƟaƟves in the organisaƟon (R4, R8) 
2. Ask quesƟons speciﬁcally to those who oŌen don’t speak up to create a safe 
space where everyone can share experiences and opinions (R4, R5) 
3. Transform organisaƟonal goals into departmental goals and ensure that the 
team understands them, demonstraƟng and fostering accountability (R8) 
4. Challenge tradiƟonal masculine leadership pracƟces, moving towards soŌer, 
empowering, and team-oriented approaches (R1, R2, R8) 
5. Foster open communicaƟon and be open to diﬀerent perspecƟves so women 
do not feel pressured into adopƟng masculine traits to ﬁt-in and succeed (R2, 
R8) 
6. Develop a leadership framework/model that works for men and women, 
focusing on must-have skills (R8) 
 
Sponsorship and mentorship: change from mentorship-only programmes to 
sponsorship, parƟcularly in core technical and strategic roles. Find high-proﬁle 
sponsors to advocate for career advancement for women and to acƟvely open more 
doors for them. Women’s access to high-visibility projects and decision-making forums 
should also increase, and networking events should be redesigned to move away from 
“old boys’” spaces.   
1. Implement mentorship programmes where experienced female leaders can 
mentor younger women, providing guidance and support (R3, R6) 
2. Implement accelerator programmes that oﬀer faster opportuniƟes for selected 
individuals to connect and learn from senior leaders, and essenƟally be 
promoted (R1) 
3. Provide leadership courses and succession planning to idenƟfy and develop 
potenƟal future leaders (R1) 
==PAGE:34==
DTU Entrepreneurship 
| 
Women in leadership with decision-making power in STEM 
28 
 
4. Use social media and internal safe spaces to create networks where women 
can discuss leadership, connect with potenƟal sponsors, and explore upskilling 
opportuniƟes (R2, R6) 
 
Bias-resistant processes: recruitment and promoƟon should be transparent with 
gender-neutral language in the job posƟngs, structured interviews, and diverse panels. 
Focus on must-have skills and conduct regular audits to polish these processes.    
1. Create job descripƟons that are more gender-neutral and at the same Ɵme 
more aƩracƟve to women, avoiding overly technical language (R4, R8) 
2. Challenge the “best candidate” bias and be open to diﬀerent perspecƟves, as 
leaders oŌen tend to mirror themselves when recruiƟng or promoƟng (R4, R8) 
3. PotenƟally use AI tools as a complement to ﬁlter candidates more objecƟvely 
(R5) 
 
Inclusive environments that enable EM: leaders should build psychological safety and 
teach EM as a team skill. Normalise calculated risk-taking, iteraƟve learning, and create 
tolerance for smart failure.   
1. CulƟvate an organisaƟonal culture that embraces smart failure and is open to 
new ideas, fostering an innovaƟon spirit (R8) 
2. Again, develop psychological safety in the team to foster accountability, risk-
taking, and open communicaƟon (R2, R8, R4, R5) 
3. Encourage the team to have a proacƟve role and develop an EM, embracing 
uncertainty and conƟnuous learning (R1, R2, R4, R5, R8) 
4. Train women to develop EM by encouraging them to step out of their comfort 
zone and be proacƟve despite not knowing the outcome (R5, R8) 
 
Equitable life-course policies: normalise and plan for career breaks for both genders, 
essenƟally parental leave, but also others that extend beyond parenthood such as 
health or travel. Prepare return-to-work strategies and guarantee role protecƟon. 
1. Create policies that support parental leave equally for both men and women 
and protect women’s roles aŌer maternity leave (R6, R8) 
2. Create new and ﬂexible policies for career breaks in general, acknowledging 
the increase of pension age in Denmark (R8) 
3. Create work-life balance policies in leadership that apply equally for men and 
women emphasising that it is possible to be a good leader without working 
excessive hours (R2) 
 
Role models: in order to create idenƟty-ﬁt for leadership roles for women, elevate 
high-proﬁle female leaders especially in technical roles and create explicit leadership 
models that show mulƟple ways to lead, incorporaƟng both feminine and masculine 
traits. 
1. Encourage exisƟng female leaders to be aware of the role model they 
represent and to inspire younger women to pursue leadership roles (R3) 
==PAGE:35==
DTU Entrepreneurship 
| 
Women in leadership with decision-making power in STEM 
29 
 
2. Promote and highlight diverse role models (female leaders) in order for women 
to be able to view themselves as successful leaders and change agents (R2, R5) 
3. Once again, emphasise that there are mulƟple ways of eﬀecƟve leadership, 
challenging the tradiƟonal masculine leadership approaches (R2, R6, R7) 
5.1. LimitaƟons and direcƟons for future research 
While the thesis provides insights into STEM leadership pracƟces in Denmark, gender 
diﬀerences in leadership, and the role of EM, several limitaƟons must be acknowledged. The 
small size of the sample, with women represenƟng 62,5% of parƟcipants and only 25% expats, 
restricts the extent to which the ﬁndings can be generalised. Future research should therefore 
seek to include a larger and more diverse sample of STEM leaders in Denmark, incorporaƟng 
intersecƟonal factors such as age, gender, and cultural and educaƟonal background.  
ConsideraƟons for future research could include quanƟtaƟve approaches such as surveys to 
examine the relaƟonship between EM and innovaƟon outcomes (new product launches or new 
iniƟaƟves), considering both men and women as leaders. On the other hand, longitudinal 
studies could oﬀer insights into how gender barriers and enablers evolve across women’s 
careers, from entry level to senior leadership.  
6. Conclusion 
Research quesƟon: How do cultural norms, organisaƟonal pracƟces, and the entrepreneurial 
mindset (EM) shape women’s access to leadership roles in STEM organisaƟons in Denmark? 
The thesis invesƟgated how cultural norms and organisaƟonal pracƟces, through the lens of 
EM and the Nordic gender equality paradox, shape women’s access to leadership roles in 
Danish STEM industries. Through the analysis of interviews, literature review, and secondary 
data, it can be concluded that despite Denmark’s global reputaƟon for gender equality, rooted 
cultural expectaƟons and structural barriers conƟnue to hinder women’s career progression to 
leadership roles.  
Firstly, several gaps were idenƟﬁed that contribute to this paradox. The Nordic gender equality 
paradox shows that even though women have a parƟcipaƟon over 70% in the Danish labour 
market and 48,8% of all scienƟsts and engineers in 2024 were women, this does not translate 
into equal access and representaƟon in leadership. Women face barriers such as the “child 
penalty”, tradiƟonal masculine leadership ideals, exclusion from informal networks, 
microaggressions, and hidden biases that conƟnue to shape their experiences and contribute 
to the lack of idenƟty-ﬁt. At the same Ɵme, enablers such as psychological safety, trust, and 
open communicaƟon were idenƟﬁed as crucial for women to be able to pracƟce leadership. 
EM was idenƟﬁed as a potenƟal way for women to create value and challenge organisaƟonal 
norms. However, this is only be possible if organisaƟons acƟvely foster environments that 
encourage an entrepreneurial behaviour across genders, promoƟng risk-taking and toleraƟng 
smart failure. 
==PAGE:36==
DTU Entrepreneurship 
| 
Women in leadership with decision-making power in STEM 
30 
 
In order to foster long-term change and be able to recruit and promote more women in STEM 
industries to leadership roles, several iniƟaƟves were suggested. OrganisaƟons should create 
structured and gender-neutral processes, highlight role models to inspire and increase 
women’s aspiraƟons to leadership, ﬁnd sponsors who can acƟvely advocate for them, and have 
senior leaders support and pracƟce these iniƟaƟves to set the example. 
In conclusion, women’s access to leadership roles in Danish STEM industries is inﬂuenced by a 
combinaƟon of cultural expectaƟons and organisaƟonal barriers. Change will require 
organisaƟons to challenge persistent stereotypes, redesign leadership pathways and recognise 
the value of EM as a tool for inclusion and innovaƟon. Only then, Denmark will be able to fully 
align its reputaƟon with its pracƟces for gender equality and equal access to leadership roles 
for women, essenƟally in STEM industries.   
 
==PAGE:37==
DTU Entrepreneurship 
| 
Women in leadership with decision-making power in STEM 
31 
 
7. Bibliography 
Adams, A., Jensen, M. F., & Petrongolo, B. (2025). The ContribuƟon of Employee-Led and 
Employer-Led Work Flexibility to the Motherhood Wage Gap. AEA Papers and 
Proceedings, 115, 243–247. hƩps://doi.org/10.1257/pandp.20251015 
An, S.-H., & Meier, K. J. (2021). Gender and the EﬀecƟveness of Leadership Training: Results 
From a Field Experiment. Review of Public Personnel AdministraƟon, 41(4), 747–770. 
hƩps://doi.org/10.1177/0734371X20932989 
Andreasson, U., & Lundqvist, M. (2018). Nordic leadership. Nordic Council of Ministers. 
hƩps://urn.kb.se/resolve?urn=urn:nbn:se:norden:org:diva-5413 
Bobek, V., & Carter, E. V. (2025). REGENERATIVE LEADERSHIP AGENCY: DIALECTICS OF 
LEADERSHIP AND ECOSYSTEMS. 
Bosman, L., & Fernhaber, S. (2018). Teaching the Entrepreneurial Mindset to Engineers 
(1570261). Springer. hƩps://research.ebsco.com/linkprocessor/plink?id=72d6bc45-
890a-3248-a1d3-f3b8d8a8bdc6 
Braun, V., & Clarke, V. (2006). Using themaƟc analysis in psychology. QualitaƟve Research in 
Psychology, 3(2), 77–101. hƩps://doi.org/10.1191/1478088706qp063oa 
Campoy, H. (2024, November 27). Danish Leadership: A Cultural PerspecƟve. Skale Egenkapital. 
hƩps://skaleegenkapital.com/2024/11/27/danish-leadership-a-cultural-perspecƟve/ 
Chisholm-Burns, M. A., Spivey, C. A., Hagemann, T., & Josephson, M. A. (2017). Women in 
leadership and the bewildering glass ceiling. American Journal of Health-System 
Pharmacy, 74(5), 312–324. hƩps://doi.org/10.2146/ajhp160930 
Daspit, J. J., Fox, C. J., & Findley, S. K. (2023). Entrepreneurial mindset: An integrated deﬁniƟon, 
a review of current insights, and direcƟons for future research. Journal of Small 
Business Management, 61(1), 12–44. 
hƩps://doi.org/10.1080/00472778.2021.1907583 
Denmark StaƟsƟcs. (2023a). Board members and managers by residence province, educaƟon, 
type, Ɵme, age and sex. hƩps://www.statbank.dk/BEST11 
Denmark StaƟsƟcs. (2023b). Gender equality. 
hƩps://www.dst.dk/en/StaƟsƟk/temaer/ligesƟlling 
Denmark StaƟsƟcs. (2023c). Sustainable Development Goals. 
hƩps://www.dst.dk/en/StaƟsƟk/temaer/SDG/globale-verdensmaal 
Denmark StaƟsƟcs. (2023d). Sustainable development goals Indicator: 5.5.2 - Women in 
managerial posiƟons. hƩps://www.dst.dk/en/StaƟsƟk/temaer/SDG/globale-
verdensmaal/05-ligesƟlling-mellem-koennene/delmaal-05/indikator-2 
Denmark StaƟsƟcs. (2024). Higher educaƟon status of adults. 
hƩps://www.dst.dk/en/StaƟsƟk/emner/uddannelse-og-forskning/befolkningens-
uddannelsesstatus/voksnes-status-paa-videregaaende-uddannelser 
Denmark StaƟsƟcs. (2025). EducaƟonal acƟvity on STEM-educaƟons by educaƟon, sex and 
Ɵme. hƩps://www.statbank.dk/LIGEUB6 
Descript. (n.d.). Descript. Retrieved 11 July 2025, from hƩps://web.descript.com/authenƟcate 
Easterby-Smith, M., Jaspersen, L. J., Thorpe, R., & Valizade, D. (2021). Management and 
Business Research (7th edn). SAGE PublicaƟons Ltd. 
==PAGE:38==
DTU Entrepreneurship 
| 
Women in leadership with decision-making power in STEM 
32 
 
Eurostat. (2025). Employed HRST by category, sex, age and NACE Rev. 2 acƟvity. 
hƩps://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/databrowser/view/hrst_st_nsecsex2__custom_1769800
7/default/table 
Eva, N., Robin, M., Sendjaya, S., van Dierendonck, D., & Liden, R. C. (2019). Servant Leadership: 
A systemaƟc review and call for future research. The Leadership Quarterly, 30(1), 111–
132. hƩps://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2018.07.004 
First Word Pharma. (2025, May). Novo Nordisk latest drugmaker to drop gender goals in US. 
hƩps://ﬁrstwordpharma.com/story/5958360 
Frandsen, U. (2025, May). The shortage of STEM graduates will rise to new heights towards 
2040. IDA. hƩps://ida.dk/om-ida/nyt-fra-ida/manglen-paa-stem-uddannede-sƟger-Ɵl-
nye-hoejder-frem-mod-2040 
Gipson, A. N., Pfaﬀ, D. L., Mendelsohn, D. B., Catenacci, L. T., & Burke, W. W. (2017). Women 
and Leadership: SelecƟon, Development, Leadership Style, and Performance. The 
Journal of Applied Behavioral Science, 53(1), 32–65. 
hƩps://doi.org/10.1177/0021886316687247 
Griﬀeth, L. L., Malik, R. F., Charas, S., & Randall, N. (2021). Sponsorship: An IntervenƟon to 
Accelerate Women’s Career Velocity. IUP Journal of SoŌ Skills, 15(3), 7–22. 
Hersby, M. D., Ryan, M. K., & JeƩen, J. (2009). Geƫng Together to Get Ahead: The Impact of 
Social Structure on Women’s Networking. BriƟsh Journal of Management, 20(4), 415–
430. hƩps://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-8551.2008.00604.x 
Hovden, J., Kvande, E., & Rasmussen, B. (2011). Gender and the producƟon of elites in the 
Nordic countries: New direcƟons in research. Gender in Management: An InternaƟonal 
Journal, 26(6), 408–418. hƩps://doi.org/10.1108/17542411111164902 
Ibarra, H. (2023). A Lack of Sponsorship Is Keeping Women from Advancing into Leadership. 
Harvard Business Review. hƩps://hbr.org/2019/08/a-lack-of-sponsorship-is-keeping-
women-from-advancing-into-leadership 
Kim, J. Y., & Meister, A. (2023). Microaggressions, Interrupted: The Experience and Eﬀects of 
Gender Microaggressions for Women in STEM. Journal of Business Ethics, 185(3), 513–
531. hƩps://doi.org/10.1007/s10551-022-05203-0 
KiƩerød, R. H., & Teigen, M. (2018). Bringing Managers Back in: Support for Gender-Equality 
Measures in the Business Sector. Nordic Journal of Working Life Studies, 8(3), ArƟcle 3. 
hƩps://doi.org/10.18291/njwls.v8i3.109545 
Kleven, H., Landais, C., & Søgaard, J. E. (2019). Children and Gender Inequality: Evidence from 
Denmark. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 11(4), 181–209. 
hƩps://doi.org/10.1257/app.20180010 
Koenig, A. M., Eagly, A. H., Mitchell, A. A., & RisƟkari, T. (2011). Are leader stereotypes 
masculine? A meta-analysis of three research paradigms. Psychological BulleƟn, 137(4), 
616–642. hƩps://doi.org/10.1037/a0023557 
Kuratko, D. F., Fisher, G., & Audretsch, D. B. (2021). Unraveling the entrepreneurial mindset. 
Small Business Economics, 57(4), 1681–1691. hƩps://doi.org/10.1007/s11187-020-
00372-6 
Lauring, J., & Klitmøller, A. (2015). Danish Leadership Style in a Global PerspecƟve. Dansk 
Industri. hƩps://www.e-pages.dk/dikataloger/549/ 
==PAGE:39==
DTU Entrepreneurship 
| 
Women in leadership with decision-making power in STEM 
33 
 
Lundqvist, D., Wallo, A., & Reineholm, C. (2023). Leadership and well-being of employees in the 
Nordic countries: A literature review. WORK, 74(4), 1331–1352. 
hƩps://doi.org/10.3233/WOR-210063 
McKinsey & Company & InnovaƟon Fund Denmark. (2018). Bridging The Talent Gap in 
Denmark. hƩps://innovaƟonsfonden.dk/sites/default/ﬁles/2018-10/gender-diversity-
in-denmark.pdf 
Menzel, H. C., AalƟo, I., & Ulijn, J. M. (2007). On the way to creaƟvity: Engineers as 
intrapreneurs in organizaƟons. TechnovaƟon, 27(12), 732–743. 
hƩps://doi.org/10.1016/j.technovaƟon.2007.05.004 
Mitchell, G. R. (2007). InsƟll the entrepreneurial mindset. Research Technology Management, 
50(6), 11–13. hƩps://doi.org/10.1080/08956308.2007.11657467 
Muhammad, S., AƩa, A., & Zaman, H. M. (2023). The Nordic Paradox: Unraveling the 
ComplexiƟes of Gender Equality in the Nordic Model. 
hƩps://doi.org/10.5281/ZENODO.7951641 
Naumann, C. (2017). Entrepreneurial Mindset: A SyntheƟc Literature Review. Entrepreneurial 
Business and Economics Review, 5(3), ArƟcle 3. 
hƩps://doi.org/10.15678/EBER.2017.050308 
Neergaard, H., & Thrane, C. (2011). The Nordic Welfare Model: Barrier or facilitator of women’s 
entrepreneurship in Denmark? InternaƟonal Journal of Gender and Entrepreneurship, 
3(2), 88–104. hƩps://doi.org/10.1108/17566261111140189 
Newman, A., Donohue, R., & Eva, N. (2017). Psychological safety: A systemaƟc review of the 
literature. Human Resource Management Review, 27(3), 521–535. 
hƩps://doi.org/10.1016/j.hrmr.2017.01.001 
Nordic StaƟsƟcs. (2024a). EDUC11: PopulaƟon by educaƟonal aƩainment level by reporƟng 
country, age, level, sex, unit and Ɵme. PxWeb. 
hƩps://pxweb.nordicstaƟsƟcs.org:443/pxweb/en/Nordic StaƟsƟcs/Nordic 
StaƟsƟcs__Nordic Gender Equality Indicators__EducaƟon/EDUC11.px/ 
Nordic StaƟsƟcs. (2024b). LABO04: Gender balance in listed companies by sex, reporƟng 
country, Ɵme and posiƟon. PxWeb. 
hƩps://pxweb.nordicstaƟsƟcs.org:443/pxweb/en/Nordic StaƟsƟcs/Nordic 
StaƟsƟcs__Nordic Gender Equality Indicators__Inﬂuence and power/LABO04.px/ 
Payne, R., & Keeﬀe, M. (2023). Advancing Meaningful Inclusion in the Workplace: A Model for 
Avoiding Tokenism and MarginalizaƟon. In Advances in Human Resources Management 
and OrganizaƟonal Development (pp. 1–19). IGI Global. hƩps://doi.org/10.4018/978-
1-6684-6602-5.ch001 
Petersen, M. O. (2025, March 31). USA’s krav Ɵl danske virksomheder kaldes for ‘en łollet 
skræmmekampagne’. TV2. hƩps://nyheder.tv2.dk/udland/2025-03-31-usas-krav-Ɵl-
danske-virksomheder-kaldes-for-en-łollet-skraemmekampagne 
Rajagopal. (2014). The Entrepreneurial Mindset. In ArchitecƟng Enterprise (pp. 31–57). 
Palgrave Macmillan, London. hƩps://doi.org/10.1057/9781137366788_2 
Sanandaji, N. (2018, March 8). The Nordic Glass Ceiling. Cato InsƟtute. 
hƩps://www.cato.org/policy-analysis/nordic-glass-ceiling 
Seong, M., & Parker, S. C. (2024). Does gendered wording in job adverƟsements deter women 
from joining start-ups? A replicaƟon and extension of Gaucher, Friesen, and Kay (2011). 
Strategic Entrepreneurship Journal, 18(2), 286–305. hƩps://doi.org/10.1002/sej.1489 
==PAGE:40==
DTU Entrepreneurship 
| 
Women in leadership with decision-making power in STEM 
34 
 
Sitaridis, I., & Kitsios, F. C. (2021). Gendered personality traits and entrepreneurial intenƟons: 
Insights from informaƟon technology educaƟon. EducaƟon + Training, 64(7), 1018–
1034. hƩps://doi.org/10.1108/ET-12-2020-0378 
Sørensen, A. E. (2019, February 22). Gender segregaƟon in the Nordic labour market. 
hƩps://nordics.info/show/arƟkel/gender-segregaƟon-of-nordic-labour 
Spangsdorf, S., & Forsythe, A. (2021). The glass slipper eﬀect: Understanding the Nordic gender 
equality paradox from an idenƟty ﬁt perspecƟve. Career Development InternaƟonal, 
26(6), 766–785. hƩps://doi.org/10.1108/cdi-01-2021-0010 
The Diversity Council. (2022). The Danish gender equality paradox in leadership roles (pp. 1–
72). hƩps://www.Ō.dk/samling/20231/almdel/liu/spm/13/svar/2024428/2828069.pdf 
Turner-Wharfe, C. (2025, April). LEGO accused of minimising diversity and inclusion eﬀorts. 
hƩps://www.brickfanaƟcs.com/lego-accused-playing-down-diversity-report/ 
United NaƟons. (2023). Gender Inequality Index. Human Development Reports. 
hƩps://hdr.undp.org/data-center/themaƟc-composite-indices/gender-inequality-index 
Villesèche, F., OƩsen, C., & Paunova, M. (2021). Bias and leadership aspiraƟons: Exploring the 
interacƟon of gender and parental status in self-evaluaƟons. Kvinder, Køn & Forskning, 
3, 70–85. hƩps://doi.org/10.7146/kkf.v31i3.128967 
Wedel, S. O. (2020, May). Danish equality is a myth. Aarhus University. 
hƩps://bss.au.dk/en/insights/business-2/2020/danish-equality-is-a-myth 
Wenjun, Z., & Panikarova, S. V. (2023). INTRAPRENEUTIAL BEHAVIOR IN EMPLOYEES: 
INFLUENCE OF ENTREPRENEURIAL MINDSET AND DEMOGRAPHICS. BENEFICIUM 
Научное Периодическое Сетевое Издание, 4, ArƟcle 4. 
hƩps://doi.org/10.34680/BENEFICIUM.2023.4(49).100-108 
Wood, Z. (2025, April 11). Lego drops diversity terms from its annual sustainability report. The 
Guardian. hƩps://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2025/apr/11/lego-drops-
diversity-terms-from-its-annual-sustainability-report 
World Economic Forum. (2025, June). Global Gender Gap Report 2025. World Economic Forum. 
hƩps://reports.weforum.org/docs/WEF_GGGR_2025.pdf 
Zahra, Y., Handoyo, S., & Fajrianthi, F. (2025). A comprehensive overview of GeneraƟon Z in the 
workplace: Insights from a scoping review. SA Journal of Industrial Psychology, 51(0), 
11. 
Zappe, S. E., Cutler, S. L., & Gase, L. (2023). A SystemaƟc Review of the Impacts of 
Entrepreneurial Support Programs in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math 
Fields. Entrepreneurship EducaƟon and Pedagogy, 6(1), 3–31. 
hƩps://doi.org/10.1177/25151274211040422 
 
