==PAGE:1==
The role of vegetation for the greenhouse
gas exchange in a Danish suburb
Paula Dawn Sachsenmaier, s232527
September 24, 2025
MSc Environmental Engineering ŌĆō Master Thesis
==PAGE:2==
Master Thesis
Preface
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Department DTU Sustain, at
the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfillment of the requirements for
the degree Master of Science in Engineering (Environmental Engineering). The thesis has a
scope equivalent to 30 ECTS.
Paula Dawn Sachsenmaier
Signature, September 24, 2025
Acknowledgement
Andreas Ibrom, Supervisor, Associate Professor, Department of Environmental and Re-
source Engineering Waste, Climate & Monitoring
Susanne Wiesner, Supervisor, Associate Professor, Department of Environmental and Re-
source Engineering Waste, Climate & Monitoring
Ziqiong Wang, PhD Student, Department of Environmental and Resource Engineering
Waste, Climate & Monitoring
Konstantinos Kissas, Postdoc, Department of Environmental and Resource Engineering
Waste, Climate & Monitoring
I would like to express my gratitude to my supervisors for their support and guidance
throughout this project. I am thankful for having learnt from you, and your dedication,
knowledge, and support have been essential in shaping this work.
I
==PAGE:3==
Master Thesis
Declaration for use of AI
Section of the
report
How
was
generative
AI
used?
(1,2,3,4,5)*
Reflections on what was learned
by the use of Generative AI
Abstract
3
The usage of AI is very helpful when
improving the language, especially as a
non-native speaker. While it enhanced
clarity and readability in many sec-
tions, it also reformulated sentences in
ways that introduced inaccuracies, re-
quiring careful review and correction.
Introduction
3
as above
Method
3
as above
Results
3
as above
Discussion
3
as above
Conclusion
3
as above
Figures
5
AI was especially helpful for quickly
finding the right websites and tools to
create and improve different parts of
my figures, and therefore saving a lot
of time.
Data analysis
5
While a helpful tool, caution is neces-
sary when using AI for debugging as it
sometimes add lines that modify your
data in a way that you did not ask for
(e.g., cutting outliers without me hav-
ing asked for it)
* Uses of GenAI:
1. No use of GenAI
2. GenAI used for idea generation and structuring the assignment
3. GenAI to edit language/grammar but not content
4. GenAI used to write part of the text/make figures
5. GenAI was used to debug code
II
==PAGE:4==
Master Thesis
Abstract
Cities are hotspots of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions but also contain green spaces that
may offset part of these emissions through photosynthetic CO2 uptake [1]. Quantifying this
uptake remains challenging, as urban CO2 fluxes are a combination of multiple sources and
sinks across a heterogeneous landscape [2]. This thesis addresses this challenge by combining
Eddy-Covariance (EC) measurements with high-resolution flux footprint modelling to dis-
entangle source and sink contributions in Gladsaxe, a suburban area north of Copenhagen,
Denmark. A forward model that uses footprint-weighted fluxes was developed to simulate
gross CO2 flux components, namely, traffic, residential heating, ecosystem respiration, gross
primary production, and human respiration. The model is then calibrated against EC flux
observations from March to June 2025. The calibrated model was then applied to produce
footprint-independent, spatially explicit maps of net ecosystem exchange (NEE) for the tar-
get area. Results show that residential green spaces act as a persistent CO2 sink during
the study period, with photosynthetic uptake exceeding ecosystem respiration. Neverthe-
less, traffic emissions dominate the local carbon budget, offsetting the vegetation sink. By
integrating EC data with footprint analysis, this work not only quantifies source contribu-
tions but also demonstrates a methodological framework for applying EC measurements in
complex urban landscapes.
III
==PAGE:5==
Contents
List of Figures
VI
List of Tables
VII
Nomenclature
VIII
1
Introduction
1
2
Materials and Method
5
2.1
Eddy-Covariance measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Footprint model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Modelled CO2 exchange
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3.1
CO2 exchange from vegetation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3.2
Modelling of CO2 flux from traffic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3.3
Residential heating . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.3.4
Integrating flux over the footprint . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.4
Model fitting and evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.5
CO2 flux map . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3
Results
20
3.1
Eddy-Covariance flux measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2
Spatial attribution of fluxes and sampling bias . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.3
Model fitting and evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.4
Results of the CO2 exchange-model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4
Discussion
35
4.1
The role of vegetation for CO2 exchange in cities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.2
Discussion of methodology used . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.2.1
Critical evaluation of the approach, the measured data and the model
38
5
Conclusion
44
References
45
6
Appendix A
51
A Footprint climatology
51
B Eddy Covariance data
52
C Model equation and model statistics
52
D Results of unfitted model
55
IV
==PAGE:6==
Master Thesis
Contents
E ERA5 data
58
F Plots of the residual analysis
59
V
==PAGE:7==
Master Thesis
List of Figures
List of Figures
1
Overview of CO2 sources and sinks in cities
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Satellite image of target area . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Landuse map of target area
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
4
Diurnal CO pattern . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5
Full set of measured CO2 flux with Eddy-Covariance
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
6
Residential and vegetation CO2 flux with Eddy-Covariance . . . . . . . . . .
21
7
Relation between CO2 fluxes and incoming short-wave radiation . . . . . . .
21
8
Cumulative contribution to footprint by land cover
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
9
Sensor location bias, land-use types . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
10
Sensor location bias, NDRE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
11
Modelfit 0: Residuals over traffic flux and hour of the day
. . . . . . . . . .
26
12
Modelfit4: Measured over predicted flux
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
13
Modelfit6 Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
14
Time series over measured flux vs predicted flux after fitting . . . . . . . . .
29
15
Contribution of model terms to CO2 flux after fitting . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
16
Contribution of respiration and GPP to CO2 flux after fitting
. . . . . . . .
30
17
Net ecosystem exchange map
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
18
Net ecosystem exchange comparing literature parameters and fitted parameters 33
19
Cumulated unbiased CO2 flux for the target area
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
A.1 Footprint climatology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
B.1 Relation between CO2 flux and incoming short-wave radiation per month . .
52
D.1 Comparison simulated data with measured data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
D.2 Contribution of model terms to CO2 flux, unfitted model . . . . . . . . . . .
56
D.3 Net ecosystem exchange map, unfitted model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
E.1
ERA5 temperature data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
E.2
ERA5 radiation data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
VI
==PAGE:8==
Master Thesis
List of Tables
List of Tables
1
Overview of different land uses and their relative coverage in the study area .
8
2
Road-types in Open Street Map . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3
Traffic stations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4
Overview of Modelfits
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
C.1 Evaluation of unfitted models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
C.2 Parameter and standard deviation for each modelfit . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
C.3 Parameter and standard deviation for each modelfit . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
VII
==PAGE:9==
Master Thesis
Nomenclature
Nomenclature
AIC
Akaike Information Criterion
EC
Eddy Covariance
EF
Emission factor
EVI
Enhanced Vegetation Index
FFP
Flux Footprint Prediction
GEE Google Earth Engine
GHG Greenhouse gas
GPP Gross Primary Production
LSWI Land Surface Water Index
NDRE Normalized Difference Red Edge Index
NEE Net Ecosystem Exchange
NID
Denmarks National Inventory Document 2025
NIR
Near-infrared light
NPP Net Primary Production
OMS Open Street Map
PAR
Photosynthetically active radiation
R
Ecosystem Respiration
VI
Vegetation Index
VIII
==PAGE:10==
Master Thesis
Introduction
1
Introduction
Global surface temperature has increased by 1.1 ŌŚ”C since the pre-industrial age [1]. The
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) states in its most recent assessment
report that "limiting human-caused global warming requires net zero CO2 emissions" [1].
While emission reductions, such as those achieved through the energy transition, are es-
sential to limiting global warming, a substantial gap remains between current nationally
determined contributions and the emission reductions required to meet the Paris Agreement
targets of 1.5 ŌŚ”C or 2 ŌŚ”C [1]. In addition to reduction initiatives, carbon sequestration can
play a vital role in combating climate change [3].
Vegetation can act as a carbon sink and therefore help achieve net-zero emissions. It takes
up CO2 during photosynthesis and releases it during respiration. The difference is the Net
Primary Productivity (NPP). When heterotrophic respiration is subtracted from the NPP,
the result is the Net Ecosystem Exchange (NEE), which is an indicator of the net CO2
exchange of the ecosystem.
Urban areas are responsible for roughly 70% of global greenhouse gas (GHG) emis-
sions [1]. Urban greening has therefore been widely explored as a potential climate mitiga-
tion strategy. It is widely supported by the public and simultaneously helps reduce other
climate-related risks, such as urban heat and flooding.[1, 4]. The interest in quantifying
the contribution of urban vegetation to climate mitigation has grown significantly in recent
years, as evidenced by the large number of studies conducted worldwide [5, 6, 2, 7, 8]. For
example, a study in Beijing, China, investigated strategies to maximize vegetation-driven
carbon uptake and found that medium-sized evergreen trees were optimal for urban parks to
maximize net carbon uptake [6]. Another study investigated the NEE of a green roof at the
Berlin-Brandenburg airport in Berlin, Germany. The roof, which is mostly vegetated with
herbs, showed a net uptake of carbon of -141.1 g C mŌłÆ2 yearŌłÆ1 [7].
Urban greening is also gaining political momentum, with projects ranging from EU-
level initiatives, such as the LIFE URBANGREEN project supporting improved vegetation
management in municipalities [9], to concrete projects such as the ŌĆ£Metropolitan ForestŌĆØ in
Madrid, Spain, which aims to create a continuous green ring of forests and parks around
the city [10]. These examples underline the strong interest from both research and policy
communities in leveraging vegetation for climate mitigation, highlighting the need for robust
quantification of the CO2 uptake potential at urban sites.
Figure 1 provides an overview of the sources and sinks of CO2 in an urban area.
The
main sources are emissions from the combustion of fuels in traffic, heating, and industrial
activities; additionally, emissions occur from human and ecosystem respiration, as well as
smaller residential activities such as cooking. Photosynthesis is the only sink of CO2 and
the only gross flux that depends directly on incoming short-wave radiation. All other gross
fluxes occur both during the day and nighttime, and are independent of weather, although
they still exhibit a diurnal pattern [11].
Page 1 of 87
==PAGE:11==
Master Thesis
Introduction
Figure 1: Overview of CO2 sources and sinks in cities. Photosynthesis is the only gross flux
that depends directly on radiation.
Eddy Covariance (EC) measurements are an established method for measuring net CO2
fluxes in field observations [11]. EC measurements are spatially biased, meaning that the
measurement is not representative of the entire target area but is dependent on the flux
source area during a measurement time (called the footprint). This means that not every
pixel of the investigated area contributes equally to the measured CO2 flux, but their con-
tribution is dependent on variables, among others, the wind direction, wind speed, stability
conditions, and boundary layer height. Usually, EC is therefore only applied to homogenous
surfaces where the sampling bias doesnŌĆÖt matter [12]. In urban areas, the surface is not
homogeneous, and the different sources make it difficult to estimate how much each source
or sink contributes to the net carbon flux [2].
Different approaches have been tried to distinguish between sources and sinks of the CO2
exchange. These include using multiple EC flux measurements in the same region but over
different landscapes to compare the influence of different land covers [5, 13]. Another ap-
proach is analysing EC data based on wind direction and how the source area changes with
it [14]. A third approach is to model the individual sources and sinks using activity data and
meteorological observations to estimate their contributions and compare them to measured
EC data [2]. Lastly, footprint modelling can be applied, in which an area is weighted by its
ability to contribute to the measured flux using a footprint model. Knowing how much a
certain area contributes to the measured flux then allows the allocation of CO2 exchange to
sources and sinks.
Although EC in urban areas is still relatively new, several studies have applied one of the
mentioned approaches and used EC to estimate carbon emissions in cities [15]. These studies
have identified clear seasonal and diurnal patterns in CO2 fluxes. These patterns are influ-
enced by environmental factors, such as incoming sunlight and temperature, which affect
photosynthesis and heating, and by activities that follow societal schedules, like traffic.
Page 2 of 87
==PAGE:12==
Master Thesis
Introduction
The approach of area weighting by the footprint, which is used in this work, has been applied
in numerous studies, but the majority of them do not investigate urban areas. Most studies
focus on using this method to evaluate how representative a certain vegetation type is for an
area and how similar the footprint and the target area are [16, 17, 18, 19]. Giannico et al.
(2018) investigated the effect of heterogeneous land covers on EC measurements. The study
found that the high heterogeneity of an area has a strong impact on EC flux measurements,
especially under stable conditions, and concluded that high-resolution remote sensing data
should be included in EC flux analysis. [14].
Few studies were found that use the area weighted with the footprint to quantify the contri-
bution of different sources and sinks to the flux. A study by Tuovinen et al. (2019) combined
a footprint model with high-resolution spatial data to distinguish between land-cover types
with varying strengths as methane sources or sinks [20]. Additionally, they estimated the
sensor location bias, which is the bias introduced by the location of the measurement system.
They found a bias of -200 to 400%, highlighting the importance of footprint awareness [20].
These studies highlight the need to incorporate footprint analysis when analysing EC data,
and that very few sites are actually homogenous.
Crawford & Christen (2014) investigated CO2 fluxes in an urban residential neighbourhood of
Vancouver, Canada, using four years of EC measurements combined with geospatial data and
footprint modelling. It is the only study identified that applies a combination of footprint
weighting and source-sink modelling to urban areas.
Their objective was to disentangle
the contributions of the major CO2 sources and sinks, namely traffic, residential heating,
photosynthesis, and respiration, to the measured fluxes.
Annual average source contributions to the net flux were estimated as: traffic 68.8%,
residential heating 27.9%, ecosystem respiration 5.5%, and photosynthesis -7.2% (offset). [2]
Although EC has been widely applied to study CO2 fluxes, its application in urban areas
remains limited, and source attribution is often constrained by heterogeneous land cover
and the spatial bias of flux footprints. There is a need to test and consolidate the applied
methods, as the one from Crawford & Christen (2014), across diverse urban settings. This
study addresses that gap by applying the method for the first time in a European suburb,
providing a key step towards developing standardised, observation-based tools for urban CO2
flux attribution.
The central objective of this thesis is to investigate how vegetation contributes to the CO2
exchange in Gladsaxe, Denmark, a heterogeneous suburban area north of Copenhagen. To
achieve this, a forward modelling framework is developed that predicts the main CO2 sources
and sinks, namely traffic, residential heating, photosynthesis, and ecosystem respiration,
using spatial data, activity information, and footprint weighting. The model is calibrated
with EC measurements from the study area and then applied to simulate NEE for the target
area, independent of the footprint bias. In doing so, this work provides new insights into
the role of urban vegetation and contributes to the broader effort of adapting EC methods
Page 3 of 87
==PAGE:13==
Master Thesis
Introduction
for urban environments. This thesis is part of a larger research project in the Department
of DTU Sustain that investigates the potential of tall-tower EC measurements in urban
environments. For this work, it is assumed that the heterogeneity of the area doesnŌĆÖt affect
the EC method and the footprint estimation systematically; instead, the assumption is that
the heterogeneity is homogeneously distributed and that the EC methodology can therefore
still be applied.
Page 4 of 87
==PAGE:14==
Master Thesis
Materials and Method
2
Materials and Method
2.1
Eddy-Covariance measurements
An eddy is a movement that deviates from the general flow of a fluid. The Eddy-Covariance
(EC) measurements are using this to measure the net CO2 flux in a given time interval
(30 min). The EC measurements are taken on a tower to access the constant flux layer well
above the surface. The EC system consists of 3 sonic anemometers placed at 3 different
heights, 70, 90 and 112 m. Wind and turbulence data are collected at 10 Hz using three
METEK uSonicMP ultrasonic anemometers (Metek, Elmshorn, Germany). One TILDAS gas
analyser (Tunable infrared dual laser spectrometer, Aerodyne, Billerca, USA) is measuring
the concentrations of CO2, CO, COS, N2O and CH4. The gas analyser can only measure at
one height at a time. Every 30 min an algorithm decides at which height measurements are
taken based on stratification so that sampling bias due to different atmospheric stability can
be minimized. Measurements are taken in the lower 15ŌĆō20% of the atmospheric boundary
layer (ABL), where vertical mixing is uniform over height [21]. In contrast, in the upper
ABL, vertical mixing depends strongly on the height [21]. The ABL is shallower at night
and therefore the measurements are taken on average at a lower level in the night [21]. The
ABL height is monitored using a Vaisala CL51 ceilometer (Vaisala, Helsinki, Finland). [22]
Measurements from 18.03.2025 until 23.06.2025 are taken into account for this thesis.
Earlier data were excluded because radiation measurements, which are required for the cho-
sen modelling approach, were not available before this period.
EC is based on the principle to quantify the molecules moving upward and downward over
time, as well as their vertical travel velocity [12]. The calculation of the turbulent fluxes is
made by the Eddy Pro software in 30 min time intervals. The processing in the software
is not made as part of this thesis but was conducted by the project group. The following
outlines the theory behind the flux calculation.
The net ecosystem exchange of a scalar (here CO2) in a heterogeneous landscape can
be described by the generalized EC method, expressed in Equation 1 [23]. This equation
represents the full CO2 budget within the control volume between the surface and the mea-
surement height zm. Equation 1 consists of five terms:
I. The turbulent flux, calculated as the covariance of the vertical wind speed w and the
dry mole fraction s.
II. The storage term, which describes how the concentration changes below zm.
III. Horizontal advection, driven by mean wind components u,v and horizontal concentra-
tion gradients
IV. Vertical advection due to non-zero mean vertical wind w
V. The horizontal flux divergence, caused by non-homogeneous landscapes.
Page 5 of 87
==PAGE:15==
Master Thesis
Eddy-Covariance measurements
The variable Žüd is the dry air density, w is the vertical wind speed and s is the dry mole
fraction of CO2. u and v are the horizontal wind components and t is the time.
F = Žüd wŌĆ▓ sŌĆ▓ 
zm
|
{z
}
I
+
Z zm
0
1
Žüd
Ōłés
Ōłét dz
|
{z
}
II
+
Z zm
0

Žüd u Ōłés
Ōłéx + Žüd v Ōłés
Ōłéy

dz
|
{z
}
III
+
Z zm
0
Žüd w Ōłés
Ōłéz dz
|
{z
}
IV
+
Z zm
0

Žüd
ŌłéuŌĆ▓
Ōłéx s + Žüd
ŌłévŌĆ▓
Ōłéy s

dz
|
{z
}
V
.
(1)
For homogenous terrains, it is possible to simplify Equation 1. Horizontal fluxes and advec-
tion become negligible, and the net flux is described by the sum of the turbulent flux (I) and
the storage term (II) [23]. The area of this study is not homogeneous, but the assumption is
made that the heterogeneity is homogenously distributed and that this simplification there-
fore still holds, and it is possible to calculate the net surface flux as the sum of the turbulent
flux and the storage term.
Applying Reynolds decomposition and assuming constant air density and negligible mean
vertical motion, the turbulent flux simplifies to Equation 2 [12].
F ŌēłŽüd wŌĆ▓sŌĆ▓
CO2
(2)
The Eddy Pro software already performs a quality check of the data. They are flagged in
three different categories: 0 (high quality fluxes), 1 (intermediate quality fluxes), and 2 (poor
quality fluxes). All data that are flagged as "2" are filtered out and are not used for any
analysis.
The storage term is also calculated by the Eddy Pro software using the 1-point method, due
to the CO2 sensor of the profile system being broken. The method assumes that changes in
concentration measured at the sampling height during a 30-minute period can be taken as
representative of the entire profile below [24].
All measurement points with a friction velocity < 0.1 m sŌłÆ1 are filtered out. Measurements
that are from a wind direction between 20 and 60┬░ are manually flagged as 1. This is because
a tower shading effect can be expected in this wind sector, meaning that the effect of the
tower on air movement likely influences the measurements.
Study area
The studied area is located in Gladsaxe, Denmark. Gladsaxe is a municipality north of
Copenhagen and has 70.888 inhabitants [25]. The EC tower is located in Isbanevej 4, 2860
S├Ėborg, Denmark. (55.735153┬░N, 12.491913┬░E). Figure A.1 shows the extension of the foot-
print over that area, and it is visible that 70% of the measured flux originates from a radius
of 4-5 km around the tower. Therefore, a square of 100 km2, with the tower in the centre,
was taken as the area of interest. Figure 3 shows the target area with the red dot at the
Page 6 of 87
==PAGE:16==
Master Thesis
Eddy-Covariance measurements
placement of the tower.
Figure 2: Left: Placement of the tower in Denmark. Right: Satellite image of the target
area. The red dot shows the placement of the tower with the Eddy-Covariance system.
Figure 3: Landuse map of the target area [26].
Page 7 of 87
==PAGE:17==
Master Thesis
Footprint model
The target area is characterized by heterogeneous land-use. Above 73% of the area is taken up
by either buildings or roads. It is important to note that these areas also contain vegetation,
like gardens and alleys. Approximately 21% of the area consists exclusively of vegetation;
assuming that recreational areas and sports grounds can be fully attributed to vegetated
areas. Table 1 shows a detailed overview of the different land-use types and the fractions
of the area they cover. The category that is classified as "nature" in the land-use map is
from now on referred to as "grassland", as it mostly consists of that, to avoid confusion
with other natural land uses. When in the below the term "nature" is used, it includes all
areas characterized as: forest, agriculture, grassland, and recreational areas/sports grounds.
Approximately 12.7% of the built-up area (7% of the total area) is characterized as industry.
[26]
Table 1: Overview of different land uses and their relative coverage in the study area [26].
Land-use type
Relative area (%)
Building
53.5
Road, paved
19
Road, not paved
0.5
Railway
1
Recreation area/ sports ground
8.5
Agriculture
1.6
Forest
7.7
Grassland
3.2
Water
4.3
Unmapped
0.7
2.2
Footprint model
The footprint model by Kljun, et al. (2015) is used to determine how different areas con-
tribute to the measured flux at a specific point in time. This Flux Footprint Prediction (FFP)
model is a parameterisation derived from a Lagrangian stochastic particle dispersion model
(LPDM). While LPDMs are physically more accurate, they are computationally intensive
[27]. By fitting the FFP to LPDM simulations, the parameterisation retains much of the
accuracy of the full model while offering significantly reduced computational demands. The
footprint model chosen has the advantage that it is valid for a wide range of measurement
heights and boundary layer stratifications. Additionally, it describes both the width and
the upwind extent of the footprint [27]. The FFP uses atmospheric parameters, namely the
wind speed and wind direction, and variables characterizing the measurement (measurement
height, boundary layer height, friction velocity, Obukhov length, and velocity fluctuations,
represented by their standard deviation) to calculate a probability for each pixel that it
contributes to the footprint [27]. In this thesis, the assumption is made that the probability
can be seen as a fractional contribution to the flux. The footprint is computed for each mea-
surement interval of 30 minutes by the PhD Student Ziqiong Wang. A circle with a 4 km
radius from the EC-tower is considered in the footprint. The pixel resolution is 10x10 m2.
Page 8 of 87
==PAGE:18==
Master Thesis
Modelled CO2 exchange
To evaluate how well the flux footprint represents the target area, the sensor location
bias is calculated following Tuovinen et al. (2019). This is based on the original formulation
by Schmid and Lloyd (1999), which Tuovinen et al. (2019) adapted as:
Ōłåx = X ŌłÆX
X
(3)
Here, X represents the footprint-weighted mean of a variable (e.g., Vegetation Index (VI),
road fraction), while X is the mean value of the same variable across the entire target area.
A positive Ōłåx indicates that the footprint over-represents the variable compared to the
target area mean, whereas a negative Ōłåx indicates under-representation. The calculation
was carried out for multiple variables. To account for wind direction, the data were grouped
into 10┬░ bins. For each bin, the average footprint-weighted value was computed to represent
X, while X was derived from the land-use and VI maps of the target area.
2.3
Modelled CO2 exchange
It is not possible to assess the relevance of green spaces to carbon exchange isolated, as
multiple processes contribute to the net flux measured by the EC system. These processes
are grouped based on whether they depend on radiation and/ or time of the day. Net ecosys-
tem exchange (NEE), traffic emissions, and residential heating, in particular, show a strong
diurnal pattern. Other sources, such as human respiration and other residential activities,
are assumed to remain relatively constant throughout the day.
Although industrial emissions may also follow a diurnal cycle, they are not considered
in this thesis. To minimize their influence, flux measurements associated with industrial
activity are filtered out. This is achieved by defining an industrial sector based on land-use
maps from the Danish Centre for Environment and Energy [26]. From the towerŌĆÖs perspec-
tive, this sector lies between 240┬░ and 340┬░ (north is at 0┬░). Data recorded when the wind
originates from this sector are excluded to reduce the impact of industrial variability on the
observed fluxes.
A number of forward models are created in R version 2025.05.0 [28]. They simulate the gross
CO2 fluxes and sum them up to compare the results of the model with the measured data.
The predicted flux (Fpred) is formulated as shown in Equation 4:
Fpred = FTraffic + Fresidential heating + Fecosystem respiration ŌłÆFGPP
(4)
The traffic flux (FTraffic) is modelled using national inventories and Open Street Map (OSM).
This is similar to the approach of Crawford & Christen (2014), who estimated traffic emis-
sions using a multiple linear regression model that related fluxes to the fraction of roads
present in the footprint.
The flux from photosynthesis-respiration (FGPP and FR) is modelled using measure-
ment data and vegetation indices from satellite images. The flux from residential heating
(Fresidential heating) is calculated in a parallel written master thesis by Marie-Therese Hallkvist
Guidje (2025) and is based on estimating the number of people in the footprint that use a
Page 9 of 87
==PAGE:19==
Master Thesis
Modelled CO2 exchange
specific heating source [29].
The created model can then use area characterization to estimate the real net CO2
flux from an area (in contrast to the biased EC measurements). To be able to compare
the predictions with the measured EC data, which are footprint-biased, the model is then
adjusted in a second step to integrate the simulated fluxes over the footprint to enable
comparison.
Therefore, the simulated flux for each pixel is multiplied by the respective
footprint value. This approach follows a similar methodology to Crawford & Christen (2014),
which also created a model for each source and sink and weighted the flux by the footprint.
2.3.1
CO2 exchange from vegetation
A vegetation photosynthesis respiration (VPRM) model is used to estimate the Net Ecosys-
tem CO2 Exchange (NEE), Gross Primary Production (GPP), and ecosystem respiration
(R). The VPRM model was originally introduced by Mahadevan et al. (2008) using satellite
data from MODIS, and was later adapted by Glauch et al. (2025) to accommodate data from
other satellite missions [30, 31]. The model uses climate data and satellite data to predict
the NEE and data from EC measurements to optimize the model parameters. It is based
on only four parameters for a given vegetation class [30]: ŽĄ, ╬▒, ╬▓, PAR0. The Equation 5
to Equation 14 are proposed by Mahadevan et al. (2008) and Glauch et al. (2025) and are
used in this thesis to simulate NEE per pixel. A negative NEE represents an uptake of CO2
from the atmosphere, a positive NEE represents a release of CO2 to the atmosphere.
FNEE = FR ŌłÆFGPP
(5)
FR = (╬▒ ŌłŚmax(T, Tlow) + ╬▓) ŌłŚg
(6)
g =
(
1,
for pixels classified as nature
0.44,
for pixels classified as built up
(7)
The parameters ╬▒ and ╬▓ are free parameters taken from Glauch et al. (2025) and depend
on the satellite sensor and vegetation class. T is the air temperature, and Tlow accounts for
continued respiration during winter periods when soil temperatures remain higher than air
temperatures [31]. In addition, a new parameter g is introduced to scale ecosystem respira-
tion by the soil fraction in each pixel, thereby adjusting the model for partially vegetated
built-up areas, e.g., gardens. The value for built-up areas is derived from the observed vege-
tated fraction in a comparable residential area in England [32]. The inclusion of g addresses
a key limitation of the original equation by Mahadevan et al. (2008), which assumes that the
entire area is fully vegetated. In urban settings, this assumption does not hold, and scaling
respiration by the vegetated fraction provides a more realistic representation of ecosystem
respiration.
FGPP = ŽĄ ŌłŚ
1
1 + PAR/PAR0
ŌłŚPAR ŌłŚV I
(8)
Page 10 of 87
==PAGE:20==
Master Thesis
Modelled CO2 exchange
ŽĄ = ╬╗ ŌłŚTscale ŌłŚWScale ŌłŚPScale
(9)
The parameter ŽĄ describes the light-use efficiency of the vegetation. It is calculated using
four terms: TScale, PScale, WScale and ╬╗. Tscale accounts for the temperature dependence of
photosynthesis [33]. Pscale describes the effect of leaf age and WScale takes the effect of water
stress on photosynthesis into account [33]. Mahadevan et al. (2008) propose the following
equations to calculate these terms:
TScale =
(T ŌłÆTmin) ŌłŚ(T ŌłÆTmax)
(T ŌłÆTmin) ŌłŚ(T ŌłÆTmax) ŌłÆ(T ŌłÆTopt)2
(10)
The variable T denotes the actual temperature. For this thesis, one T value is assigned per
month, calculated as the average temperature during the sunlit hours of that month. Night
temperatures are not taken into account, as photosynthesis only takes place when light is
available. The parameters Tmin, Tmax and Topt are derived from Glauch et al. (2025) and
depend on the vegetation class and satellite sensor. As starting values, the parameter values
for the vegetation class "Mixed forest" are used. If the temperature drops below Tmin or
rises above Tmax, photosynthetic activity is set to 0 [33].
For evergreen vegetation PScale is set to 1. For all other vegetation, the following applies:
Pscale =
(
1,
between leaf full expansion and senescence
1+LSWI
2
,
during bud burst to leaf full expansion and during senescence
(11)
LSWI is the Land Surface Water Index and can be derived from satellite data using the near
and short-wave infrared band [31].
WScale =
1 + LSWI
1 + LSWIMax
(12)
The LSWIMax is the maximum detected value in the growing season. Mahadevan et al.
(2008) found that the LSWI has only a small impact on the prediction of fluxes (as well as
Pscale and Wscale). Therefore, Pscale and Wscale were set to 1 to simplify the model.
PAR, the photosynthetically active radiation, is derived from the measured incoming short
wave radiation (SW) using the proxy of PAR = 2 ŌłŚSW, Equation 13 shows the unit con-
version [33]. PAR0 is derived from Glauch et al. (2025), it is the half-saturation value for
the plantŌĆÖs photosynthetic activity and is individual for each vegetation class and satellite
sensor. [31].
PAR [┬Ąmol
m2s1 ] = 0.45 ŌłŚSW[ W
m2] ŌłŚ4.57[
┬Ąmol
m2s1
W
m2
]
(13)
For the VI, maps of two different VI are simulated in Google Earth Engine (GEE) using
Page 11 of 87
==PAGE:21==
Master Thesis
Modelled CO2 exchange
satellite images. The VI is calculated for each pixel in the target area with a resolution of
10 x 10 m2. The process is described below.
Vegetation index maps
To model the flux from photosynthesis, it is necessary to know the vegetated area. A VI
is used to assess the presence and quality of vegetation in the area. Two VI are tested in
this study, the Enhanced Vegetation Index (EVI) and the Normalized Difference Red Edge
Index (NDRE).
Using the normalized difference of near-infrared (NIR) and red light is an established way
of observing photosynthetically active biomass from satellite data [30]. It is based on the
spectral characterization of vegetation. Vegetation absorbs wavelengths between 400 and
700 nm, (PAR). Within the PAR, the quantum yield is especially high for red light [34].
In contrast, vegetation reflects near infrared light [35, 30].
Vegetation can therefore be
quantified using the ratio of red light and NIR.
Compared to indices like NDVI, the EVI has the advantage of incorporating the blue band
to correct for atmospheric aerosol effects on the red band [36]. The EVI responds strongly
to the leaf area index, plant physiognomy and canopy type [31]. The EVI is described in
Equation 14 by Huete et al. (2002) [36]. With Žü representing the spectral reflectance.
EV I = G ŌłŚ
(ŽüNIR ŌłÆŽüRed)
(ŽüNIR + C1 ŌłŚŽüRed ŌłÆC2 ŌłŚŽüBlue + L
(14)
The four parameters G, C1, C2 and L depend on the satellite sensor. In this work, Sentinel-2
data are used to derive the VI, as the resolution is higher than for MODIS data. The pa-
rameters are the following: G = 2.5, C1 = 6, C2 = 7.5 and L = 1 [31].
The NDRE is sensitive to chlorophyll concentration and allows an assessment of the health
of vegetation. It is calculated with Equation 15. ŽüRE is the reflectance of the red-edge light.
NDRE = ŽüNIR ŌłÆŽüRE
ŽüNIR + ŽüRE
(15)
For each month and VI, one map for the area is generated using the Image collection: "Har-
monized Sentinel-2 MSI: MultiSpectral Instrument, Level-2A (SR)" [37].
The Sentinel-2
satellite is equipped with a MultiSpectral Instrument, based on the pushbroom principle.
It collects sunlight reflected from the earth [38]. To ensure data quality, images with more
than 30% cloud coverage are excluded. Additionally, Sentinel-2 includes a Scene Classifica-
tion Layer (SCL) that distinguishes between 11 surface types based on pixel characteristics
[37]. For the current analysis, four relevant SCL classes are retained for further processing:
vegetation (SCL 4), bare soil (SCL 5), water (SCL 6), and built-up areas (SCL 7). The re-
spective VI of each pixel is computed based on Equation 14 and 15 for the remaining filtered
images. The monthly EVI and NDRE maps are then derived by averaging the pixel-level
EVI/NDRE values across all valid observations within that month.
Page 12 of 87
==PAGE:22==
Master Thesis
Modelled CO2 exchange
2.3.2
Modelling of CO2 flux from traffic
Traffic, like photosynthesis, follows a diurnal pattern. It is therefore important to quantify
the contributions to the CO2 flux from traffic to be able to distinguish it from the CO2 flux
from vegetation.
To do this, an equation for the direct CO2 emissions from traffic per km of road, based on
a lookup table, was created.
From OSM, 4 different types of roads are identified and included in the model. More types
are included in OSM, but they are regarded as not relevant for this work (e.g., Paths for
cycling, roads for agricultural use). DenmarkŌĆÖs National Inventory Document 2025 (NID)
differentiates between 3 different driving conditions (urban, rural, and highway), for which
it publishes emission factors [39]. The NID is published yearly by Aarhus University and
is submitted to the United Nations Framework Convention. It quantifies emissions from
Denmark from 1990 to 2023 [39]. A driving condition is assigned to each road type from
OSM. An overview is presented in Table 2.
Table 2: Road-types in Open Street Map
Code
in
Open
Street
Map
Description
Driving condition
5111, 5112, 5113
Major roads:
Motorways
and primary roads
Highway
5114, 5115
Major
roads:
Secondary
and tertiary roads
Urban
512x
Minor roads
Urban
513x
Highway links
Highway
The total, unbiased traffic-related CO2 emissions for a 30 min time interval can be calculated
with Equation 16 for each pixel.
CO2 emissionsTraffic(t, d) =
X
i= road-type
li ŌłŚEFi(j) ŌłŚvehicles
24h
i ŌłŚŽĢ(t)i ŌłŚd
(16)
Where li is the km of road-type i in the pixel, EFi is the emission factor for a road type i
based on its assigned driving condition j in g CO2 kmŌłÆ1, vehicles
24h
i describes the total number
of vehicles for each road type in 24 hours, ŽĢ(t)i is the percentage of the total number of
vehicles for the time interval and road-type of interest and d is a parameter for the changes
in traffic intensity between workdays and non-workdays.
The EF is calculated using data from the NID 2025. Equation 17 shows the calculation of
the EF for the 3 different driving conditions (j).
EFi(j) =
X
l=vehicle type
xl ŌłŚEFl,j
(17)
Page 13 of 87
==PAGE:23==
Master Thesis
Modelled CO2 exchange
xl is the fraction of each type of vehicle in the total fleet in 2023. These values are given
in Annex 3B-1 of the NID. It is assumed that the composition of vehicle types is the same
for all road types. EFl,j is the emission factor for each vehicle type in the driving condi-
tion of interest and is in g CO2 kmŌłÆ1 vehicleŌłÆ1, it is obtained from Annex 3B-7 of the NID
[39]. This results in an emission factor for each road type based on the fleet composition in
g CO2 kmŌłÆ1 vehicleŌłÆ1.
The total number of vehicles in 24 hours is derived from Open Data DK. The dataset
"Trafiktal" from K├Ėbenhavns Kommune contains all the stations at which the commune has
done manual traffic counting on weekdays. 7 stations were identified as representative of the
different road types in OSM. An overview is presented in Table 3.
Table 3: Traffic stations
Name of traffic sta-
tion
Road-type
Date of counting
Reference
Lyngbyvej
nord
for
Emdrupvej
(Hels-
ing├Ėrmotorvejen)
5111, 5112, 5113
29.05.2024
[40]
Hareskovvej
nv.f.
Ruten
(Hiller├Ėdmo-
torvejen)
5111, 5112, 5113
23.05.2024
[41]
M├Ėrkh├Ėjvej 2 nord for
Frederikssundsvej
5114, 5115
16.05.2024
[42]
├ģkandevej
nord
for
Gadelandet
5114, 5115
08.06.2021
[43]
H├Ėje
Gladsax-
evej
nord├Ėst
for
Hareskovvej
513x
23.05.2024
[44]
Gavlushusvej
512x
10.01.2017
[45]
Langhusvej
512x
10.01.2017
[46]
The datasets contain how many vehicles pass each station every hour. For each road type,
the average number of vehicles per hour is determined based on the stations assigned to that
road type. Only for roads of the type 512x a 24 h traffic count is given, for the other road-
types it is only available from 7 am to 7 pm. For 512x 74% of the traffic occurs from 7 am to
7 pm. The assumption is that the same is true for the other road types and that they follow
the same trend as 512x in the time period from 7 pm to 7 am. Since the EC measurements
are taken on a half-hourly basis, the number of vehicles for each hour is divided by 2 to
match these half-hourly data. The fraction of the total number of vehicles dependent on
time, ŽĢ(t)i is then calculated by dividing the number of vehicles per half-hour by the total
number of vehicles in a day.
The parameter d describes the difference in traffic between workdays (Monday-Friday) and
Page 14 of 87
==PAGE:24==
Master Thesis
Modelled CO2 exchange
non-workdays (Saturday, Sunday, public holidays). To estimate traffic on non-workdays, an
adaptation of the method described by Pousset (2023) is used [47]. In this adapted version,
the ten Danish public holidays that do not fall on a Sunday are classified as non-workdays
and treated in the same way as weekends. This leads to Equation 18 to estimate the traffic
intensity on non-workdays (Tnon-workdays). The numerator subtracts the traffic assigned to
workdays (adjusted for weekends and holidays) and July (treated separately, as it is the
main holiday month) from the total annual traffic. The denominator accounts for all non-
workdays: weekends (104 days), minus 8 weekend days in July, plus 10 public holidays.
Tnon-workdays = 365 ŌłŚTaverage day ŌłÆ[(5 ŌłŚ52 + 1 ŌłÆ23 ŌłÆ10) ŌłŚTworkdays + 31 ŌłŚTJuly]
2 ŌłŚ52 ŌłÆ8 + 10
(18)
The traffic intensity (T) on an average day (Taverage day), a workday (Tworkday) and a day in
the holiday month July (TJuly) is given from a traffic count of the Danish Vejrdirektoratet
(The Danish Road Directorate) in numbers of vehicles per day. The dataset used is called
"OPEN_DATA_NOEGLETAL_VIEW". This detailed counting of different types of days
is not available for the same roads as the ŽĢ(t)i calculation is based on. Therefore, it is
not possible to directly compare the data. The Tnon-workdays is calculated for all available
counting stations that counted motorised traffic. The relative difference for each counting
station between a workday and a non-workday is calculated. Traffic on non-workdays is on
average 42% lower than on workdays.
d =
(
1,
for workdays
0.42,
for non-workdays
(19)
With all of these information the traffic related CO2 emissions per pixel can be calculated
using Equation 16. To transfer them into a flux Equation 20 and 21 are used.
F = CO2emissions [ gCO2
30 min]
dx ŌłŚdy[m2]
(20)
dx dy are the pixel dimensions (10x10m2).
To convert from
gCO2
30 minŌłŚm2 to ┬Ąmol
sŌłŚm2:
FTraffic = FTraffic[
gCO2
30 min ŌłŚm2] ŌłŚM ŌłÆ1
CO2 ŌłŚ1e6 ┬Ąmol
mol
ŌłŚ
1
1800
(21)
M is the molar mass of CO2.
2.3.3
Residential heating
To estimate direct CO2 emissions of residential heating, the results of a model created in a
parallel master thesis by Marie-Therese Hallkvist Guidje (2025) are used [29]. No changes
to that model are made in this study. The results include emissions from spatial and water
Page 15 of 87
==PAGE:25==
Master Thesis
Modelled CO2 exchange
heating in residential buildings [29]. The model uses spatial building data to estimate the
number of people in a pixel that use a specific heating source s (Ps). This number is then
multiplied by an emission factor from the NID 2025 for a specific heating source (EFs), an
average yearly energy consumption per person (ECyear), and a temporal scaling factor that
accounts for different heating behaviour, both seasonally and diurnally (ct). This leads to
the following equation for the CO2 flux of residential heating per pixel:
Fresidential heating =
X
s
Ps ŌłŚECyear ŌłŚEFs ŌłŚct ŌłŚ1000
MCO2
ŌłŚ106
(22)
2.3.4
Integrating flux over the footprint
The Equation 5, 16 and 22 calculate the unbiased fluxes from each pixel. To be able to com-
pare the simulated data with the observed data, the footprint function must be incorporated
by weighting each pixelŌĆÖs CO2 exchange according to its footprint contribution. Directly
applying the footprint at the end of the calculation would be computationally expensive.
Instead, the footprint is introduced earlier by reformulating the model equations as inte-
grated expressions. This approach is valid because multiplication is both commutative and
associative; thus, the order of operations does not affect the final result.
For traffic, the integrated flux is expressed as:
FTraffic(t, d, r) =
X
i=roadtype
ri ŌłŚEFi ŌłŚvehicles
24h
i ŌłŚŽĢ(t)i ŌłŚd ŌłŚM ŌłÆ1
CO2 ŌłŚ1e6 ┬Ąmol
mol
ŌłŚ
1
1800
(23)
The variable r is the integrated length of a road type over the footprint and is calculated
following Equation 24. It describes how much the emissions of a road type contribute to the
flux for one measurement period. fp is the footprint value in the respective pixel p.
ri =
X
Pixel
ni,Pixel ŌłŚfp
(24)
For the vegetation model, the integrated VI over the footprint is added to the equation as
well as the integrated green area, leading to Equation 25.
FNEE = (╬▒ ŌłŚmax(T, Tlow) + ╬▓) ŌłŚv ŌłÆŽĄ ŌłŚ
1
1 + PAR/PAR0
ŌłŚPAR ŌłŚe
(25)
with e:
e =
X
p
V Ip ŌłŚfp
(26)
and v:
Page 16 of 87
==PAGE:26==
Master Thesis
Model fitting and evaluation
v =
X
p
(VNature, p ŌłŚfp + VBuilding, p ŌłŚg ŌłŚfp)
(27)
Here VNature, p is a binary operator that equals 1 if the pixel is classified as nature and 0
otherwise. Similarly, VBuilding, p equals 1 if the pixel is classified as built up and 0 otherwise.
This ŌĆ£green is greenŌĆØ approach treats all vegetation types uniformly rather than distin-
guishing between vegetation classes.
For the residential heating model, Equation 22 modifies to:
Fresidential heating =
X
p(t)s ŌłŚECyear ŌłŚEFs ŌłŚct ŌłŚ1000
MCO2
ŌłŚ106
(28)
with:
p(t)s =
X
p
Ps, p ŌłŚfp
(29)
p(t)s denotes the number of people using a heating source s at a given time t, weighted by
the footprint.
To enable comparison between the model and the measurements, the results of Equation 23,
25, and 28 are summed.
2.4
Model fitting and evaluation
The model is calibrated against measured CO2 surface fluxes to adjust for discrepancies
between literature-derived parameter values and site-specific conditions. Model fitting is
performed with non-linear regression in R using the nlsLM() function [48], testing differ-
ent scenarios. For each fit, parameter significance, residuals, and parameter correlations
are evaluated. Parameters are considered significant when their p-value is below 0.05. The
residual analysis focuses on the difference between observed and predicted values, with par-
ticular attention to systematic trends between residuals and explanatory variables. Such
trends provide insights into potential weaknesses and systematic limitations of the model.
Model performance is further assessed using the Akaike Information Criterion (AIC), which
identifies the best-fitting model while penalizing excessive degrees of freedom to reduce the
risk of overfitting [49].
To optimize model performance, four modifications are introduced and tested against the
model described above.
The first one is to replace the respiration Equation 6 with an
exponential respiration curve, as studies have found that an exponential relationship between
temperature and soil respiration is a good explanation of seasonal variation [50, 51].
R = R0 ŌłŚQ
( T
10 )
10
(30)
R0 is the soil respiration at 0┬░C and Q10 is the factor by which the respiration increases with
10┬░C temperature increase [51]. The starting value for R0 is 2 ┬Ąmol mŌłÆ2sŌłÆ1 and 2 for Q10
Page 17 of 87
==PAGE:27==
Master Thesis
Model fitting and evaluation
[51]. The variable T is the measured air temperature at 2 m height, measured at the tower.
Secondly, a parameter a is introduced to scale the traffic flux. a is multiplied by the traffic
flux based on local traffic counting. Depending on the setup, a is either kept constant over
the day or allowed to vary by the time of the day, with a1 representing morning (05:00ŌĆō10:30),
a2 midday (10:30ŌĆō15:00), a3 evening (15:00ŌĆō22:00), and a4 night (22:00ŌĆō05:00).
Another modification uses CO flux measurements to derive the diurnal traffic pattern in-
stead of relying on traffic counts of the commune. CO is a good proxy for traffic because
it is a direct by-product of combustion [52, 53, 47]. CO is measured by the EC system.
To construct the diurnal traffic profile, the relative contribution of each half-hour to the
total daily CO flux is calculated (Figure 4). Only days with complete data coverage (all 48
half-hour periods) are included, and measurements are used if their quality flag equals 0 or
1. Data from the industrial sector are retained in order to maintain a sufficient number of
observations.
Lastly, a model that includes human respiration is fitted, as it has been identified as a
significant source of CO2 by past studies [2]. This is done by using the summed up p(t)s values
from the residential heating model (number of people per 1 m2 weighted by the footprint)
and multiplying them with a human respiration factor Rhum of 181 ┬Ąmol sŌłÆ1 personŌłÆ1 [54].
The flux from human respiration is added to the rest of the model and the parameter Rhum
is fitted. This modifies Equation 4 to the following:
Fpred = FTraffic + Fresidential heating + Fecosystem respiration ŌłÆFGPP + FHuman respiration
(31)
Additionally, the modelfit is run once with all data that have a quality flag of 0 or 1 and
once only with those that have a quality flag of 0. This is done to observe if lower-quality
data influences the choice of the right model and the parameter estimation.
Page 18 of 87
==PAGE:28==
Master Thesis
CO2 flux map
Figure 4: Diurnal CO pattern for days where a full data set is available. Red triangles
indicate the average pattern.
2.5
CO2 flux map
The unbiased gross CO2 fluxes across the study area are estimated using the fitted parameters
and Equations 5, 16, and 22.
Radiation and temperature data from the tower are unavailable between 18 March and
23 June 2025 due to instrument failure and a temporary system shutdown by DTU for secu-
rity reasons. These gaps are filled using ERA5 reanalysis data from the Copernicus Climate
Change Service. ERA5 provides hourly estimates of climate variables, including tempera-
ture and incoming SW radiation, on a spatial grid of 31 km [55]. Comparison with locally
measured data in Gladsaxe shows good agreement for both temperature and short-wave ra-
diation (see Figures E.1 and E.2).
From this, an unbiased CO2 flux map for NEE is generated, showing the per-pixel CO2
exchange attributable to vegetation in the target area for each month.
Page 19 of 87
==PAGE:29==
Master Thesis
Results
3
Results
3.1
Eddy-Covariance flux measurements
The full set of CO2 fluxes measured by the Eddy-Covariance system (EC) during the ob-
servation period from 18 March to 25 June 2025 is shown in Figure 5. The background
colour indicates from what area the flux is coming from; with 0┬░ being North of the tower,
the vegetation-dominated area is from 120┬░-240┬░, the industrial area is from 240┬░-340┬░, and
the residential area is from 340┬░-120┬░. The pink lines mark the range in which 99% of the
measured fluxes lie. In all further analyses, only this range is considered. The outliers can
either stem from measurement errors or sources and sinks that are unaccounted for in this
thesis. For example, chimney plumes can lead to unusually high CO2 emissions [56] and
elevated sources are not captured by the footprint model, as the FFP simulations are based
on ground levels.
Figure 5: Time series of measured CO2 fluxes from the Eddy Covariance system. The data
are colour-coded by wind direction group to distinguish between fluxes originating from
different areas. The pink lines indicate the boundaries of the 99th quantile.
After filtering out values outside the 99th quantile and excluding the wind sector associ-
ated with industrial emissions, the CO2 surface flux derived from EC ranges from -21 to
38 ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1 (Figure 6).
Page 20 of 87
==PAGE:30==
Master Thesis
Eddy-Covariance flux measurements
Figure 6: Time series of measured CO2 fluxes from the Eddy Covariance system.
The
data are colour-coded by wind direction sector to distinguish between fluxes arising from
residential and vegetation-dominated areas.
The relationship between CO2 fluxes and incoming short-wave radiation is illustrated in
Figure 7, and broken down by month in Figure B.1. The observed trend aligns with the
expected pattern of photosynthesis, showing negative CO2 fluxes with increasing radiation,
particularly in the vegetation-dominated sector. The seasonal analysis shows that this trend
is particularly visible during the summer months. In contrast, this relationship is not evident
in spring.
Figure 7: Relation between CO2 fluxes and incoming short-wave radiation. The y-axis is cut
so that 16 outliers are not presented.
Page 21 of 87
==PAGE:31==
Master Thesis
Spatial attribution of fluxes and sampling bias
3.2
Spatial attribution of fluxes and sampling bias
The data from the footprint model were used to estimate the fractional contribution of a
process (e.g., the fraction of road area) to the footprint. Figure 8 shows the cumulative
contribution of different land covers to the footprint. It can be seen that the built-up area
dominates the footprint. The values do not add up to 1, as the target area does not explain
the whole source area of the measured flux.
Figure 8: Cumulative contribution to footprint by land cover. The values do not add up to
1, as the target area does not explain the whole source area of the measured flux.
The fractional contribution of a process to the measured footprint was compared with the
average contribution of that process in the target area to estimate the sensor location bias.
Figure 9 shows the average fraction of a land cover in the footprint per wind-direction bin
on the left y-axis. The dashed line indicates the average fraction of that land cover in the
target area. The right y-axis shows the sensor location bias.
The sensor location bias for the fraction of roads is negative across all wind directions,
showing an under-representation of roads in the footprint compared to the target area. For
the fractions of nature and buildings, the bias varies depending on the wind sector, ranging
from -0.87 to 1.2 and from -0.3 to 0.39, respectively.
Figure 10 shows the same as Figure 9, but for the NDRE value for each month. The sensor
location bias is mostly negative for all 4 months, and varies with wind direction. It is also
apparent that the average NDRE of the area increases over the months, showcasing the
seasonal variability of vegetation.
Page 22 of 87
==PAGE:32==
Master Thesis
Spatial attribution of fluxes and sampling bias
(a) Land-use type: Road
(b) Land-use type: Nature
(c) Land-use type: Building
Figure 9: Footprint weighted land-use type fraction (left y-axis) and average sensor location
bias and standard deviation (right y-axis) by wind direction for 3 different land-use types:
Road, Nature, Building. The dashed line indicates the target area average of the land-use
type fraction. The colour shows how often a wind direction bin of 10┬░ was sampled.
Page 23 of 87
==PAGE:33==
Master Thesis
Spatial attribution of fluxes and sampling bias
(a) March
(b) April
(c) May
(d) June
Figure 10: Footprint weighted NDRE (left y-axis) and average sensor location bias and
standard deviation (right y-axis) by wind direction for March to June. The dashed line
indicates the target area average of the NDRE for the respective month. The colour shows
how often a wind direction bin of 10┬░ was sampled.
Page 24 of 87
==PAGE:34==
Master Thesis
Model fitting and evaluation
3.3
Model fitting and evaluation
The model is run for two different Vegetation Indices (VI) and once using data within the
99th quantile and once using data within the 95th quantile. Without parameter fitting, the
best result (RMSE: 3.34) is achieved using data within the 95th quantile and the NDRE
(see Table C.1 for statistics on model performance). The results of this (unfitted) model are
shown in Appendix D. Due to showing the lowest RMSE, the model using the NDRE and
data within the 95th quantile is used for parameter fitting.
To fit the parameters, the nlsLM() function in R is used.
To find the best possible fit,
different parameter combinations are tested, Table 4 shows an overview. The full equation
for each model can be found in Appendix C. The parameters are fitted globally rather than
monthly. This approach is justified because NDRE and temperature already capture the
seasonal variability of vegetation, while traffic emissions are assumed to remain constant
across seasons. Residential heating is not fitted, as its contribution is assumed to be small
during the observed months.
The different models are tested on different datasets:
1. Dataset KK: A dataset that uses the diurnal traffic distribution ŽĢ(t) derived from data
of the K├Ėbenhavn Kommune.
2. Dataset CO: A dataset that uses the diurnal traffic distribution ŽĢ(t) derived from the
diurnal variations of the measured CO fluxes.
Table 4: Overview of models that are fitted, with different parameter combinations.
A
parameter is listed if it is fitted. "-" indicates that the parameters are not part of the model.
a1 is applied during the morning, a2 during midday, a3 during evening and a4 during night
Model
╬▒, ╬▓
R0, q10
ŽĄ, PAR0, g
a
Rhum
Equation
M0
╬▒, ╬▓
-
ŽĄ, PAR0, g
-
-
Equation 32
M1
╬▒, ╬▓
-
ŽĄ, PAR0, g
a
-
Equation 33
M2
-
R0, q10
ŽĄ, PAR0, g
a
-
Equation 34
M3
-
R0, q10
ŽĄ, PAR0, g
a1,a2,a3,a4
-
Equation 35
M4
-
R0, q10
ŽĄ, PAR0, g
a1,a2,a3
-
Equation 36
M5
-
R0, q10
ŽĄ, PAR0, g
a1,a2,a3
Rhum
Equation 37
M6
-
R0, q10
ŽĄ, PAR0, g
a1,a2,a3,a4
Rhum
Equation 38
The results presented in the following are based on the data with the quality flag 0 only.
An overview of the parameter estimates and standard errors for all models is presented in
Table C.2 and C.3. All plots of the residual analysis can be found in Appendix F.
M0 shows a trend between the residuals and the traffic, indicating an overestimation of the
traffic (Figure 11). This trend is present both when using the KK dataset and when using
the CO dataset. Negative residuals are also strong during the rush hour, leading to the
Page 25 of 87
==PAGE:35==
Master Thesis
Model fitting and evaluation
conclusion that the traffic model is not optimal. The correlation matrix shows an expected
strong correlation between ŽĄ and PAR0 and between ╬▒ and ╬▓.
The parameter g is not
significant for both datasets and is estimated to have a negative value, which is physically
not possible.
Figure 11: Top row: Residuals of M0 over the traffic flux. Bottom row: Residuals of M0
over the hour of the day.
To account for the trend between residuals and traffic flux, the parameter a is introduced.
In M1, a is first fitted as a time-independent parameter. M1 reduces the trend between
residuals and traffic, but a moderate negative correlation remains between a and g: -0.52 for
both CO data and KK data. Photosynthesis and traffic are assumed to follow similar diur-
nal patterns, although with opposite signs; both terms have higher absolute values during
daytime. It is tested whether this correlation can be reduced when taking out the diurnal
variability of the respiration by using average daily temperatures instead of half-hour values.
This does not lower the correlation between the two parameters. All parameters in M1 are
significant, and g is now estimated to have a positive, physically plausible value of 0.42 (KK
data) and 0.43 (CO data). The fitted values for a are 0.23 (KK data) and 0.24 (CO data).
In M2, it is tested whether an exponential respiration function is better suited, as it accounts
Page 26 of 87
==PAGE:36==
Master Thesis
Model fitting and evaluation
for the seasonal change of respiration. The parameter and correlation results are very similar
to M1. Because the residual trend in M1 was especially strong during rush hours, and due
to the correlation between g and a, it was decided to test a as a time-dependent parameter
with four different periods of the day.
M3 is fitted with a dependent on the period of the day and an exponential respiration
function. It doesnŌĆÖt show a trend between residuals and traffic. The parameter a4, which
scales traffic in the night, is not significant for the KK dataset. The correlation analysis
shows no correlation above 0.5 between parameters that do not contribute to the same CO2
source/sink.
As a4 was, dependent on the dataset, insignificant in M3, M4 is adapted to only fit the
a parameters for morning, midday and evening and fixes a4 to 1. The correlation matrix
doesnŌĆÖt show unexpected correlations. When plotting predicted over measured flux data, it
can be seen that the highest measured fluxes are not predicted by M4 (see Figure 12).
Figure 12: M4: Measured over predicted flux
For M5 and M6, a term for human respiration is added and the human respiration coefficient
Rhum is fitted. Neither model shows a trend between residuals and traffic, and the measured
data exhibit a linear trend with the predicted data(Figure 13). In M6 the parameter a4
is not significant for both datasets. Rhum and g have a relatively high correlation of -0.59
in M5. This can be expected as g scales ecosystem respiration and increases with the soil
fraction. In contrast, human respiration is indirectly linked to the soil fraction through its
inverse relationship with built-up cover: as the soil fraction decreases, built-up area and thus
human respiration increase. In M6 the correlation is lower with -0.41 (KK dataset) and -0.40
(CO dataset).
Page 27 of 87
==PAGE:37==
Master Thesis
Model fitting and evaluation
Figure 13: Top row: Residuals of M6 over the traffic flux. Bottom row: Measured fluxes
over predicted fluxes of M6.
For all tested models, there is a clear trend visible between residuals and the storage term,
where the model under-predicts the flux for large storage term values. The trend of residuals
over other variables, like the predicted GPP and the wind direction, is tested, but no trends
were found (see Appendix F).
The Akaike Information Criterion (AIC) identified model M6 as having the lowest AIC value
across all four tested cases: (1) the CO dataset including data with quality flags 0 and 1, (2)
the CO dataset restricted to quality flag 0, (3) the KK dataset including data with quality
flags 0 and 1, and (4) the KK dataset restricted to quality flag 0.
For further modelling the parameters derived from the CO dataset restricted to quality flag
0 were used (Table C.2). The RMSE values of the models based on CO and KK data were
nearly identical (CO: 2.85; KK: 2.86).
However, the parameters obtained from the CO
dataset resulted in a lower Mean Bias Error (MBE) compared to those from the KK dataset
(CO: -0.02; KK: 0.16).
Page 28 of 87
==PAGE:38==
Master Thesis
Results of the CO2 exchange-model
3.4
Results of the CO2 exchange-model
In the following, the footprint-weighted simulated data are compared to the measured data.
Figure 14 shows a time series of how the measured CO2 flux values from the EC system
compare to the simulated fluxes, using the parameters from M6. It can be observed that M6
leads to fewer over-predictions than the model without parameter fitting (Figure D.1, D.2).
The model follows the patterns of the measured data well, but it does not capture the very
high or very low flux values.
Figure 15 shows a time series of how the different sources and sinks contribute to the mea-
sured flux values. The effect of traffic in M6 is reduced compared to the unfitted model. The
NEE also shows a smaller uptake of CO2 than in the unfitted model. The effect of NEE is
mostly negative (uptake of CO2 through photosynthesis), with small positive peaks (release
of CO2 through ecosystem respiration).
Figure 16 shows the different contributions from GPP and respiration. The magnitude of
GPP is larger than that of respiration, leading to a net uptake of CO2 by vegetation.
Figure 14: Time series of the total simulated surface CO2 flux, weighted by the footprint,
using M6 (red) and measured surface CO2 flux (black).
Page 29 of 87
==PAGE:39==
Master Thesis
Results of the CO2 exchange-model
Figure 15: Time series of the individual model terms using M6, weighted by the footprint.
Figure 16: Time series of ecosystem respiration and GPP using M6, weighted by the foot-
print.
Page 30 of 87
==PAGE:40==
Master Thesis
Results of the CO2 exchange-model
Unbiased net ecosystem exchange
To predict the unbiased NEE flux of the vegetation in the target area, a spatial map is
simulated using M6. It represents the monthly cumulative CO2 flux from NEE per pixel,
thereby quantifying the contribution of vegetation to the CO2 exchange in the target area.
Figure 17 shows that photosynthetic uptake consistently exceeds respiratory release in
residential areas throughout all four months. Areas with a positive NEE in March and April
are primarily classified as industry, forests, recreational areas, or agriculture. These land-
use types contribute less to the footprint on average than the built-up areas, as shown in
Figure 8.
Figure 17: The total CO2 exchange from vegetated areas (NEE) in the target area per
month. The red line indicates the sector dominated by industry. Negative values indicate
CO2 uptake, positive CO2 release to the atmosphere.
Page 31 of 87
==PAGE:41==
Master Thesis
Results of the CO2 exchange-model
Analysis of Figure 17, together with the land-use map, shows that with regard to vegetation,
in May and June only some recreational areas, industrial zones, and cropland act as net CO2
sources. In contrast, forests and other natural areas shift to functioning as CO2 sinks during
these months. Due to the ŌĆ£green is greenŌĆØ approach, the differences between vegetation types
are based solely on variations in the NDRE.
Forests show an average NEE of 0.19 kg CO2 mŌłÆ2 monthŌłÆ1 in March and ŌĆō0.08 kg CO2
mŌłÆ2 monthŌłÆ1 in June. Vegetation in built up area has an average NEE of -0.02 kg CO2
mŌłÆ2monthŌłÆ1 in March and -0.13 kg CO2 mŌłÆ2monthŌłÆ1 in June. Surfaces classified as grass-
land have an average NEE of 0.21 kg CO2 mŌłÆ2monthŌłÆ1 in March and of -0.02 kg CO2 mŌłÆ2
monthŌłÆ1 in June. Agriculture and recreational area remain net CO2 sources in all months,
with an average NEE of 0.16 kg CO2 mŌłÆ2monthŌłÆ1 and 0.17 kg CO2 mŌłÆ2monthŌłÆ1, respec-
tively, in March and 0.03 kg CO2 mŌłÆ2monthŌłÆ1 and 0.1 kg CO2 mŌłÆ2monthŌłÆ1 in June.
Individual areas of grassland around the southern lakes are a strong sink with an uptake
of approximately -0.5 to -0.6 kg CO2 mŌłÆ2monthŌłÆ1 in June.
It is noteworthy that the increase in average NDRE from March to June is substan-
tially smaller in built-up areas than in vegetated land-cover types. NDRE rises from 0.14 to
0.23 in built-up areas, compared to 0.16 to 0.40 in grassland areas and 0.18 to 0.44 in forests.
Effect of site-specific parameter calibration
Comparing the results of the fitted model M6 with the unfitted model provides valuable
insight into the importance of site-specific calibration.
Figure 18 shows the cumulative NEE difference between the unbiased and fitted models,
calculated as the unfitted minus the fitted model for each pixel. For negative NEE values, the
difference is negative when the fitted model predicts a smaller uptake than the unfitted model.
Overall, the comparison indicates that the fitted model estimates a weaker net negative
contribution of NEE to CO2 exchange. Cropland and recreational areas remain CO2 sources
in summer under the fitted model, whereas the unfitted model predicts them to become sinks.
The difference is especially large for forests and grassland. The difference also changes with
the season and reaches up to a maximum difference of -0.51 kg CO2 mŌłÆ2monthŌłÆ1 in June.
This difference is in the same order as the maximum uptake predicted for some of the pixels
by the fitted model in that month.
Page 32 of 87
==PAGE:42==
Master Thesis
Results of the CO2 exchange-model
Figure 18: Difference in NEE when using the fitted model instead of the unfitted model (Ōłå=
unfitted model - fitted model). The red line indicates the sector dominated by industry.
Total unbiased CO2 flux in the target area
Figure 19 shows an overview of the cumulative flux of each source and sink over the en-
tire target area (100 km2) per month. The effect of vegetation (both on respiration and
photosynthesis) increases from spring to summer.
The total NEE of the target area is
2670 t CO2 monthŌłÆ1 in March, -168 t CO2 monthŌłÆ1 in April, -8274 t CO2 monthŌłÆ1 in May
and -7669 t CO2 monthŌłÆ1 in June. This compares to cumulative traffic emissions of on aver-
age 10469 t CO2 monthŌłÆ1 (the only variation between months is the amount of non-working
days), emissions of human respiration of 5815 t CO2 monthŌłÆ1 and emissions of residential
heating that have a maximum in March of 5725 t CO2 monthŌłÆ1 and a minimum in June of
Page 33 of 87
==PAGE:43==
Master Thesis
Results of the CO2 exchange-model
3335 t CO2 monthŌłÆ1.
Figure 19: Cumulated unbiased CO2 flux for each source and sink over the target area
(100 km2) for each month.
Page 34 of 87
==PAGE:44==
Master Thesis
Discussion
4
Discussion
4.1
The role of vegetation for CO2 exchange in cities
Seasonal and spatial variation of the contribution from vegetation to the CO2
exchange
The Eddy Covariance (EC) measurements already show a negative relationship between
CO2 exchange and incoming radiation. As there is no other CO2 sink than vegetation, this
pattern provides initial evidence that photosynthetic uptake exceeds CO2 emissions during
certain periods. The NEE maps further confirm that vegetation in residential areas acts as
a net CO2 sink, with a stronger uptake during summer. This seasonal increase is consistent
with previous studies and can be explained by higher NDRE values, warmer temperatures,
and more hours of sunlight during this period [2, 13].
Analysis by land-cover type shows that vegetation type influences the potential to act
as a CO2 sink. Residential areas exhibit smaller seasonal differences compared to other land-
cover types, which can be linked to the smaller seasonal change in NDRE. This is possibly
introduced by management practices such as irrigation and fertilization that maintain vege-
tation greenness in built-up areas during periods where meteorological conditions would not
allow vegetation growth. The NEE maps show that grassland areas around the southern
lakes act as particularly strong CO2 sinks. In contrast, agriculture and recreational areas do
not function as net CO2 sinks.
The uncertainty is higher for NEE estimations of natural areas (forest, grassland, cropland,
recreational areas), as no distinction was made between different vegetation classes. These
areas contribute less to the footprint than built-up areas, which biases the parameter fitting
towards vegetation in residential areas. Nevertheless, the NEE values simulated for forests
are consistent with findings by Ward et al. (2015). Their study reported that a woodland
south-west of London showed positive NEE values from January to June, shifting to a CO2
sink from July/ August until December, depending on the year. In June, the woodland they
investigated acted as a carbon sink of approximately 0 to -0.1 kg CO2 mŌłÆ2monthŌłÆ1 [13].
These observations are in line with the model predictions of this work.
The fact that recreational areas are a continuous sink could be linked to the presence
of football fields with artificial turf that are part of this land cover. These areas are charac-
terized by low NDRE values, which reduce the modelled GPP. However, respiration in these
areas is likely overestimated, as the respiration model does not account for artificial turf
but rather sees these areas as fully vegetated. For cropland, additional information on crop
type and management practices would be required to evaluate the accuracy of the simulated
NEE, as these factors strongly influence seasonal CO2 exchange [57, 58].
Another land cover that is not included in the analysis is lakes and streams. The map
shows them to have partly a large NEE of up to -0.9 kg m2 monthŌłÆ1 in June. However, this
actually reflects only the GPP, as the respiration is set to 0 for water areas. The high GPP
can be attributed to the fact that some lake areas have a high NDRE. This could be due to
the fact that the lakes are covered by vegetation like algae or cattails, as well as to small
islands in the lake. Since it was not possible to estimate the respiration and therefore the
Page 35 of 87
==PAGE:45==
Master Thesis
Discussion of methodology used
NEE for water areas, their contribution to the CO2 exchange remains unknown.
Contribution of vegetation to the total CO2 exchange
When comparing the monthly mean absolute values of CO2 fluxes, traffic emerges as the
dominant source of emissions. Vegetation offsets some of the anthropogenic emissions with
a peak in May, where it offsets approximately 42% of the anthropogenic emissions. This
indicates that urban vegetation can make a significant contribution towards reducing net
emissions.
However, even at its peak, vegetation alone is insufficient to achieve climate
neutrality, at least under current land-use conditions.
Direct quantitative comparison between studies is not possible as the investigated sites
differ in population density, vegetation cover and type, land-use distribution, industrial ac-
tivity, and local climate and meteorological conditions. Nevertheless, the trends observed
here align with previous research, which generally identifies traffic as the largest contributor
to urban CO2 exchange and vegetation as a relatively smaller, though non-negligible, sink
[2, 5]. Regarding human respiration, this study finds a higher relative contribution than the
5% reported by Crawford & Christen (2014). A discrepancy is plausible, due to the fact that
human respiration is strongly correlated with population density and can vary considerably
across cities [59]. Ward et al. (2015) further demonstrated that in densely populated ar-
eas, emissions from human respiration can even exceed traffic emissions on certain temporal
scales [13].
No assessment of net CO2 exchange from vegetation over an entire year was conducted in this
study. Ecosystem respiration during winter may offset part of the carbon uptake observed in
spring and summer, potentially reducing the net annual sink strength. The modelŌĆÖs structure
allows application to other seasons by combining it with climate data, such as ERA5, and
future work should extend this approach to a full annual cycle to provide a more complete
picture of the net CO2 balance.
4.2
Discussion of methodology used
The methodology used allows the prediction of an unbiased estimate of the total CO2 flux
as well as the contribution of individual terms. Therefore, the model treats a process in-
dependent of its location and assumes, for example, that vegetation in each garden has the
same characteristics if the NDRE is similar, or that a highway in the south has the same
emissions as one in the east. This approach allows the application of the model to areas
not used in the model fitting (e.g., the sector dominated by industry or regions outside the
target area) if the necessary spatial data (VI, people per m2, road-km) and meteorological
data are available. This makes the model useful in predicting CO2 exchange over larger
areas without intensive field studies. It introduces, however, also an uncertainty as the areas
modelled are complex structures and differ in, e.g., shadings, microclimates, and traffic pat-
terns. This issue is particularly relevant when conclusions are drawn for very small areas,
where uncertainties are not averaged out. Nevertheless, compared to most greenhouse gas
accounting approaches, this methodology operates at a much finer spatial resolution, allow-
ing more accurate assessments of regional effects than those provided by nationwide studies
Page 36 of 87
==PAGE:46==
Master Thesis
Discussion of methodology used
such as DenmarkŌĆÖs National Inventory Document (NID).
Footprint weighted analysis
A key component of the method is the use of footprint weighting and the analysis of the
sensor location bias, which determines the representativeness of the EC observations. The
footprint analysis shows that EC observations are strongly influenced by wind direction,
with different source areas dominating at different times. This demonstrates that individual
EC measurements cannot represent the entire study area but are shaped by the upwind
distribution of sources and sinks. A particularly important finding is the sensor location
bias with respect to road fraction: road surfaces are systematically under-represented in
the footprint compared to their actual share of the target area.
This explains why the
traffic-related CO2 contribution appears relatively small in Figure 15. Because the values in
this figure are footprint-weighted, the sensorŌĆÖs location bias directly translates into a lower
apparent traffic signal.
When considering the absolute, unbiased CO2 exchange, it becomes evident that traffic
is the dominant emission source. This underlines not only the importance of performing a
detailed footprint analysis but also the risk of concluding gross CO2 fluxes directly from EC
measurements. It confirms the findings of previous studies that including footprint analysis
is essential for any robust source attribution and for quantifying the contributions of different
processes to the net flux in heterogeneous terrain [14, 20, 2].
Site specific calibration of model parameters
A significant difference was observed between the predictions of the model calibrated with
site-specific observations and those of an unfitted model based on literature. Both traffic
emissions and NEE were significantly reduced in the fitted model. The strong difference
highlights the importance of calibrating the model with site-specific measurements instead
of relying on literature-based values. For NEE, this is an expected result, as the unfitted
model uses vegetation parameter estimates from the literature that are derived for homoge-
neous ecosystems and do not reflect the heterogeneous vegetation cover in the target area.
In addition, the literature parameters are optimized for EVI, whereas the NDRE is used
here. Shading can also affect the prediction of ŽĄ. When vegetation is shaded by, for example,
buildings, less light reaches the vegetation, leading to lower ŽĄ values than those suggested by
literature, which does not take shading effects in cities into account. The fitting procedure
helps correct for such effects, at least on an area-averaged scale.
Several factors may explain the discrepancy between fitted and a priori predictions of traffic
emissions. First, the data used in the original model were likely not optimal. The vehicle
fleet composition has changed since 2023, with a larger share of electric vehicles today, lead-
ing to lower direct CO2 emissions. The diurnal traffic distribution applied in the model is
also uncertain, as it is based on one-time counts conducted on only a few roads and from
different years. It is therefore questionable whether these data are representative of 2025
and of the specific roads in the study area. This interpretation is supported by the residual
analysis, which revealed a systematic pattern: CO2 fluxes are overestimated during rush
hours for M0. The parameter fitting was able to reduce the trend of residuals over both
Page 37 of 87
==PAGE:47==
Master Thesis
Discussion of methodology used
predicted traffic emissions and rush hours. This shows an important improvement achieved
through the fitting process and the measured flux data.
Comparison to other approaches
An alternative to the footprint weighting applied in this study is the approach of Crawford &
Christen (2014), who partitioned their dataset and fitted separate process models to subsets
of data where each process was dominant. In their study, residential heating emissions were
modelled as a linear function of heating degree days, while traffic influence was minimized
by selecting periods when the footprint contained less than 2% road area. Applying this
method to Gladsaxe, however, would be challenging. Crawford & Christen (2014) consid-
ered only major and secondary roads, leaving large areas without road coverage and thus
enough datapoints after filtering. In contrast, Gladsaxe has roads distributed across nearly
the entire study area, making it difficult to filter out measurements unaffected by traffic.
The model relies on a uniform ŌĆ£green is greenŌĆØ approach. In contrast, studies such as Tuovi-
nen et al.
(2019) differentiate between a greater number of land-cover classes to better
capture variations in biological characteristics. However, it is important to balance model
detail with robustness. Introducing too many parameters, particularly those representing
land-cover types with only minor contributions to the footprint, such as cropland, risks
adding unnecessary complexity and increasing the likelihood of overfitting due to insufficient
data for reliable parametrization [60]. The residual analysis further supports the simplified
approach of this study, showing only a very small R2 value for trends of residuals across
specific vegetation classes (Appendix F). This justifies the ŌĆ£green is greenŌĆØ assumption and
suggests that NDRE effectively captures the differences between vegetation classes.
Ward et al. (2015) investigated the influence of different processes on CO2 exchange using
three EC sites in the same region: an urban area, a suburban area, and a forest. Their
study examined how land cover and urban density shape flux dynamics, relying on direct
EC measurements supported by energy use, traffic, and population statistics, and on the
interpretation of temporal patterns such as diurnal cycles and changes in meteorological
conditions to attribute sources and sinks. In comparison, the total measured flux in this
study is lower than that at their urban site but higher than that at their suburban site
during summer. This is consistent with the surface characteristics of Gladsaxe, which has
more vegetation and less impervious cover than their urban site, but less vegetation and
more impervious surface than their suburban site. While Ward et al. (2015) provided valu-
able insights across an urbanŌĆōsuburbanŌĆōrural gradient, their method required a much larger
measurement effort than what was available for Gladsaxe and did not explicitly account for
footprint variability.
4.2.1
Critical evaluation of the approach, the measured data and the model
The results of this study should be interpreted with caution, as several sources of uncertainty
affect the findings. Each component of the approach used to generate locally parametrized
Page 38 of 87
==PAGE:48==
Master Thesis
Discussion of methodology used
estimates of CO2 exchange contributes to the overall uncertainty.
The following section
discusses the uncertainties of these individual components and their effect on the total un-
certainty of the estimates.
Uncertainty of EC measurements
A major assumption in this study is that the conditions typically assumed for traditional EC
measurements also apply here. Specifically, it is assumed that horizontal fluxes and advec-
tion are negligible. These assumptions are generally valid over homogeneous terrain. Here,
it is assumed that heterogeneity within the footprint area is evenly distributed, allowing the
flux equations to remain applicable. In reality, certain sectors are dominated by distinct
land-cover types and activities, making uniform heterogeneity unlikely. The validity of this
assumption, and the extent to which it affects the results, remains uncertain. However,
several studies showed that even heterogeneous landscapes are not uniformly heterogeneous,
and that such uncertainties are an inherent limitation of EC measurements [16, 17, 14, 20].
Measurement errors also contribute to uncertainty. Random errors are always present in
flux measurements and can introduce discrepancies between observed and simulated values.
Random errors could also be a reason for some negative fluxes at PAR values below 400 nm.
While random errors are unavoidable, the large number of measurements minimizes their
effect on the results. In addition, systematic errors may occur due to the measurement setup.
For example, strong variations in wind direction within a 30-minute averaging period are
not accounted for, as only the mean wind direction is used. In this case, the stationarity of
the measurement is not given any longer. This can also lead to inaccuracies in the storage
term, but the error is minimized due to a filtering of the EddyPro software with a stationary
test.
No CO2 concentration profile measurements were available to assess the CO2 storage term
but instead a 1-point method was used. While this method works under turbulent condi-
tions, it can lead to large errors during non-turbulent conditions and for low fluxes, especially
during night and sunrise/sunset [61, 12]. This effect leads to a systematic underestimation
of NEE, reducing both the strength of uptake (negative values) and release (positive values)
[62]. The residual analysis shows a trend of positive residuals over positive CO2 storage term
values and negative residuals for negative storage terms. This could be an indicator that the
storage term is under-predicted by the EddyPro software. In this case, the total measured
surface CO2 flux might be too small, which can influence the parameter fitting.
Uncertainties of the footprint analysis
Heterogeneity is also an issue for the footprint model. The applied model was originally
developed for homogeneous surfaces, its use in an urban context is novel and associated with
considerable uncertainty. The assumption is that every pixel has a theoretical chance of
contributing equally to the footprint due to neglecting the horizontal and vertical advection
[14]. In a heterogeneous, non-flat landscape, this is not a given condition, and it is likely
that different pixels vary in their ability to contribute to the measured flux. As a result,
the footprint may contain errors, which affects both the comparison between simulated and
Page 39 of 87
==PAGE:49==
Master Thesis
Discussion of methodology used
observed data and the parameter fitting process. The magnitude of this error is unknown
and can be present both as random and systematic error. In addition, the footprint model is
not designed to accurately predict the source area of fluxes when the source originates from
an elevated surface, such as chimneys. In urban areas, sources can be at different heights.
Emissions released above the ground level can reach the EC sensor in higher concentrations
than ground-level sources at the same horizontal location. This can cause some pixels to
have a smaller estimated fj value than they have in reality. To compensate, these pixels are
then attributed a higher emission estimate in order to match the measured flux. This effect
could be quantified by using a Lagrangian stochastic particle dispersion model to model
particles emitted by elevated sources [63].
The fraction of the measured flux that originates from the defined target area can be esti-
mated by summing the half-hourly footprint contributions of all pixels within it. On average,
only about 78% of the measured flux is explained by the target area, while the remainder
originates from outside. If this is not corrected for, it implicitly assumes that the surrounding
areas have the same land-cover and sourceŌĆōsink characteristics as the target area. However,
the area outside the target area might influence the flux differently. One way to reduce this
uncertainty is to extend the target area so that a larger fraction of the flux originates from
the target area.
Finally, interpreting the results of the footprint model as a fraction contribution is a sim-
plified approach, as the result does not actually give the fraction of contribution to the flux
per pixel but a probability that the pixel corresponds to the footprint. This approach has
been applied in other studies and has not been identified as a major source of uncertainty
in previous research [20, 2].
Uncertainties of the vegetation model
Uncertainty arises from the natural variability of vegetation. The GPP model relies on a
monthly average vegetation index (VI) map.
This cannot resolve short-term changes in
vegetation structure caused by management activities such as mowing, harvesting, or shrub
removal. As a result, periods of reduced NEE immediately after such events are reflected
in the measurements but remain unaccounted for in the model, biasing the parameter fit-
ting. Likewise, the timing of phenological events may shift within a month, which means
the model cannot precisely capture the onset or peak of photosynthesis. While this leads
to small inaccuracies, it is still a valid approach, and monthly VI are commonly used in
seasonal vegetation analysis as the VI differences within a month are small [64].
Finally, comparison with Crawford & Christen (2014) highlights a potential overestimation
of ecosystem respiration. In their study, respiration was evaluated using two approaches:
(1) an exponential soil respiration model applied to nighttime data only, and (2) daytime
light-response curves, where the y-intercept at zero PPFD was interpreted as mean respira-
tion. They found that the nighttime-based models produced respiration fluxes about 250%
higher than daytime-based estimates, with independent chamber measurements supporting
the lower daytime-based values [2].
Page 40 of 87
==PAGE:50==
Master Thesis
Discussion of methodology used
However, the daytime approach was originally developed for homogeneous ecosystems
[65], and in urban environments, the y-intercept may also capture constant, time-independent
anthropogenic sources such as human respiration and building emissions. Crawford & Chris-
ten (2014) concluded that the large discrepancy between the two methods could only be
explained under the unrealistic assumption that human respiration occurs exclusively at
night.
The respiration model used here yields results closer to the nighttime estimates, sug-
gesting that a systematic overestimation cannot be ruled out. During model fitting, this
may have been partially compensated by an increase in GPP, which balances the fluxes to
reproduce the observed net NEE. This limits confidence in the absolute values of GPP and
respiration, although the resulting NEE may still be reliable. When comparing GPP param-
eter estimates, the fitted PAR0 value is higher than reported by Glauch et al. (2025), which
would increase GPP, whereas the fitted ŽĄ is lower, which would reduce GPP relative to values
from homogeneous sites. This combination makes it difficult to determine whether GPP is
truly overestimated, particularly since the parameters from Glauch et al. (2025) were not
derived for heterogeneous urban environments. The potential overestimation of respiration
is nevertheless consistent with the observation that both respiration and GPP increased in
the fitted model relative to the a priori values, while the net uptake decreased. A direct
parameter comparison with Crawford & Christen (2014) is not possible, as they applied a
different GPP model.
Uncertainties of the traffic model
As every model, the traffic model also relies on simplifying assumptions that introduce
potential errors into the emission estimates. By removing flux data from source areas con-
taining intersections, Crawford & Christen (2014) showed that emissions at road segments
with intersections were up to 68% higher than at uninterrupted segments, primarily due to
vehicle deceleration and acceleration [2]. This effect is not represented in the present model,
due to the simplified categorisation of driving conditions. A more differentiated model that
captures the effect of intersections could therefore improve model accuracy. This could also
explain why some of the high observed fluxes are not predicted by the model. Emission
increases related to intersections follow a spatial rather than a purely temporal pattern,
although rush hours can intensify their impact by causing longer traffic queues. Since the
current traffic model does not account for this, these emissions cannot be correctly classified
as traffic emissions by the applied function. Finally, roads classified in OpenStreetMap as
ŌĆ£very small roadsŌĆØ (e.g., parking lots and building access roads) were assumed to generate
no traffic emissions. While the overall impact is expected to be minor, emissions from these
areas are still included in the measured fluxes and may therefore introduce a bias in the
parameter fitting by attributing their contribution to other model components.
As mentioned above, there are uncertainties about the half-hourly traffic distribution ŽĢ(t).
This regards both the KK data and the CO data. Measured CO data are not only generated
by traffic but also by other combustion activities or oxidation of hydrocarbons that are
released by soil and plants [52]. The diurnal traffic pattern estimated by CO data might
therefore be influenced by other processes than traffic. This effect is evaluated to be minor as
Page 41 of 87
==PAGE:51==
Master Thesis
Discussion of methodology used
traffic was identified as the major source of CO in urban environments [52]. While the traffic
component of the model could in principle be refined further, for instance, using a Bayesian
framework to better capture the temporal variability of ŽĢ(t) [66], the current implementation
performs well. Residuals show no systematic trend with traffic emissions, indicating that
the model has no systematic error and is well-suited for the objectives of this study.
Currently, studies are being developed that model traffic in the greater Copenhagen
area; once published, these should be tested to assess whether they can improve predictions
of traffic emissions [67, 68].
Uncertainties of the residential heating model
The residential heating model was not the focus of this work, as heating emissions were as-
sumed to be small during the summer months. There are, however, uncertainties introduced
through this term that should not be overlooked, especially when trying to extend the model
to cover a full year, as heating emissions are expected to increase in winter, and therefore
also the relevance of uncertainties. The estimated CO2 emissions from heating only consider
residential heating, buildings that are labelled as e.g., "Offices", "Commerce and Services"
or "trade" are not considered [29], this can lead to a systematic underestimation of CO2
emissions from heating, and these buildings should be included in future analysis.
Data from 2023 were used to determine the residential heating emissions (both for emis-
sions factors and energy usage). Although energy use is sensitive to factors such as energy
prices and temperature variations [29], the impact is expected to be minor in this case. A
comparison of 2025 and 2023 temperature data shows that the average monthly tempera-
ture differs by less than 1.5┬░C [69]. This suggests only a negligible effect on heating demand.
Another source of error is the used temporal scaling factor. The model assumes the same
heating pattern for every day (distinction between weekdays and weekends) in a month.
This leads to unrealistic and abrupt changes in heating patterns at the beginning of a new
month. The issue is most pronounced at the beginning and end of the heating season, when
heating demand responds to changes in air temperature rather than the calendar. While this
simplification does not affect the annual CO2 budget, it can distort monthly estimates. For
example, during the observation period, the largest discontinuity occurs between March and
April, with a difference of about 1,600 t CO2 monthŌłÆ1, corresponding to 8% of the total net
emissions in March. Total emissions may be misrepresented by up to 8% in these months.
An approach to estimate CO2 emissions from heating based on heating degree days could
therefore show a more realistic result.
Uncertainties from sources not considered in the model
The model does not account for all CO2 sources in the target area. In particular, emissions
from industry are not included. Although fluxes from the sector dominated by industry
were excluded from the EC data, this filtering cannot completely remove the influence of
industrial emissions. Industrial sources also exist outside the primary sector and can still
contribute to the measured flux signal. Residual analysis, however, revealed no systematic
trend with the remaining industrial contribution to the footprint, suggesting that the filter-
ing approach was largely effective. Nevertheless, a more detailed quantification of industrial
emissions would be valuable in future work to provide a complete CO2 budget and better
Page 42 of 87
==PAGE:52==
Master Thesis
Discussion of methodology used
assess the potential for vegetation to offset local emissions.
Total uncertainty
The different sources of uncertainty discussed above should be viewed in combination, as their
cumulative effect can influence both absolute flux estimates and the partitioning of sources
and sinks. Nevertheless, the framework developed here shows that EC-based modelling is
a valuable tool for investigating urban CO2 exchange. Future applications would benefit
from a more comprehensive uncertainty quantification, for instance, through a Bayesian
approach. Compared to Crawford & Christen (2014), the method applied in this study may
introduce additional sources of error, yet it offers advantages in terms of transferability to
other suburban settings and reduced demands on data filtering. This highlights an important
methodological trade-off.
Moreover, national greenhouse gas inventories often introduce much larger uncertainties
when downscaled, making them poorly suited for regional assessments and highlighting the
value of local approaches such as the one applied here.
Page 43 of 87
==PAGE:53==
Master Thesis
Conclusion
5
Conclusion
This thesis aimed to quantify how vegetation contributes to the urban CO2 exchange in
Gladsaxe, Denmark, by combining Eddy Covariance (EC) measurements with a forward
model of traffic, heating, photosynthesis, ecosystem respiration, human respiration, and
footprint weighting. For this, a measurement period between March and June 2025 was
investigated. The model calibration against local EC data led to a different simulated CO2
exchange compared to literature-based parametrizations.
This indicates that literature-
based parameters might not be fully representative for heterogeneous, non-traditional, urban
landscapes. The results show that vegetation is a consistent net CO2 sink in residential areas
during the observed period, with uptake increasing in summer. The type of vegetation is,
however, relevant when planning for optimized CO2 uptake, as vegetation covers differ both
in their strength as a sink as well as in their capability to act as a sink over the seasonal
changes.
Traffic showed to be the largest contributor to the net CO2 exchange. Despite uncertain-
ties, the results demonstrate that suburban vegetation can substantially offset anthropogenic
emissions on a seasonal scale, reinforcing the importance of urban greening strategies for cli-
mate mitigation. However, it is also visible that urban green spaces alone can not offset all
CO2 emissions, and emission reduction should therefore stay in the focus of policymakers.
Overall, this work provides a transferable framework for spatially explicit CO2 flux
modelling in cities and offers insights into how vegetation can help meet climate targets,
as well as providing an independent test to validate local greenhouse gas inventories on
smaller regional scales.
The study helps to understand how to design urban areas that
maximize carbon sequestration potential. Scientifically, the study highlights the complexity
of sourceŌĆōsink attribution in urban areas, and proposes an approach to remove the bias of
EC measurements in urban landscapes. While the methodology developed here improves
spatially explicit estimates of CO2 exchange, the results should be interpreted in light of
the uncertainties.
Future work should prioritize assessing sink capacity over a full year,
integrating improved traffic data, extending the target area so that a larger fraction of the
flux originates within it, and evaluating the usability of the footprint model with respect to
elevated sources to reduce systematic biases.
Page 44 of 87
==PAGE:54==
Master Thesis
References
References
[1] IPCC, ŌĆ£Climate change 2023: Synthesis report. contribution of working groups i, ii and
iii to the sixth assessment report of the intergovernmental panel on climate change,ŌĆØ
2023.
[2] B. Crawford and A. Christen, ŌĆ£Spatial source attribution of measured urban eddy co-
variance co2 fluxes,ŌĆØ Theoretical and Applied Climatology, vol. 119, no. 3, pp. 733ŌĆō755,
2014.
[3] Z. Sha, Y. Bai, R. Li, S. E. Thompson, Y. Zhang, Q. Zhu, W. Wang, J. Wu, H. S.
He, J. Fang, and G. Yu, ŌĆ£The global carbon sink potential of terrestrial vegetation
can be increased substantially by optimal land management,ŌĆØ Communications Earth
& Environment, vol. 3, no. 1, p. 8, 2022.
[4] Senatsverwaltung f├╝r Mobilit├żt, Verkehr, Klimaschutz und Umwelt, Berlin, ŌĆ£Knapp
10.000 m2 neue gr├╝nfl├żchen auf berlins d├żchern.ŌĆØ https://www.berlin.de/sen/
uvk/presse/pressemitteilungen/2021/pressemitteilung.1119181.php,
2021.
Pressemitteilung, Senatsverwaltung Berlin.
[5] A. M. Coutts, J. Beringer, and N. J. Tapper, ŌĆ£Characteristics influencing the variability
of urban co2 fluxes in melbourne, australia,ŌĆØ Atmospheric Environment, vol. 41, no. 1,
pp. 51ŌĆō62, 2007.
[6] Y. Wang, Q. Chang, and X. Li, ŌĆ£Promoting sustainable carbon sequestration of plants in
urban greenspace by planting design: A case study in parks of beijing,ŌĆØ Urban Forestry
Urban Greening, vol. 64, p. 127291, 2021.
[7] J. Konopka, J. Heusinger, and S. Weber, ŌĆ£Extensive urban green roof shows con-
sistent annual net uptake of carbon as documented by 5 years of eddy-covariance
flux measurements,ŌĆØ Journal of Geophysical Research: Biogeosciences, vol. 126, no. 2,
p. e2020JG005879.
[8] J. Soininen, K. M. Kohonen, P. Rantala, et al., ŌĆ£Carbon uptake of an urban green space
inferred from carbonyl sulfide fluxes,ŌĆØ npj Climate and Atmospheric Science, vol. 8,
p. 90, 2025.
[9] European Climate, Infrastructure and Environment Executive Agency (CINEA),
ŌĆ£LIFE
URBANGREEN.ŌĆØ
https://cinea.ec.europa.eu/featured-projects/
life-urbangreen_en, 2023. Featured Projects page; factsheet dated 2 October 2023.
[10] Ayuntamiento
de
Madrid,
ŌĆ£Bosque
metropolitano.ŌĆØ
https://www.madrid.es/
portales/munimadrid/es/Bosque-Metropolitano/?idCapitulo=11442957&
vgnextchannel=a68fed8a96b06010VgnVCM100000dc0ca8c0RCRD&vgnextfmt=
default&vgnextoid=effb3c0a55e16710VgnVCM1000001d4a900aRCRD,
2023.
Por-
tal oficial del Ayuntamiento de Madrid. Responsable del contenido: Direcci├│n General
de Planificaci├│n Estrat├®gica. Fecha de actualizaci├│n: febrero 2023.
Page 45 of 87
==PAGE:55==
Master Thesis
References
[11] E. Velasco and M. Roth, ŌĆ£Cities as net sources of co2: Review of atmospheric co2
exchange in urban environments measured by eddy covariance technique,ŌĆØ Geography
Compass, vol. 4, no. 9, pp. 1238ŌĆō1259, 2010.
[12] G. Burba, Eddy Covariance Method for Scientific, Regulatory, and Commercial Appli-
cations. LI-COR Bioscience.
[13] H. Ward, S. Kotthaus, C. Grimmond, A. Bjorkegren, M. Wilkinson, W. Morrison,
J. Evans, J. Morison, and M. Iamarino, ŌĆ£Effects of urban density on carbon dioxide
exchanges: Observations of dense urban, suburban and woodland areas of southern
england,ŌĆØ Environmental Pollution, vol. 198, pp. 186ŌĆō200, 2015.
[14] V. Giannico, J. Chen, C. Shao, Z. Ouyang, R. John, and R. Lafortezza, ŌĆ£Contribu-
tions of landscape heterogeneity within the footprint of eddy-covariance towers to flux
measurements,ŌĆØ Agricultural and Forest Meteorology, vol. 260-261, pp. 144ŌĆō153, 2018.
[15] E. Velasco, M. Roth, L. Norford, and L. T. Molina, ŌĆ£Does urban vegetation enhance
carbon sequestration?,ŌĆØ Landscape and Urban Planning, vol. 148, pp. 99ŌĆō107, 2016.
[16] H. Chu, X. Luo, Z. Ouyang, W. S. Chan, S. Dengel, S. C. Biraud, M. S. Torn, S. Met-
zger, J. Kumar, M. A. Arain, T. J. Arkebauer, D. Baldocchi, C. Bernacchi, D. Billes-
bach, T. A. Black, P. D. Blanken, G. Bohrer, R. Bracho, S. Brown, N. A. Brunsell,
J. Chen, X. Chen, K. Clark, A. R. Desai, T. Duman, D. Durden, S. Fares, I. For-
brich, J. A. Gamon, C. M. Gough, T. Griffis, M. Helbig, D. Hollinger, E. Humphreys,
H. Ikawa, H. Iwata, Y. Ju, J. F. Knowles, S. H. Knox, H. Kobayashi, T. Kolb, B. Law,
X. Lee, M. Litvak, H. Liu, J. W. Munger, A. Noormets, K. Novick, S. F. Oberbauer,
W. Oechel, P. Oikawa, S. A. Papuga, E. Pendall, P. Prajapati, J. Prueger, W. L. Quin-
ton, A. D. Richardson, E. S. Russell, R. L. Scott, G. Starr, R. Staebler, P. C. Stoy,
E. Stuart-Ha├½ntjens, O. Sonnentag, R. C. Sullivan, A. Suyker, M. Ueyama, R. Vargas,
J. D. Wood, and D. Zona, ŌĆ£Representativeness of eddy-covariance flux footprints for
areas surrounding ameriflux sites,ŌĆØ Agricultural and Forest Meteorology, vol. 301-302,
p. 108350, 2021.
[17] H. Wang, G. Jia, A. Zhang, and C. Miao, ŌĆ£Assessment of spatial representativeness of
eddy covariance flux data from flux tower to regional grid,ŌĆØ Remote Sensing, vol. 8,
no. 9, 2016.
[18] A. Goodwell, M. Zahan, J. Cao, and D. R. URycki, ŌĆ£Spatial heterogeneity of agricultural
evapotranspiration as quantified by satellite and flux tower sources,ŌĆØ Agricultural and
Forest Meteorology, vol. 372, p. 110608, 2025.
[19] L. C. Hernandez Rodriguez, A. E. Goodwell, and P. Kumar, ŌĆ£Inside the flux foot-
print: The role of organized land cover heterogeneity on the dynamics of observed
land-atmosphere exchange fluxes,ŌĆØ Frontiers in Water, vol. Volume 5 - 2023, 2023.
[20] J.-P. Tuovinen, M. Aurela, J. Hatakka, A. R├żs├żnen, T. Virtanen, J. Mikola, V. Ivakhov,
V. Kondratyev, and T. Laurila, ŌĆ£Interpreting eddy covariance data from heterogeneous
Page 46 of 87
==PAGE:56==
Master Thesis
References
siberian tundra: land-cover-specific methane fluxes and spatial representativeness,ŌĆØ Bio-
geosciences, vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 255ŌĆō274, 2019.
[21] R. Stull, Practical Meteorology: An Algebra-based Survey of Atmospheric Science. Uni-
versity of British Columbia, version 1.02b ed., 2017.
[22] K. Kissas. personal communication. 6 May 2025.
[23] T. Foken, ed., Springer Handbook of Atmospheric Measurements. Springer Handbooks,
Springer Cham, 1 ed., 2021.
[24] K. Kissas. Email. 8 September 2025.
[25] ŌĆ£The population disaggregated by municipalities, last update: 10.6.2025.ŌĆØ
[26] G. Levin, ŌĆ£Technical report from DCE ŌĆō Danish Centre for Environment and Energy no.
252,ŌĆØ tech. rep., Aarhus University, Department of Environmental Science, September
2022.
[27] N. Kljun, P. Calanca, M. W. Rotach, and H. P. Schmid, ŌĆ£A simple two-dimensional
parameterisation for flux footprint prediction (ffp),ŌĆØ Geoscientific Model Development,
vol. 8, no. 11, pp. 3695ŌĆō3713, 2015.
[28] R Core Team, R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing. R Foundation
for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria, 2025. Version 2025.05.0.
[29] M.-T. H. Guidje, ŌĆ£Assessing the industryŌĆÖs role in greenhouse gas emissions using eddy
covariance measurements. a case study in gladsaxe,ŌĆØ masterŌĆÖs thesis, Technical Univer-
sity of Denmark, 2025.
[30] C. J. Tucker, ŌĆ£Red and photographic infrared linear combinations for monitoring vege-
tation,ŌĆØ Remote Sensing of Environment, vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 127ŌĆō150, 1979.
[31] T. Glauch, J. Marshall, C. Gerbig, S. Bot├Ła, M. Ga┼ékowski, S. N. Vardag, and A. Butz,
ŌĆ£pyVPRM : A next-generation vegetation photosynthesis and respiration model for the
post-modis era,ŌĆØ EGUsphere, vol. 2025, pp. 1ŌĆō45, 2025.
[32] H. C. Ward, J. G. Evans, and C. S. B. Grimmond, ŌĆ£Multi-season eddy covariance
observations of energy, water and carbon fluxes over a suburban area in swindon, uk,ŌĆØ
Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics, vol. 13, no. 9, pp. 4645ŌĆō4666, 2013.
[33] P. Mahadevan, S. C. Wofsy, D. M. Matross, X. Xiao, A. L. Dunn, J. C. Lin, C. Gerbig,
J. W. Munger, V. Y. Chow, and E. W. Gottlieb, ŌĆ£A satellite-based biosphere param-
eterization for net ecosystem co2 exchange: Vegetation photosynthesis and respiration
model (vprm),ŌĆØ Global Biogeochemical Cycles, vol. 22, no. 2, 2008.
[34] K. McCree, ŌĆ£The action spectrum, absorptance and quantum yield of photosynthesis in
crop plants,ŌĆØ Agricultural Meteorology, vol. 9, pp. 191ŌĆō216, 1971.
Page 47 of 87
==PAGE:57==
Master Thesis
References
[35] C. F. Jordan, ŌĆ£Derivation of leaf-area index from quality of light on the forest floor,ŌĆØ
Ecology, vol. 50, no. 4, pp. 663ŌĆō666, 1969.
[36] A. Huete, K. Didan, T. Miura, E. Rodriguez, X. Gao, and L. Ferreira, ŌĆ£Overview of
the radiometric and biophysical performance of the modis vegetation indices,ŌĆØ Remote
Sensing of Environment, vol. 83, no. 1, pp. 195ŌĆō213, 2002. The Moderate Resolution
Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS): a new generation of Land Surface Monitoring.
[37] E. S. Agency, ŌĆ£Sentinel-2 msi level-2a boa reflectance,ŌĆØ 2022.
[38] E. S. Agency, SENTINEL-2 User Handbook, 2015.
[39] M. W. M. N. S. G. M. H. M. R. A. K. H. P. F. H. G. B. G. L. L. W. C. T. A. A. V.
K. J. T. N.-L. L. V. I. S. N. S.-B. E. R. S. B. P. L. B. M. G. H. Ole-Kenneth Nielsen,
Marlene S. Plejdrup, ŌĆ£DenmarkŌĆÖs national inventory document 2025,ŌĆØ tech. rep., Aarhus
University, Department of Environmental Science, 2025.
[40] K├Ėbenhavns Kommune, Teknik- og Milj├Ėforvaltningen, ŌĆ£Manuel t├”lling lyngbyvej nord
for emdrupvej (helsing├Ėrmotorvejen),ŌĆØ 2024.
[41] K├Ėbenhavns Kommune, Teknik- og Milj├Ėforvaltningen, ŌĆ£Manuel t├”lling hareskovvej
nv.f. ruten (hiller├Ėdmotorvejen),ŌĆØ tech. rep., K├Ėbenhavns Kommune, Teknik- og Milj├Ė-
forvaltningen, 2024.
[42] K├Ėbenhavns Kommune, Teknik- og Milj├Ėforvaltningen, ŌĆ£Manuel t├”lling m├Ėrkh├Ėjvej 2
nord for frederikssundsvej,ŌĆØ 2024.
[43] K├Ėbenhavns Kommune, Teknik- og Milj├Ėforvaltningen, ŌĆ£Manuel t├”lling ├ģkandevej nord
for gadelandet,ŌĆØ 2021.
[44] K├Ėbenhavns Kommune, Teknik- og Milj├Ėforvaltningen, ŌĆ£Manuel t├”lling h├Ėje gladsaxe
vej nord├Ėst for hareskovvej,ŌĆØ 2024.
[45] K├Ėbenhavns Kommune, Teknik- og Milj├Ėforvaltningen, ŌĆ£Manuel t├”lling gavlhusvej,ŌĆØ
2017.
[46] K├Ėbenhavns Kommune, Teknik- og Milj├Ėforvaltningen, ŌĆ£Manuel t├”lling langhusvej,ŌĆØ
2017.
[47] P. Pousset, ŌĆ£Evaluation of carbon monoxide exchanges in a rural landscape as proxy
for the distinction between fossil and natural carbon dioxide emissions,ŌĆØ master thesis,
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet, 2023.
[48] T. R. Bates and K. M. Watts, minpack.lm: R Interface to the Levenberg-Marquardt Non-
linear Least-Squares Algorithm Found in MINPACK, Plus Support for Bounds, 2024. R
package version 1.2-4.
[49] E. Parzen Journal of the American Statistical Association, vol. 83, no. 403, pp. 907ŌĆō907,
1988.
Page 48 of 87
==PAGE:58==
Master Thesis
References
[50] S. Chen, M. Zhang, J. Zou, et al., ŌĆ£Relationship between basal soil respiration and
the temperature sensitivity of soil respiration and their key controlling factors across
terrestrial ecosystems,ŌĆØ Journal of Soils and Sediments, vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 769ŌĆō781,
2022.
[51] A. S. A. Johnston and R. M. Sibly, ŌĆ£The influence of soil communities on the temperature
sensitivity of soil respiration,ŌĆØ Nature Ecology & Evolution, vol. 2, no. 10, pp. 1597ŌĆō1602,
2018.
[52] U. Gamnitzer, U. Karstens, B. Kromer, R. E. M. Neubert, H. A. J. Meijer, H. Schroeder,
and I. Levin, ŌĆ£Carbon monoxide: A quantitative tracer for fossil fuel co2?,ŌĆØ Journal of
Geophysical Research: Atmospheres, vol. 111, no. D22, 2006.
[53] I. B. Konovalov, E. V. Berezin, P. Ciais, G. Broquet, R. V. Zhuravlev, and G. Janssens-
Maenhout, ŌĆ£Estimation of fossil-fuel co2 emissions using satellite measurements of
ŌĆ£proxyŌĆØ species,ŌĆØ Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics, vol. 16, pp. 13509ŌĆō13540, 2016.
[54] M. Li, G. Bek├Č, N. Zannoni, G. Pugliese, M. Carrito, N. Cera, C. Moura, P. Wargocki,
P. Vasconcelos, P. Nobre, N. Wang, L. Ernle, and J. Williams, ŌĆ£Human metabolic
emissions of carbon dioxide and methane and their implications for carbon emissions,ŌĆØ
Science of The Total Environment, vol. 833, p. 155241, 2022.
[55] European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts, ŌĆ£Ecmwf reanalysis v5 (era5).ŌĆØ
https://www.ecmwf.int/en/forecasts/dataset/ecmwf-reanalysis-v5.
[56] Z. Wang. personal communication. 30 Juli 2025.
[57] L. Heimsch, A. Lohila, J.-P. Tuovinen, H. Vekuri, J. Heinonsalo, O. Nevalainen, M. Ko-
rkiakoski, J. Liski, T. Laurila, and L. Kulmala, ŌĆ£Carbon dioxide fluxes and carbon bal-
ance of an agricultural grassland in southern finland,ŌĆØ Biogeosciences, vol. 18, no. 11,
pp. 3467ŌĆō3483, 2021.
[58] M. Herbst, T. Friborg, K. Schelde, R. Jensen, R. Ringgaard, V. Vasquez, A. G. Thom-
sen, and H. Soegaard, ŌĆ£Climate and site management as driving factors for the atmo-
spheric greenhouse gas exchange of a restored wetland,ŌĆØ Biogeosciences, vol. 10, no. 1,
pp. 39ŌĆō52, 2013.
[59] Q. Cai, N. Zeng, F. Zhao, et al., ŌĆ£The impact of human and livestock respiration on
CO2 emissions from 14 global cities,ŌĆØ Carbon Balance and Management, vol. 17, no. 1,
p. 17, 2022.
[60] M. Van Oijen, J. Rougier, and R. Smith, ŌĆ£Bayesian calibration of process-based forest
models: Bridging the gap between models and data,ŌĆØ Tree physiology, vol. 25, pp. 915ŌĆō
27, 08 2005.
[61] G. Nicolini, M. Aubinet, C. Feigenwinter, B. Heinesch, A. Lindroth, O. Mamadou,
U. Moderow, M. M├Člder, L. Montagnani, C. Rebmann, and D. Papale, ŌĆ£Impact of
Page 49 of 87
==PAGE:59==
Master Thesis
References
co2 storage flux sampling uncertainty on net ecosystem exchange measured by eddy
covariance,ŌĆØ Agricultural and Forest Meteorology, vol. 248, pp. 228ŌĆō239, 2018.
[62] D. Papale, M. Reichstein, E. Canfora, M. Aubinet, L. Bernard, W. L. Kutsch, S. Ram-
bal, R. Valentini, and V. T, ŌĆ£Towards a more harmonized processing of eddy covariance
co2 fluxes: algorithms and uncertainty estimation,ŌĆØ Biogeosciences Discussions, vol. 3,
07 2006.
[63] J. Weil, ŌĆ£A hybrid lagrangian dispersion model for elevated sources in the convective
boundary layer,ŌĆØ Atmospheric Environment, vol. 28, no. 21, pp. 3433ŌĆō3448, 1994.
[64] R. Eastman, F. Sangermano, E. Machado, J. Rogan, and A. Anyamba, ŌĆ£Global trends
in seasonality of normalized difference vegetation index (ndvi), 1982-2011,ŌĆØ Remote
Sensing, vol. 5, issue 10, pp. 4799-4818, vol. 5, pp. 4799ŌĆō4818, 09 2013.
[65] G. Lasslop, M. Reichstein, D. Papale, A. D. Richardson, A. Arneth, A. Barr, P. Stoy, and
G. Wohlfahrt, ŌĆ£Separation of net ecosystem exchange into assimilation and respiration
using a light response curve approach: critical issues and global evaluation,ŌĆØ Global
Change Biology, vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 187ŌĆō208, 2010.
[66] A. H. Sarris, ŌĆ£A bayesian approach to estimation of time-varying regression coefficients,ŌĆØ
in Annals of Economic and Social Measurement, Volume 2, number 4 (S. V. Berg, ed.),
vol. 2, NBER, October 1973.
[67] Artelia, ŌĆ£Compass ŌĆō new traffic model for the capital area of denmark,ŌĆØ 2025. Accessed:
2025-08-19.
[68] U. Europe, ŌĆ£Integrated systems and analysis of urban mobility for climate-neutral and
sustainable cities in europe and china,ŌĆØ 2025. Accessed: 2025-08-19.
[69] DMI, ŌĆ£Vejrarkiv hele landet.ŌĆØ https://www.dmi.dk/vejrarkiv, 2025. Accessed: 2025-09-
23.
Page 50 of 87
==PAGE:60==
Master Thesis
Appendix A
6
Appendix A
A
Footprint climatology
(a) March
(b) April
(c) May
(d) June
Figure A.1: Footprint for the observation period. The red line indicates where 70% of the
footprint originates from. The plots are created by the PhD student Ziqiong Wang.
Page 51 of 87
==PAGE:61==
Master Thesis
Eddy Covariance data
B
Eddy Covariance data
Figure B.1: Relation between CO2 flux and incoming short-wave radiation per month. The
data are colour-coded by wind direction sector to distinguish between fluxes arising from
residential (blue) and vegetation (green) dominated areas.
C
Model equation and model statistics
The following shows the different model equations for the tested models.
Fpred, M0 =
X
i=roadtype
ri ŌłŚEFi ŌłŚvehicles
24h
i ŌłŚŽĢ(t)i ŌłŚd ŌłŚM ŌłÆ1
CO2 ŌłŚ1e6 ┬Ąmol
mol
ŌłŚ
1
1800
+ (╬▒ ŌłŚmax(T, Tlow) + ╬▓) ŌłŚv ŌłÆŽĄ ŌłŚ
1
1 + PAR/PAR0
ŌłŚPAR ŌłŚe
+ Fresidential heating
(32)
Fpred, M1 =
X
i=roadtype
ri ŌłŚEFi ŌłŚvehicles
24h
i ŌłŚŽĢ(t)i ŌłŚd ŌłŚM ŌłÆ1
CO2 ŌłŚ1e6 ┬Ąmol
mol
ŌłŚ
1
1800 ŌłŚa
+ (╬▒ ŌłŚmax(T, Tlow) + ╬▓) ŌłŚv ŌłÆŽĄ ŌłŚ
1
1 + PAR/PAR0
ŌłŚPAR ŌłŚe
+ Fresidential heating
(33)
Page 52 of 87
==PAGE:62==
Master Thesis
Model equation and model statistics
Fpred, M2 =
X
i=roadtype
ri ŌłŚEFi ŌłŚvehicles
24h
i ŌłŚŽĢ(t)i ŌłŚd ŌłŚM ŌłÆ1
CO2 ŌłŚ1e6 ┬Ąmol
mol
ŌłŚ
1
1800 ŌłŚa
+ (R0 ŌłŚQ
( T
10 )
10 ) ŌłŚv ŌłÆŽĄ ŌłŚ
1
1 + PAR/PAR0
ŌłŚPAR ŌłŚe
+ Fresidential heating
(34)
Fpred, M3 =
X
i=roadtype
ri ŌłŚEFi ŌłŚvehicles
24h
i ŌłŚŽĢ(t)i ŌłŚd ŌłŚM ŌłÆ1
CO2 ŌłŚ1e6 ┬Ąmol
mol
ŌłŚ
1
1800
ŌłŚa(morning, midday, evening, night)
+ (R0 ŌłŚQ
( T
10 )
10 ) ŌłŚv ŌłÆŽĄ ŌłŚ
1
1 + PAR/PAR0
ŌłŚPAR ŌłŚe
+ Fresidential heating
(35)
Fpred, M4 =
X
i=roadtype
ri ŌłŚEFi ŌłŚvehicles
24h
i ŌłŚŽĢ(t)i ŌłŚd ŌłŚM ŌłÆ1
CO2 ŌłŚ1e6 ┬Ąmol
mol
ŌłŚ
1
1800
ŌłŚa(morning, midday, evening)
+ (R0 ŌłŚQ
( T
10 )
10 ) ŌłŚv ŌłÆŽĄ ŌłŚ
1
1 + PAR/PAR0
ŌłŚPAR ŌłŚe
+ Fresidential heating
(36)
Fpred, M5 =
X
i=roadtype
ri ŌłŚEFi ŌłŚvehicles
24h
i ŌłŚŽĢ(t)i ŌłŚd ŌłŚM ŌłÆ1
CO2 ŌłŚ1e6 ┬Ąmol
mol
ŌłŚ
1
1800
ŌłŚa(morning, midday, afternoon, night)
+ (R0 ŌłŚQ
( T
10 )
10 ) ŌłŚv ŌłÆŽĄ ŌłŚ
1
1 + PAR/PAR0
ŌłŚPAR ŌłŚe
+
X
s=heating source
p(t)s ŌłŚRhum + Fresidential heating
(37)
Page 53 of 87
==PAGE:63==
Master Thesis
Model equation and model statistics
Fpred, M6 =
X
i=roadtype
ri ŌłŚEFi ŌłŚvehicles
24h
i ŌłŚŽĢ(t)i ŌłŚd ŌłŚM ŌłÆ1
CO2 ŌłŚ1e6 ┬Ąmol
mol
ŌłŚ
1
1800
ŌłŚa(morning, midday, afternoon)
+ (R0 ŌłŚQ
( T
10 )
10 ) ŌłŚv ŌłÆŽĄ ŌłŚ
1
1 + PAR/PAR0
ŌłŚPAR ŌłŚe
+
X
s=heating source
p(t)s ŌłŚRhum + Fresidential heating
(38)
Table C.1: Evaluation of unfitted models
Vegetation
Index
Quantile of measured data
Month
RMSE
MAE
MBE
EVI
99
March-June
5.19
3.81
1.59
EVI
95
March-June
4.80
3.66
1.56
NDRE
99
March-June
4.02
2.78
-0.94
NDRE
95
March-June
3.34
2.47
-0.07
Table C.2: Results of the parameter estimation for each modelfit using the nlsLM() function
in R and the CO dataset. The table shows both the estimated value and the standard
deviation.
Parameter
M0
M1
M2
M3
M4
M5
M6
╬▒
0.33 ┬▒ 0.09
0.22 ┬▒ 0.05
-
-
-
-
-
╬▓
5.3 ┬▒ 1.1
4.2 ┬▒ 0.6
-
-
-
-
-
R0
-
-
4.8 ┬▒ 0.5
4.6 ┬▒ 0.46
4.5 ┬▒ 0.5
3.2 ┬▒ 0.08
3.1 ┬▒ 0.7
q10
-
-
1.3 ┬▒ 0.08
1.4 ┬▒ 0.09
1.4 ┬▒ 0.1
1.5 ┬▒ 0.18
1.6 ┬▒ 0.16
ŽĄ
0.12 ┬▒ 0.11
0.08 ┬▒ 0.009
0.08 ┬▒ 0.009
0.09 ┬▒ 0.01
0.07 ┬▒ 0.009
0.07 ┬▒ 0.009
0.09 ┬▒ 0.01
PAR0
671 ┬▒ 96
833 ┬▒ 145
848 ┬▒ 150
753 ┬▒ 137
896 ┬▒ 180
858 ┬▒ 176
708 ┬▒ 131
g
ŌłÆ0.003 ┬▒ 0.03
0.43 ┬▒ 0.06
0.42 ┬▒ 0.06
0.42 ┬▒ 0.06
0.33 ┬▒ 0.05
0.25 ┬▒ 0.08
0.36 ┬▒ 0.08
a
-
0.24 ┬▒ 0.04
0.24 ┬▒ 0.04
-
-
-
-
a1
-
-
-
0.47 ┬▒ 0.07
0.51 ┬▒ 0.07
0.49 ┬▒ 0.07
0.44 ┬▒ 0.07
a2
-
-
-
0.25 ┬▒ 0.05
0.29 ┬▒ 0.05
0.27 ┬▒ 0.05
0.24 ┬▒ 0.06
a3
-
-
-
0.20 ┬▒ 0.04
0.25 ┬▒ 0.04
0.24 ┬▒ 0.04
0.18 ┬▒ 0.04
a4
-
-
-
0.31 ┬▒ 0.14
-
-
0.27 ┬▒ 0.14
Rhum
-
-
-
-
-
204 ┬▒ 88
243 ┬▒ 88
Page 54 of 87
==PAGE:64==
Master Thesis
Results of unfitted model
Table C.3: Results of the parameter estimation for each modelfit using the nlsLM() function
in R and the KK dataset. The table shows both the estimated value and the standard
deviation.
Parameter
M0
M1
M2
M3
M4
M5
M6
╬▒
0.33 ┬▒ 0.09
0.22 ┬▒ 0.05
-
-
-
-
-
╬▓
5.6 ┬▒ 1.2
4.2 ┬▒ 0.6
-
-
-
-
-
R0
-
-
4.8 ┬▒ 0.5
4.6 ┬▒ 0.46
4.6 ┬▒ 0.5
3.2 ┬▒ 0.08
3.1 ┬▒ 0.7
q10
-
-
1.3 ┬▒ 0.08
1.4 ┬▒ 0.09
1.4 ┬▒ 0.1
1.5 ┬▒ 0.18
1.6 ┬▒ 0.16
ŽĄ
0.12 ┬▒ 0.11
0.09 ┬▒ 0.01
0.08 ┬▒ 0.01
0.09 ┬▒ 0.01
0.07 ┬▒ 0.009
0.07 ┬▒ 0.009
0.09 ┬▒ 0.01
PAR0
426 ┬▒ 59
727 ┬▒ 126
738 ┬▒ 130
729 ┬▒ 134
896 ┬▒ 180
824 ┬▒ 171
685 ┬▒ 128
g
ŌłÆ0.04 ┬▒ 0.03
0.42 ┬▒ 0.06
0.41 ┬▒ 0.06
0.42 ┬▒ 0.06
0.33 ┬▒ 0.05
0.25 ┬▒ 0.08
0.36 ┬▒ 0.08
a
-
0.23 ┬▒ 0.04
0.23 ┬▒ 0.04
-
-
-
-
a1
-
-
-
0.32 ┬▒ 0.05
0.35 ┬▒ 0.05
0.33 ┬▒ 0.05
0.30 ┬▒ 0.05
a2
-
-
-
0.30 ┬▒ 0.07
0.34 ┬▒ 0.07
0.32 ┬▒ 0.07
0.27 ┬▒ 0.07
a3
-
-
-
0.17 ┬▒ 0.04
0.22 ┬▒ 0.04
0.21 ┬▒ 0.04
0.15 ┬▒ 0.04
a4
-
-
-
0.27 ┬▒ 0.14
-
-
0.24 ┬▒ 0.14
Rhum
-
-
-
-
-
219 ┬▒ 88
252 ┬▒ 88
D
Results of unfitted model
The following presents the results of the unfitted model. Especially in May and June the
simulated data follow the same trend as the data measured by the EC tower. However, there
is still a gap between the two datasets, especially visible in March.
Figure D.1: Time series of the total simulated surface CO2 flux, weighted by the foot-
print(red) and measured surface CO2 flux (black).The vegetation Index is NDRE.
Page 55 of 87
==PAGE:65==
Master Thesis
Results of unfitted model
Figure D.2: Time series of the individual model terms and their contribution to the surface
CO2 flux, weighted by the footprint. The vegetation Index is NDRE.
An unbiased NEE Map for the area with the unfitted baseline model shows that NEE becomes
more negative with the change of season. In March and April residential areas have negative
NEE (photosynthesis dominates) and nature-based areas have a positive NEE (respiration
dominates). In contrast in May and June almost the entire target area has a negative NEE
with a maximum uptake of -1.14 kg/m2 in June in the nature areas around the small lakes
in the south.
Page 56 of 87
==PAGE:66==
Master Thesis
Results of unfitted model
Figure D.3: The total CO2 exchange from vegetation (NEE) in the target area per month,
calculated with the unfitted model. The red line indicates the indstry dominated sector.
Negative values indicate CO2 uptake, positive CO2 release to the atmosphere.
Page 57 of 87
==PAGE:67==
Master Thesis
ERA5 data
E
ERA5 data
Figure E.1: Comparison of the measured temperature data in Gladsaxe and the ERA5
temperature data.
Figure E.2: Comparison of the measured radiation data in Gladsaxe and the ERA5 radiation
data.
Page 58 of 87
==PAGE:68==
Master Thesis
Plots of the residual analysis
F
Plots of the residual analysis
Page 59 of 87
==PAGE:69==
Master Thesis
Plots of the residual analysis
0
5
10
15
ŌłÆ10
0
5
10
Modelfit 0 , CO dataset
Predicted traffic CO2 flux in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0.1619
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
ŌłÆ10
0
5
10
Modelfit  0 , CO dataset
Predicted GPP CO2 flux in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 6eŌłÆ04
ŌłÆ10
ŌłÆ8
ŌłÆ6
ŌłÆ4
ŌłÆ2
0
2
ŌłÆ10
0
5
10
Modelfit 0 , CO dataset
Predicted NEE CO2 flux in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 6eŌłÆ04
0
1
2
3
ŌłÆ10
0
5
10
Modelfit 0 , CO dataset
Predicted Respiration CO2 flux in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 1eŌłÆ04
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
ŌłÆ10
0
5
10
Modelfit 0 , CO dataset
u*
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0
(0,30]
(90,120]
(210,240]
(330,360]
ŌłÆ10
0
5
10
Modelfit 0 , CO dataset
wind direction [┬░]
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
ŌłÆ10
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
ŌłÆ10
0
5
10
Modelfit 0 , CO dataset
 CO2 storage term in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0.2372
3
4
5
6
ŌłÆ10
0
5
10
Modelfit 0 , CO dataset
Month
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
Page 60 of 87
==PAGE:70==
Master Thesis
Plots of the residual analysis
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
15
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
15
Modelfit 0 , CO dataset
Predicted CO2 flux in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
Measured CO2 flux in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0.3135
00:00
05:00
10:00
15:00
20:00
ŌłÆ10
0
5
10
Modelfit 0 , CO dataset
Time of the day (CET)
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
ŌłÆ10
0
5
10
Modelfit 0 , CO dataset
Contribution of industry in footprint
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0.0028
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
ŌłÆ10
0
5
10
Modelfit 0 , CO dataset
Contribution of cropland in footprint
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 7eŌłÆ04
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
ŌłÆ10
0
5
10
Modelfit 0 , CO dataset
Contribution of forest in footprint
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0.0046
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
ŌłÆ10
0
5
10
Modelfit 0 , CO dataset
Contribution of built up area in footprint
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0.0023
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
ŌłÆ10
0
5
10
Modelfit 0 , CO dataset
Contribution of recreational area in footprint
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0.0029
Page 61 of 87
==PAGE:71==
Master Thesis
Plots of the residual analysis
0
5
10
15
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 1 , CO dataset
Predicted traffic CO2 flux in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 1eŌłÆ04
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit  1 , CO dataset
Predicted GPP CO2 flux in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 5eŌłÆ04
ŌłÆ10
ŌłÆ8
ŌłÆ6
ŌłÆ4
ŌłÆ2
0
2
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 1 , CO dataset
Predicted NEE CO2 flux in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 4eŌłÆ04
0
1
2
3
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 1 , CO dataset
Predicted Respiration CO2 flux in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 3eŌłÆ04
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 1 , CO dataset
u*
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 1eŌłÆ04
(0,30]
(90,120]
(210,240]
(330,360]
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 1 , CO dataset
wind direction [┬░]
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
ŌłÆ10
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 1 , CO dataset
 CO2 storage term in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0.3074
3
4
5
6
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 1 , CO dataset
Month
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
Page 62 of 87
==PAGE:72==
Master Thesis
Plots of the residual analysis
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
15
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
15
Modelfit 1 , CO dataset
Predicted CO2 flux in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
Measured CO2 flux in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0.411
00:00
05:00
10:00
15:00
20:00
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 1 , CO dataset
Time of the day (CET)
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 1 , CO dataset
Contribution of industry in footprint
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0.0045
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 1 , CO dataset
Contribution of cropland in footprint
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0.0067
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 1 , CO dataset
Contribution of forest in footprint
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0.0046
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 1 , CO dataset
Contribution of built up area in footprint
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0.0053
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 1 , CO dataset
Contribution of recreational area in footprint
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0.0054
Page 63 of 87
==PAGE:73==
Master Thesis
Plots of the residual analysis
0
5
10
15
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 2 , CO dataset
Predicted traffic CO2 flux in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 1eŌłÆ04
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit  2 , CO dataset
Predicted GPP CO2 flux in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 5eŌłÆ04
ŌłÆ10
ŌłÆ8
ŌłÆ6
ŌłÆ4
ŌłÆ2
0
2
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 2 , CO dataset
Predicted NEE CO2 flux in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 4eŌłÆ04
0
1
2
3
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 2 , CO dataset
Predicted Respiration CO2 flux in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 1eŌłÆ04
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 2 , CO dataset
u*
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 1eŌłÆ04
(0,30]
(90,120]
(210,240]
(330,360]
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 2 , CO dataset
wind direction [┬░]
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
ŌłÆ10
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 2 , CO dataset
 CO2 storage term in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0.3079
3
4
5
6
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 2 , CO dataset
Month
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
Page 64 of 87
==PAGE:74==
Master Thesis
Plots of the residual analysis
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
15
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
15
Modelfit 2 , CO dataset
Predicted CO2 flux in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
Measured CO2 flux in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0.4097
00:00
05:00
10:00
15:00
20:00
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 2 , CO dataset
Time of the day (CET)
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 2 , CO dataset
Contribution of industry in footprint
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0.0047
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 2 , CO dataset
Contribution of cropland in footprint
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0.0067
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 2 , CO dataset
Contribution of forest in footprint
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0.0044
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 2 , CO dataset
Contribution of built up area in footprint
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0.0052
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 2 , CO dataset
Contribution of recreational area in footprint
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0.0057
Page 65 of 87
==PAGE:75==
Master Thesis
Plots of the residual analysis
0
5
10
15
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 3 , CO dataset
Predicted traffic CO2 flux in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 1eŌłÆ04
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit  3 , CO dataset
Predicted GPP CO2 flux in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 5eŌłÆ04
ŌłÆ10
ŌłÆ8
ŌłÆ6
ŌłÆ4
ŌłÆ2
0
2
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 3 , CO dataset
Predicted NEE CO2 flux in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 5eŌłÆ04
0
1
2
3
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 3 , CO dataset
Predicted Respiration CO2 flux in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 3 , CO dataset
u*
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 3eŌłÆ04
(0,30]
(90,120]
(210,240]
(330,360]
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 3 , CO dataset
wind direction [┬░]
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
ŌłÆ10
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 3 , CO dataset
 CO2 storage term in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0.3164
3
4
5
6
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 3 , CO dataset
Month
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
Page 66 of 87
==PAGE:76==
Master Thesis
Plots of the residual analysis
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
15
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
15
Modelfit 3 , CO dataset
Predicted CO2 flux in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
Measured CO2 flux in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0.4172
00:00
05:00
10:00
15:00
20:00
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 3 , CO dataset
Time of the day (CET)
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 3 , CO dataset
Contribution of industry in footprint
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0.0037
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 3 , CO dataset
Contribution of cropland in footprint
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0.007
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 3 , CO dataset
Contribution of forest in footprint
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0.0046
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 3 , CO dataset
Contribution of built up area in footprint
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0.0059
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 3 , CO dataset
Contribution of recreational area in footprint
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0.0052
Page 67 of 87
==PAGE:77==
Master Thesis
Plots of the residual analysis
0
5
10
15
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 4 , CO dataset
Predicted traffic CO2 flux in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0.0016
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit  4 , CO dataset
Predicted GPP CO2 flux in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 4eŌłÆ04
ŌłÆ10
ŌłÆ8
ŌłÆ6
ŌłÆ4
ŌłÆ2
0
2
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 4 , CO dataset
Predicted NEE CO2 flux in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 4eŌłÆ04
0
1
2
3
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 4 , CO dataset
Predicted Respiration CO2 flux in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 4 , CO dataset
u*
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 5eŌłÆ04
(0,30]
(90,120]
(210,240]
(330,360]
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 4 , CO dataset
wind direction [┬░]
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
ŌłÆ10
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 4 , CO dataset
 CO2 storage term in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0.3106
3
4
5
6
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 4 , CO dataset
Month
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
Page 68 of 87
==PAGE:78==
Master Thesis
Plots of the residual analysis
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
15
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
15
Modelfit 4 , CO dataset
Predicted CO2 flux in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
Measured CO2 flux in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0.4065
00:00
05:00
10:00
15:00
20:00
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 4 , CO dataset
Time of the day (CET)
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 4 , CO dataset
Contribution of industry in footprint
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0.0017
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 4 , CO dataset
Contribution of cropland in footprint
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0.0056
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 4 , CO dataset
Contribution of forest in footprint
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0.0038
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 4 , CO dataset
Contribution of built up area in footprint
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0.005
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 4 , CO dataset
Contribution of recreational area in footprint
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0.0041
Page 69 of 87
==PAGE:79==
Master Thesis
Plots of the residual analysis
0
5
10
15
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 5 , CO dataset
Predicted traffic CO2 flux in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0.0015
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit  5 , CO dataset
Predicted GPP CO2 flux in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 3eŌłÆ04
ŌłÆ10
ŌłÆ8
ŌłÆ6
ŌłÆ4
ŌłÆ2
0
2
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 5 , CO dataset
Predicted NEE CO2 flux in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 4eŌłÆ04
0
1
2
3
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 5 , CO dataset
Predicted Respiration CO2 flux in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 1eŌłÆ04
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 5 , CO dataset
u*
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 4eŌłÆ04
(0,30]
(90,120]
(210,240]
(330,360]
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 5 , CO dataset
wind direction [┬░]
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
ŌłÆ10
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 5 , CO dataset
 CO2 storage term in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0.3098
3
4
5
6
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 5 , CO dataset
Month
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
Page 70 of 87
==PAGE:80==
Master Thesis
Plots of the residual analysis
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
15
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
15
Modelfit 5 , CO dataset
Predicted CO2 flux in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
Measured CO2 flux in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0.4097
00:00
05:00
10:00
15:00
20:00
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 5 , CO dataset
Time of the day (CET)
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 5 , CO dataset
Contribution of industry in footprint
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0.0011
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 5 , CO dataset
Contribution of cropland in footprint
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0.0035
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 5 , CO dataset
Contribution of forest in footprint
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0.0056
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 5 , CO dataset
Contribution of built up area in footprint
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0.0059
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 5 , CO dataset
Contribution of recreational area in footprint
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0.0024
Page 71 of 87
==PAGE:81==
Master Thesis
Plots of the residual analysis
0
5
10
15
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 6 , CO dataset
Predicted traffic CO2 flux in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 1eŌłÆ04
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit  6 , CO dataset
Predicted GPP CO2 flux in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 4eŌłÆ04
ŌłÆ10
ŌłÆ8
ŌłÆ6
ŌłÆ4
ŌłÆ2
0
2
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 6 , CO dataset
Predicted NEE CO2 flux in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 5eŌłÆ04
0
1
2
3
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 6 , CO dataset
Predicted Respiration CO2 flux in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 6 , CO dataset
u*
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 2eŌłÆ04
(0,30]
(90,120]
(210,240]
(330,360]
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 6 , CO dataset
wind direction [┬░]
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
ŌłÆ10
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 6 , CO dataset
 CO2 storage term in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0.3155
3
4
5
6
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 6 , CO dataset
Month
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
Page 72 of 87
==PAGE:82==
Master Thesis
Plots of the residual analysis
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
15
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
15
Modelfit 6 , CO dataset
Predicted CO2 flux in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
Measured CO2 flux in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0.4216
00:00
05:00
10:00
15:00
20:00
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 6 , CO dataset
Time of the day (CET)
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 6 , CO dataset
Contribution of industry in footprint
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0.0028
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 6 , CO dataset
Contribution of cropland in footprint
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0.0043
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 6 , CO dataset
Contribution of forest in footprint
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0.007
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 6 , CO dataset
Contribution of built up area in footprint
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0.0072
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 6 , CO dataset
Contribution of recreational area in footprint
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0.003
Page 73 of 87
==PAGE:83==
Master Thesis
Plots of the residual analysis
0
5
10
15
ŌłÆ10
0
5
10
Modelfit 0 , KK dataset
Predicted traffic CO2 flux in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0.2052
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
ŌłÆ10
0
5
10
Modelfit  0 , KK dataset
Predicted GPP CO2 flux in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 5eŌłÆ04
ŌłÆ10
ŌłÆ8
ŌłÆ6
ŌłÆ4
ŌłÆ2
0
2
ŌłÆ10
0
5
10
Modelfit 0 , KK dataset
Predicted NEE CO2 flux in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 5eŌłÆ04
0
1
2
3
ŌłÆ10
0
5
10
Modelfit 0 , KK dataset
Predicted Respiration CO2 flux in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
ŌłÆ10
0
5
10
Modelfit 0 , KK dataset
u*
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 5eŌłÆ04
(0,30]
(90,120]
(210,240]
(330,360]
ŌłÆ10
0
5
10
Modelfit 0 , KK dataset
wind direction [┬░]
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
ŌłÆ10
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
ŌłÆ10
0
5
10
Modelfit 0 , KK dataset
 CO2 storage term in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0.2231
3
4
5
6
ŌłÆ10
0
5
10
Modelfit 0 , KK dataset
Month
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
Page 74 of 87
==PAGE:84==
Master Thesis
Plots of the residual analysis
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
15
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
15
Modelfit 0 , KK dataset
Predicted CO2 flux in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
Measured CO2 flux in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0.30
00:00
05:00
10:00
15:00
20:00
ŌłÆ10
0
5
10
Modelfit 0 , KK dataset
Time of the day (CET)
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
ŌłÆ10
0
5
10
Modelfit 0 , KK dataset
Contribution of industry in footprint
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0.0026
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
ŌłÆ10
0
5
10
Modelfit 0 , KK dataset
Contribution of cropland in footprint
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 3eŌłÆ04
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
ŌłÆ10
0
5
10
Modelfit 0 , KK dataset
Contribution of forest in footprint
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0.0054
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
ŌłÆ10
0
5
10
Modelfit 0 , KK dataset
Contribution of built up area in footprint
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0.0022
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
ŌłÆ10
0
5
10
Modelfit 0 , KK dataset
Contribution of recreational area in footprint
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0.0027
Page 75 of 87
==PAGE:85==
Master Thesis
Plots of the residual analysis
0
5
10
15
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 1 , KK dataset
Predicted traffic CO2 flux in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 1eŌłÆ04
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit  1 , KK dataset
Predicted GPP CO2 flux in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 5eŌłÆ04
ŌłÆ10
ŌłÆ8
ŌłÆ6
ŌłÆ4
ŌłÆ2
0
2
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 1 , KK dataset
Predicted NEE CO2 flux in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 4eŌłÆ04
0
1
2
3
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 1 , KK dataset
Predicted Respiration CO2 flux in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 3eŌłÆ04
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 1 , KK dataset
u*
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 2eŌłÆ04
(0,30]
(90,120]
(210,240]
(330,360]
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 1 , KK dataset
wind direction [┬░]
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
ŌłÆ10
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 1 , KK dataset
 CO2 storage term in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0.3083
3
4
5
6
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 1 , KK dataset
Month
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
Page 76 of 87
==PAGE:86==
Master Thesis
Plots of the residual analysis
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
15
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
15
Modelfit 1 , KK dataset
Predicted CO2 flux in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
Measured CO2 flux in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0.4132
00:00
05:00
10:00
15:00
20:00
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 1 , KK dataset
Time of the day (CET)
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 1 , KK dataset
Contribution of industry in footprint
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0.0048
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 1 , KK dataset
Contribution of cropland in footprint
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0.0074
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 1 , KK dataset
Contribution of forest in footprint
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0.0049
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 1 , KK dataset
Contribution of built up area in footprint
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0.0054
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 1 , KK dataset
Contribution of recreational area in footprint
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0.0054
Page 77 of 87
==PAGE:87==
Master Thesis
Plots of the residual analysis
0
5
10
15
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 2 , KK dataset
Predicted traffic CO2 flux in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 1eŌłÆ04
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit  2 , KK dataset
Predicted GPP CO2 flux in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 5eŌłÆ04
ŌłÆ10
ŌłÆ8
ŌłÆ6
ŌłÆ4
ŌłÆ2
0
2
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 2 , KK dataset
Predicted NEE CO2 flux in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 4eŌłÆ04
0
1
2
3
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 2 , KK dataset
Predicted Respiration CO2 flux in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 1eŌłÆ04
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 2 , KK dataset
u*
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 2eŌłÆ04
(0,30]
(90,120]
(210,240]
(330,360]
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 2 , KK dataset
wind direction [┬░]
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
ŌłÆ10
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 2 , KK dataset
 CO2 storage term in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0.3088
3
4
5
6
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 2 , KK dataset
Month
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
Page 78 of 87
==PAGE:88==
Master Thesis
Plots of the residual analysis
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
15
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
15
Modelfit 2 , KK dataset
Predicted CO2 flux in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
Measured CO2 flux in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0.4119
00:00
05:00
10:00
15:00
20:00
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 2 , KK dataset
Time of the day (CET)
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 2 , KK dataset
Contribution of industry in footprint
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0.005
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 2 , KK dataset
Contribution of cropland in footprint
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0.0074
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 2 , KK dataset
Contribution of forest in footprint
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0.0047
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 2 , KK dataset
Contribution of built up area in footprint
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0.0053
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 2 , KK dataset
Contribution of recreational area in footprint
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0.0057
Page 79 of 87
==PAGE:89==
Master Thesis
Plots of the residual analysis
0
5
10
15
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 3 , KK dataset
Predicted traffic CO2 flux in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 1eŌłÆ04
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit  3 , KK dataset
Predicted GPP CO2 flux in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 5eŌłÆ04
ŌłÆ10
ŌłÆ8
ŌłÆ6
ŌłÆ4
ŌłÆ2
0
2
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 3 , KK dataset
Predicted NEE CO2 flux in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 5eŌłÆ04
0
1
2
3
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 3 , KK dataset
Predicted Respiration CO2 flux in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 1eŌłÆ04
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 3 , KK dataset
u*
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 4eŌłÆ04
(0,30]
(90,120]
(210,240]
(330,360]
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 3 , KK dataset
wind direction [┬░]
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
ŌłÆ10
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 3 , KK dataset
 CO2 storage term in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0.3163
3
4
5
6
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 3 , KK dataset
Month
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
Page 80 of 87
==PAGE:90==
Master Thesis
Plots of the residual analysis
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
15
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
15
Modelfit 3 , KK dataset
Predicted CO2 flux in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
Measured CO2 flux in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0.417
00:00
05:00
10:00
15:00
20:00
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 3 , KK dataset
Time of the day (CET)
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 3 , KK dataset
Contribution of industry in footprint
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0.0044
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 3 , KK dataset
Contribution of cropland in footprint
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0.0076
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 3 , KK dataset
Contribution of forest in footprint
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0.0047
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 3 , KK dataset
Contribution of built up area in footprint
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0.0059
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 3 , KK dataset
Contribution of recreational area in footprint
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0.0055
Page 81 of 87
==PAGE:91==
Master Thesis
Plots of the residual analysis
0
5
10
15
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 4 , KK dataset
Predicted traffic CO2 flux in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0.0017
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit  4 , KK dataset
Predicted GPP CO2 flux in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 4eŌłÆ04
ŌłÆ10
ŌłÆ8
ŌłÆ6
ŌłÆ4
ŌłÆ2
0
2
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 4 , KK dataset
Predicted NEE CO2 flux in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 4eŌłÆ04
0
1
2
3
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 4 , KK dataset
Predicted Respiration CO2 flux in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 4 , KK dataset
u*
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 7eŌłÆ04
(0,30]
(90,120]
(210,240]
(330,360]
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 4 , KK dataset
wind direction [┬░]
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
ŌłÆ10
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 4 , KK dataset
 CO2 storage term in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0.3098
3
4
5
6
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 4 , KK dataset
Month
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
Page 82 of 87
==PAGE:92==
Master Thesis
Plots of the residual analysis
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
15
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
15
Modelfit 4 , KK dataset
Predicted CO2 flux in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
Measured CO2 flux in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0.4045
00:00
05:00
10:00
15:00
20:00
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 4 , KK dataset
Time of the day (CET)
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 4 , KK dataset
Contribution of industry in footprint
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0.0023
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 4 , KK dataset
Contribution of cropland in footprint
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0.0062
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 4 , KK dataset
Contribution of forest in footprint
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0.0039
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 4 , KK dataset
Contribution of built up area in footprint
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0.0047
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 4 , KK dataset
Contribution of recreational area in footprint
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0.0044
Page 83 of 87
==PAGE:93==
Master Thesis
Plots of the residual analysis
0
5
10
15
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 5 , KK dataset
Predicted traffic CO2 flux in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0.0015
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit  5 , KK dataset
Predicted GPP CO2 flux in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 3eŌłÆ04
ŌłÆ10
ŌłÆ8
ŌłÆ6
ŌłÆ4
ŌłÆ2
0
2
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 5 , KK dataset
Predicted NEE CO2 flux in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 4eŌłÆ04
0
1
2
3
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 5 , KK dataset
Predicted Respiration CO2 flux in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 1eŌłÆ04
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 5 , KK dataset
u*
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 5eŌłÆ04
(0,30]
(90,120]
(210,240]
(330,360]
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 5 , KK dataset
wind direction [┬░]
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
ŌłÆ10
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 5 , KK dataset
 CO2 storage term in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0.3092
3
4
5
6
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 5 , KK dataset
Month
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
Page 84 of 87
==PAGE:94==
Master Thesis
Plots of the residual analysis
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
15
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
15
Modelfit 5 , KK dataset
Predicted CO2 flux in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
Measured CO2 flux in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0.4081
00:00
05:00
10:00
15:00
20:00
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 5 , KK dataset
Time of the day (CET)
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 5 , KK dataset
Contribution of industry in footprint
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0.0016
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 5 , KK dataset
Contribution of cropland in footprint
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0.0038
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 5 , KK dataset
Contribution of forest in footprint
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0.0057
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 5 , KK dataset
Contribution of built up area in footprint
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0.0056
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 5 , KK dataset
Contribution of recreational area in footprint
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0.0026
Page 85 of 87
==PAGE:95==
Master Thesis
Plots of the residual analysis
0
5
10
15
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 6 , KK dataset
Predicted traffic CO2 flux in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 1eŌłÆ04
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit  6 , KK dataset
Predicted GPP CO2 flux in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 4eŌłÆ04
ŌłÆ10
ŌłÆ8
ŌłÆ6
ŌłÆ4
ŌłÆ2
0
2
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 6 , KK dataset
Predicted NEE CO2 flux in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 5eŌłÆ04
0
1
2
3
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 6 , KK dataset
Predicted Respiration CO2 flux in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 6 , KK dataset
u*
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 2eŌłÆ04
(0,30]
(90,120]
(210,240]
(330,360]
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 6 , KK dataset
wind direction [┬░]
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
ŌłÆ10
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 6 , KK dataset
 CO2 storage term in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0.3155
3
4
5
6
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 6 , KK dataset
Month
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
Page 86 of 87
==PAGE:96==
Master Thesis
Plots of the residual analysis
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
15
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
15
Modelfit 6 , KK dataset
Predicted CO2 flux in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
Measured CO2 flux in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0.4217
00:00
05:00
10:00
15:00
20:00
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 6 , KK dataset
Time of the day (CET)
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 6 , KK dataset
Contribution of industry in footprint
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0.0034
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 6 , KK dataset
Contribution of cropland in footprint
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0.0046
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 6 , KK dataset
Contribution of forest in footprint
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0.0072
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 6 , KK dataset
Contribution of built up area in footprint
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0.0071
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
ŌłÆ5
0
5
10
Modelfit 6 , KK dataset
Contribution of recreational area in footprint
Model residuals in ┬Ąmol CO2 mŌłÆ2 sŌłÆ1
R2 = 0.0031
Page 87 of 87
