==PAGE:1==
DTU Wind and Energy Systems
Techno-economical assessment of 
lightning monitoring systems for 
multi-megawatt wind turbines
Alberto Jiménez Montesdeoca
DTU Wind-WEM-0033
June 2024
==PAGE:2==
DTU Wind WEM-0033
ECTS: 15
Education: Master of Wind Energy
Supervisor(s):
Joachim Holbøll
DTU Wind and Energy Systems
Yaru Mendez
LM Wind Power
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for 
graduation in the above education at the 
Technical University of Denmark.
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Wind and Energy Systems
Frederiksborgvej 399
DK-4000 Roskilde
www.wind.dtu.dk
Author:
Alberto Jiménez Montesdeoca
Title:
Techno-economical assessment of 
lightning monitoring systems for multi-
megawatt wind turbines
DTU Wind and Energy Systems is a department of 
the Technical University of Denmark with a unique 
integration of research, education, innovation and 
public/private sector consulting in the field of wind 
and energy. Our activities develop new 
opportunities and technology for the global and 
Danish exploitation of wind and energy. Research 
focuses on key technical-scientific fields, which are 
central for the development, innovation and use of 
wind energy and provides the basis for advanced 
education.
Picture on cover page by Erik Vogeley, DTU
==PAGE:3==
 
 
 
Contents 
INTRODUCTION ....................................................................................................................................... 1 
Background ........................................................................................................................................... 1 
Project Description ................................................................................................................................ 1 
Terminology .......................................................................................................................................... 2 
Abbreviated Terms ................................................................................................................................ 5 
PART I -- LITERATURE, STANDARDS, PRE-STANDARDIZATION REPORTS AND 
COMPANY SPECIFIC INFORMATION ............................................................................................... 6 
PART II – PHYSICS BEHIND LIGHTNING ......................................................................................... 6 
PART III -- BASIC PRINCIPLES FOR LIGHTNING CURRENT MEASUREMENTS IN 
STRUCTURES .......................................................................................................................................... 18 
Rogowski Coil .................................................................................................................................... 18 
Optic and Faraday Effect .................................................................................................................... 25 
Magnetic Field .................................................................................................................................... 28 
PART IV – LIGHTNING PROTECTION SYSTEM (LPS)................................................................. 31 
PART V – LIGHTNING MONITORING SYSTEM (LMS) ................................................................ 35 
Classification of lightning current measurements ............................................................................... 37 
Characteristics every LMS should comply as per the latest IEC & JIS Standards ............................. 39 
V.A) COMMERCIALLY AVAILABLE SOLUTIONS IN THE MARKET .................................. 47 
LMS COMPARISON TABLE ........................................................................................................... 85 
V.B) DATA ASSESSMENT, ANALYSIS AND KNOWLEDGE SHARING.................................. 93 
V.C) COMPATIBILITY WITH OTHER WTG MONITORING SYSTEMS .............................. 108 
V.D) MAIN PURPOSE OF THE LMS, REAL TIME MONITORING VS LONG TERM 
ASSESSMENT, MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENT / STRATEGIES ....................................... 108 
PART VI -- APPLICABILITY EVALUATION TO LM/GE TURBINES AND 
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR FUTURE APPLICATION OF THE METHODS ON REAL CASES 
IN THE COMPANY. .............................................................................................................................. 109 
PART VII -- CONCLUSION ................................................................................................................. 110 
REFERENCES ........................................................................................................................................ 111 
ANNEX I - DATASHEETS OF LMS STUDIED ................................................................................. 112 
ANNEX II - LMS TEST REPORT ....................................................................................................... 139 
ANNEX III – CALCULATION OF THE RECEPTOR MASS LOSS .............................................. 147 
 
 
==PAGE:4==
 
 
 
 
1 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
Background 
 
Up to 2023, onshore and offshore wind installations accounted 906 GW installed total capacity. 
This makes wind turbine industry an attractive market, which has reached a critical mass. The 
industry’s development points to increasing rotor blade length and mass, higher hub heights and 
higher wind turbine power ratings, especially in offshore applications. 
 
With increased wind turbine dimensions, the interest from manufacturers, certifying companies 
and insurance companies in the effects of lightning strikes on wind turbines has increased 
considerably. In certain regions, like Japan, the installation and operation of Lightning 
Monitoring Systems - LMS is compulsory. 
 
Recent editions of the international norms IEC 61400-24 Ed. 2.0 (2019) and JIS C 1400-24:2023 
devote one completely annex to this topic. More thoroughly speaking, we will be focusing on 
Annex L of the IEC Standard (2019) and Annex JA of the JIS C 1400-23:2023 to understand 
physics behind LPS and LMS systems. 
 
 
 
 
 
Project Description 
 
The project covers and investigation of new and traditional technologies, sensors, and systems 
for lighting current measurements, especially applied to wind turbine rotor blades, were typically 
the LMS is deployed. The latest developments and trending in LMS will be investigated. 
 
This thesis will be focused on a thorough understanding on available lightning measuring 
principles and techniques, how the installation, manufacturing and O&M processes are 
conducted in a global wind rotor blade manufacturer and how they affect the environment as 
well as investment and operational costs. 
 
==PAGE:5==
 
 
 
 
2 
 
The project covers current paths from the blade to the nacelle (Passing through spinner, frame & 
hub) and nacelle to the ground throughout the tower, independently on the wind turbine type and 
manufacturer. 
 
In order to give a formal and comprehensive understanding of what we are about to discuss, this 
thesis will be divided into seven main parts: 
 
I. 
Literature, Standards, pre-standardization reports and company specific information 
II. 
Physics behind lightning 
III. 
Basic Principles for lightning current measurements in structures 
IV. 
LPS (Lightning Protection System) 
V. 
LMS (Lightning Monitoring System) 
V.a) Commercially available solutions in the market 
V.b) Data assessment, analysis, and knowledge sharing 
V.c) Compatibility with other WTG monitoring systems 
V.d) Real time monitoring vs long term assessment, maintenance requirement / strategies 
VI. 
Evaluation applicability to the company LM/GE WTG and recommendations for future 
applications. 
VII. 
Conclusion 
 
Terminology 
 
 
The definitions given in IEC 62305-1, IEC 62305-2, IEC 62305-3 and IEC 62305-4 will take 
precedence and are shown next. 
Further and more in-depth definitions can be found at the IEC Electropedia and ISO online 
browsing platform respectively: 
• IEC Electropedia: http://www.electropedia.org/ 
• ISO Online browsing platform:  http://www.iso.org/obp 
 
==PAGE:6==
 
 
 
 
3 
 
Air – Termination System → Part of an external LPS using metallic elements such as 
rods, mesh conductors or catenary wires intended to intercept lighting flashes and 
conduct them throughout the whole WTG towards grounding. 
Average Steepness →  Maximum current steepness of the impulse, I, divided by the front 
time of the impulse T1. Its symbol is di/dt. 
Bonding Bar → Metal bar, normally manufactured in copper, on which metal 
installations, external conductive parts, electric power lines, telecommunication lines and 
other cables can be grounded or earthed. 
Charge, Q → Time integral of the current transferred to a blade, either positive or 
negative. Its unit is the Coulomb, C. 
Down- conductor system → Part of an external LPS intended to conduct a lightning 
current from the air-termination system to the earth, normally allocated underground at 
the bottom of the WTG. Normally it is placed inside WTG’s. 
Downward flash → Lightning flash initiated by a downward leader from cloud to earth. 
It can be positive or negative (depending on the cloud’s charge). 
A downward flash normally consists of a first impulse, which can be followed by 
subsequent ones of a large or shorter duration. One or more impulses may be followed by 
a long stroke. 
Earth Electrode → Part of a group of parts of the earth-termination system that provides 
direct electrical contact and disperses the lightning current to earth. 
Flash Charge →  Value resulting from the time integral of the lightning current for the 
entire lightning flash duration. 
High Voltage →  Any Alternative Current (AC) higher than 1000 Volts or any Direct 
Current (DC) lower than 1500 Volts. 
Leader Connection Point →  Place in the air gap between test object and HV Electrode 
where positive and negative leaders meet and the discharge triggers out. 
Lightning Current → Current flowing at the point of strike, represented by ‘’I’’ and its 
normal value is Kiloamperes (kA). 
Lightning Electromagnetic Impulse (LEMP) →  Refers to all electromagnetic effects of 
lightning current via resistive, inductive, and capacitive coupling that create surges and 
radiated electromagnetic field that might interfere with our electrical / electronic 
components. 
Lightning Equipotential Bonding → Bonding to LPS of separated metallic parts by 
direct conductive connections or via Surge Protection Devices (SPD) to reduce potential 
differences caused by the lightning current. 
Lightning flash to earth → Electric discharge of atmospheric origin between cloud and 
earth consisting of one or more strokes of different duration each. 
==PAGE:7==
 
 
 
 
4 
 
 A negative flash lowers negative charge from the thundercloud to the earth. A positive 
flash results in a positive charge being transferred from the thundercloud to the earth. 
Lightning Protection Level (LPL) → Is the number related to a set of lightning current 
parameter values relevant to the probability that the associated maximum and minimum 
design values will not be exceeded in a natural condition. It is used to design protection 
measures according to the relevant set of lightning current parameters. 
Lightning Protection Systems (LPS) → Full physical system used to reduce physical 
damage inside a WTG due to lightning flashes / strokes to a structure. It consists of both 
external and internal LPS’s. 
Lightning Protection Zone (LPZ) → Zone where the lightning electromagnetic 
environment is defined. In a WTG blade, a stroke is more likely to happen at the tip of 
the blade (0-2 meters away from the tip, 90% of times). 
Lightning Monitoring System (LMS) →  Physical and non-physical components mainly 
employed to measure, capture, and send key electrical parameters after a stroke hits a 
structure for future analysis and decision making. 
Lightning Stroke → Single electrical discharge in a lightning flash to earth. 
Long Stroke → Part of the lightning strike which corresponds to a continuing current. 
Normally its duration is typically more than 2 millisecond (msec) and less than 1 second 
(s). 
Multiple Strokes →Lightning Flash consisting of average 3 to 4 strokes whose interval is 
between 50 milliseconds. 
Peak or Impulse Current →  Current flowing at the point of strike after a structure is hit 
(or in our case, tip of a WTG blade) represented by ‘’I’’ and its normal value is 
Kiloamperes (kA). 
Peak Value →  Maximum value in kA of the lightning current.  
Receptor  → Form of air termination on wind turbine blades (i.e., discrete metal studs 
deployed through the blade surface connected to a down conductor system) 
Short Stroke →  Part of the lightning flash that corresponds to an impulse current. 
Normally has a time T2  equal to the half peak value on the tail less than 2 milliseconds. 
Specific Energy → Value resulting from time integral of the square of the lightning 
current for the entire flash duration. It represents the energy dissipated by the lightning 
current in a unit resistance. Represented by Watts/Resistance (W/ R) and its unit is 
Megajoules/Ohm (MJ/Ω) 
Surge Protection Device (SPD) → Device intended to limit over voltages and divert 
surge currents. Is a complete assembly, having different physical components connected. 
Steepness or slope charge→ Maximum current of the impulse current divided by the 
time of the impulse T1. 
==PAGE:8==
 
 
 
 
5 
 
Time Parameters →  Defined as 1.25 times the time interval between the moment of 
10% of the peak current value and the time to reach 90% of it. 
Upward Flash →  Lightning flash initiated by an upward leader from an earthed 
structure to cloud. Consists of a first long stroke with or without multiple superimposed 
impulses. One or more impulses might be followed by a long stroke. 
Winter lightning →  Geographical areas where upward lightning is the most common 
lightning phenomena, particularly during winter. In areas exposed to this winter lightning 
are more likely to share higher values of charge (i.e., Q=600C). 
 
 
Abbreviated Terms 
AC  
Alternating current. 
CFRP  Carbon fibre reinforced plastic. 
CG 
 Cloud to ground lightning. 
DE 
 Detection efficiency. 
EB 
 Lightning equipotential bonding. 
EGM  Electro geometrical model. 
EMC  Electromagnetic compatibility. 
GFRP Glass fibre reinforced plastic. 
HC 
 High Current. 
IC 
 Intra-cloud lightning. 
LEMP  Lightning electromagnetic impulse. 
LLS 
 Lightning location system. 
LPE 
 Lightning protection environment. 
LPL 
 Lightning protection level. 
LPS 
 Lightning protection system. 
LPZ 
 Lightning protection zone. 
LV 
 Low voltage. 
HV 
 High voltage. 
OCPD  Overcurrent protection device. 
PE 
 Protective earth. 
QA 
 Quality assurance system. 
SCIG  Squirrel cage induction generator. 
SEMP  Switching electromagnetic impulse. 
SPD 
 Surge protective device. 
SPM  Surge protection measures. 
WRIG  Wound rotor induction generator. 
WTG  Wind turbine generator. 
==PAGE:9==
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
 
PART I -- LITERATURE, STANDARDS, PRE-STANDARDIZATION REPORTS AND 
COMPANY SPECIFIC INFORMATION 
 
In this first part, the main standards used to write this thesis and external documentation given by 
LM Wind Power are discussed, to aid understanding principles behind physics, main concepts, 
and key parameters before deciding which LMS system satisfies the wind turbine manufacturers 
or wind park operator’s requirements, depending on the region of the world our wind farm is 
installed on. 
 
Regarding international standards we have applied the: 
- 
IEC 61400-24 ed.2.0 (July 2019) International Standard, Lightning Protection Part 24  
→ More specifically Annexes ‘A’ and ‘L’. 
- 
JIS C 1400-24:2023, Japanese International Standard, Part 24 → More specifically, 
Annex ‘JA’. 
We have included Japanese standard as is slightly more restrictive than the IEC and more wind 
farms, especially offshore, are planned to be built in this country, entailing a more restrictive 
detection method. 
Together with the standards, LM facilitator has shared few internal documents and presentations 
that have helped to understand main concepts behind lightning phenomena, current detection 
method and testing. 
Finally, a wide variety of company specific information, meetings with suppliers, datasheet, 
operation manuals, technical specifications and example of measurements have been at our 
disposal to be able to assess, compare and learn about different LMS system currently available 
in the market. 
 
PART II – PHYSICS BEHIND LIGHTNING 
 
In this second part, we will try to give a comprehensive understanding on the physics behind the 
lightning phenomena and why this occurs. 
==PAGE:10==
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Clouds are subject to get electrified by the environment itself due to charge sharing. In particular, 
clouds, ground and any built structure can get either positively or negatively charged, depending 
on the atmosphere conditions. 
 
 
Figure 1- Exchange of positive and negative charges (Source: 
https://www.weather.gov/safety/lightning-science-overview) 
 
It is precisely this potential difference what makes the positive or negative charge to flow 
throughout a lightning strike trying to find the shortest path to ground. Once a path is found and 
a charge difference occurs, a stroke happens led by a so called, Streamers, and followed by a 
Leaders: 
==PAGE:11==
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Figure 1-Examples of leaders and streamers (Source: https://www.weather.gov/safety/lightning-
science-overview) 
 
Lightning flashes are produced following a separation of charge in thunderstorm clouds. A 
lightning flash is observed when this charge is discharged to the earth or to a region of opposite 
polarity charge within the same cloud or a neighbouring cloud. The discussion that follows is 
concerned only with lightning flashes striking earth, resulting in the transfer of charge between a 
thundercloud and the earth. 
A lightning flash usually consists of several components. The whole event following the same 
ionised path is called a lightning flash, which may last up to about 1 s. The individual 
components of a flash are called short strokes and long strokes, where the latter are more 
commonly known as continuing currents. 
These strikes or lightning flashes, can be downward or upward initiated: 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:12==
 
 
 
 
9 
 
Downward lightning initiated 
 
Either the ground gets positive or negative charged and clouds have the opposite sign, then and 
due to its attraction, a lightning flash occurs from the clouds towards the ground followed by the 
stepped leaders. 
A good snapshot & explanation can be found in the pictures below with both positive and 
negative charge: 
 
Figure 2- Downward lightning with positive or negative ground (Source: DEHN lightning 
protection system guide) 
 
 
Figure 3- Downward lightning flash towards a building (Source: DEHN lightning protection 
system guide) 
==PAGE:13==
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
Upward Lightning Initiated 
It follows same principle as the downward lightning flash but in this case, the ground, object, or 
building is the one generating and leading the lightning flash (positive or negative) towards the 
clouds (return stroke). 
 
 
Figure 4- Upward lightning with positive or negative ground (Source: DEHN lightning 
protection system guide) 
 
 
==PAGE:14==
 
 
 
 
11 
 
 
Figure 5- Upward flashing from the ground towards the clouds (Source: DEHN lightning 
protection system guide) 
 
 
Nonetheless, according to field experience and studies, it is important to remark that over 90 % 
of lightning flashes are negative and less that 10 % are positive and the vast majority are 
downwards and a tiny minority, upwards. 
However, the positive flashes exhibit the most powerful current parameters (i.e. higher I, Q, and 
W/R) while the negative flashes exhibit the steepest current impulses (i.e. highest di/dt). 
A lightning flash consists of several components that can be parameterized to define its 
characteristics and schedule future preventive maintenance in wind farms or assess damages. 
Given the variability in the characteristics of lightning events, the international standards (IEC 
61400-24:2019 and JIS C 1400-24:2023) have established representative lightning strike 
characteristics, of which most important are: 
 
- 
Peak or Impulse Current (kA) 
- 
Charge (Q) 
- 
Time Parameters (T1/T2) 
- 
Average steepness or slope charge (di/dt) 
- 
Specific Energy content (MJ/Ohm) 
 
 
==PAGE:15==
 
 
 
 
12 
 
 
 
Figure 6-Typical impulse parameters after a lightning stroke represented in a graphic (Source: 
LM Wind Power) 
 
In addition to all said before, we all have witnessed not only single but also multiple lightning 
flashes or strokes during a storm. This also is considered whilst designing a lighting protection 
system (LPS) together with its monitoring system (LMS). Due to its nature, we might experience 
first long, short, and subsequent strokes or a combination of all of them, depending on the type of 
storm we are in: 
==PAGE:16==
 
 
 
 
13 
 
 
Figure 7- Different types of lightning strokes (Source: IEC 61400-24 Ed.2.0)
 
Figure 8- Combination of different lightning strokes (Source: IEC 61400-24 Ed. 2.0) 
In order to quantify  maximum parameters a lighting protection and measurement system has to 
withstand, to design lightning protection components (i.e. cross-section of conductors, thickness 
of metal sheets, current loading capability of SPDs, separation against dangerous sparking), and 
to define test parameters simulating the effects of lightning on such components, IEC 61400-24 
==PAGE:17==
 
 
 
 
14 
 
ed 2 (2019) and JIS C 1400-24:2023 have provided the following table, according to the 
Lightning Protection Level (LPL): 
 
 
Figure 9- Maximum values of lightning parameters according to LPL (Source: Adapted from 
IEC 62305-1) 
 
However, and as stated in the Annex E of the IEC 61400-24:2019), there is an explanation to 
show how the lightning exposure can be distributed along the blade length and the blade 
attachment probability at different spanwise locations, resulting in a higher strike probability 
towards the tip region of the blade. 
This explanation takes place for two types of blade concepts (Type A & B) as the following 
figure: 
==PAGE:18==
 
 
 
 
15 
 
 
Figure 10- Examples of generic blade lightning environment definition (Source: IEC 61400-
24:2019) 
In the type A concept, blade area 1 could be protected to cover LPL I lightning currents for direct 
strikes and the rest of the areas 2, 3 and 4 with LPL II, III and IV respectively. In the type B, 
LPL I and lower could be chosen for areas 1 and 2. For any approach, it is a requirement that 
area 1 comprising blade tip should comply with LPL I, alternatively the overall risk assessment 
should show that LPL II or less is applicable for the most severe part of the blade. Disregarding 
the exposure chosen for each area, the manufacturer should ensure that the direct strikes 
intercepting area 1 can be safely conducted through the blade and the remaining areas, even if 
the exposure to direct strikes is less in the inboard areas. 
The lightning environment is defined for each area, examples for concept A and B in Figure E.1 
are shown in Table E.1 for concept A, and Table E.2 for concept B. 
==PAGE:19==
 
 
 
 
16 
 
 
Figure 11- Tables E.1 and E.2 for the two concepts of blade area definition. (Source: IEC 
61400:24-2019) 
 
 
 
==PAGE:20==
 
 
 
 
17 
 
 
For wind turbines installed in certain geographical areas where they are exposed to high numbers 
of upward lightning, particularly during winter, it may be relevant to increase the required 
durability of air termination systems (i.e. receptors) with regard to flash charge to more than 
lightning protection level I, Qflash  = 300 C, as this parameter decides the wear (melting) of 
materials and therefore influences the need for maintenance of air termination systems, spark 
gaps etc. (i.e. components subject to erosion due to arcing). In locations exposed to winter 
lightning (like in Japan), charge levels may reach   Qflash = 600 C due to upward initiated winter 
lightning. 
==PAGE:21==
 
 
 
 
18 
 
Same values are also applied for offshore wind turbines as there are no evidence of lightning 
parameters being significantly different offshore. 
PART III -- BASIC PRINCIPLES FOR LIGHTNING CURRENT MEASUREMENTS IN 
STRUCTURES 
 
For an effective lightning protection and monitoring system, an accurate measurement of the 
strokes that hit structure or wind turbines, shall take place. 
Nowadays, there are few physical principles which a LMS are based on: 
- 
Rogowski Coil 
- 
Optic & Faraday Effect 
- 
Magnetic field 
In this chapter we go through all of them to have a better understanding on how they operate. 
 
Rogowski Coil 
 
Named after German physicist Walter Rogowski (1881 – 1947), is considered an electrical 
device mainly used to measure alternative current (AC), but also to measure the high-speed 
transient, pulsed current or sinusoidal current. 
Normally consist of an evenly wounded coil with ‘N’ number of turns and constant cross-section 
area ‘A’. There is no metal core in a Rogowski coil. 
The end of the coil is returned through the central axis of the coil to another end. Therefore, both 
terminals are at the same end of the coil. 
This entire assembly is wrapped around the current-carrying conductor. 
==PAGE:22==
 
 
 
 
19 
 
 
Figure 12- Example of current carrying conductor and Rogowski coil around it (Source: 
electrical4you) 
This type of coil work on the principle of faraday’s law. It is similar to AC current transformer 
where the voltage induced in a secondary coil is proportional to the current flow through the 
conductor. 
The main difference between Rogowski coils and AC current transformers is in the core. 
Whereas air core is used in the Rogowski coils, iron or steel-based cores are used in the CTs. 
When current passes through the conductor, it creates a magnetic field. Due to an intersection 
with a magnetic field, a voltage is induced between the terminals of the Rogowski coil. 
This voltage’s magnitude is then proportional to the current that passes through the conductor. 
Rogowski coils are closed pathed, and its output is generally connected to an integrator circuit, 
so the coil voltage is then integrated to provide an output voltage that is proportional to the input 
current signal, so we can obtain the current waveform. 
Normally, they are companioned with an integrator circuit to compensate for the 90º phase shift 
due to practical limitations. By choosing careful components, this error might be reduced. 
Depending on the components used in the integrator, we can have passive or active integrators 
which we explain after, but first off, why do we need to integrate? 
Reason is that by measuring voltage in the Rogowski Coils, what we obtain is the derivate of the 
current (V=L*di/dt), so in order to get the value of the current needs to be integrated: 
==PAGE:23==
 
 
 
 
20 
 
V= L * (
𝑑𝑖
𝑑𝑡); 
𝑑𝑖
𝑑𝑡= 
𝑉
𝐿 → I = ∫
𝑉
𝐿 
 
Passive Integrator: 
For a large output range of Rogowski coils, the series RC circuit act as an integrator. The value 
of the acceptable phase error decides the value of Resistance (R) and Capacitance (C). 
The relationship between R and C and phase error can be derived from the phasor diagram of the 
RC network. And it is as shown in the below figure: 
 
Figure 13- Example of Passive Integrator (Source: Electrical4you) 
 
Active Integrator 
The RC circuit act as an attenuator and drop across the capacitor gets attenuated. At a low 
current level, when the output voltage is very low, and it is in terms of microvolt (μV). It creates 
a poor signal at the input of Analog to Digital Converter (ADC). This problem occurs in the RC 
circuit for low current. 
This problem can be solved by using an Active Integrator. The circuit of an active integrator is as 
shown in the figure below: 
==PAGE:24==
 
 
 
 
21 
 
 
Figure 14- Example of Active Integrator (Source: Electrical4you) 
 
Here, the RC element is in feedback path of the amplifier and its gain can be adjusted by using 
the following equation: 
 
Figure 15- Example of Gain formula (Source: Electrical4you) 
 
These coils are preferred due to no magnetic saturation, no overheating nor hysteresis loss and 
very low insertion impedance. 
 
==PAGE:25==
 
 
 
 
22 
 
 
Figure 16-Example of Rogowski coil schematic (Source: ScienceDirect) 
 
Despite all stated above and focused on measurement purposes, Rogowski coil is only applicable 
for transitory current and not steady ones. 
Translating above picture into wind turbines, these coils can be installed in different locations of 
the wind turbine’s structure, for example: 
At the transition between hub and nacelle. 
 
Figure 17- Rog. Coil installed between the hub and nacelle (Source: DEHN) 
 
==PAGE:26==
 
 
 
 
23 
 
 
At the transition between nacelle and tower (e.g., around the yaw system) 
 
Figure 18- Rog. Coil Installed at the Yaw system (Source: DEHN) 
 
At the bottom of the tower 
 
Figure 19- Rog. Coil Installed at the Yaw system (Source: DEHN) 
 
==PAGE:27==
 
 
 
 
24 
 
 
This type of coils present given advantages and disadvantages: 
Advantages: 
 
- 
It can respond to fast-changing e.g. transient currents. 
- 
The second terminal of the coil is returning to the first terminal. And it makes 
an open circuit coil. So, there is no danger of opening of the secondary coil 
due to induced uncontrolled over voltages. 
- 
The air is used as a medium. There is no magnetic core is used. So, there is no 
question of saturation of the core. 
- 
In order to keep output current constant, the AC current transformer (CT) 
needs to increase the number of secondary turns for large currents. Hence, for 
equal rating, the size of the Rogowski coil is small compared to a 
conventional current transformer. 
- 
It is available in two types: flexible and rigid. 
 
Disadvantages: 
 
- 
To obtain the current waveform, the output of the coil must flow through the 
integrator circuit. It needs a power supply of 3V to 24Vdc, needing external 
batteries or continues power supply, when an active integrator is implemented. 
- 
It has limitations related to DC or quasi-DC currents as generates a voltage as 
the current field changes. For this reason, several LMS systems are equipped 
with an integrator in their circuitry and from there, other parameters such as 
charge, gradient and energy are calculated. 
- 
During increased measured transient currents, parasite capacitances may 
reduce its accuracy, due to its construction method (insulation, diameter 
length etc...)  limiting its capability of reading very high frequencies 
(subsequent strokes, very fast strokes) 
 
 
 
==PAGE:28==
 
 
 
 
25 
 
Optic and Faraday Effect 
 
The basic principles of optical methods for measuring voltage and current at high voltage are 
presented. These include the magneto-optic effect, the electro-optic effect and the electro 
gyration effect, plus various detection, and noise reduction techniques. Both free path and 
enclosed path devices which have been constructed on these principles are described. The 
viability of these devices for the electricity supply industry is assessed. 
Is suggested as an angular force, which is produced by the interaction of both the Polarized 
electric field and the Supplied Magnetic field. 
It is also, a rotational force, therefore, it’s an angular velocity, containing the angle by which the 
magneto-optic force rotates. 
In addition, it is proportional to the magnetization of the diamagnetic material. 
 
The magneto-optic effect normally uses a current transducer, commonly known as magneto-optic 
current transducer (MOCT) and it makes use of the Faraday Effect. 
Note → Faraday effect is an induced circular birefringence due to the presence of a magnetic 
field in an optical material. Linearly polarized light (electromagnetic wave) traveling through a 
dielectric material exhibits a rotation of the plane of polarization proportional to the applied 
magnetic field. The angle of rotation (Φ) is given by: 
Φ = V∫ B* dl 
Where: 
V = Verdet constant of a Faraday Material. Is an empirical proportionality constant un units of 
radians per Tesla per meter, it varies with wavelength and temperature and is tabulated for 
various materials, the Verdet constant is a material property and gives a quantitative measure of 
the Faraday rotation ability of the material. Larger Verdet constant indicates that the material has 
a strong faraday effect and is more suitable for building an optical isolator since a short length of 
material can be used. Is negative by definition. 
B = magnetic flux strength parallel to the propagation direction of the Lightwave. 
L= length of the Faraday Material. 
MOCT detects how the magnetic field surrounding the conductor rotates the polarization of 
polarized plane’s light that is transmitted by a light-emitted diode (LED) through a single fibre-
optic passing around the conductor. 
==PAGE:29==
 
 
 
 
26 
 
The polarizer is normally made of rare raw material and is normally located near the down 
conductor. The goal is to measure the variation of the beam’s angle transmitted by the LED, 
generated by the magnetic field occasioned due to the strike, and sent via FO cables. 
The amount of rotation is proportional to the strength of the magnetic field; thus, it is 
proportional to the measured current ‘I’. 
 
Figure 20- Representation of Optic system diagram. (Source: Phoenix systems) 
In other words, and transposed to the LMS sensor systems: 
Whenever a lightning strike occurs, a light beam gets linear polarized insight the sensor before 
entering the dielectric changing its angle. 
The direction of propagation is parallel to the magnetic field. 
Inside the dielectric, the polarization plane of the light wave is turned in dependency to the 
magnetic field. 
 
The Faraday effect was discovered by Michael Faraday in 1845, the Faraday Effect causes linear 
light polarization in a fiber to rotate when the fiber is exposed to a magnetic field. The 
polarization change is detected using a reflective polarimetric scheme. Forming fiber loops and 
applying Ampere’s law, measuring the total light rotation results in the determination of the total 
current enclosed. 
This effect occurs in most optically transparent dielectric materials (including liquids) under the 
influence of magnetic fields (B) and the relation between the angle of rotation (Φ) of the 
polarization and the magnetic field in a transparent material is to be expressed by formula 
already shown. 
==PAGE:30==
 
 
 
 
27 
 
Φ = V∫ B* dl 
 
Figure 21- Visual variation of light field’s angle of rotation due to magnetic field. (Source: 
Phoenix system) 
Faraday Effect causes light’s polarization plane (EPF) in a medium to rotate when the medium is 
exposed to a magnetic field in the direction of light propagation. Using optical fiber as the 
propagation medium and by forming closed fiber loops, measuring the total light rotation would 
result in the total current enclosed. 
 
==PAGE:31==
 
 
 
 
28 
 
 
Figure 22- Detailed representation of light’s direction of rotation due to magnetic field (Source: 
Phoenix) 
The Polarized Electric Field (EPF) interacted with the Effective Magnetized Field (ME), 
producing the Magneto-Optic Force (FMO), it rotates around the Magnetic Line of Force. 
Rotation is clockwise in ‘A’ and counterclockwise in ‘B’. 
 
Magnetic Field 
 
Maybe one of the most common lightning strike measurement techniques currently applied in the 
wind industry. It is based on the Faraday’s law of induction which describes how an electric 
current produces a magnetic field and conversely, how a changing magnetic field generates an 
electric current in a conductor. 
To understand Faraday’s law of induction, it is important to have a basic understanding of 
magnetic fields, which is more complex than the electric one. Magnetic fields always come in 
pairs (dipoles, one north and south pole). 
These poles are called like that after the direction in which compass needles point and they 
attract opposite signs, meaning north pole attracts south pole fields and vice versa. 
 
==PAGE:32==
 
 
 
 
29 
 
A magnetic field is often depicted as lines of magnetic flux. In the case, let’s say of a bar magnet, 
the flux lines exit from the north pole and curve around to re-enter at the south pole. In this 
model, the number of flux lines passing through a given surface in space represents the flux 
density, or the strength of the field. 
 
Figure 23- Representation of a magnetic flux (Source: Sciencedirect) 
 
If we run an electric current through a wire, it will produce a magnetic field around the wire and 
if we apply a current through a write loop in a magnetic field, the interaction of these magnetic 
fields will exert a twisting force, or torque, causing it to rotate. However, it will only rotate till 
the magnetic fields are aligned, that is, it will bobble back and forth instead of spinning. For the 
loop to continue rotating, we must reverse the direction of the current, which will reverse the 
direction of the magnetic field from the loop. The loop will then rotate 180º until its field is 
aligned in the other direction, this for example is the basis for the electric motor. 
Conversely, if you rotate a wire loop in a magnetic field, the field will induce an electric current 
in the wire. The direction of the current will reverse every half turn, producing an alternating 
current. This is the basis for the electric generator. 
Importantly, it is not the motion of the wire, but rather the opening and closing of the loop with 
respect to the direction of the field, that induces the current. When the loop is face-on to the 
==PAGE:33==
 
 
 
 
30 
 
field, the maximum amount of flux passes through the loop. However, when the loop is turned 
edge-on to the field, no flux lines pass through the loop. It is this change in the amount of flux 
passing through the loop that induces the current. 
 
Figure 24- Graphic representation of magnetic field forces generated by the presence of a 
current and how this varies if we pass a magnet through a copper coil (Source: ScienceDirect) 
Trespassing to wind energy lightning current measurements, now that we have explained and 
understood the basic principles behind magnetism, the main idea is that every current electrical 
current applied generates a magnetic field / flux, as they are intrinsically correlated, and this 
variation of flux density can be measured, analysed, and assessed with sensors. 
 
 
==PAGE:34==
 
 
 
 
31 
 
PART IV – LIGHTNING PROTECTION SYSTEM (LPS) 
 
In this chapter, we briefly introduce and quickly explain what a lightning protection system 
(LPS) is and how the impulse current generated by a lightning stroke, is collected, routed 
throughout the whole wind turbine generator (WTG) in a safely manner until it reaches the 
grounding or earthing system. 
As per the IEC 61400-24 (2019) definition, a lightning protection system is a complete system 
used to reduce physical damage due to lightning flashes to a structure, consisting of both external 
and internal but not measures taken to protect internal system against the effect of LEMP 
(Lightning Electro Magnetic Pulses). 
Whenever the atmospheric conditions are ideal for the formation of a lightning strike and this 
one attaches the blade, lightning current often follows the down conductor throughout the whole 
blade until it reaches the connection point between blade and hub. Further, this current is 
diverted towards the nacelle, later, between the nacelle – top flange of the tower top section 
(where the yaw teeth are) and finally all the way down passing through the tower sections to the 
ground. 
This is also valid for the offshore wind turbines (fixed foundation). 
The most common type of blades are the CFRP (Carbon Fiber Reinforced Plastic) and GFRP 
(Glass Fiber Reinforced Plastic) 
 
Figure 25- Example of a GFRP blade (Source: LM Wind power) 
 
 
==PAGE:35==
 
 
 
 
32 
 
 
Figure 26- Example of a CFRP and its structure (Source: Steigmann, R.; Iftimie, N.; Savin, A.; 
Sturm, R. Wind turbine blade composites assessment using non-contact ultrasound method. J. 
Clean Energy Technol. 2016, 4, 440–443.) 
These blades normally contain different types of receptors systems, as depicted in Figure 27. 
 
 
==PAGE:36==
 
 
 
 
33 
 
 
Figure 27-Real Example of External Receptor (Source: IEC 61400-24 Ed. 2.0 and picture taken 
during author’s visit at Marshalling Harbor in New Bedford, USA) 
 
After a blade tip is hit by a lightning strike, it is conducted down through the down conductor 
cable. And routed till its blade root, where it is assembled with the hub via cable termination. 
 
 
 
Figure 28- 3D model and real life representation of connection between blade root and hub 
(Source: LM Wind Power & Author’s Field Experience) 
==PAGE:37==
 
 
 
 
34 
 
 
After that, and like the blade – hub connection, current continues its flow between the hub- 
nacelle, nacelle-tower till reaching its final grounding point. 
Note that also bonding straps like the figure below, can be used depending on the technical 
sepcifications of each WTG’s manufacturer and customer requirements to conduct current. 
 
Figure 29- Example of different types of bonding straps (Normally Aluminium or Copper, 
Source: RS Online) 
 
 
 
 
As an overall view, the following sketch represents the path that a lightning current follows till 
grounding: 
==PAGE:38==
 
 
 
 
35 
 
 
Figure 30- Overall view of an LPS (Source: lsp-international.com) 
 
Before finalizing this chapter, we must remind ourselves and lectors that every time a lightning 
strike occurs, whole WTG’s electrical and mechanical components are affected by this strike, 
either due to the electromagnetic impulse of the current (Affecting majority of electronic and 
electrical components), increase of bearing’s temperature generated by the intensity of the 
current, communication interferences and wear and tear of surge protection devices (SPD’s) 
materials, etc… 
This is not the main scope of this master thesis, but further information can be found in the 
Annex C of IEC 61400:24 (2019) and Annex C of JIS C 1400-24:2023. 
 
PART V – LIGHTNING MONITORING SYSTEM (LMS) 
 
Now that we have ‘briefly’ introduced basic lightning principles, how it is generated and the 
physical system on which this is based on, it’s time to deeply dive into the main core of this 
master thesis, the technical economic feasibility of different Lightning Monitoring Systems 
widely used in the market. 
==PAGE:39==
 
 
 
 
36 
 
This chapter is subdivided into 4 subparts: 
V.a) Commercially available solutions in the market 
V.b) Data assessment, analysis, and knowledge sharing 
V.c) Compatibility with other WTG monitoring systems 
V.d) Real time monitoring vs long term assessment, maintenance requirement / strategies 
 
In Part V.a) the suppliers analysed are: 
1. Phoenix 
2. Takaoka Toko 
3. DEHN 
4. Polytech 
5. Jomitek 
6. Ingesco 
7. Tesicnor 
8. LM Magnetic Card 
 
And we go analysing one by one with respect to, as minimum, the following aspects: 
- 
Working Principle 
- 
Information delivered by the system, quantity, single lightning strike vs 
multiple. 
- 
Potential and limitations both with respect to applicability and performance as 
seen in the light of different WT manufacturers. 
- 
Reliability, maintenance requirements, future safe. 
- 
Investment and operational costs. 
 
Nonetheless, following annex JA of the norm JIS C 1400-24:2023, annex L of the norm IEC 
61400-24 ed 2 (2019) and in the upcoming amendment of IEC 61400-24 ed 2 (2019), the 
minimum technical requirements for local active lightning detection systems, are shown next. 
Generally speaking, if possible, LMS shall avoid the installation of sensors requiring lightning 
down-conductor’s and signal cables clipping, if possible. If not, active countermeasures for 
avoiding flashover risks and/or over-voltages transmission to hub (dedicated shielding or 
overvoltage protection, such as, surge protection devices -SDPs) shall be considered. 
==PAGE:40==
 
 
 
 
37 
 
To give an overall view on where these LMS can be installed, the following sketch is provided in 
Figure 31: 
 
Figure 31- Overview of different positions where LMS can be installed in a WTG. (Source: 
Different suppliers & author’s photo) 
Places where LMS can be physically installed on a WTG is shown, but we must remind 
ourselves that it will depend on the supplier, its external equipment and on the needs of every 
specific wind turbine (Physical space availability, need of powering, length of the wires to 
connect, interface properties etc…) 
 
Classification of lightning current measurements 
 
There are 4 types of classification of lighting current measurements if we effectively want to 
capture the desired outcome of the lightning strikes. They are listed according to the 
measurement performance, and hence, the adequacy of measuring the different lightning 
characteristics. 
Classification is shown on the following table: 
 
==PAGE:41==
 
 
 
 
38 
 
 
 
Figure 32- Classification of lightning measurement systems (Source: IEC-61400-24 Ed. 
2.02019) 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:42==
 
 
 
 
39 
 
Characteristics every LMS should comply as per the latest IEC & JIS Standards 
 
As per the electrical characteristics, available LMS shall comply with the minimum criteria as 
per the latest revision of the IEC and JIS standards: 
 
DETECTION METHOD 
The front end of the lightning measurement system defines the detection method. Several 
principles exist ranging from full current measurements in individual blades, full current in the 
tower, or partial current measurements in earthing systems. When measuring lightning current in 
wind turbines, it is important to consider that the structure itself might affect the current 
measurement. 
This appears due to impedance mismatch at interfaces between blade and nacelle, and/or tower 
and ground. The result can be reflections in the measured lightning current, which are still part of 
the actual current components affecting the turbine but would not be present if the lightning 
current could be measured without the turbine. 
Most of the systems that measure the lightning current flowing through the LPS (air termination, 
down conductor, tower, and earthing system, etc.) and hence detect lightning strikes on wind 
turbines, use various current sensors (Rogowski coil, CT, solenoid coil, resistive shunt, etc.) to 
measure the above-mentioned lightning parameters. 
It is, however, highly recommended methods based on individual measurements in rotor blades. 
 
CURRENT DETECTION FREQUENCY BANDWIDTH 
Since lightning current is known to exhibit a wide range of frequencies from short strokes at 
downward lightning to long strokes experienced as ICC or winter lightning, the frequency range 
should be properly chosen for the application. 
 
The observation period, or total time of recording and processing, should ensure that the entire 
duration of the expected lightning flashes are covered. For Class I, Class II-1 and Class II (as per 
Table above shown): 1.0 s or higher (as per Figure 32). 
 
==PAGE:43==
 
 
 
 
40 
 
However, it is recommended the installation of Class I LMs. The current detection frequency 
bandwidth (the frequency bandwidth with a gain characteristic between -3 dB and +3 dB) should 
be defined by the manufacturer. 
 
MINIMUM DETECTABLE CURRENT VALUE 
 
Is the magnitude that the LMS can measure reliably relative to noise floor, DC offset, dynamic 
range, etc. ICC strokes are known to transfer significant amount of charge at low current 
magnitude; hence a small minimum detectable current is desirable at sites experiencing upward 
lightning and lightning during cold seasons, and when the turbine design is prone to damages 
resulting from excessive charge transfer. 
 
Further, and as per JIS 1400-24:2023, the minimum detected current value must be less than or 
equal to 1 % of the maximum measured current value or lower than 2 kA. 
 
MAXIMUM MEASURABLE CURRENT VALUE OR PEAK VALUE 
 
The maximum measurable current magnitude should reflect the risk of observing such strikes in 
field. For areas exposed to mainly low magnitude strikes (cold season winter lightning) 100 kA 
for the full lightning current may be sufficient, whereas the general ability of justifying exposure 
within the LPL 1 requires LMS capable of measuring the full lightning current of at least 200 
kA. 
 
RESOLUTION 
 
Is a measure of how well the current waveform is digitized in discrete steps. A high resolution 
means that the current magnitude is discretized in small steps, such that even small magnitude 
events like ICC can be measured and the associate charge transfer can be accurately calculated. 
A resolution of 12 bits vertical and a minimum sampling rate of 4 MS/s is required. 
 
 
==PAGE:44==
 
 
 
 
41 
 
 
MEASUREMENT OF ELECTRIC CHARGE 
 
The charge is calculated by the time integral of the current, and its accuracy and minimum / 
maximum parameters will therefore depend on both the dynamic range (maximum and minimum 
detectable current magnitude), the resolution, the observation time and the sampling rate. 
 
For areas exposed to long strokes transferring significant amounts of charge (winter lightning 
during cold seasons), the LMS should be capable of measuring the extensive charge levels. The 
limit for the measurement and calculation of the electric charge shall be less than or equal to 1 C. 
 
TRIGGER PROCESS 
 
Is the mechanism in a lightning detection system at which the recording current is triggered. Can 
be defined by the current magnitude, certain waveform features, magnetic fields, or a 
combination of 2 or more parameters. The main goal of the trigger process sis to ensure a reliable 
discrimination of lightning events over false positives. 
 
Some LMS have a fixed and high trigger level chosen to ensure a reliable triggering in the event 
of what is perceived as real lightning strikes and to avoid too many false alarms, which may 
result in low current amplitude lightning events being neglected, whereas other systems provide 
a customizable trigger level enabling the user to also measure small magnitude lightning events. 
 
Small trigger levels will provide a high number of events, since also induced current and aborted 
leaders are measured, whereas higher trigger levels might miss the recordings of potential ICCs 
transferring significant amount of charge. 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:45==
 
 
 
 
42 
 
MEASUREMENT ACCURACY AND TOLERANCES 
Every manufacturer should specify the accuracy and tolerances of the current measurement 
system with regards to the different key parameters as peak current, specific Energy, charge, and 
current gradient. Accuracy should be specified and verified within the relevant range of the 
different parameters, potentially by executing lightning current tests using principles and 
tolerances from table D.4, Annex D of IEC61400-24 Ed.2.0 (2019). 
 
 
Figure 33- Test current parameters & tolerances corresponding to LPL I (For Flexible Paths). 
Source: IEC 61400-24 (2019).  
 
ELECTROMAGNETIC COMPLIANCE 
 
LMS systems should comply to the lightning environment and keep operational during the event. 
The performance should be documented by demonstrating compliance to relevant EMC 
standards and tests, as described in the IEC 61000 series. 
 
RECORDING OF LIGHTNING INFORMATION 
 
Whenever an ICC strikes, important information should be recorded and stored for tailoring 
maintenance, inspection intervals, or aiding in the discussion of liability in the event of damages. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:46==
 
 
 
 
43 
 
TIME OF LIGHTNING STRIKE 
 
The time of every lightning strike is recorded, and if a correlation with other sensor system is 
desired, the accuracy should be, in general, within 0.1s. The method of reading the time must be 
specified by the supplier and may span between Global Positioning System (GPS) synchronized 
time stamps, Network Time protocol (NTP) synchronized time stamps, internal clock with 
manual synchronization etc. 
 
Also, time zone shall be configurable. 
 
 
LIGHTNING KEY PARAMETERS 
 
The important lightning key parameters for the intended application should be recorded and 
stored, potentially including maximum current value, rise time, electric charge transfer, specific 
Energy, strike polarity, strike direction of initiation, di/dt, etc. 
 
For sites exposed to a lightning environment with charge transfer during long strokes, the 
accumulated charge transfer may also be very important to evaluate lifetime of air terminations 
etc. 
 
CURRENT WAVEFORM 
 
For additional analysis of the lightning impact to the blade, or for validation of the calculated key 
parameters, the current waveform itself can be valuable to record. The manufacturer should 
specify whether the current waveform is recorded as well as the resolution and the sampling rate 
of the recording. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:47==
 
 
 
 
44 
 
INTERFACE PROPERTIES 
 
Besides the measurement properties of the active lightning detection systems, another important 
feature is how it interfaces to the wind turbine, to turbine wind turbine SCADA systems, 
operator SCADA systems, customer cloud solutions, etc. 
 
In addition to the alarm output, it is required remote access to the log recorded by the lightning 
detection system. Preferred interfaces (with Scada, typically) are HTTPS (Hypertext Transfer 
Protocol Secure) and SFTP (Secured File Transfer Protocol). 
 
ALARM OUTPUT 
 
Many systems feature the option of an alarm/warnings output, to notify the operator when a 
lightning event has occurred. 
 
For some systems, the alarm/warning outputs are set to trigger at a lightning event whereas other 
systems enable a trigger output when one or more of the key parameters exceeds a predefined 
threshold level. 
The manufacturer should specify the alarm output options, whether it triggers on the lightning 
event or a key data trigger threshold, or a combination of trigger thresholds (current magnitude, 
charge, accumulated charge, specific Energy, etc.) has been exceeded. 
 
The alarm/warning output and other status signals may be hardwired or transmitted through 
serial communication. 24Vdc IOs and ProfNet are preferred for those methods, respectively. 
 
COMMUNICATION INTERFACE 
 
There are several options for communicating the measurements exists. 
- Online system where data is transferred to the operator SCADA system 
==PAGE:48==
 
 
 
 
45 
 
- Online system where the data is transferred to the local turbine SCADA system 
- Other systems not covered by the above 
Each manufacturer should specify the options for the communication with the LMS. 
 
 
INSTALLATION & COMMISSIONING 
 
Installation and commissioning should be provided by the manufacturer, to ensure a durable 
installation with respect to the location within the turbine and specific site conditions. If the LMS 
utilizes conductive elements in the blade, the designer/installer should ensure that it doesn’t 
compromise the lightning protection coordination. 
Working instructions and maintenance manuals should be part of the manufacturer’s 
documentation. 
Ideally, LMS should be easy and quick to upkeep to reduce the down time of the WTG. 
 
OPERATION FLOW CHART 
 
Should be developed by the user in collaboration with the blade designer, to ensure that 
actionable information is provided by the LMS. A simple example is shown in Figure L.1, where 
the evaluation of current magnitude and secondly Charge transfer decides if an alarm is raised. 
Depending on the LMS capabilities and measurement accuracy provided, other combinations of 
insight providing actionable information can be defined: Measurement of accumulated charge 
correlated with results from verification tests of the present LPS will identify the expected wear 
of air terminations, current magnitude and di/dt provide insight on induced voltages and 
differential voltage distribution, specific energy provides insight on electrical loading of 
connection components and equipotential bonding, the number of lightning events attaching to 
one turbine relative to others may affect inspection plans, etc. 
==PAGE:49==
 
 
 
 
46 
 
 
Figure 34- Example of flow chart for lightning detection and alarm output for LPS design 
sensitive to charge transfer. (Source: JIS C 1400-24:2023). 
Where: 
ip: Maximum value of detected lightning current 
Q: Electric charge Value of detected lightning 
it: Trigger current value 
ia: Alarm current value 
Qa: Alarm electric charge value 
 
 
==PAGE:50==
 
 
 
 
47 
 
V.A) COMMERCIALLY AVAILABLE SOLUTIONS IN THE MARKET 
 
PHOENIX 
 
With more than 3000 systems installed worldwide, the German LMS system it is one of the most 
used in the wind industry. This system was initially developed by a Danish company and after 
licensed to the company Phoenix Contact. 
The set up consists of x3 optic sensors that utilizes the Optic / Faraday Effect for lightning 
detection installed in each blade connected via Fiber Optic cable to an analyzer / Web interface 
and uses an Ethernet connection / GSM Modem (add-on) to configure the system and lightning 
data analysis by the user / customer. 
Its analyzer can be installed inside a pre-designed box and be easily installed inside the nacelle. 
System is capable of capture single and multiple strikes as well as upward and downward 
lightning. On the other hand, it measures polarity but does not give it nor the current waveform. 
However, Phoenix Contact is working on a new add-on /sensor to capture polarity, waveform, as 
well as low current (down to 1kA min. detectable current, so it fulfills with JIS C 1400-24:2023 
Annex JA requirements) 
 
Figure 35- Example of Optic Sensors installed on the down conductor of a Wind turbine and 
connected to the Analyzer inside the Machine Head. (Source: Phoenix Systems) 
==PAGE:51==
 
 
 
 
48 
 
 
Figure 36- Standard Phoenix LMS System. (Source: Phoenix Systems) 
 
 
Figure 37- Real life sketch with remote sensing. (Source: Phoenix Systems) 
==PAGE:52==
 
 
 
 
49 
 
 
 
Installation of the sensor and analyzer is not time consuming.  Sensors are fixed on silicon beams 
adhered with Sikaflex onto the blade’s body and secured with metallic brackets mounted on top 
of it with screws. However, it is highly recommended that technicians take a specific-given 
training by Phoenix to ensure installation & procedures are followed by supplier. 
The continuos sending of the light pulses through its FO cable provides the analyzer  visible 
LED status, ensuring minimal maintenance by the operators. 
 
Figure 38- Real life Phoenix sensor installed on an LM blade for an Offshore Wind Farm in the 
US. (Source: Picture taken by the author during his visit to the Marshalling Harbor) 
 
Diving deeper into the LMS main properties (Electrical & Mechanical) and some other aspects 
considered key for the purpose of this Master Thesis, its most important are: 
 
1. Detection Method: Optic sensor (Utilizes the Faraday Effect).  
2. Current Detection Frequency Bandwidth: System measures all 150 
picoseconds. Within Class I IEC 61400-24 annex L (from 0.1 Hz to 1 MHz or 
wider) 
3. Minimum detectable current value:  Currently +/- 5kA, but supplier is working 
on new sensor which can go down to 1kA. 
4. Maximum measurable current value: +/- 400kA. 
==PAGE:53==
 
 
 
 
50 
 
5. Measurement of electric charge: Specification states 600C but this comes from 
the old standard. Currently there is no min/max. 
6. Trigger process: 5kA, only current triggers the process, however wit this special 
sensor, it can go down to 1kA. It can be set up by the customer. 
7. Measurement accuracy and tolerances: +-5% current (50kA-300kA) +-5 % 
charge (50kA-300kA) and +-8% Energy(50kA-300kA). Complies with table D.4, 
Annex D of IEC 61400-24 Ed. 2.0 (2019). 
 
Figure 39-Phoenix LMS tolerances (Source: Phoenix Contact) 
8. Electromagnetic Compliance: Yes. 61000 is part of the CE declaration. 
9. Time of lightning strike: System has an onboard time server but can be 
connected to a NTP server, i.e. in the WTG or Wind Farm. 
10. Lightning key parameters:   Impulse current, gradient or current steepness, 
charge, specific energy. No polarity. 
11. Current waveform: The Fiber system only has the data (current / Charge / 
Energy / Gradient) stored locally in the WBM. However, the new system also 
stores the current wave form. 
12. Interface properties: Lightning data, analysis and adjustments can be accessed 
remotely via antenna / ethernet cable. 
13. Alarm Output: In the current version, the alarm is only current, or event based. 
On the other hand, the new   is fully configurable. 
14. Communication interface: Modbus 
15. Installation and commissioning:  Low complexity. One optic sensor per blade 
onto the down conductor, FO cable from each sensor to analyzer located inside a 
plastic box installed inside the MH mounted on a Din rail. However, supplier 
highly recommends personnel overtakes specific Phoenix training to ensure 
proper functionality. 
==PAGE:54==
 
 
 
 
51 
 
 
Figure 40- Example of Optic Sensors installed on the down conductor of a Wind turbine and 
connected to the Analyzer inside the Machine Head. (Source: Phoenix Systems) 
 
16. List price per complete system:  Approx. 7.080,50 € per system. 
17. Vibration (mechanical assessment) Standard:  Tested according to IEC 60068-
2-64 Test Vibration, broadband random and guidance. However, every client can 
request specific tests according to their needs. 
18. Compliant with standard JIS C 1400-24:2023 Annex JA: No, it is not. 
However, with the new improved sensor developed by them (allowing lower 
current peaks detections), it will comply. 
19. Retrofit possible in old and new WTG’s?  Yes, it is possible and already 
performed in old units. 
20. IP Grade:  IP67 for optic sensors and IP20 for the Analyzer. 
21. LMS Supplier has experience/maturity in the field?  Over 3000 systems 
installed on the field globally. There is less information available from the long-
term experience with this system. 
22. Do they comply with the American Standard? If so, which one? No request 
has been officially done. 
23. Is lightning strike open to be shared (for meteorological purposes for 
example): No. The data belong to the owner of the system and are not even 
public for Phoenix Contact. 
 
==PAGE:55==
 
 
 
 
52 
 
 
TAKAOKA - TOKO 
 
Developed by the Japanese company TAKAOKA TOKO CO., LTD, the WLC-6 LMS system 
has irrupted quite new in the wind industry market with very interesting and useful 
characteristics.  
The lightning current measurement device measures and records lightning current crest values, 
electric charges, specific Energy, and the time when lightning strikes wind turbine equipment. 
The lightning current measurement device consists of the measurement device located in the 
tower, a Rogowski coil for measuring lightning current, and a GPS antenna for measuring the 
time at which lightning flashes occur. The Rogowski coil is installed along the outer 
circumference of the foot of the tower so that it surrounds the whole tower. Several Japanese 
LMS manufactures made of wide-diameter Rogowski coils. 
 
 
Figure 41- Configuration of Lightning Current Measurement Device where the remote data 
acquisition function is used (Source: TAKAOKA TOKO CO., LTD.) 
==PAGE:56==
 
 
 
 
53 
 
 
Figure 42- Configuration of Lightning Current Measurement Device where the remote data 
acquisition function is not used (Source: TAKAOKA TOKO CO., LTD.) 
 
The measurement device consists of measuring equipment and a data transmitter. 
In the measuring equipment the measured lightning data is stored in the measurement device and 
it can be collected using a recording medium. In addition, the measuring equipment has a 
function for outputting a contact signal on occurrence of lightning flashes (Output by lightning 
level and Triggered output). This contact signal can then be utilized to control a wind turbine. 
The data transmitter has a remote data acquisition function (Web server, Modbus/TCP) as 
standard. Connecting the data transmitter to the customer’s network makes possible to collect 
lightning data remotely and send mail of occurrence of lightning flash. 
However, it is important to remark that WLC-6 does not have a current waveform recording 
function. On the other hand, it is possible to output sensor analog signals and trigger signals by 
connecting this system to a data logger. 
Toko-Takaoka stated in a near future, they plan to equip the device with a waveform recording 
function. 
==PAGE:57==
 
 
 
 
54 
 
Nevertheless, it is important to remark that one of the downsides of Rogowski Coils used by 
Toko-Takaoka, is that impacted blade is not identified by this type of technology. 
 
Also, WLC-6 is currently not compliant with the Japanese standard JIS yet given that is still 
needs to satisfy the required performance for lightning current measurement, including the 
detection (measurement accuracy of current value and electric charge specified by the 
manufacturer. 
For this purpose, it is necessary to conduct tests specified by JEM 1515: 
JEM: Standards of the JEMA (Japan Electrical Manufacturers Association) 
           1515: Test methods of Lightning current detection system for wind turbines 
▪ Current detection frequency band test 
▪ Current value detection test 
▪ Electric charge detection test 
▪ Observation period test 
▪ Other (Withstand voltage test, Environmental resistance test, 
Electromagnetic compatibility test) 
JEMA is currently revising JEM 1515, and the revised version is scheduled to be published at the 
end of 2024. 
Toko-Takaoka is also in the process of creating a generator for the applied current waveform 
(Figure A.4 in [IEC 61400-24, Annex A]) specified in Electric charge detection test. 
Therefore, they will carry out type test specified by revised JEM 1515 and declare self-
conformity in early 2025. 
Diving deeper into the LMS main properties (Electrical & Mechanical) and some other aspects 
considered key for the purpose of this Master Thesis, its most important are: 
 
1. Detection Method: Rogowski Coil 
2. Current Detection Frequency Bandwidth: 0.1Hz to 300kHz. Complies with JIS C 
1400-24 Class I. 
3. Minimum detectable current value:  2kA 
4. Maximum measurable current value: +/- 200kA. 
5. Measurement of electric charge: 0 to 9999C with a resolution of 1C. 
6. Trigger process: 1% of Max Measurable current (2kA). 
==PAGE:58==
 
 
 
 
55 
 
7. Measurement accuracy and tolerances: 10kA or more: Within +-10%   less than 10kA: 
Within 1 kA. 
8. Electromagnetic Compliance: According to JIS C 61000-6-2:2019 & JIS C 61000-4-
2:2012. 
9. Time of lightning strike: Recorded via GPS. 
10. Lightning key parameters:   Current, Crest-values or peak values measurements, 
Charge, specific Energy, trigger time. 
11. Current waveform: Not yet. In a near future. 
12. Interface properties: LAN cable + USB stick? No cloud platform. WLC-6 is connected 
to the SCADA network / own dedicated network via LAN cable. Also, USB stick option 
is available. 
13. Alarm Output: Impulse current & charge. Customized by the customer. 
14. Communication interface: Web server, Modbus/TCP, TCP/IP. 
15. Installation and commissioning:  Low complexity. X1 Rogowski coil around the 
bottom of the tower section plus measurement device and UPS inside the bottom section 
of the WTG hold by support brackets. Some wiring is also needed (grounding, 
communications, GPS antenna etc.) 
 
 
Figure 43- Overall installation diagram (Source: TAKAOKA TOKO Ltd) 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:59==
 
 
 
 
56 
 
 
Figure 44- Real example of Rogowski Coil installed on an offshore WTG (Source: TAKAOKA 
TOKO Ltd) 
 
16. Price per complete system:  Approx. 8844,75 EUR. 
17. Vibration (mechanical assessment) Standard: WLC-6 has been tested in accordance 
with the following: JIS C 60068-2-6:2007, Vibration (sinusoidal), Annex C, TableC.2 
,frequency range [10Hz-55Hz] JIS C 60068-2-27:1995 ,Shock ,30G. 
18. Compliant with standard JIS C 1400-24:2023 Annex JA: No, it is not yet. It will be 
after lightning current and charge accuracy tests. ETA 1 year approximately. 
19. Retrofit possible in old and new WTG’s?  Yes. 
20. IP Grade:  IP54(dust resistant) 
21. LMS Supplier has experience/maturity in the field?  Over 30 years. 
22. Do they comply with the American Standard? If so, which one? No, it is not. Only 
JIS. 
23. Is lightning strike open to be shared (for meteorological purposes for example): End 
customers are owners of the lightning data. If required, Non-Disclosure Agreements 
(NDA) can be made if data needs to be shared. 
 
 
==PAGE:60==
 
 
 
 
57 
 
 
DEHN 
 
DEHNdetect not only recognizes peak currents but also these dangerous long stroke currents and 
can, moreover, be equipped with optional rotor blade detection. The system can be integrated in 
the IT infrastructure of the wind turbine via existing interfaces. The data can then simply be read 
out and managed using the available SCADA systems. If direct integration is not possible, the 
data can be transmitted to a cloud. The current curve can be evaluated in detail in this web 
application. This makes it possible to monitor several turbines or even entire wind parks. 
 
Full version consists of x1 measuring coil which envelop all metal parts which can be installed in 
several parts of the WTG, e.g., the transition from the hub to the nacelle, at the yawing or at the 
bottom section (In this case the BDU cannot be used as it is far away), x3 individual BDU’s 
(rotor blade detectors with battery), x1 data logger and x1 integrator. 
The main characteristic of these BDU’s is that they use Zigbee technology to transmit 
information captured on each blade towards the datalogger via radio 2.4 GHz signals. To 
minimize the consumption of power in the BDUs, system can be put to ‘sleep’ and be woken up 
once in a week to read data and send it to the datalogger for inspection / reading purposes. This is 
done via software configuration. 
However, this radio signal can be a challenge due to EMC interferences inside the blades and 
nacelle. For this reason, DEHN also offers the possibility of installing an external zigbee antenna 
to mitigate this ‘downside’. 
A measuring integrator takes care of the signal conditioning. The datalogger DDT DL TCP 
triggers, records and communicates the event to a higher-level system, e.g. cloud, PLC. 
Vane detectors (DDT BDUs) indicate which rotor has been hit by lightning. They can measure 
single, multiple strikes as well as upward and downward lightning. 
The configuration of x2 Rogowski Coils is also available (one coil detects the high impulse 
currents and the second one the lower-amplitude long stroke currents). These measuring coils are 
flexible and can be mounted at several sections of the wind turbine. It is important that all 
lightning current-carrying components are encompassed by the coil. 
Installation of the whole system is time-consuming, around 5 hours for experienced personnel 
depending on the type of WTG. No extensive maintenance is required, just every regular or 
scheduled WTG maintenance, to ensure that BDU’s are at place and ensure that system is 
==PAGE:61==
 
 
 
 
58 
 
reading the data. Prior inspection of the WTG together with DEHN to check the possible cables 
routing is also wise to perform to ensure effectiveness. 
It is also important to highlight that the DEHN Rogowski coil also measures the reflection of the 
current inside the tower when it is installed at the bottom section, similar to the Takaoka system, 
when installed in the bottom section. 
 
 
Figure 45- Current distribution of DehnDetect LMS (Source: Dehn) 
 
The “DEHNdetect datalogger DDT DL TCP” is the recording and communication component of 
the DEHNdetect system. It records the lightning events of the measuring integrator. It receives 
the events of the vane detectors (BDUs) and communicates them via Ethernet, to a higher-level 
system, e.g., cloud, PLC, etc. 
The LMS and the measuring integrator are mounted in a switch cabinet, which can be located at 
the machine head or at the bottom section. 
 
==PAGE:62==
 
 
 
 
59 
 
 
Figure 46- Application of the DEHNDetect system (Source: DEHN) 
==PAGE:63==
 
 
 
 
60 
 
 
Figure 47- Example of locations where Rogowski coil can be installed (Source: DEHN) 
Diving deeper into the LMS main properties (Electrical & Mechanical) and some other aspects 
considered key for the purpose of this Master Thesis, its most important are: 
 
1. Detection Method: Rogowski Coil + single Blade Detection Units (BDU’s). 
2. Current Detection Frequency Bandwidth: according to Class 1 (IEC 61400-24 Ed2 
Annex L) from 0.1Hz up to 1MHz or wider. Observation period is 1s or longer. 
3. Minimum detectable current value:  +/- 500A (datalogger, impulse current) 60A for 
long stroke current. Can be configured by the end user. 
4. Maximum measurable current value: +/- 250kA. 
5. Measurement of electric charge: min 0.25C - 125C +/-9%. Max 1000C or higher 
charge. 
6. Trigger process: <100A (BDU) & 5kA (10/350us) adjustable to 60A. 
7. Measurement accuracy and tolerances: Measurements between 2kA - 5kA, +/-9%, 
measurement between 5kA -250kA, +/- 6%. 
8. Electromagnetic Compliance: Yes, it does comply, also DEHNdetect systems complies 
with the following standards: EN 61326-1:2013 / IEC 61326-1:2012, EN 55011:2016 + 
==PAGE:64==
 
 
 
 
61 
 
A1:2017 / CISPR 11:2015 + A1:2016, EN IEC 61000-6-2:2019 / IEC 6100-6-2:2016, EN 
IEC 61000-6-4:2019 / IEC 61000-6-4:2018. 
9. Time of lightning strike: DEHN detect LMS system utilizes the time server 
synchronization. However, internet connection is required, or the laptop connected to, 
needs internet. 
10. Lightning key parameters:   Impulse current, specific energy, Charge, Long Stroke 
current, Rise time. 
11. Current waveform: DEHNdetect system records the current wave form. However, it 
depends on the sample rate you have set (from 1sec by 4MHz to 4 sec by 1 MHz) 
12. Interface properties:  Mainly DEHN uses web interface, however supplier can offer an 
add-on named DehnCloud. 
13. Alarm Output: DEHNdetect Generates a digital output signal when the electric charge 
value per event (max Q) and total charge (max Q total) is equal to or higher than the 
alarm electric charge value. 
14. Communication interface: Communication to internet via integrated LTE module or 
ethernet connection for either connection to internet or through Modbus TCP/IP for local 
SCADA. 
15. Installation and commissioning:  Low complexity. No need for wiring as most of the 
communications takes place wireless. Installation of BDU’s is straight forward with 
Sikaflex or holders. However, they are supplied with 5v batteries with service lifespan of 
minimum 5 years. BDU can be ‘put to sleep’ mode to extend the battery’s life by 
awakening once a week to send information to the receiver. 
16. Price per complete system:  8.200 € (Including the blade detection units). 
17. Vibration (mechanical assessment) Standard:  Test passed according to IEC 60068-2-
64 
18. Compliant with standard JIS C 1400-24:2023 Annex JA: Yes. 
19. Retrofit possible in old and new WTG’s?  Yes. 
20. IP Grade:  Rogowski Coil IP54, Integrator IP20. 
21. LMS Supplier has experience/maturity in the field?  DEHN has installed the LMS in 
Poland, Germany, USA, Japan, China, South Africa, Greece, Italy and soon in the 
Netherlands. Also, DEHN collaborates with wide range of educational institutes around 
the globe. 
22. Do they comply with the American Standard? If so, which one? It was not necessary 
for the LMS system as it has been tested according to the following standards: 
i. EN 300 328 V2.1.1 
ii. Draft EN 301 489-1 V2.2.1 
iii. Draft EN 301 489-17 V3.2.0 
iv. EN 62368-1:2014+A11:2017 
==PAGE:65==
 
 
 
 
62 
 
v. EN 62311:2008 
23. Is lightning strike open to be shared (for meteorological purposes for example): No, 
it is only accessible to the customer, but the measuring point can also be shared with third 
parties if required. (Access via the display of a new user). Public LMS cannot measure 
Icc events or obtain detailed information about the lightning strike (waveform, load, 
specific energy, rise time.... etc.) But DEHNdetect proves the system with public LMS 
because they co-ordinate the date and time stamp with the real lightning measurement. 
 
POLYTECH 
 
The Lightning Key Data System (LKDS®) is a wind turbine lightning measurement system 
developed at Polytech. The system measures and records lightning events using Rogowski coil 
sensors on top of the down conductors and calculates the four key parameters from a lightning 
strike in your wind turbine. Due to the individual impact of lightning on the exposed structure, 
the system provides important, useful, and valuable information. 
Knowing the exact time, peak current, charge, specific energy and rise time, it provides a unique 
and accurate insight to make immediate and right decisions on whether the turbine can continue 
to operate safely or must be stopped immediately for inspection. You can therefore plan your 
service more efficiently and avoid stopping the turbine for no reason. 
 
LKDS® records single and multiple lightning as well as upward & downward strikes in a time 
frame of 1.5s on each of the three channels thanks to its 100ms pre trigger and 1.4 s after the 
trigger.  
This ensures a measurement of the entire lightning incidence and an accurate calculation of the 
four key parameters and complete waveform. Due to the system architecture, LKDS® can 
measure four consecutive 1.5s events on each channel, enabling recordings even in severe 
thunderstorms with fast and multiple strikes. 
Accessing its software, user can easily modify trigger parameters such as its min. detectable 
current (Down up to 300A approx. without any add-on) and can measure from 50A onwards. 
Can store up to 1,000 events on the expandable onboard flash memory. Data recordings can be 
accessed via the four key parameters or in the full recording resolution using ethernet 
communication. 
==PAGE:66==
 
 
 
 
63 
 
The system is typically installed with a sensor in each blade, while the central processing unit is 
located in the wind turbine hub. Once the system is installed and configured, it will provide valid 
lightning measurements. No special qualification is needed to perform installation and 
commissioning. 
 
Lightning event data can be downloaded for a single or complete wind farm. Polytech can 
download and prepare a weekly report upon demand. 
 
 
 
Figure 48- Image of the main LKDS components (Source: Polytech) 
LKDS® has been tested extensively in EMC, climate chambers, and mechanical test rigs, and 
has also been exposed to numerous lightning strike impacts at an accredited testing facility. It is 
also certified by DNV and compliant to Class 1 of the future IEC 61400-24 Ed2 Annex L. 
 
==PAGE:67==
 
 
 
 
64 
 
 
Figure 49- Overall view of LKDS installation on a WTG (Source: Polytech) 
Installation is quite simple as everything occurs inside the blades and in the hub. Its constantly 
high optical trigger ensures minimal maintenance & surveillance to confirm everything is 
working as intended. There is also a verification of each sensor being properly connected to ease 
problem solving. 
 
Diving deeper into the LMS main properties (Electrical & Mechanical) and some other aspects 
considered key for the purpose of this Master Thesis, its most important are: 
 
1. Detection Method:  Based on Rogowski coils. 
2. Current Detection Frequency Bandwidth:  30mHz to 1MHz: according to 
Class 1 of the IEC 61400-24 Ed2 Annex L. 
3. Minimum detectable current value:  1 kA but trigger threshold can be 
customized by user down to 200-500 kA. Measures upwards and downward 
lightning as well as single & multiple strikes. 
4. Maximum measurable current value: 240 kA. 
5. Measurement of electric charge:  Yes, charge levels have been measured 
efficiently from few mC up to 336000 C. 
6. Trigger process:   1 kA but can be adjustable by the user. 
7. Measurement accuracy and tolerances: Approx. +- 2% +0.2kA for currents 
between 0.9 kA to 216kA, for specific energy +- 1% + 0.05 MJ/Ohm within 
measured ranges of 0.01 to 13.66 MJ/Ohm and +- 8% +10C for charge transfer 
applicable for ranges between 0.1C to 356.8C 
==PAGE:68==
 
 
 
 
65 
 
8. Electromagnetic Compliance: Yes, it complies with EMC immunity IEC61000-
6-2 EMC Emission IEC61000-6-3. 
9. Time of lightning strike:   Recorded via NTP or GPS. 
10. Lightning key parameters:   Peak current [kA], Specific energy [MJ/Ω], Charge 
content [C], Maximum rise time [kA/μs]. 
11. Current waveform: Yes. LKDS records 1.5s of the event with a 100ms pre 
trigger, and a resolution of 10MS/s in 16bit, giving 0.1us per sample, and a 
resolution of 7.3A from 0 to +/-240kA. When one blade is struck, current is 
measured in all three and provide the four key data as well as three full 
waveforms. 
12. Interface properties: PLC/SCADA/ Park Network/Router. Interfaces are SSH, 
SFTP, HTTP, OPCUAt. 
13. Alarm Output: Charge and polarity. 
14. Communication interface:  Web Server, standard IPC-UA protocol. 
15. Installation and commissioning:  Low complexity. x3 Rogowski coil sensors for 
the three blades + hub control box unit located in the hub.  Minimum maintenance 
thanks to the no need for calibration and an optical trigger in the FO cables that 
continually monitors the data being read by the sensors and transmitted to the 
main control box, advising with an alarm whenever connection is lost. 
Replacement of certain components might happen after 6 years of service. 
16. Price per complete system: € 11,646.00 
17. Vibration (mechanical assessment) Standard:  2g only as per DIN EN 60068-
2-6:2008, DIN EN 60068-2-27:2010, DIN EN 60068-2-27 :2010. Not compliant 
with IEC 60068-2-64 10Hz-500Hz, 7G. 
18. Compliant with standard JIS C 1400-24:2023 Annex JA: Yes, it is compliant. 
19. Retrofit possible in old and new WTG’s?  Yes, retrofit is possible in old 
WTG’s. 
20. IP Grade:  Control box is IP55. Sensors are fully casted, although they have not 
been tested, it would be around IP66/67. 
21. LMS Supplier has experience/maturity in the field?  Yes, over 1000 units 
installed, mostly in Europe (Offshore Wind), as well as the US and Asia. 
22. Do they comply with the American Standard? If so, which one?   It has never 
been requested; however, they comply with the IEC 61400-24 which is 
international and adopted widely. 
23. Is lightning strike open to be shared (for meteorological purposes for 
example):  Normally it is not but if the customer (which is the owner of the data) 
is willing to share, supplier can facilitate it and agree to share the data based on 
the data. 
==PAGE:69==
 
 
 
 
66 
 
 
JOMITEK 
 
Jomitek offers two generations of lightning sensors. These are the Lightning Sensor Classic 
(LSC), and Analyzer (LSA). The Classic sensor features a simple relay functionality, which 
triggers when a lightning strike current exceeds a given threshold. The Advanced/Analyzer 
model feature enhanced analysis, configuration, and reporting functionalities using the IEC 
60870-5-104 protocol over Ethernet connection, or a web based graphical user interface. 
The system subject of study is the latter one, the Lightning Sensor &Analyzer (LSA), which 
offers better and more functionalities than the classic one. 
LSA itself, is the 2nd generation designed with a focus on ease of installation and operation. The 
system raises an alarm in the form of signaling to the turbine control via Ethernet based 
protocols, when a lightning current surge is channeled through the structure the system is 
mounted on. There is no requirement for built-in battery backup for alarm retention, eliminating 
the need for periodic maintenance of the sensor system. External power supply backup is 
assumed present at the site of installation. 
Power supply and additional battery backup systems (Lightning sensor control box.) are also 
offered as an additional add-on. 
Mounting the sensor box is simple. Strong permanent magnets integrated in the box design, 
ensures securing on magnetically adhesive surfaces. Additional caulking along the rim of the box 
is recommended. 
==PAGE:70==
 
 
 
 
67 
 
 
Figure 50- Example of sensor mounting adhered to the tower using magnets (Source: Jomitek) 
 
A single Ethernet cable is the only interface to the box, which supports easy installation of the 
cabling. 
The power is supplied via the Ethernet cable as Power over Ethernet (PoE) and its internal 
memory can store more than 100 strike events. 
 
Figure 51- Example of real-life sensor mounted above of a WTG’s door (Source: Jomitek) 
==PAGE:71==
 
 
 
 
68 
 
 
The theory of operation is as follows: The sensor is continuously sampling the magnetic field 
near the turbine tower. If the signal raises above the trigger level, the active sample buffer is 
filled, and the alternate sample buffer is used afterwards. While the active buffer data is being 
processed and analyzed, the alternate buffer is used to record potential new strikes, allowing for 
a combined 2 second continuous recording capability @ 1MHz. 
Whenever a trigger situation has been detected, a digital output relay is activated via the optional 
lightning sensor control box. The relay will automatically reset after a predefined period or by a 
specific reset command. After sensor internal data processing, the key measurement parameters 
and the corresponding time series recording will be available for read out. This typically takes 40 
seconds. 
Readout of the data is possible using several protocols. A simple web interface might be used or 
the FTP protocol, the IEC 60870-5-104 protocol or Modbus TCP. The wave files (time series 
recording) generated during a strike can be inspected in detail on the web interface or can be 
downloaded via FTP or the web interface as zipped versions (. wav.gz-files). 
However, it is important to remark that the LSA detects only direct lightning strikes and its main 
measurement parameters are: 
 
✓ Strike timestamp (t) 
✓ Peak current (I) 
✓ Rise Time (di/dt) 
✓ Charge (C) 
✓ Specific energy (I 2dt) 
✓ Polarity (+/-) 
✓ Receptor mass loss (g) 
 
 
Regarding the last measurement parameter (Receptor mass loss), it is worthy to mention how this 
mass loss is calculated. This is the first LMS manufacturer that includes this feature. 
For this purpose, please refer to the Annex II for further information.  
 
 
 
==PAGE:72==
 
 
 
 
69 
 
The following picture depicts a process whenever a lightning strike is detected by the LSA: 
 
Figure 52- Diagram of LSA process flow (Source: Jomitek) 
So, whenever lightning strike occurs, a digital electronic relay output is triggered. The Ethernet 
Mode B pins are used. The maximum voltage to apply on the output pins is 24V. 
==PAGE:73==
 
 
 
 
70 
 
 
Figure 53- Example of trigger circuit output after a lightning strike (Source: Jomitek) 
 
In addition to the basic configuration of the LSA, there are three use cases for the Lightning 
Sensor & Analyzer which requires adding a second box: the lightning sensor control box. The 
primary features provided of this box, are: 
✓ Interfacing of relay output signal 
✓ Battery backup during power outage 
✓ (Non-standard) PoE injection 
Secondary features include: 
✓ Multiple power input redundancy 
✓ Manual reset of lightning alarm 
✓ Visual alarm indication via LEDs 
 
Use case 1: Via the lightning sensor box relay interfacing, status LEDs and manual reset buttons, 
full backwards compatibility with the Jomitek Lightning Sensor Classic is provided. 
Use case 2: If an industrial PoE switch/router with battery backup is not available for interfacing 
of the Lightning Sensor & Analyzer, the control box features an integrated, and easily accessible, 
Lithium-Ion battery which can supply the lightning sensor with the power needed to ensure that a 
lightning causing a power outage is recorded and stored in non-volatile memory. 
 
 
Use case 3: If an industrial PoE switch/router is not available the control box is able to inject a 
non-standard PoE signal, compatible with the lightning sensor, using one of the following 
sources: 
✓ 110/230VAC 
==PAGE:74==
 
 
 
 
71 
 
✓ 12-48VDC 
✓ Integrated battery 
 
Diving deeper into the LMS main properties (Electrical & Mechanical) and some other aspects 
considered key for the purpose of this Master Thesis, its most important are: 
 
1. Detection Method:  Measurement of magnetic field variation. 
2. Current Detection Frequency Bandwidth:  According to Class 1 (IEC 61400-24 Ed2 
Annex L 2023) from 0.1Hz up to 1MHz. Observation period is 1s or longer. 
3. Minimum detectable current value:  LSA can measure from 1 A onwards, but it is set 
like this (1kA -4kA) to avoid detection of events in the power lines within the turbine, 
e.g. transformer inrush currents, or other power line transients 
4. Maximum measurable current value: +/- 250 kA. 
5. Measurement of electric charge:  According to datasheet, long stroke Reference 300C, 
can be set to 600C or higher. 100C for first positive short stroke. However, Jomitek 
ensures there is no max limit (and the min limit is 0,01C) as they use floating point 
calculations to integrate the current over time. 
6. Trigger process:   1 kA as per Annex JA of the JIS C 1400-24. Supplier recommends 
leaving it between 1-50kA in order to avoid detection of lightning leader initiation, in 
cases where the lightning never strikes the turbine and for the same reasons as #3. Can be 
configurable by the user. 
7. Measurement accuracy and tolerances: Approx. +- 2% +0.2kA for currents between 
0.9 kA to 216kA, for specific energy +- 1% + 0.05 MJ/Ohm within measured ranges of 
0.01 to 13.66 MJ/Ohm and +- 8% +10C for charge transfer applicable for ranges between 
0.1C to 356.8C. On the other hand, Jomitek states that sensors are calibrated within 1% 
tolerance, but state 10 % to accommodate tolerances for configuration & installation 
environment as well, type of steel, point of installation, etc. Briefly speaking, the LSA 
meets the IEC 62305-1 accuracy requirements. 
8. Electromagnetic Compliance: Complies with EN 61000-6-4:2019. 
9. Time of lightning strike:   SNTP/NTP server 
10. Lightning key parameters: Peak current [kA], Specific energy [MJ/Ω], Charge content 
[C], Maximum rise time [kA/μs], Polarity (+/-), Strike timestamp (t), Receptor mass loss 
(g)- 
11. Current waveform: Full waveform recorded. 
12. Interface properties: Web interface or full event log file via FTP or WebDAV 
==PAGE:75==
 
 
 
 
72 
 
13. Alarm Output: Only current but Jomitek is planning to include specific Energy, average 
steepness, and charge within the different LPL I measurement categories within May 
2024. 
14. Communication interface:  Web interface FTP IEC608070-5-104 Modbus TCP 
15. Installation and commissioning:  Easy installation of the LSA with magnets, PoE cable 
and lightning sensor control box if required inside of the WTG. Maintenance is reduced 
to the minimum. Installation takes roughly 1-3 hours. 
16. Price per complete system: 3.000 EUR excl. installation costs. 
17. Vibration (mechanical assessment) Standard:  Not compliant as they never were 
requested to it. 
18. Compliant with standard JIS C 1400-24:2023 Annex JA: Yes, but check points #3 and 
#6. 
19. Retrofit possible in old and new WTG’s?  Yes, retrofit is possible in old WTG’s. 
20. IP Grade:  LSA IP66 Ethernet cable IP67. 
21. LMS Supplier has experience/maturity in the field?  Yes. LSA delivered since 1999 
worldwide. 
22. Do they comply with the American Standard? If so, which one?   It has never been 
requested; however, Jomitek has worked with customers from the USA without 
inconveniences. 
23. Is lightning strike open to be shared (for meteorological purposes for example):  The 
majority of installations and the data gathered, are owned by the turbine OEM, the 
company responsible for servicing the turbine, or the turbine owner. Some of the cases 
where Jomitek has access to LSA recordings is presented as anonymized real-world 
examples. So, sharing of data can be done upon formal request. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
INGESCO 
 
Ingesco offers the in-house high bandwidth lightning strike counter DL EOLOS K15FO together 
with the three channel DL EOLOS FO-RCVR-3CH receiver for analysis and data sharing. 
==PAGE:76==
 
 
 
 
73 
 
DL EOLOS K15FO lightning strike counters register and account local strikes impacting on 
wind turbine blades. The compact design and robust construction, combined with a high current 
impulse bandwidth (From 500Hz to 125kHz) makes this product a perfect fit for monitoring the 
most common types of lightning strike impacts registered in wind turbine blades and elevated 
structures. 
 
The output optical fiber event notification signals generated by the DL EOLOS K15FO counter 
can be received and decoded by the DL EOLOS FO-RCVR-DIN and DL EOLOS FO-RCVR-
DIN-1CH optical fiber receivers. 
 
 
Figure 54- Sample of DL EOLOS K15FO counters (Source: Ingesco) 
 
The counter detects the current impulse produced by the lightning strike in the lightning 
protection system down conductor. Registered lightning strikes are reported as events (Maximum 
of 999 events, then rolls down to 000) in the optical fiber output and, at the same time, accounted 
in one mechanical counter that eases the events accounting. 
 
The high bandwidth magnetic sensor used in the DL EOLOS K15FO counter ensures a contact-
free installation and a maintenance free operation, as it can be installed directly with adhesive or 
with screws, depending on the needs. 
 
These counters harvest all necessary energy from the lightning strike current impulse without 
any need for batteries, external power sources or moving parts. Ideally, each blade contains one 
counter plus a receiver installed inside a cabinet in the nacelle. 
 
==PAGE:77==
 
 
 
 
74 
 
Counters do comply with IEC 62561-6 standard requirements, except for the minimum current 
threshold. The counter's current threshold has been optimized for detecting lightning impacts as 
described by IEC 61400-24 standard. 
 
In addition, have also been tested for current impulse at LABELEC (Laboratorio de Ensayos 
Electrotécnicos ENAC accreditation number 307/LE681) and meets the IEC 62305, UNE 21.186 
and NFC 17-102 standards. 
 
On the other hand, the DL EOLOS FO-RCVR-DIN optical fiber communications receiver allows 
to receive the signals sent by up to three DL EOLOS K15FO and DL EOLOS K15FO/820 high 
bandwidth lightning strike counters. This device is designed for direct installation in DIN35 rails. 
It has three independent, galvanically isolated, normally open relay outputs for notifying impact 
detections and supports Modbus RTU communications over RS485. Its outputs configuration 
facilitates the connection of a wide range of devices and input configurations for programmable 
logical controllers (PLC). 
 
The DL EOLOS FO-RCVR-DIN receiver decodes the event notification signals generated by the 
DL EOLOS K15FO and DL EOLOS K15FO/820 counters in real-time. This device analyses the 
signals received from the counters, in real-time, to avoid generating false alarms. The fast signals 
received from the counters are processed to produce slower event notification pulses at the relay 
outputs. 
 
This device keeps a local events log with information about the channel from which the 
notification has been received and the type of lightning detection notified by the lightning 
counter. The logs registry can be accessed through Modbus RTU. 
 
Its output normally consists of 3 normally open relay contacts, which can be configurable for 
operating in normal or inverted contact logic. 
 
==PAGE:78==
 
 
 
 
75 
 
 
Figure 55- Example of 3 channel Fiber Optic based receiver (Source: Ingesco) 
 
Can be easily mounted inside a DIN rail on any of the cabinets inside the nacelle, together with 
the FO cables to communicate and transmit data captured by the K15FO and K15FO/820 
counters. 
 
 
 
Figure 56- Overview of DL EOLOS K15FO installation on a WTG (Source: Ingesco) 
==PAGE:79==
 
 
 
 
76 
 
 
 
Figure 57- Physical representation of 3 channel DL-EOLOS K15FO plus receiver on a WTG 
(Source: Ingesco) 
 
Diving deeper into the LMS main properties (Electrical & Mechanical) and some other aspects 
considered key for the purpose of this Master Thesis, its most important are: 
1. Detection Method:  Magnetic field 
2. Current Detection Frequency Bandwidth:  500Hz to 125kHz (8us to 2000us) Not 
compliant with any of the classes described in IEC 61400-24-2019. 
3. Minimum detectable current value:  180A 
4. Maximum measurable current value: 280kA 
5. Measurement of electric charge:  EOLOS does not measure Electric Charge. 
6. Trigger process:  Electrical Current. Cannot be customized by the user. 
7. Measurement accuracy and tolerances: (+-)10% for the current only. 
8. Electromagnetic Compliance: Tests not finished yet. In process of testing and 
compliance. 
==PAGE:80==
 
 
 
 
77 
 
9. Time of lightning strike:   EOLOS utilizes an internal microcontroller with internal 
clock to immediately transmit data after a lightning event. 
10. Lightning key parameters:  Only current. 
11. Current waveform:  There is no current waveform given by the LMS system. 
12. Interface properties:  FO connections for SCADA, PLC & others. 
13. Alarm Output: Only current. 
14. Communication interface:   Modbus RTU over RS485. 
15. Installation and commissioning:  Low complexity. One counter in each blade glued 
onto the blade or with a specific bracket and sensor through the LPS down conductor 
communicated via FO cable to a DIN rail mounted receiver installed in any cabinet inside 
the nacelle. No maintenance is required.  
16. Price per complete system:  € 2,457.10 for the complete system. 
17. Vibration (mechanical assessment) Standard:  Not in a certificate laboratory yet. They 
do their own tests in their labs.  
18. Compliant with standard JIS C 1400-24:2023 Annex JA: No. 
19. Retrofit possible in old and new WTG’s?   Yes. 
20. LMS Supplier has experience/maturity in the field?  Yes. 
21. Do they comply with the American Standard? If so, which one?   No, they do not 
comply. 
22. Is lightning strike open to be shared (for meteorological purposes for example):   It 
could but depends on the final customer. 
23. IP Grade: IP65 for the sensors, IP20 for the receiver. 
 
TESICNOR 
 
Developed originally by French company Indelec, the Advanced lightning flash counter LMS 
system consist of single lightning counters based on measurement of magnetic field installed on 
every blade plus a wireless node inside the nacelle. 
After an impact, the sensor sends immediately basic information (current magnitude, country, 
date and time of event, wind farm name, WTG’s affected, polarity, battery status) onto the 
controller / wireless node and from there, communication is set to the rest of the wind turbine via 
Modbus / TCP_ IP protocols via SCADA or HTTPS / SFTP as can be configurable. 
 
==PAGE:81==
 
 
 
 
78 
 
 
Figure 58 - Overall view of LMS installation. (Source: Tesicnor) 
 
Once this information is transmitted to the webserver, it can be customized by the user and every 
time there is an impact, a notification is sent via email and optionally via SMS to those contacts 
pre-defined by the customer with the relevant information. 
 
As stated previously, installation is simple, and it does not require much expertise. Counters are 
mounted onto the down conductor with a clamp and wireless node inside the nacelle. 
Maintenance activities are reduced to regular WTG service activities and limited to visual 
inspection, status of batteries and connectivity check-up between wireless controller and sensors. 
==PAGE:82==
 
 
 
 
79 
 
 
Figure 59 - Installation of LMS system onto the down conductor (Source: Tesicnor) 
Very limited information has been given by the supplier but diving deeper into the LMS main 
properties (Electrical & Mechanical) and some other aspects considered key for the purpose of 
this Master Thesis, its most important are: 
 
1. Detection Method:  Magnetic field. 
2. Current Detection Frequency Bandwidth:  Unknown as supplier did not provide this 
information. 
3. Minimum detectable current value:  1kA. 
4. Maximum measurable current value: 100kA. 
5. Measurement of electric charge:  None. 
6. Trigger process:  Normally current but user can configure the warnings at will. 
7. Measurement accuracy and tolerances: +/- 10 % of the current only. 
8. Electromagnetic Compliance:  It complies with EN 62561-6, which fulfills IEC 
610068-6-4. 
9. Time of lightning strike:   Not defined by the supplier. Information is immediately 
transmitted to the node inside the nacelle. 
10. Lightning key parameters:  Only current. 
11. Current waveform:  There is no current waveform given by the LMS system. 
12. Interface properties:  SCADA, HTTPS and SFTP as this LMS is configurable. 
13. Alarm Output: Only current. 
14. Communication interface:   Modbus and TCP/IP. 
15. Installation and commissioning:  Simple, one detector per blade mounted on top of 
down conductor with a clamp plus a wireless node inside the nacelle. O&M activities 
==PAGE:83==
 
 
 
 
80 
 
limited to check of battery level statuses, visual inspection of sensors and signal strength 
between sensors and node. 
16. Price per complete system: Unknown. Not shared by the supplier. 
17. Vibration (mechanical assessment) Standard:  Unknown. Not shared by the supplier. 
18. Compliant with standard JIS C 1400-24:2023 Annex JA: No. 
19. Retrofit possible in old and new WTG’s?  Yes, it is possible. 
20. LMS Supplier has experience/maturity in the field?  Yes, since 2002. Not defined 
where in the world / business line. 
21. Do they comply with the American Standard? If so, which one?   No, they do not 
comply. 
22. Is lightning strike open to be shared (for meteorological purposes for example):   It 
depends on the client. Up to them what to do next. 
23. IP Grade: IP 67 for the sensors, wireless node’s protection not defined by the supplier. 
 
LM MAGNETIC CARD 
 
It is a legacy system and currently barely used nowadays in modern Wind Turbines due to its 
limited capabilities. This system was initially developed by the German company Obo 
Bettermann. 
The rotor blade’s lightning card system is only an indicator of peak current values, to which the 
rotor blade’s down-conductor has been exposed to. Its readings are only indicative and can be 
affected by previous lightning activity in the blade, such as current flowing in the opposite 
direction & opposite polarity. When a peak current is read on the card reader system and its 
value is below the Lightning Protection Level I (200 kA), blade damage can occur, especially 
with lightning discharges with increased transferred charge levels, specific energies, and elevated 
current steepness. 
Consists of three components and the sensor card can be mounted on both land and offshore 
wind turbines that are already operating. The three components are: 
1. Lightning sensor card installed in a card holder. 
2. Card reader. 
3. Analysis and reporting software. 
The lightning cards are tested to work in temperatures ranging from -30°C to +80°C. 
==PAGE:84==
 
 
 
 
81 
 
 
Figure 60- Representation of LM Magnetic card and its reader (Source: Global Lightning 
Protection, now acquired by Polytech) 
The principle behind this magnetic card is as follows: 
When a lightning strike is lead to ground via a lightning down conductor, a magnetic field is 
created around the conductor.  
The strength of the magnetic field is proportional to the amplitude of the lightning current and 
decreases with the distance to the conductor.  
 
By applying a card with a special magnet code vertically on the conductor, the magnetic field 
generated by the lightning current will delete the data in the area where its strength is higher than 
what the magnetic code can withstand. By assessing the distance from the conductor at which the 
code is erased, the peak amplitude of the lightning current can be defined.  
 
The maximum lightning current to which a card has been exposed, can then be read by a special 
card reader. The dynamic range of the lightning sensor cards are 3-120 kA on its low coercive 
magnetic tape and between 20- 400kA in their high coercive side. On the other hand, we have to 
bear in mind measuring range of the card reader is between 3-120kA. 
 
==PAGE:85==
 
 
 
 
82 
 
 
Figure 61- Sample or LM Magnetic Card (Source: LM Wind Power) 
 
Assembling this card reader is quite simple. Card holder is fixed to the lightning down conductor 
and the Lightning sensor card is installed in the card holder. Several cards can be placed within a 
single turbine, enabling a more detailed analysis of the lightning attachment point and the current 
distribution when struck by lightning.  
 
 
Figure 62- Schematic of Magnetic Card installation. (Source: LM Wind Power) 
 
Previous analysis have considered cards mounted in all three blades, at different places within 
the nacelle, at the weather station and the tower, providing data on the point of impact of the 
lightning and its way through the turbine to ground. 
  
==PAGE:86==
 
 
 
 
83 
 
 
Figure 63- Example of real-life magnetic card installed on a down conductor (Source: LM Wind 
Power) 
This simple installation reduces the maintenance activities to regular service activities by ground 
personnel. 
To read the data, technicians have to remove the card, bring it to a specifically designed card 
reader which is connected to a PC via USB port. This data then, can be saved automatically in 
the belonging analysis and recording software and can be added up to ten individually text fields 
with supplementary information by the technicians who reads the card. 
 
Figure 64- Example of OBO Bettermann magnetic card reader (Source: LM Wind Power) 
==PAGE:87==
 
 
 
 
84 
 
Very limited information has been given by the supplier but diving deeper into the LMS main 
properties (Electrical & Mechanical) and some other aspects considered key for the purpose of 
this Master Thesis, its most important are: 
 
1. Detection Method:  Magnetic field. 
2. Current Detection Frequency Bandwidth:  Not provided by the supplier. 
3. Minimum detectable current value:  3kA for both the magnetic card and the card 
reader. 
4. Maximum measurable current value: 120kA (Low coercive magnetic band + Card 
reader) 700kA (high coercive magnetic band) 
5. Measurement of electric charge:  None. 
6. Trigger process:  No trigger process. Information about strike is stored in the magnetic 
bands. 
7. Measurement accuracy and tolerances: < 2kA (Card Reader) 
8. Electromagnetic Compliance:  None. 
9. Time of lightning strike:  Not specified, we assume it occurs instantaneously.  
10. Lightning key parameters:  Only current. 
11. Current waveform:  There is no current waveform given by the LMS system. 
12. Interface properties:  None, only card reader. 
13. Alarm Output: Only current. 
14. Communication interface:   Card reader connected via USB to a PC. 
15. Installation and commissioning:  Card mounted on top of down conductor and fixed 
with cable ties. Multiple card readers can be mounted on the same down conductor. 
16. Price per complete system: Unknown. Not shared by the supplier. 
17. Vibration (mechanical assessment) Standard:  Unknown. Not shared by the supplier. 
18. Compliant with standard JIS C 1400-24:2023 Annex JA: No. 
19. Retrofit possible in old and new WTG’s?  Yes, it is possible. However, given the 
obsolesce of this system, other LMS systems will be preferred. 
20. LMS Supplier has experience/maturity in the field?  Extensive. 
21. Do they comply with the American Standard? If so, which one?   No, they do not 
comply. 
22. Is lightning strike open to be shared (for meteorological purposes for example):   It 
depends on the client.  
23. IP Grade: Not defined by the supplier. 
 
 
==PAGE:88==
 
 
 
 
85 
 
TABLE PRESENTING A SUMMARY OF THE LMS MANUFACTURERS 
 
Lastly, as a summary and to provide an overall view of the main characteristics of the shown 
LMS suppliers, a comparison table is given so the lector has a proper visibility of its main 
features. 
LMS COMPARISON TABLE 
 
 
DEHNdetect
WLC-6
DL EOLOS 
K15FO +  DL 
EOLOS FO-
RCVR-DIN 
Card + LCR10
GE Wind LM-S 
Blitzschutzsyste
m
Advanced 
lightning 
flash 
counter 
(from 
indelec)
LKDS
LSA
Name of the LMS
LMS PROPERTIES
Rogowski Coil
Rogowski Coil
Magnetic
Magnetic
Faraday Effect (optic 
sensor that is based on 
the Faraday effect)
Magnetic
Rogowski Coil
Magnetic
Detection Method
0.1Hz up  1MHz or 
wider. Observation 
period is 1s or 
longer
0.1 Hz to 300kHz
500Hz to 125kHz 
(8us to 2000us)
Not provided
System measures all 
150 picoseconds. 
Within Class I IEC 
61400-24 annex L
Not provided
30mHz to 1 
MHz
0.1Hz  to 1MHz. 
Observation period is 
1s or longer
500A (datalogger, 
impulse current) 
60A for long stroke 
current
2kA
180 A
3kA (Low coersive 
magnetic band) 
5kA (High coersive 
magnetic band)
(+/-)5kA
1kA
()+-)1kA
1kA
Current Detection Frequency 
Bandwidth
Minimum detectable current value
250kA
200kA
200kA
120kA (Low 
coersive magnetic 
band) 700kA( (high 
coersive magnetic 
band)
250kA
100kA
(+-)240kA
(+-)250kA
Maximum measurable current value
==PAGE:89==
 
 
 
 
86 
 
  
 
 
 
 
<100A (BDU) & 5kA 
(10/350us) 
adjustable to 60A
1% of Max 
Measurable 
current (2kA)
Current. Not 
configurable
Electrical current
5kA. Can be 
customized
Electrical 
current
1kA
1kA, 4kA by default. 
Current and time 
series length only can 
be configured
Trigger process
DEHNdetect
WLC-6
DL EOLOS 
K15FO +  DL 
EOLOS FO-
RCVR-DIN 
Card + LCR10
GE Wind LM-S 
Blitzschutzsyste
m
Advanced 
lightning 
flash 
counter 
(from 
indelec)
LKDS
LSA
Name of the LMS
LMS PROPERTIES
2kA - 5kA +/-9%, 
5kA -250kA +/- 6%
10kA or more: 
Within +-10%   
less than 10kA: 
Within 1 kA
(+-)10% for the 
current only
<2kA
+-5% current (50kA-
300kA) +-5 % charge 
(50kA-300kA) and +-8% 
Energy(50kA-300kA)
Current 
Tolerance is  +/- 
10 %. 
Current 
Tolerance: +- 
2% 
+0.2kA,Energy 
Tolerance +- 
1% + 0.05 
MJ/Ohm, 
Charge 
Tolerance: +- 
8% +10C
10% Current Accuracy 
corresponding to LPL I
Measurement accuracy and 
tolerances
Yes, among others.
JIS C 61000-6-
2:2019 & JIS C 
61000-4-2:2012
No
No
Yes. 61000 is part of 
the CE declaration
Yes. 61000 is 
part of the CE 
declaration
EMC 
immunity 
IEC61000-6-2 
EMC Emission 
IEC61000-6-3
EN 61000-6-4:2019
Electromagnetic Compliance
==PAGE:90==
 
 
 
 
87 
 
 
  
  
 
Time server 
synchronization 
GPS
Immediatly
None. We assume 
instantaneously.
Time Server + NTP
Data is 
transmitted 
immediatly
NTP or GPS
SNTP/NTP server
Time of lightning strike
Impulse 
current[kA], 
specific 
energy[Mj/Ω], 
Charge[C], Long 
Stroke current[kA], 
Rise time[kA/us]
Current [kA], 
Crest-values 
measurements, 
Charges [C] , 
specific energy 
[MJ/, trigger time 
[t]
Only current [kA]
Only current [kA]
Peak Current [kA]
 Steepness [kA/μs]
Charge [C]
Specific Energy [MJ/Ω]
Serial number, 
blade hit, 
polarity, 
impulse current 
and battery 
status
Peak current 
[kA], Specific 
energy 
[MJ/Ω], 
Charge 
content [C], 
Maximum rise 
time [kA/μs]
Peak current [kA], 
Specific energy 
[MJ/Ω], Charge 
content [C], Maximum 
rise time 
[kA/μs]Polarity (+/-) 
Strike timestamp (t)
Receptor mass loss (g)
Lightning key parameters
DEHNdetect
WLC-6
DL EOLOS 
K15FO +  DL 
EOLOS FO-
RCVR-DIN 
Card + LCR10
GE Wind LM-S 
Blitzschutzsyste
m
Advanced 
lightning 
flash 
counter 
(from 
indelec)
LKDS
LSA
Name of the LMS
LMS PROPERTIES
Yes. Depends on 
the sample rate 
you have set (from 
1sec by 4Mhz and 4 
sec by 1 Mhz)
None
None
None
Upcoming in the new 
version.Not in the 
current one
None
Yes.1.5 s 
recorded after 
the lightning 
event.
Full waveform 
recorded
Current waveform
Web interface 
dehncloud 
(optional)
No cloud 
platform. WLC-6 is 
connected to the 
SCADA network / 
own dedicated 
network.
FO connections for 
SCADA, PLC & 
Other modules
With Card reader
Remote access from 
control room via 
antenna for 
adjustments and data 
analysis.
Any system, as 
it can be 
configurable
PLC/SCADA/ 
Park 
Network/Rout
er. Interfaces 
are SSH, SFTP, 
HTTP, OPCUA
Web interface or full 
event log file via FTP 
or WebDAV
Interface properties
==PAGE:91==
 
 
 
 
88 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Current and 
charge. 
Customised by 
customer
Current and 
charge. 
Customised by 
customer
Only current
Only current
Current version: Only 
current or event 
based.  New version : 
Fully configurable
Serial number, 
blade hit, 
polarity, 
impulse current 
and battery 
status
Yes. 
charge,polarit
y and current
Only current. In future 
also Energy , charge 
and steepness.
Alarm output
Modbus TCP/IP for 
local SCADA
Web server, 
Modbus/TCP, 
TCP/IP
Modbus RTU over 
RS485
None, you need 
card reader for that
Modbus
Modbus and 
TCP/IP
Web Server, 
standard IPC-
UA protocol
Web interface FTP 
IEC608070-5-104 
Modbus TCP
Communication interface
Mediumç
Medium
Easy
Easy
Easy
Easy
Easy
Easy
Installation and commissioning
8,200.00
€                  
8844,75
2,457.10
€                  
Not provided
7,080.50
€                         
Not provided
11,646.00
€      
3,000.00
€                         
Price per complete system
DEHNdetect
WLC-6
DL EOLOS 
K15FO +  DL 
EOLOS FO-
RCVR-DIN 
Card + LCR10
GE Wind LM-S 
Blitzschutzsyste
m
Advanced 
lightning 
flash 
counter 
(from 
indelec)
LKDS
LSA
Name of the LMS
LMS PROPERTIES
Test passed 
according to IEC 
60068-2-64 10-
500Hz, 7G
JIS C 60068-2-
6:2007 ,Vibration 
(sinusoidal) 
,Annex C 
,TableC.2 
,frequency range 
[10Hz-55Hz]
JIS C 60068-2-
27:1995 ,Shock 
,30G
Not in a certificate 
laboratory yet. 
They do their own 
tests in their labs
Not provided
Test passed according 
to IEC 60068-2-64 10-
500Hz, 7G
Not provided
2g DIN EN 
60068-2-
6:2008, DIN EN 
60068-2-
27:2010, DIN 
EN 60068-2-27 
:2010
Not compliant. Can be 
tested upon request.
Vibration (mechanical assessment) 
Standard
Yes
WLC-6 will comply 
with [JIS C 1400-
24:2023 ,AnnexJA] 
within a year
No
No
No but the new add on 
sensor will fulfill this 
requirement
No
Yes. Also joint 
research with 
Japanese 
institutions.
Yes, but not with the 
trigger process which 
will be in near future.
Compliant with standard JIS C 1400-
24:2023 Annex JA
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Retrofit possible in old and new 
WTG's?
==PAGE:92==
 
 
 
 
89 
 
 
 
 
We have seen and analyzed the main LMS suppliers currently available in the market. In 
addition to exposed above, there are three additional Japanese systems that comply with the 
Japanese standard JIS C 1400-24:2023 annex JA, and given its technical capabilities and 
functionalities are worthy to be mentioned in this Master Thesis.  
However, they were not included in the comparison table due to lack of information. 
The mentioned are: 
DEHNdetect
WLC-6
DL EOLOS 
K15FO +  DL 
EOLOS FO-
RCVR-DIN 
Card + LCR10
GE Wind LM-S 
Blitzschutzsyste
m
Advanced 
lightning 
flash 
counter 
(from 
indelec)
LKDS
LSA
Name of the LMS
LMS PROPERTIES
Rog.Coil IP54 
Integrator IP20
IP54(dust 
resistant)
IP65(sensors) IP20 
Receiver
None
IP67(sensor) IP20 
(decoder)
IP67
Processor 
IP55. Sensors 
IP66 or Ip67
LSA IP66 Ethernet 
cable IP67
IP Grade
 Poland, Germany, 
USA, Japan, Greece 
, Italy and soon in 
the Netherlands.  
Over 30 years, not 
only WTG but also 
other power 
facilities.
Yes
Yes
>3000 Pcs in the field  
globally. mainly wind 
but also buildings. 
Since 2002. 
Yes, >1000 
Systems  
mostly in 
Europe but 
also in Asia 
and in the US
Yes, since 1999
LMS Supplier has 
experience/maturity in the field?
Not Necessary
WLC-6 is not ANSI 
compliant. 
Not checked
No
No request has been 
made
No
No request 
has been 
made
No request has been 
made although they 
have a lot of customer 
from the US. Tests can 
be done upon 
request.
Do they comply with the American 
Standard?If so , which one?
==PAGE:93==
 
 
 
 
90 
 
1. Lightning detector of a windmill Type1 LDW-RC series, from Otowa Electric CO. Ltd. 
Link here. 
 
Figure 65 - Example of Otowa’s LMS system Installation. (Source: Otowa Electric CO. Ltd.) 
 
Figure 66- Overview of Otowa's configuration (Source: Otowa Electric CO. Ltd.) 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:94==
 
 
 
 
91 
 
2.  TMZ-1000 from Shoden. Link here 
 
 
Figure 67- Image of TMZ-100 (Source: Shoden) 
 
Figure 68- Example of Rogowski Coil used. (Source: Shoden) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:95==
 
 
 
 
92 
 
 
 
3. WLC-S3WRO-1 from Shoden. Link here. 
 
 
Figure 69- Configuration of WLC-S3WRO-1 around the tower (Source: Shoden) 
 
Figure 70- Installation of WLC-S3WRO-1 and main unit (Source: Shoden) 
 
 
 
==PAGE:96==
 
 
 
 
93 
 
 
V.B) DATA ASSESSMENT, ANALYSIS AND KNOWLEDGE SHARING 
 
In this section, the goal is to share with the lector how each LMS supplier presents the data to its 
customers after a lightning event, how it can be interpretated, information about the 4 key 
parameters, preparation of reports and knowledge sharing. 
It is important to remark that during this study, some suppliers were not willing/able to share 
information nor event reports, so lack of information is expected. 
Having said that, lets proceed with our analysis supplier by supplier. 
 
PHOENIX CONTACT 
 
Currently deployed in several offshore wind turbines and widely deployed within the industry. 
As stated previously, Phoenix Contact provides the 4 key parameters (Impulse Current, Charge, 
Current gradient & Specific Energy) but the current sensor does not provide the current 
waveform. 
However, the improved new sensor (to be deployed by the end of the Year 2024 approx.) will 
include an improvement/variation in the current detection method (from optic to magnetic field) 
and will also record the current waveform. 
Data obtained by the Phoenix LMS System is entirely private and owned by the customer, not 
even Phoenix has access to it, making difficult the data sharing for example, for meteorological 
purposes. 
User can configure the system to receive an alert via SMS whenever a blade is attached by a 
lightning stroke. 
 
Full user’s instruction manual can be found at Phoenix contact main website. Link posted in the 
references section. 
 
==PAGE:97==
 
 
 
 
94 
 
 
Figure 71- Alert of lightning event warning sent via SMS to the user. (Source: Phoenix Contact) 
Data and information can be checked remotely via SCADA throughout the web interface. Here’s 
an example of what user can display after a lightning event with the 4 key parameters: 
 
Figure 72 - Information provided by the LMS after a lightning stroke. (Source: Phoenix Contact) 
==PAGE:98==
 
 
 
 
95 
 
 
Figure 73- Status of the LMS after a lightning event. (Source: Phoenix Contact) 
Finally, Phoenix Contact is willing to assist with technical queries & prepare lightning reports 
upon official request issued by the final customer. 
 
 
TAKAOKA- TOKO 
 
Little information nor examples of what their LMS system can display could be obtained from 
this supplier due to policy reasons as well as data sharing. 
Nonetheless, WLC-6 can provide Current, Crest-values measurements, Charge, Specific Energy 
and Trigger Time. 
In countries like Japan, wind power companies who are users of WLC-6 systems have complete 
ownership of the lightning data. In case of need for academic data, for instance, a non-disclosure 
agreement needs to be signed and discussed with end customer. 
Moreover, Toko-Takaoka has been occasionally approached by final customers to perform 
statistical analysis on lightning data. 
==PAGE:99==
 
 
 
 
96 
 
 
DEHN 
 
The German LMS system detects the Impulse Current, Specific Energy, Charge and Rise Time 
(steepness), it also permits measurement of the long stroke current. 
Data analysis can be displayed thanks to the DEHNcloud blade by blade, permitting a wide range 
of possibilities for future analysis: 
 
 
Figure 74- Representation of System’s parameters configuration via Web Interface (Source: 
DEHN) 
 
On the other hand, lightning strike data is strictly accessed to the customer, but the measuring 
information can be shared with third parties if required (After agreement). 
 
==PAGE:100==
 
 
 
 
97 
 
 
Figure 75-Example of DEHN web interface (Source: DEHN) 
 
DEHN system also records current waveform, allowing end user to have a look onto the graphic 
for analyzing and assessing purposes, permitting taking decisions on when to perform an external 
& internal blade inspection by personnel (for instance). 
 
==PAGE:101==
 
 
 
 
98 
 
 
Figure 76- Example of a current waveform given by the DEHN LMS System (Source: DEHN) 
 
POLYTECH 
 
The Polytech LKDS system can measure the Peak Current, Specific Energy, Charge and Rise 
Time. In addition to it, it measures the current wave form as records 1.5 seconds of the event 
with a 100ms pre trigger and a resolution of 10MS/s in 16 bits, yielding 0.1us per sample and a 
resolution of 7.3A from 0 to +/- 240kA. 
When one blade is struck, LKDS measures the current in all three and provide the four key data 
as well as three full waveforms. 
A sample of an event report where the LKDS is installed can be found below: 
==PAGE:102==
 
 
 
 
99 
 
 
Figure 77- Example of Polytech Lightning event Report (Source: Polytech) 
==PAGE:103==
 
 
 
 
100 
 
 
Figure 78-Example of overall view of the 4 key parameters in a wind farm by blade (Source: 
Polytech) 
==PAGE:104==
 
 
 
 
101 
 
 
Figure 79- Detailed strike event in blade A with current waveform for future analysis (Source: 
Polytech) 
==PAGE:105==
 
 
 
 
102 
 
 
Figure 80-Detailed strike event in blade C with current waveform for future analysis (Source: 
Polytech) 
 
LKDS offers very complete, detailed, and useful information about every lightning strike thanks 
to its individual blade sensors plus Rogowski Coil, allowing the user to perform a full analysis of 
every component hit by the lightning prior to determine whether to send a service team to the 
WTG to inspect, analyze or replace components. 
The customers own the data, making difficult to publicly share it. Polytech has also been 
requested by end customers to perform joint insights and analysis of the data. 
 
==PAGE:106==
 
 
 
 
103 
 
 
JOMITEK 
 
The Jomitek LSA system allows the measurement of the Peak Current, Specific Energy, Charge, 
Rise Time, Polarity, Strike Time Stamp, and calculation of the Receptor Mass Loss. 
On top of the key parameters, LSA also records the full current waveform. 
End customers are entirely owners of the data captured by the LMS installed in their WTG. 
Therefore, it is up to them whether to share data or not. 
However, and in some cases, Jomitek has had access to LSA recordings presented as an 
anonymize real world examples, where they have been involved in validation analysis with 
lightning strikes recorded by the LSA’s being compared to wide area lightning detection 
systems, yielding a great correlation result. 
Examples of what LMS delivers can be found below: 
 
Figure 81- Example recording of a real-world lightning event. The recording includes a listing 
of the key lightning. (Source: Jomitek) 
==PAGE:107==
 
 
 
 
104 
 
 
Interface also allows the option of zooming in to better analyze the current waveform: 
 
Figure 82- Zoom of current waveform. (Source:Jomitek) 
An example of LSA real-life measurements can be found on the point [14] of the reference 
chapter (Courtesy of Jomitek) where user can visualize a group or single events and visualize 
events, data and display the current waveform. 
==PAGE:108==
 
 
 
 
105 
 
 
Figure 83- Offline simulation prepared by Jomitek of what LSA system can deliver to the user 
and graphics. (Source: Jomitek) 
 
INGESCO 
 
Ingesco team was not able to provide information as it is confidential to show the type of 
information their LMS system provides to the user nor useful information can be found on their 
website.  
Although data is transmitted immediately to the web server, this data can be 
transformed/adequate to fulfil different purposes. But again, no real-life example of what the 
LMS delivers could be shared. 
However, they stated information provided by the EOLOS LMS system depends on the end 
customer and they are the righteous owner of the data. 
 
==PAGE:109==
 
 
 
 
106 
 
 
 
TESICNOR 
 
The Advanced Lightning Flash Counter LMS system is capable to provide information about the 
serial number of the WTG, blade which was hit, polarity, impulse current and battery status. No 
further information has been shared by supplier. 
Once a lightning strike occurs, data is instantly transmitted to the webserver, where can be 
customized by the end user and prepared for posterior analysis. 
 
 
Figure 84- Information provided by the webserver. (Source: Tesicnor) 
==PAGE:110==
 
 
 
 
107 
 
 
Figure 85- List of lightnings displayed on the webservice (Source: Tesicnor) 
LM MAGNETIC CARD 
 
The old LM Magnetic Card measures only the current. No visual example on what the magnetic 
card deliver has been provided to us as this system is very old and an external reader connected 
to a PC is needed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:111==
 
 
 
 
108 
 
V.C) COMPATIBILITY WITH OTHER WTG MONITORING SYSTEMS 
 
The goal of this chapter is to check whether different LMS systems can be compatible / 
reconditioned to fulfill other LMS’s manufacturer hardware & software in the same WTG. 
However, and after thorough study of every LMS previously exposed, we have concluded that no 
compatibility has been found among them due to multiple factors such as: 
- 
Different communication protocols. 
- 
Noncompliance with IEC or JIS standards. 
- 
Different technologies & hardware usage. 
Therefore, and after discussions with several suppliers, it is strongly recommended to replace the 
whole LMS system in your WTG by a completely new one and assess technical conditions in 
every singular case (enough space, power supply, protocols compatibility etc.). It would be 
desirable to have a compatibility level, similar to IEC-61850 
 
V.D) MAIN PURPOSE OF THE LMS, REAL TIME MONITORING VS LONG TERM 
ASSESSMENT, MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENT / STRATEGIES 
 
As we have witnessed during this Master Thesis, the main scope of the Lightning Monitoring 
Systems is to immediately capture the main electrical characteristics a lightning possesses after a 
stroke and transmit it immediately to a webserver or end user for ulterior analysis, so physical 
status of the asset can be assessed and send personnel to the field for inspection. 
Majority of the LMS subjected to study, do have this real time monitoring. Some are constantly 
sending signals to the sensors to check status, and some others and in order to save battery, are 
set to sleep mode, awakening once a week to send data to the webserver with all the data. 
Regarding the maintenance strategies, current LMS solutions available in the market have been 
designed to keep a minimal maintenance activity by personnel. Some duties include, for instance, 
battery replacement every 5 years, overall visual inspection of the hardware (FO cables, 
fixations, hardware etc.) and connection to the webserver. 
In any case, some LMS send alert messages whenever a signal to any sensor is lost, alerting the 
end user about this error. 
However, it is wise to follow every LMS supplier maintenance recommendations to ensure 
proper functionality. 
==PAGE:112==
 
 
 
 
109 
 
Recent conversations with the company GE Offshore Wind depicted that LMS data normally is 
not used to stop a WTG after a blade is hit and this is the common rule nowadays among most 
OEM’s. 
Nevertheless, this option is configurable, and owners of the wind farm can implement this option 
linked to the LPL I value (200kA approx.) which is the maximum current a blade is normally 
designed to withstand, ordering the WTG to stop whenever this value is reached and would be a 
non-resettable alarm, forcing a personnel to go onsite and perform a visual inspection via UAV’s 
(Unmanned Aerial Vehicles or commonly known as Drones) or different equipment to ensure 
blade has not received significant damage before resuming operation. 
 
PART VI -- APPLICABILITY EVALUATION TO LM/GE TURBINES AND 
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR FUTURE APPLICATION OF THE METHODS ON REAL 
CASES IN THE COMPANY. 
 
Throughout the course of this Master Thesis, it has come to light the absolute importance of the 
data captured by LMS systems and how end user and OEMs are able to evaluate them. 
For this reason, the more information we can collect from every lightning together with current 
wave forms, the better for the end customer. 
Current LMS being used in the wind turbine industry provides useful information but could be 
improved. This has been considered by the supplier and that’s why their product will be 
improved by the end of the year including better capabilities of their system and inclusion of 
current waveform recording option. 
More and more suppliers are realizing the importance of complying with the new version of the 
IEC 61400-24:2019 and the Japanese standard JIS C 1400-24:2023 to be more competitive in the 
market and gain more customers. 
One characteristic that no supplier has been curious about is the detection of the electric arc that 
might happen at the down conductor within the blade’s cavity once a blade is attached and how it 
affects the internal structure and diverse electrical components a blade consists of.  
Another good improvement would be that every LMS supplier would be able to provide a table 
stating the threshold a WTG should stop after a hit / several hits, to preserve its physical 
integrity, and forcing human inspection. 
However, this option is more OEM-dependent, but a close collaboration among them would 
benefit the whole industry. 
==PAGE:113==
 
 
 
 
110 
 
PART VII -- CONCLUSION 
 
Arrived at this point, we have deeply taken a lookout at the LMS systems currently available in 
the market, its main characteristics and how some offers more possibilities than others based on 
its detection method, technology, and emphasis on capturing the most information out of the 
strike. 
After this study, where different suppliers were contacted, the following conclusions can be 
derived.: 
 
- 
Lightning is an amazing natural phenomenon that has amazed mankind for 
centuries and is continuous being desecrated to study and understand it better. 
- 
Early lightning detection and monitoring systems are gaining importance as 
more wind farms are being built worldwide and OEM’s and insurance 
companies rely on data and maintenance activities carried out by owners after 
a major incident in a blade, as investment in modern wind parks increases. 
- 
Detection method and technology is constantly evolving, trying to determine 
the best system without raising the price and compromising the quality. 
 
The following companies were evaluated: 
1. DEHN 
2. JOMITEK 
3. POLYTECH 
4. PHOENIX CONTACT 
5. TAKAOKA TOKO 
Dehn, Polytech, Phoenix can differentiate which blade was attached. Polytech and Phoenix lack 
a detection to the nacelle. 
In terms of installation, Dehn (without blade detection), Takaoka and Jomitek do offer a fast and 
less complex installation process. 
When it comes to visualization of the data via webserver, all of them except Takaoka (Due to 
impossibility of checking) present very clear representation of data, together with current 
waveforms (option not yet applicable for Phoenix Contact but in the new version it will be 
included) 
Communication protocols, all do offer a variety of options, such as, Modbus, etc. 
==PAGE:114==
 
 
 
 
111 
 
When it comes to the financial cost, almost all of them swing in the same range of price, being 
the most expensive Polytech and Jomitek, the lowest. 
Maintenance, Dehn Blade detection requires battery change based on their use (if this method is 
selected) up to five years of life. Other manufacturers require minimum maintenance activities or 
are autonomous (signal constant check).  
In addition to the list, I encourage to also look at the emerging Japanese suppliers (Previously 
mentioned in this Thesis) as they look very promising and JIS compliant. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
IEC 61400-24 ed.2.0 (July 2019) International Standard, Lightning Protection Part 24 
More specifically Annexes ‘A’ and ‘L’ 
[2] 
JIS C 1400-24:2023, Japanese International Standard, Part 24. More specifically, Annex 
‘JA’ 
[3] 
IEC Electropedia: available at http://www.electropedia.org/ (last access: Jun/2024) 
[4] 
ISO Online browsing platform: available at http://www.iso.org/obp (last access: 
Jun/2024) 
[5] 
https://www.sciencedirect.com (last access: Jun/2024) 
[6] 
https://www.electrical4u.com (last access: Jun/2024) 
[7] 
https://ntrs.nasa.gov/api/citations/20150000574/downloads/20150000574.pdf (last 
access: Jun/2024) 
[8] 
https://www.livescience.com (last access: Jun/2024) 
[9] 
https://www.researchgate.net (last access: Jun/2024) 
[10] 
 Internal LM Wind Power and Specific Suppliers Documentation 
[11] 
lsp-international.com (last access: Jun/2024) 
[12] 
 Own field experience, pictures taken at Marshalling Harbor. (Visited March 2024, New 
Bedford, Boston, United States of America) 
[13] 
Phoenix Contact Instructions Manual. Link https://www.phoenixcontact.com/en-
pc/products/lightning-current-measuring-system-lm-s-ls-h-2800616 
[14] 
Example of real life measuring sharing data of LSA from Jomitek 
http://212.97.233.230:803/index.lp?page=event 
==PAGE:115==
 
 
 
 
112 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEX I - DATASHEETS OF LMS STUDIED 
 
==PAGE:116==
 
 
 
 
113 
 
PHOENIX CONTACT
==PAGE:117==
 
 
 
 
114 
 
==PAGE:118==
 
 
 
 
115 
 
==PAGE:119==
 
 
 
 
116 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:120==
 
 
 
 
117 
 
TOKO-TAKAOKA 
 
==PAGE:121==
 
 
 
 
118 
 
  
==PAGE:122==
 
 
 
 
119 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:123==
 
 
 
 
120 
 
 
DEHN
 
==PAGE:124==
 
 
 
 
121 
 
 
==PAGE:125==
 
 
 
 
122 
 
 
==PAGE:126==
 
 
 
 
123 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:127==
 
 
 
 
124 
 
POLYTECH 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:128==
 
 
 
 
125 
 
 
==PAGE:129==
 
 
 
 
126 
 
JOMITEK  
 
==PAGE:130==
 
 
 
 
127 
 
==PAGE:131==
 
 
 
 
128 
 
 
==PAGE:132==
 
 
 
 
129 
 
 
==PAGE:133==
 
 
 
 
130 
 
 
==PAGE:134==
 
 
 
 
131 
 
INGESCO
==PAGE:135==
 
 
 
 
132 
 
 
==PAGE:136==
 
 
 
 
133 
 
TESICNOR 
 
 
 
==PAGE:137==
 
 
 
 
134 
 
LM MAGNETIC CARD
==PAGE:138==
 
 
 
 
135 
 
==PAGE:139==
 
 
 
 
136 
 
==PAGE:140==
 
 
 
 
137 
 
==PAGE:141==
 
 
 
 
138 
 
 
 
==PAGE:142==
 
 
 
 
139 
 
ANNEX II - LMS TEST REPORT 
 
Only one supplier (Polytech) granted us a full lightning exposure report from a generic wind 
farm and Takaoka Toko did not grant permission to post a sample routine test report of its LMS. 
==PAGE:143==
 
 
 
 
140 
 
==PAGE:144==
 
 
 
 
141 
 
==PAGE:145==
 
 
 
 
142 
 
==PAGE:146==
 
 
 
 
143 
 
==PAGE:147==
 
 
 
 
144 
 
==PAGE:148==
 
 
 
 
145 
 
 
==PAGE:149==
 
 
 
 
146 
 
 
==PAGE:150==
 
 
 
 
147 
 
ANNEX III – CALCULATION OF THE RECEPTOR MASS LOSS 
 
In the present annex, the calculation of how much mass the receptor losses is shown. For this 
purpose, we must go back to the previous revision of the IEC 61400-24, edition 2.0, where we 
can find the following statement: 
Assuming that the total arc energy W is consumed by the receptor at the time of lightning strike 
and melts and evaporates, and assuming that UAK of the voltage-drop of the positive electrode or 
the negative electrode due to the arc is constant, the melt and evaporate quantity V can be 
calculated by the following equation. 
 
Where W: arc energy (J) 
Material Density (kg/m3) 
Thermal Capacity of Material (J/kgK) 
Melting Point (°C) of Material 
Ambient temperature (°C) 
Molten Latent Heat (J/kg) 
The arc energy W is expressed by the following equation. 
 
Q: Total charge (C) 600C 
UAK: Positive or negative voltage drop (V) due to arcing: 30V. 
The calculation of the melted volume during a lightning attachment for different materials is 
depicted in Table below. Special attention is paid to copper, aluminum, brass, and graphite on 
GE blades. 
The volume of the blade-tip graphite receptor is 75 cm3, and the melt/evaporate volume caused 
by the lightning strike is negligible. If the severe deterioration is observed, receptors can be 
replaced at the maintenance timing. 
The volume of the blade center receptors is 20 cm3 and cannot be ignored for the lightning 
strike. If the blade receptor is damaged, it can be replaced. Therefore, this receptor is 
interchangeable. 
 
 
==PAGE:151==
 
 
 
 
148 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Property 
Material 
 
Copper 
Aluminum 
Brass 
Stainless 
Steel 
Graphite 
Tungsten 
γ(kg/m 3) 
8920 
2700 
8730 
8000 
2265 
19260 
θs (°C) 
1080 
658 
1700 
1500 
3697 
3400 
Cs (J/kg) 
209x103 
397x103 
205x103 
272x103 
356 x103 
193 x103 
CW 
(J/kgK) 
385 
908 
380 
500 
719 
142 
Melted 
Vol (cm3) 
for 600 C 
3.27 
6.83 
2.44 
2.22 
2.36 
1.39 
Figure 86 - Physical properties of major receptor materials and calculated melted volume 
(Source: IEC 61400-24 Ed.2.0)  
 
