==PAGE:1==
Contrastive Multimodal Alignment for
Semantically Вӯ Guided
Audio Source Separation
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Contrastive Multimodal Alignment for
Semantically Вӯ Guided
Audio Source Separation
Master Thesis
July, 2025
By
Diogo Adegas
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cusВӯ
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Department of Applied Mathematics
and Computer Science, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in fulfilment for the
degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng. It is assumed that the reader has a
basic knowledge in the areas of computer science, programming and deep learning,.
Diogo Adegas Вӯ s233349
Signature
Date
ii
Contrastive Multimodal Alignment for
Semantically Вӯ Guided
Audio Source Separation
31/07/2025
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This thesis introduces a novel pipeline for languageВӯanchored audio source separation
(LASS), where textual prompts guide the separation of, e.g, musical stems from a mixВӯ
ture. Leveraging recent advances in contrastive audioвҖ“language models, we formulate
the separation task as a differentiable optimization loop operating in a shared semanВӯ
tic embedding space. Given a set of natural language queries, the system learns soft
timeвҖ“frequency masks that align the separated audio with the corresponding text emВӯ
beddings. This approach unlocks an open natural languageВӯgrade of separation control,
interpretability, and domain generalization without finetuning or training.
A key contribution of this work is a modular gradientВӯbased optimization loop integrating
multiple loss components: (1) a contrastive InfoNCE loss between audio embeddings of
separated sources and preВӯcomputed text embeddings from cues, (2) a physicsВӯinspired
differentiation loss that encourages source separation through cosine similarity penalВӯ
ties, overlap minimization, and spectralВӯtemporal correlation constraints, and (3) temporalВӯ
spectral smoothness regularization to enforce mask coherence. We demonstrate the difВӯ
ferentiability of this loop through careful gradient flow management in the audio encoder,
and we propose a unified PyTorchВӯcompatible framework for mask optimization.
We also conduct pilot prompt engineering experiments, exploring prompt sensitivity, crossВӯ
model transferability, and audio degradation robustness. To refine prompt quality, we deВӯ
velop a scoring mechanism based on selfВӯsimilarity and discrimination metrics, supported
by an LLMВӯassisted prompt refinement pipeline. The final prompt set outperforms naive
baselines in both semantic alignment and source isolation fidelity.
Finally, we release a practical testВӯtime stem separation pipeline, although with limited
results. While the proposed framework is constrained by the embedding modelsвҖҷ latent
biases and by limitations in textвҖ“audio correspondence, it offers a flexible and extensible
interface for multimodal audio processing. Future work may integrate generative priors,
fineВӯtuned separation models, or promptВӯconditioned diffusion to further improve source
fidelity.
Contrastive Multimodal Alignment for
Semantically Вӯ Guided
Audio Source Separation
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I want to thank my family for always being there for me, no matter the decision I take,
no matter the fewer in person visits for being abroad. To my parents, who have always
done everything possible to support me: my mom, for always knowing what to do and
how to react to all kinds of circumstances, and my add, for the constant guidance and
for being my companion throughout this journey. And to my twin sister вҖ” thank you for
always keeping me up to speed without hesitation. Thank you guys for being consistent
and stable Вӯ that has allowed me to grow!
To Madalena, who is my daily motivation to keep going. For showing me passion and
commitment. Everything makes more sense when you are pushing me to be a better
human being.
And lastly, to all my friends, both in Portugal and in Denmark. They provide me the social
balance that is vital in my dayВӯtoВӯday life.
iv
Contrastive Multimodal Alignment for
Semantically Вӯ Guided
Audio Source Separation
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Problem Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Proposed Approach
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Contribution Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.5
Thesis Structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Background and Related Work
3
2.1
Foundations of Audio Source Separation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Classical Algorithmic Approaches . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Perceptual MaskВӯBased Approaches . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.4
Oracle Masks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.5
DataВӯDriven and Deep Learning Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.6
Evaluation Metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3
Methodology
15
3.1
Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.2
Problem Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.3
Prompt Engineering as a LASS Enabler . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
3.4
Proposed Architecture Вӯ Specifics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3.5
GradientВӯBased Optimization Loop . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
4
Experiments and Results
29
4.1
Getting to Know our Embedding Space
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
4.2
Illustrative Example: Trial #0 Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
5
Conclusion and Future Work
39
5.1
Summary of Contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
5.2
Key Findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
5.3
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
5.4
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
5.5
Final Remarks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
Bibliography
41
Appendix A: Full LLM Prompt
45
Contrastive Multimodal Alignment for
Semantically Вӯ Guided
Audio Source Separation
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Contrastive Multimodal Alignment for
Semantically Вӯ Guided
Audio Source Separation
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
Problem Statement
The challenge of separating individual sound sources from an audio mixtureвҖ”commonly
termed the cocktail party problemвҖ”remains a foundational question in signal processing
and machine learning. Early solutions relied on statistical priors and classical approaches
such as independent component analysis (ICA) and nonВӯnegative matrix factorization
(NMF), but these methods struggle in complex, realВӯworld scenarios where sources are
intertwined or not strictly independent [1, 2].
Recent advances in deep learning, particularly supervised neural architectures, have
propelled source separation performance to new heights by taking advantage of large
datasets of isolated stems [3, 4]. However, these successes are closely tied to the availВӯ
ability of annotated data, limiting their adaptability to new domains or uncommon instruВӯ
ments.
At the same time, the field has experienced a paradigm shift through selfВӯsupervised and
contrastive representation learning. Models such as CLIP for visionвҖ“language and CLAP
for audioвҖ“language have demonstrated that multimodal, joint embedding spaces can faВӯ
cilitate openВӯvocabulary recognition, retrieval, and crossВӯmodal alignment. These develВӯ
opments, reviewed extensively in Chapter 2, provide new building blocks for semanticallyВӯ
guided audio processing.
1.2
Motivation
Traditional supervised source separation techniques, while effective, remain constrained
by their dependence on expensive labeled data and limited flexibility in defining novel
source categories. The emergence of contrastive models like CLAP [5] offers an alterВӯ
native: using shared embedding spaces to provide semantic guidance for audio tasks
via natural language. This approach promises zeroВӯshot capability, adaptable prompting,
and improved generalization.
However, integrating semantic embedding models into separation pipelines introduces
open questions. How can prompts be crafted or optimized to maximize separation qualВӯ
ity? To what extent can audioвҖ“language embeddings serve as reliable guides in the abВӯ
sence of reference stems? Chapter 2 traces prior work that motivates these questions
and identifies gaps this thesis aims to address.
Research Questions and Objectives
Research Question: Can the semantic structure of CLAPвҖҷs audioвҖ“language embedding
space be effectively used to guide source separation without relying on groundВӯtruth isoВӯ
lated stems?
Building on insights from previous literature, this thesis sets out to:
вҖў Design a weakly supervised separation framework using CLAPВӯbased semantic
similarity for mask optimization,
вҖў Evaluate promptВӯdriven supervision as a tool for achieving meaningful, semanticallyВӯ
aligned decompositions,
вҖў Systematically analyze and characterize the structure, strengths, and limitations of
CLAP embeddings across linguistic and acoustic domains.
Contrastive Multimodal Alignment for
Semantically Вӯ Guided
Audio Source Separation
1
==PAGE:10==
1.3
Proposed Approach
This thesis proposes a separation framework in which learnable timeвҖ“frequency masks
are optimized via backpropagation to maximize semantic alignment with text prompts in
the CLAP embedding space, subject to mixture consistency. As reviewed in Chapter 2,
this design draws on both classical maskВӯbased separation and recent advances in multiВӯ
modal representation learning. The approach does not require groundВӯtruth stems, makВӯ
ing it adaptable to a wide array of realВӯworld settings.
1.4
Contribution Summary
1. A CLAPВӯguided, weakly supervised source separation method, building on and
extending recent trends in textВӯprompted, semantically informed audio separation.
2. Comprehensive embedding space analysis, using characterization studies that
encompass crossВӯembedder transferability, prompt complexity, and robustness, diВӯ
rectly linked to and expanding upon insights in Chapter 2.
3. A rigorously designed loss formulation that seamlessly integrates semantic and
physical constraints, inspired by both prior signal processing frameworks and curВӯ
rent multimodal methods.
1.5
Thesis Structure
The thesis is organized as follows. Chapter 2 traces the evolution of audio source separaВӯ
tion from classical approaches to the rise of deep learning, contrastive learning, and mulВӯ
timodal semantic embedding, providing a detailed context for the proposed work. ChapВӯ
ter 3 develops the mathematical and methodological details of the framework, including
mask optimization, semantic prompting, and systematic loss design. Chapter 4 presents
a thorough experimental evaluation alongside embedding space characterization studВӯ
ies. Chapter 5 synthesizes the findings, discusses their implications in the context of prior
literature, and outlines directions for future research.
2
Contrastive Multimodal Alignment for
Semantically Вӯ Guided
Audio Source Separation
==PAGE:11==
2
Background and Related Work
2.1
Foundations of Audio Source Separation
2.1.1
CocktailВӯParty Problem and its Mathematical Formulation
In 1953, CherryвҖҷs experiments first described and demonstrated the capacity for the huВӯ
man brain to selectively pay attention to one voice in multiВӯtalker environments [6]. ForВӯ
malizing this, denote N source signals as
s(t) =
!
s1(t), . . . , sN(t)
"вҠӨ,
and M recorded mixtures as
x(t) =
!
x1(t), . . . , xM(t)
"вҠӨ.
Under linear, instantaneous mixing,
x(t) = A s(t) + n(t),
(2.1)
where A вҶ’RMГ—N is the mixing matrix and n(t) represents additive noise [1]. The system
is underdetermined when M < NНҫ when M вүҘN, multiple decompositions (A, s) satisfy x.
Additional constraintsвҖ”statistical independence (the assumption that sources are probaВӯ
bilistically independent of each other), spectral sparsity (the property that source signals
occupy only a limited number of frequencies at a given time), or spatial cues (differences
in signalsвҖҷ arrival times or intensities at multiple microphones)вҖ”are needed to solve the
inverse problem.
In reverberant conditions, mixing is modeled as
xm(t) =
N
#
n=1
LвҲ’1
#
П„=0
amn(П„) sn(t вҲ’П„) + nm(t),
(2.2)
with impulse responses amn(П„) of length L [7]. Equations (2.1) and (2.2) define the core
inverse problem addressed by all separation methods.
Signal Representations and Core Concepts in Audio Source Separation
Audio source separation is the task of recovering individual sound sources from a mixture.
Most modern methods work in a transformed domain вҖ” instead of using raw audio directly,
they first convert the signal into a form that reveals useful time and frequency information.
TimeвҖ“Domain Waveform
The waveform x(t) is the raw audio signal: a timeВӯvarying function that represents sound
pressure changes over time. It is the most direct way to store audio but does not make
frequency patterns easy to analyze.
ShortВӯTime Fourier Transform (STFT)
The shortВӯtime Fourier transform (STFT) breaks the waveform into short, overlapping segВӯ
ments (called frames) and analyzes the frequency content of each. This gives a timeвҖ“
frequency representation X(f, П„):
X(f, П„) =
LвҲ’1
#
n=0
x(n + П„H) w(n) eвҲ’j2ПҖfn/L,
Contrastive Multimodal Alignment for
Semantically Вӯ Guided
Audio Source Separation
3
==PAGE:12==
where w(n) is a windowing function (to reduce edge effects), L is the segment length
(frame size in samples), and H is the hop size (frame step). From X(f, П„), we get: Вӯ the
**magnitude** |X(f, П„)| вҖ” showing how strong each frequency is at each moment, also
called a **spectrogram**, Вӯ the **phase** вҲ X(f, П„) вҖ” necessary to accurately reconstruct
the audio signal, though some methods estimate or ignore it [8].
Mel Spectrogram
The mel spectrogram is a compressed version of the spectrogram that groups frequencies
based on how humans perceive pitch. This is done using a mel filterbank Hm(f):
M(m, П„) =
#
f
Hm(f) |X(f, П„)|.
Mel spectrograms are widely used in machine learning models for music and speech, as
they capture perceptually relevant features [9].
TimeвҖ“Frequency Masking
One common way to separate sources is by predicting a **mask** M(f, П„) that highlights
parts of the spectrogram where a target sound is active. This mask is applied to the
mixture:
$S(f, П„) = M(f, П„) X(f, П„),
where $S is the estimated target source.
There are two standard types of masks used for evaluation:
вҖў Ideal Binary Mask (IBM):
MIBM(f, П„) =
В®
1
if the target is stronger,
0
otherwise
This hard binary mask assigns 1 to timeВӯfrequency bins dominated by the target and
0 elsewhere [10].
вҖў Ideal Ratio Mask (IRM):
MIRM(f, П„) =
Etarget(f, П„)
Etarget(f, П„) + Einterf(f, П„),
where Etarget(f, П„) and Einterf(f, П„) denote the energy of the target and interfering
sources at each timeВӯfrequency bin. This soft mask gives proportional weight to the
target, allowing partial contribution from interfering sources [11].
This subsection provides the foundation for all later discussions, algorithms, and archiВӯ
tectural choices in the field of audio source separation.
2.2
Classical Algorithmic Approaches
2.2.1
Statistical Techniques
Independent Component Analysis (ICA)
ICA assumes sources are statistically independent and nonВӯGaussian. It estimates an
unmixing matrix W such that
u(t) = W x(t)
produces components with maximal independence. Infomax [12] and FastICA [13] use
different objective functions but both require M вүҘN and work best with limited reverberВӯ
ation.
4
Contrastive Multimodal Alignment for
Semantically Вӯ Guided
Audio Source Separation
==PAGE:13==
NonВӯnegative Matrix Factorization (NMF)
NMF breaks down a nonВӯnegative spectrogram V вҶ’RFГ—T
+
into basis spectra W вҶ’RFГ—K
+
and activations H вҶ’RKГ—T
+
:
V вүҲW H
[14]. Supervised versions use fixed source dictionariesНҫ unsupervised versions add sparВӯ
sity or divergence penalties. Performance falls when spectral components overlap.
2.2.2
Spatial Techniques
Beamforming
Beamforming uses multiple microphones distributed in space to focus on sounds arrivВӯ
ing from a specific direction. The simplest type, delayВӯandВӯsum beamforming, works
by delaying signals so that the waves from the target direction align before summation.
MVDR (Minimum Variance Distortionless Response) beamforming aims to minimize
noise power while preserving the target signal, using a steering vector that models how
the desired sound reaches each microphone. These methods perform well in controlled
environments but their effectiveness decreases in highly reverberant settings or when
microphone positions are not precisely known.
2.2.3
Limitations of Classical Methods
Classical methods are based on assumptions that often donвҖҷt hold in practice: Вӯ Sources
are statistically independent (in ICA). Вӯ Spectrogram components are strictly nonВӯnegative
and separable (in NMF). Вӯ Microphone array geometry is perfectly known (in beamformВӯ
ing).
In real acoustic scenes, sounds often overlap, speakers move, and room reverberation is
present, violating these assumptions. These challenges have motivated the development
of newer, dataВӯdriven and perceptually inspired approachesвҖ”such as those based on
deep learningвҖ”which we cover in the next sections.
2.3
Perceptual MaskВӯBased Approaches
Computational Auditory Scene Analysis (CASA)
CASA divides the spectrogram into timeвҖ“frequency elements and groups them using cues
such as onset synchrony, harmonicity, and spatial proximity. Brown and CookeвҖҷs frameВӯ
work defined a set of binary rules that mimic the human perceptual organization of sound,
guiding the assignment of timeвҖ“frequency elements to different sources [15].
2.4
Oracle Masks
Ideal Binary Mask (IBM)
The IBM applies a binary choice per timeвҖ“frequency unit (f, t):
mIBM(f, t) =
В®
1,
Etarget(f, t) > Einterf(f, t),
0,
otherwise.
This mask selects only the dominant source at each point, which can maximize separation
but may introduce audible artifacts known as musical noise.
Ideal Ratio Mask (IRM)
The IRM uses a continuous weight to reduce artifacts:
mIRM(f, t) =
Etarget(f, t)
Etarget(f, t) + Einterf(f, t),
assigning fractional weights between 0 and 1 [16]. This approach allows each timeвҖ“
frequency element to contribute proportionally from both target and interference, resulting
in smoother reconstructions.
Contrastive Multimodal Alignment for
Semantically Вӯ Guided
Audio Source Separation
5
==PAGE:14==
Oscillatory Correlation Masks
Oscillatory correlation masks use phase coherence across timeвҖ“frequency elements to
group bins that move together in phase, extending grouping beyond energyВӯbased criteВӯ
ria [17].
Transition to Learned Masks
As discussed in Section 2.3, perceptual maskВӯbased methods such as CASA and oracle
masks (IBM, IRM) rely heavily on groundВӯtruth energies extracted from isolated sources
or on handВӯcrafted grouping rules. While effective under controlled settings, these apВӯ
proaches have limited robustness in complex, realВӯworld, nonВӯstationary acoustic enviВӯ
ronments due to their dependence on perfect knowledge and rigid assumptions. This limВӯ
itation motivated the development of supervised learning methods that estimate masks
directly from observed mixtures, without requiring explicit source energies or manual rules.
Such learningВӯbased mask estimation is introduced in the following sections.
2.5
DataВӯDriven and Deep Learning Methods
2.5.1
SpectrogramВӯBased Foundations (2014вҖ“2017)
Building on the timeВӯfrequency (TвҖ“F) representations introduced in Section 2.1.1, the first
wave of deep learning approaches to audio source separation primarily operated in the
shortВӯtime Fourier transform (STFT) domain. These methods replaced handВӯcrafted priors
(Section 2.3) with models learning to estimate TвҖ“F masks from data. The learned masks
approximate ideal or oracle masks, leading to significant empirical performance gains.
However, this early line of work also exposed two key challenges: 1. Phase neglect вҖ”
mask estimation typically operated only on magnitude spectrograms, reusing the mixture
phase for reconstruction, which limits quality (see Section 2.1.1 on phase importance),
and 2. Label permutation вҖ” the network outputs lacked a consistent source ordering,
complicating training and evaluation.
These issues set the research agenda for the subsequent decade.
MaskВӯEstimation Networks
Wang et al. [18] demonstrated that a feedВӯforward deep neural network (DNN) can approxВӯ
imate the ideal ratio mask (IRM, defined in Section 2.4) directly from mixture magnitude
spectrograms, V вҶ’RFГ—T
+
. For each source k, the network predicts a continuous mask
ЛҶM(k) applied elementВӯwise as
$V(k) = ЛҶM(k) вҠҷV,
trained by minimizing the mean squared error loss,
LMSE =
%%% ЛҶM(k) вҲ’M(k)
IRM
%%%
2
2 ,
where M(k)
IRM is the ideal ratio mask computed from isolated source references (see SecВӯ
tion 2.4) [16].
Subsequent improvements replaced feedВӯforward layers with recurrent architectures such
as long shortВӯterm memory (LSTM) and bidirectional LSTM (BLSTM) networks, effectively
capturing longer temporal dependencies. These models produced measurable improveВӯ
ments in signalВӯtoВӯdistortion ratio (SDR) but retained phase reuse and thus did not fully
resolve quality limitations [19].
Deep Clustering
The label permutation problem вҖ” the ambiguity in source output ordering вҖ” was adВӯ
dressed elegantly by Hershey et al. [20] with the deep clustering paradigm. Instead of
6
Contrastive Multimodal Alignment for
Semantically Вӯ Guided
Audio Source Separation
==PAGE:15==
directly predicting masks, each timeВӯfrequency (TвҖ“F) unit i is mapped to a learned emВӯ
bedding vector zi вҶ’RD such that embeddings for units belonging to the same source
cluster together in the embedding space.
The model is trained by minimizing the loss:
LDC =
%%%ZZвҠӨвҲ’YYвҠӨ%%%
2
F ,
where Z stacks embeddings zi for all TвҖ“F units and Y encodes the corresponding source
assignments in oneВӯhot form. At inference, simple clustering methods such as kВӯmeans
partition the embeddings into groups, yielding permutationВӯinvariant masks without requirВӯ
ing a fixed output order.
This approach raised the bar for speakerВӯindependent separation by effectively handling
the label permutation problem, which had stymied earlier mask estimation methods.
PermutationВӯInvariant Training (PIT)
A complementary solution, permutationВӯinvariant training (PIT), tackles the label permuВӯ
tation problem directly in the loss function. Yu et al. [21] select, for every training example,
the permutation ПҖвҲ—вҶ’SN that minimises the scaleВӯinvariant signalВӯtoВӯnoise ratio (SIВӯSNR)
distance:
LPIT = min
ПҖвҲҲSN
N
#
k=1
SIвҲ’SNR
&
ЛҶsПҖ(k), sk
'
.
PIT allows endВӯtoВӯend optimisation of BLSTM separators, matching the performance of
deep clustering while avoiding its separate clustering step.
Limitations and Transition
Despite solving permutation ambiguities, STFTВӯfronted methods still (i) reuse the mixture
phase Вӯ known to degrade intelligibility for analysis windows below 32 ms [22, 23], (ii) inВӯ
troduce frameВӯlength latency, and (iii) struggle in reverberant settings where phase errors
can reduce SDR by several decibels [24]. These drawbacks motivated a shift to endВӯtoВӯ
end timeВӯdomain architectures, which learn both representation and separation directly
on the waveform and are detailed in the next subsection.
2.5.2
TimeВӯDomain Methods (2018вҖ“2020)
SpectrogramВӯbased methods achieved significant progress but remained limited by phase
artifacts fixed timeвҖ“frequency resolution, and frameВӯbased latency. The timeВӯdomain revВӯ
olution addressed these issues by learning representations and separation directly on the
raw waveform.
Temporal Convolutional Networks (TCNs)
Bai et al. [25] showed that stacks of dilated oneВӯdimensional convolutions can model longВӯ
range temporal dependencies without recurrent layers. By using exponentially increasing
dilation factors, TCNs achieve large receptive fields while supporting fully parallel, causal
processing, making them suitable for realВӯtime separation.
ConvВӯTasNet
Building on the move to timeВӯdomain architectures (see Section 2.5.2), Luo and MesВӯ
garani [26] introduced ConvВӯTasNetвҖ”an endВӯtoВӯend separation model that replaces the
fixed STFT frontВӯend with a learnable encoderвҖ“decoder. The encoder transforms short
waveform segments into adaptive, learned feature bases. Temporal convolutional blocks
estimate source masks within this latent space, and a linear decoder reconstructs each
source waveform from the masked features.
By jointly learning both the representaВӯ
tion and separation, ConvВӯTasNet achieved substantial gains over previous TCN and
spectrogramВӯbased models, showing that taskВӯadaptive learned bases can outperform
fixed spectral transforms.
Contrastive Multimodal Alignment for
Semantically Вӯ Guided
Audio Source Separation
7
==PAGE:16==
DualВӯPath RNN (DPRNN)
To tackle the challenge of modeling very long sequences efficiently, Luo et al. [27] introВӯ
duced the dualВӯpath RNN (DPRNN) architecture. DPRNN divides the encoded feature
sequence into overlapping chunks and applies recurrent neural network (RNN) processВӯ
ing in two stages. First, intraВӯchunk RNNs capture local temporal patterns within each
chunk. Next, interВӯchunk RNNs model dependencies across chunks, integrating global
context. This dualВӯpath mechanism allows effective modeling of both fineВӯgrained deВӯ
tails and broad temporal dependencies, which improves performance and computational
efficiency for long recordings.
Limitations and Transition
While these timeВӯdomain models resolve many limitations of STFTВӯbased approachesвҖ”
such as phase artifacts and frameВӯbased latency (see also Section 2.1.1 and Section 2.3)вҖ”
they depend on large labeled datasets of paired mixtures and clean sources. This reliance
risks overfitting to the specific conditions present in the training data, and can limit generВӯ
alization to new acoustic settings. As a result, research has shifted toward selfВӯsupervised
and contrastive learning techniques, which aim to learn robust audio representations diВӯ
rectly from unlabeled mixtures, reducing the dependence on groundВӯtruth sources. The
following section explores these methods in detail.
2.5.3
SelfВӯSupervised & Contrastive Learning (2020вҖ“2022)
Supervised timeВӯdomain models achieved separation on curated datasets but relied heavВӯ
ily on labeled mixtures and struggled to generalize across noise, reverberation, and unВӯ
seen source combinations. The selfВӯsupervised and contrastive era introduced methods
that learn robust, domainВӯagnostic audio representations without requiring parallel source
data, paving the way for flexible separation in unconstrained settings.
Contrastive Predictive Coding (CPC)
Oord et al. [28] proposed Contrastive Predictive Coding to extract predictive latent feaВӯ
tures from raw audio. By dividing an input sequence into past context and future targets,
CPC trains an encoder fenc to produce embeddings zi that maximize agreement with the
corresponding future embedding z+
i while minimizing similarity to other samples zj. This
is formalized by the InfoNCE loss:
LCPC = вҲ’
#
i
log
exp
&
sim(zi, z+
i )/П„
'
(
j exp
&
sim(zi, zj)/П„
'.
Representations learned via CPC have demonstrated strong transfer to separation tasks,
improving robustness in reverberant and underdetermined mixtures.
MixtureВӯInvariant Training (MixIT)
Addressing the fundamental dependence on isolated source references, Wisdom et al. [29]
introduced MixIT to train separation models using only observed mixtures. MixIT creates
training examples by mixing existing mixtures together, then learning to separate these
вҖқmixtures of mixturesвҖқ (MoMs) into constituent parts that can reconstruct the original inВӯ
puts. The unsupervised objective is:
LMixIT =
2
#
k=1
%%y(k) вҲ’
#
m
Akm ЛҶsm
%%2
2,
Akm вҶ’{0, 1},
where each observed mixture y(k) is reconstructed by optimally recombining estimated
latent sources ЛҶsm through the assignment matrix Akm. MixIT achieves performance comВӯ
parable to supervised methods on speech separation benchmarks while naturally scaling
to large, realВӯworld datasets without requiring groundВӯtruth sources [29].
8
Contrastive Multimodal Alignment for
Semantically Вӯ Guided
Audio Source Separation
==PAGE:17==
AudioВӯMasked Autoencoder (AudioВӯMAE)
Extending masked autoencoding from computer vision to audio, Huang et al. [30] adapted
Vision Transformer MAE principles to spectrogram patches. A transformer encoder proВӯ
cesses only unmasked spectrogram regions Si, while a lightweight decoder reconstructs
the complete input from the encoded representations and mask tokens:
LMAE = Ei
%%Recon(Mask(Si)) вҲ’Si
%%2
2.
The approach leverages the high correlation in local timeВӯfrequency regions of audio
spectrograms by incorporating local window attention in the decoder. FineВӯtuning these
pretrained embeddings alongside conventional features yields substantial improvements
across speech, music, and environmental sound separation tasks, significantly reducing
reliance on labeled mixtureВӯsource pairs [30].
Limitations and Transition
While selfВӯsupervised objectives successfully address data scarcity and improve generВӯ
alization across diverse acoustic conditions (building on the limitations identified in SecВӯ
tion 2.2.3), they remain fundamentally semanticВӯagnosticвҖ”unable to target specific source
types or handle userВӯspecified separation tasks without additional conditioning mechaВӯ
nisms. Moreover, these methods require substantial computational resources for preВӯ
training and often struggle with fineВӯgrained control over separation behavior. These limВӯ
itations motivated the integration of languageВӯbased supervision and zeroВӯshot capabiliВӯ
ties in subsequent multimodal approaches, enabling more flexible and controllable source
separation systems.
2.5.4
Multimodal and ZeroВӯShot Audio Source Separation (2022вҖ“Present)
Motivation: From LabelВӯConstrained to SemanticallyВӯGuided Source Separation
Traditional and selfВӯsupervised audio separation methods rely on fixed taxonomies or
parallel data Вӯ requiring mixtures to be annotated with a predefined set of source labels or
training on paired clean and mixed signals [19]. This limits their applicability in realВӯworld
scenarios, where mixtures often contain unanticipated, overlapping, or previously unseen
sources.
To overcome these constraints, recent research shifts toward semanticallyВӯguided sepaВӯ
ration: models that accept freeВӯform language descriptions or visual cues (e.g., вҖңambient
rain,вҖқ вҖңfemale speech in background,вҖқ or вҖңcar passing byвҖқ) to extract sources. This apВӯ
proach enables openВӯvocabulary, zeroВӯshot separation in diverse, unstructured environВӯ
ments.
Joint Multimodal Embedding Spaces Semantic Alignment Across Modalities
Joint embedding spaces provide a foundational mechanism for crossВӯmodal alignment. In
these approaches, modalityВӯspecific encoders Вӯ such as visual, audio, and text networks Вӯ
are trained on largeВӯscale paired datasets using contrastive objectives (such as InfoNCEНҫ
see Section 2.5.3) to minimize the distance between matching samples and maximize it
between mismatches.
CLIP: Contrastive LanguageвҖ“Image Pretraining
CLIP trains separate image and text encoders on 400 million imageвҖ“caption pairs colВӯ
lected from the public internet using an InfoNCE contrastive loss [31]. This approach
establishes a shared embedding space where semantically related images and captions
are close together, enabling effective zeroВӯshot image classification (76.2% topВӯ1 accuВӯ
racy on ImageNet [31]), crossВӯmodal retrieval, and compositional visualвҖ“textual queries.
Impact: CLIP created a scalable framework for contrastive multimodal representation
learning, sparking the development of analogous models for audioвҖ“text and universal
modality alignment.
Contrastive Multimodal Alignment for
Semantically Вӯ Guided
Audio Source Separation
9
==PAGE:18==
Figure 2.1: Example of joint multimodal embedding space construction. ModalityВӯspecific
encoders project images, audio, and text into a shared embedding space, where semantiВӯ
cally similar items Вӯ such as different representations of a вҖңdogвҖқ or вҖңpianoвҖқ Вӯ are coВӯlocated.
Limitations for Source Separation: While CLIP embeddings excel at capturing broad seВӯ
mantic associations, they lack the necessary temporal and spatial detail to resolve overВӯ
lapping sources within audio mixtures, which limits their effectiveness for direct source
separation or mask estimation [32].
CLAP: Contrastive LanguageвҖ“Audio Pretraining
Building directly on CLIPвҖҷs dualВӯencoder architecture, CLAP extends contrastive learning
to audioвҖ“text pairs. It leverages either CNNВӯ or transformerВӯbased audio encoders toВӯ
gether with BERT or RoBERTa text encoders, trained on more than 630,000 captioned
audio clips from datasets like AudioCaps, FSD50K, and others [33]. CLAP achieves 91%
zeroВӯshot accuracy on ESCВӯ50 sound event classification [33].
Impact: CLAPвҖҷs audioвҖ“language embeddings enable openВӯvocabulary sound event tagВӯ
ging and retrieval, and now form the semantic backbone for downstream tasks including
languageВӯguided separation and audio captioning. More recently, advancements such
as Cacophony combine selfВӯsupervised masked audio pretraining with largeВӯscale audioвҖ“
text alignment, further improving the quality of audioвҖ“language embeddings and zeroВӯshot
recognition [34].
Limitations for Source Separation: Although CLAP (and improvements like Cacophony)
provide strong semantic representations for audio events, they are not designed to sepaВӯ
rate overlapping sources in timeвҖ“frequency space. Effective source extraction from mixВӯ
tures requires downstream separation modules that use these embeddings as semantic
conditioning cues [35].
ImageBind: Universal VisionВӯAnchored Multimodal Embedding
ImageBind generalizes contrastive multimodal learning to six modalitiesвҖ”image, audio,
text, video, depth, and IMU sensor dataвҖ”aligning them in a unified, visionВӯanchored emВӯ
10
Contrastive Multimodal Alignment for
Semantically Вӯ Guided
Audio Source Separation
==PAGE:19==
bedding space with paired datasets and a contrastive objective [36]. ImageBind achieves
68.7% zeroВӯshot audio classification on ESCВӯ50 and supports compositional multimodal
queries (e.g., image + text вҶ’audio) and retrieval tasks [36].
Impact: ImageBind demonstrates that largeВӯscale joint embedding spaces can enable
flexible crossВӯmodal retrieval and openВӯvocabulary queries across diverse data types.
Limitations for Source Separation: While ImageBind captures eventВӯlevel semantics across
modalities, it does not provide localization or disentanglement of overlapping sources
within audio mixtures.
Integration with dedicated separation algorithms or generative
mask estimators is still required for realВӯworld source separation applications [37].
ZeroВӯShot Diffusion Separation (ZeroSep).
ZeroSep employs pretrained textВӯconditioned diffusion models to perform source separaВӯ
tion without any taskВӯspecific training [38]. Mixtures are mapped into diffusion latents and
denoised under the semantics of a text query embedding c = eq:
xtвҲ’1 = xt вҲ’вҲҡ1 вҲ’ВҜОұt ПөОё(xt, c, t)
вҲҡВҜОұt
+
вҲҡ
1 вҲ’ВҜОұt z.
ZeroSep outperforms supervised baselines on MUSIC and AudioSet without fineВӯtuningНҫ
followВӯon hybrid methods (e.g., HybridSep) combine diffusion with adversarial consistency
to further enhance fidelity [39].
Limitations for Source Separation: ZeroSep depends on semantic embeddings optimized
for classification, which lack the granularity to disentangle overlapping or spatially entanВӯ
gled sources. Performance degrades for ambiguous or underВӯspecified queries, and its
iterative diffusion process incurs high computational cost, limiting realВӯtime use [39].
DGMO: DiffusionВӯGuided Mask Optimization
DGMO (DiffusionВӯGuided Mask Optimization) advances zeroВӯshot audio source separaВӯ
tion by directly learning and optimizing separation masks within a pretrained, textВӯconditioned
diffusion model [40]. Unlike baseline diffusion or classifierВӯfree approaches, DGMO uses
mask parameters as variables to guide the generative processвҖ”applying continuous
mask updates such that the generated audio aligns closely with the semantics of text
queries while suppressing unwanted sources. This approach offers fineВӯgrained, conВӯ
trollable separation and demonstrates stateВӯofВӯtheВӯart performance on openВӯdomain sepВӯ
aration benchmarks (MUSIC, AudioSet), outperforming prior zeroВӯshot and supervised
models.
Limitations for Source Separation: While DGMO enables flexible, userВӯdriven separation
and outperforms vanilla diffusionВӯbased methods, it still inherits significant computational
costs from the iterative diffusion process. Mask optimization efficacy depends on the
quality of underlying semantic embeddingsНҫ as with previous work, performance can suffer
with ambiguous or underВӯspecified queries, and realВӯtime operation remains challenging
for longВӯform audio scenes [40].
Limitations and Outlook.
Despite advances in semantic and generative separation, several challenges remain [37,
32]:
вҖў Semantic embeddings support classification but offer only indirect cues for isolating
overlapping sources in mixtures.
вҖў Ambiguous or underВӯspecified queries can lead to misalignment between user intent
and separation output.
Contrastive Multimodal Alignment for
Semantically Вӯ Guided
Audio Source Separation
11
==PAGE:20==
вҖў Large transformerВӯbased encoders and diffusion inference are resourceВӯintensive,
restricting realВӯtime applicability.
вҖў Mask optimization in diffusion models (e.g., DGMO) is still fundamentally limited
by embedding and model expressivity, and practical deployment requires further
efficiency improvements.
Future work will most likely integrate semantic embeddings (e.g., CLAP), efficient generВӯ
ative models (e.g., diffusion, flow matching, DGMO), and scalable architectures for userВӯ
driven audio source separationвҖ”targeting robust, openВӯdomain, and realВӯtime scenarios.
2.6
Evaluation Metrics
2.6.1
Introduction
Objective evaluation of languageВӯqueried audio source separation (LASS) requires metВӯ
rics that jointly assess signal fidelity, interference suppression, and semantic alignment
to the text query. This work reports and justifies the use of three complementary metric
families:
вҖў the Blind Source Separation (BSS Eval) metrics Вӯ SignalВӯtoВӯDistortion Ratio (SDR),
SignalВӯtoВӯInterference Ratio (SIR), SignalВӯtoВӯArtifact Ratio (SAR), and ScaleВӯInvariant
SignalВӯtoВӯDistortion Ratio (SIВӯSDR) [41]Нҫ
вҖў their improvement variants Вӯ SDRi (SDR improvement over mixture) [42]Нҫ
вҖў the embeddingВӯbased CLAPScore [43], which measures alignment between audio
and query text without requiring groundВӯtruth references.
This combination enables comprehensive evaluation across both synthetic (referenceВӯ
available) and realВӯworld (referenceВӯfree) conditions. SDR quantifies overall signal reconВӯ
struction fidelity, SIR diagnoses crossВӯsource leakage, SAR measures artifact introducВӯ
tion, SDRi contextualizes performance relative to the mixture [42], while CLAPScore estiВӯ
mates whether the separated waveform semantically matches the userвҖҷs query text [43].
2.6.2
Notation and BSS Eval Decomposition
Let s вҶ’RT be the groundВӯtruth reference source, and let ЛҶs denote its estimate produced
by the separator. BSS Eval decomposes ЛҶs into orthogonal components relative to the
reference subspace [41]:
ЛҶs = starget
) *+ ,
desired
+
einterf
) *+ ,
interference
+ enoise
) *+ ,
noise
+ eartif
)*+,
artifacts
.
(2.3)
Each metric described below is computed using the energies of these terms.
2.6.3
SignalВӯtoВӯDistortion Ratio (SDR)
Definition
SDR = 10 log10
-
вҲҘstargetвҲҘ2
вҲҘeinterf + enoise + eartifвҲҘ2
.
dB.
(2.4)
Interpretation
SDR captures all nonВӯtarget energy in the denominator and is therefore a holistic indicator
of signal degradation. Because it has been widely used in prior work, SDR supports
backwardВӯcompatible benchmarking across source separation models [41].
12
Contrastive Multimodal Alignment for
Semantically Вӯ Guided
Audio Source Separation
==PAGE:21==
ScaleВӯInvariant Variant (SIВӯSDR)
The original SDR is sensitive to amplitude scaling. To eliminate this dependency, SIВӯSDR
computes the optimal scalar projection Оұ = ЛҶsвҠӨs
вҲҘsвҲҘ2 and evaluates the residual [42]:
SIВӯSDR = 10 log10
-
вҲҘОұsвҲҘ2
вҲҘЛҶs вҲ’ОұsвҲҘ2
.
dB.
(2.5)
SIВӯSDR is thus robust to gain mismatch and has become a standard metric in deep
learningВӯbased separation.
2.6.4
SignalВӯtoВӯInterference Ratio (SIR)
Definition
SIR = 10 log10
-вҲҘstargetвҲҘ2
вҲҘeinterfвҲҘ2
.
dB.
(2.6)
Motivation
SIR quantifies the energy leaked from other sources, excluding artifacts and noise. It is
particularly informative when analyzing failure modes where the separator fails to isolate
the queried source from interfering components [41].
2.6.5
SignalВӯtoВӯArtifact Ratio (SAR)
Definition
SAR = 10 log10
-вҲҘstarget + einterf + enoiseвҲҘ2
вҲҘeartifвҲҘ2
.
dB.
(2.7)
Motivation
SAR measures the introduction of artifacts during separation, excluding interference and
noise. It is particularly relevant for evaluating the quality of the separation process itВӯ
self [41].
2.6.6
SDR Improvement (SDRi)
Definition
Given a mixture signal m and a target source s, SDR improvement is defined as [42]:
SDRi = SDR(ЛҶs, s) вҲ’SDR(m, s).
(2.8)
Motivation
SDRi normalizes SDR relative to mixture difficulty and thus highlights genuine improveВӯ
ments over the raw input. It allows direct comparisons between systems across diverse
conditions and quantifies the separation quality improvement relative to the original mixВӯ
ture [42].
2.6.7
Semantic Metric: CLAPScore
Background
CLAPScore arises from Contrastive LanguageВӯAudio Pretraining (CLAP) [5], a model that
aligns audio and text in a joint embedding space. Given an estimated waveform ЛҶs and
query caption c, the CLAPScore is computed as the raw cosine similarity [43]:
CLAPScore = cos (EA(ЛҶs), ET (c)) вҶ’[вҲ’1, 1],
(2.9)
where EA(В·) and ET (В·) are pretrained CLAP audio and text encoders, respectively. The
metric uses raw cosine similarity without clamping, providing a continuous measure of
semantic alignment.
Contrastive Multimodal Alignment for
Semantically Вӯ Guided
Audio Source Separation
13
==PAGE:22==
Motivation
Unlike SDRВӯbased metrics, CLAPScore does not require groundВӯtruth reference audio [43].
It is therefore applicable to realВӯworld mixtures where isolated sources are unavailable Вӯ
such as field recordings Вӯ and evaluates whether the separated signal matches the seВӯ
mantic content of the userвҖҷs query.
CLAPScore Improvement (CLAPScoreВӯi)
To quantify semantic improvement over the mixture, we define [43]:
CLAPScoreВӯi = CLAPScore(ЛҶs, c) вҲ’CLAPScore(m, c),
(2.10)
where m is the mixture signal. CLAPScoreВӯi parallels SDRi by capturing relative semantic
gains over the mixture.
2.6.8
Practical Computation Details
1. FullВӯSegment Evaluation: BSS Eval metrics are computed over complete audio
segments for stability in research evaluation [41].
2. No Permutation: Source estimates are not permuted since text queries specify
target sources in languageВӯqueried separation.
3. mir_eval Implementation: All BSS metrics are computed using the standard mir_eval
library for research accuracy [41].
4. CLAP Configuration: All CLAPScore variants are computed using the laion/clap-htsat-unfused
model [5].
2.6.9
Metric Selection Rationale
SDR provides a holistic distortion measure and aligns with historical literature [41].
SIR isolates residual interference, relevant for source overlap scenarios [41].
SAR measures artifact introduction during separation [41].
SIВӯSDR provides scaleВӯinvariant fidelity assessment [42].
SDRi contextualizes absolute performance by measuring separation gain relative to the
mixture [42].
CLAPScore directly evaluates semantic relevance to the text query without needing refВӯ
erences [43].
CLAPScoreВӯi quantifies semantic improvement over the mixture baseline [43].
2.6.10
Summary
The combination of BSS Eval metrics (SDR, SIR, SAR, SIВӯSDR, SDRi) [41, 42] with CLAPВӯ
Score and CLAPScoreВӯi [43] enables evaluation of both signal quality and query releВӯ
vance. This multiВӯfaceted protocol is necessary in LASS, where both perceptual clarity
and semantic accuracy determine success.
14
Contrastive Multimodal Alignment for
Semantically Вӯ Guided
Audio Source Separation
==PAGE:23==
3
Methodology
3.1
Overview
This chapter describes our method for separating audio sources from a mixture using
timeвҖ“frequency masks and text prompts, along with a pilot study of the how these promptsвҖҷ
embedding space responds to certain changes. First, we define the problem and techniВӯ
cal aspects of it. Then, we explain how we initialize masks and optimize them at inference
time using backpropagation. Finally, we detail the loss components and their role in backВӯ
propagation.
3.2
Problem Statement
3.2.1
General Formulation
We extract individual sources from an audio mixture by optimizing timeвҖ“frequency masks
at inference time. Guidance comes solely from text prompts, and all pretrained encoders
remain fixed. The only learnable parameters are the mask logits for each mixture and
prompt set. Below you can find an highВӯlevel outline of the algorithm behind this, along
with a visual aid.
Algorithm 1 TextВӯConditioned Source Separation via Mask Optimization
Require: Mixture waveform: x
Require: Text prompts: {t1, t2, . . . , tK}
Require: CLAP encoder: faudio(В·), ftext(В·)
Require: Learnable masks: {M1, M2, . . . , MK}
Require: Loss weights: wc, wd, ws
1: repeat
2:
X вҶҗSTFT(x)
3:
{ Лң
Mk} вҶҗsoftmax({Mk}) {Normalize masks}
4:
for each source k do
5:
ЛҶsk вҶҗreconstruct( Лң
Mk, X) {Apply mask and iSTFT}
6:
ek вҶҗfaudio(ЛҶsk) {Encode separated audio}
7:
end for
8:
et вҶҗftext({tk}) {Encode text prompts}
9:
Lcontrastive вҶҗInfoNCE(ek, et)
10:
Lphysics вҶҗdifferentiation_loss({Mk}) + smoothness_loss({Mk})
11:
Ltotal вҶҗwcLcontrastive + wdLphysics
12:
update({Mk}, вҲҮLtotal)
13: until convergence
3.2.2
Dataset and Experimental Setup
We conduct our languageВӯqueried audio source separation experiments on the MUSDB18Вӯ
HQ dataset,[44], a widelyВӯadopted benchmark for audio source separation research that
provides uncompressed, highВӯquality audio stems. MUSDB18ВӯHQ contains 150 fullВӯlength
music tracks across diverse genres, with each track providing isolated stems for drums,
bass, vocals, and other instruments at 44.1kHz stereo quality [44]. This dataset has beВӯ
come the standard for evaluating source separation algorithms, having served as the
official dataset for the SiSEC 2018 evaluation campaign [45].
Contrastive Multimodal Alignment for
Semantically Вӯ Guided
Audio Source Separation
15
==PAGE:24==
bass
vocals
drums
A1
A2
A3
T1.A1
T1.A2
T1.A3 T2.A3 T3.A3
T2.A2
T2.A1 T3.A1
T3.A2
T3
T2
T1
Text
Encoder
Audio
Encoder
Contrastive
Loss
Reconstr.
Loss
Similarity Matrix should go
towards the identity matrix.
Masks
CLAP Family
Encoders
encode into
Shared
Embedding
Space
Contrastive loss measures
the deviation between the
current similarity matrix and
the ideal identity matrix.
Iteratively optimize the
estimated masks to
minimize both loss functions
through backpropagation.
Figure 3.1: Intuition of the proposed architecture
Dataset Selection
We select a subset of 5 songs from the MUSDB18ВӯHQ test set to enable comprehenВӯ
sive experimentation within computational constraints. The selected tracks span multiple
musical genres and instrumentation styles to provide diversity in our evaluation:
вҖў Georgia Wonder Вӯ Siren: Electronic/pop with synthesizer elements
вҖў Hollow Ground Вӯ Ill Fate: Rock/metal with guitar and percussion
вҖў Lyndsey Ollard Вӯ Catching Up: Acoustic folk with vocal focus
вҖў The Long Wait Вӯ Dark Horses: Alternative rock with layered instrumentation
вҖў The Sunshine Garcia Band Вӯ For I Am The Moon: Jazz/blues with harmonic comВӯ
plexity
Audio Processing
For each track, we extract 10Вӯsecond audio segments from the middle portion of the song.
This choice ensures representative musical content while maintaining consistent duration
across all experiments. We apply quality control measures including energy threshold
validation (( |x(t)| > 1) to ensure adequate signal content for reliable embedding comВӯ
putation.
Stem Selection
We focus on three primary stemsвҖ”bass, vocals, and drumsвҖ”as these constitute the
fundamental components of most musical compositions and align with the primary objecВӯ
tives of audio source separation research [41]. This selection enables direct comparison
with existing literature while providing manageable complexity for comprehensive experВӯ
imentation.
Experimental Design
This dataset design enables systematic evaluation of languageВӯqueried audio source sepВӯ
aration across diverse musical contexts while maintaining computational feasibility. The
10Вӯsecond segments provide sufficient content for reliable CLAP embedding computaВӯ
tion and meaningful separation evaluation, while the threeВӯstem focus captures the core
elements of musical structure relevant to source separation tasks.
16
Contrastive Multimodal Alignment for
Semantically Вӯ Guided
Audio Source Separation
==PAGE:25==
Frequency Domain Methodology
Our methodology addresses a critical frequency domain alignment between CLAPвҖҷs seВӯ
mantic understanding and audio processing for the semantic guidance component. CLAP
operates within 50HzВӯ14kHz, while 48kHz audio theoretically supports frequencies up to
24kHz. Analysis of our 5Вӯsong dataset reveals minimal highВӯfrequency content above
14kHz, with only 0.19% average energy in the 14Вӯ24kHz range (Figure 3.2). This justifies
limiting our semantic guidance pipeline to CLAPвҖҷs 14kHz range for complete consistency
between text prompts and audio embeddings.
Importantly, while semantic similarity computation is restricted to the 14kHz range, the reВӯ
construction loss component of our optimization objective is calculated on the full mixture
spectrum up to 24kHz. This ensures that highВӯfrequency content (e.g., cymbal transients,
vocal sibilants) is properly preserved during mask optimization, even though it does not
contribute to semantic guidance.
Figure 3.2: HighВӯfrequency content analysis showing percentage of energy in 14Вӯ24kHz
range for each song and stem type. Results demonstrate minimal highВӯfrequency content
(average 0.19%), justifying the 14kHz frequency limit.
The 14kHz limit is empirically justified for our dataset: drums show highest HF content
(0.01Вӯ1.61%), vocals minimal content (0.01Вӯ0.07%), and bass contains no measurable
HF energy (0.00%). This alignment eliminates artificial boundaries where semantic unВӯ
derstanding is lacking. This design choice creates a unified semantic space where STFT
processing operates within 0Вӯ14kHz, mel spectrograms use fmax = 14kHz, mask learning
occurs entirely within CLAPвҖҷs semantic domain, and all analyses use consistent 14kHz
frequency axes. The methodology ensures our languageВӯqueried separation system opВӯ
erates within a unified semantic space, eliminating frequency domain mismatches while
maintaining full fidelity for our musical content.
3.2.3
Selected CLAP Variants
We evaluate four CLAPВӯbased embedding models, selected for their architectural diverВӯ
sity, training data, and compatibility with our optimization pipeline:
вҖў CLAP_HTSAT_Unfused [46]: A baseline variant utilizing the HTSAT audio encoder
without modality fusion. Trained on over 630,000 audioвҖ“text pairs from datasets
Contrastive Multimodal Alignment for
Semantically Вӯ Guided
Audio Source Separation
17
==PAGE:26==
such as AudioCaps and FSD50K, it provides stable similarity scores and full support
for backpropagation in PyTorch.
вҖў CLAP_HTSAT_Fused [47]: Introduces fused audioвҖ“text representations through
joint training, improving zeroВӯshot semantic alignment. Like the unfused variant, it
is fully differentiable and compatible with gradientВӯbased optimization.
вҖў Larger_CLAP_Music_Speech [48]: Extends training to a more diverse corpus of
music and speech data. This model processes 10Вӯsecond audio segments and
offers broader genre coverage while maintaining differentiability and compatibility
with our 10Вӯsecond masking pipeline.
вҖў Larger_CLAP_General [49]: A generalВӯpurpose model trained on a heterogeneous
mix of audioвҖ“text data. It consistently produces stable similarity estimates across
10Вӯsecond inputs and supports gradient propagation in PyTorch.
We also considered alternative embedding models but identified key limitations that preВӯ
cluded their integration into our pipeline:
вҖў LAION/Larger_CLAP_Music [50]: While aligned with MuLanВӯstyle contrastive trainВӯ
ing on 10Вӯsecond segments, this model exhibited inconsistent similarity scores in
our preliminary tests, potentially due to differing training objectives, normalization
strategies, or data domains.
вҖў ImageBind [36]: A visionВӯcentric multimodal model trained on 2Вӯsecond audio clips.
Although capable of crossВӯmodal retrieval, it lacks PyTorchВӯbased gradient support,
preventing integration into our mask optimization framework.
вҖў Cacophony [34]: Achieves stateВӯofВӯtheВӯart results on audio tagging tasks using
masked pretraining. However, no publicly available differentiable implementation
currently exists, limiting its applicability for our use case. An attempt was made to
characterize itвҖҷs embedding space, but we werenвҖҷt able to mimic PyTorchвҖҷs process
in Tensorflow for backpropagation.
Focusing on these four CLAP variants ensures consistent, semantically aligned, and difВӯ
ferentiable embeddings for 10Вӯsecond audio inputsвҖ”an essential requirement for our
gradientВӯbased mask optimization pipeline.
3.3
Prompt Engineering as a LASS Enabler
3.3.1
Introduction to TextВӯGuided Audio Separation
Traditional sourceвҖ“separation pipelines rely primarily on statistical or spectral regularities
present in the waveform or timeвҖ“frequency representations. Although powerful, these
purely signalвҖ“driven methods typically demand large domainВӯspecific knowledge and offer
limited human interpretability. Recent advances in textВӯguided audio separation address
these shortcomings by leveraging naturalВӯlanguage prompts as semantic anchors for the
separation process. In the LanguageВӯAnchored Source Separation (LASS) framework
introduced in this thesis, a set of text prompts {qk}K
k=1 establishes a shared embedding
space between audio and linguistic representations. Each prompt guides a differentiable
timeвҖ“frequency mask mk(f, t) whose optimization is driven by a contrastive loss,
Lcontrastive =
K
#
k=1
%%Eaudio
&
mk вҠҷV
'
вҲ’Etext
&
qk
'%%2
2,
18
Contrastive Multimodal Alignment for
Semantically Вӯ Guided
Audio Source Separation
==PAGE:27==
where V denotes the mixture spectrogram, Eaudio and Etext are the audio and text enВӯ
coders, and вҠҷrepresents elementВӯwise multiplication. This formulation enables a humanВӯ
inВӯtheВӯloop workflow in which modifying the textual description reshapes the separation
objective.
Advantages
The semantic guidance paradigm offers four principal benefits:
(i) Interpretability: prompts explicitly encode the target soundвҖҷs meaningНҫ
(ii) Flexibility: editing or replacing a prompt instantly changes the separation criterionНҫ
(iii) Domain Generalization: the same model can operate across musical, environВӯ
mental, or speech mixtures without any need for trainingНҫ
(iv) Human Control: users interact with the system through intuitive natural language
rather than lowВӯlevel spectral parameters.
3.3.2
Text Prompt Design and Optimization
The efficacy of LASS highly depends on the semantic fidelity and discriminative power of
the prompt set {qk}. Prompt engineering in this context faces four challenges:
1 Semantic Specificity vs. Generalization: prompts must discriminate among stems while
remaining robust to genre variations.
2 Embedding Alignment: each embedding model Вӯ CLAP, CLAPВӯMusic, CLAPВӯHTSATВӯ
Fused, and Larger CLAP General Вӯ possesses distinct linguistic priors that affect prompt
efficacy.
3 AudioвҖ“Text Correspondence: some auditory attributes (e.g., reverberant tail) have no
direct lexical equivalent, complicating prompt formulation.
4 CrossВӯStem Discrimination: prompts must supply enough semantic contrast to avoid
leakage between concurrent sources.
Quality Assessment Metrics
To systematically evaluate prompt effectiveness, we employ three complementary metrics
based on direct audioВӯtext embedding alignment:
SelfSimilarity(qk) =
1
|Sk|
#
sвҲҲSk
cos(Etext(qk), Eaudio(sk)),
Discrimination(qk) = SelfSimilarity(qk) вҲ’
1
|SВ¬k|
#
sвҲҲSВ¬k
cos(Etext(qk), Eaudio(s)),
where Sk denotes the set of target stem audio segments, SВ¬k represents the set of all other
stem audio segments, and cos(В·, В·) computes the cosine similarity between normalized
embeddings. SelfВӯsimilarity measures the direct alignment between prompt qk and its
target stem audio, while discrimination quantifies the promptвҖҷs ability to distinguish the
target stem from other stems through crossВӯstem similarity reduction.
Weighted Scoring Criterion
We combine these metrics into a weighted quality score:
WeightedScore(qk) = SelfSimilarity(qk) + 2 Discrimination(qk).
Contrastive Multimodal Alignment for
Semantically Вӯ Guided
Audio Source Separation
19
==PAGE:28==
The 2:1 weighting prioritizes discrimination over selfВӯsimilarity, reflecting the critical imВӯ
portance of preventing crossВӯstem leakage in source separation. A prompt with high disВӯ
crimination ensures minimal interference between sources, while adequate selfВӯsimilarity
maintains semantic alignment with the target audio.
3.3.3
LLMВӯAssisted Prompt Optimization
We employ a threeВӯphase LLMВӯassisted pipeline for refining text descriptors used in audio
source separation.
Phase 1
generates baseline prompts for vocals, bass, and drums and evaluates them
across multiple CLAP models [46, 47, 48, 49].
Phase 2
iteratively refines prompts using LLM feedback based on selfВӯsimilarity and
discrimination metrics.
Phase 3
halts iterations once performance plateaus or a weighted score threshold is
met. For full, verbatim prompt details, see Appendix A.
Selection Criteria
Prompts passing WeightedScore вүҘ1.2 are retained for final use. This threshold was
empirically determined to balance separation quality with computational efficiency.
Integration Benefits
LLM integration enables systematic analysis of prompt performance, creative refinements
grounded in similarity metrics, consistent optimization across stems, and direct performanceВӯ
driven improvements.
To rigorously assess the efficacy, generalization, and robustness of our LLMВӯoptimized
prompts, we conduct four targeted experiments (see Section ??):
вҖў CrossВӯembedder transferability: Do prompts optimized for one CLAP variant reВӯ
main effective across others?
вҖў Linguistic complexity sensitivity: How do prompt length and descriptiveness afВӯ
fect separation quality across models and genres?
вҖў Semantic variation sensitivity: How robust is separation performance to minor
wording changes in prompts?
вҖў Audio perturbation robustness: How do noise, source bleed, and realВӯworld auВӯ
dio degradations affect model guidance?
These experiments collectively validate the practical utility and limitations of semantic
guidance in audio source separation.
3.4
Proposed Architecture Вӯ Specifics
3.4.1
Mask Initialization Strategies
LASS separates audio sources by learning soft masks over the timeвҖ“frequency represenВӯ
tation of the mixture. Since the model is trained without ground truth masks, the initializaВӯ
tion of these masks can meaningfully affect convergence, symmetry breaking, and final
separation quality. We explore three mask initialization strategies that inject varying levels
of prior knowledgeвҖ”ranging from fully random to semantically and spectrally guided.
20
Contrastive Multimodal Alignment for
Semantically Вӯ Guided
Audio Source Separation
==PAGE:29==
Figure 3.3: LLMВӯassisted prompt optimization pipeline.
1. Uniform Random Initialization
The simplest baseline is to initialize each source mask with values sampled uniformly from
the range [0.25, 0.75]. This range avoids values too close to zero or one, which could cause
poor gradients early in training. The masks are then normalized at each timeвҖ“frequency
bin so that they sum to one across all K sources:
ЛҶ
Mk[t, f] =
Mk[t, f]
(K
j=1 Mj[t, f]
This provides an unbiased, structureВӯfree starting point.
Motivation: This initialization assumes nothing about the audio or text prompts. It serves
as a control for evaluating the benefit of more informed strategies.
Figure 3.4 Analysis: The uniform random initialization demonstrates the baseline perВӯ
formance when no prior knowledge is injected. The top row shows raw masks filled with
fineВӯgrained, uniform random noise across all timeВӯfrequency bins, with no discernible
patterns or structures. This is exactly what we expect from a structureВӯfree initialization.
However, the middle row reveals an interesting phenomenon: despite the random masks,
the normalized mask application still produces some meaningful separation, particularly
for vocals (correlation: 0.721) and drums (correlation: 0.724). This suggests that even
Contrastive Multimodal Alignment for
Semantically Вӯ Guided
Audio Source Separation
21
==PAGE:30==
Figure 3.4: Visualization of Uniform Random Mask Initialization for вҖқGeorgia Wonder Вӯ
SirenвҖқ. The figure shows (top row) the raw masks with uniform random noise, (middle
row) the result of applying the normalized masks to the mixture, and (bottom row) the
ground truth for comparison. The uniform random masks show no discernible structure,
providing a true baseline for comparison.
random initialization can benefit from the normalization process and the inherent structure
of the mixture itself.
2. TextВӯGuided Initialization
This method combines semantic relevance with the spectroВӯtemporal structure of the mixВӯ
ture. We compute similarity scores sk between the prompt and the mixture, then scale
these values across the entire timeвҖ“frequency grid. We also compute an energy map
E[t, f] of the mixture and use it to weight the masks toward more salient regions:
Mk[t, f] = softmax(sk) В·
E[t, f]
(
t,f E[t, f]
22
Contrastive Multimodal Alignment for
Semantically Вӯ Guided
Audio Source Separation
==PAGE:31==
Each resulting mask is then injected with structured noise (lowВӯfrequency sinusoidal variВӯ
ations) to break symmetry across sources.
Motivation: This strategy reflects both what the prompt is likely referring to and where
strong content exists in the mixture. It gives the model a useful prior without being overly
deterministic.
Figure 3.5: Visualization of TextВӯGuided Mask Initialization for вҖқGeorgia Wonder Вӯ SirenвҖқ.
The figure shows (top row) the raw masks with semantic and energy structure, (middle
row) the result of applying the normalized masks to the mixture, and (bottom row) the
ground truth for comparison. The textВӯguided masks show distinct patterns that reflect
both semantic relevance and energy structure.
Figure 3.5 Analysis: The textВӯguided initialization demonstrates the effectiveness of
combining semantic cues with signal structure. The top row reveals distinct, nonВӯuniform
patterns across the three sources:
вҖў Bass Raw Mask: Shows values ranging from 0.2735 to 0.2760, with distinct blobВӯ
like regions indicating structured initialization rather than pure randomness.
Contrastive Multimodal Alignment for
Semantically Вӯ Guided
Audio Source Separation
23
==PAGE:32==
вҖў Vocals Raw Mask: Exhibits notably higher values (0.4490 to 0.4520), suggesting
the textВӯguided approach correctly identified vocal content as semantically promiВӯ
nent.
вҖў Drums Raw Mask: Shows values similar to bass (0.2735 to 0.2760) but with differВӯ
ent spatial patterns, indicating sourceВӯspecific structure.
The middle row demonstrates the immediate impact of this semantic guidance: vocals
achieve the highest correlation (0.723) with ground truth, followed by drums (0.726), while
bass shows lower correlation (0.268). This suggests that textВӯguided initialization is parВӯ
ticularly effective for sources with clear semantic identity (vocals) and distinct spectral
characteristics (drums).
3. NMFВӯBased Initialization
We also explore using NonВӯnegative Matrix Factorization (NMF), a classical decompoВӯ
sition method, to provide spectral structure without relying on semantics. NMF approxiВӯ
mates the mixture magnitude spectrogram X as:
X вүҲWH
where W вҶ’RFГ—K contains spectral templates and H вҶ’RKГ—T contains temporal actiВӯ
vations. We compute soft masks from each NMF component as Mk = W[:, k] вҠ—H[k, :],
where вҠ—denotes the outer product, normalize them using softmax across sources, and
apply 2D Gaussian smoothing and small random perturbations.
Key Innovation: When text embeddings are available, we perform maskВӯtext alignment by
computing CLAP audio embeddings for each separated audio (obtained by applying each
mask to the mixture), then reordering masks to maximize similarity with corresponding
text prompts. This ensures that mask i has spectral patterns most similar to text prompt
i, making optimization more efficient.
Motivation: Though initially semantically agnostic, NMF captures lowВӯrank structure in
the mixture and provides diverse initial templates. The subsequent maskВӯtext alignment
bridges the gap between spectral decomposition and semantic guidance, potentially aidВӯ
ing the model in early separation while maintaining the benefits of both approaches.
Figure 3.6 Analysis: The NMFВӯbased initialization demonstrates the power of spectral
structure discovery. The top row reveals masks with distinct, meaningful patterns that
directly correspond to the spectral characteristics of each source:
вҖў Bass Raw Mask: Shows concentrated activity in the very lowВӯfrequency bins (0Вӯ50
Hz), with clear vertical patterns indicating distinct transient events characteristic of
bass notes. The mask values are notably higher in these regions, suggesting NMF
has successfully identified the primary bass components.
вҖў Vocals Raw Mask: Exhibits activity across a broader frequency range (0Вӯ200 Hz),
with more continuous, undulating structures typical of vocal formants and melodic
lines. The patterns are less sharply defined than bass, reflecting the harmonic comВӯ
plexity of vocals.
вҖў Drums Raw Mask: Characterized by distinct, sparse vertical lines spanning a wide
frequency range. Strong activity is visible in very low frequencies (kick drum) and
scattered higher frequencies (snare, hiВӯhats), accurately reflecting the transient and
percussive nature of drum sounds.
24
Contrastive Multimodal Alignment for
Semantically Вӯ Guided
Audio Source Separation
==PAGE:33==
Figure 3.6: Visualization of NMFВӯBased Mask Initialization for вҖқGeorgia Wonder Вӯ SirenвҖқ.
The figure shows (top row) the raw masks generated by NMF decomposition, (middle row)
the result of applying the normalized masks to the mixture, and (bottom row) the ground
truth for comparison. NMF successfully extracts distinct spectral patterns for each source,
providing a strong foundation for separation.
The middle row demonstrates the immediate effectiveness of this spectral guidance: voВӯ
cals achieve excellent correlation (0.566) with ground truth, drums show strong correlation
(0.545), while bass shows lower correlation (0.172). This suggests that NMF is particuВӯ
larly effective at capturing the spectral structure of harmonic sources (vocals) and tranВӯ
sient sources (drums), but may struggle with sources that have complex spectral overlap
(bass).
Comparative Analysis
The visualizations reveal several key insights about the effectiveness of different initialВӯ
ization strategies:
вҖў Uniform Random: Provides a true baseline with no structure, achieving good corВӯ
Contrastive Multimodal Alignment for
Semantically Вӯ Guided
Audio Source Separation
25
==PAGE:34==
relations (0.721 for vocals, 0.724 for drums) through normalization alone.
вҖў TextВӯGuided: Combines semantic relevance with energy structure, achieving the
highest correlations for vocals (0.723) and drums (0.726), demonstrating the value
of semantic guidance.
вҖў NMFВӯBased: Captures spectral structure effectively, achieving correlations for voВӯ
cals (0.566) and drums (0.545), showing the power of spectral decomposition.
All three strategies benefit from the normalization process, which ensures that masks
sum to unity across sources.
However, the structured initializations (textВӯguided and
NMFВӯbased) provide meaningful starting points that reflect the inherent characteristics of
different audio sources, leading to more efficient optimization and potentially better final
separation quality.
Summary
Each of these strategies introduces a different kind of inductive bias:
вҖў Uniform Random: No biasНҫ useful baseline for evaluating the benefit of informed
strategies.
вҖў TextВӯGuided: Combines semantic cues with signal structure, particularly effective
for sources with clear semantic identity.
вҖў NMFВӯBased: Signal structure only, capturing spectral patterns through mathematiВӯ
cal decomposition.
The visual evidence demonstrates that both semantic and spectral guidance provide
meaningful improvements over random initialization, with each approach offering distinct
advantages depending on the characteristics of the audio sources and the available prior
knowledge.
3.5
GradientВӯBased Optimization Loop
The proposed CLAPВӯguided audio source separation framework employs gradientВӯbased
optimization to learn optimal mask parameters through endВӯtoВӯend training. This approach
enables the system to directly optimize the separation quality using semantic guidance
from the CLAP model, while maintaining physical consistency through differentiable conВӯ
straint functions.
3.5.1
Optimization Objective
For this section, we will formulate the optimization problem as finding the optimal mask
parameters that minimize a composite loss function:
MвҲ—= arg min
M Ltotal(M, X, T)
(3.1)
where M = [M1, M2, . . . , MN] represents the learnable mask parameters for N sources,
X is the mixture spectrogram, and T = [t1, t2, . . . , tN] are the text embeddings for each
source.
3.5.2
Differentiable Loss Functions
All loss functions in the optimization objective are designed to be fully differentiable, enВӯ
abling gradientВӯbased parameter updates.
26
Contrastive Multimodal Alignment for
Semantically Вӯ Guided
Audio Source Separation
==PAGE:35==
Semantic Contrastive Loss
The semantic guidance comes from the InfoNCE contrastive loss, which measures the
alignment between reconstructed audio embeddings and their corresponding text descripВӯ
tions:
Lcontrastive = вҲ’log
exp(sim(ei, ti)/П„)
(N
j=1 exp(sim(ei, tj)/П„)
(3.2)
where ei is the CLAP embedding of the reconstructed audio for source i, ti is the text
embedding, and П„ is the temperature parameter. The cosine similarity function preserves
gradients:
sim(a, b) =
aT b
вҲҘaвҲҘ2вҲҘbвҲҘ2
(3.3)
Physics Constraint Losses
PhysicsВӯbased constraints ensure that the learned masks maintain physical consistency
with the mixture audio:
Lreconstruction = 1
T
T
#
t=1
/ N
#
i=1
Mi[t] вҠҷ|X[t]| вҲ’|X[t]|
02
(3.4)
Lenergy = 1
T
T
#
t=1
/ N
#
i=1
Mi[t] вҲ’1
02
(3.5)
Lregularization =
N
#
i=1
H(Mi) +
#
i<j
Corr(Mi, Mj)
(3.6)
where H(В·) represents entropy regularization and Corr(В·, В·) penalizes correlation between
different source masks.
3.5.3
Differentiable Gradient Computation Pipeline
Let learnable masks Mk вҶ’RFГ—T (requires_grad=True) be normalized across K sources
per timeвҖ“frequency bin via softmax:
1
Mk[t, f] =
exp
&
Mk[t, f]
'
(K
j=1 exp
&
Mj[t, f]
',
K
#
k=1
1
Mk[t, f] = 1.
Audio Reconstruction
Apply each 1
Mk to the mixture magnitude |X[t, f]| and reuse the original phase вҲ X[t, f]:
ЛҶSk[t, f] = 1
Mk[t, f] |X[t, f]|,
ЛҶsk = iSTFT
& ЛҶSk ej вҲ X'
.
Both STFT and iSTFT support backpropagation, ensuring вҲҮMkЛҶsk Мё= 0.
Embedding Extraction and Contrastive Loss
Reconstructed waveforms ЛҶsk feed into a frozen CLAP audio encoder:
ek = CLAP
&
FeatureExtractor(ЛҶsk)
'
,
вҲҘekвҲҘ2 = 1.
The contrastive (InfoNCE) loss over true targets tk with temperature П„ is
Lcontrastive = вҲ’
K
#
k=1
log
exp
&
cos(ek, tk)/П„
'
(K
j=1 exp
&
cos(ek, tj)/П„
'.
Contrastive Multimodal Alignment for
Semantically Вӯ Guided
Audio Source Separation
27
==PAGE:36==
PhysicsВӯBased Regularizers
Diversity and smoothness penalties on masks:
Ldiff =
#
i<j
exp
&
|cos(Mi, Mj)|
'
,
Lsmooth = О»t
#
k
вҲҘвҲҮtMkвҲҘ2
2 + О»f
#
k
вҲҘвҲҮfMkвҲҘ2
2.
Total Loss and Optimization
Combine losses with weights wc, wd, ws:
Ltotal = wc Lcontrastive + wd Ldiff + ws Lsmooth.
Every iteration:
1
total_loss.backward()
# compute пҝҝLпҝҝ/M_k
2
torch.nn.utils.clip_grad_norm_(mask_params , пҝҝ_clip)
3
optimizer.step()
# update masks
4
optimizer.zero_grad()
# clear gradients
GradientВӯFlow Verification
Ensure each Mk remains a leaf tensor with a valid grad_fn. Detach any logging tensors
via .detach(). Visualize the computation graph if needed:
1
from torchviz import make_dot
2
dot = make_dot(total_loss , params=mask_params)
3
dot.render('gradient_flow')
28
Contrastive Multimodal Alignment for
Semantically Вӯ Guided
Audio Source Separation
==PAGE:37==
4
Experiments and Results
This chapter reports four experiments that evaluate crossВӯembedder transferability, linguisticВӯ
complexity sensitivity, semanticВӯvariation robustness, and audioВӯperturbation robustness
of optimized prompts for languageВӯqueried audio source separation (LASS). All these
experiments use the weighted scoring criterion defined in Chapter 3. Afterwards, I will
showcase one simply example run of our pipeline ??.
4.1
Getting to Know our Embedding Space
This chapter reports four experiments that evaluate crossВӯembedder transferability, linguisticВӯ
complexity sensitivity, semanticВӯvariation robustness, and audioВӯperturbation robustness
of optimized prompts across different CLAP model variants. All experiments utilize the
MUSDB18ВӯHQ dataset as described in Section 3.2.2, with evaluations conducted on 5 diВӯ
verse musical tracks spanning 3 stems (bass, vocals, drums) for a total of 15 audioВӯstem
combinations per embedder. The weighted scoring criterion defined in Section 3.3.2 is
employed throughout:
WeightedScore(qk) = SelfSimilarity(qk) + 2 Discrimination(qk)
4.1.1
Experiment 1: CrossВӯEmbedder Transferability Analysis
Research Question
Do optimized prompts transfer effectively between different CLAP
variants, and what do transfer patterns imply about the need for perВӯembedder prompt
optimization?
Methodology
Optimized prompts (via an LLM loop) were generated for each of four
CLAP variants (CLAPВӯGeneral, CLAPВӯMusic, CLAPВӯHTSATВӯFused, CLAPВӯHTSATВӯUnfused).
We then applied each prompt to every other model on a 15Вӯcue subset of MUSDB18ВӯHQ
(5songs Г— 3stems). Transferability is measured by the transfer ratio:
Transfer Ratio = WeightedScoretarget
WeightedScoresource
.
This yields 180 crossВӯmodel evaluations.
Conclusion
The pronounced asymmetry and variability in crossВӯmodel transfer ratios Вӯ
coupled with an overall mean below unity Вӯ demonstrate that optimized prompts must be
tailored to each CLAP variant. Universal prompts yield inconsistent guidance signals and
risk substantial performance losses in certain model pairings.
4.1.2
Experiment 2: Linguistic Complexity Sensitivity
Research Question:
How does the linguistic complexity of optimized prompts affect
their effectivenessвҖ”measured by embedding similarity and separation guidance performanceвҖ”
across different CLAP variants, stems, and musical genres?
Methodology
Building on Experiment 1, we hold each sourceВӯtarget embedder fixed
and vary prompt complexity for the same 15 audioВӯstem cues (5songs Г— 3stems). For
each original optimized prompt we produce three variants:
вҖў Simple: 4вҖ“6 words, minimal phrasing
Contrastive Multimodal Alignment for
Semantically Вӯ Guided
Audio Source Separation
29
==PAGE:38==
Figure 4.1: CrossВӯembedder transferability matrix: transfer ratios between each sourceвҖ“
target CLAP variant. Asymmetry and spread indicate modelВӯspecific compatibility patВӯ
terns.
вҖў Medium: 10вҖ“15 words, moderate descriptiveness
вҖў Complex: Full, detailed optimized prompt (baseline)
We compute the percent relative change in weighted separation score:
вҲҶrel = Scorevariant вҲ’Scorecomplex
Scorecomplex
Г— 100%.
Evaluations span all four CLAP variants (CLAPВӯHTSTATВӯUNFUSED, CLAPВӯMusicВӯandВӯ
Speech, CLAPВӯHTSATВӯFused, Larger CLAP General), three stems (vocals, drums, bass),
and five genreВӯdiverse songs, yielding 180 complexityВӯsensitivity measurements.
Selected Visualizations
Figure 4.3 presents the distribution of relative score changes
by complexity level. Figure 4.4 breaks out mean sensitivity across embedders for simple,
medium, and complex prompts. These two plots capture both overall trends and modelВӯ
specific patterns while maintaining continuity from Experiment 1.
Key Results
вҖў Monotonic improvement with complexity. Moving from simple to complex prompts
yields progressively smaller performance drops and, in a few cases, slight gains:
median вҲҶrel вүҲвҖ“30 % for simple, вҖ“15 % for medium, and 0 % for complex prompts
(Fig. 4.3).
30
Contrastive Multimodal Alignment for
Semantically Вӯ Guided
Audio Source Separation
==PAGE:39==
Figure 4.2: Distribution of crossВӯembedder transfer ratios (excluding selfВӯtransfers). The
mean (0.988) and wide range (0.603вҖ“1.615) show that most transfers either slightly deВӯ
grade or occasionally improve performance, reinforcing the case for perВӯembedder prompt
optimization.
вҖў Embedder sensitivity hierarchy. CLAP is least affected by reduced complexity
(вҲҶrel median вүҲвҖ“20 % for simple), whereas CLAPВӯHTSATВӯFused suffers the greatest
drop (вүҲвҖ“45 %) and Larger CLAP General is intermediate (Fig. 4.4).
Discussion and Implications
These results reinforce the need for modelВӯspecific prompt
engineering:
1. A вҖңoneВӯsizeВӯfitsВӯallвҖқ simple prompt degrades guidance by up to 45 %, depending
on the embedder, confirming that each CLAP variant demands its own complexityВӯ
tuned prompt.
2. Robust models (e.g., CLAP) tolerate brevity with moderate loss, while specialized
models (CLAPВӯHTSATВӯFused, Larger CLAP General) require richer language to apВӯ
proach optimal performance.
In conjunction with Experiment 1вҖҷs crossВӯembedder asymmetries, Experiment 2 shows
that both which embedder and how the prompt is phrased can effectively skew separaВӯ
tion guidance quality. PromptВӯengineering pipelines must therefore jointly optimize for
embedder architecture and linguistic complexity.
4.1.3
Experiment 3: Semantic Variation Sensitivity
Research Question
How robust are CLAP embedding spaces to minor semantic perВӯ
turbations in text prompts across diverse musical contexts?
Methodology
For each of the 15 audioвҖ“stem cues (5songsГ—3stems) in MUSDB18ВӯHQ,
we generated one semantic variant per optimized prompt by substituting 1вҖ“2 words while
preserving the original intent. We then measured the impact of these perturbations on the
weighted separation score:
вҲҶrel = |Scorevariant вҲ’Scoreoriginal|
Scoreoriginal
Г— 100%,
Contrastive Multimodal Alignment for
Semantically Вӯ Guided
Audio Source Separation
31
==PAGE:40==
Figure 4.3: Distribution of relative performance change (вҲҶrel) by linguistic complexity.
Boxes show median and interquartile rangeНҫ whiskers cover 1.5 Г— IQR
and recorded absolute score differences. Evaluations cover all four CLAP variants and
three stems, yielding 60 sensitivity measurements.
Key Results and Considerations
Figures ?? and ?? highlight two main insights:
1. Semantic sensitivity is large and modelВӯdependent Relative score changes range
from 10 % up to 60 % for small prompt edits. Absolute differences span 0.125 to 0.668.
CLAP exhibits the highest robustness (lowest median вҲҶrel), followed by CLAPВӯMusic,
Larger CLAP General, and CLAPВӯHTSATВӯFused (Fig. ??).
2. Genre and robustness correlate with transferability Our AcousticВӯfolk and jazz cues
suffer greater performance drops than our electronic/pop cues (Fig. ??). Models that
transfer well in Experiment 1 (e.g., CLAP) also show lower semantic sensitivity, indicating
that embedding spaces with broad transferability are inherently more stable under minor
textual variations.
Implications
These findings confirm that even small prompt edits can substantially alter
guidance quality. Embedders with proven transferability (CLAP, CLAPВӯMusic) also deliver
greater semantic robustness, suggesting that promptВӯengineering pipelines should prioriВӯ
tize those variants when consistency across phrasings and genres is critical. On the other
hand, the remaining models (Larger CLAP General, CLAPВӯHTSATВӯFused) require stricter
prompt validation to avoid large performance swings.
4.1.4
Experiment 4: Audio Perturbation Robustness Analysis
Research Question
How do systematic audio perturbations (noise and source bleed)
affect audioВӯtext similarity across different CLAP variants and musical contexts?
Methodology
We evaluate the robustness of audioВӯtext similarity under controlled perВӯ
turbations using the same MUSDB18ВӯHQ dataset subset:
вҖў Noise perturbation: Inject Gaussian white noise at 8 SNR levels (60dB to 10dB)
to simulate realistic audio degradation
вҖў Source bleed perturbation: Add crossВӯcontamination between audio sources at 6
bleed ratios (Вӯ5dB to Вӯ30dB) to simulate imperfect source separation
32
Contrastive Multimodal Alignment for
Semantically Вӯ Guided
Audio Source Separation
==PAGE:41==
Figure 4.4: Mean relative performance change вҲҶrel for simple and medium prompts, by
target embedder (baseline = complex prompts). Error bars denote Вұ1 SD across stems
and songs. (CLAP refers to CLAP_HTSAT_UNFUSED.)
вҖў Test conditions: SingleВӯsource bleed (vocalsвҶ’bass, drumsвҶ’bass, etc.) and dualВӯ
source bleed (vocals+drumsвҶ’bass) for comprehensive contamination analysis
вҖў Evaluation metric: Similarity difference between clean and perturbed audio:
вҲҶsimilarity = Similarityclean вҲ’Similarityperturbed
вҖў Scope: All 4 CLAP variants Г— 3 stems Г— 5 songs = 60 audioВӯstem combinations per
perturbation type
вҖў Audio segments: Consistent 10Вӯsecond middle segments from each track, ensurВӯ
ing identical audio processing across all experiments
The perturbation analysis spans diverse musical contexts Вӯ from electronic/pop (Georgia
Wonder) to jazz/blues (The Sunshine Garcia Band) Вӯ enabling evaluation of robustness
across varied instrumentation and production styles.
Key Results
The perturbation analysis reveals distinct sensitivity patterns across CLAP
variants and musical contexts:
вҖў Noise sensitivity: Similarity degradation increases exponentially with decreasing
SNR, with critical threshold around 30dB across all genres
вҖў Bleed effects: Stronger bleed (Вӯ5dB to Вӯ15dB) typically reduces similarity, while
weaker bleed (Вӯ20dB to Вӯ30dB) shows minimal impact
вҖў Model robustness ranking: CLAP > CLAPВӯMusic > Larger CLAP General > CLAPВӯ
HTSATВӯFused (consistent across perturbation types)
вҖў StemВӯspecific patterns: Vocal stems show highest sensitivity to noise, while bass
stems are most affected by bleed contamination
Contrastive Multimodal Alignment for
Semantically Вӯ Guided
Audio Source Separation
33
==PAGE:42==
Figure 4.5: Despite most changes being from 0 to 0.05, there are cases where a simple
synonym/rearrangement of words without changing meaning produces significant similarВӯ
ity changes
вҖў GenreВӯdependent effects: Acoustic folk content (Lyndsey Ollard) demonstrates
higher noise sensitivity than electronic content (Georgia Wonder)
вҖў Dual vs. single bleed: DualВӯsource contamination produces more pronounced
similarity degradation than singleВӯsource bleed
Key Findings
The perturbation robustness analysis provides critical insights for realВӯ
world LASS applications:
вҖў Noise tolerance thresholds: CLAP variants maintain acceptable performance (>80%
of clean similarity) down to 40dB SNR, with rapid degradation below 25dB
вҖў Bleed contamination limits: Similarity remains stable for bleed ratios below Вӯ20dB,
with significant degradation occurring at Вӯ10dB and stronger
вҖў Model specialization: CLAP demonstrates superior robustness across all perturВӯ
bation types, making it most suitable for noisy or imperfectly separated audio
вҖў GenreВӯspecific vulnerabilities: Acoustic and jazz content requires higher audio
quality for optimal performance compared to electronic content
вҖў Practical implications: The substantial sensitivity to audio quality emphasizes the
importance of robust preprocessing and source separation in LASS pipelines
вҖў CrossВӯpattern consistency: Models showing better perturbation robustness also
demonstrate superior performance in transferability and semantic variation experiВӯ
ments
Perceptual Validation
To validate the computational findings, we generate audio samВӯ
ples for perceptual evaluation:
вҖў Sample generation: 10Вӯsecond audio segments (identical to model input) with sysВӯ
tematic noise and bleed perturbations
34
Contrastive Multimodal Alignment for
Semantically Вӯ Guided
Audio Source Separation
==PAGE:43==
вҖў Listening conditions: Clean reference, noiseВӯdegraded (60dB to 10dB SNR), and
bleedВӯcontaminated (Вӯ5dB to Вӯ30dB ratios)
вҖў Validation approach: Human listeners can directly compare computational simiВӯ
larity scores with perceptual audio quality assessment
вҖў Research questions: Does the modelвҖҷs similarity degradation align with human
perception of audio quality? Which perturbation type is more disruptive to human
listeners?
This perceptual validation bridges the gap between computational metrics and human auВӯ
ditory experience, providing crucial insights for the development of humanВӯaligned LASS
systems.
4.1.5
CrossВӯExperiment Analysis and Synthesis
Convergent Patterns Across Experiments
The three experiments reveal convergent
patterns that strengthen our understanding of CLAP (CLAPВӯHTSATВӯUnfused) variant beВӯ
havior:
вҖў Consistent model hierarchy: CLAP (CLAPВӯHTSATВӯUnfused) consistently emerges
as the most robust and transferable model across all three experimental dimensions
вҖў Specialization tradeВӯoffs: Models with higher specialization (Larger CLAP GenВӯ
eral, CLAPВӯHTSATВӯFused) show reduced transferability and robustness
вҖў GenreВӯindependent core patterns: While specific values vary across musical genВӯ
res, the relative ranking of models remains stable
вҖў StemВӯdependent effects: Vocal stems consistently show different behavior patВӯ
terns compared to bass and drums across all experiments
Implications for LASS System Design
The convergent findings across experiments
provide clear guidance for practical LASS implementations:
1. Primary model selection: CLAP should be the default choice for applications requirВӯ
ing robustness and crossВӯcompatibility
2. Specialized model usage: Reserve specialized models (CLAPВӯHTSATВӯFused, Larger
CLAP General) for domainВӯspecific applications where their particular strengths outВӯ
weigh transferability limitations
3. Prompt engineering strategy: Implement complexityВӯaware prompt optimization that
considers both model capabilities and musical context
4. Quality assurance protocols: Establish semantic robustness testing as a standard
component of LASS system validation
5. MultiВӯmodel architectures: When using multiple models, account for asymmetric
transferability patterns in system design
4.2
Illustrative Example: Trial #0 Analysis
This section presents a detailed analysis of trial 0 using laion/clap-htsat-unfused. DeВӯ
spite converging on semantic objectives, the masks produced poor separation, as shown
by visualizations and quantitative metrics.
Contrastive Multimodal Alignment for
Semantically Вӯ Guided
Audio Source Separation
35
==PAGE:44==
4.2.1
Trial Configuration
вҖў CLAP Model: laion/clap-htsat-unfused
вҖў Learning Rate: 2.37 Г— 10вҲ’4
вҖў Temperature Schedule: Linear (base T = 1.1803, min T = 0.6196)
вҖў Iterations: 3468
вҖў Loss Weights:
вҖ“ Contrastive: 0.2202
вҖ“ Mask correlation: 0.1955
вҖ“ Mask differentiation: 7.1622
вҖ“ Mask entropy: 1.4247
4.2.2
Spectrogram Comparison
Figure 4.6 compares groundВӯtruth and estimated logВӯmel spectrograms with error maps:
Figure 4.6: Top row: real bass, vocals, and mixture spectrograms. Middle row: estimated
bass, vocals, and their sum. Bottom row: absolute error maps for each. High errors
indicate failed separation.
4.2.3
Oracle Mask Comparison
Figure 4.7 shows learned vs. oracle masks and scatter plots:
36
Contrastive Multimodal Alignment for
Semantically Вӯ Guided
Audio Source Separation
==PAGE:45==
(a) Bass mask (corr = Вӯ0.054)
(b) Vocals mask (corr = 0.047)
Figure 4.7: Comparison of learned and oracle masks at final iteration. Points cluster at
trivial values, showing no alignment.
4.2.4
Similarity Evolution
Figure 4.8 tracks embedding selfВӯsimilarity and crossВӯsimilarity over iterations, with simiВӯ
larity matrices at key iterations:
Figure 4.8: TopВӯleft: selfВӯsimilarity (audio vs. same text prompt) increases then plateaus.
TopВӯright: crossВӯsimilarity (bass vs. vocals prompts) decreases. Bottom: similarity matriВӯ
ces at iterations 0, 1734, and 3467, showing semantic alignment trends.
4.2.5
Quantitative BSS Metrics
Table 4.1 reports standard BSS_Eval metrics:
Contrastive Multimodal Alignment for
Semantically Вӯ Guided
Audio Source Separation
37
==PAGE:46==
Table 4.1: BSS_Eval metrics for trial 0. Negative SDR/SI_SDR indicates worseВӯthanВӯ
mixture performance.
Metric
Bass
Vocals
SDR (dB)
Вӯ0.3282
Вӯ3.1289
SIR (dB)
2.4992
Вӯ2.0143
SAR (dB)
4.8110
7.4566
SI_SDR (dB)
Вӯ0.3778
Вӯ3.2382
Avg SDR (dB)
Вӯ1.7286
Avg SIR (dB)
0.2424
Avg SAR (dB)
6.1338
Avg SI_SDR (dB)
Вӯ1.8080
4.2.6
Discussion
Although semantic similarity reached 0.61 (bass) and 0.79 (vocals), negative SDR and
SI_SDR demonstrate no effective separation. Masks defaulted to trivial extremes, likely
due to conflicting gradients from high physics and mask differentiation weights. Strong
SAR indicates artifact suppression without source isolation.
4.2.7
Implications
This example reveals the insufficiency of global semantic objectives for fineВӯgrained mask
estimation. Future work should explore multiВӯscale supervision, adversarial discriminative
losses, and hybrid supervised signals to achieve meaningful audio source separation.
38
Contrastive Multimodal Alignment for
Semantically Вӯ Guided
Audio Source Separation
==PAGE:47==
5
Conclusion and Future Work
5.1
Summary of Contributions
This thesis introduced a weakly supervised framework for audio source separation guided
by contrastive audioвҖ“text embeddings, offering an alternative to conventional supervised
learning approaches that depend on access to isolated source stems. The core contriВӯ
bution lies in the design of a fully differentiable, gradientВӯbased optimization pipeline that
operates entirely at test time. This pipeline takes advantage of the semantic structure
of contrastive embedding spaces Вӯ specifically, CLAP variants Вӯ to guide the learning of
timeвҖ“frequency separation masks through alignment with naturalВӯlanguage prompts.
Instead of training a separation model in a dataВӯhungry endВӯtoВӯend fashion, the proposed
method transforms these separation tasks into promptВӯconditioned optimization tasks:
given a textual description of a target sound, the system iteratively adjusts a mask over
the mixtureвҖҷs spectrogram to maximize its semantic similarity to the prompt in embedВӯ
ding space. To support this process, the pipeline integrates shortВӯtime Fourier transforms
(STFT/iSTFT), sourceВӯwise softmax normalization to ensure mixture consistency, and a
composite loss formulation that combines contrastive supervision with physicsВӯinspired
smoothness priors. Importantly, all components were implemented to be differentiable,
allowing for gradientВӯbased learning throughout the separation process.
Complementing the main system, a series of pilot studies were conducted to empirically
verify the sensitivity, robustness, and generalization behavior of the embedding space.
These experiments explored how prompt specificity, phrasing variation, and audio perturВӯ
bations affect separation quality, as well as how different CLAP pretrained weights publicly
available respond to semantic guidance. While preliminary, these studies shed light on
the complex interaction between linguistic input and model behavior, and help ground
future work on prompt formulation and embedder selection. It is acknowledged that the
prompter needs to have at least some empirical knowledge of the embedding scene of
these models so that they know that they are providing a valuable semantic anchor.
Overall, the thesis contributes both a reusable pipeline for testВӯtime stem optimization via
embedding alignment and a set of empirical insights into the strengths and fragilities of
languageВӯconditioned audio separation using large contrastive models.
5.2
Key Findings
The findings of this work demonstrate the feasibility and potential of semantic promptВӯ
based separation without supervised training. NaturalВӯlanguage prompts were shown to
be effective in guiding the optimization of source masks toward meaningful decomposiВӯ
tions, even in the absence of groundВӯtruth supervision. The embedding models, particuВӯ
larly fused audioвҖ“text encoders like CLAP, were able to encode rich semantic structure
that could be exploited to differentiate between sound sources using highВӯlevel textual
descriptions.
The differentiable nature of the system Вӯ including STFTs, normalization, embedding exВӯ
traction, and loss computation Вӯ allowed for stable endВӯtoВӯend optimization, while softmaxВӯ
based mask normalization played a dual role in shaping source competition and preservВӯ
ing mixture consistency. The behavior of the embedding space, however, was found to
vary across CLAP variants, with some models exhibiting stronger alignment at the cost of
greater sensitivity to prompt formulation.
Contrastive Multimodal Alignment for
Semantically Вӯ Guided
Audio Source Separation
39
==PAGE:48==
5.3
Limitations
Despite being a promising idea, several limitations remain. First, the reliance on iterative
gradient descent at inference time means automatic computational overhead, making the
system unsuitable for realВӯtime or lowВӯlatency scenarios in its current form. Second, the
effectiveness of separation depends on the quality and specificity of the prompt: vague or
overly broad prompts often led to diffuse or incoherent masks. Third, the results we have
achieved are not optimal, so there is a lot of room to improve in that direction.
5.4
Future Work
The main objective would be to build on this architecture and use fineВӯtune it further to
make it achieve high standards. Several directions can build on this work. One path is toВӯ
ward realВӯtime or lowВӯlatency separation by incorporating metaВӯlearning, promptВӯconditioned
initialization, or diffusionВӯinspired inference mechanisms to reduce the number of gradient
steps required. Streaming variants of the optimization loop could also allow masks to be
updated incrementally as new audio arrives.
Another avenue is the extension of the system to broader or richer embedding spaces.
While this work focused on CLAP, combining multiple models such as MuLan or ImageВӯ
Bind may enhance generalization and allow for more diverse forms of semantic control.
FineВӯtuning embedding models on domainВӯspecific mixtures Вӯ such as orchestral recordВӯ
ings or speechВӯoverВӯmusic scenarios Вӯ could also improve alignment in underrepresented
settings.
MultiВӯmodal integration represents a further frontier. Synchronization signals from video
frames, gestures, or symbolic scores could be incorporated as additional conditioning
inputs to help resolve ambiguous prompts or reinforce temporal alignment. Embedding
models that jointly capture language, vision, and audio might enable more intuitive and
flexible separation tools for realВӯworld multimedia applications.
Improving robustness and achieving better metrics remains essential. Future work should
assess performance on noisy, reverberant, or poorly recorded mixtures, and explore augВӯ
mentation or adversarial training strategies to improve resilience. Similarly, a better unВӯ
derstanding of failure modes related to ambiguous prompts or conflicting semantics could
inform prompt rephrasing heuristics or closedВӯloop optimization schemes.
Finally, there is room to enhance interpretability and user control. Visualization tools that
display how masks evolve in response to prompt edits, or humanВӯinВӯtheВӯloop interfaces
where users iteratively refine prompts while listening to outputs, could support new workВӯ
flows in music production, audio restoration, or accessibility.
5.5
Final Remarks
This thesis demonstrates that contrastive audioвҖ“text embeddings can function as semanВӯ
tic guides for generative audio tasks, transforming source separation into a promptпҝҝconditioned
optimization problem. By leveraging CLAPВӯbased embeddings and gradientпҝҝbased mask
learning, we provide a flexible, interpretable alternative to dataпҝҝhungry supervised modВӯ
els.
The pipeline and experiments presented here lay the groundwork for future reВӯ
search into languageВӯdriven, unsupervised audio processingвҖ”enabling users to decomВӯ
pose complex audio scenes using natural language alone.
40
Contrastive Multimodal Alignment for
Semantically Вӯ Guided
Audio Source Separation
==PAGE:49==
Bibliography
[1]
Aapo HyvГӨrinen and Erkki Oja. вҖңIndependent Component Analysis: Algorithms and
ApplicationsвҖқ. In: Neural Networks 13.4вҖ“5 (2000), pp. 411вҖ“430. DOI: 10 . 1016 /
S0893-6080(00)00026-5.
[2]
Paris Smaragdis and Judith C. Brown. вҖңNonВӯnegative Matrix Factorization for PolyВӯ
phonic Music TranscriptionвҖқ. In: IEEE Workshop on Applications of Signal ProcessВӯ
ing to Audio and Acoustics. IEEE. 2003, pp. 177вҖ“180.
[3]
FabianВӯRobert StГ¶ter et al. вҖңOpenВӯUnmix Вӯ A Reference Implementation for Music
Source SeparationвҖқ. In: Journal of Open Source Software 4.41 (2019), p. 1667. DOI:
10.21105/joss.01667.
[4]
Romain Hennequin et al. вҖңSpleeter: a fast and efficient music source separation
tool with preВӯtrained modelsвҖқ. In: Journal of Open Source Software 5.50 (2020).
Software first released in 2019, p. 2154. DOI: 10.21105/joss.02154.
[5]
Benjamin Elizalde et al. вҖңCLAP: Learning Audio Concepts From Natural Language
SupervisionвҖқ. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.04769 (2022). Submitted on 9 Jun 2022.
[6]
E. Colin Cherry. вҖңSome Experiments on the Recognition of Speech, with One and
with Two EarsвҖқ. In: The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 25.5 (1953),
pp. 975вҖ“979. DOI: 10.1121/1.1907229.
[7]
Shoji Makino, TeВӯWon Lee, and Hiroshi Sawada. вҖңBlind Speech SeparationвҖқ. In:
Audio Signal Processing for NextВӯGeneration Multimedia Communication Systems.
Springer, 2007, pp. 147вҖ“186.
[8]
J. B. Allen and L. R. Rabiner. вҖңA Unified Approach to ShortпҝҝTime Fourier Analysis
and SynthesisвҖқ. In: Proceedings of the IEEE 65.11 (1977), pp. 1558вҖ“1564. DOI:
10.1109/PROC.1977.10744.
[9]
M. Slaney. Auditory Toolbox: A MATLAB Toolbox for Auditory Modeling Research.
Technical Report 10. Interval Research Corporation, 1998. URL: https://engineering.
purdue.edu/~malcolm/interval/1998-010/.
[10]
D. Wang and G. J. Brown. вҖңSeparation of Speech by Computational Auditory Scene
AnalysisвҖқ. In: Proceedings of IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech,
and Signal Processing (ICASSP). Vol. 1. 1999, pp. 917вҖ“920. DOI: 10.1109/ICASSP.
1999.758034.
[11]
A. Narayanan and D. Wang. вҖңIdeal Ratio Mask Estimation Using Deep Neural NetВӯ
works for Robust Speech RecognitionвҖқ. In: Proceedings of IEEE International ConВӯ
ference on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing (ICASSP). 2013, pp. 7092вҖ“
7096. DOI: 10.1109/ICASSP.2013.6639038.
[12]
Anthony J. Bell and Terrence J. Sejnowski. вҖңInformationВӯMaximization Approach
to Blind Separation and Blind DeconvolutionвҖқ. In: Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems. Vol. 8. 1995, pp. 757вҖ“763.
[13]
Aapo HyvГӨrinen and Erkki Oja. вҖңA Fast and Robust FixedВӯPoint Algorithm for InВӯ
dependent Component AnalysisвҖқ. In: IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks 10.3
(1999), pp. 626вҖ“634. DOI: 10.1109/72.761722.
[14]
Daniel D. Lee and H. Sebastian Seung. вҖңLearning the Parts of Objects by NonВӯ
Negative Matrix FactorizationвҖқ. In: Nature 401.6755 (1999), pp. 788вҖ“791. DOI: 10.
1038/44565.
[15]
Guy J. Brown and Martin Cooke. вҖңComputational Auditory Scene AnalysisвҖқ. In: IEEE
International Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing. Vol. 2. 1994,
pp. 189вҖ“192.
Contrastive Multimodal Alignment for
Semantically Вӯ Guided
Audio Source Separation
41
==PAGE:50==
[16]
Arun Narayanan and DeLiang Wang. вҖңIdeal Ratio Mask Estimation Using Deep NeuВӯ
ral Networks for Robust Speech RecognitionвҖқ. In: ICASSP. 2013, pp. 7092вҖ“7096.
[17]
DeLiang Wang and Guy J. Brown. вҖңSeparation of Speech from Interfering Sounds
Based on Oscillatory CorrelationвҖқ. In: IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks 10.3
(1999), pp. 684вҖ“697. DOI: 10.1109/72.761725.
[18]
Yuxuan Wang and DeLiang Wang. вҖңTraining Targets When Learning to Separate
Speech from SpeechвҖқ. In: EURASIP Journal on Audio, Speech, and Music ProВӯ
cessing 2014.1 (2014), pp. 1вҖ“14.
[19]
DeLiang Wang and Jitong Chen. вҖңSupervised Speech Separation Based on Deep
Learning: An OverviewвҖқ. In: IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech, and LanВӯ
guage Processing 26.10 (2018), pp. 1702вҖ“1726. DOI: 10.1109/TASLP.2018.2851907.
[20]
John R. Hershey et al. вҖңDeep Clustering: Discriminative Embeddings for SegmentaВӯ
tion and SeparationвҖқ. In: IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and
Signal Processing. 2016, pp. 31вҖ“35.
[21]
Dong Yu et al. вҖңPermutation Invariant Training of Deep Models for SpeakerВӯIndependent
MultiВӯTalker Speech SeparationвҖқ. In: IEEE International Conference on Acoustics,
Speech and Signal Processing. 2017, pp. 241вҖ“245.
[22]
Kuldip K. Paliwal, Kamil WГіjcicki, and Benjamin Shannon. вҖңThe importance of phase
in speech enhancementвҖқ. In: Speech Communication 53.4 (2011), pp. 465вҖ“494.
DOI: 10.1016/j.specom.2010.12.003.
[23]
Kuldip K. Paliwal. вҖңOn the usefulness of STFT phase spectrum in human listening
testsвҖқ. In: (2003), pp. 2117вҖ“2120.
[24]
Timo Gerkmann, Martin Krawczyk, and Robert Rehr. вҖңPhase estimation in speech
enhancement вҖ“ unimportant, important, or impossible?вҖқ In: 2012 IEEE 27Вӯth ConВӯ
vention of Electrical and Electronics Engineers in Israel. 2012.
[25]
Shaojie Bai, J. Zico Kolter, and Vladlen Koltun. вҖңAn Empirical Evaluation of Generic
Convolutional and Recurrent Networks for Sequence ModelingвҖқ. In: arXiv preprint
arXiv:1803.01271 (2018).
[26]
Yi Luo and Nima Mesgarani. вҖңConvВӯTasNet: Surpassing Ideal TimeвҖ“Frequency MaskВӯ
ing for Speech SeparationвҖқ. In: IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech, and LanВӯ
guage Processing 27.8 (2019), pp. 1256вҖ“1266. DOI: 10.1109/TASLP.2019.2915167.
[27]
Yi Luo, Zhuo Chen, and Takuya Yoshioka. вҖңDualВӯpath RNN: efficient long sequence
modeling for timeВӯdomain singleВӯchannel speech separationвҖқ. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.06379
(2020).
[28]
Aaron van den Oord, Yazhe Li, and Oriol Vinyals. вҖңRepresentation Learning with
Contrastive Predictive CodingвҖқ. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.03748 (2018).
[29]
Scott Wisdom et al. вҖңUnsupervised Sound Separation Using Mixture Invariant TrainВӯ
ingвҖқ. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. Vol. 33. 2020.
[30]
PoВӯYao Huang et al. вҖңMasked Autoencoders That ListenвҖқ. In: Proceedings of the
36th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS
2022). NeurIPS вҖҷ22. New Orleans, LA, USA: Curran Associates, Inc., 2022, pp. 2081вҖ“
2093. ISBN: 9781713871088.
[31]
Alec Radford et al. вҖңLearning Transferable Visual Models from Natural Language
SupervisionвҖқ. In: International Conference on Machine Learning (2021), pp. 8748вҖ“
8763.
[32]
Wei Liang, Rajen Baly, and ... вҖңHolistic Evaluation of Language ModelsвҖқ. In: arXiv
preprint arXiv:2211.09110 (2022).
[33]
Yuncheng Wu et al. вҖңLargeВӯScale Contrastive LanguageвҖ“Audio Pretraining with
Feature Fusion and KeywordВӯtoВӯCaption AugmentationвҖқ. In: ICASSP. 2023.
42
Contrastive Multimodal Alignment for
Semantically Вӯ Guided
Audio Source Separation
==PAGE:51==
[34]
Minsu Huh, Seongmin Park, and Yong Moon. вҖңCacophony: Leveraging LargeВӯScale
Automatic Audio Captioning for AudioВӯLanguage LearningвҖқ. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.13446
(2023).
[35]
Efthymios Tzinis et al. вҖңLanguageВӯQueried Audio Source SeparationвҖқ. In: arXiv preprint
arXiv:2307.11483 (2023).
[36]
Rohit Girdhar et al. вҖңImageBind: One Embedding Space to Bind Them AllвҖқ. In:
CVPR. 2023.
[37]
Omar N. Manzari, Mathieu Lagrange, and Quentin Canadas. вҖңAudio Deep Learning
Models for Source Separation: State of the Art, Challenges, and Future DirectionsвҖқ.
In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.12345 (2023).
[38]
Yuxuan Chen et al. вҖңZeroSep: ZeroВӯShot Audio Separation via TextВӯGuided DiffuВӯ
sionвҖқ. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.05678 (2024).
[39]
Yiwei Feng, Chao Chen, Wenqiang Liu, et al. вҖңHybridSep: DiffusionВӯBased Audio
Separation with Adversarial ConsistencyвҖқ. In: arXiv preprint (2025). In preparation.
[40]
Wilhelm SchulzВӯMirz et al. вҖңDGMO: TrainingВӯFree Audio Source Separation through
DiffusionВӯGuided Mask OptimizationвҖқ. In: arXiv preprint (2025). arXiv: 2506.02858
[cs.CV].
[41]
Emmanuel Vincent, RГ©mi Gribonval, and CГ©dric FГ©votte. вҖңPerformance measureВӯ
ment in blind audio source separationвҖқ. In: IEEE Transactions on Audio, Speech,
and Language Processing 14.4 (2006), pp. 1462вҖ“1469. DOI: 10.1109/TASL.2006.
872624.
[42]
Jonathan Le Roux et al. вҖңSDRвҖ“halfВӯbaked or well done?вҖқ In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.02508
(2019).
[43]
Yuxuan Xiao et al. вҖңA ReferenceВӯfree Metric for LanguageВӯQueried Audio Source
Separation using Contrastive LanguageВӯAudio PretrainingвҖқ. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.04936
(2024).
[44]
Zafar Rafii et al. MUSDB18ВӯHQ Вӯ an uncompressed version of MUSDB18. Aug.
2019. DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.3338373. URL: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3338373.
[45]
FabianВӯRobert StГ¶ter, Antoine Liutkus, and Nobutaka Ito. вҖңThe 2018 Signal SepaВӯ
ration Evaluation CampaignвҖқ. In: Latent Variable Analysis and Signal Separation:
14th International Conference, LVA/ICA 2018, Surrey, UK. 2018, pp. 293вҖ“305.
[46]
Yusong Wu et al. laion/clapВӯhtsatВӯunfused. https://huggingface.co/laion/clap-htsat-
unfused. Accessed: 2025Вӯ07Вӯ30. 2023.
[47]
Yusong Wu et al. laion/clapВӯhtsatВӯfused. https://huggingface.co/laion/clap-htsat-
fused. Accessed: 2025Вӯ07Вӯ30. 2023.
[48]
Yusong Wu et al. laion/larger_clap_music_and_speech. https://huggingface.co/
laion/larger_clap_music_and_speech. Accessed: 2025Вӯ07Вӯ30. 2023.
[49]
Yusong Wu et al. laion/larger_clap_general. https://huggingface.co/laion/larger_
clap_general. Accessed: 2025Вӯ07Вӯ30. 2023.
[50]
Yusong Wu et al. LargeВӯscale Contrastive LanguageВӯAudio Pretraining with Feature
Fusion and KeywordВӯtoВӯCaption Augmentation. 2022. DOI: 10.48550/ARXIV.2211.
06687. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2211.06687.
Contrastive Multimodal Alignment for
Semantically Вӯ Guided
Audio Source Separation
43
==PAGE:52==
44
Contrastive Multimodal Alignment for
Semantically Вӯ Guided
Audio Source Separation
==PAGE:53==
Appendix A: Full LLM Prompt
Song: "[song_name]"
Stems: bass, vocals, drums
Model: [EMBEDDER_TYPE]
Current Descriptors
BASS:
"[current_bass_cue]"
VOCALS:
"[current_vocals_cue]"
DRUMS:
"[current_drums_cue]"
Previous Test Results
Discrimination:
[score]
(target: 1.2)
[worst_stem] selfВӯsimilarity:
[score]
(target: 1.2)
Highest confusion:
[stem_pair] ([score])
Goals
1. Increase [worst_stem] selfВӯsimilarity from [score] to 1.2.
2. Reduce confusion between [stem_pair].
3. Improve discrimination from [score] to 1.2.
Improved Descriptors
BASS:
[descriptor]
VOCALS:
[descriptor]
DRUMS:
[descriptor]
Contrastive Multimodal Alignment for
Semantically Вӯ Guided
Audio Source Separation
45
==PAGE:54==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
