==PAGE:1==
 
1 
Error! Use the Home tab to apply Normal - Forside Overskrift 1 to the text that you want to appear here. 
 
 
==PAGE:2==
 
Climatology of Extratropical cyclones and its connection to Wind Energy Applications  
2 
 
 
==PAGE:3==
 
Climatology of Extratropical cyclones and its connection to Wind Energy Applications  
3 
Acknowledgements 
First, I would like to express how grateful I am to have had the opportunity to undertake this 
high quality education master enhancing my knowledge of the wind energy disciplines, also in-
cluding programming skills.   
 
I would like to thank to all the staff of the DTU online Wind Energy Master program, Head of 
Master Studies, courses teachers, and program coordinators who have taken care of my study 
journey. 
 
A special thank you to my DTU supervisors, Marc Imberger and Xiaoli Gu Larsen for their contin-
ued support, advice, and engagement during my thesis journey and to Jacob Burrows, EDF su-
pervisor, for its interest and guidance on my study. 
 
Last but not least, a massive thank you to Patricia Santana, my dear parents and sister who have 
always supported me to overcome the challenges of undertaking a master study coping with a 
full time job. 
 
 
Adolfo Guerrero Gutiérrez de Agüera 
                     s206203
21.12.2024
==PAGE:4==
 
Climatology of Extratropical cyclones and its connection to Wind Energy Applications  
4 
Contents 
Acknowledgements ................................................................................................. 3 
1. 
Introduction ................................................................................................... 5 
1.1 
Background and Context .................................................................................... 5 
1.2 
Objectives ......................................................................................................... 5 
1.3 
Scope ................................................................................................................ 5 
2. 
Literature Review......................................................................................... 10 
2.1 
Description of Extratropical cyclones ................................................................. 10 
2.2 
Detection and tracking methods overview ......................................................... 12 
2.3 
Climate reanalyses methods overview ............................................................... 13 
3. 
Background of Design principles for Offshore Wind Turbines .................. 15 
3.1 
Loads and site conditions standards .................................................................. 15 
3.2 
Meteorological data definition ........................................................................... 16 
4. 
Datasets used ............................................................................................... 18 
4.1 
The Gramcianinov et al. work ........................................................................... 18 
4.2 
The Lodise et al. work ...................................................................................... 19 
4.3 
Comparison of the Gramcianinov and Lodise storm track data ............................ 21 
5. 
Methodology ................................................................................................. 24 
5.1 
Metrics in climatology of extratropical cyclones .................................................. 24 
5.2 
Metrics in wind energy ..................................................................................... 25 
5.3 
The two study areas ........................................................................................ 26 
5.4 
Data treatment and analysis ............................................................................. 29 
6. 
Results .......................................................................................................... 32 
6.1 
Characterization of cyclones over the Gulf of Maine lease areas .......................... 32 
6.2 
Characterization of cyclones over the Coast of California lease areas ................... 69 
7. 
Conclusion .................................................................................................... 98 
8. 
References .................................................................................................. 100 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:5==
 
Climatology of Extratropical cyclones and its connection to Wind Energy Applications  
5 
1. Introduction 
1.1 Background and Context  
Extreme storm events, such as extra-tropical cyclones (ECs), pose significant challenges to wind 
turbines and wind farms due to high wind speeds, heavy rain, and storm surges in offshore 
installations. The ECs are large-scale low-pressure systems occurring in mid latitude regions, 
above 30° N in the Northern Hemisphere (NH) and below 30° S in the Southern Hemisphere (SH). 
This affects not only the turbines themselves, but also other aspects like operation and mainte-
nance, grid stability and safety. Understanding the severity and frequency of such events for a 
specific region is thus crucial and one method to assess this is by examining historic track data 
from extra-tropical cyclones. Within this project, different storm datasets are employed to de-
scribe the climatological characteristics of the ECs in different regions, including the inter-decadal 
and inter-annual trends in time as well as in space. Computerized data analysis is employed to 
examine long term time series comprising climatology variables and storms track data obtained 
from sources publicly available. From there the analysis is taken in the context of offshore wind 
applications. 
 
Further to DTU this thesis is supported by Électricité de France (EDF) in its capacity as industrial 
partner, who owns and operates offshore wind farms worldwide and have shown interest in my 
research.  
 
1.2 Objectives 
The objectives of my research are two. Firstly, to address the statistical characterization of inter-
decadal and inter-annual trends in ECs with focus on metrics relevant for wind energy. This anal-
ysis is a crucial first step towards looking into climate change impacts since it can provide a 
detailed understanding of the present and the past.  
 
The second objective is to connect the above-mentioned characterization to wind energy appli-
cations with use cases such as offshore wind turbines (OWTs) and offshore wind farms (OWFs) 
as well as to assess its impact on OWFs development areas, wind energy production, downtime, 
and operation and maintenance activities.  
 
1.3 Scope 
The major ocean basins of ECs activity are the North Atlantic, North Pacific, the Southern Ocean, 
and the Mediterranean, being the first two the focus of this work. The study encompasses to 
analyze EC storm tracks 1 hourly data recorded within specific regions of some of these areas 
from 1979 to 2020 retrieved from ERA5, the fifth and latest generation of reanalysis from the 
European Center for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts (ECMFW). 
 
To connect the analysis of the ECs to wind energy applications EDF has provided certain specific 
regions of interest (ROIs) where OWFs development areas are being currently considered in the 
offshore wind market. These regions are the Gulf of Maine in the United States (US) Northeast 
coast and the Coast of California in the US West coast, which are part of the Biden-Harris admin-
istration’s goal of deploying 30 GW of offshore wind energy capacity by 2030 and 15 GW of 
floating offshore wind by 2035. The Bureau of Ocean Energy Management (BOEM) from the 
==PAGE:6==
 
Climatology of Extratropical cyclones and its connection to Wind Energy Applications  
6 
Department of Interior of the US (DOI) has seen very strong appetite on the emerging offshore 
renewable energy projects on the US Outer Continental Shelf (OCS) and have been launching 
several auctions to allocate seabed leases within the predetermined offshore wind planning areas 
across different states bounded by coastline (Figure 1). 
 
 
Figure 1. Map including offshore wind energy planning leases areas. Source: BOEM. [14] 
 
The US offshore wind energy pipeline comprising project development and operational reached 
80.5 GW of potential generating capacity, with 174 MW operational and 4.1 GW under construc-
tion as of May 31, 2024. The US Department of Energy (DOE) estimates $10 billion has been 
invested or potentially to be invested in the US offshore wind supply chain since 2021 including 
port development, vessel orders, workforce development, research [37]. 
  
The following map provides an overview of the offshore wind energy pipeline activity in the US 
(Figure 2).  
==PAGE:7==
 
Climatology of Extratropical cyclones and its connection to Wind Energy Applications  
7 
 
Figure 2. US offshore wind energy pipeline activity as of May 31, 2024. Source: NREL. [37] 
 
Narrowing to the specific ROIs chosen for this thesis work, the current plan announced by the 
BOEM consists of eight proposed offshore lease areas over the Gulf of Maine making 13.2 GW 
and five lease areas on the Coast of California for a total of 6 GW. To date of writing this work  
the wind energy auctions completed covering the ROIs have been a sale of the five offshore 
leases in California concluded in December 2022 totaling $757.1 million, being the first ever lease 
sales for the Pacific region, and more recently, a sale of four out of the eight offshore leases in 
the Gulf of Maine concluded in October 2024 for $21.9 million [14], [37].   
 
The ROIs and their leases areas above mentioned are shown in greater detail on the following 
maps. The Gulf of Maine is in the North Atlantic (Figure 3) and the Coast of California in the 
Pacific (Figure 4).  
 
==PAGE:8==
 
Climatology of Extratropical cyclones and its connection to Wind Energy Applications  
8 
 
Figure 3. US offshore wind energy pipeline in the North Atlantic, including the ROI of the Gulf of Maine. Source: NREL. 
[37] 
 
Figure 4. US offshore wind energy pipeline in the Pacific, including the ROI of the Coast of California. 
Source: NREL. [37] 
==PAGE:9==
 
Climatology of Extratropical cyclones and its connection to Wind Energy Applications  
9 
1.3.1 Thesis Outline 
This thesis is structured as follows: 
 
• 
Chapter 2: Literature Review 
A description of the ECs and their long-term statistics are presented in section 2.1. Section 
2.2 discusses the detection and tracking methods employed in climatology. Section 2.3 
provides an overview of the climate reanalysis methods and the state of art. 
 
• 
Chapter 3: Background of Design principles for Offshore Wind Turbines 
An overview of the relevant standards in current use for Offshore wind turbines is pre-
sented, focused on the loads and site conditions assessment and the meteorological pa-
rameters. 
 
• 
Chapter 4: Datsets used 
In this chapter the storms data sets employed in my thesis work are described. Section 
4.1 discusses the Gramcianinov et al. work (OK), section 4.2 discusses the Lodise et al. 
work and section 4.3 provides a comparison, highlighting their differences and simili-
tudes. 
 
• 
Chapter 5: Methodology 
In this chapter the workflow followed to characterize the ECs is presented and its con-
nection to the OWFs regions of interest. Section 5.1 describes the metrics employed in 
climatology of extratropical cyclones, section 5.2 the climatology metrics applied in wind 
energy. Section 5.3 presents the two study areas of my work and section 5.4 show the 
data treatment and analysis performed.   
 
• 
Chapter 6: Results 
Section 6.1. presents the results obtained for the characterization of cyclones over the 
offshore wind farms Gulf of Maine and section 6.2 over the Coast of California Develop-
ment Zones. Along with the results the findings of my thesis work are also discussed in 
this chapter as their impact on different aspects of OWFs. 
 
• 
Chapter 7: Conclusion 
Finally, this chapter summarizes the outcomes from this study and future work. 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:10==
 
Climatology of Extratropical cyclones and its connection to Wind Energy Applications  
10 
2. Literature Review 
2.1 Description of Extratropical cyclones 
ECs are large-scale low-pressure systems that occur in mid-latitude regions of both the NH and 
the SH [1], [6]. They are an important component of global circulation, transporting vast amounts 
of moisture and energy, responsible for much of the day to day variability of weather in the mid-
latitudes [2]. These systems can travel thousands of kilometers and can last several days [1], 
being the main cause of rainfall enabling agriculture and many human activities. They happen in 
all seasons, more frequently in autumn and winter [4]. The ECs are often, but not always, asso-
ciated with extreme winds, heavy precipitation, storm surges, sea level and wave build up causing 
loss of life as well as high damage to infrastructure and properties, having huge socio economics 
impacts [1], [6]. The challenging conditions may impact an offshore wind turbine (OWT) and its 
associated infrastructure including subsea cables and substations. The assessment of the affec-
tion of OWFs presents difficulties due to the limitation of historical data of the extreme weather. 
For instance, 80% of the OWTs installed in the North Sea required large repairs due to extreme 
weather beyond the predictions [18].  
 
From the various Earth's atmosphere layers, the troposphere is the lower, it begins in the Earth's 
surface and almost all weather occurs in this region. Its height is 18-20 km at the equator, 9 km 
at 50° North and 50° South, and just under 6 km at the poles. The above layer to the troposphere 
is called the stratosphere and the transition layer in between is the tropopause [15]. 
 
The ECs use to form over ocean basins close to upper tropospheric jet streams [6], with their 
strongest winds near the tropopause (about 12 km up) either converted from tropical cyclones 
or from the flow over mountains [6]. The atmospheric flow in the mid-latitudes adopts certain 
configurations that are expected to force upward motion, thereby inducing cyclogenesis [2]. They 
have a circular region of low surface pressure with a radius of 100-2000 km, made by cold and 
warm fronts (UNDRR) [5]. 
 
The primary mechanism by which ECs develop is baroclinic instability or baroclinicity, which refers 
to a process by which perturbations draw energy from the mean flow potential energy. It is char-
acterized by strong vertical wind shear and flow caused by a strong meridional temperature gra-
dient in the mid-latitudes due to the differential heating of Earth by the Sun [2], which is high at 
low latitudes and low at high latitudes. ECs act to reduce this gradient through polewards 
transport of latent and sensible heat [1]. This is a type of wave instability that grows by converting 
available potential energy into kinetic energy [2]. Such baroclinic interaction is based on the so-
called thermal wind balance, under which ECs evolve towards a kind of equilibrium between wind 
and temperature, combining the hydrostatic equilibrium related to the vertical distribution of mass 
to temperature and the geostrophic equilibrium to the horizontal distribution of mass to the wind 
[4].    
 
In terms of wind speed the Beaufort Wind scale (WMO, 1970) determines an empirical measure 
that relates wind speed and also wind loads to observed conditions at sea or on land with the 
Beaufort number ranging from 1 to 12, for a cyclone called storm when wind speed is from 24.5 
m/s to 28.4 m/s (89 – 102 km/h), violent storm from 28.5 m/s to 32.6 m/s (103-117 km/h), and 
hurricane force above 32.7 m/s (118 km/h) [3]. 
==PAGE:11==
 
Climatology of Extratropical cyclones and its connection to Wind Energy Applications  
11 
 
The lifecycle of an EC from genesis to lysis can sometimes last more than 10 days, being from 2 
to 5 days the typical average. 
 
The pathways along which ECs typically travel are known as storm tracks. For example, in the 
NH there is a maximum polewards transport of energy occurring in the  
North Pacific and North Atlantic. In the SH, during summer, the storm track data forms a circular 
pattern around Antarctica, becoming more asymmetrical in winter. Baroclinicity is at a maximum 
in both the North Pacific and North Atlantic Ocean basis during winter. The SH storms track 
maximum intensity also occurs during winter, with the most activity in the Southern Atlantic and 
Indian Ocean regions [1].  
 
The distribution of ECs is not homogeneous in both the NH and the SH [4]. Changes in the 
location of storms tracks have been linked to subtropical jet or air stream, baroclinicity and ex-
tratropical sea-surface temperatures (SST), further to respond to large scale phenomena such as 
the El Niño Southern Oscillation (ENSO), the North Atlantic Oscillation (NAO) [1], [6], the South-
ern Annular Mode (SAM), and the Indian Ocean Dipole (IOD) [6]. Those phenomena impacting 
the ECs behavior in the areas of the present study are discussed later. 
 
The world map (Figure 5) shows the regions where ECs occur based on the latitude range.  
 
 
Figure 5: Regions where ECs have been recorded. Source: Wikipedia 
 
For avoidance of doubt, cyclones and storms are terms considered ECs and have the same mean-
ing for the purpose of this thesis work. 
  
A sequence of images (Figure 6) displays an EC over the North Atlantic Ocean in which the yellow 
dots mark the trajectory of the storm event every 12h. These show how EC are formed by large 
cloud covered vortices [4]. 
 
==PAGE:12==
 
Climatology of Extratropical cyclones and its connection to Wind Energy Applications  
12 
 
Figure 6. A mid-latitude cyclone or EC trajectory during 72h over the North Atlantic Ocean happened in February 1997 
shown every 24h. Source: NOAA GOES and EUMETSAT METEOSAT. Source [4]. 
 
 
2.2 Detection and tracking methods overview 
This section aims to provide an overview of the current methods used for detection and tracking 
of ECs. The different detection and tracking methods approaches are translated to differences in 
the output, being these differences one of the two main sources of cyclones characterization 
activity uncertainty [1] [7]. 
 
A large number of scientists have been investigating how to quantify storm track activity given 
its huge impact on weather and climate developing numerous metrics, however, there has not 
been a systematic assessment of the relationship between metrics and weather impacts. This use 
of different metrics can lead to variability and change not always being consistent [35]. Despite 
large improvements have been made to gain more understanding of the ECs activity in the recent 
years, to date there is no global consensus of the definition of an EC or how to determine its 
accurate position [1]. The two more common storms track frameworks used in climate modelling 
are Eulerian eddy variance/covariance statistics and Lagrangian cyclone track statistics [35].  
 
The first framework is based on the observation of atmospheric properties and their changes at 
fixed locations and employs a time period bandpass filter from 2 to 6 days to identify activity on 
synoptic timescale [1]. One Eulerian measure is the dynamic storm track defined as a region of 
improved standard deviation of such time period bandpass filter at 500 hPa geopotential height. 
A large portion of the synoptic scale variability within this frequency band relates not only to 
cyclones but high-pressure systems and large-scale waves [12]. Many other variance and covar-
iance statistics have been used such as mean sea-level pressure (MSLP), meridional wind at 
850hPa and 300hPa, eddy kinetic energy at 850 hPa and 300 hPa, and relative vorticity at 850 
==PAGE:13==
 
Climatology of Extratropical cyclones and its connection to Wind Energy Applications  
13 
hPa and 300 hPa [32]. This framework, however, does not provide much detail of ECs character-
istics such as occurrence rate and intensity [1].  
 
The second framework, Langragian, observes atmospheric properties and their changes following 
a moving air parcel and uses a spatial and temporal tracking of individual ECs [1]. It consists of 
two steps: detection and tracking [12]. The position of an EC can be identified employing a wide 
range of variables like the above mentioned such as meridional winds, relative vorticity, eddy 
kinetic energy, geopotential height, and (MSLP), being the most recurrent either local minima in 
MSLP or maxima in vorticity at a single geopotential height or pressure level enabling to track 
these variables over time time and space [1]. Each method may apply different minimum filtering 
thresholds for the duration (24, 48, or 72 hours) and the travelling distance (500 or 1000 km) to 
detect ECs that last a minimum distance over a minimum period of time [1], [7], [10].  
 
[31], [32], [33], and [34] developed an ECs tracking algorithm widely used which employes rel-
ative vorticity at 850hPa meantime a tracking algorithm using minimum MSLP at 6-h frequency 
is typically employed by different authors [1]. The first method represents the high frequency, 
small scale features and the second the low frequency, large scale features, being the 850 hPa 
vorticity the preferred technique [19]. Generally, the vorticity method identifies more ECs than 
employing the MSLP with equal characteristics of duration and travelling distance [19]. Tracks, 
frequency, and intensity of cyclones are highly dependent on the datasets, the detection and the 
tracking algorithm used [12]. The largest difference between methods was found when detecting 
weak cyclones and at the start and end stages of the cyclone lifecycle [7]. A widely accepted way 
to determine the centers of the ECs is to use two conditions: local minimum in the mean sea-
level pressure and the maximum vorticity within a 400-km diameter which must be larger than 
10 −5 s −1. [7] 
 
New detection and tracking methods are being developed. For instance, a 4-dimensional tracking 
algorithm that detects and tracks ECs across various levels in the atmosphere was developed by 
[1]. Worth highlighting that each method has its limitations, and there is no ”best” way to address 
them.  
 
In my research the datasets employed to assess the climatology of the two study areas have 
been obtained from both tracking methods using relative vorticity and MSLP independently. The 
characteristics of each method are described in the methodology section.    
 
2.3 Climate reanalyses methods overview 
Climate reanalyses are a quite powerful tool in the study of atmospheric systems able to generate 
observational data employing systems of Numerical Weather Prediction (NWP) at intraday fre-
quency [13]. They work integrating climate observations and historical weather data aiming to 
recover detailed climate data covering the entire globe over the different layers of the atmosphere 
[8]. They provide useful information on the properties, climatology, and variability of ECs [13], 
[34] and a way for climate models validation for these ECs [13]. 
 
The second main source of uncertainty in the cyclones activity characterization is the use of 
various climate reanalyses and their different approaches in how to formulate the models, reso-
lution, and data assimilation [7]. The industry has been comparing climate reanalyses methods 
==PAGE:14==
 
Climatology of Extratropical cyclones and its connection to Wind Energy Applications  
14 
to gain more understanding of these uncertainties [13], being the two main players in the rea-
nalysis field the National Center for Environmental Prediction (NCEP) of the National Oceanic and 
Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) of the United States and the European Center for Medium-
Range Weather Forecasts (ECMWF) [8].  
 
From the literature reviewed for my study up to 9 different climate reanalyses methods over a 
period of years have been intercompared by several authors [7], [8], [13]. Some of the reanalyses 
explored are the NCEP-NCAR (NCEP1), NCEP-Department of Energy Reanalysis (NCEP2), and the 
NCEP Climate Forecast System Reanalysis (NCEP-CFSR) from one side and the ERA40 Reanalysis, 
the ERA-Interim Reanalysis and the ERA Reanalysis for the Twentieth Century (ERA20C) on the 
other side. In addition to the above mentioned, other widely used reanalyses include the NOOA 
Twentieth Century Reanalysis (20CR), the Modern Era Retrospective-analysis for Research and 
Applications (MERRA) of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) of the United 
States, the Japanese JRA-55 Reanalysis (JRA55), and the Japanese JRA-25 Reanalysis (JRA25) 
[8]. 
 
For instance, a data comparison done between five climate reanalyses over the NH during 1979-
2010 found notable differences in cyclone depth, lifetime, deepening rate, and propagation speed 
[7]. A finer reanalysis resolution leads to a larger number of cyclones; with the NCEP–DOE show-
ing the lower annual counts and the NASA MERRA the higher. The intensity level of a cyclone can 
be assessed by employing the MSLP at the cyclone center and maximum 10m wind speed. Using 
MSLP categories a cyclone as “very deep” when MSLP <930 hPa), “moderate” as MSLP in the 
range 980-1000 hPa, and “shallow” when MSLP >1000 hPa [8]; the moderate and shallow cy-
clones are the main contributors of the output differences of the climate reanalyses [7]. 
 
The current thesis work uses ERA5, the fifth and latest generation of weather data reanalysis 
released from the ECMWF which replaced the ERA-Interim reanalysis in 2019. ERA5 is produced 
by the Copernicus Climate Change Service (C3S) at ECMWF and provides hourly estimates of 
many atmospheric, land and oceanic climate variables. The data covers the Earth on a 31km grid 
from the surface up to a height of 80km. It works with STAC Metadata doing an analysis at a 
specific time providing instantaneous parameters and computing atmospheric conditions for sev-
eral forecast steps, at increasing validity times. The ERA5 has a horizontal grid resolution of 0.25 
degrees or 31 km in both latitude and longitude [16]. Implications of the ERA5 resolution are 
discussed later in the methodology chapter. 
 
 
==PAGE:15==
 
Climatology of Extratropical cyclones and its connection to Wind Energy Applications  
15 
3. Background of Design principles for             
Offshore Wind Turbines 
3.1 Loads and site conditions standards 
When it comes to selection of wind turbine location, one of the most critical parameters to decide 
is the wind turbines class which is defined in terms of wind speed and turbulence. The Interna-
tional Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) provides standards for wind turbines among other elec-
trical equipment. The IEC 61400-1 Design requirements standard for wind turbine safety Edition 
4 and the IEC 61400-3-1 Design requirements for fixed offshore wind turbines standard Edition 
1 both released in 2019 comprise the design criteria that the OWTs must follow [25]. The IEC 
61400-1 standard, which was originally made for onshore wind turbines, provides wind parame-
ters also applicable for offshore environment as these cover the design of the Rotor-nacelle as-
sembly. The IEC 61400-3-1 standard provides additional criteria for site specific conditions in 
offshore environment including marine conditions encompassing wave, sea currents, water level, 
sea ice, marine growth, scour protection, soil, and seabed movement [24] that are beyond the 
scope of the study. 
  
In wind energy applications the selection of a commercial wind turbine for a particular location 
must be verified from the safety point of view using general criteria. The above-mentioned IEC 
61400-1 standard classifies the turbines and provides the criteria for the required verification 
subject to certain general site conditions based on two aspects, wind speed and turbulence. This 
criteria defines 3 turbine classes (I, II, II) with a reference wind speed, 𝑉𝑟𝑒𝑓, for each class (50 
m/s, 47.5 m/s, 37.5 m/s), see Table 1. The 𝑉𝑟𝑒𝑓 is defined as the 10 min average wind speed at 
turbine hub height [25]. The design lifetime of the wind turbine for any of the three classes is at 
least 20 years. 
 
Furthermore, the standard defines 4 categories for turbulence (A+, A, B, and C) that are set by 
the reference turbine intensity, 𝐼𝑟𝑒𝑓, to (18%, 16%, 14%, 12%) respectively [23], [25]. The 𝐼𝑟𝑒𝑓 is 
defined as the 10 min average turbulence intensity of the longitudinal velocity fluctuations at 15 
m/s [25].  
 
It is noted that the IEC 61400-1 standard includes a second reference wind speed, 𝑉𝑟𝑒𝑓,𝑇, that 
defines the same value of 57 m/s for each of the three classes and allows its combination with 
all turbulence categories. This second reference wind speed is also defined as the 10 min average 
wind speed and is applied for areas subject to tropical cyclones although it does not cover all the 
areas exposed to these extreme weather events [23]. Up to date there are no specific criteria for 
ECs, thus the wind community employs such 𝑉𝑟𝑒𝑓,𝑇, when assessing wind farms sites located in 
the midlatitudes exposed to ECs. 
 
The standard also defines a further wind turbine class S to employ for cases where the turbine 
requires to withstand higher extreme wind conditions than for the other three classes, with wind 
speed and turbulence values to be specified by the manufacturer's designer. This class is normally 
employed for OWTs. In terms of design lifetime, class S may specify a shorter or longer time 
period than the 20 years for classes I, II, and III [23], [25].  
 
==PAGE:16==
 
Climatology of Extratropical cyclones and its connection to Wind Energy Applications  
16 
The above-mentioned parameters are shown in the following Table 1: 
 
 
     Table 1. Source: IEC 61400-1:2019 [23] 
 
Further to the two IEC standards referred above, Det Norske Veritas (DNV), the independent 
expert in assurance and risk management, released the DNV-ST-0437 standard in 2016 which set 
design requirements and guidelines to be used for the determination of loads and site conditions 
for onshore and offshore wind turbines. It supplements IEC 61400-1 Ed. 4 and IEC 61400-3-1 
Ed. 1 where further guidance is needed. This DNV standard defines different turbulence catego-
ries for offshore applications: OA (14%), OB (12%), and OC (10%) for high, medium, and low 
turbulence intensity and significant wave height conditions respectively. The turbulence intensity 
values are lower than those set for onshore conditions due to a smoother orography over the sea 
than on land [26]. 
 
One of the more important parts when designing a wind turbine is the description of normal and 
extreme wind conditions to come up with a proper representation of the aerodynamics loads the 
turbine is subject to. Normal wind conditions determine fatigue, and extreme wind conditions are 
employed to define extreme wind loads, with the latter including gust wind speeds and sudden 
changes in both wind speed and wind direction due to storms. Turbine loads are defined combin-
ing both the normal and extreme wind conditions with load extrapolation methods [26]. 
 
3.2 Meteorological data definition 
Wind parameters at the specific wind farm site must be determined for the wind turbine design 
phase and these are shown here. Some of these parameters have been described in the previous 
section.  
 
▪ 
ρ     Air density 
▪ 
𝑉𝑟𝑒𝑓 reference wind speed (10 min average) 
▪ 
𝑉50  extreme gust wind speed (3 sec average) for 50-year return period 
▪ 
𝑉𝑎𝑣𝑒 annual average wind speed 
==PAGE:17==
 
Climatology of Extratropical cyclones and its connection to Wind Energy Applications  
17 
▪ 
Wind speed distribution (Weibull distribution) 
▪ 
Wind direction distribution (wind rose) 
▪ 
Turbulence intensity and standard deviation of the turbulence intensity 
▪ 
Wind shear 
▪ 
Inflow angle 
 
Extrapolation of the extreme wind speeds from actual in situ measurements to the long-term 
plays an important part to determinate the design load conditions of a potential specific site. To 
obtain reliable data the measurement period shall be long enough, significantly longer than 12 
months. In the analysis of extreme values, the choice of the base values (mean or maxima) may 
impact largely on its outcome. On the other hand, the analysis should consider all storm types 
characterized in the site and each storm data should be analyzed independently from each other 
with a sufficient time gap between two maxima datapoints. Finally, uncertainties should be dis-
cussed using confidence levels [26]. 
 
Out of the two parameters that define a wind turbine class, wind speed and turbulence, this study 
focuses on those aspects related to wind speed. In this sense, the IEC 61400-1 standard set two 
conditions that must be met in every turbine of a wind farm when performing a site assessment 
that are related to extreme wind speed and mean wind speed [23], [25]: 
 
▪ 
The 50-year extreme wind, 𝑉50, defined as the 10 min average extreme wind speed with 
a return period or recurrence interval of 50 years, must be lower than the reference wind 
of the turbine class. 
 
▪ 
The wind speed probability density distribution of the specific site, pdfsite (u), must be 
lower than the stated in the wind turbine certificate from 0.2 to 0.4 times the reference 
wind. This is to avoid the turbine to be exposed to enhanced fatigue damage. The 𝑉𝑎𝑣𝑒, 
is the annual average of the wind speed over many years. 
 
Additionally, the standard specifies also an acceptable range for the Weibull shape parameter k 
which converges to k = 2 when the 𝑉𝑎𝑣𝑒 at the site equals the 𝑉𝑎𝑣𝑒 defined by the wind turbine 
class. 
 
These three aspects are summarized in the Table 2: 
 
Extreme wind 50-year return period 
ρsiteV50
2  ≤ ρdesignVref
2  
Mean wind speed 
pdfsite (u) ≤ pdfdesign (u) 
for  Vave ≤ u ≤  2Vave 
Limits on Weibull k 
6.5 · 𝑥 – 4.5 ≤ k ≤ 8 – 6 · x 
Where x =  Vave,site/  Vave,design 
Table 2. Site assessment conditions for wind speed as per IEC 61400-1. Source: Course notes DTU [25] 
 
It is noted that the data employed in my thesis are based on hourly mean wind speed in they do 
not intend to account extreme wind speeds which is 10 min mean based, however it might con-
tribute to the samples for determining Vref in areas of extratropical cyclone activity. 
 
==PAGE:18==
 
Climatology of Extratropical cyclones and its connection to Wind Energy Applications  
18 
4. Datasets used  
The storm data employed for my research were obtained from two public data sources held in 
repositories on the internet provided by the DTU for the purpose of this thesis. The data were 
used to produce climatology in two independent works issued by Gramcianinov et al., and Lodise 
et al, which are relevant authors in the climatology subject.  
 
4.1 The Gramcianinov et al. work 
The first of the two storm data sources was used in the work called ”Analysis of Atlantic extra-
tropical storm tracks characteristics in 41 years of ERA5 and CFSR/CFSv2 databases”, published 
by C.B. Gramcianinov et al. in 2020 which belongs to the project “Extreme wind and wave mod-
elling and statistics in the Atlantic Ocean”, funded by the Portuguese Foundation for Science and 
Technology. This work describes the main North Atlantic and South Atlantic storm track charac-
teristics, such as the spiral pattern poleward, seasonal variability, latitudinal range, and the gen-
esis regions within these ocean basins [27]. 
 
The storm data produced, that can be found in [28], were developed mainly to support ocean-
ography and ocean engineering studies. They are based on two different known reanalyses, ERA5 
from the ECMWF and CFS from the NCEP, employing data from ERA5 for the period from 1979 
to 2019 and data from CFSR for the period 1979 to 2011 and CFSv2 from 2011 to 2019. The 41 
years data belong to two different large basin areas on Earth, being the first on the extratropical 
North Atlantic Ocean capturing cyclones that pass from 85° N to 25° N and from 65° W to 0° E 
and the second which covers the extratropical South Atlantic Ocean for cyclones moving from 
85° S to 25° S and from 75° W to 20° E [27].  
 
The storm data include the following parameters on hourly basis: storm track id, date (UTC), 
longitude (0 - 360º), latitude, and T42 vorticity. T42 vorticity is the central minimum vorticity 
used for the cyclone detection employed during the identification process and storm tracking. 
The storm tracking was performed with a program called TRACK [31], [32], [33], [34]. Each 
cyclone/track has a unique ID in the database, which is organized in monthly files, containing all 
tracks that start in the selected month, even if it ends in the next one. The authors have excluded 
weather systems such as thermal lows and mesoscale storms by considering only systems that 
last at least 24 h and that travel more than 1000 km [27]. An example of the storm data format 
contained in the datasets is shown in Table 3.  
 
From the above-mentioned storms data, this thesis employs the datasets that cover the North 
Atlantic based on ERA5 data. The reason for choosing ERA5 is to be able to add other atmospheric 
parameters such as wind speed and wind direction to be obtained from the same type of Reanal-
ysis from the public C3S database. An overview of the areas over the North Atlantic and South 
Atlantic Oceans covered by these datasets employing data obtained from ERA5 and CFSR/CFSv2 
is shown in Figure 7 using ECs genesis and track densities. 
 
==PAGE:19==
 
Climatology of Extratropical cyclones and its connection to Wind Energy Applications  
19 
 
Figure 7. Genesis (shaded) and track (contour) densities computed for extratropical cyclones during 1979-2019 by 
Gramcianinov et al. Track density are 1 track per month per area. (a) North Atlantic in ERA5. (b) North Atlantic in 
CFSR/CFSv2. (c) South Atlantic in ERA5. (d) South Atlantic in CFSR/CFSv2. Source: [27] 
 
 
Table 3. Example of storm data file extracted from the datasets employed by Gramcianinov et al. 
 
4.2 The Lodise et al. work 
The second storm track source was from the work ”Global Climatology of Extratropical Cyclones 
From a New Tracking Approach and Associated Wave Heights From Satellite Radar Altimeter” 
[29] published by John Lodise et al. in 2022. The work presents the climatology of storms includ-
ing seasonal to longer term trends occurring in the North Atlantic, North Pacific, and Southern 
Oceans employing a different tracking method than the previous authors, to which a long-term 
data series of satellite radar altimeter is added to study the wave climate induced by each storm 
[29]. 
 
==PAGE:20==
 
Climatology of Extratropical cyclones and its connection to Wind Energy Applications  
20 
The storm data generated [30] were used to define cyclone centers accurately with focus on 
large waves based only on one type of reanalysis, employing data from ERA5 for the period from 
1979 to 2020. The storm datasets encompass 42 years of data recorded over the three oceanic 
domains: the North Atlantic bounded by 85° N, 25° N, 80° W, and 10° E, the North Pacific by 
85° N, 25° N, 120° W, and 120° E, and the Southern Ocean capturing cyclones between 85° S 
and 25° S.  
 
The output of the storm data comprises the following parameters on an hourly basis: storm track 
id, date (UTC), longitude, latitude, and minimum pressure. The cyclone has a unique ID in the 
database which is organized in yearly files. Similar to the datasets generated by Gramcianinov, 
Lodise et al considered tracks that last between 1 day and 14 days and travel more than 1000 
km excluding the weather systems that do not comply with these thresholds. An example of the 
storm data form contained in the datasets is shown in Table 4.  
 
For the purpose of this thesis work, we use the datasets from Lodise et al. (2022) covering the 
North Atlantic and North Pacific and discarding the one covering the South Atlantic. An overview 
of the areas over the North Atlantic, North Pacific, and the Southern Oceans covered by these 
datasets employing data obtained from ERA5 is shown in Figure 8 using ECs track densities. 
 
 
Figure 8. Densities computed for extratropical cylones during 1979-2020 by Lodise et al. Densities are the number of 
cyclone centers per year within 1° x 1° bin. Source: [29] 
 
==PAGE:21==
 
Climatology of Extratropical cyclones and its connection to Wind Energy Applications  
21 
 
                     Table 4. Example of storm data file extracted from the datasets employed by Lodise et al.  
 
4.3 Comparison of the Gramcianinov and Lodise storm track 
data 
In the work performed by Gramcianinov et al., ECs are tracked in the North Atlantic and South 
Atlantic Oceans using relative vorticity at 850 hPa employing public data from the reanalyses 
ERA5 and CFS. The work done by Lodise et al. track ECs in the North Atlantic, North Pacific, and 
Southern Oceans used fields of MSLP and Laplace of MSLP employing ERA5 data. In terms of 
duration the datasets from both works span the same years from 1979 to 2019, with Lodise 
extended until 2020. 
 
Both storm datasets use the ERA5 reanalysis providing a time stamp and the geographical coor-
dinates of each point of a storm track for the same 1-hour frequency. In terms of the regions 
analyzed by the two works, the North Atlantic is covered by both storm data that are employed 
for the characterization of the climatology of ECs passing over the Gulf of Maine. The North Pacific 
is only covered by Lodise et al; hence only this dataset is used here to study the ECs moving 
across the Coast of California. 
 
The more notable difference between both works is the storm tracking method as mentioned 
above, with Gramcianinov et al. choosing relative vorticity and Lodise et al. focusing on mean sea 
level pressure. The first presents a greater accuracy in detecting and tracking a large number of 
cyclones, especially those at higher frequencies and smaller scales, meantime the second shows 
more accuracy in defining cyclone centers, lower frequencies, and large scales. A summary of the 
features of each dataset is shown in Table 5. 
 
 
                 Gramcianinov et al 
Lodise et al 
 
Area coverage 
North Atlantic Ocean           South 
Atlantic Ocean  
North Atlantic Ocean 
North Pacific Ocean 
Southern Oceans 
Cyclone tracking method 
Relative vorticity at 850 hPa 
MSLP and Laplace of MSLP 
Data source  
ERA5, CFS  
ERA5 
Period of time 
1979-2019 
1979-2020 
Table 5. Summary of datasets features 
 
The similarities between Gramcianinov et al. and Lodise et al. storms datasets are that both cover 
the North Atlantic during the same period from 1979 to 2019 and use ERA5 renalyses. The most 
notable differences between both datasets are the Earth coverage area and the cylone tracking 
==PAGE:22==
 
Climatology of Extratropical cyclones and its connection to Wind Energy Applications  
22 
method employed to analyse cyclones tracks. Gramcianinov et al. covers North and South Atlantic 
meantime Lodise et al. covers the North Atlantic, North Pacific, and the Southern Oceans. Clear 
different tracking algorithm methods are employed by Gramcianniov et al. (relative vortictiy) and 
Lodise et al. (MSLP).  
 
For illustration purposes, in the following we show the differences between the two EC track 
storms datasets recorded in January 2011, which is a period taken from [29]. The cyclones tracks 
ERA5 based from this month are shown in Figure 9 using both Gramcianinov et al. (magenta) 
and Lodise et al. (blue) data. It can be seen as the two types of methods provide different cyclone 
counts number and variability on the regional densities [29]. The two datasets are displayed 
separately in Figure 10 and 11, respectively, with Figure 10 from Gramcianinov et al. and Figure 
11 from Lodise et al. The cyclones tracked over the North Pacific Ocean by Lodise et al for the 
same month/year obtained from the computerized analysis are also presented in Figure 12. 
 
Figure 9. EC tracks in the North Atlantic for January 2011 from Gramcianinov et al. (magenta) and Lodise et al. (blue) 
both based on ERA5. Source: [29] 
 
Figure 10. EC tracks in the North Atlantic Ocean covering Eastern Coast of North America, Western Southern Europe, 
and Northern Europe for January 2011 from Gramcianinov et al. based on ERA5 
 
==PAGE:23==
 
Climatology of Extratropical cyclones and its connection to Wind Energy Applications  
23 
 
Figure 11. EC tracks in the North Atlantic Ocean covering Eastern Coast of North America, Western Southern Europe, 
and Northern Europe for January 2011 from Lodise et al. based on ERA5 
 
 
Figure 12. EC tracks in the North Pacific Ocean covering Western Coast of North America for January 2011 from 
Lodise et al. based on ERA5 
 
 
==PAGE:24==
 
Climatology of Extratropical cyclones and its connection to Wind Energy Applications  
24 
5. Methodology 
This chapter describes how I use the atmospheric metrics from the literature to reanalysis data 
in the content of wind energy. I describe the climatology of the two study areas and introduce 
how the data are processed and analysed to characterize the cyclones using the given storm 
datasets. I connect such characterization to wind energy applications as OWTs and OWFs. 
 
5.1 Metrics in climatology of extratropical cyclones 
The literature revised of selected articles of the subject of climatology of ECs shows that there is 
not a systematic and common approach to define the climatology of ECs as discussed in the 
previous chapter, counting with a large spectrum of different metrics. A summary of the more 
common metrics employed on the characterization of ECs is presented in the Table 6. 
 
Cyclone intensity 
Relative vorticity 
MSLP and local Laplacian of MSLP 
Wind speed 
MSLP and wind speed 
Cyclone counts number 
Number of storms tracks in a grid cell in a period of time 
(rate of occurrence) 
Cyclone frequency 
Number of times a cyclone centre passes grid cell within a given time 
interval 
Cyclone trajectory 
Wind direction, spatial distribution 
Cyclone lifetime 
Duration of the storm track 
Cyclone distance 
Travelling distance of the storm track from genesis to lysis 
Cyclone propagation speed 
Travelling distance per storm 
Table 6. Summary of cyclone feature metrics 
 
From the above, cyclone intensity and event number are the two characteristics more commonly 
used by scientists in many ECs climatology studies. Specifically, the intensity, which is one of the 
most key cyclone features, is characterized using different metrics by different authors, either 
independently employing vorticity, MSLP, the local Laplacian of MSLP, and the near surface 10 
meters wind speed or a combination of these: vorticity and MSLP, MSLP and local Laplacian of 
MSLP, or MSLP and wind speed.  
 
This heterogeneous way to address the characterization shows the challenges that this subject 
currently presents for the scientific community to come up with an agreement of a general 
adopted method caused by the high complexity of the ECs climatology subject.   
 
A large number of analyses of meteorological data of cyclones recorded over time have concluded 
that the intensity or strength of a cyclone increases with a higher relative vorticity, a higher 10 
meters wind speed, and a lower MSLP. The cyclone centre, where its higher destructive activity 
occurs, has been identified with the maximum vorticity or the minimum MSLP recorded in specific 
geographical points over its trajectory during its lifetime.  
 
Rate of occurrence of a cyclone provide useful information on how often a region can be impacted 
by the passing of a cyclone. Regions of the globe subject to a higher number of storms counts or 
==PAGE:25==
 
Climatology of Extratropical cyclones and its connection to Wind Energy Applications  
25 
higher cyclone frequency are exposed to a higher likelihood of damages to life, infrastructure, 
and property. 
 
Cyclone trajectory and lifetime features give an understanding of the spatial distribution and how 
long the extreme events live. The trajectory is characterized by looking at geographical coordi-
nates over time to determine the position of the cyclone with the wind direction as a metric that 
determines the trajectory. Distance and propagation speed provide data of how far and at what 
pace respectively the cyclone travels.  
 
In addition to the above-mentioned features there are other used on cyclones climatology such 
as temperature, precipitation, or turbulence that are beyond the scope of the thesis work. 
 
5.2 Metrics in wind energy 
The atmospheric cyclone features or characteristics described in section 5.1 applicable to cyclone 
climatology can be different from those relevant to wind energy. What can be defined as a strong 
storm from a wind energy perspective can be different from a climatology perspective. For in-
stance, wind speed is more direct and relevant for wind energy than relative vorticity or mean 
sea level pressure. However, these two metrics are quite important when characterizing a cyclone 
from the climatology point of view. 
An useful characterization of cyclones to apply to wind energy should address key aspects for 
wind energy, thus a general question could be ”what wind energy aspect will the cyclone feature 
metric be addressing?” or ”what wind energy aspect will the cyclone feature metric be used for?”. 
For instance, this study intends to connect the characterization of ECs to its impact on the OWFs 
development areas, Offshore Wind Turbine (OWT) wind energy production covering actual re-
gions of interest for deploying wind farms installation overseas. 
 
OWT data have been used from the publicly available reference wind turbine design IEA 15 MW 
Offshore Reference Wind described in the technical report issued by NREL dated on March 2020. 
 
To capture the impact caused by ECs to OWFs, we use some of the most used atmospheric 
metrics for weather extreme events, and they are listed in Table 7. 
 
Cyclone intensity 
Wind speed (and MSLP)  
Cyclone counts number 
Rate of occurrence inter-decadal, inter-annual, monthly, per season 
Cyclone trajectory  
Wind direction, spatial distribution 
Cyclone lifetime 
Duration of the storm track passing over the wind farm area 
Cyclone distance 
Travelling distance of the storm track from genesis to lysis 
Cyclone propagation speed 
Travelling distance per storm within the wind farm area 
Table 7. Cyclone feature metrics applicable to wind energy applications 
 
The working operation regime of a wind turbine is dependent of the wind speed at hub height 
being contained within a range of values. Most of the commercial wind turbines work with a cut 
in wind speed of 3 or 4 m/s and a cut off wind speed of 25 m/s measured at hub height. Thus, 
for OWTs, it is reasonable to use wind speed at hub height to characterize a cyclone intensity 
with the caveat that ERA5 reanalyses only provides winds at 100m which is not necessary the 
height of the OWT s nbeing installed nowdays. The cut-off wind speed can be used to calculate 
==PAGE:26==
 
Climatology of Extratropical cyclones and its connection to Wind Energy Applications  
26 
the wind energy production considering high winds forcing the turbine to stop. This has been 
analysed for the two study areas applying a wind speed threshold of 25 m/s (my strong storm 
threshold).  
 
The air pressure or sea level pressure is another metric widely used on ECs climatology charac-
terization; however, it is less applicable directly wind energy. To find any significative trend be-
tween wind speed and sea level pressure, 10m and 100m wind speed and MSLP at 850 hPa data 
for each study area have been examined, although I have not considered to present them in the 
results. Overall speaking, high winds occur when the sea level pressure of the cyclone is low, 
although this does not occur at all times. 
 
This study calculates cyclone counts rate of occurrence for the study areas in different periods of 
time, interdecadal, annually, monthly, and per season along with 100 m wind speed. Measure-
ment of cyclone intensity are useful information to assess impact on OWTs energy production 
and downtime.  
 
Cyclone trajectory adds additional information to wind speed and rate of occurrence what can be 
useful to assess the feasibility to develop OWFs in the ROIs. Furthermore, cyclone lifetime, dis-
tance, and propagation speed are valuable information to understand how long time, how long 
distance, and at what speed an EC can impact a OWF located in a ROI. These cyclone features 
along with trajectory, wind speed, and rate of occurrence can provide further datapoints when 
scheduling operation and maintenance activities. 
 
5.3 The two study areas 
The focus of my research covers both the East and West coasts offshore areas of the US due to 
the high interest to deploy investments on OWFs. Within these areas the Gulf of Maine and the 
Coast of California located in the Northeast and the West coast respectively have been selected 
as the ROIs for my research due to their high potential offshore wind development advised by 
EDF. These regions offer a high wind resource assessment, could use the in-land ports infrastruc-
ture located to a feasible distance from the location of the potential OWFs and they could connect 
to the US continental grid network. On the other side, both regions are subject to a large exposure 
of passing of extreme weather events as ECs, especially the East coast, therefore my study of 
the climatology in the specific regions becomes a key aspect to be scrutinized aiming to improve 
the relationship between OWFs and events of this nature.  
 
5.3.1 Gulf of Maine in US Northeast coast 
The Northeast coast of the US region extends along the shore of the Atlantic Ocean between 
latitudes 32.5° and 42° North covering from Maine to Virginia encompassing the marine coastlines 
of 11 states. Within its bounds are the Gulf of Maine, Cape Cod Bay, as well as estuarine systems 
including Long Island Sound, the New York Bight, the Delaware and Chesapeake Bays. 
 
In a wide perspective the central and northeast US areas are subject to extreme and hazardous 
wind events, tropical and extratropical cyclones, with the later classified in 3 types: Alberta Clip-
pers (AC), Colorado Lows (CL), and decaying tropical cyclones called nor’easters (NEs).  
 
==PAGE:27==
 
Climatology of Extratropical cyclones and its connection to Wind Energy Applications  
27 
The first type, AC, is associated with storm tracks that go across the US onshore 100° W longitude 
and north of 40° N latitude, with a genesis happening within the Canadian province of Alberta 
and they develop eastwards over the Great Lakes. The second, CL, when the cyclone track goes 
across the US onshore 100° W longitude and from 30° to 40° N latitude. The genesis of this EC 
type occurs within the state of Colorado and the track uses to move to the northeast. The third 
type is made by the called decaying tropical cyclones or the NEs with a storm genesis to south of 
30° N latitude over an offshore area and become a ECs moving north from the Gulf Mexico or 
over the Atlantic coast [12], [14].  
 
The physical process which drives the ECs over the US East coast is the baroclinic zone originated 
by the warm waters of the Gulf Stream and the cold continental air passing off the eastern limit 
of the mainland. Several studies sustain that the cyclogenesis in this area of the US occur due to 
a combination of baroclinic and diabatic processes. Furthermore, the location and frequency of 
the cyclones are largely related to the NAO climate pattern during its positive phase, which im-
pacts largely on the ECs activity in the US East coast during the cool seasons [12], [18].  
 
The ECs over eastern US occur with a higher frequency during the fall and winter seasons from 
October to March than during the spring and summer from April to September. This is potentially 
linked to the strong horizontal temperature gradients happening in this area during the cool sea-
sons [12]. 
 
As briefed in the introduction chapter, the Gulf of Maine is located at the northern extreme of the 
US East coast. Its eight offshore wind lease areas are shown in the Figure 13.   
 
 
Figure 13. Map of the eight final lease blocks for the Gulf of Maine within the Final Wind Energy Area                          
(September 2024). Source: [14] 
 
==PAGE:28==
 
Climatology of Extratropical cyclones and its connection to Wind Energy Applications  
28 
5.3.2 Coast of California 
The Coast of California in the US Weast coast extends along the shore of the Pacific Ocean 
between latitudes 32.5° and 42° North. Its more than 1,340 miles of coastline constitutes nearly 
three-fourths of the Pacific coastline of the US. It is bounded on the north by Oregon, on the east 
by Nevada and Arizona, and on the south by Mexico [28].  
 
The extreme weather events impacting the US West Coast are mostly driven by the called atmos-
pheric rivers (ARs) that move from the subtropics or tropics to the coast introduced in a previous 
section, being the primary source of heavy precipitation and flooding in this region. Studies have 
identified a higher number of ARs associated with ECs [20], [21]. One important climate feature 
that affects the weather events in the US West coast is the Aleutian Low (AL), a low-pressure 
system formed across the Aleutian Islands located in the North Pacific that occur during large 
winters. The ALs impacts largely the temperature and the wind patterns and increases rainfall 
through enhanced ARs especially in California [22]. They have been identified as the main source 
of the Pacific Decadal Oscillation (PDO) and is also interlinked with the ENSO. 
 
With regards to the physical process governing the ECs across the Coast of California these are 
made of a combination of baroclinic and adiabatic process, similar than in the US East coast. The 
seasonality of the ECs in this area of the US is characterized by a higher frequency in cool months 
(fall and winter) and less in warm months (spring and summer) [28].  
 
The Coast of California five offshore wind lease areas are shown in the Figure 14.   
 
==PAGE:29==
 
Climatology of Extratropical cyclones and its connection to Wind Energy Applications  
29 
 
      Figure 15. Map of the five final lease blocks for the Gulf of Maine within the Final Wind Energy Area 
      (September 2024). Soruce: [14] 
  
 
5.4 Data treatment and analysis 
This section describes how the ECs or storms data given are treated and provides an insight of 
the data analysis performed to characterize the ECs that have passed through the two study 
areas during representative periods of time, with high focus on the metrics to apply to OWFs and 
OWTs to be installed in such ROIs. 
 
The storms data used for this work comprise 492 and 504 months of 1 hourly ERA5 data produced 
for the work done by Gramcianinov et al. and Lodise et al. respectively. As discussed in chapter 
4, these storm datasets contain one key climatological variable, T42 relative vorticity in the 
Gramcianinov et al. datasets and minimum sea level pressure in the Lodise et al. datasets. Their 
storm datasets however don't include wind speed and wind direction that are relevant variables 
to apply to wind energy, thus, these other variables have been retrieved by DTU from C3S ob-
taining full ERA5 global 1 hourly time series after treating the eastward, u, and northward, v, 
==PAGE:30==
 
Climatology of Extratropical cyclones and its connection to Wind Energy Applications  
30 
horizontal components of wind speed, measured at 10 m and 100 m above the Earth surface. 
The final complete set of data variables obtained is shown in the Table 8. 
 
  Data variables  
               
                Coordinates 
wind_speed_at_100_metres 
Time, latitude, longitude  
wind_speed_at_10_metres 
Time, latitude, longitude  
air_pressure_at_mean_sea_level 
Time, latitude, longitude  
wind_direction_at_100_metres 
Time, latitude, longitude  
wind_direction_at_10_metres 
Time, latitude, longitude  
Table 8. ERA5 based global 1 hourly time series data variables obtained from the C3S service 
 
Two main factors drive the uncertainty of the data obtained from C3S to employ in the thesis 
work: the spatial domain and the resolution of the ERA5 reanalysis data covering such spatial 
domain.  
 
Aiming to narrow the spatial domain of the C3S climatology datapoints to an Earth zone which 
covers the study areas, a bounding box for which to retrieve the full ERA5 data has been defined 
for each of the two study areas. It is worth noticing that due to the tracking algorithms for the 
storm path of the cyclone's centres, the larger the bounding box size is, the larger the storms 
number passing a study area is. This has been proved in the data analysis performed. Thus, the 
choice of the bounding box size is a compromise between capturing a representative number of 
storm tracks passing over the study area and computed data handling/storage limitations. The 
bounding box defined for each the Gulf of Maine and the Coast of California is shown in the Figure 
16 and 17 respectively and its geographical coordinates in the Table 9. 
 
                  
 
Gulf of Maine 
 
Coast of California 
Latitude (degrees) 
46° N, 40° N 
45° N, 32.5° N 
 
Longitude (degrees) 
73° W, 65° W 
130° W, 117° W 
Table 9. Geographical coordinates of the bounding boxes defined for the Gulf of Maine and Coast of California 
 
Figure 17. Full ERA5 data bounding box defined for 
the Coast of California ROI in Google Earth 
Figure 16. Full ERA5 data bounding box defined for 
the Gulf of Maine ROI in Google Earth 
==PAGE:31==
 
Climatology of Extratropical cyclones and its connection to Wind Energy Applications  
31 
The second factor to assess is whether the resolution of the ERA5 reanalysis data is fine enough 
to capture a representative number of storms within a study area. The global climatology com-
munity has been making significant progress on the Reanalyses products resolution over the 
years. For instance, ERA5, the Reanalyses state of the art, provides a spatial resolution of 31 km 
globally, namely a grid cell, and 137 levels to 0.01 hPa while its predecessor ERA-Interim offered 
79 km globally and 60 levels to 0.1 hPa; ERA5 thus allows to capture storms tracked over an 
Earth area more accurately using the same spatial domain or bounding box. This ERA5 spatial 
domain resolution matches with the range of the dimensions of the OWFs leases areas within the 
two study areas, this being from 25 to 45 km. Therefore, when setting measuring points within 
a study area the criteria used has been to have a distance greater than 31 km between measuring 
points seeking to characterize the ECs using datapoints from different grid cells. 
 
Given the huge amount of data to review and process, Jupyter notebook, a web-based interactive 
computing platform publicly available, has been used. The Jupyter notebook has been employed 
with an isolated python environment created with conda, an open-source package management 
system. Two code scripts have been developed for this thesis work. The first for diagnosing and 
visualization of the C3S climatology data recorded over the study areas and the second for pro-
cessing the storm track data passing over the study areas combined with the C3S climatology 
data. 
 
The first script allows to obtain time slices for a given time step in a location area defined by 4 
geographical coordinates points for the data variables above mentioned: wind speed at 10m and 
100m, wind direction at 10m and 100m, and mean sea level pressure.  
 
5.4.1 Processing storms track data 
The storms track data are processed employing a second code script which can load the CSV files 
from the given storms datasets and is combined with the full ERA5 time series data obtained from 
C3S to find out which storms are passing a specific domain of interest (see more details below). 
The code works with both Gramcianinov et al. and Lodise et al. databases and compute those 
metrics to characterize the long-term ECs as described in the datasets review chapter: wind 
speed, wind direction, mean sea level pressure, storms count, it also presents the storms trajec-
tory or path, calculates the storm lifetime, and the distance between two consecutive storms 
track points.  
 
A post-processing was applied to both datasets CSV files; a transformation of the geographical 
coordinates for Gramcianinov et al. raw data to match the definition in the ERA5 data and the 
creation of a global storm identification for Lodise et al. raw data to relates its files to a unique 
index within a given domain.   
 
The script checks which storms are passing the domain of interest by checking if latitude and 
longitude of storm centre are lying between minimum and maximum values. It can query and 
group in between time periods when the storms track pass over a domain of interest. With a 
reduced set of relevant storms, the code slices the ERA5 data and uses the time stamps of the 
storm dataset to extract only the relevant time stamps of the complete ERA5 dataset to obtain 
wind speed, wind direction, and mean sea level pressure. Two aspects have been considered 
before using the time stamps; to deal with the duplication of storms as multiple storms can occur 
simultaneously within the domain and to address the events which are not in chronological order.  
==PAGE:32==
 
Climatology of Extratropical cyclones and its connection to Wind Energy Applications  
32 
 
6. Results 
This chapter presents the characterization of the long-term ECs in the two study areas focusing 
on wind energy applicable metrics, including the inter-decadal, inter-annual, and seasonal trends 
from a qualitative and quantitative perspective, connecting it to OWTs and OWFs to be installed 
in such areas to be used for assessment of the OWFs development areas, wind energy production, 
and operation and maintenance activities. 
 
The chapter is divided in two main sections, one for each study area, the Gulf of Maine and the 
Coast of California OWFs lease areas, with each comprising subsections to tackle the relevant 
cyclone features discussed in the methodology chapter. 
 
6.1 Characterization of cyclones over the Gulf of Maine lease 
areas 
6.1.1 Assumptions 
A spatial framework has been employed comprising of two steps, firstly, a wider bounding box 
defined to retrieve the full ERA5 data from C3S (black shaded polygon in Figure 18), and secondly, 
a narrower bounding box (orange polygon in Figure 18) containing the two Gulf of Maine OWFs 
Development Zones (Northern and Southern areas), which comprise the eight BOEM OWFs lease 
areas. Additionally, two reduced bounding boxes (yellow polygons in Figure 18) within the previ-
ous OWFs Development Zones have been considered, fitting the OWFs lease areas with a south-
ern and northern zone called OWFs Development Zone 1 and 2 respectively. 
 
The bounding boxes have been used to compute cyclones features such as cyclones trajectory 
(see section 6.1.2), cyclones count number (see section 6.1.3), cyclones lifetime (see section 
6.1.5). Additionally, one latitude/longitude point falling within each OWF Development Zone has 
been defined, which have been employed to calculate cyclones intensity, (see section 6.1.4) and 
active power and non-generated production for wind speeds above 25 m/s (see section 6.1.6). 
In this regard, it is worth noticing that on time series analysis, I treat the ERA5 grid cell as 
equivalent to a single latitude/longitude point since I look at wind farms that are located at a 
fixed location. Moreover, I used the nearest neighbor interpolation method when running the 
script for the computations, i.e. the time series is extracted at the closest ERA5 grid point to the 
latitude/longitude points selected. The bounding boxes’ and the latitude/longitude points coordi-
nates employed are shown in Table 10. 
==PAGE:33==
 
Climatology of Extratropical cyclones and its connection to Wind Energy Applications  
33 
 
 
                                                 Latitude range (degrees) 
     Longitude range (degrees) 
Full ERA5 data from C3S bounding 
box (black polygon) 
46° N, 40° N 
 
73° W, 65° W 
OWFs two joint Development Zones 
bounding box (orange polygon) 
44.51° N, 41° N 
 
71° W, 67° W 
OWFs Development Zone 1 bound-
ing box (southern yellow polygon) 
42.53° N, 41.82° N 
 
69.63° W, 68.44° W 
OWFs Development Zone 2 bound-
ing box (northern yellow polygon) 
43.38° N, 42.94° N 
 
68.99° W, 68.28° W 
DZ1_Measuring Point 1 within OWFs 
Development Zone 1 bounding box 
42.05° N 
 
68.75° W 
DZ1_Measuring Point 2 within OWFs 
Development Zone 1 bounding box 
41.84° N 
 
69.41° W 
Table 11. Geographical coordinates of the four bounding boxes and Measuring Points defined for the OWFs Gulf of 
Maine study area 
 
The temporal framework selected encompasses 40 years of ERA5 Reanalysis data obtained from 
C3S provided by DTU, ranged from 1979 to 2019, and the storms datasets from Gramcianinov et 
al. and Lodise et al. works. It is noted that the individual storm lifetime of my research is com-
puted within the defined spatial domains, although the whole storm lifetime is greater, being 24h 
in both Gramcianinov et al. and Lodise et at. Works. The same occurs with the minimum threshold 
for storm travelling distance, which is 1000 km displacement used by Gramcianinov et al. and 
500 km from cyclone center by Lodise et al. works.  
Figure 18. Spatial framework of the four bounding boxes and the Measuring Points de-
fined for the OWFs Gulf of Maine study area 
==PAGE:34==
 
Climatology of Extratropical cyclones and its connection to Wind Energy Applications  
34 
 
6.1.2 Cyclones trajectory 
The trajectory of the relevant cyclones passing through the Gulf of Maine OWFs Development 
Zones for 1979 - 2019 (Figure 19) and for each 10 years (Figure 20) employing both Gramcianinov 
et al. and Lodise et al. datasets are presented in the following. For illustration purposes the annual 
cyclones that occurred in 1979 and 2019 are also presented in Figure 21, these being the first 
and last year of the study period. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 19. Annual cyclones tracks passing the OWFs Development Zones employing Gramcianinov et al. (pink) 
and Lodise et al. (blue) datasets for 1979 and 2019 
==PAGE:35==
 
Climatology of Extratropical cyclones and its connection to Wind Energy Applications  
35 
 
 
 
Figure 20. Inter-decadal cyclones tracks passing the OWFs Development Zones employing Gramcianinov et al. 
(pink) and Lodise et al. (blue) datasets for the periods 1979-1988, 1989-1998, 1999-2008, 2009-2019 
==PAGE:36==
 
Climatology of Extratropical cyclones and its connection to Wind Energy Applications  
36 
         
 
 
As anticipated in the literature review chapter, the cyclones tracked using Gramcianinov et al. 
relative vorticity method shows a higher number of tracks than Lodise et al. MSLP method, prov-
ing that the first has a greater accuracy to detect small scale features added to different thresh-
olds for lifetime and displacement of the cyclones.   
 
6.1.3 Cyclones count number 
As initially seen in section 6.1.2, Gramcianinov et al. work captures a higher number of tracks 
than Lodise et al. work, thus the first out of the two storms dataset has been used for the analysis 
of cyclones counts in the Gulf of Maine OWFs Development Zones. Counts number or occurrence 
rate of cyclones centers passing over the bounding box defined for the OWFs Development Zones 
have been computed, generating inter-decadal, inter-annual years, and seasonal trends from 
1979 to 2019. For the seasonal trends December-January-February (DJF), March-April-May 
(MAM), June-July-August (JJA), September-October-November (SON) have been considered. For 
comparison purposes, the occurrence rate has also been computed for cyclones centers passing 
over the bounding box defined for the full ERA5 data obtained from C3S, and the bounding boxes 
of each OWFs Development Zone 1 and 2, applying the same time scale and cyclones datasets. 
Firstly, inter-decadal results are presented (Figures 22 and 23 and Table 12), then inter-annual 
results (Figures 24 and 25 and Table 13) to follow by results per season for each 10-year period 
(Figures 26 to 29 and table 14). 
 
 
Figure 21. Annual cyclones tracks passing the OWFs Development Zones employing Gramcianinov et al. (pink) 
and Lodise et al. (blue) datasets for 1979 and 2019 
==PAGE:37==
 
Climatology of Extratropical cyclones and its connection to Wind Energy Applications  
37 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 23. Inter-decadal occurrence rate of cyclones passing over OWFs Gulf of Maine Development Zone 1 
and 2 bounding boxes using Gramcianinov et al. storms data 
Figure 22. Inter-decadal occurrence rate of cyclones passing over the OWFs Gulf of Maine full ERA5 data and 
the Development Zones bounding boxes using Gramcianinov et al. storms data 
==PAGE:38==
 
Climatology of Extratropical cyclones and its connection to Wind Energy Applications  
38 
 
Time period 
Full ERA5 data 
from C3S bound-
ing box 
OWFs 
development 
zones bounding 
box 
OWFs develop-
ment zones 1 
bounding box 
OWFs develop-
ment zone 2 
bounding box 
Size (km2) 
432,562 
127,060 
7,947 
2,851 
1979-2019 
2,976 
1,542 
279 
141 
1979-1988 
689 
357 
68 
29 
1989-1998 
731 
374 
69 
35 
1999-2008 
751 
386 
77 
38 
2009-2019 
806 
425 
65 
39 
median 
741 
380 
68.5 
36.5 
average 
744.25 
385.5 
69.75 
35.25 
Standard deviation 
48.60 
28.90 
5.12 
4.5 
Table 12. All years, inter-decadal counts passing through the Gulf of Maine bounding boxes employing Gramcianinov et 
al. 
 
The results show a large dependency between the size of the bounding box and the counts of 
cyclones passing over a determined spatial domain. The inter-decadal cyclone count number 
and their statistics obtained in the Gulf of Maine OWFs Development Zones bounding box show 
an increase of the number of cyclones over time, with 357 counts for 1979-1988, 374 counts for 
1989-1998, 386 counts for 1999-2000, and 425 counts for 2009-2019. They present a variability 
from 1979 to 2019 of minus 28 counts and plus 39 counts around an average of 386 counts for 
each 10 years period and a standard deviation of 29 counts. These results agree with the 
cyclones count computed for the wider bounding box used for the full ERA5 data from C3S, 
yielding an average of 744 counts and a standard deviation of 49 counts. When looking at 
each of the two reduced OWFs development zones, the cyclones count results are much lower 
with an average of 70 counts and a standard deviation of 5 counts in the OWFs development 
zone 1, and an average of 35 counts and a standard deviation of 4 counts in the OWFs 
development zone 2 for each 10-year period. This is due to the cyclone centers passing over 
those reduced bounding box decay substantially, although this does not protect the OWTs to be 
exposed to strong cyclones leading to high winds stopping the turbine or high aerodynamic loads 
which might cause their structural damage.  
 
 
==PAGE:39==
 
Climatology of Extratropical cyclones and its connection to Wind Energy Applications  
39 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 24. Inter-annual occurrence rate of cyclones passing over the full ERA5 data and the OWFs Gulf of 
Maine Development Zones bounding boxes using Gramcianinov et al. storms data 
Figure 25. Inter-annual occurrence rate of cyclones passing over OWFs Gulf of Maine Development Zone 1 
and 2 bounding boxes using Gramcianinov et al. storms data 
==PAGE:40==
 
Climatology of Extratropical cyclones and its connection to Wind Energy Applications  
40 
Time period 
Full ERA5 
data from 
C3S bounding 
box 
OWFs 
development 
zones 
bounding box 
OWFs 
development 
zone 1 
bounding box 
OWFs 
development 
zone 2 
bounding box 
1979 
63 
28 
6 
1 
1980 
70 
35 
4 
4 
1981 
68 
39 
7 
2 
1982 
62 
36 
3 
4 
1983 
63 
28 
9 
2 
1984 
75 
36 
7 
4 
1985 
68 
40 
5 
1 
1986 
79 
42 
9 
2 
1987 
69 
40 
12 
5 
1988 
72 
33 
6 
4 
1989 
74 
46 
7 
8 
1990 
81 
42 
9 
2 
1991 
70 
34 
6 
3 
1992 
79 
42 
8 
3 
1993 
73 
39 
4 
3 
1994 
78 
37 
7 
5 
1995 
55 
30 
6 
1 
1996 
83 
38 
5 
3 
1997 
75 
34 
11 
3 
1998 
64 
32 
6 
4 
1999 
72 
31 
5 
3 
2000 
96 
50 
9 
5 
2001 
64 
32 
11 
3 
2002 
75 
48 
7 
6 
2003 
84 
37 
5 
4 
2004 
63 
32 
7 
3 
2005 
70 
38 
8 
2 
2006 
85 
37 
7 
4 
2007 
71 
41 
14 
6 
2008 
72 
40 
4 
2 
2009 
73 
44 
6 
9 
2010 
72 
38 
4 
6 
2011 
70 
42 
10 
4 
2012 
68 
32 
6 
4 
2013 
65 
33 
5 
2 
2014 
73 
32 
9 
1 
2015 
79 
44 
5 
4 
2016 
70 
34 
1 
1 
2017 
80 
38 
7 
4 
2018 
73 
37 
5 
0 
2019 
83 
51 
7 
4 
median 
72 
37.30 
6.90 
3.22 
average 
73 
38 
7 
3 
Standard deviation 
7.59 
5.50 
2.51 
1.85 
 
 
 
 
Table 13. Inter-decadal, and inter-annual cyclones counts passing through the Gulf of Maine bounding boxes 
employing Gramcianinov e al 
==PAGE:41==
 
Climatology of Extratropical cyclones and its connection to Wind Energy Applications  
41 
 
 
Figure 27. Occurrence rate of cyclones per season passing over the Gulf of Maine OWFs Development Zones 
using Gramcianinov et al. storms data 
Figure 26. Occurrence rate of cyclones per season passing over the OWFs Gulf of Maine full ERA5 data using 
Gramcianinov et al. storms data 
==PAGE:42==
 
Climatology of Extratropical cyclones and its connection to Wind Energy Applications  
42 
 
 
Figure 28. Occurrence rate of cyclones per season passing over the Gulf of Maine OWFs Development Zone 1 
using Gramcianinov et al. storms data 
Figure 29. Occurrence rate of cyclones per season passing over the Gulf of Maine OWFs Development Zone 2 
using Gramcianinov et al. storms data 
==PAGE:43==
 
Climatology of Extratropical cyclones and its connection to Wind Energy Applications  
43 
 
Time period 
Season 
Full ERA5 data 
from C3S bound-
ing box 
OWFs 
development 
zones 
bounding box 
OWFs 
development 
zone 1 
bounding box 
OWFs 
development 
zone 2 
bounding box 
1979-2019 
DJF 
870 
444 
76 
28 
 
MAM 
737 
387 
72 
43 
 
JJA 
687 
333 
54 
34 
 
SON 
613 
329 
70 
32 
1979-1988 
DJF 
194 
89 
20 
4 
 
MAM 
175 
99 
21 
16 
 
JJA 
171 
83 
12 
6 
 
SON 
152 
86 
15 
3 
1989-1998 
DJF 
218 
107 
11 
4 
 
MAM 
196 
99 
23 
7 
 
JJA 
158 
73 
8 
8 
 
SON 
161 
96 
27 
16 
1999-2008 
DJF 
230 
121 
24 
11 
 
MAM 
183 
93 
18 
9 
 
JJA 
176 
89 
18 
10 
 
SON 
168 
84 
17 
8 
2009-2019 
DJF 
251 
142 
23 
12 
 
MAM 
209 
112 
14 
11 
 
JJA 
202 
98 
16 
11 
 
SON 
147 
73 
12 
5 
Table 14. Cyclones counts per season passing through the Gulf of Maine bounding boxes employing Gramcianinov et al. 
 
Overall speaking, the results for each season over the year presented in cumulative 10 years 
periods from 1979 to 2019 and the full ERA5 data from C3S spatial domains computed for the 
OWFs development zones show the larger cyclones count in winter (DJF) and fall (SON) seasons 
with spring (MAM) and summer (JJA) being the calmer seasons. As previously mentioned, the 
more reduced the spatial domain where computing data is, the less representative the storms 
occurrence rate is, as proved from the results obtained for the OWFs development zones 1 and 
2. The development zone 1 still follows the trend of the wider spatial domains with light devia-
tions, however the pattern shown for the development zone 2 when calculating the cyclones 
occurrence rate does not, hence is not representative due to its reduced bounding box. 
 
6.1.4 Cyclones intensity 
As discussed in the literature review chapter the climatology community widely agree to define 
the intensity or strength of a cyclone employing either maximum relative vorticity or minimum 
mean sea level pressure of cyclone centers over its trajectory as employed by Gramcianinov et 
al. and Lodise et al. This definition should be amended to apply to wind energy applications, being 
the wind speed above a certain threshold the more relevant variable, which I have chosen to be 
25 m/s as the WT cut-off. This section of my study focuses on this variable to determine the 
intensity.  
 
As done with the tracks and counts I have run computations to characterize the intensity of the 
long-terms ECs connecting it to the OWFs study area, presenting their results graphically (Tables 
15 and 16) and numerically (Table 17). The motivation of making such graphical representation 
==PAGE:44==
 
Climatology of Extratropical cyclones and its connection to Wind Energy Applications  
44 
and quantification is to determine possible impacts on the defined OWFs development areas, their 
wind energy production, and operation and maintenance activities.  
 
The domain which I have selected is the Gulf of Maine OWFs Development Zones covering two 
different grid cells for 1979-2019 and every 10-year periods. Specifically, the grid cells selected 
for the characterization have been two latitude/longitude points within the Development Zone 1 
(southern area) named DZ1_Measuring Point 1 and 2 (Figure 18). The results encompass the 
following metrics: 
 
- 
Hourly wind speed at 100 m occurrence rate within (4-25 m/s) and without (<4 and >25 
m/s) the operational wind speed regime of a WT for the Full ERA5 data from C3S, 
Gramcianinov et al. and Lodise et al. storms data. 
- 
Wind speed at 100 m above 25 m/s occurrence rate for the Full ERA5 data from C3S, 
Gramcianinov et al. and Lodise et al. storms data. 
- 
Wind roses for the Full ERA5 data from C3S, Gramcianinov et al. and Lodise et al. storms 
data. 
- 
Wind speed distribution and Weibull fit for the Full ERA5 data. 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:45==
 
Climatology of Extratropical cyclones and its connection to Wind Energy Applications  
45 
GULF OF MAINE DEVELOPMENT ZONE 1 (SOUTHERN) POINT 1 
1979-2019 
Data 
variable 
Full ERA5 data 
Reduced Gramcianinov et al. data 
Reduced Lodise et al. data 
1h wind 
speed oc-
currence 
rate (nor-
malized) 
1h wind 
speed 
>25m/s oc-
currence 
rate 
 
 
 
Wind rose 
1h wind 
speed distri-
bution prob-
ability and 
Weibull fit 
(only for 
Full ERA5 
data) 
 
Weibull shape (k) 2.119 
Weibull scale (A) 10.589 m/s 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:46==
 
Climatology of Extratropical cyclones and its connection to Wind Energy Applications  
46 
GULF OF MAINE DEVELOPMENT ZONE 1 (SOUTHERN) POINT 1 
1979-1988 
Data 
variable 
Full ERA5 data 
Reduced Gramcianinov et al. data 
Reduced Lodise et al. data 
1h wind 
speed oc-
currence 
rate (nor-
malized) 
1h wind 
speed 
>25m/s oc-
currence 
rate 
 
 
 
Wind rose 
1h wind 
speed distri-
bution prob-
ability and 
Weibull fit 
(only for 
Full ERA5 
data) 
 
Weibull shape (k) 2.112 
Weibull scale (A)10.468 m/s 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:47==
 
Climatology of Extratropical cyclones and its connection to Wind Energy Applications  
47 
GULF OF MAINE DEVELOPMENT ZONE 1 (SOUTHERN) POINT 1 
1989-1998 
Data 
variable 
Full ERA5 data 
Reduced Gramcianinov et al. 
data 
Reduced Lodise et al. data 
1h wind 
speed oc-
currence 
rate (nor-
malized) 
1h wind 
speed 
>25m/s oc-
currence 
rate 
 
 
 
Wind rose 
1h wind 
speed distri-
bution prob-
ability and 
Weibull fit 
(only for 
Full ERA5 
data) 
 
Weibull shape (k) 2.130 
Weibull scale (A) 10.596 m/s 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:48==
 
Climatology of Extratropical cyclones and its connection to Wind Energy Applications  
48 
GULF OF MAINE DEVELOPMENT ZONE 1 (SOUTHERN) POINT 1 
1999-2008 
Data 
variable 
Full ERA5 data 
Reduced Gramcianinov et al. 
data 
Reduced Lodise et al. data 
1h wind 
speed oc-
currence 
rate (nor-
malized) 
 
 
1h wind 
speed 
>25m/s oc-
currence 
rate 
Wind rose 
1h wind 
speed distri-
bution prob-
ability and 
Weibull fit 
(only for 
Full ERA5 
data) 
 
 
Weibull shape (k) 2.142 
Weibull scale (A) 10.638 m/s 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:49==
 
Climatology of Extratropical cyclones and its connection to Wind Energy Applications  
49 
GULF OF MAINE DEVELOPMENT ZONE 1 (SOUTHERN) POINT 2 
2009-2019 
Data 
variable 
Full ERA5 data 
Reduced Gramcianinov et al. 
data 
Reduced Lodise et al. data 
1h wind 
speed oc-
currence 
rate (nor-
malized) 
1h wind 
speed 
>25m/s oc-
currence 
rate 
 
 
 
Wind rose 
 
 
 
 
1h wind 
speed distri-
bution prob-
ability and 
Weibull fit 
(only for 
Full ERA5 
data) 
 
Weibull parameters are NaN as the a
lgorithm for the Weibull fit fails in thi
s measuring point 
 
 
 
 
Table 15. Histograms for the occurrence rate of 1h wind speed at 100m (normalized) [first row] and 1h wind speed at 
100 m above 25 m/s (counts) [second row], wind roses [third row], and 1h wind speed at 100m distribution with 
Weibull fit [fourth row] for 1979 - 2019 and inter-decadal over the Gulf Maine Development Zone 1 in Point 2, employ-
ing Full ERA5 data, Gramcianinov et al. storms data, and Lodise et al. storms data 
 
 
 
==PAGE:50==
 
Climatology of Extratropical cyclones and its connection to Wind Energy Applications  
50 
GULF OF MAINE DEVELOPMENT ZONE 1 (SOUTHERN) POINT 2 
1979-2019 
Data 
variable 
Full ERA5 data 
Reduced Gramcianinov et al. data 
Reduced Lodise et al. data 
1h wind 
speed oc-
currence 
rate (nor-
malized) 
1h wind 
speed 
>25m/s oc-
currence 
rate 
Wind rose 
1h wind 
speed distri-
bution prob-
ability and 
Weibull fit 
(only for 
Full ERA5 
data) 
 
Weibull shape (k) 2.133 
Weibull scale (A) 10.513 m/s 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:51==
 
Climatology of Extratropical cyclones and its connection to Wind Energy Applications  
51 
GULF OF MAINE DEVELOPMENT ZONE 1 (SOUTHERN) POINT 2 
1979-1988 
Data 
variable 
Full ERA5 data 
Reduced Gramcianinov et al. 
data 
Reduced Lodise et al. data 
1h wind 
speed oc-
currence 
rate (nor-
malized) 
1h wind 
speed 
>25m/s oc-
currence 
rate 
Wind rose 
1h wind 
speed distri-
bution prob-
ability and 
Weibull fit 
(only for 
Full ERA5 
data) 
 
Weibull parameters are NaN as 
the algorithm for the Weibull fit 
fails in this measuring point 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:52==
 
Climatology of Extratropical cyclones and its connection to Wind Energy Applications  
52 
GULF OF MAINE DEVELOPMENT ZONE 1 (SOUTHERN) POINT 2 
1989-1998 
Data 
variable 
Full ERA5 data 
Reduced Gramcianinov et al. 
data 
Reduced Lodise et al. data 
1h wind 
speed oc-
currence 
rate (nor-
malized) 
1h wind 
speed 
>25m/s oc-
currence 
rate 
Wind rose 
1h wind 
speed distri-
bution prob-
ability and 
Weibull fit 
(only for 
Full ERA5 
data) 
 
Weibull shape (k) 2.142 
Weibull scale (A) 10.542 m/s 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:53==
 
Climatology of Extratropical cyclones and its connection to Wind Energy Applications  
53 
GULF OF MAINE DEVELOPMENT ZONE 1 (SOUTHERN) POINT 2 
1999-2008 
Data 
variable 
Full ERA5 data 
Gramcianinov et al. data 
Lodise et al. data 
1h wind 
speed oc-
currence 
rate (nor-
malized) 
1h wind 
speed 
>25m/s oc-
currence 
rate 
Wind rose 
1h wind 
speed distri-
bution prob-
ability and 
Weibull fit 
(only for 
Full ERA5 
data) 
 
Weibull shape (k) 2.154   
Weibull scale (A) 10.550 m/s 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:54==
 
Climatology of Extratropical cyclones and its connection to Wind Energy Applications  
54 
GULF OF MAINE DEVELOPMENT ZONE 1 (SOUTHERN) POINT 2 
2009-2019 
Data 
variable 
Full ERA5 data 
Reduced Gramcianinov et al. 
data 
Reduced Lodise et al. data 
1h wind 
speed oc-
currence 
rate (nor-
malized) 
1h wind 
speed 
>25m/s oc-
currence 
rate 
Wind rose 
1h wind 
speed distri-
bution prob-
ability and 
Weibull fit 
(only for 
Full ERA5 
data) 
 
Weibull shape (k) 2.099 
Weibull scale (A) 10.528 m/s 
 
 
Table 16. Histograms for the occurrence rate of 1h wind speed at 100m (normalized) [first row] and 1h wind speed at 
100 m above 25 m/s (counts) [second row], wind roses [third row], and 1h wind speed at 100m distribution with Weibull 
fit [fourth row] for 1979 - 2019 and inter-decadal over the Gulf Maine Development Zone 1 in Point 1, employing Full 
ERA5 data, Gramcianinov et al. storms data, and Lodise et al. storms data 
 
 
 
==PAGE:55==
 
Climatology of Extratropical cyclones and its connection to Wind Energy Applications  
55 
GULF OF MAINE DEVELOPMENT ZONE 1 (SOUTHERN) POINT 1 
Time period 
Full ERA5 data 
Gramcianinov et al. data 
Lodise et al. data 
1979-2019 
300 
20 
40 
1979-1988 
80 
5 
7 
1989-1998 
60 
2 
9 
1999-2008 
55 
3 
8  
2009-2019 
110 
10 
16 
 
GULF OF MAINE DEVELOPMENT ZONE 1 (SOUTHERN) POINT 2 
Time period 
Full ERA5 data 
Gramcianinov et al. data 
Lodise et al. data 
1979-2019 
270 
24 
35 
1979-1988 
80 
6 
8 
1989-1998 
52 
2 
4 
1999-2008 
50 
7 
10 
 
2009-2019 
90 
9 
14 
 
Table 17. Maximum values of the occurrence rate of wind speeds above 25 m/s at 100m for 1979 - 2019 and inter-
decadal over the Gulf Maine Development Zone 1 in Point 1 and Point 2, employing Full ERA5 data, Gramcianinov et al. 
storms data, and Lodise et al. storms data 
 
Several findings have been obtained from the above figures and numbers, which are discussed 
here, focused on the results from wind speed above 25 m/s occurrence rate, wind roses, and 
wind speed distribution probability.  
 
- 
Occurrence rate of wind speed at 100 m above 25 m/s: 
Both points 1 and 2 within the OWFs Development Zones for the full ERA5 data, the 
Gramcianinov et al. storms data, and Lodise et al. storms data show the same trends 
over time. In both points the period 2009-2019 has had the highest occurrence rate of 
wind speeds above 25 m/s, yielding from 90 to 110 for the full ERA5 data, from 10 to 9 
for the Gramcianinov et al. storms data, and from 16 to 14 for the Lodise et al. storms 
data, followed from the period 1979-1988. Furthermore, the results show higher values 
using Lodise et al. than Gramcianinov et al. storms data in both points and for all periods. 
Using the maximum occurrence rate of wind speeds above 25 m/s as intensity or strength 
metric, I cannot conclude that the storms have been stronger with time from 1979 to 
2019 on the points selected, however I can conclude the strongest storms from 1979 to 
2019 have occurred over the 2009-2019 period. 
 
- 
Wind roses: 
The wind roses obtained show a consistent flow from southwest and west in both points 
1 and 2 for 1979 - 2019 and every 10 years periods. This occurs for the full ERA5 data, 
Gramcianinov et al. storms data, and Lodise et al. storms data, matching the wind roses 
presented in [9] for the wind energy leases areas of Massachusetts in the US Northeast 
coast, quite close to the Gulf of Maine. 
 
- 
Wind speed distribution probability and Weibull fit: 
The wind speed distribution probability along with the Weibull scale (A) and Weibull shape 
(k) parameters have been computed for the Full ERA5 data, which are in agreement with 
the results presented in [9], which show A values from 10.17 to 10.36 m/s and k values 
from 2.14 to 2.21, computed in the wind energy leases areas of Massachusetts. There 
are two time periods in which the fitting algorithm for the Weibull fit fails (1979-2019 for 
==PAGE:56==
 
Climatology of Extratropical cyclones and its connection to Wind Energy Applications  
56 
Point 1 and 1979-1988 for Point 2). On the other hand, it does not make sense to com-
pute this distribution probability for the storms datasets as these don't contain a repre-
sentative wind speed time series at all wind speed bins, hence the distribution will not 
follow the expected distribution.  
 
Additionally, for the characterization of the ECs intensity over time, hourly wind speeds at 100 m 
time series in one grid cell (Development Zone 1 Point 1) for the Full ERA5 data from C3S, 
Gramcianinov et al., and Lodise et al. storms data have been sorted from high to low wind speeds. 
The top three wind speeds for 1979-2019, inter-decadal, and inter-annual periods are presented 
in Table 18. 
 
 
==PAGE:57==
 
Climatology of Extratropical cyclones and its connection to Wind Energy Applications  
57 
Time 
period 
Full ERA5 
wind 
speed 
data 
(m/s) 
DZ1_MP1 
Gramcianinov 
et al. wind 
speed data 
(m/s) 
DZ1_MP1 
Lodise et 
al. 
DZ1_MP1 
Time 
period 
Full ERA5 
wind 
speed 
data 
(m/s) 
DZ1_MP1 
Gramcianinov 
et al. wind 
speed data 
(m/s) 
DZ1_MP1 
Lodise et 
al. 
DZ1_MP1 
1979-
2019 
36.31 
36.31 
36.31 
1997 
26.75 
22.57 
25.34 
35.41 
35.41 
35.41 
26.62 
21.85 
22.76 
34.45 
34.02 
34.45 
26.29 
21.63 
22.57 
1979-
1988 
28.60 
28.38 
28.20 
1998 
26.88 
20.70 
22.09 
28.59 
28.29 
27.74 
26.88 
20.36 
21.66 
28.59 
27.74 
27.63 
25.98 
19.79 
20.70 
1989-
1998 
34.02 
34.02 
34.02 
1999 
27.58 
27.20 
27.20 
33.68 
33.68 
33.68 
27.20 
24.75 
24.75 
33.01 
33.01 
33.01 
26.82 
24.57 
24.57 
1999-
2008 
36.31 
36.31 
36.31 
2000 
27.85 
26.42 
26.42 
35.41 
35.41 
35.41 
27.64 
25.10 
25.10 
32.95 
31.45 
32.95 
26.88 
23.66 
24.83 
2009-
2019 
34.45 
29.25 
34.45 
2001 
31.17 
22.22 
31.17 
34.36 
29.24 
34.36 
29.32 
20.91 
29.32 
34.34 
29.03 
34.34 
27.89 
19.15 
27.89 
1979 
26.98 
25.13 
26.25 
2002 
36.31 
36.31 
36.31 
26.25 
24.23 
25.59 
32.95 
23.08 
32.95 
26.09 
22.70 
24.23 
31.58 
20.86 
31.58 
1980 
28.59 
18.39 
22.39 
2003 
25.75 
20.86 
24.45 
28.48 
17.99 
20.59 
25.70 
20.51 
24.45 
28.45 
17.84 
20.26 
25.49 
20.14 
24.24 
1981 
28.59 
27.74 
27.74 
2004 
26.54 
21.12 
24.41 
28.30 
26.00 
26.00 
26.17 
20.83 
24.29 
27.81 
25.79 
25.61 
26.14 
20.78 
23.34 
1982 
28.20 
24.07 
28.20 
2005 
35.41 
35.41 
35.41 
27.31 
21.15 
27.31 
29.53 
27.81 
27.81 
26.64 
19.79 
26.64 
29.52 
27.71 
27.71 
1983 
28.60 
28.38 
22.24 
2006 
28.55 
22.11 
22.11 
28.38 
27.00 
21.44 
27.32 
21.50 
21.50 
27.51 
26.17 
21.30 
26.42 
20.73 
20.38 
1984 
28.35 
19.97 
25.18 
2007 
31.45 
31.45 
31.45 
28.19 
19.46 
24.54 
28.96 
26.50 
28.96 
27.72 
19.44 
24.27 
28.27 
25.12 
25.77 
1985 
27.13 
21.10 
22.40 
2008 
28.44 
23.21 
28.44 
27.01 
19.69 
21.43 
27.33 
22.88 
27.33 
26.80 
19.33 
21.10 
26.80 
22.70 
26.80 
 
 
==PAGE:58==
 
Climatology of Extratropical cyclones and its connection to Wind Energy Applications  
58 
Time 
period 
Full ERA5 
wind 
speed 
data 
(m/s) 
DZ1_MP1 
Gramcianinov 
et al. wind 
speed data 
(m/s) 
DZ1_MP1 
Lodise et 
al. 
DZ1_MP1 
Time 
period 
Full ERA5 
wind 
speed 
data 
(m/s) 
DZ1_MP1 
Gramcianinov 
et al. wind 
speed data 
(m/s) 
DZ1_MP1 
Lodise et 
al. 
DZ1_MP1 
1986 
26.04 
25.48 
25.48 
2009 
26.98 
25.64 
26.25 
25.93 
24.32 
24.88 
26.25 
21.90 
25.64 
25.67 
22.37 
24.82 
25.64 
20.91 
25.60 
1987 
28.29 
28.29 
27.63 
2010 
31.27 
20.40 
31.27 
27.86 
27.63 
26.92 
29.44 
19.39 
24.44 
27.63 
26.92 
21.81 
26.71 
19.16 
24.04 
1988 
26.43 
24.26 
25.21 
2011 
31.76 
26.78 
31.76 
25.91 
24.21 
25.03 
30.58 
26.25 
30.58 
25.30 
23.68 
22.83 
29.98 
26.20 
27.43 
1989 
26.74 
24.13 
25.42 
2012 
27.42 
22.95 
26.83 
26.68 
23.85 
24.13 
27.19 
21.14 
25.76 
26.38 
21.94 
23.85 
27.18 
20.75 
24.46 
1990 
25.37 
25.03 
23.95 
2013 
34.45 
26.65 
34.45 
25.29 
24.75 
23.93 
34.36 
25.01 
34.36 
25.13 
24.74 
23.85 
34.34 
23.63 
34.34 
1991 
34.02 
34.02 
34.02 
2014 
34.16 
29.24 
29.24 
33.68 
33.68 
33.68 
33.81 
27.06 
27.06 
33.01 
33.01 
33.01 
33.75 
26.16 
26.91 
1992 
28.19 
19.15 
23.58 
2015 
29.36 
22.35 
26.85 
27.60 
19.06 
21.56 
28.65 
22.22 
26.55 
27.56 
17.39 
20.97 
28.65 
22.01 
25.95 
1993 
30.63 
27.32 
28.71 
2016 
29.12 
21.37 
27.08 
30.57 
24.90 
26.94 
29.00 
20.91 
22.09 
30.18 
22.15 
25.10 
28.99 
20.40 
21.37 
1994 
28.82 
22.43 
27.15 
2017 
32.64 
29.03 
32.64 
28.73 
21.59 
26.97 
29.03 
26.48 
29.03 
28.72 
20.49 
26.90 
27.67 
25.58 
26.48 
1995 
29.24 
24.69 
22.59 
2018 
31.65 
25.16 
25.37 
28.66 
22.32 
20.85 
31.53 
24.88 
24.82 
27.58 
20.85 
20.43 
30.68 
23.15 
21.55 
1996 
28.44 
24.40 
24.40 
2019 
29.25 
29.25 
22.36 
28.24 
24.33 
24.33 
29.11 
27.49 
22.10 
28.16 
23.82 
23.82 
27.62 
26.19 
21.70 
Table 18. Quantification of strongest winds with the 3 top wind speeds at 100 m (m/s) for 1979-2019, inter-decadal and 
inter-annual reached over the Gulf Maine Development Zone 1 in Point 1 employing Full ERA5 data, Gramcianinov et al. 
storms data, and Lodise et al. storms data 
 
 
==PAGE:59==
 
Climatology of Extratropical cyclones and its connection to Wind Energy Applications  
59 
A clear trend for the strongest winds over time cannot be determined as high winds have occurred 
in alternative years. I can conclude that, out of the three datasets analyzed (full ERA5 data, 
Gramcianinov et al., and Lodise et al.) the strongest winds have been recorded in the full ERA5 
data for each time period. This suggests that the strongest winds are not caused by EC (as 
selected based on the two storm track datasets) indicating that there are other weather phenom-
ena that are actually that seem to be more important when it comes to the annual maximum.  
Finally, among the two storms datasets, Lodise et al. presents the strongest winds in most of the 
periods, what agrees with the findings obtained from the wind speed above 25 m/s occurrence 
rate discussed in section 6.1.4. 
 
6.1.5 Cyclones lifetime 
The lifetime or length of an individual cyclone is a quite important variable in climatology. From 
the literature review a cyclone travel between up to dozens of days. From an offshore wind energy 
perspective, a cyclone might cause impact when passing an OWF, what last only a few days, but 
is also important to gather data about its entire lifetime to assess the likelihood of its impact. If 
the length of a storm in a determined ROI is very long this could indicate that storms that are 
developing further away have a higher chance of hitting our OWF farm compared to regions 
where the lifetime of storms is short. Thus, to reduce the impact caused by ECs in OWFs is 
strongly recommended to look for areas where their lifetime is as short as possible. 
 
In my study I have calculated the occurrence rate of individual storm length within the selected 
bounding boxes covering the Gulf of Maine OWFs Development Zones from 1979 to 2019 and 
every 10 years within this period for Gramcianinov et al. and Lodise et al. storms data. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:60==
 
Climatology of Extratropical cyclones and its connection to Wind Energy Applications  
60 
GRAMCIANINOV ET AL. STORMS OCCURRENCE RATE 
Period 
Data variable 
Full ERA5 data 
Bounding box 
OWFs Development Zones 1&2 
Bounding box 
1979-2019 
Occurrence 
rate storm 
duration [.] 
 
 
Occurrence 
rate storm 
duration 
(normalized) 
[PDF] 
1979-1988 
Occurrence 
rate storm 
duration [.] 
 
 
Occurrence 
rate storm 
duration 
(normalized) 
[PDF] 
 
 
1989-1998 
Occurrence 
rate storm 
duration [.] 
Occurrence 
rate storm 
duration 
(normalized) 
[PDF] 
==PAGE:61==
 
Climatology of Extratropical cyclones and its connection to Wind Energy Applications  
61 
GRAMCIANINOV ET AL. STORMS OCCURRENCE RATE 
1999-2008 
Occurrence 
rate storm 
duration [.] 
Occurrence 
rate storm 
duration 
(normalized) 
[PDF] 
2009-2019 
Occurrence 
rate storm 
duration [.] 
Occurrence 
rate storm 
duration 
(normalized) 
[PDF] 
Table 19. Histograms for the occurrence rate of individual storm duration for 1979 - 2019 and inter-decadal over the 
Gulf Maine Development Zones employing Gramcianinov et al. and Lodise et al. storms data 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:62==
 
Climatology of Extratropical cyclones and its connection to Wind Energy Applications  
62 
LODISE ET AL. STORMS OCCURRENCE RATE 
Period 
Data variable 
Full ERA5 data 
Bounding box 
OWFs Development Zones 1&2 
Bounding box 
1979-2019 
Occurrence 
rate storm 
duration [.] 
 
 
Occurrence 
rate storm 
duration 
(normalized) 
[PDF] 
1979-1988 
Occurrence 
rate storm 
duration [.] 
 
 
Occurrence 
rate storm 
duration 
(normalized) 
[PDF] 
 
 
1989-1998 
Occurrence 
rate storm 
duration [.] 
Occurrence 
rate storm 
duration 
(normalized) 
[PDF] 
==PAGE:63==
 
Climatology of Extratropical cyclones and its connection to Wind Energy Applications  
63 
LODISE ET AL. STORMS OCCURRENCE RATE 
1999-2008 
Occurrence 
rate storm 
duration [.] 
Occurrence 
rate storm 
duration 
(normalized) 
[PDF] 
2009-2019 
Occurrence 
rate storm 
duration [.] 
Occurrence 
rate storm 
duration 
(normalized) 
[PDF] 
Table 20. Histograms for the occurrence rate of individual storm duration for 1979 - 2019 and inter-decadal over the Gulf 
Maine Development Zones employing Gramcianinov et al. and Lodise et al. storms data 
 
 
The results show how storms tracked by Gramcianinov et al. have a lifetime up to twice higher 
than Lodise et al. storms and its occurrence rate up to five times higher in storms of shorter 
duration. The lifetime goes from 30 to 60 h for Gramcianinov et al. and from 25 to 30 h for Lodise 
et al. data. The occurrence rates of storm duration go from 50 to 100 for each 10 years period 
and 400 for 1979 – 2019 for Gramcianinov et al. data, meantime Lodise et al. data go from 14 to 
25 inter-decadal and 70 for 1979 – 2019. These large differences must be related to the tracking 
algorithm methods and the different filters applied for both storms datasets; see methodology 
section. It also can be seen how the occurrence rate decreased in 1989 - 1998 respective of 1979 
- 1988 and increased again from 1989 - 1998 to 2009 – 2019 showing the same trends in both 
Gramcianinov et al. and Lodise et al. data. 
 
==PAGE:64==
 
Climatology of Extratropical cyclones and its connection to Wind Energy Applications  
64 
This gives an overview of how long a ECs might take to pass the Gulf of Maine OWFs Development 
Zones to schedule activities during development, construction, operation and maintenance 
phases. Looking closely at the duration of storms that have occurred in each year, for season or 
month, activities can be programmed aiming to optimize their performance and minimize down-
time and losses.  
 
Travelling distances of individual storms are clearly linked to their lifetime. Data show total indi-
vidual cyclone lengths above 1000 kms from genesis to lysis from 10 to 100 kms between track 
points for each hourly time stamp for both Gramcianinov et al. and Lodise et al. storms datasets, 
what yields a propagation speed of 10-100 km/h. In contrast, the OWFs of my study extends up 
to dozens of kms, thus, the number of cyclones which passed over the OWFs within the defined 
OWFs Development Zones on this thesis work will mostly be passing over the whole OWFs area 
subject to the evolution of its size, which is beyond of this thesis work. As occurs with cyclone 
lifetime, large cyclone distances might increase the likelihood of impacting an OWF and its infra-
structure.  
 
6.1.6 Active power and annual energy production 
To further connect the characterization of the long-term ECs to the OWFs planned to be 
developed in the Gulf of Maine Development Zones investigated in this thesis work, computations 
to calculate the active power output and gross energy production per year for a theoritical 
operational OWT installed within such Development Zones have been performed. 
 
I have assumed a publicly available OWT power curve from the IEA 15MW Reference Wind 
Turbine report issued by NREL dated on March 2020 [36], which parameters are shown in Table 
21, including wind speed, power, power coefficient (Cp), thrust, and thrust coefficient (Ct). The 
cut-in and cut-off wind speed values of this OWT is 3 and 25 m/s respectively. 
 
Wind Speed [m/s] 
Power [kW] 
Cp [-] 
Thrust [kN] 
Ct [-] 
2.999999831 
70.021377 
0.100335552 
593.964861 
0.819748943 
3.499999916 
301.9937 
0.272197208 
659.768436 
0.801112031 
4 
595.088475 
0.359305118 
744.019844 
0.808268424 
4.500000084 
964.887394 
0.409156685 
844.283886 
0.821910918 
4.750000126 
1185.081978 
0.42729002 
896.218567 
0.822876237 
5.000000169 
1429.216889 
0.441819614 
950.66647 
0.823265981 
5.249999874 
1695.245223 
0.452708049 
1013.407273 
0.830989358 
5.999999663 
2656.263808 
0.475270298 
1206.649681 
0.834932456 
6.199999966 
2957.216831 
0.479478644 
1260.317718 
0.833618598 
6.40000027 
3275.743373 
0.482871263 
1315.060648 
0.83180478 
6.499999747 
3442.669566 
0.484447627 
1340.858086 
0.829011103 
6.55000016 
3528.654678 
0.485186337 
1353.03462 
0.826909201 
6.599999899 
3614.989064 
0.485905846 
1365.170435 
0.824740997 
6.700000051 
3791.164267 
0.487114154 
1389.573781 
0.820429675 
6.800000202 
3971.967845 
0.488094793 
1414.180748 
0.816176257 
6.900000354 
4155.58904 
0.488866488 
1437.989395 
0.811200233 
6.919999845 
4192.387051 
0.488988058 
1442.160463 
0.809740903 
6.929999928 
4210.773549 
0.489050152 
1443.944251 
0.808780765 
==PAGE:65==
 
Climatology of Extratropical cyclones and its connection to Wind Energy Applications  
65 
Wind Speed [m/s] 
Power [kW] 
Cp [-] 
Thrust [kN] 
Ct [-] 
6.94000001 
4228.841377 
0.489088858 
1446.095476 
0.808102306 
6.950000093 
4247.186435 
0.489114531 
1448.433817 
0.807566626 
6.960000175 
4265.458105 
0.489127764 
1451.063716 
0.807251977 
6.969999584 
4283.898392 
0.48915576 
1453.280931 
0.80662442 
6.980000341 
4301.948494 
0.489165047 
1456.152592 
0.806495512 
6.989999749 
4320.289911 
0.489154466 
1459.581324 
0.806806173 
6.999999831 
4339.296326 
0.489163867 
1462.408574 
0.806651158 
7.499999916 
5338.82324 
0.489224161 
1618.598616 
0.805469658 
8 
6481.116995 
0.489263048 
1785.688325 
0.804571567 
8.500000084 
7774.570984 
0.48928802 
1963.797766 
0.803949121 
9.000000169 
9229.227024 
0.489293116 
2153.76621 
0.803904895 
9.500000253 
10855.04374 
0.489304304 
2354.153957 
0.803708734 
10.00000034 
12661.25448 
0.489319143 
2565.156695 
0.80345211 
10.2499997 
13638.148 
0.48938292 
2670.036159 
0.801706154 
10.49999975 
14660.65727 
0.489378059 
2782.638159 
0.801777393 
10.60000057 
14994.84635 
0.486507177 
2727.830431 
0.768657554 
10.70000005 
14994.64979 
0.472991558 
2582.325993 
0.70731525 
10.72000022 
14994.61195 
0.470349316 
2563.16707 
0.698507743 
10.73999971 
14994.55374 
0.467724941 
2545.414142 
0.690211963 
10.76000055 
14994.52082 
0.465119143 
2528.795404 
0.682335591 
10.78000004 
14994.55424 
0.462537044 
2513.190807 
0.674835939 
10.78400034 
14994.52965 
0.462021882 
2510.161326 
0.673371183 
10.78600049 
14994.53211 
0.461765284 
2508.666998 
0.672646111 
10.78699989 
14994.53141 
0.461636557 
2507.917813 
0.672283185 
10.78799997 
14994.51543 
0.46150846 
2507.17275 
0.671921569 
10.78899937 
14994.52466 
0.461380941 
2506.43983 
0.671564033 
10.78950042 
14994.59142 
0.461317766 
2506.078932 
0.671386994 
10.8000002 
14994.53984 
0.459972382 
2498.382011 
0.667639697 
10.89999968 
14994.4265 
0.447424184 
2433.69366 
0.635292304 
10.99999983 
14994.26629 
0.435324299 
2379.709865 
0.607277698 
11.24999987 
14994.02192 
0.406934831 
2271.612586 
0.548965866 
11.50000059 
14994.10762 
0.380965216 
2185.962064 
0.501379105 
11.75000063 
14994.17514 
0.357157168 
2114.041428 
0.460982977 
11.99999933 
14994.17331 
0.335295525 
2051.783979 
0.425965654 
12.99999949 
14994.76256 
0.263718683 
1861.059797 
0.32116631 
13.99999966 
14994.76121 
0.211136579 
1724.382126 
0.2511023 
14.99999983 
14994.75771 
0.171651956 
1619.130709 
0.201415182 
17.50000025 
14994.82665 
0.108080744 
1434.534952 
0.125653944 
20.00000067 
14994.82754 
0.072394937 
1314.275979 
0.08506697 
22.49999975 
14996.27008 
0.050842443 
1229.73494 
0.061026446 
24.99999882 
14997.62687 
0.037062292 
1168.739896 
0.045814967 
Table 21. Power curve parameters of the IEA 15 MW Reference Wind Turbine included in the NREL report dated on March 
2020. Source [9].  
 
==PAGE:66==
 
Climatology of Extratropical cyclones and its connection to Wind Energy Applications  
66 
To calculate the OWT active power output, the OWT IEA 15 MW power curve has been fed in 
with the raw wind speed time series for every year from 1979 to 2019 using the full ERA5 data 
for a determined grid cell or latitude/longitude point (Point 1) within the OWFs Development 
Zones. 
 
Furthermore, to come up with the installed capacity not used by the OWT due to strong storms, 
i.e. above 25m/s (my storm wind speed threshold), a cap limitation has been applied to the raw 
wind speed time series, replacing all values above 25m/s with a fixed value equal to 25 m/s, so 
the OWT active power output adds up power for wind speed values above the defined threshold 
when a storm is passing over the Point 1.  
 
Then I calculated the sum of power for the raw wind speed time series with and without the cap 
limitation. The difference gives the amount of installed capacity lost, noticing the losses are a 
blend between strong stroms and other weather phenomena as I have employed the Full ERA5 
data instead of the filtered storms data time series. Since the time series is available hourly, the 
sum of the power is actually equivalent to the total energy production. This implies the 
assumption that for each time stamp the turbine will produce the power P for 1 hour, i.e. until 
the next time stamp. Table 22 presents an example of the plots generated for OWT active power 
outputs employing the above mentioned wind speed time series with and without the cap 
limitation of wind speeds above 25 m/s in 1979, 1980, 2018, and 2019. Gross annual energy 
production in each case and non-generated energy production is shown in Table 23.   
 
 
 
==PAGE:67==
 
Climatology of Extratropical cyclones and its connection to Wind Energy Applications  
67 
Year 
Active power output 
with and without capping wind speed > 25 m/s 
Year 
Active power output 
with and without capping wind speed > 25 m/s 
1979 
2018 
1980 
2019 
Table 22. OWT IEA 15 MW active power outputs with capping wind speed above 25 m/s (orange) and without (blue) 
 
 
==PAGE:68==
 
Climatology of Extratropical cyclones and its connection to Wind Energy Applications  
68 
Year 
Gross en-
ergy pro-
duction 
without 
capping 
wind speed 
> 25 m/s 
(GWh) 
Hypothet-
ical Gross 
energy pro-
duction 
capping 
wind speed 
> 25 
m/s(GWh) 
Non-gener-
ated gross 
energy pro-
duction 
(GWh) 
Year 
Gross en-
ergy pro-
duction 
without 
capping 
wind speed 
> 25 m/s 
(GWh) 
Hypothet-
ical Gross 
energy pro-
duction 
capping 
wind speed 
> 25 
m/s(GWh) 
Non-gener-
ated gross 
energy pro-
duction 
(GWh) 
1979 
76.822 
77.047 
0.225 
2000 
77.221 
77.401 
0.180 
1980 
78.195 
78.495 
0.300 
2001 
73.752 
73.872 
0.120 
1981 
78.528 
78.917 
0.390 
2002 
80.540 
80.735 
0.195 
1982 
76.706 
76.826 
0.120 
2003 
74.932 
75.007 
0.075 
1983 
73.465 
73.645 
0.180 
2004 
77.178 
77.298 
0.120 
1984 
72.952 
73.162 
0.210 
2005 
74.775 
75.225 
0.450 
1985 
72.882 
73.032 
0.150 
2006 
80.521 
80.611 
0.090 
1986 
71.858 
72.038 
0.180 
2007 
77.087 
77.432 
0.345 
1987 
72.541 
72.811 
0.270 
2008 
73.919 
74.159 
0.240 
1988 
76.756 
76.846 
0.090 
2009 
74.968 
75.058 
0.090 
1989 
72.412 
72.487 
0.075 
2010 
79.124 
79.439 
0.315 
1990 
78.075 
78.165 
0.090 
2011 
75.920 
76.355 
0.435 
1991 
76.117 
76.432 
0.315 
2012 
69.466 
69.691 
0.225 
1992 
74.850 
75.165 
0.315 
2013 
76.288 
76.948 
0.660 
1993 
75.197 
75.467 
0.270 
2014 
75.316 
75.811 
0.495 
1994 
82.776 
83.031 
0.255 
2015 
74.779 
75.109 
0.330 
1995 
74.230 
74.395 
0.165 
2016 
76.979 
77.129 
0.150 
1996 
74.952 
75.327 
0.375 
2017 
78.777 
79.152 
0.375 
1997 
78.635 
78.920 
0.285 
2018 
78.809 
79.484 
0.675 
1998 
73.211 
73.316 
0.105 
2019 
76.018 
76.423 
0.405 
1999 
75.847 
75.907 
0.060 
 
Table 23. OWT IEA 15 MW gross annual energy production with (3rd and 7th columns) and without (2nd and 6th column) 
capping wind speeds above 25 m/s. Non-generated gross annual energy production (4th and 8th columns)   
 
The mean annual gross energy production of the above presented results yields 75.936 GWh, 
what matches the value of the OWT IEA 15MW of 77.4 GWh, which is stated in [36]. 
 
The standard deviation of the annual gross energy production for all years is 2.648 GWh. 
 
Assuming an offtaker energy price of $110/MWh taken from [37] and a OWT lifetime of 30 years, 
the non-generated revenues due to strong stroms for a single OWT yield $ 27,884 per year and 
$836,541 over its lifetime. Under the same assumptions and considering the OWF capacity to 
install in the Gulf of Maine Wind Energy Lease Area OCS-A-0569 (Figure 3) of 1716 MW [37], 
where the selected Point 1 falls, the non-generated revenues due to strong storms for a OWF 
yield $3,190,010 per year and $95,700,316 over its lifetime. These results do not account for 
losses from the OWF to the point of the network where the revenues are accounted and implies 
==PAGE:69==
 
Climatology of Extratropical cyclones and its connection to Wind Energy Applications  
69 
that the production remains the same in the operational working regime of the OWT with and 
without strong storms.  
 
 
6.2 Characterization of cyclones over the Coast of California 
lease areas 
 
6.2.1 Assumptions 
A spatial framework has been employed comprising of two steps. Firstly, a wider bounding box 
defined to retrieve the full ERA5 data from C3S (black polygon in Figure 30), and secondly, two 
narrower bounding boxes containing each of the two Coast of California OWFs Development 
Zones, which comprise the five BOEM OWFs lease areas; Development Zone 1 to the north (or-
ange polygon in Figure 30) and Development Zone 2 to the south (green polygon in Figure 30). 
I have tested several sizes of bounding boxes aiming to capture a representative number of 
storms to perform the analysis of the data variables.  
 
The criteria for the selection of the sizes of the bounding boxes for the Coast of California has 
been different than for the Gulf of Maine. In the Gulf of Maine, the two OWFs Development Zones 
1 and 2 have been combined under the same bounding box and each Development Zone sepa-
rately to compute calculations, meantime for the Coast of California the two OWFs Development 
Zones 1 and 2 have been employed separately. This is due to the reduced spatial domain of the 
location of the OWFs leases areas in the Gulf of Maine in comparison with the larger spatial 
domain which comprises the OWFs leases areas in the Coast of California. The bounding boxes’ 
and the latitude/longitude points coordinates employed are shown in Table 24.  
 
 
==PAGE:70==
 
Climatology of Extratropical cyclones and its connection to Wind Energy Applications  
70 
 
 
                                                  Latitude range (degrees) 
     Longitude range (degrees) 
Full ERA5 data from C3S bounding 
box (black polygon) 
45°N, 32.5°N 
130°W, 117°W 
OWFs Development Zone 1 bound-
ing box (northern orange polygon) 
43.68°N, 38.74° 
127.99°W, 123.00°W 
OWFs Development Zone 2 bound-
ing box (southern green polygon) 
38.16°N, 33.31°N 
120.56°W, 125.14°W 
 
DZ1_Measuring Point 1 within OWFs 
Development Zone 1 
41.20°N 
124.54°W 
DZ2_Measuring Point 1 within OWFs 
Development Zone 1 
35.76°N 
 
122.09°W 
Table 24. Geographical coordinates of the four bounding boxes defined for the OWFs Coast of California study area 
 
As for the Gulf of Maine the temporal framework selected encompasses 40 years of ERA5 Rea-
nalysis data obtained from C3S provided by DTU, ranged from 1979 to 2019, and the storms 
datasets from Lodise et al. works. 
 
6.2.2 Cyclones trajectory 
The trajectory of the relevant cyclones passing through the Coast of California OWFs Develop-
ment Zone 1 and 2 for 1979-2019 (Figure 31) and for each 10 years (Figure 32) employing Lodise 
et al. dataset are presented in Figure 31. For visualization purposes the annual cyclones that 
occurred in 1979 and 2019 are also presented in Figure 33. 
 
Figure 30. Spatial framework of the three bounding boxes and the two latitude/longitude 
points defined for the OWFs Coast of California study area 
==PAGE:71==
 
Climatology of Extratropical cyclones and its connection to Wind Energy Applications  
71 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 31. Cyclones tracks passing the Coast of California OWFs Development Zone 1 and 2 employing Lodise 
et al. (blue) dataset for the period 1979-2019 
Figure 32. Inter-decadal cyclones tracks passing the Coast of California OWFs Development Zone 1 and 2 employ-
ing Lodise et al. dataset for the period 1979-1988, 1989-1998, 1999-2008, 2009-2019 
==PAGE:72==
 
Climatology of Extratropical cyclones and its connection to Wind Energy Applications  
72 
 
    
It can be observed as the Coast of California OWFs Development Zone 1 has been exposed to 
many more cyclones than the Development Zone 2, what is in agreement with the winds de-
scribed in the literature review in that area of the Eastern North Pacific. 
 
6.2.3 Cyclones count number 
Occurrence rate of cyclones centers passing over the bounding box defined for each Coast of 
California OWFs Development Zone 1 and 2 have been computed, generating inter-decadal, inter-
annual years, and seasonal trends from 1979 to 2019. Also, the occurrence rate has also been 
computed for cyclones centers passing over the bounding box defined for the full ERA5 data 
obtained from C3S. Firstly, inter-decadal results are presented (Figures 34 and 35 and Table 25), 
then inter-annual results (Figures 36 and 37 and Table 26) to follow by results per season for 
each 10-year period (Figures 38 and 39 and table 27). 
 
 
Figure 33. Cyclones tracks passing the Coast of California OWFs Development Zone 1 and 2 employing Lodise 
et al. dataset for 1979 and 2019 
==PAGE:73==
 
Climatology of Extratropical cyclones and its connection to Wind Energy Applications  
73 
 
 
 
 
Figure 35. Inter-decadal occurrence rate of cyclones passing over the Coast of California OWFs Development 
Zone 1 and 2 bounding boxes using Lodise et al. storms data 
Figure 34. Inter-decadal occurrence rate of cyclones passing over the Coast of California Full ERA 5 data 
bounding box and the OWFs Development Zone 1 and 2 bounding boxes using Lodise et al. storms data 
==PAGE:74==
 
Climatology of Extratropical cyclones and its connection to Wind Energy Applications  
74 
  
Full ERA5 data from C3S 
bounding box 
OWFs development zones 
1 bounding box 
OWFs development zone 2 
bounding box 
Size (km2) 
1,557,975 
227,825 
219,456 
1979-2019 
544 
228 
118 
1979-1988 
113 
43 
26 
1989-1998 
144 
63 
33 
1999-2008 
134 
58 
28 
2009-2019 
143 
59 
29 
median 
138.5 
58.5 
28.5 
average 
133.5 
55.75 
29 
std 
14.39 
8.77 
2.94 
Table 25. All years, and inter-decadal occurrence rate of cyclones passing over the Coast of California Full ERA 5 data 
bounding box OWFs Development Zone 1 and 2 bounding boxes using Lodise et al. storms data 
 
As seen in the Gulf of Maine, the results show a large dependency between the size of the 
bounding box and the counts of cyclones passing over a determined spatial domain. The inter-
decadal cyclone count number and their statistics obtained in the Coast of California OWFs De-
velopment Zone 1 and 2 bounding boxes does not show a specific trend of increasing or decreas-
ing the number of cyclones over time. They present an average from 55 to 29 counts for each 
10 years period and a standard deviation from 9 to 3 counts. These results agree with the 
cyclones count computed for the wider bounding box used for the full ERA5 data from C3S, 
yielding an average of 133 counts and a standard deviation of 14 counts. A notable difference 
of the cyclone count number computed between the Gulf Maine and the Coast of California 
bounding boxes is that the latter has been exposed to a smaller number of cyclones. 
 
 
Figure 36. Inter-annual occurrence rate of cyclones passing over the Coast of California Full ERA 5 data 
bounding box using Lodise et al. storms data 
==PAGE:75==
 
Climatology of Extratropical cyclones and its connection to Wind Energy Applications  
75 
 
 
 
 
Figure 37. Inter-annual occurrence rate of cyclones passing over the Coast of California OWFs Development 
Zone 1 and 2 bounding boxes using Lodise et al. storms data 
==PAGE:76==
 
Climatology of Extratropical cyclones and its connection to Wind Energy Applications  
76 
Time period 
Full ERA5 data from C3S 
bounding box 
OWFs 
development zone 1 
bounding box 
OWFs 
development zone 2 
bounding box 
1979 
14 
8 
2 
1980 
9 
2 
0 
1981 
12 
7 
3 
1982 
12 
5 
3 
1983 
9 
4 
3 
1984 
10 
2 
2 
1985 
12 
6 
5 
1986 
10 
3 
2 
1987 
9 
1 
2 
1988 
16 
5 
4 
1989 
10 
6 
3 
1990 
9 
3 
1 
1991 
8 
2 
4 
1992 
20 
7 
2 
1993 
21 
8 
6 
1994 
14 
6 
6 
1995 
14 
11 
2 
1996 
13 
6 
4 
1997 
16 
3 
2 
1998 
19 
11 
3 
1999 
11 
5 
4 
2000 
12 
6 
3 
2001 
22 
10 
3 
2002 
15 
6 
3 
2003 
12 
4 
1 
2004 
12 
4 
4 
2005 
11 
7 
2 
2006 
13 
6 
3 
2007 
14 
7 
3 
2008 
12 
3 
2 
2009 
9 
4 
1 
2010 
17 
10 
1 
2011 
16 
7 
7 
2012 
14 
5 
6 
2013 
11 
4 
2 
2014 
8 
5 
2 
2015 
9 
5 
0 
2016 
11 
3 
2 
2017 
14 
8 
1 
2018 
13 
5 
1 
2019 
21 
7 
6 
median 
12 
5.27 
2.91 
average 
13 
6 
3 
std 
3.64 
2.40 
1.67 
Table 26. Inter-decadal, and inter-annual cyclones counts passing over the Coast of California Full ERA 5 data bounding 
box and the OWFs Development Zone 1 and 2 bounding boxes using Lodise et al. storms data 
==PAGE:77==
 
Climatology of Extratropical cyclones and its connection to Wind Energy Applications  
77 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 39. Occurrence rate of cyclones per season passing over the Coast of California OWFs Development 
Zone 1 using Lodise et al. storms data 
Figure 38. Occurrence rate of cyclones per season passing over the Coast of California Full ERA 5 data bound-
ing box using Lodise et al. storms data 
==PAGE:78==
 
Climatology of Extratropical cyclones and its connection to Wind Energy Applications  
78 
 
 
me period 
Season 
Full ERA5 data from 
C3S bounding box 
OWFs 
development zone 1 
bounding box 
OWFs 
development zone 2 
bounding box 
1979-2019 
DJF 
204 
93 
48 
 
MAM 
143 
59 
37 
 
JJA 
66 
19 
9 
 
SON 
104 
46 
16 
1979-1988 
DJF 
43 
17 
12 
 
MAM 
27 
11 
6 
 
JJA 
17 
3 
0 
 
SON 
27 
12 
8 
1989-1998 
DJF 
65 
32 
19 
 
MAM 
39 
18 
10 
 
JJA 
17 
4 
4 
 
SON 
25 
10 
0 
1999-2008 
DJF 
53 
20 
11 
 
MAM 
36 
15 
10 
 
JJA 
16 
8 
1 
 
SON 
29 
15 
6 
2009-2019 
DJF 
56 
28 
11 
 
MAM 
45 
16 
12 
 
JJA 
19 
5 
4 
 
SON 
24 
10 
2 
Table 27. Cyclones counts per season passing through the Coast of California full eR5 data bounding box and the OWFs 
Development Zone 1 and 2 using Lodise et al. storms data 
 
Generally, the cyclone count number computed for the OWFs Development Zone 1 and 2 and the 
full ERA5 data from C3S spatial domains show the larger cyclones count in winter (DJF) and 
spring (SON) seasons with summer (JJA) and fall (SON) being the calmer seasons. This agrees 
with the Gulf of Maine cyclones number computed for winter but different for the fall season.    
 
Figure 40. Occurrence rate of cyclones per season passing over the Coast of California OWFs Development 
Zone 2 using Lodise et al. storms data 
==PAGE:79==
 
Climatology of Extratropical cyclones and its connection to Wind Energy Applications  
79 
6.2.4 Cyclones intensity 
As done for the Gulf of Maine I have run computations to characterize the intensity of the long-
terms ECs connecting it to the OWFs study area of the Coast of California, presenting their results 
graphically (Tables 28 and 29) and numerically (Table 30).  
 
I have selected two spatial domains for this calculation, the Coast of California OWFs Develop-
ment Zone 1 and 2 separately for 1979-2019 and every 10-year periods. Specifically, the grid 
cells selected for the characterization have been one latitude/longitude point within the Develop-
ment Zone 1 (northern area) named DZ1_Measuring Point 1 and one latitude/longitude point 
within the Development Zone 2 (southern area) named DZ2_Measuring Point 1 (Figure 30). The 
results encompass the following metrics: 
 
- 
Hourly wind speed at 100 m occurrence rate within (4-25 m/s) and without (<4 and >25 
m/s) the operational wind speed regime of a WT for the Full ERA5 data from C3S, Lodise 
et al. storms data. 
- 
Wind speed at 100 m above 25 m/s occurrence rate for the Full ERA5 data from C3S, 
Lodise et al. storms data. 
- 
Wind roses for the Full ERA5 data from C3S and Lodise et al. storms data. 
- 
Wind speed distribution and Weibull fit for the Full ERA5 data. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:80==
 
Climatology of Extratropical cyclones and its connection to Wind Energy Applications  
80 
COAST OF CALIFORNIA DEVELOPMENT ZONE 1 (NORTHERN) POINT 1 
1979-2019 
Data 
variable 
Full ERA5 data 
Reduced Lodise et al. data 
1h wind 
speed oc-
currence 
rate (nor-
malized) 
1h wind 
speed 
>25m/s oc-
currence 
rate 
 
 
Wind rose 
1h wind 
speed distri-
bution prob-
ability and 
Weibull fit 
(only for 
Full ERA5 
data) 
 
Weibull parameters are NaN as the algorithm 
for the Weibull fit fails in this measuring point 
 
 
 
==PAGE:81==
 
Climatology of Extratropical cyclones and its connection to Wind Energy Applications  
81 
COAST OF CALIFORNIA DEVELOPMENT ZONE 1 (NORTHERN) POINT 1 
1979-1988 
Data variable 
Full ERA5 data 
Reduced Lodise et al. data 
1h wind 
speed occur-
rence rate 
(normalized) 
1h wind 
speed 
>25m/s oc-
currence rate 
 
 
Wind rose 
1h wind 
speed distri-
bution proba-
bility and 
Weibull fit 
(only for Full 
ERA5 data) 
 
Weibull parameters are NaN as the 
algorithm for the Weibull fit fails in 
this measuring point 
 
 
 
==PAGE:82==
 
Climatology of Extratropical cyclones and its connection to Wind Energy Applications  
82 
COAST OF CALIFORNIA DEVELOPMENT ZONE 1 (NORTHERN) POINT 1 
1989-1998 
Data variable 
Full ERA5 data 
Reduced Lodise et al. data 
1h wind 
speed occur-
rence rate 
(normalized) 
1h wind 
speed 
>25m/s oc-
currence rate 
 
 
Wind rose 
1h wind 
speed distri-
bution proba-
bility and 
Weibull fit 
(only for Full 
ERA5 data) 
 
Weibull shape (k) 1.760 
Weibull scale (A) 9.648 m/s 
 
 
 
==PAGE:83==
 
Climatology of Extratropical cyclones and its connection to Wind Energy Applications  
83 
COAST OF CALIFORNIA DEVELOPMENT ZONE 1 (NORTHERN) POINT 1 
1999-2008 
Data variable 
Full ERA5 data 
Reduced Lodise et al. data 
1h wind 
speed occur-
rence rate 
(normalized) 
 
 
1h wind 
speed 
>25m/s oc-
currence rate 
Wind rose 
1h wind 
speed distri-
bution proba-
bility and 
Weibull fit 
(only for Full 
ERA5 data) 
 
 
Weibull shape (k) 2.142  
Weibull scale (A) 10.638 m/s 
 
 
 
==PAGE:84==
 
Climatology of Extratropical cyclones and its connection to Wind Energy Applications  
84 
COAST OF CALIFORNIA DEVELOPMENT ZONE 1 (NORTHERN) POINT 1 
2009-2019 
Data 
variable 
Full ERA5 data 
Reduced Lodise et al. data 
1h wind 
speed occur-
rence rate 
(normalized) 
1h wind 
speed 
>25m/s oc-
currence 
rate 
 
 
Wind rose 
1h wind 
speed distri-
bution prob-
ability and 
Weibull fit 
(only for Full 
ERA5 data) 
 
Weibull shape (k) 1.762 
Weibull scale (A) 9.819 m/s 
 
Table 28. Histograms for the occurrence rate of 1h wind speed at 100m (normalized) [first row] and 1h wind speed at 
100 m above 25 m/s (counts) [second row], wind roses [third row], and 1h wind speed at 100m distribution with Weibull 
fit [fourth row] for 1979 - 2019 and inter-decadal over the Coast of California Development Zone 1 in Point 1, employing 
Full ERA5 data and Lodise et al. storms data 
 
 
 
==PAGE:85==
 
Climatology of Extratropical cyclones and its connection to Wind Energy Applications  
85 
COAST OF CALIFORNIA DEVELOPMENT ZONE 2 (SOUTHERN) POINT 1 
1979-2019 
Data 
variable 
Full ERA5 data 
Reduced Lodise et al. data 
1h wind 
speed oc-
currence 
rate (nor-
malized) 
1h wind 
speed 
>25m/s oc-
currence 
rate 
No wind speed above 25 m/s 
No wind speed above 25 m/s 
Wind rose 
1h wind 
speed distri-
bution prob-
ability and 
Weibull fit 
(only for 
Full ERA5 
data) 
 
Weibull parameters are NaN as the algorithm 
for the Weibull fit fails in this measuring point 
 
 
 
==PAGE:86==
 
Climatology of Extratropical cyclones and its connection to Wind Energy Applications  
86 
COAST OF CALIFORNIA DEVELOPMENT ZONE 2 (SOUTHERN) POINT 1 
1979-1988 
Data variable 
Full ERA5 data 
Reduced Lodise et al. data 
1h wind 
speed occur-
rence rate 
(normalized) 
1h wind 
speed 
>25m/s oc-
currence rate 
 
No wind speed above 25 m/s 
Wind rose 
1h wind 
speed distri-
bution proba-
bility and 
Weibull fit 
(only for Full 
ERA5 data) 
 
Weibull shape (k) 2.200 
Weibull scale (A) 10.019 m/s 
 
 
 
==PAGE:87==
 
Climatology of Extratropical cyclones and its connection to Wind Energy Applications  
87 
COAST OF CALIFORNIA DEVELOPMENT ZONE 2 (SOUTHERN) POINT 1 
1989-1998 
Data variable 
Full ERA5 data 
Reduced Lodise et al. data 
1h wind 
speed occur-
rence rate 
(normalized) 
1h wind 
speed 
>25m/s oc-
currence rate 
 
No wind speed above 25 m/s 
Wind rose 
1h wind 
speed distri-
bution proba-
bility and 
Weibull fit 
(only for Full 
ERA5 data) 
 
 
Weibull parameters are NaN as the al-
gorithm for the Weibull fit fails in this 
measuring point 
 
 
 
==PAGE:88==
 
Climatology of Extratropical cyclones and its connection to Wind Energy Applications  
88 
COAST OF CALIFORNIA DEVELOPMENT ZONE 2 (SOUTHERN) POINT 1 
1999-2008 
Data variable 
Full ERA5 data 
Reduced Lodise et al. data 
1h wind 
speed occur-
rence rate 
(normalized) 
 
 
1h wind 
speed 
>25m/s oc-
currence rate 
No wind speed above 25 m/s 
Wind rose 
1h wind 
speed distri-
bution proba-
bility and 
Weibull fit 
(only for Full 
ERA5 data) 
 
Weibull shape (k) 2.218 
Weibull scale (A) 9.855 m/s 
 
 
 
==PAGE:89==
 
Climatology of Extratropical cyclones and its connection to Wind Energy Applications  
89 
COAST OF CALIFORNIA DEVELOPMENT ZONE 2 (SOUTHERN) POINT 1 
2009-2019 
Data 
variable 
Full ERA5 data 
Reduced Lodise et al. data 
1h wind 
speed occur-
rence rate 
(normalized) 
1h wind 
speed 
>25m/s oc-
currence 
rate 
 
No wind speed above 25 m/s 
Wind rose 
1h wind 
speed distri-
bution prob-
ability and 
Weibull fit 
(only for Full 
ERA5 data) 
 
Weibull parameters are NaN as the algorithm f
or the Weibull fit fails in this measuring point 
 
Table 29. Histograms for the occurrence rate of 1h wind speed at 100m (normalized) [first row] and 1h wind speed at 
100 m above 25 m/s (counts) [second row], wind roses [third row], and 1h wind speed at 100m distribution with Weibull 
fit [fourth row] for 1979 - 2019 and inter-decadal over the Coast of California Development Zone 2 in Point 1, employing 
Full ERA5 data and Lodise et al. storms data 
 
 
 
==PAGE:90==
 
Climatology of Extratropical cyclones and its connection to Wind Energy Applications  
90 
COAST OF CALIFORNIA DEVELOPMENT ZONE 1 (NORTHERN) POINT 1 
Time period 
Full ERA5 data 
Lodise et al. data 
1979-2019 
110 
N/A 
1979-1988 
40 
N/A 
1989-1998 
28 
N/A 
1999-2008 
27 
N/A 
2009-2019 
23 
N/A 
COAST OF CALIFORNIA DEVELOPMENT ZONE 2 (SOUTHERN) POINT 1 
Time period 
Full ERA5 data 
Lodise et al. data 
1979-2019 
NaN 
N/A 
1979-1988 
7 
N/A 
1989-1998 
6 
N/A 
1999-2008 
3 
N/A 
2009-2019 
7 
N/A 
Table 30. Maximum values of the occurrence rate of wind speeds above 25 m/s at 100m for 1979 - 2019 and inter-
decadal over the Coast of California Development Zone 1 in Point 1 and Development Zone 2 in Point 1, employing Full 
ERA5 data and Lodise et al. storms data 
 
Several findings have been obtained from the above figures and numbers, which are discussed 
here, focused on the results from wind speed above 25 m/s occurrence rate, wind roses, and 
wind speed distribution probability.  
 
- 
Occurrence rate of wind speed at 100 m above 25 m/s: 
The more notable finding is there have not been recorded wind speeds above 25 m/s in 
any of the two points 1 and 2 within the OWFs Development Zone 1 and 2 respectively 
for the Lodise et al. storms data. A trend found has been a decrease of the wind speed 
above 25 m/s occurrence rate over time, yielding from 40 to 23 for the Development 
Zone 1 Point 1 employing the Full ERA5 data. This trend is not the same when looking at 
the results computed for the Development Zone 2 Point 1 which yields between 3 to 7. 
Thus, focusing on the Development Zone 1 I can conclude that the storms have been 
weaker with time from 1979 to 2019 on the point selected. 
 
- 
Wind roses: 
The wind roses obtained do not show a consistent flow from the same direction, being 
north for the Full ERA5 data and south for the Lodise et al. storms data the Development 
Zone 1 Point 1 for 1979 - 2019 and every 10 years periods. This inconsistency is even 
larger in the Development Zone 2 Point 1. In the Gulf of Maine, the wind rose show a 
consistent flow from the same direction. 
 
- 
Wind speed distribution probability and Weibull fit: 
The wind speed distribution probability along with the Weibull scale (A) and Weibull shape 
(k) parameters have been computed for the Full ERA5 data, however the results are not 
following a Weibull distribution in each of the periods computed.  
 
Additionally, as for the Gulf of Maine, for the characterization of the ECs intensity over time, 
hourly wind speeds at 100 m time series in one grid cell (Development Zone 1 Point 1) for the 
Full ERA5 data from C3S, and Lodise et al. storms data have been sorted from high to low wind 
speeds. The top three wind speeds for 1979-2019, inter-decadal, and inter-annual periods are 
presented in Table 31. 
==PAGE:91==
 
Climatology of Extratropical cyclones and its connection to Wind Energy Applications  
91 
Time period 
Full ERA5 wind 
speed data 
(m/s) 
DZ1_MP1 
Lodise et al. 
DZ1_MP1 
Time period 
Full ERA5 wind 
speed data 
(m/s) 
DZ1_MP1 
Lodise et al. 
DZ1_MP1 
1979-2019 
30.361944 
30.361944 
1997 
28.352207 
18.635693 
30.165495 
29.8366 
27.836086 
18.238867 
29.8366 
29.68612 
26.994936 
17.430666 
1979-1988 
30.361944 
30.361944 
1998 
26.587856 
26.587856 
29.8366 
29.8366 
25.695406 
24.716913 
29.785955 
29.68612 
25.58755 
23.330673 
1989-1998 
28.73206 
27.477406 
1999 
25.765545 
24.952847 
28.548548 
26.587856 
25.471338 
24.16779 
28.352207 
26.4677 
25.280458 
23.202993 
1999-2008 
30.165495 
26.115728 
2000 
26.33326 
14.621528 
29.700918 
24.972015 
26.124847 
14.569875 
29.684935 
24.952847 
25.938026 
14.526377 
2009-2019 
27.166155 
27.157598 
2001 
25.500307 
17.91789 
27.157598 
26.736708 
24.872879 
17.525093 
26.812792 
26.705132 
24.693907 
17.355204 
1979 
24.281631 
21.735357 
2002 
30.165495 
24.972015 
24.25918 
21.68975 
29.700918 
24.449007 
24.201708 
20.707033 
29.684935 
22.55341 
1980 
26.808712 
10.393245 
2003 
24.771849 
15.658713 
26.439346 
9.798757 
24.453798 
15.149773 
26.195553 
9.309144 
24.372837 
14.511041 
1981 
30.361944 
30.361944 
2004 
29.117489 
6.565178 
29.8366 
29.8366 
26.90703 
6.2127013 
29.68612 
29.68612 
24.188791 
14.511041 
1982 
29.785955 
19.108448 
2005 
24.835789 
19.823143 
29.37347 
17.618017 
23.489109 
19.78922 
29.308235 
17.009764 
23.369736 
19.788925 
1983 
27.68757 
17.3125 
2006 
26.115728 
26.115728 
27.588493 
17.013895 
23.769482 
20.646296 
26.97981 
16.7325 
23.651936 
20.44524 
1984 
27.381063 
16.776215 
2007 
28.253456 
22.246927 
27.338518 
15.946444 
28.00007 
21.661097 
26.860825 
15.751984 
27.650723 
20.212254 
1985 
26.898537 
26.898537 
2008 
27.171043 
20.09703 
26.818983 
26.818983 
26.280415 
20.002441 
25.442106 
25.442106 
26.227148 
19.175587 
1986 
24.000162 
18.533964 
2009 
23.7086 
16.939692 
22.823029 
18.062391 
23.467564 
16.812965 
22.697485 
17.491627 
23.438833 
16.606192 
==PAGE:92==
 
Climatology of Extratropical cyclones and its connection to Wind Energy Applications  
92 
Time period 
Full ERA5 wind 
speed data 
(m/s) 
DZ1_MP1 
Lodise et al. 
DZ1_MP1 
Time period 
Full ERA5 wind 
speed data 
(m/s) 
DZ1_MP1 
Lodise et al. 
DZ1_MP1 
1987 
27.218014 
22.041597 
2010 
27.166155 
21.60304 
27.10411 
21.995472 
26.812792 
21.282513 
26.673079 
21.633488 
25.396313 
21.099836 
1988 
24.101997 
19.495293 
2011 
24.574505 
17.803726 
23.924114 
17.981 
24.467533 
17.24649 
23.829636 
17.827845 
24.3552 
17.22065 
1989 
23.785582 
21.732122 
2012 
26.520409 
23.980623 
23.67785 
21.412977 
26.478544 
23.219822 
23.415073 
21.373537 
26.121187 
23.079432 
1990 
24.495695 
15.0221195 
2013 
23.695002 
11.317333 
24.442614 
14.834767 
23.63872 
11.292455 
23.814714 
14.674063 
23.587685 
8.46777 
1991 
26.61216 
13.287241 
2014 
27.157598 
27.157598 
24.945332 
13.258988 
26.705132 
26.705132 
24.943216 
12.605183 
26.014494 
26.014494 
1992 
27.125288 
25.40154 
2015 
26.143982 
18.49039 
26.144133 
24.94032 
24.962236 
17.062614 
25.40154 
24.128967 
24.716913 
15.33697 
1993 
26.4677 
26.4677 
2016 
26.036707 
22.38111 
25.704527 
25.704527 
25.986776 
19.497797 
25.005781 
24.761755 
25.311266 
19.436295 
1994 
25.821653 
19.86989 
2017 
26.573086 
24.3125 
25.617682 
19.468023 
25.978432 
23.497423 
24.502949 
19.437801 
25.695103 
23.264948 
1995 
28.73206 
27.477406 
2018 
24.784225 
17.67524 
28.548548 
22.44307 
24.380608 
17.625443 
28.3125 
22.151203 
23.617146 
17.116558 
1996 
28.063126 
21.859816 
2019 
26.736708 
26.736708 
27.483305 
21.47173 
25.943825 
25.943825 
26.958881 
21.051462 
25.320755 
25.320755 
Table 31. Quantification of strongest winds with the 3 top wind speeds at 100 m (m/s) for 1979-2019, inter-decadal and 
inter-annual reached over the Coast of California Development Zone 1 in Point 1 employing Full ERA5 data and Lodise et 
al. storms data 
 
 
==PAGE:93==
 
Climatology of Extratropical cyclones and its connection to Wind Energy Applications  
93 
Like for the Gulf of Maine findings, no clear trend for the strongest winds recorded in the Coast 
of California Development Zone 1 Point 1 over time can be determined. There some findings 
worth highlighting such as very low wind speeds have been recorded as the top 3 wind speeds 
in some of the years, what must be due to the point employed for the calculation. 
 
 
6.2.5 Cyclones lifetime 
I have calculated the occurrence rate of individual storm length within three bounding boxes; the 
Coast of California Full ERA5 data bounding box, the OWFs Development Zone 1, and the OWFs 
Development Zone 2 from 1979 to 2019 and every 10 years using Lodise et al. storms data (Table 
32).  
 
 
 
==PAGE:94==
 
Climatology of Extratropical cyclones and its connection to Wind Energy Applications  
94 
LODISE ET AL. STORMS OCCURRENCE RATE 
Period 
Data 
variable 
Full ERA5 data 
Bounding box 
OWFs Development Zone 1 
Bounding box 
OWFs Development Zone 2 
Bounding box 
1979-2019 
Occurrence 
rate storm 
duration [.] 
 
 
 
Occurrence 
rate storm 
duration 
(normalized) 
[PDF] 
1979-1988 
Occurrence 
rate storm 
duration [.] 
Occurrence 
rate storm 
duration 
(normalized) 
[PDF] 
 
 
 
1989-1998 
Occurrence 
rate storm 
duration [.] 
Occurrence 
rate storm 
duration 
(normalized) 
[PDF] 
==PAGE:95==
 
Climatology of Extratropical cyclones and its connection to Wind Energy Applications  
95 
LODISE ET AL. STORMS OCCURRENCE RATE 
Period 
Data 
variable 
Full ERA5 data 
Bounding box 
OWFs Development Zone 1 
Bounding box 
OWFs Development Zone 2 
Bounding box 
1999-2008 
Occurrence 
rate storm 
duration [.] 
Occurrence 
rate storm 
duration 
(normalized) 
[PDF] 
2009-2019 
Occurrence 
rate storm 
duration [.] 
Occurrence 
rate storm 
duration 
(normalized) 
[PDF] 
Table 32. Histograms for the occurrence rate of individual storm duration for 1979 - 2019 and inter-decadal over the 
Coast of California Full ERA 5 data bounding box and the OWFs Development Zone 1 and 2 employing Lodise et al. storms 
data 
 
The results show how storms tracked by Lodise et al. have a lifetime higher in the Development 
Zone 1 (up to 50 h) than in the Development Zone 2 (up to 32h) and its occurrence rate up to 
two times higher in storms of shorter duration, not very different than those seen for the Gulf of 
Maine. The occurrence rates of storm duration go from 5 to 10 for each 10 years period and 40 
for 1979 – 2019 for the Development Zone 1, and around 5 for each 10 years and 17 for 1979 – 
2019. The lifetime of cyclones occurred in the Coast of California bounding boxes studied are 
clearly lower than those calculated for the Gulf of Maine, although it is noted that one important 
aspect is the different tracking algorithm method applied by Gramcianinov et al. and Lodise et al. 
in their works. section.  
 
==PAGE:96==
 
Climatology of Extratropical cyclones and its connection to Wind Energy Applications  
96 
The travelling distances of individual storms show values in the range of 10 to 70 km between 
track points with a propagation speed of 10-70 km/h 10-100 km/h, what is slightly lower than 
those seen in the Gulf of Maine.  
 
6.2.6 Active power and annual energy production 
Same principle has been employed to the data for the Coast of California OWFs Development 
Zones calculate than for the Gulf of Maine to come up with the OWT active power output and the 
non-generated energy production. In this case, the Point 1 within the OWFs Development Zone 
1 has been used. The OWF Development Zone 2 has not been analysed as the results in that 
zone have not recorded wind speeds above 25 m/s.  
 
Table 33 presents an example of the plots generated for OWT active power outputs employing 
the above mentioned wind speed time series with and without the cap limitation of wind speeds 
above 25 m/s in 1979, 1980, 2018, and 2019. Gross annual energy production in each case and 
non-generated energy production is shown in Table 34.   
 
 
Year 
Active power output 
with and without capping wind speed > 25 m/s 
Year 
Active power output 
with and without capping wind speed > 25 m/s 
1979 
2018 
1980 
2019 
Table 33. OWT IEA 15 MW active power outputs with capping wind speed above 25 m/s (orange) and without (blue) 
==PAGE:97==
 
Climatology of Extratropical cyclones and its connection to Wind Energy Applications  
97 
Year 
Gross en-
ergy pro-
duction 
without 
capping 
wind speed 
> 25 m/s 
(GWh) 
Gross en-
ergy pro-
duction 
capping 
wind speed 
> 25 
m/s(GWh) 
Non-gen-
erated 
gross en-
ergy pro-
duction 
(GWh) 
Year 
Gross en-
ergy pro-
duction 
without 
capping 
wind speed 
> 25 m/s 
(GWh) 
Gross en-
ergy pro-
duction 
capping 
wind speed 
> 25 
m/s(GWh) 
Non-gen-
erated 
gross en-
ergy pro-
duction 
(GWh) 
1979 
66.352 
66.352 
0.000 
2000 
63.735 
63.930 
0.195 
1980 
67.893 
67.983 
0.090 
2001 
73.644 
73.659 
0.015 
1981 
67.609 
67.864 
0.255 
2002 
72.281 
72.656 
0.375 
1982 
71.365 
71.635 
0.270 
2003 
66.103 
66.103 
0.000 
1983 
74.113 
74.368 
0.255 
2004 
66.491 
66.521 
0.030 
1984 
74.400 
74.565 
0.165 
2005 
60.891 
60.891 
0.000 
1985 
63.179 
63.239 
0.060 
2006 
73.597 
73.612 
0.015 
1986 
71.040 
71.040 
0.000 
2007 
63.902 
64.307 
0.405 
1987 
71.897 
72.017 
0.120 
2008 
68.814 
68.874 
0.060 
1988 
67.634 
67.634 
0.000 
2009 
65.893 
65.893 
0.000 
1989 
66.596 
66.596 
0.000 
2010 
74.748 
74.808 
0.060 
1990 
65.487 
65.487 
0.000 
2011 
73.326 
73.326 
0.000 
1991 
67.483 
67.498 
0.015 
2012 
70.623 
70.728 
0.105 
1992 
65.998 
66.058 
0.060 
2013 
63.202 
63.202 
0.000 
1993 
64.063 
64.108 
0.045 
2014 
67.856 
67.931 
0.075 
1994 
68.874 
68.904 
0.030 
2015 
61.927 
61.942 
0.015 
1995 
64.003 
64.363 
0.360 
2016 
69.756 
69.816 
0.060 
1996 
71.908 
72.193 
0.285 
2017 
68.489 
68.624 
0.135 
1997 
65.981 
66.056 
0.075 
2018 
64.638 
64.638 
0.000 
1998 
72.564 
72.639 
0.075 
2019 
67.591 
67.651 
0.060 
1999 
70.544 
70.604 
0.060 
 
 
 
 
Table 34. OWT IEA 15 MW gross annual energy production with (3rd and 7th columns) and without (2nd and 6th column) 
capping wind speeds above 25 m/s. Non-generated gross annual energy production (4th and 8th columns)   
 
The mean annual gross energy production of the above presented results yields 68.207 GWh, 
what is closes to the value of the OWT IEA 15MW of 77.4 GWh, which is stated in [36]. 
 
The standard deviation of the annual gross energy production for all years is 3.753 GWh. 
 
Assuming an offtaker energy price of $110/MWh taken from [37] and a OWT lifetime of 30 years, 
the non-generated revenues due to strong stroms for a single OWT yield $ 10,260 per year and 
$307,817 over its lifetime. Under the same assumptions and considering the OWF capacity to 
install in the Coast of California Wind Energy Lease Area OCS-P-0561 (Figure 4) of 1025 MW 
[37], where the selected Point 1 falls, the non-generated revenues due to strong storms for a 
OWF yield $1,173,809 per year and $35,214,281 over its lifetime. The losses are in this case 
much lower than those calculated for the Gulf of Maine OWFs Development Zone.  
 
==PAGE:98==
 
Climatology of Extratropical cyclones and its connection to Wind Energy Applications  
98 
7. Conclusion 
Despite large progress in the climatology community has been made over the years, currently 
there is no consensus on a common approach to identify and characterize extratropical cyclones 
due to the numerous factors contributing to their activity. When it comes to wind energy the 
atmospheric variables differ from those employed in climatology, the main variable being high 
wind speeds that might cause a wind turbine to stop in order to preserve its integrity. 
 
Extratropical cyclone features have been analysed in this thesis work such as trajectory, count 
occurrnce rate, wind speeds, wind direction, lifetime, and travelling distance employing two 
publicly storms datasets in two wind energy leases areas planned for the development of OWFs,  
located in the US Northeast coast and the Coast of California, where the offshore sector is now 
booming. From there I have connected the climatology variables into metrics applicable to OWFs. 
 
Notable differences have been found between both storms datasets when are employed in the 
same OWFs development zones of my study, which are mostly due to the tracking algorithm 
employed by each datasets, the spatial domain limitations, available weather data, time 
constraints, and storage limitations of the scripts employed for my study. Overall speaking, the  
storms dataset employed by Gramcianinov et al. shows a higher number of cyclones tracks, a 
longer cyclone lifetime, while the second storms dataset employed by Lodise et al. presents 
stronger winds and higher wind speed occurrence rates when both are used in the same resgion 
of interest.  
  
The findings of my study could be useful to add further data points and better inform the multi-
criteria decisions analysis/problem to be taken by stakeholders during the different phases of an 
OWF comprising development, construction, and operation. Developers and investors could 
better assess wind farms development areas where to deploy investment in locations where the 
recorded data show either a lower number of cyclones passing, cyclone intensity or lifetime. 
Developers and turbine suppliers could better assess if it is worth incurring costs to manufacture 
wind turbines stronger which could withstand high loads caused by strong storms, to equip wind 
turbines with additional features to their control system, or to add new kits to the turbine to improve 
its performance. Operation and maintenance contractors could use the findings to improve the 
scheduled maintenance tasks during the year making use of the findings to simulate execution of 
tasks during meteorological windows clear of storms. Also owners, investors, offtakers, and 
insurers could use the data investigated in this thesis work to assess potential economical losses 
caused for impacts on OWT and OWFs. 
  
Future work to this thesis might include defining best data variables from the cyclones features to 
commonly apply to wind energy applications. Moreover, other areas to be further investigated 
might cover investigations of the long term ECs characterization and their impact to high voltage 
infrastructures, subsea cables, offshore substations, and overhead lines, considering other 
atmospheric variables such as precipitation and temperature and sea variables such as waves 
and currents. Further investigations could also comprise the use of other storms datasets, to 
perform further analysis on different grid cells over OWFs development zones of interest or to 
employ new climate reanalysis methods which are being developed aiming to assess the cyclones 
activity more accurately.  
==PAGE:99==
 
Climatology of Extratropical cyclones and its connection to Wind Energy Applications  
99 
 
 
==PAGE:100==
 
Climatology of Extratropical cyclones and its connection to Wind Energy Applications  
100 
8. References 
[1] Erin Walker, Daniel Mitchell and William Seviour. 2020. The numerous approaches to tracking 
extratropical cyclones and the challenges they present 
 
[2] Catto, J. L. 2016. Extratropical cyclone classification and its use in climate studies 
 
[3] The Beaufort Scale of Wind Force. Reports on Marine Science Affairs No. 3. World Meteoro-
logical Organization, Geneva. 1970. World Meteorological Organization.  
 
[4] A Joly, F Ayrault and S Malardel. 2003. Extra tropical cyclones. 
 
[5] United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction. https://www.undrr.org/ 
 
[6] Victor Ongoma, Hossein Tabari. 2022. Climate impacts on extreme weather. Current to future 
changes on a local to global scale. 
 
[7] Natalia Tilinina et al. 2013. Comparing Cyclone Life Cycle Characteristics and Tyheir Interan-
nual Variability in different reanalysis 
 
[8] Xiaolan L. Wang et al. 2016. Inter-comparison of extra-tropical cyclone activity in nine rea-
nalysis datasets 
 
[9] Rebeca J. Barthelmie. 2021. Extreme Wind and Waves in U.S. East Coast Offshore Wind 
Energy Lease Areas 
  
[10] Arielle J. Catalano et al. 2019. High-Impact Extratropical Cyclones along the Northeast Coast 
of the United States in a Long Coupled Climate Model Simulation 
 
[12] C. C. Raible et al. 2008. Northern Hemisphere Extratropical Cyclones A Comparison of De-
tection and Tracking Methods and Different Reanalyses 
 
[13] K. I. Hodges et al. 2011. A Comparison of Extratropical Cyclones in Recent Reanalyses ERA-
Interim, NASA MERRA, NCEP CFSR, and JRA-25 
 
[14] https://www.boem.gov/renewable-energy/offshore-renewable-activities 
 
[15] https://www.noaa.gov/ 
 
[16] https://www.ecmwf.int/en/forecasts/dataset/ecmwf-reanalysis-v5 
 
[17] Brian A. Colle et al. 2015. A Review of Historical and Future Changes of Extratropical Cyclones 
and Associated Impacts Along the US East Coast 
 
[18] Jiali Wang et al. 2024. Modeling and observations of North Atlantic cyclones. Implications 
for U.S. Offshore wind energy 
 
[19] Kimberly E. diamond. 2012. Extreme Weather Impacts on Offshore Wind Turbines: Lessons 
Learned 
 
[20] Zhenhai Zhang et al. 2018. The Relationship Between Extratropical Cyclone Strength and 
Atmospheric River 
==PAGE:101==
 
Climatology of Extratropical cyclones and its connection to Wind Energy Applications  
101 
 
[21] Michael D. Warner et al. 2012. Wintertime Extreme Precipitation Events along the Pacific 
Northwest Coast 
 
[22] K. Giamalaki et al. 2021. Future intensification of extreme Aleutian low events and their 
climate impacts 
 
[23] IEC 61400-1_2019 Edition 4 Wind energy generation systems - Part 1_Design requirements  
 
[24] IEC 61400-3-1_2019 Edition 1 Wind energy generation systems - Part 3-1_Design require-
ments for offshore fixed wind turbines 
 
[25] Nielsen, M. 2018. DTU Course notes Wind-related aspects of the IEC 61400-1 standard  
 
[26] DNVGL-ST-0437 Edition 2019 Loads and site conditions for wind turbines 
 
[27] C.B. Gramcianinov et al. 2020. Analysis of Atlantic extratropical storm tracks characteristics 
in 41 years of ERA5 and CFSR-CFSv2 databses 
 
[28] https://wrcc.dri.edu/Climate/narrative_ca.php 
 
[29] John Lodise et al. 2022. Global Climatology of Extratropical Cyclones from a new tracking 
approach and associated wave heights 
 
[31] Hodges KI. 1994. A general method for tracking analysis and its application to meteorological 
data 
 
[32] Hodges KI. 1995. Feature Tracking on the Unit Sphere. Mon. Weather Rev.  123 3458–3465. 
 
[33] Hodges, K. I. 1999. Adaptive constraints for feature tracking. Monthly Weather Review, 127 
(6). pp. 1362-1373 
 
[34] Hoskins, Hodges. 2002. New Perspectives on the Northern Hemisphere Winter Storm Tracks. 
 
[35] Albert Man Wai. 2020. Finding Storm Track Activity Metrics Correlated with Weather Impacts 
Part I Frameworks for Evaluation and Accumulated Track Activity 
 
[36] Gaertner, Evan, Jennifer Rinker, Latha Sethuraman, Frederik Zahle, Benjamin Anderson, 
Garrett Barter, Nikhar Abbas, Fanzhong Meng, Pietro Bortolotti, Witold Skrzypinski, 
George Scott, Roland Feil, Henrik Bredmose, Katherine Dykes, Matt Shields, Christopher 
Allen, and Anthony Viselli. 2020. Definition of the IEA 15-Megawatt Offshore Reference 
Wind. Golden, CO: National Renewable Energy Laboratory. NREL/TP-5000-75698. 
 
[37] McCoy, Angel, Walter Musial, Rob Hammond, Daniel Mulas Hernando, Patrick Duffy, Philipp 
Beiter, Paula Pérez, Ruth Baranowski, Gage Reber, and Paul Spitsen. 2024. Offshore Wind 
Market Report: 2024 Edition. Golden, CO: National Renewable Energy Laboratory. NREL/TP-
5000-90525. 
 
