==PAGE:1==
Mechanical properties and Circular potential of
carbon fibre composites with Recycled non-woven
fabrics: a comparative study of epoxy resin and
polyamide matrices
Francesca Moser
DTU Wind-M-0999
September 2025
==PAGE:2==
DTU Wind-M-
6HStHPEHU 2025
E&T6 30
EduFation Master of 6FienFe
SXSerYLsRrs
-ustLQH %HDusRQ 
/DUs 3LOgDDUG 0LNNHOsHQ 
'78 :ind 	 (nerJy 6ystems
%HUQKDUG /HLtQHU
)raunhofer
.DULQ 2GHOLus
.7+
RemarNs:
TKis reSort is suEmitted as Sartial 
fulfillment of tKe reTuirements for 
graduation in tKe aEoYe eduFation at 
tKe TeFKniFal UniYersity of DenmarN
7echnical 8niversity of 
'enmarN DeSartment of Wind and 
Energy 6ystems )rederiNsEorgYeM 
 000 5osNilde
'enmarN
ZZZZLnddtXdN
$uthor:
)UDQFHsFD 0RsHU
7itle:
0HFKDQLFDO SURSHUtLHs DQG &LUFuODU SRtHQtLDO RI 
FDUERQ ILEUH FRPSRsLtHs ZLtK 5HF\FOHG QRQ-ZRYHQ 
IDEULFs D FRPSDUDtLYH stuG\ RI HSR[\ UHsLQ DQG 
SRO\DPLGH PDtULFHs
DTU Wind 	 Energy 6ystems is a deSartment of 
tKe TeFKniFal UniYersity of DenmarN ZitK a uniTue 
integration of researFK eduFation innoYation and 
SuEliFSriYate seFtor Fonsulting in tKe field of Zind 
energy 2ur aFtiYities deYeloS neZ oSSortunities 
and teFKnology for tKe gloEal and DanisK 
e[Sloitation of Zind energy 5esearFK foFuses on 
Ney teFKniFal-sFientifiF fields ZKiFK are Fentral for 
tKe deYeloSment innoYation and use of Zind 
energy and SroYides tKe Easis for adYanFed 
eduFation at tKe eduFation
3ublicity 
7Ke reSorW Ls public.
IGCV
==PAGE:3==
Summary
Abstract
i
Introduction
iii
1
Background
1
1.1
Carbon fibres reinforced polymers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Reinforcement mechanism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2.1
Interface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.2.2
Porosity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.3
Matrix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.3.1
Epoxy resin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.3.2
Polyamide . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.3.3
Matrix recycling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.4
Carbon fibres . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.4.1
CF recycling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
1.5
Additives
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
1.6
Processing of CFRP
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
1.7
Composite characterization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2
Methodology
19
2.1
Material specifications
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.2
Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.2.1
TGA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.2.2
Single fibre Tensile Test
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.2.3
Single fibre Pull-out
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.2.4
Plate fabrication
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.2.5
Microscopy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
2.2.6
FVC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
2.2.7
Four-point bending test
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
2.2.8
Charpy impact test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
2.2.9
Pyrolysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
2.2.10 Oxidation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
2.2.11 SEM-EDS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
2.2.12 Re-fabrication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
==PAGE:4==
SUMMARY
Summary
;A<
3
Results & Discussion
28
3.1
Matrix comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.2
Recycling process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.3
Re-fabrication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4
Conclusion
47
4.0.1
Further research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
Ringraziamenti
49
Page
==PAGE:5==
Acronyms
Tg Glass transition temperature. 7, 8
Tm Melting temperature. 8
BSE Backscatter electron detector. 18
CF Carbon fibre. 10, 11
CFRP Carbon fibre reinforced polymer. 6, 9, 13
CFs Carbon fibers. iii, 5, 9–12, 29
EDS Energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy. 18
EOL End-of-life. ii, iii, 2
FR Flame retardant. 13, 14, 22, 29, 34, 48
FRs Flame retardants. 13
FVC Fibre volume content. 6, 12, 16, 42, 44
PAs Polyamides. 8
rCF Recycled carbon fibres. 10, 12, 39, 43, 44
RTM Resin transfer moulding. 13
SE Secondary electron detector. 18
SEM Scanning electron microscopy. 18, 26
SFPO Single fibre pull-out. 15
SFTT Single fibre tensile test. 15
SMCs Sheet moulding compounds. 11
TGA Thermogravimetric analysis. 12, 14
TP Thermoplastic. 6, 13, 14, 22
TS Thermoset. 6, 13, 22
vCF Virgin carbon fibres. 11, 12
WCM Wet compression moulding. 13, 23
==PAGE:6==
Abstract
This project focused on pyrolytic recycling of carbon fibres from composite materials. A
non-woven made of cut-off fibres was used as reinforcing agent for the production of hot-
pressed panels with three different matrices: epoxy, PA66/6I, and PA66/6I with flame
retardant. the matrices were compared both for their mechanical properties and for their
influence on recycling. It was demonstrated in this work that carbon fibres from both
thermoset and thermoplastic matrices can be successfully recycled through a common
process, yielding fibres with similar properties. Importantly, PA66/6I shows potential
qualitative advantages in re-manufactured properties, likely due to a stronger interaction
with the recycled carbon fibre surface. The addition of an organic aluminum phosphi-
nate helps with the retention of fibre properties and yield more consistent mechanical
performance over the whole recycling process.
i
==PAGE:7==
Introduction
Our current economic model - the linear model - fails to account for resource limitation,
biodiversity loss, climate change, and pollution that it is causing. Based on a ”take,
make, consume, dispose” philosophy, it relies on over-consumption and planned obsoles-
cence, often supporting labor exploitation. As society advances and our understanding
deepens, the need for a more sustainable alternative becomes increasingly evident. Sus-
tainability is defined as “meeting the needs of the present without compromising the
ability of future generations to meet their own needs” [United Nations Brundtland Com-
mission, 1987], and for this to be true of our economy we need to rethink our processes
and reshape our mindset. We need to cherish and preserve what we already have, while
recovering and re-purposing the resources embedded in what we’ve already produced.
In response to these challenges, The European Union and other independent orga-
nizations such as the Ellen MacArthur Foundation are working on promoting a circular
model - one designed to sustain and foster the natural environment as well as our society.
This model emphasizes reuse, repair, and recycling, aiming to extend product lifecycles
and minimize waste. On the path towards technological advancement and sustainability,
composite materials play a crucial role. By combining two distinct materials in vary-
ing ratios, we can merge their properties with flexibility, tailoring the final product to
meet specific needs across a wide range of applications. Typical composites exhibit high
specific strength and stiffness, making them especially valuable in the transport sector,
where reducing weight - and consequently fuel consumption - is essential, without com-
promising the mechanical performance. Numerous other fields also benefit from these
materials, such as aerospace, sports engineering, medical equipment, wind turbines, and
gas and liquid storage.
Although composites offer excellent solutions to many design challenges, their durable
nature poses significant difficulties in the End-of-life (EOL) stage. Since recycling tech-
nologies for these materials are still limited, the majority of them are either landfilled or,
at best, incinerated. This not only results in the loss of valuable embedded resources but
also greatly amplifies their environmental impact. Landfills are often poorly regulated
or monitored, allowing hazardous chemicals and pollutants to leak into the environment,
threatening ecosystems and worsening living conditions for vulnerable communities, es-
pecially those in impoverished areas.
Given the environmental and social concerns, EOL management has become a cen-
ii
==PAGE:8==
Acronyms
Acronyms
;A<
tral focus of research. An effective solution must be able to address all aspects of the
value-chain: product design needs to account for the EOL phase; manufacturing pro-
cesses require a shift that enables the integration of recycled materials; and recycling
facilities necessitate technologies that are capable of recovering high quality materials
from complex waste streams.
This project touches on all the previously mentioned aspects, aiming to evaluate the
quality of Carbon fibers (CFs) subjected to multiple recycling cycles and to investigate
the influence of different matrix materials on the process. In the first phase, composite
plates will be produced using recovered cut-off fibers from industry and three differ-
ent matrix materials. In the second phase, new plates will be manufactured using the
thermally recycled fibers obtained from the first step. This approach will enable the
assessment of recycled carbon fibers both for their own mechanical properties and their
performance when reintroduced in the manufacturing process, providing insight into how
the material choice affects the recycling stage.
Project specifics
The focus of this project will be on composite materials based on
PA66/6I - a thermoplastic polyamide-based copolymer - and on an epoxy-based ther-
moset resin of trade name Araldite LY 3585/Aradur 3475. The epoxy resin is already
widely applied in automotive manufacturing thanks to its short curing cycles and high
quality impregnation [1]. The copolymer PA66/6I, on the other hand, has shown compa-
rable properties to that of the epoxy resin and is currently being developed for short fibre
textiles [1]. As reinforcing material, a non-woven manufactured from recovered cut-off
fibres will be used. Previous research already showed how the two matrix materials com-
bined with a non-woven reinforcement mat from the same line show comparable material
selection indices with those from a commercial automotive-grade SMC (Figure 2.1) [1]
and are therefore relevant to current manufacturing processes. More details about these
materials can be found in sections 1.3 & 1.4.
Page iii
==PAGE:9==
Chapter 1
Background
A composite material is defined as a combination of two physically and chemically dis-
tinct constituents which leads to an improved performance in respect to the single com-
ponents.
Being able to combine the unique properties of multiple materials enables
composite materials to be fairly flexible in terms of applications, e.g. for fiber reinforced
polymers: aerospace, ground transportation, sports engineering, medical applications,
wind turbines, and gas/liquid storage are all good examples[2][3][4].
1.1
Carbon fibres reinforced polymers
CFRP - abbreviation for carbon-fibres-reinforced-polymers - are a special class of com-
posites where the reinforcing agent, as the name suggests, are carbon fibres. The last
market report released by Composites United (CU), calculated the global demand of
carbon fibres to be 126 500 tonnes in 2024, with an average 10.07% annual growth since
2010 [5]. The result is coherent with Lin Gang’s report from 2023, in which the global
demand of CF was estimated to be 115 000 tonnes [6]. The application market pat-
tern reported by L. Gang is shown in figure 1.1. The highest demand comes from the
aerospace, wind blades, and sports and leisure sectors. This distribution is confirmed
- at least in terms of ranking - by the CU’s report, which cites aviation and aerospace
(including defense) as leading with 32% demand, followed by wind energy at 26%, sports
at 16%, and mobility and transport at 14%.
1
==PAGE:10==
CHAPTER 1. BACKGROUND
1.2. Reinforcement mechanism
;A<
Figure 1.1: Global demand of CF by application as calculated by Lin Gang’s report in 2023.
While the market expands, however, the cumulative waste of CFRP becomes an
increasingly evident issue. Projections indicate that by 2050, cumulative CFRP waste
could total between 200 000 and 500 000 tonnes [7]. Even though specific data on EOL
treatment of composites is scarce, it is widely recognized that sustainable and viable
recycling solutions for composite materials are lacking, with landfilling and incineration
remaining the predominant treatment options.
1.2
Reinforcement mechanism
As mentioned above, typical composites exhibit high strength and stiffness relative to
their total weight. This performance is achieved by combining a reinforcing agent - such
as carbon fibres - with a filling material known as the matrix, which provides structural
integrity and protection against chemical and physical degradation. As much as material
selection is crucial to the final properties, other factors - such as fibre dispersion, fibre
orientation, volume fraction, porosity, interface properties, and product thickness - also
play a significant role.
When a composite is subjected to a load, the stress is distributed between the matrix
and the fibres according to their relative volume fractions, elastic properties, and to
the shape and orientation of the reinforcement. The material can be considered a true
composite if the reinforcement carries the majority of the applied load.
Page 2
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1. BACKGROUND
1.2. Reinforcement mechanism
;A<
Figure 1.2: Axial loading of
unidirectional long-fibre
composite
Unidirectional long-fibre composite
The simplest way
to introduce the analysis of elastic behaviour in composites
is by considering long, aligned fibres.
When subjected to axial loading, assuming perfect bond-
ing and equal lengths, both constituents experience identical
strain ϵcomposite (Figure 1.2). Given the definition of Young’s
modulus E (eq. 1.1), the following relationship holds (eq.
1.2):
E = σ/ϵ
(1.1)
ϵcomposite = σ2/E2
= σ1/E1
(1.2)
The relation implies that the stress carried by the two components - σ1 and σ2 - is
directly proportional to their stiffness, with the reinforcement bearing a higher portion
when it has higher Young’s modulus. As the total stress can also be described in terms
of volume fractions, the rule of mixtures (eq. 1.3) can be derived to describe the Young’s
modulus of the whole material:
E1 = (1 −Vf)Em + VfEf
(1.3)
When considering transverse loading, however, the cross-sections of the reinforcing
agent can no longer be regarded as continuous, and the strain experienced by both the
reinforcing agent and the matrix depends on the spatial distribution of the fibres (Figure
1.3).
Figure 1.3: Transverse loading
In this case, a plane parallel to the strain direction in
which only matrix is present experiences low levels of
strain compared to a plane in which the cross-section of
the fibres interrupts the matrix. As the reinforcement
is typically stiffer and its cross-sectional area is often
too small to undergo significant strain, for the material
to achieve the same overall extension, the matrix must
accommodate larger portion of the strain. The inho-
mogeneity in the strain distribution for transverse load-
ing leads to areas of stress-concentration, where crack-
ing and fibre-matrix debonding are facilitated. Overall
the reinforcing mechanism of the fibres is lacking and
for this reason, unidirectional reinforced composites are
typically integrated into the final products in a way that ensures that most of the loading
occurs axially [8].
Short fibre composite
Stress and strain analysis of short fibre composites requires
a more complex approach. As the fibres do not span the whole length of the material,
Page 3
==PAGE:12==
CHAPTER 1. BACKGROUND
1.2. Reinforcement mechanism
;A<
Figure 1.4: stress distribution
even when the material is subjected to axial load the extremities of the fibres need to be
taken into account. The simplest model that treats short-fibre composites is called Shear
Lag Model and assumes that the stress transfers from the matrix to the fibre exclusively
through the interfacial shear stresses, neglecting the stress transfer across the fibre ends.
The solution of the model yields:
σf = Ef ϵ1 {1 −coshnx
r0
sech(ns)}
(1.4)
where σf, the axial stress in the fibre, varies based on the aspect ratio of the fibre s. n
represents a dimensionless constant specific to the composite, Ef the Young’s modulus
of the fibres and ϵ1 the strain to which the composite is subjected.
Even if this model provides only an approximate description of the stress distribution,
it clearly shows how the distribution is non-homogeneous, with an axial stress concen-
tration at the centre of the fibre and an interfacial shear stress concentration at the fibre
ends (Figure 1.4) [8].
Fracture mechanism
Fracture in a composite material can occur either in the ma-
trix, in the fibre, or at the interface between the two. When the composite is under
stress, the stress is transferred from the matrix to the fibres through the interface. Given
a unidirectional long-fibre composite, to which is applied a axial stress (as in Figure
1.2), three modes of failure are possible depending on some key parameters: fracture
Page 4
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 1. BACKGROUND
1.2. Reinforcement mechanism
;A<
strain of matrix and fibre (strain at fracture), shear strength of the composite (maxi-
mum strength necessary to de-bond fibre and matrix) and tensile strength of fibres and
matrix(maximum strength that can be withstood before fracture) [8] [9].
1. Fracture initiates in the fibre (least likely). If the fracture strain of the matrix is
higher than that of the fibre, assuming equal elongation, the fibres will break first
transferring all the load to the matrix.
2. Fracture initiates in the matrix. If the fracture strain of the matrix is lower than
that of the fibre, assuming equal elongation the matrix will fracture first and all
the load will transfer to the fibres.
3. Fracture initiates at the interface. If the shear force developed at the interface
is higher than the shear strength of the composite but the tensile force devel-
oped in the fibre/matrix interface is lower than the tensile strength of the single
fibre/matrix, the interface will fail first. The shear strength is a product of the
stress applied and of the surface involved, so that if the embedded length of the fi-
bre is short, the shear strength will be low and debonding will be facilitated, while
when the embedded length increases, the corresponding shear strength increases
until fibre fracture will eventually occur first.
1.2.1
Interface
CFs mostly present a smooth, chemically inert surface [10] [11], with low surface energy[12],
resulting in poor adhesion and bonding with the matrix. As the interface properties are
crucial to the stress transfer mechanisms in a composite material, a lot of research fo-
cuses on how to optimize the interfacial performance. Bonding at the interface acts and
can be improved through five mechanisms:
1. Adsorption and wetting: surface roughness and contamination can prevent contact
between the two surfaces, giving rise to voids and defects that will cause stress
concentration spots. The surface tension and polarity of fibres and matrices should
therefore be matched as close as possible, and the fibres should not show external
residues (like char) on their surface in order to achieve optimal infiltration.
2. Interdiffusion: if the chemical compatibility of the two materials and the per-
meability of the resins allows it, the molecules at the interface will diffuse from
one material to the other and their subsequent entanglement will strengthen their
bonding. Solvents and plasticizing agents are used to promote this phenomenon
and, especially when working with thermoset resins, it is advisable to reserve some
time for the diffusion process before proceeding with the crosslinking and curing.
3. Electrostatic attraction: opposite charges will strengthen the interface propor-
tionally to their charge densities.
4. Chemical bonding: covalent bonding is considered so far the strongest type of
fibre-resin bonding. For this reason, coupling agents and surface functionalization
are two of the most commonly used methods to enhance the interface performance.
5. Mechanical adhesion: when there is good infiltration, the rough morphology at
the interface between fibres and matrix will help in locking the two materials
Page 5
==PAGE:14==
CHAPTER 1. BACKGROUND
1.3. Matrix
;A<
together, increasing the friction between the two [12].
Composite materials with weaker interfaces have lower strength and stiffness but
higher resistance to fracture, while those with stronger interfaces show high strength
and stiffness but are in the end very brittle [8].
1.2.2
Porosity
Porosity is a key parameter for the mechanical properties of the composite. Studies have
shown that the presence of pores in a unidirectional Carbon fibre reinforced polymer
(CFRP) reduces both strength and elasticity, and in particular in-plane shear and inter
laminar properties. The bigger the pores the more accentuated the effect is, as the load
transfer capacity is negatively impacted [13][14]. High porosity also causes premature
fatigue failure as the pores act as point of stress concentration [15]. Porosity is usually the
result of air or moisture trapped within the matrix or of the production of volatile gases
during processing. To minimize the porosity of a composite, counteractive strategies like
preventive degassing, vacuum evacuation and elevated pressure have been employed. The
study of porosity can be carried out by using for example ultrasonic testing, X-ray micro-
computed tomography [13][15], grayscale histogram approach on microscopy images [16]
or indirect measurements from Fibre volume content (FVC) chemical determination if
the exact densities of resin and fibres are known.
1.3
Matrix
Figure 1.5: Schematic repre-
sentation of the differ-
ent chemical structure
of TP and TS.
Polymeric matrix materials can be divided into Thermo-
plastic (TP) and Thermoset (TS) materials. While thermo-
plastic polymers are composed by several distinct polymeric
chains - free from each other if not for secondary interactions
- thermoset polymers are characterized by a crosslinked 3D
network which connects all the polymeric chains in the mate-
rial (Figure 1.5). When thermoplastic materials are heated,
the bonds in the molecules gain enough energy to rotate and
the chains disentangle, flowing past each other. This class
of materials can therefore be reprocessed several times and
allows for a certain degree of recycling. In thermoset ma-
terials, as the molecules are covalently cross-linked to each
other, heat does not allow for disentanglement of the chains
but can only initiate decomposition when the temperature
exceeds the thermal tolerance of the material.
Thermoplastic matrices can achieve high impact strength, good thermal resistance
and have the advantage of being easily reprocessed and recycled in pure form. Ther-
moset matrices, on the other hand, are more widely employed as matrix materials for
composites thanks to their superior thermal stability, dimensional stability and mechan-
ical strength[4].
Page 6
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 1. BACKGROUND
1.3. Matrix
;A<
Sustainability
Sustainability can be approached from many different sides and encom-
passes many different solutions. In terms of plastic materials, it is always important to
contextualize the discussion based on the application for which each product is thought.
When addressing short-life and commodity plastics, these are very widespread products
that are produced and disposed of in large quantities. Important aspect to consider are
then the energy and material efficiencies, but also effective waste collection and knowl-
edge of the plastic composition to ensure successful recycling. Compostability can also
be an advantage but has to be weighted against the required product life and the com-
posting facilities available, while the energy embedded in the materials is lost. On the
other hand, when addressing engineering and high-performance plastics, durability can-
not be compromised. An extended use-life is - in this case - recommendable, and allows
for waste reduction. The production of such materials usually requires higher energy
consumption and quality materials, so that the recovering of the embedded energy and
resources remains a priority.
In the light of what was just discussed, thermoplastic polymers are desirable for
their reprocessability but special attention has to be paid to the energy required for
such process and the potential loss of material properties over successive cycles. Ther-
moset polymers, in contrast, often offer superior performance that translates into greater
durability, thereby reducing the need for frequent production and replacement.
1.3.1
Epoxy resin
Figure 1.6: Chem-
ical structure
of the epoxy
functional
group.
One of the most commonly utilized thermoset matrices is epoxy
resin[2]. Epoxy resins own their name to the functional epoxy group
(Figure 1.6), which is very reactive and is responsible for the cross-
linking during the curing of the resin. Epoxy resins are cured with
the help of a curing agent, also referred to as ”hardener”. This agent
can have multiple functionalities and will act as a link between the
monomers and oligomers by forming covalent bonds with them, giv-
ing rise to a stable and solid 3D network. The structure of the resin
monomer and hardener molecule used in this project is depicted in
Figure 1.7.
The curing of an epoxy matrix is an exothermic process and can happen both at
room temperature, by supplying extra heat, or by using irradiation in the presence of
photo-initiators. By curing at room temperature, it is possible to achieve lower Glass
transition temperature (Tg), higher flexibility, impact resistance, and higher electrical and
thermal shock resistance. On the other hand, heat-curing provides higher glass transition
temperature, tensile strength, heat resistance, and chemical resistance[4]. Several studies
were conducted to determine the relationship between temperature and degree of curing:
no matter the temperature, after an initial rapid increase in the conversion factor, the
reactions reaches a plateau [17]. When curing at higher temperatures however, not only
the plateau is reached faster but the maximum degree of conversion that can be reached
is also higher. Indeed the plateau indicates that the reaction rate has become diffusion
Page 7
==PAGE:16==
CHAPTER 1. BACKGROUND
1.3. Matrix
;A<
(a) Chemical structure of the resin precursor of trade name Araldite LY 3585.
(b) Chemical structure of the hardener
used to cross-link the resin. Trade name:
Aradur 3475.
Figure 1.7: Formulation of the epoxy resin and hardener used in this project.
controlled and the free chains are limited in their movements by the already cross-linked
resin [17] [18]. The remaining monomers or oligomers present in the matrix will later act
as plasticizers and lower the Tg as well as broaden the glass transition region due to the
different relaxation times of longer and shorter sub-molecules [9].
1.3.2
Polyamide
Figure 1.8: Chem-
ical structure
of the amide
functional
group.
Polyamides (PAs) are a class of semi-crystalline thermoplastic poly-
mers characterized by an amide group in the backbone (Figure 1.8).
The amide group induces strong inter-chain interactions, namely hy-
drogen bonding between the H of one chain and the oxygen in the
next one. Those interactions lead to a high Tg, low dissolution in or-
ganic solvents, which are apolar, and higher strength and stiffness as
well as creep resistance. On the other hand, thanks to the hydrogen
bonding, aliphatic PAs have a tendency to absorb water, which act
as a plasticizer and reduces the Tg, the strength, and the modulus
while increasing the impact strength.
The crystallinity of the material is highly dependent on the num-
ber of methyl groups in the backbone of the polymer, on the average
molecular weight of the polymer as well as on the water absorption, and thus will be the
Melting temperature (Tm) [19] [20].
Figure 1.9: Chemical
struc-
ture of the two compo-
nents in the copolymer
PA 66/6I.
To improve the impregnation of the fibres in composite
materials, a new copolymer was being developed by Ashai
Kasei based on PA66/6I. This new copolymer has a lower
viscosity than standard PA66 and PA6 and at the same
time a wider crystallization peak. [21]. As the structure
reveals (Figure 1.9), this new copolymer is partially aro-
matic. Reducing viscosity is key in composite fabrication
as it allows for better impregnation of the fibres. The semi-
Page 8
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 1. BACKGROUND
1.4. Carbon fibres
;A<
aromatic structure, on the other hand, provides benefits
like higher chemical stability and lower water absorption
thanks to the non-polar structure.
1.3.3
Matrix recycling
Matrix recycling is not always considered in the recycling of
CFRP. Pyrolysis allows at best energy or secondary resource recovery through collection
of the generated gases and liquids [22] while mechanical recycling produces low quality
materials that can only be downcycled. Out of all three, chemical recycling is the only
one that allows to depolymerize the matrix and obtain oligomers that can be reintroduced
into a new product without significant properties loss [3]. Although this route provides
good results, the energy intake required to maintain high pressure and/or temperature,
and the chemicals involved make it unattractive from an economical and environmental
perspective [22]. For this reason, new matrix materials are being tested to facilitate
recovery and recycling of composites. In one direction, thermoset matrices are being
modified to contain reversible and weak bonds, in the other thermoplastic matrices are
optimized to endure multiple recycling cycles and display high mechanical and thermal
properties [23] [24]. Studies show that PA-based composites can be mechanically and
thermally recycled [24], but also dissolved and precipitated in a closed recycling loop
[23].
1.4
Carbon fibres
Carbon fibres are defined as fibres containing 92% of carbon, which have a polycrystalline
structure and show a two-dimensional long range order in planar hexagonal networks sim-
ilar to that of graphite, while not showing any quantifiable order in the third direction[4].
Based on the treatment received and the heat treatment temperature used, CFs can have
very different modulus and crystallite orientation. The higher the temperature the more
ordered is the structure of the fibre, with the crystallites mainly parallel to the fibre’s
axis. Most of the high-performance CFs consist of turbostratic layers (Figure 1.10a). In
this form, only a two-dimensional order is achieved while the distance between the single
sheets of graphene is larger than in graphite itself, so that the strong bond that is created
between the sheets of graphene cannot be reproduced in the latter (Figure 1.10b) [4].
As already stated, CFs properties widely vary depending on the manufacturing route
and the precursor. Nonetheless, the Young’s Modulus of CFs is consistently superior to
that of glass fibres or Kevlar fibres [8]. CFs are first classified based on tensile strength
and tensile modulus, and then on bundle structure which can have different sizes and can
exhibit a twist. The classification criteria for standard, intermediate, and high modulus
CFs can be seen in Table 1.1.
Virgin CFs are supplied in diverse configurations to satisfy process needs. Long fibres
can simply be aligned in one direction inside a thin sheet of composite materials called
Page 9
==PAGE:18==
CHAPTER 1. BACKGROUND
1.4. Carbon fibres
;A<
(a) Turbostratic structure inside a carbon fi-
bre.
(b) Difference in spacing between graphene layers and turbostratic car-
bon
Figure 1.10: Carbon fibre structure and comparison with graphite crystal layering.
Fibre type
Tensile modulus [Msi]
Tensile modulus [GPa]
Standard modulus
33 - 37
230 - 255
Intermediate modulus
41 - 49
280 -340
High modulus
49 - 85
343 - 588
Table 1.1: Fibre type based on tensile modulus as specified by the CF producers Toray and Mitsubishi
[25] [26]
lamina, but they are also frequently assembled using textile processing equipment. Avail-
able formats for these fibres are roving, mats, woven/braided/stitched fabrics, unidirec-
tional tapes and tows. For short fibres, unidirectional alignment is harder to achieve and
waving is not possible. However, these fibres can be integrated into processes precluded
to long fibres like extrusion, drawing and rolling and can be assembled in non-woven
mats to be used in compression moulding and similar techniques.
Sustainability
The production of CFs requires high amount of energy - especially
to achieve high performances - and it releases, in addition, multiple hazardous gases
like CO, NOx, and HCN that require further energetic and economic investment to be
safely managed[22]. While on average the energy input ranges between 404 and 704
MJ/kg, by using Recycled carbon fibres (rCF) it is possible to bring it down to 2.03
- 30 MJ/kg [1]. One of the priority in this case is thus to reduce the need for virgin
CFs by improving technologies to extract them from finished product while preserving
their properties. A big contribution is this sense is achieved by efficiently collecting the
industrial cut-off, highly valuable as they require very little processing to be reintroduced
in the manufacturing chain.
Page 10
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 1. BACKGROUND
1.4. Carbon fibres
;A<
1.4.1
CF recycling
CFs waste can be differentiated based on its source into two main groups: fibres that are
reclaimed from production cut-off (dry fibres), which usually have a sizing on them and
properties similar to those of Virgin carbon fibres (vCF), and fibres that have already
been incorporated into semi-finished or finished products. It is estimated that dry fibres
account for around 40% of the total Carbon fibre (CF) waste [22][1]. This kind of fibres is
usually reintroduced into the manufacturing chain in the form of non-wovens, normal or
commingled yarns and non-crimp prepreg fabric, often in combination with virgin fibres
[3][22]. However, if the fibres were already embedded into a matrix, recycling requires
multiple steps and can be either mechanical, thermal, or chemical.
Processing of cut-off fibres
Cut-off fibres are usually below 100 mm in length and
cannot be used to produce conventional textiles.
Modified technologies like dry-laid
carding and wet-laid have been developed specifically with short fibres in mind, and
allow for the production of non-woven textiles.
As a dry-laid textile will be used in this project, more details are provided: the fibres
- usually in the range of 40-100 mm - are laid out in a conveyor belt and fed to a carding
machine that separates them and processes them to a thin mat. The mat that is formed
is then cross-lapped at 90° in a second conveyor belt [1][27]. From this step, the final
material shows slight orientation in this direction. The material is in the end penetrated
with needles moving at high speed to entangle the fibres. Slight anisotropic behaviour
was confirmed for a non-woven material from the same production as the one tested in
this project [1].
Mechanical recycling
Mechanical recycling consists of shredding and grinding the
composite into fine powder that can then be for example used as filler in Sheet moulding
compounds (SMCs) or reinforcing agents in epoxy foams [22].
The mechanical process has the lowest processing costs, but the form in which the
material is recovered limits the application field, especially due to the reduced length of
the carbon fibres.
Chemical recycling
Chemical recycling offers a wide range of reaction pathways using
different combinations of solvents, catalysts, temperature, and pressure, with the aim of
decomposing the matrix without damaging the fibres. This results in the retention of
long CFs with no residues on the surface and properties similar to those of vCF.
Chemical recycling and the use of supercritical water guarantee the best retention
of the fibres mechanical properties but the processes are still in development and either
require careful design of solvents recirculation systems or high running costs to maintain
high temperature and pressure coupled with a low processing capacity [3] [22].
Thermal recycling
Thermal recycling can be divided in pyrolysis and fluidized bed
processes. During pyrolysis the material is heated in inert atmosphere until the matrix is
Page 11
==PAGE:20==
CHAPTER 1. BACKGROUND
1.5. Additives
;A<
decomposed and removed from the fibres. Since noticeable residues are left on the fibres
(e.g. char), a second oxidizing step is required. The recovered fibres exhibit 50–98% of
the mechanical properties of virgin CFs [3] [28] [29] [30]. Molten salts can be coupled with
pyrolysis to achieve 95% tensile strength recovery in the rCF. In fluidized bed recycling,
the shredded waste is fed into a fluidized bed of silica sand that causes the matrix to
decompose. The recycled fibres retain from 10 to 75% of the tensile strength of the vCF
and are in the length range of 5-10 mm [3]. A newly developed method to thermally
recycle CFs consists in using microwaves as a source of heat and allows for recovery of
CFs with up to 99% of the strength of vCF [29].
Overall, pyrolysis happens to be the preferred recycling technique, being already
tested at different manufacturing stages and causing only minor losses in the mechanical
properties of the rCF [3] [31] [32].
For the scope of this work, pyrolysis will be utilized to recover carbon fibres and thus
some more detailed information are provided: as stated above, after a first pyrolytic
step necessary to decompose and remove most of the matrix from the fibres, a second
oxidative step has to be performed to eliminate the char left on the fibre’s surface. If
the last step is not performed, the char will negatively affect the fibre-matrix adhesion
of the rCF when recirculated into a new product [31] [32] [33].
Both the pyrolytic and oxidative step have an influence on the final properties of the
fibres and temperature, residence time and atmosphere are key parameters to achieve
optimal recovery [22] [28]. As the oxidation temperature depends primarily on the de-
composition temperature of the matrix, Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) are often
employed to determine the most suitable temperature range. The oxidative step is often
the most delicate for the retention of the fibre properties, as the surface can oxidize, and
the fibres degrade. By studying the pyrolysis process of epoxy-based (Sikradure 330)
composite with 45% FVC, it was found that decomposition happens in two separate
steps, the first between 300-450°C and the second one over 650°C. In this scenario, it
was then determined that pyrolysis of the composite remained efficient until 425°C, at
which a matrix loss of 55% is expected. Over this temperature the reaction rate drops
almost to zero [28]. The most effective heating rate was reported to be 20 K/min and
the residence time chosen was of 60 minutes. For the oxidative steps, clean fibres could
be obtained with a temperature of 550°C at a dwell time of 45 minutes.
The decomposition of the matrix during the process is highly dependant on chemical
structure, interaction between different components, and heating rate. The available
information about decomposition products of epoxy and polyamide-based materials are
given in section 1.7, under Thermal Gravimetric Analysis.
1.5
Additives
In the production of polymeric materials, additives are often required to improve specific
properties and avoid the degradation of the material. These can be plasticizers - which
help the polymer to flow - anti-aging antioxidants or uv-absorbers - that prevent oxidation
Page 12
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 1. BACKGROUND
1.6. Processing of CFRP
;A<
or degradation of the materials subjected to such stimuli - or flame retardants. While
the list goes on, this project will only focus on the use of Flame retardants (FRs) in
polyamide materials, as particularly popular polymers in electrical applications [34].
Flame retardants
While the most used FRs are halogen-based, these require a signif-
icant toll from the environment and more sustainable alternatives are being developed.
Of these, phosphorous(P)-based formulations show great potential due to their low tox-
icity and high efficiency, that can be further enhanced by adding extra elements like
nitrogen-containing groups to additionally dilute the oxygen concentration [35]. P-based
FRs act through two main mechanisms:
1. They generate phosphoric acid which promotes carbonization and cyclization of
the chains by dehydration reactions. The products are stable heavy molecule,
often aromatic, that do not evaporate but create a char layer on the polymer
surface that limits oxygen availability and heat transfer during combustion [35]
[36] [37].
2. They generate radicals that can chemically interact with the combustion radicals
(H* and OH*) limiting their concentration in the gaseous phase following the
reaction depicted below [38]:
PO• + H•
HPO
HPO + H•
PO• + H2
PO• + OH•
HPO2
HPO2 + H•
PO• + H2O
Depending on the oxidation state of the phosphorous in the Flame retardant (FR),
one of the two mechanisms can be preferred over the other. The combination of different
compounds is therefore preferred. It is good to keep in mind, however, that the reaction
mechanism does not only depend on the chemical structure of the FR but also on the
polymer structure and on its decomposition intermediates [34].
1.6
Processing of CFRP
Multiple processes are available for the fabrication of CFRP. For the purpose of this
project, two compression moulding techniques were used in order to manufacture the
composite plates, one for TS and one for TP.
For the epoxy resin, Wet compression moulding (WCM) was selected. WCM was
recently reintroduced in the industry by BMW, specifically for the fabrication of CFRP.
Compared with the more traditional Resin transfer moulding (RTM), it allows for a
reduction in cycle time while still guaranteeing high-quality surface finish and providing
good dimensional tolerance [39].
Practically, the resin is applied to the dry-fibre reinforcement outside of the mould
and left to pre-impregnate the mats for a specified amount of time, after which the
material is transferred to a pre-heated mould.
Here pressure is applied to drive the
resin to impregnate the whole material, and temperature is increased to cure the resin.
Better results are obtained when the resin is degassed before applying to the mats, and
Page 13
==PAGE:22==
CHAPTER 1. BACKGROUND
1.7. Composite characterization
;A<
if vacuum is created inside the press in order to reduce porosity and oxidation.
For the TP polymer, hot compression moulding was sufficient. The difference lies in
that TP polymers are usually supplied as dry powders. This means that pre-impregnation
of the mats is not possible and that by applying vacuum there is a risk of sucking in the
powder. In practice, the powder is then applied in between the fibre mats, and the stack
is placed in a closed mould to be compressed at high pressure and temperature. The
polymer has time to melt with the increasing temperature and can therefore infiltrate the
mat. Before opening the press the temperature is reduced again to solidify the polymer.
More details about the specific toolings can be found in Section 2.2.4.
1.7
Composite characterization
Composite characterization includes diverse techniques that are used to analyse the com-
ponents separately or the composite material as a whole. An overview of the theoretical
fundamentals of the analysis carried out for this project is given below.
Thermal gravimetric analysis
TGA is used to investigate the stability, purity and
thermal degradation behaviour of materials.
The sample is placed in a closed chamber, in a controlled atmosphere, and the mass
is recorded over time while the temperature is purposefully programmed. Depending on
the graph obtained and the material and conditions set, it is possible to identify chem-
ical reactions, vaporization, sublimation, desorption, purity of the sample, and thermal
stability of the material.
As mentioned above the degradation of a material depends both on its chemical
structure and on the heating programme.
From the study of several epoxy resins, it was found that pyrolysys degradation is
triggered by the generation of mono-atomic free radicals (mainly H.) [40].
The first
bonds that are broken are the ones near oxygen and nitrogen atoms and thus the resin
structure is decomposed first into aromatic compounds and later into light alkanes [33].
It was also found that most of the degradation process occurred in the resin molecules
and did not affect the hardener structure [40].
To the knowledge of the author, there is no study available about the pyrolytic
degradation of PA66/6I. However, it can be useful to mention what similar polymers
yeald.
The degradation of nylon (PA6 and PA6,6) follows a single-step degradation
pattern and results in the generation of an oil - containing a high fraction of short chain
hydrocarbons (C6 – C9) - and a gas-phase consisting of H2, CO, CO2 and some lightweight
hydrocarbons (C1 – C5) [41]. The reported char reside at the end of the process is of 1%
of the initial weight.
It is reasonable to assume that, with the introduction of an aromatic ring in the
polymer structure, the amount of aromatic structures produced is higher than for nylon,
resulting in higher amount of char. Considering a further addition of a FR molecule, the
expected amount of residue is even higher.
Page 14
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 1. BACKGROUND
1.7. Composite characterization
;A<
Single fibre tensile test
Single fibre tensile test (SFTT) is used to measure the tensile
properties of single fibres. The fibre specimen is clamped -straight - between two flat jaws
and extended at constant rate until breakage (Figure 1.11). The force-extension curve
is recorded and provides informations about breaking force and elongation at break. In
combination with a linear density (mass per unit length) measurement - conducted by
vibroscopic method - it is used to calculate breaking stress and modulus of the fibre.
Figure 1.11: Schematic representation of single fibre tensile test set-up.
Figure 1.12: Typical
pull-out
curve.
Single fibre pull-out
In Single fibre pull-out (SFPO)
a single fibre is embedded at the centre of a matrix
droplet.
Once the matrix has solidified the fibre is
pulled at constant rate until the entire fibre segment
is extracted (Figure 1.13. From the recording of force-
displacement data (Figure 1.12), it is possible to identify
the maximum force Fmax, and the effective embedded
length le which - together with the fibre diameter df
which is measured vibroscopically - are used to calcu-
late the apparent interfacial shear strength as:
τapp = Fmax
πdfle
(1.5)
Page 15
==PAGE:24==
CHAPTER 1. BACKGROUND
1.7. Composite characterization
;A<
Figure 1.13: Schematic representation of signle fibre pull-out set-up.
Figure 1.14: Schematic
representa-
tion of FVC
analysis
set-up.
Fibre volume content determination
The chemical determina-
tion of the FVC of a sample relies on the dissolution of the matrix
to obtain a precise gravimetric measurement of the amount of fibres
present in the specimen (Figure 1.14).
Bending test
The four-point bending test is used to determine
flexural strength and flexural modulus of a material. The specimens
are deflected at constant rate until fracture while the force applied
is measured (fig 1.15). Flexural strength is defined as the stress sus-
tained at maximum load while the flexural modulus gives an indica-
tion of how resistant the material is to bending.
Page 16
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 1. BACKGROUND
1.7. Composite characterization
;A<
Figure 1.15: Schematic representation of four-point bending test set-up.
Charpy test
The Charpy impact test is used to determine the
impact strength of materials. The samples are stroked with a single
blow by a hammer and bent under high, nominally constant velocity
(fig 1.16). The impact energy at break is defined as the energy expended in accelerating,
deforming and breaking the test specimen, while the impact strength is equal to the
impact energy at break normalized to the initial cross-sectional area of the specimen
(thickness * width).
Figure 1.16: Schematic representation of impact test set-up.
Page 17
==PAGE:26==
CHAPTER 1. BACKGROUND
1.7. Composite characterization
;A<
SEM-EDS
Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) is a type of microscope which uses
a beam of electrons to produce images of the samples.
SEM provides two different
detectors and three visualization modes. First is a Secondary electron detector (SE),
which captures the electron generated by inelastic scattering. In this case, the electrons
in the beam - also called primary electrons - collide with the outer electrons of the
atoms in the sample providing them with part of their initial energy. These electrons
will then absorb the energy and become loose in the sample, and only if they are close
enough to the surface they will be able to escape and reach the detector. Second is
a Backscatter electron detector (BSE), which captures the primary electrons that were
elastically scattered by the atoms in the sample. Since the probability of having an elastic
scattering depend on how tightly bound are the electrons to the nuclei, meaning on how
heavy are the atoms in the material, BSE gives more information on the composition
of the material, whereas SE give information on the surface topography.
The third
visualization mode offered is nothing else than a combination of the two just mentioned.
The SEM also operates in two different vacuum modes (low and high vacuum) at
two acceleration voltages (5kV and 15kV ). While high vacuum mode is recommended
for conductive samples, low vacuum mode is needed for non-conductive samples to facil-
itate the release of electrons from the surface of the material. The acceleration voltage
influences instead how deep in the sample can the electrons travel, and having a high
acceleration voltage can improve the resolution of the image.
Energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) can be coupled with SEM and provides
elemental composition information by analysing the X-rays released by a sample when
hit by the electron beam. As each element has a unique electronic structure, the energy
released after the surface was excited by the electrons can be traced back to the presence
of specific elements. It has a micron-scale resolution and it allows for non-destructive
characterization of the specimen.
Page 18
==PAGE:27==
Chapter 2
Methodology
2.1
Material specifications
For the scope of this project a non-woven reinforcement material derived from industrial
waste fibres was selected, combined with three different polymer matrices: a thermoset,
a thermoplastic, and a thermoplastic modified with a flame retardant additive. The non-
woven was supplied by Tenowo and was produced using a dry-laid process from recycled
cut-off fibres. The fibres were sized and the non-woven areal weight was 100 g/m2. For
the thermoset matrix, an epoxy-based resin system from Huntsman, commercially known
as Araldite LY3585/Aradur3475, was used. This served as a benchmark for comparison
with the thermoplastic systems. As the thermoplastic matrix, a copolymer of polyamide
66 (PA66) and polyamide 6I (PA6I) — supplied by Asahi Kasei — was used. To assess
the impact of a flame retardant on the composite performance and the recycling cycle,
a second batch of the PA66/PA6I copolymer was modified by addition of an organic
aluminum phosphinate as the flame retardant additive. The materials were chosen based
on on-going research at Fraunhofer IGCV. It was seen from previous research that the
combinations without flame retardant are comparable to the SMC benchmark for frame
and panel part selection in cars (Figure 2.1) [1].
2.2
Method
Figure 2.2: Process scheme.
The cut-off recycled fibres were initially characterized
to assess their mechanical and interfacial performance.
This was achieved through single fibre tensile test and
single fibre pull-out test. Similarly, thermo-gravimetric
analysis (TGA) was performed on all matrix materi-
als to determine appropriate processing temperature
windows and suitable recycling temperatures, based on
thermal stability and decomposition behaviour.
For each material, three plates were pressed, one for mechanical testing, one destined
to be pyrolyzed and one destined to be pyrolyzed and oxidized in order to recover the
19
==PAGE:28==
CHAPTER 2. METHODOLOGY
2.2. Method
;A<
Figure 2.1: Comparison of dry-laid thermoplastic composite (DL-TP) and dry-laid thermoset compos-
ite (DL-TS) with data from commercial automotive-grade SMC [1].
rCF. The mechanical behaviour of the plates was evaluated via four-point bending test
and Charpy impact test. The quality of impregnation was qualitatively assessed using
optical microscopy while the fibre volume content (FVC) was determined chemically
for each panel to ensure comparability in the results. Recycled fibres obtained from
both one-step (pyrolysis only) and two-step (pyrolysis + oxidation) recycling routes
were re-characterized through single fibre tensile tests and pull-out tests to evaluate
the effects of the recycling process on their mechanical and interfacial properties. In
parallel, the recovered matrix and flame retardant residues were analysed by scanning
electron microscopy coupled with energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (SEM-EDS) to
assess their morphology and elemental composition. The residual char content left on
the fibre surface was determined gravimetrically.
Following the first round of characterization, the recycled fibres were reintroduced
in the manufacturing cycle to produce a second generation of panels. As for the first
generation, these were also tested for their mechanical properties, impregnation quality,
and FVC to evaluate the material performance across multiple life cycles.
Further specifications can be found in the sections below.
2.2.1
TGA
Thermal gravimetric analysis is used to investigate stability, purity and thermal degra-
dation behaviour of materials. The specimen is placed in an open vessel which is heated
in a controlled atmosphere while the weight is recorded.
TGA was performed using Libra TG 209 F1 from Netzsch. The samples were heated
in inert atmosphere to 550 ◦C at 10 K/min and kept at the same temperature for 30
min. The temperature was afterward brought down to 200 ◦C and increased again to
500 ◦C in oxygen atmosphere. Afte a hold time of 30 min the temperature was increased
to 1000 ◦C to clean the crucibles. The results were analysed using NETZSCH Proteus
Page 20
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 2. METHODOLOGY
2.2. Method
;A<
tm Version 8.0.2
2.2.2
Single fibre Tensile Test
In SFTT, the single-fibre specimen is clamped - straight - between two flat jaws and
extended at constant rate until breakage (Figure 1.11). The force-extension curve is
recorded and provides informations about breaking force and elongation at break. In
combination with a linear density (mass per unit length) measurement - conducted by
vibroscopic method - it is also used to calculate breaking tenacity, modulus, tensile stress
at specific elongations and breaking toughness.
Single fibre tensile test was performed using Textechno favimat+ equipped with 4mm
clamps. The linear density measurement was performed with the software Textechno35
Version 3.0.3607, using a pretension of 1cN/tex, testing speed 1mm/min and gauge
length of 25mm while the tensile test was performed using a test speed of 5mm/min.
Fibre breakage was identified at 90% force drop. From each recovered fibre batch, 30
fibres were tested, selected from 5 different places of the material, unless otherwise spec-
ified. In the case of thermally recovered fibres, the fibres were selected from different
layers with the exception of the most charred ones, when it turned out to be impossible
to separate the single fibres without breaking them.
For more information about the method refer to ASTM Test Method D3822 and ISO
11566.
2.2.3
Single fibre Pull-out
In SFPO a single fibre is embedded at the centre of a matrix droplet. Once the matrix
has solidified the fibre is pulled at constant rate until the entire fibre segment is extracted
(1.13).
From the recording of force-displacement data (fig), it is possible to identify the
maximum force Fmax, and the effective embedding length le which - together with the
fibre diameter df - are used to calculate the apparent interfacial shear strength as:
τapp = Fmax
πdfle
(2.1)
Single fibre pull-out was performed using Textechno favimat+ at a test speed of
1mm/min and pretension of 0.1 cN. Fibre breaking was identified by a drop in force
under 0.1 cN while the test was stopped at 800 µm in case of failure to break. A total of
15 fibres was tested for each fibre batch, unless otherwise specified. The fibres obtained
from each recycling process were sampled at 5 different spots, unless otherwise specified.
The diameter of each fibre was measured using Textechno favimat+. Each fibre was then
cut into smaller segments, each of which was embedded using + Textechno fimabond with
the software FimaBondGUI Version 21.9.15.1251. Embedding parameters for thermoset
and thermoplastic matrix materials are specified in table 2.1 and 2.2.
Page 21
==PAGE:30==
CHAPTER 2. METHODOLOGY
2.2. Method
;A<
Table 2.1: Embedding cycle for pull-out test with epoxy based matrix.
Step
Temperature
Time
Description
Degassing
50 ◦C
1 min
Inert atmosphere
Embedding
50 ◦C
70 µm at 200 µm/min
Curing 1
100 ◦C
2 min
Curing 2
110 ◦C
3 min
Cooling
40 ◦C
Until T reached
Table 2.2: Embedding cycle for pull-out test with polyamide-based matrix.
Step
Temperature
Time
Description
Degassing
140 ◦C
2 min
Inert atmosphere
Melting
285 ◦C
1.5 min
Embedding
285 ◦C
120 µm at 500 µm/min
Fixing
285 ◦C
1 min
Cooling
40 ◦C
Until T reached
PA66/6I with FR was excluded from testing as the powder did not melt completely
during the embedding process due to the addition of the flame retardant. Fibres recov-
ered from such matrix were instead tested in PA66/6I.
Figure 2.3: Experimental picture of sample preparation with the PA66/6I with FR matrix.
2.2.4
Plate fabrication
For the fabrication of the panels, a fibre volume content of 25% was set as target. The
non-woven layers were manually cut from the non-woven roll and weighted before going
through further processing. The direction of the roll was always marked and will be
considered as the 0° direction in all further analysis. Data on the fiber areal weight was
also collected and found to be increasing with the unrolling of the non-woven, reason for
which the number of non-woven layers in each panel is not constant but ranges from 8
to 9. The LZT-0K-130-L Laboratory Press from Langzauner Gmbh was used to press
the panels, equipped with two different toolings for TP and TS materials.
The epoxy-based plates were fabricated through wet compression moulding using a
45x45 cm tooling with target thickness of 2 mm (the setup is visible in Figure 2.4).
Page 22
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 2. METHODOLOGY
2.2. Method
;A<
Setting a FVC of 25%, the target non-woven weight mf per panel can be calculated:
mf = Vf δf
= Vtooling ∗0, 25 δf
(2.2)
where Vf is the desired volume of fibre, Vtooling is the total volume in the tooling and δf
is the density of the fibres (1,78 g/cm3 for CFs). The pressing process is described in
table 2.3.
Table 2.3: Pressing cycle for epoxy-based panels.
Step description
Temperature
Gradient
Pressure
Time
Pre-heat press
60 ± 5 ◦C
10 K/min
Press open
Until T reached
Insert material
60 ± 5 ◦C
Close press
60 ± 5 ◦C
?
Apply vacuum
60 ± 5 ◦C
Vacuum < 100 ?
Press and heat
115 ± 5 ◦C
10 K/min
5,6?? MPa
Until T reached
Hold
115 ± 5 ◦C
10 min
Open
(a) WCM set up.
(b) WCM tooling.
Figure 2.4: Experimental picture of WCM set up and specific tooling.
The polyamide based panels were fabricated through hot compression moulding using
a 35x50cm tooling with target thickness of 2 mm (an example tooling for this process
can be seen in Figure 2.5). The target non-woven weight was calculated as above. The
pressing process is described in table 2.4. A melting temperature of 290°C was set for
the pure PA66/6I, while it was known from previous studies conducted at Fraunhofer
IGCV that the formulation with flame retardant required a higher temperature - 300°C
- to achieve similar impregnation.
Cutting
The panel designated for testing was cut using ATA BRILLANT 265 and 220
precision cutter according to the cutting plan in (fig). For each of the remaining panels,
Page 23
==PAGE:32==
CHAPTER 2. METHODOLOGY
2.2. Method
;A<
Table 2.4: Press cycle for polyamide-based panels.
Step description
Temperature
Gradient
Pressure
Time
Insert material
∼60◦C
Close press and heat
290/300 ± 5◦C
10 K/min
286 kPa
Until T reached
Press with max force
290/300 ± 5◦C
3 MPa
Cool down
50 ± 30 ◦C
10 K/min
3 MPa
Until T reached
Open
Figure 2.5: Experimental picture of hot compression moulding example tooling.
a 5 cm-wide section was removed and reserved for fibre volume content analysis. Due
to the larger dimensions of the tooling used in wet compression moulding - applied to
the thermoset-based panels - a 10 cm-wide section was removed from these instead. The
adjustment ensured that a comparable amount of material was available for the recycling
step across both thermoset and thermoplastic panel types.
2.2.5
Microscopy
For each composite plate, two samples per principal direction (0° and 90°) were prepared
for microscopy. The samples, approximately 1 × 4 cm in size, were cut using an ATA
BRILLANT 265 precision cutter. Each sample was then vertically embedded in QPOX
90 resin and QPOX 90 hardener from QATM (mixed in a 2:1 ratio by volume), and left
to cure at room temperature for a minimum of 24 hours to ensure complete polymer-
ization. After curing, the embedded samples were polished using an ATA SAPHIR 550
grinding and polishing machine. A sequential sanding process was employed, starting
with coarse 120-grit abrasive paper and progressing through finer grades down to 0.06
µm, to obtain a smooth surface suitable for optical microscopy. The cross-section of the
samples was imaged using Leica DM4000 M LED microscope and the relative software
Leica Application Suite X Version 5.2.0.26130.1.
Page 24
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 2. METHODOLOGY
2.2. Method
;A<
2.2.6
FVC
Fibre volume content was measured following standard EN 2564 A. Three samples were
prepared for each plate. The density ρ of each sample was measured using the Sartorius
YDK01MS kit by applying the Archimedes’ principle, taking into account the depth of
immersion correction with the formula:
ρ =
ma [ρl −ρa]
0, 99983 [ma −ml] + ρa
(2.3)
where ρl is the density of the liquid, ρa is , and ml and ma the relative weights.
Hydrogen peroxide 30% (Art.:
476.1011) and sulfuric acid (Art.:856.1000) were
sourced from CHEMSOLUTE.
2.2.7
Four-point bending test
The four-point bending test is used to determine flexural strength and flexural modulus
of a material. The specimens are deflected at constant rate until fracture while the force
applied is measured (Figure 1.15). Flexural strength is defined as the stress sustained
at maximum load while the flexural modulus gives an indication of how resistant the
material is to bending.
Four-point bending test was conducted using Zwick/Roell Z050 testing machine, fol-
lowing DIN EN ISO 14125:2011-05 B at a speed of 1 mm/min for material class II with
modified thickness. For each material, 6 samples per principal direction (0° and 90°)
were cut using ATA BRILLANT 265 and 220 precision cutters. The samples were con-
ditioned at 70°C and 62% RH for 9 days and at 23°C 50% RH for 7 days until the mass
was deemed stable. The initial high humidity and temperature environment was selected
based on previous research at Fraunhofer IGCV, which revealed the PA66/6I matrix to
be very slow in reaching a saturation point. The support length and span length were
calculated specifically for each material. The force applied and deflection of the specimen
were measured and analysed with Text X Pert III Version 1.9.
2.2.8
Charpy impact test
The charpy impact test is used to determine the impact strength of materials.
The
samples are stroked with a single blow by a hammer and bent under high, nominally
constant velocity (fig 1.16). The impact energy at break is defined as the energy expended
in accelerating, deforming and breaking the test specimen, while the impact strength is
equal to the impact energy at break normalized to the initial cross-sectional area of the
specimen.
Charpy impact test was performed following DIN EN ISO 179-1:2023-10 / 2 nf for
unnotched specimen. CEAST 9350 droptower impact system from Instron was used, in
conjunction with -sotware- . For each material, 6 samples per principal direction (0° and
90°) were cut using ATA BRILLANT 265 and 220 precision cutters. The samples were
conditioned at 70°C and 62% RH for 9 days and at 23°C 50% RH for 7 days until the
Page 25
==PAGE:34==
CHAPTER 2. METHODOLOGY
2.2. Method
;A<
mass was deemed stable. Velocity of impact was set at 2,90m/s and nominal pendulum
energy at 10,1J, while support length was adjusted for each material.
2.2.9
Pyrolysis
Pyrolysis was performed using Linn High Therm KS-3-160-S-Sonder industrial furnace.
The process was divided in two 30 minutes step at 450°C and 550°C after a first trial
run. The two steps were introduced due to safety concerns related to the big quantity
of material that had to be pyrolyzed. The plates were distanced from the tray with the
aid of two metal bars in order to ensure similar flow conditions on the two surfaces.
2.2.10
Oxidation
Figure 2.6: Exper-
imental
set
up
Oxidation was performed using Linn High Therm KS-3-160-S-Sonder
industrial furnace. The process was run with a technical air flow of
600l/min at 500°C for 30 minutes. Before inserting the pyrolyzed
material into the furnace, the layers of non-woven were manually
separated and distanced from each other (Figure 2.6) to minimize
the differences arising between inner and outer layers [31] [42].
2.2.11
SEM-EDS
SEM was performed using SEM-EDS Hitachi TM3030Plus Tabletop
Microscope with the software Hitachi TM3030Plus and Bruker Esprit
Compact version 2.3.0.1017. The images were taken in mode mix-
EDS at magnification of 500x, 1000x, and 2000x.
2.2.12
Re-fabrication
The layers of fibres recovered from the first generation of panels was
reused as it was for the second generation. As part of the material was removed for FVC
analysis, the missing section was replaced with ”virgin material” in the tooling. The
amount of matrix used was kept constant.
The re-pressing of the epoxy-based panels was unsuccessful. Cross-sectional analysis
revealed the presence of large voids throughout the material that it was assumed derived
from procedure errors (Figure 2.7). As a result, a new panel was prepared and divided
into two equal parts, one destined for one-step recycling (pyrolysis) and the one for two
step-recycling (pyrolysis and oxidation). Only one panel was reprocessed for this purpose
due to shortage of time (Figure 2.8).
Page 26
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 2. METHODOLOGY
2.2. Method
;A<
Figure 2.7: Microscopy images of EP ox Pan01.
Figure 2.8: EP py Pan02 in the left upper corner & EP ox Pan02 in the left bottom corner right after
re-infiltration.
Page 27
==PAGE:36==
Chapter 3
Results & Discussion
An overview of the pressed plates is visible in table 3.1. Weight, thickness, and measured
FVC are reported in 3.2.
The material will be addressed using the material name. The recovered fibres will be
addressed with the name of the panel from which they were recovered.
3.1
Matrix comparison
This section will analyse the differences in performance and impregnation visible for
the panels produced using the ”virgin” non-woven, specifically to panels PA Pan01,
PAFR Pan01, and EP Pan01. The results from the TGA analysis of the matrix materials
and of the adhesion between materials and fibres are also discussed.
Figure 3.1: TGA analysis of the three matrix materials.
From left to right: epoxy, PA66/6I, and
PA66/6I with FR.
Thermal behaviour of the matrix materials
The TGA curves obtained for the
three matrix materials are reported in Figure 3.1. All matrices show a small reduction
in weight up to 340 ◦C. This is higher for polyamide-based matrices than for epoxy
(1,9% and 1,6% vs 1,1%). This confirms than the polyamide matrix, due to its chemical
structure, can absorb more water than the epoxy resin. For this reason, drying of the PA-
type matrix before fabrication could be advantageous to reduce porosity in the plates.
During pyrolysis up to 550 ◦C the mass loss is quite similar for the three materials,
amounting to 92-95%, while during oxidation up to 500 ◦C epoxy and PA66/6I lose
on average 1,2% wt. while PA66/6I with FR remains quite constant in weight (only
28
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS & DISCUSSION
3.1. Matrix comparison
;A<
-0,2%). It can also be seen that the epoxy matrix starts degrading at lower temperature
compared to PA66/6I, while the matrix with FR falls in between.
Figure 3.2: Measured τapp of nonwoven
fibres/epoxy resin and nonwoven
fibres/PA66/6I. Measurements for
PAFR-type matrix were not possi-
ble.
The adhesion is higher between non-woven
CFs and epoxy resin
The adhesion strength of
the non-woven fibres with the epoxy was found to
be higher than the one with PA 66/6I. As already
stated in the Section 2.2.3, preparation of pull-out
samples for pull-out test was not possible, the data
is therefore missing.
Impregnation is good for all materials
From
the cross-sectional analysis of the three panels, both
the polyamide and the epoxy-based panels show
very good impregnation, with little or no voids vis-
ible. For the panel containing flame retardant, the
impregnation is more difficult to assess.
At first
glance, large and frequent black spots are visible.
It would be wrong, however, to assume that all of
them represent pores. When changing the focus of the microscope to see deeper into
these pores, a whitish substance is visible in most of them (Figure 3.4). From previous
research conducted at Fraunhofer IGCV on the same materials, it seems reasonable to
assume that a large portion of the black spots visible in the cross-section is due to the
presence of the flame retardant, and not to the presence of pores. The exact percentage
is however not known, and further analysis would be necessary to determine it. Some
examples of cross-sectional imaging for all of the three panels can be seen in Figure 3.3.
Page 29
==PAGE:38==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS & DISCUSSION
3.1. Matrix comparison
;A<
Table 3.1: Plate composition specifications
Material code
Material name
Matrix material
Fibre origin
0236 Pan04
PA Pan01
PA PA66/6I from Asahi Kasei
rCF Tenowo
0236 Pan06
PA Pan02
PA66/6I from Asahi Kasei
rCF Tenowo
0236 Pan03
PA Pan03
PA66/6I from Asahi Kasei
rCF Tenowo
0206 Pan08
PAFR Pan01
PA66/6I +FR from Asahi Kasei
rCF Tenowo
0206 Pan07
PAFR Pan02
PA66/6I +FR from Asahi Kasei
rCF Tenowo
0206 Pan09
PAFR Pan03
PA66/6I +FR from Asahi Kasei
rCF Tenowo
0230 Pan18
EP Pan01
Huntsman Epoxy LY 3585/Aradur 3475
rCF Tenowo
0230 Pan17
EP Pan02
Huntsman Epoxy LY 3585/Aradur 3475
rCF Tenowo
0230 Pan19
EP Pan03
Huntsman Epoxy LY 3585/Aradur 3475
rCF Tenowo
0230 Pan20
EP Pan04
Huntsman Epoxy LY 3585/Aradur 3475
rCF Tenowo
0453 Pan01
PA py Pan01
PA66/6I from Asahi Kasei
rCF from PA66/6I, pyrolysed
0431 Pan01
PA ox Pan02
PA66/6I from Asahi Kasei
rCF from PA66/6I, oxidized
0454 Pan01
PAFR py Pan01
PA66/6I +FR from Asahi Kasei
rCF from PA66/6I +FR, pyrolized
0455 Pan01
PAFR ox Pan01
PA66/6I +FR from Asahi Kasei
rCF from PA66/6I +FR, oxidized
0434 Pan01
EP py Pan01
Huntsman Epoxy LY 3585/Aradur 3475
rCF from Epoxy resin, pyrolized
0434 Pan02
EP py Pan02
Huntsman Epoxy LY 3585/Aradur 3475
rCF from Epoxy resin, pyrolized
0435 Pan01
EP ox Pan01
Huntsman Epoxy LY 3585/Aradur 3475
rCF from Epoxy resin, oxidized
0435 Pan02
EP ox Pan02
Huntsman Epoxy LY 3585/Aradur 3475
rCF from Epoxy resin, oxidized
Page 30
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS & DISCUSSION
3.1. Matrix comparison
;A<
Table 3.2: Plates dimensions and measured FVC
Material name
# Layers
Wt. layers [g]
Wt. plate [g]
Avg. thickness
[mm]
Measured
FVC
[%wt.]
Use
PA Pan01
9
165,4
470,5
2,05
25,18 ± 0,37
Testing
PA Pan02
8
164,3
471,1
2,08
27,29 ± 1,97
Pyro.
PA Pan03
9
166,9
471,7
2,14
26,29 ± 0,16
Pyro.-oxid.
PAFR Pan01
9
175,3
489,7
2,18
24,75 ± 0,35
Testing
PAFR Pan02
9
164,9
483,0
2,14
24,13 ± 0,66
Pyro.
PAFR Pan03
8
160,8
437,9
1,96
27,92 ± 1,79
Pyro.-oxid.
EP Pan01
8
189,7
532,6
2,00
24,51 ± 0,48
Pyro.
EP Pan02
8
189,4
552,7
2,07
24,69 ± 0,87
Testing
EP Pan03
8
189,6
529,5
2,03
26,48 ± 0,43
Pyro.-oxid.
EP Pan04
8
191,5
524,8
2,04
25,78 ± 1,54
Pyro;
Pyro.-oxid.
PA py Pan01
8
188,3
498,8
2,22
24,07 ± 1,55
Testing
EPA ox Pan02
9
174,4
477,5
2,11
23,04 ± 0,29
Testing
PAFR py Pan01
9
199,4
509,4
2,39
20,32 ± 0,10
Testing
PAFR ox Pan01
8
179,8
478,8
2,19
21,83 ± 0,21
Testing
EP py Pan01
8
211,3
541,7
2,13
Testing
EP py Pan02
8
77,6
194,9
2,05
24,48 ± 1,49
Testing
EP ox Pan01
8
196,8
536,5
2,13
Testing
EP ox Pan02
8
69,7
191,0
2,01
25,28 ± 3,50
Testing
Page 31
==PAGE:40==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS & DISCUSSION
3.1. Matrix comparison
;A<
(a) PA Pan01, 0◦
(b) PA Pan01, 0◦
(c) PA Pan01, 90◦
(d) PA Pan01, 90◦
(e) PAFR Pan01, 90◦
(f) PAFR Pan01, 90◦
(g) PAFR Pan01, 90◦
(h) PAFR Pan01, 0◦
(i) EP Pan01, 0◦
(j) EP Pan01, 0◦
(k) EP Pan01, 90◦
(l) EP Pan01, 90◦
Figure 3.3: Microscopy pics, first round. better caption will come soon
Page 32
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS & DISCUSSION
3.2. Recycling process
;A<
(a) PAFR, 20?x
(b) PAFR, 50?x
(c) PAFR, 50?x
(d) PAFR, 100?x
Figure 3.4: Visualization of ”white” substance inside the black spots visible from the microscopy of
PAFR-type materials.
As the FVC content is consistent within the three panels (Table 3.2), these are
assumed to be directly comparable in their mechanical properties.
Mechanical performance
From the obtained results, graphically depicted in Figure
3.5, the epoxy-based panels show slightly higher properties than the polyamide-based
ones, while the addition of flame retardant does not introduce any significant difference
at this stage.
The flexural strength, defined as the maximum stress that the material can withstand,
is directly related to the interfacial properties. This is confirmed by the similar trend
that Figure 3.2 and Figure 3.5a share. The lower adhesion strength between fibre and
polyamide-based matrix translates in easier fracture. While the flexural modulus follows
the same pattern (Figure 3.5b), the maximum flexural elongation (Figure 3.5c) increases
moving from thermoset to thermoplastic, reaching a peak for the TP matrix with FR.
This can be attributed to the higher stiffness of the cross-linked epoxy resin compared
to the thermoplastic PA66/6I. On top of the different chemical structure, the addition
of a particular flame retardant contributes to a further increase in material flexibility.
As already seen in previous studies [1], the dry-laid fabrication technique of non-
wovens introduces an anisotropic factor in the mat that has a measurable influence on
the composite performance (see Section 1.4.1). This effect is evident also in the data
collected for this project: at 90°, where the fraction of aligned fibres is higher, the material
is stronger and stiffer while at 0°, where the fraction of fibres aligned is comparably lower,
the materials is weaker but more flexible.
Limitations of the equipment and testing method
Adjusting of the span length
and support length for bending test as well as for Cahrpy test was manual and not
automated, which might introduce a larger error in the calculations.
3.2
Recycling process
This section will assess the effectiveness of the recycling by considering char residue
content, char composition and retention of fibre properties.
Page 33
==PAGE:42==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS & DISCUSSION
3.2. Recycling process
;A<
(a) Flexural strength.
(b) Flexural modulus.
(c) Maximum flexural strain.
(d) Impact energy.
Figure 3.5: Measured mechanical properties of plates EP Pan01, PA Pan01, and PAFR Pan01. Re-
sults in (a), (b), and (c) were obtained through bending test, results in (d) through Charpy impact
test.
Char residue down to zero for epoxy and PA66/6I matrices
The calculated char
residue after single- and double-step recycling process is reported in table 3.3. After one-
step recycling - namely pyrolysis - both the EP- and PA-type panels yielded a char residue
around 6-7% of the initial matrix weight. The char residue was successfully reduced to
less than 1% for both of them with the oxidation step. No significant difference can be
seen between these two materials. As expected, the addition of a flame retardant to the
polyamide matrix increased noticeably the residue left on the fibres and proved difficult
to remove even with the oxidation step.
The fibre surface was thus inspected using SEM-EDS analysis. Both for pyrolyzed
and oxidized fibres from epoxy and pa66/6I matrix, residues were scarcely visible. The
oxidized fibres recovered from epoxy matrix show at times some defect on the surface
(Figure 3.6).
However, for the fibres recovered from pa66/6I with FR, large clumps
of residue were visible on the surface of the fibres, containing both phosphorous and
aluminium (Figure 3.7).
Good retention of fibre properties after oxidation for all materials
As visible
in Figure 3.8, the recovered fibres after oxidation from EP-type panels allows for full
retention of the fibre properties. Slightly worse is the performance for the fibres recovered
Page 34
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS & DISCUSSION
3.2. Recycling process
;A<
Table 3.3: Calculated char content on the recovered layers as percentage of the used matrix (column 3
and 4) and as percentage of the total recovered weight (column 5).
Material
name
Recycling
process
Residue after
py.
[ %Mwt. ]
Residue after
ox.
[ %Mwt. ]
Residue after
recycling
[ %Rwt. ]
EP Pan02
Pyrolysis
6,9%
-
15%
EP Pan03
Pyro. & oxid.
6,0%
0,3%
1%
EP Pan04
Pyrolysis
4,6%
-
10%
EP Pan04
Pyro. & oxid.
5,1%
-0,2%
-1%
PA Pan02
Pyrolysis
6,6%
-
12%
PA Pan03
Pyro. & oxid.
5,0%
0,5%
1%
PAFR Pan02
Pyrolysis
9,0%
-
16%
PAFR Pan03
Pyro. & oxid.
9,6%
5,9%
10%
through oxidation from PA- and PAFR-type matrices, indicating modest degradation at
the surface. However, the properties of the ”virgin” non-woven are always within one
standard deviation of the results obtained from the oxidized fibres, showing that the
damage is negligible.
What instead catches the attention is a reduction in performance for the pyrolysed
fibres. Although it is widely reported that thermal processing in inert atmosphere does
not affect fibre properties up to 500◦C [22] [28] [31], while the oxidation process can
introduce oxidation defects [43], the fibre recovered with only pyrolysis from both EP-
and PA-type panels show lower tenacity, lower breaking stress, and lower elongation
at maximum force than both ”virgin” and oxidized ones. On the contrary, pyrolysed
fibre recovered from PAFR-type panels show the same or even better property retention
compared to their oxidized counterpart.
Considering the findings of the cited studies, there is reason to believe that some part
of the measurements was compromised by the presence of residue on the fibre surface.
Three hypothesis are presented:
1. The residue interferes with the clamping mechanism causing the fibre to slip.
2. The fibre diameter is overestimated during measurement due to the residue on
the fibre.
3. The linear density measurement is affected by the residue.
A more detailed discussion can be found in the next paragraph.
The results of the SFPO test are depicted in Figure 3.9. For both EP recovered
fibres and PAFR recovered fibres, the apparent interfacial adhesion strength τ decreases
compared to the ”virgin” non-woven fibres, with no difference between pyrolyzed and
oxidized fibres. However, the trend is different for the fibres recovered from PA. While τ
remains constant for the pyrolyzed ones, it increases after oxidation compared with the
”virgin” non-woven fibres. This effect could be explained by an enhanced compatibility
between the oxidized fibre surface and the polyamide matrix. Two different mechanisms
Page 35
==PAGE:44==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS & DISCUSSION
3.2. Recycling process
;A<
Figure 3.6: SEM imaging of the non-woven fibres in comparison to the fibres recovered from the panels.
found in literature can be used to explain the effect:
1. Polymer crystallization: unlike most thermoset polymers, multiple thermoplastic
polymers can crystallize. Crystallization is initiated at a nucleating site and it
usually proceeds to form a spherulite in which the molecular chains lie tangent to
the spherical front. For a substrate to be acting as a nucleating site, crystallinity
is a prerequisite. It is, however, not sufficient by itself, surface topography and
energy are also essential parameters. CF show both crystallinity and reasonably
homogeneous surface topography, and have been found to promote transcrys-
tallinity in a PA6 matrix [44]. The effect that fibres have as nucleating agents is
being studied for different thermoplastic polymers [45] [46] [47] in order to assess
the influence of the degree of (trans)crystallinity on the mechanical properties of
the compound.
2. Surface functionalization: it has been reported that, both heating in inert atmo-
sphere and in oxygen atmosphere induces changes in the surface chemistry of the
Page 36
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS & DISCUSSION
3.2. Recycling process
;A<
Figure 3.7: SEM-EDS analysis of the fibres recovered from PAFR Pan02.
fibres. In nitrogen atmosphere, the hydroxyl group (C
O) and the carbonyl
group (C
O) signals were significantly reduced already at 300◦C. In oxygen
athmosphere the same signals were equally reduced at 300 ◦C but started rising
again going towards the 500◦C. At the same time the signal of the ester group
(O
C
O) became visible and rose quickly around that temperature [48]
[10]. The new increase in oxygen functionality on the surface of CFs could have a
beneficial effect on the adhesion between CFs and PA 66/6I matrix by enhancing
secondary interactions like Van der Waals forces and H-bonding. One can assume
that the effect is more visible for fibre recovered from PA-type matrix rather than
the modified version PAFR, due to the higher amount of char that the latter
generates. The larger amount of char can protect the fibre from oxidation during
the oxidation treatment, and therefore hinder the functionalization process that
otherwise would occur. If this hypothesis was correct, then one could also assume
Page 37
==PAGE:46==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS & DISCUSSION
3.2. Recycling process
;A<
(a) Tenacity.
(b) Breaking stress.
(c) Elongation.
(d) Modulus.
Figure 3.8: Fibre’s mechanical properties as measured for the fibres recovered from PA py Pan01,
PA ox Pan01, EP Py Pan02, EP ox Pan02, PAFR py Pan01, PAFR ox Pan01.
that the τapp in PA 66/6I of the fibres recovered from the epoxy-based panels
would also be enhanced by the oxidation step.
(a) TappPA
(b) Breaking stress
Figure 3.9: Mech prop sfpo
Limitations of the equipment and testing method
As underlined by B. Mad-
sen et al. [49], the method implemented in the Textechno Favimat + equipment for
vibroscopic determination of the cross-sectional area may lead to an underestimation
of approximately 0,4-3,7%. For the highly charred fibres, the disentanglement of single
fibres was found to be very challenging, as the char would bind the bundles together
and the fibres would break while trying to separate them. This could result in a not
representative sample of the population.
Uncertainties on the pull-out results can furthermore originate at different stages of
the testing process: small variation in the mixing ratio of the resin; waiting time of the
resin before embedding of the fibre in the resin, especially using polyamide-based matrix
as it has a tendency to absorb moisture; differences in embedding length that lead to
Page 38
==PAGE:47==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS & DISCUSSION
3.3. Re-fabrication
;A<
variations in the calculated τapp (τapp was found to vary with embedding length so that
to have very precise result the exact same embedding length should be achieved).
Corrections for fibre testing measurements
As seen above, the results obtained
from single fibre tensile test go against what is most frequent in literature. In this section
an attempt will be made to understand what causes the distortion.
Two of the possible causes mentioned before had to do with the overestimation of
diameter and linear density of the fibres. This could happen due to the residue left on the
fibre surface, which would interfere with the measurements. As the graphs in Figure 3.10
show, both fibre diameter and linear density appear higher for the pyrolyzed samples,
confirming the hypothesis.
(a) Diameter.
(b) Linear density.
Figure 3.10: Measured diameters and linear densities in comparison.
As a follow up, the calculations of both breaking stress and fibre’s tenacity were
corrected by assuming constant diameter and linear density. The values measured for
the ”virgin” non-woven fibres were taken for this purpose. The results of this corrections
are visible in Figure 3.11, however no significant difference in trend can be seen.
(a) Comparison of measured and corrected breaking stress.
(b) Comparison of measured and corrected tenacity.
Figure 3.11: Breaking stress and tenacity corrected for fibre diameter and linear density.
As these two corrections can’t explain the fibre’ properties trend, it is to be assumed
that the test set-up is somewhat inadequate to take the residue into account. Deeper
investigations are required on how the residue amount and composition influence the
test.
3.3
Re-fabrication
This section is dedicated to the fabrication of panels with rCF. A visual assessment of
the impregnation of the panels will be followed by a discussion about the mechanical
properties of the new panels.
Page 39
==PAGE:48==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS & DISCUSSION
3.3. Re-fabrication
;A<
Uniform impregnation and high FVC are harder to achieve in the new panels
The impregnation of all the panels destined for testing was assessed qualitatively from
the cross-section imaging of the panels. Example images from each panel can be found
in Figure 3.3 and Figure 3.12.
The impregnation of the re-infiltrated panels was moderately worse than for the first
ones but still overall satisfying. The most prominent and most difficult feature to avoid
is the presence of char within the bundles of fibres (e.g. Figure 3.12d, 3.12k, 3.12t). The
char is more evident in pyrolyzed samples throughout all materials but does not disappear
entirely in the oxidized samples. As for panel PAFR Pan01, large black spots are visible
in PAFR py Pan01 (Figure 3.12i) and PAFR ox Pan01 (Figure 3.12m) throughout the
whole cross-section. However, as mentioned before, most of them might be a sign of the
presence of the flame retardant rather than of actual pores.
Epoxy panels EP py Pan02 (Figure 3.12q and EP ox Pan02 (Figure 3.12v), produced
to replace EP py Pan01 and EP ox Pan01, showed lower porosity than the latter al-
though impregnation is still sometimes lacking near the surface and near the edges (Fig-
ure 3.12r).
Page 40
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS & DISCUSSION
3.3. Re-fabrication
;A<
(a) PA py Pan01, 0◦
(b) PA py Pan01, 90◦
(c) PA py Pan01, 90◦
(d) PA py Pan01, 0◦
(e) PA ox Pan01, 0◦
(f) PA ox Pan01, 0◦
(g) PA ox Pan01, 0◦
(h) PA ox Pan01, 90◦
(i) PAFR py Pan01, 0◦
(j) PAFR py Pan01, 90◦
(k) PAFR py Pan01, 90◦
(l) PAFR py Pan01, 90◦
(m) PAFR ox Pan01, 0◦
(n) PAFR ox Pan01, 90◦
(o) PAFR ox Pan01, 90◦
(p) PAFR ox Pan01, 90◦
(q) EP py Pan02, 0◦
(r) EP py Pan02, 0◦
(s) EP py Pan02, 90◦
(t) EP py Pan02, 90◦
(u) EP ox Pan02, 90◦
(v) EP ox Pan02, 0◦
(w) EP ox Pan02, 0◦
(x) EP ox Pan02, 90◦
Figure 3.12: Microscopy pics, second round
Page 41
==PAGE:50==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS & DISCUSSION
3.3. Re-fabrication
;A<
The FVC of the new panels is not as consistent with the set target of 25% as for the
original panels, but is in most cases slightly lower (Table 3.4). As differences in FVC
have an influence on the mechanical properties of the panels, it is usually recommended
for composite structures used in the wind and aerospace industries to normalise the
results on a set FVC (See standard DNVGL-ST-0376 [50]). The results obtained from
mechanical testing will therefore be normalised for 25% FVC in a following section.
Table 3.4: Summary of impregnation and recycling outputs. *average out of available specimens
Material name
Impregnation quality
FVC [%]
Char
[%matrixwt.]
PA Pan01
Good impregnation.
25,18 ± 0,37
-
PAFR Pan01
Prominent dark spots visible, may
represent either enlarged pores or
the presence of FR.
24,75 ± 0,35
-
EP Pan01
Good impregnation, no pores visi-
ble.
24,51 ± 0,48
-
PA py Pan01
Small pores visible, large presence of
char around fibre bundles.
24,07 ± 1,55
5,8%
PA ox Pan01
Small pores visible, sparce presence
of char around fibre bundles.
23,04 ± 0,29
0,5%
PAFR py Pan01
Prominent dark spots visible, may
represent either enlarged pores or
the presence of FR.
20,32 ± 0,10
9,3%
PAFR ox Pan01
Prominent dark spots visible, may
represent either enlarged pores or
the presence of FR.
21,83 ± 0,21
5,9%
EP py Pan02
Big and small pores visible, presence
of char around fibre bundles.
24,48 ± 1,49
5,7%
EP ox Pan02
Good impregnation, some big pores
visible only near the surface. Very
little char visible.
25,28 ± 3,50
0,1%
Mechanical performance
A visual comparison of mechanical properties measured
from bending test can be seen in Figure 3.13. Charpy test was only executed for the
virgin panels to compare the influence of the matrix type on the impact properties.
As seen for the first panels, also the re-infiltrated ones show evident anisotropy.
The Flexural Strength measured for the panels fabricated using oxidized fibres is
lower for EP-based and PAFR-based specimen, but higher for the PA-based specimen
(Figure 3.13a) compared to the original panels. This trend is very similar to the apparent
interfacial adhesion strength discussed in section 3.2, while differing from the trend shown
by the breaking stress of the single fibres (Figure 3.8b). This indicates that the properties
of the composite are more deeply influenced by the changes in adhesion between fibres and
matrix rather than by the fibres’ own tensile properties. On the other hand the Flexural
Page 42
==PAGE:51==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS & DISCUSSION
3.3. Re-fabrication
;A<
(a) Flexural strength.
(b) Flex modulus.
(c) Flex strain.
Figure 3.13: Flexural properties of all the tested panel in comparison for the 90◦direction and 0◦
direction.
Strength of the panels fabricated using only pyrolyzed fibres, shows a remarkable drop
for every material. The difference compared to the original panels is of 30-40% for the
epoxy panels, but only of 10-20% for the PA66/6I panels and of 20-30% for the PAFR-
type ones. Also, the retention of flexural strength for the panels with pyrolysed rCF is
always higher in the 90◦direction and lower in the 0◦direction, meaning that in the 0◦
direction the drop is more significant.
As for all the three materials a considerable amount of char/residue was visible in be-
tween and around the bundles of fibres, especially in the pyrolysed ones, we can assume
Page 43
==PAGE:52==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS & DISCUSSION
3.3. Re-fabrication
;A<
Table 3.5: Relative change of flexural strength for the panels fabricated with rCF in respect to the ones
fabricated with virgin non-woven. 90◦direction.
90°
Epoxy
PA66/6I
PA66/6I, FR
rCF pyrolysis
-32%
-12%
-23%
rCF oxidation
-9%
10%
-12%
Table 3.6: Relative change of flexural strength for the panels fabricated with rCF in respect to the ones
fabricated with virgin non-woven. 0◦direction.
0°
Epoxy
PA66/6I
PA66/6I, FR
rCF pyrolysis
-38%
-21%
-26%
rCF oxidation
-10%
9%
-14%
that its presence in the composite introduces weak points where fracture can develop
more easily thereby lowering flexural strength. It can be supposed that, the more promi-
nent drop seen in the 0◦direction is caused by the larger fraction of fibres oriented normal
to this direction and the char surrounding them. Both these factors and contribute in
weakening the material in this direction and their effect adds up in the final composite.
The Flexural Modulus of the materials does not follow a common trend even inside
material class (e.g. only for EP). It can be seen in Figure 3.13b that the modulus for EP-
type composite increases with the recycling process in the 90◦direction but decreases in
the 0◦direction. For PA-type materials in the 90◦direction, the modulus is higher only
for the panels with oxidized rCF and for the PAFR-type material in the 90◦direction
decreases for all recycling steps.
The Maximum Flexural Strain also shows mixed behaviour. For both EP-type and
PA-type panels it decreases for pyrolyzed rCF and increases again for oxidized rCF, even
if in different proportions. For the PAFR-type panels it remains more or less constant
during recycling.
FVC normalization
Normalization by FVC is carried out as specified in [50] assuming
strength and stiffness properties of the composite to vary linearly with fibre volume
fraction:
Fnormalised =
Ftested
FV Cspecimen
FV Ctarget
(3.1)
The measured flexural strength and the normalized results are compared in Figure
3.14a. The most relevant deviation is visible for PAFR-type panels, which were also
the ones with lower FVC. The drop in flexural strength for panels with pyrolysed rCF
is most relevant for EP-type panels, while the only matrix that shows an increase in
flexural modulus is still PA66/6I with oxidized rCF.
In Figure 3.15a & 3.15b, the results of the normalization are compared to the mea-
sured flexural modulus. For the 90◦direction, the corrected values show a modest rise
Page 44
==PAGE:53==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS & DISCUSSION
3.3. Re-fabrication
;A<
with each step of the recycling process. In the 0◦this trend is not confirmed.
Finally, the measured maximum flexural strain and the normalization results are
compared in Figure 3.14b & 3.14c. Here, the corrected values follow a pattern more
similar to the one shown by the elongation of single fibres.
(a) Flexural strength
(b) Flex strain at 90°
(c) Flex strain at 0°
Figure 3.14: Normalization for fvc=25% of the flexural mechanical properties.
Page 45
==PAGE:54==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS & DISCUSSION
3.3. Re-fabrication
;A<
(a) Flex modulus at 90°
(b) Flex modulus at 0°
Figure 3.15: Normalization for fvc=25% of the flexural mechanical properties pt. 2.
Page 46
==PAGE:55==
Chapter 4
Conclusion
The demand for carbon fibre composites has steadily increased over the last decades,
raising the question of how to manage their end-of-life in a sustainable way. Among
the various recycling methods proposed, pyrolysis combined with oxidation remains one
of the most investigated approaches, as it effectively removes the polymer matrix while
preserving fibre properties.
This study investigated the recyclability of carbon fibre
composites with different matrix systems—an epoxy-based thermoset resin (Araldite LY
3585/Aradur 3475), a thermoplastic copolymer (PA66/6I), and PA66/6I modified with a
flame retardant (FR)—with a particular focus on fibre retention, residual contamination,
and the performance of re-manufactured panels.
The impregnation of the non-woven reinforcement was found to be equally effective
for all three matrix systems. Mechanical testing revealed that epoxy-based composites
exhibited higher flexural strength and modulus, whereas PA66/6I with FR achieved the
highest flexural strain.
After recycling, the tensile properties of the recovered fibres
remained within one standard deviation of virgin fibres, demonstrating that the process
is suitable for all tested matrices. Residual char was negligible for epoxy and PA66/6I
but more pronounced for PA66/6I with FR, consistent with microscopy observations of
char-rich regions between fibre bundles.
Re-infiltration of recycled fibres into new panels was also successful. Nonetheless,
achieving uniform impregnation and high fibre volume content proved more challeng-
ing, especially for PA66/6I with FR. Variations in fibre–matrix adhesion were observed,
likely due to changes in fibre surface chemistry during recycling. Adhesion improved for
PA66/6I systems, decreased for epoxy, and remained unchanged for PA66/6I with FR
compared to the non-woven reference. These trends were reflected in the flexural perfor-
mance of the re-manufactured panels: flexural strength increased for PA66/6I, decreased
for epoxy, and remained nearly constant for PA66/6I with FR, while flexural modulus
increased across all three systems after recycling.
Overall, this work demonstrates that carbon fibres can be successfully recycled from
both thermoplastic and thermoset composites through pyrolysis and oxidation, and
reintegrated into new composite panels. Importantly, thermoplastic matrices such as
PA66/6I show potential qualitative advantages in re-manufactured properties, even when
47
==PAGE:56==
CHAPTER 4. CONCLUSION
;A<
modified with flame retardants. From an application perspective, the bending stiffness
efficiency factors obtained are comparable to, or in some cases higher than, those of
industrial SMC components, underscoring the industrial relevance of these findings.
4.0.1
Further research
Identification of FR in the panels cross-sections
Chemical analysis of the panels
cross-section can help in confirming the quality of impregnation of the panels. Image
analysis of the cross-sections can also help in estimating the porosity of the panels.
Characterization of the crystallinity of polyamide near the fibre
Deeper in-
vestigations about the effect that CFs and char (also inorganic residue from the FR)
have on the crystallization of the thermoplastic polymer will help with the optimization
of the re-infiltration process and the selection of the matrices.
Characterization of the fibre’s surface functionalities
Although previous work
has already been conducted on the characterization of the fibre’s functional groups during
oxidation, further research into how the char content, and therefore the matrix, affects
the former can lead to interesting insights.
Utilization of gases
As previous research for epoxy-based composites suggest, there
is interest in re utilising the gases produced from the pyrolysis process to further recover
energy and resources. More study is needed to understand how to collect the pyrolysis
product of composites with different formulations.
Optimization of testing methods
Both single fibre tensile test and single fibre
pull-out still require some refinement. An important aspect to investigate concerns the
presence of third substances on the fibre surface and its influence on the measurements.
Standardization of pull-out test and optimisation of embedding process are key aspects
to obtain reproducible results.
Page 48
==PAGE:57==
Acknowledgment
I would first of all like to thank all my colleagues for their constant support, patience, and
teachings. Thank you Jakob, for always being available to help and teach me. Thank
you Bernhard, for always being a role example, and for always caring about my well
being. Thank you Lucas, for always helping us out with the press even when you looked
overworked yourself.
I would then like to thank my supervisors, for reading the draft over and over again
and always giving answers to my questions and doubts. Thanks for showing understand-
ing and support.
Finally, thank you Konrad for helping me with everything else around the thesis,
especially now that I am writing these lines.
49
==PAGE:58==
Bibliography
[1] Fabian Rechsteiner, Luca Raimondi, Nicola Tegas, Lorenzo Donati, and Frank Ma-
nis. Mechanical performance of sustainable composite material: Wet-laid and dry-
laid nonwoven textiles made out of recycled carbon fibers with thermoset and ther-
moplastic matrices. Journal of Cleaner Production, 519:146044, August 2025.
[2] Jingsheng Wang, Xi Chen, Jun Wang, Shuang Yang, Kaiwen Chen, Lu Zhu, Siqi
Huo, Pingan Song, and Hao Wang. High-performance, intrinsically fire-safe, single-
component epoxy resins and carbon fiber reinforced epoxy composites based on two
phosphorus-derived imidazoliums. Polymer Degradation and Stability, 208:110261,
February 2023.
[3] Jin Zhang, Venkata S. Chevali, Hao Wang, and Chun-Hui Wang. Current status of
carbon fibre and carbon fibre composites recycling. Composites Part B: Engineering,
193:108053, July 2020.
[4] Soo-Jin Park. Carbon Fibers, volume 210 of Springer Series in Materials Science.
Springer, Singapore, 2018.
[5] Composites United market report 2024 published – Overview of the current com-
posites market environment | Composites United e.V., March 2025.
[6] Lin Gang. 2023 Global Carbon Fiber Composites Market Report. Technical report,
ATA CFT Guangzhou Co., Ltd, 2023.
[7] Pi-Yu Chen, Ran Feng, Ying Xu, and Ji-Hua Zhu. Recycling and Reutilization
of Waste Carbon Fiber Reinforced Plastics: Current Status and Prospects. Poly-
mers, 15(17):3508, January 2023. Number: 17 Publisher: Multidisciplinary Digital
Publishing Institute.
[8] D. Hull and T. W. Clyne. An Introduction to Composite Materials. Cambridge
Solid State Science Series. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2 edition, 1996.
[9] Dr. Jakob Wohlert, Ass. Prof. Yuanyuan Li, Prof. Lars Berglund, and Dr. Bin Chen.
KF 2495 Polymer Composites, 2023.
[10] Qinghui Wang, Xuesong Li, and Dongdong Zhu.
A Study on the Surface Oxi-
dation Pretreatment and Nickel Plating Mechanism of Carbon Fiber. Materials,
50
==PAGE:59==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Bibliography
;A<
17(15):3650, January 2024. Publisher: Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Insti-
tute.
[11] G. Bogoeva-Gaceva, E. M¨ader, L. H¨auler, and K. Sahre. Parameters affecting the in-
terface properties in carbon fibre/epoxy systems. Composites, 26(2):103–107, Febru-
ary 1995.
[12] Hao Zheng, Wenjian Zhang, Bowen Li, Junjie Zhu, Chaohang Wang, Guojun Song,
Guangshun Wu, Xiaoping Yang, Yudong Huang, and Lichun Ma. Recent advances
of interphases in carbon fiber-reinforced polymer composites: A review. Composites
Part B: Engineering, 233:109639, March 2022.
[13] AG Stamopoulos, KI Tserpes, P Prucha, and D Vavrik. Evaluation of porosity
effects on the mechanical properties of carbon fiber-reinforced plastic unidirectional
laminates by X-ray computed tomography and mechanical testing. Journal of Com-
posite Materials, 50(15):2087–2098, June 2016. Publisher: SAGE Publications Ltd
STM.
[14] Ana Carolina Mendes Quintanilha Silva Santos, Francisco Maciel Monticeli, Heitor
OrnaghiJr, Luis Felipe de Paula Santos, and Maria Odila Hil´ario Cioffi. Porosity
characterization and respective influence on short-beam strength of advanced com-
posite processed by resin transfer molding and compression molding. Polymers and
Polymer Composites, 29(8):1353–1362, October 2021. Publisher: SAGE Publica-
tions Ltd STM.
[15] Pharindra Pathak and Suhasini Gururaja. Porosity evolution in additively manufac-
tured compression molded short fiber thermoplastics under cyclic loading: Insights
from micro-computed tomography and infrared thermography. Composites Part A:
Applied Science and Manufacturing, 194:108881, July 2025.
[16] Valeria La Saponara and Rani Elhajjar. Experimental Methods to Quantify Micro-
damage and Microstructure Anomalies in Fiber-Reinforced Polymer Composites:
Overview.
In Handbook of Damage Mechanics, pages 1325–1348. Springer, New
York, NY, 2015.
[17] Fabrice Lapique and Keith Redford. Curing effects on viscosity and mechanical
properties of a commercial epoxy resin adhesive. International Journal of Adhesion
and Adhesives, 22(4):337–346, January 2002.
[18] Christoph Czaderski, Enzo Martinelli, Julien Michels, and Masoud Motavalli. Ef-
fect of curing conditions on strength development in an epoxy resin for structural
strengthening. Composites Part B: Engineering, 43(2):398–410, March 2012.
[19] Knovel - Brydson’s Plastics Materials (8th Edition).
Page 51
==PAGE:60==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Bibliography
;A<
[20] Lars L. Schega, Daniel Hesse-Hornich, Ramon Helwing, Ronja Scholz, Frank
Walther, and Ulrich A. Handge.
Role of processing procedures and molecular
weight and their link to quasistatic and fatigue properties of polyamide 6. Polymer,
300:127012, April 2024.
[21] Asahi Kasei. REUSE OF CARBON FIBERS VIA CARBON FIBER NONWOVEN.
[22] Esfandiar Pakdel, Sima Kashi, Russell Varley, and Xungai Wang. Recent progress in
recycling carbon fibre reinforced composites and dry carbon fibre wastes. Resources,
Conservation and Recycling, 166:105340, March 2021.
[23] Rhys J. Tapper, Marco L. Longana, Ian Hamerton, and Kevin D. Potter. A closed-
loop recycling process for discontinuous carbon fibre polyamide 6 composites. Com-
posites Part B: Engineering, 179:107418, December 2019.
[24] Francesco Bandinelli, Edoardo Tito, Emmanuele Parisi, Lorenzo Peroni, and Mar-
tina Scapin. Recycling a carbon fiber-reinforced polyamide through 3D printing:
A mechanical and physicochemical analysis.
Composites Part B: Engineering,
294:112147, April 2025.
[25] Standard, Intermediate & High Modulus Carbon Fiber | Toray Composite Materials
America.
[26] Selector guide PAN Fiber https://mccfc.com/pan-fiber/.
[27] Pejman Heidarian, Fatemeh Mokhtari, Minoo Naebe, Luke C. Henderson, and Rus-
sell J. Varley. Reclamation and reformatting of waste carbon fibers: A paradigm
shift towards sustainable waste management. Resources, Conservation and Recy-
cling, 203:107465, April 2024.
[28] S. A. Hadigheh, Y. Wei, and S. Kashi. Optimisation of CFRP composite recycling
process based on energy consumption, kinetic behaviour and thermal degradation
mechanism of recycled carbon fibre. Journal of Cleaner Production, 292:125994,
April 2021.
[29] Yiyao Ren, Lei Xu, Xiaobiao Shang, Zhigang Shen, Rongzheng Fu, Wei Li, and
Lirong Guo. Evaluation of Mechanical Properties and Pyrolysis Products of Carbon
Fibers Recycled by Microwave Pyrolysis. ACS Omega, 7(16):13529–13537, April
2022. Publisher: American Chemical Society.
[30] Mohamad Anas Nahil and Paul T. Williams. Recycling of carbon fibre reinforced
polymeric waste for the production of activated carbon fibres. Journal of Analytical
and Applied Pyrolysis, 91(1):67–75, May 2011.
[31] Laura Mazzocchetti, Tiziana Benelli, Emanuele D’Angelo, Chiara Leonardi, Giorgio
Zattini, and Loris Giorgini. Validation of carbon fibers recycling by pyro-gasification:
The influence of oxidation conditions to obtain clean fibers and promote fiber/matrix
Page 52
==PAGE:61==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Bibliography
;A<
adhesion in epoxy composites. Composites Part A: Applied Science and Manufac-
turing, 112:504–514, September 2018.
[32] S. R. Naqvi, H. Mysore Prabhakara, E. A. Bramer, W. Dierkes, R. Akkerman,
and G. Brem. A critical review on recycling of end-of-life carbon fibre/glass fibre
reinforced composites waste using pyrolysis towards a circular economy. Resources,
Conservation and Recycling, 136:118–129, September 2018.
[33] Ming-xin Xu, Xiang-xi Meng, Hai-wen Ji, Jie Yang, Jin-yi Di, Ya-chang Wu, and
Qiang Lu.
Evolution of pyrolysis char during the recovery of carbon fiber rein-
forced polymer composite and its effects on the recovered carbon fiber. Journal of
Environmental Chemical Engineering, 12(2):112214, April 2024.
[34] Ulrike Braun, Horst Bahr, and Bernhard Schartel.
Fire retardancy effect of
aluminium phosphinate and melamine polyphosphate in glass fibre reinforced
polyamide 6. e-Polymers, 10(1), December 2010. Publisher: De Gruyter Section:
e-Polymers.
[35] Changbo Zhang, Yongfang Jiang, Shenghua Li, Zhe Huang, Xue-Qing Zhan, Ning
Ma, and Fang-Chang Tsai. Recent trends of phosphorus-containing flame retardants
modified polypropylene composites processing. Heliyon, 8(11):e11225, November
2022.
[36] Bin Zou, Ziyan Qian, Zixuan Zhang, Weiyi Xing, Shangshang Zhong, Jiajun Li,
Fukai Chu, Yongchun Kan, Jie Chen, and Yuan Hu. Quantitative assessment of
whether phosphorus-based flame retardants are optimizing or degrading the fire
hazard of aircraft carbon fiber/epoxy composites. Composites Part B: Engineering,
279:111413, June 2024.
[37] Bernhard Schartel. Phosphorus-based Flame Retardancy Mechanisms—Old Hat or
a Starting Point for Future Development?
Materials, 3(10):4710–4745, October
2010. Number: 10 Publisher: Molecular Diversity Preservation International.
[38] S. Lau, M. Gonchikzhapov, A. Paletsky, A. Shmakov, O. Korobeinichev, T. Kasper,
and B. Atakan. Aluminum Diethylphosphinate as a Flame Retardant for Polyethy-
lene: Investigation of the Pyrolysis and Combustion Behavior of PE/AlPi-Mixtures.
Combustion and Flame, 240:112006, June 2022.
[39] B. Muthuvel, D. Bhattacharyya, and S. Bickerton. A parametric flow visualisation
study on the impregnation and consolidation stages of the Wet Compression Mould-
ing process. Part I: Process parameters. Composites Part A: Applied Science and
Manufacturing, 150:106634, November 2021.
[40] Hongmingjian Zhang, Lingyun Wu, Xiulong Qin, Manxi Zhou, Dan Xue, Gang
Bai, Aosong Zhou, Xiaoping Yang, and Gang Sui. The pyrolysis behavior of typical
epoxy/amine system: From degradation product to the mechanism ofchemical bond
breakage. Sustainable Materials and Technologies, 43:e01297, April 2025.
Page 53
==PAGE:62==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Bibliography
;A<
[41] Ajinkya Mukund Pannase, Rohit Kumar Singh, Biswajit Ruj, and Parthapratim
Gupta. Decomposition of polyamide via slow pyrolysis: Effect of heating rate and
operating temperature on product yield and composition. Journal of Analytical and
Applied Pyrolysis, 151:104886, October 2020.
[42] Toshihira Irisawa, Reika Aratake, Miho Hanai, Yoshiki Sugimoto, and Yasuhiro
Tanabe. Elucidation of damage factors to recycled carbon fibers recovered from
CFRPs by pyrolysis for finding optimal recovery conditions. Composites Part B:
Engineering, 218:108939, August 2021.
[43] Guozhan Jiang and Stephen J. Pickering. Structure–property relationship of re-
cycled carbon fibres revealed by pyrolysis recycling process. Journal of Materials
Science, 51(4):1949–1958, 2016.
[44] R. H. Burton and M. J. Folkes. Fibre-Matrix Interactions in Reinforced Thermoplas-
tics. In D. W. Clegg and A. A. Collyer, editors, Mechanical Properties of Reinforced
Thermoplastics, pages 269–294. Springer Netherlands, Dordrecht, 1986.
[45] Sepehr Simaafrookhteh, Thijs Van Thillo, Stepan V. Lomov, and Jan Ivens. Crys-
tallinity of neat and carbon fiber-reinforced polyamide-6 processed at different cool-
ing rates.
Composites Part A: Applied Science and Manufacturing, 188:108520,
January 2025.
[46] Kendra A. Allen, Logan T. Kearney, Sumit Gupta, Hicham Ghossein, Jong K.
Keum, Joshua T. Damron, Holly E. Humphrey, Uday Vaidya, and Amit K.
Naskar. Understanding interfacial crystallization dynamics on carbon fiber rein-
forced polypropylene composite manufacturing. Composites Part B: Engineering,
291:112027, February 2025.
[47] Yi Ren, Muhuo Yu, Zhouyang Li, Chengchang Ji, Jing Li, Chao Zhang, Jintao Shen,
Jianfeng Zhou, and Shu Zhu. Exploring the self-nucleation effect: Transforming crys-
talline morphology for improved mechanical performance of carbon fiber reinforced
polyphenylene sulfide composites.
Composites Part B: Engineering, 272:111231,
March 2024.
[48] Gyungha Kim, Hyunkyung Lee, Kyungeun Kim, and Dae Up Kim. Effects of Heat
Treatment Atmosphere and Temperature on the Properties of Carbon Fibers. Poly-
mers, 14(12):2412, June 2022.
[49] Bo Madsen, Rajnish Kumar, and Hans Lilholt. Vibroscope method for determi-
nation of cross-sectional area of glass and carbon fibres – Experiments and analy-
ses. Composites Part A: Applied Science and Manufacturing, 187:108447, December
2024.
[50] Rotor blades for wind turbines, 2015.
Page 54
